Layer-dependent electronic and optical properties of tin monoxide: a potential candidate in photovoltaic applications   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CP05305A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CP05305A
(Communication)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2022, 24, 7611-7616Layer-dependent electronic and optical properties of tin monoxide: a potential candidate in photovoltaic applications†

        
          
            Li 
            Wanzhong
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Sun 
            Jian
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Deng 
            Chong
          
        
      a
aSchool of Mechanical Engineering, Xi'an Shiyou University, Xi'an, Shaanxi Province 710065, P. R. China. E-mail: liwanzhong@xsyu.edu.cn
bSchool of Mechanical and Electrical Engineering, Xi’an Polytechnic University, Xi’an, Shaanxi Province 710048, P. R. China
Received 
      19th November 2021
    , Accepted 7th March 2022First published on 10th March 2022AbstractTunable band gaps make two-dimensional (2D) SnO a promising candidate for a wide variety of applications in optoelectronic devices. In this work, we calculated the structural, electronic, and optical properties of monolayer and mutilayer SnO up to seven layers based on density functional theory. We found that the band gaps of SnO can vary from 0.61 eV to 4.05 eV as the layer number of SnO decreases from seven to one, which is mainly because of the interlayer coupling effect. The interlayer coupling ensures improved carrier transport properties between neighbouring layers, which can benefit the performance of 2D SnO in photovoltaic applications. In particular, a suitable band gap of 1.20 eV for solar cell applications is obtained in trilayer SnO, and the predicted theoretical efficiency of solar cells with trilayer SnO as the active material achieves a high value exceeding 16%, which is relatively high for 2D materials.
Introduction
During the past decade, two-dimensional (2D) metal oxides have attracted increasing interest in electronic, optoelectronic and energy-related applications because of their intrinsic air-stable properties, composition of non-toxic and earth-abundant elements, low cost for large-scale production, high flexibility, high active surface area, extraordinary mechanical properties, and tunable electronic properties. Until now, 2D metal oxides have been used as active materials in many applications including energy harvesting and storage, transistors, photodetectors, water splitting, magneto-electronics, photocatalysis, sensing, and thermo-electronic applications.1–14 Among the many 2D metal oxides, tin monoxide (SnO) is an interesting semiconductor material that is promising for a wide variety of technological applications.
Intrinsically, 2D SnO is a p-type semiconductor because of the primary Sn vacancy defect in the material,15 which has been widely used as a p-channel material in thin film transistors (TFTs) and complimentary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) devices due to its comparable high carrier mobility to other p-type oxides and ambipolar conduction behavior.16–22 Also, it has been shown that 2D SnO can be doped into an n-type semiconductor with a Sb dopant.23 This is because the 2D SnO has a comparatively large electron affinity of 3.7 eV and a small ionization potential of 4.4 eV, which favors ambipolar conduction in 2D SnO, since a large electron affinity can be doped in n-type semiconductors and a low ionization potential can be doped in p-type semiconductors.24 Bipolar resistive switching behavior has also been reported in bilayer SnO and a satisfactory memory performance is obtained.25 Though a narrow indirect fundamental band gap of ∼0.7 eV has been reported for bulk SnO, a much larger direct optical band gap of ∼2.7 eV has also been reported.16 Thus, SnO is a transparent conducting oxide. The combination of bipolar electrical conductivity and optical transparency makes SnO an ideal candidate for invisible electronic devices. Due to the p-type conductivity and high hole concentration up to 1019 cm−3, SnO is also considered a suitable candidate in solar-driven photoelectrochemical water splitting. Liang et al. used the liquid exfoliation strategy to synthesize ultrathin SnO sheets with different thicknesses, and enclose the thickness-dependent solar water splitting efficiency in ultrathin SnO sheets.26 Moreover, nanoparticulate SnO has also been used as an anode material for Li and Na ion batteries with high specific capacity, stable cyclability, and excellent rate performance due to the high-capacity of Sn-based materials and large van der Waals gaps between SnO layers.27,28
Due to the layer-dependent electronic and optical properties of 2D SnO, precise thickness control is essential for tailoring the optoelectronic properties of SnO for specific applications. Until now, advanced synthesis methods like hydrothermal and intercalation,28 liquid phase exfoliation,26,27 mechanical exfoliation29,30 and pulsed laser deposition19 have successfully realized precise control over the thickness of the synthesized SnO nanosheets. That is to say, the electronic and optical properties of SnO, such as band gaps that can range from ∼4.0 eV to ∼0.7 eV from monolayer SnO to bulk SnO and adsorption coefficients,31–34 can be regulated for realizing applications of SnO in different fields and further improving the performance of the SnO-based electronic devices. Due to the fast carrier transport and separation efficiency, as well as the wide range of tunable band gaps in SnO sheets, one would expect a fine performance of SnO sheets in solar cell applications.
In this work, we systematically studied the electronic, bonding, and optical properties of monolayer and multilayer SnO with layer numbers of up to seven based on density functional theory. Layer-dependent electronic, optical, and carrier properties are found in 2D SnO. The wide band gap variation and fine carrier transportation ensure promising performance of layered SnO in photovoltaic applications. Finally, the trilayer SnO is selected for applications in solar cells because of its appropriate band gap (1.2 eV) and balanced carrier properties. Using the spectroscopic limited maximum efficiency (SLME) method, we further predict a high solar cell efficiency of 16% with trilayer SnO as the active material. This study establishes the potential use of layered SnO in photovoltaic devices.
Theoretical methods
In this work, density-functional theory (DFT) calculations were performed using the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP). The projected augmented wave (PAW) method and the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) exchange–correlation functional within the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) were used to obtain the lattice constants.35 An energy cutoff of 500 eV was set for the plane-wave function's expansion. The van der Waals (vdW) dispersion correction was found necessary to yield more accurate lattice constants, which are described by the DFT-D3 correction.36 Monolayer and multilayer SnO are constructed by exfoliating one or several layers of SnO from the corresponding bulk structures with a vacuum spacing of >15 Å set along the direction perpendicular to the sheet plane to avoid the interaction between periodic cells. Monkhorst–Pack sampling with Γ-centered k-point sampling of 15 × 15 × 9 and 15 × 15 × 1 was used for structural optimization of bulk and layered SnO, respectively. The lattice parameters and atomic positions of all the structures were relaxed until the total energy changes were less than 1.0 × 10−5 eV and the maximum force component acting on each atom was less than 0.001 eV Å−1. The HSE06 method is also used to obtain more accurate electronic structures.37 We used the package LOBSTER to compute the crystal orbital Hamiltonian population (COHP) for the bonding analysis.38 The phonon frequencies are derived from the restoring force in response to the displacement of ions by a small amplitude from their equilibrium positions, and the DFPT method is used to construct the force constant as implemented in the PHONOPY package. The temperature-dependent Helmoltz free energies are obtained from the equilibrium structures within the harmonic approximation, and the computational details are given in the ESI.† Using the “spectroscopic limited maximum efficiency (SLME)” method, the theoretical thickness-dependent power conversion efficiency of layered SnO is estimated.
Results
We first optimized the atomic structures of bulk, mono-, and multilayer SnO up to seven layers, which are shown in Fig. 1. The structure of the bulk SnO unit cell adopts the tetragonal space group with P4/nmm symmetry, and the lattice parameters are a = b = 3.8 Å and c = 4.84 Å, which are in agreement with those of previous reports.19,20,31–34 SnO layers are separated by a van der Waals gap of 2.51 Å along the [001] stacking direction, which is mainly induced by the dipole–dipole interaction of interlayer lone pair Sn 5s electrons that point toward the interlayer spacing. Each layer adopts a Sn–O–Sn sequence. The van der Waals interaction between layers is described by the electron localization function (ELF) analysis, which measures the extent of spatial localization of the reference electron and provides a method for the mapping of electron pair probability in multielectronic systems, as shown in Fig. S1 (ESI†). The ELF of interlayer Sn–Sn interaction is shown in Fig. S1b (ESI†), the electron depletion is evident with a low ELF value of ∼0.2 in the intermediate region between layers, indicating a van der Waals type interaction. The ELF of intralayer Sn–O interaction is shown in Fig. S1a (ESI†) for comparison, and a high value of ∼0.6 can be obtained, characterizing a covalent bonding type. By using the DFPT method, the Raman active modes for the Γ point are calculated to characterize the layered SnO structure. Here, the monolayer, bilayer, and trilayer SnO cases are considered. The phonon modes for each case are listed in Table S1 (ESI†), and the results are consistent with previous experimental and theoretical reports, establishing the layered structure configuration of SnO.19,39,40 It is found that layered SnO can be easily exfoliated from the bulk system.26–30 The exfoliation energy is calculated to be 0.436 J m−2 for 2D SnO according to Eexf = (Ebulk − Emonolayer)/2A, where A is the contact area. The value is comparable with that of graphite (0.360 J m−2),41 indicating the easy exfoliation of single or multilayer structures from the bulk materials. We also analyzed the influence of temperature on the exfoliation energy. As shown in Fig. S2 (ESI†), the free energies of bulk SnO, monolayer, bilayer, and trilayer SnO have a negligible difference, indicating that the exfoliation energy is slightly affected by temperature. Here, the phonon dispersion of SnO is calculated to evaluate its dynamic stability. Apparently, there is no soft mode that exists in the phonon dispersion, as shown in Fig. S3 (ESI†). This indicates the dynamic stability of SnO. The thermodynamic stability is evaluated by considering the reaction paths in Table S2 (ESI†). The positive value for path 1 indicates that SnO can hardly decompose to Sn and O2, while the negative value for path 2 shows that SnO can be oxidised to SnO2. However, the previous experimental results indicate that the oxidation is a slow process with SnO oxidizing to SnO2 at around 573 K in air, which can be effectively suppressed using encapsulation techniques.42 The stability of SnO has also been demonstrated both by experimental and theoretical methods in previous studies.16–23,32,39,43
 Fig. 1  Structural configurations of monolayer, bilayer, and seven-layer SnO. 
To investigate the electronic properties of layered SnO, the band structures of the optimized atomic structures of bulk, mono- and muti-layer SnO are first studied. The electronic structures calculated using the PBE method are shown in Fig. 2 and Fig. S4 (ESI†). The band gaps of layered SnO are calculated to range from 0.10 eV to 3.02 eV, with the largest band gap for monolayer SnO and the smallest band gap for bulk SnO. The calculated band gaps also indicate that the band gaps of layered SnO decrease with the number of SnO layers. This band gap reduction with increasing layer number is mainly because of the interlayer coupling, and will be discussed in detail later. The calculated 0.1 eV band gap of bulk SnO is found to be much smaller than the experimental value. This is because of the well-known underestimation of the band gap in the standard GGA–PBE calculation, which neglects the quasiparticle and excitonic effects. Thus, the band gaps are also corrected using the HSE06 scheme, and the results are also displayed in Fig. 2 with the red dots. The HSE06-corrected band gap for bulk SnO is 0.61 eV, which agrees well with the experiment value16 and the band gap of monolayer SnO increases to 4.05 eV. The band gaps of all cases are summarized in Table S3 (ESI†). This wide range of tunable band gap of layered SnO promises potential use in solar cells and photocatalysis. All band structures indicate that all the layered SnO possess an indirect band gap with the conduction band minimum (CBM) at the M point and the valence band maximum (VBM) at a point between the Γ and X points, except for monolayer SnO, whose CBM is located along the Γ–M path near the M point.
 Fig. 2  Band structures of bulk, mono-, bi- and tri-layer SnO calculated using the PBE method (black curves) and HSE06 method (red curves). 
The decrease of the band gaps with increasing number of layers has been attributed to the interlayer coupling, which can result in dispersive band curves along the stacking direction, as shown in Fig. S5 (ESI†). This effect is also important for carrier transport between neighbouring layers and can improve the solar conversion efficiency of layered materials. In order to illustrate the influence of this effect on the band gap, the projected density of states (PDOS) is calculated to investigate the band composition of layered SnO, and crystal orbital Hamilton population (COHP) and band-decomposed charge density analyses are performed to better illustrate their bonding characteristics. Fig. 3a–d show the PDOS of bulk, monolayer, bilayer, and trilayer SnO. The upper valence bands of bulk and monolayer SnO are found to be dominated by O 2p, Sn 5s, and Sn 5pz states, while the lower conduction bands are mainly composed by Sn 5px and 5py states. These are also validated by the band-decomposed charge densities of the conduction band edge (CBE) and valence band edge (VBE) of bulk and monolayer SnO, as shown in Fig. S6 and S7 (ESI†). We notice from Fig. 3a and Fig. S6 (ESI†) that the dispersive CBE near the M point in bulk SnO is mainly because of the interlayer bonding coupling of the intralayer Sn 5px–Sn 5py coupling states of the nearest Sn atoms in the neighbouring layers, which can induce the splitting of the original intralayer Sn 5px–Sn 5py bonding states in isolated layers. This effect also induces a small effective electron mass of bulk SnO along the stacking direction and can benefit the carrier transport along the stacking direction. The bonding characteristics of the bulk SnO's CBE is also validated by the COHP analysis in Fig. S8 (ESI†), while Fig. 3b and Fig. S7 (ESI†) indicate that the less dispersive CBE in monolayer SnO is mainly originated from the bonding coupling of Sn 5px and 5py states in the layer at the vacuum region, which is further demonstrated by the COHP analysis in Fig. S9 (ESI†). This less dispersive feature is caused by the quantum confinement effect. Similarly, the less dispersive VBE of monolayer SnO can be ascribed to the localized Sn 5pz states near the vacuum region, while for the VBE of bulk SnO, as shown in Fig. S6 and S8 (ESI†), the interlayer Sn 5pz–Sn 5pz antibonding coupling-induced splitting of Sn 5pz states is found to be the reason for the more dispersive and higher VBE in bulk SnO, which ensures a small effective hole carrier mass of the material along the stacking direction. Therefore, the interlayer coupling-induced energy level splittings in bulk SnO result in the shrinking of the band gap of bulk SnO compared to that of the monolayer SnO. Notably, the CBE and VBE of both monolayer and bulk SnO have contributions of Sn 5s–O 2p interaction, which will also hybridize with Sn 5p states. This antibonding Sn 5s–O 2p interaction near the band edges is indicated in Fig. S8 and S7 (ESI†). Nevertheless, the CBE and VBE in bulk SnO are mainly affected by the interlayer coupling of Sn 5p states in neighbouring layers.
 Fig. 3  Partial density of states (DOS) for (a) bulk SnO, (b) monolayer SnO, (c) bilayer SnO, and (d) trilayer SnO. 
As for the bilayer case, the dispersive CBE near the M point is also attributed to the interlayer bonding coupling of intralayer Sn 5px–Sn 5py coupling states, as shown in Fig. S10 (ESI†). The intralyer bonding coupling of the Sn 5px and Sn 5py states at the vacuum region is of higher energy than the interlayer bonding coupling of the 5px and 5py states, which is at almost the same energy level position with the intralyer bonding coupling of the Sn 5px and Sn 5py states in the monolayer case. The VBE of bilayer SnO is also composed of the interlayer Sn 5pz–Sn 5pz antibonding coupling of the neighbouring Sn atoms near the junction, while the Sn 5pz states of Sn atoms near the vacuum region have a lower energy than the interlayer Sn 5pz–Sn 5pz antibonding states, and thus the VBE of bilayer SnO moves upwards compared to the VBE of monlayer SnO, resulting in a reduced band gap of bilayer SnO compared to that of monolayer SnO. The same mechanism can be used for explaining the reduced band gap of trilayer SnO, the band-decomposed charge densities of which are shown in Fig. S11 (ESI†). We also plot the PDOS for four- to seven-layer SnO in Fig. S12 (ESI†), and the compositions of VBE and CBE are found to be similar in all layered SnO. The successive band gap reduction with increasing layers can contribute to the further splitting of the band edges due to the interlayer coupling. Based on the above analysis, we conclude that the charge distributions in multilayer SnO are favorable for carrier transport across the structures.
The excitonic properties of these 2D metal oxides also significantly affect their performance in optoelectronic devices. Therefore, the effective masses of carriers are estimated by quadratic fitting of the CBE and VBE based on the calculated band structures of layered SnO. Here, the equation m* = ħ2/(∂2E/∂k2) is used to estimate the effective masses of the carriers for in-plane and out-of-plane directions (where ħ is the reduced Planck constant and k is the magnitude of the wave vector in momentum space). The estimated values of the in-plane effective masses of electrons and holes of layered SnO are summarized in Fig. 4a and Table S1 (ESI†). We found that monolayer SnO has relatively large in-plane electron and hole effective masses, while the effective masses of other layered SnO are relatively small and have no obvious differences. Only the effective masses along the z direction of bulk SnO are calculated due to the use of the slab model of monolayer and multilayer SnO. The relatively small effective masses along the z direction also establish a fine carrier transport along the stacking direction.
 Fig. 4  (a) The effective masses and (b) the exciton binding energies of layered SnO along different directions. 
The exciton binding energy directly influences the electron–hole pair recombination rate and diffusion length, which also plays a significant role in affecting the device performance. Here, the Wannier–Mott exciton binding energies (Eb) are estimated based on the effective mass theory using a modified hydrogen-atom-like Bohr model as Eb = μe4/2ħ2ε2, where ε is the high frequency dielectric constant,  is the reduced effective mass of an exciton, and e is the charge of an electron. In consideration of the equation of Eb, a smaller μ and a large dielectric constant will lead to a small exciton binding energy. The in-plane dielectric constants ε∞ of bulk and layered SnO are calculated by the DFPT method. As shown in Fig. 4b, the calculated binding energy of monolayer SnO has the largest Eb, while the bulk SnO has the smallest Eb. With the increase of the layer number, the exciton binding energies decrease successively. The small binding energies of layered SnO (layer number ≥3) can be attributed to the large dielectric constant ε∞ and small reduced effective mass μ. The low exciton binding energies may accelerate separation of the electron–hole pairs and prevent their recombination, resulting in high densities, long lifetimes, and extended diffusion lengths of photo-generated carriers. These merits promise superior carrier transport properties of layered SnO.
In order to evaluate the photovoltaic performance of layered SnO, the optical absorption spectra of the bulk and layered SnO are also calculated to estimate their light absorption abilities. The absorption spectra are calculated using the PBE method, and then are corrected by the scissor operator to match the corresponding HSE gap values. Due to the anisotropy of 2D structures, the optical absorption spectra along the in-plane and out-of-plane directions are separately displayed in Fig. S13a and b (ESI†) for bulk and layered SnO. Distinctive absorption behaviors are observed along the in-plane and out-of-plane directions. Much higher absorption intensity is observed in the in-plane direction than in the out-of-plane direction in the low energy region. Also, much lower absorption intensity is noticed in the low energy region, which is mainly because of the indirect band gap feature. The absorption edge shifts to higher energy with decreasing layer number, which is consistent with the above mentioned variation of the band gaps. Moreover, the absorption intensity is found to increase as the layer number increases in the low energy region. Fig. 5 shows the calculated “spectroscopic limited maximum efficiency (SLME)” with the thickness of the absorber as the input based on the calculated optical absorption spectra.44 The highest efficiency of about 16% is obtained for trilayer SnO due to the appropriate band gap. All SLMEs are found to increase gradually with increasing film thickness. Thus, a thick film is needed to achieve high efficiency of solar cells. The SLMEs of GaAs and Si are also calculated for comparison, as shown in Fig. S14 (ESI†). The high efficiencies of GaAs and Si are consistent with the actual situation, indicating a reliable predication of our simulation. Due to the 2D configuration of SnO, relatively low efficiencies are predicted for layered SnO compared to GaAs and Si. However, the efficiencies are high enough for 2D materials.
 Fig. 5  Spectroscopic limited maximum efficiency with the thickness of the absorbers. 
Conclusions
In conclusion, we investigated the electronic, optical, and charge transport properties of the 2D metal oxide SnO. Tunable band gaps varying from 0.61 eV to 4.05 eV are calculated for layered SnO as the layer number decreases from seven to one. The effective interlayer coupling is responsible for the band gap decrease and is beneficial for the carrier transport in this 2D material. The carrier transport properties, such as carrier effective mass and exciton binding energy, of thicker SnO are found to be superior to those of the thinner SnO. Relatively low absorption intensity is observed in layered SnO because of their indirect band gaps. However, due to the appropriate band gap (1.2 eV) and fine carrier properties, trilayer SnO is found to be a promising candidate for photovoltaic applications. The predicted efficiency of solar cells with trilayer SnO as the active material is as high as 16%, which is relatively high for 2D materials.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
The authors are truly grateful for the support by the Scientific Research Program Funded by Shannxi Provincial Education Department (Program No. 19JK0659) and the Natural Science Basic Research Program of Shaanxi (Program No. 2021JQ-606)
References
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, M. Aslam, R. Wang, Y. Zhang, A. Mahmood, Z. Ouyang, H. Zhang and Z. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 387–440 RSC .
P. Kumbhakar, C. Chowde Gowda, P. L. Mahapatra, M. Mukherjee, K. D. Malviya, M. Chaker, A. Chandra, B. Lahiri, P. M. Ajayan, D. Jariwala, A. Singh and C. S. Tiwary, Mater. Today, 2021, 45, 142–168 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lin, C. Du, B. Yan, C. Wang and G. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4036 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Kano, D. G. Kvashnin, S. Sakai, L. A. Chernozatonskii, P. B. Sorokin, A. Hashimoto and M. Takeguchi, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 3980–3985 RSC .
X. Zhou, X. Li, Y. Gao, L. Li, L. Huang and J. Ye, Mater. Lett., 2019, 234, 26–29 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, S. Liu, Z. Zhang, X. Feng, L. Zhu, H. Guo, W. Ding, L. Chen, Y. Qin and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 724–733 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Y. A. Alsaif, S. Kuriakose, S. Walia, N. Syed, A. Jannat, B. Y. Zhang, F. Haque, M. Mohiuddin, T. Alkathiri, N. Pillai, T. Daeneke, J. Z. Ou and A. Zavabeti, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1900007 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sheng, T. Liao, L. Kou and Z. Sun, Mater. Today Energy, 2017, 3, 32–39 CrossRef .
M. Li, Y. Chen, W. Li, X. Li, H. Tian, X. Wei, Z. Ren and G. Han, Small, 2017, 13, 1604115 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Xiong, R. Ma, N. Sakai and T. Sasaki, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 1768–1777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kundu, C. C. A. Ng, D. Y. Petrovykh and L. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 8459–8461 RSC .
Y. Zhao, G. Chen, C. Yan, C. Lv, R. Wang and J. Sun, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 106206–106212 RSC .
D. Chen, L. Peng, Y. Yuan, Y. Zhu, Z. Fang, C. Yan, G. Chen, R. Shahbazian-Yassar, J. Lu, K. Amine and G. Yu, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3907–3913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Heard, J. Čejka, M. Opanasenko, P. Nachtigall, G. Centi and S. Perathoner, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1801712 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Togo, F. Oba, I. Tanaka and K. Tatsumi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 74, 195128 CrossRef .
Y. Ogo, H. Hiramatsu, K. Nomura, H. Yanagi, T. Kamiya, M. Hirano and H. Hosono, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 032113 CrossRef .
L. Y. Liang, H. T. Cao, X. B. Chen, Z. M. Liu, Z. G. Fei, H. Luo, J. Li, Y. C. Lu and W. Lu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 263502 CrossRef .
K. Nomura, T. Kamiya and H. Hosono, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3431–3434 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Saji, K. Tian, M. Snure and A. Tiwari, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1500453 CrossRef .
H. Luo, L. Liang, H. Cao, M. Dai, Y. Lu and M. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 17023–17031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Myeonghun, Y. Han, S. Song, I. Cho, J. Lee and H. I. Kwon, J. Semicond. Technol. Sci., 2014, 14, 666 CrossRef .
J. A. Caraveo-Frescas, P. K. Nayak, H. A. Al-Jawhari, D. B. Granato, U. Schwingenschlögl and H. N. Alshareef, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hosono, Y. Ogo, H. Yanagi and T. Kamiya, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2011, 14, H13 CrossRef CAS .
J. Robertson and S. J. Clark, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 83, 075205 CrossRef .
M. K. Hota, M. N. Hedhili, Q. Wang, V. A. Melnikov, O. F. Mohammed and H. N. Alshareef, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2015, 1, 1400035 CrossRef .
L. Liang, Y. Sun, F. Lei, S. Gao and Y. Xie, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 10647–10653 RSC .
K. Sakaushi, Y. Oaki, H. Uchiyama, E. Hosono, H. Zhou and H. Imai, Small, 2010, 6, 776–781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, J. Zhu, D. Zhang, U. Schwingenschlögl and H. N. Alshareef, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1302–1311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Singh, E. D. Gaspera, T. Ahmed, S. Walia, R. Ramanathan, J. van Embden, E. Mayes and V. Bansal, 2D Mater., 2017, 4, 025110 CrossRef .
P. Atkin, R. Orrell-Trigg, A. Zavabeti, N. Mahmood, M. R. Field, T. Daeneke, I. S. Cole and K. Kalantar-zadeh, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 2102–2105 RSC .
A. Shukla and N. K. Gaur, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2020, 754, 137717 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhou and N. Umezawa, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 17816–17820 RSC .
Q. Guo, G. Wang, R. Pandey and S. P. Karna, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 17983–17989 RSC .
D. R. Kripalani, P.-P. Sun, P. Lin, M. Xue and K. Zhou, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 538, 147988 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 77, 3865–3868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Grimme, J. Antony, S. Ehrlich and H. Krieg, J. Chem. Phys., 2010, 132, 154104 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Heyd, G. E. Scuseria and M. Ernzerhof, J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 118, 8207–8215 CrossRef CAS .
S. Maintz, V. L. Deringer, A. L. Tchougreeff and R. Dronskowski, J. Comput. Chem., 2016, 37, 1030–1035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ge and Y. Liu, Chinese Phys. B, 2019, 28, 077104 CrossRef CAS .
K. Choudhary, G. Cheon, E. Reed and F. Tavazza, Phys. Rev. B, 2018, 98, 014107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, S. Dai, X. Li, J. Yang, D. J. Srolovitz and Q. Zheng, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. G. Sabnis, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., 1978, 15, 1565–1567 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xiao, F. Wang, Y. Wang, S. A. Yang, J. Jiang, M. Yang, Y. Lu, S. Wang and Y. Feng, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 2570 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Yu and A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 068701 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1cp05305aThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Structural configurations of monolayer, bilayer, and seven-layer SnO.	 

 	Fig. 2  Band structures of bulk, mono-, bi- and tri-layer SnO calculated using the PBE method (black curves) and HSE06 method (red curves).	 

 	Fig. 3  Partial density of states (DOS) for (a) bulk SnO, (b) monolayer SnO, (c) bilayer SnO, and (d) trilayer SnO.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) The effective masses and (b) the exciton binding energies of layered SnO along different directions.	 

 	Fig. 5  Spectroscopic limited maximum efficiency with the thickness of the absorbers.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1cp05305a

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2022
