Industrial carbon dioxide capture and utilization: state of the art and future challenges  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0CS00025F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0CS00025F
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 8584-8686Industrial carbon dioxide capture and utilization: state of the art and future challenges

        
          
            Wanlin 
            Gao
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shuyu 
            Liang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Rujie 
            Wang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Qian 
            Jiang
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Yu 
            Zhang
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Qianwen 
            Zheng
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Bingqiao 
            Xie
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Cui Ying 
            Toe
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Xuancan 
            Zhu
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            Junya 
            Wang
          
        
      g, 
      
        
          
            Liang 
            Huang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yanshan 
            Gao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zheng 
            Wang
          
        
      h, 
      
        
          
            Changbum 
            Jo
          
        
      i, 
      
        
          
            Qiang 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Lidong 
            Wang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yuefeng 
            Liu
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Benoit 
            Louis
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Jason 
            Scott
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Anne-Cecile 
            Roger
          
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Rose 
            Amal
          
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Hong 
            He
          
          
        
      h and 

        
          
            Sang-Eon 
            Park
          
          
        
      *i
aCollege of Environmental Science and Engineering, Beijing Forestry University, 35 Qinghua East Road, Haidian District, Beijing 100083, P. R. China. E-mail: qiangwang@bjfu.edu.cn
bSchool of Environmental Science and Engineering, North China Electric Power University, Baoding 071003, China
cDalian National Laboratory for Clean Energy, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian 116023, P. R. China
dICPEES – Institut de Chimie et Procédés pour l'Énergie, l'Environnement et la Santé, UMR 7515 CNRS – Université de Strasbourg, 25 rue Becquerel, 67087 Strasbourg Cedex 2, France
eParticles and Catalysis Research Group, School of Chemical Engineering, The University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales 2052, Australia
fInstitute of Refrigeration and Cryogenics, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Key Laboratory of Power Mechanical Engineering, MOE China, 800 Dongchuan Road, Shanghai, 200240, China
gFaculty of Environmental Science and Engineering, Kunming University of Science and Technology, Kunming, 650500, Yunnan, P. R. China
hLaboratory of Atmospheric Environment and Pollution Control, Research Center for Eco-Environmental Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100085, China
iLaboratory of Nano-Green Catalysis and Nano Center for Fine Chemicals Fusion Technology, Department Chemistry, Inha University, Incheon 402751, South Korea. E-mail: separk@inha.ac.kr
Received 
      23rd June 2020
    First published on 19th October 2020AbstractDramatically increased CO2 concentration from several point sources is perceived to cause severe greenhouse effect towards the serious ongoing global warming with associated climate destabilization, inducing undesirable natural calamities, melting of glaciers, and extreme weather patterns. CO2 capture and utilization (CCU) has received tremendous attention due to its significant role in intensifying global warming. Considering the lack of a timely review on the state-of-the-art progress of promising CCU techniques, developing an appropriate and prompt summary of such advanced techniques with a comprehensive understanding is necessary. Thus, it is imperative to provide a timely review, given the fast growth of sophisticated CO2 capture and utilization materials and their implementation. In this work, we critically summarized and comprehensively reviewed the characteristics and performance of both liquid and solid CO2 adsorbents with possible schemes for the improvement of their CO2 capture ability and advances in CO2 utilization. Their industrial applications in pre- and post-combustion CO2 capture as well as utilization were systematically discussed and compared. With our great effort, this review would be of significant importance for academic researchers for obtaining an overall understanding of the current developments and future trends of CCU. This work is bound to benefit researchers in fields relating to CCU and facilitate the progress of significant breakthroughs in both fundamental research and commercial applications to deliver perspective views for future scientific and industrial advances in CCU.
Wanlin Gao
Wanlin Gao is currently a PhD candidate at the College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Beijing Forestry University in China under the supervision of Prof. Qiang Wang. Her research interests include the fabrication and application of intermediate-temperature solid CO2 adsorbents for sorption-enhanced water gas shift reaction and the deployment of in situ and operando analysis for CO2 capture mechanism study.
Qiang Wang
Professor Qiang Wang received BSc (2003) and MSc (2005) from Harbin Institute of Technology in China, and PhD (2009) from POSTECH in South Korea. In 2009–2011, he worked as a research fellow at the Institute of Chemical and Engineering Sciences under A*STAR, Singapore. In 2011–2012, he worked as a postdoctoral associate at the Department of Chemistry, University of Oxford. Since 2012, he holds a full professor position at the College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Beijing Forestry University. He serves as the section editor (capture, storage, and chemical conversion of carbon dioxide) of the Journal of Energy Chemistry and the editorial boards of several scientific journals. His current research interests include environmental functional nanomaterials for air pollution control and CO2 capture and utilizations (CCU).
Anne-Cecile Roger
Professor Anne-Cécile Roger obtained her PhD from the University of Strasbourg in 1995 in the field of heterogeneous catalysis (oxidative coupling of methane). She obtained her Accreditation to Direct Research in 2003 around the direct and indirect valorization of natural gas. She got her first position as an Assistant Professor in 1996 and became full professor in 2011 at the same university. She is the deputy director of ICPEES (Institute of Chemistry and Processes for Energy, Environment and Health, UMR CNRS 7515) since 2018. After a strong experience in Fischer–Tropsch synthesis for almost 10 years, she has been, since more than ten years, involved in the development of mixed oxide-type catalytic materials for CO2 hydrogenation (methane, methanol, DME, higher alcohols) and Power-to-X technologies.
Rose Amal
Professor Rose Amal is a Scientia Professor in the School of Chemical Engineering, UNSW Sydney. Her current research focuses on designing nanomaterials for solar to chemical energy conversion applications (including photo and electrocatalysis for water and air purification, water splitting, CO2 reduction) and engineering systems for solar-induced processes. Prof. Amal is a Fellow of the Australian Academy of Technological Sciences and Engineering (FTSE), a Fellow of Australian Academy of Science (FAA). She has received the nation's top civilian honour – the Companion of the Order of Australia – as part of the 2018 Queen's Birthday Honours for her eminent service to chemical engineering, and was named 2019 NSW Scientist of the Year.
Hong He
Prof. Hong He is the Member of the Chinese Academy of Engineering, the Deputy Director of the Research Center for Eco-Environmental Sciences (RCEES), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS). Prof. He received his doctorate (PhD) from the University of Tokyo in 1994. He studied and worked in Japan, the United States, and Canada for 11 years, and thereafter joined RCEES through the “Hundred Talents Program” of the CAS in 2001. His research has mainly focused on fundamental and applied research in environmental catalysis and heterogeneous atmospheric chemistry, with a series of achievements in the areas of diesel emission control technologies, catalytic indoor air purification, and haze formation mechanisms. Prof. He was awarded the National Technology Invention Award (China) in 2011, the National Science and Technology Progress Award (China) in 2014, the Ho Leung Ho Lee Foundation Prize for Scientific and Technological Innovation in 2017, and the National Natural Science Award (China) in 2019.
Sang-Eon Park
Prof. Sang-Eon Park is the Emeritus Professor of Inha Univ., and has been the director of the Laboratory of Nano-Green Catalysis and Nano Center. He has a PhD (1981) from KAIST and experience from Chon Engrg. Co. for 6 years with a post-doc at Texas A. & M. He worked as a principal investigator in KRICT for 16 years. Now, he is the Editor-in-Chief of the Journal of CO2 Utilization and also serves as the Honorary Prof. of several Universities, the editorial boards of several scientific journals, and as an advisory member of several leading international conferences including ICCDU. He has published more than 350 scientific articles and 80 patents, with 7 industrialized projects. His current research interest involves carbon dioxide utilization as an oxidant coined as Soft Oxidant, Promoter, and Enhancer.
1. Introduction
Despite the emergence of alternative and unconventional energy resources, the world's primary energy resource is still fossil fuels and their substitution could not be developed for the coming decades.1–3 With growing fossil fuel utilization and industrial activities, the amount of CO2 emission is continuously rising, and is considered as a primary contributor to the increasingly severe climate change issue.4–7 The average concentration of atmospheric CO2 has shown an extraordinary increase, ranging from 172 to 300 ppm before the latest industrial age to 416.47 ppm on May 30, 2020 according to Earth's CO2.8 Past decades have witnessed great concerns on the catastrophic consequences resulting from ever-rising CO2 emission, for instance, climate change disaster as well as global warming and related energy and environmental issues. Many studies on the CCU scheme are therefore stimulated and proposed. The CCU scenario is regarded as a prominent method for combating anthropogenic carbon emission (Fig. 1). CO2 capture is the most economical feasible method to curb carbon emissions from industrial point sources. Subsequent utilization refers to the deployment of captured CO2 for the synthesis of value-added chemical compounds or enhanced oil recovery.9 Overall, CCU processes are of vital importance for addressing global emission issues and carbon-intensive production.
 Fig. 1  Industrial carbon dioxide capture and utilization chain scheme (Reproduced from ref. 10 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018). 
Recent years have witnessed the achievement of great progress and rapid development in the field of promising CCU materials and their implementation for the effective reduction of CO2 emissions. Considering the lack of a timely review on the state-of-the-art progress of promising CCU techniques, especially from 2017 to date, developing an appropriate and prompt summary of these advanced techniques with a comprehensive understanding is highly necessary. This work aims to be an authoritative, comprehensive, and critical review of the sustainable development for advanced improvements in CCU (storage is not involved in this work), which has received tremendous attention due to its high potential in intensifying global warming. Herein, we summarized the characteristics and properties of both liquid and solid CO2 capturing materials under various operational conditions with possible schemes for the improvement in their CO2 capture ability and CO2 utilization advances in different fields, with their industrial applications systematically compared and discussed.
2. Industrial carbon dioxide capture
CO2 capture is widely recognized as an essential procedure to curb carbon emission from fossil fuel combustion.11,12 At least 550 Gt of CO2 should be removed by the end of this century to limit the atmospheric CO2 level below 350 ppm.13 Generally, CO2 can be trapped via three major methods: pre-combustion, post-combustion, and oxy-fuel combustion.14 The post-combustion process adsorbs CO2 generated from carbon-containing materials after combustion or from flue miasma after fossil commodities.15 Pre-combustion technology employs CO2 separation from fossil commodities prior to the burning process. The oxy-fuel combustion process reduces the quantities of N2 and utilizes pure O2 in the combustion process.16
Post-combustion carbon capture requires minimal retrofitting existing facilities and therefore is regarded as the most efficient process for carbon emission mitigation. The commonly utilized CO2 capture processes for PCC are the liquid-based CO2 capture system and low-temperature solid CO2 capture materials system. Meanwhile, for certain industries, high-temperature solid CO2 capture materials system could also be deployed. Liquid-based CO2 capture system can be divided into two dominant fields, which are liquid amine- and ionic liquid-based systems. Typical low-temperature solid CO2 capture adsorbents consist of solid-amine, carbon, zeolite, MOF, and alkali carbonate-based materials. However, the relatively low CO2 partial pressure from the flue gas remains a great challenge from the separation perspective, which causes poor driving force towards CO2 capture and a large gas volume to be treated.17
The pre-combustion process can be applied in various industrial processes (e.g., IGCC coal fired power plant, biomass hydrogen generation power plant, and natural gas hydrogen power plant). According to the operation temperature of different industrial processes, the commonly utilized solid CO2 capture materials can be divided into intermediate-temperature adsorbents (LDHs and MgO) and high-temperature CO2 sorbents (alkali silicate, CaO, and alkali titanate). However, the main problems for current pre- and post-combustion CO2 capture include the further improvement of reversible CO2 uptake, long-term regenerability, moisture effect, and the optimization of capture kinetics.
2.1. Liquid-based CO2 capture system
Considering the severe global warming issue, it is urgent to develop economic and feasible CO2 capture technologies at the industrial level. Generally, PCC is usually associated with CO2/N2 separation in exhaust flue gas derived from fossil fuel combustion. The main technologies utilized for PCC are chemical absorption, solid adsorption, and membrane separation. Benefiting from the high reactivity with CO2, chemical absorption offers a rapid absorption rate and superior capture efficiency. In addition, the absorption process using liquid-based solvent/absorbent could be easily retrofitted into existing fuel-fired power plants, which has emerged as a very promising technology to capture CO2 in short-to-medium terms. Statistics has shown that absorption-based processes take up about 60% of PCC technologies.18 Amine-based solvents, such as MEA, are the most mature absorbents due to their high absorption rate, large CO2 capacity, low viscosity, and high chemical/thermal stability.19 Nevertheless, amine-based CO2 absorption systems suffer from excessive regeneration energy, equipment corrosion, and amine degradation during operation. Extensive research interest has been devoted for the development of novel liquid-based absorbents for CO2 capture. The main technology options for liquid-based CO2 capture are illustrated in Fig. 2. A detailed overview should be focused on the recent progress in liquid-based CO2 capture systems, including liquid amine-based solvents and ionic liquids (ILs)-based materials from the perspective of molecular engineering.
 Fig. 2  Technology options for liquid-based CO2 capture and strategies to improve the CO2 capture performance. (i) Blended amine solvents; (ii) non-aqueous amine solvents; (iii) biphasic solvents (Reproduced from ref. 20 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018); (iv) catalyst-aided regeneration; (v) ionic liquids (Reproduced from ref. 21 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018); (vi) ionic liquid and amine blend. 

2.1.1 Liquid amine-based solvents. 
Aqueous amines are widely used liquid absorbents for PCC due to their high absorption rate, large CO2 capacity, low viscosity, and high chemical/thermal stability.19 A typical CO2 capture process using absorption/desorption protocol is demonstrated in Fig. 3. In conventional CO2 absorption processes, liquid-based solvents contact with the flue gas counter-currently in the absorber and absorb CO2via chemical reaction at 40–60 °C. The purified gas leaves the absorber, usually achieving a CO2 removal efficiency of 90%. Subsequently, the captured CO2 is released from the CO2-rich solution upon thermal stripping at relatively high temperatures (100–120 °C). The high selectivity of chemical absorption enables a nearly pure CO2 product at the outlet of the stripper. Owing to their high reactivity towards chemical absorption, amine-based absorbents exhibit great advantage in CO2 capture from dilute, low-pressure exhaust gas streams, making the amine scrubbing technology suitable for most existing large-scale, fixed-point CO2 emission sources. However, the reactive nature of chemical absorption poses a challenge due to the high desorption energy demand.
 Fig. 3  The typical absorption/desorption process for CO2 capture using liquid-based solvents and solution characteristics favorable for low regeneration energy consumption. 
In general, the energy consumed in the absorption/desorption process for CO2 capture includes regeneration heat needed in the reboiler, electrical power to drive the circulating pumps, and compressor work for CO2 desorption. The primary obstacle in implementing this “wet-scrubbing” technology is the large regeneration heat needed in the reboiler. The regeneration energy originates from three parts: (1) the sensible heat for solvent heating, (2) the reaction heat for CO2 desorption, and (3) the latent heat to evaporate the solvent, especially water for aqueous amine solvents. These three parts are associated with the inherent properties of amine solvents. The solution characteristics favorable for low regeneration energy consumption are listed in Fig. 3. First, high cyclic capacity (i.e., the difference in the CO2 loading in CO2-rich solution and CO2-lean solution, g CO2 kg−1 solution or mol CO2 L−1 solution), low heat capacity, and low stripping volume are favorable for low sensible heat. Usually, a solvent with large absorption capacity for absorption and superior desorption ability for desorption possesses a high cyclic capacity. Second, low reaction enthalpy for CO2 desorption is beneficial for low reaction heat. However, low reaction enthalpy might be associated with a large stripping steam requirement and a large latent heat. Third, low stripping steam and low evaporation enthalpy are conducive for obtaining low latent heat. In addition, other parameters, such as amine degradation, equipment corrosion, viscosity, reaction kinetic, cost, and environment friendliness should also be taken into account when exploring novel solvents.
2.1.1.1 Basic principle of liquid amine-based absorbents. 
As the most mature amine absorbent, MEA has been employed in industrial carbon capture for over 50 years. Besides, several other amines, e.g., DEA and N-MDEA, have also been widely studied. They absorb and desorb CO2via a reversible reaction with CO2. The corresponding CO2 absorption performance depends largely on the chemical structure of the selected amine. According to the hydrogen number bonded to the nitrogen atom, amines can be categorized into three types: primary amine (with –NH2 group), secondary amine (with –NH group), and tertiary amine (with –N group). Considering the difference in the basicity of various amines, the binding energy between CO2 and amines follows the order: primary amine > secondary amine > tertiary amine. The net reactions between various amines and CO2 are: Primary/secondary amine: CO2 + 2R1R2NH ↔ R1R2NH2+ + R1R2NCOO−(1) Tertiary amine: CO2 + H2O + R1R2R3N ↔ R1R2R3NH+ + HCO3−(2)where R1 and R3 refer to the alkyl/alkanol group, and R2 refers to the hydrogen atom for primary amine or the alkyl/alkanol substituent for secondary amine and tertiary amine.
CO2 absorption in primary and secondary amines is widely suggested to follow the zwitterion mechanism.22,23 As described in eqn (1), primary and secondary amines will form a carbamate after CO2 reaction, thus offering rapid absorption rate but high regeneration energy associated with the stronger C–N bonds generated in the carbamate.24 The enthalpy for CO2 absorption reaction is usually about 80–90 kJ mol−1 CO2 for primary amines and 70–75 kJ mol−1 CO2 for secondary amines. In contrast, CO2 is absorbed into tertiary amines according to the base-catalysed hydration mechanism, wherein tertiary amines could promote CO2 hydrolysis towards bicarbonate formation (eqn (2)), thereby providing a high CO2 capacity and low regeneration heat but slow absorption rate. Moreover, the CO2 absorption enthalpy in tertiary amine generally varies from 40 to 55 kJ mol−1 CO2. Thus, a trade-off between the absorption rate and the regeneration energy exists for CO2 capture using a single amine. Clearly, CO2 absorption using a single amine cannot achieve all the desired performances.
The absorption process using liquid amine solvents is recognized as one of the most effective methodologies for CO2 capture from power plants that burn coal or natural gas. Nevertheless, such amine-scrubbing processes face several challenges. The most important drawback is the expensive operating cost due to the energy demand for solvent regeneration, though it is considered as the cheapest PCC technology available.25 The energy-intensive regeneration process consumes above 60% of the overall energy demand during carbon capture. In particular, the regeneration energy for MEA (nearly 4.0 GJ t−1 CO2) greatly exceeds the theoretical limit and the acceptable value (0.40 and 0.72 GJ t−1 CO2, respectively). Secondly, amine degradation is also considered as a major obstacle in CO2 capture using amine-based absorbents as it increases the operation cost by 10% of the total CO2 capture cost and generates potential secondary pollutants. Also, some of the degradation products have shown to increase corrosion in both carbon steel and stainless-steel systems. Recently, to reduce the amine loss and operational cost induced by amine degradation, amines and amine blends with high degradation resistance were investigated. Also, many inhibitors can be used as radical or oxygen scavengers so as to decrease amine degradation. Thirdly, equipment corrosion is another challenge in the CO2 absorption process, which involves electrochemical reaction with wet CO2 or CO2-loaded amine solution that reduces the equipment lifetime and even causes untimely downtime of the plant and safety accidents. Amine-scrubbing apparatuses, usually made of carbon steel materials, are very prone to corrosion, especially in hot areas such as the regenerator and the heat exchanger. The corrosion rates are related to CO2 concentration, temperature, some of the degradation products, oxygen content, and the amine used.
In addition, heat stable salts (HSS) are usually formed from the irreversible reaction of amines with their degradation products or other impurities in the feed gas.26 They cannot absorb CO2 or decompose through thermal solvent regeneration. The accumulative HSS in the absorption system can lead to several operational problems including CO2 capacity reduction, excessive corrosion, as well as foaming and fouling issues.27 Generally, thermal reclaiming (distillation), electrodialysis (ED), and ion exchange are considered as the most prominent methods for the removal of dissolved HSS from the spent lean amine absorbents. Thermal reclaiming includes the distillation of the purified amine away from the bottoms containing HSS, which is limited by the large energy consumption. ED separates HSS using a direct-current (DC) electric field, which is an energy-efficient procedure with a small footprint and no additional chemicals are required.28 Nevertheless, the ED process is subjected to excessive amine loss in the DC field. Basic ion exchange resins containing hydroxide ions (NaOH or KOH) can exchange the HSS anions to hydroxide ions and restore the CO2 absorption capacity of the spent amines. However, this process consumes a large amount of NaOH or KOH, and the generated alkaline wastewater causes severe secondary pollution.29 Therefore, these limitations promote the further study of chemical absorption for CO2 capture.
2.1.1.2 Progress in liquid amine-based absorbents. 
The three major disadvantages of the amine-scrubbing process, i.e., high regeneration energy, amine degradation, and equipment corrosion, are related to the inherent properties of the selected amines, e.g. such as the low thermal stability, corrosive nature, and high enthalpy for CO2 desorption. For the high regeneration heat, in particular, the optional characteristics for energy-efficient solvents are listed in Fig. 3. On the basis of these considerations, extensive research interest has been focused on developing alternative solvents to conventional amines. In view of the good CO2 absorption performance of amine solvents, most of the research has been focused on the development of liquid amine-based absorbents. Various alternative amine-based absorbents, including blended amine solvents, non-aqueous amine-based solvents, and biphasic solvents have been fabricated to optimize the carbon capture performance of amine scrubbing so as to eliminate the drawbacks. Also, catalyst-aided regeneration is proposed as a potential approach for achieving CO2 desorption below 100 °C and for substantially decreasing the energy demand. Therefore, a focused progress review is given on these four types of liquid amine-based absorbents in the following section.
(1) Blended amine solvents. 
To address the above-mentioned limitations using a single amine for CO2 capture, a number of blends of commercial primary, secondary, and tertiary amines have been developed. The blended amine solvents can reconcile the advantages of different amines, specifically, the fast absorption rate derived from primary/secondary amines together with the low desorption reaction enthalpy and high absorption capacity derived from tertiary/sterically-hindered amines, so as to yield a new-generation of amine-based absorbents for CO2 capture. Bi-amine blend usually introduces certain primary/secondary amines to aqueous tertiary amines, obtaining an optimized performance. For instance, the blending of a small amount of MEA into aqueous MDEA helped to increase the CO2 absorption speed over MDEA and reduced the regeneration heat with respect to single MEA. In addition, increasing the MEA/MDEA ratio can also enhance the reaction kinetics and mass transfer rate. A further increase in the component number to form tri- or quad-amine blends could help to maximize the absorption/desorption speed of CO2 and to minimize the regeneration heat. Blended amine solvents containing multi-components have presented significant improvements in the overall performance such as reaction kinetics, CO2 solubility, mass transfer, stability, corrosion issue, and regeneration heat. In recent publications, a large number of screening studies on bi- and tri-amine blends have been conducted. Considering the complex composition of blended amine absorbents, the reaction mechanism of CO2 absorption is complicated. Liu introduced the blended amine concept into non-aqueous solvents and compared the reaction mechanism in TETA–AMP aqueous and non-aqueous solvents by 13C NMR.30 The carbamate was firstly formed and then CO32−/HCO3− was generated during CO2 absorption (Fig. 4). Accordingly, CO32−/HCO3− was desorbed prior to the desorption of carbamates. On the contrary, carbamate and C2H5OCO2− were formed in the non-aqueous counterpart.
 Fig. 4  NMR spectra of the CO2-loaded TETA/AMP/water blended absorbent (a) in the absorption step and (b) in the desorption step. (c) The CO2 absorption/desorption pathways in aqueous and non-aqueous solvents (Reproduced from ref. 30 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018). 
Besides the lab-scaled experiments for screening blended amine solvents, a pilot plant study on carbon capture using MEA–MDEA (University of Regina), AMP–DA2MP, and PZ–MDEA has been conducted recently. 2M AMP–1.5 M DA2MP possesses increased mass transfer and CO2 absorption efficiency than that of MEA. In addition, due to the lower reaction enthalpy between CO2 and AMP–DA2MP, the regeneration energy was 13.8% lower than that in MEA. Though blended amine solvents are generally more expensive than single amines, the improved overall performance in both lab-scale studies and pilot plant tests demonstrates this type of solvents as promising alternatives for conventional single amines. Moreover, the blended amine solvents could use the typical amine absorption process without further modifications, which is expected to be commercialized in the near future. However, many other factors should be taken into account for the exploration of industrial blended amine solvents, such as viscosity, volatility, toxicity, degradation, and market price.
(2) Non-aqueous amine-based solvents. 
For a typical aqueous amine absorbent, several problems are associated with the diluent water. Its high heat capacity and high vaporization heat are not conducive for energy-efficient regeneration. In addition, equipment corrosion is certainly related to the aqueous conditions. Recently, considerable research attention has turned to novel potential non-aqueous absorbents. Several organic molecules, e.g., EG and diethylene glycol, featuring low heat capacity, evaporation enthalpy (almost half of that of water), and stripping temperature, can be alternatives to water.30 When using these non-aqueous amine-based solvents, most of the required regeneration energy is used to break the CO2-associated products, while the sensible heat and solvent vaporization heat are significantly decreased due to the relatively low heat capacity and evaporation enthalpy of the organic diluent. Therefore, non-aqueous amine solvents enable the feasibility of reducing the energy consumption while maintaining the CO2 absorption reactivity of aqueous amines.31 In addition, compared with traditional aqueous solvents, lower stripping temperatures also can reduce amine losses, thermal degradation, oxidative degradation, and equipment corrosion.32
Lately, intensive research efforts have been devoted to exploring novel non-aqueous absorbents with superior performances. For instance, the AMP–AEEA–NMP non-aqueous solvent was developed with CO2 uptake of 1.65 mmol g−1.32 The low heat capacity of NMP was conducive for low sensible heat and the low evaporation enthalpy of NMP was conducive for low latent heat, thereby resulting in a total regeneration heat down to 2.09 GJ t−1 CO2, which is approximately half of that of the aqueous 5 M MEA solution. Recently, non-aqueous 2-piperidineethanol–ethylene glycol solvent reached an absorption capacity of 0.97 mol CO2 mol−1 through the formation of carbonate species and CO2 desorption occurred at 50 °C, providing a potential candidate for conventional amine solvents.33
Barzagli et al.34,35 compared the CO2 absorption feature in several aqueous and non-aqueous amine absorbents. 13C NMR spectroscopy was found to be a valuable technique to evaluate the species distribution and reaction mechanism in the amine/CO2/solvent systems. When reacting with CO2, carbamate and bicarbonate were formed in the aqueous solution, whereas only carbamate was formed in the non-aqueous solution (Fig. 5). Thus, a higher absorption rate but lower CO2 loading was obtained in non-aqueous solutions. Lately, two kinds of glycol ethers have been used to dilute MEA instead of water.36 Similarly, only carbamate was generated in the non-aqueous solvent, whereas both carbamate and bicarbonate were detected using 13C NMR. The non-aqueous solvents exhibited a higher desorption efficiency, larger cyclic capacity (1.45 mmol g−1, Fig. 5b), and lower vaporization heat than that of aqueous 5 M MEA. Consequently, the non-aqueous solvents substantially reduce the regeneration energy by 55% compared to the aqueous 5 M MEA system (Fig. 5c). However, it is noted that the viscosity of non-aqueous amines is significantly increased with CO2 loading.
 Fig. 5  (a) 13C NMR spectra and the corresponding CO2 absorption behavior of aqueous and non-aqueous amine absorbents (Reproduced from ref. 34 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018). (b) The absorption/desorption cycles of CO2 in MEA/2ME solutions.36 (c) The comparison of regeneration heat duty in aqueous and non-aqueous MEA solutions (Reproduced from ref. 36 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019). (d) The construction and optimization of functionalized ethylenediamines (Reproduced from ref. 37 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2019). 
The rapid viscosity increase during CO2 absorption in non-aqueous amine-based absorbents was recognized as a crucial factor for industrial application by deteriorating the mass transfer and liquid transportation. Based on the correlation of the structure, Liu et al.37 put forward a novel strategy to reduce the viscosity of CO2-loaded non-aqueous solution. A series of ethylenediamine derivatives were constructed as non-aqueous solvents for CO2 capture (Fig. 5d). Favorably low viscosities and good regeneration in the range of 50–80 °C were achieved. In addition, the use of high volatility alcohols as organic diluents is susceptible to severe solvent loss.38 Likewise, poor regeneration performance without N2 sweeping was reported for some non-aqueous amine-based solvents. Prior to applying non-aqueous amine solvents into industrial application, several lab-scale studies are needed to explore remarkable overall performance for carbon capture.
(3) Biphasic solvents. 
Due to the advantages of low stripping volume and regeneration energy consumption, biphasic solvents have received great attention.39 Depending on the phase state of the CO2-rich phase, they are categorized into liquid–liquid and liquid–solid biphasic solvents. Initiated by CO2 absorption or temperature change, the homogenous absorbent can be separated into two single layers. One is the CO2-lean layer and the other is the CO2-rich layer containing most of the captured CO2. Only the CO2-rich phase, which is associated with a small volume flow and highly concentrated CO2, needs stripping, thereby enabling decreased sensible heat and vaporization heat as well as increased CO2 pressure. As a result, an energy-efficient regeneration process and decreased CO2 compression work would be realized.40
IFP Energies Nouvelles firstly developed a DMX process using the thermomorphic biphasic solvent DMX™. It only requires 2.1 GJ t−1 CO2 to desorb CO2, while the regeneration heat is up to 4.0 GJ t−1 CO2 for the conventional 5 M MEA system.41,42 Nowadays, mixed-amine biphasic solvents have attracted intensive attention, which usually contain a primary/secondary amine and a tertiary amine. During the CO2 absorption reaction, the primary or secondary amine with –NH2 or –NH sites, such as MEA and DETA, serves as the absorption accelerator and generates carbamate and protonated amine with high ionic strength. The unreacted tertiary amine with a certain hydrophobicity, such as N,N-dimethylcyclohexylamine and DEEA, contributes to liquid–liquid phase separation. For instance, mixed-amine solvents such as DETA/DEEA, TETA/N,N-dimethylcyclohexylamine,43 and DETA/pentamethyldiethylenetriamine exhibited phase change behavior during CO2 absorption. DEEA–MEA and DEEA–AEEA mixed-amine biphasic solvents showed a high cyclic capacity (0.64 mol CO2 mol−1), fast phase split time (few minutes), and low regeneration energy (2.56 GJ t−1 CO2).
Notably, high viscosity is usually associated with CO2-loaded biphasic solvents, especially due to the highly concentrated CO2-rich phase. The high viscosity could be regulated by the addition of AMP.44 In addition, an excessive rich phase volume ratio with high CO2 loading was found for the mixed amine biphasic solvent, which was detrimental for reducing the regeneration energy consumption.45 Later on, 1-methyl-2-pyrrolidinone was used to replace water partially to advance the phase-splitting property of the mixed amine biphasic solvent.46 Decreasing the water content resulted in improved phase-splitting behavior, decreased CO2 capacity, and decreased regeneration energy. Shen et al.40 proposed a two-stage reaction mechanism between the mixed-amine biphasic solvents and CO2 (Fig. 6a). With the consumption of the unreacted amine groups, the reaction process changed from absorption kinetics control to thermodynamics control. A low temperature at the first stage and an elevated temperature at the second stage were recommended for CO2 absorption.
 Fig. 6  (a) A possible two-stage reaction mechanism between the mixed-amine biphasic solvent BDA–DMCA and CO2 (Reproduced from ref. 40 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020). (b) CO2 absorption mechanism for the MEA–sulfolane biphasic solvent (Reproduced from ref. 20 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018). (c) Volume distribution variation of CO2-loaded biphasic solvents with and without sulfolane.47 (d) CO2 loading in both the layers of CO2-loaded biphasic solvents with and without sulfolane (Reproduced from ref. 47 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019). 
Recently, some organic solvents, such as sufolane and 1-propanol, have been reported to trigger the phase splitting of amine absorbents due to a difference in the hydrophilicity.48–50 The CO2 absorption mechanism for the MEA–sulfolane biphasic solvent is illustrated in Fig. 6b.20 Specifically, during CO2 absorption, sulfolane promoted the phase separation of the MEA solvent, generating a hydrophilic CO2-enriched phase together with a hydrophobic CO2-lean phase. The CO2 absorption speed was accelerated owing to the strong interaction of sulfolane and CO2. Also, the regeneration energy required for stripping such a CO2-rich phase was limited to 2.67 GJ t−1 CO2. In addition, sulfolane was chosen to tune the phase-splitting properties of the DEEA–TETA solvent (Fig. 6c and d).47 Herein, the addition of sulfolane increased the hydrophobic composition in the absorbent, thus decreasing the volume percentage of the hydrophilic CO2-enriched phase.47 The energy required for regenerating the highly concentrated CO2-rich phase was reduced to 1.81 GJ t−1 CO2. To date, developing novel biphasic solvents with low regeneration heat, fast absorption rate, large CO2 absorption capacity, low viscosity, high stability, and low volatility is still a major challenge. Moreover, the optimization of the existing CO2 absorption processes using biphasic solvents needs to be carried out to further decrease the energy consumption and operating costs for CO2 capture.
(4) Catalyst-aided regeneration. 
As a newly developed approach, catalyst-aided regeneration is still in the preliminary stage of exploration. In this scenario, solid acid catalysts, e.g., metal oxides derivatives and functional molecular sieves, have been introduced into amine absorbents to facilitate the breakdown of carbamate species and then release the absorbed CO2 at relatively low temperatures.51 Consequently, solvent regeneration at lower temperatures could be achieved, thus substantially reducing the stripping steam and the regeneration energy. In addition, several drawbacks associated with high temperature, such as the degradation and corrosion issues, would be relieved.
Several types of solid acid catalysts have been developed and evaluated for the catalytic ability to desorb CO2 at lower temperatures and to decrease the energy demand in solvent regeneration. HZSM-5 and γ-Al2O3 solid acid catalysts have been revealed to optimize CO2 desorption and decrease the regeneration energy effectively. In addition, the acidic strength and the Brønsted to Lewis acid ratio are important for the solid catalysts to facilitate CO2 desorption. Lately, the TiO(OH)2 nanocatalyst has been confirmed to increase the CO2 desorption rate from the MEA absorbent by over 4500%, thus ensuring feasible desorption at a lower temperature.52 ZrO2 and ZnO were reported to increase the CO2 desorption efficiency, CO2 cyclic capacity, and CO2 desorption rate by 32%, 56%, and 54%, respectively.53 Ag2O–Ag2CO3 exhibited superior catalytic activity in solvent regeneration, which could increase the CO2 desorption rate by 1000% at 80 °C.51 With the assistance of catalysts, a new route for CO2 desorption was developed with a lower activation energy. A possible reaction mechanism is illustrated in Fig. 7a. In the catalytic cycle, Ag2O and Ag2CO3 interconverted repeatedly.
 Fig. 7  (a) Possible desorption pathway using the Ag2O–Ag2CO3 catalyst (Reproduced from ref. 51 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019). (b) The possible desorption pathway using the SZMF catalyst (Reproduced from ref. 54 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019). 
Liang and Tontiwachwuthikul's group have developed several solid acid catalysts including metal oxide derivatives and metal-modified molecular sieves. The corresponding regeneration energy was reduced by up to 40%.54–57 The key catalyst parameters that determine the CO2 desorption performance are the acid and basic sites, Brønsted to Lewis acid ratio, mesopore structure, and specific surface area. Specifically, strong acidic sites and basic sites could significantly enhance the catalytic reaction. A high Brønsted to Lewis acid ratio is conducive for the catalytic process. Also, the large mesoporous SSA increases the availability of the active sites for catalytic reaction. In addition, for dual site catalysts with both acid and basic sites, such as SZMF, were reported to exhibit good catalytic activity.54,56,57 A possible desorption pathway using the SZMF catalyst was proposed (Fig. 7b).54 The zwitterion mechanism dominated the MEA regeneration process and involved two steps including the breakdown of carbamates and the deprotonation of protonated amines. On the other hand, the basic sites facilitated the deprotonation reaction by taking the protons away from the protonated amines to the carbamates, and the metal atoms (Fe, Zr) and acid sites facilitated the transformation of MEA-carbamate to MEA and CO2. The novel pathway provided an energy-efficient opportunity for low temperature CO2 desorption.
The catalyst-aid regeneration approach exhibits great potential in reducing the required regeneration heat duty. Nevertheless, as a newly-developed approach under preliminary exploration, the research on catalyst-aided regeneration is limited to few kinds of catalysts, some of which are expensive, unstable, and difficult to separate, rendering this catalyst-aided CO2 desorption barely feasible. It is crucial to design solid acid catalysts with high catalytic performance, good stability, inexpensive cost, and easy separation. Moreover, establishing a feasible absorption–desorption process with solid acid catalysts is necessary for future industrialization.
2.1.1.3 Summary and outlook of liquid amine-based absorbents. 
Exploring novel efficient absorbents and developing the CO2 capture process with suitable heat integration remain major challenges in liquid amine-based CO2 capture. Among the promising amine-based solvents under investigation, blended amine solvents are promising for use in industrial implementation in the near future as they preserve excellent CO2 absorption performance including rapid absorption speed and low regeneration heat, and the traditional amine absorption process can be used almost directly without further changes. Both lab-scale and pilot plant studies validated the feasibility of blended amine solvents as promising alternatives for conventional single amines. To explore the industrial scale blended amine solvents, not only the performance-limited factors, such as the cyclic capacity, absorption kinetics, and desorption enthalpy, but also many other factors, such as the viscosity, volatility, toxicity, degradation, corrosion, and market price, should be taken into account.
In the last decade, screening studies on biphasic solvents have been extensively conducted. They are capable of decreasing the low regeneration heat without sacrificing the CO2 capacity and absorption rate. Nevertheless, the problems of high regeneration temperature as well as high viscosity accompanied by biphasic solvents need to be carefully studied. So far, developing biphasic solvents with good overall performance including low regeneration heat, rapid absorption speed, large CO2 absorption capacity, low degradation, low viscosity, low corrosivity, and low volatility for further scale-up pilot tests is highly required. Furthermore, to achieve industrial level low-energy CO2 capture, process establishment and optimization need to be performed urgently.
Non-aqueous amine absorbents and catalyst-aid generation are still under preliminary exploration. Their feasibility should be evaluated prior to industrial utilization. Non-aqueous amine absorbents provide great opportunities to strip CO2 with decreased regeneration heat at lower temperature, thereby reducing amine loss and equipment corrosion as well. Solvent screening and the study on the CO2 absorption/desorption mechanism are still in progress. The rapid viscosity increases during CO2 absorption, high volatility when using alcohols as organic diluent, and poor regeneration performance without N2 sweeping should be paid more attention. Catalyst-aid generation is still under lab-scale exploration for the design of efficient catalysts and the study on the mechanism of catalytic desorption, which might be industrialized in the medium to long term. By now, only a few solid acid catalysts have been proposed. It is highly desirable to design efficient solid acid catalysts for low-energy CO2 desorption with good stability and low cost. In addition, dedicated processes for each technology option should be developed to drastically reduce the energy consumption and the operating cost.


2.1.2 Ionic liquid-based solvents for CO2 capture. 
A lot of research work has been conducted to explore alternative absorbents for traditional amine-based solvents. ILs are organic salts and are generally composed of designable organic cation and anion, which provide inherent structure tunability, high thermal stability, negligible volatility, low corrosion, and good CO2 solubility,58 thus enabling them as promising candidates for CO2 capture with low volatility, good stability, low degradation, low corrosivity, as well as low regeneration energy requirement. The main advantage of ILs in CO2 capture is that they can absorb CO2 by consuming lower regeneration heat than that consumed by amine-based solvents.
2.1.2.1 Basic principle of ionic liquid-based absorbents. 
According to the structure of ILs and the interaction between IL absorbents and CO2, they are typically divided into physical ILs (physical absorption) and functional ILs (chemical absorption). Initially, physical ILs with suitable cations and anions, such as imidazolium-based ILs, were proposed for CO2 capture. The CO2 solubility in physical ILs could be promoted through the fluorination of the anion and increment in the alkyl side chain length. The interaction (van der Waals forces) between the ILs and CO2 is usually weak, leading to low regeneration energy but limited CO2 absorption rate, capacity, and selectivity. In addition, due to the high viscosity of physical ILs, their CO2 absorption process is revealed to be controlled by limited mass transfer rather than by CO2 solubility.59 These drawbacks of physical ILs hinder their large scale industrial implementation.60 The mass transfer limitation in physical ILs could be settled by altering appropriate anions such as dicyanamide [DCN]− or tricyanomethanide [TCM]−,59 or by decreasing the gas–liquid resistance via supported ILs or encapsulated ILs.
Alternatively, functionalized ILs have been proposed to upgrade the CO2 capture performance by introducing reactive functional groups for chemical absorption. Owing to the structural tenability of ILs, it is feasible to design cation and anion groups for specific desired properties such as low viscosity, high CO2 capacity, and low reaction enthalpy. In particular, their absorption enthalpy can be conveniently regulated by the anion, which determines the regeneration heat of the ILs. Therefore, these functional ILs with chemisorption sites exhibited improved CO2 absorption performance, becoming potential alternatives for amine absorbents. In addition, ILs can directly capture CO2 without blending water diluent and the regeneration section was simplified due to the low vapor pressure of the ILs, thereby further reducing the regeneration energy as compared with the conventional amine-scrubbing process.60
2.1.2.2 Progress in ionic liquid-based solvents. 
To address the above-mentioned problems of physical ILs, certain structure modifications can be conducted by introducing suitable task-specific functional groups. The first functionalized IL was initially developed by functionalizing the imidazolium cation with a primary amine moiety.61 Similar to MEA, IL absorbed CO2 in a 1:2 stoichiometry and formed ammonium carbamate salts. Carboxylate-based or acetate-based ILs were proposed as pioneers and widely investigated for CO2 chemisorption. In particular, [Bmim][acetate] is usually used as the benchmark when developing new ILs. It possesses a large CO2 capacity and low reaction enthalpy associated with the reaction product of carboxylate. Nevertheless, their thermal degradation problem and poor mass transfer for high viscosity remain unsolved.
Lately, AA-ILs have received wide attention for their non-toxic biodegradability and large CO2 capacity. As reported, AA-ILs functionalized by an amine- or amino-acid could increase the CO2 solubility and reach a CO2 capacity of about 1.60 mol mol−1 of the absorbent.62 The CO2 capacity was influenced by the length of the amino-acids side chain and was strongly related to the amount of reactive groups (e.g., amine groups).63 However, AA-ILs still suffer from high viscosity due to the hydrogen bond network in the CO2-loaded AA-ILs solution, which might be mitigated by isolating the amino groups in the anion and, therefore, reduce the hydrogen bonding possibilities.64
Alternatively, AHA-ILs, primarily having 2-cyanopyrrole anions ([CNPyr]), are potential alternatives for CO2 chemisorption due to their high CO2 solubility (1:1 stoichiometry), high reaction rates, and good stability.65 Notably, the viscosity of the proposed ILs was quite low. The reaction mechanisms for the reaction between [DETAH][AHA] and CO2 are presented in Fig. 8a, wherein [DETAH]+ enabled a fast absorption rate of CO2, and [AHA]− ensured large absorption capacity and low regeneration heat. More specifically, the deprotonation of the alkyl chain was confirmed to be a key factor in CO2 absorption, which was determined by the basicity of the anion together with the alkyl chain length.
 Fig. 8  (a) Possible absorption and desorption pathways between [DETAH][AHA] and CO2 (Reproduced from ref. 65 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019). (b) Phase separation diagram for IL–1-propanol–water biphasic solvent.66 (c) Thermodynamic of varied IL–1-propanol–water solutions at 393.15 K (Reproduced from ref. 66 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020). (d) Plot of viscosity of imidazoline IL and amine blends (Reproduced from ref. 67 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019). 
Despite their promising CO2 capture performance, functional ILs are still limited by the high cost and low gas–liquid mass transfer resulting from the high viscosity, which hinders their industrial application. Besides the composition modification on ILs, supporting, encapsulating, and using co-solvents are suggested to reduce the viscosity and solve the transport limitations. A biphasic solvent was developed by diluting dual-functionalized ionic liquid ([DETAH][Tz]) with 1-propanol–water co-solvent.66 The phase separation diagram for the IL–1-propanol–water biphasic solvent is shown in Fig. 8b. Good phase separation and low viscosity (2.57 mPa s) were obtained. The regeneration heat was 47.63% lower than that for MEA (Fig. 8c).
The high volatility, high energy penalty of amine, as well as the high cost and viscosity of ILs largely limit their further industrialization in carbon capture. Blending conventional amine solution with functional ILs as activators can effectively preserve the desired performance of amines and ILs. This strategy offers a promising absorbent with less regeneration penalty than that in the conventional amine process, as well as better process economics and higher CO2 absorption rates than that of ILs. Recently, Liang et al.67 studied the CO2 absorption performance in several low-viscosity binary absorbents containing imidazoline ILs and amines. The MDEA–[BEIM][BF4] blended absorbent exhibited large CO2 capacity, low viscosity (Fig. 8d), and good regenerability. Besides, the [bpy][BF4]–MEA binary solvent was reported to achieve 15% energy saving and 7.44% reduction in cost than that of the conventional MEA (30 wt%) solvent. Also, the increase in the [bpy][BF4] concentration would still further reduce the total energy and operating cost. Overall, ILs and amine blends are promising candidates, which can achieve energy-saving and cost-effective CO2 capture.
2.1.2.3 Summary and outlook of ionic liquid-based solvents. 
ILs are potential candidates for CO2 absorption due to their low volatility, good stability, low corrosivity, low degradation, and low regeneration heat. However, several obstacles, such as the high cost and excessive viscosity, limit their further application. The mass transfer problem and increased pump work for liquid transportation would be caused by the high viscosity. The design of task-specific ILs is required to optimize the viscosity, cost, and reaction enthalpy of the ILs. Molecular simulation is powerful to screen the ILs and to explore the role of various cations and anions. At the present stage, it is difficult for pure ILs to compete with conventional amine solvents. The viscosity could be reduced by blending the ILs with the co-solvent or amine solution, and the cost issue can be balanced by the decreased regeneration heat. Therefore, precise feasibility and economic assessment are needed before the industrial scale application of ILs. In addition, the pilot scale test on IL-based absorbents should be necessarily performed to evaluate their carbon capture performance.


2.1.3 Implementation and challenges in the applications. 
A large number of amine-based absorption technologies have been investigated at the pilot- and demonstration-scales. To optimize the absorption performance and to reduce the energy demand of CO2 capture from power plant emissions, some configurations and process integration, for instance, absorber intercooling, solvent split-flow, flash stripper, and stripper inter-heating, have been intensively investigated.68,69 Though higher plant efficiency would be achieved by the process of integration, the increase in the investment cost is inevitable due to the increased complexity of the process,70 which should be techno-economically evaluated prior to commercialization. The combination of liquid-based solvent and membrane provides a promising option for CO2 absorption. CO2 solvent that placed at the permeate side can immediately absorb the permeated CO2; once the CO2 molecule has diffused across the membrane, it leads to fast CO2 removal rates. Recently, many institutions and companies have performed pilot plant tests and reached a CO2 absorption capacity up to 80 t CO2 per day.71–73 URCASOL™ (DOW and ALSTOM), IHI, and RS2™ solvents exhibit significantly lower energy penalty for regeneration than that by MEA.74
Lately, demonstration scale tests have been performed to provide references for further commercial implementation. Among several technology suppliers for PCC, Shell Cansolv™ and MHI are two main technology suppliers for full-scale amine-based CO2 capture. The liquid-amine based CO2 capture approach has been implemented at the commercial demonstration scale in Boundary Dam project and Petra Nova project. The Boundary Dam project was designed to capture CO2 from a 160 MW coal-fired power plant since 2014 in Saskatchewan, Canada. The Petra Nova project was built to treat the flue gas from a 240 MW coal-fired power plant (1.4 million tons of CO2 per year) since 2017 in Texas, USA.17 These two projects produce CO2 at the semi-commercial scale and promote the further full-scale commercialization of liquid-based CCS technology. Unlike the conventional CO2 capture process using monophasic amine absorbent, few absorption processes have been built for newly developed biphasic solvents. Taking the demixing solvent process (DMX™, IFP Energies Nouvelles) as an example, a demixing unit, namely, a decanter, is installed prior to the stripper. The CO2-rich phase and the CO2-lean phase are demixed in this unit and the CO2-rich phase is sent for thermal regeneration.75 Further investigation on pilot- and demonstration-scale tests is crucial to validate the techno-economic feasibility of biphasic solvents and other novel solvents.
Overall, liquid-based CCS technology is designed to capture CO2 from fossil fuel-related plants. The demand for commercial-scale CCS technology is increasing according to the reduction targets of CO2 emissions. CCS technologies are expected to mitigate 30% of the total CO2 emission reduction by 2050. Despite the feasibility of the CCS technology, which has been industrially validated, its further commercialization is still limited due to technical and economic problems. The major obstacle is the large energy consumption associated with CO2 capture. For instance, when the state-of-the-art amine unit is installed, the thermal efficiency of the power plant would be reduced by 18–30% and the electricity prices would be increased by 45–70%,76,77 which poses a vital challenge for the advancement of CCS technology.16 Therefore, liquid-based CO2 capture technology still needs substantial improvements in solvent development and process design to decrease the energy cost and reach a commercially affordable price. Moreover, considering the excessive cost for CCS at the current stage, its full deployment cannot be achieved without suitable policy actions, such as carbon price, adequate emissions trade system, global carbon pricing tax, performance standards, and CO2 storage regulation.74

2.2. Low-temperature solid CO2 adsorbents

2.2.1 Solid amine-based adsorbents. 
Solid amine-based adsorbents are excellent CO2 capture compounds with high capacities at low CO2 partial pressure (10–15%), low regeneration temperature (<100 °C), and less corrosion of the equipment.78 CO2 molecules interact with amino groups and form carbamic acid, carbamate, and bicarbonate.79 The nature of the adsorbed species varies in terms of amine loading, amine type, amine sites’ density, the amine molecular size immobilized on the solid support, and, more importantly, the CO2 partial pressure.80 Given that the adsorptive properties of amine-enriched adsorbents are mainly based on chemisorption, the poor thermal regeneration ability remains a major drawback. CO2 retention is expected to occur with the contribution of adsorbed moisture molecules. Since then, many groups have fabricated amine-based solid adsorbents by supporting amines on porous materials including silica,81,82 carbon,83 MOFs,84,85 zeolites,86 clays,87,88 graphite/graphene89,90 and polymers91 so as to improve the CO2 adsorption capacity (Fig. 9). However, considering the complex synthesis and overall performance, its industrial widespread application is still far from fulfilment.
 Fig. 9  Promising substitutes for amine-based adsorbents associated with lower energy consumption for regeneration, including zeolites (Reproduced from ref. 81 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018), MOF (Reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018), silica (Reproduced from ref. 78 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019), polymers (Reproduced from ref. 91 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019), graphite/graphene (Reproduced from ref. 89 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2018), and clays (Reproduced from ref. 87 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018). 
2.2.1.1 Effect of impurities. 
Amine-based adsorbents are vulnerable to deterioration through a variety of chemical pathways, such as irreversible SO2 adsorption, oxidative degradation of amines, steam-induced degradation of porous supports, and CO2-rich atmospheric urea formation. The amines undergo rapid oxidative degradation in the presence of O2 (3–4%), which is the greatest obstacle in industrial application. In 2018, Min and coworkers synthesized an oxidation-stable modified PEI/silica that displays extraordinarily superior oxidative stability with a minor loss of 8.5% in CO2 uptake after one month of aging in the flue gas containing oxygen at 110 °C (Fig. 10a).92 Despite the fairly low SO2 concentration (500–2000 ppm) in the flue gas, it is much more acidic than CO2 and can still cause irreversible poisoning effect and the gradual deactivation of the basic sites contained in the amine-based adsorbents. Consequently, the development of highly SO2-resistant amine-based adsorbents can substantially reduce the desulfurization cost. Primary and secondary amines generate thermally stable salts through interaction with SO2 (stable up to 200 °C), which cannot be decomposed back to free amines at the typical regeneration temperatures. In contrast, tertiary amines react with SO2 to generate a moderately stable adduct, which can be regenerated below 130 °C. However, due to the shortage of free protons at the amine sites, tertiary amines fail to form carbamate species and are therefore not favorable for CO2 adsorption. Recently, Kim's group synthesized an amine-based CO2 adsorbent with high SO2-resistance, exhibiting only a slight CO2 uptake decay (8.52%) with 50 ppm SO2 over 1000 CO2 adsorption/desorption cycles, compared with conventional PEI/SiO2 (65.1%), as depicted in Fig. 10b. A surface protection layer enriched with tertiary amines is introduced to primarily and reversibly capture SO2 in the flue gas, whereas desulfurized CO2 is freely trapped on primary and secondary amines beneath the layer.93
 Fig. 10  (a) Synthesis of oxidation-stable CO2 adsorbent. PEI was functionalized with EB, which generates tethered 2-hydroxybutyl groups,92 (b) SO2-resistant amine-containing CO2 adsorbent with a surface protection layer (Reproduced from ref. 93 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019). 
2.2.1.2 Summary and outlook of solid amine-based adsorbents. 
For commercial implementation, the CO2 capture capacity should be stable over a long-period of repeated adsorption/desorption cycles. Generally, lower regenerability requires continuous replenishment with fresh adsorbents, causing a significant increase in the material cost towards CO2 capture. Recently, Ouyang and coworkers prepared low-cost millimeter-sized TEPA functionalized palygorskite spheres for industrial-scale CO2 capture with high capture capacity as well as excellent reusability characteristics. The uniform particle size, good sphericity, and excellent mechanical properties made the spheres highly favorable for the direct utilization and easy regeneration in large-scale industrial applications.88 Amine-based adsorbents have been proved to be viable for industrialization to capture CO2 in the post-combustion process, albeit with serious shortcomings including high regeneration energy consumption and equipment corrosion. Besides, the repeatability of CO2 capture performance for these adsorbents is somehow inferior and inaccurate as the amino groups generated between the organic amines and the support with a mesoporous structure are difficult to manipulate. In addition, organic amines with poor thermal stability are vulnerable to deactivation and decomposition under a high temperature environment, which restricts the operational conditions of amine-based adsorbents. The SOx and NOx impurities that co-exist in the flue gas harm the regenerability of the adsorbents; therefore, the units operated for such adsorbents should be set behind the desulfurization and denitrification processes in industrial applications.


2.2.2 Carbon-based adsorbents. 
Carbon-based CO2 adsorbents are a kind of promising candidates for CO2 adsorption due to their high specific surface area, low price, excellent chemical stability, hydrophobicity, controllable textural properties, and low energy requirements for regeneration. However, as mentioned in previous papers,94 CO2 adsorption on carbon adsorbents is “physical” and weak, making them sensitive to the reaction temperature with low CO2 selectivity. In the temperature range of the power plant flue gas (50–120 °C), the CO2 adsorption capacity drops dramatically. Therefore, to solve this problem, the adsorbate/adsorbent interaction as well as CO2 selectivity must be improved. Currently three main methodologies, including (1) tuning the textural properties of carbon, (2) chemical modification of carbon surfaces, and (3) preparation of carbon-based hybrid composites, are being adopted to improve carbon-based CO2 capture performance (Fig. 11).
 Fig. 11  Different methods to improve the performance of carbon-based CO2 adsorbents95–100 (Reproduced from ref. 95 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2012; reproduced from ref. 96 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017; reproduced from ref. 98 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017; reproduced from ref. 99 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019; reproduced from ref. 100 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2013). 
2.2.2.1 Tuning the textural properties of carbon. 
As reported, the pore structure and SSA greatly influence the CO2 adsorption performance of carbon-based materials.101 In particular, porous carbons with high porosity have been considered as ideal candidates for CO2 adsorption due to their fast kinetics, good reversibility, and high recyclability, which is attributed to the presence of abundant pores generated during carbonization using activating agents. Several approaches have been adopted to increase the SSA and to regulate the pore structure, such as using different precursors and chemical modifications (KOH, NaOH, ZnCl2, H3PO4, H2O2, and K2CO3) to form porous carbons. Typically, KOH is one of the most commonly used activation reagents for obtaining porous carbons. High SSA and well-developed microporous structures of carbon adsorbents can be obtained by KOH, which could give rise to a high SSA of ∼2500–3000 m2 g−1 and a desired pore size distribution. Besides, the CO2 uptake of KOH-activated porous carbon is mostly higher than 4 mmol g−1 at 25 °C. Sevilla et al.102 fabricated a sustainable porous carbon material from hydrothermally-treated polysaccharides and biomass activated by KOH at different temperatures. The narrow micropores play an essential role for achieving the good CO2 capture performance of 4.8 mmol g−1 at 25 °C.
However, activation with KOH suffers from two main problems: one is that KOH requires a high temperature (≥600 °C) during the activation process, which is not energy efficient. Besides, KOH is highly corrosive and the corrosivity increases significantly with elevated activation temperatures, which greatly restricts the practical applications. Therefore, Sevilla et al.103 put forward a chemical activation method by using the less corrosive and toxic potassium oxalate. The direct activation of glucose with potassium oxalate showed excellent CO2 uptake in the range of 4.2–4.5 mmol g−1. When combined with melamine-mediated activation together, the micro-/mesoporous structure carbons could be obtained and at a relatively high pressure, the CO2 uptake could reach 32–33 and 44–49 mmol g−1 at 30 bar and 50 bar, respectively. Potassium oxalate as an activation agent can also achieve good CO2 capture performance. Moreover, the narrow micropores are beneficial for CO2 adsorption at pressures <1 bar and micropores/mesopores are favorable for CO2 adsorption at high pressures (Fig. 12a). The narrow micropore (<1 nm) presented an important factor in the high CO2 adsorption capacity of the carbon materials at the ambient conditions. Qi et al.104 studied the underlying mechanism of carbon capture capacity and CO2 selectivity by first-principles simulation, in which the adsorbed carbon dioxide poses a stronger thermal effect in all the micropores, resulting in higher CO2 selectivity. As the pore size decreases, the pores become more and more sensitive to the distinction of CO2, indicating that CO2 adsorption depends on ultra-micropores to a large extent (Fig. 12b).
 Fig. 12  (a) Chemical activation method for preparing sustainable porous carbon (Reproduced from ref. 103 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018) and (b) relationship between adsorption heat and pore diameter calculated by first-principles (Reproduced from ref. 104 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019). 
2.2.2.2 Chemical modification of carbon surfaces. 
Though the optimized porous carbons have the advantages of good reversibility and high recyclability, obtaining good CO2 adsorption and sufficient selectivity of CO2/N2 still remains a challenge. Especially for practical applications, when separating CO2 from other gas, the selectivity is even more important than the CO2 adsorption capacity. Pure carbons have a weak affinity towards CO2 due to their low polarity; thus, CO2 adsorption as well as CO2/N2 selectivity need to be improved. For instance, commercial activated carbon Norit R1 presents a very high SSA but a low IAST CO2/N2 selectivity of <5.105 However, both CO2 and N2 are linear symmetric molecules; the quadrupole moment of CO2 is slightly higher than that of N2 due to the polar CO bonds (13.4 × 10−40 cm2vs. 4.7 × 10−40 cm2). Therefore, the chemical modification of carbon surfaces, such as introducing heteroatoms (nitrogen, sulfur element, etc.) into the carbon framework or functional groups on the surface is usually adopted to increase the polarity of CO2, thus resulting in a high CO2 uptake over N2.106
Both N- and S-doping can increase the adsorbate/adsorbent electrostatic interactions as well as the heat of adsorption, which are beneficial for CO2 adsorption.107 The high CO2 uptake and selectivity of N-doped porous carbon108 were closely related to the high pore volume and nitrogen content, indicating that a suitable pore size and distribution as well as nitrogen on carbon play important roles in the selectivity performance.109 In addition, S-doping can also increase the interaction between CO2 molecules and carbonaceous materials, leading to a higher CO2 capacity. For example, Li and co-workers96 demonstrated that S doping can significantly improve the CO2 adsorption by GSP and CO2 capacity of 51 mmol mol−1 was obtained for this material, which increased by 39.85% compared to the counterpart without S-doping at 27 °C and 1 bar. The selectivity of CO2/N2 increased with increasing S content. The adsorption energy between the S-GSP surface and the CO2 molecules can be improved by S-doping, thus enhancing CO2 adsorption performance by the S-GSP material (Fig. 13).
 Fig. 13  Electron-density distributions of CO2 on the surface of graphene (a) without S-doping and (b) with S-doping. (c) Adsorption energy per CO2versus the number of CO2 molecules; (d) CO2/N2 selectivity versus the adsorption pressure at 27 °C; optimized structures for (e) 1CO2, (f) 12CO2, (g) 1CO2, and (h) 12CO2 on the surface of graphene with or without S-doping (Reproduced from ref. 96 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017). 
In addition to the doping of heteroatoms (mainly nitrogen and sulfur elements) in the carbon framework, the interaction between CO2 and the adsorbent can also be enhanced through the incorporation of amine groups into the porous carbons. Amine-functionalities can be dispersed inside the carbon pores, thus enhancing the CO2 capture performance. For example, Liu et al.110 grafted PEI onto HG and this new type of HG–PEI material exhibited a CO2 uptake of 4.13 mmol g−1 (25 °C, 1 atm), together with a good cycling stability at both low (100 °C) and high (135 °C) desorption temperatures. Except for the impregnation method, grafting with amino groups is also used for surface modification. Compared with the impregnation method, the advantages of grafted functional groups are stability and no desorption during the regeneration process. Amino incorporation in MCMs and MCNs by impregnation with PEI and grafting with EDA (Fig. 14) was carried out by Chai et al.111 The MCNs modified with PEI were preferred for CO2 capture, with a CO2 uptake of 1.97 mmol g−1 at 75 °C as well as high cyclic stability. Generally, carbon-based materials show natural CO2 affinities via physical adsorption; the addition of amino species leads to a reduction in the SSA, pore volume, and active sites of carbon, causing a loss in the CO2 adsorption capacity at low temperatures. However, the introduction of amines alters the adsorption mechanism from physical adsorption to chemisorption or combined physical and chemisorption mechanism, leading to enhanced CO2 uptake in moisture conditions or at higher temperatures, along with enhanced CO2 selectivity.
 Fig. 14  Two different methods for the amino functionalization of mesoporous carbons (Reproduced from ref. 111 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016). 
2.2.2.3 Preparation of carbon-based hybrid composites. 
Apart from tuning the textural properties or surface chemical modification of carbon, the third method for improving the CO2 uptake involves the preparation of carbon-based hybrid composites, such as carbon–MOF and carbon–carbon. For instance, HCM combined with Cu3(BTC)2 was prepared by Qian and co-workers (Fig. 15),95 exhibiting high CO2 uptake and selectivity for the CO2 molecule as well as good regeneration ability under mild conditions. Despite the excellent CO2 adsorption performance and relatively good CO2/N2 selectivity, there are still some problems to be addressed to allow the commercial application of carbon-based adsorbents, including the long-term stability to other components in the flue gas (NOx and SOx), low regeneration energy, and high reusability. The thermal stability and adsorption scale also need to be further investigated. In addition, other techniques such as DAC should also be developed to capture CO2 from a low concentration medium so as to reduce CO2 emissions.
 Fig. 15  (a) Synthetic process, (b) breakthrough curve, and (c) cycle performances of HCM–Cu3(BTC)2-x materials (Reproduced from ref. 95 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2012). 


2.2.3 Zeolite-based adsorbents. 
Among porous materials for CO2 separation, zeolites have traditionally shown promising results and have been widely used in PSA processes (<200 °C)112 due to their good availability, low cost, high specific surface area, high CO2 uptake, fast kinetics, and good chemical and thermal stability. Zeolites possess better capture capacity and higher CO2/N2 selectivity at low CO2 partial pressure (15% CO2, 85% N2) in the flue gas in contrast to activated carbons.112 The underlying mechanism contains strongly-bound carbonates via bi-coordination or CO2 physisorption via ion–dipole interaction. The CO2 selectivity towards other gases (CH4, H2O, N2, etc.) is still limited and their adsorption performances are vulnerable to the operational temperature.113 Generally, changing the framework structure and composition is proved to be an efficient methodology to improve the CO2 capture performance of such adsorbents.114
2.2.3.1 Cation exchange modifications. 
To improve the CO2/N2 selectivity in flue gases, a series of modifications based on cation exchange to effectively fabricate new zeolites has been reported. The CO2 adsorption characteristics and pore volume of zeolites can be profoundly influenced by the type of extra-framework cation. The intimate Coulombic interactions between extra-framework cations and CO2 give rise to selective capture and strong binding. The CO2 adsorption performance of zeolites highly depends on the electropositive character, cation concentration, and ionic radii.115 In 2018, Chen and co-workers employed microscopic-level molecular simulation to investigate different cation exchanges in 13X zeolite for high separation performance. The CO2 uptake and average CO2/N2 selectivity of the developed polymetallic cation-exchanged LiPdAgX zeolite were increased by 25.2% and 179.3% than those of 13X, respectively.115
2.2.3.2 Impregnation with amines. 
In addition, researchers have begun to modify the zeolites by either grafting or impregnating different amines to further enhance the CO2 uptake, which is closely correlated with the surface amine density, amine ligand basicity, and porous silica matrix dimensionality. For instance, Zeleňák and co-workers modified SBA-15 with three amine ligands (AP, DA, and TA), with mono-, di-, and tri-amine atoms, respectively. At low CO2 pressures, the adsorptive capacity highly depends on the amine center numbers and the surface density of the ligand. Driven by physisorption at higher pressures, the adsorptive capacity largely depends on the pore volume of SBA-15 and the entropic factor.116 Mohamedali and coworkers prepared ZIF-8 zeolites with the impregnation of ionic liquid, which exhibited substantially better CO2/N2 selectivity and higher CO2 uptake at 30–50 °C than that of conventional ZIF-8.117
2.2.3.3 Preparation of zeolite-based hybrid materials. 
Preparing zeolite-based hybrid materials to appropriately tune the final properties is another research direction in this field. For instance, Song's group successfully deposited an ultrathin microporous TiO2 layer on the 5A zeolite surface using the MLD technique to succeed in fine-tuning of the pore entrance towards the kinetic diameter between the N2 and CO2 molecules. The modified zeolite composite exhibited superior CO2/N2 selectivity (∼70) and a greatly improved CO2 capture capacity of 1.62 mmol g−1.118 Organic–inorganic composites have become a hot interest for various gas separation processes due to their beneficial synergistic effect. Recently, Minelli and coworkers developed novel geopolymer–zeolite composite monoliths, which exhibited a high CO2 adsorption capability of 1.1 mmol g−1.119
3D-printing technique has emerged as a promising approach for precisely and rapidly manufacturing materials with desirable configurations. Thakkar and coworkers fabricated novel zeolite-incorporated Torlon polymer composite monoliths via 3D printing technique for the first time, with outstanding mechanical strength, favorable textural properties, rapid phase separation performance, and superior CO2 uptake (1.83 mmol g−1).120 Furthermore, Wang's group proposed a versatile scheme to fabricate mechanically vigorous binder-free zeolite monoliths (Fig. 16). The material with hierarchical structures exhibits outstanding mechanical properties and a high equilibrium CO2 capture capability of 5.58 mmol g−1.121
 Fig. 16  Schematic diagram of the fabrication procedure of 3D-printed mechanically robust binder-free zeolite monoliths.121 
2.2.3.4 Summary and outlook of zeolite-based adsorbents. 
Overall, the research hot topics in zeolite-based CO2 materials are briefly summarized in Fig. 17. Fine-tuning the interior pores of zeolites with enhanced adsorption characteristics has emerged as an efficient method to improve their gas separation properties. The extra framework cation type exhibits a profound influence on the CO2 capture capacity and the pore volume of zeolites. The functionalization of amine sites with electron-withdrawing or bulky groups leads to very low adsorption heats. The methodology of pore confinement makes the fabrication of scalable and efficient zeolite adsorbents possible so that they can be applied in size-selective separations. The trade-off between the adsorption capacity, diffusion kinetics, and mechanical stability of zeolites remains a great challenge in their industrial applications. Furthermore, the existence of moisture greatly influences the CO2 capture performance of zeolites-based materials as they are not useful at higher operation temperatures with low CO2 partial pressure due to the physical adsorption mechanism.
 Fig. 17  A brief summary of the research activities on zeolite-based CO2 adsorbents12,115–119,122 (Reproduced from ref. 117 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018; reproduced from ref. 118 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018; reproduced from ref. 122 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019; reproduced from ref. 116 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018; reproduced from ref. 119 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018). 


2.2.4 MOF-based adsorbents. 
Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) are a novel category of crystalline nano-porous materials,123,124 which are composed of transition metal ions connected by bridging organic ligands to generate porous structures, with various physical and chemical properties, such as ultrahigh specific surface areas and large porosities. The wide-ranging alternative possibilities of organic linkers and transition metals lead to the development of various MOFs with tunable adsorption sites so as to enable selective and energy-efficient CO2 capture. MOFs have particularly attracted attention due to their typically high pore volume and specific surface area, which offer abundant void space and numerous adsorption sites to host CO2. The exceptional tunability of MOFs provides chemically and structurally tailorable nanopores as they possess optimal adsorption sites with careful positioning towards selective CO2 physisorption (<200 °C).125 CO2 adsorption is expected to be critically influenced by both the topology and chemistry of the MOF pores. To enhance the CO2 selectivity and affinity, Anderson and coworkers investigated the role of a variety of topological and pore chemical features of MOFs for the enhancement of CO2 capture. The CO2 capture capacity of the parent MOFs is often improved via functionalization with amino, nitro, hydroxyl, cyano-, or thiol-related chemistries but the efficacy depends strongly on the pore topology-related descriptors.125,126
Generally, MOFs beat zeolites in terms of the working capacities, energy consumptions, and efficiencies.113 Their performance can be further improved by post-synthetic modification,127 functionalization of organic linkers,128–130 and doping nanomaterials117,131 into their frameworks.132,133 A stronger CO2 molecule interaction with MOF was achieved by post-synthetic rapid heat treatment, giving rise to drastically improved adsorption performance. The temperature-activated transport confirmed the lattice stiffening.134 The introduction of a tertiary amine linker yields a higher affinity for CO2, leading to increased overall CO2 adsorption capacity.129 Less polar or non-polar solvents have more benefits than more polar ones towards alkylamine incorporation into MOFs. Alkylamine molecules dispersed in less polar solvents possess higher chemical potential, driving more alkylamine molecules to be integrated into the framework so as to form modified MOFs with drastically improved CO2 capture properties.85 The immobilization of unsaturated alkali metal sites in the MOFs via a tetrazole-based motif can greatly boost the gas affinity.135
2.2.4.1 Integration with functional components. 
The rational synergetic integration of multiple functional components such as combining ionic liquid with Lewis base sites and MOF with Lewis acid sites into a bifunctional composite material polyILs@MIL-101 could lead to significantly improved activity towards CO2 capture. The significantly enhanced activity of polyILs@MIL-101 is ascribed to the synergy effect among the Lewis base sites in the polyILs, Lewis acid sites in the MOF, and the good CO2 enrichment capacity.136 MOFs offer various chemical environments, resulting in different and complex structure-adsorbate chemical interactions towards CO2 separation. A novel bi-porous MOF, SION-8, endowed with chemically distinct hydrophobic and hydrophilic structural pores, was obtained by judiciously altered activation conditions. The intrinsic structural flexibility, primarily along the b-axis, correlated with the structural adjustments, which allowed for the accommodation of gas molecules and guest solvent (Fig. 18).137 In particular, isoreticular synthesis via the fine-tuning of inorganic moieties remains a great challenge.138 Jiang and co-workers successfully adjusted the channels in NJU-Bai35, achieving significantly high CO2 uptake (7.2%) by upgrading the inorganic clusters’ symmetry in isoreticular MOFs as well as the CO2 selectivity.139
 Fig. 18  (a) A chain of alternating Ca–O atoms running along [100]. (b) Arrangement of the TBAPy4− ligands relative to the Ca–O chains. (c) A dihedral angle between the planes of the TBAPy4− ligands bound to two subsequent Ca atoms of 80.06°. (d) Tubular structural voids extending along the [100] direction, marked as gold surfaces, occupying 24.8% of the unit-cell volume (Reproduced from ref. 137 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018). 
2.2.4.2 Intrinsic property regulation. 
The uniqueness of MOFs is that the intrinsic functionalities and properties could be finely regulated to address diverse applications. In particular, the co-existence of CO2 and H2S in natural gas and biogas causes severe corrosion problems for pipeline transportation and influences the quality standards in a variety of energy-related applications.140 The formation of impurities such as COS should be carefully avoided by selectively manipulating the concentration of CO2 and H2S. The high degree regulation of MOFs shows attractive potential in the selective removal of H2S and CO2 with different efficiencies. Through the integration of favorable sites for CO2 and H2S capture, Belmabkhout et al.141 reported the distinctive structural features offered by a fluorinated AlFFIVE-1-Ni, allowing the simultaneous removal of H2S and CO2. Interestingly, N-rich organic linkers are superior for the design of functional MOFs for CO2 and H2S separation due to their high affinity.142
2.2.4.3 Summary and outlook of MOF-based adsorbents. 
The thermal stability of MOF, particularly, their stability towards moisture, is a primary consideration for practical utilization.143 Developing MOFs with water-resistant features is a big challenge for practical CO2 capture. The hydroxo-functional groups are of paramount importance for enhancing the CO2 capture performance under humid conditions.144 The μ3-O groups interact strongly with the adsorbed H2O inside the pores due to the strong polarity of water molecules, which allows more CO2 to be efficiently trapped due to the confinement effect.144 González and co-workers reported an environment-friendly Mg(II)-based MOF, which exhibited high storage capabilities to reversibly adsorb H2S and CO2 with an unusual thermal stability (>500 °C).145
For the evaluation of the possibility of deploying MOFs towards CO2 separation in large-scale implementation, further pilot adsorption installations and investigations of functionalized compounds at the bench-scale are highly necessary. In 2018, Olajire published a systematic review on the synthetic chemistry of MOF for CO2 capture and conversion towards future sustainable energy development.132 Ghanbari and co-workers discussed the CO2 adsorption properties of MOFs, with an emphasis on the MOF structure design and adsorption mechanism in another review in 2020.146 The research interests on MOF-based CO2 adsorbents are briefly presented in Fig. 19. The introduction of Zn–OH groups with stronger nucleophilic properties could provide MOFs with enhanced CO2 uptake under low pressure. Functionalized mesoporous polymer supports play a critical role in the effective regulation of the crystal growth of MOFs on a localized surface, while the enhancement in the intimate interaction gives rise to synergistic properties. Unsaturated alkaline metal ions embedded into MOFs have proven to be another relatively straightforward method for boosting their CO2 affinity and the corresponding adsorption performance. The introduction of functional groups (tertiary amides or amines) to tune the inherent moisture adsorption properties of the MOFs could further improve the CO2 capture performance.129,147 Surface coating with polydimethylsiloxane dramatically enhances the moisture stability, which proves to be a facile methodology for stabilizing moisture-unstable MOFs with desirable CO2 capture capabilities under humid flue gas conditions.148 The use of MOF-based adsorbents also faces several challenges, for instance, low mechanical and thermal stabilities as well as poor moisture resistance under harsh conditions. Therefore, the development of functionalized MOFs with high mechanical and thermal stabilities is of vital importance, which needs further attention and in-depth studies.146 In addition, the cost of MOF-based adsorbents has to be significantly reduced to achieve further large-scale application.
 Fig. 19  A brief summary of the research activities on MOF-based CO2 adsorbents123,126,128,135,144,146,149 (Reproduced from ref. 149 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018; reproduced from ref. 126 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018; reproduced from ref. 144 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018; reproduced from ref. 123 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018; reproduced from ref. 146 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020; reproduced from ref. 135 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2019). 


2.2.5 Alkali carbonate-based adsorbents. 
Alkali-metal carbonate-based adsorbents (mainly K2CO3 and Na2CO3) have been widely investigated for CO2 capture due to their high uptake, low cost, and low working temperatures (adsorption at 50–80 °C and desorption at <200 °C), which show great potential in application for fossil fuel power plants. Alkali metal carbonates can react with CO2 to form alkali metal hydrogen carbonate and the basic principle for CO2 adsorption is presented as follows: M2CO3(s) + H2O(g) + CO2(g) ⇔ 2MHCO3(s)(3)where M is potassium or sodium. The regeneration of Na2CO3/K2CO3 normally occurs at temperatures over 150 °C, which demands much energy during the process. Besides, there are some other problems including slow carbonation reaction rate and poor durability with the unmodified Na2CO3/K2CO3 adsorbents, thus restricting their industrial applications. Therefore, alkali-metal carbonates are always dispersed on stable and porous supports such as metal oxides (Al2O3, TiO2, SiO2, MgO), active carbon, and zeolites to improve their performance. Al2O3-supported Na2CO3 adsorbent showed good CO2 adsorption at relatively low temperatures. With the addition of MgO, both the CO2 adsorption capacity and the adsorption rate could be increased compared to that of the Na2CO3/Al2O3 adsorbent.
In terms of both the CO2 adsorption capacity and the adsorption kinetics, K2CO3 generally performs better than Na2CO3. The adsorption process of K2CO3 as a CO2 adsorbent is divided into three steps: (i) the formation of K2CO3·1.5H2O, (ii) the transformation into K4H2(CO3)3·1.5H2O, and (iii) the further slow conversion into KHCO3. In particular, K2CO3/Al2O3 with high porosity and high mechanical strength is an ideal adsorbent for CO2 capture. The pathway of the Na2CO3 carbonation process was proposed by Cai and co-workers (Fig. 20),150 which is controlled by diffusion limitation rather than the reaction kinetics on the surface. One of the possible rate-limiting reaction pathways related to the diffusion of the reactants is that the CO2 and H2O molecules diffuse through the NaHCO3 layer and react at the interface of NaHCO3 and Na2CO3. Another possible reaction pathway is due to the Na+ diffusion from Na2CO3 and H+ counter diffusion from NaHCO3 to their interface, thus promoting the reaction.
 Fig. 20  (a) Scheme of the Na2CO3 carbonation reaction with surface carbonation and diffusion-control and (b and c) two kinds of possible pathways for Na2CO3 carbonation (Reproduced from ref. 150 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019). 


2.2.6 Implementation and challenges in post-combustion applications. 
Despite the consensus that CCS could make a great difference in achieving the 2 °C target proposed by IPCC, the implementation of commercial-scale CCS projects has made slow progress. In 2019, there were fifty-one large-scale CCS facilities globally, with nineteen at work, four under construction, and the remainder under various stages of development.151 According to the classification of the nine-point TRL system, among all CO2 capture technologies, only the chemical absorption using amine solutions technology has reached a commercial scale (TRL 9). Adsorption-based processes, which are discussed in this section and in Section 2.4.4, are still at the demonstration stage (TRL 7).152
Post-combustion processes separate CO2 from the flue gas released by fossil fuel combustion in power plants or industrial processes including coking, iron, and steel as well as cement and oil refining. Post-combustion CO2 capture operates at atmospheric pressures and low temperatures (<200 °C) with CO2 concentrations varying from 5% to 20%, which depend on the carbon sources. The impurities in the flue gases (NOx, SOx, solid particles) are removed before passing through the CO2 capture facilities. Since first being considered in the 1990s,153 adsorption processes for post-combustion CO2 capture have undergone rapid development as a substitute for the chemical absorption processes due to their avoidance of the hydrodynamics, volatility, and degradation problems associated with the use of chemisorption solvents. Research efforts towards post-combustion CO2 capture based on adsorption technologies have been directed at three aspects: (1) low-temperature adsorbents with larger CO2 working capacities, faster kinetics, higher selectivity, and better stability; (2) efficient cyclic processes with energy-saving regeneration methods; and (3) novel adsorbent structures and capture devices with low gas-solid mass transfer resistance.
VPSA or VSA is regarded as a relatively mature technology for post-combustion CO2 capture, which is based on physisorbents such as zeolites or activated carbon with pressurized feed gas.154–157 The regeneration pressure for a single VSA unit packed with zeolite 13X should be lower than 10 kPa to obtain a CP of 95%. Although the use of novel adsorbents, such as MOFs, to reduce the vacuum requirements is possible, these adsorbents are not currently available in large amounts. Therefore, VSA systems commonly adopt multi-stage configurations, allowing flexible adsorbent packing and process sequencing. Dry flue gas is commonly required in a VSA system to avoid the performance degradation of physisorbents, which causes additional capture cost. The energy consumption of the VSA process is between 1.5 and 3 MJe kg−1, which is equal to 4.5–9 MJth kg−1.
TSA is a more attractive option for the separation of CO2 from dilute gases. One obvious advantage of the TSA process based on chemisorbents is avoiding the requirement of pre-drying the flue gas, which accounts for 2–3 MJth kg−1 of additional energy consumption. In the TSA process, it is preferable to implement low-pressure steam for regeneration. This requires the adsorbents to be water-tolerant. A fluidized bed configuration is commonly adopted in TSA to enhance the heat transfer during heating and cooling.158–160
In early 2014, the Korea Institute of Energy Research installed the largest adsorbent-based post-combustion CO2 capture demonstration system, the 10 MWe-scale KIERDARY® plant, which is fed with 35000 N m3 h−1 flue gas from the Hadong coal-fired power plant and has the ability to capture 200 t CO2 d−1.158 The pilot plant used a two fluidized bed configuration, where the sorbent KEP-CO2P2 (K2CO3-based sorbent) captures and releases CO2 at 40–80 °C and 140–200 °C, respectively. The simulation studies indicated that the energy consumption of the plant was required to reach an 80% CCR and 95% CP is 4–5 MJth kg−1. Furthermore, the ADAsorb process, with a three-stage fluidized bed reactor, was used to develop a 1 MWe post-combustion CO2 capture installation for a coal-fired electricity generation plant in Alabama, USA.161 In addition to power generation sources, RTI International developed a fluidized bed-based TSA process to trap CO2 from the Brevik cement plant via a polyamine-based solid adsorbent at operating temperatures of about 60–70 °C and 110–120 °C.159 The estimated cost for RTI's TSA is between 38 and 46 € t−1.
The moving bed avoids the use of multiple reactors for the fixed bed system in a large-scale plant and is thus regarded as another candidate for TSA separation applications.162–164 The KCC system is a typical post-combustion CO2 capture pilot plant based on the moving bed reactor.162 The solid sorbent, a polyamine-impregnated mesocellular silica foam provided by the Research Institute of Innovative Technology for the Earth, flows into the top of the reactor and passes successively through the absorption, regeneration, and adsorbent dryer zones before being collected at the bottom using a circulating conveyer. The bench-test plant captures 5.5 t CO2 d−1 from the flue gas containing 13% CO2, and waste heat is used to generate steam (60 °C) for regeneration. The next plan for the Kawasaki system is to scale up this technology to 40 t CO2 d−1. In another moving bed process, SRI, Linde, and ATMI developed an advanced carbon sorbent technique based on carbon beads for CO2 capture from a 0.5 MWe slipstream of a coal-fired electricity generation plant.164 The estimated capture cost of SRI's ACS is $45 t−1 CO2. TDA Research, Inc., is also planning to build a 0.5 MWe-scale post-combustion CO2 capture demonstration system with a simulated moving bed process using alkalized alumina.163
One of the main challenges of the moving bed process arises from the low gas velocity that is required to avoid the fluidization of the adsorbents, which leads to intolerantly large equipment dimensions. The use of structured sorbents can solve this problem. An example is the VeloxoTherm™ process developed by Svante Inc., in Canada,165 which consists of a rotary adsorption unit divided by three gas paths for flue gas (adsorption), steam (regeneration), and air cooling. This technology uses structured silica gel functionalized with amine, which allows a fast adsorption–desorption process in 60 s with almost no pressure drop and high mass and heat transfer. It was reported that Svante launched a demonstration plant capturing 30 t CO2 d−1 from a natural gas steam boiler in Saskatchewan and will build a facility of the same size with funding by Chevron Technology Ventures.
Post-combustion CO2 capture technologies based on adsorbents offer alternatives to amine-based absorption processes but their further development is needed to reach higher TRLs. Table 1 summarizes the current status of adsorption-based post-combustion CO2 capture facilities. High-throughput simulation is required to evaluate the large number of adsorbent candidates to meet the multi-objective optimization of the adsorption performance (e.g., CO2 uptake, kinetics, selectivity, and stability) and the process performance (e.g., CCR, CP, energy consumption, abd productivity).166 When the TSA process is used in post-combustion CO2 capture, the adsorption bed should be designed carefully to achieve better heat integration as well as a good balance between the gas–solid mass transfer and the pressure drop. A fully comprehensive comparison between the adsorption and absorption processes pertaining to energy consumption and operating cost is still lacking. In addition, more pilot-scale post-combustion CO2 capture facilities should be implemented to acquire engineering experience with adsorption technologies.
Table 1 Status of adsorption-based post-combustion CO2 capture facilities




Project
Feed flow rate
Adsorbent(s)
Process
Reactor
CCR (%)
CP (%)
Energy
Sources
Country
Ref.




Single-stage VPSA
46 N m3 h−1 (dehydrated)
Zeolite 5A
VPSA
Fixed bed
79
85
2.37 MJe kg−1
Power generation
China

154



Two-stage VPSA
35 N m3 h−1 (dehydrated)
Zeolite 13X APG & activated carbon beads
VPSA
Fixed bed
90.2
95.6
2.44 MJe kg−1
Power generation
China

155



DR-VPSA
100 N m3 h−1 (dehydrated)
Activated carbon
VPSA
Fixed bed
44.6
87.5
3.52 MJe kg−1
Power generation
Poland

156



ASCOA-3
330 N m3 h−1
Zeolite (zeolum F9)
VSA
Fixed bed
80
90
0.44 MJe kg−1
Steel
Japan

157



TEPCO's two-stage VSA
1000 N m3 h−1 (dehydrated)
Ca–X zeolite
PTSA/VSA
Fixed bed
90
99
2.02 MJe kg−1
Power generation
Japan

153



KIERDARY
35000 N m3 h−1
K2CO3-based sorbent
TSA
Fluidized bed
80
95
4.0–5.0 MJth kg−1
Power generation
Korea

158



ADAsorb
0.38 kg s−1
Amine-based ion exchange polymer
TSA
Three-staged fluidized bed
90
89.4
4.75 MJth kg−1
Power generation
USA

161



RTI's TSA
—
PEI-based sorbent
TSA
Fluidized bed
90


2.4 MJth kg−1
Cement
USA

159



KCC
1000 N m3 h−1
Amine-coated porous material
VTSA
Moving bed
75
95
1.3 MJe kg−1
Power generation
Japan

162



SRI's ACS
120 m3 h−1
Carbon beads
TSA
Moving bed
67
93
—
Power generation
USA

164



TDA's SMB
0.63 kg s−1
Alkalized alumina
TSA
Simulated moving bed
—
—
—
Power generation
USA

163



VeloxoTherm
—
Diamine-tethered silica gel
RTSA
Rotary wheel
—
90
1.5 MJe kg−1
Power generation
Canada

165






2.3. Intermediate-temperature solid CO2 adsorbents
Pre-combustion technologies have received tremendous attention for industrial hydrogen production due to their small-scale capturing system, low energy consumption, and high adsorption efficiency. Fossil fuels transform into CO2 and H2 through combustion, resulting in high gas pressure and CO2 concentration, which is favorable for CO2 capture. Syngas (CO + H2O) is converted into a gas mixture containing CO2 and H2 through the water gas shift reactor at 200–400 °C. The introduction of in situ CO2 adsorption materials could effectively achieve the integration of WGS and the gas separation process in one reactor. Layered double hydroxide (LDH)-derived mixed metal oxides (LDOs) and magnesium oxide (MgO) have excellent affinity for acidic CO2 molecules in the intermediate temperature range of 200–400 °C and thus possess good CO2 capturing potential for the SEWGS process.

2.3.1 LDH-based adsorbents. 
Layered double hydroxides (LDHs) with precisely controlled chemical composition and tunable properties have been well studied in many fields (Fig. 21a).167 Though LDHs have been deployed as adsorbents for decades, their first application in CO2 capture appeared in 2001.168 The LDOs capture CO2 at intermediate-temperature (200–450 °C), and thus can be applied in the SEWGS reaction. The research of LDH on CO2 capture started with its tunable chemical composition,169 followed by the synthetic method, doping with alkali metals, LDH-based composite, and the influence of the other gases as well as the adsorption mechanism.
 Fig. 21  (a) Schematic structure of the LDHs,167 (b) CO2 capture performance of different Mg3X–CO3 (X = Al, Fe, Ga, and Mn) LDHs as a function of the calcination temperature (Reproduced from ref. 170 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2010), (c) the diagram of the structural change in the Mg3Al–stearate LDH and Mg3Al–CO3 LDH after calcination at 400 °C, (d) the CO2 uptake of Mg3Al–stearate LDH and Mg3Al–CO3 LDH.171 
2.3.1.1 The effect of chemical composition and fabrication method of LDHs. 
The CO2 capture performance of LDOs has been found to be highly dependent on the divalent and trivalent cations within the brucite-like layers and the interlayer anions. The influence of divalent cations including Mg2+, Co2+, Ca2+, and Cu2+ was studied by Wang et al.,169 where the Ca–Co–Al LDH system displayed the highest CO2 adsorption capacity (1.39 mmol g−1). Wang et al.170 revealed that the trivalent cations (Al3+, Fe3+, Mn3+, and Ga3+) can affect the dehydration and the dehydroxylation/decarbonation processes, and different LDHs (with different trivalent cations) possess different optimal calcination temperatures (Fig. 21b). Among them, MgAl LDH displayed the highest CO2 adsorption capacity and excellent thermal stability. Moreover, due to the good affinity of lithium-containing complex oxides with CO2, LiAl2 LDH, as a unique monovalent cation containing LDH for CO2 capture, was first reported by Huang et al.172 The basic Li–O and lattice O2− sites were formed after thermal treatment, which was beneficial for CO2 capture. In short, the trivalent cations in LDHs may influence the layer charge density, whereas the divalent cations in LDH can provide the basic sites and affect the optimal adsorption temperature.169,170,172
Different optimal divalent/trivalent ratios also depend on the type of interlayer anions. Therefore, the effect of interlay anions (CO32−, NO3−, Cl−, ClO4−, Fe(CN6)4−, SO42−, and HCO3−) in LDHs on the CO2 capture performance has also been investigated. Among them, Mg/Al–CO3 LDH exhibited the greatest advantages in the CO2 capture performance with the highest specific surface area.173 The anions in LDHs can affect its thermal stability, morphology, and SSA, thus affecting its CO2 capture ability. Based on the above results, Wang et al.171 first fabricated an organic anion stearate (C17H35COO−) intercalated LDH for CO2 capture. By replacing CO32− with long carbon-chained C17H35COO−, its CO2 uptake was significantly enhanced from 0.5 to 1.25 mmol g−1 (Fig. 21d). The structural changes in the Mg–Al–CO3 and Mg–Al–stearate LDHs are comparatively illustrated in Fig. 21c. Compared with CO32−, the decomposition of C17H35COO− could generate more surface basic sites. The obtained LDOs possess lower degree of crystallinity and more stable structures, which are beneficial for capturing CO2. Qin et al.174 further studied the influence of the carbon-chain length on the CO2 capture performance of organo-LDHs. The CO2 uptake increased significantly when the carbon chain increased from 10 to 16. Therefore, it was concluded that larger interlayer spacing, higher layer charge density, and greater number of basic sites are more favorable for capturing CO2 over LDOs.
Moreover, the synthetic method could result in LDHs with different morphologies including “stone-like”, “platelet-like”, and “sand rose” morphologies, consequently influencing the CO2 capture performance. Wang et al.175 employed the IEP theory to fabricate nano-sized spherical LDH for CO2 adsorption. The obtained LDHs showed mesoporous structures and large pores. The average particle size of the obtained LDHs was about 20 nm, which is favorable for the dispersion of alkali metals.
2.3.1.2 LDH-based composites. 
In recent years, LDH-based composites have become very promising as CO2 adsorbents. To enhance the adsorption ability and cycling stability of LDO adsorbents, different carbon materials (CNF, GO, and CNT) have been studied as supports for LDHs.176–178 In general, three synthetic methods are often employed, namely, direct co-precipitation, electrostatically driven self-assembly, and hydrothermal urea reaction. Garcia-Gallastegui et al.178,179 prepared LDH/MWCNT and LDH/GO composites by direct co-precipitation (Fig. 22a) and proved that the CO2 capture performance of the LDH were enhanced both in terms of the adsorption ability and cycling stability. The enhanced interactions between the gas and the adsorbent were attributed to the increased effective SSA and the disordered structure of the composites. By utilizing the electrostatically driven self-assembly process, Wang et al.180 prepared highly dispersed LDH/GO composites from two exfoliated LDH and GO solutions (Fig. 22b). The obtained LDH/GO composite with 6.54 wt% GO resulted in maximum CO2 uptake, which was two times higher than that of pure LDH without GO due to the dispersion of exfoliated LDH and the stabilization caused by GO. Qiao et al.181 fabricated multilayer LDH/MgCO3 hybrids on aluminum foil/mesh using the urea hydrolysis method (Fig. 22c). The aluminum foil/mesh, which functioned as a substrate and the sole source of aluminum, could effectively prevent the sintering and pasting problems. More importantly, the Al-supported LDH thin film can be further made into any shape for practical applications.
 Fig. 22  (a) The schematic structure of the LDH/GO composite synthesized by the direct co-precipitation method,179 (b) the photographs of the electrostatically driven self-assembly process of exfoliated LDH and GO (Reproduced from ref. 180 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2015), (c) the synthetic diagram of the LDH/MgCO3 hybrids.181 
2.3.1.3 Doping with alkali metals. 
Doping alkali metal carbonates on LDH is another effective method to promote its CO2 capture performance.182 Numerous studies have been focused on the use of K2CO3 as a promoter since K2CO3 impregnation can increase the amount of active sites on LDH, thus enhancing the adsorption capacity, thermal stability, and cycling stability of the parent LDH. The level of adsorption depends on the doping amount of K2CO3 on the LDH. 10–30 wt% of K2CO3 was proved to be the optimum loading amount, considering that the overload of K2CO3 may block the pores of LDH. Wang et al.173 found that organic solvents may result in better dispersion of K2CO3 than inorganic solvents during K impregnation, thus enhancing the promotion of CO2 capture capacity. Long carbon chains as anions can enlarge the interlayer distance for promoting more cation exchange on the external surface or the internal surface of each of its layers. Therefore, the K2CO3-promoted stearate-pillared LDH exhibited a superior CO2 uptake of 1.93 mmol g−1 at 300 °C, which is much higher than that of K2CO3-promoted carbonate intercalated LDHs (1.11 mmol g−1). Likewise, Meis et al.176 compared the CO2 adsorption performance of supported LDHs and unsupported LDH with K2CO3 doping and found that K2CO3 loaded on the supported LDH showed higher adsorption capacity than that of the unsupported LDH due to the existence of K+ on the surface of the supported LDH after thermal treatment, which caused a higher concentration of defects on the K2CO3-loaded supported LDHs (Fig. 23). The higher occurrence of low-coordinated sites (corners and edges) was considered to be of significant importance for CO2 capture. Therefore, K2CO3 was further used to improve the CO2 uptake of the LDH-based composite adsorbents by Wang and Zhu et al.177,180,183
 Fig. 23  The schematic representation of the addition of K2CO3 to supported/unsupported LDHs (the red ball represents oxygen, the light gray ball represents magnesium, and the dark gray ball represents potassium) (Reproduced from ref. 176 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2010). 
Commercially available LDHs commonly exhibit stone-like morphologies with highly stacked structures, which lead to low SSA for doping alkali metal ions. Though it is reported that LDH layers are possible to be exfoliated into nanosheets through “top down” or “bottom up” methods,184 they are easy to re-stack during the drying process due to their high surface charges and hydrophilic properties. Recently, O’Hare's group successfully synthesized a series of Zn2Al–borate LDH nanosheets with high SSA (459 m2 g−1) and large pore volumes (2.15 cm3 g−1) using a facile exfoliation method called AMOST.185 AMOST refers to the washing of the LDH wet cake with AMO solvents in the co-precipitation process; thus, the interlayer water is removed. The replaced AMO solvent molecules are then evaporated during the following drying process, which makes the LDH layers easy to slide. Zhu et al.186 reported flower-like Mg3Al–CO3 LDH after acetone washing, which leads to more uniform dispersion of the impregnated K+ ions, exhibiting increased CO2 uptake by about 22.9% at 400 °C compared to that of commercial K-MG70 (Fig. 24). A subsequent work screened six impregnation solvents and proved that ethanediol is more effective for dispersing the doped K2CO3 than water on the surface of the LDH prepared by the AMOST method.187
 Fig. 24  Scheme of AMOST and the characterization of K-promoted LDH before and after acetone washing (Reproduced from ref. 186 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019). 
In addition to alkali metal carbonates, alkali metal nitrates have also been studied as promoters for LDH-based adsorbents. For instance, the CO2 uptake of LDH with a Mg/Al molar ratio of 20 can reach a relatively high value of 9.27 mmol g−1 with the existence of NaNO3 at 240 °C.182 Qin et al.174 verified that ternary alkali nitrates (Li–Na–K)NO3 can also enhance the CO2 capture performance of a carboxylic anion-intercalated LDH. Lara-García et al.188 investigated the mechanism of (Li–Na–K)NO3 promoted Mg–Al–palmitate LDH by in situ DRIFTS and confirmed that two reaction processes took place for nitrates for enhancing the CO2 adsorption ability. In the first process, CO2 combined with the melted NO3−, resulting in the generation of NO2− and CO32−. Then, the CO32− reacted with the calcined LDH material to form MgCO3. In the second process, O2− was released and reacted with nitrite, thus recovering the initial NO3− species.
2.3.1.4 Adsorption mechanism. 
LDH itself does not have alkaline sites, while its derived metal oxides after thermal treatment contain abundant alkaline sites. According to the CO2 adsorption mechanism over LDH-derived adsorbents, the Mg–O species are the active sites for CO2 capture.169,189 Gao et al.190 proposed two possible active Mg–O species formation mechanisms for LDH. The Mg–O species were achieved by replacing Mg2+ with Al3+ at the octahedral positions in the MgO lattice, resulting in Mg vacancies, or by the diffusion of Al3+ out of the octahedral brucite layers, leaving behind Al vacancies. Recently, Zhu et al.191 applied in situ techniques to illustrate the CO2 adsorption mechanism of K-promoted MgxAl–CO3 LDH with different Mg/Al ratios. They proved that there is a synergistic effect between the K+ ions and the Mg/Al ratio. After adsorbing CO2, bidentate carbonates are formed on the surface of the K-promoted LDH. However, when the Mg/Al ratio is less than two, unidentate carbonates with stronger binding force are also formed. In practice, the actual mechanism of CO2 adsorption and desorption on LDHs is complex.
2.3.1.5 Summary and outlook of LDH-based adsorbents. 
To the best of our knowledge, for intermediate-temperature CO2 capture, there are only two promising adsorbent candidates so far, namely, LDH and MgO. MgO has attracted a great interest in recent years due to the extraordinary progress achieved by doping molten salts. However, Zhu et al.192 found that K2CO3-promoted MgO showed lower CO2 uptake with trace CO2, whereas K2CO3-promoted LDH exhibited higher uptake with relatively low Mg/Al ratio under the same conditions. They proposed that the introduction of Al3+ to Mg2+ combined with K2CO3 may create more CO2 adsorption sites. Meanwhile, unidentate carbonates were formed in K2CO3-promoted LDH with the lowest Mg/Al ratio, making it possible to capture extremely low concentration CO2.
The service life of the adsorbents has significant economic implications on any commercial-scale operations. The introduction of carbon materials as supports can help to minimize the pulverization of LDH. However, there are few studies that have reported the uses of LDH-based composites for long-time cycling tests. Although doping alkali metals can enhance the CO2 capture capacity of LDH-derived CO2 adsorbents, the relatively low adsorption capacity and poor cycling stability are still a challenge. The adsorption mechanism and the alkali metal promotion mechanism for CO2 adsorption over LDH-derived adsorbents are still controversial, which need more in-depth investigations. It was suggested that the molecular models and force fields should be developed to investigate the adsorption mechanism of LDH-derived CO2 adsorbents based on the actual flue gas conditions. LDH-derived CO2 adsorbents have displayed significant advantages in the adsorption of low concentration CO2 but the intrinsic reason remains unclear. In addition, the influence of the impurities in the flue gas, including H2O, SO2, and H2S, on the CO2 uptake of LDH needs to be further investigated. Finally, parameters relevant to cost analysis, lifetime of the adsorbent, and kinetics under the industrial operating conditions should also be taken into account.


2.3.2 MgO-based adsorbents. 
Magnesium oxide (MgO), which is abundant on Earth, exhibits promising potential for CO2 capture due to its high theoretical adsorption capability, lack of toxicity, low cost, and relatively low regeneration temperature.193,194 It can capture CO2 in the temperature range of 200–400 °C and can be easily regenerated at a moderate temperature at 450 °C.195 However, the main obstacle in MgO adsorbents towards the practical application of CO2 capture lies in its low actual CO2 uptake and poor adsorption kinetics due to the intrinsically high lattice enthalpy and barren basic active sites.196 It is commonly accepted that MgO displays reduced uptake tendency during high-temperature exposure in CO2 capture, resulting from the decline in SSA due to sintering.193 The low-coordination Mg2+–O2− sites located at the corner/edge exhibit favorable interaction towards CO2, resulting in inherently limited adsorption performance. Recently, the “negative-sintering” hypothesis was challenged by Mutch and co-workers using both spectroscopic and computational methods, who first claimed necessary high-temperature conditions for facet-dependent surface activation to unleash the capability of the MgO polar (111) facet.197
2.3.2.1 Fabrication with mesoporous structure. 
Mesoporous materials as heterogeneous adsorbents, which possess narrow pore size distributions, provide a combination of a certain degree of shape- as well as size- selectivity and large SSAs. Therefore, Gao and co-workers fabricated mesoporous MgO adsorbents possessing abundant basic sites, which exhibited a superior CO2 capture capacity of 2 mmol g−1. During the interaction with CO2, a variety of carbonate surface species including monodentate and bidentate carbonates as well as bicarbonate were generated on the surface of MgO.193 Using small-sized MgO with more corner- and edge-located basic O2− capturing active sites in the O2−–Mg2+ bonds for acidic CO2 molecule could achieve higher capturing efficiency for MgO. Meanwhile, combination with a support can further enhance the regenerability of the MgO species, thus preventing its agglomeration over multiple cycles.198 Inspired by this, Li's group dispersed ultrafine MgO nanocrystallites with full exposure of the active sites on well-defined dual supports (amorphous C and rGO sheets as protectants). The novel hierarchical rGO@MgO/C nanocomposite system possessing unique physicochemical properties (large SSA, sheet-on-sheet architecture, and abundant nanopores) exhibits remarkable CO2 uptake (1.36 mmol g−1), fast adsorption kinetics, as well as superior process durability.199
2.3.2.2 Molten salts modification. 
Notably, Gao and co-workers published a review in 2017, which summarized the fabrication and property advances of molten salt-modified MgO-based CO2 adsorbents, which has emerged as a promising approach to enhance the capturing performance of MgO adsorbents.200,201 The CO2 uptake for pure MgO is far from satisfactory, even with the optimization by the above-mentioned promotion methods (<2 mmol g−1). In 2015, Harada and coworkers reported the remarkable effect of molten salts on the CO2 uptake of highly regenerable MgO (>10.2 mmol g−1) at ∼300 °C. The generation of a CO2-impermeable monodentate carbonate rigid layer on the MgO surface is effectively prevented by the molten salts and CO2 capture capability with a high rate is promoted by the rapid generation of carbonate ions (Fig. 25).202,203 Inspired by the promotion effect of the molten salts, Qiao and co-workers further improved the CO2 uptake of MgO to 16 mmol g−1 by optimizing the alkali metal ratio (Li/Na/K) of the nitrates.204 In 2018, Zhao's group fabricated NaNO3/NaNO2 mixture-promoted mesoporous MgO, which exhibited a superior CO2 uptake of 19.8 mmol g−1 at 350 °C.205 The significant improvement achieved by the introduction of molten salts for MgO-based adsorbents makes it a research hot topic for SEWGS. However, the detailed reaction mechanism for molten salt-promoted MgO is not yet fully understood.205,206
 Fig. 25  Schematic illustration of the possible reaction occurring in the molten alkali metal nitrate-coated MgO (Reproduced from ref. 202 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015). 
The durability of molten salt-promoted MgO adsorbents during multiple sorption-regeneration cycles has become a major concern for their real applications in SEWGS. Trivino and co-workers utilized commercially available LDHs as stabilizers to improve the cyclic stability of NaNO3-promoted MgO adsorbents. Restricting the formation of non-uniform and large product crystallites, the LDHs effectively act as templates for MgCO3 and regulate the basic sites for their high interaction with both NaNO3 and MgO (Fig. 26).198 In 2019, the same group went a step further to apply this novel MgO-based adsorbent to the SEWGS process for 30 cycles. The superior CO2 capture performance resulted in greatly increased H2 purity (99.4% in dry basis) at 300 °C, 12 atm in the 1st cycle, which remained stable over ten consecutive cycles, thus indicating its excellent regenerability (Fig. 27).207
 Fig. 26  Formation of smaller MgCO3 crystals, exposure of stabilized sites, and higher MgO-stablizer-NaNO3 interactions (Reproduced from ref. 198 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018). 
 Fig. 27  Sorption-enhanced water gas shift reaction by in situ CO2 capture on an alkali metal salt-promoted MgO–CaCO3 adsorbent (Reproduced from ref. 207 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019). 
2.3.2.3 Summary and outlook of MgO-based adsorbents. 
Overall, the research strategies for improving the CO2 adsorption properties of MgO-based adsorbents are briefly summarized in Fig. 28. A timely review covering deeper and broader advancements of MgO adsorbents has been provided by Hu and co-workers in 2019.196 However, the development of MgO adsorbent granulation techniques and the enhancement of granule performance are quite urgent for realistic large-scale applications with excellent mechanical and chemical properties.208 The ease of granulation operation and energy consumption of the manufacturing process should be taken into consideration for industrial implementation. Future tests need to be focused on the evaluation of the adsorption performance under realistic conditions and targeted apparatus to verify the techno-economic consumption of MgO-based CO2 adsorbents for implementation.
 Fig. 28  A brief summary of the research activities on MgO-based CO2 adsorbents (Reproduced from ref. 208 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019; reproduced from ref. 193 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018; reproduced from ref. 200 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2017). 

2.4. High-temperature solid CO2 sorbents
Methane-reforming is a highly efficient, economical, and widely used process for industrial H2 production at high temperatures (600–900 °C). The sorption enhanced methane-reforming (SEMR) process requires high-temperature solid CO2 sorbents such as calcium oxide, alkali silicate, and alkali titanate, which can effectively capture CO2 in the relatively high temperature range of 600–900 °C. The deployment of such sorbents could successfully inhibit large heat consumption, simplify the whole process, and further improve the conversion efficiency of CH4 to form H2 with simultaneously captured CO2 of high purity.

2.4.1 CaO-based sorbents. 
2.4.1.1 Basic principle of CaO-based adsorbents. 
Calcium oxide (CaO)-based materials have been widely studied as high temperature CO2 sorbents since 1933.209 Owing to its high theoretical sorption capacity and availability, CaO has shown great potential applications in CO2 capture. With decades of research, more and more CaO-based CO2 sorbents with high-performance have been reported, driving this research forward from the foundation towards real applications. For practical applications, the sorption capacity is one of the dominating parameters for determining the cost and efficiency. However, the sorption capacity of CaO is poisoned by the CaCO3 layer formed outside the CaO sorbent. Since CaCO3 formation is inevitable, the capacity for CO2 sorption on CaO, which is highly dependent on the particle size, decreases rapidly due to the sintering of the sorbent particles over multiple cycles. A widely accepted explanation suggests that it is the low Tammann temperature of CaCO3 (533 °C) that leads to sintering.210 The powder sorbents need to be treated before implementation as the CaO powder in the reactor is prone to pressure drop and elutriation. In order to solve the above problems, several efforts have been devoted to the following areas over the last three years, including (1) CO2 uptake enhancement, (2) sintering-resistance improvement, (3) powder granulation, and (4) practical application exploration.
2.4.1.2 Enhancement of CO2 capture performance. 
To enhance the CO2 sorption capacity of CaO, a large amount of work has been carried out on particle size reduction, SSA increment, and surface modification. A variety of methods, such as hydration, acid treatment, precursor selection, physical grinding, and preparation process control, have been studied thoroughly in the early stages. On top of that, there has been a lot of original work in the last three years, which is especially focused on precursor modification and doping. Zhao et al.211 proposed a surfactant-free method to prepare morphology-controlled CaCO3 precursors by the reaction of Ca(NO3)2 with the CO2 storage material (CO2 bubbled ethylenediamine + ethylene glycol) and obtained nano CaO by roasting the CaCO3 precursors. The synthetic CaO particle size is about 480 nm × 255 nm, which facilitates a high sorption capacity (17.18 mmol g−1, 92% of the theoretical sorption capacity). Besides CaCO3, Ca(OH)2 is also commonly used as a CaO precursor.
Apart from the above-mentioned progress, doping with an addition agent is also an effective way to improve the sorption performance. Among all the additives, the most representative additives are metal oxides. Though metal oxides are often used to enhance the stability, they can be utilized to improve the sorption performance of CaO. In terms of energy, Liu et al.212 explored the effect of metal additives on the reactivity of CaO carbonation by DFT, indicating that the sorption energy on various promoted CaO surfaces followed the order Zr > Al > Mg > Na. The higher sorption energy demonstrated that the addition of this substance facilitates the carbonation of CaO. The CaO carbonation process involves CO2 chemisorption, surface reaction with O2− to form CO32−, and finally, the generation of CaCO3.
The diffusion of CO2 and mobility of O2− are key factors for CO2 capture. Based on these, Guo et al.213 reported a (Zr–Ce)-additive with facilitated CO2 capture of the CaO-based sorbent. Due to the formation of Ce2Zr2O7, oxygen vacancies were created to facilitate the diffusion of CO2 and O2− mobility. Similarly, Huang et al.214 developed a low melting point oxy-salt eutectic doped CaO. By loading CaO with alkali carbonate molten salt, its CO2 uptake could be significantly improved from 3.26 to 10.94 mmol g−1 at the first carbonation process (Fig. 29a), which can be ascribed to the high O2− concentration and O2− conductivity of the molten salt (Fig. 29b).215
 Fig. 29  (a) CO2 sorption/desorption cycling performance of CaO and molten salt-promoted CaO, (b) schematic diagrams of the reaction with CO2 for low melting point oxy-salt eutectic coated CaO particle214,215 (Reproduced from ref. 214 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2017). 
2.4.1.3 Improvement in sintering-resistance. 
Capacity loss is recognized as the most serious problem for CaO-based sorbents. In this regard, extensive work has been devoted to preventing the sintering effect and to improving the cyclic stability. One of the most feasible options is to incorporate CaO particles with inert materials. In earlier studies, supporting materials including Al2O3, MgO, Y2O3, CuO, CeO2, TiO2, KMnO4, SiO2, CexZryOz, La2O3, LaAlxMgyO3, and CaZrO3 have been thoroughly investigated and reviewed but the state-of-the-art works still need to be highlighted to reveal some new trends. Based on previous research, the study of CaO-based materials lays more emphasis on the performance and economy. Additives such as Al2O3, MgO, ZrO2, and their mixtures are preferred due to the high stability of their derivatives such as Ca12Al14O33, Ca9Al6O18, MgAl2O4, and CaZrO3. For stabilized CaO sorbents, the dispersion degree of inert supports is a determining factor for sintering resistance. Hence, the research emphasis aims to achieve a good dispersion of the supporting materials in the calcium precursor or CaO by adapting various synthetic methods, such as coprecipitation, sol–gel, hydrothermal, milling, spray/freeze drying, and flame spray pyrolysis. Different precursors prepared by the aforementioned methods allow to obtain stabilized CaO with specific morphology, structure, and mixing degree. Furthermore, Armutlulu et al.216 published an ALD strategy to prepare shell-comprising nanoparticles with Al2O3 film on the CaO nanoparticles. By wrapping hollow CaO in the thin Al2O3 layer (<3 nm), the sintering between the particles was effectively prevented (Fig. 30a). For CaO with 10 ALD cycles, CO2 uptake of 55 wt% was achieved after 30 cycles (80.5% capacity retention), which is higher than that of untreated synthesized CaO (40 wt% with 53.4% capacity retention); both the samples exhibited far more superior uptake compared to the performance of limestone (11 wt% with about 20.3% capacity retention). The high cyclic stability of Al2O3-stabilized CaO was attributed to its favorable morphological characteristics and the hollow spherical structure was extensively preserved during the cyclic operation (Fig. 30b). Calcium precursor was suggested to show an effect on the morphology and structure of CaO, especially the porous structure generated by the calcination of the organic precursor. Therefore, organic calcium has been selected as the CaO precursor in many mixing methods, for instance, calcium acetate. Huang et al.217 employed a facile solvent/non-solvent method to prepare MgO/CaO using calcium acetate as the precursor. The MgO/CaO composite was obtained at a nano-meter mixing level (Fig. 31), exhibiting a CO2 uptake of 59.2 wt% after 7 cycles (with 95.3% retention of its initial capacity).
 Fig. 30  (a) HR-TEM of ALD-grown Al2O3 coating CaO nanoparticles with EDX mapping; (b) SEM of Al2O3-stabilized CaO sorbents before and after carbonation over 30 cycles (Reproduced from ref. 216 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2017). 
 Fig. 31  SEM images of CaO and MgO/CaO prepared by solvent/non-solvent before and after 10 cycles (a) CaO, (b) MgO/CaO, (c) CaO after 10 cycles, and (d) MgO/CaO after 10 cycles, and (e) the schematic illustration of the possible mechanism of stability enhancement (Reproduced from ref. 217 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2018). 
2.4.1.4 CaO derived from waste resources. 
Though the synthetic stabilized CaO shows higher CO2 uptake and better stability, the high cost still inhibits its further practical application. From economic perspectives, the deployment of solid waste or minerals as calcium precursors or inert additives is being more widely applied. Common cheap calcium sources are limestone, dolomite, eggshell, seashell, and metallurgical slag. The materials used as additives such as bauxite tailings, sepiolite, fruit bunch, ash, and cement generally contain Al, Si, and Mg. The use of these cheap raw materials/scrap can not only reduce the production cost of the sorbent but also render the management of solid waste with great practical value. Unlike the direct synthesis of stabilized CaO with chemical reagents, the extraction of the calcium source and dopant is required before the sorbent preparation. Generally, the calcium sources and dopant precursors are mechanically crushed, dried, and then mixed.
2.4.1.5 Powder granulation. 
The above studies are mainly focused on the preparation and characterization of CaO sorbents in the powder form. For implementation, powders cannot be applied directly due to the elutriation from the carbonator and the regenerator. To fix the CaO sorbents, granulation and coating methods are executed to prepare molding materials. However, low CaO loading greatly reduces the sorption capacity. Another strategy is to prepare molding CaO by granulation, for example, extrusion-spheronization, to make CaO into pellets by mechanical forces. However, this methodology inevitably causes the destruction of the porous microstructures of the powder materials.218 To improve the CO2 uptake of CaO-based pellets, pore-forming templates were widely used to enhance the porosity, such as cellulose,219 hemicellulose,220 plastic wastes,218 lignin,220 and urea.221 Among these, the most widely used template is cellulose. Li et al.219 modified CaO pellets with 30% microcrystalline cellulose and found that the CO2 uptake (34 wt%) was increased by 48% compared to that of the unmodified pellets after 20 cycles. They attributed this enhancement to the gas channels and cavity formation caused by gas release and the disappearance of microcrystalline cellulose during the burning of the porosity promoter.
With the gradual improvement of CaO properties and reduction in the production costs by the deployment of cheap precursors, more studies have been focused on the application of CO2 adsorption by CaO, viz., CaL. CaL was initially studied in the power sector as an alternative to amine scrubbing for post-combustion capture to reduce the costs or was used for pre-combustion in IGCC, and had already been tested in bench- and pilot-scale plants. A comprehensive review paper on pilot-plant testing of calcium looping for CO2 capture from power generation systems has been published by Hanak et al.209 In addition, due to the world's increasing demand for clean energy hydrogen, more CaO is being utilized for sorption-enhanced hydrogen production, such as methane reforming glycerol reforming,222 ethanol reforming, tar reforming, and biomass pyrolysis-gasification. These hydrogen-producing reactions usually involve two processes, SR and WGS, which are generally reversible. By extracting CO2 from the mixture, the equilibrium is shifted to the product side (Le Chatelier's principle), resulting in higher H2 yield. Furthermore, CaO carbonation is an exothermic reaction; thus, the incorporation of the CO2 capture reaction is favorable for the endothermic SR reaction. Moreover, it even turns the SEMR into an exothermic reaction. With these merits, bi-functional CaO-supported catalysts, for example Ni/CaO, were developed for sorption-enhanced hydrogen production. However, bulk CaO still suffers from sharp CO2 uptake reduction caused by sintering and the general solution is to add supports, as mentioned above. Wu223 and Arif224 also believed that the addition of CaO carrier and inert materials (alkaline earth oxides) inhibits the formation of coke, which remains the most serious problem for Ni-based catalysts as it causes a severe decay in the activity. Though noble metals such as Pt, Pd, and Rh have better catalytic activity and anti-coking properties,224 lower cost transition metals such as Ni with high catalytic activity are deemed to possess more research value. Charisiou et al.222 reported a Ni/CaO–MgO–Al2O3 (Ni/modAl) catalyst for combined catalytic glycerol steam reforming and in situ CO2 removal. The modAl material with reduced nickel species particle size of higher dispersion exhibited high resistance to coke formation and CaO sintering, leading to enhanced and efficient glycerol conversion and hydrogen production with high purity.
2.4.1.6 Summary and outlook of CaO-based adsorbents. 
To realize the industrial application of CaO-based sorbents, the activity, price, stability, form, and anti-crush strength need to be taken into full consideration, as shown in Fig. 32. Though the CO2 sorption capacity and cycling stability of synthetic CaO have made great progress, their implementation is still limited by the high cost and poor stability. The performance of CaO derived from cheap precursors is still far from satisfactory, and more importantly, the CO2 uptake of CaO suffers a serious decline after granulation. Hence, the implications of future research should be focused on the following directions: (1) the large-scale preparation technology of CaO with higher sorption capacity and stability derived from solid waste/mineral as well as catalyst-loading techniques for sorption-enhanced hydrogen production; (2) the technology of material regeneration and CO2 separation/purification; (3) direct utilization/conversion technique of CO2 fixed by CaO sorbents.
 Fig. 32  The current problems and solutions to realize the industrial application of CaO-based CO2 sorbents211,215,217,219 (Reproduced from ref. 217 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2018; reproduced from ref. 211 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018; reproduced from ref. 219 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019). 


2.4.2 Alkali silicate-based sorbents. 
Alkali silicates, mainly including lithium silicates and sodium silicate, can act as efficient CO2 sorbents. However, considering the technical requirements for practical applications (such as high sorption capacity, good regeneration performance, and fast sorption/desorption kinetics), not all the aforementioned sorbents are suitable. For instance, the sorption capacity of Na2SiO3 is typically less than 10 wt%. On the contrary, Li8SiO6 exhibits very high sorption capacity (about 50 wt%) and fast kinetics. Unfortunately, the poor regeneration performance hinders its application potential.225 In contrast to Na2SiO3 and Li8SiO6, Li4SiO4 not only has a high sorption capacity (36.5 wt%) but also possesses good regeneration ability.226 Therefore, as the representative of alkali silicate-based CO2 sorbents, Li4SiO4 will be highlighted in this section.86
2.4.2.1 Basic principle and current challenges of Li4SiO4. 
CO2 can react with Li4SiO4 at high temperatures (>400 °C) to produce Li2CO3 and Li2SiO3 (eqn (4)). The generally-accepted sorption theory is based on the double-shell model. As depicted in Fig. 33, the CO2 capture process includes two steps: (1) CO2 reacts with Li+ at the surface of Li4SiO4 and the products (Li2CO3 and Li2SiO3) can cover the Li4SiO4 surface to form a dense shell with a fast reaction rate; (2) CO2 and Li+ must penetrate this dense product shell in order to react with each other. However, the carbonate shell is not easy to diffuse; thus, the sorption rate in this step diminishes rapidly. As the product shell thickness increases, the reaction gradually stops for CO2 and Li+ cannot penetrate within this shell. The strategies that can improve the CO2 diffusion or Li+ and O2− ion transportation will therefore be extremely effective for CO2 sorption performance of Li4SiO4. Furthermore, the cost of the sorbents is also to be taken into account. Li4SiO4(s) + CO2(g) ↔ Li2CO3(s) + Li2SiO3(s)(4)
 Fig. 33  Double shell model for CO2 sorption over Li4SiO4 (Reproduced from ref. 227 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2016). 
Hereunder, we have aimed to provide an overview of the optimization methods and their corresponding principles. At the same time, the future application prospect of Li4SiO4 has been evaluated. We hope that this part can provide guidance for the development of alkali silicate-based sorbents. The specific strategies to improve the Li4SiO4 sorption performance are summarized in Fig. 34, including the selection of a proper silicon source, influence of the preparation method, and the addition of foreign materials. For practical applications, the prilling process for making pelletized Li4SiO4 is also of great importance.
 Fig. 34  Different strategies for improving the Li4SiO4 sorption performance226–231 (Reproduced from ref. 227 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2016; reproduced from ref. 226 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017; reproduced from ref. 228 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018; reproduced from ref. 229 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015; reproduced from ref. 230 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2015; reproduced from ref. 231 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018). 
2.4.2.2 Strategies for improving the performance of Li4SiO4. 
According to the aforementioned optimization strategies, there are mainly four ways to enhance the CO2 capture property of Li4SiO4: (1) proper selection of the raw material and preparation methods; (2) creation of more pores by the addition of pore forming agents, (3) surface modification of Li4SiO4 with molten salts, (4) using Si-containing minerals as precursors and utilizing the impurity phases to enhance the stability and to prevent sintering. For the traditional solid-state method, an ideal calcination temperature is typically about 950 °C. During the solid-state process, SiO2 with a high melting point (about 1650 °C) as a “core” material gradually reacts with lithium salts with lower melting points (usually below 800 °C). The reaction progresses from the outside layer of SiO2 to the inside. Hence, large SiO2 particles lead to an increase in the Li4SiO4 particle size. In addition, the large particle size of the raw materials will raise the synthesis temperature and induce a non-uniform reaction, which would undoubtedly facilitate the sintering of Li4SiO4 particles, thus raising the probability of by-product (Li2SiO3 or Li2O) formation. Therefore, an optimization of the raw silica source is crucial.
At present, Li4SiO4 sorbents can be synthesized from a large panel of silica sources, such as zeolites or fumed silica. Compared to commercial silica, these novel silica sources exhibit smaller particle sizes and high SSAs. As a consequence, the formed Li4SiO4 sorbents demonstrate outstanding CO2 capture performances. As shown in Fig. 35a, SBA-15–Li4SiO4226 achieved the highest sorption capacity of 36.3 wt%, which is very close to the maximum theoretical sorption capacity (36.7 wt%). Likewise, MCM-41–Li4SiO4 showed excellent cycling stability during 20 cycles.232 However, high cost and complex synthesis remain the main drawbacks for the practical use of these new silica sources. Hence, some waste materials or natural minerals containing silicon have also been used as raw materials to both reduce the cost and promote waste valorization. Recently, lithium precursors such as Li2CO3, LiNO3, LiOH, and few organometallic salts have also been used as Li-precursors.233 The use of LiOH as a lithium source can significantly decrease the synthesis temperature to 600 °C, thanks to its higher reactivity than that of Li2CO3 and LiNO3.233
 Fig. 35  (a) Li4SiO4 synthesis from SBA-15 zeolite (Reproduced from ref. 226 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017), (b) Li4SiO4 obtained by sol–gel method (Reproduced from ref. 234 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017), and (c) Li4SiO4 modification by adding TiO2 nanotubes and porous carbon (Reproduced from ref. 235 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017; reproduced from ref. 236 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2016). 
To decrease the preparation temperature and time, novel processing methods have been developed in recent years, including sol–gel method,237 impregnation-precipitation method, glycine-nitrate solution combustion method, and “solvo-plasma” technique.234 Nano-sized or special morphological ceramic materials could be synthesized via these methods. The fine powder or fast heating of raw materials greatly diminished the sintering. In contrast, the conventional solid-state method can only obtain micron-size ceramic particles. Recently, Li4SiO4 nanowire sorbent was firstly synthesized using the “solvo-plasma” technique (Fig. 35b).234 The fabricated sorbent demonstrated a fast sorption rate (sorption capacity reaches 25 wt% in 3 min) and a high sorption capacity (about 35 wt%) due to the high SSA of the nanowires. Unfortunately, serious sintering issues related to the nanowire morphology led to difficult regeneration.
Back-up technical solutions have been set involving ball milling or hydration-calcination method as auxiliary technologies so as to intimately mix raw materials, thus further enhancing the SSA of the as-obtained Li4SiO4 powder.238 The addition of pore forming agents is another strategy to raise the porosity and the SSA of the adsorbent. Pore forming agents generally include carbon materials, organic materials, or porous materials with excellent thermal stability at high temperatures. Carbon and, in general, organic materials become volatile at high synthesis temperature and result in pore formation. In contrast, thermally stable porous materials still remain within the samples, thus generating a secondary porous network. The presence of these pores does not only enhance the mass transfer phenomena but also increases the contact area between the reactants. For instance, TiO2 nanotubes, polyethylene, and porous carbon have been used to design Li4SiO4 sorbents (Fig. 35c).
The main reason for the limitation of the CO2 capture capacity is the dense shell composed of carbonated products (Li2CO3 and Li2SiO3) covering the unreacted core of Li4SiO4. The loading of molten salts, mainly consisting of single, binary, or ternary alkali metal salts, is an effective way to promote the diffusion of CO2 and ions. Indeed, it can form low-temperature eutectic compounds with Li2CO3 and further cause the formation of a “liquid product shell”. Compared with the solid state, the ‘molten state’ is more conducive for the diffusion of CO2 and ions. Hence, this strategy greatly improves the sorption property of Li4SiO4 at low temperatures and CO2 concentration. Zhang et al.232 proved that compared with pure Li4SiO4, the sorption capacity of 10 wt% Na2CO3-loaded Li4SiO4 was increased from 10.8 to 34.7 wt% at 550 °C under 20 vol% CO2.
The surface modification of Li4SiO4 is usually aimed to improve the diffusion capacity of CO2. However, the influence of ion migration on the property of Li4SiO4 sorbents cannot be neglected. The point defects as a result of charge compensation can be formed by the doping of ions into the crystal lattice, which would enhance the ion hopping ability. Recent studies have confirmed that a solid solution can be formed by doping Al, Fe, Na, Ti, Ge, etc., with Li4SiO4via the isomorphous substitution of Si4+ or Li+ in the Li4SiO4 crystal lattice.230,239 Among these solid solutions, Li4+xSi1−xAlxO4 has been widely studied due to its CO2 sorption capacity, compared with Li4SiO4, which can be efficiently improved at medium temperature ranges (e.g., 400–600 °C). Furthermore, a recent study showed that the solid solution of Li4SiO4 doped with Ge (Li4SixGe1−xO4) exhibited excellent sorption performance at a wider operational temperature range (150–680 °C).240
However, the mechanism of promoting the sorbent performance by the addition of other elements is complex and still under debate. For example, Al and Ca react with lithium or silicon to form by-products, such as LiAlO2 or Ca2SiO4, which can then improve the sorption capacity as the promoters in the Li4SiO4 sorbent. The addition of a certain amount of CeO2 can inhibit the aggregation of Li4SiO4 crystals and obtain foam-like Li4SiO4 with improved sorption rate and capacity. The addition of Na, Ti, or Br can also inhibit the growth at the grain boundaries and avoid changes in the morphology of Li4SiO4.230 Besides, doping with sintering-resistant materials (Y2O3 or Gd2O3) also enhances the regeneration performance of the sorbent, thanks to the higher dispersion of Li4SiO4 particles.240 Recently, silicon sources from cheap wastes or minerals has aroused intensive interest, such as blast furnace slag,241 fly ash, diatomite, rice husk ash, halloysite, sediment,242 and biomass ash. Pure SiO2 can be obtained after treatment with acids. However, acid waste solution generated by this process can cause secondary pollution. The sorption performance of the obtained Li4SiO4 is similar to the sorbent synthesized by purified SiO2 or even worse, and the regeneration performance is not significantly improved. To avoid acid pollution, Wang et al.243 used an acid solution, which was produced using the natural silicon source (vermiculite) acid treatment to synthesize Mg–Al LDH. In this new route, two kinds of CO2 sorbents were obtained (Li4SiO4 and Mg–Al LDH) while avoiding pollution due to waste acid liquids. This study also demonstrated that metal oxide impurities that exist in vermiculite as dispersants can improve the cycling performance of Li4SiO4. Furthermore, Li4SiO4 synthesized by BFS-derived silica gel exhibited a fast sorption rate and stable sorption capacity in different CO2 concentration atmospheres (5–100 vol%). The presence of Ti4+ and Al3+ in BFS can improve the CO2 uptake performance (Fig. 36a).241
 Fig. 36  (a) Schematic diagram of the mechanism (replacement of Li+ by foreign ions) (Reproduced from ref. 241 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019), (b) CO2 sorption isotherms of vermiculite–Li4SiO4 and SiO2–Li4SiO4 sorbents under different CO2 concentrations (100 vol%, 50 vol%, 20 vol%) at 550 °C, and (c) the schematic illustration of the synthesis of a Li4SiO4-based CO2 sorbent from a vermiculite precursor (Reproduced from ref. 228 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018). 
As a natural mineral, vermiculite possesses a higher silicon content (about 40%) than fly ash, and also contains various alkaline earth metals and alkali metals (Mg, Al, K, etc.). Li4SiO4 synthesized by vermiculite exhibited high sorption capacity (20.7 wt%) and excellent sorption stability under different operating conditions. As shown in Fig. 36b, the vermiculite–Li4SiO4 sorption capacity only declined by 0.8 wt% (from 19.4 to 18.6 wt%) with the reduction of CO2 concentration from 100 to 20 vol%, whilst the traditional SiO2–Li4SiO4 capture capacity deteriorated rapidly. This result may be attributed to the porous structure and alkali metals that the adsorbent inherits from vermiculite. Though the sorption capacity of vermiculite–Li4SiO4 is still lower than that of Li4SiO4 prepared by pure SiO2 reagent, the excellent cycling performance and sorption capacity at low CO2 concentrations is warranted for industrial applications. The porous structure of vermiculite–Li4SiO4 can exhibit reduced mass transfer limitation for CO2 diffusion. Likewise, the alkali metal oxides in vermiculite not only promote the CO2 sorption capacity but also prevent the sintering of the particles (Fig. 36c).
Recently, Wang et al.244 synthesized a new nanoparticle/flaker composite silicon source, which was able to adjust the silicon content. For this silicon source, vermiculite and MCM-41 mesoporous silica were connected by the hydrothermal method. The prepared Li4SiO4 presented high SSA (6.8 m2 g−1) and high crystallinity with the even dispersion of alkali metals or alkali earth metals from vermiculite. These characteristics had a positive effect on the adsorption property of Li4SiO4. Compared with Li4SiO4 sorbents obtained from single silicon sources, (MCM-41/vermiculite)–Li4SiO4 demonstrated a higher CO2 sorption capacity at low temperature and low CO2 concentration, reaching 26.1 wt% at 550 °C under 20 vol% CO2. Furthermore, the sorption capacity was slightly diminished by about 1.4 wt% after 20 cycles. In general, a sufficiently high SiO2 content, the presence of moderate amounts of thermally stable impurities, and the presence of alkali or alkaline compounds are necessary (but probably not sufficient) features for silicon precursors to fabricate efficient Li4SiO4 sorbents.
2.4.2.3 Perspectives and outlook of alkali silicate-based sorbents. 
Recently, the demand of a high-temperature CO2 sorbent gradually increased with the SEHP process development. In this process, CO2 as the by-product, is generated simultaneously with H2, which greatly affects the H2 purity and limits the production rate when the equilibrium is gradually reached. It is therefore mandatory to introduce a suitable CO2 sorbent into the process to shift the equilibrium for improved H2 purity yield and reduced energy consumption. However, the presence of SO2, NOx, and H2O in the flue gas further raise the complexity of post-combustion CO2 capture. The post-combustion CO2 capture process by using high temperature CO2 sorbent is considered as an effective way to reduce CO2 emissions. Pacciani et al.245 proved that the existence of SO2 in the flue gas will cause the deactivation of lithium-based sorbents due to the irreversible reaction between Li4SiO4 and SO2. Therefore, removing SO2 is mandatory prior to CO2 capture. There is no clear decrease in the CO2 sorption capacity over Li4SiO4 in the 0–1000 ppm NO concentration range due to the chemical inertia of NO with Li4SiO4. In contrast, the presence of steam in flue gas sorption conditions can promote CO2 capture of Li4SiO4 for the enhanced diffusion of Li+. The industrial applications require prilling of Li4SiO4 powder, which is the last step in sample preparation after the different steps involved in the optimization of the Li4SiO4 sorbent. Though the study of granulation technology of Li4SiO4 is limited, promising results could be obtained using extrusion-spheronization, agar method, and graphite moulding pelletization method. Considering that the particle size of the sorbent increases rapidly after granulation, the addition of a pore-forming agent in the prilling process is therefore necessary to reduce the diffusion resistance of CO2. For the Li4SiO4 sorbent, the optimization of synthetic conditions and methods greatly improve the sorption capacity under pure CO2 atmosphere. However, the CO2 concentration in practical applications are varied in a wide range. Thus, improving the regeneration performance and sorption capacity at low CO2 concentration are of paramount importance. In addition, the impact of the complex compositions in the flue gas, such as fly ash, SO2, and H2O, on the Li4SiO4 sorbent performance should be assessed in a more systematic manner. In addition, the granulation of the Li4SiO4 powder needs to be considered due to the difficulties in using and recycling the powder in a machine. However, there are few reports about it at present.


2.4.3 Alkali titanate-based sorbents. 
Traditional solid chemical CO2 sorbents, such as CaO-based, alkali silica-based, and alkali zirconate-based sorbents, have been widely investigated in terms of the sorption performance and modification. However, in addition to material modification, the proposal of a new capturing material has also attracted widespread attention due to the improved cycling stability and other limitations. A variety of novel materials have been proposed for high-temperature CO2 chemisorption in recent years. Nevertheless, the sintering effect over multiple sorption-desorption processes still largely restricts the development of these materials. Meanwhile, a new promising CO2 capture material, alkali titanate-based sorbent with a similar structure to that of silicate- and zirconate-based sorbents, has shown selective CO2 sorption capacity and great potential for high-temperature CO2 capture. The titanates possessed a typical layered structure with a chemical formula of MxTiyOx/2+2y·zH2O (M = H, Li, Na, K, etc.). Similar to other layered materials, these titanates have a 2D sheet structure formed by Ti and O atoms, with cations or neutral molecules located inside the layers’ spaces. A majority of layers consist of many edge-sharing TiO6 octahedral blocks, such as H2Ti3O7 and K2Ti6O13. There are still a few titanates possessing different Ti atom- coordinated structures. For example, K2Ti2O5 exhibits a unique layered structure, which has a five-fold coordination structure and then forms the 2D (Ti2O5)2− sheets.246
2.4.3.1 Progress in alkali titanate-based sorbents. 
Alkali titanate-based materials were used for low-temperature CO2 capture at first. However, over the past decades, significant research efforts have been devoted to the development of alkali titanate-based sorbents, particularly for the SESR processes of pre-combustion CO2 capture. By overcoming the reaction equilibrium limitation, it is possible to achieve the complete conversion of CH4 or CO by the sorption by a solid CO2 sorbent. Initially, the performance of CO2 sorption and desorption capacities was investigated over Li4TiO4 at high temperatures. Li4TiO4 can adsorb CO2 from a lower temperature (250 °C) to about 900 °C and shows a significantly fast sorption rate promotion at 710 °C. The weight increase was approximately 27 wt% at 710 °C during continuous heating and carbonization, with the formation of Li2TiO3 and Li2CO3. Besides, CO2 uptake increased with the decreasing diameter of the sorbents. However, this material suffers from poor stability over repeated cycles due to increased particle size and decreased reactive SSA. Moreover, the prepared Li4TiO4 deteriorates easily when exposed to the atmosphere.
Sodium titanate is widely used in various fields, such as catalysis and wastewater treatment,247 and has been utilized as a possible CO2 sorbent in the recent years. Furthermore, potassium titanates, especially potassium dititanate (K2Ti2O5), have also been systematically investigated for their CO2 capture capacity, reaction kinetics, and regeneration ability. In contrast to other sorption materials suffering from serious sintering problems due to high temperature operation condition of multiple cycles, K2Ti2O5 showed a typical particle size “break-down” process. The morphology cracked down into K2Ti2O5 nanofibers instead of bulk particles at high temperature after 20 cycles. Thanks to the morphological changes, CO2 uptake was increased in the first few cycles and then finally reached a plateau. In addition, K2Ti2O5 showed a dramatic improvement in reversible structure switching during the CO2 sorption/desorption processes (Fig. 37). A rapid and complete release of captured CO2 can be achieved within only 6.0 min at the same temperature (750 °C).246
 Fig. 37  The proposed CO2 sorption and desorption mechanism over K2Ti2O5 caused by reversible structure switching.246 
Recently, to further enhance the CO2 capture capability and to develop advanced sorption materials, the fabrication of KNaTiO3 was carried out and its capture performance was systematically investigated based on previous studies by Wang et al.248 The weight decrease was only about 1.6 wt% (from 19.0 to 17.4 wt%) with reduced CO2 concentration from pure CO2 to 20 vol%, indicating that KNaTiO3 is very suitable for application in industry (Fig. 38a). In terms of the actual conditions, it is necessary to understand the effect of vapor on the capture properties. In the presence of steam, the mass loss in the sorption performance of KNaTiO3 under 20 and 50 vol% CO2 concentration was 0.87 and 1.38 wt% (Fig. 38b), respectively. Generally, KNaTiO3 has less dependence on CO2 concentration and has higher tolerance for the existence of water vapor in the CO2 uptake rate and the sorption capacity. Moreover, it has an outstanding thermal stability during 20 cycles under different CO2 partial pressures and its performance achieves a large step forward compared to the original research on alkali titanate-based sorbents.
 Fig. 38  (a) The influence of CO2 sorption capacity over KNaTiO3 and K2Ti2O5 under different CO2 concentrations, (b) the cycling performance of KNaTiO3 and other capturing materials (K2Ti2O5 and neat CaO) at different CO2 partial pressures (Reproduced from ref. 248 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020). 
The CO2 chemisorption/desorption mechanism for alkali titanate-based sorbents, similar to silicate- and zirconate-based materials, is mainly ascribed to the double-shell theory. To be more specific, when the CO2 sorption process is carried out on Na-doped Li2TiO3 particles, though external eutectic molten carbonates (Li2CO3 and Na2CO3) cannot react with CO2, it can facilitate the transfer of gaseous CO2 into the inner unreacted layer. Na2TiO3 possesses different CO2 capture reaction pathways, which is heavily dependent on the capture temperature. A detailed mechanism for K2Ti2O5 was proposed and verified by DFT calculations. O2− and K+ are released from K2TiO5 and further encounter CO2, forming K2CO3 among the outer layer. The shortage of K+ resulted in the transformation of K2Ti2O5 to form K2Ti4O9 with a lower K/Ti ratio rate. After losing two K atoms by interaction with CO2, the system energy could be elevated by 13.8 eV. The structural transformation into K2Ti4O9 can result in a system energy reduction by about 50.6 eV and better stability. KNaTiO3 rapidly transformed into K2Ti6O13, Na2Ti6O13, Na2CO3, and K2CO3 after CO2 adsorption. The double-shell model was proposed by Ida et al.249 to explain the CO2 sorption-desorption mechanism on pure and modified Li2ZrO3 in 2003.
2.4.3.2 Summary and outlook for alkali titanate-based sorbents. 
So far, few studies on titanate-based sorbents have been reported, considering their enormous potential in CO2 capture performance, theoretical research, and practical application, compared with other high-temperature CO2 sorption materials. However, current studies on alkali titanate-based sorbents have mainly been confined to the fabrication of sorption materials and the characterization of their sorption properties. More work is needed to clarify the systematic research results under various conditions and detailed reaction mechanism. With respect to novel materials, it would have bright prospects in material modification, such as a change in the different titanium sources and other alkali or transition metal promotion. Besides, bulk titanate-based materials are usually prepared by solid state reactions. The SSAs of these prepared materials are small, which limits their practical sorption performance. Hence, the selection and utilization of different synthetic methods is also worthy of further discussion.
The CO2 separation and capture technology using alkali titanate-based sorbents can be applied in a variety of realistic conditions. However, in the pre-combustion capture technology, the CO2 concentration in steam (i.e., 15–60% by volume, dry basis)250 is often higher than that in other technologies. The suitability should be estimated under realistic conditions, including testing temperature, gas flow rate, various CO2 concentrations, effect of water vapor, foreign gases, and impurities.
The chemisorption–desorption kinetics is one of the key factors for evaluating the performance of sorption materials. Some studies about sorption kinetics have been investigated using various theoretical kinetic models, such as the power law model, the SCM, the Avrami–Erofe’ev model, and the double exponential model. Besides, kinetic limitation under low CO2 concentrations is recognized as the main obstacle for many sorbents. To overcome this limitation and to enhance the sorption performance, sorption kinetics analysis should be taken into consideration as one of the essential factors to evaluate the CO2 capture property in the future. The reason that the coexistence of K and Na in the KNaTiO3's crystal shows better CO2 sorption than single metal ion in K2Ti2O5 is not fully understood. Further investigation of the cooperation mechanism of binary ions would provide a theoretical support for the modification of other materials. The industrial application of alkali titanate-based sorbents for CO2 capture also demands a prolonged evolution in terms of the economic advantages in the future.


2.4.4 Implementation and challenges in pre-combustion applications. 
The pre-combustion CO2 capture process is that by which CO2 is separated from H2-rich syngas or reformed gas at high pressures (2–7 MPa) and intermediate temperatures (200–450 °C). Commonly, the capture facility is placed after the WGS reactor, where CO is catalytically converted to CO2 and H2; however, it may be integrated with WGS to shift the equilibrium conversion. For reforming processes operated at high temperatures (>450 °C), high temperature CO2 adsorbents such as CaO and Li2SiO3 are also possible to be directly added into the catalytic reactors to enhance the H2 yields by in situ CO2 capture. The PSA process is preferred in pre-combustion CO2 capture because it can take advantage of the high CO2 concentrations (e.g., 15–60%). It should be noted that pre-combustion low-temperature separation technologies are still limited to lab tests (TRL3), probably due to the complicated processes, high equipment cost, and large energy consumption. In contrast, the concept of WGC, in which CO2 in the shifted gas is directly removed at elevated temperatures without pre-cooling the shifted gas, has received wide attention.251 Weak chemisorbents with reversible CO2 capture capacities are suitable for WGC systems.
SEWGS technology is a typical WGC process for pre-combustion CO2 capture, which achieves WGS catalysis, sulfur removal, and CO2 capture in a single step. The ECN has devoted to branching out SEWGS by using commercialized K2CO3-promoted hydrotalcites as CO2 adsorbents since 2005. The technical feasibility of SEWGS was verified in the 2 year CCP.252 A co-current CO2 rinsing step after the feed and a counter-current steam purge step for regeneration was introduced into the seven-bed, ten-step PSA process so as to reduce H2 loss in the product gas. However, the deployment of the CO2 rinsing step gave rise to lower productivity and consumed the CO2 compression energy; thus, in the following European FP6 project CACHET, it was replaced by a steam rinse step.253 The European FP7 project CAESAR mainly focused on reducing steam consumption for the rinsing and purging steps via operating parameter optimization.254 It is worth noting that the steam consumption could be much lower than expected if the co-adsorption of H2O is considered during the feed and rinse steps.255 In 2013, ECN announced that the SEWGS technology was ready for scale-up.256 Currently, SEWGS is being demonstrated in the STEPWISE project for CO2 capture from BFG with the objective of achieving 85% CCR with 60% lower energy consumption and 25% lower capture cost.257
TDA developed another PSA-based WGC technology for pre-combustion CO2 capture operated at 190–260 °C by using functionalized mesoporous carbon. In the 0.1 MWe-scale field test at the National Carbon Capture Center, the 4-bed, 8-step PSA prototype underwent 1500 adsorption/desorption cycles without performance degradation.258 A recent simulation study indicated that an 8-bed, 10-step PSA based on TDA-patented adsorbents can achieve both high CCR (>90%) and CP (>99%) with low energy consumption of 0.34 MJe kg−1.259 TDA is planning to build a pilot-scale PSA plant at the Sinopec Yangzi Petrochemical Plant in China. In another project, TDA is developing a low-temperature WGS–PSA combined PSA process but with a small scale (10 kg CO2 h−1).260 Compared to the single PSA process, the integrated WGS–PSA improved the system efficiency by 0.5%.
Tsinghua University conducted basic studies on ET–PSA, which exhibits 20.3–26.6% lower energy consumption compared with the Selexol process.261 In a 5 year project (2011AA050601), a four-bed, eight-step ET–PSA prototype was built to handle 6 N m3 h−1 CO2/H2/H2S mixed gas at 400 °C and 30 bar.262 The results from 75 h of continuous operation and 1089 h of accumulative operation indicate that the lab-scale prototype achieves 95.7–98.6% CCR and more than 99% H2S removal ratio. Since 2016, research has focused on high-purity H2 production with in situ CO2 separation. As a recent achievement, a 2-train ET–PSA with reflux structures was executed to exhibit both high hydrogen purity (HP, 99.9994%) and hydrogen recovery ratio (HRR, 97.51%) from the shifted gas.263 In a project funded by the Shanxi Government (MH2015-06), an ET–PSA unit with a processing capability of 5000 N m3 h−1 has been planned to be constructed for the high-purity H2 production from a coal-to-ammonia plant by the end of 2020.
SER using high temperature CO2 adsorbents is an efficient technology to produce high purity H2 with CO2 capture from various carbon sources including methane, biomass, glycerol, bio-oil, and ethanol.264 The SER system captures CO2 at the time of its production, thus eliminating the individual reactor for WGS and the downstream H2 purification process. In addition, the coupled carbonation process enables to provide the endothermic reforming reactions with heat energy. Besides the conventional fixed bed configuration, the DFB reactor, where the saturated adsorbents are regenerated in a separate reactor with additional heat from combustion, is commonly adopted for SER. Pure O2 and recycled flue gas for cooling are required for the calcination process to concentrate CO2. In recently years, several SER pilot plants have been successfully constructed. Unfortunately, most of the pilot-scale projects used SER technologies only to regulate the H2-to-CO ratio for downstream synthetic processes and to mitigate the reforming energy consumption, where the removed CO2 was released back into the flue gas without concentrating. An exceptional example is the SER tests with oxyfuel combustion conducted in a 200 kWth DFB reactor at the IFK Stuttgart using wood gasification as the fuel gas source. It was reported that when the operation mode for calcination was switched from air to O2 combustion, the CO2 content in the flue gas increased from 26.7 vol% to up to 95 vol%.
In summary, the PSA-based WGC process is one of the most promising options for pre-combustion CO2 capture. Several pilot-scale (TRL 6) WGC plants are now being constructed worldwide. Table 2 summarizes the simulation results of adsorption-based pre-combustion CO2 capture. Meanwhile, several challenges at the adsorbent, reactor, and system scales have been exposed. Although great progress has been achieved in the development of intermediate- and high-temperature CO2 adsorbents, their working capacities are still lower than those of low-temperature adsorbents for post-combustion CO2 capture. Molten salt-promoted MgO exhibits impressive capacities through bulk phase reactions but prototypes should be fabricated to verify its performance stability in pre-combustion CO2 capture. Current WGC systems still consume a large amount of high-temperature steam to achieve both high purity and recovery. Although multi-train PSA is able to reduce the energy consumption, it leads to higher operational complexity and capital cost. In addition to CO2, the removal of impurities, such as H2S, COS, HCl, and heavy metals, at elevated temperatures also needs to be considered. Note that the WGC processes are applicable not only in IGCC but also in NGCC, biomass gasification power plants, integrated steelworks, and coal chemical industries, where CO2-rich and H2-rich streams with high pressures and elevated temperatures are generated. SER hydrogen production processes based on high temperature CO2 adsorbents with pure O2 generated by an additional air separation unit for the calcination process provide feasibility for pre-combustion CO2 capture; however, detailed techno-economic analysis should be conducted to evaluate the capture cost.
Table 2 Simulation results of adsorption-based pre-combustion CO2 capture




Project
Feed flow rate
Adsorbent(s)
Catalysts
PSA process
CCR (%)
CP (%)
HRR (%)
Energy
Source
Country
Ref.




CCP
0.41 N m3 h−1
K2CO3/MG70
UCI C12-4-02
7-Bed 10-step
90
98
98.5
—
Power generation
UK

252



CACHET
4.48 N m3 h−1
K2CO3/MG70
UCI C12-4-02
8-Bed 11-step
90
99
98.9
—
Power generation
Netherlands

253



CAESAR
—
ALKASORB
Fe2O3/Cr2O3
8-Bed 11-step
90
98
—
2.59–2.89 MJth kg−1
Power generation
Netherlands

254



CATO-2
15.05 kg s−1
K2CO3/MG30
Fe2O3/Cr2O3
9-Bed 11-step
95
99
94.5
—
Power generation
Netherlands

255



SEWGS
16,975 N m3 h−1
K2CO3/MG70
Fe2O3/Cr2O3
8-Bed 11-step
95
99
99.3
—
Power generation
Norway

265



STEPWISE
208.6 kg s−1
K2CO3-promoted hydrotalcite
Fe2O3/Cr2O3


89.4
97.6
—
2.59–2.89 MJth kg−1
Iron & steel
Netherlands

257



TDA's PSA
—
AMS-19
—
8-Bed 10-step
90
95
—
0.34 MJth kg−1
Power generation
USA

259



MIT's PSA
—
MgO/activated carbon
—
8-Bed 11-step
92.5
—
96.9
—
Power generation
USA

266



ET–PSA
4 N m3 h−1
K2CO3/MG70
—
4-Bed 8-step
84.3
—
90.5
3.36 MJth kg−1
Power generation
China

267



Two-train ET–PSA
117.8 N m3 h−1
K2CO3/MG30
Fe2O3/Cr2O3
8-Bed 13-step
—
—
97.5
1.11 MJth kg−1 H2
Hydrogen production
China

263





A cross-technology comparison of different technologies for CO2 capture with common metrics including absorption/adsorption type, enthalpy of absorption/adsorption, modification schemes, absorption/adsorption condition, capture capacity, desorption condition, and contaminant sensitivities is presented in Table 3. In general, post-combustion processes based on liquid solvent absorption systems have emerged as a mature technology for implementation. The development of novel capturing materials with highly-effective adsorption performance and excellent regenerability is of paramount importance for the pre-combustion process. Furthermore, future research priorities should be focused on the investigation of pilot-scale demonstrations for practical applications.
Table 3 A cross-technology comparison of different technologies for CO2 capture




Absorption/adsorption type


Enthalpy of absorption/adsorption
Modification scheme
Absorption/adsorption temperature (°C)
Absorption/adsorption condition
Absorption/adsorption capacity (mmol g−1)
Desorption condition
Contaminant sensitivities
Ref.




Liquid-based CO2 capture system
Liquid amine-based solvents
−90 to −40 kJ mol−1
Blended amine solvents
40
100% CO2, till equilibrium
1.01
120 °C, for 60 min
—

30



Non-aqueous amine-based solvents
25
100% CO2, for 60 min
0.97
50 °C, 100% N2, for 100 min
—

33



40
15% CO2, 85% N2, till equilibrium
0.72
110 °C
—

35



Biphasic solvents
40
100% CO2, for 90 min
0.63
120 °C, for 30 min
—

44



30
100% CO2, for 60 min
0.46
120 °C
—

47



Ionic liquid-based solvents
−35 to −16 kJ mol−1
Amine- or amino-acid-functionalized ILs
40
100% CO2, 5 bar, for 4 h
1.60
—
—

62



−54 to −37 kJ mol−1
Aprotic heterocyclic anions-based ILs
100% CO2
2.04
120 °C, for 90 min
—

65







Low-temperature solid CO2 adsorbents
Solid amine-based adsorbents
−54 kJ mol−1 (ref. 185)
Supporting amines on porous materials
Silica
85
95% CO2, 5% N2, for 3 h
3.28
85 °C, 100% N2, for 90 min
—

82



60
15% CO2, 3% O2, 10% H2O, and N2 balance, for 30 min
1.98
110 °C, 100% CO2, for 30 min
8.5% loss in 3% O2 containing flue gas

92



60
15% CO2, 10% H2O, 2% Ar balanced with N2, for 10 min
3.59
100 °C, 100% N2, for 10 min
8.52% loss in 50 ppm SO2 containing flue gas

93



MOFs
25
15% CO2, 85% He, for 30 min
4.21
90 °C, 100% He, for 10 min
—

85



40
4.06


Clays
60
15% CO2, 3% O2, 10% H2O, and 2% Ar in N2 balance
4.05
110 °C, 100% CO2, for 30 min
—

87



75
60% CO2, 40% N2, for 120 min
3.7
110 °C, 100% N2, for 40 min
—

88



Polymers
25
Moist CO2/N2 gas
2.92
60 °C, 100% N2, for 50 min
—

91



Carbon-based adsorbents
−68 kJ mol−1 (ref. 110)
Tuning the textural properties
25
100% CO2
4.8
200 °C, 100% He
—

102



Surface chemical modification
25
10% CO2, 90% Ar, for 60 min
4.13
135 °C, 100% Ar, for 60 min
—

110



Hybrid composites preparation
30
100% CO2
1.5
120 °C, 100% N2, 20 min
—

100



Zeolite-based adsorbents
−71.8 kJ mol−1 (ref. 115)
Amines impregnation
30
100% CO2, for 1 h
0.45
100 °C, 100% N2
—

117



Hybrid preparation materials
25
100% CO2
1.62
—
—

118



35
10% CO2, 90% N2, for 20 min
1.1
100% N2, for 20 min
—

119



10% CO2, 90% N2
1.83
—
—

120



MOF-based adsorbents
−57 kJ mol−1 (ref. 141)
Functional component integration
25
15% CO2
1.63
—
—

139



Alkali carbonates-based adsorbents
−135 to −141 kJ·mol−1
—
60
10% CO2, 10% H2O, 80% N2
3.1
—
—

221







Intermediate-temperature solid CO2 adsorbents
LDH-based adsorbents
—
Chemical composition tuning
200
100% CO2, for 2 h
1.25
—
—

171



LDH-based composite
200
100% CO2, for 2 h
0.47
400 °C, 100% N2, for 30 min
—

180



Doping with alkali metals
240
100% CO2, for 5 h
9.27
—
—

182



MgO-based adsorbents
MgO + CO2 → MgCO3 ΔH = −100.7 kJ mol−1
Mesoporous structure fabrication
300
100% CO2, for 4 h
1.22
450 °C, 100% N2, for 30 min
—

193



200
15% CO2 in N2 balance, for 120 min
1.36
400 °C, 99.995% N2, for 30 min
—

199



Molten salts modification
300
100% CO2, for 4 h
10.2
350 °C, 100% N2, for 1 h
—

202



350
85% CO2 in N2 balance, for 50 min
19.8
450 °C, 100% N2, for 20 min
—

205







High-temperature solid CO2 sorbents
CaO-based sorbents
CaO + CO2 → CaCO3 ΔH = −178 kJ mol−1
Preparation of CaO nanoparticles
700
100% CO2, for 30 min
17.18
Room temperature to 900 °C, 5 vol% H2/N2
—

211



Molten salts modification
600
100% CO2, for 60 min
10.93
—
—

215



Alkali silicate-based sorbents
−141.9 kJ mol−1
Molten salts modification
650
100% CO2, for 2 h
8.25
700 °C, 100% N2, for 30 min
—

226



Alkali titanate-based sorbents
Na2TiO3 + CO2 = Na2CO3 + TiO2 ΔH = −128.917 kJ mol−1
Binary alkali-metal titanate
700
20–100% CO2, for 10 min
0.43
100% N2, for 30 min
—

248






3. Industrial carbon dioxide utilization
To combat climate change, an important strategy is to close the anthropogenic carbon cycle and the key requirement focuses on the effective combination of CO2 capture with further conversion.268–270 The utilization of CO2 to generate value-added products could reduce the net cost of removing atmospheric CO2 and mitigating the emissions.271 The import dependency of countries without fossil fuel production could be alleviated by CO2-based fuels with the diversification of energy supply and the reinforcement of energy security.272–274 In addition, other environmental impacts, for instance, particular matter and NOx emissions from fuels, could be mitigated by CCU products.275–277 The comparison with conventional chemical production processes combined with the assessment of CO2-based chemical production impacts are of significant importance.278 From a life cycle perspective, polyol production and formic acid generation via hydrogenation have emerged as the best promising conversion technologies for global warming impact mitigation.279 Recent estimates have put CO2 utilization potential at 10% for the fuels sector and 1–7% for the chemicals sector. Over 110 Mt per year CO2 have been transformed into chemicals such as urea (70 Mt CO2 used per Mt product, annual market demand 100 Mt per year), methanol (14 Mt CO2 used per Mt product, annual market demand 40 Mt per year), and inorganic carbonates (30 Mt CO2 used per Mt product, annual market demand 80 Mt per year). The deployment of various CO2 utilization technologies could potentially reduce annual CO2 emissions by 3.7 Gt, which equates to approximately 10% of the current annual CO2 emissions. With the exception of very few materials, the utilization would overwhelm the market if deployed at a large scale.280 In this section, we have systematically summarized the following aspects that are dominant research interests towards CO2 utilization, including thermochemical conversion of CO2, photochemical conversion of CO2, electrochemical conversion of CO2, photoelectrochemical conversion of CO2, and photothermal conversion of CO2 and CO2 as soft oxidants for dehydrogenation.
3.1. Thermochemical conversion of CO2
Considering that CO2 is an economical and abundant source, the thermo-catalytic transformation of CO2 into chemicals is a promising strategy for CO2 utilization that not only contributes to mitigate climate change caused by increasing CO2 emissions but also provides a sustainable means towards essential chemicals or materials production. Indeed, the thermochemical conversion of CO2 to platform chemicals and fuels could be quickly industrially implemented at a large-scale, hence further speeding up the great efforts that mankind has made to diminish CO2 emissions. In order to obtain a drastic reduction in CO2 molecules, large-scale conversion plants are going to be built for clean fuels. The rise in oil barrel prices, or at least their volatility, have led numerous researchers to focus on the electrochemical, photochemical, biological, or catalytic conversion of CO2. Another strong incentive for the conversion of CO2 to fuels is the ongoing energy transition, which aims to change the way electricity is produced by processes that emit less CO2. The increasing penetration of intermittent renewable energy sources is accompanied by difficulties in managing electricity grids, and the chemical storage of excess electricity in hydrogen and then, in combination with CO2, in fuels or chemicals (power-to-X processes) that further facilitates the development of these decarbonized energy sources in the energy mix. Hence, the direct conversion of CO2 has a strong effect on the reduction in CO2 emissions. The CO2 molecule is thermodynamically stable and kinetically inert;281 therefore, its activation acts as the rate-determining step in the transformation into value-added chemicals. Usually, another valuable reactant with high energy content is reacted with CO2 due to its efficient conversion. H2 is the most widely used reducing agent as it can be supplied from renewable energy via the relatively mature technology of water electrolysis.282
However, based on the aforementioned “apparent” chemical inertness, rather harsh conditions, such as high temperature and pressure, are required for accelerating the reaction rate or shifting the chemical equilibrium. Hence, CO2 hydrogenation reactions to form methane, CO, methanol, and several hydrocarbons appear as a sound option and will be reported in the coming sections. In consideration of the long history of these reactions and extensive works dedicated to those topics, the state of the art of the technologies and processes will be summarized herein for the in-depth understanding of the reaction mechanisms as well as the synthetic strategies of the catalysts. Due to the high cost of noble metals, special effort will be focused on the deployment of cheaper transition metals such as Fe, Co, Ni, and Cu. In addition, industrial CO2 utilization situations all over the world will also be reviewed.

3.1.1 CO2 methanation via the thermochemical route. 
Methane, the main component in natural gas, plays an important role not only in industrial processes but also acts as the main cooking and heating medium in Europe. Besides, methane can be easily liquefied and stored safely in large quantities. The presence of numerous existing infrastructures provides a tremendous convenience for storage and transportation of this high energy density alkane. The conversion of CO2 into methane, according to the CO2 methanation reaction CO2 + 4H2 → CH4 + 2H2O, the so-called Sabatier–Senderens reaction, is therefore meaningful for both the industry and consumer needs of our daily life. NASA has even investigated the process of converting carbon dioxide existing in the Martian atmosphere, where the reduction agent (H2) is generated from the H2O splitting process, to CH4 and H2O as an energy source and life-support system of astronauts.
The COx methanation reaction is industrially operated at moderate pressure (5–20 bar) and moderate temperatures in the range of 200–500 °C up to 800 °C in the Tremp process. The main difficulty in operating CO2 methanation reactors is the management of the heat release caused by the strong exothermicity of the reaction to maintain thermodynamically favorable conditions and to avoid catalyst deactivation by sintering under hydrothermal conditions. The catalytic systems concerning group VIII noble metals (i.e., Ru and Rh) supported on conventional oxide carriers (Al2O3, SiO2, ZrO2, TiO2, and CeO2) as well as their mixtures have been widely investigated for the Sabatier reaction.283 In particular, Ni-based catalysts have been recognized as the most promising materials in terms of the activity/selectivity/stability typically for CO2 methanation at relatively low cost. Different strategies have been employed to further enhance the activity or improve the methane selectivity, such as by introducing promoters at the active sites or support modification by tuning metal–support interactions.284,285 Peculiar electronic interactions between the metal and its support strongly impact the catalyst performance, which is triggered by the modification of the chemical bonding strength of the chemisorbed species. Hence, reducible supports are suggested to provide suitable active sites for CO2 activation, thanks to the oxygen vacancies generated during the reduction process.
Thus, depending on the nature of the support, different reaction mechanisms have been proposed: the “direct” methanation of CO2 through the CHOx intermediate species or the “indirect” methanation through the formation of CO. Conventional Ni/alumina catalysts promote the indirect methanation pathway. Finally, different promoters have also been evaluated and targeted for enhancing the metal reducibility, nanoparticle dispersion, CO2 adsorption, and further activation. For instance, Liu and co-workers showed that the introduction of the LaOx promoter into Ni/CNT promoted the number of basic sites that are necessary for CO2 adsorption, which resulted in not only lower CO2 activation temperature but also extremely high selectivity for methane compared with the pristine Ni catalyst.284 The 10Ni–2La/CNT catalyst with 2 wt% La-activated CO2 at 163 °C reached the full-selectivity towards CH4. The LaOx species in sub-nano clusters deposited on Ni NPs were suggested as the real (promoted) active sites. Similar results were also observed for BEA-type zeolite-supported Ni catalysts after the introduction of the La promoter.285
Reducible supports have been widely investigated in a large variety of reactions, such as WGS, CO oxidation, and CO/CO2 hydrogenation, which can be attributed to the existence of oxygen vacancies formed during the reduction process.286–288 The oxygen vacancies participate in the catalytic processes via two key roles: (i) storage and release of oxygen; (ii) promotion of dispersion and activity for the supported noble metal.289,290
Wei et al.286 revealed the reaction mechanisms of CO2 methanation with the comparison of Ru active sites’ supported on α-Al2O3 and CeO2 (Fig. 39c). Combined with operando XANES, Raman, and IR techniques, the Ce3+ sites were generated and oxygen vacancies as well as the surface hydroxyl groups were presented in the Ru/CeO2 catalyst during the catalytic reaction. By using SSITKA-type in situ DRIFT-IR, a formate route could be assessed over the Ru/CeO2 catalyst with all of the three aforementioned species getting involved. The dissociation of the formate species to methanol was found to be the rate-determining step, which was catalyzed by the presence of O-vacancies. In contrast, metallic Ru is considered to be the sole active site for the CO pathway on Ru supported on chemically inert α-Al2O3.
 Fig. 39  (a) The possible CO2 catalytic hydrogenation mechanisms. Pathways 1 and 2, in the preceding green and red boxes, indicate reverse-water–gas-shift (RWGS) mechanisms (Reproduced from ref. 282 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2018). (b) Qualitative scheme of the reaction network involving RWGS, carbon monoxide methanation, and carbon dioxide (Sabatier) methanation processes (Reproduced from ref. 291 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016). (c) Schematic illustration of the formate route for CO2 methanation over the Ru/CeO2 catalyst, (1) conversion of CO2 to CO2δ−, (2) hydrogenation of CO2δ− to formate, (3) dissociation of formate to methanol, (4) hydrogenation of methanol to CH4 (Reproduced from ref. 286 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016). 
In contrast to Fischer–Tropsch synthesis, where it has been generally accepted that the particle size strongly affects the reaction rate,292 this factor has been seldom reported for the Sabatier reaction, especially that catalyzed by Ni-based catalysts. However, Weckhuysen et al.,282 using sophisticated operando spectroscopic tools, unraveled the structure sensitivity between the Ni particles and the stability of the reaction intermediates. The CO adsorption strength, which is directly related to the formation of Ni(CO)4, diminished with an increase in the Ni particle size, thus leading to the selective formation of CO with the decrease in the Ni NPs size (Fig. 39a). Schlögl and co-workers sketched the contours of the detailed reactions that occur and the stable surface species existing on the nickel catalyst surface by using some advanced techniques (Fig. 39b).291
CO2 methanation offers multiple perspectives, for instance, the introduction of renewable energy into the energy system through SNG as a carrier (Fig. 40). Firstly, SNG benefits from the technology reserves and the existing infrastructures of the natural gas sector for efficient transportation to places for power or heat generation, or as fuels. Secondly, renewable SNG conduces to the secure energy supply with the aid of large gas storage facilities that already exist and dedicates to the reduction of the net carbon emissions when coal or biomass are employed as feedstocks. In addition, the development of novel methanation processes with an automated and safe control of intermittent operation is also required for small-scale decentralized productions. It could be associated with the delocalized production of biogas by methanation, where the separation of CO2 from methane before injection into the gas grid is inherent to the process, thus providing a source of CO2 ready to be valorized.
 Fig. 40  The key role of methanation for the supply of renewable substitute natural gas (Reproduced from ref. 293 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2014). 


3.1.2 Dry reforming of CO2 and methane via the thermochemical route. 
Methane dry reforming (DRM, CO2 + CH4 → 2CO + 2H2) represents an efficient way for CO2 utilization, allowing the production of valuable syngas. It has been reported that all syngas-producing processes are afflicted by coking. The zones of thermodynamic stability of solid carbon are illustrated in Fig. 41.294 Coke formation is especially prominent in the DRM between 550–700 °C according to the Boudouard reaction (2CO ⇔ C + CO2) and above 900 °C due to methane pyrolysis (CH4 → C + 2H2).
 Fig. 41  C–H–O phase ternary diagram (graphite, 1 bar) (Reproduced from ref. 294 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018). 
In accordance with the principle of microreversibility, Ni catalysts have been identified as one of the most promising candidates for the DRM process owing to their relatively low price and high catalytic activity.295 Since coke formation can barely be avoided over conventional Ni based catalysts, strategies for designing sintering- and coke-resistant catalysts or even an in situ manner for coke removal are therefore optional.
Yavuz et al.296 recently synthesized a single-crystalline MgO-supported NiMo catalyst, which exhibited superior stability over 850 h with almost 100% conversion of CO2 and methane without coke formation (Fig. 42a–c). In situ TEM and SEM observations disclosed the migration of Ni–Mo nanoparticles to the high-energy step edges of crystalline MgO(111), hence forming a stable and sustained average particle size of 17 nm during activation. Thereinto, the single-crystalline MgO and Ni–Mo alloy are both necessary for conferring excellent sintering- and coke-resistant properties. This method may provide an inspiration for the preparation of catalysts with high stability and selective product formation in the near future. Qiao and co-workers297 designed single Ni atoms trapped in the CeOx-doped hydroxyapatite catalyst. In this catalyst, isolated Ni atoms could inhibit coke formation owing to the peculiar ability of the activation of only the first σ C–H bond of methane, thus preventing the consecutive decomposition to coke. The doping of Ce in HAP induces strong metal–support interactions, which stabilizes single Ni atoms. This catalyst exhibited extremely superior catalytic activity as well as stability for at least 100 h of DRM with negligible coke formation.
 Fig. 42  (a) NOSCE mechanism for the sustained catalytic activity of NiMoCat. (b) Synchrotron analysis of NiMoCat sampled at different times under reactive conditions. (c) HAADF-STEM analysis of the spent catalyst (Reproduced from ref. 296 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2020). (d) A summary of thermodynamic properties of eligible metal candidates for participation in the CH4/CO2 redox cycle for DRM (Reproduced from ref. 298 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2020). (e) Proposed DRM mechanism using m-V2CTx MXene as the precursor, highlighting the transformation of V8C7 into V2O3 nanoparticles in-between the layers and on the surface via an in situ redox mechanism (Reproduced from ref. 299 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020). 
To remove the carbon deposition during the DRM process, a downstream process was elaborated by McFarland et al.298 based on the coupling of methane dry reforming with the catalytic pyrolysis of methane in a molten metal bubble column reactor (Fig. 42d). A coupled reduction–oxidation process occurs, in which CO2 was reduced by the liquid metallic species and methane was partially oxidized to syngas by the produced metal oxide intermediate, thus regenerating the active metal species. Three advantages of this smart strategy were proposed: (i) the H2/CO ratio could be regulated by varying the CH4/CO2 feed ratio; (ii) this process produces syngas by consuming CO2, unlike SMR, which produces CO2; (iii) the solid carbon produced by the reaction floats to the surface of the melt, where it can be easily removed. Furthermore, each gas bubble in the bubbling column reactor is in contact with the carbon-free molten catalyst surface; hence, neither coking nor coarsening may occur. Meanwhile, the metal in the catalyst has to satisfy three main criteria at the desired operating temperature in the range of 1000–1100 °C: (i) CO2 must be able to oxidize one (or both) metal, (ii) CH4 must be able to reduce the formed metal oxide species, and (iii) the metals should not form very stable carbides under the reaction conditions.
Newly emerging materials have also aroused researchers’ interest towards potential implementation in traditional catalytic reactions. For instance, Mxene exhibits the unusual electronic property of the 2D structure and unique properties of transition metal carbides, such as metallic conductivity and hydrophilic properties of the oxygen or hydroxyl terminated surface.300 VC MXene (m-V2CTx) was reported as a precursor for an efficient oxy-carbide catalyst (V2O3 and V8C7) in DRM by Carrero and co-workers (Fig. 42e).299 The in situ redox mechanism is demonstrated, in which the V2O3 nanocrystals generated by the oxidation of CO2 were further transformed into V8C7 nanocrystals by the carbonization of CH4. This catalyst exhibits comparable activity as that of the Ni-based catalyst and more than four-fold better performance compared with the bulk analogues (VC and V2AlC MAX phase). In particular, it lessened the occurrence of side reactions, such as methane cracking, Boudouard, and RWGS, and demonstrated high stability.


3.1.3 Reverse water–gas shift (RWGS) reaction via the thermochemical route. 
The conversion of CO2 into CO through the reverse water gas shift reaction (RWGS, CO2 + H2 → CO + H2O) has been generally considered to be a suitable option since the produced CO is chemically active and represents a valuable intermediate in numerous chemical industrial processes, such as hydroformylation or carbonylation and in the synthesis of methanol, acetic acid, dimethyl ether, hydrocarbons, etc.
In general, two main mechanisms are proposed for the RWGS reaction including RRM and AM. For RRM, hydrogen acts as the reducing agent without being directly involved in the intermediate formation.301 The RRM is based on the fact that CO2 could re-oxidize the partially reduced support, thus resulting in CO formation. In contrast, AM deems that CO arises from the decomposition of formate intermediate, which is derived from the association of H2 with CO2.302 However, other researchers proposed the carbonate mechanism for the RWGS reaction. Cu-based catalysts are most widely used in this catalytic process owing to their excellent activity and selectivity. In addition, metal carbides with noble metal-like properties also stand out in this process, leading to the achievement of a high CO selectivity.303 Moreover, the tuning of properties from other active metals, such as Ni, Co, and Fe, also presents the good performance for the RWGS reaction. For example, Ni is a classical active metal in the methanation process. Reina et al.304 employed the bimetallic Ni–Cu formulation to suppress methanation so as to reach a satisfactory CO selectivity.
Cu remains an efficient active metal for RWGS, especially the Cu–oxide interface, which is recognized as the active place, while Cu NPs tend to agglomerate under working conditions, thus losing a mass of active sites, especially under high temperatures. Malmstadt and Brutchey et al.305 reported the preparation of pure phase α-MoC1−x NPs by a solution-phase synthetic method. After its deposition on carbon, the catalysts showed a two-fold improvement in the activity with respect to the bulk α-MoC1−x counterparts. Since each reaction requires its own characteristic active metal, the modulation of the active site properties can be achieved by fine tuning the product distribution. Rodriguez and co-workers designed γ-Mo2N supported cobalt clusters, in which the charge transfer from Co to Mo2N via the nitride-bonded cobalt led to the stabilization of the Co 3d levels, reaching 100% selectivity for CO.306
With the advanced development of electron microscopy in the last decade, especially with the aid of AC-STEM, the atomic arrangement of complex catalyst systems can be investigated directly to get an in-depth insight towards the relationship between the catalyst structure and the activity.307–310 In particular, in situ HRTEM technology allows the tracing of the real catalyst structure under real reaction conditions. Liu et al.311 reported a NiAu catalyst that displayed selective CO formation in the CO2 hydrogenation reaction, which manifests an intact ultra-thin Au shell that covered the Ni core before and after the reaction by ex situ techniques (Fig. 43). However, the formation of a transient re-constructed alloy surface was discovered by in situ environmental TEM during the reaction, which was re-considered as the real active site, as further proved by other in situ tools including XAS and IR. The discovery of such a reversible transformation urges us to reconsider the nature of the active sites in the dynamic state for core–shell nanoparticles as well as other well-defined nanocatalysts.311
 Fig. 43  
In situ observation of the structural transition of the NiAu NPs during the reaction. (a) In situ TEM imaging of the alloying and dealloying evolution of an individual NiAu particle during the CO2 hydrogenation reaction. Scale bar, 2 nm. (b and c) Surface atom arrangement of the NiAu NPs reconstructed from the full alloy (60 °C) (b) to the Ni@Au core–shell (400 °C) (c); the four parts from left to right in b show the HRTEM image. Scale bars, 2 nm. (d) Intensity profiles from the integration of the diffraction rings of the SAED patterns during the reaction. (e) In situ EXAFS of the Au L3 edge and the coordination number changes (inset) of the Au–Au, Au–Ni, and Ni–Ni pairs at room temperature (r.t.), 400, and 550 °C (Reproduced from ref. 311 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2020). 


3.1.4 CO2 hydrogenation to methanol via the thermochemical route. 
Methanol is known as a key product in the chemical industry, which is used as solvent, fuel additive, or as a fuel for fuel cells. Besides, methanol serves as an indispensable building block for the production of high value-added chemicals such as acetic acid, formaldehyde, anhydrides, methyl esters, and monomers such as methyl methacrylate. Its world demand is continuously expanding, which was roughly 40 million ton in 2007 and is now almost (in 2019) 100 million ton.312 The first methanol industrial plant, started with syngas as the feed mixture, was developed by BASF in 1923. Cu/Zn-based catalysts have been intensively investigated in methanol synthesis from CO2 hydrogenation with Zn as a physical spacer to promote Cu dispersion during the preparation process. Whilst the debate for ‘which species acts as the real active sites’ still remains, it has been suggested that the metallic copper surface, the Cu–ZnOx interface, or the CuZn alloys may catalyze the reaction.
Based on the investigation on the nature of active sites of industrial methanol catalysts, Behrens et al.313 pointed out that the intrinsic activity presented a linear relationship with the stacking fault probability and highlighted that the defects are of paramount importance in affecting the activity (Fig. 44). The partial coverage of the metal particles by ZnOx under a reductive atmosphere was also demonstrated by in situ XPS experiments (Fig. 44f).314 With the development of operando advanced techniques, the precise location and visualization of active sites can be achieved. For example, the graphite-like ZnO metastable layers structure can be detected via Cs-corrected TEM on the commercial Cu/ZnO/Al2O3 catalyst during the reductive activation process. Zn was also indicated to be in the ZnxO form rather than in the ZnO from under the reaction conditions according to DFT calculations, microcalorimetry, and FTIR experiments.315 The Cu–ZnO interface was further demonstrated to be the active site in the CO2 hydrogenation reaction by Rodriguez and Chen.316 XPS, kinetic Monte Carlo simulations, and DFT calculation results suggested that the surface oxidation of the ZnCu alloy model catalyst during the reaction induced the evolvement of the surface Zn species into ZnO. Except for Cu and ZnO, other structural components such as Al2O3 or ZrO2 have been introduced to achieve better dispersion.317 Based on the kinetic studies, Roger et al.317 observed that Cu/ZnO/ZrO2 exhibited high methanol selectivity during CO2 hydrogenation, thus effectively limiting the occurrence of RWGS.
 Fig. 44  (a–d) Aberration-corrected HRTEM images of the Cu particles in the conventionally prepared, most-active Cu/ZnO/Al2O3 catalyst, (d) is a close-up of the marked area in (c). (e) Relation of the intrinsic activity of Cu to the concentration of stacking faults (Reproduced from ref. 313 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2012). (f) Relative measured methanol exit concentrations at 130 °C (temperature ramp-down) as a function of the post-reaction values of θZn. Varying values of θZn are obtained by pretreatments with H2 at different pressures and temperatures prior to the activity tests. The dashed line is a second-order polynomial fit (Reproduced from ref. 314 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2016). 
Though Cu–ZnO catalysts have been utilized as industrial catalysts for methanol synthesis, the methanol selectivity remains limited owing to the presence of the competitive RWGS reaction. Efforts have been devoted to novel catalyst design with high methanol selectivity. For instance, In2O3 has been investigated for methanol synthesis owing to its oxygen vacancies that may favor CO2 dissociation. Pérez-Ramírez et al.318 tested ZrO2-supported In2O3 for the CO2 hydrogenation reaction and achieved methanol selectivity of 100% and excellent stability of 1000 h. The high methanol selectivity is attributed to the lower apparent activation energy for CO2 hydrogenation to methanol than that for the competitive RWGS reaction (103 vs. 117 kJ.mol−1), as disclosed for the In-based catalyst. Furthermore, DFT calculations pointed out that the oxygen vacancies surrounded by three In atoms prompt CO2 activation and hydrogen splitting heterolytically. Afterwards, Pd, an efficient H2-splitter, was introduced as a promoter to boost the catalytic performance without losing the high methanol selectivity by the controlled co-precipitation method, which displayed good stream stability of over 500 h in the methanol synthesis.319
Apart from the aforementioned catalytic systems, cobalt-based catalysts have also been explored in the CO2 hydrogenation reaction. Cobalt is renowned in Fischer–Tropsch synthesis owing to its good C–O and H–H dissociation as well as the C–C coupling ability to produce hydrocarbons. When CO2 is employed as a feedstock, methane is formed. However, on changing the microstructure property of the active phase, methanol can be obtained as a prominent product. Zeng et al.320 attempted the incorporation of N into Co nanosheets through NH3 treatment, which shifted the selectivity towards the products from methane to methanol, along with a 64-fold increase in the TOF, compared with the pristine nanosheets. Co4N was regarded as the active phase with Co4NHx formed in the presence of H2. The amido-hydrogen atoms in the Co4N nanosheets directly interacted with CO2 to yield HCOO* intermediates. Wang et al.321 designed the Co@Six catalyst, in which silica acts as a support and a ligand, modifying the nature of the cobalt species via Co–O–SiOn linkages with Co0 and Co2+ both existing in the catalyst. On metallic cobalt, *CHx tends to form according to its excellent H–H and C–O bond dissociation ability and *COOH was generated over Co2+ with a high formation rate.322,323 Hence, controlling the appropriate Co0/Co2+ ratio remains the key point for obtaining a proper balance between the methanol selectivity and catalyst activity.


3.1.5 CO2 hydrogenation to hydrocarbons via the thermochemical route. 
Hydrocarbons are key building blocks from bulk chemistry, mainly including light (C2–C4) olefins, aromatics, as well as liquid alkanes and alkenes. The latter liquids act as fuels, including gasoline (C5–C11), jet fuels (C8–C16), and diesel (C10–C20).281 In the past decades, hydrocarbons have been produced by the well-known Fischer–Tropsch synthesis catalyzed by Fe, Co, and Ru from syngas.307,324 The metallic nanoparticle surface provides the right environment and good affinity for CO and H2 dissociation as well as C–C chain growth. The selectivity control, however, remains a big challenge since the product distribution usually follows the ASF rule.
Recently, the mixture of metal oxides and zeolites has been evaluated as a bifunctional catalyst, which attracted considerable attention due to its distinct characteristics of violating the ASF distribution, which has been a challenge for decades. Hence, an oxide-zeolite catalytic system was developed, aiming to overcome the hydrocarbon selectivity restrictions found in the conventional Fischer–Tropsch synthesis. Bao et al.325 designed the ZnCrOx/MSAPO catalyst with a ZnCrOx phase to activate the CO and H2 molecules, whilst the acid sites (from MSAPO) performed the C–C coupling, yielding a selectivity for C2–C4 olefins as high as 80%. C2–C4 olefins with a selectivity of 70% were obtained over the Zr–Zn/SAPO-34 hybrid catalyst by Wang et al.326
In contrast, when CO2 is used as the carbon source, the activation follows two different paths, i.e., (i) CO2 was transformed to CO via the RWGS reaction and then CO was converted into hydrocarbons, following the ASF distribution. Sun et al.327 directly converted CO2 into gasoline over a multi-functional catalyst involving three kinds of active sites (i.e., Fe3O4, Fe5C2, and acid sites), which cooperatively promoted a tandem reaction (Fig. 45a). During this reaction, CO2 was firstly reduced to CO through RWGS on the Fe3O4 sites and CO was subsequently converted into α-olefins on the Fe5C2 sites through FT synthesis. Finally, the olefin secondary products diffused towards the zeolite acid sites, undergoing classical acid-catalyzed processes (i.e., oligomerization, isomerization, and aromatization); (ii) the second path consists of CO2 hydrogenation to methanol or DME, followed by C–C coupling reactions catalyzed by Brønsted acid sites. Zhong et al.328 developed an In2O3/HZSM-5 bifunctional catalyst for CO2 hydrogenation to yield a high selectivity of 79% towards gasoline range hydrocarbons (Fig. 45b–e). CO2 and H2 were activated on the oxygen vacancies of In2O3, forming methanol and subsequent C–C coupling reactions within the zeolite pores. Several metal oxides, including Zn–Cr oxide,329 Cu–Zn–Zr,329 Fe–Zn–Zr, ZnO–ZrO2,326 In2O3–ZrO2,330 ZnGa2O4, Cr2O3, and ZnAlOx,331 have been investigated for CO2 conversion into methanol/DME with the bifunctional catalyst. Amongst all these oxide–zeolite catalytic systems, the distance between the oxide and the zeolite particles remains a crucial factor that strongly influences the targeted product selectivity. For instance, intimate contact between the two functions may lead to the poisoning of the Brønsted acid sites, thus resulting in CH4 formation as the main product.
 Fig. 45  (a) Reaction scheme for CO2 hydrogenation towards gasoline-range hydrocarbons. The CO2 hydrogenation reaction over the Na–Fe3O4/zeolite multi-functional catalyst takes place in three steps: (1) the initial reduction to CO via RWGS, (2) the subsequent hydrogenation of CO to α-olefins intermediate via FT, and (3) the formation of gasoline-range hydrocarbons via acid-catalyzed oligomerization, isomerization, and aromatization reactions (Reproduced from ref. 327 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2017). (b) Influence of the integration manner of the active components (In2O3/HZSM-5 mass ratio = 2:1) on the catalytic behavior under the same conditions. (c) Schematic of the hydrocarbon-pool mechanism for CH3OH conversion into hydrocarbons inside HZSM-5. (d) Schematic for the formation of CH3OH from CO2 at the oxygen vacancy sites on the In2O3 catalyst surface, which involves four major steps: (1) CO2 adsorption at the oxygen vacancy sites, (2) sequential hydrogenation of the adsorbed CO2 species to CH3OH, (3) CH3OH desorption, which leads to a surface without oxygen vacancies, and (4) hydrogenation of the surface to regenerate the oxygen vacancy sites. (e) Schematic for hydrocarbon formation from CH3OH at the acidic site inside the pores of the HZSM-5 catalyst via the hydrocarbon-pool mechanism (Reproduced from ref. 328 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2017). 

3.2. Photochemical conversion of CO2
Photochemical CO2 conversion is viewed as a clean and environment-friendly technology, utilizing one of the most viable and widely abundant renewable energy sources, i.e., solar energy. With the constantly increasing concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere, directly converting the energy from the sun into chemical fuels (e.g., CH4, C2H6, CH3OH, C2H5OH, and other longer chain hydrocarbons) using CO2 as the feedstock has gained significant momentum.332,333 In addition, the advantage of photochemical CO2 conversion driven by the inexhaustible solar energy source is complemented by the simplicity and cost-effectiveness of a photocatalytic array, thus encouraging the further development of this technology. Given that the reduction of CO2 by water to form chemical fuels is a highly endothermic process (+802 and +726 kJ mol−1 for methane and methanol, respectively),334 these fuels can be stored and used upon demand, overcoming the intermittency of sunlight while generating electricity. In diverging from the use of fossil fuel resources, this approach could contribute to creating a new CO2 economy, based on the realization of sustainable CO2 conversion systems.

3.2.1 Basic principles of photocatalytic CO2 reduction. 
Unlike thermal CO2 conversion, the electrons that participate in the photochemical CO2 reduction reaction originate from the photoexcitation of a photo-absorber (commonly known as a photo-catalyst). During photo-catalysis, CO2 reduction occurs in concert with the oxidation reaction, ideally, water oxidation in a vapor-based or aqueous-phase environment (a hole scavenger is often used in place of water to improve the overall performance).335 The reduction and oxidation reactions are triggered by photo-generated electrons and holes from the conduction and valence bands of the photo-catalyst, respectively. As illustrated in Fig. 46a, the charge kinetics during photocatalytic CO2 reduction comprise three key steps: (1) charge generation upon illumination, promoting the excitation of electrons and holes to the conduction and valence bands of the material, respectively; (2) charge separation/migration from the bulk to the surface of the material; and (3) charge consumption by redox reactions on the surface of the photo-catalyst to invoke CO2 reduction and water oxidation.336
 Fig. 46  (a) Schematic illustration of three key charge kinetic steps during the photochemical conversion of CO2 and (b) valence and conduction band potentials of selected common photo-catalysts in relation to CO2 reduction, H2 reduction, and water oxidation potentials. 
The rate of photocatalytic CO2 conversion strongly depends on the charge dynamics of the photo-catalyst. In particular, the amount of charge generated in Step 1 relies on the light intensity and the band energy/HOMO–LUMO levels of the photo-absorber. Considering the fact that the solar radiation spectrum comprises of approximately 43% visible light, selecting a visible-light activated CO2 reduction photo-catalyst with a bandgap energy smaller than 3.0 eV is crucial. Charge excitation within the bulk photo-catalyst is followed by migration of the charge (Step 2) to the photo-catalyst surface. Charge migration is often hindered by intrinsic surface and bulk charge recombination, particularly in the presence of defects or impurities that act as charge trapping and recombination centers.337,338 Various strategies have been employed to improve the overall charge separation efficiency (by suppressing the charge recombination rate), such as metal deposition, heterojunction formation, and the integration of carbon-based materials.339,340 Improved charge separation can then facilitate efficient charge consumption (Step 3) by CO2 and water on the catalyst surface. The conduction and valence band potentials play a critical role in regulating the potential reaction pathways. For instance, selected visible-light active photo-catalysts (e.g., Fe2O3 and WO3) are unable to produce chemical fuels from CO2 due to the less energetic conduction band potential relative to the CO2 reduction potential (Fig. 46b).341 In contrast, TiO2, Cu2O, and C3N4 have been regularly applied to the photocatalytic CO2 reduction reaction due to their suitable conduction band potential.
The slow kinetics of the water oxidation reaction (similar to that experienced during photocatalytic water splitting342) deploying a hole sacrificial agent as the electron donor has gained favor. As a consequence, the current focus has been primarily directed towards investigating the CO2 reduction half reaction. From the viewpoint of artificial photosynthesis, the ideal photocatalytic CO2 reduction reaction should accompany O2 evolution via water oxidation.343 However, H2 evolution (via proton reduction) is more favorable than CO2 reduction in the presence of H2O as the reactant because of the need for multi-electron transfer during CO2 reduction. Utilizing H2O as the electron donor for O2 evolution as well as suppressing the H2 evolution therefore represents one of the most critical issues in photocatalytic CO2 reduction, and considerable research effort has been devoted for constructing photocatalytic systems towards efficient CO2 conversion together with water oxidation.344–346
Another important issue in photocatalytic CO2 reduction is the product selectivity. There exist various reaction pathways that can generate a selection of products. The most common products are CO, CH4, and CH3OH, although the capacity to photo-chemically convert CO2 into C2-based solar fuels such as C2H4, C2H6, and C2H5OH has also been demonstrated. The formaldehyde, carbene, and glyoxal reaction pathways are most favored for C1 product generation. The formaldehyde and carbene pathways are illustrated in Fig. 47 and the multi-electron nature of the reactions is highlighted as mentioned above (i.e., the production of CO and HCOOH required 2e−, HCHO needs 4e−, CH3OH and CH4 need 6e− and 8e−, respectively), irrespective of the reaction pathways. A combination of these pathways in conjunction with dimerization facilitates the formation of C2 hydrocarbons.347,348 Simultaneous H+ ion production from the oxidation half reaction is also essential for producing the methane, aldehyde, and alcohol species. However, the complexities of photocatalytic CO2 reduction still require further unravelling, where deeper understanding and knowledge of the processes will benefit both the activity and selectivity of the system.
 Fig. 47  Potential carbene and formaldehyde pathways of photocatalytic CO2 reduction to CH4 on the surface of a photo-catalyst (Reproduced from ref. 348 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020). 


3.2.2 Progression and current challenges. 
Some of the earliest publications on photochemical CO2 conversion involved catalysis by a metal complex in a homogeneous system, including W2(CO)102− complexes, [Ru(bpy)2(CO)2]2+ complexes, and nickel(II) complexes, which were then followed by the development of Re-, Fe-, and other transition metal complexes.349,350 Although using metal complexes is known to invoke high selectivity and high quantum yield for CO production, metal complexes are typically expensive and difficult to synthesize, especially at a larger scale. In addition, the potential re-oxidation of the products by the metal complexes means that the production of methane or longer chain hydrocarbons in a homogeneous photocatalytic CO2 conversion system is challenging.
The research on heterogeneous photocatalytic CO2 reduction in a liquid–solid system was first reported by Inoue et al.351 in 1979. Here, TiO2 was shown to deliver the best CO2 reduction performance amongst the assessed photo-catalysts (i.e., TiO2, ZnO, CdS, GaP, SiC, and WO3). Over the past four decades, significant effort has been devoted to establishing effective gas and liquid phase heterogeneous photocatalytic CO2 reduction systems. Gas phase systems offer the distinct advantage of reduction in the competition between CO2 reduction and H2 evolution reactions. The saturated CO2 gas existing in the system only needs to compete with a comparatively small number of protons from the introduced water vapor. The advantage of a liquid phase system, where the photo-catalyst is suspended in a CO2-saturated solution, is the greater exposure of the catalyst surface to incident light.
Despite the apparent benefits of heterogeneous photocatalytic CO2 reduction systems, a significantly low yield and poor selectivity are the key barriers that hinder the effective uptake of the approach. Designing a photo-catalyst that is visible-light active while simultaneously possessing the desired properties for selectively reducing CO2 into the desired chemical fuels continues to be a challenge. In principle, in relation to the basic charge kinetics highlighted in Fig. 46a, an ideal photo-catalyst should possess: (1) a relatively small bandgap to effectively harness solar energy; (2) a crystal structure that promotes high intrinsic carrier density, charge mobility, and a long charge lifetime; and (3) conduction/valence band potentials and surface properties that drive the reaction towards a preferable reaction pathway. The greatest challenge that remains in photocatalytic CO2 reduction research is the scarcity of highly active, stable, cheap, and abundant photo-catalysts that meet all these criteria. The relatively low product yield from photocatalytic CO2 reduction (especially for longer-chain ‘C2/C3’ carbon products, which are typically produced in the nmol h−1 g−1 range) has led to the debate that whether the products are generated from CO2 or other surface impurities.352 The presence of carbon residues on a photo-catalyst surface (particularly alkoxides, which may have been used as precursors for catalyst preparation) have shown to contribute to the carbon product yield via a reverse Boudouard reaction.353 Using carbon-based photo-catalysts (e.g., g-C3N4, graphene, reduced graphene oxide, or MOFs) will further compromise the reliability of the results if proper control experiments (e.g., in the absence of CO2 or in the presence of 13C-labelled CO2) are not performed.
Rapid developments in photochemical CO2 conversion have seen significant improvements in solar fuel (i.e., CH4) production rates of up to 2.2 mmol h−1 g−1 (∼97% selectivity towards methane production) using the Au/Cu-deposited TiO2 photo-catalyst.354 In comparison, the highest methane production rate was less than 10 μmol h−1 g−1 a decade ago.347 Despite the material advances, the low solar fuel production level continues to be a significant issue from a practical standpoint. Other aspects that require consideration, including the smaller band gap of the visible-light active photo-catalyst, is often at the expense of the conduction band energy/potential, which may in turn not meet the high driving force required to reduce CO2. Furthermore, loading a noble metal on the photo-catalyst to promote CO2 reduction might increase the cost to a point where large-scale production is unfeasible. In terms of the selectivity, a mixture of chemical fuels in the product stream due to the lack of control over the reaction pathways necessitates a complicated separation process, which is also technically impractical. Finally, photo-stability issues that have been frequently reported in other photocatalytic studies (particularly for copper-based or sulfide semiconductors) should not be neglected.337,355


3.2.3 Strategies to improve the performance. 
The above-mentioned challenges define the research domains that require advanced strategies to deliver improved overall CO2 reduction performance. The well-established photo-catalyst, TiO2, continues to be the most commonly studied material for photochemical CO2 conversion, despite a wide band gap (∼3.2 eV) that only permits the absorption of UV light. High photo-corrosion resistance, non-toxicity, low cost, and abundance are the primary reasons that make TiO2 favorable. Along with the discovery of other photo-catalysts (e.g., Cu2O, C3N4, and photoactive perovskite materials) that are suitable for photochemical CO2 conversion, a range of strategies have been developed to enhance the photo-activity and selectivity, including doping, integration of secondary components (i.e., co-catalyst deposition, heterojunction formation, incorporation of carbon-based materials, and photosensitization), morphology or crystal facet tuning, as well as defect engineering. Fig. 48 summarizes the commonly-employed material design strategies that have been adopted to improve photochemical CO2 conversion. Each strategy introduces one or more ideal characteristics (e.g., good light absorption capacity, high charge separation efficiency, and enhanced surface properties) into the photo-catalyst, which promotes photochemical CO2 conversion. This section will build on the review articles on photocatalytic CO2 reduction published over the past few years by presenting a clear and concise evaluation of the latest progress in the above-mentioned techniques.347,356,357 Note that only reliable literature that performed appropriate control experiments proving the generation of solar fuels from CO2 instead of other carbon sources is included here.
 Fig. 48  Strategies to advance photocatalytic CO2 reduction performance by improving the light absorption ability, charge separation efficiency, and surface reactions. 
Metal and non-metal dopants can induce different conduction or valence band energy levels within a semiconductor, thus narrowing the band gap for visible light excitation. This strategy has been widely employed in various photocatalytic or photo-electro-catalytic applications, such as water splitting, organic degradation, photo-reforming, and CO2 conversion. Given that doping introduces distortion within the crystal structure and commonly increases the charge carrier density (at a low dopant concentration), the intrinsic charge separation/migration efficiency will also be affected. Metals such as Ag, Cu, Fe, Pt, and Au have been doped into the TiO2 lattice to reduce the band gap, making it visible-light responsive for photocatalytic CO2 reduction. For non-metal doping such as nitrogen, the introduced N 2p states often form a mid-gap level that reduces the band gap of the semiconductor and allows visible light absorption. For example, (g-C3N4)–N–TiO2 has displayed improved CO2 conversion to CO,358 while P-doped C3N4 also exhibited enhanced photo-activity and selectivity towards CO2 reduction due to better light absorption capacity and CO2 adsorption ability.
Co-catalyst loading and heterojunction formation (particularly type II heterojunction and direct Z-scheme systems) are known to be the most effective and widely implemented strategies for improving photocatalytic CO2 reduction.339,357,359 As illustrated in Fig. 48, these techniques enhance all three of the key photo-catalyst aspects and can potentially enable the realization of a highly active and selective photo-catalyst. In addition, there exist many simple and effective synthetic methods to produce co-catalyst-loaded or heterojunction-based photo-catalysts, such as photo-deposition, impregnation, and one-pot hydrothermal method. Integrating a plasmonic co-catalyst (e.g., Ag, Au, and Cu) or a narrow-bandgap photo-catalyst with the primary photo-catalyst material are well-established strategies to deliver visible-light active photo-catalyst arrays for photochemical CO2 reduction.360,361 These secondary components facilitate charge separation to suppress charge recombination and also change the surface active sites, thereby improving the surface reaction and potentially tuning the product selectivity. For instance, Neatų et al.354 achieved a high level of methane production using an Au/Cu alloy on the surface of the TiO2 photo-catalyst, demonstrating the important role each component played in improving the overall performance (Fig. 49a). The enhanced CO2 reduction capability was attributed to the plasmonic properties of Au, which facilitated visible light absorption, while CO adsorption was preferred on Cu. A reaction mechanism explaining the highly selective CH4 production was proposed (Fig. 4b), whereby CO2 was first reduced to CO and then CH4 in the presence of photo-generated electrons and H+ ions, following the carbene pathway.
 Fig. 49  (a) The TEM image and (b) the proposed rationale based on the influence of irradiation wavelength range on the product distribution by the Au/Cu alloy deposits on the TiO2 photo-catalyst (Reproduced from ref. 354 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014). (c) Comparison of the photocatalytic production of CH4 using CdS, TiO2, and direct Z-scheme TiO2/CdS system. (d) Schematic illustration of the charge migration mechanism according to type II heterojunction and direct Z-scheme of TiO2/CdS (Reproduced from ref. 362 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2018). (e) Production rate during photocatalytic CO2 conversion for different ratio of g-C3N4/Bi4O5I2 under visible light illumination (Reproduced from ref. 363 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2016). (f) Production rate during photocatalytic CO2 conversion for different ratios of Bi2WO6/RGO/g-C3N4 under visible light irradiation (Reproduced from ref. 364 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018). 
The Z-scheme approach has attracted considerable attention for photocatalytic CO2 reduction. The combination of two narrow-bandgap semiconductors with suitable conduction and valence band potentials can effectively enhance visible light utilization, and the Z-scheme configurations promote charge separation and accomplish CO2 conversion together with water oxidation.357 There exist two discrete Z-scheme photocatalytic systems (direct and indirect) with the difference defined by the absence/presence of an electron mediator. While direct Z-scheme charge transfer occurs in the absence of an electron mediator (the two photo-catalysts are in direct contact), it needs to be clearly distinguished from a type II heterojunction. Recently, Low et al.362 systematically differentiated direct Z-scheme charge migration within TiO2/CdS from a typical type II heterojunction using in situ XPS so as to probe the charge transfer pathway upon illumination, as illustrated in Fig. 49c and d. A Z-scheme SiC@MoS2 structure achieved the overall conversion of gas phase CO2 and H2O into CH4 and O2 with an apparent quantum efficiency of 1.75% at 400 nm.346 In the case of an in-direct Z-scheme system, a liquid-phase redox couple (e.g., I3−/I− or Fe2+/Fe3+) or a solid-phase conducive material (e.g., graphene or reduced graphene oxide) are employed as an electron mediator. The Z-scheme structure of g-C3N4/Bi4O5I2 in a suspension containing I3−/I−,363 the combination of (CuGa)1−xZn2xS2 and BiVO4 in a [Co(tpy)2]3+/2+ redox couple solution, Bi2WO6/RGO/g-C3N4,364 and CuGaS2/RGO/BiVO4365 have shown to successfully convert CO2 into CO and CH4 using H2O as an electron donor (Fig. 49e and f). The simultaneous deposition of a co-catalyst on the heterojunction photo-catalyst also provided favorable results. A recent study employing the g-C3N4/Au–TiO2 Z-scheme system displayed promising photo-activity and selectivity towards CO2 reduction under visible light illumination.366 Overall, the selection of an appropriate co-catalyst and semiconductor combinations is crucial for imparting high efficiency and selectivity during photochemical CO2 reduction.
There are intensive studies that have examined the potential of graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) for photocatalytic CO2 conversion.367 This emerging metal-free photo-catalyst shows the benefits of being visible-light active, photostable, and possesses a very energetic conduction band that permits the conversion of CO2 into various chemical fuels. The effective tuning of the product selectivity has also been demonstrated by computational DFT calculations, where Pd/g-C3N4 was shown to preferentially convert CO2 into HCOOH, while Pt/g-C3N4 produced more CH4.368 Given that g-C3N4 is a carbon-based semiconductor, extra precautions and comprehensive control experiments confirming the origin of the products should not be neglected. With the exception of g-C3N4, integrating secondary carbon-based materials on a photo-catalyst has emerged as a popular strategy due to the extensive possibilities for improving the charge transfer efficiency and surface adsorption of CO2. The possible contribution of carbon products originating from the integrated carbon species needs to be carefully evaluated. In most cases, graphene or reduced graphene oxide was employed369 due to their high conductivity and flexibility with morphology control, which leads to improved photo-activity.370 Recently, the development of MOFs as photo-catalysts or to fabricate photo-catalyst composites has attracted wide interest in photo-catalysis, predominantly for application in photocatalytic CO2 reduction. Sophisticated MOF structures could be rationally designed and finely tuned to suit the specific reaction pathway for enhanced photo-activity and selectivity. For instance, the construction of a modified ZIF on TiO2/carbon displayed almost complete selectivity (99%) towards CO production.371 Although implementing MOFs in photochemical CO2 conversion remains limited by the photo-stability concerns (where unstable MOFs will result in misinterpretation or overestimation of products formed) and high material costs, a wide range of interesting properties derived from their structural controllability is yet to be thoroughly explored.372
Over the past decade, faceted photo-catalysts have shown to provide excellent performance towards photocatalytic CO2 reduction. Facet control imbues improved charge transfer efficiency and reactant adsorption ability, which is attributed to the preferred surface electronic and atomic structures, respectively.356 The CO2 adsorption capacity and geometry on the photo-catalyst surface are crucial in determining the conversion efficiency and selectivity. Different exposed facets and the associated surface atomic structure of TiO2 can significantly influence the CO2 adsorption geometry. Possible surface arrangements of the CO2 molecule on TiO2 are illustrated in Fig. 50a.373 Although CO2 adsorption is the initial critical step in the reduction process, the simultaneous adsorption of CO2 and water is also important when converting CO2 into chemical fuels. For example, (010) anatase TiO2 has been reported as an active facet for CO2 reduction (Fig. 50b), despite it being thermodynamically less stable than the (101) facet. This derives from the more energetic conduction band (Fig. 50c) and exposed Ti atoms on the high energy (010) facet, which improve the adsorption of CO2 and water.374 Ohno et al.375 also demonstrated that brookite TiO2 with a high aspect ratio of the (210) to (212) facets (Fig. 50d) produced a greater amount of CH3OH from photocatalytic CO2 reduction, as illustrated in Fig. 50e.
 Fig. 50  (a) Possible surface structures of CO2 adsorbed on TiO2 (Reproduced from ref. 373 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014). (b) SEM images of microsized anatase rods with a dominant (010) facet, with the inset illustrating the facet arrangement. (c) Schematic electronic band structure of anatase rods with a dominant (010) facet.374 (d) Brookite TiO2 nanorods prepared in the absence of a polymer. (e) CH3OH production rate of several kinds of brookite TiO2 (Reproduced from ref. 375 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2014). 
Likewise, defect engineering is a surface modification technique that can enhance charge transfer in a photo-catalyst. By prolonging the charge lifetime and providing relevant surface-active sites for the reaction, defect engineering has been implemented to improve the photocatalytic CO2 reduction reaction.376 A predominance of research studies on oxide-based semiconductors have reported that surface oxygen vacancies (Ov) with low coordinative sites are beneficial for promoting charge separation, charge transfer, and the CO2 adsorption capacity. As demonstrated by Yin et al.,377 the presence of localized Ti3+ defects on a blue TiO2 photo-catalyst (Fig. 51a–d) both improved the charge migration to the surface for the CO2 reduction reaction and acted as surface active sites to promote CO2 adsorption and activation so as to provide high selectivity towards CH4 (see the proposed mechanism in Fig. 51e). If the defect layer was too thick (Fig. 51d), the resultant high defect concentration would impede the charge transfer, leading to a lower photo-activity. Recently, bismuth-based photo-catalysts (i.e., Bi12O17Cl2 and BiOI3)378,379 have illustrated the beneficial role of surface oxygen vacancies in accelerating charge transfer during photocatalytic CO2 reduction. A higher oxygen vacancy concentration in the Bi12O17Cl2 nanotubes when compared to bulk Bi12O17Cl2 accounted for the accelerated CO production rate.378 Similarly, oxygen defects introduced into BiOI3 nanostrips boosted the CO production rate.379 Defect formation could also be observed from the carbon-based material, such as g-C3N4. Akin to oxygen removal from an oxide material, g-C3N4 with nitrogen vacancies exhibited an approximately eight times higher CO2 conversion to CO when compared to that of pristine g-C3N4.380
 Fig. 51  (a–d) HRTEM images of pristine TiO2 and blue TiO2 with different thicknesses of the Ti3+ defect layer. The amorphous shell is illustrated by the dashed line and arrows. (e) Proposed reaction pathways for CO2 photo-reduction in the presence of H2O by the blue TiO2 photo-catalyst (Reproduced from ref. 377 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018). 


3.2.4 Perspective and outlook for photocatalytic CO2 reduction. 
In the context of utilizing renewable resources, the photocatalytic conversion of CO2 into value-added chemical fuels using solar energy is very appealing. Photochemical conversion customarily occurs close to the ambient temperature and pressure, which renders it less energy consuming than other approaches. Given that a heterogeneous system is more promising in terms of future scale-up (including the system with a combination of complexes on a heterogeneous photo-catalyst), various strategies have been established to overcome the foremost challenges in designing photo-catalysts that possess both high thermodynamic and kinetic potentials toward CO2 reduction. An ideal photo-catalyst for photochemical CO2 conversion should possess selected key features. First, a narrow band gap that allows the harnessing of a larger portion of the solar spectrum. Second, good intrinsic charge properties that suppress charge recombination and promote charge migration. Finally, it should possess desirable surface properties that drive selected surface reactions. These include appropriate band potentials that minimize competition with the water reduction reaction (H2 evolution reaction) and good adsorption ability towards CO2 molecules. While a combination of the above-mentioned strategies has demonstrated the possibility to boost the overall conversion of CO2 and H2O upon illumination, it is also important to consider the product selectivity. The potential for the formation of a wide range of products (CO, CH4, C2H4, CH3OH, and C2H5OH) and a corresponding lack of understanding of the reaction mechanisms and pathways has yielded little control over its product selectivity. Consequently, the factors that regulate the reaction pathways and define product distributions from photochemical CO2 conversion are yet to be convincingly identified. Despite the comparatively low efficiency in relation to other approaches, there continues to be a clear interest in exploring and establishing promising photo-catalysts for enhanced CO2 photo-conversion. The current low yields of solar fuels from photocatalytic CO2 reduction are impractical in its present state. Thorough mechanistic studies, both experimental and first principles-based to unearth new photo-catalysts and provide a greater fundamental insight in effectively capturing the broad solar energy spectrum, are crucial. In fact, such new knowledge could be further extended into other catalysis modes, such as photo-thermal catalysis (as detailed in the ensuing section), to synergistically harness both light and heat from the sun.

3.3. Electrochemical conversion of CO2
Electrochemical CO2 reduction into fuels and chemicals provides an important way for a carbon neutral cycle and renewable energy storage and utilization. The activity and selectivity towards specific products via electrochemical CO2 reduction has proved to be dependent on selected electro-catalysts and the conditions of reactions. In the past few decades, researchers have made great efforts to develop novel heterogeneous and homogeneous electro-catalysts. Considering that typical homogeneous catalysts are difficult to be separated from the product mixtures, which hampers large-scale applications, herein, we mainly focus on the recent progresses in heterogeneous catalyst development. They have achieved high selectivity towards different products, especially for the 2e− transfer products (CO and HCOOH), the FE of which has reached nearly 100% today.381,382 However, the current densities regarding the CO2RR activity have always been lower than 40 mA cm−2 because of low CO2 solubility in aqueous solution (∼0.33 mol L−1 at 25 °C, 1 atm). Recently, numerous studies have focused on the large-scale production of various products for further industrial applications, aimed to achieve long-term reaction (>20000 hours) and large current density (>200 mA cm−2) in the future.383–385 The obstacle in technology development mainly includes two aspects: one is the catalytic property (over-potential, product selectivity, activity, and stability), the other is the construction of infrastructure (combination with CO2 capture, resistance in the cell, product separation, etc.). Herein, we have mainly summarized the outstanding works in the field of electrochemical CO2 reduction that focus on low-cost materials with prospects for the large-scale production of various products in the past three years.

3.3.1 Basic principle of electro-catalytic CO2 reduction. 
CO2RR involves a multiple-electron transfer process including 2e−, 4e−, 6e−, 8e−, 12e−, or even more electrons pathways to form a variety of products. In aqueous solution, a competitive reaction HER also occurs to form the H2 by-product. As shown in Table 4, the equilibrium potentials (vs. SHE) for the reduction half-reactions of CO2-to-various products in aqueous solution (pH = 7.0) has been summarized.386 Although some product formation pathways seem to be thermodynamically more favorable than HER, the kinetics of CO2RR is quite slow because of the standard redox potential of the intermediate radical CO2˙− species formation at about −1.9 V (Fig. 52).387 Subsequently, this intermediate is further reduced to ˙COOH or HCOO˙ through the protonation of its oxygen atom or carbon atom to produce CO and formate, respectively. These two transfer processes only involve two electrons; thus, CO and formate are mostly produced as the main products of CO2RR. In addition, CO can be further reduced to a series of different hydrocarbons through hydrogenation, C–O bond breakage, and C–C bond coupling.388,389
Table 4 Possible electrochemical reactions for the formation of various products alongside the standard potentials




CO2 conversion to various products

E
0 [V] vs. SHE at pH = 7




2H+ + 2e− → H2
−0.42


CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → CO + H2O
−0.52


CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → HCOOH
−0.61


CO2 + 4H+ + 4e− → HCHO + H2O
−0.51


CO2 + 6H+ + 6e− → CH3OH + H2O
−0.38


CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4 + 2H2O
−0.24


CO2 + 12H+ + 12e− → C2H4 + 4H2O
−0.34


CO2 + e− → CO2˙−
−1.90




 Fig. 52  Schematic diagram of various metal electro-catalysts for CO2RR in aqueous solution (Reproduced from ref. 390 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2017). 


3.3.2 Recent progress in formic acid/formate selective formation. 
Formic acid is a latent liquid fuel and a common organic chemical material, which is easy to store and transport. The most widely studied catalysts for formic acid production are Sn, Bi, and In instead of other heavy metals due to their non-toxicity, environment-friendly properties, and good performance, which show great potential in further commercial applications.
3.3.2.1 Sn-Based catalysts. 
Sn-Based catalysts have been widely used for formate formation in the past few decades due to their excellent selectivity towards HCOOH and low cost. Previous work reported by Hori group391 indicated that the bulk Sn electrode was able to selectively convert CO2 to formate with a relatively large over-potential and low current density. Oxide-derived metals have gained great attention in electrolysis in recent years, especially for characteristic metals that are synthesized via in situ or ex situ reduction from the oxidized metal architecture. The morphology and/or chemical composition of the metal surfaces could be changed from the bulk form of the metals after the oxidation–reduction steps, thereby influencing the electro-catalytic performances.392–394 SnO2 has been typically prepared via different methods and then reduced to Sn0 with residual surface oxide, which could create more active sites for CO2RR. For example, SnO2 porous nanowire reduced by an electrochemical method was reported to reach a high HCOOH FE of up to 80% under an applied potential of −0.8 V vs. RHE due to the high density of the grain boundaries within the porous structure, as compared to that of commercial SnO2 nanoparticles.395 Moreover, Amal and her co-workers396 proposed a convenient and scalable strategy to develop efficient Sn-based electro-catalysts for CO2RR by manipulating defects generation. They applied an industrially adopted FSP technique to synthesize SnO2 nanoparticles for electrochemical CO2 reduction to formate. According to ex situ and in situ characterizations, the surface defects containing oxygen vacancies and oxygen hole centers in the obtained FSP-SnO2 catalysts could be altered by tuning the flame synthesis conditions, which play an important role in CO2 activation. FSP-SnO2-5 exhibited better performance for formate production with higher current density and selectivity compared to the other two catalysts, which could be attributed to a higher amount of defects, achieving a HCOO− FE up to 85% as well as a high total current density of −23.7 mA cm−2 at −1.1 V.
Apart from oxide-derived catalysts, sulfide-derived catalysts have also been intensively applied for efficient CO2 reduction. Li and co-workers397 reported a 2D SnS2/rGO composite for CO2-to-formic acid conversion, for which the highest selectivity of up to 84.5% along with a total current density of ∼14 mA cm−2 was obtained at −0.68 V. According to the characterization results, metallic Sn derived from SnS2 was considered to be the active site and the remaining SnS2 was found to improve the catalytic activity. Moreover, a sulfur-modulated tin (Sn(S)) catalyst on Au was prepared for formate formation, which was reduced from the atomic layer deposition of SnSx on Au needles.398 The detailed synthetic process is illustrated in Fig. 53a, suggesting that Sn(S) films were formed via the selective reduction of the SnSx slab on Au needles. XANES analysis illustrated in Fig. 53b indicated that the tin oxidation state in the Sn(S) catalyst was higher than that in the Sn NPs before and after reaction; thus, Sn(S) might have more under-coordinated Sn centers than Sn NPs. As illustrated in Fig. 53c, sulfur-modulated tin on Au needles (Sn(S)/Au) achieved a high total current density of 55 mA cm−2 at −0.75 V and the HCOOH FE was up to 93%, suggesting superior efficiency for HCOOH formation compared to the pure Sn NPs/Au (Fig. 53c). The existence of S atoms in the electro-catalysts’ surface was able to boost the under-coordinated sites, thus enhancing the activity for CO2-to-formate reduction.
 Fig. 53  (a) SEM images and schematics for the synthesis of Sn(S) nanostructured electrodes. (b) In situ Sn L3-edge XANES spectra and Sn K-edge of Sn(S) and the relevant controls. (c) Performance tests including polarization curves and potential dependence of the faradaic efficiencies and current densities in CO2-saturated 0.1 M KHCO3 (Reproduced from ref. 398 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2017). (d) Schematic images for the synthesis of SnO2@N-rGO and SnO2@rGO nanocomposites, respectively. (e) HRTEM, TEM, and the corresponding elemental mapping images of SnO2/0.14@N-rGO. (f) Faradaic efficiency of CO, HCOOH, and H2 for SnO2/0.07@N-rGO, SnO2/0.14@N-rGO, SnO2/0.21@N-rGO, and SnO2/0.14@rGO, respectively (Reproduced from ref. 399 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018). 
Integrating metal-based catalysts with carbon supports (e.g., CNT, carbon nanofibers, and graphene nanosheet) provides a useful way to boost the electrical conductivity and surface area, and to further improve their electrolytic performance. Besides, it also promotes metal nanoparticle dispersion and alleviates the agglomeration of particles during the electrochemical reaction. Recently, Zhang and co-workers399 prepared a hybrid catalyst containing ultra-small SnO2 nanocrystals deposited on N-doped graphene through the in situ transformation approach (Fig. 53d) and applied the electro-catalysts for CO2 reduction. The presence of SnO2 and N-doped rGO (SnO2@N-rGO) was proved by the TEM images (Fig. 53e). As shown in Fig. 53f, the optimized SnO2/0.14@N-rGO electro-catalyst showed an excellent performance towards formate formation with a high FE up to 89%, which was attributed to the ensemble effect between the well-dispersed SnO2 nanocrystals (Fig. 53e) and the N-doped graphene nanosheets (Fig. 53f).
3.3.2.2 Bi-Based catalysts. 
Bi is another earth-abundant, cost-effective, and environment-friendly catalyst comparable to Sn, which is adjacent to Sn and Pb in the periodic table and has similar electrochemical properties. Before 2017, most studies about Bi-based catalysts for CO2RR focused on selective CO formation in ionic liquids or aprotic electrolytes. Recently, its application in HCOOH production via CO2RR in aqueous solution has aroused intensive interest.400–403 Metallic Bi has a layered crystal architecture similar to black phosphorus, in which the layers interact with each other, mainly via weak van der Waals’ forces. Therefore, many strategies for 2D Bi preparation with atomic layers have been reported so as to expose more active sites for improved CO2RR performance.
Among the different strategies, the sacrificial template method is most commonly used due to the flexibility that various templates such as oxides,404 sulfides,405 and oxyhalides381,385 can be reduced to novel Bi-based catalysts with abundant exposed sites. Recently, Li et al.406 successfully in situ synthesized ultrathin Bi nanosheets derived from the BiOI nanosheets template for CO2 reduction to formate, and reached a maximum selectivity up to ∼100% as well as good stability of 10 h. Moreover, they combined the Bi nanosheets cathode with the Ir-based anode to establish a full cell driven by two alkaline batteries, and achieved an HCOOH FE of ∼95% and electrical energy conversion of 47%. Besides, they also used ultra-thin 2D Bi2O2CO3 nanosheets as a sacrificial template to obtain mesoporous Bi nanosheets with atomic layers for CO2RR, which showed an excellent selectivity for formate (∼100%) with great durability.381 They further proposed that the structural defects in the Bi nanotubes derived from the Bi2O3 nanotubes played a significant role in the catalytic performance.404 As illustrated in Fig. 54a and b, the obtained catalyst consists of a distinct double-layer tubular architecture and a highly fragmented outer surface. The tubular nanostructure could maintain its original form even after the Bi2O3 nanotubes were reduced to metallic Bi under the cathodic potential. According to DFT calculations (Fig. 54c and d), the presence of defective Bi sites was favorable for the stabilization of the *OCHO intermediate and thus improved the CO2RR performance. The nanotube-derived Bi catalyst exhibited an outstanding performance towards CO2 reduction to HCOOH, suggesting a high CO selectivity that approaches 100% within a broad potential range (Fig. 54e) and an excellent formate partial current density of about 60 mA cm−2 at −1.05 V vs. RHE, which is superior to most reports related to CO2-to-formate reduction. Besides, the catalysts loaded on a gas diffusion layer reached an excellent current density of 136 mA cm−2 at −0.86 V vs. RHE in 1 M KHCO3, and ∼288 mA cm−2 at −0.61 V vs. RHE in 1 M KOH within a flow cell (Fig. 54f and g), which showed great potential for commercialization. Similarly, Sargent group385 applied BiOBr as a template for the in situ preparation of petal-shaped Bi nanostructure with prior exposure of Bi(110) facets so as to enhance the electrochemical activity. They also operated the CO2RR within a flow cell under a high total current density over 200 mA cm−2 in 2 M KHCO3 along with a FE of about 90% towards formate formation.
 Fig. 54  (a) HAADF-STEM image. (b) Schematic image of Bi2O3 NTs configuration with fragmented outer walls. (c) Optimized configurations of the *OCHO intermediates adsorbed on different Bi(001) surfaces. (d) Gibbs free energy diagrams for CO2-to-formate conversion. (e) Potential-dependent faradaic efficiencies of different products. (f) Polarization curves of nanotube-derived Bi in 1 M KHCO3 or 1 M KOH in a flow cell, (g) schematic image of the flow cell configuration (Reproduced from ref. 404 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2019). 
Electrodeposition is another facile method to deposit metals on some substrates from the metal ion-containing solution. Carbon materials are commonly composited with metal-based catalysts to improve the electrical conductivity. For example, carbon-supported BiOx NPs (BiOx/C) were prepared through a facile solvothermal approach for CO2 reduction, which exhibited a superior selectivity of 96.0% with a total current density of 12.5 mA cm−2 towards formate formation in 0.5 M NaCl electrolyte.407 Liu et al.408 composed Bi2O3 nanosheets with NGQDs and the obtained electro-catalyst achieved an excellent selectivity of 95.6% towards HCOOH in a wide potential range due to the enhanced binding energy of CO2ads and OCHO* intermediates.
3.3.2.3 In-Based catalysts. 
Similar to Sn and Bi, In is also non-toxic and environment-friendly; however, its cost is higher than that of Sn and Bi, which remains the main obstacle in its industrial implementation. Compared to bulk Sn, the bulk In electrode showed higher selectivity towards formate of ∼95% under the same conditions.391 Nevertheless, the current density of CO2RR on the In electrode is needed to be further improved. Therefore, nanostructured In catalysts were synthesized by different strategies. For example, a 3D hierarchical porous In electro-catalyst was prepared through the template-free electrodeposition on Cu meshes.409 A high HCOOH selectivity of ∼90% as well as a high current efficiency were obtained with an unprecedented production rate of 1.14 mmol cm−2 h−1 at −1.2 V. The DFT results revealed that the porous In surface stabilized the *OCHO intermediate for the formate pathway.
Likewise, oxygen and sulfur residues on the In surface also demonstrated improved electrolytic performance. Ma et al.410 reported a sulfur-doped In catalyst derived from the electroreduction of S-doped In2O3 nanoparticles for enhanced CO2RR. The optimized S2-In electro-catalyst with an S content of 4.9 mol% achieved a high formate selectivity of 85% for a wide range of current densities (25–100 mA cm−2) in the KHCO3 electrolyte. Moreover, in the CsHCO3 electrolyte, it showed a higher value of 93% for HCOOH selectivity and a total current density of 84 mA cm−2 with a production rate of 1449 μmol h−1 cm−2 (Fig. 55a). Based on the DFT calculation results, they proposed that the adsorbed S2− ions on In, which interacted with the hydrated metal cations (e.g., K+ or Cs+) in the double layer, could help H2O to dissociate and form the H* species instead of directly activating CO2, thus stabilizing the formation of the HCOO* intermediate (Fig. 55b and c). The surface S2− species could anchor with the K+(H2O)n cation to keep them close to the In surfaces in the double layer through Coulombic interactions (Fig. 55d). The chemical coupling interaction between the porous In2O3 nanobelts and rGO was also investigated by Zhang and co-workers411 to enhance the CO2 electroreduction. The formate FE and current density of the obtained In2O3–rGO hybrid electro-catalyst were 1.4-fold and 3.6-fold superior to the catalyst prepared via the physical mixing of In2O3 and rGO at −1.2 V, respectively. Based on theoretical analysis, the enhancement in the electro-catalytic activity was attributed to the increase in the electrical conductivity and the stabilization of the key intermediate HCOO−* (Fig. 55e and f).
 Fig. 55  (a) Effect of alkali metal cations (Na+, K+, and Cs+) on the current density and formate FE. (b) Gibbs free energies for CO2-to-HCOOH conversion on In(101) and S–In(101) surfaces. (c) Gibbs free energies for the HER pathway on pure In(101), In/S sites of the S–In(101) surfaces. (d) Schematic image for the role of S2− in facilitating water dissociation and H* formation for CO2 electroreduction to formate (Reproduced from ref. 410 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2019). (e) The differential charge diagram of the In2O3–rGO hybrid electro-catalyst. (f) Gibbs free energy diagram for CO2-to-formate conversion on different catalysts (Reproduced from ref. 411 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019). 
3.3.2.4 Other metal-based catalysts. 
Normally, Pb is not regarded as a promising candidate like Sn, Bi, and In for industrial CO2RR applications due to its high toxicity, even though it shows good performance towards CO2 electroreduction. Nevertheless, the fundamental study on Pb for CO2RR still makes sense for comparison with other main group metals. Recently, Guay and co-workers412 prepared honeycomb porous Pb films with dendrite-shaped secondary architecture via dynamic hydrogen bubble templating strategy for efficient electrochemical CO2 reduction, which grew along the [100]-axis. The thickness and the electrochemically active surface area of the obtained porous Pb films could be manipulated by the current density and the deposition time. It was observed that an optimized porous Pb film deposited at −4.0 A cm−2vs. 40 s exhibited the best performance, suggesting a formate FE up to 97% along with a partial current density of −7.5 mA cm−2 at an overpotential of −0.99 V after long-term electrolysis of 6 h, which could be attributed to the increased fraction of the [100] surfaces. Furthermore, the morphology effect on the Pb catalyst activity for the CO2-to-formate conversion was studied by Yeo et al.413 They synthesized SD-Pb and OD-Pb electro-catalysts from electrochemically-reduced PbS and PbOx precursors with different morphologies. The obtained SD-Pb catalyst with a wafer structure exhibited a formate FE of 88% and a geometric partial current density approaching 12 mA cm−2 at −1.08 V. Besides, the formate partial current density normalized to the ECSA of the SD-Pb was significantly higher than those of the OD-Pb and polished Pb disks, suggesting a higher activity towards formate formation. The unique morphology was responsible for the improved activity. Therefore, tuning the morphology of the Pb cathodes is an effective way to enhance the CO2RR activity.
In the periodic table, the position of Sb is close to that of Sn and Bi but there are few studies about Sb-based electrodes for CO2 electroreduction.414 For instance, Zhang and co-workers414 reported 2D “few-layer” antimony (Sb) nanosheets prepared by cathodic exfoliation for active CO2RR, which suggested better performance than bulk Sb due to the larger amount of active edge site exposure. The obtained Sb/graphene composite showed a maximum formate FE up to 88.5% with the partial current density approaching 8 mA cm−2 due to the combination of higher density of active sites and the strong electronic interaction between graphene and Sb.


3.3.3 Recent progress in selective CO formation. 
CO is gaseous under the ambient conditions and can be easily separated after electrolysis. It is widely used in chemical, metallurgical, and medicine industries and is the principal raw material for Fischer–Tropsch process for the synthesis of hydrocarbons. The process of CO formation by CO2RR only requires two-electron transfer and the pathway is not as complicated as that for other products’ formation. Therefore, electrochemical CO2 reduction to CO is most likely to be implemented for industrial applications, and thus, has attracted intensive attention in the past few years. CO2-to-CO conversion mainly involves three steps: first, CO2 molecule is adsorbed on the electrode surface to form the *COOH (* refers to the surface-adsorbed species) intermediate through the H+/e− transfer process, then the adsorbed *COOH intermediate further reacts with an electron-proton to generate *CO, and finally, *CO is desorbed from the electrode surface to form the CO product. Hence, the key to designing an efficient electro-catalyst for CO formation is to facilitate the adsorption energy for both CO2 activation and *CO desorption. Noble metals such as Au,392,415–417 Ag,418–420 and Pd421,422 have been extensively studied to exploit novel approaches for excellent performance and to investigate the fundamental mechanisms of CO2RR, which have been proved to be highly active for selective CO production due to their position in the Trassati's volcano curve. These different strategies of improving noble catalysts could also be extended to other non-noble metals. Based on thorough studies on these noble metals for CO formation, researchers have started to shift their interest to non-noble metal-based electro-catalysts and carbon-based electro-catalysts so as to substitute noble metals in the recent years, which are considered as ideal candidates for the further commercialization of CO2-to-CO conversion.
3.3.3.1 Non-noble metal-based catalysts. 
Zn is considered as a promising substitute to noble metals due to its effective CO2-to-CO conversion, low cost, and non-toxicity. Similar to other metal-based catalysts, the effect of surface morphology,423 exposed facets,424 and oxidation states on the CO2RR catalytic performance have been systematically investigated. Recently, a report proposed that Zn nanosheets covered with a porous ZnS sub-nanometer layer could reach an outstanding performance comparable to those of noble metal-based catalysts due to the lower energy barrier for *COOH formation.425 Meanwhile, a porous Zn catalyst was obtained by applying a facile electrodeposition approach so as to improve its CO2RR performance.426 The porous Zn catalyst reached a remarkable CO selectivity up to 95% with a total current density of about 27 mA cm−2 at −0.95 V in an H-type cell. The boost in the activity towards CO production correlated with the increased electrochemical surface area and the high local pH effect in the porous construction. Moreover, the porous Zn catalyst deposited on GDE was applied for CO2RR as well in a flow cell, which obtained a superior current density of 200 mA cm−2 with a CO selectivity up to 84% at −0.64 V, which is superior to most other non-precious metal-based electro-catalysts for CO2RR. These achievements in the exploitation of Zn-based electro-catalysts show tremendous potential for the application of low-cost metals such as Zn to substitute precious metals for further practical CO2 electroreduction to CO with high efficiency.
In addition to Zn, Cu is also capable of reducing CO2 to CO or further reducing CO to hydrocarbons. Cu is favorable for hydrocarbon production, leading to relatively low CO selectivity. In addition, Cu-based alloys such as CuPd, CuIn, and CuAu have shown excellent performance for CO formation due to the break in the scaling relations through the adjustment of the binding energies for the key intermediates.427,428 Besides, Cu-based hybrid catalysts such as Cu–SnO2 with a core–shell structure,429 SnO2-modified CuO nanowires,430 and hybrid Cu/Ni(OH)2 nanosheets431 have been studied as well, which successfully reduced CO2 to CO with a superior selectivity of more than 90%. Furthermore, another non-noble metals such as Bi, which prefer to produce formate in aqueous solutions, resulted in a completely different product orientation by employing ionic liquids as the promoter or electrolyte, which indicated high CO selectivity towards CO2RR.432,433
3.3.3.2 Metal-free carbon-based catalysts. 
Carbon is commonly used as a catalyst support in the field of electrocatalysis owing to its high SSA, electrical conductivity, low cost, and earth abundance. Besides, heteroatom doping is an efficient approach to introduce active sites into the inert carbon matrix, which is able to modify the electron structure of the carbon surface so as to enable it to absorb the CO2 molecule and stabilize the reaction intermediates during CO2RR. In the past few years, various carbon materials such as CNT, graphene, and carbon fibers have been employed as supports to synthesize N-doped carbon electro-catalysts for CO2RR.434,435
Researchers have also found that the type and concentration of N in the carbon matrix can influence the CO2RR performance, wherein pyridinic N is regarded as one of the most functional active sites.434,436,437 For instance, Liu et al.435 synthesized 3D N-GRW via the adjustment of N dopants, obtaining a high CO selectivity of 87.6% at a relatively low overpotential of 0.49 V. The pyridinic N sites in the catalyst were found to be the active sites for CO2RR, exhibiting a linear relationship with the current density (Fig. 56a). In addition, DFT calculations further suggested that the pyridinic N was favorable for the transformation of CO2 to *COOH and *CO desorption during the CO2RR (Fig. 56b). Moreover, detailed DFT calculations of various active sites in the N-doped graphene matrix (Fig. 56c) for CO2RR were employed to investigate the activity trends of these different sites.437 As shown in Fig. 56d, the binding energies of COOH* and CO* intermediates in the N-doped graphene did not maintain linear scaling relationships like the transition metals. Notably, many active sites suggested a lower required binding energy for COOH* formation than that of Au in the thermodynamic activity volcano image (Fig. 56e), thus demonstrating higher efficiency for CO2-to-CO reduction. Pyridinic-N (Fig. 56c (14)) showed a low *COOH binding energy at low overpotentials, suggesting high activity for CO formation.
 Fig. 56  (a) The relation between the CO partial current density and the pyridinic N content in various N-GRW catalysts at 0.5 (left) and 0.7 V (right) versus RHE. (b) Illustration of the CO2-to-CO conversion processes on the N-GRW catalysts and the free energy diagram for CO2-to-CO conversion on various N-GRW catalysts (Reproduced from ref. 435 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2018). (c) Optimized structures of different examined carbon structures with and without N-doping, where LD stands for line defect. Here, 5, 6, 7, and 8 refer to the pentagon, hexagon, heptagon, and octagon in the defect configuration. (d) Activity volcano for CO2-to-CO conversion. (e) Free energy diagram of CO2-to-CO conversion on different examined active sites displayed in panel (a) at an equilibrium potential of −1.2 V vs. RHE (Reproduced from ref. 437 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017). (f) Schematic illustration showing the synthetic processes of the NS-C layers. (g) Free-energy diagrams of CO2RR at an electrode potential U = 0 V for graphitic-N, pyridinic-N, S-containing graphitic-N, and S-containing pyridinic-N (Reproduced from ref. 438 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019). 
However, these N-doped carbon catalysts still suffer from low current density and poor efficiency at a low overpotential. Recently, other heteroatoms such as sulfur have been introduced as dopants into the N-doped carbon matrix to form a dual-doping catalyst so as to further improve the CO2RR performance.438 Li and coworkers438 reported an N-doped carbon catalyst with sulfur addition (Fig. 56f) to boost the activity and selectivity towards CO production. The obtained N,S-co-doped carbon catalyst reached an excellent CO selectivity up to 92% with a partial current density of 2.63 mA cm−2 at a relatively low overpotential of 0.49 V, which is superior to that of the S-free N–C catalyst. The introduction of S into N–C resulted in the formation of a higher concentration of pyridinic N, which facilitated CO2 activation. Moreover, the S dopants reduced the binding energy barrier of *COOH, thereby significantly improving the activity of the pyridinic N and graphitic N sites towards CO formation (Fig. 56g).
3.3.3.3 Metal–nitrogen–carbon materials. 
To further improve the performance of carbon-based electro-catalysts towards CO formation, the introduction of transition metals into N-doped carbon have been paid much attention to for efficient CO2RR.439–443 The metal- and N-co-doped carbon catalysts consist of atomically-dispersed transition metals and the N-doped carbon matrix, referred to as M–N–C electro-catalysts (M = Fe, Co, Ni, etc.). The single atom carbon-based catalysts have shown outstanding performance for CO2-to-CO conversion due to their maximum atomic utilization, tunable coordination environments, and unique electronic properties. In 2017, Strasser et al.439 reported a series of transition metal- and N-co-doped porous carbons containing atomically dispersed M–Nx centers (M = Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu) for the effective CO2 electroreduction to CO and studied their intrinsic catalytic reactivity and selectivity (Fig. 57a), in which the M–Nx centers worked as the active sites. The theoretical and experimental results both proved that Fe–N–C and especially Ni–N–C displayed comparable CO2RR performance to that of Au- and Ag-based electro-catalysts. Moreover, Ni–N–C achieved a maximal selectivity of CO at a relatively high potential while Fe–N–C produced more CO at lower potentials (Fig. 57b). A similar conclusion was reported by Li and coworkers444 that Fe and Ni were found to be more active than other metals in the M–N–C structure for CO2 electroreduction to CO. Fe–N–C achieved the lowest onset overpotential of 0.19 V while Ni–N–C reached the highest CO selectivity of up to 96% at a moderate overpotential of 0.65 V (Fig. 57c). Mechanistic investigations shown in Fig. 57d indicated that for M–N–C (M = Fe, Cr, Mn), the production of a *COOH intermediate during CO2RR was the rate-determining step, while for M–N–C (M = Ni, Co), the formation of a *CO2˙− species through the first electron transfer process was crucial.
 Fig. 57  (a) CO faradaic efficiencies (FE) and CO partial currents (mass activity) vs. the applied potential for the five M–N–C catalysts compared to the state-of-the-art Au catalysts (Reproduced from ref. 439 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2017). (b) The summary of maximum CO FEs and CO TOFs at the corresponding overpotentials for M–N–C. (c) Proposed CO2RR mechanisms on M–N–C (Reproduced from ref. 444 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018). (d) Optimized atomic structures of different Ni–N structures with Ni atoms coordinated with 4N atoms (NiN4), 3N atoms (NiN3 and NiN3V), 2N atoms (NiN2V2), and free energy diagrams for CO2-to-CO with different Ni–N structures.445 (e) CO and H2 faradaic efficiency and (b) CO partial current densities of Fe3+–N–C in an H-cell (red) and on a GDE (blue), and of Fe2+–N–C in an H-cell (black) (Reproduced from ref. 442 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2019). 
Apart from the type of metal centers, metallic states including the coordinative environment and the oxidation state also influenced the catalysts’ activity.381,383,441 Coordinatively saturated M–N4 moieties in heterogeneous M–N–C have been widely studied and demonstrated to be effective for heterogeneous CO2 electroreduction to CO.446–449 In 2017, Wu et al.446 first proved that exclusive Ni–N4 sites exhibited unprecedentedly high activity and selectivity for CO formation, which could be assigned to the lower formation energy of COOH* relative to that for N–C. Besides the typical M–N4 structure, other coordinatively unsaturated M–Nx (x = 1–3) centers for CO2 electroreduction to CO were also comparatively studied. For example, a series of Ni–N–C catalysts containing coordinatively unsaturated Ni–N sites doped within the porous carbon were prepared by the pyrolysis of Zn/Ni bimetallic ZIF-8, which exhibited high CO selectivity from 92.0% to 98.0% in the broad potential range from −0.53 V to −1.03 V (vs. RHE) and reached an outstanding current density of about 71.5 mA cm−2 at −1.03 V.445 DFT calculations indicated that CO2RR was more favorable than HER over the coordinatively unsaturated Ni–N sites, and the binding energies for *COOH formation on the coordinatively unsaturated NiN3, NiN3V, and NiN2V2 moieties were significantly lower than those on NiN4, leading to high current density and faradaic efficiency. Moreover, the effect of the oxidation state of the metal centers on the CO2RR performance was also examined. A catalyst containing dispersed single Fe atom sites was reported for efficient CO production,442 exhibiting a very low overpotential of 80 mV along with a CO partial current density of up to 94 mA cm−2 at an overpotential of 340 mV. The active sites were found to be Fe3+ ions coordinated with pyrrolic N atoms within the N-doped carbon matrix, and the +3 oxidation state was maintained during CO2RR. The Fe3+ sites possessed better performance than the conventional Fe2+ sites due to faster CO2 adsorption and weaker CO absorption.


3.3.4 Recent progress in the selective formation of C2+ products. 
Typically, C2+ products such as ethylene, ethanol, and n-propanol are more desirable than C1 products owing to their higher energy densities and highly commercial values. For example, ethylene can be employed as a raw material to produce polyethylene, ethylene oxide, and diesel. However, the conversion of CO2 to C2+ products is not as easy as C1 products formation because of the large obstacle for C–C coupling activation and the competition between the C–C bond and the other bonds’ (C–O and C–H) generation. For C2+ products formation, the binding energy of *CO on the electrode surface should be strong enough for further C–C coupling, which would inevitably lead to increased activation barriers. Therefore, it is necessary to optimize the interaction for selective C–C coupling and to exploit novel electro-catalysts. Among different metal-based catalysts, copper has been intensively studied as the most active electro-catalysts for C2+ products formation due to its moderate adsorption energy towards *CO.450 However, most C2+ products formation catalysts still suffer from high overpotentials and relatively low selectivity, which are far from industrial applications.
In the past few years, various modification methods on Cu structures have been reported, including nanostructured Cu, oxide-derived (OD) Cu, Cu alloys, and supported Cu electro-catalysts, as summarized in previous reviews.451 Electrocatalytic CO2RR on single crystal Cu facets demonstrated that single crystal Cu(100) possessed higher electivity towards C2+ products formation than Cu(111).449,452,453 Recently, DFT calculation results (Fig. 58a) demonstrated that the Cu(100) and stepped (211) facets were more favorable for selective C2+ products formation than Cu(111).454 Besides, the Cu nanocube catalyst showed a six-fold enhancement in the ratio of C2+ to C1 product formation, reaching a maximum C2+ FE of more than 60% and a corresponding C2+ partial current density of up to 40 mA cm−2, which was consistent with the theoretical result.
 Fig. 58  (a) DFT simulations of C–C coupling on the Cu facets (Reproduced from ref. 454 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2018). (b) Schematic of the electro-growth process and the SEM images of ERD-Cu under CO2RR with time resolution. (c) DFT studies of C1 and C2 electro-production as a function of the metal oxidation state (Reproduced from ref. 455 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2018). (d) Schematic illustration of the Cu2S–Cu–V CSVE electro-catalyst design for the production of multi-carbon alcohols from CO2 reduction. (e) Simulated result of the positron density distribution in the pure Cu2S bulk (left graph) and the schematic representation of trapped positrons of copper vacancies in the CSVE catalyst (right graph) (Reproduced from ref. 456 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2018). (f) Schematic of the cathode portion of a gas diffusion electrode for CO2. (g) Schematic illustration and cross-sectional SEM image of the graphite/carbon NPs/Cu/PTFE electrode (Reproduced from ref. 457 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2018). 
OD-Cu possesses boosted activity and selectivity towards C2+ products formation.455,458 Various fabrication strategies including annealed/OD-Cu,459 electrodeposited/OD-Cu,454,455 Cl−/OD-Cu, plasma/OD-Cu,460 and in situ/OD-Cu461 for OD-Cu catalysts’ synthesis have been developed, leading to various product distributions. However, the actual active sites in these OD-Cu materials for electrochemical CO2 reduction are still controversial. Some reports proposed that the grain boundaries393 and under-coordinated atoms462,463 generated from the electroreduction of the copper oxide catalyst worked as the actual active sites for CO2RR. Besides, Cu0 is also regarded as an actual electro-catalyst due to the driving force for oxidized Cu reduction under negative potentials during electrolysis.464,465 In contrast, some groups demonstrated that the Cu+ site remaining on the electrode surface under reducing potentials played a key role in the boosted activity and C2+ products selectivity during CO2RR.455,460,466 Moreover, sub-surface oxygen in the OD-Cu catalysts was also found to be functional in causing a synergy effect between the surface Cu+ and the surface Cu0 sub-oxide species.458 Recently, ERD-Cu was reported for the enhanced electrochemical CO2 reduction by the simultaneous control of the morphology and oxidation state during the synthetic process (Fig. 58b).455 The oxidation state of Cu was monitored via in situ soft X-ray absorption spectroscopy during CO2RR with time resolution, which is indicative of a stable state of Cu+ under negative reduction potentials. The sharp structures kinetically suppressed CH4 production via the influence of a high local pH while Cu+ existence could stabilize the OCCOH* intermediate along the C2H4 pathway (Fig. 58c). Consequently, ERD copper established a superior C2H4 partial current density of 161 mA cm−2 within a flow cell at −1.0 V with a high formation ratio of C2H4 to CH4 (up to 200).
Introducing heteroatom dopants into Cu-based catalysts has also been considered as a useful way to adjust the surface electron structure and the Cu oxidation state for improved electrolytic performance. Recently, Sargent's group467 employed boron to tune the ratio of the Cuδ+ to Cu0 active sites with enhanced efficiency and durability towards C2 products formation. Tuning the average oxidation state of Cu could manipulate the CO adsorption and dimerization, achieving a highly selective C2 products formation by CO2RR. The boron-doped Cu catalyst exhibited a high C2 selectivity of ∼79% and maintained a stable activity during electrolysis for 40 h. Besides, copper sulfide-derived catalysts have also attracted much attention for the generation of stable surface defects and for tuning the concentration of surface vacancies.468 A series of CSVE electro-catalysts with S atoms in the nanoparticle core and Cu vacancies in the shell (Fig. 58d) was prepared for efficient CO2RR,456 which favor the production of liquid alcohols. Besides, the catalyst reached a C2+ alcohol partial current density of ∼126 mA cm−2 with a corresponding FE of ∼32%. The simulated results (Fig. 58e) of the positron density distribution suggested a higher vacancy density for the CSVE NPs catalyst compared to the pure Cu2S bulk. Typically, Cu foil/plate/mesh/foam or FTO is employed as a substrate for Cu-based electro-catalysts for CO2RR, and glassy carbon or carbon cloth/paper is often applied for Cu powder electro-catalysts. Recently, more researchers have applied highly efficient GDE in flow cells for C2+ products formation. The GDE can enhance the activity of the corresponding deposited Cu-based electro-catalysts due to their gas/electrolyte penetrability. Sargent's group457 fabricated Cu electro-catalysts supported on polymer-based GDL (Fig. 58g) for CO2-to-ethylene reduction in an alkaline electrolyte within a flow cell architecture (Fig. 58), which reached an unprecedented C2H4 selectivity of 70% at an applied potential of −0.55 V vs. RHE and an extremely high ethylene partial current density of 473 mA cm−2 at a relatively low potential of −0.67 V. Abundant hydroxide ions close to the Cu surface derived from high KOH concentrations reduced the activation energy barriers for C–C coupling. The introduction of a polymer-based GDL sandwiched between the separated hydrophobic and conductive supports helped the electrode to maintain stable electrolysis for 150 h.


3.3.5 Summary and outlook of electrocatalytic CO2 reduction. 
Recent progress in the development of novel electro-catalysts for selective products formation (formate, CO, and C2+ products) by CO2RR have been summarized and the merits have been systematically assessed including current density, faradaic efficiency, and electrolysis durability. Sn-, Bi-, and In-based electro-catalysts for CO2 electroreduction to formate, non-noble metal-based catalysts and carbon-based catalysts for CO formation, and Cu-based catalysts for C2+ products formation have attracted much attention in the past three years and have shown great potential for further industrial application due to their low cost, earth abundance, environment-friendly property, as well as the high electrolytic efficiency. Moreover, various, strategies have been undertaken to prepare unique metal-based catalysts, including nanostructured metals, oxide-derived metals, sulfur-derived metals, metallic alloys, and metal@carbon composites, tuning the adsorption energy energies of the CO2 and CO2 intermediates with enhanced reactivity and selectivity towards electrocatalytic CO2 reduction. The introduction of heteroatoms and transition metals into the carbon-based catalysts is usually considered as an effective approach to improve their CO2RR performance. Therefore, it is crucial to develop a controllable synthetic approach to generate active sites with suitable adsorption energies for reaction intermediates to selectively produce various products via different CO2 reduction pathways. Moreover, the development of electro-catalysts loaded on gas diffusion electrodes applied in flow cells is also very crucial for the realization of large-scale production.

3.4. Photoelectrochemical conversion of CO2
Photoelectrocatalysis has shown enormous potential in water splitting driven by a broad solar spectrum but it is still in its infancy for CO2 reduction. In recent years, the PEC conversion of CO2 in aqueous environments has become appealing as it enables the generation of fuels or chemicals using renewable solar energy. Compared to photocatalysis and electrocatalysis, the photoelectrochemical reduction of CO2 can integrate their advantages to simultaneously achieve improved catalytic efficiency and decreased electric energy input. Unlike the electrolysis process during which CO2 is only reduced by external electricity, photogenerated electrons and holes in the PEC system react with CO2 molecules and H2O on the catalysts’ surface to form reduced products and oxygen, respectively. Moreover, compared with photocatalytic CO2 reduction, the PEC system could exhibit a higher efficiency for CO2 reduction due to more efficient charge separation assisted by external electricity. Based on different photoelectrodes, the PEC CO2 reduction system can be commonly divided into three categories using semiconductors as photocathodes, photo-anodes, or both the photo-anode and photocathode (Fig. 59).
 Fig. 59  Schematic diagrams for PEC CO2 reduction in water using a semiconductor as (a) a photocathode, (b) a photo-anode, and (c) both photo-anode and photocathode. (d) Schematic diagram for the device combining a photovoltaic cell with an efficient electrochemical catalyst for CO2 reduction (Reproduced from ref. 469 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2018). 

3.4.1 Basic principle of photoelectrocatalytic CO2 reduction. 
Similar to eletrocatalytic CO2 reduction, the PEC system consists of two half-reactions, for which CO2 electroreduction takes place in the cathodic side while OER takes place in the anodic side. The main reaction products include CO, HCOOH, methanol, and CH4 as well as long-chain hydrocarbons with H2 as the by-product from water. Notably, it is difficult to select an original semiconductor material with a suitable band energy location for both CO2RR and OER. Therefore, different types of PEC systems with the combination of a semiconductor and a metal or two semiconductors were developed (Fig. 59). In terms of each configuration, the selection of photoelectrode materials combined with the electrolyte is of significant importance, leading to various product distributions. Typically, n-type semiconductors, having more positive valence band maximum than water oxidation potential, are employed as the photo-anode and p-type semiconductors with the conduction band minimum higher than the CO2 reduction potential are employed as the photocathode. When the photo-anode is used as a light absorption electrode to generate electron–hole pairs, the photogenerated holes would be supplied for the oxygen evolution reaction and the generated electrons would migrate to the dark-cathode for CO2RR with the assistance of the applied bias potential. In terms of the photocathode–anode system, electron–hole pairs are formed by the light absorption of the photocathode and charge separation is driven via the applied bias potential. The generated electrons would be consumed by CO2RR on the photocathode surface and OER would simultaneously proceed on the surface of the anode. Moreover, a photo-anode connected with a photocathode is able to form the Z-scheme conversion of CO2 and H2O so as to establish a single photoelectrode-counter electrode system. The applied bias potential is not necessary for the two photoelectrodes system if the stable current–potential curves of each photoelectrode are intersected from the onset position. The energy levels of VB and CB as well as the external applied electricity are significantly crucial for products distribution. A schematic energy level graph of PEC water oxidation and CO2RR with a CO2 activation catalyst for the photo-anode–cathode system is presented in Fig. 60.
 Fig. 60  Schematic representation of the energy level diagram of PEC water oxidation and CO2 reduction reaction with CO2 activation catalyst on the thermodynamic and kinetic aspects (Reproduced from ref. 470 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019). 


3.4.2 Recent progress in photocathode-dark anode system. 
Photocathodes made of p-type semiconductors combined with a dark anode (such as carbon material or Pt) are the most widely used configuration for PEC CO2 reduction (Fig. 59a). Various p-type semiconductors have been developed, such as metal oxides,471,472 nitrides,473 and phosphides.474 In 1978, a pioneering study on PEC CO2 reduction was first published by Halmann,475 in which the p-GaP semiconductor was employed as a photocathode with a carbon rod as the anode and an external electrical bias was applied for the system. As a result, the following products, HCOOH, HCHO, and CH3OH, were obtained. Recently, Persson et al.476 reported the largest CO2 photocathode examination that covered 68860 candidate materials through a computational screening approach to evaluate the synthesizability, corrosion resistance, visible-light absorption, and compatibility of the electronic structure with fuel preparation (Fig. 61a). It was proved that only 52 materials met the strict CO2 photocathode requirements. However, these pure semiconductor photocathodes always possess low activity towards CO2 reduction due to inefficient light harvesting and the lack of active sites for CO2 activation. Therefore, many strategies including nanostructure formation, heteroatom doping, heterojunction construction, and co-catalyst decoration have been deployed to enhance the reaction efficiency on the photocathodes.
 Fig. 61  (a) The selection criteria, as well as the number of materials that satisfy the criterion, are shown for each tier (Reproduced from ref. 476 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2019). (b) Schematic diagrams for a typical structure heterojunction and photocathode components (Reproduced from ref. 469 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2018). (c) Layer-by-layer molecular p–n-junction assembly formed by Zr(IV)–phosphonate bridging. (d) n-GaN nanowires on the silicon substrate with the surface-immobilized molecular assemblies (Reproduced from ref. 477 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2019). 
3.4.2.1 Unique structural design of the photocathodes. 
Considering the low efficiency of light absorption and the slow electron transfer process for conventional photocathodes, unique structures of photocathodes have been developed to enhance light harvesting and to improve the charge kinetics. Integrating semiconductors into heterojunctions provides an efficient way to enhance the light absorption, steer the charge kinetics, and improve the durability. A typical structure of the heterojunctions is shown in Fig. 61b, where the photogenerated electrons are transferred from a higher CB-containing semiconductor to a lower one, and the photogenerated holes are collected at the semiconductor with a higher VB after light harvesting. Subsequently, these accumulated electrons on the lower CB-containing semiconductor would participate in CO2RR, while the holes would migrate to the other side. For example, Cu2O is a typical p-type semiconductor, which is promising for photoelectrochemical CO2 reduction. Integrating Cu2O and other semiconductors such as CuO into heterojunctions proved to be efficient for photoelectro-catalysis since they can match well at the interface.478 Moreover, ZnO@ZnSe and ZnTe/ZnO479 have also been reported for efficient PEC CO2 reduction in the past few years.
In addition, semiconductor photocathodes with heterojunctions further combined with molecular assemblies have also showed great feasibility to boost the system efficiencies, avoiding the shortcomings of two optical conversion cells. Recently, Thomas and co-workers477 synthesized a series of photocathodes with a layer-by-layer structure (Fig. 61c and d) through the binary p–n junction approach for highly active CO2-to-formate conversion. Light irradiation on the photocathodes produced redox separated states, which generated an intermediate state with remotely-separated electrons and holes at the catalyst and the semiconductor, respectively. The function mechanism of the photoelectrode was derived from the dynamic interaction between the molecules and the p–n junctions, in which two photosensitive cells harvested visible light in a complementary way and produced electrons to activate the complex for CO2-to-formate conversion. As a result, the obtained photocathodes enabled formate formation with a maximum FE of up to 64% and a steady photocurrent density of about −1.1 mA cm−2 during 20 h of photoelectrolysis.
3.4.2.2 Co-catalysts anchored on photocathodes. 
Some highly-efficient electro-catalysts for CO2RR are also effective cocatalysts for photocathodes to boost the activity and selectivity towards desirable products. These CO2RR co-catalysts can be classified into four categories: noble metal-based, non-noble metal-based, metal-free, and biological co-catalysts. In the past few decades, noble metal-based co-catalysts have been most extensively reported due to their outstanding performance. For example, Au has aroused much attention owing to its high activity towards CO production by electrochemical CO2 reduction. Pure nanoparticles of Au or Au alloys have been combined with various p-type semiconductors such as p-Si, p-GaN, and ZnO, displaying enhanced activity and selectivity towards CO formation.479–481 Besides, noble metal complexes have also been widely applied for PEC CO2 reduction, facilitating charge separation by trapping the photo-generated electrons from the photocathodes and the reduced metal centers can act as active sites for CO2 conversion.
Considering the scarcity and high cost of precious metals, non-noble metal-based co-catalysts have been intensively investigated for further large-scale application. A series of low-cost and earth-abundant metals including Cu,430,482 Sn,483 and Co484 in the form of nanoparticles or complexes have been used as co-catalysts on photocathodes to reach a high efficiency for the production of various products by the PEC CO2 reduction. Recently, a noble metal-free molecular catalyst-based photocathode was reported for efficient CO2 conversion in aqueous solution, which consisted of a p-Si semiconductor modified with a mesoporous TiO2 layer and adsorbed Co catalyst.484 The obtained hybrid photoelectrode reached a high turnover number of ∼330 and a high selectivity of about 75% towards CO production, and maintained an excellent stability exceeding 24 h in both organic solution and pure aqueous solution, which is comparable to those of noble metal-based co-catalysts.
In addition, metal-free co-catalysts including organic molecules, conductive polymers, and enzymatic biocatalysts have been applied for PEC CO2 reduction in the early years. During photo-electrolysis, the organic molecules usually work as mediators to migrate electrons and protons to the carbonaceous reactants. Besides, the conductive polymers possessing rich functional groups can be bonded with reaction molecules and change the adsorption constitution. In particular, biological co-catalysts anchored onto photocathodes have attracted much attention and showed enormous potential in industrial application due to their abundant active sites for CO2 reduction, which led to improved performance. For example, Park et al.485 developed a tandem PEC cell with an integrated enzyme-cascade setup by employing an Rh complex and three dehydrogenases, which migrated the photogenerated electrons to a multi-enzyme cascade for biocatalyzed methanol formation. During photo-electrolysis, NADH reacted with dehydrogenases to form NAD+, then the generated NAD+ was converted to NADH through the Rh complex and electrons for efficient regeneration.


3.4.3 Recent progress in ohoto-anode–dark cathode system. 
Another promising way for bias-assisted PEC CO2 reduction is to combine an effective cathode for electrocatalytic CO2 reduction with a photo-anode to oxidize water under irradiation, providing electrons and protons for the cathodic side (Fig. 59b). As the light absorber, the photo-anode can be assembled with earth-abundant, low-cost, and stable n-type metal oxide semiconductors (e.g., TiO2, BiVO4, and Fe2O3).486 TiO2 is one of the most widely applied n-type semiconductors for photocatalysis, which has been extensively employed as a photo-anode to absorb light, combined with a cathode for PEC CO2 reduction.487,488 For instance, Pt-modified TiO2 nanotubes and P-modified rGO on Ni foam were used as the photo-anode and cathode, respectively, for PEC CO2 reduction, during which CO2 was reduced into a series of liquid products, including CH3OH, C2H5OH, HCOOH, and CH3COOH.487 Apart from metal/carbon cathodes, metal oxides have also been considered as promising candidates for efficient CO2 reduction. Recently, a photoelectrocatalytic system consisting of nanosheet-like CoOx as the cathode and TiO2 nanotube arrays as the photo-anode was employed for PEC CO2 reduction.488 The cathode was obtained by the electrodeposition of the nanosheet-like CoOx onto a copper foam, which exhibited a maximum FE of 60.9% towards HCOOH formation for electrochemical CO2 reduction. Compared with the electrocatalytic system, the PEC system combining CoOx and TiO2 nanotubes exhibited a high HCOOH yield of 56.6 μmol cm−2 h at a low applied potential. Besides, CoOx coated with a thin ZnO layer was prepared through the atomic layer deposition approach for protection so as to improve the durability of the cathode. Furthermore, a (040)-facet engineered BiVO4 plate was employed as a photo-anode combined with a Cu cathode for PEC CO2 reduction (Fig. 62a), formatting rich protons to convert CO2 into various liquid products by tuning the reduction potential.489 As a result, a high selectivity of 62% towards HCOOH production and a FE of 85% for formaldehyde, 8% for MeOH, and 6% for EtOH were obtained at various potentials. The outstanding photo-anodes in water splitting systems can be further used for the PEC CO2 reduction setup with efficient cathodes in the future and an improved performance can be expected.
 Fig. 62  (a) Schematic illustrations of 040-BVO-driven PEC CO2 reduction (Reproduced from ref. 490 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018). (b) CO2 reduction mechanism over the photocathode and the schematic representation of the two-electrode PEC CO2 reduction (Reproduced from ref. 491 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018). (c) Schematic illustration for the solar-driven CO2 reduction device (Reproduced from ref. 430 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2017). 


3.4.4 Photocathode–photo-anode and photovoltaic tandem electrocatalytic devices systems. 
The combination of a photo-anode with a photocathode provides an approach to maximize the light harvesting and minimize the external electrical bias of PEC CO2 reduction, thus reducing the energy input (Fig. 59c). Within this system, an n-type semiconductor with an adequately positive VB position is used as the photo-anode for water oxidation, while a p-type semiconductor with an adequately negative CB position is used as the photocathode for CO2RR. Besides, the CB position of the photo-anode should be higher than the VB position of the photocathode to allow the Z-scheme charge transfer. The selected photo-anode and photocathode should be extremely stable in the respective electrolyte and the band gaps of both the electrodes should be suitable for visible light harvesting. Recently, a hybrid photocathode consisting of ruthenium complex with a multi-heterojunction architecture (TiO2/N, Zn–Fe2O3/Cr2O3) and a reduced SrTiO3 photo-anode (Fig. 62c) was applied for PEC CO2 reduction.491 A steady photocurrent of 150 μA cm−2 for formic acid and CO formation under 1 sun irradiation at −0.1 V vs. RHE was obtained. The system exhibited superior energy conversion efficiency of 0.15% for solar to chemical transformation. With the absence of an external bias, the excellent performance was attributed to the functional combination of the photo-anode and the photocathode through suitable band arrangement and heterojunctions in the photocathode.
In addition, a novel PEC set up coupling a photovoltaic cell with an active electro-catalyst was invented for CO2 reduction (Fig. 59d), demonstrating a promising approach for high energy conversion efficiency. Photovoltaic cells can be well matched to the solar spectrum to maximize the light absorption, resulting in high incident photon–electron conversion efficiency, which provides sufficient current density for the chemical reaction. Meanwhile, a strong voltage was supported by connecting the photovoltaic cells in series to meet the thermodynamic redox potential of CO2 reduction and water oxidation. Recently, an earth-abundant SnO2-modified CuO catalyst prepared through atomic layer deposition was employed as both the anode and the cathode for complete CO2 electrolysis due to its efficient activity towards CO2RR and oxygen evolution reaction.430 In the solar-driven CO2 reduction device, a bipolar membrane was used to divide the anodic and cathodic electrolytes, and a GaInP/GaInAs/Ge photovoltaic cell was employed for CO2 splitting into CO and O2 driven by solar energy, which reached a high efficiency of 13.4% and selectivity over 80% towards CO production.


3.4.5 Summary and outlook of photoelectrocatalytic CO2 reduction. 
Photoelectrocatalysis integrates photocatalysis with electrocatalysis and combines their advantages, thus enabling higher energy efficiency. The photocathode–anode system has been widely investigated and great efforts have been devoted to modifying the photocathodes made from p-type semiconductors, including enhancing the light utilization efficiency and constructing active sites with high activity. Establishing unique structures of photocathodes via heterojunction formation and anchoring co-catalysts have been carried out to effectively improve the light utilization efficiency and facilitate CO2 activation and reduction, respectively. Within a photo-anode–cathode PEC system, the photo-anode consisting of n-type semiconductors is applied for light harvesting independently, while the cathode served as the active site for CO2 reduction reaction, for which the separation configuration has the flexibility to optimize the performance. The combination of photo-anode with photocathode to establish a Z-scheme photocatalytic setup can minimize the consumption of external electricity and extend the lifetime of the semiconductors, which is an ideal candidate for PEC CO2 reduction as it can be operated without external electricity input; however, it still needs further exploration. In addition, integrating a photovoltaic solar cell to an electrocatalytic system is also appealing due to the high efficiency. Despite the above-mentioned advancement achieved in the recent years, the development of PEC CO2 reduction is still in its infancy and stays far from satisfactory. The activity, durability, and selectivity towards specific products needs to be enhanced, and the ambiguous reaction mechanism needs to be further studied through some in situ technologies. Besides, the cell design for PEC CO2 reduction with high mass transfer efficiency is highly warranted for practical applications.

3.5. Photothermal conversion of CO2
The idea of “photothermal CO2 reduction” arose under the backdrop of increasing carbon dioxide emissions (global warming) and fossil fuel over-exploitation (energy crisis), and has evolved in the anticipation of renewable energy, such as solar energy, being utilized/coupled to power CO2 conversion to value-added chemicals or fuels. From a practical perspective, solar energy is transformed and stored in the CO2-derived products, which could then be used as an active “working carbon” for the supply of essential chemicals or as an alternative energy resource in our daily life. Such a practice mimics the natural photosynthesis process and would deliver a man-made solar-powered “carbon cycling” concept.492,493 In addition, the quantum efficiency and reaction rate/energy efficiency of photothermal CO2 catalysis is estimated to be higher than that of conventional semiconductor-based CO2 photocatalysis494 and thermal catalysis,489 respectively. As an added benefit, the lower operating temperature during photothermal CO2 catalysis can suppress unwanted side reactions and improve the long-term stability of the catalyst.495–498 From a mechanistic perspective, photothermal CO2 catalysis conversion relies on the capability of a catalyst to synergistically incorporate heating (thermochemistry) with light–matter interactions (photochemistry) in the gaseous CO2 reduction reaction.499,500 To clarify, “photochemistry” in the context of this review differs from that of a traditional photochemical process, which involves an electronic transition from the ground state to an excited state upon light absorption by a molecule.501 In photothermal studies, photochemistry has been associated with the generation of electron–hole pairs by an optically active catalyst, which activates adjacent molecules/intermediates for catalytic conversion.502 Despite its similarity, photochemistry is not interchangeable with photocatalysis, which is conducted at room temperature. The coupling of photochemical processes with conventional thermal activation mechanism offers opportunities to address the slow reactivity and/or low selectivity during CO2 reduction by targeting the high-activation-barrier/kinetically-relevant intermediary steps.503,504

3.5.1 Fundamental understanding of photothermal CO2 catalysis. 
3.5.1.1 LSPR excitation and its subsequent dephasing mechanisms. 
Seen as one of the most important mediators for the conversion of solar energy to chemical energy, LSPR excitation in plasmonic metallic nanostructures and its subsequent dephasing processes have aroused significant interest in the domain of catalytic chemical synthesis and transformation.505,506 LSPR excitation is achieved when a metal with a high free electron mobility interacts with photons that match the resonant frequency of the electrons oscillating against the restoring force of the positive nuclei.507 Many studies have shown that, in addition to conventional plasmonic metals (Au, Ag, and Cu), other metallic or metal-like nanostructures can exhibit variable plasmonic properties.508–511 Following the excitation of the LSPR in plasmonic nanostructures, the collective electron oscillation non-radiatively dephases and generates a non-thermal electron distribution, normally in a very short time scale (1–10 fs).512 The electron distribution rapidly thermalizes to a Fermi–Dirac distribution via electron–electron or electron–phonon scatterings, which give way to a high lattice temperature (Fig. 63a). This pathway acts mainly as a heating source from light–matter interaction. The dephasing process becomes more complicated in the presence of electron-accepting orbitals of a surface adsorbate or an electronically interacting semiconductor (Fig. 63b).506 In addition to the generation of a non-thermal electron distribution (also known as Landau damping), hot electrons with a sufficiently high kinetic energy have a chance to be injected into the unoccupied states of adjacent objects. A direct electron transfer mechanism (known as CID) was proposed to describe the interaction of the excited energetic electrons with unpopulated adsorbate orbitals and was recently confirmed by time-dependent DFT calculations for Ag/H2O513 and Ag/CO.514 A similar phenomenon was also confirmed when the adsorbed molecule was replaced by a semiconductor cluster (Cd33Se33).515 The electron transfer processes are always accompanied by thermalization and back-transfer processes, as depicted in Fig. 63b. The excitation of the LSPR and the subsequent electronic excitations are powerful for promoting reactant activation or modulating reaction pathways (referred to as hot electron photochemistry506) and can increase the CO2 conversion rate451,516 or invoke greater selectivity504,517 of the thermocatalytic process.
 Fig. 63  (a) Electronic energy distribution upon LSPR excitation and its relaxation processes (Reproduced from ref. 512 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2015). Initially, the electrons follow a Fermi–Dirac distribution at the thermal temperature of the system. The photoexcitation of the electrons from the filled states to the unfilled states generates a non-thermal electron distribution (0–10 fs). The electron distribution thermalizes to an elevated electron temperature through electron–electron scattering (500 fs). The hot electron distribution cools over time as it couples with the substrate phonons (1 ps). (b) Plasmon-induced hot carrier generation and hot electron transfer/back-transfer processes in clean metal, metal/adsorbate, and metal/semiconductor systems. In each case, the left component (relative to energy y-axis) displays the Fermi level (EF) of the plasmonic metals and the right component (relative to energy y-axis) illustrates the HOMOs and LUMOs for the adsorbates, or the CB and VB positions for the semiconductors. The gray regions represent the population of the electronic states (Reproduced from ref. 506 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018). 
3.5.1.2 Driving forces in photothermal CO2 catalysis. 
Considering the published systems, two commonalities are apparent during photothermal catalysis, namely, “light–matter interactions” and “thermal activation”, which could be referred to as the origins of “photo” and “thermal”, respectively. Fig. 64 details the driving forces behind the thermal/photochemical contributions to photothermal catalysis and their respective underlying principles. The thermal contribution stems from either external physical heating or, ideally, the photothermal heating effect in the plasmonic nanostructures. It plays a role in thermally activating the reactants and intermediates (overcoming activation energy, Ea) with the assistance of surface functional sites (path a in Fig. 64). The photochemical contributions can originate from photocatalysis by a semiconductor or plasmonic photocatalysis by a metallic nanostructure. The gaseous photocatalytic reduction of CO2 over a semiconductor with the aid of appropriate heating has been recently described as a potentially economic and scalable (non-metal component) solar-driven CO2 conversion technology.518 The mechanism involves a redox reaction initiated by the electron–hole pairs (path f in Fig. 64) but under thermal activation.519 Plasmonic photocatalysis initiated by LSPR excitation in metallic nanostructures is experiencing increasing interest in traditional gaseous catalytic reaction systems due to its promotional role in well-known surface catalytic processes and distinctive activation mechanisms.520–522 Physical plasmonic photocatalytic mechanisms can be classified into one of the following two systems: (i) direct plasmonic photocatalysis on a metal–adsorbate array, and (ii) indirect plasmonic photocatalysis on a semiconductor in conjunction with energy transfer from the metal to the semiconductor. In detail, direct plasmonic catalysis is initiated by either (i) non-radiative Landau damping (where electrons are initially generated in the metal and are subsequently transferred to the adsorbate), or (ii) chemical interface damping (where electrons are instantaneously injected into the unoccupied orbitals of the adsorbates)505 (path b and c in Fig. 64). Two pathways are also available for indirect plasmonic catalysis: (i) DET via electron injection from the metal nanoparticles to the semiconductor, or (ii) RET from the metal nanoparticles to the semiconductor (near-field electromagnetic or phonon scattering mechanisms), and the generation of electron–hole pairs in the semiconductor507,523 (path d and e in Fig. 64). The net effect of the energy transfer processes is the generation of more electrons in the semiconductor. It is highly dependent on the catalyst architecture and components as to whether the above-mentioned processes can occur. In addition, light excitation in a single system, for instance, broad range light illumination in a composite catalyst system, can induce multiple phenomena, which can interact beneficially with each other.496,497,524
 Fig. 64  Driving forces behind photothermal catalytic CO2 reduction, including: (a) thermal activation, (b) Landau damping,525 (c) chemical interface damping (Reproduced from ref. 525 with permission from The American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2018), (d) direct energy transfer,523 (e) resonant energy transfer (Reproduced from ref. 523 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2012), and (f) electron–hole pair generation. 
3.5.1.3 Classification of photothermal CO2 catalysis. 
Two types of photothermal CO2 catalysis can be defined (Fig. 65). The first is the case where photochemistry seldom contributes and thermally-driven processes govern the surface catalytic reaction. Catalyst performance originates from a localized photo-heating effect on the nanostructure526 to power conventional thermal CO2 catalysis.527,528 This type of reaction experiences no benefits from photocatalysis and is subject to the same intrinsic catalytic parameters (activation barrier/selectivity/T-dependent kinetics) as that of conventional thermocatalysis529 and is suggested to be termed as “PTH” CO2 catalysis. The second type of photothermal CO2 catalysis involves the application of light-induced chemistries (for example, hot electron photochemistry) to promote/tailor CO2 catalysis with the assistance of heating. A unique feature of this situation is that it draws on both thermal and photochemical contributions in a single system500,530 and is suggested to be termed as “PTD” CO2 catalysis. Both PTH and PTD CO2 catalysis have attracted extensive attention and appear to be promising approaches for the solar-assisted chemical transformation of CO2. The ensuing review primarily focuses on the mechanistic understanding and experimental progress in the PTD approach as it offers greater flexibility in integrating photochemical contributions with conventional thermal CO2 catalysis.
 Fig. 65  Graphic depicting photothermal CO2 catalysis classifications. 
In a system powered by both thermal and photochemical activation (for example, hot electron chemistry), one effect may dominate catalytic conversion while the other assists the process. Consequently, PTD catalytic systems can be divided into two groups: (i) light-assisted thermocatalysis and (ii) heat-assisted photocatalysis. The former case has been mainly observed for gaseous CO2 reduction catalysts where plasmonic metals are present. Without LSPR excitation, CO2 catalysis can continue to proceed at a remarkable reaction rate, driven by the thermal activation pathway. Light acts as a promoter to extend the capability of the reaction via photochemistry effects. The latter case involves photocatalytic CO2 reduction (predominantly under visible light) operating with the assistance of heat. Here, photogenerated carriers are the main driving force for the CO2 reduction reaction, while the thermal contribution (i.e., in reactant cleavage,524 activation barrier overcome, population of excited vibrational states,520 and species desorption518) plays an important role in maintaining an acceptable reaction rate. Removing the thermal contribution may result in a sharp decline in the activity (several orders of magnitude lower than that with heating); despite this, the operational heating condition (<150 °C) is typically insufficient to solely drive the CO2 catalytic reduction at a significant rate.


3.5.2 Latest progress in photothermal CO2 reduction. 
Early examples of light-assisted CO2 thermocatalytic reactions can be found almost two decades ago, in a study by Grätzel and co-workers in 1987 (over TiO2-supported Ru/RuOx using a xenon lamp as the excitation source).283 An inspiring work in 2001 by Ljungström and co-workers stressed on the potential of using non-thermal and selective excitation (for example, by forming transient radicals) to invoke low-temperature catalysis.495 However, applying light-induced chemistries to thermal catalytic reactions only found significant traction once reports suggesting plasmon-generated hot electrons on plasmonic nanostructure can interact with surface adsorbates directly (via electron injection from metal to adsorbates520,521) or indirectly (via hot electron transfer on metal/semiconductor heterostructure506) began to surface. The first instance where the photothermal approach was used to realise the complete reduction of CO2 to solar fuels (CH4) involved a Ni–silica–alumina catalyst in 2014.531 The system, in essence, represented direct plasmonic photocatalysis by a Ni nanostructure with the assistance of heat (T ≈ 150 °C). Meanwhile, a single-component semiconductor photo-catalyst (driven by the bandgap excitation of In2O3−x(OH)y) for CO2 reduction in the gas-phase under UV-visible light with moderate heating (T ≈ 150 °C) was reported.518 The reports illustrate two classic examples of heat-assisted photocatalysis. At around the same time, two early studies of LSPR-enhanced thermocatalysis (light-assisted thermocatalysis) were reported over Au nanoparticles for CO2 reduction by methane532 and RWGS reaction.533
3.5.2.1 CO2 hydrogenation via the photothermal route. 
CO2 hydrogenation is regarded as a key option in terms of approaches for converting CO2 into chemical necessities, especially when advances in producing green hydrogen are realised.534 Thermodynamic and kinetic considerations of the governing reactions and reaction intermediates are vital for further improving the catalytic performance for CO2 hydrogenation. The choice of temperature and pressure conditions relies mostly on the thermodynamic features and overall gas volume change during CO2 hydrogenation: CO2 methanation (exothermic), CO2-to-methanol (exothermic), and RWGS (endothermic). The use of high pressures and low temperatures should be favorable for the CO2 methanation and methanol-production processes. At milder and more economically favorable temperatures, CO2 methanation and methanol-production become kinetically limited, while thermodynamics limits the RWGS process. The kinetic limitations are highly relevant to the elevated activation barrier of the intermediary steps, e.g., HCOO* hydrogenation in methanol production over a Cu–ZnO catalyst and C–O cleavage of HCO* species in methane production on a Rh surface.504 Increasing the temperature can help to overcome the intermediary activation barriers, despite the expense of selectivity, catalyst stability, and lifetime.495 In this regard, light-induced chemistries on plasmonic nanostructures serve as a promising approach to tackle thermodynamic and kinetic limitations of thermally-driven systems so as to achieve low-temperature and solar-assisted catalytic CO2 reduction.530,535,536
As mentioned before, LSPR excitation in metallic nanostructures and the subsequent dephasing processes serve as a promising approach to extend the capability of conventional CO2 catalytic reaction systems. Along with the discovery of the stimulative role of Ni531/Au532,533 LSPR excitation in CO2 hydrogenation, the optical excitation of Al,517,520 Pd,498,537 Ru,489,538 Ag,524 and Cu539 nanostructures with a plasmonic resonance (Fig. 66) in the visible light range have been successively reported for enhanced CO2 hydrogenation. The plasmonic excitation of Al enhancing the catalytic CO2 hydrogenation to CO on an adjacent semiconductor was recently reported by Halas's group (Fig. 67a–c).517 They found that the photogenerated hot electrons in the Al could deposit their energy into the vibrational mode of C–O, causing vibrational excitation and C–O bond elongation, following transfer to the adjacent Cu2O semiconductor. An overlap of the Al optical plasmonic absorption spectra and the measured EQE strongly indicated that the improved catalytic performance was derived from the excitation of the Al quadrupolar plasmon mode. They also described an ingenious antenna-reactor nanostructure where the photon energy could be assimilated (antenna), transferred (interface), and utilized (reactor) for chemical conversion in the form of energetic electrons. Other studies demonstrated that the excitation of the plasmonic components in the commonly-studied methanol catalysts Pd/ZnO537 and Cu/ZnO could facilitate methanol production. In the case of Cu–ZnO, a wavelength-dependent behavior observed during photothermal methanol synthesis (Fig. 67d and e) revealed a synergism between the pivotal adsorbed intermediate species (e.g., HCOO* and H*) under UV-vis light illumination at the interfacial perimeter.496 Rh nanoparticles possessing a controlled size and shape, which enabled a strong LSPR absorption peak at 334 nm (3.71 eV), were studied as plasmonic photo-catalysts for CO2 hydrogenation.504 It was demonstrated that photo-generated hot electrons on the Rh nanostructure, upon illumination by either ultraviolet (365 nm) or blue (460 nm) LED light sources, could transfer into the C–O π* anti-bonding orbitals with a surmountable energy barrier and matched orbital levels, thus selectively enhancing CO2 methanation over the CO-production pathway (Fig. 67f–h). The optical excitation of Ru (which exhibits weak intra-band and inter-band absorption) was also reported to promote CO2 activation on its surface.489 After comparing different metal systems, which were characterised by different band structures (HOMO–LUMO gap) of adsorbed CO2, it was concluded that, irrespective of the absorption property of clean metal particle, hot electron generation in the system is relevant to the HOMO–LUMO energy gap of the CO2 adsorbed on the metal surface. To confirm this, in the in situ UV-vis spectrum, an absorption peak at 528 nm following CO2 adsorption on the catalyst surface was identified (with no similar absorption peak on a clean Ru metal surface). This molecular activation mechanism likely falls into the scope of direct intramolecular excitation of HOMO-to-LUMO transfer induced by the photoexcitation of the Ru–CO2(ads.) hybrid orbitals.540
 Fig. 66  Optical absorption spectra of metallic nanostructures in the visible light range. Experimental and theoretically (Mie's theory) calculated optical absorption spectra of embedded (a) copper and (b) silver nanoclusters in soda-lime glass (Reproduced from ref. 541 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2003). (c) Extinction spectra of Rh nanocubes in ethanol solution (black) and on a porous Al2O3 support (blue) (Reproduced from ref. 504 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2017). (d) Pd nanocubes with average sizes of 25 and 50 nm (Reproduced from ref. 510 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2005). (e) Normalized extinction spectra of 200 nm diameter nickel disks (left), of elliptical nickel disks with polarization along the short axis (b = 190 nm, center), and of elliptical nickel disks with polarization along the long axis (a = 300 nm, right) (Reproduced from ref. 509 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2011). (f) UV-vis tuning of aluminum plasmons (left). Experimental dark-field spectra of individual nanodisks with D = 70, 80, 100, 120, 130, 150, 180 nm (center). SEM micrographs of the corresponding nanodisk structures. Scale bar is 100 nm (right). Simulations of the nanodisk spectra, assuming a 3 nm surface oxide and an SiO2 substrate (Reproduced from ref. 508 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014). 
 Fig. 67  LSPR-assisted CO2 hydrogenation reaction performance over the Rh/Al2O3 (a–c), Al@Cu2O (d–f), and Cu/ZnO/Al2O3 (g and h) catalysts. (a) Rates of CH4 (green) and CO (black) production at 623 K on Rh/Al2O3 (solid lines) and Al2O3 (dotted lines) under dark and ultraviolet illumination at 3 W cm−2. CH4 production is strongly and selectively enhanced by ultraviolet light on the Rh photo-catalyst. (b) Selectivity towards CH4 of the thermo- (black circles) and photocatalytic reactions under ultraviolet (365 nm, red squares) and blue (460 nm, blue triangles) illumination as a function of temperature under H2-rich (CO2:H2 = 1:5.5, solid symbols) and H2-deficient (CO2:H2 = 1:3.1, open symbols) conditions. (c) LDOS for adsorbed CHO on C(pz), O(pz), and Rh(d) orbitals. The Rh(100) surface is perpendicular to the x direction and the C–O bond is along the y direction. Major bands are identified as (1) C–O p bonding band (6.5 eV) with C(pz) (black) and O(pz) (red) interactions; (2) C–O p* anti-bonding band (1–3 eV, mode around 2 eV) with C(pz) and O(pz) interactions (Reproduced from ref. 504 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2017). (d) Numerically calculated local electric field strength |E(r)|2 in the Al core (left axis) and the Cu2O shell (right axis). (e) MeOH selectivity/space time yield (STY) in the range of 200–300 °C under dark and 350–800 nm light irradiation (red dotted box indicates the highest photo-enhancement at 225 °C). The error bars indicate the deviation among three independent experiments; (f) time-on-stream MeOH yield under different light irradiation conditions (350–800 nm, 200–500 nm, and 420–800 nm, which corresponds to the excitation of Cu, ZnO, and Cu + ZnO, respectively). P = 21 bar, T = 225 °C, light intensity = 600 mW cm−2 for all the spectral ranges (Reproduced from ref. 496 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2020). (g) Typical gas chromatogram of the chamber output during light (7 W cm−2) and thermally-driven (350 °C) rWGS on Al@Cu2O. (h) The measured EQE as a function of illumination wavelength for oxide-supported Al@Cu2O compared to Al vs. illumination wavelength (Reproduced from ref. 517 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2017). 
Beyond the LSPR-induced chemistries, efforts have also been devoted to the study/improvement of photocatalytic gas-phase CO2 reduction on semiconductors at an elevated temperature, where the electron–hole pairs from bandgap excitation (usually with visible light illumination) drive the reaction. For instance, the strategy used to promote heat-assisted photocatalytic CO2 reduction by defective In2O3 by doping an optimum amount of Bi3+ into the In2O3−x(OH)y lattice. The increased Lewis basicity and acidity of FLPs served to increase the splitting of H2 and the RWGS reaction rate.542 To induce better light absorption by indium oxide, black 2D In2O3−x nanosheets prepared by photoinduced defect engineering were reported to possess excellent light harvesting and CO2 adsorption abilities, delivering 103.21 mmol gcat.−1 h−1 CO yield in a 300 W Xe lamp-powered batch reactor system (350 °C achieved without external heating).543 Similarly, a recent study showed that the thermal hydrogenation treatment of pale yellow In2O3 at 400 °C could transform it into non-stoichiometric black In2O3−x, where a three order enhancement in the performance magnitude was achieved (relative to stoichiometric In2O3)494 (Fig. 68). The presence of oxygen vacancies and dynamic amorphization processes were confirmed by Raman spectroscopy, in situ XPS, and in situ HRETEM (Fig. 68a–f). Under photothermal conditions, a substantial enhancement in the CO production rate (approximately 417%) under illumination was achieved at 300 °C compared to the dark (non-illuminated) reaction conditions (Fig. 68g). The elevated heat-assisted photocatalytic performance was attributed to the higher population of oxygen defects, serving as unsaturated states for trapping photo-generated electrons/holes (Fig. 68h). The long-term stability of the photo-catalyst performance under light illumination was examined where there was no significant drop in the CO generation rate over 70 h on stream (Fig. 68i). Another successful example of utilizing a semiconductor for photothermal CO2 hydrogenation was demonstrated for silicon-based nanostructures. In addition to being a single-component photo-catalyst (hydride-terminated silicon nanocrystals544), the photogenerated electron–hole pairs in Si have also been used to thermally or photochemically facilitate CO2 reduction on the hybrid structures (Ru/Si,497 RuO2/Si,545 and In2O3/Si546). Other semiconductors, such as WO3547 and MoO3−x,548 have also been appraised for photocatalytic CO2 reduction at an elevated temperature. The introduction of oxygen defects was confirmed to be pivotal for both an extended absorption of visible (to IR) light and CO2 activation/reduction.
 Fig. 68  Non-stoichiometric black In2O3 as a catalyst for the heat-assisted photocatalytic RWGS reaction. In situ high-resolution images of a stoichiometric In2O3 nanocrystal at 400 °C (a) under an N2 atmosphere and then switched to an H2 atmosphere for the following times: (b) 5 min, (c) 10 min, and (d) 20 min. Scale bar in d applies to all the images; green squares indicate the formation of an amorphous phase. Graphical representation of the (e) original and (f) treated In2O3, where the blue region, pink dots, yellow dots, and yellow circles represent the amorphous phase, In atoms, O atoms, and [O], respectively. (g) Catalytic performance for S4 in a flow reactor at different temperatures, both with and without light irradiation; inset is the enlarged view of the catalytic performance for 200, 225, and 250 °C. (h) The In2O3−x/In2O3 heterostructure showing the In(III)′, [O] electron-trapping, and O′ hole-trapping mid-gap energy states near the CB and the VB edges. (i) Stability test for a hydrogenated sample (at 400 °C) in a flow reactor at 300 °C with light irradiation for 70 h (Reproduced from ref. 494 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2020). 
It is worth mentioning that a range of unique nanostructures that favor light-to-heat transfer and heat-retention have been appraised for photothermal heating CO2 catalysis. An early example demonstrated the ability of Group VIII nanocatalysts in converting CO2 into the solar fuel with high selectivity and conversion (both >90%) (under a 300 W Xe lamp). After that, catalysts, such as the Al2O3-supported CoFe alloy,529 Ru-loaded ultrathin layered double hydroxides,549 and Pd@Nb2O5,528 have exhibited both a good photothermal heating effect (achieving over 300 °C) and a high CO2 hydrogenation activity under illumination by a 300 W Xe lamp. Li et al.548 recently demonstrated a light absorber-assisted, sunlight-driven CO2 methanation array over a Y2O3-supported single-atom Ni catalyst (SA Ni/Y2O3). Combining the excellent thermocatalytic activity of SA Ni/Y2O3 (with a Tlight-off = 180 °C) with the sunlight-selective light absorber (AlNx/Al foil), the system provided an impressive ∼100% methanation selectivity and ∼87% CO2 conversion at 240 °C under only 0.52 to 0.7 kW m−2 of light intensity.
3.5.2.2 Dry reforming of CO2 and methane via the photothermal route. 
As a high operating temperature (700–1000 °C, intensive energy input) is typically required for any appreciable activity by the DRM reaction, the notion of integrating solar energy into the system is highly attractive. Introducing plasmonic (unreactive) gold metal deposits into the Rh/SBA-15532 and Pt/SiO2550 catalysts facilitated a 1.2–1.7 times improvement in the CO2 conversion for the DRM reaction upon visible light illumination at a comparatively lower reaction temperature (400–500 °C). A similar observation was reported for a functionalized monometallic plasmonic Ni catalyst supported on mesoporous silica.551 It was claimed that the rate-determining step for CO2 activation was improved by energetic electrons from the LSPR and the activation barrier was greatly lowered.550 This implies that the electronic excitation induced photochemical/photocatalytic contribution may pave the way for further mitigation of the temperature requirements by DRM reaction. This was also echoed in the bandgap-excitation-driven heat-assisted photocatalytic DRM system over the Pt/black TiO2 catalyst.552 Under simulated solar light illumination, the catalytic activity was observed at 350 °C, where at 550 °C, appreciable CO2 conversion (158 mmol h−1 gcat.−1), which is three orders of magnitude larger than that of the reported photocatalytic DRM system, was apparent. Strong visible light absorption by the black TiO2 was ascribed to be responsible for the photocatalytic contribution to the system.


3.5.3 Summary and outlook of photothermal CO2 catalysis. 
In summary, the physical understanding of LSPR excitation and its subsequent dephasing processes, which serve as one of the important mediators for chemical utilization of solar energy in CO2 catalysis, was initially discussed. Subsequently, to provide a clear demonstration of the motivations behind and the classifications of photothermal CO2 catalysis, different driving forces for photothermal CO2 catalysis were summarized and classified into one of the two groups (PTH and PTD), depending on whether photochemical contributions are involved or not. PTD CO2 catalysis was then further classified into light-assisted thermocatalysis and heat-assisted photocatalysis. Finally, the recent progress in photothermal CO2 catalysis (including CO2 hydrogenation and DRM reaction) from the perspective of materials engineering and mechanistic elucidations was reviewed. Broadly, the studied photothermal CO2 reduction catalysts are mainly derived from catalysts that have been previously considered for conventional thermal-catalytic CO2 reduction, such as Ni/Cu/Pd/Ru/Rh and defective-rich In2O3,553 which could also absorb visible light. Within these catalysts, hot electrons in the metallic component are generated upon light illumination, which can potentially accelerate the rate-determining steps or alter the energetics of intermediate reactions (where excited state species are involved). Heat-assisted photocatalysis using active narrow-bandgap semiconductors such as surface modified MoO3,548 WO3,547 or silicon nanocrystals544 were also studied. Overall, the design of plasmonic metal/semiconductor hybrid materials with tailor-made architectures is a promising approach for photothermal CO2 reduction catalysis with multiple benefits: (i) moderate photothermal heating from the metal is sufficient for activating important molecules (i.e., H2) with localised and fast heat-up;524 (ii) interaction between the semiconductor and the strong SPR-induced electric fields close to the metallic nanostructures increases the electron–hole pair formation for photocatalytic CO2 reduction; (iii) generated hot electrons accelerate the intermediary reactions on metal surfaces/interfaces496,504via the direct plasmonic photocatalysis phenomenon; (iv) the generated hot electrons accelerate the intermediary reactions on the semiconductor surface517via plasmon-induced interfacial charge-transfer transition (indirect plasmonic photocatalysis approach). Strategies such as alloying a metal catalyst with a plasmonic metal, defect engineering, and the creation of surface functional groups have been employed to further improve the photothermal catalysis of the CO2 reduction reaction.
Importantly, to rationally design or tailor the catalyst properties, it is mandatory to develop a fundamental understanding of the currently-observed experimental phenomena comprising (i) photothermal heating effect and hot-electron-induced non-thermal contribution; (ii) light-induced chemistries behind the observed photo-enhancement over supported plasmonic nanostructure catalysts; (iii) origins of the temperature-dependent photo-thermal performance. In particular, the non-thermal effect lowers the apparent Ea of the CO2 reduction reaction and exhibits a linear to superlinear relation between the AQE (rate performance) and the photon flux.520 In contrast, the catalyst temperature increases from photothermal heating, which usually follows a sublinear relation with the illumination intensity.554 It is thus practical to differentiate the contributions from the plots of rate vs. photon flux. In addition, a reactor system that can eliminate heat accumulation and favors heat dissipation (i.e., a flow reactor, small amount of catalyst, and low illumination intensity) is normally dominated by the non-thermal contribution. Li et al.538 recently developed a direct and indirect illumination technique to extract the contribution of the non-thermal plasmonic effect. Knowing that a non-thermal contribution is involved, ascertaining in which way hot electrons are influencing the surface catalytic CO2 reduction reaction is essential. Existing observations pointing towards three mechanisms: reactant activation, accelerating a certain intermediary step (RDS-relevant), or regulating surface chemistry. For example, on the Ru metal surface, the cleavage of CO2 into CO* was verified (via DRIFTS technique) to be promoted within the considered temperature range upon LSPR excitation.489 The increased CH4 production on Rh under illumination was ascribed to the plasmon-enhanced selective C–O bond weakening within the CHO* species (supported by DFT calculations).504 Beyond this, light-induced variations in the physicochemical properties of the catalyst (i.e., defects555 and carbon deposition556) could provide another explanation for enhanced catalytic performance (i.e., rate and stability). Finally, temperature-dependent behaviors during photothermal CO2 reduction, such as the linear relation between non-thermal AQE and catalyst temperature538 or the decreased rate enhancement factor at higher temperatures,533 have been observed. The former effect has been rationalized by an increase in the relative population of the adsorbate-excited vibrational states, resulting in less energy to overcome the energy barrier for plasmonic photocatalysis (non-thermal contribution) at higher temperatures, which enables a linear relation between non-thermal AQE and temperature.538,554 In the latter case, the decreased contribution of the non-thermal effect can be correlated with the dominance of the thermocatalytic process and decreased coverage of the surface intermediates at a higher temperature.496 Further experimental evidence is needed to support these inferences and to establish more comprehensive and robust understandings of the cooperative role of heat and light.557 Heterogeneous CO2 catalysis with a single activation mechanism is already a complicated process; the coupling of multiple driving forces adds more complexity to physical studies.496,524 Ensuing studies should place emphasis on unveiling the dynamic atomic catalyst surface variations/molecular-level surface catalytic processes and interplays between different activation mechanisms with the assistance of in situ/operando characterization techniques.

3.6. CO2 as a soft oxidant
CO2 utilization has been focused on its use with a reductant, mostly hydrogen. However, the current major source of hydrogen highly relies on the reforming of methane, naphtha, and alcohols with low carbon numbers and oxygenates such as dimethylether, resulting in the co-production of CO. This makes the conversion of CO2 into chemicals and fuels uneconomical if renewable H2 is not used. It has been proposed that CO2 reduction could be possibly achieved not only by using hydrogen but also by saturated hydrocarbons, such as light paraffins and alkylaromatics. Simultaneously, these saturated hydrocarbons could be converted into the corresponding olefinic compounds, which are basic industrial chemicals such as ethylene, propylene, butenes (including butadiene), and styrene, which are produced mainly through cracking and simple dehydrogenation or oxidative dehydrogenation using molecular oxygen. However, these olefins were proposed to be generated by oxidative dehydrogenation using CO2, during which CO2 plays a role as an oxidant to directly abstract hydrogen from the saturated bond and/or capturing hydrogen molecules, which are produced through simple dehydrogenation as follows: CnH2n+2 + CO2 → CnH2n + CO + H2O(5)or CnH2n+2 → CnH2n + H2(6) CO2 + H2 → H2O + CO(7)
CO2 utilization, as a soft oxidant, enhances the catalytic oxidative transformations, and is enjoying rapid growth in industrialization, and could greatly contribute to carbon emission mitigation and economical energy efficient fabrication of several chemicals.558,559 CO2 plays an important role in hydrogen abstraction from functionalized or simple hydrocarbons via CO2 catalytic activation to form oxygen species and CO (Fig. 69).560,561 The economic efficiency, non-toxicity, mild oxidizing properties, and abundant availability of CO2 have led to the intensive investigation on its utilization as a soft oxidant in various catalytic reactions, including the oxidative dehydrogenation of alkyl aromatics and alkanes as well as methane oxidative coupling.562,563 Notably, Park and co-workers first reported the idea of CO2 utilization as a soft oxidant for the oxidative dehydrogenation of ethyl benzene to styrene, with solely CO2 instead of steam over the oxygen-deficient Fe-based catalysts, resulting in both the enhancement in the activity and selectivity together with high stability.564 The oxidizability of CO2 has been rarely studied. To the best of our knowledge, the first report on carbon oxidizability reported the order O2(105) ≫ H2O(3) > CO2(1) ≫ H2(0.003) at 800 °C and 0.1 atm for carbon oxidizability.565 Since then, CO2 has been coined as a mild oxidant, non-traditional oxidant, unusual oxidant, and an oxygen transfer agent.566
 Fig. 69  (a) The role of CO2 in abstracting hydrogen from functionalized or simple hydrocarbons via CO2 catalytic activation to form the oxygen species and CO (Reproduced from ref. 567 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2016); (b) styrene yield in ethylbenzene dehydrogenation reaction over the Ce–K–Fe2O3 catalyst using CO2 and steam as the oxidants. The thermodynamic equilibrium was referred to from the work of Mimura.568 
It is of significant importance to utilize CO2 in catalysis with superior merits, including reaction rate acceleration, total oxidation suppression, chemical equilibrium alleviation, product selectivity enhancement, and hot spot prevention on the surface of the catalyst.569,570 The diversities in the catalytic performance shed light on the behavioral aspects of CO2 and its activation, the importance of surface oxygen species, the surface properties of catalysts, the role of supports, and the distinct mechanistic pathways that form the evolution basis of the oxidation reaction (depicted in eqn (7)–(10)), which are of vital importance for CO2 utilization as a soft oxidant.571,572 In 2012, Park and co-workers presented a systematic review tracing the emergence, development, and industrialization of the scheme based on CO2 as a soft oxidant.558 Due to its lower oxidization ability, CO2 suppresses the unwanted total oxidation products, poisons the non-selective catalysts sites, and thus results in improved selectivity.573 CO2 acts as a gas-mediated modification of the bulk composition and/or catalyst surface in various catalytic reactions, affecting the electronic, structural, diffusion, acid–base, redox, and adsorption properties.574 CO2 + MO(x−1) → MOx + CO(8) H2 + MOx → MO(x−1) + H2O(9) CO2 + H2 → H2O + CO(7) C + CO2 → CO(10)
The lattice/surface oxygen contributes to oxygen donation from the metal oxide lattice, reducing the higher valence states to lower valence oxides with water generation so as to abstract hydrogen from the substrate in oxidative dehydrogenation. Subsequently, CO2 re-oxides the lower valence metal oxide back to its original state. Yao and co-workers investigated the surface properties that govern the selectivity of Mo2C catalysts with CO2 as a soft oxidant in ethane oxidative dehydrogenation. Oxygen modification is essential to inhibit the C–C bond cleavage in ethane and to enhance ethylene production.575 Nowicka and co-workers synthesized an Al, Zr, and Ce-containing mixed oxide support for propane oxidative dehydrogenation with CO2 as a soft oxidant, which possessed both basic and acidic sites with superior selectivity and long-term stability to propylene. The dissociation of CO2 over the reduced catalyst leads to the formation of selective oxygen species and CO, regeneration of selective oxygen species, and equilibrium shift for alkane dehydrogenation via hydrogen consumption through the RWGS reaction.576
Acid–base bifunctionality is of significant importance in CO2-mediated oxidative dehydrogenation. The basic properties are favorable for hydrogen atoms and CO2 activation, whereas the acid sites present on the catalysts play a predominant role in substrate activation. Kainthla and co-workers employed a novel MoO3/TiO2–Al2O3 catalyst using CO2 as a soft oxidant for ethylbenzene oxidative dehydrogenation to styrene (Fig. 70), which exhibited superior activity for 40 h with a maximum styrene selectivity of ∼97% and ethylbenzene conversion of ∼70%. Surface acidic sites, strong interaction with TiO2–Al2O3 highly dispersed active species of MoO3, and excellent physical properties greatly contributed to the remarkable activity.577
 Fig. 70  Pictorial representation of the plausible reaction pathway for the dehydrogenation of ethylbenzene to styrene over the MoO3-based catalyst (Reproduced from ref. 577 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2017). 
The redox properties of the catalyst as a mediator for oxygen transfer from CO2 to hydrocarbon in oxidative dehydrogenation are of paramount importance. Ren and co-workers systematically prepared and evaluated MnOx catalysts with CO2 as a soft oxidant for ethylbenzene oxidative dehydrogenation, exhibiting the highest ethylbenzene conversion of 60%. The redox mechanism involves lattice oxygen. The SSA and the amount of mobile oxygen species are key factors for determining the catalytic activity.578
The support providing high SSA, porosity, and immobilization with highly dispersed surface-active sites with large fractions, which reactants have easy access to for adsorption is ideal for overcoming the diffusion problems. Wang's group fabricated a flower-like Al2O3 support for the iron oxide catalyst using CO2 as a soft oxidant for ethylbenzene oxidative dehydrogenation. The high concentration of O2− anions on the flower-like support surface resulted in abundant highly-dispersed FexOy species on the support, which exhibited superior activity.579 Li and co-workers investigated oxide-supported NiFe bimetallic catalysts using CO2 as a soft oxidant for the oxidative dehydrogenation of n-butane to 1,3-butadiene. The FeOx/Ni(111) promotes the CeH bond cleavage while Ni(111) favors CeC bond scission. The highly reducible supports, such as CeO2–ZrO2 and CeO2, enhance the production of 1,3-butadiene.580 The utilization of CO2 as a soft oxidant for olefins is depicted in Fig. 71.
 Fig. 71  CO2 uses as a soft oxidant for olefinic basic chemicals. 

3.6.1 Oxidative dehydrogenation of light hydrocarbons. 
CO2 has been found to reduce carbon deposition and assists in the rapid desorption of ethylene from the catalyst surface. The enhancement in the ethylene productivity by CO2 was also observed over a wide range of bulk metal oxides (e.g., Ga2O3, Cr2O3, and V2O5). Park et al.581 proposed that the promotional effect of CO2 on the catalyst stability could be enhanced using cerium–zirconia oxide as a support due to its higher CO2 adsorption capability due to its surface basicity. However, it is still a challenging task to design catalytic systems with high product yield and better catalytic stability so that the oxidative dehydrogenation of ethane with CO2 will go beyond the current steam cracking technology.
For propane dehydrogenation, usually the non-oxidative path is followed, which results in the quick deactivation of the catalyst and the loss of valuable products. The challenge is the selection of such a catalyst and an oxidant that leads to enhanced catalytic activity and propylene selectivity, and to avoid coke formation. To overcome these limitations, CO2 is considered as a much safer, weaker, and easily available soft oxidant that can replace oxygen.582,583 For instance, Hutchings et al.576 illustrated that CO2, in the presence of the Ga2O3/TiO2 catalyst, contributes mainly to the RWGS reaction, which leads to enhanced dehydrogenation activity, while utilizing CO2 with the Ga2O3/ZrO2 catalyst system leads to coke removal (through reverse Boudouard reaction) and increased catalyst stability.
Butadiene is one of the basic petrochemical products that are widely used in the production of butadiene–styrene rubber and plastics with special mechanical properties. In 1980, most of the butadiene was produced via steam cracking from naphtha but catalytic dehydrogenation has recently attracted much attention as an alternative route. n-Butane is a relatively strong reducing agent than C1–C3 hydrocarbons, which might prevent the re-activation (i.e., re-oxidation) of the catalyst by the CO2 oxidant. Instead, the addition of a small amount of CO2 into the O2 atmosphere dramatically enhanced the selectivity towards butadiene with a slight loss in butane conversion in the n-butane dehydrogenation reaction over the titanium pyrophosphate catalysts. This is attributed to the competitive adsorption of O2 and CO2 on the catalyst surface and the decrease in the amount of adsorbed O2, which might be responsible for the over-oxidation reaction.


3.6.2 Oxidative dehydrogenation of alkylaromatics with CO2. 
Initially, CO2 utilization in ethylbenzene dehydrogenation was limited because CO2 was commonly known as a catalyst-poisoning agent. Since the 1990s, however, several research teams have demonstrated the enhancement effect of CO2 on the catalytic performance in the ethylbenzene dehydrogenation reaction. CO2 could be activated by the basic catalyst to react with hydrogen, which shifted the dehydrogenation reaction to the right side. Carbon dioxide functioned as a soft oxidant in the redox cycle of the metal oxides to retain their highest oxidation states. Therefore, styrene yield could be improved 2.5 times by the addition of CO2. Another role of carbon dioxide is to enhance the equilibrium conversion of ethylbenzene by combining CO2 reduction with styrene oxidative dehydrogenation reaction.
It has been proposed that the dehydrogenation of ethylbenzene using CO2 oxidants may proceed via two pathways, i.e., one-step and two-step routes. In case of the one-step route, CO2 directly interacts with ethylbenzene to abstract hydrogen from the ethyl moiety with the concomitant formation of CO and H2O, as shown in the following eqn (11). (11)
In the case of the two-step route, ethylbenzene is first converted to styrene and hydrogen, and the formed hydrogen then reacts with CO2via the RWGS (eqn (12)). (12) (13)
Generally, both mechanisms participate in the dehydrogenation reaction, and enhanced activity and selectivity are obtained through the utilization of CO2 towards oxidative dehydrogenation by the simultaneous activation of both paraffin and CO2 as well as the removal of the H2 by-product through RWGS with CO2. Ge et al. studied the roles of CO2 in the oxy-dehydrogenation of ethylbenzene to styrene on the CO2(111) surface by DFT, claiming that the two pathways have almost the same activation energy (Fig. 72).584
 Fig. 72  The potential energy profile, the configuration of initial (IS), transition (TS) and final (FS) states of (a) the oxo-insertion pathway, (b) CO2 reaction with H via the RWGS pathway on the CeO2(111) surface (Reproduced from ref. 584 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018). 
Since ethylbenzene could be dehydrogenated without the addition of CO2, eqn (6) should occur. CO2 addition accelerates the styrene formation rate either because the one-step route becomes accessible or because of the shifting of the equilibrium towards the product side via the RWGS (eqn (13)). The former case produced no hydrogen during the dehydrogenation reaction, while the latter pathway generated H2. In general, both the routes may occur simultaneously and the relative contribution of the two pathways is difficult to separate.
In spite of dedicated research, only few processes at present based on the utilization of CO2 as a soft oxidant have been implemented at a technical scale.585 CO2-mediated oxidative dehydrogenation has emerged as an environment-friendly alternative to the conventional dehydrogenation processes, the recent progress was summarized by Mukherjee and co-workers in 2016.567 Numerous studies on CO2-mediated oxidative dehydrogenation have mainly focused on redox and acid–base catalysts and are restricted to the bench-scale. The primary challenges for commercial implementation involve the enhancement in the thermal stability of the catalyst, improvement in the catalytic performances per pass, and the increase in CO2 conversion with minimal coke deposition.567 Current research utilizing CO2 as a soft oxidant at the laboratory scale can be regarded as a foundation for future technologies to present chances and bring changes in the world economy.558,586 Park et al.587 proposed the process, ISOCO2, with the concept of retrofitting of the current simple dehydrogenation of ethylbenzene with the minimal process modification for replacing steam with CO2 (Fig. 73).
 Fig. 73  The schematic illustration of the ISOCO2 process.587 


3.6.3 Perspectives on CO2 as an oxygen source. 
The concept of soft oxidant is also extended to other reactions such as dehydrogenative polymerization, for example, the hydrosilane oxidation to silanol using CO2 as a soft oxidant or CO2-mediated dehydrogenative polymerization of hydrosilane to form polysilanes,588 and glycerol dehydration.589 In addition, other molecules such as sulfur, in the case of coupling of methane, give less activation energy and coke with stronger metal–sulfur bonding (for example, Pd16S7), which suppresses the over-oxidation of methane (2CH4 + S → C2H4 + 2H2S).590,591 N2O was also investigated to be effectively utilized as a soft oxidant in the oxidative dehydrogenation of ethylbenzene over alumina-supported iron oxide catalysts, in which the improved reducibility of iron oxide and the increased dispersion of the iron active species were ascribed to the presence of N2O.592 In the conversion of n-butane to 1,3-butadiene on Ni–Mo/Al2O3, N2O is demonstrated to be a soft oxidant such as CO2, which limits the formation of the electrophilic oxygen species, thus promoting the oxidation of alkenes to carbon oxides on the surface of the catalyst with increased selectivity towards butadiene.593
There is a study on the great challenge in both the activation of CO2 and CH4. CO2 activation on the catalyst surfaces is an essential elementary step in oxidative reactions. With an optimum ratio of substrate to CO2, alkali or alkaline earth metals could improve the catalytic activity as promoters in oxidative dehydrogenation reactions. The simultaneous C–H bond activation of CO2 and CH4, both with high stabilities, is regarded as one of the toughest obstacles in the field of catalysis. Park and co-workers successfully synthesized acetic acid over Cu-loaded M+-ZSM-5 catalysts through the concurrent feed of CH4 and CO2 (Fig. 74), with a remarkably rapid formation rate. The basic cation greatly contributes to the surface-activated CO2, and therefore, gave rise to the high insertion activity.594
 Fig. 74  Direct synthesis of acetic acid by the simultaneous co-activation of methane and CO2 over the Cu-exchanged ZSM-5 catalysts (Reproduced from ref. 594 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2017). 
These approaches of utilization of CO2 as an oxidant, therefore, appear to be very promising from various viewpoints, such as being energy efficient by alleviating the equilibrium, allowing easy retrofitting modification of the current industries for commercialization, and the considerable consumption of CO2 with the production of CO as a by-product due to oxidative conversion. Moreover, these utilizations could be applied for the production of industrially valuable basic chemicals, such as olefinic monomers. The utilization of CO2 as an oxidant would be applicable more broadly for the formation of oxygenates and aromatics through oxygen insertion, aromatization, and dehydrogenation as well.
A summary that compares the many technologies with emphasis on the energy source, reducing agent, conversion conditions, representative catalyst, main products, as well as the performances is presented in Table 5. Currently, CO2 utilization using concentrated CO2 as a source can gain high selectivity, especially towards CO and HCOOH formation via two-electron transfer processes. The thermochemical conversion of CO2 as a conventional and mature technology could obtain a relatively high conversion ratio, while there is still room for other emerging processes to develop with future breakthroughs in reaction equipment optimization and advanced catalyst synthesis, thus showing great potential with the integration of renewable energy sources.
Table 5 A cross comparison of different technologies for CO2 utilization




Conversion technology
Energy source
Reducing agent
Conversion temperature and pressure
Main products
Representative catalyst
Selectivity and activity/yield/efficiency
Ref.




Thermochemical conversion of CO2
Thermal energy
CH4
800 °C, 1 bar
CO
NiMo/MgO
CO selectivity: 100%

296



H2
320 °C, 30 bar
Hydrocarbons
Na–Fe3O4/HZSM-5
CO2 conversion: 22%

327



C5–C11 selectivity: 78%






Photochemical conversion of CO2
Solar or UV light
H2O
Ambient
CO
Bi12O17Cl2 superfine nanotubes
CO yield: 48.6 μmol g−1 h−1, apparent quantum efficiency at 400 nm: 0.14%

378



CH4
Au–Cu/TiO2
CH4 yield: 2 mmol g−1 h−1, CH4 selectivity: 97%

354



Hydrogenated blue HTiO2−x
CH4 yield: 16.2 μmol g−1 h−1, CH4 selectivity: 79%

377







Electrochemical conversion of CO2
Electricity
H2O
Ambient
HCOOH
Sn(S)/Au
Total current density (Jtotal): 55 mA cm−2

398



HCOOH selectivity: 93%@−0.75 V vs. RHE


Nanotube-derived Bi

J
total: 288 mA cm−2 (flow cell), HCOOH selectivity: ∼100%@−0.61 V vs. RHE

404



S-Doped In

J
total: 84 mA cm−2, HCOOH selectivity: 93%@−0.98 V vs. RHE

410



CO
Porous Zn

J
total: 200 mA cm−2, CO selectivity: 84%@−0.64 V vs. RHE (flow cell)

432



N,S-Co-doped carbon

J
total: 2.63 mA cm−2, CO selectivity: 92%@−0.6 V vs. RHE

438



Ni–N–C

J
total: 71.5 mA cm−2, CO selectivity: 98%@−1.03 V vs. RHE

445



Fe3+–N–C

J
total: 94 mA cm−2, CO selectivity: >90%@−0.45 V vs. RHE

442



C2+ products
ERD-Cu
C2H4 partial current density (JC2H4): 161 mA cm−2, C2H4 selectivity: 36%@−1.0 V vs. RHE (flow cell)

455



Cu2S–Cu–V

J
C2+ alcohol: 126 mA cm−2, C2+ alcohol selectivity: 32% (flow cell)

456



Graphite/carbon NPs/Cu/PTFE

J
C2H4: 473 mA cm−2, C2H4 selectivity: 70%@−0.55 V vs. RHE (flow cell)

457







Photoelectrochemical conversion of CO2
Solar energy and electricity
H2O
Ambient
HCOOH
Si|n-GaN|–NPhN4–Ru(CP)22+–RuCt
Photocurrent density: 1.1 mA cm−2, HCOOH selectivity: 64%

477



CO
SnO2-Modified CuO
Solar-to-CO efficiency: 13.4%, CO selectivity: >80%

430



CH3OH
BiFeO3
CH3OH yield: 1280 mmol g−1 h−1, CH3OH selectivity: 31.9%

485







Photothermal conversion of CO2
Solar energy and heat
H2
400 °C, 7.6 bar (flow reactor)
CO
Au/TiO2
CO2 rate: 159 mmol g−1 h−1

533



200 °C, 1 bar (flow reactor)
CH4
Ru/silica
CO2 conversion: 50%, CO yield: 27 mmol g−1 h−1

489



350 °C from photothermal heating (batch reactor)


Ru/Al2O3
CO2 conversion: 95.75%, CH4 selectivity: 99.22%

527



225 °C, 21 bar (flow reactor)
CH3OH
Cu/ZnO/Al2O3
CH3OH yield: 7.8 mmol g−1 h−1, CH3OH selectivity: 80%

496



CH4
650 °C from photothermal heating (flow reactor)
CO + H2
Modified Ni/SiO2
CO yield: 1200 mmol g−1 h−1, solar-to-fuel efficiency: 12.5%

551






4. Process and economic aspects
Currently, the global CO2 emission is around 42 Gt per year.595 The latest released IPCC report on global warming of 1.5 °C has emphasized the urgency of addressing anthropogenic climate change.596,597 The world would have to curb CO2 emission by 49% of the 2017 levels by 2030.598,599 An annual investment of $640 to $910 billion for energy demand measures and $1.46 to $3.51 trillion towards energy supply is necessary between 2016 and 2050 to achieve carbon neutrality by 2050.600 The CCU process has emerged to be promising and attractive for mitigating CO2 emissions. It offers an alternative as a carbon source to generate carbon-containing valuable chemicals.601 Therefore, the exploration of the possibility for CO2 utilization as carbon feedstocks for conversion into value-added products or fuels has attracted much attention in recent decades.602–604 In 2020, Deng and co-workers presented a novel process of COG + BFG to MeOH process from steel refineries, which could produce about 179 kt of MeOH per year, achieving a total carbon efficiency of 72%. This efficient process leads to a net reduction in the CO2 emissions of 228 kt per year and fixes it in the conversion into methanol of 246 kt CO2 per year. The net present values of the latter process could be potentially increased by up to $54 million, compared with the current operating procedures. Overall, the production of MeOH is highly recommended for China, USA, and Mexico from both environmental and economic perspectives.605 Later on, Tian's group put forward a novel thermochemical calcium-looping methane reforming CCU scenario to realize the in situ coupling of CO2 capture and conversion in one integrated chemical process, leading to lower energy consumption than that of the traditional process.268 Zhao and co-workers proposed a novel simultaneous CO2 capture and utilization process with the deployment of chemical looping reforming for syngas production. The energy consumption is reduced by 68.6% and the CH4 conversion rate is over 92.1%, compared with that of the conventional processes.606
Recently, a collaborative research project aiming at the effective recycling of CO2 emitted from the Tomakomai refinery is commissioned by NEDO in Japan, which is about to start its use in February 2021.607 The integration of the CCU process is expected to combine the captured CO2 with H2 generated either from water electrolysis or as a by-product from refineries within the existing CCS facilities, which is favorable for enhancing the interoperability of both the facilities and sharing the CO2 recovery functions.608 The high economic consumption for the CO2 capture technique poses a severe challenge in the advancement of the CCU technology.10 The emission sources of CO2 could be divided into two categories: one is of high concentration (coal chemical industry, refinery, natural gas purification plant), and the other is of low concentration (coal-fired power plant, steel plant, cement plant). The capture cost for high concentration CO2 is largely lower than that for the opposite source. Post-combustion process, which is applied mainly for low CO2 partial pressure capture, has been a rather popular technology and has practically applied. The CO2 capture cost is about 300 RMB per t for the project implemented by Huaneng Power Corporation. The economic input for the carbon capture test platform started in 2019 of the Huarun Power Corporation is 500 RMB per t. The small scale and pilot tests of the oxy-fuel combustion process for coal-fired power plants were executed with a cost of 900 and 780 RMB per t at the Huazhong University of Science and Technology, respectively.
Recently, the U.S. DOE's Office of Fossil Energy made up to $131 million available to capture CO2 from industrial sources.609 On April 24th, 2020, the U.S. Department of Energy decided to fund multiple CCUS research projects. The fundamental purpose is to accelerate the regional deployment of the CCUS projects. The U.S., as a global leader in the fields of CCUS implementation, possesses 10 large-scale CCUS projects and captured more than 2500 t CO2 per year by the end of year 2019. The “Illinois Storage Corridor” project permits to store a combined 6.5 million metric tons of CO2 captured annually (DOE: $18 million; total: $25 million). The “San Juan Basin CarbonSAFE Phase III” project is about to accelerate the deployment of integrated CCS technology at the San Juan Generating Station, a nearby 847 megawatt coal-fired electricity generation plant. Approximately 6 to 7 million metric tons of CO2 will be captured per year, of which 2 million metric tons per year will be stored at a site approximately 20 miles from the station (DOE: $17.5 million; total: $22 million). The “Project ECO2S” will transport CO2 from Plant Daniel and Plant Miller, totaling 22.5 million metric tons per year (DOE: $17.5 million; total: $23.6 million). The “North Dakota CarbonSAFE Phase III” project will store over 3 million metric tons of CO2 per year from the Minnkota plant's 455 megawatt unit 2 (DOE: $17 million; total: $25 million). The “Wyoming CarbonSAFE” project utilizes Basin Electric's Dry Fork Station, a novel commercialized coal-fired power plant in the U.S., to source 2.2 million metric tons of CO2 per year for storage at three nearby sites within the same storage complex (DOE: $15 million; total: $19 million). The total investment of the above-mentioned projects is $85 million, as charged by the U.S. National Energy Technology Laboratory.609
Promising technologies and future plants for CCUS are summarized in Table 6. In general, the experiment and demonstration of CCUS in China are still at the early stages. The carbon capture sources are mainly focused on the coal-fired power generation and coal chemical industry. Tanker transportation remains the dominant mode of transport and there is seldom a project of pipeline transport, which is basically in the planning stages or under construction. In terms of carbon utilization and storage, the EOR is the research hotspot. The overall size of the experiment and the demonstration of CCUS in China is small with a relatively high cost. Only 3 of the completed CCUS demonstration projects in China have the ability to capture more than 100 thousand tons of CO2 per year, while the capture capacities of the other projects are normally less than 10 thousand tons CO2. Currently, most of the CCUS projects have a relatively high increment cost. For instance, the coal-fired power generation project would increase by 25–90% and 5–12% in terms of investment and operation and maintenance cost, while for the coal chemical industry, these are 1–1.3% and 7.5–8%, respectively. Most of the CCUS demonstration projects in China were set up after 2008 and put into use after 2010. The longest operation period of the demonstration project is only 10 years, and thus the demonstration experience is relatively limited. A newly-built gasification plant with the CO2 capture process is more cost-effective than a coal plant with post combustion capture. For most combustion power plants, CO2 capture requires large energy penalty and a high cost of technology. Thus, to reach affordable prices for the market, the CCU technology requires major breakthroughs in CO2 capture to reduce the overall cost of the system.16,610 CO2 conversion to carbon-neutral fuels at deployable scales requires significant development in the process design and catalysis. The production of renewable H2, as the primary cost source in CO2-to-fuel scenario, is of significant importance for cost reduction in order to move CCU forward.
Table 6 Promising technologies and future plants for CCUS




Project name
Location
Scale (tonnes per year)
Capture source
Disposal site
Final disposal technologies
Construction and operations
Ref.




The Tomakomai CCS Demonstration
Hokkaido, Japan
100000
Hydrogen generator, refineries, Hokkaido
Specialized rock formations located 3–4 km offshore
Storage
Finished construction in 2015

607



A collaborative research project commissioned by NEDO
Tomakomai City, Hokkaido, Japan
107300
Tomakomai refinery
Methanol synthesis facilities
Methanol production from captured CO2 with H2 obtained either as a by-product from refineries or from water electrolysis
Expected to run from February 2021


Alberta Carbon Trunk Line
Alberta, Canada
1800000
Agrium's Redwater fertilizer plant and the North West Redwater Partnership's Sturgeon refinery
Reservoirs across Central and Southern Alberta
Pipe transportation, new product generation such as soap, and geological storage
Construction began in 2018, with operations in 2020

611



Illinois Storage Corridor
Illinois, USA
6500000
One Earth Energy facility
A storage site near the One Earth Energy ethanol facility and a storage site at the Prairie State Generating Company
Storage
CO2 capture assessment to be performed

609



Mitsubishi Heavy Industry's KM Advanced Carbon Dioxide Recovery Process at the Prairie State Generating Company
A front-end engineering and design to be studied


San Juan Basin CarbonSAFE Phase III
New Mexico, USA
6000000–7000000
San Juan Generating Station, a 847 megawatt coal-fired electricity generation plant
Permian Basin
Enhanced oil recovery usage
Preparation to attain a Class VI permit for construction


Project ECO2S
Kemper County, Mississippi, USA
22500000
Plant Ratcliffe
CO2 Storage Complex in Kemper County, Mississippi
Storage
Seeking UIC Class VI permit for construction


Plant Daniel and Plant Miller
CO2 capture assessments to be performed


North Dakota CarbonSAFE Phase III
North Dakota, USA
3000000
Minnkota Power Plant
A commercial-scale storage complex near Minnkota's Milton R. Young Station
Injection wells for storage
Seeking UIC Class VI permit for construction


Wyoming CarbonSAFE
Wyoming, USA
2200000
Basin Electric's Dry Fork Station
A storage complex in Campbell County, Wyoming
Storage
Seeking UIC Class VI permit for construction




5. Summary and future perspectives
Carbon capture and utilization has great potential for reducing carbon emissions. This review presented an authoritative, critical, and comprehensive review regarding the sustainable development for advanced improvements in CO2 capture and utilization, which has received tremendous attention due to its high potential towards intensifying global warming. For CO2 capture, pre- and post-combustion processes have attracted worldwide attention and emerged as two major techniques. CO2-EOR utilization and CO2 hydrate are useful techniques for CO2 utilization.
CCU shows technical potential to cut down the annual CO2 emission by up to 3.5 Gt CO2-eq. in 2030.275,580,612 Targeted subsidy policies for CO2 utilization should be formulated by the government.613 Despite the large gap existing between the low carbon credit price and the high CO2 abatement cost, the incorporation of the power plant with the CCU technology into the emission trading system could effectively ease the financial subsidy pressure.610 The Shanghai United Assets and Equity Exchange carried out the evaluation of national carbon emissions trading systems construction and announced that the trial operation conditions have been provided for the national carbon market. According to the project issued publicly (by the Chinese government, not only the world view or examples), the national carbon market is about to be put into operation in 2020, the first stage of which would mainly concentrate on power generation industries, including the cogeneration supply of electricity and heat energy and captive power plant.
The CO2 hydrogenation process could be carried out either by electrolytic hydrogenation in oil refineries or through the utilization of residual gas in coking plants. Without the wasted hydrogen, it could also combine with the renewable energies. The surplus energy could be directly deployed for electro-catalytic CO2 conversion and water electrolysis for hydrogen production. The generated renewable hydrogen energy could be further put into use. To realize highly effective carbon emission reduction, the carbon market and its mobility have become an active domain of academics and engineering all over the world. The exploration of carbon allowance as a direct reward to climate-friendly enterprises has demonstrated the value for the improvement of the high-quality low-carbon economic development. The companies with the carbon credit award are forced to deliver certain quotas for sale on the carbon market on a daily basis to boost the liquidity of the market. In the course of resourceful CO2 utilization, especially CO2 hydrogenation for the production of chemicals, the development of cost-effective carbon-free hydrogen generation technology is of significant importance. Except for H2 production by water electrolysis with a high cost, the other current industrial hydrogen production processes, such as the technology of hydrogen production from coal and natural gas, emit a large amount of CO2. To obtain inexpensive, carbon-free hydrogen sources, the most recent studies have focused on solar photocatalytic hydrolysis hydrogen production, solar energy photoelectric catalytic hydrolysis hydrogen production, the decomposition of hydrogen sulfide for H2 production, and so on. CO2-ECBM and CO2-EOR are two dominant procedures for utilizing CO2, hence demonstrating the significant importance of achieving stable and increased yield of most of the oilfields and the enhancement in the exploitation and utilization volume of coal bed methane. The extensive deployment of CO2-EOR could achieve substantial carbon storage and boost oil production, which is favorable for improving the economic benefits of the oil and gas industry and to mitigate the energy challenge to the security resulting from the rising external dependence on oil.608
The cost for the CCUS demonstration project is relatively high, which greatly hinders the development of the CCUS process. The investment of the current CCUS demonstration project is typically about hundreds of millions RMB and the introduction of carbon capture would increase the extra operation cost of 140–600 RMB per (CO2)t. Given the current CCUS technologies, the implementation of CCUS would increase the primary energy consumption by 10–20% with great efficiency lost, which is one of the major obstacles in achieving the wide applications of CCUS. The full process flow, integration, and scalable technology demonstration of CCUS technology could be progressively realized by stages and technology demonstration in a variety of fields. The accumulated experience obtained via widely executed experiments and identified key techniques would gradually accelerate the standard improvement and the cost reduction of the CCUS technology, which is essential for achieving the long-term commercial deployment of CCUS. The demonstration projects combined with lost-cost carbon capture and EOR are recommended to be widely deployed for coal chemical industries. Oil and gas enterprises are encouraged to take the initiative to start the CO2-EOR demonstration so as to enrich the engineering experience. The related strategic planning and system design of the CCUS should be strengthened to improve the policy support and economic motivation so as to progressively form a policy guarantee system that is beneficial for the virtuous development of CCUS, and to lay a solid foundation for CCUS to play a key role in long-term carbon emission reduction. The control of the total carbon emission should be intensified and the quantification of the constrained objectives for various industries should be established and proposed so as to boost the consciousness of low-carbon development and initiative desire of CCUS deployment for enterprises. Innovative incentive policies such as tax exemption and differentiated subsidies that benefit the development of CCUS are encouraged to be explored and executed. The CCUS commercialized investment and financing mechanism with the integration of the government and the market is well explored to support the CCUS demonstration project with the positive utilization of various modes as green finance, climate bonds, low-carbon fund, etc. In all, the outlook of future research and progress in CCU are presented in Table 7.
Table 7 Outlook of future research and progress for CCU






Aspects
Concrete measures




(1) Technology development and demonstration of CCU
CO2 geological utilization
Oil extraction, coal-bed gas exploitation, natural gas industry, etc.


CO2 chemical utilization
Production of a series of chemicals such as organic carbonates, methanol, degradable polymers, etc.


(2) Breakthroughs in key capture technologies
Post-combustion CO2 capture
Integration of advanced absorbents, highly-efficient reactor, and novel energy-efficiency technologies.


Pre-combustion CO2 capture
Chemical engineering kinetics co-generation of coal gasification and flue gas decarbonization, development of advanced adsorbents, and technologies.


(3) System integration of the whole-process and large-scale demonstration
Large-scale CCUS system
Integration and optimization of CO2 capture and emission source, pre-/post-combustion capture facilities of capturing level of million tonnes CO2 per year.


CO2 enhanced oil recovery and storage, storage capacity and utilization potential, characterization and site selection, etc.


(4) International cooperation and technology transfer
Integration with the world market
Methodology study of CCUS to enter the International Carbon Emissions Trading Market.




Acronyms

1DMA2PDimethylamino-2-propanol
2DTwo-dimensional
3DThree-dimensional
AA-ILAmino-acid-functionalized ILs
ACAberration-corrected
ACFActivated carbon fiber
AEEA2-(2-Aminoethylamino)ethanol
AHA-ILsAprotic heterocyclic anions-based ILs
ALDAtomic layer deposition
AMAssociative mechanism
AMP2-Amino-2-methyl-1-propanol
AMOSTAqueous miscible organic solvent treatment
AP3-Aminopropyl
APSAminopropylsilane
AQEApparent quantum efficiency
ASFAnderson–Schulz–Flory
BDDE1,3-Butadienediepoxide
BFGBlast furnace gas
BFSBlast furnace slag
CaLCalcium looping
CBConduction band
CCPCO2 capture project
CCRCO2 capture ratio
CCSCarbon dioxide capture and storage
CCUCarbon dioxide capture and utilization
CCUSCarbon dioxide capture, utilization, and storage
CIDChemical interface damping
CLDChemical liquid deposition
CNTsCarbon nanotubes
CO2-ECBMCO2 enhanced coal bed methane
CO2-EORCO2 enhanced oil recovery
CO2RRCO2 reduction reaction
COGCoke oven gas
COSCarbonyl sulfide
CPCO2 purity
CSVECore–shell vacancy engineering
DA
N-Propyl ethylenediamine
DA2MP1,5-Diamino-2-methylpentane
DACDirect air capture
DCDirect-current
DEADiethanolamine
DETDirect energy transfer
DETADiethylenetriamine
DFBDouble fluidized bed
DFTDensity functional theory
DICPDalian Institute of Chemical Physics
DMAPSDimethylaminopropylsilane
DMXDemixing
DOEDepartment of Energy
DRMDry reforming of methane

E
a
Activation energy
EAEEthylethanolamine
EB1,2-Epoxybutane
ECNEnergy Research Centre of the Netherlands
ECSAElectrochemically active surface area
EDElectrodialysis
EDAEthylenediamine
EGEthylene glycol
EOREnhanced oil recovery
EPRElectron paramagnetic resonance
EQEExternal quantum efficiencies
ERDElectro-redeposition
ESRLEarth System Research Laboratory
ETElevated temperature
FEFaradaic efficiency
FLPsFrustrated Lewis pairs
FSPFlame spray pyrolysis
GDEGas diffusion electrode
GDLGas diffusion layer
GSPGraphite split pore
HCMHierarchical porous carbon monolith
HERHydrogen evolution reaction
HGHydroxylated graphene
HOMOsHighest occupied molecular orbitals
HRTEMHigh-resolution transmission electron microscopy
HRETEMHigh-resolution environmental transmission electron microscopy
HSSHeat stable salts
IASTIdeal adsorption solution theory
IEPIsoelectric point
IGCCIntegrated gasification combined cycle
ILsIonic liquids
IPCCIntergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
ISOCO2Inha Soft Oxide Hydrogenation Process with CO2
KCCKawasaki CO2 capture
LDHsLayered double hydroxides
LDOsLDHs derived mixed oxides
LSPRLocalized surface plasmon resonance
LUMOsLowest unoccupied molecular orbitals
MDEAMethyldiethanolamine
MCMsMesoporous carbon microparticles
MCNsMesoporous carbon nanospheres
MEAMonoethanolamine
MLDMolecular layer deposition
MOFMetal organic framework
NEDONew Energy and Industrial Technology Development Organization
NGCCNatural gas combined cycle
NGQDsN-Doped graphene quantum dots
N-GRWN-Doped graphene nanoribbon networks
NMP
N-Methyl pyrrolidone
NMRNuclear magnetic resonance
NOAANational Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
NRBSNon-rutherford backscattering spectroscopy
ODOxide derived
OEROxygen evolution reaction
PCCPost-combustion CO2 capture
PECPhotoelectrochemical
PEIPolyethylenimine
PSAPressure swing adsorption
PTDPhotothermally-driven
PTHPhotochemical heating
RETResonant energy transfer
rGOReduced graphene oxide
PZPiperazine
RRMRegenerative redox mechanism
RWGSReverse-water–gas-shift
SAEDSelected area electron diffraction
SCMShrinking core model
SDSulfide-derived
SEHPSorption-enhanced hydrogen production
SEMRSorption enhanced methane reforming
SERSorption enhanced reforming
SESRSorption enhanced steam reforming
SEWGSSorption enhanced water gas shift
SNGSynthetic natural gas
SRSteam reforming
SSASpecific surface area
SSITKASteady-state isotope transient kinetic analysis
SZMFSO42−/ZrO2/MCM-41 promoted by Fe
TA
N-Propyldiethylenetriamine
TSATemperature swing adsorption
TEMTransmission electron microscope
TEPATetraethylenepentamine
TRLTechnology readiness level
UKRIUK Research and Innovation
VBValence band
VPSAVacuum pressure swing adsorption
VSAVacuum swing adsorption
WGCWarm gas clean-up
WGSWater–gas shift
XANESX-ray absorption near edge structure
XPSX-ray photoelectron spectroscopy

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (2019JQ03015), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (U1810209), the International Science and Technology Cooperation Project of Bingtuan (2018BC002), and the Beijing Municipal Education Commission through the Innovative Transdisciplinary Program “Ecological Restoration Engineering”. This work was supported by the Next Generation Carbon Upcycling Project (Project No. 2019M1A2A6071804) through the National Research Foundation (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science and ICT, Republic of Korea.
References
S. Deutz, D. Bongartz, B. Heuser, A. Kätelhön, L. Schulze Langenhorst, A. Omari, M. Walters, J. Klankermayer, W. Leitner, A. Mitsos, S. Pischinger and A. Bardow, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 331–343 RSC .
S. K. Bhatia, R. K. Bhatia, J.-M. Jeon, G. Kumar and Y.-H. Yang, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2019, 110, 143–158 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Raua and J. R. Baird, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 95, 265–272 CrossRef .
Z. Yang, C. He, H. Sui, L. He and X. Li, J. CO2 Util., 2019, 30, 79–99 CrossRef CAS .
B. Parkinson, P. Balcombe, J. F. Speirs, A. D. Hawkes and K. Hellgardt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 19–40 RSC .
M. Fajardy and N. Mac Dowell, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1581–1594 RSC .
S. Szima, S. M. Nazir, S. Cloete, S. Amini, S. Fogarasi, A.-M. Cormos and C.-C. Cormos, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2019, 110, 207–219 CrossRef CAS .
J. Rogelj, D. Huppmann, V. Krey, K. Riahi, L. Clarke, M. Gidden, Z. Nicholls and M. Meinshausen, Nature, 2019, 573, 357–363 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sgouridis, M. Carbajales-Dale, D. Csala, M. Chiesa and U. Bardi, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 456–465 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, L. Liu, L. Zhang, Y. Zhuang and J. Du, Appl. Energy, 2018, 231, 194–206 CrossRef CAS .
S. Voskian and T. A. Hatton, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3530–3547 RSC .
J. Wang, L. Huang, R. Yang, Z. Zhang, J. Wu, Y. Gao, Q. Wang, D. O'Hare and Z. Zhong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3478–3518 RSC .
F. M. Brethomé, N. J. Williams, C. A. Seipp, M. K. Kidder and R. Custelcean, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 553–559 CrossRef .
S. Wang, S. Yan, X. Ma and J. Gong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3805–3819 RSC .
R. Zhao, L. Liu, L. Zhao, S. Deng, S. Li and Y. Zhang, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2019, 114, 109285 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wilberforce, A. Baroutaji, B. Soudan, A. H. Al-Alami and A. G. Olabi, Sci. Total Environ, 2019, 657, 56–72 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, Y. Shen, L. Wang, J. Chen and Y. Lu, Appl. Energy, 2019, 239, 876–897 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Bhown and B. C. Freeman, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 8624–8632 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tao, N. Xu, J. Gao, W. Zhang, Y. Li, M. T. Bernards, Y. Shi, Y. He and H. Pan, Energy Fuels, 2019, 33, 474–483 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Y. Zhang, R. Wang, Q. Li, S. Zhang, M. Li, J. Liu and B. Chen, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52, 14556–14563 CrossRef CAS .
G. Jing, Y. Qian, X. Zhou, B. Lv and Z. Zhou, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 1182–1191 CrossRef CAS .
M. Caplow, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1968, 90, 6795–6803 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Ye, L. Zhu, X. Wang and Y. Lu, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2017, 56, 278–288 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, A. S. Joel, C. Ramshaw, D. Eimer and N. M. Musa, Appl. Energy, 2015, 158, 275–291 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, M. Du, P. Shao, L. Wang, J. Ye, J. Chen and J. Chen, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52, 12708–12716 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ling, S. Liu, H. Gao and Z. Liang, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2019, 212, 822–833 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tavan, M. Moradi, A. Rostami and H. Azizpour, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2020, 237, 116314 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, W. Li, H. Yan and T. Xu, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2018, 57, 356–362 CrossRef CAS .
F. Chen, Y. Chi, M. Zhang, Z. Liu, X. Fei, K. Yang and C. Fu, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2020, 242, 116777 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, G. H. Jing, X. B. Zhou, B. H. Lv and Z. M. Zhou, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 1352–1361 CrossRef CAS .
I. I. I. Alkhatib, L. M. C. Pereira, A. AlHajaj and L. F. Vega, J. CO2 Util., 2020, 35, 126–144 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lv, K. Yang, X. Zhou, Z. Zhou and G. Jing, Appl. Energy, 2020, 264, 114703 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yang, M. Lv and J. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 12483–12486 RSC .
F. Barzagli, C. Giorgi, F. Mani and M. Peruzzini, Appl. Energy, 2018, 220, 208–219 CrossRef CAS .
F. Barzagli, C. Giorgi, F. Mani and M. Peruzzini, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 4364–4373 CrossRef CAS .
H. Guo, C. Li, X. Shi, H. Li and S. Shen, Appl. Energy, 2019, 239, 725–734 CrossRef CAS .
A. Liu, J. Li, B. Ren and X. Lu, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 5164–5171 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hwang, J. Kim, H. W. Lee, J. Na, B. S. Ahn, S. D. Lee, H. S. Kim, H. Lee and U. Lee, Appl. Energy, 2019, 248, 174–184 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sharifzadeh, G. Triulzi and C. L. Magee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2789–2805 RSC .
Y. Shen, H. Chen, J. Wang, S. Zhang, C. Jiang, J. Ye, L. Wang and J. Chen, Appl. Energy, 2020, 260, 114343 CrossRef CAS .
L. Raynal, P.-A. Bouillon, A. Gomez and P. Broutin, Chem. Eng. J., 2011, 171, 742–752 CrossRef CAS .
M. Aleixo, M. Prigent, A. Gibert, F. Porcheron, I. Mokbel, J. Jose and M. Jacquin, Energy Procedia, 2011, 4, 148–155 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shen, C. Jiang, S. Zhang, J. Chen, L. Wang and J. Chen, Appl. Energy, 2018, 230, 726–733 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, G. Jing, B. Lv, F. Liu and Z. Zhou, Appl. Energy, 2019, 235, 379–390 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, S. An, Q. Li, S. Yu and S. Wu, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 314, 681–687 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ye, C. Jiang, H. Chen, Y. Shen, S. Zhang, L. Wang and J. Chen, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2019, 53, 4470–4479 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, S. Liu, R. Wang, Q. Li and S. Zhang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2019, 53, 12873–12881 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, S. Yu, Q. Li, Y. Zhang, S. An and S. Zhang, Appl. Energy, 2018, 228, 568–576 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, S. Liu, L. Wang, Q. Li, S. Zhang, B. Chen, L. Jiang and Y. Zhang, Appl. Energy, 2019, 242, 302–310 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, L. Jiang, Q. Li, G. Gao, S. Zhang and L. Wang, Energy, 2020, 211, 118667–118675 CrossRef CAS .
U. H. Bhatti, D. Sivanesan, S. Nam, S. Y. Park and I. H. Baek, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 10234–10240 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lai, S. Toan, M. A. Assiri, H. Cheng, A. G. Russell, H. Adidharma, M. Radosz and M. Fan, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2672–2678 CrossRef .
U. H. Bhatti, S. Nam, S. Park and I. H. Baek, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 12079–12087 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Z. Zhu, X. Sun, J. Yang, H. Gao, Y. Huang, X. Luo, Z. Liang and P. Tontiwachwuthikul, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2019, 53, 6094–6102 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ali Saleh Bairq, H. Gao, Y. Huang, H. Zhang and Z. Liang, Appl. Energy, 2019, 252, 113440 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gao, Y. Huang, X. Zhang, Z. A. S. Bairq, Y. Huang, P. Tontiwachwuthikul and Z. Liang, Appl. Energy, 2020, 259, 114179 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Y. Huang, J. Yang, H. Gao, Y. Huang, X. Luo, Z. Liang and P. Tontiwachwuthikul, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 383, 123077 CrossRef CAS .
M. Aghaie, N. Rezaei and S. Zendehboudi, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 96, 502–525 CrossRef CAS .
J. Palomar, M. Larriba, J. Lemus, D. Moreno, R. Santiago, C. Moya, J. de Riva and G. Pedrosa, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2019, 213, 578–586 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hospital-Benito, J. Lemus, C. Moya, R. Santiago and J. Palomar, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 390, 124509 CrossRef CAS .
E. D. Bates, R. D. Mayton, I. Ntai and J. H. Davis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 926–927 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mohamed Mohsin, A. Mohd Shariff and K. Johari, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2019, 222, 297–308 CrossRef CAS .
G. Cui, J. Wang and S. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 4307–4339 RSC .
B. E. Gurkan, J. C. de la Fuente, E. M. Mindrup, L. E. Ficke, B. F. Goodrich, E. A. Price, W. F. Schneider and J. F. Brennecke, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2116–2117 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, B. Lv, X. Wu, Z. Zhou and G. Jing, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 7312–7323 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhan, B. Lv, K. Yang, G. Jing and Z. Zhou, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2020, 54, 6281–6288 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xiao, H. L. Liu, H. X. Gao, W. Olson and Z. W. Liang, Appl. Energy, 2019, 235, 311–319 CrossRef CAS .
F. Rezazadeh, W. F. Gale, G. T. Rochelle and D. Sachde, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2017, 58, 246–255 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jiang, K. Li, H. Yu, Z. Chen, L. Wardhaugh and P. Feron, Appl. Energy, 2017, 202, 496–506 CrossRef CAS .
M. Stec, A. Tatarczuk, L. Wieclaw-Solny, A. Krotki, T. Spietz and A. Wilk, Asia-Pac. J. Chem. Eng., 2017, 12, 283–291 CrossRef CAS .
D. Thimsen, A. Maxson, V. Smith, T. Cents, O. Falk-Pedersen, O. Gorset and E. S. Hamborg, Energy Procedia, 2014, 63, 5938–5958 CrossRef CAS .
E. S. Hamborg, V. Smith, T. Cents, N. Brigman, O. F. Pedersen, T. D. Cazenove, M. Chhaganlal, J. K. Feste, Ø. Ullestad, H. Ulvatn, O. Gorset, I. Askestad, L. K. Gram, B. F. Fostås, M. I. Shah, A. Maxson and D. Thimsen, Energy Procedia, 2014, 63, 5994–6011 CrossRef CAS .
N. Brigman, M. I. Shah, O. Falk-Pedersen, T. Cents, V. Smith, T. D. Cazenove, A. K. Morken, O. A. Hvidsten, M. Chhaganlal, J. K. Feste, G. Lombardo, O. M. Bade, J. Knudsen, S. C. Subramoney, B. F. Fostås, G. d. Koeijer and E. S. Hamborg, Energy Procedia, 2014, 63, 6012–6022 CrossRef CAS .
F. Vega, F. M. Baena-Moreno, L. M. G. Fernandez, E. Portillo, B. Navarrete and Z. E. Zhang, Appl. Energy, 2020, 260, 114313 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Dreillard, P. Broutin, P. Briot, T. Huard and A. Lettat, in 13th International Conference on Greenhouse Gas Control Technologies, Ghgt-13, ed. T. Dixon, L. Laloui and S. Twinning, Elsevier Science Bv, Amsterdam,  2017, vol. 114, pp. 2573–2589 Search PubMed .
K. Li, W. Leigh, P. Feron, H. Yu and M. Tade, Appl. Energy, 2016, 165, 648–659 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Lin, T. Madan and G. T. Rochelle, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 4067–4074 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ge, Q. Yu, S. Chen, X. Shi and J. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 364, 328–339 CrossRef CAS .
F. Sha, H. Hong, N. Zhu, X. Qiao, B. Zhao, L. Ma and J. Zhang, J. CO2 Util., 2018, 24, 407–418 CrossRef CAS .
R. Afonso, M. Sardo, L. Mafra and J. R. B. Gomes, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2019, 53, 2758–2767 CrossRef CAS .
B. Boukoussa, A. Hakiki, A. P. Nunes-Beltrao, R. Hamacha and A. Azzouz, J. CO2 Util., 2018, 26, 171–178 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, A. Goeppert, S. Kar and G. K. S. Prakash, J. CO2 Util., 2018, 26, 246–253 CrossRef CAS .
L. Keller, B. Ohs, L. Abduly and M. Wessling, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 359, 476–484 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Forse, P. J. Milner, J.-H. Lee, H. N. Redfearn, J. Oktawiec, R. L. Siegelman, J. D. Martell, B. Dinakar, L. B. Porter-Zasada, M. I. Gonzalez, J. B. Neaton, J. R. Long and J. A. Reimer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 18016–18031 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, K. Wang, Z. Hu, Y.-P. Chen, W. Verdegaal, D. Zhao and H.-C. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 7867–7874 RSC .
Y. Zhang, Y. Gao, H. Pfeiffer, B. Louis, L. Sun, D. O'Hare and Q. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 7962–8005 RSC .
K. Min, W. Choi, C. Kim and M. Choi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 23825–23833 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ouyang, C. Zheng, W. Gu, Y. Zhang, H. Yang and S. L. Suib, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 337, 342–350 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Owuor, T. Tsafack, S. Schara, H. Hwang, S. Jung, R. V. Salvatierra, T. Li, S. Susarla, M. Ren, B. Wei, R. Vajtai, J. M. Tour, J. Lou, C. S. Tiwary and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1800932 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, C. Wang, Y. Liu, D. R. MacFarlane and G. G. Wallace, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801400 CrossRef .
F. Liu, W. Fu and S. Chen, J. CO2 Util., 2019, 31, 98–105 CrossRef CAS .
K. Min, W. Choi, C. Kim and M. Choi, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 726–732 CrossRef .
C. Kim, W. Choi and M. Choi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 16586–16593 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, J. Luo, Z. Zhong and A. Borgna, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 42–55 RSC .
D. Qian, C. Lei, G.-P. Hao, W.-C. Li and A.-H. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 6125–6132 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Q. Xue, X. Chang, L. Zhu, C. Ling and H. Zheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 8336–8343 CrossRef CAS .
D.-H. Jeon, S.-T. Bae and S.-J. Park, Carbon Lett., 2016, 17, 85–89 CrossRef .
A. Gholidoust, J. D. Atkinson and Z. Hashisho, Energy Fuels, 2017, 31, 1756–1763 CrossRef CAS .
L. Rao, R. Ma, S. Liu, L. Wang, Z. Wu, J. Yang and X. Hu, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 362, 794–801 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kong, L. Jin and J. Qiu, Sci. Total Environ, 2013, 463–464, 192–198 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Benzigar, S. N. Talapaneni, S. Joseph, K. Ramadass, G. Singh, J. Scaranto, U. Ravon, K. Al-Bahily and A. Vinu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 2680–2721 RSC .
M. Sevilla and A. B. Fuertes, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1765–1771 RSC .
M. Sevilla, A. S. M. Al-Jumialy, A. B. Fuertes and R. Mokaya, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 1623–1633 CrossRef CAS .
S.-C. Qi, Y. Liu, A.-Z. Peng, D.-M. Xue, X. Liu, X.-Q. Liu and L.-B. Sun, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 361, 945–952 CrossRef CAS .
M. Oschatz and M. Antonietti, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 57–70 RSC .
J. P. Paraknowitsch and A. Thomas, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2839–2855 RSC .
M. Sevilla, P. Valle-Vigon and A. B. Fuertes, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2781–2787 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. F. To, J. He, J. Mei, R. Haghpanah, Z. Chen, T. Kurosawa, S. Chen, W.-G. Bae, L. Pan, J. B.-H. Tok, J. Wilcox and Z. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 1001–1009 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shi, N. Yan, H. Cui, Y. Liu, Y. Weng, D. Li and X. Ji, J. CO2 Util., 2017, 21, 444–449 CrossRef CAS .
F.-Q. Liu, W. Li, J. Zhao, W.-H. Li, D.-M. Chen, L.-S. Sun, L. Wang and R.-X. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 12252–12258 RSC .
S. Chai, Z.-M. Liu, K. Huang, S. Tan and S. Dai, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2016, 55, 7355–7361 CrossRef CAS .
S. Divekar, S. Dasgupta, A. Arya, P. Gupta, S. Singh and A. Nanoti, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2020, 234, 115594 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. A. Qasem and R. Ben-Mansour, Appl. Energy, 2018, 230, 1093–1107 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zukal, M. Shamzhy, M. Kubů and J. Čejka, J. CO2 Util., 2018, 24, 157–163 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, M. Zhu, Y. Tang, Y. Fu, W. Li and B. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 19570–19583 RSC .
V. Zeleňák, M. Skřínska, A. Zukal and J. Čejka, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 348, 327–337 CrossRef .
M. Mohamedali, H. Ibrahim and A. Henni, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 334, 817–828 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Song, Q. Dong, W. L. Xu, F. Zhou, X. Liang and M. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 769–775 CrossRef CAS .
M. Minelli, E. Papa, V. Medri, F. Miccio, P. Benito, F. Doghieri and E. Landi, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 341, 505–515 CrossRef CAS .
H. Thakkar, S. Lawson, A. A. Rownaghi and F. Rezaei, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 348, 109–116 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, P. Bai, M. Sun, W. Liu, D. Li, W. Wu, W. Yan, J. Shang and J. Yu, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1901317 CrossRef .
M. Signorile, J. G. Vitillo, M. D’Amore, V. Crocellà, G. Ricchiardi and S. Bordiga, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 17214–17224 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cheng, S. R. Tavares, C. M. Doherty, Y. Ying, E. Sarnello, G. Maurin, M. R. Hill, T. Li and D. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 43095–43103 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, Z. Qiao, S. Zhao, Z. Wang and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3151–3161 RSC .
R. Anderson, J. Rodgers, E. Argueta, A. Biong and D. A. Gómez-Gualdrón, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 6325–6337 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Bien, K. K. Chen, S.-C. Chien, B. R. Reiner, L.-C. Lin, C. R. Wade and W. S. W. Ho, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 12662–12666 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, K. Xie, M. D. Nothling, P. A. Gurr, S. S. L. Tan, Q. Fu, P. A. Webley and G. G. Qiao, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 11591–11599 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jiao, Z. Majeed, G.-H. Wang and H. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 17220–17226 RSC .
K. Gottschling, L. Stegbauer, G. Savasci, N. A. Prisco, Z. J. Berkson, C. Ochsenfeld, B. F. Chmelka and B. V. Lotsch, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 1946–1955 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang, P. Tan, S.-C. Qi, X.-Q. Liu, J.-H. Yan, F. Fan and L.-B. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 6600–6604 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, M. Du, P. Shao, L. Wang, J. Ye, J. Chen and J. Chen, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52, 12708–12716 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Olajire, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 92, 570–607 CrossRef CAS .
E. V. Ramos-Fernandez, A. Grau-Atienza, D. Farrusseng and S. Aguado, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 5598–5602 RSC .
D. J. Babu, G. He, J. Hao, M. T. Vahdat, P. A. Schouwink, M. Mensi and K. V. Agrawal, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900855 CrossRef .
Z. C. Na, Li, H. Huang, R. Feng, W.-W. He, M. Zhong, D. G. Madden, M. J. Zaworotko and X.-H. Bu, Small, 2019, 15, 1900426 CrossRef .
M. Ding and H.-L. Jiang, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 3194–3201 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gładysiak, K. S. Deeg, I. Dovgaliuk, A. Chidambaram, K. Ordiz, P. G. Boyd, S. M. Moosavi, D. Ongari, J. A. R. Navarro, B. Smit and K. C. Stylianou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 36144–36156 CrossRef .
X. Jiang, S. Li, S. He, Y. Bai and L. Shao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 15064–15073 RSC .
J. Jiang, Z. Lu, M. Zhang, J. Duan, W. Zhang, Y. Pan and J. Bai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 17825–17829 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, A. Cadiau, Y. Liu, K. Adil, V. Chernikova, I.-D. Carja, Y. Belmabkhout, M. Karunakaran, O. Shekhah, C. Zhang, A. Itta, S. Yi, M. Eddaoudi and W. Koros, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 14811–14816 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Belmabkhout, P. M. Bhatt, K. Adil, R. S. Pillai, A. Cadiau, A. Shkurenko, G. Maurin, G. Liu, W. J. Koros and M. Eddaoudi, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 1059–1066 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Qiao, Q. Xu and J. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 18898–18905 RSC .
Q. Wang and D. Astruc, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 1438–1511 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, Z. Qiao, J. Huang, H. Wu, J. Xiao, Q. Xia, H. Xi, J. Hu, J. Zhou and Z. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 38638–38647 CrossRef CAS .
E. Sánchez-González, P. G. M. Mileo, M. Sagastuy-Breña, J. R. Álvarez, J. E. Reynolds, A. Villarreal, A. Gutiérrez-Alejandre, J. Ramírez, J. Balmaseda, E. González-Zamora, G. Maurin, S. M. Humphrey and I. A. Ibarra, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 16900–16909 RSC .
T. Ghanbari, F. Abnisa and W. M. A. W. Daud, Sci. Total Environ., 2019, 707, 135090 CrossRef .
Z.-S. Wang, M. Li, Y.-L. Peng, Z. Zhang, W. Chen and X.-C. Huang, Angew. Chem., 2019, 131, 16217–16222 CrossRef .
M. Kang, J. E. Kim, D. W. Kang, H. Y. Lee, D. Moon and C. S. Hong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 8177–8183 RSC .
D. Bahamon, A. Díaz-Márquez, P. Gamallo and L. F. Vega, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 342, 458–473 CrossRef CAS .
T. Cai, J. K. Johnson, Y. Wu and X. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 9033–9041 CrossRef CAS .
GCCSI, Global Status of CCS 2019: Targeting Climate Change, http://www.globalccsinstitute.com/resources/global-status-report/.
M. Bui, C. S. Adjiman, A. B. E. J. Anthony, A. Boston, S. Brown, P. S. F. S. Fuss, A. Galindo, L. A. Hackett, J. P. Hallett, H. J. Herzog, G. Jackson, J. Kemper, S. Krevor, G. C. Maitland, M. Matuszewski, I. S. Metcalfe, C. Petit, G. Puxty, J. Reimer, D. M. Reiner, E. S. Rubin, S. A. Scott, N. Shah, B. Smit, J. P. M. Trusler, P. Webley, J. Wilcox and N. M. Dowell, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1062–1176 RSC .
M. Ishibashi, H. Ota, N. Akutsu, S. Umeda, M. Tajika, J. Izumi, A. Yasutake, T. Kabata and Y. Kageyama, Energy Convers. Manage., 1996, 37, 929–933 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, D. Long, H. Zhou, Q. Chen, X. Liu and L. Ling, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5742–5749 RSC .
L. Wang, Y. Yang, W. Shen, X. Kong, P. Li, J. Yu and A. E. Rodrigues, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2013, 52, 7947–7955 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wawrzyńczak, I. Majchrzak-Kucęba, K. Srokosz, M. Kozak, W. Nowak, J. Zdeb, W. Smółka and A. Zajchowski, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2019, 209, 560–570 CrossRef .
S. S. Kazi, A. Aranda, J. Meyer and J. Mastin, Energy Procedia, 2013, 37, 7152–7159 CrossRef .
Y. C. Park, S.-H. Jo, S.-Y. Lee, J.-H. Moon, H. Kim, C.-K. Yi, C. Sun, H. Liu and C. E. Snape, Energy Procedia, 2017, 114, 6660–6665 CrossRef .
T. O. Nelson, A. Kataria, P. Mobley, M. Soukri and J. Tanthana, Energy Procedia, 2017, 114, 2506–2524 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Sjostrom, J. Denney, C. Senior and W. Morris, Evaluation of Solid Sorbents as a Retrofit Technology for CO2 Capture. ADA-ES, Highlands Ranch, CO: US Department of Energy Topical Report: US Department of Energy Final Technical Report. DOE DE-FE004343. June 2016, https://www.osti.gov/servlets/purl/1261627 (10 January 2019, date last accessed).
B. Liu, L. Ye, R. Wang, J. Yang, Y. Zhang, R. Guan, L. Tian and X. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 4001–4009 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Okumura, K. Yoshizawa, R. Numaguchi, S. Nishibe, A. Kanou, Y. Hasegawa, S. Inoue, K. Tsuji, S. Fujita and M. Nabeshima, in Demonstration Plant of the Kawasaki CO2 Capture (KCC) System with Solid Sorbent for Coal-Fired Power Station, 14th Greenhouse Gas Control Technologies Conference Melbourne, 2018, pp. 21–26.

          J. Elliot and F. Yi, in Sorbent Based Post Combustion CO2 Slipstream Testing, 2014 NETL CO2 Capture Technology Meeting, 2014.

          M. Hornbostel, Pilot-Scale Evaluation of an Advanced Carbon Sorbent-Based Process for Post-Combustion Carbon Capture, Sri International, 2018.
Svante, our innovative carbon capture technology, https://svanteinc.com/carbon-capture-technology/.
A. H. Farmahini, D. Friedrich, S. Brandani and L. Sarkisov, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1018–1037 RSC .
J. Wang, L. Huang, Y. Gao, R. Yang, Z. Zhang, Z. Guo and Q. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 10130–10132 RSC .
Z. Y. Mata and A. E. Rodrigues, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2001, 40, 204–209 CrossRef .
X. Wang, J. Yu, J. Cheng, Z. Hao and Z. Xu, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 614–618 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, H. H. Tay, D. J. W. Ng, L. Chen, Y. Liu, J. Chang, Z. Zhong, J. Luo and A. Borgna, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 965–973 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, H. H. Tay, Z. Zhong, J. Luo and A. Borgna, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7526–7530 RSC .
L. Huang, J. Wang, Y. Gao, Y. Qiao, Q. Zheng, Z. Guo, Y. Zhao, D. O'Hare and Q. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 18454–18462 RSC .
Q. Wang, Z. Wu, H. H. Tay, L. Chen, Y. Liu, J. Chang, Z. Zhong, J. Luo and A. Borgna, Catal. Today, 2011, 164, 198–203 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Qin, J. Wang, T. Zhou, Q. Zheng, L. Huang, Y. Zhang, P. Lu, U. Ahmad, L. Benoît and Q. Wang, J. Energy Chem., 2017, 3, 346–353 CrossRef .
Q. Wang, Y. Gao, J. Luo, Z. Zhong, A. Borgna, Z. Guo and D. O'Hare, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 3414–3420 RSC .
N. N. A. H. Meis, J. H. Bitter and K. P. d. Jong, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2010, 49, 8086–8093 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, L. Huang, Q. Zheng, Y. Qiao and Q. Wang, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2016, 36, 255–262 CrossRef CAS .
A. Garcia-Gallastegui, D. Iruretagoyena, V. Gouvea, M. Mokhtar, A. M. Asiri, S. N. Basahel, S. A. Al-Thabaiti, A. O. Alyoubi, D. Chadwick and M. S. P. Shaffer, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 4531–4539 CrossRef CAS .
A. Garcia-Gallastegui, D. Iruretagoyena, M. Mokhtar, A. M. Asiri, S. N. Basahel, S. A. Al-Thabaiti, A. O. Alyoubi, D. Chadwick and M. S. P. Shaffer, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2012, 22, 13932–13940 RSC .
J. Wang, X. Mei, L. Huang, Q. Zheng, Y. Qiao, K. Zang, S. Mao, R. Yang, Z. Zhang, Y. Gao, Z. Guo, Z. Huang and Q. Wang, J. Energy Chem., 2015, 24, 127–137 CrossRef .
Y. Qiao, J. Wang, L. Huang, Q. Zheng, D. O'Hare and Q. Wang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 82777–82780 RSC .
S. Kim, S. G. Jeon and K. B. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 5763–5767 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhu, Q. Wang, Y. Shi and N. Cai, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 9244–9253 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang and D. O'Hare, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 4124–4155 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, M. Yang, Q. Wang, J.-C. Buffeta and D. O'Hare, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 15102–15110 RSC .
X. Zhu, C. Chen, H. Suo, Q. Wang, Y. Shi, D. O'Hare and N. Cai, Energy, 2019, 167, 960–969 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhu, C. Chen, Y. Shi, D. O’Hare and N. Cai, Adsorption, 2020 DOI:10.1007/s10450-020-00209-4 .
H. Lara-Garcia, W. Gao, A. Gómez-Cortés, G. Díaz, H. Pfeiffer and Q. Wang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 5501–5509 CrossRef CAS .
M. Khalkhali, X. Zhu, Y. Shi, Q. Liu, P. Choi and H. Zhang, J. CO2 Util., 2020, 36, 64–75 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, Z. Zhang, J. Wu, X. Yi, A. Zheng, A. Umar, D. O'Hare and Q. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 12782–12790 RSC .
X. Zhu, C. Chen, Q. Wang, Y. Shi, D. O'Hare and N. Cai, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 366, 181–191 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhu, C. Chen, Q. Wang, Y. Shi, D. O'Hare and N. Cai, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 366, 181 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gao, T. Zhou and Q. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 336, 710–720 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, B. Liu, X. a. Zhao, X. Zhang, Y. Miao, N. Yang, B. Yang, L. Zhang, W. Kuang, J. Li, E. Ma and Z. Shan, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4058–4065 CrossRef .
W. Gao, T. Zhou, B. Louis and Q. Wang, Catalysts, 2017, 7, 116 CrossRef .
Y. Hu, Y. Guo, J. Sun, H. Li and W. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 20103–20120 RSC .
G. A. Mutch, S. Shulda, A. J. McCue, M. J. Menart, C. V. Ciobanu, C. Ngo, J. A. Anderson, R. M. Richards and D. Vega-Maza, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 4736–4742 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. T. Trivino, V. HIremath and J. G. Seo, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52, 11952–11959 CAS .
P. Li and H. C. Zeng, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2017, 51, 12998–13007 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gao, T. Zhou, Y. Gao, B. Louis, D. O'Hare and Q. Wang, J. Energy Chem., 2017, 26, 830–838 CrossRef .
H. Joo, S. J. Cho and K. Na, J. CO2 Util., 2017, 19, 194–201 CrossRef CAS .
T. Harada, F. Simeon, E. Z. Hamad and T. A. Hatton, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1943–1949 CrossRef CAS .
T. Harada and T. A. Hatton, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 8153–8161 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qiao, J. Wang, Y. Zhang, W. Gao, T. Harada, L. Huang, T. A. Hatton and Q. Wang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2017, 56, 1509–1517 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, G. Ji, W. Liu, X. He, E. J. Anthony and M. Zhao, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 332, 216–226 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gao, T. Zhou, Y. Gao, Q. Wang and W. Lin, Energy Fuels, 2018, 33, 1704–1712 CrossRef .
Y. Hu, H. Cui, Z. Cheng and Z. Zhou, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 377, 119823 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jin, K.-J. Ko and C.-H. Lee, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 371, 64–77 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Hanak, E. J. Anthony and V. Manovic, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2199–2249 RSC .
M. Broda, A. M. Kierzkowska and C. R. Müller, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 5753–5761 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhao, L. Ma, H. Shi, K. Liu and J. Zhang, J. CO2 Util., 2018, 25, 315–322 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, D. Hong and X. Guo, J. CO2 Util., 2017, 22, 155–163 CrossRef CAS .
H. Guo, J. Feng, Y. Zhao, S. Wang and X. Ma, J. CO2 Util., 2017, 19, 165–176 CrossRef CAS .
L. Huang, Y. Zhang, W. Gao, T. Harada, Q. Qin, Q. Zheng, T. A. Hatton and Q. Wang, Energy Technol., 2017, 5, 1328–1336 CrossRef CAS .
L. Huang, C. Xu, R. Ren, Q. Zheng, Z. Wang, B. Louis and Q. Wang, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 68–72 RSC .
A. Armutlulu, M. A. Naeem, H.-J. Liu, S. M. Kim, A. Kierzkowska, A. Fedorov and C. R. Müller, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702896 CrossRef .
L. Huang, Q. Zheng, B. Louis and Q. Wang, Energy Technol., 2018, 6, 2469–2478 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sun, Y. Sun, Y. Yang, X. Tong and W. Liu, Appl. Energy, 2019, 242, 919–930 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, M. Qu, Y. Yang, Y. Hu and W. Liu, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 374, 619–625 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, H. Ding, C. Luo, Y. Zheng, Y. Xu, X. Li, Z. Zhang, C. Shen and L. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 334, 2520–2529 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, J. Sun, Y. Guo, C. Zhao, W. Li, G. Wang, S. Lei and P. Lu, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 374, 20–28 CrossRef CAS .
N. D. Charisiou, K. N. Papageridis, L. Tzounis, V. Sebastian, S. J. Hinder, M. A. Baker, M. AlKetbi, K. Polychronopoulou and M. A. Goula, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 256–273 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wu, Y. Tao, H. Ling, Z. Chen, J. Ding, X. Zeng, X. Liao, C. Stampfl and J. Huang, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 10060–10069 CrossRef CAS .
N. N. Mohd Arif, S. Z. Abidin, O. U. Osazuwa, D.-V. N. Vo, M. T. Azizan and Y. H. Taufiq-Yap, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 20857–20871 CrossRef CAS .
F. Durán-Muñoz, I. C. Romero-Ibarra and H. Pfeiffer, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3919–3925 RSC .
Y. Pan, Y. Zhang, T. Zhou, B. Louis, D. O’Hare and Q. Wang, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 7821–7834 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, W. Liu, J. Sun, Y. Hu, W. Wang, H. Chen, Y. Zhang, X. Li and M. Xu, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 1–8 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, F. Yu, B. Louis and Q. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 349, 562–573 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, Q. Zhang, C. Shen, Y. Ni, Y. Wu, Q. Wu and Z. Zhu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2015, 54, 7292–7300 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xiang, Y. Zhang, M. Hong, S. Liu, Y. Zhang, H. Liu and C. Gu, J. Mater. Sci., 2015, 50, 4698–4706 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, W. Liu, Y. Hu, J. Sun, X. Tong, Q. Chen and Q. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 353, 92–99 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Y. Gao, B. Louis, Q. Wang and W. Lin, J. Energy Chem., 2019, 33, 81–89 CrossRef .
H. Kim, H. D. Jang and M. Choi, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 280, 132–137 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nambo, J. He, T. Q. N. V. Atla, T. L. Druffel and M. K. Sunkara, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3327–3333 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Lee and C. T. Yavuz, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2017, 56, 3413–3417 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jeoung, J. H. Lee, H. Y. Kim and H. R. Moon, Thermochim. Acta, 2016, 637, 31–37 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Subha, B. N. Nair, P. Hareesh, A. Peer Mohamed, T. Yamaguchi, K. G. K. Warriera and U. S. Hareesh, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 12792–12798 RSC .
M. T. Izquierdo, A. Turan, S. García and M. M. Maroto-Valer, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3249–3257 RSC .
V. L. Mejía-Trejo, E. Fregoso-Israel and H. Pfeiffer, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 7171–7176 CrossRef .
P. V. Subha, B. N. Nair, V. Visakh, C. R. Sreerenjini, A. P. Mohamed, K. G. K. Warrier, T. Yamaguchi and U. S. Hareesh, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 7913–7921 RSC .
W. Liu, L. Song, C. Xu, S. Rohani, M. Chen, B. Liang and C. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 370, 71–80 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, T. Zhang, Y. Yang, M. Li, Q. Qin, P. Lu, P. Ning and Q. Wang, Energy Fuels, 2019, 33, 1734–1744 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yu, Z. Tuantuan, L. Benoit, Y. Feng, D. Jianming and W. Qiang, Catalysts, 2017, 7, 105 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, Y. Gao, F. Yu and Q. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 371, 424–432 CrossRef CAS .
R. Pacciani, J. Torres, P. Solsona, C. Coe, R. Quinn, J. Hufton, T. Golden and L. F. Vega, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 7083–7088 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zheng, L. Huang, Y. Zhang, J. Wang, C.-Z. Zhao, Q. Zhang, W. Zheng, D. Cao, D. O'Hare and Q. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 12889–12896 RSC .
D. J. Yang, Z. F. Zheng, H. Y. Zhu, H. W. Liu and X. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2777–2781 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zheng, L. Huang, Z. Zhong, B. Louis and Q. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 380, 122444 CrossRef CAS .
J.-i. Ida and Y. S. Lin, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2003, 37, 1999–2004 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Theo, J. S. Lim, H. Hashim, A. A. Mustaffa and W. S. Ho, Appl. Energy, 2016, 183, 1633–1663 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhu, S. Li, Y. Shi and N. Cai, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2019, 75, 100784 CrossRef .

          R. J. Allam, R. Chiang, J. R. Hufton, P. Middleton, E. L. Weist and V. White, Development of the Sorption-Enhanced Water Gas Shift Process, in Carbon Dioxide Capture for Storage in Deep Geologic Formations – Results from the CO2 Capture Project,  2005, vol. 1, pp. 227–256 Search PubMed .

          E. V. Selow, P. Cobden, R. V. d. Brink, A. Wright, V. White, P. Hinderink and J. Hufton, Pilot-Scale Development of the Sorption Enhanced Water Gas Shift Process, in Carbon Dioxide Capture for Storage in Deep Geologic Formations, CPL Press, Berks,  2009, pp. 157–180 Search PubMed .
R. Reijers, E. v. Selow, P. Cobden, J. Boon and R. v. d. Brink, Energy Procedia, 2011, 4, 1155–1161 CrossRef CAS .
J. Boon, P. D. Cobden, H. A. J. v. Dijk and M. v. S. Annaland, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2015, 122, 219–231 CrossRef CAS .
D. Jansen, E. van Selow, P. Cobden, G. Manzolini, E. Macchi, M. Gazzani, R. Blom, P. P. Henriksen, R. Beavis and A. Wright, Energy Procedia, 2013, 37, 2265–2273 CrossRef CAS .
G. Manzolini, A. Giuffrida, P. D. Cobden, H. A. J. v. Dijk, F. Ruggeri and F. Consonni, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2020, 94, 102935 CrossRef CAS .

          G. Alptekin, A low cost, high capacity regenerable sorbent for pre-combustion CO2 capture, TDA Research, Incorporated,  2012 Search PubMed .
S. G. Subraveti, K. N. Pai, A. K. Rajagopalan, N. S. Wilkins, A. Rajendran, A. Jayaraman and G. Alptekin, Appl. Energy, 2019, 254, 113624 CrossRef CAS .
Integrated water gas shift (WGS)/pre-combustion carbon capture process, https://www.netl.doe.gov/projects/project-information.aspx?p=FE0023684.
X. Zhu, Y. Shi and N. Cai, Appl. Energy, 2016, 176, 196–208 CrossRef CAS .

          X. Zhu, Y. Shi, S. Li, N. Cai and E. J. Anthony, System and Processes of Pre-combustion Carbon Dioxide Capture and Separation, Pre-combustion Carbon Dioxide Capture Materials, The Royal Society of Chemistry,  2018, pp. 281–334 10.1039/9781788013390-00281 .
X. Zhu, Y. Shi, S. Li and N. Cai, Appl. Energy, 2018, 229, 1061–1071 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ji, J. G. Yao, P. T. Clough, J. C. D. d. Costa, E. J. Anthony, P. S. Fennell, W. Wang and M. Zhao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2647–2672 RSC .
B. Najmi, O. Bolland and K. E. Colombo, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2016, 157, 80–92 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu and W. H. Green, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 11145–11158 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, Y. Shi, S. Li, Y. Yang and N. Cai, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 3771–3779 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tian, F. Yan, Z. Zhang and J. Jiang, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaav5077 CrossRef CAS .
F. A. Rahman, M. M. A. Aziz, R. Saidur, W. A. W. A. Bakar, M. R. Hainin, R. Putrajaya and N. A. Hassan, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 71, 112–126 CrossRef .
P. Psarras, S. Comello, P. Bains, P. Charoensawadpong, S. Reichelstein and J. Wilcox, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2017, 51, 11440–11449 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hepburn, E. Adlen, J. Beddington, E. A. Carter, S. Fuss, N. M. Dowell, J. C. Minx, P. Smith and C. K. Williams, Nature, 2019, 575, 87–97 CrossRef CAS .
S.-Y. Pan, Y.-H. Chen, L.-S. Fan, H. Kim, X. Gao, T.-C. Ling, P.-C. Chiang, S.-L. Pei and G. Gu, Nat. Sustainable, 2020, 3, 399–405 CrossRef .
Z. Liu, K. Wang, Y. Chen, T. Tan and J. Nielsen, Nat. Catal., 2020, 3, 274–288 CrossRef CAS .
A. Policicchio, A. Meduri, C. Simari, V. Lazzaroli, S. Stelitano, R. G. Agostino and I. Nicotera, J. CO2 Util., 2017, 19, 185–193 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kätelhön, R. Meys, S. Deutz, S. Suh and A. Bardow, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2019, 116, 11187–11194 CrossRef .
N. Zhang, B. Zou, G.-P. Yang, B. Yu and C.-W. Hu, J. CO2 Util., 2017, 22, 9–14 CrossRef CAS .
V. Eveloy, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2019, 108, 550–571 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mikulčić, I. Ridjan Skov, D. F. Dominković, S. R. Wan Alwi, Z. A. Manan, R. Tan, N. Duić, S. N. Hidayah Mohamad and X. Wang, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2019, 114, 109338 CrossRef .
N. Thonemann and M. Pizzol, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2253–2263 RSC .
H. Mikulčić, I. R. Skov, D. F. Dominković, S. R. W. Alwi, Z. A. Manan, R. Tan, N. Duić, S. N. H. Mohamad and X. Wang, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2019, 114, 109338 CrossRef .
W. Zhou, K. Cheng, J. C. Kang, C. Zhou, V. Subramanian, Q. H. Zhang and Y. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 3193–3228 RSC .
C. Vogt, E. Groeneveld, G. Kamsma, M. Nachtegaal, L. Lu, C. J. Kiely, P. H. Berben, F. Meirer and B. M. Weckhuysen, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 127–134 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Thampi, J. Kiwi and M. Gratzel, Nature, 1987, 327, 506–508 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gao, Q. Jiang, Y. F. Liu, W. Liu, W. Chu and D. S. Su, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 14207–14219 RSC .
A. Quindimil, U. De-La-Torre, B. Pereda-Ayo, J. A. Gonzalez-Marcos and J. R. Gonzalez-Velasco, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 238, 393–403 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, S. He, H. Chen, B. Wang, L. R. Zheng, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 6298–6305 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhou, S. Kooi, M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos and H. Saltsburg, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 2801–2807 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kopelent, J. A. van Bokhoven, J. Szlachetko, J. Edebeli, C. Paun, M. Nachtegaal and O. V. Safonova, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 8728–8731 CrossRef CAS .
B. Murugan and A. V. Ramaswamy, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 3062–3063 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Farmer and C. T. Campbell, Science, 2010, 329, 933–936 CrossRef CAS .
M. Roiaz, E. Monachino, C. Dri, M. Greiner, A. Knop-Gericke, R. Schlogl, G. Comelli and E. Vesselli, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 4146–4154 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. Bezemer, J. H. Bitter, H. P. C. E. Kuipers, H. Oosterbeek, J. E. Holewijn, X. D. Xu, F. Kapteijn, A. J. van Dillen and K. P. de Jong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 3956–3964 CrossRef CAS .
S. Walspurger, W. G. Haije and B. Louis, Isr. J. Chem., 2014, 54, 1432–1442 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yabe and Y. Sekine, Fuel Process. Technol., 2018, 181, 187–198 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pakhare and J. Spivey, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7813–7837 RSC .
Y. Song, E. Ozdemir, S. Ramesh, A. Adishev, S. Subramanian, A. Harale, M. Albuali, B. A. Fadhel, A. Jamal, D. Moon, S. H. Choi and C. T. Yavuz, Science, 2020, 367, 777–781 CrossRef CAS .
M. Akri, S. Zhao, X. Y. Li, K. T. Zang, A. F. Lee, M. A. Isaacs, W. Xi, Y. Gangarajula, J. Luo, Y. J. Ren, Y. T. Cui, L. Li, Y. Su, X. L. Pan, W. Wen, Y. Pan, K. Wilson, L. Li, B. T. Qiao, H. Ishii, Y. F. Liao, A. Q. Wang, X. D. Wang and T. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5181–5190 CrossRef .
C. Palmer, D. C. Upham, S. Smart, M. J. Gordon, H. Metiu and E. W. McFarland, Nat. Catal., 2020, 3, 83–89 CrossRef CAS .
R. Thakur, A. VahidMohammadi, J. Smith, M. Hoffman, J. Moncada, M. Beidaghi and C. Carrero, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 5124–5134 CrossRef CAS .
M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 992–1005 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, S. P. Wang, X. B. Ma and J. L. Gong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3703–3727 RSC .
L. F. Bobadilla, J. L. Santos, S. Ivanova, J. A. Odriozola and A. Urakawa, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 7455–7467 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pajares, H. Prats, A. Romero, F. Viñes, P. R. de la Piscina, R. Sayós, N. Homs and F. Illas, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 267, 118719 CrossRef CAS .
N. Nityashree, C. A. H. Price, L. Pastor-Perez, G. V. Manohara, S. Garcia, M. M. Maroto-Valer and T. R. Reina, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 261, 118241 CrossRef CAS .
F. G. Baddour, E. J. Roberts, A. T. To, L. Wang, S. E. Habas, D. A. Ruddy, N. M. Bedford, J. Wright, C. P. Nash, J. A. Schaidle, R. L. Brutchey and N. Malmstadt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 1010–1019 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Yao, L. L. Lin, W. J. Liao, N. Rui, N. Li, Z. Y. Liu, J. J. Cen, F. Zhang, X. Li, L. Song, L. B. De Leon, D. Su, S. D. Senanayake, P. Liu, D. Ma, J. G. Chen and J. A. Rodriguez, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 9087–9097 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, J. Luo, Y. Shin, S. Moldovan, O. Ersen, A. Hébraud, G. Schlatter, C. Pham-Huu and C. Meny, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11532–11540 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, D. Teschner, M. Dimitrakopoulou, A. Fedorov, B. Frank, R. Kraehnert, F. Rosowski, H. Kaiser, S. Schunk, C. Kuretschka, R. Schlogl, M. G. Willinger and A. Trunschke, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 8709–8713 CrossRef CAS .
T. Lunkenbein, J. Schumann, M. Behrens, R. Schlögl and M. G. Willinger, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 4544–4548 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Su, B. Zhang and R. Schlögl, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 2818–2882 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, S. Han, B. Zhu, G. Zhang, X. Li, Y. Gao, Z. Wu, B. Yang, Y. Liu and W. Baaziz, Nat. Catal., 2020, 3, 411–417 CrossRef CAS .

          G. A. Olah, A. Goeppert and G. S. Prakash, Beyond oil and gas: the methanol economy, John Wiley & Sons,  2018 Search PubMed .
M. Behrens, F. Studt, I. Kasatkin, S. Kuhl, M. Havecker, F. Abild-Pedersen, S. Zander, F. Girgsdies, P. Kurr, B. L. Kniep, M. Tovar, R. W. Fischer, J. K. Norskov and R. Schlogl, Science, 2012, 336, 893–897 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kuld, M. Thorhauge, H. Falsig, C. F. Elkjaer, S. Helveg, I. Chorkendorff and J. Sehested, Science, 2016, 352, 969–974 CrossRef CAS .
V. Schott, H. Oberhofer, A. Birkner, M. C. Xu, Y. M. Wang, M. Muhler, K. Reuter and C. Woll, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 11925–11929 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kattel, P. J. Ramirez, J. G. Chen, J. A. Rodriguez and P. Liu, Science, 2017, 355, 1296–1299 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kobl, S. Thomas, Y. Zimmermann, K. Parkhomenko and A. C. Roger, Catal. Today, 2016, 270, 31–42 CrossRef CAS .
O. Martin, A. J. Martin, C. Mondelli, S. Mitchell, T. F. Segawa, R. Hauert, C. Drouilly, D. Curulla-Ferre and J. Perez-Ramirez, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6261–6265 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Frei, C. Mondelli, R. Garcia-Muelas, K. S. Kley, B. Puertolas, N. Lopez, O. V. Safonova, J. A. Stewart, D. C. Ferre and J. Perez-Ramirez, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3371–3381 CrossRef .
L. B. Wang, W. B. Zhang, X. S. Zheng, Y. Z. Chen, W. L. Wu, J. X. Qiu, X. C. Zhao, X. Zhao, Y. Z. Dai and J. Zeng, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 869–876 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, E. Guan, Y. Wang, L. Wang, Z. Gong, Y. Cui, X. Meng, B. C. Gates and F.-S. Xiao, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1033–1041 CrossRef CAS .
L. X. Wang, L. Wang, J. Zhang, X. L. Liu, H. Wang, W. Zhang, Q. Yang, J. Y. Ma, X. Dong, S. J. Yoo, J. G. Kim, X. J. Meng and F. S. Xiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 6104–6108 CrossRef CAS .
L. X. Wang, S. X. He, L. Wang, Y. Lei, X. J. Meng and F. S. Xiao, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 11335–11340 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Liu, B. de Tymowski, F. Vigneron, I. Florea, O. Ersen, C. Meny, P. Nguyen, C. Pham, F. Luck and P. H. Cuong, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 393–404 CrossRef CAS .
F. Jiao, J. J. Li, X. L. Pan, J. P. Xiao, H. B. Li, H. Ma, M. M. Wei, Y. Pan, Z. Y. Zhou, M. R. Li, S. Miao, J. Li, Y. F. Zhu, D. Xiao, T. He, J. H. Yang, F. Qi, Q. Fu and X. H. Bao, Science, 2016, 351, 1065–1068 CrossRef CAS .
K. Cheng, B. Gu, X. L. Liu, J. C. Kang, Q. H. Zhang and Y. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 4725–4728 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wei, Q. J. Ge, R. W. Yao, Z. Y. Wen, C. Y. Fang, L. S. Guo, H. Y. Xu and J. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15174–15182 CrossRef .
P. Gao, S. G. Li, X. N. Bu, S. S. Dang, Z. Y. Liu, H. Wang, L. S. Zhong, M. H. Qiu, C. G. Yang, J. Cai, W. Wei and Y. H. Sun, Nat. Chem., 2017, 9, 1019–1024 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fujiwara, R. Kieffer, H. Ando and Y. Souma, Appl. Catal., A, 1995, 121, 113–124 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gao, S. S. Dang, S. G. Li, X. N. Bu, Z. Y. Liu, M. H. Qiu, C. G. Yang, H. Wang, L. S. Zhong, Y. Han, Q. Liu, W. Wei and Y. H. Sun, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 571–578 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Ni, Z. Y. Chen, Y. Fu, Y. Liu, W. L. Zhu and Z. M. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3457–3463 CrossRef .
U. Ulmer, T. Dingle, P. N. Duchesne, R. H. Morris, A. Tavasoli, T. Wood and G. A. Ozin, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3169–3180 CrossRef .
S. C. Roy, O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose and C. A. Grimes, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1259–1278 CrossRef CAS .
A. Corma and H. Garcia, J. Catal., 2013, 308, 168–175 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, N. Talreja, H. Tao, J. Texter, M. Muhler, J. Strunk and J. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 7610–7627 CrossRef CAS .
M. Khalil, J. Gunlazuardi, T. A. Ivandini and A. Umar, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2019, 113, 109246 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Toe, Z. Zheng, H. Wu, J. Scott, R. Amal and Y. H. Ng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 14072–14081 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Y. Inoue, T. Hisatomi, R. Ishikawa, Q. Wang, T. Takata, S. Chen, N. Shibata, Y. Ikuhara and K. Domen, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 756–763 CrossRef CAS .
N. Shehzad, M. Tahir, K. Johari, T. Murugesan and M. Hussain, J. CO2 Util., 2018, 26, 98–122 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, J. Yu, M. Jaroniec and X. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 3962–4179 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xie, Q. Zhang, G. Liu and Y. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 35–59 RSC .
Z. Wang, C. Li and K. Domen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2109–2125 RSC .
K. Iizuka, T. Wato, Y. Miseki, K. Saito and A. Kudo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20863–20868 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lu, B. Wang, S. Wang, Z. Shi, S. Yan and Z. Zou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702447 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, K. Teramura, S. Hosokawa and T. Tanak, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 11313–11319 RSC .
Y. Wang, Z. Zhang, L. Zhang, Z. Luo, J. Shen, H. Lin, J. Long, J. C. S. Wu, X. Fu, X. Wang and C. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 14595–14598 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Habisreutinger, L. Schmidt-Mende and J. K. Stolarczyk, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7372–7408 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fu, K. Jiang, X. Qiu, J. Yu and M. Liu, Mater. Today, 2020, 32, 222–243 CrossRef CAS .
H. Rao, L. C. Schmidt, J. Bonin and M. Robert, Nature, 2017, 548, 74–77 CrossRef CAS .
V. S. Thoi, N. Kornienko, C. G. Margarit, P. Yang and C. J. Chang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 14413–14424 CrossRef CAS .
T. Inoue, A. Fujishima, S. Konishi and K. Honda, Nature, 1979, 277, 637–638 CrossRef CAS .
K. Li, B. Peng and T. Peng, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 7485–7527 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Yang, Y.-H. Yu, B. V. D. Linden, J. C. S. Wu and G. Mul, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8398–8406 CrossRef CAS .
S. Neatu, J. A. Macia-Agullo, P. Concepción and H. Garcia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 15969–15976 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Toe, Z. Zheng, H. Wu, J. Scott, R. Amal and Y. H. Ng, Angew. Chem., 2018, 130, 13801–13805 CrossRef .
Z. Xiong, Z. Lei, Y. Li, L. Dong, Y. Zhao and J. Zhang, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2018, 36, 24–27 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, A. R. Mohamed and W.-J. Ong, Angew. Chem., 2020 DOI:10.1002/ange.201914925 .
S. Zhou, Y. Liu, J. Li, Y. Wang, G. Jiang, Z. Zhao, D. Wang, A. Duan, J. Liu and Y. Wei, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 158, 20–29 CrossRef .
J. Ran, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704649 CrossRef .
D. Hong, L.-M. Lyu, K. Koga, Y. Shimoyama and Y. Kon, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 18955–18964 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, Z. Wang, S.-W. Cao and C. Xue, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 25939–25947 CrossRef CAS .
J. Low, B. Dai, T. Tong, C. Jiang and J. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1802981 CrossRef .
Y. Bai, L. Ye, L. Wang, X. Shi, P. Wang, W. Bai and P. K. Wong, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 194, 98–104 CrossRef CAS .
W.-K. Jo, S. Kumar, S. Eslava and S. Tonda, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 239, 586–598 CrossRef CAS .
A. Iwase, S. Yoshino, T. Takayama, Y. H. Ng, R. Amal and A. Kudo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 10260–10264 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, Y. Zhao, H. Xu, Y. Li, Y. Wei, J. Liu and Z. Zhao, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 263, 118314 CrossRef CAS .
A. Akhundi, A. Habibi-Yangjeh, M. Abitorabi and S. Rahim Pouran, Catal. Rev., 2019, 61, 595–628 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gao, Y. Jiao, E. R. Waclawik and A. Du, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 6292–6297 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, M. Yang, B. Chen, X. Wang, H. Chen, D. Kuang and C. Su, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 5660–5663 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Z.-R. Tang, X. Fu and Y.-J. Xu, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7426–7435 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zhou, Y. Dou, C. Zhao, J. Zhou, X.-Q. Wu and J.-R. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 264, 118519 CrossRef .
Q. Mu, W. Zhu, X. Li, C. Zhang, Y. Su, Y. Lian, P. Qi, Z. Deng, D. Zhang and S. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 262, 118144 CrossRef CAS .
L. Mino, G. Spoto and A. M. Ferrari, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 25016–25026 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pan, X. Wu, L. Wang, G. Liu, G. Q. M. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 8361–8363 RSC .
T. Ohno, T. Higo, N. Murakami, H. Saito, Q. Zhang, Y. Yang and T. Tsubota, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 152, 309–316 CrossRef .
J. Jia, C. Qian, Y. Dong, Y. F. Li, H. Wang, M. Ghoussoub, K. T. Butler, A. Walsh and G. A. Ozin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 4631–4644 RSC .
G. Yin, X. Huang, T. Chen, W. Zhao, Q. Bi, J. Xu, Y. Han and F. Huang, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 1009–1017 CrossRef CAS .
J. Di, C. Zhu, M. Ji, M. Duan, R. Long, C. Yan, K. Gu, J. Xiong, Y. She and J. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 14847–14851 CrossRef CAS .
F. Chen, Z. Ma, L. Ye, T. Ma, T. Zhang, Y. Zhang and H. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1908350 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, C. Miao, P. Yang, Y. He, J. Feng and D. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 244, 919–930 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, N. Han, J. Deng, J. Wu, Y. Wang, Y. Hu, P. Ding, Y. Li, Y. Li and J. Lu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801536 CrossRef .
F. Pan, B. Li, E. Sarnello, S. Hwang, Y. Gang, X. Feng, X. Xiang, N. M. Adli, T. Li, D. S. G. Wu, G. Wang and Y. Li, Nano Energy, 2020, 68, 104384 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jiang, S. Siahrostami, T. Zheng, Y. Hu, S. Hwang, E. Stavitski, Y. Peng, J. Dynes, M. Gangisetty, D. Su, K. Attenkofer and H. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 893–903 RSC .
T. Zheng, K. Jiang, N. Ta, Y. Hu, J. Zeng, J. Liu and H. Wang, Joule, 2019, 3, 265–278 CrossRef CAS .
F. P. G. d. Arquer, O. S. Bushuyev, P. D. Luna, C.-T. Dinh, A. Seifitokaldani, M. I. Saidaminov, C.-S. Tan, L. N. Quan, A. Proppe, M. G. Kibria, S. O. Kelley, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802858 CrossRef .
J. Schneider, H. Jia, J. T. Muckerman and E. Fujita, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2036–2051 RSC .
H. A. Schwarz and R. W. Dodson, J. Phys. Chem., 1989, 93, 409–414 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Peterson, F. Abild-Pedersen, F. Studt, J. Rossmeisl and J. K. Norskov, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1311–1315 RSC .
J. Wu, Y. Huang, W. Ye and Y. Li, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700194 CrossRef .
W. Zhang, Y. Hu, L. Ma, G. Zhu, Y. Wang, X. Xue, R. Chen, S. Yang and Z. Jin, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700275 CrossRef .
Y. Hori, H. Wakebe, T. Tsukamoto and O. Koga, Electrochim. Acta, 1994, 39, 1833–1839 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, C. W. Li and M. W. Kanan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19969–19972 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lum and J. W. Ager, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 551–554 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dutta, I. Z. Montiel, R. E. K. Kiran, M. Rahaman, J. Drnec and P. Broekmann, Nano Energy, 2020, 68, 104331 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kumar, V. Atla, J. P. Brian, S. Kumari, T. Q. Nguyen, M. Sunkara and D. J. M. Spurgeon, Angew. Chem., 2017, 56, 3645–3649 CrossRef CAS .
R. Daiyan, E. C. Lovell, N. M. Bedford, W. H. Saputera, K.-H. Wu, S. Lim, J. Horlyck, Y. H. Ng, X. Lu and R. Amal, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900678 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, L. Chen, M. Xue, T. Williams, Y. Zhang, D. R. MacFarlane and J. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2017, 31, 270–277 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, P. De Luna, F. P. G. de Arquer, B. Zhang, N. Becknell, M. B. Ross, Y. Li, M. N. Banis, Y. Li and M. Liu, Joule, 2017, 1, 794–805 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhang, Z. Guo, Z. Zuo, W. Pan and J. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 239, 441–449 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, W. J. Dong, S. Gim, W. Sohn, J. Y. Park, C. J. Yoo, H. W. Jang and J.-L. Lee, Nano Energy, 2017, 39, 44–52 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, T. Lei, Y. Liu and J. Qiao, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 218, 46–50 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhao, Y. Gu, W. Gao, P. Cui, H. Tang, X. Wei, H. Zhu, G. Li, S. Yan, X. Zhang and Z. Zou, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 266, 118625 CrossRef .
F. Yang, A. O. Elnabawy, R. Schimmenti, P. Song, J. Wang, Z. Peng, S. Yao, R. Deng, S. Song, Y. Lin, M. Mavrikakis and W. Xu, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1088–1095 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Gong, P. Ding, M. X. X. Zhu, M. Wang, J. Deng, Q. Ma, N. Han, Y. Zhu, J. Lu, Z. Feng, Y. Li, W. Zhou and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2807–2816 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, F. Li, X. Zhang, T. Williams, C. D. Easton, A. M. Bond and J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 4714–4720 RSC .
N. Han, Y. Wang, H. Yang, J. Deng, J. Wu, Y. Li and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1320–1327 CrossRef .
C. W. Lee, J. S. Hong, K. D. Yang, K. Jin, J. H. Lee, H.-Y. Ahn, H. Seo, N.-E. Sung and K. T. Nam, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 931–937 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, K. Mou, X. Wang and L. Liu, Angew. Chem., 2018, 130, 12972–12976 CrossRef .
W. Luo, W. Xie, M. Li, J. Zhang and A. Züttel, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 4505–4515 RSC .
W. Ma, S. Xie, X.-G. Zhang, F. Sun, J. Kang, Z. Jiang, Q. Zhang, D.-Y. Wu and Y. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 892–901 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, F. Ahmad, W. Zhao, W. Yan, W. Zhang, H. Huang, C. Ma and J. Zeng, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 4029–4034 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fan, S. Garbarino, G. A. Botton, A. C. Tavares and D. Guay, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 20747–20756 RSC .
J. E. Pander, J. W. J. Lum and B. S. Yeo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 4093–4101 RSC .
J. Zhang, F. Li, M. Xue, J. Li, X. Ma, L. Chen, X. Zhang and D. MacFarlane, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 14718–14722 CrossRef .
M. Liu, Y. Pang, B. Zhang, P. D. Luna, O. Voznyy, J. Xu, X. Zheng, C. T. Dinh, F. Fan, C. Cao, F. P. G. d. Arquer, T. Saberi Safaei, A. Mepham, A. Klinkova, E. Kumacheva, T. Filleter, D. Sinton, S. O. Kelle and E. H. Sargent, Nature, 2016, 537, 382–386 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Hossain, Z. Liu, J. Wen and A. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 236, 483–489 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhu, Y. Zhang, H. Zhang, H. Lv, Q. Li, R. Michalsky, A. A. Peterson and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 16132–16135 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lu, J. Rosen, Y. Zhou, G. S. Hutchings, Y. C. Kimmel, J. G. Chen and F. Jiao, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3242–3247 CrossRef .
C. Kim, H. S. Jeon, T. Eom, M. S. Jee, H. Kim, C. M. Friend, B. K. Min and Y. J. Hwang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13844–13850 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Firet, M. A. Blommaert, T. Burdyny, A. Venugopal, D. Bohra, A. Longo and W. A. Smith, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2597–2607 RSC .
D. Gao, H. Zhou, J. Wang, S. Miao, F. Yang, G. Wang, J. Wang and X. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4288–4291 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhu, S. Kattel, F. Jiao and J. G. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802840 CrossRef .
F. Quan, D. Zhong, H. Song, F. Jia and L. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 16409–16413 RSC .
D. H. Won, H. Shin, J. Koh, J. Chung, H. S. Lee, H. Kim and S. I. Woo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 9297–9300 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, G. Shen, R. Zhang, D. Wu, C. Zou, T. Ling, H. Liu, C. Dong and X.-W. Du, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 1418–1423 RSC .
W. Luo, J. Zhang, M. Li and A. Züttel, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 3783–3791 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Mun, S. Lee, A. Cho, S. Kim, J. W. Han and J. Lee, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 246, 82–88 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhu, L. Zhang, P. Yang, X. Chang, H. Dong, A. Li, C. Hu, Z. Huang, Z. Zhao and J. Gong, Small, 2018, 14, 1703314 CrossRef .
Q. Li, J. Fu, W. Zhu, Z. Chen, B. Shen, L. Wu, Z. Xi, T. Wang, G. Lu, J.-J. Zhu and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 4290–4293 CrossRef CAS .
M. Schreier, F. Heroguel, L. Steier, S. Ahmad, J. S. Luterbacher, M. T. Mayer, J. Luo and M. Gratzel, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17807 Search PubMed .
L. Dai, Q. Qin, P. Wang, X. Zhao, C. Hu, P. Liu, R. Qin, M. Chen, D. Ou, C. Xu, S. Mo, B. Wu, G. Fu, P. Zhang and N. Zheng, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1701069 CrossRef .
J. Medina-Ramos, S. S. Lee, T. T. Fister, A. A. Hubaud, R. L. Sacci, D. R. Mullins, J. L. DiMeglio, R. C. Pupillo, S. M. Velardo, D. A. Lutterman, J. Rosenthal and P. Fenter, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 7285–7295 CrossRef CAS .
A. Atifi, D. W. Boyce, J. L. DiMeglio and J. Rosenthal, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 2857–2863 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, R. M. Yadav, M. Liu, P. P. Sharma, C. S. Tiwary, L. Ma, X. Zou, X.-D. Zhou, B. I. Yakobson, J. Lou and P. M. Ajayan, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5364–5371 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, H. Yang, X. Huang, L. Liu, W. Cai, J. Gao, X. Li, T. Zhang, Y. Huang and B. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1800499 CrossRef .
J. Wu, M. Liu, P. P. Sharma, R. M. Yadav, L. Ma, Y. Yang, X. Zou, X. Zhou, R. Vajtai, B. I. Yakobson, J. Lou and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 466–470 CrossRef CAS .
S. Siahrostami, K. Jiang, M. Karamad, K. Chan, H. Wang and J. Norskov, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 11080–11085 CrossRef CAS .
F. Pan, B. Li, W. Deng, Z. Du, Y. Gang, G. Wang and Y. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 252, 240–249 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ju, A. Bagger, G.-P. Hao, A. S. Varela, I. Sinev, V. Bon, B. R. Cuenya, S. Kaskel, J. Rossmeisl and P. Strasser, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 944–952 CrossRef .
M. Wang, K. Torbensen, D. Salvatore, S. Ren, D. Joulié, F. Dumoulin, D. Mendoza, B. Lassalle-Kaiser, U. Işci, C. P. Berlinguette and M. Robert, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3602–3609 CrossRef .
Z. Geng, Y. Cao, W. Chen, X. Kong, Y. Liu, T. Yao and Y. Lin, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 240, 234–240 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gu, C.-S. Hsu, L. Bai, H. M. Chen and X. Hu, Science, 2019, 364, 1091–1094 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Yang, S.-F. Hung, S. Liu, K. Yuan, S. Miao, L. Zhang, X. Huang, H.-Y. Wang, W. Cai, R. Chen, J. Gao, X. Yang, W. Chen, Y. Huang, H. M. Chen, C. M. Li, T. Zhang and B. Liu, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 140–147 CrossRef CAS .
F. Pan, W. Deng, C. Justiniano and Y. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 226, 463–472 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yan, H. Li, Y. Ye, H. Wu, F. Cai, R. Si, J. Xiao, S. Miao, S. Xie, F. Yang, Y. Li, G. Wang and X. Bao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1204–1210 RSC .
X. Li, W. Bi, M. Chen, Y. Sun, H. Ju, W. Yan, J. Zhu, X. Wu, W. Chu, C. Wu and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 14889–14892 CrossRef CAS .
F. Pan, H. Zhang, Z. Liu, D. Cullen, K. Liu, K. More, G. Wu, G. Wang and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 26231–26237 RSC .
C. Lu, J. Yang, S. Wei, S. Bi, Y. Xia, M. Chen, Y. Hou, M. Qiu, C. Yuan, Y. Su, F. Zhang, H. Liang and X. Zhuang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1806884 CrossRef .
Y. Huang, A. D. Handoko, P. Hirunsit and B. S. Yeo, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 1749–1756 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Kuhl, E. R. Cave, D. N. Abram and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7050–7059 RSC .
H. Xie, T. Wang, J. Liang, Q. Li and S. Sun, Nano Today, 2018, 21, 41–54 CrossRef CAS .
K. J. P. Schouten, Z. Qin, E. P. Gallent and M. T. M. Koper, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9864–9867 CrossRef CAS .
F. S. Roberts, K. P. Kuhl and A. Nilsson, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 5179–5182 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jiang, R. B. Sandberg, A. J. Akey, X. Liu, D. C. Bell, J. K. Nørskov, K. Chan and H. Wang, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 111–119 CrossRef CAS .
P. De Luna, R. Quintero-Bermudez, C.-T. Dinh, M. B. Ross, O. S. Bushuyev, P. Todorović, T. Regier, S. O. Kelley, P. Yang and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 103–110 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhuang, Z. Liang, A. Seifitokaldani, Y. Li, P. De Luna, T. Burdyny, F. Che, F. Meng, Y. Min, R. Quintero-Bermudez, C. T. Dinh, Y. Pang, M. Zhong, B. Zhang, J. Li, P.-N. Chen, X. Zheng, H. Liang, W.-N. Ge, B.-J. Ye, D. Sinton, S.-H. Yu and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 421–428 CrossRef CAS .
C.-T. Dinh, T. Burdyny, M. G. Kibria, A. Seifitokaldani, C. M. Gabardo, F. P. G. d. Arquer, A. Kiani, J. P. Edwards, P. D. Luna, O. S. Bushuyev, C. Zou, R. Quintero-Bermudez, Y. Pang, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2018, 360, 783–787 CrossRef CAS .
A. Eilert, F. Cavalca, F. S. Roberts, J. O. Orcid, C. Liu, M. Favaro, E. J. Crumlin, H. Ogasawara, D. Friebel, L. G. M. Pettersson and A. Nilsson, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 285–290 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Li and M. W. Kanan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7231–7234 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gao, I. Zegkinoglou, N. J. Divins, F. Scholten, I. Sinev, P. Grosse and B. R. Cuenya, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 4825–4831 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Le Duff, M. J. Lawrence and P. Rodriguez, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 12919–12924 CrossRef CAS .
D. Raciti, L. Cao, K. J. T. Liv, P. F. Rottmann, X. Tang, C. Li, Z. Hicks, K. H. Bowen, K. J. Hemker, T. Mueller and C. Wang, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 4467–4472 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cao, D. Raciti, C. Li, K. J. T. Livi, P. F. Rottmann, K. J. Hemker, T. Mueller and C. Wang, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 8578–8587 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Li, J. Ciston and M. W. Kanan, Nature, 2014, 508, 504–507 CrossRef CAS .
C. Reller, R. Krause, E. Volkova, B. Schmid, S. Neubauer, A. Rucki, M. Schuster and G. Schmid, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602114 CrossRef .
S. Y. Lee, H. Jung, N.-K. Kim, H.-S. Oh, B. K. Min and Y. J. Hwang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 8681–8689 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, F. Che, M. Liu, C. Zou, Z. Liang, P. D. Luna, H. Yuan, J. Li, Z. Wang, H. Xie, H. Li, P. Chen, E. Bladt, R. Quintero-Bermudez, S. B. Tsun-Kong Sham8, D. S. Johan Hofkens6, G. Chen and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 974–980 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Luther, P. K. Jain, T. Ewers and A. P. Alivisatos, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 361–366 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang, R. Long, C. Gao and Y. Xiong, Sci. China Mater., 2018, 61, 771–805 CrossRef CAS .
A. U. Pawar, C. W. Kim, M.-T. Nguyen-Le and Y. S. Kang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 7431–7455 CrossRef CAS .
X. Deng, R. Li, S. Wu, L. Wang, J. Hu, J. Ma, W. Jiang, N. Zhang, X. Zheng, C. Gao, L. Wang, Q. Zhang, J. Zhu and Y. Xiong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 10924–10929 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chang, T. Wang, P. Zhang, Y. Wei, J. Zhao and J. Gong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 8840–8845 CrossRef CAS .
G. Capilli, M. Costamagna, F. Sordello and C. Minero, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 242, 121–131 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lessio and E. A. Carter, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13248–13251 CrossRef CAS .
M. Halmann, Nature, 1978, 275, 115–116 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Singh, J. H. Montoya, J. M. Gregoire and K. A. Persson, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 443–451 CrossRef CAS .
B. Shan, S. Vanka, T.-T. Li, L. Troian-Gautier, M. K. Brennaman, Z. Mi and T. J. Meyer, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 290–299 CrossRef CAS .
C. Janaky, D. Hursan, B. Endrodi, W. Chanmanee, D. Roy, D. Liu, N. R. de Tacconi, B. H. Dennis and K. Rajeshwar, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 332–338 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Jang, J.-w. Jang, J. Lee, J. H. Kim, H. Kumagai, J. Lee, T. Minegishi, J. Kubota, K. Domen and J. S. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3597–3604 RSC .
J. DuChene, G. Tagliabue, A. J. Welch, W.-H. Cheng and H. A. Atwater, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 2545–2550 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Song, H. Ryoo, M. Cho, J. Kim, J.-G. Kim, S.-Y. Chung and J. Oh, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601103 CrossRef .
J. S. DuChene, G. Tagliabue, A. J. Welch, X. Li, W.-H. Cheng and H. A. Atwater, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 2348–2358 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Rao, S. Pishgar, J. Strain, B. Kumar, V. Atla, S. Kumari and J. M. Spurgeon, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 1736–1742 RSC .
J. J. Leung, J. Warnan, K. H. Ly, N. Heidary, D. H. Nam, M. F. Kuehnel and E. Reisner, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 354–365 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Kuk, R. K. Singh, D. H. Nam, R. Singh, J.-K. Lee and C. B. Park, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 3827–3832 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sivula and V. D. K. Roel, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 15010 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cheng, M. Zhang, G. Wu, X. Wang, J. Zhou and K. Cen, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2014, 48, 7076–7084 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pan, X. Ye, Y. Cao, S. Zhu, X. Chen, M. Chen, D. Zhang and G. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 511, 145497 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kim, S. Hyeon, J. Lee, W. D. Kim, D. C. Lee, J. Kim and H. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3027–3034 CrossRef .
C. W. Kim, M. J. Kang, S. Ji and Y. S. Kang, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 968–974 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sekizawa, S. Sato, T. Arai and T. Morikawa, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 1405–1416 CrossRef CAS .
E. T. Kho, T. H. Tan, E. Lovell, R. J. Wong, J. Scott and R. Amal, Green Energy Environ., 2017, 2, 204–217 CrossRef .
A. A. Tountas, X. Peng, A. V. Tavasoli, P. N. Duchesne, T. L. Dingle, Y. Dong, L. Hurtado, A. Mohan, W. Sun, U. Ulmer, L. Wang, T. E. Wood, C. T. Maravelias, M. M. Sain and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1801903 CrossRef .
L. Wang, Y. Dong, T. Yan, Z. Hu, A. A. Jelle, D. M. Meira, P. N. Duchesne, J. Y. Y. Loh, C. Qiu, E. E. Storey, Y. Xu, W. Sun, M. Ghoussoub, N. P. Kherani, A. S. Helmy and G. A. Ozin, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 2432–2439 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ljungström, D. Chakarov, J. Bergeld, S. Johansson and B. Kasemo, Top. Catal., 2001, 16, 433–436 CrossRef .
B. Xie, R. J. Wong, T. H. Tan, M. Higham, E. K. Gibson, D. Decarolis, J. Callison, K.-F. Aguey-Zinsou, M. Bowker, C. R. A. Catlow, J. Scott and R. Amal, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1615–1625 CrossRef .
P. G. O'Brien, A. Sandhel, T. E. Wood, A. A. Jelle, L. B. Hoch, D. D. Perovic, C. A. Mims and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Sci., 2014, 1, 1400001 CrossRef .
Y. F. Li, N. Soheilnia, M. Greiner, U. Ulmer, T. Wood, A. A. Jelle, Y. Dong, A. P. Yin Wong, J. Jia and G. A. Ozin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 5610–5615 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, H. O. Everitt and J. Liu, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 1268–1280 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, H. Song, H. Liu and J. Ye, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 8016–8035 CrossRef CAS .
G. Bergamini, P. Ceroni and V. Balzani, Rend. Lincei-Sci. Fis., 2017, 28, 125–142 CrossRef .
S. Linic, U. Aslam, C. Boerigter and M. Morabito, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 567–576 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Jain, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 24347–24351 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, X. Li, D. Zhang, N. Q. Su, W. Yang, H. O. Everitt and J. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14542–14550 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Kale, T. Avanesian and P. Christopher, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 116–128 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, S. He, W. Guo, Y. Hu, J. Huang, J. R. Mulcahy and W. D. Wei, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 2927–2954 CrossRef CAS .
S. Linic, P. Christopher and D. B. Ingram, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 911–921 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Knight, N. S. King, L. Liu, H. O. Everitt, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 834–840 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, P. Albella, Z. Pirzadeh, P. Alonso-González, F. Huth, S. Bonetti, V. Bonanni, J. Åkerman, J. Nogués, P. Vavassori, A. Dmitriev, J. Aizpurua and R. Hillenbrand, Small, 2011, 7, 2341–2347 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiong, J. Chen, B. Wiley, Y. Xia, Y. Yin and Z.-Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1237–1242 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Watson, X. Zhang, R. Alcaraz de la Osa, J. M. Sanz, F. González, F. Moreno, G. Finkelstein, J. Liu and H. O. Everitt, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1095–1100 CrossRef CAS .
S. Linic, U. Aslam, C. Boerigter and M. Morabito, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 567–576 CrossRef CAS .
O. A. Douglas-Gallardo, M. Berdakin and C. G. Sánchez, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 24389–24399 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kumar, T. P. Rossi, M. Kuisma, P. Erhart and D. J. Norris, Faraday Discuss., 2019, 214, 189–197 RSC .
P. V. Kumar, T. P. Rossi, D. Marti-Dafcik, D. Reichmuth, M. Kuisma, P. Erhart, M. J. Puska and D. J. Norris, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 3188–3195 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, M. Li, T. D. Dao, Y. Liu, W. Zhou, L. Liu, X. Meng, T. Nagao and J. Ye, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 398–404 CrossRef CAS .
H. Robatjazi, H. Zhao, D. F. Swearer, N. J. Hogan, L. Zhou, A. Alabastri, M. J. McClain, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 27–36 CrossRef .
L. B. Hoch, T. E. Wood, P. G. O'Brien, K. Liao, L. M. Reyes, C. A. Mims and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Mater., 2014, 1, 1400013 Search PubMed .
K. K. Ghuman, L. B. Hoch, P. Szymanski, J. Y. Y. Loh, N. P. Kherani, M. A. El-Sayed, G. A. Ozin and C. V. Singh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 1206–1214 CrossRef CAS .
P. Christopher, H. Xin, A. Marimuthu and S. Linic, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 1044–1050 CrossRef CAS .
P. Christopher, H. Xin and S. Linic, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 467–472 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Kale, T. Avanesian, H. Xin, J. Yan and P. Christopher, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5405–5412 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Cushing, J. Li, F. Meng, T. R. Senty, S. Suri, M. Zhi, M. Li, A. D. Bristow and N. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15033–15041 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, T. Itoi, T. Konishi and Y. Izumi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 6292–6301 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kazuma, J. Jung, H. Ueba, M. Trenary and Y. Kim, Science, 2018, 360, 521–526 CrossRef CAS .
Z. J. Coppens, W. Li, D. G. Walker and J. G. Valentine, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1023–1028 CrossRef CAS .
X. Meng, T. Wang, L. Liu, S. Ouyang, P. Li, H. Hu, T. Kako, H. Iwai, A. Tanaka and J. Ye, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 11662–11666 CrossRef .
J. Jia, P. G. O'Brien, L. He, Q. Qiao, T. Fei, L. M. Reyes, T. E. Burrow, Y. Dong, K. Liao and M. Varela, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1600189 CrossRef .
G. Chen, R. Gao, Y. Zhao, Z. Li, G. I. N. Waterhouse, R. Shi, J. Zhao, M. Zhang, L. Shang, G. Sheng, X. Zhang, X. Wen, L.-Z. Wu, C.-H. Tung and T. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704663 CrossRef .
M. Ghoussoub, M. Xia, P. N. Duchesne, D. Segal and G. Ozin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1122–1142 RSC .
F. Sastre, A. V. Puga, L. Liu, A. Corma and H. García, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6798–6801 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, X. Meng, T. D. Dao, H. Zhang, P. Li, K. Chang, T. Wang, M. Li, T. Nagao and J. Ye, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11545–11549 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Upadhye, I. Ro, X. Zeng, H. J. Kim, I. Tejedor, M. A. Anderson, J. A. Dumesic and G. W. Huber, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2015, 5, 2590–2601 RSC .
A. Álvarez, A. Bansode, A. Urakawa, A. V. Bavykina, T. A. Wezendonk, M. Makkee, J. Gascon and F. Kapteijn, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 9804–9838 CrossRef .
G. Chen, G. I. N. Waterhouse, R. Shi, J. Zhao, Z. Li, L.-Z. Wu, C.-H. Tung and T. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 17528–17551 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Ozin, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1957–1963 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wu, K. Deng, B. Hu, Q. Lu, G. Liu and X. Hong, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 1598–1604 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, H. O. Everitt and J. Liu, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 1906–1911 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gao, T. Zhou, Y. Gao and Q. Wang, Appl. Energy, 2019, 254, 113700 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kazuma and Y. Kim, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 4800–4808 CrossRef CAS .
D. Manikandan, S. Mohan, P. Magudapathy and K. G. M. Nair, Physica B, 2003, 325, 86–91 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dong, K. K. Ghuman, R. Popescu, P. N. Duchesne, W. Zhou, J. Y. Loh, A. A. Jelle, J. Jia, D. Wang and X. Mu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 5, 1700732 Search PubMed .
Y. Qi, L. Song, S. Ouyang, X. Liang, S. Ning, Q. Zhang and J. Ye, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1903915 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sun, C. Qian, L. He, K. K. Ghuman, A. P. Y. Wong, J. Jia, A. A. Jelle, P. G. O’Brien, L. M. Reyes, T. E. Wood, A. S. Helmy, C. A. Mims, C. V. Singh and G. A. Ozin, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12553–12561 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Jelle, K. K. Ghuman, P. G. O'Brien, M. Hmadeh, A. Sandhel, D. D. Perovic, C. V. Singh, C. A. Mims and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702277 CrossRef .
L. B. Hoch, P. G. O’Brien, A. Jelle, A. Sandhel, D. D. Perovic, C. A. Mims and G. A. Ozin, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 9017–9025 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Cheng, Z. Liu, Q. Guo, M. N. Ha and Z. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 5314–5322 RSC .
Y. Li, J. Hao, H. Song, F. Zhang, X. Bai, X. Meng, H. Zhang, S. Wang, Y. Hu and J. Ye, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2359–2367 CrossRef .
J. Ren, S. Ouyang, H. Xu, X. Meng, T. Wang, D. Wang and J. Ye, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601657 CrossRef .
H. Song, X. Meng, T. D. Dao, W. Zhou, H. Liu, L. Shi, H. Zhang, T. Nagao, T. Kako and J. Ye, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 408–416 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, M. Mao, Q. Zhang, Y. Li, J. Bai, Y. Yang, M. Zeng and X. Zhao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702472 CrossRef .
B. Han, W. Wei, L. Chang, P. Cheng and Y. H. Hu, ACS Catal., 2015, 6, 494–497 CrossRef .
J. Wang, C.-Y. Liu, T. P. Senftle, J. Zhu, G. Zhang, X. Guo and C. Song, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 3264–3273 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, D. F. Swearer, C. Zhang, H. Robatjazi, H. Zhao, L. Henderson, L. Dong, P. Christopher, E. A. Carter and P. Nordlander, Science, 2018, 362, 69–72 CrossRef CAS .
F. Pan, X. Xiang, Z. Du, E. Sarnello, T. Li and Y. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 260, 118189 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, X. Meng, T. D. Dao, L. Liu, P. Li, G. Zhao, T. Nagao, L. Yang and J. Ye, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 10567–10573 RSC .
X. Zhang, X. Li, M. E. Reish, D. Zhang, N. Q. Su, Y. Gutiérrez, F. Moreno, W. Yang, H. O. Everitt and J. Liu, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 1714–1723 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Ansari and S.-E. Park, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9419–9437 RSC .
K. N. Rao, B. M. Reddy, B. Abhishek, Y.-H. Seo, N. Jiang and S.-E. Park, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 91, 649–656 CrossRef CAS .
J.-S. Chang, V. P. Vislovskiy, M.-S. Park, D. Young Hong, J. S. Yoo and S.-E. Park, Green Chem., 2003, 5, 587–590 RSC .
B. M. Reddy, S.-C. Lee, D.-S. Han and S.-E. Park, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 87, 230–238 CrossRef CAS .
K. N. Rao, B. M. Reddy and S.-E. Park, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 100, 472–480 CrossRef CAS .
J. Madhavi, M. Suresh, G. V. Ramesh Babu, P. S. Sai Prasad, B. David Raju and K. S. Rama Rao, J. CO2 Util., 2014, 8, 21–26 CrossRef CAS .
J.-S. Chang, S.-E. Park and M. S. Park, Chem. Lett., 1997, 1123–1124 CrossRef CAS .
P. L. Walker, F. Rusinko and L. G. Austin, Adv. Catal., 1959, 11, 133–221 CAS .
A. Kh. Mamedov and S. R. Mirzabekova, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 1995, 34, 474–482 CrossRef .
D. Mukherjee, S.-E. Park and B. M. Reddy, J. CO2 Util., 2016, 16, 301–312 CrossRef CAS .
N. Mimura, I. Takahara, M. Saito, T. Hattori, K. Ohkuma and M. Ando, Catal. Today, 1998, 45, 61–64 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Burri, K. M. Choi, D.-S. Han, J.-B. Koo and S.-E. Park, Catal. Today, 2006, 115, 242–247 CrossRef CAS .
G. Raju, B. M. Reddy and S.-E. Park, J. CO2 Util., 2014, 5, 41–46 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Porosoff, M. N. Z. Myint, S. Kattel, Z. Xie, E. Gomez, P. Liu and J. G. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 15501–15505 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, Z. Wu, N. C. Nelson, A. D. Sadow, I. I. Slowing and S. H. Overbury, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 6426–6435 CrossRef CAS .
D. Riemer, B. Mandaviya, W. Schilling, A. C. Götz, T. Kühl, M. Finger and S. Das, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 3030–3034 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhang, H. Wang, S. Tang, C. Liu, F. Dong, H. Yue and B. Liang, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 9280–9286 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yao, B. Yan, Z. Jiang, Z. Liu, Q. Wu, J. Lee and J. G. Chen, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 5374–5381 CrossRef CAS .
E. Nowicka, C. Reece, S. M. Althahban, K. M. H. Mohammed, S. A. Kondrat, D. J. Morgan, Q. He, D. J. Willock, S. Golunski, C. J. Kiely and G. J. Hutchings, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 3454–3468 CrossRef CAS .
I. Kainthla, G. V. R. Babu, J. T. Bhanushali, K. S. R. Rao and B. M. Nagaraja, J. CO2 Util., 2017, 18, 309–317 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ren, J. Song, Y.-H. Song, H. Wang, Z. Liu, Z.-T. Liu, J. Jiang and Z.-W. Liu, J. CO2 Util., 2017, 22, 63–70 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, L. Qi, H. Lu and M. Ji, J. CO2 Util., 2017, 17, 162–169 CrossRef CAS .
K. Roh, H. Lim, W. Chung, J. Oh, H. Yoo, A. S. Al-Hunaidy, H. Imran and J. H. Lee, J. CO2 Util., 2018, 26, 60–69 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ji, D.-Y. Hong, J.-S. Chang, V. P. Vislovskiy, J. S. Yoo and S.-E. Park, Stud. Surf. Sci. Catal., 2004, 153, 339–342 CrossRef CAS .
A. Burri, M. A. Hasib, Y.-H. Mo, B. M. Reddy and S.-E. Park, Catal. Lett., 2018, 148, 576–585 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Atanga, F. Rezaei, A. Jawad, F. Mark and A. R. Ali, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 220, 429–445 CrossRef CAS .
H.-X. Fan, J. Feng, W.-Y. Li, X.-H. Li, T. Wiltowski and Q.-F. Ge, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 427, 973–980 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yan, Q. Kouk, S. X. Tan, J. Luo and Y. Liu, J. CO2 Util., 2016, 15, 154–159 CrossRef CAS .
T. Lee, S. Jung, J. Hong, C.-H. Wang, D. S. Alessi, S. S. Lee, Y.-K. Park and E. E. Kwon, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2020, 54, 6329–6343 CrossRef CAS .

          S. E. Park, N. Jiang and Y. H. Tahir Kalid, KR Pat., 1020100041049,  2010 Search PubMed .
X. Wang, C. Xia and L. Wu, Green Chem., 2018, 20, 5415–5426 RSC .
J. d. R. M. Costa, R. C. R. Santos, L. P. Coutinho, O. R. Silva, H. O. Barros, V. N. Freire and A. Valentini, Catal. Today, 2020, 344, 199–211 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhu, S. L. Wegener, C. Xie, O. Uuche, M. Neurock and T. J. Marks, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 104–109 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhu, S. L. Wegener, C. Xie, O. Uche, M. Neurock and T. J. Marks, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 103–109 Search PubMed .
R. Li, Adv. Mater. Res., 2011, 361, 932–935 Search PubMed .
V. D. B. C. Dasireddy, M. Huš and B. Likozar, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 3291–3302 RSC .
A. M. Rabie, M. A. Betiha and S.-E. Park, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 215, 50–59 CrossRef CAS .
O. Hoegh-Guldberg, D. Jacob, M. Taylor, T. G. Bolaños, S. B. M. Bindi, I. A. Camilloni, A. Diedhiou, R. Djalante, K. Ebi, F. Engelbrecht, J. Guiot, Y. Hijioka, S. Mehrotra, C. W. Hope, A. J. Payne, H.-O. Pörtner, S. I. Seneviratne, A. Thomas, R. Warren and G. Zhou, Science, 2019, 365, eaaw6974 CrossRef CAS .
F. Creutzig, C. Breyer, J. Hilaire, J. Minx, G. P. Peters and R. Socolow, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1805–1817 RSC .
R. Bellamy, J. Lezaun and J. Palmer, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 743–751 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tollefson, Nature, 2018, 562, 172–173 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lu, J. S. Guest, C. A. Peters, X. Zhu, G. H. Rau and Z. J. Ren, Nat. Sustainable, 2018, 1, 750–758 CrossRef .
D. Shindell and C. J. Smith, Nature, 2019, 573, 408–411 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jiang, P. Ashworth, S. Zhang, X. Liang, Y. Sun and D. Angus, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2020, 119, 109601 CrossRef .
H. Sun, J. Wang, J. Zhao, B. Shen, J. Shi, J. Huang and C. Wu, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 244, 63–75 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Grim, Z. Huang, M. T. Guarnieri, J. R. Ferrell, L. Tao and J. A. Schaidle, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 472–494 RSC .
S. Kar, A. Goeppert, V. Galvan, R. Chowdhury, J. Olah and G. K. S. Prakash, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 16873–16876 CrossRef CAS .
L. Deng and T. A. Adams, Energy Convers. Manage., 2020, 204, 112315 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, B. Jin, Z. Deng, Y. Huang, X. Luo and Z. Liang, Energy Convers. Manage., 2018, 171, 1685–1696 CrossRef CAS .
Carbon Capture Journal, 2020. Mitsubishi selected to conduct research on effective recycling of CO2 to produce methanol, http://www.carboncapturejournal.com/ViewNews.aspx?NewsID=4326.
N. Mac Dowell, P. S. Fennell, N. Shah and G. C. Maitland, Nat. Clim. Change, 2017, 7, 243–249 CrossRef CAS .
DOE, 2020. U.S. Department of Energy Announces $131 Million for CCUS Technologies, https://www.energy.gov/articles/us-department-energy-announces-131-million-ccus-technologies.
L. Yang, M. Xu, Y. Yang, J. Fan and X. Zhang, Appl. Energy, 2019, 255, 113828 CrossRef .
CBC, 2020. At long last, newcarbon capture project launches in Alberta, https://www.cbc.ca/news/business/actl-enhance-energy-oil-ccs-co2-ccus-1.5593969.
D. A. Nowicki, J. M. S. Skakle and I. R. Gibson, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 5367–5377 RSC .
R. S. Norhasyima and T. M. I. Mahlia, J. CO2 Util., 2018, 26, 323–335 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Wanlin Gao
	Wanlin Gao is currently a PhD candidate at the College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Beijing Forestry University in China under the supervision of Prof. Qiang Wang. Her research interests include the fabrication and application of intermediate-temperature solid CO2 adsorbents for sorption-enhanced water gas shift reaction and the deployment of in situ and operando analysis for CO2 capture mechanism study.

Qiang Wang
	Professor Qiang Wang received BSc (2003) and MSc (2005) from Harbin Institute of Technology in China, and PhD (2009) from POSTECH in South Korea. In 2009–2011, he worked as a research fellow at the Institute of Chemical and Engineering Sciences under A*STAR, Singapore. In 2011–2012, he worked as a postdoctoral associate at the Department of Chemistry, University of Oxford. Since 2012, he holds a full professor position at the College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Beijing Forestry University. He serves as the section editor (capture, storage, and chemical conversion of carbon dioxide) of the Journal of Energy Chemistry and the editorial boards of several scientific journals. His current research interests include environmental functional nanomaterials for air pollution control and CO2 capture and utilizations (CCU).

Anne-Cecile Roger
	Professor Anne-Cécile Roger obtained her PhD from the University of Strasbourg in 1995 in the field of heterogeneous catalysis (oxidative coupling of methane). She obtained her Accreditation to Direct Research in 2003 around the direct and indirect valorization of natural gas. She got her first position as an Assistant Professor in 1996 and became full professor in 2011 at the same university. She is the deputy director of ICPEES (Institute of Chemistry and Processes for Energy, Environment and Health, UMR CNRS 7515) since 2018. After a strong experience in Fischer–Tropsch synthesis for almost 10 years, she has been, since more than ten years, involved in the development of mixed oxide-type catalytic materials for CO2 hydrogenation (methane, methanol, DME, higher alcohols) and Power-to-X technologies.

Rose Amal
	Professor Rose Amal is a Scientia Professor in the School of Chemical Engineering, UNSW Sydney. Her current research focuses on designing nanomaterials for solar to chemical energy conversion applications (including photo and electrocatalysis for water and air purification, water splitting, CO2 reduction) and engineering systems for solar-induced processes. Prof. Amal is a Fellow of the Australian Academy of Technological Sciences and Engineering (FTSE), a Fellow of Australian Academy of Science (FAA). She has received the nation's top civilian honour – the Companion of the Order of Australia – as part of the 2018 Queen's Birthday Honours for her eminent service to chemical engineering, and was named 2019 NSW Scientist of the Year.

Hong He
	Prof. Hong He is the Member of the Chinese Academy of Engineering, the Deputy Director of the Research Center for Eco-Environmental Sciences (RCEES), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS). Prof. He received his doctorate (PhD) from the University of Tokyo in 1994. He studied and worked in Japan, the United States, and Canada for 11 years, and thereafter joined RCEES through the “Hundred Talents Program” of the CAS in 2001. His research has mainly focused on fundamental and applied research in environmental catalysis and heterogeneous atmospheric chemistry, with a series of achievements in the areas of diesel emission control technologies, catalytic indoor air purification, and haze formation mechanisms. Prof. He was awarded the National Technology Invention Award (China) in 2011, the National Science and Technology Progress Award (China) in 2014, the Ho Leung Ho Lee Foundation Prize for Scientific and Technological Innovation in 2017, and the National Natural Science Award (China) in 2019.

Sang-Eon Park
	Prof. Sang-Eon Park is the Emeritus Professor of Inha Univ., and has been the director of the Laboratory of Nano-Green Catalysis and Nano Center. He has a PhD (1981) from KAIST and experience from Chon Engrg. Co. for 6 years with a post-doc at Texas A. & M. He worked as a principal investigator in KRICT for 16 years. Now, he is the Editor-in-Chief of the Journal of CO2 Utilization and also serves as the Honorary Prof. of several Universities, the editorial boards of several scientific journals, and as an advisory member of several leading international conferences including ICCDU. He has published more than 350 scientific articles and 80 patents, with 7 industrialized projects. His current research interest involves carbon dioxide utilization as an oxidant coined as Soft Oxidant, Promoter, and Enhancer.

 	Fig. 1  Industrial carbon dioxide capture and utilization chain scheme (Reproduced from ref. 10 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018).	 

 	Fig. 2  Technology options for liquid-based CO2 capture and strategies to improve the CO2 capture performance. (i) Blended amine solvents; (ii) non-aqueous amine solvents; (iii) biphasic solvents (Reproduced from ref. 20 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018); (iv) catalyst-aided regeneration; (v) ionic liquids (Reproduced from ref. 21 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018); (vi) ionic liquid and amine blend.	 

 	Fig. 3  The typical absorption/desorption process for CO2 capture using liquid-based solvents and solution characteristics favorable for low regeneration energy consumption.	 
Primary/secondary amine: CO2 + 2R1R2NH ↔ R1R2NH2+ + R1R2NCOO−	(1)
Tertiary amine: CO2 + H2O + R1R2R3N ↔ R1R2R3NH+ + HCO3−	(2)

 	Fig. 4  NMR spectra of the CO2-loaded TETA/AMP/water blended absorbent (a) in the absorption step and (b) in the desorption step. (c) The CO2 absorption/desorption pathways in aqueous and non-aqueous solvents (Reproduced from ref. 30 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) 13C NMR spectra and the corresponding CO2 absorption behavior of aqueous and non-aqueous amine absorbents (Reproduced from ref. 34 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018). (b) The absorption/desorption cycles of CO2 in MEA/2ME solutions.36 (c) The comparison of regeneration heat duty in aqueous and non-aqueous MEA solutions (Reproduced from ref. 36 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019). (d) The construction and optimization of functionalized ethylenediamines (Reproduced from ref. 37 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2019).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) A possible two-stage reaction mechanism between the mixed-amine biphasic solvent BDA–DMCA and CO2 (Reproduced from ref. 40 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020). (b) CO2 absorption mechanism for the MEA–sulfolane biphasic solvent (Reproduced from ref. 20 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018). (c) Volume distribution variation of CO2-loaded biphasic solvents with and without sulfolane.47 (d) CO2 loading in both the layers of CO2-loaded biphasic solvents with and without sulfolane (Reproduced from ref. 47 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019).	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Possible desorption pathway using the Ag2O–Ag2CO3 catalyst (Reproduced from ref. 51 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019). (b) The possible desorption pathway using the SZMF catalyst (Reproduced from ref. 54 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019).	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Possible absorption and desorption pathways between [DETAH][AHA] and CO2 (Reproduced from ref. 65 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019). (b) Phase separation diagram for IL–1-propanol–water biphasic solvent.66 (c) Thermodynamic of varied IL–1-propanol–water solutions at 393.15 K (Reproduced from ref. 66 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020). (d) Plot of viscosity of imidazoline IL and amine blends (Reproduced from ref. 67 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019).	 

 	Fig. 9  Promising substitutes for amine-based adsorbents associated with lower energy consumption for regeneration, including zeolites (Reproduced from ref. 81 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018), MOF (Reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018), silica (Reproduced from ref. 78 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019), polymers (Reproduced from ref. 91 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019), graphite/graphene (Reproduced from ref. 89 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2018), and clays (Reproduced from ref. 87 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018).	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Synthesis of oxidation-stable CO2 adsorbent. PEI was functionalized with EB, which generates tethered 2-hydroxybutyl groups,92 (b) SO2-resistant amine-containing CO2 adsorbent with a surface protection layer (Reproduced from ref. 93 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019).	 

 	Fig. 11  Different methods to improve the performance of carbon-based CO2 adsorbents95–100 (Reproduced from ref. 95 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2012; reproduced from ref. 96 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017; reproduced from ref. 98 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017; reproduced from ref. 99 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019; reproduced from ref. 100 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2013).	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Chemical activation method for preparing sustainable porous carbon (Reproduced from ref. 103 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018) and (b) relationship between adsorption heat and pore diameter calculated by first-principles (Reproduced from ref. 104 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019).	 

 	Fig. 13  Electron-density distributions of CO2 on the surface of graphene (a) without S-doping and (b) with S-doping. (c) Adsorption energy per CO2versus the number of CO2 molecules; (d) CO2/N2 selectivity versus the adsorption pressure at 27 °C; optimized structures for (e) 1CO2, (f) 12CO2, (g) 1CO2, and (h) 12CO2 on the surface of graphene with or without S-doping (Reproduced from ref. 96 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017).	 

 	Fig. 14  Two different methods for the amino functionalization of mesoporous carbons (Reproduced from ref. 111 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016).	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Synthetic process, (b) breakthrough curve, and (c) cycle performances of HCM–Cu3(BTC)2-x materials (Reproduced from ref. 95 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2012).	 

 	Fig. 16  Schematic diagram of the fabrication procedure of 3D-printed mechanically robust binder-free zeolite monoliths.121	 

 	Fig. 17  A brief summary of the research activities on zeolite-based CO2 adsorbents12,115–119,122 (Reproduced from ref. 117 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018; reproduced from ref. 118 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018; reproduced from ref. 122 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019; reproduced from ref. 116 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018; reproduced from ref. 119 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018).	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) A chain of alternating Ca–O atoms running along [100]. (b) Arrangement of the TBAPy4− ligands relative to the Ca–O chains. (c) A dihedral angle between the planes of the TBAPy4− ligands bound to two subsequent Ca atoms of 80.06°. (d) Tubular structural voids extending along the [100] direction, marked as gold surfaces, occupying 24.8% of the unit-cell volume (Reproduced from ref. 137 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018).	 

 	Fig. 19  A brief summary of the research activities on MOF-based CO2 adsorbents123,126,128,135,144,146,149 (Reproduced from ref. 149 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018; reproduced from ref. 126 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018; reproduced from ref. 144 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018; reproduced from ref. 123 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018; reproduced from ref. 146 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020; reproduced from ref. 135 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2019).	 
M2CO3(s) + H2O(g) + CO2(g) ⇔ 2MHCO3(s)	(3)

 	Fig. 20  (a) Scheme of the Na2CO3 carbonation reaction with surface carbonation and diffusion-control and (b and c) two kinds of possible pathways for Na2CO3 carbonation (Reproduced from ref. 150 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019).	 

Single-stage VPSA	46 N m3 h−1 (dehydrated)	Zeolite 5A	VPSA	Fixed bed	79	85	2.37 MJe kg−1	Power generation	China	
154

Two-stage VPSA	35 N m3 h−1 (dehydrated)	Zeolite 13X APG & activated carbon beads	VPSA	Fixed bed	90.2	95.6	2.44 MJe kg−1	Power generation	China	
155

DR-VPSA	100 N m3 h−1 (dehydrated)	Activated carbon	VPSA	Fixed bed	44.6	87.5	3.52 MJe kg−1	Power generation	Poland	
156

ASCOA-3	330 N m3 h−1	Zeolite (zeolum F9)	VSA	Fixed bed	80	90	0.44 MJe kg−1	Steel	Japan	
157

TEPCO's two-stage VSA	1000 N m3 h−1 (dehydrated)	Ca–X zeolite	PTSA/VSA	Fixed bed	90	99	2.02 MJe kg−1	Power generation	Japan	
153

KIERDARY	35000 N m3 h−1	K2CO3-based sorbent	TSA	Fluidized bed	80	95	4.0–5.0 MJth kg−1	Power generation	Korea	
158

ADAsorb	0.38 kg s−1	Amine-based ion exchange polymer	TSA	Three-staged fluidized bed	90	89.4	4.75 MJth kg−1	Power generation	USA	
161

RTI's TSA	—	PEI-based sorbent	TSA	Fluidized bed	90	
	2.4 MJth kg−1	Cement	USA	
159

KCC	1000 N m3 h−1	Amine-coated porous material	VTSA	Moving bed	75	95	1.3 MJe kg−1	Power generation	Japan	
162

SRI's ACS	120 m3 h−1	Carbon beads	TSA	Moving bed	67	93	—	Power generation	USA	
164

TDA's SMB	0.63 kg s−1	Alkalized alumina	TSA	Simulated moving bed	—	—	—	Power generation	USA	
163

VeloxoTherm	—	Diamine-tethered silica gel	RTSA	Rotary wheel	—	90	1.5 MJe kg−1	Power generation	Canada	
165


 	Fig. 21  (a) Schematic structure of the LDHs,167 (b) CO2 capture performance of different Mg3X–CO3 (X = Al, Fe, Ga, and Mn) LDHs as a function of the calcination temperature (Reproduced from ref. 170 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2010), (c) the diagram of the structural change in the Mg3Al–stearate LDH and Mg3Al–CO3 LDH after calcination at 400 °C, (d) the CO2 uptake of Mg3Al–stearate LDH and Mg3Al–CO3 LDH.171	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) The schematic structure of the LDH/GO composite synthesized by the direct co-precipitation method,179 (b) the photographs of the electrostatically driven self-assembly process of exfoliated LDH and GO (Reproduced from ref. 180 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2015), (c) the synthetic diagram of the LDH/MgCO3 hybrids.181	 

 	Fig. 23  The schematic representation of the addition of K2CO3 to supported/unsupported LDHs (the red ball represents oxygen, the light gray ball represents magnesium, and the dark gray ball represents potassium) (Reproduced from ref. 176 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2010).	 

 	Fig. 24  Scheme of AMOST and the characterization of K-promoted LDH before and after acetone washing (Reproduced from ref. 186 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019).	 

 	Fig. 25  Schematic illustration of the possible reaction occurring in the molten alkali metal nitrate-coated MgO (Reproduced from ref. 202 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015).	 

 	Fig. 26  Formation of smaller MgCO3 crystals, exposure of stabilized sites, and higher MgO-stablizer-NaNO3 interactions (Reproduced from ref. 198 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018).	 

 	Fig. 27  Sorption-enhanced water gas shift reaction by in situ CO2 capture on an alkali metal salt-promoted MgO–CaCO3 adsorbent (Reproduced from ref. 207 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019).	 

 	Fig. 28  A brief summary of the research activities on MgO-based CO2 adsorbents (Reproduced from ref. 208 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019; reproduced from ref. 193 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018; reproduced from ref. 200 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2017).	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) CO2 sorption/desorption cycling performance of CaO and molten salt-promoted CaO, (b) schematic diagrams of the reaction with CO2 for low melting point oxy-salt eutectic coated CaO particle214,215 (Reproduced from ref. 214 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2017).	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) HR-TEM of ALD-grown Al2O3 coating CaO nanoparticles with EDX mapping; (b) SEM of Al2O3-stabilized CaO sorbents before and after carbonation over 30 cycles (Reproduced from ref. 216 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2017).	 

 	Fig. 31  SEM images of CaO and MgO/CaO prepared by solvent/non-solvent before and after 10 cycles (a) CaO, (b) MgO/CaO, (c) CaO after 10 cycles, and (d) MgO/CaO after 10 cycles, and (e) the schematic illustration of the possible mechanism of stability enhancement (Reproduced from ref. 217 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2018).	 

 	Fig. 32  The current problems and solutions to realize the industrial application of CaO-based CO2 sorbents211,215,217,219 (Reproduced from ref. 217 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2018; reproduced from ref. 211 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018; reproduced from ref. 219 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019).	 
Li4SiO4(s) + CO2(g) ↔ Li2CO3(s) + Li2SiO3(s)	(4)

 	Fig. 33  Double shell model for CO2 sorption over Li4SiO4 (Reproduced from ref. 227 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2016).	 

 	Fig. 34  Different strategies for improving the Li4SiO4 sorption performance226–231 (Reproduced from ref. 227 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2016; reproduced from ref. 226 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017; reproduced from ref. 228 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018; reproduced from ref. 229 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015; reproduced from ref. 230 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2015; reproduced from ref. 231 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018).	 

 	Fig. 35  (a) Li4SiO4 synthesis from SBA-15 zeolite (Reproduced from ref. 226 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017), (b) Li4SiO4 obtained by sol–gel method (Reproduced from ref. 234 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017), and (c) Li4SiO4 modification by adding TiO2 nanotubes and porous carbon (Reproduced from ref. 235 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017; reproduced from ref. 236 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2016).	 

 	Fig. 36  (a) Schematic diagram of the mechanism (replacement of Li+ by foreign ions) (Reproduced from ref. 241 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019), (b) CO2 sorption isotherms of vermiculite–Li4SiO4 and SiO2–Li4SiO4 sorbents under different CO2 concentrations (100 vol%, 50 vol%, 20 vol%) at 550 °C, and (c) the schematic illustration of the synthesis of a Li4SiO4-based CO2 sorbent from a vermiculite precursor (Reproduced from ref. 228 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018).	 

 	Fig. 37  The proposed CO2 sorption and desorption mechanism over K2Ti2O5 caused by reversible structure switching.246	 

 	Fig. 38  (a) The influence of CO2 sorption capacity over KNaTiO3 and K2Ti2O5 under different CO2 concentrations, (b) the cycling performance of KNaTiO3 and other capturing materials (K2Ti2O5 and neat CaO) at different CO2 partial pressures (Reproduced from ref. 248 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020).	 

CCP	0.41 N m3 h−1	K2CO3/MG70	UCI C12-4-02	7-Bed 10-step	90	98	98.5	—	Power generation	UK	
252

CACHET	4.48 N m3 h−1	K2CO3/MG70	UCI C12-4-02	8-Bed 11-step	90	99	98.9	—	Power generation	Netherlands	
253

CAESAR	—	ALKASORB	Fe2O3/Cr2O3	8-Bed 11-step	90	98	—	2.59–2.89 MJth kg−1	Power generation	Netherlands	
254

CATO-2	15.05 kg s−1	K2CO3/MG30	Fe2O3/Cr2O3	9-Bed 11-step	95	99	94.5	—	Power generation	Netherlands	
255

SEWGS	16,975 N m3 h−1	K2CO3/MG70	Fe2O3/Cr2O3	8-Bed 11-step	95	99	99.3	—	Power generation	Norway	
265

STEPWISE	208.6 kg s−1	K2CO3-promoted hydrotalcite	Fe2O3/Cr2O3	
	89.4	97.6	—	2.59–2.89 MJth kg−1	Iron & steel	Netherlands	
257

TDA's PSA	—	AMS-19	—	8-Bed 10-step	90	95	—	0.34 MJth kg−1	Power generation	USA	
259

MIT's PSA	—	MgO/activated carbon	—	8-Bed 11-step	92.5	—	96.9	—	Power generation	USA	
266

ET–PSA	4 N m3 h−1	K2CO3/MG70	—	4-Bed 8-step	84.3	—	90.5	3.36 MJth kg−1	Power generation	China	
267

Two-train ET–PSA	117.8 N m3 h−1	K2CO3/MG30	Fe2O3/Cr2O3	8-Bed 13-step	—	—	97.5	1.11 MJth kg−1 H2	Hydrogen production	China	
263


Liquid-based CO2 capture system	Liquid amine-based solvents	−90 to −40 kJ mol−1	Blended amine solvents	40	100% CO2, till equilibrium	1.01	120 °C, for 60 min	—	
30

Non-aqueous amine-based solvents	25	100% CO2, for 60 min	0.97	50 °C, 100% N2, for 100 min	—	
33

40	15% CO2, 85% N2, till equilibrium	0.72	110 °C	—	
35

Biphasic solvents	40	100% CO2, for 90 min	0.63	120 °C, for 30 min	—	
44

30	100% CO2, for 60 min	0.46	120 °C	—	
47

Ionic liquid-based solvents	−35 to −16 kJ mol−1	Amine- or amino-acid-functionalized ILs	40	100% CO2, 5 bar, for 4 h	1.60	—	—	
62

−54 to −37 kJ mol−1	Aprotic heterocyclic anions-based ILs	100% CO2	2.04	120 °C, for 90 min	—	
65



Low-temperature solid CO2 adsorbents	Solid amine-based adsorbents	−54 kJ mol−1 (ref. 185)	Supporting amines on porous materials	Silica	85	95% CO2, 5% N2, for 3 h	3.28	85 °C, 100% N2, for 90 min	—	
82

60	15% CO2, 3% O2, 10% H2O, and N2 balance, for 30 min	1.98	110 °C, 100% CO2, for 30 min	8.5% loss in 3% O2 containing flue gas	
92

60	15% CO2, 10% H2O, 2% Ar balanced with N2, for 10 min	3.59	100 °C, 100% N2, for 10 min	8.52% loss in 50 ppm SO2 containing flue gas	
93

MOFs	25	15% CO2, 85% He, for 30 min	4.21	90 °C, 100% He, for 10 min	—	
85

40	4.06
Clays	60	15% CO2, 3% O2, 10% H2O, and 2% Ar in N2 balance	4.05	110 °C, 100% CO2, for 30 min	—	
87

75	60% CO2, 40% N2, for 120 min	3.7	110 °C, 100% N2, for 40 min	—	
88

Polymers	25	Moist CO2/N2 gas	2.92	60 °C, 100% N2, for 50 min	—	
91

Carbon-based adsorbents	−68 kJ mol−1 (ref. 110)	Tuning the textural properties	25	100% CO2	4.8	200 °C, 100% He	—	
102

Surface chemical modification	25	10% CO2, 90% Ar, for 60 min	4.13	135 °C, 100% Ar, for 60 min	—	
110

Hybrid composites preparation	30	100% CO2	1.5	120 °C, 100% N2, 20 min	—	
100

Zeolite-based adsorbents	−71.8 kJ mol−1 (ref. 115)	Amines impregnation	30	100% CO2, for 1 h	0.45	100 °C, 100% N2	—	
117

Hybrid preparation materials	25	100% CO2	1.62	—	—	
118

35	10% CO2, 90% N2, for 20 min	1.1	100% N2, for 20 min	—	
119

10% CO2, 90% N2	1.83	—	—	
120

MOF-based adsorbents	−57 kJ mol−1 (ref. 141)	Functional component integration	25	15% CO2	1.63	—	—	
139

Alkali carbonates-based adsorbents	−135 to −141 kJ·mol−1	—	60	10% CO2, 10% H2O, 80% N2	3.1	—	—	
221



Intermediate-temperature solid CO2 adsorbents	LDH-based adsorbents	—	Chemical composition tuning	200	100% CO2, for 2 h	1.25	—	—	
171

LDH-based composite	200	100% CO2, for 2 h	0.47	400 °C, 100% N2, for 30 min	—	
180

Doping with alkali metals	240	100% CO2, for 5 h	9.27	—	—	
182

MgO-based adsorbents	MgO + CO2 → MgCO3 ΔH = −100.7 kJ mol−1	Mesoporous structure fabrication	300	100% CO2, for 4 h	1.22	450 °C, 100% N2, for 30 min	—	
193

200	15% CO2 in N2 balance, for 120 min	1.36	400 °C, 99.995% N2, for 30 min	—	
199

Molten salts modification	300	100% CO2, for 4 h	10.2	350 °C, 100% N2, for 1 h	—	
202

350	85% CO2 in N2 balance, for 50 min	19.8	450 °C, 100% N2, for 20 min	—	
205



High-temperature solid CO2 sorbents	CaO-based sorbents	CaO + CO2 → CaCO3 ΔH = −178 kJ mol−1	Preparation of CaO nanoparticles	700	100% CO2, for 30 min	17.18	Room temperature to 900 °C, 5 vol% H2/N2	—	
211

Molten salts modification	600	100% CO2, for 60 min	10.93	—	—	
215

Alkali silicate-based sorbents	−141.9 kJ mol−1	Molten salts modification	650	100% CO2, for 2 h	8.25	700 °C, 100% N2, for 30 min	—	
226

Alkali titanate-based sorbents	Na2TiO3 + CO2 = Na2CO3 + TiO2 ΔH = −128.917 kJ mol−1	Binary alkali-metal titanate	700	20–100% CO2, for 10 min	0.43	100% N2, for 30 min	—	
248


 	Fig. 39  (a) The possible CO2 catalytic hydrogenation mechanisms. Pathways 1 and 2, in the preceding green and red boxes, indicate reverse-water–gas-shift (RWGS) mechanisms (Reproduced from ref. 282 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2018). (b) Qualitative scheme of the reaction network involving RWGS, carbon monoxide methanation, and carbon dioxide (Sabatier) methanation processes (Reproduced from ref. 291 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016). (c) Schematic illustration of the formate route for CO2 methanation over the Ru/CeO2 catalyst, (1) conversion of CO2 to CO2δ−, (2) hydrogenation of CO2δ− to formate, (3) dissociation of formate to methanol, (4) hydrogenation of methanol to CH4 (Reproduced from ref. 286 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016).	 

 	Fig. 40  The key role of methanation for the supply of renewable substitute natural gas (Reproduced from ref. 293 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2014).	 

 	Fig. 41  C–H–O phase ternary diagram (graphite, 1 bar) (Reproduced from ref. 294 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018).	 

 	Fig. 42  (a) NOSCE mechanism for the sustained catalytic activity of NiMoCat. (b) Synchrotron analysis of NiMoCat sampled at different times under reactive conditions. (c) HAADF-STEM analysis of the spent catalyst (Reproduced from ref. 296 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2020). (d) A summary of thermodynamic properties of eligible metal candidates for participation in the CH4/CO2 redox cycle for DRM (Reproduced from ref. 298 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2020). (e) Proposed DRM mechanism using m-V2CTx MXene as the precursor, highlighting the transformation of V8C7 into V2O3 nanoparticles in-between the layers and on the surface via an in situ redox mechanism (Reproduced from ref. 299 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020).	 

 	Fig. 43  
In situ observation of the structural transition of the NiAu NPs during the reaction. (a) In situ TEM imaging of the alloying and dealloying evolution of an individual NiAu particle during the CO2 hydrogenation reaction. Scale bar, 2 nm. (b and c) Surface atom arrangement of the NiAu NPs reconstructed from the full alloy (60 °C) (b) to the Ni@Au core–shell (400 °C) (c); the four parts from left to right in b show the HRTEM image. Scale bars, 2 nm. (d) Intensity profiles from the integration of the diffraction rings of the SAED patterns during the reaction. (e) In situ EXAFS of the Au L3 edge and the coordination number changes (inset) of the Au–Au, Au–Ni, and Ni–Ni pairs at room temperature (r.t.), 400, and 550 °C (Reproduced from ref. 311 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2020).	 

 	Fig. 44  (a–d) Aberration-corrected HRTEM images of the Cu particles in the conventionally prepared, most-active Cu/ZnO/Al2O3 catalyst, (d) is a close-up of the marked area in (c). (e) Relation of the intrinsic activity of Cu to the concentration of stacking faults (Reproduced from ref. 313 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2012). (f) Relative measured methanol exit concentrations at 130 °C (temperature ramp-down) as a function of the post-reaction values of θZn. Varying values of θZn are obtained by pretreatments with H2 at different pressures and temperatures prior to the activity tests. The dashed line is a second-order polynomial fit (Reproduced from ref. 314 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2016).	 

 	Fig. 45  (a) Reaction scheme for CO2 hydrogenation towards gasoline-range hydrocarbons. The CO2 hydrogenation reaction over the Na–Fe3O4/zeolite multi-functional catalyst takes place in three steps: (1) the initial reduction to CO via RWGS, (2) the subsequent hydrogenation of CO to α-olefins intermediate via FT, and (3) the formation of gasoline-range hydrocarbons via acid-catalyzed oligomerization, isomerization, and aromatization reactions (Reproduced from ref. 327 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2017). (b) Influence of the integration manner of the active components (In2O3/HZSM-5 mass ratio = 2:1) on the catalytic behavior under the same conditions. (c) Schematic of the hydrocarbon-pool mechanism for CH3OH conversion into hydrocarbons inside HZSM-5. (d) Schematic for the formation of CH3OH from CO2 at the oxygen vacancy sites on the In2O3 catalyst surface, which involves four major steps: (1) CO2 adsorption at the oxygen vacancy sites, (2) sequential hydrogenation of the adsorbed CO2 species to CH3OH, (3) CH3OH desorption, which leads to a surface without oxygen vacancies, and (4) hydrogenation of the surface to regenerate the oxygen vacancy sites. (e) Schematic for hydrocarbon formation from CH3OH at the acidic site inside the pores of the HZSM-5 catalyst via the hydrocarbon-pool mechanism (Reproduced from ref. 328 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2017).	 

 	Fig. 46  (a) Schematic illustration of three key charge kinetic steps during the photochemical conversion of CO2 and (b) valence and conduction band potentials of selected common photo-catalysts in relation to CO2 reduction, H2 reduction, and water oxidation potentials.	 

 	Fig. 47  Potential carbene and formaldehyde pathways of photocatalytic CO2 reduction to CH4 on the surface of a photo-catalyst (Reproduced from ref. 348 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020).	 

 	Fig. 48  Strategies to advance photocatalytic CO2 reduction performance by improving the light absorption ability, charge separation efficiency, and surface reactions.	 

 	Fig. 49  (a) The TEM image and (b) the proposed rationale based on the influence of irradiation wavelength range on the product distribution by the Au/Cu alloy deposits on the TiO2 photo-catalyst (Reproduced from ref. 354 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014). (c) Comparison of the photocatalytic production of CH4 using CdS, TiO2, and direct Z-scheme TiO2/CdS system. (d) Schematic illustration of the charge migration mechanism according to type II heterojunction and direct Z-scheme of TiO2/CdS (Reproduced from ref. 362 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2018). (e) Production rate during photocatalytic CO2 conversion for different ratio of g-C3N4/Bi4O5I2 under visible light illumination (Reproduced from ref. 363 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2016). (f) Production rate during photocatalytic CO2 conversion for different ratios of Bi2WO6/RGO/g-C3N4 under visible light irradiation (Reproduced from ref. 364 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018).	 

 	Fig. 50  (a) Possible surface structures of CO2 adsorbed on TiO2 (Reproduced from ref. 373 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014). (b) SEM images of microsized anatase rods with a dominant (010) facet, with the inset illustrating the facet arrangement. (c) Schematic electronic band structure of anatase rods with a dominant (010) facet.374 (d) Brookite TiO2 nanorods prepared in the absence of a polymer. (e) CH3OH production rate of several kinds of brookite TiO2 (Reproduced from ref. 375 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2014).	 

 	Fig. 51  (a–d) HRTEM images of pristine TiO2 and blue TiO2 with different thicknesses of the Ti3+ defect layer. The amorphous shell is illustrated by the dashed line and arrows. (e) Proposed reaction pathways for CO2 photo-reduction in the presence of H2O by the blue TiO2 photo-catalyst (Reproduced from ref. 377 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018).	 

2H+ + 2e− → H2	−0.42
CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → CO + H2O	−0.52
CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → HCOOH	−0.61
CO2 + 4H+ + 4e− → HCHO + H2O	−0.51
CO2 + 6H+ + 6e− → CH3OH + H2O	−0.38
CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4 + 2H2O	−0.24
CO2 + 12H+ + 12e− → C2H4 + 4H2O	−0.34
CO2 + e− → CO2˙−	−1.90

 	Fig. 52  Schematic diagram of various metal electro-catalysts for CO2RR in aqueous solution (Reproduced from ref. 390 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2017).	 

 	Fig. 53  (a) SEM images and schematics for the synthesis of Sn(S) nanostructured electrodes. (b) In situ Sn L3-edge XANES spectra and Sn K-edge of Sn(S) and the relevant controls. (c) Performance tests including polarization curves and potential dependence of the faradaic efficiencies and current densities in CO2-saturated 0.1 M KHCO3 (Reproduced from ref. 398 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2017). (d) Schematic images for the synthesis of SnO2@N-rGO and SnO2@rGO nanocomposites, respectively. (e) HRTEM, TEM, and the corresponding elemental mapping images of SnO2/0.14@N-rGO. (f) Faradaic efficiency of CO, HCOOH, and H2 for SnO2/0.07@N-rGO, SnO2/0.14@N-rGO, SnO2/0.21@N-rGO, and SnO2/0.14@rGO, respectively (Reproduced from ref. 399 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018).	 

 	Fig. 54  (a) HAADF-STEM image. (b) Schematic image of Bi2O3 NTs configuration with fragmented outer walls. (c) Optimized configurations of the *OCHO intermediates adsorbed on different Bi(001) surfaces. (d) Gibbs free energy diagrams for CO2-to-formate conversion. (e) Potential-dependent faradaic efficiencies of different products. (f) Polarization curves of nanotube-derived Bi in 1 M KHCO3 or 1 M KOH in a flow cell, (g) schematic image of the flow cell configuration (Reproduced from ref. 404 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2019).	 

 	Fig. 55  (a) Effect of alkali metal cations (Na+, K+, and Cs+) on the current density and formate FE. (b) Gibbs free energies for CO2-to-HCOOH conversion on In(101) and S–In(101) surfaces. (c) Gibbs free energies for the HER pathway on pure In(101), In/S sites of the S–In(101) surfaces. (d) Schematic image for the role of S2− in facilitating water dissociation and H* formation for CO2 electroreduction to formate (Reproduced from ref. 410 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2019). (e) The differential charge diagram of the In2O3–rGO hybrid electro-catalyst. (f) Gibbs free energy diagram for CO2-to-formate conversion on different catalysts (Reproduced from ref. 411 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019).	 

 	Fig. 56  (a) The relation between the CO partial current density and the pyridinic N content in various N-GRW catalysts at 0.5 (left) and 0.7 V (right) versus RHE. (b) Illustration of the CO2-to-CO conversion processes on the N-GRW catalysts and the free energy diagram for CO2-to-CO conversion on various N-GRW catalysts (Reproduced from ref. 435 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2018). (c) Optimized structures of different examined carbon structures with and without N-doping, where LD stands for line defect. Here, 5, 6, 7, and 8 refer to the pentagon, hexagon, heptagon, and octagon in the defect configuration. (d) Activity volcano for CO2-to-CO conversion. (e) Free energy diagram of CO2-to-CO conversion on different examined active sites displayed in panel (a) at an equilibrium potential of −1.2 V vs. RHE (Reproduced from ref. 437 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017). (f) Schematic illustration showing the synthetic processes of the NS-C layers. (g) Free-energy diagrams of CO2RR at an electrode potential U = 0 V for graphitic-N, pyridinic-N, S-containing graphitic-N, and S-containing pyridinic-N (Reproduced from ref. 438 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019).	 

 	Fig. 57  (a) CO faradaic efficiencies (FE) and CO partial currents (mass activity) vs. the applied potential for the five M–N–C catalysts compared to the state-of-the-art Au catalysts (Reproduced from ref. 439 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2017). (b) The summary of maximum CO FEs and CO TOFs at the corresponding overpotentials for M–N–C. (c) Proposed CO2RR mechanisms on M–N–C (Reproduced from ref. 444 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018). (d) Optimized atomic structures of different Ni–N structures with Ni atoms coordinated with 4N atoms (NiN4), 3N atoms (NiN3 and NiN3V), 2N atoms (NiN2V2), and free energy diagrams for CO2-to-CO with different Ni–N structures.445 (e) CO and H2 faradaic efficiency and (b) CO partial current densities of Fe3+–N–C in an H-cell (red) and on a GDE (blue), and of Fe2+–N–C in an H-cell (black) (Reproduced from ref. 442 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2019).	 

 	Fig. 58  (a) DFT simulations of C–C coupling on the Cu facets (Reproduced from ref. 454 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2018). (b) Schematic of the electro-growth process and the SEM images of ERD-Cu under CO2RR with time resolution. (c) DFT studies of C1 and C2 electro-production as a function of the metal oxidation state (Reproduced from ref. 455 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2018). (d) Schematic illustration of the Cu2S–Cu–V CSVE electro-catalyst design for the production of multi-carbon alcohols from CO2 reduction. (e) Simulated result of the positron density distribution in the pure Cu2S bulk (left graph) and the schematic representation of trapped positrons of copper vacancies in the CSVE catalyst (right graph) (Reproduced from ref. 456 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2018). (f) Schematic of the cathode portion of a gas diffusion electrode for CO2. (g) Schematic illustration and cross-sectional SEM image of the graphite/carbon NPs/Cu/PTFE electrode (Reproduced from ref. 457 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2018).	 

 	Fig. 59  Schematic diagrams for PEC CO2 reduction in water using a semiconductor as (a) a photocathode, (b) a photo-anode, and (c) both photo-anode and photocathode. (d) Schematic diagram for the device combining a photovoltaic cell with an efficient electrochemical catalyst for CO2 reduction (Reproduced from ref. 469 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2018).	 

 	Fig. 60  Schematic representation of the energy level diagram of PEC water oxidation and CO2 reduction reaction with CO2 activation catalyst on the thermodynamic and kinetic aspects (Reproduced from ref. 470 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019).	 

 	Fig. 61  (a) The selection criteria, as well as the number of materials that satisfy the criterion, are shown for each tier (Reproduced from ref. 476 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2019). (b) Schematic diagrams for a typical structure heterojunction and photocathode components (Reproduced from ref. 469 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2018). (c) Layer-by-layer molecular p–n-junction assembly formed by Zr(IV)–phosphonate bridging. (d) n-GaN nanowires on the silicon substrate with the surface-immobilized molecular assemblies (Reproduced from ref. 477 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2019).	 

 	Fig. 62  (a) Schematic illustrations of 040-BVO-driven PEC CO2 reduction (Reproduced from ref. 490 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018). (b) CO2 reduction mechanism over the photocathode and the schematic representation of the two-electrode PEC CO2 reduction (Reproduced from ref. 491 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018). (c) Schematic illustration for the solar-driven CO2 reduction device (Reproduced from ref. 430 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2017).	 

 	Fig. 63  (a) Electronic energy distribution upon LSPR excitation and its relaxation processes (Reproduced from ref. 512 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2015). Initially, the electrons follow a Fermi–Dirac distribution at the thermal temperature of the system. The photoexcitation of the electrons from the filled states to the unfilled states generates a non-thermal electron distribution (0–10 fs). The electron distribution thermalizes to an elevated electron temperature through electron–electron scattering (500 fs). The hot electron distribution cools over time as it couples with the substrate phonons (1 ps). (b) Plasmon-induced hot carrier generation and hot electron transfer/back-transfer processes in clean metal, metal/adsorbate, and metal/semiconductor systems. In each case, the left component (relative to energy y-axis) displays the Fermi level (EF) of the plasmonic metals and the right component (relative to energy y-axis) illustrates the HOMOs and LUMOs for the adsorbates, or the CB and VB positions for the semiconductors. The gray regions represent the population of the electronic states (Reproduced from ref. 506 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018).	 

 	Fig. 64  Driving forces behind photothermal catalytic CO2 reduction, including: (a) thermal activation, (b) Landau damping,525 (c) chemical interface damping (Reproduced from ref. 525 with permission from The American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2018), (d) direct energy transfer,523 (e) resonant energy transfer (Reproduced from ref. 523 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2012), and (f) electron–hole pair generation.	 

 	Fig. 65  Graphic depicting photothermal CO2 catalysis classifications.	 

 	Fig. 66  Optical absorption spectra of metallic nanostructures in the visible light range. Experimental and theoretically (Mie's theory) calculated optical absorption spectra of embedded (a) copper and (b) silver nanoclusters in soda-lime glass (Reproduced from ref. 541 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2003). (c) Extinction spectra of Rh nanocubes in ethanol solution (black) and on a porous Al2O3 support (blue) (Reproduced from ref. 504 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2017). (d) Pd nanocubes with average sizes of 25 and 50 nm (Reproduced from ref. 510 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2005). (e) Normalized extinction spectra of 200 nm diameter nickel disks (left), of elliptical nickel disks with polarization along the short axis (b = 190 nm, center), and of elliptical nickel disks with polarization along the long axis (a = 300 nm, right) (Reproduced from ref. 509 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2011). (f) UV-vis tuning of aluminum plasmons (left). Experimental dark-field spectra of individual nanodisks with D = 70, 80, 100, 120, 130, 150, 180 nm (center). SEM micrographs of the corresponding nanodisk structures. Scale bar is 100 nm (right). Simulations of the nanodisk spectra, assuming a 3 nm surface oxide and an SiO2 substrate (Reproduced from ref. 508 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014).	 

 	Fig. 67  LSPR-assisted CO2 hydrogenation reaction performance over the Rh/Al2O3 (a–c), Al@Cu2O (d–f), and Cu/ZnO/Al2O3 (g and h) catalysts. (a) Rates of CH4 (green) and CO (black) production at 623 K on Rh/Al2O3 (solid lines) and Al2O3 (dotted lines) under dark and ultraviolet illumination at 3 W cm−2. CH4 production is strongly and selectively enhanced by ultraviolet light on the Rh photo-catalyst. (b) Selectivity towards CH4 of the thermo- (black circles) and photocatalytic reactions under ultraviolet (365 nm, red squares) and blue (460 nm, blue triangles) illumination as a function of temperature under H2-rich (CO2:H2 = 1:5.5, solid symbols) and H2-deficient (CO2:H2 = 1:3.1, open symbols) conditions. (c) LDOS for adsorbed CHO on C(pz), O(pz), and Rh(d) orbitals. The Rh(100) surface is perpendicular to the x direction and the C–O bond is along the y direction. Major bands are identified as (1) C–O p bonding band (6.5 eV) with C(pz) (black) and O(pz) (red) interactions; (2) C–O p* anti-bonding band (1–3 eV, mode around 2 eV) with C(pz) and O(pz) interactions (Reproduced from ref. 504 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2017). (d) Numerically calculated local electric field strength |E(r)|2 in the Al core (left axis) and the Cu2O shell (right axis). (e) MeOH selectivity/space time yield (STY) in the range of 200–300 °C under dark and 350–800 nm light irradiation (red dotted box indicates the highest photo-enhancement at 225 °C). The error bars indicate the deviation among three independent experiments; (f) time-on-stream MeOH yield under different light irradiation conditions (350–800 nm, 200–500 nm, and 420–800 nm, which corresponds to the excitation of Cu, ZnO, and Cu + ZnO, respectively). P = 21 bar, T = 225 °C, light intensity = 600 mW cm−2 for all the spectral ranges (Reproduced from ref. 496 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2020). (g) Typical gas chromatogram of the chamber output during light (7 W cm−2) and thermally-driven (350 °C) rWGS on Al@Cu2O. (h) The measured EQE as a function of illumination wavelength for oxide-supported Al@Cu2O compared to Al vs. illumination wavelength (Reproduced from ref. 517 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2017).	 

 	Fig. 68  Non-stoichiometric black In2O3 as a catalyst for the heat-assisted photocatalytic RWGS reaction. In situ high-resolution images of a stoichiometric In2O3 nanocrystal at 400 °C (a) under an N2 atmosphere and then switched to an H2 atmosphere for the following times: (b) 5 min, (c) 10 min, and (d) 20 min. Scale bar in d applies to all the images; green squares indicate the formation of an amorphous phase. Graphical representation of the (e) original and (f) treated In2O3, where the blue region, pink dots, yellow dots, and yellow circles represent the amorphous phase, In atoms, O atoms, and [O], respectively. (g) Catalytic performance for S4 in a flow reactor at different temperatures, both with and without light irradiation; inset is the enlarged view of the catalytic performance for 200, 225, and 250 °C. (h) The In2O3−x/In2O3 heterostructure showing the In(III)′, [O] electron-trapping, and O′ hole-trapping mid-gap energy states near the CB and the VB edges. (i) Stability test for a hydrogenated sample (at 400 °C) in a flow reactor at 300 °C with light irradiation for 70 h (Reproduced from ref. 494 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2020).	 
CnH2n+2 + CO2 → CnH2n + CO + H2O	(5)
CnH2n+2 → CnH2n + H2	(6)
CO2 + H2 → H2O + CO	(7)

 	Fig. 69  (a) The role of CO2 in abstracting hydrogen from functionalized or simple hydrocarbons via CO2 catalytic activation to form the oxygen species and CO (Reproduced from ref. 567 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2016); (b) styrene yield in ethylbenzene dehydrogenation reaction over the Ce–K–Fe2O3 catalyst using CO2 and steam as the oxidants. The thermodynamic equilibrium was referred to from the work of Mimura.568	 
CO2 + MO(x−1) → MOx + CO	(8)
H2 + MOx → MO(x−1) + H2O	(9)
CO2 + H2 → H2O + CO	(7)
C + CO2 → CO	(10)

 	Fig. 70  Pictorial representation of the plausible reaction pathway for the dehydrogenation of ethylbenzene to styrene over the MoO3-based catalyst (Reproduced from ref. 577 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2017).	 

 	Fig. 71  CO2 uses as a soft oxidant for olefinic basic chemicals.	 
	(11)
	(12)
	(13)

 	Fig. 72  The potential energy profile, the configuration of initial (IS), transition (TS) and final (FS) states of (a) the oxo-insertion pathway, (b) CO2 reaction with H via the RWGS pathway on the CeO2(111) surface (Reproduced from ref. 584 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018).	 

 	Fig. 73  The schematic illustration of the ISOCO2 process.587	 

 	Fig. 74  Direct synthesis of acetic acid by the simultaneous co-activation of methane and CO2 over the Cu-exchanged ZSM-5 catalysts (Reproduced from ref. 594 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2017).	 

Thermochemical conversion of CO2	Thermal energy	CH4	800 °C, 1 bar	CO	NiMo/MgO	CO selectivity: 100%	
296

H2	320 °C, 30 bar	Hydrocarbons	Na–Fe3O4/HZSM-5	CO2 conversion: 22%	
327

C5–C11 selectivity: 78%


Photochemical conversion of CO2	Solar or UV light	H2O	Ambient	CO	Bi12O17Cl2 superfine nanotubes	CO yield: 48.6 μmol g−1 h−1, apparent quantum efficiency at 400 nm: 0.14%	
378

CH4	Au–Cu/TiO2	CH4 yield: 2 mmol g−1 h−1, CH4 selectivity: 97%	
354

Hydrogenated blue HTiO2−x	CH4 yield: 16.2 μmol g−1 h−1, CH4 selectivity: 79%	
377



Electrochemical conversion of CO2	Electricity	H2O	Ambient	HCOOH	Sn(S)/Au	Total current density (Jtotal): 55 mA cm−2	
398

HCOOH selectivity: 93%@−0.75 V vs. RHE
Nanotube-derived Bi	
J
total: 288 mA cm−2 (flow cell), HCOOH selectivity: ∼100%@−0.61 V vs. RHE	
404

S-Doped In	
J
total: 84 mA cm−2, HCOOH selectivity: 93%@−0.98 V vs. RHE	
410

CO	Porous Zn	
J
total: 200 mA cm−2, CO selectivity: 84%@−0.64 V vs. RHE (flow cell)	
432

N,S-Co-doped carbon	
J
total: 2.63 mA cm−2, CO selectivity: 92%@−0.6 V vs. RHE	
438

Ni–N–C	
J
total: 71.5 mA cm−2, CO selectivity: 98%@−1.03 V vs. RHE	
445

Fe3+–N–C	
J
total: 94 mA cm−2, CO selectivity: >90%@−0.45 V vs. RHE	
442

C2+ products	ERD-Cu	C2H4 partial current density (JC2H4): 161 mA cm−2, C2H4 selectivity: 36%@−1.0 V vs. RHE (flow cell)	
455

Cu2S–Cu–V	
J
C2+ alcohol: 126 mA cm−2, C2+ alcohol selectivity: 32% (flow cell)	
456

Graphite/carbon NPs/Cu/PTFE	
J
C2H4: 473 mA cm−2, C2H4 selectivity: 70%@−0.55 V vs. RHE (flow cell)	
457



Photoelectrochemical conversion of CO2	Solar energy and electricity	H2O	Ambient	HCOOH	Si|n-GaN|–NPhN4–Ru(CP)22+–RuCt	Photocurrent density: 1.1 mA cm−2, HCOOH selectivity: 64%	
477

CO	SnO2-Modified CuO	Solar-to-CO efficiency: 13.4%, CO selectivity: >80%	
430

CH3OH	BiFeO3	CH3OH yield: 1280 mmol g−1 h−1, CH3OH selectivity: 31.9%	
485



Photothermal conversion of CO2	Solar energy and heat	H2	400 °C, 7.6 bar (flow reactor)	CO	Au/TiO2	CO2 rate: 159 mmol g−1 h−1	
533

200 °C, 1 bar (flow reactor)	CH4	Ru/silica	CO2 conversion: 50%, CO yield: 27 mmol g−1 h−1	
489

350 °C from photothermal heating (batch reactor)	
	Ru/Al2O3	CO2 conversion: 95.75%, CH4 selectivity: 99.22%	
527

225 °C, 21 bar (flow reactor)	CH3OH	Cu/ZnO/Al2O3	CH3OH yield: 7.8 mmol g−1 h−1, CH3OH selectivity: 80%	
496

CH4	650 °C from photothermal heating (flow reactor)	CO + H2	Modified Ni/SiO2	CO yield: 1200 mmol g−1 h−1, solar-to-fuel efficiency: 12.5%	
551


The Tomakomai CCS Demonstration	Hokkaido, Japan	100000	Hydrogen generator, refineries, Hokkaido	Specialized rock formations located 3–4 km offshore	Storage	Finished construction in 2015	
607

A collaborative research project commissioned by NEDO	Tomakomai City, Hokkaido, Japan	107300	Tomakomai refinery	Methanol synthesis facilities	Methanol production from captured CO2 with H2 obtained either as a by-product from refineries or from water electrolysis	Expected to run from February 2021
Alberta Carbon Trunk Line	Alberta, Canada	1800000	Agrium's Redwater fertilizer plant and the North West Redwater Partnership's Sturgeon refinery	Reservoirs across Central and Southern Alberta	Pipe transportation, new product generation such as soap, and geological storage	Construction began in 2018, with operations in 2020	
611

Illinois Storage Corridor	Illinois, USA	6500000	One Earth Energy facility	A storage site near the One Earth Energy ethanol facility and a storage site at the Prairie State Generating Company	Storage	CO2 capture assessment to be performed	
609

Mitsubishi Heavy Industry's KM Advanced Carbon Dioxide Recovery Process at the Prairie State Generating Company	A front-end engineering and design to be studied
San Juan Basin CarbonSAFE Phase III	New Mexico, USA	6000000–7000000	San Juan Generating Station, a 847 megawatt coal-fired electricity generation plant	Permian Basin	Enhanced oil recovery usage	Preparation to attain a Class VI permit for construction
Project ECO2S	Kemper County, Mississippi, USA	22500000	Plant Ratcliffe	CO2 Storage Complex in Kemper County, Mississippi	Storage	Seeking UIC Class VI permit for construction
Plant Daniel and Plant Miller	CO2 capture assessments to be performed
North Dakota CarbonSAFE Phase III	North Dakota, USA	3000000	Minnkota Power Plant	A commercial-scale storage complex near Minnkota's Milton R. Young Station	Injection wells for storage	Seeking UIC Class VI permit for construction
Wyoming CarbonSAFE	Wyoming, USA	2200000	Basin Electric's Dry Fork Station	A storage complex in Campbell County, Wyoming	Storage	Seeking UIC Class VI permit for construction

(1) Technology development and demonstration of CCU	CO2 geological utilization	Oil extraction, coal-bed gas exploitation, natural gas industry, etc.
CO2 chemical utilization	Production of a series of chemicals such as organic carbonates, methanol, degradable polymers, etc.
(2) Breakthroughs in key capture technologies	Post-combustion CO2 capture	Integration of advanced absorbents, highly-efficient reactor, and novel energy-efficiency technologies.
Pre-combustion CO2 capture	Chemical engineering kinetics co-generation of coal gasification and flue gas decarbonization, development of advanced adsorbents, and technologies.
(3) System integration of the whole-process and large-scale demonstration	Large-scale CCUS system	Integration and optimization of CO2 capture and emission source, pre-/post-combustion capture facilities of capturing level of million tonnes CO2 per year.
CO2 enhanced oil recovery and storage, storage capacity and utilization potential, characterization and site selection, etc.
(4) International cooperation and technology transfer	Integration with the world market	Methodology study of CCUS to enter the International Carbon Emissions Trading Market.
1DMA2P	Dimethylamino-2-propanol
2D	Two-dimensional
3D	Three-dimensional
AA-IL	Amino-acid-functionalized ILs
AC	Aberration-corrected
ACF	Activated carbon fiber
AEEA	2-(2-Aminoethylamino)ethanol
AHA-ILs	Aprotic heterocyclic anions-based ILs
ALD	Atomic layer deposition
AM	Associative mechanism
AMP	2-Amino-2-methyl-1-propanol
AMOST	Aqueous miscible organic solvent treatment
AP	3-Aminopropyl
APS	Aminopropylsilane
AQE	Apparent quantum efficiency
ASF	Anderson–Schulz–Flory
BDDE	1,3-Butadienediepoxide
BFG	Blast furnace gas
BFS	Blast furnace slag
CaL	Calcium looping
CB	Conduction band
CCP	CO2 capture project
CCR	CO2 capture ratio
CCS	Carbon dioxide capture and storage
CCU	Carbon dioxide capture and utilization
CCUS	Carbon dioxide capture, utilization, and storage
CID	Chemical interface damping
CLD	Chemical liquid deposition
CNTs	Carbon nanotubes
CO2-ECBM	CO2 enhanced coal bed methane
CO2-EOR	CO2 enhanced oil recovery
CO2RR	CO2 reduction reaction
COG	Coke oven gas
COS	Carbonyl sulfide
CP	CO2 purity
CSVE	Core–shell vacancy engineering
DA	
N-Propyl ethylenediamine
DA2MP	1,5-Diamino-2-methylpentane
DAC	Direct air capture
DC	Direct-current
DEA	Diethanolamine
DET	Direct energy transfer
DETA	Diethylenetriamine
DFB	Double fluidized bed
DFT	Density functional theory
DICP	Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics
DMAPS	Dimethylaminopropylsilane
DMX	Demixing
DOE	Department of Energy
DRM	Dry reforming of methane

E
a
	Activation energy
EAE	Ethylethanolamine
EB	1,2-Epoxybutane
ECN	Energy Research Centre of the Netherlands
ECSA	Electrochemically active surface area
ED	Electrodialysis
EDA	Ethylenediamine
EG	Ethylene glycol
EOR	Enhanced oil recovery
EPR	Electron paramagnetic resonance
EQE	External quantum efficiencies
ERD	Electro-redeposition
ESRL	Earth System Research Laboratory
ET	Elevated temperature
FE	Faradaic efficiency
FLPs	Frustrated Lewis pairs
FSP	Flame spray pyrolysis
GDE	Gas diffusion electrode
GDL	Gas diffusion layer
GSP	Graphite split pore
HCM	Hierarchical porous carbon monolith
HER	Hydrogen evolution reaction
HG	Hydroxylated graphene
HOMOs	Highest occupied molecular orbitals
HRTEM	High-resolution transmission electron microscopy
HRETEM	High-resolution environmental transmission electron microscopy
HSS	Heat stable salts
IAST	Ideal adsorption solution theory
IEP	Isoelectric point
IGCC	Integrated gasification combined cycle
ILs	Ionic liquids
IPCC	Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
ISOCO2	Inha Soft Oxide Hydrogenation Process with CO2
KCC	Kawasaki CO2 capture
LDHs	Layered double hydroxides
LDOs	LDHs derived mixed oxides
LSPR	Localized surface plasmon resonance
LUMOs	Lowest unoccupied molecular orbitals
MDEA	Methyldiethanolamine
MCMs	Mesoporous carbon microparticles
MCNs	Mesoporous carbon nanospheres
MEA	Monoethanolamine
MLD	Molecular layer deposition
MOF	Metal organic framework
NEDO	New Energy and Industrial Technology Development Organization
NGCC	Natural gas combined cycle
NGQDs	N-Doped graphene quantum dots
N-GRW	N-Doped graphene nanoribbon networks
NMP	
N-Methyl pyrrolidone
NMR	Nuclear magnetic resonance
NOAA	National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
NRBS	Non-rutherford backscattering spectroscopy
OD	Oxide derived
OER	Oxygen evolution reaction
PCC	Post-combustion CO2 capture
PEC	Photoelectrochemical
PEI	Polyethylenimine
PSA	Pressure swing adsorption
PTD	Photothermally-driven
PTH	Photochemical heating
RET	Resonant energy transfer
rGO	Reduced graphene oxide
PZ	Piperazine
RRM	Regenerative redox mechanism
RWGS	Reverse-water–gas-shift
SAED	Selected area electron diffraction
SCM	Shrinking core model
SD	Sulfide-derived
SEHP	Sorption-enhanced hydrogen production
SEMR	Sorption enhanced methane reforming
SER	Sorption enhanced reforming
SESR	Sorption enhanced steam reforming
SEWGS	Sorption enhanced water gas shift
SNG	Synthetic natural gas
SR	Steam reforming
SSA	Specific surface area
SSITKA	Steady-state isotope transient kinetic analysis
SZMF	SO42−/ZrO2/MCM-41 promoted by Fe
TA	
N-Propyldiethylenetriamine
TSA	Temperature swing adsorption
TEM	Transmission electron microscope
TEPA	Tetraethylenepentamine
TRL	Technology readiness level
UKRI	UK Research and Innovation
VB	Valence band
VPSA	Vacuum pressure swing adsorption
VSA	Vacuum swing adsorption
WGC	Warm gas clean-up
WGS	Water–gas shift
XANES	X-ray absorption near edge structure
XPS	X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
