Graphene-based materials for capacitive deionization  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TA02653F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TA02653F
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 13907-13943Graphene-based materials for capacitive deionization

        
          
            Peiying 
            Liu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Tingting 
            Yan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Liyi 
            Shi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ho Seok 
            Park
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Xuecheng 
            Chen
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Zhigang 
            Zhao
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Dengsong 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *a
aResearch Center of Nano Science and Technology, Shanghai University, Shanghai 200444, China. E-mail: dszhang@shu.edu.cn;  Fax: +86 21 66136079
bSchool of Chemical Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University (SKKU), Suwon 440-746, Republic of Korea
cInstitute of Chemical and Environment Engineering, West Pomeranian University of Technology, ul. Pulaskiego 10, Szczecin, 70-322, Poland
dKey Lab of Nanodevices and Applications, Suzhou Institute of Nano-Tech and Nano-Bionics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Suzhou 215123, P. R. China
Received 
      27th March 2017
    , Accepted 6th June 2017First published on 6th June 2017AbstractCapacitive deionization is an emerging technology for energy-efficient water desalination and has attracted more and more attention in recent years. The capacitive deionization technology is based on ion electrosorption at the surface of a pair of electrically charged electrodes, which are commonly composed of carbon materials. Among numerous electrode materials, graphene-based materials are outstanding, playing a vital role during the deionization process due to their intriguing features. After a brief introduction of the theory and instruments of capacitive deionization, we systematically summarize the current progress in graphene nanosheets, porous graphene, graphene-based composites, surface tuned graphene and its composites as electrodes for capacitive deionization. We also present our perspectives on the development of graphene-based electrodes for capacitive deionization.Peiying LiuPeiying Liu was born in Shandong, China, in 1991. She obtained her bachelor's degree from Linyi University, China. She is currently studying for a master's degree at Shanghai University under the supervision of Dr Dengsong Zhang. She obtained the National Scholarship and was awarded “Outstanding Students” of Shanghai University in 2016. Her research interests are the synthesis of nanomaterials and their applications in capacitive deionization.Dengsong ZhangProf. Dengsong Zhang received his Ph.D. degree from Shanghai University in 2007. He then joined the Research Center of Nano Science and Technology at Shanghai University. He also worked as a Research Fellow at the SHU-ESSILOR (France) Joint R&D Center. Currently, he is a Professor of materials chemistry at Shanghai University. He was elected as a member of the New Chemical Materials Committee of the Chemical Industry and Engineering Society of China, a member of the Energy and Environment Committee of China Energy Society, and a member of the Catalysis Committee of the Chinese Society of Rare Earths. His scientific interest is focused on surface and interfacial materials as well as energy and environmental science. He has published more than 120 publications.
1. Introduction
Water scarcity has become one of the most serious global challenges due to the increasing population, the industrial development, and the contamination of freshwater resources.1,2 To tackle this threatening issue, novel technologies for purifying water from sea or brackish water are urgently required.3,4 The desalination of seawater or brackish water is an effective method to solve this critical issue.5,6 Over the years, a multitude of desalination methods have been developed among which distillation,7 reverse osmosis,8,9 and electrodialysis10 are the most commonly known and widespread technologies. However, the limitations of these traditional methods, such as high cost, excessive energy consumption, poor efficiency and being less environment-friendly, are quite evident.11,12 Therefore, the search for an economical, efficient and environment-friendly method for desalination is urgently needed.
Capacitive deionization (CDI), which is environmentally friendly, energy efficient and cost effective for water purification in comparison with other conventional approaches, has drawn much attention from researchers worldwide in recent years.13 Typically, the CDI performance of the concerned carbon materials was evaluated in a recycle system, as shown in Fig. 1. CDI is an electrochemically controlled method based on electric double-layer capacitors (EDLCs).14 Charged ions can be adsorbed onto the surface or into the pores of porous electrodes to form EDLCs when an external voltage is applied and released from the electrodes when the charge is removed or reversed.15,16 According to the CDI process, the electrode material is crucial to the performance of CDI.17 The ideal electrode for CDI should possess a high specific surface area with a porous structure offering high ion mobility, high conductivity, and good wettability, and be made of a low-cost, scalable, and easily processable material.18 Carbon materials meet most of these criteria and the development of CDI electrodes has been mostly focused on carbon materials like carbon aerogels,19–23 activated carbon,24,25 ordered mesoporous carbon,26–32 carbon nanotubes,33–37 activated carbon fiber38–41 and their composites.42–47 However, the development has been limited by these porous carbon materials with too many micropores or low electrical conductivity. Therefore, it is urgently desired to find a new material with superior physical and chemical properties for CDI.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the CDI set-up. 
The latest material to capture the attention of researchers is graphene, a two-dimensional layer of carbon atoms arranged in a hexagonal crystalline structure,48–54 which has prospects in a wide range of important domains, such as energy,55–58 electronics,59–61 photonics and sensing.62–64 The interest in graphene originates from its unique physicochemical properties, notably the exceptionally high surface area, electron and thermal mobility, and mechanical strength.65–67 These exceptional properties have triggered extensive efforts to apply graphene into all fields of technology, from electronic systems to biomedical devices.68–77 Also, graphene is one of the most promising CDI electrode materials with a good salt removal ability due to its high theoretical specific surface area, good electrical conductivity and controllable morphological structure.78–82 Over the past few years, considerable efforts (∼75 papers) have been dedicated to the design of graphene-based materials for CDI.83,84 There are several reviews on various carbon-based electrodes including graphene-based electrodes previously, but none of the systematically summarized current progress in graphene-based electrodes for CDI has been published.17,83,85–92 Therefore, graphene-based materials for CDI are the focus of this review. This review will lay a solid scientific foundation for the design and application of graphene-based electrodes.
In this work, we will review the recent research activities in graphene-based materials for CDI and lay emphasis on the preparation methods of graphene-based materials and their desalination performance. We also discuss the impacts of the specific surface area, porous structure, hydrophilicity, and electrical conductivity of graphene on its desalination performance. These recent advances in materials preparation and configuration design will bring new insights into the future of graphene-based electrodes. Finally, we will highlight the main challenges to overcome in order to realize the full potential of graphene-based materials in CDI application.
2. The theory and instruments of CDI
The CDI technique is based on the theory of EDLs. The initial CDI models for EDL structure models are the Helmholtz EDL model93 and Gouy–Chapman–Stern (GCS) EDL model.94 An advanced equilibrium EDL structure model named the modified Donnan (mD) model can account for the confined nature of the micropores in CDI electrodes.95 In the mD model, the micropores are considered to have a strongly overlapped double layer and so the classical Donnan assumption of a uniform pore electrostatic potential can be utilized. Recently, Porada et al. put forward 2D porous electrode theory to describe the electrosorption and electrical current (Fig. 2).96 This theory considered both the flow direction of the aqueous solution through the spacer channel, and the movement of salt in and out of the electrodes. The theory of CDI is relatively mature. However, with the fast development of CDI, the current CDI models are expected to be further modified to adapt to practical applications.
 Fig. 2  Schematic view of the time-dependent two-dimensional porous electrode model, combining a sequence of sub-cells in the flow direction, with ion fluxes into the electrode. A symmetric CDI geometry is assumed; thus only half of a cell is depicted. The electrode contains an electrolyte-filled volume allowing for ion transport and carbon material in which ions and charge are stored. Electrical current (denoted by “+”) flows through the conductive carbon material. Copyright 2013, the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In the progress of CDI techniques, CDI instruments play an important role in the desalination performance. Recently, a variety of novel instruments with unique features and novel functionalities for CDI have been designed. There are mainly two kinds of CDI instruments, one is symmetric CDI and the other is asymmetric CDI. The first and widely utilized CDI instrument is flow-through CDI (Fig. 3A).97 In 1960, Blair et al. pioneered the work of flow-through CDI.98 Afterwards, Oren and Soffer studied the electrochemical parametric pumping by utilizing flow-through CDI in the 1970's and 1980's.99,100 This instrument was subsequently utilized in a wide variety of studies.101–103 In 1970, Johnson et al. developed an osmosis CDI instrument, in which the feed osmoses the electrodes directly (Fig. 3B).104 Avraham et al. utilized the osmosis CDI instrument to study the fundamental performance parameters.105 They noted that the osmosis CDI allowed for faster cell charging than flow-through CDI.106 In 2012, a desalination battery was proposed, which utilizes two battery electrodes for desalination (Fig. 3C). This instrument is promising for high salinity water desalination and allows high salt sorption. However, the desalination battery is unstable due to faradaic reactions. In 2014, a new CDI instrument came out which leveraged carbon flow electrodes or carbon slurry electrodes (Fig. 3D).107 This flow-electrode CDI can potentially enable compact and low resistance systems. In addition, Porada et al. introduced another form of “electrodes in motion” by using moving wires to perform desalination.108 Hatzell et al. developed a new type of suspension-electrode CDI for desalting brackish and seawater by using carbon suspensions (Fig. 3E).109
 Fig. 3  (A)–(E) Symmetric CDI, including (A) flow-through CDI, (B) osmosis CDI, (C) desalination battery, (D) flow-electrode CDI and (E) suspension-electrode CDI. (F)–(K) Asymmetric CDI, including (F) flow-through MCDI, (G) ion-selective flow-through CDI, (H) hybrid CDI, (I) inverted CDI, (J) flow-electrode CDI and (K) asymmetric flow-electrode CDI. 
Recently, asymmetric CDI has attracted great interest. In 2006, Lee et al. proposed membrane CDI (MCDI) (Fig. 3F).93 In the flow-through MCDI, a free-standing cation exchange membrane is placed before the cathode, and a free-standing anion exchange membrane is placed before the anode. After adding the membranes, the charge efficiency can be effectively improved because the membranes block co-ions from carrying parasitic current.110 Alternatively, it is possible to directly graft ion-selective groups onto porous carbon (Fig. 3G), which can reduce the internal resistance and production cost.111,112 In the ion-selective flow-through CDI, the functional groups can minimize the co-ion expulsion effect and increase the charge efficiency. Recently, Gao et al. developed an inverted CDI by using an anode with net negative surface charges and a cathode with net positive surface charges (Fig. 3H).113 Salt separation in this system is achieved in an opposing manner to the conventional CDI system, when the system is charged using a power source, and cations and anions are desorbed at the anode and cathode, respectively. Inspired by the previously developed desalination battery, Lee et al. reported a novel desalination technique referred to as “hybrid CDI” (Fig. 3I).114 The hybrid CDI exhibited more than double the ion removal sorption capacity than a typical CDI system. Jeon et al. designed and experimentally tested a novel membrane CDI process for seawater desalination (Fig. 3J).115 It is demonstrated that a flowing carbon suspension can be applied to the desalination of high salinity streams. However, in practical cases, the operation voltage of flow-electrode CDI is usually limited by the decomposition potential of water, which is not beneficial for the desalinization performance. Thus, Xu et al. proposed a novel asymmetric flow-electrode CDI device by using an activated carbon (AC)/MnO2 suspension as the positive electrode and an AC suspension as the negative electrode (Fig. 3K).116 In the asymmetric flow-electrode CDI, the operation voltage can be improved to be 1.8 V, and its salt removal efficiency is much higher than that of conventional flow-electrode CDI.
As discussed above, the asymmetric CDI is promising for practical applications. Because the asymmetric CDI can minimize co-ion effects, it can achieve high adsorption capacity and high charge efficiency. The asymmetric flow-electrode CDI is still in its infancy, and there is potential for vast improvements in desalination performance. Therefore, the asymmetric CDI is an important future research direction.
3. Types of graphene-based materials for CDI
3.1 Graphene for CDI
Graphene is a promising material for the development of high performance CDI electrodes due to its extraordinary conductivity, tunable surface properties and morphology, and outstanding physical and chemical properties.117–119 Graphene is composed of pure carbon in a single layer two-dimensional (2D) structure that provides a very large specific surface area,120,121 which is beneficial to ion storage on the surface. In theory, parallel plates could provide extensive channels through which salt ions can easily access the surface of each graphene sheet with low diffusion resistance.122,123 The high electrical conductivity of graphene sheets could eliminate the need for conductive additives, enabling graphene-based electrodes with increased specific capacitance.124–126 Furthermore, the 2D layer structure endows graphene electrodes with good mechanical flexibility, which makes graphene sheets easy to assemble into graphite paper with robust mechanical stability.127,128 Therefore, these intriguing features make graphene an attractive electrode material for CDI application.

3.1.1 Graphene nanosheets for CDI. 
With the increasing of chemical approaches for the large-scale production of highly conductive graphene sheets, the application of graphene is becoming more widespread.129–137 Stoller et al. successfully applied graphene as an electrode material in ultracapacitors with a high specific capacitance of 135 and 99 F g−1 in aqueous and organic electrolytes, respectively.138 Such a good capacitive performance of graphene also enables it to be a promising electrode material in CDI. In 2009, Li and co-workers pioneered the application of graphene as an electrosorptive electrode of CDI.139 Graphene was fabricated by a modified Hummers' method and a hydrazine reduction process. The initial attempt to use graphene for CDI resulted in relatively low Na+ electrosorption capacity (1.85 mg g−1), due to the tendency of graphene to aggregate, which resulted from its relatively low surface area (14.2 m2 g−1). They demonstrated that the electrosorption of NaCl onto graphene electrodes is driven by a physisorption process by taking into account thermodynamic parameters.
When graphene nanoflakes synthesized by a modified Hummers' method were employed for the electrosorption of ferric chloride,140 it was found that the optimum flow rate and electrical voltage were at 25 mL min−1 and 2.0 V, and the electrosorption capacities of cations followed the order of Fe3+ > Ca2+ > Mg2+ > Na+. It means that when hydrated cations are electrically adsorbed on a negatively charged carbon electrode highly charged multivalent ions with a smaller hydrated radius would be strongly attracted. The results confirmed that graphene would be a good candidate as an electrode material because of its high surface area (2600 m2 g−1) and high conductivity (7200 S m−1) (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  Summary of graphene-based materials for CDI. (A) Graphene nanosheets, (B) porous graphene, (C) graphene–porous carbon composites, (D) graphene–carbon nanotube composites, (E) graphene-activated carbon nanofiber composites, (F) graphene–metal oxide composites, (G) graphene–polymer composites, (H) multi-component graphene-based composites, (I) nitrogen-doped graphene, (J) nitrogen-doped graphene based composites, (K) functionalized graphene, and (L) functionalized graphene based composites. 
Analogously, Li et al. synthesized graphene-like nanoflakes by a modified Hummers' method using hydrazine for reduction.102 It was found that the ratio of nitric acid and sulfuric acid plays a vital role in determining the specific surface area of graphene-like nanoflakes (Fig. 5A). The specific surface area of graphene-like nanoflakes is 222.01 m2 g−1. Fig. 5B illustrates the principle of CDI and the mechanism of how ions are electrosorbed onto activated carbon and graphene-like nanoflakes, respectively. The graphene-like nanoflakes have an interlayer structure that is more accessible for ions, while activated carbon has a large fraction of inaccessible small micropores (Fig. 5C–E). The salt adsorption capacity of the graphene-like nanoflakes was 1.35 mg g−1 for Na+ in a NaCl solution with an initial conductivity of 55 μS cm−1 at 1.2 V, which was higher than that of activated carbon under the same experimental conditions. Actually, the micropores in activated carbon can increase the surface area and offer more adsorption sites. But some dead pores and the lack of an interconnected network have unfavorable influence on the salt adsorption capacity and rate. In addition, the CDI performance is related not only to the surface area but also to the pore structure, conductivity and wettability of the electrode materials. Although the surface area of activated carbon is much higher than that of graphene, many micropores in activated carbon are disordered, which increases the transport resistance of salt ions through the porous network. As a result, the surface area of activated carbon has not been utilized fully, leading to smaller specific capacitance than that of graphene. In addition, the conductivity of activated carbon is lower than that of graphene, which also increases the diffusion resistance of salt ions. In comparison to activated carbon, graphene shows promising potential for applications in brackish water desalination and drinking water purification.
 Fig. 5  (A) Comparison of electrosorptive performance by employing graphene-like nanoflakes and activated carbon under the same experimental condition; the pictures at the top-left and top-right depict the pore size distribution of activated carbon and graphene-like nanoflakes below 10 nm, respectively. (B) Mechanism of CDI employing activated carbon and graphene-like nanoflake electrodes. TEM images of activated carbon (C) and graphene-like nanoflakes at low (D) and high (E) magnification, respectively. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. 
Unfortunately, the most commonly used reducing agents to produce graphene, such as hydrate hydrazine,141 hydroquinone,142 NaBH4 (ref. 143) and alkali,144 are almost always highly toxic and even explosive. Therefore, many attempts have been made to develop green reductants including urea,145 metal powders,146,147 sugar,148 vitamin C,149,150 and alcohol.151 Although great achievements have been made, the reduction efficiency and exfoliation degree may be compromised, and also the reduction process is complicated.152,153 Hence, a more feasible and environmentally friendly chemical reduction approach is urgently desired to produce graphene with a high deoxidization and exfoliation degree. In order to prepare high-quality graphene with a low presence of oxygen-containing groups, our group reported a pyridine-thermal strategy for successive exfoliation and reduction of graphite oxide by using pyridine as the intercalating agent and dispersant (Fig. 6).154 As an intercalating agent, the pyridine molecules can intercalate into graphite oxide basal planes through π–π accumulation between the phenyl ring of pyridine and the aromatic system of graphite oxide, which is favorable for inhibiting the re-stacking of graphene during the reaction process. In addition, as a dispersant, pyridine can improve the dispersity of graphene. The obtained graphene shows a loosely layered structure and the gap between the sheets is obvious due to the effective exfoliation. The CDI performance of the as-prepared graphene was also investigated. After 120 min, the conductivity of the NaCl aqueous solution reduced from 86.9 to 10.2 μS cm−1, and the salt adsorption capacity is calculated to be 0.88 mg g−1. The cross-linking and porous structure is formed through loose stacking between the graphene sheets, which provides a pathway for the salt ions to be transported easily during the CDI process.
 Fig. 6  Procedure for the preparation of graphene by the pyridine-thermal strategy. Copyright 2012, the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Interestingly, there is another highly facile and rapid method for the preparation of scalable large-area graphene using an energy efficient technique for the reduction of chemically synthesized graphite oxide paper by a focused solar irradiation method.155 The as-prepared graphene has a high specific surface area (273.2 m2 g−1). And a high value of electrosorption capacity of 9.6 mg g−1 was obtained in 584.4 mg L−1 NaCl solution in 60 minutes. This indicates the huge potential applicability of graphene as an electrode material for CDI.
From the above, the salt adsorption capacity of graphene nanosheets is not satisfactory due to the lack of pores in the graphene nanosheets. Still, graphene nanosheets, despite having a lower surface area than activated carbon electrodes, demonstrated a higher electrosorption capacity due to the interlayer structure of graphene that is more accessible to ions than the small micropores of activated carbon. These results highlighted the potential of graphene for CDI applications, with the condition that the surface area of the graphene-based electrode can be increased. In addition, a multitude of novel methods to prepare high-quality graphene accelerates graphene-based electrodes in the CDI application.


3.1.2 Porous graphene for CDI. 
As mentioned above, graphene shows great potential in the CDI application, but the salt adsorption capacity of graphene nanosheets is still far from expectation. This can be attributed to the irreversible aggregation and restacking of graphene owing to the strong π–π interactions and van der Waals forces between the planar basal planes of graphene sheets,156,157 which results in a decrease in the desalination performance. Therefore, a number of strategies have been developed to prevent aggregation of graphene sheets in order to increase the effective specific surface area and promote the transport of ions.158–160
Generally, the desalination performance is significantly affected by ion accumulation and transport, which usually depend on the microstructure and specific surface area of the electrode materials. These can be improved by fabricating interconnected electrode materials with a high specific surface area and porous structure.161–164 To address these issues, graphene-based macrostructures with 3D porous networks,165–169 such as aerogels,170–172 hydrogels,173–176 foams,177–181 frameworks,125,182 and sponges,183–185 have recently attracted considerable interest. These 3D graphene materials, consisting of micro-, meso- and even macroporous networks, can provide a high surface area and fast ion/electron transport. Several groups have confirmed that the formation of 3D macroscopic structures of graphene can prevent inter-sheet restacking.186–190 In addition, it was reported that the 3D macroscopic interpenetrating architectures of electrode materials were beneficial for the transport of ions and electrons in the electrode, thereby obtaining a higher salt adsorption capacity.191–194
In order to prevent the aggregation and restacking of graphene sheets, our group designed 3D macroporous graphene architectures by a simple template-directed method using polystyrene microspheres as sacrificial templates (Fig. 7A).195 The TEM image in Fig. 7B confirmed that the macroporous network of 3D macroporous graphene with intact continuous walls does not collapse, and the specific surface area of 3D macroporous graphene is 339 m2 g−1. 3D macroporous graphene was first used as a CDI electrode with good electrosorption capacity. When the voltage increased from 1.2 V to 2.0 V, the electrosorptive capacity of the 3D macroporous graphene electrodes increased from 1.97 mg g−1 to 5.39 mg g−1. However, the increment of the electrosorptive capacity of graphene electrodes is not notable, only from 1.27 mg g−1 to 2.68 mg g−1 in a NaCl aqueous solution with an initial conductivity of 105 μS cm−1 with the applied voltage of 1.6 V (Fig. 7C). When the voltage increased from 1.2 V to 2.0 V, the electrosorptive capacity of the 3D macroporous graphene electrodes increased from 1.97 mg g−1 to 5.39 mg g−1 (Fig. 7D). Considering the porous structure, effective specific surface area and electrical conductivity, it is believed that 3D macroporous graphene with a high specific surface area and 3D porous conductive network is a good candidate electrode material for CDI application.
 Fig. 7  (A) Schematic illustration of the 3D macroporous graphene for CDI application. (B) TEM images of the 3D macroporous graphene. (C) CDI profiles of the 3D macroporous graphene and traditional graphene electrodes at 1.6 V. (D) The electrosorption capacity comparison of the 3D macroporous graphene and traditional graphene electrodes at various voltages. Copyright 2013, the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Alternatively, 3D graphene sponge is another structure that prevents the aggregation of graphene sheets and enlarges the specific surface area, thus improving the electrosorption capacity. Yang et al. reported on the sponge (polyurethane)-templated strategy to prepare sponge-like graphene with a high specific surface area (305 m2 g−1) and favorable pore size distribution as a CDI electrode material (Fig. 8A).191 As shown in Fig. 8B–D, the sponge-like graphene exhibits a macroporous structure with well-defined interconnected pores in a size range from 76 μm to 379 μm. The capacitive deionization behavior of sponge-like graphene and graphene electrodes was investigated in a 20 mL NaCl aqueous solution with an initial conductivity of 106 μS cm−1 and flow rate of 3 mL min−1 at 1.5 V. The resulting macroporous materials composed of graphene nanosheets exhibited the CDI performance with a superior electrosorptive capacity of 4.95 mg g−1 and a fast desorption rate. The sponge-templated strategy offers a facile and variable route to rationally design and prepare macroporous structured graphene-based electrode materials for CDI.
 Fig. 8  (A) Schematic representation of the procedure for preparing sponge-like graphene. The bottom part gives the photo images of the sponge (B), sponge saturated with graphite oxide solution (C), and sponge-like graphene (D). Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Similarly, Pan et al. fabricated a novel graphene sponge via directly freeze-drying graphene oxide solution followed by annealing in a nitrogen atmosphere.196 The obtained graphene sponge displays a porous structure with a high specific surface area of 356 m2 g−1 with a pore volume of 1.51 cm3 g−1. The graphene sponge electrode exhibits an electrosorption capacity of 14.9 mg g−1 due to its unique 3D interconnected porous structure, large accessible surface area and low charge transfer resistance when the initial NaCl concentration is ∼500 mg L−1 at 1.2 V. The graphene sponge electrode can be completely regenerated and reused for over 30 cycles without any declination. The graphene sponge is a promising electrode material for actual application of CDI. The 3D graphene-based materials for CDI include 3D macroporous graphene and graphene sponge. Both of them possess abundant interconnected porous structures, which provide lots of adsorption sites and can capture more salt ions. Therefore, 3D graphene-based materials with a porous structure can be applied in CDI. It is also a big challenge to develop a simple, green and cost-effective method to fabricate 3D porous graphene for practical applications.
In order to enlarge the effective specific surface area and improve the CDI performance, some recent reports proposed in situ defect etching methods to enlarge the specific surface area of graphene, including using H2O2,192,197 KOH,198 and KMnO4 (ref. 199) as etching agents to produce holey structured graphene. Hierarchical structures could offer a huge increase in the specific surface area due to the large range of pores, having great potential in energy storage, energy conversion, drug delivery and catalytic applications.200–202 For example, Li and coworkers presented KOH-activated graphene by using KOH as the etching agent that has an ultrahigh specific surface area of 3513 m2 g−1 and a good electrical conductivity of 104 S m−1.198 During the activation process, carbon can be etched by using KOH, and the graphene forms a 3D network structure with a large portion of micropores in graphene planes. The higher porosity and high conductivity of the KOH-activated graphene facilitate ion transport. Consequently, a high electrosorption capacity of 11.86 mg g−1 was achieved in a 74 mg L−1 NaCl solution at 2.0 V. The high performance of KOH-activated graphene makes it an ideal electrode material for CDI in miniaturized water-cooling systems.
However, when the external electrostatic field is relatively weak, the ion diffusion through micropores into the internal pores is hampered, thus decreasing the ion storage. In other words, the accessible surface area and space cannot be entirely utilized to accommodate ions.203 Thus, the Pan group proposed a carbothermal strategy to prepare graphene sheets with a unique mesoporous morphology by using KMnO4 as the etching agent.204 Clearly, the mesoporous graphene displays a large specific surface area of 474 m2 g−1 with a pore volume of 2.81 cm3 g−1, much higher than those of graphene (106 m2 g−1 and 0.23 cm3 g−1). Electrosorption experiments were performed in a NaCl solution with an initial concentration of ∼500 mg L−1 at an applied voltage of 1.2 V. The electrosorption capacity of mesoporous graphene is calculated to be 14.2 mg g−1. The mesoporous graphene electrode can also be completely regenerated and reused for over 30 cycles without obvious declination.
It is generally acknowledged that hierarchically porous carbon combines the structural advantages of macropores and micro/mesopores. In the case of hierarchically porous carbon, macropores serving as ion-buffering reservoirs guarantee a shorter ion diffusion distance to the pores, and micro/mesopores can provide efficient pathways and large accessible surface areas for ion transport and charge storage.205,206 Our group developed an approach that can form ample micro-/mesopores across highly interconnected 3D graphene sheets via the combination of in situ defect etching and template-directed methods (Fig. 9).207 The as-obtained 3D graphene with a hierarchically porous structure is composed of a 3D graphene architecture with ample micro-/mesopores across the highly interconnected macroporous walls. The high specific surface area (824 m2 g−1), hierarchically porous structure (micro-, meso- and macropores), high conductivity and good wettability of 3D hierarchically porous graphene can ensure abundant adsorption sites and efficient electron and ion transport. In the CDI experiments, the 3D hierarchically porous graphene showed a high salt adsorption capacity of 14.7 mg g−1 in a 500 ppm NaCl aqueous solution at 1.2 V and exhibited a higher salt adsorption rate than the 3D graphene electrodes. The 3D hierarchically porous graphene electrodes also exhibited a better regeneration performance in repeated electrosorption–desorption experiments. The unique combination of the hierarchically porous structure and graphene building block may open opportunities to create a new class of high-performance materials suitable for CDI.
 Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of the construction of 3D hierarchically porous graphene. Copyright 2016, the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Alternatively, Kong et al. reported the construction of a 3D holey graphene hydrogel with in-plane pores by hydrothermal reduction of graphene oxide sheets (Fig. 10).192 During this process, the reduced graphene oxide sheets self-assemble into an interconnected holey graphene hydrogel, and the H2O2 preferentially etches the defective site on the reduced graphene oxide sheets to produce in-plane pores. The unique architecture of the holey graphene hydrogel provides not only a large specific area (1261.7 m2 g−1) for electrosorption of ions but also abundant in-plane pores, enabling efficient transport of ions. Moreover, the interconnected structure reduces resistance against electron transport. As a result, the electrosorption capacity of the holey graphene hydrogel reaches a value as high as 16.0 mg g−1 when feeding a NaCl solution with an initial concentration of 500 mg L−1 at an applied voltage of 1.2 V. The holey graphene hydrogel is considered to have potential for CDI applications and beyond.
 Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of the preparation of graphene hydrogels and the process of CDI desalination. Copyright 2016, Tsinghua University Press and Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg. 
In addition, El-Deen et al. presented a novel and facile strategy for the fabrication of 3D activated porous graphene.208 Briefly, thiocarbohydrazide coated silica nanoparticle intercalated graphene sheets are used as a sacrificial material for creating mesoporous graphene followed by an alkaline activation process. This fabrication procedure meets the requirement of an ideal desalination pore diameter with a high specific surface area ∼2680 m2 g−1 of activated 3D graphene-based micropores. The desalination performance of the fabricated electrodes was evaluated by carrying out single pass mode experiments at various cell potentials with symmetric and asymmetric cells. The asymmetric charge coated microporous activated graphene exhibits an exceptional electrosorption capacity of 18.43 mg g−1 at a flow rate of 20 mL min−1 upon an applied cell potential of 1.4 V with an initial NaCl concentration of 300 mg L−1, high charge efficiency, and good recyclability. The present strategy provides a new avenue for producing ultrapure water via green capacitive deionization technology.
Gelation is another simple, effective, and straightforward route to fabricate 3D porous macroscopic materials. Kim et al. presented an interfacial gelation process to fabricate large-scale 3D porous graphene hydrogel films with simple immersion of arbitrary Zn objects in aqueous dispersions of graphite oxide.165 This gelation method enables a wide range of controllable 3D gel structures as well as macroscopic objects based on any desired structure. The graphene sheets were interconnected in a quasi-parallel manner to form an open porous morphology with a large range of pore sizes from tens of nanometers to several micrometers. Interestingly, the introduction of various template structures at the Zn surface facilitates a straightforward route for fabricating 3D macroscopic graphene gels with any arbitrary shape. Accordingly, the graphene hydrogel films exhibit high specific areas (up to 778.5 m2 g−1).
In summary, graphene-based materials as a promising candidate have been widely used in the CDI application. Table 1 summarizes the salt adsorption capacity of various graphene architectures. Although the graphene nanosheets showed a lower surface area, their desalination performance is superior to that of activated carbon. Fortunately, the specific surface area of graphene-based electrodes can be increased by tuning their morphologies, structures and pores. Thus, many researchers have made great efforts to construct different 3D porous structures with various pores in order to achieve a high specific surface area, which provides lots of adsorption sites and can capture more salt ions. It has been demonstrated that micro- and mesopores are essential for the CDI application, because micro- and mesopores can increase the surface area and thus offer more adsorption sites. But some dead pores and the absence of an interconnected network have unfavorable influence on the salt adsorption capacity and rate. Through the above research studies, macropores in 3D graphene can guarantee a short diffusion distance. The results strongly demonstrated that the 3D graphene-based materials have good desalination performance. However, the accessible surface area and ion transport in the 3D macroporous graphene need to be improved due to the lack of micro- and mesopores. Also, it has been demonstrated that hierarchical porous structures (intertwined micro-, meso-, and macropores) are beneficial to ionic mass transportation. There is no doubt that the construction of a hierarchically porous architecture with an enormous porosity as well as a perfect pore interconnection can enhance the salt adsorption capacity. It is also a big challenge to develop a simple, green and cost-effective route to fabricate 3D porous graphene architectures to further improve the salt adsorption capacity.
Table 1 Comparison of the salt adsorption capacity of various graphene materials




Materials
Preparation method
Specific surface area (m2 g−1)
Applied voltage (V)
Initial NaCl concentration
Operational mode
Salt adsorption capacity (mg g−1)
Ref.




Graphene
Hummers' method
14.2
1.2
50 μS cm−1
Batch-mode CDI
1.85

139



Graphene-like nanoflake
Hummers' method
222.01
2.0
55 μS cm−1
Batch-mode CDI
1.35

102



Graphene
Pyridine thermal
—
2.0
86.9 μS cm−1
Batch-mode CDI
0.88

154



Three-dimensional macroporous graphene architectures
Template-directed
339
1.6
105 μS cm−1
Batch-mode CDI
3.9

195



Sponge-templated graphene
Sponge-templated
305
1.5
106 μS cm−1
—
4.95

191



Graphene sponge
Freeze-drying
356.0
1.2
500 mg L−1
Batch-mode CDI
14.9

196



Microporous graphene
KOH-activated
3513
2.0
160 μS cm−1
Batch-mode CDI
11.86

198



Mesoporous graphene
KMnO4 etching
474.0
1.2
500 mg L−1
Batch-mode CDI
14.2

204



Three-dimensional graphene with a hierarchically porous structure
Oxometalate etching
824
1.2
1045 μS cm−1
Batch-mode CDI
14.7

207



Holey graphene hydrogel
H2O2 etching
1261.7
1.2
500 mg L−1
Home-made CDI
16.0

192



3D porous graphene
Silica particles as templates
2680
1.4
300 mg L−1
Single pass asymmetric-CDI
14.08

208






3.2 Graphene-based composites for CDI
Pristine graphene prepared by either chemical or thermal reduction of graphene oxide always exhibits a relatively low electrosorptive capacity due to the agglomeration of graphene sheets and does not reflect the intrinsic capacitance of an individual graphene nanosheet. Different kinds of spacer materials could be employed to prevent the agglomeration of graphene and increase the specific surface area of graphene. To exploit the potential electrochemical applications of graphene, many efforts have been focused on the composites of graphene with other materials,89,209 such as graphene–porous carbon composites, graphene–carbon nanotube composites, graphene-activated carbon fiber composites, graphene–metal oxide composites, graphene–polymer composites, and graphene-based multi-composites.

3.2.1 Graphene–porous carbon composites for CDI. 
Porous carbons have been demonstrated to be an attractive material for CDI,210–212 because of their unique porous structure with a high accessible surface area, low resistance, maximal structural stability and good chemical stability, which can facilitate ion transport and storage.213–215 Among porous carbons, activated carbons stand out, and together with their hybrid composites, they are often utilized as a CDI electrode due to their high specific surface area, low cost fabrication, large-scale production and natural abundance.216–221 As a general trend, an increase in the total pore volume/specific surface area results in a higher salt adsorption capacity.222 Graphene-activated carbon composites can not only increase the vacancies to accommodate ions, but also speed up the transportation of ions to promote the ion adsorption due to the high specific surface area (1000–3500 m2 g−1) of activated carbons and the superior conductivity (theoretically 7200 S m−1) of graphene.
A detailed study on graphene-activated carbon composites was presented by Li et al. where a reduced graphene oxide and activated carbon composite was synthesized by a facile chemical method for the capacitive removal of salt ions from brackish water.223 In the reduced graphene oxide and activated carbon composite, reduced graphene oxide acts as a flexible bridge to form a “plane-to-point” conducting network, which is beneficial for decreasing the aggregation of activated carbon particles and therefore enhancing the pore availability. The electrosorption capacity of the composite electrode is 2.94 mg g−1 in a NaCl solution with an initial conductivity of 0.1 mS cm−1 at 1.2 V.
Apart from activated carbon, carbon aerogels are another promising material for the CDI technology.224–227 Carbon aerogels consist of interconnected, uniform carbonaceous particles (3–30 nm) with small interstitial pores (<50 nm). Such a continuous, monolithic structure leads to a very high specific surface area (400–1100 m2 g−1) and good electrical conductivity (25–100 S cm−1).228–231
Interestingly, Pan et al. fabricated carbon aerogel electrodes with a reduced graphene oxide additive, in which reduced graphene oxide was considered as a new kind of conductive additive.232 As a result, the surface of reduced graphene oxide sheets is bestowed with a great deal of carbon aerogels. It is confirmed that a good contact between reduced graphene oxide and carbon aerogels is formed, which favors the electron transfer between them. Apparently, the carbon aerogel electrode with 15 wt% reduced graphene oxide exhibits the highest desalination efficiency of 59% in a NaCl solution with an initial conductivity around 100 μS cm−1 at 1.2 V.
Although activated carbons and carbon aerogels have been the most widely used CDI electrodes, the presence of small micropores (<2 nm) always restricts the desalination performance due to the limited ion accessibility and slow ion diffusion.101,233–236 To solve this problem, mesoporous carbon with a large accessible surface area, high and tunable mesoporosity, and narrow pore-size distribution seems to be an attractive candidate for CDI electrodes, which has been demonstrated by us and other groups.26,30,32,237 It is clear that the mesoporous carbon has a much better electrochemical performance than conventional high-surface-area activated carbons in both aqueous and non-aqueous electrolytes.238–240
To exploit the potential electrochemical applications of graphene, our group prepared graphene/mesoporous carbon composites via a direct triblock-copolymer-templating method and used them as CDI electrodes for the first time.241 A combination of mesoporous carbon and graphene in this work opened a new opportunity to prepare high surface area and highly conductive carbon materials for CDI application. As for the graphene/mesoporous carbon composites, both mesopores and paper-like structures can be observed in Fig. 11A. The specific surface area increases from 567.7 m2 g−1 for pristine mesoporous carbon to a maximum value of 685.2 m2 g−1 for graphene/mesoporous carbon composites. Of more concern is that the introduction of graphene can improve the desalination capability of the mesoporous carbon electrode to a large extent and the specific electrosorption capacity of the graphene/mesoporous carbon composites and mesoporous carbon electrodes is 0.7 mg g−1 and 0.6 mg g−1 in a NaCl aqueous solution with an initial conductivity of ∼89.5 μS cm−1 at 2.0 V, respectively (Fig. 11B). The graphene/mesoporous carbon composite electrodes were proved to be promising electrodes for CDI.
 Fig. 11  (A) TEM images of graphene/mesoporous carbon composites. (B) Comparison of CDI curves of the activated carbon, mesoporous carbon and graphene/mesoporous carbon composite electrodes. Copyright 2012, the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Recently, 3D hierarchically porous carbon containing macropores, mesopores and micropores has been explored as a promising electrode material due to its fascinating ion transportation with a smaller inner resistance and a shorter diffusion pathway.166,242,243 On the one hand, carbon nanospheres acting as nanospacers were introduced into a dual-template method and the CDI behavior of the resulting material was investigated for the first time.244,245 This revealed that the resultant electrode with a hierarchical pore arrangement exhibits superior CDI performance over the ordered mesoporous carbon electrode with a single-sized pore channel. For example, the Pan group reported novel hierarchical hybrids with microporous carbon sphere decorated 3D graphene frameworks through a simple freeze-drying process,246 which not only possess a unique hierarchically porous structure with micro-/meso-/macropores, but also maintain favorable features for CDI applications (Fig. 12A and B). A high electrosorption capacity (9.86 mg g−1) was obtained in a NaCl solution with an initial concentration of ∼100 mg L−1 at 1.2 V (Fig. 12C). The electrosorption capacity still maintains a high value of 19.01 mg g−1 after 30 times of cycling, showing a good performance in durability and stability (Fig. 12D). It is expected that the obtained composites will not only serve as a highly efficient CDI electrode material, but also hold the potential to be applied in other fields.
 Fig. 12  (A) Schematic illustration of the procedure for the preparation of the 3D graphene frameworks–microporous carbon sphere composite. (B) TEM image of the 3D graphene frameworks–microporous carbon sphere composite. (C) Concentration transients of 3D graphene frameworks–microporous carbon sphere composite electrodes. The inset is corresponding electrosorption capacities. (D) Cycling stability of the 3D graphene frameworks–microporous carbon sphere composite electrode. Copyright 2016, Elsevier Ltd. 
Furthermore, our group rationally designed graphene-coated hollow mesoporous carbon spheres and originally used them as efficient electrode materials for CDI application.199 The graphene-coated hollow mesoporous carbon spheres were fabricated by a simple template-directed method using phenolic polymer coated polystyrene spheres as templates (Fig. 13A). The resulting graphene-based composites have a hierarchically porous nanostructure with hollow mesoporous carbon spheres uniformly embedded in the graphene sheets (Fig. 13B–D). The hierarchically porous structure of graphene-coated hollow mesoporous carbon sphere electrodes can guarantee fast transport of salt ions, and the improved specific surface area of graphene-coated hollow mesoporous carbon spheres provides more adsorption sites for the formation of an electrical double layer. In addition, the graphene sheets in the graphene-coated hollow mesoporous carbon spheres as interconnected conductive networks lead to fast charge transfer. The CDI performance at a direct voltage of 1.6 V was investigated. The electrosorption capacity of the graphene-coated hollow mesoporous carbon sphere electrode is calculated to be 2.3 mg g−1 in a NaCl aqueous solution with an initial conductivity of 68.5 μS cm−1. The proposed carbon composite architectures are expected to lay the foundation for the design and fabrication of high-performance electrodes in the field of energy and electrochemistry.
 Fig. 13  (A) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of graphene coated hollow mesoporous carbon spheres. (B) TEM image of phenolic polymer coated polystyrene spheres. (C) TEM image of graphene oxide coated phenolic polymer and polystyrene sphere composites. (D) TEM image of graphene coated hollow mesoporous carbon spheres. Copyright 2014, the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Another strategy to fabricate hierarchically porous graphene is to introduce porous carbon consisting of numerous mesoporous and macroporous channels into the macroporous framework of 3D graphene to obtain a novel composite with a 3D hierarchical pore arrangement.247 The 3D graphene and hierarchically porous carbon composites were prepared by a dual-template strategy with SiO2 spheres as the hard template and the triblock copolymer Pluronic F127 as the soft one, and the representative synthesis route is illustrated in Fig. 14. The composite possesses macroporous and mesoporous structures simultaneously. This indicates that the porous carbon with enormous mesoporous channels has been successfully incorporated into the macroporous framework of 3D graphene, and the resultant composite displays a hierarchical pore structure. The electrosorptive capacities were 6.18 and 4.41 mg g−1 for the composite and pristine 3D graphene electrodes, respectively. In addition, the desalination efficiency of the composite electrode can attain 88.96%, which displays an evident improvement of 40% over the pristine 3D graphene one (63.52%). The combination of 3D graphene and porous carbon in the present work may open a new opportunity to prepare a graphene-based hierarchically porous carbon composite electrode with a higher specific surface area, an enhanced electric conductivity, and a superior ion diffuse pathway for CDI application.
 Fig. 14  Schematic illustration of the synthesis route for 3D graphene and hierarchically porous carbon composites. Copyright 2013, the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Graphene-porous carbon composites, simultaneously combining a wide variety of pores (micro-, meso- and macropores), have been regarded as promising electrode materials. On the one hand, porous carbon can prevent the aggregation of graphene and further increase the specific surface area. On the other hand, the incorporation of graphene with porous carbon can speed up the ion diffusion by providing a decreased ion diffusion distance and also ensuring a minimized inner resistance for the ion transportation pathways. Besides, the porous carbon present can serve as an ion-buffering reservoir guaranteeing a shorter ion diffusion distance, which facilitates the rapid transportation of the ions into the interior of the bulk material. Therefore, combining porous carbon with graphene is an effective method to achieve high desalination performance.


3.2.2 Graphene–carbon nanotube composites for CDI. 
Since carbon nanotubes have demonstrated significant electrosorption capacity in CDI, they could be an ideal spacer for inhibiting the aggregation of graphene sheets and further enhancing the desalination performance.248 In order to combine the merits of 2D graphene and 1D carbon materials, many attempts have recently been made to obtain graphene–carbon nanotube hybrid materials or composites.249–258
In order to inhibit agglomeration and increase the conductivity in the vertical direction of graphene, our group employed carbon nanotubes to intercalate graphene to form graphene and carbon nanotube composite architectures by a modified exfoliation approach (Fig. 15).259 In this carbon architecture, long and tortuous carbon nanotubes as conductive networks not only interconnect the adjacent graphene but also inhibit the aggregation of graphene. It was found that with the carbon nanotube contents increasing, the specific capacitance of the electrodes firstly increases to the highest value and then decreases obviously. The graphene and carbon nanotube composite electrodes performed much better than the activated carbon and graphene ones in a NaCl aqueous solution with an initial conductivity of ∼57 μS cm−1 at 2.0 V, and the salt adsorption capacity is 1.41 mg g−1 for the graphene and carbon nanotube composite electrodes. The graphene and carbon nanotube composites are confirmed to be promising materials for CDI electrodes.
 Fig. 15  Schematic illustration of the formation process of graphene and carbon nanotube composites. Copyright 2012, the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Analogously, Li and coworkers fabricated a carbon nanotubes coupled with reduced graphite oxide composite by a one-step facile chemical method.260 The specific surface area of the composite is determined to be 438.6 m2 g−1. The electrosorptive capacity of the composite is determined to be 1.4 mg g−1 in a NaCl solution with an initial conductivity of 1000 μS cm−1 at an applied voltage of 1.2 V. Besides, the charge efficiency of the composite electrode at 1000 μS cm−1 is lower than that at 100 μS cm−1, revealing that CDI is envisioned to be a very energy efficient water desalination technology when the ionic content is relatively low.
Another strategy to fabricate a carbon nanotube/graphene composite as an electrode for CDI was explored by Zou et al.261 The structure of the carbon nanotube/graphene composite was highly porous, with single-walled carbon nanotubes sandwiched between graphene sheets that functioned as spacers and provided diffusion paths for smooth and rapid ion conduction. The associated increase in the electrical double-layer capacitance enhanced the desalination performance. The carbon nanotube/graphene composites achieved an electrosorption capacity of 26.42 mg g−1 with 100% regeneration in a 50 mL NaCl solution with an initial concentration of 780 mg L−1 (1540 μS cm−1 conductivity) at 2 V, showing great potential as a high performance electrode material in CDI applications. To increase the energy effectiveness and thus the competitiveness of CDI, improved design, fabrication and assembly of the CDI operational unit are as important as the development of high quality electrode materials.
Alternatively, Pan et al. designed and fabricated a novel graphene/carbon nanotube hybrid sponge structures by employing carbon nanotubes to intercalate graphene sheets in a graphene sponge via directly freeze-drying graphene oxide/carbon nanotube mixed solution followed by annealing in a nitrogen atmosphere (Fig. 16).262 The results show that the graphene/carbon nanotube hybrid sponge with 20 wt% carbon nanotubes has a maximum specific surface area of 498.2 m2 g−1. When used as a CDI electrode, it exhibits a high electrosorption capacity of 18.7 mg g−1 in a NaCl solution with an initial concentration of ∼500 mg L−1 at an applied voltage of 1.2 V.
 Fig. 16  Schematic illustration of the procedure for the preparation of graphene/carbon nanotube hybrid sponge. Copyright 2015, the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
As mentioned above, an ocean of great efforts have been made to construct graphene–carbon nanotube composites. Graphene–carbon nanotube composites can be obtained easily due to the π–π stacking interactions between graphene and carbon nanotubes. It has been demonstrated that intercalated carbon nanotubes can effectively exfoliate graphene and improve the conductivity and enhance the electrosorption eventually. Interestingly, the salt adsorption capacity of graphene–carbon nanotube composites ranged from 1.4 mg g−1 to 26 mg g−1 under different test conditions. This is because the electrosorption capacity is related to the influent concentration, flow rate, voltage, and CDI equipment. Even so, a graphene–carbon nanotube composite is quite a suitable and promising electrode material for CDI electrodes.


3.2.3 Graphene-activated carbon nanofiber composites for CDI. 
Commercial carbonaceous materials, such as activated carbon fibers and activated carbon cloths, have previously been developed as electrodes for capacitive deionization, due to their high ratio of surface area to volume.263–265 Because the ion adsorption efficiency of the carbon electrode can be strongly dependent on the microstructure and chemical functional groups formed during the chemical surface modification, activated carbon cloths were chemically surface-modified by etching in alkaline or acidic solution with various etching times in order to improve the efficiency of CDI from aqueous solution.266,267
Electrospun activated carbon nanofiber webs exhibit a good monolithic structure and high electrical conductivity; previous work has shown that activated carbon nanofibers with various structures and multiscale texture hold promise for CDI technology.268–272 The electrosorption capacity of activated carbon nanofiber composites can be further improved by incorporating them with graphene by electrospinning, in which the graphene helps to improve the electrical conductivity and the pore distributions with tuned porous structures.
For instance, Qiu et al. developed a new way to synthesize web-like reduced graphite oxide and activated carbon nanofiber composites by electrospinning, followed by CO2 activation and applied them to CDI.273 The as-made composites have a well-developed mesoporous structure and high conductivity that can be tuned to some extent by changing the weight ratio of the mesoporous reduced graphite oxide incorporated into the electrospinning step (Fig. 17A and B). A high desalination capacity (7.2 mg g−1) and good reversibility of the reduced graphite oxide and activated carbon nanofiber composite for CDI were obtained at a low cell potential of 1.2 V in comparison with the composite electrodes (Fig. 17C and D). This approach may pave a new way to make web-like functional carbon materials with high performance for CDI desalination by incorporating reduced graphite oxide and activated carbon nanofibers under further optimized conditions.
 Fig. 17  (A) Optical images of reduced graphite oxide and activated carbon nanofiber composites. (B) FESEM images of reduced graphite oxide and activated carbon nanofiber composites; the inset is the TEM image of reduced graphite oxide and activated carbon nanofiber composites. (C) Electrosorption capacity of the activated carbon nanofiber, reduced graphite oxide, and reduced graphite oxide and activated carbon nanofiber composite electrodes as a function of time in CDI. (D) Recycle electrosorption performance of the reduced graphite oxide and activated carbon nanofiber composites at a cell potential of 1.2 V. Copyright 2014, Elsevier Ltd. 
Qiu et al. fabricated reduced graphene oxide/activated carbon nanofiber monolithic composite web electrodes with tuned conductivity by using an ultrasound-assisted electrospinning method (Fig. 18A).274 Freestanding monolithic carbon nanofiber webs function as a framework that prevents graphene sheets from restacking. The conductive graphene network helps quickly transfer electrons across the matrix while the ions are efficiently stored in the pores of the electrodes (Fig. 18B). As a result, a high electrosorption capacity of 9.2 mg g−1 in a NaCl solution is achieved with an initial NaCl concentration of 300 mg L−1 at an applied charging voltage of 1.2 V (Fig. 18C). The micropores lead to an enhanced electrical double-layer capacitance while the mesopores provide low-resistant pathways and channels for the ions through the porous fibers (Fig. 18D). The enhanced electrical conductivity of the composites by graphene addition (Fig. 18E) is another vital factor in improving electrosorption capacity. This study may provide new insights into high-performance, energy-efficient, and cost effective CDI. And also, it may be used as a basis of the wide application of functional reduced graphene oxide/activated carbon nanofiber composites.
 Fig. 18  (A) Schematic illustration of the electrospinning process coupled with ultrasonic spraying; (B) electrosorption capacity of the electrodes with different conductivities (C0 = 100 mg L−1, V = 1.2 V); (C) conductivity variation of the effluent and the corresponding current during 2.5 cycles, as measured in a batch-mode setup with a feeding NaCl solution (300 mg L−1) and 1.2 V applied voltage. (D) Schematic view of the electrical double layer responsible for the electrosorption of ions. (E) Schematic of the complex conductive network formed by the incorporated graphene. Copyright 2016, Elsevier Ltd. 
Activated carbon nanofibers are considered to be a good material in water purification due to their large surface area, moderate pore diameter and fast adsorption speed. The incorporation of activated carbon nanofibers into graphene can increase the specific surface area and enlarge the conductivity of the composite. Therefore, combining activated carbon nanofibers with graphene is a great method to enhance the desalination performance.


3.2.4 Graphene–metal oxide composites for CDI. 
Graphene and metal oxides are two promising electrode materials for many applications.275–280 The combination of these two types of materials improves the specific capacitance largely due to their synergistic effects. Therefore, such graphene–metal oxide composites have also been explored for CDI applications.
Generally, the incorporation of metal oxide nanoparticles like TiO2,281–283 MnO2,284–288 ZnO,289–291 Fe3O4 (ref. 292 and 293) and Co3O4 (ref. 294) into some nanocarbon materials can inhibit the aggregation tendency which can remarkably improve the specific capacitance. The metal oxides on carbon electrodes may contribute to the CDI desalination efficiency with their suitable physicochemical properties such as high hydrophilicity to increase the wettability of the electrode, inhibition of physical adsorption of ion species affecting the electrochemical adsorption/desorption during CDI operation,295,296 or alteration of the surface zeta-potential on the carbon electrode to increase the ion removal rate.297
For example, Tang et al. presented a versatile method to fabricate 3D graphene aerogel/metal oxide (including TiO2, CeO2, Fe2O3, and Mn3O4) nanoparticle hybrids by using low valence metal ions as the precursors (Fig. 19A and B).298 The incorporation of metal oxide remarkably improved the capacitance of graphene-based materials, and a high specific capacitance of graphene aerogel/TiO2 hybrids was obtained. When the graphene aerogel/TiO2 hybrid with open pore structures was used as a high performance CDI electrode material, the electroadsorption capacity of graphene aerogel/TiO2 reached 15.1 mg g−1 in a NaCl solution with an initial concentration of 500 mg L−1 at an applied voltage of 1.2 V (Fig. 19C and D).
 Fig. 19  (A) Schematic illustration of the formation mechanism of graphene aerogel/TiO2 hybrids (C) SEM image of graphene aerogel/TiO2 hybrids, inset in (B) is the image of the monolithic graphene aerogel/TiO2 hybrids product after freeze-drying. (D) Desalination capacity of activated carbon, graphene aerogel and graphene aerogel/TiO2 hybrids with different equilibrium concentrations and the corresponding Langmuir isotherm fitted curves. Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Among the commonly utilized metal oxides, TiO2 has the advantages of low cost, good chemical inertia, being eco-friendly, and ease of anchoring into a carbon structure; moreover it enhances the adsorption capacity in a CDI system. Compared to a nanoparticulate morphology, nanorods exhibit easier accessibility for ion adsorption due to the relatively large axial ratio aspect which offers higher ion accumulation and more interfacial contact.299
To improve the electrochemical characteristics, El-Deen et al. proposed a green and efficient synthesis of reduced graphite oxide/TiO2 nanorods by using a modified Hummers' method followed by alkaline hydrothermal treatment for the prepared graphite oxide and TiO2 nanoparticles.300 The resultant TiO2 nanorods are fully encapsulated by graphene nanosheets. This unique morphological structure reveals impressive features; high wettability prevents releasing of TiO2 and creates superior facile accessibility of water and ions from the bulk solution to the electrode through additional channels between graphene layers. The nanocomposite electrode has significant electrochemical properties as it presents a remarkable increase in the specific capacitance. Even at a low applied potential (0.8 V), the reduced graphite oxide/TiO2 composite has a high adsorption/desorption capability of ion salts (9.1 mg g−1) compared to pure reduced graphene oxide (1.89 mg g−1). Additionally, the resulting composite electrodes exhibit superior hydrophilicity, electrochemical behaviors, desalination capacity and recyclability.
MnO2 as an eco-friendly, low cost, good chemical stability and high capacitance material is considered a promising candidate for many electrochemical applications. Most recently, a graphene/MnO2 nanocomposite has been reported as a high performance electrode for supercapacitor301 and Li-ion battery302 applications using different techniques including hydrothermal and traditional heating at high temperatures over many hours and multiple sequential steps.303 El-Deen et al. introduced a rapid and green synthesis route for rapid transformation of graphite into graphene-intercalated with nanostructure MnO2 with morphology control by a one-pot reaction, low-time consuming and eco-friendly method.304 Interestingly, morphology control could be performed; MnO2-nanorods and MnO2-nanoparticles@graphene could be prepared (Fig. 20A). As an electrode in the CDI unit, the synthesized MnO2-nanorods@graphene revealed distinct electrosorptive capacity (5.01 mg g−1), amazing salt removal efficiency (∼93%) and distinguished recyclability in a NaCl solution with an initial conductivity around ∼100 μS cm−1 at 1.2 V (Fig. 20B). Therefore, the MnO2-NRs@graphene can be considered as a novel and efficient electrode material for CDI applications.
 Fig. 20  (A) Schematic illustration of the one pot synthesis procedure of MnO2-nanostructures@graphene sheets as a sandwich structure. (B) CDI performance of the synthesized material electrode and activated carbon in a NaCl solution at 1.2 V. Copyright 2014, Elsevier Ltd. 
The incorporation of metal oxides will significantly improve the capacitance of graphene-based materials. Fe3O4, for example, is environmentally benign, chemically stable and has high pseudocapacitance through redox reactions. Potentially, Fe3O4 is a promising material for the synthesis of graphene/metal oxide nanocomposites for energy storage and related technologies.305,306 Li et al. prepared reduced graphene oxide and Fe3O4 hybrids by a facile hydrothermal method.293 The resultant Fe3O4 nanoparticles are fully encapsulated by reduced graphene oxide nanosheets and the specific surface area of the reduced graphene oxide and Fe3O4 hybrids is 150.8 m2 g−1. Compared to the reduced graphene oxide, the enhanced capacitance of the reduced graphene oxide and Fe3O4 hybrids may arise from an exchange activity between the hydrated Fe3O4 and Na+. When RGO@Fe3O4 was fabricated as an electrode for symmetric CDI, it is found that the removal capacity, electrosorption rate constant and charge efficiency of the reduced graphene oxide and Fe3O4 hybrids are nearly twice as high as those of reduced graphene oxide due to the hydroxylation of the Fe3O4 surface. Additionally, the maximum removal capacity of the reduced graphene oxide and Fe3O4 hybrids is predicted by the Langmuir model, which shows a high value of 8.33 mg g−1 at 1.2 V in a NaCl solution with an initial conductivity of 500 μS cm−1.
ZrO2 is also considered a promising candidate due to its distinct characteristics such as eco-friendliness, inexpensiveness, and good chemical stability, having a great ability of destroying some microorganisms attributed to its features in photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants;307 moreover it can enhance the adsorption capacity in CDI systems. Yasin et al. fabricated a graphite oxide/ZrO2 electrode with an easy manufacturing process via a simple hydrothermal method.308 It was found that ZrO2 was successfully embedded in the graphene oxide sheets and enhanced the conductivity of graphite oxide and provided a better storage space for ion adsorption and conduction. The obtained results indicated that the synthesized ZrO2-doped graphene oxide nanocomposite having 10 wt% ZrO2 exhibits great cycling stability, good salt removal efficiency (93.03%), distinct electrosorptive capacity (4.55 mg g−1) and high charge efficiency (0.84) in a NaCl solutions with an initial conductivity of 100 μS cm−1 at 1.2 V. It is believed that graphene oxide could be considered a good candidate as support material for capacitive deionization attributed to its great theoretical surface area and good conductivity.
The incorporation of metal oxides into graphene can prevent the aggregation of graphene, increase the wettability of the electrode, and improve the specific capacitance of the composite electrodes. As a result, the desalination performance can be enhanced significantly. It is worth mentioning that the external voltage should be controlled rationally to prevent the occurrence of the redox reaction.


3.2.5 Graphene–polymer composites for CDI. 
Similar to metal oxides, a conducting polymer can contribute to the pseudo-capacitance,309,310 which can largely enhance the capacitive performance of graphene for supercapacitor or CDI applications.311–315 Among the wide range of materials that may be suitable for the aforementioned applications, polymers such as polyaniline, and polypyrrole,316–318 chitosan,319,320 and ion-exchange polymers321–324 are of particular interest. Polyaniline is one of the most promising electrode materials for pseudocapacitors due to its high specific capacitance and electrical conductivity. And polyaniline has multiple redox states, a high doping–dedoping rate during charge–discharge and good environmental stability. Moreover, it can be economically and easily fabricated into various nanostructures.325–327 Polyaniline introduced into a nanocomposite can enhance the capacitance of carbon material, and at the same time the stability of polyaniline can be improved by the carbon contained in the nanocomposite.327–329 In the past few years, composites of single-walled carbon nanotubes and polyaniline have been studied as the electrode material for CDI.330 The introduction of polyaniline modified the meso-structure of single-walled carbon nanotubes and facilitated the entrance and exit of ions onto the surface of the electrodes. It was also reported that with a graphite and polyaniline composite as the electrode the CDI unit could be regenerated easily.331
For instance, Zou et al. synthesized graphene/polyaniline composites by chemical polymerization of aniline in the presence of dispersed graphene sheets through in situ polymerization (Fig. 21A).332 The graphene/polyaniline composite has a more homogeneous pore distribution mainly in the range of 2–6 nm because of the introduction of polyaniline (Fig. 21B). The ion removal performance of the graphene/polyaniline composite was determined by using a membrane CDI bench-scale system. At 500 μS cm−1 initial concentration, conductivity removal was 94% for electrodes made of the graphene/polyaniline composite. In addition, faster regenerations of the graphene/polyaniline nanocomposite electrodes were achieved at the initial conductivity of 1000 μS cm−1 at 1.2 V (Fig. 21C).
 Fig. 21  (A) Schematic illustration of the in situ polymerization of polyaniline in the presence of graphene sheets. (B) TEM images of the graphene/polyaniline nanocomposite. (C) Regeneration of the electrode performance. Copyright 2014, Elsevier Ltd. 
Polyaniline, as a conducting polymer, is one of the most interesting materials due to its many advantages such as facile preparation, environmental friendliness, chemical stability and low cost production in large quantities.333,334 Polyaniline has a good processability when blended with other polymers such as polyvinyl alcohol, polyvinylidene fluoride335 and polyvinyl chloride;336 its solubility can be improved by modification to form its derivatives. Therefore, polyaniline with good processability and solubility can be obtained by chemical modification of the monomer.
In order to prepare more conductive ion exchange membranes, Zou et al. fabricated a series of novel more conductive anion exchange membranes by a dry phase inversion method, where reduced graphene oxide/polyaniline was added in a polyvinylidene fluoride polymer matrix.337 The prepared membranes possess both higher electrical conductivity and high ion exchange capacity. More importantly, it was found that adding the reduced graphene oxide/polyaniline in the membrane formula has increased the salt removal efficiency and sorption capacity. It was found that the sample with a low graphene oxide concentration, and 50% polyaniline/reduced graphene oxide composites in the membrane showed the best performance among all the membranes prepared.
Modifying the porous structure and electrical properties of electrospun porous carbon nanofiber webs would further enhance the desalination capacity. This optimization can be achieved by adding foreign materials (carbon black and carbon nanotubes, etc.) into the polymer matrix, which has been demonstrated by the improved physicochemical characteristics of electrospun composite webs in studies for various electrochemical applications.338–340 Huang et al. prepared novel freestanding graphene oxide-embedded porous carbon nanofiber webs by electrospinning from polyacrylonitrile and graphene oxide, followed by carbonization and steam activation.341 The graphene oxide–porous carbon nanofiber webs possess nanometer-scaled fiber diameter and improved hierarchical pore structure and electrical conductivity due to graphene oxide embedment, which could lead to a reduced ion-transport obstacle and enhanced electrical double-layer capacitance. When the graphene oxide–porous carbon nanofiber webs were used as a binder-free electrode in capacitive deionization, the electrosorption capacity reached 7.8 (C0 = 100 mg L−1) and 13.2 mg g−1 (C0 = 450 mg L−1) at 1.2 V. More technical routes such as optimizing the percent of GO added are still needed to enhance the desalination performance of nanofiber webs in further study.
Wang et al. successfully synthesized a reduced graphite oxide–resol composite material,342 in which the reduced graphite oxide is fully covered by resol. With the increase of voltage from 0.5 V to 2.0 V, the electrosorptive capacity gradually rose from 0.457 mg g−1 to 1.424 mg g−1. With the concentration that increased from 25 mg L−1 to 65 mg L−1, the electrosorptive capacity of the composite electrode is gradually enhanced from 1.424 mg g−1 to 3.229 mg g−1, illustrating that the initial concentration has a positive impact on the electrosorption performance of the reduced graphite oxide–resol composite. Compared with activated carbon and the as-synthesized reduced graphite oxide, this reduced graphite oxide–resol composite material can be an electrode candidate, which shows promising potential for an efficient CDI process in brackish water desalination and drinking water purification.
At the same time, Wang et al. applied the reduced graphite oxide–resol composite as a CDI electrode for the removal of ferric ions.343 The reduced graphite oxide–resol composite has the largest electrosorptive capacity of 3.47 mg g−1 in FeCl3 solution with an initial concentration of 40 mg L−1 at an electrical voltage of 2.0 V. For the reduced graphite oxide and activated carbon electrodes, the electrosorptive capacities are 2.46 and 1.41 mg g−1, respectively. This again confirms that the composite is a suitable candidate as the electrode material for CDI. The electrosorptive capacity of FeCl3, MgCl2 and NaCl was 3.41, 2.84 and 2.36 mg g−1, respectively, following the order Fe3+ > Mg2+ > Na+. The electrosorptive capacity of Fe2(SO4)3, Fe(NO3)3 and FeCl3 is 3.69, 3.58 and 3.41 mg g−1, respectively. The order of the anion removal efficiency was SO42− > NO3− > Cl−. Besides, through investigation of the adsorption–electrosorption kinetics, it is confirmed that the electrosorption could effectively enhance the adsorption rate and adsorption capacity according to the adsorption–electrosorption rate constant as a result of pseudo-first-order adsorption.
The capacitance and adsorption capacity of the composite electrodes can be improved obviously by introducing the conducting polymer in the graphene–polymer composites. Moreover, the graphene–polymer composites can reduce the co-ion effects and improve the desalination performance due to the combination of the ion exchange polymer with graphene.


3.2.6 Graphene-based multi-composites for CDI. 
Although graphene-based composites exhibit a high specific surface area or good electrical conductivity or favorable surface wettability, it is difficult to combine two or more advantages into the composites for CDI electrodes. Therefore, graphene-based multi-composites have been studied for CDI applications. Graphene-based multi-composites usually possess the merits of different materials and show good desalination performance.
For example, Zhu et al. designed graphene/carbon nanotube/activated carbon hybrids via a facile chemical approach combing 2D graphene and 1D carbon nanotubes with 0D activated carbon into one new type of hybrid.344 This hierarchical nanostructure is composed of a “plane-to-line-to-point” (graphene-to-carbon nanotube-to-activated carbon) conducting network. When used as a CDI electrode, the composite exhibits a high electrosorption capacity of 10.94 mg g−1 in a NaCl solution with an initial conductivity of ∼1000 μS cm−1 at an applied voltage of 1.2 V. In addition, Niu et al. presented a one-pot and one-step self-assembly process for producing carbon sulfur electrode materials with a 3D interconnected structure, that is, a graphene/carbon nanotube/sulphur hybrid.345 Alternatively, Lou et al. demonstrated a facile one-step hydrothermal method for large-scale production of well-designed flexible and free-standing Co3O4/reduced graphene oxide/carbon nanotube hybrid paper.346 Also, Zhang et al. synthesized Ag nanoparticle–carbon nanotube–reduced graphene oxide hybrids by reduction of graphite oxide in carbon nanotube–graphene oxide hybrids and AgNO3.347 These graphene-based multi-composites are very useful for CDI application.
A few other graphene-based multi-composites were prepared by Zhang and coworkers.348 Large-scale Li-ion doped graphene/carbon nanofiber porous architectures were fabricated by electrospinning homogeneous LiNO3/graphene oxide/polyacrylonitrile nanofibers, followed by carbonization at 900 °C (Fig. 22A and B). The architectures show good electrical adsorption, which is enhanced by the incorporation of LiC6 and graphene, with a higher electro-adsorption capacity and a faster adsorption rate due to the large surface area (393.64 m2 g−1) and good conductivity. Li+/graphene/carbon nanofiber electrodes have a higher electroadsorption capacity and a faster adsorption rate showing high electrical adsorption and a faster adsorption rate showing high electrical adsorption (the maximum efficiency η = 84%), which is enhanced by the incorporation of Li ions and graphene (Fig. 22C). A possible mechanism was proposed to explain the salt adsorption and charge storage in the Li+/graphene/carbon nanofiber electrodes according to a modified Donnan model of EDLC theory.
 Fig. 22  (A) Digital image of as-prepared porous Li+/graphene/carbon nanofiber. (B) SEM image of the as-prepared porous Li+/graphene/carbon nanofiber. (C) Sketch map of salt adsorption and charge storage mechanism in porous Li+/graphene/carbon nanofiber electrodes. Copyright 2016, Elsevier Ltd. 
Recently, the incorporation of conducting polymers and transition metal oxides into some graphene-based materials to improve their capacitance has been remarkably investigated.349,350 In novel architectures with conducting polymers, graphene not only serves as a highly conductive support material but also provides a large surface for the dispersion of conducting polymers.351 Additionally, the introduction of conducting polymers can minimize the stacking effects of graphene sheets as “spacers”, and thus the electrochemical performance of these composites is enhanced to some degree accordingly.352 Among transition metal oxides, manganese oxide has stood out due to its outstanding characteristics such as high theoretical specific capacitance, natural abundance, and environmental friendliness.286,302,353 Furthermore, constructing graphene composite electrodes with manganese oxide can enhance the electronic conductivity of manganese oxide with the aim of improving capacitive performance.
For example, Wang et al. developed a 3D porous reduced graphene oxide–polypyrrole–MnO2 composite, combining a hydrothermal method with chemical oxidative polymerization (Fig. 23A and B).354 The resultant composites exhibit a hierarchically porous structure with a specific surface area of 331 m2 g−1 and a good specific capacity of 356 F g−1, much higher than those of pure reduced graphene oxide or polypyrrole electrodes. Enhanced electrochemical capacity and low inner resistance endow the composite electrodes with an outstanding specific electrosorptive capacity of 12.5 mg g−1 at 2.0 V in a NaCl solution with an initial conductivity of 600 μS cm−1 (Fig. 23C). Furthermore, the composite electrodes have good rate stability and cycling stability for capacitive deionization applications.
 Fig. 23  (A) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of the reduced graphene oxide–polypyrrole–MnO2 (RGO–PPy–Mn) composite. (B) SEM images of RGO–PPy–Mn composites. (C) CDI profiles of reduced graphene oxide (RGO), RGO–PPy0.5–Cu1, RGO–PPy0.5–Mn0.4, and PPy electrodes at 2.0 V. Copyright 2015, the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Graphene/metal oxide composites are drawing increasing attention as electrode materials since graphene not only serves as a highly conductive support material but also provides a large surface for the dispersion of metal oxide nanoparticles. Chitosan, derived from the alkaline deacetylation of chitin, has been intensively studied due to its properties of being environmentally friendly, low cost, and available from an abundant source.355 Owing to a large amount of primary amines along its backbone, chitosan possesses useful properties including biocompatibility, biodegradability, and antimicrobial ability, especially metal ion adsorption activity.356 Gu et al. demonstrated a green method for the preparation of graphene–chitosan–Mn3O4 composites, where graphene–chitosan hydrogels are first prepared from the self-assembly of chitosan with graphene oxide nanosheets; then the composites are obtained by oxidizing Mn(II) ions which are adsorbed by graphene–chitosan hydrogels (Fig. 24A).357 This unique 3D morphology and chitosan sheets effectively prevent restacking of graphene sheets (Fig. 24B), which can offer an open diffusion path for the efficient access of both charge and ions. An electrosorptive capacity of 12.7 mg g−1 for the graphene–chitosan–Mn3O4 composite was obtained, much higher than 6.5 mg g−1 for graphene and 7.93 mg g−1 for graphene–chitosan electrodes in a NaCl solution with an initial conductivity of 300 μS cm−1 at a working voltage of 1.6 V (Fig. 24C and D). The graphene–chitosan–Mn3O4 composites prepared by this green method can facilitate the fabrication of suitable and promising materials for high-performance CDI electrodes.
 Fig. 24  (A) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of graphene–chitosan and graphene–chitosan–Mn3O4 xerogels. (B) SEM images of graphene–chitosan–Mn3O4 xerogels. (C) CDI profiles of graphene, graphene–chitosan, and graphene–chitosan–Mn3O4 xerogel electrodes at 1.6 V. (D) Electrosorption capacity and removal efficiency of graphene–chitosan–Mn3O4 xerogel electrodes in a NaCl solution with respect to different initial concentrations. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Apart from this, Estevez et al. reported the synthesis of multifunctional hybrids in both films and bulk form, combining electrical and ionic conductivity with porosity and catalytic activity. The hybrids are synthesized by a two-step process: (a) ice templation of an aqueous suspension comprised of Nafion, graphite oxide, and chloroplatinic acid to form a microcellular porous network and (b) mild reduction in hydrazine or monosodium citrate which leads to graphene-supported Pt nanoparticles on a Nafion scaffold.358 The graphene-based multi-composites can combine the advantages of various materials together to achieve high desalination efficiency.

Table 2 summarizes the salt adsorption capacity of various graphene-based composites. In summary, graphene–porous carbon composites, graphene–carbon nanotube composites, and graphene-activated carbon nanofiber composites can prevent the agglomeration of graphene and increase the specific surface area of graphene with enhanced desalination performance. Graphene–metal oxide composites and graphene–polymer composites can exhibit exciting characteristics, such as a high electrical conductivity, enhanced specific surface area, and high charge efficiency and desalination performance. The graphene-based multi-composites take full advantages of different materials to become good electrodes with a high conductivity, large specific surface area, and good wettability.
Table 2 Comparison of the salt adsorption capacity of various graphene-based composites




Electrode material
Specific surface area (m2 g−1)
Applied voltage (V)
Initial NaCl concentration
Operational mode
Salt adsorption capacity (mg g−1)
Ref.




Reduced graphene-activated carbon
779
1.2
100 μS cm−1
Batch mode CDI
2.94

223



Three-dimensional graphene frameworks with microporous carbon spheres
676.9
1.2
100 mg L−1
Batch mode CDI
9.86

246



Graphene/mesoporous carbon
685.2
2
40 μS cm−1
Batch mode CDI
0.73

241



Graphene-coated hollow mesoporous carbon spheres
400.4
1.6
68.5 μS cm−1
Batch mode CDI
2.3

199



Three-dimensional graphene-based hierarchically porous carbon composites
384.4
1.2
60 μS cm−1
Batch mode CDI
6.18

247



Graphene aerogel/TiO2
187.60
1.2
600 mg L−1
Batch mode CDI
24.2

298



Reduced graphene/TiO2
658
0.8
560 μS cm−1
Single-pass mode MCDI
9.1

300



MnO2-nanorods@graphene
—
1.2
100 μS cm−1
Batch-mode CDI
5.01

304



Reduced graphene@Fe3O4
150.8
1.2
500 μS cm−1
Batch-mode CDI
8.33

293



Graphene oxide/ZrO2


1.2
100 μS cm−1
Batch-mode CDI
4.55

308



Graphene/carbon nanotubes/activated carbon
426.56
1.2
1000 μS cm−1
Batch-mode CDI
10.94

344



Graphene–chitosan–Mn3O4
240
1.6
300 μS cm−1
Batch-mode CDI
12.7

357



Reduced graphene oxide–polypyrrole–MnO2
331
2.0
600 μS cm−1
Batch-mode CDI
12.5

354






3.3 Surface tuned graphene and its composites for CDI
Generally, the surface properties of electrode materials, such as wettability, hydrophilicity and surface charge, are critical in determining the desalination performance. Surface-tuned graphene, including nitrogen-doped graphene and functionalized graphene, could show good wettability and a high specific surface area, which is beneficial to improve the desalination performance. Typically, doping heteroatoms or grafting functional groups on the surface of graphene is an effective method to tune the surface of the graphene. The two dimensional structure of sp2 hybridized carbon has great potential due to its extraordinary physicochemical and electronic properties. Modification via chemical doping with hetero-atoms or charged groups can further improve the electronic properties of graphene.359–362 Nitrogen-doped graphene and functionalized graphene in particular have shown promise for high-performance CDI applications.363,364

3.3.1 Nitrogen-doped graphene for CDI. 
Recently, nitrogen doping has attracted wide attention as an effective method to improve the electrochemical performance of carbon materials.365–368 Doping of nitrogen atoms into graphitic networks is considered as one of the best approaches to produce n-type conductive materials with improved conductivity.369 Until now, different kinds of nitrogen doped carbon materials, such as nitrogen-doped carbon nanofibers,370,371 porous carbon spheres,372–374 carbon aerogels,375–377 and graphene,378–382 have been developed to show an improved desalination performance. Actually, the nitrogen in the graphene frameworks could improve the electrical conductivity383 and the wettability of the interface between the electrolyte and the electrodes.384 As a result, the salt ions can be captured easily by the electrode materials, thus accelerating the salt adsorption rate. Nitrogen-doped graphene is typically synthesized by thermal conversion with various nitrogen precursors,385–388 hydrothermal treatment,389–391 CVD,392 and treatment with plasma393,394 and flames.395,396 The common methods used to prepare nitrogen-doped graphene for CDI is thermal treatment in an ammonia atmosphere.
For instance, Pan et al. prepared nitrogen-doped graphene via a thermal treatment of graphene oxide in an ammonia atmosphere.364 The nitrogen atoms have successfully been doped in the graphene backbone and the doping ratio is about 7.3%. Nitrogen doping in graphene can efficiently prevent the stacking between graphene interlayers by introducing nitrogen functional groups, and thus results in a much higher specific surface area and pore volume. The nitrogen-doped graphene displays a high specific surface area of 358.9 m2 g−1 with a pore volume of 1.02 cm3 g−1. Due to the increased pseudo-capacitive effect of nitrogen doping and the improvement of the wettability of the interface between the solution and the electrode, the nitrogen-doped graphene possesses good capacitive performance. The electrosorption capacity is determined to be 12.8 mg g−1 in a NaCl solution with an initial conductivity of 1000 μS cm−1 at 1.2 V. This work demonstrated that the nitrogen-doped graphene should be a promising candidate as an electrode material for CDI.
Similarly, Pan et al. prepared a nitrogen-doped graphene sponge by directly freeze-drying graphite oxide followed by annealing in an ammonia atmosphere.363 Nitrogen-doped graphene sponges display a high specific surface area of 526.7 m2 g−1 with a pore volume of 3.13 cm3 g−1 and a high degree of nitrogen doping of 8.5%. It was noted that the electrosorption capacity of the nitrogen-doped graphene sponge was 21.0 mg g−1 when the initial NaCl concentration was ∼500 mg L−1 at 1.2 V. Furthermore, the charge efficiency of the nitrogen-doped graphene sponge is 0.60. The nitrogen-doped graphene sponge electrode can be completely regenerated and reused for over 30 cycles without any loss in performance. It is expected that this work provide a promising CDI electrode material candidate for practical applications.
Another common strategy to fabricate nitrogen-doped graphene for CDI is doping nitrogen in graphene with various solid nitrogen precursors. Several types of solid nitrogen precursors such as melamine,391 polyacrylonitrile,388 cyanamide,397 urea398 and sugar399 have been reported for obtaining nitrogen-doped graphene via pyrolysis with variable outcomes. For example, Gu et al. prepared nitrogen-doped graphene by the carbonization of graphite oxide and melamine formaldehyde, in which melamine formaldehyde was used as the nitrogen source.400 The obtained composites exhibited a hierarchically porous structure, with a specific surface area of 352 m2 g−1 and a high degree of nitrogen doping of 10.86%. Their good electrochemical capacity with low inner resistance and high reversibility endows the 3D nitrogen-doped graphene composite electrodes with an outstanding specific electrosorptive capacity of 21.93 mg g−1 at a direct voltage of 2.0 V in a NaCl aqueous solution with the initial conductivity of 1000 μS cm−1. The 3D reduced graphite oxide and melamine formaldehyde composites are well suited as high performance CDI electrode materials and can be further investigated as promising electrode materials for cost effective, energy-optimised CDI technology.
Alternatively, Amiri and co-workers developed a promising and efficient route to fabricate highly crumpled, few-layered graphene and nitrogen-doped graphene nanosheets by exfoliation of graphite in the liquid-phase using microwave-assisted methods with cyanamide as the nitrogen source.401 The specific surface area of nitrogen-doped graphene nanosheets after annealing under a nitrogen atmosphere at 900 °C was 1689 m2 g−1, and the electrosorption capacity was 1.96 mg g−1 at 2.0 V with an initial NaCl conductivity of 50 μS cm−1. Although the electrosorption capacity of nitrogen-doped graphene is not very high at low concentration, this sample with a high specific surface area offers the potential to develop high performance CDI electrodes.
Gu et al. prepared nitrogen-doped graphene composites by the carbonization of graphite oxide and melamine formaldehyde, in which melamine formaldehyde was used as the nitrogen source.400 The obtained composites exhibited a hierarchically porous structure, with a specific surface area of 352 m2 g−1 and a high degree of nitrogen doping of 10.86%. Their good electrochemical capacity with low inner resistance and high reversibility endows the 3D nitrogen-doped graphene composite electrodes with an outstanding specific electrosorptive capacity of 21.93 mg g−1 at 2.0 V in a NaCl aqueous solution with the initial conductivity of 1000 μS cm−1. The 3D reduced graphite oxide and melamine formaldehyde composites are well suited as high performance CDI electrode materials and can be further investigated as promising electrode materials for cost effective, energy-optimised CDI technology.
Apart from those mentioned above, nitrogen-doped graphene prepared by using other nitrogen precursors is also expected to be applied for CDI. For example, a nitrogen-doped graphene hydrogel was prepared through an effective one-step solvothermal reaction by using o-phenylenediamine as a double-N precursor.402 The doping level of nitrogen reaches up to 7.7 atom%. Du et al. prepared nitrogen-doped graphene sheets by a simple process using 1% ammonia water solution as the reducing agent, nitrogen precursor and solvent.403 The N content in nitrogen-doped graphene sheets was 4.4%. Park et al. synthesized 3D nitrogen doped reduced graphene oxide monoliths using graphene oxide and melamine through an ice-templated assembly.404 The nitrogen content is around 6.2 at% in the nitrogen doped reduced graphene oxide with a predominant pyridinic N-type configuration. Lee et al. prepared nitrogen-doped graphene sheets by using a simple hydrothermal reaction with graphene oxide and hexamethylenetetramine.405 The prepared nitrogen-doped graphene sheets reduced by hexamethylenetetramine have a high nitrogen (8.62%) content. These nitrogen-doped graphene sheets with a high nitrogen content can effectively improve the wettability of the CDI electrodes, thus enhancing their desalination performance.
Our group also prepared nitrogen-doped porous hollow carbon spheres by using polystyrene spheres as hard templates and dopamine hydrochloride as the carbon and nitrogen source, and the nitrogen doping amount is 2.92%.406 The nitrogen-doped porous hollow carbon sphere electrodes present a high salt adsorption capacity of 12.95 mg g−1 at a cell voltage of 1.4 V with a flow rate of 40 mL min−1 in a 500 mg L−1 NaCl aqueous solution.
Analogously, Liu et al. reported a simple fabrication of nitrogen-doped graphene hollow spheres by utilizing polystyrene nanospheres as hard templates.407 Graphite oxide and polyaniline are first layer-by-layer assembled on polystyrene nanospheres, and subsequently calcined in a nitrogen atmosphere to remove the polystyrene sphere template and realize the carbonization of polyaniline. The resultant nitrogen-doped graphene hollow spheres have a high nitrogen content of 8.7%. Parvez et al. reported a facile synthesis of nitrogen-doped graphene by immobilizing graphitic carbon nitride on graphene sheets to form a carbon nitride graphene composite.397 The carbon nitride graphene composite is then subjected to thermal treatment at 800, 900, and 1000 °C, leading to the decomposition of carbon nitride and therefore introducing nitrogen moieties into graphene, resulting in pyridinic nitrogen, graphitic nitrogen and pyridinic N+–O− (Fig. 25). In this way, nitrogen-doped graphene sheets with a nitrogen content from 4.0% to 12.0% can be obtained by controlling the pyrolysis temperature. This nitrogen-doped graphene is also a potential candidate for CDI. From the above descriptions, nitrogen-doped graphene has typically been synthesised by thermal conversion with various nitrogen precursors or annealing in a NH3 atmosphere. A high degree of nitrogen doped graphene can be obtained by both methods. Therefore, a high desalination performance can be achieved due to the high wettability and conductivity.
 Fig. 25  Schematic representation of nitrogen-doped graphene, and three types of nitrogen in nitrogen-doped graphene. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 


3.3.2 Nitrogen-doped graphene-based composites for CDI. 
In recent years, nitrogen-doped graphene-based composites combining the advantages of other materials have shown improved desalination performance. An alternative route involves the incorporation of nanoporous carbon or metal oxides into a nitrogen-doped graphene surface, leading to a high specific surface area and good electrical conductivity. The nanoporous carbon or metal oxide can not only be employed as a spacer material to avoid the agglomeration of graphene, but also be easily modified with other functional groups and metal (or metal oxide) nanoparticles which are included in the pores to broaden their applications.
It has been demonstrated that the combination of porous carbon with graphene can enhance their performance in electrochemical applications. For example, Yin et al. reported a self-template strategy for the fabrication of 3D nitrogen-doped hierarchically porous carbon/graphene.408 The content of nitrogen is 11.3%. The as-prepared 3D nitrogen-doped hierarchically porous carbon/graphene offers good dispersion, a high specific surface area of 3108.7 m2 g−1 and an electronic conductivity of 3096 S m−1. These results demonstrate that the 3D nitrogen-doped hierarchically porous carbon/graphene electrode is a good candidate for CDI.
Ordered mesoporous carbons are universally used for the CDI application due to their advantages such as a large surface area, tunable pore structure, uniform and adjustable pore size, chemically inert nature, mechanical stability and good conductivity.409 Song et al. in situ synthesized composites of graphene and nitrogen-doped ordered mesoporous carbon nanosheets by a triblock-copolymer assembly directly on graphene oxide (Fig. 26).410 The strong interaction of nitrogen-doped ordered mesoporous carbon and graphene in the form of N–O bonding limits graphene aggregation. The resulting composites with the nitrogen-doped ordered mesoporous carbon mass content of 95% show a high surface area (1569 m2 g−1) and good electronic conductivity. This graphene/nitrogen-doped ordered mesoporous carbon nanosheet is an candidate for CDI application.
 Fig. 26  Schematic illustration of the general preparation process of graphene/nitrogen-doped ordered mesoporous carbon composites. Copyright 2016, Elsevier Ltd. 
Alternatively, Pan et al. fabricated a nitrogen-doped electrospun reduced graphene oxide–carbon nanofiber composite via electrospinning by adding graphite oxide into a precursor solution and subsequent thermal treatment under an ammonia atmosphere.411 The XPS analysis confirmed that the nitrogen content of the nitrogen-doped graphene–carbon nanofiber composite is 8.3%. The enhanced performance of the nitrogen-doped graphene–carbon nanofiber composite is ascribed to the nitrogen doping and the formation of an effective “plane-to-line” conducting network in the composite, which facilitates the electron transfer and ion transport as well as increases the specific surface area. The specific surface area of nitrogen-doped graphene–carbon nanofiber composites is greatly improved to 864.10 m2 g−1. The salt adsorption capacity of nitrogen-doped graphene–carbon nanofiber composites is 3.91 mg g−1 in a NaCl aqueous solution with the initial conductivity of 100 μS cm−1 at 1.2 V.
Actually, novel nitrogen-doped porous carbon can be obtained by using a bimetallic zeolitic imidazolate framework based on ZIF-8 and ZIF-67 as the carbon and nitrogen sources.412 The nitrogen-doped carbon possesses a large surface area of 813 m2 g−1, a high N content of 8.0%, a high graphitization degree, and good wettability. If this kind of nitrogen-doped carbon was combined with graphene, it could show good desalination performance. Wang demonstrated an ultra-small zeolitic-imidazolate-framework nanocrystal layer protected carbonization method to prepare nitrogen-doped nano-porous carbon/graphene nano-sandwiches (Fig. 27).413 The resultant carbon nanosheets revealed a high specific surface area (1170 cm2 g−1), nanoporous structure and good electrical conductivity. It should be a good potential electrode material for CDI.
 Fig. 27  Schematic illustration of the synthesis of N-doped nanoporous carbon/graphene nano-sandwiches. Copyright 2015, the Royal Society of Chemistry. 

Table 3 summarizes the salt adsorption capacity of various nitrogen doped graphene and its composites. Apart from N-doped graphene, the S-doped graphene,414–416 B-doped graphene,417,418 N, S co-doped graphene,419–423 N, B co-doped graphene,424 and S, P co-doped graphene425 have been widely investigated in the application of solar cells,426 lithium batteries427 and supercapacitors.428 The diatomic doping can improve the specific capacitance largely and increase the electron transfer rate effectively due to their synergistic effects. In addition, the nitrogen-doped graphene combined with metal oxides, such as Mn3O4,429 MnO2,430 TiO2 (ref. 431) Fe3O4 (ref. 432), shows good electrochemical performance. Therefore, these materials are promising candidates for application in CDI.
Table 3 Comparison of the salt adsorption capacity of various nitrogen doped graphene




Materials
Doping method
Nitrogen content (%)
Specific surface area (m2 g−1)
Applied voltage (V)
Initial NaCl concentration
Operational mode
Salt adsorption capacity (mg g−1)
Ref.




Three-dimensional reduced graphene oxide–melamine formaldehyde composites
Carbonized with melamine formaldehyde
10.8
352.0
2.0
1000 μS cm−1
Batch-mode
21.9

400



Nitrogen-doped graphene
Thermal treatment in an ammonia atmosphere
7.3
358.9
1.2
1000 μS cm−1
Batch-mode
12.8

364



Nitrogen-doped graphene sponge
Thermal treatment in an ammonia atmosphere
8.5
526.7
1.2
500 mg L−1
Batch-mode
21.0

363



Highly crumpled nitrogen-doped graphene
Annealing with cyanamide
10.3
1689.0
2.0
50 μS cm−1
Batch-mode
0.21

401



Nitrogen-doped reduced graphene oxide–carbon nanofiber composite
Thermal treatment in an ammonia atmosphere
8.3
864.1
1.2
100 μS cm−1
Batch-mode
3.9

411







3.3.3 Functionalized graphene for CDI. 
When traditional porous carbon materials were used as an electrode material for CDI application, counter ions (the opposite charge to the electrode) in the solution are adsorbed onto the electrodes and co-ions (the same charge as the electrode) are expelled when an electric potential is applied between electrodes.433 This means that ion adsorption and desorption occur simultaneously in the pore volume of the electrodes, which leads to higher energy consumption and lower charge efficiency.94,434 To address this issue, an effective strategy is to graft ion selective groups on the electrode materials.435,436 In the past few years, novel functional carbon materials such as activated carbon,437 carbon nanotubes,438–440 and graphene441–449 have attracted significant interest for desalination because of their high electrical conductivity and tunable surface properties and morphology.439 For functional carbon materials, the combination of superior electron mobility and a highly accessible surface can significantly enhance the interfacial charge transfer rate.450 In addition, sulfonated graphene with good wettability is beneficial for CDI performance due to the introduction of hydrophilic functional groups.451,452 It has been demonstrated that the desalination performance can be further enhanced by using asymmetric configurations with functionalized electrodes.453–456
In order to obtain graphene nanosheets with a high specific surface area and good dispersion in aqueous solution, the Zou group developed a novel three-step reduction of graphite oxide.457 As shown in Fig. 28, iron powders, as mild and environmentally friendly reducing agents, were used in partial-reduction of graphite oxide and then sulphonic functional groups were introduced onto the surface of partially reduced graphene oxide. The negatively charged sulphonic group units can effectively prevent the graphitic sheets from aggregating and enhance the specific surface area of graphene nanosheets after further reduction with hydrazine. The electrodes based on this kind of graphene nanosheet achieved a NaCl removal efficiency of 83.4% and a specific electrosorptive capacity of 8.6 mg g−1 with outstanding regeneration capability. The findings of this research prove that graphene nanosheets synthesised from this multi-step reducing process can be applied as high-performance electrodes in the CDI process.
 Fig. 28  Schematic illustration of the multistep synthesis of well dispersed graphene. Copyright 2012, Elsevier Ltd. 
The functional groups on the surface of carbon materials have a significant effect on the interfacial charge transfer rate and the wettability of the electrodes. Instead of adding a secondary phase such as silicon which may dramatically decrease the electrical conductivity,458 Zou et al. proposed the surface modification of graphene nanosheets by the controlled introduction of sulphonic functional groups to enhance the hydrophilicity of graphene nanosheet-based electrodes.459 Similar to hydroxyl and carboxyl, sulphonic groups are also hydrophilic and have been adopted to improve the dispersion of graphene nanosheets in water in which the negatively charged sulphonic functional groups can effectively prevent graphene nanosheets from aggregating after the reduction and result in a higher specific surface area. Zou et al. creatively investigated wettability and its influence on graphene nanosheets as an electrode material for capacitive deionization. By altering the hydrophilicity of graphene nanosheets through controlled introduction of sulphonic groups, the water contact angle of graphene nanosheets is much reduced, indicating a better wettability.
In order to overcome the co-ion effects and enhance the charge efficiency, our group rationally designed a novel ion-selective 3D graphene electrode by grafting sulfonic and amine functional groups onto three dimensional graphene (Fig. 29). These grafted groups can act as ion-selective functional coatings, which can minimize the co-ion expulsion effect and increase the charge efficiency. In addition, they can increase the hydrophilicity and wettability of the electrode surface, which is beneficial for ion transmission from the solution to the electrode. The CDI performance of functionalized 3D graphene was evaluated under various operating conditions by using asymmetric configurations assembled with different combinations of the sulfonated, aminated and original 3D graphene. The CDI performances of the flow-through capacitor based on the ion-selective 3D graphene were improved regarding both salt adsorption capacity and charge efficiency. The results show that the capacitor exhibits a salt adsorption capacity of 13.72 mg g−1 in a 500 mg L−1 NaCl aqueous solution with the flow rate of 40 mL min−1 at 1.4 V and the charge efficiency reaches 0.85. The rationally designed ion-selective 3D graphene electrode can improve desalination performance and reduce co-ion expulsion effects. The graphene electrode can also be modified by carboxymethyl cellulose with carboxylic groups (COO−) and quaternary ammonium cellulose with quaternary amine groups (NR4+). El-Deen et al. fabricated functionalized microporous activated graphene electrodes by this strategy.208 Their novel asymmetric coated microporous activated 3D graphene employs a nontoxic water-soluble binder which increases the surface wettability and decreases the interfacial resistance and moreover improves the electrode flexibility compared with organic binders. The desalination performance of the fabricated electrodes was evaluated by carrying out a single pass mode experiment with asymmetric cells, and they show superior desalination performance, cycling stability, and charge efficiency.
 Fig. 29  Schematic representation of sulfonation and amination of 3D graphene. The inset is the salt adsorption capacity and current response for capacitors 3DGR–3DGR and 3DNGR–3DSGR in a 500 mg L−1 NaCl solution at 1.4 V with a flow rate of 40 mL min−1. Copyright 2016, the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In addition, an effective method to improve the desalination efficiency by surface modification of the electrodes could be realized by the treatment using anhydrous ethanol solution containing metal alkoxides (such as titanium oxide),460 nitric acid,440,461–463 potassium hydroxide,464 sulfuric acid,465 permanganate,466 hydrogen peroxide,467 and zeolites.468 All of these activating agents can effectively functionalize graphene electrode materials with oxygen-containing functional groups or ion exchange groups, which is beneficial to improve the wettability of electrodes, and then increase the desalination efficiency.


3.3.4 Functionalized graphene-based composites for CDI. 
As previously discussed, sulphonated reduced graphene oxide can be generally fabricated in three steps, including pre-reduction of graphene oxide with sodium borohydride, sulfonation with the aryl diazonium salt of sulfanilic acid, and postreduction with hydrazine.451 In order to further promote the electrosorption capacity, some researchers proposed assembling sulphonated reduced graphene oxide with carbon fiber. For instance, Li et al. prepared a carbon fiber cloth and sulphonated reduced graphene oxide composite by electrophoretic deposition (Fig. 30A).469 The resulting composite shows a cross-linked nanotubular structure and the individual carbon fiber is fully encapsulated by sulphonated reduced graphene oxide nano-sheets, forming a cylindrical-shell microstructure. Specifically, the salt removal efficiency of the composite electrode reached 60% when the electrical voltage was 1.4 V in a NaCl solution with an initial conductivity of around 500 μS cm−1 (Fig. 30B). The composite electrode exhibits improved charge efficiency (0.45) of more than twice as compared to that of the bare carbon fiber cloth electrode due to the ion selectivity characteristic of sulphonated reduced graphene oxide nano-sheets and a decreased interfacial resistivity (Fig. 30C). This work provides a large-scale production method to prepare a novel carbon electrode for high performance CDI which might favor the commercialization of the CDI technique in near future.
 Fig. 30  (A) Schematic illustration of the preparation of carbon fiber cloth and sulphonated reduced graphene oxide composites by electrophoresis deposition and the SEM image of graphite, sulphonated reduced graphene oxide, carbon fiber cloth and the carbon fiber cloth and sulphonated reduced graphene oxide composite. (B) The electrosorption–desorption performance of the carbon fiber cloth and sulphonated reduced graphene oxide composite electrode in a NaCl solution with an initial conductivity of 500 μS cm−1 by varying the cell voltage from 0.6 to 1.4 V. (C) Removal capacity and specific charge with respect to the cell voltage. Copyright 2014, the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Alternatively, Qiu et al. demonstrated a rational design of sulfonated graphene and carbon nanofiber composites by making use of electrospun carbon nanofibers with a hierarchically porous structure as substrates, while introducing the sulfonated graphene with abundant negatively charged groups as a cation exchange membrane (Fig. 31A and B).470 It can be seen that a relatively uniform coating is successfully attached onto the coated part of carbon nanofibers, which can be distinguished by a clear visible boundary (Fig. 31C). Notably, the as-made sulfonated graphene and carbon nanofiber composites can be tuned to hydrophilic from hydrophobic and show dramatic enhancements in electrochemical properties. In addition, for the CDI cells that are constructed with asymmetric electrodes of pure carbon nanofibers and sulfonated graphene and carbon nanofiber composites (Fig. 31D), the sulfonated graphene coating shows significant cation selectivity, resulting in typical electrosorption behavior of membrane capacitive deionization with an enhancement up to 89% in the electrosorption capacity and 137% in the charge efficiency. The novel approach may open up a new way to the applications of functional graphene-based materials for high performance, energy-efficient, and cost-effective desalination.
 Fig. 31  (A) Schematic illustration of the three-step synthesis of sulfonated graphene; insets display the digital images of the reduced graphite oxide and sulfonated graphene suspension after being allowed to stand for 1 week. (B) Schematic illustration of the “dip-coating” process; insets show the digital images of reduced graphite oxide, carbon nanofiber composites and sulfonated graphene and carbon nanofiber composites. (C) FE-SEM images of sulfonated graphene and carbon nanofiber composites from the top view with a coating boundary. (D) Schematic of three CDI cells assembled with different electrode pairs. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Functionalized graphene in particular has recently been regarded as a promising CDI electrode material. However, the preparation of functionalized graphene-based on graphene oxide usually results in serious secondary pollution due to the usage of highly poisonous chemicals, and thus still cannot meet the demand of practical application. It is feasible that environmentally friendly activated carbon and small amounts of functionalized graphene can be combined rationally, and used as CDI electrodes. Therefore, Song et al. rationally designed a novel composite electrode by sono-assembling activated carbon/m-phenylenediamine or p-phenylenediamine functionalized graphene into an inter-connected network architecture for CDI application successfully.471 The functionalization of graphene can not only inhibit its tendency to agglomerate, but also distinctly improve the electrochemical performance including conductivity. The electrosorption experimental data obtained for the composite electrode are in agreement with the Langmuir adsorption isotherm model, which is absolutely different from that of activated carbon. After the introduction of m-phenylenediamine or p-phenylenediamine functionalized graphene, the composite exhibited an electrosorption capacity of 12.58 mg g−1, which is approximately about 2.37 times that of the activated carbon electrode (5.31 mg g−1). The enhanced electrosorption performance of the composite is ascribed to its enlarged accessible pore diameter as an efficient channel for fast salt ion transport and lower charge transfer resistance. The good performance of this composite indicates that it can be a promising candidate as an electrode material for CDI.
The functional groups on the surface of graphene not only can prevent the aggregation of graphene sheets but also have a significant effect on the interfacial charge transfer rate and the wettability of the electrodes. As a result, the desalination performance and charge efficiency are much improved. In addition to grafting ion-selective functional groups on graphene, many chelating agents, such as ethylenediamine triacetic acid,472–474 diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid,475 ethylenediamine,476 polydopamine,477 and chitin,478,479 can also be used to functionalize graphene, and applied to heavy metal ion adsorption. Maybe the graphene modified by chelating agents can be used to separate heavy metal ions from salt ions by the CDI technique. Furthermore, the functionalized graphene combined with other carbon materials can effectively increase the desalination efficiency.

4. Summary
The CDI technology has received tremendous attention and research interest in recent years due to its energy-efficient and cost-saving advantages over traditional desalination technologies. In this review, we have summarized the recent progress made in graphene-based materials for CDI electrodes, with a specific focus on the fabrication methods, different kinds of porous structures, conductivity, specific surface area and wettability needed for graphene-based electrodes, and their influences on the desalination performance. The outstanding graphene-based materials for CDI always possess a suitable porous structure, high conductivity and good wettability, which were beneficial to enhance the desalination performance.
The current research has mainly focused on fabricating graphene-based materials with an innovative structure, and modifying them with functional groups or doping them with heteroatoms. Although recent developments in graphene-based materials for CDI appear to be extremely promising, there remain challenges for different types of electrode materials for practical applications. For example, micro- and mesopores in graphene can increase the surface area and offer a plenty of adsorption sites. But some dead pores without perfect pore interconnection will limit the improvement of the salt adsorption capacity and rate. 3D macroporous graphene can guarantee a short diffusion distance. However, the accessible surface area and ion transport in 3D macroporous graphene need to be improved due to the lack of micro- and mesopores. Therefore, it is quite necessary to introduce mesopores and micropores into the macroporous framework of 3D graphene to construct a hierarchically porous architecture. The ion-buffering reservoirs formed in the macroporous channels can minimize the ion diffusion distances into interior pore surfaces. The presence of the mesoporous structure guarantees not only a large accessible surface area for ion adsorption, but also a low-resistant pathway for ion transport through the framework, which can endow 3D hierarchical graphene with a high salt adsorption capacity and fast salt adsorption rate. Thus, it is of great significance to control the pore size and construct 3D hierarchical graphene for CDI.
In addition to reasonable porous structures, the electrochemistry and surface physical properties are also quite important. While graphene-based electrodes exhibit high electrical conductivity and good mechanical flexibility, they have only moderate desalination efficiency due to limited wettability that generally confines the effective transport and diffusion of salt ions. In contrast, nitrogen doped graphene and functionalized graphene electrodes endow the electrodes with good wettability and desalination performance, but the nitrogen doped graphene and functionalized graphene electrodes have decreased adsorption sites due to the blockage of pores by large molecules. Graphene-based composite electrodes generally show better conductivity and a large surface area; however, their preparation methods are often complicated. Advantages always seem to be accompanied by trade-offs in these different kinds of graphene-based electrodes. Thus, there exists substantial room for stimulating research and development of high-performance graphene-based materials for CDI applications.
5. Future prospects
The CDI technology has experienced tremendous growth over the last decade. Particularly, graphene-based materials have been demonstrated as potential CDI electrodes. However, further development is needed for high-performance CDI electrodes that can simultaneously ensure high salt adsorption capacity, high salt adsorption rate and high charge efficiency. Rationally designing the porous structures of CDI electrodes to form hierarchically interconnected porous microstructures and avoid the formation of dead volume or the collapse of the porous microstructures is an effective way to enhance the desalination performance. Besides, it is significant to endow graphene with high conductivity, good wettability, and high specific surface area by tuning the surface of graphene or combining graphene with other materials. In addition, developing a new way to overcome the co-ion effects and then increase the salt adsorption capacity might be an effective solution. Therefore, the exploration of the potential of graphene-based materials for CDI is needed.
In addition to fabricating high performance electrode materials, a unified system to evaluate the desalination performance of CDI is needed. It is noted that it is difficult to compare the reported performances due to the inconsistent performance evaluation methods with different device configurations and operating conditions. Therefore, uniform standards for calculating the performance of different electrode materials should be established. In conventional desalination evaluations, the capacity and rate of desalination were separately provided under specific conditions; thus facile acquisition of the overall desalination performance is difficult. Recently, the CDI Ragone plot of salt adsorption capacity versus salt adsorption rate has been used as a new performance metric of CDI, which evaluates the desalination performance taking into consideration both the capacity and rate. The CDI Ragone plot could facilitate designing and optimizing the CDI process, working as a comprehensive guide to evaluate the desalination performance.
Generally, cost consideration is of key importance to make CDI an affordable mass-market technology. At the moment, the production costs for graphene are coming down gradually. Besides, there are more and more methods for the construction of porous structures with high conductivity and good wettability. It has been demonstrated that graphene-based materials exhibit high desalination performance. Compared to traditional desalination methods, the CDI technology is low-cost and environmentally friendly. All these favorable conditions make the application of graphene-based materials to the CDI technology possible in practice.
In conclusion, graphene-based materials for CDI have been extensively explored. It has been demonstrated that graphene-based materials will play an important and perhaps an irreplaceable role in CDI due to their intriguing features.
Although there are many challenges that remain to be settled, we believe that graphene-based CDI will emerge as a widely used technology in the application of desalination in the near future.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the support of the State Key Research and Development Plan (2017YFB0102200), Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality (16JC1401700 and 16DZ1204300). The authors would like to thank all the students and collaborators who have worked diligently to carry out the original experiments.
References
M. W. Rosegrant and S. A. Cline, Science, 2003, 302, 1917–1919 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. L. McGinnis and M. Elimelech, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 8625–8629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Shannon, P. W. Bohn, M. Elimelech, J. G. Georgiadis, B. J. Marinas and A. M. Mayes, Nature, 2008, 452, 301–310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Kim, S. H. Ko, K. H. Kang and J. Han, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 297–301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Elimelech and W. A. Phillip, Science, 2011, 333, 712–717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. F. Service, Science, 2006, 313, 1088–1090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Earle, J. Esperanca, M. A. Gilea, J. N. C. Lopes, L. P. N. Rebelo, J. W. Magee, K. R. Seddon and J. A. Widegren, Nature, 2006, 439, 831–834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Klaysom, T. Y. Cath, T. Depuydt and I. F. J. Vankelecom, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 6959–6989 RSC .
B. E. Logan and M. Elimelech, Nature, 2012, 488, 313–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Post, H. V. M. Hamelers and C. J. N. Buisman, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 5785–5790 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Sholl and R. P. Lively, Nature, 2016, 532, 435–437 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Schiermeier, Nature, 2008, 452, 260–261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. Suss, S. Porada, X. Sun, P. M. Biesheuvel, J. Yoon and V. Presser, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2296–2319 CAS .
C. Largeot, C. Portet, J. Chmiola, P.-L. Taberna, Y. Gogotsi and P. Simon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2730–2731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. M. Biesheuvel, B. van Limpt and A. van der Wal, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 5636–5640 CAS .
H. Li, L. Pan, Y. Zhang, L. Zou, C. Sun, Y. Zhan and Z. Sun, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2010, 485, 161–166 CrossRef CAS .
S. Porada, R. Zhao, A. van der Wal, V. Presser and P. M. Biesheuvel, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2013, 58, 1388–1442 CrossRef CAS .
S. Porada, L. Borchardt, M. Oschatz, M. Bryjak, J. S. Atchison, K. J. Keesman, S. Kaskel, P. M. Biesheuvel and V. Presser, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3700–3712 CAS .
A. C. Pierre and A. G. R. M. Pajonk, Chem. Rev., 2002, 102, 4243–4265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kumar, S. Sen Gupta, S. Katiyar, V. K. Raman, S. K. Varigala, T. Pradeep and A. Sharma, Carbon, 2016, 99, 375–383 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Farmer, D. V. Fix, G. V. Mack, R. W. Pekala and J. F. Poco, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1996, 143, 159–169 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xu, J. E. Drewes, D. Heil and G. Wang, Water Res., 2008, 42, 2605–2617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Gabelich, T. D. Tran and I. H. Suffet, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2002, 36, 3010–3019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, B. Qian, Q. Dong, J. Yang, Z. Zhao and J. Qiu, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2013, 103, 216–221 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chang, Y. Yu, X. Duan and W. Liu, Sep. Sci. Technol., 2012, 48, 359–365 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tsouris, R. Mayes, J. Kiggans, K. Sharma, S. Yiacoumi, D. DePaoli and S. Dai, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 10243–10249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, S. Yoon, T. Hyeon, S. M. Oh and K. B. Kim, Chem. Commun., 1999, 2177–2178 RSC .
R. T. Mayes, C. Tsouris, J. O. Kiggans Jr, S. M. Mahurin, D. W. DePaoli and S. Dai, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 8674–8678 RSC .
Y.-C. Tsai and R.-a. Doong, Synth. Met., 2015, 205, 48–57 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zou, L. Li, H. Song and G. Morris, Water Res., 2008, 42, 2340–2348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Duan, Y. Li, H. Cao, Y. Xie and Y. Zhang, Desalin. Water Treat., 2014, 52, 1388–1395 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Peng, D. Zhang, L. Shi, T. Yan, S. Yuan, H. Li, R. Gao and J. Fang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 17068–17076 CAS .
L. Wang, M. Wang, Z.-H. Huang, T. Cui, X. Gui, F. Kang, K. Wang and D. Wu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 18295–18299 RSC .
L. Yang, Z. Shi and W. Yang, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2014, 251, 122–127 CrossRef CAS .
C. Nie, L. Pan, H. Li, T. Chen, T. Lu and Z. Sun, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2012, 666, 85–88 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhang, L. Shi, J. Fang and K. Dai, J. Mater. Sci., 2006, 42, 2471–2475 CrossRef .
L. Wang, M. Wang, Z. H. Huang, T. X. Cui, X. C. Gui, F. Y. Kang, K. L. Wang and D. H. Wu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 18295–18299 RSC .
R. Elazari, G. Salitra, A. Garsuch, A. Panchenko and D. Aurbach, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5641–5644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wu, G. Wang, Q. Dong, B. Qian, Y. Meng and J. Qiu, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 176, 426–433 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bian, P. Liang, X. Yang, Y. Jiang, C. Zhang and X. Huang, Desalination, 2016, 381, 95–99 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, T. Lu, Z. Sun, D. H. C. Chua and L. Pan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8693–8700 CAS .
A. K. Meena, G. K. Mishra, P. K. Rai, C. Rajagopal and P. N. Nagar, J. Hazard. Mater., 2005, 122, 161–170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Peng, D. Zhang, L. Shi and T. Yan, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 6603–6612 RSC .
Z. Peng, D. Zhang, T. Yan, J. Zhang and L. Shi, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 282, 965–973 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhang, L. Shi, J. Fang and K. Dai, Mater. Lett., 2006, 60, 360–363 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Kohli, R. Singh, M. K. Singh, A. Singh, R. K. Khardekar, P. R. Sankar, P. Tiwari and P. K. Gupta, Desalin. Water Treat., 2012, 49, 130–135 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ziyin, L. Zhuo, M. Kyoung-sik, F. Yunnan, Y. Yagang, L. Liyi and W. Ching-ping, Carbon, 2013, 63, 547–553 CrossRef .
J. Annett and G. L. Cross, Nature, 2016, 535, 271–275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. Dreyer, S. Park, C. W. Bielawski and R. S. Ruoff, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 228–240 RSC .
V. Singh, D. Joung, L. Zhai, S. Das, S. I. Khondaker and S. Seal, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2011, 56, 1178–1271 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tang and Z. Zhou, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2013, 58, 1244–1315 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kuila, A. K. Mishra, P. Khanra, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 52–71 RSC .
M. Diba, D. W. H. Fam, A. R. Boccaccini and M. S. P. Shaffer, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2016, 82, 83–117 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, Z. Liu, H. Y. Sun and C. Gao, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 7046–7117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Bonaccorso, L. Colombo, G. Yu, M. Stoller, V. Tozzini, A. C. Ferrari, R. S. Ruoff and V. Pellegrini, Science, 2015, 347, 1246501 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Raccichini, A. Varzi, S. Passerini and B. Scrosati, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 271–279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. B. Schon, B. T. McAllister, P. F. Li and D. S. Seferos, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 6345–6404 RSC .
D. Lin, Y. Liu, Z. Liang, H.-W. Lee, J. Sun, H. Wang, K. Yan, J. Xie and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 626–632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Q. Wu, F. Zhang, H. W. Liang and X. L. Feng, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 6160–6177 RSC .
S. Park and R. S. Ruoff, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 217–224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. El-Kady, Y. Shao and R. B. Kaner, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16033 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Robinson, F. K. Perkins, E. S. Snow, Z. Wei and P. E. Sheehan, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3137–3140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Wen and N. F. Steinmetz, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 4074–4126 RSC .
H. Gonzalez-Herrero, J. M. Gomez-Rodriguez, P. Mallet, M. Moaied, J. Jose Palacios, C. Salgado, M. M. Ugeda, J.-Y. Veuillen, F. Yndurain and I. Brihuega, Science, 2016, 352, 437–441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pumera, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4146–4157 RSC .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, W. Cai, X. Li, J. W. Suk, J. R. Potts and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3906–3924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Higgins, P. Zamani, A. P. Yu and Z. W. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 357–390 CAS .
Y. Huang, J. Liang and Y. Chen, Small, 2012, 8, 1805–1834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, D. K. James and J. M. Tour, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4924–4955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shao, M. F. El-Kady, L. J. Wang, Q. Zhang, Y. Li, H. Wang, M. F. Mousavi and R. B. Kaner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 3639–3665 RSC .
F. Perreault, A. Fonseca de Faria and M. Elimelech, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5861–5896 RSC .
H. A. Becerril, J. Mao, Z. Liu, R. M. Stoltenberg, Z. Bao and Y. Chen, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 463–470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ma, G. Tocci, A. Michaelides and G. Aeppli, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 66–71 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, Y. Li, K. Dai, G. Zheng, C. Liu, C. Shen, X. Yan, J. Guo and Z. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 157–166 RSC .
S. J. Heerema and C. Dekker, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 127–136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Qiu, M. Bulut Coskun, Y. Tang, J. Z. Liu, T. Alan, J. Ding, V. T. Truong and D. Li, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 194–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lee, T. K. Choi, Y. B. Lee, H. R. Cho, R. Ghaffari, L. Wang, H. J. Choi, T. D. Chung, N. Lu, T. Hyeon, S. H. Choi and D.-H. Kim, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 566–572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xu, B. Xu, Y. Gu, Z. Xiong, J. Sun and X. S. Zhao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1388–1414 CAS .
J. Zhang, J. Jiang, H. Li and X. S. Zhao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4009–4015 CAS .
P. S. Goh and A. F. Ismail, Desalination, 2015, 356, 115–128 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, D. Tonderys, S. E. Leggett, E. K. Williams, M. T. Kiani, R. S. Steinberg, Y. Qiu, I. Y. Wong and R. H. Hurt, Carbon, 2016, 97, 14–24 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Bandurin, I. Torre, R. K. Kumar, M. Ben Shalom, A. Tomadin, A. Principi, G. H. Auton, E. Khestanova, K. S. Novoselov, I. V. Grigorieva, L. A. Ponomarenko, A. K. Geim and M. Polini, Science, 2016, 351, 1055–1058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Jia and W. Zhang, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2016, 11, 1–25 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, Z. Zeng, Z. Fan, J. Liu and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5979–6004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Oren, Desalination, 2008, 228, 10–29 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Welgemoed and C. F. Schutte, Desalination, 2005, 183, 327–340 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ahmad, S. J. Khan, Y. Jamal, H. Kamran, A. Ahsan, M. Ahmad and A. Khan, Desalin. Water Treat., 2016, 57, 7659–7666 CrossRef CAS .
E. Garcia-Quismondo, C. Santos, J. Palma and M. A. Anderson, Desalin. Water Treat., 2016, 57, 2315–2324 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, C. Nie, X. Liu, X. Xu, Z. Sun and L. Pan, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 15205–15225 RSC .
A. Subramani and J. G. Jacangelo, Water Res., 2015, 75, 164–187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Thamilselvan, A. S. Nesaraj and M. Noel, Int. J. Environ. Sci. Technol., 2016, 13, 2961–2976 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-H. Huang, Z. Yang, F. Kang and M. Inagaki, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 470–496 CAS .
J.-B. Lee, K.-K. Park, H.-M. Eum and C.-W. Lee, Desalination, 2006, 196, 125–134 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhao, P. M. Biesheuvel, H. Miedema, H. Bruning and A. van der Wal, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 205–210 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Biesheuvel, S. Porada, M. Levi and M. Z. Bazant, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2014, 18, 1365–1376 CrossRef CAS .
S. Porada, L. Borchardt, M. Oschatz, M. Bryjak, J. S. Atchison, K. J. Keesman, S. Kaskel, P. M. Biesheuvel and V. Presser, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3700–3712 CAS .
M. E. Suss, T. F. Baumann, W. L. Bourcier, C. M. Spadaccini, K. A. Rose, J. G. Santiago and M. Stadermann, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9511–9519 CAS .
J. W. Blair and G. W. Murphy, Adv. Chem. Ser., 1960, 27, 206 CrossRef .
Y. Oren and A. Soffer, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1983, 13, 473–487 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Oren and A. Soffer, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1978, 125, 869–875 CrossRef CAS .
S. Porada, L. Weinstein, R. Dash, A. van der Wal, M. Bryjak, Y. Gogotsi and P. M. Biesheuvel, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 1194–1199 CAS .
H. Li, L. Zou, L. Pan and Z. Sun, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 44, 8692–8697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zhao, M. van Soestbergen, H. H. M. Rijnaarts, A. van der Wal, M. Z. Bazant and P. M. Biesheuvel, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2012, 384, 38–44 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. M. Johnson, A. W. Venolia, J. Newman, R. G. Wilbourne, C. M. Wong, W. S. Gilliam, S. Johnson and R. H. Horowitz, The Office of Saline Water Research and Development, Progress Report No. 516, US Dept. of the Interior, Publication 200056,  1970 Search PubMed .
I. Cohen, E. Avraham, M. Noked, A. Soffer and D. Aurbach, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 19856–19863 CAS .
E. Avraham, Y. Bouhadana, A. Soffer and D. Aurbach, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, P95–P99 CrossRef CAS .
S.-i. Jeon, J.-g. Yeo, S. Yang, J. Choi and D. K. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 6378–6383 CAS .
S. Porada, B. B. Sales, H. V. M. Hamelers and P. M. Biesheuvel, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1613–1618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. B. Hatzell, E. Iwama, A. Ferris, B. Daffos, K. Urita, T. Tzedakis, F. Chauvet, P.-L. Taberna, Y. Gogotsi and P. Simon, Electrochem. Commun., 2014, 43, 18–21 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Biesheuvel, R. Zhao, S. Porada and A. van der Wal, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 360, 239–248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-J. Kim and J.-H. Choi, Water Res., 2010, 44, 990–996 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Liu, H. Wang, T. Yan, J. Zhang, L. Shi and D. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 5303–5313 CAS .
X. Gao, A. Omosebi, J. Landon and K. Liu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 897–909 CAS .
J. Lee, S. Kim, C. Kim and J. Yoon, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3683–3689 CAS .
S.-i. Jeon, H.-r. Park, J.-g. Yeo, S. Yang, C. H. Cho, M. H. Han and D. K. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1471–1475 CAS .
X. Xu, M. Wang, Y. Liu, T. Lu and L. Pan, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 189–195 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, X. Wang, L. Zhang, S. Lee and H. Dai, Science, 2008, 319, 1229–1232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Gupta, T. Sakthivel and S. Seal, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2015, 73, 44–126 CrossRef CAS .
C. N. Rao, A. K. Sood, K. S. Subrahmanyam and A. Govindaraj, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 7752–7777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ambrosi, C. K. Chua, A. Bonanni and M. Pumera, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 7150–7188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, C. W. Magnuson, A. Venugopal, R. M. Tromp, J. B. Hannon, E. M. Vogel, L. Colombo and R. S. Ruoff, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2816–2819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, M. D. Stoller, K. J. Ganesh, W. Cai, P. J. Ferreira, A. Pirkle, R. M. Wallace, K. A. Cychosz, M. Thommes, D. Su, E. A. Stach and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2011, 332, 1537–1541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. S. Wu, K. Parvez, X. Feng and K. Mullen, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2487 Search PubMed .
M. D. Stoller, C. W. Magnuson, Y. Zhu, S. Murali, J. W. Suk, R. Piner and R. S. Ruoff, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4685–4689 CAS .
Y. Xu, Z. Lin, X. Zhong, X. Huang, N. O. Weiss, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4554 CAS .
K. S. Kim, Y. Zhao, H. Jang, S. Y. Lee, J. M. Kim, K. S. Kim, J. H. Ahn, P. Kim, J. Y. Choi and B. H. Hong, Nature, 2009, 457, 706–710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Rath and P. P. Kundu, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 26666–26674 RSC .
R. R. Nair, P. Blake, A. N. Grigorenko, K. S. Novoselov, T. J. Booth, T. Stauber, N. M. Peres and A. K. Geim, Science, 2008, 320, 1308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, L. Qiu, K. Wang, Y. Zeng, D. Li, T. Williams, Y. Huang, M. Tsapatsis and H. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 2249–2251 RSC .
P. Ruffieux, S. Wang, B. Yang, C. Sanchez-Sanchez, J. Liu, T. Dienel, L. Talirz, P. Shinde, C. A. Pignedoli, D. Passerone, T. Dumslaff, X. Feng, K. Mullen and R. Fasel, Nature, 2016, 531, 489–492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lotya, Y. Hernandez, P. J. King, R. J. Smith, V. Nicolosi, L. S. Karlsson, F. M. Blighe, S. De, Z. Wang, I. T. McGovern, G. S. Duesberg and J. N. Coleman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3611–3620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Choucair, P. Thordarson and J. A. Stride, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 30–33 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, J. C. Xu, G. H. Li, X. L. Jia, Y. F. Li, F. Yang, L. Q. Zhang, C. M. Xu, J. S. Gao, Y. Liu and Z. W. Fang, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 284, 78–84 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, M. R. Lohe, K. Muellen and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6213–6221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Ruffieux, S. Wang, B. Yang, C. Sanchez-Sanchez, J. Liu, T. Dienel, L. Talirz, P. Shinde, C. A. Pignedoli, D. Passerone, T. Dumslaff, X. Feng, K. Muellen and R. Fasel, Nature, 2016, 531, 489–492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Talirz, P. Ruffieux and R. Fasel, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6222–6231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hao, L. Wang, Y. Liu, H. Chen, X. Wang, C. Tan, S. Nie, J. W. Suk, T. Jiang, T. Liang, J. Xiao, W. Ye, C. R. Dean, B. I. Yakobson, K. F. McCarty, P. Kim, J. Hone, L. Colombo and R. S. Ruoff, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 426–431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Stoller, S. J. Park, Y. W. Zhu, J. H. An and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3498–3502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, T. Lu, L. Pan, Y. Zhang and Z. Sun, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 6773–6779 RSC .
H. Li, L. Zou, L. Pan and Z. Sun, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2010, 75, 8–14 CrossRef CAS .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, R. D. Piner, K. A. Kohlhaas, A. Kleinhammes, Y. Jia, Y. Wu, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Carbon, 2007, 45, 1558–1565 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, J. Yang, J. Park, X. Gou, B. Wang, H. Liu and J. Yao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 8192–8195 CAS .
S. Pei and H.-M. Cheng, Carbon, 2012, 50, 3210–3228 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fan, W. Peng, Y. Li, X. Li, S. Wang, G. Zhang and F. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4490–4493 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lei, L. Lu and X. S. Zhao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6391–6399 CAS .
Z. Fan, K. Wang, T. Wei, J. Yan, L. Song and B. Shao, Carbon, 2010, 48, 1686–1689 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-J. Fan, W. Kai, J. Yan, T. Wei, L.-J. Zhi, J. Feng, Y.-m. Ren, L.-P. Song and F. Wei, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 191–198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhu, S. Guo, Y. Fang and S. Dong, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2429–2437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Fernandez-Merino, L. Guardia, J. I. Paredes, S. Villar-Rodil, P. Solis-Fernandez, A. Martinez-Alonso and J. M. D. Tascon, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 6426–6432 CAS .
J. Zhang, H. Yang, G. Shen, P. Cheng, J. Zhang and S. Guo, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 1112–1114 RSC .
D. R. Dreyer, S. Murali, Y. Zhu, R. S. Ruoff and C. W. Bielawski, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3443–3447 RSC .
V. H. Pham, H. D. Pham, T. T. Dang, S. H. Hur, E. J. Kim, B. S. Kong, S. Kim and J. S. Chung, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 10530 RSC .
U. Saha, R. Jaiswal and T. H. Goswami, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 196, 386–404 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, D. Zhang, T. Yan, X. Wen, L. Shi and J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 23745–23748 RSC .
K. Mohanapriya, G. Ghosh and N. Jha, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 209, 719–729 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Coleman, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3680–3695 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nardecchia, D. Carriazo, M. L. Ferrer, M. C. Gutierrez and F. del Monte, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 794–830 RSC .
L. L. Zhang, X. Zhao, M. D. Stoller, Y. Zhu, H. Ji, S. Murali, Y. Wu, S. Perales, B. Clevenger and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1806–1812 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhi, W. Zhao, X. Y. Liu, A. R. Chen, Z. Q. Liu and F. Q. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 2013–2019 CrossRef CAS .
X. M. Li, T. T. Yang, Y. Yang, J. Zhu, L. Li, F. E. Alam, X. Li, K. L. Wang, H. Y. Cheng, C. T. Lin, Y. Fang and H. W. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1322–1329 CrossRef CAS .
S. Han, D. Wu, S. Li, F. Zhang and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 849–864 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Xiao, T. E. Beechem, M. T. Brumbach, T. N. Lambert, D. J. Davis, J. R. Michael, C. M. Washburn, J. Wang, S. M. Brozik, D. R. Wheeler, D. B. Burckel and R. Polsky, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3573–3579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Q. Yan, W. L. Yao, L. Hu, D. D. Liu, C. D. Wang and C.-S. Lee, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 5563–5577 RSC .
G. Hu, C. Xu, Z. Sun, S. Wang, H.-M. Cheng, F. Li and W. Ren, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1603–1609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. N. Maiti, J. Lim, K. E. Lee, W. J. Lee and S. O. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 615–619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Lee, H. W. Kim, J. O. Hwang, W. J. Lee, J. Kwon, C. W. Bielawski, R. S. Ruoff and S. O. Kim, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 10084–10088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liang, Z. Li, X. Yu, Z. H. Huang, F. Kang and Q. H. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4634–4639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, G. Shi and X. Duan, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 1666–1675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cao, Z. Zeng, W. Shi, P. Yep, Q. Yan and H. Zhang, Small, 2013, 9, 1703–1707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Worsley, P. J. Pauzauskie, T. Y. Olson, J. Biener, J. H. Satcher Jr and T. F. Baumann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14067–14069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. P. Cong, X. C. Ren, P. Wang and S. H. Yu, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2693–2703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Han, Z. Tang, P. Li, G. Yang, Q. Zheng and J. Yang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 5462–5467 RSC .
Y. X. Xu, Z. Y. Lin, X. Q. Huang, Y. Liu, Y. Huang and X. F. Duan, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4042–4049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sui, X. Zhang, Y. Lei and Y. Luo, Carbon, 2011, 49, 4314–4321 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, K. Sheng, C. Li and G. Shi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4324–4330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-x. Sheng, Y.-x. Xu, C. Li and G.-q. Shi, New Carbon Mater., 2011, 26, 9–15 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Chen, Q. Zhang, C. H. Huang, X. C. Zhao, B. S. Zhang, Q. Q. Kong, M. Z. Wang, Y. G. Yang, R. Cai and D. Sheng Su, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 7149–7151 RSC .
H. Ji, L. Zhang, M. T. Pettes, H. Li, S. Chen, L. Shi, R. Piner and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2446–2451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Nieto, B. Boesl and A. Agarwal, Carbon, 2015, 85, 299–308 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, W. Ren, L. Gao, B. Liu, S. Pei and H. M. Cheng, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 424–428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Niu, J. Chen, H. H. Hng, J. Ma and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4144–4150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. G. Choi, M. Yang, W. H. Hong, J. W. Choi and Y. S. Huh, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4020–4028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zhang, Y. Cao, P. Li, X. Zang, P. Sun, K. Wang, M. Zhong, J. Wei, D. Wu, F. Kang and H. Zhu, Nano Res., 2014, 7, 1477–1487 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, Q. Wu, Y. Sun, H. Bai and G. Shi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 7358–7362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Chabot, D. Higgins, A. Yu, X. Xiao, Z. Chen and J. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1564–1596 CAS .
K. Shehzad, Y. Xu, C. Gao and X. Duan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 5541–5588 RSC .
D.-W. Wang, F. Li, M. Liu, G. Q. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 120, 379–382 CrossRef .
M. T. Pettes, H. Ji, R. S. Ruoff and L. Shi, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2959–2964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li and G. Shi, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5549–5563 RSC .
W. Lv, C. Zhang, Z. Li and Q.-H. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 658–668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-Y. Yang, L.-J. Jin, G.-Q. Lu, Q.-Q. Xiao, Y.-X. Zhang, L. Jing, X.-X. Zhang, Y.-M. Yan and K.-N. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 3917–3925 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kong, X. Duan, Y. Ge, H. Liu, J. Hu and X. Duan, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 2458–2466 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. El-Deen, R. M. Boom, H. Y. Kim, H. Duan, M. B. Chan-Park and J.-H. Choi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 25313–25325 CAS .
X. C. Dong, H. Xu, X. W. Wang, Y. X. Huang, M. B. Chan-Park, H. Zhang, L. H. Wang, W. Huang and P. Chen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3206–3213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, D. Zhang, T. Yan, X. Wen, J. Zhang, L. Shi and Q. Zhong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 11778–11789 CAS .
X. Xu, L. Pan, Y. Liu, T. Lu, Z. Sun and D. H. Chua, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 8458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, C. Y. Chen, Z. Zhao, Z. Lin, C. Lee, X. Xu, C. Wang, Y. Huang, M. I. Shakir and X. Duan, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 4605–4610 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, B. Song, Z. Wu, Z. Lin, Y. Yao, K.-S. Moon and C. P. Wong, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 711–718 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, L. Shi, T. Yan, J. Zhang, Q. Zhong and D. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 4739–4750 CAS .
C. M. Parlett, K. Wilson and A. F. Lee, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3876–3893 RSC .
S. Y. Yin, Y. Y. Zhang, J. H. Kong, C. J. Zou, C. M. Li, X. H. Lu, J. Ma, F. Y. C. Boey and X. D. Chen, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3831–3838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, B. Q. Qian, Y. W. Wang, Q. Dong, F. Zhan and J. S. Qiu, New J. Chem., 2016, 40, 3786–3792 RSC .
C.-L. Yeh, H.-C. Hsi, K.-C. Li and C.-H. Hou, Desalination, 2015, 367, 60–68 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, Y. Liu, M. Wang, X. Yang, C. Zhu, T. Lu, R. Zhao and L. Pan, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 188, 406–413 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Sun, S. Z. Huang, L. H. Chen, Y. Li, X. Y. Yang, Z. Y. Yuan and B. L. Su, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 3479–3563 RSC .
Z.-S. Wu, Y. Sun, Y.-Z. Tan, S. Yang, X. Feng and K. Muellen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19532–19535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, T. Yan, P. Liu, G. Chen, L. Shi, J. Zhang, Q. Zhong and D. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 4908–4919 CAS .
A. G. El-Deen, R. M. Boom, H. Y. Kim, H. Duan, M. B. Chan-Park and J.-H. Choi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 25313–25325 CAS .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, G. H. Dommett, K. M. Kohlhaas, E. J. Zimney, E. A. Stach, R. D. Piner, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nature, 2006, 442, 282–286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Leong and H. Y. Yang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 53542–53549 RSC .
L. Chang, J. Li, X. Duan and W. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 176, 956–964 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, L. Pan, T. Chen, X. Xu, T. Lu, Z. Sun and D. H. C. Chua, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 151, 489–496 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Vol'fkovichz, A. A. Mikhalin and A. Y. Rychagov, Russ. J. Electrochem., 2013, 49, 594–598 CrossRef .
K. Sharma, Y. H. Kim, J. Gabitto, R. T. Mayes, S. Yiacoumi, H. Z. Bilheux, L. M. Walker, S. Dai and C. Tsouris, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 1038–1047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Zhao, T. T. Yan, Z. Wang, J. P. Zhang, L. Y. Shi and D. S. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 4297–4305 RSC .
M. Aslan, M. Zeiger, N. Jackel, I. Grobelsek, D. Weingarth and V. Presser, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2016, 28, 114003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P.-I. Liu, L.-C. Chung, C.-H. Ho, H. Shao, T.-M. Liang, M.-C. Chang, C.-C. M. Ma and R.-Y. Horng, Desalination, 2016, 379, 34–41 CrossRef CAS .
R. Niu, H. Li, Y. Ma, L. He and J. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 176, 755–762 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zou, G. Morris and D. Qi, Desalination, 2008, 225, 329–340 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Choi, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2010, 70, 362–366 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kim and J. Yoon, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2013, 704, 169–174 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Figueiredo, M. F. R. Pereira, M. M. A. Freitas and J. J. M. Orfao, Carbon, 1999, 37, 1379–1389 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, L. Pan, C. Nie, Y. Liu and Z. Sun, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 15556–15561 RSC .
C. Macias, P. Lavela, G. Rasines, M. C. Zafra, J. L. Tirado and C. O. Ania, J. Solid State Chem., 2016, 242, 21–28 CrossRef CAS .
C. Macias, G. Rasines, P. Lavela, M. C. Zafra, J. L. Tirado and C. O. Ania, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 2487–2494 CrossRef CAS .
H.-H. Jung, S.-W. Hwang, S.-H. Hyun, L. Kang-Ho and G.-T. Kim, Desalination, 2007, 216, 377–385 CrossRef CAS .
G. Rasines, P. Lavela, C. Macias, M. Haro, C. O. Ania and J. L. Tirado, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2012, 671, 92–98 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sung-Woo and H. Sang-Hoon, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2004, 347, 238–245 CrossRef .
J. Biener, M. Stadermann, M. Suss, M. A. Worsley, M. M. Biener, K. A. Rose and T. F. Baumann, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 656–667 CAS .
R. W. Pekala, J. C. Farmer, C. T. Alviso, T. D. Tran, S. T. Mayer, J. M. Miller and B. Dunn, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1998, 225, 74–80 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Yang, T. Y. Ying, S. Yiacoumi, C. Tsouris and E. S. Vittoratos, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 1961–1969 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, C. Nie, L. Pan, X. Xu, Z. Sun and D. H. C. Chua, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2014, 1, 249 RSC .
K. Sharma, H. Z. Bilheux, L. M. H. Walker, S. Voisin, R. T. Mayes, J. O. Kiggans Jr, S. Yiacoumi, D. W. DePaoli, S. Dai and C. Tsouris, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 11740–11747 RSC .
L. Li, L. Zou, H. Song and G. Morris, Carbon, 2009, 47, 775–781 CrossRef CAS .
A. Walcarius, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 4098–4140 RSC .
C. Macias, M. Haro, J. B. Parra, G. Rasines and C. O. Ania, Carbon, 2013, 63, 487–497 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Tsai and R.-a. Doong, Desalination, 2016, 398, 171–179 CrossRef CAS .
C.-W. Lee, S.-B. Yoon, H.-K. Kim, H.-C. Youn, J. Han, K. C. Roh and K.-B. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 2314–2322 CAS .
C. Liang, Z. Li and S. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3696–3717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-C. Huang and J.-C. He, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 221, 469–475 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhang, X. Wen, L. Shi, T. Yan and J. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5440–5446 RSC .
L. M. Chao, Z. Y. Liu, G. X. Zhang, X. N. Song, X. D. Lei, M. Noyong, U. Simon, Z. Chang and X. M. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 12730–12737 CAS .
S. S. Zhao, T. T. Yan, H. Wang, J. P. Zhang, L. Y. Shi and D. S. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 18027–18035 CAS .
X. Wen, D. Zhang, L. Shi, T. Yan, H. Wang and J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 23835–23844 RSC .
H. Wang, T. Yan, L. Shi, G. Chen, J. Zhang and D. Zhang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 3329–3338 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, Y. Liu, M. Wang, C. Zhu, T. Lu, R. Zhao and L. Pan, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 193, 88–95 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wen, D. Zhang, T. Yan, J. Zhang and L. Shi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 12334–12344 CAS .
H. Li, L. Pan, T. Lu, Y. Zhan, C. Nie and Z. Sun, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2011, 653, 40–44 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lin, C. Zhang, Z. Yan, Y. Zhu, Z. Peng, R. H. Hauge, D. Natelson and J. M. Tour, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 72–78 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. C. Tung, L.-M. Chen, M. J. Allen, J. K. Wassei, K. Nelson, R. B. Kaner and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1949–1955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhuyin, M. Qinghan, Z. Xuetong, M. Rui and C. Bing, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8767–8771 RSC .
Y. Zhang, Z. Zhen, Z. Zhang, J. Lao, J. Wei, K. Wang, F. Kang and H. Zhu, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 157, 134–141 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, P. Liang, Y. Bian, Y. Jiang, X. Sun, C. Zhang, X. Huang and F. Wei, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 58907–58915 RSC .
W. Wang, S. Guo, M. Penchev, I. Ruiz, K. N. Bozhilov, D. Yan, M. Ozkan and C. S. Ozkan, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 294–303 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, L. Li, C. Zhang, G. Casillas, Z. Sun, Z. Yan, G. Ruan, Z. Peng, A. R. Raji, C. Kittrell, R. H. Hauge and J. M. Tour, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1225 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Dong, B. Li, A. Wei, X. Cao, M. B. Chan-Park, H. Zhang, L.-J. Li, W. Huang and P. Chen, Carbon, 2011, 49, 2944–2949 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rikhtehgaran and A. Lohrasebi, Desalination, 2015, 365, 176–181 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fan, J. Yan, L. Zhi, Q. Zhang, T. Wei, J. Feng, M. Zhang, W. Qian and F. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3723–3728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhang, T. Yan, L. Shi, Z. Peng, X. Wen and J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 14696–14704 RSC .
H. Li, S. Liang, J. Li and L. He, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 6335–6341 CAS .
Y. Wimalasiri and L. Zou, Carbon, 2013, 59, 464–471 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, Y. Liu, T. Lu, Z. Sun, D. H. C. Chua and L. Pan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 13418–13425 CAS .
J. Liu, Z. Xiong, S. Wang, W. Cai, J. Yang and H. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 210, 171–180 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, J. Ma, T. Lu and L. Pan, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 32784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Pan, J. Yang, S. Wang, Z. Xiong, W. Cai and J. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 13827–13834 CAS .
C. Choong-Soo, O. Han-Jun, L. Jong-Ho, A. Hong-Joo, J. Yongsoo and K. Young-Jig, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 515, 220–225 CrossRef .
O. Han-Jun, A. Hong-Joo, L. Jong-Ho, J. Yongsoo, L. Jun-Hee and C. Choong-Soo, Mater. Sci. Eng., A, 2007, 449–451, 841–845 Search PubMed .
Z. Fan, J. Yan, T. Wei, L. Zhi, G. Ning, T. Li and F. Wei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2366–2375 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, Q. Dong, Z. Ling, C. Pan, C. Yu and J. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 21819–21823 RSC .
G. Wang, C. Pan, L. Wang, Q. Dong, C. Yu, Z. Zhao and J. Qiu, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 69, 65–70 CrossRef CAS .
P. Liang, L. Yuan, X. Yang, S. Zhou and X. Huang, Water Res., 2013, 47, 2523–2530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Guo, J. Huang, Z. Xue and X. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 306, 99–106 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Dong, G. Wang, B. Qian, C. Hu, Y. Wang and J. Qiu, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 137, 388–394 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, Q. Dong, T. T. Wu, F. Zhan, M. Zhou and J. S. Qiu, Carbon, 2016, 103, 311–317 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tang, S. Shen, J. Zhuang and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4603–4607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Sun, M. Xie, G. Wang, H. Sun, A. S. Cavanagh, J. J. Travis, S. M. George and J. Lian, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, A364–A369 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, T. Zhu, X. Zhou, Y. Zhang, X. W. Lou, X. Chen, H. Zhang, H. H. Hng and Q. Yan, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 1084–1089 RSC .
W. Wei, X. Cui, W. Chen and D. G. Ivey, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 1697–1721 RSC .
A. Sumboja, C. Y. Foo, X. Wang and P. S. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2809–2815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tang, B. Q. Li, Q. Zhang, L. Zhu, H. F. Wang, J. L. Shi and F. Wei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 577–585 CrossRef CAS .
B. Qiu, M. Xing and J. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5852–5855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Du, X. Lai, N. Yang, J. Zhai, D. Kisailus, F. Su, D. Wang and L. Jiang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 590–596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-Y. Zhang, H.-P. Li, X.-L. Cui and Y. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2801 RSC .
G. Yu, L. Hu, M. Vosgueritchian, H. Wang, X. Xie, J. R. McDonough, X. Cui, Y. Cui and Z. Bao, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2905–2911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yang, M. Zhou and Q. Xu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 19730–19740 RSC .
Y. He, W. Chen, X. Li, Z. Zhang, J. Fu, C. Zhao and E. Xie, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 174–182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ge, H.-B. Yao, W. Hu, X.-F. Yu, Y.-X. Yan, L.-B. Mao, H.-H. Li, S.-S. Li and S.-H. Yu, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 505–513 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-S. Wu, W. Ren, D.-W. Wang, F. Li, B. Liu and H.-M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5835–5842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yin, S. Wu, X. Zhou, X. Huang, Q. Zhang, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Small, 2010, 6, 307–312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, Z. Wang, Y. Qiu, Q. Pan and P. Hu, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 620, 31–37 CrossRef CAS .
I. Y. Y. Bu and R. Huang, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2015, 31, 131–138 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, J. Liu, Z. Zeng, C. F. Ng, L. Ma, H. Zhang, J. Lin, Z. Shen and H. J. Fan, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 6136–6143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, Z. Y. Leong, W. Shi, J. Zhang, T. Chen and H. Y. Yang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 11967–11972 RSC .
B. G. Choi, S. J. Chang, Y. B. Lee, J. S. Bae, H. J. Kim and Y. S. Huh, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5924–5930 RSC .
L. M. Chang, X. Y. Duan and W. Liu, Desalination, 2011, 270, 285–290 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Ryoo, J. H. Kim and G. Seo, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2003, 264, 414–419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. C. Leonard, J. R. Genthe, J. L. Sanfilippo, W. A. Zeltner and M. A. Anderson, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 5286–5291 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yin, S. Zhao, J. Wan, H. Tang, L. Chang, L. He, H. Zhao, Y. Gao and Z. Tang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 25, 6270–6276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Z. Myint and J. Dutta, Desalination, 2012, 305, 24–30 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. El-Deen, J.-H. Choi, C. S. Kim, K. A. Khalil, A. A. Almajid and N. A. M. Barakat, Desalination, 2015, 361, 53–64 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Ma, S. H. Chen, S. Y. Yang, W. P. Chen, Y. H. Cheng, Y. W. Guo, S. J. Peng, S. Ramakrishna and M. F. Zhu, J. Power Sources, 2016, 306, 481–488 CrossRef CAS .
J. Deng, L. Chen, Y. Sun, M. Ma and L. Fu, Carbon, 2015, 92, 177–184 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, Y. Mi, X. Liu, S. Liu, S. Yang and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 14706–14711 RSC .
A. G. El-Deen, N. A. M. Barakat and H. Y. Kim, Desalination, 2014, 344, 289–298 CrossRef CAS .
Z. S. Wu, S. B. Yang, Y. Sun, K. Parvez, X. L. Feng and K. Mullen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9082–9085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ngoc Tuan, S. Chung, J. K. Lee and J. Lee, J. Energy Chem., 2016, 25, 354–360 CrossRef .
C.-C. Ou, C.-S. Yang and S.-H. Lin, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2011, 1, 295–307 CAS .
A. S. Yasin, H. O. Mohamed, I. M. A. Mohamed, H. M. Mousa and N. A. M. Barakat, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2016, 171, 34–43 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xia, D. Chao, Z. Fan, C. Guan, X. Cao, H. Zhang and H. J. Fan, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1651–1658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Kulkarni, U.
M. Patil, I. Shackery, J. S. Sohn, S. Lee, B. Park and S. Jun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 4989–4998 CAS .
X. Gao, A. Omosebi, N. Holubowitch, A. Liu, K. Ruh, J. Landon and K. Liu, Desalination, 2016, 399, 16–20 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wu, Y. X. Xu, Z. Y. Yao, A. R. Liu and G. Q. Shi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1963–1970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. Wang, F. Li, J. P. Zhao, W. C. Ren, Z. G. Chen, J. Tan, Z. S. Wu, I. Gentle, G. Q. Lu and H. M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1745–1752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, X. Duan, Y. Xu and X. Duan, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7231–7247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Nadiv, M. Shtein, M. Buzaglo, S. Peretz-Damari, A. Kovalchuk, T. Wang, J. M. Tour and O. Regev, Carbon, 2016, 99, 444–450 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Zhang, Y. Wang, S. C. Xu, J. X. Wang, Z. Wang and S. C. Wang, Synth. Met., 2010, 160, 1392–1396 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, K. Xu, X. Zhang, C. Qi, Q. Lv and H. Feng, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2016, 16, 520–526 CrossRef .
X. M. Zhang, J. Y. Wang, H. B. Jia, S. Y. You, X. G. Xiong, L. F. Ding and Z. D. Xu, Composites, Part B, 2016, 84, 121–129 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, Y. Tu, L. Li, S. Shang and X. M. Tao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 1707–1713 CAS .
Y. Zhan, L. Pan, C. Nie, H. Li and Z. Sun, J. Alloys Compd., 2011, 509, 5667–5671 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Kim and J.-H. Choi, Water Res., 2010, 44, 990–996 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Kim, Y. S. Jeon and J. W. Rhim, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2016, 157, 45–52 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Jeong, W. C. Hwang and T. S. Hwang, J. Membr. Sci., 2015, 495, 316–321 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gu, Y. Deng and C. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 325–333 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bhadra, D. Khastgir, N. K. Singha and J. H. Lee, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2009, 34, 783–810 CAS .
M. Jaymand, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2013, 38, 1287–1306 CAS .
H.-P. Cong, X.-C. Ren, P. Wang and S.-H. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1185–1191 CAS .
F. Yang, M. Xu, S.-J. Bao, H. Wei and H. Chai, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 137, 381–387 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, Q. Ma, H. Gu, Y. Zheng and X. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 173, 184–192 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yan, L. Zou and R. Short, Desalination, 2012, 290, 125–129 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, Asian J. Chem., 2010, 22, 8126–8130 CAS .
C. Yan, Y. W. Kanaththage, R. Short, C. T. Gibson and L. Zou, Desalination, 2014, 344, 274–279 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bhadra, N. K. Singha and D. Khastgir, Eur. Polym. J., 2008, 44, 1763–1770 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Zhao, Y. F. Zhang, Z. K. Wu and S. L. Bai, Composites, Part B, 2016, 84, 52–58 CrossRef CAS .
L. F. Malmonge, G. d. A. Lopes, S. d. C. Langiano, J. A. Malmonge, J. M. M. Cordeiro and L. H. C. Mattoso, Eur. Polym. J., 2006, 42, 3108–3113 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Hosseini, F. Jeddi, M. Nemati, S. S. Madaeni and A. R. Moghadassi, Desalination, 2014, 341, 107–114 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, L. Zou, Y. Wimalasiri, J.-Y. Lee and Y. Chun, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 182, 383–390 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, Q. Dong, Z. Ling, C. Pan, C. Yu and J. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2012, 22, 21819–21823 RSC .
H. Q. Hou, J. J. Ge, J. Zeng, Q. Li, D. H. Reneker, A. Greiner and S. Z. D. Cheng, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 967–973 CrossRef CAS .
J.-G. Wang, Y. Yang, Z.-H. Huang and F. Kang, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 75, 213–219 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bai, Z. H. Huang, X. L. Yu and F. Y. Kang, Colloids Surf., A, 2014, 444, 153–158 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, B. J. Dou, L. Zheng, G. N. Zhang, Z. H. Liu and Z. P. Hao, Desalination, 2012, 299, 96–102 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, L. Yue, Z.-T. Liu, Z.-H. Liu and Z. P. Hao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 14101–14107 RSC .
G. Zhu, W. Wang, X. Li, J. Zhu, H. Wang and L. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 5817–5823 RSC .
S. Z. Niu, W. Lv, C. Zhang, Y. T. Shi, J. F. Zhao, B. H. Li, Q. H. Yang and F. Y. Kang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 295, 182–189 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yuan, L. Yang, L. Hou, J. Li, Y. Sun, X. Zhang, L. Shen, X. Lu, S. Xiong and X. W. D. Lou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2560–2566 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Z. Wang, Y. Ji, S. Liu and T. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 39037–39041 RSC .
T. Zhang, H. Zhao, X. X. Huang and G. Wen, Desalination, 2016, 379, 118–125 CrossRef CAS .
S. Giri, D. Ghosh and C. K. Das, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2013, 697, 32–45 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, Y. Han, S. Shuang and C. Dong, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 13166 RSC .
M. Xue, F. Li, J. Zhu, H. Song, M. Zhang and T. Cao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1284–1290 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Vickery, A. J. Patil and S. Mann, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2180–2184 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, W. W. Tjiu, J. Pan, C. Zhang, W. Gao and T. Liu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 4233–4242 RSC .
X. Gu, Y. Yang, Y. Hu, M. Hu, J. Huang and C. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5866–5874 CAS .
H. Liu and C. Wang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 3864–3872 RSC .
L. Qian and H. Zhang, Green Chem., 2010, 12, 1207–1214 RSC .
X. Gu, Y. Yang, Y. Hu, M. Hu and C. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 3, 1056–1065 CrossRef CAS .
L. Estevez, A. Kelarakis, Q. Gong, E. H. Da'as and E. P. Giannelis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 6122–6125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Geng, S. Yang, Y. Zhang, J. Yang, J. Liu, R. Li, T.-K. Sham, X. Sun, S. Ye and S. Knights, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 9193–9198 CrossRef CAS .
G. X. Luo, L. Z. Liu, J. F. Zhang, G. B. Li, B. L. Wang and J. J. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 11184–11193 CAS .
H. Liu, Y. Liu and D. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3335–3345 RSC .
M. Fan, Z.-Q. Feng, C. Zhu, X. Chen, C. Chen, J. Yang and D. Sun, J. Mater. Sci., 2016, 51, 10323–10349 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, Z. Sun, D. H. Chua and L. Pan, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 11225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xu, L. Pan, Y. Liu, T. Lu and Z. Sun, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 445, 143–150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wen, X. Wang, S. Mao, Z. Bo, H. Kim, S. Cui, G. Lu, X. Feng and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5610–5616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chang, J. Kang, L. Chen, J. Wang, K. Ohmura, N. Chen, T. Fujita, H. Wu and M. Chen, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 5960–5966 RSC .
J. Song, Z. Yu, M. L. Gordin and D. Wang, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 864–870 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Zitolo, V. Goellner, V. Armel, M.-T. Sougrati, T. Mineva, L. Stievano, E. Fonda and F. Jaouen, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 937–942 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Xiao, Y. Q. Liu, P. A. Hu, G. Yu, Y. M. Sun and D. B. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 8614–8617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-F. Chen, X.-D. Zhang, H.-W. Liang, M. Kong, Q.-F. Guan, P. Chen, Z.-Y. Wu and S.-H. Yu, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7092–7102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. R. Ismagilov, A. E. Shalagina, O. Y. Podyacheva, A. V. Ischenko, L. S. Kibis, A. I. Boronin, Y. A. Chesalov, D. I. Kochubey, A. I. Romanenko, O. B. Anikeeva, T. I. Buryakov and E. N. Tkachev, Carbon, 2009, 47, 1922–1929 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, T. Chen, T. Lu, Z. Sun, D. H. C. Chua and L. Pan, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 158, 403–409 CrossRef CAS .
N. P. Wickramaratne, J. Xu, M. Wang, L. Zhu, L. Dai and M. Jaroniec, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 2820–2828 CrossRef CAS .
T. Chen, L. Pan, T. A. Loh, D. H. Chua, Y. Yao, Q. Chen, D. Li, W. Qin and Z. Sun, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 14931–14935 RSC .
G. Rasines, P. Lavela, C. Macías, M. C. Zafra, J. L. Tirado and C. O. Ania, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 170, 154–163 CrossRef CAS .
G. Rasines, P. Lavela, C. Macías, M. C. Zafra, J. L. Tirado, J. B. Parra and C. O. Ania, Carbon, 2015, 83, 262–274 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chen, J.-J. Yang, S.-S. Li, Z. Wang, T.-Y. Xiao, Y.-H. Qian and S.-H. Yu, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 249–256 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Deng, L. B. Yao, Q. A. Huang, Q. M. Su, J. Zhang and G. H. Du, Mater. Res. Bull., 2016, 84, 218–224 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, M. Liu, P. P. Sharma, R. M. Yadav, L. Ma, Y. Yang, X. Zou, X. D. Zhou, R. Vajtai, B. I. Yakobson, J. Lou and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 466–470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Jiang, C. Tian, L. Wang, L. Sun, C. Chen, X. Nong, Y. Qiao and H. Fu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 258, 3438–3443 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wei, Y. Huo, G. Tian, Q. Meng and B. Cao, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2016, 20, 2351–2362 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, X. Guo, R. Tallon, X. Huang and J. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 881–884 RSC .
Y. Qiu, X. Zhang and S. Yang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 12554–12558 RSC .
L. Sun, L. Wang, C. Tian, T. Tan, Y. Xie, K. Shi, M. Li and H. Fu, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 4498 RSC .
M. Hassan, E. Haque, K. R. Reddy, A. I. Minett, J. Chen and V. G. Gomes, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 11988–11994 RSC .
S. Hou, X. Cai, H. Wu, X. Yu, M. Peng, K. Yan and D. Zou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3356–3362 CAS .
T. Hu, X. Sun, H. Sun, G. Xin, D. Shao, C. Liu and J. Lian, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 1060–1066 RSC .
H. Gao, L. Guo, L. Wang and Y. Wang, Mater. Lett., 2013, 109, 182–185 CrossRef CAS .
F. N. I. Sari and J. M. Ting, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 355, 419–428 CrossRef CAS .
X. R. Wang, X. L. Li, L. Zhang, Y. Yoon, P. K. Weber, H. L. Wang, J. Guo and H. J. Dai, Science, 2009, 324, 768–771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. H. Sheng, L. Shao, J. J. Chen, W. J. Bao, F. B. Wang and X. H. Xia, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4350–4358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-F. Lu, S.-T. Lo, J.-C. Lin, W. Zhang, J.-Y. Lu, F.-H. Liu, C.-M. Tseng, Y.-H. Lee, C.-T. Liang and L.-J. Li, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6522–6532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shao, S. Zhang, M. H. Engelhard, G. Li, G. Shao, Y. Wang, J. Liu, I. A. Aksay and Y. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 7491 RSC .
G. Singh, D. S. Sutar, V. Divakar Botcha, P. K. Narayanam, S. S. Talwar, R. S. Srinivasa and S. S. Major, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 355704 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, B. Cao, B. Zhang, X. Qi and C. Pan, Thin Solid Films, 2012, 520, 6850–6855 CrossRef CAS .
B. Cao, B. Zhang, X. Jiang, Y. Zhang and C. Pan, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 7868–7873 CrossRef CAS .
K. Parvez, S. Yang, Y. Hernandez, A. Winter, A. Turchanin, X. Feng and K. Muellen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 9541–9550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lin, G. Waller, Y. Liu, M. Liu and C.-P. Wong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 884–888 CrossRef CAS .
F. Pan, J. Jin, X. Fu, Q. Liu and J. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 11108–11114 CAS .
X. Gu, Y. Yang, Y. Hu, M. Hu, J. Huang and C. Wang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 63189–63199 RSC .
A. Amiri, G. Ahmadi, M. Shanbedi, M. Savari, S. N. Kazi and B. T. Chew, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 17503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lu, F. Zhang, T. Zhang, K. Leng, L. Zhang, X. Yang, Y. Ma, Y. Huang, M. Zhang and Y. Chen, Carbon, 2013, 63, 508–516 CrossRef CAS .
X. Du, C. Zhou, H.-Y. Liu, Y.-W. Mai and G. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2013, 241, 460–466 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kota, X. Yu, S.-H. Yeon, H.-W. Cheong and H. S. Park, J. Power Sources, 2016, 303, 372–378 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Lee, J. M. Ko and J.-D. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 85, 459–466 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhao, T. Yan, H. Wang, G. Chen, L. Huang, J. Zhang, L. Shi and D. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 369, 460–469 CrossRef CAS .
W. Fan, Y. Y. Xia, W. W. Tjiu, P. K. Pallathadka, C. B. He and T. X. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2013, 243, 973–981 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yin, R. Li, Z. Li, J. Liu, Z. Gu and G. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 125, 330–337 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Song, L. Li, Y. Wang, C. Wang, Z. Guo and Y. Xia, ChemPhysChem, 2014, 15, 2084–2093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Song, J. Yang, K. Wang, S. Haller, Y. G. Wang, C. X. Wang and Y. Y. Xia, Carbon, 2016, 96, 955–964 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, X. Xu, T. Lu, Z. Sun, D. H. C. Chua and L. Pan, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 34117–34124 RSC .
Z. Wang, T. Yan, J. Fang, L. Shi and D. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10858–10868 CAS .
J. Wei, Y. Hu, Y. Liang, B. Kong, J. Zhang, J. Song, Q. Bao, G. P. Simon, S. P. Jiang and H. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5768–5777 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, Z. Yao, G. Li, G. Fang, H. Nie, Z. Liu, X. Zhou, X. a. Chen and S. Huang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 205–211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Parveen, M. O. Ansari, S. A. Ansari and M. H. Cho, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 233–240 CAS .
L. Li, G. Zhou, L. Yin, N. Koratkar, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, Carbon, 2016, 108, 120–126 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Z. Sofer, P. Šimek, I. Tomandl and M. Pumera, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 23251–23257 CAS .
J. Han, L. L. Zhang, S. Lee, J. Oh, K. S. Lee, J. R. Potts, J. Y. Ji, X. Zhao, R. S. Ruoff and S. Park, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 19–26 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. G. Qu, Y. Zheng, S. Dai and S. Z. Qiao, Nano Energy, 2016, 19, 373–381 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, K. Su, W. Wan, H. Guo, H. Zhou, J. Chen, X. Zhang and Y. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 5018 CAS .
X. Wang, J. Wang, D. Wang, S. Dou, Z. Ma, J. Wu, L. Tao, A. Shen, C. Ouyang, Q. Liu and S. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 4839–4842 RSC .
J. Liang, Y. Jiao, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11496–11500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, K. Qian, J. Lv, W. Yan, J. Liu, J. Ai, Y. Zhang, T. Guo, X. Zhou, S. Xu and Z. Guo, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 27957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. S. Wu, A. Winter, L. Chen, Y. Sun, A. Turchanin, X. Feng and K. Mullen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5130–5135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yu, Y. Kang and H. S. Park, Carbon, 2016, 101, 49–56 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Roy-Mayhew and I. A. Aksay, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 6323–6348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. D. Zhao, L. Wang, P. Yu, L. Zhao, C. U. Tian, W. Zhou, L. Zhang and H. G. Fu, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 2998–3010 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, C. Li and G. Shi, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 1244–1253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, X. Song, P. Zhang and L. Gao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 14162 CAS .
H. R. Naderi, P. Norouzi and M. R. Ganjali, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 366, 552–560 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, L. Q. Zhang, R. Liu, Z. F. Gao, X. P. Yang, Z. Q. Tu, F. Yang, Z. Z. Ye, L. S. Cui, C. M. Xu and Y. F. Li, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 656, 24–32 CrossRef CAS .
Z. S. Wu, S. B. Yang, Y. Sun, K. Parvez, X. L. Feng and K. Mullen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9082–9085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. M. Biesheuvel and A. van der Wal, J. Membr. Sci., 2010, 346, 256–262 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhao, P. M. Biesheuvel and A. van der Wal, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9520–9527 CAS .
J. Kathi and K. Y. Rhee, J. Membr. Sci., 2007, 43, 33–37 Search PubMed .
V. Georgakilas, J. N. Tiwari, K. C. Kemp, J. A. Perrnan, A. B. Bourlinos, K. S. Kim and R. Zboril, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 5464–5519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-r. Park, J. Choi, S. Yang, S. J. Kwak, S.-i. Jeon, M. H. Han and D. K. Kim, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 69720–69727 RSC .
J. Yang, L. Zou and N. R. Choudhury, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 91, 11–19 CrossRef CAS .
R. Das, S. B. Abd Hamid, M. E. Ali, A. F. Ismail, M. S. M. Annuar and S. Ramakrishna, Desalination, 2014, 354, 160–179 CrossRef CAS .
L.-x. Li and F. Li, New Carbon Mater., 2011, 26, 224–228 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hu, J. Huang, Q. Zhang, Y. Yang, S. Ma and C. Wang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 103394–103402 RSC .
B. Ramezanzadeh, S. Niroumandrad, A. Ahmadi, M. Mahdavian and M. H. M. Moghadam, Corros. Sci., 2016, 103, 283–304 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lai, H. Yang, L. Wang, B. K. Teh, J. Zhong, H. Chou, L. Chen, W. Chen, Z. Shen, R. S. Ruoff and J. Lin, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5941–5951 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. C. Ding, Z. S. Miao, Z. Y. Xie and J. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2413–2418 CAS .
X. Qi, K. Y. Pu, X. Zhou, H. Li, B. Liu, F. Boey, W. Huang and H. Zhang, Small, 2010, 6, 663–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Johnson, A. Behnam, S. J. Pearton and A. Ural, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4877–4880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, Z. Lin, X. Huang, Y. Wang, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5779–5784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ma, J. Zhang, Z. Xiong, Y. Yong and X. S. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3350–3352 RSC .
Z. Niu, L. Liu, L. Zhang, Q. Shao, W. Zhou, X. Chen and S. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3681–3687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Valles, C. Drummond, H. Saadaoui, C. A. Furtado, M. He, O. Roubeau, L. Ortolani, M. Monthioux and A. Penicaud, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 15802–15804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Si and E. T. Samulski, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1679–1682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Jia and L. Zou, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2013, 568, 101–105 CrossRef .
K. Laxman, L. Al Gharibi and J. Dutta, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 176, 420–425 CrossRef CAS .
L. Han, K. G. Karthikeyan, M. A. Anderson, J. J. Wouters and K. B. Gregory, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 90, 573–581 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Lado, R. E. Pérez-Roa, J. J. Wouters, M. Isabel Tejedor-Tejedor and M. A. Anderson, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2014, 133, 236–245 CrossRef CAS .
A. Omosebi, X. Gao, J. Landon and K. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 12640–12649 CAS .
B. Jia and L. Zou, Carbon, 2012, 50, 2315–2321 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Yang, W. H. Choi, B. K. Na, B. W. Cho and W. I. Cho, Desalination, 2005, 174, 125–133 CrossRef CAS .
B. Jia and L. Zou, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2012, 548, 23–28 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Ryoo and G. Seo, Water Res., 2003, 37, 1527–1534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Cohen, E. Avraham, M. Noked, A. Soffer and D. Aurbach, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 19856–19863 CAS .
W. Huang, Y. Zhang, S. Bao, R. Cruz and S. Song, Desalination, 2014, 340, 67–72 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Yeo and J.-H. Choi, Desalination, 2013, 320, 10–16 CrossRef CAS .
I. Villar, S. Roldan, V. Ruiz, M. Granda, C. Blanco, R. Menendez and R. Santamaria, Energy Fuels, 2010, 24, 3329–3333 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lu and H. Chiu, Chem. Eng. J., 2008, 139, 462–468 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yin, M. Aroua and W. Daud, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2007, 52, 403–415 CrossRef CAS .
X. Song, H. Liu, L. Cheng and Y. Qu, Desalination, 2010, 255, 78–83 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kim, J. Lee, S. Kim and J. Yoon, Desalin. Water Treat., 2016, 1–6 Search PubMed .
H. Li, F. Zaviska, S. Liang, J. Li, L. He and H. Y. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 3484–3491 CAS .
B. Qian, G. Wang, Z. Ling, Q. Dong, T. Wu, X. Zhang and J. Qiu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2, 1500372 CrossRef .
H. O. Song, Y. F. Wu, S. P. Zhang, W. T. Li, B. J. Wang, C. M. Wang, J. J. Gao and A. M. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 205, 161–169 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Madadrang, H. Y. Kim, G. Gao, N. Wang, J. Zhu, H. Feng, M. Gorring, M. L. Kasner and S. Hou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 1186–1193 CAS .
I. E. Mejias Carpio, J. D. Mangadlao, H. N. Nguyen, R. C. Advincula and D. F. Rodrigues, Carbon, 2014, 77, 289–301 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Cui, Y. G. Wang, L. Gao, L. H. Hu, L. G. Yan, Q. Wei and B. Du, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 281, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
E. Repo, J. K. Warchol, T. A. Kurniawan and M. E. T. Sillanpää, Chem. Eng. J., 2010, 161, 73–82 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, J. Wang, W. Zhang, J. Ji, Y. Li, G. Zhang, F. Zhang and X. Fan, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 13205–13209 CrossRef CAS .
W. C. Ye, J. Yu, Y. X. Zhou, D. Q. Gao, D. A. Wang, C. M. Wang and D. S. Xue, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 181, 371–378 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Gonzalez, M. E. Villanueva, L. L. Piehl and G. J. Copello, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 280, 41–48 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, A. G. El-Deen, P. Li, B. H. L. Oh, Z. Guo, M. M. Khin, Y. S. Vikhe, J. Wang, R. G. Hu, R. M. Boom, K. A. Kline, D. L. Becker, H. Duan and M. B. Chan-Park, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 10142–10157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:
Peiying Liu	Peiying Liu was born in Shandong, China, in 1991. She obtained her bachelor's degree from Linyi University, China. She is currently studying for a master's degree at Shanghai University under the supervision of Dr Dengsong Zhang. She obtained the National Scholarship and was awarded “Outstanding Students” of Shanghai University in 2016. Her research interests are the synthesis of nanomaterials and their applications in capacitive deionization.
Dengsong Zhang	Prof. Dengsong Zhang received his Ph.D. degree from Shanghai University in 2007. He then joined the Research Center of Nano Science and Technology at Shanghai University. He also worked as a Research Fellow at the SHU-ESSILOR (France) Joint R&D Center. Currently, he is a Professor of materials chemistry at Shanghai University. He was elected as a member of the New Chemical Materials Committee of the Chemical Industry and Engineering Society of China, a member of the Energy and Environment Committee of China Energy Society, and a member of the Catalysis Committee of the Chinese Society of Rare Earths. His scientific interest is focused on surface and interfacial materials as well as energy and environmental science. He has published more than 120 publications.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the CDI set-up.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic view of the time-dependent two-dimensional porous electrode model, combining a sequence of sub-cells in the flow direction, with ion fluxes into the electrode. A symmetric CDI geometry is assumed; thus only half of a cell is depicted. The electrode contains an electrolyte-filled volume allowing for ion transport and carbon material in which ions and charge are stored. Electrical current (denoted by “+”) flows through the conductive carbon material. Copyright 2013, the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A)–(E) Symmetric CDI, including (A) flow-through CDI, (B) osmosis CDI, (C) desalination battery, (D) flow-electrode CDI and (E) suspension-electrode CDI. (F)–(K) Asymmetric CDI, including (F) flow-through MCDI, (G) ion-selective flow-through CDI, (H) hybrid CDI, (I) inverted CDI, (J) flow-electrode CDI and (K) asymmetric flow-electrode CDI.	 

 	Fig. 4  Summary of graphene-based materials for CDI. (A) Graphene nanosheets, (B) porous graphene, (C) graphene–porous carbon composites, (D) graphene–carbon nanotube composites, (E) graphene-activated carbon nanofiber composites, (F) graphene–metal oxide composites, (G) graphene–polymer composites, (H) multi-component graphene-based composites, (I) nitrogen-doped graphene, (J) nitrogen-doped graphene based composites, (K) functionalized graphene, and (L) functionalized graphene based composites.	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) Comparison of electrosorptive performance by employing graphene-like nanoflakes and activated carbon under the same experimental condition; the pictures at the top-left and top-right depict the pore size distribution of activated carbon and graphene-like nanoflakes below 10 nm, respectively. (B) Mechanism of CDI employing activated carbon and graphene-like nanoflake electrodes. TEM images of activated carbon (C) and graphene-like nanoflakes at low (D) and high (E) magnification, respectively. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Procedure for the preparation of graphene by the pyridine-thermal strategy. Copyright 2012, the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) Schematic illustration of the 3D macroporous graphene for CDI application. (B) TEM images of the 3D macroporous graphene. (C) CDI profiles of the 3D macroporous graphene and traditional graphene electrodes at 1.6 V. (D) The electrosorption capacity comparison of the 3D macroporous graphene and traditional graphene electrodes at various voltages. Copyright 2013, the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) Schematic representation of the procedure for preparing sponge-like graphene. The bottom part gives the photo images of the sponge (B), sponge saturated with graphite oxide solution (C), and sponge-like graphene (D). Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of the construction of 3D hierarchically porous graphene. Copyright 2016, the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of the preparation of graphene hydrogels and the process of CDI desalination. Copyright 2016, Tsinghua University Press and Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.	 

Graphene	Hummers' method	14.2	1.2	50 μS cm−1	Batch-mode CDI	1.85	
139

Graphene-like nanoflake	Hummers' method	222.01	2.0	55 μS cm−1	Batch-mode CDI	1.35	
102

Graphene	Pyridine thermal	—	2.0	86.9 μS cm−1	Batch-mode CDI	0.88	
154

Three-dimensional macroporous graphene architectures	Template-directed	339	1.6	105 μS cm−1	Batch-mode CDI	3.9	
195

Sponge-templated graphene	Sponge-templated	305	1.5	106 μS cm−1	—	4.95	
191

Graphene sponge	Freeze-drying	356.0	1.2	500 mg L−1	Batch-mode CDI	14.9	
196

Microporous graphene	KOH-activated	3513	2.0	160 μS cm−1	Batch-mode CDI	11.86	
198

Mesoporous graphene	KMnO4 etching	474.0	1.2	500 mg L−1	Batch-mode CDI	14.2	
204

Three-dimensional graphene with a hierarchically porous structure	Oxometalate etching	824	1.2	1045 μS cm−1	Batch-mode CDI	14.7	
207

Holey graphene hydrogel	H2O2 etching	1261.7	1.2	500 mg L−1	Home-made CDI	16.0	
192

3D porous graphene	Silica particles as templates	2680	1.4	300 mg L−1	Single pass asymmetric-CDI	14.08	
208


 	Fig. 11  (A) TEM images of graphene/mesoporous carbon composites. (B) Comparison of CDI curves of the activated carbon, mesoporous carbon and graphene/mesoporous carbon composite electrodes. Copyright 2012, the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  (A) Schematic illustration of the procedure for the preparation of the 3D graphene frameworks–microporous carbon sphere composite. (B) TEM image of the 3D graphene frameworks–microporous carbon sphere composite. (C) Concentration transients of 3D graphene frameworks–microporous carbon sphere composite electrodes. The inset is corresponding electrosorption capacities. (D) Cycling stability of the 3D graphene frameworks–microporous carbon sphere composite electrode. Copyright 2016, Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 13  (A) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of graphene coated hollow mesoporous carbon spheres. (B) TEM image of phenolic polymer coated polystyrene spheres. (C) TEM image of graphene oxide coated phenolic polymer and polystyrene sphere composites. (D) TEM image of graphene coated hollow mesoporous carbon spheres. Copyright 2014, the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic illustration of the synthesis route for 3D graphene and hierarchically porous carbon composites. Copyright 2013, the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic illustration of the formation process of graphene and carbon nanotube composites. Copyright 2012, the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 16  Schematic illustration of the procedure for the preparation of graphene/carbon nanotube hybrid sponge. Copyright 2015, the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 17  (A) Optical images of reduced graphite oxide and activated carbon nanofiber composites. (B) FESEM images of reduced graphite oxide and activated carbon nanofiber composites; the inset is the TEM image of reduced graphite oxide and activated carbon nanofiber composites. (C) Electrosorption capacity of the activated carbon nanofiber, reduced graphite oxide, and reduced graphite oxide and activated carbon nanofiber composite electrodes as a function of time in CDI. (D) Recycle electrosorption performance of the reduced graphite oxide and activated carbon nanofiber composites at a cell potential of 1.2 V. Copyright 2014, Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 18  (A) Schematic illustration of the electrospinning process coupled with ultrasonic spraying; (B) electrosorption capacity of the electrodes with different conductivities (C0 = 100 mg L−1, V = 1.2 V); (C) conductivity variation of the effluent and the corresponding current during 2.5 cycles, as measured in a batch-mode setup with a feeding NaCl solution (300 mg L−1) and 1.2 V applied voltage. (D) Schematic view of the electrical double layer responsible for the electrosorption of ions. (E) Schematic of the complex conductive network formed by the incorporated graphene. Copyright 2016, Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 19  (A) Schematic illustration of the formation mechanism of graphene aerogel/TiO2 hybrids (C) SEM image of graphene aerogel/TiO2 hybrids, inset in (B) is the image of the monolithic graphene aerogel/TiO2 hybrids product after freeze-drying. (D) Desalination capacity of activated carbon, graphene aerogel and graphene aerogel/TiO2 hybrids with different equilibrium concentrations and the corresponding Langmuir isotherm fitted curves. Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 20  (A) Schematic illustration of the one pot synthesis procedure of MnO2-nanostructures@graphene sheets as a sandwich structure. (B) CDI performance of the synthesized material electrode and activated carbon in a NaCl solution at 1.2 V. Copyright 2014, Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 21  (A) Schematic illustration of the in situ polymerization of polyaniline in the presence of graphene sheets. (B) TEM images of the graphene/polyaniline nanocomposite. (C) Regeneration of the electrode performance. Copyright 2014, Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 22  (A) Digital image of as-prepared porous Li+/graphene/carbon nanofiber. (B) SEM image of the as-prepared porous Li+/graphene/carbon nanofiber. (C) Sketch map of salt adsorption and charge storage mechanism in porous Li+/graphene/carbon nanofiber electrodes. Copyright 2016, Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 23  (A) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of the reduced graphene oxide–polypyrrole–MnO2 (RGO–PPy–Mn) composite. (B) SEM images of RGO–PPy–Mn composites. (C) CDI profiles of reduced graphene oxide (RGO), RGO–PPy0.5–Cu1, RGO–PPy0.5–Mn0.4, and PPy electrodes at 2.0 V. Copyright 2015, the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 24  (A) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of graphene–chitosan and graphene–chitosan–Mn3O4 xerogels. (B) SEM images of graphene–chitosan–Mn3O4 xerogels. (C) CDI profiles of graphene, graphene–chitosan, and graphene–chitosan–Mn3O4 xerogel electrodes at 1.6 V. (D) Electrosorption capacity and removal efficiency of graphene–chitosan–Mn3O4 xerogel electrodes in a NaCl solution with respect to different initial concentrations. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

Reduced graphene-activated carbon	779	1.2	100 μS cm−1	Batch mode CDI	2.94	
223

Three-dimensional graphene frameworks with microporous carbon spheres	676.9	1.2	100 mg L−1	Batch mode CDI	9.86	
246

Graphene/mesoporous carbon	685.2	2	40 μS cm−1	Batch mode CDI	0.73	
241

Graphene-coated hollow mesoporous carbon spheres	400.4	1.6	68.5 μS cm−1	Batch mode CDI	2.3	
199

Three-dimensional graphene-based hierarchically porous carbon composites	384.4	1.2	60 μS cm−1	Batch mode CDI	6.18	
247

Graphene aerogel/TiO2	187.60	1.2	600 mg L−1	Batch mode CDI	24.2	
298

Reduced graphene/TiO2	658	0.8	560 μS cm−1	Single-pass mode MCDI	9.1	
300

MnO2-nanorods@graphene	—	1.2	100 μS cm−1	Batch-mode CDI	5.01	
304

Reduced graphene@Fe3O4	150.8	1.2	500 μS cm−1	Batch-mode CDI	8.33	
293

Graphene oxide/ZrO2	
	1.2	100 μS cm−1	Batch-mode CDI	4.55	
308

Graphene/carbon nanotubes/activated carbon	426.56	1.2	1000 μS cm−1	Batch-mode CDI	10.94	
344

Graphene–chitosan–Mn3O4	240	1.6	300 μS cm−1	Batch-mode CDI	12.7	
357

Reduced graphene oxide–polypyrrole–MnO2	331	2.0	600 μS cm−1	Batch-mode CDI	12.5	
354


 	Fig. 25  Schematic representation of nitrogen-doped graphene, and three types of nitrogen in nitrogen-doped graphene. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 26  Schematic illustration of the general preparation process of graphene/nitrogen-doped ordered mesoporous carbon composites. Copyright 2016, Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 27  Schematic illustration of the synthesis of N-doped nanoporous carbon/graphene nano-sandwiches. Copyright 2015, the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

Three-dimensional reduced graphene oxide–melamine formaldehyde composites	Carbonized with melamine formaldehyde	10.8	352.0	2.0	1000 μS cm−1	Batch-mode	21.9	
400

Nitrogen-doped graphene	Thermal treatment in an ammonia atmosphere	7.3	358.9	1.2	1000 μS cm−1	Batch-mode	12.8	
364

Nitrogen-doped graphene sponge	Thermal treatment in an ammonia atmosphere	8.5	526.7	1.2	500 mg L−1	Batch-mode	21.0	
363

Highly crumpled nitrogen-doped graphene	Annealing with cyanamide	10.3	1689.0	2.0	50 μS cm−1	Batch-mode	0.21	
401

Nitrogen-doped reduced graphene oxide–carbon nanofiber composite	Thermal treatment in an ammonia atmosphere	8.3	864.1	1.2	100 μS cm−1	Batch-mode	3.9	
411


 	Fig. 28  Schematic illustration of the multistep synthesis of well dispersed graphene. Copyright 2012, Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 29  Schematic representation of sulfonation and amination of 3D graphene. The inset is the salt adsorption capacity and current response for capacitors 3DGR–3DGR and 3DNGR–3DSGR in a 500 mg L−1 NaCl solution at 1.4 V with a flow rate of 40 mL min−1. Copyright 2016, the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 30  (A) Schematic illustration of the preparation of carbon fiber cloth and sulphonated reduced graphene oxide composites by electrophoresis deposition and the SEM image of graphite, sulphonated reduced graphene oxide, carbon fiber cloth and the carbon fiber cloth and sulphonated reduced graphene oxide composite. (B) The electrosorption–desorption performance of the carbon fiber cloth and sulphonated reduced graphene oxide composite electrode in a NaCl solution with an initial conductivity of 500 μS cm−1 by varying the cell voltage from 0.6 to 1.4 V. (C) Removal capacity and specific charge with respect to the cell voltage. Copyright 2014, the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 31  (A) Schematic illustration of the three-step synthesis of sulfonated graphene; insets display the digital images of the reduced graphite oxide and sulfonated graphene suspension after being allowed to stand for 1 week. (B) Schematic illustration of the “dip-coating” process; insets show the digital images of reduced graphite oxide, carbon nanofiber composites and sulfonated graphene and carbon nanofiber composites. (C) FE-SEM images of sulfonated graphene and carbon nanofiber composites from the top view with a coating boundary. (D) Schematic of three CDI cells assembled with different electrode pairs. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
