Effects of geometry and composition of soft polymer films embedded with nanoparticles on rates for optothermal heat dissipation   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8NR00977E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8NR00977E
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 11531-11543Effects of geometry and composition of soft polymer films embedded with nanoparticles on rates for optothermal heat dissipation†

        
          
            D. Keith 
            Roper
          
        
      *abc, 
      
        
          
            Keith R. 
            Berry
             Jr.
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jeremy R. 
            Dunklin
          
        
      ad, 
      
        
          
            Caitlyn 
            Chambers
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Vinith 
            Bejugam
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Gregory T. 
            Forcherio
          
        
      be and 

        
          
            Megan 
            Lanier
          
        
      a
aRalph E. Martin Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR 72701, USA. E-mail: dkroper@uark.edu;   Tel: +1 (801) 891-8921
bMicroelectronics-Photonics Graduate Program, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR 72701, USA
cInstitute for Nanoscience and Engineering, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR 72701, USA
dChemistry & Nanoscience Center, National Renewable Energy Lab, Golden, CO, 80401 USA
eSensors & Electron Devices Directorate, U.S. Army Research Laboratory, Adelphi, MD, 20783 USA
Received 
      2nd February 2018
    , Accepted 2nd May 2018First published on 12th June 2018AbstractEmbedding soft matter with nanoparticles (NPs) can provide electromagnetic tunability at sub-micron scales for a growing number of applications in healthcare, sustainable energy, and chemical processing. However, the use of NP-embedded soft material in temperature-sensitive applications has been constrained by difficulties in validating the prediction of rates for energy dissipation from thermally insulating to conducting behavior. This work improved the embedment of monodisperse NPs to stably decrease the inter-NP spacings in polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) to nano-scale distances. Lumped-parameter and finite element analyses were refined to apportion the effects of the structure and composition of the NP-embedded soft polymer on the rates for conductive, convective, and radiative heat dissipation. These advances allowed for the rational selection of PDMS size and NP composition to optimize measured rates of internal (conductive) and external (convective and radiative) heat dissipation. Stably reducing the distance between monodisperse NPs to nano-scale intervals increased the overall heat dissipation rate by up to 29%. Refined fabrication of NP-embedded polymer enabled the tunability of the dynamic thermal response (the ratio of internal to external dissipation rate) by a factor of 3.1 to achieve a value of 0.091, the largest reported to date. Heat dissipation rates simulated a priori were consistent with 130 μm resolution thermal images across 2- to 15-fold changes in the geometry and composition of NP-PDMS. The Nusselt number was observed to increase with the fourth root of the Rayleigh number across thermally insulative and conductive regimes, further validating the approach. These developments support the model-informed design of soft media embedded with nano-scale-spaced NPs to optimize the heat dissipation rates for evolving temperature-sensitive diagnostic and therapeutic modalities, as well as emerging uses in flexible bioelectronics, cell and tissue culture, and solar-thermal heating.
1. Introduction
Electromagnetically-active nanoparticles (NPs) embedded in soft matter exhibit enhanced thermal properties1–7 and efficiencies8,9 that augment energy and mass transport in numerous systems.10,11 Soft abiotic material containing NPs has been shown to induce hyperthermia in photothermal12 and chemo-thermal13 therapy, photosensitization for inactivating bacteria,14–16 targeted drug release,17,18 contrast in medical images,19 and gene transfection.12 In particular, resonant laser irradiation of NPs in soft polymers results in a characteristic dissipation of thermal energy as heat.20–22 Functional descriptions of heat dissipated from pulsed or continuous resonant excitation23 are relevant for use in designing and optimizing cancer ablation,24–27 catalytic reactions,28 membrane separation,29 microfluidic flux,30 and photothermal therapy.31–38
However, rigorous comparisons between simulated data and the measured energy output of irradiated NPs have largely considered heat dissipated at thermal equilibrium as a function of NP size/shape/composition in one of two scenarios: (i) monodisperse NPs suspended in fluid, deposited or formed on a ceramic or semiconducting material, or diluted into a soft material so that neighboring NPs are microns or more apart; and (ii) polydisperse NPs reduced by biological or chemical means into a soft material to achieve a high NP density. As a result, NP-transduced heating in soft matter such as gels and tissues for temperature sensitive applications, e.g., clinical diagnostics and therapies, remains limited due to the lack of data for non-equilibrium (transient) rates of heat dissipation,18 which are critical to biological outcomes,39,40 scant evaluation of heating from monodisperse NPs embedded in soft matter below micron-scale spacing, and scarcity41 and difficulties42,43 in comparing simulations with experimental data to evaluate the effects of soft matter size, shape, density, thermal conductivity or NP concentration on transient heat dissipation at nano- to micron-scales.
Landau damping of localized surface plasmons induced by resonant irradiation of NPs dissipates energy via charge-transfer and/or heating of the surrounding media via conduction, convection and radiation.44 To date, simulations of phase changes,45,46 ultrafast dynamics,47–49 and light-to-heat conversion8,50–54 in nanocomposites have primarily characterized the steady-state components of the energy flux, e.g., radiative heat transfer,44,55–58 phonon transport,59 thermal conductivity,60–62 and Brownian dynamics61,63,64 or total energy dissipation.23,50,65 Yet predicting even the steady-state temperature of homogeneous media embedded with evenly-dispersed, uniformly-sized NPs remains challenging.54,66 For example, increasing NP concentration has been recently reported to paradoxically result in tumor regrowth,42 despite increased temperatures due to reduced depth of laser penetration.67 Such anomalies due to optothermal aspects that differ from conventional bulk, radiant, or resistive modes call for the rigorous comparison of measured optothermal heat dissipation with conventional conductive, convective and radiative mechanisms.
The transient (dynamic) rate of temperature increase, i.e., the heating rate, is a critical factor influencing a variety of biomedical outcomes. A heating rate of not less than 1 °C per minute has been advised for superficial hyperthermia clinical trials.39 The heating rate of NP-containing material was reported to vary by nearly 3-fold depending on the configuration of NPs.68 Heating transients can influence the rate of drug release from polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) films40 and phase change materials.69–72 Biocompatibility, optical transparency, and thermal properties support the use of NP-embedded soft polymer-like PDMS in targeted drug release,40 photoacoustic imaging,19 gene transfection and photothermal therapy.12 PDMS is widely used as a tissue phantom, i.e., a surrogate, to characterize the spectral and thermal features of tissue73 in hyperthermia,39 photodynamic therapy, and optical coherence tomography.
Heat dissipated at a steady state by plasmon resonant NPs dispersed into various polymer films of micro- to nano-scale thicknesses was recently observed to scale with the amount of incident optical power extinguished.74,75 This was demonstrated by a finite element simulation of heat dissipation, which integrated relations for Fourier conduction, Rayleigh convection and Stefan–Boltzmann radiation to conservation of energy in the film.50 Steady-state, micro-scale profiles of dissipated heat were found to be dependent on micro- vs. nano-scale film thicknesses and super- vs. sub-wavelength inter-NP separation. Interestingly, both Maxwell Garnett effective medium theory and coupled dipole approximation showed that the temperature increase per NP ultimately diminished at high loadings. The reported consistency between the measured heat dissipation and corresponding simulated values at the steady state indicates that finite element analysis could also distinguish the effects of the geometry of soft matter and embedded NP size/shape/composition on transient rates for heat dissipation via internal (conduction) and external (convection and radiation) processes.
The present work examined changes in the transient rate for heat dissipation as the inter-NP separation was reduced from greater than 5 microns to sub-micron intervals while varying the 3D geometry of a polymer and its NP density by 2- to 15-fold. This work validated the use of a compact structure–function relation for a priori design and optimization of thin PDMS films embedded with an increasing number of monodisperse gold (Au) NPs to transform the films from thermally insulating to conductive. Rates for heat dissipation estimated a priori using both the analytic structure–function relation and finite element simulation were consistent with measured values across significant parameter variations: film thicknesses from 0.7 to 1.5 mm, Au content from 0.001 (2.34 × 1011 NP per cm3) to 0.015 mass% (35.2 × 1011 NP per cm3), two forms of AuNPs (monodisperse spheres vs. randomly reduced polydisperse NPs), and two sizes of monodisperse AuNPs: 16 nm (non-scattering) and 76 nm (scattering and absorbing). Rates for buoyant heat convection were observed to depend on the fourth root of the Rayleigh number, validating the structure–function relations from thermally insulating to thermally conducting behaviors. A refined fabrication approach allowed the NP-to-NP spacings to be reduced to nano-scale values approaching the resonant wavelength. Such proximity enhanced the apparent Nusselt number (the ratio of convective to conductive heat transfer) by up to 29% and increased the dynamic thermal responses by 3.1-fold to achieve the largest reported value for dynamic thermal response to date. Together, these advances support the rational design and optimization of NP-embedded soft material with high dynamic thermal responses for use in diagnostics, therapeutics, and sustainable energy, particularly in heat-sensitive circumstances.
2. Materials and methods
2.1 Film fabrication and AuNP addition
A previously reported method65 to fabricate AuNP-PDMS films was refined to increase NP content while eliminating observable gas/vapor entrapment and NP aggregation. The refined method increased the AuNP content by 15-fold up to a mass percentage 0.015% in PDMS, while at the same time decreasing the inter-NP spacing to the nano-scale without detectable aggregation. Briefly, dried, poly(vinylpyrrolidone) (PVP)-coated AuNPs (Nanocomposix Inc., San Diego, CA) were dispersed into isopropanol (IPA) at a concentration of 1 mg mL−1. Monodisperse AuNPs with mean diameters of 16 nm and 76 nm (see ESI† for size distribution and absorption spectra) were dispersed into PDMS (Sylgard® 184 silicone elastomer kit #4019862, Dow Corning, Midland, MI) at 1011–1012 and 1010 NP per cm3, respectively, using the following approach. PDMS monomer and crosslinker were mixed at a 10:1 ratio and degassed for 2 hours. A volume of AuNP-IPA dispersion selected to achieve a targeted AuNP density was added into uncured PDMS and mixed while degassing for 1 hour. A 1.5 g mass of AuNP-IPA-PDMS was poured into a 25 mm × 25 mm × 1 mm polystyrene sample box and cured at 60 °C for 24 hours. The box was wrapped in foil to prevent light-induced curing. Compared to the previous method, the method reported in this work extended the degas time of the polymer and cross linker, reduced the cure temperature and extended the cure time. It also allowed for the optical isolation of the curing samples. These changes minimized the observable gas/vapor bubble formation and entrapment, as well as polymer defects and NP conglomerates, which improved the overall structure and performance of the nanocomposite films. These refinements enabled the AuNP content to be increased by 150-fold to 0.015% by mass in soft matter, while simultaneously decreasing the inter-NP spacing to the nano-scale for the first time without detectable aggregation. Fig. 1 shows frontal and cross-section images of ca. 5 mm × 5 mm films containing (a) 16 nm (above) and (b) 76 nm (below) spherical AuNPs. From left to right in each row, the film color changed from dark red to slightly pink as the Au content decreased. The length and width of the films varied across a range of 28–L × W–35 mm2, enabling the analysis of the dissipation rate sensitivity to film geometry. The corresponding values of measured thickness, the Au content (in both NPs per cm3 and mass percentage) and average NP-to-NP separation distance as measured by the Wigner Seitz radius are shown below each film.
 Fig. 1  Optical images of ca. 5 × 5 mm PDMS films (above facing; below side) containing monodisperse 16 nm (a; above) and 76 nm (b; below) AuNPs. AuNP content decreases from left to right in (a) and (b) as given in the text below each film. Images of films containing polydisperse, reduced AuNPs (rAuNPs), categorized as Film II in Table, are shown in the ESI.† 
2.2 Au content calculations
The total mass of monodisperse AuNPs in PDMS was determined by multiplying the volume of the AuNP-containing stock solution added to the PDMS by (i) the concentration of the stock solution, (ii) the volume of a single AuNP, (4πrp/3),3 where rp is the AuNP radius, and (iii) Au density, ρAu = 19.3 g cm−3. The mass percentage of AuNPs in PDMS was calculated by dividing the mass of the added AuNPs by the mass of solution (PDMS mass plus AuNP mass) and multiplying by 100%. The Wigner–Seitz radius, rW–S, was calculated as rW–S = rp(ρAu/x)1/3 = (3V/4πN)1/3, where x is Au mass per cubic centimeter of the host media, V is the media volume, and N is the number of AuNPs added to volume V. Twice the value of rW–S reduced by twice the value of rp is an estimate of the NP-to-NP separation distance for randomly-dispersed AuNPs at a particular concentration.
2.3 Thermal characterization
AuNPs embedded in PDMS films fabricated using the refined method herein were irradiated resonantly using a 532 nm laser (MXL-FN-532, CNI, Changchun, China) at 25 or 100 mW. Laser power was recorded using a power meter (PM310D, Thorlabs, Newton, NJ). Incident laser power during the 3-minute heating period was measured to be within ±1.05% at 25 and 100 mW. This was well within the laser manufacturer's specification of ±1 to 10%. The power meter was rated for a calibration uncertainty of ±3.3% at 1064 nm and ±5% at 190 nm–1064 μm. Infrared images of the AuNP-PDMS nanocomposites were captured at 5 images per second over 6 minutes (min): 0:10 minutes at ambient conditions, 2:50 minutes of laser irradiation, and 3:00 minutes of cooling using an infrared thermal imaging camera (ICI 7320, Infrared Cameras Inc., Beaumont, TX). A laser shutter (SH05, Thorlabs, Newton, NJ) and shutter controller (SC10, Thorlabs, Newton, NJ) were used to open and close the laser at each time interval (see ESI† for a schematic of the thermal setup). A K-type thermocouple recorded the ambient temperature ∼1 cm away from the nanocomposite to compare with the IR camera ambient readings. Each AuNP-PDMS film was mounted with tweezers to position the incident laser spot at the top center of the film. All power incident on the Film I samples was contained within a laser spot with a D4σ diameter of 3 mm. The thermal measurement apparatus was isolated from ambient light and convection was forced by enclosing it in an opaque chamber. Two or more replicates were measured. Temperature values reported are from one representative cooling period.
2.4 Measured total dissipation rates
The measured total time for heat dissipation, τT−1, during cooling was determined using temperature data extracted from the raw thermal images using MATLAB R2015b (Mathworks, Natrick, MA). The MATLAB code divided the images into pixelated temperature heat maps. Maximum (ambient) temperature at each pixel was evaluated by averaging the measured temperature equilibrated at laser-heated (ambient) conditions over the final 30 seconds of laser heating (final 5 seconds of cooling). Values of maximum temperature, Tmax, and ambient temperature, Tamb, at each pixel were used to calculate a dimensionless temperature driving force, θ = (Tamb − T)/(Tamb − Tmax), at every pixel, where T is the measured time-varying temperature during cooling after laser irradiation. Plotting the natural log of the driving force vs. time for a 45 seconds cooling period for the 16 nm and 76 nm films and a 30 seconds cooling period for the rAuNP films yielded τT−1 at each pixel. The value of τT−1 is the negative inverse of the linearly regressed slope. This process of measuring τT− is illustrated in Fig. 2b. In calculating θ, the values of temperature below Tamb were excised to eliminate imaginary results when calculating τT−1. Mean values of Tmax, Tamb, T, and τT−1 across the film face were determined by averaging the pixelated values for maximum, ambient, and transient temperatures and thermal dissipation times, respectively.
 Fig. 2  (a) Temperature map of Film 1 (0.1896% rAuNP-PDMS). (b) A single pixel representative plot of the measured lnθ vs. time from Film F used to calculate measured value of τT. (c) Total dissipation rate, τT−1, values obtained from measurements (closed circles), a priori estimates using eqn (1)–(3) (open circles), and FEA simulation (open triangles) for AuNP-PDMS films containing 16 nm (orange symbols), 76 nm (purple symbols), and in situ reduced (black symbols) AuNPs. Dashed and dash-dot lines show constant values of external dissipation rate, τext−1, and thermal dynamic ratio, τin/τext, respectively. 
2.5 Predicted total dissipation rates

2.5.1 Compact structure function relation. 
Summing a series of consecutive thermal resistances, Ri, yields the overall thermal resistance, . Here, subscript i identifies components with distinguishable thermal resistances, i.e., internal vs. external thermal dissipation rates. Rewriting this sum in terms of dissipation rates, with time constants being proportional to resistances yields:23 (1)where τint and τext are the internal and external time constants for thermal dissipation, respectively. Decomposing each time constant into independently measurable, composition-dependent thermodynamic and geometric parameters23 shows that the total thermal dissipation rate of a plasmonic system is a function of its external dissipation, τext, relative to its intrinsic internal dissipation, τint, viz.: (2a) (2b)where, mi is mass, Cp,i is heat capacity, k is thermal conductivity, L, W and D are sample length, width and thickness, respectively, Lc is the characteristic thermal length of the sample (D/2 for thin films in the current work), α is the mass-averaged thermal diffusivity calculated on a percent mass basis, and U is the overall heat transfer coefficient45 given by: (3)where kc is the thermal conductivity of the heat-conductive material, Ac is the contact area perpendicular to conduction, Lc,e is a characteristic length for conduction to the environment, hconv is the heat transfer coefficient for convection, As is the surface area of the film, ε is the emissivity of the material, σ is the Stefan–Boltzmann constant, and Tamb is the ambient temperature. The value of T used in eqn (3) is the average surface temperature at hot equilibrium, Tmax.
Films were oriented vertically to allow laser irradiation and temperature mapping from opposite sides. Therefore, hconv was estimated using23 (4)where k is the thermal conductivity and Lc is defined as the height of the plate in the vertical direction. The Rayleigh number is RaL = gρ2βCp(T − Tamb)L3/kμ where g is acceleration due to gravity, β is the coefficient of thermal expansion of air, ρ is the density of air, Cp is the heat capacity of air, k is the thermal conductivity of air, and μ is the viscosity of air. L for this system is equivalent to Lc in eqn (4).
To analyze the Nusselt number (Nu) dependence, estimated values of hconv were determined using eqn (4). Measured values of hconv were calculated from the observed data as follows. Measured τint and τT values were used to calculate τext using eqn (1) and (2). From this value of τext, a measured value of U was obtained from eqn (3) using τext = kLWD/αU. Thermal conductivity of air made the conduction term in eqn (3) negligible. The radiation term was calculated using measured parameters. Then hconv was obtained from eqn (2) and used in Nu = hconvLc/k where hconv, Lc, and k are as defined in eqn (4).


2.5.2 Finite element analysis. 
Finite element heat transfer analysis (FEA) was conducted using the Heat Transfer in Solids module in version 5.2a of COMSOL Multiphysics (Stockholm, Sweden) as described previously.50 Briefly, concurrent internal and external heat dissipation in AuNP-PDMS films was modeled using Fourier's law for conductive heat transfer and the convective heat transfer coefficient for a vertical plate (defined in eqn (4)) coupled with radiation as defined in the rightmost term of eqn (3). For the current work, temperature profiles of each film at the instant the laser irradiation ceased were imported into COMSOL. An initial 2D conjugate model using Heat Transfer in Solids and Gaussian Cooling (via Rayleigh convection and Stefan–Boltzmann radiation) was applied to the model to estimate the cooling curve for each film. Temperature changes at each second over a 45 seconds period were computed using a COMSOL Dynamic Study function. A ‘cut plane’ was then used to extract the temperature across the entire surface of the film at each second. These values were imported into MATLAB where an average value for τT−1 was calculated using the approach described in §2.4 Measured Total Dissipation Rates.

3. Results and discussion
This study evaluated transient (dynamic) rates of temperature change due to spectrothermal heat dissipation in soft PDMS embedded with dispersed, uniformly-sized AuNPs or electrochemically-reduced, heterogeneously-sized AuNPs down to inter-NP spacings at the nano-scale for the first time. The biocompatibility, optical transparency, and thermal properties of the NP-PDMS nanocomposites support their use in targeted drug release,40 photoacoustic imaging,19 gene transfection and photothermal therapy,12 and tissue phantoms.73 Beyond use in these evolving therapeutic and diagnostic modalities, PDMS is employed in emerging biomedical technologies that leverage the activity of nano-scale matter. PDMS assembles into a synthetic extracellular matrix (ECM) to form a facile, biocompatible substrate for cell and tissue culture76,77 whose properties may be enhanced by the incorporation of nano-scale materials, e.g., graphene. PDMS is key to fabricating flexible, stretchable electronics.78–81
Thermal dissipation by resonantly-induced NPs in soft matter differs from energy dissipation in such media when they are heated by conventional bulk or resistive means. In conventionally-heated media, micro- to macro-scale bulk, surface, or linear thermal sources drive heat flux from an interface into an adjacent target media in a direction opposite to a developing temperature gradient.82 In contrast, irradiation of optically-active NPs embedded in soft media originates heat at point sources within the media. NP irradiation can augment energy dissipation relative to surface or linear sources. For example, resonant induction of plasmonic near fields on NPs may induce NP re-radiation as well as absorptive thermal dissipation.83 Wavelength-scale inclusions (e.g., voids) and/or surface reflection may induce concurrent geometric scattering.9,84 Such re-radiated, scattered, and reflected incident photons supplement point-source plasmon heating, thereby changing the thermal response, heat flux and equilibrium temperature relative to values predicted or observed when such optical or plasmonic effects are absent.50 This potential augmentation relative to conventional conductive, convective and radiative energy flux due to bulk, surface or linear thermal sources requires quantitative consideration as well as experimental validation in order to accurately describe magnitudes and parametric variation of steady-state and transient energy dissipation in soft material embedded with spectrothermal NPs.
Soft polymer films embedded with two types of NPs that were examined herein are characterized in Table 1. AuNP-PDMS films labeled ‘Film I’ were fabricated using a refined process to increase the content of monodisperse (i.e., uniformly-sized) Au nanospheres, thereby reducing inter-NP spacing to the nano-scale, and to vary film thickness while eliminating observable entrapment of gas or vapor and AuNP aggregation. AuNP-PDMS films labeled ‘Film II’ were fabricated using electrochemical reduction of Au into polydisperse (i.e., heterogeneously-sized) NPs with varying morphology (size/shape). Samples of Film I exhibited a higher equilibrium temperature increase per power input (ΔT/watt) and Au content and lower inter-NP spacing than such films fabricated previously. The present work compared a greater range of film dimensions and AuNP sizes side-by-side than had been previously characterized. The films exhibited (i) ΔT/watt increasing 3.2-fold, from 93.8 °C per watt (Film 6: polydisperse rAuNP at 0.0141 mass%) to 304 °C per watt (Film A: monodisperse AuNP at 0.015 mass%); and (ii) Film I thicknesses ranging up to 2.1-fold, from 0.64 mm to 1.45 mm. The Film II thickness was constant at 0.68 mm.
Table 1 Characteristics of PDMS thin films embedded with two different types of nanoparticles




 
Film I65
Film II1





a PDMS dielectric constant = 2.02. PDMS refractive index = 1.42.
b Diameter = 15.4 ± 2.4 nm (mean ± one standard deviation). Coefficient of variation = 15.3%.
c Diameter = 76 ± 13 nm (mean ± one standard deviation). Coefficient of variation = 16.5%.





Description
Monodisperse Au nanospheres in PDMS
Polydisperse reduced AuNP (rAuNP) in PDMSa


Dimensions L × W × D (mm)
28–L × W–35 mm2
5.0 × 5.0 × 0.68


0.64–D–1.45 mm


AuNP type

 16 nm PVP coated AuNPb
● rAuNP reduced from HAuCl4



 76 nm PVP coated AuNPc


Gold content (mass%)
16 nm: 0.001 to 0.015
0.007 to 0.190


76 nm: 0.005 to 0.015


Measured overall thermal equilibration time, τT(s)
16 nm: 40.4 to 53.3
15.9 to 27.1


76 nm: 29.1 to 57.9


ΔTeq (K)
16 nm: 1.3 to 7.6
5.4 to 34.9


76 nm: 2.0 to 5.2


Laser wavelength (nm)
532
532


Laser power (mW)
25
100


Laser spot size (mm)
3
≤2


Irradiation time (s)
180
180




Only geometric (L, W and D) and compositional (mass%) properties of NP-embedded soft films in Table 1 and relevant material properties (k, Cp and ρ) were used in the compact relations in eqn (1)–(3) to estimate corresponding rates of heat dissipation. In section 3.1, these analytic a priori estimates were compared in Fig. 2c with FEA simulated heat dissipation and with values measured for soft PDMS films embedded with two forms of AuNPs. The broad range of parameter values shown in Table 1, enabled by the refined AuNP-PDMS film fabrication herein, supported the characterization of heat dissipation rates in insulative (thicker and/or less NPs) and conductive (thinner and/or more NPs) films. The use of eqn (1)–(3) across this entire range was validated by an increase in the Nusselt number with the fourth root of Rayleigh number observed in Fig. 3. Section 3.2 examines the relative contributions to the overall rate of heat dissipation from internal and external processes. The specific applications to rate-dependent cancer photothermal therapy and sustainable energy processes were evaluated. External dissipation via convection into an adjacent fluid and radiation into the surroundings largely determined the overall rate of energy flow. Interestingly, decreasing the inter-NP separation distances down to the nano-scale enhanced the overall rate by as much as 29% relative to estimates. However, non-negligible internal dissipation via conduction in the solid phase decreased the overall energy dissipation rate, as insulation by the soft polymer film increased with thickness and with lesser NP content. This is illustrated in Fig. 4. In section 3.3, geometry and inter-NP separation of soft polymer films guided by eqn (1)–(3) were shown to yield soft matter with a large range (Fig. 5) of thermal dynamics and transient rates for heat dissipation. Improved AuNP-PDMS fabrication herein allowed decreasing inter-NP separation to achieve the highest dynamic thermal response measured to date. The tunability of a thermal response is particularly important in temperature-sensitive applications.
 Fig. 3  Measured (filled symbols) vs. estimated (open symbols) Nu calculated using eqn (4), plotted vs. GrPr1/4 for monodisperse 16 nm (orange), 76 nm (purple), and polydisperse reduced AuNPs (inset, black). Normal variation of measured data around the mean supports utility of eqn (1)–(3) for characterizing overall rates for optothermal heat dissipation. 
 Fig. 4  Estimated rates for total heat dissipation (filled circles; left y-axis) and external heat dissipation (open triangles; right y-axis) compared with corresponding measured values (x-axis). Results shown are for thin PMDS films embedded with 16 nm (orange) or 76 nm (purple) spherical AuNPs. 
 Fig. 5  Dynamic thermal response increases as internal dissipation rate decreases for films with 16 nm (A–F, open orange circles), 76 nm (a–d, open purple circles), and heterogeneous (open black circles) AuNPs. All labels start at the highest AuNP concentration and go toward the lowest AuNP concentration. 
3.1 Total heat dissipation rates of metal–polymer thin films
For refined Film I, values of total dissipation rate, τT−1, estimated a priori using either eqn (1)–(3) or finite element analysis were within 24% of experimentally measured rates across significant changes in diameter (5-fold) and concentration (15-fold) of uniform AuNPs embedded into PDMS films of varying thicknesses (2-fold). Measured values of τT−1 were determined44 as the negative inverse of the slope from a linear regression of the natural log of the temperature driving force, θ = (Tamb − T)/(Tamb − Tmax) vs. time, as detailed in §2.4 Measured Total Dissipation Rates. Fig. 2a shows a map of equilibrium temperature at the onset of the cooling period. Fig. 2b illustrates a plot of natural log of the temperature driving force, lnθ, vs. time used to determine a measured value of τT. Estimated values of τT−1 were determined a priori from independently measured physical characteristics of each film by using eqn (1)–(3). FEA of τT−1 was performed using COMSOL and MATLAB, as detailed in §2.5 Predicted Total Dissipation Rates.
The refined fabrication method expanded the ranges of attainable Au content, inter-NP spacing, film thickness, and equilibrium temperature per power input (ΔT/watt). This resulted in AuNP-PDMS films with widely tunable external and internal thermal dynamics that spanned from thermally conductive to thermally insulative behavior. As shown in Fig. 2c, the characteristic time for heat dissipation via radiation, convection and conduction from a film to its environment, τext, varied 4.5-fold across the films examined from a low near 13.0 seconds (τext−1 = 0.077 s−1; measured Film 1; closed circle near top of Fig. 2c) to a high of 57.7 seconds (τext−1 = 0.017 s−1; measured Film c; closed circle near bottom of Fig. 2c). At the same time, the characteristic time required for internal temperature equilibration due to conduction within the film, τint, relative to time required for external dissipation (i.e., τint/τext) ranged 5.8-fold from negligible (τint/τext = 0.017; measured Film 1; closed circle on RHS of Fig. 2c) to non-negligible (τint/τext = 0.098; Film C; closed circle on LHS of Fig. 2c).
Overall, the magnitudes of the a priori estimates of τT−1 calculated with eqn (1)–(3) remained consistent with both the measured and FEA-simulated values across significant variations in internal (τint, 20.2-fold), external (τext, 4.5-fold) and overall (τint/τext, 5.8-fold) thermal dynamics. Fig. 2c compares values of τT−1 that were measured (closed circles), those calculated a priori with eqn (1)–(3) (open circles), and those simulated using FEA (open triangles) for 16 nm (orange), 76 nm (purple) and reduced (black) AuNPs. Lines with dashes and dash-dots indicate constant values of the external dissipation rate, τext−1, and overall thermal dynamic ratio, τint/τext, respectively. The dash-dot line for constant τint/τext ∼ 0.05 divides Fig. 2c into two regimes: an insulative regime as τint/τext increases to 0.1 or greater and a conductive regime as τint/τext decreases to 0.01 or less. In the insulative regime, the rate for internal heat dissipation via conduction becomes significant relative to external heat dissipation, which occurs primarily via convection and radiation. This lowers the overall rate for NP-induced optothermal heat dissipation relative to τext−1. The internal dissipation rate, dominated by geometric (characteristic film thickness, Lc) and compositional (thermal diffusivity, α) parameters, reduces the overall rate. In the conductive regime, the overall rate for optothermal heat dissipation approaches the rate for external heat dissipation. The relative effect of internal dissipation diminishes. Significantly, for τint/τext ≥ 0.01, both internal and external rates for heat dissipation must be considered to accurately characterize the overall rate for optothermal dissipation.
The Rayleigh number (Ra) dependence of convective heat transfer coefficients obtained from measured heat dissipation rates was evaluated to validate the use of eqn (1)–(3) to describe the AuNP-PDMS films. The Nusselt number (Nu) has a ¼ power dependence on the Ra.82 This dependence is indicated by the dash-dot line in Fig. 3. Ra is the product of Grashoff (Gr) and Prandtl (Pr) numbers. Heat transfer coefficients obtained from measured heat dissipation rates (filled symbols) were distributed normally around theoretically expected values for both 16 nm (orange) and 76 nm (purple) AuNPs as well as for the reduced AuNPs (black symbols, inset). Nu, Ra, and the heat transfer coefficient were calculated as described in §2.5.1 Compact Structure Function Relation.
3.2 Tunable total dissipation and dynamic thermal response
The compact structure–function relations in eqn (1)–(3) directly apportion variations in the composition and geometry of the AuNP-polymer films to changes in internal and external dissipation rates as shown in Fig. 2c and 3. This provides insights that are valuable for applications ranging from sustainable energy to human health.
Overall, Fig. 2c and eqn (1) show that decreases in the overall heat dissipation rate occur nonlinearly and with increasing magnitude as the rate of internal temperature equilibration due to conduction within the film approaches the rate of external heat dissipation due to heat transfer with the surroundings. Such decreases are most prominent for films with higher external heat transfer rates, e.g., for τext−1 = 0.077 as opposed to τext−1 = 0.017. For example, a value of τint/τext = 0.1 yields a 10% decrease in the overall heat dissipation as a result of slow conduction within the film.
The utility of the intuitive understanding of relative effects of internal and external dissipation rates provided by eqn (1)–(3) is illustrated by considering a recent report on nanocomposites in sustainable energy. Kosuga et al. reported that heat dissipation lowered the temperature induced after 100 seconds of artificial AM 1.5G (i.e., 1 sun) incidence on ca. 0.2 mm transparent polyethylene naphthalate (PEN) films. Measured temperatures for films embedded with fixed beads (FBs) decorated with Au and silver (Ag) NPs decreased from 120 °C (expected) to 43.4 °C (measured) and 40 °C (expected) to 36.8 °C (measured), respectively.52 From the cooling curves reported for PEN films embedded with AuNP-FBs and AgNP-FBs, we calculated the corresponding total thermal dissipation rates by the method in §2.4 Measured Total Dissipation Rates to be 0.036 and 0.031 s−1, respectively. Interestingly, these overall rates for thermal dissipation were similar to those of Films b, 6 and 7 (all ca. 0.7 mm thick; see Fig. 2c), although the PEN films were 29% as thick. By setting Lc = 0.1 mm and using the bulk thermal diffusivity of PEN film, the internal dissipation rate could be estimated to be 5.88 s−1. This internal dissipation rate was higher than values from Film 2 on the RHS of Fig. 2c. Relative to the high NP-FB-film internal dissipation rate, the external dissipation rate for the PEN films was thus <1%. The structure–function relations in eqn (1)–(3) illustrated by Fig. 2c identify three specific possible approaches to increase the induced temperature of a PEN film so that it approaches a higher expected value: (i) decrease internal dissipation rate (i.e., increase Lc or reduce α); (ii) decrease external convection (i.e., reduce hconv); and/or (iii) decrease external radiation (e.g., reduce emissivity, ε).
Across the data for all films in Fig. 2c, the overall rate for heat dissipation was increased by 3.6-fold from 0.017 to 0.063 s−1 by varying the diameter (5-fold) and concentration (15-fold) of the uniform AuNPs embedded into PDMS films of varying thicknesses (2-fold). The corresponding compact a priori description of total heat dissipation rate allows for the design of NP-induced thermalization. This has broad utility, as illustrated by considering results from Tang et al. who showed that Au nanorods (NRs) coated with a shell of platinum (Pt) nanodots (Au@Pt) were more efficient photothermal therapy (PTT) agents than bare AuNRs, killing >80% of cancer cells vs. <50%, respectively, both in vitro and in vivo.24 From the cooling curves and physical properties reported for Au@Pt and AuNRs, the measured total thermal dissipation rates were calculated as detailed in §2.4 Measured Total Dissipation Rates to be 0.0031 and 0.0025 s−1, respectively, for coated and bare AuNRs. These rates are ∼7-fold lower than values measured herein for the nanocomposite films. These rates are comparable to values reported previously for aqueous Au nanosphere suspensions, estimated using the compact description (eqn (1)–(3) in §2.5.1 Compact Structure Function Relations).23 Correspondence between rates for heat dissipation from tissue-embedded and aqueous-suspended AuNPs appears attributable to the primarily aqueous content of cells. Notably, the overall rates for heat dissipation appeared slightly lower for the less efficient AuNR PTT agents, i.e., bare AuNRs. The fact that the greater heat dissipation rate improved the PTT efficiency is consistent with clinical assessments of superficial hyperthermia, which advise a heat rate of not less than 1 °C per minute for clinical trials.39 This indicates that a geometry- or composition-dependent influence on dynamic thermal dissipation rate that is detrimental to PTT could be mitigated using alterations guided by the structure–function relations of eqn (1)–(3).
Comparing estimates from eqn (1)–(3) with measurements in Fig. 2c identifies opportunities to further enhance optothermal transduction. For example, measured values of the external dissipation rate for AuNP-PDMS films with higher AuNP content for both 16 nm and 76 nm particles exceeded estimates, with the exception of Film A. Thermal dissipation from films with more concentrated AuNPs and/or larger NPs appeared more likely to be enhanced by resonant optical reflection or scattering.65 Such effects are not accounted for in the compact description for dynamic thermal response in eqn (1)–(3). As a second example, the total heat dissipation rate for PDMS films into which AuNPs had been reduced in situ (black symbols) varied primarily with Au content. Au content in these films increased from 0.007% to nearly 0.2% (from left to right in Fig. 2c); the geometry of these films was kept constant. In contrast, total dissipation rates for 16 nm (orange symbols) and 76 nm (purple symbols) varied with both geometry and Au content. Exchanging the global value of Tmax for its local pixelated value did not appreciably change the measured or estimated total dissipation rates.
Accounting for internal (τint−1) as well as external (τext−1) contributions to heat dissipation improves the a priori description of the overall rate for heat dissipation (τT−1). Fig. 4 compares estimated rates for total heat dissipation (filled circles; left y-axis) and external heat dissipation (open triangles; right y-axis) from 16 nm (orange) or 76 nm (purple) AuNPs embedded in PDMS films with corresponding measured values (x-axis). Across the range of heat dissipation rates measured for the films (0.017 to 0.035 s−1), estimates for most films (A, B, F, a, c and d) were nearer to the measured values when τint−1 and τext−1 were used to calculate τT−1viaeqn (1). As examples, estimated τT−1 values for Films a and B (filled circles) shown near the dot-dash line in Fig. 4 were within 2.6 and 1.4% of the measured values, respectively. Adding internal (τint−1) contributions to the heat transfer lowered the estimated value of τT−1 relative to its measured counterpart in films for which the apparent Nu exceeded its a priori estimate by eqn (4), as shown in Fig. 3. In these films (C, D, E and b), resistance to internal dissipation appeared negligible and the estimate for τext−1 in eqn (2a) agreed better with τT−1 measured from the overall sample. Notably, Film E possessed measured and estimated dissipation rates near that of Film a, despite a 14.2-fold higher AuNP concentration (4.7 × 1011 NP per cm3 in E vs. 0.33 × 1011 in a) and a 4.8-fold smaller AuNP size (16 nm for E vs. 76 nm for a) resulting in a 7.5-fold lower mass percentage of Au (0.002% in E vs. 0.015% in a). Measured thicknesses for Films E and a were 1.25 and 1.24 mm, respectively. This underscored the primary control of the dissipation rate by film thicknesses at relatively low gold content (i.e., the insulative regime).
3.3 Thermal dynamics of metal–polymer thin films
The rate at which thermal energy is dissipated from a system to its environment relative to the rate of internal thermal equilibrium is characterized by the ratio τint/τext, termed the dynamic thermal response. Higher dynamic thermal responses are indicative of highly insulative films for which the internal dissipation rate must be accounted for to accurately estimate the overall rate for heat dissipation a priori. Lower dynamic thermal responses are indicative of more conductive films. In this case, the external dissipation dominates and internal dissipation becomes negligible in eqn (1). In Fig. 5, the effects on dynamic thermal response of geometry and composition for nanocomposite thin films evaluated in this work are examined, by taking the ratio of eqn (2(b)) to (2(a)) using parameters identified in Fig. 2a and described in §2.5 Predicted Total Dissipation Rates. Fig. 5 distinguishes the two thermal response regimes identified in Fig. 2c: an insulative regime as τint/τext approaches 0.1, where internal dissipation rates of less than about 1 s−1 result in the overall rate for optothermal dissipation rate being lowered as film thickness increases; and a conductive regime as τint/τext approaches 0.01, where internal dissipation rates greater than about 1 s−1 result in the overall rate for energy dissipation being increased by a larger Au content.
For larger insulating films, the Au content was increased to ≤0.015% (35.2 × 1011 NP per cm3) to achieve nano-scale inter-NP separations. The film geometry exhibited a predominant influence on τint/τext. Samples from the Film I and Film II groups had thicknesses that increased 2.1-fold and area cross-sections that increased by 1.1-fold. This yielded an overall increase in the dynamic thermal response by a factor of 3.1 (0.091/0.029), the largest reported to date. The structure–function relation in eqn (1) more accurately predicted the rates for heat dissipation from such insulating films than previous methods. This occurred because modest increases in sample thickness in insulative films rapidly raised internal dissipation times to values that were non-negligible relative to external equilibration times due to the stochastic nature of temperature dissipation. In other words, insulating films with non-negligible internal dissipation rates are ‘thermally thick’. For example, increasing the thickness from 1.0 to 1.5 mm yielded a 2-fold increase in the internal dissipation and a >1.5-fold increase in the dynamic thermal response. Decreasing the thickness from 1.3 to 0.7 mm resulted in a 4-fold decrease in the internal dissipation and a >1.5-fold decrease in the dynamic thermal response.
In contrast, thinner films into which Au was reduced exhibited a 3-fold decrease in the dynamic thermal response as the Au content increased 27-fold from 0.007 to 0.19 mass%. The time for internal thermal equilibration was lower than the characteristic time for external heat dissipation in these films, resulting in ‘thermally thin’ behavior. Thus, the thermal response was determined primarily by the Au content, rather than the film thickness. This difference occurred despite compositional similarities with the thicker films. These results were consistent with previous reports for AuNPs reduced onto conductive SiO2 substrates that exhibited negligible internal dissipation rates, τint ≪ τext, and corresponding low dynamic thermal responses.23 Note that values for NP per cm3 could not be determined for the AuNP-reduced films because the particle sizes and size distributions of reduced NPs were not known.9 Also, accounting for the temperature dependence of PDMS geometric and thermodynamic parameters resulted in less than 2.5% differences in the values calculated for the dynamic thermal response.
Importantly, a priori estimates of rates for optothermal heat dissipation in Fig. 2–5 were obtained with eqn (1)–(3) using only geometric (L, W and D) and thermodynamic (k, Cp and ρ) parameters for the material with embedded nanoparticles at ambient conditions. Fig. 2 shows good correspondence between a priori estimates calculated analytically or simulated by FEA and values measured for soft PDMS films embedded with two forms of AuNPs across a broad range of parameter values. Fig. 3 shows the compact structure function relations in eqn (1)–(3) provide consistency with a fundamental description of convective, conductive and radiative heat transfer. Fig. 4 illustrates the importance of considering both the internal and external dissipation rates in evaluating the overall rate for heat dissipation in a AuNP-polymer nanocomposite. Embedding NPs (particularly small, non-scattering NPs) in soft matter at concentrations that yield nanometer-scale separation distances was more likely to exhibit transient rates of heat dissipation that exceed estimated values after accounting for internal conduction, as well as external conduction, convection and radiation. Fig. 5 identifies a large range of thermal dynamics and transient rates for heat dissipation possible in similar nanocomposite films as a result of variations in geometry and composition. This range spans insulative and conductive regimes, in which trends in dynamic thermal response arise primarily due to film thickness and AuNP content in thermally thick and thin films, respectively. The compact structure function relations in eqn (1)–(3) thus provide a facile tool by which changes in the transient overall rate for heat dissipation from optothermal NPs can be quickly, directly and scalably attributed to specific parameters. These relations and the refined fabrication method exhibit usefulness in specifying the geometry and composition of NP-embedded films that demonstrably impact rates for heat dissipation in photothermal energy, tissue ablation, membrane separation, and catalytic reactions.
4. Conclusions
The effects of geometry and composition on the transient rate for optothermal dissipation from resonantly irradiated NPs were examined in soft PDMS thin films using compact structure function relations and finite element analysis. A refined fabrication method that stably reduced the inter-NP distance to nano-scale intervals increased the energy dissipation by up to 29%. For both 16 nm and 76 nm diameter AuNPs embedded in PDMS at 0.015 mass% (35.2 × 1011 NP per cm3) or less, the film thickness controlled the dynamic thermal response and total dissipation rate when non-negligible internal dissipation rates approached 10% of the external dissipation rates, i.e., the insulative regime. Increasing the film thickness from 0.7 to 1.5 mm reduced the total measured dissipation rate from 0.063 to 0.017 s−1 and increased the dynamic thermal response from 0.029 to 0.091. The latter value is the highest increased dynamic thermal response observed to date. The measured total dissipation rates across the entire film were within 24% of estimates from the compact description across a range of sample thicknesses from 0.64 to 1.45 mm, Au content from 0.001 (2.34 × 1011 NP per cm3) to 0.015 mass% (35.2 × 1011 NP per cm3) for 16 nm and 0.005 (0.109 × 1011 NP per cm3) to 0.015 mass% (0.328 × 1011 NP per cm3) for 76 nm, and area from 28 to 35 mm2. The good correspondence between the a priori estimates by the compact structure function relation or finite element analysis and measures from the refined AuNP-PDMS films across an expanded range of geometric and thermodynamic parameters demonstrates important progress towards the rational design and development of optothermal nanocomposites with tunable dynamic thermal responses.
Author contributions
D. K. Roper derived the approach, directed the work, analyzed data, refined figures, and prepared, revised and finalized the text. K. R. Berry Jr. performed numerical analysis, prepared and refined figures and drafted the text. J. R. Dunklin fabricated films and performed initial calculations. C. Chambers performed the thermographic experiments of the 16 nm and 76 nm films and initial data analysis. V. Bejugam performed COMSOL simulations for cooling dissipation rates. G. T. Forcherio provided guidance for experiments and calculations. M. Lanier showed that mass-averaged thermal parameter values for lower AuNP contents were not needed using volume fraction calculations from Maxwell relationships in Ref. 82
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported in part by NSF CBET-1134222, NSF ECCS-1006927, the University of Arkansas Foundation, and the Walton Family Charitable Foundation. J. R. Dunklin and G. T. Forcherio acknowledge support from respective NSF GRFP awards. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.
References
K. R. Berry, A. G. Russell, P. T. Blake and D. K. Roper, Gold nanoparticles reduced in situ and dispersed in polymer thin films: optical and thermal properties, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 11 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Bozlar, 
            et al., Carbon nanotube microarchitectures for enhanced thermal conduction at ultralow mass fraction in polymer composites, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1654–1658 CrossRef PubMed .
J. R. Dunklin, G. T. Forcherio, K. R. Berry and D. K. Roper, Asymmetric Reduction of Gold Nanoparticles into Thermoplasmonic Polydimethylsiloxane Thin Films, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 8457–8466 Search PubMed .
T.-L. Li and S. L.-C. Hsu, Enhanced thermal conductivity of polyimide films via a hybrid of micro-and nano-sized boron nitride, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 6825–6829 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Lin, K. S. Moon and C. P. Wong, A combined process of in situ functionalization and microwave treatment to achieve ultrasmall thermal expansion of aligned carbon nanotube-polymer nanocomposites: Toward applications as thermal interface materials, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2421–2424 CrossRef .
A. S. Urban, 
            et al., Optical trapping and manipulation of plasmonic nanoparticles: fundamentals, applications, and perspectives, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 4458 RSC .
M. Chen, 
            et al., Plasmonic Nanoparticle-Embedded Poly(p-phenylene benzobisoxazole) Nanofibrous Composite Films for Solar Steam Generation, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 6186–6193 RSC .
W. Ahn and D. K. Roper, Transformed gold island film improves light-to-heat transduction of nanoparticles on silica capillaries, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 12214–12218 Search PubMed .
G. T. Forcherio and D. K. Roper, Optical attenuation of plasmonic nanocomposites within photonic devices, Appl. Opt., 2013, 53, 6417–6427 CrossRef PubMed .
E. S. Cho, 
            et al., Engineering Synergy: Energy and Mass Transport in Hybrid Nanomaterials, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5744–5752 CrossRef PubMed .
A. I. Volokitin and B. N. J. Persson, Radiative heat transfer between nanostructures, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 63, 205404 CrossRef .
J. H. Byeon and Y.-W. Kim, Gas-phase self-assembly of soft nanocomposites for efficient gene transfection and photothermal therapy, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 3185 RSC .
J. H. Byeon, Aerosol Nanoencapsulation: Single-Pass Floating Self-Assembly of Biofunctional Hybrid Nanoplatforms, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 17757–17762 Search PubMed .
S. Noimark, C. W. Dunnill and I. P. Parkin, Shining light on materials—A self-sterilising revolution, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2013, 65, 570–580 CrossRef PubMed .
M. J. Bovis, 
            et al., Photosensitisation studies of silicone polymer doped with methylene blue and nanogold for antimicrobial applications, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 54830–54842 RSC .
S. K. Sehmi, 
            et al., Enhancing the Antibacterial Activity of Light-Activated Surfaces Containing Crystal Violet and ZnO Nanoparticles: Investigation of Nanoparticle Size, Capping Ligand, and Dopants, ACS Omega, 2016, 1, 334–343 CrossRef PubMed .
A. S. Angelatos, B. Radt and F. Caruso, Light-Responsive Polyelectrolyte/Gold Nanoparticle Microcapsules, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 3071–3076 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Kaur, M. L. Aliru, A. S. Chadha, A. Asea and S. Krishnan, Hyperthermia using nanoparticles–Promises and pitfalls, Int. J. Hyperthermia, 2016, 32, 76–88 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Shi, H. Qin, S. Yang and D. Xing, Thermally confined shell coating amplifies the photoacoustic conversion efficiency of nanoprobes, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 3644–3655 CrossRef .
M. Rashidi-Huyeh and B. Palpant, Thermal response of nanocomposite materials under pulsed laser excitation, J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 96, 4475–4482 CrossRef .
P. Worajittiphon, I. Jurewicz, A. A. K. King, J. L. Keddie and A. B. Dalton, Enhanced Thermal Actuation in Thin Polymer Films Through Particle Nano-Squeezing by Carbon Nanotube Belts, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5310–5314 CrossRef PubMed .
S. V. Zimovets and P. I. Geshev, Nonstationary heating of two-dimensional metal nanoparticles by laser radiation, J. Eng. Phys. Thermophys., 2008, 81, 976–984 CrossRef .
K. R. Berry, J. R. Dunklin, P. A. Blake and D. K. Roper, Thermal dynamics of plasmonic nanoparticle composites, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 10550–10557 Search PubMed .
J. Tang, 
            et al., Au@Pt nanostructures: a novel photothermal conversion agent for cancer therapy, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 3670 RSC .
Y. Xu, 
            et al., Progress in materials for thermal ablation of cancer cells, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 20128 RSC .
J. Z. Zhang, Biomedical applications of shape-controlled plasmonic nanostructures: A case study of hollow gold nanospheres for photothermal ablation therapy of cancer, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 686–695 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, 
            et al., A multi-functional nanoplatform for tumor synergistic phototherapy, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 65104 Search PubMed .
C. Wang, 
            et al., Visible light plasmonic heating of Au–ZnO for the catalytic reduction of CO2, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 6968 RSC .
K. Vanherck, S. Hermans, T. Verbiest and I. Vankelecom, Using the photothermal effect to improve membrane separations via localized heating, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6079 RSC .
Y. Li, T. Verbiest and I. Vankelecom, Improving the flux of PDMS membranes via localized heating through incorporation of gold nanoparticles, J. Membr. Sci., 2013, 428, 63–69 CrossRef .
D. Jaque, 
            et al., Nanoparticles for photothermal therapies, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 9494–9530 RSC .
J. Qin, 
            et al., Gold nanorods as a theranostic platform for in vitro and in vivo imaging and photothermal therapy of inflammatory macrophages, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 13991–14001 RSC .
J. Zhou, 
            et al., Hybridized doxorubicin-Au nanospheres exhibit enhanced near-infrared surface plasmon absorption for photothermal therapy applications, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 5869–5883 RSC .
S. Clemenson, L. David and E. Espuche, Structure and Morphology of Nanocomposite Films Prepared from Polyvinyl Alcohol and Silver Nitrate: Influence of Thermal Treatment, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2007, 45, 2657–2672 CrossRef .
M. Lisunova, 
            et al., Photothermal response of the plasmonic nanoconglomerates in films assembled by electroless plating, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 20894–20901 RSC .
M. Lisunova, J. R. Dunklin, S. V. Jenkins, J. Chen and D. K. Roper, The unusual visible photothermal response of free standing multilayered films based on plasmonic bimetallic nanocages, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 15719–15727 RSC .
V. Pustovalov, L. Astafyeva and B. Jean, Computer modeling of the optical properties and heating of spherical gold and silica-gold nanoparticles for laser combined imaging and photothermal treatment, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 225105 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Ricciardi, 
            et al., Plasmonic mediated cancer phototherapy: the combined effect of thermal and photodynamic processes, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 19279–19289 RSC .
H. Dobšíček Trefná, 
            et al., Quality assurance guidelines for superficial hyperthermia clinical trials, Strahlenther. Onkol., 2017, 193, 351–366 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Scott, R. Gupta and G. U. Kulkarni, A Simple Water-Based Synthesis of Au Nanoparticle/PDMS Composites for Water Purification and Targeted Drug Release, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2010, 211, 1640–1647 CrossRef .
R. K. Kannadorai and Q. Liu, Optimization in interstitial plasmonic photothermal therapy for treatment planning, Med. Phys., 2013, 40, 103301 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Jang, Y. S. Kim and Y. Choi, Effects of Gold Nanorod Concentration on the Depth-Related Temperature Increase During Hyperthermic Ablation, Small, 2011, 7, 265–270 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ruta, R. Chantrell and O. Hovorka, Unified model of hyperthermia via hysteresis heating in systems of interacting magnetic nanoparticles, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 9090 CrossRef PubMed .
D. K. Roper, W. Ahn and M. Hoepfner, Microscale Heat Transfer Transduced by Surface Plasmon Resonant Gold Nanoparticles, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 3636–3641 Search PubMed .
A. G. Russell, M. D. McKnight, A. C. Sharp, J. A. Hestekin and D. K. Roper, Gold Nanoparticles Allow Optoplasmonic Evaporation from Open Silica Cells with a Logarithmic Approach to Steady-State Thermal Profiles, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 10132–10139 Search PubMed .
A. G. Russell, M. D. McKnight, J. A. Hestekin and D. K. Roper, Thermodynamics of Optoplasmonic Heating in Fluid-Filled Gold-Nanoparticle-Plated Capillaries, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 7799–7805 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Chen, J. H. Walther and P. Koumoutsakos, Ultrafast cooling by covalently bonded graphene-carbon nanotube hybrid immersed in water, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 465705 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Maity, 
            et al., Spatial temperature mapping within polymer nanocomposites undergoing ultrafast photothermal heating via gold nanorods, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 15236–15247 RSC .
J. S. Melinger, 
            et al., Ultrafast dynamics of gold-based nanocomposite materials, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2003, 107, 3424–3431 CrossRef .
J. R. Dunklin, G. T. Forcherio, K. R. Berry and D. K. Roper, Gold nanoparticle-polydimethylsiloxane thin films enhance thermoplasmonic dissipation by internal reflection, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 7523–7531 Search PubMed .
G. Fu, S. T. Sanjay, M. Dou and X. Li, Nanoparticle-mediated photothermal effect enables a new method for quantitative biochemical analysis using a thermometer, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 5422–5427 RSC .
A. Kosuga, Y. Yamamoto, M. Miyai and M. Matsuzawa, A high performance photothermal film with spherical shell-type metallic nanocomposites for solar thermoelectric conversion, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 7580–7584 RSC .
N. K. Mishra, V. Kumar and K. B. Joshi, Thermoplasmonic effect of silver nanoparticles modulates peptide amphiphile fiber into nanowreath-like assembly, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 20238–20248 RSC .
H. H. Richardson, M. T. Carlson, P. J. Tandler, P. Hernandez and A. O. Govorov, Experimental and theoretical studies of light-to-heat conversion and collective heating effects in metal nanoparticle solutions, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1139–1146 CrossRef PubMed .
O. Ekici, 
            et al., Thermal analysis of gold nanorods heated with femtosecond laser pulses, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2008, 41, 185501 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Sassaroli, K. C. P. Li and B. E. O'Neill, Numerical investigation of heating of a gold nanoparticle and the surrounding microenvironment by nanosecond laser pulses for nanomedicine applications, Phys. Med. Biol., 2009, 54, 5541–5560 CrossRef PubMed .
B. E. Smith, P. B. Roder, X. Zhou and P. J. Pauzauskie, Nanoscale materials for hyperthermal theranostics, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 7115–7126 RSC .
N. Zhou, L. M. Traverso and X. Xu, Power delivery and self-heating in nanoscale near field transducer for heat-assisted magnetic recording, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 134001 CrossRef PubMed .
M.-S. Jeng, R. Yang, D. Song and G. Chen, Modeling the Thermal Conductivity and Phonon Transport in Nanoparticle Composites Using Monte Carlo Simulation, J. Heat Transfer, 2008, 130, 42410 CrossRef .
R. Yang and G. Chen, Thermal conductivity modeling of periodic two-dimensional nanocomposites, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 69, 1–10 Search PubMed .
A. S. Almusallam and D. S. Sholl, Brownian dynamics study of polymer-stabilized nanoparticles, Nanotechnology, 2005, 16, S409–S415 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Baral, A. Rafiei Miandashti and H. H. Richardson, Near-field thermal imaging of optically excited gold nanostructures: scaling principles for collective heating with heat dissipation into the surrounding medium, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 941–948 RSC .
J. Millen, T. Deesuwan, P. Barker and J. Anders, Nanoscale temperature measurements using non-equilibrium Brownian dynamics of a levitated nanosphere, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 9, 425–429 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Gardea, B. Glaz, J. Riddick, D. C. Lagoudas and M. Naraghi, Identification of energy dissipation mechanisms in CNT-reinforced nanocomposites, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 105707 CrossRef PubMed .
J. R. Dunklin, G. T. Forcherio and D. Keith Roper, Gold nanoparticle-polydimethylsiloxane films reflect light internally by optical diffraction and Mie scattering, Mater. Res. Express, 2015, 2, 85005 CrossRef .
Z. Qin, 
            et al., Quantitative Comparison of Photothermal Heat Generation between Gold Nanospheres and Nanorods, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 29836 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Vera and Y. Bayazitoglu, A note on laser penetration in nanoshell deposited tissue, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2009, 52, 3402–3406 CrossRef .
G. M. Santos, 
            et al., Photothermal inactivation of heat-resistant bacteria on nanoporous gold disk arrays, Opt. Mater. Express, 2016, 6, 256863 Search PubMed .
W. Li, 
            et al., Gold nanocages covered with thermally-responsive polymers for controlled release by high-intensity focused ultrasound, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 1724–1730 RSC .
G. D. Moon, 
            et al., A New Theranostic System Based on Gold Nanocages and Phase-Change Materials with Unique Features for Photoacoustic Imaging and Controlled Release, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 4762–4765 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Sun, 
            et al., Using SV119-Gold Nanocage Conjugates to Eradicate Cancer Stem Cells Through a Combination of Photothermal and Chemo Therapies, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2014, 3, 1283–1291 CrossRef PubMed .
D. C. Hyun, N. S. Levinson, U. Jeong and Y. Xia, Emerging Applications of Phase-Change Materials (PCMs): Teaching an Old Dog New Tricks, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 3780–3795 CrossRef PubMed .

          F. Ayers, A. Grant, D. Kuo, D. J. Cuccia and A. J. Durkin, Fabrication and characterization of silicone-based tissue phantoms with tunable optical properties in the visible and near infrared domain, in Proceedings of SPIE, ed. R. J. Nordstrom, SPEI,  2008, p. 687007.  DOI:10.1117/12.764969 .
J. R. Dunklin and D. K. Roper, Heat dissipation of resonant absorption in metal nanoparticle-polymer films described at particle separations near resonant wavelength, J. Nanomater., 2017, 2017, 2753934 Search PubMed .
T. V. Howard, J. R. Dunklin, G. T. Forcherio and D. K. Roper, Thermoplasmonic dissipation in gold nanoparticle–polyvinylpyrrolidone thin films, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 56463–56470 RSC .
J. Kim, 
            et al., Engineering structures and functions of mesenchymal stem cells by suspended large-area graphene nanopatterns, 2D Mater., 2016, 3, 35013 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, 
            et al., Fluorinated Graphene for Promoting Neuro-Induction of Stem Cells, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4285–4290 CrossRef PubMed .

          D. Corning, Sylgard® 184 Silicone Elastomer,  2014 Search PubMed .
W.-H. Yeo, 
            et al., Multifunctional Epidermal Electronics Printed Directly Onto the Skin, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2773–2778 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-W. Jeong, 
            et al., Wireless Optofluidic Systems for Programmable In Vivo Pharmacology and Optogenetics, Cell, 2015, 162, 662–674 CrossRef PubMed .
J. G. McCall, 
            et al., Preparation and implementation of optofluidic neural probes for in vivo wireless pharmacology and optogenetics, Nat. Protoc., 2017, 12, 219–237 CrossRef PubMed .

          R. Bird, W. Stewart and E. Lightfoot, Transport Phenomena, John Wiley and Sons, Inc.,  2007 Search PubMed .
G. Mie, Contributions to the optics of turbid media, particularly of colloidal metal solutions, Ann. Phys., 1908, 25, 377–445 CrossRef .
J. R. Dunklin, G. T. Forcherio and D. K. Roper, Geometric optics of gold nanoparticle-polydimethylsiloxane thin film systems, Opt. Mater. Express, 2014, 4, 375–383 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8nr00977eThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Optical images of ca. 5 × 5 mm PDMS films (above facing; below side) containing monodisperse 16 nm (a; above) and 76 nm (b; below) AuNPs. AuNP content decreases from left to right in (a) and (b) as given in the text below each film. Images of films containing polydisperse, reduced AuNPs (rAuNPs), categorized as Film II in Table, are shown in the ESI.†	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Temperature map of Film 1 (0.1896% rAuNP-PDMS). (b) A single pixel representative plot of the measured lnθ vs. time from Film F used to calculate measured value of τT. (c) Total dissipation rate, τT−1, values obtained from measurements (closed circles), a priori estimates using eqn (1)–(3) (open circles), and FEA simulation (open triangles) for AuNP-PDMS films containing 16 nm (orange symbols), 76 nm (purple symbols), and in situ reduced (black symbols) AuNPs. Dashed and dash-dot lines show constant values of external dissipation rate, τext−1, and thermal dynamic ratio, τin/τext, respectively.	 
	(1)
	(2a)
	(2b)
	(3)
	(4)


Description	Monodisperse Au nanospheres in PDMS	Polydisperse reduced AuNP (rAuNP) in PDMSa
Dimensions L × W × D (mm)	28–L × W–35 mm2	5.0 × 5.0 × 0.68
0.64–D–1.45 mm
AuNP type	
 16 nm PVP coated AuNPb	● rAuNP reduced from HAuCl4

 76 nm PVP coated AuNPc
Gold content (mass%)	16 nm: 0.001 to 0.015	0.007 to 0.190
76 nm: 0.005 to 0.015
Measured overall thermal equilibration time, τT(s)	16 nm: 40.4 to 53.3	15.9 to 27.1
76 nm: 29.1 to 57.9
ΔTeq (K)	16 nm: 1.3 to 7.6	5.4 to 34.9
76 nm: 2.0 to 5.2
Laser wavelength (nm)	532	532
Laser power (mW)	25	100
Laser spot size (mm)	3	≤2
Irradiation time (s)	180	180

 	Fig. 3  Measured (filled symbols) vs. estimated (open symbols) Nu calculated using eqn (4), plotted vs. GrPr1/4 for monodisperse 16 nm (orange), 76 nm (purple), and polydisperse reduced AuNPs (inset, black). Normal variation of measured data around the mean supports utility of eqn (1)–(3) for characterizing overall rates for optothermal heat dissipation.	 

 	Fig. 4  Estimated rates for total heat dissipation (filled circles; left y-axis) and external heat dissipation (open triangles; right y-axis) compared with corresponding measured values (x-axis). Results shown are for thin PMDS films embedded with 16 nm (orange) or 76 nm (purple) spherical AuNPs.	 

 	Fig. 5  Dynamic thermal response increases as internal dissipation rate decreases for films with 16 nm (A–F, open orange circles), 76 nm (a–d, open purple circles), and heterogeneous (open black circles) AuNPs. All labels start at the highest AuNP concentration and go toward the lowest AuNP concentration.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8nr00977e

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
