Phosphorus containing materials for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution  - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6GC02825J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6GC02825J
(Tutorial Review)
Green Chem., 2017, 19, 588-613Phosphorus containing materials for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution

        
          
            Zhuofeng 
            Hu
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Zhurui 
            Shen
          
          
        
      *abc and 

        
          
            Jimmy C. 
            Yu
          
          
        
      *ab
aDepartment of Chemistry, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong, China
bShenzhen Research Institute, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, PR China. E-mail: jimyu@cuhk.edu.hk
cKey Laboratory of Advanced Ceramics and Machining Technology, Ministry of Education, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, PR China. E-mail: shenzhurui@tju.edu.cn
Received 
      11th October 2016
    , Accepted 7th December 2016First published on 7th December 2016AbstractHydrogen from photocatalytic water splitting is a sustainable and renewable source of clean energy. The development of highly efficient photocatalysts is essential for the cost-effective and large-scale production of hydrogen. Effective photocatalysts made of earth abundant elements such as phosphorus have attracted great attention. The elemental red phosphorus by itself exhibits respectable photocatalytic activity, and some phosphorus compounds including phosphates and phosphides have also been found to be good photocatalysts. This timely review describes in detail all these P-containing species as well as P-doped systems. Their preparation, microstructure, optical and semiconductive properties are summarized thoroughly. Moreover, new findings about the relationship between the structure and activity are also discussed. Finally, inspired by the large amount of excellent examples, we have offered some perspectives for the future development of P-containing materials.Zhuofeng HuZhuofeng Hu received his B.Sc. degree from Sun Yat-Sen University in 2008 and his PhD degree in Chemistry from The Chinese University of Hong Kong (CUHK) in 2014. He is now a postdoctoral fellow under the supervision of Professor Jimmy C. Yu in CUHK. His current research interest primarily focuses on elemental photocatalytic hydrogen production, nanostructure electrocatalysis, semiconductor based photoelectrochemical water splitting, 3D diagram design and Vasp theoretical calculation.Zhurui ShenZhurui Shen received his B.S. degree and Ph.D. in Materials Chemistry from Nankai University in 2005 and 2010, respectively. He joined Tianjin University as a lecturer in 2010, and then he worked as a research associate from 2013 to 2015 at The Chinese University of Hong Kong, under the supervision of Prof. Jimmy C. Yu. In 2015, he was promoted as an Associate Professor in Tianjin University. His current research interests include novel photocatalysts and photoelectrodes, nanostructured gas sensors and functional coordination polymers.Jimmy C. YuJimmy Yu received a Ph.D. degree from the University of Idaho in 1985. He joined The Chinese University of Hong Kong in 1995, and was named the Choh-Ming Li Professor of Chemistry in 2015. Prof. Yu is a leading scientist in the field of photocatalysis. He has been selected as a 2016 Web of Science Highly Cited Researcher in both chemistry and materials science.
1. Introduction
The world is running out of easily extractable fossil fuels, and their burning greatly threatens our environment, climate and human health.1–5 A sensible solution to these problems is to develop renewable and clean energy. Hydrogen (H2) is an ideal fuel due to its high energy density, high combustion value and green burning product (water).1–3 Compared to the extremely small quantity of hydrogen in air (ca. <1 ppm), the hydrogen percentage in water is much larger. Therefore, it is very promising to extract hydrogen from water.1–3 Besides, as the burning product of hydrogen is water, a “water–hydrogen–water” cycle is formed in this way. This cycle in the ecosystem is green and environmentally friendly. H2 evolution from water can be achieved by the direct splitting of water molecules. However, it requires a pyrolysis temperature of above 1800 K or irradiation of high energy ultraviolet (UV) light, which are energy consuming and have a high cost.6 Compared with these methods, solar-driven photocatalytic H2 evolution from water is a simple, low cost and environmentally benign route.1–3,6 Moreover, this method aims at directly and sustainably converting solar energy into the chemical energy of hydrogen. To achieve a high efficiency in photocatalytic H2 evolution, a suitable photocatalyst is crucial. It should satisfy several requirements:1–3,6–9 (1) a wide response range in the solar light spectrum, the ideal one is preferred to cover most of or the whole visible light region (ca. 400 nm–800 nm, 43% in solar energy). (2) The conduction band (CB) edge of semiconductor photocatalysts should be at least more negative than the energy level of H2 evolution (0 V vs. normal hydrogen electrode (NHE), pH = 7). Moreover, if an overall water splitting is considered, the valance band (VB) edge should meanwhile be more positive than the energy level of O2 evolution (+1.23 V vs. NHE, pH = 7). Therefore, considering the over potential of water reduction or oxidation, the bandgap of a photocatalyst for further overall water splitting should also be larger than 1.23 eV. (3) Has effective charge separation. (4) High chemical stability, geologically abundant, low cost and environmentally benign. Theoretically, a practical photocatalyst should have a solar-to-hydrogen (STH) efficiency of at least 10%.10
Since the discovery of photocatalytic H2 evolution on TiO2 photoelectrodes in 1972 by Fujishima and Honda,11 huge efforts have been made to search for ideal photocatalysts for H2 evolution.1–3,6–9,12 To date, hundreds of photocatalysts have been developed for H2 evolution, and most of them are transition metal based semiconductive compounds.1–3,6–9,11–16 They can be sorted into oxides (e.g. TiO2)13, sulfides (e.g. CdS)14, nitrides (e.g. Ta3N5)15 and oxynitrides (e.g. BaNbO2N).16 In 2010, a breakthrough was realized by Wang et al. and the first metal free photocatalyst graphic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) was developed, which exhibits great potential in photocatalytic H2 evolution under visible light.17 Thereafter, other very simple photocatalysts have also been discovered, such as elemental photocatalysts (e.g. red phosphorus, sulfur and boron),18–20 metallic materials21,22 and even polymeric hydrogels.23 Although many photocatalysts and their composites have been developed, very few of them can fully satisfy the requirements of an ideal photocatalyst for H2 evolution. Moreover, an industrial level of STH could hardly be achieved over these photocatalysts.
To achieve satisfactory STH efficiency, three main strategies should be carefully considered: (1) rational examination of the database of new photocatalysts to select those worth further studies, (2) optimizing the materials’ composition and structure according to the green chemistry principles, and (3) theoretical simulations followed by experimental confirmation to explore ways to enhance their photocatalytic activity.
Phosphorus containing photocatalysts are important members in the family of photocatalysts (Fig. 1). There are plenty of reports about phosphorus containing photocatalysts and they have shown great potential in photocatalysis, especially for photocatalytic H2 evolution. Importantly, their investigations are still very attractive in photocatalysis today. Based on these perspectives, we focus on the phosphorus containing materials for photocatalytic H2 evolution in this review, which have seldom been systematically discussed before. We will introduce and conclude the application and development of phosphorus elements in photocatalysis, especially for H2 evolution, which is beneficial for improving the known photocatalysts and exploring new ones. A summary and comparison of current research are helpful for further understanding the role and mechanism of the phosphorus element and phosphorus containing photocatalysts, and they will also be beneficial for optimizing current photocatalysts and developing novel photocatalysts. Considering the physical and chemical relationships among different elements in the periodic table, this review may also help to further understand photocatalyst systems of other elements’ families, e.g. the chalcogen elements (CdS, CdSe as the photocatalysts, the sulfate as the beneficial dopants).14,24,25
 Fig. 1  The diagram of phosphorus containing materials for photocatalytic H2 evolution in this review. 
Phosphorus (number: 15) is one of the most widespread elements, and there are approximately 100 billion tons of phosphorus on earth.26–29 This element is of great significance in the field of chemistry, physics, biology, ecology etc.26–29 Based on the chemical valence, P compounds are composed of five main stable types: elemental P (P0), phosphate (P5+) and phosphide (P3−). The former three can exist stably and have played a more and more important role in photocatalysis in the past few decades, and especially in recent years.25–73 From the viewpoint of green chemistry, they are less toxic or nontoxic and relatively stable. P compounds with a chemical valence of P+ and P3+ are highly active, and may not be appropriate as photocatalysts and cocatalysts. The elemental P (P0) can exist in three kinds of allotropes including white, black and red P. Among them, in 2012, our group for the first time demonstrated photocatalytic H2 evolution over red P under visible light.18 Thereafter, a series of recent efforts have proved that red P (including amorphous and crystalline modifications) is very promising in photocatalytic hydrogen evolution, especially under visible light irradiation.18,30–38 Phosphate, the most stable chemical form of P compounds, was studied as a photocatalyst decades ago, and some recent findings show that the phosphate photocatalyst or cocatalyst can be used for photocatalytic H2 evolution.39–53 Phosphides (mainly metal phosphides) have gained high attention due to their potential for working as photocathodes and for substituting Pt as the cocatalyst in photocatalysis.54–78 Besides, P elements also played important roles in doping and improving widely studied photocatalysts e.g. TiO2 and g-C3N4.79–123
Accordingly, we will organize this timely review in the order of elemental red P, phosphate, phosphide and P element doping (Fig. 2). We will try to give readers a relatively complete understanding of P based materials, their applications and related mechanisms in photocatalysis, especially for H2 evolution. We mainly focus on the latest reports about P based materials in photocatalysis and we also introduce the basic concepts as well as develop the history of P photocatalysis. From the viewpoint of materials chemistry, their preparation, microstructure, optical and semiconductive properties are carefully summarized. Moreover, some deep understanding about the relationship of “structure–activity” is also discussed. Finally, inspired by the large amount of excellent examples, we have offered some perspectives to further develop P based materials at the end of each section and the whole manuscript.
 Fig. 2  Summary of main phosphorus containing materials in this review. The black ones are photocatalysts/photocathodes. The black bar denoted the approximate light response region edge. The red ones are cocatalysts. 
2. Elemental phosphorus (P0) photocatalysts
Recently, besides the widely studied metal oxide photocatalysts, simple elemental photocatalysts have been studied and have attracted increasing attention, such as silicon (Si),124 boron (B),20 carbon (C),125 sulfur (S)19, selenium (Se)126, phosphorus (P)18,30–38etc. This is because: they are geologically abundant, metal free, less toxic and commonly-used in industries and daily life. Moreover, their crystal structures are quite different from the well-known ionic crystal photocatalysts, and they can be mainly classified into covalent crystals (e.g. Si, B) and molecular crystals (e.g. Se, P, S). This structural characteristic of elemental photocatalysts gives them a special electronic structure, and thus some unprecedented results can be envisaged in the investigation of elemental photocatalysts.
To date, among these elemental photocatalysts, only Si and P are able to produce hydrogen photocatalytically under illumination.18,30–38,124,127–129 However, Si is vulnerable to surface oxidation.124,127–129 In contrast, other elemental photocatalysts like sulfur (S), boron (B), carbon (C) and selenium (Se) hardly show photocatalytic activity in H2 evolution due to their poor hydrophilicity (e.g. S) or low conduction band maximum (e.g. B).
The elemental P can exist in three kinds of allotropes including white, black and red P (for their partial molecular structure, see Fig. 3). White P is the most active one among them, and has been widely used in organic chemistry.130–132 However, its high toxicity greatly limits its wider applications. By contrast, orthorhombic black P is considered to be thermodynamically stable and chemically inert.133–139 The investigation of black P has been limited in crystallographic analysis for a long time.133 The semiconductive property of the exfoliated black P nanosheet (phosphorene) is discovered in 2014,134–139 and the band gap of phosphorene can be changed from 0.3 eV to 2.29 eV, which is promising in photocatalysis. Very recently, Qiao and his coworkers have demonstrated the potential of black phosphorene for photocatalytic H2 evolution in a comprehensive review.140
 Fig. 3  Characteristic structural fragments of partial elemental P allotropes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 147. Copyright 1994 American Chemical Society. 
Compared with the white and black allotropes, red P is more commonly used, inexpensive and less toxic. These advantages render red P a promising candidate in material physics and chemistry.141–144 Since its discovery in 1660s,141 studies of the crystalline modifications of red P have received extensive attention (for its molecular structure, see Fig. 3).74,145–152 The red P modifications displayed colors from blood red (amorphous) to dark red (fibrous type), corresponding to the slightly different light absorption edge from ∼680 nm to ∼720 nm. This is very attractive for photocatalytic solar energy conversion. However, in the early stages, the applications of red P mainly focused on the preparation of igniters, gunpowder and flame retardants in the past centuries.141 In 2012, our group discovered the photocatalytic H2 evolution of elemental red phosphorus (red P).18 Since then, a series of studies about red P photocatalysts have been reported.
2.1 Chemical structures and synthesis of red P modifications
The internal physical and chemical properties (e.g. band structure, conductivity, hydrophilicity etc.) of red P modifications are determined by their chemical structures and highly related to their photocatalytic activity, which will be firstly introduced in this section. Red P is a typical molecular crystal. The amorphous and crystalline modifications of red P are based on tubular units of five- and six-membered rings of covalent bonding P atoms (Fig. 3).132,150,153 In the early literature studies, various red P modifications were named I–V types, because their chemical structures were not fully known.145 One is in the amorphous phase (type I), which is the most versatile and widely used in industries and our daily life, while the other four are in crystalline forms, including type II (hexagonal), type III (metastable), type IV (fibrous phase) and type V (Hittorf phase).132,150,153 Among them, the chemical structures of Hittorf (characterized in 1969) and fibrous phase (characterized in 2005) modifications have been resolved in detail (Fig. 4).150,154
 Fig. 4  The molecular structure of (a) fibrous phosphorus and (b) Hittorf's phosphorus, derived from their single crystal data, using Mercury software. 
The molecular structure of the fibrous type of crystalline red P is close to that of Hittorf type P (Fig. 4). Both of them consist of polymeric tubes with a pentagonal cross section, which in turn is a regular sequence of three different building units. The subunits are cages of eight or nine P atoms, which are denoted as [P8] and [P9]. The tubes can be interpreted alternatively as zigzag shaped double chains, which form a corrugated ladder. Free valences are saturated by “roofs” of two or three P atoms. These single tubes feature the symmetry of the rod group p2mm. At the medial roof atoms of the [P9] cages, denoted as P(21) and P(21i) (Fig. 4b), two tubes are each connected to form double tubes with the p112/m symmetry. Covalent bonds of the atoms P(21) and P(21i) are arranged in a staggered conformation, and the corresponding lone pairs are aligned antiparallelly.150
Accordingly, the Hittorf and fibrous red P have several interesting features: (1) the covalent bonding of P atoms and the van der Waals force between the polymeric chains are the internal forces to maintain their molecular structures. These determine the band structure of red P modifications, which will be fully illustrated in the following part. However, these structures will lead to a relatively low conductivity and mechanical strength of the red P modifications. (2) Both of them contain a layered structure, which may bring something new for photocatalysis;150,154 (3) no matter which crystalline facet is preferentially exposed, the P atoms will directly contact with the air or solution. This means that the interactions of P atoms and adsorbed molecules e.g. dyes or water are crucial for further understanding the reaction mechanism in a photocatalyst, which is the ongoing job in our lab.
Besides, the precise chemical structure of amorphous red P still remains unknown due to its non-crystalline nature. In 2008, Zaug et al. used X-ray diffraction supplemented with micro-Raman scattering to build three-dimensional structural models of amorphous red P under a pressure of 6.30 GPa. Results show that a structural ordering of atoms creates periodically modulated void structures; from the assembly of atomic subunit structures (triangles (P3), tetrahedra (P4) and medium range order chain structures) emerge voids with even longer correlation lengths.155 This contribution is very important to further resolve the chemical structure of amorphous red P and promote its applications.
In addition, other interesting P modifications have also been found by Pfitzner’ s group; they have prepared two novel solid red-brown P allotrope nanorods153 from the adducts (CuI)8P12156 and (CuI)3P12.157 Another kind of P nanorod is found in (CuI)2P14.158 In these P modifications, some polymeric chains different from those in Hittorf and fibrous red P have been resolved such as [P8]P4(4), [P10]P2, [P12(4)]P2 etc.
The preparation of red allotropes using a solution based method has rarely been reported, because high valence P (e.g. P5+, P3+) can hardly be reduced in the solution. Therefore, high temperature gas–solid processes have become the main methods to obtain red P. The crystalline red allotropes are mainly produced by heating white P or amorphous red P in a sealed device assisted with catalysts (e.g. lead, iodine, CuI etc.) or without them. In 1969, Thurn and Krebs annealed white phosphorus at temperatures between 545 and 580 °C for several months using lead as the catalyst, in addition to plate like crystals of Hittorf P, bunches of capillary parallel lying fibers were also formed.154 In 2005, Ruck et al. prepared fibrous red P using a similar heating–cooling method.150 In their work, amorphous red P was sublimed in evacuated fused-silica capsules using iodine (I2) as a catalyst. Besides, CuI was used by Pfitzner et al.153 as the matrix and the catalyst to obtain P nanorod modifications.
Besides the widely used heating–cooling program, other methods may also be promising for the fabrication of crystalline red P modifications. Sandra et al. have successfully prepared the black P powder from amorphous red P via a repeating sonication process.159 It is known that the chemical structure of black P also shows partial similarity to crystalline red P modifications. Therefore, a modified sonication process is quite possible for the fabrication of crystalline red P modifications. The power of crystallization may come from the localized high temperature and pressure of the sonication process. Another possible method is ball milling, which can also offer high energy for the crystallization of amorphous red P. A clue can be found in Ansari's work; after ball milling amorphous red P for 36 h, crystal facets of red P are observed in the HRTEM image, indicating the potential of ball milling for producing crystalline red P modifications.160
To date, most of the crystalline red P modifications applied for photocatalysis are prepared via the traditional heating–cooling methods, which will be found in the detailed examples in the next part.
2.2 Semiconductive and photocatalytic properties of red P

2.2.1 First case of the red P photocatalyst. 
For a long time, the semiconductive property and related applications of red P have rarely been reported. In 2012, our group discovered the probability of using red P as a semiconductor for photocatalytic water splitting (Fig. 5).18 Commercial red phosphorus was hydrothermally treated at 200 °C for 12 hours to remove surface oxidation. The treated red phosphorus was crystallized in a vacuum tube furnace at 450 °C for 12 hours to obtain the product. The as-prepared products were microparticles coated with a layer of Hittorf phase (monoclinic) P nanorods (Fig. 5a–d).
 Fig. 5  (a and b) SEM images, (c) a typical XRD pattern and (d) TEM image (SAED pattern) of crystalline red P.(e) UV-visible diffuse reflectance spectra of curve “a” amorphous and curve “b” crystalline red P. The inset figure shows rates of H2 formation over bar “a” amorphous and bar “b” crystalline red P, 300 W xenon lamp. (f) A typical time course for H2 production from aqueous methanol solution by 1 wt% Pt loaded crystalline red P under plot “a”, the visible light, and plot “b”, the full spectrum of 300 W xenon lamp irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 18. Copyright 2012, Elsevier. 
The absorption edge of red phosphorus shifts from 700 nm to 680 nm after crystallization (Fig. 5e). The blue-shift is due to the decreased imperfections and disordering of the structure. The bandgap of crystalline red phosphorus is estimated to be 1.7 eV. The products showed a virtually constant rate of 0.6 μmol h−1 g−1 for H2 evolution over 45 hours under visible light irradiation in the presence of a methanol sacrificing agent (Fig. 5f). Without methanol, H2 and O2 are steadily produced under irradiation. The molar ratio of H2/O2 is nearly 2/1. These results confirmed that H2 came from the photoreduction of water molecules. After the photocatalytic H2 evolution, trace levels of phosphate and hydrogen phosphate ions are detected, suggesting that phosphorus was stable. By using the density functional theory, we calculated the band gap to be ca. 1.8 eV. It is in agreement with the experimental result. The reduction level of hydrogen formation (−4.18 eV) was located within the band gap. These results suggested that the reduction of water by red phosphorus under irradiation is energetically possible.


2.2.2 Nanostructured red P photocatalysts. 
According to the general rule of the “structure–property” relationship, it is quite meaningful and attractive to further study other red P modifications as semiconductive photocatalysts. The early investigation of red P photocatalysts mainly focused on amorphous, large-grain and poorly-distributed red P particles, which tend to cause serious charge recombination. However, amorphous red P still suffers from its excess defects on the surface, which are electron/hole trapping sites. Therefore, decreasing the size of crystalline red P allotropes is of great significance for their photocatalytic activity.
In 2016, our group for the first time used fibrous phase red P as a semiconductor for photocatalytic H2 evolution (Fig. 6 and 7).35 Small sized fibrous P is obtained by two methods: (1) we uniformly distributed submicron-sized fibrous red P on photoinactive SiO2 fibers via a chemical vapor deposition (CVD) process (donated as “micro-fibrous P/SiO2”). (2) Also, we prepared bulk single phase fibrous P according to a previous report151 and smashed them into microstructures (denoted as “smashed-fibrous P”). The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of micro-fibrous P/SiO2 and smashed-fibrous P were well indexed into the simulated pattern of triclinic fibrous-phase red P (CSD 391323). The microstructures of fibrous P in micro-fibrous P/SiO2 and smashed-fibrous P are extensively in contact with water, achieving a high activity of photocatalytic H2 evolution (Fig. 6a). The microstructure is very helpful to obtain higher charge separation efficiency, as confirmed by the photoelectrochemical measurement. The estimated activity of phosphorus in the micro-fibrous P/SiO2 in photocatalytic H2 evolution reaches 633 μmol h−1 g−1, while the activity of smashed-fibrous P reaches 684 μmol h−1 g−1. These values increase by about 1055/1138 and 396/427 times compared to bulk amorphous and Hittorf P, respectively (Fig. 6b).18,33 Moreover, these values are the highest records in the family of elemental photocatalysts including silicon (Si),124 boron (B),20 carbon (C),125 sulfur (S)19 and selenium (Se) (Fig. 6b).126 Besides, red P is more stable than silicon in water under irradiation, because silicon will be deactivated by the surface oxidation reaction.
 Fig. 6  Time course of hydrogen evolution on (a) micro-fibrous P/SiO2 (fibrous P loading ca. 31 wt%) and (b) smashed-fibrous P. (c) Comparison of the activity of photocatalytic H2 evolution on different elemental photocatalysts. The light sources used or referred to here are all visible light, except the mesoporous crystalline Si (full spectrum). Reprinted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH. 
 Fig. 7  (a) Theoretical calculation of the band structure of fibrous P. (b) Atomic structure of fibrous P simulated in the theoretical calculation. (c) Absorption spectrum of the micro-fibrous P/SiO2, smashed-fibrous P and SiO2 fibers. (d) Kubelka–Munk plots converted from the absorption spectrum of micro-fibrous P/SiO2 (up) and smashed-fibrous P (down). Reprinted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH. 
The band structure of fibrous P was studied by theoretical calculation of P. van der Waals correction (Grimme d2) was introduced into the calculations (Fig. 7a and b). The fibrous P clearly exhibits a band gap of 1.5 eV according to the projector-augmented-wave method with the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof generalized gradient approximation (GGA) functional. It is the typical characteristic of a semiconductor. This value is well in agreement with the absorption spectra of micro-fibrous P/SiO2 and smashed-fibrous P (Fig. 7c and d). This result also indicates that fibrous P is a direct band gap semiconductor. Thus, it compares favorably with Si (indirect band gap) that has energy loss during excitation. Importantly, it has a very high conduction band minimum of −0.9 V vs. NHE. This is higher than the theoretical potential of H2 evolution (0 V vs. NHE). Also, this is much higher than previously reported Hittorf red P (−0.25 V vs. NHE) and Si (−0.2–0.35 V vs. NHE), indicating that fibrous P is more energetically favorable for water reduction. The larger energy gap between the conduction band edge and the H+/H2 potential for fibrous red P is remarkably beneficial for water reduction, which should be one of the reasons for the higher photocatalytic activity of fibrous-phase red P.
Besides, our group also fabricated fibrous red P nanowires and nanorods on Si substrates.38 Some amorphous P powder and a silicon wafer were placed in a sealed quartz tube with a certain vacuum (0.01 MPa–0.07 MPa) and heated at 550 °C for 2 hours. After gradually cooling, high purity fibrous phase P submicron fibers were grown on the silicon wafer. It displayed better activity than the amorphous P nanoparticles. By adjusting the vacuum level and the amount of amorphous P precursors, the diameter of the fibrous P nanorods can be controlled. By altering the growth wafer, type II phase red P nanorods were also fabricated. Interestingly, they displayed a much lower photocatalytic activity than that of fibrous red P, although they had a similar surface area and light absorption range. The reason might be ascribed to their difference in crystalline structures. Besides the great potential of crystalline red P, it is worth noting that black phosphorene is more stable and more conductive than crystalline red P. Therefore, the photocatalytic hydrogen yield of black phosphorene should be very promising in the near future.140
Recently, Ansari et al. used a ball milling method to obtain small-sized red P.31,160 The XRD patterns of the milled red P at different time durations revealed peak broadening, which also confirms the reduction in the crystal size of the milled red P according to the Scherer rule. Milled red P exhibited a higher absorption edge in the visible region than the commercial red P. This shift in the absorbance edge of the milled red P in the visible region is expected to improve the photocatalytic activity under visible light irradiation (Fig. 8), and also suggests the improvement in its structure. The novel milled red P showed significantly enhanced photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical performances with a more effective charge separation compared to commercial red P under wide visible photoirradiation, as confirmed by their electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurement.
 Fig. 8  Logarithmic change in the concentration (ln(C/C0)) of RhB by RP-0 h, RP-12, RP-24, RP-36, and RP-48 h as a function of the visible photo-irradiation time and the related parameters. Reprinted from ref. 160 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 


2.2.3 Red P based composite photocatalysts. 
To enhance the charge separation efficiency of red P, some red P based composites have been fabricated. Hierarchical microspheres of YPO4 nanosheet/amorphous red P were fabricated in 2012.33 The YPO4 nanosheet/amorphous red P microspheres were prepared via a facile hydrothermal method. The starting materials were amorphous red P and YCl3 in aqueous solution. On hydrothermal treatment, the YPO4 nanosheet/amorphous red P composite can be obtained by the reaction of red P, water and YCl3. Based on the time-dependent experiments, the formation process of the YPO4 nanosheet/amorphous red P composite can be demonstrated as follows. The solid red P microspheres firstly emerged from red P particles, which may be ascribed to the synergetic effect of the shear stress from water and the reaction between YCl3 and P. Then with the gradual growth of the YPO4 nanosheet, a hollow interior was formed in the red P microsphere following the Kirkendall effect. Finally, the YPO4 nanosheet/amorphous red P hollow microspheres were produced after consumption of YCl3. The composite had an enhanced photocatalytic H2 evolution rate than both of the components. A 55 wt% YPO4 composite was the best, which showed 6 times the H2 evolution rate as that of pure amorphous red P. The band structure analysis showed that YPO4 had more negative CB and VB than those of red P. Thus the photoexcited holes can transfer from the VB of red P to the VB of YPO4. As a result, the composite exhibited an activity of about 1.6 μmol h−1 g−1.
Another red P composite of the black P/red P heterojunction was prepared by an in situ mechanical milling method.36 During this process, the black P nanoparticles can be produced from amorphous red P. By selecting the rotation rate and milling time, composites with different weight percents of black P can be obtained (estimated by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA)). Among them, the 50 wt% black P/red P composite displayed the best photocatalytic activity for RhB dye degradation under visible light. The dynamic calculations showed that its apparent reaction rate was nearly 3 times compared with that of pure red P. Moreover, this value was comparable with that of CdS, a well-known visible-light-driven photocatalyst. The density functional theory (DFT) calculation was then performed to explore the band structures of black P and red P. Results showed that the CB of red P is more negative than that of black P. Thus the photoexcited electrons can transfer from the CB of red P to the CB of black P, and more photoexcited holes can avoid recombination and be involved in the photocatalytic reactions.
In 2013, Xue et al. prepared a red P/C3N4 heterojunction with enhanced photocatalytic activity for solar fuel production.34 The introduction of g-C3N4 onto the r-P surface led to a considerable improvement in the photocatalytic activity for H2 production and CO2 conversion into valuable hydrocarbon fuels (CH4) in the presence of water vapor. The enhancement could be attributed to the effective charge separation across the r-P/g-C3N4 heterojunction. The pure r-P sample showed very weak activity for the H2 evolution rate (22 μmol h−1 g−1). However, upon loading of 5 wt% g-C3N4 (as PCN-5) onto red-P surfaces, the H2 evolution rate (310 μmol h−1 g−1) was enhanced more than ten times and even comparable to that of pure g-C3N4 (340 μmol h−1 g−1). In comparison, a simple mixture of red P with 5 wt% g-C3N4 only showed a H2 evolution rate of 70 μmol h−1 g−1. These results demonstrate that thermal annealing facilitates the formation of r-P/g-C3N4 heterojunctions for effective charge separation in PCN-5, as confirmed by the enhanced H2 evolution rate (more than 4 times enhancement by annealing). The photocatalytic activity can be further enhanced (up to 1000 μmol h−1 g−1 for H2 evolution) by increasing the g-C3N4 content to 30 wt% (PCN-30). The above results clearly demonstrate that the red P/g-C3N4 interface plays an essential role in enhancing the photocatalytic H2 evolution. A higher g-C3N4 loading on r-P leads to larger interfaces and enhanced photocatalytic activities. Besides, other red P based composites have been reported. Dong and coworkers reported a red P/CdS composite.32 The optimal P molar ratio was 10 mol% and the corresponding H2 evolution rate reached 923 μmol h−1 g−1, which is about 2.53 times higher than that of the CdS sample. Meanwhile, the composite photocatalysts show favorable photostability. The enhanced photocatalytic activity can be attributed to the effective charge separation on P–CdS hybrids as confirmed by the PL result. In 2014, Dong and coworkers prepared red P/Ni(OH)2 composites.161 Ni(OH)2 nanoparticles are demonstrated to be cost-efficient alternatives to Pt co-catalysts for enhancing the visible-light photocatalytic H2 evolution activity of red phosphorus (P) when deposited onto its surface. The optimum Ni(OH)2 loading content was measured to be 0.5 wt%, giving a H2 evolution rate of 33 μmol h−1 g−1, which exceeded 1.12 times the value obtained on the 1 wt% Pt/red P sample. In 2016, Ansari et al. reported the introduction of red P into TiO2 to obtain visible-light-driven photocatalysts via a ball milling method.30 Their photoelectrochemical performance on electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) under visible light irradiation revealed more effective charge separation.

2.3 Section summary and prospects
In summary, red phosphorus has a wide light response range and is very promising in photocatalysis, especially in photocatalytic H2 evolution.18,35–38 Moreover, red phosphorus (amorphous) is widespread, less toxic and cost effective (ca. 3400 USD per ton, internet data), which makes it a potential candidate for industrial level photocatalysis in the future. However, several issues should be carefully addressed to promote its further study: (1) the main synthetic methods to obtain crystalline red phosphorus are relatively complex and time consuming, which are mainly based on the heating–cooling process, e.g. fibrous phosphorus35,36 and Hittorf phosphorus.18 Novel simple synthetic methods (especially the possible solution route) are still great challenge. (2) The conductivity of red phosphorus, even in its crystalline form, is relatively low due to the nature of its molecular crystal.35–38 To address this problem, the construction of nanoscale heterojunctions might be effective to improve the photocatalytic activity of red phosphorus, e.g. the black phosphorus–red phosphorus nanocomposite.36 Additionally, combining red phosphorus with high conductivity materials (e.g. graphene) might also be useful to improve its activity. (3) The mechanical strength of red phosphorus, especially its amorphous phase, is relatively low as observed in our own experiments. Some coating or encapsulating methods might be helpful to strengthen the red phosphorus photocatalyst. (4) As an unprecedented photocatalyst, the precise photocatalytic mechanism of red phosphorus is not very clear, such as the charge separation in its bulk, the reaction sites on its surface etc. More attention should be paid to address these fundamental problems. (5) Notably, to date, red phosphorus is not the only potential photocatalyst of elemental phosphorus. Black phosphorene may be another very promising photocatalyst.140 It is very attractive to combine red phosphorus and black phosphorene together for photocatalytic H2 evolution.
3. Phosphate (P5+) photocatalysts and cocatalysts
Phosphorus can exist in a very stable manner in the form of phosphate (PO43−, P5+), and most of the phosphorus minerals on earth are apatites, which are mainly composed of calcium phosphate. Phosphate is chemically stable due to the highest valence of P5+, but it easily interacts with metal cations to form metal phosphates with a strong ionic bonding. Some of these phosphates are promising photocatalysts or cocatalysts. In this section, based on their roles in photocatalysis, we will briefly introduce these phosphates as follows: (1) photocatalysts for photocatalytic H2 evolution, e.g. titanium phosphate (ρ-phase, open framework titanium phosphate, and zirconium–titanium phosphate), bismuth phosphate (BiPO4) and iron hydroxyl phosphate, (2) photocatalysts for photooxidation but promising in a combined photocatalytic water splitting system, e.g. silver phosphate (Ag3PO4), copper hydroxyl phosphate (Cu2(OH)PO4) etc. (3) Cocatalysts for photocatalytic H2 evolution e.g. the well-known cobalt phosphate (Co-Pi) and dissociative phosphates.
3.1 Metal phosphates for photocatalytic H2 evolution
Titanium phosphate, with a similar conduction band minimum as TiO2, is considered to be suitable for photocatalytic H2 evolution.40,49 Its visible-light-driven photoactivity can be ascribed to its favorable band structure: titanium phosphate can be envisioned as a “doped semiconductor” with the phosphate “dopant” in well-defined structural positions of TiO2. Based on this viewpoint, Guo et al.40 have synthesized a hierarchical 3D flower-like nano/micro titanium phosphate (ρ-phase) by simple hydrothermal treatment without surfactants. This flower-like titanium phosphate owned a relatively large surface area of 68 m2 g−1 and exhibited a 3.5 times higher H2 evolution than that of TiO2 under xenon lamp irradiation (Fig. 9).
 Fig. 9  H2 evolution of the titanium phosphates and TiO2 under the xenon lamp irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2015 Elsevier. 
Another fascinating titanium phosphate was the so-called open-framework titanium phosphate. The open-framework structure was flexible in the preparation, which allowed metal ions to diffuse easily into the lattice.41,49 Usually, the diffusion of other metal cations can also largely enhance the performance of the resultant production. For instance, Serra et al.49 reported an open-framework mixed-valence titanium phosphate synthesized by the hydrothermal route. Suitable Ti3+ and V doping led to significant enhancement in H2 evolution (47 μmol h−1 g−1), in the absence of any noble metal co-catalyst. The performance can mainly be attributed to the presence of Ti3+ centers in an equimolar ratio with respect to Ti4+, which led to a great extension of light absorption for the semiconductor that covered all the visible wavelength range. This wide wavelength absorption region allows the photocatalytic production of hydrogen under visible light irradiation. Also, the doping of vanadium ions increases the population of electrons and holes without affecting their relocation or their reactivity. Kapoor et al.41 had reported a zirconium–titanium phosphate mesoporous photocatalyst. This mixed mesoporous Zirconium Titanium Phosphate (ZTP) with a varied range of compositions showed an enhanced photoactivity for H2 evolution, which was ∼9 times higher than that of mesoporous titanium phosphates. The enhanced performance can also partly be attributed to the addition of zirconium.
Besides titanium phosphate, iron hydroxyl phosphate also has a similar flat band potential as that of TiO2 and it is structurally flexible for doping. Garcia and his coworkers50 have doped several kinds of metal cations (Cr, Mn, Co) in iron hydroxyl phosphate, and obtained a better response and remarkably enhanced H2 production under visible light irradiation. In the iron hydroxyl phosphate photocatalysts, dopants can introduce additional states into the interband gap space. They can trap electrons or holes, and/or increase the lifetime of the charge-separated state.
Bismuth phosphate (BiPO4) is another kind of phosphate that has a favorable band structure for H2 evolution.47 BiPO4 possesses a conduction band edge (−0.1 vs. NHE), which is more negative than the reduction potential of water. Therefore, Pan et al. fabricated a BiPO4 with graphene oxide for H2 evolution.47 Three methods have been applied to fabricate the composite, including hydrothermal treatment, photoreduction and chemical reduction (using N2H4). Among them, the composite obtained by hydrothermal treatment showed the optimum activity in photocatalytic H2 evolution. The highly reduced graphene oxide (RGO) and its intimate contact with BiPO4 may accelerate the charge separation between BiPO4 and RGO. This is supported by their photocurrent measurement. The rate of H2 evolution calculated for BiPO4/RGO-hydrothermal with the 2 wt% graphene oxide (GO) nanocomposite was about 306 μmol h−1 g−1 under UV light irradiation, which was almost 2 times as high as that for bare BiPO4.
3.2 Promising metal phosphate composites for H2 evolution
Silver phosphate (Ag3PO4), the most attractive phosphate photocatalyst, is an n-type semiconductor with a direct bandgap of 2.43 eV and an indirect transition of 2.36 eV, which enabled Ag3PO4 to be a promising visible-light-driven photocatalyst.46,53 The band structure of Ag3PO4 was calculated by Ye’ group via a density functional method.53 The VB positions of Ag3PO4 (+2.90 V vs. NHE; pH = 0) are much more positive than the potential of the O2/H2O redox couple (1.23 V vs. NHE). Therefore, it ensures that the photogenerated holes in the valence band of Ag3PO4 have sufficient energy to oxidize water.46,52,53
As reported by Ye's group,53 the Ag3PO4 photocatalysts were not only applicable for photoelectrochemical oxygen evolution, but also for the photodegradation of organic pollutants. Under visible light irradiation, the Ag3PO4 photocatalyst was highly active with vigorous bubbles of O2 (636 μmol h−1/1272 μmol h−1 g−1). The process of methylene blue decomposition over Ag3PO4 was dozens of times quicker than that over the reference materials; 100% of methylene blue is degraded within 4 minutes.
Although the band structure of Ag3PO4 is not favorable for photocatalytic H2 evolution, it can also act as part of an efficient water splitting system. Wu et al.52 have reported Ag/Ag3PO4 nanoplate photoanodes, where the Ag nanoplate “core” could efficiently drain the photogenerated electrons from Ag3PO4 to the Pt counter electrode. The Ag nanoplates enabled the system to promote the use of photogenerated holes, and led to a high catalytic activity toward the photoelectrochemical (PEC) oxygen evolution reaction (OER). Specifically, the Faraday efficiency for PEC OER reached ca. 95.6%, indicating that most of the photoinduced holes were engaged in OER. Meanwhile, in this system, assisted by the electrons from the external circuit, the H2 evolution on the Pt counter electrode is also highly efficient.
Copper hydroxyl phosphate (Cu2(OH)PO4, CHP) is another very promising phosphate photocatalyst. Interestingly, it is a near-infrared-activated photocatalyst that does not require an up-conversion counterpart to absorb near-infrared (NIR) light energy.44,51 Therefore, compared with traditional NIR-active photocatalyst systems, the CHP photocatalyst was easier to be prepared, and can directly generate photo-induced charge carriers under NIR irradiation. According to Wang and his coworkers’ report,51 the CHP photocatalyst alone exhibited decent absorption both in the UV-light region (200 nm–300 nm) and visible-light to NIR region (500 nm–2000 nm). It can effectively oxidize 2,4-DCP in a aqueous solution under NIR irradiation. In another work, Chan et al. have estimated the band structure of CHP using electrochemical methods on different substrates (FTO and Au).43 Results showed that CHP has a deep valence band edge (ca. +3.7 V vs. NHE), indicating that it is energetically favorable in photo-oxidation. Besides, it had a conduction band edge (ca. +0.02 V vs. NHE), indicating that CHP could not be used in photocatalytic H2 evolution. Like Ag3PO4, CHP could also act as a highly efficient oxygen generation counterpart in a water splitting system.
3.3 Metal phosphate (or dissociative phosphate) cocatalysts for photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical H2 evolution
Cobalt phosphate (Co-Pi), a widely used cocatalyst in photoelectrochemical cells,39,48 has been recently demonstrated as an effective cocatalyst in powder photocatalytic H2 evolution.42 A mpg-CNx (mesoporous g-CNx)–CoPi composite was prepared by Lee et al. via a photo-assisted deposition approach using Co(NO3)2 and phosphate buffer as the precursors. Under visible light illumination, when a hole scavenger e.g. methanol was used, mpg-CNx–CoPi can be converted into mpg-CNx–H2-CoCat, which is highly active in photocatalytic H2 evolution (626.4 μmol h−1 g−1). Moreover, overall water splitting was recorded with the correct stoichiometry for a H2 and O2 evolution of 2:1 with rates of 13.6 μmol h−1 g−1 and 6.6 μmol h−1 g−1, respectively, in the absence of a scavenger.
Hu and coworkers reported an amorphous iron phosphate (denoted Fe-Pi) on a hematite photoanode for water splitting (Fig. 10).162 The surface states of hematite were mainly attributed to Fe3+/Fe2+ redox couples in oxygen deficient regions (surface oxygen vacancies). They would trap holes or electrons on the surface and cause serious recombination problems during the charge/discharge process, thereby inhibiting the increase in photocurrent density. Different from the traditional ironic metal passivation overlayers, where the formation of oxygen vacancies is thermodynamically favorable, iron phosphate could “covalently fix” the atoms in the phosphate (PO43−). As a result, the oxygen vacancies are decreased and the surface states are effectively suppressed. The onset potential of the corresponding photoanode shifted negatively by 0.15 V and the photocurrent density increased by 4.2 (simulated sunlight) and 4.1 (visible light) times, respectively. The suppression of surface states by the amorphous Fe-Pi overlayer was then confirmed by a series of electrochemical analysis.
 Fig. 10  The diagram, preparation method, microstructure and the photoelectrochemical performance of the Fe-Pi coated hematite photoanode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 162. Copyright 2016 American Chemical society. 
A dissociative phosphate anion is another kind of phosphate cocatalyst for photocatalytic H2 evolution.45 In natural photosynthesis, phosphates played an important role in the system in both charge separation and in pumping protons to drive adenosine triphosphate synthesis during the light-dependent reactions. Thereby, Ye and her coworkers reported the photocatalytic system of g-C3N4 nanosheets and dissociative phosphate with a H2 evolution rate of 947 μmol h−1 g−1 and an apparent quantum yield of approximately 26.1% at (420 ± 14.5) nm, which is the highest value reported for a g-C3N4 photocatalyst. Notably, the role of dissociative phosphate described here is different from those in the section of P-doped photocatalysts (phosphate as the dopant). In this section, the dissociative phosphates worked by binding the oxidized proton and releasing the reduced hydrogen, while the phosphates as the dopants worked by transferring photoexcited electrons via their conjugated molecular structure.
3.4 Section summary and prospects
In fact, most metal phosphates are cheap (e.g. titanium phosphate, ca. 4000 USD per ton; iron phosphate, ca. 2800 US. D per ton, internet data) and chemically stable, making them promising photocatalysts.40,47,49,50 However, to date, in photocatalytic H2 evolution, less attention has been paid to metal phosphate photocatalysts except Ag3PO4.52,53 Several issues can be summarized for this section: (1) photocatalytic H2 evolution can be achieved on metal phosphate photocatalysts.40,47,49 Novel metal phosphates and their composite photocatalysts are very attractive for H2 evolution. (2) BiPO4 is very promising in photocatalytic H2 evolution but is only UV active.47 Future work on its band engineering is quite welcome. (3) The phosphate cocatalysts in photoelectrochemical or photocatalytic H2 evolution are much more efficient, e.g. the well-known Co-Pi.39,48 More attention should be paid to this prospect, and new compounds are necessary to be developed.
4. Phosphide (P3−) photocathodes, photocatalysts and cocatalysts
Metal phosphide is a compound composed of a P3− anion and its metal cation counterpart. Most of the metal phosphides are binary phosphides, such as GaP, InP, WP2, NiP etc.57–59,62–64,70,75,163–165 There are several methods to prepare phosphides. The most common one is heating of the metal and commercial red phosphorus (P) under inert atmospheric conditions or vacuum. In principle, all the metal phosphides can be synthesized from elemental phosphorus and the respective metal element in stoichiometric forms. In the field of photocatalysis and photoelectrocatalysis, metal phosphides are mainly used as photocathodes and cocatalysts. For example, InP is one of the most efficient photocathodes for solar hydrogen generation, while NiP and FeP were thought to be most promising substitutes for Pt cocatalysts in photoelectrochemical water splitting.61,65,68,73 Very recently, several reports have demonstrated that metal phosphides can be used as photocatalysts in photochemical hydrogen generation, which opens up another route for their applications in solar driven clean energy production.
Accordingly, in this section, we will introduce the study of metal phosphides as follows: (1) metal phosphides as photocathodes, (2) metal phosphides as cocatalysts in photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical H2 evolution, (3) metal phosphides as photocatalysts for H2 evolution. At the end of this section, several suggestions aiming at the future promotion of metal phosphides in photocatalysis and photoelectrocatalysis are also proposed here.
4.1 Metal phosphide photocathode
A photocathode is usually a p-type semiconductor. At the interface between the photocathode and the electrode, an electric field will drive the photoexcited electrons to the electrolyte to reduce water molecules into hydrogen, and it will drive the hole to the external circuit to a generate photocurrent. InP is the one of the most widely studied phosphide photocathode materials.59,62,63,163,164 As a photocathode InP has several advantages: (1) its band gap (1.3 eV) matches well with the solar spectrum; InP-based solar cells have achieved efficiencies of up to 22% under AM1.5 G illumination.163 (2) If the conduction band minimum of InP is slightly above the water reduction potential, then the electron transfer is favorable in InP. (3) The surface-recombination velocity of untreated InP is low (ca. 10 × 104 cm s−1 for n-type and 10 × 105 cm s−1 for p-type), which is of great significance to nonplanar devices with high surface areas. For these reasons, InP has been studied previously as a photocathode for both water splitting and CO2 reduction.166,167
In 2012, Lee et al. reported p-type InP nanopillar photocathodes for efficient solar-driven H2 evolution. p-InP arrays were fabricated by a simple self-masking reactive ion etching (RIE) process, and approximately 14% energy conversion efficiency was achieved with a Ru cocatalyst. Also, a passivating layer with 3–5 nm of TiO2 was deposited by atomic layer deposition (ALD). In the InP/TiO2/Ru photocathodes, p-InP serves as the absorber layer. Photogenerated electrons in InP are transported to the n-TiO2 interface owing to band bending. Electrons are transported through the amorphous TiO2 through tail or defect states. Pinholes may also contribute to the transport of electrons through the thin TiO2 layers. Subsequently electrons are consumed in a redox reaction at the electrolyte interface with the help of Ru cocatalysts. The enhanced efficiency of the product arises from a combination of increased current density and onset potential Eos.62
GaP is another promising phosphide photocathode material. Moore found that cobaloxime-modified GaP showed a high cathode photocurrent in per geometric area hydrogen production rates, achieving a current density greater than 1 mA cm−2 when polarized at potentials positive of the reverse hydrogen electrode (RHE).168 In 2013, Wood and coworkers prepared a InP/GaP composite photocathode and investigated its H2 evolution mechanism (Fig. 11).169 By using ab initio molecular dynamics simulations, they showed that contact with the semiconductor surface enhanced the water hydrogen-bond strength at the interface. This leads to the formation of an ice-like structure within which dynamically driven water dissociation and local proton hopping are amplified. This can be traced to the slightly more covalent-like character in the binding of surface adsorbates to GaP, which results in a more rigid hydrogen-bond network that limits the explored topological phase space. As a consequence, the local proton hopping can give rise to long-range surface proton transport on InP, whereas the process is kinetically limited on GaP. This allows for the spatial separation of individual stages of hydrogen-evolution and multistep reactions on InP (001).164
 Fig. 11  The diagram of the possible additional H2 evolution reaction (HER) mechanisms (a, b) on InP (001) and self-healing/charge compensation mechanisms (c, d) on hydroxylated InP (001). Reprinted with permission from ref. 164. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
The nanostructure of InP exhibits enhanced activity.59,63 In 2014, Gao et al. reported vertically aligned p-type InP nanowire arrays, coated with noble-metal-free MoS2 nanoparticles, as the cathode for photoelectrochemical hydrogen production from water. They demonstrate a photocathode efficiency of 6.4% under Air Mass 1.5G illumination with only 3% of the surface area covered by nanowires.59
4.2 Metal phosphide cocatalysts
Besides in photocathodes, phosphides can also be applied as cocatalysts for H2 evolution.56,65,71 NiP was predicted to be a H2 evolution reaction (HER) catalyst by density functional theory (DFT) calculations in 2005.170 According to the DFT calculations, the Ni hollow sites and the Ni–P bridge site have an ensemble effect, which plays an essential role in the high H2 evolution rate.170 The phosphides were firstly used as an electrocatalyst for the H2 evolution reaction to replace noble metals.61,65,68,73 Molybdenum phosphide,57,58,64,70,165 tungsten phosphide,67,72 and ferrous phosphide69,171 have been prepared as cocatalysts. Ni2P supported on carbon nanospheres (CNSs) with different carbon contents (Ni2P/CNSs-x, x = 10, 20, 40, 60) is synthesized by thermal decomposition using nickel acetylacetonate as the nickel source and trioctylphosphine as the phosphorus source in an oleylamine solution containing CNSs. The activity is comparable to that of a noble metal of Pt.65
Molybdenum phosphide is another hot phosphide catalyst.57,58,64,70,165 Deng et al. found that the metal Mo itself was not a good catalyst for HER and its phosphide Mo3P was not suitable for HER either. In contrast, MoP showed a rather high performance in 0.5 M H2SO4. The onset of the H2 evolution reaction can be observed at around 50 mV vs. RHE and the current density reaches 30 mA cm−2 at a potential of 0.18 V vs. RHE.58 In 2016, Wang et al. found that Co-promoted molybdenum phosphide nanoparticles demonstrated excellent HER activity with a small Tafel slope of 50 mV dec−1 which was among the best records reported for MoP-based catalysts. The addition of Co not only reduced the particle size of the MoP-based catalyst, but also enhanced the intrinsic activity of each active site, paving the way for optimizing the HER performances of ternary or multiple transition metal phosphide catalysts.
Inspired by the high activity of phosphides in electrochemical H2 evolution, they were subsequently used as cocatalysts in photocatalysis. In 2014, Cao et al. prepared a monodispersed nickel phosphide (Ni2P)/CdS nanorod composites for photocatalytic H2 evolution from a lactic acid aqueous solution under visible light LED irradiation (Fig. 12).56 The system exhibited high photocatalytic hydrogen-generating activity. Under optimal conditions, the turnover number (TON) of 26300 for the first 20 h of irradiation and an initial turnover frequency (TOF) of 2110 h−1 were achieved. Ni2P NPs exhibited outstanding stability under acid electrocatalytic conditions and less than 0.25% of Ni2P NPs were removed from the electrode in 1.0 M H2SO4. Under the optimal photocatalytic conditions, the H2 evolution activity can sustain for more than 20 h.56
 Fig. 12  (a) TEM and (b) HRTEM images of Ni2P NPs. (c, d) Visible light-driven hydrogen production in aqueous solution (10 mL) containing 0.5 mL lactic acid (5% v/v), under visible light irradiation (λ ≥ 420 nm), including the TON and sample comparison. Reprinted from ref. 56 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In addition to nickel phosphide, cobalt phosphide54,55,60,66 and ferrous phosphide69,171 are also effective cocatalysts for photocatalysts. In 2015, Cao first deposited cobalt phosphide (Co2P) on a CdS nanorod (NR) photocatalyst. With DL-mandelic acid as an electron donor in water the H2 evolution rate can reach up to 19373 μmol h−1 g−1 after 10 h of LED light irradiation. After four cycles, there is no obvious decrease observed in the H2 evolution rate, indicating the good stability of the system during the photocatalytic reaction. The fluorescence quenching of the CdS NRs with the addition of Co2P NPs showed an obvious decrease in the fluorescence intensity when Co2P NPs were added to the CdS NRs, which indicated that excitonic electrons in the conduction band of CdS were transferred onto the Co2P for H2 evolution.55
In 2014, Schaak et al. found that FeP deposited on TiO2 exhibited sustained photocatalytic H2 evolution over 16 h with a minimal decrease in activity under both acidic and neutral-pH conditions. After testing, the FeP/TiO2 composite remained largely intact. The average rates of H2 evolution for FeP/TiO2 were 1.2 and 1.9 μmol H2 mg−1 h−1 (1200 μmol h−1 g−1 and 1900 μmol h−1 g−1) in acidic and neutral-pH solutions, respectively. The apparent quantum yields were 0.056 and 0.087 in acidic and neutral solutions, respectively, and were comparable to the quantum yields of the Pt/TiO2 control.171
Phosphides can also work as cocatalysts when coupling with a p-type semiconductor photocathode. For example, Thomas fabricated a film of the CoP catalyst on a Si photocathode.60 The CoP exhibited a high average turnover frequency (TOF) of 0.48 H2 per s and 1.0 H2 per s at 100 and 120 mV overpotentials, respectively. The photoelectrode achieves −10 mA cm−2 at +0.345 V vs. RHE. The CoP-n + p Si photocathode exhibits a photovoltage of ≈580 mV, as estimated by the difference in the potential required to achieve −0.5 mA cm−2 in the non-iR-corrected CoP on n+Si and the illuminated CoP-n + p Si samples. The maximum photocurrent density of 19.8 mA cm−2 corresponds to about 45% of the theoretical limit of 44 mA cm−2 determined by the 1.12 eV silicon bandgap.
4.3 Metal phosphide photocatalysts
Very recently, several metal phosphides have also been directly used as photocatalysts for H2 evolution, and they have shown great potential in this prospect.
In 2015, Sun's group prepared well-defined cobalt phosphide nanowires (denoted as “CoP NWs”), and their CB potential was roughly estimated to be −0.27 V vs. NHE. Therefore, the CoP NWs and the fluorescein-based dye decorated CoP hybrids as photocatalysts were used for the photochemical H2 evolution using triethanolamine (TEOA) as a sacrificial agent. Results showed that the amount of evolving H2 increased continuously and irradiation for 40 min produced 66.7 μmol H2 using CoP (3335 μmol h−1 g−1). In contrast, a total amount of 160.7 μmol H2 (8035 μmol h−1 g−1) was produced using the CoP hybrid within the same time. The enhanced activity of the CoP hybrid was attributed to the photoinduced electron transfer (PET) from dyes to CoP.76
In 2016, Wu and coworkers discovered that NiPs could not only work as cocatalysts, but could also act as main photocatalysts. They prepared nanocrystalline nickel phosphide (Ni12P5) by a simple hydrothermal method via using NiCl2 and red phosphorus as raw materials. The results indicated that the Ni12P5 sample showed a high catalytic activity (10760 μmol h−1 g−1, TOF = 9.3 h−1) and good stability (15 h) in the present system. The electrochemical results revealed that Ni12P5 had a high cathodic current and higher conductivity, which further suggested that Ni12P5 indeed could efficiently catalyze the evolution of hydrogen.71
Also in 2016, Pi et al. prepared WP2 particles through a solid-state reaction route via the vacuum encapsulation technique followed by water washing (Fig. 13). The first principles calculations and electric transport measurements show a semimetallic characteristic of WP2, however a strong absorption in the UV range is observed. The prepared WP2 particles exhibit an admirable photocatalytic activity towards the oxidation of methyl orange and reduction of water for H2 evolution (8 μmol h−1 g−1) with the assistance of the co-catalyst element Pt under UV light irradiation.75
 Fig. 13  The XRD patterns, atomic structure and photocatalytic H2 evolution rate of WP2. Reprinted from ref. 75 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
4.4 Section summary and prospects
In this section, metal phosphides have been proven to be very suitable for photoelectrochemical- and photo-catalysis. Among them, InP and CaP are very promising photocathode materials. Both of them exhibit a high photocurrent density.59,62,63 Nickel phosphide,65,68 molybdenum phosphide,57,58 tungsten phosphide,62,67 and iron phosphide69 are promising cocatalysts for photoelectrochemical H2 evolution, and they have also been proved to be useful cocatalysts when loaded on traditional metal oxide semiconductors. To further promote the study of metal phosphides, several issues might be helpful: (1) the band engineering of a wide bandgap phosphide such as GaP may be attractive, (2) the interface improvement of a metal phosphide cocatalyst and the photocatalyst main body should be carefully considered,59,69 and (3) more attention should be paid to the metal phosphides in photochemical H2 evolution due to their increasing potential in this prospect.71,75
5. Phosphorus doped photocatalysts
Doping means introducing impurities (called “dopants”) into the crystalline structure of semiconductors. In the early 1980s, doping was used to introduce an impurity energy level in the forbidden band of UV-light driven TiO2 photocatalysts.79,81 Their light absorption and photocatalytic activity could be dramatically enhanced by doping with metal elements like Cr, Fe, and Mo, rare earth metals like La and Ce or non-metals like N, F, S, B, C and P.79–81,96,97 Specifically for phosphorus doping, Asahi et al. in 2001 predicted via Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculation that P doping (a deep impurity energy level) could affect the band structure of TiO2.80 In 2003, our group prepared phosphated mesoporous TiO2 with enhanced UV-light-driven photocatalytic performance, and we found that phosphorus doping helped to suppress the grain growth and stabilize the anatase phase.115 We also purposed a possible Ti–O–P active structure of the P-doped TiO2. In 2005, Zhu's group prepared another kind of P-doped TiO2, and for the first time discovered its enhanced visible-light-driven activity.95 In 2009, Wang et al. discovered a novel visible-light-driven photocatalyst of graphic carbon nitride (g-C3N4),17,82,84,116 and then Zhang et al. firstly synthesized phosphorus doped g-C3N4 with enhanced activity in photocatalytic hydrogen evolution.118 So far, the phosphorus doping mainly focuses on TiO285,89,90,95,99,104,106,108,110,112–115,120,121 and g-C3N486–88,98,100,102,105,118,122,123 photocatalysts.
Herein, we will introduce the preparation, structure, performance and enhanced mechanism of P-doped TiO2 and P-doped g-C3N4, and especially explore the relationship between the structures and their performance in H2 evolution. Also, we briefly introduce other P-doped photocatalysts such as P-doped graphene93 and P-doped BiVO4.91 Besides, on the basis of the above investigation, we propose some prospects of phosphorus doping, which may be helpful to discover novel P-doped photocatalysts, especially in the field of photocatalytic H2 evolution.
5.1 Phosphorus as dopants for TiO2
TiO2 is the most widely studied photocatalyst for H2 evolution due to its high quantum efficiency under UV light illumination and at an appropriate conduction position.83,107,119 Besides, TiO2 is nontoxic, inexpensive and chemically stable, rendering its commercialization and industrialization more and more possible.79,96 However, P-doped TiO2 is rarely reported for photocatalytic H2 evolution. Considering the advances of TiO2 in H2 evolution,83,107,119 it is highly desirable to study the P-doped TiO2 for photocatalytic H2 evolution.
The chemical doping state of P-doped TiO2 can change its defect types, crystal structure, grain size, band structure and crystal stability. These will greatly influence the performance of the photocatalysts. So far, there are mainly four kinds of P doping states: (1) cation substitution to form Ti–O–P;85,95,108,112,115,120,121 (2) anion substitution (P3−);89,90 (3) PO43− grafting on the surface;99,110 (4) other possible doping states: interstitial P in solid solution and P surface states.106,114

5.1.1 Ti–O–P doping state. 
Ti–O–P (P5+) is the most widely studied P doping state. In 2003, our group prepared this kind of P-doped TiO2 (mesoporous structure) by using mixed H3PO4 and tetrabutyl titanate.115 In this work, we firstly propose a Ti–O–P active center in the P-doped TiO2. In the fine P 2p X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectrum, the P peak is situated at 133.8 eV, suggesting its chemical state to be P5+. In the fine Ti 2p XPS spectrum, two Ti peaks are located at 458.9 eV and 459.8 eV, corresponding to the normal Ti4+ and Ti atoms in a tetrahedral environment with a high bonding energy. In the Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectra, no peaks of PO (1300–1400 cm−1) and P–O–P deformation (750 cm−1) are found. Therefore, we conclude that the phosphorus is incorporated into the framework of mesoporous TiO2 by forming Ti–O–P. Besides, results show the structure advantage of P-doping: (1) P doping could suppress the growth of crystal grain, thereby increasing the specific surface area and performance of the products; (2) it could stabilize the anatase phase of TiO2. For photocatalytic degradation of pentane, the as-prepared P-doped mesoporous TiO2 shows enhanced activity than that of P25 and the undoped reference. This is ascribed to the higher oxidation ability from a wider bandgap, higher specific surface area, faster formation of hydroxyl radicals induced by adsorbed water, and faster charge separation rate.
In 2005, Zhu's group also prepared P-doped TiO2 by a similar sol–gel method with H3PO2 as the P source.95 P-doped TiO2 is firstly proved to exhibit excellent visible-light-driven activity toward the photocatalytic degradation of 4-chlorophenol, while the undoped sample exhibits no activity. That P atoms are doped into TiO2via the formation of Ti–O–P is confirmed by comparing the XPS of their product with commercial sodium phosphate. The XPS Ti 2p spectrum is a single peak at ca. 458 eV, indicating that only Ti4+ exists. However, its P 2p peak is located at 132.7 eV, lower than that of our result.115 This is probably due to the fact that some phosphorus exists in an environment of a higher density of electrons. In the UV-vis spectra, an obvious absorption tail is observed in the visible light region. The calculated bandgap of 3.05 eV for P-doped TiO2 is smaller than that of undoped samples. Importantly, their P-doped TiO2 shows obvious visible-light-driven photocatalytic degradation activity for 4-chlorophenol, while the undoped sample exhibits no activity. Besides, even at such a low phosphorus content (1.3 wt%), the stabling and grain growth suppressing activity of the anatase phase can still be observed. Also, in another work,121 they further confirm by the results of XPS and FT-IR spectra that P atoms are doped into the lattice of TiO2via the formation of Ti–O–P. They thought that the small P5+ ions (radius: 0.038 nm) might be able to replace the large Ti4+ ions (0.065 nm) easily to form Ti–O–P (the ion radii may be affected by their special chemical environment, and here we only use the data based on Shannon et al.'s work as the reference).172 Moreover, when the authors changed the P/Ti ratio from 0.5 at% to 8 at%, the optimum visible-light-driven photocatalytic activity is achieved with the P/Ti ratio of 2 at%.
The Ti–O–P structure is firstly believed to enhance the photocatalytic performance by decreasing the crystal size and extending the light absorption, as discussed above. Gopal et al. proposed that the Ti–O–P structure enhanced the activity not only by extending the light absorption, but also by promoting photoexcited carriers generation.85 Gopal et al. have prepared P-doped TiO2 with the phosphorus content as low as 0.02 at%.85 The Ti–O–P structure in their work was also confirmed by XPS analysis. The optimum sample was obtained by calcination at 600 °C, which showed the largest red shift of the absorption edge in UV-vis spectra, and the best visible-light-driven photocatalytic activity. Notably, their EPR (electron paramagnetic resonance spectrum) results showed that the amount of photogenerated holes was proportional to the activity of the photocatalysts. This indicates that the Ti–O–P doping state could enhance the photocatalytic activity both by extending the light absorption and promoting the generation of photoexcited carriers.
In the early stage, P-doped TiO2 with the Ti–O–P structure was mainly used for the photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants.79,81,85,95,115,121 Recently, their investigations on H2 evolution were also reported. Sang's group synthesized P-doped TiO2 with a similar structure and obtained an activity of 335 μmol h−1 g−1.108 They found that the content of P dopants can highly influence the chemical structure of P dopants, light absorption and the photocatalytic performance of the doped samples, which is consistent with the results of ours and Zhu's group.95,115,121 In the photocatalytic H2 evolution test, the optimum activities of 1838 μmol h−1 g−1 (UV light) and 209 μmol h−1 g−1 (simulated sunlight) are obtained with the 5 at% P doped sample. The activity under simulated sunlight is three times as high as that of the undoped counterpart. The high activity is believed to be stemming from the high specific surface area, and impurity energy level that can trap the electrons for H2 evolution. Furthermore, Sang's group synthesized another P-doped TiO2 nanotube also with the Ti–O–P structure and achieved a photocatalytic H2 evolution rate of 335 μmol h−1 g−1 under simulated sunlight irradiation.112
Recently, Zheng et al. prepared a kind of P, N codoped TiO2 by calcination of a mixture of titanium nitride and boron phosphate at 1050 °C.120 They found that the P doping is formed by replacing Ti4+ with P5+, and the N doping is formed by replacing O2− with N3−. This product could achieve overall water splitting with a H2 evolution rate of 11.2 μmol h−1 g−1 under visible light illumination without any sacrificial agents. They supposed that the radius of N3− (0.0146 nm) was larger than that of O2− (0.0135 nm), while the radius of P5+ (0.038 nm) was smaller than that of Ti (0.065 nm). Thereby, a balance is obtained, which is advantageous to maintain the crystal structure of the sample.
The P-doped TiO2 compares favorably with other non-metal doped TiO2. For example, N-doped TiO2 with 2.5 at% N exhibits 0.2 μmol h−1 g−1 under visible light.173 F-Doped TiO2 with 4 wt% F shows an activity of 2 μmol h−1 g−1.117 The best result for P-doped TiO2 is in fact comparable with the best S-doped TiO2 (163.9 μmol h−1 g−1, visible light, sacrificial reagents).111 Consequently, it is suggested that P-doped TiO2, especially with the Ti–O–P structure, has considerable potential for photocatalytic H2 evolution.


5.1.2 P3− substitution doping state. 
P3− substitution of O2− is the second doping state. Wakita's group prepared this kind of P-doped TiO2 with titanium phosphide and titanium isopropoxide via a sol–gel method and following a calcination process.89,90 The optimum weight ratio of titanium phosphide is 6 wt%. XPS analysis indicates that P is in the form of P3− inside the crystal lattice, but in the form of PO43− on the surface. The calculated atomic ratio between P and Ti is 0.01 to 0.02 based on XPS results. The UV-vis spectrum shows a red shift in the visible light region. The P3− doping state determines that the visible light absorption region is between 400 and 450 nm, and the quantum efficiency reaches 0.66% at 410–440 nm. The product also exhibits obvious visible-light-driven activity for the photocatalytic degradation of acetaldehyde. Besides, two units of P3− are able to create one oxygen vacancy. However, due to the low amount of P, the generated oxygen vacancies can hardly contribute to the photocatalytic performance. However, the radius of P3− (0.0212 nm) is larger than that of O2− (0.0135 nm). This kind of doping is relatively difficult and there are rarely any reports for H2 evolution. Further exploration of the P3− doping state, especially about its role in photocatalytic H2 evolution is still necessary.


5.1.3 Phosphate grafting on the surface. 
Phosphate grafting on the surface is the third doping state for P-doped TiO2. In previous investigations about the Ti–O–P structure, phosphates were difficult to form on the crystal lattice of TiO2.85,95,115,121 However, with a higher calcination temperature or higher P content, phosphates could be found on the surface of TiO2.85,95,115,121 Generally, phosphates cannot extend the light absorption of TiO2. But they can accelerate charge separation and enhance the activity, which is possibly ascribed to the conjugated structure of O–PO in phosphate. For example, Li et al. synthesized this kind of P-doped TiO2 by calcinating the TiO2 particle that had been soaked in H3PO4.99 The flat band potential shifts negatively by about 0.11 V, when the sample is grafted with phosphate. Phosphate-grafted TiO2 exhibits a high activity of 1196 μmol g−1 h−1 under visible light illumination in the presence of sensitizer eosin Y, which is 1.6 times as high as that of pure TiO2. In addition, it is possible that dye-TiO2-phosphate grafting structures may be crucial to enhance the charge separation. A similar phenomenon has also been reported by Xie's group.110 They prepared a TiO2–BiVO4 composite and grafted the phosphate groups as the bridge between it. Under visible light illumination, the phosphate can enhance the photocatalytic H2 evolution of the composite by promoting charge separation between TiO2 and BiVO4, as confirmed by electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectra. However, certain reports indicated that the excess phosphates on the surface may inhibit the formation of photocatalytically active species, thereby decreasing the photocatalytic activity.121
Besides these kinds of P doping, there are also some reports about interstitial P in a solid solution114 or P surface states.106 For example, Jiang's group pointed out that P doping can lead to surface states near the conduction band, and they will trap the photoexcited electrons.106 These results are interesting but still need further investigation.


5.1.4 Theoretical calculations for P-doped TiO2. 
The activity of photocatalysts in H2 evolution strongly related to the position of the conduction band. A higher conduction band will lead to photoexcited electrons with a stronger reducing ability.79,96 The related information can be obtained by DFT theoretical calculations. Dai and Huang et al. first carried out the theoretical calculation about the impact of P on the band structure of TiO2.113 They found that (1) P will replace Ti as a cation in an oxygen rich environment, while it will replace O in a Ti rich environment. For example, when P is doped into TiO2 with H3PO4 or H3PO3 as the P source, P dopants easily exist as Ti–O–P.85,95,115,121 But they will exist as P3− anions when TiP, a Ti rich material, is used.89,90 (2) P3− anions are more obvious in broadening the bandgap of TiO2. Wakita's group found that the P3− anion could extend the effective light absorption to 450 nm.89,90 (3) P3− anions will raise the valance band, but hardly influence the conduction band. Thereafter, Wei's group has focused on the concentration effect of P doping by theoretical calculations.104 They found that (1) it was easier to form the Ti–O–P structure by cation replacement during the P doping process. (2) For the Ti–O–P structure, the band gap was obviously dependent on the concentration of P dopants. When the doping content of P is about 0.7 at%, the doping TiO2 shows the largest decrease in the band gap of 0.3 eV. This is consistent with the previous experimental results that the optimum band gap narrowing is always achieved at low concentrations of the P:Ti ratio (e.g. <3 at%).85,121 Notably, although the conduction band could be slightly altered after P doping, it is always located above the energy level of H2 evolution. The theoretical calculation results (both of Dai/Huang and Wei's work) have confirmed that the P-doped TiO2 with Ti–O–P or P3− replacing structures is very promising for photocatalytic H2 evolution (Fig. 14).
 Fig. 14  Left: Total density of states (DOS) and right: projected density of states (PDOS) for 96-atom anatase and P-doped anatase. Reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. 
To date, considerable interesting results have been shown for P-doped TiO2. However, there are still some disadvantages: (1) related reports are still insufficient to obtain a reasonable comparison. (2) The space distribution of P species (or the active sites for doping) in the crystalline lattice is still not clear. (3) The dilemma between the enhancement of activity and distortion of the TiO2 lattice after P doping need further investigation. (4) The activity for the H2 evolution of P-doped TiO2 is usually lower than that of most state-of-the-art photocatalysts. Therefore, we propose that P-doped TiO2 could be optimized by (1) co-doping with other elements. For example, Liu et al. prepared a B–N co-doped TiO2, in which the O–Ti–B–N structure greatly promoted the activity of TiO2.97 Wang et al. synthesized an N–P sequential doping TiO2 with a bandgap of 1.8 eV. The product exhibits good activity under visible light illumination.109 (2) Doping with different kinds of P. For example, it is helpful in one sample to build phosphates on the surface to enhance the electron transfer and create P anions inside the lattice for bandgap narrowing. Also, the construction of TiO2 with both P cations and P3− anion dopants should be promising. (3) The most widely used method for P-doping is sol–gel followed by the calcination process,85,89,90,95,106,114,115,121 which may limit the exploration of P doping. Introducing other novel preparation methods for P-doping would be helpful to understand the role of P doping more clearly. Finally, it is advantageous to combine experiments and theoretical calculations simultaneously and to introduce new characterization methods such as transient florescent spectroscopy and transient absorption spectroscopy.

5.2 Phosphorus as dopants for graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4)
Graphitic carbon nitride (known as “g-C3N4”) is the most stable allotrope among various carbon nitrides under ambient conditions.17,82,84,116 It is a two-dimensional (2D) sheet structure that is composed of tri-s-triazines interconnected via tertiary amines. It shows advances of nontoxicity, stability and chemical tunability. In 2009, Wang et al. found that g-C3N4 can split water to generate hydrogen (H2) and oxygen (O2) in a stoichiometric ratio under visible light irradiation.17 This initiates the great research interest about g-C3N4 as one of the most promising visible-light-driven photocatalysts. It has a bandgap of ca. 2.7 eV, with the CB and VB positions respectively at ca. −1.1 eV and ca. +1.6 eV vs. a normal hydrogen electrode (NHE), which suitably matches the energy request to generate H2 and O2.17,82,84,116 However, pristine g-C3N4 still suffers from unsatisfactory photocatalytic efficiency owing to its restricted visible-light harvesting capacity (ca. up to 460 nm), rapid recombination of charge carriers, and low surface area. One important strategy to enhance its performance is to optimize its electronic structure by doping and hybridization with non-metal (e.g., B, S, O, and I) or metal (e.g., Fe, Zn, and Cu) atoms.82,84,116 This elemental doping strategy plays an essential role in tuning the band gap structure, extending the light absorption, increasing the mobility and creating more active sites.
Principally, conjugated polymers with heteroatoms of higher periodic elements tend to have narrower band gaps and lower HOMO levels; e.g., polythiophene containing S atoms show a reduced band gap and lower highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level than polypyrrole containing lower periodic O atoms.101 The large atomic size of phosphorus (P) is expected to improve the conformation and the conductivity of the resultant g-C3N4 polymers and hence offer a template tool to tune their texture and electronic structure. Up to now, dozens of reports have been published about the P-doped g-C3N4, which can be mainly sorted by the doping states of phosphorus: (1) substituting carbon (C) atoms (corner or bay position); (2) substituting nitrogen (N) atoms and (3) interstitial doping. Next, we will summarize and illustrate the research on P-doped g-C3N4 accordingly. Besides, the theoretical calculations of P-doped g-C3N4 and other related reports such as related codoping studies will also be discussed here.

5.2.1 P substituting carbon (C) atom. 
In 2010, Zhang et al. reported the first case of P-doped g-C3N4, and demonstrated its chemical structure, optical properties and enhancement in electronic and photoelectric performance.118 In their work, 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium hexafluorophosphate (BmimPF6) was selected as a mild phosphorus source for P-doped g-C3N4. The ionic liquid PF6− is expected to react with the amine groups to introduce P atoms into the C–N framework (optimum doping content: 0.6 at%, 550 °C for 4 hours). Then, the FT-IR, XPS and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectra were used to study the chemical state of P in g-C3N4. The vibrations of the P-related group were hardly observed in doped g-C3N4, except for a peak centered at ca. 950 cm−1, which corresponded to the P–N stretching mode. The P 2p XPS spectrum of P-doped g-C3N4 is centered at ca. 133.5 eV, which is a typical P–N coordination (P–C bonding would be ∼1–2 eV lower). Moreover, NMR investigations of doped g-C3N4 on the 31P show four well-resolved signals between 0 and −40 ppm, which correspond to four different positions in the framework structure. The P heteroatoms most probably replace the corner or bay C atoms in the structure by forming P–N bonding in the doped g-C3N4 framework, which has four kinds of chemical environments. With this kind of P doping, the P doped g-C3N4 showed a brown color compared with the pale yellow of undoped g-C3N4. The corresponding UV-vis spectra of P doped g-C3N4 showed an obvious red shift toward the visible light region, especially with the increasing of the doping content. After doping, the sample showed a significant increase in the electric conductivity by up to 4 orders of magnitude, indicating a higher charge carrier density. This may result from the a decreased number or cross-section of the possible scattering centers/trapping sites, an increased electron mobility or altered phase and grain boundary conditions. In the photoelectrochemical test, the photocathode of P doped g-C3N4 shows a 5 times enhancement in the photocurrent compared with that of g-C3N4 under visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm, 150 W Xe lamp). This improvement in the photocurrent was then possibly due to the higher conductivity and enhanced absorption of visible light and better charge separation and transfer. This work for the first time indicated that the P doped g-C3N4 (in detail, substituting carbon atoms) can indeed enhance the light absorption of g-C3N4, and might be beneficial for photocatalytic H2 evolution.
Notably, the 31P NMR spectrum is useful to study the precise chemical state of phosphorus doping for g-C3N4 due to its organic nature.86,118 Zhang et al. have ever found four kinds of chemical states of phosphorus (substituting carbon) in their sample using the 31P NMR spectrum, but they did not have a further detailed discussion.118 Recently, Shi and his coworkers gave a possible explanation for the 31P NMR spectrum of P-doped g-C3N4.122 The signals at −7.6 and −17.8 ppm should associate with the chemical environment of corner and bay phosphorus sites, while the signal at +3.2 ppm can be ascribed to PO at some edge terminal locations. Although this result still needs further evidence, it will remind us of the importance of the precise chemical state of phosphorus as a dopant, and the role of 31P NMR, especially for organic semiconductors, e.g. g-C3N4 discussed here.
Thereafter, Qiao and his coworkers reported another carbon substituting P-doped g-C3N4 with a porous structure and nanosheet morphology (PCN-S), and they further demonstrated the role of P in the P-doped C3N4 structure in photocatalysis by theoretical calculations (Fig. 15).105 In their preparation, 2-aminoethylphosphonic acid (AEP) and melamine (ME) with a mass ratio of 1:60 were used to fabricate an organic precursor. The bulk P doped g-C3N4 (PCNB) was obtained by grinding and calcination of this precursor. Then, PCN-S was synthesized by thermal exfoliation of (PCNB). Results of XRD and FT-IR evidenced that the 2D conjugated backbone structures of g-C3N4 were well maintained for PCN-S. However, its P 2p peak is observed at a binding energy of 133.1 eV, which corresponded to the P–N coordination, suggesting that the P atoms most probably replace the C atoms in g-C3N4 to form P–N bonds. Their calculation results further showed that the more energy-favorable C site for P doping is C1 (corner) instead of C2 (bay) in the heptazine unit. Their PCN-S showed a very strong tail absorption (Urbach tail) in the visible-light region. Usually, the Urbach tail is attributed to the electronic states located within the band gap (known as midgap states). The empty midgap states arising from the hybridization of C 2s2p, N 2s2p and P 3s3p appeared below the conduction band (CB) of g-C3N4. Particularly, in their work, the empty midgap states (−0.16 V vs. standard hydrogen electrode) created by P doping were found to greatly extend the light-responsive region up to 557 nm (2.24 eV) by density functional theory and experimental studies, whilst the macroporous structure promotes the mass-transfer process and enhances light harvesting. As a result, the PCN-S showed an enhanced H2 evolution under visible light irradiation (1596 μmol h−1 g−1), λ > 420 nm with an apparent quantum efficiency of 3.56% at 420 nm.
 Fig. 15  (a) UV-Vis diffuse reflectance spectra of CN-B, CN-S, PCN-B, and PCN-S with the inset showing the optical images of sample powders with different colours. Total density of states (TDOS) and partial density of states (PDOS) of (b) the pure g-C3N4 and (c) the P-doped g-C3N4. The Fermi level is set to zero energy. (d) Quantum efficiency (QE) of PCN-S at 420 nm, 460 nm, 500 nm or 540 nm. (e) Electronic band structures of CN-B, CN-S, PCN-B, and PCN-S. Reprinted from ref. 105 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Very recently, Fu and Jiang et al. have reported another carbon substituting P-doped g-C3N4 by heating a hexagonal rod-like single crystal supramolecular precursor.86 The product was a hexagonal tubular carbon nitride with the layered stacking structure (P-TCN, 1.3 wt% P). Their P doping state was investigated in detail by XPS, FT-IR and NMR spectra. The P 2p peak of P-TCN is centered at 133.5 eV, which is typical of the P–N coordination (P–C bonding would be 1–2 eV lower), indicating that P most probably replaces C in triazine rings to form P–N bonds. The NMR investigations of P-TCN on the 31P show signals between 10 and −20 ppm, which further proves that P is doped in the framework. One new band of FT-IR at around 950 cm−1 is also attributed to the P–N stretching mode. These results are consistent with that of Zhang and Qiao's reports, although their preparation methods are quite different. The tubular structure favors the enhancement of light scattering and active sites. Meanwhile, the introduction of P leads to a narrow band gap (from 2.67 eV to 2.55 eV) and increased electric conductivity. Thus, P-TCN exhibited a high H2 evolution rate of 670 μmol h−1 g−1 (λ > 420 nm) in the presence of sacrificial agents, and an apparent quantum efficiency of 5.68% at 420 nm, which is better than most of the bulk g-C3N4 reported.


5.2.2 P substituting nitrogen (N) atom. 
Besides the C substitution, another chemical state of phosphorus doping is the N substitution. Recently, Yuan's group has prepared a P-doped g-C3N4 containing the nitrogen substitution site.123 In their work, a precursor is firstly obtained by evaporating melamine and (hydroxyethylidene)diphosphonic acid (HEDP) (mass ratio of 12:1) in a binary solvent (Vdistilled water/Vethylene glycol = 15:1). Then, the target P-doped g-C3N4 (P-CN, 1.3 atom% P) was prepared by heating the precursor in a quartz container from room temperature to 500 °C and stabilized for 3 h in a N2 flow. Due to the doping of P, the P-CN showed almost 10 times H2 evolution under visible light irradiation compared with the undoped g-C3N4. They also studied P-related functional groups using FT-IR and XPS spectra like that in most cases. In the FT-IR spectrum, only a weak peak can be observed at about 950 cm−1 that is assigned to the P–N stretching mode. While their P 2p spectrum can be fitted into two components, the sharp peak centered at 131.5 eV is assigned to P–C and the weak one at 133.1 eV is typical of the P–N coordination, indicating that P probably substitutes C and N in the g-C3N4 framework to form P–N or P–C bonds. Although the novel P–C bond is found in their sample, P-CN did not show an obviously different light absorbance compared with that of only carbon substitution samples. This might be due to the small quantity of P doping and the complex factors in determining the energy structure for organic g-C3N4 (e.g. the covalent bonding, van der Waals forces, the distortion of organic backbones etc.17,82,84,116).


5.2.3 Interstitial P doping. 
Interstitial phosphorus doping is the third chemical state for P-doped g-C3N4. Hu et al. have reported an example of interstitial phosphorus doping for g-C3N4.88 In their synthesis, the target P-doped g-C3N4 (6 wt% feeding of P) was obtained by heating dicyandiamide and (NH4)2HPO4 as raw materials. Their evidence for interstitial phosphorus doping was demonstrated by comparing with the typical C substitution sample (by Zhang et al.'s method, using BmimPF6118): (1) their XRD pattern showed a slight shift for the (002) peak of g-C3N4; (2) their FT-IR spectrum showed a more obvious band at 950 cm−1, indicating a stronger P–N stretching; (3) their P 2p spectrum showed a higher binding energy at 133.7 eV (reference: 133.4 eV), and they realized that this is due to the different coordination number of the P–N bond (interstitial doping: 2 vs. C substituting: 3). Their P-doped g-C3N4 showed a highly enhanced activity in photocatalytic RhB degradation, but the H2 evolution experiment was not performed in this work. In another work reported by the same authors (also interstitial P doping), the P-doped g-C3N4 showed only 1.7 times enhancement in H2 evolution compared with that of g-C3N4, which is much weaker compared with that of most C substitution or carbon/nitrogen co-substitution samples.87 The reason was remained unknown but is valuable to be explored.


5.2.4 Theoretical calculations for P-doped g-C3N4. 
To further study the enhanced mechanism for the photocatalytic performance of P-doped g-C3N4, several papers have focused on theoretical calculations. Ma et al. demonstrated that among the three kinds of chemical states, a P atom preferentially situates the interstitial sites of in-planar g-C3N4.102 However, to date, most reported P-doped g-C3N4 samples are C or N substitution types.86,105,118,122,123 A possible reason is that most of the P-doped g-C3N4 was obtained by heating raw materials (C, N sources and P sources) at high temperatures (usually >500 °C). P is more favorable to chemically react with highly activated C or N sites rather than fill in the interstitial sites. Some related issues can also be found. For example, when less chemically active phosphate was used instead of organic phosphorus or an ionic liquid, the interstitial doping dominated in P-doped g-C3N4.87,88 Moreover, they calculated the light absorption edges for different P doping sites, and they found that C substitution doping and interstitial doping have an edge of 540 nm and 620 nm, respectively. Their results also showed that P interstitial doping had a prominent potential due to the appearance of a new channel for carrier migration. The increased dispersion of the contour distribution of the HOMO and LUMO brought by doping facilitates the enhancement of the carrier mobility, while the noncoplanar HOMO and lowest unoccupied molecular orbit (LUMO) favored the charge separation.
Besides, Liu et al. have calculated the bandgap of P-doped g-C3N4.98 Their results indicated that pure g-C3N4 has an indirect band gap of about 2.73 eV, which is in good agreement with the experimental value. By doping P into N2 and C1 sites of g-C3N4, the band gap reduces to 2.03 and 2.22 eV, respectively. This data is well consistent with that of Qiao's experimental work, which showed a value of 2.24 eV due to the carbon substituting site mid-gap. They also found that though narrowing the energy band of g-C3N4 by doping P, the conduction band and valance band edge of the g-C3N4 doping system are thermodynamically favorable to split water.
In summary, P doping is an effective strategy to improve the visible light response photocatalytic performance of g-C3N4, especially for H2 evolution. The chemical states of P doping such as C substitution, N substitution or interstitial doping determine the energy structure, charge separation and thus the H2 evolution performance.86–88,98,102,105,118,122,123 Although P-doped g-C3N4 has shown great potential in enhancing the photocatalytic activity of the g-C3N4 based photocatalyst, there is still a great scope to explore: (1) it is found that the preparation process and phosphorus sources can greatly influence the chemical states of P doping, morphology and total backbone of P-doped g-C3N4. Therefore, new preparation methods at low temperature and new phosphorus sources are valuable to be found. (2) Recently, some co-doping samples with P and other metal or nonmetal elements have been reported to have a better performance than that of single elemental doping.87,100 Thus, it is attractive to develop novel co-doping systems using phosphorus and other elements, like we discussed in the P doped TiO2 part. (3) The theoretical results showed that interstitial P doping should have more potential than the other two chemical states of P doping.102 However, the reported experimental results of interstitial P doping are quite few.87,88 It is suggested that much more attention be paid to this doping state. The use of less active phosphorus precursors or conducting a post-modification of g-C3N4 may be useful to obtain interstitial P doping samples. (4) The performance of P-doped g-C3N4, in fact, will be influenced by the distortion or defect formation of g-C3N4 during the preparation method.92,94,103 Therefore, more experimental cases and effective spectroscopic studies, e.g. XPS and 13C/31P NMR spectra are urgently needed.

5.3 Phosphorus as a dopant for other photocatalysts
Besides the most widely reported TiO2 and g-C3N4, P-doped graphene93 and P-doped BiVO491 are also representative and very promising for developing highly efficient P-doped photocatalysts.
Latorre-Sánchez et al. have reported unprecedented P-doped graphene ((P)G) photocatalysts for visible light driven H2 evolution.93 Their (P)G samples were obtained by pyrolysis of a H2PO4− (20–320 wt%) modified alginate at 900 °C under an inert atmosphere. The chemical structure of the (P)G samples was characterized by UV/Vis, Raman, 31P NMR spectroscopy and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), and the sample (P)G-2 (C%/P% = 13.86, molar ratio) was used as an example. The UV/Vis absorption spectra showed an extinction coefficient that increases towards the blue side of the visible region, and a band at lmax = 265 nm in the UV region. The Raman spectrum showed the three expected peaks that correspond to the 2D′ band (2892 cm−1), the G (1596 cm−1) and the D peaks (1358 cm−1). The presence of P atoms and their chemical states were ascertained by XPS measurements and solid-state 31P NMR spectroscopy. The P 2p peak was deconvoluted into two components of 132.9 and 131.5 eV, and these were attributed to P atoms bonded to O atoms and C atoms, respectively. In agreement with the P 2p XPS spectrum, the typical 31P NMR spectrum showed two peaks at 4 and 21 ppm, which were located in the similar positions of PPh3 (6 ppm) and OPPh (23 ppm) in solution, respectively. These indicated the substitution of C atoms by P atoms in the graphene sheets. Evidence was also found in the C 1s spectrum, in which the peak of C was found to occur at lower binding energies than C in pure graphene, because P donates some electrons to C.
The activity of their (P)G samples in photocatalytic H2 evolution increases significantly on increasing the percentage of H2PO4− during the synthesis of (P)G; the maximum activity was obtained with the maximum percentage of H2PO4− (C%/P% = 12.73, molar ratio). However, a comparison of the H2 evolution activity under UV/Vis and visible-light irradiation leads to the conclusion that a large percentage of H2 evolved under UV/Vis irradiation must be derived from UV light excitation, and there is still room for improving the activity under visible-light irradiation. The highest H2 evolution rate of P-doped graphene (282 μmol h−1 g−1) was achieved in the sample with a molar ratio of C%/P% = 12.73 (denoted as Pt–(P)G-4 in the cited work) and a band gap of 2.85 eV under UV/Vis irradiation using triethanolamine. Furthermore, the photocatalytic activity of (P)G is about one order of magnitude higher than that of GO. The phosphorus could atomically incorporate into the backbone of graphene, and optimize the energy structure. Pure graphene with a bandgap of 0 eV can be changed into a semiconductor (e.g. with a Eb = 2.85 eV) by hybridization of the C and P atomic orbits. This will inspire a further study for engineering the energy structure by doping P atoms in other unconventional materials not limited to graphene, e.g. metallic materials or polymers.22,23
Lee and his coworkers have demonstrated another promising P-doped photocatalyst by fabricating P-doped BiVO4.91 They for the first time doped phosphorus into the vanadium sites in the host lattice of BiVO4, replacing some of the VO4 oxoanions in BiVO4 with PO4 oxoanions. The doping level of phosphorus was adjusted in their work. According to the Tauc plots, the bandgap showed a slight increase with the increasing P doping level, that is, pristine BiVO4 (ca. 2.36 eV), 0.5% P (ca. 2.37 eV), 1% P (ca. 2.38 eV), and 5% P (ca. 2.40 eV). This result is consistent with the theoretical calculations. Upon PO43− doping, the calculated band gap becomes slightly larger, (1.95 eV for 6.25% doping and 2.00 eV for 25%, compared with the calculated value of 1.94 eV). Moreover, according to their theoretical calculation, an internal electric field is built owing to the lattice strain imposed by the different bond lengths between V–O and P–O and the charge redistribution around the dopant. This electric field is very advantageous for charge separation, which can improve the photocatalytic property. In the photoelectrochemical test, the 0.5% PO4-doped BiVO4 showed the highest photocurrent density, which is about 30 times higher than that of pristine BiVO4. The same trend was observed for photocatalytic O2 evolution rates. EIS measurements further revealed that PO43− oxoanion doping promotes charge separation in mBiVO4 remarkably. In fact, this suggests that enhancing the charge separation should be another main effect of phosphorus doping. It seems that this was accomplished in their work by creating an internal electric field due to the distortion of the lattice after P doping. A similar effect can also be found in the Ti–O–P mode of TiO285 and the interstitial P doping mode of carbon nitride.87,88,102 This reminds us that phosphorus doping is not only to expand the light absorption range but also to accelerate the charge separation.
5.4 Section summary and prospects
Besides the issues referred to at the end of each part, several general suggestions are also summarized here for developing novel P-doped photocatalysts: (1) the chemical state of P in the photocatalyst plays an important role in the energy structure, charge separation and thus the H2 evolution activity (XPS results summarized in Table 1).89,90,95,105,110,115,123 For example, the P3− substituted TiO2 shows a more obvious shoulder absorption in the range of 400–450 nm than that of P doped TiO2 with the Ti–O–P structure.89,90,121 A comprehensive study of its chemical nature would require theoretical calculations and experimental characterization such as spectroscopic measurements. (2) The preparation methods and phosphorus source are critical. For example, for g-C3N4, some energy unfavorable doping states could also be achieved by high temperature heating methods.86,105,118,122 For TiO2, the energy unfavorable P anion doping can be realized by using TiP as the P source to make Ti rich conditions.89,90 (3) We emphasize again that the co-doping of phosphorus with other elements for their synergetic effect is worth exploring.120 (4) Finally, it is worth noting that besides the light absorption extension, doping can also alter other physical or chemical properties of the photocatalysts, e.g. surface area, particle size, charge transfer kinetics, surface states etc. These factors may contribute to the enhanced photocatalytic activity of doping materials.
Table 1 The chemical state of doping phosphorus by XPS analysis




Doping state
P 2p XPS peaks
Synthesis route (details in references)
Ref.





P 2p XPS spectra of P-doped photocatalysts




P 2p XPS spectra of P-doped TiO

2




Ti–O–P (P5+)
133.8 eV
H3PO4, sol–gel process, calcination at 600 °C

115



Ti–O–P (P5+)
132.6 eV
H3PO2, sol–gel process, calcination at 400 °C

95



Ti–O–P (P5+)
133.4 eV (400 °C calcination); 133.6 eV (900 °C calcination)
H3PO2, sol–gel process, calcination from 400 °C to 900 °C

121



Ti–O–P (P5+)
133.72 eV (400 °C calcination); 133.96 eV (700 °C calcination)
H3PO4, sol–gel process, calcination from 400 °C to 700 °C

85



Ti–O–P (P5+)

ca. 133.2 eV
BPO4, solid-state reaction, annealing at 1050 °C

120



P3− substitution of O2−
128 eV (for P3− in bulk), 134 eV (for PO43− on surface)
TiP (titanium phosphide), sol–gel process, calcination from 450 °C to 600 °C

89 and 90



PO43− grafting on the surface (P5+)
134.2 eV
Soaked in the H3PO4 solution and calcination at 450 °C

99



 



P 2p XPS spectra of P-doped g-C

3

N

4




P substituting carbon (C) atom (P–N bonding)
133.5 eV
BmimPF6, dicyandiamide, calcination at 550 °C

118



P substituting carbon (C) atom (P–N bonding)
133.1 eV
2-Aminoethylphosphonic, acid (AEP) and melamine, calcination at 550 °C

105



P substituting carbon (C) atom (P–N bonding)
133.5 eV
Melamine and H3PO4, hydrothermal treatment and then calcination at 550 °C

86



P substituting nitrogen (N) atom (P–C bonding)
131.5 eV
Melamine and (hydroxyethylidene)diphosphonic acid, calcination at 500 °C after pre-assembly.

123



Interstitial P doping
133.7 eV
Dicyandiamide and (NH4)2HPO4, calcination at 520 °C

88



 



P 2p XPS spectra of other P-doped Graphene



P–O bonding, P–C bonding
132.9 eV (P–O bonding), 131.5 eV (P–C bonding)
Pyrolysis of phosphate-alginate at 900 °C under an Ar atmosphere, and sonication

93





6. Conclusion, challenge and outlook
Recently, the energy and environmental crisis has greatly driven the development of photocatalysis research. Phosphorus containing photocatalysts are important members of the family of photocatalysts. There are plenty of reports about phosphorus containing photocatalysts and they have shown great potential in photocatalysis, especially for photocatalytic H2 evolution (for hydrogen yield summary, see Table 2). The phosphorus elements contain different chemical states (mainly 0, +5 and −3), and many P-containing species act as a photocatalyst, cocatalyst, photocathode and dopant based on their physiochemical properties. After careful consideration, several issues about some conclusions, challenges and outlook are listed for further development of this family of materials.
Table 2 Conditions of photocatalytic hydrogen evolution for the main photocatalysts and cocatalysts in this review




Samples
H2 evolution rate
Experimental conditions of photocatalysis
Ref.




Amorphous red phosphorus microparticles (Hittorf red phosphorus nanorods on the surface)
0.6 μmol h−1 g−1
50 mg catalyst (1 wt% Pt as a cocatalyst), 100 mL aqueous solution containing 5 vol% methanol as a hole sacrificial agent. 300 W xenon lamp with an 400 nm cut-off filter and a water filter

18



YPO4 nanosheets/amorphous red phosphorus composite
1.6 μmol h−1 g−1
50 mg catalyst (1 wt% Pt), 100 mL aqueous solution containing 5 vol% methanol as a hole sacrificial agent. 300 W xenon lamp with an appropriate cut-off filter and a water filter (a 400 nm cut-off filter)

33



Micro-fibrous phosphorus/SiO2
633 μmol h−1 g−1
25 mg catalyst (1 wt% Pt), 50 mL of water (10 vol% methanol as the hole sacrificial agent). 300 W xenon lamp (a 420 nm cut-off filter)

35



Smashed-fibrous phosphorus
684 μmol h−1 g−1
25 mg catalyst (1 wt% Pt), 50 mL of water (10 vol% methanol as the hole sacrificial agent). 300 W xenon lamp (a 420 nm cut-off filter)

35



Red phosphorus/g-C3N4 heterojunction
1000 μmol h−1 g−1
10 mg catalyst (0.5 wt% Pt), 10 mL aqueous solution of L-ascorbic acid as a sacrificial agent (0.1 M, pH 4.0). 300 W xenon lamp (a 420 nm cut-off filter)

34



Red phosphorus/CdS composite
923 μmol h−1 g−1
50 mg of catalysts (1 wt% Pt), 100 mL of 0.1 M Na2S and 0.1 M Na2SO3 as a sacrificial agent. 300 W xenon lamp (a 400 nm cut-off filter)

32



Red phosphorus/Ni(OH)2 composite
33 μmol h−1 g−1
50 mg catalyst (1 wt% Pt); 5 vol% methanol aqueous solution (100 mL) as a sacrificial agent, 300 W xenon lamp (a 400 nm cut-off filter)

161



3D flower-like nano/micro titanium phosphate

ca. 250 μmol h−1 g−1
10 mg samples were dispersed in 100 ml of methanol solution (10 ml of methanol as a sacrificial agent, 90 ml of deionized water) under magnetic stirring. 300 W xenon lamp for direct irradiation

40



Open-framework mixed valence titanium phosphate (Ti3+, V5+ doping)
47 μmol h−1 g−1
25 mg catalyst, 1 g catalyst per L solution, LED visible light irradiation

49



BiPO4/RGO composite
306 μmol h−1 g−1
100 mg catalyst, 200 mL of 5 vol% ethanol as the sacrificial agents. A 125 W high-pressure Hg lamp, emission at about 365 nm, was used as a light source

47



g-C3N4 nanosheets and dissociative phosphate as a synergistic system
947 μmol h−1 g−1
50 mg catalyst (3 wt% Pt), 270 mL aqueous TEOA solution (10%) as a sacrificial agent, 0.20 mol K2HPO4, 300 W Xe lamp (a 400 nm cut-off filter)

45



Cobalt phosphide (Co2P) on CdS nanorods (Co2P is a cocatalyst)
19373 μmol h−1 g−1
CdS NRs (0.33 mg), Co2P NPs (0.15 mg), 15 mL aqueous solution of DL-mandelic acid (0.5 M), pH = 6.0 and with 1 M NaOH white LEDs (3 × 30 W, a 420 nm cut-off filter)

55



FeP nanoparticle/TiO2 (FeP is a cocatalyst)
1200 μmol h−1 g−1 (acidic) and 1900 μmol h−1 g−1 (neutral-pH)
50 mg FeP/TiO2 (1.5 wt%), 50 mL of a 1:1 MeOH/H2O solution (pH-neutral solution) or 1 M HCl (acidic solution). UV illumination was provided by a 200 W Hg (Xe) lamp fitted with a water filter to cut off the infrared radiation

169



CoP nanorods
3335 μmol h−1 g−1
20 mg catalyst, 20 mL of 5 vol% TEOA solution (pH = 1.0), 500 W Xe lamp (a 420 nm cut-off filter)

76



Fluorescein-based dye decorated CoP nanorod hybrid
8035 μmol h−1 g−1
20 mg catalyst, 20 mL of 5 vol% TEOA solution (pH = 1.0), 500 W Xe lamp (a 420 nm cut-off filter)

76



Nickel phosphide (Ni12P5)
10760 μmol h−1 g−1
5 mg catalyst, 20 mg fluorescein sodium as photosensitizer, 80 mL aqueous solution containing TEOA. 300 W Xe lamp (a 420 nm cut-off filter)

71



WP2 particles
8 μmol h−1 g−1
70 mg catalyst (2 wt%), 50 mL solution containing 20 vol% triethanolamine (TEOA), 350 W high pressure mercury lamp

75



P-Doped TiO2 nanoparticles (with Ti–O–P structure)
1838 μmol h−1 g−1 (UV), 209 μmol h−1 g−1 (simulated sunlight)
300 mg catalyst, 10 mL (5 vol%) glycerol, 125 W high pressure mercury lamp or 500 W xenon lamp (simulated sunlight)

108



P-Doped TiO2 nanotube
1850 μmol h−1 g−1 (UV), 335 μmol h−1 g−1 (simulated sunlight)
300 mg catalyst, 10 mL (5 vol%) glycerol, 125 W high pressure mercury lamp or 500 W xenon lamp (simulated sunlight)

112



P, N codoped TiO2
11.2 μmol h−1 g−1
50 mg catalyst, 100 ml of high purity water (18.2 MΩ cm) for direct water splitting. 300 W xenon lamp (a 420 nm cut-off filter)

120



Phosphate grafting on TiO2
1196 μmol h−1 g−1
50 mg catalyst (0.5 wt% Pt), 80 mL aqueous solution containing TEOA (9.5 × 10−2 mol L−1) and a given concentration of EY (3.0 × 10−4 mol L−1). 400 W Hg lamp (a 420 nm cut-off filter)

99



P-Doped C3N4 nanosheet
1596 μmol h−1 g−1
50 mg catalyst (1 wt% Pt), aqueous TEOA solution (20%) as a sacrificial agent, 300 W Xe lamp (a 400 nm cut-off filter).

105



P-Doped g-C3N4 hexagonal microtubes
670 μmol h−1 g−1
100 mg catalyst (1 wt% Pt), 80 mL distilled water and 20 mL methanol, 300 W Xe lamp (a 420 nm cut-off filter)

86



P-Doped graphene
282 μmol h−1 g−1
330 mg L−1 catalyst (2 wt% Pt), 30 mL aqueous solution of methanol (30% v/v), xenon lamp (235–850 nm) with a focused intensity on the flask of 1.3 W m−2

93





(1) Theoretical calculations can shed light on the energy structure and reactions kinetics of photocatalysts. Examples can be found in the study of elemental phosphorus, phosphate, phosphide and P dopants.35,51,76,96,105,113,167 Comprehensive simulations would also be helpful for designing new photocatalysts.140 Combining theoretical simulations with experimental results will be a promising strategy to discover and study new phosphorus containing materials.
(2) It is essential to investigate photocatalysis at the molecular (and even atomic) level and to explore the structure–property relationship. In our opinion, this is as important as the discovery of new materials. For P-containing photocatalysts, several fundamental issues have not been addressed. For example, (i) how are the photoexcited charges transported in the bulk of crystalline red P, and what is the exact reaction process of H2 evolution on their surface?18,35 (ii) Why does the light absorption range of phosphate change from near infrared (Cu2(OH)PO4), visible (Ag3PO4) to the UV (BiPO4) region.47,51,53 (iii) What is the foundational mechanism for the low overpotential of H2 evolution on a transition metal phosphide?55,66,69,76 (iv) What is the exact substitution position of P atoms in P doped g-C3N4, and how do they affect the charge separation?86,105 In fact, we will find additional questions while searching for answers.
(3) Chemical transformation is expected to occur among elemental phosphorus, phosphates, phosphides and even phosphorus doping materials. Some novel composite photocatalysts with excellent interface contact might be developed from this viewpoint, which include the known materials and some totally new ones.
(4) Several kinds of P-containing materials deserve more attention, because their potential is not limited to photocatalytic H2 evolution. These consists of crystalline red P modifications,35 transition metal phosphide (FeP, NiP, CoP etc.),55,66,69,76,171 BiPO4,47 and novel P-doped g-C3N4 and TiO2.85,105
Finally, we believe that phosphorus containing photocatalysts are now one of the central issues of photocatalysis, and we expect that the next generation of phosphorus containing photocatalysts, which are waiting for our persistent exploration and discovery, could bring us exciting news.
Acknowledgements
The work described in this paper was partially supported by the grants from the Research Grants Council of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China. (Project no. T23-407/13-N and Project no. 14304315). This work was also supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Ref. no. 21173179, Ref. no. 21303118) and a grant from the Vice-Chancellor's One-off Discretionary Fund of The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Project no. VCF2014016).
Notes and references
X. Chen, S. Shen, L. Guo and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6503–6570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ran, J. Zhang, J. Yu, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7787–7812 RSC .
L.-Z. Wu, B. Chen, Z.-J. Li and C.-H. Tung, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 2177–2185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Colmenares and R. Luque, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 765–778 RSC .
S.-H. Li, S. Liu, J. C. Colmenares and Y.-J. Xu, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 594–607 RSC .
M. Bowker, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 2235–2246 RSC .
Q. Xiang and J. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 753–759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sarina, E. R. Waclawik and H. Zhu, Green Chem., 2013, 15, 1814–1833 RSC .
K. Zhang, L. Wang, J. K. Kim, M. Ma, G. Veerappan, C.-L. Lee, K.-j. Kong, H. Lee and J. H. Park, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 499–503 CAS .
J. Chen, D. Yang, D. Song, J. Jiang, A. Ma, M. Z. Hu and C. Ni, J. Power Sources, 2015, 280, 649–666 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Doscher, J. L. Young, J. F. Geisz, J. A. Turner and T. G. Deutsch, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 74–80 CAS .
S. Yu, H. J. Yun, Y. H. Kim and J. Yi, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 144, 893–899 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jia, D.-H. Wang, Y.-X. Huang, A.-W. Xu and H.-Q. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 11466–11473 CAS .
Z. Su, L. Wang, S. Grigorescu, K. Lee and P. Schmuki, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 15561–15564 RSC .
T. Hisatomi, C. Katayama, Y. Moriya, T. Minegishi, M. Katayama, H. Nishiyama, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3595–3599 CAS .
X. Wang, K. Maeda, A. Thomas, K. Takanabe, G. Xin, J. M. Carlsson, K. Domen and M. Antonietti, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 76–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, W. K. H. Ng, J. C. Yu, H. Zhu, C. Li, L. Zhang, Z. Liu and Q. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 111–112, 409–414 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, P. Niu, L. Yin and H.-M. Cheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9070–9073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, L.-C. Yin, P. Niu, W. Jiao and H.-M. Cheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 6242–6245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xu, C. Randorn, P. Efstathiou and J. T. S. Irvine, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 595–598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Hu, G. Liu, X. Chen, Z. Shen and J. C. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 4445–4455 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Weingarten, R. V. Kazantsev, L. C. Palmer, M. McClendon, A. R. Koltonow, P. S. SamuelAmanda, D. J. Kiebala, M. R. Wasielewski and S. I. Stupp, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 964–970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chauhan, Y. Kumar, J. Dana, B. Satpati, H. N. Ghosh and S. Deka, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 15802–15812 RSC .
X. H. Lin, S. N. Lee, W. Zhang and S. F. Y. Li, J. Hazard. Mater., 2016, 303, 64–75 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fujita, H. O. Venterink, P. M. van Bodegom, J. C. Douma, G. W. Heil, N. Holzel, E. Jablonska, W. Kotowski, T. Okruszko, P. Pawlikowski, P. C. de Ruiter and M. J. Wassen, Nature, 2014, 505, 82–86 CrossRef PubMed .
B. C. Koo, Y. H. Lee, D. S. Moon, S. C. Yoon and J. C. Raymond, Science, 2013, 342, 1346–1348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Low, R. Roldan, H. Wang, F. N. Xia, P. Avouris, L. M. Moreno and F. Guinea, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 113, 5 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Velian and C. C. Cummins, Science, 2015, 348, 1001–1004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Ansari and M. H. Cho, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 25405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Ansari, Z. Khan, M. O. Ansari and M. H. Cho, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 44616–44629 RSC .
Z. Shi, X. Dong and H. Dang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 5908–5915 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, C. Li, Y. Li and J. C. Yu, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 119–120, 267–272 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-P. Yuan, S.-W. Cao, Y.-S. Liao, L.-S. Yin and C. Xue, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 140–141, 164–168 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Hu, L. Yuan, Z. Liu, Z. Shen and J. C. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 9580–9585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Shen, S. Sun, W. Wang, J. Liu, Z. Liu and J. C. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 3285–3288 CAS .
D. Xia, Z. Shen, G. Huang, W. Wang, J. C. Yu and P. K. Wong, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2015, 49, 6264–6273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Shen, Z. Hu, W. Wang, S.-F. Lee, D. K. L. Chan, Y. Li, T. Gu and J. C. Yu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 14163–14167 RSC .
G. M. Carroll and D. R. Gamelin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2986–2994 CAS .
S.-y. Guo and S. Han, J. Power Sources, 2014, 267, 9–13 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Kapoor, S. Inagaki and H. Yoshida, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 9231–9238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R.-L. Lee, P. D. Tran, S. S. Pramana, S. Y. Chiam, Y. Ren, S. Meng, L. H. Wong and J. Barber, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2013, 3, 1694 CAS .
M. Li, Q. Cheng, R. M. Wittman, X. Peng and C. K. Chan, ChemElectroChem, 2014, 1, 663–672 CrossRef .
Z. Li, Y. Dai, X. Ma, Y. Zhu and B. Huang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 3267–3273 RSC .
G. Liu, T. Wang, H. Zhang, X. Meng, D. Hao, K. Chang, P. Li, T. Kako and J. Ye, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 13561–13565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Martin, G. G. Liu, S. J. A. Moniz, Y. P. Bi, A. M. Beale, J. H. Ye and J. W. Tang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 7808–7828 RSC .
B. Pan, Y. Wang, Y. Liang, S. Luo, W. Su and X. Wang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 13527–13533 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Pilli, T. E. Furtak, L. D. Brown, T. G. Deutsch, J. A. Turner and A. M. Herring, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 5028–5034 CAS .
M. Serra, H. G. Baldovi, F. Albarracin and H. Garcia, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 183, 159–167 CrossRef CAS .
M. Serra, H. G. Baldovi, M. Alvaro and H. Garcia, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2015, 2015, 4237–4243 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, B. Huang, X. Ma, Z. Wang, X. Qin, X. Zhang, Y. Dai and M. H. Whangbo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 4810–4813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Y. Wu, P. Diao, J. Sun, D. Xu, T. Jin and M. Xiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18991–18999 CAS .
Z. G. Yi, J. H. Ye, N. Kikugawa, T. Kako, S. X. Ouyang, H. Stuart-Williams, H. Yang, J. Y. Cao, W. J. Luo, Z. S. Li, Y. Liu and R. L. Withers, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 559–564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Q. Bao, M. Fatima Cerqueira, P. Alpuim and L. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 10742–10745 RSC .
S. Cao, Y. Chen, C.-C. Hou, X.-J. Lv and W.-F. Fu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 6096–6101 CAS .
S. Cao, Y. Chen, C. J. Wang, P. He and W. F. Fu, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 10427–10429 RSC .
X. Chen, D. Wang, Z. Wang, P. Zhou, Z. Wu and F. Jiang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 11683–11685 RSC .
C. Deng, F. Ding, X. Li, Y. Guo, W. Ni, H. Yan, K. Sun and Y.-M. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 59–66 CAS .
L. Gao, Y. Cui, J. Wang, A. Cavalli, A. Standing, T. T. Vu, M. A. Verheijen, J. E. Haverkort, E. P. Bakkers and P. H. Notten, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3715–3719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. R. Hellstern, J. D. Benck, J. Kibsgaard, C. Hahn and T. F. Jaramillo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501758 CrossRef .
J. Kibsgaard, C. Tsai, K. Chan, J. D. Benck, J. K. Nørskov, F. Abild-Pedersen and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3022–3029 CAS .
M. H. Lee, K. Takei, J. Zhang, R. Kapadia, M. Zheng, Y. Z. Chen, J. Nah, T. S. Matthews, Y. L. Chueh, J. W. Ager and A. Javey, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 10760–10764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, M. Zheng, B. Zhang, C. Zhu, F. Wang, J. Song, M. Zhong, L. Ma and W. Shen, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 075704 CrossRef PubMed .
J. M. McEnaney, J. C. Crompton, J. F. Callejas, E. J. Popczun, A. J. Biacchi, N. S. Lewis and R. E. Schaak, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 4826–4831 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pan, Y. Liu and C. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2015, 285, 169–177 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Popczun, C. G. Read, C. W. Roske, N. S. Lewis and R. E. Schaak, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 5427–5430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Pu, Q. Liu, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 21874–21879 CAS .
Y. Shi and B. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 1529–1541 RSC .
Z. Sun, H. Chen, Q. Huang and P. Du, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2015, 5, 4964–4967 CAS .
D. Wang, D. Zhang, C. Tang, P. Zhou, Z. Wu and B. Fang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 1952–1956 CAS .
W. Wu, X. Yue, X.-Y. Wu and C.-Z. Lu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 24361–24365 RSC .
Z. Xing, Q. Liu, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 145–149 CrossRef CAS .
Y. P. Zhu, X. Xu, H. Su, Y. P. Liu, T. Chen and Z. Y. Yuan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 28369–28376 Search PubMed .
S. Lange, M. Bawohl, R. Weihrich and T. Nilges, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 5654–5657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pi, T. Wu, D. Zhang, S. Chen and S. Wang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 15724–15730 RSC .
J. Tian, N. Cheng, Q. Liu, W. Xing and X. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 5493–5497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, Y. V. Kolen'ko, X.-Q. Bao, K. Kovnir and L. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 8188–8192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Xiao, M. A. Sk, L. Thia, X. Ge, R. J. Lim, J.-Y. Wang, K. H. Lim and X. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2624–2629 CAS .
R. Asahi, T. Morikawa, H. Irie and T. Ohwaki, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9824–9852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Asahi, T. Morikawa, T. Ohwaki, K. Aoki and Y. Taga, Science, 2001, 293, 269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Borgarello, J. Kiwi, M. Graetzel, E. Pelizzetti and M. Visca, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1982, 104, 2996–3002 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cao, J. Low, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2150–2176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Cho, K. H. Kim, H. O. Choi and H.-T. Jung, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 3972–3978 RSC .
C. Fettkenhauer, G. Clavel, K. Kailasam, M. Antonietti and D. Dontsova, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 3350–3361 RSC .
N. O. Gopal, H.-H. Lo, T.-F. Ke, C.-H. Lee, C.-C. Chou, J.-D. Wu, S.-C. Sheu and S.-C. Ke, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 16191–16197 CAS .
S. Guo, Z. Deng, M. Li, B. Jiang, C. Tian, Q. Pan and H. Fu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 1830–1834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hu, L. Ma, J. You, F. Li, Z. Fan, G. Lu, D. Liu and J. Gui, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 311, 164–171 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hu, L. Ma, J. You, F. Li, Z. Fan, F. Wang, D. Liu and J. Gui, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 21657–21663 RSC .
M. Iwase, K. Yamada, T. Kurisaki, B. Ohtani and H. Wakita, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 140–141, 327–332 CrossRef CAS .
M. Iwase, K. Yamada, T. Kurisaki, O. O. Prieto-Mahaney, B. Ohtani and H. Wakita, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 132–133, 39–44 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Jo, J.-W. Jang, K.-j. Kong, H. J. Kang, J. Y. Kim, H. Jun, K. P. S. Parmar and J. S. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 3147–3151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kang, Y. Yang, L.-C. Yin, X. Kang, G. Liu and H.-M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4572–4577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Latorre-Sánchez, A. Primo and H. García, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 11813–11816 CrossRef PubMed .
V. W.-h. Lau, I. Moudrakovski, T. Botari, S. Weinberger, M. B. Mesch, V. Duppel, J. Senker, V. Blum and B. V. Lotsch, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lin, W. Lin, Y. Zhu, B. Zhao and Y. Xie, Chem. Lett., 2005, 34, 284–285 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, L. Wang, H. G. Yang, H.-M. Cheng and G. Q. Lu, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 831–843 RSC .
G. Liu, Y. Zhao, C. Sun, F. Li, G. Q. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 4516–4520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 672, 271–276 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, Y. Li, S. Peng, G. Lu and S. Li, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2013, 12, 1903–1910 CAS .
H. Ma, Y. Li, S. Li and N. Liu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 357(Part A), 131–138 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ma, S. Li and Y. Jiang, Macromolecules, 2002, 35, 1109–1115 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ma, Y. Lv, J. Xu, Y. Liu, R. Zhang and Y. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 23485–23493 CAS .
P. Niu, L.-C. Yin, Y.-Q. Yang, G. Liu and H.-M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 8046–8052 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Peng, J. He, Q. Liu, Z. Sun, W. Yan, Z. Pan, Y. Wu, S. Liang, W. Cheng and S. Wei, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 8184–8188 CAS .
J. Ran, T. Y. Ma, G. Gao, X.-W. Du and S. Z. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3708–3717 CAS .
Q. Shi, D. Yang, Z. Jiang and J. Li, J. Mol. Catal. B: Enzym., 2006, 43, 44–48 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sinhamahapatra, J.-P. Jeon and J.-S. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3539–3544 CAS .
Y. Tian, H. Sang and X. Wang, Chin. J. Catal., 2012, 33, 1395–1401 CAS .
F. Wang, Y.-Y. Sun, J. B. Hatch, H. Xing, X. Zhu, H. Zhang, X. Xu, H. Luo, S. Perera, S. Zhang and H. Zeng, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 17989–17994 RSC .
M. Xie, Y. Feng, X. Fu, P. Luan and L. Jing, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 631, 120–124 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xing, Z. Li, X. Wu, G. Wang and W. Zhou, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 1535–1541 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, W. Zhao, M. Feng and H. Sang, Environ. Chem., 2014, 33, 129–134 CAS .
K. Yang, Y. Dai and B. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 18985–18994 CAS .
H.-F. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2007, 68, 600–607 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Yu, L. Zhang, Z. Zheng and J. Zhao, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 2280–2286 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Y. Chen and X. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3092–3108 CAS .
P. Zhang, T. Tachikawa, M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 617–623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, T. Mori, J. Ye and M. Antonietti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6294–6295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhao, H. Luo, F. Chen, P. Zhang, L. Yi and K. You, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1700–1707 CAS .
P. Zheng, H. Wu, J. Guo, J. Dong, S. Jia and Z. Zhu, J. Alloys Compd., 2014, 615, 79–83 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zheng, L. Lin, J. Xie, Y. Zhu and Y. Xie, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 15502–15509 CAS .
Y. Zhou, L. Zhang, J. Liu, X. Fan, B. Wang, M. Wang, W. Ren, J. Wang, M. Li and J. Shi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 3862–3867 CAS .
Y.-P. Zhu, T.-Z. Ren and Z.-Y. Yuan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 16850–16856 CAS .
F. Dai, J. Zai, R. Yi, M. L. Gordin, H. Sohn, S. Chen and D. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5 Search PubMed .
M. Xing, W. Fang, X. Yang, B. Tian and J. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 6637–6640 RSC .
Y.-D. Chiou and Y.-J. Hsu, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 105, 211–219 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shao, L. Cheng, X. Zhang, D. D. D. Ma and S.-t. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 17738–17739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Su, H. Yu, X. Quan, S. Chen and H. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 138–139, 427–433 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Kang, C. H. A. Tsang, Z. Zhang, M. Zhang, N.-b. Wong, J. A. Zapien, Y. Shan and S.-T. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 5326–5327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Arrowsmith, M. S. Hill, A. L. Johnson, G. Kociok-Kohn and M. F. Mahon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 7882–7885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Mal, B. Breiner, K. Rissanen and J. R. Nitschke, Science, 2009, 324, 1697–1699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Bachhuber, J. von Appen, R. Dronskowski, P. Schmidt, T. Nilges, A. Pfitzner and R. Weihrich, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 11629–11633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Park and H. J. Sohn, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2465–2468 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, A. T. Neal, Z. Zhu, Z. Luo, X. F. Xu, D. Tomanek and P. D. D. Ye, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4033–4041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, Y. Yu, G. J. Ye, Q. Ge, X. Ou, H. Wu, D. Feng, X. H. Chen and Y. Zhang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 372–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yuan, X. Liu, F. Afshinmanesh, W. Li, G. Xu, J. Sun, B. Lian, A. G. Curto, G. Ye, Y. Hikita, Z. Shen, S.-C. Zhang, X. Chen, M. Brongersma, H. Y. Hwang and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 707–713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, S. S. Baik, S. H. Ryu, Y. Sohn, S. Park, B. G. Park, J. Denlinger, Y. Yi, H. J. Choi and K. S. Kim, Science, 2015, 349, 723–726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Viti, J. Hu, D. Coquillat, W. Knap, A. Tredicucci, A. Politano and M. S. Vitiello, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5567–5572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Favron, E. Gaufres, F. Fossard, A. L. Phaneuf-L'Heureux, N. Y. W. Tang, P. L. Levesque, A. Loiseau, R. Leonelli, S. Francoeur and R. Martel, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 826–832 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Z. Rahman, C. W. Kwong, K. Davey and S. Z. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 709–728 CAS .
M. Scheer, G. Balázs and A. Seitz, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 4236–4256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Young, J. Chem. Educ., 2004, 81, 945 CrossRef CAS .
E. C. Koch, Propellants, Explos., Pyrotech., 2008, 33, 165–176 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sladkova, J. Houska and J. Havel, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2009, 23, 3114–3118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. L. Roth, T. W. DeWitt and A. J. Smith, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1947, 69, 2881–2885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. Barr, B. R. Adams, R. R. Weller and L. F. Dahl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1991, 113, 3052–3060 CrossRef CAS .
M. Haeser, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1994, 116, 6925–6926 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hartl, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1996, 34, 2637–2638 CrossRef .
J. Legros and C. Bolm, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 4225–4228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ruck, D. Hoppe, B. Wahl, P. Simon, Y. Wang and G. Seifert, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 7616–7619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Eckstein, A. Hohmann, R. Weihrich, T. Nilges and P. Schmidt, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 2013, 639, 2741–2743 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bachhuber, J. von Appen, R. Dronskowski, P. Schmidt, T. Nilges, A. Pfitzner and R. Weihrich, Z. Kristallogr., 2015, 230, 107–115 CAS .
A. Pfitzner, M. F. Bräu, J. Zweck, G. Brunklaus and H. Eckert, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 4228–4231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Thurn and H. Krebs, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Crystallogr. Cryst. Chem., 1969, 25, 125–135 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Zaug, A. K. Soper and S. M. Clark, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 890–899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Möller and W. Jeitschko, J. Solid State Chem., 1986, 65, 178–189 CrossRef .
A. Pfitzner and E. Freudenthaler, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1995, 34, 1647–1649 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pfitzner and S. Zimmerer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1997, 36, 982–984 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Sandra, N. Y. Maruthi, Z. Weinan, K. Joonseok, S. S. Sushant, P. N. Avinash and A. Deji, 2D Mater., 2016, 3, 014007 CrossRef .
S. A. Ansari, M. S. Ansari and M. H. Cho, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 3921–3928 RSC .
H. Dang, X. Dong, Y. Dong, H. Fan and Y. Qiu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 44823–44826 RSC .
Z. Hu, Z. Shen and J. C. Yu, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 564–572 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Lee, K. Takei, J. Zhang, R. Kapadia, M. Zheng, Y.-Z. Chen, J. Nah, T. S. Matthews, Y.-L. Chueh, J. W. Ager and A. Javey, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 10760–10764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. C. Wood, E. Schwegler, W. I. Choi and T. Ogitsu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15774–15783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Xiao, M. A. Sk, L. Thia, X. Ge, R. J. Lim, J.-Y. Wang, K. H. Lim and X. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2624–2629 CAS .
T. Arai, S. Sato, K. Uemura, T. Morikawa, T. Kajino and T. Motohiro, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6944–6946 RSC .
A. Heller and R. G. Vadimsky, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1981, 46, 1153–1156 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Beiler, D. Khusnutdinova, S. I. Jacob and G. F. Moore, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2016, 55, 5306–5314 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Wood, E. Schwegler, W. I. Choi and T. Ogitsu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15774–15783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Liu and J. A. Rodriguez, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 14871–14878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Callejas, J. M. McEnaney, C. G. Read, J. C. Crompton, A. J. Biacchi, E. J. Popczun, T. R. Gordon, N. S. Lewis and R. E. Schaak, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11101–11107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Shannon, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. A: Cryst. Phys., Diffr., Theor. Gen. Cryst., 1976, 32, 751–767 CrossRef .
K.-I. Liu, C.-Y. Su and T.-P. Perng, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 88367–88374 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:
Zhuofeng Hu	Zhuofeng Hu received his B.Sc. degree from Sun Yat-Sen University in 2008 and his PhD degree in Chemistry from The Chinese University of Hong Kong (CUHK) in 2014. He is now a postdoctoral fellow under the supervision of Professor Jimmy C. Yu in CUHK. His current research interest primarily focuses on elemental photocatalytic hydrogen production, nanostructure electrocatalysis, semiconductor based photoelectrochemical water splitting, 3D diagram design and Vasp theoretical calculation.
Zhurui Shen	Zhurui Shen received his B.S. degree and Ph.D. in Materials Chemistry from Nankai University in 2005 and 2010, respectively. He joined Tianjin University as a lecturer in 2010, and then he worked as a research associate from 2013 to 2015 at The Chinese University of Hong Kong, under the supervision of Prof. Jimmy C. Yu. In 2015, he was promoted as an Associate Professor in Tianjin University. His current research interests include novel photocatalysts and photoelectrodes, nanostructured gas sensors and functional coordination polymers.
Jimmy C. Yu	Jimmy Yu received a Ph.D. degree from the University of Idaho in 1985. He joined The Chinese University of Hong Kong in 1995, and was named the Choh-Ming Li Professor of Chemistry in 2015. Prof. Yu is a leading scientist in the field of photocatalysis. He has been selected as a 2016 Web of Science Highly Cited Researcher in both chemistry and materials science.

 	Fig. 1  The diagram of phosphorus containing materials for photocatalytic H2 evolution in this review.	 

 	Fig. 2  Summary of main phosphorus containing materials in this review. The black ones are photocatalysts/photocathodes. The black bar denoted the approximate light response region edge. The red ones are cocatalysts.	 

 	Fig. 3  Characteristic structural fragments of partial elemental P allotropes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 147. Copyright 1994 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  The molecular structure of (a) fibrous phosphorus and (b) Hittorf's phosphorus, derived from their single crystal data, using Mercury software.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a and b) SEM images, (c) a typical XRD pattern and (d) TEM image (SAED pattern) of crystalline red P.(e) UV-visible diffuse reflectance spectra of curve “a” amorphous and curve “b” crystalline red P. The inset figure shows rates of H2 formation over bar “a” amorphous and bar “b” crystalline red P, 300 W xenon lamp. (f) A typical time course for H2 production from aqueous methanol solution by 1 wt% Pt loaded crystalline red P under plot “a”, the visible light, and plot “b”, the full spectrum of 300 W xenon lamp irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 18. Copyright 2012, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  Time course of hydrogen evolution on (a) micro-fibrous P/SiO2 (fibrous P loading ca. 31 wt%) and (b) smashed-fibrous P. (c) Comparison of the activity of photocatalytic H2 evolution on different elemental photocatalysts. The light sources used or referred to here are all visible light, except the mesoporous crystalline Si (full spectrum). Reprinted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Theoretical calculation of the band structure of fibrous P. (b) Atomic structure of fibrous P simulated in the theoretical calculation. (c) Absorption spectrum of the micro-fibrous P/SiO2, smashed-fibrous P and SiO2 fibers. (d) Kubelka–Munk plots converted from the absorption spectrum of micro-fibrous P/SiO2 (up) and smashed-fibrous P (down). Reprinted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 8  Logarithmic change in the concentration (ln(C/C0)) of RhB by RP-0 h, RP-12, RP-24, RP-36, and RP-48 h as a function of the visible photo-irradiation time and the related parameters. Reprinted from ref. 160 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  H2 evolution of the titanium phosphates and TiO2 under the xenon lamp irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2015 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  The diagram, preparation method, microstructure and the photoelectrochemical performance of the Fe-Pi coated hematite photoanode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 162. Copyright 2016 American Chemical society.	 

 	Fig. 11  The diagram of the possible additional H2 evolution reaction (HER) mechanisms (a, b) on InP (001) and self-healing/charge compensation mechanisms (c, d) on hydroxylated InP (001). Reprinted with permission from ref. 164. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) TEM and (b) HRTEM images of Ni2P NPs. (c, d) Visible light-driven hydrogen production in aqueous solution (10 mL) containing 0.5 mL lactic acid (5% v/v), under visible light irradiation (λ ≥ 420 nm), including the TON and sample comparison. Reprinted from ref. 56 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  The XRD patterns, atomic structure and photocatalytic H2 evolution rate of WP2. Reprinted from ref. 75 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  Left: Total density of states (DOS) and right: projected density of states (PDOS) for 96-atom anatase and P-doped anatase. Reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) UV-Vis diffuse reflectance spectra of CN-B, CN-S, PCN-B, and PCN-S with the inset showing the optical images of sample powders with different colours. Total density of states (TDOS) and partial density of states (PDOS) of (b) the pure g-C3N4 and (c) the P-doped g-C3N4. The Fermi level is set to zero energy. (d) Quantum efficiency (QE) of PCN-S at 420 nm, 460 nm, 500 nm or 540 nm. (e) Electronic band structures of CN-B, CN-S, PCN-B, and PCN-S. Reprinted from ref. 105 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 


P 2p XPS spectra of P-doped photocatalysts


P 2p XPS spectra of P-doped TiO

2


Ti–O–P (P5+)	133.8 eV	H3PO4, sol–gel process, calcination at 600 °C	
115

Ti–O–P (P5+)	132.6 eV	H3PO2, sol–gel process, calcination at 400 °C	
95

Ti–O–P (P5+)	133.4 eV (400 °C calcination); 133.6 eV (900 °C calcination)	H3PO2, sol–gel process, calcination from 400 °C to 900 °C	
121

Ti–O–P (P5+)	133.72 eV (400 °C calcination); 133.96 eV (700 °C calcination)	H3PO4, sol–gel process, calcination from 400 °C to 700 °C	
85

Ti–O–P (P5+)	
ca. 133.2 eV	BPO4, solid-state reaction, annealing at 1050 °C	
120

P3− substitution of O2−	128 eV (for P3− in bulk), 134 eV (for PO43− on surface)	TiP (titanium phosphide), sol–gel process, calcination from 450 °C to 600 °C	
89 and 90

PO43− grafting on the surface (P5+)	134.2 eV	Soaked in the H3PO4 solution and calcination at 450 °C	
99

 

P 2p XPS spectra of P-doped g-C

3

N

4


P substituting carbon (C) atom (P–N bonding)	133.5 eV	BmimPF6, dicyandiamide, calcination at 550 °C	
118

P substituting carbon (C) atom (P–N bonding)	133.1 eV	2-Aminoethylphosphonic, acid (AEP) and melamine, calcination at 550 °C	
105

P substituting carbon (C) atom (P–N bonding)	133.5 eV	Melamine and H3PO4, hydrothermal treatment and then calcination at 550 °C	
86

P substituting nitrogen (N) atom (P–C bonding)	131.5 eV	Melamine and (hydroxyethylidene)diphosphonic acid, calcination at 500 °C after pre-assembly.	
123

Interstitial P doping	133.7 eV	Dicyandiamide and (NH4)2HPO4, calcination at 520 °C	
88

 

P 2p XPS spectra of other P-doped Graphene

P–O bonding, P–C bonding	132.9 eV (P–O bonding), 131.5 eV (P–C bonding)	Pyrolysis of phosphate-alginate at 900 °C under an Ar atmosphere, and sonication	
93


Amorphous red phosphorus microparticles (Hittorf red phosphorus nanorods on the surface)	0.6 μmol h−1 g−1	50 mg catalyst (1 wt% Pt as a cocatalyst), 100 mL aqueous solution containing 5 vol% methanol as a hole sacrificial agent. 300 W xenon lamp with an 400 nm cut-off filter and a water filter	
18

YPO4 nanosheets/amorphous red phosphorus composite	1.6 μmol h−1 g−1	50 mg catalyst (1 wt% Pt), 100 mL aqueous solution containing 5 vol% methanol as a hole sacrificial agent. 300 W xenon lamp with an appropriate cut-off filter and a water filter (a 400 nm cut-off filter)	
33

Micro-fibrous phosphorus/SiO2	633 μmol h−1 g−1	25 mg catalyst (1 wt% Pt), 50 mL of water (10 vol% methanol as the hole sacrificial agent). 300 W xenon lamp (a 420 nm cut-off filter)	
35

Smashed-fibrous phosphorus	684 μmol h−1 g−1	25 mg catalyst (1 wt% Pt), 50 mL of water (10 vol% methanol as the hole sacrificial agent). 300 W xenon lamp (a 420 nm cut-off filter)	
35

Red phosphorus/g-C3N4 heterojunction	1000 μmol h−1 g−1	10 mg catalyst (0.5 wt% Pt), 10 mL aqueous solution of L-ascorbic acid as a sacrificial agent (0.1 M, pH 4.0). 300 W xenon lamp (a 420 nm cut-off filter)	
34

Red phosphorus/CdS composite	923 μmol h−1 g−1	50 mg of catalysts (1 wt% Pt), 100 mL of 0.1 M Na2S and 0.1 M Na2SO3 as a sacrificial agent. 300 W xenon lamp (a 400 nm cut-off filter)	
32

Red phosphorus/Ni(OH)2 composite	33 μmol h−1 g−1	50 mg catalyst (1 wt% Pt); 5 vol% methanol aqueous solution (100 mL) as a sacrificial agent, 300 W xenon lamp (a 400 nm cut-off filter)	
161

3D flower-like nano/micro titanium phosphate	
ca. 250 μmol h−1 g−1	10 mg samples were dispersed in 100 ml of methanol solution (10 ml of methanol as a sacrificial agent, 90 ml of deionized water) under magnetic stirring. 300 W xenon lamp for direct irradiation	
40

Open-framework mixed valence titanium phosphate (Ti3+, V5+ doping)	47 μmol h−1 g−1	25 mg catalyst, 1 g catalyst per L solution, LED visible light irradiation	
49

BiPO4/RGO composite	306 μmol h−1 g−1	100 mg catalyst, 200 mL of 5 vol% ethanol as the sacrificial agents. A 125 W high-pressure Hg lamp, emission at about 365 nm, was used as a light source	
47

g-C3N4 nanosheets and dissociative phosphate as a synergistic system	947 μmol h−1 g−1	50 mg catalyst (3 wt% Pt), 270 mL aqueous TEOA solution (10%) as a sacrificial agent, 0.20 mol K2HPO4, 300 W Xe lamp (a 400 nm cut-off filter)	
45

Cobalt phosphide (Co2P) on CdS nanorods (Co2P is a cocatalyst)	19373 μmol h−1 g−1	CdS NRs (0.33 mg), Co2P NPs (0.15 mg), 15 mL aqueous solution of DL-mandelic acid (0.5 M), pH = 6.0 and with 1 M NaOH white LEDs (3 × 30 W, a 420 nm cut-off filter)	
55

FeP nanoparticle/TiO2 (FeP is a cocatalyst)	1200 μmol h−1 g−1 (acidic) and 1900 μmol h−1 g−1 (neutral-pH)	50 mg FeP/TiO2 (1.5 wt%), 50 mL of a 1:1 MeOH/H2O solution (pH-neutral solution) or 1 M HCl (acidic solution). UV illumination was provided by a 200 W Hg (Xe) lamp fitted with a water filter to cut off the infrared radiation	
169

CoP nanorods	3335 μmol h−1 g−1	20 mg catalyst, 20 mL of 5 vol% TEOA solution (pH = 1.0), 500 W Xe lamp (a 420 nm cut-off filter)	
76

Fluorescein-based dye decorated CoP nanorod hybrid	8035 μmol h−1 g−1	20 mg catalyst, 20 mL of 5 vol% TEOA solution (pH = 1.0), 500 W Xe lamp (a 420 nm cut-off filter)	
76

Nickel phosphide (Ni12P5)	10760 μmol h−1 g−1	5 mg catalyst, 20 mg fluorescein sodium as photosensitizer, 80 mL aqueous solution containing TEOA. 300 W Xe lamp (a 420 nm cut-off filter)	
71

WP2 particles	8 μmol h−1 g−1	70 mg catalyst (2 wt%), 50 mL solution containing 20 vol% triethanolamine (TEOA), 350 W high pressure mercury lamp	
75

P-Doped TiO2 nanoparticles (with Ti–O–P structure)	1838 μmol h−1 g−1 (UV), 209 μmol h−1 g−1 (simulated sunlight)	300 mg catalyst, 10 mL (5 vol%) glycerol, 125 W high pressure mercury lamp or 500 W xenon lamp (simulated sunlight)	
108

P-Doped TiO2 nanotube	1850 μmol h−1 g−1 (UV), 335 μmol h−1 g−1 (simulated sunlight)	300 mg catalyst, 10 mL (5 vol%) glycerol, 125 W high pressure mercury lamp or 500 W xenon lamp (simulated sunlight)	
112

P, N codoped TiO2	11.2 μmol h−1 g−1	50 mg catalyst, 100 ml of high purity water (18.2 MΩ cm) for direct water splitting. 300 W xenon lamp (a 420 nm cut-off filter)	
120

Phosphate grafting on TiO2	1196 μmol h−1 g−1	50 mg catalyst (0.5 wt% Pt), 80 mL aqueous solution containing TEOA (9.5 × 10−2 mol L−1) and a given concentration of EY (3.0 × 10−4 mol L−1). 400 W Hg lamp (a 420 nm cut-off filter)	
99

P-Doped C3N4 nanosheet	1596 μmol h−1 g−1	50 mg catalyst (1 wt% Pt), aqueous TEOA solution (20%) as a sacrificial agent, 300 W Xe lamp (a 400 nm cut-off filter).	
105

P-Doped g-C3N4 hexagonal microtubes	670 μmol h−1 g−1	100 mg catalyst (1 wt% Pt), 80 mL distilled water and 20 mL methanol, 300 W Xe lamp (a 420 nm cut-off filter)	
86

P-Doped graphene	282 μmol h−1 g−1	330 mg L−1 catalyst (2 wt% Pt), 30 mL aqueous solution of methanol (30% v/v), xenon lamp (235–850 nm) with a focused intensity on the flask of 1.3 W m−2	
93


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
