Ionic liquids and derived materials for lithium and sodium batteries  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CS00464H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CS00464H
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 2020-2064Ionic liquids and derived materials for lithium and sodium batteries

        
          
            Qiwei 
            Yang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhaoqiang 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiao-Guang 
            Sun
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yong-Sheng 
            Hu
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Huabin 
            Xing
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Sheng 
            Dai
          
          
        
      *bd
aKey Laboratory of Biomass Chemical Engineering of Ministry of Education, College of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China. E-mail: xinghb@zju.edu.cn
bChemical Sciences Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN 37831, USA
cKey Laboratory for Renewable Energy, Beijing Key Laboratory for New Energy Materials and Devices, Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, School of Physical Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
dDepartment of Chemistry, University of Tennessee, Knoxvile, TN 37966, USA. E-mail: dais@ornl.gov
Received 
      20th October 2017
    First published on 2nd February 2018AbstractThe ever-growing demand for advanced energy storage devices in portable electronics, electric vehicles and large scale power grids has triggered intensive research efforts over the past decade on lithium and sodium batteries. The key to improve their electrochemical performance and enhance the service safety lies in the development of advanced electrode, electrolyte, and auxiliary materials. Ionic liquids (ILs) are liquids consisting entirely of ions near room temperature, and are characterized by many unique properties such as ultralow volatility, high ionic conductivity, good thermal stability, low flammability, a wide electrochemical window, and tunable polarity and basicity/acidity. These properties create the possibilities of designing batteries with excellent safety, high energy/power density and long-term stability, and also provide better ways to synthesize known materials. IL-derived materials, such as poly(ionic liquids), ionogels and IL-tethered nanoparticles, retain most of the characteristics of ILs while being endowed with other favourable features, and thus they have received a great deal of attention as well. This review provides a comprehensive review of the various applications of ILs and derived materials in lithium and sodium batteries including Li/Na-ion, dual-ion, Li/Na–S and Li/Na–air (O2) batteries, with a particular emphasis on recent advances in the literature. Their unique characteristics enable them to serve as advanced resources, medium, or ingredient for almost all the components of batteries, including electrodes, liquid electrolytes, solid electrolytes, artificial solid–electrolyte interphases, and current collectors. Some thoughts on the emerging challenges and opportunities are also presented in this review for further development.
Qiwei Yang
Qiwei Yang received a BS in Biological Engineering and a PhD in Applied Chemistry from Zhejiang University in 2005 and 2010, respectively. After working as a postdoctoral fellow at Zhejiang University in 2010–2013, he became an Associate Professor in the College of Chemical and Biological Engineering at Zhejiang University in 2013. He has published more than 70 refereed papers and two book chapters, and he has received several awards such as the Te-Pang Hou Chemical Science and Technology Youth Award. His current research interests are the design and application of ionic liquids and ionic hybrid materials.
Zhaoqiang Zhang
Zhaoqiang Zhang is currently a PhD candidate in the College of Chemical and Biological Engineering at Zhejiang University. He completed his master's degree from the department of Chemical Engineering, Qufu Normal University, in 2015. His current research interests include development of hierarchical and one-dimensional nanomaterials and ultra-microporous hybrid materials with ionothermal/hydrothermal methods and their applications for energy storage and gas separation.
Xiao-Guang Sun
Xiao-Guang Sun is a senior research scientist in the Chemical Science Division of the Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL). He received his PhD degree from the Arizona State University in 2001 with Prof. C. Austen Angell. His main research interests are developing novel organic salts and organic and polymeric electrolytes for energy storage applications (Li-ion batteries, Mg-ion batteries, Al-ion batteries, etc.). He has won two R&D 100 awards, published more than 80 refereed papers and one book chapter. He also has 8 issued US patents and 11 pending US patent applications.
Yong-Sheng Hu
Yong-Sheng Hu is a professor at the Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His current research interests include advanced materials for long-life and low-cost rechargeable batteries and their energy storage mechanism, particularly focusing on sodium based rechargeable batteries. He was selected as a Thomson Reuters Highly Cited Researcher in the field of Materials Science in 2014–2017. He also received several awards and honors, such as The 14th China Youth Science and Technology Award, Tajima Prize, Fellow of The Institute of Physics (UK), Fellow of The Royal Society of Chemistry, etc.
Huabin Xing
Huabin Xing received a BS in Pharmaceutical Engineering (2000) and a MS in Chemical Engineering (2003) from Zhejiang University, and a PhD in Chemical Engineering (2007) from Tsinghua University. Then he joined the College of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Zhejiang University, in 2007 as a postdoctoral fellow. In 2014, he became a full professor at Zhejiang University. His research interests focus on the preparation of ionic liquids and ionic hybrid porous materials and their application in energy storage and separations. He has published over 100 journal articles, and was selected as NSFC Distinguished Young Scholars and ACS I&EC 2017 Class of Influential Researcher.
Sheng Dai
Sheng Dai is currently a corporate fellow and group leader at Chemical Sciences Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) and a Professor of Chemistry at the University of Tennessee, Knoxville (UTK). His research interests include ionic liquids, porous carbon and oxide materials, advanced materials, and their applications for energy storage and separation sciences as well as catalysis by nanomaterials. He has published over 600 peer-reviewed journal papers with a total citation over 27000, and he also holds over 26 US patents. His research has led to Battelle S&T Challenges Award, six R&D100 Awards, and a Battelle Distinguished Inventor Award.
1. Introduction
The growing concern for environment pollution and fossil energy depletion and the rapid revolution of portable electronics have created a soaring demand for more efficient electrical energy storage devices. One of the most important electrical energy storage devices that emerged in the last two decades is the rechargeable lithium-ion (Li-ion) batteries, because of their superiority to conventional batteries in terms of high operating voltage, high energy density, long service life, design flexibility, etc.1,2 According to a report published by Allied Market Research, the global Li-ion battery market size is expected to reach $46.21 billion by 2022, with a compound annual growth rate of 10.8% during the forecast period (2016–2022).3 Nevertheless, the theoretical potential of Li-ion batteries has not been fully realized yet, and the pursuit of more powerful Li-ion batteries is still ongoing in numerous academic labs and companies to improve the energy/power density of batteries and enable a wider applicability in industries such as automotive, oil exploration, and mining which require special environmental conditions (especially high temperature). At the same time, lithium–sulfur (Li–S), lithium–oxygen (Li–O2) and lithium–air (Li–air) batteries have also attracted tremendous attention in recent years as promising next-generation rechargeable batteries.4–6 Li–S batteries comprising a sulfur positive electrode and a Li–metal negative electrode have a theoretical energy density of 2567 W h kg−1, based on the reversible reaction of S + 2Li ↔ Li2S, which is approximately seven times larger than that of C/LiCoO2 Li-ion batteries.7,8 Moreover, sulfur is abundant, inexpensive and environmentally benign. Non-aqueous Li–O2 batteries, based on the reaction of 2Li + O2 ↔ Li2O2, have an even larger theoretical energy density of 3505 W h kg−1.7 Furthermore, sodium (Na)-ion batteries are considered more competitive than Li-ion batteries in the field of large scale storage due to the natural abundance and low toxicity of Na resources, and thus they have become a very active research field in recent years as well,9,10 and Na–air and Na–S batteries have also attracted increasing attention.11–13 In addition, dual-ion batteries containing Li+ or Na+ cations are also notable devices with attractive properties.14 These diverse lithium and sodium batteries will play a vital role in various energy-related fields, from wearable devices, sustainable vehicles, to large scale power grids and even military uses.
Despite the fascinating prospect of lithium and sodium batteries, many problems remain to be solved to achieve enhanced battery safety and improved electrochemical performance. For instance, carbonate-based electrolytes have been extensively used in Li-ion batteries and other Li/Na-based batteries; however, their volatility, flammability and potential leakage will induce serious safety risk and shortened service life, especially when used on a large scale or under high temperatures. Moreover, in Li–S batteries and Li/Na–air (O2) batteries, carbonate-based electrolytes will also be strongly afflicted by side reactions and dissolution of electroactive materials.5,15 The surface chemistry and nanostructure of the electrodes must be precisely tailored to attain an optimized electrochemical performance, but the conventional synthesis and processing of electrode materials are not qualified enough to meet the requirements. The interfacial properties among the different components of batteries have an important influence on the battery efficiency, but in many cases they are not satisfactory such as the notable resistance of the electrode/electrolyte interface in solid-state batteries.16 The solution to these challenges largely depends on the development of new materials to serve as novel resources, medium or ingredient for each component of Li/Na-based batteries.
Ionic liquids (ILs), consisting of organic cations and inorganic/organic anions, are molten salts having melting points lower than 100 °C. They are characterized by many unique properties such as ultralow volatility, good thermal stability, low flammability, tunable polarity and basicity/acidity, and ionic conductivity. These properties endow ILs with great prospect in various chemical processes, among which electrical energy storage is one of the most promising areas. The negligible volatility and low flammability of ILs can bring on greatly improved safety over molecular solvent electrolytes, and the wide electrochemical window and good thermal stability of ILs would further enhance their feasibility. The coexistence of electrostatic charges, aromatic groups and alkyl segments in the ion structures contributes to the good affinity of ILs to both inorganic and organic materials, which is advantageous for preparing composite battery materials, improving interfacial properties, and generating ordered nanostructures. Moreover, the designable functional groups, nonvolatility, thermal stability and fluidity of ILs can favour the synthesis of highly functional carbon materials, and their tunable polarity provides opportunities to prevent the adverse dissolution of active materials, water, etc. Furthermore, ILs can be utilized to produce various IL-derived materials such as poly(ionic liquids) (PILs), ionogels and IL-tethered nanoparticles. These materials retain most of the characteristics of ILs, while being endowed with new features such as less risk of leakage, higher flexibility, and enhanced structural/property diversity. Therefore, the interest in ILs and IL-derived materials in constructing energy storage devices including Li/Na-based batteries remains strong and has increased in recent years (Fig. 1a).
There have been several reviews published involving ILs and PILs in energy storage and conversion devices.17–25 Here we focus on a comprehensive review of the various applications of ILs and IL-derived materials in lithium and sodium batteries, including electrodes, liquid electrolytes, solid electrolytes, artificial electrode–electrolyte interfaces and current collectors (Fig. 1b and 2), and we highlight the recent research progress, especially in the last three years, in the innovation in lithium and sodium batteries by virtue of the unique characteristics of ILs and IL-derived materials as novel resources, medium, or ingredient. After that, conclusive remarks from technical and economic aspects are presented along with an outlook. Abbreviations of typical cations and anions of ILs appearing in this review are shown in Tables 1 and 2.
 Fig. 1  (a) Number of publications per year since 2000 on Scopus regarding the use of ILs and IL-derived materials in lithium and sodium batteries (up to Nov. 2017); (b) distribution of publications during 2012–2017 regarding the different applications of ILs and IL-derived materials in lithium and sodium batteries. 
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the structures of ILs, IL-derived materials, and the battery components for which they can be applied. 
Table 1 List of abbreviations, descriptions and molecular structures of typical cations in this review




Abbreviation
Description
Molecular structure
Abbreviation
Description
Molecular structure




[Emim]+
1-Ethyl-3-methylimidazolium



[Pmim]+
1-Propyl-3-methylimidazolium





[Bmim]+
1-Butyl-3-methylimidazolium



[DMBim]
1,2-Dimethyl-3-butylimidazolium





[Cnmim]+
1-Alkyl-3-methylimidazolium



[Amim]+
1-Allyl-3-methylimidazolium





[Daim]+
1,3-Diallylimidazolium



[Avim]+
1-Allyl-3-vinylimidazolium





[Veim]+
1-Vinyl-3-ethylimidazolium



[MCNim]+
1-Cyanomethyl-3-methylimidazolium





[BCNim]+
1,3-Dicyanomethyl-imidazolium



[PP13]+
1-Propyl-1-methylpiperidinium





[PP14]+
1-Butyl-1-methylpiperidinium



[Pyr12]+
1-Methyl-1-ethylpyrrolidinium





[Pyr13]+
1-Propyl-1-methylpyrrolidinium



[Pyr14]+
1-Butyl-1-methylpyrrolidinium





[Pyr12O1]+
1-Methoxy-ethyl-1-methylpyrrolidinium



[MMMPyr]+
Methyl-methylcarboxymethyl-pyrrolidinium





[N1111]+
Tetramethylammonium



[N2222]+
Tetraethylammonium





[N4441]+
Tributylmethylammonium



[DADMA]+
Diallyldimethylammonium





[DEME]+

N-N-Diethyl-N-methyl-N-(2-methoxyethyl)ammonium



[DEMM]+

N,N-Diethyl-N-(2-methacryloylethyl)-N-methylammonium





[P111i4]+
Trimethylisobutyl-phosphonium



[P1i444]+
Triisobutylmethylphosphonium





[P1444]+
Tributylmethylphosphonium



[P1224]+
Diethylmethylisobutyl-phosphonium





[P66610]+
Trihexdecylphosphonium



[P66614]+
Trihexyltetradecylphosphonium





[Li(G3)1]+
Li(triglyme)



[Li(G4)1]+
Li(tetraglyme)







Table 2 List of abbreviations, descriptions and molecular structures of typical anions in this review




Abbreviation
Description
Molecular structure
Abbreviation
Description
Molecular structure




[BF4]−
Tetrafluoroborate



[PF6]−
Hexafluorophosphate





[N(CN)2]−
Dicyanamide



[C(CN)3]−
Tricyanomethide





[CH3COO]−
Acetate



[MeSO3]−
Methanesulfonate





[TfO]−
Trifluoromethylsulfonate



[NfO]−
Nonafluorobutanesulfonate





[FSI]−
Bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide



[BETI]−
Bis(pentafluoroethane-sulfonyl)imide





[TFSI]−
Bis(trifluoromethyl-sulfonyl)imide



[NFSA]−
Bis(nonafluorobutane-sulfonyl)amide







2. Fabrication of electrode materials
The development of new electrode materials as well as new synthetic methods for known materials is of extreme importance to address the challenges of lithium and sodium batteries. IL-based fabrication of electrode materials has received a great deal of interest because of the outstanding ability of ILs to optimize the chemical composition, nanostructure and functions of diverse anode/cathode materials (carbonaceous, ceramic, metallic or composite) in easy and/or moderate ways. Therefore, this section presents the up-to-date progress in the fabrication of electrodes for lithium and sodium batteries using ILs and IL-derived materials as carbon precursors, reaction medium, structure-directing agents, soft templates, binders, and so on.
2.1 Carbon precursors of electrodes
Carbonaceous materials are important electrode materials for both rechargeable and non-rechargeable Li/Na-based batteries.26,27 The main method of synthesizing these materials is the carbonization of both synthetic and natural polymers.28 The low-vapor pressure of polymers restrains the volatile loss of carbon during high-temperature pyrolysis, which is crucial to achieve high carbon yields under mild pressure, but the breakdown of polymeric chains in carbonization usually makes the fabrication of high-quality carbon nanocomposites and uniform carbon coatings difficult.29 Similar to these polymers, ILs are also non-volatile carbon-rich materials and thus have the potential to be used as new precursors of carbonaceous materials. The fluidity and good thermal stability of ILs can facilitate the production of continuous uniform carbon films, and the tunable cation/anion structure of ILs allows for easier adjustment of the structural morphology of carbon products. Additionally, simultaneous doping of heteroatoms and tunable intrinsic porosity can be readily achieved by IL precursors owing to their structural features. Nevertheless, the non-volatility of ILs does not imply that their pyrolysis products are also non-volatile, and a complete mass loss has been observed for most common ILs at temperatures higher than 800 °C which is usually necessary for pyrolysis.30 The advantage of ILs as “designable solvents” provides a solution to this problem via incorporating a polymerizable group, dominantly the cyano group, in one or both of the ions and generating a class of “task-specific” ILs, because these groups are capable of undergoing cross-linking reactions at elevated temperatures to form non-volatile chars (Fig. 3). On the other hand, pyrolysis in confined pores or gaps allows ILs without crosslinkable groups to act as carbon precursors, although usually generating few-nitrogen carbons. Therefore, ILs have been extensively studied as new precursors of both carbon backbones and carbon coatings for various applications including Li/Na-based batteries.22
 Fig. 3  Typical scheme of the direct synthesis of carbons from cyano-containing ions in ILs, featured by a polymerization reaction to form an extended network. 

2.1.1 Carbon backbone. 
The research field of IL-based carbonization was pioneered by Dai et al. in 2009. They described this new strategy for fabricating porous carbons through facile one-step thermolysis of ILs consisting of the 1-cyanomethyl-3-methylimidazolium ([MCNim]+) or 1,3-dicyanomethylimidazolium ([BCNim]+) cation and ordinary anions,31 showing very high carbonization yields up to 53% at 800 °C. Utilizing cyano-functionalized anions, dicyanamide ([N(CN)2]−) or tricyanomethide ([C(CN)3]−), in combination with classical cations as precursors also realized a successful carbonization with yields of 11–25% at 800 °C.32 When the [N(CN)2]− anion is combined with a polymerizing cation [BCNmim]+ to form a dual-functionalized IL, the carbonization yield increased to 44.2% due to enhanced cross-linking upon pyrolysis.32 Although in their work the fabricated carbons were not evaluated as electrodes for batteries, the feasibility of this new strategy was already demonstrated.
It is exciting to note that the carbonization products of cyano-functionalized ILs are actually N-doped carbons due to the nitrogen-containing feature of most kinds of IL cations and the cross-linking of cyano groups, especially when the ILs incorporating cyano-functionalized anions are used as precursors. This is an outstanding merit of using ILs as a carbon source. N-Doped carbons have attracted a great deal of attention as promising electrode materials for energy storage devices,33,34 because the in situ doping of nitrogen into carbons can bring on significantly improved performance such as enhanced conductivity, Lewis basicity and oxidation stability.35,36 In Li–S batteries, which are viewed as one of the most promising ‘beyond Li-ion’ batteries, the N-doping on carbon surface can enhance the interaction with lithium sulfides to achieve longer cycling performance.37 Thanks to the unique characteristics of ILs, their carbonization gives rise to most of the reported highly N-doped carbons. For example, when 1-alkyl-3-methylimidazolium tricyanomethide ([Cnmim][C(CN)3]) ILs were carbonized at 800 °C under N2, a very high nitrogen content up to 15–20 wt% was achieved for the products.32 Carbonization of ILs comprising imidazolium- and benzimidazolium-substituted diacetylene cations also generated a nitrogen content of 16–20 wt% under 800 °C.38 Very interestingly, the IL-derived N-doped carbons are usually characterized by a graphite-like local structure with embedded pyridinic nitrogen and quaternary nitrogen. This structural feature contributes to very high conductivity and stability of the carbons. For example, the conductivity of N-doped carbons derived from [N(CN)2]− ILs even exceeded that of more perfectly condensed synthetic graphite usually produced above 2000 °C.39 Not only doping of nitrogen, but also doping or co-doping of other heteroatoms such as B and S can be readily achieved into the carbon matrix by IL precursors, depending on the specific ionic structures containing those elements.40–43 It is also remarkable that there is a self-templating effect during carbonization of ILs and thus a porous structure could be readily achieved for products with the absence of an additional template or porogen. It can be viewed as a result of the structural characteristic of ILs in that they are composed by two discrete ions rather than a single component. When the cyano-containing cations/anions undergo cross-linking to form a carbonaceous backbone, the discrete non-crosslinkable counterions serve as templates to generate pores. A bulky size of the counterion is necessary for good porosity, and high BET surface areas up to 780.6 m2 g−1 can be achieved by using IL precursors with cation-tethering cyano groups.32 In addition to the ability to form micropores, ILs also have the ability to tailor the pore sizes and generate mesopores through tuning the ion structure or adding a catalyst.44,45
The interest in ILs as carbon precursors was intensified by their fluidity at room temperature and the strong ability to interact with inorganic/organic surfaces, which allows for the facile synthesis of porous N-doped carbons by nanocasting approaches. When mixed with hard templates such as SBA-15,46 ILs can penetrate and fill the pores very well, leading to a good replication of the porous structure of the template in the N-doped carbon. Compared with the template-free carbonization, this method is easy to generate materials with high surface area and ordered pores without the need of bulky ions for ILs. Furthermore, even common ILs without cross-linkable cyano groups can be used as carbon precursors with this method, because the confining effect of pores depresses the volatilization of pyrolysis products of those ILs. This is helpful for using cheaper ILs and taking the full advantages of IL's diversity to modulate the products. For example, Song et al. synthesized carbon nanobubbles co-doped with nitrogen and oxygen by using 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium bromide ([Bmim][Br]) as the carbon precursor and SiO2 nanospheres as templates.47 The nanobubbles were characterized by multiscale nanopores and locally graphitized few-layer graphitic zones in nanometer-thick shells, which can facilitate the ionic and electronic transport process. When examined as anodes for Li-ion and Na-ion batteries, good storage capability and rate performance were achieved along with enhanced long-term cyclability. Such a confinement effect can also be realized by a nonhydrolytic sol–gel process, relying on the excellent miscibility of ILs with both hydrophilic formic acid and hydrophobic tetraethyl orthosilicate.48 This nanocasting method further enabled the fabrication of nitrogen-enriched hierarchical carbon/sulfur composite cathodes with microstructure for Li–S batteries. Schneider et al. prepared porous nitrogen-enriched carbon monoliths using [Bmim][N(CN)2] as the carbon precursor and porous silica monolith as the template,49 and then infiltrated molten sulfur into the pores of that N-enriched carbon to reach a sulfur accommodation up to ∼80% by weight (Fig. 4). Reitz et al. not only prepared a sulfur/N-doped carbon composite by the melt-infiltration method for Li–S batteries, using [Bmim][C(CN)3] as precursor, but also prepared TiO2/N-doped carbon for Li-ion batteries by coating the pore surface of IL-derived hierarchical carbon with anatase TiO2 through atomic layer deposition.50 Additionally, porosity can also be incorporated into IL-derived carbons by using particulate porogen templates. The calcination of a task-specific IL, bis-1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrachloride cobaltate(II) ([Bmim]2[CoCl4]), produced mesoporous N-doped carbon-supported Co nanoparticles (BET surface area: 139.15 m2 g−1) when a silica template was used.51 After exposure to air, mesoporous N-doped carbon-supported CoO@Co nanoparticles were obtained. When these CoO@Co nanoparticles were added as catalyst to the cathode of a Li–O2 cell, the charge potential decreased to 3.75 V at a current density of 100 mA g−1 and the rate capability was also enhanced.
 Fig. 4  Preparation of nitrogen-enriched carbon/sulfur composite monoliths from hierarchically porous silica as the template, ILs as the carbon precursor, and molten sulfur. Reproduced from ref. 49 with permission from Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
A major concern in the fabrication of IL-derived carbons is the complicate synthesis and high cost of cyano-functionalized ILs and even common aprotic ILs compared to traditional precursors, and thus the development of more easy-to-synthesize and cheaper IL-type carbon precursors is of great importance. Deep eutectic solvents (DESs)-type ILs are one class of examined alternatives, which are usually a liquid mixture of a solid ionic hydrogen-bond acceptor, choline chloride, and a molecular hydrogen-bond donor such as urea and phenols.45,52 Compared to the normal ILs, DESs are very easy to synthesize with high purity from cheap raw materials, along with better biocompatibility and environmental influence. However, probably due to the weak stability of DESs at high temperature, the carbonization of solely DES hardly generated carbon residues, in spite of the successful production of porous carbons with the addition of aldehydes to initiate polycondensation reactions.53–57 Another attractive solution is expected to be the utilization of N-containing protic ILs/salts developed recently mainly by Watanabe's group.58–61 These compounds are easily synthesized by neutralization of relatively low-cost precursors, and can be directly carbonized to generate N-doped carbons. For example, diphenylammonium bisulfate gave rise to a carbon yield of 46.0 wt% and a nitrogen content of 4.5 wt% at 1000 °C, and 3-cyanopyridinium bisulfate was converted to 11.91 wt% N-containing carbons.59 Poly(ionic liquids) were also developed as alternative carbon precursors, by virtue of their higher carbon yield or easier formation of pores than IL monomers and broad diversity of the product morphology.62–64 Nevertheless, the performance of carbons derived from these alternative precursors has not been checked in batteries.


2.1.2 Carbon coating. 
A promising solution to the synthesis and cost problem of ILs is using IL-derived carbons as the coating of support materials rather than backbones. In fact, the carbon coating-support composites can usually bring on many advantages over the coating-free pristine support as electrodes, such as elevated conductivity, enhanced diffusion and improved structure stability, while maintaining the merits of support materials over pure carbons.65,66 Compared to traditional coating precursors, ILs have better fluidity and penetrability, and will not evaporate during the thermolysis. Moreover, doping of heteroatoms into the coatings can be intrinsically achieved to improve the performance of electrode materials. For example, Zhao et al. fabricated a uniform N-doped carbon coating on Li4Ti5O12 particles by treating the mixture of porous Li4Ti5O12 and crosslinkable [Emim][N(CN)2] at moderate temperature.67 The resulted material exhibited improved rate capability and cycling performance over pristine Li4Ti5O12, and also showed much higher capacities and lower polarization than a sample of nitrogen-free carbon-coated porous Li4Ti5O12 using sugar as the coating precursor. The electric conductivity and the surface stability of Li4Ti5O12 were significantly improved by the N-doped coating, and the formation of a Ti–N–C-like interphase between Li4Ti5O12 and the coating layer might also contribute to the improved performance. They further extended this method to coat a uniform and dense layer on Li2S nano-clusters (Fig. 5),68 and the resulted cathode displayed both high active material utilization (826 mA h g−1 at 0.1C) and long cycling stability (82% capacity retention after 500 cycles at 1C) with almost 100% Coulombic efficiency. Many factors contribute to this performance including a short Li ion diffusion distance, a low charge transfer resistance, and the encapsulation effect on lithium polysulfide by the carbon cage. In that work, the oxygen-free nature was also a remarkable advantage of [Emim][N(CN)2] as precursor because it prevented the adverse side reaction between Li2S and H2O during pyrolysis. Similar success was recently reported for synthesizing carbon-antimony hybrids as anode materials for Na-ion batteries, conducted by ball-milling the Sb/1-cyano-3-methylimidazolium chloride ([MCNim][Cl]) mixture and subsequent pyrolysis treatment.69 Sb–N–C bonds were formed, and the carbon matrix buffered the substantial volume expansion of Sb nanoparticles and ensured a fast electron transport. Other inorganic electrode materials coated by an IL-derived N-doped carbon layer for Li/Na-based batteries include LiFePO4, Li3V2(PO4)3, TiO2, silica, etc.70–73
 Fig. 5  Preparation of carbon cage encapsulated Li2S nano-clusters. Reproduced from ref. 68 with permission from Copyright 2015 Elsevier. 
IL-derived carbon coating on carbon support is also attractive because it is able to readily endow the highly conductive support with more desired properties such as improved surface chemistry. Moreover, when graphene was used as the support, because of the presence of interlayer space and the strong interaction of the graphitic surface with ILs, non-crosslinkable ILs can be used as the precursor of carbon coating due to the confining and directing effect of the graphitic surface. This has been demonstrated by a recent work on coating a N,B-co-doped carbon layer on graphene to enhance the chemisorption of lithium polysulfides in Li–S batteries.40 The graphitic layers entrapped the non-crosslinkable IL 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate ([Emim][BF4]) which acted as the source of both surface carbon and N/B heteroatoms. The N/B co-doped surface strongly bound to lithium polysulfides and lithium sulfides, and particularly the unique N = B/N–B structure in the surface exhibited much stronger binding than the pyrrolic/pyridinic N atoms and non-doped graphene. The C/S composite cathode prepared by this method realized a synergy of high conductivity of the graphene support, strong affinity of the carbon layer for the discharge products and rich wrinkles of the carbon layer to tolerate the large volume change of sulfur, and consequently displayed a good cycling performance over 1500 cycles and a high rate performance.
In addition to the above continuous carbon coatings on support materials, discrete but ordered N-doped carbon coating was also successfully fabricated with the use of ILs.74 After mixing [Emim][N(CN)2] with a salt mixture (ZnCl2 and KCl with a mass ratio of 1:6, acting as a template) and dropping onto a nickel foam support, a thermal treatment at 900 °C and subsequent removal of salt realized the fabrication of vertically aligned two-dimensional (2D) N-doped graphitic carbon nanosheets (CNS) (Fig. 6). If additional precursor metal salts (e.g. MoCl6) were added into the IL–salt mixture, the product was metal carbide@CNS hybrids. If replacing [Emim][N(CN)2] by a neutral carbon source, only 2D carbon nanosheets or porous carbon was obtained without vertically aligned structures. This fabrication method is simpler than the conventional chemical vapor deposition or multi-step methods, and the products exhibited remarkable Li ion storage performance when used as anode materials for Li-ion batteries.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the salt-templating process for the formation of vertically aligned two-dimensional nanosheets; (b and c) typical field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) images of nitrogen-doped graphitic carbon nanosheets (CNS) prepared at 900 °C for 3 h; (d and e) FESEM images of MoC0.654@CNS; (f and g) FESEM images of MoC0.654@CNS2. Reproduced from ref. 74 with permission from Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 

2.2 IL-assisted synthesis of inorganic materials and inorganic/organic composites
Inorganic materials constitute a major part of electrode materials in batteries. The structural control of inorganic electrode materials is of essential importance to improve the electronic and ionic transport, enhance the energy density, and elevate the stability. The classical methods of synthesizing these materials are solid-state reactions or hydrothermal/solvothermal methods, which often suffer from problems such as high-temperature or high-pressure conditions, unsatisfactory solubility/dispersion of reactants in the medium, and limited ability of tuning the geometry and nanostructure of products. Benefiting from their ultralow volatility, strong polarizability, self-assembly ability and “two component” (i.e. cation and anion) feature, ILs are able to overcome these problems when used as medium in ionothermal synthesis. Milder reaction conditions can be obtained, and more importantly, ILs can simultaneously play multiple roles besides as solvents such as structure-directing agents and reactants. Furthermore, their good affinity with both inorganic materials and carbon surfaces greatly favors the production of inorganic/organic composite electrode materials which have received significant attention in recent years.

2.2.1 Inorganic materials. 
A good example to showcase the advantages of IL-assisted synthesis of inorganic materials is the synthesis of nanostructured FeF3, which is mainly prepared by high-energy mechanical ball-milling and aqueous chemical methods.75 Li et al. reported a facile synthesis of a nanostructured carbon-free FeF3·0.33H2O cathode from nitrate nonahydrate (Fe(NO3)3·9H2O) using ILs,76 in which case the IL 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate ([Bmim][BF4]) performed simultaneously as a solvent, a soft template, and a safe fluoride source to avoid the use of hazardous HF. Compared to the traditional approaches, this IL-assisted process includes many advantages such as low reaction temperature (∼50 °C), feasibility of microstructure control by vacuum treatment, improved environmental and operational safety, and better controllability. Moreover, the particle growth and agglomeration can be restricted due to the great ability of ILs to disperse inorganic compounds. The synthesized FeF3·0.33H2O featured a one-dimensional (1D) tunnel structure and self-assembled mesoporous morphology with a high specific surface area.77 When used as a cathode for lithium cells at room temperature, it exhibited both a large reversible Li-storage capacity and a high reactive voltage. Besides this dissolution–precipitation method, ILs were also used as novel media for the top-down synthesis of FeF3·0.33H2O as Li- and Na-storage cathode material.78,79 With the use of [Bmim][BF4], a nearly 100% yield of FeF3·0.33H2O with an open framework structure was achieved from the solid–solid transformation of the precursor FeF3·3H2O above 200 °C. The key role of [Bmim][BF4] is to alleviate the release of hydration water from FeF3·3H2O through infiltrating and capping the channel surface, so that the original Fe-based octahedral chains in FeF3·3H2O can be well preserved and self-organized into hexagonal rings of hexagonal tungsten bronze-phase in FeF3·0.33H2O. If replacing the hydrophilic [Bmim][BF4] by a hydrophobic IL, 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide ([Bmim][TFSI]), less complete solid–solid transformation was obtained even though at a higher reaction temperature. Besides FeF3, pure phase tetragonal MnF2 with a uniformly distributed nanocrystalline phase of 100–300 nm was also synthesized by the [Bmim][BF4]-assisted solvothermal method, as the anode for Li-ion batteries.80 Additionally, Na-based fluorophosphates (Na2MPO4F, M = Fe, Mn, or mixtures) were successfully synthesized in 1,2-dimethyl-3-butylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide ([DMBim][TFSI]) at 270 °C, while temperatures as high as 600 °C were needed to obtain similar quality phases by solid-state reactions. When evaluated as cathode materials, the as-prepared Na2FePO4F powders showed better electrochemical performances vs. either Li or Na than their ceramic counterparts. Good chemical stability of ILs is important, as demonstrated by the failure synthesis using 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide ([Emim][TFSI]) due to the elimination of the acidic C2 proton by the basic species present in solution.81
Tailoring the structure of ILs can produce surfactant-like ILs featuring a long alkyl chain in the cation, which can strongly form self-assembled micelles in aqueous solution.82 But different from normal ionic surfactants, these ILs can also be directly used as non-aqueous reaction medium featuring significant nano-segregated microstructures. These features enhance the structure-directing ability of ILs in both hydrothermal and non-aqueous syntheses of electrode materials. For example, in the synthesis of LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 particles as cathode material for Li-ion batteries in the aqueous solution of 1-dodecyl-3-methylimidazolium bromide ([C12mim][Br]),83 the critical step is the orientation of metallic ions from precursors on the surface of [C12mim][Br] micelles. If pure [C12mim][Br] was used without water, more uniform polygon particles with no agglomeration were generated. This probably resulted from the nano-segregation of bulky neutral nanodomains (aggregation of long alkyl chains) and charged nanodomains (anions and imidazolium rings) in [C12mim][Br],84,85 because the latter was likely the reaction region in synthesis. In another work, the ionothermal fluorination of FeCl3·6H2O in surfactant-like 1-decyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate ([C10mim][BF4]) resulted in dehydrated FeF3 with a hexagonal tungsten bronze (HTB) structure, whereas the controlled experiment in [Bmim][BF4] led to a hydrated FeF3 of HTB phase. This difference was attributed to the strong nano-segregation behavior of [C10mim][BF4] which made [C10mim]+ unable to promptly cap the surface of FeF3 due to steric hindrance and then benefited the removal of tunnel water molecules.86 Considering the relatively high cost of long alkyl-substituted cations, examinations of surfactant-like ILs featuring long alkyl-substituted anions, such as long chain fatty acid anions, are considered necessary due to their low cost and different physicochemical properties.87,88 Interestingly, when used as additives in hydrothermal synthesis, even ILs bearing a short alkyl chain can also form micelles and benefit the control of a specific product structure. In a microwave-assisted synthesis of self-assembled hierarchical TiO2–B nanosheets using water–ethylene glycerol as the main solvent, the additive [Bmim][BF4] served as a soft template to form flower-like TiO2–B spheres which have well-defined mesoporosity with a narrow pore size distribution (5–13 nm) and a moderate BET surface area (133.6 m2 g−1).89 The [Bmim]+ ions tended to form micelles in the water–ethylene glycerol solution, which then guided the nucleation of TiO2 around the micelles, and the F− ions generated from the hydrolysis of [BF4]− may also play a shape-directing role. Otherwise, the absence of [Bmim][BF4] in the synthesis only resulted in irregular particles.
The strong ability of ILs to modulate the structure of electrode materials is well demonstrated again in the preparation of metal oxide mesocrystals. For instance, hexagonal tungsten trioxide (h-WO3) mesocrystals with biconical morphology were synthesized by an IL-assisted hydrothermal method and examined as the anode materials for Li-ion batteries.90 The presence of 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium acetate ([Bmim][CH3COO]) was found to be crucial to stabilize the (100) planes of h-WO3 during mesocrystal growth. This was ascribed to the multiple characteristics of [Bmim][CH3COO] in synthesis, including good solubility, low surface tension, preferential adsorption of [Bmim]+ ions on the O2− terminated (100) planes of h-WO3 particles, and hydrogen-bonding interactions between the imidazolium C2 hydrogen and the bridged oxygen atoms of (100) planes along the [001] direction (Fig. 7). The authors extended their study to the synthesis of three-dimensional (3D) hierarchical CuO mesocrystals with the help of 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride ([Bmim][Cl]) and n-butylamine, which were built from anisotropic nanosheets and nanorods and have a (001) plane-exposed 3D hierarchical superstructure (Fig. 8).91 The inherent porosity and a well-defined nanoparticle orientation of these mesocrystals resulted in a higher electrochemical performance than CuO nanosheets and nanorods when used as anodes for Li-ion batteries.
 Fig. 7  Structure of hexagonal WO3 viewed along the [100] direction (top left), scheme for [Bmim]+ ions perpendicular to the (100) planes of hexagonal WO3 to self-assemble into ordered structures along the [001] direction (top right), and shape evolution of various morphologies and crystal forms at different concentrations of [Bmim][CH3COO] (bottom). Reproduced from ref. 90 with permission from Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 8  Structure illustration of monoclinic CuO viewed along the [100] direction (4 × 4 × 4 cells) (top left), scheme for [Bmim]+ ions perpendicular to the (100) planes of CuO and self-assembly into ordered structures along the [010] direction (top right), and schematic illustration of shape evolution of 3D hierarchical CuO mesocrystals (down). Reproduced from ref. 91 with permission from Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry. 


2.2.2 Inorganic/organic composite materials. 
ILs not only have affinity for the surface of inorganic materials, but also have a good ability to interact with single-wall carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) and multi-wall carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) via their cations.92,93 This feature affords novel methods of SWCNT/MWCNT wiring/wrapping to fabricate nanostructured composite cathodes, which can effectively improve the performance of Li-ion batteries. The first example of this method is given by Li et al. for the synthesis of SWCNT-wired FeF2.5·0.5H2O and SWCNT-wired FeF3·0.33H2O composite materials with the use of [Bmim][BF4],94 which played multiple roles including solvent, reagent, dispersant and binder. SWCNTs were well disentangled and dispersed in [Bmim][BF4] via the interaction between the [Bmim]+ cation and the π-electrons of the SWCNT surface, leading to surface-capping of [Bmim]+ onto SWCNT, while the paired [BF4]− anions reacted with the surrounding Fe3+ ions to form iron-based fluoride nanoparticles. This contributed to the in situ formation of two kinds of self-assembly structure for the synthesized composites. Well-defined mixed conductive networks were constructed in the composites, which significantly improved the capacity and rate performances of the cathode. Compared to the traditional pyrolysis-induced carbon-coating process, this IL-assisted wiring process can be conducted under very mild conditions. Moreover, only as low as 5 wt% SWCNT was required by this process, much lower than the amount of conductive carbon additive required by traditional ball-milling wiring (>15 wt%). The advantages of using ILs in preparing FeF3–SWCNT composite cathodes also included a notably temperature-dependent viscosity of ILs that allowed for successful exclusion of channel water to obtain amorphized FeF3 from its open parent phase,95 owing to the slow mobility of water in highly viscous IL medium at low temperature (e.g. 0 °C). The infiltrated IL binder was also expected to dissolve the Li-salt and facilitate Li-ion transport. The alkyl-chain length of the imidazolium cation exhibited remarkable influence on the morphology and performance of the SWCNT-wired fluoride composite.96 When using [Bmim][BF4] as reaction media to synthesize wired FeF3·0.5H2O, defect-rich nanoparticles (∼10 nm) encapsulated by few-layer nanographene were obtained, whereas octahedron-shaped defect-deficient grains (200–300 nm) were generated from 1-octyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate ([C8mim][BF4]) and exhibited a very high capacity of >220 mA h g−1 for both Li-ion and Na-ion batteries. The synthesis of MWCNT-wrapped materials was also exemplified by FeF2.5·0.5H2O. With the use of [Bmim][BF4] as an environmentally friendly fluorine source, appropriate solvent and binder, spherical FeF2.5·0.5H2O–MWCNT nanocomposites were synthesized as a high performance cathode material for Li-ion batteries.97 Not surprisingly, the strong interaction between imidazolium cations and graphite surface also makes this method successful when carbon nanotubes were replaced by reduced graphene oxide (rGO). The obtained Fe2F5·H2O/rGO composite was evaluated as the cathode material for Na-ion batteries, showing an initial discharge capacity of 248.7 mA h g−1.98 This strategy remains useful even using biomolecules as the organic support. When immersing a lyophilized 3D porous hydrogel matrix constructed from recombinant elastin-like polypeptides containing metal binding motifs (ELK16-FLAG) into the mixture of MnCl2·4H2O and [Bmim][BF4], a subsequent annealing procedure resulted in the formation of N/F co-doped 3D porous carbon supported MnF2 nanocrystals. This product was examined as the anode material for Li-ion batteries, showing good cycling stability at 10C for up to 2000 cycles with a nearly 100% coulombic efficiency.99
The above concept can be extended to the fabrication of metallic compounds of group VIA elements (O, S, Se). In a microwave-assisted synthesis of carbon nanotube–TiO2–B composite material,100 [Bmim][BF4] interacted with carbon nanotubes via cation–π interactions and directed the in situ growth of TiO2–B nanosheet arrays onto carbon nanotubes via the attraction of OH− anions by [Bmim]+ cations. The [BF4]− anions were supposed to adjust the production yield of TiO2via the hydrolyzation reaction with water. The resulted composite material was characterized by a large specific surface area, existence of mesopores and abundant electron/Li+ pathways, and it exhibited a high reversible capacity and good rate capability when used as an anode material for Li-ion batteries. Similarly, Cheng et al. used 1-allyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride ([Amim][Cl]) as reaction medium for the one-pot synthesis of TiO2 nanocrystals on carbon nanotubes or graphene oxide without additives.101 Besides the above mentioned advantages, the IL can also directly convert GO into reduced GO without extra reducing agent. In addition to these studies involving TiO2, more examples can be found in the synthesis of the MoS2/N-doped graphene–IL composite and the ultrathin few-layered MoSe2/graphene hybrid as anodes for Li-ion batteries through the IL-assisted hydrothermal approach.102,103
Protic ILs and DESs have the potential as easy-to-synthesize and cheaper alternatives of aprotic ILs. Zhang et al. reported the use of a protic IL, pyrrolidinium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide, as a soft template and carbon source for the one-pot synthesis of carbon-coated Li3V2(PO4)3 (LVP) nanoparticles embedded in a micrometer-sized carbon matrix (LVP/PIL),104 realizing a double conductive carbon network. LVP/PIL-based electrodes exhibited ultrafast and stable Li+ ion storage performance due to the fast Li+ diffusivity, high electronic conductivity and favorable nano-architecture of the material. High specific capacities of 100 mA h g−1 at 100C in the potential range of 3.0–4.3 V and 120 mA h g−1 at 50C in 3.0–4.8 V were obtained. Furthermore, excellent cycling stability during 10000 cycles at 50C (3.0–4.8 V) could be demonstrated. The feasibility of choline chloride/urea DES in the ionothermal synthesis of metallic electrode materials has been reported as well.105

2.3 IL-mediated electrodeposition
Template-assisted electrodeposition of metals and alloys with a well-defined shape and nanostructure has attracted a great deal of attention in recent years,106–110 providing new technologies for the fabrication of metallic Li-ion battery electrode materials. ILs are promising solvents for template-assisted electrodeposition because of their unique physicochemical properties. Compared to traditional aqueous or organic plating solution, ILs are characterized by a wide electrochemical window, ultra-low vapor pressure and good thermal-stability, which allows the deposition of many reactive elements and deposition at temperature above 100 °C. ILs have better wetting ability for organic templates than water, and electrodeposition processes which are impossible in water due to the water-sensitivity of metals or the electrolysis of water become feasible by the use of ILs. Besides, the chemical stability of templates may be improved in ILs.111,112 Typically, successful electrochemical synthesis of aluminium nanowire architectures, which are of interest to be applied as anodes for Li-ion batteries, was reported by Abedin et al. through a template-assisted electrodeposition technique in IL,113 overcoming the limits of aqueous electroplating solution for aluminium electrodeposition due to the instability of aluminium in water. The employed IL is a Lewis acidic IL consisting of 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride ([Emim][Cl]) and AlCl3 (40/60 mol%), and nuclear track etched polycarbonate membranes were employed as templates. Different nanowire architectures including free-standing nanowires, bunched nanowire films and vertically aligned tree-shaped arrays could be obtained by controlling the deposition parameters. Instead of the Al-containing anions (for example [Al2Cl7]−) formed by interaction between Cl− and AlCl3, Al-containing cations can also be incorporated into the IL structure as electroactive species for the deposition of Al, as presented by Dai's group.114 The complexation of a “neutral” ligand, 4-propylpyridine, with AlCl3 induced the asymmetric cleavage of AlCl3 and generated the Al-containing cation [AlCl2(4-Pr-Py)2]+ and the AlCl4− anion, and the prepared ILs were less moisture-sensitive than the ILs based on Al-containing anions. The IL-mediated electrodeposition was also reported for the fabrication of well-ordered two- or three-dimensional macroporous zinc films in 1-butyl-1-methylpyrrolidinium trifluoromethylsulfonate ([Pyr14][TfO]) with polystyrene spheres as templates.115 The wettability of the [Pyr14][TfO] electrolyte on polystyrene was found to be much better than that of aqueous solution, facilitating the infiltration into the voids of the polystyrene spheres. Consequently, the IL-based electrodeposition was much faster than the process in aqueous solution, and may be more favorable for the homogeneous growth of the deposits. Liu et al. fabricated 3D ordered macroporous germanium by electrodeposition from [Emim][TFSI] with polystyrene spheres as templates.116 This method avoided the undesired reaction between Ge and the SiO2 template above 300 °C in the chemical vapor deposition method.117 When evaluated as an anode material in lithium half-cells, the resulting macroporous germanium exhibited much better cyclability and rate performance than the nanoparticle Ge film.
Template-free electrodeposition was also obtained successfully in ILs to address the problems of template-assisted electrodeposition such as possible nanostructure damage during template removal and the more complex nature of the process. A recent example is the preparation of Ge nanowires in [Emim][TFSI] without using any templates and catalyst nanoparticles.109 Ge nanoparticles were directly electrodeposited from 1.5 M AlCl3 + 0.1 M GeCl4/[Emim][TFSI] solution onto Ni current collectors at room temperature, and then were annealed at 500 °C under an Ar atmosphere to form Ge nanowires according to the Lifshitz–Slyozov–Wagner theory. The obtained Ge nanowires can directly be incorporated into a Li-ion half-cell as the electrode for electrochemical testing. Furthermore, a tributylmethylammonium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide ([N4441][TFSI])-assisted electrodeposition strategy has succeeded in the preparation of discrete ultrafine Si nanoparticles on the surface of nanoscale arrays for the fabrication of Si/C-modified Co3O4 nanowire arrays.110
Considering the concerns of the high cost and purity issues of ILs, DES-type ILs have also been examined as electrolytes in electrodeposition for several kinds of metals and alloys, some of which are of interest as anode candidates for Li-ion batteries. For instance, porous tin-based films with a SnO2/Sn–Cu alloy double layer structure were electrodeposited on copper foils by using a choline chloride/ethylene glycol-based electrolyte,118 which showed a reversible capacity of 300–350 mA h g−1 over 50 cycles when evaluated as an anode for Li-ion batteries. Although DESs have several limitations such as the much less structural diversity but generally higher melting-points and viscosity than normal ILs and the possible decomposition into individual components in the presence of water or even other polar solvents,119 they may be feasible in some specific processes.
2.4 Component of electrodes
A polymer binder is an essential integral of common electrodes in batteries with a content of 5–10 wt% to effectively “glue” powderous electrochemically active components and conductive additives. Poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF) has been widely used as the binder for electrodes, especially cathode, of Li-ion batteries, but its insulating character and susceptibility to electrolyte swelling will induce a deteriorated adhesion to electrode materials after long-term operation and increased contact resistance between the active and the conductive materials. As a new class of polymers, the emerging poly(ionic liquids) (PILs) open new opportunities for next-generation binders because of their characteristics such as ionic conductivity and good interaction with organic/inorganic surfaces. Although this concept was claimed by Yuan et al. in 2011 and the binding effect of PILs toward materials has been revealed for years,120,121 only little work has been done in using PILs as electrode binders in batteries. An earlier example was presented by Zamory et al.,122 where crosslinked PIL nanoparticles were synthesized as binder for Li-ion battery electrodes. The PIL was synthesized by aqueous dispersion polymerization of the 1-vinyl-3-ethylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide ([Veim][TFSI]) monomer with the use of an imidazolium-based IL crosslinker, and the processed electrodes include graphite electrodes, carbon coated LiFePO4 and Li4Ti5O12. Unfortunately, these PIL nanoparticle binders were found to be not very stable and decomposition occurred under operation. After that, this field is mainly improved by Yuan's group, who has developed different kinds of PILs to process Li-ion battery electrodes as the binder.123–125 They first prepared a series of polyvinylimidazolium-based nanoparticles via precipitation polymerization and examined as binders in the LiFePO4 cathode of Li-ion batteries,123 and obtained higher specific capacity than the commercial PVDF binder as well as long-term electrochemical durability for 1000 charge–discharge cycles. The presence of methyl moieties in the phenyl ring of the cation has an adverse effect on the stability, because they are prone to undergo electrochemical oxidation at voltages around 1.5 V. The suppression of α-H elimination of the imidazolium ring benefits the stability, as shown by the higher stability of poly([1-(4-vinylbenzyl)-2,3-dimethylimidazolium][TFSI]) in the charging–recharging process than poly([Veim][TFSI]) and poly([1-(4-vinylbenzyl)-3-methylimidazolium][TFSI]).124 These PILs also showed higher specific capacity than PVDF, probably arising from the facilitated charge transfer among solvent/salt, binder, and active material as well as the creation of a new interphase (Fig. 9).124 Similar results were also found when comparing the performance of a thiazolium-type PIL binder with that of PVDF.125
 Fig. 9  Hypothetic schematic illustration of the effect of different binders on Li+ transport: PIL binder (left) and PVDF binder (right), showing that PVDF blocks the Li+ transport and thus induces a higher resistance compared to the cathode composed of the PIL binder. For simplification, carbon additives are not described in the figure. Reproduced from ref. 124, Copyright 2015, published by The Royal Society of Chemistry with permission from Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence (http://https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode). 
It is noted that ILs can play a relatively indirect role in the fabrication of polymer binders in batteries, as the solvent of processing a natural binder, cellulose. Compared with PVDF, cellulosic binders, especially sodium carboxymethylcellulose (NaCMC), have attracted a great deal of attention in recent years because of several advantages such as lower cost, greener processing and easier disposability.126–128 Natural cellulose is regarded intrinsically greener than NaCMC, but its insolubility in common solvents restricts the processing for downstream applications. This problem can be solved by using ILs, because the abundant H-bonding sites in ILs have resulted in great dissolution and processing of cellulose.129 The utilization of IL-processed natural cellulose as Li-ion battery electrode binder has been reported by Passerini's group.130 A solution of natural cellulose in a recyclable IL, 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium acetate ([Emim][CH3COO]), was mixed with active materials and conductive carbons and then coated on metal foil. After that, [Emim][CH3COO] was removed by the phase inversion process and extracted with water. The Li-ion cell using graphite and carbon-coated LiFePO4 as active material and natural cellulose as binder delivered a specific capacity of 123 mA h g−1 (LiFePO4) in 1 M lithium hexafluorophosphate (LiPF6) in ethylene carbonate (EC)–diethyl carbonate (DEC) (3:7, wt%) electrolyte at room temperature.
ILs are able to act as key components of the SWNT/IL cross-linked network gel (CNG) electrode for Li–O2 and Li–air batteries. This is exemplified by the work of Zhang et al.,131 which was aimed to address one major problem in porous air electrodes, the block of oxygen diffusion by the filled liquid electrolyte in the pores of the electrode. The interaction between the cation of [Emim][TFSI] and the surface of nanotubes untangled the SWNTs upon grinding and increased the number of available reaction sites (Fig. 10). Moreover, the existence of the anchored IL in the CNG could suppress the permeation of the IL electrolyte into the CNG while allows for the Li+ conduction, and the pores acted as oxygen diffusion channels to permit its passage without dissolution. Consequently, when operated in 1 atm O2 with a cut-off voltage from 2.0 to 4.0 V vs. Li/Li+, the Li–O2 cell using the SWNT/IL CNG as the electrode and the same IL as the electrolyte reached a discharge capacity of 5930 mA h g−1, significantly higher than that of the ultrasound-induced non-grinding SWNT/IL mixture (950 mA h g−1), and was also feasible when replacing O2 by ambient air.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic representations of SWNT/[Emim][TFSI] CNG, in which SWNTs (gold) were untangled by a π–cation/π–electron interaction with the imidazolium cation of [Emim]+ (green), while the [TFSI]− ions (purple) were anchored in the gel through electric neutrality and oxygen fills the entire cross-linked network gel; (b) three dimensional tricontinuous passage of electrons, ions, and oxygen; (c) weight variation of SWNT/[Emim][TFSI] CNG after immersion in an electrolyte of 0.5 M Li[TFSI] salt and [Emim][TFSI] for one week; (d) the discharge/charge curves of the Li–O2 cell with the SWNT/[Emim][TFSI] CNG and a mixture (before gelation) at 200 mA gSWNT−1 in 1 atm O2, where the capacity was normalized by the weight of the SWNTs and the inset shows the corresponding XRD patterns of the SWNT/IL CNG loaded onto the carbon paper current collector before and after discharge/charge. Reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH. 
3. Liquid electrolytes
The electrolyte is an indispensable key component in all batteries, determining cell stability, capacity, cycle life, and safety. Generally, the electrolyte functions as a carrier medium, which has the properties of ionic conduction and electron insulation, facilitating ion transport between two electrodes, simultaneously withstanding the strong reducing and oxidizing forces coming from negative and positive electrodes, respectively.7,132–135 To fulfil these roles in the batteries, electrolytes are required to have specific properties, such as high ionic conductivity, low viscosity, a wide electrochemical window, chemical inertness, low interfacial resistance with electrodes, etc.136–140
In general, various types of electrolytes have been developed and reported in the literature to date, and among them, the organic electrolytes based on molecular solvents such as carbonates and ethers with dissolved lithium or sodium salts are most commonly used and investigated.139,141–143 However, these molecular liquid electrolytes suffer from the intrinsic disadvantages of flammability, volatility, toxicity, and physicochemical instability, which raises safety concerns for the battery. Especially, in the development of high-voltage and high-temperature batteries and open systems (e.g. Li–air cells), the instability and volatility of organic liquid electrolytes are one of the bottlenecks for commercialization. Moreover, the significant dissolution of lithium polysulfide in conventional electrolytes results in the “shuttle” effect which induces severe active material loss and Li corrosion in Li–S cells, and their insufficient stability toward strongly oxidative intermediates degrades the performance of Li–O2/air cells. These problems have severely restricted their implementation for large-scale energy storage and vehicle application. Nevertheless, as strong combinations of cations and anions, ILs exhibit ultralow volatility and intrinsic ionic conductivity coupled with high electrochemical and thermal stability, and have better ability to suppress the dissolution of polysulfides and stabilize the oxidative intermediates. These unique characteristics have created the possibility of designing more ideal electrolytes for high-energy electrochemical devices including Li/Na-based batteries.17,144–148 Moreover, in order to broaden the property spectrum and/or overcome the undesired characteristics (mainly the high viscosity) of ILs, efforts have also been delivered to IL-based hybrid solvents such as IL–molecular solvent mixtures and IL-tethered nanoparticle hybrid electrolytes. In addition, solvate ILs have also attracted considerable attention recently which feature a Li+/Na+-coordinated cation. This section will focus on the recent progress in these fields.
3.1 Li/Na salt-dissolved ILs
ILs with various dissolved lithium or sodium salts are most commonly investigated as electrolytes for Li/Na-based batteries.144,149–151 ILs can be engineered by changing their structure, thus tailoring their properties, in order to contemporarily meet various important needs such as high ionic conductivity, interfacial and electrochemical stability as well as thermal stability and low flammability. Nevertheless, compared with the enormous number of ILs ever developed in the chemical community, the kinds of ILs examined as electrolytes are rather limited. The cations are usually non-functionalized imidazolium, pyrrolidinium and phosphonium cations, while the typical anions are fluorinated [BF4]−, [TFSI]−, [FSI]− and [PF6]− due to their high stability and in particular relatively low viscosity.139,152 The electrochemical properties of ILs are strongly affected by the cation and anion structures; for example, the viscosity increases and ionic conductivity decreases with increasing ionic radius of the organic cation. In addition, organic cations containing ether groups usually result in lower viscosities. For the anions, a larger size not always leads to an increased viscosity, and the introduction of asymmetric structure in the anions could effectively decrease the viscosity, which might be due to a decrease in melting points. With regard to the stability, cations possessing reactive moieties such as [Cnmim]+ are more prone to decompose during operation.

3.1.1 Li/Na-ion battery. 
Typically consisting of a carbon cathode, a Li-containing transition metal oxide anode, and an aprotic organic electrolyte, Li-ion batteries are the most well-established rechargeable batteries at present, and are still very active in academic and industrial research to achieve higher energy/power density, super long-term cyclability and great safety. Na-ion batteries have similar mechanisms to Li-ion batteries, and are considered particularly promising from an economic viewpoint for applications where weight and energy density are minor concerns (e.g. grid energy storage for wind and solar power). The development of both aspects raises a demand for new electrolytes with higher thermal stability and sufficient electrochemical stability, satisfied by the Li/Na salt-dissolved IL electrolytes. IL electrolytes have been assembled for Li/Na-ion batteries with various anodes and cathodes, giving many examples that exhibited improved safety, lower interfacial resistance, higher Coulombic efficiency and capacity, and better cyclability. These improvements are specially highlighted in operations at high voltage and high temperature. For example, Cao et al. recently reported that the IL-based electrolyte could overcome the severe capacity fading issue during the cycling of high voltage LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4/Li4Ti5O12 (LNMO/LTO) full cells.153 Two inherently thermal stable ILs, 1-butyl-1-methylpyrrolidinium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide ([Pyr14][TFSI]) and ester modified methyl-methylcarboxymethyl pyrrolidinium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide ([MMMPyr][TFSI]), were selected. Much higher Coulombic efficiency and specific capacity were observed in the batteries with the lithium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide (LiTFSI)/IL electrolytes than LiPF6/EC and LiPF6/dimethyl carbonate (DMC) electrolytes, especially for the batteries at relatively high temperature (60 °C). And the LiTFSI/IL electrolytes outperformed the benchmark electrolyte at elevated temperature with much lower impedance after cycling. Continuous formation of the cathode–electrolyte interphase and concurrent Li+ loss were mainly responsible for the capacity fading, which was mitigated by using ILs to replace EC/DMC due to improved anodic stability. Moreover, the LiTFSI/[MMMPyr][TFSI] electrolyte showed better electrochemical performance than LiTFSI/[Pyr][TFSI] in the LNMO/LTO full-cell. Lin et al. reported a Li/LiCoO2 battery which could provide power at 100 °C using the phosphonium IL trihexyldecylphosphonium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide ([P66610][TFSI]) as the solvent of LiTFSI.154 The formed non-flammable electrolytes possessed an electrochemical stability window spanning 5 V vs. Li+/Li at 25 °C and 100 °C, and their significantly enhanced Li-ion transport at high temperatures over low temperatures resulted in the battery becoming thermally responsive. The improved thermal stability could be also found in the Na/Na0.44MnO2 cell with [Pyr14][TFSI]-based electrolytes containing various sodium solutes, such as sodium tetrafluoroborate (NaBF4), sodium perchlorate (NaClO4), sodium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide (NaTFSI), and sodium hexafluorophosphate (NaPF6).155 The results showed that the NaClO4-dissolved IL was the most compatible electrolyte with the lowest solid electrolyte interface (SEI) and charge transfer resistance at both anode and cathode. The Na0.44MnO2 electrode showed an optimum discharge capacity of 97 mA h g−1 at 0.05C and 25 °C but with a relatively low cyclic efficiency (63%). However, when the operation temperature increased to 75 °C, the Na0.44MnO2 capacity could also be increased to 115 mA h g−1, with 83% retention of the initial capacity after 100 cycles which outperformed the case of using EC and DEC electrolytes (33% retention). The significant capacity loss at higher temperature for the organic electrolyte was mainly ascribed to the adverse electrode/electrolyte interactions and electrolyte evaporation.
The formation of a stable SEI layer facilitated by IL-based electrolytes contributes to achieving long-term cycling stability of Li/Na-ion batteries. Recently, Elia et al. reported an exceptional long-life performance of Li-ion batteries with the use of IL-based electrolytes.156 Several different ILs including [Pyr14][TFSI], 1-butyl-1-methylpyrrolidinium bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide ([Pyr14][FSI]), N-methoxy-ethyl-N-methylpyrrolidinium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl) imide ([Pyr12O1][TFSI]) and N-N-diethyl-N-methyl-N-(2-methoxyethyl)ammonium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide ([DEME][TFSI]) were investigated at a constant LiTFSI concentration of 0.2 mol kg−1, and the [Pyr14][FSI]–LiTFSI mixture exhibited the highest ionic conductivity (15 mS cm−1 at 60 °C and 0.3 mS cm−1 at 30 °C), the lowest viscosity (13 mPs at 80 °C and 1573 mPs at 30 °C), the most favorable electrode/electrolyte interface and low polarization. When assembled into a Sn–C/[Pyr14][FSI]–LiTFSI/LiFePO4 cell, the electrolytes (0.2 mol kg−1 LiTFSI) showed excellent electrochemical stability, and the cell delivered a maximum capacity of 160 mA h g−1 at an average working voltage of 3 V with a columbic efficiency higher than 99.9% over more than 2000 charge/discharge cycles (Fig. 11a). The cell exhibited a very low overall interface resistance at the open circuit (16 Ω), and the exceptionally stable SEI film formation at the electrode surface was completed upon 10 charge/discharge cycles.
 Fig. 11  (a) Specific capacity and Columbic efficiency of the Sn–C/[Pyr14][FSI]–LiTFSI/LFP cell galvanostatically cycled at 25 and 500 mA g−1 (0.12 and 2.4 mA cm−2, respectively) at 40 °C and a cut off voltage of 2–3.8 V; (b) half-cell cycling stability and Coulombic efficiencies of the SiNW-cPAN electrodes cycled under galvanostatic conditions in both [Pyr13][FSI] (1.2 M LiFSI) and EC/DEC (1 M LiPF6) electrolytes; (c) specific charge capacity and Coulombic efficiency of SiNW-cPAN/L33 full-cells assembled with different electrolytes. Part (a) is reproduced from ref. 156 with permission from Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry, and parts (b) and (c) are reproduced from ref. 157 with permission from Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH. 
The favorable SEI stability in IL-based electrolytes is particularly crucial when the battery is composed of an electrode showing significant volume change during cycling, such as a silicon electrode. The high theoretical specific capacity (3579 mA h g−1) and natural abundance of silicon have triggered extensive research efforts to develop Si-based anodes. However, the severe volume change of Si during Li+ insertion and extraction makes the SEI layer mechanically unstable with continuous breaking and reforming, leading to rapid deterioration of cell performance upon cycling. Lee's group reported that this problem could be effectively alleviated by merging Si-based electrodes with IL-based electrolytes to assemble Li-ion batteries, which can provide a more robust SEI layer. When incorporating 1D silicon nanowires (SiNW) into the cyclized-polyacrylonitrile (cPAN) as electrode with 1-methyl-1-propylpyrrolidinium bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide ([Pyr13][FSI]) (1.2 M LiFSI) as electrolyte, the half-cell study exhibited a retention of capacities above 1700 mA h g−1 over 700 cycles (Fig. 11b).157 A high Columbic efficiency of the anode was manifested and stabilized after only 2 cycles. In contrast, the performance of the same anode in the EC/DEC (1 M LiPF6) electrolyte quickly degraded in 100 cycles, and the capacity after 500 cycles was only 837.4 mA h g−1. Consequently, the SiNW–cPAN/L333 full cell cycled in EC/DEC (1 M LiPF6) degraded rapidly, whereas the cell cycled in [Pyr13][FSI] (1.2 M LiFSI) stabilized immediately after cycle 2 and provided an average charge capacity of 126.73 mA h g−1 and a capacity retention of 99.62% after 350 cycles at C/2 (Fig. 11c). The outstanding performance mainly resulted from the more stable SEI formed via the decomposition of [Pyr13][FSI].158 Theoretical simulation and experimental characterization of the interface revealed the formation of a stable SEI consisting of relatively small inorganic compounds through the fast release of F− from [FSI]− to form LiF along with oxygen/sulfur-based compounds. Moreover, the SEI formed by [Pyr13][FSI] was stable even at higher temperature.158 Additionally, another recent work revealed that IL electrolytes can also provide long-term cycling stability for Si/Ge-anode batteries through their ability to promote the transformation of the anode to a more robust structure.159 When investigating Ge and Si nanowires as Li-ion battery anodes in combination with an IL-based 0.1 M LiTFSI–0.3[Pyr13][TFSI]–0.6[Pyr13][FSI] + 5 wt% EC electrolyte, a capacity retention over 50% for Si after 500 cycles and 67% for Ge after 1000 cycles was respectively obtained at a current rate of 0.5C.
The positive effect of ILs on the formation of a favorable SEI can also be found at the cathode–electrolyte interface. In a most recent study on the xLi2MnO3·(1 − x)LiMO2 or Li[LixM1−x]O2 (M = Ni, Mn, Co) (LMR) cathode, the utilization of carbonate electrolytes led to notable destruction of LMR particles and rapid lowering of cell operating voltage over cycling life, due to the formation of H+via the oxidative decomposition of alkyl carbonate electrolytes which promoted the disproportionation of transition metal valence states within the LMR crystal lattice.160 In contrast, the [Pyr13][FSI] (1.2 M LiFSI) electrolyte could form more favorable decomposition products to avoid parasitic acid attack, and thus provided better stability of the LMR structure and improved cycling performance (Fig. 12). If a small quantity of LiPF6 was added as a sacrificial additive into [Pyr13][FSI] (1.2 M LiFSI), the resultant electrolyte further dramatically increased the average cycling voltage and energy retention of the LMR half-cell, owing to more favorable LMR/IL interfacial behavior through the in situ formation of a heavily fluorinated interface. The SiNW-cPAN/LMR full cell assembled with the [Pyr13][FSI] (1.2 M LiFSI, 0.1 M LiPF6) electrolyte retained greater than 84% capacity over 1000 cycles at various rates (average coulombic efficiency of 100.6% in 1000 cycles), which was claimed within the Department of Energy Vehicle Technology Office's Li-ion battery performance requirements (>80% retention at 1000 cycles with 80% DoD).160
 Fig. 12  Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy spectra evolution in LMR half-cells using different electrolytes: (a) [Pyr13][FSI] (1.2 M LiFSI); (b) EC/DEC (1 M LiPF6). The insets are the composite morphologies after 1000 electrochemical cycles. Reproduced from ref. 160 with permission from Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH. 
For a given IL, the increase of Li/Na salt concentration generally leads to higher viscosity and lower ionic conductivity, but a highly concentrated IL electrolyte may still be possible to produce better cell performance compared to the electrolyte with lower salt concentrations.161–164 A recent example is given by Forsyth et al., in which the electrolytes were composed by [Pyr13][FSI] and NaFSI.161 The highest NaFSI concentration could reach 3.2 mol kg−1 (50 mol%) in the electrolyte at room temperature, which exhibited higher current densities (1 mA cm−2) and better stability upon symmetric Na/Na cell cycling and showed unexpectedly high Na+ transference numbers (greater than 0.3) due to a novel structural diffusion mechanism. Molecular dynamic simulations indicated that Na+ and [FSI]− ions formed 2:1 clusters at high concentration, which enabled a site exchange and/or structural diffusion mechanism for Na+ and then a higher transference number.


3.1.2 Dual-ion battery. 
The concept of the “dual-ion” battery, or the “dual-carbon” battery in the case of using carbon as both anode and cathode, was pioneered by McCullough et al. and Carlin et al. and developed by Placke and Winter et al.165–167 in which the electrolyte salt not only serves as a charge carrier between the anode and the cathode, but also acts as an active material.168–173 It is reported as a novel energy storage device with unconventional architecture which has the merits of high safety, a low-cost cathode and environmental benefits over conventional Li-ion batteries. The main difference of the mechanism between dual-ion and Li-ion batteries is that both cations and anions are involved in dual-ion batteries for charge transport and storage, where the cations intercalate into the negative electrode (typically Li metal, Li4Ti5O12 or carbon) and the anions intercalate into the positive electrode (typically carbon) during charging, while conventional batteries only involve cation transference (Fig. 13).165,174 Due to the advantages of the dual-ion batteries, continuous progress has been made in dual-ion batteries based on organic solvent electrolytes containing different lithium salts, such as lithium bis(pentafluoroethanesulfonyl)amide (LiBETI), lithium perchlorate (LiClO4), LiTFSI, LiF, lithium tetrafluoroborate (LiBF4), LiPF6, etc.,175–179 but the limited oxidative stability of organic solvent electrolytes restricts the Coulombic efficiency during the cycling tests. Moreover, the issue of solvent co-intercalation into the graphite electrode at high cell potentials exists. These problems can be mitigated by using IL electrolytes.177,180–182 Winter's group developed dual-ion cells with the use of [Pyr14][TFSI] (1 M LiTFSI) as the electrolyte and metallic lithium or Li4Ti5O12 as the anode. Stable cycling performance with a discharge capacity of 50 mA h g−1 and Coulombic efficiencies above 99% could be achieved over hundreds of cycles. In order to use low-cost graphite as both anode and cathode, SEI-forming additives such as ethylene sulfite should be added into the IL electrolyte to prevent the intercalation of IL cations into the graphite anode (Fig. 14).170
 Fig. 13  Schematic illustration of charge/discharge processes of the dual-ion battery using Al foil as the anode and mesocarbon microbeads as the cathode based on an ionic liquid electrolyte. Reproduced from ref. 165 with permission from Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH. 
 Fig. 14  Schematic illustration of a dual-graphite cell: (a) with no effective SEI layer at the graphite anode during the charge process where the negative graphite electrode suffers from exfoliation reactions caused by co-intercalation of the relatively large pyrrolidinium ([Pyr14]+) cations; (b) with an effective SEI layer (using ethylene sulfite as SEI-forming additive) at the graphite anode during the charge process where the negative graphite electrode is protected from co-intercalation reaction of pyrrolidinium cations by the SEI layer but the transport and intercalation of Li ions are allowed. Reproduced from ref. 170, Copyright 2014, published by The Royal Society of Chemistry with permission from Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence (http://https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode)/merged from original. 
Recently, much efforts have been devoted to the dual-ion batteries with various ILs, and the batteries exhibited superior performances compared to existing dual-ion batteries with organic solvent electrolytes. Tang's group reported that dual-ion batteries comprising an Al foil anode, a mesocarbon microbead cathode (MCMB) and an IL electrolyte (1.5 M LiTFSI/[Pyr14][TFSI]) with 10 wt% fluoroethylene carbonate additive (FEC) exhibited significantly improved cycling stability and rate performance.174 Owing to the good stability of ILs at high working voltage and the protection of FEC in the electrolyte by forming a stable SEI layer on Al foil, the Al/MCMB dual-ion batteries presented a reversible capacity of ∼98 mA h g−1 at 0.5C and showed negligible capacity fading after 300 cycles at a cut-off voltage of 4.8 V. The energy density was 221 W h kg−1 at the power density of 109 W kg−1, and remained 185 W h kg−1 at 1141 W kg−1 (it is noted that the energy density was calculated based on the mass of the cathode and anode). However, the dual-ion battery assembled with organic solvent electrolytes exhibited limited cyclability due to the decomposition of the electrolyte induced by high working voltages,183 and the co-intercalation of organic solvents into the graphite cathode generated Cn+(solv)yX− and resulted in graphite exfoliation upon cycling.184 Fan et al. used pure 1-butyl-1-methylpiperidinium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide ([PP14][TFSI]) ILs as electrolytes (without Li salts) for dual-ion batteries with graphite as both the electrodes, which outperformed the battery using [Pyr14][TFSI].169 The batteries exhibited a high discharge voltage initiated at 4.4 V with a specific capacity of 82 mA h g−1, a wide charge/discharge potential range of 1.0–5.0 V, and superior stability with ∼100% capacity retention for 600 cycles. Shi et al. reported a dual-ion battery by selecting 1 M 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium hexafluorophosphate ([Emim][PF6]) as the electrolyte and using graphite as positive and reduced graphene oxide as negative electrodes.185 While [PF6]− anions were intercalated/de-intercalated at graphite for charge storage/delivery, simultaneously [Emim]+ cations were fast absorbed/desorbed at the surface of graphene to ensure an improved electrode kinetics of dual-ion batteries for higher power density. The obtained power density was 1333 W kg−1, along with an energy density of 70 W h kg−1.
Beltrop at al. investigated a series of imide-based IL electrolytes for dual-ion batteries to present the intercalation of IL electrolytes into a graphite cathode and reveal the effect of anion size on the electrochemical properties (Fig. 15).168 The results showed that the onset potentials of anion intercalation into graphite were 4.42–4.53 V vs. Li/Li+ with the order [BETI]− > [FSI]− > [FTFSI]− > [FSI]−/[TFSI]− (11:1, molar ratio) > [TFSI]− > [TFSI]−/[FSI]− (10:1), implying that the effect of ion-pair formation and/or self-aggregation exceeded the effect of anion size. The ionic conductivity showed the opposite trend: [BETI]− < [TFSI]− < [TFSI]−/[FSI]− < [FTFSI]− < [FSI]−/[TFSI]− < [FSI]− at 20 °C which increased with decreasing ion size, suggesting a minor role of ionic conductivity in determining the onset potential for anion uptake. The quaternary [TFSI]/[FSI]− mixture displayed the best cycling behavior with a specific capacity of ∼54 mA h g−1 and a Coulombic efficiency of >99%. Moreover, it was also demonstrated that the use of the [FSI]−-abundant electrolytes could induce continuous Al dissolution and accordingly a low Coulombic efficiency, whereas the other electrolytes exhibited good compatibility with the Al current collector.
 Fig. 15  (a) Comparison of the ionic conductivity of the specific IL-based electrolytes as a function of temperature (−20 °C to 90 °C); (b) onset potentials for anion uptake obtained from cyclic voltammetry measurements; (c) size estimation (by HyperChem 7.52) of these imide-based anions. Reproduced from ref. 168 with permission from Copyright 2016 Elsevier. 
Most recently, Na-based dual-ion batteries utilizing an IL-based electrolyte based on a mixture of NaTFSI and [Pyr14][TFSI] have also been reported.171 However, the results of the galvanostatic cycling showed an inferior performance in terms of reversible capacity as compared to the Li-based system, where almost the double capacity can be achieved under the same operating conditions, while taking into account the potential difference of 0.3 V for the redox couples Li/Li+ and Na/Na+.171 Additionally, potassium-based dual-ion batteries have also been developed very recently for the first time, using [Pyr14][TFSI] + 0.3 M KTFSI + 2 wt% ethylene sulfite as the electrolyte and graphite as the electrode material for both the anode and the cathode. A highly reversible capacity of 42 mA h g−1 (with respect to the graphite cathode) was attained even at a current of 250 mA g−1, and the Coulombic efficiency exceeded 99% in a potential range from 3.4 to 5.0 V vs. K/K+. Moreover, an excellent capacity retention of 95% after 1500 cycles was achieved.172 Finally, it should be pointed out that the amount of electrolytes in dual-ion batteries is much more than that in conventional Li-ion batteries since both cation and anion participate in cathode and anode reactions, leading to a lower energy density.


3.1.3 Li–S battery. 
Lithium–sulfur (Li–S) batteries have high theoretical gravimetric and volumetric energy densities of 2600 W h kg−1 and 2800 W h L−1, significantly higher than traditional Li-ion batteries, and the use of sulfur as the electrode is advantageous in terms of natural abundance, low price, and non-toxicity. Thus they have become one of the most attractive candidates of next-generation energy storage systems.4,7,186–189 However, the rechargeable Li–S batteries still suffer from serious challenges for their practice applications, such as the self-discharge effect, the poor conductivity of sulfur and lithium sulfides, the large volume change during the lithiation/delithiation process, capacity degradation induced by the shuttle effect, etc. (Fig. 16).190–194
 Fig. 16  Schematic illustration of the parasitic polysulfide shuttle effect in a liquid electrolyte based Li/S8-cell. Long chain polysulfides originating from the high discharge and charge plateaus diffuse to the negative electrode to be further reduced to shorter chain length polysulfides that diffuse back to the positive electrode and are re-oxidized to higher chain length polysulfides. Reproduced from ref. 194 with permission from Copyright 2014 Elsevier. 
Apart from the safety concern, the major disadvantage of the conventional organic liquid electrolytes in Li–S batteries is the great solubility of polysulfide intermediates in electrolytes, which results in the “shuttle” effect that induces severe loss of active material and Li corrosion. For this reason, great attention has been paid to restrain the shuttle effect.195–198 In an earlier study, Wang et al. reported that the capacity and cyclic stability of the S–C composite using an IL electrolyte consisting of [Emim][TFSI] and LiTFSI were much better than that using a conventional solvent electrolyte.199 This was attributed to suppressed polysulfide dissolution into the electrolyte and an easier charge transport at the electrode/electrolyte interface in the IL-based system. Later, the solubility of S8 and Li2Sm was quantitatively investigated by Watanabe's group for several different IL electrolytes (Fig. 17),200 showing that the use of ILs is not always effective for reducing the dissolution. Most importantly, the solubility of Li2Sm was proposed to be mainly determined by the donor ability of the IL anion. Only anions with weak donor ability could result in lower Li2Sm dissolution than typical organic electrolytes and prevent redox shuttle reaction efficiently. Also it is worth noting that the unfavorable side reactions of the IL anions with polysulfides and the slow mass transport in ILs could influence the battery performance, even though there is greatly suppressed dissolution of Li2Sm. More stable charge/discharge along with high capacity and high Coulombic efficiency of the Li–S batteries was achieved by the low-viscous [TFSI]−-based ILs. Following this research, the effect of anions on the behavior of Li–S batteries using [Pyr14]−-based ILs was investigated,201 which also elucidated the correlation between the polysulfide solubility and the donor ability of the electrolyte solvent. Solvents with low donor number coordinated less effectively with the Lewis acidic Li+ ion, and consequently led to less dissociation and dissolution of lithium polysulfides. Indeed, the use of [Pyr14][TFSI] delivered the highest capacity of batteries among the investigated ILs and presented the best capacity retention due to the suppressed polysulfide dissolution and the formation of an effective SEI layer on the anode. In fact, this concept is also useful for the development of FeS2-based Li-ion batteries. Lee's group demonstrated that the use of a [TFSI]−-based IL electrolyte could endow a conventionally prepared FeS2 cathode with exceptional performance.202 The weak Lewis basicity of the charge-delocalized [TFSI]− anion resulted in a low degree of polysulfide solvation and mitigated the parasitic redox shuttle effectively. As a consequence, highly stable cycling and exceptional energy density were achieved in a FeS2/[Pyr13][TFSI] (0.6 M LiTFSI)/Li cell, because the need for complex auxiliary electrode components in previous work to confine electroactive species had been eliminated.202 In contrast, the significant polysulfide solubility in organic liquid electrolytes led to not only a parasitic redox shuttle and unfavorable side reactions with the Li metal electrode, but also a lower charging efficiency and rapidly degraded cell performance.203–205
 Fig. 17  Saturation concentrations of S8 and mixtures of S8 and LiS2 (Li2Sm), represented in units of total atomic-S concentration (a) in pyrrolidinium ILs with different anions in the absence and presence of 0.5 mol kg−1 Li[TFSI] (on a semilogarithmic scale), and (b) in [TFSI]−-based ILs with different cations without Li[TFSI]. Reproduced from ref. 200 with permission from Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
The self-discharge of Li–S batteries could be mitigated by optimizing the IL electrolytes, as shown by Wang et al. when using the 1-propyl-1-methylpiperidinium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide ([PP13][TFSI]) and lithium nitrate (LiNO3) mixture as the electrolyte.206 Zero self-discharge was achieved in resting a full-charged Li–S battery for two days, whereas the self-discharge rate was around 4% after one day storage when using a LiNO3-containing ether-based electrolyte. The rapid polysulfide redox shuttle process could be suppressed pronouncedly by [PP13][TFSI] (Fig. 18), and the formation of a compact and uniform surface film of the cycled Li electrode indicated possibly suppressed Li dendrite growth. Meanwhile, LiNO3 could facilitate the formation of a protective layer composed of LixNOy compounds and oxidized polysulfides on the Li surface, and it showed a synergetic effect with polysulfides to inhibit dendrite formation.190,191,207–211
 Fig. 18  Schematic illustration of the functional mechanism of polysulfide dissolution and diffusion in ether (left) or [PP13][TFSI]-based (right) solvent. Reproduced from ref. 206 with permission from Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry. 


3.1.4 Li–air/O2 battery. 
Li–air/O2 batteries are cutting-edge technology for electrochemical energy storage devices for powering long-range electric vehicles, mainly owing to their much higher theoretical energy density than Li-ion batteries. The volatility of organic solvent electrolytes is especially problematic in nonaqueous Li–air/O2 batteries with an open system due to a rapid drying out, and these electrolytes are also not sufficiently stable toward strongly oxidative intermediates (O2˙−, O22−, HO2−, etc.) formed during cell operation. In addition to the ultralow volatility and large electrochemical stability windows, ILs are promising solvents for Li–air/O2 batteries also due to their designability to enhance hydrophobicity. Therefore, the suitability of IL-based electrolytes for Li–air/O2 batteries has already been evaluated in many studies.212–221 For example, Elia et al. reported a Li–O2 battery exploiting [Pyr14][TFSI]–LiTFSI as the electrolyte medium.212 The resulted charge–discharge gap was 0.6 V, a particular remarkably low value, considering that it was obtained with a catalyst-free electrode composed of a commercial gas diffusion layer coated with carbon black. The large improvement in reducing the cell polarization might be explained in light of the fact that discharge in this IL electrolyte led to the formation of Li2O2 particles having a much smaller size than that usually observed in other electrolytes, which finally allowed a facile reconversion and thus a low polarization overvoltage. It was speculated that the formation of smaller Li2O2 particles was a result of favored nucleation rather than crystal growth under Li-ion diffusion-limited conditions due to the higher viscosity of ILs than molecular solvents. Moreover, it was found that the common decomposition of PVDF binder in the presence of superoxide was prevented,222 probably because IL-based electrolytes could stabilize the superoxide anion radical.223 The stabilization of superoxide species in ILs was also demonstrated to be helpful for reducing the recharge overpotential through the switch of recharge processes from a two-electron one to a single-electron one (Fig. 19).216 In fact, the encouraging results of IL-based Li–O2 batteries have also inspired the studies on other metal–air batteries, including Mg–air, Zn–air, Al–air and Na–air batteries which are gaining increasing attraction in the electrochemical and engineering communities.144,224–226
 Fig. 19  Schematic illustration of the decomposition pathways of Li2O2 when [Pyr14][TFSI] is present, with a key hypothesis that the solvation effect by [Pyr14][TFSI] promotes the single-electron pathway (the upward branch in the illustration) that features low recharge overpotentials. Reproduced from ref. 216 with permission from Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
Asadi et al. used molybdenum disulfide nanoflakes (MoS2 NFs) as the electrode and [Emim][BF4] (1 M LiTFSI) as the electrolyte.213 In the cyclic voltammetry study, MoS2 NFs showed a maximum oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) apparent activity (current density of 10.5 mA cm−2) at 2.0 V together with a remarkable oxygen evolution reaction (OER) activity (5.04 mA cm−2) at 4.2 V in O2-saturated ILs. However, the catalytic performance of MoS2 NFs was relatively poor in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and tetraethylene glycol dimethyl ether (TEGDME), suggesting a strong synergy of MoS2 NFs and ILs for both ORR and OER. The combination of MoS2 NFs and ILs as cocatalyst also performed well in a Li–O2 battery system, with a small discharge/charge polarization gap as well as good stability, cyclability and 85% round-trip efficiency. DFT calculations showed that the coverage of the Mo edge by the [Emim]+ ions tended to form isolated Mo sites, which prevented O2 dissociation and enabled oxygen reduction (Fig. 20). In the IL electrolyte, [Emim]+ ions bind strongly to the negatively charged Mo edge and form an [Emim]+-covered Mo edge, leaving single-atom Mo sites exposed to the solvent and making O2 bind onto these sites with charge transfer from O2−. However, in the DMSO electrolyte, the neutral DMSO molecules bind only weakly to the Mo edge and leave multiatom Mo sites exposed to the solvent, enabling the O2 molecule either replace an adsorbed DMSO molecule on the Mo edge or bind directly on the multiatom Mo sites and rapidly dissociate to two bound O atoms on the Mo edge. Although in some cases the dissociated O atoms may rearrange on the Mo edge and form an active binding site and O2 can be reduced to O2− on this site, continued O2 dissociation on the Mo edge is thermodynamically favorable and will eventually lead to a highly stable oxidized but deactivated Mo edge. Moreover, the IL facilitated the dissolution of O2−, which led to the formation of Li2O2via a through-solution mechanism. Another noticeable recent work by Zhou's group also suggested a synergistic effect of the IL and cathode, in which a hydrophobic IL (1-propyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide, [Pmim][TFSI]) with dissolved LiTFSI was utilized as the electrolyte and a composite of electrolytic manganese dioxide (EMD, 7.5 wt%) and RuO2 (7.5 wt%) nanoparticles supported on Super P (EMD/RuO2/SP) was employed as the cathode.214 The results indicated that there were two routes presented for the discharge reaction: (1) under dry conditions O2 was electrochemically reduced and generated Li2O2; (2) under humid conditions O2 was first reduced by H2O to HO2− and then HO2− chemically reacted with Li+ to generate LiOH and H2O2, and LiOH could be further converted to LiOH·H2O. For Li–O2 batteries in an atmosphere of high relative humidity, the much higher moisture content could facilitate the second route and lead to high discharge potentials. At a relative humidity of 51%, the fabricated (EMD/RuO2/SP)/electrolyte/LiFePO4 Li–O2 battery showed a small potential gap of 0.4 V and exhibited a superior recharge ability and rate capability, which could be discharged/charged for 218 cycles at 500 mA g−1 and 95 cycles at 1000 mA g−1 (Fig. 21).
 Fig. 20  Schematic illustration of the oxygen reduction reaction on MoS2 nanoflakes in two different electrolytes (ionic liquid ([Emim][BF4]) and DMSO) based on DFT calculations. The numbers in the figure are reaction energies, eV. Reproduced from ref. 213 with permission from Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 21  Cycling performance of Li–O2 batteries in an O2 atmosphere with a relative humidity of 51%: (a) discharge–charge profiles of the selected cycles at 500 mA g−1; (b) plots of discharge/charge capacities and the corresponding Coulombic efficiencies against cycle number at 500 mA g−1. The Li–O2 batteries were fabricated with a configuration of (EMD/RuO2/SP)/electrolyte/LiFePO4. Reproduced from ref. 214 with permission from Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH. 
One challenge for IL-based electrolytes in Li–O2 batteries is that the electrochemical stability of ILs remains insufficient, especially in practical operation environments, despite better than commonly used organic solvents. Das et al. investigated the rechargeability of a Li–O2 cell using IL electrolytes based on different anions and cations, and observed that none of them behaved as needed for a functional Li–O2 battery. In comparison, the [TFSI]− anion showed higher stability than the [FSI]− anion, and the imidazolium and quaternary ammonium cations were much less stable than the pyrrolidinium and piperidinium cations.227 Furthermore, unsatisfactory oxygen and superoxide transport properties are also considered as one of the major challenges, because the transport process has significant impact on Li–O2 cell performance but it is inhibited by the large viscosity of ILs and their strong interaction with dissolved species.228 Addition of conventional organic solvents into IL electrolytes and a flow-cell concept have been proposed to overcome the intrinsic limitation of mass transport.142,228,229 The current densities delivered in the IL electrolytes are usually very low, 0.05–0.5 mA cm−2. A recent work reported a notable improvement of current densities to 5.0 mA cm−2 (80 °C) by coordinating the cathode/IL electrolyte/anode interfacial properties (mainly O2 diffusion and wettability) and reaction mechanism, in which an ether-functionalized ammonium IL [DEME][TFSI] was used as the electrolyte and a cross-linked network gel consisting of SWCNTs and that IL was used as the oxygen cathode.230


3.1.5 Li–SO2 battery. 
The diverse lithium and sodium batteries discussed above are all secondary (rechargeable) batteries. However, the interest in ILs has also been extended to primary Li metal batteries such as Li–SO2 batteries. The Li–SO2 battery is attractive in terms of light weight, long-life, high energy density (up to 330 W h kg−1), and the cheapness and abundance of SO2 as the active cathode material. However, the pressurized SO2 and flammable solvents in the system have incurred serious safety concerns. IL electrolytes with tailored basicities could solvate SO2 molecules through reversible chemical absorption and then be used to assemble the new-generation ambient Li–SO2 battery, as reported by Xing et al. (Fig. 22).231 The battery delivered a high energy density and good discharge performance with operating voltages above 2.8 V through tuning the IL–SO2 interactions, and the cathode discharge products were examined to be Li2S2O4. It is noteworthy that the optimized ILs used in this battery were not fluorinated anion-based ILs as in the case of rechargeable Li/Na-based batteries, but thiocyanate ([SCN]−) based ILs due to their higher SO2 loading and higher ionic conductivity.
 Fig. 22  Schematic illustration of the ambient ionic liquid-based Li–SO2 battery. Reproduced from ref. 231 with permission from Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH. 

3.2 Hybrid electrolytes of ILs and molecular solvents
Although the advantages of IL electrolytes favor safety and electrochemical performances compared to the conventional organic solvent electrolytes, the higher viscosity and lower conductivity relative to molecular solvents, which originate from the intrinsic strong ion–ion interactions and rather large size of the ions, still restrict the utilization of ILs in batteries by affecting the rate performance and capacity. To address this issue, mixing ILs with commonly used molecular solvents such as organic carbonates (EC, vinylene carbonate (VC), propylene carbonate (PC), etc.) allows much lower viscosity and higher ionic conductivity than the pure IL-based electrolytes and enhanced safety over organic carbonate-based electrolytes. Moreover, the hybrid IL–molecular solvent electrolytes may also bring about optimized electrode/electrolyte interface chemistry. Thus the hybrid IL–molecular solvent electrolytes have been extensively investigated, mainly in Li-ion batteries.23,134,139,146,232–241
Khalid Ababtain et al. investigated 3D nano-silicon electrodes with high energy density paired with [PP13][TFSI]/PC/LiTFSI electrolytes.242 The addition of a small amount of PC showed detrimental but acceptable effects on the flammability and thermal stability of electrolytes, while largely reducing the viscosity and improving the transport properties at lower temperatures. For the battery with 20% PC–[PP13][TFSI] as the electrolyte, a drastically improved capacity was observed for the Si electrodes at 25 °C with stability over 100 cycles, and the capacity further increased significantly to 0.52 mA h cm−2 (2230 mA h g−1) at 100 °C. The addition of EC and DMC into the [Pyr14][TFSI] + LiTFSI mixture also largely reduced the viscosity of the electrolytes and cell resistance, along with favored electrode/electrolyte interface properties and enhanced Li+ transference number.234 The ionic conductivity of the electrolyte was of the order of 10−2 S cm−1, and the transference number was 0.38 with high electrochemical stability (Fig. 23). When the electrolyte was used in a Li-ion full battery with graphene nanoplatelets as the anode and LiFePO4 as the cathode, the battery exhibited promising performances with a stable capacity of ca. 150 mA h g−1 at 2.4 V.234 Lombardo et al. reported that the addition of [Pyr14][TFSI] in EC:DMC and in EC:DMC:DEC with 1 M LiPF6 could enlarge the electrochemical stability window and significantly reduce the self-extinguishing time of the electrolyte mixture when exposed to a free flame, while the ionic conductivity exhibited no decrease compared with that of pristine IL-free electrolytes.243 Monti et al. systematically investigated the effects of the concentration of ILs on the properties of EC:PC:IL electrolytes for Na-ion batteries.238 They found that the ionic conductivity of the hybrid electrolytes was similar to that of IL-free organic solvent electrolytes as long as the IL content was kept below 20%, but with highly enhanced safety properties. Moreover, the SEI derived from this hybrid electrolytes was mechanically and electrochemically more stable than that formed in pure IL-based electrolytes. For a half-cell consisting of a hard carbon electrode and a hybrid electrolyte of 0.8 M NaTFSI in EC0.45:PC0.45:[Pyr13][TFSI]0.10, the specific capacity was ca. 182 mA h g−1 at C/10 over 40 cycles. The formation and structure of the SEI layer in Li-ion batteries consisting of IL–molecular solvent hybrid electrolytes have attracted much attention. Lahiri et al. recently studied the influence of adding polar organic solvents into the [Pyr14][FSI] (1 M LiFSI) electrolyte on the Li-ion battery performance and SEI layer.244 Atomic force microscope (AFM) images showed that the addition of acetonitrile or dimethyl carbonate into the [Pyr14][FSI] electrolyte resulted in a SEI layer with a porous and clustered structure, respectively, whereas the SEI layer had a layered morphology for the IL electrolytes without other solvents. The SEI composition was also different. For the pure IL or the IL + DMC mixture electrolytes, the SEI was mainly composed of carbon, oxygen, and fluorine in approximately equal amounts, but remarkable nitrogen content was also presented for the IL + acetonitrile mixture. Li et al. reported that using the hybrid [Pyr13][TFSI] and ether electrolyte could be a promising Li metal passivation strategy.235 Compared with IL-free electrolytes, the reversibility of Li plating/stripping can be remarkably increased by the synergy between [Pyr13][TFSI] ILs and Li salt concentration, and the stability of the SEI layer was enhanced by the hybrid electrolyte through the in situ passivation process with restrained Li dendrite growth and Li metal corrosion. The symmetrical cell testing presented a much lower voltage fluctuation in the optimized hybrid electrolyte than in the IL-free electrolyte. Chen's group found that the lithium difluoro(oxalate)borate salt in a hybrid IL-based electrolyte ([PP14][TFSI] + tetramethylene sulfone) in Li-ion batteries could be preferably oxidized during the charging process and reduced during the discharging process. The reaction products piled up to form the SEI layers on the surfaces of electrodes, which prevented the electrolyte and electrode materials and ensured the good electrochemical performance of the cells.237
 Fig. 23  Electrochemical characterization of [Pyr14][TFSI]–LiTFSI 0.2 M (black colored) and [Pyr14][TFSI] 70 wt%–(EC-DMC, 1:1) 30 wt%–LiTFSI 0.2 M: (a) Arrhenius plot; (b) time evolution of the cell resistance and, in the inset, corresponding Nyquist plot; (c) current–time curve following a dc polarization of 20 mV and, in the inset, impedance response before and after polarization. Reproduced from ref. 234 with permission from Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH. 
The concept of IL–molecular solvent hybrid electrolytes was also used in Li–S and Li–O2 batteries.215,216,245,246 The Li–S cell comprising [Pyr14][TFSI]/1,3-dioxolane/dimethoxyethane (DME) with 1 M LiTFSI as the electrolyte and a cetyltrimethyl ammonium bromide-modified sulfur–graphene oxide nanocomposite as the cathode delivered a high initial discharge capacity of 1440 mA h g−1 of sulfur at 0.2C, and exhibited excellent rate capability up to 6C for discharge and 3C for charge with retained high specific capacity.239 Moreover, the cell could perform with a low decay rate of 0.039% per cycle up to 1500 cycles. The IL in the electrolyte formed a passivation layer on the surface of the Li metal electrode, which provided a protective effect. Cecchetto et al. presented a hybrid electrolyte based on lithium trifluoromethanesulfonate (LiTfO) in the TEGDME–[Pyr14][TFSI] mixture (volume ratio of 1:1) for the Li–O2 cell.245 It was found that this electrolyte showed an improvement in ionic conductivity and the formation of a less-resistive solid film at the cathode/air/electrolyte interface compared to a solution of LiTfO in TEGDME, which enhanced the overall kinetics of oxygen reduction and oxidation. Most importantly, a reduced overvoltage for the charge reaction was presented in the Li–O2 cell using the mixed electrolyte compared to that using an IL-free electrolyte.246 The kinetics and mechanisms of ORRs and OERs in the absence and presence of Li+ have been systematically investigated in five IL/DMSO mixed electrolytes for potential applications in high performance Li–O2 batteries by Khan et al.247 The mixed electrolytes exhibited a higher oxygen diffusion coefficient (6.2–11.3 × 10−6 cm2 s−1) than neat ILs and higher solubility (2.9–6.8 mM) than DMSO, and also displayed good stability against superoxide (O2˙−) except for 1-butyl-3-methylpyridinium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide.
3.3 IL-tethered nanoparticles hybrid electrolytes
Development of a practical rechargeable battery comprising a Li metal electrode remains a big challenge because of nonuniform lithium deposition and consequent dendrite formation during repeated charge–discharge cycles. An electrolyte with reduced anion mobility (e.g. single-ion conductor) or capable of selectively resupplying anions to the near-electrode fluid (e.g. supporting electrolyte) would prevent the dendrite growth in a Li metal battery. On the other hand, although ILs possess many advantages over conventional liquid electrolytes, they usually suffer from low Li+ transference number and poor mechanical performance, and are also not satisfactory in suppressing dendrite growth in Li metal batteries. In this context, IL-tethered nanoparticle hybrid electrolytes have been synthesized and investigated extensively in recent years, mainly by Archer's group.248–258 ILs are tethered onto the surface of inorganic nanoparticles, and then the nanoparticles are blended with Li salt or a molecular solvent containing Li salt. This class of electrolytes potentially offer at least two functions to suppress lithium dendrites. Firstly, the tethered ion pairs can dissociate to release anions in the electrolyte to suppress the formation of a space charge. Secondly, the impermeability and mechanical stability of the nanoparticles are able to slow down the penetration of nucleated dendrites. This electrolyte could also overcome the low Li+ transference numbers and poor mechanical performance of ILs. The ionic conductivity of this electrolyte tends to decrease with the increase of particle loading, but very slightly at a low loading, whereas the mechanic modulus and Li+ transference numbers increase.
Various nanoparticles, such as SiO2, ZrO2, TiO2 and Fe2O3, have been reported to synthesize the IL-tethered nanoparticle hybrid electrolytes.23,250,252,259–261 For example, Archer's group reported an electrolyte produced by tethering ILs to inorganic ZrO2 nanoparticles.250 This electrolyte exhibited a good Li+ transference number (0.35–0.4), approximately seven times larger than that for the pure IL electrolytes (0.05), and excellent mechanical properties (elastic modulus 4.5 MPa in the limit of zero strain). In another work, they created SiO2-nanoparticle-tethered [Pmim][TFSI] (SiO2–IM–TFSI) and [PP13][TFSI] (SiO2–PP–TFSI) as Li-ion battery electrolytes by blending with PC in 1 M LiTFSI (Fig. 24),254 in which the tethered IL component allowed for fast replenishment of counterions upon cell polarization. The results presented that SiO2–PP–TFSI had higher conductivity than SiO2–IM–TFSI, and was more effective in promoting uniform Li deposition and suppressing cell short circuiting perhaps due to the weaker association of the [PP13][TFSI] ion pair. The Li/Li symmetric cell tests revealed that only 11 wt% of SiO2–PP–TFSI in a PC-1 M LiTFSI host resulted in a more than ten-fold increase in cell lifetime. Using this hybrid electrolyte in a Li/Li4Ti5O12 half-cell, galvanostatic cycling measurements exhibited attractive capacity retention with almost no electrolyte degradation over 1000 cycles.262 Recently, Li et al. reported the positive effect of using mesoporous nanoparticles to tether ILs on enhancing Li+ transference number and ionic conductivity, in which the mesoporosity of silica nanoparticles provided a reservoir to replenish the depleted anions near the cathode, and also offered a single-ion-conductor-like environment to favor the dissociation of Li+ as well as Li+ transport channels.260
 Fig. 24  Schematic representation of the SiO2–IL–TFSI/PC in the 1 M LiTFSI hybrid electrolyte system (top). TEM images of the electrolytes with a volume fraction of nanoparticles (ϕ) of 0.23: SiO2–IM–TFSI (bottom left) and SiO2–PP–TFSI (bottom right), respectively. The insets display photographs of the two hybrid electrolyte materials showing their fluid-like and homogeneous liquid features. Reproduced from ref. 254 with permission from Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH. 
This class of electrolytes has been extended to Na metal batteries. The addition of as little as 10% of SiO2–IM–TFSI to PC electrolytes (1 M NaTFSI) extended the high-voltage stability of the electrolyte by at least 1 V and thus allowed recharge of the Na-CO2/O2 (v/v = 1:1) cells.256 The cells exhibited unchanged charge potentials for over 20 cycles, whereas the Na/O2 cell based on SiO2–IL–TFSI/PC–NaTFSI and the Na-CO2/O2 cell using PC–NaTFSI as the electrolyte exhibited a steady increase, indicating the decomposition of electrolytes in the latter two cells. In a recent work, using 1-propyl-3-methylimidazolium chlorate ([Pmim][CIO4]) IL-tethered silica nanoparticles (SiO2–IL–ClO4) as additive in a EC/PC (v/v = 1:1) mixture containing 1 M NaClO4 (Fig. 25), the Na–S battery showed stable cycling at a rate of 0.5C with a reversible capacity of 600 mA h g−1 and a Coulombic efficiency of almost 100%.263 The SiO2–IL–ClO4 electrolyte could form a particle-rich and mechanically robust SEI layer to protect Na metal from parasitic side reactions with the carbonate electrolyte, while also providing a tethered-anion effect to stabilize deposition of Na which was similar to the case of Li metal batteries.
 Fig. 25  (a) Schematic drawing of the Na–S cell during galvanostatic cycling, using 1-methyl-3-propylimidazoliumchlorate ionic liquid tethered silica nanoparticles SiO2–IL–ClO4 as additive in 1 M NaClO4 in a mixture of ethylene carbonate and propylene carbonate (EC/PC) (v/v = 1:1), where SiO2–IL–ClO4 helps to stabilize the sodium anode by forming a conformal layer on the anode surface as shown by the SEM image of the sodium metal surface (scale bar, 30 nm) cycled in a cell with 10 vol% of SiO2–IL–ClO4 in the electrolyte; (b) constant voltage-charge profile of the Na–S cells with different volume fractions of SiO2–IL–ClO4 in the electrolyte maintained at different voltages for 1 h at room temperature; (c) ionic conductivity of the Na–S cells with different volume fractions of SiO2–IL–ClO4 in the electrolyte as a function of temperature. EC/DEC represents a mixture of ethylene carbonate and diethyl carbonate (v/v = 1:1), and the solid lines are linear Vogel–Fulcher–Tammann fits of the ionic conductivity. Reproduced from ref. 263, Copyright 2016, published by Nature Publishing Group with permission from Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode)/not modified. 
3.4 Solvate ionic liquids
Recently, concentrated Li+ or Na+ salts in glymes exhibiting a molten state, termed as ‘solvate’ ILs, were developed as new electrolytes for batteries. Distinct from normal ILs, the solvate ILs intrinsically possess an Li atom in their cation structure, in which the positively charged Li atom was strongly coordinated by the ligand molecules such as glymes. The equimolar mixture of triglyme (G3) with Li[TFSI] is regarded as a typical solvate IL with the abbreviation [Li(G3)1][TFSI]. The [Li(G3)1]+ cation is a 1:1 complex of G3 and Li+, in which each Li atom is coordinated by four oxygen atoms from the crown ether-like G3 molecule. [Li(G3)1]+ acts as an independent cation and could be long-lived in solvents, much like the properties of cations of normal ILs.264–267 The characteristics of [Li(G3)1][TFSI] are very similar to normal ILs, such as negligible vapor pressure, non-flammability, high ionic conductivity (1.1 mS cm−1 at 30 °C), and a wide electrochemical window, making it a promising candidate for an electrolyte in Li-ion, Li–S or Li–air batteries.
Watanabe's group investigated the structure of Li+ ions in equimolar mixtures of glymes and various Li salts such as LiTFSI, LiBETI, LiTfO, LiBF4, LiClO4, LiNO3, and lithium trifluoroacetate (LiTFA) to discriminate between solvate ILs and concentrated solutions (Fig. 26).268 The results confirmed that [Li(glyme)][TFSI] and [Li(glyme)][BETI] (glyme = G3 or G4, G4 is tetraglyme) could be deemed as solvate ILs with almost no free glyme in the complexes due to the weak Lewis basicity of anions. The complexes containing other anions could be considered as concentrated solutions due to the presence of a large amount of free glyme in the solvents, because the strong Lewis basic anions interact with Li+ much stronger than the Li+–glyme interaction. In the liquid state, the glyme molecules were found to adopt a crown-ether like conformation to generate a monomeric [Li(glyme)]+. From the results of single crystal X-ray diffraction studies, the Li+ in [Li(G3)1][BETI] was coordinated to four oxygen atoms from a single G3 molecule and one from a [BETI]− anion; however, for the [TFSI]−-based complex the Li+ was 6-fold coordinated with four oxygen from a single G3 and two from a single [TFSI]−.269,270
 Fig. 26  Percentages of uncoordinated free glyme (cf/cG) in equimolar molten mixtures [Li(glyme)1]X at 30 °C estimated from the Raman spectroscopy analysis. The inset shows the optimized geometries of [Li(G4)]+ at the B3LYP/6-311+G** level. Reproduced from ref. 268 with permission from Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Many attempts have been made to use these solvate ILs as electrolytes. For example, [Li(G3 or G4)][TFSI] resulting from the equimolar complex of G3 or G4 with LiTFSI exhibited high self-dissociativity (0.6–0.7) at room temperature. The electrode potential at which the electrochemical oxidation of [Li(glyme)1][TFSI] took place was ∼5 V vs. Li/Li+, higher than that for the solutions with excess glyme molecules (∼4 V vs. Li/Li+) due to the stability of [Li(glyme)]+. The assembled Li/[Li(glyme)1][TFSI]/LiCoO2 battery could be operated over 200 charge–discharge cycles in the voltage range of 3.0–4.2 V.268,271,272 After that, the electrochemical measurements on graphite electrodes showed that the desolvation of Li+ ions occurred at the graphite/[Li(G3)1][TFSI] interface in the potential range of 0.3–0 V vs. Li, and the cointercalation of G3 and Li+ as the [Li(G3)1]+ cation into graphite took place only in electrolytes containing excess G3 molecules in the voltage range of 1.5–0.2 V of the Li/graphite battery.265 The [Li(G3)1]+-intercalated graphite formed staged phases in the voltage range of 1.5–0.3 V, and further intercalation below 0.3 V would result in the exfoliation of graphite. The concept of solvate ILs could also be extended to Na systems, resulting in the [Na(glyme)1][TFSI] electrolytes.273–276
It is known that for the Li–S battery, the donor ability of the electrolytes should be as weak as possible to suppress the solubility of Li2Sm, so as to prevent the polysulfide shuttle phenomenon and improve the retention of active material within the sulfur electrode.277 In addition to normal ILs, it is found that the solvate ILs could also be used in Li–S batteries to suppress Li2Sm dissolution due to the low Lewis acidity and basicity of their cations and anions. Dokko et al. reported that the Li–S battery with [Li(G3 or G4)1][TFSI] as the electrolyte could be cycled more than 400 times while still maintaining a coulombic efficiency above 98%, indicating the high efficiency of these solvate ILs preventing Li2Sm from dissolution.277 The high viscosity of solvate ILs restricted the rate capability; therefore, non-flammable 1,1,2,2-tetrafluoroethyl 2,2,3,3-tetrafluoropropyl ether (HFE) was added to decrease the electrolyte viscosity and facilitate the ionic conduction. Moreover, the solubility of Li2Sm in the [Li(G4)1][TFSI]/HFE mixture was found to be much lower than that in the absence of HFE, and the energy efficiency and rate capability of the Li–S cell with the [Li(G4)1][TFSI]/HFE electrolyte also increased compared with that of [Li(G4)1][TFSI]. The other less polar solvents were also investigated, such as toluene and DEC,271 and it was found that the glyme molecules preferentially coordinated to Li+ in less polar solvents and the [Li(G4)1][TFSI] diluted by HFE and toluene were the most promising electrolyte candidates because of the higher dissociativity. In Li–S batteries consisting of graphite anodes, Li2S/graphite composite cathodes and [Li(G4)x][TFSI]/HFE electrolytes,278 the solvate ILs can perform as a single-phase electrolyte compatible with both anode and cathode and inhibit the Li2Sm shuttle effect. The battery consisting of [Li(G4)0.8][TFSI]/HFE delivered the highest first- and 20th-cycle discharge capacities, 809 and 586 mA h g−1, respectively, along with up to 99% Coulombic efficiency.278 The effect of the porous structure of carbon materials on the Li–S battery performance using solvate ILs was also investigated.279
The performance of the solvate IL electrolytes in Li–O2 batteries was also evaluated very recently.280 The results showed that the increased stability of [Li(G3)1][TFSI] induced higher O2 and lower CO2 evolution during the charge process compared with a conventional electrolyte solution. When extended to Li–air batteries, hydrophobic phosphonium ILs, such as tributylmethylphosphonium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide ([P1444][TFSI]) and trihexyltetradecylphosphonium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide ([P66614][TFSI]), were introduced to mix with solvate ILs for decreasing the equilibrium moisture content.281 Compared with [TFSI]−, bis(nonafluorobutanesulfonyl)amide ([NFSA]−) is a more hydrophobic anion (Fig. 27). After optimizing the ratio of [Li(G4)1][NFSA] to [P66614][NFSA], the equilibrium moisture content in the electrolyte was greatly reduced to lower than 1 wt% at 30 °C and 90% relative humidity ([H2O]/[Li]).281 However, this method has a limitation because [P66614][NFSA] itself absorbed 0.1 wt% of water at that temperature and humidity, and the addition of [P66614][NFSA] made the electrolyte less conductive. Nazar's group developed another type of solvate IL (also termed as chelate IL by the authors), [(2,3-dimethyl-2,3-dimethoxybutane)2Li][TFSI], for the Li–O2 cell, in which 2,3-dimethyl-2,3-dimethoxybutane was synthesized by substituting the hydrogen of DME with the methyl group to eliminate the possibility of hydrogen abstraction by superdioxide radical.282 This IL electrolyte could suppress the formation of lithium formate, dimethyl oxalate, and lithium carbonate. Virtually no CO2 was evolved on charge, demonstrating that the electrode surface was deposited with much less decomposition product compared to the system using DME. The cell assembled with this electrolyte and TiC electrodes showed little increase in polarization after cycling over 300 h.
 Fig. 27  Moisture sorption isotherms for [Li(G4)][TFSI], [Li(G4)][BETI] and [Li(G4)][NFSA]. Reproduced from ref. 281 with permission from Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH. 
4. Solid-state electrolytes
Several issues such as safety concerns and/or cell lifetime problems arising from dendrite formation or the decomposition of the liquid electrolyte in lithium and sodium batteries have stimulated the emerging field of solid-state electrolytes (SSEs). Moreover, in Li–air/O2 batteries, SSEs can prevent the permeation of liquid electrolytes into the pores of an air electrode which would block oxygen diffusion and lead to an electrochemical reaction based only on the dissolved O2 molecules in the electrolyte and subsequent large polarization.283 Up to date, various SSEs have been developed for lithium and sodium batteries, including inorganic, polymer, or hybrid composite SSEs. Poly(ionic liquids) can act as alternatives to the conventional polymers in solid polymer electrolytes because they combine the general features of polymers with some advantages of ILs such as intrinsic ionic conductivity and good chemical affinity, and pristine ILs themselves can replace the molecular solvents in solid or quasi-solid gel electrolytes. Additionally, a special class of ILs known as ionic plastic crystals can directly serve as SSEs. This section will focus on the progress in the utilization of ILs and poly(ionic liquids) in SSEs (including quasi-solid electrolytes) of lithium and sodium batteries, especially the most recent progress in ionogel electrolytes. Although a simultaneous achievement of both high ionic conductivity and good mechanical properties remains a big challenge, many studies have shown encouraging results compared to conventional SSEs.
4.1 Poly(ionic liquids)
Polymerized ionic liquids or poly(ionic liquids) (PILs) are a unique class of polymers, derived from IL monomers in which either the cation or the anion or both are incorporated into the polymer backbone while non-incorporated counterion species are free.284–290 This structure configuration retains some features of ILs and the general characteristics of macromolecules, and is also able to acquire new properties and functions. In comparison with ILs, PILs possess improved processability, prevented leakage, enhanced mechanical stability, durability, and spatial controllability of the ionic moieties,284,290–295 and thus PILs have been recognized as promising solid polymer electrolytes. Similar to conventional solid polymer electrolytes, the use of PIL-based electrolytes offers the potential to produce thin-film and flexible batteries without an additional separator. But differently, PILs are ionic conductive materials even if no salts are added. Nevertheless, compared with liquid electrolytes, the ionic conductivity of PILs and their mixtures with lithium/sodium salts is still low, and thus PILs are often used as the polymer matrix for gel polymer electrolytes to confine salt-dissolved molecular solvents or ILs. The latter case refers to polymer-supported ionogels, which will be specified in the next Section 4.2.
Reviews of PILs have been reported previously by several pioneer research groups.20,284,291,296–298 In general, two basic strategies were majorly involved in the synthesis of PILs: direct polymerization of IL monomers or chemical modification of existing polymers. Various PILs with different structural parameters, such as macromolecular architecture, molecular weight distribution, etc., could be obtained by different polymerization techniques including conventional free radical polymerization, reversible addition–fragmentation chain transfer (RAFT) polymerization, step-growth polymerization, and so on.296

4.1.1 Direct polymerization of IL monomers. 
The PILs synthesized using ILs as monomers could provide abundant Li+-rich channels for Li ion transportation, leading to relatively high ionic conductivity. For example, the straightforward polymerization of 1,3-dichloro-4,6-dinitrobenzene and imidazole successfully synthesized the polymer poly(imidazolium chloride-4,6-dinitrobenzene-1,3-diyl), which was stable below 500 °C and had much higher ionic conductivity (28.88 × 10−6 S cm−1, room temperature) than the commercial polyaniline (16.70 × 10−6 S cm−1). The PILs synthesized via the IL monomer polymerization also presented favorable mechanical properties, except the good conductivity and wide electrochemical window. For example, Li et al. synthesized a PIL poly(diallyldimethylammonium) bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (P([DADMA][TFSI])) through anion exchange from the commercially available polymer poly(diallyldimethylammonium) chloride (P([DADMA][Cl])), which was obtained via conventional free radical polymerization of [DADMA][Cl].299,300 Succinonitrile (SN) and LiTFSI were added into the PIL and resulted in the composite polymer electrolyte consisting of 40% PIL–40% SN–20% LiTFSI. This electrolyte exhibited an ionic conductivity of 5.74 × 10−4 S cm−1, along with a wide electrochemical window (5.5 V) and good mechanical strength (Young's modulus of 4.9 MPa). The Li/LiFePO4 cell using this composite electrolyte delivered a discharge capacity of 150 mA h g−1 at 25 °C. Interestingly, the discharge capacity increased upon cycling, which was attributed to the gradual optimization of the electrode/electrolyte interface.299 Very recently, the electrochemical properties of in situ photopolymerized imidazolium-type zwitterion PIL electrolytes were reported, in which the monomer was an equimolar mixture of zwitterion 3-(1-vinyl-3-imidazolio)-propanesulfonate and LiTFSI that was regarded as an IL. The polymerized product could form a thin and flexible film, and could also provide Li+-rich channels for Li+ transport.301 The film exhibited ionic conductivity of 2.4 × 10−5–2.9 × 10−3 S cm−1 within 30–150 °C owing to the promotion of Li+ dissociation by the zwitterionic effect, which was much higher than that of another similar zwitterionic-type salt 3-(1-ethyl-3-imidazolio)-propanesulfonate in the absence of lithium salts (<10−9 S cm−1 at room temperature).302 The addition of PC could further increase the conductivity to ∼10−3 S cm−1 at 30 °C. The Li/LiFePO4 half-cell using the PIL/30% PC film electrolytes showed a good initial discharge capacity of 120.4 mA h g−1 with a Coulombic efficiency of 89.1%.
New polymerization techniques such as atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP), RAFT, and nitroxide-mediated polymerization (NMP) have been developed and also employed to polymerize ILs. These techniques could generate PILs with uniform polymerization degrees with predetermined molecular weight distributions.303,304 ATRP was reported to polymerize the IL monomers 2-(1-butylimidazolium-3-yl)ethylmethacrylate tetrafluoroborate,305 1-(4-vinylbenzyl)-3-butylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate, and 1-(4-vinylbenzyl)-3-butylimidazolium hexafluorophosphate.306 The polymerization of N,N-diethyl-N-(2-methacryloylethyl)-N-methylammonium bis(trifluoro-methylsulfonyl) imide ([DEMM][TFSI])304via copper-mediated surface-initiated ATRP generated SiO2 particles grafted with well-defined poly([DEMM][TFSI]) brushes. A long polymer brush on the SiO2 particles was disadvantageous for ionic conduction because its entanglement may suppress the formation of effective ionic conducting paths in the matrix.
A novel double PILs-based amphiphilic di-block copolymer was recently synthesized with both blocks exclusively containing N-vinyl-imidazolium units. The first block possessed triethylene glycol pendant groups, and the second block had a statistical distribution of N-vinyl-3-ethyl- and N-vinyl-3-perfluorooctyl-imidazolium bromides.307 The synthesis was performed via a direct one-pot cobalt-mediated radical polymerization-induced self-assembly, and the substitution of Br− counteranions by [TFSI]− led to two different lengths of the first block in the copolymer. The [TFSI]−-based product having the highest molar mass exhibited a good compromise between ionic conductivity (3.0 × 10−7 S cm−1 at 30 °C under anhydrous conditions) and mechanical properties (Young's modulus = 3.8 MPa at 30 °C). The products also had high stability over a large electrochemical window (0–4.8 V vs. Li+/Li). Single-ion block co-PILs comprising poly(lithium 1-[3-(methacryloyloxy)-propylsulfonyl]-1-(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide) and poly(ethylene glycol) methyl ether methacrylate blocks were prepared via the RAFT polymerization technique.308 The product exhibited low Tg values of −61 to 0.6 °C, wide electrochemical stability of 4.5 V vs. Li+/Li, comparatively high ionic conductivity (up to 2.3 × 10−6 S cm−1 at 25 °C), and a close to unity (0.83) value of Li+ transference number. Li–metal battery prototypes with the prepared polymers as electrolytes and binders showed high charge/discharge efficiency and excellent specific capacity (up to 130 mA h g−1) at C/15 rate.


4.1.2 Chemical modification of the existing polymers. 
Neutral polymers could be chemically modified by ILs and then incorporated with free anions or cations in the pores or channels, leading to increased ionic conductivity. This type of PIL electrolytes could also attain the high mechanical properties of the pristine polymers. Recently, Kuo et al. synthesized a new polymer electrolyte with polyvinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene (PVDF-co-HFP) as host.309 The reaction of phenolic epoxy resin with HBr and 1-methylimidazole led to the oligomeric ILs with Br− anion counterion, OIL–Br. The ultimate PIL or OIL was obtained via anion exchange of OIL–Br with LiTFSI. Different amounts of OILs were blended with PVDF-co-HFP, leading to flame-retardant ionized polymer membranes PVDF–HFP/x% OIL which could be used as solid electrolyte films. The gel polymer electrolytes by blending this ionic polymer with organic liquid electrolytes exhibited high thermal stability (with less than 1% dimensional change at 150 °C) and high ionic conductivity (2 × 10−3 S cm−1 at room temperature).

4.2 Ionogel
Ionogel, also termed as ion gel or ionic liquid gel, is a new category of hybrid materials or gels in which ILs are confined as the dispersed or liquid phase in or percolated throughout a continuous solid phase, including the inorganic, organic, and organic–inorganic hybrid matrix.286,310–313 Ionogels are mainly prepared through five methods: sol–gel, solvent casting, swelling of the matrix in ILs, hot pressing, and in situ polymerization. The incorporated ILs act as both plasticizer and charge carrier, and thus the conductivity of ionogels can be dramatically improved (up to ∼10−2 S cm−1 at 25 °C) over all-solid electrolytes (∼10−8–10−5 S cm−1). Moreover, the ionogel electrolytes exhibit improved mechanical flexibility and better electrode/electrolyte interfacial contact than all-solid electrolytes.311,314
Compared with conventional gel electrolytes bearing volatile organic solvents such as alkyl carbonates, ionogels have a higher safety and can be used at elevated temperatures due to the retained ultralow vapor pressure, non-flammability and good thermal stability of ILs. Moreover, ionogels are less vulnerable to the high viscosity of ILs than pure IL electrolytes because of the diffusion of Li through the gel channels, and their flexibility endows the casting and cell design with more opportunities. Therefore, in recent years a huge interest has been devoted to developing diverse ionogels for next-generation energy storage devices. The kinds of investigated ILs are relatively limited, usually consisting of fluorine-based anions (e.g. [TFSI]−, [BF4]−, [TfO]−) and imidazolium/pyrrolidinium-based cations, on account of their success as liquid electrolytes in energy storage devices.315–317 In contrast, a notable diversity of matrices have been reported, including inorganic oxides, linear polymers, cross-linked polymers, and inorganic–organic hybrid networks. Through the control of components and structures, the conductivity of ionogels can be close to or even higher than that of IL electrolytes.

4.2.1 Inorganic matrix. 
Inorganic matrices are generally advantageous in terms of thermal stability, mechanical strength and safety, and the mostly used inorganic matrices to confine ILs are silica materials. The properties of the matrices like pore size, orientation and shape can be easily tuned during synthesis. The silica-based ionogels could be easily obtained by either an in situ sol–gel synthesis or a physical mixing of fumed silica nanoparticles and an IL. For example, a transparent solid nanocomposite electrolyte consisting of porous silica matrices and an in situ immobilized Li+-conducting IL was prepared, and it not only exhibited superior safety compared to the conventional organic electrolytes, but also had relatively high ionic conductivity and good mechanical strength.318,319 Nevertheless, the relatively low dielectric constant of SiO2 particles makes it difficult for the ionogels to dissociate the lithium salt, and the hindrance caused for Li ion conduction often induces low conductivity at high volume fractions of SiO2 particles. Therefore, the ionic conductivity of the resultant ionogels is generally lower than that of the corresponding IL electrolyte. To overcome this problem, Chen and Guo's group very recently utilized an organically modified SiO2 scaffold to confine ILs.320 The in situ sol–gel of 3-ethacryloxypropyltrimethoxysilane generated a [Pyr13][TFSI]-immobilized biomimetic ant-nest SiO2 matrix with lots of polar groups (methacryloyl group, containing electron pairs) in the interconnected channels, which could coordinate Li+ ions and facilitate their transport (Fig. 28). The biomimetic ant-nest architecture also enabled the formation of a particle-rich protective layer during charge/discharge cycling, which restrained the Li dendrite growth and ensured a reversible stripping/plating of Li metal at a high rate. When the ionogels were used as electrolytes in the Li/LiNi1/3Mn1/3Co1/3O2 full cell, a very high energy density of ca. 390 W h kg−1 was obtained. When used in the Li/Li4Ti5O12 full cell, the cells exhibited excellent cycling stability up to 3000 cycles with Coulombic efficiencies of >99.8%. In another recent work of the same group, another new ionogel electrolyte was synthesized with the same method for high temperature Li-ion batteries, using an epoxy-functionalized silane coupling agent as an organosilica precursor instead of 3-ethacryloxypropyl trimethoxysilane.321 A cross-linked Si–O–Si network functionalized with epoxy and hydroxylated silicon groups was presented in the ionogel matrix. The latter groups interacted strongly with [TFSI]− through hydrogen bonding, which broke the bond between Li+ and [TFSI]− to increase the amount of free Li+ in the system. Compared with the neat IL, this ionogel electrolyte possessed a remarkably higher ionic conductivity of 1.91 × 10−3 S cm−1 at 30 °C and lower activation energy, and it was stable up to 195 °C with an electrochemical window of 4 V (Fig. 29). A Li/LiFePO4 battery with this ionogel electrolyte exhibited high capacities over a wide range of temperatures (154.9 mA h g−1 at 30 °C and 168.6 mA h g−1 at 90 °C). Additionally, its coulombic efficiency was over 98% at 90 °C.321 TiO2 can also serve as the matrix instead of SiO2 in ionogels, named TiSEs (TiO2-based nanogelator solid electrolytes).322 In the straightforward nonhydrolytic sol–gel synthesis of TiSEs, when the solution of titanium alkoxide and LiTFSI-containing ILs was mixed with formic acid, gel networks were quickly formed within 5 min, much shorter than that in synthesizing SiSEs (SiO2-based nanogelator solid electrolytes) (1 h). Furthermore, the TiSEs exhibited a very high room temperature ionic conductivity of 2.93 × 10−3 S cm−1, only 20% lower than that of unconfined LiTFSI-containing ILs, whereas the conductivity of SiSE was dramatically decreased (by 40–70%) compared to the unconfined IL electrolyte. Interestingly, the average pore diameter of both TiSE and SiSE increased linearly with increasing IL ion size, endowing the solid electrolytes with self-regulating ability to immobilize different ILs with different size cations.
 Fig. 28  (a) SEM images of the X–SiO2 scaffold showing an ant-nest-like structure; (b) the reaction mechanism for immobilizing ionic liquids with a tri-alkoxy silane coupling agent; (c) schematic illustration of the surface structure of the biomimetic ant-nest ionogel electrolyte and its interaction with Li+ ions; (d) schematic illustration of the transport path of Li+ ions. Reproduced from ref. 320 with permission from Copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 29  (a) Possible mechanism for the formation of organically modified silica-supported ionogels through sol–gel reaction of an epoxy-functionalized silane coupling agent (SCA) in an ionic liquid electrolyte (ILE), LiTFSI-dissolved [Pyr13][TFSI]; (b) conductivity as a function of inverse temperature for electrolytes with various ILE/SCA molar ratios. Reproduced from ref. 321 with permission from Copyright 2017 Elsevier. 
The presence of a self-assembled liquid-crystalline structure in electrolytes is attractive because it forms well-organized channels for ion transportation in the liquid-crystalline phases.323 However, the silica, titania, and other metal oxide nanoparticles usually used as inorganic matrices of ionogels are isotropic nanoparticles which will significantly suppress the liquid crystalline behavior of ionogels. Zhao et al. recently reported a new kind of liquid crystalline nanohybrid ionogels synthesized via the self-assembly of anisotropic natural inorganic halloysite nanotubes (HNTs), in 1-alkyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate.324 This ionogel not only presented very high thermal stability (400 °C) and mechanical stability, but also exhibited high anisotropic ionic conductivity, reaching 3.8 × 10−3 S cm−1 at room temperature for nanotubes aligned perpendicular to the electrode even at a high HNTs content of 40 wt% (Fig. 30). This was 380 times higher than the conductivity for nanotubes aligned parallel to the electrode (1.0 × 10−5 S cm−1).
 Fig. 30  (a) Schematic illustration of the liquid crystal domains that were assembled through noncovalent bonding between ionic liquids and halloysite nanotubes (HNTs); (b) the anisotropic electrical conductivity of the sample sheared in two orthogonal directions, along with the nonaligned material's conductivity for comparison. Reproduced from ref. 324 with permission from Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
A simple mixing of ILs and bentonite clay or hexagonal boron nitride powder also produced quasi-solid electrolytes for batteries, although not claimed as gel by the authors.325,326 These electrolytes were demonstrated to have good thermal stability at elevated temperatures. The composite electrolyte based on hexagonal boron nitride and a 1 mol L−1 LiTFSI-in-[PP13][TFSI] solution allows operating Li-ion batteries with high efficiency at least from room temperature to 150 °C. The ionic conductivity of this composite can reach 3 mS cm−1 above 120 °C, with an electrochemical window broader than 4.7 V. Shikinak et al. reported a quasi-solid electrolyte comprising a transparent imogolite thixotropic gel swelled by ILs such as [Bmim][BF4], [Emim][BF4] and [Emim][MeSO3] (1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium methanesulfonate).327 These gels exhibited relatively the same high values of ionic conductivity at 25 to 80 °C as the neat ILs.


4.2.2 Polymer matrix. 
Most ionogels reported in recent years are based on polymer matrices. The polymers used mainly include poly(vinylidenefluoride–hexafluoropropylene) (PVDF–HFP), poly(oxyethylene) (PEO), poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA), poly(vinyl chloride) (PVC), poly(acrylonitrile) (PAN), etc.315–317 Solution casting is a common technique to produce ionogels. For example, ionogel electrolytes were prepared by incorporating liquid electrolytes such as the mixture of lithium nonafluorobutanesulfonate (LiNfO) and 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium nonafluorobutanesulfonate ([Bmim][NfO]) into the PVDF–HFP matrix.315 The ionogels exhibited good cycling performance in the Li/LiCoO2 cell at a low current rate and achieved a discharge capacity of 138.1 mA h g−1 at room temperature. When the IL was [Pyr14][TFSI] and the salt was LiTFSI, a more conductive and stable SEI was formed on the Li metal of a quasi-solid-state Li–O2 battery along with more effective suppression of water transport toward the Li anode.328 Free standing films of PEO + 20 wt% LiTFSI with different amounts of added IL [Emim][TFSI] were prepared by a solution casting technique.316 The assembled battery comprising this ionogel electrolyte (12.5 wt% [Emim][TFSI]), a Li metal foil anode and a LiMn2O4 standard cathode showed high thermal stability (up to 310 °C), good ionic conductivity (2.08 × 10−4 S cm−1 at 30 °C), high Li+ transference number (0.39) and a wide electrochemical stability window (4.6 V). Li et al. synthesized a solid-like ionogel comprising PVDF–HFP, [Emim][N(CN)2] and LiClO4, and incorporated it into a flexible Li-ion battery.329 The electrolyte exhibited good thermal stability up to 300 °C and relatively high ionic conductivity (6 × 10−4 S cm−1) with a polymer to IL ratio of 1:2. Another route of preparing ionogel polymer electrolytes is the polymerization of monomers in salt-containing ILs, although it may be limited by the loss of miscibility above a certain degree of polymerization. Bhattacharyya et al. synthesized a polymer gel electrolyte by free radical polymerization of acrylonitrile in an IL electrolyte [Pyr14][TFSI]–LiTFSI containing 0.5 M LiTFSI.330 The product (acrylonitrile:[Pyr14][TFSI] = 0.16–0.18, w/w) exhibited superior mechanical strength and thermal stability compared to [Pyr14][TFSI]–LiTFSI. The ionic conductivity decreased with increasing acrylonitrile concentration, and a ratio of acrylonitrile:[Pyr14][TFSI] = 0.16 delivered ionic conductivity (1.7 × 10−3 Ω−1 cm−1 at 25 °C) nearly identical to that of non-confined [Pyr14][TFSI]–LiTFSI (1.8 × 10−3 Ω−1 cm−1 at 25 °C). When assembled into a Li/LiFePO4 battery, the gel electrolyte exhibited exceptional cyclability and rate capability compared to the pure IL electrolyte.
The neutral nature of the above polymers usually makes their interaction with ILs not strong enough, which can induce low miscibility with ILs and easy phase separation. Moreover, the neutral structure makes these polymers intrinsically inert and thus limits the conductivity of the constructed ionogel. To overcome these problems, PILs can be used as an alternative polymer matrix. Owing to the ionic nature, PILs can bring on strong ion–ion interactions with the ionic filler, which not only generates high chemical affinity between PILs and ILs to better encapsulate-solidify-gelify the IL–salt mixtures, but also prevents phase separation and liquid leakage. Moreover, the intrinsic conductivity of PILs allows reaching high ionic conductivity suitable for practical use (10−4–10−2 S cm−1 at 25 °C) at low contents of ILs. The anion of the PILs is usually [TFSI]−, to match with the confined [TFSI]−-based IL electrolytes, and the cation structure of PILs is an essential factor to tailor the structure and property of ionogels. A recent example is given by Safa et al.331 Free-standing gel polymer electrolytes composed of PIL P([DADMA][TFSI]), [Emim][TFSI] and LiTFSI were prepared by the solution casting method. Benefiting from the good affinity between P([DADMA][TFSI]) and [Emim][TFSI], the content of the LiTFSI:[Emim][TFSI] electrolyte in the formed gels can reach up to 80 wt%, giving rise to high ionic conductivity (3.35 mS cm−1 at 25 °C), a wide electrochemical window (5.0 V vs. Li/Li+) and improved transference number (0.41) compared with IL electrolyte (0.3). Moreover, the gel electrolytes suppressed the dendrite formation more efficiently than IL electrolytes. The Li/LiFePO4 battery using this ionogel electrolyte exhibited a discharge capacity of 169.3 mA h g−1 at C/10 (22 °C), ca. 99.9% of the theoretical capacity of LiFePO4, indicative of hardly any ionic or interfacial limitations for this ionogel at that rate, and the retention percentage of theoretical capacity in the gel electrolyte at all C-rates (up to 5C) was always higher than that in the IL electrolyte counterpart. Zhang et al. synthesized three kinds of PILs with six ion pairs per repeating unit as matrices for ionogel electrolytes (Fig. 31).289 The high charge density of the obtained matrix provided abundant weakly coordinating sites to facilitate the Li+ movement via electrostatic interactions. In addition, the PIL matrices exhibited a hierarchical structure and a robust backbone, providing a rich void for Li+ mobility and contributing to the mechanical stability of the membrane. When immobilizing the LiTFSI:[Emim][TFSI] electrolyte (0.5 mol kg−1) into those matrices, good ionic conductivity of up to 5.32 mS cm−1 at 22 °C and wide electrochemical windows of up to 5.6 V were obtained along with good interfacial compatibility with the electrodes.
 Fig. 31  (a) Chemical structure of two polymeric ionic networks (PINs) with six ion pairs per repeating unit: PIN-1 and PIN-3; (b) the ionic conductivity of PIN@LiTFSI–[Emim][TFSI] solid electrolytes, where PIN-2 and PIN-4 are the analogues of PIN-1 and PIN-3, respectively, in which the substituent number of the benzene core is three instead of six. Reproduced from ref. 289 with permission from Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH. 
A trade-off between ionic conductivity and mechanical strength is usually observed for polymer ionogels, no matter what methods are used for synthesizing ionogels (solvent casting, film swelling or direct polymerization). Increasing the content of ILs in ionogels can render higher conductivity, but often with the sacrifice of mechanical strength. To address this problem, incorporation of chemical cross-linking into the polymer matrix was attempted. For instance, UV cross-linked PEO–LiTFSI–[Pyr14][TFSI] solid polymer electrolytes were prepared using benzophenone as a cross-linking agent,332 showing superior mechanical and conduction properties compared to the non-crosslinked electrolytes and IL-free polymer electrolytes, respectively. However, when the [Pyr14][TFSI]/EO mole ratio exceeded 0.4, the product was still too soft and sticky. Therefore, another useful strategy to address this problem was developed, featured by constructing phase-separated nanostructured block copolymers to generate a bicontinuous ionic-conductive membrane structure. Schulze et al. reported this strategy based on one-pot polymerization-induced phase separation, through which nanostructured polymer electrolyte membranes were generated with an unprecedented combination of high ionic conductivity and high modulus at high temperature.333 Heating the solution of the PEO macromolecular chain transfer agent in a mixture of [Bmim][TFSI], styrene and divinylbenzene generated a bi-continuous polymer electrolyte membrane consisting of interpenetrating nanodomains of highly crosslinked polystyrene (mechanically robust phase) and PEO/[Bmim][TFSI] (ion-conductive phase). Ionic conductivity higher than 1 mS cm−1 was achieved together with an elastic modulus approaching 1 GPa at room temperature, and the membrane could still be a robust solid above 100 °C with significantly elevated conductivity (Fig. 32).
 Fig. 32  The elastic modulus and ionic conductivity of the nanostructured solid-state polymer electrolyte membranes (solid circle) and several other materials, the schematic illustration of the phase separation, and the chemical structure of the polymer. Reproduced from ref. 333 with permission from Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
Another interesting strategy to address the trade-off between ionic conductivity and mechanical strength was presented by Zhou et al. in a very recent work, featuring an in situ synthetic technique which completed the preparation of composite polymer electrolytes and the formation of high-safety polymer Li/Na-ion batteries in one step.334 A hierarchical PIL-based solid electrolyte (HPILSE) was fabricated via in situ polymerizing the 1,4-bis[3-(2-acryloyloxyethyl)imidazolium-1-yl]butane bis[-bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide] ([C1-4][TFSI]) monomer in the [Emim][TFSI]-based electrolyte which was filled in a P([DADMA][TFSI]) (also abbreviated as P([DDA][TFSI])) porous membrane (Fig. 33). The porous membrane and the [Emim][TFSI]-based electrolyte with a suitable content provided the HPILSE with satisfactory tensile strength (2.4 MPa) and high ionic conductivity (>1 mS cm−1 at 25 °C), respectively, meanwhile the crosslinked [C1-4][TFSI] kept it in a quasi-solid state without the risk of liquid leakage even at high temperature. As a result, this in situ synthesis method not only significantly simplified the assembly process of polymer Li/Na-ion batteries, but also ensured a robust low-resistant interfacial contact between HPILSE and electrodes against the electrode volumetric changes during charge/discharge cycles. Both Li/Li-HPILSE/Li and Na/Na-HPILSE/Na cells displayed a low voltage fluctuation during 300 cycles. The LiFePO4/LiHPILSE/Li cell delivered specific reversible capacities of 162.4, 155.0, 141.5, 111.6 and 81.4 mA h g−1 at 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.5 and 1C (25 °C), respectively, better than most of the reported Li-ion batteries using PIL-based electrolytes,334 and a capacity retention ratio of 97.7% was obtained after 100 cycles at 0.1C with nearly 100% coulombic efficiency except for the initial cycle (95.5%). The Na0.9[Cu0.22Fe0.30Mn0.48]O2/Na-HPILSE/Na cell delivers 59.9–101 mA h g−1 at the same C-rate range, with a capacity retention of 85.5% after 100 cycles at 0.1C and an average coulombic efficiency near 100%. It was noted that both the charge transfer resistance and the SEI interface resistance of the cell using Na-HPILSE were much higher than those of the cell using Li-HPILSE, which stems from the larger size of Na+ and the higher reactivity of the Na metal, relatively.
 Fig. 33  Schematic illustration of the in situ synthesis route towards a nesting doll-like hierarchical PIL-based solid electrolyte (HPILSE). Reproduced from ref. 334 with permission from Copyright 2017 Elsevier. 


4.2.3 Inorganic–polymer composite ionogel. 
Apart from using inorganic or organic materials as host for ionogels, ionogels synthesized via confining an IL within a hybrid organic–inorganic matrix have also been reported to integrate the merits of both inorganic and organic matrices. A typical method is incorporating inorganic nanoparticles into polymer ionogels, which can improve the mechanical properties of polymer ionogels while preserving their flexibility and tractability. For example, Guyomard-Lack et al. synthesized a hybrid silica–polymer ionogel by a straightforward one-pot solubilization of PVDF-co-HEA, tetraethylorthosilicate (TEOS), and LiTFSI:[Pyr13][TFSI] solution followed by in situ polycondensation of the TEOS.335 This electrolyte exhibited high ionic conductivity, good mechanical properties and excellent transparency in a wide spectral range, which could be tuned by varying the ratios of PVDF-co-HEA to SiO2 and the amounts of LiTFSI:[Pyr13][TFSI] solution, especially the relative amount of silica. Interestingly, the conductivity of this ionogel electrolyte enhanced with the increase of the amount of silica at a constant LiTFSI:[Pyr13][TFSI] solution amount (64 vol%), even with an amount of silica as high as 18 vol%. This result was worth noting because a barrier effect was present when using silica nanofillers to generate composites which induced sharply decreased ionic conductivity when the silica content was only above 10 wt%. But in this work, a continuous silica network was expected to form during the in situ sol–gel silica formation process, which could generate a silica/[Pyr13][TFSI] bi-continuous interface and enhance the ionic conductivity. Correspondingly, a higher proportion of silica in the ionogel resulted in a higher capacity of the Li/ionogel/LiFePO4 battery, and the battery with an ionogel composition of [(PVDF-co-HEA)/SiO2]/[Pyr13][TFSI] = [18.7/6.3]/75 (volume) showed quite similar performance capacity to a battery comprising the same electrodes but a conventional separator and the LiTFSI:[Pyr13][TFSI] liquid electrolyte.
Song et al. recently reported a hybrid polymer/oxide/IL (PEO20/SiO2/[Emim][FSI]–NaClO4) solid electrolyte by a mechanochemical preparation.336 A composition of PEO20–NaClO4–5% SiO2–70% [Emim][FSI] yielded a high ionic conductivity of 1.3 × 10−3 S cm−1 at room temperature, along with suitable mechanical properties, a wide electrochemical window (4.2 V) and a high Na+ transference number (0.61). The mechanochemical route of synthesis may be essential for achieving these properties, because it is able to afford a stronger interaction between different components of the hybrid electrolyte than conventional solvent-casting synthesis, leading to higher availability of the amorphous state of the polymer even with lower IL content.337 This electrolyte was used in a solid Na metal battery, which delivered a relatively stable capacity of 62.7 mA h g−1 at 60 °C after 100 cycles.
Wang et al. reported a PIL-matrix ionogel electrolyte in which PIL-functionalized mesoporous silica nanoplates (PIL-FMSiNP) were incorporated instead of the commonly used oxide nanoparitcles.338 A high degree of compatibility between the nanoplates and PIL/IL as well as a homogeneous dispersion in this electrolyte could be obtained by in situ polymerizing IL monomers grafted on the surfaces of nanoplates. The combination of grafted PIL and mesoporosity in the 2D nanofillers within porous structures created abundant and favorable ion transfer pathways that increased ion mobility and ionic conductivity (Fig. 34). The electrolyte containing 8 wt% PIL-FMSiNP had an ionic conductivity 1130% higher than that of nanoplate-free PIL/IL electrolytes while significantly decreased ion transport activation barrier (ca. 10 kJ mol−1). The conductivity of the PIL/IL(LiTFSI)/PIL-FMSiNP electrolytes could reach above 10−3 S cm−1 at 130 °C with a small IL loading (15 wt%), whereas more ILs were required by other kinds of IL-based composite polymer electrolytes to reach comparable ionic conductivity. Li/LiFePO4 cells with PIL/IL(LiTFSI)/PIL-FMSiNP electrolytes were able to deliver 135.8 mA h g−1 capacity at 60 °C during 30 cycles, whereas cells using PIL/IL(LiTFSI) electrolytes only delivered 50 mA h g−1 (in both cases the loading of IL(LiTFSI) was 30%). Another strategy for fabricating inorganic–organic hybrid ionogels was also reported recently through crosslinking of a newly developed ionic polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane with an inorganic core.339 Besides these studies on Li/Na-ion batteries, it is noticed that a hydrophobic IL–silica–PVDF–HFP–LiTFSI composite electrolyte was synthesized and employed in Li–air batteries.340 The battery could reach much higher capacity of 2800 mA h g−1 of carbon in the absence of O2 catalyst using this composite electrolyte compared to the battery using pure ILs as the electrolyte (1500 mA h g−1). When employing the α-MnO2/C composite as the electrode, the discharge capacity could be extended to 4080 mA h g−1 of carbon due to the elevated oxygen reduction catalytic activity and reduced polarization by α-MnO2 catalyst.
 Fig. 34  (a) Conceptual illustrations of Li+ ion diffusion pathways and electrode-PIL/IL interface in the PIL/IL(LiTFSI)/PIL-FMSiNP cell; (b) ionic conductivity of IL-based composite polymer electrolytes with different IL loading. Reproduced from ref. 338 with permission from Copyright 2017 Elsevier. 

4.3 Organic ionic plastic crystals
Organic ionic plastic crystals (OIPCs) are unique materials that have attracted growing interest in recent years as alternative solid-state electrolytes for rechargeable batteries and other electrochemical devices.341 OIPCs are structural analogues of room temperature ILs and inorganic salts that were fully composed by cations and anions, and actually can be included in a more generalized definition of ILs. What distinguishes OIPCs from normal IL crystals is their plasticity, which reflects the conformational and rotational motion of ions in a definite 3D lattice under low stress. The presence of vacancies and extended defects in the sub-melting phases (‘rotator phase’) is considered to be responsible for the rotational motion and ionic conductivity of OIPCs, and both cation and anion have significant influence on the solid–solid phase transition temperature and ionic conductivity. For example, one plastic crystal phase was present within 292–327 K prior to melting for tetraethylammonium dicyanamide ([N2222][N(CN)2]), with an ionic conductivity of ca. 10−4–10−3 S cm−1,342 but the solid–solid phase transition of [N1111][N(CN)2] started at ∼380 K with an ionic conductivity of ca. 10−5 S cm−1.343 Different polyfluorinated anions coupled with the N,N-dimethylpyrrolidinium cation also lead to notable difference.344,345 Compared with normal ILs, OIPCs generally bear short alkyl groups in their cations.
The potential of OIPCs as alternative electrolytes strongly relies on the phenomenon that their conductivity can be significantly elevated by the addition of dopant ions such as Li+.346,347 For example, 4 mol% LiFSI-doped tributylmethylphosphonium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl) imide ([P1444][FSI]) showed conductivity more than 3 orders of magnitude over pure [P1444][FSI] at the same temperature.348 This doping effect is frequently interpreted by the enhanced solid-state diffusion/conduction, but research on the phase behavior of Li-doped OPILs suggests that the formation and distribution of a liquid phase with a low-melting eutectic mixed-salt composition within the matrix of the plastic crystalline salt may also account for the dramatic increase of conductivity (Fig. 35a).349 Moreover, a recent quantitative in situ magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) study of operating solid-state lithium cells showed that a partial liquefaction of the OPLC-Li salt electrolyte at the metal interface and the subsequent liquid-like front displacement are essential for the enhanced ion transport across the interface and overall battery performance, which were initiated by the Li+ transfer into the OIPC matrix during the ongoing discharge of the anode (Fig. 35b).350 Such solid–liquid hybrid behavior in many OIPCs combines the benefits of highly conductive ILs with the safety and flexibility of solids.
 Fig. 35  (a) Phase diagram for (1 − x)[N1111][TFSI]–(x) LiTFSI mixtures (data for multiple measurements shown); (b) hybrid behavior of the organic ionic plastic crystal (OIPC)-based electrolyte, showing that positive current drives Li+ ions from the working electrode into the electrolyte and an increased Li+ concentration induces expansion of mobile boundary domains; (c) ionic conductivity of pure and Na+ mixed [Pyr12][TFSI] with variable Na[TFSI] concentration, along with the ionic conductivity of pure and 1 mol% Li+ mixed [Pyr12][TFSI] in the inset. Reproduced from ref. 349, 350 and 357 with permission from Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society, and Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry, respectively. 
To date, several efforts have been devoted to utilizing OIPCs as solid electrolytes in all-solid-state Li/Na-based cells,348,351–356 of which a major part was reported by MacFarlane, Forsyth and coworkers. The cations of employed OIPCs mainly include N-alkyl-N-methylpyrrolidinium, tetraalkylammonium, tetraalkylphosphonium and pyrazolium, and the anions are dominated by fluorinated anions such as [TFSI]−, [FSI]− and [BF4]−. In particular, phosphonium-based OIPCs have received increasing interest in recent works because of their higher electrochemical stability than the ammonium analogues and better ability to stabilize the superoxide species in reversible metal–air battery applications. For example, a solid electrolyte comprising 4 mol% LiFSI in the OIPC tri-isobutyl(methyl)phosphonium bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide ([P1i444][FSI]) was reported for the Li|LiFePO4 cell.348 [P1i444][FSI] had a suitable plastic phase range near room temperature (10–37 °C), and the LiFSI–[P1i444][FSI] solid electrolyte combined both wide electrochemical window (ca. 6 V) and high ionic conductivity (0.26 mS cm−1 at 22 °C). Moreover, it was also able to form a stable and conductive SEI on the Li surface. As a result, excellent cycling performance of the Li|LiFePO4 cell was achieved at 30 °C and 20 °C at rates of up to 1C, and a record discharge capacity of 160 mA h g−1 for OIPC-based cells was obtained at 20 °C. In a more recent work, a solid electrolyte consisting of the OIPC trimethylisobutylphosphonium bis(trifluoromethanesulphonyl)imide ([P111i4][TFSI]) and NaTFSI was developed for operating Na-ion cells,356 and stable discharge capacities of ∼76 mA h g−1 were obtained at 50 °C with full Na/25 mol% NaTFSI/NaFePO4 cells. Nevertheless, the concentration of NaTFSI in the electrolyte should be much higher than the case of Li analogues to achieve dramatically increased ionic conductivity over pure [P111i4][TFSI], and the depression of eutectic transition temperature upon addition of the sodium salt was less significant than the equivalent lithium systems. This is also the conclusion of another comparative study for the 1-methyl-1-ethyl-pyrrolidinium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)amide ([Pyr12][TFSI]) system.357 In contrast to [Pyr12][TFSI] doped with LiTFSI, there was only limited solid solution behavior in [Pyr12][TFSI] doped with NaTFSI, and the eutectic temperature of NaTFSI/[ Pyr12][TFSI] (63 °C) was higher than that of LiTFSI/[Pyr12][TFSI] (30 °C). Moreover, in contrast to the dramatic increase of conductivity upon Li+ addition, the conductivity of the NaTFSI/[Pyr12][TFSI] mixture in lower temperature phases was not enhanced (even reduced) with increasing Na+, and the conductivity was smaller than that of the LiTFSI system under the same temperature even with a much higher NaTFSI concentration than LiTFSI (Fig. 35c). A molecular dynamic simulation study on the Li/Na-doped OIPC diethyl(methyl)(isobutyl)phosphonium hexafluorophosphate ([P1224][PF6]) related the higher mobility of Li+ than Na+ ions in OIPCs to the different shapes and energies of their solvation structures.358 It was found that the hopping transport of the Na+ ion was dominated by interchange between a triangular and tetrahedral solvation shell coordination geometry, whereas for the Li+ ion it was realized by only the cooperative motion between Li+ and a triangular solvation shell.
5. Artificial interface and current collector
In the development of rechargeable Li/Na metal anode-based batteries, despite the significant advantages of these batteries over Li-ion batteries, the indispensable Li/Na metal anodes are subjected to several problems in liquid electrolyte systems, including instability of the SEI, spatial variation of Li/Na deposition, large volumetric and morphological changes, and dendrite-induced short circuits.359–362 In addition to tailoring the anode structure and optimizing the liquid electrolyte, building an artificial SEI layer over the anode surface is also a validated method to protect the metal anodes and alleviate those problems.363–366 Two strategies are generally adopted for the building, reactions toward metallic Li/Na or coating. Although only few reports have been delivered, ILs and IL-derived polymers have made success in both strategies. For example, a recent work by Basile et al. created a durable and Li ion-permeable SEI on metallic Li through a simple reaction between Li0 and [Pyr13][FSI] mixtures containing diverse lithium salts.367 [Pyr13][FSI] was employed because of its low viscosity and the reactivity to provide a smooth SEI morphology that can suppress dendrite formation in symmetrical Li|electrolyte|Li cells,368 and the addition of lithium salts can accelerate the surface-morphology changes and modify the SEI compositions. As a result, smooth and stable SEIs were formed on the pretreated anodes during cycling without the formation of dendrites after a long period. The secondary Li|electrolyte|LiFePO4 cell utilizing the pretreated Li metal anode showed efficiency not lower than 99% after 1000 charge–discharge cycles, much better than the control cell with the pristine, untreated Li metal as the anode (Fig. 36).
 Fig. 36  (a) Discharge capacity and Coulombic efficiencies of Li|electrolyte|LiFePO4 full cells versus cycle number cycle at 1C rate assembled with pristine lithium and the LiFSI|[Pyr13][FSI] electrolyte; (b–d) discharge capacity and Coulombic efficiency for cells with the LiFSI|[Pyr13][FSI] electrolyte and pretreated with electrolytes composed of (b) LiFSI/[Pyr13][FSI], (c) LiPF6/[Pyr13][FSI] and (d) LiAsF6/[Pyr13][FSI]; (e) discharge capacity and Coulombic efficiency for the same LiFSI|[Pyr13][FSI] cell in (b) after a shelf-life of 330 days. Reproduced from ref. 367, Copyright 2016, published by Nature Publishing Group with permission from Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode)/not modified. 
The feasibility of IL-derived polymers as effective artificial SEI films has been demonstrated by Archer's group very recently.369 The polymer films were created on a Na metal electrode by in situ electroinitiated polymerization of imidazolium-type ILs containing unsaturated functional groups and perchlorate anion, and the structure of the side chain on the imidazolium cation has important influence on the film quality. A high unsaturated degree of the side chain gave rise to membranes with better adhesion and higher molecular weight, as demonstrated by the better results from 1-allyl-3-vinyl imidazolium perchlorate ([Avim][ClO4]) as the monomer than from 1-allyl-3-methylimidazolium perchlorate ([Amim][ClO4]) and 1,3-diallyl imidazolium perchlorate ([Daim][ClO4]), while less open morphologies were produced by [Avim][ClO4] than [Daim][ClO4]. The created PIL membrane exhibited protection of Na metal anodes against side reactions with liquid carbonate electrolytes without compromising ion transport in the SEI, and it could serve as a tethered supporting electrolyte to reduce the electric field at the anode and stabilize deposition of Na against dendrite formation (Fig. 37). When applied in a high voltage Na/Na3V2(PO4)3 battery and a high energy Na/polyacrylonitrile–sulfur (SPAN) battery, the protected anodes showed high Coulombic efficiency and stable long-term cycling even at relatively high current densities. For instance, when the anode was protected by a [Daim][ClO4]-based membrane, the Coulombic efficiency exceeded 96% and capacity maintained at 97 mA h g−1 after 160 cycles. In contrast, the control cell without anode protection exhibited lower variable Coulombic efficiency and a quick decrease of discharge capacity to below 20 mA h g−1 in 30 cycles.
 Fig. 37  (a) Schematic illustration of the polymeric ionic liquid film formation on the electrode, showing that the unsaturated cations accept electrons from the electrode during charging and form free radicals which then initiate and propagate the polymerization process and form a polymer film on the electrode surface; (b) light microscopy images of electrochemical sodium deposition on the sodium electrode in 1 M NaClO4 in EC/PC, taken at 0, 10, 20, and 30 min at a current density of 1 mA cm−2; (c) light microscopy images of sodium deposition in the same conditions as with (b) in 1 M NaClO4 in EC/PC with 20 wt% [Daim][ClO4] as an additive (scale bar: 50 μm). Reproduced from ref. 369 with permission from Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH. 
Besides creating SEI films, the strategies of tailoring the electrode/electrolyte interface also include the incorporation of additional coating between the electrode and the electrolyte to improve the cell performance. In particular, when solid inorganic electrolytes were utilized in batteries, the presence of a coating layer in the solid/solid interface is an effective approach to increase the interfacial wettability and stability.370,371 In this regard, the excellent wettability of conductive ILs to inorganic surfaces makes them able to be applied as novel wetting agents in the assembly of solid inorganic electrolyte-based cells. This concept has been validated by a very recent work from Hu's group.372 In order to enhance the charge-transfer rate at the cathode/electrolyte interface in the Na3V2(PO4)3/electrolyte/Na cell, the authors utilized a small amount of a nonflammable and nonvolatile IL, N-methyl-N-propylpiperidinium-bis(fluorosulfonyl) imide ([PP13][FSI]), at the cathode side to serve as a wetting agent and enable favourable interface kinetics (Fig. 38). This strategy effectively improved the Coulombic efficiency, rate capability and cycle stability of the battery even at room temperature, without compromising the safety of all-solid-state batteries. This was ascribed to the multiple roles of ILs in the formation of a mixed ionic and electronic conductive network, which include enhancing the solid/solid interface contact, rendering an ion migration channel, and providing a ‘soft’ buffer space for volume expansion during cycling.
 Fig. 38  Schematic illustration of the Na3V2(PO4)3/solid electrolyte/Na and Na3V2(PO4)3/ionic liquid/solid electrolyte/Na solid-state batteries. Reproduced from ref. 372 with permission from Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH. 
In addition to electrode active materials and electrolytes, current collectors are also indispensable in the assembly of batteries. Modulating the structure of current collectors has been demonstrated to be an effective way for improving the battery performance, and 3D-structured current collectors can outperform the conventional 2D flat foils with several advantages such as high surface area and continuous hosts for electrode materials.359,373,374 The utilization of ILs in making structured current collectors has been reported, by virtue of their advantages as electrodeposition medium. For example, Lecoeur et al. reported a template-free method to electrodeposit structured aluminum onto aluminum substrates to create Al current collectors, using four [Cnmim]+ ILs bearing different alkyl lengths and anions as the electrodeposition medium. It was revealed that the cation of ILs had more notable influence on the Al deposits than the anion, and cations with long alkyl chains favored deposits having smaller or isolated entities. Compared to [C8mim][TFSI] and [C16mim][TFSI], [Emim][TFSI] offered the deposits a narrowing of the spreading in size and distance. A Li/half-cell using LiFePO4 self-supported on the [Emim][TFSI]-assisted electrodeposited Al current collector as the positive electrode was assembled, which maintained 95% of initial capacity after 45 cycles. Poetz et al. developed a 3D current collector for the cathode materials of Li-ion batteries,375 based on the electrodeposition of an aluminium layer from the [Emim][Cl]:AlCl3 mixture on a Ni-plated non-woven polymer. Nevertheless, thermal decomposition of [Emim][Cl] initiated by AlCl3 was observed.
6. Concluding remarks and outlook
We have comprehensively reviewed in this article applications of ILs and IL-derived materials for lithium and sodium batteries in the fabrication of electrode materials, liquid electrolytes, solid electrolytes, artificial electrode–electrolyte interfaces, current collectors, etc. From a technical point of view, ILs and IL-derived materials have shown encouraging realization of their potential as suitable candidates for carbon/heteroatom precursors, solvents, additives and ion-conducting materials in the fabrication of lithium and sodium batteries, owing to their unique properties distinct from molecular solvents and inorganic salts. Not only significantly elevated safety, but also enhanced electrochemical performance and more sustainable production processes have been observed in many cases. Nevertheless, several problems are also worth noting and need to be addressed in the future work. When applying ILs as carbon precursors, only a few kinds of ILs can provide high carbon yield and high nitrogen content when pyrolyzed, and these ILs feature complicated synthesis and high cost. In IL-assisted ionothermal synthesis of electrode materials, the interactions between ILs and precursors/intermediate products are not sufficiently elucidated, leading to limited prediction of product structure. In the applications as electrolytes, the large viscosity of ILs induces notable restriction on the ion transport, especially when operating the batteries under relatively low temperatures, and the long-term stability of several IL-based materials under harsh electrochemical conditions is not as good as ordinarily conceived. Moreover, insights into the interfacial interaction/structure between different IL-based liquid/solid electrolytes and different electrode materials are inadequate, and the relationship between the electrolyte structure and the cell performance needs further elucidation.
There are more concerns from the economical viewpoint. The average prices of organic carbonate solvents DMC and DEC in recent years in China are ca. $1270 per t and $2500 per t, respectively, which account for approximately 6% of the overall cost of Li-ion batteries. The price of ILs in industrial-scale quantity is not available; however, it is expected to be considerably more expensive than organic carbonates, because the ILs used in electrolytes generally need fluorinated-anion metal salts as the key precursor, but those salts are expensive (e.g., the price of LiPF6 in China is ca. $30000 per t, for LiFSI it is ca. $150000 per t). Thus the production cost of batteries will be notably increased if directly replacing the current carbonate electrolytes with IL electrolytes. With regard to solid-state polymer electrolytes, PILs are also more expensive than conventional polymers (e.g., the prices of PEO and PVDF in China are lower than $15000 per t). When using ILs and PILs as the precursor, medium or ingredient to prepare electrodes, the cost is higher than conventional substances as well.
In the above context, ILs and derived materials will be promising mainly in processes where their unique characteristics are indispensable, such as the operation of batteries at high temperatures, high voltages, or in open systems. More stable, less viscous and cheaper ILs are in great need of development, and further attention should be directed to the science of the effect of IL-based materials on the battery performance. On the other hand, in order to improve the economic feasibility and overcome some drawbacks of ILs, the hybrids of IL-based materials with conventional ‘cheap’ materials are more promising than the pure materials. The IL–molecular solvent hybrid electrolytes, the ionogels, and the IL-derived carbon coatings on support materials are all important strategies in this aspect. In these cases, understanding the complex interactions among each component of the hybrid materials will be crucial to create a synergistic effect and maximize the advantages of ILs and derived materials with low consumption of them.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21725603, 21476192 and 21436010), the Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (No. LZ18B060001), and the National Program for Support of Top-notch Young Professionals (H. X.). and X. S and S. D. were supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Materials Sciences and Engineering Division under contract number DE-AC05-00OR22725.
References
B. Scrosati and J. Garche, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 2419–2430 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Goodenough and K. S. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1167–1176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
The Allied Market Research, http://https://www.alliedmarketresearch.com/press-release/lithium-ion-battery-market.html, accessed October 2017.
Y. X. Yin, S. Xin, Y. G. Guo and L. J. Wan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13186–13200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Girishkumar, B. McCloskey, A. C. Luntz, S. Swanson and W. Wilcke, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2193–2203 CrossRef CAS .
L. Grande, E. Paillard, J. Hassoun, J. B. Park, Y. J. Lee, Y. K. Sun, S. Passerini and B. Scrosati, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 784–800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. G. Bruce, S. A. Freunberger, L. J. Hardwick and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 19–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. L. Ji and L. F. Nazar, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 9821–9826 RSC .
H. L. Pan, Y. S. Hu and L. Q. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2338–2360 CAS .
M. D. Slater, D. Kim, E. Lee and C. S. Johnson, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 947–958 CrossRef CAS .
P. Adelhelm, P. Hartmann, C. L. Bender, M. Busche, C. Eufinger and J. Janek, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2015, 6, 1016–1055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Larcher and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 19–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Wang, B. W. Zhang, W. H. Lai, Y. F. Xu, S. L. Chou, H. K. Liu and S. X. Dou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 1602829,  DOI:10.1002/aenm.201602829, .
Z. Y. Tang, Sci. China Mater., 2017, 60, 368–370 CrossRef .
M. Barghamadi, A. S. Best, A. I. Bhatt, A. F. Hollenkamp, M. Musameh, R. J. Rees and T. Rüther, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3902–3920 CAS .
K. Takada, Acta Mater., 2013, 61, 759–770 CrossRef CAS .
M. Armand, F. Endres, D. R. MacFarlane, H. Ohno and B. Scrosati, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 621–629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Ye, J. Rick and B. J. Hwang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 2719–2743 CAS .
G. Gebresilassie Eshetu, M. Armand, B. Scrosati and S. Passerini, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 13342–13359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Shaplov, R. Marcilla and D. Mecerreyes, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 175, 18–34 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. MacFarlane, M. Forsyth, P. C. Howlett, M. Kar, S. Passerini, J. M. Pringle, H. Ohno, M. Watanabe, F. Yan, W. J. Zheng, S. G. Zhang and J. Zhang, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 15005 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Zhang, K. Dokko and M. Watanabe, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 168–197 RSC .
M. Watanabe, M. L. Thomas, S. G. Zhang, K. Ueno, T. Yasuda and K. Dokko, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 7190–7239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. MacFarlane, N. Tachikawa, M. Forsyth, J. M. Pringle, P. C. Howlett, G. D. Elliott, J. H. Davis Jr, M. Watanabe, P. Simonf and C. A. Angell, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 232–250 CAS .
G. G. Eshetu, M. Armand, H. Ohno, B. Scrosati and S. Passerini, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 49–61 CAS .
R. Marom, S. F. Amalraj, N. Leifer, D. Jacob and D. Aurbach, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 9938–9954 RSC .
A. H. Dahn, T. Zheng, Y. H. Liu and J. S. Xue, Science, 1995, 270, 590–593 Search PubMed .
A. H. Lu, A. Kiefer, W. Schmidt and F. Schüth, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 100–103 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Hou, X. Q. Wang, C. D. Liang, S. Yiacoumi, C. Tsouris and S. Dai, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 8563–8570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          P. Wasserscheid and T. Welton, Ionic liquids in synthesis, Wiley-VCH,  2008 Search PubMed .
J. S. Lee, X. Q. Wang, H. M. Luo, G. A. Baker and S. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4596–4597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Lee, X. Wang, H. Luo and S. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1004–1007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. M. Reddy, A. Srivastava, S. R. Gowda, H. Gullapalli, M. Dubey and P. M. Ajayan, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6337–6342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Qie, W. M. Chen, Z. H. Wang, Q. G. Shao, X. Li, L. X. Yuan, X. L. Hu, W. X. Zhang and Y. H. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2047–2050 CrossRef PubMed .
C. P. Ewels and M. Glerup, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2005, 79, 1345–1369 CrossRef .
Y. Y. Shao, J. H. Sui, G. P. Yin and Y. Z. Gao, Appl. Catal., B, 2008, 79, 89–99 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Qiu, W. F. Li, W. Zhao, G. Z. Li, Y. Hou, M. N. Liu, L. S. Zhou, F. M. Ye, H. F. Li, Z. H. Wei, S. H. Yang, W. H. Duan, Y. F. Ye, J. H. Guo and Y. G. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4821–4827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Fahsi, X. Dumail, S. G. Dutremez, A. van der Lee, A. Vioux and L. Viau, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 1682–1695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Paraknowitsch, A. Thomas and M. Antonietti, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 6746–6758 RSC .
S. Y. Yuan, J. L. Bao, L. N. Wang, Y. Y. Xia, D. G. Truhlar and Y. G. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501733 CrossRef .
Y. Y. She, Z. G. Lu, M. Ni, L. Li and M. K. Leung, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 7214–7221 CAS .
F. He, X. H. Chen, Y. F. Shen, Y. Li, A. R. Liu, S. Q. Liu, T. Mori and Y. J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6630–6638 CAS .
Z. L. Li, G. L. Li, L. H. Jiang, J. L. Li, G. Q. Sun, C. G. Xia and F. W. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 1494–1498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. F. Fulvio, P. C. Hillesheim, Y. Oyola, S. M. Mahurin, G. M. Veith and S. Dai, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 7289–7291 RSC .
A. P. Abbott, G. Capper, D. L. Davies, R. K. Rasheed and V. Tambyrajah, Chem. Commun., 2003, 70–71 RSC .
J. P. Paraknowitsch, J. Zhang, D. S. Su, A. Thomas and M. Antonietti, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 87–92 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. W. Song, N. Li, H. Cui and C. X. Wang, Nano Energy, 2014, 4, 81–87 CrossRef CAS .
X. Q. Wang and S. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6664–6668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Schneider, C. Weidmann, C. Suchomski, H. Sommer, J. Janek and T. Brezesinski, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1674–1683 CrossRef CAS .
C. Reitz, B. Breitung, A. Schneider, D. Wang, M. von der Lehr, T. Leichtweiss, J. Janek, H. Hahn and T. Brezesinski, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 10274–10282 CAS .
W. P. Ni, S. M. Liu, Y. Q. Fei, Y. D. He, X. Y. Ma, L. J. Lu and Y. Q. Deng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7746–7753 CAS .
M. C. Ali, Q. W. Yang, A. A. Fine, W. B. Jin, Z. G. Zhang, H. B. Xing and Q. L. Ren, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 157–164 RSC .
M. A. C. Gutiérrez, F. Rubio and F. del Monte, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 2711–2719 CrossRef .
D. Carriazo, M. C. Gutierrez, F. Pico, J. M. Rojo, J. L. Fierro, M. L. Ferrer and F. del Monte, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 1405–1409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Carriazo, M. A. C. Gutiérrez, M. L. Ferrer and F. del Monte, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 6146–6152 CrossRef CAS .
N. López-Salas, M. C. Gutiérrez, C. O. Ania, J. L. G. Fierro, M. Luisa Ferrer and F. d. Monte, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 17387–17399 Search PubMed .
M. C. Gutiérrez, D. Carriazo, C. O. Ania, J. B. Parra, M. L. Ferrer and F. del Monte, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3535–3544 Search PubMed .
S. G. Zhang, M. S. Miran, A. Ikoma, K. Dokko and M. Watanabe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 1690–1693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. G. Zhang, K. Dokko and M. Watanabe, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 2915–2926 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Zhang, A. Ikoma, K. Ueno, Z. J. Chen, K. Dokko and M. Watanabe, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 1608–1617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. G. Zhang, S. Tsuzuki, K. Ueno, K. Dokko and M. Watanabe, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 1302–1306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          Y. Yang and J. Y. Yuan, Polymer Precursor-Derived Carbon, American Chemical Society,  2014, vol. 1173, pp. 17–34 Search PubMed .
M. Einert, C. Wessel, F. Badaczewski, T. Leichtweiß, C. Eufinger, J. Janek, J. Y. Yuan, M. Antonietti and B. M. Smarsly, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2015, 216, 1930–1944 CrossRef CAS .
P. F. Zhang, J. Y. Yuan, T. P. Fellinger, M. Antonietti, H. R. Li and Y. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 6028–6032 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wagemaker, E. R. H. van Eck, A. P. M. Kentgens and F. M. Mulder, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 224–230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. G. Wang, H. M. Liu, K. X. Wang, H. Eiji, Y. R. Wang and H. S. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 6789–6795 RSC .
L. Zhao, Y. S. Hu, H. Li, Z. X. Wang and L. Q. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1385–1388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Suo, Y. J. Zhu, F. D. Han, T. Gao, C. Luo, X. L. Fan, Y. S. Hu and C. S. Wang, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 467–473 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, L. Si, X. S. Zhou, F. Z. Tu, X. S. Zhu and J. C. Bao, J. Power Sources, 2017, 349, 37–44 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yoon, C. Liao, X. G. Sun, C. A. Bridges, R. R. Unocic, J. Nanda, S. Dai and M. P. Paranthaman, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 4611–4614 RSC .
X. F. Zhang, N. Bockenfeld, F. Berkemeier and A. Balducci, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 1710–1718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Ryu, K. N. Jung, K. H. Shin, K. S. Han and S. Yoon, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 8092–8098 CAS .
K. Sasidharachari, B. K. Na, S. G. Woo, S. Yoon and K. Y. Cho, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2016, 20, 2873–2878 CrossRef CAS .
J. X. Zhu, K. Sakaushi, G. Clavel, M. Shalom, M. Antonietti and T. P. Fellinger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5480–5485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, P. Balaya and J. Maier, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, A1878–A1885 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Li, L. Gu, S. Tsukimoto, P. A. van Aken and J. Maier, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3650–3654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. Li, L. Gu, J. W. Tong, S. Tsukimoto and J. Maier, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1391–1397 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Li, C. L. Yin, X. K. Mu and J. Maier, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 962–969 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Han, J. L. Hu, C. L. Yin, Y. Zhang, J. J. Xie, D. G. Yin and C. L. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7382–7389 CAS .
K. Rui, Z. Y. Wen, Y. Lu, J. Jin and C. Shen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401716 CrossRef .
N. Recham, J. N. Chotard, L. Dupont, K. Djellab, M. Armand and J. M. Tarascon, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, A993–A999 CrossRef CAS .
M. Blesic, M. H. Marques, N. V. Plechkova, K. R. Seddon, L. P. N. Rebelo and A. Lopes, Green Chem., 2007, 9, 481–490 RSC .
X. L. Li, W. Guo, Y. F. Liu, W. X. He and Z. H. Xiao, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 116, 278–283 CrossRef CAS .
O. Russina, A. Triolo, L. Gontrani and R. Caminiti, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 27–33 CrossRef CAS .
O. Russina and A. Triolo, Faraday Discuss., 2012, 154, 97–109 RSC .
J. L. Hu, Y. Zhang, D. P. Cao and C. L. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 16166–16174 CAS .
Q. W. Yang, D. Xu, J. Z. Zhang, Y. M. Zhu, Z. G. Zhang, C. Qian, Q. L. Ren and H. B. Xing, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 3, 309–316 CrossRef CAS .
X. X. Liu, Q. W. Yang, Z. B. Bao, B. G. Su, Z. G. Zhang, Q. L. Ren, Y. W. Yang and H. B. Xing, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 9150–9156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Chen, X. L. Hu, P. Hu, Y. Qiao, L. Qie and Y. H. Huang, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2013, 5320–5328 CrossRef CAS .
X. C. Duan, S. H. Xiao, L. L. Wang, H. Huang, Y. Liu, Q. H. Li and T. H. Wang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 2230–2234 RSC .
X. C. Duan, H. Huang, S. H. Xiao, J. W. Deng, G. Zhou, Q. H. Li and T. H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8402–8411 CAS .
T. Fukushima, A. Kosaka, Y. Ishimura, T. Yamamoto, T. Takigawa, N. Ishii and T. Aida, Science, 2003, 300, 2072–2074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Fukushima and T. Aida, Chem. – Eur. J., 2007, 13, 5048–5058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. Li, L. Gu, J. W. Tong and J. Maier, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 2930–2938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. Li, X. K. Mu, P. A. van Aken and J. Maier, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 113–119 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Li, C. L. Yin, L. Gu, R. E. Dinnebier, X. K. Mu, P. A. van Aken and J. Maier, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 11425–11428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Wei, X. Y. Wang, R. Zhang, H. Hu, Y. Q. Shen and J. Liu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 97759–97769 RSC .
M. L. Jiang, X. Y. Wang, S. Y. Wei, Y. Q. Shen and H. Hu, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 670, 362–368 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, Y. P. Zhou, Q. Y. Yan and E. Fong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2691–2698 CAS .
C. J. Chen, X. L. Hu, Z. H. Wang, X. Q. Xiong, P. Hu, Y. Liu and Y. H. Huang, Carbon, 2014, 69, 302–310 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Cheng, Z. Chen, H. B. Wu, M. F. Zhu and Y. F. Lu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1338–1346 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ma, X. P. Zhou, L. M. Xu, X. Y. Xu, L. L. Zhang and W. X. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2015, 285, 274–280 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Ye, Z. T. Yu, W. X. Chen, Q. N. Chen, S. R. Xu and R. Liu, Carbon, 2016, 107, 711–722 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Zhang, R. S. Kühnel, H. T. Hu, D. Eder and A. Balducci, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 207–214 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ge, C. D. Gu, Y. Lu, X. L. Wang and J. P. Tu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 13454–13461 CAS .
X. D. Meng, R. Al-Salman, J. P. Zhao, N. Borissenko, Y. Li and F. Endres, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 2703–2707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          F. Endres, A. Abbott and D. R. Macfarlane, Electrodeposition from Ionic Liquids, Wiley-VCH,  2017 Search PubMed .
K. V. Singh, A. A. Martinez-Morales, G. S. Andavan, K. N. Bozhilov and M. Ozkan, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 2446–2454 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hao, Y. Yang, J. P. Zhao, X. S. Liu, F. Endres, C. X. Chi, B. S. Wang, X. X. Liu and Y. Li, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 8481–8488 RSC .
J. Yu, X. Wang, S. M. Chen, X. Y. Liu and S. J. Zhang, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 172–186 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Pomfret, D. J. Brown, A. Epshteyn, A. P. Purdy and J. C. Owrutsky, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 5945–5947 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tsuda, G. R. Stafford and C. L. Hussey, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, H5007–H5017 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zein El Abedin, A. Garsuch and F. Endres, Aust. J. Chem., 2012, 65, 1529–1533 CrossRef .
Y. X. Fang, K. Yoshii, X. G. Jiang, X. G. Sun, T. Tsuda, N. Mehio and S. Dai, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 160, 82–88 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, A. Prowald, S. Zein El Abedin and F. Endres, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2013, 17, 1185–1188 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, J. P. Zhao, J. Hao, B. L. Su and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 15076–15081 CAS .
M. H. Park, K. Kim, J. Kim and J. Cho, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 415–418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. D. Gu, Y. J. Mai, J. P. Zhou, Y. H. You and J. P. Tu, J. Power Sources, 2012, 214, 200–207 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Gutierrez, M. L. Ferrer, C. R. Mateo and F. del Monte, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 5509–5515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kim, T. T. Tung, T. Lee, J. Kim and K. S. Suh, Chem. – Asian J., 2010, 5, 256–260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Yuan and M. Antonietti, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 744–750 CrossRef CAS .
J. von Zamory, M. Bedu, S. Fantini, S. Passerini and E. Paillard, J. Power Sources, 2013, 240, 745–752 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Yuan, S. Prescher, K. Sakaushi and M. Antonietti, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 7229–7234 CAS .
J. S. Lee, K. Sakaushi, M. Antonietti and J. Y. Yuan, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 85517–85522 RSC .
K. Grygiel, J. S. Lee, K. Sakaushi, M. Antonietti and J. Y. Yuan, ACS Macro Lett., 2015, 4, 1312–1316 CrossRef CAS .
S. Komaba, K. Shimomura, N. Yabuuchi, T. Ozeki, H. Yui and K. Konno, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 13487–13495 CAS .
G. T. Kim, S. S. Jeong, M. Joost, E. Rocca, M. Winter, S. Passerini and A. Balducci, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 2187–2194 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Zhang, M. Dahbi and S. Komaba, Curr. Opin. Chem. Eng., 2016, 13, 36–44 CrossRef .
H. Wang, G. Gurau and R. D. Rogers, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 1519–1537 RSC .
S. S. Jeong, N. Böckenfeld, A. Balducci, M. Winter and S. Passerini, J. Power Sources, 2012, 199, 331–335 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang and H. S. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11062–11067 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yamadal and A. Yamadal, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A2406–A2423 CrossRef .
K. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11503–11618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kalhoff, G. G. Eshetu, D. Bresser and S. Passerini, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 2154–2175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Abada, G. Marlair, A. Lecocq, M. Petit, V. Sauvant-Moynot and F. Huet, J. Power Sources, 2016, 306, 178–192 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach, E. Zinigrad, Y. Cohen and H. Teller, Solid State Ionics, 2002, 148, 405–416 CrossRef CAS .
M. Balaish, A. Kraytsberg and Y. Ein-Eli, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 2801–2822 RSC .
E. M. Erickson, E. Markevich, G. Salitra, D. Sharon, D. Hirshberg, E. de la Llave, I. Shterenberg, A. Rozenman, A. Frimer and D. Aurbach, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A2424–A2438 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhong, Y. D. Deng, W. B. Hu, J. L. Qiao, L. Zhang and J. J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 7484–7539 RSC .
D. R. MacFarlane, J. M. Pringle, P. C. Howlett and M. Forsyth, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 1659–1669 RSC .
K. M. Abraham, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 830–844 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bresser, E. Paillard and S. Passerini, J. Electrochem. Sci. Technol., 2014, 5, 37–44 CrossRef CAS .
G. R. Li, Z. P. Li, B. Zhang and Z. Lin, Front. Energy Res., 2015, 3, 5 Search PubMed .
M. Kar, T. J. Simons, M. Forsyth and D. R. MacFarlane, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 18658–18674 RSC .
M. Smiglak, J. M. Pringle, X. Lu, L. Han, S. Zhang, H. Gao, D. R. MacFarlane and R. D. Rogers, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 9228–9250 RSC .
M. Galiński, A. Lewandowski and I. Stępniak, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51, 5567–5580 CrossRef .
H. Y. Che, S. L. Chen, Y. Y. Xie, H. Wang, K. Amine, X. Z. Liao and Z. F. Ma, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1075–1101 CAS .
A. Eftekhari, Y. Liu and P. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2016, 334, 221–239 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lewandowski and A. Świderska-Mocek, J. Power Sources, 2009, 194, 601–609 CrossRef CAS .
H. Srour, L. Chancelier, E. Bolimowska, T. Gutel, S. Mailley, H. Rouault and C. C. Santini, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2015, 46, 149–155 CrossRef .
S. J. Zhang, J. Sun, X. C. Zhang, J. Y. Xin, Q. Q. Miao and J. J. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7838–7869 RSC .
M. Kerner, N. Plylahan, J. Scheers and P. Johansson, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 19569–19581 RSC .
X. Cao, X. He, J. Wang, H. L. Liu, S. Roser, B. R. Rad, M. Evertz, B. Streipert, J. Li, R. Wagner, M. Winter and I. Cekic-Laskovic, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 25971–25978 CAS .
X. Lin, R. Kavian, Y. Lu, Q. Hu, Y. Shao-Horn and M. W. Grinstaff, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 6601–6606 RSC .
C. H. Wang, Y. W. Yeh, N. Wongittharom, Y. C. Wang, C. J. Tseng, S. W. Lee, W. S. Chang and J. K. Chang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 274, 1016–1023 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Elia, U. Ulissi, S. Jeong, S. Passerini and J. Hassoun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3210–3220 CAS .
D. Molina Piper, T. Evans, S. S. Xu, S. C. Kim, S. S. Han, K. L. Liu, K. H. Oh, R. G. Yang and S. H. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 188–193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Molina Piper, T. Evans, K. Leung, T. Watkins, J. Olson, S. C. Kim, S. S. Han, V. Bhat, K. H. Oh, D. A. Buttry and S. H. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6230 CrossRef PubMed .
G. T. Kim, T. Kennedy, M. Brandon, H. Geaney, K. M. Ryan, S. Passerini and G. B. Appetecchi, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5933–5943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Evans, D. M. Piper, H. X. Sun, T. Porcelli, S. C. Kim, S. S. Han, Y. S. Choi, C. Tian, D. Nordlund, M. M. Doeff, C. M. Ban, S. J. Cho, K. H. Oh and S. H. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604549 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Forsyth, H. Yoon, F. F. Chen, H. J. Zhu, D. R. MacFarlane, M. Armand and P. C. Howlett, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 4276–4286 CAS .
H. Yoon, P. C. Howlett, A. S. Best, M. Forsyth and D. R. MacFarlane, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, A1629–A1637 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yoon, A. S. Best, M. Forsyth, D. R. MacFarlane and P. C. Howlett, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 4656–4663 RSC .
Y. Yamada, M. Yaegashi, T. Abe and A. Yamada, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 11194–11196 RSC .
R. T. Carlin, H. C. D. Long, J. Fuller and P. C. Trulove, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1994, 141, L73–L76 CrossRef CAS .
R. T. Carlin, J. Fuller, W. K. Kuhn, M. J. Lysaght and P. C. Trulove, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1996, 26, 1147–1160 CrossRef CAS .
J. O. Besenhard and M. Winter, Pure Appl. Chem., 1998, 70, 603–608 CrossRef CAS .
K. Beltrop, P. Meister, S. Klein, A. Heckmann, M. Grünebaum, H.-D. Wiemhöfer, M. Winter and T. Placke, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 209, 44–55 CrossRef CAS .
J. X. Fan, Z. X. Zhang, Y. H. Liu, A. Wang, L. Li and W. H. Yuan, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 6891–6894 RSC .
S. Rothermel, P. Meister, G. Schmuelling, O. Fromm, H.-W. Meyer, S. Nowak, M. Winter and T. Placke, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3412–3423 CAS .
P. Meister, O. Fromm, S. Rothermel, J. Kasnatscheew, M. Winter and T. Placke, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 228, 18–27 CrossRef CAS .
K. Beltrop, S. Beuker, A. Heckmann, M. Winter and T. Placke, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2090–2094 CAS .
X. L. Ji and I. A. Rodríguez-Pérez, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1762–1770 CrossRef .
F. Zhang, B. F. Ji, X. F. Tong, M. H. Sheng, X. L. Zhang, C. S. Lee and Y. B. Tang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1600605 CrossRef .
M. L. Aubrey and J. R. Long, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13594–13602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Miyoshi, H. Nagano, T. Fukuda, T. Kurihara, M. Watanabe, S. Ida and T. Ishihara, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, A1206–A1213 CrossRef CAS .
T. Placke, O. Fromm, F. S. Lux, P. Bieker, S. Rothermel, H.-W. Meyer, S. Passerini and M. Winter, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, A1755–A1765 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Read, A. V. Cresce, M. H. Ervin and K. Xu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 617–620 CAS .
X. Qi, B. Blizanac, A. DuPasquier, P. Meister, T. Placke, M. Oljaca, J. Li and M. Winter, Phys. Chem. Chem.
Phys., 2014, 16, 25306–25313 RSC .
T. Placke, O. Fromm, S. Rothermel, G. Schmuelling, P. Meister, H.-W. Meyer, S. Passerini and M. Winter, ECS Trans., 2013, 50, 59–68 CrossRef .
T. Placke, S. Rothermel, O. Fromm, P. Meister, S. F. Lux, J. Huesker, H. W. Meyer and M. Winter, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, A1979–A1991 CrossRef CAS .
G. Schmuelling, T. Placke, R. Kloepsch, O. Fromm, H.-W. Meyer, S. Passerini and M. Winter, J. Power Sources, 2013, 239, 563–571 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Zhang, Y. B. Tang, F. Zhang and C. S. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502588 CrossRef .
J. O. Besenhard and H. P. Fritz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1983, 22, 950–975 CrossRef .
X. Y. Shi, W. Zhang, J. F. Wang, W. T. Zheng, K. K. Huang, H. B. Zhang, S. H. Feng and H. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1601378 CrossRef .
J. Q. Huang, Q. Zhang, H. J. Peng, X. Y. Liu, W. Z. Qian and F. Wei, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 347–353 CAS .
N. Jayaprakash, J. Shen, S. S. Moganty, A. Corona and L. A. Archer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 123, 6026–6030 CrossRef .
X. G. Sun, X. Q. Wang, R. T. Mayes and S. Dai, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 2079–2085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Urbonaite, T. Poux and P. Novák, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500118 CrossRef .
W. Y. Li, H. B. Yao, K. Yan, G. Y. Zheng, Z. Liang, Y. M. Chiang and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zang, T. H. An, Y. J. Dong, X. L. Fang, M. S. Zheng, Q. F. Dong and N. F. Zheng, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 2663–2675 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Pang, X. Liang, C. Y. Kwok and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16132 CrossRef CAS .
T. Z. Hou, X. Chen, H. J. Peng, J. Q. Huang, B. Q. Li, Q. Zhang and B. Li, Small, 2016, 12, 3283–3291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Busche, P. Adelhelm, H. Sommer, H. Schneider, K. Leitner and J. Janek, J. Power Sources, 2014, 259, 289–299 CrossRef CAS .
A. Manthiram, Y. Fu, S. H. Chung, C. Zu and Y. S. Su, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11751–11787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Peng, J. Q. Huang and Q. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 5237–5288 RSC .
W. M. Kang, N. P. Deng, J. G. Ju, Q. X. Li, D. Y. Wu, X. M. Ma, L. Li, M. Naebe and B. W. Cheng, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 16541–16588 RSC .
Q. Pang, X. Liang, C. Y. Kwok and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16132 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, S. Y. Chew, Z. W. Zhao, S. Ashraf, D. Wexler, J. Chen, S. H. Ng, S. L. Chou and H. K. Liu, Carbon, 2008, 46, 229–235 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Park, K. Ueno, N. Tachikawa, K. Dokko and M. Watanabe, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 20531–20541 CAS .
M. Barghamadi, A. S. Best, A. I. Bhatt, A. F. Hollenkamp, P. J. Mahon, M. Musameh and T. Rüther, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 180, 636–644 CrossRef CAS .
T. Evans, D. M. Piper, S. C. Kim, S. S. Han, V. Bhat, K. H. Oh and S. H. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7386–7392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Son, T. A. Yersak, D. M. Piper, S. C. Kim, C. S. Kang, J. S. Cho, S.-S. Suh, Y.-U. Kim, K. H. Oh and S. H. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1300961 CrossRef .
X. Ji, K. T. Lee and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 500–506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. L. Ellis, K. T. Lee and L. F. Nazar, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 691–714 CrossRef CAS .
L. N. Wang, J. Y. Liu, S. Y. Yuan, Y. G. Wang and Y. Y. Xia, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 224–231 CAS .
T. Jaumann, J. Balach, M. Klose, S. Oswald and L. Giebeler, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, A557–A564 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, A. Lushington, Q. Sun, W. Xiao, J. Liu, B. Q. Wang, Y. F. Ye, K. Q. Nie, Y. F. Hu, Q. F. Xiao, R. Y. Li, J. H. Guo, T. K. Sham and X. L. Sun, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3545–3549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Etacheri, R. Marom, R. Elazari, G. Salitra and D. Aurbach, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3243–3262 CAS .
M. J. Klein, G. M. Veith and A. Manthiram, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 10669–10676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Manthiram, Y. Z. Fu and Y. S. Su, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1125–1134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. A. Elia, J. Hassoun, W. J. Kwak, Y. K. Sun, B. Scrosati, F. Mueller, D. Bresser, S. Passerini, P. Oberhumer, N. Tsiouvaras and J. Reiter, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6572–6577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Asadi, B. Kumar, C. Liu, P. Phillips, P. Yasaei, A. Behranginia, P. Zapol, R. F. Klie, L. A. Curtiss and A. Salehi-Khojin, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2167–2175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Wu, J. Tang, F. J. Li, X. Z. Liu, Y. Yamauchi, M. Ishida and H. S. Zhou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3291–3298 CrossRef CAS .
A. Khan and C. Zhao, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 506–513 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xie, Q. Dong, I. Madden, X. H. Yao, Q. M. Cheng, P. Dornath, W. Fan and D. W. Wang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 8371–8376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Allen, S. Mukerjee, E. J. Plichta, M. A. Hendrickson and K. M. Abraham, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 2420–2424 CrossRef CAS .
F. Soavi, S. Monaco and M. Mastragostino, J. Power Sources, 2013, 224, 115–119 CrossRef CAS .
F. Mizuno, K. Takechi, S. Higashi, T. Shiga, T. Shiotsuki, N. Takazawa, Y. Sakurabayashi, S. Okazaki, I. Nitta, T. Kodama, H. Nakamoto, H. Nishikoori, S. Nakanishi, Y. Kotani and H. Iba, J. Power Sources, 2013, 228, 47–56 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Cui, W. G. Fan and X. X. Guo, J. Power Sources, 2013, 235, 251–255 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Allen, J. Hwang, R. Kautz, S. Mukerjee, E. J. Plichta, M. A. Hendrickson and K. M. Abraham, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 20755–20764 CAS .
R. Black, S. H. Oh, J. H. Lee, T. Yim, B. Adams and L. F. Nazar, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2902–2905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Randström, G. B. Appetecchi, C. Lagergren, A. Moreno and S. Passerini, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 53, 1837–1842 CrossRef .
Y. G. Li and H. J. Dai, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5257–5275 RSC .
X. T. Jia, Y. Yang, C. Y. Wang, C. Zhao, R. Vijayaraghavan, D. R. MacFarlane, M. Forsyth and G. G. Wallace, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 21110–21117 CAS .
D. Gelman, B. Shvartsev and Y. Ein-Eli, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 20237–20242 CAS .
S. Das, J. Højberg, K. B. Knudsen, R. Younesi, P. Johansson, P. Norby and T. Vegge, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 18084–18090 CAS .
S. Monaco, F. Soavi and M. Mastragostino, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 1379–1382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Grande, A. Ochel, S. Monaco, M. Mastragostino, D. Tonti, P. Palomino, E. Paillard and S. Passerini, Energy Technol., 2016, 4, 85–89 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang and Z. Y. Wen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 5968–5973 CAS .
H. B. Xing, C. Liao, Q. W. Yang, G. M. Veith, B. Guo, X. G. Sun, Q. L. Ren, Y. S. Hu and S. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 2099–2103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ababtain, G. Babu, X. R. Lin, M. T. Rodrigues, H. Gullapalli, P. M. Ajayan, M. W. Grinstaff and L. M. Arava, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 15242–15249 CAS .
L. Lombardo, S. Brutti, M. A. Navarra, S. Panero and P. Reale, J. Power Sources, 2013, 227, 8–14 CrossRef CAS .
M. Agostini, L. G. Rizzi, G. Cesareo, V. Russo and J. Hassoun, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2, 1500085 CrossRef .
N. W. Li, Y. X. Yin, J. Y. Li, C. H. Zhang and Y. G. Guo, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600400 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Lahiri, G. Z. Li, M. Olschewski and F. Endres, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 34143–34150 CAS .
F. Wu, Q. Z. Zhu, R. J. Chen, N. Chen, Y. Chen and L. Li, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 546–553 CrossRef CAS .
D. Monti, A. Ponrouch, M. R. Palacín and P. Johansson, J. Power Sources, 2016, 324, 712–721 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Song, Y. G. Zhang and E. J. Cairns, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5891–5899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Tartaj, J. M. Amarilla, E. Morales and M. B. Vazquez-Santos, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 2132–2141 CAS .
X. G. Sun and S. Dai, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 4618–4626 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ababtain, G. Babu, X. Lin, M. T. Rodrigues, H. Gullapalli, P. M. Ajayan, M. W. Grinstaff and L. M. Arava, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 15242–15249 CAS .
L. Lombardo, S. Brutti, M. A. Navarra, S. Panero and P. Reale, J. Power Sources, 2013, 227, 8–14 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lahiri, G. Li, M. Olschewski and F. Endres, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 34143–34150 CAS .
L. Cecchetto, M. Salomon, B. Scrosati and F. Croce, J. Power Sources, 2012, 213, 233–238 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Kim, E. Ahn and Y. Tak, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2015, 10, 2921–2930 CAS .
A. Khan and C. Zhao, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 506–513 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Wen, Y. Y. Lu, K. M. Dobosz and L. A. Archer, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 4479–4492 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Schaefer, D. A. Yanga and L. A. Archer, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 834–839 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Moganty, N. Jayaprakash, J. L. Nugent, J. Shen and L. A. Archer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 9158–9161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Moganty, S. Srivastava, Y. Lu, J. L. Schaefer, S. A. Rizvi and L. A. Archer, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 1386–1392 CrossRef CAS .
B. Smarsly and H. Kaper, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 3809–3811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Lu, Z. Y. Tu and L. A. Archer, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 961–969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Lu, K. Korf, Y. Kambe, Z. Y. Tu and L. A. Archer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 488–492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Korf, Y. Y. Lu, Y. Kambe and L. A. Archer, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 11866–11873 CAS .
S. M. Xu, Y. Y. Lu, H. S. Wang, H. D. Abruña and L. A. Archer, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 17723–17729 CAS .
S. Wei, S. M. Xu, A. Agrawral, S. Choudhury, Y. Y. Lu, Z. Y. Tu, L. Ma and L. A. Archer, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Lu, S. K. Das, S. S. Moganty and L. A. Archer, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4430–4435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Lu, S. S. Moganty, J. L. Schaefer and L. A. Archer, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 4066–4072 RSC .
Y. Li, K. W. Wong and K. M. Ng, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 4369–4372 RSC .
Y. Y. Lu, Z. Tu and L. A. Archer, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 961–969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Korf, Y. Lu, Y. Kambe and L. A. Archer, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 11866–11873 CAS .
S. Y. Wei, S. M. Xu, A. Agrawral, S. Choudhury, Y. Y. Lu, Z. Y. Tu, L. Ma and L. A. Archer, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, A. Yamazaki, J. Murai, J.-W. Park, T. Mandai, K. Ueno, K. Dokko and M. Watanabe, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 17362–17373 CAS .
H. Moon, R. Tatara, T. Mandai, K. Ueno, K. Yoshida, N. Tachikawa, T. Yasuda, K. Dokko and M. Watanabe, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 20246–20256 CAS .
C. A. Austen, Y. Ansari and Z. F. Zhao, Faraday Discuss., 2012, 154, 9–27 RSC .
T. M. Pappenfus, W. A. Henderson, B. B. Owens, K. R. Mann and W. H. Smyrl, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, A209–A215 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ueno, R. Tatara, S. Tsuzuki, S. Saito, H. Doi, K. Yoshida, T. Mandai, M. Matsugami, Y. Umebayashi, K. Dokko and M. Watanabe, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 8248–8257 RSC .
W. A. Henderson, F. McKenna, M. A. Khan, N. R. Brooks, V. G. Young, Jr. and R. Frech, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 2284–2289 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Seo, P. D. Boyle, R. D. Sommer, J. S. Daubert, O. Borodin and W. A. Henderson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2014, 118, 13601–13608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ueno, J. Murai, K. Ikeda, S. Tsuzuki, M. Tsuchiya, R. Tatara, T. Mandai, Y. Umebayashi, K. Dokko and M. Watanabe, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 15792–15802 CAS .
K. Yoshida, M. Nakamura, Y. Kazue, N. Tachikawa, S. Tsuzuki, S. Seki, K. Dokko and M. Watanabe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 13121–13129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Mandai, R. Nozawa, S. Tsuzuki, K. Yoshida, K. Ueno, K. Dokko and M. Watanabe, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2013, 117, 15072–15085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Mandai, K. Yoshida, S. Tsuzuki, R. Nozawa, H. Masu, K. Ueno, K. Dokko and M. Watanabe, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2015, 119, 1523–1534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Monti, E. Jónsson, M. R. Palacín and P. Johansson, J. Power Sources, 2014, 245, 630–636 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tsuzuki, T. Mandai, S. Suzuki, W. Shinoda, T. Nakamura, T. Morishita, K. Ueno, S. Seki, Y. Umebayashi, K. Dokko and M. Watanabe, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 18262–18272 RSC .
K. Dokko, N. Tachikawa, K. Yamauchi, M. Tsuchiya, A. Yamazaki, E. Takashima, J.-W. Park, K. Ueno, S. Seki, N. Serizawa and M. Watanabe, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, A1304–A1310 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, S. G. Zhang, S. Terada, X. F. Ma, K. Ikeda, Y. Kamei, C. Zhang, K. Dokko and M. Watanabe, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 16053–16062 CAS .
S. G. Zhang, A. Ikoma, Z. Li, K. Ueno, X. F. Ma, K. Dokko and M. Watanabe, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 27803–27813 CAS .
H. M. Kwon, M. L. Thomas, R. Tatara, Y. Oda, Y. Kobayashi, A. Nakanishi, K. Ueno, K. Dokko and M. Watanabe, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 6014–6021 CAS .
M. L. Thomas, Y. Oda, R. Tatara, H.-M. Kwon, K. Ueno, K. Dokko and M. Watanabe, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601753 CrossRef .
B. D. Adams, R. Black, Z. Williams, R. Fernandes, M. Cuisinier, E. J. Berg, P. Novak, G. K. Murphy and L. F. Nazar, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1400867 CrossRef .
J. Yi, S. H. Guo, P. He and H. S. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 860–884 CAS .
J. Y. Yuan, D. Mecerreyes and M. Antonietti, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2013, 38, 1009–1036 CrossRef CAS .
L. Z. Long, S. J. Wang, M. Xiao and Y. Z. Meng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10038–10069 CAS .
I. Osada, H. de Vries, B. Scrosati and S. Passerini, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 500–513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Kim, T. J. Shin and M. J. Park, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2208 Search PubMed .
Y. Q. Li, Y. Song, X. Y. Zhang, X. X. Wu, F. Wang and Z. Y. Wang, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2015, 216, 113–121 CrossRef CAS .
P. F. Zhang, M. T. Li, B. L. Yang, Y. X. Fang, X. G. Jiang, G. M. Veith, X. G. Sun and S. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 8088–9094 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Qiu, B. C. Lin and F. Yan, Polym. Int., 2013, 62, 335–337 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Obadia and E. Drockenmuller, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 2433–2450 RSC .
R. Nakamura, M. Tokuda, T. Suzuki and H. Minami, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 2331–2337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Green and T. E. Long, Polym. Rev., 2009, 49, 291–314 CrossRef CAS .
O. Green, S. Grubjesic, S. Lee and M. A. Firestone, Polym. Rev., 2009, 49, 339–360 CrossRef CAS .
G. B. Appetecchi, G. T. Kim, M. Montanino, M. Carewska, R. Marcilla, D. Mecerreyes and I. De Meatza, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 3668–3675 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mecerreyes, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2011, 36, 1629–1648 CrossRef CAS .
R. Marcilla, F. Alcaide, H. Sardon, J. A. Pomposo, C. Pozo-Gonzalo and D. Mecerreyes, Electrochem. Commun., 2006, 8, 482–488 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tao, J. Lu, B. Hu, J. Chen, S. Xu, F. Liu and D. He, Mater. Res. Innovations, 2014, 19, 65–68 CrossRef .
X. W. Li, Z. X. Zhang, S. J. Li, L. Yang and S.-i. Hirano, J. Power Sources, 2016, 307, 678–683 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dautzenberg, E. Görnitz and W. Jaege, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 1998, 199, 1561–1571 CrossRef CAS .
F. Lu, X. P. Gao, A. L. Wu, N. Sun, L. J. Shi and L. Q. Zheng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 17756–17763 CAS .
M. Yoshizawa, M. Hirao, K. Ito-Akita and H. Ohno, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 1057–1062 RSC .
W. J. Qian, J. Texter and F. Yan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 1124–1159 RSC .
T. Morinaga, S. Honma, T. Ishizuka, T. Kamijo, T. Sato and Y. Tsujii, Polymers, 2016, 8, 146 CrossRef .
S. J. Ding, H. D. Tang, M. Radosz and Y. Q. Shen, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2004, 42, 5794–5801 CrossRef CAS .
H. D. Tang, J. B. Tang, S. B. Ding, M. Radosz and Y. Q. Shen, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2005, 43, 1432–1443 CrossRef CAS .
D. Cordella, F. Ouhib, A. Aqil, T. Defize, C. Jérôme, A. Serghei, E. Drockenmuller, K. Aissou, D. Taton and C. Detrembleur, ACS Macro Lett., 2017, 6, 121–126 CrossRef CAS .
L. Porcarelli, A. S. Shaplov, M. Salsamendi, J. R. Nair, Y. S. Vygodskii, D. Mecerreyes and C. Gerbaldi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 10350–10359 CAS .
P. L. Kuo, C. H. Tsao, C. H. Hsu, S. T. Chen and H. M. Hsu, J. Membr. Sci., 2016, 499, 462–469 CrossRef CAS .
M.-A. Néouze, J. L. Bideau, P. Gaveau, S. Bellayer and A. Vioux, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 3931–3936 CrossRef .
J. Le Bideau, L. Viau and A. Vioux, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 907–925 RSC .
X. Tong and V. Thangadurai, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 7621–7630 CAS .
M. A. B. H. Susan, T. Kaneko, A. Noda and M. Watanabe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 4976–4983 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. C. Marr and A. C. Marr, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 105–128 RSC .
K. Karuppasamy, P. A. Reddy, G. Srinivas, A. Tewari, R. Sharma, X. S. Shajan and D. Gupta, J. Membr. Sci., 2016, 514, 350–357 CrossRef CAS .
L. Balo, Shalu, H. Gupta, V. Kumar Singh and R. Kumar Singh, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 230, 123–131 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Gao, B. K. Guo, J. Song, K. Park and J. B. Goodenough, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1402235 CrossRef .
G. Q. Tan, F. Wu, C. Zhan, J. Wang, D. B. Mu, J. Lu and K. Amine, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1960–1968 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, D. Zhou, H. R. Jiang, Y. X. Ren, F. Y. Kang and T. S. Zhao, Nano Energy, 2016, 28, 97–105 CrossRef CAS .
N. Chen, Y. J. Dai, Y. Xing, L. L. Wang, C. Guo, R. J. Chen, S. J. Guo and F. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1660–1667 CAS .
F. Wu, N. Chen, R. J. Chen, L. L. Wang and L. Li, Nano Energy, 2017, 31, 9–18 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wu, N. Chen, R. J. Chen, Q. Z. Zhu, G. Q. Tan and L. Li, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500306 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Soberats, M. Yoshio, T. Ichikawa, S. Taguchi, H. Ohno and T. Kato, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15286–15289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. N. Zhao, Y. L. Liu, X. M. Zhao and H. Z. Song, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 1545–1554 RSC .
M.-T. F. Rodrigues, K. Kalaga, H. Gullapalli, G. Babu, A. L. M. Reddy and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600218 CrossRef .
R. S. Borges, A. L. Reddy, M. T. Rodrigues, H. Gullapalli, K. Balakrishnan, G. G. Silva and P. M. Ajayan, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2572 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Shikinaka, N. Taki, K. Kaneda and Y. Tominaga, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 613–616 RSC .
K. N. Jung, J. I. Lee, J. H. Jung, K. H. Shin and J. W. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 5458–5461 RSC .
Q. Li and H. Ardebili, J. Power Sources, 2016, 303, 17–21 CrossRef CAS .
M. Patel, M. Gnanavel and A. J. Bhattacharyya, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17419–17424 RSC .
M. Safa, A. Chamaani, N. Chawla and B. El-Zahab, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 213, 587–593 CrossRef CAS .
G. T. Kim, G. B. Appetecchi, M. Carewska, M. Joost, A. Balducci, M. Winter and S. Passerini, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 6130–6137 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Schulze, L. D. McIntosh, M. A. Hillmyer and T. P. Lodge, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 122–126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhou, R. L. Liu, J. Zhang, X. G. Qi, Y. B. He, B. H. Li, Q. H. Yang, Y. S. Hu and F. Y. Kang, Nano Energy, 2017, 33, 45–54 CrossRef CAS .
A. Guyomard-Lack, J. Abusleme, P. Soudan, B. Lestriez, D. Guyomard and J. L. Bideau, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301570 CrossRef .
S. F. Song, M. Kotobuki, F. Zheng, C. H. Xu, S. V. Savilov, N. Hu, L. Lu, Y. C. Wang and W. D. Z. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 6424–6431 CAS .
V. K. Singh, S. Shalu, S. K. Chaurasia and R. K. Singh, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 40199–40210 RSC .
S. Wang, Q. X. Shi, Y. S. Ye, Y. Xue, Y. Wang, H. Y. Peng, X. L. Xie and Y. W. Mai, Nano Energy, 2017, 33, 110–123 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Lee, A. S. Lee, J. C. Lee, S. M. Hong, S. S. Hwang and C. M. Koo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 3616–3623 CAS .
D. Zhang, R. S. Li, T. Huang and A. S. Yu, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 1202–1206 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Pringle, P. C. Howlett, D. R. MacFarlane and M. Forsyth, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2056–2062 RSC .
G. Annat, J. Adebahr, I. R. McKinnon, D. R. Macfarlane and M. Forsyth, Solid State Ionics, 2007, 178, 1065–1071 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Seeber, M. Forsyth, C. M. Forsyth, S. A. Forsyth, G. Annat and D. R. MacFarlane, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2003, 5, 2692–2698 RSC .
S. A. Forsyth, K. J. Fraser, P. C. Howlett, D. R. MacFarlane and M. Forsyth, Green Chem., 2006, 8, 256–261 RSC .
K. M. Johansson, J. Adebahr, P. C. Howlett, M. Forsyth and D. R. MacFarlane, Aust. J. Chem., 2007, 60, 57–63 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. MacFarlane, J. H. Huang and M. Forsyth, Nature, 1999, 402, 792–794 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. MacFarlane and M. Forsyth, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 957–966 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Jin, P. C. Howlett, J. M. Pringle, J. Janikowski, M. Armand, D. R. MacFarlane and M. Forsyth, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3352–3361 CAS .
W. A. Henderson, D. M. Seo, Q. Zhou, P. D. Boyle, J.-H. Shin, H. C. De Long, P. C. Trulove and S. Passerini, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 1343–1350 CrossRef CAS .
K. Romanenko, L. Y. Jin, P. Howlett and M. Forsyth, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 2844–2851 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. Howlett, Y. Shekibi, D. R. MacFarlane and M. Forsyth, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2009, 11, 1044–1048 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Abu-Lebdeh, A. Abouimrane, P. J. Alarco and M. Armand, J. Power Sources, 2006, 154, 255–261 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Jin, P. Howlett, J. Efthimiadis, M. Kar, D. Macfarlane and M. Forsyth, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 10171–10178 RSC .
Y. Abu-Lebdeh, P. J. Alarco and M. Armand, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 4499–4501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. C. Gao, L. G. Xue, S. Xin, K. Park and J. B. Goodenough, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 5541–5545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Makhlooghiazad, D. Gunzelmann, M. Hilder, D. R. MacFarlane, M. Armand, P. C. Howlett and M. Forsyth, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601272 CrossRef .
M. Forsyth, T. Chimdi, A. Seeber, D. Gunzelmann and P. C. Howlett, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 3993–4003 CAS .
F. F. Chen, J. M. Pringle and M. Forsyth, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 2666–2672 CrossRef CAS .
Y. P. Guo, H. Q. Li and T. Y. Zhai, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700007 CrossRef PubMed .
X. F. Hu, J. C. Sun, Z. F. Li, Q. Zhao, C. C. Chen and J. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6482–6486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. I. Iermakova, R. Dugas, M. R. Palacin and A. Ponrouch, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A7060–A7066 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Luo, Y. Zhang, S. M. Xu, J. Q. Dai, E. Hitz, Y. J. Li, C. P. Yang, C. J. Chen, B. Y. Liu and L. B. Hu, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3792–3797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Q. Ma, Z. Y. Wen, M. F. Wu, C. Shen, Q. S. Wang, J. Jin and X. W. Wu, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 14209–14212 RSC .
N. W. Li, Y. X. Yin, C. P. Yang and Y. G. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1853–1858 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yan, H. W. Lee, T. Gao, G. Y. Zheng, H. B. Yao, H. T. Wang, Z. D. Lu, Y. Zhou, Z. Liang, Z. F. Liu, S. Chu and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6016–6022 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Y. Zheng, S. W. Lee, Z. Liang, H. W. Lee, K. Yan, H. B. Yao, H. T. Wang, W. Y. Li, S. Chu and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 618–623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Basile, A. I. Bhatt and A. P. O'Mullane, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11794 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Budi, A. Basile, G. Opletal, A. F. Hollenkamp, A. S. Best, R. J. Rees, A. I. Bhatt, A. P. O’Mullane and S. P. Russo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 19789–19797 CAS .
S. Y. Wei, S. Choudhury, J. Xu, P. Nath, Z. Y. Tu and L. A. Archer, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605512 CrossRef PubMed .
K. H. Park, D. Y. Oh, Y. E. Choi, Y. J. Nam, L. Han, J. Y. Kim, H. Xin, F. Lin, S. M. Oh and Y. S. Jung, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1874–1883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Yao, D. Liu, C. S. Wang, P. Long, G. Peng, Y. S. Hu, H. Li, L. Q. Chen and X. X. Xu, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7148–7154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Z. Zhang, Q. H. Zhang, J. N. Shi, Y. S. Chu, X. Q. Yu, K. Q. Xu, M. Y. Ge, H. F. Yan, W. J. Li, L. Gu, Y. S. Hu, H. Li, X. Q. Yang, L. Q. Chen and X. J. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601196 CrossRef .
E. Perre, L. Nyholm, T. Gustafsson, P.-L. Taberna, P. Simon and K. Edström, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 1467–1470 CrossRef CAS .
L. B. Hu, F. La Mantia, H. Wu, X. Xie, J. McDonough, M. Pasta and Y. Cui, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 1012–1017 CrossRef CAS .
S. Poetz, P. Handel, G. Fauler, B. Fuchsbichler, M. Schmuck and S. Koller, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 6685–6690 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Qiwei Yang
	Qiwei Yang received a BS in Biological Engineering and a PhD in Applied Chemistry from Zhejiang University in 2005 and 2010, respectively. After working as a postdoctoral fellow at Zhejiang University in 2010–2013, he became an Associate Professor in the College of Chemical and Biological Engineering at Zhejiang University in 2013. He has published more than 70 refereed papers and two book chapters, and he has received several awards such as the Te-Pang Hou Chemical Science and Technology Youth Award. His current research interests are the design and application of ionic liquids and ionic hybrid materials.

Zhaoqiang Zhang
	Zhaoqiang Zhang is currently a PhD candidate in the College of Chemical and Biological Engineering at Zhejiang University. He completed his master's degree from the department of Chemical Engineering, Qufu Normal University, in 2015. His current research interests include development of hierarchical and one-dimensional nanomaterials and ultra-microporous hybrid materials with ionothermal/hydrothermal methods and their applications for energy storage and gas separation.

Xiao-Guang Sun
	Xiao-Guang Sun is a senior research scientist in the Chemical Science Division of the Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL). He received his PhD degree from the Arizona State University in 2001 with Prof. C. Austen Angell. His main research interests are developing novel organic salts and organic and polymeric electrolytes for energy storage applications (Li-ion batteries, Mg-ion batteries, Al-ion batteries, etc.). He has won two R&D 100 awards, published more than 80 refereed papers and one book chapter. He also has 8 issued US patents and 11 pending US patent applications.

Yong-Sheng Hu
	Yong-Sheng Hu is a professor at the Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His current research interests include advanced materials for long-life and low-cost rechargeable batteries and their energy storage mechanism, particularly focusing on sodium based rechargeable batteries. He was selected as a Thomson Reuters Highly Cited Researcher in the field of Materials Science in 2014–2017. He also received several awards and honors, such as The 14th China Youth Science and Technology Award, Tajima Prize, Fellow of The Institute of Physics (UK), Fellow of The Royal Society of Chemistry, etc.

Huabin Xing
	Huabin Xing received a BS in Pharmaceutical Engineering (2000) and a MS in Chemical Engineering (2003) from Zhejiang University, and a PhD in Chemical Engineering (2007) from Tsinghua University. Then he joined the College of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Zhejiang University, in 2007 as a postdoctoral fellow. In 2014, he became a full professor at Zhejiang University. His research interests focus on the preparation of ionic liquids and ionic hybrid porous materials and their application in energy storage and separations. He has published over 100 journal articles, and was selected as NSFC Distinguished Young Scholars and ACS I&EC 2017 Class of Influential Researcher.

Sheng Dai
	Sheng Dai is currently a corporate fellow and group leader at Chemical Sciences Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) and a Professor of Chemistry at the University of Tennessee, Knoxville (UTK). His research interests include ionic liquids, porous carbon and oxide materials, advanced materials, and their applications for energy storage and separation sciences as well as catalysis by nanomaterials. He has published over 600 peer-reviewed journal papers with a total citation over 27000, and he also holds over 26 US patents. His research has led to Battelle S&T Challenges Award, six R&D100 Awards, and a Battelle Distinguished Inventor Award.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Number of publications per year since 2000 on Scopus regarding the use of ILs and IL-derived materials in lithium and sodium batteries (up to Nov. 2017); (b) distribution of publications during 2012–2017 regarding the different applications of ILs and IL-derived materials in lithium and sodium batteries.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the structures of ILs, IL-derived materials, and the battery components for which they can be applied.	 

[Emim]+	1-Ethyl-3-methylimidazolium	

	[Pmim]+	1-Propyl-3-methylimidazolium	


[Bmim]+	1-Butyl-3-methylimidazolium	

	[DMBim]	1,2-Dimethyl-3-butylimidazolium	


[Cnmim]+	1-Alkyl-3-methylimidazolium	

	[Amim]+	1-Allyl-3-methylimidazolium	


[Daim]+	1,3-Diallylimidazolium	

	[Avim]+	1-Allyl-3-vinylimidazolium	


[Veim]+	1-Vinyl-3-ethylimidazolium	

	[MCNim]+	1-Cyanomethyl-3-methylimidazolium	


[BCNim]+	1,3-Dicyanomethyl-imidazolium	

	[PP13]+	1-Propyl-1-methylpiperidinium	


[PP14]+	1-Butyl-1-methylpiperidinium	

	[Pyr12]+	1-Methyl-1-ethylpyrrolidinium	


[Pyr13]+	1-Propyl-1-methylpyrrolidinium	

	[Pyr14]+	1-Butyl-1-methylpyrrolidinium	


[Pyr12O1]+	1-Methoxy-ethyl-1-methylpyrrolidinium	

	[MMMPyr]+	Methyl-methylcarboxymethyl-pyrrolidinium	


[N1111]+	Tetramethylammonium	

	[N2222]+	Tetraethylammonium	


[N4441]+	Tributylmethylammonium	

	[DADMA]+	Diallyldimethylammonium	


[DEME]+	
N-N-Diethyl-N-methyl-N-(2-methoxyethyl)ammonium	

	[DEMM]+	
N,N-Diethyl-N-(2-methacryloylethyl)-N-methylammonium	


[P111i4]+	Trimethylisobutyl-phosphonium	

	[P1i444]+	Triisobutylmethylphosphonium	


[P1444]+	Tributylmethylphosphonium	

	[P1224]+	Diethylmethylisobutyl-phosphonium	


[P66610]+	Trihexdecylphosphonium	

	[P66614]+	Trihexyltetradecylphosphonium	


[Li(G3)1]+	Li(triglyme)	

	[Li(G4)1]+	Li(tetraglyme)	



[BF4]−	Tetrafluoroborate	

	[PF6]−	Hexafluorophosphate	


[N(CN)2]−	Dicyanamide	

	[C(CN)3]−	Tricyanomethide	


[CH3COO]−	Acetate	

	[MeSO3]−	Methanesulfonate	


[TfO]−	Trifluoromethylsulfonate	

	[NfO]−	Nonafluorobutanesulfonate	


[FSI]−	Bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide	

	[BETI]−	Bis(pentafluoroethane-sulfonyl)imide	


[TFSI]−	Bis(trifluoromethyl-sulfonyl)imide	

	[NFSA]−	Bis(nonafluorobutane-sulfonyl)amide	



 	Fig. 3  Typical scheme of the direct synthesis of carbons from cyano-containing ions in ILs, featured by a polymerization reaction to form an extended network.	 

 	Fig. 4  Preparation of nitrogen-enriched carbon/sulfur composite monoliths from hierarchically porous silica as the template, ILs as the carbon precursor, and molten sulfur. Reproduced from ref. 49 with permission from Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Preparation of carbon cage encapsulated Li2S nano-clusters. Reproduced from ref. 68 with permission from Copyright 2015 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the salt-templating process for the formation of vertically aligned two-dimensional nanosheets; (b and c) typical field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) images of nitrogen-doped graphitic carbon nanosheets (CNS) prepared at 900 °C for 3 h; (d and e) FESEM images of MoC0.654@CNS; (f and g) FESEM images of MoC0.654@CNS2. Reproduced from ref. 74 with permission from Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Structure of hexagonal WO3 viewed along the [100] direction (top left), scheme for [Bmim]+ ions perpendicular to the (100) planes of hexagonal WO3 to self-assemble into ordered structures along the [001] direction (top right), and shape evolution of various morphologies and crystal forms at different concentrations of [Bmim][CH3COO] (bottom). Reproduced from ref. 90 with permission from Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  Structure illustration of monoclinic CuO viewed along the [100] direction (4 × 4 × 4 cells) (top left), scheme for [Bmim]+ ions perpendicular to the (100) planes of CuO and self-assembly into ordered structures along the [010] direction (top right), and schematic illustration of shape evolution of 3D hierarchical CuO mesocrystals (down). Reproduced from ref. 91 with permission from Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  Hypothetic schematic illustration of the effect of different binders on Li+ transport: PIL binder (left) and PVDF binder (right), showing that PVDF blocks the Li+ transport and thus induces a higher resistance compared to the cathode composed of the PIL binder. For simplification, carbon additives are not described in the figure. Reproduced from ref. 124, Copyright 2015, published by The Royal Society of Chemistry with permission from Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence (http://https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode).	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic representations of SWNT/[Emim][TFSI] CNG, in which SWNTs (gold) were untangled by a π–cation/π–electron interaction with the imidazolium cation of [Emim]+ (green), while the [TFSI]− ions (purple) were anchored in the gel through electric neutrality and oxygen fills the entire cross-linked network gel; (b) three dimensional tricontinuous passage of electrons, ions, and oxygen; (c) weight variation of SWNT/[Emim][TFSI] CNG after immersion in an electrolyte of 0.5 M Li[TFSI] salt and [Emim][TFSI] for one week; (d) the discharge/charge curves of the Li–O2 cell with the SWNT/[Emim][TFSI] CNG and a mixture (before gelation) at 200 mA gSWNT−1 in 1 atm O2, where the capacity was normalized by the weight of the SWNTs and the inset shows the corresponding XRD patterns of the SWNT/IL CNG loaded onto the carbon paper current collector before and after discharge/charge. Reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Specific capacity and Columbic efficiency of the Sn–C/[Pyr14][FSI]–LiTFSI/LFP cell galvanostatically cycled at 25 and 500 mA g−1 (0.12 and 2.4 mA cm−2, respectively) at 40 °C and a cut off voltage of 2–3.8 V; (b) half-cell cycling stability and Coulombic efficiencies of the SiNW-cPAN electrodes cycled under galvanostatic conditions in both [Pyr13][FSI] (1.2 M LiFSI) and EC/DEC (1 M LiPF6) electrolytes; (c) specific charge capacity and Coulombic efficiency of SiNW-cPAN/L33 full-cells assembled with different electrolytes. Part (a) is reproduced from ref. 156 with permission from Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry, and parts (b) and (c) are reproduced from ref. 157 with permission from Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 12  Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy spectra evolution in LMR half-cells using different electrolytes: (a) [Pyr13][FSI] (1.2 M LiFSI); (b) EC/DEC (1 M LiPF6). The insets are the composite morphologies after 1000 electrochemical cycles. Reproduced from ref. 160 with permission from Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic illustration of charge/discharge processes of the dual-ion battery using Al foil as the anode and mesocarbon microbeads as the cathode based on an ionic liquid electrolyte. Reproduced from ref. 165 with permission from Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic illustration of a dual-graphite cell: (a) with no effective SEI layer at the graphite anode during the charge process where the negative graphite electrode suffers from exfoliation reactions caused by co-intercalation of the relatively large pyrrolidinium ([Pyr14]+) cations; (b) with an effective SEI layer (using ethylene sulfite as SEI-forming additive) at the graphite anode during the charge process where the negative graphite electrode is protected from co-intercalation reaction of pyrrolidinium cations by the SEI layer but the transport and intercalation of Li ions are allowed. Reproduced from ref. 170, Copyright 2014, published by The Royal Society of Chemistry with permission from Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence (http://https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode)/merged from original.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Comparison of the ionic conductivity of the specific IL-based electrolytes as a function of temperature (−20 °C to 90 °C); (b) onset potentials for anion uptake obtained from cyclic voltammetry measurements; (c) size estimation (by HyperChem 7.52) of these imide-based anions. Reproduced from ref. 168 with permission from Copyright 2016 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 16  Schematic illustration of the parasitic polysulfide shuttle effect in a liquid electrolyte based Li/S8-cell. Long chain polysulfides originating from the high discharge and charge plateaus diffuse to the negative electrode to be further reduced to shorter chain length polysulfides that diffuse back to the positive electrode and are re-oxidized to higher chain length polysulfides. Reproduced from ref. 194 with permission from Copyright 2014 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 17  Saturation concentrations of S8 and mixtures of S8 and LiS2 (Li2Sm), represented in units of total atomic-S concentration (a) in pyrrolidinium ILs with different anions in the absence and presence of 0.5 mol kg−1 Li[TFSI] (on a semilogarithmic scale), and (b) in [TFSI]−-based ILs with different cations without Li[TFSI]. Reproduced from ref. 200 with permission from Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  Schematic illustration of the functional mechanism of polysulfide dissolution and diffusion in ether (left) or [PP13][TFSI]-based (right) solvent. Reproduced from ref. 206 with permission from Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 19  Schematic illustration of the decomposition pathways of Li2O2 when [Pyr14][TFSI] is present, with a key hypothesis that the solvation effect by [Pyr14][TFSI] promotes the single-electron pathway (the upward branch in the illustration) that features low recharge overpotentials. Reproduced from ref. 216 with permission from Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  Schematic illustration of the oxygen reduction reaction on MoS2 nanoflakes in two different electrolytes (ionic liquid ([Emim][BF4]) and DMSO) based on DFT calculations. The numbers in the figure are reaction energies, eV. Reproduced from ref. 213 with permission from Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  Cycling performance of Li–O2 batteries in an O2 atmosphere with a relative humidity of 51%: (a) discharge–charge profiles of the selected cycles at 500 mA g−1; (b) plots of discharge/charge capacities and the corresponding Coulombic efficiencies against cycle number at 500 mA g−1. The Li–O2 batteries were fabricated with a configuration of (EMD/RuO2/SP)/electrolyte/LiFePO4. Reproduced from ref. 214 with permission from Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 22  Schematic illustration of the ambient ionic liquid-based Li–SO2 battery. Reproduced from ref. 231 with permission from Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 23  Electrochemical characterization of [Pyr14][TFSI]–LiTFSI 0.2 M (black colored) and [Pyr14][TFSI] 70 wt%–(EC-DMC, 1:1) 30 wt%–LiTFSI 0.2 M: (a) Arrhenius plot; (b) time evolution of the cell resistance and, in the inset, corresponding Nyquist plot; (c) current–time curve following a dc polarization of 20 mV and, in the inset, impedance response before and after polarization. Reproduced from ref. 234 with permission from Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 24  Schematic representation of the SiO2–IL–TFSI/PC in the 1 M LiTFSI hybrid electrolyte system (top). TEM images of the electrolytes with a volume fraction of nanoparticles (ϕ) of 0.23: SiO2–IM–TFSI (bottom left) and SiO2–PP–TFSI (bottom right), respectively. The insets display photographs of the two hybrid electrolyte materials showing their fluid-like and homogeneous liquid features. Reproduced from ref. 254 with permission from Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Schematic drawing of the Na–S cell during galvanostatic cycling, using 1-methyl-3-propylimidazoliumchlorate ionic liquid tethered silica nanoparticles SiO2–IL–ClO4 as additive in 1 M NaClO4 in a mixture of ethylene carbonate and propylene carbonate (EC/PC) (v/v = 1:1), where SiO2–IL–ClO4 helps to stabilize the sodium anode by forming a conformal layer on the anode surface as shown by the SEM image of the sodium metal surface (scale bar, 30 nm) cycled in a cell with 10 vol% of SiO2–IL–ClO4 in the electrolyte; (b) constant voltage-charge profile of the Na–S cells with different volume fractions of SiO2–IL–ClO4 in the electrolyte maintained at different voltages for 1 h at room temperature; (c) ionic conductivity of the Na–S cells with different volume fractions of SiO2–IL–ClO4 in the electrolyte as a function of temperature. EC/DEC represents a mixture of ethylene carbonate and diethyl carbonate (v/v = 1:1), and the solid lines are linear Vogel–Fulcher–Tammann fits of the ionic conductivity. Reproduced from ref. 263, Copyright 2016, published by Nature Publishing Group with permission from Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode)/not modified.	 

 	Fig. 26  Percentages of uncoordinated free glyme (cf/cG) in equimolar molten mixtures [Li(glyme)1]X at 30 °C estimated from the Raman spectroscopy analysis. The inset shows the optimized geometries of [Li(G4)]+ at the B3LYP/6-311+G** level. Reproduced from ref. 268 with permission from Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 27  Moisture sorption isotherms for [Li(G4)][TFSI], [Li(G4)][BETI] and [Li(G4)][NFSA]. Reproduced from ref. 281 with permission from Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) SEM images of the X–SiO2 scaffold showing an ant-nest-like structure; (b) the reaction mechanism for immobilizing ionic liquids with a tri-alkoxy silane coupling agent; (c) schematic illustration of the surface structure of the biomimetic ant-nest ionogel electrolyte and its interaction with Li+ ions; (d) schematic illustration of the transport path of Li+ ions. Reproduced from ref. 320 with permission from Copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) Possible mechanism for the formation of organically modified silica-supported ionogels through sol–gel reaction of an epoxy-functionalized silane coupling agent (SCA) in an ionic liquid electrolyte (ILE), LiTFSI-dissolved [Pyr13][TFSI]; (b) conductivity as a function of inverse temperature for electrolytes with various ILE/SCA molar ratios. Reproduced from ref. 321 with permission from Copyright 2017 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) Schematic illustration of the liquid crystal domains that were assembled through noncovalent bonding between ionic liquids and halloysite nanotubes (HNTs); (b) the anisotropic electrical conductivity of the sample sheared in two orthogonal directions, along with the nonaligned material's conductivity for comparison. Reproduced from ref. 324 with permission from Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) Chemical structure of two polymeric ionic networks (PINs) with six ion pairs per repeating unit: PIN-1 and PIN-3; (b) the ionic conductivity of PIN@LiTFSI–[Emim][TFSI] solid electrolytes, where PIN-2 and PIN-4 are the analogues of PIN-1 and PIN-3, respectively, in which the substituent number of the benzene core is three instead of six. Reproduced from ref. 289 with permission from Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 32  The elastic modulus and ionic conductivity of the nanostructured solid-state polymer electrolyte membranes (solid circle) and several other materials, the schematic illustration of the phase separation, and the chemical structure of the polymer. Reproduced from ref. 333 with permission from Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 33  Schematic illustration of the in situ synthesis route towards a nesting doll-like hierarchical PIL-based solid electrolyte (HPILSE). Reproduced from ref. 334 with permission from Copyright 2017 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 34  (a) Conceptual illustrations of Li+ ion diffusion pathways and electrode-PIL/IL interface in the PIL/IL(LiTFSI)/PIL-FMSiNP cell; (b) ionic conductivity of IL-based composite polymer electrolytes with different IL loading. Reproduced from ref. 338 with permission from Copyright 2017 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 35  (a) Phase diagram for (1 − x)[N1111][TFSI]–(x) LiTFSI mixtures (data for multiple measurements shown); (b) hybrid behavior of the organic ionic plastic crystal (OIPC)-based electrolyte, showing that positive current drives Li+ ions from the working electrode into the electrolyte and an increased Li+ concentration induces expansion of mobile boundary domains; (c) ionic conductivity of pure and Na+ mixed [Pyr12][TFSI] with variable Na[TFSI] concentration, along with the ionic conductivity of pure and 1 mol% Li+ mixed [Pyr12][TFSI] in the inset. Reproduced from ref. 349, 350 and 357 with permission from Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society, and Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 36  (a) Discharge capacity and Coulombic efficiencies of Li|electrolyte|LiFePO4 full cells versus cycle number cycle at 1C rate assembled with pristine lithium and the LiFSI|[Pyr13][FSI] electrolyte; (b–d) discharge capacity and Coulombic efficiency for cells with the LiFSI|[Pyr13][FSI] electrolyte and pretreated with electrolytes composed of (b) LiFSI/[Pyr13][FSI], (c) LiPF6/[Pyr13][FSI] and (d) LiAsF6/[Pyr13][FSI]; (e) discharge capacity and Coulombic efficiency for the same LiFSI|[Pyr13][FSI] cell in (b) after a shelf-life of 330 days. Reproduced from ref. 367, Copyright 2016, published by Nature Publishing Group with permission from Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode)/not modified.	 

 	Fig. 37  (a) Schematic illustration of the polymeric ionic liquid film formation on the electrode, showing that the unsaturated cations accept electrons from the electrode during charging and form free radicals which then initiate and propagate the polymerization process and form a polymer film on the electrode surface; (b) light microscopy images of electrochemical sodium deposition on the sodium electrode in 1 M NaClO4 in EC/PC, taken at 0, 10, 20, and 30 min at a current density of 1 mA cm−2; (c) light microscopy images of sodium deposition in the same conditions as with (b) in 1 M NaClO4 in EC/PC with 20 wt% [Daim][ClO4] as an additive (scale bar: 50 μm). Reproduced from ref. 369 with permission from Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 38  Schematic illustration of the Na3V2(PO4)3/solid electrolyte/Na and Na3V2(PO4)3/ionic liquid/solid electrolyte/Na solid-state batteries. Reproduced from ref. 372 with permission from Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
