Characterization of a new phase of ammonia borane   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B914338F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B914338F
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 796-804Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsCharacterization of a new phase of ammonia borane†

        
          
            Wendy J. 
            Shaw
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Mark 
            Bowden
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Abhi 
            Karkamkar
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Christopher J. 
            Howard
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            David J. 
            Heldebrant
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Nancy J. 
            Hess
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            John C. 
            Linehan
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Tom 
            Autrey
          
        
      
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, P.O. Box 999, MS K2-57, Richland, WA 99354, USA. E-mail: wendy.shaw@pnl.gov;  Fax: +(509)375-6660;   Tel: +(509)375-5922
Received 
      16th July 2009
    , Accepted 5th February 2010First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      2nd March 2010
    AbstractAn uncharacterized phase of ammonia borane (AB) was previously identified while investigating the thermal aging of this hydrogen rich solid state material. This phase was identified as a key intermediate for the release of hydrogen from AB prompting the current characterization study. The new phase (AB*) was investigated extensively using in situ solid state MAS NMR spectroscopy, including 11B, 15N and 1H NMR. Single-pulse excitation, cross polarization and T1 relaxation experiments for all nuclei collectively demonstrated a significant increase in mobility of AB in the new phase compared to the room temperature phase of AB, consistent with a highly mobile solid. This implies a disruption of the extensive dihydrogen bonding network, allowing increased motional freedom. Complementary studies by in situ X-ray diffraction showed AB* to have the same crystal lattice as AB, but suggested an expanded lattice, providing support for increased mobility. NMR measurements of AB embedded into a mesoporous scaffold were also consistent with high mobility in AB*. These data suggest that a breakdown of the extensive hydrogen bonding network occurs before hydrogen can be released and will be an important factor in the practical use of AB as a hydrogen storage material.

Broader context
Energy storage is a critical requirement to balance the use of energy from intermittent renewable sources such as wind or solar power. Ammonia borane stores energy in chemical bonds that can be released as hydrogen on demand with high efficiencies for fuel cell power applications. In this work we describe the use of a number of NMR techniques to study the structural transitions leading to the low-temperature release of hydrogen from ammonia borane.

Introduction
High-density energy storage is necessary to ballast intermittent renewable energy sources such as wind or solar power.1 To this end hydrogen storage materials have received recent interest due to the increased energy storage densities relative to energy storage in batteries.2 Chemical hydrides have received significant interest given the high hydrogen content (10–20% H2 by weight) and low temperatures required for hydrogen release. The hydrogen energy carrier can be oxidized in a fuel cell, ideal for stationary or portable power applications. Lower temperatures for hydrogen release from energy storage materials are a key factor in enhancing the efficiency of hydrogen as an energy carrier. To this end, mechanistic insight into the critical pathways and key phase changes leading to hydrogen release from chemical hydrides will aid in developing more efficient energy storage materials.
Ammonia borane (AB), NH3BH3, is a chemical hydride that is of particular interest as a hydrogen storage material.3 It consists of 19.6% H2 by weight and releases more than two-thirds of its hydrogen below 150 °C, making it an ideal candidate for a storage medium. While AB is isoelectronic with ethane, the extensive dihydrogen bonding network4 (Fig. 1A) results in a stable solid at room temperature, with little physical similarity to ethane. Hydrogen release is achieved at elevated temperatures, and earlier studies from our group provided an analysis of the products and the mechanism of the release of the first equivalent of hydrogen (∼85 °C) from solid AB.5 This analysis revealed an induction period prior to hydrogen release, with two new species preceding the onset of hydrogen loss (Fig. 1B).
 Fig. 1  (A) AB has an extended dihydrogen bonding network at room temperature, affording long range order. (B) Taken from ref. 5, the proposed mechanism for the transformation from AB, through the new phase (AB*), to DADB. 
Based on in situ11B{1H} NMR spectra, one of these species was the diammoniate of diborane ([NH3BH2BH3+][−BH4]), DADB.5 However, the first species to appear, slightly before but almost coincident with DADB, has not been previously reported. The proton coupled 11B NMR spectrum confirmed that the boron in this species was a BH3, leading to the interpretation that it was a new phase of AB (AB*). This species, in conjunction with DADB, appeared to be a critical intermediate in the loss of hydrogen, since hydrogen loss products were observed immediately following its appearance. AB* was found to be quite mobile in nature (faster than the microsecond timescale) based on the narrow 11B resonances observed, indicating significant averaging of the quadrupolar interaction. This was true even at low field (96 MHz 11B frequency), where the quadrupolar coupling still dominated the spectrum for AB.5 Based on these data, it was unclear whether AB* was a liquid (i.e. simply melted AB), a disordered solid, or something in between.
The structures of the tetragonal and orthorhombic crystalline phases of AB and the phase transition at 220 K have been well characterized.7–9 A large amplitude motion in the molecular crystal is attributed to the hydrogens attached to both the N and the B ends of the molecule, the hopping of which has been examined by NMR,10–12 neutron13–15 and anelastic spectroscopies.16 In the room temperature tetragonal phase, the AB molecule has been suggested to undergo whole molecule, uniaxial rotation about the B–N bond,11 while at lower temperatures, in the orthorhombic phase, the BH3 motion slows significantly relative to the NH3 motion.17,18 A few studies have examined the effects of external environmental factors, such as pressure19–22 and scaffolding,9,23 on phase transformation behavior in AB. However, to our knowledge little is known about the structure and dynamics of AB*. It is assumed to be amorphous.6 Therefore, we performed in situ11B, 15N and 1H NMR to further characterize this new phase. These studies included single pulse excitation (SPE) spectra for all three nuclei, cross polarization (CP) for 11B and 15N, and T1 relaxation measurements for 11B. X-Ray diffraction (XRD) and observations of the physical appearance of the material were also used to provide further insight into the nature of AB*.
Results and discussion
The presence of a new phase, observed transiently during decomposition only at elevated temperatures, creates a unique challenge. The previous solid state NMR (SSNMR) evidence5 indicated enhanced mobility, substantial enough that it could be consistent with isotropic tumbling, or even a liquid. However, direct observation of the sample during heating below the melting temperature (110 °C), and just up until hydrogen loss did not produce any observable visual physical transformation. Furthermore, isothermal differential scanning calorimetry between 70 °C and 90 °C did not indicate any melting based on the lack of a measurable endotherm (or exotherm) prior to hydrogen release.24,25 While reconciling these two apparent conflicting observations is possible, it raises the question of whether something unique is happening in the NMR rotor (spinning at 10–15 kHz) that isn't happening under more typical “static” heating conditions. However, since AB* has only been characterized directly by in situ SSNMR, this precludes the physical observation of the sample while it is being made (i.e. inside a rotor, in a probe, in a magnet, spinning at 10–15 kHz), and relying on the NMR properties to “observe” the material becomes necessary.
Thus, we had two objectives in this research: 1) to provide insight into the nature of AB* (i.e. liquid, solid or something in between) and 2) to confirm that our observations using SSNMR were consistent with observations using other techniques. We will show that while many of the NMR characteristics of AB* are consistent with a liquid, the sample is not liquid but a crystalline solid with enhanced and persistent atomic motion. This will be demonstrated with other NMR signatures along with physical observations of the sample, the creation of AB* when AB is put in a scaffold and XRD data of the decomposition of AB.
Initial characterization of the phase of AB*


11B NMR characterization. 
Experiments were performed at both 96 and 256 MHz 11B frequency. Data at 96 MHz were used for more reliable temperature regulation and reproducibility, while data at 256 MHz were used for enhanced resolution to more carefully identify new products. In the SPE experiment (Fig. 2), we observed the AB* peak grow in as the AB peak receded. A quartet was observed in the 1H coupled spectrum of deuterium modified AB (ND3BH3), used because it resulted in better resolution,5 verifying its identity as a BH3 (Fig. 2, inset). The narrowness of the new resonance relative to neat AB, along with the observation that distinct 1H J-coupling was observed, which cannot be observed for neat AB, suggests that AB* is very mobile. The narrow resonance is due to the averaging of the quadrupolar interaction due to motion. However, this is more easily observed at lower field, because of the inverse relationship between field and the quadrupolar coupling constant.26–28
 Fig. 2  
11B NMR at 800 MHz 1H frequency shows a new peak growing in as the sample is heated. The inset shows the coupled spectrum of material completely converted to AB* (dotted line), establishing that the new peak is a BH3. 
In Fig. 3, 11B SPE spectra of AB at 96 MHz 11B frequency are shown. The AB resonance shows an η = 0 lineshape, where η is the asymmetry parameter defining the lineshape.29,30 The observed shape is characteristic of the residual second order quadrupolar interaction not averaged by magic angle spinning (MAS).29–31 Even at this field, however, the AB* peak remains sharp, providing further indication of a mobile species on the NMR time scale (≤10−6 s).
 Fig. 3  Decomposition of AB at 88 °C, monitored by 11B SPE (left) and CP (right) at 300 MHz 1H frequency. AB* is observed by the single pulse experiment, but is not observed in the cross polarization experiment, indicating a liquid or liquid-like species. 
A simple explanation of AB* is that it is merely melted at the in situ temperatures, and solidifies again at room temperature, disguising the character of AB*. The melting point of AB is 110 °C,32 so this is unlikely based on the Pb(NO3)2 calibration of the NMR at 85–88 °C. Physical melting using a melting point apparatus is not observed at this temperature. Another important observation is that the linewidth for AB* is still 10 times larger than for AB in a glyme (taken in the same NMR probe and rotor), further evidence that AB* is not a liquid at the decomposition temperatures investigated. However, the effect of the G-forces due to sample spinning is largely unknown, so further investigation to confirm that the AB was not simply melting in the rotor was warranted.



Ex situ XRD. 
To further investigate the nature of the phase of AB*, X-ray diffraction (XRD) was run on AB* prepared using solid-state NMR while continuously monitoring the 11B spectrum (96 MHz 11B frequency). The sample was taken after the complete loss of the broad η = 0 resonance of AB, replaced with resonances dominated by AB* (−22 ppm), with the presence of DADB and NH3BH2NH2BH3 (data shown in Fig. S1†). It was necessary to allow formation of these phases and the onset of hydrogen release to ensure complete elimination of normal AB. On cooling to room temperature, the same NMR spectrum remained with a broadened AB* signal.
The AB* sample was removed from the NMR rotor and examined by X-ray diffraction. Its diffraction pattern was indistinguishable from normal AB at the resolution of the laboratory instrument. The intensity of the diffraction pattern was similar to that of normal AB and therefore did not arise from a trace of AB undetected in the baseline of the NMR spectrum. The same specimen was re-examined by solid-state NMR after XRD measurements (∼24 h) and was found to have an unchanged 11B spectrum, confirming that the XRD signal was due to AB* and was not simply converted back to normal AB.

Characterizing the mobility of AB*
While the XRD establishes that AB* is crystalline, the NMR data suggest a significant increase in mobility. Further characterizing that mobility is important in understanding the hydrogen release mechanism and was approached with a combination of in situ NMR, XRD and physical observations.


T
1 relaxation. 
Relaxation measurements can provide further insight into sample mobility. The T1 relaxation of 11B{1H} was observed as a function of time at 256 MHz 11B frequency (data not shown). The initial T1 of AB at room temperature (before heating) was found to be 0.44 s, which remained essentially unchanged at early times at ∼90 °C (0.4 s). After 10 min, AB was ∼50% converted to AB*. Due to spectral overlap, the T1 of AB* was only qualitatively determined to be much faster than that of AB, evidenced by the inversion of the AB* resonance when the AB resonance had not yet inverted. By 11 min, the spectrum was dominated by the AB* peak which gave a T1 of 0.05 s. At 12.5 min, the T1 was 0.01 s and continued to relax more quickly up to 14 min (T1 = 0.0025 s), at which time significant product had been generated and the heating was turned off. Upon reaching room temperature, the T1 of the residual material was found to be unchanged, at 0.0032 s, even though the AB* resonance significantly broadens at room temperature. The rapid T1 even at room temperature indicates that AB* has undergone a significant physical transition that enhances mobility and remains even at room temperature.
When a sample was heated to partially convert AB to AB*, cooled to room temperature and heated again, the total time required to observe hydrogen loss was the same as if the heat were continuously applied, with no significant hysteresis. For instance, the sample could be heated continuously for 30 min to convert to AB* and release hydrogen, or it could be heated for 20 min, cooled, and heated a second time for 10 min, both resulting in a similar level of conversion of AB. Since the induction time for hydrogen loss from AB shows no hysteresis, this provides further evidence that AB* has resulted in a significant irreversible physical transformation of the sample. If AB were undergoing a reversible transformation, reduced heating time for H2 release would not be expected.


Scaffolded AB. 
As further evidence of the unique and mobile nature of AB*, we have observed that scaffolding AB into a mesoporous silica scaffold (MCM-41) results in a new 11B resonance at room temperature coincident with the AB* resonance that is only observed in AB after heating (Fig. 4). This species has a T1 of 0.004 s, consistent with AB*. We also observed a reduced heating temperature and time for hydrogen release for AB in MCM-41,24 as would be expected if AB* were already present. One interpretation explaining these results is that scaffolding AB provides stabilization of AB* at room temperature.23 It is possible that the surface of the mesoporous silica breaks up the 3-dimensional dihydrogen bonding network. This relaxation of the extended structure allows mobility which may be important in hydrogen release from AB.
 Fig. 4  
11B spectra of neat AB heated to 85 °C until AB* appears (top), and AB scaffolded in MCM-41 (1:1) at room temperature (bottom). The coincident chemical shift of the new phase in neat AB and the scaffolded AB suggest that they are a similar species. 


Cross polarization experiments. 
To further investigate the dynamics of AB*, cross polarization experiments were undertaken. Cross polarization is a technique by which magnetization is transferred from the proton spins (abundant spins) to the less abundant spin of interest, in this case 11B. This technique requires a spin lock, or a time period that the two nuclei are locked in the xy-plane with the same RF frequency (called the Hartman-Hahn match)31 which allows magnetization to transfer from the protons to the 11B. In the presence of motion, this transfer is not very efficient33,34 and, in the presence of either large amplitude or large frequency motion, can result in a complete loss of signal.
The spectra from the 11B cross polarization experiment are shown in Fig. 3. SPE and CP experiments were run interleaved, with the SPE experiment run first. The SPE spectra (Fig. 3, left) show that at increasing heating times, the conventional AB resonance decreases, while a sharp resonance just downfield, AB*, grows in intensity. Because of the sharpness of the resonance, the AB* peak completely dominates the spectrum even when some conventional phase AB remains.
The cross polarization experiments, interleaved with the SPE experiments to allow direct spectral comparison (Fig. 3, right), also show a decrease in the crystalline AB resonance as the heating time increases. However, in contrast to the SPE spectra, no new resonances are observed. The residual dispersive peak located at the chemical shift of AB* is likely from residual single pulse magnetization. In comparison to the AB* signal observed for the SPE spectrum, this signal is negligible. The absence of any significant resonance for AB* using the cross polarization experiment implies a highly mobile phase. Contact times from 0.05 ms out to 0.5 ms did not result in the appearance of an AB* signal.



15N and 1H NMR experiments. 
Because of the chemical structure of AB, all of the nuclei can be investigated by NMR, and we took advantage of this to further explore the nature of AB*, specifically, whether all nuclei were affected by the enhanced mobility observed for 11B. 15N{1H} SPE and CP experiments were both undertaken to see if additional insight could be gained.
The SPE spectra for the 15N coupled 15N-labeled AB (300 MHz 1H frequency) after heating at 88 °C for 15 and 25 min are shown in Fig. 5. The product peaks were identified by correlating them to the 11B spectra. As with the 11BH3, the 15NH3 chemical shift also changes by several ppm when converted to AB*, though in this case, the resonances shift upfield. This suggests that while the boron of AB* loses electron density, the nitrogen sees an increase in electron density (ED). The increase in ED at N in AB* is consistent with the increase in the ED on going from AB in a cluster to an isolated AB molecule.17 This may suggest that the environment in AB* has more characteristics of an isolated molecule as a result of a weakening of the dihydrogen bonds between neighboring molecules.
 Fig. 5  SPE 15N coupled spectrum of 15NH3BH3 after heating at 85 °C for 15 min (top) and 25 min (bottom) (800 MHz 1H frequency). Spectra are externally referenced to solid NH4Cl (−341 ppm). 
The CP experiments were run interleaved with 1H experiments to provide further evidence of phase changes. Fig. 6 shows the resulting data for the time correlated 15N{1H} and 1H spectra, heated to 88 °C in situ (30 MHz) for the indicated time. On the left, the 15N AB resonance decreases while no new product peaks are observed. However, the correlated 1H spectra show that the AB peaks are becoming sharper over the same time period, indicating a substantial increase in mobility. There is little chemical shift difference for AB and AB* in the 1H NMR spectra, but the transformation of the spectra from a very broad, nearly featureless lump, to an almost liquid-like spectrum characterized by a nearly baseline resolved quartet (BH3) and doublet (NH3) from the corresponding J-coupling is remarkable. The 1H spectra have also been taken in correlation with the 11B spectra to confirm that the narrowing of the 1H resonances is associated with the appearance of AB* (data not shown). The absence of new resonances in the 15N CP spectra, while the presence of AB* is confirmed at the same time by the 1H spectra, provides further confirmation that AB* is very mobile. The present study has shown that all nuclei (B, N and both sets of protons) of AB* exhibit high mobility, indicating the motion affects the whole molecule.
 Fig. 6  Decomposition of 15NH3BH3 at 88 °C monitored simultaneously by 15N CP (left) and 1H SPE (right) at 300 MHz 1H frequency. As the AB signal disappears, no product signals appear in the 15N CP spectra, even as the correlated 1H spectrum is revealing new and sharpened resonances. As with the 11B spectra above, the inability to cross polarize is consistent with a liquid or liquid-like species, as is the sharpness of the observed resonances. 



In situ X-ray diffraction experiments. 
More detailed diffraction studies were performed using synchrotron radiation on AB samples which were heated in situ to form AB* and subsequently release hydrogen. Only diffraction peaks attributable to AB were observed, which slowly declined in intensity to leave an amorphous pattern. The intensities recorded at 80 °C (Fig. 7, top) showed two distinct rates of decline, with the slope steeper during the second period (after 200 min). Bubbles of gas were observed during the second period which indicated the formation of hydrogen and polyaminoborane (an amorphous polymer), and suggested that the first period corresponded to the induction period and formation of AB*. This observation confirms that AB* is crystalline with a lattice, and presumably structure, almost the same as AB.
 Fig. 7  Decomposition of AB tracked by XRD at 80 °C. The decrease in integrated intensity of the (110) peak shows two different slopes (top) as a function of time. During the first period the decrease is faster for peaks at larger 2θ, illustrated here (bottom) for the (110) and (213) peaks (2θ = ca. 15° and 43° respectively). 
Close examination revealed subtle changes in the diffraction pattern on conversion of AB to AB*. Firstly, both a and c increased by approximately 0.05%. Coincident with this, Rietveld refinements of the data showed an increase in the angle of inclination between AB molecules and the c axis. Recent molecular simulation calculations have shown that instead of being parallel to c, the AB molecule is inclined to and precesses around c in addition to rotating about the B–N bond.14 When this was modeled in the Rietveld refinement, the inclination angle at 80 °C increased from approximately 16° in AB to around 19° for AB*.
Further, the reduction in diffracted intensity during the induction period was more rapid for peaks at larger diffraction angles (Fig. 7, bottom). This was attributed to larger atomic displacements in AB* compared to AB, consistent with the relationship between diffracted intensity and atomic displacement (u). This relationship contains a term exp(−u8π2sin2θ/λ2), and therefore increased atomic displacement will reduce the intensity more at larger diffraction angles. The effect was not observed after the induction period; in the more rapid period of intensity loss, the intensity ratio between different peaks remained constant.
These observations show that the initial description5 of AB* as a more mobile variant of AB is essentially correct. AB* has the same basic crystallographic arrangement as AB, but the NH3BH3 molecules precess at a larger angle around the c axis and create a larger unit cell volume.

AB* identity
A complete description of AB* is not straightforward since it exhibits some of the characteristics of both a solid and a liquid. There are several classes of material which also display both solid and liquid behaviour and may provide a basis for understanding AB*. Liquid crystals, for example, are “ordered liquids” or anisotropic liquids which fill their container, but maintain some long range order.35 AB* does not seem completely consistent with this definition since it maintains a predominantly solid character based on physical appearance.
Materials above their glass transition temperatures (Tg), but below their melting point can demonstrate the properties of solids and liquids, as seen for polymers.36 The glass transition for organic polymers is often associated with the weakening of non-covalent bonds between the polymer chains. A recent example of the effects of the glass transition on the NMR spectrum of a polymer37 shows how polyethylene oxide raised above Tg has narrowed NMR resonances. However, the X-ray diffraction data demonstrating retained long range order in AB* suggests that this also does not describe AB*.
It may be more instructive to compare AB* to rotator phases, a class of materials which exhibit rotational disorder on a molecular scale while retaining long range translational order. Examples which show strong similarities to AB* are the metastable phases observed in n-alkanes between the conventionally crystalline and molten states.38,39 These phases are characterized by increased rotational disorder around the long axis of the alkane chain, while maintaining the packing of chains in pseudohexagonal layers. Some characteristic signatures of the n-alkane rotator phases are that they still diffract with peaks that are as sharp as they are in the crystalline phase, they have reduced intensities at high diffraction angles and their unit cell is larger compared to the crystalline phase in all dimensions.40 All of these observations are similar to those made for AB transforming to AB*. Rotator phases may provide the best example of materials similar to AB* and provide a model which is consistent with high molecular mobility in a solid phase which has a crystalline diffraction pattern.40,41
Applying these concepts to the work here, an increase in temperature gives rise to increased rotation and precession of AB molecules around the long axis of the molecule (rotation around the B–N bond), resulting in this case from the loss or weakening of dihydrogen bonds. At room temperature in the tetragonal phase, there are multiple dihydrogen bonds per AB molecule,14 but as the sample is heated, we propose that some of the dihydrogen bonds are lost or weakened to a point that the barrier to rotation is reduced, enhancing mobility. Our current analysis does not allow us to determine precisely how many dihydrogen bonds remain. Thus, the most accurate description of AB* with the current data is that it is composed of NH3BH3 with 1 to 6 dihydrogen bonds stabilizing it to prevent AB from going into the molten or gas phase, but the reduced number loosens the structure to allow increased mobility in preparation for hydrogen release. The new phase has some similarities to rotator phases based on the synchrotron data, which show an increased mobility of the molecules about the c axis, but do not show random tumbling. Even in the absence of chemical bonding, the dihydrogen bonding is likely enforcing extended order even at elevated temperatures, until DADB is formed and begins releasing hydrogen.

Implications for hydrogen release. 
The combination of NMR spectroscopies and XRD measurements discussed in this paper provide a unique approach to characterizing AB*. The presence of rapid molecular motion in AB* helps us to understand how the diammoniate of diborane (DADB) is formed prior to hydrogen release. The tetragonal phase of AB is stable to decomposition because AB, while free to rotate about the B–N axis, is not in a suitable molecular geometry to facilitate isomerization to DADB. If DADB is not formed, the activation barrier for hydrogen release from AB is too high to achieve at conventional reaction temperatures.42 On the other hand, adding sufficient thermal energy to AB disrupts the hydrogen bonding network to form a new phase of AB. In the new phase, AB has sufficient freedom and mobility to obtain a suitable molecular geometry to facilitate isomerization to DADB. Once DADB is formed at these temperatures, hydrogen release subsequently follows.

Conclusions
The in situ SSNMR data presented here show that the new phase for AB, which is essential for hydrogen release, is a solid with rapidly moving AB molecules. Furthermore, the change in the chemical shift (15N and 11B) in AB* suggests that the electron density at the N and the B in AB* is more like an isolated molecule than an AB molecular crystal. In situ XRD shows an expanded crystalline lattice for the new phase with larger atomic displacements. The most consistent physical description of this phase is a relaxation of the extensive dihydrogen bonding structure which dominates the room temperature structure of AB, allowing rapid rotation about the B–N bond while still maintaining long-range order. The relaxed dihydrogen bonding is a requirement for the formation of DADB, the nucleation event that leads to H2 release from solid state AB. Scaffolding AB stabilizes AB* and the observation of reduced induction times and temperatures for hydrogen release for AB on MCM-41 further supports the importance of this phase in efficient hydrogen release.
Experimental methods
Ammonia borane
Unlabeled AB was purchased from Aviabor chemical company (98% purity) and used as received. Isotopically 15N labeled material was prepared as follows. In a 1 L flask, 1 L of 15NH3 was condensed to ∼1 mL at −78 °C. Under nitrogen, 1 M {BH3:THF} (50 mL) was syringed into the flask and stirred for 1 h. After removal of THF under vacuum, the crude 15NH3BH3 was recrystallized from ether and stored in a glove box.
NMR experiments
NMR samples were packed into a boron-free rotor with a pinhole in the top of the rotor cap to release hydrogen, preventing pressure from building during the decomposition. Samples were packed outside the glove box, but were run under inert conditions, as both spinning and variable temperature were achieved using nitrogen gas. Experiments performed at 300 MHz 1H frequency used a 5 mm, Chemagnetics 2-channel, variable temperature probe and a Chemagnetics Infinity console. Experiments performed at 800 MHz 1H frequency used a 4 mm, Doty 3-channel, variable temperature probe and a Varian Unity+ console.
Boron

11B{1H} spectra were referenced to NaBH4 (−41 ppm). SPE experiments at 96 MHz 11B frequency were run using a 3 μs 90° pulse, a 10 s pulse delay and 10 kHz sample spinning. SPE experiments at 256 MHz 11B frequency were run using a 4 μs 90° pulse, a 10 s pulse delay and 14 kHz sample spinning. Typically, 4 to 16 scans were collected for each spectrum.
CP experiments were run at 96 MHz 11B frequency and utilized a 3 μs 90° pulse, contact times from 0.05 to 0.5 ms with a field of 42 kHz, a 10 s pulse delay and 10 kHz sample spinning.
Nitrogen

15N{1H} spectra were referenced to NH4Cl (−341 ppm).43 SPE experiments at 30 MHz 15N frequency were run using a 6 μs 90° pulse, a 20 s pulse delay and 10 kHz sample spinning. SPE experiments at 80 MHz were run using a 6 μs 90° pulse, a 10 s pulse delay and 14 kHz sample spinning.
CP experiments were run at 30 MHz 15N frequency using a 6 μs 90° 1H pulse, contact times of 0.5 to 2 ms, a 20 s pulse delay and 10 kHz sample spinning.
Proton

1H spectra were referenced to H2O (4.8 ppm). SPE experiments at 300 MHz were run using a 6 μs 90° pulse, a 3 s pulse delay and 10 kHz sample spinning. SPE experiments at 800 MHz were run using a 6 μs 90° pulse, a 3 s pulse delay and 14 kHz sample spinning.
Variable temperature experiments
The temperature was calibrated by following the chemical shift of 207Pb in Pb(NO3)2 according to the following equation.44  
The set point sample temperature was achieved within 4 min (within 2 °C of the set point in under 2 min) and was stable within ± 0.2 °C over the experimental time frame and over multiple experiments. The conditions, including the spinning speed and all air flows used to calibrate the temperature, were identical to those used during the experiment. A single rotor was used to minimize temperature deviations.

In situ sample heating was performed at 85–95 °C (800 MHz) or 88 °C (300 MHz). Time zero was established as the time the thermocouple reading indicated the correct temperature (approximately 15–30 s after heating started). The decomposition was followed in 2 min increments for 10 min, 5 min increments to 30 min, and 10 min increments to 1 h. In the case that SPE and CP were run simultaneously, the SPE was always run first, followed by the CP. For cases where either 11B or 15N were run simultaneously with 1H, the spectrum of the X nucleus was always run first, followed by the 1H spectrum.
Melting point experiments
An Electrothermal melting point apparatus was used to observe the physical appearance of AB under isothermal temperature conditions at 88 °C.
X-Ray diffraction
A Philips X'Pert multi-purpose diffractometer with a fixed Cu anode operating at 45 kV and 40 mA was used for the ex situ measurements. Programmable divergence and anti-scatter slits were employed along with a graphite monochromator and proportional counter. The specimen was loaded and unloaded in a nitrogen glove box and covered with polyimide tape during measurement.

In situ measurements were performed at the Powder Diffraction beam line (10-BM-1) at the Australian Synchrotron using a beam energy of 12.398 keV (1.000 Å). Samples were packed into 0.8 mm diameter PET capillaries made from material supplied by Advanced Polymers Inc., and heated in a stream of nitrogen gas regulated by an Oxford Cryosystems crysotat/heater. Data covering 80° 2θ were collected approximately every 4 min using a Mythen microstrip detector.
Acknowledgements
Support for this work by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy and facilitated by the International Partnership for the Hydrogen Economy. A portion of the research described in this paper was performed in the Environmental Molecular Sciences Laboratory, a national scientific user facility sponsored by the U.S. Department of Energy's Office of Biological and Environmental Research and located at Pacific Northwest National Laboratory. PNNL is operated by Battelle for the US DOE. The authors are grateful for the assistance given by Dr Kia Wallwork and staff at the Australian Synchrotron, Victoria, Australia. We also gratefully acknowledge Paul Ellis and Andy Lipton for fruitful discussions.
References
G. Crabtree, M. Dresselhaus and M. Buchanan, Phys. Today, 2004, 57, 39–44 CrossRef CAS .
S. Orimo, Y. Nakamori, J. Eliseo, A. Zuttel and C. Jensen, Complex hydrides for hydrogen storage, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 4111–4132 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Hamilton, R. T. Baker, A. Staubitz and I. Manners, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 279 RSC .
W. T. Klooster, K. T. F., P. E. M. Siegbahn, T. B. Richardson and R. H. Crabtree, Study of the N–H. H–B dihydrogen bond including the crystal structure of BH3NH3 by neutron diffraction, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 6337–6343 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Stowe, W. J. Shaw, J. C. Linehan, B. Schmid and T. Autrey, In situ solid state 11B MAS-NMR studies of the thermal decomposition of ammonia borane: mechanistic studies of the hydrogen release pathways from a solid state hydrogen storage material, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 1831–1836 RSC .
D. J. Heldebrant, A. Karkamkar, N. J. Hess, M. Bowden, S. Rassat, F. Zheng, K. Rappe and T. Autrey, The effects of chemical additives on the induction phase in solid-state thermal decomposition of ammonia borane, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 5332–5336 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Hess, M. E. Bowden, V. M. Parvanov, C. Mundy, S. M. Kathmann, G. K. Schenter and T. Autrey, Spectroscopic studies of the phase transition in ammonia borane: Raman spectroscopy of single crystal NH3BH3 as a function of temperature from 88 to 330 K., J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 128, 034508 CrossRef .
C. F. Hoon and E. C. Reynhardt, Molecular-dynamics and structure of amine boranes of the type R3N.BH3.1. X-ray investigation of H3N.BH3 at 295 K and 110 K, J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys., 1983, 16, 6129–6136 CrossRef CAS .
A. Paolone, O. Palumbo, P. Rispoli, R. Cantelli and T. Autrey, Hydrogen Dynamics and Characterization of the Tetragonal-to-Orthorhombic Phase Transformation in Ammonia Borane, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 5872–5878 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cho, W. J. Shaw, V. Parvanov, G. K. Schenter, A. Karkamkar, N. J. Hess, C. Mundy, S. Kathmann, J. Sears, A. S. Lipton, P. D. Ellis and S. T. Autrey, Molecular structure and dynamics in the low temperature (orthorhombic) phase of NH3BH3, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 4277–4283 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Penner, Y. C. P. Chang and J. Hutzal, A deuterium NMR spectroscopic study of solid BH3NH3, Inorg. Chem., 1999, 38, 2868–2873 CrossRef CAS .
O. Gunaydin-Sen, R. Achey, N. S. Dalal, A. Stowe and T. Autrey, High resolution N-15 NMR of the 225 K phase transition of ammonia borane (NH3BH3): Mixed order-disorder and displacive behavior, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 677–681 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Hess, M. R. Hartman, C. M. Brown, E. Mamontov, A. Karkamkar, D. J. Heldebrant, L. L. Daemen and T. Autrey, Quasielastic neutron scattering of –NH3 and –BH3 rotational dynamics in orthorhombic ammonia borane, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2008, 459, 85–88 CrossRef .
N. J. Hess, G. K. Schenter, M. R. Hartman, L. L. Daemen, T. Proffen, S. M. Kathmann, C. J. Mundy, M. Hartl, D. J. Heldebrant, A. C. Stowe and T. Autrey, Neutron Powder Diffraction and Molecular Simulation Study of the Structural Evolution of Ammonia Borane from 15 to 340 K., J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 5723–5735 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Kathmann, V. Parvanov, G. K. Schenter, A. C. Stowe, L. L. Daemen, M. Hartl, J. Linehan, N. J. Hess, A. Karkamkar and T. Autrey, Experimental and computational studies on collective hydrogen dynamics in ammonia borane: Incoherent inelastic neutron scattering., J. Chem. Phys., 2009, 130, 024507 CrossRef .
A. Paolone, O. Palumbo, P. Rispoli, R. Cantelli, T. Autrey and A. Karkamkar, Absence of the Structural Phase Transition in Ammonia Borane Dispersed in Mesoporous Silica: Evidence of Novel Thermodynamic Properties, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 10319–10321 CrossRef CAS .
J. Dillen and P. Verhoeven, The End of a 30-Year-Old Controversy? A Computational Study of the B-N Stretching Frequency of BH3–NH3 in the Solid State, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2003, 107, 2570 CrossRef CAS .
V. M. Parvanov, G. K. Schenter, N. J. Hess, L. L. Daemen, M. Hartl, A. C. Stowe, D. M. Camaioni and T. Autrey, Materials for hydrogen storage: structure and dynamics of borane ammonia complex, Dalton Trans., 2008, 4514–4522 RSC .
R. Raja, S. Chellappa, M. Somayazulu, V. V. Struzhkin, T. Autrey and R. J. Hemley, Pressure-induced Complexation of NH3BH3–H2, J. Chem. Phys., 2009, 131, 224515 CrossRef .
R. Custelcean and Z. A. Dreger, Dihydrogen Bonding under High Pressure: A Raman Study of BH3NH3 Molecular Crystal, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 9231–9235 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, W. L. Mao, V. Drozd, J. Chen and L. L. Daemen, Raman Spectroscopy Study of Ammonia Borane at High Pressure, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 129, 234509 CrossRef .
S. Trudel and D. F. R. Gilson, Inorg. Chem., 2003, 42, 2814 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, A. Karkamkar, T. Autrey, P. Chupas and T. Proffen, Determination of structure and phase transition of light element nanocomposites in mesoporous silica: case study of NH3BH3 in MCM-41., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 13749 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Gutowska, L., Y. Shin, C. M. Wang, X. S. Li, J. C. Linehan, R. S. Smith, B. D. Kay, B. Schmid, W. Shaw, M. Gutowski and T. Autrey, Nanoscaffold Mediates Hydrogen Release and the Reactivity of Ammonia Borane, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 3578–3782 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wolf, J. Baumann, F. Baitalow and F. P. Hoffmann, Calorimetric process monitoring of thermal decomposition of B–N–H compounds, Thermochim. Acta, 2000, 343, 19–25 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Mehring, High Resolution NMR in Solids, Springer-Verlag, Berlin,  1983 Search PubMed .

          C. P. Slichter, Principles of Magnetic Resonance, Springer-Verlag, Berlin,  1989 Search PubMed .
K. Muller, Spin relaxation in isolated and coupled non-integer quadrupolar nuclei: Theory and application for I = 3/2 nuclei, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2002, 4, 5515–5523 RSC .
E. Kundla, A. Samoson and E. Lippmaa, High-Resolution NMR of Quadrupolar Nuclei in Rotating Solids, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1981, 83, 229–232 CrossRef CAS .
A. Samoson, E. Kundla and E. Lippmaa, High Resolution MAS-NMR of Quadrupolar Nuclei in Powders, Journal of Magnetic Resonance, 1982, 49, 350–357 Search PubMed .

          E. O. Stejskal and J. D. Memory, High Resolution NMR in the Solid State, Oxford University Press, New York,  1994 Search PubMed .
E. Mayer, Symmetrical Cleavage of Diborane by Ammonia in Solution, Inorg. Chem., 1972, 11, 866–869 CrossRef CAS .
J. Schaefer, E. O. Stejskal and R. Buchdahl, Magic Angle 13C NMR Analysis of Motion in Solid Glassy Polymers, Macromolecules, 1977, 10, 384–405 CAS .
J. R. Long, W. J. Shaw, P. S. Stayton and G. P. Drobny, Structure and Dynamics of Hydrated Statherin on Hydroxyapatite As Determined by Solid-State NMR, Biochemistry, 2001, 40, 15451–15455 CrossRef CAS .

          G. Meier, Applications of Liquid Crystals, Springer Verlag, New York,  1975 Search PubMed .

          F. Rodriguez, Principles of Polymer Systems, Hemisphere Publishing Corporation, New York,  1982 Search PubMed .
C. Lorthioir, F. Laupretre, J. Soulestin and J.-M. Lefebvre, Segmental Dynamics of Poly(ethylene oxide) Chains in a Model Polymer/clay Intercalated Phase: Solid-State NMR Investigation, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 218–230 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cao and P. A. Monson, Solid-Fluid and Solid-Solid Equilibrium in Hard Sphere United Atom Models of n-Alkanes: Rotator Phase Stability, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 13866–13873 CrossRef CAS .
E. B. Sirota and A. B. Herhold, Transient rotator phase induced nucleation in n-alkane melts, Polymer, 2000, 41, 8781–8789 CrossRef CAS .
J. Doucet, I. Denicolo and A. Craievich, X-ray study of the “rotator” phase of the odd-numbered paraffins C17H36, C19H40 and C21H44, J. Chem. Phys., 1981, 75, 1523–1529 CrossRef CAS .
T. Shimizu, S. Tanaka, N. Onoda-Yamamuro, S. i. Ishimaru and R. Ikeda, New rotator phase revealed in di-n-alkylammonium bromides studied by soild-state NMR, powder XRD, electrical conductivity and thermal measurements. Journal of the Chemical Society, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1997, 93, 321–326 RSC .
V. S. Nguyen, M. H. Matus, D. J. Grant, M. T. Nguyen and D. A. Dixon, Computational Study of the Release of H2 from Ammonia Borane Dimer (BH3NH3)2 and Its Ion Pair Isomers, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2007, 111, 8844–8856 CrossRef .

          T. M. Duncan, Principal Components of Chemical Shift Tensors: A Compilation, Farragut Press, Madison, WI,  1997 Search PubMed .
A. Bielecki and D. P. Burum, J. Magn. Reson., Ser. A, 1995, 116, 215–220 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Additional NMR data. See DOI: 10.1039/b914338fThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Table Content:

Broader context
Energy storage is a critical requirement to balance the use of energy from intermittent renewable sources such as wind or solar power. Ammonia borane stores energy in chemical bonds that can be released as hydrogen on demand with high efficiencies for fuel cell power applications. In this work we describe the use of a number of NMR techniques to study the structural transitions leading to the low-temperature release of hydrogen from ammonia borane.


 	Fig. 1  (A) AB has an extended dihydrogen bonding network at room temperature, affording long range order. (B) Taken from ref. 5, the proposed mechanism for the transformation from AB, through the new phase (AB*), to DADB.	 

 	Fig. 2  
11B NMR at 800 MHz 1H frequency shows a new peak growing in as the sample is heated. The inset shows the coupled spectrum of material completely converted to AB* (dotted line), establishing that the new peak is a BH3.	 

 	Fig. 3  Decomposition of AB at 88 °C, monitored by 11B SPE (left) and CP (right) at 300 MHz 1H frequency. AB* is observed by the single pulse experiment, but is not observed in the cross polarization experiment, indicating a liquid or liquid-like species.	 

 	Fig. 4  
11B spectra of neat AB heated to 85 °C until AB* appears (top), and AB scaffolded in MCM-41 (1:1) at room temperature (bottom). The coincident chemical shift of the new phase in neat AB and the scaffolded AB suggest that they are a similar species.	 

 	Fig. 5  SPE 15N coupled spectrum of 15NH3BH3 after heating at 85 °C for 15 min (top) and 25 min (bottom) (800 MHz 1H frequency). Spectra are externally referenced to solid NH4Cl (−341 ppm).	 

 	Fig. 6  Decomposition of 15NH3BH3 at 88 °C monitored simultaneously by 15N CP (left) and 1H SPE (right) at 300 MHz 1H frequency. As the AB signal disappears, no product signals appear in the 15N CP spectra, even as the correlated 1H spectrum is revealing new and sharpened resonances. As with the 11B spectra above, the inability to cross polarize is consistent with a liquid or liquid-like species, as is the sharpness of the observed resonances.	 

 	Fig. 7  Decomposition of AB tracked by XRD at 80 °C. The decrease in integrated intensity of the (110) peak shows two different slopes (top) as a function of time. During the first period the decrease is faster for peaks at larger 2θ, illustrated here (bottom) for the (110) and (213) peaks (2θ = ca. 15° and 43° respectively).	 

 		 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Additional NMR data. See DOI: 10.1039/b914338f

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
