Conjunction of fiber solar cells with groovy micro-reflectors as highly efficient energy harvesters   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1EE01427G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1EE01427G
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3379-3383Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsConjunction of fiber solar cells with groovy micro-reflectors as highly efficient energy harvesters†

        
          
            Yongping 
            Fu‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Zhibin 
            Lv‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Shaocong 
            Hou
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hongwei 
            Wu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Dang 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chao 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zengze 
            Chu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xin 
            Cai
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xing 
            Fan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhong Lin 
            Wang
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Dechun 
            Zou
          
        
      *a
aBeijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, Key Laboratory of Polymer Chemistry and Physics of Ministry of Education, College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Peking University, Beijing, China 100871. E-mail: dczou@pku.edu.cn
bSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332-0245, USA. E-mail: zhong.wang@mse.gatech.edu
Received 
      7th April 2011
    , Accepted 2nd June 2011First published on 15th July 2011AbstractSolar cells are the most effective approach for sustainable energy to meet the world's increasing needs in energy. However, their large-scale applications have been limited by low cost performance, supply of raw materials, complex preparation processes and the possible pollutions produced during processing. Here we introduce a novel fiber solar cell housed in a simple and low-cost parabolic-shape reflector, which can effectively capture diffuse light from all directions. The maximum efficiency of the fiber based dye-sensitized solar cells alone reached 7.02%. Furthermore, the maximum power output was enhanced by a factor of two and five, respectively, when the fiber was in conjunction with a diffuse reflector or a micro-light concentrating groove.

Broader context
To date, photovoltaic devices are the most powerful tools for converting solar energy to electrical energy. The traditional solar cells are based on planar sandwich structures, which are restricted by the choices of materials and preparation methods, especially silicon based solar cells and concentrator solar cells. Also their conversion efficiencies severely depend on the incident light angles, lowering their daily average power generation efficiency. Herein, to overcome these issues, a non-planar structure, fiber photovoltaic cell (FPVC), is introduced. The FPVC can capture light from all directions, especially the unparallel reflecting or scattering light from the surroundings. In addition, we investigate the 3-D light harvesting capacity of the FPVC in both experiments and simulation. What is more, a simple and cost-effective concentrator design for the FPVC is presented, which allows the FPVC to have a much enhanced power output. With further structure and materials optimization, one of the fascinating applications of the FPVC is to weave and integrate the fiber photovoltaic units into fabrics, which may be the next generation technology to produce flexible thin-film solar cells.

Introduction
Solar cells have many different designs, such as silicon based solar cells, semiconductor compound solar cells, CIGS cells,1–7 low-cost dye-sensitized cells (DSSCs)8–10 and organic film cells (OPVs).11–14 The traditional solar cells are based on planar sandwich structures, which restrict the choices of materials and preparation methods. In addition, the preparation of high efficiency cells, especially silicon based solar cells, requires complicated purification of materials and vacuum conditions, all of which directly increase the manufacturing cost. Moreover, the specific planar light-collecting design only allows light being harvested from one side, and the conversion efficiency drops dramatically at high incidence angles due to surface reflection, as a result, lowering their daily average power generation efficiency. Although light collecting efficiencies of concentrator solar cells are significantly high, they also suffer from the planar panel design geometry. They hardly capture light from all directions especially the unparallel reflecting or scattering light from the surroundings. The light collecting structure is very complex, whose production not only requires high precision, but also needs expensive condensing lens. In comparison, the outputs of the spherical three-dimensional solar cell unit15 and the symmetric tubular solar cell unit16 are not affected by the light incident angle.
The fiber photovoltaic cell (FPVC) can also overcome those structural shortcomings of the planar photovoltaic cells as discussed above.17–25 First, it does not depend on transparent conductive materials. Second, the light collection is a 3-D geometry, so it can work more efficiently for a much wider incidence angle. Third, its applications can be greatly enriched by means of weaving and integrating the fiber units into fabrics, which is the next generation of the roll to roll technology to produce flexible thin-film solar cells.26 In this paper, we present a fibrous dye-sensitized solar cell (FDSC) with the directly twisted photo-anode and the counter electrode, and demonstrate the advantages of its 3-D light-collecting structure including diffuse reflecting light collection. A simple and cost-effective concentrator design allows the FDSC to have a much enhanced power output. Our design also addresses the problems such as cost performance, sealing and electrolyte leakage.
Experimental
Preparation of TiO2 colloids
To prepare TiO2 colloids, 12.0 ml tetrabutyl titanate (Aldrich) and 2.0 ml acetic acid are mixed followed by vigorous stirring. Then the mixture is dropped slowly into 60.0 ml water. 0.5 ml of 65% nitric acid is added into the system. After stirring for 2 hours in the oil bath at 80 °C, 35 ml of the mixture is transferred into the autoclave and left undisturbed at 220 °C for 12 hours. Then after getting rid of part of the solvent, 0.6 g PEO (Mw = 4000, Aldrich) is added. Now the TiO2 colloid is ready.
Fabrication of the fiber solar cell
The photovoltaic fiber working electrode is prepared as follows. Ti wires are ultrasonically cleaned in acetone, isopropanol, and ethanol for 10 minutes, respectively. Then immerse the Ti wire in the prepared colloid and dip it in and out for several times which is then heated at 400 °C for 5 min to remove the solvent in the colloid on the wire. A thin layer of the TiO2 film is formed on the Ti wire. Repeat the above step to obtain the required thickness of TiO2. Sinter the TiO2 coated electrode at 450 °C for 30 min. When it cools down to 150 °C, it is sensitized at a concentration of 5 × 10−4 M of N719 ethanol solution (Solaronix) for 24 hours to obtain the sensitized electrode, which is then washed with anhydrous ethanol and dried in the air before assembling FPVCs. The counter electrode is a Pt wire of diameter 80 μm. Uniformly and spirally wind the Pt wire onto the photo-anode, then insert it into the sealing capillary (0.5 mm inner diameter and 0.85 mm outer diameter) filled with the electrolyte, which contains 0.04 M (or 0.1 M for fiber solar cells when they are housed in micro-groove reflectors) iodine (Aldrich, AR), 0.6 M BMII (1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide, Dalian Rainbow Light Solar Technology Development Co., Ltd.), 0.05 M LiClO4 (Aldrich, AR), and 0.30 M 4-tert-butyl pyridine (Aldrich, AR) in CH3CN solution (Tianjin Four Friends, GR). The preparation of the light condenser is mentioned in the ESI†.
Methods and measurements
The measurements for the fiber solar cell are the same as those for the flat cells. The solar simulator is a YSS-50A (Yamashita DESO, Japan). The device used to test the I–V and short-circuit current response is a Keithley Model 2000; the light density is 100 mW cm−2 (AM 1.5) and is calibrated using a standard silicon cell. Based on our experimental results, the cell's aperture area for receiving the light is taken as the projected area of the photo-anode, which is (Ti wire diameter + 2 × TiO2 film thickness) × the anode's optical length. The solar efficiency is: η = Voc × Jsc × FF/light intensity.
Results and discussion
3.1. Device structure, mechanism and performance
We first present the performance of a fiber based solar cell A before introducing the light concentrator for comparison purpose. Fig. 1a shows a cross-sectional structure of the FDSC. The photo-anode is a Ti wire coated with a layer of the dye-sensitized TiO2 semiconductor membrane, while the counter electrode is a Pt wire. Fig. 1b is a photo of a Cell A that is protected by a capillary for packaging and holding the electrolyte. Its photo-anode has a diameter of 286 μm, which fits the diameter (250 μm) of the Ti wire substrate plus two times of the thickness (18 μm) of the dye-sensitized TiO2 layer. Its counter electrode is a Pt wire with the diameter of 80 μm. Fig. 1c is a schematic of the FDSC working principle. Photons absorbed by the dye molecules created excitons. Then excitons rapidly spilt, with injecting electrons into the conduction bands of TiO2. The injected electrons transmit through the metal substrate of the photo-anode to external circuits. At the same time, the oxidized dye molecules are reduced by I− which is oxidized to I3−. Consecutively, the I3− diffuses onto the surface of the Pt electrode, where it is reduced to I−. Thus, a whole photo-electrochemical cycle is completed.27
 Fig. 1  Schematic of the proposed solar cell. (a) Cross-sectional structure of the fiber based dye-sensitized solar cell (FDSC); (b) optical image of a fiber solar Cell A; (c) a schematic of the FDSC working mechanism; (d) current–voltage curves of a fiber solar Cell A under different irradiation modes. (SM for the standard condition: AM 1.5; DRM for the diffuse light illumination mode using a diffuse reflector under a solar Cell A. Both are shown in the inset. The whole FDSCs are irradiated without any masks.) 
The entire FDSC was irradiated perpendicularly to the fiber with the standard illumination intensity of AM 1.5 (100 mW cm−2) without any masks. This test condition is labeled as Standard Illumination Mode (SM) for comparison purpose. All of the short circuit current density and efficiency calculation were done by taking the projected area of the photo-anode, which was the product of the device length by the diameter of the photo-anode. These are the most commonly adopted way for area calculation of fiber-shaped solar cells.17–24Fig. 1d shows the current–voltage curves of the fiber solar Cell A under different irradiation modes as described above. Under the SM mode, the open circuit voltage Voc = 0.728 V, the short-circuit current Isc = 1.68 mA (Jsc = 12.28 mA cm−2 or 0.3512 mA cm−1), the fill factor FF = 0.786, the maximum power output 0.962 mW (0.201 mW cm−1) and the photoelectric conversion efficiency η = 7.02%. The conversion efficiency is very close to the updated maximum efficiency for the planar dye-sensitized cell under the backside illumination.28 Twenty FPVC samples are fabricated and they exhibit an average efficiency of 6.70% ranging from 6.20% to 7.02%, showing great stability and reproducibility.
One of the characteristics of the FPVC is the three-directional light harvesting capacity due to its cylindrical-like and symmetrical structure, which means that the FPVC can capture diffuse light from all directions even at its backside. To simulate the strong diffuse light source from all possible directions, we used the white plastic foam placed perpendicularly to the incident light underneath the tested FDSC, under which the performance of the FDSC was measured. This test condition is labeled as Diffuse Reflection Illumination Mode (DRM). And current–voltage curves are shown in Fig. 1d. Under the DRM, Voc = 0.734 V, FF = 0.755, and Isc = 3.82 mA (0.7997 mA cm−1), which means that the absolute output short circuit current is 2.27 times of that in the SM mode, and the corresponding output power has been improved by 122% (0.4462 mW cm−1) compared to that measured in the SM mode. The actual output power is greatly enhanced due to the efficient harvesting of the diffusely scattered light from the backside by the FPVC.
3.2. Current and output power of the FDSC in the DRM (diffuse light illumination mode)
The three directional light harvesting capacity of the FPVC is further investigated under the DRM by computer simulation. Fig. 2a is a schematic of the diffuse reflection illumination mode, where d0 is related to the width of the diffuse plate, d0 = d − r, where r is the radius of the sealing tube of the fiber-shaped photovoltaic cells. According to Lambert's cosine law and a supposed case that the FDSC can utilize all of the diffuse light entering into the device, we derived the relationship between the short circuit current and power output ηpower output of the FPVC under the DRM and the half-width d0 of the diffuse plate (ESI†). Here we introduce β as the enhancement factor to demonstrate the capacity utilization of diffuse light or concentrating light by the FPVC. The bigger the β is, the higher is the utilization of the FPVC in diffuse light. The amount of diffuse light harvested by the FPVC is reducing as the diffuse light comes further away from the FPVC and it predicted that the limiting value of β is 2.05 under ideal conditions (see the simulation results in the ESI†, Part 1). Fig. 2b shows a comparison between theoretical and experimental results of short circuit current enhancement βJsc and power output enhancement βη as a function of d0. In Fig. 2b, the line curves are simulation results, which agree well with the experimental results using the correction factor K = 1.10 (see the ESI†, Part 1). In other words, with d0 gradually increasing, firstly, βJsc or βη rapidly increases, and then approaches nearly constant. The limiting value of βJsc or βη is about 2.32, indicating that the cell module has high utilization efficiency of diffuse light, which proves the FPVCs with obvious advantages over the planar cells in both outdoor and indoor environments since their diffuse light is a major part of the light.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic of the diffuse reflection illumination mode (DRM); (b) the ratio β(Jsc or η) of the short circuit current and efficiency in the SM mode to that in the DRM as a function of d (SM for the standard condition: AM 1.5; DRM for the diffuse light illumination, d = d0 + r, where d is the half width of the diffuse reflector and r is the radius of the sealing capillary). 
3.3. The advantages of 3-D light-collecting
Also the 3-D structures of FPVCs have resulted in less dependence on the incident angle compared to the planar cells. Fig. 3a and b show the schematics of the light-collecting modes of the FPVC (Cell A) and the traditional planar solar cell (Cell C). During the test, the cells were respectively spun around x-, y-, and z-axes to mimic the changes in the incident angles of daily sunlight. Fig. 3c shows the dependences of the normalized short circuit currents of the Cell A alone and the composite Cell A with the diffuse plate along x, y, z directions upon the incident angle; Fig. 3d is the dependences of the normalized short circuit currents of the planar Cell C (for whose fabrication see ESI†) along x, y, z directions upon the incident angle. In the above figures, the smooth curves are drawn according to calculations (ESI†), where the points denote the experimentally measured data. It is obvious from the figures that the short circuit current of the Cell A does not vary with the incident angle along the x- and z-directions (Fig. 3c), while the planar Cell C is independent of the angle only in the z-direction (Fig. 3d). In addition, the composite Cell A with the diffuse plate also has one-dimensional (z-direction in Fig. 3c) angular independence, whereas the x-direction angle dependence is not as much as that in the planar cell, especially at larger incident angles (larger than 60 degrees). For example, at an incidence angle of 60°, the maximum efficiency of the fiber cell with a diffuse plate beneath (red hollow circle in Fig. 3c) is >80% of the efficiency at the normal incidence. However, as for a planar geometry (black square in Fig. 3d), the efficiency drops to ∼50% after tilting for 60°. The low angle dependence of the FPVC is helpful for the stereo layout of solar cell panels and for building integrated photovoltaic's (BIPV) design.
 Fig. 3  (a) 3-D light-collecting schematic of the fiber-shaped solar cell (Cell A); (b) 3-D light-collecting schematic of the traditional plate solar cell (Cell C); (c) the angle dependences of the normalized short-circuit currents of the Cell A and those of the composite Cell A; (d) the angle dependences of the normalized short-circuit currents of the plate Cell C. 
3.4. Conjunction of the FDSC with micro-reflector grooves
Furthermore, the 3-D light-collecting characteristic of FPVCs also facilitates the novel high-efficiency light concentrator as schematically shown in Fig. 4a. A 5 cm long FPVC is placed at the focus line of a parabolic condenser coated with aluminium foil. (Concentrator fabrication is shown in the ESI†.) The incident light is reflected by an aluminium (Al) foil and converged onto the FPVC located at the focus line of the parabolic condenser. Fig. 4b shows I–V curves of the fiber cell with the parabolic grooves with 0.4 mm focal length and different widths. As the width of the parabolic groove increases from 2.00 to 5.00 mm, the corresponding short circuit current (Isc) increases from 3.60 mA to 9.40 mA and the corresponding maximum power output (Pmax) is increased dramatically from 1.92 mW to 4.78 mW. While, the Isc and Pmax of the same FPVC under the SM are 1.33 mA and 0.772 mW, respectively. The measurements confirm that the new designs are in favor of light harvesting to enhance the power output of FPVCs. Here we introduce the enhancement factor βpower output, which is calculated by the amount of output power acquired using collectors divided by the output power acquired in the SM mode. For instance, as shown in Fig. 4b, the power output of the FPVC gained in the SM mode is 0.772 mW, while that of the FPVC housed in a parabolic groove with a width of 2.00 mm is 1.92 mW. In such case, βpower output equals 1.92 mW/0.772 mW = 2.48. Fig. 4c shows the correlation between the enhancement factor βpower output of the output powers and the ratio of D and 2r (D/2r) combined with different concentrators, where D is the width of the concentrator and 2r is the diameter of the FPVC's sealing glass capillary tube. As shown in Fig. 4c, when D/2r is 3.5, the βpower output of the FPVC combined with a parabolic condenser is 4.8. It confirms that utilization of the light condenser significantly increases the output power of FPVCs by a factor of ∼5 compared to that of the FPVCs alone without using a light condenser.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of a fiber-based dye sensitized solar cell housed in a parabolic condenser. (b) I–V curves of the fiber solar cell housed in a parabolic condenser with different widths D (units: millimetres) at the open of the parabolic condenser under SM and dark conditions. (c) The ratio βpower output of the different condenser output powers to the output powers in the SM as a function of ratio D/(2r) using different shaped grooves, including a parabolic condenser, a semi-ellipse condenser, a semicircular condenser and a V-shaped condenser (45° of V angle). D is the width of the upper condenser groove mentioned above and r is the radius of the capillary. (d). Comparative histogram of the short-circuit currents and the efficiencies of different size condensers, D = 3 mm and 5 mm. 
Besides parabolic design, concentrators can be in shapes of V-groove, semi-ellipse, semicircle and so on, whereas the parabolic condenser gives the best performance (Fig. 4c). Due to the limited precision of our prepared light condensers, ηpower output value using different concentrators other than the parabolic condenser is less than the maximum expected value. According to geometrical optics, the converged light after reflected by the parabolic groove should theoretically fall perpendicularly onto the arc surface of the FPVC capillary tube, therefore the relative amount of light reflected by the arc surface of the cell tube is less than that in the case of SM irradiation in which not all light falls perpendicularly onto the arc surface of the FPVC capillary tube.

Fig. 4d shows comparisons of the short circuit currents and the power output of the FPVC combined with different concentrators when D (the width of different grooves) is 3 mm and 5 mm, respectively. When D is 3 mm, the power outputs of the condensers in shapes of parabolic, semi-ellipse, semicircle, and V-shape (V angle = 45 degrees) reach 0.752, 0.604, 0.644, and 0.482 mW cm−1, respectively. (Here mW cm−1 are used as power output units for convenience of calculation and comparison to that acquired under the SM.) Combined with the parabolic condenser with D equals to 5 mm, the short circuit current is as high as 1.912 mA cm−1, and the power output reaches 0.9747 mW cm−1. Under intense light intensity, the FPVC combined with the condenser still has relatively high output power and filling factor, possibly for the following reasons. (1) The FPVC is working under the backside illumination, i.e. the incident light enters into the photo-anode from the pitch space of the counter electrode. Most of its excitons are separated mainly at the anode surface. Therefore, the average distance that the regenerated I3− diffuses toward the counter electrode and passes through the porous TiO2 obstacle29 is smaller than that in the planar cell case that works under the front-lighting mode and is favorable for the holes to arrive at the counter electrode. (2) The substrate is a metal wire whose thermal and electrical conductivities are several orders of magnitudes higher than those of FTO, which reduce the resistances and thus the local temperature.28 (3) The I3− concentration (e.g. 0.1 M) in the electrolyte is high enough to ensure rapid transmission of the holes in the cell. It is worth noting that the conventional silicon-based cells produce large amounts of heat under intense light, which consequently lowers their output efficiency and stability, especially for the non-crystalline cells.30 In contrast, the output efficiency of dye-sensitized solar cells increases with the increase in the cell temperature.31 This is another advantage of the novel concentrator conjunct with dye-sensitized solar cells. Also, the size of the novel cells can be very small, such as d = 1–2 mm. Even with high magnification design, such as D/2r equal to 5, the size of the condenser grooves is still very small, so that the thickness of the condenser cell module still can be very thin, such as smaller than 10 mm, far thinner than the conventional concentrator used for flat-type solar cells (from centimetres to even metres).32–34
Conclusions
In summary, we have successfully prepared a novel FPVC with a photoelectric conversion efficiency of 7.02%, which is the highest efficiency of the reported FPVC at present to our knowledge. Its output power has been increased by a factor of 5 simply by altering the configuration of light harvesting using a millimetre size back-reflector. The light collectors used are rather space saving, but effectively converted the unused light into electricity through the three-dimensional structure offered by the FPVC. Multiple FPVCs can be integrated into a module for practical applications (ESI†), which are connected in serial to form a subunit module, and the subunits can be integrated into a module panel in either serial or parallel. Because the simple light condenser is structurally very simple and made of cheap materials, the increase in the overall cost of the cell module is low. Also the Pt counter electrode can be replaced by other fibers, such as industrial carbon fibers, stainless steel wire or other conductive substrate sputtered or coated with Pt nanoparticles. Moreover, the novel FPVC technology can be applied to all photovoltaic cells to fabricate flexible cells with high efficiency. With further material and structure optimization, this 3-D light-collection, flexible, FPVC technology is likely to become one of the most important and practical technologies for solar energy.
Acknowledgements
This work is jointly supported by NSFC (50833001), MOST (2011CB933300) and MOE (309001) of China.
Notes and references
S. R. Wenham and M. A. Green, Prog. Photovoltaics, 1996, 4(1), 3 CAS .
A. A. Rockett, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2010, 14(6), 117 CrossRef .
K. L. Chopra, P. D. Paulson and V. Dutta, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2004, 12(2–3), 69 CAS .
R. W. Birkmire and B. E. McCandless, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2010, 14(6), 139 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa and W. Warta, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2009, 17(5), 320 CAS .
R. R. King, D. C. Law, K. M. Edmondson, C. M. Fetzer, G. S. Kinsey, H. Yoon, R. A. Sherif and N. H. Karam, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90(18), 183516 CrossRef .
J. F. Geisz, S. Kurtz, M. W. Wanlass, J. S. Ward, A. Duda, D. J. Friedman, J. M. Olson, W. E. McMahon, T. E. Moriarty and J. T. Kiehl, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91(2), 023502 CrossRef .
B. Oregan and M. Gratzel, Nature, 1991, 353(6346), 737 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Kay, I. Rodicio, R. Humphrybaker, E. Muller, P. Liska, N. Vlachopoulos and M. Gratzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115(14), 6382 CrossRef CAS .
Q. J. Yu, Y. H. Wang, Z. H. Yi, N. N. Zu, J. Zhang, M. Zhang and P. Wang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4(10), 6032 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Liang, Z. Xu, J. B. Xia, S. T. Tsai, Y. Wu, G. Li, C. Ray and L. P. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22(20), E135 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Brabec, S. Gowrisanker, J. J. M. Halls, D. Laird, S. J. Jia and S. P. Williams, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22(34), 3839 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Kim, K. Lee, N. E. Coates, D. Moses, T. Q. Nguyen, M. Dante and A. J. Heeger, Science, 2007, 317(5835), 222 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Chen, J. H. Hou, S. Q. Zhang, Y. Y. Liang, G. W. Yang, Y. Yang, L. P. Yu, Y. Wu and G. Li, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3(11), 649 CrossRef CAS .
K. Taira and J. Nakata, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4(9), 602 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tachan, S. Ruhle and A. Zaban, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94(2), 317 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Liu and M. Misra, ACS Nano, 2010, 4(4), 2196 CrossRef CAS .
S. Q. Huang, Q. X. Zhang, X. M. Huang, X. Z. Guo, M. H. Deng, D. M. Li, Y. H. Luo, Q. Shen, T. Toyoda and Q. B. Meng, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21(37), 375201 CrossRef .
B. Weintraub, Y. G. Wei and Z. L. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48(47), 8981 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Lee, R. D. Eckert, K. Forberich, G. Dennler, C. J. Brabec and R. A. Gaudiana, Science, 2009, 324(5924), 232 CrossRef CAS .
B. O'Connor, K. P. Pipe and M. Shtein, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92(19), 193306 CrossRef .
X. Fan, Z. Z. Chu, F. Z. Wang, C. Zhang, L. Chen, Y. W. Tang and D. C. Zou, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20(3), 592 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fan, Z. Z. Chu, L. Chen, C. Zhang, F. Z. Wang, Y. W. Tang, J. L. Sun and D. C. Zou, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92(11), 113510 CrossRef .
B. O'Connor, K. H. An, Y. Zhao, K. P. Pipe and M. Shtein, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19(22), 3897 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Wang, Y. Liu, H. X. Yang, H. Wang, H. Shen, M. Li and J. Yan, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2010, 10(1), 119 CrossRef .
M. A. Green, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2006, 14(5), 383 Search PubMed .
A. Hagfeldt and M. Gratzel, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95(1), 49 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ito, N. L. C. Ha, G. Rothenberger, P. Liska, P. Comte, S. M. Zakeeruddin, P. Pechy, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Chem. Commun., 2006,(38), 4004 RSC .
Z. Kebede and S. E. Lindquist, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1998, 51, 291–303 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Staebler and C. R. Wronski, J. Appl. Phys., 1980, 51(6), 3262 CrossRef CAS .
Dyesol.Ltd, http://www.sta.com.au/downloads/DSC%20Booklet.pdf,  2006.
R. M. Swanson, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2000, 8(1), 93 CAS .
P. Benitez, J. C. Minano, P. Zamora, R. Mohedano, A. Cvetkovic, M. Buljan, J. Chaves and M. Hernandez, Opt. Express, 2010, 18(9), A25 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Rowan, L. R. Wilson and B. S. Richards, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2008, 14(5), 1312 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c1ee01427g‡ Yongping Fu and Zhibin Lv contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

Broader context
To date, photovoltaic devices are the most powerful tools for converting solar energy to electrical energy. The traditional solar cells are based on planar sandwich structures, which are restricted by the choices of materials and preparation methods, especially silicon based solar cells and concentrator solar cells. Also their conversion efficiencies severely depend on the incident light angles, lowering their daily average power generation efficiency. Herein, to overcome these issues, a non-planar structure, fiber photovoltaic cell (FPVC), is introduced. The FPVC can capture light from all directions, especially the unparallel reflecting or scattering light from the surroundings. In addition, we investigate the 3-D light harvesting capacity of the FPVC in both experiments and simulation. What is more, a simple and cost-effective concentrator design for the FPVC is presented, which allows the FPVC to have a much enhanced power output. With further structure and materials optimization, one of the fascinating applications of the FPVC is to weave and integrate the fiber photovoltaic units into fabrics, which may be the next generation technology to produce flexible thin-film solar cells.


 	Fig. 1  Schematic of the proposed solar cell. (a) Cross-sectional structure of the fiber based dye-sensitized solar cell (FDSC); (b) optical image of a fiber solar Cell A; (c) a schematic of the FDSC working mechanism; (d) current–voltage curves of a fiber solar Cell A under different irradiation modes. (SM for the standard condition: AM 1.5; DRM for the diffuse light illumination mode using a diffuse reflector under a solar Cell A. Both are shown in the inset. The whole FDSCs are irradiated without any masks.)	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic of the diffuse reflection illumination mode (DRM); (b) the ratio β(Jsc or η) of the short circuit current and efficiency in the SM mode to that in the DRM as a function of d (SM for the standard condition: AM 1.5; DRM for the diffuse light illumination, d = d0 + r, where d is the half width of the diffuse reflector and r is the radius of the sealing capillary).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) 3-D light-collecting schematic of the fiber-shaped solar cell (Cell A); (b) 3-D light-collecting schematic of the traditional plate solar cell (Cell C); (c) the angle dependences of the normalized short-circuit currents of the Cell A and those of the composite Cell A; (d) the angle dependences of the normalized short-circuit currents of the plate Cell C.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of a fiber-based dye sensitized solar cell housed in a parabolic condenser. (b) I–V curves of the fiber solar cell housed in a parabolic condenser with different widths D (units: millimetres) at the open of the parabolic condenser under SM and dark conditions. (c) The ratio βpower output of the different condenser output powers to the output powers in the SM as a function of ratio D/(2r) using different shaped grooves, including a parabolic condenser, a semi-ellipse condenser, a semicircular condenser and a V-shaped condenser (45° of V angle). D is the width of the upper condenser groove mentioned above and r is the radius of the capillary. (d). Comparative histogram of the short-circuit currents and the efficiencies of different size condensers, D = 3 mm and 5 mm.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c1ee01427g
‡ Yongping Fu and Zhibin Lv contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
