Advanced cobalt-free cathode materials for sodium-ion batteries  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CS00442E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CS00442E
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 13189-13235Advanced cobalt-free cathode materials for sodium-ion batteries

        
          
            Shiyong 
            Chu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shaohua 
            Guo
          
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Haoshen 
            Zhou
          
          
        
      *a
aCollege of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Artificial Functional Materials, National Laboratory of Solid State Microstructures, Collaborative Innovation Centre of Advanced Microstructures, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China. E-mail: shguo@nju.edu.cn; hszhou@nju.edu.cn
bShenzhen Research Institute of Nanjing University, Shenzhen 518000, China
Received 
      4th July 2021
    First published on 1st November 2021AbstractAttempts to utilize lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) in large-scale electrochemical energy storage systems have achieved initial success, and solid-state LIBs using metallic lithium as the anode have also been well developed. However, the sharply increased demands/costs and the limited reserves of the two most important metal elements (Li & Co) for LIBs have raised concerns about future development. Sodium-ion batteries (SIBs) equipped with advanced cobalt-free cathodes show great potential in solving both “lithium panic” and “cobalt panic”, and have made remarkable progress in recent years. In this review, we comprehensively summarize the recent advances of high-performance cobalt-free cathode materials for advanced SIBs, systematically analyze the conflicts of structural/electrochemical stability with intrinsic insufficiencies of cobalt-free cathode materials, and extensively discuss the strategies of constructing stable cobalt-free cathode materials by making full use of non-cobalt transition-metal elements and suitable crystal structures, all of which aim to provide insights into the key factors (e.g., phase transformation, particle cracks, crystal defects, lattice distortion, lattice oxygen oxidation, morphology, transition-metal migration/dissolution, and the synergistic effects of composite structures) that can determine the stability of cobalt-free cathode materials, provide guidelines for future research, and stimulate more interest on constructing high-performance cobalt-free cathode materials.
Shiyong Chu
Shiyong Chu got his PhD degree from the College of Chemical Engineering in Nanjing Tech University in 2019. He is now a postdoctoral researcher in the College of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Nanjing University, under the supervision of Prof. Haoshen Zhou and Prof. Shaohua Guo. His research interests focus on lithium-ion batteries, sodium-ion batteries, and related energy-storage materials.
Shaohua Guo
Shaohua Guo received his PhD from the University of Tsukuba in 2015, after which he worked as a postdoctoral researcher at the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST). He is currently a Professor at the College of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Nanjing University, and a researcher in Shenzhen Research Institute of Nanjing University. His research interest involves energy materials and chemistries for lithium-ion batteries, sodium-ion batteries, and solid-state batteries.
Haoshen Zhou
Haoshen Zhou obtained his BS degree from Nanjing University in 1985, and received his PhD from the University of Tokyo in 1994. He is a professor in the College of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Nanjing University. His research interests include the synthesis of energy active materials and their applications in Li-ion batteries, Na-ion batteries, Li-redox flow batteries, metal–air batteries, and new type batteries/cells.
1. Introduction
To reasonably utilize and store renewable clean energy sources derived from wind power, solar power and hydropower, energy storage devices are indispensable.1–3 To date, as a leading player in the field of energy storage, pumped storage still suffers from many disadvantages, such as high equipment costs, poor response flexibility, and geographical constraints.4 Electrochemical energy storage systems usually exhibit high energy density levels, high energy utilization rates, timely responses, geographical independence, and adaptability to various scale energy storage scenarios.5 Over the past three decades, lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) have been widely and successfully used in small-scale smart electronic devices because of their high energy density.6,7 However, the application of LIBs in large-scale energy storage devices still faces many challenges, especially the high price and low reserves of lithium resources.8,9
Recently, sodium-ion batteries (SIBs), showing similar working principles as LIBs, have been extensively investigated (Fig. 1a) due to the large-scale use of LIBs and concerns about the lack of lithium resources.10,11 Compared with lithium resources, sodium resources are abundant (Fig. 1b), widely distributed and inexpensive. Moreover, the battery system cost of SIBs can also be reduced by using cheap aluminium foil as both the cathode and anode current collectors instead of the relatively expensive copper foil current collectors. The main cost distributions of a battery are shown in Fig. 1c.12 The cathode accounts for nearly one-third of the total battery cost and dominates the output voltage, specific capacity and working lifespan of the battery.13,14 Classic cathode materials of SIBs include Prussian blue analogues (PBAs), polyanionic compounds, tunnel oxides and layered oxides, where many transition metal elements are electrochemically active within the potential window of the cathode, including V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, and so on.15–20
 Fig. 1  (a) The number of published papers on LIBs and SIBs from 2010 to 2020, based on the Web of Science Core Collection, search strategies: TOPIC = (“lithium batter*” OR “lithium ion batter*” OR “Li-ion batter*” OR “lithium-ion batter*”) NOT TOPIC = (“sodium batter*” OR “sodium ion batter*” OR “Na-ion batter*” OR “sodium-ion batter*”) for LIBs and TOPIC = (“sodium batter*” OR “sodium ion batter*” OR “Na-ion batter*” OR “sodium-ion batter*”) for SIBs. (b) The contents of the two alkali metal elements (Li and Na) and the two current collector metal elements (Cu and Al) in the earth's crust. (c) Cost comparison of LIBs and NIBs at the manufacturing level in 2018. These data are based on ref. 12. 
Cobalt may be the most important metal element in LIBs except Li,21,22 because of its vital role in enabling robust cathodes, such as in the original LiCoO2,23–25 the current Li–Ni–Co–Mn–O or Li–Ni–Co–Al–O,26–28 and the cobalt-containing nickel-rich29,30 or lithium-rich layered cathode materials31–33 of the future. The contents of various electrochemically active transition metal elements in the earth's crust are shown in Fig. 2a. Among them, the content of cobalt in the crust is the lowest, while the price of cobalt is the highest. The low reserve and high price of lithium and cobalt resources have jointly hindered the development of LIBs in relatively large-scale electrochemical energy storage systems, such as electric vehicles and energy storage power stations. Therefore, when developing SIBs, we should comprehensively consider the issues of both Li and Co resources to avoid unnecessary competition between LIBs and SIBs in terms of the raw materials of transition metals. A summary of the published papers on cobalt-free cathode materials for SIBs in the past ten years is shown in Fig. 2b, where the increasing number of papers suggests a great and fast-growing interest in cobalt-free cathode materials.
 Fig. 2  (a) The price and abundance of several electrochemically active transition metal elements (Fe, Mn, V, Cr, Ni, and Co) in the earth's crust. The price data were collected from http://www.metal.com. The abundance data were collected from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Elemental_abundances.svg. (b) The number of published papers on cobalt-free cathodes and cobalt-containing cathodes of SIBs from 2010 to 2020, based on the Web of Science Core Collection, search strategies: TOPIC = (“sodium batter*” OR “sodium ion batter*” OR “Na-ion batter*” OR “sodium-ion batter*”) AND TOPIC = (“cathode*” OR “cathode material*” OR “positive electrode*”) for all cathodes and TOPIC = (“sodium batter*” OR “sodium ion batter*” OR “Na-ion batter*” OR “sodium-ion batter*”) AND TOPIC = (“cathode*” OR “cathode material*” OR “positive electrode*”) AND TOPIC = (“cobalt*” OR “Co”) NOT TOPIC = (“co-dop*” OR “co-introduc*” OR “co-substitut*” OR “co-precipitat*”) for cobalt-containing cathodes. (c) A schematic of constructing cobalt-free cathodes for SIBs by making full use of compound structures and transition metal elements. 
SIBs, especially cobalt-free SIBs, are important supplements to LIBs in energy storage, and their development and application greatly affect the price and application prospects of LIBs by stabilizing or even decreasing the price of Li/Co and even Cu. Based on the facts that sodium is heavier than lithium and SIBs show a lower operating voltage than LIBs, SIBs can hardly achieve the high-energy density of LIBs. Fortunately, stable SIBs can be easily fabricated due to their flexible material structure and unique sodium ion migration pathway. Furthermore, stable cathode materials show less dependence on cobalt in SIBs and the influences of cobalt on potential and capacity are negligible; therefore, the construction of high-performance or high-stability cobalt-free SIBs is reliable. For large-scale energy storage, it may be more meaningful to pursue long-term stable battery operation under the premise of suitable energy density than to pursue ultrahigh energy density.
Note that some review articles addressing advances in the development of SIBs,10,11,14,15,34–38 including sodium storage mechanisms, working potentials, capacities, electrode materials, electrolytes and costs, provide us a comprehensive and accurate understanding of SIBs and materials. Recently, some reviews have also emphasized the significance of cathodes, and the advances of several typical cathodes have been summarized and prospected.8,39–41 However, no special review article has focused on the advances of cobalt-free cathodes for SIBs, especially the construction of high-performance cobalt-free cathode materials by making full use of non-cobalt transition-metal elements (Mn, Fe, Ni, V, Cr, etc.) and suitable crystal structures (layered oxides, tunnel oxides, Prussian blue analogues, polyanionic compounds, etc.). In this review, we comprehensively review the recent advances in high-performance cobalt-free cathode materials for advanced SIBs. The key factors determining the stability of cathode structures are discussed, and various effective strategies to boost the structural/electrochemical stability of cobalt-free cathode materials are highlighted. First, the roles of cobalt in cathode materials are introduced, such as strict synthesis, complex phases, electrochemical performances and air stability. Then, the inherent structural characteristics and electrochemical properties of several suitable cathode structures for highly reversible sodiation and de-sodiation are overviewed and extensively analyzed. These structures include layered oxides, tunnel oxides, PBAs and polyanionic compounds. After this, we introduce a variety of electrochemically active non-cobalt metal elements (e.g., Mn, Fe, Ni, V and Cr) constructed in suitable cathode structures to achieve stable SIBs (Fig. 2c). The intrinsic relationships between electrochemical stability and phase transformation, particle cracks, transition metal slab slip, lattice distortion, lattice oxygen oxidation and transition-metal migration/dissolution are discussed, and some strategies (e.g., morphology control, surface/interface engineering, and synergistic effect of composite) to enhance structural and electrochemical stabilities are highlighted. Finally, this review ends with the remaining challenges and future perspectives of stable SIBs with cobalt-free cathodes. Our main objective is to provide the readers with an updated and comprehensive understanding of cobalt-free cathode materials, the inherent advantages of stable cobalt-free SIBs, and possible guidelines for the development of many other electrochemical energy storage systems.
2. Cobalt in cathode materials
2.1 Strict synthesis conditions of pure-phase NaxCoO2
NaxCoO2 was introduced by Hagenmuller et al. in 1980,42 and its phase diagram was successfully drawn by Ceder et al. recently.43 The phase types of NaxCoO2 are very rich, and both the synthesis process of the pristine materials and the charge–discharge process of the electrodes also show obvious induction effects on the crystal structure evolution. For the synthesis process, different sodium raw material feeding and sintering temperatures could lead to one pure phase structure (e.g., P2, P′3, O′3, and O3 types), two-phase composite structures (e.g., P2/O′3, P′3/O′3, P2 + P′3, and O′3/O3 types), and even three-phase composite structures (e.g., P2/P′3/O′3 type). The corresponding specific phase diagram is shown in Fig. 3a. These results indicate that special attention needs to be paid to the feeding and sintering temperature when preparing NaxCoO2 with a specific phase structure. The detailed phase classification of layered oxides will be discussed later.
 Fig. 3  (a) Phase diagram of NaxCoO2 with different sodium contents and calcination temperatures. Reproduced with permission.43 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (b) Phase structure evolution of P2-type NaxCoO2 in the discharge process monitored by in situ XRD. The diffraction peak indicated by asterisk is the signal of the beryllium window. The shifting of the diffraction peak to a higher 2θ position and peak splitting indicate a decreasing internal crystal plane distance and the appearance of a new phase, respectively. Discharge curves of P2-type NaxCoO2 in the GITT mode (right line). The inset figures indicate that XRD measurements were conducted on the equilibrium potential to obtain a real phase structure. Reproduced with permission.44 Copyright 2011, Nature Publishing Group. Galvanostatic charging–discharging curves of (c) Co-introduced P2-type Na0.67Mn0.65Ni0.2Co0.15O2 and (d) Mg-introduced P2-type Na0.67Mn0.65Ni0.2Mg0.15O2 from the 1st cycle to the 100th cycle in the potential window of 2.0–4.3 V. Reproduced with permission.50 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Ltd. (e) XRD patterns of P2-type Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 exposed to humid air for ten days. (f) XRD patterns of fresh Co-introduced P2-type Na2/3Co1/6Ni1/6Mn2/3O2 and P2-type Na2/3Co1/6Ni1/6Mn2/3O2 exposed to humid air for ten days. Reproduced with permission.51 Copyright 2001, American Chemical Society. 
2.2 Complex phase transformations and unsatisfactory electrochemical performances of NaxCoO2
Although NaxCoO2 has been reported forty years ago, its detailed electrochemical performances and phase transformations were systematically studied by Delmas et al. more recently.44 Unlike LiCoO2, due to the large radius of sodium ions, an ordered Na+/hole is formed in NaxCoO2 during the charge–discharge process in SIBs, resulting in multiple charge–discharge platforms. An elaborate phase evolution (Fig. 3b), using in situ X-ray diffraction (XRD) and galvanostatic intermittent titration technique (GITT) composite methods, indicated that P2 type NaxCoO2 suffered from nine single-phase regions in a narrow sodium content of 0.5 ≤ x < 1 at room temperature during sodium intercalation as the strongly ordered Na+/hole is dependent on a specific sodium content.44 Complex phase transformations or rich platforms during charging–discharging correspond to the significant expansion/contraction of microscopic crystals and even the breaking of chemical bonds, which results in inactive structural phase formation. At a relatively macro level, changes in the crystal volume further cause the electrode active particulate matter to crack or even fall off from the electrode. The cracking of the active particles may further cause side reactions related to the dissolution of the transition metal elements on the surface, the decomposition of the electrolyte, and the continuous formation of the cathode electrode interface film. In short, these adverse phase changes or charging–discharging platforms should be avoided as much as possible to obtain better electrochemical stability.
2.3 Cobalt vs. heteroatoms in improving the stability of NaxMn1−yNiyO2
Cobalt is widely accepted to show an improvement effect in the structural and electrochemical stabilities of cathode materials for LIBs. In SIBs, it has been reported that cobalt introduction shows a same improvement effect in both the O-phase and P-phase layer structures.45,46 As a kind of typical cathode materials, NaxMn1−yNiyO2 suffer from unfavourable phase transformations and poor electrochemical stabilities when they are charged to a high potential. Although these challenges can be alleviated by cobalt cooperation,45–47 the low reserve and high price of cobalt resources are worrying. Fortunately, cobalt can be replaced by other non-cobalt/noble metals (e.g., Mg, Al, Ti, etc.), and they can even show better stabilizing effect than cobalt.48–50 As a typical example, the comparison of the electrochemical behaviour of cobalt-introduced P2-type Na0.67Mn0.65Ni0.2Co0.15O2 and Mg-introduced P2-type Na0.67Mn0.65Ni0.2Mg0.15O2 was systematically investigated by Sun et al. recently, who found that a charging platform of approximately 4.2 V in Na0.67Mn0.65Ni0.2Co0.15O2 was still observed (Fig. 3c), while the charging platform at approximately 4.2 V in Na0.67Mn0.65Ni0.2Mg0.15O2 was effectively suppressed (Fig. 3d).50 Furthermore, online differential electrochemical mass spectrometry testing in coin cells showed that less CO2 was generated in the Na0.67Mn0.65Ni0.2Mg0.15O2 electrode than in the Na0.67Mn0.65Ni0.2Co0.15O2 electrode, indicating that less electrolytes were decomposed in the Na0.67Mn0.65Ni0.2Mg0.15O2 electrode. As expected, the capacity retention increased from 62% in Na0.67Mn0.65Ni0.2Co0.15O2 to 94% in Na0.67Mn0.65Ni0.2Mg0.15O2 over 100 cycles in the voltage of 2.0–4.0 V at 12 mA g−1. Therefore, heteroatoms may play a more important role than cobalt in modifying NaxMn1−yNiyO2 cathodes.
2.4 Negative effects of cobalt introduction on the air stability of NaxMn1−yNiyO2
In addition to the preparation and electrochemical performances of electrode materials, air stability or storage stability is another important indicator of materials in practical applications. The effect of cobalt doping on the air stability of P2 type Na2/3CoxNi1/3−xMn2/3O2 was first explored by Dahn et al. twenty years ago.51 The pristine cobalt-free Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 did not show any impure phase after exposure to humid air for ten days (Fig. 3e), suggesting an excellent air stability. It is generally accepted that the ordered arrangement of MnO6 and NiO6 in the crystal lattice of cobalt-free Na2/3CoxNi1/3−xMn2/3O2 results in the formation of a superstructure, which can suppress the insertion of water molecules. However, obvious impure phases appeared in cobalt-introduced Na2/3Co1/6Ni1/6Mn2/3O2 after being exposed to humid air for ten days (Fig. 3f), suggesting that the structure of the material was damaged or the material was air sensitive. The presence of cobalt in Na2/3CoxNi1/3−xMn2/3O2 inhibits the ordered arrangement of MnO6 and NiO6 or the generation of superstructures, leading to the insertion of water molecules and the consequent poor air stability. Simultaneously, the existence of Mn3+ in the material caused by the introduction of cobalt is also considered to be beneficial to the erosion of water molecules. Both the O3 phase and the P2/P3 mixed phase Na–Mn–Ni–Co–O have also been found to show obvious water insertion behavior.52–55 In brief, the introduction of cobalt will make the material more prone to water insertion, which will significantly increase costs in terms of material preparation and storage.
3. Typical cathode structures for stable cobalt-free SIBs
The transition metal elements in the fourth period of the periodic table from Ti to Cu are all electrochemically active in SIBs, which provides sufficient active elements for the development of cobalt-free cathode materials. Excluding Co, in the cathode operating voltage windows, V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Ni and Cu can all be used as active elements for oxidation/reduction or provide transferred electrons and reversible capacity. Furthermore, there are many types of crystal structures that can accommodate these electrochemically active cobalt-free transition metal elements, including layered oxides, tunnel oxides, PBAs, and polyanionic compounds. Interestingly, these cobalt-free elements can always stably exist in one or more of the above four types of crystal structures and exhibit satisfying electrochemical performances. For example, the oxidation/reduction of Cu is considered to be impossible in LIBs cathodes, but it is possible in SIBs. By designing Cu in the layered oxide, Cu2+/Cu3+ can be reversibly oxidized/reduced at approximately 4 V (vs. Na/Na+), which provides the possibility for the development of high-voltage cathode materials.56 Fe and Cr did not show electrochemical activity in a layered lithium transition metal oxide structure, but they could perform reversible deintercalation of sodium ions in layered oxide structures.57 Fe and Mn usually exhibit poor electrochemical stability in layered oxide structures due to transition metal migration and Jahn–Teller distortion,58,59 but excellent electrochemical stability can be achieved when they are designed in PBA structures and tunnel oxide structures, respectively.60,61
3.1 Layered oxides

3.1.1 Structural characteristics. 
Due to the various oxygen arrangement sequences and rich local sodium environments in the oxygen environment, layered oxides NaxTMO2 (0 < x ≤ 1, TM = transition metals) exhibit abundant structures. Delmas et al. systematically classified and defined layered NaxTMO2 oxides in 1980,62 in which the layered oxides were divided into O (octahedron) type (sodium in an octahedral configuration consisting of the nearest six oxygen) and P (prism) type (sodium in prismatic configuration consisting of the nearest six oxygen) according to the different oxygen environments in which sodium was located. According to the numbers of the TMO6 layers in a single unit cell, they were specifically divided into Px and Ox (x = 1, 2 or 3). Finally, these crystal structures could be further subdivided into P′x, P′′x, O′x, and O′′x according to different distorting degrees of the transition metal layer. However, considering the stability of the crystal structure and electrochemical performance, P2 and O3 have been studied the most. Schematic diagrams of the crystal structures of the O3 phase with a space group of Rm and the P2 phase with a space group of P63/mmc are shown in Fig. 4a and d. Taking P2 type layered NaxTMO2 as an example, in which sodium is located in an oxygen prism structure and the minimum number of repeated TMO6 layers is “2”, Na exists in the prism in two stable ways, namely, Naf (defined as Na1) in NaO6 prisms sharing faces with adjacent TMO6 octahedra and Nae (defined as Na2) in NaO6 prisms sharing edges with adjacent TMO6 octahedra, as shown in Fig. 4d.
 Fig. 4  Crystal structure diagram of (a) O3 phase and (d) P2 phase layered oxides. Sodium ion diffusion paths and energy profiles based on DFT calculations. (b) Dumbbell and (c) tetrahedron paths of sodium ion diffusion in the O3 phase. (e) Na(1) to Na(2) and Na(2) to Na(1) paths for sodium ion diffusion in the P2 phase. (f) Energy profiles of the four kinds of sodium ion diffusion paths in O3 and P2. A, B, and C represent the oxygen layer stacking sequence. The red, dark green, and light green balls represent oxygen, Na(1), and Na(2), respectively. The dark green prism, light green prism, light green octahedron, and blue octahedron represent Na(1)O6 (P2), Na(2)O6 (P2), NaO6 (O3), and TMO6, respectively. O3- and P2-type Na2/3Fe2/3Mn1/3O2 with the same stoichiometry were first synthesized, and the stronger diffusion ability of sodium ions in P2 phase than in O3 phase is mainly related to the crystal structure types. Reproduced with permission.64 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. 
In general, sodium-deficient layered NaxTMO2 (0 < x < 1) tends to form the P-type phase, and stoichiometric layered NaxTMO2 (x ≈ 1) tends to form the O-type phase. In sodium-deficient P-type structures, Chu et al. found that the P3 and P2 phases tend to be formed under low-temperature and high-temperature calcination conditions, respectively, and the mixed phases of P3 and P2 were obtained at intermediate calcination temperatures.63 The transformation process of the P3 to P2 phase needs to break the TM–O bond; hence, high temperature assistance is needed. When the transformation of the P2 to O2 phase occurs during the electrochemical charging process, sliding of the TMO6 layer is needed without breaking the TM–O bond. The sodium ion migration paths in P2 and O3 phase structures also differ greatly during the charge and discharge processes. Early research studies suggest that sodium ions in the P2 phase can directly migrate to the adjacent prism structure, showing a short ion transfer path, while sodium ions in the O3 phase need to cross an adjacent tetrahedral structure before moving to the adjacent octahedron. The sodium ion diffusion in the O3 phase structure suffers from a longer or more tortuous ion transfer path than that in the P2 structure, which indicates sluggish sodium ion transfer kinetics in the O3 phase. In fact, the different diffusion kinetics of sodium ions in the P2 and O3 phase structures may not be totally attributed to the difference of phase structures because the sodium content and the transition metal oxidation state of the materials in the common P2 and O3 phases are not all the same. To make a further confirmation, Rojo and co-workers first synthesized O3 and P2 phase Na2/3Fe2/3Mn1/3O2 with the same stoichiometry and studied sodium ion diffusion in the two structures through density functional theory (DFT) calculations.64 Two types of sodium ion diffusion paths in the O3 phase are shown in Fig. 4b and c, namely, the dumbbell and tetrahedral paths, and two types of sodium ion diffusion paths in the P2 phase are shown in Fig. 4e, namely, the Na(1) to Na(2) and Na(2) to Na(1) paths. Interestingly, excluding the effects of sodium content and transition metal oxidation state, the sodium ion diffusion resistance in the P2 phase was still significantly lower than that in the O3 phase (Fig. 4f), confirming that the stronger diffusion ability of sodium ions in the P2 phase than in the O3 phase is mainly related to the crystal structure type and has little relationship with the sodium ion content and the transition metal oxidation state of the original materials.


3.1.2 Material compositions and electrochemical properties. 
Electrochemically active TMs in layered NaxTMO2 include Ti, V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, and Mo, among which cobalt-free TMs that can provide the main capacity in the cathode voltage windows include V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Cu and Ni. In terms of synthesis, Mn-, Fe-, Cu- and Ni-based layered oxides are usually obtained by calcining uniformly mixed raw materials at high temperature in air or an oxygen atmosphere, which can be easily expanded to large-scale preparation. For V- and Cr-based layered oxides, since both Cr and V are in the low oxidation state in the layered structures, they need to be calcined in an inert atmosphere or a reducing atmosphere to avoid being oxidized to an inactive phase. This means that Cr and V are difficult to be replaced arbitrarily in the layered structure by Mn, Fe, and Ni, but they show the potential to undergo in situ recombination with carbon materials to improve the electrochemical performance. In terms of the operating voltage, based on the reversible redox of Fe3+/Fe4+ and Ni3+/Ni4+, Ni- and Fe-based layered cathode materials can achieve a high operating voltage. In terms of capacity and cycling performance, the layered oxide has a theoretical specific capacity beyond 250 mA h g−1 and an actual reversible specific capacity of approximately 200 mA h g−1, and the stable transition metal layer framework and two-dimensional sodium ion transmission channel ensure good cycling performance of the layered cathode material.
Although electrochemically active transition metals in layered structure materials can be fully utilized as potential cathode materials for SIBs, there are still some issues that have not been well solved. First, V and Fe migration in the crystal structure during charging and discharging still severely restricts the long-cycle stability of V- and Fe-based layered cathode materials. Fortunately, V and Fe can exhibit excellent long-cycle stability in polyanionic compounds and PBA cathode materials. In addition, the complex phase transformation is another important restraining factor that affects the electrochemical performance of layered cathode materials, especially for materials with only one element at the transition metal site. Introducing other active metal elements or inactive metal elements into the transition metal sites is thought to be an effective way to address the adverse effects of phase transformation. Typically, the layered NaNi0.12Cu0.12Mg0.12Fe0.15Co0.15Mn0.1Ti0.1Sn0.1Sb0.04O2 cathode material designed by Hu et al. via introducing multiple active/inactive metal elements to the transition metal sites shows a simple and highly reversible O3/P3 phase transformation process during charging and discharging, and a capacity retention rate of 83% over 500 cycles and 80% capacity retention rate at a 5.0C rate are achieved.65 Finally, air stability also severely restricts the commercialization of layered cathode materials because poor air stability of the materials will increase the cost of material preparation, transportation, and storage.66–69 In addition to the traditional surface coating method to improve the long-term stability of the material in air, reasonable elemental composition and the surficial enrichment of certain elements can also improve the stability of the material during the long-term exposure. In terms of optimizing the composition of elements, Na0.9Cu0.22Fe0.30Mn0.48O2 and NaNi0.45Cu0.05Mn0.4Ti0.1O2 with multi-element composition designed by Hu et al. showed excellent long-term air exposure stability.70,71 In terms of element surface enrichment, a Ti element enrichment layer on the surface of NaMn0.8Ti0.1Ni0.1O2 developed by our group also showed excellent air stability.72

3.2 Tunnel oxides

3.2.1 Structural characteristics. 
Compared with the layered oxide NaxTMO2, the tunnel-type transition metal oxide NaxTMO2 is much simpler in terms of the structure type and the type of transition metal element, and usually exists in the form of Na0.44MnO2. In terms of structural stability, Mn-based tunnel transition metal oxides are far superior to Mn-based layered oxides, which means that Mn can be well utilized in tunnel structures to achieve electrodes with a long working life. Similar to the layered NaxCoO2 mentioned in the previous section, tunnel-type Na0.44MnO2 was first reported by Hagenmuller et al. in 1971.73 Affected by the sluggish hopping mechanism of tunnel-type Na0.44MnO2 and the insufficient study on SIBs, it was more than 20 years later that the electrochemical properties of this material were first studied by Doeff et al. in polymer solid-state batteries.74 The crystal structure of tunnel Na0.44MnO2 with a space group of Pbam is shown in Fig. 5.75 Mn exists in tunnel Na0.44MnO2 in the form of mixed trivalent and tetravalent states. In the Na0.44MnO2 crystal, half of the trivalent Mn is present in the MnO5 tetragonal pyramid, and the other half of the trivalent Mn and all the tetravalent Mn are in the MnO6 octahedron. The MnO5 tetragonal pyramids are connected by sharing edges, and the MnO6 octahedra are connected by sharing faces. Two double MnO6 octahedron chains and one triple MnO6 octahedron chain are connected by a MnO5 tetragonal pyramid to form the skeleton of the tunnel structure with a spacious S-shaped tunnel.
 Fig. 5  Crystal structure diagram of tunnel Na0.44MnO2. The red and grey balls represent oxygen and sodium, respectively. The purple octahedron and tetragonal pyramid represent MnO6 and MnO5, respectively. Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2007, American Chemical Society. 


3.2.2 Material composition and electrochemical properties. 
In terms of composition, tunnel transition metal oxides, typical Na0.44MnO2, are usually Mn-based, and the Na/Mn ratio is not flexible. However, in terms of synthesis, tunnel sodium transition metal oxides show various preparation methods, such as the solid-state phase reaction method, sol–gel method, combustion method, hydrothermal method, solvothermal method, polymer-pyrolysis method, and electrospinning method. In terms of capacity, tunnel transition metal oxides show a theoretical specific capacity of 121 mA h g−1,76 which is half of the theoretical specific capacity of layered transition metal oxides. Fortunately, the actual reversible specific capacity of such materials can be very close to the theoretical capacity. Multangular rod-shaped Na0.44MnO2, prepared by Liu et al. using a reverse micro-emulsion method, showed a reversible specific capacity of 101.3 mA h g−1.77 The electrospinning method was used by Fan et al. to successfully synthesize Na0.44MnO2 nanowires, and the nanomaterial showed a reversible specific capacity of 120.4 mA h g−1.78 Single crystalline tunnel Na4Mn9O18 nanowires were synthesized using a polymer-pyrolysis method by Cao et al., showing a high reversible specific capacity of 130 mA h g−1 at 0.1C.79
To break the theoretical specific capacity of tunnel-type cathode materials, tunnel-type materials compounded with layered transition metal oxides have been developed to show a remarkably increased specific capacity. Copper ions were introduced into the tunnel structure to induce a layered-tunnel composite Na0.6Mn1−xCuxO2 cathode material by Chen et al., where the layer-tunnel composite material showed a reversible specific capacity of 173 mA h g−1. Qu et al. reported that a layer-tunnel composite Na0.6Mn0.98Zr0.02O2 cathode material could be fabricated by doping zirconium into the tunnel structure, showing a reversible specific capacity of 165 mA h g−1 at 0.2C.80
In terms of rate performance, based on the various synthetic methods of tunnel transition metal oxides, various nanomorphologies, such as nanoparticles, nanowires, and nanorods, ensure an excellent high-rate performance of such materials. To enrich these kinds of tunnel transition metal oxide cathode materials, some novel tunnel transition metal oxides have also been developed, such as Na0.61Ti0.48Mn0.52O281 and Fe-based tunnel type Na0.61[Mn0.27Fe0.34Ti0.39]O2.82

3.3 Prussian blue analogues

3.3.1 Structural characteristics. 
Prussian blue, expressed as Fe4[Fe(CN)6]3, was artificially synthesized and successfully applied in dyes as early as the 18th century. In recent years, Prussian blue and its derivatives have been widely used in energy storage and conversion.83–85 The chemical formula of PBAs can be expressed as NaaM[Fe(CN)6]1−b·cH2O (0 < a ≤ 2, 0 < b < 1), where “b” and “c” represent the degree of defects and the amount of coordination water in the crystal structure, respectively. The crystal structures of face-centered cubic (FCC) PBAs with a space group of Fmm are shown in Fig. 6, where Fig. 6a shows the perfect PBA crystal structure without structural defects and Fig. 6b shows the imperfect PBA crystal structure with structural defects.86 C and N in the CN ligands coordinate with Fe and M, respectively, in a six-coordinate manner to form a 3D framework with an FCC structure. The FCC structure shows an open sodium ion diffusion channel (approximately 3.2 Å in diameter) and a spacious sodium ion interstitial space (approximately 4.6 Å in diameter). The PBA crystal structure is always rich in Fe(CN)6 defects, and the defect locations are always occupied by coordination water.
 Fig. 6  Crystal structure diagrams of (a) perfect PBA Na2M[Fe(CN)6] without structural defects and (b) imperfect PBA NaaM[Fe(CN)6]1−b·cH2O with structural defects. The red, blue, dark blue, grey, dark green, orange, and light grey balls represent sodium, transition metal M, iron, carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, and hydrogen, respectively. Reproduced with permission.86 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. Micromorphology of (c) highly crystalline PBAs with less structural defects and (d) low crystalline PBAs with more structural defects. Sodium ion diffusion coefficients of highly crystalline PBA electrodes (red points) and low crystalline PBA electrodes (black points) in the (e) charge procedure and (f) discharge procedure based on GITT. Reproduced with permission.92 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. 


3.3.2 Material composition and electrochemical properties. 
Similar to layered cathode materials, PBA cathode materials also show rich composition because PBAs have a variety of optional M types, such as Fe, Mn, Ni, Cu, and so on. Moreover, Fe in NaaM[Fe(CN)6]1−b·cH2O can also be replaced by other electrochemically active transition metal elements. Unlike the layered cathodes widely studied in both LIBs and SIBs, PBAs have been more intensively investigated in the field of SIBs than LIBs,87 suggesting that PBAs may be more suitable for SIBs.88 Although PBAs have been extensively studied in SIBs in recent years, most of them are focused on Fe-based materials, so further research is still needed. In terms of capacity, two sodium ions could be de-intercalated in PBAs, so a high theoretical specific capacity can be obtained. For example, the PBA nanocrystal Na0.61Fe[Fe(CN)6]0.94·2.79H2O showed a reversible specific capacity of 170 mA h g−1 at a current density of 25 mA g−1.89 The Na1.96Mn[Mn(CN)6]0.99·2H2O reported by Lee et al. showed a discharge specific capacity of 209 mA h g−1 at 40 mA g−1.90
For the synthesis of PBAs, low-temperature wet-chemical methods are often used, which inevitably introduces Fe(CN)6 defects and coordination water, as explained in the structural analysis section above. The occupation of the Fe(CN)6 defect sites by coordination water in PBAs would lead to the reduction of sodium ion sites and blockage of sodium ion diffusion channels, which directly influenced the specific capacity and rate performance of the materials.91 Furthermore, the coordination water in the crystal lattice was also likely to come out of the crystal lattice and enter the electrolyte during the repeated charging and discharging process, and might directly interact with the electrolyte and cause a degradation of battery performance and a deterioration of safety.88 Therefore, in terms of improving the electrochemical performance of PBAs, it may be critical to optimize the synthesis process to prepare high-quality or low-defect materials. Highly crystalline PBAs with less structural defects showed an ordered growth of cubic particles with good particle dispersion (Fig. 6c), while low crystalline PBAs with more structural defects showed irregularly shaped and randomly aggregated particles (Fig. 6d).92 In addition, a comparison of sodium ion diffusion coefficients of highly crystalline PBAs and low crystalline PBAs in the charge and discharge processes is shown in Fig. 6e and f. PBAs with less structural defects usually show better sodium ion diffusion than PBAs with more structural defects. High-quality PBA crystals with very few Fe(CN)6 defects and coordination water were synthesized by You et al. by using a single iron source precursor, and high-quality PBAs showed higher reversible specific capacity, higher rate performance and better cycle performance than low-quality PBA crystals.89 Peng et al. synthesized a highly crystalline PBA material with less defects through a slow dissociation/precipitation process, and the material showed a high specific capacity of 152.8 mA h g−1 at 10 mA g−1, a good rate performance of 110.3 mA h g−1 at 1000 mA g−1, and an excellent cycle stability of 82% retention over 500 cycles.92
In terms of rate performance, PBAs have spacious sodium ion diffusion channels with a sodium ion diffusion coefficient of up to 10−9 cm2 s−1, allowing sodium ions to quickly transfer in the crystal.93 The low-temperature wet chemistry preparation process also enabled PBAs to be prepared into nanostructures with various morphologies,94 thereby shortening the diffusion distance of ions in the bulk phase of the material.95 PBAs could also be interacted with various kinds of carbon materials with good electron transport capabilities to form PBA/carbon composite structures to ensure excellent electron transport, such as PBA/conductive carbon,96 PBA/carbon nanotubes,97 and PBA/graphene composites.98

3.4 Polyanionic compounds

3.4.1 Structural characteristics. 
Polyanionic compounds are also a big family of battery materials, including cathodes, electrolytes, and anodes.40,99 Among these cathode materials, polyanionic compounds include orthophosphates, fluorophosphates, pyrophosphates, silicates, sulfates, and others.100–102 Comprehensively considering the specific capacity, cycle life and industrial application prospects of polyanionic compounds, orthophosphates and fluorophosphates may be the most prominent.
NaFePO4 (NFP), a typical orthophosphate, has two main crystal structures, namely, maricite and olivine. Maricite NFP is considered to show no electrochemical activity because of the lack of sodium ion diffusion channels, while olivine NFP, showing the same structure as LiFePO4, exhibits excellent sodium storage electrochemical activity, and its crystal structure diagram is shown in Fig. 7a.103 Fe and P are connected to O in six-coordinate and four-coordinate modes, respectively, to form FeO6 octahedra and PO4 tetrahedra. FeO6 octahedra and PO4 tetrahedra are connected through sharing oxygen atoms to form a polyanion skeleton, and the one-dimensional voids at the junction are occupied by sodium atoms. Fluoride with high electronegativity was introduced into NFP to form Na2FePO4F (NFPF), which provided a higher working potential for NFPF than NFP. The crystal structure diagram of NFPF is shown in Fig. 7b,104 where four O and two F are connected with one Fe in a six-coordinated manner to form an FeO4F2 octahedron, and one P and four O are connected in a four-coordinated manner into a PO4 octahedron. Two FeO4F2 octahedra are connected to form Fe2O7F2 by sharing F, and then the Fe2O7F2 octahedron is connected by a PO4 tetrahedron to form the polyanion framework by sharing oxygen with Na being filled in the two-dimensional void of the framework. Furthermore, Na in the two-dimensional channel can be divided into two types, namely, Na1 close to the FeO4F2 octahedron and Na2 close to the PO4 tetrahedron. Compared with NFP with a 1D sodium ion diffusion channel, F-introduced NFPF with a 2D sodium ion diffusion channel provides the possibility of improving the electrochemical performance. Na3V2(PO4)3 (NVP) and Na3V2(PO4)2F3 (NVPF) are also typical orthophosphates and fluorophosphates, respectively, and they are both typical sodium superionic conductor (NASICON) structures. The typical crystal structure of NASICON is shown in Fig. 7c,101 where VO6 octahedra and PO4 tetrahedra are interlinked through corner sharing to build a 3D framework with two kinds of Na sites. One-third of the sodium is at the Na1 position with six-fold coordination, and the other 2/3 is at the Na2 position with eight-fold coordination.
 Fig. 7  (a) Crystal structure diagram of olivine NaFePO4. The red balls, yellow balls, green octahedra and blue tetrahedra represent oxygen, sodium, FeO6, and PO4, respectively. Reproduced with permission.103 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (b) Crystal structure diagram of triphylite Na2FePO4F. The yellow ball, brown octahedron and light pink tetrahedron represent sodium, FeO4F2, and PO4, respectively. Reproduced with permission.104 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (c) Crystal structure diagram of NASICON. Reproduced with permission.101 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. Schematic diagram of sodium ion diffusion and electron transfer in (d) bulk particles, (e) carbon-coated bulk particles and (f) carbon-coated nanoparticles. Reproduced with permission.40 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 


3.4.2 Material composition and electrochemical properties. 
Both Fe and V show excellent electrochemical performance in polyanionic compounds, and they have been widely studied. In terms of sodium ion diffusion, NVP with a NASICON structure shows a large diffusion coefficient. For example, NVP prepared by the freeze-drying assisted thermal decomposition method showed a high sodium ion diffusion coefficient of 1.99 × 10−9 cm2 s−1 at room temperature.105
However, almost all polyanionic compounds, including NFP and NVP, suffer from a low electronic conductivity. Fortunately, Fe2+ and V3+ in polyanionic compounds are highly stable during high-temperature calcination under inert or reducing atmospheres, so both NFP and NVP can be well combined with high-electronic-conductivity carbon materials in situ to form a high-conductivity composite. Schematic diagrams of sodium ion diffusion and electron transfer in bulk particles during charging and discharging are shown in Fig. 7d.40 Limited by the poor electronic conductivity of the active material and the long ion diffusion path, the electrons cannot be effectively transferred, and the exchange of sodium ions between the interior and the surface of the bulk particles is also very sluggish. Although the bulk particles can be coated by a conductive carbon layer to effectively transport electrons (Fig. 7e), the diffusion of sodium ions still restricts the overall conductivity, resulting in the underutilization of the active materials. In addition to effectively improving the electronic conductivity of the active material particles, the in situ recombination process of NFP or NVP with conductive carbon can also prevent the agglomeration of NFP or NVP particles at high calcination temperatures, thereby ensuring good dispersion of the original nanoparticles. The nanometerization of NFP or NVP particles with an in situ carbon coating shortens the diffusion distance of sodium ions in the active material particles (Fig. 7f), and then the sodium ions can be fully and quickly de-intercalated to ensure an actual reversible specific capacity close to the theoretical capacity and excellent rate performance. The coated carbon layer or the carbon conductive network can not only ensure the excellent electronic conductivity of the material and inhibit the agglomeration of the nanoparticles but also effectively suppress the side reactions of electrolyte/active materials and the dissolution of transition metal elements during the charge and discharge processes, thereby ensuring excellent rate performance and long working life of the electrode. Therefore, although polyanionic compound materials may not be comparable with layered cathode materials in terms of capacity, they may be the best cathode materials to achieve both ultra-high rates and ultra-long working lives. For example, carbon-coated olivine NFP nanoparticles (NFP/C-NPs) prepared by an electrochemical-driven ion-exchange method with sodium ions exchanged with lithium ions in carbon-coated LiFePO4 nanoparticles were reported by Tang et al., where the NFP/C-NPs could reach a rate of 20C and a long working lifespan of 6000 cycles.106 An et al. reported nanoflake-assembled hierarchical NVP/carbon micro-flowers (NVP/C-MFs) prepared by a facile precipitation method, where the NVP/C-MFs electrode could be reversibly charged and discharged at 91C and a high capacity retention ratio of 83.6% was obtained at 9.1C over a long working lifespan of 5000 cycles.107
As typical fluorophosphates, NFPF and NVPF also show good compatibility with carbon materials and various preparation processes, which facilitate the development of high working potential NFPF/carbon and NVPF/carbon composites with excellent rate and cycle performances. For example, a carbon-coated NFPF showed two discharge plateaus at 2.92 and 3.07 V, and a capacity retention of approximately 85% was obtained over 1000 cycles.108 The composite electrode of NVPF nanoparticles/graphene oxide showed two potential plateaus at 3.51 and 3.98 V, and a capacity retention of 75% was obtained over 1000 cycles at 10C.109

4. Abundant non-cobalt metal elements with electrochemical activity for stable SIBs
Building stable cathode materials is a key step in the commercialization of SIBs, which can effectively maximize the economic benefits of the whole battery system by reducing maintenance and overall costs. Unlike the requisite presence of cobalt in cathode materials for a long working life in LIBs, the long-lifespan cathode materials of SIBs can be obtained without using the high-price and low-reserve cobalt. Reasonably understanding and utilizing the four types of structures mentioned above and the five kinds of non-cobalt transition metals (Mn, Fe, Ni, Cr and V) with excellent electrochemical activity are expected to achieve the purpose of designing a variety of cathode materials with stable working lifespans.
4.1 Mn-Based stable cathode materials
For Mn, the raw material reserves are abundant, the price is low, and it can also be stably adapted to the above four types of structures. In particular, Mn-based layered oxides and tunnel oxides have been the most extensively studied in SIBs, and various effective strategies have also been developed to optimize the structural and electrochemical stabilities.

4.1.1 Mn in layered oxides. 
Layered Mn-based cathode materials can be expressed as NaxMnO2 (0 < x ≤ 1). NaxMnO2 always contains a large amount of Jahn–Teller active ion Mn3+, and the Jahn–Teller active ions usually lead to adverse crystal lattice distortion and Mn dissolution derived from the disproportionation reaction of Mn3+ → Mn4+ + Mn2+.110,111 Additionally, the ordered Na+/hole derived from the large radius of sodium ion also induces complex phase transformations. The adverse effects of lattice distortion, transition metal dissolution, and complex phase structure evolution are considered to be the main issues that restrict the structural and electrochemical stabilities of layered Mn-based cathode materials. A schematic diagram of the electronic structure of Mn3+ with a d4 high-spin electron structure (t32ge1g) and the corresponding Jahn–Teller distortion forms with elongation and compression are shown in Fig. 8a.112 To date, bulk doping and surface modification have been widely adopted to alleviate Jahn–Teller lattice distortion and dissolution of transition metals to improve the cycle stability of layered NaxMnO2 cathodes. Furthermore, as we mentioned in the previous section on analysing layered oxide structures, layered oxides always undergo complex phase transformations during the charge and discharge processes, especially for layered materials with a single transition metal. In addition to suppressing lattice distortion and transition metal element dissolution, the metal element doping can also restrain the undesired phase transformation of layered cathodes in the charge and discharge processes. The doping metal elements need be not only electrochemically inactive metals, such as Li, Mg, Zn, and Al, but also electrochemically active metal elements, such as Cu, Ni, Fe and Co. Since the doping of Co is not within the scope of this article, we will not discuss it; the doping of Ni and Fe will be discussed later in the sections of “Ni in layered oxides” and “Fe in layered oxides”.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic diagram of the electronic structure of Mn3+ with compressed and elongated Jahn–Teller distortions. Reproduced with permission.112 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) dQ/dV and (c) charge–discharge curves of Na2/3Mn1−yMgyO2 (y = 0, 0.05 and 0.1). The introduction of bivalent Mg2+ into P2-type NaxMn1−yMyO2 not only alleviated the unfavourable Jahn–Teller effect, but also effectively disrupted the Na+/hole order in the charge–discharge process, thus smoothing the charge and discharge curves. Reproduced with permission.115 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
4.1.1.1 NaxMn1−yLiyO2. 
Since Li is not only the lightest metal element but also the metal cation with the lowest oxidation state (+1), the introduction of inactive Li into the Mn site of layered NaxMnO2 can reduce the content of Mn3+ to improve the cyclic stability of the material without affecting the specific capacity of the material as much as possible. Nazar et al. found that Li-introduced P2 phase Na0.6Li0.2Mn0.8O2 showed a reversible specific capacity of up to 190 mA h g−1, where the material had almost no Jahn–Teller active ions.113 The doping of Li simultaneously suppressed the unfavourable phase transformations in the high-working potential regions and alleviated Jahn–Teller lattice distortion, so the cycle stability of Li-doped Na0.6Li0.2Mn0.8O2 showed an improvement of 20% compared with that of the undoped Na0.6MnO2 over 100 cycles. Interestingly, P2-type Na0.72Li0.24Mn0.76O2 was found to show anionic redox activity to provide additional capacity, and the anion redox reaction could also play a role in suppressing adverse phase transformations.114 Although the introduction of Li+ is a very effective way to alleviate the Jahn–Teller lattice distortion, suppress the unfavourable phase transformations, and improve the cycling performance of layered NaxMnO2, we do not believe it is a good choice. An important starting point of developing SIBs is to use the more abundant and cheaper sodium to replace the expensive lithium with increasing consumption and limited reserves, thereby alleviating the phenomenon of “Li panic”, but the introduction of Li into the transition metal sites of layered NaxMnO2 will inevitably further aggravate the phenomenon. However, as a fundamental research, it is a good idea to start with Li and then extend it to other elements such as Na, Zn, Cu, Mg, and so on.
4.1.1.2 NaxMn1−yMyO2, (M = Mg, Cu and Zn). 
Similar to Li+, the introduction of divalent metal cations, such as Mg2+, Cu2+ and Zn2+, into layered NaxMnO2 can also effectively reduce the content of Mn3+ and alleviate Jahn–Teller lattice distortion. Additionally, the introduction of Mg2+, Cu2+ and Zn2+ can also activate the lattice oxygen activity of NaxMnO2 to provide additional capacity. Fortunately, earth-abundant Mg, Cu and Zn are more abundant and cheaper than Li.
In fact, the introduction of bivalent M2+ into P2-type NaxMn1−yMyO2 not only alleviated the Jahn–Teller effect but also effectively disrupted the order of Na+/holes in the charge–discharge process, thus smoothing the charge and discharge curves (Fig. 8b and c).115 Gray et al. found that even a small amount of Mg doping into P2-type Na2/3Mn1−xMgxO2 (x = 0.05 and 0.1) could effectively suppress the complex phase transformations during charging and discharging, and the original complex phase transformation reactions were replaced by solid-solution reactions in a wide range. Mg doping also disrupted the ordered Mn3+/Mn4+ arrangement; thus, the electrochemical performance was improved, especially the electrochemical stability. The improved long-term cycle stability of Mg-introduced P2-type NaxMg0.11Mn0.89O2 was systematically studied by Passerini et al., where they found that the material showed a capacity retention of 93.8% over 90 cycles and a capacity retention of 75% over 190 cycles in a wide voltage window of 1.5–4.4 V.116 Although the addition of electrochemically inactive Mg2+ would cause a slight decrease in terms of specific capacity, Mg-introduced Na2/3Mn1−xMgxO2 was also found to show lattice oxygen activity at a high potential, and an additional capacity was provided by lattice oxygen.117 For desodiated Na0[Mg0.28Mn0.72]O2, electron-deficient oxygen ions or oxygen ions with electron holes were coordinated octahedrally on one side with one Mg and two Mn atoms of the transition metal layer and on the side with three Na vacancies (Fig. 9a), and Mg was found to remain in the transition metal layers after fully charging. DFT calculations revealed that the O 2p states were at the top of the valence band (Fig. 9b), suggesting that oxygen could participate in the redox reaction. More importantly, Na2/3[Mg0.28Mn0.72]O2 showed almost no lattice oxygen loss, particularly different from Li-rich lithium transition metal oxides, such as Li[Li0.2Ni0.13Co0.13Mn0.54]O2 with Li in the transition metal layers. For Li0[LixNi0.13Co0.13Mn0.54]O2 (Fig. 9c), some of the oxygen was only coordinated by two cations, and some non-bonded O 2p orbitals were formed. In the voltage window of 2–4.5 V, the lattice oxygen-activated Na2/3[Mg0.28Mn0.72]O2 showed a specific capacity of approximately 175 mA h g−1 and almost no capacity fading over 50 cycles at a current density of 10 mA g−1. In addition, at a high working voltage, due to the oxidation of lattice oxygen, the repulsive force between the transition metal layers decreases, which effectively suppresses unfavourable phase transformations at high working potential ranges, thus theoretically providing the possibility of long-term structural stability during repeated sodium insertion–extraction.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic diagram of O2-type Na0[Mg0.28Mn0.72]O2 and the corresponding lattice-oxygen coordination environment. The electron-deficient oxygens are coordinated octahedrally on one side with one Mg and two Mn of the transition metal layers and on the other side with three Na vacancies, without leading to lattice-oxygen losing. (b) Schematic diagram of energy vs. density of states in O2-type Na0[Mg0.28Mn0.72]O2. (c) Schematic diagram of O3-type Li0[LixNi0.13Co0.13Mn0.54]O2 and the corresponding coordination around oxygen. The electron-deficient oxygens are only coordinated by two cations on one side, and some non-bonded O-2p orbitals are formed, resulting in lattice-oxygen losing. Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. 
For Cu2+, the adverse Jahn–Teller distortion and unfavourable phase transformations in Cu-introduced NaxMn1−yCuyO2 were also suppressed. P2-type Na0.67CuxMn1−xO2 (x = 0, 0.14, 0.25 and 0.33) were systematically investigated by Yu et al.,118 where they found that the structural and electrochemical stabilities of the materials was well enhanced with the doping of Cu. An ultrahigh capacity retention of approximately 100% for Na0.67Cu0.33Mn0.67O2 was achieved over 150 cycles at 200 mA g−1, and a capacity retention of 70% was obtained over 500 cycles at 1000 mA g−1. Recently, our group successfully developed a novel layered cathode material, P_1-type Na2.3Cu1.1Mn2O7−δ.119 Based on the in situ XRD results, no phase transformation (Fig. 10a) was observed during charge–discharge in the voltage window of 2–4.05 V, and a high working voltage of 3.6 V was achieved (Fig. 10b). Furthermore, due to the simple solid-solution reaction during the sodium ion insertion–extraction process, an ultrahigh capacity retention rate of 95.8% was obtained over 1000 cycles (Fig. 10c). More recently, Cu2+ was also found to show the same ability as Mg2+ to activate the lattice oxygen of NaxMnO2 for reversible redox. P2-Type Na2/3Mn0.72Cu0.22Mg0.06O2 with lattice oxygen anion activity showed that Mn3+/Mn4+, Cu2+/Cu3+ and O2−/(O2)n− all participated in the capacity contribution, and a high capacity retention of more than 87% was also obtained over 100 cycles at a current density of 1C.120
 Fig. 10  (a) In situ XRD patterns of the P_1-type Na2.3Cu1.1Mn2O7−δ electrode in a voltage window of 2.1–4.05 V. (b) Galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of the initial three cycles of P_1-type Na2.3Cu1.1Mn2O7−δ. (c) Cycle stability and the corresponding Coulombic efficiency of P_1 type Na2.3Cu1.1Mn2O7−δ electrode at a current density of 20C. Reproduced with permission.119 Copyright 2018, Elsevier Ltd. (d) Schematic diagram of sodium birnessite NaMnO2−y−δ(OH)2y with an eight-coordinated Mn(OH)8 hexahedron and a six-coordinated MnO6 octahedron. (e) Cycle stability of NaMnO2−y−δ(OH)2y electrodes at a current density of 10C. Reproduced with permission.126 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (f) EELS-mapping of Ti in NaMn0.8Ti0.1Ni0.1O2. (g) STEM images of NaMn0.8Ti0.1Ni0.1O2 and the corresponding enlarged views of (h) the blue rectangle with a layered structure and (i) the red rectangle with a spinel-like structure. Reproduced with permission.72 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. 
Zn2+ is as electrochemically inactive as Mg2+ but has a larger molar mass. Therefore, the introduction of Zn2+ may not be conducive to the contribution of the material's electrochemical capacity. Although Zn and Cu show similar large molar masses, Cu2+ has a certain electrochemical activity in the layered oxide cathode material. Therefore, in terms of improving the electrochemical performance of layered NaxMn1−yMyO2 by introducing divalent cations, Zn2+ shows almost no obvious advantages over Mg2+ and Cu2+ in regulating the unfavourable phase transformation and Jahn–Teller effect during the charge and discharge processes. However, as mentioned above, Mg2+, Cu2+, and Zn2+ have an activating effect on the lattice oxygen of NaxMn1−yMyO2, and the redox of lattice oxygen can usually provide a large additional capacity, so the sacrifice of the capacity of some cations can be tolerated. In addition, the electronegativity as well as the ability to regulate lattice oxygen of Zn2+ is between that of Mg2+ and Cu2+. P2-Type Na2/3Mn1−yZnyO2 (0 < y < 0.23) with anionic redox activity were first investigated by Tarascon et al., where the materials showed no oxygen gas release during charging.121 Then, the electrochemical performances of P2-type Na2/3[Mn1−xZnx]O2 (x = 0.0, 0.1, 0.2 and 0.3) were further investigated by Myung et al.,122 and the redox of lattice oxygen in P2-type Na2/3Mn0.7Zn0.3O2 was also confirmed by DFT and X-ray adsorption spectrum (XAS). Compared with pristine P2-type NaMnO2, the capacity retention rate of Zn-introduced P2-type Na2/3Mn0.7Zn0.3O2 increased from 30% to 80% over 200 cycles.
4.1.1.3 NaxMn1−yAlyO2. 
Unlike Li+, Mg2+, Cu2+, and Zn2+, which alleviate the Jahn–Teller effect by reducing Jahn–Teller active Mn3+ and increasing Mn4+, the introduction of Al3+ directly replaces Jahn–Teller active ions. Ex situ23Na solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy and powder XRD revealed that Al3+ introduction in P2-type Na0.67Al0.1Mn0.9O2 could suppress the formation of the Jahn–Teller distortion phase of the P′2 phase in the synthesis process of the pristine material.123 In addition, the in situ synchrotron XRD results suggested that the introduction of Al3+ also effectively suppressed the complex and unfavourable phase transformations during the sodium ion insertion/extraction process. Compared with the capacity retention of 50% of pristine Al-free Na0.67MnO2, Al-introduced Na0.67Al0.05Mn0.95O2, Na0.67Al0.1Mn0.9O2, and Na0.67Al0.2Mn0.8O2 showed capacity retentions of 69%, 86%, and 88%, and all Al-introduced Na0.67AlxMn1−xO2 (x = 0.05, 0.1, and 0.2) showed higher capacities than pristine Na0.67MnO2 after cycling. P2-type Na2/3Mn1−xAlxO2 (x = 0, 1/18, 1/9, and 2/9) was also investigated by Wu et al., and a similar conclusion was obtained to the above example.124 Over 150 cycles, all the Al-introduced Na2/3Mn1−xAlxO2 showed higher capacity retention than pristine Na2/3MnO2, and the cycle stability of Na2/3Mn8/9Al2/9O2 was the best. Since the Al–O bond is stronger than the bonds of Mn–O and M–O (M = Li, Mg, Cu, and Zn), Al-introduced NaxMn1−yAlyO2 has a more spacious Na+ transmission channel and a more stable structure than pure NaxMnO2 and M-introduced NaxMn1−yMyO2, ensuring rapid migration of sodium ions and long-term structural stability during the repeated sodium ion insertion–extraction process of the materials.
4.1.1.4 Other NaxMn1−yMyO2. 
The construction of composite phases could make full use of the advantages of different phases, which is another effective strategy to improve the electrochemical performance of cathode materials. Layered P2/P3 composite phases were fabricated in Na0.78Cu0.27Zn0.06Mn0.67O2 induced by a small amount of Zn introduction.125 In the composite phase, the P3 phase was mainly coated on the surface, which effectively improved the chemical and electrochemical stabilities of the material. Compared with the capacity retention of approximately 55% for pristine P2-type Na0.78Cu0.33Mn0.67O2, the P2/P3 composite showed an increased capacity retention rate of 85%.
A novel sodium birnessite NaMnO2−y−δ(OH)2y with a large sodium ion interlayer distance of approximately 0.7 Å was also developed by a hydrothermal process.126 First, Mn3O4 nano-sheets were deposited on carbon cloth by an electrochemical deposition method, which was then soaked in NaOH solution under a high-temperature hydrothermal reaction. After the hydrothermal process, the material was further annealed under an Ar atmosphere to obtain the final electrode materials. For the crystal structure (Fig. 10d), Mn was located in two coordination environments: eight-coordinate Mn(OH)8 hexahedra and six-coordinate MnO6 octahedra, and beneficial oxygen holes were also formed during the calcination process under an Ar atmosphere. At a voltage window of 2.0–4.0 V, a high specific capacity of above 220 mA h g−1 was obtained, and the corresponding Coulomb efficiency of the first cycle was as high as 94.6%. Over 1000 cycles at a current density of 10C, an ultrahigh capacity retention of 94.6% was obtained, and the corresponding discharge capacity was over 170 mA h g−1 after cycling (Fig. 10e). Moreover, when a full battery with N-doped graphene as the anode was assembled, a specific capacity of 204.6 mA h g−1 was obtained at a voltage window of 1.7–3.5 V, and a high capacity retention of 95.1% was achieved over 500 cycles at 10C.
A spinel-like TiOx coating layer was uniformly coated on the surface of Ti/Ni co-doped NaMn0.8Ti0.1Ni0.1O2in situ by our group.72 Based on the electron energy-loss spectroscopy (EELS) mapping results, the Ti-rich coating layer (Fig. 10f) was approximately 2 nm on the surface. Scanning tunnel electron microscopy (STEM) further confirmed that the coating layer was approximately 2 nm and showed that the coating layer was a spinel-like structure (Fig. 10g–i). The stable coating layer not only well improved the air stability of the material but also greatly enhanced the electrochemical cycle stability. Recently, our group found that even a small amount of Ru-doped P2-type Na0.6Mn0.93Ru0.07O2 could effectively suppress the phase transformations at high working potentials.127 Due to the strong electronegativity of Ru, Ru–O showed a stronger interaction than Mn–O, so the introduction of Ru made the material structure more stable and the sodium ion transmission channel more spacious. Compared with pristine P2-type Na0.6MnO2, Na0.6Mn0.93Ru0.07O2 showed an outstanding rate and cycle performance, and the capacity retention was increased from 59.9% to 87.4%.
In addition to the modification strategies of Mn-based layered cathode materials mentioned above, the binder used in the preparation of electrodes also plays an important role in the electrochemical performance of NaxMnO2. Recently, our group systematically investigated the electrochemical performance of the P2-type Na2/3MnO2 electrodes prepared by using polyvinylidene fluoride and sodium alginate as binders, and found that the performances of the electrodes using sodium alginate as the binder were significantly better than those using polyvinylidene fluoride as the binder.128 In a voltage window of 1.5–4.0 V, an electrode with polyvinylidene fluoride as the binder showed a capacity retention of 32% over 100 cycles, while an electrode with alginate as the binder achieved a capacity retention of 75% over 500 cycles. Compared with the common polyvinylidene fluoride binder, the sodium alginate binder could effectively alleviate the volume change of P2-type Na2/3MnO2 to avoid unfavourable cracking of material particles and promote the formation of a stable cathode–electrolyte interphase to prevent the electrode/electrolyte interface from undergoing continuous side reactions.


4.1.2 Mn in tunnel oxides. 
The cathode materials of Mn-based tunnel oxides can be expressed as Na4Mn9O18, but it appears more often in the form of Na0.44MnO2. Although the preparation and basic properties of Na0.44MnO2 have been reported decades ago, it was not until the year 2007 that Tarascon et al. formally studied the non-aqueous electrochemical performance of the material at room temperature.75 However, the complex phase changes of the electrode material in the potential range of 2–3.8 V (Fig. 11a) directly led to its poor cycle stability. Furthermore, Jung et al. further clarified the mechanism of sodium ion insertion and extraction in Na0.44MnO2 through DFT calculations, and determined that seven intermediate phases (Fig. 11b) were produced in the process.129 Due to the large radius of sodium ions, the lattice parameters would also change significantly to adapt to the strong internal stress generated inside the crystal during the insertion and extraction of sodium ions (Fig. 11c), resulting in poor ion transmission ability, considerable structural damage within the crystal and poor cycle stability of the electrode. Fortunately, nanoscale Na0.44MnO2 with strong stress buffering ability can be synthesized by various preparation processes.
 Fig. 11  (a) PITT curve (blue line) and the corresponding dQ curve (red line) of Na0.44MnO2. Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2007, American Chemical Society. (b) Theoretical and calculated voltage curves. (c) Changes in lattice parameters a, b and c during sodium insertion. Reproduced with permission.129 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
4.1.2.1 Morphological control. 
During the insertion and extraction of sodium ions, the lattice parameters a and b of Na0.44MnO2 changed significantly, while there was a slight change in the lattice parameter c (Fig. 11c). This is mainly due to the insertion and extraction of sodium ions along the c axis. Similarly, during the preparation of the material, the crystals will also tend to grow along the c-axis and grow into nanofibres or nanorods.
The polymer-pyrolysis method was applied by Liu et al. to synthesize nanofibre-like Na0.44MnO2 single crystals, where the length of the fibre reached approximately 10 μm and the diameter was approximately 50 nm (Fig. 12a).79 The tunnel Na0.44MnO2 nanofibres calcined at different temperatures (600 °C, 750 °C, and 900 °C) showed quite different cycle stabilities in a voltage window of 2.0–4.0 V. With calcination temperatures of 600 °C and 900 °C, the electrodes obtained capacity retention rates of 63.1% and 73.2%, respectively, over 100 cycles (Fig. 12b). In particular, for the sample with a calcination temperature of 750 °C, less than 7% of capacity was lost in the initial 30 cycles, almost no capacity decay occurred in the later 70 cycles, and an excellent capacity retention rate of 77% was obtained over 1000 cycles.
 Fig. 12  (a) Typical SEM (left) and TEM (right) images of Na0.44MnO2 nanofibres. (b) The corresponding cycle stability of Na0.44MnO2 electrodes at a current density of 0.5C. Na0.44MnO2 samples prefer to crystalize into a nanofibre morphology along the c axis. Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH. (c) SEM (left) and HR-TEM (right) images of Na0.44MnO2 nanorods. (d) Corresponding cycle stability of Na0.44MnO2 electrodes at a current density of 8.3C. Modifying a long fibre morphology to a short rod morphology along the c axis can reduce the diffusion distances of sodium-ions, leading to enhanced electrothermal performance. Reproduced with permission.77 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Electrospinning technology was also developed by Fan et al. to fabricate tunnel Na0.44MnO2 nanofibres, where the length and diameter of the fibres were in microns and nanometres, respectively.78 Due to the special nanofibre structure constructed by electrospinning technology, a capacity retention rate of approximately 90% was obtained over more than 3000 cycles.
In fact, in terms of electrochemical stability, nanofibres may not be as good as the nanorod-shaped-Na0.44MnO2. Under the same synthesis method, nanofibres tend to be formed at a low calcination temperature, while nanorods tended to be formed at a high calcination temperature.130 With the same electrospinning fabrication process and under the same electrochemical testing conditions, the capacity retention rates of Na0.44MnO2 nanofibres and nanorods were approximately 68% and 100%, respectively.
A reverse micro-emulsion method was reported by Dou et al. to synthesize tunnel Na0.44MnO2 multi-angular rods,77 and the typical scan electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of nanorods are shown in Fig. 12c. The tunnel Na0.44MnO2 multi-angular rods calcined at both 850 °C and 900 °C showed excellent cycle stability in a voltage window of 2.0–3.8 V, and a negligible capacity decay was observed over more than 1000 cycles at a current density of 8.3C (Fig. 12d). In particular, the multi-angular rods calcined at 850 °C showed an ultra-high capacity retention rate of approximately 99.6% over 2000 cycles, and a high Coulombic efficiency of 100% was maintained during the long-term cycling. After 100 cycles under a low current density of 0.1C, the micromorphology, lattice spacing, and selected area electron diffraction spots of the material showed the same states as the pristine crystal, indicating a stable structure and excellent stress tolerance during sodium ion insertion and extraction. Additionally, a reverse micro-emulsion method was also adopted by Jiao et al. to fabricate nanorod-like Na0.44MnO2 single crystals, where the nanorod-like single crystals showed a main diameter of 100–200 nm under the calcination conditions of 700–800 °C.131
A molten salt method was developed to synthesize tunnel-structured nanorods, and Qian et al. first adopted this method to fabricate Na0.54Mn0.50Ti0.51O2 nanorods.132 The tunnel-structured nanorod showed a length of up to approximately 5 μm and a diameter as short as approximately 150 nm. In a wide voltage window of 2.0–4.2 V, the nanorod showed capacity retention rates of approximately 88% over 150 cycles at a current density of 0.2C and 81% over 400 cycles at 1C. Furthermore, the rate and cycle performances of the Na0.54Mn0.50Ti0.51O2 nanorods were further improved by carbon coating with a coating thickness of about several nanometres.
A sol–gel synthesis method and a simple oxalate precursor-based process were, respectively, reported by Wang et al.133 and Liu et al.134 to fabricate Na0.4MnO2 nanorods. For electrochemical stability, a capacity retention rate of 89% was obtained over 100 cycles at 0.5C, and 86% capacity was maintained over 500 cycles at a high current density of 20C.
Based on the comparisons between nanofibres and nanorods discussed above, reducing the one-dimensional length can expose more sodium ion insertion and extraction channels, namely, the (001) active planes. Recently, Wang et al. compared the electrochemical performances of Na0.44MnO2 nanorods with different lengths and found that short Na0.44MnO2 nanorods showed better rate and cycle performance than long nanorods.135 For short nanorods, shorter sodium ion transmission distances and much more exposed transmission channels in the material promoted the rapid transmission of sodium ions and better buffered the adaptability of internal material stress due to the insertion and extraction of sodium ions.
To avoid particles growing in one direction ([001] direction) to form one-dimensional nanofibres or nanorods, a template-assisted sol–gel method was developed to fabricate Na0.44MnO2 nanoplates.136 The capacity retention rate of Na0.44MnO2 nanoplates with disrupted growth along a one-dimensional direction was close to 100% over 100 cycles, which is significantly better than the capacity retention rate of less than 80% of Na0.44MnO2 nanorods with growth along a one-dimensional direction.
4.1.2.2 Coating. 
In addition to the adverse internal stress caused by the insertion and extraction of sodium ions, the side reaction of the highly active manganese ions on the surface of the materials with the electrolyte and the collapse of the interface structure are key issues as well. The soft XAS, which is sensitive to the metal oxidation valence state on the surface of the materials, indicated that Mn2+ appeared in the material surface/interface when Na0.44MnO2 was discharged to below 2.6 V, and the amounts of Mn2+ continued to accumulate as the cycle number increased.137 In addition, the decay of electrochemical cycle stability was directly proportional to the accumulation of Mn2+ on the surface of the materials. Interestingly, when the discharge cut-off voltage was increased to 3 V, the unfavourable accumulation of Mn2+ and capacity decay disappeared simultaneously.
Recently, attempts were made to coat Al2O3 and NaTi2(PO4)3 on the surface of Na0.44MnO2 to avoid adverse reactions at the interface.138,139 The construction of the Al2O3 coating layer extended the working voltage window to 2.0–4.5 V, and the electrode still maintained excellent electrochemical stability within the wide voltage window. With a 2 wt% coating layer on Na0.44MnO2, the adverse side effects and unfavourable surface layer were suppressed, and the rate and cycle performances were both enhanced.
4.1.2.3 Doping. 
In addition to stable cycling performances, Fe-introduced tunnel Na0.61[Mn0.27Fe0.34Ti0.39]O2 could also exhibit a high working voltage of 3.56 V, based on the redox couple of Fe3+/Fe4+.82 F-doping can accelerate sodium ion transport and enhance the stability of the framework structure, that is, improving the kinetic and thermodynamic properties. F-Doped Na0.66[Mn0.66Ti0.34]O2−xFx showed enhanced electrochemical stability, and low-temperature electrochemical performances were also effectively improved.140


4.1.3 Mn in layered-tunnel composite oxides. 
In terms of specific capacity, a layered oxide cathode material shows a specific capacity of approximately 250 mA h g−1 which is twice the specific capacity of the tunnel type oxide cathode material (121 mA h g−1). However, a tunnel-type cathode can more easily obtain better electrochemical stability than a layered cathode. Mn-Based oxides with layered and tunnel composite structures are expected to have both high specific capacity and excellent cycle stability.
It has been proven that P2 and tunnel phases could be connected through an interface with a loose polycrystalline structure (Fig. 13a).141 An intergrown phase occurred in a nanoscale domain with a coherent orientation relationship, and a schematic diagram of the interface connecting P2 and tunnel phases is shown in Fig. 13b. Furthermore, compared with the pure P2 phase and pure tunnel phase, the P2/tunnel composite phase showed better sodium ion diffusion ability, which was more than one order of magnitude (Fig. 13c). As previously reported,142 ion diffusion was easier at the interface than in the bulk phase,143 which revealed why the composite phase showed a high sodium ion diffusion coefficient, suggesting that the formation of a composite phase provides an effective way to improve the electrochemical performance of Mn-based cathode materials.
 Fig. 13  (a) Coexistence of P2 and tunnel (T) phases, and their interfaces. The yellow square, pink square, and red square represent the P2 phase, the interface, and the T phase, respectively. The amplified figures of the yellow square, pink square, and red square are shown in a1, a2, and a3. (b) Schematic diagram of the interface connecting the P2 and T phases. (c) Sodium ion diffusion coefficient (d) of the pure P2 phase, pure T phase, and P2/T phase based on cyclic voltammetry and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy analyses. Reproduced with permission.141 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) The specific capacities of the layered-tunnel intergrowth Na0.6MnO2 composite, layered Na0.7MnO2, and tunnel Na0.44MnO2 at different current densities. (e) Cycle stability of the layered-tunnel intergrowth Na0.6MnO2 composite. Reproduced with permission.145 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
A layered-tunnel composite Na0.6MnO2 was prepared by Guo et al. through a co-precipitation method, where the composite material exhibited both a high specific capacity of layered cathode material and a long cycle performance of tunnel cathode material.144 Based on the potentiostatic intermittent titration technic (PITT) measurements and DFT calculations, the composite structure improved the reversibility of the Mn3+/Mn4+ redox couple and enhanced sodium ion transfer kinetics. Later, Guo et al. further compared the electrochemical performances of a layered-tunnel Na0.6MnO2 composite with the intergrowth of layered Na0.7MnO2 and tunnel Na0.44MnO2.145 The composite material showed a higher specific capacity than layered and tunnel materials (Fig. 13d) at different current densities. Additionally, the composite material also showed an excellent cycle stability (Fig. 13e). Based on the in situ XRD, the excellent electrochemical performance of the layered-tunnel intergrowth cathode might be due to the highly reversible phase transformation at a relatively wide working voltage.
In most cases, the formation of Mn-based layered-tunnel composite structures was induced by the doping of other elements, such as the cation doping of Al,146 Cu,147 Ni,148 Zr,80 Mg,149 Ti,150 and Bi,151 and the anion doping of F.152 The electrochemical properties of a series of Mn-based layered-tunnel composite cathode materials are summarized in Table 1.
Table 1 A summary of the electrochemical performances of Mn-based layered-tunnel composite cathode materials




Materials
Specific capacity (mA h g−1)
Cycle number
Capacity retention
Ref.




Na0.6MnO2
193.6@1.0C
700@10C
72%

144



Na0.6MnO2
198.2@0.2C
100@1C
85.1%

145



Na0.44MnO2/Na2Mn3O7
278@20 mA g−1
100@200 mA g−1
88%

153



NaAl0.1Mn0.9O2
145@0.1C
100@0.1C
71%

146



Na0.6Mn0.9Cu0.1O2
173@0.1C
250@4C
70.4%

147



Na0.6Mn0.95Ni0.05O2
171@0.1C
67@1C
60%@55 °C

148



Na0.6Mn0.98Zr0.02O2
165@0.2C
1000@2A g−1
75%

80



Na0.6Mn0.99Mg0.01O2
∼195@0.2C
500@1000 mA g−1
76.6%

149



Na0.6Mn0.9Ti0.1O2
∼100@1C
500@5C
87.9%

150



Na0.7Bi0.01MnO2
86.2@0.5C
300@2C
∼86.5%

151



Na0.44MnO1.93F0.07
149@0.5C
400@5C
79%

152






4.2 Fe-Based stable cathode materials
Fe is the second highest metal element in the earth's crust, only next to Al. In addition, the price of iron is low, and most iron compounds are environmentally friendly. To date, all the four types of structures mentioned above exhibit Fe redox activity to provide reversible capacity in SIBs. The reversible redox of the Fe3+/Fe4+ couple appears in layered and tunnel structures, and the reversible redox of the Fe2+/Fe3+ couple appears in PBAs and polyanionic compounds.

4.2.1 Fe in layered oxides. 
Alpha-NaFeO2 is well known as the structural prototype of layered O3 phase NaTMO2. Unfortunately, based on in situ/operando XRD, iron was found to prefer to migrate into the sodium layers when the electrode was charged to above 3.5 V, and approximately 40% of the initial iron migrated to the sodium layers at the end of charging to 4 V.58 Although the in situ XRD and PITT results suggested that the migration of Fe in NaxFeO2 was partially reversible, the capacity decay and voltage polarization were still serious. The Jahn–Teller active Fe4+ in desodiated NaxFeO2 was also found to influence the structural stability.154 Therefore, extensive research is focused on suppressing Fe migration to enhance the structural and electrochemical stabilities.
Mn-introduced NaxFe1−yMnyO2 was found to be the most successful attempt to suppress the adverse migration. In 2012, P2-type NaxFe1/2Mn1/2O2 was first reported by Komaba et al., where the material reached a high specific capacity of 190 mA h g−1 with an average working voltage of 2.75 V (vs. Na/Na+), corresponding to a high-energy density of 520 W h kg−1.155 Later, based on X-ray pair distribution function (PDF) analysis, Nazar et al. found that the migrated Fe in sodium layers was reduced from 12.5% of pristine P2 type Na0.67Fe0.5Mn0.5O2 to 3.1% of Ni-introduced Na0.67Fe0.2Mn0.65Ni0.15O2 in a charged state (Fig. 14a and b), and an energy density retention of 80% was obtained over 150 cycles.156 A Co/Ni-free O3-type Fe-based Na0.9[Cu0.22Fe0.30Mn0.48]O2 was developed by Hu et al., where the material showed a high air stability and a stable cycle performance.70
 Fig. 14  (a) PDF curves of chemically oxidized Na0.1Fe0.2Mn0.65Ni0.15O2 and Na0.14Fe0.5Mn0.5O2. Yellow shading and lavender shading show the evolution of the MO6/MO4 ratio and the contraction of the bilayer thickness. (b) Schematic diagram of the above two structures and the corresponding Fe-migration contents in the sodium layers (tetrahedral MO4). In the desodiation states, Fe prefers to migrate into the sodium layers from the TM layers in layered NaxFe0.5Mn0.5O2, while this unfavourable migration can be suppressed by Ni doping. Reproduced with permission.156 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. STEM images of (c) NaFeO2 and (d) ruthenium-doped NaFeO2 charged to 4 V. Geometric phase analysis of (e) NaFeO2 and (f) ruthenium-doped NaFeO2 charged to 4 V. Particle cracks in (g) NaFeO2 and (h) ruthenium-doped NaFeO2. Serious Fe-migration leads to unfavourable particle cracks in Fe-based layer cathodes. Reproduced with permission.157 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
Very recently, based on STEM, our group restudied the Fe migration in NaFeO2 at the atomic scale.157 When charged to 4 V, NaFeO2 showed obvious Fe migration into the sodium layers (Fig. 14c), but almost no Fe migration appeared in the Ru-doped NaFeO2 (Fig. 14d). Based on local lattice strain analysis, the NaFeO2 lattice presented intense lattice strain (Fig. 14e) after repeated cycling, accompanied by remarkable particle cracks (Fig. 14f). Remarkably, the local lattice strain and particle cracks were effectively alleviated in Ru-doped NaFeO2 (Fig. 14g and h). As a result, the cycle stability of Ru-doped NaFeO2 was remarkably enhanced, and a capacity retention of 80% was obtained over 100 cycles.


4.2.2 Fe in Prussian blue structures. 
In 2012, the sodium ion electrochemical storage performance of KMFe(CN)6 (M = Fe, Mn, Ni, Cu, Co, and Zn) was first reported by Goodenough et al., where they found that KFeFe(CN)6 showed the largest specific capacity among them.91 In a voltage window of 2.0–4.0 V, KFeFe(CN)6 showed two couples of redox peaks at 2.97/2.92 V and 3.69/3.58 V, and they corresponded to the redox of the Fe2+/Fe3+ couple bonded with nitrogen and the Fe2+/Fe3+ couple bonded with carbon, respectively. In the preparation process of PBA crystals, since the crystals are usually grown in an aqueous solution and do not subsequently undergo high-temperature calcination, PBA crystals always contain a large amount of Fe(CN)6 lattice defects and coordination water, thus blocking sodium ion transfer and destroying organic electrolytes. Therefore, to achieve a long-term stable insertion and extraction of sodium ions in PBAs, the most important thing may be to optimize the synthesis process to prepare defect/coordination water-free PBA crystals.
A precipitation method involving K3Fe(CN)6 and FeCl3 aqueous solutions was developed by Yang et al. to synthesize FeFe(CN)6 single crystals.158 Due to the perfect crystal structure, the single-crystal cathode material showed a high reversible capacity of 120 mA h g−1 at 0.5C and an excellent capacity retention of 87% over 500 cycles. Later, Ma et al. fabricated coordination water-free Na0.81Fe[Fe(CN)6]0.79·□0.21 (□ = defect) micro-cubes through the electron exchange of graphene oxide and Na4Fe(CN)6.159 In the voltage window of 2.0–4.0 V, a high specific capacity of more than 160 mA h g−1 was obtained at 0.5C for the composite electrode, and an ultra-high capacity retention of approximately 92% was achieved over 500 cycles. The coordination water-free PBA electrode showed complete sodium ion transmission channels, and no crystal water entered the electrolyte during the repeated charge–discharge cycles, which together contributed to the high specific capacity and excellent cycle stability of the coordination water-free PBA electrode. However, sodium-poor PBAs are far from practical applications due to the low Coulombic efficiency of the initial charge–discharge process. Very recently, a series of low-defect and sodium-rich NaxFe[Fe(CN)6]1−y□y-zH2O (x = 0.96, 1.74 and 1.81; y = 0.81 and 0.83) cathode materials were developed through a controlled coprecipitation method.160 For sodium-poor Na0.96Fe[Fe(CN)6]0.81-4.83H2O, the initial charge and discharge capacities at 0.2C were 56 and 120 mA h g−1, respectively, corresponding to a Coulombic efficiency of approximately 47%. With the sodium content increasing to 1.74, the initial charge and discharge capacities of Na1.74Fe[Fe(CN)6]0.83-2.37H2O were 100 and 118 mA h g−1, respectively, corresponding to a Coulombic efficiency of approximately 85%. For sodium-rich Na1.81Fe[Fe(CN)6]0.83-2.04H2O, the initial charge and discharge capacities were 138 and 140 mA h g−1, respectively, corresponding to a Coulombic efficiency of approximately 99%. The abundant sodium allows sufficient sodium ion extraction during the initial charge process, ensuring a high first-cycle Coulombic efficiency. Additionally, the low defects of the material well stabilized the crystal structure during repeated sodium extraction and insertion, and an ultra-high capacity retention of approximately 80% was obtained over 3700 cycles.
As mentioned above, PBAs are usually synthesized via a low temperature and wet chemical pathway; thus nano-engineering, surface engineering and compounding with conductive materials can be applied in PBAs to further improve the electrochemical performance.
The inevitable lattice defects and coordination water of PBA crystals could hinder the migration of sodium ions, thus nano-engineering by adjusting the size of crystal particles and sodium ion transmission channels can effectively reduce sodium ion transmission barriers. Wu et al. prepared sub-micron Na0.39Fe[Fe(CN)6]0.82-2.35H2O with rich nano-pores by using a surface-active agent.161 Later, Na1.58Fe[Fe(CN)6]0.92-0.65H2O hollow nano-spheres were fabricated by Wang et al. using a hydrothermal method, and the hollow nano-spheres had a diameter of approximately 200 nm.162 Based on the BET result, the hollow nano-spheres showed a high specific surface area of approximately 107 m2 g−1. A high specific capacity of 142 mA h g−1 was obtained at 0.1C, and a capacity retention of approximately 90% was achieved over 800 cycles.
Compounding with conductive networks is another effective strategy to improve the electrochemical performance of PBAs. Guo et al. fabricated a PBA/CNT composite, and typical SEM and TEM images are shown in Fig. 15a and b.97 Typical PBA cubes were well connected with CNT conductive networks, which well ensured sodium ion diffusion and electron transport at the same time (Fig. 15c). Due to the well fabricated composite allowing excellent kinetic properties, the composite material showed high specific capacities (Fig. 15d) and excellent cycle stabilities at different working temperatures (Fig. 15e). In addition, composites of PBAs/carbon and PBAs/conductive-polypyrene were also developed and exhibited satisfactory electrochemical performances, especially the cycle stability.96,163
 Fig. 15  (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of PBA/CNT composites. (c) Schematic diagram of sodium ion and electron transport in PBA/CNT electrodes. (d) Charge–discharge curves and (e) cycle performances of PBA/CNT electrodes at temperatures of −25, 0 and 25 °C. Compounding PBAs with carbon-based conductive networks is an effective strategy to boost the electrochemical performance. Reproduced with permission.97 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. 
Surface engineering is also a widely-adopted method to regulate the electrochemical performance of electrode materials by stabilizing the surface/interface and the bulk structure. On the one hand, the construction of a passivated surface can effectively prevent the degeneration of the material surface from the non-electrochemical process.164 On the other hand, the construction of the surface protective layer can prevent the electrode surface from being damaged during the repeated charge–discharge cycles. Wang et al. constructed a polyaniline layer on the surface of the PBA cubic-particles, where the coating layer effectively promoted the diffusion of sodium ions and the transfer of electrons during long-term cycling.165
For a direct comparison, the electrochemical performances, especially the cycle stability, of Fe-based PBAs and PBA/carbon composite electrodes are listed in Table 2. Based on abundant raw materials, easy synthesis processes and excellent electrochemical performances, we conclude that Fe-based PBAs can be promising cobalt-free cathode materials for SIBs with a long-lifespan.
Table 2 A summary of the electrochemical performances of Fe-based PBA cathode materials




Materials
Voltage window (V)
Specific capacity (mA h g−1)
Cycle number
Capacity retention (%)
Ref.




KFe2(CN)6-nH2O
2.0–4.0
∼100@1/20C
30@1/20C
∼100

91



FeFe(CN)6-nH2O
2.0–4.0
120@0.5C
500@20C
87

158



Na0.81Fe[Fe(CN)6]0.79/rGO
2.0–4.0
163@30 mA g−1
500@800 mA g−1
92

159



Na1.81Fe[Fe(CN)6]0.83-2.04H2O
2.0–4.1
140@0.2C
3700@5C
78

160



Na0.83Fe1.97(CN)6-nH2O
2.0–4.1
∼147@25 mA g−1
200@25 mA g−1
∼100




Na1.03Fe1.95(CN)6-nH2O
2.0–4.1
∼155@25 mA g−1
200@25 mA g−1
∼100

166



Na1.24Fe1.94(CN)6-nH2O
2.0–4.1
135@25 mA g−1
200@25 mA g−1
∼100




Na1.63Fe1.89(CN)6-nH2O
2.0–4.1
150@25 mA g−1
200@25 mA g−1
90




Na1.56Fe[Fe(CN)6]-3.1H2O
2.0–4.1
∼100@20 mA g−1
400@20 mA g−1
97

167



Na1.92Fe[Fe(CN)6]-nH2O
2.0–4.2
∼160@10 mA g−1
750@0.5C
80

168



Na1.19Fe[Fe(CN)6]0.9-H2O
2.0–4.0
99@100 mA g−1
500@100 mA g−1
79

169



Na0.647Fe[Fe(CN)6]0.93-2.6H2O/C
2.0–4.0
112@1C
2000@20C
90

96



NaxFe2(CN)6-nH2O/CNT
2.0–4.2
167@0.1C
1000@2.4C
∼77

97



NaxFe[Fe(CN)6]-nH2O/PPy
2.0–4.2
113@25 mA g−1
500@200 mA g−1
79

163



K3Fe(CN)6-nH2O/CNT
2.0–3.8
81@0.1C
500@1C
83

170



Fe4[Fe(CN)6]3-nH2O
2.0–4.2
115@50 mA g−1
150@50 mA g−1
96

161



Na1.58Fe[Fe(CN)6]0.92-nH2O
2.0–4.2
142@0.1C
800@2C
90

162







4.2.3 Fe in polyanionic compounds. 
Given the high redox potential and excellent structural thermal stability, orthophosphate NFP and fluorophosphate NFPF have been extensively studied, and considerable progress has been made. Since NFP and NFPF both suffer insufficient electrical conductivity due to their intrinsic structural properties, improving electrical conductivity through carbon composite and nanotechnology has become the main strategy to enhance the comprehensive electrochemical performance of this kind of cathode materials.
4.2.3.1 NaFePO4. 
For the orthophosphates, the cathode material of LiFePO4 developed by John B. Goodenough's group has been widely used in electric vehicles because of its cheap iron raw materials and high safety. Inspired by LiFePO4, in 2012, olivine NFP was developed by Sun et al. via an electrochemical Li/Na exchange method, and a specific capacity of 125 mA h g−1 was obtained for sodium ion electrochemical storage.171 During the full charge (FePO4) and discharge (NaFePO4) process, NFP suffers a lattice volume change of approximately 18% due to the large sodium ion and intrinsic material structural properties,172 which is another worthy issue that affects the electrochemical performance. The combination of carbon coating and nanocrystallization is widely regarded as the main means to alleviate the unfavourable lattice volume changes and enhance the conductivity of NFP. In fact, at high synthesis temperatures, olivine NFP tends to be converted to maricite NFP; thus, an ion-exchange method with olivine LiFePO4 as the pristine material is usually adopted to obtain olivine NFP. Using carbon-coated LiFePO4 nanoparticles as the original material, Loh et al. obtained carbon-coated NFP nanoparticles by ion exchange in an aqueous electrolyte.106 In the voltage window of 2–4 V, a reversible discharge capacity of 142 mA h g−1 and an ultra-high capacity retention of 70% were obtained over 6000 cycles. In the well-fabricated composite electrode, the conductivity was highly enhanced by the carbon coating layer, and the unfavourable lattice volume change was effectively alleviated by the nano-sized particles.
Earlier, maricite NFP was considered to have no electrochemical activity because of the lack of sodium ion transfer channels. In 2014, Kim et al. first found that maricite NFP showed excellent sodium ion storage activity in nano-scale particles.173 In the initial cycle, maricite NFP particles converted into amorphous FePO4 (Fig. 16a) under the charge state, and a reversible specific capacity of approximately 140 mA h g−1 was obtained in the subsequent sodium ion insertion process (Fig. 16b). The detailed activation process in the initial stage is shown in Fig. 16c. Since then, maricite NFP has been extensively studied for sodium ion storage. Shen et al. loaded carbon-coated NFP nanoparticles on a three-dimensional conductive network carbon cloth to fabricate a free-standing electrode, where the electrode showed a specific capacity of 142 mA h g−1 at 0.1C and an ultra-high capacity retention of approximately 100% over 5000 cycles at 10C.174 A classic electrospinning process was adopted by Fan et al. to fabricate free-standing composite electrodes, where the NFP nanoparticles were embedded into three-dimensional conductive carbon fibres at a particle size of approximately 1.6 nm (Fig. 16d and e).175 As expected, an outstanding capacity retention of 89% was achieved over 6300 cycles (Fig. 16f). For maricite NFP, the combined effect of three-dimensional conductive network construction and particle minimization almost alleviated the disadvantages of intrinsic lattice volume expansion and low conductivity of the material to the largest extent.
 Fig. 16  (a) TEM images of charged maricite NaxFePO4. (b) Charge–discharge curves of maricite NFP at different current densities (C/20–2C) and cycles (1–200). (c) Schematic diagram of the electrochemical activation process of maricite NFP. Inactive maricite NFP was proven to show excellent sodium-ion storage activity in nano-scale particles. Reproduced with permission.173 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) TEM image and (e) particle size distribution of maricite NFP nanoparticles embedded in carbon nanofibres. (f) Long cycle performance of the electrode of maricite NFP nanoparticles embedded in carbon nanofibres. Morphology engineering is an effective improvement strategy for maricite NFP with typical polyanionic structures. Reproduced with permission.175 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
4.2.3.2 Na2FePO4F. 
As a cathode material, NFPF was first systematically investigated by Nazar et al. in 2007, and they revealed that NFPF exhibited one sodium ion extraction/insertion (Na2FePO4F ↔ Na1.5FePO4F ↔ NaFePO4F) with a small lattice volume change of 3.7%.176 Recently, Yang et al. further identified the structural evolution using ex-situ solid-state NMR.177 Based on 23Na magic angle spinning (MAS) solid-state NMR, Na1 remained in the crystal (Fig. 17a and c) and Na2 was extracted in the charge process; in the discharge process, the Na2 was then fully inserted (Fig. 17b and c). Carbon-coated NFPF showed two discharge potential plateaus at approximately 3.06 and 2.91 V,178 higher than that of F-free NFP (2.7 V).171 DFT calculations revealed that NFPF with 2D sodium diffusion channels (0.29 eV) had smaller sodium ion migration barriers than NFP with 1D sodium diffusion channels (0.32 eV),179 which was consistent with the smaller lattice volume expansion of NFPF than NFP.
 Fig. 17  (a–c) The structural evolutions of NFPF electrodes through ex situ solid-state NMR. Normalized 23Na MAS NMR spectra of NFPF at different (a) charging states and (b) discharging states of the first cycle at 60 and 55 kHz. (c) Changes of sodium content at different sites during the initial charge and discharge processes. Reproduced with permission.177 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (d) TEM image and (e) particle size distribution of NFPF nanoparticles embedded in carbon nanofibres. (f) Long-term cycling performance of NFPF nanoparticles embedded in carbon nanofibres. Reproduced with permission.181 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
Sharing intrinsic advantages and disadvantages with NFP, NFPF showed similar electrochemical optimization strategies to NFP, such as nanometerization, carbon coating, and so on. A carbon-coated NFPF composite electrode was fabricated by Shao et al. with vitamin C as the green organic carbon source, showing a specific capacity of 117 mA h g−1 at 0.1C.108 For a long-term cycle, the electrode achieved a capacity retention of approximately 85% over 1000 cycles at 4C. Nano-composites of carbon-coated NFPF nanoparticles (15–25 nm) and reduced graphene oxide were prepared by Dunn et al., which showed a specific capacity of 110 mA h g−1 at C/10 and a capacity retention of 70% over 5000 cycles at 10C.180 Recently, in similar synthesis processes to the NFP mentioned above, free-standing composite electrodes with ultra-small NFPF nanoparticles embedded into 3D conductive carbon fibres were further fabricated by Fan et al. using a classic electrospinning process, where the nanoparticle size was approximately 3.8 nm (Fig. 17d and e) and a stable cycle performance was also obtained (Fig. 17f).181
A summary and comparison of NFP and NFPF in terms of specific capacity and electrochemical stability are listed in Table 3. In general, the specific capacity of NFP is usually higher than that of NFPF, which can be attributed to the smaller mass of NFP. In terms of cycle stability, NFP is also slightly more stable than NFPF, which may be because the 3D polyanion framework composed of FeO6 octahedra and PO4 tetrahedra in NFP has a more stable crystal structure than the 2D polyanion framework composed of Fe2O7F2 octahedra and PO4 tetrahedra in NFPF. Based on the abundant raw materials and the satisfactory cycling performances, we conclude that Fe-based polyanionic compounds are suitable to construct long-lifespan cobalt-free cathode materials for SIBs.
Table 3 Summary and comparison of the electrochemical performances of Fe-based olivine NFP, maricite NFP and NFPF cathode materials, where “C”, “PTh”, “rGO”, and “PEDOT” represent “carbon”, “polythiophene”, “reduced graphene oxide”, and “poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)”, respectively




Materials
Voltage window (V)
Specific capacity (mA h g−1)
Cycle number
Capacity retention (%)
Ref.





o-NFP
2.2–4.3
125@0.05C
50@0.05C
∼90

171




o-NFP/C
2.0–3.8
111@0.1C
240@0.1C
90

182




o-NFP/PTh
2.2–4.0
142@10 mA g−1
100@10 mA g−1
94

183




o-NFP/C
2.0–4.0
140@0.1C
500@0.5C
86

106



500@1C
90


500@2C
89


6000@10C
70



m-NFP/C
1.5–4.5
142@C/20
200@C/20
95

173




m-NFP/C@graphene
1.5–4.3
145@0.1C
300@0.1C
98

184




m-NFP/C
1.5–4.5
115@1C
800@1C
91

185




m-NFP/C
1.5–4.5
142@0.1C
5000@10C
∼100

174




m-NFP@C
1.5–4.5
145@0.2C
6300@5C
89

175



NFPF/C
2.0–3.8
80@0.1C
750@1C
80

186



NFPF/C
2.0–4.0
117@0.1C
1000@4C
85

108



NFPF/C
2.0–4.0
110@C/10
5000@10C
70

180



NFPF/PEDOT
2.0–4.2
123@C/5
700@1C
70

187



NFPF/C
2.0–4.0
114@0.1C
600@5C
55

188



NFPF@C
2.0–4.0
118@0.1C
2000@5C
85

181






4.3 Ni-Based stable cathode materials

4.3.1 Ni in layered oxides. 
Ni-Based materials are also promising cathode materials for SIBs because of the high output working voltage and a two-electron transfer process based on the redox couples of Ni2+/Ni3+ and Ni3+/Ni4+, which results in high specific capacity and energy density. Since Ni can stably exist in layered cathode materials and exhibit excellent electrochemical activity, layered cathodes have been the most widely studied in Ni-based cathodes.
For sodium nickel oxide cathode materials, there are two prototype structures of orthorhombic Na2NiO2 and layered NaNiO2. During the insertion and extraction of sodium ions, Na2NiO2 would gradually be irreversibly converted into NaNiO2,189 so most of research was focused on layered NaNiO2.
Like most layered cathode materials containing a single transition metal, NaNiO2 underwent even more complex reversible and irreversible P- and O-type phase transformations during sodium ion insertion and extraction (Fig. 18a), such as O′3, O′′3, O′′′3, and so on.190 These phase transformations derived from the insertion and extraction of sodium ions appeared as multiple voltage platforms on the charge–discharge curves (Fig. 18b), and the charge compensation was accompanied by the redox of Ni2+/Ni3+/Ni4+(Fig. 18c). Based on operando synchrotron-based transmission X-ray microscopy, NaNiO2 went through an asymmetric phase change process similar to the “core–shell” model in the first charge–discharge process, and an irreversible Na0.19NiO2 phase transformation occurred (Fig. 18d).
 Fig. 18  (a) In situ high-energy XRD patterns of NaNiO2. (b) Galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of NaNiO2 in 2.0–4.5 V. (c) XANES profiles of pristine NaNiO2, NaxNiO2 charged to 3.2 V, and fully charged Na0.19NiO2. (d) Operando synchrotron-based transmission X-ray microscopy image of the first charge–discharge process. Reproduced with permission.190 Copyright 2017, Elsevier Ltd. 
Based on the above considerations, researchers generally believe that optimizing the cut-off potential can well avoid the irreversible phase transformations and doping various metal elements can alleviate the adverse phase transformations and stabilize the crystal structure. However, the optimization of the potential window comes at the expense of capacity. Therefore, the doping of other metal elements has been studied most extensively, including doping inactive metal elements, such as Ti, Sb, Te, and Bi, and doping active metal elements, such as Fe, Co and Mn. The introduction of Te6+, Sb5+, and Bi5+ with a high oxidation state can effectively reduce the Jahn–Teller active Ni3+ in pristine NaxNiO2, while the highly ordered [Te/Sb/BiO6]/[NiO6] caused by the differences in electronegativity and oxidation state of Te6+/Sb5+/Bi5+ and Ni2+ is generally not conducive to the stability of the structure of the material during long cycling, such as honeycomb Na2Ni2TeO6,191 Na3Ni2BiO6,192 and Na3Ni2SbO6.193 Additionally, the atomic masses of Te, Bi, and Sb are so large that the specific capacities of the corresponding materials are lowered. Although the doping of Fe3+ and Co3+ with a relatively low oxidation state can partially replace the Jahn–Teller active Ni3+ in NaxNiO2, Fe3+ still faces inevitable migration in layered oxide structures and Co3+ is beyond the scope of this review. Thus, Ti4+ and Mn4+ with suitable oxidation states are considered to be the best doping metal elements to improve the structural stability of NaxNiO2.
4.3.1.1 NaxNi1−yMnyO2. 
Among the many NaxNi1−yMnyO2 compositions, P2 phase Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 may be the most classic one, which has not only excellent electrochemical performances, but also superior air stability. In the voltage window of 2–4.5 V (vs. Na/Na+), the theoretical capacity of Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 is 173 mA h g−1 based on the redox of Ni2+/Ni3+/Ni4+, and the actual reversible capacity is approximately 150 mA h g−1. In 2013, Meng et al. took the lead to systematically study the electrochemical performances and phase transformations of the material.47 First-principle calculations revealed that the phase transformation of P2–O2 would happen at approximately 4.22 V, which was further confirmed by synchrotron-based XRD. In the specific charge/discharge states with sodium contents of 1/2 and 1/3, ordered sodium ions/holes appear (Fig. 19a), which displayed on the charge–discharge curves as voltage platforms.
 Fig. 19  (a) The ordered arrangement of sodium ions in pristine P2-type Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 (left), Na1/2Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 (middle), and Na1/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 (right). The blue and pink balls represent the sodium ions at the Nae and Naf sites, respectively. Reproduced with permission.47 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of P2 type Na2/3Mn2/3Ni1/3−xMgxO2 (x = 0, 0.02, 0.05, 0.10, and 0.15) in the voltage window of 2.5–4.35 V. (c) Ex situ XRD patterns of P2 type Na2/3Mn2/3Ni1/3−xMgxO2 (x = 0.05) at different charge–discharge states. The unfavourable phase transformation of P2–O2 in P2-type Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 can be suppressed by Mg introduction. Reproduced with permission.197 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. In situ XRD patterns and galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of (d) P2 type Na0.67Ni0.3Mn0.7O2 and (e) P2 type Na0.67Ni0.1Cu0.2Mn0.7O2 in the voltage window of 2.0–4.5 V. Cu introduction shows the same function as Mg introduction in suppressing the unfavourable phase transformation of P2–O2 in P2-type Na0.67Ni0.3Mn0.7O2. Reproduced with permission.198 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Crystal structures of P2 type Na0.7Mn0.6Ni0.4O2 (MN), Na0.7Mn0.6Ni0.3Mg0.1O2 (MNM-1) and Na0.7Mn0.6Ni0.2Mg0.2O2 (MNM-2). Mg in P2-type Na0.7Mn0.6Ni0.4O2 can serve as a pillar to stabilize the layered structure. Reproduced with permission.199 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
Dou et al. reported that layered P2-type Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 particles synthesized by a solid-state reaction method showed a capacity retention of approximately 80% over 2000 cycles in a voltage window of 2.0–4.0 V.194 Later, P2-type Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 was synthesized through a sol–gel method by Chou et al., showing a capacity retention of approximately 71% over 1200 cycles at 10C in 2.0–4.0 V.195 Very recently, porous P2-type Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 was synthesized by Fan et al. using the electrospinning technique.196 The nanofibres showed a specific capacity of 166.7 mA h g−1 in the voltage window of 1.5–4.0 V, and a capacity retention rate of approximately 81% was obtained over 500 cycles. All the above examples show that P2-type Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 can avoid the adverse P2–O2 phase transformation when working below 4.22 V and exhibit excellent electrochemical stability.
Although pristine P2-type Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 can show excellent electrochemical stability by limiting the working voltage below 4.2 V to avoid the P2–O2 phase transformation, it is not conducive to the construction of high energy density batteries. Therefore, researchers have turned their attention towards suppressing the adverse P2–O2 phase transformation to make the Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 electrode show a higher output working voltage. A series of Mg-doped P2-Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 were systematically investigated by Guo et al., and they first observed through STEM that the introduction of Mg could suppress the P2–O2 phase transformation in P2-type Na2/3Mn2/3Ni1/3−xMgxO2 (x = 0, 0.02, 0.05, 0.10, and 0.15).197 When pristine P2-Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 electrode was charged to approximately 4.2 V, an obvious charge voltage platform appeared (Fig. 19b), corresponding to the unfavourable P2–O2 phase transformation. With the increase in the introduction amount of Mg, the voltage plateau corresponding to the P2–O2 phase transformation of approximately 4.2 V gradually disappeared. Ex situ XRD also showed that Mg-doped P2-type Na2/3Mn2/3Ni1/3−xMgxO2 (x = 0.05) maintained the P2 phase structure (Fig. 19c) in the whole charge–discharge process. Correspondingly, with the disappearance of the voltage plateau at 4.2 V or the suppression of the phase transformation of P2 to O2, the cycle stability increased from 50% of pristine P2-Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 to 85% of Mg-doped P2-type Na2/3Mn2/3Ni1/3−xMgxO2 (x = 0.05). Later, Cao et al. found that the introduction of Cu could also effectively suppress the occurrence of adverse P2–O2 phase transformation.198 In the working voltage window of 2.0–4.5 V, the Cu-free P2-type Na0.67Ni0.3Mn0.7O2 electrode showed an obvious P2–O2 phase transformation at around 4.2 V (Fig. 19d), while the Cu-introduced P2-type Na0.67Ni0.1Cu0.2Mn0.7O2 maintained the single P2 phase (Fig. 19e) during the whole charge–discharge process.
Mg was introduced into not only the transition metal sites but also the Na sites in P2-type Na0.7Mn0.6Ni0.4O2 by Zhou et al. by a traditional solid-state phase reaction method.199 The XRD results well revealed the successful introduction of Mg into the Na and transition metal sites. In addition to the positive effect of Mg in the transition metal sites mentioned above, the Mg in the Na sites served as a pillar to stabilize the layered structure (Fig. 19f), especially in the deep desodiated state.
At a high cutoff voltage of above 4.2 V, the adverse P2–O2 phase transformation of Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 would lead to a more than 20% lattice volume change,200 which would always cause adverse particle cracks and a drastic capacity delay.201 The main transport channels for sodium ions were well observed in the HR-TEM image (Fig. 20a), which corresponded to the 0.55 nm lattice spacing of the (002) lattice planes. However, after repeated sodium ion insertion and extraction, the particle cracks were well observed along the (002) plane direction (Fig. 20b and c). The particle cracks of Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 over repeated cycling could be well suppressed by coating with a nano-sized Al2O3 layer (Fig. 20d). As a result, the electrochemical stability was increased from 26.8% of the pristine Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 electrode to 73.2% of the Al2O3-coated electrode with particle cracks suppressed over 300 cycles at 2.5–4.3 V.
 Fig. 20  HR-TEM images of (a) pristine P2 type Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 particles, (b) cycled Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 particles with remarkable cracks and (c) an enlarged view of the crack area. Reproduced with permission.201 Copyright 2016, Elsevier Ltd. (d) HR-TEM image of the cycled Al2O3-coated Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 particle. Surface cracks can be suppressed by surface coating in Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 particles during charging and discharging. (e–l) STEM images of cross sections of pristine and cycled Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 particles in different voltage windows. (e) Pristine sample without intergranular cracks. Trace intergranular cracks appeared over 50 cycles in the working windows of (f) 2.0–3.8 and (g) 2.0–4.1 V. High density of intergranular cracks appeared over 50 cycles in the working windows of (h) 2.0–4.25 and (i) 2.0–4.5 V. (j) Enlarged view of the selected area of figure (g). (k) Enlarged view of the selected area of figure (h). (l) Enlarged view of a single intergranular crack. Reproduced with permission.202 Copyright 2018, Elsevier Ltd. 
Not only the surface but also the bulk of the Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 material was found to generate intragranular cracks, which was qualitatively proven to be one of the main causes for the decay of structural and electrochemical stabilities at high cutoff voltages.202 Based on cross-sectional STEM results, pristine Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 particles (Fig. 20e) were densely packed without any intragranular cracks, and only trace intergranular cracks were formed after 50 cycles at 2.0–3.8 (Fig. 20f) and 2.0–4.1 V (Fig. 20g and j). However, a high density of intergranular cracks appeared when the electrodes were cycled for 50 cycles at 2.0–4.25 (Fig. 20h and k) and 2.0–4.5 V (Fig. 20i). Remarkably, all the intergranular cracks were propagated along the (002) lattice planes (Fig. 20l), similar to the surface cracks mentioned above, which was consistent with the sodium ion diffusion paths. For electrochemical stability, a low capacity retention of 46% was obtained over 50 cycles for the electrodes cycled at 2.0–4.25 V and 2.0–4.5 V, while the electrodes cycled at 2.0–3.8 V and 2.0–4.1 V had good capacity retentions of 97% and 94%, respectively. The particle cracks induced by phase transformation play a leading role in the decay of the cycle performance of layered cathodes.
Very recently, based on galvanostatic charge–discharge and STEM, Yan et al. found that intragranular cracks could be effectively suppressed through the migration and segregation of dopant Mg in the gain bulk at a high cut-off working voltage of 4.5 V during cycling.203 Based on the cross-sectional STEM, dense and long cracks were formed in the pristine P2-type Na0.67Mn0.67Ni0.33O2 (Fig. 21a) particles over 50 cycles at 2.0–4.5 V, while the Mg-doped Na0.67Mn0.67Ni0.28Mg0.05O2 (Fig. 21b) showed few short cracks. With the increasing concentration of doped Mg, there were even less cracks in Mg-doped Na0.67Mn0.67Ni0.23Mg0.1O2 (Fig. 21c), and only a few cracks appeared on the particle surface. Enlarged STEM images confirmed that the doped Mg tended to migrate and segregate into nanoprecipitates during cycling (Fig. 21d–f). EDS mapping (Fig. 21g) further revealed that both Na and Mg were rearranged to suppress the formation of particle cracks.
 Fig. 21  Cross-sectional STEM images of (a) Na0.67Mn0.67Ni0.33O2 with intensive cracks, (b) Na0.67Mn0.67Ni0.28Mg0.05O2 with few cracks, and (c) Na0.67Mn0.67Ni0.23Mg0.1O2 with almost no crack after 50 cycles in the working voltage window of 2.0–4.5 V. (d) Pristine Na0.67Mn0.67Ni0.23Mg0.1O2 sample with uniform contrast. (e) The sample after 10 cycles appeared low density of bright stripes (yellow arrows). (f) The sample after 50 cycles exhibited high density of bright stripes (yellow arrows). (g) STEM image and EDS mapping of Na0.67Mn0.67Ni0.23Mg0.1O2 after 50 cycles. The bright stripes are Mg-rich and Na-poor regions, and Ni, Mn, and O show no obvious composition fluctuation. Reproduced with permission.203 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
4.3.1.2 NaxNi1−yTiyO2. 
In the working voltage windows of cathode materials, Ti is an electrochemically inactive element. As a doping element of layered NaxNiO2, Ti can not only effectively reduce the Jahn–Teller active Ni3+ of the pristine material but also act as a skeleton due to its inactivity during charging and discharging. Ti-Introduced O3 phase NaNi0.5Ti0.5O2 cathode material was first reported by our group.204 Because of the positive effects of Ti on stabilizing the crystal structure of the Ni-based layered material during charge–discharge, the Ti-introduced material showed high capacity retention rates of 93% over 100 cycles and 75% over 300 cycles at 0.2C and 1C, respectively. XAS results showed that only Ni (Ni2+ ↔ Ni3+ ↔ Ni4+) in NaxNi0.5Ti0.5O2 participated in the redox reaction during the charge–discharge process in 1.5–4.2 V, while the oxide state of Ti always maintained at IV.205 Interestingly, our group also discovered for the first time that Na0.8Ni0.4Ti0.6O2 could be used as a dual-function electrode, namely, Ni2+/Ni3+/Ni4+ for charge compensation in the cathode reaction process and Ti3+/Ti4+ for charge compensation in the anode reaction process.206 The symmetrical battery showed an output voltage of approximately 2.8 V, and a capacity retention of 75% was obtained over 150 cycles.
Cation mixing or transition metal migration in Fe/V/Cr-based layered cathodes is considered to be the main reason for their poor structural and electrochemical stabilities. However, our group found that the adverse O3–P3 phase transformation in the repeated charge–discharge process could be effectively suppressed in Ti-introduced Ni-based layered cathodes by utilizing cation mixing.207In situ XRD revealed that only the adverse phase transformation of O3–P3 appeared at around 3.4 V during the initial charging process but the reverse P3–O3 phase conversion was suppressed in the subsequent discharging process (Fig. 22a). STEM (Fig. 22b) and corresponding line profiles (Fig. 22c) revealed that some transition metal ions migrated into the sodium sites in the initial charging process and the migrated transition metal ions were maintained in the subsequent discharge process. The migrated transition metal ions in the sodium sites were further confirmed to be Ni by STEM-EELS. The migrated Ni ions showing stronger bonding with oxygen in the sodium layers could suppress the slipping of the TMO6 layers during sodium ion insertion and extraction (Fig. 22d), thus suppressing the adverse phase transformation.
 Fig. 22  (a) In situ XRD patterns of the O3-type Ni/Ti-based cathode in the first charge–discharge process. The unfavourable P3–O3 phase transformation was suppressed after the first charging process. (b) STEM images and (c) the corresponding line profiles of pristine (bottom), fully charged (middle), and fully discharged (top) electrodes. (d) Schematic diagram of crystal structural evolution during charging–discharging. The blue balls represent the mixed Ni atoms in the sodium layers. A few transition metals migrated into the sodium layers in the initial charging process, and the migrated transition metals were trapped in the sodium layers during the subsequent discharge process, resulting in an enhanced layer structure. Reproduced with permission.207 Copyright 2018, Elsevier Ltd. 
4.3.1.3 NaxNi1−y−zMnyTizO2. 
Layered P2-type Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 and O3-type NaNi1/2Mn1/2O2 suffer from adverse phase transformations of P2–O2 and O3–P3 in the charge–discharge process, respectively. The unfavourable P2–O2 phase transformation can be suppressed by introducing Mg2+ and Cu2+, but the unfavourable O3–P3 phase transformation has seldom been reported to be suppressed. For this reason, researchers focused on improving the reversibility of the O3–P3 phase transformation and suppressing the order of sodium ions/holes during the charge–discharge processes. Guo et al. found that Ti-introduced O3-type NaNi0.5Mn0.2Ti0.3O2 showed a highly revisable O3–P3 phase transformation, and the voltage profiles were also effectively smoothed.208 Over a long-term cycling of 200 cycles, a high capacity retention rate of approximately 85% was obtained. Ti-Introduced P2 type Na0.67Ni0.33Mn0.67−yTiyO2 (0 ≤ y ≤ 0.33) was also investigated by Molenda et al., where Na0.67Ni0.33Mn0.47Ti0.2O2 showed a disordered arrangement of sodium ions/holes in the crystal.209 The smoothed voltage profile indicated the enhanced sodium ion migration ability, which was further confirmed by the improved sodium ion diffusion coefficient.
4.3.1.4 Ni-Rich layered cathode materials. 
Ni-rich layered lithium transition metal oxides are promising cathode materials for high-performance LIBs, but these materials suffer from severe Li+/Ni2+ mixing due to the similar ionic radii of Li+ (0.76 Å) and Ni2+ (0.69 Å). Appropriate cobalt introduction is regarded as the most effective way to suppress the adverse cation mixing and stabilize the crystal structure of Ni-rich cathode materials. However, the situation of Ni-rich layered cathode materials in SIBs is quite different, where the large ion radius of Na+(1.02 Å) hinders the possible cation mixing of Na+/Ni2+. Very recently, cobalt-free and Ni-rich O3 type Na[Ni0.60Fe0.25Mn0.15]O2 was developed by Hu et al., where a capacity retention of approximately 84% was obtained.210
For a direct comparison, the working stabilities of pristine NaxNiO2, Te/Bi/Sb-introduced NaxNiO2, Fe-introduced NaxNiO2, and Mn/Ti-introduced NaxNiO2 are listed in Table 4. Based on the above analysis and the electrochemical performance comparisons in Table 4, we conclude that the electrochemical stabilities of the original orthorhombic Na2NiO2 and layered NaNiO2 are very poor but the introduction of other metal elements into the layered NaxNiO2 can effectively improve the electrochemical stability. The electrochemical stability of NaxNi1−y−zMnyTizO2 (0 < x ≤ 1, y + z < 1) introduced with Mn4+ and/or Ti4+ has been greatly improved and almost reached the commercialization level. In addition, proper doping of Mg2+ and Cu2+ into NaxNi1−y−zMnyTizO2 can further widen the operating voltage window.
Table 4 Electrochemical performances of orthorhombic Na2NiO2 and Ni-based layered cathodes




Materials
Voltage window (V)
Specific capacity (mA h g−1)
Cycle number
Capacity retention (%)
Ref.




Na2NiO2
1.15–3.8
∼180@C/20
30@C/20
39

189



2.0–3.6
∼90@C/20
30@C/20
78


1.5–2.3
∼10@C/20






NaNiO2
1.25–3.75
123@C/10
30@C/10
78

211



2.0–4.5
147@C/10
30@C/10
68


NaNiO2
2.0–4.0
∼114@C/10
25@C/10
88

212



Na2Ni2TeO6
3.0–4.5
∼110@0.03C
10@0.03C
89

191



3.0–4.35
∼93@0.03C
20@0.03C
95


Na3Ni2BiO6
2.0–4.0
106@0.05C
50@0.05C
91

192



Na3Ni2BiO6
2.0–4.0
95@0.1C
100@1C
74

213



Na3Ni2SbO6
2.0–4.0
120@0.1C
100@0.1C
66

214



NaNi2/3Sb1/3O2
2.0–4.0
120@0.05C
50@0.05C
82

215



NaFe0.5Ni0.5O2
2.0–3.8
112@30 mA g−1
30@30 mA g−1
55

216



NaFe0.3Ni0.7O2
2.0–3.8
135@30 mA g−1
30@30 mA g−1
74

216



NaNi0.5Fe0.5O2
2.0–3.9
129@C/10
20@C/10
94

217



2.0–4.2
∼150@C/10
20@C/10
67


NaNi0.5Mn0.5O2
2.2–3.8
125@C/30
50@C/5
75

218



Na0.62Mn0.75Ni0.25O2
2.0–4.05
88@15 mA g−1
50@15 mA g−1
89

219



2.0–4.3
160@15 mA g−1
79


1.5–4.05
152@15 mA g−1
73


1.5–4.3
185@15 mA g−1
84


Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2
2.0–4.0
84@0.05C
2000@1C
80

194



2.0–4.3
123@0.05C
100@0.5C
60


Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2
2.0–4.0
93@0.1C
1200@10C
71

195



2.0–4.5
∼175@0.1C
10@0.1C
72


NaTi0.5Ni0.5O2
2.0–4.0
102@0.2C
300@1C
75

204



NaNi0.5Mn0.2Ti0.3O2
2.0–4.0
135@0.05C
300@1C
85

208



Na0.67Ni0.3Mn0.7O2
2.0–4.5
151@0.1C
200@1C
28

198



Na0.67Ni0.2Cu0.1Mn0.7O2
2.0–4.5
125@0.1C
200@1C
76




Na0.67Ni0.1Cu0.2Mn0.7O2
2.0–4.5
115@0.1C
200@1C
67




Na0.67Mn0.67Ni0.33O2
2.5–4.35
143@0.1C
50@0.1C
50

197



Na0.67Mn0.67Ni0.23Mg0.1O2
2.5–4.35
∼108@0.1C
100@0.1C
92







4.4 V-Based stable cathode materials

4.4.1 V in polyanionic compounds. 
V has the smallest atomic mass among many transition metals with cathodic activity. Although high-oxide-state vanadium (V5+) shows high toxicity, only low-oxide-state vanadium (V4+/V3+/V2+) with low- or non-toxicity appears in the cathode materials of NVP and NVPF during the whole electrochemical process.
4.4.1.1 Na3V2(PO4)3. 
NVP with a NASICON structure has a theoretical specific capacity of 117.6 mA h g−1 corresponding to the reversible insertion/extraction of Na2 and a discharge voltage plateau of approximately 3.4 V.220 In 2011, carbon-coated NVP was first reported as a sodium ion storage host by Hu et al., where the composite electrode showed high and flat charge–discharge voltage plateaus and high structural stability.221 Based on the XAS results, the flat voltage plateau of 3.4 V (vs. Na/Na+) derived from the reduction of V4+ to V3+,222 corresponding to the transition of Na3V2(PO4)3 to NaV2(PO4)3. STEM was adopted by Hu et al. to directly observe sodium ion locations in Na3V2(PO4)3 and NaV2(PO4)3 (Fig. 23a–d), which revealed that only the Na1 sites were occupied in NaV2(PO4)3 in the fully charging state, corresponding to the full extraction of Na2.223 Based on the in situ XRD results (Fig. 23e), the calculated lattice volume change was approximately 8.26%.224
 Fig. 23  STEM ABF images of (a) Na3V2(PO4)3 and (b) NaV2(PO4)3. The blue and yellow circles represent sodium atoms at the Na1 and Na2 sites, respectively, and the blue arrow represents the sodium atoms at the Na2 site. Line profiles along in the ABF images of (c) Na3V2(PO4)3 and (d) NaV2(PO4)3, where the image contrast of the dark dot is inverted and displayed as peaks. In the full charging state, Na1 were maintained in the lattice, while Na2 were fully extracted. Reproduced with permission.223 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. (e) In situ XRD patterns of Na3V2(PO4)3, where ♦ Na3V2(PO4)3, ♣ NaV2(PO4)3. Na3V2(PO4)3 undergoes a highly reversible phase transformation. Reproduced with permission.224 Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. 
As discussed in NFP and NFPF, reducing particle size and combining with conductive media are the two ideal strategies to enhance the electrochemical performance of NVP. Normally, in the synthesis process, the presence of carbon can also avoid the agglomeration of NVP particles under high calcination temperatures; thus, the two strategies mentioned above can usually be performed simultaneously. Mai et al. dispersed NVP nanoparticles in acetylene carbon matrices, where the NVP nanoparticles were only approximately 5 nm.225 The composite electrode showed a reversible capacity of 117.5 mA h g−1 at 0.5C, approximately 100% of the theoretical capacity of NVP (117.6 mA h g−1), and a high cycling stability of 96.4% was obtained over 200 cycles at 5C. Carbon-coated NVP nanoparticles embedded in a mesoporous carbon CMK-3 matrix were fabricated by Yu et al., where a reversible capacity of 115 mA h g−1 was obtained at 0.5C and a capacity retention of 68% was obtained over 2000 cycles at 5C.226 Carbon-coated NVP nanoparticles embedded in a porous graphene network were also fabricated by Yu et al., where the composite architecture showed an ultra-high electrical conductivity of approximately 110 S m−1.227 For the long-term cycle performance, a capacity retention of 64% was obtained over 10000 cycles at 100C. Furthermore, Cao et al. adopted a simple and cost-effective chemical vapor deposition method to create a hierarchical and highly conductive carbon framework to coat the NVP nanoparticles in situ,228 where the carbon framework consisted of graphene-like coating layers and interconnected nanofibres (Fig. 24a). Since the composite structure allowed ultra-fast electron transport and accommodated lattice volume changes during sodium ion insertion and extraction, an ultra-high rate of 500C (Fig. 24b) was achieved and a capacity retention of 54% was obtained over 20000 cycles at 30C (Fig. 24c).
 Fig. 24  (a) TEM image of NFP wrapped by a hierarchical carbon framework. (b) Rate performance and (c) long-term cycle stability of the hierarchical carbon framework wrapped NFP composite electrodes at 30C. Reproduced with permission.228 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (d) Charge–discharge curves of NVP and NVPF at 12.7 mA g−1. Reproduced with permission.234 Copyright 2014, Elsevier Ltd. (e) TGA/DTA curves of chemically desodiated NaV2(PO4)2F3. NVPF is a thermally stable cathode material. Reproduced with permission.235 Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Additionally, doping various sites, including the V, Na1 and P sites, was found to be an effective way to enhance the cycle lifespan of NVP. For V site doping, Wu et al. reported that Mg2+ could be doped into the V site by DFT calculations, empirical formula and ICP, and the doped Mg2+ preferred to distribute on the surface of the particles,229 thus stabilizing the crystal structure and improving the electrochemical performance. Huang et al. reported that Mo-doped NVP showed a significant improvement in conductivity, and a high capacity retention of 93.5% could be obtained over 500 cycles at 10C.230 For Na1 site doping, Chen et al. found that K could be introduced into Na1, which alleviated the lattice variation and improved the sodium ion diffusion kinetics.231 For P site doping, based on DFT calculations and experiment results, Cui et al. reported that B doping changed the local element oxide states, leading to the adjacent polyhedron geometry distortion, which narrowed the band gap and promoted sodium ion diffusion.232 As a result, the B-doped NVP showed enhanced structural stability, and a capacity retention of 98.7% was obtained over 200 cycles at 5C.
NVP also shows excellent thermal stability due to its stable polyanionic structure with a 3D framework, which is of great significance to long-term cycle stability and large-scale practical applications. Choi et al. found that NVP was thermally stable up to 450 °C even in the sodium ion extracted state by the TGA/DSC and in situ XRD analyses at different temperatures.233
4.4.1.2 Na3V2(PO4)2F3. 
F-Substituted NVPF, where one (PO4)3− in NVP is replaced by three F−, is also a typical V-based polyanionic compound, having been widely reported as a cathode material. Due to the introduction of high electronegative F−, NVPF showed a higher redox voltage plateau than F-free NVP (Fig. 24d), and two couples of redox peaks appeared at 3.66/3.6 V and 4.1/4.0 V.234 The lattice volume change was approximately 1.8%, suggesting a negligible structural distortion during the charge–discharge processes. Similar to NVP, NVPF also showed an excellent thermal stability.235 At a high temperature of 550 °C (Fig. 24e), only 5% weight loss was observed for the desodiated phase NaV2(PO4)2F3, implying the feasibility of NVPF as a safe cathode material.
In fact, NVPF was first synthesized and characterized by Le Meins et al. in 1999.236 In 2013, NVPF was first investigated as a cathode material for SIBs, and a specific capacity of approximately 120 mA h g−1 was achieved.237 Since then, much attention has been paid to NVPF. Similar to NVP, NVPF also has a low electronic conductivity. Therefore, many strategies that were used for improving the electrochemical performance of NVP have been adopted to enhance that of NVPF. For combining NVPF with conductive carbon-based materials, Yu et al. embedded NVPF nanoparticles into graphene networks by a hydrothermal method,109 where the composite electrode provided a reversible specific capacity of 114 mA h g−1 and a capacity retention of 75% was obtained over 1000 cycles at 10C. Additionally, nitrogen-doped carbon was coated on NVPF by Yang et al. through self-polymerization and subsequent sintering.238 The carbon coating layer well protected NVPF from the corrosion of liquid electrolytes to improve the cycle stability, and an ultra-high capacity retention of 95.9% was obtained over 800 cycles at 10C. For doping, Zhang et al. found that moderate Ti doping could well improve electron transfer and sodium ion diffusion.239 Masquelier et al. found an order–disorder phase transformation in Na3V2(PO4)2F3−yOy, namely, O-doped NVPF, where the ionic conductivity and electronic conductivity were both enhanced with the introduction of oxygen into the F sites.240
A summary of the specific capacities and cycle stabilities of NVP and NVPF modified by coating different carbon-based conductive networks and doping different elements is listed in Table 5. Based on the satisfactory electrochemical performances in SIBs, especially the cycle performances, and rare applications in LIBs, we conclude that V-based polyanionic compounds are suitable to construct cobalt-free cathode materials for long-lifespan SIBs.
Table 5 A summary of the electrochemical performances of V-based NVP and NVPF cathode materials, where “C”, “rGO”, and “CNT” represent “carbon”, “reduced graphene oxide” and “carbon nano-tube”, respectively




Materials
Voltage window (V)
Specific capacity (mA h g−1)
Cycle number
Capacity retention
Ref.




Porous NVP/C
2.3–3.9
116@0.1C
30000@40C
50%

241



NVP/C core–shell nanocomposite
2.5–3.8
104@0.5C
700@5C
96%

242



Carbon-coated nano-sized NVP
2.3–3.9
104@1C
1000@10C
81%

243



@50C
80%


@100C
69%


NVP/carbon nano-spheres
2.3–3.9
117@0.5C
200@5C
96%

225



NVP/3D carbon foam
2.5–3.8
112@1C
1000@100C
100%

244



3D NVP/C/rGO
2.5–3.8
115@1C
10000@100C
64%

227



Carbon coated NVP/CNTs
2.0–3.9
115@0.2C
20000@30C
54%

228



NVP/C-hollow carbon spheres
2.3–3.9
100@20 mA g−1
300@20 mA g−1
90%

245



NVP/C/CMK-3
2.3–3.9
115@0.5C
1000@1C
87%

226



2000@5C
68%


1000@10C
85%


1000@20C
67%


Layered NVP/rGO
2.5–4.0
115@0.5C
500@5C
92%

246



7000@20C
78%


15000@50C
70%


NVP/3D carbon
2.5–4.0
113@1C
8000@2C
87%

247



NVP/rGO/CNT
2.3–3.9
117@0.5C
2000@10C
96%

248



NVP/3D carbon
2.3–3.9
99@0.5C
800@1C
98%

249



2000@10C
91%


NVP/C/carbon cloth
2.3–3.9
117@1C
5000@20C
81%

250



5000@10C
83%


B-doped NVP
2.5–4.0
105@1C
200@5C
99%

232



NVPF/graphene
2.3–4.3
114@0.5C
1000@10C
75%

109



NVPF/N-doping carbon
3.0–4.6
112@0.5C
800@10C
96%

238



NVPF/graphene
2.0–4.3
119@0.5C
2000@20C
98%

251



NVPF/C/CNT
2.0–4.3
113@1C
300@1C
98%

252






4.5 Cr-Based stable cathode materials

4.5.1 Cr in layered oxides. 
For Cr-based materials, layered NaxCrO2 has been the most widely studied cathode material in SIBs, while LixCrO2 is electrochemically inactive in LIBs. In both LIBs and SIBs, during the extraction of lithium/sodium ions from LixCrO2 and NaxCrO2, Cr3+ was first oxidized to Cr4+, and then Cr6+ with a smaller ion radius would generate due to the disproportionation reaction of Cr4+. In LixCrO2, the Cr6+ produced during the charging process could easily migrate from the octahedra of the transition metal layers to the interstitial tetrahedra of the adjacent sodium layers, hindering the further extraction of sodium ions and the subsequent reversible insertion.253 In NaxCrO2, it was difficult for Cr6+ to migrate from the octahedra of the transition metal layers to the interstitial tetrahedra of the adjacent sodium layers because of the mismatch between the O–O bond length (2.97 Å) in the interstitial tetrahedra and tetrahedron height (3.15 Å).254 The typical electrochemical performances and crystal structures of LiCrO2 and NaCrO2 are shown in Fig. 25a and b.
 Fig. 25  Charge–discharge curves of the (a) LiCrO2 electrode with lithium metal as the counter electrode at 3.0–4.5 V and (b) NaCrO2 electrode with sodium metal as the counter electrode at 2.0–3.6 V. The inset images are the crystal structures of LiCrO2 and NaCrO2, and the length of the O–O bond in the CrO6 octahedron and the height of the interstitial tetrahedron are also shown. LixCrO2 is electrochemically inactive in LIBs, while NaxCrO2 shows an excellent electrochemical performance in SIBs. Reproduced with permission.254 Copyright 2010, Elsevier Ltd. (c) Charge–discharge curves of NaxCrO2 in a wide voltage window of 2.5–4.5 V. Reproduced with permission.257 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (d) Charge–discharge curves of carbon coated NaCrO2 at 2.0–3.6 V. The inset image is the SEM image of the carbon coating layer on the surface of NaCrO2. (e) Rate performance and (f) cycle stability of carbon-coated NaCrO2. Reproduced with permission.259 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In 1982, Hagemuller et al. first reported NaxCrO2 as a cathode material for SIBs.255 In the voltage window of 2.0–3.6 V, O3-type NaCrO2 showed a reversible specific capacity of approximately 120 mA h g−1 with the reversible insertion and extraction of 0.5 mol sodium ions, and a reversible phase transformation process of O3 → O′3 → P′3 → O′3 → O3 was indicated during the process.256 When the cut-off voltage was up to 3.6 V, the disproportionation of 3Cr4+ → 2Cr3+ + Cr6+ would be triggered, leading to an obvious capacity decay. When the cut-off voltage was above 3.8 V, the P′3 type Na0.4CrO2 preferred to irreversibly convert into a rock-salt CrO2 phase. For example, in the wide voltage window of 2.5–4.5 V, a high specific capacity of 235 mA h g−1 was obtained, but the discharging capacity was only 9 mA h g−1 in the first charge–discharge process (Fig. 25c).257
At a cut-off working voltage of below 3.6 V, the main issue affecting the electrochemical stability of NaxCrO2 is complex phase transformations. To address this issue, three strategies can be adopted. The first strategy is to nanometerize the material to alleviate the internal stress caused by lattice expansion and contraction. For example, Yabuuchi et al. prepared nano-sized layered NaCrO2 by high-temperature calcining the rock-salt type NaCrO2.258 Compared with the layered NaCrO2 bulk, the nano-sized layered NaCrO2 showed a smooth charge–discharge curve in 2.5–3.5 V. Over a long cycling of 500 cycles, the capacity retention rates increased from approximately 25% of the NaCrO2 bulk to more than 60% of the nano-sized NaCrO2. The second strategy is to fabricate a coating layer on the material to suppress the destruction of the surface structure caused by the phase transformations. Since an inert or reducing calcination atmosphere is needed for the synthesis of layered NaxCrO2, carbon coating on NaxCrO2 is feasible. A cheap pitch was chosen as a precursor to coat O3-type NaCrO2 by Sun et al., and then it was calcined at a high temperature under an inert atmosphere to obtain a carbon uniformly coated NaCrO2 (C-NaCrO2).259 The C-NaCrO2 electrode showed almost no voltage hysteresis (Fig. 25d), namely, a high-energy efficiency, which effectively avoided undesirable heat generation during battery operation. In addition, the Coulombic efficiency of the first cycle was close to 100%. Since the carbon coating layer allowed a fast electronic transfer, the electrical conductivity improved from 8 × 10−5 S cm−1 of pristine NaCrO2 to 0.47 S cm−1 of C-NaCrO2. Under the operating conditions of the rapid charge–discharge processes, only approximately 27 seconds (150C) were needed for the electrode to finish a charge or discharge process (Fig. 25e). In a long-term cycling of 300 cycles, a capacity retention rate of 90% was obtained (Fig. 25f), and a high capacity retention of approximately 90% was also obtained when the electrode was tested in a full cell with a hard carbon as the counter electrode. The third strategy is to dope other metal elements to disrupt the order of sodium ions/holes. The sodium storage performances of Fe3+/Ni2+/Ti4+-introduced O3-type NaCr1/4Fe1/4Ni1/4Ti1/4O2 in the working voltage window of 1.5–3.4 V were investigated by Zhou et al. recently.260 Based on the X-ray absorption near-edge spectroscopy (XANES) results, charge compensation was done through the redox of Cr3+/Cr4+ and Ni2+/Ni3+ during sodium ion insertion and extraction, and no Cr6+ appeared even in the full charge state. Based on the ex situ XRD results, no new phase appeared in the whole charge–discharge process, and the unit cell volume change was as small as just approximately 1.3%. For the cycle stability, a capacity retention of more than 77% was obtained over 300 cycles at 1C.
When the working voltage cut-off is beyond 3.6 V, the main issue affecting the electrochemical stability of NaxCrO2 is no longer the complex phase transformations but the transition metal migration of Cr6+ derived from the disproportionation of Cr4+. At present, the most effective strategy to suppress the disproportionation reaction is introducing metal ions with lower electronegativity than Cr4+ into the transition metal sites. As a typical example, the electronegativity of Ti4+ is lower than that of Cr4+. P2-Type Na0.6[Cr0.6Ti0.4]O2 was first reported as a cathode material by Hu et al., where they found that a high capacity retention of 94% could be obtained over 200 cycles at a high cut-off voltage of 3.85 V.261 Later, Ti-introduced P2-type Na2/3Cr2/3Ti1/3O2 was investigated by Yabuuchi et al., and the absence of Cr4+ disproportionation was proven through XAS.262 XANES showed that Cr3+ was oxidized to Cr4+ after charging to 3.8 V, and then Cr4+ was fully reduced to Cr3+ after discharging to 2.5 V, no disproportionation occurred. In the working voltage window of 2.5–3.8 V, a high capacity retention of beyond 70% was obtained over 400 cycles. In addition to Ti, Fe/Mn co-introduced NaCr1/3Fe1/3Mn1/3O2 also showed effective suppression on the disproportionation reaction of Cr4+ in a wide working voltage window of 1.5–4.1 V, which was well confirmed by XAS and EELS.263 Recently, our group found through STEM that O3-type ruthenium-doped NaxCrO2 showed that no Cr6+ migrated to the sodium layers when charged to 3.8 V.264 When the electrodes were charged to 3.8 V, the sodium layers of the NaxCrO2 crystals were full of migrated Cr6+ (Fig. 26a), while the sodium layers of ruthenium-doped NaxCrO2 crystal showed no signal of migrated transition metals (Fig. 26b). In a wide voltage window of 1.5–3.8 V, a reversible specific capacity of 156 mA h g−1 was obtained, and an ultra-high capacity retention of approximately 81% was achieved over 1100 cycles (Fig. 26c).
 Fig. 26  STEM images of (a) NaxCrO2 and (b) ruthenium-doped NaxCrO2 samples charged to 3.8 V. (c) Cycle performance of ruthenium-doped NaxCrO2 in the voltage window of 1.5–3.8 V. NaxCrO2 suffers from an unfavourable Cr-migration under a high working voltage, while this migration can be prevented by lattice doping. Reproduced with permission.264 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Ltd. (d) The phase evolution of Na0.5CrO2 in a wide temperature window of 27–500 °C, based on HT-SXRD. NaxCrO2 can work as thermally stable cathodes for SIBs without oxygen gas release at a high temperature. Reproduced with permission.266 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
In addition to the electrochemical performance, the thermal stability of the electrode is an important indicator for commercialization. Interestingly, in 2012, Dahn et al. found that the cathode material NaCrO2 showed fundamentally safe properties in SIBs with non-aqueous liquid electrolytes.265 Based on accelerating rate calorimetry, the deintercalated NaxCrO2 (x ≈ 0.5) showed almost no reactivity with ethylene carbonate/diethyl carbonate solvent in the temperature window of 50–350 °C, and the thermal stability of NaxCrO2 was even better than those of deintercalated Li0FePO4 and Li0.5CoO2. To further explore the high thermal stability of NaxCrO2, the phase evolutions of NaxCrO2 under a continuous heating process was investigated by Komaba through high-temperature synchrotron X-ray diffraction (HT-SXRD).266 In the temperature window of 27–527 °C, the detailed phase transformations of Na0.5CrO2 are shown in Fig. 26d. In 27–150 °C, Na0.5CrO2 maintained the ordered P′3 phase. When the temperature was increased to 150–200 °C, the ordered P′3 phase transferred into disordered P3 phase. When the temperature was increased to approximately 250 °C, phase segregation appeared and the P3 type Na0.5CrO2 was transferred into sodium-rich P3 type NaxCrO2 and sodium-free P3 type CrO2. When the temperature was further increased to beyond 400 °C, sodium-rich P3-type NaxCrO2 was transferred into phase-stable O3-type NaCrO2. The oxygen gas derived from the decomposition reaction of CrO2 → Cr2O3 + O2 was released only when the temperature reached 500 °C. The high chemical stability of Cr4+ in the CrO6 octahedra and high thermal stability of NaCrO2 will greatly promote the development of safe SIBs.

5. Summary and perspectives
5.1 Summary
Given that cobalt has been widely utilized in secondary LIBs and the reserves of cobalt resources are poor, it is generally believed that the development of cobalt-free secondary SIBs can avoid competing with secondary LIBs and promote the large-scale application of secondary SIBs to simultaneously alleviate “lithium panic” and “cobalt panic”. Based on the fact that the energy density of SIBs can hardly reach the high level of LIBs due to the heavy molar mass (23 g mol−1) and high potential (−2.7 V vs. standard hydrogen electrode) of sodium, the pursuit of stability for SIBs is considered more meaningful and realistic. Over the past ten years, great breakthroughs have been made in designing and preparing cobalt-free cathode materials for SIBs, where many of these materials have reached or surpassed the stability of many cathode materials for LIBs, and a large number of studies have confirmed that the construction of high-performance SIBs shows a low dependence on cobalt, and the introduction of cobalt shows ignorable or even negative effects on the electrochemical performances and air stability of the cathode materials in many cases. The objectives of this comprehensive and timely review are to provide guidelines for future research and stimulate more interest in constructing high-performance cobalt-free cathode materials.
In this review, the recent advances in high-performance cobalt-free cathode materials for advanced SIBs by making full use of suitable cathode structures (e.g., layered oxides, tunnel oxides, PBAs, polyanionic compounds, etc.) and several electrochemically active non-cobalt metal elements (e.g., Mn, Fe, Ni, V, Cr, etc.) have been comprehensively summarized and discussed. The typical and excellent electrochemical performances of cobalt-free cathode materials are listed in the tables, such as Mn-based layered-tunnel composites (Table 1), Fe-based PBAs (Table 2), Fe-based olivine/maricite NFP and NFPF (Table 3), Ni-based layered oxides (Table 4), and V-based NVP and NVPF (Table 5). Furthermore, the conflicts of structural/electrochemical stability of the cathode with intrinsic insufficiencies of the materials (e.g., crystal defects, phase transformation, particle cracks, lattice distortion, lattice oxygen oxidation, transition-metal migration, sluggish kinetics, transition-metal dissolution, etc.) are deeply analyzed, and the corresponding strategies (e.g., crystallinity engineering, doping, composite phase, surface/interface engineering, valence regulation, atomic-scale synergy, and morphology engineering) are also discussed, and they are summarized in Fig. 27. For example, (1) the structural/electrochemical stability of PBAs is largely restricted by crystal defects, and this restriction can be dealt with by crystallinity engineering. (2) Layered cathodes suffer from drastic phase transformation and particle cracking, which can be eliminated by doping, composite phase and surface engineering strategies. (3) The lattice distortion in Mn-based cathode materials due to the Jahn–Teller effect can be suppressed by doping and valence regulation strategies. (4) Mn-based layered cathode materials also suffer from irreversible lattice oxygen oxidation under a high charge potential, while doping with some low electronegative cations can allow the redox of lattice oxygen to be highly reversible, with no oxygen gas released during the whole charge–discharge processes. (5) Transition-metal migration usually occurs in most Fe/Cr-based layered cathode materials, and this can be dealt with by doping and atomic-scale synergy strategies. It is worth mentioning that cobalt-free Ni-rich materials are usually free of adverse cation mixing due to the much larger ionic radius difference of Na+ (0.102 nm) than that of Ni2+ (0.069 nm). (6) Tunnel oxides and polyanionic compounds show sluggish sodium-ion diffusion, and the nano-particles are prone to agglomeration during the repeated charge–discharge cycles. The combination of nanometerization (morphology engineering) and carbon coating (surface engineering) has been proven to be effective. (7) Almost all transition-metal-based cathode materials undergo transition-metal dissolution during long-term cycling, and carbon or metal oxide coating (surface engineering) on the surface is widely accepted to be one of the most effective strategies.
 Fig. 27  Summary of intrinsic challenges and developed strategies for advanced cobalt-free cathode materials in SIBs. 
A comparison of the electrochemical stability of typical Mn/Fe/Ni/V/Cr-based cathodes is shown in Fig. 28, where the Fe-based and V-based cathode materials show the best stability. The long working lifespan of carbon-modified Fe-based cathode materials can exceed 6000 cycles,175 and carbon-modified V-based cathode materials can even reach 30000 cycles.241
 Fig. 28  Summary of typical Mn- (layer Na2.3Cu1.1Mn2O7−δ,119 Na0.55[Ni0.1Fe0.1Mn0.8]O2,267 NaMn0.8Ti0.1Ni0.1O272 and NaMnO2−y−δ(OH)2y;126 layer-tunnel Na0.6Mn0.98Zr0.02O280 and Na0.6MnO2;268 tunnel Na0.44MnO277), Fe-(Prussian blue analogues Na1.81Fe[Fe(CN)6]0.83-2.04H2O,160 Na0.647Fe[Fe(CN)6]0.93-2.6H2O/C96 and NaxFe2(CN)6-nH2O/CNT;97 polyanionic compounds NFP/C@C cloth,174 NFP@C nanofibre175 and NFPF@C nanofibre181), Ni- (layer Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2194 and NaNi0.5Mn0.2Ti0.3O2208), Cr- (layer nano-sized NaCrO2258 and C-NaCrO2259) and V- (polyanionic compounds porous NVP/C,241 3D NVP/C/rGO,227 carbon coated NVP/CNTs228 and layered NVP/rGO246) based cathode materials with excellent electrochemical stability. 
5.2 Perspectives
Although great advances and remarkable achievements in cobalt-free cathode materials for stable SIBs have been made in recent years, some issues listed below (Fig. 29) still need to be further considered and well explored in the future:
 Fig. 29  Perspectives of the potential directions of cobalt-free cathode materials for advanced SIBs. 

5.2.1 Exploiting novel cobalt-free cathode materials. 
Although many kinds of high-performance cobalt-free cathode materials have been designed and synthesized, their specific capacity and working potential are still unsatisfactory, and only a few of them can meet the ultralong-term operation requirements of large-scale energy power stations. Therefore, further research on mechanism exploration and material design is still needed to expand the family of cobalt-free cathode materials and enhance the comprehensive electrochemical performance. For example, Hu et al. found that many layered cathode materials can be predicted and prepared by calculating the cationic potential.269 In addition to electrochemical stability, specific capacity and working potential, the cost of cathodes plays a key role in future large-scale applications of SIBs, because the high cost will lower the competitiveness of SIBs and cathode accounts for nearly one third of the whole battery cost. Cathode materials consisting of abundant and cheap elements are desired. In addition to the current Co, further consideration on eliminating Ni, V, Cr and Cu in SIBs is also needed in future, as the resource reserves are not far excessive and prices are not sufficiently low. In terms of elements, electrochemically active Mn/Fe and electrochemically inactive Mg/Al/Ti metal elements may be the ideal and final choices for SIBs in large-scale electrochemical energy storage systems. In general, a novel and ideal cathode material for SIBs should have (1) excellent electrochemical stability during the ultra-long-term cycle process, (2) high output potential, and (3) high specific capacity, and be (4) earth-abundant elements, (5) of low cost, and (6) easy to massively synthesize and simple to prepare.
Unfortunately, very few cathode materials in full compliance with the above conditions have been reported. The V-based polyanionic compound NVP exhibits an ultralong cycle lifespan of 30000 cycles and a high output voltage of 3.3 V, while its reversible specific capacity is below 120 mA h g−1 (Fig. 30).241 The Mn-based layered Na2/3MnO2 has a high reversible specific capacity of beyond 200 mA h g−1, but the output voltage is just approximately 2.6 V (Fig. 30).271 Considering the electrochemical stability, specific capacity and output voltage comprehensively, the in-depth study of Fe-based PBAs may be a direction worth considering. In addition to the redox of transition metals for charge compensation, lattice oxygen in layered cathodes was also found to participate in charge compensation. Furthermore, lattice oxygen (O2−/O(2−n)−) exhibits a higher redox potential than almost all transition metals (e.g., Mn3+/4+, Ni2+/3+, Co3+/4+, Cr3+/4+, Ni3+/4+, Fe3+/4+), which can reach approximately 4.2/4.0 V (oxidation/reduction potential, vs. Na/Na+). In terms of specific capacity, layered cathodes with lattice oxygen activity can reach a high reversible capacity of beyond 250 mA h g−1 (theoretical capacity of normal layer cathodes) because of the additional capacity from lattice oxygen.114,275–277 In terms of safety, lattice oxygen redox of layered cathodes in SIBs showed no oxygen gas release when the electrode was even charged to a high working potential of 4.5 V, suggesting excellent electrochemical safety. In terms of synthesis and storage, the layered cathode materials with lattice oxygen activity share the same preparation method as the normal layered cathode materials, namely, the easy-to-scale solid-state method, and almost all fabricated materials are air-stable and can be stored in an air atmosphere.278 In terms of chemical components, layered cobalt-free cathode materials with lattice oxygen activity can be expressed as NaxMn1−yMyO2, where the M represents Na,279,280 Li,281,282 Mg,117,283 Zn,121,284 Cu,120,285 transition-metal vacancies286,287etc. in the transition metal layer. Generally, the most important aspect of the cathodes of SIBs is to fully utilize abundant/cheap elements to achieve an ultra-long cycle stability. On the one hand, the layered cathodes with lattice oxygen activity mainly consist of the abundant elements of Na, Mn and O. On the other hand, the materials show no lattice oxygen loss and negligible phase transformation under a high working potential, allowing a high structure stability during the repeated charge–discharge cycles. However, this kind of promising material has recently attracted the attention of a few research groups, and further efforts are still needed in future.
 Fig. 30  Summary of the specific capacities and middle working voltages of typical Mn- (layer NaMnO2270 & Na2/3MnO2,271 tunnel Na0.44MnO2,79 and layer-tunnel Na0.6Mn0.9Cu0.1O2272 & Na0.6MnO2273), Fe- (layer Na2/3Fe1/2Mn1/2O2,155 polyanionic compounds NaFePO4274 & Na2FePO4F,178 and Prussian blue analogues NaxFeFe(CN)697 & Na1.92Fe[Fe(CN)6]168), Ni- (layer Na2/3Mn2/3Ni1/3O247 & Na0.67Mn0.67Ni0.28Mg0.05O2197), V- (polyanionic compounds Na3V2(PO4)3224 & Na3V2(PO4)2F3)109 and Cr- (layer NaCrO2259) based cathode materials. The data in brackets represent the working voltage windows of the corresponding materials. 


5.2.2 Exploring facile/versatile strategies and utilizing synergy effects. 
Ideally, a strategy to improve the electrochemical stability of cathode materials for SIBs should also enhance other properties (e.g., capacity, working potential, cost, and synthesis) simultaneously, or at least not affect these properties, but this does not happen always. For example, (1) Mn-based tunnel oxide cathode materials can provide a stable electrochemical performance by accurately regulating the rod-like micromorphology, but this comes at the expense of preparation costs; (2) the introduction of the noble-metal Ru can inhibit Cr migration in Cr-based layered cathode materials, thereby effectively improving its electrochemical stability, while this is at the expense of chemical component costs; (3) suppressing the unfavourable phase transformation of Ni-based layered cathode materials (e.g., P2 type Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2) by doping inactive metal elements (e.g., Mg, Cu, Ti etc.) is considered to be one of the best strategies to improve their electrochemical stability, at the expense of specific capacity; (4) the composite of carbon-coated nanoparticles and high-quality CNT/rGO is regarded as one of the most effective strategies to boost the comprehensive electrochemical performance, but this comes at the expense of a complex synthetic process and expensive high-quality CNT/rGO.
To address the above issues, facile/versatile strategies and synergistic effects of different compositions/strategies are urgently needed to be studied. (1) The bulk-doped element simultaneously enriches in situ on the surface of the material, which can realize bulk doping and surface coating in one step. For example, our group found that part of doped Ti can be enriched on the surface of the layered cathode NaMn0.8Ni0.1Ti0.1O2,72 where the Ti-doped and -coated material shows improved chemical/electrochemical stability without affecting the capacity and output voltage. (2) The synergistic effect of composite structures can take advantage of each phase or eliminate the adverse phase transformation. Since the ionic radius of sodium ions is larger than that of lithium ions, the insertion–extraction of sodium ions in cathode materials leads to complex phase transformations and even subsequent particle cracking. In particular, irreversible phase transformations will be triggered when the cathode materials undergo a deep deintercalation of sodium ions, leading to the collapse of the crystal structure due to lattice shrinkage. These unfavourable phase transformations are particularly remarkable in layered cathodes, while the composite structure strategy can well address this issue. For example, our group reported that the P2/O3288 and P2/O′3289 composite phases showed remarkably enhanced electrochemical stability without sacrificing other aspects. In addition to the composite phase of layered cathodes, the composite cathode material of layered oxide and tunnel oxide exhibited not only enhanced stability but also improved capacity.290 The composite phase of a polyanionic cathode with high stability and a layered cathode with high capacity may be a direction full of opportunities, while the synthetic process is a great challenge. (3) A certain amount of transition metal mixed or pinned in the sodium layer is another effective improvement strategy. Unlike the traditional doping strategy, this improvement strategy introduces active transition metals into the transition metal layers in large amounts and into the sodium layers in small amounts, where the capacity and potential show almost no influence. For example, our group reported that a layered cathode with Ni mixed into the sodium layers shows a much higher stability than the pristine one without Ni mixed in the sodium layers due to the suppression of unfavourable O3–P3 phase transformation, where the capacity and potential also exhibited improvement.207 Additionally, our group also found that Fe pinning in the sodium layer could suppress the unfavourable phase transformation and improve the electrochemical and thermodynamic stabilities of the cathode without influencing other electrochemical performances.291 However, these strategies are limitedly studied, and extensive studies on these strategies and other effective strategies should be developed and explored in the future.


5.2.3 Computational tools and advanced characterization techniques. 
Although noble metals and cobalt are excluded, the chemical compositions of many kinds of active/inactive metals in different cathode structures constitute a large gene library of cathode materials for SIBs. The resulting big family of potential cathode materials is a great challenge for experimental scientists. Fortunately, computer science has achieved great development in recent years, leading to many computational tools being adopted to promote the exploration of novel cathode materials, such as machine learning and DFT calculations. With the aid of machine learning, we can efficiently get the differences of the synthetic cathode materials and new cathode materials in many aspects, and we can predict cathode materials with better electrochemical performances than the present ones, while there is still a long way for the platform construction of machine learning. DFT calculations have been one of most powerful and mature tools to predict and explain the excellent performance of cathode materials at the atomic and electronic levels.
However, in the execution process, machine learning and DFT calculations work at given parameters and under specific ideal reaction conditions, while these parameters are based on existing rules as well as experimental data and the actual reaction conditions are also changing. Based on these concerns, some advanced characterization techniques, such as atomic-level resolution STEM, neutron diffraction (NPD), and soft/hard XAS, are necessary to directly and accurately obtain the atomic position in the crystal, the atomic coordination environment and the electron occupied state. For instance, the order/superlattice structure and cation mixing show great influences on the structural stability and electrochemical stability of cathode materials, while the combination of atomic-level resolution STEM with NPD can directly confirm the atomic position and atomic coordination environment to build the structure–performance relationship and provide guidelines for theoretical simulation/calculation. Additionally, the collapse of the bulk structure of the material crystals will directly affect the cycle life of the electrodes, but the bulk structure changes are difficult to be directly observed. The collapse of the internal structure of the materials is usually accompanied by changes in the M–O bond length and the coordination numbers of M, and XANES and extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) based on hard XAS are sensitive to the changes in bond length and coordination numbers, thus well reflecting the changing of the bulk structures. Furthermore, in situ/operando techniques can well reflect the real-time structure of the material during the actual reaction process. For instance, in situ XRD can monitor the phase transformation during charging and discharging, in situ Raman can observe the redox of lattice oxygen on the surface, and in situ TEM can uncover the evolution of the cathode–electrolyte interface during the whole charge–discharge process. Overall, the combined application of suitable theoretical computation tools and advanced characterization techniques may be a good opportunity for researchers to understand the fundamental Na-storage mechanism in depth and explore new and highly stable cathode materials.


5.2.4 Industrial applications. 
5.2.4.1 Material synthesis. 
For industrial applications, the ideal material synthesis process should be simple, scalable, and impurity-free. Among the many cobalt-free cathode materials, Fe/V-based polyanionic materials and Cr-based layered cathodes should be given special attention, as the elements in the materials are in the low or intermediate oxidation states, which are easily oxidized to inactive high oxidation states in the high-temperature synthesis process. Additionally, the high-oxidation-state oxides of V and Cr, namely, V2O5 and CrO3, show high toxicity to human bodies and cause considerable damage to the natural environment. To avoid the above troubles, two strategies can be considered. On the one hand, an inert atmosphere or a reducing atmosphere is used for protection during high-temperature calcination. On the other hand, material precursors are recombined in situ with different carbon precursors or carbon to monitor the contact with oxygen during high-temperature calcination and consume trace oxygen that may enter.
5.2.4.2 Air stability. 
Air stability of cathode materials is another key issue worth considering, as this will aggravate transportation and storage costs. Unfortunately, many Mn/Fe-based layered cathode materials are air sensitive, where water molecules can be inserted into the bulk of the materials and the Na2CO3 layer formed on the surface will seriously affect the structural stability and electrochemical performance of the electrode and compromise the safety of the whole battery. After high-temperature calcination in air, the materials should be quickly taken out before the materials drop to a certain temperature, for example approximately 100 °C, and then quickly transferred to a water-free and CO2-free environment for storage. These materials can also be doped with a small amount of Ni/Cu to reduce air sensitivity,51,70,71 or constructing a surface protective layer can prevent direct contact of water/CO2 in the air with the materials.66,292
5.2.4.3 Full cell. 
At the electrode level, the residual alkali in cathode materials should be considered. The prepared cathode materials usually contain a certain amount of “residual alkali” with strong alkalinity, such as Na2O, Na2CO3 and NaOH, which will cause the polyvinylidene fluoride binder to fail and then lead to the falling off the active materials in the electrodes.293 Therefore, it is better to perform a residual alkali removal treatment on the prepared cathode materials before preparing the electrode slurry, such as post-heat treatment and alcohol/water washing.19,294 At the battery level, in addition to cathodes, anodes and electrolytes are other two important components that dominate the cycle stability. Comprehensively considering the electrochemical performance, costs and resources, carbon-based materials are widely accepted to show the greatest potential in practical applications of SIB anodes.295,296 Additionally, Ti-based anode materials are particularly suitable for long-lifespan SIBs, as the materials show a low volume variation during sodiation and desodiation.297,298 A compatible anode should possess a high coulombic efficiency and a stable solid electrolyte interphase (SEI). The utilization of Na-rich cathode materials, sodium compensation reagents, and pre-sodiated anodes has been proven to meet low coulombic efficiencies.299–302 Constructing artificial SEI layers and utilizing suitable electrolyte additives are necessary to ensure an electrochemically stable anode.303–305 Electrolyte serves as a sodium-ion conductor between cathodes and anodes, showing complex reactions with active materials. Aqueous SIBs are cheap and safe,306,307 while the low energy density remains a huge challenge to practical applications. Organic liquid electrolytes have been widely explored and utilized in SIBs, including sodium salts (NaClO4, NaPF6, NaTFSI, etc.), solvents (e.g., ethylene carbonate, propylene carbonate, ethyl methyl carbonate, dimethyl carbonate, diethyl carbonate, etc.) and additives (fluoroethylene carbonate, vinylene carbonate, etc.).308 Organic liquid electrolytes have generated high-performance SIBs, especially cycle stability.309,310 Solid-state/polymer electrolytes are ideal for stable batteries because of the elimination of transition metals dissolution and side interfacial reactions,311–313 while high costs and complex manufacturing processes have currently hindered the practical applications. Although some tough challenges still need to be overcome, we believe that the in-depth understanding of the Na-storage mechanism and the continuing research on cobalt-free cathode materials would effectively push the practical application of SIBs in large-scale electrochemical energy storage systems.

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was partially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 22075132 and 51802149), the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province, China (No. BK20211556), and the Shenzhen Science and Technology Innovation Committee (RCYX20200714114524165 and 2021Szvup055).
References
S. Chu and A. Majumdar, Nature, 2012, 488, 294–303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chow, R. J. Kopp and P. R. Portney, Science, 2003, 302, 1528–1531 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Chu, Y. Cui and N. Liu, Nat. Mater., 2016, 16, 16–22 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Amirante, E. Cassone, E. Distaso and P. Tamburrano, Energy Convers. Manage., 2017, 132, 372–387 CrossRef CAS .
B. Dunn, H. Kamath and J.-M. Tarascon, Science, 2011, 334, 928–935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Armand and J.-M. Tarascon, Nature, 2008, 451, 652–657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Goodenough and K. S. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1167–1176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xiang, K. Zhang and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5343–5364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-W. Kim, D.-H. Seo, X. Ma, G. Ceder and K. Kang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 710–721 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yabuuchi, K. Kubota, M. Dahbi and S. Komaba, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11636–11682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-Y. Hwang, S.-T. Myung and Y.-K. Sun, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3529–3614 RSC .
C. Vaalma, D. Buchholz, M. Weil and S. Passerini, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 1–11 CrossRef .
Z. Yang, J. Zhang, M. C. Kintner-Meyer, X. Lu, D. Choi, J. P. Lemmon and J. Liu, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3577–3613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Pan, Y.-S. Hu and L. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2338 RSC .
D. Kundu, E. Talaie, V. Duffort and L. F. Nazar, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 3431–3448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Cheng, J. Liang, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1695–1715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, S. Guo and H. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 9, 1800212 CrossRef .
Y. Sun, S. Guo and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 825–840 RSC .
S. Chu, Y. Chen, J. Wang, J. Dai, K. Liao, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 775, 383–392 CrossRef CAS .
S. Guo, J. Yi, Y. Sun and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2978–3006 RSC .
N. Voronina, Y.-K. Sun and S.-T. Myung, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1814–1824 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chu, Y. Zhong, K. Liao and Z. Shao, Curr. Opin. Green Sustainable Chem., 2019, 17, 29–34 CrossRef .
L. Wang, B. Chen, J. Ma, G. Cui and L. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6505–6602 RSC .
Q. Liu, X. Su, D. Lei, Y. Qin, J. Wen, F. Guo, Y. A. Wu, Y. Rong, R. Kou, X. Xiao, F. Aguesse, J. Bareño, Y. Ren, W. Lu and Y. Li, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 936–943 CrossRef CAS .
J.-N. Zhang, Q. Li, C. Ouyang, X. Yu, M. Ge, X. Huang, E. Hu, C. Ma, S. Li, R. Xiao, W. Yang, Y. Chu, Y. Liu, H. Yu, X.-Q. Yang, X. Huang, L. Chen and H. Li, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 594–603 CrossRef CAS .
S.-K. Jung, H. Gwon, J. Hong, K.-Y. Park, D.-H. Seo, H. Kim, J. Hyun, W. Yang and K. Kang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1300787 CrossRef .
X. Jiang, S. Chu, Y. Chen, Y. Zhong, Y. Liu and Z. Shao, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 691, 206–214 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yabuuchi and T. Ohzuku, J. Power Sources, 2003, 119, 171–174 CrossRef .
W. Liu, P. Oh, X. Liu, M. J. Lee, W. Cho, S. Chae, Y. Kim and J. Cho, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 4440–4457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Shi, D. D. Xiao, M. Ge, X. Yu, Y. Chu, X. Huang, X. D. Zhang, Y. X. Yin, X. Q. Yang, Y. G. Guo, L. Gu and L. J. Wan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705575 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Li, B. Song and A. Manthiram, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3006–3059 RSC .
N. Yabuuchi, K. Yoshii, S. T. Myung, I. Nakai and S. Komaba, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 4404–4419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sathiya, A. M. Abakumov, D. Foix, G. Rousse, K. Ramesha, M. Saubanere, M. L. Doublet, H. Vezin, C. P. Laisa, A. S. Prakash, D. Gonbeau, G. VanTendeloo and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 230–238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Liu, Y. Zhang, Z. Jiang, X. Zeng, J. Ji, Z. Li, X. Gao, M. Sun, Z. Lin, M. Ling, J. Zheng and C. Liang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1512–1533 RSC .
P. K. Nayak, L. Yang, W. Brehm and P. Adelhelm, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 102–120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-L. Xu, R. Amine, A. Abouimrane, H. Che, M. Dahbi, Z.-F. Ma, I. Saadoune, J. Alami, W. L. Mattis, F. Pan, Z. Chen and K. Amine, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702403 CrossRef .
K. Kubota, S. Kumakura, Y. Yoda, K. Kuroki and S. Komaba, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703415 CrossRef .
R. Usiskin, Y. Lu, J. Popovic, M. Law, P. Balaya, Y.-S. Hu and J. Maier, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2021, 1–16 Search PubMed .
C. Fang, Y. Huang, W. Zhang, J. Han, Z. Deng, Y. Cao and H. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501727 CrossRef .
S. Chen, C. Wu, L. Shen, C. Zhu, Y. Huang, K. Xi, J. Maier and Y. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700431 CrossRef PubMed .
P.-F. Wang, Y. You, Y.-X. Yin and Y.-G. Guo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701912 CrossRef .
J.-J. Braconnier, C. Delmas, C. Fouassier and P. Hagenmuller, Mater. Res. Bull., 1980, 15, 1797–1804 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lei, X. Li, L. Liu and G. Ceder, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 5288–5296 CrossRef CAS .
R. Berthelot, D. Carlier and C. Delmas, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 74–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Hwang, C. S. Yoon, I. Belharouak and Y. K. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 17952–17959 RSC .
N. Bucher, S. Hartung, J. B. Franklin, A. M. Wise, L. Y. Lim, H. Y. Chen, J. N. Weker, M. F. Toney and M. Srinivasan, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 2041–2051 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Lee, J. Xu and Y. S. Meng, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 3304–3312 RSC .
T. Fang, S. Guo, K. Jiang, X. Zhang, D. Wang, Y. Feng, X. Zhang, P. Wang, P. He and H. Zhou, Small Methods, 2018, 3, 1800183 CrossRef .
D. Yuan, W. He, F. Pei, F. Wu, Y. Wu, J. Qian, Y. Cao, X. Ai and H. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3895–3899 RSC .
Y. Wen, J. Fan, C. Shi, P. Dai, Y. Hong, R. Wang, L. Wu, Z. Zhou, J. Li, L. Huang and S.-G. Sun, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 162–170 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lu and J. Dahn, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 1252–1257 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sathiya, K. Hemalatha, K. Ramesha, J. M. Tarascon and A. S. Prakash, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 1846–1853 CrossRef CAS .
D. Buchholz, L. G. Chagas, C. Vaalma, L. Wu and S. Passerini, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 13415–13421 RSC .
S. Chu, H. Sun, G. Chen, Y. Chen, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 25227–25235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chu, D. Guan, H. Sun, L. Fei, Z. Hu, H.-J. Lin, S.-C. Weng, C.-T. Chen, R. Ran, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 8075–8083 RSC .
Y. Li, Z. Yang, S. Xu, L. Mu, L. Gu, Y. S. Hu, H. Li and L. Chen, Adv. Sci., 2015, 2, 1500031 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Kim, X. Ma, S. P. Ong and G. Ceder, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 15571–15578 RSC .
B. Silván, E. Gonzalo, L. Djuandhi, N. Sharma, F. Fauth and D. Saurel, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 15132–15146 RSC .
X. Ma, H. Chen and G. Ceder, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, A1307 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, E. Wang, Q. Liu, X. Guo, W. Chen, S.-L. Chou and S.-X. Dou, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 19, 163–178 CrossRef .
M. Chen, Q. Liu, S. W. Wang, E. Wang, X. Guo and S. L. Chou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803609 CrossRef .
C. Delmas, C. Fouassier and P. Hagenmuller, Phys. B + C, 1980, 99, 81–85 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chu, S. Wei, Y. Chen, R. Cai, K. Liao, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, Ceram. Int., 2018, 44, 5184–5192 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Katcho, J. Carrasco, D. Saurel, E. Gonzalo, M. Han, F. Aguesse and T. Rojo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601477 CrossRef .
C. Zhao, F. Ding, Y. Lu, L. Chen and Y. S. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 264–269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chu, X. Jia, J. Wang, K. Liao, W. Zhou, Y. Wang and Z. Shao, Composites, Part B, 2019, 173, 106913 CrossRef CAS .
V. Duffort, E. Talaie, R. Black and L. F. Nazar, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 2515–2524 CrossRef CAS .
E. Talaie, S. Y. Kim, N. Chen and L. F. Nazar, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 6684–6697 CrossRef CAS .
Y. You, A. Dolocan, W. Li and A. Manthiram, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 182–188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Mu, S. Xu, Y. Li, Y. S. Hu, H. Li, L. Chen and X. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6928–6933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. R. Yao, P. F. Wang, Y. Gong, J. Zhang, X. Yu, L. Gu, C. OuYang, Y. X. Yin, E. Hu, X. Q. Yang, E. Stavitski, Y. G. Guo and L. J. Wan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 8440–8443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Guo, Q. Li, P. Liu, M. Chen and H. Zhou, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 135 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-P. Parant, R. Olazcuaga, M. Devalette, C. Fouassier and P. Hagenmuller, J. Solid State Chem., 1971, 3, 1–11 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Doeff, M. Y. Peng, Y. Ma and L. De Jonghe, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1994, 141, L145–L147 CrossRef CAS .
F. Sauvage, L. Laffont, J.-M. Tarascon and E. Baudrin, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 3289–3294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Wang, Y.-W. Yeh, N. Wongittharom, Y.-C. Wang, C.-J. Tseng, S.-W. Lee, W.-S. Chang and J.-K. Chang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 274, 1016–1023 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, Z. Hu, M. Chen, Q. Gu, Y. Dou, Z. Sun, S. Chou and S. X. Dou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 3644–3652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, X. Liu, F. Bu, X. Zhao, L. Wang, Q. Shen, J. Zhang, N. Zhang, L. Jiao and L.-Z. Fan, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 313, 122–130 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cao, L. Xiao, W. Wang, D. Choi, Z. Nie, J. Yu, L. V. Saraf, Z. Yang and J. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3155–3160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qu, T. Sheng, Z.-G. Wu, T.-R. Chen, H. Chen, Z.-G. Yang, X.-D. Guo, J.-T. Li, B.-H. Zhong and X.-S. Dou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 13934–13942 RSC .
S. Guo, H. Yu, D. Liu, W. Tian, X. Liu, N. Hanada, M. Ishida and H. Zhou, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 7998 RSC .
S. Xu, Y. Wang, L. Ben, Y. Lyu, N. Song, Z. Yang, Y. Li, L. Mu, H.-T. Yang, L. Gu, Y.-S. Hu, H. Li, Z.-H. Cheng, L. Chen and X. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501156 CrossRef .
F. Ma, Q. Li, T. Wang, H. Zhang and G. Wu, Sci. Bull., 2017, 62, 358–368 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, Y. Han, X. Wang, N. Bahlawane, H. Pan, M. Yan and Y. Jiang, iScience, 2018, 3, 110–133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Hurlbutt, S. Wheeler, I. Capone and M. Pasta, Joule, 2018, 2, 1950–1960 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, C. Wu, C. Wei, L. Hu, J. Qian, Y. Cao, X. Ai, J. Wang and H. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 5393–5399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, S. Zheng, H. Tang, X. Guo, H. Xue and H. Pang, Energy Storage Mater., 2017, 9, 11–30 CrossRef .
J. Qian, C. Wu, Y. Cao, Z. Ma, Y. Huang, X. Ai and H. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702619 CrossRef .
Y. You, X.-L. Wu, Y.-X. Yin and Y.-G. Guo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1643–1647 RSC .
H. W. Lee, R. Y. Wang, M. Pasta, S. Woo Lee, N. Liu and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lu, L. Wang, J. Cheng and J. B. Goodenough, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 6544–6546 RSC .
F. Peng, L. Yu, P. Gao, X.-Z. Liao, J. Wen, Y.-S. He, G. Tan, Y. Ren and Z.-F. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 22248–22256 RSC .
M. Takachi, Y. Fukuzumi and Y. Moritomo, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 458–461 RSC .
Y. Yue, A. J. Binder, B. Guo, Z. Zhang, Z. A. Qiao, C. Tian and S. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 3134–3137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Kim, M. B. Zakaria, M.-S. Park, A. Alowasheeir, S. M. Alshehri, Y. Yamauchi and H. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 240, 300–306 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang, S. Yu, B. Wang, Y. Li, W. Sun, Y. Lu, M. Yan, B. Song and S. Dou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 5315–5321 CrossRef CAS .
Y. You, H. R. Yao, S. Xin, Y. X. Yin, T. T. Zuo, C. P. Yang, Y. G. Guo, Y. Cui, L. J. Wan and J. B. Goodenough, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7243–7248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chu, Y. Pei, Z. Cui, C. Steven, P. Dong, P. M. Ajayan, M. Ye and J. Shen, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 14697–14704 RSC .
S.-P. Guo, J.-C. Li, Q.-T. Xu, Z. Ma and H.-G. Xue, J. Power Sources, 2017, 361, 285–299 CrossRef CAS .
P. Barpanda, L. Lander, S.-I. Nishimura and A. Yamada, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703055 CrossRef .
T. Jin, H. Li, K. Zhu, P. F. Wang, P. Liu and L. Jiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 2342–2377 RSC .
J. Shao, X. Li, J. Wei, H. Pang and C. Chen, Adv. Sustain. Syst., 2018, 2, 1700154 CrossRef .
M. Avdeev, Z. Mohamed, C. D. Ling, J. Lu, M. Tamaru, A. Yamada and P. Barpanda, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 8685–8693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fang, Z. Chen, L. Xiao, X. Ai, Y. Cao and H. Yang, Small, 2018, 14 Search PubMed .
J. Fang, S. Wang, Z. Li, H. Chen, L. Xia, L. Ding and H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1180–1185 RSC .
W. Tang, X. Song, Y. Du, C. Peng, M. Lin, S. Xi, B. Tian, J. Zheng, Y. Wu, F. Pan and K. P. Loh, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 4882–4892 RSC .
Q. An, F. Xiong, Q. Wei, J. Sheng, L. He, D. Ma, Y. Yao and L. Mai, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401963 CrossRef .
X. Deng, W. Shi, J. Sunarso, M. Liu and Z. Shao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 16280–16287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhu, C. Wu, C.-C. Chen, P. Kopold, P. A. van Aken, J. Maier and Y. Yu, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 5207–5215 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Han, E. Gonzalo, G. Singh and T. Rojo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 81–102 RSC .
X. Li, X. Ma, D. Su, L. Liu, R. Chisnell, S. P. Ong, H. Chen, A. Toumar, J. C. Idrobo, Y. Lei, J. Bai, F. Wang, J. W. Lynn, Y. S. Lee and G. Ceder, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 586–592 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Ortiz-Vitoriano, N. E. Drewett, E. Gonzalo and T. Rojo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1051–1074 RSC .
E. de la Llave, E. Talaie, E. Levi, P. K. Nayak, M. Dixit, P. T. Rao, P. Hartmann, F. Chesneau, D. T. Major, M. Greenstein, D. Aurbach and L. F. Nazar, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 9064–9076 CrossRef CAS .
X. Rong, E. Hu, Y. Lu, F. Meng, C. Zhao, X. Wang, Q. Zhang, X. Yu, L. Gu, Y.-S. Hu, H. Li, X. Huang, X.-Q. Yang, C. Delmas and L. Chen, Joule, 2019, 3, 503–517 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Clément, J. Billaud, A. Robert Armstrong, G. Singh, T. Rojo, P. G. Bruce and C. P. Grey, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3240–3251 RSC .
D. Buchholz, C. Vaalma, L. G. Chagas and S. Passerini, J. Power Sources, 2015, 282, 581–585 CrossRef CAS .
U. Maitra, R. A. House, J. W. Somerville, N. Tapia-Ruiz, J. G. Lozano, N. Guerrini, R. Hao, K. Luo, L. Jin, M. A. Perez-Osorio, F. Massel, D. M. Pickup, S. Ramos, X. Lu, D. E. McNally, A. V. Chadwick, F. Giustino, T. Schmitt, L. C. Duda, M. R. Roberts and P. G. Bruce, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 288–295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Kang, Z. Zhang, P.-K. Lee, T.-W. Ng, W. Li, Y. Tang, W. Zhang, C.-S. Lee and D. Y. Wai Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 22846–22852 RSC .
K. Jiang, S. Xu, S. Guo, X. Zhang, X. Zhang, Y. Qiao, T. Fang, P. Wang, P. He and H. Zhou, Nano Energy, 2018, 52, 88–94 CrossRef CAS .
P.-F. Wang, Y. Xiao, N. Piao, Q.-C. Wang, X. Ji, T. Jin, Y.-J. Guo, S. Liu, T. Deng, C. Cui, L. Chen, Y.-G. Guo, X.-Q. Yang and C. Wang, Nano Energy, 2020, 69, 104474 CrossRef CAS .
X. Bai, M. Sathiya, B. Mendoza-Sánchez, A. Iadecola, J. Vergnet, R. Dedryvère, M. Saubanère, A. M. Abakumov, P. Rozier and J.-M. Tarascon, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802379 CrossRef .
A. Konarov, J. H. Jo, J. U. Choi, Z. Bakenov, H. Yashiro, J. Kim and S.-T. Myung, Nano Energy, 2019, 59, 197–206 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, W. Zuo, B. Zheng, Y. Xiang, K. Zhou, Z. Xiao, P. Shan, J. Shi, Q. Li and G. Zhong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 18086–18095 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-L. Pang, X.-H. Zhang, J.-Z. Guo, J.-Y. Li, X. Yan, B.-H. Hou, H.-Y. Guan and X.-L. Wu, J. Power Sources, 2017, 356, 80–88 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yan, L. Tang, Y. Huang, W. Hua, Y. Wang, R. Liu, Q. Gu, S. Indris, S. L. Chou, Y. Huang, M. Wu and S. X. Dou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 1412–1416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xia, X. Zhu, J. Liu, Q. Liu, S. Lan, Q. Zhang, X. Liu, J. K. Seo, T. Chen, L. Gu and Y. S. Meng, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 5100 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Jiang, X. Zhang, H. Li, X. Zhang, P. He, S. Guo and H. Zhou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 14848–14853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xu, K. Jiang, X. Zhang, X. Zhang, S. Guo and H. Zhou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 26817–26823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kim, D. J. Kim, D.-H. Seo, M. S. Yeom, K. Kang, D. K. Kim and Y. Jung, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 1205–1211 CrossRef CAS .
B. Fu, X. Zhou and Y. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2016, 310, 102–108 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhan, S. Wang, Y. Yuan, K. Jiao and S. Jiao, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A1028–A1032 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jiang, S. Liu, H. Xu, L. Chen, J. Yang and Y. Qian, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 8480–8483 RSC .
Y. Zhang, Z. Liu, H. Deng, J. Xie, J. Xia, S. Nie, W. Liu, L. Liu and X. Wang, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 1711–1721 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhang, W.-j. Shi, Y.-w. Yan, S.-d. Xu, L. Chen, X.-m. Wang and S.-b. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 258, 1035–1043 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ju, H. Huang, H. Zheng, P. Deng, S. Li, B. Qu and T. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2018, 395, 395–402 CrossRef CAS .
X. He, J. Wang, B. Qiu, E. Paillard, C. Ma, X. Cao, H. Liu, M. C. Stan, H. Liu, T. Gallash, Y. S. Meng and J. Li, Nano Energy, 2016, 27, 602–610 CrossRef CAS .
R. Qiao, K. Dai, J. Mao, T.-C. Weng, D. Sokaras, D. Nordlund, X. Song, V. S. Battaglia, Z. Hussain, G. Liu and W. Yang, Nano Energy, 2015, 16, 186–195 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, L. Liu, S. Jamil, J. Xie, W. Liu, J. Xia, S. Nie and X. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 494, 1156–1165 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Q. Zhou, J. Liao, X. Ding, Q. Hu, X. He and C.-H. Chen, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 7497–7503 CrossRef CAS .
Q.-C. Wang, Q.-Q. Qiu, N. Xiao, Z.-W. Fu, X.-J. Wu, X.-Q. Yang and Y.-N. Zhou, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 15, 1–7 CrossRef .
G. Gao, D. Tie, H. Ma, H. Yu, S. Shi, B. Wang, S. Xu, L. Wang and Y. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 6675–6684 RSC .
C. C. Chen, L. Fu and J. Maier, Nature, 2016, 536, 159–164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Maier, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 4998–5026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. G. Wu, J. T. Li, Y. J. Zhong, X. D. Guo, L. Huang, B. H. Zhong, D. A. Agyeman, J. M. Lim, D. H. Kim, M. H. Cho and Y. M. Kang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 21267–21275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xiao, P.-F. Wang, Y.-X. Yin, Y.-F. Zhu, X. Yang, X.-D. Zhang, Y. Wang, X.-D. Guo, B.-H. Zhong and Y.-G. Guo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800492 CrossRef .
D. W. Han, J. H. Ku, R. H. Kim, D. J. Yun, S. S. Lee and S. G. Doo, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 1870–1875 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. R. Chen, T. Sheng, Z. G. Wu, J. T. Li, E. H. Wang, C. J. Wu, H. T. Li, X. D. Guo, B. H. Zhong, L. Huang and S. G. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 10147–10156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, Z. Wu, Z. Zheng, T. Chen, X. Guo, J. Li and B. Zhong, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 273, 63–70 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qu, D. Wang, Z. G. Yang, Z. G. Wu, L. Qiu, X. D. Guo, J. T. Li, B. H. Zhong, X. C. Chen and S. X. Dou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 26938–26945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, C. Shi, Y.-P. Deng, Z. Wu, Z. Yang, Y. Zhong, Y. Jiang, B. Zhong, L. Huang, X. Guo and Z. Chen, Nano Energy, 2020, 70, 104539 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, Y. Liu, Z. Wu, X. Liu, J. Qu, H. Liu, Y. Ming, Y. Zhong, B. Zhong and X. Guo, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 2921–2924 RSC .
W.-J. Shi, Y.-W. Yan, C. Chi, X.-T. Ma, D. Zhang, S.-D. Xu, L. Chen, X.-M. Wang and S.-B. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2019, 427, 129–137 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zheng, J. Su, Y. Wang, W. Zhou, J. Song, Q. Su, N. Reeves-McLaren and S. Guo, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 1793–1799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, Y. Wang, D. Wu, L. Liu, S.-H. Bo and G. Ceder, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 6575–6583 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yabuuchi, M. Kajiyama, J. Iwatate, H. Nishikawa, S. Hitomi, R. Okuyama, R. Usui, Y. Yamada and S. Komaba, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 512–517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Talaie, V. Duffort, H. L. Smith, B. Fultz and L. F. Nazar, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2512–2523 RSC .
J. Xu, Z. Han, K. Jiang, P. Bai, Y. Liang, X. Zhang, P. Wang, S. Guo and H. Zhou, Small, 2020, 16, e1904388 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wu, W. Deng, J. Qian, Y. Cao, X. Ai and H. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 10130 RSC .
D. Yang, J. Xu, X. Z. Liao, H. Wang, Y. S. He and Z. F. Ma, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 8181–8184 RSC .
C. Yan, A. Zhao, F. Zhong, X. Feng, W. Chen, J. Qian, X. Ai, H. Yang and Y. Cao, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 332, 135533 CrossRef CAS .
R. Chen, Y. Huang, M. Xie, Q. Zhang, X. Zhang, L. Li and F. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 16078–16086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Tang, H. Liu, D. Su, P. H. L. Notten and G. Wang, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 3979–3990 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tang, W. Zhang, L. Xue, X. Ding, T. Wang, X. Liu, J. Liu, X. Li and Y. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6036–6041 RSC .
L. Yang, Q. Liu, M. Wan, J. Peng, Y. Luo, H. Zhang, J. Ren, L. Xue and W. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2020, 448, 227421 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, L. Fu, J. Luan, X. Huang, Y. Tang, H. Xie and H. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2018, 395, 305–313 CrossRef CAS .
Y. You, X. Yu, Y. Yin, K.-W. Nam and Y.-G. Guo, Nano Res., 2014, 8, 117–128 CrossRef .
W.-J. Li, S.-L. Chou, J.-Z. Wang, Y.-M. Kang, J.-L. Wang, Y. Liu, Q.-F. Gu, H.-K. Liu and S.-X. Dou, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1997–2003 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, J. Song, R. Qiao, L. A. Wray, M. A. Hossain, Y. D. Chuang, W. Yang, Y. Lu, D. Evans, J. J. Lee, S. Vail, X. Zhao, M. Nishijima, S. Kakimoto and J. B. Goodenough, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2548–2554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, L. Li, S. Zuo, Y. Zhang, L. Lv, R. Ran, X. Li, B. Li, F. Zhao, J. Zhang, Y. Wang and P. Nie, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 341, 136057 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gao, R. Du, C. Zhou, B. Han, K. Xia, Q. Gao and J. Wu, Mater. Today Energy, 2018, 10, 302–306 CrossRef .
S.-M. Oh, S.-T. Myung, J. Hassoun, B. Scrosati and Y.-K. Sun, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 22, 149–152 CrossRef CAS .
M. Galceran, D. Saurel, B. Acebedo, V. V. Roddatis, E. Martin, T. Rojo and M. Casas-Cabanas, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 8837–8842 RSC .
J. Kim, D.-H. Seo, H. Kim, I. Park, J.-K. Yoo, S.-K. Jung, Y.-U. Park, W. A. Goddard Iii and K. Kang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 540–545 RSC .
X. Ma, J. Xia, X. Wu, Z. Pan and P. K. Shen, Carbon, 2019, 146, 78–87 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, N. Zhang, F. Wang, X. Liu, L. Jiao and L.-Z. Fan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801917 CrossRef .
B. L. Ellis, W. R. M. Makahnouk, Y. Makimura, K. Toghill and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 749–753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, Z. Liu, F. Zheng, R. Liu, J. Lee, G. L. Xu, G. Zhong, X. Hou, R. Fu, Z. Chen, K. Amine, J. Mi, S. Wu, C. P. Grey and Y. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 11918–11923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kawabe, N. Yabuuchi, M. Kajiyama, N. Fukuhara, T. Inamasu, R. Okuyama, I. Nakai and S. Komaba, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 1225–1228 CrossRef CAS .
R. Tripathi, S. M. Wood, M. S. Islam and L. F. Nazar, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2257 RSC .
J. S. Ko, Vicky V. T. Doan-Nguyen, H.-S. Kim, X. Petrissans, R. H. DeBlock, C. S. Choi, J. W. Long and B. S. Dunn, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 18707–18715 RSC .
F. Wang, N. Zhang, X. Zhao, L. Wang, J. Zhang, T. Wang, F. Liu, Y. Liu and L. Z. Fan, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900649 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Fang, Q. Liu, L. Xiao, X. Ai, H. Yang and Y. Cao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 17977–17984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ali, J. H. Lee, D. Susanto, S. W. Choi, B. W. Cho, K. W. Nam and K. Y. Chung, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 15422–15429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Rahman, I. Sultana, S. Mateti, J. Liu, N. Sharma and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 16616–16621 RSC .
F. Xiong, Q. An, L. Xia, Y. Zhao, L. Mai, H. Tao and Y. Yue, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 608–615 CrossRef CAS .
A. Langrock, Y. Xu, Y. Liu, S. Ehrman, A. Manivannan and C. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2013, 223, 62–67 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ko, J.-K. Yoo, H. Park, Y. Lee, H. Kim, Y. Oh, S.-T. Myung and J. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2019, 432, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, X. Zhou, Y. Wang, J. Qian, F. Zhong, X. Feng, W. Chen, X. Ai, H. Yang and Y. Cao, Small, 2019, 15, e1903723 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Park, B.-C. Yu and J. B. Goodenough, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 6682–6688 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, J. Wang, X. Zhang, Y. Ren, P. Zuo, G. Yin and J. Wang, Nano Energy, 2017, 34, 215–223 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gupta, C. Buddie Mullins and J. B. Goodenough, J. Power Sources, 2013, 243, 817–821 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Bhange, G. Ali, D.-H. Kim, D. A. Anang, T. J. Shin, M.-G. Kim, Y.-M. Kang, K. Y. Chung and K.-W. Nam, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1300–1310 RSC .
J. Ma, S.-H. Bo, L. Wu, Y. Zhu, C. P. Grey and P. G. Khalifah, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 2387–2399 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, P. Li, H. Zhu, K. Rui, G. Zhao, J. Shu, X. Xu, W. Sun and S. X. Dou, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 15, 257–265 CrossRef .
Q. Liu, Z. Hu, M. Chen, C. Zou, H. Jin, S. Wang, Q. Gu and S. Chou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 9215–9221 RSC .
Y. Liu, Q. Shen, X. Zhao, J. Zhang, X. Liu, T. Wang, N. Zhang, L. Jiao, J. Chen and L. Z. Fan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 30, 1907837 CrossRef .
P. F. Wang, Y. You, Y. X. Yin, Y. S. Wang, L. J. Wan, L. Gu and Y. G. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 7445–7449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, Y.-G. Sun, L.-L. Hu, J.-Y. Piao, J. Guo, A. Manthiram, J. Ma and A.-M. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 8752–8761 RSC .
Q. C. Wang, J. K. Meng, X. Y. Yue, Q. Q. Qiu, Y. Song, X. J. Wu, Z. W. Fu, Y. Y. Xia, Z. Shadike, J. Wu, X. Q. Yang and Y. N. Zhou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 840–848 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lu and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2001, 148, A1225 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, X. Fang, A. Zhang, C. Shen, Q. Liu, H. A. Enaya and C. Zhou, Nano Energy, 2016, 27, 27–34 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, P. Yan and M. Sui, Nano Energy, 2018, 54, 148–155 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, H. Wan, P. Yan, X. Chen, J. Fu, Z. Liu, H. Deng, F. Gao and M. Sui, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1904816 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yu, S. Guo, Y. Zhu, M. Ishida and H. Zhou, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 457–459 RSC .
S. Maletti, A. Sarapulova, A. Schokel and D. Mikhailova, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 33923–33930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Guo, H. Yu, P. Liu, Y. Ren, T. Zhang, M. Chen, M. Ishida and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1237–1244 RSC .
S. Guo, Y. Sun, P. Liu, J. Yi, P. He, X. Zhang, Y. Zhu, R. Senga, K. Suenaga, M. Chen and H. Zhou, Sci. Bull., 2018, 63, 376–384 CrossRef CAS .
P. F. Wang, H. R. Yao, X. Y. Liu, J. N. Zhang, L. Gu, X. Q. Yu, Y. X. Yin and Y. G. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700210 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Milewska, K. Świerczek, W. Zając and J. Molenda, J. Power Sources, 2018, 404, 39–46 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ding, C. Zhao, D. Zhou, Q. Meng, D. Xiao, Q. Zhang, Y. Niu, Y. Li, X. Rong, Y. Lu, L. Chen and Y.-S. Hu, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 30, 420–430 CrossRef .
P. Vassilaras, X. Ma, X. Li and G. Ceder, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 160, A207–A211 CrossRef .
M. H. Han, E. Gonzalo, M. Casas-Cabanas and T. Rojo, J. Power Sources, 2014, 258, 266–271 CrossRef CAS .
P.-F. Wang, Y.-J. Guo, H. Duan, T.-T. Zuo, E. Hu, K. Attenkofer, H. Li, X. S. Zhao, Y.-X. Yin, X. Yu and Y.-G. Guo, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2715–2722 CrossRef CAS .
P.-F. Wang, H.-R. Yao, Y. You, Y.-G. Sun, Y.-X. Yin and Y.-G. Guo, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 3258–3271 CrossRef CAS .
P. F. Wang, M. Weng, Y. Xiao, Z. Hu, Q. Li, M. Li, Y. D. Wang, X. Chen, X. Yang, Y. Wen, Y. X. Yin, X. Yu, Y. Xiao, J. Zheng, L. J. Wan, F. Pan and Y. G. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1903483 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, G. Liu, T. Iwao, M. Okubo and A. Yamada, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 2970–2976 CrossRef CAS .
P. Vassilaras, D.-H. Kwon, S. T. Dacek, T. Shi, D.-H. Seo, G. Ceder and J. C. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 4596–4606 RSC .
S. Komaba, N. Yabuuchi, T. Nakayama, A. Ogata, T. Ishikawa and I. Nakai, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 6211–6220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Gutierrez, W. M. Dose, O. Borkiewicz, F. Guo, M. Avdeev, S. Kim, T. T. Fister, Y. Ren, J. Bareño and C. S. Johnson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 23251–23260 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, J. Xu, W. Zhang, M. Mao, Z. Wei, L. Wang, C. Cui, Y. Zhu and J. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 8815–8838 RSC .
Z. Jian, L. Zhao, H. Pan, Y.-S. Hu, H. Li, W. Chen and L. Chen, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 14, 86–89 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pivko, I. Arcon, M. Bele, R. Dominko and M. Gaberscek, J. Power Sources, 2012, 216, 145–151 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jian, C. Yuan, W. Han, X. Lu, L. Gu, X. Xi, Y.-S. Hu, H. Li, W. Chen, D. Chen, Y. Ikuhara and L. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 4265–4272 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jian, W. Han, X. Lu, H. Yang, Y.-S. Hu, J. Zhou, Z. Zhou, J. Li, W. Chen, D. Chen and L. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 156–160 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, Y. Dong, L. Xu, X. Xu, L. He and L. Mai, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3545–3553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiang, Z. Yang, W. Li, L. Zeng, F. Pan, M. Wang, X. Wei, G. Hu, L. Gu and Y. Yu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1402104 CrossRef .
X. Rui, W. Sun, C. Wu, Y. Yu and Q. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6670–6676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fang, L. Xiao, X. Ai, Y. Cao and H. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5895–5900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, H. Tang, C. Ma, Y. Bai, J. Alvarado, B. Radhakrishnan, S. P. Ong, F. Wua, Y. S. Meng and C. Wu, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 2498–2505 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Y. Huang, J. Wang, L. Miao, Y. Li, Y. Liu, Y. Qiu, C. Fang, J. Han and Y. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 1390–1396 RSC .
Q. Wang, M. Zhang, C. Zhou and Y. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 16649–16654 CrossRef CAS .
P. Hu, X. Wang, T. Wang, L. Chen, J. Ma, Q. Kong, S. Shi and G. Cui, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1600112 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Y. Lim, H. Kim, R. A. Shakoor, Y. Jung and J. W. Choi, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, A1393–A1397 CrossRef CAS .
W. Song, Z. Wu, J. Chen, Q. Lan, Y. Zhu, Y. Yang, C. Pan, H. Hou, M. Jing and X. Ji, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 146, 142–150 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Shakoor, D.-H. Seo, H. Kim, Y.-U. Park, J. Kim, S.-W. Kim, H. Gwon, S. Lee and K. Kang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 20535 RSC .
J. M. Le Meins, M. P. Crosnier-Lopez, A. Hemon-Ribaud and G. Courbion, J. Solid State Chem., 1999, 148, 260–277 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chihara, A. Kitajou, I. D. Gocheva, S. Okada and J.-I. Yamaki, J. Power Sources, 2013, 227, 80–85 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Zhang, D. Ma, T. Li, J. Liu, X. K. Ding, Y. H. Huang and X. L. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 36851–36859 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yi, M. Ling, W. Xu, X. Li, Q. Zheng and H. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2018, 47, 340–352 CrossRef CAS .
T. Broux, B. Fleutot, R. David, A. Brüll, P. Veber, F. Fauth, M. Courty, L. Croguennec and C. Masquelier, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 358–365 CrossRef CAS .
K. Saravanan, C. W. Mason, A. Rudola, K. H. Wong and P. Balaya, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 444–450 CrossRef CAS .
W. Duan, Z. Zhu, H. Li, Z. Hu, K. Zhang, F. Cheng and J. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 8668–8675 RSC .
C. Zhu, K. Song, P. A. van Aken, J. Maier and Y. Yu, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2175–2180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, X. Rui, W. Sun, Z. Xu, Y. Zhou, W. J. Ng, Q. Yan and E. Fong, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4628–4635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Mao, C. Luo, T. Gao, X. Fan and C. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10378–10385 RSC .
Y. Xu, Q. Wei, C. Xu, Q. Li, Q. An, P. Zhang, J. Sheng, L. Zhou and L. Mai, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600389 CrossRef .
Q. Zhang, W. Wang, Y. Wang, P. Feng, K. Wang, S. Cheng and K. Jiang, Nano Energy, 2016, 20, 11–19 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhu, P. Kopold, P. A. van Aken, J. Maier and Y. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2409–2416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Wang, M. Chen, X. Liu, Y. Liu, H. Guo, Z. Wu, W. Xiang, B. Zhong, X. Guo, S. Chou and S. X. Dou, Small Methods, 2018, 3, 1800169 CrossRef .
W. Li, Z. Yao, C. A. Zhou, X. Wang, X. Xia, C. Gu and J. Tu, Small, 2019, 15, e1902432 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Cai, X. Cao, Z. Luo, G. Fang, F. Liu, J. Zhou, A. Pan and S. Liang, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800680 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Shen, H. Long, G. Wang, W. Lu, L. Shao and K. Xie, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 6007–6014 RSC .
S. Komaba, T. Nakayama, A. Ogata, T. Shimizu, C. Takei, S. Takada, A. Hokura and I. Nakai, ECS Trans., 2009, 16, 43 CrossRef CAS .
S. Komaba, C. Takei, T. Nakayama, A. Ogata and N. Yabuuchi, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 355–358 CrossRef CAS .
J. Braconnier, C. Delmas and P. Hagenmuller, Mater. Res. Bull., 1982, 17, 993–1000 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Bo, X. Li, A. J. Toumar and G. Ceder, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 1419–1429 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kubota, I. Ikeuchi, T. Nakayama, C. Takei, N. Yabuuchi, H. Shiiba, M. Nakayama and S. Komaba, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 119, 166–175 CrossRef .
Y. Tsuchiya, A. M. Glushenkov and N. Yabuuchi, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2017, 1, 364–370 CrossRef .
C.-Y. Yu, J.-S. Park, H.-G. Jung, K.-Y. Chung, D. Aurbach, Y.-K. Sun and S.-T. Myung, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2019–2026 RSC .
M.-H. Cao, Z. Shadike, S.-M. Bak, T. Wang, E. Hu, S. Ehrlich, Y.-N. Zhou, X.-Q. Yang and Z.-W. Fu, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 24, 417–425 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, R. Xiao, Y. S. Hu, M. Avdeev and L. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6954 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tsuchiya, K. Takanashi, T. Nishinobo, A. Hokura, M. Yonemura, T. Matsukawa, T. Ishigaki, K. Yamanaka, T. Ohta and N. Yabuuchi, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 7006–7016 CrossRef CAS .
M.-H. Cao, Y. Wang, Z. Shadike, J.-L. Yue, E. Hu, S.-M. Bak, Y.-N. Zhou, X.-Q. Yang and Z.-W. Fu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5442–5448 RSC .
K. Xi, S. Chu, X. Zhang, X. Zhang, H. Zhang, H. Xu, J. Bian, T. Fang, S. Guo, P. Liu, M. Chen and H. Zhou, Nano Energy, 2020, 67, 104215 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xia and J. R. Dahn, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2012, 15, A1 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yabuuchi, I. Ikeuchi, K. Kubota and S. Komaba, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 32292–32299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Hwang, J. Kim, T. Y. Yu and Y. K. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803346 CrossRef .
Z.-G. Wu, J.-T. Li, Y.-J. Zhong, X.-D. Guo, L. Huang, B.-H. Zhong, D.-A. Agyeman, J.-M. Lim, D.-H. Kim and M.-H. Cho, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 21267–21275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. Zhao, Q. D. Wang, Z. P. Yao, J. L. Wang, B. Sanchez-Lengeling, F. X. Ding, X. G. Qi, Y. X. Lu, X. D. Bai, B. H. Li, H. Li, A. Aspuru-Guzik, X. J. Huang, C. Delmas, M. Wagemaker, L. Q. Chen and Y. S. Hu, Science, 2020, 370, 708–711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Billaud, R. J. Clément, A. R. Armstrong, J. Canales-Vázquez, P. Rozier, C. P. Grey and P. G. Bruce, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 17243–17248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kumakura, Y. Tahara, K. Kubota, K. Chihara and S. Komaba, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 128, 12952–12955 CrossRef .
T.-R. Chen, T. Sheng, Z.-G. Wu, J.-T. Li, E.-H. Wang, C.-J. Wu, H.-T. Li, X.-D. Guo, B.-H. Zhong and L. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 10147–10156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xiao, P. F. Wang, Y. X. Yin, Y. F. Zhu, X. Yang, X. D. Zhang, Y. Wang, X. D. Guo, B. H. Zhong and Y. G. Guo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800492 CrossRef .
Y. Zhu, Y. Xu, Y. Liu, C. Luo and C. Wang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 780–787 RSC .
H. Xu, S. Guo and H. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 23662–23678 RSC .
M. Otoyama, Q. Jacquet, A. Iadecola, M. Saubanère, G. Rousse and J. M. Tarascon, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803674 CrossRef .
Y. Qiao, S. Guo, K. Zhu, P. Liu, X. Li, K. Jiang, C.-J. Sun, M. Chen and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 299–305 RSC .
W. Zuo, J. Qiu, X. Liu, F. Ren, H. Liu, H. He, C. Luo, J. Li, G. F. Ortiz, H. Duan, J. Liu, M. S. Wang, Y. Li, R. Fu and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Y. Qiao, S. Guo, K. Jiang, S. Xu, H. Xu, P. Wang, P. He and H. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1807770 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Mortemard de Boisse, M. Reynaud, J. Ma, J. Kikkawa, S. I. Nishimura, M. Casas-Cabanas, C. Delmas, M. Okubo and A. Yamada, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2185 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Du, J. Zhu, G. Hu, H. Gao, Y. Li and J. B. Goodenough, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2575–2577 RSC .
D. Kim, M. Cho and K. Cho, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701788 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Song, E. Hu, J. Liu, Y. Zhang, X.-Q. Yang, J. Nanda, A. Huq and K. Page, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 1491–1498 RSC .
A. Konarov, H. J. Kim, J. H. Jo, N. Voronina, Y. Lee, Z. Bakenov, J. Kim and S. T. Myung, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001111 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zheng, Q. Liu, Z. Wang, Z. Wu, S. Gu, L. Cao, K. Zhang, J. Fransaer and Z. Lu, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 28, 300–306 CrossRef .
B. Mortemard de Boisse, S.-i. Nishimura, E. Watanabe, L. Lander, A. Tsuchimoto, J. Kikkawa, E. Kobayashi, D. Asakura, M. Okubo and A. Yamada, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800409 CrossRef .
L. Yang, Z. Liu, S. Liu, M. Han, Q. Zhang, L. Gu, Q. Li, Z. Hu, X. Wang, H.-J. Lin, C.-T. Chen, J.-M. Chen, S.-C. Haw, Z. Wang and L. Chen, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105172 CrossRef CAS .
S. Guo, P. Liu, H. Yu, Y. Zhu, M. Chen, M. Ishida and H. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 5894–5899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, K. Jiang, S. Chu, J. Wu, H. Xu, X. Zhang, P. Wang, S. Guo and H. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 23820–23826 RSC .
Y. Xiao, Y. F. Zhu, W. Xiang, Z. G. Wu, Y. C. Li, J. Lai, S. Li, E. Wang, Z. G. Yang, C. L. Xu, B. H. Zhong and X. D. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 1491–1495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chu, C. Zhang, H. Xu, S. Guo, P. Wang and H. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 13366–113371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kaliyappan, J. Liu, B. Xiao, A. Lushington, R. Li, T.-K. Sham and X. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701870 CrossRef .
K. Kubota and S. Komaba, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A2538–A2550 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zheng, L. Li, R. Shunmugasundaram and M. N. Obrovac, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 38246–38254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hou, C. E. Banks, M. Jing, Y. Zhang and X. Ji, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7861–7866 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Xiao, T. Rojo and X. Li, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 133–144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Wang, C. Chu, X. Xu, Y. Du, J. Yang, Z. Bai and S. Dou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801888 CrossRef .
Y. Sun, L. Zhao, H. Pan, X. Lu, L. Gu, Y. S. Hu, H. Li, M. Armand, Y. Ikuhara, L. Chen and X. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1870 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Martinez De Ilarduya, L. Otaegui, J. M. López del Amo, M. Armand and G. Singh, J. Power Sources, 2017, 337, 197–203 CrossRef CAS .
H. He, D. Sun, Y. Tang, H. Wang and M. Shao, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 23, 233–251 CrossRef .
H. Wang, Y. Xiao, C. Sun, C. Lai and X. Ai, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 106519–106522 RSC .
B. Zhang, R. Dugas, G. Rousse, P. Rozier, A. M. Abakumov and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Li, U. Gulzar, X. Bai, S. Monaco, G. Longoni, M. Prato, S. Marras, Z. Dang, C. Capiglia and R. Proietti Zaccaria, J. Power Sources, 2018, 384, 18–26 CrossRef CAS .
F. A. Soto, A. Marzouk, F. El-Mellouhi and P. B. Balbuena, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 3315–3322 CrossRef CAS .
P. Shi, S. Zhang, G. Lu, L. Wang, Y. Jiang, F. Liu, Y. Yao, H. Yang, M. Ma, S. Ye, X. Tao, Y. Feng, X. Wu, X. Rui and Y. Yu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 11, 2003381 CrossRef .
D. Bin, F. Wang, A. G. Tamirat, L. Suo, Y. Wang, C. Wang and Y. Xia, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703008 CrossRef .
H. Gao and J. B. Goodenough, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 12768–12772 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. G. Eshetu, G. A. Elia, M. Armand, M. Forsyth, S. Komaba, T. Rojo and S. Passerini, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000093 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ponrouch, R. Dedryvère, D. Monti, A. E. Demet, J. M. Ateba Mba, L. Croguennec, C. Masquelier, P. Johansson and M. R. Palacín, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2361 RSC .
H. Che, S. Chen, Y. Xie, H. Wang, K. Amine, X.-Z. Liao and Z.-F. Ma, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1075–1101 RSC .
H. Yin, C. Han, Q. Liu, F. Wu, F. Zhang and Y. Tang, Small, 2021, 17, e2006627 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhao, L. Liu, X. Qi, Y. Lu, F. Wu, J. Zhao, Y. Yu, Y.-S. Hu and L. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703012 CrossRef .
Y. Lu, L. Li, Q. Zhang, Z. Niu and J. Chen, Joule, 2018, 2, 1747–1770 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Shiyong Chu
	Shiyong Chu got his PhD degree from the College of Chemical Engineering in Nanjing Tech University in 2019. He is now a postdoctoral researcher in the College of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Nanjing University, under the supervision of Prof. Haoshen Zhou and Prof. Shaohua Guo. His research interests focus on lithium-ion batteries, sodium-ion batteries, and related energy-storage materials.

Shaohua Guo
	Shaohua Guo received his PhD from the University of Tsukuba in 2015, after which he worked as a postdoctoral researcher at the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST). He is currently a Professor at the College of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Nanjing University, and a researcher in Shenzhen Research Institute of Nanjing University. His research interest involves energy materials and chemistries for lithium-ion batteries, sodium-ion batteries, and solid-state batteries.

Haoshen Zhou
	Haoshen Zhou obtained his BS degree from Nanjing University in 1985, and received his PhD from the University of Tokyo in 1994. He is a professor in the College of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Nanjing University. His research interests include the synthesis of energy active materials and their applications in Li-ion batteries, Na-ion batteries, Li-redox flow batteries, metal–air batteries, and new type batteries/cells.

 	Fig. 1  (a) The number of published papers on LIBs and SIBs from 2010 to 2020, based on the Web of Science Core Collection, search strategies: TOPIC = (“lithium batter*” OR “lithium ion batter*” OR “Li-ion batter*” OR “lithium-ion batter*”) NOT TOPIC = (“sodium batter*” OR “sodium ion batter*” OR “Na-ion batter*” OR “sodium-ion batter*”) for LIBs and TOPIC = (“sodium batter*” OR “sodium ion batter*” OR “Na-ion batter*” OR “sodium-ion batter*”) for SIBs. (b) The contents of the two alkali metal elements (Li and Na) and the two current collector metal elements (Cu and Al) in the earth's crust. (c) Cost comparison of LIBs and NIBs at the manufacturing level in 2018. These data are based on ref. 12.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) The price and abundance of several electrochemically active transition metal elements (Fe, Mn, V, Cr, Ni, and Co) in the earth's crust. The price data were collected from http://www.metal.com. The abundance data were collected from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Elemental_abundances.svg. (b) The number of published papers on cobalt-free cathodes and cobalt-containing cathodes of SIBs from 2010 to 2020, based on the Web of Science Core Collection, search strategies: TOPIC = (“sodium batter*” OR “sodium ion batter*” OR “Na-ion batter*” OR “sodium-ion batter*”) AND TOPIC = (“cathode*” OR “cathode material*” OR “positive electrode*”) for all cathodes and TOPIC = (“sodium batter*” OR “sodium ion batter*” OR “Na-ion batter*” OR “sodium-ion batter*”) AND TOPIC = (“cathode*” OR “cathode material*” OR “positive electrode*”) AND TOPIC = (“cobalt*” OR “Co”) NOT TOPIC = (“co-dop*” OR “co-introduc*” OR “co-substitut*” OR “co-precipitat*”) for cobalt-containing cathodes. (c) A schematic of constructing cobalt-free cathodes for SIBs by making full use of compound structures and transition metal elements.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Phase diagram of NaxCoO2 with different sodium contents and calcination temperatures. Reproduced with permission.43 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (b) Phase structure evolution of P2-type NaxCoO2 in the discharge process monitored by in situ XRD. The diffraction peak indicated by asterisk is the signal of the beryllium window. The shifting of the diffraction peak to a higher 2θ position and peak splitting indicate a decreasing internal crystal plane distance and the appearance of a new phase, respectively. Discharge curves of P2-type NaxCoO2 in the GITT mode (right line). The inset figures indicate that XRD measurements were conducted on the equilibrium potential to obtain a real phase structure. Reproduced with permission.44 Copyright 2011, Nature Publishing Group. Galvanostatic charging–discharging curves of (c) Co-introduced P2-type Na0.67Mn0.65Ni0.2Co0.15O2 and (d) Mg-introduced P2-type Na0.67Mn0.65Ni0.2Mg0.15O2 from the 1st cycle to the 100th cycle in the potential window of 2.0–4.3 V. Reproduced with permission.50 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Ltd. (e) XRD patterns of P2-type Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 exposed to humid air for ten days. (f) XRD patterns of fresh Co-introduced P2-type Na2/3Co1/6Ni1/6Mn2/3O2 and P2-type Na2/3Co1/6Ni1/6Mn2/3O2 exposed to humid air for ten days. Reproduced with permission.51 Copyright 2001, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Crystal structure diagram of (a) O3 phase and (d) P2 phase layered oxides. Sodium ion diffusion paths and energy profiles based on DFT calculations. (b) Dumbbell and (c) tetrahedron paths of sodium ion diffusion in the O3 phase. (e) Na(1) to Na(2) and Na(2) to Na(1) paths for sodium ion diffusion in the P2 phase. (f) Energy profiles of the four kinds of sodium ion diffusion paths in O3 and P2. A, B, and C represent the oxygen layer stacking sequence. The red, dark green, and light green balls represent oxygen, Na(1), and Na(2), respectively. The dark green prism, light green prism, light green octahedron, and blue octahedron represent Na(1)O6 (P2), Na(2)O6 (P2), NaO6 (O3), and TMO6, respectively. O3- and P2-type Na2/3Fe2/3Mn1/3O2 with the same stoichiometry were first synthesized, and the stronger diffusion ability of sodium ions in P2 phase than in O3 phase is mainly related to the crystal structure types. Reproduced with permission.64 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 5  Crystal structure diagram of tunnel Na0.44MnO2. The red and grey balls represent oxygen and sodium, respectively. The purple octahedron and tetragonal pyramid represent MnO6 and MnO5, respectively. Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2007, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Crystal structure diagrams of (a) perfect PBA Na2M[Fe(CN)6] without structural defects and (b) imperfect PBA NaaM[Fe(CN)6]1−b·cH2O with structural defects. The red, blue, dark blue, grey, dark green, orange, and light grey balls represent sodium, transition metal M, iron, carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, and hydrogen, respectively. Reproduced with permission.86 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. Micromorphology of (c) highly crystalline PBAs with less structural defects and (d) low crystalline PBAs with more structural defects. Sodium ion diffusion coefficients of highly crystalline PBA electrodes (red points) and low crystalline PBA electrodes (black points) in the (e) charge procedure and (f) discharge procedure based on GITT. Reproduced with permission.92 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Crystal structure diagram of olivine NaFePO4. The red balls, yellow balls, green octahedra and blue tetrahedra represent oxygen, sodium, FeO6, and PO4, respectively. Reproduced with permission.103 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (b) Crystal structure diagram of triphylite Na2FePO4F. The yellow ball, brown octahedron and light pink tetrahedron represent sodium, FeO4F2, and PO4, respectively. Reproduced with permission.104 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (c) Crystal structure diagram of NASICON. Reproduced with permission.101 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. Schematic diagram of sodium ion diffusion and electron transfer in (d) bulk particles, (e) carbon-coated bulk particles and (f) carbon-coated nanoparticles. Reproduced with permission.40 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic diagram of the electronic structure of Mn3+ with compressed and elongated Jahn–Teller distortions. Reproduced with permission.112 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) dQ/dV and (c) charge–discharge curves of Na2/3Mn1−yMgyO2 (y = 0, 0.05 and 0.1). The introduction of bivalent Mg2+ into P2-type NaxMn1−yMyO2 not only alleviated the unfavourable Jahn–Teller effect, but also effectively disrupted the Na+/hole order in the charge–discharge process, thus smoothing the charge and discharge curves. Reproduced with permission.115 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic diagram of O2-type Na0[Mg0.28Mn0.72]O2 and the corresponding lattice-oxygen coordination environment. The electron-deficient oxygens are coordinated octahedrally on one side with one Mg and two Mn of the transition metal layers and on the other side with three Na vacancies, without leading to lattice-oxygen losing. (b) Schematic diagram of energy vs. density of states in O2-type Na0[Mg0.28Mn0.72]O2. (c) Schematic diagram of O3-type Li0[LixNi0.13Co0.13Mn0.54]O2 and the corresponding coordination around oxygen. The electron-deficient oxygens are only coordinated by two cations on one side, and some non-bonded O-2p orbitals are formed, resulting in lattice-oxygen losing. Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) In situ XRD patterns of the P_1-type Na2.3Cu1.1Mn2O7−δ electrode in a voltage window of 2.1–4.05 V. (b) Galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of the initial three cycles of P_1-type Na2.3Cu1.1Mn2O7−δ. (c) Cycle stability and the corresponding Coulombic efficiency of P_1 type Na2.3Cu1.1Mn2O7−δ electrode at a current density of 20C. Reproduced with permission.119 Copyright 2018, Elsevier Ltd. (d) Schematic diagram of sodium birnessite NaMnO2−y−δ(OH)2y with an eight-coordinated Mn(OH)8 hexahedron and a six-coordinated MnO6 octahedron. (e) Cycle stability of NaMnO2−y−δ(OH)2y electrodes at a current density of 10C. Reproduced with permission.126 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (f) EELS-mapping of Ti in NaMn0.8Ti0.1Ni0.1O2. (g) STEM images of NaMn0.8Ti0.1Ni0.1O2 and the corresponding enlarged views of (h) the blue rectangle with a layered structure and (i) the red rectangle with a spinel-like structure. Reproduced with permission.72 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) PITT curve (blue line) and the corresponding dQ curve (red line) of Na0.44MnO2. Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2007, American Chemical Society. (b) Theoretical and calculated voltage curves. (c) Changes in lattice parameters a, b and c during sodium insertion. Reproduced with permission.129 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Typical SEM (left) and TEM (right) images of Na0.44MnO2 nanofibres. (b) The corresponding cycle stability of Na0.44MnO2 electrodes at a current density of 0.5C. Na0.44MnO2 samples prefer to crystalize into a nanofibre morphology along the c axis. Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH. (c) SEM (left) and HR-TEM (right) images of Na0.44MnO2 nanorods. (d) Corresponding cycle stability of Na0.44MnO2 electrodes at a current density of 8.3C. Modifying a long fibre morphology to a short rod morphology along the c axis can reduce the diffusion distances of sodium-ions, leading to enhanced electrothermal performance. Reproduced with permission.77 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Coexistence of P2 and tunnel (T) phases, and their interfaces. The yellow square, pink square, and red square represent the P2 phase, the interface, and the T phase, respectively. The amplified figures of the yellow square, pink square, and red square are shown in a1, a2, and a3. (b) Schematic diagram of the interface connecting the P2 and T phases. (c) Sodium ion diffusion coefficient (d) of the pure P2 phase, pure T phase, and P2/T phase based on cyclic voltammetry and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy analyses. Reproduced with permission.141 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) The specific capacities of the layered-tunnel intergrowth Na0.6MnO2 composite, layered Na0.7MnO2, and tunnel Na0.44MnO2 at different current densities. (e) Cycle stability of the layered-tunnel intergrowth Na0.6MnO2 composite. Reproduced with permission.145 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

Na0.6MnO2	193.6@1.0C	700@10C	72%	
144

Na0.6MnO2	198.2@0.2C	100@1C	85.1%	
145

Na0.44MnO2/Na2Mn3O7	278@20 mA g−1	100@200 mA g−1	88%	
153

NaAl0.1Mn0.9O2	145@0.1C	100@0.1C	71%	
146

Na0.6Mn0.9Cu0.1O2	173@0.1C	250@4C	70.4%	
147

Na0.6Mn0.95Ni0.05O2	171@0.1C	67@1C	60%@55 °C	
148

Na0.6Mn0.98Zr0.02O2	165@0.2C	1000@2A g−1	75%	
80

Na0.6Mn0.99Mg0.01O2	∼195@0.2C	500@1000 mA g−1	76.6%	
149

Na0.6Mn0.9Ti0.1O2	∼100@1C	500@5C	87.9%	
150

Na0.7Bi0.01MnO2	86.2@0.5C	300@2C	∼86.5%	
151

Na0.44MnO1.93F0.07	149@0.5C	400@5C	79%	
152


 	Fig. 14  (a) PDF curves of chemically oxidized Na0.1Fe0.2Mn0.65Ni0.15O2 and Na0.14Fe0.5Mn0.5O2. Yellow shading and lavender shading show the evolution of the MO6/MO4 ratio and the contraction of the bilayer thickness. (b) Schematic diagram of the above two structures and the corresponding Fe-migration contents in the sodium layers (tetrahedral MO4). In the desodiation states, Fe prefers to migrate into the sodium layers from the TM layers in layered NaxFe0.5Mn0.5O2, while this unfavourable migration can be suppressed by Ni doping. Reproduced with permission.156 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. STEM images of (c) NaFeO2 and (d) ruthenium-doped NaFeO2 charged to 4 V. Geometric phase analysis of (e) NaFeO2 and (f) ruthenium-doped NaFeO2 charged to 4 V. Particle cracks in (g) NaFeO2 and (h) ruthenium-doped NaFeO2. Serious Fe-migration leads to unfavourable particle cracks in Fe-based layer cathodes. Reproduced with permission.157 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of PBA/CNT composites. (c) Schematic diagram of sodium ion and electron transport in PBA/CNT electrodes. (d) Charge–discharge curves and (e) cycle performances of PBA/CNT electrodes at temperatures of −25, 0 and 25 °C. Compounding PBAs with carbon-based conductive networks is an effective strategy to boost the electrochemical performance. Reproduced with permission.97 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH.	 

KFe2(CN)6-nH2O	2.0–4.0	∼100@1/20C	30@1/20C	∼100	
91

FeFe(CN)6-nH2O	2.0–4.0	120@0.5C	500@20C	87	
158

Na0.81Fe[Fe(CN)6]0.79/rGO	2.0–4.0	163@30 mA g−1	500@800 mA g−1	92	
159

Na1.81Fe[Fe(CN)6]0.83-2.04H2O	2.0–4.1	140@0.2C	3700@5C	78	
160

Na0.83Fe1.97(CN)6-nH2O	2.0–4.1	∼147@25 mA g−1	200@25 mA g−1	∼100	

Na1.03Fe1.95(CN)6-nH2O	2.0–4.1	∼155@25 mA g−1	200@25 mA g−1	∼100	
166

Na1.24Fe1.94(CN)6-nH2O	2.0–4.1	135@25 mA g−1	200@25 mA g−1	∼100	

Na1.63Fe1.89(CN)6-nH2O	2.0–4.1	150@25 mA g−1	200@25 mA g−1	90	

Na1.56Fe[Fe(CN)6]-3.1H2O	2.0–4.1	∼100@20 mA g−1	400@20 mA g−1	97	
167

Na1.92Fe[Fe(CN)6]-nH2O	2.0–4.2	∼160@10 mA g−1	750@0.5C	80	
168

Na1.19Fe[Fe(CN)6]0.9-H2O	2.0–4.0	99@100 mA g−1	500@100 mA g−1	79	
169

Na0.647Fe[Fe(CN)6]0.93-2.6H2O/C	2.0–4.0	112@1C	2000@20C	90	
96

NaxFe2(CN)6-nH2O/CNT	2.0–4.2	167@0.1C	1000@2.4C	∼77	
97

NaxFe[Fe(CN)6]-nH2O/PPy	2.0–4.2	113@25 mA g−1	500@200 mA g−1	79	
163

K3Fe(CN)6-nH2O/CNT	2.0–3.8	81@0.1C	500@1C	83	
170

Fe4[Fe(CN)6]3-nH2O	2.0–4.2	115@50 mA g−1	150@50 mA g−1	96	
161

Na1.58Fe[Fe(CN)6]0.92-nH2O	2.0–4.2	142@0.1C	800@2C	90	
162


 	Fig. 16  (a) TEM images of charged maricite NaxFePO4. (b) Charge–discharge curves of maricite NFP at different current densities (C/20–2C) and cycles (1–200). (c) Schematic diagram of the electrochemical activation process of maricite NFP. Inactive maricite NFP was proven to show excellent sodium-ion storage activity in nano-scale particles. Reproduced with permission.173 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) TEM image and (e) particle size distribution of maricite NFP nanoparticles embedded in carbon nanofibres. (f) Long cycle performance of the electrode of maricite NFP nanoparticles embedded in carbon nanofibres. Morphology engineering is an effective improvement strategy for maricite NFP with typical polyanionic structures. Reproduced with permission.175 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a–c) The structural evolutions of NFPF electrodes through ex situ solid-state NMR. Normalized 23Na MAS NMR spectra of NFPF at different (a) charging states and (b) discharging states of the first cycle at 60 and 55 kHz. (c) Changes of sodium content at different sites during the initial charge and discharge processes. Reproduced with permission.177 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (d) TEM image and (e) particle size distribution of NFPF nanoparticles embedded in carbon nanofibres. (f) Long-term cycling performance of NFPF nanoparticles embedded in carbon nanofibres. Reproduced with permission.181 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 


o-NFP	2.2–4.3	125@0.05C	50@0.05C	∼90	
171


o-NFP/C	2.0–3.8	111@0.1C	240@0.1C	90	
182


o-NFP/PTh	2.2–4.0	142@10 mA g−1	100@10 mA g−1	94	
183


o-NFP/C	2.0–4.0	140@0.1C	500@0.5C	86	
106

500@1C	90
500@2C	89
6000@10C	70

m-NFP/C	1.5–4.5	142@C/20	200@C/20	95	
173


m-NFP/C@graphene	1.5–4.3	145@0.1C	300@0.1C	98	
184


m-NFP/C	1.5–4.5	115@1C	800@1C	91	
185


m-NFP/C	1.5–4.5	142@0.1C	5000@10C	∼100	
174


m-NFP@C	1.5–4.5	145@0.2C	6300@5C	89	
175

NFPF/C	2.0–3.8	80@0.1C	750@1C	80	
186

NFPF/C	2.0–4.0	117@0.1C	1000@4C	85	
108

NFPF/C	2.0–4.0	110@C/10	5000@10C	70	
180

NFPF/PEDOT	2.0–4.2	123@C/5	700@1C	70	
187

NFPF/C	2.0–4.0	114@0.1C	600@5C	55	
188

NFPF@C	2.0–4.0	118@0.1C	2000@5C	85	
181


 	Fig. 18  (a) In situ high-energy XRD patterns of NaNiO2. (b) Galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of NaNiO2 in 2.0–4.5 V. (c) XANES profiles of pristine NaNiO2, NaxNiO2 charged to 3.2 V, and fully charged Na0.19NiO2. (d) Operando synchrotron-based transmission X-ray microscopy image of the first charge–discharge process. Reproduced with permission.190 Copyright 2017, Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) The ordered arrangement of sodium ions in pristine P2-type Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 (left), Na1/2Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 (middle), and Na1/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 (right). The blue and pink balls represent the sodium ions at the Nae and Naf sites, respectively. Reproduced with permission.47 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of P2 type Na2/3Mn2/3Ni1/3−xMgxO2 (x = 0, 0.02, 0.05, 0.10, and 0.15) in the voltage window of 2.5–4.35 V. (c) Ex situ XRD patterns of P2 type Na2/3Mn2/3Ni1/3−xMgxO2 (x = 0.05) at different charge–discharge states. The unfavourable phase transformation of P2–O2 in P2-type Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 can be suppressed by Mg introduction. Reproduced with permission.197 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. In situ XRD patterns and galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of (d) P2 type Na0.67Ni0.3Mn0.7O2 and (e) P2 type Na0.67Ni0.1Cu0.2Mn0.7O2 in the voltage window of 2.0–4.5 V. Cu introduction shows the same function as Mg introduction in suppressing the unfavourable phase transformation of P2–O2 in P2-type Na0.67Ni0.3Mn0.7O2. Reproduced with permission.198 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Crystal structures of P2 type Na0.7Mn0.6Ni0.4O2 (MN), Na0.7Mn0.6Ni0.3Mg0.1O2 (MNM-1) and Na0.7Mn0.6Ni0.2Mg0.2O2 (MNM-2). Mg in P2-type Na0.7Mn0.6Ni0.4O2 can serve as a pillar to stabilize the layered structure. Reproduced with permission.199 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 20  HR-TEM images of (a) pristine P2 type Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 particles, (b) cycled Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 particles with remarkable cracks and (c) an enlarged view of the crack area. Reproduced with permission.201 Copyright 2016, Elsevier Ltd. (d) HR-TEM image of the cycled Al2O3-coated Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 particle. Surface cracks can be suppressed by surface coating in Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 particles during charging and discharging. (e–l) STEM images of cross sections of pristine and cycled Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 particles in different voltage windows. (e) Pristine sample without intergranular cracks. Trace intergranular cracks appeared over 50 cycles in the working windows of (f) 2.0–3.8 and (g) 2.0–4.1 V. High density of intergranular cracks appeared over 50 cycles in the working windows of (h) 2.0–4.25 and (i) 2.0–4.5 V. (j) Enlarged view of the selected area of figure (g). (k) Enlarged view of the selected area of figure (h). (l) Enlarged view of a single intergranular crack. Reproduced with permission.202 Copyright 2018, Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 21  Cross-sectional STEM images of (a) Na0.67Mn0.67Ni0.33O2 with intensive cracks, (b) Na0.67Mn0.67Ni0.28Mg0.05O2 with few cracks, and (c) Na0.67Mn0.67Ni0.23Mg0.1O2 with almost no crack after 50 cycles in the working voltage window of 2.0–4.5 V. (d) Pristine Na0.67Mn0.67Ni0.23Mg0.1O2 sample with uniform contrast. (e) The sample after 10 cycles appeared low density of bright stripes (yellow arrows). (f) The sample after 50 cycles exhibited high density of bright stripes (yellow arrows). (g) STEM image and EDS mapping of Na0.67Mn0.67Ni0.23Mg0.1O2 after 50 cycles. The bright stripes are Mg-rich and Na-poor regions, and Ni, Mn, and O show no obvious composition fluctuation. Reproduced with permission.203 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) In situ XRD patterns of the O3-type Ni/Ti-based cathode in the first charge–discharge process. The unfavourable P3–O3 phase transformation was suppressed after the first charging process. (b) STEM images and (c) the corresponding line profiles of pristine (bottom), fully charged (middle), and fully discharged (top) electrodes. (d) Schematic diagram of crystal structural evolution during charging–discharging. The blue balls represent the mixed Ni atoms in the sodium layers. A few transition metals migrated into the sodium layers in the initial charging process, and the migrated transition metals were trapped in the sodium layers during the subsequent discharge process, resulting in an enhanced layer structure. Reproduced with permission.207 Copyright 2018, Elsevier Ltd.	 

Na2NiO2	1.15–3.8	∼180@C/20	30@C/20	39	
189

2.0–3.6	∼90@C/20	30@C/20	78
1.5–2.3	∼10@C/20	
	

NaNiO2	1.25–3.75	123@C/10	30@C/10	78	
211

2.0–4.5	147@C/10	30@C/10	68
NaNiO2	2.0–4.0	∼114@C/10	25@C/10	88	
212

Na2Ni2TeO6	3.0–4.5	∼110@0.03C	10@0.03C	89	
191

3.0–4.35	∼93@0.03C	20@0.03C	95
Na3Ni2BiO6	2.0–4.0	106@0.05C	50@0.05C	91	
192

Na3Ni2BiO6	2.0–4.0	95@0.1C	100@1C	74	
213

Na3Ni2SbO6	2.0–4.0	120@0.1C	100@0.1C	66	
214

NaNi2/3Sb1/3O2	2.0–4.0	120@0.05C	50@0.05C	82	
215

NaFe0.5Ni0.5O2	2.0–3.8	112@30 mA g−1	30@30 mA g−1	55	
216

NaFe0.3Ni0.7O2	2.0–3.8	135@30 mA g−1	30@30 mA g−1	74	
216

NaNi0.5Fe0.5O2	2.0–3.9	129@C/10	20@C/10	94	
217

2.0–4.2	∼150@C/10	20@C/10	67
NaNi0.5Mn0.5O2	2.2–3.8	125@C/30	50@C/5	75	
218

Na0.62Mn0.75Ni0.25O2	2.0–4.05	88@15 mA g−1	50@15 mA g−1	89	
219

2.0–4.3	160@15 mA g−1	79
1.5–4.05	152@15 mA g−1	73
1.5–4.3	185@15 mA g−1	84
Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2	2.0–4.0	84@0.05C	2000@1C	80	
194

2.0–4.3	123@0.05C	100@0.5C	60
Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2	2.0–4.0	93@0.1C	1200@10C	71	
195

2.0–4.5	∼175@0.1C	10@0.1C	72
NaTi0.5Ni0.5O2	2.0–4.0	102@0.2C	300@1C	75	
204

NaNi0.5Mn0.2Ti0.3O2	2.0–4.0	135@0.05C	300@1C	85	
208

Na0.67Ni0.3Mn0.7O2	2.0–4.5	151@0.1C	200@1C	28	
198

Na0.67Ni0.2Cu0.1Mn0.7O2	2.0–4.5	125@0.1C	200@1C	76	

Na0.67Ni0.1Cu0.2Mn0.7O2	2.0–4.5	115@0.1C	200@1C	67	

Na0.67Mn0.67Ni0.33O2	2.5–4.35	143@0.1C	50@0.1C	50	
197

Na0.67Mn0.67Ni0.23Mg0.1O2	2.5–4.35	∼108@0.1C	100@0.1C	92	


 	Fig. 23  STEM ABF images of (a) Na3V2(PO4)3 and (b) NaV2(PO4)3. The blue and yellow circles represent sodium atoms at the Na1 and Na2 sites, respectively, and the blue arrow represents the sodium atoms at the Na2 site. Line profiles along in the ABF images of (c) Na3V2(PO4)3 and (d) NaV2(PO4)3, where the image contrast of the dark dot is inverted and displayed as peaks. In the full charging state, Na1 were maintained in the lattice, while Na2 were fully extracted. Reproduced with permission.223 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. (e) In situ XRD patterns of Na3V2(PO4)3, where ♦ Na3V2(PO4)3, ♣ NaV2(PO4)3. Na3V2(PO4)3 undergoes a highly reversible phase transformation. Reproduced with permission.224 Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) TEM image of NFP wrapped by a hierarchical carbon framework. (b) Rate performance and (c) long-term cycle stability of the hierarchical carbon framework wrapped NFP composite electrodes at 30C. Reproduced with permission.228 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (d) Charge–discharge curves of NVP and NVPF at 12.7 mA g−1. Reproduced with permission.234 Copyright 2014, Elsevier Ltd. (e) TGA/DTA curves of chemically desodiated NaV2(PO4)2F3. NVPF is a thermally stable cathode material. Reproduced with permission.235 Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

Porous NVP/C	2.3–3.9	116@0.1C	30000@40C	50%	
241

NVP/C core–shell nanocomposite	2.5–3.8	104@0.5C	700@5C	96%	
242

Carbon-coated nano-sized NVP	2.3–3.9	104@1C	1000@10C	81%	
243

@50C	80%
@100C	69%
NVP/carbon nano-spheres	2.3–3.9	117@0.5C	200@5C	96%	
225

NVP/3D carbon foam	2.5–3.8	112@1C	1000@100C	100%	
244

3D NVP/C/rGO	2.5–3.8	115@1C	10000@100C	64%	
227

Carbon coated NVP/CNTs	2.0–3.9	115@0.2C	20000@30C	54%	
228

NVP/C-hollow carbon spheres	2.3–3.9	100@20 mA g−1	300@20 mA g−1	90%	
245

NVP/C/CMK-3	2.3–3.9	115@0.5C	1000@1C	87%	
226

2000@5C	68%
1000@10C	85%
1000@20C	67%
Layered NVP/rGO	2.5–4.0	115@0.5C	500@5C	92%	
246

7000@20C	78%
15000@50C	70%
NVP/3D carbon	2.5–4.0	113@1C	8000@2C	87%	
247

NVP/rGO/CNT	2.3–3.9	117@0.5C	2000@10C	96%	
248

NVP/3D carbon	2.3–3.9	99@0.5C	800@1C	98%	
249

2000@10C	91%
NVP/C/carbon cloth	2.3–3.9	117@1C	5000@20C	81%	
250

5000@10C	83%
B-doped NVP	2.5–4.0	105@1C	200@5C	99%	
232

NVPF/graphene	2.3–4.3	114@0.5C	1000@10C	75%	
109

NVPF/N-doping carbon	3.0–4.6	112@0.5C	800@10C	96%	
238

NVPF/graphene	2.0–4.3	119@0.5C	2000@20C	98%	
251

NVPF/C/CNT	2.0–4.3	113@1C	300@1C	98%	
252


 	Fig. 25  Charge–discharge curves of the (a) LiCrO2 electrode with lithium metal as the counter electrode at 3.0–4.5 V and (b) NaCrO2 electrode with sodium metal as the counter electrode at 2.0–3.6 V. The inset images are the crystal structures of LiCrO2 and NaCrO2, and the length of the O–O bond in the CrO6 octahedron and the height of the interstitial tetrahedron are also shown. LixCrO2 is electrochemically inactive in LIBs, while NaxCrO2 shows an excellent electrochemical performance in SIBs. Reproduced with permission.254 Copyright 2010, Elsevier Ltd. (c) Charge–discharge curves of NaxCrO2 in a wide voltage window of 2.5–4.5 V. Reproduced with permission.257 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (d) Charge–discharge curves of carbon coated NaCrO2 at 2.0–3.6 V. The inset image is the SEM image of the carbon coating layer on the surface of NaCrO2. (e) Rate performance and (f) cycle stability of carbon-coated NaCrO2. Reproduced with permission.259 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 26  STEM images of (a) NaxCrO2 and (b) ruthenium-doped NaxCrO2 samples charged to 3.8 V. (c) Cycle performance of ruthenium-doped NaxCrO2 in the voltage window of 1.5–3.8 V. NaxCrO2 suffers from an unfavourable Cr-migration under a high working voltage, while this migration can be prevented by lattice doping. Reproduced with permission.264 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Ltd. (d) The phase evolution of Na0.5CrO2 in a wide temperature window of 27–500 °C, based on HT-SXRD. NaxCrO2 can work as thermally stable cathodes for SIBs without oxygen gas release at a high temperature. Reproduced with permission.266 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 27  Summary of intrinsic challenges and developed strategies for advanced cobalt-free cathode materials in SIBs.	 

 	Fig. 28  Summary of typical Mn- (layer Na2.3Cu1.1Mn2O7−δ,119 Na0.55[Ni0.1Fe0.1Mn0.8]O2,267 NaMn0.8Ti0.1Ni0.1O272 and NaMnO2−y−δ(OH)2y;126 layer-tunnel Na0.6Mn0.98Zr0.02O280 and Na0.6MnO2;268 tunnel Na0.44MnO277), Fe-(Prussian blue analogues Na1.81Fe[Fe(CN)6]0.83-2.04H2O,160 Na0.647Fe[Fe(CN)6]0.93-2.6H2O/C96 and NaxFe2(CN)6-nH2O/CNT;97 polyanionic compounds NFP/C@C cloth,174 NFP@C nanofibre175 and NFPF@C nanofibre181), Ni- (layer Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2194 and NaNi0.5Mn0.2Ti0.3O2208), Cr- (layer nano-sized NaCrO2258 and C-NaCrO2259) and V- (polyanionic compounds porous NVP/C,241 3D NVP/C/rGO,227 carbon coated NVP/CNTs228 and layered NVP/rGO246) based cathode materials with excellent electrochemical stability.	 

 	Fig. 29  Perspectives of the potential directions of cobalt-free cathode materials for advanced SIBs.	 

 	Fig. 30  Summary of the specific capacities and middle working voltages of typical Mn- (layer NaMnO2270 & Na2/3MnO2,271 tunnel Na0.44MnO2,79 and layer-tunnel Na0.6Mn0.9Cu0.1O2272 & Na0.6MnO2273), Fe- (layer Na2/3Fe1/2Mn1/2O2,155 polyanionic compounds NaFePO4274 & Na2FePO4F,178 and Prussian blue analogues NaxFeFe(CN)697 & Na1.92Fe[Fe(CN)6]168), Ni- (layer Na2/3Mn2/3Ni1/3O247 & Na0.67Mn0.67Ni0.28Mg0.05O2197), V- (polyanionic compounds Na3V2(PO4)3224 & Na3V2(PO4)2F3)109 and Cr- (layer NaCrO2259) based cathode materials. The data in brackets represent the working voltage windows of the corresponding materials.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
