Tunable hydrodynamic characteristics in microchannels with biomimetic superhydrophobic (lotus leaf replica) walls   - Soft Matter (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4SM00037D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4SM00037D
(Paper)
Soft Matter, 2014, 10, 3451-3462Tunable hydrodynamic characteristics in microchannels with biomimetic superhydrophobic (lotus leaf replica) walls†

        
          
            Ranabir 
            Dey
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kiran 
            Raj M.
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Nandini 
            Bhandaru
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Rabibrata 
            Mukherjee
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Suman 
            Chakraborty
          
        
      *ab
aDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, Kharagpur 721 302, West Bengal, India. E-mail: suman@mech.iitkgp.ernet.in
bAdvanced Technology Development Centre, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, Kharagpur 721 302, West Bengal, India
cDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, Kharagpur 721 302, West Bengal, India
Received 
      7th January 2014
    , Accepted 17th February 2014First published on 17th February 2014AbstractThe present work comprehensively addresses the hydrodynamic characteristics through microchannels with lotus leaf replica (exhibiting low adhesion and superhydrophobic properties) walls. The lotus leaf replica is fabricated following an efficient, two-step, soft-molding process and is then integrated with rectangular microchannels. The inherent biomimetic, superhydrophobic surface–liquid interfacial hydrodynamics, and the consequential bulk flow characteristics, are critically analyzed by the micro-particle image velocimetry technique. It is observed that the lotus leaf replica mediated microscale hydrodynamics comprise of two distinct flow regimes even within the low Reynolds number paradigm, unlike the commonly perceived solely apparent slip-stick dominated flows over superhydrophobic surfaces. While the first flow regime is characterized by an apparent slip-stick flow culminating in an enhanced bulk throughput rate, the second flow regime exhibits a complete breakdown of the aforementioned laminar and uni-axial flow model, leading to a predominantly no-slip flow. Interestingly, the critical flow condition dictating the transition between the two hydrodynamic regimes is intrinsically dependent on the micro-confinement effect. In this regard, an energetically consistent theoretical model is also proposed to predict the alterations in the critical flow condition with varying microchannel configurations, by addressing the underlying biomimetic surface–liquid interfacial conditions. Hence, the present research endeavour provides a new design-guiding paradigm for developing multi-functional microfluidic devices involving biomimetic, superhydrophobic surfaces, by judicious exploitation of the tunable hydrodynamic characteristics in the two regimes.
I Introduction
The term ‘biomimetics’, as coined by Otto Schmitt in 1957, refers to the technological field pertaining to the development of functional surfaces and devices, which mimic the behaviour of biological surfaces, and bio-physical processes, inherent in various plant and animal species.1 The cornerstone of biomimetics is the need for replicating the intricate interplay of the structural, physical and chemical properties, of various natural surfaces to mimic a myriad of naturally observable physical features like superhydrophobicity, controllable or reversible adhesion, drag reduction, structural colours, and aerodynamic properties.2,3 It goes without saying that such biomimetic surfaces, endowed with the aforementioned attributes, are indispensible for a wide range of engineering applications like the development of self-cleaning coatings, development of anti-(bio)fouling surfaces, underwater drag reduction, energy conversion and conservation, transport of liquid microdroplets, development of smart adhesive tapes, development of antifogging coatings and antireflection coatings, and development of optical devices for solar cells, only to name a few.2–6 However, arguably the most multi-functional of all the biomimetic surfaces are the low adhesion, superhydrophobic surfaces, which exhibit extreme water repellence and self-cleaning properties, popularly categorized as the ‘Lotus effect’.2,3 Naturally, lotus (Nelumbo nucifera) leaves achieve such striking superhydrophobicity due to the ubiquitous complex hierarchical micro- and nano-structures, constituting of microscale convex structures (papillae) covered with nanoscale, three-dimensional wax tubules.7,8 Over the years, various techniques were standardized for fabricating artificial surfaces demonstrating the aforementioned ‘Lotus effect’,9–12 but to date, the two-step, soft-molding process, involving the fabrication of negative and subsequent positive replicas of natural lotus leaves, remains the easiest, fast, and by far the most efficient route for closely mimicking the lotus leaf micro-structures.2,13
An important application of biomimetic, superhydrophobic surfaces, exhibiting the ‘Lotus effect’, is the wall drag reduction in fluid flows. The drag reducing capability of such surfaces was unequivocally demonstrated for laminar (Reynolds number (Re) < 300) and turbulent water flows (Re > 4200) through mini-channels (hydraulic diameter ∼ 1.1 mm), by measuring the associated pressure-drops.14 The reduction in the wall friction, and hence the decrease in the pressure drop, stems from the apparent slip due to the composite solid–liquid–air interfacial condition, existing for flows over biomimetic, superhydrophobic surfaces.15 It must be mentioned here that besides the superhydrophobic surfaces mimicking the ‘Lotus effect’, shark skin replicas14,16 and rice leaf and butterfly wing replicas17,18 are also capable of efficient drag reduction in fluid flows. However, all the aforementioned studies, delineating the biomimetic surface mediated hydrodynamic characteristics, were performed for mini-channels (hydraulic diameter of the order of a few millimeters) and did not address the paradigm of microscale flows (hydraulic diameter of the order of a few hundred-to-tens of microns), as characterised by an enhanced surface-to-volume ratio and extremely low Reynolds number (Re ≪ 1). In this regard, the few existing research studies, on superhydrophobic surface mediated microscale flows, used lithographically etched regular arrays of microposts or microridges for the topographic modification of the microchannel surfaces and did not involve biomimetic surfaces per se.15,19,20 The involvement of the photo-lithography process makes the fabrication of such micro-devices complex, sophisticated infrastructure-dependent, costly, and time consuming, and consequently detrimental for efficient and cost-effective engineering applications. Ideally, it might be scientifically enriching and practically stimulating to study microscale fluid flows over biomimetic superhydrophobic substrates fabricated by relatively inexpensive processes. It also needs to be appreciated in this context that the surface characteristics intrinsic to a specific fabrication procedure are likely to influence the hydrodynamic characteristics of the device with a unique signature.
Previously, the microscale flow over an artificial lotus leaf substrate was implemented only once, to demonstrate the efficacy of such flows as an immunosensing chip for C-reactive proteins.21 However, the detailed microscale hydrodynamic characteristics triggered by a biomimetic, superhydrophobic substrate, like the lotus leaf replica, remain largely unaddressed. Moreover, such a study becomes all the more important because the characteristics of microscale flows over biomimetic, superhydrophobic surfaces cannot be predicted a priori by extrapolating the flow behaviour observed for macro-channel flows. This understanding is substantiated by a very recent numerical study, which demonstrated that contrary to the general perception elucidated in the literature, the drag reduction for microscale flows, through channels with microposts (artificial roughness) on the walls, is restricted by a critical micro-confinement configuration, even within the low Reynolds number paradigm.22
From the above discussions, we may reach a consensus that there is an overwhelming need for a critical assessment of the biomimetic, superhydrophobic wall mediated microscale hydrodynamics not only from an engineering perspective, but also from a scientific standpoint for unambiguously comprehending the underlying physics dictating such microflows. To comprehensively address this issue, the present work delineates the hydrodynamic characteristics of water flows through rectangular microchannels with a lotus leaf replica wall. The artificial lotus leaf substrate is fabricated using a polymer (cross-linked polydimethylsiloxane) by a two-step, soft-molding process, from a natural lotus leaf template, and is then mechanically integrated with a polymethylmethacrylate microchannel. The biomimetic surface–liquid interfacial hydrodynamics and the consequential bulk flow characteristics are quantitatively and qualitatively analyzed by using the micro-particle image velocimetry (μ-PIV) technique. The in situ μ-PIV analysis gives an explicit and accurate picture of the role of the lotus leaf replica wall, exhibiting structural superhydrophobicity, in altering the microscale flow. Moreover, the flow characteristics, for the microchannels with the biomimetic, superhydrophobic wall, are compared with those obtained for geometrically identical microchannels, with an unmodified wall, under identical conditions, to pin-point the hydrodynamic alterations induced by the lotus leaf replica wall. Furthermore, the experiments are performed here for microchannels of different cross-sectional sizes, and over a range of flow rates in accordance with the low Reynolds number framework, to critically establish the micro-confinement effect on the biomimetic, superhydrophobic surface mediated microscale flows. Finally, the experimental observations are substantiated by a theoretical model developed by taking cognizance of the ubiquitous interfacial interactions between the lotus leaf replica and the flowing liquid in a micro-confinement.
II Experimental materials and methods
Fabrication of the biomimetic superhydrophobic substrate (lotus leaf replica) from a natural lotus leaf template by a two-step soft-molding process
Fresh lotus leaves for replication are obtained from the Horticulture Section, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur. Sylgard 184, a two part, thermo-curable, cross-linked polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) based elastomer (Dow Corning, USA) is used for the replication procedure. The prepolymer is prepared by mixing the elastomeric base and curing agent in a 10:1 w/w ratio. The degassed prepolymer is then poured on a clean and fresh lotus leaf and is left in open air, for 24 hours, for the cross-linking process. After an appropriate time interval, the leaf is carefully peeled off to get a negative replica of the natural lotus leaf. This negative replica has micropores (see Fig. 1(a)), instead of the microstructures present on the lotus leaf. The first replication step is subsequently followed by a second replication procedure to get the desired positive replica from the negative replica. However, as a Sylgard 184 stamp (negative replica) is being used to create the positive replica, again on a Sylgard 184 layer, it becomes critically important to ensure that no cohesive bonding takes place between these two replicas. To this end, the negative replica is exposed to UV radiation, of 185 nm wavelength, for 30 min. This UV irradiation leads to the production of ozone from atmospheric oxygen. The ozone molecules, in turn, dissociate into oxygen at 254 nm irradiation. The reactive oxygen radicals, thus created, attack the methyl groups present in Sylgard (Si–CH3) and replace them with silanol groups (Si–O–H), hence, generating a superficial oxide layer which prevents the negative replica from sticking to other Sylgard surfaces during the final replication process.23 The degassed Sylgard 184 prepolymer is poured into a reservoir, made on a glass slide using adhesive tapes, to get a thin layer of prepolymer on the glass slide, which is again degassed in a desiccator. Thereafter, the UV irradiated negative replica is placed gently onto the thin prepolymer layer, and the setup is again degassed. After 15 minutes, the whole system is cured at 95 °C for 1 hour. After curing, the negative replica is peeled off to get the positive Sylgard replica of the natural lotus leaf on the glass slide (see Fig. 1(b)). The pillar-like microstructures present on the lotus leaf replica are further meticulously characterized by using a scanning electron microscope (see Fig. 1(c)). The average feature size of the microstructures on the Sylgard replica is evaluated to be lp = 14.2 ± 1.7 μm. Furthermore, the equilibrium contact angle of water on the Sylgard lotus leaf substrate (see Fig. 1(d)) is determined to be 161.59° ≤ θeq. ≤ 180°, which clearly establishes the superhydrophobic nature of the replica (θeq. is measured using the ‘Circle Method’, as used in the DROPimage Advanced software (v. 2.5) provided along with the goniometer by Ramé-hart Instrument Co.).
 Fig. 1  (a) Confocal microscopy image of the Sylgard 184 negative replica of the natural lotus leaf template. (b) Confocal microscopy image of the Sylgard lotus leaf replica (positive replica). (c) Scanning electron microscopy image of the lotus leaf replica showing the details of the microstructures present in it. (d) Equilibrium contact angle of a water droplet (θeq. ∼ 161.59°) on the lotus leaf replica, as captured using a goniometer (Ramé-hart Instruments Co.). 
Microchannel fabrication and integration with the Sylgard 184 lotus leaf replica
In order to study the micro-confinement effect on the biomimetic, superhydrophobic surface mediated microscale hydrodynamics, three rectangular microchannels (i.e. three test-sections (TS)) of decreasing cross-sectional area – 1000(w) × 300(h) μm (TS-1; hydraulic diameter, DH = 461 μm; ratio of lotus leaf replica feature size to hydraulic diameter, ε = lp/DH = 0.03), 200(w) × 300(h) μm (TS-2; DH = 240 μm; ε = 0.06) and 200(w) × 100(h) μm (TS-3; DH = 133 μm; ε = 0.1) are fabricated by micromachining (upcut micromilling process) on polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) sheets of 5 mm thickness. The equilibrium contact angle of water on the used PMMA sheets is 82.6°. Lengths (L) of all the microchannels are 20 mm. Inlet and outlet tappings are provided on the channels through drilled holes on the channel bed (see Fig. 2(a)). The tappings are fitted with needle connectors to provide connections for the inlet and outlet tubes.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic of the rectangular microchannel with the lotus leaf replica wall. (b) Schematic of the experimental setup used for the μ-PIV analysis. The two visualization planes, along the Z-axis, are shown in the inset. 
The lotus leaf replica is plasma bonded24 to a thin, flat Sylgard layer attached to a flat PMMA covering sheet, having dimensions similar to the PMMA sheet containing the microchannel (see Fig. 2(a)). The covering PMMA sheet, containing the lotus leaf replica, is then mechanically clamped to the PMMA microchannel substrate, thus creating a leak-proof, robust microfluidic confinement with a biomimetic superhydrophobic wall (see ESI†).
Micro-particle image velocimetry (μ-PIV) methodology
The μ-PIV procedure25 implemented in the present study utilizes an Olympus IX71 inverted fluorescent microscope, fitted with a CCD camera (ProgRes MFcool) for capturing the necessary images. The inlet needle connector of the microfluidic device is fitted with a Teflon tube, which is connected to a syringe pump (Harvard Apparatus PHD 2000: 0–100 ml min−1). The syringe pump sustains the pressure-gradient driven flow of the test liquid (Milli-Q ultrapure water; Millipore India Pvt. Ltd) at a desired in-flow rate. Now, the outlet connector of the microfluidic device is connected to an outlet reservoir by another Teflon tube of identical diameter. The microchannel itself is placed on the observation platform of the inverted microscope, above the objective with 10× magnification such that the modified wall (lotus leaf replica) of the microchannel is at the top (see Fig. 2(b)). The test liquid is seeded with carboxylate-modified fluorescent red polystyrene particles (i.e. the particles have a peak emission of 612 nm (red) corresponding to a peak excitation of 542 nm (green)), having a 1 μm mean diameter (Sigma-Aldrich; seeding concentration 0.03% (v/v)), for successful visualization of the flow field. 40 images (20 image pairs) (image resolution: 680 × 512 pixels ×12 bits) are captured at regular time intervals of Δt = 50 ms, at the same exposure (i.e. single-exposed multiple images are grabbed). A sample fluorescence microscopy image of the flow, under consideration, is shown in Fig. 3(a). The captured images are post-processed using an in-house MATLAB code (MATLAB v 7.1, The MathWorks, USA), which is developed using the open source MATLAB package for PIV measurements (i.e. MatPIV, v 1.6.1 (ref. 26)), as its kernel. This μ-PIV code is capable of generating the velocity vector maps of the flow field, average axial velocity profiles and the velocity magnitude colourmaps. The μ-PIV analysis is performed using a ‘multipass’ method. In this method, the analysis is executed in three successive iterations, where the interrogation window or the subwindow size is reduced by half in every consecutive iteration step. For the problem under consideration, the interrogation window size in the first iteration is fixed at 32 × 32 pixels, which results in a sub-viewport size of 8 × 8 pixels (∼20 × 20 μm) in the final iteration step to achieve the desired level of spatial resolution for successfully capturing the velocity details. The interrogation windows are overlapped by 50% to satisfy the Nyquist sampling criterion, as suggested by Meinhart et al.28 The velocity field in an X–Y plane, at a definite Z-location (i.e. at a definite height of the channel), is evaluated by the well-established cross-correlation technique.25 To further enhance the accuracy of the result, the velocity vectors, for the 20 image pairs, are ensemble averaged to obtain the final velocity vector field. It is to be further noted here that the velocity profiles, shown in the present work, represent the variations of the line-averaged X-component of the velocity vectors ( at a definite Y-location) along the Y-direction. Hence, in general, for a steady and uni-directional flow along the ‘X’ direction, such a velocity profile represents the streamwise averaged velocity variation. The overall average velocity for an X–Y plane, at a definite Z-location, is represented by 
 Fig. 3  (a) A sample fluorescence microscopy image of the flow through a microchannel with the lotus leaf replica wall, as obtained during the μ-PIV analysis. (b) Comparison of the experimentally obtained streamwise-averaged velocity profile, for a pressure-driven flow through a normal rectangular microchannel, with the analytically evaluated velocity profile27 for the same. 
Before proceeding further with the pertinent observations, the accuracy of the aforementioned μ-PIV analysis procedure is first established by comparing the experimentally obtained velocity profile, for a pressure-gradient driven flow through a normal PMMA microchannel (DH = 461 μm) with an unmodified Sylgard substrate, with the velocity profile obtained from classical theoretical analysis of steady, low Reynolds number flows through straight rectangular microchannels27 (see Fig. 3(b)). The excellent agreement between the experimental and the theoretical velocity profiles unarguably establishes the desired accuracy and reliability of the μ-PIV analysis implemented in the present work. However, it must be noted here that very close to the side PMMA walls (i.e. for Δy ≲ 15 μm from the side walls at y = ±w/2), the μ-PIV measurement generates erroneous velocity values, and hence, these values are not taken into consideration in the present analysis (see Fig. 3(b)). This error usually stems from the misrepresentation of the flow velocity by the velocity of the tracer particles due to hydrodynamic interactions between the wall and the particles and due to large shear-induced enhanced diffusivity of the particles in the immediate vicinity of the walls. Such an error in the measurement of the near-wall flow velocity in microfluidic devices is well documented in the literature19 and is acceptable within the present framework. Hence, the omission of the velocity data near the PMMA side walls neither compromises the generality of the present problem nor does it restrict the scope of the problem.
Procedure for investigating the hydrodynamic characteristics in microchannels with biomimetic superhydrophobic walls
It is to be remembered here that the primary objectives of the present endeavour are to clearly delineate the microscale flow characteristics induced by the lotus leaf replica and to simultaneously ascertain the influence of micro-confinement on the observed flow features. To this end, at a definite flow rate, the μ-PIV analysis is performed at two different focal planes (i.e. X–Y planes) along the height of the microchannel (i.e. along ‘Z’) for TS-1 and TS-2. The focal plane is adjusted by moving the 10× objective lens in the Z-direction. One of the planes (A–A; see the inset in Fig. 2(b)) is chosen in the immediate vicinity of the pillar-like structures on the Sylgard lotus leaf replica (i.e. at z = 120 μm for TS-1 and TS-2), in order to capture the alterations in solid–liquid interfacial hydrodynamics induced by the biomimetic wall. This plane is selected on the basis of the facts that the average feature size on the lotus leaf replica is lp ∼ 14 μm and that the μ-PIV measurement gives erroneous results very close to a solid wall (i.e. for Δz ≲ 15 μm in the case of the biomimetic substrate), as mentioned previously. The other plane of visualization (B–B; see the inset in Fig. 2(b)) is fixed at the middle of the channel (i.e. at z = 0) in order to characterize the consequential alterations in the bulk flow characteristics, due to the modifications in solid–liquid interfacial interactions near the lotus leaf replica. However, for TS-3, accurate visualization is performed only at a single focal plane (at z = 0) due to the small height of the involved microchannel. For all the quantitative flow visualization experiments, the field of view is roughly fixed at the middle of the channel length in order to avoid any entrance effects. Moreover, for the microchannels under consideration  (L/DH) ∼ 102, and hence, entrance effects can be anyways neglected. In order to pin-point the role of the lotus leaf replica in altering the microscale hydrodynamics, the flow characteristics of a definite test section with the biomimetic wall, at a definite flow rate, are compared with those obtained for a geometrically identical microchannel with an unmodified Sylgard substrate as one of the walls (instead of a biomimetic superhydrophobic wall), under identical experimental conditions.
For all the test sections, the experiments are performed for a range of water in-flow rates (Q ∼ 0.03–2 μl min−1), such that the corresponding Reynolds number always remains small. For the experiments reported herein (Re) ≲ 0.1, satisfying the conditions for a low Re regime.
III Results and discussion
For a definite test-section, the lotus leaf replica induced solid–liquid interfacial hydrodynamics, and the consequential bulk flow characteristics are coherently captured by the  characteristics (where ȳ = y/w) and the velocity vector fields at the planes A–A and B–B. Here, for brevity, the test-section with the biomimetic superhydrophobic wall and the associated parameters are denoted with the subscript ‘BW’ (e.g. TS-1BW), while the corresponding (geometrically identical) test-section with the normal Sylgard wall and its associated parameters are denoted with the subscript ‘NW’ (e.g. TS-1NW). Furthermore, the water in-flow rate, as maintained using the syringe pump, is represented in a non-dimensional form as  = Q/Qmax.
Hydrodynamic characteristics of TS-1 (ε = 0.03)
The comparative study, at different flow rates, between the  variations for the two geometrically identical microchannels – one with the biomimetic, superhydrophobic wall (TS-1BW) and the other with the normal flat Sylgard 184 wall (TS-1NW) – are delineated in Fig. 4(a) and (b), for the planes A–A and B–B respectively. At  = 0.25,  in the immediate vicinity of the solid–liquid interface is appreciably more for TS-1BW than that observed for TS-1NW (see Fig. 4(a)). A similar relative trend in the  characteristics, between TS-1BW and TS-1NW, is also observed at the plane B–B (see Fig. 4(b)), which coherently reflects the ensuing bulk flow characteristics. Before proceeding further with this discussion, it must be noted here that the pressure-gradient driven flow through TS-1BW, at  = 0.25, is laminar and uni-axial (along X-direction), like the classical low Reynolds number, pressure-gradient driven flows through smooth microchannels. The aforementioned flow characteristics, for TS-1BW, can be easily inferred from the nature of the corresponding velocity vector fields at the planes A–A and B–B, as shown in Fig. 5I(a) and (b), respectively. Hence, for this flow,  represents the streamwise-averaged velocity profile. So, at  = 0.25, the lotus leaf replica substantially augments the flow velocity, and hence, the throughput rate, through TS-1BW, as compared to that through the microchannel without the biomimetic, superhydrophobic wall. This enhancement in the velocity is relatively more near the solid–liquid interface (ϕ = [(UBW − UNW)/UNW] × 100 = 73.18% at the plane A–A) than that occurring in the bulk flow (ϕ = 37.44% at the plane B–B), which, nevertheless, is still substantial. The value of ϕ at B–B also represents the percentage increase in the bulk throughput rate through TS-1BW. Now, as the water in-flow rate is increased to  = 0.5, the difference in velocity variations, between TS-1BW and TS-1NW, reduces (see Fig. 4). From a practical perspective, the bulk throughput rate, for the biomimetic and the normal microchannels, can be considered to be comparable at  = 0.5 (see Fig. 4(b); ϕ is only 2.24% at the plane B–B). Beyond  = 0.5, the hydrodynamic characteristics of TS-1BW undergo a paradigmatic shift.
 Fig. 4  (a) Comparison between the variations of the axial flow velocity (i.e. the line-averaged X-component of the velocity vectors), along the microchannel width (i.e. the Y-direction), for TS-1BW and TS-1NW, at different water in-flow rates, in the immediate vicinity of the biomimetic surface–liquid interface (i.e. at the plane A–A). (b) Comparison between the variations of the axial flow velocity along the Y-direction for TS-1BW and TS-1NW, at different water in-flow rates, in the bulk (i.e. at the plane B–B). 
 Fig. 5  Velocity vector field for the flow through TS-1BW (Ia) at the plane A–A, corresponding to  = 0.25, (Ib) at the plane B–B, corresponding to  = 0.25, (IIa) at the plane A–A, corresponding to  = 1.0, (IIb) at the plane B–B, corresponding to  = 1.0. The blow-up of a portion of the velocity vector field at B–B, for  = 1.0, clearly shows the random nature of the resulting velocity vectors, which implies the breakdown of the laminar and uni-axial flow regime. 
At  = 1.0,  is drastically less for TS-1BW than that observed for TS-1NW, both near the solid–liquid interface and in the bulk (see Fig. 4). To understand this change in the flow characteristic, it must be noted here that for the microchannel with the lotus leaf replica wall, the previously observed laminar and uni-axial flow regime completely breaks down at  = 1.0 and the existing hydrodynamic paradigm is defined by velocity vectors of random spatial orientation and magnitude, as captured by the velocity vector maps in Fig. 5II(a) and (b). The resulting velocity vector fields imply that the ensuing flow pattern generates transverse velocity components and localized regions of back flow (for better comprehension see the blow-up in Fig. 5II(b)). The cumulative effect of these flow features culminates in the severe reduction of  for TS-1BW (which now represents the line-averaged X-components of the velocity vectors), as compared to the  variation for TS-1NW (which still represents the streamwise-averaged velocity, as the flow remains laminar and uni-axial). Hence, at  = 1.0, the lotus leaf replica impedes the bulk axial transport of water and consequently reduces the throughput rate, through TS-1BW. However, to fully comprehend the underlying physics, dictating the microscale hydrodynamics over the lotus leaf replica, it is imperative to also study the micro-confinement effect, i.e. the effect of the micro-confinement size on the pertinent flow characteristics.
Hydrodynamic characteristics of TS-2 (ε = 0.06)
TS-2BW has a smaller hydraulic diameter (DH = 240 μm); hence, for this test section, the value of the ratio (ε) of the lotus leaf replica feature size (lp) to DH is greater than that for TS-1BW. It must be noted here that the smaller value of DH results in a greater value of ε, implying a stronger effect of the confinement on the lotus leaf replica mediated flow.
At  = 0.1, the biomimetic, superhydrophobic wall augments the water flow velocity through TS-2BW, in comparison to that perceived for TS-2NW (see Fig. 6(a) and (b)), while preserving the laminar and uni-axial nature of the low Reynolds number flow (see Fig. 7I(a) and (b)). The corresponding enhancement in the bulk water throughput rate through TS-2BW, as quantified by the parameter ϕ, is equal to 26.4%. Now, as the water in-flow rate is increased to  = 0.15, the axial flow velocity in the immediate vicinity of the solid–liquid interface, for TS-2BW, is greatly reduced, as compared to that in TS-2NW (see Fig. 6(a), along with its inset). This dramatic shift in the flow characteristics is definitely indicative of the breakdown of the lotus leaf replica aided laminar and uni-axial flow regime, as mentioned previously in relation to TS-1BW. Moreover, this change in the flow pattern can be also verified here from the resulting characteristics of the velocity vector field at the plane A–A, for TS-2BW, corresponding to  = 0.15 (see Fig. 7II(a)). However, the bulk axial flow velocity through TS-2BW remains moderately high, albeit lower than that existing through TS-2NW at  = 0.15. The bulk water throughput rate, as represented by the axial flow velocity at the plane B–B, progressively decreases with the gradually increasing water in-flow rate beyond  = 0.15 (see Fig. 6(b)). This implies that the paradigmatic shift in the solid–liquid interfacial hydrodynamics at  = 0.15 does not extensively alter the bulk flow characteristics right away, but the disturbance initiated in the vicinity of the biomimetic surface–liquid interface gradually percolates to the bulk with increasing water in-flow rate. The aforementioned flow behaviour is unambiguously substantiated by the sequence of velocity vector fields at the plane B–B, for increasing water in-flow rates, as shown in Fig. 7II(b), III(a) and (b). It must be remembered here that even at  = 0.25, the flow through TS-2NW remains laminar and uni-axial (see ESI†). Furthermore, it is also interesting to note here that at  = 0.25, while the lotus leaf replica enhances the water throughput rate through TS-1BW, it completely disturbs the low Reynolds number, uni-axial flow through TS-2BW, culminating in impeded water transport. This clearly indicates that the transition from the laminar, uni-axial flow regime to the disturbed, random flow regime takes place at a smaller water in-flow rate for TS-2BW, as compared to that for TS-1BW. This transition between the flow regimes takes place at an even smaller water in-flow rate for TS-3BW, which has the smallest micro-confinement among all the three test-sections.
 Fig. 6  (a) Comparison between the variation of the axial flow velocity (i.e. the line-averaged X-component of the velocity vectors) along the microchannel width (i.e. the Y-direction) for TS-2BW, and the same for TS-2NW, for different water in-flow rates, in the immediate vicinity of the biomimetic surface–liquid interface (i.e. at the plane A–A). The inset clearly shows the substantially reduced, but non-zero magnitudes of the axial transport velocity through TS-2BW, for  = 0.15 and beyond. (b) Comparison between the axial flow velocity variation, along the Y-direction, for TS-2BW and the same for TS-2NW, at different water in-flow rates, in the bulk (i.e. at the plane B–B). 
 Fig. 7  Velocity vector field for the flow through TS-2BW (Ia) at the plane A–A, corresponding to  = 0.1, (Ib) at the plane B–B, corresponding to  = 0.1, (IIa) at the plane A–A, corresponding to  = 0.15, (IIb) at the plane B–B, corresponding to  = 0.15, (IIIa) at the plane B–B, corresponding to  = 0.2, (IIIb) at the plane B–B, corresponding to  = 0.25. 
Hydrodynamic characteristics of TS-3 (ε = 0.1)
For TS-3BW, the bulk flow, at the small in-flow rate of  = 0.015 is characterised by a flow field comprising of velocity vectors having transverse components and localized regions of black flow; while the flow through TS-3NW, at the same flow rate, remains laminar and uni-axial (see Fig. 8(a) and (b)). This clearly proves that the transition between the flow regimes, over the lotus leaf replica, takes place at a smaller value of  for TS-3BW as compared to that for TS-2BW and TS-1BW.
 Fig. 8  Velocity vector field corresponding to  = 0.015 for (a) TS-3BW and (b) TS-3NW. 
From the preceding discussion it can be inferred that the lotus leaf replica mediated microscale hydrodynamics exhibit two distinct, controllable flow regimes, even within the low Reynolds number framework. In the first regime (Regime I), the biomimetic, superhydrophobic wall enhances the velocity for the laminar, uni-axial flow, culminating in a superior bulk throughput rate; while in the second regime (Regime II), the lotus leaf replica induces a random, disturbed flow, which although reduces the axial liquid transport, can still be conducive for micro-mixing.29 Interestingly, the transition from the first to the second flow regime is triggered at a critical in-flow rate, or at a threshold value of the applied pressure-gradient, which is intrinsically dependent on the size of the micro-confinement relative to the size of the micro-structures on the lotus leaf replica.
Now, the question that remains to be addressed is: can the observed microscale hydrodynamic characteristics of the two flow regimes and the confinement size dependent transition between them be explained in purview of the ubiquitous biomimetic surface–liquid interfacial interactions?
Interfacial interaction between the natural lotus leaf replica and the flowing liquid in a micro-confinement
In Regime I, the biomimetic, superhydrophobic wall enables the entrapment of air, in between the pillar-like micro-structures present on it, culminating in the successful sustenance of the Cassie–Baxter state at the biomimetic surface–liquid interface.30 Due to this Cassie–Baxter state, fractions of the interface, between the lotus leaf replica and the flowing liquid, are occupied by liquid–air interfaces (see Fig. 9(a)). The presence of the liquid–air interfaces diminishes the physical contact area between the liquid and the solid surface, leading to the effective reduction of the wall drag.15 Such reduction in the interfacial friction manifests in the enhanced velocity of the laminar, uni-axial bulk flow, due to the increased surface-to-volume ratio at the microscale. Hence, the Cassie–Baxter interfacial condition increases the throughput rate through the microchannels with the biomimetic wall (i.e. TS-1BW, TS-2BW and TS-3BW), as compared to that through the geometrically identical microchannels with the flat Sylgard wall (i.e. TS-1NW, TS-2NW and TS-3NW), under identical flow conditions. However, as perceived from the aforementioned experimental results, it is erroneous to intuitively assume here that the enhanced liquid transport, over the lotus leaf replica, is sustained perennially, for ranges of externally imposed flow parameters (like flow rate or pressure-gradient) in consonance with the low Reynolds number paradigm. In reality, even within the low Reynolds number framework, the extent of the Regime I is restricted by the existence of a maximum pressure difference that can be sustained by the liquid–air interface, in the Cassie–Baxter state.15 Hence, beyond a critical magnitude of the imposed flow rate (or the imposed pressure-gradient), the pressure in the flow exceeds the maximum sustainable pressure difference in the Cassie state, thereby leading to the spontaneous transition of the interfacial condition to the Wenzel state.31
 Fig. 9  (a) A confocal microscopy image (at a 20× magnification with a Leica TCS-SP8; obtained for independently performed experiments) showing the entrapped air-pockets between the lotus leaf replica and the liquid due to the Cassie–Baxter state, as in Regime I. The inset shows the close-up of an entrapped air-pocket. (b) A confocal microscopy image (at a 40× magnification; obtained for independently performed experiments) showing the lotus leaf replica–liquid interfacial condition due to the Wenzel state, as in Regime II. (c) Variation of the critical flow rate, i.e. the maximum sustainable flow rate in the Regime I, with varying confinement effects, as represented by the ratio of the lotus leaf replica feature size to the microchannel hydraulic diameter. The theoretical estimation (eqn (6)) of the critical flow rate agrees quite well with the experimentally evaluated values for the three test sections considered in the present study. The ranges of the in-flow rate, necessary for controlling the flow in the desired regime, can be also estimated from this graphical representation. 
In the Wenzel state, the flowing liquid completely floods the pre-existing interfacial air pockets, thereby conforming to the exact geometry of the lotus leaf replica (see Fig. 9(b)). Under such conditions, the pillar-like micro-structures present on the replica and the flat surfaces in between them non-uniformly pin the flowing liquid along their surfaces. Such biomimetic surface induced pinning of the flowing liquid hinders the bulk flow and subsequently breaks the laminar and uni-axial nature of the flow. The latter is also due to the fact that the micro-structures on the lotus leaf replica, with lengths commensurate with the hydraulic diameters of the microchannels, penetrate into the bulk and obstruct the flow, under the Wenzel condition. Hence, the consequential flow characteristics in the Regime II, for TS-1BW, TS-2BW and TS-3BW are defined by erratic, two dimensional velocity vector fields (at any X–Y plane along the Z-direction), with drastically reduced axial components. Therefore, in essence, the paradigmatic shift in the lotus leaf replica–liquid interfacial condition, from the Cassie–Baxter state to the Wenzel state, triggers the collapse of Regime I and the subsequent genesis of Regime II, for the microchannels with the lotus leaf replica wall. However, interestingly, the aforementioned interfacial physics, dictating the conditions for transition between the two flow regimes, is intrinsically dependent on the extent of micro-confinement effect.
To critically elucidate the role of the micro-confinement size in controlling the transition between the two flow regimes, a low Reynolds number, pressure-gradient driven flow of a Newtonian liquid is considered through a parallel-plate micro-confinement, with topographically modified walls. It must be noted here that for facilitating an analytical treatment of the present problem, the topography of the lotus leaf replica is modelled as arrays of cylindrical posts with diameter d, pitch p, and height lp. However, the magnitudes of the aforementioned geometrical parameters are considered in accordance with those estimated for the actual lotus leaf replica (see Fig. 1(c)). For the experimentally observed flows in Regime I, the order of magnitude of the capillary number is much smaller than 1, i.e. (Ca) ≪ 1. Hence, while theoretically addressing the flows in the Cassie–Baxter state, in Regime I, the liquid–air interfaces are considered to be flat, without any loss of generality.32 Under these physical conditions, the change in interfacial energy associated with the transition from the Cassie–Baxter state to the Wenzel state can be written as: ΔE = EW − EC = −p2σl[(1 − φs) + (r − φs)cosθ](1)where σl is the surface tension of the flowing liquid (i.e. water), φs is the fraction of the projected interfacial surface area covered by the micro-structures, r = 1 + (4φslp/d) is the roughness factor defined as the ratio of the actual wetted area of the topographically modified surface to its projected area, and θ is the equilibrium contact angle of the flowing liquid on the material constituting the confinement walls (i.e. water on Sylgard 184), as predicted by Young's law.31 In order for the Cassie-to-Wenzel interfacial transition to be energetically viable, ΔE must be less than the work done (W) in displacing the liquid–air interface into the micro-structures on the topographically modified wall;15 here, W = p2lp(1 − φs)ΔP(2)where ΔP is the pressure difference across the liquid–air interface. So, the maximum sustainable pressure difference in the Cassie–Baxter state can be obtained by equating eqn (1) and (2); and it can be written as:15 ΔPmax = [Pwater − Pair]max = −(σl/lp)[1 + {(r − φs)/(1 − φs)}cosθ](3)
Therefore, when the pressure, in the flow, exceeds the critical limit specified by eqn (3), there is a spontaneous transition of the biomimetic surface–liquid interfacial condition from the superhydrophobic Cassie–Baxter state to the Wenzel state, which, in turn, triggers the transition of the flow from Regime I to Regime II.
It must be realized here that the flow in the Cassie–Baxter state simultaneously involves two phenomenologically different interfacial interactions due to the composite solid–liquid–air interface. The flow of the liquid over the air layer, mediating fractions of the solid–liquid interface, results in an apparent slip of the bulk liquid. This apparent slip flow is modelled here considering the Stokes flow of two immiscible fluids (i.e. water and air) between two infinite parallel plates.33 On the other hand, the flow, over the top surfaces of the wall micro-structures, is modelled considering the classical Stokes flow with the no-slip boundary condition.27 Finally, the overall throughput rate (q) is expressed as a weighted average of these two interfacial interactions, in a manner analogous to that used for expressing the cumulative velocity33 or friction factor34 for such stick-slip flows. So, the flow rate in Regime I can be expressed as: q = (DH3/96μl)(−dP/dx)[(1 − φs)(1 + 3Ω) + φs](4)where DH is the hydraulic diameter of the micro-confinement, μl is the dynamic viscosity of the flowing liquid (i.e. water), (−dp/dx) is the axial pressure-gradient along the flow, and Ω = (μl/μair)(4ε + 8ε2). Here, ε = lp/DH, as defined previously, and μair is the dynamic viscosity of the entrapped air-layer. Using eqn (4), the pressure, at any point in the flow, can be evaluated as: [Pwater − Pair] = (96μlq/DH3)[(1 − φs)(1 + 3Ω) + φs]−1Lref(5)
Equating eqn (3) and (5), the critical flow rate (qc), i.e. the maximum sustainable flow rate in the Cassie–Baxter state, which determines the extent of validity of Regime I, can be expressed as an explicit function of ε (which embodies the confinement effect): qc = [lp2σl/(96μlLref)][−1 − {(r − φs)/(1 − φs)}cosθ](1/ε3)[(1 − φs){1 + 3(μl/μair)(4ε + 8ε2)} + φs](6)

Fig. 9(c) shows the variation of the non-dimensionalized critical flow rate  with increasing values of ε, as captured by eqn (6), corresponding to the range of hydraulic diameters generally used for microfluidic applications ((DH) ∼ 1000 − 100 μm). Here,  However, the exact magnitude of the non-dimensionalising factor is chosen in a manner that takes into consideration the non-infinite extent of the actual rectangular microchannels. The  characteristic shows the exact nature of the decrease of the maximum sustainable flow rate in Regime I with decreasing size of the micro-confinement relative to the size of the lotus leaf replica microstructures. This behaviour clearly proves that the Cassie-to-Wenzel interfacial transition and consequently the transition of the flow over the lotus leaf replica from Regime I to Regime II is triggered at a smaller flow rate for a microchannel having a larger value of ε, as inferred previously from the experimental observations. Moreover, this theoretical prediction of the micro-confinement dependent critical flow rate also quantitatively agrees quite well with the experimental values of the non-dimensional bulk flow rates, measured just prior to the onset of Regime II, through each of TS-1BW, TS-2BW and TS-3BW (see Fig. 9(c)). Hence, the theoretical framework presented here not only provides a sound foundation for the experimental observations, but can be also used for estimating the liquid in-flow rate, and consequently the corresponding pressure-gradient, necessary for controlling the flow through a microchannel of a known geometry, with a natural lotus leaf replica wall, in the desired regime (see Fig. 9(c) for the demarcation of the regimes).
IV Conclusions and outlook
The low Reynolds number hydrodynamics through a microchannel, with a lotus leaf replica wall, is characterised by two distinct regimes, stemming from the nature of the biomimetic surface–liquid interfacial interaction. In the first regime, the existence of the interfacial Cassie–Baxter state results in effective wall drag reduction. Such a decrease in the interfacial friction consequently manifests in an appreciable enhancement of the bulk throughput rate, for the laminar, uni-axial flows through the microchannels with the biomimetic, superhydrophobic wall. Interestingly, for microflows, the sustainability of this regime is restricted by a critical flow rate, which still conforms to the low Reynolds number paradigm. For a definite configuration of the microchannel, the pressure in the flow, beyond this critical flow rate, triggers a spontaneous change of the interfacial condition from the Cassie–Baxter to the Wenzel state, thereby marking the onset of the second flow regime. Furthermore, this threshold value of the flow rate is intrinsically dependent on the micro-confinement effect, i.e. the size of the confinement relative to the size of the micro-structures on the lotus leaf replica. More specifically, the value of the critical flow rate decreases with decreasing microchannel size, thereby triggering an early transition between the flow regimes for a smaller channel. In the second flow regime, the lotus leaf replica induced non-uniform pinning of the flow, and the consequential hindrance provide by the micro-structures, under the Wenzel condition, disturbs the flow in the vicinity of the solid–liquid interface. The interfacial disturbance, thus created, gradually percolates to the bulk and eventually transforms the laminar, uni-axial flow into an erratic flow with reduced axial velocity.
The present endeavour conclusively proves that, contrary to the common perception, the lotus leaf replica mediated low Reynolds number microscale hydrodynamics is not necessarily always characterized by an apparent slip flow. There exists a critical condition, dependent on the microchannel configuration, which dictates whether the ensuing flow is a stick-slip flow or a flow completely governed by the no-slip interfacial condition. This understanding sets a new paradigm for designing microfluidic devices, involving biomimetic surfaces exhibiting structural superhydrophobicity. It is shown here that an aptly designed microfluidic confinement, with a lotus leaf replica wall, can be easily operated in a reversible manner in either of the two aforementioned flow regimes. Moreover, the present investigation also delineates the ranges of imposed external parameters (like flow-rate or the pressure gradient) for judicious control of the flow in the desired flow regime. While the flow in Regime I is useful for microfluidic applications requiring low power consumption, high throughput rate and hence greater engineering efficiency, the flow in Regime II can be used for low Reynolds number micro-mixing, especially immediately after the impregnation of the Cassie–Baxter state. The latter aspect can be the central theme of a separate research work. In this regard, the authors are presently working on the feasibility and the associated characteristics of lotus leaf replica mediated microscale mixing, involving the inexpensive microfabrication paradigm considered in this work. Such a device can be judiciously controlled to achieve an optimal combination of throughput and mixing, as ideally desired in microscale mixing processes.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support provided by the Sponsored Research and Industrial Consultancy Cell (SRIC) of Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, under the project- ‘Center of Excellence in Microfluidics (CEM)’.
Notes and references
B. Bhushan, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2009, 367, 1445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Bhushan, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 1698 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Y. Chen, L. Shi, J. Li and Z. Guo, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 799 RSC .
V. A. Ganesh, H. K. Raut, A. S. Nair and S. Ramakrishna, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 16304 RSC .
K. Liu, X. Yao and L. Jiang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3240 RSC .
M. Nosonovsky and B. Bhushan, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 14, 270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Koch, B. Bhushan and W. Barthlott, Soft Matter, 2008, 4, 1943 RSC .
J. Zhang, J. Wang, Y. Zhao, L. Xu, X. Gao, Y. Zheng and L. Jiang, Soft Matter, 2008, 4, 2232 RSC .
Z. Guo, W. Liu and B.-L. Su, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 353, 335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Yan, N. Gao and W. Barthlott, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 169, 80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ma and R. M. Hill, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2006, 11, 193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Roach, N. J. Shirtcliffe and M. I. Newton, Soft Matter, 2008, 4, 224 RSC .
K. Koch, B. Bhushan, Y. C. Jung and W. Barthlott, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 1386 RSC .
Y. C. Jung and B. Bhushan, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2010, 22, 035104 CrossRef PubMed .
J. P. Rothstein, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech., 2010, 42, 89 CrossRef .
B. Dean and B. Bhushan, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2010, 368, 4775 CrossRef PubMed .
G. D. Bixler and B. Bhushan, Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 11271 RSC .
G. D. Bixler and B. Bhushan, Soft Matter, 2013, 9, 1620 RSC .
P. Tsai, A. M. Peters, C. Pirat, M. Wessling, R. G. H. Lammertink and D. Lohse, Phys. Fluids, 2009, 21, 112002 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Byun, J. Kim, H. S. Ko and H. C. Park, Phys. Fluids, 2008, 20, 113601 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Liu, Microfluid. Nanofluid., 2010, 9, 923 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Heck and D. V. Papavassiliou, Chem. Eng. Commun., 2013, 200, 919 CrossRef CAS .
R. Mukherjee and A. Sharma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 4, 355 Search PubMed .
M. A. Eddings, M. A. Johnson and B. K. Gale, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2008, 18, 067001 CrossRef .

          M. Raffel, C. E. Willert, S. T. Wereley and J. Kompenhans, Particle Image Velocimetry: A Practical Guide, Springer-Verlag, 2nd edn,  2007 Search PubMed .

          J. K. Sveen, An Introduction to MatPIV v. 1.6.1, Mechanics and Applied Mathematics, Department of Mathematics, University of Oslo,  2004, 2, pp. 1–27 Search PubMed.

          F. M. White, Viscous Fluid Flow, McGraw-Hill, Inc., 3rd edn,  2006 Search PubMed .
C. D. Meinhart, S. T. Wereley and J. G. Santiago, Exp. Fluids, 1999, 27, 414 CrossRef .
N.-T. Nguyen and Z. Wu, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2005, 15, R1–R16 CrossRef .
A. Marmur, Soft Matter, 2013, 9, 7900 RSC .
D. Quéré, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2008, 38, 71 CrossRef .
C. J. Teo and B. C. Khoo, Microfluid. Nanofluid., 2008, 7, 353 CrossRef .
D. C. Tretheway and C. D. Meinhart, Phys. Fluids, 2004, 16, 1509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Dey, S. DasGupta and S. Chakraborty, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 134101 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4sm00037dThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Confocal microscopy image of the Sylgard 184 negative replica of the natural lotus leaf template. (b) Confocal microscopy image of the Sylgard lotus leaf replica (positive replica). (c) Scanning electron microscopy image of the lotus leaf replica showing the details of the microstructures present in it. (d) Equilibrium contact angle of a water droplet (θeq. ∼ 161.59°) on the lotus leaf replica, as captured using a goniometer (Ramé-hart Instruments Co.).	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic of the rectangular microchannel with the lotus leaf replica wall. (b) Schematic of the experimental setup used for the μ-PIV analysis. The two visualization planes, along the Z-axis, are shown in the inset.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) A sample fluorescence microscopy image of the flow through a microchannel with the lotus leaf replica wall, as obtained during the μ-PIV analysis. (b) Comparison of the experimentally obtained streamwise-averaged velocity profile, for a pressure-driven flow through a normal rectangular microchannel, with the analytically evaluated velocity profile27 for the same.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Comparison between the variations of the axial flow velocity (i.e. the line-averaged X-component of the velocity vectors), along the microchannel width (i.e. the Y-direction), for TS-1BW and TS-1NW, at different water in-flow rates, in the immediate vicinity of the biomimetic surface–liquid interface (i.e. at the plane A–A). (b) Comparison between the variations of the axial flow velocity along the Y-direction for TS-1BW and TS-1NW, at different water in-flow rates, in the bulk (i.e. at the plane B–B).	 

 	Fig. 5  Velocity vector field for the flow through TS-1BW (Ia) at the plane A–A, corresponding to  = 0.25, (Ib) at the plane B–B, corresponding to  = 0.25, (IIa) at the plane A–A, corresponding to  = 1.0, (IIb) at the plane B–B, corresponding to  = 1.0. The blow-up of a portion of the velocity vector field at B–B, for  = 1.0, clearly shows the random nature of the resulting velocity vectors, which implies the breakdown of the laminar and uni-axial flow regime.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Comparison between the variation of the axial flow velocity (i.e. the line-averaged X-component of the velocity vectors) along the microchannel width (i.e. the Y-direction) for TS-2BW, and the same for TS-2NW, for different water in-flow rates, in the immediate vicinity of the biomimetic surface–liquid interface (i.e. at the plane A–A). The inset clearly shows the substantially reduced, but non-zero magnitudes of the axial transport velocity through TS-2BW, for  = 0.15 and beyond. (b) Comparison between the axial flow velocity variation, along the Y-direction, for TS-2BW and the same for TS-2NW, at different water in-flow rates, in the bulk (i.e. at the plane B–B).	 

 	Fig. 7  Velocity vector field for the flow through TS-2BW (Ia) at the plane A–A, corresponding to  = 0.1, (Ib) at the plane B–B, corresponding to  = 0.1, (IIa) at the plane A–A, corresponding to  = 0.15, (IIb) at the plane B–B, corresponding to  = 0.15, (IIIa) at the plane B–B, corresponding to  = 0.2, (IIIb) at the plane B–B, corresponding to  = 0.25.	 

 	Fig. 8  Velocity vector field corresponding to  = 0.015 for (a) TS-3BW and (b) TS-3NW.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) A confocal microscopy image (at a 20× magnification with a Leica TCS-SP8; obtained for independently performed experiments) showing the entrapped air-pockets between the lotus leaf replica and the liquid due to the Cassie–Baxter state, as in Regime I. The inset shows the close-up of an entrapped air-pocket. (b) A confocal microscopy image (at a 40× magnification; obtained for independently performed experiments) showing the lotus leaf replica–liquid interfacial condition due to the Wenzel state, as in Regime II. (c) Variation of the critical flow rate, i.e. the maximum sustainable flow rate in the Regime I, with varying confinement effects, as represented by the ratio of the lotus leaf replica feature size to the microchannel hydraulic diameter. The theoretical estimation (eqn (6)) of the critical flow rate agrees quite well with the experimentally evaluated values for the three test sections considered in the present study. The ranges of the in-flow rate, necessary for controlling the flow in the desired regime, can be also estimated from this graphical representation.	 
ΔE = EW − EC = −p2σl[(1 − φs) + (r − φs)cosθ]	(1)
W = p2lp(1 − φs)ΔP	(2)
ΔPmax = [Pwater − Pair]max = −(σl/lp)[1 + {(r − φs)/(1 − φs)}cosθ]	(3)
q = (DH3/96μl)(−dP/dx)[(1 − φs)(1 + 3Ω) + φs]	(4)
[Pwater − Pair] = (96μlq/DH3)[(1 − φs)(1 + 3Ω) + φs]−1Lref	(5)
qc = [lp2σl/(96μlLref)][−1 − {(r − φs)/(1 − φs)}cosθ](1/ε3)[(1 − φs){1 + 3(μl/μair)(4ε + 8ε2)} + φs]	(6)
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4sm00037d

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
