Organic–inorganic hybrid lead halide perovskites for optoelectronic and electronic applications  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4CS00458B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4CS00458B
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 655-689Organic–inorganic hybrid lead halide perovskites for optoelectronic and electronic applications

        
          
            Yixin 
            Zhao
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Kai 
            Zhu
          
          
        
      *b
aSchool of Environmental Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 800 Dongchuan Rd., Shanghai 200240, China. E-mail: yixin.zhao@sjtu.edu.cn
bChemistry and Nanoscience Center, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, 15013 Denver West Parkway, Golden, CO 80401, USA. E-mail: kai.zhu@nrel.gov
Received 
      4th December 2014
    First published on 8th December 2015AbstractOrganic and inorganic hybrid perovskites (e.g., CH3NH3PbI3), with advantages of facile processing, tunable bandgaps, and superior charge-transfer properties, have emerged as a new class of revolutionary optoelectronic semiconductors promising for various applications. Perovskite solar cells constructed with a variety of configurations have demonstrated unprecedented progress in efficiency, reaching about 20% from multiple groups after only several years of active research. A key to this success is the development of various solution-synthesis and film-deposition techniques for controlling the morphology and composition of hybrid perovskites. The rapid progress in material synthesis and device fabrication has also promoted the development of other optoelectronic applications including light-emitting diodes, photodetectors, and transistors. Both experimental and theoretical investigations on organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites have enabled some critical fundamental understandings of this material system. Recent studies have also demonstrated progress in addressing the potential stability issue, which has been identified as a main challenge for future research on halide perovskites. Here, we review recent progress on hybrid perovskites including basic chemical and crystal structures, chemical synthesis of bulk/nanocrystals and thin films with their chemical and physical properties, device configurations, operation principles for various optoelectronic applications (with a focus on solar cells), and photophysics of charge-carrier dynamics. We also discuss the importance of further understanding of the fundamental properties of hybrid perovskites, especially those related to chemical and structural stabilities.
Yixin Zhao
Yixin Zhao is an associate professor at Shanghai Jiao Tong University. He obtained his PhD degree from Case Western Reserve University in 2010 followed by working as a postdoctoral fellow at Penn State University and National Renewable Energy Laboratory. He had worked on photocatalysis, semiconductor quantum dots, thermoelectrics and dye sensitized water splitting cells. His current research interests focus on perovskite solar cells, water splitting cells and functional materials for solar energy conversion and environmental remediation application.
Kai Zhu
Kai Zhu is a senior scientist in the Chemistry and Nanoscience Science Center at the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL). He received his PhD degree in physics from Syracuse University in 2003. His research interests have included characterization and modeling of hydrogenated amorphous silicon thin film solar cells, III–V wide-bandgap light emitting diodes, dye-sensitized solar cells, and Li-ion batteries and supercapacitors. His current research focuses on perovskite solar cells, including material development, device fabrication, and fundamental characterization on charge-carrier dynamics and device operating principles.
1. Overview of the development of perovskite solar cells
In recent years, organic–inorganic hybrid halide perovskites have been one of the most intensively investigated optoelectronic materials by researchers in many different disciplines. With a certified 20% solar conversion efficiency, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have reached a performance level that is comparable to state-of-the-art copper indium gallium diselenide (CIGS) solar cells and are approaching commercial monocrystalline silicon solar cells. More importantly, there is no sign that PSC efficiency has reached a bottleneck.1,2 This is the first time a new solar cell technology has demonstrated the potential to be comparable to traditional commercial solar cells in such a short time; consequently, it has attracted the attention of an unprecedented number of solar cell researchers. The concept and basic fabrication techniques of PSCs have been introduced to undergraduate students because it is so simple to produce relatively high-performance perovskite devices.3 The perovskite-related studies—especially of PSCs—have been described as “perovskite fever,”4 primarily because of the skyrocketing efficiencies of PSCs during the last three years. Historically, organic–inorganic perovskites are not particularly novel in materials science, and MAPbX3 (MA = CH3NH3, X = Cl, Br, and I) and MASnBrxI3−x were synthesized and characterized as new materials as early as the 1980s.5,6 However, their physical and chemical properties had not been thoroughly investigated with a sufficient research effort due to the lack of potential application at that time.7,8
Hybrid perovskite was first used as a light absorber in a solar cell with less than 4% efficiency by Miyasaka's group in 2009.9 In this pioneering work, hybrid perovskites of MAPbI3 were initially used as an alternative sensitizer to dye molecules in the conventional dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC) configuration based on the liquid electrolyte. The efficiency of this configuration of perovskite-sensitized solar cells slowly increased to ∼6% by Park and his co-workers.9,10 However, the poor stability and low efficiency levels in these liquid perovskite-sensitized solar cells did not attract much attention. In 2012, three coincident breakthrough reports11–13 on solid-state PSCs with 10–11% efficiencies triggered the research explosion on PSCs. Since then, hybrid halide perovskites have attracted enormous worldwide attention from researchers previously working on different optoelectronic materials, and these research efforts have focused on both perovskite material/device development and the fundamental understanding of material properties and device principles.14–43
In this review, we focus on the latest progress of organic–inorganic hybrid lead halide perovskites for optoelectronic and electronic conversion. We first summarize briefly the theoretical and experimental studies on the chemical and crystal structure of halide perovskites, as well as syntheses of bulk perovskite crystals that have been useful for understanding the basic electro-optical properties of halide perovskites. We then review the progress on using various solution and vapor-phase deposition approaches to prepare high-quality lead halide perovskite thin films. This represents one of the key areas contributing to the rapid development of perovskite devices, especially solar cells, in the past several years. For PSCs, we summarize their device configurations and operation principles in conjunction with discussion on their physical properties. We also present the progress of other types of perovskite-based optoelectronic and electronic applications (e.g., light-emitting devices, lasers, photodectors, and water splitting). Finally, we give a brief outlook on the current challenges and future development opportunities of lead halide perovskites for various applications, especially for PSCs and their long-term stabilities.
2. Chemical and crystal structures of halide perovskites
2.1 Crystal structure and phase transition of lead halide perovskites
The unit cell of lead halide perovskites with formula ABX3 is composed of five atoms in a cubic structure (α phase), where cation B has six nearest-neighbor anions X and cation A has twelve nearest neighbors (Fig. 1A). To maintain a high-symmetry cubic structure, the tolerance factor t of the perovskite should be close to 1 and could be between 0.813 and 1.107, where RA, RB, and RX are the ionic radii of the corresponding ions.45,46 In the lead halide perovskites, the B site is usually occupied by a large atom of Pb or Sn, so the A site must be large enough to satisfy the tolerance factor. Otherwise, the cubic structure will be distorted and crystal symmetry is reduced. It is worth noting that the challenge for determining the tolerance factor for hybrid perovskites is to properly estimate the ionic radii of the molecular cations.46 Currently, the most-studied lead halide perovskites usually have MA+ (methylammonium) and/or HC(NH2)2+ (formamidinium, or FA) anions for the A site. The tolerance factors for the most popular lead or tin halide perovskites are listed in Fig. 1C.8 When the A site is occupied by groups that are too large, such as long-chain alkyl amine anions, the lead halide perovskite becomes a two-dimensional (2D) layer structure. The MAPbI3 perovskite has a reversible cubic (α) to tetragonal (β) phase transition that occurs at ∼56 °C.47,48 A low-temperature, stabilized orthorhombic (γ) phase was detected at 100 K, and the phase transition between the tetragonal (β) phase and orthorhombic (γ) phase occurs at around 160 K; the atomic structure for these three phases are shown in Fig. 1A and B. This tetragonal-cubic phase transition accounts, in part, for the thermal stability issue for MAPbI3 perovskite and its photoelectronic device.49 A similar phase transition of HC(NH2)2PbI3 occurs at higher temperature, which gives it better thermal stability. A recent report revealed that light irradiation can also induce some reversible structure transformation.50
 Fig. 1  (A) Crystal structure of cubic lead halide perovskite (α phase). Reprinted with permission from ref. 7. (B) Crystal structure of the tetragonal crystal system (β) phase and orthorhombic (γ) phase of MAPbX3. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44. (C) Tolerance factors (t) of a series of halide perovskites. Reprinted with permission from ref. 8. 
2.2 Theoretical investigation
The conversion efficiency of perovskite solar cells has progressed rapidly, but a fundamental experimental understanding of perovskites is still lacking in this early stage. In contrast, theoretical investigations have contributed much to our fundamental understanding.7,51–68 For the most-studied MAPbI3 perovskite, MA+ at the A site and Pb2+ at the B site donate one and two electrons, respectively, to three I ions at the X site. MA+ can effectively stabilize this MAPbX3 perovskite structure with a reasonable tolerance factor; however, the MA+ cation does not have any significant contribution for the conduction and valence band states except for donating one electron to the Pb–I framework. Studies by Motta et al. revealed that the orientation of the MA+ cation can indirectly play a fundamental role in determining the electronic properties of perovskites via distorting the PbI6 octahedral cage.69 Such molecular rotations induce a dynamical change of the band structure that may partially account for the MAPbI3 perovskite's unique properties of slow carrier recombination and high conversion efficiency.69 The 1.5 eV bandgap of MAPbI3 is formed between the unoccupied Pb p orbital and the occupied I p orbital, as shown in Fig. 2A.40 The advanced theoretical calculations have already helped to explain some fundamental mechanisms for the superior properties of lead halide perovskites compared to other popular photovoltaic (PV) materials such as GaAs and CZTS, as shown in Fig. 2B.7 Yan and his co-workers have explained two main important properties of MAPbI3 perovskite based on theoretical calculations. (1) The much higher optical absorption of MAPbI3 than GaAs is because the density of states (DOS) derived from the Pb p orbital in the lower conduction band (CB) of the halide perovskites is significantly higher than that of GaAs owing to a more dispersed s orbital from Ga. (2) The strong s–p anti-bonding coupling in MAPbI3 perovskite leads to small effective masses for both electrons and holes, which is helpful for efficient solar cells with a p–i–n configuration.70 This work reveals the importance of Pb for the MAPbI3 perovskite's superior properties; unfortunately, it also predicts the difficulty of obtaining high-performance Pb-free perovskites.
 Fig. 2  (A) The contributions of MA, Pb, and I on the density of state of MAPbI3 perovskite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 31. (B) Calculated maximum efficiencies of halide perovskites, CIS, CZTS, and GaAs as a function of film thickness. Reprinted with permission from ref. 70. (C) The theoretical calculated energy barrier for the phase transition between the tetragonal (β) phase and orthorhombic (γ) phase of MAPbX3. Reprinted with permission from ref. 71. 
Understanding and controlling the stability (e.g., thermal and moisture) of perovskites is the main challenge for future commercialization of technologies based on hybrid perovskites.72 Theoretical investigations have attempted to explore the atomic mechanism related to stability. For example, the crystal structure of MAPbI3 perovskite is orthorhombic at low temperature and tetragonal at room temperature. The theoretical calculation has elucidated the origin of structural phase transition between these two phases by determining a critical ratio of out-of-plane (c) to in-plane (a) lattice constants, c/a ∼ 1.45. The orthorhombic Pnma phase is stable at a lower c/a value whereas the tetragonal I4/mcm phase is stable at a higher c/a value. The change of PbI6 octahedral tilting with the rotation of the MA+ cations in and out of the oxy plane is induced by varying the c/a ratio, as shown in Fig. 2C.71,73 Very recently, a quasi-cubic tetragonal P4mm phase has been theoretically reported at 400 K due to the rotation of MA cations.71 The ab initio molecular dynamics simulations on the interaction between the MAPbI3 perovskite surfaces and water have been considered to understand the atomic details of the moisture stability for perovskite.74 According to these theoretical calculations, the interaction of water molecules with Pb atoms prompts the release of I atoms at the MAI-terminated surface of MAPbI3 perovskites. In contrast, the PbI2-terminated surfaces are more robust to degradation (via releasing the I atom) because of the stronger (shorter) Pb–I bonds. Furthermore, the water incorporation into bulk MAPbI3 produces almost no change to the tetragonal structure of the perovskite crystal (∼1% volume expansion) and has little effect on its electronic structure. These results suggest that proper interfacial modifications and device architectures could be used to improve the moisture stability of PSCs and optoelectronic devices.
2.3 Bandgap tuning by anion and cation exchange
Theoretical work has revealed that the electronic structure of MAPbX3 is related to the p orbital of X and the p orbital of Pb—and thus, the bandgap can generally be tuned by the p orbital of X. In MAPbX3 perovskite, the valence orbital of the halide changes from 3p to 4p to 5p when X changes from Cl to Br to I; the bandgap of the MAPbX3 then decreases monotonically as suggested through theoretical calculations.75 The absorbance of the MAPbX3 (X = I, Br, Cl) single crystals have also confirmed the bandgap narrowing when X changes from I to Br to Cl. This theoretical study also predicted that Br and Cl secondary phases in MAPbI3 thin films would act as barriers to charge transport in PV devices via a classical type I core–shell band alignment.76 Seok and his co-workers first demonstrated a continuous bandgap tuning (1.6–2.2 eV) in the mixed-halide perovskite MAPbI3−xBrxvia adjusting the Br/I ratios, as illustrated in Fig. 3A.77 This work revealed the promising potential of using bandgap-tunable lead halide perovskites for tandem solar cells. For example, the 1.8 eV-bandgap MAPbI2Br perovskite is a promising candidate as the top cell for a tandem solar cell configuration.78,79 For the mixed-halide perovskite studies, the mixed-(I, Cl) perovskite has been a controversial topic throughout the development of PSCs. Several theoretical reports have suggested that the mixed-(I, Cl) perovskite is difficult to form with high Cl content, whereas forming mixed-(Br, Cl) and mixed-(I, Br) alloys are easy at room temperature.75,80 These theoretical studies have been confirmed by many experimental reports. Because the halide ion, especially I−, has low chemical stability, a promising approach for enhancing perovskite's chemical stability is to replace chemically reactive halides by more robust pseudohalogen polyanions. Some pseudohalogen molecules such as SCN and BF4 have been incorporated into lead halide perovskites to modify their properties. Because the ionic radii of BF4 (0.218 nm) is similar to I (0.220 nm), the incorporation of BF4 into MAPbI3 has a negligible effect on the onset of optical absorption.81 However, the photoluminescence (PL) of MAPbI3−x(BF4)x shows a Stokes shift of only about 6 nm, whereas the pure MAPbI3 exhibits about a 20 nm Stokes shift. This lower Stokes shift in MAPbI3−x(BF4)x reveals a very low non-radiative loss as compared to MAPbI3, which makes the mixed pseudohalogen/halide perovskite a promising candidate for optoelectronic application. The MAPbI3−x(BF4)x perovskite shows one order-of-magnitude enhancement in low-frequency electrical conductivity and more than four orders-of-magnitude photoresponse compared to pure MAPbI3 perovskite due to the inclusion of fluorine into the lead halide perovskite.31,82
 Fig. 3  (A) Ultraviolet-visible absorption spectra and photos of MAPb(I1−xBrx)3 perovskite films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. (B) Two-dimensional map of the density-functional-theory-simulated bandgaps of PbI3-based perovskites as a function of the apical and equatorial metal–halide–metal bond angles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 31. 
Although a recent study shows that MA is responsible for the ambipolarity of MAPbI3 because of the similarity of electron effective mass and hole effective mass,83 there is no orbital or electron from the cation contributing to the final electronic structure of lead halide perovskite from the abovementioned theoretical calculation.69,70,84 However, the theoretical calculations also revealed that the bandgap of metal–halide perovskites correlates strongly with the largest metal–halide–metal bond angle, and this simple structural feature of ABX3 can be adjusted by the BX6 octahedra tilting. Therefore, the cation can still affect the electronic structure of perovskites through the steric effect, as shown in Fig. 3B.31,85 It is practical to tune the bandgap of metal–halide perovskites via the steric size of the cation. Precise bandgap engineering is achieved by controlling the bond angles through the steric size of the molecular cation. The iodoformamidinium cation has been first applied in hybrid lead halide perovskite, which exhibits much better hydrolysis resistance.34 Furthermore, the formamidinium lead iodide perovskite (FAPbI3) has a narrower bandgap compared to methylammonium lead iodide perovskite (MAPbI3) due to its strong steric size.31 There are several reports on FAPbI3-based perovskite or FA-based mixed-cation perovskite for higher efficiency and better stability.49,86–97 Although the steric effect of FA results in the bandgap narrowing for higher light absorption, the intercalation of FA cations into lead halide is much more difficult than MA cations because of the larger steric size of the FA cations compared to the MA cations.
2.4 Lead-free halide perovskites
There is enough Pb reserve on Earth (with even waste lead–acid batteries having the potential), for lead halide PSC fabrication98 and their environmental side effects could be controllable.2 But Pb-free perovskite light absorbers are still desired for solar cell applications. In fact, the Pb-free perovskite of MASnBr3−xIx was synthesized by Weber in the 1970s, as early as the synthesis of MAPbX3.5 Unfortunately, to date, lead-free MASnI3 and MASnI3−xBrx PSCs have shown much lower PV performance compared to MAPbI3, with only about 6% efficiency. More importantly, these Sn-based perovskites appear unstable in air and the oxidation-induced Sn4+ is detrimental to device characteristics.99,100 It is noteworthy that the mixed-metal perovskite of MAPb1−xSnxI3 exhibits an extended absorbance up to about 1050 nm (x = 0.5), implying great potential if the stability issue can be avoided.21 Another lead-free perovskite of CsSnI3−xBrx also exhibited much lower PV performance, especially having very low photovoltage and fill factor.101 The high Urbach energy and defect-induced recombination have been proposed to account for the low open-circuit voltage (Voc) and fill factor (FF) in Sn-based PSCs.102 Some vacancy modulation on CsSnI3via addition of SnF2 improved the photocurrent of the CsSnI3 PSC.103 Other Pb-free halide perovskites such as CsGeI3 have also been synthesized, and their optoelectronic properties have been theoretically and experimentally investigated, but without any report on PV performance.104 The halide perovskites based on Bi, Cu, and other transition metals are still being investigated.105 Clearly, we need further fundamental studies on the properties of Pb-free perovskite and more advanced solar cell fabrication techniques to develop high-performance Pb-free PSCs in the future.
3. Synthesis of halide perovskite crystals
3.1 Bulk crystal synthesis
Preparing lead halide perovskite bulk crystals generally follows a typical crystal-growth reaction that is very similar to most crystal growth. In brief, a hot, oversaturated, aqueous perovskite precursor solution containing an inorganic lead salt and organic halide salt is carefully cooled to form halide perovskite crystals with a crystal size of up to the centimeter scale, as listed in Fig. 4A.6,31,57,106,107 In this method, the crystal-growth technique is required and an extra amount of hydrohalide acid is added into the crystal-growth solution, which makes it somewhat difficult for a non-expert. Alternatively, a simple approach to grow a perovskite crystal, especially for MAPbBr3, is to slowly evaporate an organic solvent such as DMF or alcohol from the lead halide perovskite precursor solution.49,108,109 Besides these two traditional solution-chemistry crystal-growth methods, several novel crystal-growth methods have been developed to grow high-quality lead halide single-crystal perovskite. The bulk single-crystal lead halide perovskite such as MAPbBr3 has been grown through antisolvent vapor-assisted crystallization (AVC), in which an appropriate antisolvent is slowly diffused into a perovskite precursor solution to promote the growth of sizable MAPbX3 perovskite crystals.36 The AVC concept or its variations have also been widely adopted to grow high-quality perovskite thin films, which will be discussed in a later section. Recently, we demonstrated a facile solvothermal method to grow mixed-halide perovskite single crystals of MAPb(Br1−xClx)3.110 In this report, the single crystal of MAPbBr3 can easily be grown up to the 5 mm scale by simply heating the precursor solution containing stoichiometric PbBr2 and MABr in a closed vial without evaporating solvent. Once stoichiometric MABr is replaced by MACl in the precursor solution, the mixed-halide perovskite single crystals of MAPb(Br1−xClx)3 could be obtained with the same treatment, as shown in Fig. 4B. Interestingly, the Cl:Br ratio in the single crystal is different from that in the precursor solution, suggesting an unusual crystal-growth mechanism in this solvothermal method. Later, another report showed the preparation of MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3 single crystals via a similar heating method.111 Of course, the lead halide perovskite can also be synthesized by solid-state reaction via a classical solid-crystal synthesis technique. For example, a simple mixing of PbBr2 with MABr or PbI2 with MAI can generate the red or dark MAPbBr3 and MAPbI3 powders, as we observed.
 Fig. 4  (A) Single crystals of MAPbI3 prepared from a regular crystal-growth method. Reprinted with permission from ref. 57. (B) Solvothermal growth of MAPb(Br1−xClx)3 single crystals. Reprinted with permission from ref. 58. (C) Template-assisted growth of lead halide perovskite nanocrystals. Reprinted with permission from ref. 112. (D) Scheme of the hot-injection method for preparing lead halide perovskite nanocrystals. Reprinted with permission from ref. 113. 
3.2 Nanocrystal synthesis
Much effort has been devoted to obtaining large-grain perovskite thin films for better charge-transport properties. However, it is still necessary to synthesize perovskite nanostructures in view of fundamental research and other applications. The synthesis of lead halide perovskite nanocrystals has already been demonstrated.10 Small-sized perovskite nanocrystals were reported in the pioneering work on perovskite-sensitized solar cells by Park and his co-workers.10 In this study, the perovskite nanoparticles were deposited into mesoporous TiO2 nanocrystal films using the regular perovskite precursor solution. Using similar approaches, luminescent MAPbBr3 nanocrystals were also simply deposited on the mesoporous Al2O3 nanoporous films.114 In these reports, there is no surfactant ligand to control nanoparticle size, and the size of perovskite nanocrystals appears to be controlled by the nanopores, which is similar to the hard-template approach for growing nanocrystals. Besides these mesoporous metal-oxide nanocrystal films, a soft template has also been adapted. As illustrated in Fig. 4C, a crystal-to-crystal transformation method accompanied by spinodal demixing of the triethylene glycol-containing precursor structure has been developed to synthesize various MAPbI3 nanostructures. The particle shape of perovskite nanostructures can be controlled by the selective binding of a capping agent.112 Various nanostructured lead halide perovskite crystals can grow into solution without templates or surfactants, but their size and shape distribution seems random.115
Very recently, a series of monodispersed organic/inorganic hybrid lead halide perovskite nanocrystals were synthesized via solution chemistry by a typical non-template synthesis method. This typical hot-inject method has been widely used in the synthesis of semiconductor nanocrystals.116 For the first-reported MAPbBr3 nanocrystals, the monodispersed lead halide nanocrystals were formed by injecting precursor PbBr2 solution in the presence of oleic acid and octadecene into a mixture solution of MABr and a medium- or long-chain alkyl ammonium bromide.117 The particle size can be tuned by the reaction temperature and the chain length of the alkyl ammonium bromide.118,119 These nontemplate-synthesized MAPbBr3 nanocrystals exhibit high PL, with up to 70% quantum efficiency (QE). Using a similar method, highly luminescent monodispersed colloidal inorganic lead halide perovskites nanocrystals (MAPbX3 and CsPbX3, X = Cl, Br, and I; or mixed-halide systems of Cl/Br and Br/I) have also been prepared using inexpensive commercial precursors.113,120 Their synthesis scheme is listed in Fig. 4D. Luminescent MAPbBr3 nanocrystals with 20% PL quantum yield were first nontemplate-synthesized by using ammonium bromide with a medium-sized chain that retains the nanoparticles dispersed in a wide range of organic solvents.117 A size effect was also observed in MAPbBr3 nanocrystals, which is very similar to quantum dots (QDs).119,121,122 Some theoretical calculations have predicted that the Bohr radius for these perovskite QDs is about 5 nm.52 Through the comparisons between 3 nm-sized MAPbBr3 QDs and the corresponding micrometer-sized bulk particles, the size-dependent enhanced PL quantum yield seems to originate from both the increase of the exciton binding energy and chemical passivation of the Br-rich surface.123
Other than the organic–inorganic hybrid lead halide perovskite, highly luminescent monodisperse colloidals with all inorganic cesium lead halide perovskite nanocubes (CsPbX3, X = Cl, Br, and I; or mixed-halide systems Cl/Br and Br/I) have been prepared recently by a typical QD synthesis method using inexpensive commercial precursors.120Fig. 5A reveals that the bandgap energies and emission spectra of these CsPbX3 nanocrystals can be tuned through compositional modulations and quantum size-effects, and their spectra are tunable over the entire visible spectral region of 410–700 nm. These MAPbX3 (X = Br, I, Cl) and CsPbX3 nanocrystals are promising alternative candidates to complement metal chalcogenide-based QDs for optoelectronic applications.120,123,125 The chemical composition of the CsPbX3 nanocrystals can also be easily tuned by anion-exchange reactions, as illustrated in Fig. 5B.124
 Fig. 5  (A) Colloidal perovskite CsPbX3 nanocrystals (NCs; X = Cl, Br, I) with size- and composition-tunable bandgap energies covering the entire visible spectral region with narrow and bright emission. Reprinted with permission from ref. 120. (B) Sketch of the inter-particle anion exchange method for growing colloidal CsPbX3 NCs (X = Cl, Br, I). Reprinted with permission from ref. 124. 
4. Deposition of halide perovskite thin films
Because the main application of hybrid perovskite is, to date, centered on optoelectronic device applications, a high-quality thin film is needed in either a solar cell or light-emitting device. The fabrication of perovskite thin films has been widely investigated in the past several years with tremendous progress.
4.1 Vapor-phase deposition
The first uniform flat lead halide perovskite films were fabricated by dual-source vapor deposition, as shown in Fig. 6A,126 in which MAPbI3−xClx was carefully deposited with evaporation simultaneously from two separate sources at 10−5 mbar with an as-deposited molar ratio of 4:1 for MAI and PbCl2. Later, a semitransparent perovskite film with centimeter-scale superior uniformity was prepared by a vapor method, in which both the PbCl2 evaporation rate and the MAI vapor pressure were controllable, as shown in Fig. 6B. This hybrid method has high reproducibility for large-area deposition.127 Both reports have revealed that the precursor ratio control in the vapor deposition is critical to the successful deposition of high-quality perovskite film.
 Fig. 6  (A) Dual-source thermal evaporation system for depositing perovskite thin films using MAI as the organic source and PbCl2 as the inorganic source. Reprinted with permission from ref. 126. (B) Thermal-evaporation system for controlling the MAI vapor partial pressure inside the vacuum chamber. Reprinted with permission from ref. 127. 
To avoid the difficulty in controlling the precursor ratio in vapor-phase deposition, a layer-by-layer approach is developed to prepare uniform and compact MAPbI3−xClx perovskite films.128 The PbCl2 film was first evaporated onto the substrate and followed by soaking it in an MAI solution. The film thickness was controlled by the layer-by-layer cycles. Finally, the PSCs fabricated by this method showed an efficiency up to 15.12% with improved stability.128 The vapor-deposition technique requires advanced, expensive equipment, and most research groups do not find it attractive for depositing high-quality perovskite films because of the possible complicated growth mechanism in vapor-phase deposition.
4.2 Solution-chemistry approaches
Since PSCs have become one of the hottest research topics, tremendous research efforts have focused on developing synthetic controls for preparing high-quality perovskite films, which has been one of the most important factors for successfully fabricating high-efficiency PSCs.8,45,96,110,129–142 Among these reports, solution-chemistry fabrication of perovskite films represents the mainstream because of its low-cost, facile process in producing high-quality perovskite thin films. The various solution-chemistry techniques for depositing perovskite thin films can be grouped into two main strategies: one-step and two-step methods. In the typical one-step method, the perovskite films are directly deposited from the precursor solution or source, which is similar to most film deposition techniques. Because perovskite MAPbI3 can be synthesized by intercalation of MAI into PbI2, a typical two-step method encompasses the first step of PbI2 deposition, which is then converted into MAPbI3 during the second conversion step. The schematic growth processes of the one-step and two-step method are compared in Fig. 7. The morphology and quality of the perovskite films deposited by the one-step method are primarily determined by the film shrinkage during the crystallization of perovskite due to the removal of solvent. The main challenge for the two-step method is the volume expansion of PbI2 precursor films because of the MAI intercalation. Thus, the key factor for solution-chemistry deposition of perovskite films is to control film shrinkage in the one-step method and film expansion in the two-step method.
 Fig. 7  The growth scheme of MAPbI3 perovskite by one-step and two-step methods. 

4.2.1 One-step solution deposition. 
In the one-step method, the formation of perovskite film undergoes two key steps: removal of excess solvent through evaporation and crystallization of solid perovskite film. In the classical one-step method, these two steps usually occur simultaneously during spin-coating and/or subsequent annealing processes. This is not a significant issue for depositing perovskites in mesoporous-configuration PSCs.143–152 However, it is difficult to obtain a high-quality and uniform, planar perovskite film due to film shrinkage. The issues of film shrinkage in the one-step method are related to the simultaneous solvent evaporation and perovskite crystallization. There are dozens of reported one-step methods to deposit high-quality perovskite films with high coverage, and they generally follow two strategies: (1) in retarded crystallization, a smooth precursor film is formed, followed by slow crystallization to form perovskites; (2) in rapid crystallization, a high-quality perovskite film is obtained directly by accelerating the perovskite nucleation/crystallization process even before the solvent evaporation is completed.

Retarded crystallization. The retarded crystallization of perovskite in a one-step method can be realized by controlling solvent composition and additives, as illustrated in Fig. 8A. The perovskite precursor solution is usually prepared in γ-butyrolactone (GBL), dimethylformamide (DMF), and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), with an oxygen group to coordinate with Pb2+.153 In the first perovskite-sensitized solar cell paper by Miyasaka and co-workers,9 the MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3 precursor solutions were prepared by dissolving MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3 in DMF. Park and his co-workers later prepared the MAPbI3 solution in GBL.10 When preparing the MAPbI3 precursor solution, it is generally observed that the mixture of MAI and PbI2 can be more easily dissolved in solvent than dissolving either MAI or PbI2 alone. This observation suggests that MAI and PbI2 might form cations, ions, or complexes with the solvent molecule. When using either DMF or GBL as the solvent, MAPbI3 perovskite films with poor surface coverage on a planar substrate are immediately formed after a few minutes of annealing to evaporate the solvent.45 In comparison to DMF and GBL, DMSO can interact with PbI2 to form strong DMSO–PbI2 complexes to retard rapid crystal reaction, which has been demonstrated by the Seok and Han groups.153,154
 Fig. 8  (A) Illustration of perovskite formation stages in fabricating MAPbI3−xClx thin films with an excess organic component to retard the crystallization of perovskite thin films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 35. (B) Solvent engineering procedure for preparing a uniform and dense perovskite film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 186. 
The first successful one-step method to deposit high-quality MAPbI3−xClx film used a DMF precursor solution of PbCl2 and MAI with a 1:3 molar ratio (denoted as the PbCl2–3MAI precursor).12 With the usual annealing temperature of ∼100 °C, polycrystalline perovskite films with ∼100–1000 nm grain size are typically obtained. Snaith and co-workers have systematically investigated the effect of annealing temperature on the surface coverage and device characteristics using the PbCl2–3MAI precursor.155 They found that a short, rapid annealing at 130 °C favors the growth of uniform, micron-sized textured perovskites with better performance.156 The MAPbI3−xClx film prepared from PbCl2–3MAI precursor requires an annealing process, and the Cl content in the final MAPbI3−xClx film is much lower than the stoichiometric ratio in the PbCl2–3MAI precursor, which suggests that some Cl composition is sublimated.144,157 An annealing temperature as low as 60 °C is insufficient to obtain MAPbI3−xClx perovskite films from the PbCl2–3MAI precursor.144 In addition to annealing temperature, the annealing atmosphere is also very important for the properties of the MAPbI3−xClx film because the perovskite crystallization process is very sensitive to moisture. Usually, a perovskite fabricated under a moisture-free condition may exhibit better film coverage than one prepared under ambient condition.155 Yang and his co-workers have demonstrated that certain moisture levels could promote the formation of high-quality perovskite films.56,158 The PbCl2–3MAI precursor recipe has become one of the most popular for producing high-quality PSCs or photoelectronic devices.93,128,159–170 However, it is difficult to obtain a pinhole-free perovskite film by this PbCl2–3MAI precursor recipe alone. To further improve the processing control, Jen and co-workers have demonstrated that 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO; ∼1 wt%) can be used as an effective additive to the standard PbCl2–3MAI precursor solution to improve the surface coverage and film morphology of the resulting MAPbI3−xClx perovskite films for better PV performance.171,172 Similar to DMSO, the DIO additive retards the crystallization rate of perovskite formation through strong chelation with Pb2+.172 Other lead salts such as Pb(NO3)2 and PbCO3 have also been tried to replace PbCl2 in the standard mixed-halide recipe to prepare a smooth and uniform lead halide perovskite layer.35,173 Among these different precursor compositions, the mixture of Pb(CH3COO)2 with 3MAI provides much smoother and more uniform perovskite film than other lead salt recipes.35,174 Some fundamental studies have revealed that different lead salts strongly affect the activation energy for the transformation of the precursor into perovskites.121
We have found that using an additive (e.g., MACl) to the standard perovskite precursor (e.g., equimolar mixture of MAI/Br and PbI2 in DMF) can significantly slow down the crystallization process of forming MAPbI3 and MAPbI2Br, and the rate of the perovskite formation process can be controlled by the amount of MACl.78,175 Using the MACl additive, the coverage/morphology of MAPbI3 and MAPbI2Br perovskite films is substantially improved compared to those not using MACl. The much improved film morphology for MAPbI3 and MAPbI2Br is presumably associated with the formation of an intermediate solid solution containing MACl in the precursor or during the film formation process, in which the MACl works like a glue.176 Other chlorine additives such as NH4Cl have also been effective in obtaining high-quality perovskite films.177,178 It is worth noting that there is no traceable chlorine found in the final perovskite films when using the additive of either MACl or NH4Cl, which further confirms that the chlorine compound can sublimate. It is interesting to note that the chlorine compounds can be removed at a lower temperature than pure MACl when they form a solid solution with perovskite precursors.78,179 A recent study shows that not all chlorine-containing additives exhibit a positive effect on optoelectronic properties of perovskite films; for example, the non-volatile CaCl2 additive shows a reversible effect on PV performance although high-quality perovskite can also be obtained with the addition of CaCl2.180 Other than a chlorine compound additive, the iodine compounds such as MAI and hydroiodic acid (HI) are also efficient additives to retard the crystallization of perovskites. The PbI2–3MAI or PbBr2–3MAI precursor recipes (precursor solution of PbI2/PbBr2 and MAI with a 1:3 molar ratio) have been used to fabricate high-quality MAPbI3 and MAPbI3−xBrx perovskite films.181,182 The addition of HI into MAPbI3 precursor solution helps achieve highly uniform perovskite films.183,184 Furthermore, the addition of a small amount of HI into the stoichiometric FAI:PbI2 perovskite precursor solution can significantly facilitate the formation of phase-pure and high-quality FAPbI3.87 Similarly, the addition of hydrobromidic acid is useful for achieving MAPbBr3 PSCs with a record high efficiency.185

Rapid crystallization. The different additive-controlled one-step methods mentioned above are successful in preparing high-performance PSCs. However, these methods need a relatively long annealing time because of the retarded crystallization process. In contrast to the strategy of slowing down the film-formation process, another effective one-step method is to have rapid crystallization or precipitation of perovskite film through solvent engineering. Seok and his co-workers have demonstrated successful solvent engineering to prepare extremely uniform, dense perovskite layers that led to a certified power conversion efficiency of up to ∼17.9% with no current–voltage hysteresis, which is the most significant, recent advance in one-step solution process.97,154,187,188 The key to Seok's solvent-engineering approach is to first obtain a highly uniform perovskite precursor film with DMSO as the complex to retard the crystallization of perovskite, which needs a short annealing on such precursor films. Cheng and co-workers have independently developed the antisolvent concept in one-step solution-processing perovskite films.189,190 In Cheng's approach, the perovskite film is immediately obtained after the antisolvent process because the solvent DMF does not form complexes with Pb2+ as strong as DMSO to retard the perovskite's crystallization. In both Seok's solvent-engineering and Cheng's antisolvent concept, the key step for obtaining a uniform film involves applying an (anti)solvent (e.g., toluene, chlorine benzene) during spin coating, as shown in Fig. 8B. This solvent does not dissolve the perovskite precursor film but is miscible with the perovskite precursor solvent. Adding toluene or chlorine benzene during spin coating of the perovskite precursor solution induces a drastic increase in the uniform concentration of perovskite precursor materials, leading to the rapid precipitation of perovskite film across the entire substrate surface. As a result of the rapid precipitation, a uniform perovskite precursor film is formed before the annealing process to evaporate the solvent.189 In addition to the solvent engineering or antisolvent concept, the crystallization of perovskite films can also be achieved by quick evaporation of solvent via the gas-blow method or hot-casting methods.191,192 The gas-assisted solution-processing technique or gas-blow method changes the kinetics of nucleation and crystal growth of the perovskite via rapid evaporation of the solvent by blowing Ar gas during the spin coating; a very uniform perovskite thin film packed with crystalline grains was obtained after annealing.191 In the hot-casting methods, a hot precursor solution of MAPbI3 without additive was spin coated onto a hot substrate up to 170 °C. The solvent (e.g., DMF) evaporates quickly during the hot-casting process, and a high-quality crystallized perovskite film is simultaneously formed during the spin-coating process. The grain size of the obtained perovskite film by this hot-casting method appears to be much larger than those post-annealing ones.192
Recently, the mechanism for rapid crystallization in the hot-casting method has been carefully investigated and proposed.193 The thermal energies during the hot-coating process is sufficient to promote the growth of perovskite crystals into a Volmer–Weber mode, in which precursor solution solidifies rapidly and then intermediately converts into a pure crystalline MAPbI3 film. This thermal-induced deposition of dense perovskite layers with island-shaped grains primarily comprises small (submicron) crystals. This observation contrasts significantly with the wafer-scale, single-crystalline claim in the previous report.


4.2.2 Two-step solution synthesis. 
In the one-step methods, the primary problem is that the naturally crystallized perovskite films often exhibit low-quality film uniformity and perovskite crystallinity. In contrast, the main precursor of PbI2 can easily be fabricated into a uniform, compact film by solution chemistry or vapor deposition due to the layer structure of PbI2. This layer structure makes it easy for intercalation with ammonium,194 pyridine,195 and methylamine.196,197 Mitzi and his co-workers first reported the two-step deposition of perovskite film, in which the MAI intercalates into the PbI2 precursor film to form MAPbI3 perovskite by dipping PbI2 film in MAI solution.196 Grätzel et al. first adapted this method to successfully fabricate the first PSC with >14% certified efficiency.197 Various groups later adopted the two-step deposition technique to fabricate high-performance PSCs.17,20,26,88,197–210
In a typical two-step method, the formation of perovskite is a heterogeneous phase reaction between the solid PbI2 precursor film and MAI solution. The two main features for two-step deposition are the following: (1) the morphology of the final perovskite film is largely determined by the PbI2 film, and (2) the reaction rate is determined by the diffusion of MAI into the PbI2 lattice. To obtain a smooth perovskite film, the warm substrate and PbI2 precursor solution (e.g., 60–70 °C) are commonly used to achieve a compact and uniform PbI2 film on the substrate via spin coating.14,197,200,210 Because of the nature of the two-step conversion process described above, the main challenges for the two-step method are volume expansion and MAI diffusion into the PbI2 lattice.
The mesoporous structure can provide enough space for volume expansion and diffusion of MAI, so that the two-step method has been quite successful in preparing high-quality perovskite for mesoporous configurations. It only takes about 15 seconds for the complete conversion of PbI2 into perovskite using TiO2 mesoporous films in Grätzel's first report of fabricating a mesoporous PSC with two-step deposition.197 In contrast to the mesoporous configuration, the complete conversion of PbI2 into MAPbI3 with two-step deposition is generally a challenge for preparing planar perovskite films. It normally takes up to 2–3 hours for the complete conversion of compact PbI2 into perovskite on planar substrates.196 The prolonged soaking time could lead to the dissolution (sometimes the peeling off) of perovskites, which would significantly affect PSC efficiency and limits device reproducibility due to the extraction of MAI from perovskite.211,212 The long soaking step required for the planar PbI2 film is likely caused by the limited access for diffusion and intercalation of MAI into the compact PbI2 layers to form MAPbI3. Furthermore, the volume expansion induced by the MAI intercalation reaction also blocks the pathways of MAI diffusion into the PbI2 layer. The PbI2 residue usually leads to the low performance in PSCs,153,213,214 and we found that the PbI2 layer can be detrimental to electron transfer.215

Complete conversion of PbI

2
. Several strategies have been developed to facilitate the challenge of intercalating MAI into the PbI2 layer. The first simple method is the pre-wetting technique developed by Grätzel and co-workers, in which the PbI2-coated TiO2 film is pre-wetted in IPA prior to the second step of dipping in the MAI solution. A detailed study revealed that the pre-wetting time (from 0 to 10 s) strongly affects the morphology and consequently the device performance of perovskite prepared by the two-step method.200 In addition to pre-wetting, the crystallinity of PbI2 precursor films and the MAI solution temperature also significantly affect the kinetics of MAI intercalation into PbI2 films. Due to variations in PbI2 annealing treatment and MAI solution temperature from different groups, the soaking time required for converting PbI2 on mesoporous TiO2 to perovskite after pre-wetting treatment varies from less than a minute to hours.197,216,217 Several strategies have been developed to achieve better reproducibility and quality of perovskite films with the two-step method.
To reduce the crystallinity of the PbI2 film, unheated PbI2 precursor solution and substrates had been used for spin coating without post-annealing.26,213,218 The precursor PbI2 films were then dried naturally with slow evaporation of the remaining precursor solvent, which can result in porous perovskite films. Such naturally dried porous PbI2 films can be converted completely into perovskite by the two-step method more rapidly than those with annealed films. We have demonstrated that a porous PbI2 film can be obtained via thermal decomposition of PbI2·MACl film, which can be converted rapidly into MAPbI3 perovskite without any trace of residual PbI2.211 Due to the available solvent to dissolve the PbI2 precursor, most PbI2 precursor films are deposited from PbI2 DMF solution. However, the reproducibility of the PSCs via the regular two-step method based on DMF-solution-prepared PbI2 appears to be low in early reports. Furthermore, in regular two-step-fabricated perovskite film (using crystalized PbI2 prepared from PbI2 DMF solution), the grain size often has a broad distribution as well as observable pinholes. Han and his co-workers proposed to use amorphous PbI2 film by using DMSO as an alternative solvent to improve the conversion process.153 The formation of complexes between PbI2 and DMSO is so strong that the crystallization of PbI2 is significantly retarded, and the prepared PbI2–DMSO complex films have negligible PbI2 peaks in X-ray diffraction (XRD). The amorphous PbI2 layer is much more uniform and smooth than the regular crystalline PbI2 film prepared from DMF solution. It is demonstrated that MAI intercalates into amorphous PbI2 more homogenously and enables a full conversion of PbI2 to a pinhole-free MAPbI3 film with uniform distribution of perovskite grain sizes. Consequently, high-performance PSCs fabricated from these amorphous PbI2 precursor films were obtained with improved reproducibility.
Adjusting the MAI solution is also effective for fabricating high-efficiency PSCs. Park and his co-workers have demonstrated that varying the MAI solution concentration can affect the morphology of perovskite films, and, in general, a lower MAI solution seems to promote the formation of a perovskite film with larger grain sizes.219 The addition of MACl into the MAI solution in the regular two-step method has also been tried for fabricating morphology-controllable perovskite films for high-efficiency cells.160,210,220 The chlorine incorporation from the addition of MACl affects the perovskite film morphology, but it also improves carrier transport, leading to improved conversion efficiency.220
To avoid dissolution and peeling-off associated with the solid/liquid interface in fabricating planar perovskite film with a complete conversion, a solid/vapor reaction step (exposing the PbI2 film to the MAI vapor) was developed as an alternative to replace the regular MAI solution soaking step. This solid/vapor two-step conversion approach in Fig. 9A was first demonstrated by Yang and co-workers to prepare high-quality, pinhole-free planar MAPbI3 films.20 In this report, the PbI2 film is deposited via the standard regular solution chemistry by spin-coating a PbI2 DMF solution; the annealed PbI2 film was then reacted in situ with MAI vapor. A pinhole-free, high-quality perovskite film was then obtained after vapor reaction for hours. In contrast, the annealed PbI2 film soaked in MAI solution after half an hour was then peeled off but still exhibited PbI2 residues. In this report, the whole procedure simply uses some glassware, which could introduce uncertainties in accurately controlling the conversion process. Later, a series of solid/vapor two-step methods adopting a chemical-vapor deposition setup was then developed to prepare morphology-controllable perovskite with higher reproducibility.221,222
 Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of perovskite film formation through the (A) vapor-assisted solution process (reprinted with permission from ref. 20); (B) two-step spin-coating method (reprinted with permission from ref. 223); (C) solvent annealing process (reprinted with permission from ref. 224); and (D) solid-state pressing method (reprinted with permission from ref. 232). 

Two-step spin-coating and solvent-annealing approaches. In addition to the hybrid sequential deposition approaches mentioned above, a series of simple but effective “two-step spin coating” or “interdiffusion” methods were simultaneously developed to overcome the incomplete conversion of PbI2 into perovskites. Park and his co-workers presented the “two-step spin-coating” approach, in which the MAI solution is dropped onto the PbI2 precursor film, followed by spin coating. As shown in Fig. 9B, this is different from soaking the PbI2 film in MAI solution.223 Huang and his co-workers developed the “interdiffusion” approach, as illustrated in Fig. 9C, where MAI is also interdiffused into the PbI2 film through spin-coating the MAI solution, followed by a solvent-vapor-assisted annealing to control morphology.224–226
Many reports have adopted this two-step spin-coating method or the modified interdiffusion approaches to obtain more reliable and reproducible high-efficiency PSCs.213,227–231 The faster conversion of PbI2 into perovskite in the two-step spin-coating approaches is preferred and may be due to the following: minimized possibility for a back-extraction reaction of MAI from perovskite due to accelerated solvent removal during the spin-coating step and the relatively excessive amount of MAI for diffusion into PbI2. In other words, two-step spin-coating approaches seem to be a combination of solution chemistry and solid reaction.172,213 In addition to faster conversion of PbI2 into solvent annealing, the two-step spin-coating approach has another main advantage: PSCs prepared by two-step spin coating have acceptable performance even in the presence of PbI2 residue. In contrast, the PSC with a similar amount of PbI2 residue prepared via standard two-step solution deposition has much lower PV performance, especially in photocurrent density.213 Our previous investigation revealed that the charge transfer in PbI2 is much slower than in perovskite215 and the low photocurrent density should be due to the blocking effect by the compact PbI2 layer. In contrast, the diffusion of MAI in the two-step spin-coating approach could effectively penetrate the PbI2 layer.

Solid-state reaction. Similar to the solid synthesis of lead halide powder, high-quality lead halide perovskite films have also recently been easily prepared by solid-state chemistry, as shown in Fig. 9D. The MAPbI3 films were fabricated via thermally accelerated diffusion of MAI and PbI2, in which these two solid-state precursor thin films of MAI and PbI2 were brought into contact with each other. This solid-state reaction fabricated perovskite film exhibited good optical absorption and a smooth morphology, and it was fabricated into an efficient PSC.232

Volume-expansion control. The techniques mentioned above have effectively addressed the main issue of the two-step deposition method with complete conversion of PbI2 into perovskites. These methods mainly focus on controlling perovskite growth kinetics. Very recently, however, some novel concepts of volume-expansion control have been developed to tune both the growth kinetics and perovskite morphology using two-step methods. Although the surface of planar perovskite films by the two-step method is usually rough due to volume expansion during the conversion process, it is not particularly difficult to fabricate uniform MAPbI3 film using several modified two-step methods. However, it is quite challenging to deposit high-quality FAPbI3via the two-step method if using the regular PbI2 precursor films because of the large size of the FA group. Zhao and his co-workers have recently demonstrated the deposition of a uniform FAPbI3 using a novel precursor of HPbI3 to replace PbI2 as the starting material for the two-step method. HPbI3 is formed by the reaction of PbI2 and HI in DMF.95 In this report, the intercalation of FAI into the HPbI3 is much easier than the packed PbI2 films because the PbI2 framework has been expanded in HPbI3, as shown in Fig. 10A. Similarly, a recent study has demonstrated that the Cl doped HPbI2Cl can also be converted into MAPbI3via sequential deposition with fast conversion rate and less volume expansion.233
 Fig. 10  (A) Schematic illustration of the configurations of PbI2, HPbI3, and FAPbI3 and their intercalation reaction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 95. (B) Schematics of FAPbI3 perovskite crystallization involving the direct intramolecular exchange of dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) molecules intercalated in PbI2 with formamidinium iodide (FAI). Reprinted with permission from ref. 234. (C) Typical scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of (a–d) PbI2·xMAI (x = 0.1, 0.15, 0.2, and 0.3) precursor films and (e–h) MAPbI3 films prepared from their respective pre-expanded precursor films as indicated. Reprinted with permission from ref. 235. 
Recently, Seok and his co-workers have reported an “intramolecular exchange” method to address the volume-expansion issues.234 In this method, a PbI2(DMSO)x complex was developed as a novel precursor for the two-step method. PbI2(DMSO)2 was isolated from the PbI2 DMSO solution by precipitating with toluene. PbI2(DMSO) was prepared by annealing PbI2(DMSO)2 to remove the DMSO. When using the PbI2–DMSO complex precursor film in the two-step method, the DMSO molecules intercalated in PbI2 can be easily replaced by FAI molecules due to their higher affinity toward PbI2 compared to DMSO. Interestingly, the inorganic PbI2 framework expanded by DMSO would be retained after the FAI intercalation, as shown in Fig. 10B. There is negligible volume expansion, resulting in pinhole-free perovskite films with large crystal grains. High-efficiency solar cells fabricated using this intermolecular exchange technique exhibited average power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of over 19% and achieved a record certified 20.1% efficiency based on the best cells.234
We have recently developed a morphology-controllable two-step method for depositing MAPbI3 perovskite films. The key of this method is to add a small amount (non-stoichiometric) MAI (denoted as xMAI) into the PbI2 precursor solution.235 With the addition of xMAI, the crystallinity of the obtained PbI2·xMAI film decreases significantly due to the formation of some unknown complex between PbI2 and MAI. The stoichiometric (PbI2:MAI = 1:1) precursor solution cannot result in a uniform perovskite film via simple spin coating, but the nonstoichiometric PbI2·xMAI precursor solution can spin-coat a smooth PbI2·xMAI film when x < 0.3. The addition of non-stoichiometric xMAI is believed to partially expand the PbI2 framework, which could facilitate the intercalation of MAI into the PbI2 framework. It takes ∼1–3 min to completely convert PbI2 into perovskite, whereas the standard spin-coated PbI2 film needs about 20 min for a complete conversion under the same conditions. The morphology of the perovskite fabricated by the two-step method can be further controlled by adjusting the x value. The best perovskite film is so smooth that it is comparable to the perovskite film fabricated via the one-step solvent-engineering method, as shown in Fig. 10C. Furthermore, the volume-expansion ratio in these PbI2·xMAI films is less than 2, and it depends on the exact value of x. In summary, the issue of volume expansion with two-step solution growth has now been addressed by several approaches. With this progress, better perovskite thin films with controllable morphology, crystallinity, or even interfaces could help achieve better conversion efficiency and improve device stability in the future.

4.3 Moisture sensitivity in fabricating perovskite film
It is well known that organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites are sensitive to humidity, and so is perovskite film fabrication.236–240 In general, a perovskite film fabricated under moisture-free conditions may exhibit better film coverage than the one prepared under ambient conditions.155 Therefore, many research groups prepare PSCs completely in glove boxes filled with an inert gas (e.g., Ar or N2). Contrary to this general perception, Yang and his co-workers have reported that certain moisture conditions (e.g., ∼30% relative humidity in air) could promote the formation of high-quality perovskite films.56,158 In general, the one-step method is more sensitive to humidity than the two-step method. A recent report has shown that the relative humidity strongly affects the perovskite film morphology of FAPbI3. The uniform and fully covered film morphology prepared under low humidity (e.g., ∼2%) deteriorated to an inhomogeneous film consisting of pinholes under relatively high humidity (e.g., 30–40%). Such deterioration of film morphology is also accompanied by reduced perovskite film crystallinity, lower optical absorption, and shorter carrier lifetime. Consequently, the device efficiency decreases from 16.2% at 2% humidity to less than 10% at 40% humidity.241 In contrast, a 15.76%-efficient MAPbI3 PSC was prepared under 50% relative humidity via a two-step method.227 The possible reason could be that the morphology of the PbI2 precursor is less sensitive to humidity and could be improved via pre-heating of the substrate, whereas a similar strategy does not work for the perovskite precursor film using the one-step method. Very recently, adding a certain amount of H2O into PbI2 has been demonstrated to be an effective method to obtain high-quality perovskite films in two-step sequential deposition methods.242 This progress reveals that moisture sensitivity in perovskite fabrication can be solved or controlled, and thus, it should not be a technique obstacle for future large-scale fabrication of high-efficiency PSCs.
4.4 Large-scale and large-size PSCs
Although there are still many technical problems (such as stability) to be addressed, the high efficiency of PSCs has sparked interest for possible large-scale fabrication. Currently, most of the high efficiencies reported are obtained from ∼0.1–0.2 cm2-sized PSC devices, primarily fabricated by spin coating. Recently, some large-area PSCs up to 100 cm2 in area have been reported, and several scale-up techniques have been attempted for large-scale fabrication in the future.

Spin coating. Spin coating may be the simplest and most effective technique for fabricating a thin film by solution chemistry although it does not have a high yield because most of the precursor solution is wasted during the process. In addition to the intrinsic shortcoming associated with spin coating, the early reported solution-chemistry approaches are also not effective in fabricating uniform perovskite films over a large area. Very recently, 12%-efficient planar hybrid PSCs with 100 cm2 area were reported with the inverted configuration of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PCBM/Au.183,184 This 100 cm2-sized, pinhole-free perovskite layer in Fig. 11A was fabricated by one-step spin coating of a MAPbI3/DMSO solution or MAPbI3 DMF solution with HI addition to control the uniformity of the final perovskite films. DMSO is used to control the crystallization process, as discussed above.243 The addition of HI can control the crystal growth, but it also inhibits the thermal decomposition of perovskite to reduce the defects in the perovskite layers. All these improvements help to obtain medium-sized PSCs.
 Fig. 11  (A) Photograph of the inverted MAPbI3 planar hybrid solar submodule (10 × 10 cm2) prepared by spin coating. Reprinted with permission from ref. 183. (B) Schematic illustration showing the (anti)solvent–solvent extraction process for the room-temperature deposition of hybrid perovskite thin films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 244. 
It is clear that the anti-polar solvent or solvent-engineering techniques mentioned above are effective for obtaining highly uniform perovskite films. However, the addition of anti-polar solvent or gas (Ar) blowing during spin coating makes this process difficult for scale up. Recently, a room-temperature (anti)solvent–solvent extraction (SSE) concept was developed to deposit hybrid perovskite thin films over large areas. Instead of adding the antisolvent during spin coating, the coated substrate using a novel perovskite precursor solution is immediately immersed in a bath of an anti-polar solvent (e.g., diethyl ether) at room temperature, as shown in Fig. 11B. The precursor-solvent and anti-polar solvent induces the rapid crystallization of uniform, ultra-smooth perovskite thin films.239
This process makes spin-coating potentially effective for fabricating medium-sized perovskite films for solar cells. However, the low efficiency of precursor solution usage, especially for the Pb-containing precursor solution, precludes spin coating as an ideal, environmentally benign commercial technique for scaled-up fabrication of PSCs. Some other scale-up techniques for PSCs, especially the perovskite layer fabrication method, are consequently being developed with promising results.

Spray and blade coating. Spray coating is one of the most popular techniques for the film preparation or coating process, and it can provide a uniform film that is comparable to spin coating. Lidzey and his co-workers have successfully demonstrated for the first time the fabrication of high-efficiency PSCs by spray coating.163 In this report, the precursor solution is the mixture of PbCl2 and 3 molar ratio MAI in DMF with a concentration of 100 mg mL−1. Because the deposited lead halide layer can be re-dissolved by the solvent such as DMF, it is important to control solvent evaporation to obtain a uniform, smooth perovskite layer. To evaporate the solvent effectively, the substrate for the spray deposition should be heated (>55 °C). The uniform films obtained were then treated with thermal annealing at a higher temperature (∼90 °C) to remove the Cl additive. Recently, precursors of MAI and PbI2 (99%, Alfa Aesar) were dissolved in anhydrous DMF with various molar weight ratios (1:0.65, 1:0.7, 1:0.75, 1:0.8, and 1:1) at a concentration of about 1 wt% and were tested for spray deposition of MAPbI3.245 The scheme for this spray technique is listed in Fig. 12A. The effect of precursor ratio, spray volume, substrate temperature, and post-spray annealing temperature has been explored. Interestingly, the optimal spray conditions are similar to those for spin-coating deposition. An in situ optical thickness monitoring system with a photodiode/light-emitting diode (LED) couple has been incorporated into the spray deposition process.246 The precursor solution concentrations also significantly affect the grain sizes of the deposited perovskite films.247 The report showed that the spray method could be an effective candidate for upscale production of a perovskite active layer; however, the spray process may introduce some lead contamination in the work place due to MAPbI3 precursor mist in the air or exhausting system, and this issue needs to be carefully evaluated and mitigated. Another strategy, other than the direct spray of MAPbI3 precursor solution, is to spray the MAI solution onto PbI2 film to form MAPbI3 films similar to a two-step approach. The morphology and grain size can be adjusted via the MAI solution's concentration, as shown in Fig. 12B.231
 Fig. 12  (A) Schematic illustration of perovskite film formation through the spray deposition process. Reprinted with permission from ref. 247. (B) Schematics of perovskite formation from a two-step process using spin-coated PbI2 and spray-coated MAI. Reprinted with permission from ref. 231. 
The doctor-blade coating is the most straightforward candidate technique for large-scale production of perovskite films due to it being a fast process, having high yield, and safely controlling lead contamination. However, it is challenging to deposit a MAPbI3 layer via the doctor-blade technique by a regular process of spreading the precursor solution and then annealing the substrate.248,249 The technical obstacle is caused by the unbalanced crystal growth and solvent evaporation, which is similar to classical one-step spin coating. A precursor solution of MAPbI3−xClx/DIO was used for the blade-coating technique, and the PSC fabricated using this approach exhibited an efficiency of up to 12%. Interestingly, this doctor-bladed perovskite layer of MAPbI3−xClx exhibited enhanced environmental stability compared to spin-coated layers.248 Huang and his co-workers successfully fabricated large-area PSCs with up to 15% efficiency by the doctor-blade coating method using the regular MAPbI3 DMF solution.250 In this doctor-blade method as shown in Fig. 13A, the substrates were held at elevated temperature during doctor-blade deposition to balance the solvent evaporation and crystal growth, leading to the formation of smooth, pinhole-free perovskite films. The perovskite film thickness and morphology can also be tuned by precursor concentration and PbI2:MAI ratio. This doctor-blade perovskite fabrication method opens up a new opportunity for scaling up the fabrication and commercialization of PSCs, which is comparable to the roll-to-roll method for organic photovoltaic (OPV) commercialization.
 Fig. 13  (A) Schematic illustration of the experimental setup for perovskite film deposition via doctor-blade coating and a photo of the typical perovskite film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 250. (B) Schematic illustration and photos of slot-die coating using a gas-quenching process for fabricating a pinhole-free PbI2 layer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 251. 

Roll-to-roll method. Very recently, a scalable printing method of sequential slot-die coating has been demonstrated to produce efficient PSCs. Using this method, all layers except the electrodes for the PSC can be fabricated through printing, which is suitable for roll-to-roll production.251 In this report, the precursor solution of PbI2 was homogenously spread on the substrate via slot-die coating, and a gas-quenching process was used to evaporate the solvent. Finally, a uniform pinhole-free PbI2 precursor film was obtained; the quality of this film is comparable to spin-coating-prepared PbI2 precursor films, as shown in Fig. 13B. The PbI2 precursor films can be converted into perovskite through a sequential deposition process, which is also suitable for large-scale fabrication. Recently, a similar technique of air-flow-assisted PbI2 blade-coating deposition has fabricated 100 cm2 PSC modules with up to 10% efficiency for each 10 cm2 subcell.252 In the reports mentioned above, only the perovskite active layer is processed through the large-scale technique. The electrode deposition still uses the expensive and complicated evaporation process.
In addition to producing rigid PSCs, a 4.9%-efficient flexible PSC with printed back-electrodes has been demonstrated recently via a fully ambient scalable technique.253 In this report, the perovskite layer can be deposited via both one-step and two-step methods on the indium tin oxide (ITO) substrate by slot-die roll coating, which is similar to the slot-die coating mentioned above. The processing time for depositing the perovskite layer is between 5 and 45 minutes, depending on whether the one-step or two-step method is used. The back-contact electrode (Ag or carbon) is also screen printed. A significant loss in solar cell performance of about 50% is found in devices using this fabrication approach compared to solar cells using the regular spin-coating of the perovskite layer coupled with evaporation of the back electrode. This loss of efficiency is comparable to previous reports on printable polymer solar cells. However, it is still a promising demonstration of the potential for realistic scaled-up fabrication of PSCs.
4.5 Surface passivation of the halide perovskite layer
Trap states on the perovskite surface could generate charge recombination. It is hypothesized that uncoordinated iodine ions within the perovskite structure are responsible for forming trap states on the perovskite surface. To passivate these trap states, some supramolecular halogen in Fig. 14A has been used to successfully coordinate with these iodine trapping sites. The surface passivation treatment helps to achieve a high efficiency of up to 15.7% for PSCs, with a stable power output of over 15%.254 In addition to surface halide ions causing surface defects, surface Pb atoms could also introduce electronic defects. The exposed Pb is a Lewis acid, so a series of Lewis bases such as thiophene and pyridine in Fig. 14B has been used to treat the MAPbI3−xClx perovskite to passivate these surface defects. The Lewis base-passivated perovskite exhibited order-of-magnitude longer PL lifetimes, and the PCEs of the planar heterojunction PSCs based on the passivated perovskite films were 15.3% and 16.5%, respectively, for the thiophene and pyridine-treated solar cells.255
 Fig. 14  (A) Lead halide perovskite crystals passivated with the iodopentafluorobenzene (IPFB) layer via a halogen bond with lead. Reprinted with permission from ref. 254. (B) Possible nature of trap sites related to the loss of iodine at the perovskite surface and proposed surface Pb passivation mechanism by thiophene or pyridine molecules by a coordinate or dative covalent bond with the lead defect. Reprinted with permission from ref. 255. (C) Structure of the mesoporous structured PSC with HOOC-R-NH3+ between the perovskite layer and mesoporous titania. Reprinted with permission from ref. 256. (D) Passivation of MAPbI3 perovskite by PbI2 through a type I configuration. Reprinted with permission from ref. 257. 
In addition to passivating perovskites, the amino acids have been used to form a HOOC-R-NH3I monolayer as an anchor to connect the surface of porous metal oxide (titania or alumina) with the perovskite crystal layer. As shown in Fig. 14C, the bifunctional HOCO-R-NH3 could also retard the charge recombination via surface passivation as well as controlling the growth of the MAPbI3 crystal on these porous metal oxides.256 The PCE of the PSCs with the HOOC-R-NH3I monolayer exhibited up to 50% improvement in efficiency compared to the regular cell. Considering a similar surface passivation strategy of an amino acid monolayer, the carboxylate and bromoacetate monolayer has also been introduced between the MAPbBr3 and TiO2 nanostructure. The interfacial carboxylate groups could promote electron injection from MAPbBr3 to TiO2 and suppress the recombination of photoinjected electrons in the TiO2 conduction band (CB) back to the perovskites.258
Besides this ligand-induced surface passivation, the perovskite film can also be self-passivated through a controllable compositional-change technique. The decomposition of perovskite crystals during annealing releases organic species, and the PbI2 phase tends to form near perovskite grain boundaries and relevant interfaces. The wider-bandgap PbI2 layer could exhibit passivation effects similar to core–shell structured QDs, as shown in Fig. 14D, which help improve the efficiency.257 The PbI2 passivation was simultaneously confirmed by femtosecond spectroscopy.259
The trap states on the surface or at the grain boundaries of perovskites could be one origin for the large current–voltage hysteresis observed in many organometal trihalide PSCs, especially for the planar device structure. Huang and his co-workers have demonstrated that fullerene layers deposited on perovskites can effectively passivate the charge trap states on perovskite and reduce the trap density by two orders of magnitude. Finally, fullerene passivation is also shown to help suppress or eliminate the unwanted photocurrent hysteresis in PSCs.36
5. Device architectures and operation principles of PSCs
5.1 Device architectures

Mesoporous structure. The first PSC reported by the Miyasaka group was a typical sensitized solar cell using the liquid electrolyte. Common to these early configurations of PSCs is the use of a mesoporous metal-oxide layer (e.g., TiO2 and Al2O3) as the scaffold for depositing perovskites, as illustrated in Fig. 15.11–13 The configuration of mesoporous PSCs is similar to solid-state sensitized solar cells by replacing the dye molecular with lead halide perovskite. The choice of this mesoporous configuration could be that these pioneering researchers were coming from the field of DSSCs. In the mesoporous structure, the perovskite morphology is mainly controlled by the underlying mesoporous scaffold, making the perovskite deposition facile and reproducible.17,22,148,150,175,176,260–263 In the early stage, the mesoporous configuration helped realize high-efficiency PSCs when the various techniques for producing high-quality perovskite films had not yet been developed. However, the regular mesoporous layer is usually thicker than 500 nm, which could lead to a lower charge-collection efficiency, in order to absorb sufficient light in this configuration.151 But the electron diffusion length of mesoporous PSCs is around 1–2 μm, so a mesoporous layer thicker than 1 μm generally shows lower efficiency due to the limitation in charge-collection efficiency. The main disadvantage of the mesoporous configuration for PSCs is the relatively low Voc and weak light absorbance at >700 nm wavelength.264 Moreover, deposition of the mesoporous layer usually requires a high-temperature annealing process, which is inconvenient for fabricating large-area devices on large-sized fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) substrates. Thus, developing low-temperature routes for growing a mesoporous scaffold layer represents one active direction of research. With the rapid development of perovskite film deposition, the pure mesoporous device structure has become less critical. Other configurations, such as the bi-layer or planar cell structures, have attracted more attention with higher efficiencies demonstrated. However, one advantage associated with the mesoporous cell structure is the low (negligible) hysteresis in photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) measurements. This advantage has been used in a more popular, bi-layer device structure, as discussed below.
 Fig. 15  Schematic illustration of the mesoporous, bi-layer, n–i–p, and p–i–n hybrid perovskite film architectures in solar cells. HTM represents the hole-transporting material; ETM represents the electron-transporting material. 

Bi-layer structure. Shortly after the emergence of mesoporous PSCs, a PSC with a bi-layer configuration (Fig. 15) was demonstrated with a milestone efficiency of 15%.197 The bi-layer-structured perovskite has a perovskite capping layer on top of a mesoporous scaffold perovskite sensitized layer.188,254,265 Perovskite solar cells based on such a bi-layer structure have demonstrated high cell efficiency with negligible J–V hysteresis. Interestingly, all of the certified high-efficiency PSCs have apparently been limited to this configuration.13,97,197,219,234 In this bi-layer configuration, the mesoporous scaffold perovskite sensitized layer usually is thinner than the regular mesoporous PSC, and the deposition of a high-quality capping layer is key to the final efficiency. A balanced mesoporous layer and capping layer is important for having a high-efficiency PSC with the bi-layer configuration. The combination of the mesoporous layer and capping layer could help obtain high efficiency with less hysteresis, but it also makes the perovskite deposition more difficult than the corresponding mesoporous PSCs.

Planar structure. The concept of planar PSCs originated from the Al2O3-based mesoporous PSC.12 An important result from this study is that the mesoporous TiO2 electron-conducting network is not necessary for a high-performance PSC. In 2013, Snaith et al. reported a 15%-efficient planar PSC without the mesoporous layer via vapor-phase deposition.126 The main advantage of such a PSC structure is being free of a high-temperature-processed mesoporous TiO2 layer, which makes it convenient for low-temperature fabrication of PSCs. Currently, the two popular perovskite configurations for planar solar cells are the n–i–p and p–i–n planar heterojunction PSCs, which are sandwich configurations similar to OPV architecture.20,26,35,36,87,126,128,155,163,169,171,175,178,193,210,248,266–281 It is worth noting that a recent study based on bias-dependent Kelvin probe force microscopy shows that the electrical potential distribution of normal perovskite solar cells points to a n/p junction at the TiO2/perovskite interface, which resembles that of the traditional inorganic polycrystalline PV devices.282 Regardless of the exact junction type, the perovskite film morphology, especially the surface coverage, has been found critical to avoid shunting because photocarriers need to transfer through the perovskite layer. The challenge of depositing planar perovskite thin films has inspired many research groups to develop various techniques to prepare smooth perovskite thin films with high surface coverages. Most reported planar PSCs have exhibited higher photovoltage and photocurrent than mesoporous devices, but generally with much worse J–V hysteresis. Due to their extremely high absorption coefficient, a perovskite layer less than 400 nm thick is generally sufficient to absorb most sunlight, and planar-structure PSCs have also exhibited more than 17% efficiency.183,235,243

Flexible PSCs. Flexible solar cells based on dye cells or OPV configuration have been an active research topic before the emergence of PSCs. However, the relatively low efficiency has limited their development for practical applications. Snaith and his co-workers first demonstrated that PSCs can be successfully fabricated on flexible substrates with the OPV configuration, in which the MAPbI3−xClx thin film is sandwiched between organic contacts on the flexible polymer substrate.266 In this report, the flexible PSCs can exhibit a PCE of over 6%. This work represents an important step to inspire the PSC community to adopt the experiences and lessons learned from the OPV field, especially the extensive knowledge on contact interfaces, for further device modification. Because the perovskite layer can be prepared under mild conditions, various kinds of flexible solar cell configurations have been demonstrated successfully.26,128,187,283–290 In addition to the regular PSC fabricated on a flexible substrate, flexible fiber PSCs with about 3.3% efficiency have also been prepared; they may be woven into electronic textiles for large-scale applications.291 In this report, perovskite materials were dip-coated onto a mesoporous TiO2-coated stainless-steel fiber, followed by a typical HTM layer covered with an layer of aligned multiwalled carbon nanotube sheet electrodes through a solution process. These reports demonstrated that PSCs with both the mesoporous and planar configurations can be fabricated on a flexible substrate, and the substrate can be either a polymer or metal, as shown in Fig. 16.
 Fig. 16  (A) Photograph of a flexible PSC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 26. (B) Structure of the fiber-shaped PSC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 291. 
5.2 Energetics and operation principles
Perovskite solar cells can be built on several different device configurations to obtain good device performance. This is largely the result of good (perhaps balanced) electron and hole transport properties with long diffusion length, and it allows almost all known solar cell configurations to work for PSCs. Perovskite solar cells can follow the operation principles as p–i–n, p/n junctions, or excitonic solar cells. Their energetics schemes are listed in Fig. 17. It is well known that developing high-quality lead halide perovskite films is critical to high-efficiency PSCs, as demonstrated by the large number of publications during the past two years. In addition to the absorber layer, it is equally important to develop or select proper electron- and hole-conducting materials to achieve high-efficiency PSCs. Toward this end, a variety of electron- and hole-conducting materials have been tested in different device configurations.
 Fig. 17  Energy-level diagrams of PSCs with different device configurations. 

5.2.1 Hole-transfer materials. 
Inorganic HTM layer. 
Electron- and hole-transport layers are necessary components in most PSC configurations. The most widely used HTM is the doped Spiro-MeOTAD, which was originally used in solid-state DSSCs.292 Many alternative organic HTMs have been adapted in PSCs; these studies have been reviewed recently in detail.138 Significant research efforts are also devoted to investigating alternative inorganic HTMs. Such all inorganic materials offer the potential for low cost and better stability for PSCs.
The first PSC using inorganic HTM was demonstrated by Kamat and his co-workers.293 They drop-cast deposited CuI, a well-known HTM used in solid-state DSSCs, onto the perovskite layer. This CuI layer does not need doping material, unlike Spiro-MeOTAD.294 The PSC with CuI as the HTM has shown 6.0% PCE with very good photocurrent stability. CuI has also been successfully fabricated in an inverted CsSnI3 PSC configuration as the hole-transport layer.295
CuSCN is another frequently used inorganic solid-state hole conductor used in DSSCs. Perhaps not surprisingly, it has also been used as a hole-transport layer in PSCs, with the first-reported efficiency around 5%.296 Shortly after this first report, different device configurations using CuSCN were demonstrated by various groups.297–301 Grätzel and his co-workers reported a 12.3%-efficient CuSCN-based PSC with the regular mesoporous configuration. The efficiency of CuSCN-based PSCs using an inverted device architecture has now reached ∼16% efficiency, which is comparable to the state-of-the-art PSCs with the inverted configuration.300
In addition to CuI and CuSCN, p-type NiOx nanoparticles have also been used to fabricate PSCs based on an inverted configuration.207,302 The combination of NiOx and CuSCN has shown promise as an effective hole-transport layer for high-efficiency PSCs.298 Other p-type semiconductors such as PbS QDs have also been used as the HTM for high-efficiency PSCs.303 Yang's group has recently reported that a lead halide perovskite solar cell using the p-type NiOx HTM and n-type ZnO nanoparticle ETM shows improved stability against water and oxygen degradation than those devices using organic charge transport layers.304

HTM-free devices. In the early stages of development of solid-state PSCs, Spiro-MeOTAD seems to be a necessary component to ensure reasonable performance. But the high cost of Spiro-MeOTAD, which is nearly 10 times more expensive than gold, makes it difficult to realize the full potential of the low-cost aspect of PSC technology. Etgar et al. first demonstrated a hole-conductor-free PSC, which is constructed on a thin layer of TiO2 nanosheets coated/filled with a perovskite layer without the HTM layer. However, due to the high reactivity of halide with silver metal, much more expensive gold was used as the top contact to extract photogenerated holes. This first hole-conductor-free PSC delivered an efficiency of ∼6%, suggesting that the MAPbI3 perovskite can both work as a light absorber and a hole conductor.143 In a later study along this research direction, Etgar and his co-workers reported a depleted hole-conductor-free MAPbI3/TiO2 heterojunction solar cell using a thick MAPbI3 layer, and the efficiency improved to more than 8%.149 In this report, the thicker perovskite film was achieved by repeated (twice) spin-coating via the standard one-step method. Using the two-step method to produce a thicker perovskite layer, a better cell efficiency (9.4%) was achieved by Cohen et al. for the HTM-free PSCs.305 The mixed-halide perovskite thin film has also been used to fabricate HTM-free PSCs.306 Meng and his co-workers demonstrated an ∼10%-efficient HTM-free PSC based on a mesoporous TiO2 scaffold using the two-step solution-deposition method.216,217,307,308

Carbon electrode. In 2013, Han and his co-workers first reported a 6.7%-efficient PSC based on a carbon top-electrode. In this device configuration of Fig. 18A, the black-carbon electrode replaces the expensive conventional hole-extracting electrode (e.g., Spiro-MeOTAD in combination with a noble metal Au/Ag collecting electrode).152 Because the carbon electrode was first screen printed, the pressure would cause the shunt between the carbon paste and the FTO substrate via the cracks in the TiO2 mesoporous layer. In this report, the carbon layer was printed onto a stack of TiO2/ZrO2 layers in which the large-size insulating ZrO2 particle film is inserted as a space layer to avoid shunting due to filling of the carbon-paste contact with FTO. Although the 6.7% efficiency in this first report is not as high as state-of-the-art PSCs, the device performance with similar structures was soon improved to 10–12% by modifying the perovskite deposition control and the TiO2 layer (e.g., TiO2 particle size).88,280,309,310 The carbon electrode can be either screen-printed or doctor-bladed directly onto the perovskite layer to fabricate a high-efficiency PSC.311,312 The ZrO2 layer can also be replaced by hole-conducting NiO, which could obtain a higher efficiency when combined with a carbon electrode.207,313 In this method, the carbon electrode was first printed, followed by deposition of the perovskite layer. The carbon electrode can also be printed or coated onto the perovskite layer after the perovskite deposition, and the uniform and compact perovskite layer could effectively prevent the shunt. As a result, in the absence of the insulating ZrO2 layer, PSCs with a carbon electrode also demonstrate an efficiency of ∼10%, in which the carbon electrode was spin-coated onto the perovskite layer.88 Yang and his co-workers innovatively used candle soot as an effective carbon electrode to fabricate a >10%-efficient PSC using an easy clamping technique.206 For the fully printed mesoscopic PSCs based on a carbon counter electrode, an interface-engineering approach was used to introduce an organic silane self-assembled monolayer between the mesoporous TiO2 and MAPbI3 for optimized interface band alignments and enhanced charge lifetime.314 Other carbon materials, such as carbon nanotubes combined with a hole-transport layer such as P3HT, has also been applied in a planar PSC with an impressive 14.2% efficiency, as illustrated in Fig. 18B.315 The graphene-type carbon electrode has also been demonstrated to be effective in extracting holes in PSCs.199
 Fig. 18  (A) Schematic illustration of a carbon-based monolithic device. Reprinted with permission from ref. 152. (B) Schematic illustration of the solar cell with a carbon nanotube/polymer composite as the hole-transporting structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 315. 


5.2.2 Electron-transfer layer. 
A metal oxide layer (e.g., TiO2 and ZnO) is normally used as the electron-transport layer in DSSCs and OPV. This electron-transport layer also serves as the hole-blocking layer to mitigate recombination at the interface. Han and his co-workers have systematically investigated the effect of different compact TiO2 layers on device performance, in which the compact TiO2 layers were fabricated using different techniques including spin coating, spray pyrolysis, and atomic layer deposition (ALD).316 The ALD-fabricated compact TiO2 exhibits much lower density of nanoscale pinholes, offers a large shunt resistance, and enables a high PCE of 12.56%. Liu et al. demonstrated that ZnO is also an effective electron-transfer layer for high-efficiency PSCs, as shown in Fig. 19A.26 In this report, the ZnO compact layer is obtained by spin-coating a ZnO nanoparticle thin film, followed by a sintering or annealing step. The mild condition of fabricating a ZnO compact layer is more convenient than the regular TiO2 compact-layer deposition. Many groups with OPV background have started to adopt this approach in later reports.24,317 This processing at mild temperature of the ZnO electron-transport layer is attractive for preparing PSCs on the flexible substrate.26,251,280 However, the ZnO compact layer seems to introduce some stability issues on the perovskite layer.218
 Fig. 19  (A) Device architecture and energy-level diagram of the ITO/ZnO/MAPbI3/Spiro-MeOTAD/Ag cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 26. (B) Schematic view and energy-band diagram of PSC based on SnO2 and Spiro-MeOTAD contact layers for electrons and holes, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 318. 
In addition to the well-studied TiO2 and ZnO compact layers mentioned above, low-temperature solution-processed nanocrystalline SnO2 has also been demonstrated as an excellent electron-transport layer for high-efficiency PSCs (>16% efficiency), as illustrated in Fig. 19B.318 The SnO2 layer exhibited several advantages for thin-film PSCs, such as good antireflection, suitable band-edge positions, and high electron mobility. Low-temperature processing of electron-transport layers is necessary for large-scale manufacturing of low-cost PSCs on flexible substrates.

Compact electron-transport-layer-free PSCs. Zhu and his co-workers first demonstrated an interface engineering approach that could help fabricate a high-efficiency PSC without depositing a compact n-type metal-oxide electron-transport layer.218 In their work, an alkali salt solution of Cs2CO3 was used to modify the transparent conducting oxide surface to achieve the optimized interface energy-level alignment, as shown in Fig. 20A.
 Fig. 20  (A) Schematic and performance of a compact ETM-layer-free PSC based on Cs2CO3-modified ITO substrate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 218. (B) Schematic view of compact-layer-free PSCs, reprinted with permission from ref. 84. 
Liu et al. reported a high-efficiency compact-layer-free bilayer PSC for the first time,319 in which the perovskite layer is sandwiched between the ITO and hole-transport layer in the absence of the electron-transport layer. The PSCs with the same configurations using P3HT or Spiro-MeOTAD as hole-transporting layers exhibit PCEs of up to 11.6% and 13.5%, respectively.319 In these compact-layer-free PSCs, the increase in contact resistance due to the removal of an electron-transfer layer could be offset by reducing surface recombination.319 Ke et al. have reported a high-efficiency PSC grown directly on FTO-coated substrates without using any hole-blocking layers, as shown in Fig. 20B.84 The FTO substrate was ultraviolet (UV)-ozone-treated and used to complete a planar Au/HTM/MAPbI3−xClx/FTO with >14% efficiency.

6. Photophysics of perovskite solar cells
6.1 Charge injection/separation at interfaces
The femtosecond transient absorption (TAS) studies and transient photocurrent decay measurements have been performed to elucidate the mechanism of charge separation in PSCs using the mesoporous TiO2 or Al2O3 configuration in these pioneering studies, as shown in Fig. 21.11,12 Later, a detailed examination using various time-resolved spectroscopy techniques was carried out of the operation mechanisms within this PV system, such as the photoinduced charge-transfer processes at the surface of perovskite.320 The primary charge separation in PSCs occurs at perovskite junctions with TiO2 and the HTM, simultaneously. The ultrafast electron and hole injection from the photoexcited perovskite occurs over similar timescales.320 The electron–hole pairs in perovskites (or, in some cases, in the perovskite/alumina blends) are generated almost instantaneously after photoexcitation and dissociate rapidly in ∼2 ps to form electrons and holes with lifetimes up to a microsecond. For the perovskite/mesoporous TiO2 blend, it is found that electron injection from perovskite to TiO2 occurs in the subpicosecond range, but the lower intrinsic electron mobility in TiO2 leads to an unbalanced charge transport.259,321 The charge-carrier mobility of perovskite deposited on mesoporous TiO2 was attributed predominantly to holes. In contrast, perovskite deposited on mesoporous Al2O3 exhibited a 50%-lower mobility, but with the balanced mobility of holes and electrons. The intrinsic charge-carrier mobility of perovskite is found to be independent of the mesoporous scaffold. All these reports confirmed the superiority of the perovskite charge transfer/separation coupled with the suppressed charge recombination, and an extremely shallow trap depth (10 meV) with a low trap-state concentration.322
 Fig. 21  Schematic illustration of the charge transfer and charge transport in a perovskite-sensitized TiO2 solar cell (left) and a non-injecting Al2O3-based solar cell (right) with their corresponding representations of the energy landscape. Reprint with permission from ref. 12. 
6.2 Charge transport and recombination
Using intensity-modulated photocurrent/photovoltage spectroscopies, we found that the transport and recombination in solid-state mesostructured perovskite MAPbI3 solar cells are similar to those in solid-state DSSCs.151 In these mesoporous PSCs with low perovskite pore filling in the TiO2 network, the charge transport in perovskite cells is dominated by electron conduction within the mesoporous TiO2 network, as shown in Fig. 22A. The charge diffusion length in mesostructured perovskite cells is found to be longer than 1 μm.151 In the similar TiO2-based mesoporous solar cells using various perovskite compositions with similar perovskite pore filling via one-step solution deposition of perovskite, the electron-diffusion coefficient and recombination lifetime are all governed by the underlying mesoporous TiO2 film, as shown in Fig. 22B.215 However, when coated with PbI2 instead of perovskite, the device exhibited a factor of 5 slower diffusion coefficient than perovskite-based devices.215 Interestingly, when the MAPbI3 perovskite was deposited via the two-step method with different concentrations of PbI2 precursor solutions, the electron-transfer properties showed an obvious PbI2 concentration dependence in Fig. 22C, suggesting that the transport is no longer dominated by the underlying mesoporous TiO2 network.323 The reason for this apparent PbI2 concentration dependence of transport property may be associated with the different interfacial contacts between perovskite and TiO2 with different amounts of pore filling. Snaith and his co-workers have discovered that the perovskite layer itself can block the primary recombination pathway between the TiO2 and the HTM.265
 Fig. 22  (A) Electron-diffusion coefficient as a function of photoelectron density and recombination lifetime as a function of open-circuit voltage. PS: perovskite MAPbI3; dye: Z907 dye. Reprinted with permission from ref. 151. (B) Comparison of electron-diffusion coefficient and recombination lifetime of mesoporous solar cells based on various perovskite absorbers with PbI2 based cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 215. (C) Electron lifetime and charge-transport time of PSCs based on MAPbI3 prepared with different concentration PbI2 precursor films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 323. 
To elucidate the behavior of charge carriers in hybrid perovskites, Kamat and his co-workers have conducted femtosecond TAS measurements to investigate the excited-state properties of MAPbI3 thin films. They found that the dominant band-edge relaxation pathway is via recombination of free electrons and holes. Moreover, they discovered that the intrinsic bandgap increases due to the charge accumulation in the perovskite films following the Burstein–Moss band-filling model.324

Ultra-long diffusion length in single-crystal perovskites. The diffusion length of MAPbI3 was initially thought to be only ∼100 nm, with a carrier lifetime on the order of several ns,38 whereas the diffusion length of MAPbI3−xClx mixed-halide perovskite exceeds 1 μm.37 Although the diffusion length measured in different reports shows some differences, both MAPbI3 and MAPbI3−xClx exhibited balanced electron and hole diffusion lengths. In the same time, some diffusion lengths of the MAPbI3 solar cell with the mesoporous TiO2 configuration are larger than 1 μm.151 It is noteworthy that when these early studies were carried out, the film quality and morphologies of both MAPbI3 and MAPbI3−xClx were difficult to control, and the grain size of these perovskite films was usually less than a micrometer. Recently, “millimeter”-sized large-grain perovskite thin films and perovskite single-crystals (e.g., MAPbI3, MAPbBr3, and mixed-halide MAPbBr3−xClx) have been demonstrated by solution chemistry.31,35,36,107,110,325 In 2015, three groups reported an ultra-long diffusion length in single-crystal-based PSCs. The measured carrier lifetime in these single crystals increases to hundreds of nanoseconds and the corresponding diffusion length increases to more than a hundred micrometers.31,35,36
6.3 Hysteresis in PSCs
The J–V hysteresis phenomenon, first observed and discussed by Snaith and his co-workers on planar PSCs, has become an active topic under debate in the PSC field.326J–V hysteresis was not often reported in DSSCs or OPV. It is also rarely observed in PSCs based on mesoporous TiO2 films.211,327J–V hysteresis is affected strongly by the light and voltage biasing conditions, and it depends strongly on the light-soaking time prior to measurement. A proposed mechanism for the hysteresis is photo-induced ion migration, which was also confirmed by theoretical calculation.65,66,327 Huang and his co-workers have attributed the observed giant switchable PV to the formation of reversible p–i–n structures induced by ion drift in the perovskite layer, as shown in Fig. 23A.328 Perovskite materials are well known for their application in ferroelectrics, and ferroelectrics in lead halide perovskite has been predicted by theoretical calculations.104,329 A lead halide perovskite molecular ferroelectric semiconductor of benzylammonium lead chloride was recently demonstrated by Xiong's group.330 Padture and his co-workers used piezoforce microscopy (PFM) to demonstrate for the first time the presence of ferroelectric domains in MAPbI3 perovskite thin films, with direct evidence of reversible ferroelectric domain switching under electrical poling with different bias voltages. They found that the size of the ferroelectric domains is about the size of the grains (∼100 nm).331 Several reports have presented experimental evidence of the apparent ferroelectric behavior of MAPbI3, but the room-temperature ferroelectrics of MAPbI3 is still under debate.122,332 Some researchers have proposed the ferroelectrics to be responsible for the J–V hysteresis.333,334 In this case, the counter ferroelectric polarization field would reduce the driving force for charge separation, and thus, it can account for the observed lower efficiency during the forward J–V scans. As compared in Fig. 23B, ferroelectric polarization is observed in planar PSCs, but this polarization can be minimized in PSCs with the mesoporous configuration. In contrast to these reports, a recent study based on the measurements of conductance hysteresis of MAPbI3 thin films suggests that ferroelectricity cannot explain the observed hysteresis behaviour, and instead, the ion migration is a more plausible cause for the hysteresis behaviour,335 since the polarization-field-induced hysteresis could also be related to the space-charge field associated with ion migration.336 However, a recent mechanistic study indicates that the hysteresis is dominated by the capacitive effect, whereas the steady-state photocurrent can be modified by ion migration occurring on a much slower time scale (several minutes).337
 Fig. 23  (A) Scheme of ion migration in lead halide perovskite during positive and negative electric polings, respectively, showing that accumulated ions in the perovskite near the electrode induced p- and n-doping. Reprinted with permission from ref. 328. (B) Schematic illustration of the physical mechanism of the polarization in ferroelectric lead halide PSCs in planar and mesoporous TiO2 configurations. Reprinted with permission from ref. 333. 
7. Other optoelectronic applications
7.1 Light-emitting devices
As early as 1990s, the long-chain alkyl organic/inorganic lead halide perovskite of (C6H5C2H4NH3)2PbI4 has been fabricated as LEDs with high working voltages such as 24 V. Unfortunately, these devices worked well at liquid-nitrogen temperatures but were unstable at room temperature.338,339 Later, a room-temperature perovskite LED was fabricated based on the (H3NC2H4C16H8S4C2H4NH3)PbX4 (X = Cl, Br, I) perovskite, which exhibited a much lower turn-on voltage of 4.8 V and a PCE around 0.11%.340 All these long-chain perovskite-fabricated LEDs then progressed slowly during the last couple decades.160 However, these decades have seen the growth of solid technique development on organic LEDs (OLEDs). In 2012, before the start of “PSC fever,” Miyasaka's group reported on short-chain lead bromide perovskite nanoparticles of MAPbBr3 exhibiting strong photoluminescence, which can be easily synthesized with porous alumina media.114 With the explosive development of MAPbI3-based PSCs, the bright perovskite LED based on these short-chain organic/inorganic hybrid lead halide perovskites in Fig. 24A was soon demonstrated by Friends and his co-workers.341 These novel perovskite LEDs have a turn-on voltage of 1.5 V, which is much lower than those previous reports, and their QE has increased to 3.4%. However, the perovskite layer coverage in this report is still low, which significantly limits the device performance due to electrical shunts. With the rapid development of various deposition techniques for high-quality perovskite layers, Wang's and Jin's groups collaboratively developed an interfacial engineering approach by applying a multifunctional polyethyleneimine (PEI) interlayer between the oxide electron-transporting layer and the perovskite emissive layer to promote the growth of a high-quality perovskite layer.342 LEDs based on this high-quality perovskite layer showed significantly improved QEs and luminous efficiency. In addition to modifying the morphology of perovskite film, a blend of perovskite nanocrystals is solution-deposited in a thin-film matrix of a polyimide precursor (PIP) dielectric. This modified structure improves the QE by two orders of magnitude with reduced nonradiative current losses and an external QE of 1.2%.343 The use of organic poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene) (F8) as a large-bandgap, charge-blocking layer in the Friend group's pioneering work also showed the impure blue color from F8, as illustrated in Fig. 24C. They later replaced F8 with a ZnO-based inorganic layer and obtained a color-pure perovskite LED with low turn-on voltages and higher luminance.344 Because lead halide perovskite's bandgap can easily be tuned by different halide compositions, as illustrated in Fig. 24C, the multiple-colored LED based on MAPbI3−xBrx and MAPbBr3−xClx with emission from near-UV to near-infrared (IR) was recently demonstrated.345,346 In these reports, the perovskite layers were deposited from a solution-chemistry process. Recently, highly photoluminescent perovskite nanocrystals with high QE were developed for a high-performance LED.113,120
 Fig. 24  (A) Illustration of the structure of a perovskite light-emitting diode (PeLED). Reprinted with permission from ref. 341. (B) Device structure and light-emitting photograph of a MAPbBr3 PeLED. Reprinted with permission from ref. 343. (C) The electroluminescence spectra of PeLEDs with MAPbClxBryI3−x−y. Reprinted with permission from ref. 345. (D) Three-dimensional atomistic model of PbS QDs in a perovskite matrix. Reprinted with permission from ref. 347. 
It is difficult to tune the bandgap of lead halide perovskite to the IR region. Therefore, the perovskite matrix was designed to combine with the narrow-bandgap QDs for IR optoelectronics. A recent report reveals that the heterocrystals of perovskite embedded with PbS QDs of Fig. 24D exhibit remarkable optoelectronic properties: photoelectrons and holes generated in the larger-bandgap perovskites could become excitons in the QD nanocrystals with 80% PL quantum yield. This indicates that a combination of perovskite with narrow-bandgap semiconductor QDs could be a promising candidate for bright IR emission.347
7.2 Laser
Lead halide perovskites are also an ideal candidate for semiconductor laser applications due to their combined advantages of large absorption coefficients, ultra-low bulk defect densities, and slow Auger recombination. Recently, room-temperature and wavelength-tunable lasing has been demonstrated on solution-processed perovskite (MAPbX3 where X = Cl, Br, I) film or single-crystal lead halide perovskites.348,349 These perovskite lasers exhibited ultra-stable amplified spontaneous emission at strikingly low thresholds. For example, the lasing threshold of the single-crystal perovskite nanowire corresponds to a charge-carrier density as low as 1.5 × 1016 cm3. Furthermore, these single-crystal nanowires have estimated lasing quantum yields approaching 100% due to little charge-carrier trapping.348 The ease of solution processing of single-crystal perovskite with broad emission-color tunability makes lead halide perovskites a promising novel candidate material for nanophotonics.
7.3 Photodetectors
Lead halide perovskites have also been used to fabricate high-performance photodetectors. Yang and his co-workers have first demonstrated a perovskite photodetector with a similar configuration as in a standard PSC (Fig. 25A).350 This novel perovskite photodetector that operates at room temperature exhibits a large detectivity, a linear dynamic range of over 100 dB, and fast photoresponse. This high performance is comparable to the traditional inorganic semiconductor-based photodetectors and better than most reported organic, QD, and hybrid photodetectors. A photodetector with an inverse PSC configuration of Fig. 25B was reported to couple with an OLED to form an effective photocouple.351 These photodetectors based on a PSC configuration perform well, but their fabrication is relatively complicated. A robust flexible perovskite photodetector by easily depositing a MAPbI3 film on a flexible ITO-coated substrate has been demonstrated to exhibit high sensitivity, high speed, and broad-spectrum photoresponse.352 In these reports, the perovskite photodetectors do not have direct contact with water so as to avoid the degradation issue associated with their moisture sensitivity.
 Fig. 25  (A) Planar configuration of a hybrid perovskite photodetector. Reprinted with permission from ref. 350. (B) Schematic diagram of the structure of a photodetector with the mesoporous structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 351. 
A novel perovskite photodetector consisting of MAPbI3 and graphene exhibits a dramatically enhanced photoresponsivity (180 A W−1) and effective QE over a broad bandwidth from the UV to visible range.158 Other studies demonstrate a large and linear dynamic range of light detection/sensing by incorporating photodiodes and photovoltaic functions into a single device structure based on planar perovskite thin film with a high responsivity value up to 620 A W−1.353,354 In addition to these regular perovskite photodetectors based on a perovskite thin film, a visible-light photodetector with high sensitivity and stability has recently been demonstrated using porous MAPbBr3 perovskite nanowires by self-template-directed synthesis.355 The photodetector fabricated on a thin layer of dispersive organolead halide perovskite (MAPbBr2I) islands covered with monolayer graphene demonstrated a photoconductive gain of ∼109 electrons per photon and a responsivity of ∼6.0 × 105 A W−1.356
7.4 Water-splitting application
Lead halide perovskite materials are highly sensitive to moisture, so it is difficult to directly use lead halide perovskite for photocatalytic water-splitting—although some lead halide perovskites have a suitable, even ideal, bandgap and electronic structure for water splitting. One of the main advantages for PSCs is their high photovoltage; thus, a tandem of PSCs could provide enough voltage for water splitting. The Grätzel and Park groups have, for the first time, demonstrated a solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency of 12.3% on an electrolysis water-splitting cell, combining a state-of-the-art solution-processed perovskite tandem solar cell and Earth-abundant catalysts of NiFe layered double hydroxide, as shown in Fig. 26A.357 Kamat and his co-workers have coupled the MAPbI3 solar cell with the BiVO4 photoanode as a PV–photoelectrochemical (PEC) hybrid electrode configuration for solar fuel generation, as illustrated in Fig. 26B. This PV–PEC electrode exhibits a solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency of 2.5% in a neutral pH solution.358 Using this hybrid approach, the issue associated with the water sensitivity of perovskites can also be mitigated. The application of water splitting powered by high-efficiency PSCs was also demonstrated by a similar configuration in which a perovskite (MAPbI3) solar cell is coupled with a high-performance hematite photoanode, as shown in Fig. 26C; this configuration achieved an overall 2.4% solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency.359
 Fig. 26  (A) Schematic diagram of the combination of the perovskite tandem cell with NiFe DLH/Ni foam electrodes for water splitting. Reprinted with permission from ref. 357. (B) Schematic diagram of the BiVO4-MAPbI3 tandem device for generating solar fuels. Reprinted with permission from ref. 358. (C) Schematic of the dual-junction PSC/hematite photoanode tandem cell. Reprinted with permission from ref. 359. (D) Schematic illustration of a Ni-coated perovskite photoanode in a PEC cell. Reprinted with permission from ref. 360. 
It is noteworthy that in the perovskite water-splitting devices mentioned above, the PSC is placed outside of the water-splitting cells. Recently, a Ni-modified MAPbI3 PSC in Fig. 26D was placed in the Na2S aqueous solution for direct hydrogen generation.360 All these pioneering studies have demonstrated the potential of hybrid perovskite for generating solar fuel. However, the moisture stability issue will be the main obstacle for their future application.
7.5 Other electronic applications
In the 1990s, Mitzi et al. demonstrated a hybrid perovskite electronic device such as a field-effect transistor (FET) using wide-bandgap metal halide perovskite (C6H5C2H4NH3)2SnI4.32,361 But there has been almost no follow-up research on this application in the past decade. Although lead halide perovskite-based solar cells and LEDs have progressed rapidly in the last two years, there is still very little progress on a perovskite FET. This is largely due to the low hole mobility of MAPbI3 and the strong ionic transport-related hysteresis. Such technical barriers for developing lead halide perovskite-based FET applications can be overcome by simply lowering the operating temperature of MAPbI3 FETs to below 200 K, which increases field-effect carrier mobility by almost two orders of magnitude via quenching the MA cation-related phonon interaction.362 In addition to enabling LED applications, the high luminescence has been used as an optical probe for detecting 2,4,6-trinitrophenol (TNP, picric acid) in solution and the vapor state.125 The detection mechanism for this application is similar to previous optical analysis techniques based on semiconductor QDs.135 These QD-like perovskite nanocrystals may be used widely in the future in different applications similar to other conventional inorganic semiconductor QDs.
8. Issues and challenges
To date, most researchers have accepted that lead halide perovskites solar cells are attractive for potential future large-scale manufacturing because of the demonstrated high efficiency and low cost of this new technology. However, long-term stability—especially for regular MAPbI3—remains a major obstacle for their actual future large-scale application.140 Although all the intrinsic and extrinsic factors critical to perovskite stability remain to be fully examined, two of the commonly accepted factors are related to their moisture sensitivity and thermal stability. There is tremendous research effort focusing on understanding the mechanisms and developing strategies to overcome the moisture sensitivity. If the moisture issue is simply caused by the water ingression into the perovskite layer in a device stack, it can, in principle, be solved by advanced sealing techniques, as commonly used in the PV industry.140,202,363–366 For thermal stability, a recent study has demonstrated that the decomposition of MAPbI3 occurs at 85 °C, even in an inert atmosphere.367 More research effort in the future should be devoted to searching for new perovskite families with improved thermal stability. Recently, more stable pseudohalide, such as the thiocyanate ions (SCN−), has also been used to replace two iodides in MAPbI3, which also has similar optical properties and PV performance as MAPbI3.368 The resulting hybrid MAPb(SCN)2I perovskite films showed superior moisture tolerance compared to conventional MAPbI3 films. There was no significant degradation of MAPb(SCN)2I perovskite films even after exposure to a relative humidity of 95% in air for over 4 hours, whereas the MAPbI3 films degraded in less than 1.5 hours in the same environment. The perovskite containing a larger amine group such as (PEA)2(MA)2[Pb3I10] (PEA = C6H5(CH2)2NH3+, MA = MA+) has shown better moisture tolerance, although their PCE is not as high as MAPbI3 solar cells, as shown in Fig. 27A.369
 Fig. 27  (A) Moisture-enhanced 2D perovskite (PEA)2(MA)2[Pb3I10] compared with the 3D perovskite MAPbI3. Reprinted with permission from ref. 369. (B) Schematic illustration of two neighboring grain structures of the MAPbI3 unit crosslinked by butylphosphonic acid 4-ammonium chloride (4-ABPACl) hydrogen-bonding interactions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 373. 
8.1 Long-term stability
In the carbon-electrode-based PSCs as demonstrated by Han and his co-workers, the carbon layer works as a contact electrode but also functions as a hydrophobic layer to prevent moisture ingress and enhance the device's moisture stability. Furthermore, they have also incorporated a 5-ammoniumvaleric acid (5-AVA) iodide into their perovskite precursor solution to create mixed-cation perovskite (5-AVA)x(MA)1−xPbI3 crystals, in which the 5-AVA molecules are proposed to crosslink between their COOH and NH3+ groups and I ions from the PbI6 octahedra. The incorporation of 5-AVA further enhances device stability.25 The stability of carbon-based hole-conductor-free (5-AVA)x(MA)1−xPbI3 PSCs has now been proven by extensive testing in the hot desert climate and indoor long-term light-soaking, as well as heat exposure over three months at 80–85 °C.370 Very recently, large-area perovskite solar cells with >1 cm2 active area exhibited 15–16% efficiency with improved stability.371,372 These progresses have further demonstrated the promising potential for future applications of high efficiency perovskite solar cells.
A recent study has demonstrated that adding a phosphonic acid ammonium additive of butylphosphonic acid 4-ammonium chloride into a one-step method precursor solution modifies the surface of MAPbI3 perovskite, as shown in Fig. 27B.373 This phosphonic acid ammonium additive with the –PO(OH)2 and –NH3+ terminal groups acts as a crosslink between the adjacent perovskite grains. The addition of this additive facilitates the incorporation of perovskite within a mesoporous TiO2 scaffold, but it also promotes the growth of a uniform perovskite capping layer at the surface. Finally, this additive helps to obtain a stable 16.7%-efficient PSC with high resistance to moisture.373
8.2 Environmental impact
Perovskite solar cells are low in cost and energy consumption. Therefore, the comprehensive life-cycle inventory analysis demonstrates that perovskite solar modules possess the shortest energy-payback time among various known solar cell technologies, which is promising for lowering CO2 emissions.374 The elements used in lead halide perovskite are all Earth-abundant. For example, Pb is widely used in the car battery industry, and there is even a report demonstrating the possibility of fabricating lead halide PSCs based on the lead waste recycled from lead–acid batteries.98 Of course, the production of iodine is relatively low compared to that of lead, which could be an issue for large-scale production. Perovskite is promising from the perspective of efficiency and payback time, and the availability of elements for lead halide perovskite may not a big challenge. But the commercialization or application of lead halide PSCs has been questioned because of the toxicity of its Pb content. Lead halide is highly sensitive to water and can be released into the environment by being dissolved in water. The impact of rain on MAPbI3 perovskite films was investigated by simulating exposure of the films to rain.2 However, it is encouraging that the extent of Pb loss to the environment in the case of catastrophic module failure was estimated to be far from catastrophic for the environment due to the small amount of lead halide perovskite in ultra-thin PSCs.2
9. Conclusion and outlook
In summary, organic–inorganic hybrid lead halide perovskites have demonstrated rapid progress in various optoelectronic applications (e.g., PV, light-emitting devices, photodetectors) within a short period of time. At the beginning of perovskite development, perovskite film quality (e.g., coverage and uniformity) was the main limiting factor for different applications. But during the past three years, many solution-chemistry approaches have been successfully developed to produce high-quality perovskite films. Furthermore, a variety of optoelectronic conversion device configurations have been tested for various perovskite-based devices. These research efforts have led to unprecedented progress on producing high-performance PSCs with 15–20% efficiencies from various research groups using different device configurations and perovskite deposition methods. Besides the continued advances in perovskite device performance, further development of perovskites will be helped by more fundamental investigations including theoretical calculations and various photophysics characterization to understand the fundamental material properties and charge-carrier dynamics related to lead halide perovskites. Progress in the fundamental understanding of lead halide perovskite has helped to improve the chemical stability of perovskites, which could be the most important issue for the future of lead halide perovskite optoelectronic devices. Chemical passivation and surface-ligand termination have shown promise for long-term stability in PSCs. To date, the best stability data are up to several months under sunlight irradiation. Very recently, several demonstration PSC panels based on a carbon counter electrode with up to square-feet area have been developed and subjected to outdoor long-term stability testing. Much progress has already been made in lead halide perovskites, but much more research will be needed to address issues such as improving the reproducibility of perovskite-based devices, long-term stability, and potential for lead leakage in real applications. A deep fundamental understanding of lead halide perovskite materials and their device architectures should also be fully examined to make perovskite-based optoelectronic conversion a relevant alternative technology and not just “perovskite fever.”
Acknowledgements
Y. Z. is thankful for the support of the NSFC (Grants 51372151 and 21303103). The work at the National Renewable Energy Laboratory is supported by the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC36-08-GO28308. K.Z. acknowledges the support by the Hybrid Perovskite Solar Cell Program of the National Center for Photovoltaics funded by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, Solar Energy Technologies Office.
References
R. F. Service, Science, 2014, 344, 458 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Hailegnaw, S. Kirmayer, E. Edri, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1543–1547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Patwardhan, D. H. Cao, S. Hatch, O. K. Farha, J. T. Hupp, M. G. Kanatzidis and G. C. Schatz, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 251–255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Editorial, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 837 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Weber, Z. Naturforsch., B: J. Chem. Sci., 1978, 33, 862–865 Search PubMed .
D. Weber, Z. Naturforsch., B: J. Chem. Sci., 1978, 33, 1443–1445 Search PubMed .
W. J. Yin, J. H. Yang, J. Kang, Y. F. Yan and S. H. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8926–8942 CAS .
Z. Fan, K. Sun and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18809–18828 CAS .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Im, C.-R. Lee, J.-W. Lee, S.-W. Park and N.-G. Park, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4088–4093 RSC .
H.-S. Kim, C.-R. Lee, J.-H. Im, K.-B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J.-H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Grätzel and N.-G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 1–7 Search PubMed .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Heo, S. H. Im, J. H. Noh, T. N. Mandal, C.-S. Lim, J. A. Chang, Y. H. Lee, H.-j. Kim, A. Sarkar, K. NazeeruddinMd, M. Grätzel and S. I. Seok, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 486–491 CrossRef CAS .
J.-W. Lee, D.-J. Seol, A.-N. Cho and N.-G. Park, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4991–4998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. A. Laban and L. Etgar, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3249–3253 CAS .
B. Cai, Y. Xing, Z. Yang, W.-H. Zhang and J. Qiu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1480–1485 CAS .
J. Qiu, Y. Qiu, K. Yan, M. Zhong, C. Mu, H. Yan and S. Yang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3245–3248 RSC .
D. Bi, S.-J. Moon, L. Haggman, G. Boschloo, L. Yang, E. M. J. Johansson, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 18762–18766 RSC .
J. A. Christians, R. C. M. Fung and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 136, 758–764 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Chen, H. Zhou, Z. Hong, S. Luo, H.-S. Duan, H.-H. Wang, Y. Liu, G. Li and Y. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 622–625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ogomi, A. Morita, S. Tsukamoto, T. Saitho, N. Fujikawa, Q. Shen, T. Toyoda, K. Yoshino, S. S. Pandey, T. L. Ma and S. Hayase, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1004–1011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Edri, S. Kirmayer, D. Cahen and G. Hodes, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 897–902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Colella, E. Mosconi, P. Fedeli, A. Listorti, F. Gazza, F. Orlandi, P. Ferro, T. Besagni, A. Rizzo, G. Calestani, G. Gigli, F. De Angelis and R. Mosca, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 4613–4618 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mahmood, B. S. Swain and H. S. Jung, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 9127–9138 RSC .
A. Mei, X. Li, L. Liu, Z. Ku, T. Liu, Y. Rong, M. Xu, M. Hu, J. Chen, Y. Yang, M. Grätzel and H. Han, Science, 2014, 345, 295–298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Liu and T. L. Kelly, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 133–138 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Manser and P. V. Kamat, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 737–743 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Ponseca, T. J. Savenije, M. Abdellah, K. Zheng, A. Yartsev, T. Pascher, T. Harlang, P. Chabera, T. Pullerits, A. Stepanov, J.-P. Wolf and V. Sundström, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5189–5192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Schulz, E. Edri, S. Kirmayer, G. Hodes, D. Cahen and A. Kahn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1377–1381 CAS .
D. W. deQuilettes, S. M. Vorpahl, S. D. Stranks, H. Nagaoka, G. E. Eperon, M. E. Ziffer, H. J. Snaith and D. S. Ginger, Science, 2015, 348, 683–686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Filip, G. E. Eperon, H. J. Snaith and F. Giustino, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Kagan, D. B. Mitzi and C. D. Dimitrakopoulos, Science, 1999, 286, 945–947 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Bella, A. Sacco, G. P. Salvador, S. Bianco, E. Tresso, C. F. Pirri and R. Bongiovanni, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 20421–20430 CAS .
D. B. Mitzi, S. Wang, C. A. Feild, C. A. Chess and A. M. Guloy, Science, 1995, 267, 1473–1476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, M. Saliba, D. T. Moore, S. K. Pathak, M. T. Horantner, T. Stergiopoulos, S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, J. A. Alexander-Webber, A. Abate, A. Sadhanala, S. Yao, Y. Chen, R. H. Friend, L. A. Estroff, U. Wiesner and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shao, Z. Xiao, C. Bi, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Science, 2013, 342, 344–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-S. Kim and N.-G. Park, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 2927–2934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Yin, T. Shi and Y. Yan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 063903 CrossRef .
E. M. Miller, Y. Zhao, C. C. Mercado, S. K. Saha, J. M. Luther, K. Zhu, V. Stevanovic, C. L. Perkins and J. van de Lagemaat, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 22122–22130 RSC .
S. T. Williams, F. Zuo, C.-C. Chueh, C.-Y. Liao, P.-W. Liang and A. K. Y. Jen, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 10640–10654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Miyasaka, Chem. Lett., 2015, 44, 720–729 CrossRef CAS .
J. Feng and B. Xiao, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1278–1282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-S. Kim, S. H. Im and N.-G. Park, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 5615–5625 CAS .
G. Kieslich, S. Sun and A. K. Cheetham, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 4712–4715 RSC .
Y. Kawamura, H. Mashiyama and K. Hasebe, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 2002, 71, 1694–1697 CrossRef CAS .
T. Baikie, N. S. Barrow, Y. Fang, P. J. Keenan, P. R. Slater, R. O. Piltz, M. Gutmann, S. G. Mhaisalkar and T. J. White, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9298–9307 CAS .
S. P. Pang, H. Hu, J. L. Zhang, S. L. Lv, Y. M. Yu, F. Wei, T. S. Qin, H. X. Xu, Z. H. Liu and G. L. Cui, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 1485–1491 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gottesman, L. Gouda, B. S. Kalanoor, E. Haltzi, S. Tirosh, E. Rosh-Hodesh, Y. Tischler, A. Zaban, C. Quarti, E. Mosconi and F. De Angelis, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2332–2338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Melissen, F. Labat, P. Sautet and T. Le Bahers, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 2199–2209 RSC .
A. Buin, R. Comin, A. H. Ip and E. H. Sargent, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 13965–13971 CAS .
H.-S. Duan, H. Zhou, Q. Chen, P. Sun, S. Luo, T.-B. Song, B. Bob and Y. Yang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 112–116 RSC .
B.-w. Park, S. M. Jain, X. Zhang, A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo and T. Edvinsson, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 2088–2101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Even, L. Pedesseau, J.-M. Jancu and C. Katan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2999–3005 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, Q. Chen, G. Li, S. Luo, T.-b. Song, H.-S. Duan, Z. Hong, J. You, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, Science, 2014, 345, 542–546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dang, Y. Liu, Y. Sun, D. Yuan, X. Liu, W. Lu, G. Liu, H. Xia and X. Tao, CrystEngComm, 2015, 17, 665–670 RSC .
T. Zhang, M. Yang, E. E. Benson, Z. Li, J. van de Lagemaat, J. M. Luther, Y. Yan, K. Zhu and Y. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 7820–7823 RSC .
J. H. Montoya, M. Garcia-Mota, J. K. Noerskov and A. Vojvodic, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 2634–2640 RSC .
G. Giorgi, J.-I. Fujisawa, H. Segawa and K. Yamashita, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 4694–4701 CAS .
W.-J. Chi and Z.-S. Li, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 5991–5998 RSC .
T. Minemoto and M. Murata, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 133, 8–14 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, Q. Chen, G. Li, S. Luo, T. B. Song, H. S. Duan, Z. Hong, J. You, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, Science, 2014, 345, 542–546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Grinberg, D. V. West, M. Torres, G. Gou, D. M. Stein, L. Wu, G. Chen, E. M. Gallo, A. R. Akbashev, P. K. Davies, J. E. Spanier and A. M. Rappe, Nature, 2013, 503, 509–512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Eames, J. M. Frost, P. R. F. Barnes, B. C. O'Regan, A. Walsh and M. S. Islam, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8 Search PubMed .
A. M. A. Leguy, J. M. Frost, A. P. McMahon, V. G. Sakai, W. Kochelmann, C. H. Law, X. E. Li, F. Foglia, A. Walsh, B. C. O'Regan, J. Nelson, J. T. Cabral and P. R. F. Barnes, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 10 Search PubMed .
F. Brivio, K. T. Butler, A. Walsh and M. van Schilfgaarde, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 155204 CrossRef .
E. L. da Silva, J. M. Skelton, S. C. Parker and A. Walsh, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 91, 144107 CrossRef .
C. Motta, F. El-Mellouhi, S. Kais, N. Tabet, F. Alharbi and S. Sanvito, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Yin, T. Shi and Y. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4653–4658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. P. Ong, T. W. Goh, Q. Xu and A. Huan, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2015, 119, 11033–11038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Stoumpos, C. D. Malliakas and M. G. Kanatzidis, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 9019–9038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. P. Ong, T. W. Goh, Q. Xu and A. Huan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 681–685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Mosconi, J. M. Azpiroz and F. De Angelis, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 4885–4892 CrossRef CAS .
E. Mosconi, A. Amat, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and F. De Angelis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 13902–13913 CAS .
K. T. Butler, J. M. Frost and A. Walsh, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 228–231 RSC .
J. H. Noh, S. H. Im, J. H. Heo, T. N. Mandal and S. I. Seok, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1764–1769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao and K. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 12241–12244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P.-W. Liang, C.-C. Chueh, X.-K. Xin, F. Zuo, S. T. Williams, C.-Y. Liao and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 5, 201400960 Search PubMed .
W.-J. Yin, Y. Yan and S.-H. Wei, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3625–3631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Grancini, S. Marras, M. Prato, C. Giannini, C. Quarti, F. De Angelis, M. De Bastiani, G. E. Eperon, H. J. Snaith, L. Manna and A. Petrozza, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3836–3842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Nagane, U. Bansode, O. Game, S. Chhatre and S. Ogale, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 9741–9744 RSC .
G. Giorgi, J.-I. Fujisawa, H. Segawa and K. Yamashita, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 12176–12183 CAS .
W. Ke, G. Fang, J. Wan, H. Tao, Q. Liu, L. Xiong, P. Qin, J. Wang, H. Lei, G. Yang, M. Qin, X. Zhao and Y. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Amat, E. Mosconi, E. Ronca, C. Quarti, P. Umari, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and F. De Angelis, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3608–3616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Koh, K. Fu, Y. Fang, S. Chen, T. C. Sum, N. Mathews, S. G. Mhaisalkar, P. P. Boix and T. Baikie, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16458–16462 CAS .
G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, C. Menelaou, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 982–988 CAS .
M. Hu, L. Liu, A. Mei, Y. Yang, T. Liu and H. Han, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 17115–17121 CAS .
A. Binek, F. C. Hanusch, P. Docampo and T. Bein, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1249–1253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. P. Boix, S. Agarwala, T. M. Koh, N. Mathews and S. G. Mhaisalkar, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 898–907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. E. Eperon, D. Bryant, J. Troughton, S. D. Stranks, M. B. Johnston, T. Watson, D. A. Worsley and H. J. Snaith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 129–138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, S.-C. Lee, S.-H. Lee and K.-H. Hong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 4627–4634 CAS .
B. Philippe, B.-W. Park, R. Lindblad, J. Oscarsson, S. Ahmadi, E. M. J. Johansson and H. Rensmo, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1720–1731 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Seol, J. W. Lee and N. G. Park, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 2414–2419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, H. Yu, H. Xu and N. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 1120–1126 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zheng, D. Zhang, Y. Ma, Z. Lu, Z. Chen, S. Wang, L. Xiao and Q. Gong, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 10582–10593 RSC .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Nature, 2015, 517, 476–480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P.-Y. Chen, J. Qi, M. T. Klug, X. Dang, P. T. Hammond and A. M. Belcher, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3659–3665 CAS .
F. Hao, C. C. Stoumpos, D. H. Cao, R. P. H. Chang and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 489–494 CrossRef CAS .
N. K. Noel, S. D. Stranks, A. Abate, C. Wehrenfennig, S. Guarnera, A. Haghighirad, A. Sadhanala, G. E. Eperon, S. K. Pathak, M. B. Johnston, a. petrozza, L. Herz and H. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3061–3068 CAS .
D. Sabba, H. K. Mulmudi, R. R. Prabhakar, T. Krishnamoorthy, T. Baikie, P. P. Boix, S. Mhaisalkar and N. Mathews, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 1763–1767 CAS .
Q. Shen, Y. Ogomi, J. Chang, T. Toyoda, K. Fujiwara, K. Yoshino, K. Sato, K. Yamazaki, M. Akimoto, Y. Kuga, K. Katayama and S. Hayase, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9308–9316 CAS .
M. H. Kumar, S. Dharani, W. L. Leong, P. P. Boix, R. R. Prabhakar, T. Baikie, C. Shi, H. Ding, R. Ramesh, M. Asta, M. Graetzel, S. G. Mhaisalkar and N. Mathews, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7122–7127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Stroppa, D. Di Sante, P. Barone, M. Bokdam, G. Kresse, C. Franchini, M.-H. Whangbo and S. Picozzi, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Jaffe, Y. Lin, W. L. Mao and H. I. Karunadasa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1673–1678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. E. Wasylishen, O. Knop and J. B. Macdonald, Solid State Commun., 1985, 56, 581–582 CrossRef CAS .
T. Baikie, Y. Fang, J. M. Kadro, M. Schreyer, F. Wei, S. G. Mhaisalkar, M. Graetzel and T. J. White, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5628–5641 CAS .
S. Zhuo, J. Zhang, Y. Shi, Y. Huang and B. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 5693–5696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Bi, Y. Shao, Y. Yuan, Z. Xiao, C. Wang, Y. Gao and J. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 18508–18514 CAS .
N.-G. Park, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 65–72 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Saidaminov, A. L. Abdelhady, B. Murali, E. Alarousu, V. M. Burlakov, W. Peng, I. Dursun, L. Wang, Y. He, G. Maculan, A. Goriely, T. Wu, O. F. Mohammed and O. M. Bakr, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7586 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Kollek, D. Gruber, J. Gehring, E. Zimmermann, L. Schmidt-Mende and S. Polarz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 1341–1346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, H. Zhong, C. Chen, X.-g. Wu, X. Hu, H. Huang, J. Han, B. Zou and Y. Dong, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4533–4542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kojima, M. Ikegami, K. Teshima and T. Miyasaka, Chem. Lett., 2012, 41, 397–399 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fu, F. Meng, M. B. Rowley, B. J. Thompson, M. J. Shearer, D. Ma, R. J. Hamers, J. C. Wright and S. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5810–5818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. B. Murray, C. R. Kagan and M. G. Bawendi, Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci., 2000, 30, 545–610 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Schmidt, A. Pertegás, S. González-Carrero, O. Malinkiewicz, S. Agouram, G. Mínguez Espallargas, H. J. Bolink, R. E. Galian and J. Perez-Prieto, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 850–853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. E. Galian, S. G. Carrero and J. Perez-Prieto, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 3, 9187–9193 Search PubMed .
S. Gonzalez-Carrero, R. E. Galian and J. Perez-Prieto, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9187–9193 CAS .
L. Protesescu, S. Yakunin, M. I. Bodnarchuk, F. Krieg, R. Caputo, C. H. Hendon, R. X. Yang, A. Walsh and M. V. Kovalenko, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3692–3696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. T. Moore, H. Sai, K. W. Tan, D.-M. Smilgies, W. Zhang, H. J. Snaith, U. Wiesner and L. A. Estroff, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2350–2358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chen, A. J. Barker, F. L. C. Morgan, J. E. Halpert and J. M. Hodgkiss, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 153–158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Anaya, G. Lozano, M. E. Calvo, W. Zhang, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith and H. Miguez, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 48–53 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. A. Akkerman, V. D'Innocenzo, S. Accornero, A. Scarpellini, A. Petrozza, M. Prato and L. Manna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10276–10281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Mailoa, C. D. Bailie, E. C. Johlin, E. T. Hoke, A. J. Akey, W. H. Nguyen, M. D. McGehee and T. Buonassisi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 121105 CrossRef .
M. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 501, 395–398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. K. Ono, S. Wang, Y. Kato, S. R. Raga and Y. Qi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3989–3993 CAS .
Y. Chen, T. Chen and L. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1053–1059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, P. K. Nayak, W. Zhang, T. Stergiopoulos and H. J. Snaith, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 3240–3248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wei, H. Chen, K. Yan and S. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 13239–13243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Gao, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2448–2463 CAS .
S. Gamliel and L. Etgar, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 29012–29021 RSC .
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 506–514 CrossRef CAS .
M. He, D. Zheng, M. Wang, C. Lin and Z. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 5994–6003 CAS .
Y. Lou, Y. Zhao, J. Chen and J.-J. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 595–613 RSC .
T. C. Sum and N. Mathews, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2518–2534 CAS .
B. Wang, X. Xiao and T. Chen, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 12287–12297 RSC .
C.-C. Chueh, C.-Z. Li and A. K. Y. Jen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1160–1189 CAS .
M.-H. Li, P.-S. Shen, K.-C. Wang, T.-F. Guo and P. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9011–9019 CAS .
G. Niu, X. Guo and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8970–8980 CAS .
T.-B. Song, Q. Chen, H. Zhou, C. Jiang, H.-H. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Liu, J. You and Y. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9032–9050 CAS .
Q. Wang, H. Chen, G. Liu and L. Wang, Sci. Bull., 2015, 60, 405–418 CrossRef CAS .
L. Etgar, P. Gao, Z. Xue, Q. Peng, A. K. Chandiran, B. Liu, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 17396–17399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dualeh, N. Tétreault, T. Moehl, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 3250–3258 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, X. Pan, W. Liu, M. Cai, D. Kou, Z. Huo, X. Fang and S. Dai, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 7277–7279 RSC .
B. Cai, Y. Xing, Z. Yang, W.-H. Zhang and J. Qiu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1480–1485 CAS .
D. Bi, L. Yang, G. Boschloo, A. Hagfeldt and E. M. J. Johansson, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 1532–1536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bi, G. Boschloo, S. Schwarzmuller, L. Yang, E. M. Johansson and A. Hagfeldt, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 11686–11691 RSC .
W. Abu Laban and L. Etgar, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3249–3253 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhao and K. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2880–2884 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, A. M. Nardes and K. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 490–494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ku, Y. Rong, M. Xu, T. Liu and H. Han, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 3132 Search PubMed .
Y. Wu, A. Islam, X. Yang, C. Qin, J. Liu, K. Zhang, W. Peng and L. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2934–2938 CAS .
J. W. Seo, S. Park, Y. C. Kim, N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, S. C. Yoon and S. I. Seok, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2642–2646 CAS .
G. E. Eperon, V. M. Burlakov, P. Docampo, A. Goriely and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 151–157 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saliba, K. W. Tan, H. Sai, D. T. Moore, T. Scott, W. Zhang, L. A. Estroff, U. Wiesner and H. J. Snaith, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 17171–17177 CAS .
H. Yu, F. Wang, F. Xie, W. Li, J. Chen and N. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 7102–7108 CAS .
J. You, Y. Yang, Z. Hong, T.-B. Song, L. Meng, Y. Liu, C. Jiang, H. Zhou, W.-H. Chang, G. Li and Y. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 183902 CrossRef .
C.-Y. Chang, C.-Y. Chu, Y.-C. Huang, C.-W. Huang, S.-Y. Chang, C.-A. Chen, C.-Y. Chao and W.-F. Su, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 4955–4961 CAS .
Y. Xu, L. Zhu, J. Shi, S. Lv, X. Xu, J. Xiao, J. Dong, H. Wu, Y. Luo, D. Li and Q. Meng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 2242–2248 CAS .
L. Zheng, Y. H. Chung, Y. Ma, L. Zhang, L. Xiao, Z. Chen, S. Wang, B. Qu and Q. Gong, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 11196–11199 RSC .
J. M. Ball, M. M. Lee, A. Hey and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1739–1743 CAS .
A. T. Barrows, A. J. Pearson, C. K. Kwak, A. D. F. Dunbar, A. R. Buckley and D. G. Lidzey, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2944–2950 CAS .
D. E. Starr, G. Sadoughi, E. Handick, R. G. Wilks, J.-H. Alsmeier, L. Kohler, M. Gorgoi, H. Snaith and M. Bar, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1609–1615 CAS .
X. Liu, W. Jiao, M. Lei, Y. Zhou, B. Song and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9278–9284 CAS .
Y. L. Guo, C. Liu, H. Tanaka and E. Nakamura, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 535–539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, J. K. Cooper, R. Buonsanti, C. Giannini, Y. Liu, F. M. Toma and I. D. Sharp, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 493–499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Di Giacomo, S. Razza, F. Matteocci, A. D'Epifanio, S. Licoccia, T. M. Brown and A. Di Carlo, J. Power Sources, 2014, 251, 152–156 CrossRef CAS .
T.-B. Song, Q. Chen, H. Zhou, S. Luo, Y. Yang, J. You and Y. Yang, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 494–500 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wu, S. Bai, J. Xiang, Z. Yuan, Y. Yang, W. Cui, X. Gao, Z. Liu, Y. Jin and B. Sun, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 10505–10510 RSC .
P.-W. Liang, C.-Y. Liao, C.-C. Chueh, F. Zuo, S. T. Williams, X.-K. Xin, J. Lin and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3748–3754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-C. Chueh, C.-Y. Liao, F. Zuo, S. T. Williams, P.-W. Liang and A. K. Y. Jen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9058–9062 CAS .
F. K. Aldibaja, L. Badia, E. Mas-Marza, R. S. Sanchez, E. M. Barea and I. Mora-Sero, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9194–9200 CAS .
D. Forgacs, M. Sessolo and H. J. Bolink, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14121–14125 CAS .
Y. Zhao and K. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 9412–9418 CAS .
E. Edri, S. Kirmayer, M. Kulbak, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 429–433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zuo and L. Ding, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 9935–9938 RSC .
Y. Chen, Y. Zhao and Z. Liang, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1448–1451 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yan, M. Long, T. Zhang, Z. Wei, H. Chen, S. Yang and J. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4460–4468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, Y. Zhao and Z. Liang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9137–9140 CAS .
C. Wehrenfennig, G. E. Eperon, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith and L. M. Herz, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1584–1589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yang, R. Guo, K. Kadel, Y. Liu, K. O'Shea, R. Bone, X. Wang, J. He and W. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19616–19622 CAS .
J. H. Heo, H. J. Han, D. Kim, T. K. Ahn and S. H. Im, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1602–1608 CAS .
J. H. Heo, D. H. Song, H. J. Han, S. Y. Kim, J. H. Kim, D. Kim, H. W. Shin, T. K. Ahn, C. Wolf, T.-W. Lee and S. H. Im, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3424–3430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Heo, D. H. Song and S. H. Im, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 8179–8183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ryu, J. Seo, S. S. Shin, Y. C. Kim, N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh and S. I. Seok, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 3271–3275 CAS .
N. J. Jeon, H. G. Lee, Y. C. Kim, J. Seo, J. H. Noh, J. Lee and S. I. Seok, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7837–7840 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xiao, F. Huang, W. Huang, Y. Dkhissi, Y. Zhu, J. Etheridge, A. Gray-Weale, U. Bach, Y.-B. Cheng and L. Spiccia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 9898–9903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Della Gaspera, Y. Peng, Q. Hou, L. Spiccia, U. Bach, J. J. Jasieniak and Y.-B. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 249–257 CrossRef CAS .
F. Huang, Y. Dkhissi, W. Huang, M. Xiao, I. Benesperi, S. Rubanov, Y. Zhu, X. Lin, L. Jiang, Y. Zhou, A. Gray-Weale, J. Etheridge, C. R. McNeill, R. A. Caruso, U. Bach, L. Spiccia and Y.-B. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2014, 10, 10–18 CrossRef CAS .
W. Nie, H. Tsai, R. Asadpour, J.-C. Blancon, A. J. Neukirch, G. Gupta, J. J. Crochet, M. Chhowalla, S. Tretiak, M. A. Alam, H.-L. Wang and A. D. Mohite, Science, 2015, 347, 522–525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Zheng, S. Yang, X. Chen, Y. Chen, Y. Hou and H. G. Yang, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 5116–5121 CrossRef CAS .
N. Preda, L. Mihut, M. Baibarac, I. Baltog, R. Ramer, J. Pandele, C. Andronescu and V. Fruth, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2009, 20, 465–470 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Yu-Hallada and A. H. Francis, J. Phys. Chem., 1990, 94, 7518–7523 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liang, D. B. Mitzi and M. T. Prikas, Chem. Mater., 1998, 10, 403–411 CrossRef CAS .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S. J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xiao, C. Bi, Y. Shao, Q. Dong, Q. Wang, Y. Yuan, C. Wang, Y. Gao and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2619–2623 CAS .
K. Yan, Z. Wei, J. Li, H. Chen, Y. Yi, X. Zheng, X. Long, Z. Wang, J. Wang, J. Xu and S. Yang, Small, 2015, 11, 2269–2274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zheng, Y. Ma, S. Chu, S. Wang, B. Qu, L. Xiao, Z. Chen, Q. Gong, Z. Wu and X. Hou, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 8171–8176 RSC .
J. Song, E. Zheng, J. Bian, X.-F. Wang, W. Tian, Y. Sanehira and T. Miyasaka, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10837–10844 CAS .
N. Li, H. Dong, H. Dong, J. Li, W. Li, G. Niu, X. Guo, Z. Wu and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 14973–14978 CAS .
S. A. Kulkarni, T. Baikie, P. P. Boix, N. Yantara, N. Mathews and S. Mhaisalkar, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9221–9225 CAS .
Z. Zhu, J. Ma, Z. Wang, C. Mu, Z. Fan, L. Du, Y. Bai, L. Fan, H. Yan, D. L. Phillips and S. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 3760–3763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, Z. Wei, K. Yan, Y. Yi, J. Wang and S. Yang, Faraday Discuss., 2015, 176, 271–286 RSC .
Z. Wei, K. Yan, H. Chen, Y. Yi, T. Zhang, X. Long, J. Li, L. Zhang, J. Wang and S. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3326–3333 CAS .
Z. Liu, M. Zhang, X. Xu, L. Bu, W. Zhang, W. Li, Z. Zhao, M. Wang, Y.-B. Cheng and H. He, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 3967–3973 RSC .
J. J. Shi, J. Dong, S. T. Lv, Y. Z. Xu, L. F. Zhu, J. Y. Xiao, X. Xu, H. J. Wu, D. M. Li, Y. H. Luo and Q. B. Meng, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 063901 CrossRef .
Z. Wei, H. Chen, K. Yan and S. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 126, 13455–13459 CrossRef .
P. Docampo, F. Hanusch, S. D. Stranks, M. Döblinger, J. M. Feckl, M. Ehrensperger, N. K. Minar, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith and T. Bein, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400355 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhao and K. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9086–9091 CAS .
H. A. Harms, N. Tetreault, N. Pellet, M. Bensimon and M. Grätzel, Faraday Discuss., 2014, 176, 251–269 RSC .
Y. Zhou, M. Yang, A. L. Vasiliev, H. F. Garces, Y. Zhao, D. Wang, S. Pang, K. Zhu and N. P. Padture, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9249–9256 CAS .
D. H. Cao, C. C. Stoumpos, C. D. Malliakas, M. J. Katz, O. K. Farha, J. T. Hupp and M. G. Kanatzidis, APL Mater., 2014, 2, 091101 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, A. M. Nardes and K. Zhu, Faraday Discuss., 2014, 176, 301–312 RSC .
Y. Xu, J. Shi, S. Lv, L. Zhu, J. Dong, H. Wu, Y. Xiao, Y. Luo, S. Wang, D. Li, X. Li and Q. Meng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 5651–5656 CAS .
J. Shi, Y. Luo, H. Wei, J. Luo, J. Dong, S. Lv, J. Xiao, Y. Xu, L. Zhu, X. Xu, H. Wu, D. Li and Q. Meng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 9711–9718 CAS .
Q. Hu, J. Wu, C. Jiang, T. Liu, X. Que, R. Zhu and Q. Gong, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 10161–10167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Im, I.-H. Jang, N. Pellet, M. Grätzel and N.-G. Park, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 927–932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Chen, H. Zhou, Y. Fang, A. Z. Stieg, T.-B. Song, H.-H. Wang, X. Xu, Y. Liu, S. Lu, J. You, P. Sun, J. McKay, M. S. Goorsky and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hu, D. Wang, Y. Zhou, J. Zhang, S. Lv, S. Pang, X. Chen, Z. Liu, N. P. Padture and G. Cui, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 28964–28967 RSC .
S. Wang, L. K. Ono, M. R. Leyden, Y. Kato, S. R. Raga, M. V. Lee and Y. Qi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14631–14641 CAS .
K. Kakiage, T. Kyomen and M. Hanaya, Chem. Lett., 2013, 42, 1520–1521 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xiao, Q. Dong, C. Bi, Y. Shao, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6503–6509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhu, T. Yu, F. Li, C. Bao, H. Gao, Y. Yi, J. Yang, G. Fu, X. Zhou and Z. Zou, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 5427–5434 RSC .
J. Lian, Q. Wang, Y. Yuan, Y. Shao and J. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9146–9151 CAS .
H.-S. Ko, J.-W. Lee and N.-G. Park, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8808–8815 CAS .
D.-Y. Son, K.-H. Bae, H.-S. Kim and N.-G. Park, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 10321–10328 CAS .
N. Tripathi, M. Yanagida, Y. Shirai, T. Masuda, L. Han and K. Miyano, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 12081–12088 CAS .
J. Xiao, Y. Yang, X. Xu, J. Shi, L. Zhu, S. Lv, H. Wu, Y. Luo, D. Li and Q. Meng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5289–5293 CAS .
K. M. Boopathi, M. Ramesh, P. Perumal, Y. C. Huang, C. S. Tsao, Y. F. Chen, C. H. Lee and C. W. Chu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9257–9263 CAS .
L. Chen, F. Tang, Y. Wang, S. Gao, W. Cao, J. Cai and L. Chen, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 263–270 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, T. Zhang and Y. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19674–19678 CAS .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Science, 2015, 348, 1234–1237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhang, M. Yang, Y. Zhao and K. Zhu, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3959–3963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Christians, P. A. Miranda Herrera and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1530–1538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, B. D. Siempelkamp, D. Liu and T. L. Kelly, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1955–1963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Han, S. Meyer, Y. Dkhissi, K. Weber, J. M. Pringle, U. Bach, L. Spiccia and Y.-B. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8139–8147 CAS .
H. Gao, C. Bao, F. Li, T. Yu, J. Yang, W. Zhu, X. Zhou, G. Fu and Z. Zou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 9110–9117 CAS .
S. R. Raga, M.-C. Jung, M. V. Lee, M. R. Leyden, Y. Kato and Y. Qi, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1597–1603 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wozny, M. Yang, A. M. Nardes, C. C. Mercado, S. Ferrere, M. O. Reese, W. Zhou and K. Zhu, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 4814–4820 CrossRef CAS .
C.-G. Wu, C.-H. Chiang, Z.-L. Tseng, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2725–2733 CAS .
J.-H. Heo, H. J. Han, D. Kim, T. Ahn and S. H. Im, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1602–1608 CAS .
Y. Zhou, M. Yang, W. Wu, A. L. Vasiliev, K. Zhu and N. P. Padture, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8178–8184 CAS .
M. Ramesh, K. M. Boopathi, T. Y. Huang, Y. C. Huang, C. S. Tsao and C. W. Chu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 2359–2366 CAS .
D. Vak, J. van Embden, W. W. H. Wong and S. Watkins, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 5 CrossRef .
Z. R. Liang, S. H. Zhang, X. Q. Xu, N. Wang, J. X. Wang, X. Wang, Z. N. Bi, G. Xu, N. Y. Yuan and J. N. Ding, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 60562–60569 RSC .
J. H. Kim, S. T. Williams, N. Cho, C.-C. Chueh and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 201401229 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhibin, C. Chu-Chen, Z. Fan, J. H. Kim, L. Po-Wei and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500328 Search PubMed .
Y. Deng, E. Peng, Y. Shao, Z. Xiao, Q. Dong and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1544–1550 CAS .
K. Hwang, Y.-S. Jung, Y.-J. Heo, F. H. Scholes, S. E. Watkins, J. Subbiah, D. J. Jones, D.-Y. Kim and D. Vak, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1241–1247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Razza, F. Di Giacomo, F. Matteocci, L. Cina, A. L. Palma, S. Casaluci, P. Cameron, A. D'Epifanio, S. Licoccia, A. Reale, T. M. Brown and A. Di Carlo, J. Power Sources, 2015, 277, 286–291 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Schmidt, T. T. Larsen-Olsen, J. E. Carlé, D. Angmo and F. C. Krebs, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 201500569 Search PubMed .
A. Abate, M. Saliba, D. J. Hollman, S. D. Stranks, K. Wojciechowski, R. Avolio, G. Grancini, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3247–3254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. K. Noel, A. Abate, S. D. Stranks, E. S. Parrott, V. M. Burlakov, A. Goriely and H. J. Snaith, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9815–9821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ogomi, A. Morita, S. Tsukamoto, T. Saitho, Q. Shen, T. Toyoda, K. Yoshino, S. S. Pandey, T. L. Ma and S. Hayase, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16651–16659 CAS .
Q. Chen, H. Zhou, T.-B. Song, S. Luo, Z. Hong, H.-S. Duan, L. Dou, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4158–4163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Kim, I. Im, Y. Yoon, S. D. Sung, E. Kim, J. Kim and W. I. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9264–9270 CAS .
L. Wang, C. McCleese, A. Kovalsky, Y. Zhao and C. Burda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 12205–12208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-Y. Son, J.-H. Im, H. S. Kim and N.-G. Park, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16567–16573 CAS .
W. Zhang, M. Saliba, S. D. Stranks, Y. Sun, X. Shi, U. Wiesner and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4505–4510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Choi, X. Yang, Z. M. Norman, S. J. L. Billinge and J. S. Owen, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 127–133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-S. Kim, J.-W. Lee, N. Yantara, P. P. Boix, S. A. Kulkarni, S. Mhaisalkar, M. Grätzel and N.-G. Park, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2412–2417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, S. Pathak, A. Abate, M. M. Lee and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2014, 4, 2885 Search PubMed .
T. Leijtens, B. Lauber, G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks and H. J. Snaith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1096–1102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Docampo, J. M. Ball, M. Darwich, G. E. Eperon and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2761 Search PubMed .
T. Du, N. Wang, H. Chen, H. Lin and H. He, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 3382–3388 CAS .
C. Liu, K. Wang, P. Du, T. Meng, X. Yu, S. Z. D. Cheng and X. Gong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 1153–1159 CAS .
P. Luo, Z. Liu, W. Xia, C. Yuan, J. Cheng and Y. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 2708–2714 CAS .
W. Wang, J. Yuan, G. Shi, X. Zhu, S. Shi, Z. Liu, L. Han, H.-Q. Wang and W. Ma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 3994–3999 CAS .
C. Liu, K. Wang, P. Du, C. Yi, T. Meng and X. Gong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 201402024 Search PubMed .
J. H. Kim, P.-W. Liang, S. T. Williams, N. Cho, C.-C. Chueh, M. S. Glaz, D. S. Ginger and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 695–701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. G. Lim, H. B. Kim, J. Jeong, H. Kim, J. Y. Kim and T. W. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6461–6466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Song, W. Wang, P. Sun, W. Ma and Z.-K. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 033901 CrossRef .
J. M. Ball, S. D. Stranks, M. T. Horantner, S. Huttner, W. Zhang, E. J. W. Crossland, I. Ramirez, M. Riede, M. B. Johnston, R. H. Friend and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 602–609 CAS .
K. Wang, C. Liu, P. Du, J. Zheng and X. Gong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1245–1255 CAS .
L. Hu, W. Wang, H. Liu, J. Peng, H. Cao, G. Shao, Z. Xia, W. Ma and J. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 515–518 CAS .
D. Liu, M. K. Gangishetty and T. L. Kelly, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19873–19881 CAS .
D. Shen, X. Yu, X. Cai, M. Peng, Y. Ma, X. Su, L. Xiao and D. Zou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 20454–20461 CAS .
H. Zhou, Y. Shi, K. Wang, Q. Dong, X. Bai, Y. Xing, Y. Du and T. Ma, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 4600–4605 CAS .
Q. Wang, C. Bi and J. Huang, Nano Energy, 2015, 15, 275–280 CrossRef CAS .
C.-S. Jiang, M. Yang, Y. Zhou, B. To, S. U. Nanayakkara, J. M. Luther, W. Zhou, J. J. Berry, J. van de Lagemaat, N. P. Padture, K. Zhu and M. M. Al-Jassim, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Poorkazem, D. Liu and T. L. Kelly, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9241–9248 CAS .
C. Roldan-Carmona, O. Malinkiewicz, A. Soriano, G. M. Espallargas, A. Garcia, P. Reinecke, T. Kroyer, M. I. Dar, M. K. Nazeeruddin and H. J. Bolink, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 994–997 CAS .
M. Lee, Y. Jo, D. S. Kim and Y. Jun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 4129–4133 CAS .
F. Di Giacomo, V. Zardetto, A. D'Epifanio, S. Pescetelli, F. Matteocci, S. Razza, A. Di Carlo, S. Licoccia, W. M. M. Kessels, M. Creatore and T. M. Brown, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 201401808 Search PubMed .
J. Han, S. Yuan, L. Liu, X. Qiu, H. Gong, X. Yang, C. Li, Y. Hao and B. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5375–5384 CAS .
B.-J. Kim, d. H. Kim, Y.-Y. Lee, H.-W. Shin, G. S. Han, J. S. Hong, K. Mahmood, T. Ahn, Y.-C. Joo, K. S. Hong, N.-G. Park, S. Lee and H. S. Jung, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 8, 916–921 Search PubMed .
Y. Dkhissi, F. Huang, S. Rubanov, M. Xiao, U. Bach, L. Spiccia, R. A. Caruso and Y.-B. Cheng, J. Power Sources, 2015, 278, 325–331 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Jung, S. T. Williams and A. K. Y. Jen, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 62971–62977 RSC .
L. Qiu, J. Deng, X. Lu, Z. Yang and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 10425–10428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Bach, D. Lupo, P. Comte, J. E. Moser, F. Weissortel, J. Salbeck, H. Spreitzer and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1998, 395, 583–585 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Christians, R. C. M. Fung and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 758–764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Abate, D. J. Hollman, J. Teuscher, S. Pathak, R. Avolio, G. D'Errico, G. Vitiello, S. Fantacci and H. J. Snaith, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 13538–13548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. P. Marshall, R. I. Walton and R. A. Hatton, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 11631–11640 CAS .
S. Ito, S. Tanaka, H. Vahlman, H. Nishino, K. Manabe and P. Lund, ChemPhysChem, 2014, 15, 1194–1200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ito, S. Tanaka and H. Nishino, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 881–886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Subbiah, A. Halder, S. Ghosh, N. Mahuli, G. Hodes and S. K. Sarkar, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1748–1753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chavhan, O. Miguel, H. J. Grande, V. Gonzalez-Pedro, R. S. Sanchez, E. M. Barea, I. Mora-Sero and R. Tena-Zaera, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 12754–12760 CAS .
S. Ye, W. Sun, Y. Li, W. Yan, H. Peng, Z. Bian, Z. Liu and C. Huang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3723–3728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Qin, S. Tanaka, S. Ito, N. Tetreault, K. Manabe, H. Nishino, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3834 CAS .
V. Trifiletti, V. Roiati, S. Colella, R. Giannuzzi, L. De Marco, A. Rizzo, M. Manca, A. Listorti and G. Gigli, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 4283–4289 CAS .
J. Shi, X. Xu, D. Li and Q. Meng, Small, 2015, 11, 2472–2486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. You, L. Meng, T.-B. Song, T.-F. Guo, Y. Yang, W.-H. Chang, Z. Hong, H. Chen, H. Zhou, Q. Chen, Y. Liu, N. De Marco and Y. Yang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015 DOI:10.1038/nnano.2015.230 .
B.-E. Cohen, S. Gamliel and L. Etgar, APL Mater., 2014, 2, 081502 CrossRef .
S. Aharon, B. E. Cohen and L. Etgar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 17160–17165 CAS .
H. Wei, J. Shi, X. Xu, J. Xiao, J. Luo, J. Dong, S. Lv, L. Zhu, H. Wu, D. Li, Y. Luo, Q. Meng and Q. Chen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 4937–4944 RSC .
J. Shi, J. Dong, S. Lv, Y. Xu, L. Zhu, J. Xiao, X. Xu, H. Wu, D. Li, Y. Luo and Q. Meng, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 063901 CrossRef .
Y. Rong, Z. Ku, A. Mei, T. Liu, M. Xu, S. Ko, X. Li and H. Han, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2160–2164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, T. Liu, L. Liu, M. Hu, Y. Yang, A. Mei and H. Han, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9165–9170 CAS .
F. Zhang, X. Yang, H. Wang, M. Cheng, J. Zhao and L. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 16140–16146 CAS .
Y. Yang, J. Xiao, H. Wei, L. Zhu, D. Li, Y. Luo, H. Wu and Q. Meng, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 52825–52830 RSC .
X. Xu, Z. Liu, Z. Zuo, M. Zhang, Z. Zhao, Y. Shen, H. Zhou, Q. Chen, Y. Yang and M. Wang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2402–2408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. F. Liu, A. Y. Mei, T. F. Liu, P. Jiang, Y. S. Sheng, L. J. Zhang and H. W. Han, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1790–1793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Habisreutinger, T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, R. J. Nicholas and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5561–5568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, X. Yang, H. Chen, K. Zhang, C. Qin, J. Liu, W. Peng, A. Islam, E. Bi, F. Ye, M. Yin, P. Zhang and L. Han, Appl. Phys. Express, 2014, 7, 052301 CrossRef .
K. Mahmood, B. S. Swain and A. Amassian, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 14674–14678 RSC .
W. Ke, G. Fang, Q. Liu, L. Xiong, P. Qin, H. Tao, J. Wang, H. Lei, B. Li, J. Wan, G. Yang and Y. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 6730–6733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Liu, J. Yang and T. L. Kelly, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 17116–17122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Marchioro, J. Teuscher, D. Friedrich, M. Kunst, R. van de Krol, T. Moehl, M. Grätzel and J. E. Moser, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 250–255 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Ponseca, T. J. Savenije, M. A. Abdellah, K. Zheng, A. P. Yartsev, T. Pascher, T. Harlang, P. Chabera, T. Pullerits, A. Stepanov, J.-P. Wolf and V. Sundstrom, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5189–5192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Oga, A. Saeki, Y. Ogomi, S. Hayase and S. Seki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 13818–13825 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bi, A. M. El-Zohry, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, ACS Photonics, 2015, 2, 589–594 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Manser and P. V. Kamat, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 737–743 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Dang, Y. Liu, Y. X. Sun, D. S. Yuan, X. L. Liu, W. Q. Lu, G. F. Liu, H. B. Xia and X. T. Tao, CrystEngComm, 2015, 17, 665–670 RSC .
H. J. Snaith, A. Abate, J. M. Ball, G. E. Eperon, T. Leijtens, N. K. Noel, S. D. Stranks, J. T.-W. Wang, K. Wojciechowski and W. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1511–1515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. L. Unger, E. T. Hoke, C. D. Bailie, W. H. Nguyen, A. R. Bowring, T. Heumuller, M. G. Christoforo and M. D. McGehee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3690–3698 CAS .
Z. Xiao, Y. Yuan, Y. Shao, Q. Wang, Q. Dong, C. Bi, P. Sharma, A. Gruverman and J. Huang, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 193–198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, F. Zheng, N. Z. Koocher, H. Takenaka, F. Wang and A. M. Rappe, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 693–699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-Q. Liao, Y. Zhang, C.-L. Hu, J.-G. Mao, H.-Y. Ye, P.-F. Li, S. D. Huang and R.-G. Xiong, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7338 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Oskam, B. V. Bergeron, G. J. Meyer and P. C. Searson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2001, 105, 6867–6873 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fan, J. Xiao, K. Sun, L. Chen, Y. Hu, J. Ouyang, K. P. Ong, K. Zeng and J. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1155–1161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-W. Chen, N. Sakai, M. Ikegami and T. Miyasaka, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 164–169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Chen, X. Zheng, M. Yang, Y. Zhou, S. Kundu, J. Shi, K. Zhu and S. Priya, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 582–591 CrossRef CAS .
J. Beilsten-Edmands, G. Eperon, R. Johnson, H. Snaith and P. Radaelli, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 173502 CrossRef .
W. Tress, N. Marinova, T. Moehl, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 995–1004 CAS .
B. Chen, M. Yang, X. Zheng, C. Wu, W. Li, Y. Yan, J. Bisquert, G. Garcia-Belmonte, K. Zhu and S. Priya, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 4693–4700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Era, S. Morimoto, T. Tsutsui and S. Saito, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1994, 65, 676–678 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hattori, T. Taira, M. Era, T. Tsutsui and S. Saito, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1996, 254, 103–108 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chondroudis and D. B. Mitzi, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 3028–3030 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-K. Tan, R. S. Moghaddam, M. L. Lai, P. Docampo, R. Higler, F. Deschler, M. Price, A. Sadhanala, L. M. Pazos, D. Credgington, F. Hanusch, T. Bein, H. J. Snaith and R. H. Friend, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 687–692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, N. Wang, Y. Jin, J. Si, Z.-K. Tan, H. Du, L. Cheng, X. Dai, S. Bai, H. He, Z. Ye, M. L. Lai, R. H. Friend and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2311–2316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. R. Li, Z. K. Tan, D. W. Di, M. L. Lai, L. Jiang, J. H. W. Lim, R. H. Friend and N. C. Greenham, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2640–2644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. L. Z. Hoye, M. R. Chua, K. P. Musselman, G. Li, M.-L. Lai, Z.-K. Tan, N. C. Greenham, J. L. MacManus-Driscoll, R. H. Friend and D. Credgington, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1414–1419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Kim, H. Cho, J. H. Heo, T. S. Kim, N. Myoung, C. L. Lee, S. H. Im and T. W. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1248–1254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-C. Hsiao, T. Wu, M. Li and B. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2899–2906 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ning, X. Gong, R. Comin, G. Walters, F. Fan, O. Voznyy, E. Yassitepe, A. Buin, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, Nature, 2015, 523, 324–328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, Y. Fu, F. Meng, X. Wu, Z. Gong, Q. Ding, M. V. Gustafsson, M. T. Trinh, S. Jin and X. Y. Zhu, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 636–642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. S. Lim, N. Yantara, X. Liu, D. Sabba, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 476–480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dou, Y. M. Yang, J. You, Z. Hong, W. H. Chang, G. Li and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, G. F. Dong, W. Z. Li and L. D. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 6 Search PubMed .
X. Hu, X. D. Zhang, L. Liang, J. Bao, S. Li, W. L. Yang and Y. Xie, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 7373–7380 CrossRef CAS .
H.-W. Chen, N. Sakai, A. K. Jena, Y. Sanehira, M. Ikegami, K.-C. Ho and T. Miyasaka, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 164–169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, J. Du, X. Wu, G. Zhang, Y. Chu, D. Liu, Y. Zhao, Z. Liang and J. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 21634–21638 CAS .
N. Marinova, W. Tress, R. Humphry-Baker, M. I. Dar, V. Bojinov, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4200–4209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, Y. Lu, W. Xu, H. Mu, C. Chen, H. Qiao, J. Song, S. Li, B. Sun, Y.-B. Cheng and Q. Bao, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 1389–1396 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, J.-H. Im, M. T. Mayer, M. Schreier, M. K. Nazeeruddin, N.-G. Park, S. D. Tilley, H. J. Fan and M. Grätzel, Science, 2014, 345, 1593–1596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Chen, J. S. Manser and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 974–981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Gurudayal, D. Sabba, M. H. Kumar, L. H. Wong, J. Barber, M. Grätzel and N. Mathews, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3833–3839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. X. Xie, D. Zhang, H. Su, X. Ren, K. S. Wong, M. Grätzel and W. C. H. Choy, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 639–646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Mitzi, C. D. Dimitrakopoulos and L. L. Kosbar, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 3728–3740 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Chin, D. Cortecchia, J. Yin, A. Bruno and C. Soci, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 9 Search PubMed .
H. Dong, X. Guo, W. Li and L. Wang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 60131–60134 RSC .
X. Guo, H. Dong, W. Li, N. Li and L. Wang, ChemPhysChem, 2015, 16, 1727–1732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, J. Li, L. Wang, G. Niu, R. Gao and Y. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 11735 CAS .
G. Niu, W. Li, F. Meng, L. Wang, H. Dong and Y. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 705–710 CAS .
B. Conings, J. Drijkoningen, N. Gauquelin, A. Babayigit, J. D'Haen, L. D'Olieslaeger, A. Ethirajan, J. Verbeeck, J. Manca, E. Mosconi, F. D. Angelis and H.-G. Boyen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 201500477 Search PubMed .
Q. Jiang, D. Rebollar, J. Gong, E. L. Piacentino, C. Zheng and T. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 7617–7620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. C. Smith, E. T. Hoke, D. Solis-Ibarra, M. D. McGehee and H. I. Karunadasa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 126, 11414–11417 CrossRef .
U. P. Bansode, R. Naphade, O. Game, S. Agarkar and S. B. Ogale, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 9177–9185 CAS .
M. Yang, Y. Zhou, Y. Zeng, C. S. Jiang, N. P. Padture and K. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6363–6370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, Y. Wu, Y. Yue, J. Liu, W. Zhang, X. Yang, H. Chen, E. Bi, I. Ashraful, M. Grätzel and L. Han, Science, 2015, 350, 944–948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, M. Ibrahim Dar, C. Yi, J. Luo, M. Tschumi, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin, H. Han and M. Grätzel, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 703–711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gong, S. B. Darling and F. Q. You, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1953–1968 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

Yixin Zhao
	Yixin Zhao is an associate professor at Shanghai Jiao Tong University. He obtained his PhD degree from Case Western Reserve University in 2010 followed by working as a postdoctoral fellow at Penn State University and National Renewable Energy Laboratory. He had worked on photocatalysis, semiconductor quantum dots, thermoelectrics and dye sensitized water splitting cells. His current research interests focus on perovskite solar cells, water splitting cells and functional materials for solar energy conversion and environmental remediation application.

Kai Zhu
	Kai Zhu is a senior scientist in the Chemistry and Nanoscience Science Center at the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL). He received his PhD degree in physics from Syracuse University in 2003. His research interests have included characterization and modeling of hydrogenated amorphous silicon thin film solar cells, III–V wide-bandgap light emitting diodes, dye-sensitized solar cells, and Li-ion batteries and supercapacitors. His current research focuses on perovskite solar cells, including material development, device fabrication, and fundamental characterization on charge-carrier dynamics and device operating principles.

 	Fig. 1  (A) Crystal structure of cubic lead halide perovskite (α phase). Reprinted with permission from ref. 7. (B) Crystal structure of the tetragonal crystal system (β) phase and orthorhombic (γ) phase of MAPbX3. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44. (C) Tolerance factors (t) of a series of halide perovskites. Reprinted with permission from ref. 8.	 

 	Fig. 2  (A) The contributions of MA, Pb, and I on the density of state of MAPbI3 perovskite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 31. (B) Calculated maximum efficiencies of halide perovskites, CIS, CZTS, and GaAs as a function of film thickness. Reprinted with permission from ref. 70. (C) The theoretical calculated energy barrier for the phase transition between the tetragonal (β) phase and orthorhombic (γ) phase of MAPbX3. Reprinted with permission from ref. 71.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) Ultraviolet-visible absorption spectra and photos of MAPb(I1−xBrx)3 perovskite films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. (B) Two-dimensional map of the density-functional-theory-simulated bandgaps of PbI3-based perovskites as a function of the apical and equatorial metal–halide–metal bond angles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 31.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) Single crystals of MAPbI3 prepared from a regular crystal-growth method. Reprinted with permission from ref. 57. (B) Solvothermal growth of MAPb(Br1−xClx)3 single crystals. Reprinted with permission from ref. 58. (C) Template-assisted growth of lead halide perovskite nanocrystals. Reprinted with permission from ref. 112. (D) Scheme of the hot-injection method for preparing lead halide perovskite nanocrystals. Reprinted with permission from ref. 113.	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) Colloidal perovskite CsPbX3 nanocrystals (NCs; X = Cl, Br, I) with size- and composition-tunable bandgap energies covering the entire visible spectral region with narrow and bright emission. Reprinted with permission from ref. 120. (B) Sketch of the inter-particle anion exchange method for growing colloidal CsPbX3 NCs (X = Cl, Br, I). Reprinted with permission from ref. 124.	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) Dual-source thermal evaporation system for depositing perovskite thin films using MAI as the organic source and PbCl2 as the inorganic source. Reprinted with permission from ref. 126. (B) Thermal-evaporation system for controlling the MAI vapor partial pressure inside the vacuum chamber. Reprinted with permission from ref. 127.	 

 	Fig. 7  The growth scheme of MAPbI3 perovskite by one-step and two-step methods.	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) Illustration of perovskite formation stages in fabricating MAPbI3−xClx thin films with an excess organic component to retard the crystallization of perovskite thin films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 35. (B) Solvent engineering procedure for preparing a uniform and dense perovskite film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 186.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of perovskite film formation through the (A) vapor-assisted solution process (reprinted with permission from ref. 20); (B) two-step spin-coating method (reprinted with permission from ref. 223); (C) solvent annealing process (reprinted with permission from ref. 224); and (D) solid-state pressing method (reprinted with permission from ref. 232).	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) Schematic illustration of the configurations of PbI2, HPbI3, and FAPbI3 and their intercalation reaction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 95. (B) Schematics of FAPbI3 perovskite crystallization involving the direct intramolecular exchange of dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) molecules intercalated in PbI2 with formamidinium iodide (FAI). Reprinted with permission from ref. 234. (C) Typical scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of (a–d) PbI2·xMAI (x = 0.1, 0.15, 0.2, and 0.3) precursor films and (e–h) MAPbI3 films prepared from their respective pre-expanded precursor films as indicated. Reprinted with permission from ref. 235.	 

 	Fig. 11  (A) Photograph of the inverted MAPbI3 planar hybrid solar submodule (10 × 10 cm2) prepared by spin coating. Reprinted with permission from ref. 183. (B) Schematic illustration showing the (anti)solvent–solvent extraction process for the room-temperature deposition of hybrid perovskite thin films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 244.	 

 	Fig. 12  (A) Schematic illustration of perovskite film formation through the spray deposition process. Reprinted with permission from ref. 247. (B) Schematics of perovskite formation from a two-step process using spin-coated PbI2 and spray-coated MAI. Reprinted with permission from ref. 231.	 

 	Fig. 13  (A) Schematic illustration of the experimental setup for perovskite film deposition via doctor-blade coating and a photo of the typical perovskite film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 250. (B) Schematic illustration and photos of slot-die coating using a gas-quenching process for fabricating a pinhole-free PbI2 layer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 251.	 

 	Fig. 14  (A) Lead halide perovskite crystals passivated with the iodopentafluorobenzene (IPFB) layer via a halogen bond with lead. Reprinted with permission from ref. 254. (B) Possible nature of trap sites related to the loss of iodine at the perovskite surface and proposed surface Pb passivation mechanism by thiophene or pyridine molecules by a coordinate or dative covalent bond with the lead defect. Reprinted with permission from ref. 255. (C) Structure of the mesoporous structured PSC with HOOC-R-NH3+ between the perovskite layer and mesoporous titania. Reprinted with permission from ref. 256. (D) Passivation of MAPbI3 perovskite by PbI2 through a type I configuration. Reprinted with permission from ref. 257.	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic illustration of the mesoporous, bi-layer, n–i–p, and p–i–n hybrid perovskite film architectures in solar cells. HTM represents the hole-transporting material; ETM represents the electron-transporting material.	 

 	Fig. 16  (A) Photograph of a flexible PSC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 26. (B) Structure of the fiber-shaped PSC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 291.	 

 	Fig. 17  Energy-level diagrams of PSCs with different device configurations.	 

 	Fig. 18  (A) Schematic illustration of a carbon-based monolithic device. Reprinted with permission from ref. 152. (B) Schematic illustration of the solar cell with a carbon nanotube/polymer composite as the hole-transporting structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 315.	 

 	Fig. 19  (A) Device architecture and energy-level diagram of the ITO/ZnO/MAPbI3/Spiro-MeOTAD/Ag cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 26. (B) Schematic view and energy-band diagram of PSC based on SnO2 and Spiro-MeOTAD contact layers for electrons and holes, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 318.	 

 	Fig. 20  (A) Schematic and performance of a compact ETM-layer-free PSC based on Cs2CO3-modified ITO substrate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 218. (B) Schematic view of compact-layer-free PSCs, reprinted with permission from ref. 84.	 

 	Fig. 21  Schematic illustration of the charge transfer and charge transport in a perovskite-sensitized TiO2 solar cell (left) and a non-injecting Al2O3-based solar cell (right) with their corresponding representations of the energy landscape. Reprint with permission from ref. 12.	 

 	Fig. 22  (A) Electron-diffusion coefficient as a function of photoelectron density and recombination lifetime as a function of open-circuit voltage. PS: perovskite MAPbI3; dye: Z907 dye. Reprinted with permission from ref. 151. (B) Comparison of electron-diffusion coefficient and recombination lifetime of mesoporous solar cells based on various perovskite absorbers with PbI2 based cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 215. (C) Electron lifetime and charge-transport time of PSCs based on MAPbI3 prepared with different concentration PbI2 precursor films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 323.	 

 	Fig. 23  (A) Scheme of ion migration in lead halide perovskite during positive and negative electric polings, respectively, showing that accumulated ions in the perovskite near the electrode induced p- and n-doping. Reprinted with permission from ref. 328. (B) Schematic illustration of the physical mechanism of the polarization in ferroelectric lead halide PSCs in planar and mesoporous TiO2 configurations. Reprinted with permission from ref. 333.	 

 	Fig. 24  (A) Illustration of the structure of a perovskite light-emitting diode (PeLED). Reprinted with permission from ref. 341. (B) Device structure and light-emitting photograph of a MAPbBr3 PeLED. Reprinted with permission from ref. 343. (C) The electroluminescence spectra of PeLEDs with MAPbClxBryI3−x−y. Reprinted with permission from ref. 345. (D) Three-dimensional atomistic model of PbS QDs in a perovskite matrix. Reprinted with permission from ref. 347.	 

 	Fig. 25  (A) Planar configuration of a hybrid perovskite photodetector. Reprinted with permission from ref. 350. (B) Schematic diagram of the structure of a photodetector with the mesoporous structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 351.	 

 	Fig. 26  (A) Schematic diagram of the combination of the perovskite tandem cell with NiFe DLH/Ni foam electrodes for water splitting. Reprinted with permission from ref. 357. (B) Schematic diagram of the BiVO4-MAPbI3 tandem device for generating solar fuels. Reprinted with permission from ref. 358. (C) Schematic of the dual-junction PSC/hematite photoanode tandem cell. Reprinted with permission from ref. 359. (D) Schematic illustration of a Ni-coated perovskite photoanode in a PEC cell. Reprinted with permission from ref. 360.	 

 	Fig. 27  (A) Moisture-enhanced 2D perovskite (PEA)2(MA)2[Pb3I10] compared with the 3D perovskite MAPbI3. Reprinted with permission from ref. 369. (B) Schematic illustration of two neighboring grain structures of the MAPbI3 unit crosslinked by butylphosphonic acid 4-ammonium chloride (4-ABPACl) hydrogen-bonding interactions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 373.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
