Synthesis and photo-induced charge separation of confined conjugation length phenylene vinylene-based polymers   - Polymer Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3PY00061C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3PY00061C
(Paper)
Polym. Chem., 2013, 4, 5305-5309Synthesis and photo-induced charge separation of confined conjugation length phenylene vinylene-based polymers†Tina A. T. Tana, Tracey M. Clarkeb, David Jamesb, James R. Durrantb, Jonathan M. Whitea and Kenneth P. Ghiggino*aaSchool of Chemistry, Bio21 Institute, The University of Melbourne, Victoria 3010, Australia. E-mail: ghiggino@unimelb.edu.aubDepartment of Chemistry and Centre for Plastic Electronics, Imperial College, London SW7 2AZ, UKReceived 15th January 2013, Accepted 28th February 2013First published on 4th March 2013AbstractWe report the synthesis and photophysics of four confined chromophore phenylene vinylene (PPV)-based polymers where PPV-type trimer chromophores are linked by alkyl ether chains of increasing length (PT3–PT6). These confined chromophore polymers were blended in a 1:1 w/w ratio with the fullerene derivative PCBM and the photoinduced charge-separation properties compared to that of a fully conjugated polymer analogue (alt-co-MEH-PPV). Fluorescence from all polymers is quenched in the presence of PCBM and transient absorption measurements confirm the presence of polymer polarons arising from charge transfer from the polymer to the PCBM acceptor. The polaron decay kinetics of all the blend films were similar but the yields of polarons for the confined conjugation length polymers were lower than for alt-co-MEH-PPV:PCBM. These observations suggest that many of the initially formed radical ion pairs for the confined length polymers are unable to fully charge dissociate and undergo fast geminate recombination.1 IntroductionConjugated polymers are finding increasing use as the active materials in a variety of optoelectronic applications. Current applications being explored include OLEDs, photovoltaic cells, chemical and biosensing agents and organic field-effect transistors.1–5 However, there remain gaps in our understanding of the fundamental light-induced processes occurring in conjugated polymers that limit the full commercial exploitation of these interesting materials.Photoexcitation of conjugated polymers, such as the commercially important poly[2-methoxy-5-(2′-ethyl-hexyloxy)-1,4-phenylene vinylene] (MEH-PPV), results in the formation of singlet excitons that can undergo charge-transfer to suitable electron acceptor additives such as the fullerene (C60) derivative PCBM.2 This process is the basis for the application of conjugated polymers in organic solar cells.2,4 In bulk hetero-junction solar cell devices, intimate mixing of the polymer donor and electron acceptor is required to facilitate efficient charge transfer by ensuring the fullerene acceptor is within the exciton diffusion length, between 5 and 14 nm.6,7 To achieve high conversion efficiencies the charge-transfer process must be faster than competing intramolecular radiative and non-radiative pathways.8 Furthermore, the geminate charge carriers (bound radical pairs) need to escape their mutual coulomb attraction by dissociating before wasteful geminate charge-recombination processes can occur.4,9,10 Charge dissociation leads to the formation of positively charged polymer polarons that have characteristic absorption spectra, and decay dynamics that depend on the distribution and mobility of charge carriers in the material.11The objective to optimise charge separation processes has led to a large number of experimental and theoretical studies investigating the effects of molecular structure on charge generation and transport in semi-conducting polymers.2,4 Conjugated polymers such as MEH-PPV are thought to be composed of a distribution of chromophore lengths of 10–14 units arising from structural and conformational defects in the polymer chain.12 This distribution of chromophore lengths in a conjugated polymer and the likely involvement of energy transfer processes create complexities in understanding charge transfer mechanisms from the chemical structure. The role of conjugation length in determining charge-transfer dynamics remains largely unexplored.In order to obtain further insights into the role of polymer backbone conjugation on charge transport processes we report here the synthesis and photophysics of a series of phenylene vinylene-based polymers of defined conjugation length (and hence chromophore type), but with controlled spatial separation between the chromophores within the polymer chain by incorporating non-conjugated ether linkages. Their charge transfer properties with PCBM in thin film blends are compared with those of a fully conjugated polymer analogue, alt-co-MEH-PPV. Keeping the conjugation length constant in the confined chromophore polymers but varying the length of the linker between chromophores, should reveal any role of intrachain chromophore separation on charge transfer and recombination processes.2 Experimental2.1 Polymer synthesisFour confined chromophore polymers (PT3–PT6) were synthesised via a two-fold Horner–Emmons reaction as depicted in Fig. 1. The alkyl ether chain length was varied to systematically spatially separate the PPV-type trimer chromophores. 1,4-Bischloromethyl-2-methoxy-5-(2′-ethyl-hexyloxy) benzene 1 was synthesised according to literature procedure.13 The pale yellow liquid was then heated to reflux in triethyl phosphite for 12 h and distilled under reduced pressure to give the bisphosphonate 2 as a clear viscous liquid. The linked dialdehydes 3–6 were synthesised by reacting 2 equivalents of p-hydroxybenzaldehyde with the respective dibromo alkane, under basic conditions. The fully conjugated polymer was synthesised via the same method but using terephthaldehyde and designated alt-co-MEH-PPV (an alternating copolymer of poly[p-(phenylene vinylene)-(2-methoxy-5-(2′-ethyl-hexyloxy)-p-phenylene vinylene)]). Fig. 1  Synthesis of the confined conjugation length polymers PT3–6, and alt-co-MEH-PPV. Polymer molecular weights were determined by gel permeation chromatography. For PT3, PT4, PT5, PT6 and alt-co-MEH-PPV the number average molecular weights (and polydispersities) were respectively 9410 (1.73), 9360 (1.81), 12830 (1.99), 8920 (2.15), and 12020 (1.67). Full details of the synthesis and characterisation of the polymers are provided in the ESI.†2.2 Film preparation and photophysical measurementsThin films of the polymer samples, approximately 60–100 nm thick, were prepared by spin-coating a 5 mg ml−1 solution of the polymers dissolved in chloroform onto glass substrates. The films were placed in a cuvette and flushed with dry argon for 20 minutes prior to measurements.Absorption spectra were recorded on a Varian Cary 50 UV-Vis spectrophotometer while corrected steady-state photoluminescence spectra were recorded on a Varian Cary Eclipse fluorometer. Transient absorption measurements of thin films were obtained using a microsecond flash photolysis instrument that has been described previously.11 The instrument uses a nitrogen laser-pumped dye laser as the excitation source (PTI GL3300/GL-301), 100 W tungsten lamp as the monitoring light source and an amplified silicon photodiode/Tektronix TDS 220 oscilloscope for transient detection. UV-visible spectra were recorded before and after the transient absorption measurements to ensure no degradation of the film had occurred.3 Results and discussionThe absorption spectra of thin films of the 1:1 polymer:PCBM blends are shown in Fig. 2 while fluorescence spectra of the neat (i.e. no PCBM incorporated) polymer films and representative polymer:PCBM blend films are shown in Fig. 3. The absorption spectra of polymers PT3–6 are all similar but blue shifted compared to alt-co-MEH-PPV reflecting the decreased conjugation length of the confined chromophore polymers. The fluorescence of the confined length polymers is also blue shifted compared to the fully conjugated polymer. In all cases the addition of PCBM quenched (>90%) the fluorescence of the polymer films. Fig. 2  Absorption spectra of films of PT3–PT6 and alt-co-MEH-PPV:PCBM blends.  Fig. 3  Fluorescence spectra of thin films of alt-co-MEH-PPV (λex = 400 nm) and PT6 (λex = 400 nm) pristine and in 1:1 blends with PCBM. Two processes could account for the efficient quenching of the polymer fluorescence: electron transfer to the PCBM or energy transfer from the polymer to form the excited state of PCBM. If singlet energy transfer from the polymers to PCBM was occurring, enhanced emission of PCBM at 700 nm might be expected.14 However no PCBM emission near 700 nm was apparent in the spectra of any of the blend films, indicating energy transfer from the polymers to PCBM is not a major process under these conditions.The transient absorption decay dynamics of both the neat polymers and the polymer:PCBM blend materials were investigated to find evidence for the alternative fluorescence quenching process of electron transfer. The transient absorption spectrum of the 1:1 alt-co-MEH-PPV:PCBM film sample measured at 100 μs after pulsed laser excitation at 450 nm, at room temperature and under an inert Ar atmosphere is shown in Fig. 4. A broad, long-lived transient absorption was observed in the 750–975 nm spectral region. Similar spectral features were recorded for the PT3–PT6 blends and pristine polymers although with much smaller signal amplitude. Fig. 4  Transient absorption spectrum of the 1:1 alt-co-MEH-PPV:PCBM blend film recorded 100 μs after pulsed excitation at 450 nm. The transient absorption observed following excitation can be attributed to the formation of positive polymer polarons by comparison with transient spectra previously reported for other poly(phenylene vinylene) derivatives using similar instrumentation and conditions.15,16 The long-lived alt-co-MEH-PPV+ polarons are generated by charge separation of the initially formed radical ion pairs that arise from quenching of photoexcited polymer chromophores by PCBM within the film. The absorption spectrum maximum of the radical anion of PCBM is known to be located near 1100 nm (ref. 11) but was outside the detection range of the instrumentation used in this study.Fig. 5 shows the decay dynamics of the polaron transient absorption signal in alt-co-MEH-PPV:PCBM at different excitation densities (1–65 μJ cm−2) together with the transient dynamics of the neat polymer plotted on a log–log scale. Low excitation densities were employed to avoid saturation effects, and generate charge densities comparable to those expected to be generated under device operation.11 A high sensitivity detector was employed to observe the resultant small (<10−4) transient changes in film optical density due to polaron formation. The low yield of charges in the pristine film resulted in clear signals only being obtained at the highest excitation density (65 μJ cm−2) due to the low signal intensity. The approximately power law nature of the dynamics (approximately straight lines in the log–log plot shown) and long lifetimes of the observed polaron absorption (up to the millisecond time scale) allows us to assign these decay dynamics to the non-geminate recombination of dissociated polarons, as we have discussed in detail previously.11 It is furthermore apparent that the amplitudes of the observed transients increases with excitation density, indicating that the magnitude of the polaron absorption does not saturate, and is therefore a measure of the yield of dissociated polarons generated by the optical excitation. The amplitude of the decay in the neat polymer film is much smaller than that for the blend with PCBM, indicating a relatively low (but non-zero) yield of charge dissociation in the neat homopolymer, analogous to our previous studies of MDMO-PPV.11 It is clear that addition of the strong electron acceptor PCBM dramatically improves the quantum efficiency for photogeneration of charge carriers in the blends. Fig. 5  Transient absorption decays of pristine alt-co-MEH-PPV and 1:1 blends with PCBM at different excitation power densities as indicated (λpump = 450 nm, λprobe = 875 nm) plotted on a log–log scale. Fig. 6 illustrates the transient decays of PT3–6 and alt-co-MEH-PPV:PCBM blend films. The decay dynamics of the observed polaron absorption are broadly similar for all the blend films, indicative in all cases of non-geminate recombination of dissociated charges. There is a significantly lower transient signal for all the confined length polymers compared with the fully conjugated alt-co-MEH-PPV even though the absorbances of the samples at the respective laser excitation wavelength, and the excitation intensities, were similar (from Fig. 2 the variation in absorbed photon density at the respective excitation wavelengths used is within 10%). Such lower transient absorption amplitudes were observed for all excitation wavelengths, and for all probe wavelengths used. While one possible explanation is that the absorption cross-sections of the polarons in the confined chromophore polymer systems are lower than for alt-co-MEH-PPV, this would seem unlikely to explain the greater than threefold difference in transient absorbance. In addition the energies of the absorption and emission spectra suggest the driving force for electron transfer to the PCBM acceptor should be lower for alt-co-MEH-PPV than for the confined chromophore systems. The smaller band gap of the fully conjugated polymer can be expected to reduce the energy of photogenerated excitons, thereby potentially reducing the free energy available to drive charge separation.17 Fig. 6  Transient absorption decays of 1:1 polymer:PCBM blends at high excitation densities as indicated. For PT3–PT6 (λpump = 400 nm, λprobe = 875 nm) and alt-co-MEH-PPV (λpump = 450 nm, λprobe = 875 nm). Since almost total fluorescence quenching was observed for all the polymers in the presence of PCBM, it is reasonable to assume a similar yield for exciton dissociation at the polymer–PCBM interface. However, results of the transient studies indicate that in the confined conjugation length polymers, the formation of fully dissociated polarons (on the microsecond time scale) is reduced. This outcome suggests that many of the initially generated radical-ion pairs (often referred to as interfacial charge transfer states) in the blends employing the confined polymer chromophores and PCBM are unable to fully charge dissociate and are thus undergoing rapid geminate recombination on a time-scale faster than the microsecond detection limit of the current instrumentation. In the confined chromophore length polymers it seems that processes favouring complete charge separation are reduced. One scenario is that, in the case of the fully conjugated polymer, the positive polarons can be delocalised over a greater chain length resulting in larger electron–hole separation and reduced coulombic attraction, thus favouring more complete dissociation. In the spatially confined polymers, the positive polaron delocalisaton is reduced, resulting most probably in stronger coulombic attraction of the initially generated radical ion pair states, and increased geminate recombination losses. An alternative explanation is that the polaron is able to diffuse away from the interface more readily in alt-co-MEH-PPV thereby assisting full charge separation. Other factors may also contribute including changes in the microstructure at the exciton:acceptor interface arising from the covalent ‘spacer’ linkage connecting the confined chromophores that could influence the charge separation process. At present it is difficult to unambiguously discriminate between these explanations. What is clear is that the decay kinetics of the polaron does not appear greatly affected by the different polymer structures.There is increasing evidence that geminate recombination of coulombically bound interfacial ion pair or charge transfer states is a key loss pathway limiting the performance of organic solar cells, particularly in limiting short circuit current4 and also, potentially, open circuit voltage.18 It remains unclear what role molecular structure has in determining the extent of such losses. Friend et al.19 have for example completed electronic calculations that indicate the electronic coupling across the donor–acceptor interface may be strongly dependent upon the details of molecular alignment at this interface. Recent studies have additionally emphasised the importance of excited delocalised band states in overcoming columbic attraction and achieving full charge separation in organic semiconductors.20 The results we report herein suggest that the extent of wavefunction delocalisation may assist charge separation and reduce geminate recombination losses.AcknowledgementsWe wish to thank the Faculty of Science David Hay Award (to TATT), the UNICHE scheme for scholarship support (to TATT) and the Australian Bicentennial Scholarship, Menzies Foundation, Kings College, London. This project is supported by International Science Linkages established under the Australian Government's innovation statement, Backing Australia's Ability and the EPSRC Supergen and Grand Challenge programmes.ReferencesS. W. Thomas III, G. D. Joly and T. M. Swager, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1339 CrossRef .S. Gunes, H. Neugebauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1324 CrossRef .C. J. Brabec and J. R. Durrant, MRS Bull., 2008, 33, 670 CrossRef CAS .T. M. Clarke and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6736 CrossRef CAS .Organic Light Emitting Devices: Synthesis, Properties and Applications, ed. K. Mullen and U. Scherf, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2006 Search PubMed .S. R. Scully and M. D. McGehee, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 34097 CrossRef .P. W. M. Blom, V. D. Mihailetchi, L. J. A. Koster and D. E. Markov, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1551 CrossRef CAS .N. S. Sacrifitci, L. Smilowitz, A. J. Heeger and F. Wuld, Science, 1992, 258, 1474 Search PubMed .I. G. Hill, A. Kahn, Z. G. Soos and R. A. Pascal, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2000, 327, 181 CrossRef CAS .J. Cornil, A. Van Vooren, V. Lemaur, A. Ye and D. Beljonne, ChemPhysChem, 2007, 8, 1240 CrossRef .J. R. Durrant, A. F. Nogueira, I. Montanari, J. Nelson, C. Winder, N. S. Sariciftci and C. Brabec, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 1567 CrossRef .D. Hu, J. Yu and P. Barbara, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 6937 Search PubMed .P. L. Burn, A. B. Holmes, A. Kraft, D. R. Baigent, D. D. C. Bradley, A. B. Brown and R. H. Friend, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 10117 CrossRef CAS .S. Cook, H. Ohkita, Y. Kim, J. J. Benson-Smith, D. D. C. Bradley and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2007, 445, 276 CrossRef CAS .J. R. Durrant, I. Montanari, A. F. Nogueira and J. Nelson, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 3001 CrossRef .C. J. Brabec, A. Cravino, A. Zera, N. S. Sariciftci, R. Kiebooms, D. Vanderzande and J. C. Hummelen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 1528 CrossRef CAS .T. Clarke, A. Ballantyne, F. Jamieson, C. Brabec, J. Nelson and J. Durrant, Chem. Commun., 2009, 89 RSC .K. Vandewal, K. Tvingstedt, A. Gadisa, O. Inganäs and J. Manca, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 904 CrossRef CAS .Y. Huang, S. Westenhoff, I. Avilov, P. Sreearunothai, J. Hodgkiss, C. Deleener, R. H. Friend and D. Beljonne, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 483 CrossRef CAS .A. A. Bakulin, A. Rao, V. G. Pavelyev, P. H. M. van Loosdrecht, S. Pshenichnikov, D. Niedzialek, J. Cornil, D. Beljonne and R. H. Friend, Science, 2012, 335, 1340 CrossRef CAS .Footnote† Electronic supplementary information: Details of the synthesis and characterization of the polymers. See DOI: 10.1039/c3py00061cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Synthesis of the confined conjugation length polymers PT3–6, and alt-co-MEH-PPV.	 

 	Fig. 2  Absorption spectra of films of PT3–PT6 and alt-co-MEH-PPV:PCBM blends.	 

 	Fig. 3  Fluorescence spectra of thin films of alt-co-MEH-PPV (λex = 400 nm) and PT6 (λex = 400 nm) pristine and in 1:1 blends with PCBM.	 

 	Fig. 4  Transient absorption spectrum of the 1:1 alt-co-MEH-PPV:PCBM blend film recorded 100 μs after pulsed excitation at 450 nm.	 

 	Fig. 5  Transient absorption decays of pristine alt-co-MEH-PPV and 1:1 blends with PCBM at different excitation power densities as indicated (λpump = 450 nm, λprobe = 875 nm) plotted on a log–log scale.	 

 	Fig. 6  Transient absorption decays of 1:1 polymer:PCBM blends at high excitation densities as indicated. For PT3–PT6 (λpump = 400 nm, λprobe = 875 nm) and alt-co-MEH-PPV (λpump = 450 nm, λprobe = 875 nm).	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information: Details of the synthesis and characterization of the polymers. See DOI: 10.1039/c3py00061c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
