Supramolecular chemistry of donor–acceptor interactions  - Annual Reports Section "B" (Organic Chemistry) (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2OC90016E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2OC90016E
(Review Article)
Annu. Rep. Prog. Chem., Sect. B: Org. Chem., 2012, 108, 186-201Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsSupramolecular chemistry of donor–acceptor interactions

        
          
            Koujiro 
            Tambara
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            G. Dan 
            Pantoş
          
        
      *b
aUniversity Chemical Laboratory, University of Cambridge, Lensfield Road, Cambridge CB2 1EW, UK. E-mail: kt287@cam.ac.uk;   Tel: +44 (0)1223 336317
bDepartment of Chemistry, University of Bath, Bath BA2 7AY, UK. E-mail: g.d.pantos@bath.ac.uk;   Tel: +44 (0)1225 384376
First published on 4th September 2012AbstractThis report highlights some of the advances that have been made in the study of donor–acceptor interactions and their applications in the construction of functional supramolecular architectures in 2011. The review is organised into three broad sections encompassing light-harvesting systems, mechanically interlocked molecules and donor–acceptor chromophores.
1 Introduction
Donor–acceptor (D–A) interactions refer to the stacking arrangements observed between π-rich (donor) and π-deficient (acceptor) aromatic molecules. They are a specific form of the more general π–π interactions, and concern π-systems that are π-rich and π-deficient due to molecular polarisation. The electrostatic attraction between these two sets of molecules, especially significant in aqueous or high-polarity media, can be used to direct and drive their self-assembly into various architectures including catenanes, rotaxanes, light-harvesting polymers and dyes.
In 2011, research groups around the world have put forward many advances in the areas of organic photovoltaics, mechanically interlocked molecules, light-harvesting arrays and self-assembled systems in general. Some functionalities feature prominently across several sub-topics, including (poly)thiophenes (and their derivatives) and benzothiadiazoles as electron-donors and acceptors respectively.
2 Light-harvesting systems
Over the past two decades, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) have been the focus of considerable research interest because of their high incident solar conversion efficiency. A DSC typically consists of three components: a sensitising dye, a semiconductor (titanium dioxide) and an electrolyte, a p-type semiconductor or a hole-transmitting solid.1 In addition to these components the DSC incorporates a transparent anode which allows the photoexcitation of the sensitising dye which leads to the generation of current. With respect to the latter, π-conjugated donor–acceptor (D-π-A) dyes, in which electron-donating (D) and electron-accepting (A) groups are linked together by a π-conjugated bridge, have emerged as one of the most promising organic dye sensitizer constructions for DSCs on account of their broad and intense UV absorption properties. Typically, D-π-A dyes consist of a dialkyl amine or di/triphenylamine group as the donor and a carboxylic acid or cyanoacrylic acid group as the acceptor, with the latter also acting as the anchor for attachment onto a TiO2 surface. While a significant number of current DSCs are liquid cells based on ruthenium and/or other precious metals, they have major drawbacks such as cost, environmental sustainability and ease of band-gap manipulation. A stable and metal-free alternative is to use sensitizers based on perylene monoimides (as acceptor). Müllen and co-workers have reported a solid state, metal-free donor–acceptor sensitizer for DSCs by coupling perylene monoimides, which are known for their excellent photo- and thermochemical stability as well as high absorptivity, with a branched oligothiophene π-spacer and a triphenylamine donor.2 Another example comes from Chi and co-workers,3 who reported the photochemical properties of a new series of organic dyes comprising triphenylamine as the donor and cyanoacrylic acid as the acceptor, bridged by a 3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene unit (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  The family of donor–acceptor organic dye sensitizers prepared by Chi et al.3 
Based on electrochemical data, the authors conclude that the incorporation of a phenylene or fluorophenylene spacer unit lends both increased and extended absorptivity into the longer wavelength region, leading to the enhancement of its light-harvesting properties as well as suppression of dark current, thereby increasing open–circuit voltage (VOC). The pattern of the fluorine substitution on the phenylene spacer was significant, as the ortho-substituted (relative to thiophene) derivative yielded the greatest VOC value, followed by the non-fluorinated phenylene derivative, and finally the meta-substituted derivative; this order also coincided with their overall device performances. The importance of the fluorine substitution pattern, and hence inductive and conjugative effects, was thus shown to influence the donor–acceptor interaction strength and the overall device performance.
An alternative method for improving the charge transfer ability and overall performance in donor–acceptor DSC sensitizers is increasing the coplanarity of the spacer between the donor and acceptor moieties. Wong and co-workers report the use of indacenodithiophene, functionalised at the core with bulky n-hexoxyphenyl sidechains to minimise undesirable dye aggregation,4 as the π-spacer between the diarylamine donor and the cyanoacetic acceptor anchor (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  The DSC sensitizer designed by Wong et al.4 The indacenodithiophene spacer confers increased co-planarity between donor and acceptor units. Reprinted with permission, copyright (2011) American Chemical Society. 
The dyes investigated possess absorption maxima at over 500 nm and exhibited quantum efficiency values of over 80%, leading to overall DSC efficiencies in excess of 6%. The most efficient of these metal-free organic dyes possesses a short current density (JSC, the theoretical maximum current density that could be drawn from the solar cell, as in the case if the resistance was zero) value of 13.54 mA cm−2 and a conversion efficiency of 6.67%, which is approximately 82% of the efficiency of a corresponding ruthenium dye N719-based reference cell under identical conditions. A similar strategy involving the introduction of octylphenyl substituents onto the polythiophene backbones was adopted by Fréchet and co-workers, resulting in the raising in energy of the thermally relaxed and potentially excited charge-transfer states.5 Harima and co-workers have designed a new type of D-π-A dye sensitizer containing a pyridine as the acceptor anchoring group.6,7 Some sensitizing dyes containing either a pyridine or a carboxylic acid group, or having both groups but in different parts of the same molecule, as the acceptor anchor were synthesised and their absorption/emission spectra investigated (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  The series of sensitizing dyes investigated by Harima et al.6 using carboxylic acid and pyridine groups as the acceptor anchor (R = nBu). 
The dyes containing pyridine as the acceptor anchor had the greatest peak intensities and coverage of the UV spectrum in the absorption/emission spectra, both in solution (1,4-dioxane) and when adsorbed onto TiO2 nanoparticles. Furthermore, a plot of the short current density (JSC) against quantity of dye adsorbed on TiO2 indicates that the strong pyridine-Ti coordination bond leads to the formation of a more efficient electron conduction pathway, when compared with that observed for dyes containing only carboxylic acid groups as the acceptor anchor. For dyes containing both pyridine and carboxylic acid groups, their JSC values were inferior to those containing only pyridine, suggesting that the efficiency of the electronic injection is compromised by the flexibility of the alkyl chain on the carboxylic acid group (Fig. 4). Since the power conversion efficiency (PCE) value of an organic photovoltaic system depends critically on the fill factor, the VOC and the JSC value, the work shows promising potential for application in DSCs.
 Fig. 4  The configurations of the dyes on the TiO2 surface. The electron injection efficiency (represented by the size of the arrow) is greater when pyridine alone is used as the acceptor anchor due to the greater strength of the pyridine-Ti coordination bond compared with the CO2-Ti linkage. 
Polymer solar cells (PSCs) have been the subject of significant research attention in recent years as an alternative to inorganic solar cells – of which the Graetzel-type DSCs are the most common – since they have the advantage of solution processing and low manufacturing and fabrication costs. Structurally, the most efficient method of charge separation is that of the bulk heterojunction (BHJ), in which a blend of conjugated polymers (electron donor) and fullerene derivatives (electron acceptor) is cast together as a mixture which then undergoes phase-separation, resulting in a large surface area of contact between the two phases for charge transfer. [6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM) is widely considered to be the test bed of acceptor materials in solar cell research, and Andersson and co-workers8 have reported the synthesis of a highly thermally-stable co-polymer comprising of alternating thiophene-isoindigo units with a high number average molecular weight (Mn) of 86000 and a polydispersity index of 2.2 (Fig. 5).
 Fig. 5  The alternating thiophene-isoindigo co-polymer reported by Andersson et al.8 The solvent used in the UV studies was o-dichlorobenzene, while the black trace refers to the polymer:PC71BM (1:2) blend. Reprinted with permission, copyright (2011) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
UV spectral data and AFM images show the polymer to be a promising candidate for industrial use: its intense and broad absorption in the visible range of the electromagnetic spectrum, high extinction coefficient, and suitable HOMO–LUMO levels result in a PCE of 3% and a high VOC of 0.89 V in the resulting PSC films.
Andersson and co-workers also report a variation of this system in which the thiophene donor is replaced by a terthiophene unit,9 which lends extra conjugation and also has the benefit of good π–π stacking in the polymer backbone due to its relative coplanarity. Consequently, the new polymer has more appropriate HOMO/LUMO positions which led to PCE values of up to 6.3% in the resulting PSCs – the highest efficiency reported for PSCs based on isoindigo, and also for polymers with an optical band gap as low as 1.5 eV. Fullerene derivatives, and to a lesser extent, quinoxalines10 and phthalocyanines,11 are popular choices as acceptors for PSCs. However, because of the recombination of the photogenerated carriers within the BHJ film, useful film thicknesses are often limited. As demonstrated by Heeger and co-workers,12 one method of increasing the absorption by the BHJ film without increasing the film thickness is to directly mix metal nanoparticles in an active layer of the solar cell on the basis that metal nanoparticles exhibit localised surface plasmon resonances which couple strongly to incident light. The authors created a series of photovoltaic cells containing different donor–acceptor blends, in each case using the same PC70BM acceptor (Fig. 6).
 Fig. 6  Molecular structures of the donors and the acceptor PC70BM used by Heeger et al.12 
Based on UV studies, the authors concluded that the addition of Au nanoparticles (5 wt%) intensified the visible region absorption for the P3HT/PC70BM system as a result of the nanoparticles acting as an “optical reflector” for the incident light within the BHJ. Furthermore, the JSC and fill factor, and hence the overall incident photon-to-current efficiency value, are increased upon addition of the Au nanoparticles (Fig. 7).
 Fig. 7  Left: SEM image of truncated octahedral Au nanoparticles. Centre: UV/Vis spectrum of the Au nanoparticles in DMF. Right: The UV/Vis spectra of the plain P3HT/PC70BM BHJ film (black trace) and of the BHJ film after annealing with 5 wt% Au nanoparticles at 150 °C for 20 mins.12 Reprinted with permission, copyright (2011) Wiley. 
The electron-acceptor properties of benzothiadiazole have been investigated by Wudl and co-workers. A polymer with repeating D–A–D units was synthesised using derivatized thiophene as the donor, and diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPP) and either benzene, benzothiadiazole (BT) or benzobisthiadiazole (BBT) as the acceptors, in order of their electron accepting ability. Whilst interchain D–A interactions are complex – with interacting moieties taking on donor and/or acceptor roles depending on their energy levels – the authors conclude that coupling DPP with BBT as the acceptor results in the formation of strongly ambipolar polymers. The transistors fabricated with the BBT-containing polymers showed exceptional thermal stability due to the BBT moiety strongly modulating interchain interactions, which in turn lends higher performance for transistors with BBT-containing polymers as the active layer.13 Marder and co-workers have also synthesised D–A–D and A–D–A triads using BT as the acceptor and determined the frontier molecular orbital distributions using DFT calculations.14
With regard to donor units in PSCs, a recurring theme is the use of thiophene and its alkylated derivatives; in particular, 3-hexylthiophene which has, in addition to the work described earlier, has also been employed by Wudl and co-workers for their study on ambipolarity in derivatized thiophene-benzobisthiadiazole (D–A) conjugated polymers.15 Whilst the need to reduce the HOMO–LUMO bandgap to maximise charge transfer properties is well-known and intuitive, raising the HOMO of the polymer results in a decrease in the VOC, and hence the PCE value, of the PSC. A compromise in the form of a low band gap with a low-lying HOMO is a strategy followed by Nielsen and co-workers,16 who have reported the characterisation of a donor–acceptor polymer (Fig. 8) based on alternating benzotrithiophene (BTT, donor) and BT (acceptor) units.
 Fig. 8  Left: molecular structure of the BTT–BT donor–acceptor polymer.16 HOMO distribution (top right) and LUMO (bottom right) for the energy-minimised conformation of a methyl-substituted BTT–BT trimer at the 6-31G* level. Reprinted with permission, copyright (2011) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The HOMO level of the co-polymer was measured by photoelectron spectroscopy in air and shown to be −5.09 eV, compared with −4.65 eV for poly-3-hexylthiophene under identical conditions. After optimisation, the 55 nm-thick BHJ solar cells with the best efficiency using PC61BM achieved a high VOC value of 0.80V and a PCE value of 1.64%; using the more absorptive PC71BM derivative resulted in an increase in the PCE value to 2.12% on account of improved JSC and fill factor. Further optimisation by reducing the film thickness to 45 nm for PC71BM films results in an increase in PCE to 2.18%. The results show the potential of benzotrithiophene (BTT) as a promising donor unit for use in PSCs.
3 Mechanically interlocked molecules (MIMs)
Donor–acceptor interactions in high-polarity media can be used to direct the self-assembly of complex supramolecular architectures. Pascu and co-workers have reported the formation of donor–acceptor complexes using various porphyrins as donors and naphthalenediimides (NDIs) as acceptors, resulting in alternating DADA π-stacks. The results of a systematic investigation into the electronic effects of the substituents at the meso position of the porphyrin ring suggest an increased binding affinity when the π-richness of the porphyrin is increased.17 Increasing the complexity of the system leads to the field of rotaxanes and catenanes, which fall under the category of mechanically interlocked molecules (MIMs), a class of supramolecular constructs usually, but not exclusively, comprising of two or more components joined together by mechanical bonds instead of chemical bonds. MIMs of this type constitute an attractive and important class of artificial molecular machines due to the potential of their components to undergo intramolecular motion. The Sanders group has used a dynamic combinatorial approach to synthesise a ‘cocktail’ of [2]catenanes in an aqueous medium,18 employing dialkoxynaphthalenes (DNs) and NDIs as the electron-donor and acceptor functionalities respectively. The efficiency of the assembly process was enhanced by manipulating the library equilibrium in one of several ways: addition of a templating guest, changing the stoichiometries of the building blocks, increasing the overall library concentration or the ionic strength of the solvent by addition of an inert salt. The results of the experiments were unusual and unexpected, as the catenanes possessed either DAAD or DADD stacking sequences in the π units of their structures instead of the expected DADA stack (Fig. 9).
 Fig. 9  Cartoon representation of the DN donor and NDI acceptor units in the formation of D-A [2]catenanes reported by Sanders et al.18 Under the experiment conditions, no [2]catenanes with the expected DADA π-stack was observed. Reprinted with permission, copyright (2011) American Chemical Society. 
Further investigation into the mechanism of the [2]catenane formation pathways under similar library conditions revealed a stepwise assembly process, with donor–acceptor interactions driving and directing their assembly alongside hydrophobic effects (Fig. 10).19 The results from these experiments underline the power of Dynamic Combinatorial Chemistry in accessing unprecedented and unexpected structures. The mechanism predicts and rationalises the observed range of catenanes and, importantly, predicts the absence of any AAAA or DDDD homocatenane.
 Fig. 10  The mechanism of formation of D–A [2]catenanes proposed by Sanders et al.19 DN donor units are represented in red, NDI acceptor units in blue. Reprinted with permission, copyright (2011) American Chemical Society. 
Stoddart and co-workers have also used donor–acceptor interactions to drive the synthesis of [2]catenanes in water.20 Cationic diazapyrenium and bipyridinium units were employed as acceptors and 1,5-dialkoxynaphthalene and 1,5-diaminonaphthalene, both acetylene-functionalised at their termini for post-assembly covalent modification by Glazer-Hay coupling, as donors (Fig. 11). At elevated temperatures (>320 K), pirouetting motions of the butadiyne-triethylene glycol loop of the donor ring are observed by dynamic 1H NMR spectroscopy, and the thermodynamic parameters of this motion calculated in both acetonitrile and water.
 Fig. 11  The cartoon (top left) and molecular structure (top right) of a water-soluble [2]catenane prepared by Stoddart et al. In the cartoon representation, the diazapyrenium acceptor is depicted in blue, and the DN donor in red. Bottom: the pirouetting motion of the [2]catenane reported by Stoddart et al.20 Reprinted with permission, copyright (2011) American Chemical Society. 
Rotaxanes have also been the subject of much research attention in the past few decades. Stoddart and co-workers have synthesised and characterised a [1]rotaxane, termed a molecular “Figure-of-Eight” (Fo8, Fig. 12),21 using click-chemistry to bring together two components into one self-complexing molecule. Azide-functionalised cyclobis(paraquat-p-phenylene) acceptor rings were reacted via click chemistry with PEG-ylated DN molecules functionalised with acetylenes at their termini to yield molecular Fo8s. The resulting structure, which has an ADA sequence of π-units, is the result of the templating effects of donor–acceptor interactions.
 Fig. 12  A [1]rotaxane, “Figure-of-eight” synthesised using click-chemistry from a acceptor-containing macrocycle and a donor axle.21 Reprinted with permission, copyright (2011) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In the case of [2]rotaxanes, a ‘dumbbell-like’ molecule containing electron-rich donor units in its structure for complexation with an electron-deficient acceptor ring is typically constructed. The Stoddart group has studied the shuttling behaviour of a degenerate, bistable [2]rotaxane system of this kind by dynamic NMR spectroscopy,22 and also demonstrated that the incorporation of an electron-deficient bipyridinium unit into the [2]rotaxane can act as an electrostatic barrier in an aqueous environment in order to increase the barrier to shuttling by the acceptor-ring (Fig. 13). In addition, the solid-state structure and superstructures of a different donor–acceptor [2]rotaxane have been reported by Stoddart and co-workers, in which the geometry of the (super)structures is stabilised by the participation of solvent and counterion molecules in hydrogen–bonding interactions.23
 Fig. 13  A bistable, degenerate [2]rotaxane containing a dicationic bipyridinium unit in the middle of the dumbbell structure which acts as an electrostatic barrier for the tetracationic acceptor ring.22 Reprinted with permission, copyright (2011) Wiley. 
Whilst a significant amount of research effort has been dedicated to the development of the aforementioned [2]rotaxane systems in which the electron-rich recognition site is incorporated into the ‘molecular dumbbell’ for the electron-deficient ring component, the literature concerning ‘reverse’ donor–acceptor [2]rotaxanes, in which the acceptor unit is now incorporated into the dumbbell for association with a donor ring, is relatively sparse. The Stoddart group has reported the characterisation of a ‘reverse’ [2]rotaxane using a DN ring as the donor and an acceptor dumbbell comprising of NDI and cationic bipyridinium (BIPY2+) groups separated by a tetraarylmethane ‘speed bump’ (Fig. 14).24 The relative proportions of the two acceptor sites encircled by the donor ring was shown to change at room temperature over time without any external stimuli; equilibration was reached after 72 hours and the final ratio of co-conformers was shown to be 3:2 in favour of DN·NDI over DN·BIPY2+, this on account of the less favourable ‘side-on’ interaction between the π-units of BIPY2+ and the DN. Cyclic voltammetry experiments showed that the 4-electron reduction of the dumbbell to yield the NDI2− and the neutral BIPY species encourages migration of the electron-rich donor towards the BIPY, as this minimises the electronic repulsion between the dianionic NDI and the electron-rich donor ring.
 Fig. 14  The molecular structure (above) and cartoon representation (below) of a D–A ‘reverse’ [2]rotaxane reported by Stoddart et al.24 Unlike conventional [2]rotaxnaes, the NDI/bipyridinium acceptor units are incorporated into the dumbbell, whilst the ring component contains the DN donor motif. Reprinted with permission, copyright (2011) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The strength and potential of donor–acceptor interactions in constructing supramolecular architectures can also be seen from the Stoddart group’s assembly of a [3]rotacatenane using tetrathiafulvalene (TTF) as the donor moiety.25 A DADA [2]catenane, in which a bis-bipyridinium ring was catenated by a donor ring containing both DN and TTF groups, was threaded onto a donor-functionalised dumbbell containing both DN and TTF groups, giving a tetracationic [3]rotacatenane. UV studies showed that, at ground state, the [2]catenane component preferentially encircles the TTF group on the molecular dumbbell. The Stoddart group have previously shown that the radical-cation dimer of TTF, (TTF+˙)2, is stable at room temperature in a [3]catenane, which acts as a molecular flask to confer mechanical stability.26 This phenomenon is exploited once more in the [3]rotacatenane system: CV experiments performed on the [3]rotacatenane showed the sequential oxidation of the TTF moieties, via the mixed-valence (TTF2)+˙ species, to the radical-cationic (TTF+˙)2 species at room temperature. Consequently, the bipyridinium acceptor ring migrated to the alternative binding station, namely the DN site, thus forcing the separation of the (TTF+˙)2 radical-cation dimer and allowing modulation of the intensity of these interactions. The ability of TTF to form D–A complexes has also been highlighted by Sessler and co-workers, who have used TTF-functionalised calix[4]pyrroles to form chemoselective alternating supramolecular copolymers with various acceptor units based on nitrated benzene rings.27
The Stoddart group has also investigated higher-order rotaxanes. A [4]rotaxane containing 5 donor DN sites in its dumbbell unit and 3 cyclobis(paraquat-p-phenylene) acceptor rings has been synthesised (Fig. 15), and the average chemical shift changes of the DN units after conversion into [2]-, [3]-, and [4]rotaxanes have been measured.28
 Fig. 15  A water-soluble [4]rotaxane synthesised by Stoddart et al.28 The dumbbell structure folds in a way that both maximises the π-contact between the donor (DN) and acceptor (bispyridinium) units and minimises the solvent-exposed surface. Reprinted with permission, copyright (2011) Wiley. 
A more synthetically challenging poly[n]rotaxane, with a well-defined molecular structure and a high density of donor groups along the polymer chain, has also been investigated (Fig. 16). Cyclic voltammetry and 1H NMR studies provided evidence for switching behaviour in solution, similar to its small-molecule analogues,29 and the results show promising potential for application in spin-coating, spray-coating and ink-jet printing amongst others.
 Fig. 16  A poly[n]rotaxane reported by Stoddart et al.29 The cationic bispyridinium acceptor ring (blue) complexes the tetrathiafulvalene (TTF) donor (green) at ground state but sequential oxidation of the TTF unit into its radical species causes the migration of the acceptor ring onto the DN donor site. Reprinted with permission, copyright (2011) Royal Society of chemistry. 
4 Donor–acceptor chromophores
Donor–acceptor chromophores attract considerable research interest due to their optoelectronic properties, in particular their second- and third-order optical nonlinear behaviour. Diederich and co-workers30 have synthesised a series of homologous donor–acceptor (‘push–pull’) oligoenes and oligoynes, using dialkylaniline and dicyanovinyl groups as the donor and acceptor respectively (Fig. 17), in order to compare the properties of carbon–carbon triple bonds and double bonds as spacers in these systems.
 Fig. 17  The family of D–A ‘push–pull’ chromophores and the UV/Vis spectra of oligoynes in CH2Cl2 at 298 K.30 Reprinted with permission, copyright (2011) Wiley. 
The longer oligoynes (tetraynes and longer) were thermally unstable, whilst the oligoenes exhibited good thermal stability but were sensitive to light with respect to cis-trans isomerisation. Interestingly, in both the alkyne and alkene series, the HOMO–LUMO gap decreases from 2.2 V for both mono-ene and -yne to values between 1.62 V (triyne) and 1.70 V (triene), showing that, for a given spacer length, the optoelectronic properties of D–A oligoynes and -enes are almost identical. In general, the oligoenes produced more homogeneous solutions for nonlinear optical measurements and showed a clear positive correlation between third-order polarisability and spacer length. However, the same cannot be said of the oligoynes, whose thermal stabilities and ability to produce homogeneous solutions were poor and whose third-order polarisability was already saturated at the diyne level. An analogous investigation by the Wasielewski group has also focussed on the effect of the bridging unit between the donor and acceptor units, with a particular emphasis on its effect on charge recombination dynamics. The authors show that, by tuning the length and geometry of the bridge structures, control over the recombination dynamics can be achieved, with potential applications in organic electronics.31
The Swager group has reported the extensive study of a D–A alternating copolymer containing derivatized thiophenes (donor) and cationic, electron-deficient N-heterocycles (acceptor).32 These new materials show a high degree of solubility in organic solvents and display broad optical absorption bands extending into the near-infrared region. They also have very high electron affinities due to the aromatic, electron-deficient N-heterocycle and very high conductivities when reduced.
Donor–acceptor chromophores have also been investigated in conjunction with synthetic peptides. Diederich and Rijkers33 report a new class of intensely-coloured peptide chromophores with high extinction coefficients, with aniline and 1,1,4,4-tetracyano-1,3-butadiene (TCBD) installed as donor and acceptor units respectively (Fig. 18). The initially colourless dialkyne precursor molecule underwent a [2+2] cycloaddition-cycloreversion reaction with tetracyanoethylene to yield the TCBD acceptor bridge unit, resulting in its intense UV/Vis absorption properties. In their study, the authors use amino acids with a strong β-sheet preference, and it is hoped that the work will lead to the development of imaging probes for amyloid deposits as the optical properties of these peptides are tuneable.
 Fig. 18  Left: The molecular structures of the peptide-based donor–acceptor chromophores reported by Diederich and Rijkers. Right: The overlaid UV/Vis spectra (in CHCl3 at 298 K) of 12 (black dotted line; 1 μM) and 15 (solid black line: 1 μM, red line: 2 μM, blue line: 20 μM, green line: 45 μM).33 Reprinted with permission, copyright (2011) Elsevier. 
Extending the π-framework to a quadrupolar D-π-A-π-D structure gives rise to two-photon absorption (TPA) properties. One strategy towards a large two-photon absorption cross section (σ2) is to maintain co-planarity through the π-framework, as this leads to increased π-electron delocalisation; this was achieved by covalently linking adjacent phenylene spacers. Using diphenylamine and 2,1,3-benzothiadiazole as the D and A units respectively, a family of D-π-A-π-D chromophores was prepared by Wong and co-workers (Fig. 19).34
 Fig. 19  The molecular structures of the D-π-A-π-D chromophores reported by Wong et al.3420 and 21 were employed as controls to investigate the importance of co-planarity through the π-framework. 
A significant solvent effect is observed for the absorption-emission spectra for the fluorene chromophores; whilst the absorption spectra for both chromophores show limited dependence on solvent, the emission peak wavelength red-shifts significantly as solvent polarity increases (cyclohexane, toluene, THF, DCM), accompanied by a gradual reduction in emission quantum yield (Fig. 20). Based on these observations, the authors conclude that the relaxation of the excited species is solvent-mediated and that, whilst the dipole moment is relatively small in the ground state, significant charge separation is present in the excited state. Both fluorene-based chromophores, in particular the one whose benzothiadiazole acceptor allows a greater degree of coplanarity than the dicyanobenzene one, possessed larger σ2 values than the control molecules, demonstrating the importance of coplanarity in achieving greater degrees of excitation in TPA chromophores. A variation of this work was carried out by Bard and co-workers, in which a D-A-π-A-D dye using benzothiadiazole as the acceptor and triphenylamine as the donors was synthesised and characterised. The molecule showed reversible redox properties, exhibiting stable dicationic and dianionic species in cyclic voltammetry, and showing a high quantum yield and producing strong red electrogenerated chemiluminescence emission.35
 Fig. 20  The UV/Vis absorption (dashed lines) and photoluminescence (solid lines) spectra of the benzothiadiazole acceptor (left) and the dicyanobenzene one (right) in cyclohexane (green), toluene (blue), THF (red) and CH2Cl2 (black).34 Reprinted with permission, copyright (2011) Elsevier. 
5 Conclusions
Donor–acceptor interactions continue to play a key role in the rapidly diversifying and developing field of supramolecular chemistry, and the articles highlighted here are only a small selection of the literature in 2011 concerning donor–acceptor interactions. It is a highly interdisciplinary concept and, as shown by the topics covered in this review, permeates numerous different topics in supramolecular chemistry. The breadth and scope of the discoveries, and indeed their applications, will ensure that donor–acceptor interactions will continue to flourish as a powerful, versatile and elegant tool in the field of supramolecular chemistry.
References
A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Acc. Chem. Res., 2000, 33, 269–277 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wonneberger, N. Pschirer, I. Bruder, J. Schöneboom, C.-Q. Ma, P. Erk, C. Li, P. Bäuerle and K. Müllen, Chem.–Asian. J., 2011, 6, 1744–1747 CrossRef CAS .
B.-S. Chen, D.-Y. Chen, C.-L. Chen, C.-W. Hsu, H.-C. Hsu, K.-L. Wu, S.-H. Liu, P.-T. Chou and Y. Chi, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 1937–1945 RSC .
J.-H. Chen, C.-H. Tsai, S.-A. Wang, Y.-Y. Lin, T.-W. Huang, S.-F. Chiu, C.-C. Wu and K.-T. Wong, J. Org. Chem., 2011, 76, 8977–8985 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Holcombe, J. E. Norton, J. Rivnay, C. H. Woo, L. Goris, C. Piliego, G. Griffini, A. Sellinger, J.-L. Brédas, A. Salleo and J. M. J. Fréchet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 12106–12114 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ooyama, T. Nagano, S. Inoue, I. Imae, K. Komaguchi, J. Ohshita and Y. Harima, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 14837–14843 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ooyama, S. Inoue, T. Nagano, K. Kushimoto, J. Ohshita, I. Imae, K. Komaguchi and Y. Harima, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7429–7433 CrossRef CAS .
E. Wang, Z. Ma, Z. Zhang, P. Henriksson, O. Inganäs, F. Zhang and M. Andersson, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4908–4910 RSC .
E. Wang, Z. Ma, Z. Zhang, K. Vandewal, P. Henriksson, O. Inganäs, F. Zhang and M. Andersson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 14244–14247 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, J. W. Shim, S. P. Tiwari, Q. Zhang, J. E. Norton, P.-T. Wu, S. Barlow, S. A. Jenekhe, B. Kippelen, J.-L. Brédas and S. R. Marder, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 4971–4982 RSC .
F. Spänig, I. López-Duarte, M. K. R. Fischer, M. V. Martínez-Díaz, P. Bäuerle, T. Torres and D. M. Guldi, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 1395–1403 RSC .
D. H. Wang, D. Y. Kim, K. W. Choi, J. H. Seo, S. H. Im, J. H. Park, O. O. Park and A. J. Heeger, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5519–5523 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Yuen, J. Fan, J. Seifter, B. Lim, R. Hufschmid, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20799–20807 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. Polander, L. Pandey, S. Barlow, S. P. Tiwari, C. Risko, B. Kippelen, J.-L. Brédas and S. R. Marder, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 23149–23163 CAS .
J. D. Yuen, R. Kumar, D. Zakhidov, J. Seifter, B. Lim, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3780–3785 CAS .
C. B. Nielsen, B. C. Schroeder, A. Hadipour, B. P. Rand, S. E. Watkins and I. McCulloch, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17642–17645 RSC .
L. H. Tong, P. Pengo, W. Clegg, J. P. Lowe, P. R. Raithby, J. K. M. Sanders and S. I. Pascu, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 10833–10842 RSC .
H. Y. Au-Yeung, G. D. Pantoş and J. K. M. Sanders, J. Org. Chem., 2011, 76, 1257–1268 CrossRef CAS .
F. B. L. Cougnon, H. Y. Au-Yeung, G. D. Pantoş and J. K. M. Sanders, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 3198–3207 CrossRef CAS .
L. Fang, S. Basu, C.-H. Sue, A. C. Fahrenbach and J. F. Stoddart, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 396–399 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Boyle, R. S. Forgan, D. C. Friedman, J. J. Gassensmith, R. A. Smaldone, J. F. Stoddart and J.-P. Sauvage, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 11870–11872 RSC .
M. Hmadeh, A. C. Fahrenbach, S. Basu, A. Trabolsi, D. Benítez, H. Li, A.-M. Albrecht-Gary, M. Elhabiri and J. F. Stoddart, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 6076–6087 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-L. Zhao, A. K. Shveyd and J. F. Stoddart, Tetrahedron Lett., 2011, 52, 2044–2047 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dey, A. Coskun, A. C. Fahrenbach, G. Barin, A. N. Basuray, A. Trabolsi, Y. Y. Botros and J. F. Stoddart, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1046–1053 RSC .
G. Barin, A. Coskun, D. C. Friedman, M. A. Olson, M. T. Colvin, R. Carmieli, S. K. Dey, O. A. Bozdemir, M. R. Wasielewski and J. F. Stoddart, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 213–222 CrossRef CAS .
A. Coskun, J. M. Spruell, G. Barin, A. C. Fahrenbach, R. S. Forgan, M. T. Colvin, R. Carmieli, D. Benítez, E. Tkatchouk, D. C. Friedman, A. A. Sarjeant, M. R. Wasielewski, W. A. Goddard III. and J. F. Stoddart, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 4538–4547 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Park, K. Y. Yoon, D. S. Kim, V. M. Lynch, C. W. Bielawski, K. P. Johnston and J. L. Sessler, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 20913–20917 CrossRef CAS .
S. Basu, A. Coskun, D. C. Friedman, M. A. Olson, D. Benítez, E. Tkatchouk, G. Barin, J. Yang, A. C. Fahrenbach, W. A. Goddard III. and J. F. Stoddart, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 2107–2119 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, E. DeIonno, W. R. Dichtel, L. Fang, A. Trabolsi, J.-C. Olsen, D. Benítez, J. R. Heath and J. F. Stoddart, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 1487–1495 RSC .
B. B. Frank, P. R. Laporta, B. Breiten, M. C. Kuzyk, P. D. Jarowski, W. B. Schweizer, P. Seiler, I. Biaggio, C. Boudon, J.-P. Gisselbrecht and F. Diederich, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2011, 4307–4317 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Scott and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 3005–3013 CrossRef CAS .
D. Izuhara and T. M. Swager, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3579–3584 RSC .
D. T. S. Rijkers and F. Diederich, Tetrahedron Lett., 2011, 52, 4021–4025 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Z. Cheng, C.-C. Lin, P.-T. Chou, A. Chaskar and K.-T. Wong, Tetrahedron, 2011, 67, 734–739 CrossRef CAS .
J. Suk, J.-Z. Cheng, K.-T. Wong and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 14960–14968 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  The family of donor–acceptor organic dye sensitizers prepared by Chi et al.3	 

 	Fig. 2  The DSC sensitizer designed by Wong et al.4 The indacenodithiophene spacer confers increased co-planarity between donor and acceptor units. Reprinted with permission, copyright (2011) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  The series of sensitizing dyes investigated by Harima et al.6 using carboxylic acid and pyridine groups as the acceptor anchor (R = nBu).	 

 	Fig. 4  The configurations of the dyes on the TiO2 surface. The electron injection efficiency (represented by the size of the arrow) is greater when pyridine alone is used as the acceptor anchor due to the greater strength of the pyridine-Ti coordination bond compared with the CO2-Ti linkage.	 

 	Fig. 5  The alternating thiophene-isoindigo co-polymer reported by Andersson et al.8 The solvent used in the UV studies was o-dichlorobenzene, while the black trace refers to the polymer:PC71BM (1:2) blend. Reprinted with permission, copyright (2011) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  Molecular structures of the donors and the acceptor PC70BM used by Heeger et al.12	 

 	Fig. 7  Left: SEM image of truncated octahedral Au nanoparticles. Centre: UV/Vis spectrum of the Au nanoparticles in DMF. Right: The UV/Vis spectra of the plain P3HT/PC70BM BHJ film (black trace) and of the BHJ film after annealing with 5 wt% Au nanoparticles at 150 °C for 20 mins.12 Reprinted with permission, copyright (2011) Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 8  Left: molecular structure of the BTT–BT donor–acceptor polymer.16 HOMO distribution (top right) and LUMO (bottom right) for the energy-minimised conformation of a methyl-substituted BTT–BT trimer at the 6-31G* level. Reprinted with permission, copyright (2011) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  Cartoon representation of the DN donor and NDI acceptor units in the formation of D-A [2]catenanes reported by Sanders et al.18 Under the experiment conditions, no [2]catenanes with the expected DADA π-stack was observed. Reprinted with permission, copyright (2011) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  The mechanism of formation of D–A [2]catenanes proposed by Sanders et al.19 DN donor units are represented in red, NDI acceptor units in blue. Reprinted with permission, copyright (2011) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  The cartoon (top left) and molecular structure (top right) of a water-soluble [2]catenane prepared by Stoddart et al. In the cartoon representation, the diazapyrenium acceptor is depicted in blue, and the DN donor in red. Bottom: the pirouetting motion of the [2]catenane reported by Stoddart et al.20 Reprinted with permission, copyright (2011) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  A [1]rotaxane, “Figure-of-eight” synthesised using click-chemistry from a acceptor-containing macrocycle and a donor axle.21 Reprinted with permission, copyright (2011) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  A bistable, degenerate [2]rotaxane containing a dicationic bipyridinium unit in the middle of the dumbbell structure which acts as an electrostatic barrier for the tetracationic acceptor ring.22 Reprinted with permission, copyright (2011) Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 14  The molecular structure (above) and cartoon representation (below) of a D–A ‘reverse’ [2]rotaxane reported by Stoddart et al.24 Unlike conventional [2]rotaxnaes, the NDI/bipyridinium acceptor units are incorporated into the dumbbell, whilst the ring component contains the DN donor motif. Reprinted with permission, copyright (2011) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 15  A water-soluble [4]rotaxane synthesised by Stoddart et al.28 The dumbbell structure folds in a way that both maximises the π-contact between the donor (DN) and acceptor (bispyridinium) units and minimises the solvent-exposed surface. Reprinted with permission, copyright (2011) Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 16  A poly[n]rotaxane reported by Stoddart et al.29 The cationic bispyridinium acceptor ring (blue) complexes the tetrathiafulvalene (TTF) donor (green) at ground state but sequential oxidation of the TTF unit into its radical species causes the migration of the acceptor ring onto the DN donor site. Reprinted with permission, copyright (2011) Royal Society of chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 17  The family of D–A ‘push–pull’ chromophores and the UV/Vis spectra of oligoynes in CH2Cl2 at 298 K.30 Reprinted with permission, copyright (2011) Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 18  Left: The molecular structures of the peptide-based donor–acceptor chromophores reported by Diederich and Rijkers. Right: The overlaid UV/Vis spectra (in CHCl3 at 298 K) of 12 (black dotted line; 1 μM) and 15 (solid black line: 1 μM, red line: 2 μM, blue line: 20 μM, green line: 45 μM).33 Reprinted with permission, copyright (2011) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 19  The molecular structures of the D-π-A-π-D chromophores reported by Wong et al.3420 and 21 were employed as controls to investigate the importance of co-planarity through the π-framework.	 

 	Fig. 20  The UV/Vis absorption (dashed lines) and photoluminescence (solid lines) spectra of the benzothiadiazole acceptor (left) and the dicyanobenzene one (right) in cyclohexane (green), toluene (blue), THF (red) and CH2Cl2 (black).34 Reprinted with permission, copyright (2011) Elsevier.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
