Nanoscale investigation of the electrical properties in semiconductor polymer – carbon nanotube hybrid materials   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2NR11888B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2NR11888B
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2705-2712Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsNanoscale investigation of the electrical properties in semiconductor polymer–carbon nanotube hybrid materials†

        
          
            Simon 
            Desbief
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Noémie 
            Hergué
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Olivier 
            Douhéret
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mathieu 
            Surin
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Philippe 
            Dubois
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yves 
            Geerts
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Roberto 
            Lazzaroni
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Philippe 
            Leclère
          
        
      *a
aLaboratory for Chemistry for Novel Materials, Center of Innovation and Research in Materials and Polymers (CIRMAP), University of Mons, UMONS/Materia Nova, Place du Parc 20, 7000 Mons, Belgium. E-mail: philippe.leclere@umons.ac.be;  Fax: +32 65 37 38 61;   Tel: +32 65 37 38 68
bLaboratory of Polymeric and Composite Materials, Center of Innovation and Research in Materials and Polymers (CIRMAP), University of Mons, UMONS/Materia Nova, Place du Parc 20, 7000 Mons, Belgium
cLaboratoire de Chimie des Polymères CP 206/1, Faculté des Sciences, Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB), Boulevard du Triomphe, 1050 Bruxelles, Belgium
Received 
      1st December 2011
    , Accepted 15th February 2012First published on 21st February 2012AbstractThe morphology and electrical properties of hybrids of a semiconducting polymer (namely poly(3-hexylthiophene) P3HT) and carbon nanotubes are investigated at the nanoscale with a combination of Scanning Probe Microscopy techniques, i.e., Conductive Atomic Force Microscopy (C-AFM) and time-resolved Current Sensing Force Spectroscopy Atomic Force Microscopy (CSFS-AFM, or PeakForce TUNA™). This allows us to probe the electrical properties of the 15 nm wide P3HT nanofibers as well as the interface between the polymer and single carbon nanotubes. This is achieved by applying controlled, low forces on the tip during imaging, which allows a direct comparison between the morphology and the electrical properties at the nanometre scale.
1 Introduction
Semiconducting polymers have been extensively studied in the last decade in the field of organic photovoltaics,1,2 since they offer easy solution-processing under ambient conditions and tunable properties through molecular engineering, which make them very appealing for a new generation of solar cells. Up to now, the maximum power conversion of organic photovoltaic devices reaches 8%.3 Maximizing the photovoltaic efficiency requires high charge carrier mobility and an appropriate microscopic morphology where the electron donor and electron acceptor materials phase-separate at the nanoscale. This maximizes the interfaces between the compounds and generates conducting channels for the charges towards the electrodes, thereby forming a so-called bulk heterojunction.4–6 The large contact area between the two materials dramatically enhances the ability of excitons to reach an interface between donors and acceptors and to dissociate into charge carriers. The maximum amount of dissociated excitons is reached when the interpenetrating network of donor and acceptor compounds is made of domains with a typical size around the mean exciton diffusion length, i.e., around 10 nm. In addition, each material has to present efficient electrical paths towards the considered electrode to collect the maximum amount of carriers.
Regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) is widely studied in the field of organic electronics.7–10 At very high regioregularity, this polymer is known to form nanofibers, in which the P3HT chains are π-stacked perpendicularly to the fiber axis and are oriented edge-on with respect to the surface plane, as observed for other π-conjugated materials.11 This semi-crystalline morphology is favorable for charge transport,8–10 compared to amorphous or granular P3HT morphologies. The morphological and electrical properties of P3HT films strongly depend on the synthesis of the polymer, which sets the molecular weight, the regioregularity, the purity and the polydispersity index. It is expected that in a well-defined polymer (high regioregularity and purity and low polydispersity), the P3HT chains are more likely to arrange into nanofibers. Here, we used a controlled polymerization method based on Grignard metathesis in order to control those parameters.12 For this particular study, we synthesized P3HT with a controlled molecular weight of 11000 g mol−1, high regioregularity (98%) and a narrow polydispersity (1.1), see ESI† for details.
For photovoltaic devices, the introduction of carbon nanotubes (CNTs) into the active films, acting as charge pathways towards the electrodes, is of particular interest since they have very high charge carrier mobility, and only a small amount is needed to reach electrical percolation.13,14 Indeed, some recent works show that the incorporation of a small amount of carbon nanotubes in donor–acceptor blends enhances the efficiency of the photovoltaic cells.15–17 In a recent work combining scanning probe microscopy and molecular modeling,15 the P3HT fibers were shown to grow perpendicularly to the carbon nanotubes. This particular morphology may be very efficient for bringing charges from the active materials to the nanotubes.15,17,18
In this work, we present a new approach for mapping the electrical properties in P3HT:CNT blends below the 10 nanometres scale, with scanning probe microscopy measurements carried out in air and without damaging the sample by carefully controlling the tip–sample force. This is done by combining Conductive Atomic Force Microscopy (C-AFM)19–21 and a new method that combines the advantages of Intermittent Contact AFM (IC-AFM), i.e., a spatial resolution below 10 nm and no sample damage, and C-AFM, i.e., very high current sensitivity,19,21 and the possibility to record local I–V curves, allowing the analysis of charge transport properties. This new imaging mode, termed here time-resolved Current Sensing Force Spectroscopy AFM (CSFS-AFM, also known as PeakForce TUNA™),22 is based on the simultaneous measurements of the topography and the current flowing between the tip and the sample from the real-time analysis of force–distance curves measured for a tip oscillating in the kHz regime, far below the resonance frequency of the cantilever. The images are reconstructed pixel by pixel in real-time by averaging force–distance data in a time scale similar to IC-AFM. This technique also provides a direct control of the force applied between tip and sample, and eliminates the lateral forces, thus avoiding any damage to the sample or misleading interpretation due to tip contamination.
Here, we first present the results obtained by C-AFM on films of pristine P3HT with a fibrillar morphology as a reference system. Next, we incorporate carbon nanotubes into those films and we investigate the morphology of those blends with IC-AFM followed by C-AFM characterisation of their electrical properties on the nanoscale. Finally, we apply CSFS-AFM to those hybrid materials to unravel the details of the current distribution at the P3HT nanofiber/CNT interface.
2 Experimental
Thin deposits were generated by drop-casting on patterned ITO substrates from chlorobenzene solutions containing 0.25 mg mL−1 of P3HT and multi-wall carbon nanotubes supplied by Nanocyl (NT7000, 1 wt% with respect to P3HT). The AFM measurements were performed using a Dimension Icon equipped with a Nanoscope V controller from Bruker-AXS. The dispersion of CNT in the fibrillar P3HT matrix is illustrated in the ESI (see Fig. S2A†). For details on the synthesis of the P3HT, the sample preparation, and the AFM imaging, see ESI†.
Current Sensing Force Spectroscopy AFM
CSFS-AFM is a new scanning probe technique (see schematic representation in Fig. 1) combining the advantages of IC-AFM (in terms of spatial resolution) and C-AFM (in terms of current sensitivity). Similar to IC-AFM, the tip and the sample are intermittently brought into interaction while the sample is scanned. However in CSFS-AFM, the feedback loop controls the force applied on the sample for each individual oscillation cycle. This direct force control protects the tip and the sample from scan-induced damage, but more importantly, it allows every tip–sample contact to be controlled and recorded to extract the current values while the tip–sample contact area is minimized. The two electrical modules are characterized by a sensitivity below 100 fA.
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the sample set-up and the working principle of current sensing force spectroscopy AFM. 
The oscillation frequency of the probe is set between 1 and 2 kHz, which is intermediate between IC-AFM (>50 kHz) and C-AFM (contact mode operation). This working frequency allows for the recording of the current values with an acceptable signal-to-noise ratio.
When the tip is approaching the surface (approach (A) in the force plot in Fig. 1), the attractive forces (usually van der Waals, electrostatic, or capillary forces) pull the cantilever down toward the surface, as represented by the negative force in the graph of Fig. 1. When the forces overcome the cantilever stiffness, the tip is attracted by the surface, resulting in the dip in the approach curve (snap-in). Then, the force increases until the Z position of the modulation reaches its lowest point (maximum force (B) in the force plot in Fig. 1). The force at this point is kept constant by the system feedback during the interaction period. The tip then starts to withdraw and the force decreases until it reaches a minimum on the retract curve (pull-off), which coincides with the minimum contact force during the cycle (withdraw (C) in the force plot in Fig. 1). When the tip has come off the surface, no significant force acts on it.
During scanning, a DC bias can be applied between the tip and the sample and the current passing through the sample when the contact is effective can be recorded. From the time-resolved current measurements, one can extract:
- the peak current, which is the instantaneous current measured when the tip is at the lowest position in the approach–retract cycle. The peak current may be, but is not necessarily, the maximum current, since the limited rise time may cause a lag in the current response,
- the contact current, which is the mean current during the interaction between the tip and the sample (between the ‘snap-in’ and the ‘pull-off’),
- the TUNA current, which is the integration of the current during the whole approach–retract cycle, averaging the current measured upon contact, but additionally weighting it with the zero signal when the probe is retracted.
3 Results and discussion
All the images shown here have been recorded on the organic layer lying on the bare glass part of the patterned substrate, close (i.e., a few micrometres) to the ITO, as shown in Fig. 1. Not only this prevents current signal saturation and therefore contrast perturbation while scanning the above highly conductive layers such as ITO, but this also ensures that the measured current reflects the charge transport along the film (while it would correspond to charge transport through the film if the tip was placed above the ITO electrode).

Fig. 2 shows typical topographic and electrical C-AFM images obtained simultaneously across a pristine P3HT thin film deposited on a glass substrate patterned with ITO electrodes. A fiber-like morphology is clearly and consistently observed in both topography and current images. Note the presence of an area devoid of P3HT near the ITO electrode (marked by the arrows in Fig. 2A and B). There, the glass substrate is exposed and a zero signal in the current image is recorded, which confirms that the current flow is truly coming from charge transport in the polymer semiconductor rather than from an extrinsic phenomenon, as for instance the presence of a thin layer of adsorbed water. Interestingly, a similar current intensity is measured, whatever the distance between the probe and the ITO electrode, as illustrated by the current profile in Fig. 2C (no significant decrease in the current intensity is observed when moving away from the ITO electrode). This constant current signal indicates that no potential drop takes place across the P3HT film and at the contact with the electrode. The dominating resistance setting the value of the current signal is therefore expected to be that of the tip–sample contact, resulting more from spreading or injection mechanisms than from transport in the film. The high work function of PtIr-coated Si C-AFM probes (∼5.2 eV) is expected to favor injection in the P3HT layer at negative DC sample bias. The current intensity can therefore be attributed to the spreading current flowing from the probe into the sample. The corresponding spreading resistance is known to be dependent on both the tip–sample contact area and the local resistivity of the semi-conducting material. The current variations observed across the fibrillate P3HT film (Fig. 2B), typically within 5 pA (see the current–distance profile in Fig. 2C), are therefore to be related to the local electrical properties of P3HT. A transport dominating C-AFM current measurement can meanwhile be achieved using a field-effect transistor set-up as recently proposed by Bolsée et al.23 These observations show that C-AFM is an appropriate tool to locally characterize the electrical properties of materials. The next step is to try to understand the electrical properties of blends and in particular P3HT:CNT to distinguish the electrical response of the two different materials.
 Fig. 2  100 × 22 μm2 C-AFM height (A) and current (B) images of a pristine P3HT deposit (VSB = −500 mV). (C) Current profile along the white line in image (B). 7.6 × 3.7 μm2 zooms of height (D) and current (E) from images (A) and (B), respectively. 

Fig. 3A and B show 1.5 × 1.5 μm2 IC-AFM height and phase images, respectively, illustrating the typical morphology obtained by drop-casting deposition from a P3HT:CNT solution. The samples are made of a very thin P3HT deposit (i.e., one complete monolayer of fibrils) with CNTs incorporated.
 Fig. 3  1.5 × 1.5 μm2 height (A) and phase (B) intermittent contact AFM images of P3HT:CNT blends on glass/ITO substrates; the vertical color code is 9 nm for image (A) and 20° for image (B); the inset in image (A) is a 250 × 250 nm2 zoom and the inset in image (B) is a 400 × 400 nm2 zoom with the nanotube highlighted (red dotted line). (C) Schematic representation of P3HT fibrils arranged perpendicular to a carbon nanotube. 

Fig. 3A shows a flat brown background composed of a dense and homogeneous layer made of 15 nm wide P3HT fibrils, as illustrated in the inset. The morphology of the polymer is even clearer in the phase image (Fig. 3B), because the phase signal is more sensitive to local variations in the tip–sample interactions. The measured width of the fibrils (15 nm) corresponds to the value expected for P3HT chains of 11000 g mol−1 (determined by GPC on polystyrene standards) if they are π-stacked perpendicular to the fiber axis.24,25
Lying on this first layer, a second layer of fibrils is observed, appearing in yellow/orange in Fig. 3A. The fibrils composing this second layer appear to be oriented in the same way as the underlying ones, suggesting that there is interaction between the fibrils during the deposition process, leading to densely packed fibrils oriented homogeneously.

Fig. 3A shows a curved carbon nanotube (appearing bright in Fig. 3A and highlighted in dashed red in the inset of Fig. 3B). It is surrounded and partially covered by the second layer of fibrils, illustrating the fact that the CNTs are efficiently dispersed in the P3HT matrix. Moreover, fibrils surrounding the nanotube appear to be perpendicular to its axis as illustrated in the inset of Fig. 3B and the schematic representation in Fig. 3C. Modeling studies15 have shown that this arrangement stems from the π-stacking of the first P3HT chains absorbed on the CNT, which can then act as nucleation sites for the growth of the fibers. This particular arrangement of the fibrils, perpendicularly to the nanotube, may play a role in the charge transport in such hybrid films, which we explore here using electrical AFM techniques.

Fig. 4A shows a 3 × 3 μm2 C-AFM current image recorded across a P3HT:CNT blend with the DC sample bias gradually varying from 500 mV to −750 mV along the slow scan axis. The color code is set to be green for positive current values (positive DC sample bias) and red for negative ones (negative DC sample bias), while black stands for zero current. Note that the black region in the lower right part of the image corresponds to an area where the glass substrate is exposed; it is used as a reference for zero-current conditions (see ESI† for the corresponding topographic image). For both polarities, a similar contrast is observed, i.e., a discontinuous conductive curved ribbon within a less conductive layer. The topographical analysis indicates that this ribbon is a carbon nanotube and the layer around it is the fibrillate P3HT matrix.
 Fig. 4  (A) 3 × 3 μm2 C-AFM current image of a P3HT:CNT blend on a glass/ITO substrate (see ESI for the corresponding topographic image (S2B†)). The current scale is 250 pA (from −125 (red) to +125 pA (green)) and the DC sample bias ranges from 500 mV (bottom of the image) to −750 mV (top of the image). (B) I–V curves derived from the C-AFM image. These I–V curves have been obtained by averaging the current values recorded independently over P3HT or the MWCNT for different DC sample bias. 
The direction of the current flow is the same in the CNT and the P3HT matrix, and changes with bias polarity. As expected, the current intensity increases with the absolute value of the DC bias. Irrespective of bias polarity and intensity, higher current is measured over the CNT than over the P3HT layer. Consistently, the discontinuous electrical signature of the ribbon corresponds to regions where the P3HT locally covers the CNT. The I–V curves extracted from Fig. 4A and plotted in Fig. 4B for the two materials show a different profile. For each structure (P3HT and CNT), the current is measured by averaging the data values on the current image corresponding to the same voltage. A linear dependence is found in the case of CNT (ohmic behavior) while an asymmetric, non-linear behavior is observed for P3HT. These observations are consistent with both the expected metallic properties of the CNT and the p-type semiconductor nature of the P3HT. No threshold voltage is observed for negative DC sample bias for both materials, indicating no injection-limited current (Schottky contact). As previously explained (Fig. 2), the origin of the current contrast in C-AFM images taken far from the ITO electrode may be attributed to the spreading resistance at the tip–sample contact. Considering the metallic properties of CNT, an ohmic contact at the nanotube is expected for both polarities. The asymmetric I–V profile over the P3HT is consistent with the intrinsic charge transport properties of the donor material: for negative DC sample bias, non-linear variations are consistent with a space charge-limited current regime of charge transport beneath the tip–sample contact; for positive DC sample bias, the variation of the current is injection-limited due to the large injection barrier between the ITO and the P3HT. Finally, it must be stressed that the CNT shown in Fig. 4 is not in direct contact with the ITO, but is connected to the electrode via the fibrillate P3HT matrix. The fact that a higher current is recorded on the nanotube confirms that the C-AFM current contrast originates from the local properties of the material at the tip–sample contact. Consistent with the analysis of Fig. 2, the spatial extent of such electrical probing can be related to the radius of the hemispheric volume underneath the AFM probe, across which the voltage drops to reach the electrical potential of the ITO.26

Fig. 5 shows 0.7 × 0.7 μm2 CSFS-AFM height (A) and current (B) images recorded with a DC sample bias of −1 V between the tip and the sample. The color code of the current image is defined to be bright red for large current values, and dark for small current values (black standing for zero). The height image shows the same morphology as previously observed in Fig. 3, i.e., a homogeneous layer composed by close-packed fibrils, with a MWCNT lying on top of it in the center of the image, surrounded and covered by a second layer of fibrils. The P3HT fibrils are well-resolved in both height and current images (spatial resolution about a few nanometres), a result that is often difficult to achieve with C-AFM. This is due to the extremely low forces (typically 50 pN) applied to the tip, enabling a very soft contact with the sample (and no lateral forces), thereby reducing the contact area between the tip and the surface. Recently, the tip radius was evaluated to be around 2 nm using the Hertz model for sub-nN contact forces while performing classical C-AFM experiments.23
 Fig. 5  0.7 × 0.7 μm2 height (A) and contact current (B) CSFS-AFM images of a P3HT:CNT blend on a glass/ITO substrate. Force applied = 50 pN—DC sample bias = −1 V. The vertical color code is 25 nm for image (A) and 3 pA for image (B). (C) Rendered 3D topography CSFS-AFM image (A), with the current image (B) superimposed as a color code. The inset is a zoom. (D) Schematic representation of the interaction between the tip and the fibrils. 

Fig. 5C shows a 3D CSFS-AFM topographic image, with the current values superimposed as the color code. In the area pointed by the white arrow, a non-coated part of the CNT emerges from the P3HT matrix, and a relatively high current is measured: 3 pA at a DC sample bias of −1 V. When the nanotube is covered by fibrils (black arrow), the current is lower (<1 pA), consistent with the difference in electrical properties previously evidenced with C-AFM (Fig. 4).
Upon closer examination of the current distribution over the polymer, we observe a higher current in-between the fibrils, compared to the current on top of them (see the inset in Fig. 5C). Considering the polymer chains in the fibrils oriented edge-on,24,25 the alkyl side groups are exposed at the outer surface. With the very low forces involved between the tip and the surface, it is likely that the tip does not penetrate the alkyl layer (position “tip 1” in Fig. 5D). This might prevent a good electrical contact between the probe and the conjugated backbone and affect the current flow. When the tip is located in-between the fibrils (position “tip 2”), the presence of the alkyl groups may be less detrimental (because of lower local order in that area) and the charge carriers may be injected directly in the conjugated part of the molecules. Such a variation of the current across the fibrils is also observed on isolated fibrils in incomplete layers, as illustrated by the 1 × 1 μm2 CSFS-AFM height and current images shown in the ESI†: the current is larger on the fibril edges and drops to almost zero above the center of the fibrils. This is consistent with closed-packed alkyl side chains impeding charge injection in the conjugated backbone.
Finally, Fig. 6 shows specific measurements to CSFS-AFM, i.e., the time-resolved vertical deflection of the cantilever and the simultaneously recorded current during one approach–retract cycle over a P3HT fibril (A) and over a CNT (B) at a DC sample bias of −1 V. The first dip in the deflection curve corresponds to the ‘snap-in’ of the approaching tip because of the attractive forces, whereas the second dip marks the detachment of the tip from the surface during the retracting process (‘pull-off’). The time elapsed between these two events corresponds to the contact time between the tip and the surface. The maximum current is about three times higher over the CNT (2.7 pA) than over the P3HT (0.8 pA), again pointing to the difference in conductivity between the two materials. Interestingly, the current flows during most of the tip–surface contact time for the CNT, while the current appears only at the end of the contact for the P3HT layer. This may be due to molecular dynamics taking place in the polymer layer during the contact before charge injection can occur. It must be stressed that the measured current is about 4 times higher in C-AFM measurements compared to CSFS-AFM. This difference can be due to the fact that the loading force applied on the tip is in the nN range in C-AFM and only 50 pN in CSFS-AFM, resulting in a smaller contact area in the latter technique. Besides, the probes are specific to each technique and therefore have different shapes, which is also likely to affect the range of the measured current.
 Fig. 6  Time-resolved graphs showing the vertical deflection (red) and the current (blue) on a P3HT fibril (A) and on a nanotube (B) along the same scan line. The DC sample bias is −1 V and the applied force is 50 pN. 
4 Conclusion
In this work, we have studied the nanoscale morphology and the electrical properties of hybrids between P3HT with a nanofiber morphology and carbon nanotubes. Besides confirming the capacity of P3HT to efficiently disperse the CNTs, the morphological analysis shows the tendency of the P3HT fibers to form multilayers with a common orientation, and to grow perpendicularly to the surface of the CNT, to maximize the π–π interactions.
The combination of C-AFM and CSFS-AFM provides valuable information on the electrical properties of the hybrids, showing that the current is governed by the spreading resistance at the tip–sample contact, resulting in high-resolution current contrast (below 10 nm) related to the local electrical properties of the investigated materials. The electrical characterisation also shows a typical semiconducting and metallic response at the local scale for the P3HT and CNT, respectively. The very low forces, typically as low as 50 pN, involved between the tip and the sample in CSFS-AFM make it possible to map the current distribution over individual, 15 nm wide nanofibers. The measurements evidence lower current values on top of the fibrils (where the alkyl side groups are exposed), and higher current values between the fibrils, where the conjugated part of the polymer chains is possibly more accessible to the tip. The use of CSFS-AFM thus opens up the prospect of effectively investigating the generation of a photocurrent under illumination of an active organic photovoltaic layer at the nanometre scale, i.e., where the photophysical phenomena actually occur.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to Nanocyl S.A. for the supply of carbon nanotubes, and to Mickael Febvre and Chanmin Su from Bruker-Nano AXS for their helpful discussions. This work has been supported by the European Commission and Région Wallonne FEDER program (SMARTFILM project), by the Interuniversity Attraction Pole program of the Belgian Federal Science Policy Office (PAI 6/27), by Région Wallonne (SUNTUBE project and OPTI2MAT Excellence program), and by FNRS-FRFC. Ph.L. and M.S. are research associates of F.R.S.–FNRS (Belgium).
References
R. Gaudiana and C. Brabec, Nat. Photonics, 2008, 2, 287 CrossRef CAS ; A. C. Mayer, S. R. Scully, B. E. Hardin, M. W. Rowell and M. D. McGehee, Mater. Today, 2007, 10, 28 CrossRef ; S. E. Shaheen, D. S. Ginley and G. E. Jabbour, MRS Bull., 2005, 30, 10 CrossRef ; S. Günes, H. Neugebauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1324 CrossRef ; B. C. Thompson and J. M. J. Frechet, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 58 CrossRef .
P. W. M. Blom, V. D. Mihailetchi, L. J. A. Koster and D. E. Markov, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1551 CrossRef CAS ; K. M. Coakley and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4533 CrossRef ; S. E. Gledhill, B. Scott and B. A. Gregg, J. Mater. Res., 2005, 20, 3167 CrossRef ; J. Y. Kim, K. Lee, N. E. Coates, D. Moses, T.-Q. Nguyen, M. Dante and A. J. Heeger, Science, 2007, 317, 222 CrossRef .
Y. Liang, Z. Xu, J. Xia, S.-T. Tsai, Y. Wu, G. Li, C. Ray and L. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 135 CrossRef CAS ; S. H. Park, A. Roy, S. Beaupré, S. Cho, N. Coates, J. S. Moon, D. Moses, M. Leclerc, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 297 CrossRef .
X. Yang, J. Loos, S. C. H. Veenstra, W. J. Verhees, M. M. Wienk, J. M. Kroon, M. A. J. Michels and R. A. J. Janssen, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 579 CrossRef CAS ; G. Li, V. Shrotriya, J. Huang, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 864 CrossRef ; W. Ma, C. Yang, X. Gong, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1617 CrossRef .
J. Peet, J. Y. Kim, N. E. Coates, W. L. Ma, D. Moses, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 497 CrossRef CAS ; H. S. Chen, J. Hou, S. Zhang, Y. Liang, G. Yang, Y. Yang, L. Yu, Y. Wu and G. Li, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 649 CrossRef ; P. E. Keivanidis, F. Laquai, I. A. Howard and R. H. Friend, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1355 CrossRef .
A. R. Campbell, J. M. Hodgkiss, S. Westenhoff, I. A. Howard, R. A. Marsh, C. R. McNeill, R. H. Friend and N. C. Greenham, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3942 CrossRef CAS ; E. Klimov, W. Li, X. Yang, G. G. Hoffmann and J. Loos, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 4493 CrossRef ; J. Y. Kim and C. D. Frisbie, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 17726 Search PubMed ; O. Douhéret, A. Swinnen, M. Breselge, I. Van Severen, L. Lutsen, D. Vanderzande and J. Manca, Microelectron. Eng., 2007, 84, 431 CrossRef .
Z. Wu, A. Petzold, T. Henze, T. Thurn-Albrecht, R. H. Lohwasser, M. Sommer and M. Thelakkat, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 4646 CrossRef CAS ; J. Liu, M. Arif, J. Zou, S. I. Khondaker and L. Zha, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 9390 CrossRef ; S. Samitsu, T. Shimomura and K. Ito, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 2478 CrossRef ; J.-M. Verilhac, G. LeBlevenneca, D. Djuradob, F. Rieutord, M. Chouikib, J.-M. Travers and A. Pron, Synth. Met., 2006, 156, 815 CrossRef ; J. F. Chang, S. Baoquan, D. W. Breiby, M. M. Nielsen, T. I. Solling, M. Giles, I. McCulloch and H. Sirringhaus, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4772 CrossRef .
G. Wang, D. Moses and A. J. Heeger, J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 95, 316 CrossRef CAS ; H. Sirringhaus, N. Tessler and R. H. Friend, Science, 1998, 280, 1741 CrossRef ; J. Liu, E. N. Kadnikova, Y. Liu, M. D. McGehee and J. M. J. Fréchet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 9486 CrossRef ; W. Fix, A. Ullmann, J. Ficker and W. Clemens, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 1735 CrossRef ; C. D. Dimitrakopoulos and P. R. L. Malenfant, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 99 CrossRef .
M. Surin, Ph. Leclère, R. Lazzaroni, J. D. Yuen, G. Wang, D. Moses, A. J. Heeger, S. Cho and K. Lee, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 33712 CrossRef .
S. Cho, K. Lee, J. Yuen, G. Wang, D. Moses, A. J. Heeger, M. Surin and R. Lazzaroni, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 114503 CrossRef .
Ph. Leclère, A. Calderone, D. Marsitzky, V. Francke, Y. Geerts, K. Müllen, J. L. Brédas and R. Lazzaroni, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 1042 CrossRef ; Ph. Leclère, E. Hennebicq, A. Calderone, P. Brocorens, A. C. Grimsdale, K. Müllen, J. L. Brédas and R. Lazzaroni, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2003, 28, 55 CrossRef ; Ph. Leclère, M. Surin, P. Viville, R. Lazzaroni, A. F. M. Kilbinger, O. Henze, W. J. Feast, M. Cavallini, F. Biscarini, A. P. H. J. Schenning and E. W. Meijer, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4452 CrossRef .
R. S. Loewe, S. M. Khersonsky and R. D. McCullough, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 250 CrossRef CAS ; R. Miyakoshi, A. Yokoyama and T. Yokozawa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 17542 CrossRef ; E. E. Sheina, J. Liu, M. C. Iovu, D. W. Laird and R. D. McCullough, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 3526 CrossRef .
F. M. Du, R. C. Scogna, W. Zhou, S. Brand, J. E. Fischer and K. I. Winey, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 9048 CrossRef CAS ; V. Skakalova, U. Dettlaff-Weglikowska and S. Roth, Synth. Met., 2005, 152, 349 CrossRef ; A. Mierczynska, J. Friedrich, H. E. Maneck, G. Boiteux and J. K. Jeszka, Cent. Eur. J. Chem., 2004, 2, 363 CrossRef .
Q. H. Zhang, D. R. Lippits and S. Rastogi, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 658 CrossRef CAS ; B. K. Satapathy, R. Weidisch, P. Potschke and A. Janke, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2007, 67, 867 CrossRef ; P. Potschke, T. D. Fornes and D. R. Paul, Polymer, 2002, 43, 3247 CrossRef .
F. Boon, S. Desbief, L. Cutaia, O. Douhéret, A. Minoia, B. Ruelle, S. Clément, O. Coulembier, J. Cornil, P. Dubois and R. Lazzaroni, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2010, 31, 1427 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Lee, J. S. Park, S. H. Lee, H. Kim, S. Yoo and S. O. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 629 CrossRef CAS .
S. Berson, R. de Bettignies, S. Bailly, S. Guillerez and B. Jousselmes, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 3363 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, J. Zou and L. Zhai, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2009, 30, 1387 CrossRef CAS ; J. Kumar, R. K. Singh, V. Kumar, R. C. Rastogi and R. Singh, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2007, 16, 446 CrossRef ; M.-C. Wu, Y.-Y. Lin, S. Chena, H.-C. Liao, Y.-J. Wu, C.-W. Chen, Y.-F. Chen and W.-F. Su, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2009, 468, 64 CrossRef .
T. W. Kelley, E. L. Granstrom and C. D. Frisbie, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 261 CrossRef CAS ; T. W. Kelley and C. D. Frisbie, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 4538 CrossRef ; G. Leatherman, E. N. Durantini, D. Gust, T. A. Moore, A. L. Moore, S. Stone, Z. Zhou, P. Rez, Y. Z. Liu and S. M. Lindsay, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 4006 CrossRef .
M. Dante, J. Peet and T.-Q. Nguyen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 7241 Search PubMed ; R. Yang, A. Garcia, D. Korystov, A. Mikhailovsky, G. C. Bazan and T.-Q. Nguyen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 16532 CrossRef CAS .
V. Palermo, A. Liscio, M. Palma, M. Surin, R. Lazzaroni and P. Samorì, Chem. Commun., 2007, 3326 RSC .

          http://www.bruker-axs.com/peakforce_tuna_afm_mode.html
        .
J.-C. Bolsée, W. D. Oosterbaan, L. Lutsen, D. Vanderzande and J. Manca, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 2084–2089 CrossRef .
H. Yang, T. J. Shin, L. Yang, K. Cho, C. Y. Ryu and Z. Bao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 671 CrossRef CAS ; D. H. Kim, Y. D. Park, Y. Jang, H. Yang, Y. H. Kim, I. J. Han, D. G. Moon, S. Park, T. Chang, C. Chang, M. Joo, C. Y. Ryu and K. Cho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 77 CrossRef .
J. A. Merlo and C. D. Frisbie, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 19169 CrossRef CAS .
D. Moerman, R. Lazzaroni and O. Douhéret, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 0933031 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2nr11888bThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the sample set-up and the working principle of current sensing force spectroscopy AFM.	 

 	Fig. 2  100 × 22 μm2 C-AFM height (A) and current (B) images of a pristine P3HT deposit (VSB = −500 mV). (C) Current profile along the white line in image (B). 7.6 × 3.7 μm2 zooms of height (D) and current (E) from images (A) and (B), respectively.	 

 	Fig. 3  1.5 × 1.5 μm2 height (A) and phase (B) intermittent contact AFM images of P3HT:CNT blends on glass/ITO substrates; the vertical color code is 9 nm for image (A) and 20° for image (B); the inset in image (A) is a 250 × 250 nm2 zoom and the inset in image (B) is a 400 × 400 nm2 zoom with the nanotube highlighted (red dotted line). (C) Schematic representation of P3HT fibrils arranged perpendicular to a carbon nanotube.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) 3 × 3 μm2 C-AFM current image of a P3HT:CNT blend on a glass/ITO substrate (see ESI for the corresponding topographic image (S2B†)). The current scale is 250 pA (from −125 (red) to +125 pA (green)) and the DC sample bias ranges from 500 mV (bottom of the image) to −750 mV (top of the image). (B) I–V curves derived from the C-AFM image. These I–V curves have been obtained by averaging the current values recorded independently over P3HT or the MWCNT for different DC sample bias.	 

 	Fig. 5  0.7 × 0.7 μm2 height (A) and contact current (B) CSFS-AFM images of a P3HT:CNT blend on a glass/ITO substrate. Force applied = 50 pN—DC sample bias = −1 V. The vertical color code is 25 nm for image (A) and 3 pA for image (B). (C) Rendered 3D topography CSFS-AFM image (A), with the current image (B) superimposed as a color code. The inset is a zoom. (D) Schematic representation of the interaction between the tip and the fibrils.	 

 	Fig. 6  Time-resolved graphs showing the vertical deflection (red) and the current (blue) on a P3HT fibril (A) and on a nanotube (B) along the same scan line. The DC sample bias is −1 V and the applied force is 50 pN.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2nr11888b

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
