Polymeric nanocomposites containing non-covalently bonded fullerene C 60 : properties and applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2JM15472B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2JM15472B
(Application)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 9427-9438Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsPolymeric nanocomposites containing non-covalently bonded fullerene C60: properties and applications

        
          
            Elmira 
            Badamshina
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Margarita 
            Gafurova
          
          
        
      
Institute of Problems of Chemical Physics, Russian Academy of Sciences, av. N.N. Semenov 1, Chernogolovka, Russia. E-mail: badamsh@icp.ac.ru;  Fax: +7 496 5223507;   Tel: +7 496 5221916
Received 
      31st October 2011
    , Accepted 28th February 2012First published on 26th March 2012AbstractThe results of studying the wide range of properties of polymeric nanocomposites containing small doses of non-covalently bonded fullerene C60 which are of interest for modern technologies are presented. The character of bonds between components of the composites and the possible reasons for improvement of the properties of the nanocomposites in comparison with pure polymers are considered.Elmira BadamshinaElmira Badamshina studied chemistry at the Mendeleev University of Chemical Technology of Russia (Moscow) and received her PhD at the same University in 1980. She is a Head of the Department of Polymers and Composite Materials in the Institute of Problems of Chemical Physics of Russian Academy of Science. Her current research field is polymer chemistry, covering aspects of reaction mechanisms, synthesis and characterization of polymer composite materials, including nanocomposites.Margarita GafurovaMargarita Gafurova studied chemistry at the St Petersburg State Institute of Technology. She received her PhD at the Institute of Problems of Chemical Physics of Russian Academy of Science in 1988. At present, she works as a senior researcher at the same institute. Her research interests are focused on the synthesis and characterization of polymer composite materials, including nanocomposites.
1 Introduction
The unique structure and unusual properties of fullerene C60, opening unexpected prospects for its use, attracts the interest of a wide range of researchers.1–5 The assumption of experts in polymers of the possibility of combination of useful properties of polymers with unusual properties of the fullerene in one compound has already been proven to be true by the first experiments in this direction in the early 1990s. After that the formation and the fast development of new field of the science about fullerenes – creation of fullerene-containing polymeric composites has begun. There are two acknowledged procedures for their preparation, leading to two types of products. The first procedure is based on the reactions of the fullerene and fullerene derivatives with polymers and as the result fullerene is incorporated into the chemical structure via chemical covalent bond. The second approach involves the mechanical introduction of fullerenes into polymers (doping) when no covalent bonds are formed. Doubtless advantage of fullerene as carbon modifier of polymers is its notorious uniformity on the sizes and the structure of particles (molecule of C60).
Numerous publications including review2,3,6–9 were devoted to methods for the preparation of fullerene-containing nanocomposites by the first way and to studying their service characteristics and possible areas of practical application. These methods allowed the synthesis of fullerene-containing composites with different structure and arrangement of fullerene units.7
Examples of the composites obtained by the first procedure – via covalent binding of fullerene with a polymeric matrix are listed in Table 1.
Table 1 Examples of the composites obtained via covalent binding of fullerene with a polymeric matrix




Arrangements of fullerene units
Graphical presentation
Nanocomposite examples




Fullerene in the polymer backbone



Polyurethane (PU)9


Fullerene is the crosslink of crosslinked polymers



PU9


Fullerene in polymer side chains



Copolymers of styrene and allyl or vinyl monomers10,11


Fullerene is the core of star-shaped polymers



Star-shaped polymers with branches of polyethylene oxide (PEO),12 polystyrene (PS),13,14 polyvinyl pyridine15 and also heterobranched polymers16–20


Fullerene at polymer chain ends



Thiophene-thienopyrazine oligomers21


Fullerene incorporated in branched polymers and dendrimers



Branched poly(methylmethacrylate) PMMA22 and different dendrimers23




The scientific interest in the second way of creation of fullerene-containing composites was first of all related to the relative simplicity of fullerene C60 incorporation either in its native form or as a solution in organic solvents. In connection with the complexity of C60 doping in crosslinked polymers, particularly in poly(dimethacrylates), the authors of the work22 have offered an original way of introducing the fullerene by three-dimensional radical polymerization of dimethacrylates in the presence of generated preformed branched poly(methacrylates) swollen in a solution containing the modifier.
Both types of fullerene-containing composites have their own particular features, which, depending on their expected application, can be considered either advantages or disadvantages. For example, polymers with covalently bonded fullerene are characterized by a more ordered and stable structure, but they can be synthesized using far more difficult approaches as compared to the second type of fullerene-containing composites. The character of bonds between polymer and fullerene in the composites of first type dramatically changes the electron structure of fullerene and macromolecules and, consequently, of many performance characteristics of polymers. Then the polymers of the second type are formed without the covalent interaction between components there is a small distortion of their electronic structure so the unique properties of fullerene and the useful properties of polymer in nanomodified material should remain.
From the very outset of works on the preparation of fullerene-containing composites of the first and of the second types, experimentalists believed that fullerene molecules as nanoparticles would participate in the formation of the composite structure and would positively affect the characteristics of the formed material.
A series of fullerene-containing composites of both types with improved service characteristics compared with the characteristics of the initial polymers which preserved the unique properties of fullerene have been formed by now. In some experiments, fullerene-modified composites show a substantial improvement in the characteristics of fullerene or even the appearance of new properties, including, solubility or improved solubility in different organic environments.
The objective of this review is to generalize and analyze the results of scientific studies devoted to the preparation of high-quality polymeric nanomaterials by doping polymers of various nature used for different practical applications with minor amounts of fullerene C60. The results include the investigations of interactions between components in polymer composites, the broad spectrum of their service characteristics, the discussion of the reasons for the improvement of polymer properties at the doping and potential spheres of the using of nanomodified polymeric materials.
2 Character of bonds in fullerene-doped polymers
Fullerene is known to show electron-accepting properties and be capable of forming non-covalent donor–acceptor compounds with various low-molecular-mass species.24–33
Modern physicochemical methods (1H NMR, 13C NMR, electron paramagnetic resonance, UV spectroscopy, thin-layer chromatography, high-efficiency liquid chromatography, small-angle neutron scattering, etc.) convincingly demonstrated that fullerene preserves its complexation power upon addition to polymers. Fullerene is shown to form donor–acceptor complexes with polymers, which are characterized by different structures and structural organizations. Among them are poly(N-vinylpyrrolidone) (PVP) and copolymers of N-vinylpyrrolidone and N-vinylcaprolactam,34–38 PEO,39,40 poly(phenylene oxide) (PPO),35,41 polyaniline,42 PMMA, polymethacrylic acid, the copolymer of N-phenoxyphenyl-methacrylamide and N-(2-hydroxypropyl)methacrylamide, PS,43–45 and some other polymers.46–50 An idea about all doped fullerene is connected in complexes is apparently a little simplified. “Owing to ability of C60 for selective destruction of some polymers in the conditions of the joint solution fullerene can be present as separative multi-adducts – products of interaction with polymer and also with solvent”.35,45,51,52
Attention is drawn to the relatively large number of publications devoted to studying the complexation of commercial nontoxic water-soluble polymers PVP, PEO, poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) is large. This tendency is related to the high biological activity of fullerene and challenging problems of how to transfer this water-insoluble carbon modification (the solubility of fullerene C60 in water can be as low as 1.3 × 10−11 mg ml−153) to a soluble state for its further use in medicine and biology. All expectations that this goal could be accomplished by complexation between fullerene C60 and water-soluble polymers have been justified. The polymeric complex serves as a matrix keeping C60 in a soluble state. This complex is capable of allocation of fullerene in necessary quantities in the conditions of special action destroying the complex.
In some cases, certain practical tasks require relatively high fullerene content in the polymer materials. For example, the PVP–fullerene C60 system possessing antivirus activity is able to retain less than 1 wt% fullerene C60, but this content appears to be insufficient for its practical use. The efficiency of coordination interaction between a fullerene and a polymer can be improved by using additional agents that show an affinity for C60 and have a well-pronounced complexing potency toward both components in the system. In this case, a ternary fullerene C60-agent-polymer complex is formed. This procedure allows one to transfer higher quantities of fullerene into the soluble state. For the PVP–C60 pair, this agent is tetraphenylporphyrin.25,38,54 The use of this agent makes it possible to increase the content of fullerene by a factor of ∼5. Therefore, by dealing with the fundamental problems of studying the mechanism of interaction between constituent components in polymers modified by minor amounts of fullerene, one can solve the practical challenge how to improve the solubility of fullerenes in water, as well as in some other organic mediums.
In publications devoted to complexation between polymers and doped fullerene, one can find supporting information concerning the formation of complexes and gain knowledge of their composition36,38 and changes taking place in the system due to complexation at the molecular scale.34–36,41,43 In the system under study, both components are found to undergo dramatic changes.
Traditional methods used for an estimation of features of influence of fullerene on the macromolecular characteristics of the initial polymers, such as molecular mass, dimensions, shape, and mobility of macromolecules, are the methods of molecular hydrodynamics (translational diffusion, high-velocity sedimentation, viscometry, light scattering) and optoelectronics (the optical Kerr effect). The results of these studies convincingly show that, even at a low content of fullerene (0.5 wt%), the molecular parameters of the polymers turn out to be substantially changed. This observation has been proved, for example, for PPO and PVP.35 PPO and fullerene form a stable complex that does not break down into individual components upon dilution. In this case, the shape asymmetry of macromolecules partially decreases; even though this decrease does not induce any changes in both mobility and density of polymers. This fact indicates that fullerene exerts a strong orientational effect on the chain fragments of PPO, including chain fragments distant from “interaction sites”.41
Changes experienced by the components during complexation have been deliberately studied for the fullerene C60–PVP system.34 When fullerene C60 is incorporated into a complex, its electron structure is changed as polymer affects its π-electron system (UV spectroscopy). At the same time, this complexation is also accompanied by dramatic changes in the electronic structure of atoms C(1), C(4) and C(5) in PVP chain fragments that are directly involved in complexation. The electronic structure of atoms C(2) and C(3) more distant from nitrogen atom (Fig. 1) appears to be changed to a less extent (13C NMR).
 Fig. 1  PVP chain fragment. 
The complexation is also accompanied by local changes in the chain conformation i.e., the formation of a loop around a C60 molecule that does not lead to any conformational changes in a chain as a whole. The authors report that the overall electron density transfer onto a fullerene molecule to be higher than 8%. This complex can be defined as a charge-transfer complex, even though the authors did not come to this conclusion.
To work out the methods allowing the preparation of composites with desired characteristics, it seems necessary to study the effect of conditions of formation of fullerene–polymer complexes on their composition and structure, as they markedly control the resultant characteristics of the products. In particular, this investigation has been performed for the PVP–fullerene complexes with variable structures; as a result, this study allowed us to improve the procedure for the preparation of such systems, to change the content of fullerene, and to substantially widen the scope of practical application of poly(N-vinylamides).36
To optimize the procedures for the preparation of the above-mentioned type of fullerene-containing polymers, polymers possessing sufficient ability to bind fullerenes are required. The search for such polymers has been reported in ref. 43. The effect of the chemical structure of various polymers (PMMA, PS, poly(methacrylic acid), poly(N-vinylcaprolactam), the copolymers of phenoxyphenyl methacrylamide and N-(2-hydroxypropyl)methacrylamide, etc.) and the structural organization of interpolymer complexes (poly(methacrylic acid)–poly(N-vinylcaprolactam) on the efficiency of their non-covalent binding with fullerene C60 have been described.43
3 Properties of polymeric composites with non-covalently bonded fullerene
Most of the works devoted to studying of the modification of polymers by fullerene have been focused on practical aspects, e.g., mechanical properties,55–62 tribological characteristics,63–65 temperature resistance, and thermal oxidative stability;66–83 other performance characteristics that result in a practical value of fullerene-containing composites in specific applications have been reported.
3.1 Mechanical characteristics
Raw natural rubber (NR) doped with 0.065–0.75 wt% fullerene C60 is characterized by a higher elastic modulus at different tensile strains and a higher hardness; furthermore, its aging proceeds with slower rates and all resins based on NR also show a higher hydrophobicity without any changes in their traditional manufacturing technology.55
The dispersion of 2 wt% of C60 in an epoxy matrix has led to essential hardening of bonds in system of the carbon fiber-epoxy polymer.56 The authors attribute the observed strengthening of interphase interactions to polymer hardening under action of fullerene which brings the contribution to suppression of the processes of ruptures in interphase layers of polymer-fiber (the dissipation energy mechanism).
Caprolons, which are known to be bulk polyamides used for the construction and antifriction purposes. In power engineering; the ship-building industry; and the chemical, oil, and paper-and-pulp industries, these polymers are used under severe operating conditions and their characteristics, i.e., hardness and strength under compression and bending, tear resistance, electrophysical characteristics, etc., should meet high standards. One can see the effect of fullerene (0.01–0.02 wt%) on the main characteristics of Caprolon from the data, given in Table 2.57 As compared to the reference samples, nanocomposites are characterized by higher compressive strength (this value increases by 25%) and Brinell hardness (by 7%). This effect is similar to that provided by the introduction of metals; however, the content of fullerene is one to three orders of magnitude lower than that of metals. Thus, the density of the samples remains virtually unchanged. This factor seems to be highly important. In addition, the friction coefficient on metal surface and the tear resistance decrease by 40% and the Charpy impact strength increases by a factor of 1.5. Moreover, one can also observe an increase in the softening temperature and a decrease of thermal conductivity. Composite containing only 0.0017–0.1 wt% fullerene has the degradation temperature upon heating in air approximately on 50 °C higher than non-modified Caprolon. The antistatic characteristics of the composites are also considerably improved as follows: the specific electric resistance decreases by several orders of magnitude, as a result of which, static electricity is discharged with higher rates; dielectric permittivity and breakdown voltage are also markedly increased. Due to this combination of valuable characteristics, new materials appear to be safer as compared to the nonmodified polymers, during their use in the severe conditions of gas pollution in the presence of flammable and combustible gases (for example, methane discharge in mines). These results were explained by changes in the crystalline structure of polymers due to the introduction of fullerene.57 This conclusion was proved by the direct electron microscopy observations; the corresponding microscopic images clearly demonstrate that the dimensions of the crystalline grains are reduced and the inter-crystalline regions are narrow and diffuse. According to the authors’ view, fullerene molecules can serve as nucleation sites for crystallization and, thus, can regulate the degree of crystallinity in polymers.
Table 2 Some service characteristics of Caprolon–fullerene composites with 0.01–0.02 wt% of C60




Characteristic
Caprolon
Caprolon–fullerene composites





a Testing temperature is 18–25 °C.





Compressive strengtha/MPa
80–90
100–110


Brinell hardnessa/MPa
130
125–150


Coefficient of sliding frictiona/relative unit
0.2–0.3
<0.1


Abrasive resistancea/mm3
35
<20


Charpy impact strengtha/kJ mol−1
40
60–70


Softening temperature at bending/°C
80–100
>100


Coefficient of thermal conductivity at 25 °C W m−1 K−1
0.29
<0.25




The modification of PU by fullerene was studied for poly(urethane urea) (Table 3).58 As was shown, the introduction of ultra-small amounts of fullerene C60 (1.2 × 10−7–4.8 × 10−7 mol cm−3 which corresponds 7 × 10−3–3 × 10−2 wt%) lead to a marked improvement in the mechanical characteristics of the final products. The dependences of tensile strength, relative elongation at break, and elastic modulus on fullerene content show an extremum character. Compared to the corresponding parameters of the initial poly(urethane ureas), their maximum values appear to be higher by a factor of 1.3, 1.2, and 1.7, respectively. Authors assume that improvements of characteristics of PUs are due to structural transformations in a polymer. As a result of the introduction of fullerene C60, the efficient concentration υe of junctions of a three-dimensional network increases; at the maximum concentration of fullerene, this parameter increases by a factor of 3. The concentration of chemical junctions usually formed by allophanate and biuret bonds remains virtually unchanged. Therefore, υe only increases due to an increase in the concentration of junctions of a physical network, which is responsible for the mechanical characteristics of PU; this network is formed not only by urethane and urea groups, but probably by fullerene molecules as well which order macromolecules arrangement.
Table 3 Effect of fullerene on some properties of crosslinked poly(urethane urea)




[C60]/mol cm−3
Tensile strength/MPa
Elastic modulus/MPa
Elongation at break/%




0.0
26.6
32.8
480


1.18
32.4
46.5
580


1.95
35.1
57.5
590


2.98
32.9
55.5
340


4.81
30.1
43.4
320




Research59,60 has been devoted to questions about structuring of fullerene-contained PS. Results of electron-microscopic, radiographic and micrometric studying of the composite testifies to the ordering influence of fullerene on the character of orientation of PS-chains rather each other and will be useful at creation of the compounds with the set-up properties.
Polymer PMMA is known for its valuable properties such as strength, optical brightness and stability to photo ageing. Polymer PMMA is known for its good properties such as strength, optical transparence and resistance to photo-ageing. PMMA is characterized by structural uniformity on the supramolecular level. Mechanical properties of the films, cast from the mixture of PMMA and C60 (1–10 wt%) in toluene were studied.61 The curves of uniaxial deformation of the films (σud–εud) are given in Fig. 2. The strong properties changes can be seen even in presence of 1 wt% of fullerene in polymer. Particularly, five times increase in strength σb and twice increase of the Young's modulus E and the breaking strain εb was found for thin films of PMMA. With increase of the fullerene concentration up to 3 wt% the properties further improve but not so drastically. There are no changes in the properties practically at five-percentage filling of the films, and the decrease of E with the retention of the high values of εb are observed at 10 wt% of C60 content. The difference in the results obtained for the samples with the fullerene concentration of 10 wt% and with lower ones can be explained based on analysis of X-ray diffraction patterns of the films.61 Up to 5 wt% of C60 concentration the small-angle and wide-angle X-ray diffraction patterns of the samples stay unchanged due to, apparently, weak (or completely absent) aggregation of the modifier molecules. This means that the most of the C60 molecules are dispersed on the molecular level. At the same time the X-ray diffraction patterns of the films containing 10 wt% of fullerene indicate a significant increase in the system heterogeneity, i.e. the formation of the C60 aggregates resulting in the decrease of the Young's modulus.
 Fig. 2  The curves of uniaxial deformation of the PMMA films with different content of fullerene: 0 (1), 1 (2), 3 (3), 5 (4) and 10 wt% (5). 
Authors proposed a model of interaction of fullerene with the microcracks of polymeric matrix which are formed during the mechanical destruction. In their opinion, this model can explain an improvement in the mechanical properties of the composite films compare to the films of pure PMMA. According to the proposed model, the propagation of the microcrack through the material containing nanomodifier passes the stages of the consequent retraction of the C60 molecules into the microcracks. The retraction process is related to the formation of the covalent bonds between fullerene and the free polymeric radicals appeared during deformation. The result of this process is the cracks healing (Fig. 3) with following strengthening of the material. The formation of the covalent bonds between fullerene and macroradicals was proved by the method of thermo-desorption mass-spectroscopy.61
 Fig. 3  Schematic representation of the consequent retraction of the C60 molecules into the microcracks: a – microcrack formation; b – retraction of the C60 molecules into the microcrack; c – microcracks healing. 
Polyethylene (PE) is the most widespread thermoplast. In spite of the simplicity of the chemical structure, this semi-crystalline polymer reveals complex morphology with different hierarchical levels. Based on the chemical inertness of PE, one can expect that the adding of C60 in the polymer do not prevent the crystallization during film preparation. In this case the nanomodifier should be localized in the amorphous regions of matrix. The effect of the fullerene presence on the mechanical behavior of the composites was explained based on studies of the curves of uniaxial deformation of the samples of low density polyethylene (LDPE), modified by 1–10 wt% of C60 (Fig. 4).62 With increase of the fullerene concentration one can see significant changes in mechanical characteristics of the material. In particular, the plasticity of LDPE composite containing only 1 wt% of C60 strongly decreases compare to the non-modified sample. Thus, εb drops from ∼300% to ∼70% and further to ∼20% for the sample with 10 wt% of fullerene. σb and the fluidity limit are immediately increased by a factor of approximately 2.5 and the Young's modulus is increased by a factor of approximately 5. As in the case of PMMA–C60 composites, the analysis of the X-ray diffraction patterns of the films allows to make a conclusion about weak aggregation of the C60 molecules in the samples containing 1–5 wt% of fullerene, i.e., about the dispersion of most of the modifier on the molecular level. The formation of the C60 aggregates only occurs in samples containing 10 wt% of C60.
 Fig. 4  The curves of uniaxial deformation of the LDPE films with different fullerene content: 0 (1), 1 (2), 3 (3), 5 (4) and 10 wt% (5). 
According to the authors,62 the spherulites were found to be the main form of the supramolecular structure in the modified LDPE films. The radii of the spherulites and the size of crystallites were determined. It turned out that the major part of C60 is located in the inter-spherulite regions which are responsible for the changes in the mechanical properties of the films. The authors also expect that a change in the mechanical properties of the modified PE films occurs due to the closure of the free radicals on the fullerene molecules. These radicals are formed at the break of macromolecules in the processes of deformation in accordance with the scheme in Fig. 3.
At 1 wt% filling of the films of the most widespread thermoplast LDPE the tensile strength and fluidity limit have increased approximately by a factor of 2.5 and the modulus has increased approximately by a factor of 5 compared to pure polymers.62
The general idea of the works on strengthening of the polymers by fullerene examined in this review is the relationship between the mechanical properties and the structuring of the composites with C60. In past decades, many works explain the strengthening of polymer matrixes by the structural changes. These changes, caused by different reasons, result in ordering of the macromolecules. The reason for such molecular ordering can be the presence of uniformly distributed heterogeneous inclusions in the matrix, especially nanoparticles of modifiers, which facilitates the orientation of chains. In the doping of polymers the fullerene molecules (clusters, crystallites) appear to be a reason for the orientation of the macromolecules, which in turn leads to strengthening of the material.
3.2 Tribological characteristics
The service values of polymer composites used under friction conditions are controlled by their tribological properties. Metal alloys operating with oil lubrication are used as traditional antifriction materials in friction units and constructions. Recently, some polymer materials have been successfully used for the construction of certain components in friction units. During operation conditions, some lubricant components can experience polymerization and the protective tribopolymer film is formed. The introduction of 0.5–5 wt% fullerene C60 to mineral oils substantially improves their antifriction, extreme-pressure, and tear-resistant characteristics; the run-in time of friction units dramatically decreases.63 The above effects are related to the prompt and easy formation of a fullerene–polymer protective film, which uniformly blankets the whole surface of friction units and serves as a “trap” for radicals induced by mechanodestruction of this tribofilm; the thickness of this film is higher than that formed in the absence of fullerene. Fullerene blocks free radicals and protects the whole system from “progressing degradation”; furthermore, it prevents any plasticizing effect of low-molecular-mass components, which are known to impair the mechanical characteristics of materials in friction units. By blocking off oxygen in thermal-oxidative processes, fullerene protects friction units operating in air, water, and aggressive environments. Therefore, the addition of minor amounts of fullerene to mineral oils substantially improves the service lifetime of friction units, including their polymer-based components.64
In some cases, high ecological demands on the purity of friction units in machines and construction units require the use of water lubricants instead of oil lubricants. For manufacturing water-lubricated bearings, modern polymer materials are used, among which are thermoplastics (polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) and its copolymers), flexible-chain polyamides (PA), poly(formaldehyde), polycarbonate (PC), PPO, and PU.65 In the last review, the results of tribological studies performed for fullerene-containing (1–2.5 wt%) polymer materials used in water-lubricated bearings were reviewed. As was shown, the wear resistance of PTFE-based composites containing fullerene increases because “microcracks induced in the course of testing appear to be blocked (healed) by fullerene molecules due to their high electron-accepting potency.” Let us mention that PTFE is one of the best antifrictional polymer materials, however its use is limited because of cold-fluidity and low wear resistance. In the case of epoxy carbon fiber-reinforced plastics, “antifriction characteristics become better, a tendency which is seen as a broader interval of contact pressures, where the friction coefficient remains low”.65 According to the authors, further progress in the direction of improvements in the strength characteristics of polymer materials for the above mentioned goals deals with, in particular, the reinforcing of polymer matrices by nanoparticles, which serve as acceptors for free radicals; among these are fullerene C60 and other fullerene-containing additives.
3.3. Physicochemical and physical characteristics

3.3.1 Stability at elevated temperatures. 
Temperature stability at elevated temperatures is known to be one of the key technical characteristics of polymer materials. In particular, the thermal stability of thin films of amorphous polymers usually controls the scope of their application in microelectronics.84 The effect of fullerene C60 on the thermal and thermal oxidative stability of PMMAs with different microstructures and produced by different methods,66–70 the copolymers of methyl methacrylate with methacrylic acid and dimethylaminoethyl methacrylate,68 PS,67,70 PC,70,71 PPO,75 and PE79 have been studied by MTA, TGA, DSC etc. Fullerene C60 is found to inhibit radical-chain reactions of thermal degradation and branched chain reactions of the thermooxidative degradation of polymers. For example, fullerene totally prevents any low-temperature thermal degradation of PMMA,66 and its efficacy for high-temperature thermooxidative degradation (above 300 °C) is higher than that of traditional antioxidants, such as sterically hindered amines and phenols and sulfur- and phosphorus-containing compounds. Let us mention that all antioxidants are known to lose their inhibiting potency at 270–290 °C as they decompose via oxidation with oxygen; the temperature interval where fullerenes exert their stabilizing action lies at 335–340 °C. Each binary fullerene–polymer system is characterized by its own temperature threshold, which is controlled by the chemical structure of a polymer.70,71 The easier the oxidation of the polymer, the lower the temperature threshold. In particular, the temperature corresponding to the onset of intensive oxidation is 248 °C for the fullerene C60 -PS system; for fullerene-free PS, this temperature is 220 °C (the DSC method). In the case of the fullerene C60-PMMA system, the above parameters are 309 and 275 °C, respectively.
The limiting temperature threshold of the efficient action of fullerene C60 is observed even for thermal degradation; for the binary fullerene–polymer system, the higher the thermal resistance of polymer, the higher the above limiting temperature. The stabilizing effect of fullerene C60 on polymers is maximum when the concentrations of the introduced fullerene are low (∼10−2–10−3 mol kg−1). At temperatures above the temperature threshold, fullerene does not inhibit either type of degradation, even when its concentration in the composites is several times higher. Therefore, there is a certain concentration limit (in other words, the concentration of fullerene C60 in the composites, which is controlled by the polymer nature but is independent of the mode of degradation), after which the efficacy of inhibition does not depend on the concentration of fullerene C60. For PS, this concentration threshold is 4 × 10−3 mol kg−1; for PMMA, 8 × 10−3 mol kg−1.
Fullerene is known to retain its potency as an efficient high-temperature antioxidant with respect to PMMA, even after its exposure to ionizing irradiation (electrons, γ-quants). This evidence allowed its potential use in radiation-measuring films.73,74
The inhibiting action of fullerenes on the thermal degradation of polymers is directly associated with their electron donor–electron accepting characteristics or, in other words, with their interaction with radicals of different chemical natures.84 In this case, fullerene C60 serves as a specific “trap” for radicals, which are formed during high-temperature degradation of polymers. In some works, one can find the results not only on the role of fullerene in total degradation but possible routes of reactions between fullerene C60 and macroradicals formed under thermal degradation of polymers.68–70,72,77,78 For example, it is established that inhibiting action of C60 on the process of PMMA thermal destruction is caused by its interaction with the macroradicals Ri˙ (i is the different content of monomer units), RiO˙, RiO2˙.66–68,70 Macroradicals of this type are formed as a result of PMMA depolymerization which prevails in the multi-stage process of destruction (monomer yield is more than 90%, Fig. 5, reaction 1) as well as in oxidation and in other reactions where the radicals Ri˙ and the radical products of these reactions are participate (Fig. 5, reactions 2–5). Interaction of fullerene with the macroradicals leads to the formation of diamagnetic products, stable at a temperature of 277 °C: (Ri)2C60, (RiO)2C60, (Ri)(RiO)C60, (Ri)3(RiO)C60, (Ri)2(RiO)2C60, (Ri)(RiO)3C60, (Ri)4C60, (RiO)4C60.
 Fig. 5  Some reactions of PMMA thermal degradation. 
The addition of the first pair of macroradicals occurs during the induction period of thermal oxidative decomposition of PMMA. Further the efficiency of the inhibitor was reduced because of the steric hindrances (due to bonded radicals) to the subsequent addition of new pair. For the same reason the authors suppose improbable bonding to fullerene with more than four macroradicals.
The ability of C60 to interrupt the process of spontaneous destruction of liquid crystal polyethers80,81 has allowed using it as the stabilizer in reactions of polyethers high-temperature synthesis.82 Synthesis at high temperatures (about 200 °C) gives the possibility to obtain these polymers with high molecular mass in time less than 1 h; at prolongation of the reaction time the further growth of molecular weight does not occur. However at temperature above 200 °C cross-linking reactions are propagated and insoluble products of an uncertain structure are formed. This problem is especially important for polymers with double and threefold carbon-carbon bonds, i.e. for polymers perspective as active components of the organic luminescent devices; conductive polymeric systems and materials with nonlinear optical properties. The addition of 0.01 wt% of C60 has allowed the temperature interval of carrying out of reaction to be expanded to 220 °C, having excluded the cross-linking reaction.
Fullerene being “a trap” of radicals, in particular of benzyl, methyl and tert-butyl ones competes with monomer for interaction with initiating radicals or growth radicals, i.e. is inhibitor of radical polymerization of vinyl monomers initiated by benzoyl peroxide.83 At the same time authors of this work have found out the essential growth of speed of the polymerization initiating by the system benzoyl peroxide-ferrocene. The mechanism of such phenomenon is not clear yet.
Taking into account the results of studying thermal degradation and thermal oxidative degradation of fullerene-containing polymers, as well as their tribological characteristics, one can conclude63 that, for the above polymers, fullerene C60 is likely to play a stabilizing role under any modes of thermal degradation if the temperature interval of thermal degradation is below the temperature corresponding to the rupture of weak bonds between polymers and fullerene.
An analysis of the literature data on the effect of fullerene C60 additives on the characteristics of polymers reveals the following fact: some characteristics under study attain their maximum level when the concentration of fullerene is exceptionally low. As the concentration of fullerene C60 is further increased, these parameters either remain unchanged (the temperature threshold of thermal degradation and thermooxidative degradation for PMMA and PS,70 the tribological characteristics of polymer components in friction units63) or tend to decrease (the mechanical characteristics of PU,58 the sorptional characteristics of tetrazolyl acrylate copolymers85).
In our opinion, all these facts can be explained by a single cause; i.e., when minor amounts of fullerene (each polymer is characterized by its specific concentration interval) are uniformly distributed in a polymer matrix, fullerene is likely to exist as complexes of individual molecules or small clusters attached to the fragments of polymer chains. As the concentration of fullerene C60 increases, its molecules and/or small clusters tend to aggregate into bigger clusters, which are poorly solvated in the polymer matrix and turn out to be inefficient modifying agents. It seems that the dimensions of the formed aggregates are bigger than nanoscale parameters; as a result, the mechanism behind the effect of fullerene on the structure and, hence, on the characteristics of polymers is changed. This assumption is partially proved by studying of the state of fullerene molecules in PMMA at concentrations 1, 3, 5 and 10 wt%59 and at 1 and 10 wt%.70 It is shown that with an increase of C60 concentration up to 5 wt% inclusive the module of elasticity and strength grow thus X-ray diffraction patterns of samples are invariable.59 At ten-percent fullerene the elasticity module decreases (at preservation of value of tensile strength) and X-ray diffraction patterns sharply differ from the previous. Growth of mechanical characteristics and a constancy of X-ray diffraction patterns in the first case authors explain by absence of an aggregation or a weak aggregation of C60 molecules (fullerene was dispersed to molecular scale and was uniformly distributed in a composite), and the change observed in the second case – by the essential clusterization of C60.
The authors of ref. 70 have shown that at a concentration of fullerene about 10 wt% clusters are formed containing up to 100 molecules and at one-percentage concentration it is possible to speak about “true solubility” (obviously about the molecular-dispersed state).
In the literature, one can also gain information about the effect of minor amounts of the fullerene-containing products on the polymer properties, for example mixtures of fullerenes C60 and C70, fullerene-containing carbon black, washed fullerene-containing carbon black and others.63,64,86 The effect of the above products on the characteristics of the modified polymers is similar to that of fullerene C60; many characteristics are improved and the quantitative values lie within the same interval as in the case of fullerene C60-doped polymers.
However, in certain cases preference is given to a mixed modifier.87 Authors have studied the influence of 0.02–0.06 wt% C60; mixtures of fullerenes C60 and C70 and fullerene carbon black on mechanical characteristics of thermosetting composites. In all cases the Young’s modulus and strength have increased by approximately 30–40%, thus composites with mixtures of fullerene have the maximum value of these characteristics. Similar dependences were observed when modifying crystallizable polymers by combined filling agent and the maximum effect was reached at a high degree of dispersity of one component and a weak dispersive ability of another component, forming aggregates.88 In the mix of fullerenes also one component (C60) is dissolved in a polymeric matrix and another (C70) is not dissolved.


3.3.2 Diffusion. 
Problems concerning the effect of fullerene on diffusion as one of the key characteristics of nanostructured polymers are still attracting keen scientific interest. Diffusion is known to govern the structural stability of polymer materials and, finally, to control their durability. The diffusion of fullerene C60 from polymer matrices based on PS, polyimide (PI), polybutadiene, polydimethylsiloxane, and various copolymers has been studied.89–91 Diffusion is primarily controlled by the state of the modifying molecules in the polymer matrix. Fullerene C60 inclusions may present in composites as molecularly dispersed species or clusters of various dimensions and/or may form nucleation sites for a new phase. For the fullerene C60-PS and fullerene C60-poly(α-methylstyrene) composites, the state of fullerene C60 molecules in the submicron film layers of fullerene-containing polymers was studied, and the energy parameters of fullerene diffusion were estimated by means of mass spectrometry.89 Further the results obtained in89 can be considered at detailed researches of mechanisms of the formation of fullerene-containing polymeric matrixes.
Gas diffusion through polymer membranes is widely used for the concentration and purification of gas mixtures. Polymer membranes should possess high gas permeability, selectivity, mechanical strength, thermal stability, and chemical resistance. The characteristics of polymer membranes based on PPO, PEO, PI, PEG, poly(propylene glycole), and other polymers can be improved by doping with fullerene C60.92–96 For example, gas separation membranes based on PPO, as one of the most gas-permeable glassy polymers, are characterized by low selectivity, and all attempts to improve selectivity by using complicated and unsafe methods of chemical modification (bromation, sulfonation, alkylation) did not find practical applications. The introduction of 0.25–2.0 wt% fullerene C60 into PPO is accompanied by complexation between fullerene C60 and a polymer; consequently, the selectivity of gas separation increases.94 The authors consider that the modification of PPO by fullerene is the simplest way of increasing the transport properties of this polymer of all the already studied ones.
Let's note one important property of the polymeric composites – their heat-physical characteristics. It is obvious that in manufacturing some polymeric productions optimization of the thermal mode of the process of their making is necessary, so learning about the heat-physical properties is required. Particularly the essential (20–30%) heat conductivity decrease of nanocomposite PMMA-C60 was already revealed with the addition of 1 wt% fullerene.97 As noted above, the decrease in the thermal conductivity upon fullerene doping is observed for the Caprolons.57


3.3.3 Electrical and optical characteristics. 
Physical characteristics of composites based on conductive polymers containing non-covalently bonded fullerene are of utmost interest, as even pioneering studies in this direction have revealed the emergence of dramatic changes in both electric and optical characteristics of polymers. A happy combination of mechanical, electrophysical, and optical characteristics of conductive polymers, evident advantages related to their substantial improvement by the introduction of fullerene C60, and a relatively simple processing procedure make these polymers attractive materials for various applications. Fullerene-containing composites of the considered type are potentially applicable in the laser technology, systems of processing of the optical information and facilities for information storage, in corrosion-resistance coatings, galvanic batteries, devises for capillary electrophoresis, capillary electrochromatography, elements using photoconductivity – photosensitive cylinders for printers, in photo diodes, organic transistors, cells for solar energy conversion in electricity and etc.8,26,98–103 In this case, the special behaviour of the polymers are used: an efficient charge generation in result of photoexcitation and an efficient electron transfer from electron donor (polymer) to electron acceptor, fullerene C60.
Below, we present examples of fullerene-containing composites with improved electrophysical, electrochemical, and optical characteristics.
In the review in ref. 8 the results on doping conductive polymers with fullerene were summarized, and some results were considered to be encouraging. For example, the introduction of fullerene to polyphenylenevinylene markedly increases the photovoltaic response of material; the photoconductivity of fullerene-doped PA films increases by a factor of 10; and the modification of polysilanes, which belong to the unique class of photoconducting polymers, results in the preparation of a new product that can be treated as a promising candidate for use as a modern polymer photoconductor.
Further development of works on polysilanes104,105 and polyphenylenevinylenes106–111 not only met all optimistic expectations, but also led to new interesting and, in some cases, unique, results. For example, conditions for the preparation of thin films based on fullerene-modified polyphenylenevinylene (the content of fullerene is 7–40 vol%) were found.106–108 These composites were shown to demonstrate highly efficient photoinduced charge transfer between a conjugated photoexcited polymer and an electron-accepting C60 in that the conductivity of the resultant film increases by two to four orders of magnitude as compared with that of the initial film. Conditions for the preparation of composites based on polyphenylenevinylene and fullerene C60 with improved all photovoltaic parameters were specified.110,111 Impressive improvement in electric and/or optical characteristics was also observed for fullerene-doped polythiophenes,111–126 PI,127–131 and polyaniline.131–135
Thin films based on polysilane were recommended for use in photodiodes and optical shutdown systems. Composites based on polyphenylenevinylenes, polythiophenes and polysilanes can be used in photovoltaic cells for solar energy conversion.
In the past few years investigations on the possibility of increasing the efficiency of such photovoltaic devices as solar batteries of various architecture were considerably intensified. Works were conducted in the direction of searching for new organic semiconductor acceptor materials, in particular of organic derivatives of C60; creating and studying the properties of prospective composites with their participation and also studying the properties of fullerene-containing polymeric systems, which satisfy modern requirements, for the indicated above type of devices.126,136–150 As well as set of articles on the photovoltaic problem there were a number of reviews, in particular ref. 151–153.
The modification of poly(acrylonitrile) with fullerene allows one to prepare materials with a high redox activity; moreover, this composite can be used as a negative electrode in lithium-ion rechargeable batteries.154 Improvement in the electrochemical characteristics of polymers containing fullerene C60 is ensured by its ability to serve as a mediator, which increases the rate of electron transfer in a polymer matrix.
The specific features of polymer composites containing fullerene C60 also concern high values of nonlinear optical susceptibility, structural flexibility, easy processing, and low cost.131,155 An analysis of optical and nonlinear optical characteristics of organic materials based on PI, polyaniline, and other polymers modified with 0.2–15 wt% fullerene shows that these materials can replace some classical inorganic electrooptical structures that are traditionally used in nanoelectronics, non linear optics as these systems are free from such disadvantages as complicated preparation and technological processing, mechanical brittleness, big dimensions, high prices, etc.131
In recent years, special attention has been focused on studying the effect of organic derivatives of fullerene C60, their mixtures with C60; C70 and derivatives of fullerene C70 and their mixtures; mixtures of C60 with C70; endohedral derivatives and polymer types of fullerene C60, and higher fullerenes on physical and physicochemical characteristics of various polymers (primarily conductive polymers). In some trials, positive results have been attained, including results that appear to be even better than those obtained with the use of fullerene C60. Sometimes, fullerene C60 is still preferred over other candidates because, compared to other dopants, this filler has a lower cost.
The observed improvement in properties of the composites is related to changes of polymer morphology on fullerene doping.102,110,156–164

4 Conclusions
The results of studies on the preparation of nanocomposites from different polymers with specific structure and application and non-covalently bonded fullerene C60 for development of new functional materials show definite success in this field.
Materials with significantly improved mechanical, tribological, electrical, optical and other important properties compared to the raw polymers were designed and their possible applications were proposed. Thus, composite C60-bulk polyamides possess the unique combination of properties, which make them prospective candidates for considerable reduction in the risk of working under the conditions of gas pollution in the presence of flammable and combustible gases.57 The possibility of expanding applications for composites of C60 and amorphous polymers in field of microelectronics compared to non-modified polymers due to a serious increase in the stability of materials at elevated temperatures is shown.66–70
Polymeric antifriction materials with noticeably improved wear resistance have been obtained. Further progress in this field is related to using of fullerene as the modifier of polymeric matrixes.63–65
A material which can be used as the stabilizer in the reactions of high-temperature synthesis was created. This material allows the exclusion of cross-linking reactions which lead to the formation of the insoluble products with the undetermined structure. These nanocomposites are prospective active components in organic luminescent devices; conductive polymeric systems and materials with non-linear optical properties.80–82
Nanocomposites for the gas separation membranes combining improved transport characteristics with the high mechanical, thermal and chemical stability,92–96 as well as the composites resistant to ionizing irradiation for the radiation-measuring films73,74 are proposed.
Water-soluble composite materials for the applications in biology and medicine have been designed.35,38–41
Composites based on conducting polymers with a small addition of C60 molecules show more successful combination of mechanical, electro-physical, electro-chemical and optical properties than pure polymers. They effectively can be used in nanoelectronics, nanooptics and non-linear optics.
In certain cases, positive effects are achieved by introduction of an ultra-small amount of fullerene (hundredths and even thousandths of weight percentage) into the polymeric matrix.55,57,58
In solving applied problems, researchers have succeeded in explanation of several fundamental questions in this area. In particular, the problem of a change in the fullerene electron structure, electronic state and macromolecular parameters – molecular weight, sizes, form, the mobility of macromolecules, as a result of complexation between the components of nanocomposites were discussed in detail. Furthermore, the effect of the chemical structure of polymers and structural organization of their complexes on the efficiency of the non-covalent bonding of fullerene with the polymeric matrix is addressed. A certain understanding of the reasons for improvement in the properties of the nanomodified materials compare to the pure polymers has been achieved.
Despite undoubted successes in the formation of polymeric composites containing non-covalently bonded C60, numerous problems of fundamental and applied character are still remain. Using almost all carbon nanomodifiers of the polymer properties (carbon nanotubes, nanodiamonds, graphene and others) is complicated because of their tendency to aggregation. The aggregation seriously complicates the uniform distribution of nanomodifiers in the polymers required for fabrication of materials with the optimum properties. Fullerene is the only known uniform molecular form of nanocarbon but even C60 under specific conditions forms aggregates, for example, at the high concentrations in the composites. This phenomenon has to be taken into account at fullerene using.
It is generally clear that an improvement of many properties of composites (including strengthening) compared to the properties of pure polymers is related to the desired structural changes under the effect of introduced fullerene. However, the mechanism of the strengthening of the polymers during the fullerene doping is still far from clear. In particular, the study of the structure formation mechanism in the composites remains relevant. The effect of fullerene doping on phase composition, degree of crystallinity, parameters of the fine structure of polymer as well as the role of factors regulating these processes require complex analysis. These factors include conditions of the preparation of polymer nanocomposites, nature of the polymer and its ability to structure formation, the tendency of modifier to form clusters and the final structure of the complexes.
The conditions for full realization of the C60 potential require the interface interaction to provide the efficient transfer of mechanical stresses from the polymer to the modifier. The problems of interface adhesion, transfer of the stresses in the volume of material, role of the oriented layers of polymer near the surface of the particle of the nanofiller need additional attention.
The difficulties in experimental studies of interface interactions in the nanocomposites and of the destruction mechanism make it important to use of computer simulation methods.
Given above list of tasks for development of polymer nanocomposites containing non-covalently bonded fullerene with the optimal properties shows the wide field for researchers. The continuing of these studies is required, since the use of the polymer–fullerene composites discussed in the review will allow expansion of the borders of the applications of polymers traditionally used in concrete technology fields and in certain cases will allow them to be replaced with fullerene-containing materials.94,131,135
Acknowledgements
Financial support by the Ministry of Education and Science of the Russian Federation (the state contract No 16.552.12.7001) is gratefully acknowledged.
Notes and references
P. A. Troshin and R. N. Lyubovskaya, Russ. Chem. Rev., 2008, 77, 305 CrossRef CAS .
G. P. Karpacheva, Polym. Sci., Ser. C, 2000, 42, 19 Search PubMed .
F. Giacalone and N. Martin, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 5136 CrossRef CAS .
K. Scida, P. W. Stege, G. Haby, G. A. Messina and C. D. Garcia, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2011, 691, 6 CrossRef CAS .
R. Parta and J. Conyers, Int. J. Nanomed., 2009, 261 Search PubMed .
E. N. Karaulova and E. I. Bagrii, Russ. Chem. Rev., 1999, 68, 889 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, Z.-X. Guo, S. Fu, W. Wu and D. Zhu, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2004, 29, 1079 CrossRef CAS .
E. Badamshina, M. Gafurova, O. Figovsky and L. Shapovalov, Sci. Isr.–Technol. Advantages, 2006, 8, 149 CAS .
E. R. Badamshina and M. P. Gafurova, Polym. Sci., Ser. B, 2007, 49, 180 CrossRef .
R. Kh. Yumagulova, N. A. Medvedeva, I. A. Ionova, V. P. Volodina, S. I. Kuznetsov and S. V. Kolesov, Polym. Sci., Ser. B, 2010, 52, 459 CrossRef .
N. N. Smirnova, I. E. Boronina, A. V. Markin, R. Kh. Yumagulova and S. V. Kolesov, Polym. Sci., 2010, 52, 515 CrossRef .
V. T. Lebedev, D. N. Orlova, E. Yu. Melenevskaya, V. V. Shamanin and L. V. Vinogradova, Russ. J. Appl. Chem., 2011, 84, 278 CrossRef CAS .
P. N. Lavrenko and L. V. Vinogradova, Polym. Sci., Ser. A, 2000, 42, 726 Search PubMed .
C. Mathis, F. Audouin and R. Nuffer, Fullerenes, Nanotubes, Carbon Nanostruct., 2004, 12, 341 CrossRef CAS .
P. N. Lavrenko, I. P. Kolomiets, O. V. Ratnikova and L. V. Vinogradova, Polym. Sci., 2006, 48, 981 CrossRef .
P. N. Lavrenko, I. P. Kolomiets, O. V. Ratnikova and L. V. Vinogradova, Polym. Sci., 2008, 50, 848 CrossRef .
L. V. Vinogradova, E. E. Kever and A. P. Filippov, Polym. Sci., Ser. B, 2009, 51, 174 CrossRef .
A. O. Pozdnyakov, O. F. Pozdnyakov, L. V. Vinogradovaa and B. M. Ginzburg, Russ. J. Appl. Chem., 2009, 82, 650 CrossRef CAS .
L. V. Vinogradova, G. A. Polotskaya, A. A. Shevtsova and A. Yu. Alent'ev, Polym. Sci., 2009, 51, 209 CrossRef .
A. P. Filippov, O. A. Romanova and L. V. Vinogradova, Polym. Sci., 2010, 52, 221 CrossRef .
B. P. Karsten, R. K. M. Bouwer, J. C. Hummelen, R. M. Williams and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 14149 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. Kurmaz and V. V. Ozhiganov, Polym. Sci., 2011, 53, 232 CrossRef CAS .
B. Grimm, E. Karnas, M. Brettreih, K. Ohta, A. Hirsch, D. M. Guldi, T. Torres and J. L. Sessler, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 14134 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Konarev, R. N. Lyubovskaya, V. N. Semkin and A. Graja, Mol. Mater., 1998, 11, 35 CAS .
D. V. Konarev and R. N. Lyubovskaya, Russ. Chem. Rev., 1999, 68, 19 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bhattacharya, S. Banerjee, S. Chattopadhyay and M. Banerjee, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2004, 393, 504 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bhattacharya, S. Banerjee and M. Banerjee, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2004, 108, 10783 CrossRef CAS .
E. F. Sheka, J. Struct. Chem., 2006, 47, 593 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Konarev, A. Y. Kovalevsky, S. S. Khasanov, G. Saito, D. V. Lopatin, A. V. Umrikhin, A. Otsuka and R. N. Lyubovskaya, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2006, 1881 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ya. Vasilyev and N. V. Kamanina, Tech. Phys. Lett., 2007, 33, 8 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ya. Vasilyev and N. V. Kamanina, Tech. Phys. Lett., 2007, 33, 764 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiang, X.-W. Wei, X.-M. Zhang, Q.-Q. Zha, J. Sun and G. Yin, Chin. J. Chem., 2006, 24, 862 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Domrachev, Yu. A. Shevelev, V. K. Cherkasov, G. K. Fukin, G. V. Markin and A. I. Kirillov, Russ. Chem. Bull., 2006, 225 CrossRef CAS .
L. V. Vinogradova, E. Yu. Melenevskaya, A. S. Khachaturov, E. E. Kever, L. S. Litvinova, A. V. Novokreshchenova, M. A. Sushko, S. I. Klenin and V. N. Zgonnik, Polym. Sci., Ser. A, 1998, 40, 1152 Search PubMed .
N. P. Evlampieva, P. N. Lavrenko, I. I. Zaitseva, E. Yu. Melenevskaya, Yu. F. Biryulin, L. V. Vinogradova, E. I. Ryumtsev and V. N. Zgonnik, Polym. Sci., Ser. A, 2002, 44, 1004 Search PubMed .
M. G. Krakovyak, E. V. Anufrieva, T. D. Anan'eva and T. N. Nekrasova, Polym. Sci., 2006, 48, 590 CrossRef .
Gy. Török, V. T. Lebedev, L. Cser, D. N. Orlova, A. I. Sibilev, V. N. Zgonnik, E. Yu. Melenevskaya, L. V. Vinogradova and M. A. Sibileva, Phys. B, 2004, 350, E415 CrossRef .
E. Yu. Melenevskaya, O. V. Ratnikova, N. P. Yevlampieva, I. I. Zaitseva, V. T. Lebedev, D. N. Orlova, M. V. Mokeev, A. S. Khachaturov and V. N. Zgonnik, Polym. Sci., Ser. A, 2003, 45, 627 Search PubMed .
P. N. Lavrenko, N. P. Yevlampieva, M. D. Lechner, L. Börger and L. V. Vinogradova, Polym. Sci., Ser. A, 2004, 46, 1072 Search PubMed .
M. Li and Q. Chen, Polymer, 2003, 44, 2793 CrossRef CAS .
P. N. Lavrenko, N. P. Evlampieva, D. M. Volokhova, L. V. Vinogradova, E. Yu. Melenevskaya and V. N. Zgonnik, Polym. Sci., Ser. A, 2002, 44, 173 Search PubMed .
I. Sapurina, M. Mokeev, V. Lavrentev, V. Zgonnik, M. Trchová, D. Hlavatá and J. Stejskal, Eur. Polym. J., 2000, 36, 2321 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Krakovyak, T. N. Nekrasova, T. D. Anan'eva and E. V. Anufrieva, Polym. Sci., Ser. B, 2002, 44, 271 Search PubMed .
D. A. Antonenkov, I. V. Egorova and A. M. Abyzov, Russ. J. Phys. Chem. A, 2003, 77, 95 Search PubMed .
N. P. Yevlampieva, T. S. Dmitrieva, E. Yu. Melenevskaya, I. I. Zaitseva and E. I. Ryumtsev, Polym. Sci. F, 2007, 49, 284 CrossRef .
C. N. Murthy, S. J. Choi and K. E. Geckeler, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2002, 2, 129 CrossRef CAS .
Yu. F. Biryulin, D. A. Syckmanov, S. S. Moliver, S. E. Orlov, S. N. Mikov, A. V. Novoselova and M. A. Yagovkina, Microelectron. Eng., 2003, 69, 505 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ogiwara, T. Ikoma, K. Akiyama and S. Tero-Kubota, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2005, 441, 378 CrossRef .
J. G. D. Chavez, M. G. Nava, J. F. Maturano, T. Klimova, E. Klimova and M. M. García, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2007, 7, 1377 CrossRef .
A. Laiho, R. H. A. Ras, S. Valkama, J. Ruokolainen, R. Ősterbacka and O. Ikkaba, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 7648 CrossRef CAS .
Yu. F. Biryulin, D. A. Syckmanov, S. S. Moliver, S. E. Orlov, S. N. Mikov, A. V. Novoselova and M. A. Yagovkina, Microelectron. Eng., 2003, 69, 505 CrossRef CAS .
E. V. Chubarova, E. Yu. Melenevskaya, N. N. Sudareva, O. A. Andreeva, I. I. Malachova and O. V. Ratnikova, J. Macromol. Sci., Part B: Phys., 2005, 44, 455 CrossRef CAS .
I. F. Gun'kin, V. N. Tseluikin and N. Yu. Loginova, Russ. J. Appl. Chem., 2006, 79, 1001 CrossRef CAS .
V. Lebedev, Gy. Török, L. Cser, A. Len, D. Orlova, V. Zgonnik, E. Melenevskaya, L. Vinogradova and W. Treimer, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 2003, 36, 646 CrossRef CAS .
B. Jurkowska, B. Jurkowski, P. Kamrowski, S. S. Pesetskii, V. N. Koval, L. S. Pinchuk and Yu. A. Olkhov, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2006, 100, 390 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jiang, H. Zhang, Z. Zhang, H. Murayama and K. Okamoto, Composites, Part A, 2008, 39, 1762 CrossRef .
M. G. Potalitsin, A. A. Babenko, O. S. Alekhin, N. I. Alekseev, O. V. Arapov, N. A. Charykov, K. V. Nekrasov, V. I. Gerasimov and K. N. Semenov, Russ. J. Appl. Chem., 2006, 79, 306 CrossRef CAS .
Y. A. Olkhov and B. Jurkowski, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2007, 107, 1431 CrossRef .
O. V. Alekseeva, V. N. Rudin, I. V. Melikhov, N. A. Bagrovskaya, S. M. Kuz'min and A. V. Noskov, Dokl. Phys. Chem., 2008, 422, 275 CrossRef CAS .
O. V. Alekseeva, N. A. Bagrovskaya, S. M. Kuz'min, A. V. Noskov, I. V. Melikhov and V. N. Rudin, Russ. J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 83, 1170 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Ginzburg, S. Kh. Tabarov, Sh. Tuichiev and A. A. Shepelevskii, Tech. Phys. Lett., 2007, 33, 1007 CrossRef CAS .
Sh. Tuichiev, S. Kh. Tabarov, Dzh. Rashidov, U. Shoimov and B. M. Ginzburg, Tech. Phys. Lett., 2008, 34, 56 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Ginzburg, L. A. Shibaev, O. F. Kireenko, A. A. Shepelevskii, E. Yu. Melenevskaya and V. L. Ugolkov, Polym. Sci., Ser. A, 2005, 47, 160 Search PubMed .
B. M. Ginzburg, L. A. Shibaev, O. F. Kireenko, A. A. Shepelevskii, M. V. Baidakova and A. A. Sitnikova, Russ. J. Appl. Chem., 2002, 75, 1330 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Ginzburg, D. G. Tochil'nikov, V. E. Bakhareva, A. V. Anisimov and O. F. Kireenko, Russ. J. Appl. Chem., 2006, 79, 695 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Shibaev, T. A. Antonova, L. V. Vinogradova, B. M. Ginzburg, V. N. Zgonnik and E. Yu. Melenevskaya, Tech. Phys. Lett., 1997, 23, 704 CrossRef .
B. B. Troitskii, L. S. Troitskaya, A. S. Yakhnov, A. A. Dmitriev, V. N. Denisova, M. A. Novikova, L. I. Anikina and G. A. Domrachev, Dokl. Chem. Phys., 1998, 363, 372 Search PubMed .
B. B. Troitskii, G. A. Domrachev, L. V. Khokhlova and L. I. Anikina, Polym. Sci., Ser. A, 2001, 43, 964 Search PubMed .
L. A. Shibaev, B. M. Ginzburg, T. A. Antonova, V. L. Ugolkov, E. Yu. Melenevskaya, L. V. Vinogradova, A. V. Novoselova and V. N. Zgonnik, Polym. Sci., Ser. A, 2002, 44, 502 Search PubMed .
B. B. Troitskii, L. V. Khokhlova, A. N. Konev, V. N. Denisova, M. A. Novikova and M. A. Lopatin, Polym. Sci., Ser. A, 2004, 46, 951 Search PubMed .
B. B. Troitskii, L. V. Khokhlova, A. N. Konev, V. N. Denisova and M. A. Novikova, Polym. Sci. Technol., 2006, 33, 55 Search PubMed .
B. M. Ginzburg, L. A. Shibaev and V. L. Ugolkov, Russ. J. Appl. Chem., 2001, 74, 1329 CrossRef CAS .
B. B. Troitskii, G. A. Domrachev, I. A. Davydov, K. B. Zhogova, Yu. A. Khokhlov, D. N. Shadrin, I. P. Borin, L. V. Khokhlova, V. N. Denisov and M. A. Novikova, Dokl. Phys. Chem., 2002, 387, 307 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Zhogova, I. A. Davydov, V. T. Punin, B. B. Troitskii and G. A. Domrachiev, Eur. Polym. J., 2005, 41, 1260 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Shibaev, V. M. Egorov, V. N. Zgonnik, T. A. Antonova, L. V. Vinogradova, E. Yu. Melenevskaya and V. A. Bershtein, Polym. Sci., Ser. A, 2001, 43, 101 Search PubMed .
B. B. Troitskii, G. A. Domrachev, Yu. D. Semchikov, L. V. Khokhlova, L. I. Anikina, V. N. Denisova, M. A. Novikova, Yu. A. Marsenova and L. M. Yashchuk, Russ. J. Gen. Chem., 2002, 72, 1276 CrossRef CAS .
E. B. Zeinalov and G. Koßmehl, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2001, 71, 197 CrossRef CAS .
V. V. Zuev, F. Bertini and G. Audisio, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2005, 90, 28 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jipa, T. Zaharescu, B. Gigante, C. Santos, R. Setnescu, T. Setnescu, M. Dumitru, L. M. Gorghiu, W. Kappel and I. Mihalcea, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2003, 80, 209 CrossRef CAS .
V. V. Zuev, F. Bertini and G. Audisio, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2006, 91, 512 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bertini and V. V. Zuev, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2006, 91, 3214 CrossRef CAS .
V. V. Zuev, Polym. Sci., Ser. B, 2008, 50, 165 CrossRef .
Yu. I. Puzin, R. Kh. Yumagulova, V. P. Budtov, S. V. Kolesov and Yu. B. Monakov, Polym. Sci., Ser. B, 2005, 47, 72 Search PubMed .
B. L. Tumanski, Russ. Chem. Bull., 1996, 2280 Search PubMed .
M. V. Uspenskaya, N. V. Sirotinkin, V. A. Gorskii and Yu. G. Goloshchapov, Russ. J. Appl. Chem., 2006, 79, 695 CrossRef .
B. M. Ginzburg, D. G. Tochil'nikov, A. A. Shepelevskii, A. M. Leksovskii and Sh. Tuichiev, Russ. J. Appl. Chem., 2006, 79, 858 CrossRef .
V. V. Zuev, S. V. Kostromin and A. V. Shlykov, Polym. Sci. A, 2010, 52, 532 CrossRef .

          Yu. S. Lipatov, Polymer Reinforcement, ChemTec Publishing, Ontario, Canada,  1995 Search PubMed .
A. O. Pozdnyakov, B. L. Baskin and O. F. Pozdnyakov, Tech. Phys. Lett., 2004, 30, 839 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Barnes, J. F. Douglas, D.-W. Liu and A. Karim, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2001, 94, 83 CrossRef CAS .
A. O. Pozdnyakov, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2006, 66, 3188 CrossRef .
H. Cong, M. Radosz, B. F. Towler and Y. Shen, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2007, 55, 281 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tasaki, J. Gasa, H. Wang and R. DeSousa, Polymer, 2007, 48, 4438 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Polotskaya, D. V. Andreeva and G. K. El'yashevich, Tech. Phys. Lett., 1999, 25, 555 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Polotskaya and S. V. Gladchenko, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2002, 85, 2946 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. Gladchenko, G. A. Polotskaya, A. V. Gribanov and V. N. Zgonnik, Tech. Phys., 2002, 47, 102 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kh. Salikhov, S. Kh. Tabarov, D. Rashidov, Sh. Tuichiev and A. Hussain, Tech. Phys. Lett., 2009, 35, 1010 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ya. Vasilyev and N. V. Kamanina, Tech. Phys. Lett., 2007, 33, 8 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mizukami, T. Umeda, H. Noda, T. Shibata, A. Fujii and M. Ozaki, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2006, 39, 1521 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, J. Ouyang, W. R. Baeyens and J. R. Delanghe, Expert Rev. Proteomics, 2007, 4, 287 CrossRef CAS .
N. Marjanovič, Th. B. Singh, G. Dennler, S. Günes, H. Neugebauer, N. C. Sariciftci, R. Schwödiauer and S. Bauer, Org. Electron., 2006, 7, 188 CrossRef .
A. L. Pyajt, O. V. Andreeva and V. G. Bespalov, Opt. Commun., 2006, 259, 252 CrossRef .
M. Abbas, G. Cakmak, N. Tekin, A. Kara, H. Y. Guney, E. Arici and N. S. Sariciftci, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 497 CrossRef CAS .
A. Acharya, S. Seki, A. Saeki, Y. Koizumi and S. Tagawa, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2005, 404, 356 CrossRef CAS .
A. Acharya, S. Seki, A. Saeki and S. Tagawa, Synth. Met., 2006, 156, 293 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ltaief, A. Bouazizi, J. Davenas, R. Ben Chaâbane and H. Ben Ouada, Synth. Met., 2004, 147, 261 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jin, Y.-B. Hou, X.-G. Meng and F. Teng, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2007, 137, 5 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ltaief, A. Bouazizi, J. Davenas, P. Alcouffe and R. Ben Chaâbane, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 511–512, 498 CrossRef CAS .
W. T. Wondmagegn and S. A. Curran, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 515, 2393 CrossRef CAS .
T. L. Toivonen and T. I. Hukka, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2007, 111, 4821 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Chambers, Z. Zhang, F. Khatkhatay, S. Karanam, O. Kizilkaya, Y. B. Losovyj and S. Zivanovic Selmic, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2008, 20, 382202 CrossRef CAS .
P. Damlin, C. Kvarnström, A. Nybäck, M. Käldström and A. Ivaska, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51, 6060 CrossRef CAS .
B. Fan, P. Wang, L. Wang and G. Shi, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 3547 CrossRef CAS .
T. Vuorinen, K. Kaunisto, N. V. Tkachenko, A. Efimov and H. Lemmetyinen, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2006, 178, 185 CrossRef CAS .
T. Vuorinen, K. Kaunisto, V. Chukharev, N. V. Tkachenko, A. Efimov and H. Lemmetyinen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 1951 CrossRef .
U. Mengesha and T. Yohannes, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 3508 CrossRef CAS .
T. Erb, S. Raleva, U. Zhokhavets, G. Gobsch, B. Stühn, M. Spode and O. Ambacher, Thin Solid Films, 2004, 450, 97 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hatano, A.-H. Bae, K. Sugiyasu, N. Fujita, M. Takeuchi, A. Ikeda and S. Shinkai, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2003, 1, 2343 CAS .
O. M. Osiele, D. T. Britton, M. Härting, P. Sperr, M. Topič, S. E. Shaheen and H. M. Branz, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2004, 338–340, 612 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tada and M. Onoda, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 477, 187 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tada and M. Onoda, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2005, 5, 5 CrossRef .
S. Rait, S. Kashyap, P. K. Bhatnagar, P. C. Mathur, S. K. Sengupta and J. Kuma, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 757 CrossRef CAS .
M. Koppe, M. Scharber, C. Brabec, W. Duffy, M. Heeney and I. McCulloch, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1371 CrossRef CAS .
C. Voz, J. Puigdollers, S. Cheylan, M. Fonrodona, M. Stella, J. Andreu and R. Alcubilla, Thin Solid Films, 2007, 515, 7657 CrossRef .
P. Liu, J. L. Huang, W. Z. Pan, M. S. Huang, W. J. Deng, Y. L. Mai and A. B. Luan, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2007, 18, 437 CrossRef CAS .
T. Drori, J. Holt and Z. Vardeny, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 075207 CrossRef .
N. Kamanina, S. Putilin and D. Stasel'ko, Synth. Met., 2002, 127, 129 CrossRef CAS .
N. V. Kamanina, Synth. Met., 2002, 127, 121 CrossRef CAS .
N. V. Kamanina, Synth. Met., 2003, 139, 547 CrossRef CAS .
N. V. Kamanina, Yu. M. Voronin, A. V. Varnaev, I. V. Bagrov and A. P. Zhevlakov, Synth. Met., 2003, 138, 317 CrossRef CAS .
V. A. Shulev, A. K. Filippov and N. V. Kamanina, Tech. Phys. Lett., 2006, 32, 694 CrossRef CAS .
L. Feng and Z. Chen, Polymer, 2005, 46, 3952 CrossRef CAS .
M. Trchová, P. Matêjka, J. Brodinová, A. Kalendová, J. Prokeš and J. Stejskal, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2006, 91, 114 CrossRef .
A. M. Tan, I. S. Sidorov, S.É. Putilin, I. Yu. Sapurina and N. V. Kamanina, Tech. Phys., 2007, 52, 1515 CrossRef CAS .
N. V. Kamanina, Yu. A. Zubtsova, V. A. Shulev, M. M. Mikhailova, S. V. Murashov, A. I. Denisyuk, S. V. Butyanov and I. Yu. Sapurina, Solid State Phenom., 2005, 106, 145 CrossRef CAS .
K. Marumoto, M. Kato, H. Kondo and S. Kuroda, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 245204 CrossRef .
K. Moon, J.-W. Oh, C. Lee and N. Kim, Opt. Mater., 2010, 32, 436 CrossRef .
J. F. Lee, S. L. C. Hsu, P. I. Lee, H. Y. Chuang, M. L. Yang, J. S. Chen and W. Y. Chou, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 1166 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao, W. Cai, R. Xu, W. Yang, X. Gong, H. Wu and Y. Cao, Polymer, 2010, 51, 3196 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, H.-L. Yip, O. Acton, S. K. Hau, F. Huang and A. K.-Y. Jen, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2598 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Krinichnyi, E. I. Yudanova and N. N. Denisov, Polym. Sci., 2010, 52, 715 CrossRef .
V. I. Krinichnyi, P. A. Troshin and N. N. Denisov, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 128, 164715 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Krinichnyi, P. A. Troshin and N. N. Denisov, Acta Mater., 2008, 56, 3982 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Krinichnyi, Acta Mater., 2008, 56, 1427 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Krinichnyi, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 942 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Krinichnyi, E. I. Yudanova and N. N. Denisov, J. Chem. Phys., 2009, 131, 044515 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Krinichnyi, High Energy Chem., 2008, 42, 572 CrossRef CAS .
M. Limpinsel, A. Wagenpfahe, M. Mingebach and C. Deibel, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 085203 CrossRef .
T. Kirchartz, B. E. Pieters, K. Taretto and U. Rau, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 035334 CrossRef .
R. Schueppel, K. Schmidt, C. Uhrich, K. Schulze, D. Wyanands, J. L. Brédas, E. Brier, E. Reinold, H.-B. Bu, P. Bacuerle, B. Maenning, M. Pfeiffer and K. Leo, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 085311 CrossRef .
H. Hoppe and N. S. Sariciftci, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 45 RSC .
H. Hoppe and N. S. Sariciftci, Adv. Polym. Sci., 2007, 12, 121 Search PubMed .
P. A. Troshin, R. N. Lyubovskaya and V. F. Razumov, Nanotechnol. Russ., 2008, 3, 242 CrossRef .
L. M. Zemtsov, G. P. Karpacheva, V. V. Kozlov, E. P. Krinichnaya, O. N. Efimov and A. P. Moravsky, Mol. Mater., 1998, 11, 107 CAS .
G. Mountrichas, S. Pispas, E. Xenogiannopoulou, P. Aloukos and S. Couris, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 4315 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jin, Y.-B. Hou, X.-G. Meng and F. Teng, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2007, 137, 5 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ltaief, J. Davenas, A. Bouazizi, R. B. Chaâbane, P. Alcouffe and H. B. Ouada, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2005, 25, 67 CrossRef .
H. Hoppe, M. Dress, W. Schwinger, F. Schaffler and N. S. Sariciftci, Synth. Met., 2005, 152, 117 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hoppe, T. Glatzel, M. Niggemann, W. Schwinger, F. Schaffler, A. Hinsch, M. Ch. Lux-Steiner and N. S. Sariciftci, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 511–512, 587 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jin, Y.-B. Hou, Q. Shi, X.-G. Meng and F. Teng, Solid State Commun., 2006, 140, 555 CrossRef CAS .
J. Puigdollers, C. Voz, S. Cheylan, A. Orpella, M. Vetter and R. Alcubella, Thin Solid Films, 2007, 515, 7667 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Hu, D. Tenery, M. S. Bonner and A. J. Gesquiere, J. Lumin., 2010, 130, 771 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Taurozzi, C. A. Crock and V. V. Tarabara, Desalination, 2011, 269, 111 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tada and M. Onoda, Mater. Lett., 2011, 65, 1367 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:
Elmira Badamshina	Elmira Badamshina studied chemistry at the Mendeleev University of Chemical Technology of Russia (Moscow) and received her PhD at the same University in 1980. She is a Head of the Department of Polymers and Composite Materials in the Institute of Problems of Chemical Physics of Russian Academy of Science. Her current research field is polymer chemistry, covering aspects of reaction mechanisms, synthesis and characterization of polymer composite materials, including nanocomposites.
Margarita Gafurova	Margarita Gafurova studied chemistry at the St Petersburg State Institute of Technology. She received her PhD at the Institute of Problems of Chemical Physics of Russian Academy of Science in 1988. At present, she works as a senior researcher at the same institute. Her research interests are focused on the synthesis and characterization of polymer composite materials, including nanocomposites.

Fullerene in the polymer backbone	

	Polyurethane (PU)9
Fullerene is the crosslink of crosslinked polymers	

	PU9
Fullerene in polymer side chains	

	Copolymers of styrene and allyl or vinyl monomers10,11
Fullerene is the core of star-shaped polymers	

	Star-shaped polymers with branches of polyethylene oxide (PEO),12 polystyrene (PS),13,14 polyvinyl pyridine15 and also heterobranched polymers16–20
Fullerene at polymer chain ends	

	Thiophene-thienopyrazine oligomers21
Fullerene incorporated in branched polymers and dendrimers	

	Branched poly(methylmethacrylate) PMMA22 and different dendrimers23

 	Fig. 1  PVP chain fragment.	 


Compressive strengtha/MPa	80–90	100–110
Brinell hardnessa/MPa	130	125–150
Coefficient of sliding frictiona/relative unit	0.2–0.3	<0.1
Abrasive resistancea/mm3	35	<20
Charpy impact strengtha/kJ mol−1	40	60–70
Softening temperature at bending/°C	80–100	>100
Coefficient of thermal conductivity at 25 °C W m−1 K−1	0.29	<0.25

0.0	26.6	32.8	480
1.18	32.4	46.5	580
1.95	35.1	57.5	590
2.98	32.9	55.5	340
4.81	30.1	43.4	320

 	Fig. 2  The curves of uniaxial deformation of the PMMA films with different content of fullerene: 0 (1), 1 (2), 3 (3), 5 (4) and 10 wt% (5).	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic representation of the consequent retraction of the C60 molecules into the microcracks: a – microcrack formation; b – retraction of the C60 molecules into the microcrack; c – microcracks healing.	 

 	Fig. 4  The curves of uniaxial deformation of the LDPE films with different fullerene content: 0 (1), 1 (2), 3 (3), 5 (4) and 10 wt% (5).	 

 	Fig. 5  Some reactions of PMMA thermal degradation.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
