Optical neuromodulation at all scales: from nanomaterials to wireless optoelectronics and integrated systems  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2CS01020H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2CS01020H
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2023, 52, 3326-3352Optical neuromodulation at all scales: from nanomaterials to wireless optoelectronics and integrated systems

        
          
            Onuralp 
            Karatum†
a, 
      
        
          
            Min-Jun 
            Gwak†
b, 
      
        
          
            Junghun 
            Hyun
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Asim 
            Onal
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Gyan Raj 
            Koirala
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Tae-il 
            Kim
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Sedat 
            Nizamoglu
          
          
        
      *ac
aDepartment of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Koc University, Istanbul 34450, Turkey. E-mail: snizamoglu@ku.edu.tr
bSchool of Chemical Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University (SKKU), Suwon 16419, Korea. E-mail: taeilkim@skku.edu
cDepartment of Biomedical Science and Engineering, Koc University, Istanbul 34450, Turkey
Received 
      10th January 2023
    First published on 5th April 2023AbstractLight-based neuromodulation systems offer exceptional spatiotemporal resolution combined with the elimination of physical tether to communicate with neurons. Currently, optical neuromodulation systems ranging from the nano to the centimeter scale enable neural activity control from the single cell to the organ level in retina, heart, spinal cord, and brain, facilitating a wide range of experiments in intact and freely moving animals in different contexts, such as during social interactions and behavioral tasks. Nanotransducers (e.g., metallic nanoparticles, silicon nanowires, and polymeric nanoparticles) and microfabricated photodiodes convert light to electrical, thermal, and mechanical stimuli that can allow remote and non-contact stimulation of neurons. Moreover, integrated devices composed of nano and microscale optoelectronic components comprise fully implantable and wirelessly powered smart optoelectronic systems that exhibit multimodal and closed-loop operation. In this review, we first discuss the material platforms, stimulation mechanisms, and applications of passive systems, i.e., nanotransducers and microphotodiodes. Then, we review the use of organic and inorganic light-emitting diodes for optogenetics and implantable wireless optoelectronic systems that enable closed-loop optogenetic neuromodulation through the use of light-emitting diodes, wireless power transfer circuits, and feedback loops. Exploration of materials and mechanisms together with the presented applications from both research and clinical perspectives in this review provides a comprehensive understanding of the optical neuromodulation field with its advantages and challenges to build superior systems in the future.
Onuralp Karatum
Onuralp Karatum is a PhD candidate in Electrical and Electronics Engineering at Koc University, Istanbul, Turkey. He received his BS and MS degrees in Electrical and Electronics Engineering from Bilkent University and Koc University, respectively. His research interests include design and development of flexible and wireless bioelectronic devices for applications in electrical stimulation and optoelectronic neural interfaces.
Min-Jun Gwak
Min Jun Gwak is currently a MS candidate under the supervision of Associate Professor Tae-il Kim at SKKU. He received a BS degree in Chemical Engineering (2022) from Sungkyunkwan University (SKKU), Korea. His research interests lie in controlling the drug release of injectable devices by utilizing photolithographic methods for biomedical applications, including microscale implantable devices and photothermal therapies.
Junghun Hyun
Jeong Hun Hyun is currently working as a memory yield enhancement engineer at Samsung Electronics, Korea. He received a BS in Chemical Engineering from Sungkyunkwan University (SKKU) (2021). Jeong-Hun's research interest is flexible electronics fabricated by unconventional fabrication techniques.
Asim Onal
Asim Onal received his BS in Metallurgy and Materials Engineering from Yildiz Technical University, Istanbul, Turkey, in 2019. Currently, he is pursuing his PhD in Biomedical Sciences and Engineering Department of Koç University, Istanbul, Turkey. His research interests include synthesis of colloidal quantum dots, optical and structural characterization techniques, and light emitting diodes.
Gyan Raj Koirala
Gyan Raj Koirala is currently a research professor at Biomedical Institute for Convergence at Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, Korea. He received a BE in electronics and communication engineering (2010) from the Western Region Campus, Institute of Engineering, Tribhuvan University, Nepal, and a PhD in electronic engineering (2018) from Kwangwoon University in Seoul, Republic of Korea. His research focuses on the development of flexible, soft, and printed circuits and devices for wireless bioelectronic applications, RF/microwave sensors and devices, and other related topics.
Tae-il Kim
Tae-il Kim is currently working as a professor in the School of Chemical Engineering at Sungkyunkwan University (SKKU), Korea. He received a BS in Chemical Engineering from SKKU (2003) and a PhD in Chemical Engineering from Seoul National University (2009) under the guidance of Professor Hong H. Lee. From 2009 to 2012, he was a post-doctoral fellow in the lab of Professor John A. Rogers at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Tae-il's research interests are bio-inspired and biomedical electronics, and flexible electronics fabricated by unconventional fabrication techniques.
Sedat Nizamoglu
After receiving his PhD degree from Bilkent University in Turkey, Sedat Nizamoglu continued his work as a Bullock-Wellman Fellow, with a joint affiliation with Harvard Medical School and the Wellman Center for Photomedicine at Massachusetts General Hospital in the USA. He is currently an associate professor in the Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering at Koç University in Istanbul. His research interests are bioelectronics, nanotechnology and optoelectronics. He has received both ERC (European Research Council) Starting and Consolidator Grants, the first Science Diplomacy Award by YÖK (Council of Higher Education Council, Turkey), and most recently, the Aziz Sancar Incentive Award.
1. Introduction
The human brain consists of nearly 100 billion neurons, and the local and long-range communications of electrical and chemical signals give rise to numerous mental and physical processes that we continuously perform. Manipulating the neural activity via neuromodulation techniques is instrumental for the fundamental understanding of the relationship between neural mechanisms and their behavioral outcomes, and in enabling the regaining of impaired neurological functions.1–3 Today, neuromodulation helps a wide variety of patients, such as deep brain stimulation (DBS) for Parkinson's disease, cochlear implants for hearing loss, retinal prostheses for vision restoration, vagus nerve stimulators for epilepsy and depression, and spinal cord stimulators for chronic pain.4–10 Considering that neurological disorders are the leading cause of disabilities and the second leading cause of death worldwide, interest in the neuromodulation field is rapidly growing in research laboratories and industry.11–13
Optical neuromodulation is a booming field that accomplishes neural activity control with high spatiotemporal resolution and minimally invasive operation by allowing wireless communication with tissues.14–17 Recently its rapid progress has led to the emergence of a wide range of tools from nanoscopic injectable materials to microscopic and macroscopic implantable devices and systems.18–25 These novel materials, devices and systems at different size scales started to have successful impacts in medical research and clinical settings as a result of dynamic interplay among different disciplines such as optoelectronics, semiconductor physics, materials chemistry, genetic engineering, and neuroscience. For instance, the revolutionizing discovery of optogenetics triggered the development of new optoelectronic light-delivery tools,26–30 and in return, such advancements in optoelectronics have enabled optogenetic neuromodulation in more complex and socially interactive experimental conditions.31–35 Moreover, optical neuromodulation also exploits conversion of light to extracellular/intracellular stimuli in the form of heat, voltage, and mechanical force for nongenetic interaction with neurons.36–40 Altogether, numerous platforms at different size scales have emerged in the last few decades to perform optical neuromodulation from cellular scale to organ scale.41 Nanoscale interfaces can modulate the neural activity at the cellular level, and microscale devices can stimulate the sub-domains of neural networks at the tissue level.42,43 Integrated systems can overcome the light penetration depth problem and optogenetically modulate a wide variety of tissues with high cell and gene specificity.23,44–47 Hence, light-based systems offer a powerful approach for next-generation neuromodulation tools at all scales.
In this review, we summarize optical neuromodulation at different size scales (Fig. 1). Nanomaterials, such as one-dimensional nanowires and zero-dimensional nanoparticles, serve as nanoscale interfaces that convert optical energy into different types of stimulus (e.g., thermal, acoustic, electrochemical) at single cell level. Microscale light emitting diodes (μLEDs) are effective for cell-specific optogenetics, and microfabricated photovoltaics convert light into safe electrical currents for high-resolution and patterned photostimulation of neural tissue. For organ-level stimulation, we review integrated optical systems up to closed-loop operation that consist of wireless power transfer, and computational and communication modules for both stimulation and sensing. We discuss cellular-, tissue-, and organ-level applications of advanced optical neuromodulation tools at all scales for retina, heart, and nervous system stimulation, while providing perspectives on their clinical applications.
 Fig. 1  Optical neuromodulation systems at all scales. At the nanoscale, nanostructures, such as nanoparticles,18–20,48 nanowires,49–51 and nanorods,37,52,53 are used as transducers to convert light into electrical, thermal, and acoustic stimuli. At the microscale, μLEDs are used for optogenetic modulation,54–57 and photovoltaic pixels are used for photoelectrical (i.e., photocapacitive, photoelectrochemical) modulation.58–61 Wireless systems at millimeter or larger scales typically combine different-scale interfaces with additional components for specific purposes, such as light delivery, power transfer, computation, sensing, signal recording, and data transfer.23–25,31,47,62 They can be used to stimulate a variety of organs such as brain, spinal cord, sciatic nerve, heart, and retina. The figures are reprinted with permission from ref. 49 Copyright 2018 Springer Nature,49 ref. 51 Copyright 2018 Springer Nature,51 ref. 63 Copyright 2018 Science,63 ref. 40 Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society,40 ref. 64 Copyright 2011 Annual Reviews,64 ref. 54 Copyright 2015 Elsevier,54 ref. 58 Copyright 2012 Springer Nature,58 ref. 65 Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons,65 ref. 31 Copyright 2021 Springer Nature,31 and ref. 24 Copyright 2015 Springer Nature.24 
2. Nanoscale interfaces for optical neuromodulation
The emergence of non-classical phenomena at the nanoscale that are not available at the bulk scale offers novel forms of neural interfacing modalities. For example, when the size of the metals is shrunk to the nanoscale, the surface plasmons begin to be observed that can enable the induction of light to local areas of heat, and perturb the resting membrane potential of neurons.66 In addition, interfacing with excitable tissues using nanoscale materials and devices offers exceptional spatial control of cells with high temporal precision. Considering the cell bodies up to the sub-millimeter scale, the action potentials can be locally triggered and suppressed by photoactive nanomaterials. Moreover, the sizes of nanomaterials (e.g., zero-dimensional quantum dots, one-dimensional nanowires, nanorods) are compatible with the subcellular structures, such as organelles (e.g., endoplasmic reticulum), and synaptic cleft.42 Thus, besides enabling spatially specific cellular stimulation, nanomaterials can also be instrumental in manipulating subcellular activities.67,68 For example, carbon nanotubes (CNT) were contemplated to provide electrical shortcuts between distal intracellular components, improving the responsiveness of neurons by increasing the afterdepolarization occurrence.69 Finely tuned electroconductive freestanding CNT substrates can enhance the electrical activity of neurons by enhancing the signaling pathway between the axonal and synaptic neurons.70 Moreover, since the bending stiffness is directly proportional to the cube of material thickness, nanomaterials can facilitate the photostimulation of neurons with cell-matching biomechanics.71 Hence, nanoscale materials offer unique possibilities for optical neuromodulation. As a neuron stimulation mechanism, light can be converted into photogenerated charges via nanomaterials, and spatially separated electron–hole pairs can induce an ionic current in an electrochemical medium in two different ways. First, the local electric field generated by the spatial separation of charge pairs can trigger ionic displacement current.72 Second, charge transfer can take place between the nanomaterial and the electrolyte as a result of anodic and cathodic reactions, leading to photoelectrochemical current generation.73 For example, free-standing coaxial silicon nanowires (Si NWs) in p-type/intrinsic/n-type (pin) nanostructures can generate photoelectrochemical current via anodic and cathodic reactions at the p-type and n-type surfaces, respectively (Fig. 2a).49 These coaxial Si NWs can be injected into the neuron culture medium of primary neurons to form a nanowire–neuron interface (Fig. 2b). When illuminated with light, a single Si NW generates a faradaic ionic current mediated by charge injection through the surface states (Fig. 2c). Depending on the applied power, the generated photoelectrochemical current induces subthreshold depolarization or suprathreshold response that leads to action potentials, without requiring attachment or conjugation to the membrane (Fig. 2d). Quantum dots (QDs), which have unique optoelectronic properties, such as bandgap tunability and high absorption coefficient, were also explored for cellular modulation via photoelectrical conversion.74 As QDs exhibit electron–hole separation upon illumination, they generate a local electric field that can theoretically be used to modulate cellular activity. Although QDs can be coupled within a few nanometers of distance to the cell membrane, free-standing or membrane-attached QDs have not yet been able to stimulate neurons because of the insufficient magnitude of the dipole electric field and difficulty of aligning the dipoles to increase the field strength.75
 Fig. 2  Nanoscale optical neuromodulation interfaces: mechanisms. (a) Schematic showing the electron and hole migration in PIN–Si–NW and the occurrence of redox reactions leading to photoelectrochemical current generation at the PIN–Si NW–electrolyte interface. (b) Image of the DRG neurons (red) and Si–NWs (white) after NWs were drop-cast into the neuron culture medium to form the NW–neuron interface. (c) Photoelectrochemical currents generated by a single Si NW under a 10 ms light pulse with different optical powers. (d) Intracellular current-clamp recording of a DRG neuron showing light-induced subthreshold depolarization and action potential generation under a 1 ms light pulse with different optical powers. Panels a–d reprinted with permission from ref. 49 Copyright 2018 Springer Nature.49 (e) Simplified circuit model for a passive neural membrane showing the dependence of membrane current (Im(t)) on membrane potential (Vm), Thevenin conductance (gT), Thevenin potential (VT), surface charge potential (VS), and temperature-dependent membrane capacitance (Cm(T(t))). Reprinted with permission from ref. 76 Copyright 2012 Springer Nature.76 (f) SEM image of co-cultured DRG neurons and NW-templated 3D fuzzy graphene (NT-3DFG). Neuron and glia interfaces with NT-3DFG are shown with white arrows. The scale bar is 100 μm. On the right, a zoomed view of a dashed red box is shown (scale bar is 10 μm). (g) Local temperature change in the vicinity of NT-3DFG under 1 ms laser pulses with different optical powers (left) and membrane potential recording of a DRG neuron in current-clamp mode upon photoexcitation of NT-3DFG with a 1.2 ms laser pulse with different optical powers (1.45, 1.73, 2.28, and 3.02 mW) (violet, blue, green, and red, respectively) (right). 3.02 mW was able to evoke an action potential, while the other laser powers induced subthreshold responses. The purple arrow shows the start of the laser pulse. Panels f and g reprinted with permission from ref. 50 Copyright 2020 National Academy of Sciences.50 (h) Photothermal neuromodulation mechanism with macromolecular infrared nanotransducers for deep-brain stimulation (MINDS).20 (i) Temperature elevation resulting from the photoexcitation of MINDS via a 1064 nm laser pulse. (j) Variation of calcium signals in HEK293T cells under four different experimental conditions. A significant increase in the calcium signal was observed when TRPV1 is expressed and MINDS are present (red trace). Panels h–j adapted and reprinted with permission from ref. 20 Copyright 2022 Springer Nature.20 (k) Photoacoustic stimulation via nanotransducers that are excited with near-infrared light (left). A schematic of photoacoustic conversion via a nanosecond laser pulse is shown (right). Reprinted with permission from ref. 19 Copyright 2021 Elsevier.19 (l) Schematic demonstrating the use of upconversion nanoparticles (UCNPs) to convert near-infrared (NIR) light into visible light to build NIR-sensitive optogenetic systems (left). Membrane current recordings of ventral tegmental area dopamine (VTA DA) neurons interfaced with UCNPs in the voltage-clamp mode under different experimental conditions (right). NIR photoexcitation induces membrane current only in the co-presence of channelrhodopsin-2 (ChR-2) and UCNPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 63 Copyright 2018 Science.63 
Nanostructures can also induce displacement current in the cellular membrane by changing the capacitance of the membrane via rapid localized temperature variations, i.e., via the ‘optocapacitive’ effect (Fig. 2e).76,77 In this scheme, the capacitance change, thus the displacement current, is proportional to the rate of change in temperature, rather than the amplitude of change.77 To achieve high photothermal conversion efficiency, materials with large absorption coefficients and low photoluminescence quantum yield are desired since the absorbed light energy will be equal to the sum of the emitted heat and photon energy. For that gold (Au), silicon (Si), Mxene, and graphene-based photothermal interfaces can be positioned near neurons for optocapacitive modulation (Fig. 2f).48,50,78,79 Upon illumination, rapid heat generation via a millisecond time-scale laser pulse induces capacitive membrane current, which leads to action potential generation at sufficiently high laser powers of several mWs (Fig. 2g).50 On the other hand, the amplitude of change in the temperature can unlock temperature-sensitive ion channels. These ion channels are activated above or below certain threshold temperatures.80,81 The change of ion conductance upon activation of temperature-sensitive ion channels modulates the electrical activity of the cell membrane. This type of direct photothermal activation can be achieved using organic or inorganic nanoparticles that are coupled to, or positioned near, the plasma membrane (Fig. 2h), and can produce local heat upon illumination (Fig. 2i).20,40,82 The response time of the amplitude-sensitive photothermal modulation is typically on the order of a few seconds (Fig. 2j), while optocapacitive systems can provide a better temporal resolution by achieving neural activation with millisecond-scale light pulses (Fig. 2g).
Light absorption can also result in acoustic wave generation via a process called the photoacoustic effect. In the photoacoustic process, the transient temperature change upon light absorption causes thermal expansion of the molecules, which leads to the generation of acoustic waves. The use of this phenomenon for biomedical imaging, i.e., photoacoustic imaging, has attracted significant attention over the past two decades,83 but its use in neuromodulation applications has just recently started.38,84 These initial demonstrations used a fiber-based optoacoustic wave generator, which requires invasive surgical operations for in vivo applications. As a less invasive alternative, injectable nanoparticles can emit photoacoustic waves upon absorption of pulsed laser light (Fig. 2k, left), and these mechanical waves can stimulate neurons via the activation of mechanosensitive ion channels, or via the generation of capacitive membrane currents.19,85 For photoacoustic wave generation, short laser pulses (typically of the order of nanoseconds) are required to meet the stress and thermal confinement conditions (Fig. 2k, right).19 For example, carbon nanotubes and the newly synthesized bis-isoindigo-based organic semiconducting nanoparticles are efficient photoacoustic wave generators that were recently used in neural photostimulation.19,86 These photoacoustic nanoparticles can be directly delivered to stimulate tissues via stereotaxic injection,19 or they can be embedded in a biocompatible substrate material (e.g., silk) to fabricate an implantable device.86
Nanoscale interfaces led to a breakthrough in optogenetics as well, by making near-infrared (NIR)-optogenetics possible. The lack of NIR-responsive opsins has been a downside for optogenetics because the use of NIR light has important advantages, such as high tissue penetration depth and low phototoxicity, compared to visible light. The photon upconversion phenomenon, which is the conversion of two or more low energy photons into a high energy photon, has been used to build NIR-responsive optogenetic systems that convert impinging NIR light into visible light via upconversion nanoparticles that are positioned near genetically modified neurons (Fig. 2l).63 This successful approach was initially used for the activation of cultured neurons,87–89 and later for mammalian deep brain stimulation,63 paving the way for less invasive optogenetic neuromodulation that does not require the implantation of light sources.
The applications of nanoscale interfaces cover a wide range of in vitro and in vivo studies. For example, Si NWs can be co-cultured with neurons in the cell culture medium for in vitro studies. This way, an interface can be formed between a single Si NW and a neuron (Fig. 3a, left), in which the Si NW interacts with the neuron upon illumination, and generates light-induced action potentials by extracellular photoelectrochemical currents. Owing to the millisecond time-scale generation of faradaic currents, fast spiking rates of the order of 40 Hz can be achieved via photoelectrochemical stimulation (Fig. 3a, right).49 The optocapacitive system also operates at similar time scales, and thus allows the stimulation of neurons at fast spiking rates of the order of 50 Hz via photothermally induced capacitive membrane currents (Fig. 3b, top).48 Moreover, optocapacitive currents can be induced even at frequencies of the order of 200 Hz, which indicates their potential for high frequency neurostimulation above 100 Hz spiking rates (Fig. 3b, bottom).48 One major concern with Au- and Si-based optocapacitive systems has been the high laser energy densities (e.g., >30 kW mm−2) required for stimulation. Recently, the use of alternative materials that have high photothermal conversion efficiencies, such as Ti3C2Tx MXene flakes79 and fuzzy graphene,50 has allowed optocapacitive stimulation with more than one-order-of-magnitude lower energy densities, compared to the Au- and Si-based system. For example, the incubation of dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons with Ti3C2Tx flakes leads to the formation of interfaces between Ti3C2Tx flakes and DRG neurons (Fig. 3c, top). When these nanoflakes are illuminated with laser light, they generate rapid thermal fluctuations near the neural membrane which causes capacitive membrane currents and leads to the photostimulation of neurons (Fig. 3c, bottom).
 Fig. 3  Nanoscale optical neuromodulation interfaces: applications. (a) Left: SEM image of a DRG neuron with nearby single silicon nanowire with a zoomed-in image of the DRG neuron–silicon nanowire interface below. Right: Action potential firing of DRG neurons under intracellular current injection (blue) and photoexcitation (green) under 10, 20, and 40 Hz photostimulus. Reprinted with permission from ref. 49 Copyright 2018 Springer Nature.49 (b) Stimulation of DRG neurons via the optocapacitive pathway for pulse frequencies of 40 and 50 Hz (top two rows). Membrane current recordings of DRG neurons interfaced with AuNPs in the voltage-clamp mode showed similar capacitive current generation for 40 and 200 Hz pulse frequencies (bottom two rows). Reprinted with permission from ref. 48 Copyright 2015 Elsevier.48 (c) Schematic showing the use of freestanding Ti3C2Tx flakes for the optocapacitive stimulation of neurons (top). Bright field image and time series fluorescence images of a DRG neuron demonstrating Ca2+ signals in the white circled regions of interest after a 1 ms laser pulse was applied at t = 5.0 s (bottom). The red arrow shows an illuminated spot. Scale bars are 20 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 79 Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society.79 (d) Photothermal activation of the VTA that is 6 mm under the scalp by NIR-II illumination 1 m above the scalp. The VTA was targeted with TRPV1 transfection followed by MINDS injection to perform photothermal stimulation. (e) Behavioral experiment of freely moving mice, showing that the mice prefer the NIR-II illuminated region (red dashed box) because of photothermal stimulation of the VTA when MINDS and TRPV1 channels co-exist in the VTA. Panels d and e reprinted with permission from ref. 20 Copyright 2022 Springer Nature.20 (f) Attenuation of atherosclerosis by the activation of TRPV1 ion channels via the photothermal effect of copper sulfide nanoparticles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 82 Copyright 2018 Springer Nature.82 (g) Motor cortex stimulation schematic via NIR-II light and positions of recording electrodes (left). EMG recording showing forelimb response to stimulation of the motor cortex with photoacoustic nanoparticles (right). (h) Simulated temperature change at the surface of, and at 10 nm away from, the photoacoustic nanoparticles as a function of time. Panels g and h reprinted with permission from ref. 19 Copyright 2021 Elsevier.19 
The use of NIR light has high potential for in vivo studies as it enables a remote and noninvasive communication pathway with neurons inside the body. Based on this potentiality, the interest in upconversion nanoparticles has been growing in optogenetics after the successful demonstrations of remote deep brain stimulation.90 Similarly, as nongenetic approaches, NIR-responsive photothermal and photoacoustic nanotransducers are also attracting increasing attention for minimally invasive in vivo neuromodulation. For example, recently developed macromolecular infrared nanotransducers for deep-brain stimulation (MINDS) demonstrated high photothermal conversion efficiency in the second NIR window (NIR-II, 1000–1700 nm). MINDS nanostructures consist of an organic π-conjugated semiconducting core of pBBTV that absorbs NIR light and an amphiphilic polymer shell that provides water solubility to the nanotransducers.20 These nanotransducers can be activated in the brain regions as deep as 6 mm via a NIR-II light source that is placed >50 cm away from the head after the expression of TRPV1 channels and injection of MINDS in the stimulation spot (Fig. 3d). This way, the motor cortex (2 mm deep) and the ventral tegmental area (6 mm deep) of mice are activated by the opening of temperature sensitive TRPV1 ion channels in response to the photogenerated heating of nanotransducers. Successful NIR-II-mediated deep brain stimulation with MINDS was verified on freely behaving mice, where the mice show a strong place preference for NIR-II illuminated areas when MINDS and TRPV1 channels co-exist in their VTA (Fig. 3e).20 Importantly, the applied NIR-II light with relatively long wavelength (λ = 1064 nm) can penetrate through the scalp and skull more effectively, compared to NIR-I light (λ = 700–900 nm), thus removing the need for optical fibers to deliver the light. Such systems that allow effective remote and tether-free control of neural tissues in different brain regions are valuable for investigating the neural activity of freely behaving animals in a noninvasive manner. Photothermal activation of TRPV1 ion channels via nanoscale interfaces has therapeutic applications as well. NIR sensitive copper sulfide (CuS) nanoparticles were used as photothermal switches to activate TRPV1 channels in mice to induce calcium influx, which initiates autophagy and prevents atherosclerosis by inhibiting foam cell formation (Fig. 3f).82
Inhibition of neural activity also has interesting applications. For example, silencing neurons via the photothermal effect of gold nanorods was used to control the network activity of neurons in an in vitro condition.37 Inhibiting the activity of a single neuron via a photothermal mechanism in a network of neurons, while simultaneously probing the spike rate change of other neurons in the network, allows the extraction of a functional connectivity map in a neural network.37 The advantage here is the ability to silence a single neuron using a nanoscale interface, which is difficult to achieve with conventional electrical stimulation or magnetic and acoustic stimulation, which have lower spatial resolution, compared to optical methods.
More recently, photoacoustic nanotransducers have also been attracting attention. For example, Jiang et al. synthesized photoacoustic nanotransducers based on bis-isoindigo semiconducting polymers that are activated by the NIR-II light, and used them to stimulate the motor cortex in mice via mechanical neuromodulation mechanisms, potentially by activating mechanosensitive TRPV4 channels (Fig. 3g).19 As the acoustic wave generation results from the thermal expansion of molecules, the quantification of heat generation in photoacoustic systems is important to verify that the stimulation mechanism is not due to the thermal effects. The amount and time-scale of heat generation were simulated, which revealed that the temperature at the surface and 10 nm away from the nanotransducer reaches its maximum in several nanoseconds, and also decays to its initial value in several nanoseconds (Fig. 3h).19 Thus, no temperature accumulation was observed since the laser pulse repetition rate is 3.3 kHz, which confirms that the stimulation mechanism is mechanical. In addition to the light activation of neurons, nanostructures can absorb magnetic fields to modulate neural activity,91,92 and for the scope of the review, we focus on light-based nanoscale systems.
3. Micro-scale interfaces for optical neuromodulation
The developments of microfabrication technologies have enabled the miniaturization of bulky optoelectronic devices into the micrometer size scale. Shrinking the size of photovoltaic devices is advantageous for achieving high-resolution neuromodulation via photovoltaic stimulation. Moreover, the production of micrometer-scale light sources (e.g., μLEDs) has paved the way toward fully implantable and wireless optogenetic systems by eliminating the need for invasive optical fiber insertion.47 This has facilitated in vivo optogenetic neuromodulation experiments with freely moving animals. Micro-photodetector arrays and μLEDs are two main classes of micro-optoelectronic devices that have been widely adopted in the neuromodulation field, especially in the retinal prosthetics field and wireless optogenetic systems, respectively.
3.1 Microfabricated photovoltaics
Microfabricated photodetectors convert light energy into electrical current as ion flow in physiological medium for neuromodulation. These devices are biocompatible photovoltaic devices combined with electrode materials (e.g., titanium nitride (TiN), iridium(IV) oxide (IrOx)). They consist of a light-absorbing photoactive material, optionally a charge separating donor–acceptor heterojunction, charge transport/blocking layers, and a return electrode material that are fabricated in a multilayered thin-film architecture on planar substrates.59,93–96 Photogenerated charges separate due to the electronic energy alignment of the constituent layers; one type of charge carrier flows to the top layer forming the negative (or positive) electrode, while the other type migrates to the bottom layer forming the positive (or negative) electrode. This induces an ionic current flow between positive and negative electrodes, and this ionic current modulates the membrane potential of neurons that are positioned in the current flow pathway (Fig. 4a).61 Silicon has been the primary material of choice for inorganic micro-photodiode-array-based neuromodulation, due to its efficient light to electric conversion, and well-established fabrication procedures. Alternatively, with the advancements in the organic solar cell field, the use of organic photovoltaics for neuromodulation applications has been attracting attention over the last decade.
 Fig. 4  Wireless photovoltaic and photodiode array systems. (a) The mechanism of generation of ionic stimulation current at the photovoltaic device–electrolyte interface upon photoexcitation. (b) Wireless photovoltaic cuff electrode based on p-type and n-type organic pigments for the remote stimulation of the sciatic nerve via deep red light. Panels a and b reprinted with permission from ref. 61 Copyright 2021 Springer Nature.61 (c) High-density, flexible pixelated retinal prosthesis based on organic semiconductors with a pixel size of 80 μm and pixel pitch of 120 μm. (d) Flexible and conformable design of an organic retinal prosthesis allows the device to fit into the eye curvature. Panels c and d reprinted with permission from ref. 59 Copyright 2018 Springer Nature.59 (e) Silicon photodiode array-based pixelated retinal prosthesis for vision restoration with high visual acuity. An ex vivo measurement setup for the validation of RGC stimulation is shown on the right. Reprinted with permission from ref. 21 Copyright 2015 Springer Nature.21 (f) Au nanoparticle-decorated TiO2 NW arrays for the photoactivation of RGCs to restore vision in blind rats having retinal degeneration. Reprinted with permission from ref. 51 Copyright 2018 Springer Nature.51 

3.1.1 Organic photodetectors. 
One of the main advantages of organic semiconductors is that they typically have a higher absorption coefficient than silicon in the visible and NIR wavelengths, which enables the fabrication of thin and flexible prosthetic devices that are difficult to produce with silicon.65 An example of these biointerfaces was recently used as cuff electrodes for sciatic nerve stimulation.61 These electrodes comprise a p–n active electrode based on organic pigments and a gold return electrode fabricated on a parylene C substrate, where light-induced ionic current flows between these electrodes and triggers compound muscle action potentials. Moreover, operation under deep-red light enables the remote control of the biointerfaces from outside the body (Fig. 4b). For retinal application, Ghezzi and co-workers demonstrated high-density pixelated photovoltaic prostheses based on organic semiconductors.59 They fabricated a flexible, foldable epiretinal organic retinal prosthesis containing more than ten thousand pixels with a pixel size of 80 μm (Fig. 4c).97 Such pixelated device architectures offer high spatial selectivity, which is a desired feature for vision restoration with high visual acuity. Moreover, the flexibility of the prosthesis enables conformable interfacing with the eye curvature (Fig. 4d), allowing the fabrication of larger-sized devices that yield vision restoration with a larger visual angle.59
These devices were tested in Göttingen minipigs which showed that they can be used to recover vision.22 Operation of these organic prostheses in the visible spectrum is a potential drawback, since visible light may activate residual healthy photoreceptors in patients. The use of NIR-sensitive polymers in these architectures can overcome this problem, while also decreasing the risk of photodamage at the same light intensity level that may result in photothermal, photoacoustic, and photochemical effects.60,98


3.1.2 Inorganic photodetectors. 
The maturity of silicon electronics provides many advantages for Si-based photovoltaic neural interfaces such as established fabrication procedures, application of complex fabrication methods, high-resolution patterning, and high responsivity. To improve the visual acuity recovered by the retinal prostheses, researchers developed high-density pixelated array architectures using micro-fabrication techniques. Palanker and co-workers designed a high-density subretinal silicon photodiode array based retinal prosthesis that is controlled by a near-to-eye projection system.58,99 The photodiodes are activated by pulsed 880 nm NIR light emitted by the laser integrated into the projection system. NIR light is favorable because it does not interfere with natural vision and it allows higher radiant flux density according to ocular safety standards.60 Each pixel in the array consists of two to three serially connected silicon photodiodes between active and return electrodes, where active and return electrodes are coated with sputtered iridium oxide film (SIROF) electrodes to increase electrochemical charge injection density (Fig. 4e). They tested the prosthesis with 70 μm pixel size on rats and reported that the prosthesis modulates retinal responses under NIR light and elicits visually evoked potentials, while providing spatial resolution equivalent to half of the visual acuity of healthy rats.21 These devices are currently under clinical trials for subretinal implants.6
Other than silicon, alternative metallic and semiconducting materials have also been studied for building effective neuromodulation interfaces.94 One study reported Au nanoparticle-decorated TiO2 nanowire arrays fabricated on a fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) substrate that stimulate retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) in blind mice with degenerated photoreceptors under UV, blue, and green light excitation (Fig. 4f).51 Au nanoparticle decoration renders these devices sensitive to blue and green regions due to the surface plasmon absorbance of Au nanoparticles. Subretinal implantation of these Au–TiO2 nanowire arrays elicits visually evoked potentials (VEPs) in the visual cortex by the activation of RGCs, indicating the restoration of vision. As efficient light absorbers, semiconductor nanocrystals exhibit appealing structural and optoelectronic properties that render them suitable for neuromodulation.100–102 The ability to manipulate the nanostructure geometry can enhance the light absorption, while their tunable bandgap enables control of the operation spectrum from visible up to infrared wavelengths.36,52 However, despite delivering a localized stimulation current under focused light spot,51 such non-silicon technologies have not progressed yet to fabricating high-density pixelated devices that are required for high-resolution stimulation.

3.2 Micro-scale light-emitting diodes (μLEDs) as optical interfaces
Delivering light to the genetically modified light-sensitive cells or optically activated stimulation electrodes in the body is one of the critical aspects of optical neuromodulation. Although NIR light can penetrate the skin and tissues and facilitate remote neuromodulation from outside the body, many photostimulation electrodes as well as most of the light-controlled proteins (opsins) in optogenetics are sensitive to visible light, which has poor tissue penetration ability. Thus, developing minimally invasive tools that enable the delivery of light into the body is critical.24,26,103 Over the past decade, μLEDs have emerged as a promising optoelectronic device for neural interface technologies offering electrically controllable arrays with excellent spatio-temporal resolution (<0.01 mm3) and optical power densities of the order of tens of mW mm−2.57,104,105 Moreover, the low power consumption of these devices in conjunction with superior optical/electrical properties, long-term stability, and structural versatility enables wireless operation and control over a predefined time required to examine the efficacy of the optogenetic intervention. In this regard, two types of μLEDs, namely organic LEDs (OLEDs) and inorganic LEDs (ILEDs), have been explored for neuromodulation applications.

3.2.1 Organic light-emitting diode (OLED). 
The utility of μ-OLEDs in the field of bioengineering has been recognized following the pioneering studies by Gather and co-workers, wherein they have demonstrated a way of interfacing these devices in close proximity with neurons (<2 μm) to control the behavior of live cells with high spatio-temporal resolution.106–108 Their solution-processable device fabrication enables the production of a wide variety of device structures. In addition, the intriguing features of μ-OLEDs enable the fabrication of lightweight devices and offer mechanical flexibility, stretchability, and conformability, which are desirable for in vivo neuromodulation applications.109–112 Moreover, the progress in μ-OLED display technology has heralded the ability to fabricate densely packed arrays of delicate microscale OLEDs, which can be applied for multisite photostimulation experiments to control the neural activity from the network level down to single cell resolution. The study by Murawski et al. showed the fabrication of a linearly micropatterned OLED array (Fig. 5a) and its use in identifying the sensory neurons that induce locomotion behavior in Drosophila melanogaster larvae by locally controlling the electrical activity of the associated neurons in a specific peripheral sensory region via optogenetic neuromodulation (Fig. 5b).56 Each pixel in the micropatterned OLED array can locally illuminate desired sensory regions with an estimated 160 μm spatial resolution while providing a power density up to 30 μW mm−2, which is sufficient to activate the light-controlled proteins CsChrimson and GtACR2, and induce forward or backward crawling behavior, depending on the stimulation region. The flexible and highly conformable μ-OLED array fabricated by Kim et al. (Fig. 5c) was used for optogenetic stimulation of the sciatic nerve in rats (Fig. 5d, top).55 The larger dimensions of the light emission area (2 mm × 2 mm) from each pixel in this array provide the advantage of uniformly illuminating and activating a large area of neural populations with lower power, compared to the light coupled with an optical fiber behaving as a single point source.
 Fig. 5  OLEDs/μOLEDs and their applications in optical neuromodulation. (a) A schematic of the linearly stacked μ-OLED array showing the device architecture on the right. Photograph of the μ-OLED array with one pixel emitting shown below. (b) Experimental setup for optogenetically stimulating/inhibiting the neural activity of Drosophila larvae with the μ-OLED array. A photograph of the setup is shown at the top right. Images showing the procedure of estimating the spatial resolution of photostimulation are shown at the bottom right. The lateral spread of light emitted from a μ-OLED pixel was quantified. Panels a and b reprinted with permission from ref. 56 Copyright 2020 Springer Nature.56 (c) The device structure and photograph of the ultraflexible μ-OLED array used for peripheral and brain stimulation of rats. (d) Experimental setup for optogenetically stimulating sensory neurons using μ-OLEDs (top). Schematic showing the comparison between the light delivered with an optical fiber and μ-OLED (bottom). Panels c and d reprinted with permission from ref. 55 Copyright 2018 National Academy of Sciences.55 
Although these studies demonstrate the potential of μ-OLEDs for in vitro and in vivo optical neuromodulation applications, their stability under physiological conditions, i.e., in air and moist environments, is insufficient for long-term operation. Several studies addressed this problem, and offered alternative encapsulation methods to fabricate air- and moisture-resistant μ-OLEDs that could be implemented when designing μ-OLEDs for neuromodulation applications.113–115 While most optogenetic systems either stimulate or inhibit the genetically engineered cells with light, recently designed light-sensitive proteins that are sensitive to two different colors can stimulate and inhibit neural activity, depending on the wavelength of illumination.116 The μ-OLEDs that have switchable color emission can be used to control such versatile optogenetic systems that might be more ubiquitous in the future.117


3.2.2 Inorganic light-emitting diode (ILED). 
Different from μ-OLEDs, μ-ILEDs require the atomic growth of III–V materials to form an active crystalline layer by the chemical vapor deposition (CVD) process in an intrinsic wafer substrate.118 While these substrates are mechanically rigid, the additional fabrication strategies, such as etching (laser lift-off or epitaxial lift-off) and transfer printing, allow the realization of μ-ILEDs on flexible and/or stretchable polymeric substrates, which makes them suitable to interface with biological environments.119,120 In addition, μ-ILEDs typically possess superior brightness, lifetime, and light emission efficiency in comparison with μ-OLEDs.121–125 These compelling mechanical and optical features of μ-ILEDs render them promising optoelectronic tools for optical neuromodulation.
Because μ-ILEDs are limited to large area assembly and low resolution due to manufacturing and assembly constraints, various strategies were adopted to address these limitations. The main strategies include epitaxial growth of GaAs semiconductor layers, printing techniques, and planar processing.126 For lateral geometries, the epitaxial semiconductor layer with AlInGaP quantum well structure is used to yield isolated arrays of μ-ILEDs. In the printing process, a target substrate is printed using a soft elastomeric stamp via van der Waals attractions, followed by planar processing to interconnect between the μ-ILEDs (Fig. 6a). This way, thinner and smaller μ-ILED pixels can be fabricated and used for high-resolution neuronal photostimulation.
 Fig. 6  Micro-scale ILEDs and flexible vertical LEDs (f-VLEDs), and their applications in optical neuromodulation. (a) Optical micrographs of display and lighting systems including a 16 × 16 square array of stretchable μ-ILEDs on a PDMS substrate (left). Between devices, there are interconnecting lines with electrodes supported by arc-shaped bridge structures. The inset shows an array of μ-ILEDs in a passive matrix layout. Reprinted with permission from ref. 126 Copyright 2009 Science.126 (b) Photographs of blue μ-ILED arrays for photostimulation of the spinal cord. The silicon–phosphor coating enables photostimulation within a wide range of the spectrum. Reprinted with permission from ref. 25 Copyright 2022 Springer Nature.25 (c) The schematic illustrates microscale AlGaInP f-VLEDs on the motor cortex for optogenetic control and is representative of the optical interface using red light. The overall structure in particular contains an anisotropic conductive film (ACF) and a passivation layer. (d) Cross-sectional view of f-VLEDs at the microscale. LED chips are interconnected to the bottom metal line and covered with the SU8 passivation layer (bottom). Through the ACF, the optical power is improved. Panels c and d adapted and reprinted with permission from ref. 57 Copyright 2018 Elsevier.57 (e) Schematic of microscale GaN f-VLEDs for a wireless brain optical stimulator. (f) Flexible, blue GaN μ-ILED array film on the brain surface and monolithic process for producing transparent microscale f-VLEDs. The optical power ranged from 0.1 to 1 mW mm−2. Panels e and f reprinted with permission from ref. 105 Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons.105 

Fig. 6b illustrates a μ-ILED array-integrated soft optoelectronic implant that comprises silicone–phosphor coating over the μ-ILEDs for mechanical protection and customization of light emission to activate different opsins. The implant was encapsulated with a silicon membrane to provide mechanical conformability to spinal cord dura mater,25 which renders this stretchable implant adaptable to the spatial displacements of the spinal cord. Therefore, deep targeting, long-term use, and precise manipulation of the target neurons are possible using this μ-ILED array-based optoelectronic implant.
While lateral LEDs seem to be a low-cost option, the limitation imposed by lateral LEDs regarding the power efficiency and heat elevation can be addressed by an alternative class of ILEDs called flexiblevertical LEDs (f-VLEDs). f-VLEDs provide a new avenue in optogenetics owing to their enhanced lighting window and directional light emission ability to interface with deep brain stimulation. By using anisotropic conductive film (ACF) based transfer and interconnection technology (Fig. 6c), several performance metrics such as device efficiency, thermal reliability, and high resolution of the f-VLEDs can be improved, leading to optical power densities as high as 30 mW mm−2, which is sufficient to optogenetically activate motor neurons in the brain.57 The fabrication strategy comprises an AlGaInP epitaxial layer grown on an n-type GaAs substrate, which was vertically interconnected to the bottom Au/Cr electrode on a polyimide (PI) by incorporating ACF bonding via thermal compression (Fig. 6d). In addition, they are flexible but rigid enough, thereby enabling conformal contact with curved cortical surfaces, and at the same time, can be slid into the subcranial space.127
High-density microscale GaN f-VLED arrays can be constructed by combining inorganic-based laser lift-off (LLO) with a monolithic fabrication process (Fig. 6e and f). Due to their favorable characteristics of being ultrathin and highly flexible, inserting these devices into the cortex does not cause mechanical damage to the brain, whereas an optical power density of 30 mW mm−2 provided by each f-VLED in the array can activate opsins with high resolution.105 Owing to their unique capabilities of long lifetime, high durability, flexibility, and easy coupling with wireless systems, microscale f-VLEDs could therefore appeal as an outstanding optogenetic interface.

4. Integrated systems for optical neuromodulation
Recent advances in micro-electronics fabrication and neural interface fields have enriched the application and operation of implantable electronic systems. Consequently, individual devices at various scales can be realized and integrated into a system that enables target-specific modulation. In particular, when compared to the conventional optoelectronic systems, the optical efficiency of the devices has improved, along with their miniaturized size, and the exploration of highly flexible and soft substrate materials enables conformal contact with the tissue or organ. A primary challenge in operating these implants is power delivery for their operation. In the past, the power supply parts consisted of a long rigid lead connecting an energy transfer device, such as a battery, undesirably increasing the device size and the surgical complexity. Moreover, for implanted bioelectronic systems, the battery lifetime, which is also dependent upon its volume, significantly limits its application. Tethered devices with lead wires can interrupt natural movement, cause psychological stress, and have difficulty in targeting stimulation to a particular site. As an alternative, wireless integrated systems can reduce these constraints, and thus broaden the application of optoelectronic systems in bioengineering. While wired systems can stably provide high power, the optimized wireless power transfer (WPT) systems have been shown to harvest sufficient power for optical neuromodulation, which is generally 2–10 mW.34 By simplifying WPT components and miniaturizing to the microscale, the volume and rigidity of the overall system can be significantly reduced. In addition, wireless systems integrated with multimodal electronics provide continuous stimulation without movement restriction, and the sensing of neural responses from the brain, spinal cord, and peripheral nerve regions.128
Unlike battery-powered or wired systems, wireless power transfer systems can efficiently control the integrated optogenetic systems with advanced functionalities, such as modulation, monitoring, and recording. Indeed, the closed-loop control systems that can simultaneously power and receive sensory feedback from the implanted device will be essential to examine the efficacy of the optogenetic system, even without human intervention. While various methods of wireless power transfer for implantable devices and optogenetic applications are still being developed, the most prevalent options at present include optical and electromagnetic (reactive and radiative) waves. Among them, this review focuses on the three main WPT methods of optical communication, near field communication (NFC), and radio frequency (RF) communication (Fig. 7a) because of their high-power transfer capabilities and design flexibility. Furthermore, the following sub-sections discuss various WPT techniques used in optogenetics, as well as the adopted closed-loop control systems.
 Fig. 7  Wireless power transfer methods for integrated optical neuromodulation systems: light, near field communication (NFC), and radio frequency (RF) (a) schematic illustrating each component and power transfer occurring via a light source, between coils through magnetic fields (NFC), and between transmitting antenna and receiving antenna (RF). (b) Diagram demonstrating the implantable μ-ILED based optogenetic stimulator powered by micro photovoltaics. Reprinted with permission from ref. 137 Copyright 2021 Elsevier.137 (c) Representative images of a wireless optogenetic system including injectable μ-ILEDs for optical stimulation (upper) and an ultraminiaturized photovoltaic device for energy harvesting (bottom). Adapted from Park et al. (2015).32 (d and e) Spinal cord (d) and gastric (e) stimulations by μ-ILEDs and metal coils for near-field powering. Panel d reprinted with permission from ref. 140 Copyright 2018 Lippincott Williams & Wilkins,140 and panel e reprinted with permission from ref. 62 Copyright 2021 Springer Nature.62 (f) A far-field powered wireless optogenetic system with an injectable μ-ILED system. It contains micro photodetectors (μPD) and electrophysiological sensors. Reprinted with permission from ref. 47 Copyright 2013 Science.47 (g and h) RF-based wireless optofluidic system using the μLED for controlled drug release. Soft and injectable optoelectronics enable the photostimulation of tissues in the brain. Panel g reprinted with permission from ref. 141 Copyright 2015 Elsevier141 and panel h reprinted with permission from ref. 142 Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons.142 (i) Using wireless optogenetics, soft and stretchable optoelectronics integrated with a RF harvester and μ-ILEDs can stimulate peripheral nerves. Reprinted with permission from ref. 24 Copyright 2015 Springer Nature.24 
4.1 Light-powered integrated systems for optical neuromodulation
Optical power transfer has recently been in the spotlight for wireless bioelectronics due to deep tissue penetration and miniaturization of the system.129–131 The tissue transmission window at the NIR window of 650–1350 nm offers enhanced tissue penetration, compared to the visible light spectrum.132,133 One approach for light-powered systems is the use of upconversion nano particles (UCNPs) with LEDs. Light from the μ-ILED directly brings the light power to the UCNP, and the UCNPs shift light wavelength from NIR to the shorter wavelength for neural stimulation. The integrated optogenetic system comprising the μ-ILED and UCNPs can activate the photoreceptors like ChR2 and Rh to enable remote and spatiotemporally precise neuromodulation in vivo.134 Alternatively, silicon PV, which has the advantage of miniaturizing to a sub-mm size, is utilized as an optical power receiver at NIR in conjunction with a μ-ILED.135,136 The NIR-induced wireless optogenetic system can stimulate the central nervous system (Fig. 7b). In the system, the silicon PV cells on a flexible substrate harvest the light power from programmed NIR signals to generate electricity, and power the μ-ILED interfaced with the target tissue. After implantation, the maximum electrical power generated by PVs was maintained, which produces an optical power density of 30 mW mm−2, which is sufficient for phenotyping neural pathways.137 By altering a duty ratio as high as 75% at 50 Hz signal frequency, the temperature elevation in the surrounding tissues was maintained within the safety standard of 1 °C. Another study utilized a hybrid electricity-generation system wherein an electrical power of 10 mW was yielded through a RF far-field antenna and an optical power density of 2.25 mW mm−2 was achieved from silicon PV for optical neuromodulation through a μ-ILED (Fig. 7c).32 Since the optoelectronic system uses both solar cells and RF energy, the operating range of the wireless system is expanded, and the required power of solar cells decreases. However, the power transfer efficiency (PTE) of optical communication is relatively poor, compared to other methods (less than 20%).137,138 Therefore, the GaAs-based PV, which has high power conversion efficiency, is integrable for optoelectronic intracortical stimulator devices, instead of silicon. Also, II–V and III–V triple-junction solar cell modules can be used to increase the optical power transfer efficiency.139
4.2 NFC-powered integrated systems for optical neuromodulation
The near-field communication (NFC) scheme based on magnetic field coupling is widely adopted in integrated wireless systems (Fig. 7a). Advantageously, NFC has the unique capability of harvesting high power up to Watt levels in the biological tissues, which is sufficient to operate most of the clinically practiced implantable medical devices, like pacemakers and cochlear implants. The practical frequency for this short-range communication is 13.56 MHz, which is specifically standardized for NFC, and has an acceptable specific absorption rate (SAR) for biological use.34 In principle, only magnetic field-triggered nanoparticles that generate electrical, thermal, and mechanical energy can be utilized in neural stimulation. The energy thus generated affects ion channels, such as TRPV1 and TRPV4, in the brain region, and can stimulate the target cell.143 But for the optogenetic control of cells, integrated systems were explored that can interface with different organs. An NFC-powered optogenetic system, in which a magnetically coupled low-frequency signal induces optical emission up to 50 mW mm−2 by μ-ILEDs, was used to stimulate the spinal cord (Fig. 7d). Another multifunctional optogenetic system featuring soft, thin, and fully implantable devices including μ-ILEDs has been demonstrated to stimulate the peripheral nervous system (Fig. 7e). To enable gastric optogenetic neuromodulation, the μ-ILEDs were mounted on the corpus region of the stomach. In spite of significant advances of the wireless systems, a major challenge with this approach is the energy transfer range, which is generally less than a few centimeters.144,145 Hence, there are ongoing efforts to increase the transmission distance, in addition to maximizing the magnetic coupling effect through the adjustment of the quality factor of the resonator.146,147
4.3 Radio frequency (RF) powered integrated systems for optical neuromodulation
The limitation of the NFC systems regarding the transmission distance can be overcome by harvesting both the reactive and radiative waves at a few- to sub-GHz frequency range, called mid-field. Harvesting such waves requires relatively small antenna geometry, thus allowing several orders of device miniaturization. In addition, specifically designed transmitters can boost the receiver power under SAR levels defined by safety limits.148Fig. 7f shows a structure of injectable and miniaturized optoelectronics for RF-powered wireless optogenetics.47 The wireless system was composed of a RF transmitter, a signal generator and a power amplifier, and wireless power transfer can occur between 0.15 and 0.77 mW cm−2 at a distance of 1 m.47 The targeted dopamine and dopaminergic VTA-DA neurons were stimulated with 50 × 50 GaN μ-ILEDs. The RF powered optogenetic system enabled minimally invasive operation in the soft tissues for cellular-scale optogenetics. Also, a wireless optofluidic system can be integrated on the brain surface for programmable optogenetics with precise spatiotemporal control (Fig. 7g). Likewise, by inserting the wireless system into the brain with a stretchable RF harvester, seamless optogenetic control can be achieved (Fig. 7h).142 In this case, the transmitted RF power of 0.2 W can lead to an optical power density of 30 mW mm−2, and is sufficient for the activation of ChR2.149 Furthermore, an effective RF wireless system capable of performing optical stimulation of both central and peripheral nervous systems has been demonstrated.24 The optoelectronic devices are considerably thinner (size: 0.7 mm × 3.8 mm × 6 mm), lightweight (16 mg), and flexible (Fig. 7i). Long-term durability of the optical power density at the 10 mW mm−2 level was achieved, which is important for its clinical use. In addition, since the stretchable RF antenna displays a wide bandwidth of about 200 MHz, the wireless system allows the harvesting of a wide range of RF frequencies.24 Optical stimulation of the sciatic nerve and spinal cord with these epidural devices were succesfully demonstrated (Fig. 7i).
In the RF-powered integrated systems, several components can be selectively controlled and manipulated over long distances. However, because of the trade-off between antenna gain and angular acceptance, strong dependence on the angle between the transmitter and the receiver needs to be considered for effective power transfer in the far-field.32 Furthermore, the far field using a Bluetooth frequency, for example 2.4 GHz, is very susceptible to the surrounding biological environment. During powering operation, the interference between original RF waves and waves affected by reflection or scattering can lead to spatiotemporal variation in power transfer density.150 This can still induce high SARs, which can lower the power transfer efficiency (PTE) with reduced skin depth. Hence, suitable design and safety guidance instructions are needed for biological use.
4.4 Closed-loop for optical neuromodulators using WPT
The combination of sensing and feedback in a single wireless system can effectively maintain the desired operations. For example, a power-efficient wireless optoelectronic implant controlling μ-ILEDs via closed-loop feedback was introduced for photostimulation (Fig. 8a).46 The feedback is connected to the μ-ILEDs, and the corresponding light emission was about 10 mW mm−2. Therefore, the programmable closed-loop power control and multimodal optogenetics are possible. Also, there is research into utilizing far-field RF radiation to wirelessly recharge optoelectronics to operate a closed-loop optogenetic system that consists of neural probes (Fig. 8b). Here, the feedback system is composed of μ-ILEDs, coil antennae, and a Bluetooth Low Energy System-on-Chip (BLE SoC). If the battery of an optical device is less than 15%, the closed-loop system affects the power transfer system, and the device can then be repeatably fully charged.23 Therefore, the system contains on-chip processing to control photostimulation carried out by neural probes and wireless recharging with a closed-loop feedback. The applications of this closed-loop system can allow DBS, pacemakers, and other chronic in vivo operations.
 Fig. 8  Wireless neuromodulation by closed-loop systems. (a) Photograph of the optogenetic system that consists of programmable μ-ILEDs incorporated with a near-field power transfer system. The feedback regarding the light intensity of μ-ILEDs occurs in a closed loop. Reprinted with permission from ref. 46 Copyright 2018 Springer Nature.46 (b) Wireless optoelectronic system for deep brain stimulation (upper), and two different operation principles of wireless optoelectronic systems (bottom): (i) a wireless battery charging cage integrated with a RF system and (ii) conventional experimental system without RF power transmitter. Optimized battery charging is performed through a closed-loop system. Reprinted with permission from ref. 23 Copyright 2021 Springer Nature.23 (c) Closed-loop system performing bladder volume sensing and neuromodulation via optoelectronic stimulation and sensing (OESS) module operated by a wireless control and power (WCP) module. Photostimulation, activity monitoring, response recording, and near-field powering are integrated into the closed-loop system. Reprinted with permission from ref. 151 Copyright 2019 Springer Nature.151 (d) Wireless optogenetic system with inserted μ-ILED arrays and an electrophysiological sensor in a closed-loop. It can measure the neural activities of the spinal cord and is stimulated by illuminating μ-ILEDs powered by RF. Reprinted with permission from ref. 25 Copyright 2022 Springer Nature.25 (e) Five defined fundamental metrics for WPT methods (upper): power (P), miniaturization (M), depth (D), alignment tolerance (AT), and transmitter distance (TD). (f) The graph shows a relative comparison of the WPT methods regarding power, miniaturization, depth, and transmitter distance. 
In addition to the benefit of system optimization by the wireless power schemes, developing a closed-loop system in which NFC can be used to interrogate the implant because of its low SAR and BLE for communicating with the peripheral devices over a long distance has gained attention. Fig. 8c shows an organ-level optical stimulation system comprising a soft and wireless neuromodulation combined with a pair of μ-ILEDs and a closed-loop system. This device had emerged to solve existing cystitis or inflammation problems occasionally occurring when the bladder is stimulated. The whole system is composed of two main parts: the optoelectronic stimulation and sensing (OESS) module and the wireless control and power (WCP) module.151 The OESS module can continually measure volume expansion of the bladder by a strain gauge sensor, while also providing photostimulation to regulate bladder function by expressing archaerhodopsin-3 (Arch), an inhibitory opsin, in the sensory neurons. Moreover, the WCP module executes a recording of the responses and near-field powering for the μ-ILEDs. Thus, a thin and flexible closed-loop system inserted into the abdomen can facilitate the interactive communication and wireless control of μLEDs for the stimulation of peripheral organs.151 In the integrated systems, an array of μ-ILEDs was also controlled for stimulation of the spinal cord in freely moving mice (Fig. 8d).
4.5 Comparison of various WPTs for optical neuromodulation
For wireless integrated systems, the choice of the WPT scheme can be contemplated by these factors: power transfer efficiency (PTE), scaling (volume of the system), and signal misalignment (Fig. 8e). In addition, the depth of target organs and implantation positions with minimized scar and invasive techniques should be considered. In the case of optical communication, the PTE is much lower. For example, with 90% efficiency of optical sources and 47.1% efficiency of PV panels, the efficiency of the whole system is only about 38%.152 Since light scattering occurs through the tissue, high power is required for wireless optical communication with the implanted devices.153 On the other hand, optical power delivery capability and miniaturization are better than NFC and RF (Fig. 8f). Notably, device miniaturization is a pivotal characteristic of neural implants. For example, in the case of an ocular implant, it should be reduced to less than the mm scale.154–156 For the limit of silicon PV with low power efficiency, microscale GaAs photovoltaics which are also capable of a high transmitting distance are used for optogenetic stimulation.157 According to the wireless optical neuromodulation system including silicon PV, an efficiency of 22.1% (940 nm) was observed up to 1 km distance through the air, an efficiency of 5.5% (400 nm) was observed up to 100 m depth through water, and an efficiency of 2.2% (910 nm) was shown up to only 10 mm thickness in human skin.135 For the near field, the magnetic resonant coupling has the particular advantage of having a low SAR, which is induced by low-frequency operation from hundreds of kHz to tens of MHz.34,144 In practical terms, near-field communication with 13.56 MHz frequency enables a variety of applications, such as wearable electronics, optogenetic stimulation, and pharmacological neuromodulation for the long term, without safety issues.44,158 For example, deep brain stimulation is possible through a near-field wireless system with flexible optoelectronics with an advanced penetration depth.12 Because the power transfer is based on magnetic coupling, the field strength, rate of change of the field, and flux linkage between the coils primarily determine the efficiency, which is associated with the geometrical shape and size, resonance frequency, distance, input current, and alignment. Likewise, far-field RF waves are capable of transferring power to the implant of the body.104 Although the transmitter distance is increased compared to the near-field, it undergoes size restriction of antenna. On a millimeter-scale, the high-frequency radio wave is essential, but the size of the antenna mainly depends on the wavelength (in inverse proportion) to achieve a high PTE.159 Moreover, high-frequency RF leads to a high SAR, owing to an accelerated attenuation of the electromagnetic waves, caused by absorption or scattering can penetrate the body tissues more deeply, and could potentially generate heat, which can affect biological activity.160
Thus, Table 1 summarizes recent WPT systems and their characteristics for neuromodulation. While the NFC and RF powering are obvious choices for implants with high form factors, further optimization is necessary to realize sophisticated, small-scale devices for their widespread use in the future. Also, to address the misalignment tolerance within the limited scale, an advanced strategy must be in place for the movable implants.128 In this regard, optical communication can be a viable alternative, from the micro-scale to larger scale, which can stimulate single neurons individually with high spatial resolution. Furthermore, light having a long wavelength, such as NIR, can be used to reduce interaction with tissues, and transmit power to deep regions. In addition, many studies have enhanced the power efficiency of PV cells,161,162 and their optical communications are becoming attractive for efficient wireless optical neuromodulators.139,157,163 Addressing the safety concerns associated with thermal management would allow optical communication to be highly beneficial and play a prominent role in wireless optogenetic systems, including pacemakers, cochlear implants, CNS stimulators, and PNS stimulators.
Table 1 Overview of wireless power transfer methods for implantable devices and neuromodulation systems




WPT mode
Remarks
Features
Application
Ref.




Optical communication


• Power transfer efficiency: 9%
Brain neural recording

164





• Tissue penetration depth: 6 mm




• Weight: 1 μg
Cortex stimulation

165





• Size: 3 × 10−4 mm


Pros:
• Optical output power: 10 mW mm−2


• Miniaturized implants
• Weight: 23 mg



157



• Low power consumption
• Size: 400 μm × 400 μm × 5 μm




• Available power: 150 μW (single) −2.3 mW (array)


Cons:
• Optical output power: up to 3.5 mW mm−2


• Shallow implants
• Size: 1.75 mm × 1.75 mm (PV cell)
Brain stimulation

137



• Light scattering, low power transfer efficiency
• 3.75 mm × 3.75 mm (NIR receiver)




• Available power: 10.3 mW




• Optical output power: 30 mW mm−2




• Power transfer efficiency: 9.7%




• Operational distance: 35 cm






Near field communication (NFC)
Pros:
• Weight: 30 mg
Deep brain stimulation

44



• Higher power implants
• Size: 0.5–1.3 mm (thickness), 9.8 mm (diameter)


• Easy integration
• Harvesting power: 29 mW


Cons:
• Optical output power: up to 100 mW mm−2


• Large implants
• Operational distance: <30 cm


• Poor alignment tolerance
• Weight: 15–75 mg
Central nervous system (CNS) stimulation

46





• Size: 10 mm (diameter)




• Available power: 6 mW mm−2




• Optical output power: 10 mW mm−2




• Operational distance: <30 cm




• Weight: 20 mg
Spinal cord stimulation

140





• Size: 10 mm (width) × 5 mm (length) × 0.2 mm (thickness)




• Optical output power: up to 50 mW mm−2




• Operational distance: 26 cm




• Size: 3 cm (width) × 3 cm (length) 0.3 cm (thickness)
Peripheral nervous system (PNS) stimulation, physiological recording

151





• Optical output power: 10 mW mm−2




• Tissue penetration depth: 15 mm






Far field radiofrequency (RF)
Pros:
• Weight: 70 mg
Brain stimulation

32



• Large distance between TX and RX
• Size: 3.5 mm (width) × 8.5 mm (length) × 2.4 mm (thickness)


• Easy integration
• Available power: 2 mW


Cons:
• Optical output power: 1 mW mm−2


• Shallow implants
• Weight: 16 mg
Spinal cord stimulation, PNS stimulation

24



• High SAR level
• Size: 3.8 mm (width) × 6 mm (length) × 0.7 mm (thickness)




• Available power: 1.6 mW




• Optical output power: 10 mW mm−2




• Operational distance: 20 cm




• Weight: 20–50 mg
Spinal cord stimulation, PNS stimulation

104





• Size: 10–25 mm3




• Available power: 5.6–15.7 mW




• Optical output power: up to 60 mW mm−2




• Operational distance: 3 cm




• Weight: 33 mg
Brain stimulation

45





• Size: 4.3 mm (width) × 8 mm (length) × 0.7 mm (thickness)




• Optical output power: up to 12 mW mm−2




5. Human trials and potential clinical translation
Optoelectronic materials, devices, and systems are already used in the clinics for neurotechnologies. Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) and retinitis pigmentosa (RP) are the two leading retinal degeneration disorders causing loss of photoreceptors and vision loss that currently affect over 100 M patients.166 Fortunately, the inner retinal neurons are generally not affected by these disorders, and the developed retinal prosthetic devices restore vision by stimulating the inner retinal neurons. So far, Argus (I and II) and Alpha (IMS and AMS) implants have been used by over 500 patients, which helped the patients to perceive light, recognize letters and objects, and perform orientation and movement tasks.167 For example, the Alpha subretinal prosthesis contains silicon photodiodes that convert ambient light into electrical currents to stimulate retinal neurons.168 Since the photocurrent generated by ambient light is insufficient, Alpha comprises a wired power source to amplify the signal to produce sufficient stimulation currents.167 However, these wires increase the surgery time, and pose additional concerns about invasiveness.
More recently, a wireless photovoltaic retinal prosthesis, photovoltaic retina implant (PRIMA), was developed. PRIMA consists of 378 hexagonal photovoltaic pixels with a pixel size of 100 μm, and these pixels convert 880 nm light to ionic photocurrent for the photostimulation of neurons (Fig. 9a).6 The spatial profile of 880 nm light is modulated by an optoelectronic system, which is made of a portable computer controlling light patterns with a liquid crystal display (LCD) fed by a video goggle system (Fig. 9b). Here, the use of NIR 880 nm light avoids stimulation of residual healthy photoreceptors, thus preventing interference with natural vision, while minimizing the risk of potential photodamage as well.60 The pixels are made of silicon photodiodes, and used to convert 880 nm light to photovoltage. The photovoltage biases the IrOx electrodes to induce capacitive currents based on reversible faradaic reactions. Advantageously, PRIMA was designed to have local return electrodes, instead of a common return electrode, as in the case of Alpha.171 Local return electrodes for each pixel result in better confinement of the electric field, and thus minimize the crosstalk between pixels, leading to higher spatial resolution.172 The recent human-trial results of PRIMA were recently reported for five AMD patients, and it provided 20/500 average visual acuity, without interfering with peripheral vision.6 Another high-density pixelated wireless photovoltaic retinal prosthetic device architecture was proposed by using organic semiconductors named POLYRETINA.59 Organic semiconductors are favorable for fabricating flexible and conformable prostheses,59,97 and it is expected that POLYRETINA will reach the stage of human trials in the near future. However, still the achieved visual acuities with these prosthetic devices (∼20/500 with PRIMA and ∼20/480 (theoretical) with POLYRETINA) are not at desired levels considering the legally defined blindness limit of 20/200 acuity. Reducing the pixel size to increase the visual acuity necessitates higher light intensities to activate neurons.173 To avoid excessively intense illumination, different electrode geometries might be exploited in future human trials.174 A low visual angle is another limitation of PRIMA because the rigidity of the implant restricts its fit to the eye curvature.58 Flexible devices (e.g., POLYRETINA) offer a larger visual angle because of the conformability of the implant to the eye curvature.97
 Fig. 9  Clinical trials and potential use in human studies. (a) Schematic showing the design and components of the photovoltaic retinal prosthesis PRIMA that is in clinical trials. (b) Augmented reality glasses for photovoltaic retina implant (PRIMA) systems on a person. Figures a and b reprinted with permission from ref. 6 Copyright 2022 Springer Nature.6 (c) Optogenetic restoration of vision. Reprinted with permission from ref. 169 Copyright 2010 Science.169 (d) A patient with optogenetically transduced retinal ganglion cells performs a visual task while the brain activity is recorded with EEG. Reprinted with permission from ref. 170 Copyright 2021 Springer Nature.170 (e) Schematic of a concept for a fully implantable, optogenetic system for the human brain with wireless recharging. The brain can be controlled by the smartphone (left), and the wireless charging helmet (right) integrated with an RF transmission coil charges the battery. Reprinted with permission from ref. 23 Copyright 2021 Springer Nature.23 
Optogenetics can also restore vision by genetically targeting opsins to different cell types in the retina. The first optogenetic vision restoration study proposed the expression of channelrhodopsin-2 (ChR2) in retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) to enable light-induced responses in degenerate retina.175 On the other hand, alternative studies demonstrated that targeting opsins to other cell types, such as bipolar ON cells or light-insensitive cone cells, can also restore vision via the indirect activation of retinal neurons in degenerate retina. In one study, expression of ChR2 in bipolar ON cells in degenerate mice retina led to light-induced spiking activity in RGCs, and subsequently triggered visual-evoked potentials in the visual cortex.176 Another study showed that the expression of light-sensitive chloride pumps in the cone photoreceptors of degenerate retina (Fig. 9c) induces light-evoked hyperpolarization response in the photosensitized cone cells, leading to excitatory currents and action potential firing in RGCs, and also resulting in light-induced behavioral responses.169 Recently, the results of an optogenetic clinical trial on a blind patient were published.170 The optogenetic therapy introduces channelrhodopsin protein ChrimsonR to RGCs of the patient. ChrimsonR is sensitive to amber light, which is advantageous compared to blue light-sensitive opsins, because of enabling higher light intensity limits for safe exposure and posing lower phototoxicity risk.177 The patient wears light-stimulating goggles, which capture the outside images, convert them to monochromatic images, and send the projected image pixel information to the retina via 595 nm pulsed light. The patient was instructed to perform a visual task during which the brain activity was recorded with electroencephalography (EEG) (Fig. 9d). As a result, the patient, who could not perceive, locate, or count objects before the therapy, was able to perform those visual tasks after optogenetic therapy with partial vision restoration.170
Beyond retina, optoelectronic systems for optogenetics can be used against brain diseases in the clinics. Optoelectronics including μLEDs for the chronic in-body implantation, which does not limit the natural movement, is an applicable option. For example, given its lightweight and small dimensions, the proposed wirelessly rechargeable optogenetic system shown in Fig. 8b is versatile, and overcomes the implantation limitations of previous implantable devices.23Fig. 9e illustrates manipulation of the human brain using that wireless optoelectronic system, where the operation of μLEDs for photostimulation of the brain can be controlled via a smartphone alone.23 Furthermore, wireless power charging is possible through a helmet containing an RF coil for everyday use. Consequently, the integrated optoelectronic systems in conjunction with optogenetics may find use in the treatment of brain diseases, such as Parkinson's and Alzheimer's, in the future clinical applications.178,179
Implantable optoelectronic systems can also be used for cardiac diseases. Clinical cardiac pacemakers apply an electrical current to the heart muscle to control the beating frequency. Despite their widespread use, these devices are generally wired for powering the implant and data transferring purposes. Light-based simulators can eliminate the need for wires; thus, they can offer a less invasive stimulation pathway. In addition to the direct pulsed laser light, optoelectronic devices based on different materials, such as graphene, gold nanoparticles, and PEDOT:PSS, have been used for the stimulation of cardiomyocyte cells.180–182 Due to the biocompatibility, biodegradability, and ubiquity of silicon in optoelectronics, Si-based devices have shown promise for optical cardiac pacemaker applications. For example, a Si NW–polymer mesh structure containing randomly oriented high-density Si NWs can stimulate primary cardiomyocytes in vitro when implanted in a rat heart, and can control the beating frequency under pulsed green laser excitation.183 Another study showed a flexible and battery-free cardiac pacemaker fabricated with amorphous hydrogenated Si radial p–i–n (pin) junctions that can control the beating frequency of an intact porcine heart in vivo using light-induced electrical current generation under 635 nm photoexcitation.184 Due to the limited penetration of 635 nm light through the skin, an optical fiber was inserted into the tissue to deliver a sufficient amount of light to the stimulator. Shifting the responsivity of such devices to the NIR spectrum can enable remotely controlled optical pacemakers. On the other hand, the long-term biocompatibility and safety of such devices inside the body should be thoroughly investigated for their potential clinical translation.
6. Challenges and prospects
Light can directly interact with the neural membrane through light-sensitive ion channels as in the case of optogenetics, or it can modulate the membrane potential by electrical, thermal, or mechanical stimuli using transducing micro/nanomaterials or devices. Photoelectrical stimulation methods do not require genetic manipulation because excitable cells endogenously express voltage-gated channels. On the other hand, although heat-sensitive and mechanosensitive ion channels are endogenously expressed at sufficient levels in certain types of cells,185,186 photothermal and photoacoustic neuromodulation typically requires a high level of expression of heat-sensitive and mechanosensitive ion channels, respectively.19,20 Photothermal and photoacoustic stimulation can also take place via capacitive membrane currents and it is important to discern the dominating mechanism while using these methods for neuromodulation.
In terms of temporal resolution, optogenetics is currently the leading technique with sub-millisecond precision.16,187 Photoelectrical stimulation via extracellular currents (e.g., photocapacitive,61 photofaradaic49) or capacitive membrane currents (through photothermal and photoacoustic effects50,84) offers millisecond-scale temporal resolution. On the other hand, photothermal and photoacoustic stimulation through heat-sensitive and mechanosensitive ion channels exhibit slower temporal dynamics with typically second-scale action potential latencies.19,20
In terms of spatial resolution, optogenetics provides cell-type specificity and single-cell resolution. For that, one of the challenges especially for in vivo optogenetics has been the precise delivery of light to the genetically modified cells.188 Various studies attempted to overcome this problem by proposing alternative μLED probe architectures, multiphoton stimulation approaches, and optical waveguide engineering.54,189,190 Nanoscale interfaces (e.g., photoelectrochemical, photothermal, photoacoustic) can potentially offer single-cell and even subcellular resolution owing to their small size without the need for genetic modification. Microphotovoltaic devices made of silicon are downscaled to the pixel pitches of 20 μm,174 but it is also an important challenge to confine the photocurrent at the single pixel level that can allow high-resolution photostimulation of the targeted tissues. For that there is still on-going efforts especially for retinal implants to achieve higher visual acuity.191
In terms of spectral photoresponse, operation in NIR wavelengths is a desired aspect mainly because of superior tissue transparency and high photon flux within safety limits. Despite the success of using upconversion nanoparticles for the NIR modulation of visible light-sensitive opsins, many aspects of this approach, e.g., the long-term biocompatibility of nanoparticles, synthesis of nanoparticles with high photoluminescence quantum yield, potentially invasive stereotactic injection of nanoparticles, and penetration of nanoparticles through the blood–brain barrier for deep brain stimulation, require more extensive investigation.90 Hence, shifting the spectral response of opsins to NIR wavelengths would have a great impact on optogenetics technology by eliminating the complications arising from the use of upconversion nanoparticles. Nanoscale interfaces are spectrally versatile because of their size, geometry, and composition dependent tunable optical and electrical properties. Indeed, there are already examples of NIR-sensitive photoelectrical, photothermal, and photoacoustic neuromodulation systems based on different nanotransducer materials.19,36,50,82 NIR-sensitivity is also important for retinal prosthetic devices and it was achieved by the NIR absorption window of the active layer, which is silicon for PRIMA and IR-sensitive polymers for POLYRETINA.58,60
As counterparts of optical tools discussed in this review, magnetic and acoustic neuromodulation methods also offer wireless control of neural activity and these methods have already found applications in human studies and even in clinically approved therapies.192,193 However, these tools suffer from poor spatial resolution because of the challenge of focusing magnetic and acoustic waves into tiny spot sizes.194 Even though genetic modifications can render cells sensitive to magnetic and acoustic stimulation, and thereby enhance spatial specificity, magnetogenetic and sonogenetic neuromodulation need improvement in terms of their response times to reach the temporal resolution and precision of the state-of-the-art optical techniques.195,196 Moreover, there are still unsettled discussions about the physical mechanisms of magnetogenetics.197,198
6.1 Nanoscale interfaces
The advancements in the synthesis of nanomaterials have enabled the use of different transducing routes, i.e., photoelectrochemical, optocapacitive, photothermal, and photoacoustic, for optical neuromodulation. One of the main challenges at the nanoscale is the development of nanomaterials that can induce capacitive current in the cellular membrane. Since the capacitive currents are safely used at clinical levels, in principle the development of such a tiny particle can safely stimulate the neural tissues with high resolution.18,199,200
Another important challenge is to deliver nanoparticles to the targeted tissues in the body. Nanoscale interfaces can either be free-standing or conjugated with functional groups such as secondary antibodies, and specifically bind to neuronal membrane proteins via primary antibodies.201 For deep brain stimulation, nanomaterials are typically delivered into deep neural structures via stereotactic injection, which might be an invasive procedure. Intravenous injection is preferred to decrease invasiveness. However, the blood–brain barrier (BBB) might prevent penetration of nanomaterials to the brain.202 Nanoparticle surface charge and size are critical parameters for crossing the BBB.203,204 Moreover, the BBB can also be opened via pulsed ultrasound to deliver the nanomaterials.205
The quantum mechanical phenomena arising at the nanoscale can be exploited to enhance the device performance or tune the operation spectrum of nano/microscale interfaces. For example, the use of plasmonic nanostructures can boost the light-to-current transduction efficiency of optoelectronic neuromodulators via the localized surface plasmon resonance effect.206 On the other hand, due to the large Bohr exciton radius of 18 nm and the bulk bandgap of 0.41 eV of PbS, the absorption spectrum of PbS QDs can be tuned from the visible to IR spectral range toward the tissue transmission windows, while the spectra of InP and CdSe QDs are limited to visible wavelengths.207–209 It is also possible to shift the absorption spectrum of a visible-sensitive nanomaterial by doping or covering it with a shell to form a type-II core–shell band alignment.210,211 With appropriate nanoengineering steps, such as covering the photoabsorbing core material with a shell and introducing suitable surface ligands, it is possible to render nanostructures to be water soluble and biocompatible, even if the core material does not have such properties.212,213
6.2 Microscale interfaces
One of the critical requirements for microphotodiode array-based visual prosthetics is to decrease pixel size down to cellular dimensions. However, as the pixel size gets smaller, stimulation thresholds rapidly increase,173 which makes it difficult to fabricate implants with cellular-scale pixels that can stimulate retinal neurons. To overcome this limitation, active and return electrodes are vertically separated in a 3-D device architecture.174 This design allows retinal neurons to migrate into the 3-D pixel structures, and confine the electric field in the 3-D pixel structure that lowers the stimulation thresholds. However, there are still remaining fabrication challenges of reduction of the size of the pixels below cellular sizes for high-resolution photostimulation.173,191
Miniaturized LEDs and their integrated systems, including those that were introduced earlier, are highly attractive tools for light delivery to the targeted neurons having light-sensitive ion channels. Advantageously, μLEDs can operate with high durability and stability for long-term therapeutic applications. Scattering of tissue decreases the light penetration depth and necessitates elevated optical powers for deep tissue photostimulation; hence despite possessing some unique features, μLEDs generate heat that may increase the temperature of the implanted tissue, and lead to protein denaturation and cell destruction. To address these problems, materials with high thermal conductivity, such as GaN and conductive fillers, can be introduced to reduce the junction temperature, which is considerably important for LED performance. Moreover, ultrathin and flexible μLEDs are integrated with various sensors to effectively manage the elevated heat, and they are processed in the form of a microneedle to enable cellular-scale delivery of photons for spatially precise optogenetics.47 They can also be utilized for continuous in vivo application. To maintain thermal safety as defined by the FDA, pulse width and frequency can be optimized.214 For example, spinal cord stimulation is done at 5 or 10 ms pulse widths, and 1 to 10 Hz frequencies are appropriately adjustable options.215–217 Although μLEDs are efficient in terms of generating less heat than incandescent bulbs or other light sources, it is still necessary to obtain smaller and more efficient devices, and consideration of thermal management is useful for their operation at high-power levels.
6.3 Wireless integrated systems
To date, the key innovative considerations in the field of neuromodulation involve device miniaturization, increasing the complexity and variability of executable task, and understanding of the neural response.218 The technological advancements, especially in synthesizing new soft materials and device fabrication, substantiate miniaturization of the devices like μLEDs and micro-scale PV cells, and the field keeps evolving. With added functionality at the system level, we can also expect the exploration of new applications in the field of neuroscience. However, the majority of the existing optogenetics operate in a single mode, activating neurons without recording or feedback. If certain illuminations using μLEDs could be delivered to the target neuron according to the manipulation reaction along with the recording and a closed-loop system, it would be a more powerful optogenetic system, and a better insight into the neural dynamics would be possible.219 Therefore, future innovations should facilitate personalized stimulation or treatment regardless of target distance, and continuously monitor, evaluate, and control the associated signals by incorporating the most viable elements of neuromodulation. First, a wireless system is needed to avoid the limitations of the tethered system. WPT to the optogenetic devices will lead to chronic optogenetic stimulation and their minimum invasiveness will control various parts of our body, irrespective of their position. The system can even facilitate realizing a wireless network infrastructure to enable large-scale neuromodulation from multiple targets. Actually, the concept of a wireless network for behavioral neuroscience (WNBN), which is a remotely programmable operation, is already introduced.220 Furthermore, the system can selectively and simultaneously control optogenetic devices remotely by accessing the global network, and offer high-throughput neuroscience studies. Thus, a dynamic system in the form of a closed-loop system, thereby offering modulation and recording the feedback in real-time, would offer dynamic and responsive neuromodulation. As stated previously, the integrated closed-loop neuromodulation system has a significant impact while recording vital signals, like EMG and ECoG. This can indeed adjust the intensity of stimulation and inhibition during the operation.221 In addition, depending on the stimulating environment, safe and optimized optogenetics can be precisely controlled by adjusting the emission spectrum, period, and many other parameters.25,151 Consequently, the integrated systems would allow spatially and temporally accurate targeting, which can be seamlessly applied to grasp the understanding of multiplexed correlations ranging from the cellular to system level. Thus, the approach could be unleashed to animal experiments, and clinical trials for future biomedical implants and applications.
6.4 Intercrossing of boundaries at all scales
At the nanoscale, nanowires, nanoparticles, and quantum dots have proved their potential for neurostimulation. They individually perform high-resolution spatial and temporal neurostimulation. These nanomaterials can be transformed into functional microscale devices. For example, they can be directly cast into microscale photovoltaic and light-emitting devices as planar films by using solution-processable device fabrication techniques. Furthermore, microscale optoelectronic devices can be incorporated into the wireless integrated system circuits. Hence, there are already strong combination and synergistic options for neuromodulation at nano-to-micro and micro-to-macro scales. However, to date, the use of nanomaterials with integrated systems has not been significantly explored, except for one recent report.222 Such an approach can potentially introduce neuromodulation systems that combine non-genetic neurostimulation with multi-tasking capabilities. For example, an integrated system with red, green, and blue LEDs can simultaneously control different parts of the tissues at the same time, by optically exciting the injected nanoparticles with the targeted tissues. Furthermore, the system can include various wireless powering, sensing, data processing and biasing parts that can perform untethered multiple functions, such as stimulation, monitoring, and recording in our body, even through a closed-loop operation. Thus, crossing the scale boundaries in conjunction with multiple functional units can be an effective optoelectronic neurointerface with great potential.
Advanced neuromodulation technologies are becoming more attractive to control nerve activities and earn therapeutic benefits. Through the development and improvement so far, a variety of optoelectronic nanostructures, devices, and systems have emerged, and contributed to the optical neuromodulation field with remarkable functionalities. The strong scientific interest in improving these tools combined with the urgent clinical needs is expected in the near future to transform many useful optoelectronic neurotechnologies from bench-to-bedside.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
TK acknowledges funding from the Brain Research Program of the National Research Foundation (NRF), funded by the Korean government (MSIT) (NRF-2019M3C7A1032076). SN acknowledges funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the Horizon Europe Research and Innovation Programme (grant agreement 101045289). SN also acknowledges the Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey (TUBITAK) with Project No. 121C301, 120E329, and 121E376.
References
M. L. Kringelbach, N. Jenkinson, S. L. Owen and T. Z. Aziz, Nat. Rev. Neurosci., 2007, 8, 623–635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Gradinaru, M. Mogri, K. R. Thompson, J. M. Henderson and K. Deisseroth, Science, 2009, 324, 354–359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          G. Buzsaki, Rhythms of the Brain, Oxford university press,  2006 Search PubMed .
E. Ben-Menachem, Lancet Neurol., 2002, 1, 477–482 CrossRef PubMed .
R. H. Howland, Curr. Behav. Neurosci. Rep., 2014, 1, 64–73 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Palanker, Y. Le Mer, S. Mohand-Said and J.-A. Sahel, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 1–6 Search PubMed .
J. M. Bronstein, M. Tagliati, R. L. Alterman, A. M. Lozano, J. Volkmann, A. Stefani, F. B. Horak, M. S. Okun, K. D. Foote and P. Krack, Arch. Neurol., 2011, 68, 165 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Lv, Y.-H. Zhao, J.-G. Chen, D.-Y. Wang and H. Chen, Front. Psychol., 2019, 10, 64 CrossRef PubMed .
M. L. Carlson, N. Engl. J. Med., 2020, 382, 1531–1542 CrossRef PubMed .
T. C. Zhang, J. J. Janik and W. M. Grill, Brain Res., 2014, 1569, 19–31 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. L. Feigin, E. Nichols, T. Alam, M. S. Bannick, E. Beghi, N. Blake, W. J. Culpepper, E. R. Dorsey, A. Elbaz and R. G. Ellenbogen, Lancet Neurol., 2019, 18, 459–480 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Berggren, E. D. Głowacki, D. T. Simon, E. Stavrinidou and K. Tybrandt, Chem. Rev., 2022, 122, 4826–4846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Vázquez-Guardado, Y. Yang, A. J. Bandodkar and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Neurosci., 2020, 23, 1522–1536 CrossRef PubMed .
S. H. Yun and S. J. Kwok, Nat. Biomed. Eng., 2017, 1, 1–16 CrossRef .
M. Scanziani and M. Häusser, Nature, 2009, 461, 930–939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. A. Shemesh, D. Tanese, V. Zampini, C. Linghu, K. Piatkevich, E. Ronzitti, E. Papagiakoumou, E. S. Boyden and V. Emiliani, Nat. Neurosci., 2017, 20, 1796–1806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. S. Boyden, F. Zhang, E. Bamberg, G. Nagel and K. Deisseroth, Nat. Neurosci., 2005, 8, 1263–1268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Maya-Vetencourt, G. Manfredi, M. Mete, E. Colombo, M. Bramini, S. Di Marco, D. Shmal, G. Mantero, M. Dipalo and A. Rocchi, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2020, 15, 698–708 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiang, Y. Huang, X. Luo, J. Wu, H. Zong, L. Shi, R. Cheng, Y. Zhu, S. Jiang and L. Lan, Matter, 2021, 4, 654–674 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, Y. Jiang, N. J. Rommelfanger, F. Yang, Q. Zhou, R. Yin, J. Liu, S. Cai, W. Ren and A. Shin, Nat. Biomed. Eng., 2022, 1–17 Search PubMed .
H. Lorach, G. Goetz, R. Smith, X. Lei, Y. Mandel, T. Kamins, K. Mathieson, P. Huie, J. Harris and A. Sher, Nat. Med., 2015, 21, 476–482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Vagni, M. J. I. Airaghi Leccardi, C.-H. Vila, E. G. Zollinger, G. Sherafatipour, T. J. Wolfensberger and D. Ghezzi, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 1–14 Search PubMed .
C. Y. Kim, M. J. Ku, R. Qazi, H. J. Nam, J. W. Park, K. S. Nam, S. Oh, I. Kang, J.-H. Jang and W. Y. Kim, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 1–13 CrossRef PubMed .
S. I. Park, D. S. Brenner, G. Shin, C. D. Morgan, B. A. Copits, H. U. Chung, M. Y. Pullen, K. N. Noh, S. Davidson and S. J. Oh, Nat. Biotechnol., 2015, 33, 1280–1286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Kathe, F. Michoud, P. Schönle, A. Rowald, N. Brun, J. Ravier, I. Furfaro, V. Paggi, K. Kim and S. Soloukey, Nat. Biotechnol., 2022, 40, 198–208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Park, Y. Guo, X. Jia, H. K. Choe, B. Grena, J. Kang, J. Park, C. Lu, A. Canales and R. Chen, Nat. Neurosci., 2017, 20, 612–619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. McCall, T.-i Kim, G. Shin, X. Huang, Y. H. Jung, R. Al-Hasani, F. G. Omenetto, M. R. Bruchas and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Protoc., 2013, 8, 2413–2428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Pisanello, G. Mandelbaum, M. Pisanello, I. A. Oldenburg, L. Sileo, J. E. Markowitz, R. E. Peterson, A. Della Patria, T. M. Haynes and M. S. Emara, Nat. Neurosci., 2017, 20, 1180–1188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Iseri and D. Kuzum, J. Neural Eng., 2017, 14, 031001 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Park, G. Loke, Y. Fink and P. Anikeeva, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 1826–1852 RSC .
Y. Yang, M. Wu, A. Vázquez-Guardado, A. J. Wegener, J. G. Grajales-Reyes, Y. Deng, T. Wang, R. Avila, J. A. Moreno and S. Minkowicz, Nat. Neurosci., 2021, 24, 1035–1045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. I. Park, G. Shin, A. Banks, J. G. McCall, E. R. Siuda, M. J. Schmidt, H. U. Chung, K. N. Noh, J. G.-H. Mun and J. Rhodes, J. Neural Eng., 2015, 12, 056002 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Gutruf and J. A. Rogers, Curr. Opin. Neurobiol., 2018, 50, 42–49 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Won, L. Cai, P. Gutruf and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Biomed. Eng., 2021, 1–19 Search PubMed .
R. Rajalingham, M. Sorenson, R. Azadi, S. Bohn, J. J. DiCarlo and A. Afraz, Nat. Methods, 2021, 18, 1112–1116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Karatum, H. N. Kaleli, G. O. Eren, A. Sahin and S. Nizamoglu, ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 8233–8243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yoo, J.-H. Park and Y. Nam, ACS Nano, 2018, 13, 544–551 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Jiang, H. J. Lee, L. Lan, H.-A. Tseng, C. Yang, H.-Y. Man, X. Han and J.-X. Cheng, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Han, H. Bahmani Jalali, E. Yildiz, M. H. Qureshi, A. Şahin and S. Nizamoglu, Commun. Mater., 2021, 2, 1–10 CrossRef .
Y. Lyu, C. Xie, S. A. Chechetka, E. Miyako and K. Pu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 9049–9052 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jiang, X. Wu, N. J. Rommelfanger, Z. Ou and G. Hong, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2022, 9, nwac007 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Acarón Ledesma, X. Li, J. L. Carvalho-de-Souza, W. Wei, F. Bezanilla and B. Tian, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2019, 14, 645–657 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Jiang, X. Li, B. Liu, J. Yi, Y. Fang, F. Shi, X. Gao, E. Sudzilovsky, R. Parameswaran and K. Koehler, Nat. Biomed. Eng., 2018, 2, 508–521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Shin, A. M. Gomez, R. Al-Hasani, Y. R. Jeong, J. Kim, Z. Xie, A. Banks, S. M. Lee, S. Y. Han and C. J. Yoo, Neuron, 2017, 93, 509–521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. I. Park, G. Shin, J. G. McCall, R. Al-Hasani, A. Norris, L. Xia, D. S. Brenner, K. N. Noh, S. Y. Bang and D. L. Bhatti, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, E8169–E8177 CAS .
P. Gutruf, V. Krishnamurthi, A. Vázquez-Guardado, Z. Xie, A. Banks, C.-J. Su, Y. Xu, C. R. Haney, E. A. Waters and I. Kandela, Nat. Electron., 2018, 1, 652–660 CrossRef .
T.-i Kim, J. G. McCall, Y. H. Jung, X. Huang, E. R. Siuda, Y. Li, J. Song, Y. M. Song, H. A. Pao and R.-H. Kim, Science, 2013, 340, 211–216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Carvalho-de-Souza, J. S. Treger, B. Dang, S. B. Kent, D. R. Pepperberg and F. Bezanilla, Neuron, 2015, 86, 207–217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Parameswaran, J. L. Carvalho-de-Souza, Y. Jiang, M. J. Burke, J. F. Zimmerman, K. Koehler, A. W. Phillips, J. Yi, E. J. Adams and F. Bezanilla, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 260–266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Rastogi, R. Garg, M. G. Scopelliti, B. I. Pinto, J. E. Hartung, S. Kim, C. G. Murphey, N. Johnson, D. San Roman and F. Bezanilla, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2020, 117, 13339–13349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tang, N. Qin, Y. Chong, Y. Diao, Z. Wang, T. Xue, M. Jiang, J. Zhang and G. Zheng, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1–13 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Bareket, N. Waiskopf, D. Rand, G. Lubin, M. David-Pur, J. Ben-Dov, S. Roy, C. Eleftheriou, E. Sernagor and O. Cheshnovsky, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6685–6692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yoo, S. Hong, Y. Choi, J.-H. Park and Y. Nam, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8040–8049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wu, E. Stark, P.-C. Ku, K. D. Wise, G. Buzsáki and E. Yoon, Neuron, 2015, 88, 1136–1148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kim, T. Yokota, T. Suzuki, S. Lee, T. Woo, W. Yukita, M. Koizumi, Y. Tachibana, H. Yawo and H. Onodera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2020, 117, 21138–21146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Murawski, S. R. Pulver and M. C. Gather, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–11 CrossRef PubMed .
S. H. Lee, J. Kim, J. H. Shin, H. E. Lee, I.-S. Kang, K. Gwak, D.-S. Kim, D. Kim and K. J. Lee, Nano Energy, 2018, 44, 447–455 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mathieson, J. Loudin, G. Goetz, P. Huie, L. Wang, T. I. Kamins, L. Galambos, R. Smith, J. S. Harris and A. Sher, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 391–397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ferlauto, M. J. I. Airaghi Leccardi, N. A. L. Chenais, S. C. A. Gilliéron, P. Vagni, M. Bevilacqua, T. J. Wolfensberger, K. Sivula and D. Ghezzi, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1–15 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. I. Airaghi Leccardi, N. A. L. Chenais, L. Ferlauto, M. Kawecki, E. G. Zollinger and D. Ghezzi, Commun. Mater., 2020, 1, 1–13 CrossRef .
M. Silverå Ejneby, M. Jakešová, J. J. Ferrero, L. Migliaccio, I. Sahalianov, Z. Zhao, M. Berggren, D. Khodagholy, V. Đerek and J. N. Gelinas, Nat. Biomed. Eng., 2021, 1–13 Search PubMed .
W. S. Kim, S. Hong, M. Gamero, V. Jeevakumar, C. M. Smithhart, T. J. Price, R. D. Palmiter, C. Campos and S. I. Park, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 1–10 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Chen, A. Z. Weitemier, X. Zeng, L. He, X. Wang, Y. Tao, A. J. Huang, Y. Hashimotodani, M. Kano and H. Iwasaki, Science, 2018, 359, 679–684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Fenno, O. Yizhar and K. Deisseroth, Annu. Rev. Neurosci., 2011, 34, 389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Rand, M. Jakešová, G. Lubin, I. Vėbraitė, M. David-Pur, V. Đerek, T. Cramer, N. S. Sariciftci, Y. Hanein and E. D. Głowacki, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707292 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Eom, J. Kim, J. M. Choi, T. Kang, J. W. Chang, K. M. Byun, S. B. Jun and S. J. Kim, Small, 2014, 10, 3853–3857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. A. Ledesma and B. Tian, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 4276–4289 RSC .
E. Liang, J. Shi and B. Tian, Iscience, 2022, 25, 103534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Cellot, E. Cilia, S. Cipollone, V. Rancic, A. Sucapane, S. Giordani, L. Gambazzi, H. Markram, M. Grandolfo and D. Scaini, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 126–133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Barrejón, R. Rauti, L. Ballerini and M. Prato, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 8879–8889 CrossRef PubMed .
S. P. Lacour, G. Courtine and J. Guck, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 1–14 Search PubMed .
K. Lugo, X. Miao, F. Rieke and L. Y. Lin, Biomed. Opt. Express, 2012, 3, 447–454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Tian and C. M. Lieber, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 9136–9152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. O. Winter, T. Y. Liu, B. A. Korgel and C. E. Schmidt, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1673–1677 CrossRef CAS .
N. Gomez, J. O. Winter, F. Shieh, A. E. Saunders, B. A. Korgel and C. E. Schmidt, Talanta, 2005, 67, 462–471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Shapiro, K. Homma, S. Villarreal, C.-P. Richter and F. Bezanilla, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1–11 Search PubMed .
J. L. Carvalho-de-Souza, B. I. Pinto, D. R. Pepperberg and F. Bezanilla, Biophys. J., 2018, 114, 283–288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiang, J. L. Carvalho-de-Souza, R. Wong, Z. Luo, D. Isheim, X. Zuo, A. W. Nicholls, I. W. Jung, J. Yue and D.-J. Liu, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 1023–1030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, R. Garg, J. E. Hartung, A. Goad, D. A. Patel, F. Vitale, M. S. Gold, Y. Gogotsi and T. Cohen-Karni, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 14662–14671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. D. McKemy, W. M. Neuhausser and D. Julius, Nature, 2002, 416, 52–58 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Peier, A. Moqrich, A. C. Hergarden, A. J. Reeve, D. A. Andersson, G. M. Story, T. J. Earley, I. Dragoni, P. McIntyre and S. Bevan, Cell, 2002, 108, 705–715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Gao, Y. Sun, M. Cai, Y. Zhao, W. Cao, Z. Liu, G. Cui and B. Tang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1–10 CrossRef PubMed .
A. B. E. Attia, G. Balasundaram, M. Moothanchery, U. Dinish, R. Bi, V. Ntziachristos and M. Olivo, Photoacoustics, 2019, 16, 100144 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Shi, Y. Jiang, F. R. Fernandez, G. Chen, L. Lan, H.-Y. Man, J. A. White, J.-X. Cheng and C. Yang, Light: Sci. Appl., 2021, 10, 1–13 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Plaksin, S. Shoham and E. Kimmel, Phys. Rev. X, 2014, 4, 011004 Search PubMed .
N. Zheng, V. Fitzpatrick, R. Cheng, L. Shi, D. L. Kaplan and C. Yang, ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 2292–2305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hososhima, H. Yuasa, T. Ishizuka, M. R. Hoque, T. Yamashita, A. Yamanaka, E. Sugano, H. Tomita and H. Yawo, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 1–10 Search PubMed .
S. Shah, J.-J. Liu, N. Pasquale, J. Lai, H. McGowan, Z. P. Pang and K.-B. Lee, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 16571–16577 RSC .
X. Wu, Y. Zhang, K. Takle, O. Bilsel, Z. Li, H. Lee, Z. Zhang, D. Li, W. Fan and C. Duan, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 1060–1066 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Yu, L. Huang, Y. Zhou, T. Xue, Z. Chen and G. Han, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2019, 8, 1801132 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Chen, G. Romero, M. G. Christiansen, A. Mohr and P. Anikeeva, Science, 2015, 347, 1477–1480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-u Lee, W. Shin, Y. Lim, J. Kim, W. R. Kim, H. Kim, J.-H. Lee and J. Cheon, Nat. Mater., 2021, 20, 1029–1036 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, K. Mathieson, T. I. Kamins, J. D. Loudin, L. Galambos, G. Goetz, A. Sher, Y. Mandel, P. Huie and D. Lavinsky, J. Neural Eng., 2012, 9, 046014 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Han, O. Karatum and S. Nizamoglu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 20468–20490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Karatum, E. Yildiz, H. N. Kaleli, A. Sahin, B. Ulgut and S. Nizamoglu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 2109365 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jakešová, M. Silverå Ejneby, V. Đerek, T. Schmidt, M. Gryszel, J. Brask, R. Schindl, D. T. Simon, M. Berggren and F. Elinder, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaav5265 CrossRef PubMed .
N. A. L. Chenais, M. J. I. A. Leccardi and D. Ghezzi, Commun. Mater., 2021, 2, 1–16 CrossRef .
F. C. Delori, R. H. Webb and D. H. Sliney, JOSA A, 2007, 24, 1250–1265 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Loudin, D. Simanovskii, K. Vijayraghavan, C. Sramek, A. Butterwick, P. Huie, G. McLean and D. V. Palanker, J. Neural Eng., 2007, 4, S72 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Karatum, M. M. Aria, G. O. Eren, E. Yildiz, R. Melikov, S. B. Srivastava, S. Surme, I. B. Dogru, H. Bahmani Jalali and B. Ulgut, Front. Neurosci., 2021, 724 Search PubMed .
H. Bahmani Jalali, M. Mohammadi Aria, U. M. Dikbas, S. Sadeghi, B. Ganesh Kumar, M. Sahin, I. H. Kavakli, C. W. Ow-Yang and S. Nizamoglu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 8104–8114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Bahmani Jalali, O. Karatum, R. Melikov, U. M. Dikbas, S. Sadeghi, E. Yildiz, I. B. Dogru, G. Ozgun Eren, C. Ergun and A. Sahin, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 5975–5981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-H. Lee, H. Moon, H. Kim, G. H. Lee, W. Kwon, S. Yoo, D. Myung, S. H. Yun, Z. Bao and S. K. Hahn, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 5, 149–165 CrossRef PubMed .
K. L. Montgomery, A. J. Yeh, J. S. Ho, V. Tsao, S. Mohan Iyer, L. Grosenick, E. A. Ferenczi, Y. Tanabe, K. Deisseroth and S. L. Delp, Nat. Methods, 2015, 12, 969–974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. E. Lee, J. Choi, S. H. Lee, M. Jeong, J. H. Shin, D. J. Joe, D. Kim, C. W. Kim, J. H. Park and J. H. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800649 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Steude, M. Jahnel, M. Thomschke, M. Schober and M. C. Gather, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7657–7661 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Steude, E. C. Witts, G. B. Miles and M. C. Gather, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1600061 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Morton, C. Murawski, S. R. Pulver and M. C. Gather, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Yin, J. Feng, R. Ma, Y.-F. Liu, Y.-L. Zhang, X.-L. Zhang, Y.-G. Bi, Q.-D. Chen and H.-B. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1–7 Search PubMed .
J.-H. Kim and J.-W. Park, Sci. Adv., 2021, 7, eabd9715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. White, M. Kaltenbrunner, E. D. Głowacki, K. Gutnichenko, G. Kettlgruber, I. Graz, S. Aazou, C. Ulbricht, D. A. Egbe and M. C. Miron, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 811–816 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yokota, P. Zalar, M. Kaltenbrunner, H. Jinno, N. Matsuhisa, H. Kitanosako, Y. Tachibana, W. Yukita, M. Koizumi and T. Someya, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501856 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Keum, C. Murawski, E. Archer, S. Kwon, A. Mischok and M. C. Gather, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Kwon, E. G. Jeong, Y. Jeon, D.-G. Kim, S. Lee and K. C. Choi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 11, 3251–3261 CrossRef PubMed .
K. S. Kang, S. Y. Jeong, E. G. Jeong and K. C. Choi, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 2716–2725 CrossRef CAS .
J. Vierock, S. Rodriguez-Rozada, A. Dieter, F. Pieper, R. Sims, F. Tenedini, A. C. Bergs, I. Bendifallah, F. Zhou and N. Zeitzschel, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 1–20 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Ciccone, I. Meloni, R. G. Fernandez Lahore, J. Vierock, S. Reineke, H. Kleemann, P. Hegemann, K. Leo and C. Murawski, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 2110590 Search PubMed .
H. Zhang and J. A. Rogers, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1800936 CrossRef .
R. Qazi, C. Y. Kim, S.-H. Byun and J.-W. Jeong, Front. Neurosci., 2018, 12, 764 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Linghu, S. Zhang, C. Wang and J. Song, npj Flexible Electron., 2018, 2, 1–14 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rein, V. D. Favrod, C. Hou, T. Khudiyev, A. Stolyarov, J. Cox, C.-C. Chung, C. Chhav, M. Ellis and J. Joannopoulos, Nature, 2018, 560, 214–218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sekiguchi, H. Matsuhira, R. Kanda, S. Tada, T. Kitade, M. Tsutsumi, A. Nishikawa, A. Loesing, I. Fukunaga and S. Setogawa, Appl. Phys. Express, 2022, 15, 046501 CrossRef .
J. G. Um, D. Y. Jeong, Y. Jung, J. K. Moon, Y. H. Jung, S. Kim, S. H. Kim, J. S. Lee and J. Jang, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2019, 5, 1800617 CrossRef .
J. Day, J. Li, D. Lie, C. Bradford, J. Lin and H. Jiang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 031116 CrossRef .
R. X. Ferreira, E. Xie, J. J. McKendry, S. Rajbhandari, H. Chun, G. Faulkner, S. Watson, A. E. Kelly, E. Gu and R. V. Penty, IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett., 2016, 28, 2023–2026 CAS .
S.-I. Park, Y. Xiong, R.-H. Kim, P. Elvikis, M. Meitl, D.-H. Kim, J. Wu, J. Yoon, C.-J. Yu and Z. Liu, Science, 2009, 325, 977–981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Park, S. H. Lee, C. Lee, J. Kim, H. E. Lee, S.-B. Paik, K. J. Lee and D. Kim, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2791–2802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, C. Liu and Y. Huang, Energies, 2020, 13, 2837 CrossRef .

          L. Summerer and O. Purcell, Europeans Space Agency (ESA)-Advanced Concepts Team,  2009 Search PubMed .
A. Ben Amar, A. B. Kouki and H. Cao, Sensors, 2015, 15, 28889–28914 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Fakidis, S. Videv, S. Kucera, H. Claussen and H. Haas, J. Light Technol., 2016, 34, 3236–3258 CAS .
A. M. Smith, M. C. Mancini and S. Nie, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 710–711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. N. Bashkatov, E. Genina, V. Kochubey and V. Tuchin, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2005, 38, 2543 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zheng, H. Wang, H. Pan, C. Liang, W. Ji, L. Zhao, H. Chen, X. Gong, X. Wu and J. Chang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 11898–11907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. W. S. Putra, M. Tanizawa and T. Maruyama, IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett., 2018, 31, 157–160 Search PubMed .
A. Singer and J. T. Robinson, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2021, 10, 2100664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jeong, J. Jung, D. Jung, J. Kim, H. Ju, T. Kim and J. Lee, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2021, 180, 113139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ellis, M. McCarthy, M. Al Khateeb, M. Sorokina and N. Doran, Adv. Opt. Photonics, 2017, 9, 429–503 CrossRef .
M. Yamaguchi, T. Masuda, K. Araki, D. Sato, K. H. Lee, N. Kojima, T. Takamoto, K. Okumura, A. Satou and K. Yamada, Prog. Photovoltaics Res. Appl., 2021, 29, 684–693 CrossRef CAS .
V. K. Samineni, J. Yoon, K. E. Crawford, Y. R. Jeong, K. C. McKenzie, G. Shin, Z. Xie, S. S. Sundaram, Y. Li and M. Y. Yang, Pain, 2017, 158, 2108 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-W. Jeong, J. G. McCall, G. Shin, Y. Zhang, R. Al-Hasani, M. Kim, S. Li, J. Y. Sim, K.-I. Jang and Y. Shi, Cell, 2015, 162, 662–674 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. N. Noh, S. I. Park, R. Qazi, Z. Zou, A. D. Mickle, J. G. Grajales-Reyes, K. I. Jang, R. W. Gereau IV, J. Xiao and J. A. Rogers, Small, 2018, 14, 1702479 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zou, K. Xu, H. Tian and Y. Fang, Nanotechnology, 2022, 33, 272002 CrossRef PubMed .
S. D. Barman, A. W. Reza, N. Kumar, M. E. Karim and A. B. Munir, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 51, 1525–1552 CrossRef .
H.-J. Kim, H. Hirayama, S. Kim, K. J. Han, R. Zhang and J.-W. Choi, IEEE Access, 2017, 5, 21264–21285 Search PubMed .
A. Kurs, A. Karalis, R. Moffatt, J. D. Joannopoulos, P. Fisher and M. Soljacic, Science, 2007, 317, 83–86 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Ho, J. Wang, W. Fu and M. Sun, IEEE Trans. Magn., 2011, 47, 1522–1525 Search PubMed .
J. S. Ho, A. J. Yeh, E. Neofytou, S. Kim, Y. Tanabe, B. Patlolla, R. E. Beygui and A. S. Poon, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 7974–7979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Poon, S. O'Driscoll and T. H. Meng, IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., 2010, 58, 1739–1750 Search PubMed .
J. S. Ho, Y. Tanabe, S. M. Iyer, A. J. Christensen, L. Grosenick, K. Deisseroth, S. L. Delp and A. S. Poon, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2015, 4, 024001 CrossRef .
A. D. Mickle, S. M. Won, K. N. Noh, J. Yoon, K. W. Meacham, Y. Xue, L. A. McIlvried, B. A. Copits, V. K. Samineni and K. E. Crawford, Nature, 2019, 565, 361–365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          D. H. Nguyen, IEEE 2nd Global Conference on Life Sciences and Technologies (LifeTech), 2022, pp. 405–408 Search PubMed.
A. Soltan, B. McGovern, E. Drakakis, M. Neil, P. Maaskant, M. Akhter, J. S. Lee and P. Degenaar, IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circ. Syst., 2017, 11, 347–359 Search PubMed .
J. O. Lee, H. Park, J. Du, A. Balakrishna, O. Chen, D. Sretavan and H. Choo, Microsyst. Nanoeng., 2017, 3, 1–9 CAS .
C.-J. Jeon, E. Strettoi and R. H. Masland, J. Neurosci., 1998, 18, 8936–8946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Henriksson, A. M. McDermott and J. P. Bergmanson, Invest Ophthalmol. Visual Sci., 2009, 50, 3648–3654 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Obaid and L. Lu, IEEE Photonics J., 2019, 11, 1–8 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhang, A. D. Mickle, P. Gutruf, L. A. McIlvried, H. Guo, Y. Wu, J. P. Golden, Y. Xue, J. G. Grajales-Reyes and X. Wang, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaaw5296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yu, J. C. Chen, F. T. Alrashdan, B. W. Avants, Y. He, A. Singer, J. T. Robinson and K. Yang, IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circ. Syst., 2020, 14, 1241–1252 Search PubMed .
W. H. Bailey, R. Bodemann, J. Bushberg, C.-K. Chou, R. Cleveland, A. Faraone, K. R. Foster, K. E. Gettman, K. Graf and T. Harrington, IEEE Access, 2019, 7, 171346–171356 Search PubMed .
Z. Jiang, K. Fukuda, X. Xu, S. Park, D. Inoue, H. Jin, M. Saito, I. Osaka, K. Takimiya and T. Someya, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707526 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Jiang, K. Fukuda, W. Huang, S. Park, R. Nur, M. O. G. Nayeem, K. Yu, D. Inoue, M. Saito and H. Kimura, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808378 CrossRef .
K. Goto, T. Nakagawa, O. Nakamura and S. Kawata, IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., 2001, 48, 830–833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lee, A. J. Cortese, A. P. Gandhi, E. R. Agger, P. L. McEuen and A. C. Molnar, IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circ. Syst., 2018, 12, 1256–1266 Search PubMed .
H. Ding, L. Lu, Z. Shi, D. Wang, L. Li, X. Li, Y. Ren, C. Liu, D. Cheng and H. Kim, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 6632–6637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-P. Cen and T. K. Ng, Neural Regener. Res., 2018, 13, 1352 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Bloch, Y. Luo and L. da Cruz, Therapeutic Adv. Ophthalmol., 2019, 11, 2515841418817501 Search PubMed .
R. Daschner, U. Greppmaier, M. Kokelmann, S. Rudorf, R. Rudorf, S. Schleehauf and W. G. Wrobel, Biomed. Microdev., 2017, 19, 1–8 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Busskamp, J. Duebel, D. Balya, M. Fradot, T. J. Viney, S. Siegert, A. C. Groner, E. Cabuy, V. Forster and M. Seeliger, Science, 2010, 329, 413–417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-A. Sahel, E. Boulanger-Scemama, C. Pagot, A. Arleo, F. Galluppi, J. N. Martel, S. D. Esposti, A. Delaux, J.-B. de Saint Aubert and C. de Montleau, Nat. Med., 2021, 27, 1223–1229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Palanker, Y. Le Mer, S. Mohand-Said, M. Muqit and J. A. Sahel, Ophthalmology, 2020, 127, 1097–1104 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Flores, G. Goetz, X. Lei and D. Palanker, J. Neural Eng., 2016, 13, 036010 CrossRef PubMed .
B.-Y. Wang, Z. C. Chen, M. Bhuckory, A. K. Goldstein and D. Palanker, J. Neural Eng., 2022, 19, 055003 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Flores, T. Huang, M. Bhuckory, E. Ho, Z. Chen, R. Dalal, L. Galambos, T. Kamins, K. Mathieson and D. Palanker, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 1–12 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bi, J. Cui, Y.-P. Ma, E. Olshevskaya, M. Pu, A. M. Dizhoor and Z.-H. Pan, Neuron, 2006, 50, 23–33 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. S. Lagali, D. Balya, G. B. Awatramani, T. A. Münch, D. S. Kim, V. Busskamp, C. L. Cepko and B. Roska, Nat. Neurosci., 2008, 11, 667–675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. K. Baker and J. G. Flannery, Front. Cell. Neurosci., 2018, 12, 316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. A. V. Magno, H. Tenza-Ferrer, M. Collodetti, M. F. G. Aguiar, A. P. C. Rodrigues, R. S. da Silva, J. do Prado Silva, N. F. Nicolau, D. V. F. Rosa and A. Birbrair, J. Neurosci., 2019, 39, 3234–3248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Etter, S. van der Veldt, F. Manseau, I. Zarrinkoub, E. Trillaud-Doppia and S. Williams, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5322 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Savchenko, V. Cherkas, C. Liu, G. B. Braun, A. Kleschevnikov, Y. I. Miller and E. Molokanova, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaat0351 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Tajarenejad, M. A. Ansari, S. Akbari, H. Yazdanfar and S. M. Hamidi, Biomed. Opt. Express, 2021, 12, 6013–6023 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Han, E. Yildiz, H. N. Kaleli, S. Karaz, G. O. Eren, I. B. Dogru-Yuksel, E. Senses, A. Şahin and S. Nizamoglu, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2022, 11, 2102160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Parameswaran, K. Koehler, M. Y. Rotenberg, M. J. Burke, J. Kim, K.-Y. Jeong, B. Hissa, M. D. Paul, K. Moreno and N. Sarma, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2019, 116, 413–421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, B. Wen, L. Cao, S. Zhang, Y. Lei, G. Zhao, L. Chen, J. Wang, Y. Shi and J. Xu, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2020, 9, 1901342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. E. Clapham, Nature, 2003, 426, 517–524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Coste, J. Mathur, M. Schmidt, T. J. Earley, S. Ranade, M. J. Petrus, A. E. Dubin and A. Patapoutian, Science, 2010, 330, 55–60 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mohanty, Q. Li, M. A. Tadayon, S. P. Roberts, G. R. Bhatt, E. Shim, X. Ji, J. Cardenas, S. A. Miller and A. Kepecs, Nat. Biomed. Eng., 2020, 4, 223–231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Packer, B. Roska and M. Häusser, Nat. Neurosci., 2013, 16, 805–815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Packer, L. E. Russell, H. W. Dalgleish and M. Häusser, Nat. Methods, 2015, 12, 140–146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Pisanello, L. Sileo, I. A. Oldenburg, M. Pisanello, L. Martiradonna, J. A. Assad, B. L. Sabatini and M. De Vittorio, Neuron, 2014, 82, 1245–1254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. W. Huang, T. I. Kamins, Z. C. Chen, B.-Y. Wang, M. Bhuckory, L. Galambos, E. Ho, T. Ling, S. Afshar and A. Shin, J. Neural Eng., 2021, 18, 036015 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Perera, M. S. George, G. Grammer, P. G. Janicak, A. Pascual-Leone and T. S. Wirecki, Brain Stimulation, 2016, 9, 336–346 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Legon, T. F. Sato, A. Opitz, J. Mueller, A. Barbour, A. Williams and W. J. Tyler, Nat. Neurosci., 2014, 17, 322–329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Rivnay, H. Wang, L. Fenno, K. Deisseroth and G. G. Malliaras, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1601649 CrossRef PubMed .
S. del Sol Fernández, P. Martínez-Vicente, P. Gomollón-Zueco, C. Castro-Hinojosa, L. Gutiérrez, R. M. Fratila and M. Moros, Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 2091–2118 RSC .
S. Ibsen, A. Tong, C. Schutt, S. Esener and S. H. Chalasani, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 1–12 Search PubMed .
P. Anikeeva and A. Jasanoff, eLife, 2016, 5, e19569 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Barbic, eLife, 2019, 8, e45807 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Benfenati and G. Lanzani, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2021, 16, 1333–1336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Palanker, E. D. Glowacki and D. Ghezzi, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2021, 16, 1330–1332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Michalet, F. F. Pinaud, L. A. Bentolila, J. M. Tsay, S. Doose, J. J. Li, G. Sundaresan, A. Wu, S. Gambhir and S. Weiss, Science, 2005, 307, 538–544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Saraiva, C. Praça, R. Ferreira, T. Santos, L. Ferreira and L. Bernardino, J. Controlled Release, 2016, 235, 34–47 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. R. Lockman, J. M. Koziara, R. J. Mumper and D. D. Allen, J. Drug Targeting, 2004, 12, 635–641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Betzer, M. Shilo, R. Opochinsky, E. Barnoy, M. Motiei, E. Okun, G. Yadid and R. Popovtzer, Nanomedicine, 2017, 12, 1533–1546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Carpentier, M. Canney, A. Vignot, V. Reina, K. Beccaria, C. Horodyckid, C. Karachi, D. Leclercq, C. Lafon and J.-Y. Chapelon, Sci. Transl. Med., 2016, 8, 343re342 Search PubMed .
R. Melikov, S. B. Srivastava, O. Karatum, I. B. Dogru-Yuksel, H. Bahmani Jalali, S. Sadeghi, U. M. Dikbas, B. Ulgut, I. H. Kavakli and A. E. Cetin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 35940–35949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Moreels, K. Lambert, D. Smeets, D. De Muynck, T. Nollet, J. C. Martins, F. Vanhaecke, A. Vantomme, C. Delerue and G. Allan, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3023–3030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Chen, D. Li and F. Wang, Small, 2020, 16, 2002454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Jalali, S. Sadeghi, I. B. Dogru Yuksel, A. Onal and S. Nizamoglu, Nano Res., 2022, 15, 4468–4489 CrossRef CAS .
R. Xie and X. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 10645–10651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kim, B. Fisher, H.-J. Eisler and M. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 11466–11467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. McHugh, L. Jing, A. M. Behrens, S. Jayawardena, W. Tang, M. Gao, R. Langer and A. Jaklenec, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706356 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Reiss, M. Carriere, C. Lincheneau, L. Vaure and S. Tamang, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10731–10819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mondello, B. Pedigo, M. Sunshine, A. Fischedick, P. Horner and C. Moritz, Exp. Neurol., 2021, 335, 113480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Caggiano, V. C. Cheung and E. Bizzi, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 1–15 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Hayashi, C. A. Hinckley, S. P. Driscoll, N. J. Moore, A. J. Levine, K. L. Hilde, K. Sharma and S. L. Pfaff, Neuron, 2018, 97, 869–884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lu, S. Park, T. J. Richner, A. Derry, I. Brown, C. Hou, S. Rao, J. Kang, C. T. Moritz and Y. Fink, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1600955 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. J. Pathak, W. Greenleaf, L. Verhagen Metman, P. Kubben, S. Sarma, B. Pepin, D. Lautner, S. DeBates, A. M. Benison and B. Balasingh, Front. Digital Health, 2021, 43 Search PubMed .
E. S. Boyden, Nat. Neurosci., 2015, 18, 1200–1201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Qazi, K. E. Parker, C. Y. Kim, R. Rill, M. R. Norris, J. Chung, J. Bilbily, J. R. Kim, M. C. Walicki and G. B. Gereau, Nat. Biomed. Eng., 2022, 6, 771–786 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Cao, L. Gu, S. Mohanty and J.-C. Chiao, IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., 2012, 60, 225–229 Search PubMed .
H. Arami, S. Kananian, L. Khalifehzadeh, C. B. Patel, E. Chang, Y. Tanabe, Y. Zeng, S. J. Madsen, M. J. Mandella and A. Natarajan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2022, 17, 1015–1022 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† O. K. and M.-J. G. contributed equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

Onuralp Karatum
	Onuralp Karatum is a PhD candidate in Electrical and Electronics Engineering at Koc University, Istanbul, Turkey. He received his BS and MS degrees in Electrical and Electronics Engineering from Bilkent University and Koc University, respectively. His research interests include design and development of flexible and wireless bioelectronic devices for applications in electrical stimulation and optoelectronic neural interfaces.

Min-Jun Gwak
	Min Jun Gwak is currently a MS candidate under the supervision of Associate Professor Tae-il Kim at SKKU. He received a BS degree in Chemical Engineering (2022) from Sungkyunkwan University (SKKU), Korea. His research interests lie in controlling the drug release of injectable devices by utilizing photolithographic methods for biomedical applications, including microscale implantable devices and photothermal therapies.

Junghun Hyun
	Jeong Hun Hyun is currently working as a memory yield enhancement engineer at Samsung Electronics, Korea. He received a BS in Chemical Engineering from Sungkyunkwan University (SKKU) (2021). Jeong-Hun's research interest is flexible electronics fabricated by unconventional fabrication techniques.

Asim Onal
	Asim Onal received his BS in Metallurgy and Materials Engineering from Yildiz Technical University, Istanbul, Turkey, in 2019. Currently, he is pursuing his PhD in Biomedical Sciences and Engineering Department of Koç University, Istanbul, Turkey. His research interests include synthesis of colloidal quantum dots, optical and structural characterization techniques, and light emitting diodes.

Gyan Raj Koirala
	Gyan Raj Koirala is currently a research professor at Biomedical Institute for Convergence at Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, Korea. He received a BE in electronics and communication engineering (2010) from the Western Region Campus, Institute of Engineering, Tribhuvan University, Nepal, and a PhD in electronic engineering (2018) from Kwangwoon University in Seoul, Republic of Korea. His research focuses on the development of flexible, soft, and printed circuits and devices for wireless bioelectronic applications, RF/microwave sensors and devices, and other related topics.

Tae-il Kim
	Tae-il Kim is currently working as a professor in the School of Chemical Engineering at Sungkyunkwan University (SKKU), Korea. He received a BS in Chemical Engineering from SKKU (2003) and a PhD in Chemical Engineering from Seoul National University (2009) under the guidance of Professor Hong H. Lee. From 2009 to 2012, he was a post-doctoral fellow in the lab of Professor John A. Rogers at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Tae-il's research interests are bio-inspired and biomedical electronics, and flexible electronics fabricated by unconventional fabrication techniques.

Sedat Nizamoglu
	After receiving his PhD degree from Bilkent University in Turkey, Sedat Nizamoglu continued his work as a Bullock-Wellman Fellow, with a joint affiliation with Harvard Medical School and the Wellman Center for Photomedicine at Massachusetts General Hospital in the USA. He is currently an associate professor in the Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering at Koç University in Istanbul. His research interests are bioelectronics, nanotechnology and optoelectronics. He has received both ERC (European Research Council) Starting and Consolidator Grants, the first Science Diplomacy Award by YÖK (Council of Higher Education Council, Turkey), and most recently, the Aziz Sancar Incentive Award.

 	Fig. 1  Optical neuromodulation systems at all scales. At the nanoscale, nanostructures, such as nanoparticles,18–20,48 nanowires,49–51 and nanorods,37,52,53 are used as transducers to convert light into electrical, thermal, and acoustic stimuli. At the microscale, μLEDs are used for optogenetic modulation,54–57 and photovoltaic pixels are used for photoelectrical (i.e., photocapacitive, photoelectrochemical) modulation.58–61 Wireless systems at millimeter or larger scales typically combine different-scale interfaces with additional components for specific purposes, such as light delivery, power transfer, computation, sensing, signal recording, and data transfer.23–25,31,47,62 They can be used to stimulate a variety of organs such as brain, spinal cord, sciatic nerve, heart, and retina. The figures are reprinted with permission from ref. 49 Copyright 2018 Springer Nature,49 ref. 51 Copyright 2018 Springer Nature,51 ref. 63 Copyright 2018 Science,63 ref. 40 Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society,40 ref. 64 Copyright 2011 Annual Reviews,64 ref. 54 Copyright 2015 Elsevier,54 ref. 58 Copyright 2012 Springer Nature,58 ref. 65 Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons,65 ref. 31 Copyright 2021 Springer Nature,31 and ref. 24 Copyright 2015 Springer Nature.24	 

 	Fig. 2  Nanoscale optical neuromodulation interfaces: mechanisms. (a) Schematic showing the electron and hole migration in PIN–Si–NW and the occurrence of redox reactions leading to photoelectrochemical current generation at the PIN–Si NW–electrolyte interface. (b) Image of the DRG neurons (red) and Si–NWs (white) after NWs were drop-cast into the neuron culture medium to form the NW–neuron interface. (c) Photoelectrochemical currents generated by a single Si NW under a 10 ms light pulse with different optical powers. (d) Intracellular current-clamp recording of a DRG neuron showing light-induced subthreshold depolarization and action potential generation under a 1 ms light pulse with different optical powers. Panels a–d reprinted with permission from ref. 49 Copyright 2018 Springer Nature.49 (e) Simplified circuit model for a passive neural membrane showing the dependence of membrane current (Im(t)) on membrane potential (Vm), Thevenin conductance (gT), Thevenin potential (VT), surface charge potential (VS), and temperature-dependent membrane capacitance (Cm(T(t))). Reprinted with permission from ref. 76 Copyright 2012 Springer Nature.76 (f) SEM image of co-cultured DRG neurons and NW-templated 3D fuzzy graphene (NT-3DFG). Neuron and glia interfaces with NT-3DFG are shown with white arrows. The scale bar is 100 μm. On the right, a zoomed view of a dashed red box is shown (scale bar is 10 μm). (g) Local temperature change in the vicinity of NT-3DFG under 1 ms laser pulses with different optical powers (left) and membrane potential recording of a DRG neuron in current-clamp mode upon photoexcitation of NT-3DFG with a 1.2 ms laser pulse with different optical powers (1.45, 1.73, 2.28, and 3.02 mW) (violet, blue, green, and red, respectively) (right). 3.02 mW was able to evoke an action potential, while the other laser powers induced subthreshold responses. The purple arrow shows the start of the laser pulse. Panels f and g reprinted with permission from ref. 50 Copyright 2020 National Academy of Sciences.50 (h) Photothermal neuromodulation mechanism with macromolecular infrared nanotransducers for deep-brain stimulation (MINDS).20 (i) Temperature elevation resulting from the photoexcitation of MINDS via a 1064 nm laser pulse. (j) Variation of calcium signals in HEK293T cells under four different experimental conditions. A significant increase in the calcium signal was observed when TRPV1 is expressed and MINDS are present (red trace). Panels h–j adapted and reprinted with permission from ref. 20 Copyright 2022 Springer Nature.20 (k) Photoacoustic stimulation via nanotransducers that are excited with near-infrared light (left). A schematic of photoacoustic conversion via a nanosecond laser pulse is shown (right). Reprinted with permission from ref. 19 Copyright 2021 Elsevier.19 (l) Schematic demonstrating the use of upconversion nanoparticles (UCNPs) to convert near-infrared (NIR) light into visible light to build NIR-sensitive optogenetic systems (left). Membrane current recordings of ventral tegmental area dopamine (VTA DA) neurons interfaced with UCNPs in the voltage-clamp mode under different experimental conditions (right). NIR photoexcitation induces membrane current only in the co-presence of channelrhodopsin-2 (ChR-2) and UCNPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 63 Copyright 2018 Science.63	 

 	Fig. 3  Nanoscale optical neuromodulation interfaces: applications. (a) Left: SEM image of a DRG neuron with nearby single silicon nanowire with a zoomed-in image of the DRG neuron–silicon nanowire interface below. Right: Action potential firing of DRG neurons under intracellular current injection (blue) and photoexcitation (green) under 10, 20, and 40 Hz photostimulus. Reprinted with permission from ref. 49 Copyright 2018 Springer Nature.49 (b) Stimulation of DRG neurons via the optocapacitive pathway for pulse frequencies of 40 and 50 Hz (top two rows). Membrane current recordings of DRG neurons interfaced with AuNPs in the voltage-clamp mode showed similar capacitive current generation for 40 and 200 Hz pulse frequencies (bottom two rows). Reprinted with permission from ref. 48 Copyright 2015 Elsevier.48 (c) Schematic showing the use of freestanding Ti3C2Tx flakes for the optocapacitive stimulation of neurons (top). Bright field image and time series fluorescence images of a DRG neuron demonstrating Ca2+ signals in the white circled regions of interest after a 1 ms laser pulse was applied at t = 5.0 s (bottom). The red arrow shows an illuminated spot. Scale bars are 20 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 79 Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society.79 (d) Photothermal activation of the VTA that is 6 mm under the scalp by NIR-II illumination 1 m above the scalp. The VTA was targeted with TRPV1 transfection followed by MINDS injection to perform photothermal stimulation. (e) Behavioral experiment of freely moving mice, showing that the mice prefer the NIR-II illuminated region (red dashed box) because of photothermal stimulation of the VTA when MINDS and TRPV1 channels co-exist in the VTA. Panels d and e reprinted with permission from ref. 20 Copyright 2022 Springer Nature.20 (f) Attenuation of atherosclerosis by the activation of TRPV1 ion channels via the photothermal effect of copper sulfide nanoparticles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 82 Copyright 2018 Springer Nature.82 (g) Motor cortex stimulation schematic via NIR-II light and positions of recording electrodes (left). EMG recording showing forelimb response to stimulation of the motor cortex with photoacoustic nanoparticles (right). (h) Simulated temperature change at the surface of, and at 10 nm away from, the photoacoustic nanoparticles as a function of time. Panels g and h reprinted with permission from ref. 19 Copyright 2021 Elsevier.19	 

 	Fig. 4  Wireless photovoltaic and photodiode array systems. (a) The mechanism of generation of ionic stimulation current at the photovoltaic device–electrolyte interface upon photoexcitation. (b) Wireless photovoltaic cuff electrode based on p-type and n-type organic pigments for the remote stimulation of the sciatic nerve via deep red light. Panels a and b reprinted with permission from ref. 61 Copyright 2021 Springer Nature.61 (c) High-density, flexible pixelated retinal prosthesis based on organic semiconductors with a pixel size of 80 μm and pixel pitch of 120 μm. (d) Flexible and conformable design of an organic retinal prosthesis allows the device to fit into the eye curvature. Panels c and d reprinted with permission from ref. 59 Copyright 2018 Springer Nature.59 (e) Silicon photodiode array-based pixelated retinal prosthesis for vision restoration with high visual acuity. An ex vivo measurement setup for the validation of RGC stimulation is shown on the right. Reprinted with permission from ref. 21 Copyright 2015 Springer Nature.21 (f) Au nanoparticle-decorated TiO2 NW arrays for the photoactivation of RGCs to restore vision in blind rats having retinal degeneration. Reprinted with permission from ref. 51 Copyright 2018 Springer Nature.51	 

 	Fig. 5  OLEDs/μOLEDs and their applications in optical neuromodulation. (a) A schematic of the linearly stacked μ-OLED array showing the device architecture on the right. Photograph of the μ-OLED array with one pixel emitting shown below. (b) Experimental setup for optogenetically stimulating/inhibiting the neural activity of Drosophila larvae with the μ-OLED array. A photograph of the setup is shown at the top right. Images showing the procedure of estimating the spatial resolution of photostimulation are shown at the bottom right. The lateral spread of light emitted from a μ-OLED pixel was quantified. Panels a and b reprinted with permission from ref. 56 Copyright 2020 Springer Nature.56 (c) The device structure and photograph of the ultraflexible μ-OLED array used for peripheral and brain stimulation of rats. (d) Experimental setup for optogenetically stimulating sensory neurons using μ-OLEDs (top). Schematic showing the comparison between the light delivered with an optical fiber and μ-OLED (bottom). Panels c and d reprinted with permission from ref. 55 Copyright 2018 National Academy of Sciences.55	 

 	Fig. 6  Micro-scale ILEDs and flexible vertical LEDs (f-VLEDs), and their applications in optical neuromodulation. (a) Optical micrographs of display and lighting systems including a 16 × 16 square array of stretchable μ-ILEDs on a PDMS substrate (left). Between devices, there are interconnecting lines with electrodes supported by arc-shaped bridge structures. The inset shows an array of μ-ILEDs in a passive matrix layout. Reprinted with permission from ref. 126 Copyright 2009 Science.126 (b) Photographs of blue μ-ILED arrays for photostimulation of the spinal cord. The silicon–phosphor coating enables photostimulation within a wide range of the spectrum. Reprinted with permission from ref. 25 Copyright 2022 Springer Nature.25 (c) The schematic illustrates microscale AlGaInP f-VLEDs on the motor cortex for optogenetic control and is representative of the optical interface using red light. The overall structure in particular contains an anisotropic conductive film (ACF) and a passivation layer. (d) Cross-sectional view of f-VLEDs at the microscale. LED chips are interconnected to the bottom metal line and covered with the SU8 passivation layer (bottom). Through the ACF, the optical power is improved. Panels c and d adapted and reprinted with permission from ref. 57 Copyright 2018 Elsevier.57 (e) Schematic of microscale GaN f-VLEDs for a wireless brain optical stimulator. (f) Flexible, blue GaN μ-ILED array film on the brain surface and monolithic process for producing transparent microscale f-VLEDs. The optical power ranged from 0.1 to 1 mW mm−2. Panels e and f reprinted with permission from ref. 105 Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons.105	 

 	Fig. 7  Wireless power transfer methods for integrated optical neuromodulation systems: light, near field communication (NFC), and radio frequency (RF) (a) schematic illustrating each component and power transfer occurring via a light source, between coils through magnetic fields (NFC), and between transmitting antenna and receiving antenna (RF). (b) Diagram demonstrating the implantable μ-ILED based optogenetic stimulator powered by micro photovoltaics. Reprinted with permission from ref. 137 Copyright 2021 Elsevier.137 (c) Representative images of a wireless optogenetic system including injectable μ-ILEDs for optical stimulation (upper) and an ultraminiaturized photovoltaic device for energy harvesting (bottom). Adapted from Park et al. (2015).32 (d and e) Spinal cord (d) and gastric (e) stimulations by μ-ILEDs and metal coils for near-field powering. Panel d reprinted with permission from ref. 140 Copyright 2018 Lippincott Williams & Wilkins,140 and panel e reprinted with permission from ref. 62 Copyright 2021 Springer Nature.62 (f) A far-field powered wireless optogenetic system with an injectable μ-ILED system. It contains micro photodetectors (μPD) and electrophysiological sensors. Reprinted with permission from ref. 47 Copyright 2013 Science.47 (g and h) RF-based wireless optofluidic system using the μLED for controlled drug release. Soft and injectable optoelectronics enable the photostimulation of tissues in the brain. Panel g reprinted with permission from ref. 141 Copyright 2015 Elsevier141 and panel h reprinted with permission from ref. 142 Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons.142 (i) Using wireless optogenetics, soft and stretchable optoelectronics integrated with a RF harvester and μ-ILEDs can stimulate peripheral nerves. Reprinted with permission from ref. 24 Copyright 2015 Springer Nature.24	 

 	Fig. 8  Wireless neuromodulation by closed-loop systems. (a) Photograph of the optogenetic system that consists of programmable μ-ILEDs incorporated with a near-field power transfer system. The feedback regarding the light intensity of μ-ILEDs occurs in a closed loop. Reprinted with permission from ref. 46 Copyright 2018 Springer Nature.46 (b) Wireless optoelectronic system for deep brain stimulation (upper), and two different operation principles of wireless optoelectronic systems (bottom): (i) a wireless battery charging cage integrated with a RF system and (ii) conventional experimental system without RF power transmitter. Optimized battery charging is performed through a closed-loop system. Reprinted with permission from ref. 23 Copyright 2021 Springer Nature.23 (c) Closed-loop system performing bladder volume sensing and neuromodulation via optoelectronic stimulation and sensing (OESS) module operated by a wireless control and power (WCP) module. Photostimulation, activity monitoring, response recording, and near-field powering are integrated into the closed-loop system. Reprinted with permission from ref. 151 Copyright 2019 Springer Nature.151 (d) Wireless optogenetic system with inserted μ-ILED arrays and an electrophysiological sensor in a closed-loop. It can measure the neural activities of the spinal cord and is stimulated by illuminating μ-ILEDs powered by RF. Reprinted with permission from ref. 25 Copyright 2022 Springer Nature.25 (e) Five defined fundamental metrics for WPT methods (upper): power (P), miniaturization (M), depth (D), alignment tolerance (AT), and transmitter distance (TD). (f) The graph shows a relative comparison of the WPT methods regarding power, miniaturization, depth, and transmitter distance.	 

Optical communication	
	• Power transfer efficiency: 9%	Brain neural recording	
164


	• Tissue penetration depth: 6 mm

	• Weight: 1 μg	Cortex stimulation	
165


	• Size: 3 × 10−4 mm
Pros:	• Optical output power: 10 mW mm−2
• Miniaturized implants	• Weight: 23 mg	
	
157

• Low power consumption	• Size: 400 μm × 400 μm × 5 μm

	• Available power: 150 μW (single) −2.3 mW (array)
Cons:	• Optical output power: up to 3.5 mW mm−2
• Shallow implants	• Size: 1.75 mm × 1.75 mm (PV cell)	Brain stimulation	
137

• Light scattering, low power transfer efficiency	• 3.75 mm × 3.75 mm (NIR receiver)

	• Available power: 10.3 mW

	• Optical output power: 30 mW mm−2

	• Power transfer efficiency: 9.7%

	• Operational distance: 35 cm


Near field communication (NFC)	Pros:	• Weight: 30 mg	Deep brain stimulation	
44

• Higher power implants	• Size: 0.5–1.3 mm (thickness), 9.8 mm (diameter)
• Easy integration	• Harvesting power: 29 mW
Cons:	• Optical output power: up to 100 mW mm−2
• Large implants	• Operational distance: <30 cm
• Poor alignment tolerance	• Weight: 15–75 mg	Central nervous system (CNS) stimulation	
46


	• Size: 10 mm (diameter)

	• Available power: 6 mW mm−2

	• Optical output power: 10 mW mm−2

	• Operational distance: <30 cm

	• Weight: 20 mg	Spinal cord stimulation	
140


	• Size: 10 mm (width) × 5 mm (length) × 0.2 mm (thickness)

	• Optical output power: up to 50 mW mm−2

	• Operational distance: 26 cm

	• Size: 3 cm (width) × 3 cm (length) 0.3 cm (thickness)	Peripheral nervous system (PNS) stimulation, physiological recording	
151


	• Optical output power: 10 mW mm−2

	• Tissue penetration depth: 15 mm


Far field radiofrequency (RF)	Pros:	• Weight: 70 mg	Brain stimulation	
32

• Large distance between TX and RX	• Size: 3.5 mm (width) × 8.5 mm (length) × 2.4 mm (thickness)
• Easy integration	• Available power: 2 mW
Cons:	• Optical output power: 1 mW mm−2
• Shallow implants	• Weight: 16 mg	Spinal cord stimulation, PNS stimulation	
24

• High SAR level	• Size: 3.8 mm (width) × 6 mm (length) × 0.7 mm (thickness)

	• Available power: 1.6 mW

	• Optical output power: 10 mW mm−2

	• Operational distance: 20 cm

	• Weight: 20–50 mg	Spinal cord stimulation, PNS stimulation	
104


	• Size: 10–25 mm3

	• Available power: 5.6–15.7 mW

	• Optical output power: up to 60 mW mm−2

	• Operational distance: 3 cm

	• Weight: 33 mg	Brain stimulation	
45


	• Size: 4.3 mm (width) × 8 mm (length) × 0.7 mm (thickness)

	• Optical output power: up to 12 mW mm−2

 	Fig. 9  Clinical trials and potential use in human studies. (a) Schematic showing the design and components of the photovoltaic retinal prosthesis PRIMA that is in clinical trials. (b) Augmented reality glasses for photovoltaic retina implant (PRIMA) systems on a person. Figures a and b reprinted with permission from ref. 6 Copyright 2022 Springer Nature.6 (c) Optogenetic restoration of vision. Reprinted with permission from ref. 169 Copyright 2010 Science.169 (d) A patient with optogenetically transduced retinal ganglion cells performs a visual task while the brain activity is recorded with EEG. Reprinted with permission from ref. 170 Copyright 2021 Springer Nature.170 (e) Schematic of a concept for a fully implantable, optogenetic system for the human brain with wireless recharging. The brain can be controlled by the smartphone (left), and the wireless charging helmet (right) integrated with an RF transmission coil charges the battery. Reprinted with permission from ref. 23 Copyright 2021 Springer Nature.23	 
Footnote
† O. K. and M.-J. G. contributed equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
