Particulate photocatalytic reactors with spectrum-splitting function for artificial photosynthesis   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CP00597A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CP00597A
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2021, 23, 15659-15674Particulate photocatalytic reactors with spectrum-splitting function for artificial photosynthesis†

        
          
            Yasuhiko 
            Takeda
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Tomiko M. 
            Suzuki
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Shunsuke 
            Sato
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Takeshi 
            Morikawa
          
        
      
Toyota Central Research and Development Laboratories, Inc., 41-1, Yokomichi, Nagakute, Aichi 480-1192, Japan. E-mail: takeda@mosk.tytlabs.co.jp
Received 
      8th February 2021
    , Accepted 9th July 2021First published on 10th July 2021AbstractWe have applied spectrum splitting, which is the most reliable way for highly efficient solar energy utilization, to particulate photocatalytic reactors. We have elucidated that the spectrum splitting is feasible using plural cells/compartments, in which photocatalyst particles of different bandgaps are suspended respectively, arranged optically in series. When the particles are sufficiently small (≤20 nm in diameter), high-energy photons are absorbed in the wide-gap cell/compartment on the solar illumination side while low-energy photons reach the backside narrow-gap cell/compartment with being scarcely diffuse-reflected. We have proposed two concrete configurations of the reactors: wide-gap cell/narrow-gap Z-scheme cell (WG/Z), and wide-gap cell/two-compartment cell of middle-gap and narrow-gap (WG/MG–NG), based on the previous configuration of a two-compartment cell of wide-gap and narrow-gap (WG–NG). We have constructed a new model of the carrier supply process from the semiconductor photocatalysts to the active sites, and calculated the practical upper limits of the carrier supply rates and solar-to-chemical conversion efficiencies. The spectrum-splitting reactors can yield higher efficiencies of artificial photosynthetic H2 and CO production by up to 1.5–1.6 times than the conventional Z-scheme reactors. The newly proposed WG/Z reactor widens the room of the material developments and improves the robustness against solar spectrum variation, and hence would be a promising practical solution, although the efficiency is slightly lower than that for the ideal WG–NG reactor. The WG/MG–NG reactor yields the highest efficiency among the three configurations, with high spectral robustness.
1 Introduction
Suppression of net CO2 emission arising from fossil fuel consumption is indispensable for sustainable society. Solar-driven fuel production including water splitting for H2 and CO2 reduction for CO and HCOOH (formic acid) is one of the promising technologies to supply alternative fuels and to recycle emitted CO2 using solar energy.1–4 There are three types of solar-fuel production: (i) photochemical reaction, (ii) photoelectrochemical reaction, and (iii) combination of electrochemical reaction and photovoltaics. Among them, type (iii) consisting of electrochemical reactors and photovoltaic cells has achieved higher efficiencies of solar-to-chemical conversion.5–8 On the other hand, type (i) of artificial photosynthesis using particulate photocatalysts is suitable for large-sized devices owing to its simple structures,9–12 and hence could spread low-cost solar-fuel production technologies.1
When solar photons are absorbed in semiconductor photocatalysts, electron–hole pairs generate, transfer to the active sites on the surfaces, and then they are utilized for the target reduction (H2, CO, and HCOOH production) and oxidation (O2 production) reactions. The difference between the chemical potentials of these electrons and holes, Δμop, used for photocatalytic operation must be larger than the product of the thermodynamic threshold voltage of the reaction, V0, and the elementary charge, q. Further, overpotential, Vov, is needed, i.e., Δμop = qVop = q(V0 + Vov) (Vop is the operation voltage) is required in reality to achieve a meaningful reaction rate. In the present study, we consider efficient means to convert solar photons to electrons and holes (charge carriers) with Δμop = qVop to supply more carriers to the active sites.
The difficulty in efficient conversion of solar photons to energetic carriers arises from the broad solar spectrum. When solar photons are absorbed in a semiconductor material, the photo-generated carriers have high energies reflecting the solar spectrum. However, they are rapidly thermalized typically within subpicoseconds owing to inelastic scattering with phonons and reach the band edges, in other words, they lose their energies in excess of the bandgap, prior to being utilized for the reaction. Consequently, the upper limit of Δμop is determined by the bandgap of the material regardless of the absorbed photon energies.
Spectrum splitting using plural materials with different bandgaps, in which high-energy photons are absorbed in a wide-gap material and low-energy photons in a narrow-gap material, is the most reliable way to reduce the thermalization energy loss of the carriers and to improve the efficiency of solar energy utilization. For solar photovoltaics, spectrum splitting has already been established using multijunction solar cells,13,14 which are combined with electrochemical reactors for type (iii) solar-fuel production.5–7 The multijunction structures are also adopted for photoelectrodes used for type (ii).15–17 Application of spectrum splitting to type (i) has been proposed using two kinds of photocatalysts and a reactor consisting of two compartments of a double-junction-like configuration.18,19
In the present study, we propose new configurations of the spectrum-splitting reactors using three kinds of particulate photocatalysts, which potentially yield higher efficiency of solar-to-chemical conversion with higher robustness against solar-spectrum variation. We clarify the features of these different configurations, and evaluate the gain in the efficiencies compared to those of conventional reactors. For this purpose, we construct a new model to calculate the practical upper limit of the carrier supply rate of the semiconductor photocatalysts and solar-to-chemical conversion efficiency. One the other hand, one of the concerns for the spectrum-splitting reactors is that light scattering by the photocatalyst particles suspended in the reactor would hamper light absorption; the incident light would be diffuse-reflected prior to being absorbed. Therefore, we investigate the light propagation in the reactors to find the feasibility that the incident light in each spectral range is absorbed by the assigned photocatalysts.
2 Configurations of particulate photocatalytic reactors with spectrum-splitting function
We apply spectrum splitting, which is widely utilized for solar cells, to reactors using particulate photocatalysts. The point is to maximize the carrier supply rate at a given Δμop required for the target reaction. This is contrasting to that solar cells combined with power conditioners are designed to yield large output power density, i.e., product of the current density and voltage with no restriction of the voltage.

Fig. 1(a) illustrates the energy diagram and water-splitting mechanism of a photocatalyst consisting of a single material that supplies carriers with Δμop. For water splitting Δμop ≅ 1.6 eV is required, and Δμop ≅ 1.8 eV for CO2 reduction. The bandgap of the photocatalyst must be sufficiently wider than Δμop as shown later (see Fig. 4). Therefore, the photocatalyst can utilize only a small portion of the solar spectrum.
 Fig. 1  Energy diagrams and water splitting mechanisms of conventional photocatalysts. 
To widen the useful spectrum range, Z-scheme has been configured, in which two different photocatalyst materials are used and carriers are generated by two-step excitation, as depicted in Fig. 1(b).20–22 Mediators such as redox species shuttle between them for electron transfer. The optimal bandgaps of these two materials are approximately the half of that for a single-material photocatalyst. The narrower bandgaps notably widen the useful range of the solar spectrum. Consequently, the carrier supply rate significantly improves, although two photons are always consumed for a single carrier supply. When the two materials are suspended in a single container, both two materials are illuminated by whole of the solar spectrum. A variation of this configuration is all-solid-state Z-scheme shown in Fig. 1(c), in which the two kinds of photocatalysts are combined via solid-state conductors including reduced graphene oxide, In2O3:Sn, and Au between them,23–25 or directly.26 The all-solid-state type has been used for large-sized reactors.24,25
Another variation is the use of a twin reactor; two compartments, in which the two kinds of photocatalysts are suspended respectively, are connected with a separator between them.27–29 The mediators pass through the separator for electron transfer between the two materials. Although the energy diagram and reaction mechanism are the same as those of the original Z-scheme illustrated in Fig. 1(b), respectively, separation of the oxidation sites and reduction sites offers a great benefit of preventing reverse (downhill) reactions, in addition to separation of the two products, for example H2 and O2.
The double-junction-like spectrum-splitting reactor utilizes this twin-reactor configuration, as shown in Fig. 2(a).18,19 Wide-gap photocatalysts (WG-PCs) and narrow-gap photocatalysts (NG-PCs) are suspended, respectively, in the two compartments, and solar light illuminates from the WG side. In other words, the two compartments are arranged optically in series. High-energy photons are absorbed in the WG-PCs, whereas low-energy photons are absorbed in the NG-PCs after transmitting across the WG compartment and separator. For efficient spectrum splitting, diffuse reflection of the incident light in the WG compartment must be suppressed so that the low-energy photons reach the NG compartment. This, in turn, requires that the WG-PC particles are enough small. The separators should also be transparent. Although the operation mechanism is similar to that of the conventional Z-scheme, the unique point is splitting of the solar spectrum into two ranges. This reduces the thermalization energy loss of the carriers because the carrier energies in excess of the bandgaps are smaller. The reduction of the energy loss enables the use of further narrower bandgaps, increases the absorbed photon numbers, and consequently improves the carrier supply rate compared to that of the conventional Z-scheme.
 Fig. 2  Photocatalytic reactors equipped with spectrum-splitting function (upper panels), energy diagrams and water splitting mechanisms (middle panels), and corresponding solar cells (bottom panels). (a) Wide-gap and narrow-gap reactor (WG–NG),18,19 (b) wide-gap and Z-scheme reactor (WG/Z), and (c) wide-gap, middle-gap, and narrow-gap reactor (WG/MG–NG). 
However, the WG–NG reactor involves a shortcoming that sufficiently high-energy photons are not utilized efficiently. Two photons are always consumed for a single carrier supply, despite the ability of a single photon that has a sufficiently high energy to generate a single carrier with Δμop. Thus, we propose two configurations illustrated in Fig. 2(b) and (c) that fix this shortcoming. The WG/Z reactor consists of a WG cell, which is similar to the single-material reactor, located on the solar-illumination side and a Z-scheme cell on the backside, as depicted in Fig. 2(b). The original Z-scheme cell using the mediators can be replaced with the all-solid-state type. Sufficiently high-energy photons are absorbed in the WG-PCs, and thus a single photon is converted to a single carrier. Low-energy photons are utilized in the Z-scheme cell. The two cells: WG cell and Z-scheme cell operate independently with no material or energy transfer between them. Thus, the solar spectrum is split into two ranges and the high-energy photons are utilized efficiently, leading to an improvement in the carrier supply rate compared to that of the conventional Z-scheme.
The WG/MG–NG reactor shown in Fig. 2(c) is equipped with a two-compartment cell using middle-gap photocatalysts (MG-PCs) and NG-PCs instead of the Z-scheme cell used in the WG/Z reactor. Spectrum splitting into three ranges further improves the carrier supply rate.
The initial steps of the operation of these reactors on which we focus in the present study: light absorption, carrier generation, and carrier recombination are the same as those of solar cells (SCs). A single-material reactor corresponds to a single-junction (1J) SC. A conventional Z-scheme reactor is similar to a two-series-connected 1J SC. The SCs corresponding to the spectrum-splitting reactors are illustrated in the bottom panels of Fig. 2(a)–(c). The operation of the WG–NG reactor is related to that of a double-junction (2J) SC, as previously stated. The WG/Z reactor corresponds to a parallel connection of a wide-gap SC and a two-series-connected narrow-gap 1J SC.30,31 The WG/MG–NG reactor operates similarly to a series/parallel-connected triple-junction (S/P-3J) SC.32,33 In an S/P-3J SC, the series-connected middle and bottom cells are connected with the top cell in parallel, which is contrasting to that all of the top, middle, and bottom cells are series-connected in a usual 3J SC. S/P-3J SCs can yield higher solar-to-chemical conversion efficiency with higher robustness against solar spectrum variation than 2J and all-series-connected 3J SCs when they are combined with electrochemical reactors for type (iii) solar-fuel production.34
3 Evaluation of spectrum splitting
To evaluate the effect of the spectrum splitting described in Section 2, we model the light absorption, carrier generation, and carrier recombination processes and calculate the carrier supply rates of the spectrum-splitting reactors, which are compared with those for the conventional reactors. First, we optimize the bandgaps of the semiconductor photocatalysts under the standard air mass (AM) 1.5G solar spectrum illumination. Then, we investigate the impacts of solar spectrum variation dependent on weather conditions by comparing the carrier supply rates of the reactors, which are optimized for the AM 1.5G, under measured solar spectra.
For the spectrum-splitting mechanism using optically series-arranged plural cells/compartments to work well, the high-energy photons must be absorbed in the cell/compartment on the illumination side, while the low-energy photons are required to reach the backside cell/compartment with negligibly weak diffuse reflection. To examine the feasibility, we model the propagation of light in the reactors in which photocatalyst particles are suspended, and calculate the absorptivity and transmissivity in the front cell/compartment.
3.1 Modelling of carrier supply process and formulation
Among the various factors that determine the photocatalytic reaction rate, we focus on finding the practical upper limit of the carrier supply capability of the semiconductor photocatalysts in the present study, rather than accurate evaluation of solar-to-chemical conversion efficiency of the reactors using concrete combinations of constituent materials. The reaction rate also depends on the concentration and adsorption amount of the reactants, carrier transfer rate to the reactants, etc., which are significantly affected by cocatalysts on the surfaces. These effects can be described by a phenomenological parameter of the overpotential, Vov, required for a given reaction rate. Thus, we evaluate the supply rate of carriers with Δμop = qVop = q(V0 + VOV) from the particulate photocatalysts to the active sites.35,36 Because the solar light propagating in the reactor is gradually absorbed, the light intensity, carrier density and Fermi levels in the photocatalysts, and the resultant carrier supply rate also gradually change. We construct a model of the carrier supply process using the averaged values over the reactor to assess the general trend of the characteristics, instead of assuming concrete light-intensity distributions that depend on the photon energies. It is assumed that the relevant energy levels are suitably arranged; valence band maximum (VBM) of the oxidation photocatalysts and conduction band minimum (CBM) of the reduction photocatalysts straddle both the oxidation and reduction levels of the reactants, and the redox levels of the mediators are located so that electrons excited in the oxidation photocatalysts spontaneously transfer to the reduction photocatalysts with negligibly weak backward reactions. Another assumption is no parasitic light absorption by the mediators or cocatalysts.
First, we consider the single-material reactor. Photogenerated carriers in the photocatalysts with a bandgap, Eg, partially disappear by radiative and nonradiative recombination, and the rests transfer to the active sites. Thus, the carrier supply rate, Nsup(Δμop), as a function of Δμop is the difference between the carrier generation rate, Ngen, and radiative and nonradiative recombination rates, Nrad and Nnonrad, respectively: Nsup(Δμop) = Ngen − Nrad − Nnonrad(1)
The absorbed photon flux, Nabs, equals Ngen, and hence they are expressed using the spectral solar photon flux, nsun(ħω), when absorptivity of the above-gap photons in the reactor is unity: (2)The notation of Ngen(Eg,∞) clarifies that it is a function of the light-absorption range, from Eg to infinity for the single-material reactor. Near-infrared light does not reach the photocatalysts because it is absorbed by water. However, all the Eg values optimized for the reactors considered in the present study are larger than 1.5 eV as shown later (see Fig. 4), and hence the detrimental impact of light absorption by water is negligibly weak.37
The generalized Planck law determines Nrad:38 (3) (4)where h, c, and kB are the Planck constant, light velocity in vacuum, and Boltzmann constant, respectively. The carrier temperature equals room temperature (TRT = 300 K), because the photogenerated carriers are rapidly thermalized. Using the Boltzmann approximation, Nrad is simplified: Nrad ≅ N(0)rad(Eg)exp[Δμop/(kBTRT)](5) (6)
Using the nonradiative recombination lifetime, τnonrad, with the carrier density under illumination, nc, and intrinsic carrier density, ni, Nnonrad is formulated as follows: Nnonrad = (nc − ni)w/τnonrad(7)where w is the thickness of the particulate photocatalysts projected into the light-propagation direction, which is determined so that the light absorptivity is sufficiently high. Therefore, w equals the total volume of the particles per unit area (in length dimension), and ncw is the areal carrier density. Describing the valence band and conduction band using a parabolic two-band model with the same effective mass, mc, (8)is derived. Here, the origin of the energy axis (E) is located at the centre of the bandgap. The Boltzmann approximation simplifies the expression of Nnonrad: Nnonrad ≅ ni(Eg)w(exp[Δμop/(2kBTRT)] − 1)/τnonrad(9) (10)Thus, practical material properties are involved in the model via mc, τnonrad, and w.
These expressions clarify the dependence of Nsup(Δμop) on Egvia N(0)rad(Eg) and ni(Eg): (11)Thus, Nsup(Δμop) is the difference between the carrier generation rate (Ngen(Eg,∞)) determined by Eg and carrier recombination rates that are exponentially increasing functions of Δμop.
For the Z-scheme reactor using two photocatalyst materials and mediators, in which Δμop is generated by two-step excitation, Nsup(Δμop) is similarly derived. When all the electrons that transfer from the oxidation photocatalysts to the mediators reach the reduction photocatalysts with negligibly weak backward reactions,39 the carrier supply rates of these two photocatalysts should be equal to each other for achieving large Nsup(Δμop). This holds when Eg and the absorption spectra of the two materials are identical with the same mc and τnonrad values. In addition to Δμop for promoting the target reaction, the driving force for electron transfer via the redox mediators, ΔG, is needed (see Fig. 1(b)). Thus, each kind of photocatalysts is required to generate carriers with (Δμop + ΔG)/2. Because Ngen and Nrad are shared by the two photocatalysts, Nsup(Δμop) is derived as follows: (12)This is equivalent to the current–voltage relation of a two-series-connected 1J SC, as stated in Section 2.
Operation of the spectrum-splitting WG–NG reactor is similar to that of a 2J SC. The requisite corresponding to the current matching for a 2J SC is that the carrier supply rates of the WG-PCs and NG-PCs, NWG and NNG, expressed by eqn (11) should be equal to each other, similarly to the two values for the Z-scheme reactor. Thus, the following relations are derived, in which the suffix WG (NG) means that the values are of the WG-PCs (NG-PCs): Nsup(Δμop) = NWG(ΔμWG) = NNG(ΔμNG)(13.1) Δμop + ΔG = ΔμWG + ΔμNG(13.2) (13.3) (13.4)
The expressions of the WG/Z reactor are derived in a similar manner; Nsup(Δμop) equals the summation of the carrier supply rate of the WG cell on the solar illumination side, NWG, and that of the Z-scheme cell on the backside, NZ, because these two cells operate independently, in analogy with two parallel-connected SCs: Nsup(Δμop) = NWG(Δμop) + NZ(Δμop)(14.1) (14.2) (14.3)where EgNG is the bandgap of the photocatalysts used in the Z-scheme cell; the suffix NG means the narrower gap than EgWG.
Finally, Nsup(Δμop) of the WG/MG–NG reactor is derived. Independent operation of the WG cell and the MG–NG cell is in common with the WG/Z reactor. The two-compartment MG–NG cell operates similarly to the WG–NG reactor. Thus, Nsup(Δμop) is determined as a solution of the following simultaneous equation: Nsup(Δμop) = NWG(Δμop) + NMG–NG(Δμop)(15.1) (15.2) NMG–NG(Δμop) = NMG(ΔμMG) = NNG(ΔμNG)(15.3) Δμop + ΔG = ΔμMG + ΔμNG(15.4) (15.5) (15.6)
The calculated Nsup is converted to the current density, Jsup = qNsup, that is an easy parameter to understand. Then, the solar-to-chemical conversion efficiencies of H2 production from H2O, ηH2, and CO from CO2, ηCO, are determined. For the H2 production, although the thermodynamic threshold is V0 = 1.23 eV, VOV is needed to achieve practically meaningful Jsup and ηH2. Developments of electrode catalysts have realized current densities of electrochemical reactors over 30 mA cm−2 at operation voltages of Vop = V0 + VOV = 1.5–1.6 V.40,41 Therefore, ηH2 is determined using Jsup at Δμop = 1.6 eV assuming the faradaic efficiency being unity: ηH2 = Jsup(Δμop = 1.6 eV)·1.23 [V]/Psun(16)where Jsup is in units of mA cm−2 and Psun is the solar irradiance in units of mW cm−2. This corresponds to a sufficiently small Tafel slop in the current density vs. voltage relation of an electrochemical reactor.42 For the CO production, large current densities over 10 mA cm−2 have been achieved at Vop = V0 + VOV = 1.8 V (V0 = 1.34 V) with high faradaic efficiencies of around 0.9.43,44 Thus, ηCO is determined using Jsup at Δμop = 1.8 eV and the faradaic efficiency of 0.9: ηCO = Jsup(Δμop = 1.8 eV)·1.34 [V]·0.9/Psun(17)
3.2 Variation in solar spectrum
The solar spectrum varies dependent on date and time, and also on the weather conditions. Therefore, spectrally robust Nsup(Δμop) is important for practical use.

Fig. 3(a) shows global solar irradiation spectra measured in Tsukuba, Japan (N36°, E140°), on a south-facing slope with a tilt angle of 32°.45 The standard air mass (AM) 1.5G spectrum is also plotted for comparison.46 The spectral irradiance is converted to spectral photon flux as a function of the photon energy and normalized by each average over 1.19–1.21 eV in Fig. 3(b), for characterizing each spectrum. The S-1 and S-2 spectra were measured on sunny days, with different AM values. The S-1 with AM 1.03 includes relatively more high-energy photons, contrasting to smaller number of the high-energy photons in the S-2 with AM 3.95. The relative number of the high-energy photons further increases in the C-1 and C-2 spectra measured on a cloudy day.47 We investigate the impacts of these solar spectrum variation on Nsup(Δμop), ηH2, and ηCO.
 Fig. 3  (a) Global solar irradiation spectra measured in Tsukuba, Japan.45 S-1: 92.6 mW cm−2, AM 1.03 (11:40, 14/06/2015). S-2: 44.6 mW cm−2, AM 3.95 (15:00, 29/12/2015). C-1: 35.2 mW cm−2, AM 1.22 (11:20, 21/09/2015). C-2: 37.6 mW cm−2, AM 1.20 (11:10, 21/09/2015). The standard AM 1.5G spectrum is also shown for comparison.46 (b) Relations of the photon flux normalized by each average over 1.19–1.21 eV vs. the photon energy. 
 Fig. 4  (a) Carrier supply rate (Nsup) converted to the current density (Jsup = qNsup) under the AM 1.5G spectrum illumination. mc = 2m0, τnonrad = 1 ns, ΔG = 0.2 eV, and w = 4 μm are adopted. (b–d) Optimal bandgaps (Eg) of the photocatalysts used in the spectrum-splitting reactors. The values for the single-material reactors (gray open circles) and conventional Z-scheme reactors (dark blue asterisks) are also shown for comparison. 
3.3 Modelling of light propagation in the reactors including absorption and scattering
We calculate the absorptivity and transmissivity of the incident light into the reactors in which photocatalyst particles are suspended to determine the absorbed photon flux (Nabs). The particles are assumed to be spherical. Scattering and absorption of light by each particle are dealt with using the Mie scattering formula that describes the effect of a single particle in a medium. Multiple scattering in the reactor is involved using a ray-trace model and a Monte-Carlo method.48,49
In the WG–NG reactor illustrated in Fig. 2(a) for example, photons with energies lower than EgWG are not absorbed in the WG compartment and hence transmitted or reflected. The mean-free path of the photons, λmfp, equals the inverse of the product of the scattering cross section of each particle, Csca, and number density of the particles, np: λmfp = (npCsca)−1(18)The scattering events that change the propagation direction of light are dealt with probabilistically using a Monte-Carlo simulation.
On the other hand, most of the photons with higher energies than EgWG are absorbed in the WG compartment. Thus, λmfp is defined using Csca and the absorption cross section, Cabs: λmfp = (np(Csca + Cabs))−1(19)and both the scattering and absorption events are involved in the Monte-Carlo simulation.
The present model of independent scattering by each particle holds when np is small and hence the distance between the neighbouring particles is long.50 This model provides accurate results under the conditions mainly adopted in Section 4 that the photocatalyst particles of 1–100 nm in diameter are suspended in the compartments/cells of 1 cm in thickness with the total volume per unit area of w = 1–6 μm (0.39–2.3 mg cm−3 for anatase TiO2). Detailed discussion on the accuracy is given in Section S3 of the ESI.†51
4 Results and discussion
4.1 Effects of spectrum splitting
First, we evaluated Nsup of the reactors illustrated in Fig. 1 and 2 when they are illuminated under the AM 1.5G spectrum. The carrier effective mass of mc = 2m0 (m0 is the electron rest mass) and nonradiative recombination lifetime of τnonrad = 1 ns, which are typical values of anatase TiO2,52–54 were adopted unless otherwise stated. The driving force for electron transfer via the redox mediators was set to ΔG = 0.2 eV that is thermodynamically required. The differences between the redox level and relevant Fermi levels in the semiconductor photocatalysts are 0.1 eV ≅ 4 kBTRT, leading to 98% population of the lower levels.55 The total volume of the particulate photocatalysts was w = 4 μm, which meets the requisite that the high-energy photons are absorbed in the compartment/cell on the solar illumination side while the low-energy photons reach the backside compartment/cell. The conditions of w and the particle size are investigated in detail in Section 4.4.

Fig. 4(a) shows the carrier supply rates (Nsup) converted to the current densities (Jsup = qNsup) as functions of Δμop. The optimal Eg values of the photocatalysts used in these reactors are depicted in Fig. 4(b)–(d). For the single-material reactor, Jsup is 2.7 mA cm−2 at Δμop = 1.6 eV required for water splitting (ηH2 = 3.4%). The optimal Eg widens with increasing Δμop, and hence the absorbed photon flux (Nabs) that is equal to the carrier generation rate (Ngen) decreases. Consequently, Jsup reduces to 1.5 mA cm−2 at Δμop = 1.8 eV for CO2 reduction to CO (ηCO = 1.8%).
The Jsup values for the conventional Z-scheme reactors significantly improve compared to those for the single-material reactors. In particular, the improvement is more notable at a larger Δμop. The optimal Eg at a given Δμop narrows to be close to half of that for the single-material reactor. Because the spectral solar photon flux is a decreasing function of the photon energy, as is clear from Fig. 3(b), Nabs and Ngen dramatically increase with narrowing Eg. As a result, Jsup increases to 5.9 mA cm−2 at 1.6 eV (ηH2 = 7.2%) and 4.9 mA cm−2 at 1.8 eV (ηCO = 6.0%), despite the consumption of two photons for a single carrier supply and an additionally required energy of ΔG.
The WG–NG reactor equipped with spectrum-splitting function further increases Jsup. The summation of the optimal EgWG and EgNG is close to twice the optimal Eg for the conventional Z-scheme reactor at a given Δμop, because the two-step excitation and the need of ΔG are in common. Therefore, the improvement in Jsup originates from reduction of the thermalization energy loss of the carriers owing to spectrum splitting, resulting in Jsup = 8.6 mA cm−2 at 1.6 eV (ηH2 = 10.5%) and 7.2 mA cm−2 at 1.8 eV (ηCO = 8.6%).
The WG/Z reactor that is newly proposed for spectrum splitting also increases Jsup at a small Δμop, whereas it is less advantageous when Δμop is large. The optimal EgWG and EgNG are close to those for the single-material reactor and Z-scheme reactor, respectively. The additional WG (single-material) cell onto the Z-scheme cell notably contributes to carrier supply when Δμop is small. However, its effect weakens with increasing Δμop, because the optimal EgWG widens and hence Ngen(EgWG,∞) reduces rapidly. Consequently, Jsup = 7.1 mA cm−2 at 1.6 eV (ηH2 = 8.8%) is higher than that for the conventional Z-scheme reactor by 1.2 mA cm−2, whereas the gain at 1.8 eV is only 0.7 mA cm−2 (Jsup = 5.6 mA cm−2, ηCO = 6.8%).
The effects of these two configurations are synergistically combined in the WG/MG–NG reactor. The three Eg values are similarly optimized. Thus, Jsup improves to 9.2 mA cm−2 at 1.6 eV (ηH2 = 11.3%); the gain compared to that for the WG/NG reactor is 0.6 mA cm−2. However, Jsup = 7.5 mA cm−2 at 1.8 eV (ηCO = 9.0%) is larger by only 0.3 mA cm−2. For both cases, 1.5–1.6 times higher efficiencies are achieved than the conventional Z-scheme reactors.
4.2 Impacts of material properties
The first priority is to tune the Eg values for a highly efficient spectrum-splitting reactor. Although ΔG should not be larger than the requisite for negligibly weak backward reactions, its tuning range is limited by the redox level of the mediators because the CBM of the oxidation photocatalysts and the VBM of the reduction photocatalysts must straddle the redox level. The carrier effective mass (mc) that determines the density of states and nonradiative recombination lifetime (τnonrad) also affect Jsupvia Nnonrad. Thus, we next evaluated the impacts and tolerance of these material properties.
When one of the two or three Eg values deviates from the optimal value whereas the others remain the optimal, Jsup of the spectrum-splitting reactors for H2 production (Δμop = 1.6 eV) decreases as depicted in Fig. 5, where the right vertical axes are the ηH2 values converted from Jsup. Both EgWG and EgNG affect the performance of the WG–NG reactor. By contrast, as for the WG/Z reactor, the detrimental impact of deviation of EgNG is less remarkable, and Jsup or ηH2 change only slightly when EgWG widens. However, Jsup and ηH2 rapidly decrease with narrowing EgWG. Therefore, EgWG should be tuned to be slightly wider than the optimal value, and thus tolerance of Eg deviation for the WG/Z reactor is wider than that for the WG–NG reactor. The dependence on EgWG for the WG/MG–NG reactor is similar to that for the WG/Z reactor, while the impact of the change in EgMG and EgNG is analogous to that for the WG–NG reactor. It has been confirmed that the reactors designed for CO production (Δμop = 1.8 eV) exhibit similar dependence on ΔEg.
 Fig. 5  Impacts of Eg deviation from the optimal values (ΔEg) on Jsup and ηH2. mc = 2m0, τnonrad = 1 ns, ΔG = 0.2 eV, and w = 4 μm are adopted. 
There are two main factors that reduce Jsup when Eg deviates from the optimal value. One originates from the Nsupvs. Δμop relation of each cell/compartment. Because Nrad is negligibly small compared to Nnonrad under the present conditions of mc and τnonrad (see Fig. S1, ESI†), Nsup(Δμop) is further simplified as follows: (20)This shows that Nsup is approximately constant in the small Δμop range where Nnonrad is negligibly small, whereas it exponentially decreases when Δμop comes close to Eg. With decreasing Eg, Nabs and Ngen increase whereas Nnonrad at a given Δμop also increases. Thus, the optimal Eg is determined from this trade-off relation (see Fig. S2, ESI†). It should be noted that Jsup at a given Δμop is extremely more sensitive to Eg than the output power of a solar cell (see Fig. S3, ESI†). Therefore, bandgap tuning is a more serious problem for photocatalysts than that for solar cells.
The other factor that reduces Jsup is accompanied by the two-step excitation, and exactly the same as the current-matching problem in double-junction solar cells. In a WG–NG reactor, the optimal Eg values are determined so that the Nabs values of the two compartments are approximately the same. When Eg deviates, the balance of the two values breaks and the excess part of Nabs is wasted. Therefore, the tolerance of Eg deviation relates to the robustness against solar spectrum variation, which is discussed in Section 4.3.
The Z-scheme cell used in the WG/Z reactor also suffers from the current-matching problem. However, the difference in Nabs between the two kinds of photocatalysts is smaller even though EgNG is not the optimal for one of these two materials, because most of the absorption ranges overlap with each other. Therefore, the detrimental impact of EgNG deviation is less remarkable than that for the WG–NG reactor. A wider EgWG is not a great issue because photons that transmit the WG cell are utilized in the backside Z-scheme cell for the carrier supply, although the utilization efficiency halves because of the two-step excitation. These are the reasons of the wider tolerance of Eg deviation for the WG/Z reactor than that for the WG–NG reactor. However, a narrower EgWG notably deteriorates the performance, because Nabs of the Z-scheme cell reduces in addition to a reduction of the carrier supply rate of the WG reactor (NWG) caused by the first factor described above.
Introduction of different transition-metal elements into oxide materials such as SrTiO3:Rh, TiO2:Rh,Sb, etc. form midgap levels, resulting in narrower Eg.26 Another means to tune Eg is the use of mixed-anion materials.56–58 Partial substitution of oxygen with nitrogen and sulphur shifts the VBM to shallower whereas the use of fluorine shifts to deeper, with few changes in the CBM. Codoping with a metal element and nitrogen widens the tuning range of the band edges.57,59 When all the oxygen is replaced with sulphur, Eg further narrows,60 and hence sulphide materials are promising candidates for the NG-PCs. Indeed, Z-scheme reactors of the conventional type have been demonstrated using the combinations of sulphides and oxides.61–64
The two parameters of mc and τnonrad that characterize the carrier nonradiative recombination rate (Nnonrad) in the semiconductor photocatalysts also affect Jsup, ηH2, and ηCO. The dependence of Nnonrad on these two is found from eqn (20): Nnonrad ∝ mc3/2/τnonrad(21)

Fig. 6 shows that Jsup, ηH2, and ηCO notably improve with decreasing mc3/2/τnonrad. In short, a long τnonrad and a small mc that is equivalent to a small density of states of the carriers are of great importance for high performance. As is clear from eqn (20), Jsup ≅ qNgen holds up to a larger Δμop for a smaller mc3/2/τnonrad at a given Eg (see Fig. S4, ESI†). Therefore, the optimal Eg for a given Δμop narrows, leading to larger Nabs and Ngen (see Fig. S5, ESI†). The impacts of mc and τnonrad on Jsupvia Nnonrad are significant, because Nrad that is another factor reducing Jsup is negligibly small compared to Nnonrad under the present conditions, as stated above.
 Fig. 6  Impacts of the carrier effective mass (mc) and nonradiative recombination lifetime (τnonrad) on Jsup, ηH2, and ηCO. The Eg values are optimized for each case. ΔG = 0.2 eV and w = 4 μm are adopted. Asterisks: mc = 2m0 and τnonrad = 1 ns. Open diamonds: mc = 0.3m0 and τnonrad = 1 ns. Solid squares: mc = 0.3m0 and τnonrad = 10 ns. 
Sulphide materials provide smaller mc than oxides in general.60 For example, mc ≅ 0.3 of CuGaS2 is an order of magnitude smaller than that of TiO2.65 The use of sulphides has more proceeded for solar cells, achieving τnonrad exceeding 10 ns that is notably longer than that of TiO2.66 When mc = 0.3 and τnonrad = 10 ns are realized simultaneously, Nnonrad reduces to (0.3/2)3/2/(10/1) = 0.006 relative to that for the previous parameters of mc = 2 and τnonrad = 1 ns.
Under the condition of mc = 0.3 and τnonrad = 10 ns, Jsup for H2 production (Δμop = 1.6 eV) increases by 2.8–5.1 mA cm−2 compared to those at mc = 2 and τnonrad = 1 ns, and that for CO production (Δμop = 1.8 eV) by 1.8–4.5 mA cm−2. Consequently, ηH2 of the single-material reactor improves to 6.8%, and that of the conventional Z-scheme reactor to 11.2%. Spectrum splitting further boosts ηH2 to be up to 17.6% that is 1.6 times higher than that of the Z-scheme reactor. For CO production, ηCO comes close to as high as 15%.
The carrier mobility is inversely proportional to mc, and the diffusion length is proportional to . Therefore, a small mc and a long τnonrad are essential also from another perspective of carrier transfer properties that are not involved in the present model.67 Thus, to achieve a small mc and a long τnonrad of the carriers are the great points for the material developments in addition to tuning Eg.
The redox levels of the mediator limit the tuning range of ΔG, as stated above. For achieving ΔG = 0.2 eV that is thermodynamically required for electron transfer via the redox mediators,55 the distances among the redox level and relevant band edges of the two kinds of semiconductor photocatalysts must be fine-tuned, which would be difficult to realize. The impact of larger ΔG on Jsup is shown in Fig. 7. The CBM of the oxidation photocatalysts and VBM of the reduction photocatalysts, which straddle the redox level, shift to shallower and deeper, respectively, when ΔG is larger. Hence, each Eg increases (see Fig. S6, ESI†), resulting in reductions in each Nabs and Ngen. Eventually, Jsup decreases by 1.6–2.6 mA cm−2 at ΔG = 0.6 eV and ηH2 and ηCO lower by 1.9–3.2%, compared to those at ΔG = 0.2 eV. Nevertheless, the spectrum-splitting reactors yield higher efficiencies than the conventional Z-scheme reactors by up to 1.5–1.6 times at a given ΔG. Furthermore, the WG–NG and WG/MG–NG reactors remain more advantageous even at ΔG = 0.6 eV than the Z-scheme reactors at ΔG = 0.2 eV.
 Fig. 7  Impacts of the driving force for the electron transfer via the redox mediators (ΔG) on Jsup, ηH2, and ηCO. The Eg values are optimized for each case. mc = 2m0, τnonrad = 1 ns, and w = 4 μm are adopted. ΔG = 0.2 eV is the lower limit for the WG–MG and WG/MG–NG reactors using two-compartment cells, whereas ΔG = 0 eV is feasible for the Z-scheme and WG/Z reactors (solid squares) when all-solid-state Z-scheme cells are employed. 
In the WG–NG reactor, the two compartments are connected with the separator. Therefore, the separator is required to transmit the mediators along with transmission of the lower-energy photons than EgWG. When an ion-exchange membrane is used, the suitable mediators would be multivalent ions including Fe3+/Fe2+ and IO3−/I−.27–29 Therefore, fine tuning of the distances among the redox level and relevant band edges of the two kinds of semiconductor photocatalysts would be difficult. By contrast, a small ΔG would be feasible using metal-complex mediators like [Co(bpy)3]3+/2+ in a single-compartment Z-scheme cell for the WG/Z reactor, because the redox level is controlled by choosing suitable ligands.61,68 Moreover, when an all-solid-state Z-scheme cell is employed, ΔG could be close to zero, because the oxidation photocatalysts and reduction photocatalysts are combined via solid-state conductors or directly.23–26 The WG/Z reactors with ΔG = 0 eV for H2 and CO surpass the WG/NG reactors with ΔG = 0.3 and 0.35 eV, respectively.
Thus, the WG/Z reactor offers great advantages of wider tolerance of Eg deviation and feasibility of a smaller ΔG, which widens the room of the material developments. Consequently, the WG/Z reactor would be a promising practical solution to achieve higher ηH2 and ηCO than the WG–NG reactor.
4.3 Robustness against solar spectrum variation
Next, we calculated Jsup, ηH2, and ηCO of the reactors when they are illuminated under the measured solar spectra shown in Fig. 3. The Eg values are optimized for the AM 1.5G spectrum in Section 4.1. Fig. 8(a) shows Jsup at Δμop = 1.6 eV and Fig. 8(c) at 1.8 eV. These Jsup values are converted to ηH2 and ηCO in Fig. 8(b) and (d), respectively.
 Fig. 8  
J
sup, ηH2, and ηCO under the AM 1.5G and measured solar spectra shown in Fig. 3. The Eg values are optimized for the AM 1.5G. mc = 2m0, τnonrad = 1 ns, ΔG = 0.2 eV, and w = 4 μm are adopted. 
All the reactors exhibit similar trends; Jsup changes roughly reflecting the variation in the solar irradiance, although the details of the changes depend on the characteristics of each spectrum. Larger Jsup values are achieved under the S-1 spectrum (92.6 mW cm−2, AM 1.03) than those under the AM 1.5G (100 mW cm−2) for all the reactors, despite the weaker irradiance. Comparing the three values under the S-2 (44.6 mW cm−2, AM 3.95), C-1 (35.2 mW cm−2, AM 1.22), and C-2 (37.6 mW cm−2, AM 1.22), Jsup under the S-2 is approximately the same as those under the other two spectra or even smaller, although the S-2 is the most intense among the three. These trends are highlighted in ηH2 and ηCO. The highest values are exhibited under the S-1 whereas the lowest under the S-2.
As for the single-material reactor, Jsup/q is slightly smaller than Ngen that equals Nabs, i.e., the number of photons whose energies are larger than Eg (2.79 eV for H2 production), as is clear from eqn (20) and Fig. S1, ESI.† Therefore, Jsup is approximately proportional to Nabs. Under the S-1 spectrum, Jsup is the largest because the number of the high-energy photons is the largest among the five spectra shown in Fig. 3(a), see also Fig. S7(a), ESI.† By contrast, the S-2 includes the smallest number of the high-energy photons, resulting in the smallest Jsup. On the other hand, ηH2 is determined from the ratio of Jsup to Psun that is the integrated value of the spectral irradiance over the whole of the solar spectrum. Thus, ηH2 is relatively higher under the blue-shifted S-1, C-1, and C-2 spectra in which the high-energy components are relatively more intense as depicted in Fig. 3(b). Comparing the C-1 and C-2, ηH2 under the C-1 is slightly higher, because Psun of the C-1 is slightly smaller whereas the two Jsup values are very close to each other. The same holds for ηCO. These basic trends apply to the other reactors.
On the other hand, the reactor configuration also affects the details of the changes in ηH2 and ηCO, in analogy with the tolerance of Eg deviation. As for the single-material reactor, Z-scheme reactor, and spectrum-splitting WG/Z reactor, the values under the S-1 are approximately the same as those under the C-1. By contrast, the ηH2 and ηCO for the WG–NG reactor under the C-1 are appreciably lower than those under the S-1, respectively. As a result, the WG–NG reactor yields higher ηH2 and ηCO than the WG/Z reactor under the AM 1.5G, S-1, and S-2, whereas the ηH2 values for these two reactors are close to each other under the C-1 and C-2. The change in ηH2 and ηCO for the WG/MG–NG reactor is intermediate between those for the WG–NG and WG/Z reactors. The WG/MG–NG reactor yields appreciably higher ηH2 and ηCO than the WG–NG reactor under the C-1 and C-2, although the advantage under the AM 1.5G, S-1, and S-2 is less remarkable. Consequently, the WG/MG–NG reactor yields higher ηH2 and ηCO than those of the conventional Z-scheme reactor, respectively, by up to 1.5–1.6 times. The gain compared to the WG/NG reactor is as high as 12–15% (relative) under the C-1 and C-2 spectra, while that under the S-1, S-2, and AM 1.5G is 3–7%.
The number of photons whose energies are higher than Eg is directly reflected to Jsup, ηH2, and ηCO of the single-material, conventional Z-scheme, and WG/Z reactors (see Fig. S7, ESI†). On the other hand, for the other two reactors, the relation between Jsup and the higher-energy photon number is complicated. The optimal EgWG and EgNG for the WG–NG reactor are determined so that the Nabs values of the WG and NG compartments are approximately the same, as previously stated. When solar spectrum changes, the two Nabs values differ and hence the EgWG and EgNG values are no longer the optimal, because the excess part of Nabs is wasted, resulting in lower ηH2 and ηCO. Thus, the WG–NG reactor is more notably affected by solar spectrum variation than the WG/Z reactor. The WG/MG–NG reactor is also affected because the MG–NG cell on the backside operates similarly to the WG–NG reactor. However, the higher-energy photons whose number changes most significantly are absorbed in the front WG cell, which operates independently of the MG–NG cell. Therefore, the WG/MG–NG reactor is more robust against spectrum variation than the WG–NG reactor.34
The Nabs values of the two kinds of photocatalysts used in the Z-scheme cell on the backside of the WG/Z reactor are assumed to be always the same because the absorption spectra are identical. Therefore, the WG/Z reactor exhibits an advantage of high robustness against solar spectrum variation along with spectrum-splitting function. However, the detrimental impact of spectrum variation increases if the absorption spectra of these two materials are different and the total volumes (w) are adjusted so that the two Nabs values are equal to each other.
4.4 Feasibility of spectrum splitting
For the present spectrum-splitting mechanism using plural cells/compartments arranged optically in series to work well, it is required that the high-energy photons are absorbed in the cell/compartment on the illumination side while most of the low-energy photons reach the backside cell/compartment, as previously stated. Thus, we finally examined the feasibility of this mechanism.
In the WG compartment of the WG–NG reactor with EgWG = 2.30 eV optimized for H2 production (Δμop = 1.6 eV), the absorptivity for photons whose energies are larger than EgWG should be close to unity. This requires a large total volume of the WG-PCs (w). On the other hand, photons with lower energies than EgWG can escape from the illumination face of the reactor when scattering by the photocatalyst particles is significant. The requisites for suppression of the scattering and a resultant high transmissivity is that the diameter of the particles, d, is small and w is moderate.
The complex refractive index of the WG-PC material, n + ik, was modelled as follows. A constant value of n = 3.0, which is a typical value of oxide semiconductors in the visible range, was adopted, because the values in a narrow photon-energy (ħω) range around EgWG were needed for the examination. In the ħω range from EgWG (2.30 eV) to 2.50 eV, k was determined from the dependence of the absorption coefficient, α, of an indirect-bandgap semiconductor on ħω, α = A(ħω − EgWG)2/ħω, and the relation of k = αλ/(4π) (λ is the wavelength of light) with A = 1 × 107 cm−1 eV−1. This model approximately describes the n + ik values at around the bandgaps of widely used photocatalysts: TiO2, BiVO4, and Fe2O3.69–71 Photons at ħω > 2.50 eV were assumed to be perfectly absorbed because of larger k. The refractive index of water was set to 1.33.37

Fig. 9 shows the transmissivity, reflectivity, and absorptivity in the WG compartment as functions of d. Here, the total volume of the WG-PCs of w = 4 μm is adopted. The individual scattering model used in the present study holds because of the low volume fraction of the particles when the compartment is 1 cm in thickness. The accuracy of the model is discussed in detail in Section S.3 of the ESI.† Photons with ħω = 2.40 eV that is higher than EgWG by 0.10 eV are almost perfectly absorbed when d is equal to and smaller than 20 nm. However, the reflectivity notably increases at d > 30 nm and hence the absorptivity lowers; the incident light partially escapes to the external prior to being absorbed owing to significant scattering by the particles. This is because the scattering cross section (Csca) per unit volume rapidly increases with d whereas the absorption cross section (Cabs) per unit volume scarcely changes (see Fig. S8, ESI†). On the other hand, the transmissivity at ħω = 2.20 eV is close to unity up to d = 20 nm whereas it lowers and instead the reflectivity increases rapidly when d is larger than 30 nm.
 Fig. 9  Transmissivity (T), reflectivity (R), and absorptivity (A) in the WG compartment (EgWG = 2.30 eV) of the WG–NG reactor for H2 production as functions of the diameter of the photocatalyst particles (d). w = 4 μm and the compartment thickness of 1 cm are adopted. 
The impacts of w are depicted in Fig. 10, where d = 20 nm is adopted for compatibility of high absorptivity at ħω > EgWG and high transmissivity at ħω < EgWG. Although the absorption spectrum, A(ħω), increases with w, the transmission spectrum, T(ħω), lowers. In short, these two requisites are in a trade-off relation. Therefore, for finding the suitable w, the averaged values over the relevant photon-energy ranges for the absorptivity of the high-energy photons, Aav, and transmissivity of the low-energy photons, Tav, were determined as follows: (22) (23)The results shown in Fig. 11 indicate that w = 4 μm achieves the compatibility of high Aav = 0.94 and Tav = 0.95. Thus, it is concluded that the spectrum splitting is feasible, and the combination of d ≤ 20 nm and w = 4 μm is suitable.
 Fig. 10  Impacts of the total volume of the WG-PCs (w) in the WG compartment (EgWG = 2.30 eV) of the WG–NG reactor for H2 production on the absorption and transmission spectra (A(ħω) and T(ħω)). d = 20 nm and the compartment thickness of 1 cm are adopted. 
 Fig. 11  Impacts of the total volume of the WG-PCs (w) in the WG compartment (EgWG = 2.30 eV) of the WG–NG reactor for H2 production on the average absorptivity for ħω > EgWG (Aav) and transmissivity for ħω < EgWG (Tav). d = 20 nm and the compartment thickness of 1 cm are adopted. 
5 Conclusions
We examined the feasibility of spectrum splitting and evaluated its effect on the artificial photosynthetic performance of particulate photocatalytic reactors. Based on the double-junction-like reactor consisting of two compartments arranged optically in series using wide-gap and narrow-gap photocatalysts (WG–NG),18,19 we have proposed two different configurations: combination of a wide-gap cell and a narrow-gap Z-scheme cell (WG/Z), and combination of a wide-gap cell and a two-compartment cell using middle-gap and narrow-gap photocatalysts (WG/MG–NG). We evaluated the impact of light scattering by the photocatalyst particles using the Mie scattering formula and a ray-trace method. The present spectrum-splitting mechanism is feasible when the particle diameter is equal to or smaller than 20 nm; the high-energy photons are absorbed in the WG cell/compartment on the solar illumination side while the low-energy photons reach the backside cell/compartment because the light scattering is weak. We have constructed a new model of the carrier supply process from the semiconductor photocatalysts to the active sites in these reactors and calculated the practical upper limits of the carrier supply rates, which were converted to the solar-to-chemical conversion efficiencies. The spectrum-splitting reactors can yield higher efficiencies of H2 and CO production by up to 1.5–1.6 times than the conventional Z-scheme reactors. The newly proposed WG/Z reactor has great advantages of a wider tolerance of Eg deviation from the optimal value and feasibility of a smaller ΔG, which widen the room of the material developments, as well as higher robustness against solar spectrum variation. Hence, the WG/Z reactor would be a promising practical solution, although the efficiency is slightly lower than that for the ideal WG–NG reactor. The WG/MG–NG reactor provides the highest conversion efficiency among the three configurations. In particular, its high spectral robustness enhances the gain in the efficiency compared to that of the previous WG/NG reactor to 12–15% (relative) in cloudy days, although the gain is 3–7% in sunny days.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
References
B. A. Pinand, J. D. Benck, L. C. Seitz, A. J. Forman, Z. Chen, T. G. Deutsch, B. D. James, K. N. Baum, G. N. Baum, A. Ardo, H. Wang, E. Miller and T. F. Jaramillo, Technical and economic feasibility of centralized facilities for solar hydrogen production via photocatalysis and photoelectrochemistry, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1983 RSC .
J. Wu, Y. Huang, W. Ye and Y. Li, CO2 reduction: From the electrochemical to photochemical approach, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700194 CrossRef .
J. H. Kim, D. Hansora, P. Sharma, J.-W. Jang and J. S. Lee, Toward practical solar hydrogen production – an artificial photosynthetic leaf-to-farm challenge, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 1908–1971 RSC .
P. De Luna, C. Hahn, D. Higgins, S. A. Jaffer, T. F. Jaramillo and E. H. Sargent, What would it take for renewably powered electrosynthesis to displace petrochemical processes?, Science, 2019, 364, eaav3506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jia, L. C. Seitz, J. D. Benck, Y. Huo, Y. Chen, J. W. D. Ng, T. Bilir, J. S. Harris and T. F. Jaramillo, Solar water splitting by photovoltaic-electrolysis with a solar-to-hydrogen efficiency over 30%, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ota, D. Yamashita, H. Nakao, Y. Yonezawa, Y. Nakashima, H. Ebe, M. Inagaki, R. Mikami, Y. Abiko, T. Iwasaki, M. Sugiyama and K. Nishioka, Highly efficient 470 W solar-to-hydrogen conversion system based on concentrator photovoltaic modules with dynamic control of operating point, Appl. Phys. Express, 2018, 11, 077101 CrossRef .
W.-H. Cheng, M. H. Richter, I. Sullivan, D. M. Larson, C. Xiang, B. S. Brunschwig and H. A. Atwater, CO2 reduction to CO with 19% efficiency in a solar-driven gas diffusion electrode flow cell under outdoor solar illumination, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 470–476 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kato, S. Mizuno, M. Shiozawa, N. Nojiri, Y. Kawai, K. Fukumoto, T. Morikawa and Y. Takeda, Large-sized cell for solar-driven CO2 conversion with a solar-to-formate conversion efficiency of 7.2%, Joule, 2021, 5, 1–19 CrossRef .
D. M. Fabian, S. Hu, N. Singh, F. A. Houle, T. Hisatomi, K. Domen, F. E. Osterloh and S. Ardo, Particle suspension reactors and materials for solar-driven water splitting, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2825–2850 RSC .
Y. Goto, T. Hisatomi, Q. Wang, T. Higashi, K. Ishikiriyama, T. Maeda, Y. Sakata, S. Okunaka, H. Tokudome, M. Katayama, S. Akiyama, H. Nishiyama, Y. Inoue, T. Takewaki, T. Setoyama, T. Minegishi, T. Takata, T. Yamada and K. Domen, A particulate photocatalyst water-splitting panel for large-scale solar hydrogen generation, Joule, 2018, 2, 509–520 CrossRef CAS .
T. Morikawa, S. Sato, K. Sekizawa, T. Arai and T. M. Suzuki, Molecular catalysts immobilized on semiconductor photosensitizers for proton reduction toward visible-light-driven overall water splitting, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 1807–1824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang and K. Domen, Particulate photocatalysts for light-driven water splitting: mechanisms, challenges, and design strategies, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 919–985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Dimroth, T. N. D. Tibbits, M. Niemeyer, F. Predan, P. Beutel, C. Karcher, E. Oliva, G. Siefer, D. Lackner, P. Fuß-Kailuweit, A. W. Bett, R. Krause, C. Drazek, E. Guiot, J. Wasselin, A. Tauzin and T. Signamarcheix, Four-junction wafer-bonded concentrator solar cells, IEEE J. Photovolt., 2016, 6, 343–349 Search PubMed .

          S. P. Philipps, F. Dimroth and A. W. Bett, High-efficiency III–V multijunction solar cells, in McEvoy's Handbook of Photovoltaics, ed. S. A. Kalogirou, Academic Press, 3rd edn,  2017, ch. I-4-B Search PubMed .
M. F. Weber and M. J. Dignam, Efficiency of splitting water with semiconducting photoelectrodes, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1984, 131, 1258–1265 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, R. Liu, K. Sun, Y. Chen, E. Verlage, S. A. Francis, N. S. Lewis and C. Xiang, Solar driven reduction of 1 atm CO2 to formate at 10% energy-conversion efficiency by use of a TiO2-protected III-V tandem photoanode in conjunction with a bipolar membrane and a Pd/C cathode, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 764–770 CrossRef CAS .
W.-H. Cheng, M. H. Richter, M. M. May, J. Ohlmann, D. Lackner, F. Dimroth, T. Hannappel, H. A. Atwater and H.-J. Lewerenz, Monolithic Photoelectrochemical device for direct water splitting with 19% efficiency, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1795–1800 CrossRef CAS .
R. B. Chandran, S. Breen, Y. Shao, S. Ardo and A. Z. Weber, Evaluating particle-suspension reactor designs for Z-scheme solar water splitting via transport and kinetic modeling, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 115–135 RSC .
S. Keene, R. B. Chandran and S. Ardo, Calculations of theoretical efficiencies for electrochemically-mediated tandem solar water splitting as a function of bandgap energies and redox shuttle potential, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 261–272 RSC .
K. Sayama, K. Mukasa, R. Abe, Y. Abe and H. Arakawa, Stoichiometric water splitting into H2 and O2 using a mixture of two different photocatalysts and an IO3−/I− shuttle redox mediator under visible light irradiation, Chem. Commun., 2001, 2416–2417 RSC .
Y. Wang, H. Suzuki, J. Xie, O. Tomita, D. J. Martin, M. Higashi, D. Kong, R. Abe and J. Tang, Mimicking natural photosynthesis: Solar to renewable H2 fuel synthesis by Z-scheme water splitting systems, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 5201–5241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-J. Ng, L. K. Putri, X. Y. Kong, Y. W. Teh, P. Pasbakhsh and S.-P. Chai, Z-scheme photocatalytic systems for solar water splitting, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1903171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Suzuki, A. Iwase, H. Tanaka, S. Sato, A. Kudo and T. Morikawa, Z-scheme water splitting under visible light irradiation over powdered metal-complex/semiconductor hybrid photocatalysts mediated with reduced graphene oxide, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 13283–13290 RSC .
Q. Wang, S. Okunaka, H. Tokudome, T. Hisatomi, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Printable photocatalyst sheets incorporating a transparent conductive mediator for Z-Scheme water splitting, Joule, 2018, 2, 2667–2680 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, J. Warnan, S. Rodríguez-Jiménez, J. J. Leung, S. Kalathil, V. Andrei, K. Domen and E. Reisner, Molecularly engineered photocatalyst sheet for scalable solar formate production from carbon dioxide and water, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 703–710 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kudo, S. Yoshino, T. Tsuchiya, Y. Udagawa, Y. Takahashi, M. Yamaguchi, I. Ogasawara, H. Matsumoto and A. Iwase, Z-scheme photocatalyst systems employing Rh- and Ir-doped metal oxide
materials for water splitting under visible light irradiation, Faraday Discuss., 2019, 215, 313–328 RSC .
C.-C. Lo, C.-W. Huang, C.-H. Liao and J. C. S. Wu, Novel twin reactor for separate evolution of hydrogen and oxygen in photocatalytic water splitting, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 1523–1529 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Yu, C.-W. Chiu, Y.-T. Wu, C.-H. Liao, V.-H. Nguyen and J. C. S. Wu, Photocatalytic water splitting and hydrogenation of CO2 in a novel twin photoreactor with IO3−/I− shuttle redox mediator, Appl. Catal., A, 2016, 518, 158–166 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Shang, J. Shen, Z. Zhang, D. Wang, J. Lin, J. C. S. Wu, X. Fu, X. Wang and C. Li, Direct and indirect Z-scheme heterostructure-coupled photosystem enabling cooperation of CO2 reduction and H2O oxidation, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          D. C. Bobela, K. J. Schmieder, M. P. Lumb, J. E. Moore, R. J. Walters, E. A. Armour, L. Matthew, R. Rao, A. Mascarenhas and K. Alberi, Demonstration of GaInP2/Si voltage matched tandem solar cells, Proceedings of IEEE 44th Photovoltaic Specialist Conference, Washington DC, 2017, pp. 2506–2510.
R. Clemente de Lima, T. Merdzhanova, B. Turan, J. Kirchhoff, J. Hüpkes, C. Zahren and O. Astakhov, Voltage-matched thin film solar cells in 3-terminal configuration, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 188, 202–209 CrossRef CAS .
T. Trupke and P. Würfel, Improved spectral robustness of triple tandem solar cells by combined series/parallel interconnection, J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 96, 2347–2351 CrossRef CAS .
F. Guo, N. Li, F. W. Fecher, N. Gasparini, C. O. R. Quiroz, C. Bronnbauer, Y. Hou, V. V. Radmilović, V. R. Radmilović, E. Spiecker, K. Forberich and C. J. Brabec, A generic concept to overcome bandgap limitations for designing highly efficient multi-junction photovoltaic cells, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7730 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Takeda, T. Morikawa and N. Kato, Spectrally robust series/parallel-connected tripe-junction photovoltaic cells used for artificial photosynthesis, J. Appl. Phys., 2020, 127, 204503 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Archer and J. R. Bolton, Requirements for ideal performance of photochemical and photovoltaic solar energy converters, J. Phys. Chem., 1990, 94, 8028–8036 CrossRef CAS .
T. Markvart and P. T. Landsberg, Thermodynamics and reciprocity of solar energy conversion, Physica E, 2002, 14, 71–77 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Hale and M. R. Querry, Optical constants of water in the 200-nm to 200 μm wavelength region, Appl. Opt., 1973, 12, 555–563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Würfel, The chemical potential of radiation, J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys., 1982, 15, 3967–3985 CrossRef .
A. Nakada, H. Suzuki, J. J. M. Vequizo, K. Ogawa, M. Higashi, A. Saeki, A. Yamakata, H. Kageyama and R. Abe, Fe/Ru oxide as a versatile and effective cocatalyst for boosting Z-Scheme water-splitting: Suppressing undesirable backward electron transfer, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 45606–45611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wen, T. Yang, N. Zhao, L. Ma and E. Liu, Ni-Co-Mo-O nanosheets decorated with NiCo nanoparticles as advanced electrocatalysts for highly efficient hydrogen evolution, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 258, 117953 CrossRef CAS .
L. Pang, A. Barras, Y. Zhang, M. A. Amin, A. Addad, S. Szunerits and R. Boukherroub, CoO promoted the catalytic activity of nitrogen-doped MoS2 supported on carbon fibers for overall water splitting, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 31889–31898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Martinez, A. J. Nozik and M. C. Beard, Theoretical limits of multiple exciton generation and singlet fission tandem devices for solar water splitting, J. Chem. Phys., 2019, 151, 114111 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Verma, Y. Hamasaki, C. Kim, W. Huang, S. Lu, H.-R. M. Jhong, A. A. Gewirth, T. Fujigaya, N. Nakashima and P. J. A. Kenis, Insights into the low overpotential electroreduction of CO2 to CO on a supported gold catalyst in an alkaline flow electrolyzer, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 4, 193–198 CrossRef .
S. Sato, K. Saita, K. Sekizawa, S. Maeda and T. Morikawa, Low-energy electrocatalytic CO2 reduction in water over Mn-complex catalyst electrode aided by a nanocarbon support and K+ cations, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 4452–4458 CrossRef CAS .
Solar Radiation Database, New Energy and Industrial Technology Development Organization (NEDO), https://www.nedo.go.jp/library/nissharyou.html, accessed January 2021.
Reference Solar Spectral Irradiance: Air Mass 1.5, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, https://rredc.nrel.gov/solar/spectra/am1.5/, accessed January 2021.
S. Nann and C. Riordan, Solar spectral irradiance under clear and cloudy skies: Measurements and a semiempirical model, J. Appl. Meteorol., 1991, 30, 447–462 CrossRef .
G. Spadoni, E. Bandini and F. Santarelli, Scattering effects in photosensitized reactors, Chem. Eng. Sci., 1978, 33, 517–524 CrossRef CAS .
T. Jianyu, X. Yinmo, W. Fuqiang, J. Lin and M. Lanxin, Investigation of optical properties and radiative transfer of TiO2 nanofluids with the consideration of scattering effects, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2017, 115, 1103–1112 CrossRef .
C. L. Tien and B. L. Drolen, Thermal radiation in particulate media with dependent and independent scattering, Annu. Rev. Heat Transfer, 1987, 1, 1–32 CrossRef CAS .
T. Galy, D. Huang and L. Pilon, Revisiting independent versus dependent scattering regimes in suspensions or aggregates of spherical particles, J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer, 2020, 246, 106924 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kormann, D. W. Bahnemann and M. R. Hoffmann, Preparation and characterization of quantum-size titanium dioxide, J. Phys. Chem., 1988, 92, 5196–5201 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yamanaka and T. Morikawa, Charge-carrier dynamics in nitrogen-doped TiO2 powders studied by femtosecond time-resolved diffuse reflectance spectroscopy, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 1286–1292 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Cushing, F. Meng, J. Zhang, B. Ding, C. K. Chen, C.-J. Chen, R.-S. Liu, A. D. Bristow, J. Bright, P. Zheng and N. Wu, Effects of defects on photocatalytic activity of hydrogen-treated titanium oxide nanobelts, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 1742–1748 CrossRef CAS .
D. Veldman, S. C. J. Meskers and R. A. J. Janssen, The energy of charge-transfer states in electron donor-acceptor blends: Insight into the energy losses in organic solar cells, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1939–1948 CrossRef CAS .
T. Morikawa, R. Asahi, T. Ohwaki, K. Aoki and Y. Taga, Band-gap narrowing of titanium dioxide by nitrogen doping, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 40, L561–L563 CrossRef CAS .
R. Asahi, T. Morikawa, H. Irie and T. Ohwaki, Nitrogen-doped titanium dioxide as visible-light-sensitive photocatalyst: Designs, developments, and prospects, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9824–9852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cui, C. Li and F. Zhang, Development of mixed anion photocatalysts with wide visible-light absorption bands for solar water splitting, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 1872–1888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Nishioka, K. Yanagisawa, D. Lu, J. J. M. Vequizo, A. Yamakata, K. Kimoto, M. Inada and K. Maeda, Enhanced water splitting through two-step photoexcitation by sunlight using tantalum/nitrogen-codoped rutile titania as a water oxidation photocatalyst, Sustain, Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 2337–2346 CAS .
T. Omata, K. Nose and S. Otsuka-Yao-Matuo, Size dependent
optical band gap of ternary I-III-VI2 semiconductor nanocrystals, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 105, 073106 CrossRef .
T. M. Suzuki, S. Yoshino, T. Takayama, A. Iwase, A. Kudo and T. Morikawa, Z-schematic and visible-light-driven CO2 reduction using H2O as an electron donor by a particulate mixture of a Ru-complex/(CuGa)1−xZn2xS2 hybrid catalyst, BiVO4 and an electron mediator, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 10199–10202 RSC .
F. Xu, J. Zhang, B. Zhu, J. Yu and J. Xu, CuInS2 sensitized TiO2 hybrid nanofibers for improved photocatalytic CO2 reduction, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 230, 194–202 CrossRef CAS .
T. Di, Q. Xu, W. Ho, H. Tang, Q. Xiang and J. Yu, Review on metal sulphide-based Z-scheme photocatalysts, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 1394–1411 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhao, C. Shi, Q. Shen, W. Li, D. Men, B. Xu, Y. Sun and C. Li, Hierarchical Z-scheme Fe2O3@ZnIn2S4 core-shell heterostructures with enhanced adsorption capacity enabling significantly improved photocatalytic CO2 reduction, CrystEngComm, 2020, 22, 8221–8227 RSC .
I. Aguilera, J. Vidal, P. Wahnón, L. Reining and S. Botti, First-principles study of the band structure and optical absorption of CuGaS2, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 085145 CrossRef .
J. V. Li, S. Grover, M. A. Contreras, K. Ramanathan, D. Kuciauskas and R. Noufi, Recombination analysis of Cu(In,Ga)Se2 solar cells with low and high Ga compositions, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 124, 143–149 CrossRef CAS .
F. E. Osterloh, Photocatalysis versus photosynthesis: A sensitivity analysis of devices for solar energy conversion and chemical transformations, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 445–453 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sasaki, H. Kato and A. Kudo, [Co(bpy)3]3+/2+ and [Co(phen)3]3+/2+ electron mediators for overall water splitting under sunlight irradiation using Z-scheme photocatalyst system, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 5441–5449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. E. Jellison, Jr., L. A. Boatner and J. D. Budai, Spectroscopic ellipsometry of thin film and bulk anatase (TiO2), J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 93, 9537–9541 CrossRef .
J. K. Cooper, S. Gul, F. M. Toma, L. Chen, Y.-S. Liu, J. Guo, J. W. Ager, J. Yano and I. D. Sharp, Indirect bandgap and optical properties of monoclinic bismuth vanadate, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 2969–2974 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mashiko, T. Oshima and A. Ohtomo, Bandgap narrowing in α-(CrxFe1−x)2O3 solid-solution films, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 241904 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Detailed results of impacts of the material properties and spectrum variation on the photocatalytic performance, and diameter and total volume of the photocatalyst particles on light scattering. See DOI: 10.1039/d1cp00597aThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Energy diagrams and water splitting mechanisms of conventional photocatalysts.	 

 	Fig. 2  Photocatalytic reactors equipped with spectrum-splitting function (upper panels), energy diagrams and water splitting mechanisms (middle panels), and corresponding solar cells (bottom panels). (a) Wide-gap and narrow-gap reactor (WG–NG),18,19 (b) wide-gap and Z-scheme reactor (WG/Z), and (c) wide-gap, middle-gap, and narrow-gap reactor (WG/MG–NG).	 
Nsup(Δμop) = Ngen − Nrad − Nnonrad	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
Nrad ≅ N(0)rad(Eg)exp[Δμop/(kBTRT)]	(5)
	(6)
Nnonrad = (nc − ni)w/τnonrad	(7)
	(8)
Nnonrad ≅ ni(Eg)w(exp[Δμop/(2kBTRT)] − 1)/τnonrad	(9)
	(10)
	(11)
	(12)
Nsup(Δμop) = NWG(ΔμWG) = NNG(ΔμNG)	(13.1)
Δμop + ΔG = ΔμWG + ΔμNG	(13.2)
	(13.3)
	(13.4)
Nsup(Δμop) = NWG(Δμop) + NZ(Δμop)	(14.1)
	(14.2)
	(14.3)
Nsup(Δμop) = NWG(Δμop) + NMG–NG(Δμop)	(15.1)
	(15.2)
NMG–NG(Δμop) = NMG(ΔμMG) = NNG(ΔμNG)	(15.3)
Δμop + ΔG = ΔμMG + ΔμNG	(15.4)
	(15.5)
	(15.6)
ηH2 = Jsup(Δμop = 1.6 eV)·1.23 [V]/Psun	(16)
ηCO = Jsup(Δμop = 1.8 eV)·1.34 [V]·0.9/Psun	(17)

 	Fig. 3  (a) Global solar irradiation spectra measured in Tsukuba, Japan.45 S-1: 92.6 mW cm−2, AM 1.03 (11:40, 14/06/2015). S-2: 44.6 mW cm−2, AM 3.95 (15:00, 29/12/2015). C-1: 35.2 mW cm−2, AM 1.22 (11:20, 21/09/2015). C-2: 37.6 mW cm−2, AM 1.20 (11:10, 21/09/2015). The standard AM 1.5G spectrum is also shown for comparison.46 (b) Relations of the photon flux normalized by each average over 1.19–1.21 eV vs. the photon energy.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Carrier supply rate (Nsup) converted to the current density (Jsup = qNsup) under the AM 1.5G spectrum illumination. mc = 2m0, τnonrad = 1 ns, ΔG = 0.2 eV, and w = 4 μm are adopted. (b–d) Optimal bandgaps (Eg) of the photocatalysts used in the spectrum-splitting reactors. The values for the single-material reactors (gray open circles) and conventional Z-scheme reactors (dark blue asterisks) are also shown for comparison.	 
λmfp = (npCsca)−1	(18)
λmfp = (np(Csca + Cabs))−1	(19)

 	Fig. 5  Impacts of Eg deviation from the optimal values (ΔEg) on Jsup and ηH2. mc = 2m0, τnonrad = 1 ns, ΔG = 0.2 eV, and w = 4 μm are adopted.	 
	(20)
Nnonrad ∝ mc3/2/τnonrad	(21)

 	Fig. 6  Impacts of the carrier effective mass (mc) and nonradiative recombination lifetime (τnonrad) on Jsup, ηH2, and ηCO. The Eg values are optimized for each case. ΔG = 0.2 eV and w = 4 μm are adopted. Asterisks: mc = 2m0 and τnonrad = 1 ns. Open diamonds: mc = 0.3m0 and τnonrad = 1 ns. Solid squares: mc = 0.3m0 and τnonrad = 10 ns.	 

 	Fig. 7  Impacts of the driving force for the electron transfer via the redox mediators (ΔG) on Jsup, ηH2, and ηCO. The Eg values are optimized for each case. mc = 2m0, τnonrad = 1 ns, and w = 4 μm are adopted. ΔG = 0.2 eV is the lower limit for the WG–MG and WG/MG–NG reactors using two-compartment cells, whereas ΔG = 0 eV is feasible for the Z-scheme and WG/Z reactors (solid squares) when all-solid-state Z-scheme cells are employed.	 

 	Fig. 8  
J
sup, ηH2, and ηCO under the AM 1.5G and measured solar spectra shown in Fig. 3. The Eg values are optimized for the AM 1.5G. mc = 2m0, τnonrad = 1 ns, ΔG = 0.2 eV, and w = 4 μm are adopted.	 

 	Fig. 9  Transmissivity (T), reflectivity (R), and absorptivity (A) in the WG compartment (EgWG = 2.30 eV) of the WG–NG reactor for H2 production as functions of the diameter of the photocatalyst particles (d). w = 4 μm and the compartment thickness of 1 cm are adopted.	 
	(22)
	(23)

 	Fig. 10  Impacts of the total volume of the WG-PCs (w) in the WG compartment (EgWG = 2.30 eV) of the WG–NG reactor for H2 production on the absorption and transmission spectra (A(ħω) and T(ħω)). d = 20 nm and the compartment thickness of 1 cm are adopted.	 

 	Fig. 11  Impacts of the total volume of the WG-PCs (w) in the WG compartment (EgWG = 2.30 eV) of the WG–NG reactor for H2 production on the average absorptivity for ħω > EgWG (Aav) and transmissivity for ħω < EgWG (Tav). d = 20 nm and the compartment thickness of 1 cm are adopted.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Detailed results of impacts of the material properties and spectrum variation on the photocatalytic performance, and diameter and total volume of the photocatalyst particles on light scattering. See DOI: 10.1039/d1cp00597a

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2021
