Metal oxide-based materials as an emerging family of hydrogen evolution electrocatalysts  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0EE02485F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0EE02485F
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3361-3392Metal oxide-based materials as an emerging family of hydrogen evolution electrocatalysts

        
          
            Yinlong 
            Zhu
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Qian 
            Lin
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yijun 
            Zhong
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Hassan A. 
            Tahini
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Zongping 
            Shao
          
        
      bd and 

        
          
            Huanting 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia. E-mail: yinlong.zhu@monash.edu; huanting.wang@monash.edu
bWA School of Mines-Minerals, Energy and Chemical Engineering (WASM-MECE), Curtin University, Perth, WA 6102, Australia
cIntegrated Materials Design Laboratory, Research School of Physics, Australian National University, Canberra 2601, Australia
dState Key Laboratory of Materials-Oriented Chemical Engineering, College of Chemical Engineering, Nanjing Tech University, No. 5 Xin Mofan Road, Nanjing 210009, P. R. China
Received 
      4th August 2020
    , Accepted 16th September 2020First published on 16th September 2020AbstractHydrogen production from electrochemical water splitting represents a highly promising technology for sustainable energy storage, but its widespread implementation heavily relies on the development of high-performance and cost-effective hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) electrocatalysts. Metal oxides, an important family of functional materials with diverse compositions and structures, were traditionally believed inactive towards HER. Encouragingly, the continuous breakthroughs and significant progress in recent years (mainly from 2015 onwards) make engineered metal oxides emerge as promising candidates for HER electrocatalysis. In this article, we present a comprehensive review of recent advances in metal oxide-based electrocatalysts for HER. We start with a brief description of some key fundamental concepts of HER, such as mechanisms, computational activity descriptors, and experimental parameters used to evaluate catalytic performance. This is followed by a overview of various types of metal oxide-based HER electrocatalysts reported so far, including single transition metal oxides, spinel oxides, perovskite oxides, metal (oxy)hydroxides, specially-structured metal oxides and oxide-containing hybrids, with special emphasis on designed strategies for promoting performance and property–activity correlation. Finally, some concluding remarks and perspectives about future opportunities of this exciting field are provided.
Yinlong Zhu
Yinlong Zhu received his PhD degree from College of Chemical Engineering, Nanjing Tech University in 2017. He then worked as a Research Fellow at Monash University, Australia 2018. He now works as a Discovery Early Career Researcher Award (DECRA) Fellow at Monash University, Australia. His current research focuses on the development of functional materials as ORR/OER/HER electrocatalysis for the applications of electrochemical energy conversion and storage technologies, such as solid oxide fuel cell, metal–air batteries and water splitting.
Huanting Wang
Huanting Wang is a Professor and ARC Australian Laureate Fellow in the Department of Chemical Engineering, and the director of the Monash Centre for Membrane Innovation at Monash University, Australia. His current research focuses on the development of nanostructured materials and membranes for gas separation, water treatment, chiral separation, ion transport and separation, and electrochemical energy applications. He has co-authored over 300 papers in these areas.

Broader context
Hydrogen (H2) is a clean and renewable energy carrier for powering future transportation and other industrial applications. Water electrolysis is a highly promising technology for sustainable hydrogen production from renewable resources (e.g., wind and solar power). A key issue to realize a high-efficiency water splitting process is to develop highly active, stable, and low-cost hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) electrocatalysts. Due to the clear superiority of structural and compositional flexibilities, metal oxide-based materials have emerged as promising candidates for catalyzing HER in recent years. In this review, we present an overview of recent advances in the development of metal oxide-based HER electrocatalysts together with some representative examples, especially from 2015 to 2020. Various designed strategies and property–activity correlation are highlighted. In addition, we conclude existing challenges and provide some perspectives about future opportunities of this exciting field. We believe that such a comprehensive review not only promotes a profound understanding of metal oxides for HER electrocatalysis but also offers some guidelines for advanced catalysts design.

1. Introduction
In the 21st century, energy is regarded as one of the most important issues for sustainable societal development. Due to an ever-increasing global energy demand and associated environmental pollution, developing clean and sustainable energy systems is a matter of utmost urgency.1,2 During the past decades, renewable energy resources (e.g., solar, wind, and hydraulic power) have been explored as sustainable alternatives to traditional fossil fuels; however, their utilization is usually limited by the spatial and temporal intermittencies.3,4 Hydrogen (H2), an ideal carbon-free energy carrier with the highest energy density, has been recognized as a promising next-generation clean energy source.5–7 To this end, producing hydrogen via an efficient and eco-friendly route is crucial for the hydrogen economy and clean energy future. Hitherto, industrial hydrogen production is largely dominated by steam methane reforming and coal gasification which generally involves the use of fossil fuels and high temperature, bringing about intensive energy consumption, high costs, low-purity of hydrogen products and greenhouse gas CO2 emissions.8,9 Alternatively, water electrolysis (or electrochemical water splitting) for hydrogen production coupled with renewable energy resources is a promising approach, which has many advantages such as abundant water resources, stable output, high H2 purity (>99%) and feasibility of large-scale application.8–13 Fujishima and Honda conducted a pioneering work on the use of a semiconductor electrode for electrochemical photolysis of water in the 1970s.14 However, the rate of the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) at the cathode of water splitting is sluggish, thus necessitating efficient electrocatalysts to expedite the reaction rate. Currently, noble platinum group metals (e.g., Pt) are identified as the benchmark HER electrocatalysts with high activity, but the prohibitive costs and scarcity of these noble metals have seriously impeded their widespread commercial application. Therefore, extensive research have been conducted to the development of efficient Pt-free electrocatalysts for HER, e.g., metals/alloys,15–18 metal phosphides/sulfides/selenides/carbides/nitrides,19–23 single atoms,24–26 functional carbon materials,27,28 and various synergistic hybrids.29,30 These materials have been extensively studied and show high potential for use in the HER electrocatalysis.
As a large class of inorganic solids, metal oxides composed of low-cost and earth-abundant elements have been an important family of functional materials.31–35 Compared with other types of metal compounds, a clear superiority of metal oxides lies in the compositional and structural diversity, which offers an electronic and crystal structure flexibility with various desirable physical/chemical properties. Due to the advantages of compositional/structural diversity, flexible tunability, low cost, earth-abundance, easy synthesis and environmental friendliness (Fig. 1a), metal oxide-based materials have received considerable interest for various applications.31–35 Nevertheless, pure metal oxides, especially the bulk materials, were generally believed inactive towards HER in the past because of poor electrical conductivity, inappropriate hydrogen adsorption ability and limited catalytic-active site, although many of them display high activity for the anodic oxygen evolution reaction (OER).19,33–38 To address this issue, in the last few years, researchers have been devoting substantial efforts with great enthusiasm to develop advanced metal oxide-based materials that can serve as efficient HER electrocatalysts. Several recent important advances make metal oxides undergo a renaissance as HER electrocatalysts, which motivates the drive for reviewing this research field. To date, several reviews relevant to HER have been published, with a focus on Pt-free electrocatalysts (e.g., ruthenium-, nickel-, cobalt-, carbon-, phosphide- and transition-metal-based materials)8,19,20,27,37,39–45 or HER fundamentals.9,46–48 However, a comprehensive review on HER electrocatalysis based on metal oxides is timely but has never been published.
 Fig. 1  (a) Advantages and disadvantages of metal oxides as electrocatalysts for HER. (b) Summary of design strategies for the development of metal-oxide based HER electrocatalysts. 
In this article, we present a review of the recent advancements in metal oxide-based materials for HER mainly over the past few years (2015–2020), and various strategies to boost the HER performance of metal oxides are highlighted (Fig. 1b). This review is structured in the following sections. First, we briefly introduce several fundamental concepts of the HER, including reaction mechanisms, activity descriptors and parameters for evaluating the catalytic performance. Then, the recent developments in metal oxide-based HER electrocatalysts, such as single transition metal oxides, spinel oxides, perovskite oxides, metal (oxy)hydroxides, specially-structured metal oxides and oxide-containing hybrids, are summarized. In the discussion, particular attention is paid to the formulated performance enhancement strategies, and the correlations between structure/composition and catalytic activity. Finally, some concluding remarks summarize the challenges, perspectives, and research trends of this topic. We hope that this timely review will provide readers with a comprehensive understanding of the recent progress in metal oxides for HER and some guidelines for the design of advanced catalysts in the future.
2. Fundamental concepts of HER
2.1. General HER mechanism
The HER is a two-step electron transfer reaction occurring at the catalyst surface, and generally proceeds via either Volmer–Heyrovsky or Volmer–Tafel mechanisms7,9,46–48 HER in acidic medium associated with the adsorption/desorption of a hydrogen intermediate (H*) involves the following steps: Volmer step: H+ + e− → H*; Heyrovsky step: H* + H+ + e− → H2; Tafel step: H* + H* → H2, where * denotes the active site of catalyst surface. Similarly, the HER in alkaline or a neutral medium also follows the Volmer–Heyrovsky or Volmer–Tafel pathway as shown below: Volmer step: H2O + e− → H* + OH−; Heyrovsky step: H2O + H* + e− → H2 + OH−; Tafel step: H* + H* → H2. Notably, in alkaline or neutral HER it is necessary to cleave the strong covalent H–O–H bond prior to H* adsorption, in contrast to the supply of H* from the readily available hydronium cations (H3O+) in acidic solution. As a result, compared with acidic media, the kinetics of HER in alkaline media is always slower due to the extra water dissociation in the Volmer step. For example, the experimentally observed HER rate for noble Pt in alkaline medium is two or three orders of magnitude lower than that under acidic condition due to the unfavorable water dissociation kinetics on Pt.9,37,38 Therefore, ways to boost the initial water dissociation process of alkaline HER have been a point of focus. The HER mechanism can be indicated by the calculated values of the Tafel slope in addition to the insightful theoretical calculations. Specifically, ∼120, ∼40, and ∼30 mV dec−1 values of Tafel slope indicate the rate-determining step (RDS) of the Volmer, Heyrovsky, and Tafel, respectively.7,9,49 Tafel slope can be consequently considered as a convenient indicator of the reaction pathway and RDS for HER.
2.2. HER energetics and computational activity descriptors
Owing to the rapid development of computational power and techniques, density functional theory (DFT) calculations have become a powerful tool to provide in-depth information on electrochemical processes at the atomistic level.46,48,50 The calculated energetics based on DFT calculations for both kinetic and thermodynamic aspects can identify possible active sites of a reaction, and also act as intuitional descriptors for predicting the activity. Regardless of the pathway by which the HER proceeds, H* is always involved in the HER. Thus, the free energy of hydrogen adsorption (ΔGH*) is widely accepted to be a key descriptor for evaluating the HER activity, which can reflect the binding strength of H* on the catalyst surface.19,28,40,48 An optimal HER catalyst in acidic media generally have an ideal zero value of ΔGH* (ΔGH* ≈ 0) in accordance with the Sabatier principle, which reflects the optimal balance between absorption and desorption of H* on the catalyst surface.19,28,40,48 For example, ΔGH* is about zero for Pt, and correspondingly Pt is among the most active catalyst toward acidic HER.28,48 Nevertheless, the HER activity in alkaline media cannot be merely described by ΔGH*, because the kinetic barrier of water dissociation and hydroxyl adsorption may also affect the overall reaction rate.9,19,36,38,40,46–48 From a microscopic view based on HER mechanism, the apparent alkaline HER activity is governed by three important factors: (i) the H* adsorption on the surface of catalyst; (ii) the kinetic barrier of water dissociation; (iii) the prevention from hydroxyl adsorption (OH−) referred as poisoning of active sites.9,36,51 As a result, three corresponding computational energetics, i.e., the kinetic barrier of water dissociation (Eb), the free energy of hydrogen adsorption (ΔGH*) and the free energy of hydroxyl desorption (ΔGOH*), are jointly employed as the alkaline HER activity descriptors. Taken together, ΔGH* alone can act as a single descriptor for assessing the acidic HER activity; however, in alkaline media, descriptors of Eb, ΔGH* and ΔGOH* collectively (instead of alone) determine the overall HER activity.
2.3. Experimental parameters for performance evaluation
To evaluate the various aspects of HER catalytic performance of a given electrocatalyst, some important parameters are required to be calculated or measured, such as overpotential, Tafel slope, exchange current density, mass and specific activities, turnover frequency, faradaic efficiency as well as stability. A comprehensive understanding of these parameters is beneficial to design an efficient catalyst. In this section, the physicochemical meaning and interpretation of these parameters are briefly introduced and discussed, and more detailed contents about these parameters can refer to some previous reviews.7,8,19,27 (1) Overpotential. HER can start at 0 V (vs. reversible hydrogen electrode, RHE) at standard conditions, and the extra potential relative to 0 V is called overpotential (η), a key and main parameter to evaluate the activity of catalysts. Three special η values at the current densities of 1 (η1), 10 (η10), and 100 (η100) mA cm−2 are usually calculated, and a smaller η value suggests a high activity. The η1 is often defined as the onset overpotential, which indicates the starting point of HER. The η10 is a metric related to solar fuel synthesis,52 which is always used for activity comparison. The η100 is another crucial criterion for the catalyst evaluation in practical applications. (2) Tafel slope and exchange current density. Tafel slope and exchange current density are two significant indicators to the kinetics behavior of HER, which can be gained from the Tafel equation (η = blog(j/j0), where b and j0 are the Tafel slope and exchange current density). Also, the Tafel slope is indicative of the reaction pathway and RDS, as stated above. Low b and high j0 values imply better HER activity. (3) Mass and specific activities. The mass activity (MA, normalized by the catalyst mass loading) and specific activity (SA, normalized by Brunauer–Emmett–Teller or electrochemical surface area) are two quantitative parameters to describe the catalytic reactivity of a catalyst. Considering that MA is important for practical applications and SA implies the catalyst's intrinsic activity, it is meaningful to compare the MA and SA. (4) Turnover frequency. The turnover frequency (TOF) represents the catalytic activity of individual active site, which is defined as the total number of molecules transformed into a desired product per catalytic site per time unit. Thus, TOF is another important parameter that reflects the intrinsic activity of an electrocatalyst, which is not dependent of the surface area. The relatively precise calculation of TOF values can be based on a well-known method reported by the Jaramillo group.53,54 (5) Faradaic efficiency. In HER, faradaic efficiency (FE) is defined as the ratio of the experimental to theoretical amount of hydrogen production. The theoretical amount of hydrogen generation can be calculated from galvanostatic or potentiostatic electrolysis, and the practical hydrogen generation can be detected by gas chromatography or a water displacement method. The FE of HER is generally reported to be close to 100%, suggesting the good selectivity for the HER catalysis. (6) Stability. Besides the activity, the stability is also a critical criterion to evaluate the practical value of an electrocatalyst. Two popular methods were always adopted to explore the long-term stability of catalysts, i.e., chronopotentiometry/chronoamperometry test and continuous cyclic voltammetry scan. Because these parameters are easily affected by some experimental conditions (e.g., substrate, mass loading, electrolyte, ink preparation), different catalysts in one study should be kept under the same experimental conditions for fair comparison. As a successful example, McCrory et al. proposed a benchmarking methodology for HER catalyst performance, which is of great significance for the development of standard electrochemical tests and evaluation protocols.55
3. Overview of metal oxide-based electrocatalysts for HER
As mentioned, metal oxides with diverse structures and compositions have been widely used in various fields including OER electrocatalysis. In view of the considerable OER performance of metal oxides, it is of great demand and significance to develop metal oxide-based HER catalysts to form efficient bifunctional catalysts for practical applications in overall water splitting. Especially in the last five years, substantial endeavors have been made to improve the HER catalytic performance of metal oxides by adopting multiple strategies, such as doping, oxygen-vacancy engineering, phase-structure engineering, strain engineering, morphology engineering, crystallinity engineering, valence regulation, composition optimization and hybridization. Some existing progress in catalytic activity and mechanism exploration has been achieved, and the developed metal oxide-based HER catalysts have shown to be promising alternatives to noble metal-based materials. According to structural features, the metal oxide-based HER electrocatalysts ever reported can be roughly classified into the six categories: single transition metal oxides, spinel oxides, perovskite oxides, metal (oxy)hydroxides, specially-structured metal oxides and oxide-containing hybrids. In the following section, the recent advances of these electrocatalysts are comprehensively reviewed and some illustrative studies are emphatically presented. In consideration of fair comparison and testing media difference, the HER electrocatalysts based on metal oxides under acidic and alkaline conditions will be discussed separately in each part.
3.1. Simple transition metal oxides
Simple transition metal oxides composed of earth-abundant elements (Ni, Co, Ti, Mo, W, Mn, Ce, etc.) are the most common among the family of metal oxides, such as NiO, CoO, TiO2, Ti2O3, MoO3, MoO2, WO3, WO2, MnO2, CeO2, which have been intensively studied as good candidates for HER electrocatalysis by various approaches. Before summarizing the recent development on simple transition metal oxides, here we list out the strategies adopted for enhancing their HER activities in both acidic and alkaline media. Therefore, this part will be elaborated according to five main strategies, i.e., oxygen-vacancy control, phase-structure engineering, non-metal doping, metal doping and morphology engineering.

3.1.1. Oxygen-vacancy control. 
To date, the most studied simple transition metal oxides for HER in acids are based on group IV and VI transition metals (e.g., Mo, W and Ti) since these metal oxides have good thermodynamical stability in acidic solutions. Specific examples include MoO2, MoO3, WO3 and TiO2, etc., but these pristine stoichiometric oxides usually show unfavorable acidic HER activity. The creation of oxygen vacancies (OVs) in stoichiometric oxides has been regarded as one of the most commonly used and efficient ways to boost intrinsic catalytic activity by modulating the electronic structure, conductivity, and the hydrogen adsorption energies.34,56–58 In this regard, Y. Li et al. prepared oxygen-defect WO2.9 as an efficient HER electrocatalyst in acidic media through a facile thermal treatment (Fig. 2a).59 The WO2.9 with tailored structure exhibits significantly enhanced acidic HER activity (η10 of 70 mV and Tafel slope of 50 mV dec−1) than pristine WO3 (Fig. 2b and c). Further DFT calculations indicate that the origin of the enhanced activity could be attributed to the optimal hydrogen adsorption energy (close to thermodynamic neutral, ΔGH* ≈ 0 eV) (Fig. 2d). On this basis, Zheng et al. also used a liquid exfoliation method to prepare a conductive WO3 nanosheets (NSs) with rich OVs, realizing better HER activity in acidic media (η10 of 38 mV and Tafel slope of 38 mV dec−1).60 First-principles calculations demonstrate that the gap states introduced by OVs make WO3 act as a degenerate semiconductor with high conductivity and desirable hydrogen adsorption free energy (Fig. 2e and f). Likewise, TiO2 can be activated towards acidic HER by oxygen vacancy engineering.61 Swaminathan et al. presented a electrochemical cathodization method to prepare defect-rich conducting oxide TiO1.23 with plentiful active sites for HER, which shows excellent HER catalytic performance in acidic media in terms of onset potential, Tafel slope and stability.61
 Fig. 2  (a) Plausible reaction mechanism of electrocatalytic H2 evolution for WO3 and WO2.9. (b) HER polarization curves and (c) Tafel plots of different catalysts in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution. (d) Calculated free energy diagram of HER for a series of active sites on WO3(001) and WO2.9(010). Reproduced with permission.59 Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. (e) Calculated partial DOS of W 5d. (f) Free-energy diagram for hydrogen adsorption at the W site on the WO3(010) slab with different O vacancies. Reproduced with permission.60 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Besides the acidic condition, engineering the OVs of simple transition metal oxides could also improve the catalytic HER performance in alkaline media. For example, Qiao's group used a surface strain engineering strategy to enhance the alkaline HER activity of CoO nanorods (NRs).62 Based on theoretical and experimental results, they demonstrated that the atomic and electronic structure properties can be optimized through the tensile strain with the creation of large quantities of OVs, and these OVs can facilitate water dissociation and weaken the hydrogen adsorption towards the optimum region (Fig. 3a–c). As a result, the surface-strained CoO NRs with rich OVs shows excellent HER activity in alkaline solution, close to the benchmark Pt/C catalyst (Fig. 3d and e). Later, the same group also synthesized NiO NRs with abundant OVs via a cation exchange method (Fig. 3f).63 On the basis of experimental studies and DFT calculations, the chemical and electronic property of NiO NRs is successfully optimized through oxygen-vacancy engineering; the OVs on the surface of NiO NRs remarkably enhance their electronic conduction and promote HER reaction kinetics simultaneously. The engineered NiO NRs exhibit efficient alkaline HER catalytic activity with a low η10 of 110 mV and Tafel slope of 100 mV dec−1 (Fig. 3g and h). Similar tactics with introducing OVs have been also employed to reform the TiO2, MoO3 and MnO2 oxides for enhanced alkaline HER activity.64–66 The successful synthesis of these metal oxide nanomaterials with abundant OVs paves a highly promising way for rationally fabricating highly efficient HER electrocatalysts.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of H2O adsorption and dissociation on the OV-rich CoO surface. (b) ΔGH*vs. tensile strain for the OV-rich CoO surface. (c) Schematic illustration of the effect of strain on the electronic structure of OV-rich CoO surface. (d) HER polarization curves and (e) Tafel plots of different catalysts in 1 M KOH solution. Reproduced with permission.62 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (f) Schematic illustration of design strategy of NiO NRs. (g) HER polarization curves and (h) Tafel plots of different catalysts in 1 M KOH solution. Reproduced with permission.63 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 


3.1.2. Phase-structure engineering. 
In addition to the creation of oxygen vacancy, phase-structure engineering in the metal oxide itself can also boost the catalytic activity, which is reflected in a recent pioneering study by Li et al.67 By recrystallization on the substrates during epitaxial growth, three different Ti2O3 polymorphs, trigonal (denoted as α-Ti2O3), orthorhombic (denoted as o-Ti2O3), and cubic (denoted as γ-Ti2O3), were obtained (Fig. 4a and b). Electrochemical measurement reveals distinct activity difference, and γ-Ti2O3 exhibits the highest HER activity with smallest overpotential of 271 mV at 10 mA cm−2 in 0.5 M H2SO4 (Fig. 4c). Importantly, it was found that the HER activity of the Ti2O3 polymorphs is strongly correlated to their electronic structures. As shown in Fig. 4d, the overpotential of HER decreases with smaller charge-transfer energy (Δ) together with stronger Ti–O hybridization, suggesting the HER activity is highly enhanced by the electronic reconstructions. Thus, it is identified that the smallest charge-transfer energy in γ-Ti2O3 gives rise to the strongest hybridization of Ti 3d and O 2p orbitals, which results in the highest HER activity among Ti2O3 polymorphs. This work highlights the significance of the electronic structures on the acidic HER activity of oxide electrocatalysts, and also provides a strategy to achieve efficient oxide-based HER electrocatalysts by proper phase-structure engineering.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the PLD chamber where Ti2O3 polymorphs were fabricated using the same (α-Ti2O3) target. (b) Unit cells for γ-Ti2O3, o-Ti2O3, and α-Ti2O3 polymorphs. (c) HER polarization curves of different catalysts in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution. (d) Correlations between the physical parameters and HER activity in Ti2O3 polymorphs. Reproduced with permission.67 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. 


3.1.3. Non-metal doping. 
As stated in Section 3.1.1, Mo and W-based metal oxides with rich OVs has been developed as efficient HER electrocatalysts in acidic media via various fabrication techniques. Beyond that, non-metal doping (e.g., P and S) could also induce the generation of OVs for activity enhancement.68,69 For instance, Li et al. reported a facile and controllable two-step intercalation method for the synthesis of P doped MoO3−x NSs, which displays superior HER activity due to synergistic effect between the P dopants and the OVs.68 The relative low electronegativity of P element can help the adsorption and desorption of protons and then enhance the activity of the catalyst for acidic HER. Besides, Geng et al. reported that the acidic HER activity of MoO2 is much enhanced by S doping.69 The experimental results show that doping the S atoms into MoO2 could produce the OVs, induce the lattice defect, regulate charge transfer, and subsequently improve the HER.
Introducing foreign non-metal heteroatoms (e.g., N, F, S) could also improve the alkaline HER performance via adjusting the electronic structures.70–72 For example, Zhang and co-workers used N atoms to modulate electrochemical adsorption sites on the surface of NiO to achieve enhanced alkaline HER activity.70 Based on theoretical and experimental results, the surface charge redistribution after N modification can simultaneously facilitate the initial water dissociation, the Had on low coordinated oxygen (LCO) sites and the desorption of OHad on nickel sites, thus accelerating the overall hydrogen evolution process (Fig. 5a and b). In another recent study, Zhong et al. reported the halogen fluorine (F) anion doping strategy to enhance the alkaline HER activity of CoO.71 F-anion doping at O2− sites induces the charge redistribution of neighboring Co sites, facilitates water dissociation and weakens hydrogen adsorption, enabling the optimal states for the HER (Fig. 5c). In addition to the electronic effect, the hetero non-metal doping can tune the crystallinity of metal oxides. In this respect, Yu et al. found that incorporation of electronegative S into crystalline cobalt oxide can lead to the formation of disordered structure (Fig. 5d).72 Compared with its crystalline form, the disorder in S–CoOx catalyst increases low oxygen coordination and rich defect sites, endowing S–CoOx with a superior catalytic activity for both HER and OER in alkaline media.
 Fig. 5  (a) Electron transfer process among LCO, Ni, and N. (b) Schematic illustration of water adsorption, water dissociation, Had desorption to form H2 from LCO sites and OHad desorption from Ni sites on the surface of N–NiO. Reproduced with permission.70 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic illustration of the fabrication and mechanism of the bifunctional F–CoO catalysts. Reproduced with permission.71 Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic illustration for the synthesis of S–CoOx. Reproduced with permission.72 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
In short, hetero non-metal atoms (e.g., N, F, P, S) doping is a facile and efficient approach to boost the HER performance of transition metal oxides in both acidic and alkaline media. The intrinsic reasons and beneficial factors for selecting non-metal atom doping can be summarized as follows: (1) facile operation without complicated fabrication process; (2) generating OVs as HER active sites; (3) enhancing electronic conductivity for promoted charge transfer; (4) optimizing the electronic structure and modulating the adsorption and dissociation of reactants. In acidic condition, the modulated electronic structure of metal oxides can optimize the ΔGH* for HER. However, in alkaline media, the surface charge redistribution after non-metal atom modulation not only facilitates ΔGH* but also promotes the initial water dissociation and ΔGOH*, synergistically accelerating the overall alkaline HER process. These considerations will be of great importance for the development of low-cost and highly active HER electrocatalysts in the future.


3.1.4. Metal doping. 
In some cases, metal oxides consisting of a suitable combination of transition metals (e.g., binary/ternary metal oxides) can possess superior catalytic performance to single metal counterparts.73,74 Metal doping is an effective and easy way to introduce the second metals. For acidic HER, a recent systematic study carried out by Zhong et al. on binary metal oxides showed that Mo doping can significantly boost the HER activity of W18O49.75 Based on DFT calculations, the remarkably enhanced acidic HER activity of W18O49 after Mo doping is because of the ability of Mo dopant to increase the number of active sites, consequently resulting in optimal hydrogen adsorption on the active sites due to electronic and geometric modulation (Fig. 6a and b). Likewise, Zeng et al. recently reported an efficient strategy to modulate the electron density of MoO2 by Ni doping to accelerate HER in acid.76 DFT calculations confirmed that Ni doping can lead to electron-deficiency on neighboring O sites, which is induced to adsorb hydrogen and then increase the surface hydrogen coverage (Fig. 6c–e). Increasing the surface hydrogen coverage suggests a larger number of effective active sites and a higher probability for HER. The strategy of adjusting the electron density and hydrogen adsorption of the catalytic sites could provide valuable insights for the rational design of highly efficient catalysts for HER.
 Fig. 6  (a) Different oxygen sites on W18O49(010) and Mo–W18O49(010). (b) Calculated ΔGH* of HER on different oxygen sites of W18O49(010) and Mo–W18O49(010). Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (c) Top-view structural model of MoO2(−111). (d) Hydrogen-coverage dependent ΔGH* for the pristine MoO2(−111) surface and the Ni-doped cases. (e) ΔGH*, adiabatic electron (Eea) and proton affinities (Epa) of Ni doped MoO2 with different doping concentrations. Reproduced with permission.76 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
Apart from Mo/W-based metal oxides, other transition metal oxides can be designed as efficient alkaline HER electrocatalysts via proper metal doing. Very recently, Jiang et al. reported Co dopant into CeO2 NSs can promote HER, due to the optimized hydrogen binding/water dissociation and increased active sites.77 Ternary metal oxides manifest great potential for the HER as well. As one representative study, the Qiao group utilized a dual-elemental (Ni,Zn) doping strategy to change the inert CoO oxide into a highly active alkaline HER electrocatalyst (Fig. 7a and b).78 Experimental and theoretical results demonstrated that the high activity is ascribed to Ni,Zn dual doping-induced modulation of surface and bulk electronic structure; that is, the Ni dopant provides an ideal surface electronic environment for hydrogen intermediate binding (Fig. 7c), while Zn dopants modulate the bulk electronic structure to boost electrical conduction (Fig. 7d). Besides, few other multi-metal simple oxides, such as Ru1/TiO2,79 NiFeOx,80 CoIIFe-ONC,81 Ir0.8Ru0.2Oy,82 Ni2Fe1–Mo,83 CoFeNi–O84 were also developed as efficient HER electrocatalysts in alkaline media.
 Fig. 7  (a) Experimental TOFs (at 200 mV overpotential) and (b) overpotentials (at 100 mA cm−2) for different catalysts. (c) Calculated ΔGH* and (d) density of states of different catalysts. Reproduced with permission.78 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 


3.1.5. Morphology engineering. 
Other than the above strategies for tuning the intrinsic activity, engineering the morphology of the metal oxides (e.g., nano-structure or pore-structure) by producing more active sites is another effective strategy for performance enhancement.66,85–89 One typical study is from the Zhang group, who synthesized ultrathin δ-MnO2 NSs with only two monolayer thickness on a nickel foam (NF) using an in situ hydrothermal method (Fig. 8a).66 The MnO2 NSs have good electrocatalytic activity toward HER in alkaline, which is attributed to its nanosheet nature containing abundant O vacancies as well as a large number of Mn3+ active sites. Likewise, the Cui group also grew ultrathin porous MoO2 NSs directly on a NF via a wet-chemical route (Fig. 8b), exhibiting much higher alkaline HER activity than conventional compact MoO2.85 In electrocatalysis, the porous structure is beneficial because not only does it offer more catalytic active sites, but it also provides efficient pathways for reactant transport, electrolyte transfer, and gas diffusion.34,86,87 Later, Luo et al. synthesized mesoporous MoO3−x with large accessible pores (20–40 nm) by an inverse micelle-template method (Fig. 8c), which are able to facilitate mass transport and charge transfer during HER.88 As a result, the mesoporous MoO3−x displays significantly enhanced HER activity in alkaline solution relative to the commercial samples. Besides the meso-porosity, Haque et al. later prepared crystalline 2D MoO3 with ordered hexagonal pores (Crys-AMO) as efficient HER catalyst with only 138 mV at 10 mA cm−2 in 0.1 M KOH.89 These ordered intracrystalline pores acting like 1D hexagonal tunnels in Crys-AMO are particularly useful, allowing easy migration of water molecules and gaseous species (Fig. 8d).
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic showing the in situ growth of ultrathin δ-MnO2 nanosheets. Reproduced with permission.66 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (b) The synthetic steps of porous MoO2 nanosheets on nickel foam directly. Reproduced with permission.85 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (c) The proposed formation mechanism of inverse micelle-templated mesoporous MoO3−x. Reproduced with permission.88 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (d) Schematic of ion and molecule diffusion through the 1D hexagonal intracrystalline pores in the 2D lateral domain. Reproduced with permission.89 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 

3.2. Spinel oxides
Spinel-type metal oxides can be depicted with the general formula of AB2O4, where A is briefly a divalent transition metal ion at a tetrahedral site and B is a trivalent transition metal ion occupying an octahedral site (Fig. 9a).73 In the spine structure, A and B sites can be occupied by the same elements (e.g., Co3O4) or different elements (e.g., NiCo2O4). Owing to easy synthesis, low cost and tunable composition, spinel oxides have attracted considerable interest for various applications in oxygen electrocatalysis,90 photocatalysis,91 lithium batteries,92 supercapacitors,93etc. In the alkaline HER electrocatalysis, some spinel oxides with desirable performance were also designed and synthesized, which will be described in the following subsections according to two spinel compositions of Co3O4 and AB2O4 (A ≠ B).
 Fig. 9  (a) General crystal structure of spinel metal oxides. Reproduced with permission.73 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (b) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of Co3O4-MTA. (c) HER polarization curves of different catalysts in 1 M KOH solution. Reproduced with permission.94 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (d) The schematic diagram for the preparation of P-Co3O4 and VO-Co3O4 by a plasma-assisted approach. (e) Calculated free energy diagram of HER for different catalysts. (f) HER polarization curves of different catalysts in 1 M KOH solution. Reproduced with permission.95 Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 

3.2.1. Co3O4 spinel. 
Co3O4 is the most common among the spinel oxides, and a few efforts have been made to achieve desirable Co3O4-based HER electrocatalysts in alkaline media. Recently, Zhu et al. fabricated hollow Co3O4 microtube arrays (Co3O4-MTA) with hierarchical porosity (Fig. 9b) through an electrochemical sacrificial-template method.94 Featuring hollow interior and porous shells, Co3O4-MTA exhibits superb alkaline activity for HER with low onset overpotentials and high current densities (Fig. 9c). In another example reported recently, Xiao et al. used a plasma-assisted approach (Fig. 9d) to fill the in situ-generated oxygen vacancies of Co3O4 with P atoms to enhance the HER activity.95 Theoretical calculations proved that the improved electrical conductivity and intermediate binding by P filling contributed to the significant activity enhancement (Fig. 9e and f). These two studies suggest that the HER activity of Co3O4 in alkaline media can be improved by both intrinsic and extrinsic strategies.


3.2.2. AB2O4 spinels. 
Besides Co3O4, other AB2O4 spinel oxides with different A and B elements (e.g., NiCo2O4) were also intensively studied in HER electrocatalysis.96–99 For example, Gao et al. prepared hierarchical NiCo2O4 hollow microcuboids constructed by 1D porous nanowire subunits (Fig. 10a) via a thermally driven conversion process.96 Benefiting from these unique 3D hierarchical structures, the HER kinetics of NiCo2O4 is significantly promoted. Later, Liu et al. found that the concentration of OVs can greatly affect the HER activity of NiCo2O4.97 Based on theoretical results, the increased OVs reduce the adsorption energy and dissociation energy barrier of H2O molecules on the catalyst surface, thus leading to the activity enhancement of NiCo2O4 toward alkaline HER. Combining the benefits of morphology and OVs, Peng et al. developed an “adsorption–calcination–reduction” strategy to synthesize a series of spinel oxides (NiCo2O4, CoMn2O4 and NiMn2O4) with unique necklace-like multishelled hollow structure and rich OVs (Fig. 10b and c).98 Compared with the pristine NiCo2O4, the reduced sample shows better HER activity with η10 of 135 mV and Tafel slope of 52 mV dec−1 in 1 M KOH. In addition, the HER catalytic ability of spinel oxides can be also boosted by a conventional doping strategy. Very recently, the Wang group fabricated zirconium (Zr) regulated CoFe2O4 (CoFeZr oxides) nanosheets on 3D NF as highly efficient HER electrocatalysts through one-step solvothermal method (Fig. 10d and e).99 They found that the incorporation of Zr into CoFe2O4 can adjust the nanosheet morphology by generating more active sites and electronic structure for enhancing the intrinsic activity of active sites. Moreover, several other types of spinel oxides with different compositions, e.g., CuCo2O4 NSs,100 2D ZnCo2O4,101 Ce–MnCo2O4,102 were also reported to show encouraging HER catalytic performance in alkaline solutions.
 Fig. 10  (a) SEM image of hierarchical NiCo2O4 hollow microcuboids. Reproduced with permission.96 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (b) Schematic illustration of the formation process of R-TMO with a necklace-like multishelled hollow structure. (c) SEM image of reduced NiCo2O4 sample. Reproduced with permission.98 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration for in situ growth of CoFe oxides and CoFeZr oxides on the nickel foam. (e) SEM image of CoFeZr oxides. Reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 

3.3. Perovskite oxides
Perovskite oxides are a family of functional metal oxides with a general formula of ABO3, where larger A-site cations are commonly rare-earth or alkaline earth metals with 12-fold oxygen coordination, and the smaller B-site cations are commonly transition metals with 6-fold oxygen coordination (Fig. 11a). More than 90% of the elements in the Periodic Table can be doped into the A, B or O sites, leading to a large family of oxides with highly diversified properties. In addition to the primary crystal structure with ideal cubic symmetry, other multiple structures can be also formed in perovskite oxides. By tailoring the compositions and structures of the perovskite oxides, a variety of interesting physical properties, e.g., ferroelectric, pyroelectric, piezoelectric, electrical, optical, magnetic, catalytic, photovoltaic, mixed conducting and superconducting properties, can be created, which result in a wide range of applications that were explored in the last few decades.32–34,86,103–106 However, in the field of HER electrocatalysis, perovskite oxides were rarely studied in the past. Although tentative research on the use of A-site deficient Sr1−xNbO3−δ to catalyze HER in strong acids in the 1990s were reported, the HER activity remained very low.107,108 More recently (especially in the past four years), substantial efforts were devoted to improving the HER catalytic performance of perovskite oxides via multi-strategy design, and some significant advancements have been achieved. In this section, the representative development of HER electrocatalysts under alkaline conditions based on three types of perovskite oxides (i.e., simple perovskites, double perovskites and Ruddlesden–Popper-type oxides) will be reviewed, and designed strategies are highlighted.
 Fig. 11  (a) The structure of ABO3 perovskite oxide. (b) HER polarization curves of different catalysts in 1 M KOH solution. Reproduced with permission.109 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (c) Projected density of states of O 2p bands of La0.5Ba0.5CoO3−δ, La0.5Sr0.5CoO3−δ and F-doped perovskites. Reproduced with permission.110 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (d) Schematic illustration of the preparation process of SNCF-NR by electrospinning. (e) SEM image of SNCF-NR. Reproduced with permission.112 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (f) Schematic illustration of preparation for 3DOM-LF. (g) SEM image of SNCF-NR. Reproduced with permission.114 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 

3.3.1. Simple perovskites. 
One pioneering study by Xu et al. reported an A-site praseodymium (Pr)-doped Pr0.5(Ba0.5Sr0.5)0.5Co0.8Fe0.2O3−δ (Pr0.5BSCF) perovskite with cubic structure as an active and stable electrocatalyst for HER in the alkaline media.109 Because of multiple beneficial factors induced by Pr-doping, Pr0.5BSCF shows a significant enhancement of HER catalytic activity with a low overpotential of 237 mV to approach 10 mA cm−2 as compared to the undoped Ba0.5Sr0.5Co0.8Fe0.2O3−δ (BSCF) perovskite (Fig. 11b). Besides the traditional cation doping, anion-doping approach could also promote catalytic performance. For example, a trace of fluorine (F) dopants in La0.5Ba0.25Sr0.25CoO3 helps upshift the O 2p-band center and activate the redox capability of the lattice O, and thereby improve the alkaline HER activity.110 Perovskite oxides usually have a low specific surface area, which is due to high calcinations temperature required for the phase formation, resulting in low mass activity for electrocatalysis.34,86,111 Thus, the preparation of nanostructured perovskites by increasing the number of active sites could be an effective way to boost the performance of the catalysts. In our previous work, we prepared a SrNb0.1Co0.7Fe0.2O3−δ perovskite nanorod (SNCF-NR) by a facile electrospinning method, displaying excellent HER activity and stability in the base electrolyte (Fig. 11c and d).112 The same method was also used to synthesize La0.5(Ba0.4Sr0.4Ca0.2)0.5Co0.8Fe0.2O3−δ (LBSCCF) perovskite for HER catalysis.113 In another example reported recently by our group, a LaFeO3 perovskite with 3D ordered macroporous (3DOM) structure (3DOM-LF) was fabricated through a colloidal crystal template method, exhibiting approximately fourfold activity enhancement for alkaline HER compared to its bulk LF counterpart (Fig. 11e and f).114 Such 3DOM structure generates increased number of active sites and facilitates mass transfer; consequently, the activity and durability are improved.


3.3.2. Double perovskites. 
Double perovskite oxides with a formula of AA′B2O5+δ have a layered structure with alternating layers of |AOδ|BO2|A′O|BO2, where generally A is a large-radii alkaline-earth metal element (e.g., Ba), A′ is a small-radii lanthanide element (e.g., La, Pr, Nd, Gd), B is transition metal element, and the oxygen vacancies (OVs) are located in the AO layer.115,116 Double perovskites feature some unique electronic structures that are not usually found in single perovskites,115,116 which may generate several benefits to the HER electrocatalysis. In this respect, Guan et al. carried out a systematic study on A-site ordered RBaCo2O5.5+δ (R = lanthanides) double perovskites for alkaline HER electrocatalysis.117 It was observed that the OVs in the lanthanide plane of RBaCo2O5.5+δ are ordered for δ = 0 and δ = 0.25 while no vacancy ordering exists for δ = 0.37 and δ = 0.5 (Fig. 12a). Based on computational results, two active sites on RBaCo2O5.5+δ surfaces, namely, the oxygen vacancies at Co3+pyr sites and O 2p ligand holes of oxygen atoms from the Co4+oct clusters, can be active sites for H2O adsorption and H2 desorption, respectively (Fig. 12b and c). Benefiting from such synergy of the two anionic active sites, the experimentally synthesized (Gd0.5La0.5)BaCo2O5.75 (Gd0.5; δ = 0.25) exhibits the highest HER activity among the RBaCo2O5.5+δ system. Later, it was also proposed that the A-site ionic electronegativity (AIE) can serve as an efficient unifying descriptor to predict the HER activities of 13 cobalt-based perovskites, and found (Gd0.5La0.5)BaCo2O5.5+δ with an AIE value of ∼2.33 possesses the highest activity (Fig. 12d).118 The peak HER activity at a moderate AIE value of ∼2.33 can be associated with the optimal electronic states of active B-sites via an inductive effect in perovskite structure (Fig. 12e). In addition, the Ciucci group reported another promising double perovskite oxide, i.e., NdBaMn2O5.5, as a highly efficient HER electrocatalyst, which can be understood based on multiple beneficial factors associated with electronic structures.119
 Fig. 12  (a) Crystal structures of oxygen vacancy ordered RBaCo2O5.5 and RBaCo2O5.75, as well as RBaCo2O6 without oxygen vacancies. (b) The calculated free energies of H2O adsorption (grey), H2O dissociation to adsorbed OH− and H*, OH− desorption, and hydrogen desorption in the alkaline HER on RBaCo2O5.5, RBaCo2O5.75, and RBaCo2O6 surfaces. (c) Computational predictions for the HER processes of H2O adsorption, H2O dissociation, formation of H* intermediates, and subsequent recombination of two H* to form H2 on the RBaCo2O5.75 surface. Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (d) HER activity trends of overpotential at 10 mA cm−2 oxide as a function of A-site ionic electronegativity. (e) Inductive effects and electron exchange interactions between A-sites and B-sites in perovskites from molecular orbital theory. Reproduced with permission.118 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. 


3.3.3. Ruddlesden–Popper-type oxides. 
Layered Ruddlesden–Popper (RP) type oxides (formula of An+1BnO3n+1 or equivalently [AO](ABO3±δ)n), wherein n ABO3 perovskite layers are sandwiched between two AO rock-salt layers, have received considerable attention due to their chemical flexibility, layered structure, wide element accommodation, and labile lattice.34,120–122 However, the HER electrocatalysts based on RP oxides were never studied previously until a most recent report by our group.123 In this representative work, RP Sr2RuO4 with a space group of I4/mmm was prepared by a facile and mature solid-phase reaction method (Fig. 13a). Sr2RuO4 oxide presents an ultrahigh HER activity in alkaline media with an extremely low overpotential of 61 mV at 10 mA cm−2 and Tafel slope of 51 mV dec−1 (Fig. 13b and c). By theoretical calculations, the excellent HER activity of Sr2RuO4 was mainly attributed to an unusual synergistic effect in the layered structure, whereby the (001) SrO-terminated surface cleaved in rock-salt layer facilitates a barrier-free water dissociation while the active apical oxygen site in the perovskite layer promotes favorable hydrogen adsorption and evolution (Fig. 13d and e). This seminal study opens a new avenue for the development of high-performance HER electrocatalysts through constructing synergistic active sites in unique single-phase metal oxides. One direction of future research is to develop RP-type oxides composed of non-noble transition metals as potential catalysts for the HER, since Ru is a noble metal that can impose limitations on practical applications.
 Fig. 13  (a) XRD patterns of Sr2RuO4. Inset shows the local crystal structure. (b) HER polarization curves and (c) Tafel plots of different catalysts in 1 M KOH solution. (d) Free-energy diagram for hydrogen adsorption at the metal and oxygen sites on Sr2RuO4, SrRuO3, RuO2, Ru, and Pt. (e) SrO-terminated surface of Sr2RuO4 at electrode potential U = 0 V and USHE = 0.83 V, respectively. Reproduced with permission.123 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. 

3.4. Metal (oxy)hydroxides
Transition metal (oxy)hydroxides, including the special class of layered double hydroxides (LDHs), are layered metal oxides, which are featured with low cost, high specific surface area, good alkaline stability and distinctive electron distribution.19,73,124 Pristine metal (oxy)hydroxides are generally deemed as favorable OER electrocatalysts, but usually have low activity for HER because of inappropriate hydrogen adsorption energies.38,47,62,125 Considering that metal (oxy)hydroxides can effectively dissociate water, hybridizing them with other electroactive materials is an efficient approach to achieve high-performance alkaline HER electrocatalysts, which will be discussed in Section 3.6.2 below. Although studies on pure metal (oxy)hydroxides for HER are very limited, few metal (oxy)hydroxides with promising alkaline HER activity were still reported. Very recently, Fe-substituted hierarchical VOOH hollow spheres assembled by 2D flake with different doping ratio were synthesized through a one-pot hydrothermal process, and the optimized VOOH–3Fe shows a low overpotential of 93 mV to afford 10 mA cm−2 in alkaline media (Fig. 14a).125 According to DFT calculations, the Fe site of the Fe-doped VOOH generates optimal binding energies compared to that of V sites before and after Fe doping (Fig. 14b), which accounts for the enhanced activity. Chen et al. demonstrated a strategy to accelerate the hydrogen evolution kinetics of the NiFe-LDH by partially substituting Fe atoms with Ru.126 In 1 M KOH solution, the as-synthesized Ru-doped NiFe-LDH (NiFeRu-LDH) nanosheets exhibit excellent HER activity with an overpotential of 29 mV at 10 mA cm−2, close to the benchmark Pt/C catalyst (Fig. 14c). Theoretical results reveal that the dopant of Ru atoms into NiFe-LDH can efficiently reduce energy barrier of the Volmer step, eventually accelerating its HER kinetics (Fig. 14d). Likewise, Fanet et al. reported a bifunctional catalyst by doping atomic Ir into the NiCo LDH using a facile atmospheric solvothermal method and subsequently spontaneous galvanic displacement.127 The as-prepared Ir–NiCo LDH displays excellent catalytic properties with a HER overpotential of 21 mV at 10 mA cm−2 in 1 M KOH electrolyte. Li et al. also used the anionic S doping to boost the HER activity of CoOOH, resulting from the modified t2g orbital state, enhanced electrical conductivity and reduced reaction barriers.128 Moreover, the in situ formed new components during the electrochemical process could further improve the HER performance of metal (oxy)hydroxides. For instance, the Edvinsson group reported the dynamically self-optimized NiFe layered double hydroxide (DSO NiFeLDH) nanosheets as highly active HER electrocatalysts in alkaline media.129 By in situ Raman spectra (Fig. 14e and f), the dynamically formed species were identified and the real HER mechanism of DSO NiFe LDH was uncovered: the synergetic effect of NiFe compounds serves to optimize the reaction route by promoting water dissociation on the formed FeOOH and enhancing the bond association with Had–NiO (Fig. 14g). These studies suggest that the inert transition metal (oxy)hydroxides can be activated for HER by proper approaches, e.g., doping and electrochemistry-induced surface reconstruction.
 Fig. 14  (a) HER polarization curves of different catalysts in 1 M KOH solution. (b) Calculated free energy diagram for hydrogen adsorption. Reproduced with permission.125 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (c) HER polarization curves of different catalysts in 1 M KOH solution. (d) Calculated adsorption free energy diagrams for the Volmer step. Reproduced with permission.126 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (e) In situ Raman spectra collected in a large wave number region from NiFe LDH during HER process in 1 M KOH at various overpotentials vs. RHE. (f) Magnification of the corresponding orange wavelength region of (e). (g) Schematic illustration showing the reaction mechanism for HER on NiFe LDH. Reproduced with permission.129 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
3.5. Specially-structured oxides
In addition to the common metal oxides stated above, some other types of metal oxides with special crystal structures were also reported to show desirable catalytic activity towards HER in both acidic and alkaline media. Very recently, the Li group firstly studied the acidic HER performance of a Pt-containing polyoxometalate (PtW6O24), which is constructed by a {PtO6} octahedron connected to six {WO6} octahedra in an edge-sharing mode (Fig. 15a).130 The PtW6O24 shows an ultrahigh HER activity in acidic media with a very low overpotential of 22 mV at 10 mA cm−2, better than that of commercial 20% Pt/C (Fig. 15b). The in situ synchrotron radiation experiments (Fig. 15c) and DFT calculations (Fig. 15d and e) demonstrated that the elongated Pt–O bond acts as the active site during the HER process, which accelerates the coupling of proton and electron and the rapid release of H2. Not limited to this example, some oxides with special structures, such as layered misfit Ca3Co4O9,131 and layered V10O24·nH2O nanofiber,132 were investigated as promising candidates for HER in acid as well.
 Fig. 15  (a) The ball and stick representation of PtW6O24 with the corresponding semitransparent map of molecular electrostatic potential. (b) HER polarization curves of 1% PtW6O24/C and 20% Pt/C catalysts in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution. (c) In situ XANES spectra of the PtW6O24 at Pt L3-edge. (d) Mechanistic scheme of the HER catalyzed by PtW6O24. (e) Free energy diagrams for H2 production with an extremely low barrier. Reproduced with permission.130 Copyright 2020, Nature Publishing Group. 
Besides acidic HER, other types of special oxides, like crystalline cobalt phosphate Co3(OH)2(HPO4)2,133 nickel phosphate Ni11(HPO3)8(OH)6,134 helical cobalt borophosphate LiCo(H2O)2[BP2O8]·H2O,135 monoclinic MnMoO4136 and β-CoMoO4 nanoplate137 were studied as efficient alkaline HER electrocatalysts after adopting some effective strategies. For example, crystalline Co3(OH)2(HPO4)2 was explored as a precursor for alkaline HER, exhibiting remarkable catalytic activity due to the formation of in situ amorphous CoOx(OH) phase under electrochemical conditions.133 Electrochemically-inert MnMoO4 was successfully transformed into highly active alkaline HER electroctalyst through hydrogenation, which is ascribed to the formation of amorphous phase and enlarged electrochemically active surface area.136 Moreover, Zhao et al. reported P doped monoclinic β-CoMoO4 nanoplate as an efficient and stable HER electrocatalyst in alkaline electrolytes, and found both (P–O1−) and Co3+–OH− are prospective surface active sites for the HER via combined computational and in situ spectroscopic techniques.137 We note that the exploitation of specially-structured oxides as the HER electrocatalysts is still in its early stage, but the above limited studies highlight the key roles of unique structure design and proper strategy adoption for boosting the HER performance.
3.6. Oxide-containing hybrids

3.6.1. Mixed-metal-oxide composites. 
Some mixed metal oxides containing two or more oxide components were also reported for HER electrocatalysis in view of the expectancy of advantageous properties from multiple components.138–142 One typical example is that of Liu et al. who adopted a simple wet chemistry method to prepare a hybrid porous nanosheet arrays composed of strongly coupled RuO2 and NiO nanoparticles (Fig. 16a).138 The resulting RuO2/NiO exhibits exceptional alkaline HER activity, comparable to the benchmark Pt catalyst (Fig. 16b). They found that the excellent HER activity is closely related to the potential-induced interfacial synergy between the RuO2 and NiO: NiO promotes water dissociation and RuO2-derived Ru is active for hydrogen adsorption and evolution (Fig. 16c). A similar phenomenon in mixed TiO2/Co2P4O12 metal oxides was also reported by Lv et al.139 During the alkaline HER process, TiO2 was found to accelerate the surface reduction of Co2P4O12 to metallic Co, and enhanced performance is associated with the synergetic effect between Co, Co2P4O12, and TiO2. Some other catalyst systems composed of mixed metal oxides for alkaline HER were also available in recent reports, e.g., Co–Cu–W NW,140 CuCoO NW,141 MoO2/Fe1.89Mo4.11O7,142 NiO/Co3O4,143 CoO/Fe3O4,144 TiO2/NiCo2O4145 and Ni3(VO4)2/NiCo2O4.146
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration for the fabrication process of hierarchical RuO2/NiO/NF. (b) HER polarization curves of different catalysts in 1 M KOH solution. (c) Schematic illustration of potential-induced interfacial synergy between RuO2 and NiO for enhanced HER under alkaline conditions. Reproduced with permission.138 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 


3.6.2. Hybridizing with other electroactive materials. 
In recent years, heterostructure materials have become a prominent family of electrocatalysts due to their unique physicochemical properties.19,29 The construction of heterostructure is considered as an important approach to promote the advancement of catalysts with defined functions. For the HER process, the unique features of heterostructure catalysts can lead to improved or completely novel catalytic performance. Thus, constructing heterostructures by hybridizing metal (hydr)oxides with other electroactive materials (e.g. metals/alloys and metal phosphides/sulfides/selenides/carbides/nitrides) is an advisable and effective way to enhance the HER catalytic performance of bare metal (hydr)oxides.7–10,19,27,29,36–38 In this section, we will discuss three beneficial effects of heterostructure catalysts in promoting HER process, including synergistic effect, electronic effect and support effect. A few representative examples are described in detail.
Synergistic effect. 
It has been demonstrated that metal (hydr)oxides can serve as effective promoters for water dissociation.19,29 Therefore, metal (hydr)oxides can effectively facilitate the Volmer step (i.e., water dissociation) during alkaline HER process. Hybridizing metal (hydr)oxides with those conventional HER electrocatalysts is an efficient way to obtain high-performance electrocatalysts for the alkaline HER. Successful application of such synergistic hybrids has been extensively reported. In this regard, one pioneering study by the Markovic group designed a synergistic hybrid catalyst for alkaline HER via coupling Ni(OH)2 with Pt.38 More specifically, they electrodeposited a water dissociation promoter, namely Li+-intercalated Ni(OH)2, onto Pt to boost the initial water dissociation in alkaline media and the production of hydrogen intermediates, which are then adsorbed on the Pt surface to recombine into molecular hydrogen (Fig. 17a). As a result, the as-obtained hybrid catalyst can increase the Pt activity by about eight folds through this synergy (Fig. 17b). Following this early work, various noble metal/metal (hydr)oxide systems, e.g., Pt NWs/SL/Ni(OH)2,147 Pt/Co(OH)2,148 Ru/(Fe,Ni)(OH)2,149 Ru/CoO,150 Ru/SnO2,151 Ag/Cu2O,152 have been studied as excellent catalysts for the alkaline HER. Such hybrids can take advantage of the high catalytic activities of noble metals and favorable water dissociation ability of metal (hydr)oxides.
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic illustration of synergistic HER catalytic mechanism for Pt/Li+-intercalated Ni(OH)2 hybrid. (b) HER polarization curves of different catalysts in 0.1 M KOH solution. Reproduced with permission.38 Copyright 2011, AAAS. (c) ECSA-normalized polarization curves (symbols) of bare MoS2 and MoS2/NiCo-LDH hybrid catalysts in 1 M KOH solution with the best fits (lines) using the dual-pathway kinetic model. (d) Free energy diagram of the dominant Volmer–Heyrovsky pathway for HER in alkaline electrolyte for bare MoS2 and MoS2/NiCo-LDH hybrid catalysts. (e) Schematic illustration of the HER at MoS2/LDH interface in alkaline environment. The synergistic chemisorption of H (on MoS2) and OH (on LDH) benefits the water dissociation step. Reproduced with permission.153 Copyright 2017, Cell Press. 
Hybridizing metal (hydr)oxides with non-noble metal compounds (e.g., transition metal sulfides) can produce efficient and low-cost alkaline HER electrocatalysts. As a typical example, Hu et al. assembled a MoS2/NiCo-LDH hybrid as a highly efficient electrocatalysts for HER in alkaline electrolytes.153 The MoS2/NiCo-LDH hybrid exhibits high intrinsic activity than bare MoS2, suggesting the promoting role of NiCo-LDH (Fig. 17c). Benefiting from the desirable heterostructure, the MoS2/NiCo-LDH interface synergistically favor the chemisorption of H (on MoS2) and OH (on LDH), and can thus effectively accelerate the water dissociation step and the overall HER catalysis (Fig. 17d and e). Apart from the transition metal sulfides, other noble metal-free electroactive materials can also realize promoted HER activities in the alkaline environment when coupling with metal (hydr)oxides, such as Ni-Laser (Ni/NiO),154 Ni/Mn3O4,155 Ni/LixNiO,156 e-LSTN,157 Co NSNTs/TiO2 NDs,158 MoNi4/MoO2,159 NiCu/NiFeOx,160 Co9S8/TiO2,161 NiS2/Ni(OH)2,162 Co0.85Se/NiFe-LDH,163 and Cu3N/CuO.164 The combination may vary from one system to another, but the essence of the synergistic effect for alkaline HER is similar. To be specific, metal (hydr)oxides facilitate water dissociation, and electroactive material serves as the catalysts for H* adsorption and H2 evolution.
Electronic effect. 
The presence of heterointerfaces in the hybrid catalysts can tailor the electronic structure of active catalysts, consequently offering a moderate binding energy of hydrogen for improved HER catalytic performance in acid.29 Very recently, Xie et al. prepared a Pt–WO3 hybrid catalyst with excellent acidic HER activity close to that of commercial Pt/C (Fig. 18a).165 By in situ Raman spectroscopy and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy characterization, the electrochemically driven in situ phase transition from WO3 to HxWO3 was identified and the promoting mechanism of Pt/WO3 was uncovered. As schematically shown in Fig. 18b, in situ formed HxWO3 promotes electron transfer during HER process and accelerate HER kinetics by providing the hydrogen transfer pathway from HxWO3 onto Pt. Jiang et al. also reported a Pt/MoO2 heterostructure that possesses Pt-like HER activity in acidic solution with an overpotential of 20 mV at 10 mA cm−2.166 In addition to Pt metal, other materials, such as polyaniline, metal sulfides, etc., have been applied in constructing heterostructure catalysts for the acidic HER.167,168 For instance, Wang's group found that the proper d–π interfacial electronic coupling of WO3 with polyaniline (PANI) optimizes the electronic structure of the PANI surface.167 Theoretical calculations demonstrated that the antibonding states move lower with a higher occupancy, which leads to a weaker interaction between adsorbate hydrogen and catalyst surface and thereby triggers the HER activity on the inert PANI surface (Fig. 18c–f). As a result, the WO3/PANI shows excellent electrocatalytic HER activity with low overpotential of 74 mV at 10 mA cm−2 and small Tafel slope of 46 mV dec−1 in 0.5 M H2SO4. Besides, an efficient self-standing HER catalyst in acid has been developed by coating CuS/NiCo2O4 on a carbon fiber paper (CFP).168 Remarkably, the as-obtained CuS/NiCo2O4/CFP hybrid maintains excellent durability with at least 50 h operation under acidic conditions. The great stability of CuS/NiCo2O4/CFP may be ascribed to the heterostructure with strong electronic coupling, which ameliorate the negative effect of the irreversible dissolution for spinel NiCo2O4 oxide under the corrosive acidic conditions.
 Fig. 18  (a) HER polarization curves of different catalysts in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution. (b) Schematically illustration for the promoting mechanism of Pt/WO3. Reproduced with permission.165 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (c) Differential charge density of WOx–PANI with the isosurface value of 0.0004 e Å−3. (d) The calculated free-energy diagram of HER at the equilibrium potential for WOx@PANI catalysts with individual WOx, PANI, and Pt as references. (e) Projected density of state of N atom of WOx@PANI surfaces and individual PANI surface. (f) Schematic orbital hybridization of active N sites and hydrogen adsorbate on different WOx–PANI surfaces. Reproduced with permission.167 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
The modification of the electronic structure is closely associated with the charge transfer along hetero-interfaces, which can also boost the HER process in alkaline conditions. For example, Oh et al. developed a heterostructure comprising perovskite oxides La0.5Sr0.5CoO3−δ (LSC) and MoSe2 as a bifunctional electrocatalyst for alkaline water electrolysis.169 The HRTEM image analysis (Fig. 19a–c) indicates that the phase transformation partly occurs in MoSe2 from the 2H-phase to the 1T-phase during the fabrication process of the MoSe2/LSC heterostructure, which is ascribed to the charge transfer from Co to Mo as schematically displayed in Fig. 19d. Owing to such an electronic effect, an alkaline electrolyzer assembled with MoSe2/LSC heterostructure shows excellent stability at the high current density of 100 mA cm−2 over 1000 h. In another recent work, a porous nanospindle composed of carbon-encapsulated MoO2–FeP heterojunction (FeP/MoO2C) is proposed as a robust HER electrocatalyst in alkaline media.170 By combined X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy analysis and theoretical calculations, the electron transfer from MoO2 to FeP at the interfaces results in electron accumulation on FeP, which favors the optimization of H2O and H* absorption energies for alkaline HER (Fig. 19e–g). In addition to these two example catalysts, some other low-cost heterostructure catalysts, such as Ni–FeNP (Ni/γ-Fe2O3),171 Ni/MoO2,172 Co–P/Co3O4,173 V–CoP/a-CeO2,174 MoS2/Ni2O3H,175 MoS2/NiFe-LDH,176 e-ICLDH/GDY177 and Co(OH)2/PANI,178 have been developed as highly efficient alkaline HER catalysts thanks to interfacial electron transfer.
 Fig. 19  (a) HRTEM image of MoSe2/LSC, indicating the presence of both 2H- and 1T-phase MoSe2. (b) Enlarged region of 2H-MoSe2 shown with schematic lattice structure, illustrating the hexagonal crystal structure with Mo–Mo inter-atomic distance of 0.28 nm. (c) Enlarged region of 1T-MoSe2 shown with schematic lattice structure, indicating the Mo–Mo (0.563 nm) and Se–Se (0.324 nm) inter-atomic distances. (d) Schematic diagram of proposed charge transfer processes between MoSe2 and LSC. Reproduced with permission.169 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. (e) Calculated H2O adsorption energy. (f) Calculated H* adsorption energy. (g) Electron density difference plot at the MoO2–FeP interface. Reproduced with permission.170 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. 
Support effect. 
Constructing hybrid can not only tune the electron structure by electron transfer on the hetero-interface, but also bring about some enhanced properties (e.g., more exposed active sites, higher electronic conductivity and faster mass transfer), which are beneficial for the HER electrocatalysis. Such an effect can be called as “support effect”. Functional carbon materials usually act as good conductive supports for well-dispersed nanostructures to prevent their aggregation and provide more exposed surface area. Thus, the construction of metal oxide/functional carbon hybrid to expose more active sites has been an effective approach for boosting HER. For example, Wu et al. synthesized metallic WO2–carbon mesoporous nanowires with high concentration OVs (MWCMNs) via calcination of inorganic/organic WO3–ethylenediamine hybrid precursors (Fig. 20a).179 The MWCMNs are endowed with three characteristics: metallic nature (Fig. 20b), mesoporous structure (Fig. 20c) and the in situ-formed carbon as rigid substrate and electron mobility promoter. Experimental and theoretical data reveal that the unusual electronic structure and great number of active sites induced by the mesoporous carbon are key factors for excellent activity of MWCMNs in acid (Fig. 20d). Likewise, other hybrid catalysts with functional carbon component have been also reported, such as WO3−x/CNFs,180 WO3/NPRGO,181 WO2/C3N4182 and NiCo2O4/rGO.183 In addition to functional carbon, some other materials with high surface area (e.g., metal–organic framework (MOF)) can be hybridized with metal oxides as promising HER electrocatalysts. Recently, Zeng et al. used a one-pot hydrothermal method for the preparation of Co3O4@Co-MOF as an efficient electrocatalyst for overall water splitting (Fig. 20e).184 The uniformly distributed Co3O4 nanocubes supported on a high-surface-area Co-MOF (Fig. 20f) enable the full use of active sites of electrocatalyst, which results in high catalytic activity of Co3O4@Co-MOF hybrid.
 Fig. 20  (a) Synthetic schematic diagram of MWCMNs. (b) Projected density of states of MWCMNs. (c) TEM image of MWCMNs. (d) HER polarization curves of different catalysts in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution. Reproduced with permission.179 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic of the fabrication of the Co-MOF and Co3O4/Co-MOF hybrid. (f) TEM image of Co3O4/Co-MOF.184 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 

3.7. Summary
In summary, various types of metal oxides for HER in both acidic and alkaline media as reported in the literature have been reviewed in this section. These oxides have their own advantages and disadvantages. Among the single-phase oxides, the simple metal oxides are the most studied materials and extensively explored as highly active electrocatalysts for both acidic and alkaline HER by various strategies. However, from the viewpoint of material design, simple metal oxides have disadvantages of relatively poor tunability in the composition and structure. Acidic HER electrocatalysts are mainly based on Mo and W elements, and alkaline HER electrocatalysts are basically composed of Co, Ni, Fe, Mn elements. By virtue of the compositional and structural flexibility, quite a few of spinel and perovskite oxides with desirable properties have been designed and synthesized as efficient HER electrocatalysts in alkaline media. Nonetheless, most spinel and perovskite oxides are not stable in acidic solutions, consequently there is nearly no report about spinel and perovskite oxides for acidic HER electrocatalysis. Metal (oxy)hydroxides also suffer from the poor stability in acidic environment. In addition, some pure metal (oxy)hydroxides and specially-structured oxides with unique properties show great potential in HER electrocatalysis, but so far the study on this topic is very limited. With regards to oxide-containing hybrids, various heterostructure materials display their distinct HER catalytic characteristics, which comes from the sum of the interaction contributed by individual components, leading to higher activity and better stability. There is no doubt that developing rational hybrid catalysts is an effective approach to improve the HER performance of single-phase oxides. However, the fabrication processes for these hybrids are usually complicated. Therefore, in terms of the industrial large-scale application, it is expected to realize the facile synthesis of metal oxide-based catalysts with high catalytic activity and good stability.
4. Conclusion and perspectives
The development of high-performance and cost-effective electrocatalysts for HER is crucial for the sustainable production of hydrogen as an alternative clean fuel and energy carrier. Over the past few years, continuous breakthroughs have been achieved in developing metal oxide-based electrocatalysts towards efficient electrochemical HER, reviving interest and challenging the traditional view of HER-inactive metal oxides by turning them into promising HER electrocatalysts. We hope that this timely and comprehensive overview of metal oxide-based electrocatalysts for HER will stimulate further research interest in this area. In this review, we have presented recent advances and understanding in the design of efficient HER electrocatalysts in both acidic and alkaline media based on various types of metal oxides such as single transition metal oxides, spinel oxides, perovskite oxides, metal (oxy)hydroxides and specially-structured oxides, as exhaustively listed in Tables 1 and 2, respectively. In addition, hybrids comprising metal oxides and other electroactive materials (X) have been widely reported as a family of high-performance HER electrocatalysts due to synergistic effect, electronic effect and support effect. Tables 3 and 4 lists nearly all “metal oxide + X” hybrid catalysts for HER in acidic and alkaline media where “X” refers to metal, alloy, metal phosphides, metal sulfide, metal selenide, metal nitride, metal carbide, metal (hydr)oxide, functional carbon, metal–organic framework (MOF), conductive polymer and metal phosphate. Among these reported electrocatalysts, some show close activity to the benchmark Pt catalyst. Specifically, strategies to boost the HER electrocatalytic performance of metal oxides by enhancing electronic conductivity, optimizing the electronic structure and increasing catalytically active sites, are highlighted. The designed effective strategies introduced in this review include doping, oxygen-vacancy control, phase-structure engineering, strain engineering, morphology engineering, crystallinity engineering, valence regulation, composition optimization, hybridization, etc.
Table 1 Summary of single-phase metal oxides for the acidic HER




Electrocatalyst
Key strategy
Electrolyte

η
10 (mV)
Tafel slope (mV dec−1)
Year




Simple transition metal oxides


WO2.959
Oxygen-vacancy engineering
0.5 M H2SO4
70
50
2015


WO3-r NSs60
Oxygen-vacancy engineering; morphology engineering
0.5 M H2SO4
38
38
2017


TiO1.2361
Oxygen-vacancy engineering
0.5 M H2SO4
198
88
2016


WO3−x185
Oxygen-vacancy engineering; phase-structure engineering
0.5 M H2SO4
∼440
30
2019


MoO3−x186
Oxygen-vacancy engineering
0.5 M H2SO4
201
90
2019


ReO3 NP/CFP-480s187
Oxygen-vacancy engineering
0.5 M H2SO4
138
81
2019


γ-Ti2O367
Phase-structure engineering
0.5 M H2SO4
271
199
2019


P-Doped MoO3−x NSs68
Non-metal doping; oxygen-vacancy engineering; morphology engineering
0.5 M H2SO4
166
42
2017


S-Doped MoO2 NSs69
Non-metal doping; oxygen-vacancy engineering; morphology engineering
0.5 M H2SO4
176
57
2020


3D urchin-like Mo–W18O4975
Metal doping; morphology engineering
0.5 M H2SO4
45
54
2016


Ni0.35Mo0.65O276
Metal doping
0.5 M H2SO4
43
37
2020


1D MoO2188
Morphology engineering
0.5 M H2SO4
169
58
2017






Specially-structured oxides


PtW6O24130
Valence regulation
0.5 M H2SO4
22
30
2020


Ca3Co4O9131
Phase-structure engineering
0.5 M H2SO4
∼390
87
2014


V10O24·nH2O NFs132
Morphology engineering
0.5 M H2SO4
118
101
2019




Table 2 Summary of single-phase metal oxides for the alkaline HER




Electrocatalyst
Key strategy
Electrolyte

η
10 (mV)
Tafel slope (mV dec−1)
Year




Simple transition metal oxides


S–CoO NRs62
Oxygen-vacancy engineering; strain engineering; morphology engineering
1 M KOH
73
82
2017


NiO NRs-m-Ov63
Oxygen-vacancy engineering; morphology engineering
1 M KOH
110
100
2018


TiO2−x64
Oxygen-vacancy engineering
1 M KOH
∼630
188
2018


2D α-MoO3−x NSs65
Oxygen-vacancy engineering; morphology engineering
0.1 M KOH
142
58
2017


np-NiMo189
Oxygen-vacancy engineering
1 M KOH
N.A.
57
2020


N–NiO70
Non-metal doping
1 M KOH
100
113
2018


F–CoO NWs71
Non-metal doping; morphology engineering
1 M KOH
53
65
2020


S–CoOx72
Non-metal doping; crystallinity engineering
1 M KOH
136
80
2020


Co-Doped CeO2 NSs77
Metal doping; oxygen-vacancy engineering; morphology engineering
1 M KOH
<100
N.A.
2020


Ni/Zn dual-doped CoO NRs78
Co-Doping; morphology engineering
1 M KOH
53
47
2019


Ni2Fe1–Mo NWs83
Metal doping; morphology engineering
1 M KOH
147
128
2018


Ir–CoxNi1−xO190
Metal doping
1 M KOH
70
53
2019


Ni/S co-doped CoO191
Co-doping
1 M KOH
175
89
2019


Ultrathin δ-MnO2 NSs66
Morphology engineering; oxygen-vacancy engineering
1 M KOH
197
62
2017


2-Cycle NiFeOx80
Morphology engineering
1 M KOH
88
150
2015


Porous MoO2 NSs85
Morphology engineering
1 M KOH
25
N.A.
2016



mMoO388
Morphology engineering; oxygen-vacancy engineering
0.1 M KOH
138
56
2016


2D Crys-AMO89
Morphology engineering; phase-structure engineering
0.1 M KOH
138
50
2019


Porous WO2 HNs192
Morphology engineering
1 M KOH
48
43
2017


NiFe-NCs193
Morphology engineering
1 M KOH
197
130
2017


PAN/Ga-75194
Morphology engineering
0.1 M KOH
∼500
70
2019


Mesoporous CoFeNi–O84
Morphology engineering
1 M KOH
53
N.A.
2019


CoIIFe-ONC81
Valence tunning
1 M KOH
∼240
76
2019


Ir0.8Ru0.2Oy NFs82
Composition optimization
1 M NaOH
∼35
32
2018






Spinel oxides


Co3O4-MTA94
Morphology engineering
1 M KOH
∼150
98
2017


P–Co3O495
Non-metal doping
1 M KOH
120
52
2017


Ni–Co3O4 NSs195
Metal doping; morphology engineering
1 M KOH
170
77
2018


NiCo2O4 hollow microcuboids96
Morphology engineering
1 M KOH
∼100
50
2016


OV-rich NiCo2O4NRs97
Oxygen-vacancy engineering
1 M KOH
∼190
132
2018


R-NCO98
Oxygen-vacancy engineering; morphology engineering
1 M KOH
135
52
2018


3D CoFeZr NSs99
Metal doping; morphology engineering
1 M KOH
104
119
2019


CuCo2O4 NSs100
Morphology engineering
1 M KOH
115
153
2019


2D ZnCo2O4101
Morphology engineering
1 M KOH
335
43
2019


Ce–MnCo2O4102
Metal doping
1 M KOH
389
96
2019


NiCo2O4NSs196
Morphology engineering
1 M KOH
180
63
2017


NP-NiCo2O4197
Morphology engineering
1 M KOH
370
123
2019


NiFe2O4198
Composition optimization
1 M KOH
300
125
2019






Perovskite oxides


Pr0.5BSCF109
Metal doping
1 M KOH
237
45
2016


LBSCOF110
Non-metal doping
1 M KOH
∼180
44
2018


SNCF-NR112
Morphology engineering
1 M KOH
232
103
2017


LBSCCF113
Co-doping; hybridization
1 M KOH
338
80
2017


3DOM-LFC82114
Metal doping; morphology engineering
1 M KOH
350
111
2019


SCFP nanofilm199
Crystallinity engineering
1 M KOH
110
94
2018


SrCo0.7Fe0.25Mo0.05O3−δ200
Metal doping
1 M KOH
323
94
2019


LaCo0.94Pt0.06O3−δ201
Metal doping
0.1 M KOH
294
148
2019


(Gd0.5La0.5)BaCo2O5.75117
Oxygen-vacancy engineering; atomic-scale synergy
1 M KOH
185
28
2019


NdBaMn2O5.5119
Oxygen-vacancy engineering
1 M KOH
290
87
2018


PrBaCo2O5.5202
Phase-structure engineering
0.1 M KOH
245
89
2019


Sr2RuO4123
Phase-structure engineering; atomic-scale synergy
1 M KOH
61
51
2019






Metal (oxy)hydroxides


VOOH–3Fe125
Metal doping
1 M KOH
90
38
2019


CoO(OH)1−xSx128
Non-metal doping
1 M KOH
166
93
2019


NiFeRu-LDH NSs126
Metal doping
1 M KOH
29
31
2018


Ir–NiCo LDH127
Metal doping
1 M KOH
21
33
2020


DSO NiFe LDH129
Surface reconstruction
1 M KOH
59
62
2019






Specially-structured oxides


Co3(OH)2(HPO4)2133
Surface reconstruction
1 M KOH
87
91
2019


Ni11(HPO3)8(OH)6134
Surface reconstruction
1 M KOH
42
102
2018


LiCo(H2O)2[BP2O8]·H2O135
Phase-structure engineering
1 M KOH
245
N.A.
2019


H–MnMoO4136
Crystallinity engineering
1 M KOH
∼220
36
2016


P-Doped CoMoO4137
Non-metal doping
1 M KOH
94
93
2020




Table 3 Summary of “metal oxide + X” hybrid catalysts for HER in acidic media




Electrocatalyst
Type of X
Electrolyte

η
10 (mV)
Tafel slope (mV dec−1)
Year




Pt/WO3165
Metal
0.5 M H2SO4
39
32
2020


Pt/MoO2166
Metal
0.5 M H2SO4
20
22
2020


Pt/RuCeOx-PA203
Metal
0.5 M H2SO4
41
31
2020


Pt/Nx:TiO2−x204
Metal
0.1 M H2SO4
∼40
33
2017


Ag/WO3205
Metal
0.5 M H2SO4
207
52
2019


Co/CoO/N–rGO206
Metal; functional carbon
0.5 M H2SO4
140
67
2017


NiMo/NiMoO4/NC207
Alloy; functional carbon
0.5 M H2SO4
80
99
2019


MoS2/Ti4O7208
Metal sulfide
0.5 M H2SO4
287
48
2020


CoS2/Co3O4209
Metal sulfide
0.5 M H2SO4
152
45
2017


CuS/NiCo2O4168
Metal sulfide
0.5 M H2SO4
72
41
2016


WS2/WO3·2H2O210
Metal sulfide
0.5 M H2SO4
∼110
54
2016


WS2/WO3211
Metal sulfide
0.5 M H2SO4
395
50
2017


W-Doped MoS2/MoO2/CNT212
Metal sulfide; functional carbon
0.5 M H2SO4
62
44
2020


MoSe2/MoO3213
Metal selenide
0.5 M H2SO4
221
56
2018


MoC/W–MoO2/PC214
Metalcarbide
0.5 M H2SO4
∼170
96
2018


Cu2O/Co3O4215
Metal(hydr)oxide
0.5 M H2SO4
160
73
2018


MoO3@RuO2216
Metal(hydr)oxide
0.5 M H2SO4
110
62
2019


WO2/carbon mesoporous nanowires (MWCMNs)179
Functional carbon
0.5 M H2SO4
58
46
2015


WOx@C217
Functional carbon
0.5 M H2SO4
<36
19
2018


WO3−x/CNFs180
Functional carbon
0.5 M H2SO4
185
89
2016


WO3/NPRGO181
Functional carbon
0.5 M H2SO4
225
87
2019


WO2/C3N4182
Functional carbon
0.5 M H2SO4
98
94
2019


NiCo2O4/rGO183
Functional carbon
0.5 M H2SO4
108
49
2019


LaFeO3/RGO218
Functional carbon
0.5 M H2SO4
130
427
2017


W18O49/PANI167
Conductive polymer
0.5 M H2SO4
74
46
2019




Table 4 Summary of “metal oxide + X” hybrid catalysts for HER in alkaline media




Electrocatalyst
Type of X
Electrolyte

η
10 (mV)
Tafel slope (mV dec−1)
Year




Pt NWs/SL/Ni(OH)2147
Metal
1 M KOH
N.A.
N.A.
2015


Pt/Co(OH)2148
Metal
1 M KOH
32
70
2017


Ru/CoO150
Metal
1 M KOH
55
70
2019


Ru@SnO2151
Metal
0.1 M KOH
68
56
2020


Ru/RuO2/MoO3 CNRs219
Metal
1 M KOH
∼9
37
2020


(Ru–Co)Ox NSs220
Metal
1 M KOH
44
∼24
2020


Ru/(Fe,Ni)(OH)2149
Metal
1 M KOH
13
30
2020


Ir/IrO2NFs221
Metal
1 M H2SO4
∼10
30
2019


Ag/Cu2O152
Metal
1 M KOH
108
50
2019


Ni-laser (Ni/NiO)154
Metal
1 M KOH
121
88
2017


Ni/NiO NSs222
Metal
1 M KOH
145
43
2015


Ni–FeNP (Ni/γ-Fe2O3)171
Metal
1 M KOH
46
58
2019


Ni/Mn3O4155
Metal
1 M KOH
91
110
2016


Ni/V2O3223
Metal
1 M KOH
61
80
2018


Ni/Co3O4224
Metal
0.1 M KOH
145
109
2020


Ni/NiO/Fe3O4225
Metal
1 M KOH
206
57
2018


Ni/LixNiO156
Metal
1 M KOH
36
50
2020


NT-15 (Ni/NiTiO3)226
Metal
0.1 M KOH
∼190
118
2017


Ni/NiO@CoFe LDH227
Metal
1 M KOH
107
57
2019


Ni/NiFe2O4/NCNT228
Metal; functional carbon
1 M KOH
140
85
2019


e-LSTN (Ni/La0.4Sr0.4Ti0.9O3−δ)157
Metal
0.1 M KOH
∼430
97
2018


Ni/MoO2172
Metal
1 M KOH
∼58
∼37
2019


Co NSNTs/TiO2 NDs158
Metal
1 M KOH
108
62
2017


Co/CoO229
Metal
1 M KOH
158
68
2020


Co/CoO/3DHPG230
Metal; functional carbon
1 M KOH
310
78
2019


A-PBCCF-H231
Metal
1 M KOH
224
42
2017


Cu@Mn(OH)2232
Metal
1 M KOH
132
184
2018


MoNi4/MoO2159
Alloy
1 M KOH
73
82
2017


MoNi4/MoO3−x233
Alloy
1 M KOH
17
36
2017


NiCo/Sm2O3234
Alloy
1 M KOH
276
162
2019


NiCo/NiCoO2/NC235
Alloy; functional carbon
1 M KOH
94
125
2017


Reduced SNCN236
Alloy
1 M KOH
208
91
2019


CoNi/BSCF/NC237
Alloy; functional carbon
1 M KOH
180
49
2019


NiCu/NiFeOx160
Alloy
1 M KOH
66
68
2019


FeNi3/NiFeOx238
Alloy
1 M KOH
99
N.A.
2016


NiFe/NiCo2O4239
Alloy
1 M KOH
105
88
2016


MoRu/MoO3−x/rGO240
Alloy; functional carbon
1 M KOH
25
20
2019


FeP/MoO2/C170
Metal phosphide; functional carbon
1 M KOH
103
48
2020


V–CoP/a-CeO2174
Metal phosphide
1 M KOH
68
48
2020


CoP/CeO2241
Metal phosphide
1 M KOH
43
45
2018


Co–P/Co3O4173
Metal phosphide
1 M KOH
73
85
2018


CoP/PBSCF242
Metal phosphide
1 M KOH
209
94
2019


NiP2/NiO243
Metal phosphide
1 M KOH
131
93
2018


Ni2P/NiFeAlOx244
Metal phosphide
1 M KOH
105
106
2019


Ni2P/NiCo2O4245
Metal phosphide
1 M KOH
45
45
2017


Ni2P/LSCN246
Metal phosphide
0.1 M KOH
339
105
2019


NiCoP/NiO247
Metal phosphide
1 M KOH
112
56
2018


MoS2/Co3O4248
Metal sulfide
1 M KOH
205
98
2019


N–MoS2/CoO249
Metal sulfide
1 M KOH
78
71
2019


Milled MoS2/LNO250
Metal sulfide
0.1 M KOH
∼90
42
2018


MoS2/Ni(OH)2251
Metal sulfide
1 M KOH
80
60
2017


MoS2/Ni2O3H175
Metal sulfide
1 M KOH
84
∼82
2020


1T-MoS2 QS/Ni(OH)2252
Metal sulfide
1 M KOH
57
30
2020


MoS2/NiCo-LDH153
Metal sulfide
1 M KOH
78
77
2017


MoS2/NiFe-LDH176
Metal sulfide
1 M KOH
180
82
2018


Co9S8/TiO2161
Metal sulfide
1 M KOH
139
65
2018


CoS2/Ni(OH)2253
Metal sulfide
1 M KOH
<99
118
2017


CoS2/LaCo0.2Fe0.8O3254
Metal sulfide
1 M KOH
340
N.A.
2020


Ni3S2/V2O5255
Metal sulfide
1 M KOH
95
108
2017


Ni3S2/NiO256
Metal sulfide
1 M KOH
130
33
2018


Ni3S2/NiWO4257
Metal sulfide
1 M KOH
136
112
2020


NiS2/Ni(OH)2162
Metal sulfide
1 M KOH
90
89
2017


Ni3S2/Co(OH)2258
Metal sulfide
1 M KOH
72
116
2020


CuS/Ni(OH)2259
Metal sulfide
1 M KOH
95
104
2018


3D Se-(NiCo)Sx/(OH)x260
Metal sulfide
1 M KOH
103
87
2018


MoSe2/LSC169
Metal selenide
1 M KOH
∼240
34
2019


ex-MoSe2:NiCl2/4-SWCNTs261
Metal selenide; functional carbon
1 M KOH
64
114
2018


NiSe2@NiOx262
Metal selenide
1 M KOH
132
85
2017


Ru0.33Se/TiO2263
Metal selenide
1 M KOH
57
50
2018


Co0.85Se/NiFe-LDH163
Metal selenide
1 M KOH
260
N.A.
2016


Cu3N/CuO164
Metalnitride
1 M KOH
118
122
2019


200-N:NCO (NiCoNx/N-NiCo2O4)264
Metalnitride
1 M KOH
116
71
2019


TiN/CoPx/Fe3O4265
Metalnitride; metal phosphide
1 M KOH
∼200
65
2019


RuO2/NiO138
Metal(hydr)oxide
1 M KOH
22
32
2018


MoO2/Fe1.89Mo4.11O7142
Metal(hydr)oxide
1 M KOH
197
79
2018


Co–Cu–W NWs140
Metal(hydr)oxide
0.1 M KOH
103
162
2019


CuCoO NWs141
Metal(hydr)oxide
1 M KOH
140
108
2016


CoO/Fe3O4144
Metal (hydr)oxide
1 M KOH
220
73
2019


Co3O4/Fe3O4266
Metal(hydr)oxide
0.1 M KOH
∼370
117
2018


Co3O4/CuO267
Metal(hydr)oxide
1 M KOH
288
65
2019


NiO/Co3O4143
Metal(hydr)oxide
1 M KOH
170
119
2019


RuO2/Co3O4268
Metal(hydr)oxide
1 M KOH
89
91
2017


CuO@Cu2O NRs269
Metal(hydr)oxide
1 M KOH
135
135
2020


TiO2/Co2P4O12139
Metal(hydr)oxide
1 M KOH
∼60
87
2019


TiO2/NiCo2O4145
Metal(hydr)oxide
1 M KOH
185
120
2018


Ni(OH)2/NiMoOx270
Metal(hydr)oxide
1 M KOH
36
38
2019


Ni–W–O/NiMoO4271
Metal(hydr)oxide
1 M KOH
52
80
2019


NiFe LDH/CeOx272
Metal(hydr)oxide
1 M KOH
154
101
2018


NiFeLDH@Co3O4273
Metal(hydr)oxide
1 M KOH
303
79
2019


Ni3(VO4)2/NiCo2O4146
Metal(hydr)oxide
1 M KOH
113
101
2017


FeOOH/PBSC274
Metal(hydr)oxide
0.1 M KOH
280
70
2018


δ-MnO2/SGS275
Functional carbon
1 M KOH
80
42
2019


Fe2O3/NCs276
Functional carbon
1 M KOH
245
77
2019


3DCeO2/RGO277
Functional carbon
1 M KOH
340
112
2018


Co3O4/C-QA278
Functional carbon
1 M KOH
280
57
2020


Co3O4/dpa-C279
Functional carbon
1 M NaOH
54
N.A.
2019


PBSCF/3DNG280
Functional carbon
0.1 M KOH
230
124
2019


STFN/CNT-700281
Functional carbon
0.1 M KOH
304
166
2018


SrRuO3/CNT282
Functional carbon
1 M KOH
109
45
2019


e-ICLDH/GDY177
Functional carbon
1 M KOH
43
99
2018


IFONFs-45 (FeF2/Fe2O3)283
Metal fluoride
1 M KOH
47
30
2018


CoF2/NiCo2O4/NiO/mC284
Metal fluoride; functional carbon
1 M KOH
45
29
2019


Co-MOF/Co3O4184
MOF
1 M KOH
172
92
2019


CuCAT/Co3O4285
MOF
1 M KOH
100
59
2019


Co(OH)2/PANI178
Conductive polymer
1 M NaOH
90
92
2015


3DCo:Pi/CoOx286
Metal phosphate
1 M KOH
N.A.
36
2020


NiPi/Mn3O4287
Metal phosphate
1 M NaOH
N.A.
90
2020




Although remarkable advances in this field have been made, several challenges still exist. In our opinion, future research efforts for metal oxide-based electrocatalysts can be focused on the following aspects, as schematically shown in Fig. 21:
 Fig. 21  Perspectives of future research directions on metal oxide-based HER electrocatalysis. 
(1) Exploiting new materials

Requirements for ideal catalysts. 
Despite the great promise of metal oxides for HER, the catalytic activity is still not satisfactory and very few of them can possess comparable activity to noble-metal Pt. Therefore, the exploration of new metal oxide-based electrocatalysts with better performance remains at the heart of future research. Besides developing new catalysts with high performance (including activity and stability), the cost of the catalysts should be kept in mind as well, because high cost will be prohibitive for wide-scale fabrication and will increase the overall price of hydrogen products. Catalysts composed of non-noble-metals prepared by the facile synthetic methods are desired. In addition, good electrical conductivity of the metal oxides themselves is also vital for high-efficiency catalysis considering that HER is an electrocatalytic process which requires an efficient flow of electrons through the electrode to produce high currents.86,288,289 In short, an ideal metal oxide-based HER electrocatalyst should meet several requirements: (a) high intrinsic electrical conductivity; (b) low-cost compositions and facile fabrication process; (c) HER activity comparable or superior to benchmark Pt; (d) robust stability during prolonged HER operation; (e) scalability for the mass commercialization. However, up to now, none of the reported metal oxide-based HER electrocatalysts possess all the above criteria; more efforts are hence required in the future.


Stability issues. 
Stability is quite a critical criterion to evaluate the practical value of an electrocatalyst in a real-life water splitting device. In the laboratorial studies, the short-term stability of a catalyst is commonly explored by chronoamperometric/chronopotentiometric experiments or accelerated durability tests. Then, the activity profile of the catalyst is indicative of its stability. However, the stable activity obtained in this way does not necessarily represent the real-world stability of the catalysts in consideration of possible compositional and structural change on the surface of catalysts while maintaining the same level of activity. For metal oxides, they are usually unstable due to serious metal ions dissolution in acidic solution. The mass variation of metal oxides during electrocatalysis is a significant piece of information associated with their stability, and the electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance (eQCM with a detection limit of 1 ng) is a powerful tool to detect in situ the possible mass change in the electrocatalysis process.290,291 Besides, the elemental analysis by inductively coupled plasma (ICP) spectrometry is also reliable for detecting the mass change of the catalysts although it is normally not adaptable for in situ monitoring.292 In short, the study on the stability of metal oxide-based HER catalysts for future research can be summarized as follows: (a) improving the stability of metal oxides in acidic media via effective approaches (e.g., engineering special structures and heterostructures); (b) enabling prolonged stability test from hours to weeks or months or longer. (c) establishing a comprehensive stability profile by the combination of several independent methods (e.g., eQCM and ICP).

(2) Utilizing synergy conception
Generally, the overall catalytic performance for one electrocatalyst depends on multiple factors, such as the composition, structure, size, morphology and conductivity. In view of this fact, various effective strategies have been adopted to enhance the catalytic performance. However, each design strategy applied alone always leads to limited performance enhancement. To address this issue, it is more compelling to maximize the catalytic performance by integrating the synergistic advantages from multiple design strategies. For example, combining ion doping (aimed at enhancing the intrinsic activity) and morphology engineering (designed to generate more active sites) have been demonstrated as an effective way to boost the overall catalytic performance of metal oxides.68,69,75,77,78,83 Apart from adopting multiple strategies, creating multiple active sites is also very critical for the rational design of superior electrocatalysts. Based on the alkaline HER mechanism, an optimal alkaline HER electrocatalyst should have multiple active sites for favorable H2O dissociation, OH* desorption and H* adsorption simultaneously. For instance, to achieve multiple active sites for synergistic alkaline HER electrocatalysis, constructing multiple elements by doping and multiple components by hybridization can be deemed as two effective approaches. In particular, creating atomic-scale synergistic active sites in single-phase systems is highly desirable, because it can overcome the main disadvantage of long reaction paths which induce large reaction resistance in the hybrid catalyst systems. On basis of this principle, we have designed few single-phase perovskite-based oxides with synergistic active sites (such as (Gd0.5La0.5)BaCo2O5.75117 and Sr2RuO4123) as highly active alkaline HER electrocatalysts. In addition, some single-atom metals supported on metal oxides (e.g., Ru1/TiO2,79 Rh SAC/CuO,293 Pt SA/WO3−x294 and Pt SA/α-MoOx295) also show highly efficient activity for HER. Unfortunately, such studies are still very limited and future research should focus more on this topic. Overall, synergy conception can enable harnessing merits from multiple strategies, elements, components and active sites, which is worth considering when designing advanced electrocatalysts.
(3) Advancing computational and experimental tools
With the fast development of computer science, it is now possible to investigate electrocatalysts by machine learning and DFT calculations.32 Key developments for machine learning, such as identifying key descriptors, can predict catalytic activity and accelerate new catalyst discovery, which is more effective than the conventional trial-and-error methods. Besides, DFT calculations have been regarded as a powerful tool to explain experimental results at the atomic level. In spite of extensive use of DFT calculations, it is worth noting that more accurate and reasonable models describing the real catalyst's surface/interface under real HER conditions should be built. Besides, some factors affecting the computational energetics (e.g., pH, potentials, solvent effects and water arrangements), which are usually ignored before, should be also considered afterwards. Meanwhile, some advanced characterization techniques such as scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM), scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) can greatly benefit the research into the metal oxides, as they are capable of providing very useful information about the crystal and electronic structures. Moreover, in situ/operando techniques, which can allow for real-time observation of the HER process and help to uncover the real catalytic active sites, are strongly recommended in future research. For instance, in situ Raman and XAS can track the active species in HER, and in situ TEM can detect structural and morphological variation during HER. Some prior studies have demonstrated that metal oxides can be reduced to the metals under HER conditions.138,139 Is this phenomenon universal for all metal oxides? Are there different reconstruction phenomena in different metal oxides? To unravel these questions, employment of in situ/operando analysis deserves to be done. At present, the surface structure of metal oxides during HER are seldom explored and future in-depth investigation could shed more light on this aspect. Therefore, combination of rigorous theoretical computations and advanced analytic techniques may be the best way to fundamentally understand catalytic mechanisms and develop new electrocatalysts.
(4) Dedicating practical applications
In light of the practical water electrolysis application, the ideal HER electrocatalyst is anticipated to work well in basic media for alkaline electrolyzers, neutral media for microbial electrolysis cells, and acidic media for proton-exchange membrane-based water electrolyzers. Notably, electrolyzers operating in neutral media can potentially enable the direct use of saltwater, the most abundant water source, which increases the feasibility of water-splitting for hydrogen production.51 To date, metal oxide-based materials have been extensively studied in alkaline and acidic media for HER, but there is almost no report on HER in neutral media. It is thus imperative but still a big challenge to develop efficient metal oxide-based HER electrocatalysts for neutral electrolyte. Exploiting pH-universal HER electrocatalysts based on metal oxide can be one of the future focuses. Aside from the electrolyte, electrodes for practical use should sustain large current density for long-time HER operation, e.g., ≥500 mA cm−2 for thousands of hours. Furthermore, coupling HER devices to other renewable power resource, such as solar energy, wind energy or tidal energy, will greatly accelerate the industrial application of water electrolysis. We believe it would be a significant advance if metal oxide-based materials can catalyze HER efficiently, which shows great promise as bifunctional electrocatalysts for practical water electrolysis application.
In summary, recent work has revealed the great promise of metal oxide-based materials for electrochemical hydrogen evolution. Despite several challenges ahead, continuing research in this area will contribute to the development of low-cost, highly efficient and robust HER electrocatalysts that enable renewable hydrogen technology for sustainable future.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Australian Research Council (Discovery Early Career Researcher Award No. DE190100005, Discovery Project No. DP200100500).
References
J. Chow, R. J. Kopp and P. R. Portney, Science, 2003, 302, 1528–1531 Search PubMed .
S. Chu and A. Majumdar, Nature, 2012, 488, 294–303 Search PubMed .
Z. Yang, J. Zhang, M. C. Kintner-Meyer, X. Lu, D. Choi, J. P. Lemmon and J. Liu, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3577–3613 Search PubMed .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 Search PubMed .
J. A. Turner, Science, 2004, 305, 972–974 Search PubMed .
L. Schlapbach, Nature, 2009, 460, 809–811 Search PubMed .
J. Zhu, L. Hu, P. Zhao, L. Y. S. Lee and K. Y. Wong, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 851–918 Search PubMed .
X. Zou and Y. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5148–5180 Search PubMed .
N. Mahmood, Y. Yao, J. W. Zhang, L. Pan, X. Zhang and J. J. Zou, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700464 Search PubMed .
K. Zeng and D. Zhang, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2010, 36, 307–326 Search PubMed .
S. Anantharaj, S. R. Ede, K. Karthick, S. Sam Sankar, K. Sangeetha, P. E. Karthik and S. Kundu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 744–771 Search PubMed .
C. Hu, L. Zhang and J. Gong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2620–2645 Search PubMed .
M. Zeng and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14942–14962 Search PubMed .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 Search PubMed .
Q. Lu, A. L. Wang, Y. Gong, W. Hao, H. Cheng, J. Chen, B. Li, N. Yang, W. Niu, J. Wang, Y. Yu, X. Zhang, Y. Chen, Z. Fan, X. J. Wu, J. Chen, J. Luo, S. Li, L. Gu and H. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 456–461 Search PubMed .
C. Hu, Q. Ma, S. F. Hung, Z. N. Chen, D. Ou, B. Ren, H. M. Chen, G. Fu and N. Zheng, Chem, 2017, 3, 122–133 Search PubMed .
P. W. Menezes, C. Panda, S. Garai, C. Walter, A. Guiet and M. Driess, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 130, 15457–15462 Search PubMed .
F. Zhang, Y. Zhu, Y. Chen, Y. Lu, Q. Lin, L. Zhang, S. Tao, X. Zhang and H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 12810–12820 Search PubMed .
Z. Chen, X. Duan, W. Wei, S. Wang and B. J. Ni, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 14971–15005 Search PubMed .
H. Sun, Z. Yan, F. Liu, W. Xu, F. Cheng and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1806326 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhu, H. A. Tahini, Y. Wang, Q. Lin, Y. Liang, C. M. Doherty, Y. Liu, X. Li, J. Lu, S. C. Smith, C. Selomulya, X. Zhang, Z. Shao and H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 14222–14232 Search PubMed .
E. Hu, Y. Feng, J. Nai, D. Zhao, Y. Hu and X. Lou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 872–880 Search PubMed .
H. Zhou, F. Yu, Y. Liu, J. Sun, Z. Zhu, R. He, J. Bao, W. A. Goddard III, S. Chen and Z. Ren, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1487–1492 Search PubMed .
Y. Chen, S. Ji, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Joule, 2018, 2, 1242–1264 Search PubMed .
L. Cao, Q. Luo, W. Liu, Y. Lin, X. Liu, Y. Cao, W. Zhang, Y. Wu, J. Yang, T. Yao and S. Wei, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 134–141 Search PubMed .
S. J. Gutić, A. S. Dobrota, E. Fako, N. V. Skorodumova, N. López and I. A. Pašti, Catalysts, 2020, 10, 290 Search PubMed .
J. Wang, F. Xu, H. Jin, Y. Chen and Y. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605838 Search PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, Y. Zhu, L. H. Li, Y. Han, Y. Chen, A. Du, M. Jaroniec and S. Qiao, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3783 Search PubMed .
H. Wang, W. Fu, X. Yang, Z. Huang, J. Li, H. Zhang and Y. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 6926–6956 Search PubMed .
C. Saioa, H. Jonathan, J. Pierre-André, F. Jennifer, F. Vincent, G. Laure, J. Bruno, I. Valentina, D. Holger, P. Serge, F. Marc and A. Vincent, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 802–807 Search PubMed .
G. Maduraiveeran, M. Sasidharan and W. Jin, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2019, 106, 100574 Search PubMed .
J. Hwang, R. R. Rao, L. Giordano, Y. Katayama, Y. Yu and Y. Shao-Horn, Science, 2017, 358, 751–756 Search PubMed .
N. T. Suen, S. F. Hung, Q. Quan, N. Zhang, Y. J. Xu and H. M. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 337–365 Search PubMed .
D. Chen, C. Chen, Z. M. Baiyee, Z. Shao and F. Ciucci, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 9869–9921 Search PubMed .
Y. Xue, S. Sun, Q. Wang, Z. Dong and Z. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 10595–10626 Search PubMed .
M. Gong, W. Zhou, M. C. Tsai, J. Zhou, M. Guan, M. C. Lin, B. Zhang, Y. Hu, D. Y. Wang, J. Yang, S. J. Pennycook, B. J. Hwang and H. Dai, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4695 Search PubMed .
M. Gong, D. Y. Wang, C. C. Chen, B. J. Hwang and H. Dai, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 28–46 Search PubMed .
R. Subbaraman, D. Tripkovic, D. Strmcnik, K. C. Chang, M. Uchimura, A. P. Paulikas, V. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, Science, 2011, 334, 1256–1260 Search PubMed .
J. Yu, Q. He, G. Yang, W. Zhou, Z. Shao and M. Ni, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 9973–10011 Search PubMed .
S. Y. Bae, J. Mahmood, I. Y. Jeon and J. B. Baek, Nanoscale Horiz., 2020, 5, 43–56 Search PubMed .
J. Wang, W. Cui, Q. Liu, Z. Xing, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 215–230 Search PubMed .
V. Artero, M. Chavarot-Kerlidou and M. Fontecave, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7238–7266 Search PubMed .
W. Zhou, J. Jia, J. Lu, L. Yang, D. Hou, G. Li and S. Chen, Nano Energy, 2016, 28, 29–43 Search PubMed .
Y. Shi and B. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 1529–1541 Search PubMed .
P. Xiao, W. Chen and X. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500985 Search PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, M. Jaroniec and S. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 52–65 Search PubMed .
X. Wang, Y. Zheng, W. Sheng, Z. J. Xu, M. Jaroniec and S. Qiao, Mater. Today, 2020, 36, 125–138 Search PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, A. Vasileff and S. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 7568–7579 Search PubMed .
J. M. Bockris and E. C. Potter, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1952, 99, 169–186 Search PubMed .
Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, M. Jaroniec and S. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2060–2086 Search PubMed .
C. T. Dinh, A. Jain, F. P. G. de Arquer, P. D. Luna, J. Li, N. Wang, X. Zheng, J. Cai, B. Z. Gregory, O. Voznyy, B. Zhang, M. Liu, D. Sinton, E. J. Crumlin and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 107–114 Search PubMed .
C. Wei, R. R. Rao, J. Peng, B. Huang, I. E. Stephens, M. Risch, Z. J. Xu and Y. Shao-Horn, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806296 Search PubMed .
J. Kibsgaard and T. F. Jaramillo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 14433–14437 Search PubMed .
J. Kibsgaard, C. Tsai, K. Chan, J. D. Benck, J. K. Nørskov, F. Abild-Pedersen and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3022–3029 Search PubMed .
C. C. McCrory, S. Jung, I. M. Ferrer, S. M. Chatman, J. C. Peters and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4347–4357 Search PubMed .
Q. Ji, L. Bi, J. Zhang, H. Cao and X. S. Zhao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1408–1428 Search PubMed .
K. Zhu, F. Shi, X. Zhu and W. Yang, Nano Energy, 2020, 73, 104761 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhu, W. Zhou, J. Yu, Y. Chen, M. Liu and Z. Shao, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 1691–1697 Search PubMed .
Y. H. Li, P. F. Liu, L. F. Pan, H. F. Wang, Z. Z. Yang, L. R. Zheng, P. Hu, H. J. Zhao, L. Gu and H. G. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8064 Search PubMed .
T. Zheng, W. Sang, Z. He, Q. Wei, B. Chen, H. Li, S. C. Cao, R. Huang, X. Yan, B. Pan, S. Zhou and J. Zeng, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 7968–7973 Search PubMed .
J. Swaminathan, R. Subbiah and V. Singaram, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 2222–2229 Search PubMed .
T. Ling, D. Y. Yan, H. Wang, Y. Jiao, Z. Hu, Y. Zheng, L. Zheng, J. Mao, H. Liu, X. W. Du, M. Jaroniec and S. Qiao, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1509 Search PubMed .
T. Zhang, M. Y. Wu, D. Y. Yan, J. Mao, H. Liu, W. B. Hu, X. W. Du, T. Ling and S. Qiao, Nano Energy, 2018, 43, 103–109 Search PubMed .
H. Feng, Z. Xu, L. Ren, C. Liu, J. Zhuang, Z. Hu, X. Xu, J. Chen, J. Wang, W. C. Hao, Y. Du and S. Dou, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 4288–4293 Search PubMed .
R. S. Datta, F. Haque, M. Mohiuddin, B. J. Carey, N. Syed, A. Zavabeti, B. Zhang, H. Khan, K. J. Berean, J. Z. Ou, N. Mahmood, T. Daeneke and K. Kalantar-zadeh, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 24223–24231 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhao, C. Chang, F. Teng, Y. Zhao, G. Chen, R. Shi, I. N. Geoffrey, W. Huang and T. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700005 Search PubMed .
Y. Li, Z. G. Yu, L. Wang, Y. Weng, C. S. Tang, X. Yin, K. Han, H. Wu, X. Yu, L. M. Wong, D. Wan, X. R. Wang, J. Chai, Y. W. Zhang, S. Wang, J. Wang, A. T. S. Wee, M. B. H. Breese, S. J. Pennycook, T. Venkatesan, S. Dong, J. M. Xue and J. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3149 Search PubMed .
L. Li, T. Zhang, J. Yan, X. Cai and S. Liu, Small, 2017, 13, 1700441 Search PubMed .
S. Geng, Y. Liu, Y. S. Yu, W. Yang and H. Li, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 121–126 Search PubMed .
L. Zhang, P. F. Liu, Y. H. Li, M. Y. Zu, X. Li, Z. Jiang, Y. Wang, H. Zhao and H. G. Yang, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 1020–1024 Search PubMed .
C. Zhong, Z. Han, T. Wang, Q. Wang, Z. Shen, Q. Zhou, J. Zhou, J. Wang, S. Zhang, X. Jin, S. Li, P. Wang, D. Gao, Y. Zhou and H. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 10831–10838 Search PubMed .
X. Yu, Z. Y. Yu, X. L. Zhang, P. Li, B. Sun, X. Gao, K. Yan, H. Liu, Y. Duan, M. R. Gao, G. Wang and S. H. Yu, Nano Energy, 2020, 71, 104652 Search PubMed .
J. S. Kim, B. Kim, H. Kim and K. Kang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702774 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhu, W. Zhou, Y. Chen, J. Yu, M. Liu and Z. Shao, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7150–7155 Search PubMed .
X. Zhong, Y. Sun, X. Chen, G. Zhuang, X. Li and J. G. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 5778–5786 Search PubMed .
H. Zeng, S. Chen, Y. Jin, J. Li, J. Song, Z. Le, G. Liang, H. Zhang, F. Xie, J. Chen, Y. Jin, X. Chen and H. Meng, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1908–1915 Search PubMed .
S. Jiang, R. Zhang, H. Liu, Y. Rao, Y. Yu, S. Chen, Q. Yue, Y. Zhang and Y. Kang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 6461–6466 Search PubMed .
T. Ling, T. Zhang, B. Ge, L. Han, L. Zheng, F. Lin, Z. Xu, W. B. Hu, X. W. Du, K. Davey and S. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807771 Search PubMed .
D. Yi, F. Lu, F. Zhang, S. Liu, B. Zhou, D. Gao, X. Wang and J. Yao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 15855–15859 Search PubMed .
H. Wang, H. W. Lee, Y. Deng, Z. Lu, P. C. Hsu, Y. Liu, D. Lin and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7261 Search PubMed .
P. Guo, Z. Wang, T. Zhang, C. Chen, Y. Chen, H. Liu, M. Hua, S. Wei and X. Lu, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 258, 117968 Search PubMed .
Y. B. Cho, A. Yu, C. Lee, M. H. Kim and Y. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 541–549 Search PubMed .
Y. Chen, C. Dong, J. Zhang, C. Zhang and Z. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 8430–8440 Search PubMed .
L. Han, L. Guo, C. Dong, C. Zhang, H. Gao, J. Niu, Z. Peng and Z. Zhang, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 2281–2287 Search PubMed .
Y. Jin, H. Wang, J. Li, X. Yue, Y. Han, P. K. Shen and Y. Cui, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3785–3790 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhu, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, Small, 2017, 13, 1603793 Search PubMed .
X. Lu and C. Zhao, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6616 Search PubMed .
Z. Luo, R. Miao, T. D. Huan, I. M. Mosa, A. S. Poyraz, W. Zhong, J. E. Cloud, D. A. Kriz, S. Thanneeru, J. He, Y. Zhang, R. Ramprasad and S. L. Suib, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600528 Search PubMed .
F. Haque, A. Zavabeti, B. Y. Zhang, R. S. Datta, Y. Yin, Z. Yi, Y. Wang, N. Mahmood, N. Pillai, N. Syed, H. Khan, A. Jannat, N. Wang, N. Medhekar, K. Kalantar-zadeh and J. Z. Ou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 257–268 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhou, S. Sun, C. Wei, Y. Sun, P. Xi, Z. Feng and Z. J. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902509 Search PubMed .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 Search PubMed .
W. Lee, S. Muhammad, C. Sergey, H. Lee, J. Yoon, Y. M. Kang and W. S. Yoon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 2578–2605 Search PubMed .
X. Zhao, L. Mao, Q. Cheng, J. Li, F. Liao, G. Yang, L. Xie, C. Zhao and L. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 387, 124081 Search PubMed .
Y. P. Zhu, T. Y. Ma, M. Jaroniec and S. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 1324–1328 Search PubMed .
Z. Xiao, Y. Wang, Y. C. Huang, Z. Wei, C. L. Dong, J. Ma, S. Shen, Y. Li and S. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2563–2569 Search PubMed .
X. Gao, H. Zhang, Q. Li, X. Yu, Z. Hong, X. Zhang, C. Liang and Z. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6290–6294 Search PubMed .
D. Liu, C. Zhang, Y. Yu, Y. Shi, Y. Yu, Z. Niu and B. Zhang, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 603–613 Search PubMed .
S. Peng, F. Gong, L. Li, D. Yu, D. Ji, T. Zhang, Z. Hu, Z. Zhang, S. Chou, Y. Du and S. Ramakrishna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 13644–13653 Search PubMed .
L. Huang, D. Chen, G. Luo, Y. R. Lu, C. Chen, Y. Zou, C. L. Dong, Y. Li and S. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901439 Search PubMed .
A. T. Aqueel Ahmed, S. M. Pawar, A. I. Inamdar, H. Kim and H. Im, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 7, 1901515 Search PubMed .
J. Gu, C. Zhang, Z. Du and S. Yang, Small, 2019, 15, 1904587 Search PubMed .
X. Huang, H. Zheng, G. Lu, P. Wang, L. Xing, J. Wang and G. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 7, 1169–1177 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhang, R. Knibbe, J. Sunarso, Y. Zhong, W. Zhou, Z. Shao and Z. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700132 Search PubMed .
S. Royer, D. Duprez, F. Can, X. Courtois, C. Batiot-Dupeyrat, S. Laassiri and H. Alamdari, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 10292–10368 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhu, H. A. Tahini, Z. Hu, Z. G. Chen, W. Zhou, A. C. Komarek, Q. Lin, H. J. Lin, C. T. Chen, Y. Zhong, M. T. Fernández-Díaz, S. C. Smith, H. Wang, M. Liu and Z. Shao, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1905025 Search PubMed .
J. Dai, Y. Zhu, Y. Yin, H. A. Tahini, D. Guan, F. Dong, Q. Lu, S. C. Smith, X. Zhang, H. Wang, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, Small, 2019, 15, 1903120 Search PubMed .
R. Manoharan and J. B. Goodenough, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1990, 137, 910–913 Search PubMed .
J. B. Goodenough, R. Manoharan and M. Paranthaman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1990, 112, 2076–2082 Search PubMed .
X. Xu, Y. Chen, W. Zhou, Z. Zhu, C. Su, M. Liu and Z. Shao, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6442–6448 Search PubMed .
B. Hua, M. Li, W. Pang, W. Tang, S. Zhao, Z. Jin, Y. Zeng, B. S. Amirkhiz and J. Luo, Chem, 2018, 4, 2902–2916 Search PubMed .
Q. Lin, Y. Zhu, Z. Hu, Y. Yin, H. J. Lin, C. T. Chen, X. Zhang, Z. Shao and H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 6480–6486 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhu, W. Zhou, Y. Zhong, Y. Bu, X. Chen, Q. Zhong, M. Liu and Z. Shao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602122 Search PubMed .
B. Hua, M. Li, Y. Zhang, Y. Sun and J. Luo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700666 Search PubMed .
J. Dai, Y. Zhu, Y. Zhong, J. Miao, B. Lin, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1801317 Search PubMed .
Z. Gao, L. V. Mogni, E. C. Miller, J. G. Railsback and S. A. Barnett, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1602–1644 Search PubMed .
X. Xu, Y. Zhong and Z. Shao, Trends Chem., 2019, 1, 410–424 Search PubMed .
D. Guan, J. Zhou, Z. Hu, W. Zhou, X. Xu, Y. Zhong, B. Liu, Y. Chen, M. Xu, H. J. Lin, C. T. Chen, J. Q. Wang and Z. Shao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1900704 Search PubMed .
D. Guan, J. Zhou, Y. C. Huang, C. L. Dong, J. Q. Wang, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3755 Search PubMed .
J. Wang, Y. Gao, D. Chen, J. Liu, Z. Zhang, Z. Shao and F. Ciucci, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 364–371 Search PubMed .
M. E. Abrishami, M. Risch, J. Scholz, V. Roddatis, N. Osterthun and C. Jooss, Materials, 2016, 9, 921 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhu, H. A. Tahini, Z. Hu, Y. Yin, Q. Lin, H. Sun, Y. Zhong, Y. Chen, F. Zhang, H. J. Lin, C. T. Chen, W. Zhou, X. Zhang, S. C. Smith, Z. Shao and H. Wang, EcoMat, 2020, 2, e12021 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhu, Q. Lin, Z. Hu, Y. Chen, Y. Yin, H. J. Lin, C. T. Chen, X. Zhang, Z. Shao and H. Wang, Small, 2020, 16, 2001204 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhu, H. A. Tahini, Z. Hu, J. Dai, Y. Chen, H. Sun, W. Zhou, M. Liu, S. C. Smith, H. Wang and Z. Shao, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 149 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, D. Yan, S. El Hankari, Y. Zou and S. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800064 Search PubMed .
J. Zhang, R. Cui, C. Gao, L. Bian, Y. Pu, X. Zhu, X. Li and W. Huang, Small, 2019, 15, 1904688 Search PubMed .
G. Chen, T. Wang, J. Zhang, P. Liu, H. Sun, X. Zhuang, M. Chen and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706279 Search PubMed .
R. Fan, Q. Mu, Z. Wei, Y. Peng and M. Shen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 9871–9881 Search PubMed .
H. Li, W. Yuan, Q. Wang, X. Cui, J. Jiang, S. Chen, L. Song and X. Guo, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 17325–17334 Search PubMed .
Z. Qiu, C. W. Tai, G. A. Niklasson and T. Edvinsson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 572–581 Search PubMed .
F. Y. Yu, Z. L. Lang, L. Y. Yin, K. Feng, Y. J. Xia, H. Q. Tan, H. T. Zhu, J. Zhong, Z. H. Kang and Y. G. Li, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 490 Search PubMed .
C. S. Lim, C. K. Chua, Z. Sofer, O. Jankovský and M. Pumera, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 4130–4136 Search PubMed .
K. K. Dey, S. Jha, A. Kumar, G. Gupta, A. K. Srivastava and P. P. Ingole, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 312, 89–99 Search PubMed .
P. W. Menezes, C. Panda, C. Walter, M. Schwarze and M. Driess, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808632 Search PubMed .
P. W. Menezes, C. Panda, S. Loos, F. Bunschei-Bruns, C. Walter, M. Schwarze, X. Deng and M. Driess, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1287–1298 Search PubMed .
P. W. Menezes, A. Indra, I. Zaharieva, C. Walter, S. Loos, S. Hoffmann, R. Schlögl, H. Dau and M. Driess, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 988–999 Search PubMed .
X. Yan, L. Tian, J. Murowchick and X. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3683–3688 Search PubMed .
S. Zhao, J. Berry-Gair, W. Li, G. Guan, M. Yang, J. Li, F. Lai, F. Corà, K. Holt, D. J. L. Brett, G. He and I. P. Parkin, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1903674 Search PubMed .
J. Liu, Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, Z. Wang, Z. Lu, A. Vasileff and S. Qiao, Small, 2018, 14, 1704073 Search PubMed .
C. Lv, S. Xu, Q. Yang, Z. Huang and C. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 12457–12467 Search PubMed .
D. Gao, R. Liu, J. Biskupek, U. Kaiser, Y. F. Song and C. Streb, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 4644–4648 Search PubMed .
M. Kuang, P. Han, Q. Wang, J. Li and G. Zheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 8555–8561 Search PubMed .
Z. Hao, S. Yang, J. Niu, Z. Fang, L. Liu, Q. Dong, S. Song and Y. Zhao, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 5640–5645 Search PubMed .
X. Wei, Y. Zhang, H. He, D. Gao, J. Hu, H. Peng, L. Peng, S. Xiao and P. Xiao, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 6515–6518 Search PubMed .
W. Adamson, X. Bo, Y. Li, B. H. R. Suryanto, X. Chen and C. Zhao, Catal. Today, 2020, 351, 44–49 Search PubMed .
R. Vadakkekara, R. Illathvalappil and S. Kurungot, ChemElectroChem, 2018, 25, 4000–4007 Search PubMed .
X. Shang, J. Q. Chi, S. S. Lu, B. Dong, Z. Z. Liu, K. L. Yan, W. K. Gao, Y. M. Chai and C. G. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 256, 100–109 Search PubMed .
H. Yin, S. Zhao, K. Zhao, A. Muqsit, H. Tang, L. Chang, H. Zhao, Y. Gao and Z. Tang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6430 Search PubMed .
Z. Xing, C. Han, D. Wang, Q. Li and X. Yang, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 7131–7135 Search PubMed .
X. Xiao, X. Wang, X. Jiang, S. Song, D. Huang, L. Yu, Y. Zhang, S. Chen, M. Wang, Y. Shen and Z. Ren, Small Methods, 2020, 4, 1900796 Search PubMed .
J. X. Guo, D. Y. Yan, K. W. Qiu, C. Mu, D. Jiao, J. Mao, H. Wang and T. Ling, J. Energy Chem., 2019, 37, 143–147 Search PubMed .
W. Dong, Y. Zhang, J. Xu, J. W. Yin, S. Nong, C. Dong, Z. Liu, B. Dong, L. M. Liu, R. Si, M. Chen, J. Luo and F. Huang, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2020, 1, 100026 Search PubMed .
C. Song, Z. Zhao, X. Sun, Y. Zhou, Y. Wang and D. Wang, Small, 2019, 15, 1804268 Search PubMed .
J. Hu, C. Zhang, L. Jiang, H. Lin, Y. An, D. Zhou, M. K. H. Leung and S. Yang, Joule, 2017, 1, 383–393 Search PubMed .
G. Ou, P. Fan, H. Zhang, K. Huang, C. Yang, W. Yu, H. Wei, M. Zhong, H. Wu and Y. Li, Nano Energy, 2017, 35, 207–214 Search PubMed .
X. Li, P. F. Liu, L. Zhang, M. Y. Zu, Y. X. Yang and H. G. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 10566–10569 Search PubMed .
K. Lu, Y. Liu, F. Lin, I. A. Cordova, S. Gao, B. Li, B. Peng, J. Kaelin, D. Coliz, C. Wang, Y. Shao and Y. Cheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 12613–12619 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhu, J. Dai, W. Zhou, Y. Zhong, H. Wang and Z. Shao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 13582–13587 Search PubMed .
J. X. Feng, H. Xu, Y. T. Dong, X. F. Lu, Y. X. Tong and G. R. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 2960–2964 Search PubMed .
J. Zhang, T. Wang, P. Liu, Z. Liao, S. Liu, X. Zhuang, M. Chen, E. Zschech and X. Feng, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15437 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhou, Z. Wang, Z. Pan, L. Liu, J. Xi, X. Luo and Y. Shen, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1806769 Search PubMed .
S. Deng, Y. Zhong, Y. Zeng, Y. Wang, X. Wang, X. Lu, X. Xia and J. Tu, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700772 Search PubMed .
L. Zhang, I. S. Amiinu, X. Ren, Z. Liu, G. Du, A. M. Asiri, B. Zheng and X. Sun, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 13651–13654 Search PubMed .
Y. Hou, M. R. Lohe, J. Zhang, S. Liu, X. Zhuang and X. Feng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 478–483 Search PubMed .
C. Panda, P. W. Menezes, M. Zheng, S. Orthmann and M. Driess, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 747–754 Search PubMed .
C. Xie, W. Chen, S. Du, D. Yan, Y. Zhang, J. Chen, B. Liu and S. Wang, Nano Energy, 2020, 71, 104653 Search PubMed .
Y. Jiang, M. Yang, M. Qu, Y. Wang, Z. Yang, Q. Feng, X. Deng, W. Shen, M. Li and R. He, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 10409–10418 Search PubMed .
Z. F. Huang, J. Song, Y. Du, S. Dou, L. Sun, W. Chen, K. Yuan, Z. Dai and X. Wang, Carbon Energy, 2019, 1, 77–84 Search PubMed .
L. An, L. Huang, P. Zhou, J. Yin, H. Liu and P. Xi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6814–6822 Search PubMed .
N. K. Oh, C. Kim, J. Lee, O. Kwon, Y. Choi, G. Y. Jung, H. Y. Lim, S. K. Kwak, G. Kim and H. Park, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1723 Search PubMed .
G. Yang, Y. Jiao, H. Yan, Y. Xie, A. Wu, X. Dong, D. Guo, C. Tian and H. Fu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2000455 Search PubMed .
B. H. Suryanto, Y. Wang, R. K. Hocking, W. Adamson and C. Zhao, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5599 Search PubMed .
X. Liu, K. Ni, C. Niu, R. Guo, W. Xi, Z. Wang, J. Meng, J. Li, Y. Zhu, P. Wu, Q. Li, J. Luo, X. Wu and L. Mai, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 2275–2285 Search PubMed .
L. Yang, H. Zhou, X. Qin, X. Guo, G. Cui, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 2150–2153 Search PubMed .
L. Yang, R. Liu and L. Jiao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1909618 Search PubMed .
J. Hu, C. Zhang, Y. Zhang, B. Yang, Q. Qi, M. Sun, F. Zi, M. K. H. Leung and B. Huang, Small, 2020, 16, 2002212 Search PubMed .
M. S. Islam, M. Kim, X. Jin, S. M. Oh, N. S. Lee, H. Kim and S. J. Hwang, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 952–960 Search PubMed .
L. Hui, Y. Xue, B. Huang, H. Yu, C. Zhang, D. Zhang, D. Jia, Y. Zhao, Y. Li, H. Liu and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 5309 Search PubMed .
J. X. Feng, L. X. Ding, S. H. Ye, X. J. He, H. Xu, Y. X. Tong and G. R. Li, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7051–7057 Search PubMed .
R. Wu, J. Zhang, Y. Shi, D. Liu and B. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 6983–6986 Search PubMed .
J. Chen, D. Yu, W. Liao, M. Zheng, L. Xiao, H. Zhu, M. Zhang, M. Du and J. Yao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 18132–18139 Search PubMed .
G. Hu, J. Li, P. Liu, X. Zhu, X. Li, R. N. Ali and B. Xiang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 463, 275–282 Search PubMed .
S. S. Lu, L. M. Zhang, K. Fan, J. Y. Xie, X. Shang, J. Q. Zhang, J. Q. Chi, X. L. Yang, L. Wang, Y. M. Chai and B. Dong, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 487, 945–950 Search PubMed .
M. B. Askari and P. Salarizadeh, J. Mol. Liq., 2019, 291, 111306 Search PubMed .
S. Zheng, X. Guo, H. Xue, K. Pan, C. Liu and H. Pang, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 10904–10907 Search PubMed .
L. Sharma, P. Kumar and A. Halder, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 3420–3428 Search PubMed .
W. Zhang, H. Li, C. J. Firby, M. Al-Hussein and A. Y. Elezzabi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 20378–20385 Search PubMed .
W. Wu, J. Yao, S. Liu, L. Zhao, L. Xu, Y. Sun, Y. Lou, J. Zhao, J. H. Choi, L. Jiang, H. Wang and G. Zou, Nanotechnology, 2019, 30, 355701 Search PubMed .
B. Zhang, Y. Xue, A. Jiang, Z. Xue, Z. Li and J. Hao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 7217–7223 Search PubMed .
Y. A. Zhu, Y. Pan, W. Dai and T. Lu, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 1319–1327 Search PubMed .
X. Li, W. Xue, R. Mo, S. Yang, H. Li and J. Zhong, Chin. J. Catal., 2019, 40, 1576–1584 Search PubMed .
W. Lu, X. Li, F. Wei, K. Cheng, W. Li, Y. Zhou, G. Zheng, L. Pan and G. Zhang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 12501–12509 Search PubMed .
C. Shu, S. Kang, Y. Jin, X. Yue and P. K. Shen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 9655–9660 Search PubMed .
A. Kumar and S. Bhattacharyya, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 41906–41915 Search PubMed .
A. Kakoria, B. Devi, A. Anand, A. Halder, R. R. Koner and S. Sinha-Ray, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 2, 64–74 Search PubMed .
L. Zeng, K. Zhou, L. Yang, G. Du, L. Liu and W. Zhou, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 6279–6287 Search PubMed .
L. Tao, Y. Li, M. Li, G. Gao, X. Xiao, M. Wang, X. Jiang, X. Lv, Q. Li, S. Zhang, Z. Zhao, C. Zhao and Y. Shen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 25888–25897 Search PubMed .
R. Elakkiya, R. Ramkumar and G. Maduraiveeran, Mater. Res. Bull., 2019, 116, 98–105 Search PubMed .
N. Dalai, B. Mohanty, A. Mitra and B. Jena, ChemistrySelect, 2019, 4, 7791–7796 Search PubMed .
G. Chen, Z. Hu, Y. Zhu, B. Gu, Y. Zhong, H. J. Lin, C. T. Chen, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1804333 Search PubMed .
Z. Zhang, Y. Chen, Z. Dai, S. Tan and D. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 312, 128–136 Search PubMed .
C. Wang, L. Zeng, W. Guo, C. Gong and J. Yang, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 35646–35654 Search PubMed .
Q. Sun, Z. Dai, Z. Zhang, Z. Chen, H. Lin, Y. Gao and D. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2019, 427, 194–200 Search PubMed .
T. Liu, W. Gao, Q. Wang, M. Dou, Z. Zhang and F. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020 DOI:10.1002/anie.202009612 .
X. Wang, X. Yuan, X. Liu, W. Dong, C. Dong, M. Lou, J. Li, T. Lin and F. Huang, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 701, 669–675 Search PubMed .
J. Ma, Z. Ma, B. Liu, S. Wang, R. Ma and C. Wang, J. Solid State Chem., 2019, 271, 246–252 Search PubMed .
X. X. Liu, J. B. Zang, L. Chen, L. B. Chen, X. Chen, P. Wu, S. Y. Zhou and Y. H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5865–5872 Search PubMed .
K. Karuppasamy, V. R. Jothi, D. Vikraman, K. Prasanna, T. Maiyalagan, B. I. Sang, S. C. Yi and H. S. Kim, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 478, 916–923 Search PubMed .
J. Zhao, W. Li, S. Wu, F. Xu, J. Du, J. Li, K. Li, J. Ren and Y. Zhao, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 337, 135850 Search PubMed .
T. Li, K. Niu, M. Yang, N. K. Shrestha, Z. Gao and Y. Y. Song, J. Power Sources, 2017, 356, 89–96 Search PubMed .
L. Yang, X. Zhu, S. Xiong, X. Wu, Y. Shan and P. K. Chu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 13966–13972 Search PubMed .
X. Shang, Y. Rao, S. S. Lu, B. Dong, L. M. Zhang, X. H. Liu, X. Li, Y. R. Liu, Y. M. Chai and C. G. Liu, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2017, 197, 123–128 Search PubMed .
C. Li, S. Zhao, K. Zhu, B. Wang, E. Wang, Y. Luo, L. He, J. Wang, K. Jiang, S. Fan, J. Li and K. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 14944–14954 Search PubMed .
X. Xia, C. Wang, L. Liu, Y. Du and W. Ye, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 444–454 Search PubMed .
C. Lv, Z. Huang, Q. Yang and C. Zhang, Energy Technol., 2018, 6, 1707–1714 Search PubMed .
W. Jin and J. Chen, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 19400–19406 Search PubMed .
H. K. Sadhanala, V. K. Harika, T. R. Penki, D. Aurbach and A. Gedanken, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 1495–1502 Search PubMed .
S. Jing, J. Lu, G. Yu, S. Yin, L. Luo, Z. Zhang, Y. Ma, W. Chen and P. K. Shen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705979 Search PubMed .
A. Galal, H. K. Hassan, N. F. Atta and T. Jacob, ChemistrySelect, 2017, 2, 10261–10270 Search PubMed .
L. Fan, Q. Li, D. Wang, T. Meng, M. Yan, Z. Xing, E. Wang and X. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 739–742 Search PubMed .
C. Wang and L. Qi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 17219–17224 Search PubMed .
S. J. Kim, H. Jung, C. Lee, M. H. Kim and Y. Lee, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 8613–8620 Search PubMed .
X. Yan, L. Tian and X. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2015, 300, 336–343 Search PubMed .
M. Ming, Y. Ma, Y. Zhang, L. B. Huang, L. Zhao, Y. Y. Chen, X. Zhang, G. Fan and J. S. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 21452–21457 Search PubMed .
M. S. Riaz, S. Zhao, C. Dong, M. J. Iqbal, Y. Zhao and F. Huang, Energy Technol., 2020, 8, 1901310 Search PubMed .
Y. Xie, X. Wang, K. Tang, Q. Li and C. Yan, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 264, 225–232 Search PubMed .
C. Dong, X. Liu, X. Wang, X. Yuan, Z. Xu, W. Dong, M. S. Riaz, G. Li and F. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 24767–24774 Search PubMed .
H. Wu, K. Yin, W. Qi, X. Zhou, J. He, J. Li, Y. Liu, J. He, S. Gong and Y. Li, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 2773–2779 Search PubMed .
Q. Qin, L. Chen, T. Wei, Y. Wang and X. Liu, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2019, 9, 1595–1601 Search PubMed .
J. Cao, X. Chen, H. Li, J. Pu, L. Liu, L. Ma, K. Zhou, Z. Zhang, Q. Wei and F. Luo, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 1924–1932 Search PubMed .
N. Ullah, W. Zhao, X. Lu, C. J. Oluigbo, S. A. Shah, M. Zhang, J. Xie and Y. Xu, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 298, 163–171 Search PubMed .
B. Hua, M. Li, Y. F. Sun, Y. Q. Zhang, N. Yan, J. Chen, T. Thundat, J. Li and J. L. Luo, Nano Energy, 2017, 32, 247–254 Search PubMed .
L. Chen, X. Zhang, W. Jiang, Y. Zhang, L. Huang, Y. Chen, Y. Yang, L. Li and J. Hu, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 1798–1809 Search PubMed .
K. Lu, Y. Liu, F. Lin, I. A. Cordova, S. Gao, B. Li, B. Peng, J. Kaelin, D. Coliz, C. Wang, Y. Shao and Y. Cheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 12613–12619 Search PubMed .
H. Liu, S. Zeng, P. He, F. Dong, M. He, Y. Zhang, S. Wang, C. Li, M. Liu and L. Jia, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 299, 405–414 Search PubMed .
Y. Xiao, P. Zhang, X. Zhang, X. Dai, Y. Ma, Y. Wang, Y. Jiang, M. Liu and Y. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 15901–15912 Search PubMed .
Q. A. Islam, R. Majee and S. Bhattacharyya, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 19453–19464 Search PubMed .
Y. Q. Lyu, J. Yu, Z. Lu and F. Ciucci, J. Power Sources, 2019, 415, 91–98 Search PubMed .
X. Yan, L. Tian, K. Li, S. tkins, H. Zhao, J. Murowchick, L. Liu and X. Chen, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1600368 Search PubMed .
R. A. Metzler, R. Rist, E. Alberts, P. Kenny and J. J. Wilker, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 6814–6821 Search PubMed .
S. Liu, C. Chen, Y. Zhang, Q. Zheng, S. Zhang, X. Mu, C. Chen, J. Ma and S. Mu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 14466–14472 Search PubMed .
R. Zhang, X. Ren, S. Hao, R. Ge, Z. Liu, A. M. Asiri, L. Chen, Q. Zhang and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 1985–1990 Search PubMed .
Y. Q. Zhang, H. B. Tao, Z. Chen, M. Li, Y. F. Sun, B. Hua and J. L. Luo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 26607–26617 Search PubMed .
M. Y. Wu, P. F. Da, T. Zhang, J. Mao, H. Liu and T. Ling, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 17896–17902 Search PubMed .
Z. Gao, F. Q. Liu, L. Wang and F. Luo, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 3247–3255 Search PubMed .
L. Wang, C. Gu, X. Ge, J. Zhang, H. Zhu and J. Tu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 4, 1700481 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, Z. Wang, C. Jin, C. Li, X. Li, Y. Li, R. Yang and M. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 318, 120–129 Search PubMed .
M. Guo, Y. Qu, F. Zeng and C. Yuan, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 292, 88–97 Search PubMed .
A. Muthurasu, V. Maruthapandian and H. Y. Kim, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 248, 202–210 Search PubMed .
L. Pang, A. Barras, Y. Zhang, M. A. Amin, A. Addad, S. Szunerits and R. Boukherroub, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 31889–31898 Search PubMed .
J. Wang, Y. Gao and F. Ciucci, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 6409–6416 Search PubMed .
B. Zhang, J. Liu, J. Wang, Y. Ruan, X. Ji, K. Xu, C. Chen, H. Wan, L. Miao and J. Jiang, Nano Energy, 2017, 37, 74–80 Search PubMed .
W. Chen, J. Gu, Y. Du, F. Song, F. Bu, J. Li, Y. Yuan, R. Luo, Q. Liu and D. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2000551 Search PubMed .
L. Chen, J. Zhang, X. Ren, R. Ge, W. Teng, X. Sun and X. Li, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 16632–16637 Search PubMed .
L. Tang, Z. Chen, F. Zuo, B. Hua, H. Zhou, M. Li, J. Li and Y. Sun, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 401, 126082 Search PubMed .
X. Zhong, L. Zhang, J. Tang, J. Chai, J. Xu, L. Cao, M. Yang, M. Yang, W. Kong, S. Wang, H. Cheng, Z. Lu, C. Cheng, B. Xu and H. Pan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 17954–17962 Search PubMed .
X. Du, Q. Wang and X. Zhang, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 18201–18207 Search PubMed .
S. Huang, Y. Meng, Y. Cao, F. Yao, Z. He, X. Wang, H. Pan and M. Wu, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 274, 119120 Search PubMed .
Z. Wang, H. Wang, S. Ji, X. Wang, B. G. Pollet and R. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2020, 446, 227348 Search PubMed .
S. Q. Liu, H. R. Wen, Y. W. Zhu, X. Z. Fu, R. Sun and C. P. Wong, Nano Energy, 2018, 44, 7–14 Search PubMed .
C. Hu, L. Zhang, Z. J. Zhao, A. Li, X. Chang and J. Gong, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705538 Search PubMed .
L. Najafi, S. Bellani, R. Oropesa-Nuñez, A. Ansaldo, M. Prato, A. E. Del Rio Castillo and F. Bonaccorso, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801764 Search PubMed .
H. Li, S. Chen, H. Lin, X. Xu, H. Yang, L. Song and X. Wang, Small, 2017, 13, 1701487 Search PubMed .
K. Wang, Q. Chen, Y. Hu, W. Wei, S. Wang, Q. Shen and P. Qu, Small, 2018, 14, 1802132 Search PubMed .
K. Choi, I. K. Moon and J. Oh, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 1468–1478 Search PubMed .
B. Guo, J. Sun, X. Hu, Y. Wang, Y. Sun, R. Hu, L. Yu, H. Zhao and J. Zhu, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 40–47 Search PubMed .
K. L. Ng, K. Y. Kok and B. H. Ong, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2017, 1, 401–409 Search PubMed .
A. Tahira, Z. H. Ibupoto, M. Willander and O. Nur, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 26148–26157 Search PubMed .
H. Liu, G. Xia, R. Zhang, P. Jiang, J. Chen and Q. Chen, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 3686–3694 Search PubMed .
X. X. Ma, L. Chen, Z. Zhang and J. L. Tang, Chin. J. Anal. Chem., 2020, 48, e20001 Search PubMed .
Z. Dong, F. Lin, Y. Yao and L. Jiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1902703 Search PubMed .
Y. Liu, F. Wang, T. A. Shifa, J. Li, J. Tai, Y. Zhang, J. Chu, X. Zhan, C. Shan and J. He, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 11736–11743 Search PubMed .
X. Wang, Y. Yang, L. Diao, Y. Tang, F. He, E. Liu, C. He, C. Shi, J. Li, J. Sha, S. Ji, P. Zhang, L. Ma and S. Ji, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 35145–35153 Search PubMed .
A. Tahira, Z. H. Bupoto, M. Vagin, U. Aftab, M. I. Abro, M. Willander and O. Nur, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2019, 9, 2879–2887 Search PubMed .
Z. Zhang, B. He, L. Chen, H. Wang, R. Wang, L. Zhao and Y. Gong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 38032–38041 Search PubMed .
H. Begum, M. S. Ahmed and S. Jeon, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 296, 235–242 Search PubMed .
J. Jiang, L. Zhu, Y. Sun, Y. Chen, H. Chen, S. Han and H. Lin, J. Power Sources, 2019, 426, 74–83 Search PubMed .
M. Liu, Z. Ji, X. Shen, H. Zhou, J. Zhu, X. Xie, C. Song, X. Miao, L. Kong and G. Zhu, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2018, 3952–3959 Search PubMed .
H. Guo, J. Zhou, Q. Li, Y. Li, W. Zong, J. Zhu, J. Xu, C. Zhang and T. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2000024 Search PubMed .
C. H. Chen, T. W. Chiou, H. C. Chang, W. L. Li, C. Y. Tung and W. F. Liaw, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 2205–2210 Search PubMed .
Y. Bu, H. Jang, O. Gwon, S. H. Kim, S. H. Joo, G. Nam, S. Kim, Y. Qin, Q. Zhong, S. Kwak, J. Cho and G. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2048–2054 Search PubMed .
X. Wu, J. Yu, G. Yang, H. Liu, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 286, 47–54 Search PubMed .
Y. Sugawara, K. Kamata and T. Yamaguchi, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 956–960 Search PubMed .
X. Fan, Y. Liu, S. Chen, J. Shi, J. Wang, A. Fan, W. Zan, S. Li, W. A. Goddard III and X. M. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1809 Search PubMed .
S. Wu, J. Liu, B. Cui, Y. Li, Y. Liu, B. Hu, L. He, M. Wang, Z. Zhang, K. Tian and Y. Song, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 299, 231–244 Search PubMed .
L. Hu, T. Xiong, R. Liu, Y. Hu, Y. Mao, M. S. Balogun and Y. Tong, Chem. – Eur. J., 2019, 25, 6575–6583 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, H. Arandiyan, X. Chen, T. Zhao, X. Bo, Z. Su and C. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 9971–9978 Search PubMed .
Y. Tan, Q. Che and Q. Li, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 560, 714–721 Search PubMed .
D. G. Lee, O. Gwon, H. S. Park, S. H. Kim, J. Yang, S. K. Kwak, G. Kim and H. K. Song, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 15730–15733 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhu, Q. Lin, Z. Wang, D. Qi, Y. Yin, Y. Liu, X. Zhang, Z. Shao and H. Wang, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 52, 115–120 Search PubMed .
A. R. Hillman, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2011, 15, 1647–1660 Search PubMed .
M. S. Burke, S. Zou, L. J. Enman, J. E. Kellon, C. A. Gabor, E. Pledger and S. W. Boettcher, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3737–3742 Search PubMed .
R. Frydendal, E. A. Paoli, B. P. Knudsen, B. Wickman, P. Malacrida, I. E. L. Stephens and I. Chorkendorff, ChemElectroChem, 2014, 1, 2075–2081 Search PubMed .
H. Xu, T. Liu, S. Bai, L. Li, Y. Zhu, J. Wang, S. Yang, Y. Li, Q. Shao and X. Huang, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 5482–5489 Search PubMed .
J. Park, S. Lee, H. E. Kim, A. Chao, S. Kim, Y. Ye, J. W. Han, H. Lee, J. H. Jang and J. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 16038–16042 Search PubMed .
J. Xu, C. Zhang, H. Liu, J. Sun, R. Xie, Y. Qiu, F. Lü, Y. Liu, L. Zhuo, X. Liu and J. Luo, Nano Energy, 2020, 70, 104529 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Yinlong Zhu
	Yinlong Zhu received his PhD degree from College of Chemical Engineering, Nanjing Tech University in 2017. He then worked as a Research Fellow at Monash University, Australia 2018. He now works as a Discovery Early Career Researcher Award (DECRA) Fellow at Monash University, Australia. His current research focuses on the development of functional materials as ORR/OER/HER electrocatalysis for the applications of electrochemical energy conversion and storage technologies, such as solid oxide fuel cell, metal–air batteries and water splitting.

Huanting Wang
	Huanting Wang is a Professor and ARC Australian Laureate Fellow in the Department of Chemical Engineering, and the director of the Monash Centre for Membrane Innovation at Monash University, Australia. His current research focuses on the development of nanostructured materials and membranes for gas separation, water treatment, chiral separation, ion transport and separation, and electrochemical energy applications. He has co-authored over 300 papers in these areas.

Broader context
Hydrogen (H2) is a clean and renewable energy carrier for powering future transportation and other industrial applications. Water electrolysis is a highly promising technology for sustainable hydrogen production from renewable resources (e.g., wind and solar power). A key issue to realize a high-efficiency water splitting process is to develop highly active, stable, and low-cost hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) electrocatalysts. Due to the clear superiority of structural and compositional flexibilities, metal oxide-based materials have emerged as promising candidates for catalyzing HER in recent years. In this review, we present an overview of recent advances in the development of metal oxide-based HER electrocatalysts together with some representative examples, especially from 2015 to 2020. Various designed strategies and property–activity correlation are highlighted. In addition, we conclude existing challenges and provide some perspectives about future opportunities of this exciting field. We believe that such a comprehensive review not only promotes a profound understanding of metal oxides for HER electrocatalysis but also offers some guidelines for advanced catalysts design.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Advantages and disadvantages of metal oxides as electrocatalysts for HER. (b) Summary of design strategies for the development of metal-oxide based HER electrocatalysts.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Plausible reaction mechanism of electrocatalytic H2 evolution for WO3 and WO2.9. (b) HER polarization curves and (c) Tafel plots of different catalysts in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution. (d) Calculated free energy diagram of HER for a series of active sites on WO3(001) and WO2.9(010). Reproduced with permission.59 Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. (e) Calculated partial DOS of W 5d. (f) Free-energy diagram for hydrogen adsorption at the W site on the WO3(010) slab with different O vacancies. Reproduced with permission.60 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of H2O adsorption and dissociation on the OV-rich CoO surface. (b) ΔGH*vs. tensile strain for the OV-rich CoO surface. (c) Schematic illustration of the effect of strain on the electronic structure of OV-rich CoO surface. (d) HER polarization curves and (e) Tafel plots of different catalysts in 1 M KOH solution. Reproduced with permission.62 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (f) Schematic illustration of design strategy of NiO NRs. (g) HER polarization curves and (h) Tafel plots of different catalysts in 1 M KOH solution. Reproduced with permission.63 Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the PLD chamber where Ti2O3 polymorphs were fabricated using the same (α-Ti2O3) target. (b) Unit cells for γ-Ti2O3, o-Ti2O3, and α-Ti2O3 polymorphs. (c) HER polarization curves of different catalysts in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution. (d) Correlations between the physical parameters and HER activity in Ti2O3 polymorphs. Reproduced with permission.67 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Electron transfer process among LCO, Ni, and N. (b) Schematic illustration of water adsorption, water dissociation, Had desorption to form H2 from LCO sites and OHad desorption from Ni sites on the surface of N–NiO. Reproduced with permission.70 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic illustration of the fabrication and mechanism of the bifunctional F–CoO catalysts. Reproduced with permission.71 Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic illustration for the synthesis of S–CoOx. Reproduced with permission.72 Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Different oxygen sites on W18O49(010) and Mo–W18O49(010). (b) Calculated ΔGH* of HER on different oxygen sites of W18O49(010) and Mo–W18O49(010). Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (c) Top-view structural model of MoO2(−111). (d) Hydrogen-coverage dependent ΔGH* for the pristine MoO2(−111) surface and the Ni-doped cases. (e) ΔGH*, adiabatic electron (Eea) and proton affinities (Epa) of Ni doped MoO2 with different doping concentrations. Reproduced with permission.76 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Experimental TOFs (at 200 mV overpotential) and (b) overpotentials (at 100 mA cm−2) for different catalysts. (c) Calculated ΔGH* and (d) density of states of different catalysts. Reproduced with permission.78 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic showing the in situ growth of ultrathin δ-MnO2 nanosheets. Reproduced with permission.66 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (b) The synthetic steps of porous MoO2 nanosheets on nickel foam directly. Reproduced with permission.85 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (c) The proposed formation mechanism of inverse micelle-templated mesoporous MoO3−x. Reproduced with permission.88 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (d) Schematic of ion and molecule diffusion through the 1D hexagonal intracrystalline pores in the 2D lateral domain. Reproduced with permission.89 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) General crystal structure of spinel metal oxides. Reproduced with permission.73 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (b) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of Co3O4-MTA. (c) HER polarization curves of different catalysts in 1 M KOH solution. Reproduced with permission.94 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (d) The schematic diagram for the preparation of P-Co3O4 and VO-Co3O4 by a plasma-assisted approach. (e) Calculated free energy diagram of HER for different catalysts. (f) HER polarization curves of different catalysts in 1 M KOH solution. Reproduced with permission.95 Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) SEM image of hierarchical NiCo2O4 hollow microcuboids. Reproduced with permission.96 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (b) Schematic illustration of the formation process of R-TMO with a necklace-like multishelled hollow structure. (c) SEM image of reduced NiCo2O4 sample. Reproduced with permission.98 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration for in situ growth of CoFe oxides and CoFeZr oxides on the nickel foam. (e) SEM image of CoFeZr oxides. Reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) The structure of ABO3 perovskite oxide. (b) HER polarization curves of different catalysts in 1 M KOH solution. Reproduced with permission.109 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (c) Projected density of states of O 2p bands of La0.5Ba0.5CoO3−δ, La0.5Sr0.5CoO3−δ and F-doped perovskites. Reproduced with permission.110 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (d) Schematic illustration of the preparation process of SNCF-NR by electrospinning. (e) SEM image of SNCF-NR. Reproduced with permission.112 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (f) Schematic illustration of preparation for 3DOM-LF. (g) SEM image of SNCF-NR. Reproduced with permission.114 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Crystal structures of oxygen vacancy ordered RBaCo2O5.5 and RBaCo2O5.75, as well as RBaCo2O6 without oxygen vacancies. (b) The calculated free energies of H2O adsorption (grey), H2O dissociation to adsorbed OH− and H*, OH− desorption, and hydrogen desorption in the alkaline HER on RBaCo2O5.5, RBaCo2O5.75, and RBaCo2O6 surfaces. (c) Computational predictions for the HER processes of H2O adsorption, H2O dissociation, formation of H* intermediates, and subsequent recombination of two H* to form H2 on the RBaCo2O5.75 surface. Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (d) HER activity trends of overpotential at 10 mA cm−2 oxide as a function of A-site ionic electronegativity. (e) Inductive effects and electron exchange interactions between A-sites and B-sites in perovskites from molecular orbital theory. Reproduced with permission.118 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) XRD patterns of Sr2RuO4. Inset shows the local crystal structure. (b) HER polarization curves and (c) Tafel plots of different catalysts in 1 M KOH solution. (d) Free-energy diagram for hydrogen adsorption at the metal and oxygen sites on Sr2RuO4, SrRuO3, RuO2, Ru, and Pt. (e) SrO-terminated surface of Sr2RuO4 at electrode potential U = 0 V and USHE = 0.83 V, respectively. Reproduced with permission.123 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) HER polarization curves of different catalysts in 1 M KOH solution. (b) Calculated free energy diagram for hydrogen adsorption. Reproduced with permission.125 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (c) HER polarization curves of different catalysts in 1 M KOH solution. (d) Calculated adsorption free energy diagrams for the Volmer step. Reproduced with permission.126 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (e) In situ Raman spectra collected in a large wave number region from NiFe LDH during HER process in 1 M KOH at various overpotentials vs. RHE. (f) Magnification of the corresponding orange wavelength region of (e). (g) Schematic illustration showing the reaction mechanism for HER on NiFe LDH. Reproduced with permission.129 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) The ball and stick representation of PtW6O24 with the corresponding semitransparent map of molecular electrostatic potential. (b) HER polarization curves of 1% PtW6O24/C and 20% Pt/C catalysts in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution. (c) In situ XANES spectra of the PtW6O24 at Pt L3-edge. (d) Mechanistic scheme of the HER catalyzed by PtW6O24. (e) Free energy diagrams for H2 production with an extremely low barrier. Reproduced with permission.130 Copyright 2020, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration for the fabrication process of hierarchical RuO2/NiO/NF. (b) HER polarization curves of different catalysts in 1 M KOH solution. (c) Schematic illustration of potential-induced interfacial synergy between RuO2 and NiO for enhanced HER under alkaline conditions. Reproduced with permission.138 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic illustration of synergistic HER catalytic mechanism for Pt/Li+-intercalated Ni(OH)2 hybrid. (b) HER polarization curves of different catalysts in 0.1 M KOH solution. Reproduced with permission.38 Copyright 2011, AAAS. (c) ECSA-normalized polarization curves (symbols) of bare MoS2 and MoS2/NiCo-LDH hybrid catalysts in 1 M KOH solution with the best fits (lines) using the dual-pathway kinetic model. (d) Free energy diagram of the dominant Volmer–Heyrovsky pathway for HER in alkaline electrolyte for bare MoS2 and MoS2/NiCo-LDH hybrid catalysts. (e) Schematic illustration of the HER at MoS2/LDH interface in alkaline environment. The synergistic chemisorption of H (on MoS2) and OH (on LDH) benefits the water dissociation step. Reproduced with permission.153 Copyright 2017, Cell Press.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) HER polarization curves of different catalysts in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution. (b) Schematically illustration for the promoting mechanism of Pt/WO3. Reproduced with permission.165 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (c) Differential charge density of WOx–PANI with the isosurface value of 0.0004 e Å−3. (d) The calculated free-energy diagram of HER at the equilibrium potential for WOx@PANI catalysts with individual WOx, PANI, and Pt as references. (e) Projected density of state of N atom of WOx@PANI surfaces and individual PANI surface. (f) Schematic orbital hybridization of active N sites and hydrogen adsorbate on different WOx–PANI surfaces. Reproduced with permission.167 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) HRTEM image of MoSe2/LSC, indicating the presence of both 2H- and 1T-phase MoSe2. (b) Enlarged region of 2H-MoSe2 shown with schematic lattice structure, illustrating the hexagonal crystal structure with Mo–Mo inter-atomic distance of 0.28 nm. (c) Enlarged region of 1T-MoSe2 shown with schematic lattice structure, indicating the Mo–Mo (0.563 nm) and Se–Se (0.324 nm) inter-atomic distances. (d) Schematic diagram of proposed charge transfer processes between MoSe2 and LSC. Reproduced with permission.169 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. (e) Calculated H2O adsorption energy. (f) Calculated H* adsorption energy. (g) Electron density difference plot at the MoO2–FeP interface. Reproduced with permission.170 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Synthetic schematic diagram of MWCMNs. (b) Projected density of states of MWCMNs. (c) TEM image of MWCMNs. (d) HER polarization curves of different catalysts in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution. Reproduced with permission.179 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic of the fabrication of the Co-MOF and Co3O4/Co-MOF hybrid. (f) TEM image of Co3O4/Co-MOF.184 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

Simple transition metal oxides
WO2.959	Oxygen-vacancy engineering	0.5 M H2SO4	70	50	2015
WO3-r NSs60	Oxygen-vacancy engineering; morphology engineering	0.5 M H2SO4	38	38	2017
TiO1.2361	Oxygen-vacancy engineering	0.5 M H2SO4	198	88	2016
WO3−x185	Oxygen-vacancy engineering; phase-structure engineering	0.5 M H2SO4	∼440	30	2019
MoO3−x186	Oxygen-vacancy engineering	0.5 M H2SO4	201	90	2019
ReO3 NP/CFP-480s187	Oxygen-vacancy engineering	0.5 M H2SO4	138	81	2019
γ-Ti2O367	Phase-structure engineering	0.5 M H2SO4	271	199	2019
P-Doped MoO3−x NSs68	Non-metal doping; oxygen-vacancy engineering; morphology engineering	0.5 M H2SO4	166	42	2017
S-Doped MoO2 NSs69	Non-metal doping; oxygen-vacancy engineering; morphology engineering	0.5 M H2SO4	176	57	2020
3D urchin-like Mo–W18O4975	Metal doping; morphology engineering	0.5 M H2SO4	45	54	2016
Ni0.35Mo0.65O276	Metal doping	0.5 M H2SO4	43	37	2020
1D MoO2188	Morphology engineering	0.5 M H2SO4	169	58	2017


Specially-structured oxides
PtW6O24130	Valence regulation	0.5 M H2SO4	22	30	2020
Ca3Co4O9131	Phase-structure engineering	0.5 M H2SO4	∼390	87	2014
V10O24·nH2O NFs132	Morphology engineering	0.5 M H2SO4	118	101	2019

Simple transition metal oxides
S–CoO NRs62	Oxygen-vacancy engineering; strain engineering; morphology engineering	1 M KOH	73	82	2017
NiO NRs-m-Ov63	Oxygen-vacancy engineering; morphology engineering	1 M KOH	110	100	2018
TiO2−x64	Oxygen-vacancy engineering	1 M KOH	∼630	188	2018
2D α-MoO3−x NSs65	Oxygen-vacancy engineering; morphology engineering	0.1 M KOH	142	58	2017
np-NiMo189	Oxygen-vacancy engineering	1 M KOH	N.A.	57	2020
N–NiO70	Non-metal doping	1 M KOH	100	113	2018
F–CoO NWs71	Non-metal doping; morphology engineering	1 M KOH	53	65	2020
S–CoOx72	Non-metal doping; crystallinity engineering	1 M KOH	136	80	2020
Co-Doped CeO2 NSs77	Metal doping; oxygen-vacancy engineering; morphology engineering	1 M KOH	<100	N.A.	2020
Ni/Zn dual-doped CoO NRs78	Co-Doping; morphology engineering	1 M KOH	53	47	2019
Ni2Fe1–Mo NWs83	Metal doping; morphology engineering	1 M KOH	147	128	2018
Ir–CoxNi1−xO190	Metal doping	1 M KOH	70	53	2019
Ni/S co-doped CoO191	Co-doping	1 M KOH	175	89	2019
Ultrathin δ-MnO2 NSs66	Morphology engineering; oxygen-vacancy engineering	1 M KOH	197	62	2017
2-Cycle NiFeOx80	Morphology engineering	1 M KOH	88	150	2015
Porous MoO2 NSs85	Morphology engineering	1 M KOH	25	N.A.	2016

mMoO388	Morphology engineering; oxygen-vacancy engineering	0.1 M KOH	138	56	2016
2D Crys-AMO89	Morphology engineering; phase-structure engineering	0.1 M KOH	138	50	2019
Porous WO2 HNs192	Morphology engineering	1 M KOH	48	43	2017
NiFe-NCs193	Morphology engineering	1 M KOH	197	130	2017
PAN/Ga-75194	Morphology engineering	0.1 M KOH	∼500	70	2019
Mesoporous CoFeNi–O84	Morphology engineering	1 M KOH	53	N.A.	2019
CoIIFe-ONC81	Valence tunning	1 M KOH	∼240	76	2019
Ir0.8Ru0.2Oy NFs82	Composition optimization	1 M NaOH	∼35	32	2018


Spinel oxides
Co3O4-MTA94	Morphology engineering	1 M KOH	∼150	98	2017
P–Co3O495	Non-metal doping	1 M KOH	120	52	2017
Ni–Co3O4 NSs195	Metal doping; morphology engineering	1 M KOH	170	77	2018
NiCo2O4 hollow microcuboids96	Morphology engineering	1 M KOH	∼100	50	2016
OV-rich NiCo2O4NRs97	Oxygen-vacancy engineering	1 M KOH	∼190	132	2018
R-NCO98	Oxygen-vacancy engineering; morphology engineering	1 M KOH	135	52	2018
3D CoFeZr NSs99	Metal doping; morphology engineering	1 M KOH	104	119	2019
CuCo2O4 NSs100	Morphology engineering	1 M KOH	115	153	2019
2D ZnCo2O4101	Morphology engineering	1 M KOH	335	43	2019
Ce–MnCo2O4102	Metal doping	1 M KOH	389	96	2019
NiCo2O4NSs196	Morphology engineering	1 M KOH	180	63	2017
NP-NiCo2O4197	Morphology engineering	1 M KOH	370	123	2019
NiFe2O4198	Composition optimization	1 M KOH	300	125	2019


Perovskite oxides
Pr0.5BSCF109	Metal doping	1 M KOH	237	45	2016
LBSCOF110	Non-metal doping	1 M KOH	∼180	44	2018
SNCF-NR112	Morphology engineering	1 M KOH	232	103	2017
LBSCCF113	Co-doping; hybridization	1 M KOH	338	80	2017
3DOM-LFC82114	Metal doping; morphology engineering	1 M KOH	350	111	2019
SCFP nanofilm199	Crystallinity engineering	1 M KOH	110	94	2018
SrCo0.7Fe0.25Mo0.05O3−δ200	Metal doping	1 M KOH	323	94	2019
LaCo0.94Pt0.06O3−δ201	Metal doping	0.1 M KOH	294	148	2019
(Gd0.5La0.5)BaCo2O5.75117	Oxygen-vacancy engineering; atomic-scale synergy	1 M KOH	185	28	2019
NdBaMn2O5.5119	Oxygen-vacancy engineering	1 M KOH	290	87	2018
PrBaCo2O5.5202	Phase-structure engineering	0.1 M KOH	245	89	2019
Sr2RuO4123	Phase-structure engineering; atomic-scale synergy	1 M KOH	61	51	2019


Metal (oxy)hydroxides
VOOH–3Fe125	Metal doping	1 M KOH	90	38	2019
CoO(OH)1−xSx128	Non-metal doping	1 M KOH	166	93	2019
NiFeRu-LDH NSs126	Metal doping	1 M KOH	29	31	2018
Ir–NiCo LDH127	Metal doping	1 M KOH	21	33	2020
DSO NiFe LDH129	Surface reconstruction	1 M KOH	59	62	2019


Specially-structured oxides
Co3(OH)2(HPO4)2133	Surface reconstruction	1 M KOH	87	91	2019
Ni11(HPO3)8(OH)6134	Surface reconstruction	1 M KOH	42	102	2018
LiCo(H2O)2[BP2O8]·H2O135	Phase-structure engineering	1 M KOH	245	N.A.	2019
H–MnMoO4136	Crystallinity engineering	1 M KOH	∼220	36	2016
P-Doped CoMoO4137	Non-metal doping	1 M KOH	94	93	2020

Pt/WO3165	Metal	0.5 M H2SO4	39	32	2020
Pt/MoO2166	Metal	0.5 M H2SO4	20	22	2020
Pt/RuCeOx-PA203	Metal	0.5 M H2SO4	41	31	2020
Pt/Nx:TiO2−x204	Metal	0.1 M H2SO4	∼40	33	2017
Ag/WO3205	Metal	0.5 M H2SO4	207	52	2019
Co/CoO/N–rGO206	Metal; functional carbon	0.5 M H2SO4	140	67	2017
NiMo/NiMoO4/NC207	Alloy; functional carbon	0.5 M H2SO4	80	99	2019
MoS2/Ti4O7208	Metal sulfide	0.5 M H2SO4	287	48	2020
CoS2/Co3O4209	Metal sulfide	0.5 M H2SO4	152	45	2017
CuS/NiCo2O4168	Metal sulfide	0.5 M H2SO4	72	41	2016
WS2/WO3·2H2O210	Metal sulfide	0.5 M H2SO4	∼110	54	2016
WS2/WO3211	Metal sulfide	0.5 M H2SO4	395	50	2017
W-Doped MoS2/MoO2/CNT212	Metal sulfide; functional carbon	0.5 M H2SO4	62	44	2020
MoSe2/MoO3213	Metal selenide	0.5 M H2SO4	221	56	2018
MoC/W–MoO2/PC214	Metalcarbide	0.5 M H2SO4	∼170	96	2018
Cu2O/Co3O4215	Metal(hydr)oxide	0.5 M H2SO4	160	73	2018
MoO3@RuO2216	Metal(hydr)oxide	0.5 M H2SO4	110	62	2019
WO2/carbon mesoporous nanowires (MWCMNs)179	Functional carbon	0.5 M H2SO4	58	46	2015
WOx@C217	Functional carbon	0.5 M H2SO4	<36	19	2018
WO3−x/CNFs180	Functional carbon	0.5 M H2SO4	185	89	2016
WO3/NPRGO181	Functional carbon	0.5 M H2SO4	225	87	2019
WO2/C3N4182	Functional carbon	0.5 M H2SO4	98	94	2019
NiCo2O4/rGO183	Functional carbon	0.5 M H2SO4	108	49	2019
LaFeO3/RGO218	Functional carbon	0.5 M H2SO4	130	427	2017
W18O49/PANI167	Conductive polymer	0.5 M H2SO4	74	46	2019

Pt NWs/SL/Ni(OH)2147	Metal	1 M KOH	N.A.	N.A.	2015
Pt/Co(OH)2148	Metal	1 M KOH	32	70	2017
Ru/CoO150	Metal	1 M KOH	55	70	2019
Ru@SnO2151	Metal	0.1 M KOH	68	56	2020
Ru/RuO2/MoO3 CNRs219	Metal	1 M KOH	∼9	37	2020
(Ru–Co)Ox NSs220	Metal	1 M KOH	44	∼24	2020
Ru/(Fe,Ni)(OH)2149	Metal	1 M KOH	13	30	2020
Ir/IrO2NFs221	Metal	1 M H2SO4	∼10	30	2019
Ag/Cu2O152	Metal	1 M KOH	108	50	2019
Ni-laser (Ni/NiO)154	Metal	1 M KOH	121	88	2017
Ni/NiO NSs222	Metal	1 M KOH	145	43	2015
Ni–FeNP (Ni/γ-Fe2O3)171	Metal	1 M KOH	46	58	2019
Ni/Mn3O4155	Metal	1 M KOH	91	110	2016
Ni/V2O3223	Metal	1 M KOH	61	80	2018
Ni/Co3O4224	Metal	0.1 M KOH	145	109	2020
Ni/NiO/Fe3O4225	Metal	1 M KOH	206	57	2018
Ni/LixNiO156	Metal	1 M KOH	36	50	2020
NT-15 (Ni/NiTiO3)226	Metal	0.1 M KOH	∼190	118	2017
Ni/NiO@CoFe LDH227	Metal	1 M KOH	107	57	2019
Ni/NiFe2O4/NCNT228	Metal; functional carbon	1 M KOH	140	85	2019
e-LSTN (Ni/La0.4Sr0.4Ti0.9O3−δ)157	Metal	0.1 M KOH	∼430	97	2018
Ni/MoO2172	Metal	1 M KOH	∼58	∼37	2019
Co NSNTs/TiO2 NDs158	Metal	1 M KOH	108	62	2017
Co/CoO229	Metal	1 M KOH	158	68	2020
Co/CoO/3DHPG230	Metal; functional carbon	1 M KOH	310	78	2019
A-PBCCF-H231	Metal	1 M KOH	224	42	2017
Cu@Mn(OH)2232	Metal	1 M KOH	132	184	2018
MoNi4/MoO2159	Alloy	1 M KOH	73	82	2017
MoNi4/MoO3−x233	Alloy	1 M KOH	17	36	2017
NiCo/Sm2O3234	Alloy	1 M KOH	276	162	2019
NiCo/NiCoO2/NC235	Alloy; functional carbon	1 M KOH	94	125	2017
Reduced SNCN236	Alloy	1 M KOH	208	91	2019
CoNi/BSCF/NC237	Alloy; functional carbon	1 M KOH	180	49	2019
NiCu/NiFeOx160	Alloy	1 M KOH	66	68	2019
FeNi3/NiFeOx238	Alloy	1 M KOH	99	N.A.	2016
NiFe/NiCo2O4239	Alloy	1 M KOH	105	88	2016
MoRu/MoO3−x/rGO240	Alloy; functional carbon	1 M KOH	25	20	2019
FeP/MoO2/C170	Metal phosphide; functional carbon	1 M KOH	103	48	2020
V–CoP/a-CeO2174	Metal phosphide	1 M KOH	68	48	2020
CoP/CeO2241	Metal phosphide	1 M KOH	43	45	2018
Co–P/Co3O4173	Metal phosphide	1 M KOH	73	85	2018
CoP/PBSCF242	Metal phosphide	1 M KOH	209	94	2019
NiP2/NiO243	Metal phosphide	1 M KOH	131	93	2018
Ni2P/NiFeAlOx244	Metal phosphide	1 M KOH	105	106	2019
Ni2P/NiCo2O4245	Metal phosphide	1 M KOH	45	45	2017
Ni2P/LSCN246	Metal phosphide	0.1 M KOH	339	105	2019
NiCoP/NiO247	Metal phosphide	1 M KOH	112	56	2018
MoS2/Co3O4248	Metal sulfide	1 M KOH	205	98	2019
N–MoS2/CoO249	Metal sulfide	1 M KOH	78	71	2019
Milled MoS2/LNO250	Metal sulfide	0.1 M KOH	∼90	42	2018
MoS2/Ni(OH)2251	Metal sulfide	1 M KOH	80	60	2017
MoS2/Ni2O3H175	Metal sulfide	1 M KOH	84	∼82	2020
1T-MoS2 QS/Ni(OH)2252	Metal sulfide	1 M KOH	57	30	2020
MoS2/NiCo-LDH153	Metal sulfide	1 M KOH	78	77	2017
MoS2/NiFe-LDH176	Metal sulfide	1 M KOH	180	82	2018
Co9S8/TiO2161	Metal sulfide	1 M KOH	139	65	2018
CoS2/Ni(OH)2253	Metal sulfide	1 M KOH	<99	118	2017
CoS2/LaCo0.2Fe0.8O3254	Metal sulfide	1 M KOH	340	N.A.	2020
Ni3S2/V2O5255	Metal sulfide	1 M KOH	95	108	2017
Ni3S2/NiO256	Metal sulfide	1 M KOH	130	33	2018
Ni3S2/NiWO4257	Metal sulfide	1 M KOH	136	112	2020
NiS2/Ni(OH)2162	Metal sulfide	1 M KOH	90	89	2017
Ni3S2/Co(OH)2258	Metal sulfide	1 M KOH	72	116	2020
CuS/Ni(OH)2259	Metal sulfide	1 M KOH	95	104	2018
3D Se-(NiCo)Sx/(OH)x260	Metal sulfide	1 M KOH	103	87	2018
MoSe2/LSC169	Metal selenide	1 M KOH	∼240	34	2019
ex-MoSe2:NiCl2/4-SWCNTs261	Metal selenide; functional carbon	1 M KOH	64	114	2018
NiSe2@NiOx262	Metal selenide	1 M KOH	132	85	2017
Ru0.33Se/TiO2263	Metal selenide	1 M KOH	57	50	2018
Co0.85Se/NiFe-LDH163	Metal selenide	1 M KOH	260	N.A.	2016
Cu3N/CuO164	Metalnitride	1 M KOH	118	122	2019
200-N:NCO (NiCoNx/N-NiCo2O4)264	Metalnitride	1 M KOH	116	71	2019
TiN/CoPx/Fe3O4265	Metalnitride; metal phosphide	1 M KOH	∼200	65	2019
RuO2/NiO138	Metal(hydr)oxide	1 M KOH	22	32	2018
MoO2/Fe1.89Mo4.11O7142	Metal(hydr)oxide	1 M KOH	197	79	2018
Co–Cu–W NWs140	Metal(hydr)oxide	0.1 M KOH	103	162	2019
CuCoO NWs141	Metal(hydr)oxide	1 M KOH	140	108	2016
CoO/Fe3O4144	Metal (hydr)oxide	1 M KOH	220	73	2019
Co3O4/Fe3O4266	Metal(hydr)oxide	0.1 M KOH	∼370	117	2018
Co3O4/CuO267	Metal(hydr)oxide	1 M KOH	288	65	2019
NiO/Co3O4143	Metal(hydr)oxide	1 M KOH	170	119	2019
RuO2/Co3O4268	Metal(hydr)oxide	1 M KOH	89	91	2017
CuO@Cu2O NRs269	Metal(hydr)oxide	1 M KOH	135	135	2020
TiO2/Co2P4O12139	Metal(hydr)oxide	1 M KOH	∼60	87	2019
TiO2/NiCo2O4145	Metal(hydr)oxide	1 M KOH	185	120	2018
Ni(OH)2/NiMoOx270	Metal(hydr)oxide	1 M KOH	36	38	2019
Ni–W–O/NiMoO4271	Metal(hydr)oxide	1 M KOH	52	80	2019
NiFe LDH/CeOx272	Metal(hydr)oxide	1 M KOH	154	101	2018
NiFeLDH@Co3O4273	Metal(hydr)oxide	1 M KOH	303	79	2019
Ni3(VO4)2/NiCo2O4146	Metal(hydr)oxide	1 M KOH	113	101	2017
FeOOH/PBSC274	Metal(hydr)oxide	0.1 M KOH	280	70	2018
δ-MnO2/SGS275	Functional carbon	1 M KOH	80	42	2019
Fe2O3/NCs276	Functional carbon	1 M KOH	245	77	2019
3DCeO2/RGO277	Functional carbon	1 M KOH	340	112	2018
Co3O4/C-QA278	Functional carbon	1 M KOH	280	57	2020
Co3O4/dpa-C279	Functional carbon	1 M NaOH	54	N.A.	2019
PBSCF/3DNG280	Functional carbon	0.1 M KOH	230	124	2019
STFN/CNT-700281	Functional carbon	0.1 M KOH	304	166	2018
SrRuO3/CNT282	Functional carbon	1 M KOH	109	45	2019
e-ICLDH/GDY177	Functional carbon	1 M KOH	43	99	2018
IFONFs-45 (FeF2/Fe2O3)283	Metal fluoride	1 M KOH	47	30	2018
CoF2/NiCo2O4/NiO/mC284	Metal fluoride; functional carbon	1 M KOH	45	29	2019
Co-MOF/Co3O4184	MOF	1 M KOH	172	92	2019
CuCAT/Co3O4285	MOF	1 M KOH	100	59	2019
Co(OH)2/PANI178	Conductive polymer	1 M NaOH	90	92	2015
3DCo:Pi/CoOx286	Metal phosphate	1 M KOH	N.A.	36	2020
NiPi/Mn3O4287	Metal phosphate	1 M NaOH	N.A.	90	2020

 	Fig. 21  Perspectives of future research directions on metal oxide-based HER electrocatalysis.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
