Conjugated polymer -based photonic nanostructures  - Polymer Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3PY00198A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3PY00198A
(Review Article)
Polym. Chem., 2013, 4, 5181-5196Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsConjugated polymer-based photonic nanostructures
Deirdre M. O'Carroll*ab, 
Christopher E. Petoukhoffa, 
Jesse Kohla, 
Binxing Yub, 
Catrice M. Cartera and 
Sarah Goodmanb
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Rutgers University, 607 Taylor Rd., Piscataway, NJ 08840, USA. E-mail: ocarroll@rci.rutgers.edu
bDepartment of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Rutgers University, 610 Taylor Rd., Piscataway, NJ 08840, USA
Received 
7th February 2013
, Accepted 11th July 2013First published on 12th July 2013AbstractConjugated polymer materials are at the forefront of many next-generation organic optoelectronic technologies including organic light-emitting diodes, photovoltaics and lasers. The photophysical properties of these materials can be controlled and optimized through the formation of nanoscale-confined geometries such as nanoparticles, aggregates, nanofibers, or thin films. In this review, we discuss the photonic characteristics of conjugated polymer-based nanostructured materials and devices with a focus on how excitons and photons can be manipulated and managed though confinement of polymer chains and through interactions with inorganic nanostructures. We include case studies from the literature on how internal molecular morphology can be controlled in conjugated polymer thin-film optoelectronics, nanowires and nanofibers and, in turn, how internal morphology affects the photonic properties of these structures. Extrinsic approaches to controlling or modifying the photonic properties of conjugated polymer materials and devices through the addition of inorganic photonic nanostructures are also discussed.
1 Introduction
Interactions between organic conjugated (i.e., semiconducting) monomers in solids typically induce strong excitation quenching effects due to the formation of non-emissive dimer, trimer and aggregate complexes.1 However, the addition of side chains and end-capping units to organic molecules can reduce intermolecular interactions and, hence, minimize the formation of inefficient excited-state species.2–7 Addition of side chains can also render the molecules soluble in various organic solvents, and can result in altered molecular properties such as liquid crystallinity, modified charge carrier mobility or enhanced luminescence quantum efficiency.2,5–10 Polymerization of organic monomers to form conjugated oligomers or polymers can stabilize their photonic properties and allow excitations to be extended or to migrate along a single oligomer/polymer chain.11–14 As a result, the photonic properties of these extended molecular systems are strongly dependent on chain conformation and alignment, enabling the characteristics of optical transitions to be tailored through molecular processing conditions such as thermal or vapor annealing, physical chain alignment or aggregation, or through nanostructure formation.3,9,15–17
In the first part of this paper we will focus on some of the fundamental photophysical characteristics of conjugated polymer materials such as exciton formation, migration, transition dipole-orientation, and exciton dissociation. In the second part of the paper we will discuss a variety of case studies that help to elucidate the photonic and optoelectronic properties of nanostructured assemblies of conjugated polymers such as thin-films, nanowires, nanoparticles, aggregates, crystallites and lamellae. The relationships between processing conditions, internal molecular morphology and photonic functionality in such conjugated polymer-based nanostructures serve to highlight the appeal of conjugated polymer materials for use in photonic and optoelectronic devices. Strategies to modify the photonic properties of conjugated polymers extrinsically by coupling to inorganic or metallic nanostructures, which can modify the local photonic environment of the polymer, will be presented.
2 Photonic properties of conjugated polymers
Conjugated polymers are organic molecules in which π-molecular orbitals are delocalized along a backbone which consists of a series of covalently-linked conjugated monomeric repeat units (typically >20; monomer units range from 0.2 to 2 nm in length; see Fig. 1).17–20 The use of such polymers as active materials within electronic and photonic devices has been largely motivated by the extensive tunability of their physical and optical properties by tailoring substituent groups (e.g., side chain length, degree of copolymerization, end-capping),1,21,22 as well as their excellent film forming properties and their ease of application over large surfaces through relatively low-temperature, economically-viable coating techniques such as spin coating, spray coating, ink-jet printing and roll-to-roll processing.23–26 The addition of suitable side chains to the polymer backbone renders most conjugated polymers soluble in common organic solvents (Fig. 1d and e). Due to the chain-like structure of polymer molecules and the strongly bound nature of electron–hole pairs (i.e., excitons) in conjugated systems, both optical and electrical dipole orientations are often preferentially polarized along the molecular chain axis.27–29
 Fig. 1  Molecular structures of some widely-studied conjugated polymer materials: (a) poly(p-phenylene) (PPP) (b) poly(thiophene) (PT), (c) poly(p-phenylene-vinylene) (PPV), (d) poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene) (PFO); (e) poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene-co-bithiophene) (F8T2). 
2.1 Excitons in conjugated polymers
Functionalized conjugated polymers, like many molecular systems, possess strongly-bound Frenkel-like excitons (i.e., electron–hole pairs bound by a strong Coulomb attraction).30 Exciton binding energies for most conjugated organic materials are in the range 0.1–1 eV (one to two order of magnitude greater than most inorganic semiconductors), which enables observation of excitonic transitions at room temperature.30 Due to the physical anisotropy of conjugated polymer molecules when extended, individual molecular sub-units or segments can act like molecular wires with excitons polarized along the polymer chain axis.12 At somewhat larger size scales (2–100 nm), nanostructures of conjugated polymer materials can be fabricated that possess photonic properties that are determined by collective effects arising from organization and orientation of an ensemble of molecules. Quantum confinement effects, i.e., size dependent changes in photonic properties, typically associated with inorganic nanostructures that reach a size scale below the Bohr radius of the semiconductor (in the range 2–5 nm for many inorganic semiconductors), are not readily observed in nanostructured conjugated polymer materials since Frenkel-like excitons are already intrinsically quantum confined to the molecular structure.30,31
2.2 Absorption and emission characteristics
In thin film geometries, conjugated polymers can exhibit large absorption coefficients with values of up to 2.8 × 105 cm−1 for polyfluorene derivatives, which are attributed to the promotion of delocalized (conjugated) π-orbital electrons in the ground state (S0) to an excited π* state (S1).32 The polymorphism of many semicrystalline conjugated polymers provides a unique opportunity to study the influence of phase morphology on the photophysics of these materials without further chemical modification. Various phases of the polymers (e.g., semicrystalline, nematic liquid crystalline, mesomorphic) can exhibit distinct absorption spectra due to changes in the polymer molecular chain conformation and conjugation length.33–42 For example, different phases of poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene) (PFO) show distinct red-shifts in the absorption edge wavelength arising from additional low-energy absorption shoulders or low-energy peaks that occur due to transition from one of the more disordered chain conformations (e.g., glassy-phase or N-phase) to one of the more ordered, extended chain conformations (e.g., α-phase, α′-phase or β-phase).33–46 Red-shifts and sharpening of emission peaks are also commonly observed when conjugated polymers undergo a phase transition from a higher energy, disordered chain conformation to a lower energy, more well-ordered chain conformation with extended conjugated length.33,34 Therefore, phases with greater degrees in intrachain or interchain order tend to exhibit the most red-shifted absorption and emission spectra for a given conjugated polymer material.
The photoluminescence (PL) quantum efficiency of conjugated polymer materials can vary substantially from values of just a few percent for polythiophene homopolymers to values approaching 80% for polyfluorenes and polyparaphenylenes.33–36 The PL quantum efficiency can be related to the degree of intermolecular interactions in conjugated polymer solutions or thin films – intermolecular interactions often lead to bimolecular emitting species, such as excimers or exciplexes, which typically coincide with lower intramolecular singlet exciton yields.37,38
Electroluminescence (EL) quantum efficiency is typically lower than that of PL quantum yield for conjugated polymers due, in part, to spin statistics – following electrical injection of electrons and holes, three triplet excitons are expected to form for every one singlet exciton.47,48 However, it has been shown that EL quantum efficiency can exceed 25% of that of the PL quantum efficiency for certain conjugated polymers due to a larger formation cross-sections for singlet excitons compared to triplet excitons.48 Incorporation of heavy atoms (e.g. Pt) to the conjugated polymer backbone has enabled radiative phosphorescent emission from triplet excitons at room temperature, enabling EL quantum efficiencies significantly greater than 50% to be attained in polymer light-emitting diodes (PLEDs).49,50
Interchain excimer formation and fluorenone or ketone oxidative defects introduced either during polymer synthesis or during thermal, photo- or electrochemical oxidation are also common inefficient excitation decay pathways in conjugated polymers and can create unwanted effects such as color-impurities and reduced device operational lifetime, besides modification to quantum efficiency and emission lifetime.51–55 Defect emission is often more apparent upon electrical or electrochemical excitation compared with PL excitation but it has been shown that defect formation may be suppressed by choice of suitable polymer chain end-caps, blending with low-molecular-weight hole transport materials or by the addition of buffer layers during device fabrication.52,54–57 Additionally, excitation in inert atmosphere or conjugated polymer material/device passivation using epoxies or hard dielectric layers can suppress oxidative defect formation and improve emission stability.
In addition to linear absorption and emission processes in conjugated polymer materials, many can exhibit large optical nonlinearities, which may be used for applications that require, for example, third harmonic generation, three-photon luminescence and stimulated emission or gain processes.32,58–60 In comparison to other nonlinear optical materials such as rare-earth ions which offer limited fluorescence emission tunability, quench in moderate concentrations and which exhibit quantum efficiencies that are strongly dependent on the phonon energy of the host medium, conjugated polymers can offer high stimulated emission cross sections and quantum efficiencies with minimal self-quenching in the solid state.17,32,60 Laser dyes also offer wide tunability of fluorescence emission but, like rare-earth ions, they also exhibit emission quenching at moderate to low concentrations. Therefore, in contrast to other nonlinear optical materials, conjugated polymers offer larger chromophore densities in the solid state and wide spectral tunability which can be important for many photonic and optoelectronic applications.
2.3 Exciton migration, energy transfer and dissociation
Optically and electrically generated excitations in conjugated polymers may be controlled or redirected by creating spatially and energetically separated donor- and acceptor-type electronic states within a material, with donor–acceptor excitation energy exchange being facilitated by, for example, non-radiative processes such as long-range Coulombic (Förster) energy transfer.61 A range of synthetic and processing approaches may be employed to structure polymers in a manner that enables energy migration, relaxation or exchange, including chemical modification of polymer chains with appropriate donor or acceptor moieties (via, for example, co-polymerization, side-chain substitution or end-capping),56,57 blending of a polymer with another material that acts as an excitation donor or acceptor (e.g., a different conjugated polymer or oligomer material, fullerene derivatives, carbon nanotubes, inorganic semiconductor quantum dots, dye molecules) or the formation of aggregated or phase-separated domains within films (via, for example, spontaneous assembly or solvent and/or thermal treatments).62 Additionally, certain polymorphic polymers can be self-doped due to formation of a fraction of low-energy chain configurations or ordered domains within a matrix of higher energy, disordered polymer chains. For example, planarized chain segments, or segments with extended conjugation lengths, with energy gaps smaller than the surrounding host polymer matrix, can facilitate ultra-fast energy migration of excitations from the higher-energy host matrix to the lower energy planarized polymer chain segments.13,14 Studies of excitonic energy transfer in β-phase containing PFO samples have found that only a small fraction of this phase completely dominates the emission characteristics of a sample as a result of ultra-fast (<5 ps) migration of excitons generated on the glassy phase to lower energy β-phase segments.33,63,64 For this reason, β-phase containing PFO has been described as a self-doped system where a fraction of the chains with lower energy gaps are dispersed in a host matrix of polymer chains with larger energy gaps.
These approaches for controlling both the structural and energetic characteristics of polymer materials by intrinsic or extrinsic addition of low-energy dopants have been exploited in many organic photonic and optoelectronic devices such as: bulk-heterojunction polymer photovoltaic cells, in which the large available interfacial area between polymer host and fullerene dopant permits efficient exciton dissociation;65,66 light-emitting devices with tunable emission colors and improved efficiencies for radiative recombination of charge carriers;1,22,56 thin films with lowered thresholds for amplified spontaneous emission;67 and polarized displays with enhanced emission polarization ratios.56
Improved control of excited state interactions in conjugated polymer materials may also be achieved by 1-D, 2-D or 3-D nanoscale confinement (Fig. 2), leading to new or more distinct optical behavior compared with thicker films or the bulk polymer.68 For example, Kim et al. mechanically induced reversible molecular conformational changes in poly(p-phenylene-ethynylene) Langmuir films and showed that specific conformations and intermolecular interactions resulted in pronounced changes in absorption and emission spectral behavior.5 Studies of conjugated polymers incorporated into non-emissive nanopores have addressed the control of energy transfer along polymer chains by ordering and isolating them from each other.68 In addition, it has been shown that the depolarizing effects often associated with energy transfer can be suppressed by improving molecular alignment in thin conjugated polymer films.13 These experiments have demonstrated that the transport and trapping of excitation energy can be controlled with different nanoscale architectures. More recently, 2-D confined conjugated polymer nanostructures have been investigated in order to explore new or enhanced properties of potential interest in miniaturized electronic and photonic devices.17,69,70 Such nanowire and nanofiber-based nanostructures contain tens or hundreds of polymer molecules, and their photonic and electronic properties are often determined by polymer chain organization. In the next sections we will discuss the fabrication and photonic and optoelectronic characteristics of conjugated polymer nanostructures and assemblies within thin films and arrays, as well as at the single nanostructure level.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematics of 1-D, 2-D and 3-D confined conjugated polymer nanostructures. (b) Schematic of a planarized PFO backbone segment, indicating alignment direction (red dashed line). Depending on chain conformation and conjugation length, the optical transition dipole orientation (blue solid line) may be slightly off-axis.112 
3 Fabrication of conjugated polymer photonic nanostructures
Fabrication of organic nano-objects (e.g., aggregates, nanofibers, nanowires, nanoparticles) or nanostructured materials (e.g., donor–acceptor blends, organic photonic band gap materials, etc.) has enabled applications such as next-generation optoelectronic devices, nanoscale lasers, fluorescent labels and sensors and organic nanowire photodetectors.5,17,70–78 Methods that have been employed for fabrication of conjugated polymer photonic nanostructures, either as discrete structures or as arrays or nanostructure assemblies, include non-destructive top-down methods such as photolithography and nanoimprint lithography,79,80 dip-pen nanolithography,81 direct drawing,82 electrospinning,83,84 both hard and soft templating methods85–102 and bottom-up approaches such as Langmuir–Blodgett techniques and self-assembly,103–105 thus permitting molecular-level control of material architecture. For example, self-assembly of thin polymer deposits on various substrates has been shown to result in the formation of rod-like conjugated polymer nanostructures following thermal annealing or slow solvent evaporation.16,106–108 Additionally, focused near-infrared laser irradiation has been used to assemble poly(2,7-(9,9-bis(2-ethylhexyl)fluorene)) fibrils in solution which exhibit anisotropic light emission.104 In certain cases it is also desirable to introduce a dopant to alter the emissive properties of conjugated polymer nanostructures. For, example, Kuo et al. reported full-color light emission from light-emitting electrospun nanofibers prepared from polyfluorene/poly(methyl methacrylate) blends.99 Binary blends of poly(methyl methacrylate) with PFO, poly[2,7-(9,9-dihexylfluorene)-alt-5,8-quinoxaline], poly[2,7-(9,9-dihexylfluorene)-alt-4,7-(2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)] and poly[2,7-(9,9-dihexylfluorene)-alt-5,7-(thieno[3,4-b]pyrazine)] yielded blue, green, yellow and red emitting nanofibers, respectively, following electrospinning from solution.99,109
Filling of nanoporous templates (e.g., porous anodic alumina (AAO)) is one route that has been employed for fabrication of conjugated polymer nanowires in high-yields with well-defined cylindrical shape, predictable lengths and diameters and in a format that allows them to be easily transferred to various substrates for device fabrication. There are three main types of template filling technique: electrodeposition, solution-wetting and melt-wetting.69,78,85–87,110 The internal molecular morphology of the polymer nanowires can be controlled by the parameters of the particular template filling method employed (such as solvent type or cooling rate) and, as a result, each method can give rise to unique photophysics on the nanoscale. For example, Cho et al. demonstrated electrochromic switching in single poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene), PEDOT, nanowires and nanotubes prepared by electrochemical in-pore polymerization in AAO templates.98 Ultra-fast switching times of 250 ms and less than 67 ms were achieved for PEDOT nanowires and for PEDOT nanotubes with wall thicknesses of 20 nm, respectively.
Both solution- and melt-wetting of nanoporous anodic alumina templates have been employed for fabrication of polyfluorene-based nanowire photonic structures such as waveguides, polarized light sources, photodetectors and nanoscale lasers.69,70,78,111,112 During solution-assisted wetting of AAO nanopores with PFO, a fraction of the polymer chains are both planarized and aligned parallel to the nanowire long axis during pore filling.78,112 The aligned planar chains dominate the optical properties of the nanowires due to exciton energy migration to the lowest energy (i.e., most planar) polymer chain segments. As a result, nanowires prepared by solution-assisted template wetting typically exhibit axially-polarized light emission.112
The melt-wetting approach enables nanowires with very different internal phase morphology to be prepared. Wires fabricated using this particular method exhibit a semicrystalline internal phase and the polymer chains tend to orient in a direction normal to the long axis of the nanowires due the formation of rod-like polymer crystallites.17,69,111,113 As a result of the different internal morphology in melt-wetted nanowires compared to solution-wetted nanowires, very different nanophotonic properties are apparent, namely, active waveguiding, microcavity effects and optically pumped lasing (Fig. 3).69,111 The interplay between processing conditions, internal molecular morphology and nanophotonic device functionality in single conjugated polymer nanowires prepared from the same material serves to highlight the appeal of nanostructured conjugated polymer materials for use in optoelectronic and photonic applications.
 Fig. 3  Epifluorescence microscope image of (a) a single melt-wetted PFO nanowire, and (b) a single solution-wetted PFO nanowire.17,69,78 
4 Nanostructured conjugated polymer thin film optoelectronics
In comparison to inorganic semiconductor optoelectronics, there are many advantages in using organic polymer- or oligomer-based semiconductors for large-area, thin-film optoelectronic devices: (1) conjugated polymer materials can be processed using vacuum-free, solution-based techniques which are not only much less demanding in terms of their energy inputs (in comparison to energy-intensive epitaxial single crystal compound semiconductor growth processes), but are also particularly amenable to large-scale processing techniques such as the roll-to-roll process;114 (2) unlike more traditional optoelectronic materials (GaN, InxGa1−xAs, InP, CdTe) they are typically composed of earth-abundant elements (i.e., C, H, O); (3) they can have the fastest energy-payback time relative to most other renewable energy optoelectronic technologies;115 (4) they are light-weight and can be fabricated on flexible substrates, allowing them to be used in a variety of formats; (5) organic semiconductors are intrinsically quantum-confined materials, leading to room-temperature excitonic (bound electron–hole pair) optical transitions;30 (6) the optical properties of organic materials can be synthetically tuned.5–10
However, organic-based optoelectronic devices, such as organic photovoltaics (OPVs) and organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) are not as efficient as their inorganic counterparts, and they tend to degrade more rapidly when left in air: conventional, unencapsulated OPVs have a shelf life on the order of several hours to several hundreds of hours (compared to crystalline Si photovoltaics having a guaranteed shelf life of 200000 hours) and maximum power conversion efficiencies around 10% (compared to 25% for crystalline Si).116,117 OLEDs have already met lifetime and efficiency standards for red and green light emitters, each having a shelf life greater than 40000 hours and efficiencies greater than 20 cd A−1; blue OLEDs still remain a challenge, with a shelf life of around 18000 hours and efficiencies as low as 8 cd A−1.118 The potential advantages of organic optoelectronic devices are significant enough to motivate researchers to improve the efficiency, lifetime, and cost of these devices. Here, we will briefly review some widely-studied conjugated polymer optoelectronic devices and discuss nanoscale light management approaches that may be employed for improving the performance of conjugated polymer-based organic optoelectronic devices.
4.1 Overview of conjugated polymer-based photovoltaics
Conjugated polymer-based photovoltaic (CPPV) devices have been a topic of great interest over the past two decades, since the first conjugated polymer–fullerene bilayer heterojunction photovoltaic was developed by Sariciftci et al. (see Fig. 4a).119 CPPVs are formed from the junction of electron donor and electron acceptor materials; since conjugated polymers are typically hole-conductive, they usually serve as the electron donor, and fullerenes (e.g., [6,6]-phenyl C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM)), which have very high electron affinities,120 typically serve as the electron acceptor. Although conjugated polymers have large absorption coefficients (as mentioned in Section 2.2), they still require ∼100–200 nm of thickness in order to absorb most of the incident light within their absorption band. Since conjugated polymers have short exciton diffusion lengths on the order of 1–10 nm,121–123 only excitons which are generated at the donor–acceptor heterojunction are separated, as the heterojunction provides the driving force to separate the tightly bound exciton. In order to increase the effective area of the heterojunction, Yu et al. devised the notion of the bulk heterojunction (BHJ), in which donor and acceptor materials were blended together to form a nanostructured donor–acceptor junction network that reduced the total distance the exciton would need to diffuse before reaching a donor–acceptor interface (see Fig. 4b).66 The development of the BHJ was a breakthrough for CPPVs, and resulted in a rapid growth in the research field.
 Fig. 4  Schematic of various morphologies of conjugated polymer-based photovoltaics. Note that in most cases, the electron donor is the conjugated polymer; the electron acceptor is typically a fullerene-derivative, but may also be a conjugated polymer. (a) Bilayer heterojunction; (b) bulk heterojunction; (c) example of a well-ordered bulk heterojunction fabricated via nanoimprint lithography using a grating; (d) conjugated polymer nanowires blended with in electron acceptor matrix; (e) core–shell nanorods fabricated via melt-assisted wetting of anodic alumina nanotemplates (formation of conjugated polymer nanotubes), followed by filling of the nanotubes by an electron acceptor; (f) nanoparticles consisting of a blend of two conjugated polymers fabricated via a miniemulsion technique. 
Although conjugated polymers have been used extensively as the donor material, they have been used in other parts of the CPPV as well (acceptor, transport layer). As donors, some of the most common conjugated polymers used are poly[2-methoxy-5-(2′-ethylhexyloxy)-1,4-phenylene vinylene] (MEH-PPV),66,119 poly[2-methoxy-5-(3′,7′-dimethyloctyloxy)-1,4-phenylenevinylene] (MDMO-PPV),124,125 and poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HT),126–132 although recently lower bandgap polymers such as poly[[9-(1-octylnonyl)-9H-carbazole-2,7-diyl]-2,5-thiophenediyl-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole-4,7-diyl-2,5-thiophenediyl] (PCDTBT) and poly[[4,8-bis[(2-ethylhexyl)oxy]benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl][3-fluoro-2-[(2-ethylhexyl)carbonyl]thieno[3,4-b]thiophenediyl]] (PTB7) have been used.133,134 As acceptor materials, conjugated polymers that have been used include poly[(9,9-di-n-octylfluorenyl-2,7-diyl)-alt-(benzo[2,1,3]thiadiazol-4,8-diyl)] (F8BT),62,135 and cyano-polyphenylene vinylene (CN-PPV).136 PEDOT doped with polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) is one of the most widely used hole transport layers in CPPVs, as well as in other organic (opto)electronics.126,127,132,137 The most well-studied CPPV configuration consists of indium tin oxide (ITO) as the anode, PEDOT:PSS as the hole transport layer, P3HT:PCBM as the donor–acceptor BHJ, and a low workfunction metal such as Al, Ca/Al or LiF/Al as the cathode.126–128,132 Recently, the inverted configuration – which has replaced PEDOT:PSS with an electron transport layer (such as ZnO or TiOx), and the low workfunction metal cathode (typically Al) with a more stable, high-workfunction metal anode such as Cu, Ni, or Au – has been of interest due to dramatic improvements in device operational lifetime under ambient conditions.134,138–140
4.2 Donor–acceptor nanoscale morphologies
The performance of conjugated polymer-based photovoltaics depends critically on the nanoscale structure of the conjugated polymer blend. The BHJ blend composite itself requires nanoscale domains, with donor and acceptor regions having sizes close to the exciton diffusion length in order to achieve effective charge separation. Nanoscale control of phase segregation has been shown to be dependent on choice of solvent,124,125,133 blend ratio,124,131,133 and annealing times124,127–129 and temperatures.128,129 A more well-ordered bulk heterojunction morphology can be prepared by using nanoimprint lithography (NIL) to form a grating or an array of nanopillars in the conjugated polymer, depositing the electron acceptor material onto the imprinted polymer (see Fig. 4c for a grating-type BHJ).79,80 This allows for more efficient charge separation and transport to the respective electrodes.
Controlling the size of regions rich in donor or acceptor is important for improving exciton dissociation, but dissociated charges in organic materials (i.e., polarons) still have limited mobilities. In particular, conjugated polymers have hole mobilities typically on the order of 10−5 to 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1.141 The hole mobility can be dramatically improved, however, if the polymer chains become more ordered. By controlling the nanoscale crystallinity, either through slow evaporation,141,142 molecular weight (MW),142–144 choice of solvent,142 regioregularity,141 or NIL techniques145,146 the conductivity of films of pristine P3HT can be improved by a factor of over 100, up to 0.1 cm2 V−1 s−1 in the plane of the b-axis (Fig. 5).141 The nanoscale crystallinity of the BHJ will behave differently from that of a pristine polymer film due to the presence of PCBM aggregates.130,131 Whereas high regioregularity in neat P3HT films typically leads to improved lamellar stacking in the edge-on configuration (Fig. 5a),141 when blended with PCBM, higher regioregularity can lead to the formation of large, high-aspect-ratio, PCBM domains, which disrupt the P3HT order;130 lower regioregularity (which typically produces films rich in π–π stacking regions for pristine P3HT,141 Fig. 5b) results in smaller PCBM domains, thus allowing for improved P3HT crystallinity upon annealing.130
 Fig. 5  Possible orientations of polymer chains in thin films of P3HT. (a) Edge-on, in which lamellar stacking from the hexyl side chains is dominant. The crystallographic notation is given as: a, the distance of the lamellar stack; b, the π–π stacking distance (i.e., the faces of the thiophene units); c, the distance between two adjacent hexyl side chains. (b) Face-on, in which the π–π stacking is dominant.141 
Low-MW P3HT films have been shown to form nanofibers, which reduce the charge trapping that can potentially occur in higher MW films that lack the nanofibrous structure (Fig. 6).142,144 Nanofibers (also nanowires, nanorods, etc.) have the additional advantage of providing percolation pathways for more efficient charge transport in CPPVs.147 In this respect, conjugated polymer nanofibers can be intentionally fabricated to improve CPPV device efficiency. Conjugated polymer nanowires/nanorods utilized in CPPVs have been prepared via solution self-assembly (Fig. 4d),148–150 thermal annealing,151 NIL,80 and melt-wetting of AAO templates (Fig. 4e).152,153 In each case, the conjugated polymer nanostructures showed superior carrier transport and increased interfacial area between donor and acceptor relative to typical BHJ blends. The phase segregation of donor and acceptor conjugated polymers has also been shown to be controllable by formation of polymer nanoparticles.154,155 Kietzke et al. used miniemulsion synthesis to fabricate nanoparticles of controllable diameters consisting of a blend of F8BT (acceptor) and poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene-2,7,diyl-co-bis-N,N-(4-butylphenyl)-bis-N-N-phenyl-1,4-phenylenediamine) (PFB, donor) (Fig. 4f).154,155 The authors incorporated these polymer nanoparticles into CPPVs and demonstrated external quantum efficiencies of 4% for devices containing 1:2 PFB:F8BT particles, which is among the highest values reported for this active layer blend.154,155 Further control of the morphology and crystallinity at the nanoscale is essential to further improve CPPV device performance.
 Fig. 6  Model for transport in low-MW (a) and high-MW (b) films. Charge carriers are trapped on nanorods (highlighted in yellow) in the low-MW case. Long chains in high-MW films bridge the ordered regions and soften the boundaries (marked with an arrow). Reproduced with permission from American Chemical Society.142 
4.3 Nanoscale light management approaches for conjugated polymer photovoltaics
Although improvements in the nanoscale morphology and crystallinity can lead to improvements in device efficiency based on improved exciton dissociation and carrier transport, respectively, CPPVs are still ultimately limited by the relatively narrow absorption band of conjugated polymers, which limits the fraction of the solar spectrum that one organic material can absorb alone.156 Synthetic routes are one avenue that can be used to make new types of molecules or polymers with broader absorption bands.157 Alternatively, by using a blend of conjugated polymers/molecules with different band-gaps, each absorber can collect different portions of the solar spectrum. Further, if the relaxed excited-state energy of one polymer/molecule overlaps with the absorption energy of another, energy can be transferred from one absorber to the next through a non-radiative Förster Resonance Energy Transfer (FRET) process.61,158,159 This process involves a long-range dipole–dipole interaction between a FRET donor species and a FRET acceptor species (these are not necessarily the same as the electron donor and acceptor materials described above, as there is no net transfer of charge in FRET), and the rate and efficiency of FRET transfer from donor to acceptor are inversely proportional to the distance between the two species to the sixth power.61,158,159 This means that FRET donors and acceptors need to be in close proximity to one another, within 2–10 nm (but not so close that other energy transfer processes, such as Dexter resonance energy transfer, can occur).61,160
Ternary polymer blends consisting of two electron donor materials and one electron acceptor have been used for CPPVs consisting of: conjugated polymers mixed with dye molecules and fullerenes;158,161–164 two different conjugated polymers mixed with fullerenes;165–167 three different conjugated polymers;168 block copolymers mixed with their individual conjugated polymer constituents;169 block copolymers mixed with a conjugated polymer and fullerene.170 However, not all of these blends have led to enhancements in CPPV device efficiency due to non-ideal blend morphologies leading to increased recombination centers.161,164 For the ternary blends that led to enhanced CPPV device efficiency, it had not been shown that FRET was the dominant mechanism. Only very recently did Huang et al. demonstrate that FRET between P3HT and a squarine dye (SQ) led to an improvement in the efficiency of a P3HT:SQ:PCBM CPPV, with 38% enhancement in device efficiency relative to a binary P3HT:PCBM blend.158 OPVs using such ternary blend organic active layers could potentially compete with more complex tandem device architectures if designed carefully.
Finally, the efficiencies of CPPVs can be enhanced by combining these devices with photonic and plasmonic nanostructures.171–175 Combining conjugated polymers with inorganic nanorod arrays has been demonstrated to markedly enhance the performance of organic solar cells.92,93 Additionally, light-trapping techniques have been employed to enhance the amount of absorption in the active layer of CPPVs including the use of folded configurations176 and photonic crystals,177 but light trapping in CPPVs has been dominated by plasmonics. Incorporation of plasmonic nanostructures into CPPVs have been studied theoretically178–187 and experimentally171,175,179,180,185,186,188 in a variety of configurations (Fig. 7). Metallic gratings184,187 and nanoparticles185,186 have been incorporated on the back (metallic) electrode to improve the amount of light absorbed by the organic layer. Additionally, metallic clusters have been incorporated on the front (transparent) electrode of CPPVs.175,189 Since conjugated polymers are deposited from solution, it is possible to blend the metallic nanoparticles directly into the active layer, resulting in the nanoparticles being dispersed throughout the active layer182 or within the PEDOT:PSS hole transport layer.188,190 There are some cases where nanoporous metal films have been used above the polymer active layer,171,178 and metallic nanowires or meshes can also be used as transparent plasmonic electrodes.171,180 Zeng et al. recently demonstrated (theoretically) broadband, polarization-insensitive, and wide-angle absorption enhancement values as large as 82.8% using a double plasmonic nanostructure consisting of arrays of nanodiscs on top of the active layer in addition to a nanoporous metal film below the active layer.191 Yu et al. have demonstrated that vertical, cone-shaped plasmonic nanorod arrays deposited on top of sub-50 nm polythiophene films on Ag substrates result in significant absorption enhancement (>12 at the P3HT absorption band edge) and spectral broadening (more than 250 nm increase) relative to polythiophene/Ag films without plasmonic nanorod arrays.189 This approach is suitable for large-area optoelectronic applications where light management in ultrathin polymer layers is desired.
 Fig. 7  Schematic of light management schemes for a bulk-heterojunction photovoltaic device: including use of nanostructured electrodes (e.g., nanoporous metal thin films, and nanoparticle (NP) arrays) and addition of nanorod scatterers to the active layer. 
To date, active layer integrated absorption enhancement factors of 1.2–3 in theory181,182,184,191 and 1.5–2 experimentally178,185,186 have been demonstrated. Overall efficiency enhancement factors have ranged from ∼1.05–2.75 experimentally (total power conversion efficiency of 8% has been reported by Chou and Ding [ref. 171]).171,175,190,192–194 Although there have been many enhancements in the amount of light absorbed by the active layer and the total power conversion efficiency, in some cases, it is not always clear what the origin of the enhancement is. Wang et al. reported that addition of Au nanoparticles incorporated in the electron transport layer of an inverted CPPV resulted with an improvement in the total efficiency of the device by a factor of 1.05 relative to an identical device lacking the Au nanoparticles, but this efficiency enhancement was a result of improved fill factor; the absorption in the active layer actually decreased by 5%.194 Identification of the role(s) plasmonic nanostructures play(s) in CPPVs is critical to developing more efficient plasmonic-enhanced CPPVs. A recent review of plasmonic-enhanced organic photovoltaics elaborates the various configurations of plasmonics in organic photovoltaics and methods of going beyond 10% efficiency.195
5 Nanostructured polymer light sources
Proponents for more environmentally friendly lighting options advocate for organic light-emitting diodes, particularly polymer light-emitting diodes (PLEDs) as a low-cost and sustainable alternative to those that incorporate rare-earth or phosphorescent elements.47–50,196–198 A typical PLED employs conjugated polymer thin film active layers up to 50× thinner than inorganic semiconductor (e.g., GaN) layer stacks in inorganic LED device architectures. However, the short lifetime and the lower efficiency of blue PLEDs as compared to red and green and the overall cost hinders the commercialization of a full-color PLED for general lighting purposes (e.g. street lighting, public buildings, and homes).197–199 Possible approaches to tackling the issues of lifetime and efficiency are: (1) inverted device configurations,134,200 and (2) light management by control of molecular orientation, or addition of inorganic or plasmonic nanostructures to improve light-outcoupling and/or radiative decay rate (see Sections 5.1–5.3 and 6.1 below).200 In this section, we will discuss nanoscale approaches to modifying the light emitting characteristics – such as polarization, direction, efficiency and decay rate – of conjugated polymer thin film optoelectronic devices and photonic nanostructures (e.g., by controlling chain alignment, conformation, and local environment of the conjugated polymer material).
5.1 Polarized light emission: thin films and nanofibers
In thin conjugated polymer films, vertically-oriented conjugated polymer chains (and hence, vertically-oriented transition dipoles) favor trapping of emitted light within the film, while chains oriented in the plane of the thin film will radiate emitted light in a direction normal to the plane of thin film. In particular, the molecular chains of many semicrystalline conjugated polymers, may be readily oriented in an anisotropic fashion by thermal annealing of a thin film of the material on a rubbed substrate or, by friction-transferring the material onto a smooth substrate.201–203 Using such approaches, thin-film-format conjugated polymer polarized light-emitting devices exhibiting emission dichroic ratios as high as 25 in both photoluminescence and electroluminescence have been fabricated.201–203 Polarized electroluminescent devices such as these are of interest for a host of display applications since they do not require an additional backlight or polarizer, as in the case of liquid-crystal displays, and, therefore, can result in thinner, low-power-consumption devices.
Highly polarized light emission has also been observed in a variety of conjugated polymer nanowire and nanofiber structures that contain preferential orientation of polymer chains along the wire or fiber axis.12,94,104,112 For example, Herland et al. attached an emissive conjugated polyelectrolyte to amyloid-like nanoscale fibrils by incubating a mixture of the polymer and fibrils for a few minutes.94 The resulting functionalized fibrils exhibited strong polarization-dependent emission arising from the alignment of the conjugated polyelectrolyte chains along the long axis of the fibrils. Emission dichroic ratios as high as 12.4 were measured at particular spots along single fibrils. Da Como et al. investigated the polarization dependence of emission from extended “wire-like” single molecules of β-phase PFO using low-temperature (5 K) single molecule fluorescence spectroscopy. Emission dichroic ratios between 2 and 99 were determined for single molecules depending on the degree of β-phase chain extension.12
Similar effects have been observed in the case of conjugated polymer nanowires: when optical transition dipoles are oriented along the length of a nanowire, light emitted from the polymer chains will tend to radiate in the nanowire radial direction with a high degree of polarization parallel to the nanowire long axis (Fig. 3b)78. For polyfluorene nanowires prepared by solution-assisted template wetting emission dichroic ratios of up to 8.9 have been measured and attributed to a degree of axial polymer chain alignment during template pore filling and subsequent directional solvent evaporation.112 Inorganic compound semiconductor nanowires exhibit comparable emission dichroic ratios but the origin of the transition dipole orientation is substantially different and depends on dielectric effects as well as the internal crystallographic orientation.204,205 It is noteworthy that, depending on polymer chain conformation, the optical transition dipole orientation of conjugated polymers can be oriented off-the molecular axis (for example, between 19° and 26.5° for polyfluorenes).12,29,40,41,206 Therefore, knowledge of transition dipole orientation is important for understanding and optimizing the photonic properties of aligned conjugated polymer thin films and nanostructures (Fig. 2) and in determining the limits to polarization/dichroic ratios that may be achieved using such materials.
5.2 Light trapping in thin films and nanowires
A number of studies have shown that organic nanowires or nanofibers with transition dipoles that are oriented radially or off the nanofiber long axis will tend to result in emission that propagates along the length of the nanowire due to trapping of the emitted light and effective coupling to waveguide modes of the nanofiber structure.76,77,207–210 In contrast, organic 1-D nanostructures with axial (i.e., on-axis) internal molecular alignment do not exhibited active waveguide behavior. Therefore, in addition to polarization, the directionality of emission from organic nanowires is particularly sensitive to internal molecular alignment and plays an important role in the functionality of conjugated oligomer and polymer nanofiber waveguides.77,207–210 For example, para-hexaphenyl (p-6P) nanofiber active waveguides have been formed by self-assembly on cleaved mica substrates via vacuum sublimation with p-6P molecular orientation almost perpendicular to the long axis of the nanofibers.207,208,211 Depending on nanofiber quality, the propagation loss of waveguided emission was found to range from 100 to 3000 cm−1. Self-absorption of waveguided emission was proposed as a major source of loss.208,212 In self-assembled thiacyanine dye H-aggregate nanofiber waveguides (with molecules oriented 30° off the nanofiber long axis), PL propagation loss was found to depend strongly on emission wavelength, with negligible loss observed over a propagation distance of >250 μm at wavelengths between 520 and 560 nm and propagation losses of up to 215 cm−1 observed at a wavelength of 505 nm.209
Active waveguiding has also been demonstrated in conjugated polymer nanowires fabricated by melt-assisted template wetting, as described earlier.17,111,113 PFO nanowire waveguides fabricated in this way exhibited a semicrystalline internal molecular morphology whereby emitted light propagated and exited the nanowires primarily at the ends (Fig. 3a). Propagation losses on the order of 1000 cm−1 were measured from such structures and were attributed to Rayleigh scattering losses arising from internal changes in material density (e.g., due to crystalline domains), nanoscale surface roughness, a distribution in internal transition dipole orientation, re-absorption and substrate effects.111 Improvements in propagation length may be made by reducing the polydispersity of the constituent conjugated polymer material, the use of conjugated oligomer materials and further control of annealing and template pore surface roughness during nanowire fabrication.17,111
5.3 Emission rate enhancement by plasmonic nanostructures
Besides control of nanoscale molecular morphology and alignment, inorganic or metallic nanostructures can be employed to modify the local environment (by scattering or an increase in the local density of optical sates) of the polymer molecules facilitating improved light out-coupling or enhanced radiative emission decay rates.213,214 Coupling of conjugated polymer materials to resonant metallic nanostructures is a means to externally modify the photonic properties of conjugated materials by altering the density of optical states in the vicinity of the material. For example, metal–P3HT heterostructure nanoantenna configurations have been shown to cause significant radiative rate enhancements from P3HT; see Fig. 8.110,215 Electromagnetic simulations of such hybrid nanostructures, with 20 nm of P3HT sandwiched between two gold nanorods with diameters of 60 nm, indicated that radiative decay rate and modified quantum efficiency enhancements of 53 and 25, respectively, could be achieved for a total gold–P3HT–gold nanorod length of 180 nm, at a free-space wavelength of 700 nm.110 In practice, gold–P3HT and gold–P3HT–gold nanoantennas were fabricated using a template-directed sequential electrodeposition process (Fig. 8a and b).110,215 Experimental characterization of the fabricated structures by PL spectral intensity and lifetime measurements were carried out to determine the PL lifetime, τPL, of the P3HT semiconductor upon on coupling to resonant gold nanorods. Values of τPL determined from picosecond-range PL lifetime measurements for the nanoantennas (60 ps to 240 ps depending on nanoantenna length) were significantly shorter than τPL values for neat P3HT thin films and nanowires (600 ± 40 ps and 720 ± 115 ps, respectively) and P3HT–gold monomer nanoantenna structures (415 ± 60 ps); (Fig. 8c). Such structures offer a means to improve the radiative properties of deeply sub-wavelength scale conjugated polymer nanostructures and modify their emission quantum efficiency and direction in a unique way.
 Fig. 8  (a) Monomer P3HT–gold nanorod antenna. (b) A dimer Au–P3HT–Au nanorod antenna. (c) PL lifetime decay curves for a P3HT thin film, nanorod, monomer P3HT–Au nanorod antenna and a dimer Au–P3HT–Au nanorod antenna.110,215 
6 Nanoscale light management for conjugated polymer-based lasers
In comparison to other widely-used gain media, such as laser dyes (e.g., rhodamine and cyanide dye J-aggregates), rare-earth (e.g., Er) doped glasses and semiconductor materials such as InGaAsP, conjugated polymer materials offer higher chromopore densities in the solid state and ease of processability.17,211 However, to-date electrically driven lasing has not been realized in conjugated polymer-based lasers due to low charge carrier densities and losses at the metal electrode which increase the threshold gain required for stimulated emission.214,216,217 For example, PFO exhibits a very large stimulated emission cross section (∼10−15 cm2) making it a desirable active laser medium.217,218 Amplified spontaneous emission (ASE; mirrorless lasing) in thin film asymmetric slab waveguides of PFO has been demonstrated via stripe excitation with a pulsed UV laser to provide the necessary gain lengths required for light amplification. PFO thin films excited in this way have exhibited large net gains (74 cm−1) with very low propagation losses (3.5 cm−1).218 In addition, it was found that the ASE threshold can vary depending on the phase of PFO,219,220 and, in aligned thin films, with the relative orientation of the excitation and collection polarizations.65 Polyfluorene-based conjugated polymers have been incorporated into a variety of microcavity geometries, such as distributed feedback,221 microring,222 photonic band-gap223 and random lasing224 structures to provide resonant optical feedback. One of the lowest lasing thresholds of PFO (∼3 μJ cm−2 under 1 ns optical pumping), and indeed of any other conjugated polymer laser, was reported by Heliotis et al. using a two-dimensional distributed feedback cavity.221 This type of laser exhibited a very high slope efficiency of 7.8%, indicative of the quality of the cavity structure and the high emission efficiency of PFO. More recently, β-phase PFO has also been proposed as a promising candidate for electrically pumped lasing,217 although much work remains to be done to optimize and balance charge carrier injection into high quality β-phase PFO-containing optical microcavities.
6.1 Coupling to surface plasmon polaritons at electrodes
One of the primary challenges with demonstration of viable electrically-driven organic polymer lasers is supplying enough current density for population inversion to be achieved in the material.214,216,217 This requires ultra-low threshold device designs and control of the optical and electronic interaction between the gain material and the metallic electrode. In that regard, the control of polymer chain dipole orientation through processing is necessary to control the extent of coupling to propagating surface plasmon polaritons (SPP) which may be a source of reduction or enhancement of light emission at the metal electrode in optoelectronic devices.225–231 Dipole orientation plays a critical role in the degree of excitation and coupling to SPP modes at optical frequencies which occur between the emitter and the metal electrode surface.232 A parallel optical transition dipole (i.e., oriented in the plane of the electrode film) is cancelled by its own image on the metal surface, while a perpendicularly polarized dipole (oriented normal to the plane of the electrode) can couple to a propagating surface plasmon mode and is enhanced. Such coupling has been successfully utilized to implement electrically pumped surface plasmon polariton emitters,233 demonstrate enhanced emission and absorption of emitters233–237 and plasmon laser devices.238,239 For conjugated polymer-based laser and light-emitting devices an understanding of this type of coupling could be critical to optimizing device performance and is an important future direction for development of next-generation organic polymer optoelectronic light sources.
6.2 Miniaturized polymer waveguides and laser sources
Conjugated polymer nanowire-based lasers composed of polyfluorene materials are the smallest conjugated polymer lasers demonstrated to date.69 The presence of flat or cleaved end facets can, in certain cases, lead to back reflection of waveguided light into a molecular nanowire.207 In such cases, the nanowire can exhibit Fabry–Pérot-like cavity effects with resonant modes superimposed on emission spectra from the nanowire ends. Additionally, optically-pumped lasing can be observed from such structures when the nanowire is composed of a conjugated oligomer or polymer material with large stimulated emission cross-sections and when a short pulsed excitation source is employed above a certain excitation energy density.32 Optically-pumped PFO nanowire lasers with diameters of ∼250 nm and lengths ranging from 6–10 μm are capable of achieving single-mode operation and narrow line-width blue emission.69 Excitation of such structures with short pulsed, low repetition rate laser excitation is necessary to minimize heating of the nanowires and to allow time for population inversion to occur within the material.
Further miniaturization of conjugated polymer-based lasers is diffraction-limited, making the smallest possible laser dimension about half of its lasing wavelength divided by the refractive index of the gain material (i.e., 100–200 nm). However, development of coherent light sources that overcome the diffraction limit may be possible using resonant plasmonic nanostructures in a configuration similar to that of a surface-plasmon-amplification-by-stimulated-emission-of-radiation device (SPASER).238–242 SPASER devices have been previously created using a metal nanoparticle surrounded by a dye-doped silica shell as the gain medium.239 However, the use of a conjugated polymer as the gain medium may be more advantageous than using an inorganic shell with organic dye molecules in that conjugated polymers do not undergo concentration quenching in the solid state,217,218,243–245 and, therefore, a greater density of chromophores could be placed at the interface with the metal nanoparticle resonator. Such structures would provide a unique opportunity to study and control nanoscale conjugated polymer–surface plasmon interactions and may provide new knowledge of how to optimize the interfacial interactions between conjugated polymer gain media and metallic surfaces.
7 Conclusions
This paper has reviewed a number of case studies that highlight the unique photonic properties of organic conjugated polymer materials from the single-molecule level, to nanoscale assemblies – such as nanofibers and aggregates – to thin films for large-area optoelectronic applications. The excitonic nature of conjugated polymer optical transitions results in strong absorption, emission, and non-linear optical properties which can be controlled through molecular ordering and alignment within nanoconfined domains or structures. Additionally, the ability to control or redirect excitation energy within the polymer material by doping through (1) chemical modification of polymer chains with appropriate donor or acceptor moieties, (2) blending of a polymer with another material that acts as an excitation donor or acceptor or (3) the formation of aggregated or phase-separated domains within films has enabled a host of optoelectronic applications. Numerous top-down and bottom-up methods for fabricating nanostructured conjugated polymer thin films and nanostructures with new or enhanced photonic properties compared to the bulk material – such as highly-polarized light emission, efficient exciton dissociation, enhanced radiative decay rate, light trapping – were discussed. Further advancements in understanding of the photophysics of conjugated polymer materials and their interactions with metallic and inorganic materials in various nanoconfined formats are key to development of next-generation conjugated polymer nanostructures and devices for use in applications such as optical communications and solid-state lighting, photovoltaic and lasing applications.
AcknowledgementsThe authors gratefully acknowledge support by National Science Foundation Grant no. 0903661 “Nanotechnology for Clean Energy IGERT”, National Science Foundation Grant no. DMR-1309459, Corning Inc. graduate fellowships, a Rutgers' Research Council Grant, Rutgers' Institute for Advanced Materials Devices and Nanotechnology and Rutgers' Aresty Undergraduate Research Fellowship Program. The authors thank Gareth Redmond and Gary Cheung for useful discussions.
ReferencesA. Köhler, J. S. Wilson and R. H. Friend, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 701–707 CrossRef .M. J. Eslamibidgoli and J. B. Lagowski, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2012, 116, 10597–10606 CrossRef CAS .R. Stepanyan, A. Subbotin, M. Knaapila, O. Ikkala and G. Ten Brinke, Macromolecules, 2003, 36, 3758–3763 CrossRef CAS .D. L. Cheung and A. Troisi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 2105–2112 RSC .J. Kim and T. M. Swager, Nature, 2001, 411, 1030–1034 CrossRef CAS .D. Marsitzky, M. Klapper and K. Müllen, Macromolecules, 1999, 32, 8685–8688 CrossRef CAS .G.-Z. Yang, W.-Z. Wang, M. Wang and T. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 7747–7755 CrossRef CAS .Y. Geng, S. W. Culligan, A. Trajkovska, J. U. Wallace and S. H. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 542–549 CrossRef CAS .G. Sauvé, A. E. Javier, R. Zhang, J. Liu, S. A. Sydlik, T. Kowalewski and R. D. McCullough, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 3195–3201 RSC .B. Friedel, C. R. McNeil and N. C. Greenham, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 3389–3398 CrossRef CAS .J. Jo, C. Chi, S. Höger, G. Wegner and D. Y. Yoon, Chem.–Eur. J., 2004, 10, 2681–2688 CrossRef CAS .E. Da Como, K. Becker, J. Feldmann and J. M. Lupton, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2993–2998 CrossRef CAS .G. R. Hayes, I. D. W. Samuel and R. T. Phillips, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1997, 56, 3838–3843 CrossRef CAS .P. Bojarski, A. Synak, L. Kułak and A. Kubicki, J. Fluoresc., 2006, 16, 309–316 CrossRef CAS .T.-Q. Nguyen, I. B. Martini, J. Liu and B. J. Schwartz, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 237–255 CrossRef CAS .J. A. Teetsov and D. A. Vanden Bout, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 3605–3606 CrossRef CAS .D. O'Carroll, Conjugated Polymer Nanowires: One-Dimensional Structures and Devices for Nanophotonics, PhD thesis,  2007 .M. Ranger, D. Rondeau and M. Leclerc, Macromolecules, 1997, 30, 7686–7691 CrossRef CAS .H. Shirakawa, E. J. Louis, A. G. MacDiarmid, C. K. Chiang and A. J. Heeger, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1977, 578–580 RSC .M. Leclerc, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2001, 39, 2867–2873 CrossRef CAS .H. Sirringhaus, N. Tessler and R. H. Friend, Science, 1998, 280, 1741–1744 CrossRef CAS .F. Carpi and D. De Rossi, Opt. Laser Technol., 2006, 38, 292–305 CrossRef CAS .S.-I. Na, B.-K. Yu, S.-S. Kim, D. Vak, T.-S. Kim, J.-S. Yeo and D.-Y. Kim, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 1333–1337 CrossRef CAS .C. D. Müller, A. Falcou, N. Reckefuss, M. Rojahn, V. Wiederhirn, P. Rudati, H. Frohne, O. Nuyken, H. Becker and K. Meerholz, Nature, 2003, 421, 829–833 CrossRef .E. Tekin, E. Holder, D. Kozodaev and U. S. Schubert, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 277–284 CrossRef CAS .M. Jørgensen, K. Norrman, S. A. Gevorgyan, T. Tromholt, B. Andreasen and F. C. Krebs, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 580–612 CrossRef .J. W. Blatchford, S. W. Jessen, L. B. Lin, J. J. Lih, T. L. Gustafson, A. J. Epstein, D. K. Fu, M. J. Marsells, T. M. Swager, A. G. MacDiarmid, S. Yamaguchi and H. Hamaguchi, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 76, 1513–1516 CrossRef CAS .A. Köhler, D. A. dos Santos, D. Beljonne, Z. Shuai, J.-L. Brédas, A. B. Holmes, A. Kraus, K. Müllen and R. H. Friend, Nature, 1998, 392, 903–906 CrossRef .T. W. Hagler, K. Pakbaz and A. J. Heeger, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1994, 49, 10968–10975 CrossRef CAS .G. D. Scholes and G. Rumbles, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 683–696 CrossRef CAS .B. D. Fahlman, Materials Chemistry, Springer, 2nd edn,  2011 Search PubMed .M. Campoy-Quiles, G. Heliotis, R. Xia, M. Ariu, M. Pintani, P. Etchegoin and D. D. C. Bradley, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 925–933 CrossRef CAS .M. Ariu, D. G. Lidzey, M. Sims, A. J. Cadby, P. A. Lane and D. D. C. Bradley, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2002, 14, 9975–9986 CrossRef CAS .K. Asada, T. Kobayashi and H. Naito, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 45, L247–L249 CrossRef CAS .N. C. Greenham, I. D. W. Samuel, G. R. Hayes, R. T. Phillips, Y. A. R. R. Kessener, S. C. Moratti, A. B. Holmes and R. H. Friend, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1995, 241, 89 CrossRef CAS .J. Piris, T. E. Dykstra, A. A. Bakulin, P. H. M. van Loosdrecht, W. Knulst, M. Tuan Trinh, J. M. Schins and L. D. A. Siebbeles, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 14500 CAS .Y.-S. Huang, J. Gierschner, J. P. Schmidtke, R. H. Friend and D. Beljonne, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 205311 CrossRef .S. Tirapattur, M. Belletête, N. Drolet, J. Bouchard, M. Ranger, M. Leclerc and G. Durocher, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 8959–8966 CrossRef CAS .M. Redecker, D. D. C. Bradley, M. Inbasekaran and E. P. Woo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 74, 1400–1402 CrossRef CAS .M. Grell, D. D. C. Bradley, G. Ungar, J. Hill and K. S. Whitehead, Macromolecules, 1999, 32, 5810–5817 CrossRef CAS .M. Grell, D. D. C. Bradley, X. Long, T. Chamberlain, M. Insbasekaran, E. P. Woo and M. Soliman, Acta Polym., 1998, 49, 439–444 CrossRef CAS .E. Da Como, E. Scheler, P. Strohriegl, J. M. Lupton and J. Feldmann, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2009, 95, 61–66 CrossRef CAS .S. H. Chen, H. L. Chou, A. C. Su and S. A. Chen, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 6833–6838 CrossRef CAS .S.-H. Chen, A.-C. Su and S.-A. Chen, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 9143 CrossRef CAS .S. H. Chen, A. C. Su, C. H. Su and S. A. Chen, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 379–385 CrossRef CAS .O. J. Korovyanko and Z. V. Vardeny, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2002, 356, 361–367 CrossRef CAS .J. Wang, A. Chepelianskii, F. Gao and N. C. Greenham, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1191 CrossRef .Z. Shuai, D. Beljonne, R. J. Silbey and J. L. Brédas, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 84, 131–134 CrossRef CAS .J. S. Wilson, A. S. Dhoot, A. J. A. B. Seeley, M. S. Khan, A. Köhler and R. H. Friend, Nature, 2001, 413, 828–831 CrossRef CAS .S.-A. Chen, T.-H. Jen and H.-H. Lu, J. Chin. Chem. Soc., 2010, 57, 439–458 CAS .J. Teetsov and M. A. Fox, J. Mater. Chem., 1999, 9, 2117–2122 RSC .X. Gong, P. K. Iyer, D. Moses, G. C. Bazan, A. J. Heeger and S. S. Xiao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 325–330 CrossRef CAS .K. Becker, J. M. Lupton, J. Feldmann, B. S. Nehls, F. Galbrecht, D. Gao and U. Scherf, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 364–370 CrossRef CAS .M. Sims, D. D. C. Bradley, M. Ariu, M. Koeberg, A. Asimakis, M. Grell and D. G. Lidzey, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 765–781 CrossRef CAS .I. Prieto, J. Teetsov, M. A. Fox, D. A. Vanden Bout and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2001, 105, 520–523 CrossRef CAS .D. C. Neher, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2001, 22, 1365–1385 CrossRef CAS .D. Sainova, T. Miteva, H. G. Nothofer, U. Scherf, I. Glowacki, J. Ulanski, H. Fujikawa and D. Neher, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 76, 1810–1812 CrossRef CAS .A. John Kiran, D. Udayakumar, K. Chandrasekharan, A. V. Ahdikari, H. D. Shashikala and R. Philip, Opt. Commun., 2007, 271, 236–240 CrossRef .J. Mattu, T. Johansson and G. W. Leach, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 6868–6874 CAS .M. C. Gather, K. Meerholz, N. Danz and K. Leosson, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 4, 457 CrossRef .N. J. Turro, Modern Molecular Photochemistry, University Science Books, California,  1991 Search PubMed .J. J. M. Halls, A. C. Arias, J. D. MacKenzie, W. Wu, M. Inbasekaran, E. P. Woo and R. H. Friend, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 498–502 CrossRef CAS .A. L. T. Khan, P. Sreearunothai, L. M. Herz, M. J. Banach and A. Köhler, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 69, 085201 CrossRef .M. Ariu, M. Sims, M. D. Rahn, J. Hill, A. M. Fox, D. G. Lidzey, M. Oda, J. Cabanillas-Gonzalez and D. D. C. Bradley, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 67, 195333 CrossRef .G. Heliotis, R. Xia, K. S. Whitehead, G. A. Turnbull, I. D. W. Samuel and D. D. C. Bradley, Synth. Met., 2003, 139, 727–730 CrossRef CAS .G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789–1791 CAS .M. Vehse, B. Liu, L. Edman, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1001–1004 CrossRef CAS .T.-Q. Nguyen, J. Wu, V. Doan, B. J. Schwartz and S. H. Tolbert, Science, 2000, 288, 652–656 CrossRef CAS .D. O'Carroll, I. Lieberwirth and G. Redmond, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 180–184 CrossRef CAS .G. A. O'Brien, A. J. Quinn, D. A. Tanner and G. Redmond, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2379–2383 CrossRef CAS .F. Quochi, F. Cordella, A. Mura, G. Bongiovanni, F. Balzer and H.-G. Rubahn, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 21690–21693 CrossRef CAS .A. Andreev, F. Quochi, F. Cordella, A. Mura, G. Bongiovanni, H. Sitter, G. Hlawacek, C. Teichert and N. S. Sariciftci, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 99, 034305 CrossRef .F. Quochi, F. Cordella, A. Mura, G. Bongiovanni, F. Balzer and H.-G. Rubahn, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 041106 CrossRef .C. R. L. P. N. Jeukens, P. Jonkheijm, F. J. P. Wijnen, J. C. Gielen, P. C. M. Christianen, A. P. H. J. Schenning, E. W. Meijer and J. C. Maan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 8280–8281 CrossRef CAS .P. Yan, A. Chowdhury, M. W. Holman and D. M. Adams, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 724–730 CrossRef CAS .J. Brewer and H.-G. Rubahn, Phys. Status Solidi C, 2005, 2, 4058–4061 CrossRef CAS .H. Yanagi and T. Morikawa, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 75, 187–189 CrossRef CAS .D. O'Carroll, D. Iacopino, A. O'Riordan, P. Lovera, É. O'Connor, G. A. O'Brien and G. Redmond, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 42–48 CrossRef CAS .M.-S. Kim, J.-S. Kim, J. C. Cho, M. Shtein, L. J. Guo and J. Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 123113 CrossRef .X. He, F. Gao, G. Tu, D. G. Hasko, S. Hüttner, N. C. Greenham, U. Steiner, R. H. Friend and W. T. S. Huck, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 139–146 CrossRef CAS .A. Noy, A. E. Miller, J. E. Klare, B. L. Weeks, B. W. Woods and J. J. DeYoreo, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 109–112 CrossRef CAS .S. A. Harfenist, S. D. Cambron, E. W. Nelson, S. M. Berry, A. W. Isham, M. M. Crain, K. M. Walsh, R. S. Keynton and R. W. Cohn, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1931–1937 CrossRef CAS .Z.-M. Huang, Y.-Z. Zhang, M. Kotaki and S. Ramakrishna, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2003, 63, 2223–2253 CrossRef CAS .D. Li, A. Babel, S. A. Jenekhe and Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 2062–2066 CrossRef CAS .C. R. Martin, Science, 1994, 266, 1961–1966 CAS .J. C. Hulteen and C. R. Martin, J. Mater. Chem., 1997, 7, 1075–1087 RSC .M. Steinhart, J. H. Wendorff, A. Greiner, R. B. Wehrspohn, K. Nielsch, J. Schilling, J. Choi and U. Gösele, Science, 2002, 296, 1997 CrossRef CAS .K. Shin, H. Xiang, S. I. Moon, T. Kim, T. J. McCarthy and T. P. Russell, Science, 2004, 306, 76 CrossRef CAS .S. Chuangchote, T. Srikhirin and P. Supaphol, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2007, 28, 651–659 CrossRef CAS .L. Valentini, F. Mengoni, L. Mattiello and J. M. Kenny, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 115702 CrossRef .M. R. Abidian, D.-H. Kim and D. C. Martin, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 405–409 CrossRef CAS .W. U. Huynh, J. J. Dittmer and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2002, 295, 2425–2427 CrossRef CAS .Y. Kang, N.-G. Park and D. Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 113101 CrossRef .A. Herland, P. Bjork, P. R. Hania, I. V. Scheblykin and O. Inganäs, Small, 2007, 3, 318–325 CrossRef CAS .E. Zussman, A. Theron and A. L. Yarin, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 973–975 CrossRef CAS .D. Li, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1167–1171 CrossRef CAS .J. Liu, Y. Lin, L. Liang, J. A. Voigt, D. L. Huber, Z. R. Tian, E. Coker, B. McKenzie and M. J. Mcdermott, Chem.–Eur. J., 2003, 9, 604–611 CrossRef CAS .S. I. Cho, W. J. Kwon, S.-J. Choi, P. Kim, S.-A. Park, J. Kim, S. J. Son, R. Xiao, S.-H. Kim and S. B. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 171–175 CrossRef CAS .C.-C. Kuo, C.-H. Lin and W.-C. Chen, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 6959–6966 CrossRef CAS .F. Cacialli, J. S. Wilson, J. J. Michels, C. Daniel, C. Silva, R. H. Friend, N. Severin, P. Samorì, J. P. Rabe, M. J. O'Connell, P. N. Taylor and H. L. Anderson, Nat. Mater., 2002, 1, 160–164 CrossRef CAS .M. Steinhart, R. B. Wehrspohn, U. Gosele and J. H. Wendorff, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 1334–1344 CrossRef CAS .M. Zhang, P. Dobriyal, J.-T. Chen and T. P. Russell, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1075–1079 CrossRef CAS .E. R. Zubarev, J. Xu, A. Sayyad and J. D. Gibson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 15098–15099 CrossRef CAS .S. Masuo, H. Yoshikawa, H.-G. Nothofer, A. C. Grimsdale, U. Scherf, K. Müllen and H. Masuhara, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 6917–6921 CrossRef CAS .D. H. Kim, J. T. Han, Y. D. Park, Y. Jang, J. H. Cho, M. Hwang and K. Cho, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 719–723 CrossRef CAS .M. Surin, E. Hennebicq, C. Ego, D. Marsitzky, A. C. Grimsdale, K. Müllen, J.-L. Brédas, R. Lazzaroni and P. Leclère, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 994–1001 CrossRef CAS .M. Knaapila, R. Stepanyan, B. P. Lyons, M. Torkkeli and A. P. Monkman, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 599–609 CrossRef CAS .A. P. H. J. Schenning and E. W. Meijer, Chem. Commun., 2005, 3245–3258 RSC .A. Babel, D. Li, Y. Xia and S. A. Jenekhe, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 4705–4711 CrossRef CAS .D. M. O'Carroll, J. Fakonas, D. M. Callahan, M. Schierhorn and H. A. Atwater, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, OP136–OP142 CrossRef CAS .D. O'Carroll, I. Lieberwirth and G. Redmond, Small, 2007, 3, 1178 CrossRef CAS .D. O'Carroll and G. Redmond, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6501–6508 CrossRef CAS .D. O'Carroll and G. Redmond, Physica E, 2008, 40, 2468–2473 CrossRef CAS .F. C. Krebs, T. Tromholt and M. Jørgensen, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 873–886 RSC .N. Espinosa, M. Hösel, D. Angmo and F. C. Krebs, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5117–5132 CAS .F. Zhang, X. Xu, W. Tang, J. Zhang, Z. Zhuo, J. Wang, J. Wang, Z. Xu and Y. Wang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1785–1799 CrossRef CAS .M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa, W. Warta and E. D. Dunlop, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2012, 20, 606–614 Search PubMed .D. Fyfe, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 453–455 CrossRef CAS .N. S. Sariciftci, D. Braun, C. Zhang, V. I. Srdanov, A. J. Heeger, G. Stucky and F. Wudl, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1993, 62, 585–587 CrossRef CAS .H. Spanggaard and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2004, 83, 125–146 CrossRef CAS .D. E. Markov, E. Amsterdam, P. W. M. Blom, A. B. Sieval and J. C. Hummelen, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2005, 109, 5266–5274 CrossRef CAS .A. Haugeneder, M. Neges, C. Kallinger, W. Spirkl, U. Lemmer, J. Feldmann, U. Scherf, E. Harth, A. Gügel and K. Müllen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 59, 15346–15351 CrossRef CAS .P. E. Shaw, A. Ruseckas and I. D. W. Samuel, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3516–3520 CrossRef CAS .H. Hoppe, M. Niggemann, C. Winder, J. Kraut, R. Hiesgen, A. Hinsch, D. Meissner and N. S. Sariciftci, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 1005–1011 CrossRef CAS .S. E. Shaheen, C. J. Brabec, N. S. Sariciftci, F. Padinger, T. Fromherz and J. C. Hummelen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 841–843 CrossRef CAS .Y. Kim, S. Cook, S. M. Tuladhar, S. A. Choulis, J. Nelson, J. R. Durrant, D. D. C. Bradley, M. Giles, I. McCulloch, C.-S. Ha and M. Ree, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 197–203 CrossRef CAS .W. Ma, C. Yang, X. Gong, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1617–1622 CrossRef CAS .G. Li, V. Shrotriya, Y. Yao and Y. Yang, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98, 043704 CrossRef .Y. Kim, S. A. Choulis, J. Nelson, D. D. C. Bradley, S. Cook and J. R. Durrant, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 063502 CrossRef .C. H. Woo, B. C. Thompson, B. J. Kim, M. F. Toney and J. M. J. Fréchet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16324–16329 CrossRef CAS .M.-Y. Chiu, U.-S. Jeng, M.-S. Su and K.-H. Wei, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 428–432 CrossRef CAS .G. Li, V. Shrotriya, J. Huang, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 864–868 CrossRef CAS .S. H. Park, A. Roy, S. Beaupré, S. Cho, N. Coates, J. S. Moon, D. Moses, M. Leclerc, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 297–302 CrossRef CAS .Z. He, C. Zhong, S. Su, M. Xu, H. Wu and Y. Cao, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 591–595 Search PubMed .A. C. Arias, J. D. MacKenzie, R. Stevenson, J. J. M. Halls, M. Inbasekaran, E. P. Woo, D. Richards and R. H. Friend, Macromolecules, 2001, 34, 6005–6013 CrossRef CAS .J. J. M. Halls, C. A. Walsh, N. C. Greenham, E. A. Marseglia, R. H. Friend, S. C. Moratti and A. B. Holmes, Nature, 1995, 376, 498–500 CrossRef CAS .F. L. Zhang, A. Gadisa, O. Inganäs, M. Svensson and M. R. Andersson, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 3906–3908 CrossRef CAS .M. S. White, D. C. Olson, S. E. Shaheen, N. Kopidakis and D. S. Ginley, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 143517 CrossRef .Y. Şahin, S. Alem, R. de Bettignies and J.-M. Nunzi, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 476, 340–343 CrossRef .S. R. Ferreira, P. Lu, Y.-J. Lee, R. J. Davis and J. W. P. Hsu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 13471–13475 CAS .H. Sirringhaus, P. J. Brown, R. H. Friend, M. M. Nielsen, K. Bechgaard, B. M. W. Langeveld-Voss, A. J. H. Spiering, R. A. J. Janssen, E. W. Meiger, P. Herwig and D. M. de Leeuw, Nature, 1999, 401, 685–688 CrossRef CAS .R. J. Kline, M. D. McGehee, E. N. Kadnikova, J. Liu, J. M. J. Fréchet and M. F. Toney, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 3312–3319 CrossRef CAS .R. J. Kline, M. D. McGehee and M. F. Toney, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 222–228 CrossRef .R. Zhang, B. Li, M. C. Iovu, M. Jeffries-El, G. Sauvé, J. Cooper, S. Jia, S. Tristram-Nagle, D. M. Smilgies, D. N. Lambeth, R. D. McCullough and T. Kowalewski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 3480–3481 CrossRef CAS .H. Hlaing, X. Lu, T. Hofmann, K. G. Yager, C. T. Black and B. M. Ocko, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7532–7538 CrossRef CAS .M. Aryal, K. Trivedi and W. W. Hu, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3085–3090 CrossRef CAS .J.-T. Chen and C.-S. Hsu, Polym. Chem., 2011, 2, 2707–2722 RSC .H. Xin, F. S. Kim and S. A. Jenekhe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5424–5425 CrossRef CAS .H. Xin, G. Ren, F. S. Kim and S. A. Jenekhe, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6199–6207 CrossRef CAS .L. Li, G. Lu and X. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 1984–1990 RSC .X. Yang, J. Loos, S. C. Veenstra, W. J. H. Verhees, M. M. Wienk, J. M. Kroon, M. A. J. Michels and R. A. J. Janssen, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 579–583 CrossRef CAS .H.-S. Wang, L.-H. Lin, S.-Y. Chen, Y.-L. Wang and K.-H. Wei, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 075201 CrossRef .H.-S. Wang, S.-Y. Chen, M.-H. Su, Y.-L. Wang and K.-H. Wei, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 145203 CrossRef .T. Kietzke, D. Neher, K. Landfester, R. Montenegro, R. Güntner and U. Scherf, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 408–412 CrossRef CAS .T. Kietzke, D. Neher, M. Kumke, R. Montenegro, K. Landfester and U. Scherf, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 4882–4890 CrossRef CAS .H. Kiess and W. Rehwald, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1995, 38, 45–55 CrossRef CAS .E. Bundgaard and F. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 954–985 CrossRef CAS .J. Huang, T. Goh, X. Li, M. Y. Sfeir, E. A. Bielinski, S. Tomasulo, M. L. Lee, N. Hazari and D. A. Taylor, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 479–485 CrossRef CAS .R. P. Wayne, Photochemistry, Butterworth & Co Ltd, New York, NY,  1970 Search PubMed .J. R. Lakowicz, Principles of Fluorescence Spectroscopy, Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, New York, NY,  1999 Search PubMed .N. Cooling, K. B. Burke, X. Zhou, S. J. Lind, K. C. Gordon, T. W. Jones, P. C. Dastoor and W. J. Belcher, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1767–1774 CrossRef CAS .D. C. Coffey, A. J. Ferguson, N. Kopidakis and G. Rumbles, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5437–5445 CrossRef CAS .S. Honda, H. Ohkita, H. Benten and S. Ito, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 588–598 CrossRef CAS .W. Belcher, K. Wagner and P. Dastoor, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 447–452 CrossRef CAS .M. Campoy-Quiles, Y. Kanai, A. El-Basaty, H. Sakai and H. Murata, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 1120–1132 CrossRef CAS .L. Yang, H. Zhou, S. C. Price and W. You, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 5432–5435 CrossRef CAS .M. Koppe, H.-J. Egelhaaf, G. Dennler, M. C. Scharber, C. J. Brabec, P. Schilinsky and C. N. Hoth, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 338–346 CrossRef CAS .D. Gupta, D. Kabra, N. Kolishetti, S. Ramakrishnan and K. S. Narayan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 226–232 CrossRef CAS .R. C. Mulherin, S. Jung, S. Huettner, K. Johnson, P. Kohn, M. Sommer, S. Allard, U. Scherf and N. C. Greenham, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4846–4851 CrossRef CAS .C.-H. Chen, C.-H. Hsieh, M. Dubosc, Y.-J. Cheng and C.-S. Hsu, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 697–708 CrossRef CAS .S. Y. Chou and W. Ding, Opt. Express, 2013, 21, A60–A76 CrossRef CAS .S. S. Kim, J. Na, D. Y. Kim and Y. C. Nah, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93(7), 073307 CrossRef .N. C. Lindquist, W. A. Luhman, S. H. Oh and R. J. Holmes, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93(12), 123308 CrossRef .R. A. Pala, J. White, E. Barnard, J. Liu and M. L. Brongersma, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3504 CrossRef CAS .A. J. Morfa, K. L. Rowlen, T. H. Reilly III, M. J. Romero and J. Van De Lagemaat, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 013504 CrossRef .S.-B. Rim, S. Zhao, S. R. Scully, M. D. McGehee and P. Peumans, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 243501 CrossRef .D.-H. Ko, J. R. Tumbleston, L. Zhang, S. Williams, J. M. DeSimone, R. Lopez and E. T. Samulski, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2742–2746 CrossRef CAS .W. Bai, Q. Gan, G. Song, L. Chen, Z. Kafafi and F. Bartoli, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, A620–A630 CrossRef CAS .T. D. Heidel, J. K. Mapel, M. Singh, K. Celebi and M. A. Baldo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 093506 CrossRef .M.-G. Kang, T. Xu, H. J. Park, X. Luo and L. J. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4378–4383 CrossRef CAS .M. A. Sefunc, A. K. Okyay and H. V. Demir, Opt. Express, 2011, 19, 14200–14209 CrossRef CAS .H. Shen, P. Bienstman and B. Maes, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 073109 CrossRef .B. Wu, X. Liu, T. Z. Oo, G. Xing, N. Mathews and T. C. Sum, Plasmonics, 2012, 7, 677–684 CrossRef CAS .S. Vedraine, P. Torchio, D. Duché, F. Flory, J.-J. Simon, J. Le Rouzo and L. Escoubas, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, S57–S64 CrossRef CAS .D. M. O'Carroll, A. X. Collopy, V. E. Ferry and H. A. Atwater, in 25th European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference and Exhibition,  2010, pp. 834–837 Search PubMed .D. Duche, P. Torchio, L. Escoubas, F. Monestier, J.-J. Simon, F. Flory and G. Mathian, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 1377–1382 CrossRef CAS .A. Abass, H. Shen, P. Bienstman and B. Maes, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 109, 023111 CrossRef .J.-L. Wu, F.-C. Chen, Y.-S. Hsiao, F.-C. Chien, P. Chen, C.-H. Kuo, M. H. Huang and C.-S. Hsu, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 959–967 CrossRef CAS .B. Yu, S. Goodman, A. Abdelaziz and D. M. O'Carroll, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 151106 CrossRef .J. Yang, J. You, C.-C. Chen, W.-C. Hsu, H. Tan, X. W. Zhang, Z. Hong and Y. Yang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6210–6217 CrossRef CAS .B. Zeng, Q. Gan, Z. H. Kafafi and F. J. Bartoli, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 113, 063109 CrossRef .C.-S. Kao, F.-C. Chen, C.-W. Liao, M. H. Huang and C.-S. Hsu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 193902 CrossRef .D. C. Lim, K.-D. Kim, S.-Y. Park, E. M. Hong, H. O. Seo, J. H. Lim, K. H. Lee, Y. Jeong, C. Song, E. Lee, Y. D. Kim and S. Cho, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9803–9807 CAS .J. Wang, Y.-J. Lee, A. S. Chadha, J. Yi, M. L. Jespersen, J. J. Kelley, H. M. Nguyen, M. Nimmo, A. V. Malko, R. A. Vaia, W. Zhou and J. W. P. Hsu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 85–91 CAS .Q. Gan, F. J. Bartoli and Z. H. Kafafi, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2385–2396 CrossRef CAS .I. D. Rees, K. L. Robinson, A. B. Holmes, C. R. Towns and R. O'Dell, MRS Bull., 2002, 451–455 CrossRef CAS .S. A. Choulis, V. E. Choong, M. K. Mathai and F. So, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 113503 CrossRef .Y.-S. Tyan, J. Photonics Energy, 2011, 1, 011009 CrossRef .H. Yan, Q. Huang, J. Cui, J. G. C. Veinot, M. M. Kern and T. J. Marks, Adv. Mater., 2003, 10, 835–838 CrossRef .X. H. Li, W. E. Sha, W. C. H. Choy, D. D. S. Fung and F. X. Xie, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 7200–7206 CAS .M. Grell, D. D. C. Bradley, M. Inbasekaran and E. P. Woo, Adv. Mater., 1997, 9, 798–802 CrossRef CAS .M. Misaki, Y. Ueda, S. Nagamatsu, Y. Yoshida, N. Tanigaki and K. Yase, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 6926–6931 CrossRef CAS .K. S. Whitehead, M. Grell, D. D. C. Bradley, M. Jandke and P. Strohriegl, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 76, 2946–2948 CrossRef CAS .J. Wang, M. S. Gudiksen, X. Duan, Y. Cui and C. M. Lieber, Science, 2001, 293, 1455–1457 CrossRef CAS .J. C. Johnson, H. Yan, P. Yang and R. J. Saykally, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 8816–8823 CrossRef CAS .H.-M. Liem, P. Etchegoin, K. S. Whitehead and D. D. C. Bradley, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 66–72 CrossRef CAS .H. Yanagi, T. Ohara and T. Morikawa, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1452–1455 CrossRef CAS .F. Balzer, V. G. Bordo, A. C. Simonsen and H.-G. Rubahn, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 67, 115408 CrossRef .K. Takazawa, Y. Kitahama, Y. Kimura and G. Kido, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1293–1296 CrossRef CAS .A. N. Lebedenko, G. Y. Guralchuk, A. V. Sorokin, S. L. Yefimova and Y. V. Malyukin, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 17772–17775 CrossRef CAS .F. Balzer and H.-G. Rubahn, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 17–24 CrossRef CAS .V. S. Volkov, S. I. Bozhevolnyi, V. G. Bordo and H.-G. Rubahn, J. Microsc., 2004, 215, 241–244 CrossRef CAS .S. A. Choulis, M. K. Mathai and V.-E. Choong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 213503 CrossRef .R. Brückner, A. A. Zakhidov, R. Scholz, M. Sudzius, S. I. Hintschich, H. Fröb, V. G. Lyssenko and K. Leo, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 322–326 CrossRef .D. M. O'Carroll, C. E. Hofmann and H. A. Atwater, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1223–1227 CrossRef CAS .B. H. Wallikewitz, M. de la Rosa, J. H.-W. M. Kremer, D. Hertel and K. Meerholz, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 531–534 CrossRef CAS .C. Rothe, F. Galbrecht, U. Scherf and A. Monkman, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2137–2140 CrossRef CAS .R. Xia, G. Heliotis, Y. Hou and D. D. C. Bradley, Org. Electron., 2003, 4, 165–177 CrossRef CAS .M. N. Shkunov, R. Österbacka, A. Fujii, K. Yoshino and Z. V. Vardeny, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 74, 1648–1650 CrossRef CAS .G. Ryu, R. Xia and D. D. C. Bradley, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2007, 19, 056205 CrossRef .G. Heliotis, R. Xia, G. A. Turnbull, P. Andrew, W. L. Barnes, I. D. W. Samuel and D. D. C. Bradley, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 91–97 CrossRef CAS .S. V. Frolov, M. Shkunov, Z. V. Vardeny and K. Yoshino, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1997, 56, R4363–R4366 CrossRef CAS .S. Riechel, C. Kallinger, U. Lemmer, J. Feldmann, A. Gombert, V. Wittwer and U. Scherf, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 77, 2310–2312 CrossRef CAS .R. C. Polson, A. Chipouline and Z. V. Vardeny, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 760–764 CrossRef CAS .N. Sudarkin and P. A. Demkovich, Sov. Phys. Tech. Phys., 1989, 34, 764 Search PubMed .J. Bellessa, C. Bonnand, J. C. Plenet and J. Mugnier, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 036404 CrossRef CAS .M. Ambati, S. H. Nam, E. Ulin-Avila, D. A. Genov, G. Bartal and X. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3998 CrossRef CAS .A. De Luca, M. P. Grzelczk, I. Pastoriza-Santos, L. M. Iiz-Marza, M. La deda, M. Striccoli and G. Strangi, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 5823 CrossRef CAS .M. A. Noginov, G. Zhu, M. Bahoura, J. Adegoke, C. E. Small, B. A. Ritzo, V. P. Drachev and V. M. Shalaev, Opt. Lett., 2006, 31, 3022 CrossRef CAS .I. De Lion and P. Berini, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 161401 CrossRef .G. C. des Francs, P. Bramant, J. Grandidier, A. Bouhelier, J.-C. Weeber and A. Dereux, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, 16327 CrossRef CAS .W. L. Barnes, J. Mod. Opt., 1998, 45, 661 CrossRef CAS .R. J. Walters, R. V. A. van Loon, I. Brunets, J. Schmitz and A. Polman, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 21 CrossRef CAS .J. N. Farahani, D. W. Pohl, H. J. Eisler and B. Hecht, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 017402 CrossRef CAS .P. Anger, P. Bharadwaj and L. Novotny, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 96, 113002 CrossRef .K. R. Catchpole and A. Polman, Plasmonic solar cells, Opt. Express, 2008, 16, 21793–21800 CrossRef CAS .Y. Wang, T. Yang, M. T. Tuominen and M. Achermann, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 102, 163001 CrossRef .D. J. Bergman and M. I. Stockman, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 90, 027402 CrossRef .M. A. Noginov, G. Zhu, A. M. Belgrave, R. Bakker, V. M. Shalaev, E. E. Narimanov, S. Stout, E. Herz, T. Suteewon and U. Wiesner, Nature, 2009, 460, 1110–1112 CrossRef CAS .S. R. Das, IEEE Spectrum, 2009, 46, 14–16 CrossRef .M. I. Stockman, J. Opt., 2010, 12, 024004 CrossRef .M. T. Hill, Y.-S. Oei, B. Smalbrugge, Y. Zhu, T. de Vries, P. J. van Veldhoven, F. W. M. van Otten, T. J. Eijkemans, J. P. Turkiewicz, H. de Waardt, E. J. Geluk, S.-H. Kwon, Y.-H. Lee, R. Nötzel and M. K. Smit, Nat. Photonics, 2001, 1, 589–594 CrossRef .F. Hide, M. A. DiazGarcia, B. J. Schwartz, M. R. Andersson, Q. B. Pei and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1996, 273, 1833–1836 CrossRef CAS .N. Tessler, G. J. Denton and R. H. Friend, Nature, 1996, 382, 695–697 CrossRef CAS .M. D. McGehee, R. Gupta, S. Veenstra, E. Kirk Miller, M. A. Díaz-García and A. J. Heeger, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1998, 58, 7035–7039 CrossRef CAS .
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Molecular structures of some widely-studied conjugated polymer materials: (a) poly(p-phenylene) (PPP) (b) poly(thiophene) (PT), (c) poly(p-phenylene-vinylene) (PPV), (d) poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene) (PFO); (e) poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene-co-bithiophene) (F8T2).	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematics of 1-D, 2-D and 3-D confined conjugated polymer nanostructures. (b) Schematic of a planarized PFO backbone segment, indicating alignment direction (red dashed line). Depending on chain conformation and conjugation length, the optical transition dipole orientation (blue solid line) may be slightly off-axis.112	 

 	Fig. 3  Epifluorescence microscope image of (a) a single melt-wetted PFO nanowire, and (b) a single solution-wetted PFO nanowire.17,69,78	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic of various morphologies of conjugated polymer-based photovoltaics. Note that in most cases, the electron donor is the conjugated polymer; the electron acceptor is typically a fullerene-derivative, but may also be a conjugated polymer. (a) Bilayer heterojunction; (b) bulk heterojunction; (c) example of a well-ordered bulk heterojunction fabricated via nanoimprint lithography using a grating; (d) conjugated polymer nanowires blended with in electron acceptor matrix; (e) core–shell nanorods fabricated via melt-assisted wetting of anodic alumina nanotemplates (formation of conjugated polymer nanotubes), followed by filling of the nanotubes by an electron acceptor; (f) nanoparticles consisting of a blend of two conjugated polymers fabricated via a miniemulsion technique.	 

 	Fig. 5  Possible orientations of polymer chains in thin films of P3HT. (a) Edge-on, in which lamellar stacking from the hexyl side chains is dominant. The crystallographic notation is given as: a, the distance of the lamellar stack; b, the π–π stacking distance (i.e., the faces of the thiophene units); c, the distance between two adjacent hexyl side chains. (b) Face-on, in which the π–π stacking is dominant.141	 

 	Fig. 6  Model for transport in low-MW (a) and high-MW (b) films. Charge carriers are trapped on nanorods (highlighted in yellow) in the low-MW case. Long chains in high-MW films bridge the ordered regions and soften the boundaries (marked with an arrow). Reproduced with permission from American Chemical Society.142	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic of light management schemes for a bulk-heterojunction photovoltaic device: including use of nanostructured electrodes (e.g., nanoporous metal thin films, and nanoparticle (NP) arrays) and addition of nanorod scatterers to the active layer.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Monomer P3HT–gold nanorod antenna. (b) A dimer Au–P3HT–Au nanorod antenna. (c) PL lifetime decay curves for a P3HT thin film, nanorod, monomer P3HT–Au nanorod antenna and a dimer Au–P3HT–Au nanorod antenna.110,215	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
