Strategies to improve the photocatalytic activity of TiO 2 : 3D nanostructuring and heterostructuring with graphitic carbon nanomaterials  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9NR01260E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9NR01260E
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 7025-7040Strategies to improve the photocatalytic activity of TiO2: 3D nanostructuring and heterostructuring with graphitic carbon nanomaterials

        
          
            Kisung 
            Lee†
a, 
      
        
          
            Hyewon 
            Yoon†
a, 
      
        
          
            Changui 
            Ahn
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Junyong 
            Park
          
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Seokwoo 
            Jeon
          
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, KAIST Institute for the Nanocentury, Advanced Battery Center, KAIST, Daejeon 34141, Republic of Korea. E-mail: jeon39@kaist.ac.kr
bEngineering Ceramic Center, Korea Institute of Ceramic Engineering and Technology, Icheon, Gyeonggi 467-843, Republic of Korea
cSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Kumoh National Institute of Technology, Gumi, Gyeongbuk 39177, Republic of Korea
Received 
      10th February 2019
    , Accepted 19th March 2019First published on 20th March 2019AbstractTiO2-based photocatalysis has been considered to be one of the most promising avenues for environmental remediation including water purification. However, several technical issues such as the limited surface area of bulk TiO2, the large band gap of TiO2, and rapid charge recombination still limit the practical application of TiO2 photocatalysts. Therefore, here we focus on two structural design strategies: (i) monolithic three-dimensional (3D) nanostructuring, and (ii) heterostructuring with graphitic carbon nanomaterials. A monolithic 3D nanostructure enables maximal surface area in a given volume and efficient reuse of the photocatalyst without recollection. Heterostructuring with carbon nanomaterials helps achieve maximal utilization of the solar spectrum and charge separation and provides efficient TiO2 photocatalysts. In this review, recent progress on TiO2 photocatalysts toward the abovementioned strategies will be summarized. Further discussion and direction will provide insights into the rational design of highly efficient TiO2 photocatalysts, and help develop advanced photocatalyst models.Kisung LeeKisung Lee is a Master's student of Materials Science and Engineering at Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST) under the supervision of Prof. Seokwoo Jeon. He received his Bachelor's degree from Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST) in 2018. His current research focuses on synthesis of three-dimensional nanostructured metal oxide and their applications.Hyewon YoonHyewon Yoon is a PhD candidate of Materials Science and Engineering at KAIST under the supervision of Prof. Seokwoo Jeon. She received her Master's degree in Materials Science and Engineering from KAIST in 2015. Her current research focuses on design and synthesis of luminescent carbon nanomaterials and their optoelectronic applications.Changui AhnChangui Ahn is a researcher of Engineering Ceramic Center at Korea Institute of Ceramic Engineering and Technology (KICET), Republic of Korea. He received the PhD in Materials Science and Engineering from KAIST in 2018. He then worked as a postdoctoral researcher at KAIST in 2018. His research focuses on development of 3D structured metals and ceramics for photochemical, mechanical and thermal applications.Junyong ParkJunyong Park is an assistant professor of Materials Science and Engineering at Kumoh National Institute of Technology. He received his PhD in Materials Science and Engineering from KAIST in 2015. He worked as a postdoctoral associate at MIT until 2016. His current research focuses on the development of functional nanostructured materials based on 3D nanopatterning and biomimetics.Seokwoo JeonProf. Seokwoo Jeon is a Chair professor of Materials Science and Engineering at KAIST. He received a PhD degree in Materials Science and Engineering in 2006 at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Currently, his group specializes in the synthesis of low-dimensional materials, including graphene, graphene quantum dots, and WS2, and fabrication of metallic or ceramic 3D nanostructures, all of which demonstrate potential in various applications.
1. Introduction
The application of photocatalysts for water purification has received tremendous attention around the world because it potentially uses inexhaustible sunlight, and operates at room temperature without additional power sources. Among the various photocatalytic materials, titanium dioxide (TiO2) is known as the most competitive material due to its excellent photoactivity, high oxidation potential, physical and chemical stability, nontoxicity, and earth abundancy.1–3 In general, photoinduced pollutant decomposition is primarily related to redox reactions on the surface of TiO2. Photon absorption inside and at the surface of TiO2 generates excited electron–hole pairs, which migrate to the surface of the catalyst where they participate in a degradation reaction with the pollutant (eqn (1)). During the reaction, most of the electron–hole pairs undergo recombination within a few nanoseconds, and only a small portion of the charge carriers are involved in the redox reaction (∼10%).1 The generated hole (h+) reacts with the surface-trapped O2 or hydroxyl group (–OH) to produce a hydroxyl radical, which is a strong oxidizing agent for most organic/inorganic molecules, as indicated in the following equations (eqn (2), (3) and (6)). The generated electron (e−) participates in forming a superoxide anion radical, which is finally transformed to the hydroxyl radical (eqn (4) and (5)).4 hν (<\!\!388 nm) → e− + h+(1) h+ + H2O → ˙OH + H+(2) h+ + –OH → ˙OH(3) e− + O2 → O2˙−(4) (5) R + ˙OH → intermediate → CO2 + H2O (R: pollutant)(6)
A technical issue that is directly related to photocatalytic efficiency is increasing the surface area of TiO2. This is because the photodegradation of the pollutants entirely depends on the oxidation–reduction reaction occurring on the TiO2 surface, as described above. To increase the surface area, many researchers have developed various synthesis methods to produce TiO2-based nanoparticles,5 nanorods,6,7 and nanoflakes.8,9 These dispersible nanoparticulate TiO2 have shown high photocatalytic efficiency due to their large surface area, but they are difficult to recycle after use, which causes problems of secondary contamination and operational expense. TiO2 3D nanostructuring in a monolithic network can achieve both recyclability and high photocatalytic activity derived from porous network which ensures an effective mass transportation for various reactions and productions, a strong photon trapping ability, and an enlarging specific surface area. For example, Ahn's study reported that monolithic porous TiO2 structure shows almost 3.5 times higher photocatalytic performance than non-porous TiO2 thin film, which is originated from the merits of porous structure.33 E. Eftekhari et al. showed that well-designed high ordered porous structure can maximize light absorbance efficiency by slow photon effect, and it led high photocatalytic efficiency without chemical modification.38 However, the generation methods, such as electrospinning,10 3D printing,11,12 and Ti anodization,13,14 are limited in terms of reproducibility, high throughput processing, simplicity, and precise morphology control over a large area.
Another issue is that the generation of electron–hole pairs is only realized by absorption within the ultraviolet (UV) range (∼5% of the solar spectrum) due to the large band gap depending on the polymorphs of TiO2 (>3.0 eV for rutile, >3.2 eV for anatase, >3.13 eV for brookite),15,16 which means that much of the sunlight cannot be used for a photocatalytic reaction. Many researchers have solved this problem by lowering the band gap by doping pure TiO2 with an impurity element (N, S, Fe, etc.).17,18 Absorption from the additional energy states generated by doping can enhance the activity of TiO2via visible light, while intermediate energy states from the introduced atoms and defects can serve as traps for the electron–hole recombination site that degrades the photocatalytic efficiency.19–21 Instead of lowering the band gap of TiO2 through doping, a strategy to physically or chemically attach a heterogeneous material (called a photosensitizer) on TiO2 can enhance the absorption of visible light in the TiO2 matrix in a simple and more flexible way. For the sensitization of TiO2, typical photocatalytic materials such as CdS and WO3 have been mixed with to TiO2 to change the band gap and induce light activation via visible light or to transfer photoactivated electrons using a photosensitizer that absorbs visible light.22 However, these photosensitizers are limited in terms of their toxicity, water-solubility, and high cost.23,24 Therefore, an important issue in this strategy is the selection of inexpensive and nontoxic materials that can achieve efficient electron transfer between the photosensitizer and the TiO2 matrix without electron–hole recombination.
In this work, we will introduce various strategies categorized as (i) template-assisted monolithic 3D nanostructuring, and (ii) heterostructuring with graphitic carbon nanomaterials. Scheme 1 demonstrates the representative effects and models of two strategies.25–32 The strategies in each part will provide solutions for the above issues with an appropriate mechanism and fabrication methods, which will help to acquire and design efficient TiO2 photocatalysts.
 Scheme 1  Schematic diagram of efficient TiO2 photocatalysts according to their functions.25–32 Reprinted with permission from ref. 25, 30 and 32. Copyright 2009, 2010, and 2018 American Chemical Society. Reprinted with permission from ref. 26–29. Copyright 2013, 2017, and 2018 the Royal Society of Chemistry. Reprinted with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2017 Elsevier. 
2. Template-assisted monolithic 3D nanostructuring
As mentioned above, the monolithic form of a TiO2 3D nanostructure enables both recyclability and high photocatalytic activity. Table 1 shows several researches for monolithic type TiO2 photocatalyst used in pollutant degradation. A variety of fabrication methods such as template-assisted,26,33–38 anodization,14,39,40 electrospraying,41 sol–gel,42 and other methods43–45 were possible to construct nanostructured TiO2, and some of them involved different phases and doped state. Their photodegradation performance tested through measuring concentration of dyes in solution. Because each test was performed under individual experimental conditions, we roughly calculated the decomposition rate just a few of nanostructured TiO2 films from the table (Fig. 1). Compared to the immobilized P25 (diameter: ∼25 nm, surface area: 50 m2 g−1) film, which shows a strong MB decomposition ability derived from large surface area, TiO2 thin film from ALD process shows low MB decomposition ability because it utilizes only small portion of TiO2 to the photocatalytic processes. In the case of template-assisted film, they show comparable performance to immobilized P25 film due to its porous property, even though they have much smaller surface area. Among the several routes for monolithic nanostructuring, template-assisted fabrication is advantageous for obtaining not only high performance TiO2 photocatalyst with reproducibility but also a monolithic network with precise control over the porosity and morphology easily.46–48 As we mentioned, high regularity and porosity of nanostructure allow an effective mass transportation, an increasing specific surface area, and a scattering effect that result in enhanced photocatalytic activity. An important issue in template-assisted nanostructuring is how highly-ordered, nanostructured templates are provided efficiently. This chapter will introduce representative methods to make 3D TiO2 photocatalysts based on templates that maximize structural effects via fast and simple methods.
 Fig. 1  Calculated methylene blue (MB) decomposition rate of film type TiO2.14,33,36,41 
Table 1 Various types of nanostructured monolithic TiO2 with its photocatalytic degradation performance




Preparation method
Phase
Product size
Light source
Degradation performance
Ref. no.




Photolitho. and ALD process
Anatase
2 × 2.5 cm2
365 nm UV lamp, 1–1.5 mW cm−2
1 × 10−5 M MB 25 ml, 83% decomposition in 5 h

33



Photolitho. and ALD processes
Anatase, (N doped)
1 × 2 cm2
Solar simulator, 1 mW cm−2 at 525 nm
1 × 10−5 M MB 4 ml, 60% decomposition in 3 h

26



Opal template and Ti precursor solution infiltration.
Anatase (C doped)
n/a
254 nm UV light
10 ppm of PNP 30 ml, 79% decomposition in 1 h

34



AAO templates and ALD process
Anatase
1 cm2
UV light (9 W)
5 × 10−5 M MB, 90% decomposition in 200 min

35



AAO templates and ALD process
Anatase
0.2 cm2
365 nm UV lamp, 1.5 mW cm−2
0.01 mM MB 3 ml, 90% decomposition in 20 h

36



TiO2 sol. particles and PS sphere co-assembling
Anatase
n/a
305 nm UV light
10 μM MB, >95% decomposition in 40 min

43



Eletrospraying P25 on template and pattern transfer
Anatase
2.5 × 5 cm2
350–400 nm lamp
10 μM MB 50 ml 93.8% 4 h

41



Self-assemblies with P25
Anatase
1 cm2
300 nm Hg lamp (125 W)
2 mg succinonitrile, >90% decomposition in 12 min

44



Ti anodization
Anatase
1 cm2
355 nm UV laser
1 × 10−5 M MB 3 ml, 95% decomposition in 250 min

39



Ti anodization
Anatase
1 cm2
355 nm UV laser
1 × 10−5 M MB 2 ml, 90% decomposition in 6 h

14



Ti anodization
Anatase
1 × 2.5 cm2
>400 nm visible light, 120 mW cm−2
0.5 ppm of MB, 50% decomposition in 2.5 h

40



Sol–gel with chelating agent
Anatase + Rutile
50 mg
>420 nm visible light
10−5 M RhB, 50% decomposition in 2 h

42



Hydrothermal synthesis
Brookite
3 × 5 cm2
>309 nm light, 200 mW cm−2
5 μM RhB, 90% decomposition in 1 h

45



Opal template and Ti precursor solution infiltration
Anatase
2 × 2 cm2
250 nm ≤ λ ≤ 780 nm light
0.01 mM RhB 10 ml, 97% decomposition in 1 h

37



Sandwich opal templates and Ti precursor solution infiltration.
Anatase
2 × 2 cm2
Xe lamp, 150 mW cm−2
0.01 mM RhB 10 ml, 99% decomposition in 35 min

38





2.1. 3D anodic aluminum oxide (AAO) template
After H. Masuda developed two-step replication mold processes that provide highly ordered porous AAO sheets,49 AAO has become a very versatile template material hitherto. A large number of papers related to AAO-assisted nanostructured TiO2 have been published in a variety of research fields in the form of two-dimensional (2D) nanotube arrays.50–53 Researchers have struggled to extend the complexity of the structure from a 2D AAO array to a 3D anisotropic structure.54,55 A clever strategy to attain a 3D AAO template was proposed by D. Wang et al., which utilized microstructured Al foils.35 Highly pure Al foil was chemically etched in a mixed solution of CuCl2 and HCl to form microstructured Al (Fig. 2d), followed by a two-step anodization process, resulting in a 3D hierarchical nanoporous alumina template as shown in Fig. 2a. Microstructured Al foil shows unusual phenomena during pore generation. An SEM image (Fig. 2a(iii)) demonstrated that the nanopores formed vertically to all the exposed Al facets in stark contrast to the conventional AAO structure. Additionally, the growth of branched and bended nanopores was observed near the concave and convex edges, respectively (Fig. 2a(iv–v)). This unconventional pore growth is due to the abnormal electric field distribution and internal stresses of microstructured Al. An additional result of microstructuring is that the growing AAO pores undergo noticeably reduced breakdown failure which indicates the destruction of the AAO sheet due to increasing local current flow during the anodization process. Using the 3D AAO template, hierarchically ordered 3D TiO2 nanotube arrays were generated via atomic layer deposition (ALD), followed by etching and annealing processes (Fig. 2b). Fig. 2c verifies the superior photoinduced MB degradation performance of the as-prepared hierarchical 3D TiO2 compared to the 2D TiO2 nanotube arrays fabricated by a conventional AAO template under UV illumination. The excellent performance is definitely attributed to the hierarchical 3D nanostructure. This method makes it possible to reduce the Al sheet anodizing time and its breakdown, but the difficulty in controlling the pore arrangement and the partially non-anodized Al problem should be solved.
 Fig. 2  (a) Top-view SEM micrographs of as-anodized 3D hierarchical nanopore structures (10 wt% H3PO4, 10 °C, 195 V (i–ii)). Cross-sectional view of vertical nanopores and branched nanopores visibly enhanced by black lines (iii–iv). Bent nanopores at the convex edges (v). AAO templates after pore widening treatment (5 wt% H3PO4, 30 °C, 1 h (vi)). (b) Hierarchical 3D TiO2 nanotube arrays fabricated by ALD. SEM images of TiO2 nanotube arrays (i–iv). TEM images of the TiO2 nanotubes with the electron diffraction patterns (v–vi). (c) Methylene blue (5 × 10−5 M) decomposition performance under UV illumination (9 W, maximum abs. at 668 nm) of as-prepared TiO2 nanotube arrays (size: 1 cm2, TiO2 thickness: 20 nm). (d) Microstructured Al foils which are etched from 0.2 M CuCl2 and HCl mixed solution with varying HCl concentrations 0 M (i) and 0.5 M (ii).35 Reprinted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
2.2. Macro/mesoporous self-assembled opal structure
Another method to obtain monolithic TiO2 3D nanostructures is the self-assembly of polymeric spheres. Compared to AAO, self-assemblies are a faster and more scalable method, and its high-ordered structure has already been lively studied in photonics,56,57 a battery,58 a catalyst,59 and other applications.60 In particular, in terms of photocatalysts, self-assemblies are favorable for producing macro/mesoporous inverse opal structures that show higher photocatalytic activity due to a large surface area from the mesoporosity and light trapping and mass accessibility from macroporosity.34,61–63 These multiporous nanostructures can be obtained easily by using a surfactant-dissolved sol–gel process. For instance, Y. Fu et al. infiltrated triblock copolymer (P123)-dispersed titanium precursor solution into the interstitial sites of an assembled polystyrene sphere opal structure to build an ordered macro/mesoporous TiO2 inverse opal structure and confirmed its high photocatalytic performance.64 A more advanced approach was introduced by L. N. Quan et al. (Fig. 3a).34 They utilized P123 not only as a molder for formation of a mesoporous structure but also as a carbon source, creating a visible light sensitive TiO2 photocatalyst with improved performance. Although the additional UV stabilization and carbonization steps (under Ar gas, 600 °C) led to very thin, shrunk inverse opal structure with a reduced surface area (mTiO2: 114.4 m2 g−1, mcTiO2: 75.1 m2 g−1, Fig. 3b), superior photocatalytic performance compared to surfactant-free, and noncarbonization inverse opal structures was obtained under either UV and visible light irradiation (Fig. 3d). They described that the carbonized polymeric soft template produces additional electronic states above the valence band (VB) of TiO2 which contribute to decreasing the band gap of TiO2 (Eg = 2.9 eV, Fig. 3c). Moreover, converted carbon moieties may act as a channel to extract electrons from the conduction band (CB) of TiO2, thereby decreasing the rate of recombination.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic of fabrication processes of mTiO2 and mC-TiO2 inverse opals. (b) FESEM images of mTiO2 (i) and mC-TiO2 (ii) inverse opals. Insets are the corresponding digital images of the resulting samples obtained by scraping the film off the glass substrate. (c) UV-Vis absorbance spectra and Tauc plots of neat TiO2, mTiO2, and mC-TiO2 inverse opals. (d) Photocatalytic degradation ratio of p-nitro-phenol (PNP, 10 ppm with 30 ml water) using as-prepared samples under visible light (Xe lamp equipped with 420 nm cut-off filter, (i)) and UV irradiation (λ = 254 nm, (ii)).34 Reprinted with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2014 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
2.3. Interference lithography – proximity field nanopatterning
Two preparation methods for 3D nanostructured template have been introduced thus far. However, these techniques are unfavorable in terms of reproducibility and the formation of a uniform 3D nanostructure over a large region in a short time. Photolithography, is a good alternative for efficient preparation of 3D nano-scale templates. Lithographic processes can fabricate a well-defined template in a relatively short time (>100 min) regardless of the fabrication volume,33 which is better than that for other templates (AAO: 3–30 h, PS self-assembly: 4–6 h).34,35,65 For three-dimensional photolithography, several studies have been conducted with accompanying tools such as an elaborately calculated phase mask,66–69 truncated pyramidal prism,70 direct ink-writing,12 and two-photon lithography.71 In particular, a technique called proximity field nanopatterning (PnP) can acquire large-sized (>4 × 4 inch2) and highly ordered monolithic 3D nanostructures through a single exposure of light using an elastomeric phase mask. The PnP technique is fundamentally based on a self-imaging phenomenon called the Talbot effect. When the ordered patterns of the phase mask have a periodicity that corresponds to the wavelength of the incident light, diffraction beams are generated after light passes through the phase mask. As diffraction beams propagate, ordered interference patterns occur as well as formation of repeated self-images in the normal direction of the phase mask. The ordered interference patterns are transferred on a negative-tone photoresist (SU-8) film by irradiation with a planar laser beam through the phase mask, which is tightly contacted to the spin-coated photoresist film. The alternating light intensity of the interference patterns generates a highly ordered 3D continuous nanostructure after subsequent post-exposure baking and developing steps. The reproducibility and scalability of the PnP technique has already been applied for various applications, such as an energy device,72,73 a catalyst,74 a sensor,75,76 a photonic devices,76 and nanocomposites.77 More technical details of the PnP process can be found in previous studies.66

2.3.1. 3D TiO2 nanoshell structure. 
The 3D polymeric templates prepared by the PnP technique possess a distinctive body centered tetragonal (BCT) unit cell as described in Fig. 4a. This is a representative feature of the Talbot effect, where a phase-shifted self-image appears in the middle of two repeated self-images. C. Ahn et al. attempted to deposit titania nanoshells uniformly on this polymeric 3D structure (1 × 1 inch2) by ALD (Fig. 4) to obtain monolithically nanostructured 3D TiO2.33 The as-prepared polymeric 3D nanostructure is likely to lose its shape due to a collapse of the structure during TiO2 deposition at high temperatures (>100 °C). In this regard, deposition through ALD was conducted at 80 °C, and operated with at least 300 cycles (23 nm) to sustain the structure after the template removal (Fig. 4b). After TiO2 deposition by the ALD process, a two-step calcination process was performed. It consisted of a preannealing (350 °C, 5 h) step, which was essential for densification of the deposited titania to avoid structural collapse at a high temperature (500 °C), and a calcination (500 °C, 2 h) step, where the template removal and crystallization of the deposited TiO2 shell (to the anatase phase) occurred simultaneously. Fig. 4c represents the photocatalytic performance of the 3D TiO2 nanoshell structure. The result exhibited comparable performance with a film consisting of P25 nanoparticles, although the surface area of a P25 film might be higher than that of nanostructured TiO2 for the same film thickness. Well-arranged submicron pores enhance the accessibility of the reactants unlike the P25 film, whose random pores limit the accessibility of the reactants. Moreover, since the 3D TiO2 nanoshell had a monolithic form, recyclable use of the nanoshell was achieved without recollection process and performance degradation (Fig. 4d).
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of fabrication steps for a 3D nanoshell TiO2 and the corresponding SEM images. (b) Cross-sectional images of uniformly fabricated 3D nanoshell TiO2 obtained using proximity-field nanopatterning (PnP) and ALD process. Patterned sample is getting opaque with increasing the number of ALD cycles. (c) Methylene blue (MB) decomposition rate under UV irradiation (1 mW cm−2, λ = 365 nm). (d) Recyclability test of 3D nanoshell TiO2 (300 cycles) and a P25 film.33 Reprinted with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2013 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 


2.3.2. N-Doped 3D TiO2 nanoshell structure. 
The aforementioned monolithic 3D nanoshell structure ensures reusability and superior performance for photocatalysis in water. However, the intrinsic limitation of TiO2, which is only sensitive to UV light irradiation, remains a critical issue. Recently, S. Cho et al. proposed a new approach to make visible-light sensitive 3D structured N-doped TiO2 by ALD. The conversion of TiO2 into N-doped TiO2 was achieved through thermal treatment of TiO2 under a nitrogen-abundant atmosphere.78–80 However, the harsh conditions of toxic gases (e.g., NH3, NO, etc.) and high temperatures (<800 °C) to introduce N atoms into TiO278 are not industry-friendly, making preservation of the 3D nanostructure without collapse difficult. Therefore, direct conversion from TiN to an N-doped 3D TiO2 nanoshell was attempted in an atmospheric environment. Subsequent TiN deposition via ALD onto the 3D TiO2 nanoshell structure, which was prepared in the aforementioned manner, formed a sandwich shell structure with a total thickness of 40 nm (Fig. 5a). The conversion of the deposited TiN into N-doped TiO2 was carried out under an atmospheric environment at 550 °C.81 The fabricated N-doped 3D TiO2 nanoshell structure still maintained high porosity (∼90% air) without structural breakdown (Fig. 5b–d) and preserved its recyclability in photocatalysis. An optical investigation (Fig. 5e) revealed redshifted absorbance spectra derived from the introduced N 2p energy state, along with a reduced band gap (Eg = 2.75 eV). The MB decomposition performance of the 3D N-doped TiO2 nanostructure was 134% higher than that of an unstructured N-doped TiO2 film and 33% higher than that of an undoped 3D TiO2 nanostructure under solar irradiation (Fig. 5f and g). This result shows the improved photocatalytic performance through the synergetic effects of nanostructuring and doping.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of fabrication process flow. (b) Digital image of a large area (625 mm2) 3D N-doped TiO2 film. (c) Cross-sectional SEM image of a 3D N-doped TiO2 film and (d) magnified view of (c). (e) Absorbance spectra of the undoped and N-doped 3D TiO2 films (inset: Tauc plot). (f) Normalized decomposition ratio of MB solutions with the unstructured and undoped, unstructured and N-doped, 3D undoped, and 3D N-doped TiO2 films under UV (λ = 365 nm) and solar irradiation for 3 h. (g) Comparison of MB decomposition performance of different samples under solar spectrum irradiation.26 Reprinted with permission from ref. 26. Copyright 2018 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Nanostructuring with a monolithic form assisted by a sacrificial template is an effective and practical way to obtain a scalable TiO2 photocatalyst. Besides its improved photoactivity due to a large surface area, it is also possible to overcome the limited visible light absorbance of TiO2 by doping of the nanostructure. Further, limitations such as control over the pore arrangement in AAO template, process complexity of a doped nanostructure, and hindered charge separation due to the introduction of intermediate energy sites from dopants should be solved for practical applications in real systems.

3. Heterostructuring with graphitic carbon nanomaterials
Constructing a heterostructure consisting of TiO2 and other photoactive materials can address the recombination issue of photoexcited charge carriers, which is the biggest problem associated with the visible light activation method by introducing dopant or defect states within the TiO2 band gap.20,21 A heterostructure with an optimal band structure can accommodate the photoinduced charge carriers of TiO2, and further visible light activation can also be achieved when using a material that absorbs visible light, resulting in the simultaneous enhancement of the photoactivities and charge carrier separation of TiO2.82,83
In recent years, the hybridization of TiO2 with graphitic carbon nanomaterials has been actively studied to solve the drawbacks of common sensitizers (high cost and toxicity) and to improve the photocatalytic reactivity of TiO2.84,85 Since graphitic carbon nanomaterials have numerous advantages, including great electrochemical properties, high electrical conductivity, simple synthetic methods, and earth abundancy (low cost), they have been widely used in various applications.86,87 Additionally, because graphitic carbon nanomaterials have various shapes and structures, excellent electrical properties and unique electronic structural characteristics, TiO2 hybridized with graphitic carbon nanomaterials is a desirable composite material capable of improving photocatalytic reactivity.88
Considering the basic mechanism of the photocatalytic reaction, the adsorption of the reaction material should occur first, and further light absorption and charge separation must occur to achieve efficient photocatalytic performance.89 Numerous studies have been reported on TiO2 photocatalysts with graphitic carbon nanomaterials, which can be broadly classified into three types along with their roles in the heterostructure: graphitic carbon nanomaterials as an electron acceptor (electron reservoir),90–97 a dopant (for activating visible absorption),91,98,99 and a visible light sensitizer.100–102 In this section, the role of various graphitic carbon nanomaterials, including carbon nanotubes (CNTs), graphene, and graphene quantum dots (GQDs), in enhancing photocatalytic performance is discussed with underlying mechanisms.
3.1. Carbon nanotubes (CNTs)
Among the various carbon nanomaterials, CNTs and graphene have advantages such as high specific surface area, excellent mechanical properties, efficient cost and excellent electrical properties, and simple surface chemical modification to form a chemical bonding or van der Waals interaction with TiO2 (Fig. 6a). CNTs, consisting of graphitic sp2 carbons, can have either metallic and semiconducting properties depending on their chirality.103 Therefore, they are available in the form of both sensitizers that participate in light absorption and electron acceptors (reservoirs) that accept the excited electrons of TiO2 when forming heterostructures with TiO2.
 Fig. 6  (a) Three proposed mechanisms for the CNT-mediated enhancement of photocatalysis.98 Reprinted with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) TEM images of TiO2 coated MWCNTs (i) and magnified TiO2 coated MWCNTs (ii). (c) Decolorization rate of MB on (a) P25, (b) TiO2 nanofibers, (c) mixture of P25 and MWCNTs, (d) mixture of TiO2 nanofibres and MWCNTs, and (e) carbon-doped TiO2 coating on MWCNTs under visible light irradiation (shown in the solid line); and decolorization rate of MB on (f) TiO2 nanofibres and (g) carbon-doped TiO2 coating on MWCNTs without irradiation (shown in the dotted line). (d) Proposed mechanism of synergistic enhancement of visible light photocatalytic activity in carbon-doped TiO2 coating on MWCNTs.91 Reprinted with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2011 Elsevier. 
Woan et al. described three mechanisms for improving the photocatalytic mechanism of CNTs and TiO2 complexes based on the existing literature.98 Three mechanisms have been discussed to explain the improvement of the photocatalytic properties of conventional CNT–TiO2 composites. The first mechanism, involving metallic CNTs, was proposed by Hoffmann et al., where a high-energy excited photon excites electrons from the valence band into the conduction band of anatase TiO2.104 Photogenerated electrons in the space charge region are transferred to the CNTs, and holes remain in the TiO2 to participate in the redox reaction (Fig. 6b(i)). However, the application of metallic CNTs as an electron reservoir increases the efficiency of charge transfer but makes it difficult to efficiently utilize the irradiated light. The second mechanism introduced by Wang et al.105 suggested employing semiconducting CNTs as a sensitizer to transfers electrons to TiO2. Photogenerated electrons are injected into the conduction band of TiO2 to form a superoxide radical by adsorbed molecular oxygen. When this happens, positively charged nanotubes leave holes in the valence band of TiO2 by removing electrons. This positively charged TiO2 reacts with the adsorbed water to form hydroxyl radicals (Fig. 6b(ii)). Unlike these two mechanisms, the use of chemically bonded CNT–TiO2 to form nanocomposites involves a relatively more complex process.106 Ti–O–C bonding in the CNT–TiO2 complex forms carbon dopant states within the TiO2 band gap, which enables the absorption of longer wavelengths due to the formation of additional interband states of carbon, thereby improving the photocatalytic activity (Fig. 6b(iii)).
In 2011, Cong et al. reported multiple roles of CNTs in CNT/TiO2 heterostructures based on the potential of these mechanisms.91 TiO2-coated multiwalled CNTs (MWCNTs) were prepared by the oxidation of TiC-coated MWCNTs, and their photocatalytic properties were observed. First, the strong pollutant adsorption effect of MWCNTs without irradiation was confirmed by observing that a mixture of TiO2 nanofibers and MWCNTs had a much higher MB decoloration rate than pristine TiO2 nanofibers. Second, the carbon-doped TiO2 coating with MWCNTs exhibited a better decoloration rate than the simply mixed TiO2–MWCNTs, indicating that the chemical bonds between TiO2 and MWCNTs play an important role in improving the photocatalytic performance under visible light irradiation. Furthermore, MWCNTs with Fermi levels lower than the CB of TiO2 help to separate electrons by accepting the photogenerated electrons.107 As a result, CNTs can not only help to adsorb pollutants but also act as an electron acceptor and a dopant when CNTs are chemically bonded with TiO2 to form a heterostructure.
3.2. Graphene and graphene oxide (GO)
Similar to CNTs, graphene and graphene oxide have also been reported to increase the photocatalytic performance of TiO2. Unlike CNTs, which have different characteristics according to their chiral vectors, graphene is basically semimetallic but has a band gap in the case of graphene oxide.108 Therefore, graphene and graphene oxides (even reduced graphene oxide) can play a role similar to CNTs when they form heterostructures with TiO2.
In 2012, Kim et al. fabricated TiO2-attached graphene/carbon composite nanofibers (TiO2-CCNFs) and showed their photocatalytic degradation performance under visible light irradiation.92 For the fabrication of TiO2-CCNFs, CCNFs prepared via electrospinning using a homogeneous solution of PAN and graphene were immersed in a titanium n-butoxide (Ti(OnBu)4) solution, followed by heat treatment and carbonization. The carboxyl groups present in graphene enabled chemical bonding with TiO2 particles, allowing the TiO2 nanoparticles to be uniformly distributed without aggregation (Fig. 7a(i)). The TiO2 distributed in the as-prepared TiO2-CCNFs showed a mixed phase of anatase and rutile (Fig. 7a(ii)). The photocatalytic properties of the TiO2-CCNFs were confirmed by a simple dye degradation test, and the degradation performance of the TiO2-CCNFs was better (k = 0.16 min−1) than that of TiO2-carbon nanofibers (TiO2-CNFs, k = 0.012 min−1) without graphene. They explained that the origin of the improved photocatalytic performance is attributed to the graphene in TiO2-CCNFs serving as an electron acceptor (reservoir) for rutile, which promotes charge separation. On the other hand, in anatase TiO2, excited electrons generated by light absorption in graphene are injected into the CB of TiO2, indicating that graphene acts as a photosensitizer (Fig. 7b). Obviously, it has been considered to be predominant that graphene, GO, or reduced GO (rGO) act as an electron acceptor rather than a visible sensitizer when they form a heterostructure with TiO2, which has been experimentally proven by an electron paramagnetic study (EPR).95 However, there have also been a number of reports showing the contribution of the graphene-based materials to the visible light activation.
 Fig. 7  (a) HRTEM image of a 5GO–OTiO2 heterojunction. (b) Schematic illustrating the proposed charge transfer and separation processes in GO–OTiO2 binary nanocomposite.92 Reprinted with permission from ref. 92. Copyright 2015 Elsevier. (c) Schematic illustration of synthesis steps for graphene-wrapped anatase TiO2 NPs and corresponding SEM images. (d) UV-visible spectra of bare anatase TiO2 NPs, graphene-TiO2 NPs, and graphene-TiO2 NPs (two-step hydrothermal). (e) Suggested mechanism for the photocatalytic degradation of MB by graphene-wrapped anatase TiO2 NPs under visible-light.109 Reprinted with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (f) TEM image of the TiO2–CCNF hybrids (i) and their XRD pattern (ii). (g) Schematic illustration of photocatalysis with TiO2–CCNF hybrids.99 
Lee et al. reported the importance of the interaction between Ti atoms and C atoms in the visible light activity of TiO2 by red-shifting (2.80 eV) the absorbance tail of GO-wrapped amorphous TiO2 through one-step hydrothermal treatment for simultaneous GO reduction and TiO2 crystallization (Fig. 7c and d). This is much higher band gap reduction than the case of GO-wrapping and reduction of the anatase TiO2 pre-crystallized by a two-step method (3.19 eV). During the one-step hydrothermal treatment, the Ti atoms are rearranged during the conversion of TiO2 to amorphous anatase, and at the same time the GO is reduced and unpaired electrons are formed. In this process, the favourable interaction of the unpaired electrons and Ti atoms decreases the conduction band level of TiO2 as like a doping effect, resulting in decrease of the band gap. As a result, the conduction band of TiO2, which is originally higher than the excited level of MB, is lowered, so that the excited electrons of MB flow efficiently through the graphene to the TiO2 conduction band (Fig. 7e).109
Similarly, Qiu et al. also introduced the importance of the interaction between TiO2 and GO in the visible light activity of TiO2 through the self doping effect of Ti3+. They prepared Ti3+-self-doped TiO2-graphene by one-step vacuum activation technology and found that visible light activation was enabled by the Ti3+ self-doping effect, the resulting surface bonds between TiO2 and graphene oxide (GO, simultaneous loading of TiO2 nanoparticles onto a graphene surface), and a reduction of GO.99 As shown in Fig. 7f, GO is cleaved into small-sized graphene during the vacuum activation process, and the decreased graphene size facilitates the interaction between the TiO2 nanoparticles and graphene, thereby improving the photocatalytic efficiency. The smaller the size of graphene is, the more edges that can bond with TiO2, and the photoexcited electrons generated from TiO2 are more easily transferred to graphene. Moreover, as GO is reduced to graphene, Ti–O–C bonding is formed, which forms self-doping of Ti3+, resulting in a shallow trap inside the band gap (Fig. 7g).110,111 From the formation of surface shallow defect states by the introduction of Ti–O–C bonding, the band gap energy of P25 (3.03 eV) slightly reduced to 2.98 eV. As a result, the visible light activity was improved by the dopant effect. Furthermore, they demonstrated that graphene plays a major role in the adsorption of contaminants by confirming that the amount of methyl orange (MO) adsorption increases with increasing graphene content.112 These results show that graphene contributes to the adsorption of pollutants and to charge acceptor and visible light activation, similar to CNTs. However, because graphene and CNTs have a very small or no band gap, their visible light activation is based on C doping rather than the direct absorption of visible light. Thus, their visible light activation mechanisms are limited by defect states that can adversely affect efficient charge separation. In addition to the aforementioned studies, it has been confirmed in various previous studies that the visible light activity of TiO2 photocatalysts increases when TiO2 has a heterogeneous structure with CNTs or graphene. However, since CNT and graphene do not have a distinct and wide band gap and because contribute to the performance improvement, it has been difficult to clearly identify the enhancement in visible light absorption by CNT and graphene.
3.3. Graphene quantum dots (GQDs) and carbon quantum dots (CQDs)
In contrast to various graphitic materials and large-sized graphene, carbon quantum dots (CQDs, or carbon nanodots (CNDs)) and graphene quantum dots (GQDs, or graphene nanodots (GNDs)) have a relatively large band gap100,113–115 that can improve the photocatalytic performance of TiO2 in a different way from the two main mechanisms (electron reservoir and doping) of graphene and CNTs.91,92,98 Due to a number of advantages of GQDs and CQDs including chemical, physical and optical tunability,116 abundant edge site,114 low cytotoxicity117,118 and chemical stability, they have been considered as desirable materials for various catalytic applications such as selective oxidation and reduction,119 water splitting, hydrogen and oxygen evolution, and pollutant degradation.120 Among various benefits which can be taken from GQDs and GQDs in photocatalytic reaction, the most efficient point is obviously the visible light activation by their band gap. The possible methods of improving the light absorption or activity with GQDs and CQDs can be described in two mechanisms: (i) sensitizing with heterogeneous materials such as dye or semiconductor quantum dots (QDs) with a narrower band gap121 and (ii) obtaining a new absorption band through interfacial charge transfer (IFCT) or ligand-to-metal charge transfer (LMCT) by forming a charge transfer complex with surface adsorbates.22 These two methods are mainly achieved by heterostructure formation through the hybridization of TiO2 with a heterogeneous material, and the mechanism of enhanced photoactivity changes depending on the properties of the heterogeneous material or binding geometry.22 Due to their relatively large band gap, GQDs and CQDs can enhance the photocatalytic activity of TiO2 by absorption alone, compared to semiconducting materials (CdS, CdSe, WO3, etc.)122–124 that have been commonly used as sensitizers of TiO2 photocatalysts. In addition, they mostly consist of sp2 carbon, unlike inorganic semiconducting QDs, and the formation of a charge transfer complex with TiO2 can also be obtained, which may result in more efficient absorption and charge separation.

3.3.1. High-oxidized CQDs and GQDs as sensitizers (charge injection). 
Recently, a number of studies on the application of GQDs and CQDs to catalysts have been reported.84,100,102,125 In the case of a GQD/TiO2 or CQD/TiO2 complex prepared by physical adsorption, the efficiency of photocatalytic decomposition increases mainly due to the efficient adsorption of organic pollutants onto the GQDs or CQDs. However, it has been reported that when there is strong chemical interaction between GQDs or CQDs and a semiconductor such as TiO2, the photocatalytic activity can be further enhanced by stabilizing the complex and making the charge transfer more efficient.126,127
Yu et al. tested the photocatalytic performance of a CQD/P25 complex under UV-visible and visible (>450 nm) light with a CQD/P25 complex of the “dyade” structure, where the P25 surface was modified with a CQD, and obtained improved light absorption and performance (Fig. 8a and b). The authors explained that this improved photocatalytic performance was achieved by the dual role of the CQD in TiO2. Under UV-visible light irradiation, the CQD acts as an electronic reservoir as in graphene and CNTs to improve the efficient separation of the photoinduced electron–hole pairs of P25. However, under visible light irradiation, CQDs act as a photosensitizer, such as an organic dye, forming a visible light responsive “dyade” structure of the CQD to P25 (Fig. 8c). After formation of the dyade structure, absorption, which was not observed in pristine P25, was observed in the range of 410–600 nm. This was due to the absorption of the CQD with a relatively small band gap (<2.5 eV). As a result, the excited electrons of the CQD formed by visible absorption became available for injection into P25 to enable sensitization.128
 Fig. 8  (a) HRTEM images of CQDs/P25-1.5 wt%. (b) UV-Vis diffuse reflectance spectra of P25 and CQDs/P25 with different amounts of CQDs. (c) Schematic illustration for the photocatalytic mechanism over the CQDs/P25 under UV-Vis and visible light irradiation.128 Reprinted with permission from ref. 128 Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Cross section SEM image (i) and HRTEM image (ii) of GQDs-sensitized TiO2 HNWs. (e) Optical absorbance spectra of pristine and GQDs coated TiO2 electrode (inset: photoluminescence and optical absorbance spectrum of GQDs solution (Ex = 365 nm). (f) Photoexcitation charge carriers generated at GQDs/TiO2 interfaces.101 Reprinted with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2016 Elsevier. 
Similar to CQDs, GQDs have a band gap, can provide many active sites due to their small size and two-dimensional disc-like structure and can suppress electron–hole recombination, which is one of the strategies used to improve photocatalytic reactivity. Thus, GQDs are a candidate for improving both photoactivity and active sites.129,130 In 2016, Sudhagar et al. confirmed the optical carrier accumulation and recombination process after forming a heterostructure by surface modification of the GQDs (lateral size of 2 nm) with TiO2 hollow nanowires (HNWs, length 3 mm, diameter 100–250 nm) by electrostatic attraction (Fig. 8d).101 The light scattering of TiO2 increased by using the hollow structure of TiO2, and at the same time, the light utilization was improved by the adsorbing GQD (Fig. 8d). As shown in Fig. 8e, TiO2 HNWs exhibit enhanced absorption of UV and visible light after GQD adsorption due to the long tail of the absorption band of the GQD (∼600 nm), which emits yellow photoluminescence by its high oxidation state.131 In addition, the band alignment of TiO2 and the GQD in the TiO2 HNW-GQD heterostructure resulted in photogenerated holes in the GQD that could be injected into a solution for water oxidation, as well as in holes in TiO2, and photogenerated electrons of GQD that could be injected into TiO2 to enhance the photocatalytic reaction efficiency. This shows that a physically adsorbed GQD (or CQD), unlike the previously described chemically bonded CQD/P25, can also be used as a sensitizer for TiO2. In the case of graphitic materials such as GQDs and CQDs applied to TiO2 as shown above, the most common method of making GQDs and CQDs is based on a harsh reaction of strong acids and graphitic materials. Therefore, it is easy for GQDs or CQDs to possess defect or oxygen functional groups. Accordingly, the synthesized GQDs or CQDs have a relatively narrow band gap, and the increase in the visible light absorption of TiO2 is caused by a number of defective states generated during the synthesis of the GQDs (CQDs).100,125 Moreover, their absorption in the narrow band gap region due to their high oxidation degree generally corresponds to the band tail, so the increase in absorption increase is not noticeable.


3.3.2. Charge transfer complex with low-oxidized GQDs (direct charge transfer). 
Another way to increase the light absorption of TiO2 is to from a charge transfer complex. When a transition metal or transition metal oxide with a high oxidation state, such as TiO2, is chemically bonded with an organic molecule whose HOMO/LUMO levels are higher than the VB/CB of the transition metal or its oxide, direct charge transfer from the organic molecule to the metal region can be achieved. Therefore, additional absorption occurs, corresponding to the energy transferred from the HOMO level to the CB, resulting in additional absorption in the non-band gap region of each material. Because GQDs have the characteristics of dye molecules capable of absorbing and emitting light and can also be considered an organic material such as catechol or ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), which are representative adsorbates,22,132 it can be expected that both approaches (sensitization and direct charge transfer) would be possible by controlling the binding geometry between the GQD and TiO2.
Accordingly, if GQDs with broad and discrete band gaps with a HOMO level slightly higher than the VB of TiO2 are applied, it can be expected that additional absorption by charge transfer will occur in the UV-visible region.
Our group found that low-oxidized GQDs obtained from graphite intercalation compounds (GICs) undergo mild oxidation, unlike with conventional GQD fabrication methods using strong acids, which result in low defect levels and discrete band gaps.32,100,115 In addition, GQDs with such a discrete band gap unusually increase TiO2 light absorption by forming a GQD/TiO2 complex by chemically modifying TiO2 nanoparticles (NPs).32 A low-oxidized GQD was chemically bonded to the surface of TiO2 NPs through a hydrothermal process to facilitate direct charge transfer absorption of the GQD/TiO2 heterostructure (Fig. 9a and b). The chemically bonded GQD/TiO2 complex exhibited a remarkable absorption enhancement in both the UV and visible regions even with only a very small amount of GQDs (optical density ∼283% and extinction coefficient ∼243% at the absorption maximum). The large increase in the absorption of TiO2 was attributed to the fact that the photogenerated electron of the GQD was directly transferred to the CB of TiO2 by orbital coupling derived from the strong interaction between TiO2 and the low-oxidized GQD with a discrete band gap. Additionally, by comparing various oxidized graphitic materials, such as GO and GOQD, it was confirmed that only mildly oxidized GQDs with a discrete band gap satisfy the requirement for the direct charge transfer phenomenon. In addition to strong absorption, it is expected that the charge transfer absorption phenomenon could effectively separate the photoinduced e–h pairs of the GQD and TiO2 into holes toward the GQD and electrons toward TiO2. Both the high-oxidized GQD or CQD and low-oxidized GQD play roles in visible light activation and charge separation, but unlike the low absorption by the band tail in high-oxidized GQD or CQD, in the case of low-oxidized GQD, absorption by direct transfer from the GQD to TiO2 makes it possible to increase the photoactivity in the entire UV-visible region (250–600 nm) more efficiently. As a result, the practical applicability of GQDs as a photocatalytic material was proven by the pollutant adsorption capacity of a GQD attached to a TiO2 surface, with dramatically improved absorption in the entire UV-visible region (Fig. 9c–f).
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of TiO2 NP/low-oxidized GND composites. (b) HRTEM images of TiO2 NP/GND composites (inset: FFT patterns of GNDs on TiO2 surface). (c) UV/vis absorption spectra of TiO2 NPs incorporated with various graphitic materials (GOs: graphene oxides; GONDs: graphene oxide nanodots; rGONDs: reduced graphene oxide nanodots) with identical mixing (weight) ratios of 1:0.2. (d) Schematic illustrations of the charge-transfer process occurring between TiO2 NPs and GNDs of low (left) and high (right) defect densities. (e) Images of the corresponding color change of MB solutions with increasing UV (365 nm) irradiation times. (f) Change of MB concentrations as a function of UV irradiation time at 365 nm (all the residual MB concentrations were acquired by the measured absorbance at the absorption peak at 665 nm).32 Reprinted with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 

4. Summary and outlook
In this review, we presented two practical and feasible strategies for overcoming drawbacks originating from the intrinsic properties of TiO2 and improving efficiency in a cost-effective and an eco-friendly manner. Template-assisted approaches for 3D nanostructuring are favorable routes for fabricating a highly ordered nanostructure in a monolithic network. The monolithic 3D TiO2 photocatalyst prepared by a 3D AAO template and the soft template incorporated opal structure show superior pollutant degradation performance compared to 2D AAO and the conventional inverse opal structure, respectively. The PnP technique makes it possible to fabricate a large-size uniform monolithic 3D nanostructure in a simpler and more rapid way. A monolithic 3D TiO2 nanostructure provides a large surface area and maintains its performance after several reuses without a recollection process. Additionally, a visible light sensitive photocatalyst has been achieved through a nitrogen-doped monolithic 3D TiO2 structure prepared by oxidizing the deposited TiN.
We also discussed TiO2 photocatalysts using various carbon materials (mainly graphene nanocarbons) including graphene, CNTs, and GQDs, and their underlying mechanisms and advantages as photocatalytic materials. Graphitic carbon nanomaterials have been physically or chemically decorated onto TiO2 or have been used to form a composites, and the photocatalytic performance has been improved by four mechanisms largely depending on their structure, geometry, and bonding nature. Graphitic carbon nanomaterials as electron reservoirs can efficiently collect the excited electrons of TiO2, however they cannot contribute to the visible light response. Chemically bonded graphitic carbon nanomaterials with TiO2 forming Ti–O–C bonds can contribute to the visible light response of TiO2 by introducing intermediate states within the TiO2 band gap, but the intermediate states are likely to act as charge recombination sites. However, when graphitic carbon nanomaterials with the band gap function as a photosensitizers in TiO2 or charge transfer complexes with TiO2, it is possible to improve the visible light reactivity and efficient charge separation simultaneously.
With the advantages of monolithic nanostructuring and heterostructuring based on graphitic carbon nanomaterials, a significant enhancement in photocatalytic performance can be achieved through a synergetic effect of the two main strategies. Nevertheless, the practical application of nanostructured and heterostructured TiO2 in actual industry still a challenge, with limitations associated with scale and mass production. However, the suggested novel approaches in this review are expected to provide a direction for the synthesis of advanced and practical TiO2 photocatalysts.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was also supported by a National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korean government (MSIP) (2016R1E1A1A01943131). This work was also supported by the Center for Advanced Soft Electronics as Global Frontier Project (CASE-2013M3A6A5073173) through the NRF funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning.
References
J. Schneider, M. Matsuoka, M. Takeuchi, J. Zhang, Y. Horiuchi, M. Anpo and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9919–9986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. A. Deskins, R. Rousseau and M. Dupuis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 5891–5897 CrossRef CAS .
O. Carp, C. L. Huisman and A. Reller, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2004, 32, 33–177 CrossRef CAS .
K. Pirkanniemi and M. Sillanpaa, Chemosphere, 2002, 48, 1047–1060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ouzzine, J. A. Maciá-Agulló, M. A. Lillo-Rodenas, C. Quijada and A. Linares-Solano, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 154, 285–293 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, L. Zhang, K. Deng, X. Chen and Z. Zou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 2709–2714 CrossRef CAS .
J. Joo, S. G. Kwon, T. Yu, M. Cho, J. Lee, J. Yoon and T. Hyeon, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 15297–15302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Song, S. Zhang, X. Wu and Q. Wei, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2012, 19, 1169–1173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tang, P. Wee, Y. Lai, X. Wang, D. Gong, P. D. Kanhere, T.-T. Lim, Z. Dong and Z. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 2772–2780 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 555–560 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Torres Arango, D. Kwakye-Ackah, S. Agarwal, R. K. Gupta and K. A. Sierros, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 10421–10429 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Saleh, C. S. Hu and R. Panat, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1601986 CrossRef PubMed .
J. M. Macák, H. Tsuchiya and P. Schmuki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 2100–2102 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Wang, Y. Liu, B. Yu, F. Zhou and W. Liu, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1198–1206 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cheng, Y. Wang, Y. Xing, M. Shahid and W. Pan, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 15330–15336 RSC .
D. Reyes-Coronado, G. Rodríguez-Gattorno, M. Espinosa-Pesqueira, C. Cab, R. d. de Coss and G. Oskam, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 145605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Z. Islam, S. Nagpure, D. Y. Kim and S. E. Rankin, Inorganics, 2017, 5, 15 CrossRef .
J. Choi, H. Park and M. R. Hoffmann, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 114, 783–792 CrossRef .
C. W. Dunnill and I. P. Parkin, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 1635–1640 RSC .
H. Zhang, Y. Zhang, J. Yin, Z. Li, Q. Zhu and Z. Xing, Chem. Phys., 2018, 513, 86–93 CrossRef CAS .
T. Lindgren, J. M. Mwabora, E. Avendaño, J. Jonsson, A. Hoel, C.-G. Granqvist and S.-E. Lindquist, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 5709–5716 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, G. Kim and W. Choi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 954–966 RSC .
L. Wang, D. K. Nagesha, S. Selvarasah, M. R. Dokmeci and R. L. Carrier, J. Nanobiotechnol., 2008, 6, 11 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Shao, Y. Gao and F. Yan, Sensors, 2011, 11, 11736–11751 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Du, X. Lai, N. Yang, J. Zhai, D. Kisailus, F. Su, D. Wang and L. Jiang, ACS Nano, 2010, 5, 590–596 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Cho, C. Ahn, J. Park and S. Jeon, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 9747–9751 RSC .
A. Stein, B. E. Wilson and S. G. Rudisill, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2763–2803 RSC .
W. Q. Wu, H. L. Feng, H. Y. Chen, D. B. Kuang and C. Y. Su, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12699–12717 RSC .
M. Gao, S. W. L. Ng, L. Chen, M. Hong and G. W. Ho, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 10909–10916 RSC .
J. Graciani, Y. Ortega and J. Fdez Sanz, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1431–1438 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhou, L. Shen, Z. Xing, X. Kou, S. Duan, L. Fan, H. Meng, Q. Xu, X. Zhang and L. Li, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 505, 1031–1038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yoon, D. Kim, M. Park, J. Kim, J. Kim, W. Srituravanich, B. Shin, Y. Jung and S. Jeon, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 12114–12121 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ahn, J. Park, D. Kim and S. Jeon, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 10384–10389 RSC .
L. N. Quan, Y. H. Jang, K. A. Stoerzinger, K. J. May, Y. J. Jang, S. T. Kochuveedu, Y. Shao-Horn and D. H. Kim, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 9023–9030 RSC .
D. Wang, L. Zhang, W. Lee, M. Knez and L. Liu, Small, 2013, 9, 1025–1029 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kemell, V. Pore, J. Tupala, M. Ritala and M. Leskelä, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 1816–1820 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wu, J. Jin, J. Liu, Z. Deng, Y. Li, O. Deparis and B. L. Su, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 15491–15500 RSC .
E. Eftekhari, P. Broisson, N. Aravindakshan, Z. Wu, I. S. Cole, X. Li, D. Zhao and Q. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12803–12810 RSC .
D. Wang, T. Hu, L. Hu, B. Yu, Y. Xia, F. Zhou and W. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1930–1938 CrossRef CAS .
P. Le, L. Hieu, T.-N. Lam, N. Hang, N. Truong, L. Tuyen, P. Phong and J. Leu, Micromachines, 2018, 9, 618 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ramasundaram, M. G. Seid, W. Lee, C. U. Kim, E.-J. Kim, S. W. Hong and K. J. Choi, J. Hazard. Mater., 2017, 340, 300–308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Ruzimuradov, S. Nurmanov, M. Hojamberdiev, R. M. Prasad, A. Gurlo, J. Broetz, K. Nakanishi and R. Riedel, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2014, 34, 809–816 CrossRef CAS .
R.-a. Doong, S.-m. Chang, Y.-c. Hung and I.-l. Kao, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2007, 58, 192–199 CrossRef CAS .
E. Carbonell, F. Ramiro-Manzano, I. Rodríguez, A. Corma, F. Meseguer and H. García, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2008, 7, 931–935 RSC .
M. Choi, J. Lim, M. Baek, W. Choi, W. Kim and K. Yong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 16252–16260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gao, L. Zhu, W. L. Ong, J. Wang and G. W. Ho, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2015, 5, 4703–4726 RSC .
J. B. Joo, M. Dahl, N. Li, F. Zaera and Y. Yin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2082–2092 RSC .
D. Fattakhova-Rohlfing, A. Zaleska and T. Bein, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9487–9558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Masuda and K. Fukuda, Science, 1995, 268, 1466–1468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. M. Jani, D. Losic and N. H. Voelcker, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2013, 58, 636–704 CrossRef .
P. Roy, D. Kim, K. Lee, E. Spiecker and P. Schmuki, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 45–59 RSC .
Z. Yao, C. Wang, Y. Li and N.-Y. Kim, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2015, 10, 166 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Yuan, S. Meng, Y. Zhou and Z. Yue, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 2552–2557 RSC .
H. U. Lee, S. C. Lee, Y. C. Lee, B. Son, S. Y. Park, J. W. Lee, Y. K. Oh, Y. Kim, S. Choi, Y. S. Lee and J. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6740 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shi, C. Sun, M. B. Starr and X. Wang, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 624–631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Galisteo-López, M. Ibisate, R. Sapienza, L. S. Froufe-Pérez, Á. Blanco and C. López, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 30–69 CrossRef PubMed .
S.-H. Kim, S. Y. Lee, S.-M. Yang and G.-R. Yi, NPG Asia Mater., 2011, 3, 25 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, D. Choi, J. Li, Z. Yang, Z. Nie, R. Kou, D. Hu, C. Wang, L. V. Saraf and J. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 907–914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, L. Chen, S. Zhou, D. Zhao and L. Wu, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 3433–3440 CrossRef CAS .
P. Pieranski, Contemp. Phys., 1983, 24, 25–73 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, W. Zhang, R. Sun, G. Chen, X. Fan, L. Gou, Y. Mao, K. Zhao and M. Tian, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 12202–12214 RSC .
J. K. Kim, J. H. Moon, T. W. Lee and J. H. Park, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 11939–11941 RSC .
P. Yang, T. Deng, D. Zhao, P. Feng, D. Pine, B. F. Chmelka, G. M. Whitesides and G. D. Stucky, Science, 1998, 282, 2244–2246 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fu, Z. Jin, W. Xue and Z. Ge, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2008, 91, 2676–2682 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, W. Lee, Z. Huang, R. Scholz and U. Gösele, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 335604 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jeon, J. U. Park, R. Cirelli, S. Yang, C. E. Heitzman, P. V. Braun, P. J. Kenis and J. A. Rogers, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2004, 101, 12428–12433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Yuan and P. R. Herman, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 22294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jeon, E. Menard, J. U. Park, J. Maria, M. Meitl, J. Zaumseil and J. A. Rogers, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1369–1373 CrossRef CAS .
J. Park, J. H. Park, E. Kim, C. W. Ahn, H. I. Jang, J. A. Rogers and S. Jeon, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 860–864 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. G. Park, S. K. Lee, J. H. Moon and S. M. Yang, Lab Chip, 2009, 9, 3144–3150 RSC .
S. Jeon, V. Malyarchuk, J. A. Rogers and G. P. Wiederrecht, Opt. Express, 2006, 14, 2300–2308 CrossRef .
G. Hyun, S. H. Cho, J. Park, K. Kim, C. Ahn, A. P. Tiwari, I. D. Kim and S. Jeon, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 288, 108–114 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Hong, J. Park, S. G. Jeon, K. Kim, S. H. Park, H. S. Shin, B. Kim, S. Jeon and J. Y. Song, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 8974–8980 RSC .
S. Kim, C. Ahn, Y. Cho, G. Hyun, S. Jeon and J. H. Park, Nano Energy, 2018, 54, 184–191 CrossRef CAS .
D. Cho, J. Park, J. Kim, T. Kim, J. Kim, I. Park and S. Jeon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 17369–17378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. W. Kwon, J. Park, T. Kim, S. H. Kang, H. Kim, J. Shin, S. Jeon and S. W. Hong, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 4609–4617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. E. Na, D. Shin, K. Kim, C. Ahn, S. Jeon and D. Jang, Small, 2018, 14, e1802239 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Asahi, T. Morikawa, T. Ohwaki, K. Aoki and Y. Taga, Science, 2001, 293, 269–271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Matsui, H. Tabata, N. Hasuike, H. Harima and B. Mizobuchi, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97, 123511 CrossRef .
C. H. Shin, G. Bugli and G. Djegamariadassou, J. Solid State Chem., 1991, 95, 145–155 CrossRef CAS .
T. Morikawa, R. Asahi, T. Ohwaki, K. Aoki and Y. Taga, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., Part 2, 2001, 40, L561–L563 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Q. Wang, X. Zhan, F. Wang, M. Safdar and J. He, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8326–8339 RSC .
J. Tao, J. Chai, L. Guan, J. Pan and S. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 081602 CrossRef .
X. Hao, Z. Jin, J. Xu, S. Min and G. Lu, Superlattices Microstruct., 2016, 94, 237–244 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Yang, W.-Q. Huang, L. Xu, W. Hu, P. Peng and G.-F. Huang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 1423–1432 RSC .
M. S. Mauter and M. Elimelech, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 5843–5859 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. J. Brennan, M. T. Byrne, M. Bari and Y. K. Gun'ko, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 472–485 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dahl, Y. Liu and Y. Yin, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9853–9889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. El-Salamony, Res. Rev.: J. Mater. Sci., 2016, 4, 26–50 Search PubMed .
H. Xie, C. Hou, H. Wang, Q. Zhang and Y. Li, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2017, 12, 400 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Cong, X. Li, Y. Qin, Z. Dong, G. Yuan, Z. Cui and X. Lai, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 107, 128–134 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Kim, B.-H. Kim and K. S. Yang, Carbon, 2012, 50, 2472–2481 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bellamkonda, N. Thangavel, H. Y. Hafeez, B. Neppolian and G. R. Rao, Catal. Today, 2017, 321, 120–127 Search PubMed .
L.-L. Tan, W.-J. Ong, S.-P. Chai, B. T. Goh and A. R. Mohamed, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 179, 160–170 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, N. M. Dimitrijevic, A. Y. Chang, R. D. Schaller, Y. Liu, T. Rajh and E. A. Rozhkova, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7995–8002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang and F.-X. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 23681–23693 RSC .
Z. Zeng, Y.-B. Li, S. Chen, P. Chen and F.-X. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 11154–11162 RSC .
K. Woan, G. Pyrgiotakis and W. Sigmund, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2233–2239 CrossRef CAS .
B. Qiu, Y. Zhou, Y. Ma, X. Yang, W. Sheng, M. Xing and J. Zhang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 8591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Song, M. H. Jang, J. Chung, S. H. Jin, B. H. Kim, S. H. Hur, S. Yoo, Y. H. Cho and S. Jeon, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2014, 2, 1016–1023 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sudhagar, I. Herraiz-Cardona, H. Park, T. Song, S. H. Noh, S. Gimenez, I. M. Sero, F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert, C. Terashima, U. Paik, Y. S. Kang, A. Fujishima and T. H. Han, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 187, 249–255 CrossRef CAS .
G. Rajender, J. Kumar and P. Giri, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 224, 960–972 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Dresselhaus, G. Dresselhaus and R. Saito, Carbon, 1995, 33, 883–891 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Hoffmann, S. T. Martin, W. Choi and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 69–96 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, P. Serp, P. Kalck and J. L. Faria, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2005, 235, 194–199 CrossRef CAS .
G. Pyrgiotakis, S.-H. Lee and W. Sigmund, MRS Online Proc. Libr., 2005, 876 Search PubMed .
Y. Chen, J. C. Crittenden, S. Hackney, L. Sutter and D. W. Hand, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39, 1201–1208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shen, S. B. Yang, P. Zhou, Q. Q. Sun, P. F. Wang, L. Wan, J. Li, L. Y. Chen, X. B. Wang, S. J. Ding and D. W. Zhang, Carbon, 2013, 62, 157–164 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Lee, K. H. You and C. B. Park, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1084–1088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xing, J. Zhang, F. Chen and B. Tian, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4947–4949 RSC .
F. Zuo, K. Bozhilov, R. J. Dillon, L. Wang, P. Smith, X. Zhao, C. Bardeen and P. Feng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 6223–6226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, F. Xiao, Y. Guo, S. Wang and Y. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 2227–2233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Park, H. Yoon, J. Lee, J. Kim, J. Lee, S. E. Lee, S. Yoo and S. Jeon, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1802951 CrossRef PubMed .
S. H. Jin, D. H. Kim, G. H. Jun, S. H. Hong and S. Jeon, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1239–1245 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yoon, Y. H. Chang, S. H. Song, E. S. Lee, S. H. Jin, C. Park, J. Lee, B. H. Kim, H. J. Kang and Y. H. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5255–5261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. F. Yeh, C. Y. Teng, S. J. Chen and H. Teng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3297–3303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Song, M.-H. Jang, J.-M. Jeong, H. Yoon, Y.-H. Cho, W.-I. Jeong, B.-H. Kim and S. Jeon, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 8041–8043 RSC .
J. Kim, S. H. Song, Y. Jin, H.-J. Park, H. Yoon, S. Jeon and S.-W. Cho, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 8512–8519 RSC .
Z. Zeng, F.-X. Xiao, H. Phan, S. Chen, Z. Yu, R. Wang, T.-Q. Nguyen and T. T. Y. Tan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 1700–1713 RSC .
Z. Zeng, S. Chen, T. T. Y. Tan and F.-X. Xiao, Catal. Today, 2018, 315, 171–183 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Gyori, Z. Konya and A. Kukovecz, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 179, 583–588 CrossRef CAS .
N. Qin, Y. H. Liu, W. M. Wu, L. J. Shen, X. Chen, Z. H. Li and L. Wu, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 1203–1209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhao and C. F. Yang, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 54, 1048–1059 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Chai, Y. J. Kim and W. I. Lee, J. Electroceram., 2006, 17, 909–912 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, I. S. Cole and Q. Li, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 9208–9211 RSC .
Y. Wang, R. Shi, J. Lin and Y. Zhu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2922–2929 RSC .
L. Zhao, X. Chen, X. Wang, Y. Zhang, W. Wei, Y. Sun, M. Antonietti and M. M. Titirici, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3317–3321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yu, Y. Zhao, C. Zhou, L. Shang, Y. Peng, Y. Cao, L.-Z. Wu, C.-H. Tung and T. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 3344–3351 RSC .
K. J. Williams, C. A. Nelson, X. Yan, L.-S. Li and X. Zhu, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1388–1394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Qu, H. Xie, X. Xu, Y. Zhang, S. Wen and Y. Cui, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 375, 230–241 CrossRef CAS .
J. Peng, W. Gao, B. K. Gupta, Z. Liu, R. Romero-Aburto, L. Ge, L. Song, L. B. Alemany, X. Zhan and G. Gao, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 844–849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Qu, D. Huang, H. Shi, M. Gu, J. Li, F. Dong and Z. Luo, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2015, 85, 173–179 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Equally contributed.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:
Kisung Lee	Kisung Lee is a Master's student of Materials Science and Engineering at Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST) under the supervision of Prof. Seokwoo Jeon. He received his Bachelor's degree from Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST) in 2018. His current research focuses on synthesis of three-dimensional nanostructured metal oxide and their applications.
Hyewon Yoon	Hyewon Yoon is a PhD candidate of Materials Science and Engineering at KAIST under the supervision of Prof. Seokwoo Jeon. She received her Master's degree in Materials Science and Engineering from KAIST in 2015. Her current research focuses on design and synthesis of luminescent carbon nanomaterials and their optoelectronic applications.
Changui Ahn	Changui Ahn is a researcher of Engineering Ceramic Center at Korea Institute of Ceramic Engineering and Technology (KICET), Republic of Korea. He received the PhD in Materials Science and Engineering from KAIST in 2018. He then worked as a postdoctoral researcher at KAIST in 2018. His research focuses on development of 3D structured metals and ceramics for photochemical, mechanical and thermal applications.
Junyong Park	Junyong Park is an assistant professor of Materials Science and Engineering at Kumoh National Institute of Technology. He received his PhD in Materials Science and Engineering from KAIST in 2015. He worked as a postdoctoral associate at MIT until 2016. His current research focuses on the development of functional nanostructured materials based on 3D nanopatterning and biomimetics.
Seokwoo Jeon	Prof. Seokwoo Jeon is a Chair professor of Materials Science and Engineering at KAIST. He received a PhD degree in Materials Science and Engineering in 2006 at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Currently, his group specializes in the synthesis of low-dimensional materials, including graphene, graphene quantum dots, and WS2, and fabrication of metallic or ceramic 3D nanostructures, all of which demonstrate potential in various applications.
hν (<\!\!388 nm) → e− + h+	(1)
h+ + H2O → ˙OH + H+	(2)
h+ + –OH → ˙OH	(3)
e− + O2 → O2˙−	(4)
	(5)
R + ˙OH → intermediate → CO2 + H2O (R: pollutant)	(6)

 	Scheme 1  Schematic diagram of efficient TiO2 photocatalysts according to their functions.25–32 Reprinted with permission from ref. 25, 30 and 32. Copyright 2009, 2010, and 2018 American Chemical Society. Reprinted with permission from ref. 26–29. Copyright 2013, 2017, and 2018 the Royal Society of Chemistry. Reprinted with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2017 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 1  Calculated methylene blue (MB) decomposition rate of film type TiO2.14,33,36,41	 

Photolitho. and ALD process	Anatase	2 × 2.5 cm2	365 nm UV lamp, 1–1.5 mW cm−2	1 × 10−5 M MB 25 ml, 83% decomposition in 5 h	
33

Photolitho. and ALD processes	Anatase, (N doped)	1 × 2 cm2	Solar simulator, 1 mW cm−2 at 525 nm	1 × 10−5 M MB 4 ml, 60% decomposition in 3 h	
26

Opal template and Ti precursor solution infiltration.	Anatase (C doped)	n/a	254 nm UV light	10 ppm of PNP 30 ml, 79% decomposition in 1 h	
34

AAO templates and ALD process	Anatase	1 cm2	UV light (9 W)	5 × 10−5 M MB, 90% decomposition in 200 min	
35

AAO templates and ALD process	Anatase	0.2 cm2	365 nm UV lamp, 1.5 mW cm−2	0.01 mM MB 3 ml, 90% decomposition in 20 h	
36

TiO2 sol. particles and PS sphere co-assembling	Anatase	n/a	305 nm UV light	10 μM MB, >95% decomposition in 40 min	
43

Eletrospraying P25 on template and pattern transfer	Anatase	2.5 × 5 cm2	350–400 nm lamp	10 μM MB 50 ml 93.8% 4 h	
41

Self-assemblies with P25	Anatase	1 cm2	300 nm Hg lamp (125 W)	2 mg succinonitrile, >90% decomposition in 12 min	
44

Ti anodization	Anatase	1 cm2	355 nm UV laser	1 × 10−5 M MB 3 ml, 95% decomposition in 250 min	
39

Ti anodization	Anatase	1 cm2	355 nm UV laser	1 × 10−5 M MB 2 ml, 90% decomposition in 6 h	
14

Ti anodization	Anatase	1 × 2.5 cm2	>400 nm visible light, 120 mW cm−2	0.5 ppm of MB, 50% decomposition in 2.5 h	
40

Sol–gel with chelating agent	Anatase + Rutile	50 mg	>420 nm visible light	10−5 M RhB, 50% decomposition in 2 h	
42

Hydrothermal synthesis	Brookite	3 × 5 cm2	>309 nm light, 200 mW cm−2	5 μM RhB, 90% decomposition in 1 h	
45

Opal template and Ti precursor solution infiltration	Anatase	2 × 2 cm2	250 nm ≤ λ ≤ 780 nm light	0.01 mM RhB 10 ml, 97% decomposition in 1 h	
37

Sandwich opal templates and Ti precursor solution infiltration.	Anatase	2 × 2 cm2	Xe lamp, 150 mW cm−2	0.01 mM RhB 10 ml, 99% decomposition in 35 min	
38


 	Fig. 2  (a) Top-view SEM micrographs of as-anodized 3D hierarchical nanopore structures (10 wt% H3PO4, 10 °C, 195 V (i–ii)). Cross-sectional view of vertical nanopores and branched nanopores visibly enhanced by black lines (iii–iv). Bent nanopores at the convex edges (v). AAO templates after pore widening treatment (5 wt% H3PO4, 30 °C, 1 h (vi)). (b) Hierarchical 3D TiO2 nanotube arrays fabricated by ALD. SEM images of TiO2 nanotube arrays (i–iv). TEM images of the TiO2 nanotubes with the electron diffraction patterns (v–vi). (c) Methylene blue (5 × 10−5 M) decomposition performance under UV illumination (9 W, maximum abs. at 668 nm) of as-prepared TiO2 nanotube arrays (size: 1 cm2, TiO2 thickness: 20 nm). (d) Microstructured Al foils which are etched from 0.2 M CuCl2 and HCl mixed solution with varying HCl concentrations 0 M (i) and 0.5 M (ii).35 Reprinted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic of fabrication processes of mTiO2 and mC-TiO2 inverse opals. (b) FESEM images of mTiO2 (i) and mC-TiO2 (ii) inverse opals. Insets are the corresponding digital images of the resulting samples obtained by scraping the film off the glass substrate. (c) UV-Vis absorbance spectra and Tauc plots of neat TiO2, mTiO2, and mC-TiO2 inverse opals. (d) Photocatalytic degradation ratio of p-nitro-phenol (PNP, 10 ppm with 30 ml water) using as-prepared samples under visible light (Xe lamp equipped with 420 nm cut-off filter, (i)) and UV irradiation (λ = 254 nm, (ii)).34 Reprinted with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2014 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of fabrication steps for a 3D nanoshell TiO2 and the corresponding SEM images. (b) Cross-sectional images of uniformly fabricated 3D nanoshell TiO2 obtained using proximity-field nanopatterning (PnP) and ALD process. Patterned sample is getting opaque with increasing the number of ALD cycles. (c) Methylene blue (MB) decomposition rate under UV irradiation (1 mW cm−2, λ = 365 nm). (d) Recyclability test of 3D nanoshell TiO2 (300 cycles) and a P25 film.33 Reprinted with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2013 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of fabrication process flow. (b) Digital image of a large area (625 mm2) 3D N-doped TiO2 film. (c) Cross-sectional SEM image of a 3D N-doped TiO2 film and (d) magnified view of (c). (e) Absorbance spectra of the undoped and N-doped 3D TiO2 films (inset: Tauc plot). (f) Normalized decomposition ratio of MB solutions with the unstructured and undoped, unstructured and N-doped, 3D undoped, and 3D N-doped TiO2 films under UV (λ = 365 nm) and solar irradiation for 3 h. (g) Comparison of MB decomposition performance of different samples under solar spectrum irradiation.26 Reprinted with permission from ref. 26. Copyright 2018 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Three proposed mechanisms for the CNT-mediated enhancement of photocatalysis.98 Reprinted with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) TEM images of TiO2 coated MWCNTs (i) and magnified TiO2 coated MWCNTs (ii). (c) Decolorization rate of MB on (a) P25, (b) TiO2 nanofibers, (c) mixture of P25 and MWCNTs, (d) mixture of TiO2 nanofibres and MWCNTs, and (e) carbon-doped TiO2 coating on MWCNTs under visible light irradiation (shown in the solid line); and decolorization rate of MB on (f) TiO2 nanofibres and (g) carbon-doped TiO2 coating on MWCNTs without irradiation (shown in the dotted line). (d) Proposed mechanism of synergistic enhancement of visible light photocatalytic activity in carbon-doped TiO2 coating on MWCNTs.91 Reprinted with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2011 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) HRTEM image of a 5GO–OTiO2 heterojunction. (b) Schematic illustrating the proposed charge transfer and separation processes in GO–OTiO2 binary nanocomposite.92 Reprinted with permission from ref. 92. Copyright 2015 Elsevier. (c) Schematic illustration of synthesis steps for graphene-wrapped anatase TiO2 NPs and corresponding SEM images. (d) UV-visible spectra of bare anatase TiO2 NPs, graphene-TiO2 NPs, and graphene-TiO2 NPs (two-step hydrothermal). (e) Suggested mechanism for the photocatalytic degradation of MB by graphene-wrapped anatase TiO2 NPs under visible-light.109 Reprinted with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (f) TEM image of the TiO2–CCNF hybrids (i) and their XRD pattern (ii). (g) Schematic illustration of photocatalysis with TiO2–CCNF hybrids.99	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) HRTEM images of CQDs/P25-1.5 wt%. (b) UV-Vis diffuse reflectance spectra of P25 and CQDs/P25 with different amounts of CQDs. (c) Schematic illustration for the photocatalytic mechanism over the CQDs/P25 under UV-Vis and visible light irradiation.128 Reprinted with permission from ref. 128 Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Cross section SEM image (i) and HRTEM image (ii) of GQDs-sensitized TiO2 HNWs. (e) Optical absorbance spectra of pristine and GQDs coated TiO2 electrode (inset: photoluminescence and optical absorbance spectrum of GQDs solution (Ex = 365 nm). (f) Photoexcitation charge carriers generated at GQDs/TiO2 interfaces.101 Reprinted with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2016 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of TiO2 NP/low-oxidized GND composites. (b) HRTEM images of TiO2 NP/GND composites (inset: FFT patterns of GNDs on TiO2 surface). (c) UV/vis absorption spectra of TiO2 NPs incorporated with various graphitic materials (GOs: graphene oxides; GONDs: graphene oxide nanodots; rGONDs: reduced graphene oxide nanodots) with identical mixing (weight) ratios of 1:0.2. (d) Schematic illustrations of the charge-transfer process occurring between TiO2 NPs and GNDs of low (left) and high (right) defect densities. (e) Images of the corresponding color change of MB solutions with increasing UV (365 nm) irradiation times. (f) Change of MB concentrations as a function of UV irradiation time at 365 nm (all the residual MB concentrations were acquired by the measured absorbance at the absorption peak at 665 nm).32 Reprinted with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 
Footnote
† Equally contributed.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
