Bulk heterojunction organic solar cells fabricated by oblique angle deposition   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5CP03604F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5CP03604F
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 28765-28769Bulk heterojunction organic solar cells fabricated by oblique angle deposition†

        
          
            Lin 
            Zhu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Tianjiao 
            Zhao
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Kan 
            Li
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Wentao 
            Sun
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Yingjie 
            Xing
          
        
      *
      Laboratory for the Physics and Chemistry of Nanodevices and Department of Electronics, Peking University, Beijing, 100871, China. E-mail: xingyj@pku.edu.cn
Received 
      22nd June 2015
    , Accepted 22nd September 2015First published on 25th September 2015AbstractBulk heterojunction organic solar cells based on small molecules are often fabricated by the co-deposition of donor and accepter materials on substrates placed horizontally. An intimate blend of donor and acceptor molecules is the common product in as-prepared samples. Using metal phthalocyanine as the donor and fullerene as the acceptor, we tilt the substrate to deposit the active layer. Both short circuit current density and open circuit voltage increase obviously in bulk heterojunction organic solar cells fabricated by oblique angle deposition. Analysis of the active layer reveals that phase segregation occurs in obliquely deposited bulk heterojunction layers. The mechanism of phase segregation is discussed. A change in the stacking style of fullerene molecules on metal phthalocyanine grains is proposed on the tilted substrate. This result provides a simple method to form phase segregation in bulk heterojunction layers.
Introduction
Bulk heterojunction structures, which blend donor and acceptor molecules intimately to produce molecular-scale donor/acceptor interfaces for exciton dissociation, are generally considered as the most promising strategy for high efficiency organic solar cells nowadays.1 In polymer-based bulk heterojunction photovoltaic devices, it is found that proper phase segregation in the blend film is one key factor to obtain a high power conversion efficiency, which leads to less charge loss and more optical absorption.2 A bulk heterojunction structure can be fabricated in small-molecule-based organic solar cells by co-deposition of donor and acceptor materials.3 However, although great efforts have been made to induce suitable phase segregation in donor–acceptor blend films, only limited success has been reported in literature studies. Post-annealing small molecule devices is detrimental sometimes because pinholes are created in the blend layer.4 Some improvements are obtained in metal phthalocyanine–fullerene devices when substrates are heated during co-deposition of metal phthalocyanine and fullerene. Phase separation is observed in copper phthalocyanine (CuPc):C60 and zinc phthalocyanine (ZnPc):C60 blend layers grown on mildly heated substrates.5,6 To date, the most efficient way to produce proper phase segregation in small molecule blend films is to grow a template layer on the substrate before the co-deposition of metal phthalocyanine and fullerene. Tiny aggregates nucleate in the blend film due to the strong interaction between the template and the metal phthalocyanine molecules. Nonetheless, a suitable template material is not easy to choose. For example, hexaazatriphenylene–hexacarbonitrile (HAT–CN) and copper iodide (CuI) are determined as the template materials for CuPc and ZnPc,7,8 respectively, even though these two phthalocyanine molecules have a similar structure and properties. For other small molecule materials, there still remains a challenge to create suitable phase segregation by this template effect. Partly because of the weak effect of substrates to produce phase segregation, a complex graded donor–acceptor heterojunction has been prepared by adjusting the donor/acceptor evaporation rate in the co-deposition process, resulting in a more efficient transport route in the blend layer for both electrons and holes.9 Recently, a large donor/acceptor ratio (3:1) showed an obvious effect on phase segregation in CuPc:C60 bulk heterojunctions.10 It seems that some compelling forces outside the donor–accepter system, such as a higher substrate temperature, a template layer or a large donor/accepter ratio, are necessary to produce phase segregation in small molecule blend films.
Oblique angle deposition, in which the substrate is inclined at an angle relative to the incident beam (less than 90°), has been used to prepare a metal phthalocyanine columnar structure via a self-shadowing effect.11,12 Fullerene film is then coated on the columnar structure to construct interdigitated bulk heterojunction solar cells. However, these devices do not show high power conversion efficiency as expected. The large diameter of the tilted columns (several hundred nanometers) and a thick active layer (micron scale), which are typical sizes of the products obtained via the self-shadowing effect in oblique angle deposition, are proposed as the main obstacles for this unsatisfactory behavior. Here, we present the results of small molecule solar cells prepared by oblique angle deposition. A small tilting angle (∼55°) is used in our experiments. Higher power conversion efficiency is obtained due to phase segregation in the obliquely co-deposited metal phthalocyanine:fullerene layer.
Experimental section
Cleaned indium tin oxide (ITO) glass was used as the substrate in all devices. CuPc (Yannuo Chem., purity 99%) and ZnPc (Yannuo Chem., purity 99%) were used as donor materials, and C60 (Acros Organics, purity 99%) was used as the acceptor material. Bathocuporine (BCP, J&K Scientific LTD, purity 99%) was used as the buffer material. All the above materials were used as received. The configuration of all devices is ITO/donor/donor:acceptor/acceptor/BCP/Al. The donor:acceptor mixtures are all in a weight ratio of 1:1. The devices were fabricated in a commercial vacuum deposition system (ULVAC-KIKO VWR-400M/ERH). Organic materials were deposited onto ITO substrates successively at a rate of ∼0.05 nm s−1 under a pressure of ∼1 × 10−3 Pa. Aluminium was deposited at a rate of ∼0.5 nm s−1 under a pressure of 5 × 10−3 Pa. The film thickness and deposition rate were monitored in situ using a quartz crystal oscillator. The area of a single device is 4 mm2. A sunlight simulator (Newport Oriel 91160) was used to illuminate the sample with the power of 100 mW cm−2. The current–voltage curves were measured using an electrochemical analyzer. All I–V measurements were performed in air. Optical absorption was measured using a UV-Vis-NIR spectrophotometer (Cary 5000) in air. Monochromatic incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) analysis was carried out in air (Newport 74125). An atomic force microscope (AFM, DI NanoScope) was used to scan the surface of organic films. A transmission electron microscope (TEM, FEI Tecnai F30) was used to observe phase segregation in organic films.
Two types of bulk heterojunction were prepared in our experiments. The first type was deposited by normal deposition, in which the evaporant flux reaches the substrate perpendicularly and then nucleates on the sample surface. For the second type, oblique angle deposition was used to deposit the active layer. Normal deposition was used to deposit BCP/Al layers in all devices. The angle of the substrate relative to the incident beam was tuned in the vacuum chamber in situ by manual operation. The tuning degree in the present experiments was ∼55°. Fig. 1a and b show two types of deposition schematically. In order to verify the real thickness of the organic layers deposited obliquely, controlled samples were fabricated and observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Typical thicknesses were calibrated in this way approximately and used in this work. BCP(8 nm)/Al(100 nm) layers were used in all devices. The total thickness of the active layer (donor/donor:acceptor/acceptor) was the same for both types of devices, which was 47 nm approximately. We think that in this device architecture, the difference of optical distribution between the two types of device can be neglected. Therefore, we do not consider any effect of optical distribution in this work.
 Fig. 1  Schematic demonstration of co-deposition of ZnPc and C60 on ZnPc coated ITO substrate, (a) horizontal substrate and (b) tilted substrate. (c) Face-on ZnPc grains grown on CuI coated ITO substrate. Blue ellipse and black dot stand for ZnPc and C60 molecule, respectively. In (a) and (b), edge-on ZnPc grains grow on the ITO substrate at room temperature. 
Results and discussion
We chose common donor (ZnPc and CuPc) and acceptor materials (C60) to fabricate bulk heterojunction photovoltaic devices. Similar configuration and thickness are used in our devices according to ref. 3. The bulk heterojunction layer is sandwiched between a thin donor and acceptor layer. A series of devices prepared with ZnPc and C60 by normal (perpendicular) deposition or oblique angle deposition are compared. Thin films of ZnPc(12 nm), ZnPc:C60(25 nm), C60(10 nm), BCP, and Al are perpendicularly deposited onto the ITO substrate sequentially to construct a bulk heterojunction solar cell (device A). At least three devices are fabricated every batch and the best efficiency in every batch is analyzed in this work. Current density–voltage (J–V) curves of device A in the dark and under light illumination are shown in Fig. 2a. Device B differs with device A on ZnPc/ZnPc:C60/C60 layers, which are deposited at a angle relative to the horizontal plane (∼55°). J–V curves of device B are also shown in Fig. 2a. All measured factors of devices A and B are listed in Table 1. More than double the efficiency (1.82%) is obtained in device B. IPCE measurements confirm the better performance of the obliquely deposited device, which is shown in Fig. 2b. Higher conversion efficiency is measured in all ranges of wavelength from the device fabricated by oblique angle deposition. No obvious improvement is observed when only one organic layer is deposited obliquely.
 Fig. 2  (a) J–V curves of device A (perpendicular deposition) and B (oblique angle deposition). (b) IPCE spectrum of the ZnPc:C60 bulk heterojunction device prepared by perpendicular and oblique angle deposition. Inset of (b): normalized optical absorption spectra of the ZnPc:C60 bulk heterojunction device prepared by perpendicular (blue) and oblique angle deposition (red). (c) XRD spectrum of the ZnPc:C60 bulk heterojunction prepared by perpendicular (red) and oblique angle deposition (blue), the star mark reveals the edge-on phase of ZnPc (ref. 6 and 8). 
Table 1 Measured and extracted device parameters




Device

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)

η (%)
FF

n


R

s
 (Ω cm2)

R
sh (Ω cm2)




A ZnPc:C60 perpendicular
4.75
0.47
0.85
0.38
1.1
9.2
128


B ZnPc:C60 oblique
8.18
0.57
1.82
0.39
2.76
6.9
183


C CuPc:C60 perpendicular
4.18
0.33
0.47
0.34
2.1
24
233


D CuPc:C60 oblique
4.45
0.37
0.59
0.36
2.74
21.5
209


E CuPc:C60 (thin) oblique
5.85
0.4
0.84
0.36
2.87
10.8
145




The enhancement of both the short circuit current density (Jsc) and open circuit voltage (Voc) in device B reveals a beneficial effect of oblique angle deposition on bulk heterojunction devices. Because the buffer layer (BCP) and the cathode metal (Al) are the same for devices A and B, we believe that the improved performance comes from the obliquely deposited active layer. The morphology and structure of the two kinds of bulk heterojunctions are compared first to investigate the reason for the higher efficiency. SEM observation shows that oblique angle deposition makes a continuous film and no obvious fluctuation is found at the surface (shown in the ESI† Fig. S3). No pin hole or void appears in samples with one/two/three layers fabricated by oblique angle deposition, indicating no self-shadowing effect in our experiments. The XRD spectrum of the bulk heterojunction prepared by oblique angle deposition demonstrates a small peak at 6.8° (the star mark in Fig. 2c), suggesting that tiny ZnPc grains (edge-on phase) form in the bulk heterojunction layer.6,8 No obvious peak is observed in XRD measurements when only one organic layer is deposited obliquely.
A large increase of Jsc (device A: 4.75 mA cm−2, device B: 8.18 mA cm−2) is the main reason for higher efficiency of device B. This result is in accordance with IPCE measurements, which show an enlargement of efficiency in all ranges of wavelength by tilting the substrate. This overall enlargement means that the charge transport is improved and less charge loss happens in the active layer prepared by oblique angle deposition. In order to compare the charge transport in devices A and B, device behavior is analyzed according to the common one-diode model.13Rs (series resistance), Rsh (shunt resistance) and n (ideality factor) are listed in Table 1. A reduction of series resistance (device A: 9.2 Ω cm2, device B: 6.9 Ω cm2) and an enhancement of shunt resistance (device A: 128 Ω cm2, device B: 183 Ω cm2) confirm better charge transport due to oblique angle deposition. Another possible reason for the higher Jsc in device B is the enhanced optical absorption. Optical absorption of ZnPc/ZnPc:C60 samples shows higher absorption in the obliquely deposited sample. The normalized absorption spectra of two samples are shown in the inset of Fig. 2b. Two absorption peaks at 630 nm and 692 nm, which come from the Q band absorption of ZnPc,14 are obvious in both samples. Higher absorption in the range of 400–550 nm appears in the sample prepared by oblique angle deposition. It is reported that C60 crystallites contribute more absorption than amorphous C60 film in this range.6 Higher absorption suggests that some tiny C60 crystallites may form in the obliquely deposited sample and contribute more enhancement of optical absorption than ZnPc, though no C60 peak is detected in XRD analysis.
The above results reveal that both charge transport and optical absorption of the ZnPc:C60 bulk heterojunction are improved by oblique angle deposition. In bulk heterojunction photovoltaic devices based on either polymer or small molecules, efficient charge transport and enhanced optical absorption are often found in the bulk heterojunction with suitable phase segregation.2,8 For the ZnPc:C60 bulk heterojunction grown on a heated substrate, improved charge transport and higher optical absorption are obtained and proposed as a result of phase segregation.6 We think that the improved performance of device B also comes from phase segregation caused by oblique angle deposition.
AFM and TEM are used to observe the nanoscale morphology of ZnPc/ZnPc:C60 film. Fig. 3a and b show AFM images of two samples fabricated by perpendicular and oblique angle deposition, respectively. The values of RMS roughness shown in Fig. 3a and b are 2.25 nm and 3.48 nm. AFM observation reveals that the distribution of particles in Fig. 3b is not as uniform as those in Fig. 3a. Comparing with the self-shadowing effect in previous literature studies,11,12 the coarse surface shown in Fig. 3b is similar to the ZnPc:C60 bulk heterojunction with phase separation.6 We use TEM to observe ZnPc/ZnPc:C60 film deposited on a copper grid. Fig. 3c and d show the morphology of two samples fabricated by perpendicular and oblique angle deposition, respectively. Comparing with the featureless surface of the sample prepared by perpendicular deposition, some tiny particles are found in the obliquely deposited film. These particles distribute uniformly in the film and have a size of less than 10 nm. More detailed characterization of phase segregation in the ZnPc:C60 bulk heterojunction with different thickness is demonstrated in the ESI.† AFM and TEM observations show that some particles are formed on the pre-deposited ZnPc layer even in a very thin ZnPc:C60 BHJ layer, and these particles may grow larger in the following process of oblique deposition. The above analysis proves that phase segregation occurs in the ZnPc:C60 bulk heterojunction fabricated by oblique angle deposition, resulting in the improvement of charge transport and optical absorption.
 Fig. 3  Nanoscale morphology of the ZnPc:C60 bulk heterojunction sample. (a) AFM image, perpendicular deposition, (b) AFM image, oblique angle deposition, (c) TEM image, perpendicular deposition, and (d) TEM image, oblique angle deposition. The area of square (a) and (b) is 800 nm × 800 nm. 
We think that the phase segregation occurs at the nanoscale during the period of oblique co-deposition of ZnPc and C60. The growth of ZnPc film has been studied in detail in previous literature studies.15 There are two common stacking styles for ZnPc, edge-on and face-on orientation (shown in Fig. 1a and c schematically). It is found that ZnPc in edge-on orientation grows on the ITO substrate at room temperature, whereas face-on ZnPc grows on the CuI coated ITO substrate due to strong interfacial coupling.8 The main difference between these two phases is the stacking angle of ZnPc molecules on the substrate, which is schematically shown in Fig. 1a and c. We believe that the different grain surfaces of ZnPc induce the phase segregation in our experiments.
In both types of devices, a thin layer of ZnPc is deposited first on the ITO substrate. The growth of edge-on ZnPc grains occurs on both horizontal-placed and tilted ITO substrates (shown in Fig. 1a and b). Then ZnPc and C60 molecules are evaporated simultaneously and deposit on the surface of ZnPc grains. The difference of incident angle induces different stacking styles for ZnPc and C60 during this co-deposition period. An intimate mixture of ZnPc and C60 is produced in the configuration of perpendicular deposition because of weak interaction of randomly located ZnPc and C60 on the top of edge-on ZnPc grains. In contrast, the exposed surface of ZnPc grains against the evaporant flux changes in oblique angle deposition (shown in Fig. 1b). Some side facets of edge-on ZnPc grains expose to evaporated ZnPc and C60 molecules in this case. The tilting angle leads to some similar deposition facets to those in face-on ZnPc (shown in Fig. 1c) except for a small deflection (9°). It is reported that ZnPc and C60 molecules are easy to nucleate on face-on ZnPc grains and grain boundaries, respectively.8 We think that this kind of stacking style remains in our experiments of oblique angle deposition, resulting in the formation of ZnPc and C60 crystallites.
We employ this method to prepare CuPc:C60 photovoltaic cells because CuPc and ZnPc have a similar structure and properties. A similar thickness organic layer is used in the structure of ITO/CuPc(12 nm)/CuPc:C60(25 nm)/C60(10 nm)/BCP/Al. The difference between perpendicular deposition and oblique angle deposition is investigated. A better result is also measured in the obliquely deposited device. We find that the deposition angle of C60 film (perpendicular or oblique angle) on top of the bulk heterojunction layer does not show an obvious influence on the device performance, which is in accordance with the above conclusion for phase segregation in the period of co-deposition. Photovoltaic cells fabricated by perpendicular deposition and oblique angle deposition are called devices C and D. J–V curves of devices C and D in the dark and under light illumination are shown in Fig. 4. All measured and attracted factors of devices C and D are listed in Table 1. Higher Jsc and Voc are obtained in the obliquely deposited device. Then we adjust the thickness of bottom two organic layers. The optimized device (device E) has the structure of ITO/CuPc(18 nm)/CuPc:C60(20 nm)/C60(10 nm)/BCP/Al. J–V curves of device E are shown in Fig. 4. All measured and attracted factors of device E are listed in Table 1. A significant reduction of the series resistance (device D: 21.5 Ω cm2, device E: 10.8 Ω cm2) reveals that charge transport is much more efficient in a thin CuPc:C60 layer. One possible reason for this phenomenon may be that the CuPc bottom layer has less selective effect on CuPc and C60 molecules, and then, proper phase segregation occurs in a thinner bulk heterojunction layer.
 Fig. 4  
J–V curves of device C (perpendicular deposition), D and E (oblique angle deposition). 
Our result shows that oblique angle deposition can produce phase segregation in metal phthalocyanine and fullerene mixtures naturally. We believe that this method may be used in other material systems if there are different favorite depositing sites for different molecules. Selective deposition at different sites in one experiment may even be achieved with a dedicated setup to accurately adjust the tilting angle of the substrate.
Conclusions
In summary, we demonstrate a simple way to improve the power conversion efficiency of small molecule solar cells by oblique angle deposition. Both short circuit current density and open circuit voltage increase in obliquely deposited devices. Higher optical absorption and more efficient charge transport are observed in bulk heterojunction devices fabricated by oblique angle deposition. Phase segregation in the bulk heterojunction layer is found to be the main reason for the improved performance. A change in the stacking style of fullerene molecules on metal phthalocyanine grains is proposed on the tilted substrate. This method may be used in other material systems if there are different favorite depositing sites for different molecules.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 61376059, 61171023, 91421303, 91221202) and MOST of China (Grant No. 2012CB932701).
References
M. C. Scharber and N. S. Sariciftci, Efficiency of bulk-heterojunction organic solar cells, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2013, 38, 1929–1940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-M. Chen, Z. Hong, G. Li and Y. Yang, Recent Progress in Polymer Solar Cells: Manipulation of Polymer:Fullerene Morphology and the Formation of Efficient Inverted Polymer Solar Cells, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1434–1449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. P. Rand, J. Xue, S. Uchida and S. R. Forrest, Mixed donor–acceptor molecular heterojunctions for photovoltaic applications. I. Material properties, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98, 124902 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Peumans, S. Uchida and S. R. Forrest, Efficient bulk heterojunction photovoltaic cells using small molecular-weight organic thin films, Nature, 2003, 425, 158–162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Vogel, J. Strotmann, B. Johnev, M. C. Lux-Steiner and K. Fostiropoulos, Influence of nanoscale morphology in small molecule organic solar cells, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 511–512, 367–370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Schunemann, D. Wynands, L. Wilde, M. P. Hein, S. Pfutzner, C. Elschner, K.-J. Eichhorn, K. Leo and M. Riede, Phase separation analysis of bulk heterojunctions in small-molecule organic solar cells using zinc-phthalocyanine and C60, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 245314 CrossRef .
K. S. Yook, B. D. Chin, J. Y. Lee, B. E. Lassiter and S. R. Forrest, Vertical orientation of copper phthalocyanine in organic solar cells using a small molecular weight organic templating layer, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 043308 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhou, T. Taima, T. Miyadera, T. Yamanari, M. Kitamura, K. Nakatsu and Y. Yoshida, Phase separation of co-evaporated ZnPc:C60 blend film for highly efficient organic photovoltaics, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 233302 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Pandey and R. J. Holmes, Organic Photovoltaic Cells Based on Continuously Graded Donor–Acceptor Heterojunctions, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2010, 16, 1537–1543 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Y. Chen, J. Sang, B.-X. Mi, D.-H. Mua, Z.-G. Li, H. Zhang, Z.-Q. Gao and W. Huang, CuPc/C60 bulk heterojunction photovoltaic cells with evidence of phase segregation, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 250–254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, R. Bekele, J. Ouyang and J. Xue, Interdigitated Bulk Heterojunction Organic Photovoltaic Cells With Aligned Copper Phthalocyanine Nanorods, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2010, 16, 1544–1551 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Van Dijken, N. L-Y. Wu, M. D. Fleischauer, J. M. Buriak and M. J. Brett, Morphology control and nanoscale patterning of small moleculeorganic thin films, Proc. SPIE, 2012, 8435, 84350R CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhang, J. Zhang, Y. Hao, Z. Lin and C. Zhu, A simple and efficient solar cell parameter extraction method from a single current–voltage curve, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 110, 064504 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Wojdyła, B. Derkowska, Z. Łukasiak and W. Bała, Absorption and photo reflectance spectroscopy of zinc phthalocyanine (ZnPc) thin films grown by thermal evaporation, Mater. Lett., 2006, 60, 3441–3446 CrossRef PubMed .
B. P. Rand, D. Cheyns, K. Vasseur, N. C. Giebink, S. Mothy, Y. Yi, V. Coropceanu, D. Beljonne, J. Cornil, J.-L. Brédas and J. Genoe, The Impact of Molecular Orientation on the Photovoltaic Properties of a Phthalocyanine/Fullerene Heterojunction, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2987–2995 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5cp03604fThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2015
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic demonstration of co-deposition of ZnPc and C60 on ZnPc coated ITO substrate, (a) horizontal substrate and (b) tilted substrate. (c) Face-on ZnPc grains grown on CuI coated ITO substrate. Blue ellipse and black dot stand for ZnPc and C60 molecule, respectively. In (a) and (b), edge-on ZnPc grains grow on the ITO substrate at room temperature.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) J–V curves of device A (perpendicular deposition) and B (oblique angle deposition). (b) IPCE spectrum of the ZnPc:C60 bulk heterojunction device prepared by perpendicular and oblique angle deposition. Inset of (b): normalized optical absorption spectra of the ZnPc:C60 bulk heterojunction device prepared by perpendicular (blue) and oblique angle deposition (red). (c) XRD spectrum of the ZnPc:C60 bulk heterojunction prepared by perpendicular (red) and oblique angle deposition (blue), the star mark reveals the edge-on phase of ZnPc (ref. 6 and 8).	 

A ZnPc:C60 perpendicular	4.75	0.47	0.85	0.38	1.1	9.2	128
B ZnPc:C60 oblique	8.18	0.57	1.82	0.39	2.76	6.9	183
C CuPc:C60 perpendicular	4.18	0.33	0.47	0.34	2.1	24	233
D CuPc:C60 oblique	4.45	0.37	0.59	0.36	2.74	21.5	209
E CuPc:C60 (thin) oblique	5.85	0.4	0.84	0.36	2.87	10.8	145

 	Fig. 3  Nanoscale morphology of the ZnPc:C60 bulk heterojunction sample. (a) AFM image, perpendicular deposition, (b) AFM image, oblique angle deposition, (c) TEM image, perpendicular deposition, and (d) TEM image, oblique angle deposition. The area of square (a) and (b) is 800 nm × 800 nm.	 

 	Fig. 4  
J–V curves of device C (perpendicular deposition), D and E (oblique angle deposition).	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5cp03604f

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2015
