Quantum dots as platforms for charge transfer-based biosensing: challenges and opportunities  - Journal of Materials Chemistry B (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4TB00985A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4TB00985A
(Highlight)
J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 7816-7827Quantum dots as platforms for charge transfer-based biosensing: challenges and opportunities

        
          
            W. Russ 
            Algar†
*c, 
      
        
          
            Michael H. 
            Stewart†
a, 
      
        
          
            Amy M. 
            Scott
          
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Woohyun J. 
            Moon
          
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Igor L. 
            Medintz
          
          
        
      *b
aDivision of Optical Sciences Code 5600, U.S. Naval Research Laboratory, 4555 Overlook Ave, S.W. Washington, DC 20375, USA
bCenter for Bio/Molecular Science and Engineering Code 6900, U.S. Naval Research Laboratory, 4555 Overlook Ave, S.W. Washington, DC 20375, USA. E-mail: Igor.medintz@nrl.navy.mil
cDepartment of Chemistry, University of British Columbia, 2036 Main Mall, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z1, Canada. E-mail: algar@chem.ubc.ca
dDepartment of Chemistry, University of Miami, 1301 Memorial Drive, Miami, FL 33146, USA
Received 
      17th June 2014
    , Accepted 27th September 2014First published on 20th October 2014AbstractSemiconductor quantum dots (QDs) have received significant attention as unique photoluminescent materials for biological imaging and sensing. Charge transfer (CT) modulation of QD emission has recently emerged as a promising detection modality in these applications; however, much still remains unknown about the mechanism through which an electron or hole transfers from a QD exciton to a redox active moiety in a bioconjugate construct. Here, we highlight the utility and challenges of CT for QD-based biosensing, particularly in comparison to Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET), and summarize the current understanding of this process, which is situated at the intersection between biological and photovoltaic research with QDs.W. Russ AlgarDr W. Russ Algar received his PhD in analytical chemistry from the University of Toronto (2010) working with Prof. Ulrich Krull. Following postdoctoral work at the Center for Bio/Molecular Science and Engineering, U.S. Naval Research Laboratory, with Dr Igor L. Medintz, he joined the Department of Chemistry at the University of British Columbia in 2012 as an assistant professor and Canada Research Chair (Tier 2) in Biochemical Sensing. His current research interests include the design and characterization of nanoparticles and other fluorescent probes for point-of-need diagnostics, cellular imaging and sensing, and quantitative bioanalysis.Michael H. StewartDr Michael Stewart received his BS from Wittenberg University and his PhD from the University of Michigan, where he specialized in synthetic organometallic chemistry. As a postdoctoral fellow at the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) he developed and advanced colloidal semiconductor quantum dot (QD)-based technologies for biological sensing and imaging applications. Since 2009, he has been a research chemist in the Optical Sciences Division at NRL, where his research involves investigating energy and charge transfer between QDs and various donors/acceptors, studying QD surface chemistry, and developing colloidal QD structures for optoelectronic applications.Amy M. ScottDr Amy M. Scott earned her PhD in physical chemistry at Northwestern University in 2009 where she studied spin-selective charge recombination dynamics in organic donor–bridge–acceptor systems. She was a postdoctoral research at Argonne National Laboratory in 2010, and a Henry and Camille Dreyfus Environmental Postdoctoral Researcher at Columbia University from 2010–2012. She is currently an assistant professor of chemistry at the University of Miami in Miami, Florida (Aug 2013 – present). Her research focuses on controlling photoinduced charge, energy, and spin transport in organic, inorganic, and biomaterials for solar energy conversion.Woohyun J. MoonWoohyun J. Moon is currently completing a BSc in chemistry with a minor in biology at the University of British Columbia. Her current interests include using quantum dots to develop biological assays. Ms Moon received an Undergraduate Poster Award in the Analytical Division at the 2014 Canadian Society of Chemistry Conference, and has also received two awards for her involvement and leadership in the undergraduate student community.Igor L MedintzIgor L. Medintz received a PhD in molecular and cellular biology under Prof. Corinne Michels from the City University of New York in 1998. He was a postdoctoral fellow under Prof. Richard A. Mathies at the University of California, Berkeley, where he focused on developing FRET-based genetic assays for diagnosing cancer using microfabricated devices. Since 2004, he has been a Research Biologist at the Center for Bio/Molecular Science and Engineering of the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory in Washington, DC. Current research activities involve DNA-based energy transfer assemblies, understanding enzyme activity at nanoparticle interfaces, chemistries to bridge biolomolecular–nanomaterial interfaces, and designing biosensing hybrids that are based on different types of energy transfer.
1. Introduction
Colloidal semiconductor quantum dots (QDs) and their numerous prospective and established applications have been the subject of thousands of scientific publications over the past two decades.1 During this time, optoelectronics and biomedical science have emerged as two primary avenues of research with these nanomaterials. Although both avenues seek to exploit the unique optical properties of QDs to gain an advantage over bulk or molecular materials, there have been pragmatic differences between these two areas of study. Biomedical research has largely utilized core/shell QD materials in aqueous environments with emphasis on their emissive properties while interfacing within biological molecules and cellular systems. In contrast, optoelectronic research has more often used core-only QDs in solid-state or hydrophobic environments, emphasizing not only emissive properties, but also carrier generation and extraction. The fruits of these labors have begun to emerge as, for example, QDs have been increasingly utilized and accepted as biological probes,2,3 while QD-based light-emitting diodes are now being integrated into consumer products.4,5 Nevertheless, much work remains in both fields as QDs have yet to gain acceptance for in vivo and clinical biomedical applications, while QD-based photovoltaics are not yet competitive with today's other leading technologies.
Although seemingly disparate, biomedical and optoelectronic research with QDs have begun to converge in the context of charge transfer (CT)-based biosensing, which poses many fundamental and applied challenges for researchers to address. In this article, we highlight the utility of CT as a signal transduction modality for biosensing with QDs, using well-established Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) methods as a point of comparison. We also summarize what has been learned about the mechanism of CT with QDs from studies on abiotic systems that are more relevant to photovoltaic research. Representative examples of CT-based biosensing with QDs are then described, followed by discussion of what is known and remains to be understood about the CT quenching mechanism within QD bioconjugates. Clearly diverse areas of expertise in conjunction with many characterization methods will be needed to unravel the complexities of these systems. A detailed understanding of the CT quenching process with QD bioconjugates will ultimately enable the rational design of an array of CT-based biosensors that can detect, image, and track a wide range of previously inaccessible biomarkers and cellular processes.
2. QD-based biosensing with CT versus FRET
In the context of biological applications, QDs first generated excitement because they were seen as having a nearly ideal set of properties for photoluminescence (PL) detection: high brightness arising from their large molar extinction coefficients and potentially near-unity quantum yields; spectrally narrow emission that is size/composition-tunable within a wide range of wavelengths; broad absorption profiles; and outstanding resistance to photobleaching.6,7 These cumulative properties make it easy to interrogate and resolve multiple colors of QD, and multiplexed detection and imaging are applications where QDs already significantly outperform classical organic fluorophores and fluorescent proteins.3 A similarly prolific and complementary area of research has been the development of QD-based biosensors, which differ from simple imaging applications in that the QD is engineered to change its emissive properties in response to biorecognition events such as ligand–protein binding, enzymatic activity, nucleic acid hybridization, and other biomolecular interactions.8 The most popular, and to date, the most powerful and versatile strategy for biosensing has been to couple these biorecognition events to Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) such that QD emission is turned “on” or “off” as part of the sensing mechanism.8–10 QDs have been shown to engage in the dipolar energy transfer mechanism elegantly described by Förster, and hundreds of papers have been published to date on FRET-based biosensing with QDs.8–10 The value of the Förster formalism in this regard cannot be understated as it has provided fundamental means by which to rationally design QD-based biosensors. Progressively more sophisticated, multichromophore and multistep QD–FRET biosensors continue to be developed using its predictive capability.10
Studies on CT-based biosensing with QDs are considerably fewer in number than those on FRET-based biosensing, see Table 1 for a somewhat representative overview. Moreover, much of this work is phenomenological in the sense that CT quenching is invoked as the mechanism of biosensing because either FRET can be excluded (e.g., based on a lack of intrinsic donor–acceptor spectral overlap), or because the putative charge transfer partner for the QD is conventionally utilized for its redox properties in other applications. Further complicating matters is that differing studies may yield conflicting results; for example, it has been reported that ferrocene does11 and does not12 quench aqueous CdSe/ZnS QD PL. A priori expectations of CT have also been challenged by the recent observations that aqueous QDs engage in FRET and not CT with chromium13 and osmium complexes,14 and that FRET competes with CT in QD–C60 bioconjugates.15 The CT quenching of aqueous QDs and their bioconjugates can, at best, be described as superficially understood.
Table 1 Representative quantum dot charge transfer-based biosensorsa




Donor (emission max)
Acceptor
Analyte/target process
Notes
Ref.





a QDs given as the core or core/shell composition.
b Adenosine monophosphate.
c Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide.





CdSe/ZnS (∼615 nm)
Hemin
DNA & AMPb



54



CdSe/CdS/ZnCdS/ZnS (600 nm)

o-Quinone residues
Tyrosinase & thrombin activity



71



CdSe/ZnS (∼575 nm)
NAD+c
Ethanol/RDX
NAD+-dependent enzymes/substrates

61



CdSe/ZnS (560 nm)

o-Quinone residue
Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity
Also tyrosinase reporter biocatalyst

59



CdSe/ZnS (620 nm)
Azamacrocycle
Zn2+ ions
Ascribed to hole transfer

72



CdSe/ZnS (500, 540, 620 nm)
Zincon
Mn2+ ions



73



CdSe/ZnS (∼615 nm)
Doxorubicin
DNA, cocaine, thrombin, telomerase



58



CdTe (570 nm)
Benzoquinone
Glucose
Bienzyme hybrid system

55



CdTe (537 nm)

o-Quinone (dopamine)
Dopamine
Laccase hybrid

74



CdSe/ZnS (520, 550, 580 nm)

o-Quinone (dopamine)
pH changes

in vitro and intracellular

60



CdTe (570 nm)
Mitoxantrone
DNA–anticancer drug interactions



57



CdTe (528 nm)
Ru–polypyridyl complexes
Double-stranded DNA



75



CdTe (560 nm)
Ru–polypyridyl complex
Thrombin



76



CdSe/ZnS (563 nm)
Bipyridinium dication
Receptor–substrate interactions
Biotin–streptavidin

48



CdSe/ZnS (604 nm)
Substituted viologen
Glucose



77







Ru complex
InGaP/ZnS (660 nm) CdSe/ZnS (545 nm)
Pb ions
100 pM limit of detection

51



Ru complex
CdSe (∼570 nm) CdSe/ZnS (565 nm)
Maltose
Protein-based

49, 50



Ru complex
CdSe/ZnS (545 nm)
Thrombin
DNA-based

52



Thrombin
PbS (1050 nm)
Thrombin
Thrombin binding aptamer

78



Ru complex
CdSe/ZnS
Proteolytic enzyme activity
Several different QD emissions

12



Folic acid
CdS/ZnS (500 nm)
Folate receptors
Cancer cell detection

63





Despite the above, there are nevertheless advantages to using CT quenching as a transduction modality for biosensing with QDs. One such advantage is that CT does not depend on spectral overlap between donor and acceptor (as is the case with FRET), and thus broadband quenching of many colors of QD by a common CT quencher is possible.16 Without the requirement of strong spectral overlap with QD emission, the variety of molecular entities that can potentially quench a QD increases dramatically. These CT quenchers may be both electron acceptors and electron donors, whereas with FRET, the QD must generally be the energy donor and can only function as a biosensing acceptor within certain special circumstances.9,10 Moreover, because CT is typically not a through-space interaction like FRET, but rather requires orbital overlap, it can provide sensitivity to processes and effects that FRET would be insensitive toward (e.g., solvation17). Finally, redox reactions are of vital importance in many biological systems and a full understanding of their mechanisms still remains to be achieved due to the lack of ability to probe them sensitively in real-time in situ. It is anticipated that biosensors based on CT may be able to access and probe these reactions in ways that most FRET-based biosensors still cannot.
3. Mechanism and characterization of CT quenching
At the simplest level, the two essential requirements for photoinduced CT quenching are (i) that the energy of either the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) or the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of the quencher lies between the energies of the QDs quantum-confined valence and conduction band edge states, and (ii) that the CT quencher is in close proximity to the QD. Carriers generated upon photoexcitation of the QD can be transferred to either state of the quencher; for example, hole transfer from the QD to the HOMO of the quencher, or electron transfer from the QD to the LUMO of the quencher, as illustrated in Fig. 1A. The challenge is that the picture for photoinduced CT in Fig. 1A is very simplified – it suggests that knowledge of the indicated energy levels of the QD and prospective CT quencher is sufficient for a predictive understanding. In reality, there are many more variables to consider.
 Fig. 1  Charge transfer quenching of QDs. (A) Dissociation of the exciton generated by photoexcitation of a QD through either (i) hole transfer from the QD or (ii) electron transfer from the QD. (B) Some examples of CT quenchers used for biosensing. (C) Schematic diagram of a generic QD bioconjugate for CT-based biosensing. 
Electron transfer between molecular entities in solution is well-described by Marcus theory.18,19 Although this theory is, in principle, equally applicable to QDs, the various descriptive physical parameters in the Marcus model are not well-known for QDs and are difficult to determine (e.g. magnitude of charge injection barrier, internal and solvent nuclear reorganization, and the degree of orbital overlap described by the electronic coupling matrix element). In a recent review, Knowles et al. discussed these challenges, which largely relate to the heterogeneous character of QDs and the limited insight into their interfacial structure and properties.20 The groups of Weiss,20–29 Lian,30–39 and Kamat,40–46 among others,47 have been studying CT processes between QDs and molecular adsorbates, TiO2, and other nanomaterials, with the primary goal of driving progress in QD-based photovoltaics. This research has largely utilized hydrophobic QDs still displaying their native ligands in non-aqueous solvents. Analytical tools such as transient absorption spectroscopy, in combination with time-resolved, steady-state and single-particle fluorescence, have all been used to characterize the CT dynamics between QDs and molecular adsorbates. With the aid of electron microscopy, NMR, X-ray absorption and photoelectron spectroscopy, and DFT modeling, these dynamics have, to some extent, been correlated with interfacial structure.20,40 In addition to the alignment of the HOMO/LUMO levels of an adsorbate relative to the band-edge QD states, it has been shown that the following can affect CT rates: the number of adsorbates and their affinity for the QD interface,22,26,34,36 the orientation of the adsorbates,25,27 the thickness and relative coverage of interfacial ligands on the QD,24,29 the shell thickness surrounding core/shell QDs,37 and the size of the QD core.31,45 The dielectric properties of the solvent can also play a prominent and sometimes determinative role.47 Situations where the QD and donor/acceptor entities are photoexcited simultaneously can sometimes be avoided in the case of a QD donor via the QD's broad absorption spectrum, large extinction coefficients, and judicious choice of the excitation wavelength. Paradoxically, the QD features generally considered ideal for biosensing applications – a larger core size for longer wavelength emission, thick shells for high quantum yields and robust emission, dense coatings of ligands that maximize biocompatibility and resist non-specific adsorption, along with photophysical interactions over distances commensurate with the dimensions of biomolecules – would seem to be unfavorable for CT. Nonetheless, CT quenching has proven to be an effective modality for biosensing with QDs, as highlighted below (see also Table 1).
What do CT interactions with a QD look like in a “biological” context? Fig. 2 highlights recent results where the energy transfer interactions between QDs and C60 fullerenes were investigated in detail.15 In this study, a C60–pyrrolidine tris-carboxylic acid was covalently attached to a hexahistidine, (His)6, appended peptide, the structure and sequence of which are shown in Fig. 2A, to yield a C60-labeled peptide (pepC60) adduct that then self-assembled to the QDs via (His)6-driven metal-affinity coordination. Discrete QD–(pepC60)N bioconjugates, schematically depicted in Fig. 2C, were then examined where the ratio (N) of pepC60 assembled per QD was systematically increased. Photoinitiated energy transfer in these composite systems was then interrogated using steady-state and time-resolved fluorescence (Fig. 2D–F) along with ultrafast transient absorption spectroscopy. As can be seen, decreases in QD steady-state intensity and excited-state lifetime directly tracked with the number of pepC60 assembled per QD and detailed analysis showed that, for this 630 nm emitting QD, which shares almost no spectral overlap with the C60, quenching arises predominantly due to CT from the QD to the pepC60-acceptor. When more spectral overlap is present, there is an increased chance for competition between FRET and CT in this type of system. Regardless of CT directionality (i.e., to or from the QD) and the nature of the donor/acceptor, most other CT processes manifest an analogous QD quenching profile, at least in this type of biologically-assembled configuration.12,16,17,48–65
 Fig. 2  Steady-state intensity and excited-state lifetime analysis of charge transfer quenching in QDs assembled with C60–peptide conjugates. (A) Chemical structure of the carboxylated C60, dihydrolipoic acid (DHLA) QD surface-functionalizing ligand, and peptide sequence that was attached to the C60 (pepC60) to facilitate its coordination to the QDs. (B) Representative TEM images of the 630 nm emitting QDs that engaged in charge transfer with the C60. (C) Model of a QD assembled with one pepC60. The blue sphere represents a QD with a radius of 30 Å (∼550 nm QD) with a DHLA ligand shell shown in light gray, which extends ∼11 Å from the QD surface. The partially folded peptide conformation shown is energy minimized and matches FRET separation data. The distance from the QD center to the center of the C60 is ∼56 Å. (D and E) Steady-state intensity and normalized time-resolved PL decay data collected from 630 nm QDs assembled with the indicated increasing ratios of pepC60. (F) Comparison of normalized quenching profiles from steady-state (blue) versus time-resolved PL decay data (green). Reprinted from ref. 15 Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
4. Biosensing applications
One of the first examples of biosensing using CT-quenching of QDs was reported by Raymo in 2006.48 A biotin–bipyridinium dication conjugate was prepared and adsorbed to CdSe/ZnS QDs capped with anionic ligands, resulting in quenching of QD PL with electron transfer from the QD to the bipyridinium dication. QD PL recovered with the addition of streptavidin, which bound the biotin and disrupted the interaction between the tethered bipyridinium dication and QD. This general and perhaps seminal concept of using ligand–receptor interactions to modulate CT quenching through changes in quencher proximity to the QD has been the basis for designing many assays for a variety of target biomolecules. In subsequent reductions to practice, ruthenium complexes have been quite often used as hole-accepting quenchers, quinones have been frequently used as electron-accepting quenchers, and iron complexes have been used in both roles. The structures of some of the more common CT quenchers used for biosensing and discussed here are shown in Fig. 1B and a generalized schematic of a QD–biomolecule–CT donor–acceptor structure is shown in Fig. 1C.
4.1. Ruthenium complexes as putative hole acceptors
Benson's group has reported several configurations for biosensing with QDs using ruthenium(II) phenanthroline (Ru-phen) in the role of a CT quencher.17,49–52 These took advantage of conformational changes in QD-conjugated, Ru-phen-labeled receptor proteins upon ligand binding to generate changes in CT quenching efficiency. For example, maltose binding protein (MBP)49,50 and an engineered Pb2+-binding protein51 undergo a conformational change upon binding their target ligands, which altered the proximity between the QD and Ru-phen. Conformational changes in DNA/aptamer structures have also been used to detect thrombin using Ru-phen.52 Medintz et al. also adopted Ru-phen as a broadband quencher of QD peptide conjugates to detect proteolytic activity.12,16 The peptides, which were self-assembled to QDs, were labeled at their distal terminus with Ru-phen. Protease-catalyzed hydrolysis of the peptide resulted in recovery of QD PL as the Ru-phen diffused beyond the range of CT quenching.
4.2. Iron complexes as putative hole acceptors and electron acceptors
Recently, Benson's group reported a single-QD, CT-based sensor for maltose.11 As shown in Fig. 3, the conformational change in MBP upon binding maltose altered the efficiency of hole transfer from the QD to a ferrocene label on the protein. The single-particle format provided access to lower limits of detection and a more broad dynamic range than the analogous ensemble systems using the same Ru-phen. Willner's group has reported the use of hemin, an Fe3+-containing redox-active porphyrin, as a CT quencher of QD PL for the detection of target DNA sequences or adenosine monophosphate (AMP).53 In these configurations, the availability of a hemin-binding G-quadruplex sequence in a probe DNA strand was modulated through either hybridization with the target DNA or AMP-binding by another aptamer sequence in the same strand. In the presence of analyte, the hemin bound the G-quadruplex and provided the proximity for electron transfer from the QD. A hairpin structure was used to sequester the G-quadruplex sequence in the absence of analyte. In another configuration, the quenching of QD PL by hemin was also used to detect telomerase activity.54
 Fig. 3  Single-particle QD–CT biosensor for maltose with ferrocene as the CT quencher. (A) Design of the QD-bioconjugate and measurements via total internal reflection fluorescence (TIRF) microscopy. (B) Histograms showing the change in single QD emission intensities in the absence and presence of maltose. (C) Representative TIRF image. The red circles highlight single QD bioconjugates. Reprinted from ref. 11 Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
4.3. Quinones as electron acceptors
Wang's group has utilized a benzoquinone-producing enzyme-linked assay for the detection of glucose through CT quenching of QD PL,55 and reported an assay format for phenolic compounds that relied on enzyme-mediated oxidation to create their CT quenching-active quinone derivatives.56 Analysis of mitoxantrone–DNA interactions was also possible through monitoring CT quenching of QD PL.57 These assays were similar to the seminal work by Raymo in that CT quenching of the QD was mediated by adsorption of the quencher rather than proximity induced by a biomolecular bridge (as in the previous examples with Ru-phen and iron complexes). In contrast, Willner's group has used the latter format with quinones as CT quenchers for QDs.58,59 Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity was detected using QD–peptide conjugates where the peptide included a phosphotyrosine residue. This residue was dephosphorylated by ALP, then the enzyme tyrosinase was used to oxidize tyrosine to its quinone derivative, which quenched QD PL via CT.59 The intercalation of doxorubicin into double-stranded DNA has also been used by Willner's group to quench QD PL and detect target DNA sequences, thrombin, cocaine, and telomerase activity.58 In each case, transitions between single and double-stranded DNA (or vice versa) with hybridization or aptamer–substrate binding was used to modulate CT and QD PL efficiency as a function of biorecognition. The hybridization assay is illustrated in Fig. 4A. Medintz et al. demonstrated that QDs and CT could also be used to measure both in vitro and intracellular pH by self-assembling dopamine-labeled peptides to QDs.60 As shown in Fig. 4B, the sensing mechanism relied on the pH-dependent oxidation of dopamine, resulting in an increase in CT quenching. At basic pH, formation of the electron accepting quinone form is favored over the CT-inactive and reduced hydroquinone form that dominates at neutral and acidic pH. The ratio of QD PL to that of a pH-insensitive emitter served to provide a measure of pH changes.
 Fig. 4  (A) Detection of target DNA via intercalation of doxorubicin (DB) with CT quenching of QD PL. The inset shows the relative energy levels of the QD and DB that favor photoinduced electron transfer. The graph on the right shows quenching of QD PL increases with an increasing concentration of target DNA.58 Copyright 2011 Elsevier Publishing. (B) Schematic of a CT-based QD biosensor for measuring intracellular pH. QDs are self-assembled with dopamine labeled peptides, which exist in the hydroquinone form at acidic pH and in the quinone form at basic pH. The quinone is a good electron acceptor and quenches QD PL. The fluorescence images on the right show a gradual decrease in QD PL, relative to a pH-insensitive internal standard (FLX), when the pH 6.5 media bathing cells co-injected with QD–dopamine conjugates and FLX was exchanged for pH 11.5 media supplemented with a membrane permeabilizing drug. The relative QD and FLX PL intensity permitted determination of the intracellular pH.60 Copyright 2010 Nature Publishing Group. 
4.4. Other CT quenchers
It is evident from the above that there are a few tried-and-true CT quenchers for biosensing: Ru-phen and iron compounds such as hemin, specifically, along with quinione derivatives as mentioned previously. Nonetheless, a handful of other CT quenchers have been reported in the literature. Willner's group has also shown that oxidized nicotine adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) is a better CT quencher than the reduced form (NADH), permitting the detection of NADH dependent enzymes with boronic acid-capped QDs.61 This same group has also recently shown that the nitrogen rich-electroactive explosives picric acid, trinitrotoluene (TNT), and trinitrotriazine (RDX) will bind to hydroxydopamine-capped QDs with concomitant CT driven-quenching.62 Zhang et al. developed a QD probe for imaging cancer cells that overexpress folate receptor (FR).63 Here, folic acid (FA) was adsorbed on poly(ethyleneimine)-coated QDs and quenched QD PL via CT. Preferential binding of the FA by FR on cancer cells disrupted CT quenching and restored QD PL, as shown in Fig. 5. The probe detected 10 ng mL−1 FR in vitro, and QD PL scaled in proportion to the expected expression levels of FR when three different cell types were imaged using the probe.
 Fig. 5  Schematic (left) of a turn-on QD biosensor for imaging folate receptors overexpressed in cancer cells. QD PL is quenched via CT with folic acid. Folic acid receptors preferentially bind folic acid, removing these molecules from the surface of the QD, resulting in loss of CT quenching and an increase in QD PL. Fluorescence images (right) show that the degree of QD PL (green) is consistent with the amount of folic acid receptors expressed in three cell lines: Hela > HepG2 > A549. DAPI counterstaining is shown in blue. Reprinted from ref. 63 Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
5. Current challenges and outlook
An important challenge remaining in this field is developing a better understanding of the mechanism of CT quenching within QD-bioconjugates. As noted earlier, detailed physical studies on hydrophobic QDs with molecular adsorbates have indicated that many different factors can affect CT. In turn, many of these factors also appear to affect CT with aqueous QD-bioconjugates. Analogous to hydrophobic systems,30,32,41 CT decreases the PL lifetime of QD-bioconjugates (Fig. 2E) by serving as an additional pathway for non-radiative recombination of the exciton.12,64,65 As expected, the rate of CT increases with an increasing number of quenchers per QD, whether attached through a biomolecular bridge12,60,65 or directly coupled to the surface ligands of the QD.64 This effect occurs because a larger number of quenchers increases the number of pathways available for CT. Increasing shell thickness decreases the rate of CT,65 and smaller core sizes are generally quenched more efficiently than larger core sizes.12,16,60 In addition, single QD measurements on both aqueous bioconjugates and hydrophobic adsorbate systems have indicated that CT quenching leads to gray states (essentially negative charging of a QD which reduces its emission quantum yield), rather than dark states.11,39 QD-bioconjugates thus appear to be more complex but mechanistically similar CT systems when compared to their hydrophobic counterparts.
Knowles et al. have suggested that a “donor–bridge–acceptor” model may be suitable for the simplification of QD–CT systems, where the bridge collects the ligands, linkers, and inorganic shell (if present) as a net barrier to carrier tunneling between the QD and quencher.20,66,67 With QD bioconjugates in aqueous media, Fig. 1C, it is this barrier that has much greater complexity than hydrophobic systems with adsorbates. The range of possible ligands is more diverse, and careful selection of ligands is critical for biosensing functionality. CT has been shown to occur with both charged11,50,53 and neutral ligand coatings,60,64 although simple spectroscopic measurements have suggested the possibility of subtle mechanistic differences.12 Importantly, the linker is a biological macromolecule (e.g., nucleic acid, peptide, protein) that is generally solvated by aqueous electrolyte. A further and central question is the role of this biomacromolecular linker, if any, in the CT bridge between donor and acceptor. Experiments done with helical, Ru-phen-labeled peptide bridges did not show a strong dependence of QD–CT quenching rates on peptide length.65 Is it generally the case that carriers are transferred through or along the biomolecular bridge? A complication is the fact that CT through complex biomolecules such as proteins or DNA is still not fully understood. Or is it rather the case that putative CT quencher molecules must directly interact with the QD interface, even if only transiently, to physically function as CT quenchers? Conjugation to the QD would presumably increase the frequency of such interactions as the biomolecular bridge moiety dynamically samples its conformational space. However, models must reconcile the CT quenching observed with both flexible biomolecules (e.g., random coil peptides, single-stranded DNA) and more rigid ones (e.g., double-stranded DNA, folded peptides and proteins), recognizing that a single mechanism may not be sufficient to explain CT quenching within the full range of QD-bioconjugate systems.
To catalyze progress in CT-based biosensing with QDs, a simple predictive framework for a priori estimates of CT efficiency is needed. Innovation in FRET-based biosensing has been facilitated by the Förster framework, within which donor fluorescence and acceptor absorption spectra are sufficient for making useful predictions, particularly when combined with modeling of biomolecular structure.9 To establish a predictive framework for CT, it is first necessary to characterize the CT process for various permutations of QD bioconjugates in detail. This research has been extremely limited to date, but represents an important challenge at the intersection between biomedical and optoelectronic research with QDs. Expertise, materials, and characterization tools from both disciplines will be needed to develop an understanding that is sufficient for the rational design and optimization of new QD–CT biosensors. It is critical to be able to predict if CT will occur between a QD and a candidate redox-active molecule, ideally from data obtained through widely accessible techniques. Voltammetry would be one such technique; however, it is not clear that the QD states interrogated in these experiments are those most relevant to CT, as they are often not core states. The role of surface states in mediating CT is still unclear. It has been posited that trap states at the QD surface could help localize carriers for transfer to adsorbed quenchers,20 but it is also possible that new exciton recombination pathways at trap states will diminish CT efficiency. When considering the complexity of the “bridge” in QD-bioconjugate systems, it is also important to have insight into which factor(s) will dominate the CT efficiency, and whether FRET and CT will be competing pathways. Compromises with the core size and shell thickness of QDs for brightness and CT efficiency are to be expected, and studies with redox-active dyes and C60 have suggested that both donor–acceptor separation distance and the level of underlying spectral overlap are important contributing variables in determining the balance of quenching power between CT and FRET.15,34 Optimization of ligand and biomolecule essentially remains somewhat of a black box at this time.
Overall, it is clear that the CT quenching of QDs is a very promising signal transduction modality for biosensing and has a vast untapped potential. In terms of potential donor or acceptor materials, many of the Ru, Fe and quinone compounds investigated to date, and their analogues, are well-characterized mainstays of redox chemistry, suggesting not only many other possibilities for pursuing QD-based CT but also that a predictive knowledge framework may be achievable. Beyond these materials, carbon allotropes represent perhaps the largest untapped family of acceptors for QDs and CT. Indeed, photophysical interactions between QDs and carbon nanotubes, stacked-cup carbon nanotubes,68 graphene,69 graphene oxide,70 and buckminsterfullerene (C60)15,38,45 have already been reported. Although detailed studies on hydrophobic QD systems with adsorbed quenchers have provided some guidelines for designing QD–CT bioconjugates, these guidelines often run contrary to the current ideals for QD-based biological probes. However, the limited number of successful CT-based QD-bioconjugate probes reported in the literature to date suggests that our understanding of the process is incomplete. Additionally, with the exception of two examples,51,78 the majority of QD materials demonstrated in this CT context to date contain Cd (see Table 1), which has generated fears of long-term toxicity.79,80 For translation of QD–CT biosensing to in vivo systems, this issue may need to be properly addressed in the form of stable-overcoated QDs, or those that are synthesized from non-heavy-metal semiconductors but which still provide appropriate energy overlaps. It is worth noting that the metal complexes and other QD charge transfer partners may have associated toxicity and these issues will also need to be properly understood for both cellular and in vivo applications. Moreover, the need to assemble QD-biomolecular CT conjugates in a carefully controlled, homogeneous and oriented manner cannot be overstated.81–83 Overall, it is our hope that the research community will rise to the challenge of elucidating the underlying CT mechanism(s) in QD-bioconjugates, enabling new advances in their applications for bioanalysis and bioimaging.
Acknowledgements
MHS and ILM acknowledge the NRL NSI and Base Funding Program, and DTRA JSTO MIPR # B112582M. AMS acknowledges the Henry and Camille Dreyfus Foundation for an Environmental Postdoctoral Fellowship. WRA and WJM thank the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), the Canada Foundation for Innovation (CFI), the Canada Research Chairs and Michael Smith Foundation for Health Research Scholar programs, and the University of British Columbia for support of their research.
References
Source: Web of Science (Thomson Reuters), Search for “quantum dot* AND (CdS* OR CdTe*)” August 2014, These search terms, which return over 15000 hits, may provide an underestimate given the number of other quantum dot materials of interest.
Y. Zhang and T. H. Wang, Quantum dot enabled molecular sensing and diagnostics, Theranostics, 2012, 2, 631–654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Petrayeva, W. R. Algar and I. L. Medintz, Quantum dots in bioanalysis: a review of applications across various platforms for fluorescence spectroscopy and imaging, Appl. Spectrosc., 2013, 67, 215–252 CrossRef PubMed .

          K. Bullis, Quantum dots get commercial debut in more colorful Sony TVs, MIT Technology Review, Technology Review Inc. (MIT), Cambridge, MA,  2013 Search PubMed .
K. Bourzac, Quantum dots go on display, Nature, 2013, 493, 283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Chen, J. Zhao, V. P. Chauhan, J. Cui, C. Wong, D. K. Harris, H. Wei, H. S. Han, D. Fukumura, R. K. Jain and M. G. Bawendi, Compact high-quality CdSe-CdS core-shell nanocrystals with narrow emission linewidths and suppressed blinking, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 445–451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Greytak, P. M. Allen, W. H. Liu, J. Zhao, E. R. Young, Z. Popovic, B. J. Walker, D. G. Nocera and M. G. Bawendi, Alternating layer addition approach to CdSe/CdS core/shell quantum dots with near-unity quantum yield and high on-time fractions, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 2028–2034 RSC .
W. R. Algar, A. J. Tavares and U. J. Krull, Beyond labels: a review of the application of quantum dots as integrated components of assays, bioprobes, and biosensors utilizing optical transduction, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2010, 673, 1–25 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

FRET – Förster Resonance Energy Transfer From Theory to Applications, ed. I. Medintz and N. Hildebrandt, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany,  2013 Search PubMed .
W. R. Algar, H. Kim, I. L. Medintz and N. Hidebrandt, Emerging non-traditional Forster resonance energy transfer configurations with semiconductor quantum dots: Investigations and applications, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2014, 263, 65–85 CrossRef PubMed .
S. R. Opperwall, A. Divakaran, E. G. Porter, J. A. Christians, A. J. DenHartigh and D. E. Benson, Wide dynamic range sensing with single quantum dot biosensors, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8078–8086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. L. Medintz, T. Pons, S. A. Trammell, A. F. Grimes, D. S. English, J. B. Blanco-Canosa, P. E. Dawson and H. Mattoussi, Interactions between redox complexes and semiconductor quantum dots coupled via a peptide bridge, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16745–16756 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. T. Burks, A. D. Ostrowski, A. A. Mikhailovsky, E. M. Chang, P. S. Wagenknecht and P. C. Ford, Quantum dot photoluminescence quenching by Cr(III) complexes, photosensitized reactions and evidence for FRET mechanism, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 13266–13275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Stewart, A. L. Huston, A. M. Scott, A. L. Efros, J. S. Melinger, K. B. Gemmill, S. A. Trammell, J. B. Blanco-Canosa, P. E. Dawson and I. L. Medintz, Complex Förster energy transfer interactions between semiconductor quantum dots and a redox-active osmium assembly, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5330–5347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Stewart, A. L. Huston, A. M. Scott, E. Oh, W. R. Algar, J. R. Deschamps, K. Susumu, V. Jain, D. E. Prasuhn, J. Blanco-Canosa, P. E. Dawson and I. L. Medintz, Competition between Förster resonance energy transfer and electron transfer in stoichiometrically assembled semiconductor quantum dot-fullerene conjugates, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 9489–9505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. L. Medintz, D. Farrell, K. Susumu, S. A. Trammell, J. R. Deschamps, F. M. Brunel, P. E. Dawson and H. Mattoussi, Multiplex
charge-transfer interactions between quantum dots and peptide-bridged Ruthenium complexes, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 4831–4839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. P. Aryal and D. E. Benson, Electron donor solvent effects provide biosensing with quantum dots, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 15986–15987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. F. Barbara, T. J. Meyer and M. A. Ratner, Contemporary issues in electron transfer research, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 13148–13168 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Marcus, Chemical and electrochemical electron-transfer theory, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1964, 15, 155–196 CrossRef CAS .
K. E. Knowles, M. D. Peterson, M. R. McPhail and E. A. Weiss, Exciton dissociation within quantum dot–organic complexes: Mechanisms, use as a probe of interfacial structure, and applications, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 10229–10243 CAS .
K. E. Knowles, M. Malicki, R. Parameswaran, L. C. Cass and E. A. Weiss, Spontaneous multielectron transfer from the surfaces of PbS quantum dots to tetracyanoquinodimethane, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 7264–7271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. E. Knowles, M. Malicki and E. A. Weiss, Dual-time scale photoinduced electron transfer from PbS quantum dots to a molecular acceptor, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 12470–12473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. E. Knowles, D. B. Tice, E. A. McArthur, G. C. Solomon and E. A. Weiss, Chemical control of the photoluminescence of CdSe quantum dot-organic complexes with a series of para-substituted aniline ligands, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1041–1050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Malicki, K. E. Knowles and E. A. Weiss, Gating of hole transfer from photoexcited PbS quantum dots to aminoferrocene by the ligand shell of the dots, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 4400–4402 RSC .
A. J. Morris-Cohen, K. O. Aruda, A. M. Rasmussen, G. Canzi, T. Seideman, C. P. Kubiak and E. A. Weiss, Controlling the rate of electron transfer between a quantum dot and a tri-ruthenium molecular cluster by tuning the chemistry of the interface, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 13794–13801 RSC .
A. J. Morris-Cohen, M. T. Frederick, L. C. Cass and E. A. Weiss, Simultaneous determination of the adsorption constant and the photoinduced electron transfer rate for a CdS quantum dot viologen complex, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10146–10154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Morris-Cohen, M. D. Peterson, M. T. Frederick, J. M. Kamm and E. A. Weiss, Evidence for a through-space pathway for electron transfer from quantum dots to carboxylate-functionalized viologens, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 2840–2844 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Morris-Cohen, V. Vasilenko, V. A. Amin, M. G. Reuter and E. A. Weiss, Model for adsorption of ligands to colloidal quantum dots with concentration-dependent surface structure, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 557–565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tagliazucchi, D. B. Tice, C. M. Sweeney, A. J. Morris-Cohen and E. A. Weiss, Ligand-controlled rates of photoinduced electron transfer in hybrid CdSe nanocrystal/poly(viologen) films, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9907–9917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Boulesbaa, A. Issac, D. Stockwell, Z. Huang, J. Huang, J. Guo and T. Lian, Ultrafast charge separation at CdS quantum dot/rhodamine B molecule interface, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 15132–15133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, D. Stockwell, Z. Huang, D. L. Mohler and T. Lian, Photoinduced ultrafast electron transfer from CdSe quantum dots to Re-bipyridyl complexes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5632–5633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Issac, S. Jin and T. Lian, Intermittent electron transfer activity from single CdSe/ZnS quantum dots, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 11280–11281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, Z. Huang, S. Jin and T. Lian, Exciton dissociation in CdSe quantum dots by hole transfer to phenothiazine, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 19734–19738 CAS .
A. Boulesbaa, Z. Huang, D. Wu and T. Lian, Competition between energy and electron transfer from CdSe QDs to adsorbed rhodamine B, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 962–969 CAS .
J. Huang, Z. Huang, Y. Yang, H. Z. Hu and T. Lian, Multiple exciton dissociation in CdSe quantum dots by ultrafast electron transfer to adsorbed methylene blue, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 4858–4864 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jin, J. C. Hsiang, H. Zhu, N. Song, R. M. Dickson and T. Lian, Correlated single quantum dot blinking and interfacial electron transfer dynamics, Chem. Sci., 2010, 1, 519–526 RSC .
H. Zhu, N. Song and T. Lian, Controlling charge separation and recombination rates in CdSe/ZnS type I core-shell quantum dots by shell thicknesses, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 15038–15045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Song, H. Zhu, S. Jin, W. Zhan and T. Lian, Poisson-distributed electron-transfer dynamics from single quantum dots to C60 molecules, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 613–621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Song, H. Zhu, S. Jin and T. Lian, Hole transfer from single quantum dots, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8750–8759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Hines, M. A. Becker and P. V. Kamat, Photoinduced surface oxidation and its effect on the exciton dynamics of CdSe quantum dots, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 13452–13457 CAS .
S. N. Sharma, Z. S. Pillai and P. V. Kamat, Photoinduced charge transfer between CdSe quantum dots and p-phenylenediamine, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 10088–10093 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, K. Liu, P. Mukherjee, D. A. Hines, P. Santra, H. Y. Shen, P. Kamat and D. H. Waldeck, Driving charge separation for hybrid solar cells: photo-induced hole transfer in conjugated copolymer and semiconductor nanoparticle assemblies, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 26, 5066–5070 RSC .
P. V. Kamat, Boosting the efficiency of quantum dot sensitized solar cells through modulation of interfacial charge transfer, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 1906–1915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. V. Kamat, Manipulation of charge transfer across semiconductor interface. A criterion that cannot be ignored in photocatalyst design, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 663–672 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Bang and P. V. Kamat, CdSe quantum dot-fullerene hybrid nanocomposite for solar energy conversion: Electron transfer and photoelectrochemistry, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9421–9427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Tvrdy, P. A. Frantsuzov and P. V. Kamat, Photoinduced electron transfer from semiconductor quantum dots to metal oxide nanoparticles, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 29–34 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. J. Oh, M. Chen, C. H. Chuang, G. J. Wilson, C. Burda, M. A. Winnik and G. D. Scholes, Charge transfer in CdSe nanocrystal complexes with an electroactive polymer, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 18870–18884 CAS .
I. Yildiz, M. Tomasulo and F. M. Raymo, A mechanism to signal receptor-substrate interactions with luminescent quantum dots, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 11457–11460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Sandros, D. Gao and D. E. Benson, A modular nanoparticle-based system for reagentless small molecule biosensing, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 12198–12199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Sandros, V. Shete and D. E. Benson, Selective, reversible, reagentless maltose biosensing with core-shell semiconducting nanoparticles, Analyst, 2006, 131, 229–235 RSC .
V. S. Shete and D. E. Benson, Protein design provides lead(II) ion biosensors for imaging molecular fluxes around red blood cells, Biochemistry, 2009, 48, 462–470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Swain, J. Octain and D. E. Benson, Unimolecular, soluble semiconductor nanoparticle-based biosensors for thrombin using charge/electron transfer, Bioconjugate Chem., 2008, 19, 2520–2526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Sharon, R. Freeman and I. Willner, CdSe/ZnS Quantum
dots-G-quadruplex/hemin hybrids as optical DNA sensors and aptasensors, Anal. Chem., 2010, 82, 7073–7077 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Sharon, R. Freeman, M. Riskin, N. Gil, Y. Tzfati and I. Willner, Optical, electrical and surface plasmon resonance methods for detecting telomerase activity, Anal. Chem., 2010, 82, 8390–8397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yuan, W. Guo and E. Wang, Quantum dots-bienzyme hybrid system for the sensitive determination of glucose, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2008, 23, 1567–1571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yuan, W. Guo and E. Wang, Utilizing a CdTe quantum dots-enzyme hybrid system for the determination of both phenolic compounds and hydrogen peroxide, Anal. Chem., 2008, 80, 1141–1145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Yuan, W. W. Guo, X. R. Yang and E. Wang, Anticancer drug-DNA interactions measured using a photoinduced electron-transfer mechanism based on luminescent quantum dots, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 362–368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Raichlin, E. Sharon, R. Freeman, Y. Tzfati and I. Willner, Electron-transfer quenching of nucleic acid-functionalized CdSe/ZnS quantum dots by doxorubicin: A versatile system for the optical detection of DNA, aptamer-substrate complexes and telomerase activity, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2011, 26, 4681–4689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Freeman, T. Finder, R. Gill and I. Willner, Probing protein kinase (CK2) and alkaline phosphatase with CdSe/ZnS quantum dots, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2192–2196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. L. Medintz, M. H. Stewart, S. A. Trammell, K. Susumu, J. B. Delehanty, B. C. Mei, J. S. Melinger, J. B. Blanco-Canosa, P. E. Dawson and H. Mattoussi, Quantum-dot/dopamine bioconjugates function as redox coupled assemblies for in vitro and intracellular pH sensing, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 676–684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Freeman and I. Willner, NAD(+)/NADH-sensitive quantum dots: Applications to probe NAD(+)-dependent enzymes and to sense the RDX explosive, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 322–326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Freeman, T. Finder, L. Bahshi, R. Gill and I. Willner, Functionalized CdSe/ZnS QDs for the detection of nitroaromatic or RDX explosives, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 6416–6421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, J. M. Liu and X. P. Yan, Self-assembly of folate onto polyethyleneimine-coated CdS/ZnS quantum dots for targeted turn-on fluorescence imaging of folate receptor overexpressed cancer cells, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 228–234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Jin, G. Palui, T. Avellini, H. B. Na, C. Yi, K. L. Knappenberger and H. Mattoussi, On the pH-dependent quenching of quantum dot photoluminescence by redox active dopamine, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6006–6017 CrossRef PubMed .
A. M. Scott, W. R. Algar, M. H. Stewart, S. A. Trammell, J. B. Blanco-Canosa, P. E. Dawson, J. R. Deschamps, R. Goswami, E. Oh, A. L. Huston and I. L. Medintz, Probing the quenching of quantum dot photoluminescence by peptide-labeled ruthenium(II) complexes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 9239–9250 CAS .
A. M. Scott, T. Miura, A. B. Ricks, Z. E. X. Dance, E. M. Giacobbe, M. T. Colvin and M. R. Wasielewski, Spin-selective charge transport pathways through p-oligophenylene-linked donor-bridge-acceptor molecules, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 17655–17666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Scott, A. B. Ricks, M. T. Colvin and M. R. Wasielewski, Comparing spin-selective charge transport through donor–bridge–acceptor molecules with different oligomeric aromatic bridges, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2904–2908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Farrow and P. V. Kamat, CdSe Quantum dot sensitized solar cells. Shuttling electrons through stacked carbon nanocups, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 11124–11131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Chen, S. Berciaud, C. Nuckolls, T. F. Heinz and L. E. Brus, Energy transfer from individual semiconductor nanocrystals to graphene, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2964–2968 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. V. Lightcap and P. V. Kamat, Fortification of CdSe quantum dots with graphene oxide. Excited state interactions and light energy conversion, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7109–7116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Gill, R. Freeman, J. P. Xu, I. Willner, S. Winograd, I. Shweky and U. Banin, Probing biocatalytic transformations with CdSe-ZnS QDs, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 128, 15376–15377 CrossRef PubMed .
M. J. Ruedas-Rama and E. A. H. Hall, Azamacrocycle activated quantum dot for zinc ion detection, Anal. Chem., 2008, 80, 8260–8268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Ruedas-Rama and E. A. H. Hall, Multiplexed energy transfer mechanisms in a dual-function quantum dot for zinc and manganese, Analyst, 2009, 134, 159–169 RSC .
M. Shamsipur, M. Shanehasz, K. Khajeh, N. Mollania and S. H. Kazemi, A novel quantum dot-laccase hybrid nanobiosensor for low level determination of dopamine, Analyst, 2012, 137, 5553–5559 RSC .
D. Zhao, W. H. Chan, Z. K. He and T. Qiu, Quantum dot-ruthenium complex dyads: Recognition of double-strand DNA through dual-color fluorescence detection, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 3537–3543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. L. Sun, T. M. Yao and S. Shi, A molecular light switch Ru complex and quantum dots for the label-free, aptamer-based detection of thrombin, Analyst, 2012, 137, 1550–1552 RSC .
D. B. Cordes, S. Gamsey and B. Singaram, Fluorescent quantum dots with boronic acid substituted viologens to sense glucose in aqueous solution, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 3829–3832 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Choi, K. H. Chen and M. S. Strano, Aptamer-capped nanocrystal quantum dots: A new method for label-free protein detection, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 15584–15585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. E. Bradburne, J. B. Delehanty, K. Boeneman Gemmill, B. C. Mei, H. Mattoussi, K. Susumu, J. B. Blanco-Canosa, P. E. Dawson and I. L. Medintz, Cytotoxicity of quantum dots used for in vitro cellular labeling: role of QD surface ligand, delivery modality, cell type and direct comparison to organic fluorophores, Bioconjugate Chem., 2013, 24, 1570–1583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Hardman, A toxicologic review of quantum dots: toxicity depends on physicochemical and environmental factors, Environ. Health Perspect., 2006, 114, 165–172 CrossRef .
K. E. Sapsford, W. R. Algar, L. Berti, K. B. Gemmill, B. Casey, E. Oh, M. H. Stewart and I. L. Medintz, Functionalizing nanoparticles with biological molecules: developing chemistries that facilitate nanotechnology, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 1904–2074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. R. Algar, D. E. Prasuhn, M. H. Stewart, T. Jennings, J. B. Blanco-Canosa, P. Dawson and I. L. Medintz, The controlled display of biomolecules on nanoparticles: a challenge suited to bioorthogonal chemistry, Bioconjugate Chem., 2011, 22, 825–858 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Hildebrandt, Biofunctional quantum dots: controlled conjugation for multiplexed biosensors, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 5286–5290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† WRA and MHS contributed equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:
W. Russ Algar	Dr W. Russ Algar received his PhD in analytical chemistry from the University of Toronto (2010) working with Prof. Ulrich Krull. Following postdoctoral work at the Center for Bio/Molecular Science and Engineering, U.S. Naval Research Laboratory, with Dr Igor L. Medintz, he joined the Department of Chemistry at the University of British Columbia in 2012 as an assistant professor and Canada Research Chair (Tier 2) in Biochemical Sensing. His current research interests include the design and characterization of nanoparticles and other fluorescent probes for point-of-need diagnostics, cellular imaging and sensing, and quantitative bioanalysis.
Michael H. Stewart	Dr Michael Stewart received his BS from Wittenberg University and his PhD from the University of Michigan, where he specialized in synthetic organometallic chemistry. As a postdoctoral fellow at the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) he developed and advanced colloidal semiconductor quantum dot (QD)-based technologies for biological sensing and imaging applications. Since 2009, he has been a research chemist in the Optical Sciences Division at NRL, where his research involves investigating energy and charge transfer between QDs and various donors/acceptors, studying QD surface chemistry, and developing colloidal QD structures for optoelectronic applications.
Amy M. Scott	Dr Amy M. Scott earned her PhD in physical chemistry at Northwestern University in 2009 where she studied spin-selective charge recombination dynamics in organic donor–bridge–acceptor systems. She was a postdoctoral research at Argonne National Laboratory in 2010, and a Henry and Camille Dreyfus Environmental Postdoctoral Researcher at Columbia University from 2010–2012. She is currently an assistant professor of chemistry at the University of Miami in Miami, Florida (Aug 2013 – present). Her research focuses on controlling photoinduced charge, energy, and spin transport in organic, inorganic, and biomaterials for solar energy conversion.
Woohyun J. Moon	Woohyun J. Moon is currently completing a BSc in chemistry with a minor in biology at the University of British Columbia. Her current interests include using quantum dots to develop biological assays. Ms Moon received an Undergraduate Poster Award in the Analytical Division at the 2014 Canadian Society of Chemistry Conference, and has also received two awards for her involvement and leadership in the undergraduate student community.
Igor L Medintz	Igor L. Medintz received a PhD in molecular and cellular biology under Prof. Corinne Michels from the City University of New York in 1998. He was a postdoctoral fellow under Prof. Richard A. Mathies at the University of California, Berkeley, where he focused on developing FRET-based genetic assays for diagnosing cancer using microfabricated devices. Since 2004, he has been a Research Biologist at the Center for Bio/Molecular Science and Engineering of the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory in Washington, DC. Current research activities involve DNA-based energy transfer assemblies, understanding enzyme activity at nanoparticle interfaces, chemistries to bridge biolomolecular–nanomaterial interfaces, and designing biosensing hybrids that are based on different types of energy transfer.


CdSe/ZnS (∼615 nm)	Hemin	DNA & AMPb	
	
54

CdSe/CdS/ZnCdS/ZnS (600 nm)	
o-Quinone residues	Tyrosinase & thrombin activity	
	
71

CdSe/ZnS (∼575 nm)	NAD+c	Ethanol/RDX	NAD+-dependent enzymes/substrates	
61

CdSe/ZnS (560 nm)	
o-Quinone residue	Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity	Also tyrosinase reporter biocatalyst	
59

CdSe/ZnS (620 nm)	Azamacrocycle	Zn2+ ions	Ascribed to hole transfer	
72

CdSe/ZnS (500, 540, 620 nm)	Zincon	Mn2+ ions	
	
73

CdSe/ZnS (∼615 nm)	Doxorubicin	DNA, cocaine, thrombin, telomerase	
	
58

CdTe (570 nm)	Benzoquinone	Glucose	Bienzyme hybrid system	
55

CdTe (537 nm)	
o-Quinone (dopamine)	Dopamine	Laccase hybrid	
74

CdSe/ZnS (520, 550, 580 nm)	
o-Quinone (dopamine)	pH changes	
in vitro and intracellular	
60

CdTe (570 nm)	Mitoxantrone	DNA–anticancer drug interactions	
	
57

CdTe (528 nm)	Ru–polypyridyl complexes	Double-stranded DNA	
	
75

CdTe (560 nm)	Ru–polypyridyl complex	Thrombin	
	
76

CdSe/ZnS (563 nm)	Bipyridinium dication	Receptor–substrate interactions	Biotin–streptavidin	
48

CdSe/ZnS (604 nm)	Substituted viologen	Glucose	
	
77



Ru complex	InGaP/ZnS (660 nm) CdSe/ZnS (545 nm)	Pb ions	100 pM limit of detection	
51

Ru complex	CdSe (∼570 nm) CdSe/ZnS (565 nm)	Maltose	Protein-based	
49, 50

Ru complex	CdSe/ZnS (545 nm)	Thrombin	DNA-based	
52

Thrombin	PbS (1050 nm)	Thrombin	Thrombin binding aptamer	
78

Ru complex	CdSe/ZnS	Proteolytic enzyme activity	Several different QD emissions	
12

Folic acid	CdS/ZnS (500 nm)	Folate receptors	Cancer cell detection	
63


 	Fig. 1  Charge transfer quenching of QDs. (A) Dissociation of the exciton generated by photoexcitation of a QD through either (i) hole transfer from the QD or (ii) electron transfer from the QD. (B) Some examples of CT quenchers used for biosensing. (C) Schematic diagram of a generic QD bioconjugate for CT-based biosensing.	 

 	Fig. 2  Steady-state intensity and excited-state lifetime analysis of charge transfer quenching in QDs assembled with C60–peptide conjugates. (A) Chemical structure of the carboxylated C60, dihydrolipoic acid (DHLA) QD surface-functionalizing ligand, and peptide sequence that was attached to the C60 (pepC60) to facilitate its coordination to the QDs. (B) Representative TEM images of the 630 nm emitting QDs that engaged in charge transfer with the C60. (C) Model of a QD assembled with one pepC60. The blue sphere represents a QD with a radius of 30 Å (∼550 nm QD) with a DHLA ligand shell shown in light gray, which extends ∼11 Å from the QD surface. The partially folded peptide conformation shown is energy minimized and matches FRET separation data. The distance from the QD center to the center of the C60 is ∼56 Å. (D and E) Steady-state intensity and normalized time-resolved PL decay data collected from 630 nm QDs assembled with the indicated increasing ratios of pepC60. (F) Comparison of normalized quenching profiles from steady-state (blue) versus time-resolved PL decay data (green). Reprinted from ref. 15 Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  Single-particle QD–CT biosensor for maltose with ferrocene as the CT quencher. (A) Design of the QD-bioconjugate and measurements via total internal reflection fluorescence (TIRF) microscopy. (B) Histograms showing the change in single QD emission intensities in the absence and presence of maltose. (C) Representative TIRF image. The red circles highlight single QD bioconjugates. Reprinted from ref. 11 Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) Detection of target DNA via intercalation of doxorubicin (DB) with CT quenching of QD PL. The inset shows the relative energy levels of the QD and DB that favor photoinduced electron transfer. The graph on the right shows quenching of QD PL increases with an increasing concentration of target DNA.58 Copyright 2011 Elsevier Publishing. (B) Schematic of a CT-based QD biosensor for measuring intracellular pH. QDs are self-assembled with dopamine labeled peptides, which exist in the hydroquinone form at acidic pH and in the quinone form at basic pH. The quinone is a good electron acceptor and quenches QD PL. The fluorescence images on the right show a gradual decrease in QD PL, relative to a pH-insensitive internal standard (FLX), when the pH 6.5 media bathing cells co-injected with QD–dopamine conjugates and FLX was exchanged for pH 11.5 media supplemented with a membrane permeabilizing drug. The relative QD and FLX PL intensity permitted determination of the intracellular pH.60 Copyright 2010 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic (left) of a turn-on QD biosensor for imaging folate receptors overexpressed in cancer cells. QD PL is quenched via CT with folic acid. Folic acid receptors preferentially bind folic acid, removing these molecules from the surface of the QD, resulting in loss of CT quenching and an increase in QD PL. Fluorescence images (right) show that the degree of QD PL (green) is consistent with the amount of folic acid receptors expressed in three cell lines: Hela > HepG2 > A549. DAPI counterstaining is shown in blue. Reprinted from ref. 63 Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 
Footnote
† WRA and MHS contributed equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
