Non-fullerene acceptors with direct and indirect hexa-fluorination afford >17% efficiency in polymer solar cells   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1EE03225A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1EE03225A
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 645-659Non-fullerene acceptors with direct and indirect hexa-fluorination afford >17% efficiency in polymer solar cells†

        
          
            Guoping 
            Li‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Liang-Wen 
            Feng‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Subhrangsu 
            Mukherjee
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Leighton O. 
            Jones
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Robert M. 
            Jacobberger
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wei 
            Huang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ryan M. 
            Young
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Robert M. 
            Pankow
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Weigang 
            Zhu
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Norman 
            Lu
          
        
      ad, 
      
        
          
            Kevin L. 
            Kohlstedt
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Vinod K. 
            Sangwan
          
        
      *e, 
      
        
          
            Michael R. 
            Wasielewski
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Mark C. 
            Hersam
          
        
      *ae, 
      
        
          
            George C. 
            Schatz
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Dean M. 
            DeLongchamp
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Antonio 
            Facchetti
          
        
      *af and 

        
          
            Tobin J. 
            Marks
          
        
      *ae
aDepartment of Chemistry, and the Materials Research Center (MRSEC), Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois 60208, USA. E-mail: ryan.young@northwestern.edu; kkohlstedt@northwestern.edu; m-wasielewski@northwestern.edu; m-hersam@northwestern.edu; g-schatz@northwestern.edu; a-facchetti@northwestern.edu; t-marks@northwestern.edu
bMaterial Measurement Laboratory, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, Maryland 20899, USA. E-mail: dean.delongchamp@nist.gov
cTianjin Key Laboratory of Molecular Optoelectronic Sciences (TJ-MOS), Department of Chemistry, School of Science, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, P. R. China
dInstitute of Organic and Polymeric Materials, and Research and Development Center for Smart Textile, National Taipei University of Technology, Taipei 106, Taiwan
eDepartment of Material Science and Engineering, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois 60208, USA. E-mail: vinod.sangwan@northwestern.edu
fFlexterra Corporation, Skokie, Illinois 60077, USA
Received 
      14th October 2021
    , Accepted 22nd December 2021First published on 22nd December 2021AbstractThe rational molecular design of non-fullerene acceptors (NFAs) in organic solar cells (OSCs) can profoundly influence the photovoltaic (OPV) performance. To date, NFA fluorination has proven beneficial to cell performance. However, there is a lack of comprehensive understanding of how various fluorination modalities influence film morphology, carrier mobility, molecular packing, other structural properties, electronic structure, exciton separation, and charge transport, that determine ultimate cell efficiency. Here, we compare two types of end group (EG) fluorination patterns on Y6-based A-DAD-A cores, resulting in highly efficient NFAs: direct skeletal fluorination (BTF) and indirect trifluoromethyl fluorination (BTFM). These two patterns induce distinctive behaviors in the active layer blends with a chlorinated donor polymer D18-Cl and the additive, 1-chloronaphthalene, affording high PCE values of 17.30% (BTF + additive) and 17.10% (BTFM, no-additive). The BTFvs.BTFM OSC performance trends can be correlated with diffraction-derived differences in molecular packing. Density functional theory (DFT) reveals remarkably low internal reorganization energies and high electronic coupling between NFA dimers, greater and more numerous than in other NFAs reported to date, thus providing extended 3D charge transport networks in the thin film crystalline domains. Transient absorption spectroscopy reveals that hole transfer from the acceptor to the donor occurs in <300 fs and that photoexcited carriers persist for hundreds of ns in each blend film. The contrasting role of the additive in BTF and BTFM cells is further clarified by recombination dynamics analysis using in situ photocurrent and impedance spectroscopy. Overall, this work provides guidance for developing new NFAs via direct and indirect fluorination strategies for high efficiency OSCs.

Broader context
Polymer solar cells (PSCs) composed of solution processable, light weight, earth-abundant, non-toxic, mechanically durable organic materials with tunable properties offer a promising approach for large-scale/low cost light-to-electricity conversion. To date, the highest power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) near 18% have been just recently achieved with phase-separated polymer donor + small-molecule non-fullerene electron (NFA) bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) blends. However, these advances have been largely empirical, with those atomistic electronic and organizational features needed to achieve optimal blend structures and exciton dynamics control being only partly understood. Here, we compare/contrast in detail, using synthetic, crystallographic, morphological, and opto-electronic analyses, the effects of two very different NFA complementary fluorination modalities in defining bulk-heterojunction organization, carrier mobility, optical cross-section and exciton-splitting dynamics. The net result is PCEs well above 17% reflecting, among other factors, strong near-IR absorption, well-balanced hole and electron mobilities, and proper orientation of the molecular π-electron systems and compositional donor–acceptor phase separation in the PSC active layer. We also identify two NFA intermolecular interaction modes never before seen: strong F⋯NC bonding and bifurcated F⋯H–C hydrogen-bonding. The results of this study elucidate important building-block characteristics that enhance OSC performance and convey design implications for future higher performance BHJ materials.

Introduction
Solution-processable bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) organic solar cells (OSCs) offer great potential for industrialization, owing to their unique advantages of high power conversion efficiency (PCE), low-cost fabrication, light-weight, earth-abundance, and nontoxic environmental footprints.1 OSCs have thus attracted significant attention from the photovoltaic community during the past decade,1–3 and multiple types of OSC systems have been established, such as traditional polymer donor + small molecule acceptor solar cells,2–4 recently developed all-polymer solar cells,5,6 and all-small-molecule solar cells.7 While a wealth of excellent polymer donors8–10 have emerged, their lower power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) compared to those of their most efficient inorganic counterparts and poor ambient/thermal stability2,11,12 still pose a challenge for large-scale deployment.13 These issues mainly reflect the lack of appropriate acceptor materials with matching orbital energetic and photophysical properties.14–16 In this context, compared with the traditional fullerene-based acceptor (PC61/71BM, Fig. 1a), the recently developed non-fullerene acceptors (NFAs), with ITIC,3,4,17 IT-4F,18,19 Y520,21 and Y622 (Fig. 1b) as the most well-known examples, offer promising pathways to future advances in OSC performance and technologies. Emerging, frequently empirically-derived NFAs are significantly advancing the scope and understanding of soft matter photophysical processes for light-to-electricity energy conversion, such as enabling more tunable energetics and better harnessing of near-infrared photons, and modularizing synthesis for controlled electronic structure and scale-up.
 Fig. 1  Examples of (a) fullerene acceptors, PC61BM and PC71BM and (b) non-fullerene acceptors, ITIC, IT-4F, Y5 and Y6. Blue: electron-donating cores; green: solubilizing sidechains; and red: electron-withdrawing moieties. 
These new NFAs when matched with appropriate electron donors promote more tunable crystallinity and morphology in the blend films and therefore offer a rational route to performance increases via well-aligned energy levels, suppressed recombination processes, balanced hole and electron mobilities, and increased photocurrent densities.3,23–27 Consequently, the state-of-art OSCs are providing PCE values greater than 18% using A-DAD-A type NFAs.28–35 The benefits of NFA tunability are illustrated by the rapid recent advances in OSC synthetic strategies based on three main NFA components (Fig. 1b), namely, (1) the electron-donating core, (2) the solubilizing sidechain, and (3) the electron-withdrawing end group (EG).21 Among these strategies, the electron-withdrawing EG is considered as an essential component for creating an intramolecular “push–pull effect” to modulate intramolecular charge transfer (ICT).36,37 Thus, researchers have empirically explored various methods to probe the function of diverse EGs with the goal of developing superior NFAs from novel EGs.38–42 This laboratory and others found that EG halogenation, specifically fluorination, significantly enhances cell performance.18,37,43,44 Fluorine as the most electronegative element induces stronger intramolecular electron push–pull effects in NFAs without introducing deleterious steric impediments. Therefore, fluorinated NFAs typically exhibit more red-shifted optical absorption and lower orbital energetics, allowing them to more efficiently separate excitons at the donor–acceptor interface in the OSC bulk-heterojunction active layer.6,45,46 However, fluorination strategies have so far only focused on empirical relationships between the degree of NFA F substitution and OSC performance. Specifically, there is limited understanding of how the various fluorination patterns relate to OSC performance, including the F atom steric role, the origin of distinctive NFA packing motifs, film morphological behavior, molecule-level electronic structure, and bulk photophysical properties.
Here, we report a systematic comparative investigation of the impact of two very different fluorination patterns, direct fluorination and indirect –CF3 fluorination, on the NFA electronic, physical, molecular, morphological, and crystallographic properties. To this end we utilize the Y6 skeleton with naphthalenic π-extended EGs due to their established high photovoltaic performance,21 and here EG modification is used as the molecular platform to implement these two distinctly different fluorination modalities. Since EG fluorine atom density strongly affects OSC performance, we introduce two fluorination patterns on benzothiazole (BT) skeleton-based NFAs, BTF and BTFM, with an identical F atom density per molecule (Fig. 2a). BTF has 6 F atoms triply fluorinating the sp2 carbons of each naphthalenic “wing”—two at the 2 and 3 positions, one distributed between the 1 and 4 positions. BTFM has one –CF3 group per “wing” distributed between the 2 and 3 positions. Hence, BTF fluorination is directly coupled to the NFA π-system while that in BTFM is indirectly coupled. In both cases the isomers, differentiable by NMR, are inseparable by preparative chromatography or recrystallization (see ESI† Schemes S1–S4 and Section 3). Compared with the benzene-based non-extended trifluorinated EG (3F-IC),18 the naphthalene-based π-extended EG applied in this work not only facilitates intermolecular transport of the charge carriers and red-shifts the absorption,21 but is also synthetically more cost-efficient (3F-IC: 4 steps, ∼5% overall yield versus 3F/CF3-LIC: 5 steps, ∼15% overall yield).
 Fig. 2  Structures and physical properties of the donor polymer and non-fullerene acceptors (NFAs). (a) Chemical structures of the NFAs BTFM and BTF, donor polymer D18-Cl, and the processing additive 1-chloronaphthalene (1-CN). R1 = 2-ethylhexyl, R2 = 2-butyloctyl, and R3 = n-undecyl. For each ‘wing’ of BTF, Fa or b = F and Fc or d = F. (b) Optical absorption spectra of the donor and NFA film. (c) Energy levels of D18-Cl, BTF and BTFM estimated by cyclic voltammetry (CV). (d) First heating DSC thermograms of the indicated solution-cast NFAs. 
We focus here on a BTF vs BTFM comparative analysis with the versatile chlorinated donor polymer D18-Cl (Fig. 2a).47 While this approach surveys average contributions across each NFA structure class, property differences are readily assignable to the two fluorination patterns. Furthermore, comparing these results with those of the non-fluorinated and EG difluorinated analogues provides an even broader perspective – EG trifluorination significantly red-shifts optical absorption, compresses the optical bandgaps, and downshifts the exciton dissociation energetics – all critical for enhancing OSC performance. Precise molecular packing is first examined by single crystal X-ray diffraction, revealing for the first time a unique F-cyano group stacking motif. We also observe an unprecedented opposite OPV response of the two fluorinated NFAs to the commonly employed 1-CN processing additive. Detailed bulk-heterojunction thin-film characterization and DFT computation are also carried out. These factors together deliver enhanced device efficiency, with BTF blended with the polymer donor D18-Cl yielding a maximum PCE of 17.30% with 0.5% 1-CN, while the corresponding BTFM blend yields a maximum PCE of 17.10% without 1-CN. Despite the seemingly minor differences in BTF vs BTFM PCEs, distinct disparities in OSC recombination dynamics are measured by in situ integrated photocurrent device analysis. The favorable additive effects on BTF blend morphology are found to decrease bimolecular recombination and increase both carrier mobility and FF at the operating point of maximum PCE. In contrast, the presence of 1-CN in BTFM cells increases bimolecular recombination and reduces FF, thus providing experimental support for NFA-dependent OPV response in accord with the computational results.
Results and discussion
Materials synthesis and physical properties
We first describe the synthesis (ESI† Sections 2 and 3) and characterization of the new hexafluoro acceptor molecules and then discuss blends with the donor polymer D18-Cl to probe the impact of the two trifluorination patterns on photophysical processes and photovoltaic parameters. The underlying role of two different fluorination patterns is then assessed by multiple characterization techniques, including single-crystal X-ray diffraction (XRD), density functional theory (DFT) level computation, space-charge limited current (SCLC) measurements, 2D-grazing incidence wide angle X-ray scattering (2D-GIWAXS), AFM, TEM, and impedance-based integrated photocurrent device analysis (IPDA). All experimental details are provided in the ESI.† The synthetic pathways to the two new NFAs are outlined in ESI† Schemes S1–S4. 1H, 13C, 19F NMR spectra and mass spectra are also provided in the ESI† (Fig. S1–S31). The thermal properties of the two NFAs were studied by TGA and DSC. TGA shows that both the acceptors possess thermal decomposition temperatures above 300 °C (5% mass loss, BTF: 328 °C, BTFM 301 °C (Fig. S35, ESI†)), suggesting good thermal stability.
The UV-visible optical absorption spectra of BTF and BTFM are shown in Fig. 2b and Fig. S32 (ESI†), and data are summarized in Table 1. In dilute CHCl3 solution, the spectra of BTF and BTFM are nearly identical with the maximum (λsolmax) and shoulder peak located at 772 nm and 697 nm, respectively, indicating that both fluorination patterns are equally effective in creating NFA ICT effects. Furthermore, the nearly identical 0–1 and 0–0 peak intensity ratios48 of BTF and BTFM suggest nearly equal strength in intramolecular electron push–pull effects. The slightly higher absorption coefficient found for BTF solutions (1.28 × 105 mol L−1 cm−1 at λsolmax) vs BTFM solutions (1.17 × 105 mol L−1 cm−1 at λsolmax), presumably reflects the direct F – Csp2 p–π interaction in the former chromophore. For spin-coated films, both NFA spectra are strongly red-shifted, indicating the existence of J-like aggregation. However, BTF is more red-shifted than BTFM (Table 1), indicating a greater extent of close intermolecular stacking which is supported by the X-ray diffraction results (vide infra). Furthermore, the impact of two fluorination patterns can be seen in the onset of film optical absorption, 948 nm for BTF vs 935 nm for BTFM (Δλmax = 91 vs. 77 nm), proving that direct ring fluorination is more effective here in narrowing the energy bandgap.
Table 1 Summary of the optical, orbital energetic, and thermal properties of the acceptor




Acceptor

λ
solmax (nm)

λ
filmmax (nm)
Δλmax (nm)

λ
onset
opt (nm)

E
opg
t (eV)

E
CVHOMO/LUMO (eV)

E
UPSHOMO (eV)

T
C,onset (°C)
ΔH (J g−1)

T
m,onset (°C)
ΔHfusion (J g−1)





BTF

772
863
91
948
1.31
−5.65/−4.07
−5.61
195
8.3
309
15.9



BTFM

772
849
77
935
1.33
−5.62/−4.04
−5.58
177
3.2
286
19.6




We next estimated the LUMO and HOMO energy levels by cyclic voltammetry (CV; using the usual approximations,49,50 Fig. S33, ESI†) and ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS, Fig. S34, ESI†). The BTF HOMO level is (CV: −5.65eV and UPS: −5.61 eV) and lies slightly lower than that of BTFM (CV: −5.62 eV and UPS: −5.58 eV). The BTF LUMO level (CV: −4.07 eV) is also lower than that of BTFM (CV: −4.04 eV).
Regarding thermal properties, DSC was also employed to study the thermal behavior of the neat BTF and BTFM acceptors (Fig. 2d). Note that BTF shows a higher crystallization-transition temperature (Tc, Table 1) and normalized crystallization-transition enthalpy (ΔHC, Table 1) than BTFM, suggesting that the former has greater lattice cohesion and a higher tendency for crystallization and aggregation than the latter.51,52 This suggests a more extended acceptor domain in the BTF-derived D–A blend film active layer (vide infra). Both the acceptors begin to decompose immediately after the endothermic melting process is complete and the decomposition temperatures are in good agreement with the aforementioned TGA data (vide supra and ESI† Section 8).
Photovoltaic characteristics and carrier mobility
Next the comparative photovoltaic performance in a conventional OSC architecture, ITO-glass/hole transport layer/donor: acceptor BHJ active layer/electron transport layer/Ag, was probed. Optimization of the fabrication process is described in the ESI† Section 9. The D18-Cl:BTF-based devices show a slightly lower VOC of ≈0.86 V vs the D18-Cl:BTFM-based devices (VOC ≈0.88 V), in agreement with experimental energy levels (Fig. 2b and Table 2). Note that the energy loss, ΔEloss = Eoptg – q*VOC, where Eoptg is the optical bandgap, and q is the unit charge, is as low as 0.45 V for both acceptors, which is in the cohort of the most efficient NFAs reported to date.53,54 Similar values of ΔEloss for these two acceptors argue that the two fluorination modalities similarly impact the OSC performance in terms of how they affect exciton dissipation pathways. However, compared with BTFM, the BTF-based devices produce a slightly higher short circuit current density (JSC = 27.1 vs. 26.4 mA cm−2) in accord with the slightly red-shifted BTF absorption edge.
Table 2 Summary of the photovoltaic performance parameters and charge carrier mobilities for the indicated OSC blends




Blend

V
OC


J
SC


J
calSC
,



FF (%)
PCEc (%)

μ
h


μ
e


μ
h/μe


(D18-Cl)
(V)
(mA cm−2)
(× 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1)





a Fabricated with 1-CN as the processing additive.
b 
J
calSC is calculated from the integration of the external quantum efficiency spectrum.
c Photovoltaic data reported as averages taken over 10 separate devices where ± represents one standard deviation of the mean. The quantities in parantheses are data for the champion devices.






BTF

0.860
27.19
26.67
72.05
16.83 (16.13 ± 0.58)
2.08 ± 0.33
1.71 ± 0.22
1.21



BTF



0.863
26.87
26.23
74.57
17.30 (16.77 ± 0.53)
1.87 ± 0.24
0.99 ± 0.42
1.89



BTFM

0.875
26.72
26.31
73.12
17.10 (16.38 ± 0.62)
1.35 ± 0.32
0.95 ± 0.18
1.42



BTFM



0.882
26.18
25.28
70.62
16.27 (15.82 ± 0.42)
1.51 ± 0.43
1.43 ± 0.25
1.37




Interestingly, the D18-Cl:BTF- and D18-Cl:BTFM-based OSCs show opposite responses to the 1-CN processing additive (Table 2). Compared with the latter that achieve a higher PCE without 1-CN, the former devices require 1-CN for optimum performance. Thus, OSC performance was optimized to achieve a state-of-the-art PCE of 17.3% in D18-Cl:BTF devices with 0.5% 1-CN while a PCE = 17.1% was observed in D18-Cl:BTFM devices with no processing agent (1-CN reduces performance). In general, processing additives are known to enhance the FF contribution to OSC performance,55,56 and therefore, we hypothesize that the aromatic 1-CN additive favorably influences film morphology by interacting with the acceptor aromatic π-expanse.57,58 To support this hypothesis, we investigated another effective processing additive, 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO), which has an aliphatic chain with no π-electron structure.59–61
In the present case, replacing 1-CN with DIO (ESI† Section 9) lowers the performance of both the D18-Cl:BTF and D18-Cl:BTFM devices, mainly by reducing the FF and JSC. These results support the hypothesis that the 1-CN π-electron system plays a specific role in controlling the blend film morphology and thus influences device performance. A similar tendency is argued from thin-film characterization and DFT computation (vide infra).
Next assessed were hole and electron mobilities in hole-only and electron-only devices (device fabrication details are provided in ESI† Section 12) using the SCLC method (Fig. 3b, Table 2, and Fig. S45, ESI†). Interestingly, the hole mobility of the D18-Cl:NFA blend films, which is dominated by the donor domains, is not significantly impacted by the 1-CN additive (D18-Cl:BTF, 2.08 vs. 1.87; D18-Cl:BTFM, 1.35 vs. 1.51; in units of × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1). However, electron mobility, dominated by the acceptor domains, is significantly altered upon 1-CN addition (D18-Cl:BTF, 1.71 vs. 0.99; D18-Cl:BTFM, 0.95 vs. 1.43; in units of × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1). These mobility variations correlate well with relative device performance, and further support the hypothesis that the 1-CN additive mainly influences the acceptor domains of the BHJ active layer.
 Fig. 3  Photovoltaic properties and carrier mobilities of D18-Cl:NFA OSCs. (a) OSC current–voltage (J–V) characteristics; (b) corresponding external quantum efficiency (EQE) data for the indicated blends; and (c) hole-only and (d) electron-only mobilities measured by SCLC. 
Molecular packing and crystallographic analysis
To understand the relationship between the two different fluorination methods and the intermolecular packing, diffraction-quality single crystals of the BTF and BTFM were grown from saturated halogenated solvents. Multiple diffraction experiments were carried out on different samples in attempts to achieve the lowest goodness of fit (GooF) which are reported here (ESI† Section 9). In the single-crystal analysis of BTF, all three isomers co-crystallize in the unit cell of the refined BTF structure. So, it can be inferred that the three BTF isomers possess very similar crystallization characteristics. In contrast, even after multiple crystal growing attempts under different conditions, only a single isomer of BTFM could be crystallized (named, BTFM-1, ESI† Scheme S4) as seen in the refined crystal structure (Fig. 4a). From the bulk material solution NMR, BTFM-1 only accounts for ∼25% of the total composition of BTFM, suggesting that BTFM-1 may possess a higher crystallinity or a lower solubility than the other two isomers, such that BTFM-1 crystallizes first from the supersaturated solution.
 Fig. 4  Single-crystal structures of NFAs. (a) Plan view of the BTFM and BTF molecular conformations, where Dso = the distance of the S⋯O interactions, and Φ = the core – end group twist angle through the vinyl connection. (b) BTFM and BTF stacking motifs viewed along the EG stacking direction. The colors indicate different NFA components: red = F and CF3 group; blue: = naphthalenic end group; yellow = thieno[3,2-b]thiophene core unit; green = thiadiazole core unit; and the drawing illustrates the spatial orientation of the F⋯CN interaction and the two types of F⋯H–C hydrogen bonds. 
Generally, both acceptor molecules exhibit crescent-like configurations enforced by short sulphur–oxygen interactions, acting as conformational locks (Dso, Fig. 4a).62,63 BTF possesses a noticeably smaller intramolecular torsion angle than does BTFM-1 (Φ = 5.2° vs. 13.2°, Fig. 4a), which provides greater planarity for BTF, and thus is able to accommodate more electronic coupling to neighbours (vide infra). The two different fluorination modalities also induce differences in inter-molecular stacking. BTF exhibits diverse EG–EG stacking interactions (Fig. 4b, blue) compared with BTFM-1. Besides the EG-EG stacking, BTF also has stacking between two thieno[3,2-b]thiopene units (TT–TT, Fig. 4b, yellow) and two benzothiazole units (BT–BT, Fig. 4b, green). In the case of BTFM-1, the TT–TT and BT–BT stacking motifs are absent; however, two TT–BT stackings are observed. Surprisingly, it can be seen that one of the two trifluoromethyl groups (CF3-A, Fig. 4a and b) participates in the intermolecular EG–EG stacking of BTFM-1 (Fig. 4b, red circle) with a close F–N cyano group interaction (∼2.66 Å).64 Also, the cyano group CN bond length is impacted by donating a sigma hole to form the F-π interaction with CF3-A (Table S4, ESI†).65 Compared with BTF, this unique CF3-assisted stacking not only increases the electronic coupling strength in BTFM-1 stacking (72 meV vs. 26 meV, vide infra), but also establishes bifurcated hydrogen bonds66–68 between the F atom on CF3-B and the proton on the N-alkyl chain (Fig. S36 and Table S4, ESI†).65 This EG to alkyl chain hydrogen bonding therefore limits the free rotation of the N-alkyl chain. Interestingly, when the consecutiveness of the BTF and BTFM-1 stacking motifs is examined, it is seen that only the EG–EG stackings propagate through the entire crystal network (Fig. 5a, blue), while other types of stackings (TT–TT, BT–BT, and TT–BT) are all localized and separated spatially (Fig. 5a), which suggests that the main charge transport is indeed through the EG–EG stackings.
 Fig. 5  Single crystal molecular packing and the stacking distance of the present NFAs. (a) Long-range stacking pattern viewed along the b-axis. (b) NFA molecule crystallographic π–π stacking distances in the single crystal. 
The repeat distances of all the stacking motifs in the crystal networks of BTF and BTFM-1 were also calculated, including estimated standard deviations (Fig. 5b) to analyze the crystallization differences induced by these two molecular level fluorination patterns. Compared with the previously reported single-crystal structures of non-fluorinated Y5 and BT-LIC,21 both of the present newly developed acceptors have a closer EG–EG stacking distance of ≈3.34 Å. This close EG–EG stacking in BTF and BTFM-1 no doubt facilitates electron transport without sacrificing solution processibility, and thus enhances the bulk carrier mobilities. That the corresponding OSCs with direct and indirect fluorination both exhibit superior performance metrics is therefore not completely surprising.
Computational studies
We begin with computation of the frontier molecular orbitals (FMOs) of the subject NFAs. The HOMO energy is −5.76 eV for both BTFM-1 and BTF, across all isomers (ESI,† Fig. S62, S64–S75) and is in reasonable agreement with the cyclic voltammetry and ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy data (Table 1); likewise, the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energies are around −3.79 eV across all structures. Their HOMO–LUMO gaps are on average 1.97 eV. These energies are in good agreement with those of the previously reported BT series of NFAs.40,46
The internal reorganization energies (IREs) were then computed using the four-point method69 (ESI,† Section 16); see full details in Table S16 (ESI†). The electron IREs are smaller than those in our previously reported difluorinated BT-BO-L4F and Y6 molecules,46 suggesting enhanced facility of electron transport. This is in agreement with the significantly higher vertical electron affinities (≈3.05 eV) vs the BT series, by 0.1–0.2 eV; adiabatic affinities are also provided and act as a measure of the NFA stability towards a trapped/localized electron, such as a relaxed anion state, and are ≈3.07–3.21 eV. Interestingly, as more F atoms point ‘inside’ (from isomer-1 to isomer-3, ESI† Scheme S3), the IREs show a decreasing tendency in both BTF and BTFM-1, whereas the vertical electron affinities show an increasing tendency (from isomer-1 to isomer-3, ESI,† Scheme S4). This suggests that the ‘inside’ Fs may be more effective in reducing bimolecular recombination while the ‘outside’ Fs tend to stabilize excitons. Fig. 6c and d show the electronic coupling between the near-neighbor pairs70 of each dimer relative to a central molecular structure, in each single crystal of BTFM-1 and BTF. The BTF crystal has up to 17 near-neighbors, while non-zero coupling exists for only four dimers, which range between 7.76 and 26.17 meV. That said, four appreciable electronic couplings are unusual, as only two normally exist.21,50 The BTFM-1 crystal has eight near-neighbors, all with non-zero coupling; full details are summarized in Table S18 and Fig. S63 (ESI†). Three dimers have appreciable electron-coupling (AF: 17.11 meV, AG: 20.96 meV, AI: 14.91 meV) while the fourth has significant electron-coupling (AE: 71.56 meV). The fact that both BTF and BTFM-1 have more than two electron transport pathways is consistent with the higher-performing PCEs than in previous NFA structures, but may not be the exclusive origin.43
 Fig. 6  Summary of the NFA computational results. (a) Computed internal reorganization energies (IREs, λe) of the isomers of BTF and BTFM. (b) Vertical ionization energy (ΔIEv) and vertical electron affinity (ΔEAv) of BTF and BTFM. Computed electronic coupling within the (c) BTF's and (d) BTFM-1's crystal networks (top) and the plot of coupling strengths (bottom); the letters indicate each individual coupling neighbor. Note that only the pairs with nonzero coupling strength are plotted. 
The frontier molecular orbitals (FMOs) were visualized for the dimer pairs with appreciable coupling and are shown in Fig. S63–S74 (ESI†). We see that in the dimers with EG–EG overlap, the LUMO density is delocalized between the two EGs of each pair, while their HOMOs are not. For core–core overlap, such as with the BTFM-1 dimer AD, the HOMO density is delocalized across the structures in the pair. This is further evidence that the end groups of the NFAs are key to the electron transport.70
Morphological characterization
To understand how the two types of fluorination modalities impact the film morphology and crystallinity of the BHJ films, the donor–acceptor blend films were characterized with AFM, high-resolution TEM, 2D-GIWAXS, and Resonant Soft X-ray Scattering (RSoXS). The surface roughness of the blend films was first imaged by AFM. Both the D18-Cl:BTF and D18-Cl:BTFM films exhibit smooth surface features within the imaging area (RMS <1 nm, 200 nm × 200 nm, Fig. 7, ESI† Fig. S39–S41) and have similar surface roughness when processed similarly (Rq ≈ 0.6 nm without the 1-CN additive; Rq ≈ 0.8 nm with additive), suggesting that the different NFA fluorination patterns do not significantly alter the D–A phase microstructure. Upon the addition of the 1-CN additive to the donor + acceptor solutions, both the blend films slightly increase in surface roughness.
 Fig. 7  TEM and AFM images of D18-Cl:BTF and D18-Cl:BTFM blend films. First row: AFM height images of blend surfaces. Second row: TEM images of blend films, where the darker region stands for acceptor aggregation features of the blend films. 
To further understand how the two types of fluorination and the additive affect the phase separation of the blend films, TEM images were recorded in the bright field mode (ESI† Section 13), in which the more crystalline or denser acceptor domains more strongly scatter electrons,46,71 and thus appear to be darker in the images72 (Fig. 7). When there is no additive in the blend films, the BTF blend shows a greater volume fraction of dense regions compared to the BTFM blend. This suggests that BTF naturally possesses greater crystallinity than BTFM, consistent with the UV-vis, DSC, and GIWAXS crystallinity trends noted above and below. Interestingly, upon the addition of 1-CN to the BTF blend (0.5% v/v, the molar 1-CN:NFA mole ratio in the coating solution is ≈ 10:1), fewer dense regions appear suggesting that the crystallinity of the BTF in the blend film is reduced. In BTFM, the 1-CN additive leads to a larger volume of dense regions, suggesting the crystallinity of BTFM is enhanced. To further understand the impact of fluorination and additive on film morphology, the blend films with 3% 1-CN additive and without additive were both next characterized using 2-D GIWAXS and RSoXS in combination with simulated (from the single-crystal analyses) powder X-ray diffraction patterns to investigate the differences in packing and ordering caused by the different fluorination patterns and the additive.
The 2-D GIWAXS patterns, pole figures, relative crystallinities, in-plane and out-of-plane 1-D profiles, and the d-spacings of the blends are summarized in Fig. 8a-c, Fig. S46–48 and Tables S12 and S13 (ESI†). Importantly, strong low-q peaks in the range of 0.35–0.5 Å−1 are observed in both neat acceptor and blend films and likely arise from acceptor ordering, but these peaks are absent in the single crystal diffraction data of the neat acceptors. Therefore, GIWAXS reveals that instead, thin film polymorphs of the small molecule acceptors are present with a unit cell that was not observed in the single crystals. For consistency, attempts to index the peaks of these polymorphs by analogy to the single-crystal indexing were made.
 Fig. 8  X-Ray characterization of D18-Cl:BTF and D18-Cl:BTFM blends and the relative blend film domain purity. (a) 2-D GIWAXS patterns. (b) Pole figures calculated from (h00) π–π stacking peak at 1.7 Å−1. (c) Plot of the relative degree of crystallinity of the 4 blends obtained by integrating the pole figures in (b). (d) Relative average phase purities from R-SoXS. The purity uncertainties calculated from R-SoXS data were acquired at photon energies in the range of 283–284 eV. 
In the neat films of both acceptors, a (h00) π–π stacking peak (crudely analogous to the a-axis of the single-crystal unit cells) appears at ≈1.7 Å−1 with a strong out-of-plane preference, as shown in the 2-D data as well as the pole figures, suggesting that both the molecules exhibit a preferential π-face-on orientation of the conjugated plane.6,73,74 The intermolecular d-spacing of the two acceptors calculated from the (h00) π–π stacking peak is observably different (BTF ≈ 0.35 nm, BTFM ≈ 0.37 nm) suggesting a closer stacking distance in the ring-fluorinated acceptor, BTF, which is consistent with the trend found in the single-crystal structures (vide supra).
The 2-D GIWAXS data for the blend films are shown in Fig. 8a. In all four blend films and the corresponding neat films, a characteristic (00l, qxy) reflection located at ≈0.32 Å−1 can be assigned to the alkyl-chain lamellar periodicity of D18-Cl (crudely analogous to the c-axis of the single-crystal unit cells). This suggests the preferential π-face-on ordering characteristics of the donor are mostly retained in the blend film. For a consistent comparison, the relative degree of crystallinity (rDoC) of the blend films (Fig. 8c) was calculated from the predominantly out-of-plane π–π (h00) peak near 1.7 Å−1, which the GIXD patterns for both molecules exhibit. The rDoC is seen to decrease with 1-CN addition in the D18-Cl:BTF blend whereas in the D18-Cl:BTFM blend addition of 1-CN results in a slight increase of film crystallinity. Similar trends among the blend systems are also seen when rDoC is calculated using the low-q peaks over the range 0.3 to 0.5 Å−1 (Fig. S47, ESI†). When 1-CN is added to the blend film, the d-spacings corresponding to the low-q peaks in the above range from both the D18-Cl:BTFM and D18-Cl:BTF films increase monotonically.
The diffraction coherence length (CL) as measured using a Scherrer-style analysis75 shows the opposite trend in the D18-Cl:BTF and D18-Cl:BTFM blends. In the (h00) direction, compared with the undoped film, the CL from the low-q peaks corresponding to acceptor ordering in the 1-CN doped D18-Cl:BTFM blend film increases from 9.0 nm to 20.9 nm, indicating the formation of larger crystalline acceptor domains. But the CL of the corresponding peak from the 1-CN doped D18-Cl:BTF blend film decreases from 12.6 nm to 5.7 nm, indicating the acceptor domain size along this axis is suppressed by the 1-CN additive. This result is also consistent with the overall decrease in rDOC of D18-Cl:BTF with 1-CN addition. For the (h00) π stacking peak, the CL of both the D18-Cl:BTFM and D18-Cl:BTF blends increases to different extents with 1-CN addition (D18-Cl:BTFM: 2.4 to 7.0 nm, D18-Cl:BTF: 2.4 to 4.8 nm).
The RSoXS analysis (Fig. 8d and Fig. S48, ESI†) indicates that all samples show a higher scattering intensity in low-q at resonant and non-resonant energies implying that this feature likely arises from large scale (>100 nm) mass roughness variations.49,76 Samples with 1-CN exhibit a slightly higher intensity of this low-q peak (also in non-resonant 270 eV profiles) indicating a slightly coarser morphology with 1-CN addition that is consistent with the surface features found in AFM. The four sets of films exhibit a close sample domain purity distribution, but from the overall trend derived from the averages of the different scattering energies, it can still be seen that 1-CN imparts an opposite effect on the domain purities (estimated by orientation contrast contribution at different energies) for the D18-Cl:BTF and D18-Cl:BTFM blends which is consistent with the observations from HR-TEM above.
Femtosecond transient absorption spectroscopy
Femtosecond (fsTA) and nanosecond (nsTA) transient absorption spectroscopy were conducted to explore the dynamics of charge separation and recombination in the donor/acceptor bulk heterojunction films. The films were pumped with a laser pulse at 830 nm and the transient absorption was detected using a broadband white light source. The 830 nm pump is near the peak absorption of the BTF and BTFM acceptors and is in a spectral region where the absorption of the D18-Cl donor is negligible. Therefore, the regions of BTF and BTFM within the bulk-heterojunction films are selectively photoexcited, enabling exciton generation/diffusion in the acceptor and hole transfer from the acceptor to donor while suppressing exciton generation/diffusion in the donor and electron transfer from the donor to acceptor and precluding energy transfer. The kinetics are fit via global analysis using a sequential A → B → C → D model, as described further in the ESI,† Fig. S50–S61 and Tables S14 and S15, in which the last term is quadratic to account for bimolecular recombination of free carriers.
Since the ground-state bleach of D18-Cl at ≈590 nm is within the instrument response time of ≈300 fs in fsTA, we infer an ultrafast exciton generation process in the BTF and BTFM acceptors in the blends, and ultrafast hole transfer from the BTF and BTFM acceptors to the D18-Cl donor. (Fig. 9a). The profile spectra observed within the instrument response for each of the four blend films are similar, suggesting that the OSC performance difference is less likely caused by the photo-excitation and hole transfer processes occurring within these early stages. Instead, the data are consistent with our hypothesis that different electron transfer processes induced by different BHJ morphologies in the acceptor domains causes the performance difference in the devices. The kinetics of the ground-state bleach of D18-Cl (Fig. 9b) indicate that free carriers persist for hundreds of ns in each of the blend films, ensuring the effective transport of the charge carriers. The ground-state bleach of D18-Cl is depleted by 90% within 470, 680, 420, and 550 ns for films containing BTF without 1-CN, BTF + 1-CN, BTFM without 1-CN, and BTFM + 1-CN, respectively. This tendency suggests that the lifetime of free carriers in each of the blend films is generally similar, although free carriers live longer in films with the 1-CN additive.
 Fig. 9  (a) Evolution-associated spectra of the first species that is detected within the instrument response time of ≈300 fs for D18-Cl:BTF and D18-Cl:BTFM blend films. (b) Kinetics (circles) and corresponding fits (lines) of the ground-state bleach of the D18-Cl polymer obtained from nsTA. Plots are offset vertically by 0.5 for clarity. The films are excited at 830 nm. 
Charge recombination and extraction dynamics
To further elucidate the roles of the two fluorination modalities in the present photophysical processes, we performed in situ measurements of recombination dynamics of photoexcited carriers in fully functional cells. To this end, we performed integrated photocurrent device analysis (IPDA)43,46,77 in the D18-Cl:BTF and D18-Cl:BTFM devices with and without 1-CN additive (0.5%) in an N2 glove box. The motivation for developing IPDA is because it gives a more accurate value for relevant OSC parameters, especially recombination coefficient (kbr), compared to conventional methods such as open-circuit voltage decay (OCVD).77In situ IPDA measurements in an inert environment, for the first time, allowed us to reveal minor differences in the recombination parameters in high-performance NFA OSCs having PCE differences of less than 1% (PCE >17%). Earlier, ambient IPDA measurements could only reveal underlying photophysical processes in OSCs with dramatic differences in cell performance originating from EG functionalization or annealing conditions.46,49,78 Since additives in OSCs improve performance via increased FF, bimolecular recombination related losses are expected to differ in cells with and without the additive. As described elsewhere,77 IPDA quantifies both recombination rate (kbr) and charge extraction rate (kext) through in situ measurement of carrier lifetime and mobility at the maximum power point (V = Vmp). These parameters are extracted from photocurrent and chemical capacitance measurements via impedance spectroscopy as a function of bias and illumination intensity while the total number of carriers (n = nmp) at V = Vmp are calculated using a self-consistent iterative method. BTF devices (ESI† Fig. S76 and S77) with the 1-CN additive show a roughly two-fold smaller value of average kbr at a larger average nmp value compared to BTF devices without the additive (Fig. 10a). In contrast, BTFM devices with 1-CN additive show a reduced recombination rate at a larger nmp value compared to BTFM cells without the additive. Similarly, the average mobility of electrons and holes, charge extraction, and charge recombination lifetime show similar trends between the two kinds of cells (Fig. 10b and c). Overall, the FF in OSCs using fullerenes, NFAs, and poly-small-molecule acceptors is known to correlate with these parameters through a competition factor (θ ∼kbr/kext) that takes into account competing charge extraction and recombination processes.79 Overall, the D18-Cl:BTF OSCs with the additive have a larger FF and smaller θ than D18-Cl:BTF cells without the additive (Fig. 10d). However, D18-Cl:BTFM cells with the additive show a smaller FF and larger θ compared to D18-Cl:BTFM cells without the additive. The differences in average values are clearly evident despite significant device-to-device variations between the kind of cell (Fig. 10a–c), highlighting the robustness of the analysis. Thus, the inverse relation between FF and θ can be directly correlated with improved blend morphology in the D18-Cl:BTF cells with 1-CN additive and D18-Cl:BTFM cells without the additive, as suggested by the experimental and computational results above.
 Fig. 10  (a) Plot of average in situ bimolecular recombination coefficient (kbr) versus average carrier density (nmp) at maximum power point for D18-Cl:BTF and D18-Cl:BTFM cells with and without 1-CN additive. The data are averaged over 4–6 cells of each kind and error bars show standard deviation. (b) Average of In-situ carrier mobility (μ) versus average nmp for the four kinds of solar cells shown in the legend in (a). (c) Plot of average charge extraction time (τex) versus average recombination lifetime (τrec) for the solar cells shown in the legend in (a). (d) Fill factor (FF) versus competition factor (θ) for total 21 devices measured for D18-Cl:BTF and D18-Cl:BTFM cells with and without the 1-CN additive. Data for all 5 different illumination intensities from 0.3 Sun to 1.0 Sun are included. 
Conclusions
The synthesis and characterization of the direct ring-fluorinated and indirect trifluoromethyl-fluorinated nonfullerene acceptors BTF and BTFM are reported. We show that both direct and indirect fluorination modalities can significantly enhance the corresponding OSC performance under different fabrication conditions. Diverse suites of characterizations were applied to elucidate the differences between direct and indirect fluorination effects on the NFAs and their performance in bulk-heterojunction blends with the donor polymer D18-Cl. It can be seen that both the two fluorination modalities red-shift the optical absorption profiles and lower the FMO energies. While BTF and BTFM have very similar solution absorption, BTF is more effective in red-shifting the absorption in the film state and lowering the FMO energies. Compared with indirectly fluorinated BTFM, directly fluorinated BTF shows greater crystallinity as indicated by the higher Tc and Tm. Single-crystal X-ray analysis indicates that BTF isomers form cocrystals in the single crystal unit cell with a close π–π stacking distance. In contrast, only the single-crystal of isomer BTFM-1 is found in bulk BTFM, which indicates that it may possess a higher crystallinity or a lower solubility than the other two isomers. Also only BTFM-1 has a close intermolecular CF3-cyano group interaction and a unique EG-alkylchain bifurcated hydrogen-bond.65,67,68 Different stacking motifs were examined in BTF and BTFM-1, and only the EG–EG stacking can propagate through the entire crystal network, whereas other stacking motifs are localized and gapped spatially. Photovoltaic measurements reveal an additive-dependent performance relationship, with 1-CN enhancing the performance of the D18-Cl:BTF-based devices, while compromising that in the D18-Cl:BTFM-based OSCs. SCLC measurements suggest that 1-CN influences OSC performance by modifying the electron mobility, while hole mobility remains largely unchanged. DFT-level computation reveals multiple large electronic coupling neighbors and the low IREs in the BTF and BTFM crystal networks which should enable efficient intermolecular exciton separation and transport. Also, as the F substitution position systematic varies from pointing outside to pointing inside, a decreasing trend in IREs was found in BTF and BTFM, which provides a design principle for future development of NFAs with low IREs.
Morphological characterization data indicate that the opposite response of device performance to the additive most likely reflects microstructural differences in the BHJ layer acceptor domains, where HR-TEM, 2D GIWAXS, and RSoXS measurements confirm that the 1-CN additive reduces the overall D18-Cl:BTF blend film crystallinity, while promoting the overall D18-Cl:BTFM-1 blend film crystallinity. These results suggest that an ‘intermediate’ level of BHJ layer crystallinity is essential to the performance of BHJ-type OSC devices. The fsTA spectra observed within the instrument response time indicate ultrafast hole transfer from the acceptor to the donor, and the nsTA data demonstrate that the films with 1-CN added have longer exciton lifetimes, consistent with the impedance-based analysis. This work first develops the synthesis of two new hexafluorinated NFAs with different EG fluorination modalities, which when blended with the donor polymer D18-Cl afford PCEs as high as 17.3%. These metrics closely rival the current literature record of 18% and argue that OPVs remain a viable strategy for efficient solar energy capture. We believe that this contribution not only provides the community with a valuable EG strategy for developing efficient OSC NFAs, but also provides a comprehensive approach to understanding the fundamental interplay between the NFA structure and exciton dynamics in BHJ OSCs.
Author contributions
G. L., L. F., A. F. and T. J. M. conceived the idea. G. L. synthesized BTF and BTFM, characterized the physical properties (UV, CV, DSC, TGA, TEM, AFM), and grew the single crystals. L. F. fabricated and measured the solar cell devices and conducted SCLC measurements. S. M. and D. M. D conducted the GIWAXS measurement and the data analysis. L. O. J., K. L. K and G. C. S. performed the DFT computation. R. M. J., R. M. Y., and M. R. W. conducted the fs/ns TA measurement and the data analysis. W. H. conducted the UPS measurement; R. M. P. conducted the GPC characterization; V. K. S. and M. C. H. conducted the IPDA measurement and the data analysis. G. L. and W. Z. performed the TEM analysis. G. L. and N. L. performed single-crystal structure analysis. All authors analysed the results and prepared the paper.
Conflicts of interest
Authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by U.S. Office of Naval Research Contract #N00014-20-1-2116 (G. L.: material synthesis and characterizations; L. W. F.: photovoltaic device fabrication and measurement), by the U.S. Department of Commerce, National Institute of Standards and Technology as part of the Center for Hierarchical Materials Design Award #-70NANB10H005 (S. M.:GIWAXS and RSoXS analysis), and by the Northwestern University Materials Research Science and Engineering Center Award NSF DMR-1720139 (V. K. S.: impedance measurements). Theory development (K. L. K., L. O. J., G. C. S.) was supported by DOE grant DE-AC02-06CH11357. Transient optical spectroscopy was supported by the U. S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences under Award DE-FG02-99ER14999 (MRW). This work made use of the EPIC, BioCryo, Keck-II, and/or SPID facilities of Northwestern's NUANCE Center, which received support from the Soft and Hybrid Nanotechnology Experimental (SHyNE) Resource (NSFECCS-1542205) and Northwestern University Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (NSF DMR-1720139). We thank the Integrated Molecular Structure Education and Research Center (IMSERC) for characterization facilities supported by Northwestern U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF) under NSF CHE1048773, Soft and Hybrid Nanotechnology Experimental (SHyNE) Resource (NSF NNCI-1542205), the State of Illinois, and International Institute for Nanotechnology (IIN). This work was supported by the Department of Energy under contract no. DE-AC02-05CH11231 and used resources at beamline 8-ID-E of the Advanced Photon Source, a U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) Office of Science User Facility operated for the DOE Office of Science by Argonne National Laboratory under Contract No. DE-AC02-06CH11357. This research used beamlines 7-ID-1 (SST-1) and 11-BM (CMS) of the National Synchrotron Light Source II, a U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) Office of Science User Facility operated for the DOE Office of Science by Brookhaven National Laboratory under Contract No. DE-SC0012704.This work (IPDA) made use of the MatCI Facility which receives support from the MRSEC Program (NSF DMR-1720139) of the Materials Research Center at Northwestern University. W. Zhu thanks the Open Foundation of State Key Laboratory of Electronic Thin Films and Integrated Devices (KFJJ202001, Unconventional Organic Nonlinear Optical Hybrid Materials and Devices) for partial financial support. Dr Jianhua Chen, and Mr Brendan Kerwin are acknowledged for their support on some characterization techniques. The theory research was also supported in part through the computational resources and staff contributions provided for the Quest high performance computing facility at Northwestern University which is jointly supported by the Office of the Provost, the Office for Research, and Northwestern University Information Technology. This work made use of the GIANTFab core facility at Northwestern University. GIANTFab is supported by the Institute for Sustainability and Energy at Northwestern and the Office of the Vice President for Research at Northwestern. Dr Ding Zheng at Department of Chemistry, Northwestern University was acknowledged for his support in some characterization studies. Note that certain commercial equipment, instruments, or materials are identified in this paper to specify the experimental procedure adequately. Such identification is neither intended to imply recommendation or endorsement by NIST, nor is it intended to imply that the materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the purpose.
Notes and references
K. A. Mazzio and C. K. Luscombe, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 78–90 RSC .
L. Y. Lu, T. Y. Zheng, Q. H. Wu, A. M. Schneider, D. L. Zhao and L. P. Yu, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12666–12731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Cheng, G. Li, X. Zhan and Y. J. N. P. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2018, 12, 131–142 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yan, S. Barlow, Z. Wang, H. Yan, A. K.-Y. Jen, S. R. Marder and X. Zhan, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 1–19 CrossRef .
C. Lee, S. Lee, G.-U. Kim, W. Lee and B. J. Kim, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 8028–8086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, F. S. Melkonyan, A. Facchetti and T. J. Marks, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 4129–4142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Kan, Y. Kan, L. Zuo, X. Shi and K. Gao, InfoMat, 2021, 3, 175–200 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, Y. Jiang, K. Jin, J. Qin, J. Xu, W. Li, J. Xiong, J. Liu, Z. Xiao, K. Sun, Y. Shangfeng, Z. Xiaotao and D. Liming, Sci. Bull., 2020, 65, 272–275 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, G. Li, J. Fang, X. Guo, L. Zhu, B. Guo, Y. Wang, G. Zhang, L. Arunagiri and F. J. N. C. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–9 Search PubMed .
H. Sun, F. Chen and Z. K. Chen, Mater. Today, 2019, 24, 94–118 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Burlingame, M. Ball and Y.-L. Loo, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 947–949 CrossRef .
Q. Yue, W. Liu and X. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 11613–11628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Q. Zhang, H. S. Tan, X. G. Guo, A. Facchetti and H. Yan, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 720–731 CrossRef CAS .
G. Y. Zhang, J. B. Zhao, P. C. Y. Chow, K. Jiang, J. Q. Zhang, Z. L. Zhu, J. Zhang, F. Huang and H. Yan, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 3447–3507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Lin, K. Jiang, W. Kaminsky, Z. Zhu and A. K. Y. Jen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 15246–15251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Cheng, G. Li, X. W. Zhan and Y. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2018, 12, 131–142 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Z. Lin, J. Y. Wang, Z. G. Zhang, H. T. Bai, Y. F. Li, D. B. Zhu and X. W. Zhan, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1170–1174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. J. Aldrich, M. Matta, W. G. Zhu, S. M. Swick, C. L. Stern, G. C. Schatz, A. Facchetti, F. S. Melkonyan and T. J. Marks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 3274–3287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhao, S. Li, H. Yao, S. Zhang, Y. Zhang, B. Yang and J. Hou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 7148–7151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yuan, Y. Zhang, L. Zhou, C. Zhang, T. K. Lau, G. Zhang, X. Lu, H. L. Yip, S. K. So, S. Beaupré, M. Mainville, P. A. Johnson, M. Leclerc, H. Chen, H. Peng, Y. Li and Y. Zou, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807577 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Li, X. Zhang, L. O. Jones, J. M. Alzola, S. Mukherjee, L.-W. Feng, W. Zhu, C. L. Stern, W. Huang, J. Yu, V. K. Sangwan, D. M. DeLongchamp, K. L. Kohlstedt, M. R. Wasielewski, M. C. Hersam, G. C. Schatz, A. Facchetti and T. J. Marks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 6123–6139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yuan, Y. Q. Zhang, L. Y. Zhou, G. C. Zhang, H. L. Yip, T. K. Lau, X. H. Lu, C. Zhu, H. J. Peng, P. A. Johnson, M. Leclerc, Y. Cao, J. Ulanski, Y. F. Li and Y. P. Zou, Joule, 2019, 3, 1140–1151 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, H. S. Tan, X. Guo, A. Facchetti and H. Yan, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 720–731 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, J. Zhao, P. C. Y. Chow, K. Jiang, J. Zhang, Z. Zhu, J. Zhang, F. Huang and H. Yan, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 3447–3507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Wadsworth, M. Moser, A. Marks, M. S. Little, N. Gasparini, C. J. Brabec, D. Baran and I. McCulloch, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 1596–1625 RSC .
Y. Chen, Y. Zheng, Y. Jiang, H. Fan and X. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 4281–4289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhou, W. Liu, G. Zhou, M. Zhang, D. Qian, J. Zhang, S. Chen, S. Xu, C. Yang, F. Gao, H. Zhu, F. Liu and X. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Sun, F. Pan, S. Chen, R. Wang, R. Sun, Z. Shang, B. Qiu, J. Min, M. Lv, L. Meng, C. Zhang, M. Xiao, C. Yang and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1905480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yan, W. Song, J. Huang, R. Peng, L. Huang and Z. Ge, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902210 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Li, C.-Z. Li, M. Shi and H. Chen, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1554–1567 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, Y. Kan, K. Gao, J. Wang, M. Zhao, H. Chen, C. Zhao, T. Jiu, A.-K.-Y. Jen and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907604 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, Y. Jiang, K. Jin, J. Qin, J. Xu, W. Li, J. Xiong, J. Liu, Z. Xiao, K. Sun, S. Yang, X. Zhang and L. Ding, Sci. Bull., 2020, 65, 272–275 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, J. Zhou, J. Song, J. Xu, H. Zhang, X. Zhang, J. Guo, L. Zhu, D. Wei, G. Han, J. Min, Y. Zhang, Z. Xie, Y. Yi, H. Yan, F. Gao, F. Liu and Y. Sun, Nat. Energy, 2021, 6, 605–613 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun, T. Liu, J. Yu, T.-K. Lau, G. Zhang, Y. Zhang, M. Su, Y. Tang, R. Ma, B. Liu, L. Jiaen, F. Kui, L. Xinhui, G. Xugang, G. Feng and Y. He, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3328–3337 RSC .
F. Liu, Z. Zhou, C. Zhang, T. Vergote, H. Fan, F. Liu and X. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 15523–15526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. R. Grabowski, K. Rotkiewicz and W. Rettig, Chem. Rev., 2003, 103, 3899–4031 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Xue, Y. Tang, X. Zhou, Z. Tang, H. Zhao, T. Li, L. Zhang, S. Liu, C. Zhao, W. Ma and H. Yan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2101892 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gao, M. Zhang, T. Liu, R. J. Ming, Q. S. An, K. L. Wu, D. J. Xie, Z. H. Luo, C. Zhong, F. Liu, F. J. Zhang, H. Yan and C. L. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800052 CrossRef PubMed .
J. F. Qu, D. N. Li, H. Wang, J. D. Zhou, N. Zheng, H. J. Lai, T. Liu, Z. Q. Xie and F. He, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 8044–8051 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Swick, W. G. Zhu, M. Matta, T. J. Aldrich, A. Harbuzaru, J. T. L. Navarrete, R. P. Ortiz, K. L. Kohlstedt, G. C. Schatz, A. Facchetti, F. S. Melkonyan and T. J. Marks, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, E8341–E8348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. X. Dai, J. D. Zhou, S. Chandrabose, Y. J. Shi, G. C. Han, K. Chen, J. M. Xin, K. Liu, Z. Y. Chen, Z. Q. Xie, W. Ma, Y. P. Yi, L. Jiang, J. M. Hodgkiss and X. W. Zhan, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2000645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Feng, M. Li, N. N. Tang, X. D. Wang, H. Huang, G. L. Ran, Y. H. Liu, Z. Q. Xie, W. K. Zhang and Z. S. Bo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 4638–4648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Swick, J. M. Alzola, V. K. Sangwan, S. H. Amsterdam, W. Zhu, L. O. Jones, N. Powers-Riggs, A. Facchetti, K. L. Kohlstedt, G. C. Schatz, M. C. Hersam, M. R. Wasielewski and T. J. Marks, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000635 CrossRef CAS .
S. X. Dai, F. W. Zhao, Q. Q. Zhang, T. K. Lau, T. F. Li, K. Liu, Q. D. Ling, C. R. Wang, X. H. Lu, W. You and X. W. Zhan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1336–1343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, Y. Chen, L.-W. Feng, C. Gu, G. Li, N. Su, G. Wang, S. M. Swick, W. Huang, X. Guo, A. Facchetti and T. J. Marks, EnergyChem, 2020, 2, 100042 CrossRef .
W. G. Zhu, A. P. Spencer, S. Mukherjee, J. M. Alzola, V. K. Sangwan, S. H. Amsterdam, S. M. Swick, L. O. Jones, M. C. Heiber, A. A. Herzing, G. P. Li, C. L. Stern, D. M. DeLongchamp, K. L. Kohlstedt, M. C. Hersam, G. C. Schatz, M. R. Wasielewski, L. X. Chen, A. Facchetti and T. J. Marks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 14532–14547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ma, A. Zeng, J. Gao, Z. Hu, C. Xu, J. H. Son, S. Y. Jeong, C. Zhang, M. Li, K. Wang, H. Yan, Z. Ma, Y. Wang, H. Y. Woo and F. Zhang, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2020, 8, nwaa305 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Li, A. H. Balawi, P. J. Leenaers, L. Ning, G. H. Heintges, T. Marszalek, W. Pisula, M. M. Wienk, S. C. Meskers, Y. Yi, F. Laquai and R. A. J. Janssen, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–11 CrossRef PubMed .
L. W. Feng, J. H. Chen, S. Mukherjee, V. K. Sangwan, W. Huang, Y. Chen, D. Zheng, J. W. Strzalka, G. Wang, M. C. Hersam, D. M. DeLongchamp, A. Facchetti and T. J. Marks, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1780–1787 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Swick, W. Zhu, M. Matta, T. J. Aldrich, A. Harbuzaru, J. T. Lopez Navarrete, R. Ponce Ortiz, K. L. Kohlstedt, G. C. Schatz, A. Facchetti, F. S. Melkonyan and T. J. Marks, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, E8341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yu, D. Qian, S. Marina, F. A. A. Nugroho, A. Sharma, S. Hultmark, A. I. Hofmann, R. Kroon, J. Benduhn, S. Detlef, K. Vandewal, M. R. Andersson, C. Langhammer, J. Martín, F. Gao and C. Müller, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 21766–21774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Nelson, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 67, 155209 CrossRef .
J. Yuan, T. Huang, P. Cheng, Y. Zou, H. Zhang, J. L. Yang, S.-Y. Chang, Z. Zhang, W. Huang, R. Wang, D. Meng, F. Gao and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Qian, Z. Zheng, H. Yao, W. Tress, T.
R. Hopper, S. Chen, S. Li, J. Liu, S. Chen, J. Zhang, X.-K. Liu, B. Gao, L. Ouyang, Y. Jin, G. Pozina, I. A. Buyanova, W. M. Chen, O. Inganäs, V. Coropceanu, J.-L. Bredas, H. Yan, J. Hou, F. Zhang, A. A. Bakulin and F. Gao, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 703–709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. McDowell, M. Abdelsamie, M. F. Toney and G. C. Bazan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707114 CrossRef PubMed .
A. K. K. Kyaw, D. H. Wang, C. Luo, Y. Cao, T.-Q. Nguyen, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301469 CrossRef .
E. F. Manley, J. Strzalka, T. J. Fauvell, T. J. Marks and L. X. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800611 CrossRef .
J. Lv, H. Tang, J. Huang, C. Yan, K. Liu, Q. Yang, D. Hu, R. Singh, J. Lee, S. Lu, G. Li and Z. Kan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 3044–3052 RSC .
Y. Zhang, A. J. Parnell, F. Pontecchiani, J. F. K. Cooper, R. L. Thompson, R. A. L. Jones, S. M. King, D. G. Lidzey and G. Bernardo, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 44269 CrossRef PubMed .
S. J. Lou, N. Zhou, X. Guo, R. P. H. Chang, T. J. Marks and L. X. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 23805–23818 RSC .
J. Kniepert, I. Lange, J. Heidbrink, J. Kurpiers, T. J. K. Brenner, L. J. A. Koster and D. Neher, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 8310–8320 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, L. Yang, A. Facchetti and T. J. Marks, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 10291–10318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, Q. Liao, G. Wang, Z. Yan, H. Wang, Y. Wang, X. Zhang, Y. Tang, A. Facchetti, T. J. Marks and X. Guo, Macromolecules, 2018, 51, 3874–3885 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Scerba, S. Bloom, N. Haselton, M. Siegler, J. Jaffe and T. Lectka, J. Org. Chem., 2012, 77, 1605–1609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Lu, V. Elakkat, J. S. Thrasher, X. Wang, E. Tessema, K. L. Chan, R.-J. Wei, T. Trabelsi and J. S. Francisco, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 5550–5557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. S. Feldblum and I. T. Arkin, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 4085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Elakkat, C.-C. Chang, J.-Y. Chen, Y.-C. Fang, C.-R. Shen, L.-K. Liu and N. Lu, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 14259–14262 RSC .
N. Lu, W.-H. Tu, Y.-S. Wen, L.-K. Liu, C.-Y. Chou and J.-C. Jiang, CrystEngComm, 2010, 12, 538–542 RSC .
L. Jones and L. Lin, Comput. Theor. Chem., 2017, 1115, 22–29 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Swick, T. Gebraad, L. Jones, B. Fu, T. J. Aldrich, K. L. Kohlstedt, G. C. Schatz, A. Facchetti and T. J. Marks, Chem. Phys. Chem., 2019, 20, 2608–2626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. D. Truong, M. K. Devaraju, T. Tomai and I. Honma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 9926–9932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. L. Krivanek, M. F. Chisholm, V. Nicolosi, T. J. Pennycook, G. J. Corbin, N. Dellby, M. F. Murfitt, C. S. Own, Z. S. Szilagyi, M. P. Oxley, S. T. Pantelides and S. J. Pennycook, Nature, 2010, 464, 571–574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Lin, Y. J. Lu, C. S. Tsao, A. Saeki, J. X. Li, C. H. Chen, H. C. Wang, H. C. Chen, D. Meng, K. H. Wu, Y. Yang and K. H. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 3072–3082 RSC .
C.-Y. Liao, Y. Chen, C.-C. Lee, G. Wang, N.-W. Teng, C.-H. Lee, W.-L. Li, Y.-K. Chen, C.-H. Li and H.-L. Ho, Joule, 2020, 4, 189–206 CrossRef CAS .
D.-M. Smilgies, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 2009, 42, 1030–1034 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, L.-W. Feng, W. Huang, S. Mukherjee, Y. Chen, D. Shen, B. Wang, J. Strzalka, D. Zheng, F. Melkonyan, J. Yan, F. J. Stoddart, D. M. DeLongchamp, M. Zhu, A. Facchetti and T. J. Marks, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2020, 117, 17551–17557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Heiber, T. Okubo, S. J. Ko, B. R. Luginbuhl, N. A. Ran, M. Wang, H. B. Wang, M. A. Uddin, H. Y. Woo, G. C. Bazan and T. Q. Nguyen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3019–3032 RSC .
N. Su, R. Ma, G. Li, T. Liu, L.-W. Feng, C. Lin, J. Chen, J. Song, Y. Xiao, J. Qu, X. Lu, V. K. Sangwan, M. C. Hersam, H. Yan, A. Facchetti and T. J. Marks, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 728–738 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bartesaghi, I. D. Perez, J. Kniepert, S. Roland, M. Turbiez, D. Neher and L. J. A. Koster, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. CCDC 2109327 and 2109328. For ESI and crystallographic data in CIF or other electronic format see DOI: 10.1039/d1ee03225a‡ G. L. and L. F. contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Broader context
Polymer solar cells (PSCs) composed of solution processable, light weight, earth-abundant, non-toxic, mechanically durable organic materials with tunable properties offer a promising approach for large-scale/low cost light-to-electricity conversion. To date, the highest power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) near 18% have been just recently achieved with phase-separated polymer donor + small-molecule non-fullerene electron (NFA) bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) blends. However, these advances have been largely empirical, with those atomistic electronic and organizational features needed to achieve optimal blend structures and exciton dynamics control being only partly understood. Here, we compare/contrast in detail, using synthetic, crystallographic, morphological, and opto-electronic analyses, the effects of two very different NFA complementary fluorination modalities in defining bulk-heterojunction organization, carrier mobility, optical cross-section and exciton-splitting dynamics. The net result is PCEs well above 17% reflecting, among other factors, strong near-IR absorption, well-balanced hole and electron mobilities, and proper orientation of the molecular π-electron systems and compositional donor–acceptor phase separation in the PSC active layer. We also identify two NFA intermolecular interaction modes never before seen: strong F⋯NC bonding and bifurcated F⋯H–C hydrogen-bonding. The results of this study elucidate important building-block characteristics that enhance OSC performance and convey design implications for future higher performance BHJ materials.


 	Fig. 1  Examples of (a) fullerene acceptors, PC61BM and PC71BM and (b) non-fullerene acceptors, ITIC, IT-4F, Y5 and Y6. Blue: electron-donating cores; green: solubilizing sidechains; and red: electron-withdrawing moieties.	 

 	Fig. 2  Structures and physical properties of the donor polymer and non-fullerene acceptors (NFAs). (a) Chemical structures of the NFAs BTFM and BTF, donor polymer D18-Cl, and the processing additive 1-chloronaphthalene (1-CN). R1 = 2-ethylhexyl, R2 = 2-butyloctyl, and R3 = n-undecyl. For each ‘wing’ of BTF, Fa or b = F and Fc or d = F. (b) Optical absorption spectra of the donor and NFA film. (c) Energy levels of D18-Cl, BTF and BTFM estimated by cyclic voltammetry (CV). (d) First heating DSC thermograms of the indicated solution-cast NFAs.	 


BTF
	772	863	91	948	1.31	−5.65/−4.07	−5.61	195	8.3	309	15.9

BTFM
	772	849	77	935	1.33	−5.62/−4.04	−5.58	177	3.2	286	19.6




BTF
	0.860	27.19	26.67	72.05	16.83 (16.13 ± 0.58)	2.08 ± 0.33	1.71 ± 0.22	1.21

BTF


	0.863	26.87	26.23	74.57	17.30 (16.77 ± 0.53)	1.87 ± 0.24	0.99 ± 0.42	1.89

BTFM
	0.875	26.72	26.31	73.12	17.10 (16.38 ± 0.62)	1.35 ± 0.32	0.95 ± 0.18	1.42

BTFM


	0.882	26.18	25.28	70.62	16.27 (15.82 ± 0.42)	1.51 ± 0.43	1.43 ± 0.25	1.37

 	Fig. 3  Photovoltaic properties and carrier mobilities of D18-Cl:NFA OSCs. (a) OSC current–voltage (J–V) characteristics; (b) corresponding external quantum efficiency (EQE) data for the indicated blends; and (c) hole-only and (d) electron-only mobilities measured by SCLC.	 

 	Fig. 4  Single-crystal structures of NFAs. (a) Plan view of the BTFM and BTF molecular conformations, where Dso = the distance of the S⋯O interactions, and Φ = the core – end group twist angle through the vinyl connection. (b) BTFM and BTF stacking motifs viewed along the EG stacking direction. The colors indicate different NFA components: red = F and CF3 group; blue: = naphthalenic end group; yellow = thieno[3,2-b]thiophene core unit; green = thiadiazole core unit; and the drawing illustrates the spatial orientation of the F⋯CN interaction and the two types of F⋯H–C hydrogen bonds.	 

 	Fig. 5  Single crystal molecular packing and the stacking distance of the present NFAs. (a) Long-range stacking pattern viewed along the b-axis. (b) NFA molecule crystallographic π–π stacking distances in the single crystal.	 

 	Fig. 6  Summary of the NFA computational results. (a) Computed internal reorganization energies (IREs, λe) of the isomers of BTF and BTFM. (b) Vertical ionization energy (ΔIEv) and vertical electron affinity (ΔEAv) of BTF and BTFM. Computed electronic coupling within the (c) BTF's and (d) BTFM-1's crystal networks (top) and the plot of coupling strengths (bottom); the letters indicate each individual coupling neighbor. Note that only the pairs with nonzero coupling strength are plotted.	 

 	Fig. 7  TEM and AFM images of D18-Cl:BTF and D18-Cl:BTFM blend films. First row: AFM height images of blend surfaces. Second row: TEM images of blend films, where the darker region stands for acceptor aggregation features of the blend films.	 

 	Fig. 8  X-Ray characterization of D18-Cl:BTF and D18-Cl:BTFM blends and the relative blend film domain purity. (a) 2-D GIWAXS patterns. (b) Pole figures calculated from (h00) π–π stacking peak at 1.7 Å−1. (c) Plot of the relative degree of crystallinity of the 4 blends obtained by integrating the pole figures in (b). (d) Relative average phase purities from R-SoXS. The purity uncertainties calculated from R-SoXS data were acquired at photon energies in the range of 283–284 eV.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Evolution-associated spectra of the first species that is detected within the instrument response time of ≈300 fs for D18-Cl:BTF and D18-Cl:BTFM blend films. (b) Kinetics (circles) and corresponding fits (lines) of the ground-state bleach of the D18-Cl polymer obtained from nsTA. Plots are offset vertically by 0.5 for clarity. The films are excited at 830 nm.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Plot of average in situ bimolecular recombination coefficient (kbr) versus average carrier density (nmp) at maximum power point for D18-Cl:BTF and D18-Cl:BTFM cells with and without 1-CN additive. The data are averaged over 4–6 cells of each kind and error bars show standard deviation. (b) Average of In-situ carrier mobility (μ) versus average nmp for the four kinds of solar cells shown in the legend in (a). (c) Plot of average charge extraction time (τex) versus average recombination lifetime (τrec) for the solar cells shown in the legend in (a). (d) Fill factor (FF) versus competition factor (θ) for total 21 devices measured for D18-Cl:BTF and D18-Cl:BTFM cells with and without the 1-CN additive. Data for all 5 different illumination intensities from 0.3 Sun to 1.0 Sun are included.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. CCDC 2109327 and 2109328. For ESI and crystallographic data in CIF or other electronic format see DOI: 10.1039/d1ee03225a
‡ G. L. and L. F. contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
