Photocatalytic photosystem I/PEDOT composite films prepared by vapor-phase polymerization   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7NR01158J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7NR01158J
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 6158-6166Photocatalytic photosystem I/PEDOT composite films prepared by vapor-phase polymerization†

        
          
            M. T. 
            Robinson
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            C. E. 
            Simons
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            D. E. 
            Cliffel
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            G. K. 
            Jennings
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37235, USA. E-mail: Kane.G.Jennings@vanderbilt.edu
bDepartment of Chemistry, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37235, USA
Received 
      15th February 2017
    , Accepted 15th April 2017First published on 19th April 2017AbstractPhotosystem I (PSI) achieves photo-induced charge separation with outstanding internal quantum efficiency and has been used to improve the performance of various photoelectrochemical systems. Herein, we describe a fast and versatile technique to assemble composite films containing PSI and a chosen intrinsically conductive polymer (ICP). A mixture of PSI and a Friedel–Crafts catalyst (FeCl3) is drop cast atop a substrate of choice. Contact with ICP monomer vapor at low temperature stimulates polymer growth throughout PSI films in minutes. We assess the effects of PSI loading on the rapid vapor-phase growth of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) within and above PSI multilayer films, and characterize the resulting film's thickness, electrochemical capacitance, and photocatalytic response. Composite films generate cathodic photocurrent when in contact with an aqueous redox electrolyte, confirming retention of the photocatalytic activity of the polymer-entrapped PSI multilayer assembly.
Introduction
Photosystem I (PSI) is a photosynthetic protein that efficiently converts visible light into sustained reduction potential. In vivo, PSI facilitates electron excitation and cross-membrane transport necessary for carbon fixation in living cells.1,2 Briefly, chlorophylls absorb photons and transfer harvested energy to an embedded chlorophyll A dimer, P700. Receipt of sufficient energy prompts an energetic transition  and subsequent electron transfer along an internal electron transport chain to a redox-active iron–sulfur complex, FB.
Due to its natural abundance and near-unity internal quantum efficiency, isolated PSI has been used as a photodiode to augment heterogeneous photoelectrochemistry, including photocatalytic hydrogen evolution3,4 and light harvesting in dye-sensitized solar cells.5–7 Through application of specialized surface chemistries8,9 and genetic modification,10 monolayers of PSI proteins have been coupled to conductive substrates to promote direct charge exchange.11 Furthermore, our group has employed multilayers of spinach-derived PSI toward significant improvements in photocurrents over monolayer-based systems on planar gold,12–14 silicon,15,16 and graphene17 electrodes. Multilayer enhancements in photocurrent persist for many months13—well in excess of plant growing seasons—and increase with the amount of protein deposited.12
More recently, PSI has been introduced within ion- or electron-conductive matrices toward more effective charge mediation in multilayer assemblies. Badura et al. incorporated PSI proteins within an osmium-based redox hydrogel to achieve PSI turnover rates nearly seven times that of natural photosynthesis.18,19 Stieger et al. assembled films containing PSI and cytochrome c atop electrode surfaces to produce efficient and stable photocurrents enabled via charge mediation by cytochrome c.20,21
Recently, we entrapped PSI within electrochemically-grown polyaniline (PAni) and observed enhanced photocurrents due to amplified electron transfer throughout a well-integrated PAni scaffold.22 Solid-state PAni:PSI devices produce the highest power conversion efficiency (PCE) reported thus far in the solid state PSI literature and are remarkably resilient under prolonged on/off cycling owing to the environmental stability of PAni and entrapped PSI.23
We now seek to consolidate PSI within other intrinsically conductive polymer (ICP) scaffolds to investigate the effects of polymer attributes—including HOMO/LUMO energetics and side-chain chemistries—on the performance of solid-state PSI:ICP assemblies. However, electrochemical polymerization procedures are not sufficiently adaptable to achieve these aims in isolation. First, aqueous electrochemical polymerization—preferred given PSI's biological origin—is incompatible with many potentially interesting ICPs due to monomer insolubility. Second, PSI uptake within electrochemically-prepared composite films is meager, a function of generally ineffective attractive interactions between PSI and migrating monomer species during assembly; for our PAni:PSI films this upper limit was less than 1.5% PSI by film volume despite prevalent aniline/PSI hydrogen bonding. Therefore, we seek to develop a complementary technique for PSI:ICP preparation that is: (1) adaptable to an extensive catalog of ICPs and surfaces and (2) permits PSI film loading to approach that of our previously reported multilayer assemblies.
Vapor-phase polymerization (VPP) provides a route to polymer growth that is simple, rapid, and tunable. VPP achieves growth of numerous ICPs—including PAni,24 polypyrrole (PPy),25,26 poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT),27,28 and numerous polythiophenes29,30—without the use of a reaction solvent. A thin layer of Friedel–Crafts catalyst—CuCl2, FeCl3, or MoCl5—is deposited on a surface of choice, and subsequent exposure to monomer vapor stimulates >100 nm of film growth in minutes. In particular, vapor-polymerized PEDOT (vpPEDOT) is highly stable under ambient conditions and benefits from more than a decade of academic and industrial study.31,32 vpPEDOT is also remarkably biocompatible.33–35 Bongo et al. incorporated gelatin into vpPEDOT and used these assemblies as electrically-responsive substrates for endothelial cell attachment and growth; PEDOT and gelatin were observed to retain their conductive and connective functionalities, respectively.36 Furthermore, vpPEDOT can be grafted to aromatic substrates in a straightforward manner. Im et al. demonstrated covalent grafting of vpPEDOT to aromatic surfaces—including polystyrene, polyethylene terephthalate, and polyurethane37—via a radical cation coupling mechanism first identified by Kovacic et al.38 Accordingly, vpPEDOT films grafted to polystyrene substrates resist delamination when subjected to intense ultrasonication.
Herein, we report incorporation of PSI proteins within an ICP scaffold through consolidation of VPP and vacuum-assisted PSI multilayer assembly. PSI solutions containing FeCl3 are drop cast atop a substrate of choice, and subsequent exposure to monomer vapor prompts rapid growth of a chosen ICP. We observe robust growth of vpPPy (see Fig. S3†) and vpPEDOT from catalyst-replete PSI multilayers on glass, fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO), and gold substrates upon exposure to ICP monomer vapor. Furthermore, we hypothesize that PSI's many aromatic moieties—representing >15% of its peptide side-chains39—provide sites for grafted initiation and attachment that promote intimate interconnectivity between PSI and the included polymer (Fig. 1). As evidence, while vpPEDOT films on FTO substrates delaminate rapidly upon aqueous rinse, PSI:vpPEDOT films do not.
 Fig. 1  (a) PSI is a highly stable, naturally abundant photodiode that efficiently converts sunlight into prolonged reduction potential. (b) PSI can be incorporated into ICP films through a straightforward vapor-phase polymerization procedure. Drop cast films of PSI proteins replete with a Friedel–Crafts catalyst are exposed to EDOT monomer vapor to achieve rapid polymer growth. Radical cations formed on PSI's many aromatic side chains during polymerization can act as grafting points to monomer species for intimate polymer/protein association. (c) Our technique permits fabrication of composite PSI:ICP films on many substrates, including gold and FTO. 
We assembled PSI:vpPEDOT films on gold substrates to assess the optical, structural, and electrochemical characteristics of our VPP composite films. We find our method neither incurs significant modification of PSI secondary structure nor disturbs the packing of formed PSI multilayers. This simple and highly adaptable vapor-phase technique is a viable tool for study and optimization of solid-state PSI:ICP film assemblies.
Experimental
PSI extraction and isolation
PSI was extracted from commercially available spinach as described previously.8 Solutions were subsequently dialyzed to decrease concentrations of salts and surfactants. Briefly, baby spinach leaves were de-veined and macerated. Filtered solutions were centrifuged at 8000g, and the pellet was resuspended in Triton X-100 to lyse thylakoid membranes. This solution was centrifuged at 20000g and the supernatant was introduced slowly atop a chilled hydroxylapatite column. Purified protein solutions were removed in 1 mL aliquots and stored at −80 °C. Solutions were dialyzed for 12 h using 10000 MWCO dialysis tubing (Spectrum Labs). Using a previously described method, [P700] was determined to be 1 μM with 45 chlorophylls per reaction center.40
Gold electrode preparation
Chromium (10 nm) and gold (125 nm) were deposited sequentially atop a <100> silicon support using a previously described thermal deposition process.41,42 Gold electrodes were rinsed vigorously in ethanol and placed in a vial containing a ∼1 mM aminoethane thiol (AET, Acros) solution in ethanol for 12 h to provide a hydrophilic surface for film deposition.
Control of PSI concentration
180 μL of freshly dialyzed PSI solution was centrifuged at 16000g for 30 min and the pellet resuspended in a variable volume of an aqueous solution containing 10 mM FeCl3 and 0.025% w/v Triton X-100. PSI concentration was subsequently quantified using the methods of Baba et al. for solutions resuspended in deionized water.43
PSI/catalyst film deposition
A solution containing 10 mM FeCl3, 0.025% w/v Triton X-100, and a chosen PSI concentration was drop cast atop AET/gold substrates masked with plater's tape (Gamry Instruments) with an exposed area of 1 cm2. Vacuum was applied to leave behind a film of PSI, catalyst, and surfactant. The plater's tape mask was removed before subsequent polymerization.
Vapor-phase growth of PEDOT
20 μL of EDOT monomer was deposited into a 25 mL glass vial. A dried, drop cast film containing PSI, FeCl3, and Triton X-100 were introduced into the vial at room temperature. The vials were sealed and lowered into a water bath at 40 °C to stimulate vapor-phase growth. After 10 min, the reaction vials were removed from the water bath and opened. The resulting films were rinsed vigorously in deionized water and dried under a stream of nitrogen.
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS)
All impedance measurements were conducted in the dark using a Gamry Instruments CMS300 impedance system. A three-electrode assembly was used with a platinum counter electrode, Ag/AgCl reference electrode, and custom-built sample holder. The tested film/gold sample served as the working electrode, and the electrochemically accessible area was constrained to 0.28 cm2 using hole-punched plater's tape. All measurements were performed in 100 mM KCl in deionized water (18.2 MΩ).
Structural deconvolution from polarization modulation-infrared reflection absorption spectroscopy (PM-IRRAS)
PM-IRRAS was conducted on films atop reflective gold substrates using a Bruker FTIR spectrometer with a liquid nitrogen-cooled, mercury-cadmium-telluride detector and light incident at 80° from the substrate surface normal. Spectra were collected at 4 cm−1 resolution and deconvoluted using the Lorentzian fitting software available from the University of Maryland.44
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM)
SEMs of PSI:vpPEDOT film cross-sections were taken with a Hitachi S-4200 SEM using an accelerating voltage of 10 kV.
Energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectroscopy
Cross-sectional EDX was carried out on PSI:vpPEDOT samples using a Zeiss Merlin scanning electron microscope equipped with an Oxford Instruments X-ray detector (Model: 51-XMX1025). All linescans were taken at 10 kV accelerating voltage and a current of 4 nA.
Photoelectrochemical characterization
Photochronoamperometry (PCA) was performed using a three-electrode assembly and a CH660a potentiostat equipped with a Faraday cage. Ag/AgCl reference and platinum mesh counter electrodes were used in combination with the film/gold sample, which served as the working electrode. The photoelectrochemically active area during experiments was constrained to 0.28 cm2 using plater's tape. A 250 W cold light source (Leica KL 2500 LCD, 140 mW cm−2) with a spectral window of 380–790 nm was used to irradiate films. Red light measurements were conducted by applying an optical low-pass filter with a 633 nm cutoff (75 mW cm−2). All PCA measurements were performed using a redox electrolyte containing 20 mM sodium ascorbate (Asc), 1 mM dichloroindophenol (DCPIP), and 100 mM KCl.
Results and discussion
PM-IRRAS of PSI:vpPEDOT
PM-IRRAS was used to characterize the chemical composition and structural features of PSI, vpPEDOT, and PSI:vpPEDOT films on gold substrates functionalized with a SAM from AET (Fig. 2). PEDOT's inter-ring stretching at 1525 cm−1 is evident in films of both vpPEDOT and PSI:vpPEDOT.34,37,45,46 Additionally, composite films assimilate PSI's Amide I and Amide II peaks that represent protein CO and N–H/C–N vibrational modes with maximum absorption at 1662 cm−1 and 1545 cm−1, respectively.47–49 We deconvolved the Amide I peaks into contributions from structural elements including alpha-helix, beta-sheet, beta-turn, and unordered helix, as described previously by this group.8 We observe limited deviation in secondary structure between PSI stabilized in a multilayer film and that in a composite PSI:vpPEDOT assembly and conclude that prerequisite processing conditions—including the introduction of FeCl3 to PSI solutions and rapid PEDOT growth within dry films—have only minor effects on PSI secondary structure.
 Fig. 2  (a) PM-IRRAS of PSI:vpPEDOT, vpPEDOT, and PSI films reveals incorporation of PSI amide structure and PEDOT inter-ring stretching. (b) Deconvolution of Amide I into its component structural elements reveals limited modification of protein secondary structure. 
Visible absorbance and thickness
We characterized the absorbance spectra of the center regions of vpPEDOT, PSI, and PSI:vpPEDOT films in red light (Fig. 3a). vpPEDOT films exhibit limited red absorbance, as π–π* and polaronic optical transitions occur for yellow/orange (580–600 nm) and infrared (830–950 nm) light, respectively.37 PSI and PSI:vpPEDOT films incorporate the characteristic absorbance of bound chlorophyll A (ChlA).
 Fig. 3  (a) PSI:vpPEDOT films incorporate the red absorption of antenna ChlA embedded within PSI. Absorbance is proportional to the amount of PSI included in the drop casting solution. (b) Normalized absorbance at 672 nm indicates limited PSI incorporation within the center of films due to coffee ring formation until 0.6 μM PSI, after which films demonstrate linear absorbance change indicative of a densely packed multilayer film. 
Water evaporation during film assembly stimulates capillary flows within the drying droplet that displace PSI macromolecules to the three-phase contact line. As a result, PSI accumulation within the dry film interior is attenuated and a so-called coffee ring is formed.50,51 Accordingly, the normalized absorbance at 672 nm suggests low PSI thickness in the center of the film at a PSI concentration of ∼0.6 μM in the drop cast solution. Absorbance increases linearly with PSI concentration from 0.6 μM to 2.4 μM, consistent with the formation of a multilayer film (Fig. 3b).
We used the Beer–Lambert Law to calculate concentrations of ChlA within composite films and related this concentration to a uniform PSI film thickness (t) (eqn (1)), (1)where ε is the molar absorptivity for ChlA molecules bound within dried PSI multilayer films (64000 M−1 cm−1),52θi is the angle of light incident at the sample surface (8°), and γ is the fraction of red absorbance that remains after oxidation by Fe3+ during film assembly. We determine that ∼40% of ChlA absorbance remains after film assembly based on time-resolved observation of solutions containing PSI and FeCl3 (Fig. S1†). α is the measured ChlA to PSI ratio (45), NA is Avogadro's number, and VPSI is the per-unit volume of PSI packed in a multilayer assembly (954 nm3).12
We measured the thickness of PSI:vpPEDOT films using profilometry and observed that this overall thickness exceeds that of the incorporated PSI film as determined by absorbance (Fig. 4). We propose that this thickness disparity is the result of robust polymer growth, facilitated by three-dimensional dispersal of FeCl3 within the PSI film during drop casting. Polymer growth could conceivably promote various film structures, including bilayer, heterojunction, or mixed morphology.
 Fig. 4  Absorbance data is used to calculate the thickness of the underlying PSI film within PSI:vpPEDOT films prepared with varying concentrations of PSI in the drop cast solution. We find that higher incorporation of PSI leads to increases in composite thickness, which we attribute to PEDOT grown during vapor-phase polymerization. 
We used EDX spectroscopy to characterize the cross-sectional morphology of composite films prepared with solutions containing 1.8 μM and 2.4 μM PSI (Fig. 5a). The location and relative prevalence of PSI and PEDOT were resolved by probing for atomic concentrations of sulfur and nitrogen, respectively, along line scans starting at the gold surface and ending at the composite film's extent. The y-axis of our line scan analysis is presented as N/(S + N); accordingly, unmixed PEDOT and PSI regions will yield approximate values of 0 and 1, respectively. For the composite film prepared with 1.8 μM PSI, we observe two distinct regions: a lower region corresponding to a mixed sulfur/nitrogen region and an upper layer incorporating negligible nitrogen. Given the matchup between the thickness of elemental transition in EDX and the predicted uniform PSI multilayer thickness from visible absorbance measurements, we conclude that this lower film region is a packed PSI multilayer film with PEDOT incorporated throughout. PEDOT overgrowth is also supported by SEM of PSI:vpPEDOT films, which reveal films to be composed of distinct layers of disparate electron emissivity (Fig. 5b).
 Fig. 5  (a) EDX line scans indicate PEDOT growth throughout and above a catalyst-replete PSI multilayer film. (b) Cross-sectional SEM images of PSI:vpPEDOT films reveal highly electron-emissive PEDOT overgrowth atop a less-emissive region containing PSI and PEDOT. 
For the film prepared with 2.4 μM PSI, EDX linescans reveal constant N/(S + N) throughout that is approximately equal to that of the lower film region for composite films prepared with 1.8 μM PSI (0.8). This observation is consistent with negligible thickness difference between the PSI multilayer and overall composite thickness for films prepared with 2.4 μM PSI (Fig. 4). We conclude that the PEDOT overlayer was removed by post-polymerization rinse, and that in this case the profilometric thickness approximates the thickness of the PEDOT-permeated PSI multilayer film.
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy of PSI:vpPEDOT films
EIS spectra for Au/AET, Au/AET/PSI, Au/AET/vpPEDOT, and Au/AET/PSI:vpPEDOT films were collected in aqueous KCl (see Fig. S2†). Scans reveal a common high frequency resistance of the bulk solution (∼40 Ω) and a capacitance related to ion adsorption to the underlying electrode and within the film structure. Therefore, we model our electrochemical cells as series circuits consisting of a resistor for the solution and a constant phase element for the film. A constant phase element accounts for coupled phenomena that result in non-ideal capacitance (eqn (2)). (2)
The ideality constant, n, restricts the phase angle of capacitive behavior to a constant below the 90° threshold for a pure capacitor. Specifically, n = 1 indicates ideal capacitance (90°), n = 0.5 corresponds to a diffusion-controlled response (45°), and n = 0 represents a pure resistor (0°). For all films examined, we observe ideality constants near 1, and will thus refer to Yo as the capacitance throughout the remainder of the text.
Due to their high porosity53 and wettability,42 PSI films do not exhibit capacitance significantly different than that of an AET-modified surface. However, PSI:vpPEDOT films demonstrate capacitance many times that of a PSI film due to pseudo-capacitance (Fig. 6). Electrons injected into a PEDOT film can stimulate doping/de-doping reactions by which anions from a contacting solution are reversibly adsorbed to and desorbed from PEDOT's positively charged backbone.54,55 In this way, the potential sweep of a PEDOT-modified electrode captures much more charge relative to its unmodified equivalent, and a greatly enhanced capacitance is observed.
 Fig. 6  PSI incorporation within PSI:vpPEDOT films has significant effects on the pseudo-capacitance of grown PEDOT. (a) Thin PSI films include pinholes that permit augmented polymer growth but also robust connection to the underlying electrode. Thicker films decrease the density and length of polymer chains within the PSI film and occlude a PEDOT/electrode connection, which reduces the pseudo-capacitance of these films. (b) Visual model of changes in composite structure with increasing PSI multilayer thickness. 
We relate the capacitance of PSI:vpPEDOT films prepared with constant FeCl3 and variable PSI concentration to the density and location of PEDOT within the composite film structure. Based on our analysis of absorbance and EDX, we assume that incremental increase in PSI loading in drop cast films contributes to a thicker PSI multilayer at the base of the grown PEDOT. We identify two unique capacitance regions and discuss each in order of incorporated PSI film thickness.
First, between 0 μm and 0.1 μm PSI film thickness, PSI:vpPEDOT capacitance increases due to enhanced polymer surface area available for doping/de-doping interactions (eqn (3)), (3)where C is the film capacitance, εr is the relative permittivity, εo is the vacuum permittivity (8.854 × 10−12 F m−1), d is the film thickness, and A is the total surface area available for ion interaction. This first thickness region is below the threshold for the formation of a well-packed PSI multilayer assembly (Fig. 4), and thus, the prevalence of pinholes throughout the sparse PSI film contributes to a robust coupling between PEDOT and the gold electrode beneath (Fig. 6b).
However, in excess of 0.1 μm PSI film thickness, PSI:vpPEDOT capacitance decreases rapidly, an observation that runs counter to numerous studies of PEDOT films in which psuedo-capacitance is observed to increase with thickness in excess of 10 μm.56–58 We attribute reduced capacitance to PSI's imposed spatial constraints on polymer growth; a packed PSI film occludes electrode/PEDOT connection while also minimizing the free volume for polymer growth. In addition, PSI's polypeptide chains include numerous aromatic side-chains with which a polymer-terminating grafting reaction can occur, leading to short-chain PEDOT oligomers with diminished pseudo-capacitive capability. During polymerization, FeCl3 stimulates radical cation formation in many aromatic moieties, including EDOT monomers and PEDOT oligomers but also aromatic polypeptide side-chains.59 Thus, the ∼2000 aromatic side-chains per PSI39 can conceivably act as sites for polymer initiation (grafting-from) but also irreversible polymer termination (grafting-to) that yields reduction in polymer molecular weight in the PSI film relative to those grown unobstructed. Chain discontinuities in the underlying PSI:vpPEDOT layer diminish electron transfer from the underlying gold electrode to the enveloping PEDOT layer and thus lower this upper layer's pseudo-capacitive response.
Photoelectrochemical performance of composite films
To elucidate the photo-response of PSI:vpPEDOT, we tested films in an Asc/DCPIP electrolyte to facilitate photocathodic response (Fig. 7).13,14,41,42,60 Briefly, the purple, blue, and red light absorption of a PSI film stimulates rapid photoelectron generation and charge injection into water-soluble mediators, modifying their concentrations at the electrode surface such that a potential change develops as described by the Nernst equation (eqn (4)),61 (4)where CO and CR are the concentrations of oxidized and reduced mediator species at the electrode surface, respectively.  and  are the bulk concentrations of oxidized and reduced mediator species, respectively.
 Fig. 7  PSI:vpPEDOT films demonstrate photoresponse akin to that of unmodified PSI multilayer assemblies. (a) We observe a relationship between PSI loading and cathodic photocurrents under full spectrum and filtered red light. (b) Composite films sustain near-maximum photocurrents for PSI films many hundred nanometers in excess of that of unmodified PSI films, which we attribute to PEDOT behaving as an extension of the underlying gold electrode to permit more rapid supply of electrons to PSI proteins. All films were tested in an aqueous electrolyte containing 20 mM sodium ascorbate, 1 mM DCPIP, and 100 mM KCl. 
Under controlled electrode potential, the potentiostat drives current to compensate for the changes in reduced and oxidized species, as expressed by the heterogeneous current–overpotential relationship for a reversible redox couple (eqn (5)),61 (5)where jo is the exchange current density, α is the transfer coefficient, η is overpotential, and f is nF/RT.
With no PSI included in the polymer layer, we observe small anodic photocurrent under full spectrum (∼−0.05 μA cm−2) attributed to PEDOT's π–π* transition (∼580–600 nm). At low loadings of PSI within the vpPEDOT layer, we observe an increase in anodic photocurrent due to an increase in PEDOT density near the electrode surface, consistent with our discussion of capacitance. However, further PSI incorporation yields a cathodic response that reaches a limiting value of 0.7 μA cm−2 for composite films incorporating a ∼150 nm-thick PSI multilayer. A decrease in PEDOT density—the result of imposed limits on free volume and polymer growth kinetics—decreases the conjugation length of PEDOT near the surface and diminishes PEDOT's contributions to the photoresponse of the film.
The application of a low-pass red light filter permits us to study the photocatalytic response of PSI within composite films without stimulating PEDOT's optical transitions. The response of PSI:vpPEDOT to filtered red light constitutes over 70% of the response under full spectrum despite an approximate halving of the illumination intensity. Provided the pronounced red light absorption of PSI:vpPEDOT films (Fig. 3), our photocurrent response is attributed overwhelmingly to PSI embedded within the film.
We compared PSI:vpPEDOT and unmodified PSI multilayer film photocurrents with varying PSI film thickness (Fig. 7b). In an Asc/DCPIP redox electrolyte, unmodified PSI multilayer films generate maximum photocurrent at ∼150 nm film thickness; thicker films result in photocurrent attenuation. On the other hand, PSI:vpPEDOT films are observed to follow a similar upward photocurrent trend with thickness, but maintain near-maximum photocurrent for several hundred nanometers in excess of unmodified PSI films. We attribute this to integrated PEDOT extending the electrode surface within the film, thereby reducing distance-dependent photocurrent attenuation.
Conclusions
We have successfully incorporated PEDOT, a highly conductive and environmentally stable ICP, within PSI multilayer films using a rapid vapor-phase technique that is an adaptation of our previously developed vacuum-assisted method. We find that the additional processing required neither disrupts the secondary structure of a PSI film nor compromises its photocatalytic capacity. We find that composite films are comprised of a PEDOT-inundated PSI multilayer film and an enveloping PEDOT layer with thickness commensurate to the PSI loading. PSI:vpPEDOT films demonstrate pseudo-capacitance due to incorporated PEDOT that depends strongly on the PSI loading within the film. Finally, we observe that PSI:vpPEDOT films produce more photocurrent than unmodified PSI films at higher thickness due to incorporated PEDOT's extension of the electrode surface. We suggest that this novel and highly adaptable PSI:ICP preparation technique is a tool toward optimized solid-state biophotovoltaic design.
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge support from the U.S. Department of Agriculture (2013-67021-21029), the National Science Foundation (DMR-1507505), and NSF-REU (NSF DMR-1263182). Additionally, we acknowledge support from the Vanderbilt Institute of Nanoscale Science and Engineering (VINSE) for use of their characterization tools and technical support.
Notes and references
S. W. Hogewoning, E. Wientjes, P. Douwstra, G. Trouwborst, W. van Leperen, R. Croce and J. Harbinson, Plant Cell, 2012, 24, 1921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Nelson and C. F. Yocum, Annu. Rev. Plant Biol., 2006, 57, 521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Krassen, A. Schwarze, B. Friedrich, K. Ataka, O. Lenz and J. Heberle, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 4055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. LeBlanc, G. Chen, G. K. Jennings and D. E. Cliffel, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 7952 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mershin, K. Matsumoto, L. Kaiser, D. Yu, M. Vaughn, M. K. Nazeeruddin, B. D. Bruce, M. Graetzel and S. Zhang, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 234 Search PubMed .
D. Yu, M. Wang, G. Zhu, B. Ge, S. Liu and F. Huang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 9375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. B. Shah, W. R. Henson, T. S. Chadha, G. Lakin, H. Liu, R. E. Blankenship and P. Biswas, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 1675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. A. Kincaid, T. Niedringhaus, M. Ciobanu, D. E. Cliffel and G. K. Jennings, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 8114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Feifel, H. Lokstein, M. Hejazi, A. Zouni and F. Lisdat, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 10590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. F. Simmerman, T. Zhu, D. R. Baker, L. Wang, S. R. Mishra, C. A. Lundgren and B. D. Bruce, Bioconjugate Chem., 2015, 26, 2097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Szewczyk, W. Giera, S. D. Haene and R. Van Grondelle, Photosynth. Res., 2016, 1 Search PubMed .
P. N. Ciesielski, C. J. Faulkner, M. T. Irwin, J. M. Gregory, N. H. Tolk, D. E. Cliffel and G. K. Jennings, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 4048 CrossRef CAS .
P. N. Ciesielski, F. M. Hijazi, A. M. Scott, C. J. Faulkner, L. Beard, K. Emmett, S. J. Rosenthal, D. Cliffel and G. Kane Jennings, Bioresour. Technol., 2010, 101, 3047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Chen, G. LeBlanc, G. K. Jennings and D. E. Cliffel, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, H315 CrossRef CAS .
G. LeBlanc, G. Chen, E. A. Gizzie, G. K. Jennings and D. E. Cliffel, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. LeBlanc, K. M. Winter, W. B. Crosby, G. K. Jennings and D. E. Cliffel, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1 Search PubMed .
D. Gunther, G. LeBlanc, D. Prasai, J. R. Zhang, D. E. Cliffel, K. I. Bolotin and G. K. Jennings, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 4177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Badura, D. Guschin, T. Kothe, M. J. Kopczak, W. Schuhmann and M. Rögner, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2435 CAS .
T. Kothe, S. Pöller, F. Zhao, P. Fortgang, M. Rögner, W. Schuhmann and N. Plumeré, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 11029 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. R. Stieger, D. Ciornii, A. Kölsch, M. Hejazi, H. Lokstein, S. C. Feifel, A. Zouni and F. Lisdat, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 10695 RSC .
K. R. Stieger, S. C. Feifel, H. Lokstein and F. Lisdat, Nanoscale, 2014, 16, 15667 CAS .
E. A. Gizzie, G. LeBlanc, G. K. Jennings and D. E. Cliffel, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 9328 CAS .
E. A. Gizzie, J. S. Niezgoda, M. T. Robinson, A. G. Harris, G. K. Jennings, S. J. Rosenthal and D. E. Cliffel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3572s Search PubMed .
J. Cho, K. Shin and J. Jang, Thin Solid Films, 2010, 518, 5066 CrossRef CAS .
L. D. Acqua, C. Tonin, A. Varesano, M. Canetti, W. Porzio and M. Catellani, Synth. Met., 2006, 156, 379 CrossRef .
S. P. Khedkar and S. Radhakrishnan, Thin Solid Films, 1997, 303, 167 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, W. Lu, W. Dong, Q. Chen, D. Wu, W. Zhou and L. Chen, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 5257 RSC .
K. Zuber, M. Fabretto, C. Hall and P. Murphy, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2008, 29, 1503 CrossRef CAS .
B. Winther-Jensen, J. Chen, K. West and G. Wallace, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 5930 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nejati and K. K. S. Lau, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 15223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kirchmeyer and K. Reuter, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 2077 RSC .
D. Bhattacharyya, R. M. Howden, D. C. Borrelli and K. K. Gleason, Polym. Phys., 2012, 50, 1329 CrossRef CAS .
R. F. Vreeland, C. W. Atcherley, W. S. Russell, J. Y. Xie, N. D. Laude, F. Porreca and M. L. Heien, Anal. Chem., 2016, 87, 2600 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Bhattacharyya and K. Gleason, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 2600 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jin, T. Wang, Z.-Q. Feng, M. K. Leach, J. Wu, S. Mo and Q. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 1818 RSC .
M. Bongo, O. Winther-Jensen, S. Himmelberger, X. Strakosas, M. Ramuz, A. Hama, E. Stavrinidou, G. G. Malliaras, A. Salleo, B. Winther-Jensen and R. M. Owens, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 3860 RSC .
S. G. Im, P. J. Yoo, P. T. Hammond and K. K. Gleason, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2863 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kovacic and M. B. Jones, Chem. Rev., 1987, 87, 357 CrossRef CAS .
A. Amunts, O. Drory and N. Nelson, Nature, 2007, 447, 58 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Shiozawa, R. S. Alberte and J. P. Thornber, Arch. Biochem. Biophys., 1974, 165, 388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. N. Ciesielski, A. M. Scott, C. J. Faulkner, B. J. Berron, D. E. Cliffel and G. K. Jennings, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 2465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, M. T. Robinson, F. Mwambutsa, D. E. Cliffel and G. K. Jennings, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 222, 926 CrossRef CAS .
K. Baba, S. Itoh, G. Hatings and S. Hoshina, Photosynth. Res., 1996, 47, 121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          http://www.terpconnect.umd.edu/~toh/spectrum/CurveFittingC.html
        .
D. Bhattacharyya, K. Senecal, P. Marek, A. Senecal and K. K. Gleason, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 4328 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Im and K. K. Gleason, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 6552 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. R. Arrondo and F. M. Goñi, Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol., 1999, 72, 367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Seshadri, R. Khurana and A. Fink, Methods Enzymol., 1999, 309, 559 CAS .
X. Ruan, J. Wei, Q. Xu, J. Wang, Y. Gong, X. Zhang, T. Kuang and N. Zhao, J. Mol. Struct., 2000, 525, 97 CrossRef CAS .
R. Deegan, O. Bakajin, T. Dupont and G. Huber, Nature, 1997, 389, 827 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hu and R. G. Larson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 7090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hiyama and B. Ke, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1972, 267, 160 CrossRef CAS .
N. Amdursky, D. Marchak, L. Sepunaru, I. Pecht, M. Sheves and D. Cahen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7142–7161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Carlberg and O. Inganäs, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, L61 CrossRef CAS .
S. Admassie, A. Elfwing, E. W. H. Jager, Q. Bao and O. Inganas, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 1974 CAS .
J. Bobacka, A. Lewenstam and A. Ivaska, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2000, 489, 17 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bobacka, Anal. Chem., 1999, 71, 4932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. A. Snook, C. Peng, D. J. Fray and G. Z. Chen, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 83 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lota, V. Khomenko and E. Frackowiak, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2004, 65, 295 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Faulkner, S. Lees, P. N. Ciesielski, D. E. Cliffel and G. K. Jennings, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 8409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. J. Bard, L. R. Faulkner, E. Swain and C. Robey, Electrochemical Methods, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,  2001 Search PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nr01158jThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) PSI is a highly stable, naturally abundant photodiode that efficiently converts sunlight into prolonged reduction potential. (b) PSI can be incorporated into ICP films through a straightforward vapor-phase polymerization procedure. Drop cast films of PSI proteins replete with a Friedel–Crafts catalyst are exposed to EDOT monomer vapor to achieve rapid polymer growth. Radical cations formed on PSI's many aromatic side chains during polymerization can act as grafting points to monomer species for intimate polymer/protein association. (c) Our technique permits fabrication of composite PSI:ICP films on many substrates, including gold and FTO.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) PM-IRRAS of PSI:vpPEDOT, vpPEDOT, and PSI films reveals incorporation of PSI amide structure and PEDOT inter-ring stretching. (b) Deconvolution of Amide I into its component structural elements reveals limited modification of protein secondary structure.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) PSI:vpPEDOT films incorporate the red absorption of antenna ChlA embedded within PSI. Absorbance is proportional to the amount of PSI included in the drop casting solution. (b) Normalized absorbance at 672 nm indicates limited PSI incorporation within the center of films due to coffee ring formation until 0.6 μM PSI, after which films demonstrate linear absorbance change indicative of a densely packed multilayer film.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 4  Absorbance data is used to calculate the thickness of the underlying PSI film within PSI:vpPEDOT films prepared with varying concentrations of PSI in the drop cast solution. We find that higher incorporation of PSI leads to increases in composite thickness, which we attribute to PEDOT grown during vapor-phase polymerization.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) EDX line scans indicate PEDOT growth throughout and above a catalyst-replete PSI multilayer film. (b) Cross-sectional SEM images of PSI:vpPEDOT films reveal highly electron-emissive PEDOT overgrowth atop a less-emissive region containing PSI and PEDOT.	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 6  PSI incorporation within PSI:vpPEDOT films has significant effects on the pseudo-capacitance of grown PEDOT. (a) Thin PSI films include pinholes that permit augmented polymer growth but also robust connection to the underlying electrode. Thicker films decrease the density and length of polymer chains within the PSI film and occlude a PEDOT/electrode connection, which reduces the pseudo-capacitance of these films. (b) Visual model of changes in composite structure with increasing PSI multilayer thickness.	 
	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 7  PSI:vpPEDOT films demonstrate photoresponse akin to that of unmodified PSI multilayer assemblies. (a) We observe a relationship between PSI loading and cathodic photocurrents under full spectrum and filtered red light. (b) Composite films sustain near-maximum photocurrents for PSI films many hundred nanometers in excess of that of unmodified PSI films, which we attribute to PEDOT behaving as an extension of the underlying gold electrode to permit more rapid supply of electrons to PSI proteins. All films were tested in an aqueous electrolyte containing 20 mM sodium ascorbate, 1 mM DCPIP, and 100 mM KCl.	 
	(5)
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nr01158j

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
