An integrated solar evaporator with multilevel hierarchy and multifunctional properties for efficient and salt fouling-resistant desalination   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TA07153C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TA07153C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 24373-24380An integrated solar evaporator with multilevel hierarchy and multifunctional properties for efficient and salt fouling-resistant desalination†

        
          
            Zhi 
            Yang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Lei 
            Chen
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Kaijie 
            Yang
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Cheng 
            Chen
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Yuyao 
            Zhang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Shan 
            Li
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Chiheng 
            Chu
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Xiaoying 
            Zhu
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Baoliang 
            Chen
          
        
      *ab
aDepartment of Environmental Science, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310058, China. E-mail: blchen@zju.edu.cn
bZhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Organic Pollution Process and Control, Hangzhou 310058, China
cAdvanced Membranes and Porous Materials (AMPM) Center, Physical Sciences and Engineering Division, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
Received 
      11th September 2022
    , Accepted 25th October 2022First published on 26th October 2022AbstractSolar desalination is regarded as a promising technology for addressing severe freshwater scarcity, yet its long-term performance is challenged by salt fouling. Here, we develop an integrated solar evaporator with a hierarchy composed of a porous melamine foam core (MF) as a framework, black graphene oxide (GO) nanosheets as the solar absorption layer, and a positively charged poly(ethyleneimine) (PEI) shell as the salt rejecting layer. The solar evaporator equipped with a macro-, micro-, and nanoscale structure triggers multifunctional properties boosting efficiency and stability in desalinating multiple salinities. The solar evaporator achieves high energy efficiency in pure water and exhibits rather high efficiency under hypersaline conditions (82.8–93.4% in 0–25 wt% brine) compared with the state-of-the-art evaporators. The integral functions of the multiscale hierarchy bring about an optimized solar absorption rate (97.6%), improved photothermal conversion ability (25.0 °C), ultrahigh wettability (0.252 s), and excellent thermal insulation properties (0.0505 W m−1 K−1). The multilayer properties were achieved with a neutral core, negatively charged GO interlayer, and positively charged PEI outlayer benefiting salt rejection by the electrostatic repulsion forces. The multiscale structure improves the solar evaporation efficiency by regulating the states of water molecules. This integrated solar evaporator paves a new route for freshwater production from water sources of various salinities.
1 Introduction
The increasing demands for freshwater have triggered extensive research on developing reliable seawater desalination technologies.1,2 To date, technologies like membrane-based reverse osmosis (RO) and thermal-based multi-stage flash (MSF) have been applied to extract freshwater from salt-containing water.3–5 However, the operation and maintenance costs hugely increase with the addition of salt concentration because of the high-pressure demand and high-frequency membrane fouling. Under this circumstance, solar desalination, a sustainable technology, can treat various salinities without increasing the cost, and is a promising technology for addressing severe freshwater scarcity.
The key component for achieving high solar desalination performance is the solar evaporator.6,7 Although laborious work has been carried out and high solar evaporation rates have been reported, the solar evaporator could not bear high concentrations of salt-containing water due to the salt fouling.8–11 In detail, the condensed salt ions would deposit on and inside the solar evaporator because of the continuous water extraction in the solar desalination process. The salt fouling occurring on the surface and inside the solar evaporator reduces the solar absorption rate and impedes the water/vapor pathway thus damaging the efficiency and stability.
Several strategies have been developed to alleviate the salt-fouling. The first strategy involves impeding the upward movement of the salt to the solar evaporator by equipping the evaporator with a hydrophobic surface.12,13 The second strategy involves introducing surplus water to dilute the concentrated ion by endowing the solar evaporator with plenty of hydrophilic groups.14,15 In the third approach, the salt-fouling area is shrunk by regulating the water supply pathway of the solar evaporator.16,17 These studies only concentrated on the single parameter of the evaporation process by a specific design, which thus could not simultaneously address the salt-fouling and maintain the solar energy efficiency.18–20 To date, the energy efficiencies of the reported evaporators could only be maintained at 40–80% in low to medium salinities (3.5–10 wt%). Thus, figuring out an entirely new route to design the evaporator to simultaneously address the multiple problems faced by solar desalinating evaporators is needed.
Herein, we report a novel solar evaporator with a multiscale and multifunctional hierarchy to deal with the multiple problems faced by solar desalination, especially under hypersaline conditions. The multiscale hierarchy was constructed sequentially using porous melamine foam as a framework, black graphene oxide as a solar absorption layer, and positively charged poly(ethyleneimine) (MF–GO–PEI) as a salt rejecting layer. The solar evaporator achieved high energy efficiency in pure water and exhibited rather high efficiency under hypersaline conditions (82.8–93.4% in 0–25 wt% brine) compared with those of the state-of-the-art research studies. The better performance originated from the integrated functions of the multiscale hierarchy, bringing about an optimized solar absorption rate, photothermal conversion ability, ultrahigh wettability, excellent thermal insulation properties, and ionic selectivity. The elaborately designed solar evaporator with a macro- to nanoscale structure could provide a new way to fabricate a stable and efficient solar evaporator for desalinating various salinities.
2 Results and discussion
Integrated solar evaporator with a multiscale structure
An elaborate solar evaporator is crucial for achieving the trade-off between the high energy efficiency and stable solar desalination performance. Different from the reported solar evaporators which were dedicated to either improving the energy efficiency or enhancing the antifouling ability, we developed an entirely new solar evaporator with a multilevel hierarchy to simultaneously enhance the salt rejecting performance and maintain high solar conversion efficiency, especially under hypersaline conditions. The solar evaporator is denoted as GP@MF, and was synthesized in two steps, i.e., formation of the additive graphene oxide/poly(ethyleneimine) (denoted as GP) and heating the melamine foam (named MF) saturated by GP (see Fig. 1a and Methods). Meanwhile, the GO@MF evaporator was prepared as a control where GO, the graphene oxide nanosheets, was used instead of GP. At the macroscale, the white MF turned dark and deep dark after coating with GO and GP, respectively. The microscale difference in morphology was visualized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (Fig. 1b). The GP@MF had a rougher surface than the original MF and wrinkled more uniformly than GO@MF.
 Fig. 1  Illustration and morphology of the multiscale solar evaporator. (a) The fabrication process of the solar evaporator (GP@MF), and photographs of MF, GO@MF, and GP@MF are put at the corresponding bottom right corner. (b) SEM images of MF, GO@MF, and GP@MF. 
At the nanoscale, a unique multilayer structure was formed, as shown in Fig. 2a and b, which was then verified by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR). The C 1s peaks obtained by XPS were deconvoluted as shown in Fig. 2c–e. The MF had the highest content of C–N because of its special triazine rings, while the relatively lower contents of C–N and higher content of C–C in GO@MF and GP@MF are attributed to GO and GP sheets sheltering the surface of MF. GP@MF had a higher content of C–N than GO@MF because the PEI additive was grafted onto the GO@MF, depicting the multilayer structure of the solar evaporator. The high-resolution N 1s spectrum further proved the multilayer structure in GP@MF (Fig. S1†). MF had the highest content of pyridinic N, while the pyridinic N dramatically decreased in GO@MF and slightly declined in GP@MF indicating that GO covered most of the skeleton of MF by weak chemical interactions and the loss of pyridinic N recovered due to the additive PEI. The link between GO and PEI was also proven by the FTIR spectra; two new peaks assigned to the asymmetric stretching of amide I (HNCO) and the stretching of C–N (at 1475 and 1583 cm−1), and the blue shift of hydroxyl groups (3401 to 3362 cm−1) were observed (Fig. 2f).21,22
 Fig. 2  Structural characterizations of the multi-layered solar evaporator. (a and b) Illustration and nanoscale configuration of the multilayer structure in every single skeleton of GP@MF. (c–e) High-resolution XPS spectra of C 1s; the C 1s peaks of three samples were deconvoluted into four peaks of 284.6 eV (C–C), 286.1 eV (C–O), 287.6 eV (CN), and 288.9 eV (CO). (f) FTIR spectrum GO and GP. (g) XPS spectra of GO@MF and GP@MF. (h) The ζ potential curves of MF, GO, and GP. 
The elemental composition revealed by XPS spectra was also supportive (Fig. 2g and Table S1†). GO@MF and GP@MF had higher contents of C than MF illustrating the GO and GP deposition. The increased content of N and decreased content of O in GP@MF revealed the addition of PEI and the increased extent of reduction of GO nanosheets, respectively. Compared to GO@MF, the content of the C element slightly declined and the content of N element greatly increased in GP@MF. Grafting by PEI enriched the groups, thus enabling GP@MF to achieve a high solar absorption rate. The components in GP@MF exhibited different charge properties, which were detected using a zeta potential analyzer. Compared to the negatively charged GO, GP had an isoelectric point (IEP) of 10.9, which meant it was positively charged in seawater (Fig. 2h). The size of the components was given by atomic force microscopy (AFM) (Fig. S2†). The height range of GP was wider (0–6 nm) than that of GO with a consistent height of ∼2 nm. The multilayer structure of the components was verified and the entire assembly had a multiscale structure with macropores, microsurfaces, and nanosites, which was conducive to boosting the solar conversion efficiency and enhancing the salt-rejecting ability.
Solar desalination performance in various salinities
To figure out the performance of the multiscale-structured solar evaporator, the solar evaporation performance of the solar evaporator was tested in salt-containing water including under hypersaline conditions. Firstly, the solar evaporation tests were carried out in pure water and the corresponding device is presented in Fig. S3 and S4.† GP@MF had a higher solar evaporation rate of 1.392 kg m−2 h−1 than GO@MF (1.095 kg m−2 h−1), and it was 4.296-fold higher than that of the non-evaporator system (pure water, 0.324 kg m−2 h−1) (Fig. 3a and b). The corresponding solar energy efficiency of GP@MF was ∼93.4%, which outweighed most of the state-of-the-art evaporators as compared in Fig. 3c and Table S2.† Although a few evaporators achieved somewhat higher energy efficiency than our design in pure water, the complicated fabrication process and the high cost weakened their applicability. Importantly, the multiscale GP@MF exhibited high solar evaporation performance at all salinities. The solar evaporation rates only slightly decreased from 1.392 kg m−2 h−1 to 1.236 kg m−2 h−1 as the salinity increased from 3.5 wt% to 25 wt% (Fig. 3d and e). The energy efficiencies of GP@MF were higher than those of most of the reported solar evaporators, particularly under moderate to high salinities (Fig. 3f and Table S3†).
 Fig. 3  Solar desalination performances. (a and b) The mass change and the solar energy efficiency of water, GO@MF, and GP@MF under one sun. (c) The comparison of the energy efficiency in pure water. (d and e) The mass change and relative efficiency of GP@MF at different concentrations of brines. (f) Comparison of the solar energy efficiency at various salinities with recent reports under one sun. (g) A record of the salt rejection performance of the solar evaporator using GP@MP was tested in 3.5 wt% brine under 1 sun illumination. 
To illustrate the better solar desalination performance of GP@MF, a comparison experiment was carried out at various salinities (3.5 wt%, 6 wt%, 9 wt%, 12.5 wt%, 20 wt%, 25 wt%). GP@MF showed better performance than GO@MF (Fig. S5†). No obvious salt fouling was detected on the surface of GP@MF after 1 h treatment in all these salt-containing water samples. Furthermore, the salt-rejecting ability was then quantitatively evaluated under extreme situations (Fig. 3g). The solar desalination system was put in 3.5 wt% simulated brine, and 16 grams of additional solid sodium chloride (NaCl) were placed directly on the solar evaporator, and the solar evaporation system was illuminated by the solar simulator under 1 kW m−2. Under this situation, the GP@MF could not only bear an extreme amount of NaCl but also completely rejected these crystals within 1.5 h, demonstrating the high salt-rejecting ability and illustrating that this design could be applied even under extreme salinity conditions. The bulk water salinity and the solar evaporation performance were detected during the salt-rejecting process. The salinity of the bulk water increased and the solar evaporation performance was maintained demonstrating that the salt was successfully flowed back by the evaporator (Fig. S6 and S7†). The salt-rejecting performance was compared with the latest reports and the results are exhibited in Fig. S8 and Table S4.† The novel design in this study achieved a faster salt-rejecting capacity than the state-of-the-art designs.
Multifunctional properties triggered by the multiscale structure
The prerequisite for achieving high energy efficiency was to obtain a high solar evaporation rate. The solar absorption rate of GP@MF was hugely enhanced to 97.6%, which was much higher than those of carbon-based materials with a limited absorption rate of less than 95% (Fig. 4a).23 The enhanced solar absorption rate was derived from its special multiscale structure. At the macroscale, the substrate MF had plenty of interconnected channels that could prolong the light transfer path and achieve the multiple scattering effects. At the microscale, the GO sheets increased the solar absorption rate to 92.9% owing to the frequently occurring excitation and subsequent relaxation of electrons caused by the continuous energy levels of GO. From the perspective of compositing elements, the addition of PEI endowed the GP@MF with ample chemical bonds and electrons that facilitated the capture of light by the hybrid effect of π-conjugated backbones and sp2-hybridized carbon. At the nanoscale, the highly dispersed GO nanosheets existed in a single layer intensively stimulating the light trapping and thus enhancing the solar absorption rate. The Raman spectra confirmed the special state of GO nanosheets in GP@MF (Fig. 4b). The ratio of the intensity of the D peak to G peak (ID/IG) was higher in GP@MF (0.99) than in GO@MF (0.93), the corresponding G peak redshifted from 1580 cm−1 (GP@MF) to 1576 cm−1 (GO@MF) and the 2G peak was sharper in GP@MF, together indicating the presence of single-layer GO in GP@MF. An enhanced light trapping effect could improve the solar absorption rate due to the fortified multiple scattering effects. The schematics of the solar absorption process in MF, GO@MF, and GP@MF are given in Fig. 4c–e. The solar energy was projected onto the solar absorber and then divided into three parts: transmission, reflection, and absorption. At the macroscale, sunlight could barely transmit through the solar absorber because of the large thickness. At the microscale, every single skeleton would absorb a certain amount of solar energy, and the absorption rate was determined by the state of the surface. Zoom in every point in the skeleton, the light would be trapped and the efficiency was decided by the trapping depth which was negatively correlated with the layer of GO nanosheets. The abundant groups and the single layer structure of GP@MF increased both the relaxation of electrons and the light trapping effect thus performing a high solar absorption rate.
 Fig. 4  Solar absorption and conversion efficiency of GP@MF. (a) UV-vis-IR solar absorption spectra. (b) Raman spectra of GO@MF and GP@MF. (c–e) The schematics of the light absorption process among MF, GO@MF, and GP@MF. Distinct temperature change versus illumination time of dry (f) and wet samples (g). 
The photothermal conversion is critical for solar evaporation because it determines how much solar energy would be converted into heat. The photothermal conversion efficiency, contributing to both the solar absorption rate and the heat loss suppression ability, could be evaluated by the temperature change between the dry and wet states under 1 sun illumination.3,24 The GP@MF presented a higher temperature both in the dry state and in the wet state under one sun illumination (Fig. 4f and g). The calculated temperature changes of the three samples are presented in Table S5.† The MF had the lowest temperature change of 0.8 °C, while GO@MF and GP@MF exhibited a temperature change of 22.8 °C and 25.0 °C. The competitive photothermal conversion ability of GP@MF was not only ascribed to the intrinsic solar absorption ability but also to the interaction intensity between the sunlight and the components of the evaporator.
After converting the solar energy to heat, the following step is water evaporation driven by the heat. The wettability of the evaporator determines the heat transfer efficiency because a hydrophilic solar absorber has a decreased heat transfer distance. Considering that water contact angle (θwater) evaluation could only be applied to nonporous and rigid materials, we detected the wettability of the solar evaporator by measuring the air water contact angle (θair) first. According to the equation θwater = 180° − θair, the water contact angle could be calculated and the water affinity of the MF-based evaporator could be determined. Both GO@MF and GP@MF were hydrophilic because they had high air contact angles of 130.6° and 140.8° (Fig. S9†). Furthermore, the direct contact behaviour between the water droplet and the solar evaporator was observed by means of the water contact angle tests. The time for completely absorbing a water droplet was much lower in GP@MF (0.252 s) than in GO@MF (9.394 s) (Fig. 5a). The faster water migration ability of GP@MF was attributed to the abundant hydrophilic amino groups introduced by the additive PEI which ensured both efficient heat transfer and faster water evaporation. The micro- to nanoscale hydrophilic property of the samples was revealed by the AFM adhesion forces (Fig. S10†). AFM could detect the micro- to nanoscale adhesion force of the evaporator by means of a hydrophilic probe which was positively related to the wettability of the evaporator based on the Young–Dupré equation. GP@MF was more hydrophilic than GO@MF because GP@MF exhibited a higher percentage of larger adhesion forces corresponding to the hydrophilic area. The multiscale structure of GP@MF was beneficial for improving the solar evaporation efficiency by regulating the states of water molecules. As shown in Fig. 5b, the porous skeletons of MF divided the water into small cells and the water molecules existed in different states based on the distance to the skeletons. The GP additive on the skeletons brought in many amino groups and hydroxyl groups, which could bind with water molecules and affect the water evaporation process. The evaporation enthalpy of water in the solar evaporator was observed by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) tests (Fig. 5c). The calculated equivalent enthalpy is given in Fig. 5d. The GP@MF presented lower energy demand for evaporation (1639.68 J g−1) than GO@MF (1873.45 J g−1) and pure water (2378.27 J g−1). The lowest evaporation enthalpy was presented by GP@MF ensuring high and stable solar desalination performance.
 Fig. 5  The affinity between water and the evaporator. (a) The water contact angles versus time changes of GO@MF and GP@MF. (b) The illustration of the water molecules in different scales in the GP@MF. (c) Thermograms of pristine water, water in GO@MF, and water in GP@MF. (d) The calculated enthalpy. (e) The thermal conduction coefficients of GO and GP on the substrate. 
Thermal conductivity determines the heat loss during solar desalination and the heat loss could be hugely suppressed by using a thermal insulating evaporator. Both the additive GP and the GP@MF exhibited low thermal conductivities. We firstly tested the thermal conductivity coefficient of the additive by the hot-plate method. The same amounts of GO and GP were deposited onto the substrate filter paper (denoted as GO-FP and GP-FP, respectively). The thermal conductivity of the pristine filter paper was 1.560 W m−1 K−1 (Fig. 5e and Table S6†). After coating with GP, the thermal conductivity reduced to 1.159 W m−1 K−1, which was lower than that of GO-FP (1.326 W m−1 K−1). The results demonstrated that PEI additive could enhance the thermal insulation property. Then the thermal conductivity of GP@MF was detected to be 0.0505 W m−1 K−1, which was about one order of magnitude lower than those of traditional solar absorbers.25 Meanwhile, a similar tendency was also detected in samples in the wet state and GP@MF displayed a lower thermal conductivity coefficient of 0.603 W m−1 K−1 than MF (0.612 W m−1 K−1) and GO@MF (0.606 W m−1 K−1) (Fig. S11†). The excellent thermal insulation was derived from the multiscale structure of the GP@MF. At the macroscale, GP@MF had higher porosity (98.6%) than GO@MF (97.1%), only slightly lower than that of original MF (99.5%) according to Table S7† and Methods. A higher percentage of pores filled by thermal insulating air with a thermal conductivity of 0.023 W m−1 K−1 was conducive to decreasing the thermal conductivity of the solar evaporator.26 The multilayer structure formed at the micro- to nanoscale could hold the heat around GO nanosheets as the surrounding MF and PEI were poor conductors of heat.27,28
The special heterogeneous electric property achieved by multiple components enabled the evaporator to trigger the ionic selectivity. In the macroscale, evaporators with different charges were prepared by increasing the amount of PEI, the isoelectric points (IEPs) of which gradually changed from ∼2.97 (negatively charged) to ∼9.96 (positively charged) (Fig. 6a). For all kinds of samples, the solar evaporation rates and solar-to-vapor efficiencies were maintained in brines with salinities varying from 0 to 25 wt% (Fig. 6b). Although these solar evaporators had different IEPs, the multilayer structure of GP@MF formed with a neutral core (MF), negatively charged interlayer (GO), and positively charged shell (PEI) in the microscale. Such a heterogeneous electronic patch was beneficial for salt rejection owing to the electrostatic repulsion forces (Fig. 6c). Such a heterogeneous electronic patch could trigger the ionic selectivity to impede the salt fouling. The ionic selectivity worked because the GO nanosheets (<2 nm), PEI grafts (<6 nm), as well as the water film were within the Debye length (12.6 nm).
 Fig. 6  The electrical properties and solar desalination performance of the different charged samples. (a) The zeta potential test results of the GP@MF with different contents of PEI. (b) The mass change and solar vapor efficiency of GP-1.8 (negatively charged), GP-3 (neutral), and GP-6 (positively charged) in various simulated brine water samples. (c) The heterogeneous electrical distribution around the solar evaporator. 
Long-term stability and application
Long-term stability was measured by desalinating salt-containing water of low to high salinities continuously for 9 h. No salt crystal appeared on the surface of GP@MF after continuously treating 3.5 wt% and 12.5 wt% simulated brine for 9 h (Fig. 7a and b). Even under hypersaline conditions with a salt concentration of 25 wt%, the solar evaporator was clean for 1.5 h. The solar evaporation rate slightly decreased and then increased in the 5th hour (Fig. 7c and d). In the 9th hour, the solar evaporation rate was 1.269 kg m−2 h−1 and the corresponding solar energy efficiency was 85.1%. The initially decreased solar evaporation rate was due to the salt deposition that impeded the steam evaporation pathway and reduced the solar absorption rate. The following increase in solar evaporation rate was caused by the preserved and reused heat by the hedgehog-like salt crystals (Fig. S12†).
 Fig. 7  Long-term performance and application of GP@MF. Time-dependent mass change of the GP@MF in 3.5 wt% (a), 12.5 wt% (b) and 25 wt% (c) NaCl-simulated brine. (d) The record of GP@MF surface condition at 25 wt%. (e) The solar desalination performance of GP@MF in 25 wt% simulated brine. (f) The concentrations of four main ions before and after solar desalination. (g) The spectrum of methyl orange (MO) and methylene blue (MB) before and after purification. 
GP@MF can be easily redesigned to fulfill the requirements for applications under various circumstances. We prepared a solar evaporator with a hole in the center of the solar absorber filled by a hydrophilic string connected with the bulk brine of a concentration of 25 wt%. The solar evaporation rate was stable in the 25 wt% simulated brine for 12 h (Fig. 7e). Photos in Fig. S13† demonstrate that the salt only deposits onto the edge of the solar evaporator. As the salt crystals kept growing, the salt dropped from the solar desalination system.
The better performance was also detected in practical seawater and wastewater treatment. To test the performance of GP@MF under realistic conditions, we used a 4 × 4 × 1 cm3 GP@MF floating on the actual seawater collected from the South Sea which was put in a container with a rectangular pyramid as a roof to collect the desalinated vapour (Fig. S14†). The concentrations of four main ions were reduced by four to five orders of magnitude compared to the initial concentrations of the seawater according to the inductively coupled plasma mass spectroscopy results (ICP-MS) (Fig. 7f). The condensed water salinity levels of all the four primary ions were significantly reduced, which were even lower than the values typically obtained using the membrane-based (10–500 ppm) and distillation-based (1–50 ppm) technologies.16 Moreover, the obtained water met the healthy drinking water standards defined by the World Health Organization (WHO) and the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).29
The GP@MF was also used to treat the wastewater. In the same device of solar desalination, the bulk seawater was replaced by the typical cationic and anionic dyes (methylene blue and methyl orange, abbreviated as MB and MO). The concentrations of the two dyes were carefully tracked using an ultraviolet-visible spectrophotometer (UV-vis spectrometer). It was found that the concentrations of the two organic dyes in water were severely reduced to the detection limit of the UV-vis spectrometer (Fig. 7g).
3 Conclusions
In this study, we designed an entirely new solar evaporator integrated with a multiscale structure and multifunctional properties, simultaneously achieving high solar conversion efficiency and anti-fouling ability in various salinities including under hypersaline conditions. The macroscale to nanoscale configuration enhanced the energy efficiency by improving the solar absorption rate, boosting the photothermal conversion ability, regulating the water around the heat source, and decreasing the evaporation enthalpy. At the nanoscale, the multilayer structure formed by the outside positively charged PEI modification layer and negatively charged GO nanosheet interlayer redistributed the cations and anions thus enabling the solar absorber to avoid salt fouling. The GP@MF achieved a stable and efficient solar conversion rate in various salinities. The evaporation rate and the solar thermal efficiency were 1.392 kg m−2 h−1 and 93.4% for pure water, which was maintained at 1.391 kg m−2 h−1 to 1.276 kg m−2 h−1 in 3.5 wt% to 25 wt% brine. For the first time, we achieved efficient and stable solar desalination for 9 h under 1 sun with no salt deposition even in 12.5 wt% brine. Such a multiscale solar evaporator is promising for desalinating both centralized and non-centralized seawater of low to high salinities from various sources.
4 Methods
Reagents
Natural graphite flakes (325 mesh, 99.8%), poly(ethyleneimine) (PEI, MW 10000 g mol−1), sodium hydroxide (NaOH), methyl orange (MO), and methylene blue (MB) were purchased from Aladdin Industrial Corporation and were used without further purification. Commercial melamine foam (MF) was purchased from Shanghai Foam Materials.
Synthesis of graphene oxide
The graphene oxide nanosheets (GO) were self-synthesized in our lab by a modified Hummers' method.30,31 The pre-oxidized graphite (PG) was firstly prepared by heating a mixture of natural graphite flakes (GF, 30 g), concentrated sulfuric acid (H2SO4, 120 mL), and potassium persulfate (K2S2O8, 24.99 g) at 80 °C for 4.5 h and then washed until pH = 7 and then dried. Then the PG was mixed with sodium nitrate (NaNO3, 15 g), H2SO4 (690 mL), and potassium permanganate (KMnO4, 90 g) and kept at a low temperature (below 4 °C). After that, deionized water (DI water, 1380 mL) and hydrogen peroxide (30% H2O2, 25 mL) were slowly mixed with the above solution and maintained at 35 °C for 2 h. The yellow resultant was washed with hydrochloric acid (10% HCl, 10.8 L) to remove residual SO4− and then the mixture was condensed using a centrifuge and re-dispersed in DI water. The acquired solution was then sonicated for 30 min to peel. After the sonication process, the solution was transferred to a dialysis bag (MW 8000–10000) to remove ions.
Evaluating the porosity of evaporators
The porosity of the evaporators (Φ) was calculated using the formula (1): (1)where ρE and ρW are the densities of the evaporator and DI water, respectively. m1 and m2 are the weights of the evaporator before and after wetting.30 The relevant parameters are listed in Table S7.†
Solar desalination test
The as-prepared GP@MF was used as a solar absorber on the top of the solar vapour generation system, and under the GP@MF was a layer of non-woven fabrics (5 × 5 × 0.1 cm3), then a 5 × 5 × 0.5 cm3 thermally insulated polystyrene foam was the bottom layer allowing the solar vapour generation experiment to take place at the gas–water surface. The whole system was illuminated by a solar simulator, the solar flux of which was calibrated using an optical power meter (PL-MW 2000, Perfect Light, China). The mass change of bulk water was recorded in real-time using a high-accuracy balance (ME204E, Mettler Toledo, Germany). And the temperatures of the bulk water, solar evaporator, and atmosphere were detected using a thermocouple (UT320D, UNI-T, China), an infrared camera (E85, FLIR, America), and a hygrothermograph (DL8840, Deli, China), respectively. The solar desalination system was kept at a temperature of 25 °C and humidity of ∼60%. All the solar desalination tests were performed in our self-designed device (Fig. S4†).
The solar energy efficiency of the single test was quantitatively evaluated using eqn (2): (2)here ṁ is the evaporation rate calculated by deducting the dark evaporation from the solar evaporation rate, Copt is the intensity of the input solar energy, qi is the standard solar energy (1 kW m−2), and hLV is the total enthalpy of the liquid–vapor phase change (including sensible heat and phase-change enthalpy): hLV = λLV + CpΔT(3)Here, λLV, Cp, and ΔT are the latent heat of vaporization, specific heat capacity, and temperature rise of water in the evaporator, respectively.
Long-term solar desalination test
The solar desalination of actual seawater was conducted in a home-made device (Fig. S14†). The roof was made of quartz to enable maximum sunlight to project to the solar evaporator. The solar desalination device was illuminated with a solar simulator of 1 kW m−2. After desalinating for a certain time, the water turned into vapor which was then condensed by the cold roof and eventually flowed as a fluid to the bottom container. The condensed solution was then collected and tested using an inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometer (ICP-OES 6300, Thermo Scientific, Germany) and an ultraviolet and visible spectrophotometer (UV-2550, Shimadzu, Japan). The ion rejection rate (β) was then calculated using eqn (4) and the concentration of organic pollutants was calculated from the absorption rate at a certain wavelength: (4)Here, C and C0 are the concentrations of salt ions after and before solar desalination.
Author contributions
Zhi Yang: conceptualization, methodology, data curation, writing – original draft. Lei Chen: conceptualization, writing – reviewing and editing, formal analysis, validation. Kaijie Yang: conceptualization, writing – reviewing and editing, formal analysis, validation. Cheng Chen: conceptualization, software, writing – reviewing and editing, formal analysis, validation. Yuyao Zhang: software, writing – reviewing and editing, validation. Shan Li: writing – reviewing and editing, validation. Chiheng Chu: conceptualization, resources, writing – reviewing and editing, formal analysis, validation. Xiaoying Zhu: conceptualization, writing – reviewing and editing, formal analysis, validation. Baoliang Chen: conceptualization, writing – reviewing and editing, formal analysis, resources, funding acquisition.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This project was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21621005 and 22136004), and the National Key Technology Research and Development Program of China (2018YFC1800705).
References
M. Elimelech and W. Phillip, Science, 2011, 333, 712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. J. J. Alvarez, C. K. Chan, M. Elimelech, N. J. Halas and D. Villagran, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gao, L. Zhu, C. K. Peh and G. W. Ho, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 841 RSC .
P. D. Dongare, A. Alabastri, S. Pedersen, K. R. Zodrow, N. J. Hogan, O. Neumann, J. Wu, T. Wang, A. Deshmukh, M. Elimelech, Q. Li, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 6936 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Tao, G. Ni, C. Song, W. Shang, J. Wu, J. Zhu, G. Chen and T. Deng, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 1031 CrossRef .
T. Mezher, H. Fath, Z. Abbas and A. Khaled, Desalination, 2011, 266, 263 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xu, L. Zhang, L. Zhao, B. Li, B. Bhatia, C. Wang, K. L. Wilke, Y. Song, O. Labban, J. H. Lienhard, R. Wang and E. N. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 830 RSC .
W. Xu, X. Hu, S. Zhuang, Y. Wang, X. Li, L. Zhou, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702884 CrossRef .
F. Zhao, X. Zhou, Y. Shi, X. Qian, M. Alexander, X. Zhao, S. Mendez, R. Yang, L. Qu and G. Yu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ni, S. H. Zandavi, S. M. Javid, S. V. Boriskina, T. A. Cooper and G. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1510 RSC .
S. He, C. Chen, Y. Kuang, R. Mi, Y. Liu, Y. Pei, W. Kong, W. Gan, H. Xie, E. Hitz, C. Jia, X. Chen, A. Gong, J. Liao, J. Li, Z. J. Ren, B. Yang, S. Das and L. Hu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1558 RSC .
J. Chen, J. L. Yin, B. Li, Z. Ye, D. Liu, D. Ding, F. Qian, N. V. Myung, Q. Zhang and Y. Yin, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 17419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhu, L. Sun, H. Zhang, H. Aslan, Y. Sun, Y. Huang, F. Rosei and M. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 2451 RSC .
H. Li, Z. Yan, Y. Li and W. Hong, Water Res., 2020, 177, 115770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kuang, C. Chen, S. He, E. M. Hitz, Y. Wang, W. Gan, R. Mi and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900498 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Xia, Q. Hou, H. Jubaer, Y. Li, Y. Kang, S. Yuan, H. Liu, M. W. Woo, L. Zhang, L. Gao, H. Wang and X. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1840 RSC .
L. Wu, Z. Dong, Z. Cai, T. Ganapathy, N. X. Fang, C. Li, C. Yu, Y. Zhang and Y. Song, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Mu, Z. Zhang, W. Bai, J. He, H. Sun, Z. Zhu, W. Liang and A. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802158 CrossRef .
S. Meng, X. Zhao, C.-Y. Tang, P. Yu, R.-Y. Bao, Z.-Y. Liu, M.-B. Yang and W. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 2701 RSC .
Z. Yu, S. Cheng, C. Li, L. Li and J. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 32038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhao, X. Zhu and B. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 334, 1119 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, A. Ghaffar, X. Zhu and B. Chen, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2019, 53, 10398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, H. Zhang, T. Xiong, H. Qu, J. J. Koh, D. K. Nandakumar, J. Wang and S. C. Tan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 4891 RSC .
C. Chen, Y. Kuang and L. Hu, Joule, 2019, 3, 683–718 CrossRef CAS .
X. Deng, Q. Nie, Y. Wu, H. Fang, P. Zhang and Y. Xie, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 26200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. A. Cooper, S. H. Zandavi, G. W. Ni, Y. Tsurimaki, Y. Huang, S. V. Boriskina and G. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 5086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yan, L. Zhao, Z. Fang and H. Wang, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2017, 134, 45556 CrossRef .
S. Yu, Z. Chen, Y. Wang, R. Luo and Y. Pan, J. Porous Mater., 2017, 25, 527 CrossRef .
L. Zhou, Y. Tan, J. Wang, W. Xu, Y. Yuan, W. Cai, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 393 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, X. Y. Zhu and B. L. Chen, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2019, 53, 1509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, S. Li, Z. Yang, C. Chen, C. Chu and B. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 305, 121066 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ta07153cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Illustration and morphology of the multiscale solar evaporator. (a) The fabrication process of the solar evaporator (GP@MF), and photographs of MF, GO@MF, and GP@MF are put at the corresponding bottom right corner. (b) SEM images of MF, GO@MF, and GP@MF.	 

 	Fig. 2  Structural characterizations of the multi-layered solar evaporator. (a and b) Illustration and nanoscale configuration of the multilayer structure in every single skeleton of GP@MF. (c–e) High-resolution XPS spectra of C 1s; the C 1s peaks of three samples were deconvoluted into four peaks of 284.6 eV (C–C), 286.1 eV (C–O), 287.6 eV (CN), and 288.9 eV (CO). (f) FTIR spectrum GO and GP. (g) XPS spectra of GO@MF and GP@MF. (h) The ζ potential curves of MF, GO, and GP.	 

 	Fig. 3  Solar desalination performances. (a and b) The mass change and the solar energy efficiency of water, GO@MF, and GP@MF under one sun. (c) The comparison of the energy efficiency in pure water. (d and e) The mass change and relative efficiency of GP@MF at different concentrations of brines. (f) Comparison of the solar energy efficiency at various salinities with recent reports under one sun. (g) A record of the salt rejection performance of the solar evaporator using GP@MP was tested in 3.5 wt% brine under 1 sun illumination.	 

 	Fig. 4  Solar absorption and conversion efficiency of GP@MF. (a) UV-vis-IR solar absorption spectra. (b) Raman spectra of GO@MF and GP@MF. (c–e) The schematics of the light absorption process among MF, GO@MF, and GP@MF. Distinct temperature change versus illumination time of dry (f) and wet samples (g).	 

 	Fig. 5  The affinity between water and the evaporator. (a) The water contact angles versus time changes of GO@MF and GP@MF. (b) The illustration of the water molecules in different scales in the GP@MF. (c) Thermograms of pristine water, water in GO@MF, and water in GP@MF. (d) The calculated enthalpy. (e) The thermal conduction coefficients of GO and GP on the substrate.	 

 	Fig. 6  The electrical properties and solar desalination performance of the different charged samples. (a) The zeta potential test results of the GP@MF with different contents of PEI. (b) The mass change and solar vapor efficiency of GP-1.8 (negatively charged), GP-3 (neutral), and GP-6 (positively charged) in various simulated brine water samples. (c) The heterogeneous electrical distribution around the solar evaporator.	 

 	Fig. 7  Long-term performance and application of GP@MF. Time-dependent mass change of the GP@MF in 3.5 wt% (a), 12.5 wt% (b) and 25 wt% (c) NaCl-simulated brine. (d) The record of GP@MF surface condition at 25 wt%. (e) The solar desalination performance of GP@MF in 25 wt% simulated brine. (f) The concentrations of four main ions before and after solar desalination. (g) The spectrum of methyl orange (MO) and methylene blue (MB) before and after purification.	 
	(1)
	(2)
hLV = λLV + CpΔT	(3)
	(4)
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ta07153c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
