Towards the electrochemical conversion of carbon dioxide into methanol   - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4GC02453B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4GC02453B
(Critical Review)
Green Chem., 2015, 17, 2304-2324Towards the electrochemical conversion of carbon dioxide into methanol†

        
          
            J. 
            Albo
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            M. 
            Alvarez-Guerra
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            P. 
            Castaño
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            A. 
            Irabien
          
        
      b
aDept. Chemical Engineering, University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), Apdo. 644, 48080 Bilbao, Spain. E-mail: jonathan.albo@ehu.es
bDept. Chemical & Biomolecular Engineering, University of Cantabria, Avda. Los Castros s/n 39005, Santander, Spain
Received 
      16th December 2014
    , Accepted 22nd January 2015First published on 22nd January 2015AbstractVarious strategies have been proposed to date in order to mitigate the concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere, such as the separation, storage, and utilization of this gas. Among the available technologies, the electrochemical valorisation of CO2 appears to be an innovative technology, in which electrical energy is supplied to establish a potential between two electrodes, allowing CO2 to be transformed into value-added chemicals under mild conditions. It provides a method to recycle CO2 (in a carbon neutral cycle) and, at the same time, a way to chemically store the excess of renewable energy from intermittent sources, thus reducing our dependence on fossil fuels. Among the useful products that can be obtained, methanol is particularly interesting as a platform chemical, and it has gained renewed and growing attention in the research community. Accomplishments to date in the electroreduction of CO2 to methanol have been encouraging, although substantial advances are still needed for it to become a profitable technology able to shift society to renewable energy sources. This review presents a unified discussion of the significant work that has been published in the field of electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 to methanol. It emphasizes the aspects related to process design at different levels: cathode materials, reaction media, design of electrochemical cells, as well as working conditions. It then extends the discussion to the important conclusions from different electrocatalytic routes, and recommendations for future directions to develop a catalytic system that will convert CO2 to methanol at high process efficiencies.Jonathan AlboJonathan Albo obtained his MSc in Chemical Engineering (2010) from the University of Cantabria. In 2012, he completed his PhD in Chemical Engineering at the same University, focused on the development of new membrane-based processes for CO2 separation. He next held a JSPS postdoctoral fellowship (2013) at Hiroshima University and then joined the group of Prof. Javier Bilbao at the University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU) (http://www.ehu.eus/en/web/cpwv) as a Juan de la Cierva researcher (2014). At present, his main research interests are in the field of The electro- and photoelectrocatalytic conversion of CO2 to value-added chemicals, including methanol.Manuel Alvarez-GuerraManuel Alvarez-Guerra studied Chemical Engineering at University of Cantabria (2005), where he obtained his Master's (2008) and PhD (2010) in Chemical Engineering. At present, he is Assistant Professor in the Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering and member of the DePRO research group headed by Prof. Irabien (http://grupos.unican.es/depro/) in the same university. His current research work is focused on the development and assessment of innovative processes for the electrochemical conversion of CO2 into valuable products, such as formate or dimethyl carbonate. His postdoctoral research interests also include the modeling of ionic liquids, particularly for estimating their ecotoxicity and thermodynamic properties.Pedro CastañoPedro Castaño received his MSc and PhD degrees in Chemical Engineering from the University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU) in 2002 and 2006, respectively. He was hired as a postdoc in TU Delft, working on multiphase microreactors. After some voluntary work, he was hired as a Ramon y Cajal fellow (2009) and Research Associate Professor (2013) at the UPV/EHU. He has also has worked in MIT, UWO, ICP-CSIC and UU. His research interests are in thermo-chemical-electrochemical waste processing, heterogeneous catalysis performance and deactivation, surface spectroscopy and multiscale modeling. More information can be found at http://www.ehu.eus/pedro.castano
1. Introduction
In the last century, with the intensification of human industrial activities, the balance between the CO2 produced and consumed on earth has gradually been disrupted, leading to more CO2 emissions and making global warming a pressing issue. Therefore, reducing CO2 production and converting this molecule into useful materials seems to be necessary, indeed critical, for environmental protection, and various governments worldwide have signalled their concern by increasing their investment in research addressing this issue. There are different approaches to tackle the CO2 issue which include the capture of CO2 and either its storage1–3 or conversion into valuable chemicals.4–6 The recycling of the CO2 molecule by electrochemical reduction (also known as artificial photosynthesis), where electrical energy is supplied to establish a potential between two electrodes in order to allow CO2 to be transformed into reduced forms, has attracted worldwide interest due to its potential environmental and economic benefits.4,7–10 This technology, coupled to a renewable energy source, such as wind or solar, could generate carbon neutral fuels or industrial chemicals that are conventionally derived from petroleum. The reduction of global CO2 emissions and the conversion of this wasted CO2 into industrially useful chemical feedstock clearly align this process with the principles of sustainable chemistry (or green chemistry), as observed in recent review publications in this journal.11–13
Moreover, the imbalance between the energy production and consumption is particularly important for the renewable energy sources whose outputs depend on natural factors. In this scenario, CO2 electroreduction could solve, or help to solve, this imbalance, utilizing surplus energy in methanol production. The development of a cost-effective process for the electrochemical reduction of CO2 could enable a shift to a sustainable energy economy and chemical industry.
The electrochemical reduction of CO2 was studied for the first time in 1870 by Royer.14 Since then, it has been the subject of a large number of publications, especially during the last twenty years. These studies have been summarized in several specific review articles on CO2 electrochemical reduction where the state of the art is presented with different perspectives,4,15–32 as listed in ESI (Appendix I†).
Nowadays, CO2 capture, conversion, and utilization are still recognized as a feasible and promising cutting-edge area of exploration in energy and environmental research, but a deep understanding, not only of the CO2 reduction mechanisms, but also of economic viability and life cycle assessment, is still required, although some effort has already been made.8,33–35
Recently, Dominguez-Ramos et al. evaluated the environmental sustainability of the CO2 electroreduction process, focusing on resources and greenhouse gas emissions. They concluded that the integration of renewable energy and the reduction in the consumption of chemicals in the electrolysis, might lead this technology to be a potential candidate for environmentally sustainable CO2 utilization.34
The direct electrochemical reduction of CO2 results in a variety of products which depend mainly on catalyst materials and the reaction medium. Electrochemical reduction of CO2 can mainly proceed through two-, four-, six-, and eight-electron reduction pathways in gaseous, aqueous, and non-aqueous phases at different cell and electrode configurations. The major reduction products are carbon monoxide (CO), formic acid (HCOOH) or formate (HCOO−) in basic solution, formaldehyde (CH2O), methanol (CH3OH), oxalic acid (H2C2O4) or oxalate (C2O42−) in basic solution, methane (CH4), ethylene (CH2CH2) or ethanol (CH3CH2OH).32 Among the various chemicals, the challenges for converting CO2 into CH3OH are great, but the potential rewards are also enormous.
1.1 Potentialities for the electrochemical reduction of CO2 to CH3OH
Methanol is a green fuel with almost half of the energy density of the mostly used fuel, gasoline (methanol: 15.6 MJ L−1; gasoline: 34.2 MJ L−1),36 but it is also a vital intermediate for several bulk chemicals used in day-to-day life products such as silicone, paint, and plastics. Compared to hydrogen, CH3OH possesses a higher energy density, can be stored at atmospheric pressure, and can be utilized directly in energy converting systems like internal combustion engines due to its high octane rating, or directly in fuel cells in Direct Methanol Fuel Cells (DMFC) or indirectly (after conversion into hydrogen by reforming).
At present, most of the commercial CH3OH is produced from methane through syngas (the mixture of CO and H2) by steam reforming on quite large-scale industrial plants in several million tons per year capacity.10 However, the electrochemical transformation of CO2 emitted from fossil fuel burning power plants and other industries (and eventually even the CO2 contained in the air) into CH3OH can be performed under ambient conditions. This process could become feasible and renewable at human timescales, contributing to solving both global warming and energy crisis problems to a great extent.10,37
The “methanol economy”, in which CH3OH replaces fossil fuels as a form of energy vector, transportation fuel and raw material for synthetic hydrocarbons and their products, was first proposed by the Nobel Laureate Olah and widely discussed afterwards by his collaborators.10,38,39 In these publications, they summarized the state of our current energy sources, their availability and limitations before suggesting a new approach in the so-called methanol economy. In this economy, energy can be stored in the form of CH3OH and the CO2 is recycled avoiding additional emissions, as represented in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  The methanol-based economy cycle model. 
A close study of the existing information on this subject reveals that the successful development of artificial photosynthesis is no longer an unrealistic dream. The literature has reported so far the conversion of CO2 into CH3OH following thermochemical, electrochemical, photoelectrochemical, and photocatalytic reactions performed over both inorganic as well as organic molecular (homogeneous and heterogeneous) catalytic systems.32 Nevertheless, none of the review articles exclusively deals with the literature on the electrochemical conversion of CO2 into CH3OH, taking into consideration the effect of the applied catalytic material, electrolyte and configuration of the electrochemical cell.
To fill this gap, this review article presents and discusses the several fundamental aspects and opportunities of CO2 electroreduction to CH3OH, with the main perspective of designing a simple, efficient and reliable method for the continuous electroreduction of CO2 using renewable energy resources. The following key points of the CO2 electroreduction process to CH3OH are discussed: (i) cathode materials applied, (ii) effect of the reaction medium, (iii) operating conditions, (iv) configuration of the electrochemical cell and, finally (v) a comparison with other electrocatalytic routes. Besides, this review also discusses some other relevant CO2 electrocatalytic approaches despite the fact that their main objective is not CH3OH production but other products, as their results may be taken into account for the development of an efficient process to generate CH3OH and identify research needs.
2. Summary of studies
The overall reaction of CH3OH formation is a combination of a reduction and oxidation reaction at the cathode and anode of the system, respectively, as presented in Table 1.
Table 1 Electrochemical reaction for CO2 conversion to CH3OH under standard conditions




 
Electrochemical reaction

E (V)




Cathode
CO2 + 6H+ + 6e− ⇄ CH3OH + H2O
−0.22 vs. SCE


Anode
3H2O ⇄ 1.5O2 + 6H+ + 6e−
0.99 vs. SCE


Overall:
CO2 + 2H2O ⇄ CH3OH + 1.5O2
1.21




Thermodynamically, it is feasible to electrochemically reduce CO2 to CH3OH; however, the reduction potential of carbon dioxide is only 20 mV positive with respect to the potential for water reduction, which results in hydrogen generation. Then, in the electrochemical reduction of CO2 to CH3OH, the electrical energy supplied to the system is consumed by two reactions:
(i) Hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), in which the energy is consumed for the production of hydrogen through the process of water electrolysis.
(ii) The reduction of CO2 into the product of interest, CH3OH.
In order to achieve high selectivities for a given product (defined by the Faradaic efficiency) and high production rates of the desired CH3OH, it is required to use an electrode material able to suppress the HER so that most of the electric energy supplied is consumed only in the CO2 reduction reaction.

Fig. 2 shows the two most probable reaction pathways in the formation of CH3OH from the electrochemical conversion of CO2.40 The first mechanism proceeds through the CO pathway,19,41 and the second undergoes formate (HCOO−) intermediate.42–44 The other main compounds that are expected to be formed together with CH3OH are CO, HCOOH, CH2O and CH4. For example, in 2012, Kuhl et al.45 evaluated the electrochemical reduction of CO2 on metallic copper surfaces across a range of potentials and observed a total of 16 different CO2 reduction products (CH3OH, CO, CH4, acetate, acetaldehyde, ethanol, ethylene, allyl alcohol, propionaldehyde, 1-propanol, glyoxal, glycoaldehyde, ethylene glycol, hydroxyacetone, acetone). Since the transformation of CO2 to CH3OH requires 6e− the reduction reaction is considered to be kinetically slower; hence, very active and selective catalytic materials for this reaction are needed.
 Fig. 2  Probable reaction pathways in the electrochemical reduction of CO2 to CH3OH, through CO (a) and HCOOH (b) intermediates. 
2.1 Applied cathode materials
Transition metals and their associated compounds, such as metal complexes, have been widely evaluated for the electroreduction of CO2. This is probably because these metals have vacant orbitals and active d electrons, which are believed to be able to energetically facilitate the bonding between the metal and the CO2 for adduct formation and to facilitate the desorption of the reduction products.32 Besides, the electronic and geometric properties of the metallic catalysis surface, in relation to the size of the active centres and the elements forming them, seem to be crucial to block HER and promote CO2 reduction.46
Among the available metals, those identified in Fig. 3 have been reported to be the most active for the electrochemical transformation of CO2 to CH3OH, and their use is discussed in the following sections. The metals have been grouped according to their use for preparing cathode materials (as reported in the literature), as well as to their position in the periodic table of elements.
 Fig. 3  Active metals reported in the literature for the electrochemical transformation of CO2 into CH3OH. 

2.1.1 Copper (Cu) and Cu-based electrodes. 
Among the various metal electrodes employed for the electrochemical reduction of CO2, copper (Cu) is one of the most promising materials for obtaining hydrocarbons and alcohols. The industrial catalysts for the production of CH3OH are commonly composed of Cu–Zn–Al mixed oxides. It was demonstrated that the combination of these compounds produces a higher catalytic activity for CH3OH formation than the isolated metals at low pressures.47 Therefore, Cu and Zn metals were employed initially, in 1904, as cathodes for the electrochemical reduction of CO2.48 In this first work, Cu, Zn, and amalgamated Cu and Zn-based electrodes were tested for the electroreduction of CO2 in aqueous NaHCO3 and K2SO4 solutions. The results showed that the electroplated Cu with amalgamated Zn electrodes exhibited high efficiency for reducing pressurized CO2, although the main product obtained was HCOOH. In 1985 and 1986 Hori et al.49,50 observed high rates and efficiencies for the electrochemical reduction of CO2 to CO and hydrocarbons, mainly CH4 and C2H4, on Cu electrodes in aqueous hydrogen carbonate solution. This new finding awakened interest in evaluating Cu metal surfaces for the electrochemical transformation of CO2. Since then, the formation of low hydrocarbons (e.g. CH4 or C2H4), alcohols (CH3OH, CH3CH2OH and 1-propanol (C3H8O)), esters, as well as high hydrocarbons, such as paraffins and olefins (up to 6 carbon atoms), has been reported in the literature at Cu, electrodeposited Cu and Cu-coated electrodes.19,49–85 Besides, recent studies41,45,86,87 have advanced in improving the understanding of the mechanisms for the electroreduction of CO2 at Cu-based electrodes. The results suggest that the key enabling step in the formation of hydrocarbons from CO2 is the protonation of adsorbed CO to form adsorbed CHO. However, since CO binds only weakly to Cu surfaces, materials that bind CO weaker will lead to large amounts of gas-phase CO production. Therefore, materials that bind CHO strongly, while binding CO with similar tenacity, offer the best hope for future catalyst materials.41
At present, the greatest reported current densities, j, and apparent Faradaic efficiencies, FE, towards CH3OH formation are associated with oxidized Cu-based electrodes with current densities of up to 33 mA cm−2 and Faradaic efficiencies greater than 100%, where chemical and electrochemical mechanisms are involved in the transformation of the CO2 molecule.64
Cu and Cu oxides. 
In an attempt to enhance the electrochemical reduction of CO2, oxidized Cu surfaces have been applied since Frese et al. reported in 1991 the CO2 electroreduction to CH3OH at various oxidized Cu electrodes (Cu foil, Cu foil thermally oxidized in air, and air-oxidized Cu electrodeposited on anodized or air-oxidized Ti foils) at ambient temperature.64 The highest rates, 2.8 × 10−5 mol m−2 s−1, were found when using anodized Cu in 0.5 M KHCO3 at −1.90 V vs. the saturated calomel electrode (SCE). The resulting apparent Faradic efficiencies were extraordinarily high (∼240%).
In 2009, Chang et al.67 synthesized Cu2O cubes to prepare Cu2O-catalyzed carbon clothes. These materials were characterized electrochemically by potentiostatic measurements and cyclic voltammetries in 0.5 M NaOH electrolytes saturated with CO2. The GC/FID analysis of the electroreduction process confirmed the CH3OH to be the predominant product. The current responses for the potential range 0 to −1.70 V (vs. SCE) revealed the electrochemical stability and the notable catalytic ability of Cu2O-catalyzed carbon clothes for CO2 reduction. The mass activity was estimated to be 0.94 mA mg−1.
Moreover, Le et al.69 reported CH3OH production rates as high as 1.2 × 10−4 mol m−2 s−1 and Faradaic efficiencies up to 38% in 0.5 M KHCO3 at electrodeposited cuprous thin films electrodes. These values were higher than those obtained from the electroreduction of CO2 either at air-oxidized or anodized Cu electrodes, suggesting that Cu(I) species play a critical role in electrode activity and selectivity to CH3OH. The theoretical potential for CO2 reduction to CH3OH, at pH = 7.6 and 25 °C occurs at 20 mV positive of the standard hydrogen electrode with Cu materials; while using oxidized Cu, the CO2 was reduced at more positive potentials, thus showing greatest yields and efficiencies. Moreover, the formation of CH3OH was stable over Cu and Cu oxides supported on ZnO for longer reaction times. They hypothesized that the stability of these species may be a key factor for maintaining catalytic activity for CH3OH production, since ZnO stabilize oxidized Cu in the hydrogenation reaction.44,70 The mechanism for CH3OH synthesis from CO2, and its intermediates, on Cu/Zn surfaces has been also studied. The calculations indicated that the Cu–Zn site is the active site to catalyse CH3OH.70 However, more fundamental studies regarding oxidized Cu electrodes on their formal reduction potentials relative to CO2 are still required.
In 2012, Li et al.71 prepared Cu2O layers by annealing a Cu foil in air. The results showed the dependency of CO2 reduction activity on electrode layer thickness. Besides, the prepared Cu2O electrodes (≥3 μm thick) exhibited 480 larger surface roughnesses than polycrystalline Cu-based electrodes and required 0.50 V less overpotential to reduce the CO2 molecule. The electrodes prepared were stable and showed a higher level of activity than all previously reported metal electrodes evaluated under comparable conditions (>1 mA cm−2 at overpotentials <0.40 V), although the main reduction products were CO and HCOOH. Lan et al.72 very recently studied the electrochemical behaviour of different loadings of a Cu(core)/CuO(shell) catalyst in a standard three-electrode cell. They focused on the modelling of the electroreduction process of CO2 to CO and HCOOH by using an in-series first-order reaction. The models reasonably described the formation of the two products and could be used to further understand the formation of CH3OH at Cu materials. The same group reported in 2014 the performance for CO2 electroreduction at a Cu(core)/CuO(shell) catalyst in a flow reactor where CO, HCOOH and CH3OH were the main products.84 The Faradaic efficiency for CH3OH was 42.7%. A larger amount of CH3OH was obtained for the Cu(core)/CuO(shell) catalyst in 1 M KHCO3 (−1.77 V vs. SCE) than that obtained at a Cu foil. The suggested CO2 reduction pathway is shown in Fig. 4. They concluded that the interplay between the Cu core and the CuO shell is beneficial for the production of CO, HCOOH and CH3OH.
 Fig. 4  Possible reaction pathway for the electrochemical reduction of CO2 to CH3OH at Cu(core)/CuO(shell) catalyst. Reprinted from ref. 84, Copyright (2014), with permission from ESG Publisher. 
Recently, de Brito et al.88 described the photoelectrocatalytic reduction of CO2 dissolved in 0.1 M Na2CO3–NaHCO3 at Cu/Cu2O electrodes prepared by electrochemical deposition of a Cu foil. The obtained values were very promising, with a CH3OH yield as high as 80 ppm and a Faradaic efficiency of 75% under UV-Vis irradiation and bias potential of +0.16 V vs. SCE. The proposed system may inspire future work on electrochemical CO2 conversion processes.
Cu-alloys. 
Alloying Cu with other metals may enhance the electrochemical properties for CO2 reduction to CH3OH.63,65,73,76,77 Watanabe et al.63,73 reported, after studying the electrochemical reduction of CO2 in aqueous KHCO3 on 32 metal electrodes,74,75 the peculiar effects of alloying Cu with other metals (i.e. Ni, Sn, Pb, Zn, Ag and Cd) to enhance the reversibility and selectivity for CO2 electroreduction. The Cu–Ni electrodes prepared by electroplating yielded mainly CH3OH and HCOOH at less negative potentials. However, the Cu–Ni-based electrodes increase hydrogen production and decrease hydrocarbon yields with the increase of Ni coverage on the surface of Cu. Besides, the current efficiency decreased with electrolysis time, which is related to the formation of poisonous intermediates.65
Schizodimou and Kyriacou77 evaluated the accelerating effect of various cations and the effect of acidity of the solution on the rate of the electrochemical reduction of CO2 on a Cu88Sn6Pb6 alloy cathode. The results showed that the rate of CO2 reduction can be increased at low overpotentials and the distribution of the products can be controlled simply by varying the composition of the electrolyte. The main reduction products were CH3OH, CO, HCOOH and CH3CHO. The maximum current efficiency for CH3OH formation was 36.3% at −0.70 V (vs. SCE) with a total CO2 reduction rate of 1.8 × 10−5 mol m−2 s−1 (44.47 μmol h−1) in an acid solution (2 M HCl solution). More recently, Jia et al.89 conducted the electroreduction of CO2 in aqueous 0.5 M KHCO3 at nanostructured Cu–Au alloys. The Faradaic efficiency of CH3OH on Cu36.9Au36.1 supported on nanoporous Cu films (NCF) was found to be 15.9%, which was higher than in nanostructured Cu and 19 times higher than on pure Cu electrodes, as represented in Fig. 5. The material catalysed not only CO2 reduction, but CO reduction, which contributes to enhancing the conversion of CO2 to alcohols.
 Fig. 5  Faradaic efficiencies for CH3OH and CH3CH2OH production by different electrodes in 0.5 M KHCO3 solution. Reprinted from ref. 89, Copyright (2014), with permission from Elsevier. 
Other alloys resulted in the production of HCOOH and CO with an enhanced reaction rate compared to that using the elemental metals, such as in the work developed by Yamamoto et al.76 where CO and H2 were formed in 1:1 ratio at Cu–Ni catalysts with an overall energy efficiency of 44.6%.
Cu nanostructures and organic frameworks. 
In 1993 Schwartz et al.80 first studied crystal structures (perovskite-type) for the electrochemical reduction of CO2 under ambient conditions at A1.8A′0.2CuO4 (A = La, Pr and Gd; A′ = Sr and Th). The results showed Faradaic efficiencies for CO2 reduction to CH3OH, CH3CH2OH, and C3H8O of up to 40% at current densities of 180 mA cm−2. In 2013, Andrews et al.86 studied the electroreduction of CO2 using Cu electrodes and Cu nanoclusters on single crystal ZnO electrodes in aqueous bicarbonate electrolytes. The products obtained at −1.45 V (vs. SCE) in the gas phase included H2, CO, CH4 and C2H4, while those in the liquid phase were CH3OH, CH3CH2OH, HCOO−; methyl formate and trace levels of C3H8O were also detected. While the normalized current densities were similar using any type of the electrode considered at a certain potential, selectivity toward CH3OH and CH3CH2OH was improved by at least an order of magnitude using the nanostructured Cu/ZnO electrodes. They proposed that ZnO strengthens the Cu–CO−, increasing the selectivity to alcohols. Besides, in 2014, Jia et al.89 electrodeposited a novel nanostructured Cu–Au alloy, based on a nanoporous Cu film as a template. The linear voltammetry analysis showed that the synthesized material exhibit catalysis toward electrochemical reduction of CO2 to CH3OH in aqueous media. A further analysis of the products obtained (CH3OH and CH3CH2OH) revealed that Faradaic efficiencies are greatly dependent on the nanostructures and compositions of Cu–Au alloys. Recently, Xie et al.,85 in an effort to overcome the electrocatalysts instability and large reaction overpotentials, prepared Cu nanoflower (NF) catalysts with a chrysanthemum-like structure. The results showed a 400 mV reduction of overpotential for CH4 and C2H4, in comparison with polycrystalline Cu. The electrocatalytic material maintained the catalytic activity for over 9 h and HER was reduced to 25% Faradaic efficiency. These materials offer good prospects for being used to design new electrocatalysts for CH3OH formation.
In the past two decades, metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) have attracted research interest due to their high porosity and thermal stability, as well as adjustable chemical functionality. MOFs, or coordination polymers/networks, combine organic ligands and metal ions or metal-containing clusters. They have been widely used as effective materials for CO2 adsorption, storage, and separation,78 but they may also represent an opportunity in the electrochemical reduction of CO2 emissions.79
Kumar et al. studied81 the electrocatalytic properties for CO2 reduction of Cu-based MOFs in CO2-saturated N,N-dimethylformamide containing tetrabutylammonium tetrafluoroborate. The cyclic voltammetric studies revealed that the electrochemically generated Cu(I) species were very selective for CO2 reduction, although the main product was H2C2O4. In a recent study, Hinogami et al.82 successfully synthesized Cu rubeanate MOF particles and dispersed them on a carbon paper to form electrodes. The resulting potential for CO2 reduction was about 0.20 V more positive than that observed on a Cu metal electrode in an aqueous electrolyte solution. However, the major reduction product was HCOOH, whereas a Cu metal electrode could generate a range of products. In any case, the production of HCOOH was 13-fold (at −1.44 V vs. SCE) than that of a Cu metal electrode and the stability was confirmed, suggesting that promising results could also be obtained for CH3OH production with specifically designed MOFs. Maihom et al.83 further demonstrated that MOFs can be utilized not only to capture and activate CO2, but also for CO2 catalysis. They investigated the reaction mechanisms of the hydrogenation of CO2 to HCOOH over Cu-alkoxide-MOFs. The investigation of CO2 electroreduction to CH3OH on Cu-based MOFs electrodes, however, still remains a challenge for future research.


2.1.2 Molybdenum (Mo) and ruthenium (Ru). 
One of the initial studies on the topic shows that Cr, Mo, W, etc. presented scarce electrocatalytic activity in the reduction of CO2 at ambient temperatures in aqueous KHCO3, in comparison with other metallic electrodes, such as In, Sn, Hg, or Cu.58 However, in subsequent studies from the mid 1980s to mid 1990s, CO2 was reduced over several metals and the formation of CH3OH was observed on Mo90–92 and several types of Ru electrodes92–95 with Faradaic efficiencies up to 60% at current densities less than 2 mA cm−2. Since then, these metals have been well known for the electroreduction of CO2, as well as CO2, CO, and H2 adsorption, leading to different catalytic activities, electrode stabilities and product selectivities.
In 1985 Frese et al.93 firstly demonstrated the production of small amounts of CH3OH on electroplated and Teflon-supported Ru electrodes in CO2 saturated 0.2 M Na2SO4 at pH = 4–7. The Faradaic efficiency of the electroreduction process was as high as 42% at 60 °C. One year later, Summers et al.90 conducted the electrolysis of CO2 using Mo electrodes in CO2-saturated 0.2 M Na2SO4 (pH = 4.2) and 0.05 M H2SO4 (pH = 1.5) solutions, producing CH3OH as the major carbon-containing product. The reduction proceeded at room temperature and −0.57 to −0.80 V (vs. SCE) with Faradaic efficiencies near 100% in some cases. Based on these results, Frese's group patented a method for producing CH3OH at Mo foils mounted on Cu wires, with up to 84% Faradaic efficiency and without detectable corrosion.91 Such reductions can occur, for example, at −0.80 V (vs. SCE), only 160 mV negative of the standard potential corrected for pH. The electrolysis also produces small amounts of CO and traces of CH4. Bandi92 used various conductive oxide mixtures (RuO2, TiO2, MoO2, Co3O4, and Rh2O3) to catalyse CO2 electroreduction to CH3OH. The CO2 underwent reduction to CH3OH and HCOOH, as detected by GC, in a solution of 0.2 M Na2SO4 (pH = 4) saturated with CO2. At low current densities (∼50–100 μA cm−2), before the onset potential of HER, there is high current efficiency for CH3OH formation on electrodes based on mixtures of RuO2 + TiO2 and RuO2 + Co3O4 + SnO2 + TiO2 deposited on a Ti foil. The same author lately reported the electrocatalytic activity of mixed Ru/Ti materials.94 In order to optimize the current efficiency for the reduction of CO2 to CH3OH, the electrodes were covered with some amounts of Cu. The results showed that when increasing the Cu deposition on the electrode surface an increase in CH3OH production is also noted with a positive effect on current efficiency. The CO2 also underwent electrochemical reduction to CH3OH and acetone over the surfaces of Ru, Cu–Cd-modified Ru, and Cu–Cd-modified RuOX + IrOX electrodes. The current efficiencies ranged from 15.3 to 38.2% in 0.5 M NaHCO3 solution at a potential of −0.80 V (vs. SCE).95 In 2003, Spataru et al.96 showed that RuO2-coated diamond electrodes could be a promising electrocatalytic material for CO2 electroreduction. The main reduction products obtained in acidic and neutral media were CH3OH and HCOOH, with efficiencies of 7.7 and 40%, respectively. Moreover, the formation of CH3OH was detected when CO2 was subjected to electrochemical reduction in 0.5 M NaHCO3 solution in a two-compartment H-type electrochemical cell at Pt modified with RuO2–TiO2 nanotubes and RuO2–TiO2 nanoparticles.97 Recently, Li et al.98 prepared MoS2-rods/TiO2 nanotubes heterojunction electrodes for CO2 transformation. They demonstrated that MoS2 were hexagonal prism structures without notable defects that were randomly distributed on the TiO2 nanotube surface, as observed in Fig. 6. They concluded that the regular structure was beneficial for electron transfer, and therefore catalytic ability. Electroreduction experiments showed that the CH3OH yield reached 202.2 mg L−1 (6.32 mmol L−1) at 6 h of experimental time with a Faradaic efficiency of 42%, which gradually decreases as the reaction proceeds. However, when illumination was introduced, a CH3OH yield and Faradaic efficiency of 463.68 mg L−1 and 111.58%, respectively, can be achieved.
 Fig. 6  SEM images of (a) MoS2-rods/TiO2 nanotubes (at 50 μm magnification), (b) TiO2 nanotubes (100 nm) and (c) MoS2 rods (10 μm). Reprinted from ref. 98, copyright (2014), with permission from Elsevier. 


2.1.3 Other transition metals. 
Iron (Fe). 
In general, the electrochemical reduction of CO2 at electrodes made of Fe, Co, and Ni or Fe/Co/Ni complexes of porphyrin in aqueous solutions mainly gives hydrocarbons, as well as H2 and CO. However, relatively high efficiencies for CO2 electroreduction to CH3OH in durable catalysts were also obtained using Fe-based complexes of porphyrin.99
In 1986 Ogura and Yoshida showed that CO2 could be reduced electrochemically to CH3OH at a ES (Everitt's Salt, K2Fe(II)[Fe(II)(CN)6])-mediated electrode in the presence of the 1,2-dihydroxybenzene-3,5-disulfonate (tiron) ferrate(III) complex and ethanol.100 Ogura and Fujita probed the positive performance of ES in the CO2 electrochemical transformation to CH3OH when they compared the Faradaic efficiency at ES-coated Pt plate electrodes (efficiency >80%)101 with that at a quinone-derivative-coated Pt electrode (>50%).102 These results have been further confirmed by the same group when producing CH3OH from CO2 in photocatalytic103 and direct liquid fuel cells.104 Rail and Berben105 reported that, under appropriate conditions, Et4N[Fe4N(CO)12] could be a catalyst for CO2 electroreduction at 1.25 V vs. SCE using a glassy carbon electrode. ES coated on a Pt plate was also found to present activity for CH3OH formation in the presence of pentacyanoferrate(II) (Na3Fe(II)(CN)5H2O) or amminepentacyanoferrate(II) (Na3Fe(II)(CN)5NH3) and an alcohol (CH3OH or CH3CH2OH) as an electron mediator to reduce CO2.106,107 The activation energies for CH3OH formation, via HCOOH, were estimated to be 5.8–10.6 kcal mol−1, which were much higher than those determined for reduction of CO under identical experimental conditions. The proposed reduction mechanism was first the reduction of ES to PB (Prussian blue, KFe(III)[Fe(II)(CN)6]) on the cathode to start the reduction by transferring electrons to CO2.108 Based on this observation, Ogura et al.109 carried out a further study using a PB-polyaniline (PAn) dual film coated Pt/Co-2-hydroxyl-nitrosonaphthalene-3,6-disulfonate complex electrode in aqueous solution. Lactic acid, ethanol, acetone, and CH3OH were detected at a low overpotential (−0.60 V vs. SCE) under ambient conditions.110–112 Neff in 1978 first electrodeposited PB onto a Pt plate from a mixed solution of 0.01 M FeCl3 and 0.01 M K3Fe(CN)6, that was reduced to ES.113 Other studies confirmed that CO2 can be reduced to CH3OH in a continuous electrochemical process if the PB formed from ES is continuously reduced back to ES by a supply of electricity, with no degradation of the metal complex.98,99,107,114–118 When a mixture of KCl, CH3OH and metal complex was employed as an electrolyte, CH3OH was identified as the sole reduction product. These results suggest that the simultaneous existence of a metal complex and CH3OH is appropriate for the reduction of CO2 into CH3OH.119
Titanium (Ti). 
The work developed by Noda et al.58 showed that Ti electrodes possess no significant catalytic activity on their own for the electrochemical reduction of CO2 in a KHCO3 solution. However, TiO2 has shown activity and has been used as an electrocatalyst with other metal oxides deposited onto the Ti substrate to catalyse CO2 electroreduction.92,94,96–99,120,121
Monnier and collaborators reported the cathodic behaviour of TiO2, TiO2/Ru and TiO2/Pt thin film electrodes prepared by thermal deposition on Ti rods for the electrochemical reduction of CO2.120,121 Cyclic voltammetric measurements revealed adsorption of CO2 in the TiO2/Pt surface, which results in the formation of electrochemically detectable species. Lately, Bandi92 and, Bandi and Kühne,94 determined the Faradaic efficiency and current–voltage characteristics for the reduction of CO2 on various conductive oxide mixtures (RuO2, TiO2, MoO2, Co3O4, Rh2O3), resulting in higher current efficiencies for CH3OH formation. It was concluded that the first electron transfer was the rate-limiting step in the reduction process in acidic media. As mentioned in the previous subsection, the study of CO2 electroreduction at RuO2-coated diamond electrodes showed that the main reduction products in acidic media were CH3OH and HCOOH. The RuO2-boron-doped diamond electrodes resulted in lower Faradaic efficiencies for CO2 reduction to CH3OH than when the substrate was replaced by a Ti material under identical conditions, leading to the conclusion that the presence of TiO2 enhances the formation.96
Moreover, Qu et al.97 loaded RuO2 onto TiO2 nanotubes or nanoparticles, which were then coated onto a Pt electrode for the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2. Compared with electrodes coated with RuO2 or with RuO2–TiO2 nanoparticles, the electrodes coated with RuO2–TiO2 nanotubes had a higher electrocatalytic activity for the production of CH3OH, with a current efficiency of up to 60.5%, which suggests that the nanotube structure is important in achieving a high efficiency and selectivity for CO2 electroreduction. This finding has inspired the recent work of Li et al.98 for the CO2 transformation into CH3OH at MoS2-rods/TiO2 nanotubes heterojunction electrodes with and without illumination application.
Mercury (Hg). 
The first trials on the electrochemical reduction of CO2 at Hg electrodes were carried out by Teeter and Rysselberghe in 1954.122 They demonstrated that the reduction proceeded principally to HCOOH. When the reduction of CO2 was conducted in a neutral electrolyte at a Hg electrode, a high overvoltage and low efficiency for CO2 reduction to HCOOH were observed.123 Besides, HCOOH and CH2O reductions to CH3OH occurred with a Faradaic efficiency exceeding 90% in a basic solution at a current density of 10 mA cm−2. In any case, the application of Hg for the electroreduction of CO2 has been substituted by other materials, in part due to the significant pollution of the environment and adverse health effects that the release of this material may cause.


2.1.4 Noble metals. 
In contrast to other electrocatalytic materials, Pd and Pt have exhibited significantly different behaviour towards CO2 reduction, due to the differing interactions with adsorbed intermediates, such as CO and HCOOH, leading to different catalytic activities/stabilities and product selectivities depending on the way the material is applied.124–127 Several studies using electrodes based on Pt and Pd have resulted in the production of CH3OH.
Platinum (Pt). 
In 1983, Eggins and McNeill129 studied the voltammetric reduction waves for CO2 in water, dimethylsulphoxide, acetonitrile (which is not a recommendable solvent from an environmental point of view)128 and propylene carbonate using electrodes based on Pt, among others. Later, Brisard et al.130 used differential electrochemical mass spectrometry to investigate the reaction of electroreduction of CO2 on the Pt porous electrode. The results showed, for the first time, the production of CH3OH in acidic media using a Pt electrodeposited electrode. The results also suggested that CO was the intermediate of the reduction pathway leading to CH3OH.
Recently, Shironita et al.131,132 investigated the CO2 electroreduction at a carbon supported Pt (Pt/C) and Pt–Ru (Pt–Ru/C) electrode in a single cell to realize a CH3OH-based reversible fuel cell. The electroreduction of CO2 was shown to occur with a relatively high Faradaic efficiency of 30–50%. They speculated that the produced CH3OH accumulates on the active site of the Pt/C electrocatalyst, reducing the reduction current with time. The CH3OH yield efficiency was improved from 0.03% at the Pt/C to 7.5% at the Pt–Ru/C. Besides, the evaluated Faradaic efficiencies by cyclic voltammetry measurements were 35 and 75% at the Pt/C and Pt–Ru/C, respectively.
Palladium (Pd). 
Spichiger-Ulmann and Augustynski initiated in 1985 the study of CO2 electroreduction in a 1.0 M NaHCO3 solution at a Pd electrode.133 A few years later, Azuma et al.134 and Nakagawa et al.135 concluded that the main products generated from the CO2 electrocatalytic reduction were HCOOH and CO, and small amounts of hydrocarbons (from methane to hexane), in a KHCO3 medium. It was also reported that the HER can be suppressed on the Pd surface, and so the electrocatalytic activity can be enhanced.136 Ohkawa et al.137,138 modified a Pd electrode surface for the electrochemical reduction of CO2 in aqueous KHCO3 solution. The current efficiencies for CH3OH, CH4 and HCOOH production were larger on hydrogenated Cu-modified Pd electrodes than on non-hydrogenated electrodes. They hypothesized that the enhancement is caused by the participation of absorbed hydrogen in the reduction of CO2, which was further explained by Podlovchenko et al. where CO and HCOOH were formed at low overpotentials, while a range of alkanes from methane to hexane were observed at higher potentials.139


2.1.5 Post-transition metals. 
Gallium (Ga) and indium (In). 
In 1978, Halmann reported for the first time a photoelectrode made of a single crystal p-gallium phosphide (p-GaP) that was employed in an electrochemical cell to convert CO2 into CH3OH, C2H4 and HCOOH.140 Based on these results, in 1983 Aurian-blajeni et al.141 and Canfield and Frese142 observed a high selectivity for the formation of CH3OH in the electroreduction of CO2 over semiconductor materials: gallium (p-gallium phosphide, p-GaP, and p-gallium arsenide, p-GaAs), and indium (p-InP) materials at lower current densities (<1 mA cm2).141,142 The formation of CH3OH was detected by GC/FID at both metals when using a CO2 saturated-Na2SO4 electrolyte solution in a two-compartment cell separated by an agar bridge. The obtained selectivities for the production of CH3OH (in the dark) were high (maximum 85%) also at high overpotentials at GaAs(111)-based electrodes.142 These high efficiencies encouraged the production of CH3OH at these semiconductor materials.
Lead (Pb). 
In 1914, in one of the earliest studies on CO2 electroreduction, Fischer and Prziza ran electrolytic reduction reactions of CO2 dissolved under pressure in a steel bomb.143 HCOOH was the major product obtained, although minimal amounts of CH3OH were also obtained in K2SO4 and (NH4)2SO4 electrolytes. Nevertheless, Pb presents a well-known toxicity, and an efficient CO2 electroreduction process based on other green catalysis materials is preferred.
To summarize, the reported experimental data on the selective generation of CH3OH from the electroreduction of CO2, and lists of the data available in the literature for the Faradaic efficiencies and CH3OH production yields, are presented as ESI† (Appendix II). The table includes the reaction medium, operation conditions and cell configuration in which the electrochemical reduction of CO2 takes place. In general, the CO2 transformation into CH3OH at Cu, oxidized Cu, and Cu/Zn-based electrodes seems to provide the highest Faradaic efficiencies and production yields among the reported materials.

2.2 Effect of the reaction medium on CO2 reduction reaction
As previously discussed, the selection of the catalyst material is crucial for the selective production of CH3OH from CO2 electroreduction. However, the reduction mechanisms and reaction pathways (selectivity), and efficiency of the CO2 electroreduction process are highly influenced by not only the metal surface. In fact, even for the same metal electrode with the same purity, different supporting electrolytes and operating conditions have been found to have a great effect on current density, product selectivity, and energetic efficiency in CO2 reduction.19,21,56,144–147
In general, the electrochemical reduction of CO2 commonly employs aqueous electrolytes consisted of alkali cations (e.g. Na+, K+) and various anions such as halide anions (e.g. Cl−), bicarbonate (HCO3−) or hydroxide (OH−) in aqueous solutions.56,124,146,147 These inorganic salts are often used due to their high conductivities in water and because they can provide the required protons involved in the reaction pathway.
In 1986, Mo-based electrodes were pre-treated with HCl and used in the electrochemical reduction of CO2 in saturated aqueous solutions of 0.2 M Na2SO4 and 0.05 M H2SO4.91Table 2 shows the Faradaic efficiency for the formation of CH3OH with dependence on the CO2-saturated electrolysis solution used.91
Table 2 Faradaic efficiencies for CH3OH production at Mo electrodes in 0.2 M Na2SO4 (pH = 4.2) or 0.05 M H2SO4 (pH = 1.5)91




Electrolyte

T (°C)

E (V vs. SCE)

j (μA cm−2)
FE (%)




0.2 M Na2SO4
22
−0.70
26
42


22
−0.80
50
55


0.05 M H2SO4
22
−0.68
310
46


52
−0.60
590
21




As observed, the Faradaic efficiency for CH3OH formation, at a similar potential, was dependent on the electrolyte solution used. In the same work they reported an increased current efficiency (84%, electrolysis time: 23.3 h) when the electrodes were pre-treated with KOH or HF. Besides, in contrast to Ru electrodes,93 the efficiency and product distribution on a Mo-based cathode did not change much with the solution temperature even when raised to 52 °C.
Schizodimou and Kyriacou evaluated the accelerating effect of various multivalent cations, the halogen anions and the acidity of the solution on the rate of the electrochemical reduction of CO2 on a Cu88Sn6Pb6 alloy cathode.77 The rate of CO2 electroreduction to CH3OH increases with the increase of the surface charge of the cation of the supporting electrolyte in the order Na+ < Mg2+ < Ca2+ < Ba2+ < Al3+ < Zr4+ < Nd3+ < La3+ as observed in Fig. 7.
 Fig. 7  Rate of CO2 reduction vs. surface charge of the cation at −0.69 (vs. SCE) in 1.5 M HCl solution containing various cations. Electrolysis time: 120 min. Reprinted from ref. 77, copyright (2012), with permission from Elsevier. 
The acceleration effect was attributed to the participation of the radical anion (CO2−) in the rate determining step. They also showed the generation of CO, HCOOH, CH4 and CH3CHO, together with CH3OH, producing therefore a mixture that changed with the type of electrolyte and the cathode potential. The maximum current efficiency for CH3OH was 28% at −0.60 V vs. SCE and they concluded that CO2 reduction and the distribution of the products can be controlled simply by varying the composition of the electrolyte.
Other studies evaluated the influence of the reaction medium for the formation of different products, although no CH3OH was detected. For example in 1982 Hori and Suzuki conducted CO2 electroreduction experiments on Hg electrodes, in one of the first reports on evaluating the effect of the reaction medium in the CO2 reduction process.148 Aqueous solutions of NaHCO3, NaH2PO4–Na2HPO4, NaCl, NaClO4, Na2SO4, LiHCO3, and KHCO3, and their combination, were employed as electrolytes. The relationship between electrode behaviour and solution properties were quantitatively clarified by the partial current densities of HCOO− formation and HER. Similar analyses were carried out by Eggins and McNeill in 1983 for the electroreduction of CO2 on a Pt electrode in water, dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO), CH3CN, and propylene carbonate solutions.129 The apparent number of electrons involved in the reaction, and therefore the formation of different products, was determined from current densities in voltammetry and chronoamperometric analyses. Murata and Hori et al. studied in 1991 the electroreduction of CO2 and CO with Cu electrodes in hydrogencarbonate solutions of various cations (i.e. Li+, Na+, K+, and Cs+) and observed that the product selectivity was importantly affected by cationic species as well as by HCO3− concentration.146 H2 formation prevailed over CO2 reduction in a Li+ electrolyte, whereas CO2 reduction was favourable in Na+, K+ and Cs+ solutions. The selection of the cation influences the local pH (because of the different buffer capacities) at the Cu electrode and thus the nature and the amount of products formed. The main products were C2H4, CH3CH2OH and CH4. The same author also reported the importance of anion choice (i.e. Cl−, ClO4−, SO4−, HCO3−, H2PO4−), which presented different buffer capacities, in the formation of reduced species from CO2 electroreduction.56 Similar to these findings, in 2012 Wu et al. found significant differences in the activity and selectivity of Sn electrodes for HCOO− production when different electrolytes (KHCO3, K2SO4, KCl, Na2SO4, Cs2SO4, NaHCO3, and CsHCO3) were used.147 The results showed how the anion SO42− and the cation Na+ favour higher Faradaic efficiency and energy efficiency while HCO3− and Cs+ enable a high rate production of HCOO−.
Thorson et al. emphasized the significant role of the cation size (Na+ < K+ < Rb+ < Cs+) used in the reaction medium in the CO2 electroreduction on Ag electrodes.149 Specifically, they analysed the effect of the alkali cations on the partial current densities of CO and H2 products. The presence of large cations, such as Cs+ and Rb+, in the electrolyte improves the partial current density for CO production, against H2 formation. The effect of cation size on product selectivity for CO production can be explained by the interplay between the level of cation hydration and the extent of cation adsorption on Ag electrodes. Recently, Setterfield-Price and Dryfe.150 investigated the influence of supporting electrolyte cations on the voltammetric behaviour and product distribution in N-methylpyrrolidone (NMP)-based CO2 electroreduction systems at both Au and Pt electrodes. The results showed that when including TBA+ (tetrabutylammonium) cations the current efficiency for CO2 reduction was considerably larger than when Na+, Li+ or Rb+ were present at high overpotentials. Besides, the system showed no evidence of deactivation.
In summary, the studies on the effect of the reaction medium on CO2 electroreduction showed that:
(i) The selection of the anion may affect the local pH at the electrode and thus the availability of protons, which therefore influences reaction kinetics.
(ii) The size of the cation may influence its adsorption in the electrode surface, which greatly influences kinetics and the energy required in the reaction.
These considerations should be taken into account when choosing an appropriate electrolyte medium for the selective CO2 electroreduction to CH3OH.
In any case, the reported studies generally conducted the electroreduction of the CO2 molecule in aqueous solution. However, the application of aqueous media in CO2 electroreduction processes involves several drawbacks, such as:
(i) low selectivity for CO2 reduction, since this reaction competes with HER in aqueous electrolytes,
(ii) slow reaction kinetics, which leads to an increase in overpotentials needed and costs,
(iii) formation of different by-products that remain in the reaction medium, making the separation and recovery expensive, and
(iv) low solubility of CO2 in water and surface contamination due to impurities in the electrolyte, which results in lower productivity.

2.2.1 Use of solid polymer electrolytes (SPE). 
In order to tackle the problems associated with the HER that entail a less efficient CO2 electroreduction performance, the use of solid polymer electrolytes (SPEs) have been proposed in the literature. In these systems, CO2 is directly provided as a gas in the catholyte compartment and the SPE is responsible for the conduction of protons, separation of gaseous products and the electrical insulation of the electrodes. Although there are several reports that show the use of polymeric membranes to separate the liquid anolyte from the CO2 saturated aqueous catholyte in divided cells,151–157 the literature on the use of SPE in which CO2 is sent to the flow cell as gas is scarce.131,132,158–162
In 2012 Aeshala et al.161 reported the formation of CH3OH (with modest current efficiencies) after the electrochemical reduction of CO2 in a reactor using Nafion/SPEEK/Amberlist. The prepared SPEs were characterized for thickness, thermal stability, ionic conductivity, and mechanical strength. An electrodeposited Cu coated on a carbon paper was used as a cathode whereas Pt was used as an anode. Other products from the reaction were mainly HCOOH, CH2O, CO, and CH4. In 2013, the same group studied the electroreduction of CO2 at electrodeposited Cu2O/carbon paper cathodes using cationic and anionic SPE.162 Faradaic efficiency for the conversion of CO2 into products was higher than 45% using the anionic solid polymer membrane at 5.4 mA cm−2. The main products formed were CH3OH, CH4 and C2H4, apart from the undesired hydrogen gas as a by-product. They concluded that the SPE alleviated the mass transfer limitations of CO2 in the electrochemical cell.
Other studies reported the use of Cu-coated SPE prepared by the electroless plating technique. When Nafion was used as a cation exchange SPE, the electrochemical systems produced C2H4 as the major product,158,159 whereas the use of Selemion as anion exchange SPE produced CO and HCOOH.160
In conclusion, the use of SPE brings several advantages in comparison with the application of liquid electrolytes, such as:
(i) good tensile strength and ease of handling, which allow the fabrication of thin films and thus low resistance,
(ii) low convection, which reduces the problems of electrode erosion and increases the electrode life, and
(iii) easy separation of the reaction products.
Even if the current results are encouraging, further research is required to effectively use SPEs for the electrochemical transformation of CO2 into CH3OH in an improved electrochemical cell.


2.2.2 Other attempts to enhance CO2 reduction. 
Several additional approaches have been experimentally demonstrated in the literature to overcome the problems associated with the application of aqueous solutions, which are discussed hereafter.
Enzyme catalysts. 
In 1984, Parkinson and Weaver reported a novel approach for the fixation of CO2 which combines a semiconductor electrode (indium phosphide, p-InP) with a biological catalyst (a formate dehydrogenase enzyme) for a two-electron reduction of CO2 to HCOOH.163 Kuwabata et al. carried out the electroreduction of CO2 at potentials between −0.70 and −0.90 V vs. SCE in phosphate buffer solutions (pH = 7) containing formate dehydrogenase (FDH) and either methyl viologen (MV2+) or pyrroloquinoline quinone (PQQ) as an electron mediator. This reaction medium yielded HCOO− with current efficiencies as high as 90%.164 Recently, Hansen et al.165 developed a model based on density functional theory calculations to describe the trends in catalytic activity for CO2 electroreduction to CO, a CH3OH formation intermediate, in terms of the adsorption energy of the reaction intermediates in the presence of carbon monoxide dehydrogenase enzyme. It was concluded that the active sites of the enzyme optimize the binding energies of these adsorbates, allowing a reversible process with lower overpotentials needed.
Studies that used enzyme catalysts for electroreduction of CO2 to CH3OH can also be found. The electrolysis of phosphate buffer solutions containing sodium formate in the presence of methanol dehydrogenase (MDH) and MV2+ at −0.70 V vs. SCE yielded CH3OH and CH2O at relatively high concentrations of the enzyme. The use of PQQ in place of MV2+ as the electron mediator exclusively produced CH3OH after some induction period in the electrolysis. The enzyme was durable as long as the electrolysis was carried out in the dark. Addo et al. studied the role of carbonic anhydrase in efficiently facilitating the uptake of CO2, which can be the rate-determining step in the electrocatalytic production of CH3OH from CO2.166 The three oxidoreductase enzymes responsible for CO2 reduction to CH3OH are formate, aldehyde, and alcohol-dehydrogenase. These enzyme cascades were coupled to a poly(neutral red) modified electrode to regenerate NADH, although they found that dehydrogenases alone can achieve reduction of CO2. Furthermore, due to the presence of enzyme catalysts, the irreversible processes could become electrochemically reversible, as reported by Armstrong and Hirst.167
Metal complexes. 
There are several studies in the literature for the application of ES (K2FeII[FeII(CN)6]) and PB ([Fe4[Fe(CN)6]3]) as electron mediators when coated in the electrode surface. As discussed in section 2.1.3, several papers confirmed that CO2 can be reduced to CH3OH at ES-deposited electrodes and this reaction can be converted into a continuous process if the PB produced from ES during CO2 reduction into CH3OH is continuously reduced back to ES by a continuous supply of electricity.100–102,114–119,168 This reaction resulted in a reduced overpotential for the reduction of CO2, although CH3OH yields were still low. Based on the same principles, ES and PB have been applied as electron mediators in the reaction medium, as for example reported by Ogura and Takagi in 1986 where a mixture of KCl, CH3OH and ES was used as an electrolyte.119 The reduction of CO2 from the current–potential curves denoted the formation of CH3OH as the sole reduction production. From this study, it can be concluded that CO2 could be reduced to CH3OH using ES in the presence of a primary alcohol and a metal complex.
In any case, despite the fact that the use of enzyme catalysts and metal complexes significantly accelerates the rate of CO2 reduction and product yields, in comparison with HER, high overpotentials for the reduction are still needed because of the low electrochemical efficiencies. The use of pyridinium molecular catalysts and ionic liquids in the reaction medium could solve these overpotential problems to some extent.
Pyridinium molecular catalysts. 
In 1978, Raghavan and Iwamoto determined, in an electrochemical approach, the positions of coupling in the dimeric one-electron reduction products of 1-alkylpyridinium ions in acetonitrile.169 The results suggested the properties of pyridinium as a selective molecular organic catalyst. One year later, pyridinium perchlorate was employed for voltammetric studies with several electrode materials (Pt, Pd, Au, Ti, Fe, Ni, Cd, Pb and Hg), in order to clarify the reduction mechanism of a pyridinium ion in acetonitrile, which is considered a green solvent to be applied in an electrochemical process. Furthermore, in acidic electrolyte solutions, pyridine (Py) was found to undergo reduction to piperidine at a Pd electrode, generating reduced CO2 products.170 The cyclic voltammetry study indicated that CO2 electroreduction takes place at −0.55 V (vs. SCE) onset current. This corresponds to the thermodynamic potential for CH3OH formation at pH = 5.4 (0.52 V vs. SCE).171
In the work developed by Seshadri et al. CO2 was electrochemically reduced to CH3OH using pyridinium solutions at Pd electrodes.172 Although the reduction of protons to dihydrogen competes with CH3OH, the Faradaic efficiency for CH3OH was as high as 30%. They hypothesized that the reaction occurred at the electrode surface and also in the reaction medium, where Py and hydrogen were formed. As observed in Fig. 8, the reduction of CO2, or species in equilibrium with it, is promoted by species I to generate Py and reduced CO2 products.
 Fig. 8  Schematic representation of pyridinium reduction coupled, via electroreduction, to the reduction of protons to hydrogen. Reprinted from ref. 172, copyright (1994), with permission from Elsevier. 
They also demonstrated that the formation of CH3OH fell within a few hundred millivolts of the standard redox potential.172 In 2010 Cole et al. reported the detailed mechanisms of pyridinium-catalysed CO2 electroreduction to CH3OH when using a Pt disk electrode in a 10 mM aqueous solution of Py at low overpotentials (−0.58 V vs. SCE).173 At the metal surface, HCOOH and CH2O were observed to be intermediate products along the reduction pathway to CH3OH, with the pyridinium radical playing a role in the reduction of both intermediate products.174 In recent reports, Ertem et al. found that CO2 is reduced by H atoms bound to a Pt surface that are transferred as hydrides to CO2 in a mechanism activated by pyridinium (PyrH+).175 Then, the surface bound H atoms consumed by CO2 reduction are replenished by the one-electron reduction of PyrH+, therefore generating reduced CO2 products. In a theoretical study of CO2 electroreduction in the presence of a pyridinium cation and its substituted derivatives, Keith and Carter reported the thermodynamic energies of various Py-derived intermediates using first principles quantum chemistry.176 They concluded that the real form of the co-catalyst involved in pyridinium-based CO2 reduction is probably not related to the long pyridinyl radical in solution, but to the surface-bound dihydropyridine. In 2013, Lim et al. identified PyCOOH0 as an important intermediate in the homogeneous CO2 reduction by Py in a Py–p-GaP system. The formation of PyCOOH0 was believed to be the rate-determining step for CO2 reduction to CH3OH.177 Recently, Xiang et al.178 demonstrated that 6,7-dimethyl-4-hydroxy-2-mercaptopteridine (PTE) acts as a molecular electrocatalyst for CO2 reduction, without the involvement of any metal, at low overpotential. The FTIR spectroelectrochemistry analyses denoted a progression of two electron reduction products during bulk electrolysis, including HCOO−, aqueous CH2O, and CH3OH. The efficiency for CH3OH formation was in the range of 10–23%.
Other approaches have considered the application of polypyridyl transition metal complexes, such as Re(bpy)(CO)3Cl (bpy = 2,2′-bipyridine) or cis-[(bpy)2Ru(vpy)2]2+ (vpy = 4-vinylpyridine) in order to overcome the high overpotentials needed in the electroreduction process.179–182 In general, the results showed small increases in product yield for CO and HCOOH at low current efficiencies.
Ionic liquids. 
Ionic liquids (ILs) are molten salts with negligible vapour pressure and thermal stability above 200 °C and they are widely used in various fields of science.183 Replacing the conventional aqueous systems with ILs is advantageous for several reasons, which include the following:
(i) The HER, which competes for the reduction of CO2, can be suppressed,184
(ii) the conductivity of the electrolyte can be enhanced due to the nature of charged ions,185 and
(iii) the solubility of CO2 is higher than that in aqueous systems at a wide range of temperatures,186,187 thereby reducing mass transport limitations.
These are some of the key factors for an enhanced CH3OH production.
There are some recent studies in the literature that have pointed out the potential application of ILs in the electroreduction of CO2,184,188–190 but none of them deal with the transformation of CO2 to CH3OH. For example, in 2011, Rosen et al. reported an electrocatalytic system that reduces CO2 to CO at overpotentials below 0.20 V (vs. SCE).184 The system relies on an 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate, [emim][BF4] ionic liquid electrolyte to lower the energy of the CO2– intermediate, which is responsible for the large overpotentials associated with electrochemical CO2 reduction. First, [emim][BF4] appears to convert CO2 into CO2− intermediate, which is then catalysed over a silver cathode to form CO. The CO product was formed at −250 mV overpotential in comparison with −800 mV in the absence of the IL. The system continued producing CO for at least 7 h at Faradaic efficiencies greater than 96%. Therefore, the CO2 conversion to CO can occur without the large energy loss associated with a high overpotential. In further studies,191 it was observed that the addition of water to [emim][BF4] increased the efficiency of CO2 conversion to CO as observed in Fig. 9. They attributed this increase to the hydrolysis of tetrafluoroborate, which releases protons when mixed with water.
 Fig. 9  Effect of adding water to [emim][BF4] on CO2 reduction on a Ag-based electrode (v = 50 mV s−1). Reprinted from ref. 191, copyright (2013), with permission from The Electrochemical Society. 
Dimethyl carbonate (DMC) is a product whose electrosynthesis from CO2 and CH3OH with the use of ILs has been the focus of increasing attention. For example, an amino-functionalized ionic liquid, 1-(3-aminopropyl)-3-methylimidazolium bromide ([Apmim][Br]) was used as electrolyte in the electrochemical activation of CO2 and synthesis of DMC using a graphite electrode at ambient pressure and temperature.192 The high selectivity obtained (95%) was ascribed to the basicity of the IL, which was advantageous for capturing the CO2 molecule. Besides, I. Garcia-Herrero et al. quantified the direct electrosynthesis of DMC from CO2 and CH3OH using a CH3OK and [bmim][Br] ionic liquid solution in a filter-press electrochemical reactor.6 A final DMC concentration of 15.07 mmol L−1 was observed, leading to the conclusion that the IL was not merely an electrolyte, but a required substance to obtain the desired product.
A further understanding of the mechanisms underlying the electroreduction of CO2 in the presence of an IL is still required in order to improve the efficiency of the transformation of CO2 into useful products, which in turn could be applied to the specific case of producing CH3OH.

2.3 Effect of operating conditions
Despite the fact that operating conditions may highly influence yields and product selectivities, only a few reports to date have focused on evaluating the effect of pH, temperature and pressure on the CO2 electroreduction performance.19,21 In the case of CO2 electrocatalytic conversion to CH3OH, this evaluation has been practically unexplored yet.

2.3.1 Effect of pH. 
Neutral or slightly acid media are generally applied in the electrochemical reduction of CO2, since CO2 cannot survive in basic solutions. However, with decreases in pH, the HER is thermodynamically preferred in comparison with the reduction of CO2. Besides, CO2 reduction reactions lead to the formation of OH−, making the pH in the vicinity of the electrode surface higher when compared with the rest of the solution pH.193 As high pH conditions do not favour CO2 reduction, electrolytes with buffering properties such as KHCO3 or K2HPO4 are normally employed, as they can supply anions that can serve to diminish the pH changes occurring during the reaction at the electrode surface.
Several reports can be found in the literature on the effect of pH in the electroreduction of CO2.19,21,56,77,91,93,96,146,193,194 For example, in one of the first studies on CO2 electroreduction kinetics, Paik et al. reported the reduction of CO2 to HCOOH at Hg electrodes in buffered neutral and acidic aqueous solutions and determined the resulting current efficiencies.194 They found that in the neutral pH range all of the current is consumed in the production of HCOOH, while in acid solutions both HCOOH and H2 were formed, since the reduction of CO2 occurred in parallel with the reduction of H3O+ ions to yield H2. Focusing on studies that involved the production of CH3OH, Frese et al. patented a method for producing CH3OH from CO2 in aqueous solvents utilizing Mo-based cathodes.91 The current density and Faradaic efficiencies reached in the system were clearly enhanced when using 0.05 M H2SO4 (pH = 1.5) as an electrolyte, in comparison with the application of 0.2 M Na2SO4 (pH = 4.2) solutions. In 2003, carbon dioxide reduction studies were conducted at RuO2-coated diamond electrodes in acidic media, mainly producing CH3OH with a 7.7% current efficiency. It was found that the efficiency for hydrogen formation is higher than 50% only at pH = 2.4, while at higher pH values CO2 reduction prevails.96 The highest efficiencies for the electrochemical reduction of CO2 were obtained at a pH ≈ 3.9. In 2012, Schizodimou and Kyriacou tested various multivalent cations and the acidity of the electrolyte solution on the electroreduction of CO2 with Cu alloys.77 The obtained results presented in Table 3 indicated again that with decreases in pH of the reaction medium, the rate of CO2 reduction to CH3OH importantly increases, with enhancements in current density at both −0.75 and −1.70 V applied potential.77
Table 3 Faradaic efficiency for CH3OH production and total CO2 reduction rate, r, in a 0.01 M CH3COOH solution containing various cations. Electrolysis time = 120 min77




Electrolyte
pH
FE (%)
Charge (C)

r (μmol h−1)




At −0.75 V


0.01 M CH3COONa
4.53
10.2
14.82
22.82


0.003 M BaCl2
4.56
7.9
19.56
29.48


0.0016 M LaCl3
4.14
7.1
48.36
65.84


0.05 M LaCl3
4.02
6.7
49.11
69.77


At −1.70 V


0.01 M CH3COONa
4.53
0.5
300.46
84.96


0.0016 M LaCl3
4.14
0.8
315.52
93.37






2.3.2 Effect of temperature. 
The product distribution in the CO2 electroreduction process is strongly influenced by reaction temperature. In 1985, Frese and Leach demonstrated the important effect of temperature on CO2 electroreduction conversion to CH3OH when using a Ru-teflon electrode in 0.2 M Na2SO4 at pH = 4–7.93 The Faradaic efficiency was as high as 42% at 60 °C. The important effect of temperature was further demonstrated when evaluating Mo-based electrodes at 22 °C and 52 °C (Table 2).91
Hori and co-workers carried out galvanostatic work over a temperature range from 0 to 40° C.50 The results denoted an increased Faradaic efficiency of 65% for CH4 formation at 0 °C. The same effect was observed by Azuma et al.75 when comparing the efficiencies for CO2 electroreduction at a temperature of 0 to 20 °C in 0.05 M KHCO3 at −2.2 V vs. SCE, or by Kaneco et al. in 2002, where potentiostatic experiments (−2.0 V vs. SCE) in 0.65 M NaHCO3 over the temperature range from 2 to 15 °C were conducted.195 The hydrogen formation was significantly depressed with decreasing temperature. The same tendency was observed in other studies where an increase in CO2 reaction rates at 0 °C (3.06 × 10−4 mol m−2 s−1) in comparison with those values at 22 °C (2.22 × 10−4 mol m−2 s−1) on Cu foil electrodes in 0.5 M KHCO3 were observed at a current density range of 17–23 mA cm−2.52 These results suggest that lower temperatures influence adsorption equilibrium and increase CO2 solubility, where the electrochemically assisted dissociation of adsorbed CO by electron transfer is assumed to be the rate determining step. Similar results were obtained by Shironita et al. when calculating Faradaic efficiencies and detected CH3OH yields in the exhausted gas from a reversible fuel cell at the 26–90 °C temperature range.131


2.3.3 Effect of pressure. 
The experimental evaluation of the effect of pressure on CH3OH formation from CO2 electroreduction is as yet virtually unexplored.
The utilization of CO2 in aqueous solutions can be limited by the low solubility of CO2 in the reaction medium. To speed up the reaction process, pressurized CO2 is usually applied, which often causes a certain degree of change in product selectivity.196–198 For example, Hara et al. increased CO2 pressure from 0 to 60 atm, and ran galvanostatic experiments at a Cu wire cathode.196 Increases in CO2 pressure caused the predominant reaction to shift from hydrogen to hydrocarbons, reaching 44% current efficiency by around 10 atm of CO2. Nevertheless, the results showed that hydrocarbons can be produced at close to 60% current efficiency at 600 mA cm−2, which is important for any practical CO2 conversion reactor. The same group applied several electrode materials at large current densities (163–700 mA cm−2) for CO2 electrochemical reduction at 30 atm pressure in KHCO3 solutions.198 The total current density on the cathodic voltammograms of Ag, Au, Zn, Pb and In metal electrodes increased with increasing CO2 pressure from 1 to 30 atm, resulting in HCOOH and CO. On the other hand, in Fe, Co, Rh, Ni, Pd and Pt electrodes, the main reduction products were HCOOH and CO under high pressure, whereas under 1 atm CO2, H2 was formed by reduction of water. In these cases, the total current density changed only slightly with increasing CO2 pressure.
In 2002, Aydin and Köleli reported the electroreduction of CO2 at the low overpotential value of −0.40 V vs. SCE on polyaniline (PAn) electrodes under high pressure in a CH3OH–LiClO4 electrolyte.199 When increasing pressure, the current density increases gradually in the system. The maximum Faradaic efficiencies are found to be 26.5, 13.1 and 57% for HCHO, HCOOH and CH3COOH formation, respectively.

2.4 Design of the electroreduction cell

2.4.1 Types of electrochemical cells. 
From the literature, it can be observed that different research groups have used a variety of flow or electrolyzer configurations for CO2 electroreduction.200–204 There is no standard cell configuration or methodology for studying the electroreduction of CO2 to CH3OH. Most of the published studies for the electrocatalytic conversion of CO2 to CH3OH have reported the use of a two-compartment electrochemical cell configuration,77,85,89,92,93,96–98,107–110,131,132 in comparison with the traditional undivided three-electrode electrochemical cells.64,67,69,90,94,95,98 In the divided systems, the cathode and anode compartments are generally separated by a Nafion exchange membrane,41,45,77,84,89,96,97,99,100,110,131,132,161,162 Na2SO4 or an agar bridge,93,142 and a glass frit.100,102,107,172 Other configurations, such as membrane electrode assemblies (MEA) have been used for CO2 conversion to CH3OH in only a few reports.131,132,160,161Fig. 10 shows an example of a divided cell configuration, where the working and counter electrodes are separated by an ion exchange membrane.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic representation and (b) photograph of an electrochemical cell divided by an ion exchange membrane. (a) Reprinted from ref. 45 and (b) reprinted from ref. 161, copyright (2012), with permission from Elsevier. 
Jhong et al. suggested that even if the cell configuration might have a profound effect on mass transport, apparently it is not the limiting step in the electroreduction performance of CO2.28 If that is the case, the structure and configuration of the catalytic surface in the electrode may play a vital role in the electrochemical reactions for CO2 conversion.


2.4.2. Structure of the electrode. 
Metallic electrodes applied in CO2 electroreduction processes can be basically classified into the following types:
(i) bulk metal (plate, foil, etc.) electrode,
(ii) metals electrodeposited in a metallic/glassy carbon support (GCE) or,
(iii) metals supported in gas diffusion electrodes (GDE).
In general, the electrodes types (ii) and (iii) comprised a catalyst layer and a support that serves firstly to deliver CO2 from flow channels to the catalytic sites, secondly to transport the reduced product from the catalytic sites into flow channels, and finally, to conduct electrons with low resistance.204,205 Therefore, maximizing electrode performance, and consequently reactor performance, requires optimizing all of the transport processes that strongly depend on the structure of the electrode. Only a few reports to date, however, can be found in the literature for the analysis of the relation of the electrode structure and the performance of electrochemical processes.64,124,201,206–208
For example, Frese analysed the CO2 reduction to CH3OH at various Cu foil electrodes (i.e. anodized Cu foil, Cu foil thermally oxidized and air-oxidized Cu foil). Faradaic yields for CH3OH depended on the current and reached values higher than 100% in 0.5 M KHCO3, pH = 7.6, and −1.9 V (vs. SCE).64 In 1994, Hori et al. evaluated the performance of CO2 electroreduction using planar metal electrodes (i.e. Cu, Zn, Pd, Ga, Pb, Hg, In, Sn, Fe, Pt, Ti, etc.) at low current densities (5 mA cm−2).124 The low surface area, together with the low concentration of CO2 at the electrode surface due to reduced CO2 solubility in aqueous solutions, led to a limited performance of planar electrodes. In 2011, Le et al. examined the yield for CO2 transformation into CH3OH of an electrodeposited cuprous oxide thin film.69 They explored the relationship between surface chemistry and reaction behaviour relative to air-oxidized and anodized Cu electrodes in an undivided three-electrode cell. The high CH3OH conversion rates (1.2 × 10−4 mol m−2 s−1) and Faradaic efficiencies (38%) were remarkably higher in electrodeposited electrodes than in air-oxidized or anodized Cu electrodes. Furthermore, Bandi and Kühne prepared Ru/TiO2 catalysts in rotating disk electrodes.94 An analysis of the electrode kinetics for the formation of reaction intermediates suggests that the surface recombination of adsorbed hydrogen with CO2 is the rate-limiting step in the electrochemical reduction of CO2. As the current efficiency depends on the continuous removal of the products obtained (CH3OH, HCOOH and CH3CH2OH) from the electrode surface, the use of these electrodes is recommended. Chang et al. synthesized Cu2O particles that were dispersed (brush-painted) on carbon clothes for electrochemical characterizations (i.e. cyclic voltammetry and potentiostatic measurements) in a CO2-saturated 0.5 M NaOH solution contained in a three-electrode undivided cell.67 The material presented notable catalytic ability for the CO2 reduction with CH3OH as the predominant product.
Recently, CO2 electroreduction research efforts have been concentrating on the application of GDE for electrochemical processes.84,161,162,209 A GDE is a porous composite electrode usually composed of polymer bonded catalyst particles and a carbon support. To date, researchers have reported moderate to high current densities (200–600 mA cm−2) under mild conditions4 or under pressurized electrolyser systems (300–900 mA cm−2).210 Schwartz et al. first studied perovskite-type crystal structures (A1.8A′0.2CuO4, A = La, Pr and Gd; A′ = Sr and Th) in GDE for the electrochemical reduction of CO2 under ambient conditions.209 The results showed that perovskite-type electrocatalysts could achieve cumulative Faradaic efficiencies for CO2 reduction to CH3OH, CH3CH2OH, and C3H8O up to 40% at current densities of 180 mA cm−2.
In the literature for the production of other useful products, Delacourt et al.200 and Jhong et al.206 recently prepared (by hand-painting or spray-painting methods) GDE electrodes with Ag catalyst inks with current densities as high as 91 mA cm−2 in combination with 94% Faradaic efficiency for CO formation using a microfluidic cell in which a flowing aqueous KCl electrolyte separated the cathode and Pt anode. The energetic efficiency was as high as 46%.206 Besides, the deposition of the catalyst using an airbrushing method yielded a very thin, crack free layer, reducing at the same time the amount of metal needed compared to other types of electrodes. Del Castillo et al. studied the influence of key variables in the continuous electroreduction of CO2 to HCOO− at GDE loaded with Sn.211 The results showed higher rates and concentration of HCOO− (i.e. 1.4 × 10−3 mol m−2 s−1, 1348 mg L−1 and a Faradaic efficiency of 70%) than those results on planar electrodes, showing that GDEs are advantageous for these electrochemical CO2 reduction reactions. Furthermore, Salehi-Khojin et al. investigated the effect of particle size on CO2 reduction activity.212 They concluded that the production of CO from CO2 electroreduction was enhanced when decreasing particle size from 200 to 5 nm.
In summary, the use of GDEs in combination with optimized catalyst layer deposition methods led to significant improvement in the performance of CO2 electroreduction. This electrode structure, together with the use of SPE, has solved certain problems associated with the use of liquid phases in the electroreduction of CO2 and improved the mass transfer of CO2.54,197,198,210,212,213 However, despite the promising results of GDEs, further research is required to optimize the chemical composition of the catalyst layer (e.g. pore size and distribution, binder material, etc.) and porous support (e.g. thickness, porosity, etc.) and impact on the transport of CO2 and the generated products.

3. Comparison with different electrocatalytic routes
As discussed through the review, the electroreduction of CO2 can be performed under different conditions, leading to the formation of several compounds. In order to compare the electrocatalytic route for CO2 reduction to CH3OH with those for obtaining other products, Fig. 11a and b show, respectively, the Faradaic efficiency (selectivity of the process for a given product) and the energy efficiency (total energy used toward the formation of the desired product) against the current density applied in the process, for the electrochemical conversion of CO2 to CH3OH. The results are compared to CO and HCOOH formation routes, which are among the most common products formed from the reduction of CO2.
 Fig. 11  Comparison of (a) Faradaic efficiency and (b) energy efficiency against current density for CO2 conversion into CH3OH, CO and HCOOH. 
The Faradaic (FE) and energy efficiencies (EE) can be calculated according to eqn (1) and (2), respectively: (1) (2)
In eqn (1), z is the number of e− exchanged to form the desired product, n is the number of moles produced, F is the Faradaic constant (F = 96485 C mol−1) and q is the total charge applied in the process. For the energy efficiency (eqn (2)), ET stands for the theoretical potential needed in the electrochemical system for the formation of the product of interest, while E represents the real potential applied in the process. It is clear that higher energetic efficiencies can be obtained when high FE and low overpotentials on the cathode can be obtained.
It should be noted that the figures only provide a picture of the technical and economic feasibility of the different electrocatalytic routes, although the data come from studies where different variables, namely cathode materials, reaction medium, operating conditions and/or cell/electrode structure, affect the results. The extraordinary high apparent Faradaic efficiency data obtained for CH3OH formation (i.e. >100%), where clearly both chemical and electrochemical steps are involved in the CO2 reduction process, have been removed in order to clarify the analysis. Values for CO and HCOOH formation come from several reported values published in literature.16,32,33,176,202,214–221 In general, electrocatalysts for CO2 reduction to CO are based on Au, Ag, Zn, Pd and Ga metals, while Pd, Hg, In, Sn, Cd and Tl resulted the most active ones for HCOOH formation.32
As observed, electrochemical processes for CO2 transformation into CH3OH usually offer lower Faradaic and energy efficiencies at lower applied voltages, in comparison with CO and HCOOH electrocatalytic routes. That means that further work is still required to improve significantly the selectivity and optimization of the total energy required (avoiding energy losses in the process) for the transformation of CO2 to CH3OH, before it can be implemented in industry for a zero CO2 emission-based economy.
3.1 Considerations about the energetic aspects of the process
An evaluation of not only the electrocatalytic CO2 reduction reaction, but also an economic viability and a critical environmental sustainability evaluation (by means of the life cycle assessment methodology) of the integrated process, is required in order to achieve a feasible electroreduction system. Other key issues, such as the CH3OH concentration, the energy duties in the separation step, as well as the primary energy sources for the conduction of the CO2 reduction reaction, should be analysed and taken into account.
The CH3OH concentration values reported in the literature for CO2 electroreduction processes ranged from 0.04 to 202.24 mg L−1, as shown in ESI (Appendix II†). Obviously, even concentrations of the order of 200 mg L−1 will require a large amount of energy in the separation step. These energy requirements will be, of course, in line with the industrial purity requirements for the obtained products. In a first attempt to evaluate the environmental sustainability for the CO2 electroreduction to HCOOH, an approximately 5 times higher energy consumption was estimated for the separation step in the distillation column (input feed concentration of 1 M/46000 mg L−1), in comparison with that energy required for the CO2 electroreduction reaction itself.34 The integration of renewable energies and an alternative purification process, instead of conventional distillation, are therefore required to ensure a process with a reasonable energy profile. In this regard, the use of SPE, where CO2 is directly provided as a gas in the catholyte compartment, may also help to achieve an easier separation of CH3OH from other reaction products, improving, at the same time, the reactant mass transfer process.
The same study also identified the lifetime of the electrodes as a critical process parameter.34 A lifetime of the order of thousands of hours is needed in order to have a potentially viable process with an environmentally beneficial profile, or else, a regeneration technique for the electrodes with minimal consumption of energy and chemicals.
4. Concluding remarks and future perspectives
Electrocatalytic reduction is one of the most promising technologies for CO2 recycling, dealing with the depletion of fossil fuels and global warming issues. Compared with other technologies for CO2 mitigation, such as sequestration for example, electrochemical valorisation is an environmentally sustainable option which offers the possibility of closing the loop and generating useful products from CO2, storing electricity in different chemicals. Besides, this process can be carried out under mild conditions. Among the different liquid fuels and useful chemicals from CO2 electroreduction, CH3OH is particularly interesting. This review paper gives a clear picture of several decades of research on CO2 electrochemical transformation to CH3OH, analysing the effect of catalyst materials, electrolytes and cell/electrode configurations on reaction efficiency.
The formation of CH3OH is known to occur at several types of electrocatalysts, where the oxidized Cu-based electrodes seem to be the most promising materials in terms of combined product selectivity and current efficiency. Despite all the efforts put into electrochemical CO2 reduction, the production of CH3OH seems to be still far from practical application, although with continued and extensive efforts, the technology of CO2 electroreduction will become practical and economically feasible in the near future.
There are several issues that need to be tackled for this technology to achieve widespread use:
4.1 Development and application of new cathode materials
In order to achieve industrial-scale implementation, one of the main challenges is the stability of the electrode material, but scarce long-term tests have been done in previous works. The reaction intermediates and by-products may poison and block the active sites in the catalysts, leading to a catalytic deactivation. The development of stable materials, with high activity and selectivity, is a priority. Nevertheless, a continuous steady formation of CH3OH at high current densities is yet to be seen.

4.1.1 Enhancing catalyst activity and product selectivity. 
The transformation of CO2 to liquid fuels and useful chemicals will require new methods and approaches for activating the CO2 molecule at lower overpotentials. The research efforts may focus on new complex catalysts and catalyst assemblies, including hybrid metal catalysts, nanostructures (nanotubes/spheres/sheets, etc.) and MOFs, which may probably lead to promising catalyst activity, reducing the overpotentials needed. It is crucial to focus on the precise tuning of the electrode surface area, catalysts morphologies, composition of multi-metal electrodes, actives sites and porosity of the support layer, which facilitate the diffusion pathways and lead to faster kinetics, efficient electron and proton conduction, and accessible active sites for the catalytic process.
Today, only a few attempts have explored the application of these new materials for the electroreduction of CO2 to CH3OH. For the majority of the catalysts reported in the literature, even if they show moderate activity, product selectivities are still low, and some undesired products are also formed.

4.2 Development and application of new electrolytes
The high overpotentials for the CO2 electroreduction process are related to the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), which competes with the formation of CH3OH. The literature offers some examples where higher Faradaic efficiencies could be achieved using catalysts with low hydrogen overpotentials in combination with electrolytes that minimize or suppress the formation of hydrogen. Besides, the solubility in the reaction medium is one of the controlling factors in CO2 conversion, because of the effects on mass transfer. Therefore, a fine-tuning of the electrolyte composition for a given catalyst offers further opportunity for performance enhancement.
There is a great potential for conversion improvements in the application of pyridine solutions or non-aqueous media, such as ionic liquids. The application of ionic liquids for CH3OH formation from the electroreduction of CO2, however, has still not been reported, and therefore great research efforts are still required. Besides, the application of solid polymer electrolytes (SPE) developed in recent years seems to be one alternative for reducing internal resistance and improving the reactant mass transfer process.
4.3 Development and application of new cell/electrode configurations
In the future, research should also deal with the design of electrolysis cells and electrode structures, including the assembly of membranes in separate cell compartments. There are scarce reports on optimizing systems design, although the structure of the electrode seems to be a particularly important challenge in order to enhance current density and CO2 transfer to the electrode surface in the system.
A key opportunity resides in the application of the so-called gas diffusion electrodes (GDEs), which create a three-phase interface between the gaseous reactants, the solid catalyst, and the electrolyte, improving current densities and reducing overpotentials needed. Future research should probably include the relationship between GDE morphology and effective gas–liquid separation, while facilitating transport of reactants and products. These efforts will help to achieve the scale-up of CO2 recycling processes and devices in continuous operation.
4.4 Further understanding of the reaction mechanisms
The understanding of the CO2 reaction mechanisms (C–O, C–C and C–H bonds formation), pathways and intermediates to generate useful products is still insufficient, although the literature contains some attempts to understand the CO2 electroreduction process through both experimental and theoretical modelling approaches. Such efforts in fundamental mechanistic studies will guide the development of new catalysts and the optimization of operating conditions.
Finally, the estimation of the actual costs of producing CH3OH via electrochemical reduction of CO2 will require the development of in-depth cost and life cycle analysis models.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness (MINECO), under the projects ENE 2010-14828, CTQ2013-48280-C3-1-R and Juan de la Cierva program (JCI-2012-12073).
Notes and references
M.E. Boot-Handford, J. C. Abanades, E.J. Anthony, M.J. Blunt, S. Brandani, N. Mac Dowell, J.R. Fernandez, M.C. Ferrari, R. Gross, J.P. Hallet, R.S. Haszeldine, P. Heptonstall, A. Lyngfelt, Z. Makuch, E. Mangano, R.T.J. Porter, M. Pourkashanian, G.T. Rochelle, N. Shah, J.G. Yao and P.S. Fenell, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 130 CAS .
J. Albo and A. Irabien, J. Chem. Technol. Biot., 2012, 87, 1502 CrossRef CAS .
J. Albo, P. Luis and A. Irabien, Desalin. Water Treat., 2011, 27(1–3), 54 CrossRef CAS .
D. T. Whipple and P. J. A. Kenis, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 3451 CrossRef CAS .
M. Alvarez-Guerra, S. Quintanilla and A. Irabien, Chem. – Eng. J., 2012, 207, 278 CrossRef .
I. Garcia-Herrero, M. Alvarez-Guerra and A. Irabien, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2014 DOI:10.1002/jctb.4445 .
M. Gattrell, N. Gupta and A. Co, Energy Convers. Manage., 2007, 48, 1255 CrossRef CAS .
C. Oloman and H. Li, ChemSusChem, 2008, 1, 385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.A. Olah, A. Goeppert and G. K. S. Prakash, J. Org. Chem., 2009, 74, 487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A.W. Kleij, G. Fiorani and W. Guo, Green Chem., 2014 10.1039/C4GC01959H .
D.J. Darensbourg and S.J. Wilson, Green Chem., 2012, 10, 2665 RSC .
M. North, R. Pasquale and C. Young, Green Chem., 2010, 12, 1514 RSC .
M.E. Royer, C. R. Hebd. Seances Acad. Sci., 1870, 70, 731 Search PubMed .

          A. F. Sammells and R. L. Cook, in: Electrochemical and Electrocatalytic Reactions of Carbon Dioxide, ed. B. P. Sullivan, K. Krist, H. E. Guard, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  1993 Search PubMed .
M. Jitaru, D.A. Lowy, M. Toma, B.C. Toma and L. Oniciu, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1997, 27, 875 CrossRef CAS .
C.M. Sánchez-Sánchez, V. Montiel, D. A. Tryk, A. Aldaz and A. Fujishima, Pure Appl. Chem., 2001, 73, 1917 CrossRef .
R. P. S. Chaplin and A. A. Wragg, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2003, 33, 1107 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gattrell, N. Gupta and A. Co, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2006, 594, 1 CAS .
M. Jitaru, J. Univ. Chem. Technol. Metall., 2007, 42, 333 CAS .

          Y. Hori, in: Electrochemical CO2 reduction on metal electrodes, Modern Aspects of Electrochemistry, 42, ed. C. Vayenas, Springer, New York,  2008, 89 Search PubMed .
E. E. Benson, C.P. Kubiak, A.J. Sathrum and J.M. Smieja, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 89 RSC .
J. Lee, Y. Kwon, R. L. Machunda and H. J. Lee, Chem. – Asian J., 2009, 4, 1516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          W. Li, in: Electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 to small organic molecule fuels on metal catalysts, Advances in CO2 conversion and utilization, 5, ed. Y. Hu, ACS symposium series, Washington,  2010 Search PubMed .
G. Centi and S. Perathoner, Greenhouse Gases: Sci. Technol., 2011, 1(1), 21 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Spineer, J. A. Vega and W. E. Mustain, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 19 Search PubMed .
Y. Oh and X. Hu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2253 RSC .
H. R. Jhong, M. M. Sichao and P. J. A. Kenis, Curr. Opin. Chem. Eng., 2013, 2, 191 CrossRef .
J. P. Jones, G. K. Surya Prakash and G. A. Olah, Isr. J. Chem., 2013, 53, 1 CrossRef .
E. V. Kondratenko, G. Mul, J. Baltrusaitis, G. O. Larrazabal and J. Perez-Ramirez, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3112 CAS .
R. J. Lim, M. Xie, M. A. Sk, J. M. Lee, A. Fisher, X. Wang and K. H. Lim, A review on the electrochemical reduction of CO2 in fuel cells, metalelectrodes and molecular catalysts, Catal. Today, 2014, 233, 169 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qiao, Y. Liu, F. Hong and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 631 RSC .
A. S. Agarwal, Y. M. Zhai, D. Hill and N. Sridhar, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dominguez-Ramos, B. Singh, X. Zhang, E. G. Hertwich and A. Irabien, J. Cleaner Prod., 2013 DOI:10.1016/j.jclepro.2013.11.046 .
L. Barbato, G. Centi, G. Iaquaniello, A. Mangiapane and S. Perathoner, Energy Technol., 2014, 2, 453 CrossRef CAS .

          R. H. Perry and D. W. Green, Perry's chemical engineers’ handbook, McGraw-Hill, New York,  1999 Search PubMed .
J. O'M. Bockris, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 22, 2129 CrossRef .

          G.A. Olah, A. Goeppert and G. K. S. Prakash, Beyond oil and gas: the methanol economy, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2006 Search PubMed .
G.A. Olah, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 2636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Ganesh, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 31, 221 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Peterson, F. Abild-Pedersen, F. Studt, J. Rossmeisl and J. K. Nørskov, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1311 CAS .
S. Bailey, G. F. Froment, J. W. Snoeck and K. C. Waugh, Catal. Lett., 1995, 30(1–4), 99 CrossRef .
J. Nakamura, Y. Choi and T. Fujitani, Top. Catal., 2003, 22(3–4), 277 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, J. Evans, J. Rodriguez, M.G. White and P. Liu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 9909 RSC .
K. P. Kuhl, E. R. Cave, D. N. Abram and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7050 CAS .
M. Karamad, V. Tripkovic and J. Rossmeisl, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 2268 CrossRef CAS .
S. Velu, K. Suzuki, M. Okazaki, M.P. Kapoor, T. Osaki and F. Ohashi, J. Catal., 2000, 194, 373 CrossRef CAS .
A. Coehn and S. Jahn, Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges., 1904, 37(3), 2836 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hori, K. Kikuchi and S. Suzuki, Chem. Lett., 1985, 1695 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hori, K. Kikuchi, A. Murata and S. Suzuki, Chem. Lett., 1986, 897 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Cook, R. C. Macduff and A. F. Sammells, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1987, 134(9), 2375 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Kim, D. P. Summers and K. W. Frese, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1988, 245, 223 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hori, A. Murata, R. Takahashi and S. Suzuki, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1988, 17 RSC .
R. L. Cook, R. C. Mac Duff and A. F. Sammells, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1988, 135(6), 1320 CrossRef CAS .
O. Koga, K. Nakama, A. Murata and Y. Hori, Denki Kagaku Oyobi Kogyo Butsuri Kagaku, 1989, 57, 1137 CAS .
Y. Hori, A. Murata and R. Takahashi, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1989, 85, 2309 RSC .
Y. Hori, A. Murata, S. Y. Ito, Y. Yoshinami and O. Koga, Chem. Lett., 1989, 9, 1567 CrossRef .
H. Noda, S. Ikeda, Y. Oda, K. Imai, M. Maeda and K. Ito, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1990, 63, 2459 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wasmus, E. Cattaneo and W. Vielstich, Electrochim. Acta, 1990, 35, 771 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Cook, R. C. Macduff and A. F. Sammells, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1990, 137, 607 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hori, A. Murata and S. Ito, Chem. Lett., 1990, 1231 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hori, A. Murata and Y. Yoshinami, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1991, 87, 125 RSC .
M. Watanabe, M. Shibata, A. Kato, M. Azuma and T. Sakata, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1991, 138(11), 3382 CrossRef CAS .
K.W. Frese, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1991, 138(11), 3338 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kyriacou and A. Anagnostopoulos, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1992, 322, 233 CrossRef CAS .
A. Katoh, H. Uchida, M. Shibata and M. Watanabe, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1994, 141(8), 2054 CrossRef CAS .
T. Y. Chang, R. M. Liang, P. W. Wu, J. Y. Chen and Y. C. Hsieh, Mater. Lett., 2009, 63, 1001 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ohya, S. Kaneco, H. Katsumata, T. Suzuki and K. Ohta, Catal. Today, 2009, 148, 329 CrossRef CAS .
M. Le, M. Ren, Z. Zhang, P. T. Sprunger, R. L. Kurtz and J. C. Flake, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158(5), E45–E49 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nakatsuji and Z. M. Hu, Int. J. Quantum Chem., 2000, 77, 341 CrossRef CAS .
W.C. Li and M. Kanan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7231 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lan, C. Gai, P. J. A. Kenis and J. Lu, ChemElectroChem., 2014, 1(9), 1577–1582 CrossRef CAS .
M. Watanabe, M. Shibata, A. Kato, T. Sakata and M. Azuma, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1991, 305, 319 CrossRef CAS .
M. Azuma, K. Hashimoto, M. Hiramoto, M. Watanabe and T. Sakata, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1989, 260, 441 CrossRef CAS .
M. Azuma, K. Hashimoto, M. Hiramoto, M. Watanabe and T. Sakata, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1990, 137, 1772 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yamamoto, D.A. Tryk, A. Fujishima and H. Ohata, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 47, 3327 CrossRef CAS .
A. Schizodimou and G. Kyriacou, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 78, 171 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Z.U. Wang and H. C. Zhou, Greenhouse Gas: Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 239 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gascon, A. Corma, F. Kapteijn and F. X. Llabrés i Xamena, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 361 CrossRef CAS .
M. Schwartz, R. L. Cook, V. M. Kehoe, R. C. Macduff, J. Patel and A. F. Sammells, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1993, 140, 614 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Kumar, S. S. Kumar and M. A. Kulandainathan, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 25, 70 CrossRef .
R. Hinogami, S. Yotsuhashi, M. Deguchi, Y. Zenitani, H. Hashiba and Y. Yamada, ECS Electrochem. Lett., 2012, 1(4), 17 CrossRef .
T. Maihom, S. Wannakao, B. Boekfa and J. Limtrakul, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 17650 CAS .
Y. Lan, S. Ma, J. Lu and P. J. A. Kenis, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2014, 1(9), 1577 CAS .
J. F. Xie, Y. X. Huang, W.W. Li, X. N. Song, L. Xiong and H. Q. Yu, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 139, 137 CrossRef CAS .
E. Andrews, M. Ren, F. Wang, Z. Zhang, P. Sprunger, R. Kurtz and J. Flake, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160(11), H841–H846 CrossRef CAS .
X. Nie, W. Luo, M. J. Janik and A. Asthagiri, J. Catal., 2014, 312, 108 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. de Brito, A. A. da Silva, A. J. Cavalheiro and M. V. B. Zanoni, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2014, 9, 5961 CAS .
F. Jia, X. Yu and L. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 252, 85 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Summers, S. Leach and K. W. Frese, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1986, 205(1–2), 219 CrossRef CAS .

          K. W. Frese, S. C. Leach and D. P. Summers, Electrochemical reduction of aqueous carbon dioxide to methanol. US patent no. 4, 609, 441, 2 September  1986 Search PubMed .
A. Bandi, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1990, 137(7), 2157 CrossRef CAS .
K. W. Frese and S. Leach, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1985, 132(1), 259 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bandi and H. M. Kühne, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1992, 139(6), 1605 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Popic, M. L. Avramov-Ivic and N. B. Vukovic, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1997, 421(1–2), 105 CrossRef CAS .
N. Spataru, K. Tokuhiro, C. Terashima, T. N. Rao and A. Fujishima, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2003, 33(12), 1205 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Qu, X. G. Zhang, Y. G. Wang and C. X. Xie, Electrochim. Acta, 2005, 50(16–17), 3576 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li, H. Hu, J. Xu, H. Jing, H. Peng, J. Lu, C. Wu and S. Ai, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 147, 912 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ogura and I. Yoshida, J. Mol. Catal., 1988, 47, 51 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ogura and I. Yoshida, J. Mol. Catal., 1986, 34, 67 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ogura and H. Uchida, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1987, 220, 333 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ogura and M. Fujita, J. Mol. Catal., 1987, 41, 303 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ogura, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1987, 134, 2749 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ogura, C. T. Migita and H. Imura, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1990, 137, 1730 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Rail and L. A. Berben, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ogura and S. Yamasaki, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1985, 81, 267 RSC .
K. Ogura and K. Takamagari, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 1986, 1519 RSC .
K. Ogura, C. T. Migita and K. Wadaka, J. Mol. Catal., 1991, 67, 161 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ogura, K. Mine, J. Yano and H. Sugihara, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1993, 20 RSC .
K. Ogura, N. Endo, M. Nakayama and H. Ootsuka, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, 4026 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nakayama, M. Iino and K. Ogura, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1997, 440, 251 CAS .
P. Braunstein, D. Matt and D. Nobel, Chem. Rev., 1988, 88, 747 CrossRef CAS .
V. D. Neff, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1978, 128, 886 CrossRef .
K. Ogura and M. D. Salazar-Villalpando, JOM, 2011, 63, 35 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ogura, Hyomen, 1991, 29, 945 CAS .
K. Ogura and I. Yoshida, Electrochim. Acta, 1987, 32, 1191 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ogura and S. Yamasaki, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 1985, 2499 RSC .
K. Ogura and H. Uchida, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 1987, 1377 RSC .
K. Ogura and M. Takagi, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1986, 206, 209 CrossRef CAS .
A. Monnier, J. Augustynski and C. Stalder, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1980, 112, 383 CrossRef CAS .
M. Koudelka, A. Monnier and J. Augustynski, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1984, 131(4), 745 CrossRef CAS .
T. E. Teeter and P. V. Rysselberghe, J. Chem. Phys., 1954, 22, 759 CAS .
P.G. Russell, N. Kovac, S. Srinivasan and M. Steinberg, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1977, 124, 1329 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hori, H. Wakebe, T. Tsukamoto and O. Koga, Electrochim. Acta, 1994, 39, 1833 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lukaszewski and A. Czerwinski, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2007, 11, 339 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lukaszewski, H. Siwek and A. Czerwinski, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2009, 13, 813 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. McKee, J. Catal., 1967, 8, 240 CrossRef CAS .
C. Capello, U. Fischer and K. Hungerbühler, Green Chem., 2007, 9, 927 RSC .
B. R. Eggins and J. McNeill, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1983, 148, 17 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Brisard, A. P. M. Camargo, F. C. Nart and T. Iwasita, Electrochem. Commun., 2001, 3, 603 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shironita, K. Karasuda, M. Sato and M. Umeda, J. Power Sources, 2013, 228, 68 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shironita, K. Karasuda, K. Sato and M. Umeda, J. Power Sources, 2013, 240, 404 CrossRef CAS .
M. Spichiger-Ulmann and J. Augustynski, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1985, 81, 713 RSC .
M. Azuma, K. Hashimoto, M. Watanabe and T. Sakata, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1990, 294, 299 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nakagawa, A. Kudo, M. Azuma and T. Sakata, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1991, 308, 339 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ohkawa, K. Hashimoto, A. Fujishima, Y. Noguchi and S. Nakayama, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1993, 345, 445 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ohkawa, Y. Noguchi, S. Nakayama, K. Hashimoto and A. Fujishima, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1993, 348, 459 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ohkawa, Y. Noguchi, S. Nakayama, K. Hashimoto and A. Fujishima, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1994, 369, 165 CrossRef .
B. I. Podlovchenko, E. A. Kolyadko and S. Lu, Electroanal. Chem., 1994, 373, 185 CrossRef CAS .
M. Halmann, Nature, 1978, 275, 115 CrossRef CAS .
B. Aurian-blajeni, M. Halmann and J. Manassen, Sol. Energy Mater., 1983, 8, 425 CrossRef CAS .
D. Canfield and K. W. Frese, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1983, 130, 1772 CrossRef CAS .
F. Fischer and O. Prziza, Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges., 1914, 27, 256 CrossRef .
S. Ikeda, T. Takagi and K. Ito, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1987, 60, 2517 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Frumkin, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1959, 55, 156 RSC .
A. Murata and Y. Hori, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1991, 64, 123 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Wu, F. G. Risalvato, F. S. Ke, P. J. Pellechia and X. D. Zhou, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, F353 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hori and S. Suzuki, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1982, 55, 660 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Thorson, S.I. Siil and P. J. A. Kenis, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, F69 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Setterfield-Price and R. A. W. Dryfe, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2014, 730, 48 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kwon and J. Lee, Electrocatalysis, 2010, 1, 108 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Chen and M. W. Kanan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 1986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kaneco, K. Iiba, N. Hiei, K. Ohta, T. Mizuno and T. Suzuki, Electrochim. Acta, 1999, 44(26), 4701 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li and C. Oloman, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2007, 37, 1107 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. S. Prakash, F.A. Viva and G. A. Olah, J. Power Sources, 2013, 223, 68 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Nishimura, D. Yoshida, M. Mizuhata, K. Asaka, K. Oguro and H. Takenaka, Energy Convers. Manage., 1995, 36(6–9), 629 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Machunda, J. Lee and J. Lee, Surf. Interface Anal., 2010, 42, 564 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Dewulf and A. J. Bard, Catal. Lett., 1988, 1, 73 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Cook, R. C. Macduff and A. F. Sammells, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1988, 135, 1470 CrossRef CAS .
S. Komatsu, M. Tanaka, A. Okumura and A. Kungi, Electrochim. Acta, 1995, 40, 745 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Aeshala, S.U. Rahman and A. Verma, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2012, 94, 131 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Aeshala, R.G. Uppaluri and A. Verma, J. CO2 Util., 2013, 3–4, 49 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Parkinson and P. F. Weaver, Nature, 1984, 309, 148 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kuwabata, R. Tsuda and H. Yoneyama, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1994, 116, 5437 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Hansen, J. B. Varley, A. A. Peterson and J. Norskov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. K. Addo, R. L. Arechederra, A. Waheed, J. D. Shoemaker, W. S. Sly and S. D. Minteer, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2011, 14, E93 CrossRef .
F. A. Armstrong and J. Hirst, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 14049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ogura and K. Takamagari, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 1986, 8, 1519 RSC .
R. Raghavan and R. T. Iwamoto, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1978, 92, 101 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yasukouchi, I. Taniguchi, H. Yamaguchi and M. Shiraishi, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1979, 105, 403 CrossRef CAS .

          I. Taniguchi, Electrochemical and photoelectrochemical reduction of carbon dioxide. In: Modern aspects of electrochemistry, 20, ed. J.O.M. Bockris, R.E. White, B.E. Conway, Plenum Press, NewYork,  1989. p. 327 Search PubMed .
G. Seshadri, C. Lin and A. B. Bocarsly, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1994, 372(1–2), 145–50 CrossRef CAS .
E. B. Cole, P. S. Lakkaraju, D. M. Rampulla, A. J. Morris, E. Abelev and A. B. Bocarsly, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132(30), 11539 CrossRef PubMed .

          A. B. Bocarsly and E. B. Cole, Conversion of carbon dioxide to organic products, US Pat. no.US 2012/8313634 B2,  2012 Search PubMed .
M. Z. Ertem, S. J. Konezny, C. M. Araujo and V. S. Batista, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Keith and E. A. Carter, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 1490 RSC .
C. H. Lim, A. M. Holder and C. B. Musgrave, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Xiang, D. Magana and R. B. Dyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 14007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. R. ÓToole, B. P. Sullivan, M. R. M. Bruce, L. D. Margerum, R. W. Murray and T. J. Meyer, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1989, 259(1–2), 217 CrossRef .
B. P. Sullivan, Platinum Met. Rev., 1989, 33(1), 2 CAS .
B. P. Sullivan, C. M. Bollinger, D. Conrad, W. J. Vining and T. J. Meyer, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1985, 20, 1414 RSC .
C. M. Bolinger, B. P. Sullivan, D. Conrad, J. A. Gilbert, N. Story and T. J. Meyer, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1985, 12, 796 RSC .
M. J. Earle, J. M. S. S. Esperança, M. A. Gilea, J. N. Canongia Lopes, L. P. N. Rebelo, J. W. Magee, K. R. Seddon and J. A. Widegren, Nature, 2006, 439(7078), 831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Rosen, A. Salehi-Khojin, M. R. Thorson, W. Zhu, D. T. Whipple, P. J. A. Kenis and R. I. Masel, Science, 2011, 334, 643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Welton, Chem. Rev., 1999, 99, 2071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Albo, T. Yoshioka and T. Tsuru, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2014, 122, 440 CrossRef CAS .
E. Santos, J. Albo and A. Irabien, J. Membr. Sci., 2014, 452, 277 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Wang, S. Q. Liu, K. L. Huang, Q. J. Feng, D. L. Ye, B. Liu, J. L. Liu and G. H. Jin, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2010, 21, 987 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. Barrose-Antle and R. G. Compton, Chem. Commun., 2009, 3744 RSC .
B. C. M. Martindale and R. G. Compton, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 6487 RSC .
B. A. Rosen, W. Zhu, G. Kaul, A. Salehi-Khojin and R. I. Masel, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, H138 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lu, X. Wang, Y. Li, J. Sun, J. Zhao and Q. Cai, J. CO2 Util., 2013, 3–4, 98 CrossRef CAS .
B. R. W. Pinsent, L. Pearson and F.J.W. Roughton, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1956, 52, 1512 RSC .
W. Paik, T. N. Andersen and H. Eyring, Electrochim. Acta, 1969, 14(12), 1217 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kaneco, N. H. Hiei, Y. Xing, H. Katsumata, H. Ohnishi, T. Suzuki and K. Ohta, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 48(1), 51 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hara, A. Tsuneto, A. Kudo and T. Sakata, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1994, 141(8), 2097 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hara, A. Kudo and T. Sakata, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1997, 421, 1 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hara, A. Kudo and T. Sakata, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1995, 391(1–2), 141 CrossRef .
R. Aydin and F. Köleli, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2002, 535, 107 CrossRef CAS .
C. Delacourt, P.L. Ridgway, J. B. Kerr and J. Newman, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 155, B42 CrossRef .
D. T. Whipple, E. C. Finke and P. J. A. Kenis, Electrochem. Solid State Lett., 2010, 13, D109 CrossRef .
C. E. Tornow, M. R. Thorson, S. Ma, A. A. Gerwith and P. J. A. Kenis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Thorson, S. I. Siil and P. J. A. Kenis, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, F69 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cindrella, A. M. Kannan, J. F. Lin, K. Saminathan, Y. Ho, C. W. Lin and J. Wertz, J. Power Sources, 2009, 194, 146 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Jhong, F. R. Brushett, L. L. Yin, D. M. Stevenson and P. J. A. Kenis, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, B292 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Jhong, F. R. Brushett and P. J. A. Kenis, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3(5), 589 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yano, F. Shirai, M. Nakayama and K. Ogura, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2002, 533, 113 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yano, F. Shirai, M. Nakayama and K. Ogura, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2002, 519, 93 CrossRef CAS .
M. Schwartz, R. L. Cook, V. M. Kehoe, R. C. MacDuff, J. Patel and A. F. Sammels, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1993, 140(3), 614 CrossRef CAS .
N. Furuya, T. Yamazaki and M. Shibata, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1997, 431(1), 39 CrossRef CAS .
A. Del Castillo, M. Alvarez-Guerra and A. Irabien, AIChE J., 2014, 60(10), 3557 CrossRef CAS .
A. Salehi-Khojin, H. R. M. Jhong, B. A. Rosen, W. Zhu, S. Ma, P. J. A. Kenis and R. I. Masel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 1627 CAS .
K. Hara, A. Tsuneto, A. Kudo and T. Sakata, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1997, 434, 239 CrossRef CAS .

          C. G. Vayenas, R. E. White and M. E. Gamboa-Aldeco, Modern Aspects of Electrochemistry, Springer Science, New York,  2008 Search PubMed .
Y. Chen, C. W. Li and M. W. Kanan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134(49), 19969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Mizuno, M. Kawamoto, S. Kaneco and K. Ohta, Electrochim. Acta, 1998, 43(8), 899 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kaneco, K. Iiba, K. Ohta, T. Mizuno and A. Saji, Electrochim. Acta, 1998, 44, 573 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kaneco, Y. Ueno, H. Katsumata, T. Suzuki and K. Ohta, Chem. – Eng. J., 2006, 119, 107 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kaneco, R. Iwao, K. Iiba, K. Ohta and T. Mizuno, Energy, 1998, 23(12), 1107 CrossRef CAS .
M. Alvarez-Guerra, A. Del Castillo and A. Irabien, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2014, 92(4), 692 CrossRef CAS .
B. Innocent, D. Liaigre, D. Pasquier, F. Ropital, J. M. Léger and K. B. Kokoh, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2008, 39(2), 227 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: List of review articles on CO2 electrochemical transformation into useful products (Appendix I) and, summary of the best performance data for the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 to CH3OH (Appendix II). See DOI: 10.1039/c4gc02453bThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:
Jonathan Albo	Jonathan Albo obtained his MSc in Chemical Engineering (2010) from the University of Cantabria. In 2012, he completed his PhD in Chemical Engineering at the same University, focused on the development of new membrane-based processes for CO2 separation. He next held a JSPS postdoctoral fellowship (2013) at Hiroshima University and then joined the group of Prof. Javier Bilbao at the University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU) (http://www.ehu.eus/en/web/cpwv) as a Juan de la Cierva researcher (2014). At present, his main research interests are in the field of The electro- and photoelectrocatalytic conversion of CO2 to value-added chemicals, including methanol.
Manuel Alvarez-Guerra	Manuel Alvarez-Guerra studied Chemical Engineering at University of Cantabria (2005), where he obtained his Master's (2008) and PhD (2010) in Chemical Engineering. At present, he is Assistant Professor in the Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering and member of the DePRO research group headed by Prof. Irabien (http://grupos.unican.es/depro/) in the same university. His current research work is focused on the development and assessment of innovative processes for the electrochemical conversion of CO2 into valuable products, such as formate or dimethyl carbonate. His postdoctoral research interests also include the modeling of ionic liquids, particularly for estimating their ecotoxicity and thermodynamic properties.
Pedro Castaño	Pedro Castaño received his MSc and PhD degrees in Chemical Engineering from the University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU) in 2002 and 2006, respectively. He was hired as a postdoc in TU Delft, working on multiphase microreactors. After some voluntary work, he was hired as a Ramon y Cajal fellow (2009) and Research Associate Professor (2013) at the UPV/EHU. He has also has worked in MIT, UWO, ICP-CSIC and UU. His research interests are in thermo-chemical-electrochemical waste processing, heterogeneous catalysis performance and deactivation, surface spectroscopy and multiscale modeling. More information can be found at http://www.ehu.eus/pedro.castano

 	Fig. 1  The methanol-based economy cycle model.	 

Cathode	CO2 + 6H+ + 6e− ⇄ CH3OH + H2O	−0.22 vs. SCE
Anode	3H2O ⇄ 1.5O2 + 6H+ + 6e−	0.99 vs. SCE
Overall:	CO2 + 2H2O ⇄ CH3OH + 1.5O2	1.21

 	Fig. 2  Probable reaction pathways in the electrochemical reduction of CO2 to CH3OH, through CO (a) and HCOOH (b) intermediates.	 

 	Fig. 3  Active metals reported in the literature for the electrochemical transformation of CO2 into CH3OH.	 

 	Fig. 4  Possible reaction pathway for the electrochemical reduction of CO2 to CH3OH at Cu(core)/CuO(shell) catalyst. Reprinted from ref. 84, Copyright (2014), with permission from ESG Publisher.	 

 	Fig. 5  Faradaic efficiencies for CH3OH and CH3CH2OH production by different electrodes in 0.5 M KHCO3 solution. Reprinted from ref. 89, Copyright (2014), with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  SEM images of (a) MoS2-rods/TiO2 nanotubes (at 50 μm magnification), (b) TiO2 nanotubes (100 nm) and (c) MoS2 rods (10 μm). Reprinted from ref. 98, copyright (2014), with permission from Elsevier.	 

0.2 M Na2SO4	22	−0.70	26	42
22	−0.80	50	55
0.05 M H2SO4	22	−0.68	310	46
52	−0.60	590	21

 	Fig. 7  Rate of CO2 reduction vs. surface charge of the cation at −0.69 (vs. SCE) in 1.5 M HCl solution containing various cations. Electrolysis time: 120 min. Reprinted from ref. 77, copyright (2012), with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic representation of pyridinium reduction coupled, via electroreduction, to the reduction of protons to hydrogen. Reprinted from ref. 172, copyright (1994), with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  Effect of adding water to [emim][BF4] on CO2 reduction on a Ag-based electrode (v = 50 mV s−1). Reprinted from ref. 191, copyright (2013), with permission from The Electrochemical Society.	 

At −0.75 V
0.01 M CH3COONa	4.53	10.2	14.82	22.82
0.003 M BaCl2	4.56	7.9	19.56	29.48
0.0016 M LaCl3	4.14	7.1	48.36	65.84
0.05 M LaCl3	4.02	6.7	49.11	69.77
At −1.70 V
0.01 M CH3COONa	4.53	0.5	300.46	84.96
0.0016 M LaCl3	4.14	0.8	315.52	93.37

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic representation and (b) photograph of an electrochemical cell divided by an ion exchange membrane. (a) Reprinted from ref. 45 and (b) reprinted from ref. 161, copyright (2012), with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 11  Comparison of (a) Faradaic efficiency and (b) energy efficiency against current density for CO2 conversion into CH3OH, CO and HCOOH.	 
	(1)
	(2)
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: List of review articles on CO2 electrochemical transformation into useful products (Appendix I) and, summary of the best performance data for the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 to CH3OH (Appendix II). See DOI: 10.1039/c4gc02453b

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
