Atomic spectrometry update. Industrial analysis: metals, chemicals and advanced materials  - Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C005533F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C005533F
(Atomic Spectrometry Update)
J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2010, 25, 1808-1858Atomic spectrometry update. Industrial analysis: metals, chemicals and advanced materials

Simon Carter
a, 

Andy S. Fisher
*b, 

Phill S. Goodall
c, 

Michael W. Hinds
d, 

Steve Lancaster
e and 

Sian Shore
f
aHull Research & Technology Centre, BP, Saltend, East Yorkshire, HU12 8DS
bSchool of Geography, Earth and Environmental Sciences, University of Plymouth, Drake Circus, Plymouth, UK PL4 8AA
cBNFL Sellafield, Seascale, Cumbria, UK CA20 1PG
dRoyal Canadian Mint, 320 Sussex Drive, Ottawa, Canada K1A 0G8
eRoyal society of Chemistry, Thomas Graham House (290), Science Park, Milton Road, Cambridge, CB4 0WF
fShell Research and Technology Centre, Thornton, P.O. Box 1, Chester, UK CH1 3SH
Received 
14th September 2010
, Accepted 14th September 2010First published on 
8th October 2010
Contents1. Metals1.1 Ferrous metals and alloys1.2 Non-ferrous metals and alloys2. Chemicals2.1 Petroleum and petroleum products2.2 Organic chemicals and solvents2.3 Inorganic chemicals and acids2.4 Nuclear materials3. Advanced materials3.1 Polymeric materials and composites3.2 Semiconductors, superconductors and electronic materials3.3 Glasses3.4 Ceramics and refractories3.5 Catalysts4 Glossary of termsReferencesAbstractIt is a noticeable trend over the last couple of review periods that the number and quality of nuclear applications has been increasing. That trend has continued into this year. Semiconductors and other electronic components continue to become smaller and utilise more pure materials; hence analysing them becomes more difficult. This is especially true when depth-resolved data is required. Techniques capable of analysing with ever increasing depth resolution are therefore necessary and many studies into this have been reported. There is still a large interest in the non-destructive analysis of archaeological or historical materials (glasses, ceramics, paintings etc.). The use of solid sampling techniques that cause minimal damage is therefore still gaining in popularity. This is especially true for laser-based techniques such as LIBS and laser ablation, although the many variants of the X-ray-based techniques are also still proving very popular. The increasing trend to use multiple analytical techniques, ideally simultaneously to cause minimal damage and to obtain the maximal number of results in the shortest time, is also noted. These attempts to obtain maximum information are, again, mainly true for historical artefacts where obtaining more analytical information will lead to a better understanding of provenance, manufacturing process, etc.The real time analysis being undertaken in engines and at coal fired boilers is also an interesting development. These real time analyses allow monitoring of the systems and enable any deviations from peak performance to be identified and corrected in the shortest time possible.This is the latest review covering atomic spectrometric measurements of industrial materials, metals, chemicals and advanced materials. It follows on from last year's review1 and should be read in conjunction with other reviews in the series.2–6
1. Metals
For all types of metals and alloys, the majority of abstracts centre on solid sample analysis methods. Laser induced breakdown spectrometry (LIBS) continues to be of interest in 14% of the abstracts reviewed (same as last year). The number of contributions involving multiple spectrometric methods is quite high at 31%. The overall distribution of abstracts reviewed for the metals section by single instrumental method were: atomic absorption 4.6%, atomic emission (including LIBS) 25.3%, mass spectrometry 17.3%, SIMS 5.1%, and XRF 13.5%. Abstracts that are fundamental in nature and/or focus on instrument development were not cited, readers are referred to instrumental reviews.2,4
1.1 Ferrous metals and alloys
Zhang and colleagues7 used LIBS elemental mapping to study weld creep failures in grade 91 weld metal. It was observed that Cr was not homogeneously distributed in the weld metal. This led to strong activity gradients in carbon which ultimately resulted in poor mechanical properties leading to creep failure. Stehrer, et al.8 analysed loose iron oxide nanoparticles by LIBS without pre-treatment. Limits of detection (LOD) were reported for Al, Mn, Ni and Si, (8, 860, 66 and 15 ppm, respectively). There were two reports concerning the determination of P in steel using LIBS combined with laser induced fluorescence whereby the plume generated by the LIBS event was irradiated by a second laser to induce atomic fluorescence of the analyte atom. The instrumentation of Shen and co-workers9 excited P atoms at wavelengths of 253.40 and 235.56 nm and the fluorescence was detected at 213.55 and 231.62 nm. A set of standards from 3.9 to 720 ppm P was used for calibration and the limit of detection was estimated to be 0.7 ppm. Kondo and colleagues10 used the 3rd harmonic of a Ti:Sapphire laser to excite fluorescence in the 253–256 nm region and fluorescence was detected at 213.62 and 214.91 nm. With relative ease of transmitting light of wavelength longer than 200 nm in fibre optics, it was suggested that this application could be applied to on-site monitoring of P concentration in steels.
Cadosch, et al.11 studied whether human osteoclast cells would grow on stainless steel and whether the cells would corrode the steel. The corrosion of the steel in osteoclast cell cultures was monitored by ICP-AES. It was found that stainless steel did corrode and would contribute to loosening of the steel implant in the body. Ishida and co-workers12 devised an on-line atomic absorption spectrometer to measure Mn and Fe in the vapour above a basic oxygen furnace used in steel production. Good correlation was reported between the Mn/Fe absorption ratio and the manganese concentration in the melt (within 0.2%) using a laboratory scale furnace.
Radiocarbon measurement of 14C in iron by accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS) was validated by Oinonen and co-workers13 with measurement of 14C in coal-produced steel. From other studies it was suggested that the limestone used in the smelting process complicates the age determination process. Valle et al.14 found that SIMS nano-analysis was a good means to determine the carbon content in Fe–Al–Mn–C alloys. Carbon measurements were made on materials with low carbon levels (below 0.05%). It was possible to define thermal treatment parameters that improved alloy ductility based on the SIMS results.
The laser induced colouration on stainless steel surfaces was studied by optical microscopy, SEM and time-of-flight (TOF) SIMS by Li et al.15 A duplex oxide structure was formed which included an inner layer of Cr oxide and an outer layer of Fe oxide. It was claimed the oxide layer thickness increased from Fe diffusion to the surface during multiple laser scanning passes. The passive film on mild steel in a CO2 corrosive environment was studied by Han and colleagues.16 Analysis using grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXRD) indicated that trace magnetite in the siderite layer was responsible for the passivation. The structure and composition of the passive layer was determined using transmission electron microscopy (TEM), scanning electron microscopy-energy dispersive X-ray spectrometry (SEM-EDX) and energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence (EDXRF). Engkvist, et al.17 used a wide variety of instrumental methods (SEM, TEM, EDXRF, GIXRD), Auger electron spectrometry and TOF-SIMS, to study the oxidation of FeCrAl foils at temperatures of 500–900 °C in oxygen. In each temperature and humidity range, the oxide scales were composed of an inner and an outer layer of pure alumina separated by a Cr-rich band.
The surface enrichment and depletion of alloying elements in iron were examined using X-ray photoelectron spectrometry (XPS), electron probe microanalysis (EPMA) and SIMS by Suzuki et al.18 Austenitic steel (Fe–Mn–Si–Cr) was observed to have a surface depleted in Mn but enriched in Cr when annealed under vacuum which improved the resistance to corrosion. The effect of adding ammonium sulfate to biomass on two different steels normally found in waste fired boilers was studied by Viklund and co-workers.19 The techniques of SEM-EDX, TOF-SIMS and XRD were used to compare the effects on austenitic steel EN1.4301 (Fe–18Cr–9Ni) and low alloyed ferric steel EN1.7380 (Fe–2.25Cr–1Mo) at 500 °C. It was found that the addition of the sulfate reduces corrosion and that the austenitic steel is more resistant to corrosion than the low alloyed ferric steel. The effect of adding tetraethyloxysilane to welding sheath gas in reducing Cr6+ emission from stainless steel welding was studied by Topham and co-workers.20 Fume aerosols were analysed by ion chromatography and ICP-AES. There was a 45% reduction in Cr6+ with the addition of 3% tetraethyloxysilane to the sheath gas. TEM images showed fume aerosols coated with SiO2 which gives support to the mechanism that inert SiO2 coats aerosol particles thereby reducing the availability of free Cr6+. The re-crystallization of austenite in niobium micro-alloyed steels was observed using TEM-EDX, ICP-MS and XRD in a paper by Vervynckt and co-workers.21 It was found that the experimental measurements agreed with the calculated precipitated mass fraction and precipitate composition as a function of temperature and steel composition.
1.2 Non-ferrous metals and alloys
Deuterium in zircaloy-4 alloys was determined using LIBS in a helium atmosphere as reported by Hedwig and co-workers.22 Calibration was achieved using zircaloy-4 samples doped with pre-determined amounts of deuterium. The compositional change of weld material for Al5754 alloy with different welding conditions was monitored by LIBS, in a report by Jandaghi and co-workers.23 LIBS measurements confirmed the modelling predictions that Mg in the weld metal increased while the Al decreased. Sasaki and Wagatsuma24 analysed Ni–Zn alloys using a low pressure argon LIBS and found that calibration curves for several pairs of emission lines did not follow a linear relationship. It was thought this observation could be explained by the difference in the evaporation characteristics between Zn and Ni and that there are many different metallurgical phases observed in these binary alloys. A double pulse LIBS system was used to determine the composition of complex metallic alloys as reported by Sorrentino et al.25 The time-integrated spectra were analysed using the Partial Least Squares method which allowed the determination of element composition even with spectral interferences. Cristoforetti et al.26 reviewed the findings of a paper by Galbacs et al.27 which analysed gold alloys using double pulse LIBS. Cristoforetti et al. repeated the experiment and found the method of calibration requires a priori knowledge of the alloy to be effective. Low limits of detection were reported by Laville and co-workers28 during the determination of Pb in brass by laser induced fluorescence from a plasma generated by a LIBS system. A LOD of 1.2 ppm was observed for a single shot whereas 0.2 ppm was calculated after the accumulation of data from 100 shots.
The analyses of copper and magnesium alloys by IR-laser ablation (LA) sampling in combination with ICP-MS and ICP-AES were compared with results from Spark OES and glow discharge (GD)-MS methods in a paper by Wienold et al.29 It was found that LA-ICP-MS and GD-MS had comparable LOD (within a factor of 10) for most elements determined in copper and copper powder samples. Spark OES, however, consistently had lower LOD than LA-ICP-AES for elements determined in magnesium alloys. Klemm and colleagues30 demonstrated that organic monolayers adsorbed on copper could be qualitatively determined by both direct current and radio frequency GD-OES.
The process of zinc vacuum distillation was monitored by an online gas quadrupole mass spectrometer as described by Gopala et al.31 Results from high resolution GD-MS of the zinc before and after purification were also used to elucidate the mechanism of vacuum distillation. A systematic study of the effect of isotopes on depth profile metal coatings on metal substrates by LA-ICP-MS was conducted by Farinas and colleagues.32 It was found that ablation rates were in the range of 0.55 μm pulse−1 (for copper coating on steel) to 0.83 μm pulse−1 (for zinc coating on steel). Trace element impurities and Pb isotope ratios in Celtic gold coins were determined using LA-ICP-MS33 by Bendall et al. who used the above information to find potential sources of the gold that were used in making the coins. Eugster and co-workers34 demonstrated the potential for the U, Th, 4He dating technique using an ultra-sensitive mass spectrometer to identify forgeries of gold objects. The determination of radiogenic 4He can provide an estimate of time since the last melting. Yang et al.35 measured 107Ag/109Ag isotope ratios in silver products using multicollector (MC)-ICP-MS. There were no significant differences found in the isotope ratios between commercial high purity silver and NIST SRM 978a, Ag Nanopowder and Ag embedded in one brand of socks. Significant differences were found among NIST SRM 978a, Ag in a dietary supplement, decanethiol functionalized Ag nanoparticles and Ag in a different brand of socks. It was suggested by the authors that these isotope ratios might be useful for identifying sources of Ag in the environment. Copper in an aluminium alloy was determined by an online isotope dilution (ID)-ICP-MS technique combined with a microchip solvent extraction system as reported by Kagawa et al.36 The Cu was complexed with 8-hydroxyquinoline and extracted into o-xylene at pH 5.5. A solution of 0.1 M nitric acid was used to back extract the Cu at a flow rate of 20 μl per minute. The solvent extraction was about 40% efficient and the total measurement time was estimated to be 40 s per sample.
The matrix effects of portable and stationary EDXRF spectrometers for the analysis of a copper alloy, a 22 carat gold alloy and some non-metallic material were compared in a paper by Pessanha and colleagues.37 It was found that the background for the copper and gold matrices were higher than for the non-metallic samples from both spectrometers. The portable EDXRF had much higher background than the stationary EDXRF instrument. This made the determination of trace elements impossible using the portable EDXRF and limited the effectiveness of the spectrometer. There were two papers published by Cesareo et al. who used a portable EDXRF instrument for the analysis of pre-Columbian artefacts; a funerary gold mask38 and metal alloys found in a tomb.39 The portable instrument was used for determining the major alloy components at different positions on the artefacts and for identification of metal artefacts individually. The thickness of coated Ni on brass was determined using XRF by correlating known Ni coatings with the ratio of K alpha/K beta line intensities for both Ni and Cu, in a paper by Karimi and co-workers.40
Pavlova41 discussed the quality of data available from electron probe X-ray microanalysis from the analyses of copper alloy and basaltic glass reference materials. It was found that the accuracy of the measurements was comparable to the reference material values when conditions were optimised for each matrix. Constantinescu et al.42 used particle induced X-ray emission (PIXE) and micro Synchrotron Radiation XRF to measure a variety of trace elements in gold to show that Dacian gold bracelets were made from gold originating in Transylvania.
There were two different reports dealing with the metal used in the manufacture of pipe organs. Oertel et al.43 examined the corrosion from acetic acid vapour and relative humidity on Pb–Sn alloys using EDXRF, wavelength dispersive X-ray fluorescence (WDXRF), XRD and SEM. Acetic acid originates from aging wood and does not have as much corrosive effect as high humidity. It was found that 3–15% Sn protected the alloy at moderate humidity but it was less effective at higher humidity. Herrera and colleagues44 compared the elemental and micro structure of brass reed pipes from a Spanish organ from the Baroque period to a modern one. Both laboratory and synchrotron XRF spectrometers were used to determine elemental composition in the bulk and at the sub-micrometer scale. GIXRD was used to determine phase information.
Figueiredo et al.45 investigated ancient gilding and bronze metallurgy through a combination of EDXRF, μ-EDXRF, SEM-EDS and metallographic techniques. Measurements using SEM-EDS showed the gold layer was 5–8 μm thick and was covered with a corrosion layer. The EDXRF measurements were used to determine elemental composition of the artefacts.
Cooper and co-workers46 used SIMS, EDXRF, Relative Resistance Ratios and microscopy to examine the effect of different cutting techniques on the surface morphology and composition of niobium. It was found that all the techniques altered the first 3–5 microns of the metal. The water jet cutting method introduced the most oxygen and hydrogen to the niobium and the electrical discharge machining introduced the least amount of these elements. Buffered chemical polishing removed surface contamination from the electrical discharge machining process but could not remove all of the contamination introduced by the water jet cutting method. The effects of electro-polishing and coating deposition on stainless steel plates in fuel cell membranes were studied by a variety of techniques as reported by Yun.47 Surface morphology was examined using AFM and filed emission (FE)-SEM. The chemical composition was determined by ICP-MS and XPS.
The chemical composition of Pb and Cu based artefacts from the Iron Age were determined by SEM-EDS, ICP-MS and AAS and reported by Balassone et al.48 The Pb isotope ratios were determined using ICP-MS and phase information was obtained by using XRD. Torrisi and co-workers49 used LA-ICP-MS and SEM-EDX to determine both bulk composition and surface patina composition of ancient Greek silver coins. This data was thought to be useful in identifying fake coins. Renzi and colleagues50 used thermal ionisation mass spectrometry (TIMS) for Pb isotope analysis in an attempt to establish the provenance of metallurgical samples from a Phoenician excavation site in Spain. A suite of other analytical techniques including XRF, SEM-EDX and ICP-AES was also used to determine the composition of these materials.
The wear characteristics of various oils and additives on aluminium-on-aluminium and steel-on-aluminium contacts were investigated using TEM, SEM, EDXRF, secondary neutral mass spectrometry (SNMS) and XPS.51 Chen and co-workers found that SNMS and XPS differentiated between the tribofilms created by different additives on aluminium surfaces. Pogrebnjak et al.52 investigated the near surface structure and properties of titanium alloys, after implantation of W and Mo ions. Composition was determined using SEM-EDX and PIXE. Other information was provided by GIXRD and Rutherford backscattering spectrometry (RBS). The surfaces of a bioactive polymer grafted onto a titanium alloy were studied using XPS, TOF-SIMS and a colorimetric method in work undertaken by Michiardi, et al.53 It was found that the TOF-SIMS intensities of S−, SO−, and TiO3H2− ions can be used to quantify the composition and amount of grafted polymer on the Ti alloy surface.
Table 1 Applications of metals analysis




Element
Matrix
Technique; Atomisation; Presentation
Comments
Reference




Au
Gold
AA; F; L
The corrosion of gold from long term exposure to 1 mmol L−1 n-dodecanethiol was monitored by FAAS.
 54 


Cu
Silver coins
AES; GD; S
Characterisation of the coins used in Mexico.
 55 


H
Titanium
TOF-SIMS;-;S
Evacuation time dependence of depth profiles of H in titanium and stainless steel measured. Oxide layer on the surface appeared to act as a barrier to the hydrogen evacuation.
 56 


Hf
Zr and Zr alloys
AES; ICP; L
Samples were dissolved in a mixture of H2SO4 and ammonium sulfate within 15 min. The method of standard additions was used for calibration. LOD was 0.01 μg g−1.
 57 


Pb
Iron slag
MS; ICP; L
 204Pb, 206Pb, 207Pb, and 208Pb isotopes were determined in samples from two different archaeological sites.
 58 


Sn and Zn
Bronze
AES; ICP; L
The bulk compositions of 62 modern bronze statues were determined. Cluster analysis of the Sn and Zn content was a useful tool in classifying these statues.
 59 


Various (5)
Copper alloys
SIMS; -; S
Depth-profiling of Cu alloys to determine the oxygen penetration into the alloy.
 60 


Various
Copper alloy artefacts
AES; laser; S
A low cost portable laser induced plasma spectrometry (LIPS) system was developed and tested on a set of quaternary copper alloys artefacts.
 61 


Various
High purity copper rod
MS; GD; S
Analysis of a copper rod that had been purified to 4N status by using an argon plasma arc zone melting procedure.
 62 


Various
Dental alloys
MS; ICP; L
Dental alloys were tested for ion release using ICP-MS after immersion in a solution of 0.9% NaCl and 1% lactic acid for 7 days at 37 °C.
 63 


Various (4)
Low alloy steel
AES; ICP; L
After dissolution, the analytes were co-precipitated with manganese (IV) oxide. This was decomposed in a mixture of HNO3 and H2SO4 and heated to fuming. The resulting solution was analysed using ICP-AES.
 64 


Various (8)
Aluminium alloys
LIBS; -; S
LIBS system using a multi-channel grating spectrometer and charge coupled device (CCD) detector.
 65 


Various
Gold
MS; ICP; L
Samples were dissolved in aqua regia and trace elements determined by high resolution ICP-MS. LOD of 0.01–0.28 μg g−1 were reported.
 66 


Various (60)
Niobium
MS; GD; S
Purification of commercial 3N niobium by electron beam melting. Purity checked by GD-MS. After purification, purity increased to 4N.
 67 


Various (5)
Tin plated steel core guitar strings
AES;ICP;L
The elements were determined in an artificial sweat solution to see whether degradation products caused skin problems.
 68 


AA;F;L


Various
Steel
MS; ICP; L
U, Pu, Cs and lanthanides were separated from dissolved steel using TRU resin (Eichrom) by eluting 2M HNO3, 4M HCl, 0.075M oxalic acid in 1M HCl and 0.1M ammonium hydrogen oxalate, respectively.
 69 


Various (14)
Titanium
MS; ICP; L
Samples were dissolved in HF and HNO3 then injected into an ion chromatograph with an ion exchange column. Elements were eluted with dilute HNO3 and determined by ICP-MS. LOD ranged from 0.00099–0.85 μg g−1. In Chinese.
 70 


Various
Zr–Nb alloy
PIXE; -; S
Gaseous elements N, O and F as well as 14 other analytes were included in the elements determined.
 71 


PIGE; -; S




2. Chemicals
2.1 Petroleum and petroleum products
Study of the elemental composition of coal as well as geochemistry of coal rich areas continues to feature in 2010. Continuing from last year's trend, there has been increased interest in alternative fuels. Fly ash continues to feature strongly; however, in contrast to 2009, the interest is in fly ash generated from biomass rather than coal. There are several papers discussing biomass related issues, and pyrolysis studies are also increasing. The subjects considered include analysis, production and environmental impact.
The use of LIBS has continued to increase throughout this review period as it is becoming a more established technique. It is being applied in the areas of coal, asphaltene and fly ash analysis. There is also work towards online analysis using LIBS for coal fired power plants which would allow real time control over boilers. These papers, which will be discussed in far more detail later in the text, have real practical applications, which could give significant energy efficiency gains in industry. There are two interesting papers72,73 which discussed measurements of in-cylinder equivalence ratios. Both papers demonstrated a useful diagnostic engine test for spark ignition engines.
During the 2008 and 2009 review periods there was significant interest in further development of methods for the determination of low level S in fuel. There are far fewer papers reporting on this in 2010, which may be due to current methodology and technology meeting current requirements. Relatively few papers have been published about lubricating oils or wear metal analysis of lubricating oils during this review period.
This review will report novel aspects of the analytical techniques, sample pre-treatment or sample collection processes.
2.1.1 Petroleum products—Gasoline, diesels, gasohol, exhaust particulates. Polar species present in fuel, including alkylated phenols, can influence storage stability and lubricity. Kolbe et al.74 compared phenol content and phenol alkylation pattern of fuels which had been desulfurised using different methods. Sensitive and selective analytical methods were required as phenols occur at low part per million levels. The analysis used a derivatisation of phenols to ferrocene esters, followed by gas chromatography with both atomic emission detection (GC-AED) for iron, and mass spectrometric detection. Classical hydrodesulfurisation was found to lower the phenol content to a much greater extent than adsorptive desulfurisation. In particular larger alkylphenols were almost completely removed using hydrodesulfurisation, but almost unaffected by adsorptive desulfurisation on a Ni/NiO sorbent.Maryutina and Soin75 considered a novel approach to the elemental analysis of diesel and crude oil. A total of 21 analytes were preconcentrated by pumping the sample through a rotating coil column as a mobile phase. An aqueous nitric acid solution was used as the stationary phase. The phases were both well mixed and agitated, but there was no emulsion at the interface. It was possible to vary the volume of the sample from 10 mL to 1 L or more, using only 10 mL of acidic stationary phase. The acidic phase was then removed and analysed. The large preconcentration factors obtainable using this preparation could allow laboratories without ICP-MS capabilities to analyse down to the very low detection limits that are increasingly required.
A new sample introduction system for ICP-MS was constructed by Caumette and colleagues.76 A heated spray chamber with a total consumption micro-nebuliser was developed to alleviate signal suppression (arising from decreased ionisation efficiency) during the analysis of light petroleum matrices. This allowed for analysis of undiluted gasoline, kerosene and gas condensates, and increased sensitivity by a factor of 3–4 in comparison with existing approaches.
An interesting study by Kawahara and co-workers72 determined the local equivalence ratio of a CH4/air mixture in a laminar premixed flame. Spark induced breakdown spectrometry (SIBS) with a fiber-coupled intensified charge coupled device (ICCD) spectrometer was used. Emission spectra of a plasma generated by a spark plug were investigated for their potential to measure local fuel concentrations. A spark plug sensor with an optical fiber, developed for application in spark ignition engines, could measure atomic emission intensity during the breakdown and arc phases of spark discharge. The results obtained in the study confirm that SIBS is a useful diagnostic tool for spark ignition engines. Another paper that also reported the study of in-cylinder equivalence ratios was authored by Joshi et al.73 Simultaneous laser sparks were used for engine ignition and LIBS. A Nd:YAG laser operating at 1064 nm was used with an optical spark plug to ignite a natural gas engine, and the optical emission from the combustion initiating laser spark collected. Analytes determined were H (656 nm), O (777 nm) and N (742 nm, 744 nm and 746 nm). The results of this study also suggested that this is a possible engine diagnostic method for cylinder resolved equivalence ratio measurements.
A paper by de Oliveira and co-workers77reviewed alternative analytical methods for trace level contaminants in fuel ethanol (with 68 refs). The authors also presented all the official norms for quality control of fuel ethanol given by the Brazilian Association of Technical Norms, American Society for Testing and Materials and European Committee for Standardisation. Considering the rising importance of fuel ethanol worldwide this review is both useful and timely.
Chloride and sulfate ions in ethanol fuel were determined indirectly using EDXRF by Teixeira and colleagues.78 A preconcentration sample preparation step was used, which produced a precipitation of silver chloride and barium sulfate. The precipitates were filtered out, and then analysed using EDXRF. The Ag and Ba were determined using the XRF instrument and, since there is a 1:1 relationship between the Ba and the SO4 and between the Ag and the Cl, the Cl and SO4 concentrations could easily be calculated. The method was applied to hydrated ethanol fuel samples collected from various retail forecourts. Acceptable limits of detection (25 and 30 μg L−1) and precision (7.3% and 5.9%) were obtained for Cl and SO4 respectively.

2.1.2 Fuels—coal, fly ash, particulates/emissions. Wang et al.79 stated that the leaching behaviour of As and Se in coal fly ash is important in evaluating its environmental impact. Experiments were performed systematically to investigate the leaching behaviour in two major types of coal fly ashes, bituminous and sub-bituminous. The underlying processes that control As and Se leaching such as pH, solid/liquid ratio, calcium addition and leaching time were all studied. Overall, bituminous coal ash leached significantly more than sub-bituminous coal ash, and Se was more readily leachable than As for both types. Calcium precipitation played the most important role in reducing As and Se leaching from sub-bituminous coal ashes over the entire experimental pH range.An on-line, fully software-controlled LIBS system for quality analysis of pulverised coal in power plants was developed by Yin et al.80 The system contained programmable logic-controlled sampling equipment, which was capable of multipoint sampling and sample preparation. Special attention was given to the LIBS system, data processing methods and specific settings including the high pressure gas cleaning device. Measurement errors of less than 10% were reported for Al, C, Fe, H, Mg, Na, Si and Ti. Knowledge of the chemical composition of coal is vital in order to obtain optimal boiler control, and the accuracy obtained experimentally confirmed that the system is suitable for industrial use. LIBS was used for coal fly ash analysis by Ctvrtnickova and colleagues.81 Standard analysis methods used for fly ash cannot be used to control a boiler in real time. LIBS can dramatically reduce the analysis time, and online detection can be performed. This study considered various sample preparations for the analysis. Pressed pellets were prepared with varying quantities of two different binders. The LIBS parameters and procedures were also presented. It is hoped that this work will be used to establish the experimental conditions for online analysis.
A paper by Thiebaud and co-workers82 reported the development of an on-line continuous monitor for Hg determination in the exhaust stream of coal-fired power plants. The instrument was based on the ultraviolet absorption from a mercury lamp source and used a light emitting diode (LED) background correction system. This approach allowed the absorption arising from other species such as SO2 to be removed, allowing the measurement of Hg–O only. The apparatus was tested in a 230MW coal-fired power plant, and the paper stated that this proved to be operable. A laboratory study using the device yielded a LOD of 2 μg m−3 (for a 1 min measurement through a 0.49 m path length), but it was thought that this would decrease to 0.2 μg m−3 had a 7 m wide stack been used. Comparison with an accepted test method is required for validation, and this would be an interesting subject for further work.

2.1.3 Oils—crude oil, lubricants. A report by Murase et al.83 described the results of TOF-SIMS analysis of friction surfaces of hard coatings such as chromium nitride and titanium nitride in a real world lubrication system used in the automotive industry. The lubricating oils used contained typical engine oil additives, and two types of lubrication systems were used. Analysis of the friction surfaces showed that secondary ions originating from adsorbed components were detected for each additive. The differences in adsorbing behaviour of additives between different engine oil components and different substrates were clarified. The causes of difference in friction coefficient among the engine oil lubrication systems were partly explained with the adsorbing behaviour of Mo-dithiocarbamate. The results demonstrated that TOF-SIMS is useful for the analysis of real world lubrication phenomena.
2.1.4 Alternative fuels. A useful method was developed by Robinson et al.84 When using biomass in chemical processes, knowledge of the S content is important, since its presence in biomass proteins can cause metal catalyst poisoning. An EDXRF method was developed to determine low ppm levels of S in biomass feedstocks and subsequent residues from pre-treatment reactions. Calibrations by standard additions were performed using S standards milled with microcrystalline cellulose. The method was successfully validated using ultra violet fluorescence (UVF) and ICP-AES at two independent laboratories. A detection limit of 2 ppm was achieved. It is likely that this technology and application will be useful and appropriate for use in industry. Hasan and colleagues85 studied the trace metals in black solid materials deposited from biomass burned on cooking stoves in Bangladesh. Samples were taken from above the stoves, inside the kitchens. The analytes Ca, Cd, Fe, Hg, K, Mg and Pb were detected. It was found that biomass comprising straw, bamboo, cow dung, leaves and plants produced far greater Pb, Cd, Mg and K than another common fuel, rice husk coils. Factors affecting flash pyrolysis of heavy metal contaminated biomass from phyto-remediation were considered by Stals et al.86 Disposal of metal contaminated crops is a problem which limits the use of phyto-remediation. The low pyrolysis temperatures generally used do not volatilise heavy metals present. The study investigated three pyrolysis temperatures and the use of hot gas filtration. It was found that oil produced at 623 K contained very low levels of metals, with nearly all of the metals accumulated in the char/ash residue. This could offer a valuable processing method for heavy metal contaminated biomass.Silva and co-workers87 proposed alternative calibration approaches and modifiers for the determination of Cd, Pb and Tl in biodiesel. Micro-emulsions were prepared using biodiesel (2 g), nitric acid (1 mL of 10%) and propanol. The analysis was carried out using GFAAS operating under optimised pyrolysis and atomisation temperatures. Calibration solutions were matrix matched with base oil, and recoveries between 80%–116% were achieved at low ppb levels for the elements considered. This work may be helpful for laboratories without ICP-MS capability. The expansion of this method to the determination of other elements may be a suitable subject for further work.

2.2 Organic chemicals and solvents
The number of papers describing novel work involving the analysis and characterisation of ancient, valuable and archaeological objects is particularly noteworthy. This application area seems to be driving developments in either non-destructive techniques, or techniques requiring the destruction of very small sample amounts. Additionally, field-based techniques are maximising the yield of information by employing multiple analytical techniques, with atomic and molecular spectral data being acquired simultaneously. Additionally, laser-based spectroscopies, including LIBS are very prominent in the literature covered by this review period, as is the use of synchrotron sources. Laser spectroscopies are also being reported for the remote and real time analysis of hazardous environments, including suspect explosive materials. Speciation continues to feature strongly in the literature and there are several papers utilising the high efficiencies of electro-driven separations with one paper describing for the first time that micro-emulsion electro-kinetic Chromatography has been employed with ICP-MS. Here the authors described a new procedure for the speciation of anticancer platinum compounds. Several papers which are not reviewed in detail are included in Table 2, which contains papers which compliment the review or are interesting from an applications point of view.
Table 2 Atomic spectrometric applications of Organic chemicals and solvents




Analyte
Matrix
Technique; Atomisation; Presentation
Comments
Reference




Cd
Wine
AAS; F; L
On-line preconcentration with a chelating agent (2-(5-bromo-2-pyridylazo)-5-diethylaminophenol immobilised on wool.
 88 


Various
Oloroso sherry wine
AES; F; L
Cluster analysis and linear discrimination analysis gave excellent recognition and prediction ability.
 89 


AAS; F; L


Various
Wine
AAS; -; CV
A review (133 refs) of AAS in wine analysis. Includes references on direct analysis, sample digestion, extraction, preconcentration, hydride generation for As, FI-CVAAS for Cd, CVAAS for Hg, FI-HGAAS for Pb and HG-ETAAS for Sb.
 90 


AAS;-; HG


Various
Wine
Several
Overview of the structure of a project to characterise and determine the geographical origin of wines.
 91 


Various (As, Pb and Se)
Wine
ICP; MS; ETV
Results of ETV-ICP-MS compared with liquid sample introduction ICP-MS and ETAAS. Analytical figures of merit were strongly dependent on sample size and modifier. Matrix components were also important. Standard addition was a strong requirement. Lead and Se results were comparable to conventional techniques but As results were 2–4 times lower. This suggested the presence of polyatomic interferences in conventional techniques. ETAAS detection limits for As and Se were not low enough to quantify these elements in wine.
 92 


AAS; ETV, L


Various
Heritage and historically significant objects
XRF; -; S
Report on biannual round-robin tests of the application of XRF to art and heritage objects.
 93 


Various
Wall painting pigments
LIBS; -; S
A reference database of 30 commercial pigments was employed together with chemometrics for signal processing.
 94 


Various toxic metals
Lipstick
LIBS; -; S
Toxic metals quantified in lipstick. Paper discussed the pre-treatment required for the analysis of the soft matrix.
 95 




2.2.1 The analysis of archaeological and art objects. The analysis of archaeological and historical objects, tapestries and textiles features strongly in the literature covered during this review period and some innovative developments are described which may impact analytical science in other areas. X-ray techniques for the determination of pigments in historical artworks are a notable theme,96,97 as is the analysis of metals in pigments.98 The analysis of artworks in the Kunsthistorisches Museum in Vienna has been greatly facilitated by the development of an XRF spectrometer which has been specifically adapted for this purpose.99 This portable focused-beam XRF instrument was designed and manufactured to take into account the large variation in sample shape and size of museum objects, and was equipped with a vacuum chamber enclosed with a polyimide film (Kapton) window, allowing the detection of elements as low in mass as Na. Two low power tubes (one with a molybdenum-anode and the other with a chromium-anode) with a point focus of about 180 μm could be used as sequential excitation sources. A polycapillary lens with a spot size of 150 μm was used for focusing the primary beam onto small areas of the sample, examples of which included the fine brush strokes on paintings. A camera was installed into the vacuum chamber for inspecting the area of analysis, facilitated by two laser pointers which coincide with the focal point of the polycapillary. Interestingly, the use of XRF together with the fundamental parameters method has enabled de Viguerie and colleagues to determine both the composition and thickness of layers within paintings.100 There are several technological advances of note in this field and these are driven by the need for non-invasive analysis101 of archaeological and culturally significant art objects, involving minimal sample destruction whilst yielding maximum information on the object of interest, often involving portable instruments, or beam line sources and these are reviewed below.In addition to instrumental advances, the cooperation of scientists dealing with the analysis of the artistic, historical and technological aspects of these objects has been outlined as being of critical importance for their proper characterisation, including origin and dating. According to Cybulska and colleagues, proper documentation of these objects also requires cooperation between researchers representing different areas of science, including archaeology, chemistry, textile technology and the history of art.102 A range of techniques are presented with the emphasis on the elucidation of the original manufacturing methods, and analysis of the raw materials and dyes as this was stated to be fundamental for the proper identification of the object including its origin and dating. In another example of the importance of this interdisciplinary approach, radio-carbon dating of recently restored wooden doors of the medieval St Ambrogio Basilica in Milan has been carried out by Poldi et al. using accelerator mass spectrometry. Work was undertaken at two different laboratories. Results were used in conjunction with dendrochronological analysis based on high resolution photographs and analysis by EDXRF.103 This work is a timely example of the collaboration required to yield the maximum analytical information and benefit for conservation projects. Collaboration between craftsmen involved in restoration of artefacts, physicists, chemists and entomologists has enabled the development of an improved conservation strategy, better understanding of the artefact and a verification of several hypotheses made by historians over the last century.
The determination of As and Hg in extracts from ancient papers employing a unique and fully automated integration of solid phase extraction (SPE) and EDXRF has been reported by Alcalde-Molina and co-workers.104 A totally automated approach was achieved by the on-line connection of a lab-on-valve system (an automated system that enables several reagents to be mixed via numerous channels on a multi-port valve to affect assorted chemical reactions) to a methacrylate cell in which the analytes were pre-concentrated. In the last review period, it was noted that synchrotron radiation sources were becoming more widely used in the analysis of historical artefacts and valuable paintings.1 These developments continued during the current period, and a very useful review paper by Creagh and co-workers outlining the improvements in the design of synchrotron radiation sources together with some interesting examples of their use in the analysis of historical or culturally significant objects was included (28 refs).105 This paper reviewed the analysis of important artefacts held by Australian national collecting agencies using both laboratory and synchrotron based analytical techniques. Included was the use of synchrotron radiation for several spectroscopies including: FTIR micro-spectroscopy to map the spreading of inks on parchment; finely focused X-ray beams to study ageing related structural changes in collagen and the presence of ink using small and wide angle X-ray scattering, the principles of which are outlined in a paper referenced therein. The high intensity of synchrotron radiation is advantageous as it makes possible the XRD studies of pigments within small samples. Studies on around 10 μg of material were successful. Around 5 g of material was required to achieve similar diffraction contrast with conventional laboratory systems. Particle induced X-ray emission (PIXE) studies on μg quantities of ochre sample were carried out using a 2.5 MeV proton beam with sufficient sensitivity to yield quantitative results with a high degree of confidence. The authors suggested that with a combination of diffraction patterns and PIXE quantitative data, it may even be possible to establish the mine site from which the ochre originated, giving valuable information on Aboriginal trading patterns. Additionally, a new technique for the study of easel paintings was presented. Here the reflected light from two obliquely placed quartz halogen lights was reflected off the painting and imaged onto a charge coupled device (CCD) array. A filter wheel was placed in front of the detector and the spectral reflectance characteristics across the UV, visible and NIR could be recorded. This approach is known as hyperspectral imaging and is a reflectance technique which enables the distribution of surface pigments to be determined. Multiple-technique analysis employing synchrotron source XRD together with EDX, SEM, FTIR and pyrolysis GC-MS has been employed by Herrera et al. for the characterisation of both inorganic and organic compounds of the textiles, preparation layers and pictorial layers from Baroque Andalusia paintings.106 The analysis of multiple layers within parchment samples has been accomplished by Dolgin and colleagues using synchronous scanning fluorescence, LIBS, visual colour imaging and near infra red analysis.107 Ion beam analysis has also been employed for the analysis of highly degraded pigments from decorations in Egyptian tombs108 where PIXE techniques were employed for the determination of the nature of the pigments and the identification of domestic and imported materials. The analysis of a wood painting by Giorgio Vasari, where proton beams of different energies—differential PIXE—allowed the depth distribution of elements to be determined was reported by Grassi and colleagues.109 Backscattering spectrometry has been used together with PIXE to allow the characterisation of an organic binder in various artefacts.110 In this work by de Viguerie and co-workers, 3 MeV protons were used for simultaneous PIXE and backscattering spectrometry, enabling the determination of inorganic elemental composition and carbon and oxygen. This enabled a complete characterisation of the paint layers of the artefacts including composition and proportion of organic binder. An interesting application of iron K-edge XANES, using the HASYLAB beamline for the determination of the oxidation state of Fe in iron gall ink in historical manuscripts was reported by Wilke et al. and demonstrated the importance of synchrotron sources for the characterisation of historically significant artefacts.111 The determination of polysulfide radical anions in blue and mauve ultramarine pigments, using sulfur K edge XANES has been studied by Fleet and Liu.112 The spectra were dominated by features of reduced S and sulfate species. Additionally, a pre-peak was also present in the spectra, which was proportional to the depth of the blue coloration. This feature provided a new method for estimating the proportion of ultramarine cage sites occupied by the blue chromophore. The occupancy of the polysulfide radical anion was estimated at 33% in an intense ultramarine pigment, 22% in a dark blue pigment and 1% in a deep royal blue lazurite from Afghanistan. The degradation of iron gall inks can be problematic and the ratio of Fe3+/Fetot can be taken as a proxy for the degradation process. Conservation and/or restoration treatments inevitably change the redox potential of iron gall inks and spatially resolved XANES measurements allowed a comparison of the Fe3+/Fetot ratio between samples with and without conservation treatment. This paper presented a comprehensive discussion of the experiments employed and even presented a quantitative study of the radiation-induced changes due to the measurement procedure. In a slightly different approach to the characterisation of iron gall inks, a novel procedure for the sampling of micro-cores (0.7 mm diameter) from paper and parchment was proposed and has been used by Charleton and co-workers to characterise the iron gall inks using GFAAS,113 though this has the disadvantage that samples—albeit small ones—are destroyed. The elemental composition of several books from the 18th and 19th centuries has been analysed by Pessanha and colleagues for Hg diffusion in vermillion pigment.114 Elemental analysis was achieved using EDXRF with chemical mappings of Hg distribution carried out on small fragments of the books, utilising the spatial resolution capabilities of micro-synchrotron radiation XRF. The combined use of both molecular and atomic analytical techniques including XRF, LA-ICP-MS and Raman spectroscopy is an important approach and this multi-technique methodology is critically important for the comprehensive understanding and characterisation of various artefacts including manuscripts,115 pigments116 and paints employed by artists including Picasso.117 Combinations of atomic and molecular techniques are employed to achieve maximum analytical information. Portable XRF and fibre optic reflectance mid-infrared instruments have been employed in-situ by Miliani et al. for the analysis of painted stoneware objects.118 Principle Component Analysis (PCA) enabled the various types of glaze to be distinguished based on the variations of Fe, Mn and Pb concentrations. The combination of the molecular information from the mid-FTIR experiments and atomic information from the XRF data enabled a comprehensive characterisation of the constituent painting materials together with the identification of oxalates as degradation products within the decorative areas. Such a multi-analytical approach has been employed by Pessanha and co-workers for the non-destructive analysis of 18th century Chinese wallpaper119 and attenuated total refection (ATR)-FT-IR together with ICP-MS has been used for the characterisation of both organic and inorganic components in paper and inks.120

2.2.2 LIBS and laser spectroscopies. In the previous review period1 some interesting and important developments from the LIBS community were reviewed. Papers from the current review period would suggest that both the importance and the number of application areas of LIBS and related laser-based techniques are growing. The driving force for this growth appears to be its rapid and remote analysis capabilities for a wide variety of sample types including the analysis of art works where the requirement for little or no sample preparation is important and the destruction of very small areas of the sample is critical. Additionally, the ease with which laser systems can be combined with other techniques, particularly molecular techniques such as Raman spectroscopy is an advantage. A combination of these techniques, using the same optical set up has been employed by Osticioli and colleagues for the analysis of various art and architectural objects to allow the identification of the materials used in their manufacture and contaminants present on their surfaces.121 LIBS was employed for depth-profiling and yielded elemental information of the surface layers. The source was a pulsed Nd:YAG laser (λ = 532 nm) with the same laser being used for the Raman measurements. An intensified CCD camera which was synchronised with the laser pulse allowed the complete removal of fluorescent interference. This paper described the analysis of a mural painting, a fragment of a decorative tile and part of a bronze figure. The artefacts which were analysed demonstrated the applicability of this approach to a variety of sample types with no sample pre-treatment. A further significant instrumental development by the same research group was a potentially transportable prototype instrument capable of carrying out Raman, LIBS and LIF spectroscopy using a single pulsed laser source and common optical platform.122 This instrument utilised time resolved detection and gating to enable the Raman, LIBS and fluorescence signals to be separated. The instrument allowed multiple analyses on the same spot on a sample and so minimised sample destruction.One property of laser-based techniques which makes them desirable for environmental applications is their capabilities for remote or ‘standoff’ analysis. The standoff detection of nitrotoluenes from explosives residues using 213 nm laser induced fluorescence-amplified spontaneous emission (LIF-ASE) from nitric oxide has been described by Arnold and co-workers.123 Nitric oxide is a fluorescent decomposition product of nitrotoluene and other compounds including explosives. The paper described the LIF-ASE apparatus in some detail. The effects of various buffer gases on the spectra of NO were examined and the generation of various test vapours was achieved by means of exposure of nitrotoluene samples to buffer gases at various temperatures and flow rates. The directional nature of the stimulated spontaneous emission makes the technique ideally suited to standoff detection at distances of over a kilometre. The other advantage of the ASE technique over conventional LIF is the enhanced sensitivity, allowing for the detection of low-vapour pressure materials. The spectral information could also be used for the discrimination of nitrotoluene isomers. The use of LIBS for remote or standoff detection has also been reported and reviewed previously1,124 and the remote analytical capabilities of LIBS continue to be an important feature of LIBS development. In a novel development, the standoff LIBS detection of explosive residues behind various physical barriers has been reported.125 This work, by Gonzalez et al., outlined the development of a LIBS procedure for the remote detection of explosive materials when present behind materials such as polymethylmethacrylate and a variety of glasses. The transmission of the laser beam and collection of the emission from the plasma plume were examined through the various glasses and polymers and the effect of the material type and its position on the transmission of radiation was investigated. Residues of 2,6-dinitrotoluene, 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene, a range of plastic explosives and sodium chlorate supported on aluminium foil and several other supports were employed in the studies. A suite of chemometric tools were investigated within MATLAB, for the characterisation of the explosive residues. It was concluded that the detection of explosives behind a barrier is achievable if part of the laser energy and plasma light is transmitted through the barrier. In the most difficult cases, a decision based on 8 laser shots gave 100% sensitivity to the presence of explosives with no false positives and the analysis time was less than 2 s. It is likely that this combination of LIBS with chemometric data manipulation will provide an important tool in the detection of explosives and quite possibly other materials in homeland security applications. This work provided a valuable demonstration that LIBS techniques can be applied for the detection of explosive substances through the windows of vehicles and buildings. In another study of LIBS detection of explosives residues, the single shot variation of line intensity ratios for samples was found to be significant and was strongly influenced by the amount of ablated material. Emission intensities from atomic oxygen and nitrogen were found to be attenuated by the presence of organic material. This was attributed to reactions occurring in the plasma and hydrogen lines were strongly dependent on humidity.126 Three useful review papers are included. One presented recent advances, challenges and future prospects for LIBS as a means of detecting explosives.127 This review by Gottfried and colleagues (142 refs) presented some recent advances in instrumentation including double pulse LIBS experiments to reduce air entrainment in the plasma, the application of chemometric techniques to facilitate the discrimination between explosives and non-explosives and the improvement of sensitivity and selectivity by employing femtosecond pulse lasers. One growth area in the field of LIBS is the combination of LIBS with Raman spectroscopy and several papers on this are included in the review paper. Interestingly, one paper on photo-fragmentation-LIF of nitric oxide and nitrogen dioxide fragments is included as are four papers on the use of photo-acoustic spectroscopy and their future combination with LIBS is postulated. The second review paper (121 refs) presented a critique of laser-based standoff detection methods for the detection of explosives,128 and focused primarily on trace procedures for detecting small amounts of explosives arising from their handling, or the vapours surrounding an explosive charge, rather than the more usual bulk detection methods. The technologies which were discussed included LIBS, light detection and ranging (LIDAR), differential absorption LIDAR, Raman, UV-Raman and resonance enhanced Raman, LIF, photo-fragmentation-LIF and pulsed laser fragmentation mid-IR. There were also brief sections on millimetre wave imaging and terahertz spectroscopy and other novel techniques including standoff super-radiant spectroscopy, differential reflection spectroscopy and resonant IR photothermal imaging. The third review paper, by Willer et al., looked at techniques also used in standoff mode for explosives and other substances and covered mainly molecular spectroscopies including laser absorption, Raman, photoacoustic, evanescent-field, terahertz and cavity ringdown.129 A brief section on LIBS was also included. A total of 58 references were cited. A paper of note by Moros and colleagues reported the standoff detection of explosives by simultaneous Raman and LIBS, employing a mobile integrated sensor platform and collection of both Raman and LIBS signals from the same laser pulses by means of a Cassegrain telescope.130 The ability to acquire both molecular and multi-element information from the same laser pulses on the same sample cross section greatly enhanced the capabilities over conventional LIBS, and was used for the detection of compounds which were either explosive materials, or precursors of explosive substances.
An interesting environmental application making good use of the remote analytical capabilities of LIBS is the analysis of chromated copper arsenate (CCA)-treated timbers.131 This paper by Gething and co-workers employed LIBS for the on-site determination of preservative in CCA-treated timbers for recycling, employing full spectrum analysis (200–800 nm) and scanning of the laser shots across the width and length of the timber samples. The results were variable, with poor precision and it was uncertain whether this poor precision was because of the inhomogeneity of the sample or inherent to the technique. It was concluded, however, that LIBS was a useful technique for determining threshold values of the preservative concentrations. In another, quite different application, LIBS has been employed as a means of identifying analgesic pills132 by a comparison of the spectra over 200–1000 nm with reference spectra stored in a computer based spectral library. Historically, many techniques have been applied to the characterisation of paper133–135 and one LIBS application has been used for the forensic identification of confidential documents,136 by comparison of the spectra with reference spectra of a range of documents. Linear and rank correlation methods both yielded excellent identification probabilities of a range of documents.
The technique of LA-ICP-MS is very powerful for the analysis of solids and has been successfully employed by van Es and co-workers for the discrimination of document paper137 including large numbers of similar samples from different sources. A multitude of elements and isotopes were quantified using 0.25 cm2 of sample and intensities relative to 88Sr were calculated due to the fact that this Sr isotope is present in all paper samples in similar concentrations and with even distribution. LA-ICP-MS was found to discriminate the samples well, but when combined with XRF and IRMS the discrimination power was greatly enhanced. In a similar application, LA-ICP-MS was employed by Gallo and Almirall for the forensic elemental analysis of cotton fibres, to increase the discrimination between similar cotton fibres which may constitute trace evidence at crime scenes.138 This paper demonstrated for the first time the forensic elemental analysis of cotton fibres. Fibres were analysed using both a digestion ICP-MS procedure and a LA-ICP-MS procedure. The LA sampling procedure required the destruction of minimal sample amounts as compared with conventional digestion procedures, and significantly reduced the analysis time. Samples were mixed with germanium and pelletized prior to ablation. The LA-ICP-MS detection limits for a range of elements were sub ppm to ppb and RSD values (n = 5) ranged from 1.8 to 8.8%, which was better than the digestion procedure. Additionally, the accuracy of the LA-ICP-MS procedure was significantly better than the digestion procedure. All raw cotton samples were distinguishable indicating that this procedure may be sufficiently discriminating to be used as evidence.

2.2.3 Speciation analyses. Polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDE) are flame retardants employed in numerous polymer and resin materials. As stated in the previous review,1 there continues to be concern over their potential health risks and the concentrations of PBDE in the environment are increasing. In order to measure the physico-chemical properties of the PBDE vapour, their thermal and photodecomposition properties, headspace-GC-ICP-MS has been employed.139 The paper (in Japanese) by Tao and Nakazato reported that the major factor influencing the analytical performance of this technique was a significant memory effect. This was mitigated by employing a GC injection port temperature of 400 °C and a pulsed split injection, and this resulted in a precision of 2.1% for 7 replicate measurements of PBDE – 209 (Decabromodiphenyl ether) (405 ng bromine in a 20 mL vial). This procedure was employed to measure the temperature dependency of vaporisation for 13 PBDE congeners, thermal decomposition of PBDE-209 in polystyrene and the photodecomposition of the same compound. The analysis was found to be better than the conventional procedure because of the elimination of evaporation losses of reactants and products and the equimolar sensitivity facilitating the calculation of mass balances.A new procedure for organophosphorus analysis utilising the high separation efficiency of capillary electrophoresis and the sensitive element specific detection capabilities of ICP-MS has been reported by Yang and colleagues.140 Capillary electrophoresis separation has traditionally resulted in a significant dilution of the analyte and this, coupled with the fact that P is not a particularly sensitive element by ICP-MS, combine to give relatively high detection limits for organo-phosphorus compounds. This paper aimed to address these issues by utilising a “collective sample introduction technique” based on an interface developed and constructed in-house. The electrophoresis parameters were optimised for dimethoate, trichlorofon and glyphosphate. The authors presented results from a conventional system of continuous introduction of eluent into the ICP-MS and compared these with results from the new collective introduction technique where only the eluent corresponding to the elution time of the organophosphorus compounds was introduced. This was achieved via a two-pump manifold, the design and operation of which is described in the paper. The collective mode of sampling into the ICP-MS instrument resulted in significantly less chromatographic dispersion and thus narrower peaks with lower detection limits for all three of the compounds. Detection limits were reported to be up to ten times lower (0.05–0.07 ng/mL) for the collective sample introduction than with the conventional continuous introduction.
Microemulsion electrokinetic chromatography (MEEKC) is an electro-driven separation technique. The first application of MEEKC with ICP-MS detection has been developed and reported by Bytzek and co-workers141 and was employed for the speciation of PtII and PtIV anticancer drugs and drug candidates. Varying microemulsion compositions were investigated and the data compared with results obtained by standard UV-visible detection. Detection limits with ICP-MS detection were significantly lower than with the UV-visible detection.
When quantifying the total concentration of an element which exists as several different species, significant errors may arise because of the different behaviours of the species during nebulisation with a pneumatic nebuliser. This is particularly so with silicon containing species. Silicon is a very important element in many industries, particularly in petroleum products where it is a poison for hydrogenation catalysts, and in fuels where it can deposit on the oxygen sensor within the engine management system, causing engine failure. The determination of Si can be difficult for the reasons outlined, with many of the Si species being unknown. Sanchez et al.142 showed how these effects can be minimised and have evaluated two approaches to mitigate this problem. The first was the use of an elevated temperature (100–140 °C) with a single pass spray chamber. In the second, they evaluated a demountable direct injection high efficiency nebuliser (d-DIHEN). This work showed that the effect of the chemical form of silicon was very significant, but it could be mitigated by the use of total or near total sample consumption systems, with the best approach being the use of the heated single pass spray chamber with a micro-nebuliser operated at flow rates of below 40 μL min−1.
The determination of isotopes is important for many analyses. The determination of δ34S values with a high degree of precision in materials derived from biological sources is important as this parameter can serve as an indicator of origin. Multi-collector GC- ICP-MS has been employed by Amrani et al. for this analysis in a range of organic compounds.143 Isobaric interferences from oxygen were minimised by employing dry plasma conditions and were clearly resolved under medium resolution. The precision of measured δ34S values was around 0.1 parts per thousand for analytes containing >40 pmol S. It was reported that when only the centre portions of the chromatographic peaks were integrated a significant gain in resolution was achieved. The analysis of the δ34S values of crude oils can yield important information on their origin and this work demonstrated sufficient robustness and precision in the analysis of these complex samples to enable the origin to be confirmed.

2.2.4 Extraction and preconcentration. Developments in sample preparation are of continued importance and appear to be facilitating a renewal of interest in atomic absorption detection. In one paper, a rapid procedure for the ultra-trace determination of Fe and Mn in citric acid fermentation media including beet and cane molasses and raw sugar was reported.144 This study, by Pourhossein and colleagues employed an ultra-sound assisted pseudo-digestion with detection using ETAAS. The paper described the optimal sonication conditions for samples in a concentrated nitric acid and hydrogen peroxide mixture. The results were in good agreement with those from conventional wet chemical digestion procedures and significant time savings were achieved. In a similar procedure, ultrasound emulsification of a range of cosmetic samples prior to analysis by ETAAS, ICP-OES, FAAS and CVAAS for a range of elements was carried out.145 Very stable emulsions were formed and Lavilla et al. showed that the results compared well with those from microwave digestion ICP-MS procedures. A photo-oxidation procedure employing UV radiation and hydrogen peroxide for the decomposition of wine samples, prior to the determination of Fe and Mn by FAAS has been reported by dos Santos and colleagues.146 This paper described the optimisation of the digestion procedure with decomposition of red wine being monitored by the measurement of its absorbance at 530 nm. Excellent precision and recovery figures were reported, with detection limits being around 20–30 μg L−1.Photo-chemical vapour generation as a means of producing volatile analyte species to enhance their detection by means of atomic spectrometry and/or mass spectrometry is emerging as an interesting area. The range of elements amenable to vapour generation using UV radiation is growing and has recently been extended to include volatile I species.147 Grinberg and co-workers found that the presence of low molecular mass organic acids containing KI or KIO3 when exposed to UV radiation produced rapid formation of volatile species, resulting in a 40-fold enhancement in the detection limit for I by ICP-MS. A radical mechanism resulting in the formation of ligands thus giving rise to volatile products was proposed. The identification of the reaction products is fundamental to progress in understanding in this area, and this was the focus of this paper which described some interesting experiments to elucidate the type of reactions which were occurring. Volatile species resulting from the reaction with the various organic acids were identified by GC-MS, facilitated by isotopic labelling experiments. This approach has resulted in a detailed understanding of the chemistry which was occurring and should be useful when developing photo-chemical techniques for generating other volatile species. Volatile organic sulfides and disulfides produced during fermentation processes have a significant effect on the aroma of beverages. Organic Se compounds including dimethyl selenide and dimethyl diselenides are also often present in beverages, particularly in beers, although their contribution to flavour is not documented and their concentrations are usually very low. The simultaneous determination of these and other volatile S and Se compounds in beverages of different matrix compositions was reported.148 Matrix removal and preconcentration was by head space solid phase micro-extraction (SPME) with separation and detection by GC-AED. The SPME procedure, including standardisation, adjustment of alcohol content and the use of internal standards was described in detail, as was the optimisation of the GC-AED parameters. The procedures were validated by the analysis of spiked samples with average recoveries being 95%. Detection limits for most compounds were in the low ng L−1 range, with the notable exception of methionol which was worse by around three orders of magnitude.
Counterfeiting of drugs is a growing problem worldwide and includes products which may contain the correct ingredients in the correct proportions, as well as those containing the wrong ingredients, insufficient active pharmaceutical ingredients or no active pharmaceutical ingredients at all. The World Health Organisation estimates that counterfeit drugs account for 10% of the global market and cost the US pharmaceutical industry US$46 billion annually. Santamaria-Fernandez et al.149 have measured the stable isotope ratios of four elements to detect and discriminate the counterfeit antiviral drug, Heptodin. This approach can measure small variations in the isotopic composition of preparations containing identical elemental compositions and is therefore an important approach for the detection of counterfeit pharmaceutical products. In this study, multicollector ICP-MS for analysis of S isotope amount ratios was employed together with elemental analysis isotope ratio mass spectrometry (IRMS) for the carbon isotope amount ratio. Compared with previous studies, a relatively large number of samples (139 batches and 417 individual samples of Heptodin) were analysed. The isotope amount ratios of C, N and S were measured on the active pharmaceutical ingredient content and of Mg, present in the magnesium stearate and potentially, magnesium silicate excipient, by MC-ICP-MS and elemental analysis IRMS. Authenticity ranges were obtained for each isotope system and were combined to yield a unique multi-isotope pattern for the genuine article. Variation in Mg isotope amount ratios for genuine and counterfeit preparations was found to be similar to the uncertainty of the measurement so the use of this parameter was discarded. Isotope amount ratios of S, C and N however, were very indicative and were combined in a 3-dimensional plot which showed a distinctive cluster for genuine tablets and at least eight groups of counterfeits were easily seen.

2.3 Inorganic chemicals and acids
2.3.1 Certified reference materials, reviews and overviews. Narukawa and co-workers have reported the preparation and certification of an arsenate (AsV) material named NMIJ CRM 7912-a.150 High purity arsenic trioxide powder was dissolved in 0.8 M nitric acid and the AsIII then oxidised to AsV using nitric acid. The result was a material with an approximate concentration of 100 mg kg−1. The material was then divided into 400 bottles (50 mL in each). The exact concentration was then determined using four different techniques, namely ICP-MS, ICP-OES, GFAAS and LC-ICP-MS; and was found to be 99.53 ± 1.67 mg kg−1. The results of an inter-laboratory comparison of B isotope measurements have been reported by Aggarwal and colleagues.151 A set of synthetic standards prepared from enriched and purified isotopic salts was sent to 28 laboratories and analysed using several instrumental analytical techniques. The range in uncertainties between different analytical techniques was similar to that within an instrumental technique. Therefore, there was no obvious systematic offset. Two new standards (JABA and JABB) are now available to all laboratories. The delta B-11 values of the new standards were 10.0 and −23.7 parts per thousand respectively.
2.3.2 Theoretical applications. There have been several publications that have focussed on theoretical or mechanistic aspects of reactions. In this review period, many of these publications have focussed on hydride generation processes. Yang et al. have described the effects of cathodic electrolyte on the performance of electrochemical hydride generation.152 The presence of zinc ions in the potassium sulfate cathodic electrolyte was found to increase the sensitivity of AsIII whilst reducing the impact of cathode erosion on the stability of the signal. The mechanism by which this occurs was discussed in detail. In addition, the electrolytic conditions and effects of interfering ions on the electrochemical HG process were also studied. Precision for 11 replicate measurements of 20 μg L−1 AsIII standards in mixed salt solution and formic acid was 2.2 and 1.5% RSD respectively; whereas LOD were 0.04 and 0.07 μg L−1. A device that may be used to trap As, Bi, Sb and Se hydrides prior to AAS determination has been described by Kratzer and co-workers.153 The authors used the radio-tracers 205Bi, 206Bi and 125Sb to quantify the efficiency of the individual steps of the preconcentration procedure as well as investigating the spatial distribution of the analytes. The trapping efficiency of Sb was >93% with a precision of better than 6% RSD for trapping temperatures between 200 and 800 °C whereas the respective figures for Bi were >96% trapping efficiency with a precision of <5% RSD at temperatures of between 100 and 800 °C. The trapping efficiency was found to decrease to ∼83% when the temperature was raised to 900 °C. The area of the trapping spot increased in proportion with temperature. It was found that up to 400 ng of Bi and 2 μg of Sb could be trapped. The determination of Bi using tungsten trap HGAAS has been discussed by Kula and colleagues.154 The BiH3 gas formed during the HG process was trapped on a tungsten coil at 289 °C. The coil was then heated to 1348 °C releasing the analyte which was transported to a flame heated quartz atom cell. Interferences were studied in detail, with the potential interferants As, Au, Ca, Cd, Cu, Fe, Mg, Mn, Na, Ni, Pb, Se and Zn as well as chloride, phosphate and sulfate at interferant/analyte ratios of 1, 10 and 100 all being studied. For a sample volume of 8 mL, the calibration was linear between 0.1 and 10 μg L−1. The enhancement factor compared with a system without a trap was 21. Certified reference waters were used for method validation with results being in good agreement with certified values. The role of acidity (0.01–5 M) and L-cysteine (0.05–0.2 M) on the mechanism of stannane generation has been studied by Pitzalis et al.155 Different mixing sequences and reaction times were also studied. Detection of any stannane generated was by atomic absorption using a miniature argon-hydrogen diffusion flame. No stannane was produced at high acidity because of the formation of tin substrates and hydridoboron species. The presence of L-cysteine did not affect the production of stannane at low acidity, but it did extend the range of acidity that may be used. This was attributed to the formation of Sn-L-cysteine complexes that also managed to stabilise the Sn in solution at low acidity. The formation of L-cysteine–borane complexes was found not to play any significant role. The interference mechanism of cobalt in the presence of hexacyanoferrateIII during the formation of plumbane with detection using ICP-OES and ICP-MS was investigated by Zheng and co-workers.156 It was found that the formation of nano-scale catalytic and magnetic cobalt borides in the redox system caused the potential for precipitation of FeIII and PbII in solution. A combined masking agent of potassium thiocyanate, oxalic acid and 1,10-phenanthroline worked with the hexacyanoferrateIII, decreasing the amount of boride formed which, in turn, maintained the conditions for plumbane formation. The technique was applied to the determination of Sn in cobalt oxide SRM materials.Han and colleagues have measured L-alpha, L-Beta and total L XRF cross-sections for nine elements (Ag, Cd, I, In, Mo, Nb, Sb, Sn and Zr) using an energy of 5.96 keV.157 Experimental results were compared with theoretical values and were found to be in good agreement. He et al. measured the half-life of 151Sm.158 A samarium oxide sample containing 151Sm was produced by exposing samarium oxide containing 150Sm to the high neutron flux of the heavy water research reactor at the China Institute of Atomic Energy. The number of atoms and the activity of the 151Sm were measured by thermal ionisation mass spectrometry (TIMS) and liquid scintillation counting respectively. The half life was found to be 96.6 years with an uncertainty of 2.4 years.

2.3.3 Forensic applications. Several applications have described the forensic analysis of gunshot residue. The simplest of these applications was published by Fidan and Izgi who determined Sb using a simple and rapid ETAAS method.159 A sampling method using a swab was tested by using adhesive tapes and both cotton rod and bandaged cotton moistened with boric acid. Using an optimised temperature program (ash temperature of 700 °C and atomisation temperature of 1800 °C) as well as a 5% m/v boric acid modifier, the linear range was from 5–40 μg L−1 and the LOD and LOQ were 0.4 and 1.3 μg L−1 respectively. An interference study was also undertaken. Despite extensive optimisation, recoveries of only 70–80% were obtained. A study of gunshot residue collection techniques in which carbon coated adhesive stubs and alcohol swabs were compared has been prepared by Reid and colleagues.160 Particles containing Ba, Pb and Sb were counted. The adhesive stubs showed positive results for all 24 samples whereas the swabs succeeded in only half of the samples. The authors hypothesised why this should be. Gunshot residue has been detected in blowfly larvae and decomposing porcine tissue by LaGoo et al.161 Residue was collected during summer and winter months over a 37 day and 60 day sampling period respectively. Wound samples were microwave digested and analysed for Ba, Pb and Sb using ICP-MS. The three analytes were detected in the blowfly larvae on only day three and four after death, whereas they were detected over the entire 37 day summer sampling period (that actually encompasses all stages of decomposition except skeletonisation) for the tissue. No decomposition was observed during the 60 day winter sampling period. The analytes were present over the entire period in the tissue samples, but there was no blowfly activity and hence these samples could not be analysed.The use of several analytical techniques (LA-ICP-MS, XRF and instrumental neutron activation analysis (INAA)) followed by chemometric analysis of the data obtained (cluster analysis and principal component analysis) has been described by Scheid et al. for the forensic analysis of brick stones.162 The authors validated the procedure by analysing the standard reference materials NIST 679, 98b and 97b. The results obtained using the different analytical techniques were consistent. It was concluded that the combined use of analytical and chemometric techniques was a valuable tool for the forensic examination of brick stones. A similar style of paper has been published by Noguchi and co-workers who used an on-line collection/preconcentration method using a TE-05 chelating resin and ICP-OES detection for analytes in concrete samples.163 Sample weights of 10 mg were used and, after dissolution, the trace analytes Cd, Co, Ni and Pb were preconcentrated on the resin yielding a concentration factor of between 7 and 14. Other analytes (Al, Fe and Mg), which were present at much higher concentration, were determined using ICP-OES directly. Four concrete samples could be discriminated by comparing the elemental profiles.

2.3.4 Analysis of cements and concretes. As well as the paper described above,163 there have been several other applications of the analysis of cements or concretes. Of these, a number have described the analysis of historical mortars or cements. An example is a paper by Donais et al. who used a hand-held XRF instrument to determine analytes in an assortment of mortars and cements from ancient floors and walls.164 Analytes found at measurable concentration were As, Bi, Ca, Fe, Mn, Pb, Rb, Sr, Ti, Zn and Zr and, of these, Ca, Fe, Pb, Rb, Zn and Zr could be used to differentiate among the mortars. Small quantities of Roman mortars and stuccos were analysed using thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), ICP-OES and XRD.165 Principal component analysis was used to choose 10 of the potential 36 variables that could be used and then hierarchical cluster analysis was used to discriminate between the two sample types. Gatta and co-authors succeeded in their attempts at discrimination.Current methods for determining Cl in cements or concretes are time-consuming, expensive or a mixture of both. Since the Cl content in cement/concrete is one of the factors that determines the durability and safety of the material, its quantitative determination is important for these sample types. Two papers have been published that have described the use of LIBS for this purpose. Gondal and colleagues used a Nd:YAG laser at 1064 nm to form plasmas on three different types of cement.166 The operating conditions were optimised and reported. Results from the LIBS analyses were compared with those obtained using a dissolution process followed by ICP-OES analysis. The authors concluded that LIBS was a reliable method for the rapid determination of Cl in cement. Gehlen et al. determined Cl in drill cores by scanning the surface of the core with laser pulses.167 Spectral lines for Cl in both the UV and the IR range were studied. Also studied were the effects of different pressures and gases, with helium at pressures of between 5 and 400 mbar being used as the process gas. In addition, both single and double pulse modes of LIBS were tested. Using pulse energies of several hundred mJ to optimise sensitivity as well as the other optimum conditions and the Cl line at 134.72 nm, a LOD of 0.1% m/m was achieved for Cl in the hydrated cement.
Several other applications of cement analysis have been reported. The feasibility of using an in-situ fusion for the determination of Co, Cr and Mn in Portland cement was explored by Intima and colleagues.168 Sample (200 μg) was weighed into a boat-type graphite furnace platform and then 10 μL of flux mixture (4% m/v sodium carbonate + 4% m/v zinc oxide + 0.1% m/v Triton X-100) was added. After heating to 800 °C for 20 s the melt was dissolved using 10 μL of 0.1% nitric acid. The analytes were then detected using GFAAS that utilised a three-field zeeman technique to cope with the high background signals and to decrease the analytical sensitivity. Analysis of CRMs validated the protocol and the LOD were 0.11, 1.1 and 1.9 mg kg−1 for Co, Cr and Mn respectively. As expected for an analysis that includes weighing out such small masses, the precision was relatively poor (12% RSD for n = 5). Matos and Nobrega used a combination of AAS and spectrophotometry to accomplish Cr speciation in cements.169 Total Cr was determined using FAAS following sample dissolution using a fusion. The CrVI was determined by extracting the samples with an alkaline solution and then reacting the Cr with the chromogenic reagent 1,5-diphenylcarbazide prior to molecular absorption spectrophotometry. The CrIII was determined by subtracting the CrVI concentration from the “total” Cr concentration. A few of the samples were found to contain more than the 2 mg kg−1 CrVI limit which the European Community advises for this sample type.

2.3.5 Other applications. There have been several other relatively simple applications published in this review period. Most of these are best summarised in a Table (Table 3). However, there have been a few more important ones that deserve description in a little more detail. Among these has been a publication by Huang and co-authors who described the determination of I via the spectrum of barium mono-iodide using high resolution continuum source molecular absorption spectrometry in a graphite furnace.170 Several potential molecules were tested (including AlI, GaI, InI, TlI, CaI, SrI and BaI), but the BaI was found to yield the most sensitive signal using 538.308 nm. The presence of high concentrations of Cl, F, Fe, K and Na were found to decrease the sensitivity, but no other spectral interferences were observed. Different forms of I, e.g. iodide, iodate, iodine and organically bound I, were all found to produce identical BaI signal intensity. The LOD was 600 pg and the calibration was linear to 250 ng. Two real samples (an iodide pill and a thyroid hormone pill containing I) were analysed using the technique and the results were compared with those obtained using potentiometric titration and ICP-TOF-MS. Results were broadly in good agreement. Precision for the developed method was very good, being 2% RSD (n = 3). The influence of carrier gas during the analysis of alumina using LA-ICP-MS has been studied by Lee and colleagues.171 The effects of both argon and helium on the signal intensities, precision and ablated particle size were tested. Using a 213 nm laser for ablation, the analytes Fe, K, Mg, Mn, Na and Ti were determined in alumina CRMs. Signals obtained in a helium atmosphere were found to be more stable for samples in the form of both pressed powders and sintered pellets. The ablated particles were larger and more irregular when they had been ablated in argon. This presumably is the reason for the poorer signal stability. An interesting paper by McNaghten and colleagues described the LIBS determination of He and Ar in binary and ternary gas mixtures with nitrogen.172 Significant quenching of the He signal was observed through collisional deactivation of excited species, but this could largely be overcome by either increasing the laser irradiance and/or by decreasing the pressure at which the analysis takes place. Under optimal conditions, the LOD was at the ppm or tens of ppm level whilst the linear range spanned several orders of magnitude. It was concluded that LIBS could potentially be used successfully for other such gaseous applications. A novel approach to determining Cl in acidic medium using total reflection XRF (TXRF) has been presented by Misra et al.173 A known excess amount of silver nitrate was added to the sample to precipitate the Cl as silver chloride. After filtration, the Ag remaining in the supernatant was measured using TXRF with Cd being used as an internal standard. The radiation used was a tungsten continuum at 50 kV and 38 mA and the Ag and Cd k-alpha lines were used for the measurements. The approach was applied to six sodium chloride samples that had been diluted in nitric acid so that the Cl was in the range 1–60 μg mL−1. Precision was better than 10% (using one sigma criterion) and the results deviated from the expected values by less than 15%.
Table 3 Applications of the analysis of inorganic materials




Analyte
Matrix
Technique; Atomisation; Presentation
Comments
Reference




Bi
Sulfur
AFS; Flame; HG
Sample digested using 3 mL nitric acid and 1 mL hydrogen peroxide in a microwave oven within 35 mins. Analytical parameters such as reductant concentration, argon flow rate and acidity were all optimised. Interfering ions were studied. LOD reported as 0.027 μg L−1 and precision (n = 7) was ∼2%. Standard addition recovery was 96.7–106.7%. Method was described as rapid, simple and accurate.
 174 


CrVI
Mixtures of chromium oxide and potassium dichromate
XRF; -; S
Powders of chromium oxide and potassium dichromate ground together, sieved and then presented to instrument. Spectra from each sample mixture were decomposed into two reference spectra (of the two pure materials). Cr k-alpha lines used for analysis.
 175 


Gd
Gadolinium-based NMR imaging agents
OES; ICP; LC
Six species separated using reverse phase chromatography and detected using ICP-OES. Chromatographic details were listed and all six species were separated within 15 mins using an isocratic eluent at a flow rate of 1 mL min−1. Calibration ranges spanned 0.393–78.625 μg mL−1 and LOD was between 8 and 35 ng Gd mL−1. Precision (n = 3) for 3.93 μg mL−1 was <5% RSD.
 176 


 143Nd/144Nd ratio
Several CRMs
MS; ICP; L
Multicollector instrument used. 143Nd/144Nd measured without the need for a Sm separation. Isobaric interference correction of 144Sm on 144Nd using the 147Sm/149Sm ratio to calculate Sm mass fractionation. Mass discrimination corrected for by applying the natural constant 146Nd/144Nd ratio.
 177 


Several (5)
Germanium
AAS, ETV; L
Two procedures for determining Cr, Cu, Fe, Ni and Pb in germanium matrix were described. Procedure one involved cloud point extraction using ammonium pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate (APDC) – Triton X-114. Second procedure volatilised germanium matrix away using chlorine gas. Procedure one led to preconcentration factors of 75–91.5 being achieved. This led to superior LOD compared with the volatilisation method.
 178 


AAS; ETV; S


Various (27)
Table salt
OES; ICP; L
Indium phosphate used to co-precipitate analytes at pH 10. Dissolution of the precipitate using 5 mL of 1 M nitric acid and using In as the internal standard enabled LOD ranging between 0.001 (for Lu) and 0.11 μg (for Zn) in 300 mL of a 10% salt solution.
 179 




Other applications are described in Table 3.

2.3.6 Analysis of nano-structures. The use of nano-materials continues to grow rapidly, with uses as diverse as vehicles for drug delivery, magnetic resonance imaging contrast enhancement, sunscreens and as photoluminescent quantum dots all being found. Numerous papers have described novel preparation methods for such materials or have developed more novel materials and have then used atomic spectrometry to characterise them. Although interesting, these papers do not really advance knowledge in the use of atomic spectrometry and will therefore not be included in the review. This review period has, however, yielded several papers that discussed the analysis of nanostructures in some detail and many have highlighted potential problems and methods of circumventing them. These papers will be discussed in greater detail in this section of the review.
2.3.6.1 Reviews. Three review papers have been published within the last year that covered various aspects of nano-structure analysis. Surface analytical techniques based on electron spectroscopy and mass spectrometry and their role in the characterisation of nanoscopic structures has been discussed by Oechsner.180 In particular, the author discussed the use of secondary neutral mass spectrometry (SNMS); also known as sputtered neutral mass spectrometry. This technique has the ability to obtain extremely highly resolved data; possibly even surpassing the resolution and quantification capabilities of SIMS. The review contained 13 references. A second review on the area of surface analysis was prepared by Baer et al.181 These authors discussed the information that may be gleaned from the analysis of nanoparticles using techniques such as Auger electron spectroscopy, XPS, TOF-SIMS, low energy ion scattering (LEIS) and various forms of scanning probe microscopy, e.g. scanning tunnelling microscopy and atomic force microscopy. The review, containing 112 references, gave examples of the characterisation of nanoparticles and then discussed the limitations/issues that may be encountered from each of the different analytical techniques.Inorganic mass spectrometry as a tool for characterisation at the nano-scale was discussed at length (131 refs) by Fernandez and co-workers.182 The review discussed those techniques that are capable of analysing solid materials directly (and hence provide spatially resolved data). Techniques such as LA-ICP-MS, GD-MS and secondary ion/neutral mass spectrometry were described and compared. The review also discussed the techniques that may be used to characterise the size, composition and the presence of impurities in colloidal materials. The use of ICP-MS for these purposes, especially when coupled with a chromatographic separation system such as HPLC or field flow fractionation, was assessed.
2.3.6.2 Sample preparation and calibration. There have been two applications that have investigated the fundamental aspects of sample preparation and calibration. Clearly, if these are not optimised then inaccurate, insensitive or irreproducible results may be obtained. Decker and colleagues discussed the development of standardised preparation methods for single wall carbon nanotubes.183 The authors used a variety of analytical techniques including SEM, transmission electron microscopy (TEM), atomic force microscopy (AFM), UV-Vis, ICP-MS, neutron activation analysis, thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and Raman spectroscopy. The second of the fundamental papers, by Garcia et al., addressed the potential problems associated with calibration.184 These authors prepared particles using a low temperature desolvation of mono-disperse micro-droplets of analyte solutions and by nanoparticles in suspensions in argon collected on silicon wafers. The desolvation temperature was found to affect the morphology of the nanoparticles, with spherical ones being formed reproducibly (containing unavoidable contaminants) at 150 °C. However, at 200 °C, relatively stable concave, balloon-like particles of up to three micron in diameter were produced. The Au particles were surrounded by a sheath of contaminants. A lengthy discussion of how the morphology of the particles is related to the ratio of evaporation rate to the analyte diffusion rate was presented. The consequences of both size and morphology of the nanoparticles on how well they can be used for calibration processes for ICP spectrometry were also discussed.
2.3.6.3 Analysis of nanoparticles. Several papers have been published that have focussed on the analysis of nanoparticles. The most popular of the techniques used appears to have been LIBS. One example, by Stehrer and colleagues, used LIBS to analyse iron oxide powder.8 A simple powder delivery system was described which enabled analysis of the powder without pre-treatment or fixation. The LA of the loose powder ejected particles and a plasma was generated along the laser beam. Using a flushed nitrogen background, LIBS spectra were obtained by spatially integrated and time-gated measurements. Saha-Boltzmann analysis indicated a plasma temperature of 10250 ± 200 K and an electron number density of 11 ± 3 × 1016 cm−3. Similar figures were obtained from a LIBS plasma formed from a pressed pellet of the same material. Calibration curves for Al, Mn, Ni and Si impurities were obtained yielding LOD of 8, 860, 66 and 15 ppm respectively. Femtosecond LA at 400 and 800 nm and both far- and near-field processing of silicon enabled chemical analysis at the nanoscale.185 By tightly focussing the laser beam in the far-field, Zorba et al. produced craters in the sub-micron range. The crater size was decreased further (to <30 nm) by performing experiments in the near-field through sub-wavelength apertures. The authors attempted to study the minimum crater diameter that could be used to obtain reliable spectral information. According to the authors, the sub-micron craters that could be used were amongst the lowest reported for femtosecond LIBS. A combination of LIBS and a scanning mobility particle sizer has been used by Amodeo and co-workers to determine nanometric and sub-nanometric physicochemical characteristics.186 The coupling of the two instruments was designed to be used for workplace surveillance in industries that produce nanoparticle-based materials. This is because the risk of accidental release is substantial, even though significant research has been undertaken into methods of securing the processes. A technique that can be used in-situ and in real time is therefore very attractive since it would minimise the risk to the workforce of prolonged exposure. A study of the dependence of the LIBS signal on the particle size generated was undertaken using particles as small in size as 1 pm produced by two different particle size generators. Figures of merit such as repeatability and LOD were discussed. It was noted that large time delays for the LIBS signal emergence was observed for samples that had a low particle concentration. Another publication to discuss particle sizes and the relationship with LIBS signal was prepared by Asgill and Hahn.187 Temporal evolution of Si emission from particles ranging from 2.47 to 4.09 μm was evaluated using discrete delay times after plasma initiation of between 15 and 70 μs. Analyte signal was approximately constant regardless of the delay time, indicating that further vaporisation and analyte excitation was not obtained at higher delay times. It was concluded that although some recent studies had indicated that the temporal component of analyte response was extremely important for quantitative LIBS analysis, the present study seemed to demonstrate that an upper particle size limit of between 2 and 2.5 μm was necessary to obtain maximum emission from silica microspheres.Several other methods have been described that have been used to analyse nanoparticles. A simple method for the quantitative determination of Au nanoparticles was described by Allabashi and colleagues.188 After optimisation of the experimental conditions, it was found that Au particles in the size range of 5 to 20 nm could be determined by direct aspiration into an ICP-MS instrument. The data obtained were compared with those obtained using aspiration of an acid digestion of the same material. It was noted, however, that the sample diluent for the slurry method affected the results significantly. Recovery for the Au in the slurry was 93–95% when trisodium citrate was used, but this dropped to 80% when water was used. The LOD was 0.15 μg L−1 Au, which corresponded to a slurry concentration of 4.4 × 109 Au particles L−1 (assuming a mean particle size of 15 nm). No difference in analytical quality was observed over the particle size range studied. Another paper to investigate a method of size characterisation has been prepared by Tiede et al.189 This paper described the coupling of hydrodynamic chromatography (a technique that separates particles in the range 5–300 nm) with ICP-MS detection. A range of Au nanoparticles was first prepared that were sterically stabilised to prevent agglomeration and could be used as external size calibration standards. A study was then undertaken in which Ag nanoparticles were spiked into sewage sludge. Using their coupled instrumentation, the authors demonstrated that a fraction of the Ag nanoparticles survived as single particles in the supernatant. This study was then extended to several other nanoparticle types (titania, silica, alumina and iron III oxide). It was concluded that the coupling of the chromatography system with an ICP-MS instrument used in collision cell mode, could be used to study the environmental fate of these nanoparticle types. The system had the advantages of requiring little sample pre-treatment and being able to analyse samples in the fairly wide range of 5–300 nm in less than 10 min.
Choi and colleagues utilised LA-TOF-MS to achieve isotopic analysis of metallic and coated nanoparticles.190 Particles of gadolinium oxide, nickel, palladium and silica coated with gadolinium were used in the study. A frequency doubled Nd:YAG laser (λ = 532 nm) was used for ablation. Analysis of the Gd coated silica particles indicated that the Gd isotopic abundance was in accordance with the natural ratio. The result is impressive, since the analyte was present at a concentration of 50 ng per particle. The authors noted though that the plates used to load the samples had a significant effect on analytical sensitivity, with tantalum and copper plates giving greater sensitivity than a zinc plate.
According to Alberts et al. the development of highly ordered and self-assembled magnetic nanostructures is arousing increasing interest. Analysis of them is necessary to ensure manufacturing quality and to assist in the optimisation of the filling procedure.191 Both insulating and conducting materials may be analysed directly using the technique of GD-OES. In addition, the technique can also be used for depth-profiling analysis. These authors applied it to the analysis of self-aligned titania nanotubes and self-ordered nanoporous alumina filled with arrays of metallic and magnetic nanowires. The results of the analyses were compared with those obtained using SEM-EDX and the overall conclusion was that GD-OES was a promising technique for such applications.
X-ray techniques have been used by several workers for the analysis of nanostructures. The high sensitivity offered by TXRF, along with grazing incidence X-ray standing waves (GIXSW) has been utilised by von Bohlen and colleagues.192 The influence of coherence length of X-rays from different X-ray sources, the particle form, particle size and distribution were all discussed. Theoretical results obtained through simulations were compared with experimental data. The advantages and limitations of the techniques were discussed for the characterisation of gold and cadmium telluride nanoparticles. Results obtained using TXRF for the determination of Ru and Se that had been impregnated into carbon nanotubes have been evaluated by Fernandez-Ruiz and co-workers who also used ICP-MS to validate the results.193 Acid leaching of the particulates for ICP-MS analysis yielded results, especially for Ru, that deviated by up to 50% and this was attributed to poor/irreproducible recovery during the acid leaching process. A method by which the particulates were introduced to the ICP-MS instrument as a suspension was therefore developed. A suspension was also used for the TXRF analysis. The particulates were kept in suspension using ultrasonic pulses with the homogeneity being checked using SEM and the particle size distribution determined using dynamic light scattering. This latter parameter was found to have a large effect for both the TXRF and ICP-MS measurements. For the TXRF, the nominal concentration determined was unaffected, but the uncertainty varied significantly. Under optimal conditions the TXRF yielded uncertainty values of 5.9 and 2.9% for Ru and Se respectively.

2.4 Nuclear materials
There has been another increase in the number (and quality) of nuclear applications in this review period. As well as the usual selection of environmental studies, several forensic/nuclear safeguard applications have also been reported. There has also been an increase in the number of isotopes that can be determined using accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS).
2.4.1 Forensic/nuclear safeguard applications. The general area of nuclear safeguards and forensics requires a variety of techniques and approaches. One such area is the detection and isotopic analysis of small actinide particles on swabs and in wide area environmental surveillance samples.The use of Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry (SIMS) for the isotopic analysis of single particles of actinide materials is an accepted approach and the dependence of the precision of isotopic determinations on particle diameter has been investigated by Esaka and colleagues.194 Particles of various diameters were selected by SEM, transferred to a glassy carbon planchette using a manipulator and the isotopic composition determined. For small particles (<1 μm diameter), the precision of the isotopic determinations degraded as the number of measurement cycles increased. This was presumably due to erosion of these small particles. This effect was not observed for larger particles (>2 μm). Consequently, it was estimated that to obtain a precision of better than 5% RSD for 235U/238U ratios, at least 4.5 fg of 235U was required. For minor isotope ratios (vs.238U), a precision of better than 20% RSD was obtained from 0.42 fg of 234U and 1.1 fg of 236U.
The use of Laser Ablation in conjunction with MC-ICP-MS was used to determine the isotopic composition of uranium oxide particles separated from environmental samples (soils and dusts) collected from the vicinity of a factory producing uranium articles.195 A total of 115 grains were analysed and all were shown to have isotopic ratios consistent with depleted U. The precision of the measurement of 235U/238U ratios was assessed by the analysis of natural uranite grains and shown to be 0.2% RSD (using two sigma). A different approach using LA coupled to laser-based atomic absorption to determine isotope ratios of individual micron-sized particles was demonstrated for a 152Gd:160Gd system by Bushaw and Anheier.196 In this instrument, two diode lasers were tuned to isotope specific transitions at 405.9 nm (152Gd) and 413.4 nm (160Gd) and directed co-linearly through a LA plume before being wavelength separated on a diffraction grating and detected simultaneously using a pair of photodiodes. The transient atomic absorption signal was detected on a shot to shot basis. The system was tested using Gd foils and mixtures of Gd chloride with isotope ratios (152Gd/160Gd) varying between 0.01 and 0.43. The latter materials were diluted with a river sediment CRM (SRM 435013) to simulate an environmental sample. The system was shown to be capable of detecting a few highly enriched particles in the presence of >100 fold excess of low enrichment material, at trace levels of these particles in the solid diluent (0.08%) and when widely dispersed (1178 particles in 800000 laser ablation shots). The possibility of measuring U enrichment of particles in samples derived from air sampling activities was discussed.
The use of Laser Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy (LIBS) to detect U in bulk samples was investigated by Chinni et al.197 Spectra were obtained under a variety of conditions (air, vacuum, argon) and all exhibited high backgrounds arising from unresolved U emission. The spectra were partially simplified by optimising detector gate delays and the most appropriate line selected in the spectral range 260–800 nm. Double pulse techniques were also tested and shown to enhance detection of U in some cases. A detection limit of U in soil of 0.26% m/m was obtained for a close coupled system and 0.5% m/m obtained for a stand-off system (30 m). Detection of surface contamination was also demonstrated and shown to be dependant upon the substrate with detection limits varying between 13 and 150 μg cm−2. The potential for LIBS in detecting U residues on surfaces as a tool for the detection of illicit activities was discussed.
The provision of low level materials suitable for the estimation of procedural blanks is important in the detection of illicit activities/safeguards to demonstrate the significance and ultimate reliability of the measurements. A new batch of a soil CRM is under preparation (NIST-SRM-4355A, Peruvian soil) and has been certified by Inn and colleagues using mass spectrometry.198 A value for the upper limit (95% confidence) of 239Pu in this material has been assigned at 54000 atoms/g. This measurement was extremely challenging and required careful consideration of a variety of parameters such as blanks, blank correction, isobaric interferences, instrument stability etc.
Although most of the nuclear forensics have concentrated on the determination of actinides, other approaches may offer insights into the age of particles. The techniques of SIMS, SEM-EDX and Raman spectroscopy were used by Kips and co-workers to characterise uranium oxyfluoride particles and the effect of environmental conditions (humidity, temperature, light) on these particles assessed.199,200 Although considerable variation was observed for particles from nominally the same sample, general trends were observed with respect to loss of F. The characterization of U oxyfluoride particles in terms of F content was judged to show some promise on setting bounds upon the age of this type of particle.
The determination of the “age” of radioactive materials, i.e., the time since chemical separation and purification, is not limited to special nuclear materials and is of importance for other radionuclides packaged as sealed sources. The age of 137Cs sources was estimated by the determination of 137Cs and the stable daughter (137Ba) using ICP-MS after separation on Sr-resin (Eichrom Industries, Darrien, Il, USA).201,202 This included a detailed error analysis and the associated uncertainty attached to the age determination. Consideration of this error analysis suggested potential areas of improvement in the analytical process including the application of isotope dilution techniques for quantification.

2.4.2 Other nuclear applications. A number of other interesting reports outside of this broad field of nuclear forensics and safeguards have also featured in the period covered by this review. The range of isotopes that can be determined using Accelerator Mass Spectrometry (AMS) continues to expand and recent developments at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory AMS facility have raised the potential for 90Sr measurements that are competitive with radiochemical procedures.203 The paper by Tumey and colleagues described the introduction of a new detector design and the optimization of key operating parameters that has improved the discrimination of 90Sr vs.90Zr resulting in a reduction in the instrumental background by two orders of magnitude. The current background equates to 4 × 106 atoms (3 mBq) although this was still considered to be a factor of 10 higher than predicted based on the efficiency of the system. Future improvements were predicted including the use of a TOF system to improve the rejection of 90Zr.The coupling of Capillary Electrophoresis with ICP-MS has been used by Topin and colleagues to estimate the formation constants of Np(V) and Pu(V) with a variety of ligands such as chloride and sulfate,204 nitrate205 and carbonate.206 The estimates for the formation constants were consistent, where available, with previous literature values. Similarly, the formation constants of 1:1 complexes of U(VI) and La(III) with oxalate were determined using a similar protocol by Petit et al.207 In a similar vein to the coupling of electrochemical systems to ICP-MS, chemical separation of Pu from aqueous systems has been achieved on a glassy carbon electrode using a flow cell and flow injection.208 The system did not require any reagents apart from dilute nitric acid and good separation of Pu with respect to U could be achieved reducing the effect of UH+ interference on 239Pu determinations. The procedure was rapid and selective.
The application of LIBS in a process control system for the monitoring of a Pu oxide residue surrogate (CeO2) prior to incorporation into Lanthanide borosilicate glasses has been demonstrated by Tripathi and co-workers.209 The method utilized multivariate calibration routines (principle component regression and partial least squares) to reduce the effect of the variable matrix and resulted in a significant improvement in the quantification of analytes. For example, the root mean square error for the determination of Ce improved from 7.46% for a univariate calibration to 2.93% using a multivariate calibration. Similar improvements were observed for Cr, Fe, Mo and Ni.
Table 4 Nuclear applications




Analyte
Matrix
Technique; Presentation; Atomisation
Comments
Reference




 36Cl
Lichens
AMS
 129I also determined (using gamma spectrometry). Analytes determined in lichens collected from close to a reprocessing facility.
 210 


Cs isotopes
Spent fuels
TIMS
Cs isotopic composition determined after chemical separation. Mass fractionation for TIMS measurement assessed by temporal behaviour of 133Cs/137Cs and 135Cs/137Cs ratios. Mass bias effects for MC-ICP-MS assessed by external correction using element of similar mass (Sb, Eu). Results for 133Cs/137Cs and 135Cs/137Cs for the two techniques agreed within 0.2–0.5%.
 211 


MS; ICP; L


H-isotopes
Graphite
SIMS; -; S
Hydrogen isotope retention in graphite wall tiles.
 212 


In, Sb
Fuel (U, Th, U + Th)
AAS; ETV; L
Fuel dissolved and analysed without separation. Matrix shown to enhance signal and consequently, quantification obtained against matrix matched standards (U,Th). Interference study involving 21 interferent metals did not show significant effects. Method applicable between 0.5–25 ppm (In) and 1–20 ppm (Sb).
 213 


 129I, 127I
Chernobyl soil
AMS
Sample pyrohydrolyzed. 127I determined by ICP-MS, 129I by AMS.
 214 


MS; ICP; -


 129I
Ground litter
TIMS
Iodine separated from sample by thermo-chromatography. 129I quantified by ID-TIMS.
 215 


 83Kr
UO2
SIMS
Single crystal of UO2 implanted with 83Kr to test feasibility of determining fission product gas concentrations and distribution in irradiated fuels.
 216 


 237Np
Forrest litter
MS; ICP; -
Pilot study comparing Np content in relation to Pu content (where Pu was determined using alpha spectrometry).
 217 


Np
Dissolver solution
AES; ICP; L
Np separated from dissolver solution by solvent extraction using 2-thenoyltrifluoroacetone in xylene and back-washed into 8M aqueous nitric acid. Standard additions and spike recoveries used for validation. Recovery 99 ± 1%.
 218 


Np, Pu
Soil sediments
MS; ICP; L
Sample dry ashed and residue fused with a borate flux. After dissolution of melt in nitric acid, Np and Pu fractions obtained using a TEVA resin-based separation. Detection using sector field instrument yielded LOD of 1 fg g−1.
 219 


 239Pu, 240Pu
Soil
AMS
Soil core samples from Hubei Province in China were investigated for 239Pu + 240Pu total activity and 240Pu/239Pu.
 220 


 239Pu, 240Pu
Seawater
MS; ICP; L
Semiconductor alpha spectrometry, sector field ICP-MS and AMS study of northeast Atlantic Ocean (nuclear waste dumping site) and northwest Pacific Ocean. No elevated 240Pu/239Pu found in Atlantic, but elevated 240Pu/239Pu in Pacific attributed to nuclear weapons test at Marshall Islands.
 221 


AMS


Pu, U
Coral soils
MS; ICP; L
Samples spiked with tracers (233U, 242Pu), digested in mineral acids and separated on stacked TEVA and UTEVA columns. Detection using multicollector instrument.
 222 


Pu, U
Environmental samples
MS; ICP; L
Analytes separated from sample matrix on TEVA and UTEVA resins before determination on quadrupole instrument with ultrasonic nebulisation. The blanks obtained on clean swipes were 8 fg 239Pu and 1 ng 238U. The method was tested against a sediment CRM (IAEA-384) and gave accurate and precise results for total U, Pu and 240Pu/239Pu, 241Pu/239Pu, 234U/238U and 235U/238U isotope ratios.
 223 


 226Ra
Natural waters and sediment pore water
MS; ICP; -
Thin film diffusive gradient sampling using a MnO2 resin used to accumulate 226Ra. Detection limit of 0.022 pg dm−3 (0.8 mBq dm−3) reported for a 24 h accumulation. Sector field instrument used in low resolution mode for determination. Precision for 2 ng L−1 standard was 1.4% RSD (n = 10).
 224 


 126Sn
Fission product precipitates
ICP-MS
New half-life determination. Sn extracted from dissolved fission product precipitates by solvent extraction using n-benzoyl-n-phenyl-hydroxylamine. Mass concentration and nuclide activity (high resolution gamma spectrometry) of purified fractions determined with high precision and accuracy.
 225 


 233U
Contaminated materials
AMS
 233U used as an alternative marker to 236U for detection of anthropogenic U inputs. Relative abundances of 233U with respect to 238U down to 10−13 can be detected.
 226 


U, U-isotopes
Soil
ICP-MS; TIMS
Total U determined by ICP-MS, high precision isotopic abundance determined by TIMS.
 227 


U
Hanford sediments
XAFS; -; S
Identification of solid U phases.
 228 


XRF; -; S


U
U welds
SIMS, AES
Electron beam welds characterised. Surface composition maps obtained by SIMS to depth of a few μm. Deeper profiles obtained by Focussed Ion beam Milling.
 229 


 236U
Soil
AMS
Soils remote from point sources of anthropogenic U inputs analysed to estimate global fallout of 236U.
 230 


U, U-isotopes
Urine
MS; ICP; FI
FI based separation using TRU resin. Method tested using urine inter-laboratory comparison samples and U isotope CRMs (NBL U020A. NBL U050).
 231 


U, Th
Aqueous
AES; ICP; L
U, Th were pre-concentrated from aqueous solution (pH 5.5) using a silica sorbent modified with 5-nitro-2-furaldehyde. Capacity of sorbent = 47 and 49 mg g−1 for U(VI) and Th(IV) respectively. LOD of 0.3 μg cm−3 reported.
 232 


Various (Lanthanides)
Aqueous
MS; ICP; L
Lanthanides in (III) state separated by Cloud Point Extraction using APDC in 2% Triton X-100.
 233 


Various (Actinides)
Urine
MS; ICP; L
Calcium phosphate precipitation followed by separation of actinides by extraction chromatography. Long lived isotopes determined by ICP-MS (239Pu, 242Pu, 237Np, 243Am, 234U, 235U, 238U). Shorter lived isotopes determined by alpha spectrometry. Chemical yields typically >90%.
 234 


Various (U, Pu, Lanthanides, Cs)
Transmutation targets
TIMS
Sequential elution program used to separate analytes of interest from a predominantly steel element matrix using TRU resin. Fractions obtained using successive aliquots of 2M nitric acid (Cs), 4M HCl (Lanthanides), 0.075 M oxalic acid in 1M HCl (Pu) and 0.1M ammonium oxalate in 0.02M HCl. Multi-collector ICP-MS instrument used.
 69 


MS; ICP; L


Various
Reactor materials
EPMA
Candidate materials corroded in molten NaF/LiF mixture. Gross corrosion products determined by ICP-AES after dissolution of salt. EPMA used to obtain maps and profiles of sections of corroded surfaces. LA-ICP-MS (25 μm spot size) also used to scan across along salt/alloy boundary.
 235 


MS; ICP; LA


AES; ICP; L


W
Carbon
LIBS; -; S
Estimation of the thickness of W deposited on carbon shown to be possible using single pulses. Ablation rate estimated as 0.5–1 μm/pulse. More complex structures also tested, e.g., coating of diamond like carbon on the W deposit but no spectroscopic signal observed.
 236 





3. Advanced materials
3.1 Polymeric materials and composites
3.1.1 Reviews, CRMs and inter-laboratory comparisons. The certification of two CRMs has been described in this review period. One has a relatively low level of the analytes Cd, Cr, Hg and Pb in polypropylene (GBW 08404), whereas the other has higher concentrations (GBW 08405).237 The authors of the report, Feng et al. described how the materials had been prepared by doping blank materials with the analytes in the form of oxides, salts or pigments. The concentrations of the analytes were determined by microwave assisted digestion followed by ID-MS detection. Concentrations of the analytes were in the range 8–1000 mg kg−1. The two materials were then used in an inter-laboratory comparison in which the national metrology institutes of China, Japan and Korea participated. The results of this exercise demonstrated that the certified values were both accurate and reliable. The same analytes in polypropylene were also determined during an inter-laboratory comparison organised by the Inorganic Analysis Working Group of the Comité Consultatif pour la Quantité de Matière. The study was coded CCQM-P106. Ma and co-workers described this work in which 21 laboratories participated.238 The majority of the participants used microwave assisted digestion of the samples as a means of sample preparation, but a variety of analysis techniques were employed including ICP-MS, ICP-OES, ID-MS, AAS, INAA and XRF. Analytical agreement between the participants was reported to be good with results obtained using ID-MS showing particularly good precision. Another inter-laboratory comparison organised by CCQM (CCQM-P114) involved eight national metrology institutes and tested their ability to determine five selected congeners from brominated flame retardants.239 A candidate polypropylene reference material that had been fortified with penta-, octa- and deca-bromodiphenyl ether and deca-bromobiphenyl was used as the study material. The participants in the study used a variety of sample preparation methods and analytical techniques to determine the compounds. The analytical techniques included GC with electron capture detection, GC-MS, GC-MS in the electron capture negative ionisation mode, (GC-ECNI-MS) and LC-ICP-MS. The precision between laboratories was adequate (∼5% RSD) for many of the species, but for compound BDE 206, a precision of 28.5% RSD was obtained.Mahoney has prepared a review of the use of cluster SIMS for characterising polymeric materials (241 refs).240 According to Mahoney, the technique has played a critical role in characterisation studies because it has the ability to obtain spatially resolved surface and in-depth molecular information. The advent of C-60+, Au3+, SF5+ and Bi3+ ions as primary ions has yielded significantly higher yields of secondary ion signals compared with the more traditional primary ions Ar+, Cs+ or Ga+. Depth-profiling studies have also been facilitated using these new ions because the signal does not decay as rapidly as when the more simple species are used. The review discussed the advantages of using cluster ions and described the fundamental processes that occur during the analysis. A review by Belenguer and colleagues focussed on the use of pulsed glow discharges for analytical applications.241 The review (146 refs) was split into two parts with the first focussing on the physical processes occurring during the plasma ignition and the afterglow whereas the second part reviewed the applications using both OES and MS as detection systems. The advantages of the pulsed GD were discussed and the first results of the application of the technique to surface and interface analysis of multi-layers were given.

3.1.2 Fundamental techniques. Polymers are another class of material that can be difficult to bring into solution without recourse to powerful acids and/or harsh digestion conditions. Many applications therefore utilise techniques that are capable of analysing solid materials directly. Some of the more advanced techniques can even achieve depth-profiling studies.Resano and co-workers have compared line source and continuum source instrumentation for the determination of Hg in polymers using the technique of solid sampling GFAAS.242 The authors used eight CRMs (which included polyethylene, polystyrene, polyvinyl chloride (PVC) and acrlyonitrile butadiene styrene) that had a Hg content in the range 20–1100 mg kg−1. The results showed conclusively the advantages of the continuous source instrumentation. Both instrument types required the use of an argon flow during the atomisation stage but when aqueous standards were used for calibration the line source instrumentation succeeded only in the quantitative analysis of polyethylene and PVC. The continuum source instrument obtained satisfactory results for all sample types and the authors attributed this to the higher potential for the correction of high and rapidly changing background signals. In addition, the figures of merit were significantly better for continuum source instrumentation with LOD being 0.6 mg kg−1 compared with 2.2 mg kg−1, linear range covering 10–320 ng of Hg compared with 20–200 ng and the sensitivity also experiencing a marginal improvement compared with line source instrumentation.
Fliegel and Gunther have described the use of a laser ablation particle beam glow discharge TOF-MS (LA-PB-GD-TOF-MS) instrument for the analysis of halogenated polymers and other inorganic materials (glass and metal).243 Particles in the size range of 1 to 3000 μm in diameter were able to be analysed although the authors did stress that the glass and metallic samples were not analysed successfully. They attributed this to the low gas temperature of the helium pulsed GD being incapable of vaporising particles with a high vaporisation or melting point. In contrast, the soft polymers PVC and PTFE yielded excellent results and gave signals for C, Cl, F and H. Molecules such as CxHvFy+ and CxHvCly+ were also identified and enabled a fingerprint of the polymer to be made. An investigation into the influence of laser fluence and glow discharge voltage was also undertaken.
The use of LIBS has continued to increase. Weidman and colleagues used a double pulse system employing a Nd:YAG and then a carbon dioxide laser to analyse polystyrene films.244 The double pulse system yielded an enhanced emission signal compared with a single pulse system using a Nd:YAG laser alone. The double pulse system was then applied to the residues of 2,4,6 trinitrotoluene. A double pulse system has also been discussed by Pal et al. who used a 266 nm laser to form a plasma and a 10.6 μm carbon dioxide laser pulse to enhance the signal by several orders of magnitude.245 The system was applied to the standoff analysis (at distances of up to 55 m) of polymers, ceramics and metals. The temperature of the plasma was also measured and was found to increase by 3000 K when the second laser pulse was used. Another fundamental study of LIBS has been produced by Boueri and co-workers who studied the absorption of laser energy by the plasma during its early stage expansion and discussed how this influences the properties of the plasma and its interaction with ambient air.246 These interactions can lead to problems with recombination reactions that give rise to light emission at wavelengths that may interfere with those from the analytes. The authors studied the analysis of nylon and compared the use of IR laser pulses (1064 nm) with UV laser pulses (266 nm) under a nanosecond ablation regime. A comparison between nanosecond and femtosecond ablation was also made. It was found that in the femtosecond regime, these post-ablation reactions were absent. Jasik and co-workers used a vacuum UV LIBS system employing a F2 laser with a wavelength of 157 nm, a laser pulse duration of 20 ns, a pulse energy of 50 mJ and a repetition rate of 10 Hz for the analysis of polyethylene.247 The spectrometer was capable of measuring down to a wavelength of 115 nm. The LOD was 50 mg kg−1 for S and 215 mg kg−1 for Zn. The plasma formed during the process produced a very high emission signal from both neutral and ionised C and these wavelengths were used to determine the electronic temperature of the plasma (Te). This was achieved using the Saha-Boltzmann plot in which the electron density, derived from the broadening of the hydrogen H-alpha line, was also estimated.
X-ray techniques have also been studied. Nakano and Tsuji discussed the development of a laboratory confocal 3D XRF spectrometer which they used for non-destructive depth-profiling analysis of layered plastic materials and environmental samples.248 Some layered reference materials were prepared by using a spin-coating technique and these layered samples were then used to confirm the depth-profiling capability of the instrument. Three dimensional μ-XRF spectrometry has been used by Schaumann and colleagues to determine analytes in layered polymer systems.249 It was found that in a light matrix the interference effects from the matrix were minimised. Polymer layer systems comprising single layers of ethylene-polypropylene-diene rubber filled with changing concentrations of silica and zinc oxide were constructed. Other techniques including IR microscopy, optical microscopy, ICP-OES and scanning μ-XRF were used on the individual layers/components to verify layer thickness and composition. The results from the 3D-μ-XRF system were then compared with data from these independent methods. Agreement was close enough for the authors to conclude that method validity for their system had been demonstrated. Paynter has produced two papers that reported the utilisation of angle resolved X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (ARXPS) for depth-profiling analysis of plasma-oxidised polystyrene.250,251 In the first of the applications, the data obtained were evaluated using both a 3-parameter and a 10-parameter depth-profile model with and without regularisation. The partially regularised 3-parameter model yielded comparable results to the fully regularised 10-parameter model, but used only one fifteenth of the computing power. In the second of the applications,251 polystyrene films were exposed to nitrogen plasmas for periods of up to eight minutes. The analytes N and O were determined using ARXPS and the depth-profiles fitted using a regularised multi-point linear segment model. The N profile was found to vary according to the duration of exposure to the nitrogen plasma whereas the O profile was more uniform.

3.1.3 Other applications. There have been several other interesting applications published in this review period. Three different sample preparation methods for the determination of halogens in elastomers were compared by Moraes et al.252 Samples included nitrile butadiene rubber, styrene butadiene rubber and ethylene propylenediene monomer. The different sample preparation methods compared included oxygen flask combustion, microwave induced combustion (MIC) and microwave extraction using water or an alkaline solution. For the MIC procedure, 50 mM ammonium carbonate was used as the absorbing solution. Detection of the analytes Br and Cl was achieved using ion chromatography, ICP-OES and ICP-MS. Accuracy was evaluated using CRMs as well as a comparison of results with those obtained using a neutron activation technique. Both the oxygen flask combustion method and MIC (using 5 mins of reflux) led to agreement of better than 95% for both Br and Cl compared with neutron activation although the precision for MIC was superior to the oxygen flask decomposition method (5 and 20% RSD respectively). The microwave assisted extraction proved to be less efficient and led to only 45% extraction efficiency being achieved.The leaching of Sb from polyethylene terephthalate (PET) bottles into still and sparkling mineral waters as a function of time, temperature and light conditions has been assessed by Keresztes and colleagues.253 The total Sb content of the packing material was first determined using SF-ICP-MS as a means of detection, and concentrations of between 250 and 290 mg kg−1 were found. In general, leaching was found to be greater in sparkling water. For experiments that varied the storage conditions (storage time of 10–950 days, temperature 22–70 °C and illumination ranging from dark to 23 W lamp for 116 h) the amount of Sb leached was occasionally found to exceed 2 ng mL−1. It was noted, however, that the Sb leached could vary by an order of magnitude using the same conditions but by using different brands of water. The authors came to the overall conclusion that the selection of the polymer used for the production of the PET bottle ensured that low Sb levels were leached into the water under all conditions. Jiang and co-workers have also addressed the issue of determination of Sb in food packaging materials.254 Cloud point extraction followed by GFAAS was used to determine both SbIII and SbV (the latter being determined indirectly, by subtraction from total Sb concentration). A hydrophobic complex of SbIII with ammonium pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate (APDC) at pH 5 was formed and this entered the surfactant rich phase. The SbV on the other hand, remained in the aqueous phase. The SbIII was diluted with 0.2 mL of nitric acid in methanol (0.1 M) prior to determination using GFAAS. The SbV was reduced to the SbIII form by the addition of cysteine and then “total” Sb could be determined. Parameters such as pH, concentrations of APDC and of Triton X-114, equilibration temperature and time and the sample volume were all optimised. Under optimal conditions, a LOD of 0.02 ng mL−1 SbIII was obtained with a precision at a concentration level of 10 ng mL−1 being 7.8% RSD.
The use of LIBS for the determination of Ba, Cd, Cr and Pb in toys has been reported by Godoi and co-workers.255 The LIBS system used a Nd:YAG laser operating at 1064 nm, an echelle spectrometer and an intensified CCD detector. Operating conditions such as number of pulses, delay time, integration time gate and pulse energy were optimised using a Doehlert design. Results of the analyses were found to correlate “reasonably well” with those obtained using a microwave assisted digestion prior to an ICP-OES analysis. The conclusion was that LIBS produced sufficiently accurate results to act as a rapid screening method for the identification of potentially toxic elements in toys.
Another application used LIBS to determine analytes in organic materials derived from the pyrolysis of plastic wastes.256 Siddiqui et al. compared the results obtained using LIBS with those obtained using ICP-OES. Many analytes were found to be present at higher than permissible “safe limits”. These analytes and their respective concentrations (in mg kg−1) were Ag (901), Al (522), Cd (378), Co (628), Fe (231), Mn (167), Ni (558), Pb (325) and V (275). Bezati and co-workers257 used XRF spectrometry to determine rare earth oxides for the identification of polymeric materials. The REE oxide had been added to polypropylene in an attempt to make its identification more rapid during the end of life re-cycling process. Oxides of Ce, Dy, Er, Gd, Nd, Y and Yb at different concentrations were used. The procedure was optimised and it was found that it was possible to detect five of the seven tracers using a concentration of 1000 mg kg−1 and an acquisition time of one minute. A third paper describing analysis of plastic wastes was prepared by Dimitrakakis and colleagues who detected heavy metals and halogens in plastics from electric and electronic waste.258 A hand-held XRF spectrometer as well as AAS and ion exchange chromatography were used for the analysis. Unfortunately, it was concluded that precise estimates of the contents could not be made and the authors recommended the development of suitable standards and reference materials.
A simple and reliable method for the determination of Cd, Cr and Pb in plastic materials was developed by Longas and co-workers.259 The optimal conditions were determined using a 2(6–3) factorial design for screening the significant factors and a 2(3) central composite design for the optimisation of these significant variables. The CRM ERM-EC680 polyethylene was used for the optimisation process. The optimal conditions were found to be 0.3 g of material digested in 4 mL of nitric acid at 155 °C for 30 mins followed by the addition of perchloric acid (1 mL) and further digestion at 175 °C for 20 mins. Flame AAS was used for the determinations and the recoveries ranged from 94.1% (for Pb) to 99.1% (for Cr). Precision was reported as being better than 7% RSD, the worst of which was for Cr; whilst LOD were 1.3, 3.9 and 3.9 mg kg−1 for Cd, Cr and Pb respectively. The method was applied to several packing materials as well as toys.
The last application to be discussed in this part of the review concerned the characterisation of nano-clay materials used in biopolymer composites.260 Schmidt and co-workers discussed how these materials are expected to compete with fossil fuel-derived plastics in the future and then set about characterising the nanoparticulates by coupling asymmetrical field flow fractionation with both ICP-MS and multi-angle light scattering detection. The biopolymer nano-composite used was polylactide with 5% cloisite (R) 30B (a derivatised montmorillonite clay) as a filler. The nanocomposite was soaked in 95% ethanol as a simulated foodstuff and it was found that particles with radius in the range 50–800 nm migrated to the ethanol. However, it was noted that the clay minerals were not present in the migrated material and hence that the clays were not leached into the ethanol.

3.2 Semiconductors, superconductors and electronic materials
The number of applications in this research area continues to be substantial with numerous groups making products in the hope of finding a more efficient material. The reliability and yield of such materials depends greatly on the presence of impurities (especially at the surface). The analysis of these materials therefore requires characterisation using atomic spectrometric techniques that should, ideally, be highly sensitive and specific. Many research groups have used SIMS (and other techniques) to elucidate mechanistic aspects of how the materials work or why they exhibit their characteristics. These papers are numerous and although they may describe the development of novel products, they do not advance the knowledge of atomic spectrometry. As such, they will not be discussed further in this review. Instead, those papers that discuss some new method of analysis or advance the use of existing methods will be described. One aspect that is evident is that the electronics industry is one of the driving factors behind instrument manufacturing companies striving to produce ever more sensitive instrumentation that is also capable of analysis at increased depth or spatial resolution.
3.2.1 X-ray-based techniques. Numerous X-ray-based techniques have been described in the literature. Two papers have described the use of several different techniques. A paper by Erko and Zizak described the use of “hard” X-ray techniques at the Berliner Elektronenspeicherring für Synchrotronstrahlung II (BESSYII) that are capable of micro- and nanometer spatial resolution.261 Techniques such as μ-XRF, micro-extended X-ray absorption fine structure (μ-EXAFS), micro-X-ray absorption near edge structure (μ-XANES) as well as X-ray standing wave (XSW) and X-ray beam induced current (XBIC) used in conjunction with μ-XRF were all discussed since they are powerful synchrotron-based methods capable of characterising both organic and inorganic materials. Using mono- and polycapillary optical systems it was possible to focus X-rays down to 1 pm spot size with monochromatic and white synchrotron radiation. Polycapillary-based confocal detection enabled μ-XRF to obtain volume resolution of 3.4 × 10−6 mm3. Standing wave excitation and waveguides used with μ-EXAFS enabled a depth resolution of approximately 1 nm. The paper discussed several applications of such techniques for both biological materials and metal-semiconductor interfaces. Another paper that has discussed the use of a multitude of X-ray-based techniques has been prepared by Trushin and co-workers.262 These workers deliberately contaminated block cast multi-crystalline silicon with impurities and then determined these impurities' interactions using XBIC, μ-XRF and μ-X-ray absorption spectroscopy (μ-XAS). The silicon nitride (Si3N4) and silicon carbide (SiC) particles found at the upper part of the multi-crystalline blocks were found to act as sinks for Cu and Fe impurities with the Fe being equally distributed between the two types of sink whereas the Cu precipitated in significantly larger quantities at the silicon carbide inclusions rather than at the silicon nitride rods. The copper precipitates were identified as being copper rich silicides. Annealing at 950 °C, that is known to increase the presence of oxygen, was also found to enhance the formation of iron disilicide particles both in the grains and at the grain boundaries.Two research groups have discussed the use of grazing incidence-XRF (GIXRF). Two papers by a German group have discussed the necessity of using GIXRF as a complementary depth-profiling technique to SIMS since the latter technique is beginning to struggle to achieve the resolution required for ultra-shallow junction applications in complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) technologies.263,264 In one of these papers,263 the authors discussed how GIXRF used in conjunction with XSW on flat samples may be used as a tuneable sensor to obtain information about the implantation profile. This possibility arises because the in-depth changes in XSW intensity are dependent on the angle of incident radiation. Silicon wafers implanted with either As or B at different fluences and implantation energies were used as the samples and the results obtained for the depth-profiles compared with those obtained using SIMS. The GIXRF measurements were obtained using monochromatised undulator radiation of well characterised radiant power and spectral purity. Use of an “absolutely calibrated energy dispersive detector” for the acquisition of the B (K-alpha) and As (L-alpha) radiation enabled the determination of the total retained dose of impurity. Depth-profiles were obtained by using calculations and by comparison with the angular measurements of the XRF. In the second of the two papers264 soft GIXRF was used as a comparative technique for SIMS that used an ultra-low energy oxygen ion beam (0.35–0.5 keV) to characterise ultra-low energy (0.2–3 keV) B implants in single crystalline silicon. The SIMS analysis utilised an approach whereby the primary beam oblique incidence and ultra-high vacuum analysis atmosphere were investigated because it was expected that they would provide better accuracy of the B profile, especially in the region between the surface and the native oxide/substrate interface. Roughening of the surface of the crater usually poses a problem with SIMS analyses, but the authors largely overcame these problems by rotating the sample during the ion sputtering process. This led to decreased roughness and improved erosion rate stability. This, in turn, led to a more accurate depth-profile being obtained. A third application to use GIXRF has been reported by de Carvalho and co-workers.265 These workers used the technique alongside theoretical calculations to evaluate the interactions between Au and Cu atoms and the clean silicon surface. Using optimised conditions, in terms of geometries and energies, on different adsorption sites indicated that the binding energies were very high; i.e. that there was a strong interaction between the metals and the surface silicon. There was good agreement between the results of theoretical calculations and the experimental data with both indicating that the Au interaction with Si was greater than that of the Cu.
The related technique of grazing emission XRF that uses synchrotron radiation excitation has been discussed in two papers by a joint Polish, Swiss and French consortium.266,267 The ultra-low level Al impurities on a silicon surface were determined using high resolution grazing emission-XRF. By observing the Al K-alpha line in the resonant Raman-scattering background-free region and by choosing an appropriate beam energy below the silicon absorption edge, an Al impurity level of 1012 atoms cm−2 was determined. By combining the two techniques of grazing emission-XRF and vapour phase decomposition, the authors managed to detect Al at a concentration of 107 atoms cm−2. It was therefore concluded that the technique was a very sensitive method of determining the morphology of surface nanostructures.
Several other X-ray-based techniques have been described in the literature. A paper by Icelli et al. attempted to identify whether or not there was a relationship between linear differential scattering coefficients and the scattering angle.268 Wafers of gallium arsenide and both n- and p-type silicon semiconductors were used as samples where an energy beam of 60 keV was used at 10 degree increments between 60 and 120° to determine the coefficients using EDXRF as a means of detection. The authors compared the experimental results with data obtained using relativistic and non-relativistic theoretical calculations. This was, reportedly, the first time that the linear differential scattering coefficients have been determined using an energy of <100 keV and so the findings could not be compared with any results in the literature.
X-ray absorption fine structure (XAFS) was used by Yamazaki and colleagues to characterise the local structure around shallow As implants in silicon.269 A high brilliance synchrotron radiation beam from an in-vacuum type undulator was evaluated for obtaining the fluorescence yield. In addition, the performance of both a wavelength dispersive spectrometer and an energy dispersive spectrometer based on a silicon drift detector were evaluated. The wavelength dispersive spectrometer gave a superior performance in terms of reduced scattered background signal (because of the higher spectral resolution) and a higher counting rate. The use of XAFS using undulator X-rays with a wavelength dispersive spectrometer enabled very sensitive measurements to be made.
Although SIMS is generally regarded as being one of the best methods of depth-profiling and, because of its high sensitivity and large dynamic range, a very suitable method for the direct measurement of dopants; it does suffer from some drawbacks. The technique of low energy electron induced X-ray emission spectroscopy (LEXES) is a versatile, sensitive technique that can be used in-line for the measurement of thin layer composition and dopant dosimetry. A comparison between SIMS and LEXES for shallow As dose measurements on patterned 300 mm wafers was made by Ehrke et al.270 Five neighbouring dies were measured first using LEXES and then using SIMS. Repeatability of the measurements was impressive with RSD for both techniques being better than 0.5%. This was sufficiently precise to be able to determine non-uniformity between dies. In addition, both techniques were capable of discriminating between nominal doses between wafers, even when the dose differed by no more than 3%.

3.2.2 SIMS and TOF-SIMS measurements. As discussed briefly in the last section, SIMS is one of the most popular and capable techniques for measuring dopant doses and for depth-profiling studies. Numerous papers have been discussed in the literature that reported the use of SIMS to characterise newly prepared materials. These papers therefore reported the routine use of SIMS and will not be discussed at any length in this review. Instead, papers that used different primary ions or abnormal operating conditions, or reported novel methods of analysis, will be discussed in greater detail.
3.2.2.1 SIMS analyses. The influence of the primary ion beam irradiation conditions on the depth-profile of hydrogen in tantalum films has been studied by Asakawa and colleagues.271 Deuterium was implanted in a tantalum oxide/tantalum/tantalum oxide structure and then analysed using SIMS with a number of different primary ions. The use of caesium or argon primary ions was found to desorb the deuterium into the vacuum chamber. The use of oxygen primary ions yielded very different results compared with those obtained using caesium or argon ions. In addition, the data were also found to be dependent on the incidence angle of the oxygen ions. Berghmans and Vandevorst studied the effects of oxygen flooding on the ultra-low energy SIMS depth-profiling of silicon using a caesium primary ion beam.272 The sputtering yield of Si was found to be extremely sensitive to minute amounts of added oxygen. At the concentration range of oxygen added (10−9–10−8 mbar) the increase in Si yield could not be explained through the full oxidation. The authors proposed a mechanism whereby the oxygen becomes adsorbed to the surface and that the presence of this oxygen provides sites for the caesium ions to become attached, hence increasing the retention capacity significantly. In addition, the presence of the oxygen promoted desorption of Si from the surface, increasing the secondary ion yield. Jiang and Sieloff have described a novel method of determining the thickness of ultra-thin silica films by using dynamic SIMS determinations with a primary ion beam of oxygen.273 Previous methods have experienced difficulties when measuring the thickness of such films with accuracy when they are below 2 nm. The method reported in this paper used a 16O2+ primary beam and then detected 18O2− as the secondary ion for silica. The matrix effect from a silicon/silica/silicon stack was proved to be eliminated and the high ion yield of 18O2− and negligible interference from 16OH2− meant that the total O in the film could be measured with good sensitivity and accuracy. The assumption was that the silicon oxide was stoichiometric (a reasonable assumption since these materials are grown with dry oxidation), so converting the O signal into a measurement of SiO2 thickness was straightforward. The angular distribution of As and Ga sputtered from gallium arsenide (1 0 0) by a caesium ion beam under different impact energy (2–10 keV) and angle of incidence (30–60°) was measured by Verdeil et al.274 The angular distributions of emitted matter were determined by means of depth-profiles. The emitted matter was found to be sputtered preferentially in the direction of the ion beam with other ions scattered around this angle. It was noted though that the amount of As and Ga was not uniform at all angles. A decrease in the As/Ga ratio was observed around the direction of preferential emission and this was found to increase for oblique emission for different conditions of primary bombardment. It was concluded that, since the angular distribution depends on the depth of origin, the bombardment of the sample with caesium ions changes the stoichiometry of the near surface layers. The As was enriched in the outermost layers and, because of its preferential sputtering, it was impoverished at lower layers. A quantitative SIMS method for determining very high concentrations of B (up to 20%) in silicon using an isotopic comparative method has been described by Dubois and colleagues.275 The method was based on the simultaneous measurement of two different isotopes (10B and 11B) where the concentration of the first isotope (which is present at far lower concentration than the other) is determined and then the concentration of the second isotope calculated accordingly. Both argon and oxygen were tested for use as the primary ion beam but it was found that at an energy of 8 keV, the oxygen beam led to significant matrix interference effects. These were found to be almost absent when an argon beam of the same energy was used.
3.2.2.2 TOF-SIMS analyses. The technique of TOF-SIMS has high sensitivity giving a high yield of secondary ions whilst providing lateral resolution at the sub-micron level. In many studies though, it is still used as a qualitative or semi-quantitative tool. Static TOF-SIMS has been used by Ravanel and co-workers for the analysis of micro-electronic devices in two publications.276,277 In the first of these, the authors discussed the use of relative sensitivity factors to convert the normalised ion intensities into reliable concentration data. Samples deliberately contaminated with the anionic species Br, Cl, P and S were analysed using TOF-SIMS and the results compared with those obtained using other established surface analytical techniques (TXRF, vapour phase decomposition ICP-MS and liquid phase extraction ion chromatography). The TOF-SIMS method was found to provide more reliable and precise data than any of the other techniques for all of the analytes studied and hence also proved to be more versatile. In the second of the two papers277 several multi-nuclear primary ions (Aun+, SF5+, Bin+ or C60+), that had previously shown distinct advantages compared with mono-atomic sources such as gallium, were used for the analysis of micro-electronic components. The influence of the number of atoms in the primary cluster ion on the formation of the secondary ions was first determined by analysing samples of di-isononyl phthalate and perfluoropolyether. It was noted that a drastic increase in secondary ions was produced and hence a lower LOD was obtained when using a polyatomic primary ion. The yield of the higher mass species was also enhanced indicating that there was less fragmentation. This led to the conclusion that either the energy of the primary ions is spread more evenly or that there is a lower energy per incoming ion. A multi-nuclear bismuth ion was used to bombard a reference thermally grown silicon oxide sample. The amount of information depth provided was decreased with increasing number of bismuth atoms in the primary ion cluster. Molecular depth-profiling of multi-layer structures composed of organic semiconductor materials using large argon cluster primary ions has been reported by Ninomiya and colleagues.278 Materials such as tris(8-hydroxyquinoline)aluminium and 4,4′-bis(N-(1-naphthyl)-N-phenylamino)biphenyl were analysed using a linear type TOF mass spectrometer with Ar700+ ions at an energy of 5.5 keV being used as primary ions. The interfaces between the organic layers were clearly distinguished. The effect of temperature on the diffusion in these samples was also studied using the cluster argon primary ions. It was found that diffusion of the aluminium-based compound started at lower temperatures than the other material. The authors concluded that the use of large gas cluster ions had very great potential for molecular depth-profiling studies of such materials. Different primary ions used at different energies for sputtering samples was also studied by Goacher and Gardella.279 Both caesium and C60+ were tested as primary ions to evaluate the sputter yield and depth resolution on samples of a gold/silicon model system of an interface between metals and semiconductors. In addition, multi-layers of aluminium gallium arsenide, aluminium and indium arsenide in gallium arsenide were also analysed to explore the ability of C60+ ions to analyse the interfaces in gallium arsenide. It was concluded that although a caesium primary ion at an energy of 1 keV provided the best depth resolution the overall best primary ion was C60+ because it caused less surface roughening, enabling deeper heterolayers in gallium arsenide to be analysed and also provided higher sputter yields.The same research group also studied the diffusion of Mn in gallium arsenide samples that had been annealed at temperatures of between 200 and 400 °C.280 The quantitative diffusion information was obtained by calibrating the Mn concentration to ion-implanted standards and the depth scale to profilometry measurements and the information obtained enabled the calculation of diffusion coefficients and the activation energy. Low doses of Mn (1.35 × 1015 atoms cm−2) indicated that Mn was increased in the top 5 nm of the sample but that no further diffusion was observed up to a temperature of 350 °C. Higher doses (8.1 × 1015 atoms cm−2) found that diffusion was initiated at temperatures of 300 °C and that higher annealing temperatures led to greater diffusion. In the last of the papers reviewed in this section, the authors, Saleem et al. used a linear TOF-MS instrument to analyse a laser ablated plume of material from the surface of the superconducting material Bi1.6Pb0.4Sr2Ca2Cu3Oy.281 The TOF-MS spectrum demonstrated the presence of all of the atomic species of the target material as well as their monoxides and cluster ions. The authors concluded that the presence of cluster ions indicated the evidence of aggregation processes at higher laser fluence. In addition, the effects of laser wavelength were also determined, with the fundamental, second and fourth harmonic wavelengths (1064, 532 and 266 nm respectively) of a Nd:YAG laser being tested. Maximum ionisation was observed at 266 nm even when lower laser fluence was used. The results of the effects of laser fluence on the total and individual ionic yields in the ablated species were presented in full.

3.2.3 Laser-based techniques. Several papers have reported the use of lasers during the analysis of electronic components. Of these, three have used LA as a means of sample introduction for ICP-MS analysis. A paper by Asogan described the design of an open sampling cell that could be used for LA-ICP-MS.282 The cell was capable of holding large planar samples, embedded planar samples and samples of less than 2 mm mounted on a planar platform. It was tested using the CRM NIST 613 and the “washout” was found to be very rapid, with 99% of the analyte signal being obtained after 3.6 s. In addition, good precision and low LOD were also obtained. The design of the cell was given in detail. Essentially, it used a dual, annular, micro-jet gas flow array to exclude atmospheric gases and to entrain the ablated sample aerosol. Among its many attributes, the cell's micro-jet array had the facility to be electrically biased and so could be used for extracting charged plumes, e.g., those obtained using matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionisation (MALDI) or desorption electrospray ionisation (DESI) applications. The cell also had the facility of dual sample output channels and so could be attached to two different analysers simultaneously. The authors described a list of applications that the cell could potentially be useful for and this list included the analysis of silicon wafers.Metal imaging on the surface of micro- and nanoelectronic devices using LA-ICP-MS has been developed by Zoriy and co-workers.283 Selected metal analytes (including Au, Cr, Ti and Pt) were mapped using LA-ICP-MS on the surface of inter-digitated electrode array chips. The metal maps were found to be in good agreement with the corresponding micro- and nanofabricated metal pattern. The authors used a nitrogen fluoride laser in the near-field to obtain resolution at the nanometer range. Use of a thin silver needle to enhance laser beam energy was found to improve the resolution further; with a factor of x100 improvement being obtained when the needle was placed in the “near-field region”. Precision (n = 5) yielded a precision of 16% RSD.
Depth-profile analysis has been achieved using LA-ICP-MS by Dargel and colleagues.284 Copper indium selenide doped with gallium (so called CIGS) solar cells on flexible glass fibre substrates were investigated to determine whether or not migration of compounds from the substrate through the back contact layer to the absorber layer occurred. By careful optimisation of the fluence and repetition rate of the laser, the authors managed to obtain a depth resolution that was sufficient for the analysis. Apart from Na and Ti, no other elements were found to have migrated into the absorber layer. Results obtained by using LA-ICP-MS were confirmed by those obtained using PIXE.
The last paper to be reviewed here used a simple LIBS system to obtain large area images to detect H2 leaks from hydrogen fuel cells to ambient air.285 A Nd:YAG laser was used at a wavelength of 532 nm and for a duration of <1 ns (produced by a stimulated Brillouin back-scattering cell). The laser beam was then focussed onto the H2 leak using relay-imaging optics. The light emitted from the plasma so generated was collected using a 2 m long macrolens assembly with a 90 mm diameter image area and the H-alpha (Balmer-alpha) light isolated using two 100 mm diameter interference filters with a 2 nm bandpass. The light was then detected using a thermoelectrically cooled CCD camera. Photo-ionisation of water vapour in the air also gave rise to a strong H-alpha background signal, but this was overcome by using pure nitrogen as a buffer gas. The potential for detecting He, Ne or Xe gas leaks was also investigated.

3.2.4 Environmental applications. This review period has seen an increase in the number of applications that have attempted to determine potential environmental contaminants arising from used electrical components. Much of the analytical atomic spectrometry used is actually fairly routine, but some of the papers have been reviewed here simply to highlight that some of the potential environmental problems are being addressed.Incineration of batteries may lead to toxic elements being released into the atmosphere. A paper by Almeida and co-workers put used AA alkaline batteries in a refractory steel tube in a horizontal electric furnace (at 1273 K) and then introduced oxygen at a constant rate.286 The gaseous emission were passed through a filter system and then through two bubbler flasks containing 10% nitric acid. These nitric solutions were then analysed for a suite of 13 trace metals as well as S and Cl using AAS, gravimetry and the Volhard method respectively. The metal with the greatest emission was Zn, with approximately 6.5% of the total present in the battery being emitted. Other components present at high concentration in the battery (Fe and Mn) were found to have negligible emission. The volatile element Hg potentially provided the greatest problem, because it was found to be present even in the second bubbler system. A total of 36% of the Cl present in the battery was found in the bubbler system contents. The authors discussed their findings and used thermodynamic calculations to explain the processes occurring. A second paper also considered heavy metal characteristics in batteries.287 On this occasion, waste portable batteries (lithium ion and nickel metal hydride) of the type used in mobile phones were disassembled and the components prepared using EPA method 3050B. The metal (Cd, Co, Cr and Ni) contents were then determined using AAS. The lithium ion batteries contained higher concentrations of Co whereas, unsurprisingly, the nickel metal hydride batteries contained higher concentrations of Ni. In the cathodes of the batteries, both of these analytes were found to exceed the toxicity threshold limit concentration used in toxicity characterisation of solid wastes (Co = 8000 and Ni = 2000 mg/kg), although the printed circuit boards were found to contain less. It was concluded that the batteries should be treated and handled as toxic material and that a well-coordinated strategy for spent batteries is required to prevent release of such high levels of toxic heavy metals to the environment. Torrance and colleagues have investigated the liquid waste produced from semiconductor wafer processing.288 Waste slurries from gallium arsenide wafer processing at three plants were collected and compared with slurries prepared in the laboratory. The slurries were analysed using ICP-MS for their As and Ga content and the sources of the contaminants identified. The As was found to originate from the wafer thinning process whereas the Ga originated from wafer polishing processes. Slurries obtained after the lapping process were found to contain significantly lower levels of As, but a higher concentration of particulate matter. All of the waste streams were regarded as hazardous because of their As content and also because of their solids content. Treatment was therefore necessary before the material could be discharged or disposed of. It was estimated that a total of 93% of the material is discharged over the entire gallium arsenide manufacturing process; with very little recycling occurring. Although the Ga could, economically, be recovered from the waste streams, the As is usually placed in land-fill waste. The authors made some recommendations for handling the waste. It was emphasised that although the material is disposed of, the amounts of hazardous waste generated is miniscule in comparison with other industries. Nevertheless, sustainable practices are needed to minimise the environmental impact of gallium arsenide manufacture.
Exhaust gas, liquid products and the residue all produced from pyrolysis of printed circuit boards have been characterised by Chiang and colleagues.289 The pyrolysis procedure is designed to recycle metals and brominated compounds, but may be an environmental hazard if it is inefficient. Material was crushed into pieces of 4–4.8 mm in size and then pyrolysed at temperatures ranging from 200 to 500 °C. The liquid, solid and gaseous products were then analysed using ICP-OES, ICP-MS and GC-MS. It was found that trace metal content in the liquid phase was low and that the only significant components of the gaseous exhaust were carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, methane and phenol. Other components, e.g., brominated and chlorinated compounds (dichloromethane, bromophenol etc.) as well as low molecular weight volatile organic compounds (methanol, acetone, ethyl acetate, propene, propane, etc.) were present at the ppm range.

3.2.5 Thin films and depth-profiling. Although an attempt has been made to keep thin films applications separate from other electronic ones, several have been reviewed in the previous section. It is therefore advisable that the reader consult previous sections so that a more complete overview of work in the area is obtained. As usual with the analysis of thin films, virtually all of the analysis techniques have analysed the solid material directly. One notable exception to this was published by Lorge and Houk who described the use of “controlled dissolution” for the depth-resolved multi-elemental analysis of silicon dioxide layers.290 Varying dissolution time and hydrofluoric acid concentration enabled the dissolution of layers from NIST 610 glass that were as thin as 7 nm deep. After dilution of the dissolved layer, the analytes were determined using a conventional multicollector ICP-MS instrument. The actual amount removed from the surface was calculated by determining the concentration of a major element, e.g., Ca in the digest. A suite of analytes (Cd, Ce, Co, Cr, Dy, Er, Mn, Sr, U, Yb and Zn) were determined and all but Zn showed good agreement with certified values, even when a layer only 7 nm thick was analysed. Other analytes could not be determined in a layer this thin, but did provide accurate results when thicker layers (15, 30 and 500 nm) were analysed. The Zn results proved to be high throughout and the authors attributed this to either contamination or to the preferential extraction of Zn when compared with the Ca.
3.2.5.1 Reviews, overviews and comparisons. There have been several reviews of the analysis of thin films during this review period. Fortunately, the different reviews have covered many of the different analytical techniques used and so the reader interested in such applications may obtain a good overall view of the work that has been achieved in the area. A review by von Bohlen (75 refs) discussed the use of TXRF for such applications over the last four decades.291 The history, theory, instrumentation, sample preparation and applications were all summarised and new developments and future trends discussed. Surface analysis by imaging mass spectrometry is a topic that has been reviewed by Vidova and colleagues.292 Approximately 120 references were cited and these covered techniques such as SIMS, matrix assisted laser desorption/ionisation-mass spectrometry (MALDI-MS), desorption electrospray ionisation-mass spectrometry (DESI-MS) and LA-ICP-MS. A short historical perspective was presented and then the four techniques were compared. The application of pulsed glow discharges to materials analysis has been studied by several research groups over the last 20 years but, despite having several advantages over the continuous mode, they have not really been applied routinely.241 A paper by Belenguer and co-workers has reviewed (with 146 refs) the use of these pulsed GD. The review first described the physical processes that occur during the plasma ignition and the afterglow, with the evolution of electrons and of sputtered atoms in both phases being discussed along with how these relate to the excitation and ionisation processes. The second part reviewed the applications (both –OES and –MS detection) for pulsed GD. The first results of the analysis of polymer multi-layers were demonstrated. One last review of the more general subject area of inorganic mass spectrometry as a means for direct solids analysis has been presented by Pisonero et al.293 The techniques of GD-MS, LA-ICP-MS, SIMS and secondary neutral mass spectrometry (SNMS) were discussed critically giving examples from 146 references. Applications from fields as diverse as environmental wastes, biological materials, geochemical materials, coatings and semiconductors were all discussed.Concentration depth-profiles may be obtained using various analytical techniques and Wang and co-workers have compared the depth resolution obtainable using Auger electron spectroscopy, XPS and TOF-SIMS.294 The authors used a sample of sputter deposited Si/Al multi-layers as well as a model capable of accounting for broadening that arises because of the effects of atomic mixing, preferential sputtering or surface roughness.
3.2.5.2 LIBS applications. The use of LIBS for depth-profiling or for the analysis of thin films is a fairly recent development. In this review period, two publications have attempted the use of slight variants of the LIBS technique. Tereszchuk et al. obtained depth-profile information from layered samples using a combined GD-LIBS system.295 For normal LIBS applications, the laser ablates the sample and then emitted light is detected from the localised plasma. Sometimes, a second laser pulse may also be used to excite the analytes in the plasma further so that increased sensitivity can be obtained. In this application, Tereszchuk and colleagues used the LIBS laser to ablate the sample but then used a microsecond pulsed GD to excite the ablated material. This combined approach was reported to offer several advantages including the use of much lower laser energy. If the laser energy used was below the excitation and ionisation threshold, then it could be used solely for the ablation process, which should lead to improved depth resolution. The authors illustrated their technique by comparing the results obtained for the analysis of steel and brass samples using the GD-LIBS system and a standard LIBS setup. In the second application, Surmenko and co-workers used a LIBS system that utilised an axicon optical system for the analysis of thin films.296 An axicon is a specialized type of lens which has a conical surface that images a point source into a line along the optical axis, or transforms a laser beam into a ring. The axicon system provided a smaller crater depth than that obtained using a standard spherical lens and hence improved depth-resolution could be obtained. An additional advantage was that the zone of thermal effect around the crater was also reduced.
3.2.5.3 X-ray-based applications. Numerous X-ray-based techniques are used in analytical chemistry and most of these have found application in the field of thin film analysis. The speed of an analysis is very important, especially in industry where any delay can have a significantly deleterious effect on profit. Any attempt at improving sample throughput is therefore welcomed. Improving sample throughput was the subject of a study by Gregoire and colleagues who developed instrumentation capable of simultaneous measurement of diffraction images and fluorescence spectra.297 A 60 keV X-ray source was used for both techniques and, with subsequent non-interactive data processing, the combined technique provided maps of the diffraction profiles, thin film fiber texture and composition.A thermal inkjet fluidic system has been described as a means of sample introduction for micro-XRF in a paper by Fittschen and Havrilla.298 The device delivered samples of 1–300 picoliters (or 1–2000 pg) giving a spot size of 14–39 μm in diameter and a thickness of 200 nm to 2 μm. The authors did note that evaporation problems could have a major effect on the deposition, but that these problems could largely be overcome by optimisation of the process parameters. Linear responses for elemental deposits on AP1 film were obtained with standard deviations of 1–40%, depending on the element and the mass deposited, also being obtained. The LOD for Ni ranged from the sub-pg level to the low pg level. The accuracy of this dried spot approach was determined by the analysis of the thin film SRMs NIST 1832 and 1833. Deviation from the certified values was less than 10%.
A theoretical/simulation study into the quantitative analysis of layered materials using confocal micro-PIXE has been presented by Sokaras et al.299 The influence of the experimental parameters such as the beam energy, spatial resolution of the X-ray lens, micro-beam dimensions, irradiation and detection angles as well as the thickness and composition of the individual layers present in the sample were all studied. The advantages and limitations of micro-PIXE analysis in confocal geometry were presented.
One of the main methods for elemental and bonding state characterisation in the near surface region is X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). The angle resolved version (ARXPS) has been used by Oswald and Oswald for the non-destructive depth-profiling of thin films of Ta and Ti grown on silica that had been produced by in-situ magnetron sputtering.300 Measurements showed several phase-formation processes at the interfaces. Using data interpreted from ARXPS measurements and from simulations, several limitations were observed and discussed. Despite the limitations, the technique was described as “promising” for analysis at the nanometer thickness range.
Total reflection XRF (TXRF) has been used by two sets of workers for the determination of the thickness of thin films. Lee and Lim used TXRF for thickness monitoring of sub-nanometer scale lanthanum oxide films which are used to prevent poly-silicon gates and high-k dielectrics from reacting.301 Although these thin films must be present, the thickness should be controlled. The second paper, by Bennun and co-workers, used TXRF for the determination of the thickness of thin amalgamable metallic films.302 The intensities of the peaks obtained were directly proportional to the surface density which, for a homogeneous film, means the thickness. A traditional TXRF analysis may therefore be undertaken and the relative peak intensity of a specific metal line can be used to obtain a precise thickness measurement. In the scenario studied, Au and Hg peaks overlap. A general data processing scheme to achieve accurate and precise results was therefore developed.
The technique of grazing incidence XRF (GIXRF) has become one of the most powerful and versatile methods for characterisation of thin film and for layered materials. It combines features of both X-ray reflectivity and conventional XRF and, according to Tiwari and colleagues, it allows the non-destructive evaluation of layer thickness, interface roughness, interlayer formation and depth-profiling of an impurity element.303 These authors developed a computer program that assisted in the characterisation of thin films and surfaces. The program, called CATGIXRF, was discussed in detail and enabled data obtained using GIXRF and by conventional X-ray reflectivity to be analysed simultaneously. The program was applied to the data obtained using both techniques for a variety of thin-layered materials. Erdelyi and co-workers have presented an overview of the work they have undertaken over the last few years which has covered techniques such as X-ray diffraction, GIXRF, and extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS).304 They also described how GIXRF and EXAFS could be used in conjunction with X-ray standing waves to monitor the growth of the CoSi intermetallic phase by performing depth-profile measurements on amorphous silicon/Co/amorphous silicon layers. The sensitivity and accuracy of the measurements were increased by placing the layers on a waveguide structure formed from two tantalum films. Depth resolution at the nanometer scale was obtained. Another group to have achieved depth-profile measurements using GIXRF has reported the analysis of cobalt (indium, gallium) selenide (known as CIGS) semiconductor thin films used in solar cell applications.305 The varying In to Ga ratio determines the photo-voltaic properties of the thin films and so must be monitored accurately. According to Streeck and co-workers, as well as being non-destructive, GIXRF does not require well-characterised standards for calibration. Using both experimental data and by using calculations from fundamental atomic parameters, the authors demonstrated that even small differences in the Ga/In profile could be distinguished. Both GIXRF and SIMS have been used by Pepponi et al. to achieve depth-profile measurements of As in silicon.306 A combination of the two techniques was used because of the limitations of using SIMS alone when measuring the top-most few nanometers. The GIXRF data were used to correct the SIMS measurements. A combination of GIXRF and near edge X-ray absorption fine structure (NEXAFS) has been applied by Pagels and colleagues to the analysis of thin film silicon solar cells (a silicon/zinc oxide layer system).307 The materials were analysed in both their “as deposited” and “after annealing” states. The combined technique enabled depth-profiling measurements to be made which indicated that contaminants in the zinc oxide diffused into the silicon during annealing.
Grazing exit XRF is a technique related to TXRF and has, according to Yang and colleagues, unique advantages in surface and thin film analysis.308 A combination of polycapillary X-ray optics with total reflection geometry in the detection path enabled the micro-analysis of a series of titanium and iron layers that had been deposited on a single crystal of gallium arsenide. The thickness and density of the layers were obtained by fitting the experimental data to model calculations and the layer uniformity could be determined by using two-dimensional scan analysis.
Two other papers of note have used X-ray techniques to analyse thin films. One, by Mashin and colleagues, reported the approaches they had taken to improve the accuracy of the XRF determination of the composition and thickness of silicon germanide (Si1-xGex) films on Polikor alumina (an alumina-based ceramic) substrates.309 Inter-element effects were corrected by calculating correction coefficients. The improved results were used to optimise the conditions required for the preparation of the thin films. Tiwari and co-workers used intense synchrotron X-rays for X-ray standing wave analysis of a periodic molybdenum/silicon multilayer sample.310 Various trace contaminants (Cr, Fe, Ni and W) that had been unintentionally embedded in the sample during the deposition process were determined. The determination of the concentrations of these contaminants enabled the deposition process to be optimised and also enabled the authors to correlate the measured optical properties of the sample with theoretical models.
3.2.5.4 SIMS, TOF-SIMS and SNMS applications. A reduction in the scale of semiconducting devices has created many challenges to depth-profiling studies. Ever increasing purity of samples means that fewer contaminant atoms must be determined at far lower depth within the sample. Many of the important studies in this review period have reported attempts to improve sensitivity and depth resolution. It has been understood for some time that using a low energy primary beam improves depth resolution by minimising transient widths and beam-induced mixing. A study by Christofi et al. used SIMS equipped with a floating energy ion gun that was capable of operating with a primary beam energy in the sub keV region.311 It was also noted that for the most accurate depth-profiles to be obtained, an accurate measure of the depth being sampled was necessary. Traditionally, this measurement has been achieved by measuring the depth of the SIMS crater and then assuming that the sputter rate had been constant throughout. This, clearly, is potentially a significant source of error. In this publication, TEM analysis in conjunction with SIMS was used successfully to depth calibrate a test structure with an error of less than 0.5 nm. The top 5 nm has been problematic for typical SIMS depth-profiling and so this new method has managed to overcome this. Another paper confirming that the use of low energy primary beams leads to improved depth resolution has been reported by Berghmans and co-workers who used caesium ions at ultra-low energies (<150 eV).312 The impact of these extreme conditions on the steady state surface concentration of Cs was determined and discussed. The influence of the primary ion beam irradiation conditions on the depth-profiles of H in tantalum film has been studied by Asakawa et al.271 Deuterium was implanted into a tantalum oxide/tantalum/tantalum oxide structure and then determined using caesium ions as the primary beam. The H was found to be discharged from the tantalum film to the vacuum chamber. However, the H profile found using an oxygen primary beam differed markedly to the profiles obtained using either caesium or argon ions. The profile also depended on the incidence angle of the oxygen beam. A model was proposed to explain these phenomena.Other authors have used different approaches to improving depth resolution. A mathematical approach that used multi-resolution deconvolution based on Tikhonov-Miller regularisation and wavelet transformation was developed by Boulakroune and colleagues.313 The overall effect was that smoothed results were obtained without the risk of generating artifacts related to the noise content of the profile. This led to the improvement in depth resolution. The method was applied to the determination of B in a silicon matrix. Results were compared with those obtained using a mono-resolution deconvolution. The advantages and limitations of the multi-resolution deconvolution algorithm were presented and discussed.
A comparison between single and double beam TOF-SIMS for depth-profiling analysis of organic films has been reported by Brison and colleagues.314 During dual beam analysis a low energy etching beam and a high energy analysis beam are used in series. Although the fluence of the analysis beam is always kept below the static SIMS limit, it can be difficult to minimise the damage while maintaining a good depth resolution. In this paper, the authors attempted to quantify the damage caused to the sample. A dimensionless parameter, R, calculated via the equation (analysis beam fluence/total ion fluence), was introduced. Using a constant C60+ etching beam fluence, the Bin+ (where n = 1 or 3) analysis beam fluence was increased. Analysis of a plasma polymerised tetraglyme film indicated that the best depth resolution found was 8 nm and the least damage was caused at an R value of less than 0.03.
Secondary neutral mass spectrometry (SNMS) has been used by Andras et al. for the depth-profile analysis of Co/Cu multilayers.315 The technique was used in both the conventional manner, i.e. sputtering from the top surface of the material, and in the reverse manner, i.e. detaching the multilayers from the substrate and etching from the bottom up. The overall aim was to see if surface roughness affected the results and this was made possible because the top surface used for the conventional analysis was significantly more rough than the bottom surface that had been next to the substrate. The surface roughness was measured using atomic force microscopy. It was found that the rough surface yielded significantly increased intensity fluctuations, i.e. greater noise. The authors then used the experimental surface roughness data to calculate the depth profile measurements quantitatively.
3.2.5.5 Glow disharge applications. Glow discharge has found several applications in this review period. As well as the review discussed previously241 and the GD-LIBS combination reviewed in section 3.2.5.2295 many other GD applications have been presented. A paper by Zhang and King reported the use of pulsed GD-TOF-MS for the direct speciation of Mn in solid state materials.316 Once the operating parameters (i.e. the support gas pressure, operating power and temporal observation window) had been optimised, it was possible to differentiate between MnIV (manganese (IV) oxide) and MnII (manganese (II) monoxide). Conditions that favoured the production of Mn2O3+, an ion characteristic of MnIV, were used to determine this analyte first before other oxidation states were determined. Such an approach enables elemental speciation to be accomplished without recourse to lengthy extraction protocols and also eliminates the potential changes of oxidation state that the extraction methods can induce.Pulsed GD-TOF-MS has also been used by Tempez and colleagues who used GD-OES in conjunction with TEM to obtain depth-profile data for 18O/16O in anodic tantala films.317 The films had been prepared by an appropriate combination of anodising in electrolytes with enriched 18O and with natural isotopic abundance, leading to layers of known depth that were rich in 18O. The GD-OES and TEM were used to determine the morphology and elemental distributions of the samples and the 18O content of the 18O rich layers was determined using elastic recoil detection analysis. The GD-TOF-MS differentiated the 18O rich layers by measuring 16O18O+ and 181Ta18O+ signals at m/z 34 and 199 respectively. The 18O profiles were also compared with data obtained using dual beam TOF-SIMS. Micro-second pulsed GD has also been demonstrated by Voronov and co-workers.318 These workers used the pulsed GD in direct current mode with detection on a commercial mass spectrometer. Significant improvements in analytical properties were obtained using the pulsed GD with time-gated detection when compared with continuous direct current discharge. The processes involved in the sample ion transport in the pulsed GD were investigated experimentally and theoretically. The detection of negative ions using pulsed GD-TOF-MS for the analysis of halogen-containing solid samples has been described by Canulescu et al.319 The analyte signals were extracted from the afterglow region of the discharge where the cross-section for electron attachment increases. The formation of negative ions was compared with that for positive ions and those of F− and TaO2F− were found to be enhanced relative to the positive ion signals to the extent where they could be used to study the distribution of a tantalum fluoride layer within the anodised tantalum layer. A comparison with GD-OES for the detection of F was also made. The GD-OES could only detect the F when neon was used as a plasma gas. The authors then discussed the ionisation mechanisms responsible for the formation of negative ions in GD-TOF-MS.
The technique of GD-OES is a very commonly used in industry these days because of the speed of analysis (typically 2–5 mins per sample). Klemm and colleagues stated that the speed of analysis is determined largely by the pumping time of the GD source and that the reliability of the analysis of thin films is determined by the purity of the discharge gas and of the surface of the source and sample.320 By improving the dimensions and construction of the pumping set, they argued that the pressure could be reduced and the purity of the gas increased. A computer program was used to evaluate the pressure against run time in the source chamber and this enabled data regarding possible leaks or contamination of inner surfaces to be obtained in close to real-time. These “pump down” curves could aid the analyst and save time overall since they would enable the more rapid detection of sources of trouble, i.e. identifying the source of a leak, the necessity of cleaning the source chamber or replacing components.
As discussed previously, the surface topography can have a significant effect on GD depth-profiling analysis of either conductive or non-conductive samples. A paper by Trigoulet and colleagues discussed these phenomena during the analysis of anodic aluminium oxide films of various thickness and with incorporated electrolyte species.321 The surface topography modifications caused by the GD and depth resolution degradation were examined and the results revealed that both roughening or smoothing of the surface topography of the specimen could occur and this was dependent on the ratio of the film thickness to the amplitude of the substrate texture being less, or greater, than 1 respectively.

3.3 Glasses
In truth, there have been few really novel papers in the area of glass analysis over this review period. Numerous simple applications have been described but, in general, these have not been reported in this review. It is safe to say that, since glass requires aggressive decomposition/digestion methods for analysis by liquid sampling, virtually all of the papers reported the use of methods capable of analysing the solid material directly. This is especially true for historical or precious glasses, where damage must be kept to an absolute minimum to retain the sample's integrity. Solid sampling techniques are not without their problems though and several papers published have reported methods that have attempted to overcome or circumvent these problems.
3.3.1 X-ray techniques. Among the most popular ways of analysing solid samples directly are the various forms of X-ray analysis. Two papers have reported methods for the macroscopic composition analysis of chalcogenide glasses and glassy alloys. In one, Kurganova and co-workers prepared reference samples for calibration by direct elemental synthesis and then used these calibrants for the XRF analysis of As–S–Se, As–S and As–Se glasses.322 Results as well as the calibration error were reported. In the second of these applications, Bordovskii and colleagues used XRF to determine the concentrations of As and Se in glass alloys and related films of general formula As100-x − Sex.323 Again, external calibration was used and the samples were analysed with an accuracy of delta X = ±0.002.Improvements of the low energy performance of a micro-focus X-ray source for XRF analysis using SEM has been discussed by Procop et al.324 Until now, the X-ray sources were mounted on the microscope chamber and the X-ray tubes used have been equipped with beryllium windows that are approximately 100 μm thick. In addition the polycapillary X-ray lenses used have a transmission maximum at photon energies of around 10 keV and the transmission drops at both lower and higher energies. Therefore the L-radiation from traditional molybdenum or rhodium targets will be strongly attenuated and hence the excitation of fluorescence in the soft X-ray range becomes far less effective. The work reported in this paper attempted to overcome these problems. A new micro-focus X-ray source was developed that had lower self-absorption in the tube target, much thinner beryllium windows and X-ray optics that had a large distance between the foci and the maximum of transmission (at 5 keV). K-line fluorescence of light elements was therefore excited by the L-radiation from the molybdenum or rhodium tubes targets. The overall improvement in performance enabled Na2O in glass to be determined with a LOD of below 1% m/m.

3.3.2 Laser-based techniques. A large number of applications have been published that have utilised assorted laser-based techniques for the analysis. Some of the more useful developments have been described only in relatively few papers though and it is these that will be discussed in greater detail.A paper by Gornushkin and co-authors described their efforts to improve the performance of a linear correlation method used for material identification during LIBS analyses.325 The improvement was based on the use of only essential spectral information whilst ignoring empty spectral fragments. The proposed method was tested on glass fragments of forensic interest and enabled 100% identification. Contrarily, the traditional approach fell below 100% for some samples.
Many papers have discussed the use of laser ablation (LA) as a means of sample introduction to ICP-MS instrumentation. A paper by Hola and colleagues determined the influence of the physical properties and the chemical composition of the sample on the size and composition of the aerosol particles generated by a nanosecond laser operating at 213 nm.326 Three sets of samples were investigated, namely cobalt cemented carbides with variable content of W and Co, steel samples with minor variations in elemental content and silica glasses of different colour. The particle number concentration at two different size ranges (10–250 nm and 0.25–17 μm) was measured using a conventional optical aerosol spectrometer. The shapes and volumes of the ablation craters were examined using SEM and an optical profilometer respectively. Results for the particle number concentration indicated that the large majority of particles were in the smaller range, i.e. <250 nm, irrespective of the sample type. However, even if the number of larger particles was only 0.1%, this could represent up to 50% of the volume of sample that left the ablation chamber and that this was dependent on the sample type. Study of the ablation craters indicated that the particles were formed by a number of ablation processes including particle splashing and condensation, but overall, the created aerosols always consisted of two main structures. There were spherical particles that had diameters of over 0.1 μm that were originally ejected from the molten surface layer and there were fibrous agglomerates that had diameters in the range of tens and hundreds of nm. Samples that had the highest crater rim and a melted crater bottom were found to have produced the highest number of large spherical particles. The mass values of all of the produced aerosols were calculated from the measured ablation crater volumes and sample densities. Work such as this enables a better understanding of the processes occurring during LA to be obtained and, once the processes become understood, they can be optimised.
An IR femtosecond laser was used to study the influence of high repetition rate on elemental fractionation effects during the analysis of glass SRM NIST 610.327 The study, by Claverie and co-workers, used a “wet” plasma since this minimised the fractionation effects exerted by the instrument itself and gave a more robust plasma that had a greater tolerance to mass loading when compared with a “dry” plasma. The narrow laser beam used produced a crater only 17 μm in diameter and so a special arrangement of pulses was used to produce a crater of 100 μm in diameter. The ablation strategy consisted of a series of concentric circle trajectories ablated at high repetition rate. Operating conditions, i.e. two different scanner speeds (0.25 and 1.5 mm s−1), five laser repetition rates (ranging from 0.1 kHz to 10 kHz) and three fluence values (5, 14 and 25 J cm−2) were studied. The isotope ratios of 238U/232Th, 208Pb/238U and 66Zn/65Cu of the aerosols produced by the LA process under the different operating conditions described above were then evaluated. Although no heating zones or preferential evaporation were observed for any of the repetition rates, it was noted that particle size fractionation did occur. This effect was minimised by using a faster scanning speed and a higher repetition rate. Fractionation indices were also improved by using high fluence values. The authors also stressed that the structure of the aerosol particles was wholly independent of the ablation parameters.
In situ Sr isotopic analysis (87Sr/86Sr) in silicates containing low Sr values (30–400 μg g−1) was achieved by Jochum and colleagues who used a Nd:YAG laser system operating at 193 nm for LA sample introduction to a single collector sector field ICP-MS instrument.328 A fast electrical scan mode (0.1 s per pass) was used and corrections for dead time of the ion counting system, the blank signal, isobaric interferences of Kr and Rb, as well as the mass discrimination for Sr and Rb were all made. Precision (in terms of standard deviation) of 0.0002–0.0004 for the Sr isotopic ratio were achieved for Sr concentrations in the range 100–400 μg g−1, but this degraded to 0.0015 when a lower concentration range was analysed (30–100 μg g−1). The values for several reference glasses were compared with results obtained using TIMS and were found to be in good agreement. The authors then applied their method to the determination of Sr isotopic ratios in geological glasses.
A comparison of the use of refractive index and LA-ICP-MS for the determination of the provenance of glass bottles has been made by May and Watling.329 The use of refractive index alone was insufficient to discriminate between glass bottles of the same origin but produced 18 days apart. In addition, since variations in refractive index occur within the glass of the same bottle, it is impossible to identify the provenance definitively; as would be required for a forensic application. The constituents were constant within a bottle and so fragments of a bottle may be considered to be representative of the elemental composition of the entire bottle. Use of LA-ICP-MS to determine the analytes followed by statistical analysis enabled 38 of the 56 analytes determined to be used to discriminate between glass bottles made at the same plant but as little as two hours apart. It was concluded that such a technique would significantly improve the accurate comparison and provenance establishment of forensic glass evidence.

3.3.3 SIMS, TOF-SIMS and ICP-MS applications. It has recently been shown for the analysis of organic materials that the use of gold cluster (Au2+and Au3+) primary ions enhances the production of secondary ions by a factor of up to 300 when compared with a single gold primary ion. As well as enhancing sensitivity, the cluster ions were also found to minimise sample damage. A paper by King and colleagues has described the use of these cluster ions for the analysis of inorganic silicate glass samples.330 Secondary ion yields were again enhanced when the cluster ions were used compared with the single gold ions, which was consistent with the increased sputter rate; however, no increased ionisation efficiency was found. In addition, the relative sensitivity factors for major and trace elements showed no improvement in quantification when the cluster primary ions were used. It was noted that higher primary ion currents could be achieved using Au+ compared with the cluster ions and that this had the effect of improving precision of the analysis. It was concluded that although the cluster primary ions yield better overall results for organic materials, single primary ions are the preferred choice for obtaining optimal results for inorganic materials.Ternary chalcogenide glasses (As–S–Se) were analysed by Pangavhane et al. who used LA-TOF-MS in both positive and negative ion modes as a means of detection as well as isotopic envelope analysis and computer modelling.331 Several series of clusters were identified and these included ions with As: chalcogenide ratios of 3:3 (e.g. As3S3+, As3SSe2+ and As3S2Se+), 3:4 (e.g. As3S4+, As3S3Se+, As3S2Se2+, As3SSe3+ and As3Se4+); 3:1 (e.g. As3S+ and As3Se+) and with a ratio of 3:2 (e.g. As3S2+, As3SSe+ and As3Se2+). These clusters were found to form from LA of both bulk and pulsed laser deposition deposited monolayers of glass.
Elemental fractionation during LA-ICP-MS analysis of silicate glasses has been investigated by Gaboardi and Humayun.332 As expected, the elemental sensitivity ratio was found to depend very strongly on the analyte mass and the first ionisation potential. However, other complications were found when LA-ICP-MS analysis of the NIST glasses 610–614 was undertaken. Analysis of the nearly transparent glass NIST 612 indicated that the elemental sensitivity showed a dependence on the temperature of condensation; i.e. refractory elements yielded a lower signal than that predicted solely by mass and ionisation potential, whereas volatile analytes yielded a higher signal. The problem appeared to be exacerbated when using the most transparent glass (NIST 614) when a concentration offset of nearly 20% was observed compared with the certified values. The error had only been 10–15% for the less transparent NIST 612 glass. These problems could be minimised by increasing the energy of the laser beam used for the ablation. Even using high energy laser pulses, the sensitivity ratios obtained in NIST 612 were uniformally lower (11 ± 4% for a laser energy of 1.4 mJ) than those obtained in the least transparent glass NIST 610. The authors therefore tried to identify an internal standardisation technique that could overcome this. An internal standard of approximately the same volatility as the analytes of interest (e.g. Ca for the determination of REE) was found to provide the best solution.

3.3.4 Analysis of historical glasses. As with the analysis of ancient ceramics, it is necessary to analyse the sample whilst causing as little damage as possible. There have been many applications that have described the use of assorted solid-sampling techniques for the analysis of such materials and these have largely been discussed in Table 5. It is probably also worthwhile mentioning that several reviews have also been undertaken in the area. These reviews have included one by Herrera and Videla who discussed the numerous analytical techniques that may be used to identify corrosion products (and hence elucidate corrosion mechanisms) in materials of cultural heritage.333 As well as the analytical techniques, the molecular biology techniques used to explore microbial action were also discussed. A total of 49 references were cited. A review entitled “accelerators and X-rays in cultural heritage investigations” was presented by Mahnke and colleagues (27 refs).334 Techniques such as PIXE and Rutherford backscattering spectroscopy were discussed. A further review by Resano and co-workers discussed the application of LA sample introduction and ICP-MS detection for the analysis of archaeometric samples (118 refs).335 The main capabilities and limitations of the technique as well as how the different experimental parameters affect the analysis, were all discussed.
Table 5 Analysis of historical glasses




Analyte
Matrix
Technique; Atomisation; Presentation
Comments
Reference




Various
Glasses
XRF; -; S
An overview of the analysis of historical glass materials and objects. Versions of sample preparation, sample homogeneity problems and methods of converting experimental intensities into concentrations were discussed. Matrix effects exerted by certain types of glass were also discussed (86 refs).
 338 


Various (6)
11th–13th century glass bracelets from Bulgaria
AES; F; L
Flame photometry (for K and Na) and FAAS (for Al, Ca, Fe and Mg) were used to analyse acid digested samples. Results were compared with literature values. Samples were soda-lime-magnesium glasses of the near east recipe.
 339 


AAS; F; L


Various
Archaeometric glasses from 11th to 20th centuries
PIXE; -; S
Advantages and disadvantages of using proton induced gamma-ray emission (PIGE) and PIXE were discussed and a comparison with other X-ray techniques (XRF and EDX) made. Some glasses that had been corroded were analysed and good agreement between the techniques was obtained. PIGE/PIXE were shown to be excellent techniques for determining both high and low mass analytes, even at low concentration.
 340 


PIGE; -; S


Various
Egyptian faience pendant and two glass standards
XRF; -; S
Portable XRF system obtained data with similar accuracy to those obtained using PIXE.
 341 


Various
Venetian-type glass fragments from Albania
PIGE; -; S
Combined PIGE/PIXE method and source excited XRF used to analyse samples. Mechanisms of manufacture were identified.
 342 


PIXE; -; S


Various
Glass vessels and beads dating from first millennium BC from Georgia
MS; ICP; LA
LA-ICP-MS and SEM-wavelength dispersive spectrometry (WDS) were used to characterise glass vessels. Vessels were found to have compositional differences that may indicate multiple manufacturing sites. However, major and trace elemental data showed similar characteristics to Roman Levantine glassware, possibly indicating that the source of sand was from the coast of the Levant. The beads also showed signs of multiple origin with the middle east or Indian sub-continent being the most likely.
 343 


Various
26 post-medieval glass fragments from a Castle in Italy
MS; ICP; LA
SEM-energy dispersive spectrometry (EDS) study (for major elements) and LA-ICP-MS study (for trace elements and REE) of glass fragments. Information of the provenance and of the technology of glass manufacture for each was obtained.
 344 


Various
Mycenaean glass beads from the bronze age
TOF-MS; ICP; LA
Wide range of analytes determined. 11 beads analysed, four blue ones coloured with Co and two blue/green ones coloured with Cu were found to have similar composition to Egyptian glasses of the same time. Similarly, the other five beads, all coloured using Cu were found to conform to Mesopotamian glass. The data indicated direct and clear evidence of the trade of glass to the Greek state.
 345 


Various
52 ancient beads from Africa
MS; ICP; LA
Single point ablation and raster sampling were compared with data being obtained from two different laboratories. Similar results for the two sampling approaches were obtained for most beads, but the raster approach was more sensitive to the effects of glass corrosion.
 346 


Various
Islamic glass from Raya, Sinai peninsula
XRF; -; S
Portable instrument used to analyse samples from 8th–11th centuries. Most samples were found to be produced using natron as the soda source. Some of these were found to be low in Fe and Ti, but high in Sr. These were probably produced in Syria. Other samples, from the 9th century, were high in Ca, Fe and Ti. These were thought to be of Egyptian origin.
 347 


Various
Sasanian glass, Iraq
MS; ICP; -
ICP-MS as well as other techniques (SEM-EDS, XRD and thermal analysis) used to characterise weathering products. Two general production styles identified according to the MgO to K2O ratio. Four main alteration types also identified.
 348 


Various
A red stained glass in the windows of the Huelgas monastery, Spain
XRF; -; S
Various techniques including PIXE, XRF, field emission SEM and TEM used to characterise glass in terms of its chemical composition and structure. Chemical analysis using PIXE and XRF produced very similar results (in Spanish).
 349 


PIXE; -; S


Various
Enamels in stained glass windows
XRF; -; S
XRF, electron probe microanalysis and TEM were used to analyse glasses in an attempt to identify why some dark green/blue and purple enamel paint layers deteriorate whereas others from the same time period (16th–20th centuries) do not. Some compositions of the enamel appeared to be unstable, e.g. those with high K2O and low CaO and PbO content. Other samples appear not to have vitrified properly during the firing process.
 350 


Various
Deeply coloured and black glass from northern Roman provinces
MS; ICP; LA
Chronological and geographical origin of glass elucidated through their major and trace element compositions. Although dark brown, dark purple and dark green hues were observed, only the dark green ones could be used to date the materials. Before AD 150, a Ti rich source of iron was used for the colouring, whereas after AD 150, a Ti poor source of iron was used that also contained Co, Pb and Sb.
 351 


Various
Ancient glass beads excavated from Thebes, Greece
XRF; -; S
An evaluation of the advantages and limitations of lab-based (ion beam analysis and electron probe microanalysis) and portable (milli- and micro-XRF) techniques. All of the techniques provided a consistent and reliable method of characterising the glass composition.
 352 




Some papers have described a method or a piece of instrumentation that has enhanced the capabilities of analysing these precious samples. One such paper, by Manouvalou and co-workers described the use of a compact micro-XRF spectrometer that was capable of obtaining 3-dimensional XRF measurements in a non-destructive way.336 Although absorption and resolution effects complicated the qualitative analysis of the data, it was still possible to distinguish between layered and homogeneous structures without recourse to fully quantitative analysis. The instrument was applied to the analysis of historical glass that had been painted with a black enamel. It was found that the enamel had been applied “cold”, i.e. no further firing had occurred. The qualitative data obtained from this instrument were confirmed by the fully quantitative data obtained using an instrument at the Berlin Synchrotron BESSY II facility.
The use of LA-ICP-MS for quantitative analysis of ancient glasses can prove awkward simply because the composition of the samples can vary so widely and hence calibration can be difficult. Many workers overcome the problem using a complementary technique to identify a suitable internal standard. A paper by van Elteren et al. described a method that did not require this.337 Instead, they used a method that they entitled “sum normalisation technique”. A total of 54 analytes were determined and the concentrations found were normalised to 100% w/w based on their corresponding oxide concentrations. By assuming a random internal standard concentration, the composition of a major oxide (e.g. SiO2) may be used by the mathematical algorithm to change the other concentrations accordingly until the cumulated total reaches 100% w/w. Nine glass standards (some replicating historic composition) were used for calibration. Using SiO2 as the internal standard and by forcing the calibrations through the origin, precision of the slopes ranged between 0.1 and 6.6% RSD. This enabled high accuracy determination of elemental oxides in many synthetic glasses. In general, experimental data obtained using the technique were in good agreement with reported values for both major and minor elemental oxides. There were, however, a few occasions where problems arose. Polyatomic interferences could be alleviated by use of an octopole reaction system, but this had the drawback of decreasing the analytical sensitivity. This may prove problematic for the determination of analytes present at very low concentration.

3.4 Ceramics and refractories
3.4.1 Reviews, comparisons of technique and CRMs. Wang and co-workers353 have reviewed the use of ICP-OES and -MS for analysis of advanced ceramic materials (in Chinese). The review contained 55 references and concentrated on work from the last decade. The various techniques used for sample introduction were presented and the developing trends discussed.The use of portable instrumentation is becoming increasingly popular since it does not require the sample to be transported back to the laboratory. This therefore facilitates the analysis of very large samples and also enables results to be obtained more rapidly. Brai and colleagues have compared the use of a portable LIBS system with a portable XRF instrument and have employed them both for the analysis of materials from cultural heritage (bricks and mortars).354 The XRF instrument was calibrated using CRMs as standards. The LIBS instrument, which used a double laser pulse for increased sensitivity, produced results that were not linearly correlated with concentration. Therefore the LIBS system could not be used for fully quantitative analysis. Despite this, the authors concluded that a combination of XRF and LIBS was capable of yielding sufficient accuracy to gain useful information on the degradation state of the materials and to distinguish between different chemical features. Miura et al. have used both ICP-OES and ICP-SF-MS (plus ID-ICP-SF-MS for Cr) for the determination of Co and Cr in the silicon nitride CRM NMIJ 8004-a.355 The atomic spectrometric methods were used as reference methods for a neutron activation technique. Results from the different techniques were in good agreement with the uncertainty values also being comparable.

3.4.2 Novel methods of analysis. Since ceramic materials are notoriously difficult to bring into solution, it is probably not surprising to note that the majority of the techniques described during this review period have utilised a solid sampling approach. One paper by Sanchez-Rojas and co-workers that bucked that trend used an experimental design optimisation process for the acid dissolution of a biomorphic ceramic.356 The ceramic used during the study was oak wood that had been infiltrated with zirconia sol. A full factorial design (3(3)) was used to optimise variables such as microwave digestion time and both nitric and hydrofluoric acid volumes. The success (or otherwise) of the digestion was gauged by the response of the determination of Cu, Ni and Zr (using ICP-MS) and of Ca, Fe and Mg (by FAAS).The other papers to be reviewed in this section have all used a solid sampling approach, but with varying detection techniques. A paper by Pal and colleagues used a double pulse system that utilised a 266 nm UV laser to form a LIBS plasma, the emission signal from which was then enhanced by several orders of magnitude by a 10.6 μm CO2 laser.245 The system was applied to several sample target types including ceramics, metals and plastics. The pulse from the CO2 laser was found to increase the temperature of the plasma by 3000 K. The influence of carrier gas type (argon or helium) on the analysis of magnesium oxide powders by LA-ICP-MS were studied by Lee et al.357 The signal from the ICP-MS instrument was found to be more stable when helium was used as the carrier gas, but the signal was greater when argon was used. The authors therefore collected ablated particles from both systems and measured the particle size distribution. More particles were found to be ablated using the argon carrier gas system, but the particle size distribution was found to be much wider. This presumably would account for the greater noise component in the signal.
The use of slurries, i.e., a suspension of finely powdered particles in a liquid medium, has made a return to the analytical literature in this review period. It has been known for many years that this method of introduction can produce very accurate results and has many advantages; i.e. it avoids the necessity of using powerful dissolution acids, may be calibrated against aqueous standards etc. However, it is also well known that if the particle size distribution is too high, then erroneous results will be produced because the sample will not be transported in a representative way through the sample introduction systems of flame and ICP instruments. Wang and co-workers have made slurries of boron carbide powder using water and no dispersant.358 The authors validated their method using various alternative methods and by the use of the CRM ERM-ED 102 (boron carbide powder). The analytes Al, Ca, Cr, Cu, Fe, Mg, Mn, Na, Ni, Si, Ti, V and Zr were detected using an axial configuration ICP-OES instrument. The LOD, which were in the range 0.02–2 μg g−1, were superior to those obtained using the more conventional nebulisation approach. Two papers by Amberger and colleagues described the analysis of boron nitride powders359 and boron carbide powders360 using slurry sampling but with TXRF as a means of detection. Both materials could form stable slurries if the powders were suspended in 0.1% polyethylenimine at pH 4. The concentration of material forming the slurries was optimised to ensure high net line intensities and high signal to background ratios. The analytes for the boron nitride analysis were Ca, Cr, Cu, Fe, Mn and Ti; whereas for the boron carbide they were the same but with the addition of Co and Ni. Limits of detection were in the range 0.062–1.6 μg g−1. For the boron nitride, these were found to be higher than those obtained using solid or slurry sampling ETAAS or by solid/slurry sampling ICP-OES. However, for some analytes they were lower than when a wet chemical digestion was employed prior to ETAAS or ICP-OES detection. The accuracy of the data for the boron carbide powders was comparable to that obtained using wet chemical digestion and ICP-OES detection; with correlation between the two methods for the data for Fe and Ti being 0.996 and 0.997 respectively.
Nakano and Tsuji have described the use of two different micro-XRF techniques for the analysis of Japanese Lacquer ware.361 A grazing exit XRF instrument was compared with a confocal 3D XRF instrument. The grazing exit instrument used a single capillary to produce a micro-X-ray beam and was capable of obtaining two-dimensional X-ray images. The 3D instrument used two independent polycapillary X-ray lenses and two X-ray sources. The authors compared the relative merits and disadvantages of the two systems.

3.4.3 Depth-profiling studies. Only those studies involving ceramic samples are discussed in this section. Other depth-profiling studies are discussed at much greater length in section 3.2.5. It is fair to say that the variants of SIMS are the most common techniques to accomplish depth-profiling studies. However, one of the more novel methods to have been used was described by Ctvrtnickova and colleagues who used orthogonal double pulse LIBS to achieve depth-profiling of ceramic tiles.362 Two Q-switched Nd:YAG lasers in orthogonal configuration were employed, the first at 1064 nm to ablate the material and the second, at 532 nm to excite it. The light emitted from the excited sample plume was measured using a spectrograph equipped with a CCD detector. Both the depth resolution and the reproducibility of the depth-profiles were approximately two-fold better than for a single pulse laser system.Depth-profiling by SIMS (or variants) has been shown to be dependent on the surface morphology of the sample once it has come under bombardment by the ions. A paper by Fukumoto and co-workers investigated the surface morphology of silicon carbide that was bombarded by caesium ions under various conditions.363 At a high angle of incidence, the surface was found to become more rough and this led to a greater change in secondary ion intensities. In addition, the secondary ion intensities changed even at a depth of less than several hundred nanometers. The authors recommended that the primary ions should be administered at an energy of less than 1 keV to avoid these problems if a high angle of incidence is used.
Depth-profiling has also been used to determine the extent of diffusion into ceramics. An example of such a paper has been presented by Raj et al. who used SIMS to measure O diffusion as a function of temperature into 9 mol% Scandia 2 mol% yttria co-doped zirconia.364 The values of the tracer diffusion coefficient were in the range 10−8–10−7 cm2 s−1 and the Arrhenius activation energy was 0.9 eV. These values were valid for the temperature range 600–900 °C. A similar study was undertaken by Pang and colleagues who determined the oxidation characteristics of titanium aluminium carbide over the temperature range 500–900 °C.365 The authors used both SIMS and synchrotron radiation diffraction (SRD) during the study and demonstrated evidence that amorphous aluminium existed at low temperatures. The complementary techniques also demonstrated that anatase started being transformed to rutile at 600 °C and the reaction was complete at 900 °C. Boulesteix and colleagues have determined Nd cation diffusion into transparent crystalline yttrium aluminium garnet (YAG) as a function of silica content and temperature (annealing in air at temperatures of between 1400 and 1600 °C).366 Diffusion coefficients through both the grain boundaries and the bulk sample were determined. It was found that diffusion of Nd increased 10-fold with increasing silica content. The authors hypothesised that this was probably because of point defects. The results were used to elucidate the sintering mechanism. Duong et al. used SIMS to determine the diffusion of water species doped with either deuterium or 18O into both tetragonal zirconia and cubic single crystals of zirconia.367 The diffusion of oxygen species were found to be the same in both sample types and was independent of whether it was administered as a liquid or as a gas. The H or D was found to behave in a different manner though, with diffusion occurring in the tetragonal crystal but not the cubic single crystals. Fully quantitative determination of the H and D in the tetragonal crystal proved impossible even though the experiment was conducted at liquid nitrogen temperatures. However, despite this, the authors still managed to conclude that diffusion did occur in this material over a period of months. The last paper to be reviewed in this sub-section, by Gonzalez and co-workers, characterised a damaged region of a carbon implanted alumina, a candidate material for thermonuclear fusion reactors.368 Amorphisation creates volume changes and hence defects. Clearly, this cannot be allowed in a material potentially to be used in nuclear reactors. The authors irradiated the disks of alumina with mono-energetic carbon ions (75 keV) at different doses in the range 1 × 1017 to 5 × 1017 ions cm−2. The disks were then tested using assorted techniques including TOF-SIMS, TEM, XPS and glancing angle X-ray diffraction (GXRD). The TOF-SIMS determined matrix elements and profiles of the implanted C ions. These ions were found to be present in the deeper half of the amorphous region. It was also found that the damaged area was also deficient in O which, the authors suggested, was because it was selectively sputtered during the irradiation process.

3.4.4 Bioceramics. Metallic joint replacements can rub together and this can lead to wear, releasing unwanted metallic ions into the body. Bioceramics may be used to coat the metallic joint to act as a resistive layer. The majority of bioceramics used are hydroxyapatite of which some are natural. The Ca: P ratio in a certified standard of hydroxyapatite was determined using X-ray spectrometry (SEM-EDS), PIXE and Rutherford backscattering spectrometry (RBS) by Bailey and co-workers.369 It was demonstrated that the rough surface of the sample did not affect the accuracy of the Ca: P ratio determination using RBS. Bahrololoom and co-workers prepared some hydroxyapatite powder by burning bone and then treating the ash at 600–1100 °C in an air furnace.370 The white powder formed after this heat treatment was then characterised using XRD, FTIR and XRF. The analytical techniques demonstrated that no organic matter remained and that the hydroxyapatite was not transformed to other calcium phosphate species at temperatures below 1100 °C. The XRF showed that Ca and P were the most abundant species present and that Mg and Na were present as minor impurities. The Ca to P ratio was in the range of 1.46 to 2.01. Gopi and colleagues reported a successful coating of hydroxyapatite over a borate passivated 316L stainless steel using a dip coating method.371 The layer was characterised by electrochemical techniques such as cyclic voltammetry, but the sample was also analysed using SEM and XRD. Leach experiments from the material was undertaken and the leachates were analysed using ICP-OES. The enhanced bio-resistivity was attributed to a protective passive layer formed by the borate buffer solution. Fluorine substituted hydroxyapatite was prepared using a precipitation technique by Bianco et al.372 The compositional analysis was undertaken using ICP-OES, but other techniques such as electron microscopy, IR, nitrogen adsorption, XRD and dilatometry were also used for the characterisation. The needle-like material was found to be stable to 1300 °C. This material was then sintered at low temperature forming a material with a fine micro-structure and relevant nano-porosity. Significant improvements in mechanical properties were reported for this material compared with the un-substituted hydroxyapatite.
3.4.5 Archaeological pottery. Since samples of archaeological origin are often fragile and are certainly precious in terms of cultural heritage, the norm is to inflict as little damage to them as possible during the analysis. The use of solid sampling techniques that consume either micrograms of sample or, ideally, are completely sample non-destructive are common. The recent trend of using atomic spectrometry to analyse the samples followed by chemometric analysis of the analytical data to glean as much information as possible has continued, with several applications using such tools to elucidate firing processes, provenance etc. The work described in many of these papers is very much application-based with very limited amounts of knowledge on fundamental aspects of atomic spectrometry being obtained. The papers are therefore best discussed in brief in tabular form (Table 6). It should be noted, however, that several reviews of methods used to analyse articles of cultural heritage have been published. These have been discussed in section 3.3.4.
Table 6 Archaeological applications of ceramic analysis




Analyte
Matrix
Technique; Atomisation; Presentation
Comments
Reference




K, Th and U
Brazilian ceramics from Barra dos Negros and Lagoa Queimada (Bahia State)
MS; ICP; -
Dating by thermoluminescence. ICP-MS used to determine the annual dose of the analytes and hence, their age.
 373 


Various (25)
Archaeological shards from South East United States
INAA; -; S
Chemometric approach using stepwise linear discriminant analysis to obtain provenance.
 374 


Various
Ceramics from Tiwanaku and Wari in the Andes
MS; ICP; LA
Chemical signatures of the pottery from the sites demonstrated that at least five different clay sources were used. The potters used clay from their own respective regions.
 375 


Various
Cobalt blue decorated ceramics from Aragon and Iberian Peninsula
OES; ICP; -
Three different types of cobalt pigment were identified that differed between area and age. In addition, a difference in decoration technique, i.e., under or over the tin glaze was also identified.
 376 


MS; ICP; LA


Various
Pigments from pre-Hispanic ceramics of Cajamarquilla
LIBS; -; S
LIBS gave excellent results with respect to reproducibility, sensitivity, rapidity, non-destructiveness and depth-profiling ability.
 377 


Various
Black glaze and main body of ancient Attic black ceramic
LIBS; -; S
LIBS results demonstrated that the glaze was actually made from the same clay as the rest of the body, but that it had been treated differently. AAS, XRF, SEM-EDX and XRD also used as complementary techniques. For quantitative LIBS work, Al, Ca, Fe, K, Mg and Ti were calibrated using them within a silicon dioxide matrix.
 378 


Various (5)
Blue painted pottery from Egypt
XRF; -; S
Newly developed portable XRF spectrometer used in conjunction with a portable XRD instrument. Chemical composition and crystal structure therefore studied.
 379 


Various
Glazes of ceramics from Portugal from the 16th to 19th centuries
EDXRD; -; S
A μ-XRF spectrometer used as well as WDXRF, XRD and SEM-EDX. Mineralogical changes in the glazes after firing at different temperatures were studied.
 380 


WDXRF; -; S


Various
Post-medieval pottery from Southern Moravia
XRF; -; S
Three configurations of XRF spectrometers constructed and then used in-situ. Detection limits, depth of analysis, the relation of the analysed area, the homogeneity of the samples and variations in element concentration were discussed.
 381 


Various
Neolithic pottery from Alba Iulia, Romania
XRF; -; S
Three cultures produced pottery from this site. Chemical analysis and thin section analysis demonstrated differences between the pottery of different cultures.
 382 


Various
21 Neolithic pottery fragments from the Lumea Noua culture, Alba Iulia, Romania
XRF; -; S
XRF, XRD and optical microscopy used to obtain data relating to the manufacturing technique in terms of various types of raw clay used and firing temperatures.
 383 


Various
Japanese lacquer ware
XRF; -; S
Depth-profiling studies undertaken using a μ-grazing exit XRF instrument and a 3D-confocal XRF spectrometer. This paper was discussed in more detail in the text.
 361 


Various
Cooking pots from Kefar Hananya (Roman Galilee)
XRF; - S
Samples from two production sites 200 m apart were analysed. Chemometric analysis of data (cluster analysis, principle component analysis (PCA), bivariate plots and discriminant analysis) as well as computerised morphological analysis enabled authors to distinguish samples with respect to provenance, age etc.
 384 


Various
18th century Portuguese faiences
XRF; -; S
A new system for EDXRF described. Detector is a new type of micropattern gas detector (28 × 28 mm2). The interaction of X-rays with the gas causes electrons to be produced and the number of these is proportional to the absorbed X-ray energy. The counting rate can reach up to 0.5 MHz. The system was used to form elemental map distributions for different samples.
 385 


Various
17 fragments of ceramics dating from 15th and 16th century from Seville
XRF; -; S
Several techniques (XRF, XRD, SEM, ion beam analysis) used to differentiate between shards. Some shards found to originate from the Valencia area of Spain.
 386 


Various
20 middle bronze and late bronze/early iron age ceramics from two sites in Georgia
WDXRF; -; S
Ceramics from Didi Gora and Udabno I and clays from the surrounding area analysed using WDXRF. Results indicated that all samples were made from two local sources of clay over the entire time period.
 387 


Various
Pre-historic pottery from Rahmatabad, Iran
XRF; -; S
Chemical and mineralogical analysis on samples performed using XRF, XRD and SEM-EDX. Compositions were found to be similar and the presence of diopsite and mullite indicated firing temperatures of 950–1050 °C.
 388 


Various
Two terracotta polychrome sculptures by Pietro Torrigiano
XRF; -; S
Samples analysed in-situ. Original parts of one showed traces of lead white (Pb), yellow and red ochre (Ca, Fe), cinnabar (Hg) and umbra (Fe, Mn). The spectra obtained from the bench under one sculpture indicated that it was not original, but had been added later. Modern pigments were also found indicating that, at some stage, restoration work had been carried out.
 389 





3.5 Catalysts
This review has categorised papers on catalysts and catalyst function as follows: Photocatalysts, catalytic decomposition, oxidation reactions, isomerisation reactions, fuel cells and hydrogen evolution, hydrotreatment and hydrogenation, automotive catalysts, polymer immobilised catalysts and hydrodesulfurisation and hydrodeoxygenation.
As is usual with much work in this field, many of the papers included discussed primarily the synthesis of the materials and investigation of their catalytic properties, with the analysis being only briefly discussed. This review therefore includes papers covering a broad area of catalyst research including catalyst preparation and the investigation of catalytic properties in addition to papers containing significant analytical detail. Amongst the latter, of note is an increase in the use of mass spectrometry, particularly TOF-SIMS for quantitation and surface imaging, with excellent results being reported. Laser ablation ICP-MS is becoming important in catalyst analysis and one paper presented a fundamental study of the ablation process. Electrospray Ionisation mass spectrometry has also been employed for the characterisation of copper complexes. X-ray Photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) continues to feature very strongly and has proved enormously beneficial in measuring the binding energies, oxidation states and coordination of surface atoms. In one paper, in-situ XPS was employed for the measurement of oxidation states within a reactor, which is particularly important in catalyst discovery studies. In another paper, photoacoustic spectroscopy has been described for the determination of Pd with excellent results and reportedly much lower detection limits than atomic absorption spectrometry. This paper will be discussed in much more detail in the following text.
3.5.1 Photocatalysts. The development and study of new photocatalytic materials, based predominantly on titanium dioxide, is a notable feature of the catalyst-based research papers published during this review period. These are employed for the catalytic degradation of a range of organic compounds.390–396 Most semiconducting photocatalysts including TiO2 can only be activated by high energy ultraviolet light due to their wide band gaps. Therefore a major challenge is to modify the electronic structure to develop visible light driven photocatalysts. Hybrid CdS/TiO2 systems are considered to be a promising approach, however; CdS is somewhat unstable and suffers photocorrosion in aqueous solutions. Suppression of photocorrosion by ‘wrapping’ CdS nanoparticles in a 2D TiO2 nanosheet was reported by Yan and colleagues.397 Preparation was by creation of negatively charged CdS particles using polyethylenimine followed by mixing with a positively charged TiO2 nanosheet suspension. Electrostatic interaction caused the CdS particles to become covered with TiO2 nanosheets. Drying and calcination produced the active catalyst. Catalysts were well characterised using UV-Vis spectroscopy, XPS and XRD. SEM and TEM analysis showed numerous CdS nanoparticles combined with the extremely thin TiO2 sheets. The resultant CdS/TiO2 composite was found to exhibit enhanced photoactivity in the oxidation of Rhodamine B in water under visible light irradiation. ICP analysis of Cd and S in the aqueous stream showed that the catalyst was also less susceptible to photocorrosion.An important oxidation reaction for the removal of many organic pollutants is the Fenton reaction, which involves photocatalytic oxidation by hydrogen peroxide catalysed by the ferric ion. This reaction is most commonly carried out in the solution phase, using homogeneous ferric ions. In this case, however, the immobilisation of ferric ions into a titanium dioxide support employing metal–organic chemical vapour deposition (MOCVD) followed by photo-deposition to produce a heterogeneous photo-Fenton catalyst was reported, together with the characterisation of the material.398 The experimental details for the production of this material were discussed in some detail and the samples were characterised by, amongst others, pore volume and Brunauer, Emmett and Teller (BET) surface area determination. The general morphology was examined by TEM-EDX and the Fe concentrations were determined using ICP-OES and XPS, with notable and significant differences in Fe concentrations found between the two techniques indicating that the Fe loading was predominantly on the external surface of the catalyst. XPS data also showed that Fe was present as the ferric ion. An iron pillared vermiculite heterogeneous photo-Fenton catalyst was reported by Chen and co-workers.399 In a similar catalytic application, and in an attempt to extend the light absorption of TiO2 into the visible region, ferric ions together with gold were deposited onto TiO2 and this was examined for the degradation of organic pollutants.400 Iron oxide bands were notably absent from the Raman spectra, suggesting that ferric ions were present as substituents in the TiO2 lattice and this was in agreement with the XRD data. Anatase crystallite size was determined by XRD using the Scherrer equation and it was found that gold deposition had little impact on crystallite size or crystallinity of the TiO2. TEM images were presented and indicated the highly dispersed nature of the gold particles on the surface of both iron-doped and non-doped TiO2, with mean gold particle diameters of 8 nm and 9 nm respectively. Light absorption studies were carried out using UV-Vis diffuse reflectance and showed that the doped TiO2 had significantly enhanced absorption in the visible region because of the formation of a dopant energy level within the band gap of TiO2 and strong absorption bands at 500–600 nm were due to Plasmon resonance of gold. XPS analysis was employed and showed that the binding energies of titanium were in good agreement with literature values for Ti4+. Oxygen binding energies corresponded to O2− in the TiO2 lattice, showing that doping with ferric ions and gold resulted in no obvious changes in the chemical state of either titanium or oxygen. XPS data also showed that gold remained in its metallic state although there may be strong interactions between gold and Fe-TiO2. Photoluminescent emission studies were employed to understand the fate of electron – hole pairs in the samples and it was postulated that the ferric ions act as recombination centres for photogenerated charge carriers. This effect was weakened by the gold deposited in the sample as the photogenerated electrons were trapped by the gold. The authors also examined the effect of nitrogen doping, and XPS analysis was useful in establishing the gold and nitrogen species on the titania surface.401
Titanium dioxide nanocatalysts were also synthesised and doped only with nitrogen. pH values were changed by varying the nitrogen source : water ratio during the catalyst preparation and the pH effect was examined with respect to the catalytic photodecomposition of 2,4-dichlorophenol.402 The oxidation state of the nitrogen dopant was determined by XPS analysis and it was proposed that shifts in the XPS spectrum could be attributed to replacement of oxygen in the crystal lattice with nitrogen. Features of the XPS spectra were also attributed to the presence of adsorbed nitrogen species on the surface of the support, with the catalytic activity being due to the within-lattice nitrogen and the activity being reduced by the adsorbed nitrogen. Nitrogen doped TiO2 hollow spheres were prepared by Subagio et al. who then used them for the photocatalytic degradation of bisphenol-A.403 Hollow spheres of N-TiO2 were produced using a polystyrene template and later removal by calcination. These were characterised using SEM, TEM, XRD, ICP and XPS. The photocatalytic properties were investigated using an LED photoreactor and GC-MS. LC-MS-MS of the reaction solution found the main intermediates to be 4-isopropanol phenol, 4-isopropyl phenol, 4-propenyl phenol and 4-hydroxyacetophenone, allowing the author to elucidate a reaction pathway. Doping of TiO2 with Sn4+ has also been reported to be a useful way to enhance the degradation rates of organic molecules, due to electronic modifications. The activity was also found to be influenced by the anatase to rutile ratio. Consequently, the synthesis of tin modified nanosized photocatalysts with varying concentrations of dopant ions, using a reverse microemulsion preparation, was reported.404 These materials were extensively characterised using XRD, Raman spectroscopy and diffuse reflectance UV-Vis spectroscopy. One interesting application area for titanium dioxide-based photocatalysts is their use on surfaces, including glass, fabrics, cements and plastics, to facilitate self-cleaning.405 This paper by Mejia and colleagues discussed the pre-treatment of cotton with TiO2 and included a discussion on the pre-treatment methods which included colloidal synthesis of TiO2 and functionalisation of the textile fibres by RF-Plasma and UV irradiation under various conditions of time and vacuum. Effectiveness of the self-cleaning action was checked on a red-wine stain under simulated sunlight. The fabrics which had been pre-treated using various methods were examined using XPS and the surface atomic concentrations of O, Ti, C, Ca, S, Si and K were determined before and after staining, and after timed exposure of the stained material to the simulated sunlight. This analysis showed that surface carbon arising from the staining agent (red wine) decreased to 70% of pre-stain levels after 24 h. Carbon dioxide evolution determined using GC clearly showed that the carbon within the stain was being oxidised during this time and the oxidation processes were confirmed using XPS analysis. The coating of TiO2 was shown to be present as a uniform distribution of around 30 nm thickness on the surface of the fabric. UV diffuse reflectance analysis confirmed the decrease of the stain over the 24 h test period. XRD measurements determined that the TiO2 was present on the fabric as the anatase phase and HRTEM indicated a reasonably homogeneous surface coating of around 31 nm with particle sizes of 8–18 nm.
Zeolites have also been reported as an alternative/improved support structure for photocatalysts because of their ability to encapsulate molecules in a well defined spatial arrangement. They can also show specific photo-physical properties during charge transfer processes as Lewis acid (framework Al) and Lewis base (framework O) sites are fixed within the zeolite structure. These properties have been utilised by Zang and co-workers to prepare a novel AgBr/zeolite photocatalyst.406 The catalytic properties for methyl orange degradation were then evaluated. Catalysts were prepared by mixing NH4Y-Zeolite, AgNO3 and cetylmethyl ammonium bromide in water. Analysis using XRD showed that AgBr was deposited on the zeolite, and remained there after irradiation although metallic silver began to form. Initial Ag loading was determined using ICP-OES and XPS was used to measure atom content. XPS analysis of used catalyst showed a decrease in Ag and Br atom content, caused by either aggregation of AgBr on the catalyst surface or the release of Ag in the reaction medium.

3.5.2 Catalytic decomposition. The direct decomposition of nitrous oxide (N2O) and its reduction with methane is an important reaction for the control of these greenhouse gases in the environment. A novel molybdenum/gallium H-ZSM-5 catalyst has been reported for this reaction.407 The incorporation of Ga and Mo into the ZSM-5 was described, together with the characterisation of the novel materials by a range of techniques. Of note was the use of XPS on the samples as prepared, and on used and reduced catalysts within an in situ reactor attached to an XSAM-800 photoelectron spectrometer. This analysis identified the various oxidation states of Mo and Ga species and enabled an oxygen transfer mechanism to be proposed. Similar applications for the selective catalytic reduction of nitrogen oxides were reported, including; one employing methane as the reducing agent on palladium monolithic catalysts based on gamma-Al2O3.408 The preparation and characterisation of the alumina materials impregnated with palladium salts were described. Another, by Zhang et al. discussed the catalytic reduction of nitric oxide (NO) on a V2O5/TiO2 catalyst.409 The sol–gel catalyst preparation method and characterisation procedures were described. The analytical techniques of XRF, XRD, XPS and Raman spectroscopy were employed and showed that at calcination temperatures of 450 °C, only the anatase phase of TiO2 was detected and VOx species were dispersed into the anatase framework. Analysis using XPS showed that surface V was present in the +4 and +5 oxidation states. Nitric oxide decomposition has also been reported using a Cu exchanged ZSM-5 based monolith.410 The catalyst was characterised using SEM/EDX, BET, ICP-MS, XRD and H2 temperature programmed reduction, together with catalytic tests. The Cu-ZSM-5 monolith structure was found to decrease catalytic activity, compared with Cu-ZSM-5 powder. However, it had an increased hydrothermal resistance and this may lead to a more suitable catalyst under real conditions. Nitric oxide levels are tightly regulated in the food and beverage market. A range of transition metal impregnated HZSM-5 materials for the removal of trace nitric oxide to produce high purity food grade CO2 have been developed.411 Nitric oxide spiked CO2 samples were passed through a U type stainless steel reactor containing either Ce, Fe, Mn, Cu, Co or Ni impregnated HZSM-5. Adsorption of NO was measured continuously using a chemiluminescent NO/NOx analyser, whilst CO2 concentration was monitored using a mass spectrometer. The study found that a Co impregnated HSZM-5 absorbent was the most efficient and was capable of producing CO2 of purity of greater than 99.9999%. This was significantly better than the Fe–Mn mixed oxides previously reported as being the best NO adsorbent for CO2 purification.
3.5.3 Oxidation reactions. Molecular sieves based on heteroatom containing mesoporous silica exhibit useful catalytic activity in many applications. One important issue in the synthesis of such materials is their hydrothermal stability. Mesoporous SBA-15 has been found to exhibit enhanced hydrothermal stability as compared with MCM-41 because of thicker pore walls and larger pore size. However, it is difficult to introduce high levels of heteroatomic species into these catalysts because of the less favourable formation of metal-oxo species within the mesoporous structure. This has been addressed in a study by Selvaraj et al. who outlined the synthesis and characterisation of mesoporous NbSBA-15 with very high Nb loadings.412 This paper detailed their synthesis and hydrothermal treatment as well as their characterisation using a suite of atomic spectroscopic and physico-chemical techniques including ICP-OES, XRD, XPS, nitrogen adsorption and field emission scanning electron microscopy and TEM. The catalytic activity of the materials was examined in the epoxidation of cis-cyclooctene and the hydrothermal stability evaluated by exposing the materials to steam or boiling water for various times at different pressures. The Si to Nb ratios were determined by ICP-OES, EDXRF and XPS. The extent of incorporation of heteroatoms into the SBA-15 frameworks was determined and found to be dependent on the synthesis conditions, specifically on the proton concentration. XPS studies enabled the determination of location, oxidation state and coordination of Nb species in the walls of the SBA-15 and enabled a better understanding of the effect of differences in synthesis and the mechanisms of the catalytic reactions. The paper also discussed the effects of structure on hydrothermal stability.Incorporation of Ti into the framework of zeolites has been shown to be useful in the catalytic epoxidation of olefins and the influence of various Ti precursors and Ti loadings on polymorph C, a member of the zeolite beta family, were examined by Lee and co-workers.413 The paper discussed the synthesis and characterisation of the materials together with an evaluation of their catalytic activity using the epoxidation of cyclohexene. XRD analysis was employed to establish the crystallinities and the framework Ti content of the catalyst preparations, and the Si/Ti molar ratios were determined by ICP-OES. One interesting observation was that HRTEM did not yield any useful results, possibly because of a transformation of the morphology of the samples by the high voltage TEM electron beam. XPS analysis indicated an increase in the Ti–O–Si linkage with increased Ti concentration. The possible formation of an anatase phase was also proposed, based on XPS data. Titanium environments within the zeolite were examined by Ti K-edge XANES. The data clearly showed that Ti concentration affected the coordination environment of the Ti atoms, with high concentrations resulting in tetrahedral coordination, with some distortion at excessive Ti concentrations.
Doping of heterogeneous catalysts with alkali metals is known to influence their properties and the alkali metal itself may be an active catalyst component. Transition metal oxides promoted with potassium exhibit very good catalytic properties. The cobalt-manganese-aluminium mixed oxides doped with various metals have been examined as catalysts for the oxidation of volatile organic compounds and it was found that the catalytic properties of this mixed oxide could be significantly improved by the addition of potassium.414 Raman spectroscopy, XRD and voltammetry failed to fully explain the strong link between the K concentration and changes in catalytic properties. Temperature controlled reduction experiments on the parent and potassium modified catalysts showed a shift of peaks to a lower temperature and with increasing quantity of added K a new low temperature reduction peak appeared. It was concluded that K facilitates the easier reduction of cobalt and manganese oxides. Temperature programmed reduction studies indicated a strong correlation between K concentration and the number of basic sites. XPS studies showed that the oxidation state of surface manganese and cobalt did not change with increasing K content, however, the Co/Mn ratio did change, as did the oxygen species with different binding energies, showing that surface lattice oxygen increased at the expense of surface oxygen. This property was strongly correlated with the activity to ethanol oxidation.
Supported gold catalysts exhibit useful catalytic activity in many reactions of industrial and environmental importance and amongst these reactions, the oxidation of carbon monoxide is important. Gold supported on TiO2 has been prepared by Yang and colleagues using a photo-deposition method415 and by Sangeetha et al. using a deposition-precipitation method.416 Both papers reported the study of the selective oxidation of carbon monoxide in hydrogen streams. Catalysts prepared using both methods were found to be very active and selective. In both studies characterisation was performed using a wide range of techniques including ICP-MS, XRD, TEM and XPS. Gold supported on cerium and zirconium mixed oxides were also reported and the effects of the preparation and physico-chemical properties of these materials with respect to the oxidation of carbon monoxide was discussed in detail.417 A range of analyses were carried out, including BET surface area measurements, SEM-EDS, XRD, carbon monoxide temperature programmed reduction, HRTEM and TOF-SIMS using 69Ga+ primary ions. For the SIMS analysis the powder samples were formed into tablets. A range of TOF high resolution images were presented, together with the corresponding mass spectra. Additionally, electron micrographs, EDS maps and XRF spectra were presented showing a detailed surface analysis and images of the catalyst preparations. Analysis using TOF-SIMS showed a range of surface ions, including AuCl−, AuClO− and AuCl2−, confirming the presence of chloride ions surrounding the gold centres at the catalyst surface. The intensity ratio of chloride ions to the total number of ions was found to be dependent on the washing procedure, with ammonia washing resulting in a lower ratio. The cerium support was also shown to have a high affinity for chloride. Analysis using TOF-SIMS also showed the presence of AuO− and AuO2− at the catalyst surface and the AuO−/Au− and AuO2−/Au− intensity ratios yielded information about the amount of gold bonded to, or surrounded by, oxygen ions. Studies on gold foil did not show any AuO or AuOH ions and this was strong evidence that the oxide anions seen in the studies were from fragmentation of surface species, rather than recombination of species after ejection from the surface. Analysis using XPS was not sufficiently sensitive to detect these gold species, illustrating the excellent analytical capabilities of TOF-SIMS for this kind of analysis. The versatility and capability of TOF-SIMS was also highlighted by Grams et al. for the surface analysis of Au and Au/Nb containing MCM-41 catalyst.418 MCM-41 based catalysts are typically synthesised using a surfactant template technique followed by removal of the surfactant by calcination. Removal of the surfactant material is critical as it can interfere with the catalytic properties. Measurements were made using both liquid metal Ga+ and cluster bismuth (Bi3+) as the primary ion source. Samples were pressed into pellets for analysis. A peak at m/z = 197 was used to confirm the introduction of Au on the catalysts. However, a peak relating to Au–O was not observed, indicating that only metallic gold was dispersed on the surface. Catalysts containing Nb on the other hand were found to contain a mixture of Nb+, NbO+ and NbO2+ ions (m/z = 93, 109 and 125) suggesting that the Nb existed in an oxidised form on the catalyst surface. Most interestingly the author also observed an intense signal at m/z= 284, corresponding to the surfactant molecule (cetyltrimethylammonium chloride) without Cl atom, and a series of less intense peaks coming from ions differing by 14 units, corresponding to fragments of the surfactant after successive detachment of CH2. Measurements were performed before and after calcination steps to investigate the efficiency of surfactant removal. In addition to characterisation of the surroundings of both Au and Nb atoms in the catalyst structure, TOF-SIMS was also employed to investigate the organic residue left by the surfactant materials used.
In principle, laser ablation (LA) should be a useful technique for the analysis of solid samples, however there is a scarcity of papers dealing with this technique in catalyst analysis. One interesting paper, however, aimed to develop a fundamental understanding of the aerosol formation during the ablation process of heterogeneous catalysts.419 Accuracies of 5–15% were reported for LA-ICP-OES analysis of heterogeneous catalysts, but extreme values of +100% were often encountered. To improve the understanding of the ablation process, particles generated during the ablation of alumina-based catalysts were collected and analysed by microscopy and a range of surface techniques. SEM showed that the material leaving the ablation cell were nanoparticle aggregates formed on vapour condensation and XRD revealed a spinel structure with large coherence domains.
In an interesting application, Louis and colleagues employed positive ion electrospray ionisation (ESI)-MS for the characterisation of mononuclear copper (II) complexes, which were synthesised as catalysts for the selective oxidation of the C10 hydrocarbon tetralin to tetralone which is a useful reactive intermediate.420 Positive ion ESI-MS spectra for several complexes were presented and the data were discussed in detail. Of note, copper(I) species were seen and have been attributed to charge transfer between the copper (II) complexes and solvent molecules in the gas phase during MS analysis, thus illustrating the ease of reduction of these complexes. Mass spectrometric data also confirmed the preference of copper (II) for square planar geometry, allowing the presence of only two bidentate pyridyl ligands. The stability of the parent ions for different ligands was inferred from the number of fragment ions and this observation related directly to the solution phase stability constants of the complexes.

3.5.4 Isomerisation catalysts. Mixed oxides also exhibit excellent catalytic properties for isomerisation reactions. A silica-alumina MoO3 catalyst was synthesised by Debecker and co-workers, who used a nonhydrolytic sol–gel procedure.421 Amongst other techniques, XPS and positive and negative ion TOF-SIMS were employed in characterising these catalysts. XPS analysis enabled the detection and speciation of surface C, O, Cl and Mo. Both Mo5+ and Mo6+ were identified and the two species were shown to exist in different chemical environments. TOF-SIMS was again sufficiently sensitive to show the presence of several Mo and molybdenum cluster oxide species.
3.5.5 Fuel cells, hydrogen evolution reaction and energy storage. In the last few decades, there has been a rapidly growing interest in hydrogen storage and production of materials which would facilitate the transition from fossil fuels to renewable energy sources, on the way to a sustainable energy future. One such class of materials that has been deemed particularly useful is amine-boranes, the simplest being ammonium-borane (H3N-BH3) which contains 19.6% H by weight. Ammonium-borane releases molecular hydrogen upon heating above 70 °C, however, hydrogen can also be generated by catalytic methanolysis using a zeolite confined rhodium(0) nanocluster as reported by Caliskan et al.422 Catalyst samples were prepared using an ion exchange of Rh3+ ions with the extra-framework Na+ cations followed by reduction using sodium tetrahydroborate. X-ray diffraction was used to determine that the crystal structure of the zeolite remained intact after preparation treatments. The morphology and composition were determined using HRTEM, SEM-EDX and ICP-OES. High resolution TEM images showed a uniform distribution of Rh over the highly ordered crystalline zeolite, whilst SEM also indicated the presence of Rh nanoclusters in the zeolite pores. Measurements using XPS confirmed Rh was present in the zero oxidation state. The same research group proposed a more cost effective catalyst using Cu(0) confined nanoclusters, however, its catalytic activity was almost 40 times lower than the Rh counterpart.423The cost of electrolytic hydrogen production can be reduced by decreasing the overpotential of electrode reactions and this can be achieved through the use of cathode materials with high catalytic activity. Nickel/iron binary composite coatings have been employed by Solmaz and Kardas for alkaline water electrolysis with electrodeposition on to the electrode surface.424 This paper outlined the electrochemical deposition and characterisation of this binary surface material and included a study of its long term stability and corrosion behaviour. Elemental characterisation of the coatings involved the mechanical removal of the material and analysis by AAS. The data were employed to show that the surface composition could be controlled by changing the molar ratio of Ni and Fe in the plating solution. The electrochemical behaviour of the electrodes was studied using cyclic voltammetry and the physical structure and corrosion properties of the surface coatings were examined using SEM and AFM. A similar investigation by the same research group was also made using a NiCoZn alloy.425
Oxidative desulfurisation is an important means of removing S, which is a well known catalyst poison.426 This paper described the synthesis of a lacunary Keggin-type polyoxometalate associated quaternary ammonium salt on a mesoporous silica support, for the oxidative removal of S. An alternative to desulfurisation is the development of catalysts which are tolerant to S. Methanol is likely to play a role in energy storage as a convenient hydrogen source for fuel cells or as an intermediate for synthetic fuels. The use of methanol derived from coal is potentially problematic because of the high S content of coal derived syngas and this has resulted in studies on sulfur-tolerant catalysts which may be employed in methanol synthesis.427 Palladium supported on ceria (CeO2) has been shown to be an effective catalyst for the hydrogenation of carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide to methanol and this paper examined its S tolerance. Extensive characterisation of the catalyst was carried out using XRD and XRF with particular emphasis on the investigation of how S affected the catalytic behaviour. Only 6% of the total hydrogen sulfide feed was retained on the catalyst after 100 h reaction. XPS studies showed that some surface Ce4+ were reduced to Ce3+ after reaction in S-containing syngas and some lattice oxygen was consumed and evidence for the formation of S4+ and S6+ was seen. It was also noted that the presence of Pd promoted the reduction of ceria. The XPS, XRD and catalytic experimental data enabled a formal reaction scheme for methanol synthesis in the presence of S to be proposed.
The photocatalytic splitting of water into H2 and O2 under visible and solar light has attracted much attention as a means of hydrogen fuel production. Pure hydrogen is required for utilization as fuel on a large scale, however, powdered photocatalysts yield a mixture of H2 and O2. To overcome this problem a method of separate evolution of H2 and O2 from water using an H-type cell and a light responsive thin film vis-TiO2/Ti/Pt photocatalyst has been proposed.428 Titanium dioxide thin films were prepared on one side of a thin titanium foil using a radiofrequency magnetron sputtering method at different temperatures. A second radiofrequency magnetron sputtering method was used to load Pt on the other side of the titanium foil. UV-Vis diffuse reflectance was used to determine the wavelength absorption range of the TiO2 thin film. It was found that foils prepared at 473 K absorbed in the UV range (UV-TiO2) whilst foils prepared at 873 K absorbed in the visible light range (vis-TiO2). The depth profile of 18O was obtained using SIMS for each foil and showed that the secondary ion intensity gradually decreased from the top surface (O/Ti ratio = 2.00) to inside the bulk (O/Ti = 1.93) of the vis-TiO2 foil. The UV-TiO2 foil, however, exhibited the same stoichiometry (O/Ti = ∼2.00) independent of the depth from the surface. It was suggested that this anisotropic structure of the vis-TiO2 caused a significant perturbation in the electronic structure of TiO2, enabling absorption of visible light and hence photocatalytic properties. Photocatalytic production of hydrogen has also been reported from the degradation of formic acid over Pt and Ru loaded CdS/Al-HMS catalysts429 and CdS/TiO2 nanotubes.430 A suite of techniques was used to characterise the catalysts including N2 adsorption/desorption, XRD, UV-diffuse reflectance spectrometry, XRF, TEM and fluorescence emission spectra. Platinum-loaded catalysts showed the best performance for H2 evolution. Hydrogen fuelled proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFC) and direct methanol fuel cells (DMFC) are set to become very important power sources in the near future. However, one of the big technical challenges in both PEMFC and DMFC is the sluggish kinetics of the oxygen reduction reaction at the Pt cathode. Wenzhen Li et al. have reported both Pt–Co/C431 and Pt–Fe/C432 catalysts for improvements of the oxygen reduction reaction in PEMFC and DMFC respectively. Both catalysts were characterised using a standard set of techniques including ICP-OES, SEM-EDX, TEM and XRD.

3.5.6 Carbon nanotubes/hydrotreatment/hydrogenation. The high oxygen content of bio-crude is a limitation for its utilisation as a liquid transportation fuel as the oxygen content results in high viscosity, poor thermal and chemical stability, acidity and poor miscibility with hydrocarbon fuels. Sulfided Co/Mo and Co/Mo/P supported on magnesium oxide have both been investigated as hydrodeoxygenation catalysts of bio-crude with phenol being used as a model compound.433 Both catalysts worked well, resulting in a reduction in phenol concentration and an increase in reduced hydrocarbons including benzene. Characterisation of fresh and spent catalysts by XRD showed that the metal species were highly dispersed or were below the XRD detection limit and therefore smaller than 5 nm. The surface compositions of fresh and spent catalysts were determined using XPS. Sulfur was present primarily as sulfide although some sulfate was present and this was attributed to air oxidation. Additionally, the dispersed CoO within the catalysts was completely converted to CoS on exposure to 5% hydrogen sulfide/hydrogen at 400 °C for 4 h. Molybdenum was shown to be present as Mo4+ in the form of MoS2.
3.5.7 Automotive catalysts. Among the proposed solutions to reduce environmental pollution, the automotive catalyst is one of the best-known technological applications to control vehicle emissions. Although well established, this technology is in continuous development and has been adopted by the majority of countries for controlling vehicle emissions. Modern three-way catalysts are employed to completely oxidise hydrocarbons and carbon monoxide and to reduce nitrogen oxides to molecular nitrogen; they employ platinum group metals (PGM) as the active catalyst material. The high value of the PGM necessitates analytical procedures with small uncertainties, and a range of techniques including FAAS, GFAAS, ICP-OES and ICP-MS are employed, together with a variety of sample preparation/dissolution procedures. This requirement for accurate and precise determination of PGM in catalysts has resulted in a need for certified reference materials (CRMs) and the preparation and characterisation of CRMs is described in a paper by Recknagel and Michaelis.434 This paper included a discussion on sample preparation, homogeneity testing, characterisation and statistical evaluation of the uncertainty. A new reference material (ERM-EB504) resulting from this work was accepted by the European reference material initiative and is available from BAM Federal Institute for Materials Research and Testing, Berlin, Germany.Platinum group metals also occur in the environment as a result of emissions from automobiles and industrial processes. Consequently, the determination of PGM in environmental samples is a requirement. A novel procedure for the determination of Pd using photoacoustic spectroscopy after solid phase extraction using an immobilised thiazolylazo dye was developed by Saavedra and colleagues.435 The performance of this procedure was investigated for the determination of leachable Pd in spent catalyst material and tap water samples. Potential interferences were studied and sodium citrate was suggested as a suitable masking agent. Recovery studies in tap water and spent hydrogenation catalyst were carried out and were close to 100% in both cases. The new procedure was compared with FAAS and the analytical figures of merit were found to be superior, for example the detection limit with FAAS was found to be 240 μg L−1 compared with 4 μg L−1 for the photoacoustic technique. An added advantage of the developed method was that it had a much wider linear dynamic range and required less sample pre-treatment. Trace levels of Pd in sediments and autocatalysts have also been determined using an on-line separation and preconcentration method using FI-ICP-OES.436 Silica beads functionalised with diethylenetriamine groups (Quadrasil™ TA) were shown to have high selectivity for Pd(II), Os(IV), Pt(IV) and Au(III). The optimisation of the FI procedure was described in detail together with the effects of a range of interfering ions. Analysis of a certified catalyst material and stream sediment showed that the procedure gave results in good agreement with the certified values. A cloud point extraction system prior to analysis using ICP-OES was proposed by Yu and co-workers for simultaneous extraction, preconcentration and determination of Pt and Pd from spent catalysts.437 The method was based on the complexation of the aqueous metal ions with 1,8-diamino-4,5-bis (hydroxyamino) anthraquinone reagent in the presence of the non-ionic surfactant Triton X-114. The solution was then brought to its cloud point condition where phase separation occurred and the Pt complex was contained in the surfactant rich portion. Separation of the surfactant from the aqueous phase using a centrifuge, followed by addition of nitric acid to reduce viscosity allowed measurement using ICP-OES. Results from both synthetic and real samples gave satisfactory results with good precision and a low LOD.

3.5.8 Polymer immobilised catalysts. Immobilisation of active transition metal complexes on to a solid support has proved to be an attractive method for overcoming the inherent drawback of homogeneous catalysis; i.e. the separation and recovery of the catalyst after completion of the reaction. The increasing familiarity with and confidence in the use of polymer resins in solid phase synthesis has encouraged organic chemists to search for possibilities of employing polymers as catalyst supports. An excellent example of the benefits of polymer immobilisation was reported by Alexander et al.438 A palladium Schiff base catalyst, (N-salicylidene benzylamine)PdCl2 complex, was prepared for the hydrolysis of olefins. Reaction studies found the catalyst to be unstable in reaction conditions and resulted in metal separation. An alternative cross linked polystyrene-divinylbenzene polymer supported heterogeneous version was prepared and found to be more stable and effective for the hydrogenation of various olefins. SEM was used to study the morphology of the polymer beads before and after loading. Infra-red analysis suggested the formation of the Schiff base on the polymer support, where a strong band at 1631 cm−1 due to azomethine (CN) stretching was visible. A combination of XPS and far IR spectroscopy was used to characterise the Pd environment of the catalyst. An XPS spectrum of fresh catalyst exhibited peaks at 337.7 and 343.3 eV assigned to Pd(II). A broad intense peak at 332 cm−1 in the far IR spectrum indicated both Pd–Cl bridging and terminal environments. Upon activation with sodium tetrahydroborate, this band shifted to 338 cm−1, whereas the XPS spectra remained largely the same. This suggested that upon activation the catalyst moves from a Pd(II)-Cl bridged species to a mononuclear Pd(II) species with terminal Cl atoms. The polymer-bound palladium schiff base catalyst was economical and could be recycled several times without loss of activity.
3.5.9 Hydrodesulfurisation/hydrodeoxygenation/refining. The catalytic dehydrogenation of alkanes has received much attention recently because of the increasing demand for light olefins. Conventional methods include steam cracking of naphtha and as a fluid catalytic cracking (FCC) by-product. However these cannot meet the fast growing demand. Zeolites and zeolite-based catalysts have been heavily investigated in this field because of their relatively environmentally friendly, non-corrosive and solid nature. The Si to Al ratio of a zeolite is an important characteristic and is closely linked to its catalytic behaviour. Nawaz et al. have investigated the effect of the Si to Al ratio of Pt-Sn-based ZSM-5 on its ability to produce light olefins by simultaneous dehydrogenation and cracking of n-butane.439 The bulk metallic content of the catalyst was verified using XRF, whilst TEM was used to measure the dispersion of the metals. The acidity sites of the catalyst were characterised using NH3-temperature programmed desorption and pyridine adsorption measured by IR. It was found that increasing the Si to Al ratio reduced the total acidity of the catalyst and favoured light olefin selectivity, whereas a lower Si to Al ratio significantly increased the conversion. Generally, supported Pt–Sn catalysts are prepared from Cl-containing precursors such as H2PtCl6, SnCl2 or SnCl4. Therefore, the role of Cl in influencing catalytic character in terms of structural, acidic and active metal is important. Zhang et al. have investigated the effects of dechlorination on the activity of PtSnNa-ZSM5 for light olefin production.440 Dechlorination was performed using a steam-air mix at 500 °C for 1, 2, 3 or 4 h. Catalytic tests were performed on treated catalysts using a standard quartz micro-reactor. It was found that dechlorination of the catalyst reduced its performance significantly. Fresh and dechlorinated catalyst samples were studied using several techniques, including XRF, XRD, 27Al magic angle spinning (MAS) NMR, NH3-temperature programmed desorption, BET and TPR. The 27Al MAS NMR spectra obtained for a fresh sample displayed a strong signal at 54 ppm, which was attributed to four-coordinated framework Al and a very weak signal at 0 ppm was assigned as six-coordinate extra-framework Al. Spectra collected for dechlorinated samples showed a decrease in signal at 54 ppm and an increase at 0 ppm, suggesting a migration of framework tetrahydral Al species to non-structural extra framework Al. This trend was more evident with increasing dechlorination time. Measurements using XRD agreed with this, showing that the crystallinity of the catalyst degraded with dechlorination time. Elemental analysis using XRF showed that the Cl content decreased sharply after treatment for 1 h and then the rate of loss became relatively gentle. Moreover, the change in Pt and Na was negligible, while the content of Sn decreased. It was proposed that this was associated with the dealumination of the zeolite framework and Al stabilising the Sn species. The authors concluded that steam dechlorination was detrimental to the catalyst activity.
4 Glossary of terms

AASAtomic absorption spectrometry
AEDAtomic emission detection
AESAtomic emission spectrometry
AFMAtomic force microscopy
AFSAtomic fluorescence spectrometry
AMSAccelerator mass spectrometry
ANOVAAnalysis of Variance
ANSIAmerican National Standards Institute
APDCAmmonium pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate
ARXPSAngle resolved X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
ATRAttenuated total reflection
BCRBureau of Community Reference
BETBrunauer, Emmett and Teller
CCAChromated copper arsenate
CCDCharge coupled device
CFPCirculating fluidized bed
CMOSComplementary metal oxide semiconductor
CPECloud point extraction
CRMCertified reference material
CVAASCold vapour atomic absorption spectrometry
CWADPChemical warfare agent degradation product
CZECapillary zone electrophoresis
DCPDirect current plasma
DESIDesorption electrospray ionisation
DMFCDirect methanol fuel cells
d-DIHENDemountable direct injection high efficiency nebuliser
DPTDiphenyl tin
DRIFTSDiffuse reflectance infra-red Fourier transform spectroscopy
DRSDiffuse reflectance spectroscopy
DTADifferential thermal analysis
DTPADiethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid
ECNIElectron capture negative ionisation
EDSEnergy dispersive spectrometry
EDXEnergy dispersive X-ray analysis
EDXRFEnergy dispersive X-ray fluorescence
EPMAElectron probe microanalysis
ERDAElastic recoil detection analysis
ESIElectrospray ionisation
ESI-MSElectrospray ionisation – mass spectrometry
ESPElectrostatic precipitator
ESRElectron spin resonance
ETAASElectrothermal atomic absorption spectrometry
ETVElectrothermal vaporisation
EXAFSExtended X-ray absorption fine structure
FAASFlame atomic absorption spectrometry
FFFast flow
FIFlow injection
FIBFocused ion beam
FLIMFluorescence lifetime imaging
FTAFission track analysis
FTIRFourier transform-infra-red
FTSFischer–Tropsch synthesis
GCGas chromatography
GC-AEDGas chromatography atomic emission detection
GDGlow discharge
GEXRFGrazing exit X-ray fluorescence
GFAASGraphite furnace atomic absorption spectrometry
GIXRDGrazing incidence XRD
GIXRFGrazing incident XRF
GI-XSWGrazing incidence X-ray standing waves
GXRDGlancing angle X-ray diffraction
HGAASHydride generation atomic absorption spectrometry
HPLCHigh performance liquid chromatography
HRTEMHigh resolution transmission electron microscopy
IBMKIsobutylmethyl ketone
ICCDIntensified charge coupled device
ICPInductively coupled plasma
IDIsotope dilution
IDMSIsotope dilution mass spectrometry
INAAInstrumental neutron activation analysis
IRMSIsotope ratio mass spectrometry
LALaser ablation
LC-MSLiquid chromatography-mass spectrometry
LDALinear discriminant analysis
LEDLight emitting diode
LEISLow energy ion scattering
LEXESLow energy electron induced X-ray emission spectroscopy
LIBSLaser induced breakdown spectroscopy
LIDARLight detection and ranging
LIFLaser induced fluorescence
LIF-ASElaser induced fluorescence-amplified spontaneous emission
LIPSLaser induced plasma spectroscopy
LODLimit of detection
LOQLimit of quantitation
MALDIMatrix assisted laser desorption/ionisation
MASMagic angle spinning
MC-ICP-MSMultiple collector ICP-MS
MEEKCMicroemulsion electrokinetic chromatography
MFMMagnetic force microscopy
MICMicrowave induced combustion
MIMMetal insulator metal
MOCVDMetal organic chemical vapour deposition
MPTMonophenyl tin
MSMass spectrometry
MWDSMicrowave desolvation system
Nd:YAGNeodymium: yttrium aluminium garnet
NEXAFSNear edge X-ray absorption fine structure
NIRNear infra-red
NISTNational Institute of Standards and Technology
NMRNuclear magnetic resonance
NRRANuclear resonant reaction analysis
OESOptical emission spectrometry
OSLOptical stimulated luminescence
PB/HC-OESParticle beam/hollow cathode optical emission spectrometry
PBDEPolybrominated diphenyl ethers
PCAPrinciple component analysis
PEMFCProton exchange membrane fuel cells
PETPolyethyleneterephthalate
PGMPlatinum group metals
PIGEProton induced gamma ray emission
PIXEParticle induced X-ray emission
PLSPartial Least Squares
PLS-DAPartial least squares discriminant analysis
PTFEPolytetrafluoroethylene
PVCPolyvinyl chloride
PVDPhysical vapour deposition
RBSRutherford backscattering spectrometry
REERare earth elements
RFRadio frequency
RIRefractive index
RMMRelative molecular mass
RSDRelative standard deviation
SSolid
SEMScanning electron microscopy
SFSector field
SIBSSpark induced breakdown spectrometry
SIMCASoft independent modelling of class analogy
SIMSSecondary ion mass spectrometry
SNMSSecondary neutral mass spectrometry
SPESolid phase extraction
SPMScanning probe microscopy
SPMESolid phase micro-extraction
SRDSynchrotron radiation diffraction
SRMStandard reference material
SRXRFSynchrotron radiation induced X-ray fluorescence
TEMTransmission electron microscopy
TGAThermogravimetric analysis
TIMSThermal ionisation mass spectrometry
TMAHTetramethyl ammonium hydroxide
TMPPTris(2,4,6-trimethoxyphenyl) phosphonium propylamine
TOCTotal Organic Carbon
TOFTime of flight
TPRTemperature programmed reduction
TPTTriphenyl tin
TSLThermally stimulated luminescence
TRXPSTotal reflection X-ray photoelectric spectroscopy
TXRFTotal reflection X-ray fluorescence spectrometry
USNUltrasonic nebuliser
UVUltra violet
VPD-DCVapour phase decomposition-droplet collection
VUVVacuum ultra violet
WDXRFWavelength dispersive X-ray fluorescence
XAFSX-ray absorption fine structure
XANESX-ray absorption near edge spectrometry
XASX-ray absorption spectroscopy
XBICX-ray beam induced current
XPSX-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
XRDX-ray diffraction
XRFX-ray fluorescence
XRRX-ray reflectometry
WDSWavelength dispersive spectrometry

5 ReferencesS. Carter, A. S. Fisher, P. S. Goodall, M. W. Hinds, S. Lancaster and S. Shore, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2009, 24(12), 1599–1656 RSC .E. H. Evans, J. A. Day, C. D. Palmer and C. M. M. Smith, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2009, 24(6), 711–733 RSC .C. F. Harrington, R. Clough, H. R. Hansen, S. J. Hill, S. A. Pergantis and J. F. Tyson, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2009, 24(8), 999–1025 RSC .M. West, A. T. Ellis, P. J. Potts, C. Streli, C. Vanhoof, D. Wegrzynek and P. Wobrauschek, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2009, 24(10), 1289–1326 RSC . A. Taylor, S. Branch, M. P. Day, M. Patriarca and M. White, Journal Anal. At. Spectrom., 25(4), pp. 453–492 Search PubMed.O. T. Butler, J. M. Cook, C. M. Davidson, C. F. Harrington and D. L. Miles, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2009, 24(2), 131–177 RSC .Y. Zhang, P. H. Shipway and F. Boue-Bigne, Science and Technology of Welding & Joining, 2009, 14(6), 542–548 Search PubMed .T. Stehrer, B. Praher, R. Viskup, J. Jasik, H. Wolfmeir, E. Arenholz, J. Heitz and J. D. Pedarnig, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2009, 24(7), 973–978 RSC .X. K. Shen, H. Wang, Z. Q. Xie, Y. Gao, H. Ling and Y. F. Lu, Appl. Opt., 2009, 48(13), 2551–2558 CrossRef CAS .H. Kondo, N. Hamada and K. Wagatsuma, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2009, 64(9), 884–890 CrossRef .D. Cadosch, E. Chan, O. P. Gautschi, H. P. Simmen and L. Filgueira, J. Orthop. Res., 2009, 27(7), 841–846 CrossRef CAS .T. Ishida, T. Akiyoshi, I. Sumi, R. Kawabata, A. Chino and S. Kinoshiro, Tetsu to Hagane, 2009, 95(10), A690–A694 Search PubMed . M. Oinonen, G. Haggren, A. Kaskela, M. Lavento, V. Palonen and P. Tikkanen, presented at 5th International Symposium on Radiocarbon and Archaeology, Zurich, SWITZERLAND,  Mar 26–28, 2008.N. Valle, J. Drillet, A. Perlade and H. N. Migeon, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2008, 255(4), 1569–1571 CrossRef CAS .Z. L. Li, H. Y. Zheng, K. M. Teh, Y. C. Liu, G. C. Lim, H. L. Seng and N. L. Yakovlev, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2009, 256(5), 1582–1588 CrossRef CAS .J. B. Han, D. Young, H. Colijn, A. Tripathi and S. Nesic, Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research, 2009, 48(13) Search PubMed .J. Engkvist, S. Canovic, F. Liu, H. Gotlind, J. E. Svensson, L. G. Johansson, M. Olsson and M. Halvarsson, Mater. High Temp., 2009, 26(2), 199–210 Search PubMed . S. Suzuki, T. Yamamoto, H. Fukai and K. Shinoda, presented at 11th International Symposium on Physics of Materials (ISPMA), Prague, CZECH REPUBLIC,  Aug 24–28, 2008.P. Viklund, R. Pettersson, A. Hjornhede, P. Henderson and P. Sjovall, Corros. Eng., Sci. Technol., 2009, 44(3), 234–240 Search PubMed . N. Topham, M. Kalivoda, Y. M. Hsu, C. Y. Wu, S. Oh and K. Cho, Journal of Aerosol Science, 41(3), pp. 326–330 Search PubMed.S. Vervynckt, K. Verbeken, P. Thibaux, M. Liebeherr and Y. Houbaert, ISIJ Int., 2009, 49(6), 911–920 Search PubMed . R. Hedwig, Z. S. Lie, K. H. Kurniawan, A. N. Chumakov, K. Kagawa and M. O. Tjia, Journal of Applied Physics, 107(2), p. 5 Search PubMed.M. Jandaghi, P. Parvin, M. J. Torkamany and J. Sabbaghzadeh, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2009, 42(20), 8 . Y. Sasaki and K. Wagatsuma, Bunseki Kagaku, 59(4), pp. 279–285 Search PubMed.F. Sorrentino, G. Carelli, F. Francesconi, M. Francesconi, P. Marsili, G. Cristoforetti, S. Legnaioli, V. Palleschi and E. Tognoni, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2009, 64(10), 1068–1072 CrossRef .G. Cristoforetti, S. Legnaioli, V. Palleschi and E. Tognoni, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2009, 64(4), 357–358 CrossRef .G. Galbacs, N. Jedlinszki, G. Cseh, Z. Galbacs and L. Turi, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2008, 63(5), 591–597 CrossRef .S. Laville, C. Goueguel, H. Loudyi, F. Vidal, M. Chaker and M. Sabsabi, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2009, 64(4), 347–353 CrossRef .J. Wienold, H. Traub, B. Lange, T. Giray, S. Recknagel, H. Kipphardt, R. Matschat and U. Panne, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2009, 24(11), 1570–1574 RSC .D. Klemm, V. Hoffmann, K. Wetzig and J. Eckert, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2009, 395(6), 1893–1900 CrossRef CAS .A. Gopala, H. Kipphardt, R. Matschat and U. Panne, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2009, 24(7), 887–890 RSC . J. C. Farinas, A. G. Coedo and T. Dorado, Talanta, 81(1–2), pp. 301–308 Search PubMed.C. Bendall, D. Wigg-Wolf, Y. Lahaye, H. M. Von Kaenel and G. P. Brey, Archaeometry, 2009, 51, 598–625 CrossRef CAS .O. Eugster, J. Kramers and U. Krahenbuhl, Archaeometry, 2009, 51, 672–681 CrossRef CAS .L. Yang, E. Dabek-Zlotorzynska and V. Celo, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2009, 24(11), 1564–1569 RSC .T. Kagawa, M. Ohno, T. Seki and K. Chikama, Talanta, 2009, 79(4), 1001–1005 CrossRef CAS .S. Pessanha, A. Guilherme and M. L. Carvalho, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2009, 97(2), 497–505 CrossRef CAS . R. Cesareo, A. Bustamante, J. Fabian, C. Calza, M. Dos Anjos, R. T. Lopes, C. Elera, I. Shimada, V. Curay and M. A. Rizzutto, X-ray Spectrometry, 39(2), pp. 122–126 Search PubMed. R. Cesareo, C. Calza, M. Dos Anjos, R. T. Lopes, A. Bustamante, J. Fabian, W. Alva and L. Chero, Applied Radiation and Isotopes, 68(4–5), pp. 525–528 Search PubMed.M. Karimi, N. Amiri and A. A. T. Shabani, X-Ray Spectrom., 2009, 38(3), 234–238 CrossRef CAS .L. A. Pavlova, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2009, 64(8), 782–787 CrossRef .B. Constantinescu, R. Bugoi, V. Cojocaru, R. Simon, D. Grambole, F. Munnik and E. Oberlander-Tarnoveanu, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2009, 64(11–12), 1198–1203 CrossRef .C. M. Oertel, S. P. Baker, A. Niklasson, L. G. Johansson and J. E. Svensson, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156(12), C414–C421 CrossRef CAS .L. K. Herrera, A. Justo, A. Munoz-Paez, J. A. Sans and G. Martinez-Criado, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2009, 395(7), 1969–1975 CrossRef CAS . E. Figueiredo, R. J. C. Silva, M. F. Araujo and J. C. Senna-Martinez, Microchimica Acta, 168(3–4), pp. 283–291 Search PubMed.C. A. Cooper, A. Wu, P. Bauer and C. Antoine, IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond., 2009, 19(3), 1399–1403 CrossRef CAS . Y. H. Yun, International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 35(4), pp. 1713–1718 Search PubMed.G. Balassone, M. Boni, G. Di Maio and I. M. Villa, Periodico Di Mineralogia, 2009, 78(1), 45–63 Search PubMed .L. Torrisi, G. Mondio, A. M. Mezzasalma, D. Margarone, F. Caridi, T. Serafino and A. Torrisi, Eur. Phys. J. D, 2009, 54(2), 225–232 CrossRef CAS .M. Renzi, I. Montero-Ruiz and M. Bode, J. Archaeol. Sci., 2009, 36(11), 2584–2596 Search PubMed .C. Chen, H. Bosse and L. Deters, Proc Inst. Mech. Eng., Part J, 2009, 223(J3), 571–580 Search PubMed .A. D. Pogrebnjak, S. N. Bratushka, V. V. Uglov, V. S. Rusakov, V. M. Beresnev, V. M. Anischik, L. V. Malikov, N. Levintant and P. Zukovski, Vacuum, 2009, 83, S240–S244 CrossRef CAS . A. Michiardi, G. Helary, P. C. T. Nguyen, L. J. Gamble, F. Anagnostou, D. G. Castner and V. Migonney, Acta Biomaterialia, 6(2), pp. 667–675 Search PubMed.Z. Cao, L. Zhang, C. Y. Guo, F. C. Gong, S. Long, S. Z. Tan, C. B. Xia, F. Xu and L. X. Sun, Materials Science & Engineering C-Biomimetic and Supramolecular Systems, 2009, 29(3), 1051–1056 Search PubMed .M. L. Mendoza-Lopez, J. J. Perez-Bueno and M. E. Rodriguez-Garcia, Mater. Charact., 2009, 60(9), 1041–1048 CrossRef CAS .M. Takeda, H. Kurisu, S. Yamamoto and H. Nakagawa, Vacuum, 2009, 84(2), 352–356 CrossRef CAS .M. Nabi and P. Shahbazi, Nuclear Science and Techniques, 2009, 20(6), 340–343 CAS .G. Moretti, C. Barbante, W. R. L. Cairns, F. Guidi, F. Fanari and M. Rubinich, Metallurgia Italiana, 2009,(7–8), 33–39 Search PubMed .M. L. Young, S. Schnepp, F. Casadio, A. Lins, M. Meighan, J. B. Lambert and D. C. Dunand, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2009, 395(1), 171–184 CrossRef CAS .S. Suzuki, H. Shibata, M. Ito and T. Kimura, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2008, 255(4), 1327–1330 CrossRef CAS .J. Agresti, A. A. Mencaglia and S. Siano, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2009, 395(7), 2255–2262 CrossRef CAS .G. M. Lalev, J. W. Lim, N. R. Munirathnam, G. S. Choi, M. Uchikoshi, K. Mimura and M. Isshiki, Met. Mater. Int., 2009, 15(5), 753–757 CrossRef CAS .W. Elshahawy, I. Watanabe and M. Koike, Dent. Mater., 2009, 25(8), 976–981 CrossRef CAS . T. Itagaki, T. Ashino, K. Takada and K. Wagatsuma, Bunseki Kagaku, 59(1), pp. 43–50 Search PubMed.L. X. Sun and H. B. Yu, Spectroscopy and Spectral Analysis, 2009, 29(12), 3375–3378 Search PubMed .H. L. Xie, K. L. Huang, X. D. Nie and L. Fu, J. Wuhan Univ. Technol., Mater. Sci. Ed., 2009, 24(4), 608–612 Search PubMed .G. S. Choi, J. W. Lim, N. R. Munirathnam and I. H. Kim, Met. Mater. Int., 2009, 15(3), 385–390 CrossRef CAS .I. Rezic, L. Curkovic and M. Ujevic, Corros. Sci., 2009, 51(9), 1985–1989 CrossRef CAS .S. Quidelleur, M. Granet, I. Laszak, H. Isnard, E. Pons-Branchu, R. Brennetot and C. Caussignac, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2009, 280(3), 507–517 CrossRef CAS .R. Li, N. Li, J. Tong and W. X. Yuan, Chin. J. Anal. Chem., 2009, 37(5), 749–752 CAS .V. V. Levenets, A. O. Shchur, I. A. Petelguzov and N. N. Belash, Problems of Atomic Science and Technology, 2009,(6), 208–211 Search PubMed .N. Kawahara, E. Tomita, S. Takemoto and Y. Ikeda, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2009, 64(10), 1085–1092 CrossRef .S. Joshi, D. B. Olsen, C. Dumitrescu, P. V. Puzinauskas and A. P. Yalin, Appl. Spectrosc., 2009, 63(5), 549–554 CrossRef CAS .N. Kolbe, O. van Rheinberg and J. T. Andersson, Energy Fuels, 2009, 23, 3024–3031 CrossRef CAS .T. A. Maryutina and A. V. Soin, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81(14), 5896–5901 CrossRef CAS .G. Caumette, C. P. Lienemann, I. Merdrignac, H. Paucot, B. Bouyssiere and R. Lobinski, Talanta, 2009, 80(2), 1039–1043 CrossRef CAS .M. F. de Oliveira, A. A. Saczk, L. L. Okumura and N. R. Stradiotto, Energy Fuels, 2009, 23, 4852–4859 CrossRef .L. S. G. Teixeira, T. J. Chaves, P. R. B. Guimaraes, L. A. M. Pontes and J. S. R. Teixeira, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2009, 640(1–2), 29–32 CrossRef CAS .T. Wang, J. M. Wang, Y. L. Tang, H. L. Shi and K. Ladwig, Energy Fuels, 2009, 23, 2959–2966 CrossRef CAS .W. B. Yin, L. Zhang, L. Dong, W. G. Ma and S. T. Jia, Appl. Spectrosc., 2009, 63(8), 865–872 CrossRef CAS .T. Ctvrtnickova, M. P. Mateo, A. Yanez and G. Nicolas, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2009, 64(10), 1093–1097 CrossRef .J. Thiebaud, M. J. Thomson, R. Mani, W. H. Morrow, E. A. Morris and C. Q. Jia, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43(24), 9294–9299 CrossRef CAS .A. Murase, H. Mori and T. Ohmori, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2008, 255(4), 1494–1497 CrossRef CAS .J. M. Robinson, S. R. Barrett, K. Nhoy, R. K. Pandey, J. Phillips, O. A. Ramirez and R. I. Rodriguez, Energy Fuels, 2009, 23, 2235–2241 CrossRef CAS .M. Hasan, A. Salam and A. M. S. Alam, Biomass Bioenergy, 2009, 33(10), 1376–1380 CrossRef CAS . M. Stals, E. Thijssen, J. Vangronsveld, R. Carleer, S. Schreurs and J. Yperman, Journal of Analytical and Applied Pyrolysis, 87(1), pp. 1–7 Search PubMed. J. S. A. Silva, E. S. Chaves, E. J. dos Santos, T. D. Saint'Pierre, V. L. A. Frescura and A. J. Curtius, Journal of the Brazilian Chemical Society, 21(4), pp. 620–626 Search PubMed.R. R. Monasterio and R. G. Willoud, Talanta, 2009, 79(5), 1484–1488 CrossRef CAS .P. Paneque, M. T. Alvarez-Sotomayor and I. A. Gomeza, Food Chem., 2009, 117(2), 302–305 CrossRef CAS .T. Stafilov and I. Karadjova, Macedonian Journal of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, 2009, 28(1), 17–31 Search PubMed .K. Schlesier, C. Fauhl-Hassek, M. Forina, V. Cotea, E. Kocsi, R. Schoula, F. van Jaarsveld and R. Wittkowski, Eur. Food Res. Technol., 2009, 230(1), 1–13 CrossRef CAS .G. Grindlay, J. Mora, L. Gras and M. T. C. de Loos-Vollebregt, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2009, 652(1–2), 154–160 CrossRef CAS .C. Namowicz, K. Trentelman and C. McGlinchey, Powder Diffr., 2009, 24(2), 124–129 CrossRef CAS . S. Duchene, V. Detalle, R. Bruder and J. B. Sirven, Current Analytical Chemistry, 6(1), pp. 60–65 Search PubMed. M. A. Gondal, Z. S. Seddigi, M. M. Nasr and B. Gondal, Journal of Hazardous Materials, 175(1–3), pp. 726–732 Search PubMed.L. B. Brostoff, C. I. Maynor and R. J. Speakman, Powder Diffr., 2009, 24(2), 116–123 CrossRef CAS .C. Calza, A. Pedreira and R. T. Lopes, X-Ray Spectrom., 2009, 38(4), 327–332 CrossRef CAS .M. L. Carvalho, M. Manso, S. Pessanha, A. Guilherme and F. R. Ferreira, J. Cult. Heritage, 2009, 10(3), 435–438 CrossRef .  G. Buzanich, P. Wobrauschek, C. Streli, A. Markowicz, D. Wegrzynek, E. Chinea-Cano, M. Griesser and K. Uhlir, X-ray Spectrometry, 39(2), pp. 98–102 Search PubMed.L. de Viguerie, V. A. Sole and P. Walter, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2009, 395(7), 2015–2020 CrossRef CAS .J. Striova, G. Coccolini, S. Micheli, C. Lofrumento, M. Galeotti, A. Cagnini and E. M. Castellucci, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2009, 73(3), 539–545 CrossRef .M. Cybulska, A. Jedraszek-Bomba, S. Kuberski and H. Wrzosek, Fibres & Textiles in Eastern Europe, 2008, 16(5), 67–73 Search PubMed .G. Poldi, L. Quartana, A. Galli, F. Maspero, M. Fedi, A. D'Elia, G. Quarta, L. Calcagnile, P. A. Mando and M. Martini, Nuovo Cimento Della Societa Italiana Di Fisica C-Geophysics and Space Physics, 2008, 31(4), 569–580 Search PubMed .M. Alcalde-Molina, J. Ruiz-Jimenez and M. D. L. de Castro, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2009, 652(1–2), 148–153 CrossRef CAS .D. Creagh, A. Lee, V. Otieno-Alego and M. Kubik, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 2009, 78(6), 367–374 CrossRef CAS .L. K. Herrera, S. Montalbani, G. Chiavari, M. Cotte, V. A. Sole, J. Bueno, A. Duran, A. Justo and J. L. Perez-Rodriguez, Talanta, 2009, 80(1), 71–83 CrossRef CAS .B. Dolgin, V. Bulatov and I. Schechter, Reviews in Analytical Chemistry, 2009, 28(3–4), 151–307 Search PubMed .S. A. El Aal, A. Korman, A. Stonert, F. Munnik and A. Turos, Vacuum, 2009, 83, S4–S8 CrossRef CAS .N. Grassi, P. Bonanni, C. Mazzotta, A. Migliori and P. A. Mando, X-Ray Spectrom., 2009, 38(4), 301–307 CrossRef CAS .L. de Viguerie, L. Beck, J. Salomon, L. Pichon and P. Walter, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81(19), 7960–7966 CrossRef CAS .M. Wilke, O. Hahn, A. B. Woodland and K. Rickers, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2009, 24(10), 1364–1372 RSC . M. E. Fleet and X. Liu, Spectrochimica Acta Part B-Atomic Spectroscopy, 65(1), pp. 75–79 Search PubMed.K. D. Charleton, A. E. Smith and D. M. Goltz, Anal. Lett., 2009, 42(16), 2533–2546 CrossRef CAS .S. Pessanha, M. L. Carvalho, M. Manso, A. Guilherme, A. F. Marques and C. A. Perez, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2009, 64(8), 805–807 CrossRef .K. Trentelman and N. Turner, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2009, 40(5), 577–584 CrossRef CAS .C. M. Schmidt, M. S. Walton and K. Trentelman, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81(20), 8513–8518 CrossRef CAS .G. Gautier, A. Bezur, K. Muir, F. Casadio and I. Fiedler, Appl. Spectrosc., 2009, 63(6), 597–603 CrossRef CAS .C. Miliani, B. Doherty, A. Daveri, A. Loesch, H. Ulbricht, B. G. Brunetti and A. Sgamellotti, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2009, 73(4), 587–592 CrossRef .S. Pessanha, A. Guilherme, M. L. Carvalho, M. I. Cabaco, K. Bittencourt, J. L. Bruneel and M. Besnard, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2009, 64(6), 582–586 CrossRef .A. Gambaro, R. Ganzerla, M. Fantin, E. Cappelletto, R. Piazza and W. Cairns, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2009, 651(2), 139–148 CrossRef CAS .I. Osticioli, N. F. C. Mendes, S. Porcinai, A. Cagnini and E. Castellucci, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2009, 394(4), 1033–1041 CrossRef CAS .I. Osticioli, N. F. C. Mendes, A. Nevin, A. Zoppi, C. Lofrumento, M. Becucci and E. M. Castellucci, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2009, 80(7) Search PubMed .B. Arnold, L. Kelly, J. B. Oleske and A. Schill, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2009, 395(2), 349–355 CrossRef CAS .B. Charlton, A. S. Fisher, P. S. Goodall, M. W. Hinds, S. Lancaster and S. Shore, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23(12), 1636–1692 RSC .R. Gonzalez, P. Lucena, L. M. Tobaria and J. J. Laserna, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2009, 24(8), 1123–1126 RSC .V. Lazic, A. Palucci, S. Jovicevic, C. Poggi and E. Buono, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2009, 64(10), 1028–1039 CrossRef .J. L. Gottfried, F. C. De Lucia, C. A. Munson and A. W. Miziolek, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2009, 395(2), 283–300 CrossRef CAS .S. Wallin, A. Pettersson, H. Ostmark and A. Hobro, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2009, 395(2), 259–274 CrossRef CAS .U. Willer and W. Schade, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2009, 395(2), 275–282 CrossRef CAS . J. Moros, J. A. Lorenzo, P. Lucena, L. M. Tobaria and J. J. Laserna, Analytical Chemistry, 82(4), pp. 1389–1400 Search PubMed.B. A. Gething, J. J. Janowiak and R. H. Falk, Forest Products Journal, 2009, 59(3), 67–74 Search PubMed .J. Anzano, B. Bonilla, B. Montull-Ibor and J. Casas-Gonzalez, Med. Chem. Res., 2009, 18(8), 656–664 Search PubMed .M. Manso and M. L. Carvalho, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2009, 64(6), 482–490 CrossRef .E. A. McGaw, D. W. Szymanski and R. W. Smith, J. Forensic Sci., 2009, 54(5), 1171–1175 CrossRef CAS .E. A. McGaw, D. W. Szymanski and R. W. Smith, J. Forensic Sci., 2009, 54(5), 1163–1170 CrossRef CAS . A. Sarkar, S. K. Aggarwal and D. Alamelu, Analytical Methods, 2(1), pp. 32–36 Search PubMed.A. van Es, J. de Koeijer and G. van der Peijl, Sci. Justice, 2009, 49(2), 120–126 Search PubMed .J. M. Gallo and J. R. Almirall, Forensic Sci. Int., 2009, 190(1–3), 52–57 CrossRef CAS .H. Tao and T. Nakazato, Bunseki Kagaku, 2009, 58(5), 363–372 CrossRef CAS .G. D. Yang, X. Q. Xu, M. C. Shen, W. Wang, L. J. Xu, G. N. Chen and F. F. Fu, Electrophoresis, 2009, 30(10), 1718–1723 CrossRef CAS . A. K. Bytzek, M. R. Reithofer, M. Galanski, M. Groessl, B.
K. Keppler and C. G. Hartinger, Electrophoresis, 31(7), pp. 1144–1150 Search PubMed.R. Sanchez, J. L. Todoli, C. P. Lienemann and J. M. Mermet, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2009, 24(10), 1382–1388 RSC .A. Amrani, A. L. Sessions and J. F. Adkins, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81(21), 9027–9034 CrossRef CAS .A. Pourhossein, M. Madani, M. Shahlaei, K. Fakhri, P. Alimohamadi and M. Amiri, Cent. Eur. J. Chem., 2009, 7(3), 382–387 Search PubMed .I. Lavilla, N. Cabaleiro, M. Costas, I. de la Calle and C. Bendicho, Talanta, 2009, 80(1), 109–116 CrossRef CAS .W. N. L. dos Santos, G. C. Brandao, L. A. Portugal, J. M. David and S. L. C. Ferreira, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2009, 64(6), 601–604 CrossRef .P. Grinberg, Z. Mester, A. D'Ulivo and R. E. Sturgeon, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2009, 64(7), 714–716 CrossRef .N. Campillo, R. Penalver, I. Lopez-Garcia and M. Hernandez-Cordoba, J. Chromatogr., A, 2009, 1216(39), 6735–6740 CrossRef CAS .R. Santamaria-Fernandez, R. Hearn and J. C. Wolff, Sci. Justice, 2009, 49(2), 102–106 Search PubMed . T. Narukawa, T. Kuroiwa, I. Narushima, Y. Jimbo, T. Suzuki and K. Chiba, Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry, 397(2), pp. 493–499 Search PubMed.J. Aggarwal, F. Bohm, G. Foster, S. Halas, B. Honisch, S. Y. Jiang, J. Kosler, A. Liba, I. Rodushkin, T. Sheehan, J. J. S. Shen, S. Tonarini, Q. L. Xie, C. F. You, Z. Q. Zhao and E. Zuleger, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2009, 24(6), 825–831 RSC . X. A. Yang, W. B. Zhang, T. Y. Chen and X. F. Chu, Atomic Spectroscopy, 31(1), pp. 6–13 Search PubMed.J. Kratzer, M. Vobecky and J. Dedina, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2009, 24(9), 1222–1228 RSC .I. Kula, Y. Arslan, S. Bakirdere, S. Titretir, E. Kenduzler and O. Y. Ataman, Talanta, 2009, 80(1), 127–132 CrossRef CAS .E. Pitzalis, M. C. Mascherpa, M. Onor and A. D'Ulivo, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2009, 64(4), 309–314 CrossRef .L. Zheng, L. Lin, L. H. Zhu and M. D. Jiang, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2009, 64(3), 222–228 CrossRef . I. Han, S. Porikli, M. Sahin and L. Demir, Radiation Physics and Chemistry, 79(4), pp. 393–396 Search PubMed.M. He, H. T. Shen, G. Z. Shi, X. Y. Yin, W. Z. Tian and S. Jiang, Phys. Rev. C: Nucl. Phys., 2009, 80(6), 4 .N. F. Fidan and B. Izgi, Bulgarian Chemical Communications, 2009, 41(4), 404–408 Search PubMed . L. Reid, K. Chana, J. W. Bond, M. J. Almond and S. Black, Journal of Forensic Sciences, 55(3), pp. 753–756 Search PubMed. L. LaGoo, L. S. Schaeffer, D. W. Szymanski and R. W. Smith, Journal of Forensic Sciences, 55(3), pp. 624–632 Search PubMed.N. Scheid, S. Becker, M. Ducking, G. Hampel, J. V. Kratz, P. Watzke, P. Weis and S. Zauner, Appl. Radiat. Isot., 2009, 67(12), 2128–2132 CrossRef CAS .O. Noguchi, M. Oshima and S. Motomizu, Talanta, 2009, 78(4–5), 1235–1239 CrossRef CAS . M. K. Donais, B. Duncan, D. George and C. Bizzarri, X-ray Spectrometry, 39(2), pp. 146–153 Search PubMed. T. Gatta, M. Tomassetti, P. C. Rossetto, R. Grossi, G. Visco and L. Campanella, Current Analytical Chemistry, 6(1), pp. 80–87 Search PubMed.M. A. Gondal, Z. H. Yamani, T. Hussain and O. S. B. Al-Amoudi, Spectrosc. Lett., 2009, 42(4), 171–177 CrossRef CAS .C. D. Gehlen, E. Wiens, R. Noll, G. Wilsch and K. Reichling, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2009, 64(10), 1135–1140 CrossRef .D. P. Intima, E. de Oliveira and P. V. Oliveira, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2009, 64(6), 610–614 CrossRef .W. O. Matos and J. A. Nobrega, Quimica Nova, 2009, 32(8), 2094–2097 Search PubMed .M. D. Huang, H. Becker-Ross, S. Florek, M. Okruss, B. Welz and S. Mores, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2009, 64(7), 697–701 CrossRef .J. S. Lee, D. S. Lee, C. J. Park, M. S. Jeon and H. S. Lee, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2009, 9, S280–S283 CrossRef .E. D. McNaghten, A. M. Parkes, B. C. Griffiths, A. I. Whitehouse and S. Palanco, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2009, 64(10), 1111–1118 CrossRef .N. L. Misra, I. Varga, S. Dhara and S. K. Aggarwal, X-Ray Spectrom., 2009, 38(3), 182–185 CrossRef CAS .X. Z. Cheng, K. Shao, R. H. Zhang, Y. S. Zhang and Y. Liu, Atomic Spectroscopy, 2009, 30(3), 98–103 CAS . T. Tochio, S. Sakakura, H. Oohashi, H. Mizota, Y. H. Zou, Y. Ito, S. Fukushima, S. Tanuma, T. Shoji, H. Fujimura and M. Yamashita, Analytical Sciences, 26(2), pp. 277–279 Search PubMed.C. L. Kahakachchi and D. A. Moore, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2009, 24(10), 1389–1396 RSC . Y. H. Yang, F. Y. Wu, L. W. Xie and Y. B. Zhang, Analytical Letters, 43(1), pp. 142–150 Search PubMed.M. A. Reddy, N. N. Meeravali and S. J. Kumar, Atomic Spectroscopy, 2009, 30(3), 92–97 CAS .S. Kagaya, T. Mizuno and K. Tohda, Talanta, 2009, 79(2), 512–516 CrossRef CAS .H. Oechsner, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2009, 9(7), 3999–4007 CrossRef CAS . D. R. Baer, D. J. Gaspar, P. Nachimuthu, S. D. Techane and D. G. Castner, Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry, 396(3), pp. 983–1002 Search PubMed. B. Fernandez, J. M. Costa, R. Pereiro and A. Sanz-Medel, Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry, 396(1), pp. 15–29 Search PubMed.J. E. Decker, A. R. H. Walker, K. Bosnick, C. A. Clifford, L. Dai, J. Fagan, S. Hooker, Z. J. Jakubek, C. Kingston, J. Makar, E. Mansfield, M. T. Postek, B. Simard, R. Sturgeon, S. Wise, A. E. Vladar, L. Yang and R. Zeisler, Metrologia, 2009, 46(6), 682–692 CrossRef CAS . C. C. Garcia, A. Murtazin, S. Groh, M. Becker and K. Niemax, Spectrochimica Acta Part B-Atomic Spectroscopy, 65(1), pp. 80–85 Search PubMed. V. Zorba, X. L. Mao and R. E. Russo, Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry, 396(1), pp. 173–180 Search PubMed.T. Amodeo, C. Dutouquet, O. Le Bihan, M. Attoui and E. Frejafon, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2009, 64(10), 1141–1152 CrossRef .M. E. Asgill and D. W. Hahn, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2009, 64(10), 1153–1158 CrossRef .R. Allabashi, W. Stach, A. de la Escosura-Muniz, L. Liste-Calleja and A. Merkoci, J. Nanopart. Res., 2009, 11(8), 2003–2011 CrossRef CAS .K. Tiede, A. B. A. Boxall, D. Tiede, S. P. Tear, H. David and J. Lewis, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2009, 24(7), 964–972 RSC . I. Choi, K. Song, Y. J. Park, J. Y. Kim and H. S. Yoo, Microchemical Journal, 95(1), pp. 38–42 Search PubMed. D. Alberts, V. Vega, R. Pereiro, N. Bordel, V. M. Prida, A. Bengtson and A. Sanz-Medel, Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry, 396(8), pp. 2833–2840 Search PubMed.A. von Bohlen, M. Kramer, C. Sternemann and M. Paulus, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2009, 24(6), 792–800 RSC .R. Fernandez-Ruiz, P. Ocon and M. Montiel, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2009, 24(6), 785–791 RSC .F. Esaka, K. Watanabe, T. Onodera, C. G. Lee, M. Magara, S. Sakurai and S. Usuda, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2008, 255(4), 1512–1515 CrossRef CAS .N. S. Lloyd, R. R. Parrish, M. S. A. Horstwood and S. R. N. Chenery, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2009, 24(6), 752–758 RSC .B. A. Bushaw and N. C. Anheier, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2009, 64(11–12), 1259–1265 CrossRef .R. C. Chinni, D. A. Cremers, L. J. Radziemski, M. Bostian and C. Navarro-Northrup, Applied Spectroscopy, 2009, 63(11), 1238–1250 CrossRef CAS .K. G. W. Inn, J. LaRosa, S. Nour, G. Brooks, S. Lamont, R. Steiner, R. Williams, B. Patton, D. Bostick, G. Eiden, S. Petersen, M. Douglas, D. Beals, J. Cadieux, G. Hall, S. Goldberg and S. Vogt, Appl. Radiat. Isot., 2009, 67(5), 667–671 CrossRef CAS .R. S. Kips and M. J. Kristo, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2009, 282(3), 1031–1035 CrossRef CAS .R. Kips, A. J. Pidduck, M. R. Houlton, A. Leenaers, J. D. Mace, O. Marie, F. Pointurier, E. A. Stefaniak, P. D. P. Taylor, S. Van den Berghe, P. Van Espen, R. Van Grieken and R. Wellum, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2009, 64(3), 199–207 CrossRef .J. Sommers, D. Cummings, J. Giglio and K. Carney, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2009, 282(2), 591–595 CrossRef CAS .D. G. Cummings, J. D. Sommers, M. L. Adamic, M. Jimenez, J. J. Giglio, K. P. Carney and K. Grimm, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2009, 282(3), 923–928 CrossRef CAS .S. J. Tumey, T. Brown, T. Hamilton and D. Hillegonds, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2009, 282(3), 821–824 CrossRef CAS .S. Topin, J. Aupiais, N. Baglan, T. Vercouter, P. Vitorge and P. Moisy, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81(13), 5354–5363 CrossRef CAS . S. Topin, J. Aupiais and N. Baglan, Radiochimica Acta, 98(2), pp. 71–75 Search PubMed.S. Topin, J. Aupiais and P. Moisy, Electrophoresis, 2009, 30(10), 1747–1755 CrossRef CAS .J. Petit, V. Geertsen, C. Beaucaire and M. Stambouli, J. Chromatogr., A, 2009, 1216(18), 4113–4120 CrossRef CAS .M. Liezers, S. A. Lehn, K. B. Olsen, O. T. Farmer and D. C. Duckworth, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2009, 282(1), 299–304 CrossRef CAS .M. M. Tripathi, K. E. Eseller, F. Y. Yueh and J. P. Singh, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2009, 64(11–12), 1212–1218 CrossRef .O. R. Daillant, A. Bernollin, M. Josset and K. L. Fifield, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2009, 281(2), 241–245 CrossRef CAS .H. Isnard, M. Granet, C. Caussignac, E. Ducarme, A. Nonell, B. Tran and F. Chartier, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2009, 64(11–12), 1280–1286 CrossRef .M. Yoshida, T. Tanabe, Y. Nobuta, T. Hayashi, K. Masaki and M. Sato, J. Nucl. Mater., 2009, 390–91, 635–638 CrossRef .N. Goyal, P. J. Purohit, M. J. Kulkarni and S. V. Godbole, Atomic Spectroscopy, 2009, 30(5), 156–161 CAS .S. K. Sahoo, Y. Muramatsu, S. Yoshida, H. Matsuzaki and W. Ruhm, J. Radiat. Res., 2009, 50(4), 325–332 Search PubMed .M. D. Engelmann, N. E. Ballou, R. A. Kiddy and D. D. Jenson, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2009, 282(3), 825–829 CrossRef CAS .S. Portier, S. Bremier, R. Hasnaoui, O. Bildstein and C. T. Walker, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2008, 255(4), 1323–1326 CrossRef CAS . J. J. La Rosa, J. W. Mietelski and E. Wyse, Journal of Radioanalytical and Nuclear Chemistry, 283(2), pp. 385–387 Search PubMed. D. K. Pant, G. A. Chaugule, K. K. Gupta, P. G. Kulkarni, P. B. Gurba, P. Janardan, R. D. Changrani, P. K. Dey, P. N. Pathak, D. R. Prabhu, A. S. Kanekar and V. K. Manchanda, Journal of Radioanalytical and Nuclear Chemistry, 283(2), pp. 513–518 Search PubMed.S. Rollin, H. Sahli, R. Holzer, M. Astner and M. Burger, Appl. Radiat. Isot., 2009, 67(5), 821–827 CrossRef CAS . W. Dong, S. G. Tims, L. K. Fifield and Q. J. Guo, Journal of Environmental Radioactivity, 101(1), pp. 29–32 Search PubMed.S. H. Lee, P. P. Povinec, J. Gastaud, J. J. La Rosa, E. Wyse and L. K. Fifield, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2009, 282(3), 831–835 CrossRef CAS .R. E. Martinelli, T. F. Hamilton, R. W. Williams and S. R. Kehl, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2009, 282(2), 343–347 CrossRef CAS .M. Godoy, J. M. Godoy, L. A. Roldao and L. Tauhata, J. Environ. Radioact., 2009, 100(8), 613–625 CrossRef CAS .M. Leermakers, Y. Gao, J. Navez, A. Poffijn, K. Croes and W. Baeyens, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2009, 24(8), 1115–1117 RSC .P. Bienvenu, L. Ferreux, G. Andreoletti, N. Arnal, M. C. Lepy, J. Comte and M. M. Be, Radiochim. Acta, 2009, 97(12), 687–694 CrossRef CAS .S. J. Tumey, T. A. Brown, B. A. Buchholz, T. F. Hamilton, I. D. Hutcheon and R. W. Williams, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2009, 282(3), 721–724 CrossRef CAS .S. K. Sahoo, Indian Journal of Physics and Proceedings of the Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science, 2009, 83(6), 787–797 Search PubMed .W. Um, Z. M. Wang, R. J. Serne, B. D. Williams, C. F. Brown, C. J. Dodge and A. J. Francis, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43(12), 4280–4286 CrossRef CAS .J. R. Petherbridge, T. B. Scott, J. Glascott, C. Younes, G. C. Allen and I. Findlay, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 476(1–2), 543–549 CrossRef CAS .A. Sakaguchi, K. Kawai, P. Steier, F. Quinto, K. Mino, J. Tomita, M. Hoshi, N. Whitehead and M. Yamamoto, Sci. Total Environ., 2009, 407(14), 4238–4242 CrossRef CAS .M. Godoy, L. Juliao and J. M. Godoy, Radiat. Prot. Dosim., 2009, 133(4), 234–239 CrossRef CAS .S. R. Yousefi, S. J. Ahmadi, F. Shemirani, M. R. Jamali and M. Salavati-Niasari, Talanta, 2009, 80(1), 212–217 CrossRef CAS .S. E. Pepper, D. R. Peterman, T. J. Tranter and B. M. White, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2009, 282(3), 909–912 CrossRef CAS .S. L. Maxwell and V. D. Jones, Talanta, 2009, 80(1), 143–150 CrossRef CAS .T. Vaculovic, P. Sulovsky, J. Machat, V. Otruba, O. Matal, T. Simo, C. Latkoczy, D. Gunther and V. Kanicky, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2009, 24(5), 649–654 RSC .R. Paris, M. Aints, M. Laan, M. Kiisk, J. Likonen, J. Kolehmainen and S. Tervakangas, Fusion Eng. Des., 2009, 84(7–11), 1465–1467 CrossRef . L. X. Feng, L. D. Ma, J. Wang and H. Lu, Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry, 396(8), pp. 3051–3057 Search PubMed. L. D. Ma, L. X. Feng, A. Hioki, K. H. Cho, J. Vogl, A. Berger, G. Turk, S. Macleod, G. Labarraque, W. F. Tong, D. Schiel, C. Yafa, L. Valiente, L. A. Konopelko, C. Quetel, P. Vermaercke, J. V. L. Manzano, M. Linsky, E. Cortes, S. Tangpitayakul, L. Plangsangmas, L. Bergamaschi and R. Hearn, Accreditation and Quality Assurance, 15(1), pp. 39–44 Search PubMed. R. Zeleny, S. Voorspoels, M. Ricci, R. Becker, C. Jung, W. Bremser, M. Sittidech, N. Panyawathanakit, W. F. Wong, S. M. Choi, K. C. Lo, W. Y. Yeung, D. H. Kim, J. Han, J. Ryu, S. Mingwu, W. Chao, M. M. Schantz, K. A. Lippa and S. Matsuyama, Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry, 396(4), pp. 1501–1511 Search PubMed. C. M. Mahoney, Mass Spectrometry Reviews, 29(2), pp. 247–293 Search PubMed.P. Belenguer, M. Ganciu, P. Guillot and T. Nelis, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2009, 64(7), 623–641 CrossRef .M. Resano, J. Briceno and M. A. Belarra, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2009, 64(6), 520–529 CrossRef .D. Fliegel and D. Gunther, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2009, 64(5), 399–407 CrossRef . M. Weidman, M. Baudelet, S. Palanco, M. Sigman, P. J. Dagdigian and M. Richardson, Optics Express, 18(1), pp. 259–266 Search PubMed.A. Pal, R. D. Waterbury, E. L. Dottery and D. K. Killinger, Opt. Express, 2009, 17(11), 8856–8870 CrossRef CAS .M. Boueri, M. Baudelet, J. Yu, X. L. Mao, S. S. Mao and R. Russo, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2009, 255(24), 9566–9571 CrossRef CAS .J. Jasik, J. Heitz, J. D. Pedarnig and P. Veis, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2009, 64(10), 1128–1134 CrossRef . K. Nakano and K. Tsuji, Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry, 25(4), pp. 562–569 Search PubMed.I. Schaumann, W. Malzer, I. Mantouvalou, L. Luhl, B. Kanngiesser, R. Dargel, U. Giese and C. Vogt, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2009, 64(4), 334–340 CrossRef .R. W. Paynter, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2009, 255(21), 8738–8742 CrossRef CAS .R. W. Paynter, Surf. Interface Anal., 2009, 41(7), 595–601 CrossRef CAS . D. P. Moraes, J. S. F. Pereira, L. O. Diehl, M. F. Mesko, V. L. Dressler, J. N. G. Paniz, G. Knapp and E. M. M. Flores, Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry, 397(2), pp. 563–570 Search PubMed.S. Keresztes, E. Tatar, V. G. Mihucz, I. Virag, C. Majdik and G. Zaray, Sci. Total Environ., 2009, 407(16), 4731–4735 CrossRef CAS . X. M. Jiang, S. P. Wen and G. Q. Xiang, Journal of Hazardous Materials, 175(1–3), pp. 146–150 Search PubMed.Q. Godoi, D. Santos, L. C. Nunes, F. O. Leme, I. A. Rufini, J. A. M. Agnelli, L. C. Trevizan and F. J. Krug, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2009, 64(6), 573–581 CrossRef .M. N. Siddiqui, M. A. Gondal and M. M. Nasr, Bull. Environ. Contam. Toxicol., 2009, 83(1), 141–145 CrossRef CAS . F. Bezati, D. Froelich, V. Massardier and E. Maris, Waste Management, 30(4), pp. 591–596 Search PubMed.E. Dimitrakakis, A. Janz, B. Bilitewski and E. Gidarakos, Waste Manage., 2009, 29(10), 2700–2706 CrossRef CAS .N. Longas, R. G. Arrona, M. Ostra and E. Millan, Atomic Spectroscopy, 2009, 30(2), 47–53 CAS .B. Schmidt, J. H. Petersen, C. B. Koch, D. Plackett, N. R. Johansen, V. Katiyar and E. H. Larsen, Food Additives and Contaminants Part a-Chemistry Analysis Control Exposure & Risk Assessment, 2009, 26(12), 1619–1627 Search PubMed .A. Erko and I. Zizak, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2009, 64(9), 833–848 CrossRef . M. Trushin, W. Seifert, O. Vyvenko, J. Bauer, G. Martinez-Criado, M. Salome and M. Kittler, Nuclear Instruments & Methods in Physics Research Section B-Beam Interactions with Materials and Atoms, 268(3–4), pp. 254–258 Search PubMed. P. Honicke, B. Beckhoff, M. Kolbe, D. Giubertoni, J. van den Berg and G. Pepponi, Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry, 396(8), pp. 2825–2832 Search PubMed. D. Giubertoni, E. Iacob, P. Hoenicke, B. Beckhoff, G. Pepponi, S. Gennaro and M. Bersani, Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B, 28(1), pp. C1C84–C81C89 Search PubMed.H. W. P. de Carvalho, A. P. L. Batista, T. C. Ramalho, C. A. Perez and A. L. Gobbi, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2009, 74(1), 292–296 CrossRef .A. Kubala-Kukus, D. Banas, W. Cao, J. C. Dousse, J. Hoszowska, Y. Kayser, M. Pajek, M. Salome, J. Susini, J. Szlachetko and M. Szlachetko, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80(11) Search PubMed .J. Szlachetko, D. Banas, A. Kubala-Kukus, M. Pajek, W. Cao, J. C. Dousse, J. Hoszowska, Y. Kayser, M. Szlachetko, M. Kavcic, M. Salome and J. Susini, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 105(8) Search PubMed .O. Icelli, G. Cankaya and A. Cetin, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2009, 605(3), 359–363 CrossRef CAS .H. Yamazaki, M. Yoshiki, M. Takemura, M. Tomita and S. Takeno, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2009, 64(8), 808–811 CrossRef . H. U. Ehrke, N. Loibl, M. P. Moret, F. Horreard, J. Choi, C. Hombourger, V. Paret, R. Benbalagh, N. Morel and M. Schuhmacher, Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B, 28(1), pp. C1C54–C51C58 Search PubMed.T. Asakawa, D. Nagano, S. Denda and K. Miyairi, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2008, 255(4), 1387–1390 CrossRef CAS .B. Berghmans and W. Vandervorst, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106(3) Search PubMed .Z. X. Jiang and D. D. Sieloff, Surf. Interface Anal., 2009, 41(11), 893–896 CrossRef CAS .C. Verdeil, T. Wirtz and H. Scherrer, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2009, 267(16), 2745–2747 CrossRef CAS .C. Dubois, G. Prudon, B. Gautier and J. C. Dupuy, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2008, 255(4), 1377–1380 CrossRef CAS .X. Ravanel, C. Trouiller, M. Juhel, C. Wyon, L. F. T. Kwakman and D. Leonard, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2008, 255(4), 1415–1418 CrossRef CAS .X. Ravanel, C. Trouiller, M. Juhel, C. Wyon, L. F. T. Kwakman and D. Leonard, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2008, 255(4), 1440–1442 CrossRef CAS .S. Ninomiya, K. Ichiki, H. Yamada, Y. Nakata, T. Seki, T. Aoki and J. Matsuo, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2009, 23(20), 3264–3268 CrossRef CAS . R. E. Goacher and J. A. Gardella, Applied Surface Science, 256(7), pp. 2044–2051 Search PubMed.R. E. Goacher, S. Hegde, H. Luo and J. A. Gardella, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106(4) Search PubMed .M. Saleem, A. Hameed, M. J. Iqbal and M. A. Baig, Eur. Phys. J. D, 2009, 55(1), 121–126 CrossRef CAS .D. Asogan, B. L. Sharp, C. J. P. O'Connor, D. A. Green and R. W. Hutchinson, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2009, 24(7), 917–923 RSC .M. V. Zoriy, D. Mayer and J. S. Becker, J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom., 2009, 20(5), 883–890 CrossRef CAS .R. Dargel, F. Heinemeyer, M. Kontges, J. Vogt and C. Vogt, Microchim. Acta, 2009, 165(3–4), 265–270 CrossRef CAS .M. Hori, R. S. Hayano, M. Fukuta, T. Koyama, H. Nobusue and J. Tanaka, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2009, 80(10), 9 .M. F. Almeida, S. M. Xara, J. Delgado and C. A. Costa, Waste Manage., 2009, 29(1), 342–349 CrossRef CAS .I. C. Nnorom and O. Osibanjo, International Journal of Environmental Science and Technology, 2009, 6(4), 641–650 Search PubMed . K. W. Torrance, H. E. Keenan, A. S. Hursthouse and D. Stirling, Journal of Environmental Science and Health Part a-Toxic/Hazardous Substances & Environmental Engineering, 45(4), pp. 471–475 Search PubMed. H. L. Chiang, C. C. Lo and S. Y. Ma, Environmental Science and Pollution Research, 17(3), pp. 624–633 Search PubMed.S. E. Lorge and R. S. Houk, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2009, 64(11–12), 1235–1239 CrossRef .A. von Bohlen, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2009, 64(9), 821–832 CrossRef .V. Vidova, M. Volny, K. Lemr and V. Havlicek, Collect. Czech. Chem. Commun., 2009, 74(7–8), 1101–1116 CrossRef CAS .J. Pisonero, B. Fernandez and D. Gunther, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2009, 24(9), 1145–1160 RSC .J. Y. Wang, U. Starke and E. J. Mittemeijer, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517(11), 3402–3407 CrossRef CAS .K. A. Tereszchuk, J. M. Vadillo and J. J. Laserna, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2009, 64(5), 378–383 CrossRef .E. L. Surmenko, T. N. Sokolova, Y. V. Chebotarevsky and I. A. Popov, Laser Physics, 2009, 19(6), 1373–1376 .J. M. Gregoire, D. Dale, A. Kazimirov, F. J. DiSalvo and R. B. van Dover, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2009, 80(12), 6 . U. E. A. Fittschen and G. J. Havrilla, Analytical Chemistry, 82(1), pp. 297–306 Search PubMed.D. Sokaras, A. G. Karydas, W. Malzer, R. Schutz, B. Kanngiesser, N. Grlj, P. Pelicon and M. Zitnik, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2009, 24(5), 611–621 RSC . S. Oswald and F. Oswald, Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry, 396(8), pp. 2805–2812 Search PubMed.J. S. Lee and H. B. Lim, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2009, 24(12), 1681–1683 RSC .L. Bennun, E. D. Greaves, H. Barros and J. Diaz-Valdes, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2009, 267(15), 2532–2537 CrossRef CAS . M. K. Tiwari, G. S. Lodha and K. J. S. Sawhney, X-ray Spectrometry, 39(2), pp. 127–134 Search PubMed.Z. Erdelyi, C. Cserhati, A. Csik, L. Daroczi, G. A. Langer, Z. Balogh, M. Varga, D. L. Beke, I. Zizak and A. Erko, X-Ray Spectrom., 2009, 38(4), 338–342 CrossRef CAS . C. Streeck, B. Beckhoff, F. Reinhardt, M. Kolbe, B. Kanngiesser, C. A. Kaufmann and H. W. Schock, Nuclear Instruments & Methods in Physics Research Section B-Beam Interactions with Materials and Atoms, 268(3–4), pp. 277–281 Search PubMed. G. Pepponi, D. Giubertoni, M. Bersani, F. Meirer, D. Ingerle, G. Steinhauser, C. Streli, P. Hoenicke and B. Beckhoff, Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B, 28(1), pp. C1C59–C51C64 Search PubMed. M. Pagels, F. Reinhardt, B. Pollakowski, M. Roczen, C. Becker, K. Lips, B. Rech, B. Kanngiesser and B. Beckhoff, Nuclear Instruments & Methods in Physics Research Section B-Beam Interactions with Materials and Atoms, 268(3–4), pp. 370–373 Search PubMed.J. Yang, K. Tsuji, X. Y. Lin, D. Y. Han and X. L. Ding, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517(11), 3357–3361 CrossRef CAS . N. I. Mashin, A. A. Leont'eva, R. V. Lebedeva and A. N. Tumanova, Inorganic Materials, 46(3), pp. 310–313 Search PubMed. M. K. Tiwari, K. J. S. Sawhney and G. S. Lodha, Surface and Interface Analysis, 42(2), pp. 110–116 Search PubMed.A. Christofi, J. F. Walker and D. S. McPhail, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2008, 255(4), 1381–1383 CrossRef CAS .B. Berghmans, B. Van Daele, L. Geenen, T. Conard, A. Franquet and W. Vandervorst, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2008, 255(4), 1316–1319 CrossRef CAS .M. Boulakroune, D. Benatia and T. Kezai, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 48(6) Search PubMed . J. Brison, S. Muramoto and D. G. Castner, Journal of Physical Chemistry C, 114(12), pp. 5565–5573 Search PubMed.B. Andras, A. Csik, V. Kalman, M. Gyorgy, E. Toth-Kadar and P. Laszlo, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156(7), D253–D260 CrossRef .N. Zhang and F. L. King, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2009, 24(11), 1489–1497 RSC .A. Tempez, S. Canulescu, I. S. Molchan, M. Dobeli, J. A. Whitby, L. Lobo, J. Michler, G. E. Thompson, N. Bordel, P. Chapon, P. Skeldon, I. Delfanti, N. Tuccitto and A. Licciardello, Surf. Interface Anal., 2009, 41(12–13), 966–973 CrossRef CAS . M. Voronov, P. Smid, V. Hoffmann, T. Hofmann and C. Venzago, Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry, 25(4), pp. 511–518 Search PubMed. S. Canulescu, I. S. Molchan, C. Tauziede, A. Tempez, J. A. Whitby, G. E. Thompson, P. Skeldon, P. Chapon and J. Michler, Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry, 396(8), pp. 2871–2879 Search PubMed.D. Klemm, V. Hoffmann and C. Edelmann, Vacuum, 2009, 84(2), 299–303 CrossRef CAS . N. Trigoulet, T. Hashimoto, I. S. Molchan, P. Skeldon, G. E. Thompson, A. Tempez and P. Chapon, Surface and Interface Analysis, 42(4), 328–333 Search PubMed.A. E. Kurganova, G. E. Snopatin and A. I. Suchkov, Inorg. Mater., 2009, 45(12), 1408–1412 CrossRef CAS .G. A. Bordovskii, A. V. Marchenko, P. P. Seregin, N. N. Smirnova and E. I. Terukov, Tech. Phys. Lett., 2009, 35(11), 1032–1035 CrossRef CAS .M. Procop, V. D. Hodoroaba, A. Bjeoumikhov, R. Wedell and A. Warrikhoff, X-Ray Spectrom., 2009, 38(4), 308–311 CrossRef CAS .I. B. Gornushkin, U. Panne and J. D. Winefordner, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2009, 64(10), 1040–1047 CrossRef CAS . M. Hola, V. Konecna, P. Mikuska, J. Kaiser and V. Kanicky, Spectrochimica Acta Part B-Atomic Spectroscopy, 65(1), pp. 51–60 Search PubMed.F. Claverie, B. Fernandez, C. Pecheyran, J. Alexis and O. F. X. Donard, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2009, 24(7), 891–902 RSC .K. P. Jochum, B. Stoll, U. Weis, D. V. Kuzmin and A. V. Sobolev, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2009, 24(9), 1237–1243 RSC .C. D. May and R. J. Watling, Forensic Science Medicine and Pathology, 2009, 5(2), 66–76 Search PubMed . A. King, T. Henkel, D. Rost and I. C. Lyon, Rapid Communications in Mass Spectrometry, 24(1), pp. 15–20 Search PubMed. S. D. Pangavhane, J. Houska, T. Wagner, M. Pavlista, J. Janca and J. Havel, Rapid Communications in Mass Spectrometry, 24(1), pp. 95–102 Search PubMed.M. Gaboardi and M. Humayun, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2009, 24(9), 1188–1197 RSC .L. K. Herrera and H. A. Videla, Int. Biodeterior. Biodegrad., 2009, 63(7), 813–822 Search PubMed .H. E. Mahnke, A. Denker and J. Salomon, C. R. Phys., 2009, 10(7), 660–675 Search PubMed . M. Resano, E. Garcia-Ruiz and F. Vanhaecke, Mass Spectrometry Reviews, 29(1), pp. 55–78 Search PubMed. I. Mantouvalou, K. Lange, T. Wolff, D. Grotzsch, L. Luhl, M. Haschke, O. Hahn and B. Kanngiesser, Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry, 25(4), pp. 554–561 Search PubMed.J. T. van Elteren, N. H. Tennent and V. S. Selih, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2009, 644(1–2), 1–9 CrossRef CAS . A. G. Revenko, X-ray Spectrometry, 39(1), pp. 63–69 Search PubMed. R. Georgieva, A. Detcheva, Y. Dimitriev and B. Samuneva, Comptes Rendus De L Academie Bulgare Des Sciences, 63(1), pp. 71–76 Search PubMed. N. Carmona, I. Ortega-Feliu, B. Gomez-Tubio and M. A. Villegas, Materials Characterization, 61(2), pp. 257–267 Search PubMed.L. de Viguerie, A. Duran, A. Bouquillon, V. A. Sole, J. Castaing and P. Walter, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2009, 395(7), 2219–2225 CrossRef CAS .Z. Smit, F. Stamati, N. Civici, A. Vevecka-Priftaj, M. Kos and D. Jezersek, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2009, 267(15), 2538–2544 CrossRef CAS .A. J. Shortland and H. Schroeder, Archaeometry, 2009, 51, 947–965 CrossRef .D. Barca, M. Abate, G. M. Crisci and D. De Presbiteris, Periodico Di Mineralogia, 2009, 78(2), 49–64 Search PubMed .M. S. Walton, A. Shortland, S. Kirk and P. Degryse, J. Archaeol. Sci., 2009, 36(7), 1496–1503 Search PubMed .L. Dussubieux, P. Robertshaw and M. D. Glascock, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2009, 284(1–3), 152–161 Search PubMed .N. Kato, I. Nakai and Y. Shindo, J. Archaeol. Sci., 2009, 36(8), 1698–1707 Search PubMed .M. Gulmini, M. Pace, G. Ivaldi, M. N. Ponzi and P. Mirti, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2009, 355(31–33), 1613–1621 CrossRef CAS .M. P. Alonso, F. Capel, F. J. V. Fuentes, A. de Pablos, I. Ortega, B. Gomez and M. A. Respaldiza, Boletin De La Sociedad Espanola De Ceramica Y Vidrio, 2009, 48(4), 179–186 Search PubMed .O. Schalm, V. Van der Linden, P. Frederickx, S. Luyten, G. Van der Snickt, J. Caen, D. Schryvers, K. Janssens, E. Cornelis, D. Van Dyck and M. Schreiner, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2009, 64(8), 812–820 CrossRef .V. Van der Linden, P. Cosyns, O. Schalm, S. Cagno, K. Nys, K. Janssens, A. Nowak, B. Wagner and E. Bulska, Archaeometry, 2009, 51, 822–844 CrossRef CAS .D. Sokaras, A. G. Karydas, A. Oikonomou, N. Zacharias, K. Beltsios and V. Kantarelou, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2009, 395(7), 2199–2209 CrossRef CAS .Z. Wang, S. W. Wang, D. R. Qiu and P. Y. Yang, Spectroscopy and Spectral Analysis, 2009, 29(10), 2838–2842 Search PubMed .M. Brai, G. Gennaro, T. Schillaci and L. Tranchina, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2009, 64(10), 1119–1127 CrossRef .T. Miura, H. Matsue, T. Kuroiwa and K. Chiba, Anal. Sci., 2009, 25(7), 881–885 CrossRef CAS . F. S. Rojas, C. B. Ojeda and J. M. C. Pavon, Microchemical Journal, 94(1), pp. 7–13 Search PubMed.J. S. Lee, Y. S. Lee, C. J. Park, H. S. Lee and D. S. Lee, Journal of Materials Science & Technology, 2009, 25(3), 333–335 Search PubMed .Z. Wang, D. R. Qiu, G. Y. Tao and P. Y. Yang, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2009, 24(9), 1258–1261 RSC . M. A. Amberger, M. Holtig and J. A. C. Broekaert, Spectrochimica Acta Part B-Atomic Spectroscopy, 65(2), pp. 152–157 Search PubMed.M. A. Amberger and J. A. C. Broekaert, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2009, 24(11), 1517–1523 RSC .K. Nakano and K. Tsuji, X-Ray Spectrom., 2009, 38(5), 446–450 CrossRef CAS .T. Ctvrtnickova, F. J. Fortes, L. M. Cabalin, V. Kanicky and J. J. Laserna, Surf. Interface Anal., 2009, 41(9), 714–719 CrossRef CAS .N. Fukumoto, Y. Mizukami, S. Yoshikawa and H. Morita, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2008, 255(4), 1391–1394 CrossRef CAS .E. S. Raj, A. Atkinson and J. A. Kilner, Solid State Ionics, 2009, 180(14–16), 952–955 CrossRef CAS .W. K. Pang, I. M. Low, B. H. O'Connor, Z. M. Sun and K. E. Prince, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2009, 117(2–3), 384–389 CrossRef CAS .R. Boulesteix, A. Maitre, J. F. Baumard, Y. Rabinovitch, C. Salle, S. Weber and A. Kilo, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2009, 29(12), 2517–2526 CrossRef CAS .T. Duong, A. M. Limarga and D. R. Clarke, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2009, 92(11), 2731–2737 CrossRef CAS .M. Gonzalez, R. Roman, C. Maffiotte, J. Gonzalez-Casablanca, R. Perez and D. Hole, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2009, 267(8–9), 1468–1471 CrossRef CAS .M. J. Bailey, S. Coe, D. M. Grant, G. W. Grime and C. Jeynes, X-Ray Spectrom., 2009, 38(4), 343–347 CrossRef CAS .M. E. Bahrololoom, M. Javidi, S. Javadpour and J. Ma, Journal of Ceramic Processing Research, 2009, 10(2), 129–138 Search PubMed .D. Gopi, V. C. A. Prakash and L. Kavitha, Materials Science & Engineering C-Biomimetic and Supramolecular Systems, 2009, 29(3), 955–958 Search PubMed . A. Bianco, I. Cacciotti, M. Lombardi, L. Montanaro, E. Bemporad and M. Sebastiani, Ceramics International, 36(1), pp. 313–322 Search PubMed.T. M. B. Farias, R. F. Gennari, C. Etchevarne and S. Watanabe, Radiat. Prot. Dosim., 2009, 136(1), 45–49 CrossRef CAS .C. Pizarro, J. M. Gonzalez-Saiz, I. Esteban-Diez, S. Rodriguez-Tecedor, N. Perez-del-Notario and C. Saenz-Gonzalez, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2009, 646(1–2), 69–77 CrossRef CAS .N. Sharratt, M. Golitko, P. R. Williams and L. Dussubieux, Geoarchaeology, 2009, 24(6), 792–820 CrossRef .J. Perez-Arantegui, B. Montull, M. Resano and J. M. Ortega, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2009, 29(12), 2499–2509 CrossRef CAS .J. Anzano, R. J. Lasheras, E. Cunya, B. Bonilla, J. M. Begueria and J. Casas-Gonzalez, Anal. Lett., 2009, 42(10), 1509–1517 CrossRef CAS .E. Xenogiannopoulou, C. Andreouli and C. Stournaras, J. Nano Res., 2009, 8, 61–70 Search PubMed .Y. Abe, I. Nakai, K. Takahashi, N. Kawai and S. Yoshimura, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2009, 395(7), 1987–1996 CrossRef CAS .A. Guilherme, J. Coroado and M. L. Carvalho, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2009, 395(7), 2051–2059 CrossRef CAS . T. Trojek, M. Hlozek, T. Cechak and L. Musilek, Applied Radiation and Isotopes, 68(4–5), pp. 879–883 Search PubMed.B. Fabbri, M. Gligor, S. Gualtieri and S. Varvara, Studia Universitatis Babes-Bolyai Chemia, 2009, 54(1), 23–26 Search PubMed .S. Varvara, B. Fabbri, S. Gualtieri, P. Ricciardi and M. Gligor, Studia Universitatis Babes-Bolyai Chemia, 2008, 53(1), 5–13 Search PubMed .D. Adan-Bayewitz, A. Karasik, U. Smilansky, F. Asaro, R. D. Giauque and R. Lavidor, J. Archaeol. Sci., 2009, 36(11), 2517–2530 Search PubMed .A. L. M. Silva, C. A. B. Oliveira, A. L. Gouvea, J. M. F. dos Santos, M. L. Carvalho and J. Veloso, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2009, 395(7), 2073–2080 CrossRef CAS . A. P. del Rio and J. Castaing, Archaeometry, 52, pp. 83–98 Search PubMed.M. Kibaroglu, M. Satir and G. Kastl, J. Archaeol. Sci., 2009, 36(10), 2463–2474 Search PubMed .A. K. Marghussian, H. Fazeli and H. Sarpoolaky, Archaeometry, 2009, 51, 733–747 CrossRef CAS .A. Kriznar, M. V. Munoz, F. de la Paz, M. A. Respaldiza and M. Vega, X-Ray Spectrom., 2009, 38(3), 169–174 CrossRef CAS .S. Neatu, E. Sacaliuc-Parvulescu, F. Levy and V. I. Parvulescu, Catal. Today, 2009, 142(3–4), 165–169 CrossRef CAS .H. H. Tseng, M. C. Wei, S. F. Hsiung and C. W. Chiou, Chem. Eng. J., 2009, 150(1), 160–167 CrossRef CAS .J. X. Chen and L. Z. Zhu, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2009, 67(3), 282–288 CrossRef CAS .B. Braconnier, C. A. Paez, S. Lambert, C. Alie, C. Henrist, D. Poelman, J. P. Pirard, R. Cloots and B. Heinrichs, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2009, 122(1–3), 247–254 CrossRef CAS .P. Guo, X. S. Wang and H. C. Guo, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 90(3–4), 677–687 CrossRef CAS .L. G. Devi, B. N. Murthy and S. G. Kumar, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2009, 308(1–2), 174–181 CrossRef CAS . P. P. Bidaye, D. Khushalani and J. B. Fernandes, Catalysis Letters, 134(1–2), pp. 169–174 Search PubMed. X. X. Yan, G. Liu, L. Z. Wang, Y. Wang, X. F. Zhu, J. Zou and G. Q. Lu, Journal of Materials Research, 25(1), pp. 182–188 Search PubMed.F. L. Y. Lam, X. J. Hu, T. M. H. Lee and K. Y. Chan, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2009, 67(2), 233–237 CrossRef CAS . Q. Q. Chen, P. X. Wu, Z. Dang, N. W. Zhu, P. Li, J. H. Wu and X. D. Wang, Separation and Purification Technology, 71(3), pp. 315–323 Search PubMed.Y. M. Wu, J. L. Zhang, L. Xiao and F. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 88(3–4), 525–532 CrossRef CAS .Y. M. Wu, H. B. Liti, J. L. Zhang and F. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113(33), 14689–14695 CrossRef CAS .J. Z. Mingyang Xing and Feng Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 89, 563–569 CrossRef CAS . D. P. Subagio, M. Srinivasan, M. Lim and T. T. Lim, Applied Catalysis B-Environmental, 95(3–4), pp. 414–422 Search PubMed.F. Fresno, D. Tudela, J. M. Coronado and J. Soria, Catal. Today, 2009, 143(3–4), 230–236 CrossRef CAS .M. I. Mejia, J. M. Marin, G. Restrepo, C. Pulgarin, E. Mielczarski, J. Mielczarski, Y. Arroyo, J. C. Lavanchy and J. Kiwi, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 91(1–2), 481–488 CrossRef CAS .Y. J. Zang, R. Farnood and J. Currie, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2009, 64(12), 2881–2886 CrossRef CAS .L. Borko, Z. Koppany, Z. Schay and L. Guczi, Catal. Today, 2009, 143(3–4), 269–273 CrossRef CAS .J. C. Martin, S. Suarez, M. Yates and P. Avila, Chem. Eng. J., 2009, 150(1), 8–14 CrossRef CAS .X. Zhang, X. G. Li, J. S. Wu, R. C. Yang and Z. H. Zhang, Catal. Lett., 2009, 130(1–2), 235–238 CrossRef CAS .L. Lisi, R. Pirone, G. Russo and V. Stanzione, Chem. Eng. J., 2009, 154(1–3), 341–347 CrossRef CAS .S. Y. Chen, Y. C. Zhang and X. W. Guo, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2009, 69(3), 288–293 CrossRef CAS .M. Selvaraj, S. Kawi, D. W. Park and C. S. Ha, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113(18), 7743–7749 CrossRef CAS .F. Y. Lee, L. Lv, F. B. Su, T. Liu, Y. Liu, C. H. Sow and X. S. Zhao, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2009, 124(1–3), 36–41 CrossRef CAS .K. Jiratova, J. Mikulova, J. Klempa, T. Grygar, Z. Bastl and F. Kovanda, Appl. Catal., A, 2009, 361(1–2), 106–116 CrossRef CAS .Y. F. Yang, P. Sangeetha and Y. W. Chen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34(21), 8912–8920 CrossRef CAS .P. Sangeetha, L. H. Chang and Y. W. Chen, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2009, 118(1), 181–186 CrossRef CAS .I. Dobrosz-Gomez, I. Kocemba and J. M. Rynkowski, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 88(1–2), 83–97 CrossRef CAS . J. Grams and I. Sobczak, International Journal of Mass Spectrometry, 289(2–3), pp. 138–143 Search PubMed.G. Alloncle, N. Gilon, C. Legens, C. P. Lienemann, B. Rebours, L. Sorbier, S. Morin and R. Revel, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2009, 255(22), 8978–8985 CrossRef CAS .B. Louis, C. Detoni, N. M. F. Carvalho, C. D. Duarte and O. A. C. Antunes, Appl. Catal., A, 2009, 360(2), 218–225 CrossRef CAS .D. P. Debecker, K. Bouchmella, C. Poleunis, P. Eloy, P. Bertrand, E. M. Gaigneaux and P. H. Mutin, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21(13), 2817–2824 CrossRef CAS . S. Caliskan, M. Zahmakiran and S. Ozkar, Applied Catalysis B-Environmental, 93(3–4), 387–394 Search PubMed. M. Zahmakiran, F. Durap and S. Ozkar, International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 35(1), pp. 187–197 Search PubMed.R. Solmaz and G. Kardas, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54(14), 3726–3734 CrossRef CAS .R. Solmaz, A. Doner, I. Sahin, A. O. Yuce, G. Kardas, B. Yazici and M. Erbil, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34(19), 7910–7918 CrossRef CAS .Z. E. A. Abdalla, B. S. Li and A. Tufail, Colloids Surf., A, 2009, 341(1–3), 86–92 CrossRef .Y. C. Ma, Q. J. Ge, W. Z. Li and H. Y. Xu, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 90(1–2), 99–104 CrossRef CAS .M. Matsuoka, A. Ebrahimi, M. Nakagawa, T. H. Kim, M. Kitano, M. Takeuchi and M. Anpo, Res. Chem. Intermed., 2009, 35(8–9), 997–1004 CrossRef CAS .Y. J. Zhang and L. Zhang, Desalination, 2009, 249(3), 1017–1021 CrossRef CAS .Y. J. Zhang, Y. P. Wu, Z. H. Wang and Y. R. Hu, Rare Metal Materials and Engineering, 2009, 38(9), 1514–1517 Search PubMed . W. Z. Li, Z. W. Chen, L. B. Xu and Y. Yan, Journal of Power Sources, 195(9), pp. 2534–2540 Search PubMed. W. Z. Li, Q. Xin and Y. S. Yan, International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 35(6), pp. 2530–2538 Search PubMed.Y. Yang, A. Gilbert and C. B. Xu, Appl. Catal., A, 2009, 360(2), 242–249 CrossRef CAS .S. Recknagel and M. Michaelis, Accredit. Qual. Assur., 2009, 14(5), 277–280 CrossRef CAS .R. Saavedra, C. Soto, J. Yanez and M. I. Toral, J. Hazard. Mater., 2009, 167(1–3), 970–975 CrossRef CAS .J. Nakajima, M. Ohno, K. Chikama, T. Seki and K. Oguma, Talanta, 2009, 79(4), 1050–1054 CrossRef CAS . F. S. Yu, C. L. Xi, Z. H. He and L. H. Chen, Analytical Letters, 43(6), pp. 972–982 Search PubMed.S. Alexander, V. Udayakumar and V. Gayathri, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2009, 314(1–2), 21–27 CrossRef CAS . Z. Nawaz, S. Qing, J. X. Gao, X. P. Tang and F. Wei, Journal of Industrial and Engineering Chemistry, 16(1), pp. 57–62 Search PubMed.Y. W. Zhang, Y. M. Zhou, H. Liu, L. Y. Bo and M. H. Tang, Fuel Process. Technol., 2009, 90(12), 1524–1531 CrossRef CAS .
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Table Content:

Au	Gold	AA; F; L	The corrosion of gold from long term exposure to 1 mmol L−1 n-dodecanethiol was monitored by FAAS.	 54 
Cu	Silver coins	AES; GD; S	Characterisation of the coins used in Mexico.	 55 
H	Titanium	TOF-SIMS;-;S	Evacuation time dependence of depth profiles of H in titanium and stainless steel measured. Oxide layer on the surface appeared to act as a barrier to the hydrogen evacuation.	 56 
Hf	Zr and Zr alloys	AES; ICP; L	Samples were dissolved in a mixture of H2SO4 and ammonium sulfate within 15 min. The method of standard additions was used for calibration. LOD was 0.01 μg g−1.	 57 
Pb	Iron slag	MS; ICP; L	 204Pb, 206Pb, 207Pb, and 208Pb isotopes were determined in samples from two different archaeological sites.	 58 
Sn and Zn	Bronze	AES; ICP; L	The bulk compositions of 62 modern bronze statues were determined. Cluster analysis of the Sn and Zn content was a useful tool in classifying these statues.	 59 
Various (5)	Copper alloys	SIMS; -; S	Depth-profiling of Cu alloys to determine the oxygen penetration into the alloy.	 60 
Various	Copper alloy artefacts	AES; laser; S	A low cost portable laser induced plasma spectrometry (LIPS) system was developed and tested on a set of quaternary copper alloys artefacts.	 61 
Various	High purity copper rod	MS; GD; S	Analysis of a copper rod that had been purified to 4N status by using an argon plasma arc zone melting procedure.	 62 
Various	Dental alloys	MS; ICP; L	Dental alloys were tested for ion release using ICP-MS after immersion in a solution of 0.9% NaCl and 1% lactic acid for 7 days at 37 °C.	 63 
Various (4)	Low alloy steel	AES; ICP; L	After dissolution, the analytes were co-precipitated with manganese (IV) oxide. This was decomposed in a mixture of HNO3 and H2SO4 and heated to fuming. The resulting solution was analysed using ICP-AES.	 64 
Various (8)	Aluminium alloys	LIBS; -; S	LIBS system using a multi-channel grating spectrometer and charge coupled device (CCD) detector.	 65 
Various	Gold	MS; ICP; L	Samples were dissolved in aqua regia and trace elements determined by high resolution ICP-MS. LOD of 0.01–0.28 μg g−1 were reported.	 66 
Various (60)	Niobium	MS; GD; S	Purification of commercial 3N niobium by electron beam melting. Purity checked by GD-MS. After purification, purity increased to 4N.	 67 
Various (5)	Tin plated steel core guitar strings	AES;ICP;L	The elements were determined in an artificial sweat solution to see whether degradation products caused skin problems.	 68 
AA;F;L
Various	Steel	MS; ICP; L	U, Pu, Cs and lanthanides were separated from dissolved steel using TRU resin (Eichrom) by eluting 2M HNO3, 4M HCl, 0.075M oxalic acid in 1M HCl and 0.1M ammonium hydrogen oxalate, respectively.	 69 
Various (14)	Titanium	MS; ICP; L	Samples were dissolved in HF and HNO3 then injected into an ion chromatograph with an ion exchange column. Elements were eluted with dilute HNO3 and determined by ICP-MS. LOD ranged from 0.00099–0.85 μg g−1. In Chinese.	 70 
Various	Zr–Nb alloy	PIXE; -; S	Gaseous elements N, O and F as well as 14 other analytes were included in the elements determined.	 71 
PIGE; -; S

Cd	Wine	AAS; F; L	On-line preconcentration with a chelating agent (2-(5-bromo-2-pyridylazo)-5-diethylaminophenol immobilised on wool.	 88 
Various	Oloroso sherry wine	AES; F; L	Cluster analysis and linear discrimination analysis gave excellent recognition and prediction ability.	 89 
AAS; F; L
Various	Wine	AAS; -; CV	A review (133 refs) of AAS in wine analysis. Includes references on direct analysis, sample digestion, extraction, preconcentration, hydride generation for As, FI-CVAAS for Cd, CVAAS for Hg, FI-HGAAS for Pb and HG-ETAAS for Sb.	 90 
AAS;-; HG
Various	Wine	Several	Overview of the structure of a project to characterise and determine the geographical origin of wines.	 91 
Various (As, Pb and Se)	Wine	ICP; MS; ETV	Results of ETV-ICP-MS compared with liquid sample introduction ICP-MS and ETAAS. Analytical figures of merit were strongly dependent on sample size and modifier. Matrix components were also important. Standard addition was a strong requirement. Lead and Se results were comparable to conventional techniques but As results were 2–4 times lower. This suggested the presence of polyatomic interferences in conventional techniques. ETAAS detection limits for As and Se were not low enough to quantify these elements in wine.	 92 
AAS; ETV, L
Various	Heritage and historically significant objects	XRF; -; S	Report on biannual round-robin tests of the application of XRF to art and heritage objects.	 93 
Various	Wall painting pigments	LIBS; -; S	A reference database of 30 commercial pigments was employed together with chemometrics for signal processing.	 94 
Various toxic metals	Lipstick	LIBS; -; S	Toxic metals quantified in lipstick. Paper discussed the pre-treatment required for the analysis of the soft matrix.	 95 

Bi	Sulfur	AFS; Flame; HG	Sample digested using 3 mL nitric acid and 1 mL hydrogen peroxide in a microwave oven within 35 mins. Analytical parameters such as reductant concentration, argon flow rate and acidity were all optimised. Interfering ions were studied. LOD reported as 0.027 μg L−1 and precision (n = 7) was ∼2%. Standard addition recovery was 96.7–106.7%. Method was described as rapid, simple and accurate.	 174 
CrVI	Mixtures of chromium oxide and potassium dichromate	XRF; -; S	Powders of chromium oxide and potassium dichromate ground together, sieved and then presented to instrument. Spectra from each sample mixture were decomposed into two reference spectra (of the two pure materials). Cr k-alpha lines used for analysis.	 175 
Gd	Gadolinium-based NMR imaging agents	OES; ICP; LC	Six species separated using reverse phase chromatography and detected using ICP-OES. Chromatographic details were listed and all six species were separated within 15 mins using an isocratic eluent at a flow rate of 1 mL min−1. Calibration ranges spanned 0.393–78.625 μg mL−1 and LOD was between 8 and 35 ng Gd mL−1. Precision (n = 3) for 3.93 μg mL−1 was <5% RSD.	 176 
 143Nd/144Nd ratio	Several CRMs	MS; ICP; L	Multicollector instrument used. 143Nd/144Nd measured without the need for a Sm separation. Isobaric interference correction of 144Sm on 144Nd using the 147Sm/149Sm ratio to calculate Sm mass fractionation. Mass discrimination corrected for by applying the natural constant 146Nd/144Nd ratio.	 177 
Several (5)	Germanium	AAS, ETV; L	Two procedures for determining Cr, Cu, Fe, Ni and Pb in germanium matrix were described. Procedure one involved cloud point extraction using ammonium pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate (APDC) – Triton X-114. Second procedure volatilised germanium matrix away using chlorine gas. Procedure one led to preconcentration factors of 75–91.5 being achieved. This led to superior LOD compared with the volatilisation method.	 178 
AAS; ETV; S
Various (27)	Table salt	OES; ICP; L	Indium phosphate used to co-precipitate analytes at pH 10. Dissolution of the precipitate using 5 mL of 1 M nitric acid and using In as the internal standard enabled LOD ranging between 0.001 (for Lu) and 0.11 μg (for Zn) in 300 mL of a 10% salt solution.	 179 

 36Cl	Lichens	AMS	 129I also determined (using gamma spectrometry). Analytes determined in lichens collected from close to a reprocessing facility.	 210 
Cs isotopes	Spent fuels	TIMS	Cs isotopic composition determined after chemical separation. Mass fractionation for TIMS measurement assessed by temporal behaviour of 133Cs/137Cs and 135Cs/137Cs ratios. Mass bias effects for MC-ICP-MS assessed by external correction using element of similar mass (Sb, Eu). Results for 133Cs/137Cs and 135Cs/137Cs for the two techniques agreed within 0.2–0.5%.	 211 
MS; ICP; L
H-isotopes	Graphite	SIMS; -; S	Hydrogen isotope retention in graphite wall tiles.	 212 
In, Sb	Fuel (U, Th, U + Th)	AAS; ETV; L	Fuel dissolved and analysed without separation. Matrix shown to enhance signal and consequently, quantification obtained against matrix matched standards (U,Th). Interference study involving 21 interferent metals did not show significant effects. Method applicable between 0.5–25 ppm (In) and 1–20 ppm (Sb).	 213 
 129I, 127I	Chernobyl soil	AMS	Sample pyrohydrolyzed. 127I determined by ICP-MS, 129I by AMS.	 214 
MS; ICP; -
 129I	Ground litter	TIMS	Iodine separated from sample by thermo-chromatography. 129I quantified by ID-TIMS.	 215 
 83Kr	UO2	SIMS	Single crystal of UO2 implanted with 83Kr to test feasibility of determining fission product gas concentrations and distribution in irradiated fuels.	 216 
 237Np	Forrest litter	MS; ICP; -	Pilot study comparing Np content in relation to Pu content (where Pu was determined using alpha spectrometry).	 217 
Np	Dissolver solution	AES; ICP; L	Np separated from dissolver solution by solvent extraction using 2-thenoyltrifluoroacetone in xylene and back-washed into 8M aqueous nitric acid. Standard additions and spike recoveries used for validation. Recovery 99 ± 1%.	 218 
Np, Pu	Soil sediments	MS; ICP; L	Sample dry ashed and residue fused with a borate flux. After dissolution of melt in nitric acid, Np and Pu fractions obtained using a TEVA resin-based separation. Detection using sector field instrument yielded LOD of 1 fg g−1.	 219 
 239Pu, 240Pu	Soil	AMS	Soil core samples from Hubei Province in China were investigated for 239Pu + 240Pu total activity and 240Pu/239Pu.	 220 
 239Pu, 240Pu	Seawater	MS; ICP; L	Semiconductor alpha spectrometry, sector field ICP-MS and AMS study of northeast Atlantic Ocean (nuclear waste dumping site) and northwest Pacific Ocean. No elevated 240Pu/239Pu found in Atlantic, but elevated 240Pu/239Pu in Pacific attributed to nuclear weapons test at Marshall Islands.	 221 
AMS
Pu, U	Coral soils	MS; ICP; L	Samples spiked with tracers (233U, 242Pu), digested in mineral acids and separated on stacked TEVA and UTEVA columns. Detection using multicollector instrument.	 222 
Pu, U	Environmental samples	MS; ICP; L	Analytes separated from sample matrix on TEVA and UTEVA resins before determination on quadrupole instrument with ultrasonic nebulisation. The blanks obtained on clean swipes were 8 fg 239Pu and 1 ng 238U. The method was tested against a sediment CRM (IAEA-384) and gave accurate and precise results for total U, Pu and 240Pu/239Pu, 241Pu/239Pu, 234U/238U and 235U/238U isotope ratios.	 223 
 226Ra	Natural waters and sediment pore water	MS; ICP; -	Thin film diffusive gradient sampling using a MnO2 resin used to accumulate 226Ra. Detection limit of 0.022 pg dm−3 (0.8 mBq dm−3) reported for a 24 h accumulation. Sector field instrument used in low resolution mode for determination. Precision for 2 ng L−1 standard was 1.4% RSD (n = 10).	 224 
 126Sn	Fission product precipitates	ICP-MS	New half-life determination. Sn extracted from dissolved fission product precipitates by solvent extraction using n-benzoyl-n-phenyl-hydroxylamine. Mass concentration and nuclide activity (high resolution gamma spectrometry) of purified fractions determined with high precision and accuracy.	 225 
 233U	Contaminated materials	AMS	 233U used as an alternative marker to 236U for detection of anthropogenic U inputs. Relative abundances of 233U with respect to 238U down to 10−13 can be detected.	 226 
U, U-isotopes	Soil	ICP-MS; TIMS	Total U determined by ICP-MS, high precision isotopic abundance determined by TIMS.	 227 
U	Hanford sediments	XAFS; -; S	Identification of solid U phases.	 228 
XRF; -; S
U	U welds	SIMS, AES	Electron beam welds characterised. Surface composition maps obtained by SIMS to depth of a few μm. Deeper profiles obtained by Focussed Ion beam Milling.	 229 
 236U	Soil	AMS	Soils remote from point sources of anthropogenic U inputs analysed to estimate global fallout of 236U.	 230 
U, U-isotopes	Urine	MS; ICP; FI	FI based separation using TRU resin. Method tested using urine inter-laboratory comparison samples and U isotope CRMs (NBL U020A. NBL U050).	 231 
U, Th	Aqueous	AES; ICP; L	U, Th were pre-concentrated from aqueous solution (pH 5.5) using a silica sorbent modified with 5-nitro-2-furaldehyde. Capacity of sorbent = 47 and 49 mg g−1 for U(VI) and Th(IV) respectively. LOD of 0.3 μg cm−3 reported.	 232 
Various (Lanthanides)	Aqueous	MS; ICP; L	Lanthanides in (III) state separated by Cloud Point Extraction using APDC in 2% Triton X-100.	 233 
Various (Actinides)	Urine	MS; ICP; L	Calcium phosphate precipitation followed by separation of actinides by extraction chromatography. Long lived isotopes determined by ICP-MS (239Pu, 242Pu, 237Np, 243Am, 234U, 235U, 238U). Shorter lived isotopes determined by alpha spectrometry. Chemical yields typically >90%.	 234 
Various (U, Pu, Lanthanides, Cs)	Transmutation targets	TIMS	Sequential elution program used to separate analytes of interest from a predominantly steel element matrix using TRU resin. Fractions obtained using successive aliquots of 2M nitric acid (Cs), 4M HCl (Lanthanides), 0.075 M oxalic acid in 1M HCl (Pu) and 0.1M ammonium oxalate in 0.02M HCl. Multi-collector ICP-MS instrument used.	 69 
MS; ICP; L
Various	Reactor materials	EPMA	Candidate materials corroded in molten NaF/LiF mixture. Gross corrosion products determined by ICP-AES after dissolution of salt. EPMA used to obtain maps and profiles of sections of corroded surfaces. LA-ICP-MS (25 μm spot size) also used to scan across along salt/alloy boundary.	 235 
MS; ICP; LA
AES; ICP; L
W	Carbon	LIBS; -; S	Estimation of the thickness of W deposited on carbon shown to be possible using single pulses. Ablation rate estimated as 0.5–1 μm/pulse. More complex structures also tested, e.g., coating of diamond like carbon on the W deposit but no spectroscopic signal observed.	 236 

Various	Glasses	XRF; -; S	An overview of the analysis of historical glass materials and objects. Versions of sample preparation, sample homogeneity problems and methods of converting experimental intensities into concentrations were discussed. Matrix effects exerted by certain types of glass were also discussed (86 refs).	 338 
Various (6)	11th–13th century glass bracelets from Bulgaria	AES; F; L	Flame photometry (for K and Na) and FAAS (for Al, Ca, Fe and Mg) were used to analyse acid digested samples. Results were compared with literature values. Samples were soda-lime-magnesium glasses of the near east recipe.	 339 
AAS; F; L
Various	Archaeometric glasses from 11th to 20th centuries	PIXE; -; S	Advantages and disadvantages of using proton induced gamma-ray emission (PIGE) and PIXE were discussed and a comparison with other X-ray techniques (XRF and EDX) made. Some glasses that had been corroded were analysed and good agreement between the techniques was obtained. PIGE/PIXE were shown to be excellent techniques for determining both high and low mass analytes, even at low concentration.	 340 
PIGE; -; S
Various	Egyptian faience pendant and two glass standards	XRF; -; S	Portable XRF system obtained data with similar accuracy to those obtained using PIXE.	 341 
Various	Venetian-type glass fragments from Albania	PIGE; -; S	Combined PIGE/PIXE method and source excited XRF used to analyse samples. Mechanisms of manufacture were identified.	 342 
PIXE; -; S
Various	Glass vessels and beads dating from first millennium BC from Georgia	MS; ICP; LA	LA-ICP-MS and SEM-wavelength dispersive spectrometry (WDS) were used to characterise glass vessels. Vessels were found to have compositional differences that may indicate multiple manufacturing sites. However, major and trace elemental data showed similar characteristics to Roman Levantine glassware, possibly indicating that the source of sand was from the coast of the Levant. The beads also showed signs of multiple origin with the middle east or Indian sub-continent being the most likely.	 343 
Various	26 post-medieval glass fragments from a Castle in Italy	MS; ICP; LA	SEM-energy dispersive spectrometry (EDS) study (for major elements) and LA-ICP-MS study (for trace elements and REE) of glass fragments. Information of the provenance and of the technology of glass manufacture for each was obtained.	 344 
Various	Mycenaean glass beads from the bronze age	TOF-MS; ICP; LA	Wide range of analytes determined. 11 beads analysed, four blue ones coloured with Co and two blue/green ones coloured with Cu were found to have similar composition to Egyptian glasses of the same time. Similarly, the other five beads, all coloured using Cu were found to conform to Mesopotamian glass. The data indicated direct and clear evidence of the trade of glass to the Greek state.	 345 
Various	52 ancient beads from Africa	MS; ICP; LA	Single point ablation and raster sampling were compared with data being obtained from two different laboratories. Similar results for the two sampling approaches were obtained for most beads, but the raster approach was more sensitive to the effects of glass corrosion.	 346 
Various	Islamic glass from Raya, Sinai peninsula	XRF; -; S	Portable instrument used to analyse samples from 8th–11th centuries. Most samples were found to be produced using natron as the soda source. Some of these were found to be low in Fe and Ti, but high in Sr. These were probably produced in Syria. Other samples, from the 9th century, were high in Ca, Fe and Ti. These were thought to be of Egyptian origin.	 347 
Various	Sasanian glass, Iraq	MS; ICP; -	ICP-MS as well as other techniques (SEM-EDS, XRD and thermal analysis) used to characterise weathering products. Two general production styles identified according to the MgO to K2O ratio. Four main alteration types also identified.	 348 
Various	A red stained glass in the windows of the Huelgas monastery, Spain	XRF; -; S	Various techniques including PIXE, XRF, field emission SEM and TEM used to characterise glass in terms of its chemical composition and structure. Chemical analysis using PIXE and XRF produced very similar results (in Spanish).	 349 
PIXE; -; S
Various	Enamels in stained glass windows	XRF; -; S	XRF, electron probe microanalysis and TEM were used to analyse glasses in an attempt to identify why some dark green/blue and purple enamel paint layers deteriorate whereas others from the same time period (16th–20th centuries) do not. Some compositions of the enamel appeared to be unstable, e.g. those with high K2O and low CaO and PbO content. Other samples appear not to have vitrified properly during the firing process.	 350 
Various	Deeply coloured and black glass from northern Roman provinces	MS; ICP; LA	Chronological and geographical origin of glass elucidated through their major and trace element compositions. Although dark brown, dark purple and dark green hues were observed, only the dark green ones could be used to date the materials. Before AD 150, a Ti rich source of iron was used for the colouring, whereas after AD 150, a Ti poor source of iron was used that also contained Co, Pb and Sb.	 351 
Various	Ancient glass beads excavated from Thebes, Greece	XRF; -; S	An evaluation of the advantages and limitations of lab-based (ion beam analysis and electron probe microanalysis) and portable (milli- and micro-XRF) techniques. All of the techniques provided a consistent and reliable method of characterising the glass composition.	 352 

K, Th and U	Brazilian ceramics from Barra dos Negros and Lagoa Queimada (Bahia State)	MS; ICP; -	Dating by thermoluminescence. ICP-MS used to determine the annual dose of the analytes and hence, their age.	 373 
Various (25)	Archaeological shards from South East United States	INAA; -; S	Chemometric approach using stepwise linear discriminant analysis to obtain provenance.	 374 
Various	Ceramics from Tiwanaku and Wari in the Andes	MS; ICP; LA	Chemical signatures of the pottery from the sites demonstrated that at least five different clay sources were used. The potters used clay from their own respective regions.	 375 
Various	Cobalt blue decorated ceramics from Aragon and Iberian Peninsula	OES; ICP; -	Three different types of cobalt pigment were identified that differed between area and age. In addition, a difference in decoration technique, i.e., under or over the tin glaze was also identified.	 376 
MS; ICP; LA
Various	Pigments from pre-Hispanic ceramics of Cajamarquilla	LIBS; -; S	LIBS gave excellent results with respect to reproducibility, sensitivity, rapidity, non-destructiveness and depth-profiling ability.	 377 
Various	Black glaze and main body of ancient Attic black ceramic	LIBS; -; S	LIBS results demonstrated that the glaze was actually made from the same clay as the rest of the body, but that it had been treated differently. AAS, XRF, SEM-EDX and XRD also used as complementary techniques. For quantitative LIBS work, Al, Ca, Fe, K, Mg and Ti were calibrated using them within a silicon dioxide matrix.	 378 
Various (5)	Blue painted pottery from Egypt	XRF; -; S	Newly developed portable XRF spectrometer used in conjunction with a portable XRD instrument. Chemical composition and crystal structure therefore studied.	 379 
Various	Glazes of ceramics from Portugal from the 16th to 19th centuries	EDXRD; -; S	A μ-XRF spectrometer used as well as WDXRF, XRD and SEM-EDX. Mineralogical changes in the glazes after firing at different temperatures were studied.	 380 
WDXRF; -; S
Various	Post-medieval pottery from Southern Moravia	XRF; -; S	Three configurations of XRF spectrometers constructed and then used in-situ. Detection limits, depth of analysis, the relation of the analysed area, the homogeneity of the samples and variations in element concentration were discussed.	 381 
Various	Neolithic pottery from Alba Iulia, Romania	XRF; -; S	Three cultures produced pottery from this site. Chemical analysis and thin section analysis demonstrated differences between the pottery of different cultures.	 382 
Various	21 Neolithic pottery fragments from the Lumea Noua culture, Alba Iulia, Romania	XRF; -; S	XRF, XRD and optical microscopy used to obtain data relating to the manufacturing technique in terms of various types of raw clay used and firing temperatures.	 383 
Various	Japanese lacquer ware	XRF; -; S	Depth-profiling studies undertaken using a μ-grazing exit XRF instrument and a 3D-confocal XRF spectrometer. This paper was discussed in more detail in the text.	 361 
Various	Cooking pots from Kefar Hananya (Roman Galilee)	XRF; - S	Samples from two production sites 200 m apart were analysed. Chemometric analysis of data (cluster analysis, principle component analysis (PCA), bivariate plots and discriminant analysis) as well as computerised morphological analysis enabled authors to distinguish samples with respect to provenance, age etc.	 384 
Various	18th century Portuguese faiences	XRF; -; S	A new system for EDXRF described. Detector is a new type of micropattern gas detector (28 × 28 mm2). The interaction of X-rays with the gas causes electrons to be produced and the number of these is proportional to the absorbed X-ray energy. The counting rate can reach up to 0.5 MHz. The system was used to form elemental map distributions for different samples.	 385 
Various	17 fragments of ceramics dating from 15th and 16th century from Seville	XRF; -; S	Several techniques (XRF, XRD, SEM, ion beam analysis) used to differentiate between shards. Some shards found to originate from the Valencia area of Spain.	 386 
Various	20 middle bronze and late bronze/early iron age ceramics from two sites in Georgia	WDXRF; -; S	Ceramics from Didi Gora and Udabno I and clays from the surrounding area analysed using WDXRF. Results indicated that all samples were made from two local sources of clay over the entire time period.	 387 
Various	Pre-historic pottery from Rahmatabad, Iran	XRF; -; S	Chemical and mineralogical analysis on samples performed using XRF, XRD and SEM-EDX. Compositions were found to be similar and the presence of diopsite and mullite indicated firing temperatures of 950–1050 °C.	 388 
Various	Two terracotta polychrome sculptures by Pietro Torrigiano	XRF; -; S	Samples analysed in-situ. Original parts of one showed traces of lead white (Pb), yellow and red ochre (Ca, Fe), cinnabar (Hg) and umbra (Fe, Mn). The spectra obtained from the bench under one sculpture indicated that it was not original, but had been added later. Modern pigments were also found indicating that, at some stage, restoration work had been carried out.	 389 
AAS	Atomic absorption spectrometry
AED	Atomic emission detection
AES	Atomic emission spectrometry
AFM	Atomic force microscopy
AFS	Atomic fluorescence spectrometry
AMS	Accelerator mass spectrometry
ANOVA	Analysis of Variance
ANSI	American National Standards Institute
APDC	Ammonium pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate
ARXPS	Angle resolved X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
ATR	Attenuated total reflection
BCR	Bureau of Community Reference
BET	Brunauer, Emmett and Teller
CCA	Chromated copper arsenate
CCD	Charge coupled device
CFP	Circulating fluidized bed
CMOS	Complementary metal oxide semiconductor
CPE	Cloud point extraction
CRM	Certified reference material
CVAAS	Cold vapour atomic absorption spectrometry
CWADP	Chemical warfare agent degradation product
CZE	Capillary zone electrophoresis
DCP	Direct current plasma
DESI	Desorption electrospray ionisation
DMFC	Direct methanol fuel cells
d-DIHEN	Demountable direct injection high efficiency nebuliser
DPT	Diphenyl tin
DRIFTS	Diffuse reflectance infra-red Fourier transform spectroscopy
DRS	Diffuse reflectance spectroscopy
DTA	Differential thermal analysis
DTPA	Diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid
ECNI	Electron capture negative ionisation
EDS	Energy dispersive spectrometry
EDX	Energy dispersive X-ray analysis
EDXRF	Energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence
EPMA	Electron probe microanalysis
ERDA	Elastic recoil detection analysis
ESI	Electrospray ionisation
ESI-MS	Electrospray ionisation – mass spectrometry
ESP	Electrostatic precipitator
ESR	Electron spin resonance
ETAAS	Electrothermal atomic absorption spectrometry
ETV	Electrothermal vaporisation
EXAFS	Extended X-ray absorption fine structure
FAAS	Flame atomic absorption spectrometry
FF	Fast flow
FI	Flow injection
FIB	Focused ion beam
FLIM	Fluorescence lifetime imaging
FTA	Fission track analysis
FTIR	Fourier transform-infra-red
FTS	Fischer–Tropsch synthesis
GC	Gas chromatography
GC-AED	Gas chromatography atomic emission detection
GD	Glow discharge
GEXRF	Grazing exit X-ray fluorescence
GFAAS	Graphite furnace atomic absorption spectrometry
GIXRD	Grazing incidence XRD
GIXRF	Grazing incident XRF
GI-XSW	Grazing incidence X-ray standing waves
GXRD	Glancing angle X-ray diffraction
HGAAS	Hydride generation atomic absorption spectrometry
HPLC	High performance liquid chromatography
HRTEM	High resolution transmission electron microscopy
IBMK	Isobutylmethyl ketone
ICCD	Intensified charge coupled device
ICP	Inductively coupled plasma
ID	Isotope dilution
IDMS	Isotope dilution mass spectrometry
INAA	Instrumental neutron activation analysis
IRMS	Isotope ratio mass spectrometry
LA	Laser ablation
LC-MS	Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry
LDA	Linear discriminant analysis
LED	Light emitting diode
LEIS	Low energy ion scattering
LEXES	Low energy electron induced X-ray emission spectroscopy
LIBS	Laser induced breakdown spectroscopy
LIDAR	Light detection and ranging
LIF	Laser induced fluorescence
LIF-ASE	laser induced fluorescence-amplified spontaneous emission
LIPS	Laser induced plasma spectroscopy
LOD	Limit of detection
LOQ	Limit of quantitation
MALDI	Matrix assisted laser desorption/ionisation
MAS	Magic angle spinning
MC-ICP-MS	Multiple collector ICP-MS
MEEKC	Microemulsion electrokinetic chromatography
MFM	Magnetic force microscopy
MIC	Microwave induced combustion
MIM	Metal insulator metal
MOCVD	Metal organic chemical vapour deposition
MPT	Monophenyl tin
MS	Mass spectrometry
MWDS	Microwave desolvation system
Nd:YAG	Neodymium: yttrium aluminium garnet
NEXAFS	Near edge X-ray absorption fine structure
NIR	Near infra-red
NIST	National Institute of Standards and Technology
NMR	Nuclear magnetic resonance
NRRA	Nuclear resonant reaction analysis
OES	Optical emission spectrometry
OSL	Optical stimulated luminescence
PB/HC-OES	Particle beam/hollow cathode optical emission spectrometry
PBDE	Polybrominated diphenyl ethers
PCA	Principle component analysis
PEMFC	Proton exchange membrane fuel cells
PET	Polyethyleneterephthalate
PGM	Platinum group metals
PIGE	Proton induced gamma ray emission
PIXE	Particle induced X-ray emission
PLS	Partial Least Squares
PLS-DA	Partial least squares discriminant analysis
PTFE	Polytetrafluoroethylene
PVC	Polyvinyl chloride
PVD	Physical vapour deposition
RBS	Rutherford backscattering spectrometry
REE	Rare earth elements
RF	Radio frequency
RI	Refractive index
RMM	Relative molecular mass
RSD	Relative standard deviation
S	Solid
SEM	Scanning electron microscopy
SF	Sector field
SIBS	Spark induced breakdown spectrometry
SIMCA	Soft independent modelling of class analogy
SIMS	Secondary ion mass spectrometry
SNMS	Secondary neutral mass spectrometry
SPE	Solid phase extraction
SPM	Scanning probe microscopy
SPME	Solid phase micro-extraction
SRD	Synchrotron radiation diffraction
SRM	Standard reference material
SRXRF	Synchrotron radiation induced X-ray fluorescence
TEM	Transmission electron microscopy
TGA	Thermogravimetric analysis
TIMS	Thermal ionisation mass spectrometry
TMAH	Tetramethyl ammonium hydroxide
TMPP	Tris(2,4,6-trimethoxyphenyl) phosphonium propylamine
TOC	Total Organic Carbon
TOF	Time of flight
TPR	Temperature programmed reduction
TPT	Triphenyl tin
TSL	Thermally stimulated luminescence
TRXPS	Total reflection X-ray photoelectric spectroscopy
TXRF	Total reflection X-ray fluorescence spectrometry
USN	Ultrasonic nebuliser
UV	Ultra violet
VPD-DC	Vapour phase decomposition-droplet collection
VUV	Vacuum ultra violet
WDXRF	Wavelength dispersive X-ray fluorescence
XAFS	X-ray absorption fine structure
XANES	X-ray absorption near edge spectrometry
XAS	X-ray absorption spectroscopy
XBIC	X-ray beam induced current
XPS	X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
XRD	X-ray diffraction
XRF	X-ray fluorescence
XRR	X-ray reflectometry
WDS	Wavelength dispersive spectrometry

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
