Electrochemistry at nanoporous interfaces: new opportunity for electrocatalysis  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1CP22927C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1CP22927C
(Perspective)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 448-463Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsElectrochemistry at nanoporous interfaces: new opportunity for electrocatalysis

        
          
            Je Hyun 
            Bae†
, 
      
        
          
            Ji-Hyung 
            Han†
 and 

        
          
            Taek Dong 
            Chung
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-747, Korea. E-mail: tdchung@snu.ac.kr;  Fax: +82-2-887-4354;   Tel: +82-2-880-4362
Received 
      14th September 2011
    , Accepted 4th November 2011First published on 28th November 2011AbstractPhysical and electrochemical features of nanoporous electrodes arising from their morphology are presented in this perspective. Although nanoporous electrodes have been used to enhance electrocatalysis for several decades, the origin of their capability was understood on the basis of enlarged surface area or crystalline facet. However, considerable attention should be paid to the fact that nano-confined space of nanoporous electrodes can significantly affect electrochemical efficiency. Molecular dynamics in nano-confined spaces is capable of offering much more chances of interaction between a redox molecule and an electrode surface. The mass transport in the nanoporous electrode depends on various pore characteristics such as size, shape, charge, connectivity, and symmetry as well as molecular properties such as size, charge, and kinetics. Moreover, when the pore size is comparable to the thickness of an electric double layer (EDL), the EDLs overlap in the porous structure so that electrochemically effective surface area is not the same as that of the real electrode surface. These unique properties come from simply nanoporous structure and suggest new opportunity to innovative electrocatalysts in the future.
Je Hyun Bae
Je Hyun Bae graduated summa cum laude in chemistry from Chung-Ang University in Korea with his BS and MS jointly in 2008. He is currently a PhD student at the Department of Chemistry, Seoul National University under the supervision of Prof. Taek Dong Chung. His scientific interests include nanoporous electrochemistry and neuro-electronic interface.
Ji-Hyung Han
Ji-Hyung Han received her MS degrees in Chemistry from the Sungshin Women's University in Korea in 2006 under the supervision of Prof. Taek Dong Chung. She is now PhD candidate at the Seoul National University in Korea under the supervision of Prof. Taek Dong Chung. Her research interests include nanoporous electrochemistry, iontronics, and nanophotonics for applications in energy harvesting systems.
Taek Dong Chung
Prof Taek-Dong Chung received his BS in chemistry from Seoul National University in 1991 and his PhD in Electrochemistry at the Department of Chemistry, Seoul National University in 1997. He worked as a researcher at the Medical Research Center, Seoul National University, before joining Prof. Fred Anson's group at California Institute of Technology in 1998. After working as a postdoc researcher at Oak Ridge National Laboratory with Dr J. Michael Ramsey, he started his independent research career as an assistant professor at Sungshin Women's University in 2002. He moved to Seoul National University in 2007 and has been conducting research on nanoporous electrochemistry, bioanalytical tools based on nano/microfluidics and neuro-electronic interface.
Introduction
Electrochemistry on nanoporous electrodes has been attracting great attention mostly with the aim of developing electrocatalysts for diverse applications such as energy conversion devices (e.g.fuel cell, battery,1 supercapacitor,2,3 solar cell)4,5 and chemical/biosensors.6,7 The increase in current density and capacitance on nanoporous electrodes has been assumed to come simply from dramatic enlargement of their surface areas so far.8,9 Mesoporous carbon as a substrate is a good example that offers an enlarged surface to metallic catalysts which need to be distributed as uniformly and widely as possible.10–12
Besides enlarged surface area, the effect of crystalline facets13–15 has been regarded as a significant factor that affects the kinetics of sluggish electrochemical reactions. Embedment of nanoparticles with specific facets on conductive porous substrates is a well known strategy that was able to greatly improve the electron transfer kinetics, particularly for fuel cells.12 When it comes to faradaic reaction like oxygen reduction, the elements and crystalline facets of electrodes play the key roles that determine the electrokinetic efficiency. As a result, energy conversion devices for electrochemical oxygen reduction still rely on the platinum or other platinum group metals, e.g.palladium and ruthenium. In due course numerous researchers have been making tremendous effort to find alternative electrode materials to platinum or reduce the amount of platinum through platinum monolayer,16–18 alloy19,20etc. However, there are only a few reports21,22 that suggested highly electrocatalytic non-noble metal electrode materials comparable with platinum.23 Toward platinum-free electrocatalysts, it would be invaluable opportunity to devise a new approach other than enlarging surface area or maximizing a specific crystalline facet.
In this respect, interesting behaviours were recently observed at nanoporous electrodes that have numerous confined spaces on the nano scale. Nano-confined space provides unique conditions for electrochemical reaction in terms of mass transport inside the pores, electric double layer (EDL), reaction probability between the surface and reactants based on molecular dynamics. Molecular dynamics in nano-confined space could be understood on the basis of Knudsen diffusion, Brownian motion, and surface diffusion.24–26 Such a molecular species resides longer time within an effective distance from an electrode surface than that on a flat electrode. Therefore, it is more probable to undergo heterogeneous electron transfer before escaping back to the bulk solution. The molecular dynamics in the nano-confined spaces is one of the top candidates that can be ascribed to the apparent enhancement of electrokinetics on nanoporous electrodes. On the other hand, the nano-confined space may play a negative role by impeding mass transport of redox molecules and ionic electrolytes.27 The accessibility of redox molecules and ions into the nanopores is a function of the solvated molecular size and the pore diameter.28 The ion composition inside the pore, which may include reactants or products, is governed by surface charge of nano-confined space.29 When the pore size is approaching to the thickness of EDL, the EDLs overlap in the porous structure so that the electrochemical potential profile inside the pores is no longer identical to that on the outskirts of the nanoporous electrode.30 All of these are observed only at the nanoporous electrochemical system, and we define them as electrochemistry at nanoporous interfaces in this article.
It should be noted that most of these unique aspects at nanoporous electrodes are not attributed to the surface area but to morphology and dimension of nanoporous electrodes. Especially, molecular motion inside the nano-confined spaces of a nanoporous electrode is predicted to enhance apparent electrokinetics (see Fig. 1). Other features of nanoporous structure including EDL profile, surface charge, and relative size of redox molecules to that of pores should be considered to facilitate electrochemical reactions as well.
 Fig. 1  Schemes for the effect of nanoporous structure on electrochemical reaction. Movement of molecules inside the pores, EDL profile, accessibility into pore entrance, and even surface charge should be taken into account to understand the electrokinetics at nanoporous electrodes and design better electrodes. 
From nanoporous materials, we could extract another potential to futuristic electrocatalysis besides enlarged surface area. This suggestion is supported by a few recent reports30,31 that isolated the structural effect of nanoporous electrodes from overall electrocatalytic enhancement, which includes the effect of surface area enlargement. In this respect, nanoporous structures are expected to enable an alternative approach to innovative electrocatalysis based on theoretical prediction and sophisticatedly designed nanofabrication.
In this perspective, we focus on physical and electrochemical features that are observed exclusively at nanoporous electrodes and caused by their morphology. They have not been systematically addressed before. Beginning with distinctive molecular dynamics within nano-confined spaces, we look into ion transport in nanoporous structures. It is followed by outlining the aspects of EDL on nanoporous electrodes to comprehend the electrochemical environment created by morphological characteristics. Next, we introduce the electrochemical methods for study on nanoporous electrochemistry and acquiring experimental evidence. And apparent electrochemical behaviours of nanoporous electrodes induced by their morphology are discussed and followed by future research forecast in this field.
It is assumed that the nanoporous material itself in this article is the conductive electrode and so participates in electrochemical reaction. Nanoporous materials are reclassified into three categories, which are microporous (pore diameter below 1 nm), mesoporous (from 2 to several tens of nanometres), and macroporous (hundreds of nanometres). Of our top interest are micro- and mesoporous structures because they show a distinct structural effect owing to their nano-confined spaces.
Molecular dynamics in nanoporous structure
A reactant molecule should diffuse from bulk solution to the electrode surface before undergoing electrochemical reaction. Under the condition of sufficiently high overpotential applied and thereby mass transport limited, electrochemical reaction takes place as soon as the reactant molecule reaches the electrode surface. That means it takes almost no time for a reactant molecule to reside on the surface before electron transfer occurs. In this case, the number of contacts between the reactant molecule and the surface per unit time, possibly called collision frequency, is negligible for the electrochemical reaction. Rather, a gradient of concentration in the diffusion layer determines the overall faradaic current. On the other hand, kinetic-controlled electron transfer is even less dependent on mass transport in the solution and seriously affected by how long a reactant molecule resides on the electrode surface. More strictly, longer time staying within an effective distance from the electrode surface leads to more probable electron transfer. The ‘effective distance’ indicates the space between the reactant molecule and the electrode surface, over which electron transfer can occur. More chances of electron transfer lead to enhanced apparent electrokinetics, assuming that there is no difference in crystalline facets, specific adsorption, or molecular orientation to the surface. A number of energy conversion devices and analytical sensors involve sluggish electrochemical reactions such as O2reduction reaction (ORR),32methanol oxidation,33 and glucose oxidation.34 Therefore, the microscopic interaction between molecules and electrode surface should be essentially considered to enhance electron transfer rates.
In this regard, nanoporous structure offers exceptional surroundings to the electro-active molecules. Once a molecule diffuses into the nanopores, it is confined by nanoporous space and keeps residing near the inner wall of the pore. It cannot be apart from the electrode surface longer than the pore radius. Accordingly, more chances to interact with the electrode surface are given to the molecules inside the nanoporous structure, leading to augmentation in electron transfer probability. Based on this scenario, it is expected that we would be able to facilitate kinetic controlled reaction or multi-electron transfer reaction involving multiple intermediates by employing an appropriate nanoporous architecture. According to the literature, such molecular motion at nanoporous electrodes can be described by Knudsen diffusion or Brownian motion.
Knudsen diffusion is a good basis to explain molecular motion in nano-confined space when the mean free path of a molecule is long enough compared with the pore size (see Fig. 2). The molecules in the Knudsen regime are more probable to collide with the inner wall of the pore rather than to encounter other molecules.35 Assuming negligible adsorption, it is predicted that Knudsen diffusion is predominant particularly for the pores that range from 2 to 50 nm in diameter. It is because pores with less than 2 nm in diameter are subject to EDL overlap and those larger than 50 nm in diameter may have mean free path that is not long enough to satisfy the Knudsen regime. Collision frequency based on Knudsen diffusion is a function of many geometric parameters including pore diameter and shape, mobility and size of reactant molecules, connectivity and length among pores, etc. Accordingly, sophisticated design of nanoporous structure itself is expected to alter electrocatalytic activity. A few reports made mathematical and experimental approaches to examine the Knudsen diffusion in the nanoporous structure.24,36,37 They investigated the effect of the variables mentioned above in the gas phase, which is less complex than in liquid, providing intuition how electron transfer kinetics is affected by Knudsen diffusion and regulated by the nanoporous structure.
 Fig. 2  Knudsen diffusion in a nanopore. 
Knudsen diffusivity is closely related to pore size. Mu et al. simulated the effect of pore size on a 3D porous network by employing O2 molecules.36 In this work, the Knudsen diffusion markedly decreased with decrease in mean pore size. It is not surprising because narrow pores would obviously restrict the molecular diffusion. Despite reduced diffusivity in narrow pores, the molecule has more chances to interact with the pore surface before escaping. It tells that pore size and depth are crucial factors in electrochemical reaction at nanoporous structure.
Besides the pore size effect, theoretical research on the pore shape effect has been conducted in comparison with circular pore geometry with smooth surface. One of their achievements is that the cross sectional pore shape influences Knudsen diffusion.38 Knudsen diffusivity in elliptical pores was compared with that of rectangular ones, both of which were significantly different from that of circular ones. The concavity and convexity of the pore wall were also the variables for Knudsen diffusivity.37 Based on Monte Carlo simulation, molecular trajectory and collision encounter of gas molecules inside the 1D pore geometries were calculated in the Knudsen regime. This work was conducted for three different models of Swiss cheese, cannonball, and capillary for concave, convex, and cylindrical pores, respectively. The average collision numbers per journey, which was normalized by the ratio of pore channel length to mean pore size, turned out to be in the order cylindrical > concave > convex.
Malek and Coppens investigated the effect of surface roughness on Knudsen diffusion in nanopores by Monte Carlo simulations in rough pores.24,39,40 The surface roughness factor is worthwhile because real nanoporous catalysts usually have rough internal surfaces. Unlike transport diffusion, which is determined by concentration gradient, Knudsen diffusion is sensitive to surface roughness of the inner wall. The Knudsen diffusivity decreases as the surface roughness increases due to geometrical trapping by surface indentations, resulting in more interaction between a molecule and pore surface or prolonged residing near the surface before escaping from the pore. As a consequence, the pore with a rough inner wall is expected to contribute to enhancement of electrochemical reaction. This is especially relevant situation for typical sol–gel based catalysts and supports. Santra and Sapoval41 approached the effect of irregular surface of porous structure on the Knudsen regime in terms of collision frequency and catalytic efficiency. They considered the simple reaction, A → A* (products), which may happen upon collision with the pore surface. The serious irregularity of a confined surface induced high collision frequency and enhanced catalytic efficiency of a gas in the Knudsen diffusion regime. This result confirms that the catalytic efficiency is controlled by the geometrical irregularity of a porous system.
The geometrical trapping in mesoporous structure in the Knudsen regime is comparable with the adsorptive diffusion in zeolites, in which the size of the molecules is similar to the pore size and the predominant mechanism of mass transport is surface diffusion.42 Both nanoporous structures provide an extremely confined spatial environment and thereby trap molecules even longer near the surface. However, trapping in mesoporous electrodes is distinct from that in zeolites in that EDLs along the mesoporous pore inner wall can form inside the deep pores. In the microporous electrode, e.g.zeolite, the micropores are so small that EDLs are seriously overlapped in the pores even in high concentrated electrolyte solution. The electrochemical potential gradient in such overlapped EDLs is possibly too slow to drive electron transfer between the molecule and the electrode surface. In addition to very slow mass transport inside pores, EDL overlap is the important reason that the inner wall in microporous structure hardly acts as effective electrode surface. Therefore, the geometric trapping in mesoporous electrodes can be advantageous to enhance electrochemical reaction in comparison with adsorptive diffusion.
Diffusion in the Knudsen regime is not the only way to explain the structural effect of nanoporous electrodes on electrochemical reaction. Brownian motion is one of the representative molecular transport modes, where the movement of each molecule is random (see Fig. 3). Unlike the Knudsen diffusion, a molecule in this molecular diffusion regime collides with the pore surface less frequently because its mean free path is relatively short compared with the pore size. In the molecular diffusion regime, interaction between the pore surface and the molecule in nanoporous structure is highly boosted by nano-confined space.
 Fig. 3  Nano-confined molecular dynamics in Brownian motion. 
What the nano-confined Brownian motion in nanoporous electrodes is like can be inferred from electrochemical kinetics at nanosphere electrodes that was reported by White et al.25 They simulated how a molecule under Brownian dynamics encounters with the nanosphere electrode surface. The molecule, which was in very close proximity to the electrode surface or even had collided with the electrode before, was likely to escape back to the bulk solution without subsequent collisions that might lead to electron transfer. Owing to this behaviour, the simulated reaction became slower at a smaller nanosphere electrode. In contrast with the nanosphere electrode, redox molecules surrounded by three-dimensional nanoporous walls hardly get away from the electrode surface. Under restraint within nano-confined space, the reactant molecule undergoes even more additional collisions with the nanoporous electrode surface to eventually become a product. Consequently, the electrochemical reaction rate rises. Raccis et al.43 demonstrated confined diffusion of macromolecules in periodic macroporous nanostructure with hundreds of nanometres in pore diameter by using fluorescence correlation spectroscopy and Brownian dynamics simulation. The slow-down factor indicating escape time out of the porous structure increases in proportional to the ratio of particle size to pore radius. It tells that enhancement of electrochemical reaction is regulated by not only pore dimension of porous structure but also the size of reactant molecules.
Migration of the molecules absorbed on the surface, so-called surface diffusion, involves ceaseless bonding and breaking between absorbed molecules and solid surface.44,45 Surface diffusivity is influenced by surface concentration (Cs), surface coverage (θ), and solvent composition.26,46 Besides the interaction between a molecule and substrate atoms, lateral interactions on the basis of van der Waals, electrostatic, direct and indirect exchange interactions should be considered.47 The representative kinetic theory of surface diffusion is the hopping model. This supposes that diffusing molecules are hopping among distinct, energetically favourable absorption sites on the surface in the random direction. However, a recent report demonstrated directed long range surface diffusion of up to 20 nm at the rough surface of Si (100), which was explained by using recoiling motion.48
The nanoporous structures have a high surface-to-volume ratio so that molecules in the nanopores undergo much more interaction with the surface of the inner wall. Accordingly, contribution of surface diffusion to the total mass transport is significant in the nanoporous geometry. For example, in the reverse-phase liquid chromatography system, more than 90% of the sample molecules reportedly migrate by surface diffusion in the porous column.49 The contribution of surface diffusion is much more significant in the gas–solid system.50 The surface diffusion in porous structure is governed by not only chemical property of surface but also porous geometries. The Kapoor–Yang model51 describes the transport mechanisms that can be categorized into pore diffusion and surface diffusion, involving the key parameters of porosity (ε) and porous geometry (k, where k = 2 for spherical, k = 1 for cylindrical, and k = 0 for slab geometry). The effect of micropore size distribution on surface diffusion could be explained by adding micropore size distribution factor F(w) in a pore-surface diffusion (PSD) model.52 The adsorption behavior as a sensitive function of the pore size is ascribed to the size exclusion. In addition, the PSD model was shown to be generalized into the finite kinetics (FK) model.53 Besides the effect of pore size on surface diffusion, it can account for the mass transfer resistances between the bulk and the adsorbed phases (such as the micropore mouth resistance) as well. On the other hand, the branched pore kinetic model54 concerns surface diffusion in macropores with branched micropores by introducing the transfer coefficients of adsorbates from macropores to branched pores (kbr). This model consists of three resistances: first, the adsorbates pass across an external liquid; second, the surface diffusion through the macropores; third, surface diffusion in branched micropores. These theoretical models have limitations with regard to simplified geometries of porous structures such as spherical, cylindrical, or slit. Therefore, we should consider the presence of dead-end pores, rough surface, and three-dimensional porous structure to understand surface diffusion in real nanoporous catalysts. The surface diffusion in electrochemical systems is yet to be explored as shown by the problems associated with the presence of the electrolyte. The surface diffusion of CO on the flat nano-crystal phase was investigated mostly by employing EC-NMR.55 The effect of surface diffusion on electrocatalytic ability of porous electrodes will be one of the critical issues in further research.
Solution resistance in the nanoporous structure
The design of nanoporous structure on the consideration of only molecular diffusion of reactants and products possibly overlooks ion transport along nanopores, which determines solution resistance inside the nanoporous electrode. High resistance of the solution in the nanoporous structure would bring about a notable difference between electrochemical potentials at outskirts and deep-inside part of the electrode. This may make the electrochemical behavior complicated.
The ion transport process sensitively depends on the pore characteristics (size, shape, tortuousness, connectivity, and symmetry of the pores). Wang et al.56 reported that the pore packing defect in 1D ordered mesoporous carbon (OMC) hindered electrolyte diffusion and reduced the electric double layer capacitances (EDLCs). In their work, the short pore length of OMC showed much better capacity retention than that of conventional OMCs because of a short pathway leading to rapid ion diffusion and more entrances for electrolyte access.57
The effect of pore symmetry and connectivity on ion transport in OMC was reported by Sun et al.58 They synthesized body-centered cubic (isolated spherical pore), interconnected hexagonal (isolated pores connect together and form a hexagonally cylindrical pore), and worm-like symmetries (the close and isolation of partial pores) by a tri-block copolymer–template method. They prepared three porous geometries with almost the same pore size. The electron transfer resistances were found to be in the order of isolated spherical pore > worm-like > interconnected hexagonal. The interconnected hexagonal pore symmetry showed more facile mass transport along the mesoporous channel than the isolated spherical nanopores. These results demonstrate the significant effect of the pore architecture on the ion transport and electrolyte diffusion. On the other hand, electrochemical impedance analysis revealed that an interconnected 3D nanoporous Pt electrode had much lower pore resistance than 1D one.59 Collating this result with Sun et al.'s work, we can see that the connectivity among nanopores is critical to determine effectiveness of ion transport in nanoporous electrodes.
Electrical double layer in nanoporous electrodes
Electrical double layer (EDL) is the layered cloud of counterions and coions over a charged surface, that is, electrode. The thickness of EDL is typically in the order of a few nanometres along which most part of the applied electrochemical potential difference drops.60 In conventional electrochemistry, the EDL between electrode and bulk solution is where electron transfer takes place.30 Not only electrochemistry but numerous systems including living cell membranes and soaked glass surface involve the EDL because it exists wherever charged surface faces solution containing ions.
The EDL at nanoporous electrodes has special meaning. First of all, electrochemical potential distribution of EDL on nanoporous electrodes may differ from that on flat electrodes. As the pore radius is comparable with the EDL thickness, the EDLs are possibly overlapped inside the pores. Besides, size of water and ions at nanoporous electrodes with pores smaller than 10 nm should not be negligible in understanding the EDL structure and behaviour unlike flat or macroporous electrodes.61 Reportedly the electrochemical properties at the pores 20 times larger than the ions can be regarded as those at a planar electrode plane.62
Concerning the EDL structure, the classical Gouy–Chapman (GC) theory has been most widely referred to.60 Because ions and water are considered as point charges and a continuum, respectively, this theory works successfully for low surface charge density and electrolyte concentration. However, a better description of the EDL is required for both high concentration of ions and high surface charge density.63 Representative modification was made in the primitive model, in which the ions are considered as charged hard spheres while the water is assumed to be a continuum. Another modified model is the non-primitive model, in which the ions and the water are regarded as charged hard spheres and individual molecules, respectively.
The three models, which are GC, primitive, and non-primitive models, were compared in terms of the EDL shapes inside 1 and 2 nm slit-type nanopores by using Monte Carlo methods.64 For a 1 nm pore, the counterion and coion concentration profiles predicted by the primitive model were similar to those predicted by the GC model, except that some steric effects appeared at high surface charge density in the primitive model. The non-primitive model, however, gave a distinct view of the EDL from the GC and primitive models. The charged surface was covered by water molecules and the counterion concentration in a nanopore reached the maximum at the center of the pore. This shows the significance of water molecules in the nano-confined space. Furthermore, the hydration effect of ions made appreciable contribution to the ion distribution in slit pores.65 For a 2 nm pore, the discrepancy among the results predicted by the three models was decreased.64 It tells that the GC model without modification provides a sufficiently good approximation for a larger size pore. In other words, the size effect of ions and water molecules is significant in microporous electrodes, but diminishes as pore size increases. The three models discussed here are to emphasize the importance of size of ions and solvents in nano pores. In these models, the electrodes were assumed to be planar and perfect in the sense that the uniformly distributed charge of the electrode was confined to the surfaces. At the electrode–electrolyte interface, valence electrons of the electrified electrode were reported to determine the interaction between the electrode surface and solvent molecules.66 Besides, difference in the relative permittivity between the electrode and the electrolyte leads to surface polarization.67 Therefore, more sophisticated consideration of electronic structure66 and polarization67 can lead to more realistic view of the EDLs around nanopores.
One of the most interesting features of the EDL behaviour at the nanoporous electrode is the EDL overlapping. The EDL overlapping occurs when two charged plates approach one another to be within a distance less than twice of the EDL thickness. EDL overlapping slows down the electrical field gradient inside the nanopores and thus equi-potential lines in the EDL are unlikely to follow the morphology of the nanoporous surface.30,68 This behaviour brings about a few phenomena that are observed uniquely at nanoporous electrodes. Despite sufficiently high overpotential applied, the inner surface area of nanoporous electrodes does not possibly participate in electrochemical reaction owing to slow electrical field gradient inside the nanopores caused by EDL overlapping, as shown in Fig. 4a.30 EDL overlapping is not only a function of ionic strength but also the pore size.69 Lower ionic strength and smaller pores lead to EDL overlapping. Experimentally, EDL overlapping results in loss of double layer capacitance or the electrosorption capacitance, which can be estimated from the corresponding cyclic voltammogram. The double layer capacitance of the nanoporous carbon with meso/micro pores was recorded in this way.70–72 Therefore, the presence of EDL overlapping can be instantly and easily probed by simple cyclic voltammetry.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic diagram displaying the shapes of the electrical double layers that depend on the electrolyte concentration. (b) Differential capacitances (Cd) of flat and nanoporous Pt electrodes in various electrolyte concentrations at −0.5 V versusHg/Hg2SO4. Cd's were calculated with respect to geometric area (flat electrode, 3.14 × 10−2 cm2; porous electrode, 7.85 × 10−3 cm2).30 
This capacitance of the nanoporous materials depends on mass transfer rate and concentration of ions inside the pores. Compared with micropores, mesopores possess large pores that facilitate ion transport and allow high ion concentration inside the pores. It leads to the scan rate dependence of the measured capacitance in the cyclic voltammetry.70,71 In the case of the nanoporous carbon with meso- as well as micro pores, the double layer capacitance upon a fast scan comes predominantly from mesopores whereas micropores make no considerable contribution due to slow ion transport along it. On the other hand, both mesopores and micropores contribute to the double layer capacitance at a low scan rate. As expected, more concentrated electrolyte solution reduces the sensitivity of the double layer capacitance to the scan rate. Accordingly, EDL overlapping is experimentally witnessed upon faster potential scan.
There is an interesting phenomenon that originates from these electrochemical features at nanoporous electrodes. As mentioned earlier, the EDL thickness sensitively and systematically responds to ionic strength of the solution, which is a parameter that can be easily controlled. Since the nanopores are narrow and long, there should be a critical change in the shape of the electric double layer. As the ionic strength increases, an equi-potential line of the EDL, which used to be at outskirts of the nanopores, comes into the pores and strictly follows the nanoporous morphology. This event happens at a characteristic ionic strength, corresponding to the EDL thickness identical to the pore radius. This was experimentally demonstrated by employing 1D nanoporous Pt with pores of 2.5 nm in diameter30 (see Fig. 4).
Besides the EDL overlapping, the size effect of ionic species in nano-confined space is worth to be delved into. The volume occupied by ions themselves is not negligible in such a small volume and thus the double layer capacitance may differ from that expected from the electrolyte concentration of bulk solution. Larger ions occupy larger volume in the pores, resulting in capacitance difference. This ion size effect was observed in nanoporous carbon with a uniform pore size of ca. 7.2 nm in diameter73 and hexagonally ordered 1D nanoporous Pt with a pore diameter of 2.5 nm.74 When the size of the pore is reduced down to sub nanometre, the size of ions becomes even comparable to the size of the pores, resulting in ion sieving.75 Ions confined in these microporous materials were found to be partially desolvated.75,76 This indicates that the hydration number of the ion can be subject to the pore diameter and the interaction between the ion and the inner wall of the pores.
The effect of ion size on EDL overlapping at 2 nm slit-type nanopores was investigated by Monte Carlo methods.69 According to this study, EDL overlapping is more likely to occur for larger ions in the solution. Since large counter ions hardly approach as close to the charged surface as small counter ions, local concentration of large counter ions is relatively higher than that of small counter ions at the central region of the charged nanopore, resulting in a more pronounced EDL overlapping. In addition to simulation, ion selective behaviour at nanopores based on ion size was experimentally observed in a mixture of small and large counterions of the same valence.28 Smaller counterions occupying less space were predicted to favorably neutralize the surface and penetrate the pore more easily. As a consequence, more small counter ions were present inside the charged pores than large ones. The counterion selectivity was more explicit at smaller pores.
The characteristics of EDL is also a function of the surface properties of nanoporous electrodes such as hydrophobicity, surface dipole,77 and surface charge.29 For example, the hydrophobic surface of an alkanethiol monolayer prevents aqueous electrolytes from entering pores, resulting in capacitance reduction. Moreover, surface charge induced by chemical functionalization or electrode potential repels coions while counterions became the predominant ionic species.29,78 The coion exclusion phenomenon was more explicit at smaller pores and high surface charge density.28 The probability of EDL overlapping increases in response to decrease in the surface charge density because of lowered ion concentration on the surface and thereby thicker EDL. In mixtures of electrolyte with different size and valence, size of ionic species and charge of the counterions compete with each other to determine which ions are preferred to access the pores.28,69 Divalent counterions have energetic advantage of preferential screening of the surface charge owing to their higher valence. Meanwhile, small counterions are superior in terms of size affinity to access the pores and come close to the charged surfaces. Monte Carlo simulation predicted that as the surface charge density increased, the preference of the pores moved from large divalent counterions to small monovalent counterions.28 Therefore, a size-exclusion effect prevails against valence at high surface charge density.
Kiyohara et al. performed Monte Carlo simulations to investigate the effect of the dielectric constant of the medium on EDL.79 For a low dielectric constant of the medium such as acetonitrile, the total number of ions in the nano-confined space increases as the pore size decreases, despite the fact that the surrounded volume decreases. For a high dielectric constant of the medium such as water, however, this anomalous behaviour disappears. These behaviours depending on dielectric constant of the medium can be explained on the basis of the balance between the ion/electrode electrostatic interaction and the volume exclusion in the nanoporous electrode. The contribution of electrostatic interaction is considerable at the low dielectric constant of the medium because the strength of the electrostatic interaction is inversely proportional to the dielectric constant of the medium. The electrostatic interaction also becomes explicit as pore size decreases due to short distance between the ions and the surface, which tends to augment ion concentration in the pore. On the other hand, the volume exclusion is more likely to happen in smaller pores because the space available for ions is limited. An anomalous increase of the capacitance obtained at microporous carbons in organic electrolyte was experimentally observed.80,81 Although this phenomenon was explained by the partial desolvation of ions in small pores of carbon nanostructures in the literature,80 it could be also understood on the basis of the elevated concentration of ions in the narrow pores for a low dielectric constant of the medium.
Moreover, the surface charge density and the ion density in the microporous electrodes undergo discontinuous transition at a specific potential. Monte Carlo simulation predicted such a transition to occur only in the medium at the low dielectric constant.62 When the pore size is comparable to the ion size, volume exclusion is a more significant factor than electrostatic interaction at low overpotential. As the electric potential bias rises, electrostatic interaction is increasingly prevailing in the medium of the low dielectric constant. Under this condition, the effect of the electrostatic interaction becomes strong enough to overcome the effect of the volume exclusion interaction.
Electrochemical studies on the morphological effect of nanoporous electrodes
In this section, we summarize experimental ways and products to unravel electrochemical characteristics of the nanoporous electrode. Three methodologies of electrochemical impedance spectroscopy, potential sweep techniques including cyclic voltammetry, and electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance have been predominantly employed for this purpose. Besides these three classes of experimental methods, a few more techniques such as chronoamperometry, coulometry, differential pulse voltammetry and scanning electrochemical microscopy can be used for characterizing porous electrodes.82 Understanding the morphological effect on electrochemical responses has been mostly relying on the theoretical approach. However, reliable knowledge of nanoporous electrochemistry should have obvious limitation without experimental investigation and evidence. Going through the research achievements on the basis of experimental methods can provide practical view and lessons to pursue nanoporous electrochemistry.

Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS)

EIS is a representative technique to probe the electrochemical systems that employ nanoporous electrodes. In order to properly interpret and describe the results from EIS of the nanoporous electrodes, sophisticated models are required for the consideration of their structural complexity. The transmission line model (TLM) proposed by de Levie83 is widely used for the analysis of the electrochemical results from nanoporous electrodes. This model regards a porous electrode as an array of individual cylinder pores and assumes that the dominant contribution to the current is migration driven by external electrical field rather than diffusion. The impedance in the TLM model is given by the expression of eqn (1) (1)where r = series element impedance per unit length, y = parallel element impedance times length, and l = transmission line length. r and y represent resistive component from electrolyte into the pore and electrochemical characteristics at the interface between inner wall and solution, respectively. In the presence of pure charging current, y is merely capacitive component. For a faradaic system, y involves charge transfer resistance in parallel to the capacitance. When the interfacial polarization process exhibits complex behaviour, the capacitive element is described by a constant phase element (CPE).84 The impedance of electrochemical systems is presented by substituting the relevant expression for y.85 For example, for an ideally polarizable interface involving only charging current, y is nothing but a surface capacitance, y = 1/jwc (, w is the frequency in rad s−1). We obtain the equation for impedance as follows. (2)Eqn (1) and (2) are the simplest TLMs because electronic resistance of the solid electrode phase and impedance at the outermost region of a porous electrode are assumed to be negligible (see Fig. 5a). When the porous material and the underlying substrate are different from each other, TLM ignores impedance that may exist at the contact between the two phases. TLM was evolved to be able to analytically describe the systems with two transport channels and arbitrary terminal loads like impedance between two different phases.86 Recently, advanced TLM was proposed for the nanoporous electrodes with hybrid macro/meso/micro pores.87
 Fig. 5  (a) The equivalent circuits for the impedance of a flat electrode (top) and a nanoporous electrode (down) based on the simplest model. (b) Corresponding Nyquist plots for the equivalent circuits of a flat electrode (top) and a nanoporous electrode (down). 
Compared with impedance of flat electrodes, line with slope 1 commonly appears at the high frequency region in Nyquist plots from nanoporous electrodes27,85,88 (see Fig. 5b). This is called Warburg response because the same type of behaviour arises from diffusion in semi-infinite media. This indicates a diffusive behaviour of the potential profile along the pores. If the interfacial polarization process is described by simply employing a CPE, the corresponding Nyquist plot deviates from the exact slope 1 at the high frequency region.85

TLM works successfully for disordered structures as well as well-ordered porous electrodes. TLM was applied to nanoporous platinum,59,88,89gold,27carbon,90TiO2,85,91 and diamond.92 Recently, Robinson et al. reported the limitation of TLM for Au pores of 10 nm in diameter.27 They found that the anomaly from the TLM appeared at low electrolyte concentration on the intermediate time scale. This phenomenon was ascribed to hinder ion transport along the pores. For nanoporous electrodes with pores of a few nm in diameter, low resistance of mass transport requires sufficiently high electrolyte concentration. For example, 0.4 M electrolyte concentration per 1 V is needed for charge nanoporous electrodes with 10 μF cm−2 specific capacitance and 10 nm diameter.93
One of the purposes of TLM is to evaluate pore resistance, the penetration depth, and the charge transfer resistance inside the pore. These parameters are closely linked to morphology of the nanopores. The pore resistance, which means the solution resistance in a pore, is denoted by lr/3 where l is the pore length and r is the electrolyte resistance per unit length. Elliott and Owen measured the pore resistance of hexagonally ordered 1D nanoporous Pt with uniform pores each ∼2.5 nm in diameter.88 Park et al. investigated structural and electrochemical features of 3D nanoporous Pt electrodes with 1–3 nm pores.59 The pore resistance of 3D nanoporous electrodes was lower than that of 1D nanoporous electrodes with similar pore size. This resulted from higher accessibility, less probable pore clogging, and lower film thickness of the 3D porous structure under the condition of the identical surface area, that is, roughness factor. The deep region inside nanopores does not necessarily participate in electrochemical reaction.59 Such an area increases as the nanoporous film becomes thick. Therefore, minimizing the area not involved in electrochemical reaction enables optimization of the thickness of nanoporous electrodes. The minimal thickness of an effective nanoporous film (penetration depth), which drives diffusion-controlled electrochemical reaction, decreases as the pore size diminishes. Honda et al. determined the penetration depth for nano-honeycomb diamond electrodes with 400 nm × 3 μm (400 nm in diameter and 3 μm in depth) and 60 nm × 500 nm (60 nm in diameter and 500 nm in depth) dimension at Fe2+/Fe3+ reaction.92 At low frequency, the penetration depth of a 60 nm × 500 nm nano-honeycomb diamond electrode was 380 nm, whereas that of a 400 nm × 3 μm electrode was close to the actual pore depth. The diffusion of the reactants appears to be strongly inhibited by interactions with the pore wall. As a result, the effective average concentrations of the reactants deep inside the nanopores are possibly much lower than those in the bulk. For example, for a 400 nm × 3 μm electrode at Fe2+/Fe3+ reaction, the concentration of the reactant in the nanopores was ca. 80 times lower than that of the bulk solution.92 The reactant concentration gradient in the nanoporous electrode yields two semicircles in the Nyquist plot due to elevated charge transfer resistance in the pores.
Potential sweep
The potential sweep method is usually used for electrode characterization,94electrode kinetics,95 and reaction mechanism.94 The double layer capacitance obtained by potential sweep techniques is quite informative about effective area of the nanoporous electrode and the EDL profile.
Theoretical analysis in terms of quantitative information from electrochemical response by potential sweep at planar electrodes is well established in comparison with those by other techniques.60 Although a theoretical analysis of linear sweep voltammetry in porous electrodes was previously reported,96,97 it was for the micrometre-scale pores. However, that is not the case for nanoporous electrodes. The nanoporous electrodes behave like thin layer cells that are intertwined and enclose numerous spaces smaller than the diffusion layer.60,98,99 The total current flowing through a nanoporous electrode results from local mass transport within the nanopores as well as semi-infinite linear diffusion towards the outermost area of the macroscopic electrode surface. When sufficiently high overpotential is applied, semi-infinite linear diffusion is predominant. Otherwise, the contribution of thin layer mass transport to total current is greater than linear diffusion outside the nanopores in most cases.99
Although cyclic voltammograms are normally informative about electrode kinetics, intensive care must be taken in interpreting them quantitatively, especially when the electrode surface is not truly planar. Menshykau and Compton revisited the effect of the electrode porosity on cyclic voltammetry.100 They simulated electrochemical reactions at the electrodes with cylindrical pores.101 According to their works, deeper cylinders produce lower peak to peak separation. The peak to peak separation reduced by the electrode porosity was experimentally confirmed at porous graphene material.102 This result reminds us of a significant fact that the peak to peak separation reveals the reversibility of electron transfer, but it depends on the surface geometry as well. Accordingly, evaluation of electrocatalysis solely relying on peak to peak separation possibly leads to the misinterpretation. Reportedly, the geometrical properties of nanoporous electrodes have influence on electrochemical transfer coefficient, α, which is a key kinetic parameter.103,104 Anomalous lower α values than the expected value are observed when electrochemical reactions take place in porous electrodes. Since the measured α value can be used to obtain mechanistic information,105 Tafel plots from nanoporous electrodes must be interpreted with special caution.

Electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance (EQCM)

EQCM is a well known tool for simultaneously monitoring mass changes at electrodes during electrochemical processes, including the underpotential deposition of metals, adsorption/desorption of ions of surfactants, and changes in polymer films during redox processes106 offer unique information about concentration and compositional changes of ions induced by the porous structure. It is expected that enlarged surface area of nanoporous electrodes enhances the EQCM response compared with flat electrodes and the confined space of the pores plays a role of modifying the signals.
The direct information acquired through EQCM responses from a nanoporous electrode is the mass changes of the electrode due to adsorbed ions and solvent. The Aurbach group used an EQCM technique to measure ionic fluxes during charging/discharging of microporous carbons.29,107–109 They found that ion fluxes were affected by the point of zero charge (PZC) of the electrode, pore width, ion size, and cycling conditions.107 Analysis of the raw EQCM responses can provide the indirect information such as perm-selectivity failure, surface charge distribution, and solvation number. Sigalov et al. investigated the effect of surface charge distribution on the ionic fluxes.29 They obtained charge distribution among the carbon surface with charged functional groups by measuring the most contributory ion species to the charging mechanism at porous electrodes, which cannot be achieved by the cyclic voltammetry. In addition, the EQCM reveals solvation numbers of electrolyte ions that are partially desolvated by narrow pores.76,108 The solvation number is an important factor that can markedly modify the standard electrochemical rate constant110 and maximum double-layer capacitance.81 Combination of the cyclic voltammetry and the EQCM is a good approach to unravel the dynamics of ions and solvent molecules within electrified nanopores.
Morphological effect on electrochemical reaction
The structural effect of nanoporous electrodes on electrochemical reaction has been mostly examined in terms of the effectiveness of mass transport. While larger pores are disadvantageous in regard to insufficient enhancement of surface area, smaller pore impedes ion transport and augments solution resistance. In due course, the optimal pore size for the most effective mass transport has been sought.111,112 Du et al. investigated oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) by using carbon aerogel samples with different pore sizes from 4 to 19 nm. According to their work, mesoporous structure with the pores of 18.5 nm in diameter showed the best ORR performance that was attributed to effective diffusion of O2 molecules. In practice, optimal pore size sensitively depends on uniformity and stability of the porous electrodes. The nanoporous architecture may be collapsed and contain a number of dead pores or isolated volume that obstructs effective mass transport. For example, it is challenging to synthesize uniformly integrated porous structure with pores less than 25 nm in diameter by a colloidal silica crystalline template method. Although porous carbon of 10 nm pore diameter has huge surface area, methanol oxidation current from it is less than that from larger pores.113 Concerning the metal nanoparticles loaded on a porous conducting substrate, their size is a critical factor for catalytic activity because catalytic particles trapped in narrow pores may cause poor interconnectivity of pores, resulting in interrupted mass transport.114 Well ordered electrodes with highly interconnected pores allow efficient mass transfer of not only reactant but product molecules.113 Therefore, ion transport through a 3D network of a meso- or macroporous conducting architecture can yield excellent performance of battery such as facilitated charging–discharging and minimal capacity loss.115
Besides macroscopic mass transport in the pores, we need to pay attention to the role of microscopic confined dynamics. The effect of nanostructured catalysts loaded on electrocatalysis provides potentially valuable lessons. Bonakdarpour et al. investigated ORR on non-noble metal catalysts, Fe–N–C.116 A small amount of catalysts made the fraction of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) increase. The fraction of H2O2 varied as a function of the quantity of the catalyst loaded, suggesting that highly loaded catalysts offer more chances to undergo electrocatalytic reduction before H2O2 intermediates escape out of the bulk solution. On the other hand, mass transport and re-adsorption processes on the ORR were examined by employing Pt nanodiscs of ca. 100 nm in diameter, which was ten times larger than that of the typical Pt nanoparticles, on a planar glassy carbon substrate.117 This work showed that H2O2 intermediates diffuse into the stagnant diffusion layer and then re-adsorb on the surface near Pt nanodiscs to produce H2O molecules. The lower amount of Pt nanodiscs loaded resulted in lower probability of re-adsorption/reduction on the Pt nanodiscs, and thus higher yield of H2O2. This was confirmed by the oxidation of CO and formaldehyde.118
Heterogeneous interaction of a reactant with the electrified surface is tremendously amplified by nanoporous structures. Once a reactant molecule diffuses into the nanopores, the extremely high surface-to-volume ratio effectively deters it from escaping toward the bulk solution. The molecule surrounded by nanoporous structure diffuses in Brownian motion or Knudsen regime and experiences a number of collisions with the porous surface. Consequently, electrochemical reaction appears to be kinetically enhanced. This nano-confined molecular dynamics is dominant in electron transfer limited reaction rather than mass transfer limited reaction.
The effect of nano-confined dynamics on electrochemical reaction was experimentally supported in the literature. Since the Attard group119 has firstly reported nanoporous platinum (Pt) with pore diameter less than 10 nm through a surfactant assembly template, various methods such as potential control,120 reverse micelle phase,121 and block copolymer122 were introduced to fabricate nanoporous electrodes. The electrocatalytic ability of nanoporous Pt is outstanding in diverse applications, for example, nonenzymatic glucose oxidation,123 O2reduction,124H2O2 redox reaction,125 pH meter,126 solid state reference electrode,127 and glutamate microsensor.128 However, enlargement of surface area was not the sole reason that brought about those results. For nonenzymatic glucose sensing, the oxidation current at the flat Pt is even lower than the extrapolated current from linear correlation between the amperometric currents and the roughness factors of nanoporous Pt samples. ORR at nanoporous Pt shows not only increased current but also a positive shift (about 200 mV) of onset potential. H2O2 reduction on nanoporous Pt microelectrodes is a mass transfer limited reaction, whereas the current from a flat Pt microelectrode is very low and ill-defined. Many evidence unequivocally tell that there is another reason underlying peculiar phenomena in addition to surface enlargement of nanoporous structure.
Han et al.31 utilized nanoporous Pt (L2-ePt) to delve into electrocatalytic enhancement induced by microscopic molecular dynamics (see Fig. 6). The electrochemical analysis and computer simulation segregated morphological contribution to the enhanced electrocatalysis from the effect of enlarged surface area. In this work, the surface area factor was eliminated by introducing the amperometric current density, which is the current divided by active electrode surface area (jreal), instead of normalized by geometric surface area (japp). In addition to amperometric signals, potentiometric response of a nanoporous Pt microelectrode to pH was compared with that of a flat macroelectrode with a similar real surface area. Under the condition that the surface area effect was cancelled out, the nanoporous Pt produced markedly higher current density, jreal, in the kinetic controlled region (e.g. low overpotential at ORR and H2O2 reduction) and better potentiometric responses to pH as demonstrated by fast response time, low hysteresis, and near Nernstian behaviour. These phenomena are ascribed to unique geometry of nanoporous structure, which remarkably augment the residence time on the electrode surface by the confinement effect. Reactant molecules in a nanoporous structure have more opportunities to stay longer on the electrode surface and collide with the electrode more frequently than on a planar surface. Such behaviour was examined by the Monte Carlo simulations. Within a constant time, simulation results told that a reactant particle in the porous structure collides with the surface more frequently. Furthermore, current density at the porous geometry as a function of reaction time (inverse of the reaction rate) is higher than that at planar geometry in the kinetic-controlled regime. These results clearly demonstrate that the confined molecular dynamics in porous structure can play a critical role in the enhancement of redox reactions, particularly for slow heterogeneous reactions.
 Fig. 6  (a) TEM image of the L2-ePt surface. The scale bar is 10 nm. (b) Schematic view of the L2-ePt thin film. (c) Schemes for the confinement effect of nanoporous Pt. Adopted from ref. 31. 
Another ORR study conducted by Snyder et al.129 supported the presence and significance of the confinement effect in nanoporous structures. This work showed high activity for ORR by employing a composite nanoporous Ni–Pt alloy impregnated with a hydrophobic, high-oxygen-solubility, and protic ionic liquid. Focussing on the combination of ionic liquid and metal catalyst, they mentioned the nano-structural effect on ORR by analyzing the currents. The currents from nanoporous Ni–Pt electrodes were proportional to increasing surface area, or depth of the porous films, at low overpotential where the electrochemical reactions are kinetic-controlled. On the other hand, the currents at high overpotential are almost constant regardless of the surface area. This result also indicates that O2 molecules in the kinetically controlled regime are likely to be trapped in nanoporous space and reside near the electrode surface, eventually undergoing further electrochemical reduction.
As discussed earlier, EDL is another parameter that must be considered to correctly understand the electrokinetics in nanoporous electrodes. There is an essential condition for real nanoporous surface area to fully participate in faradaic reaction. The thickness of EDL, at which the applied potential drops, should be safely shorter than the pore radius. When EDL fails to be thinner than the pore radius, EDL overlap on the nanoporous surface occurs, and thus the surface area enlarged by morphological porosity is not necessarily equivalent to the electrochemically active area of the electrode. Since the EDL systematically responds to the ionic strength, the electrochemically active area can be varied from the area of electrode outskirts to real nanoporous surface area by simply changing the ion concentration of the solution. Boo et al. showed that current density of ORR at the nanoporous electrodes was not significantly different from that at the flat one in dilute ionic solutions, which made the EDL severely thick and thereby overlapped in the nanopores. On the other hand, as the ionic strength was elevated, the current density of nanoporous electrodes began to climb steeply.30 These results dramatically show that the electrolyte concentration can be a key variable governing the apparent kinetics of electrochemical reaction on a nanoporous electrode (see Fig. 7). When the nanoporous system is examined by the potential sweep method, scan rate is a considerable variable as well. Upon fast scan, time is not long enough for ions to move into the pores and form stable EDL.71 This effect is less pronounced at high electrolyte concentration.
 Fig. 7  The results of chronoamperometry of O2reduction at flat and nanoporous Pt electrodes at various electrolyte concentrations. The concentration of O2 is ca. 1 mM. Step potential is −0.75 V versusHg/Hg2SO4. Sampling time is 11 ms.30 
The electrochemical reaction in nanoporous electrodes is also subject to additional factors such as size of redox species and surface charge of electrodes. Unfortunately, there are few research studies that systemically addressed these issues of porous electrodes so far. However, the previous works on electrochemistry at nonconducting porous materials on planar electrodes imply that size and charge of redox molecules and electrode pores are presumably important factors for apparent kinetics of faradaic reaction.
If the pore size is comparable to the size of a redox molecule, faradaic reaction is significantly affected by the steric effect of the nanoporous structure.130,131 This is because accessibility of redox molecules into the nanopores is a function of the solvated molecule-to-pore size ratio. While redox species far smaller than the pore size can freely penetrate into the pore, larger redox species than the pore size undergo limited diffusion into the pore. Muguruma et al. demonstrated the diffusion mode of various redox species through a plasma-polymerized nanothin coating that possessed subnanometre-sized pores on a sputtered platinum electrode.130 Permeability of reactants into the nanoporous polymer film (pore size: 0.57–0.71 nm) was inversely proportional to molecular size as follows: H2O2 (0.34 nm) > catechol (0.52 nm) > ascorbic acid (0.67 nm) > chlorpromazine (0.92 nm). In the case of reactants as large as or larger than the pores such as ascorbic acid and chlorpromazine, the reactants can hardly penetrate the pores. The steric effect inside the nanoporous structure can make it possible to discriminate molecules with different sizes. However, it should be noted that the microporous electrode is inappropriate for electrochemical reaction. First of all, EDL in microporous electrodes is apt to overlap. And the micropores are too narrow for many ions to access and penetrate. Even mesoporous structure may be problematic in terms of ion penetration. Li and Ito reported the molecular sieving properties of nanoporous films derived from polystyrene–poly(methylmethacrylate) diblock copolymers on the gold electrode for biomacromolecules.131 The ferritin redox molecules were not able to pass through the nanopores because their size (∼12 nm) was not sufficiently small compared with the effective pore size (∼15 nm).
Moreover, the surface charge on the porous walls has a great influence on electrochemical reaction.132–134 The extremely high surface-to-volume ratio in the nanoporous structure makes the charge balance of the solution governed by surface charge on the surrounding inner wall. When electrode surfaces are negatively charged, the transport of anionic redox species to the electrode interface is hindered, while cationic charged redox species are enriched in the pores due to electrostatic interaction between electrode and charged redox species. Particularly, the surface modification with anionic or cationic charges by a self-assembly monolayer (SAM) can significantly affect electrokinetics on the nanoporous electrode. In the case of nanopores of several nanometres in diameter, a Debye layer possibly extends to the centre of the pore as predicted on the consideration of pore size, charge density, electrolyte concentration, and length of a surface modifier. Accordingly, electrostatic barrier in the nanopores can regulate diffusion of charged electroactive or non-electroactive species. The mass transport of oppositely charged redox species is facilitated and preconcentration can occur, leading to enhancement of faradaic reaction. On the other hand, redox species with the same charge as the surface are impeded or possibly even rejected by electrostatic barrier.

        Transport of ionic redox molecules in the mesoporous silica film on the indium tin oxide (ITO) electrode can be modulated by pH induced variation of surface charge as reported by Calvo et al.133 They immobilized zwitterionic polyelectrolyte on the mesoporous silica surface. At pH > 5, both the zwitterionic moieties and the SiO−groups bore negative charges. As a result, the system showed a remarkable cation-permselective behaviour and resulted in suppressed redox current of Fe(CN)63−. On the other hand, at pH lower than 5 and pIzwitter > pH > pKa,silica, the zwitterionic monomers bore positive charges while the silanol groups were still negatively charged. The presence of both negative and positive charges expelled both anions and cations simultaneously. Taffa et al. controlled pore size and surface charge in mesoporous TiO2 using post-grafted SAMs and investigated electron transport by cyclic voltammetry using Ru(NH3)63+/2+, Fe(CN)64−/3−, and [IrCl6]2−/3−.134 The pore walls were modified by phosphoric acids bearing one or two pyridinium or sulfonate head groupsvia6,10,14-methylene in order to tune the pore diameter as well as the surface charge. Surface charges on the pore wall suppress the electrochemical response of equally charged redox ions. The marked suppression of faradaic current was also observed for long alkyl chains that reduced pore diameter and strengthens electrostatic barrier by significant EDL overlapping. The decline rate of faradaic current by electrostatic barrier at mesoporous TiO2 with randomly sized pores was higher than mesoporous TiO2 with regular pores. This is because the narrowest region in randomly distributed pores can act as bottlenecks for the ion flow. The current suppression induced by the charge on the pore wall becomes less conspicuous at higher concentrations of the electrolyte due to the screening effect of the electrolyte.
Kinetic controlled reactions are sensitive to the geometric effect of nanoporous structure. Faradaic current from given concentration of a reactant varies with the thickness of nanoporous film electrodes, which is expressed as the roughness factor (Rf) assuming constant pore size (Fig. 8). A thicker nanoporous electrode produces higher faradaic current, which is saturated to be that of diffusion controlled reaction at its thickness exceeding the maximum penetration depth. Park et al.59 determined Rfs that corresponded to the characteristic maximum penetration depth for various electrochemical reactions. The reduction of O2 and H2O2 was enhanced until Rf grew to be 41. At higher Rf, the reduction currents reached a plateau, reflecting that the entire nanoporous surface no longer participates in the O2 and H2O2 reduction. Unlike O2 or H2O2, glucose oxidation current kept growing without stopping at Rf over 300. This means that the system was still in the kinetic controlled regime even at such a thick nanoporous electrode. The reactants residing inside the pores at a high Rf, a thick nanoporous electrode in other words, remains unreacted. Therefore, it is possible to determine the minimal thickness of the nanoporous catalyst for making certain electron transfer reaction diffusion-controlled.
 Fig. 8  The penetration depth of reactant molecules according to the kinetics of electrochemical reaction. Adopted from ref. 59. 
One of the interesting applications exploiting this behaviour is chemical sensors that are discriminatively sensitive to target molecules undergoing sluggish or fast reactions.123 For example, ascorbic acid is a common interfering substance in amperometric glucose sensing. The oxidation of ascorbic acid is much faster than that of glucose. Ascorbic acid is depleted inside the nanoporous structure following diffusion controlled reaction. On the other hand, glucose undergoes sluggish oxidation inside the nanoporous electrode as well as its outskirts. The faradaic current of glucose oxidation increases up to that of diffusion-controlled reaction like ascorbic acid. Considering the fact that the concentration of glucose in blood is far higher than that of ascorbic acid and any other potentially interfering molecules, a nanoporous electrode allows glucose-selective amperometric response without using enzyme, which all of the commercialized glucose sensors inevitably employ to achieve selectivity.
Beyond conventional porous electrode: nano-confined space for new aspects of electrochemistry
The nano-confined space is the origin of distinctive physicochemical phenomena such as molecular dynamics within an extremely small liquid phase, ion transport along narrow pores with a very high surface-to-volume ratio, and EDL overlapping possibly making the electric potential profile transformed dramatically around nanoporous structure. So, all of those unusual things are observed characteristically at nanoporous electrodes and suggest so-called nanoporous electrochemistry. The experimental and theoretical findings, which have been achieved and reported, are indicating that electrochemistry at nano-confined electrodes may provide new opportunity that enables us to surpass what could be expected from the traditional electrochemistry. Considering the demand on innovative technology more than surface enlargement and crystalline facet engineering, nanoporous electrochemistry deserves keen attention with regard to energy conversion and many other areas. For instance, it may help to understand biological phenomena like ion transport through ion channels with nanocavities against electrochemical potential gradient.
It is not straightforward to investigate the nano-structural effect theoretically as well as experimentally because of irregularity and complex interconnectivity of nanopores. Moreover, the electrochemical conditions such as electrolyte concentration and electric potential profile in the nanopores vary with the pore depth, electrode material, ion size, electrochemical potential difference externally applied, surface charge density, and so on. The well defined nano-structures, therefore, would make a great contribution to establishing the general model of electrochemistry in nanoporous structure. Rapid advance of nanofabrication technologies like the nano electromechanical system (NEMS) is expected to supply sophisticatedly engineered fine structure of nanopores and drive the future progress in nanoporous electrochemistry and its applications. The effective model system is not necessarily obtainable from only NEMS at high cost. One of the classical but useful systems is the nanoporous electrode that is comprised of a metal microdisk electrode sealed within a conical-shaped pore wall of glass. The orifice of the pore ranges from a few tens of nanometres to 1000 nm. The nanoporous electrode is different from the nanoporous electrodes in this article in that the inner wall surrounding internal metal is non-conductive. This electrode shows highly reproducible limiting currents in voltammetric measurements, which are within error of the theoretical prediction. The White group demonstrated theory, simulations, and experiments that showed an asymptotic approach of the diffusion-limited steady state current at a conical shaped nanoporous electrode.135 The diffusion mode changed from radial to linear geometry in response to the elevating voltammetric scan rate. They also reported electrostatic-gate transport by chemical modification of glass nanopore,136 which is similar to the surface charge effect of nanoporous electrodes. Further electrochemical aspects of nanoporous electrodes were summarized in a separate review paper.137
The nanoscale thin layer cell is another informative model that gives important implications with respect to nanoporous electrochemistry. It has a nano-space between two parallel electrodes, to which dissimilar electrical potential can be applied. The nanofluidic channel138,139 fabricated by using lithographic methods and immersion of a recessed nanoelectrode into the Hg pool140 can be regarded as a nanoscale thin layer cell. This system can trap a single molecule140 within the nanocavity and accomplish enormous current amplification by redox cycling between two electrodes.138–141 Consequently, this system enables single molecule electrochemistry.
Conclusions and perspectives
We described physical and electrochemical features of nanoporous electrodes, which are originated by neither enlarged surface area nor crystalline facet, but come from porous morphology. In addition, the electrochemical methods to investigate the structural effect of nanoporous electrodes were reviewed and characteristic behaviours were discussed.
The remarkable characteristics of nanoporous electrodes arising from their own geometry can be summarized as follows.
1. Nano-confined molecular dynamics: the nano-confined space provides longer residence time of a molecule in the vicinity of the electrode surface. This means that highly frequent interaction between the molecule and electrode surface leads to an apparent enhancement of electrokinetics. This microscopic molecular dynamics in the nanoporous structure is reasonably described by Knudsen diffusion, Brownian motion, and surface diffusion.
2. Mass transport inside the pores: the mass transport of redox species and electrolytes along the nanopores is hindered to augment the solution resistance, mostly ascribed to the steric effect of porous structure. The effectiveness of mass transport and penetration depth depends on properties of the redox active molecules like electrochemical kinetics and size as well as the pore characteristics, e.g., size, shape, connectivity, and symmetry. When pore size is comparable to that of redox molecules, accessibility of molecules into the pores is governed by size and charge of the molecule and pores.
3. EDL overlapping: when the thickness of EDL is as large as the pore radius, EDL overlapping begins to occur in the pore. Under this condition, the geometric area enlarged by morphological porosity is not necessarily equivalent to the electrochemically active area of electrodes. The characteristics of EDL is determined by a few factors such as pore size, mass transfer rate size of ionic species, surface property of nanopore, and dielectric constant of medium.
Based on these characteristics, we should be able to think of the optimized morphological conditions of nanoporous electrodes to maximize electrocatalytic efficiency. The microporous electrode with extremely narrow pores smaller than 1 nm in diameter provides spatial conditions that make redox molecules reside on the electrode surface even longer through surface diffusion. However, severe EDL overlap would make it difficult that the molecules are exposed to sufficient potential difference for facile electron transfer. On the other hand, the nanopores below several tens of nanometres in mesoporous electrodes suit for Knudsen diffusion or Brownian motion in the pores. And EDLs are not overlapped unless ionic strength is unusually low. Nevertheless, mass transport is still slow so that the deep region in the nanoporous electrode undergoes notable problems in removing products as well as feeding reactants.
Besides pore size, connectivity among the pores is another important factor to take into account for good accessibility to the intra-pores. 3D interconnected porous structure is superior to 1D porous one, in which individual pores are isolated, for the purpose of mass transport. In this sense, the 3D interconnected multi-scale electrode combining mesopores with macropores is predicted to be a promising system. It would maximize interaction between redox molecules and electrode surface and realize both effective mass transport and ideal EDL profile in the mesopores. The optimized multi-scale nanoporous structure suggests another possible route to non-noble metal electrocatalysts with electrocatalytic power even comparable to what have been expected only from platinum and its alloys ever before. Although researchers have reported hierarchical porous structures142–144 to enhance electrochemical reaction, their studies were into fabrication or structure itself. Only limited attention has been paid to systematic correlation of multi-scale porous geometry and electrokinetic enhancement. To see if multi-scale porous structures for electrokinetic reactions are effective, both theoretical and experimental approaches under strict control of the parameters mentioned in this article need to be done systematically.
Unlike macroscopic diffusion, correlation between microscopic diffusion in nano-spaces and electrochemical kinetics is yet to be explored. Microscopic molecular dynamics in the nano-confined pore system involves many variables including solvent molecules, electrolytes, surface diffusion of redox molecules, and EDL. It is demanding to experimentally verify the effect of nano-confined dynamics on electron transfer reaction in various kinds of porous geometries as a function of pore size, pore connectivity, pore shape, and surface roughness.
The reason why the structural effect of nanoporous electrodes is an attractive target of futuristic research can be clarified when we quantitatively estimate electrocatalytic enhancement that could be achieved by optimizing nanopores. To do so, let us remind of the positive shift of onset potential, which was about 200 mV for ORR at L2-ePt with 2 nm diameter and 200 nm thickness.59 This behaviour is very reproducible and easily observed at mesoporous Pt without any strict control of the experimental conditions. According to Nakano et al.'s calculation, the reactant molecules in this kind of nanoporous structure encounter the electrode surface 100 times more frequently than on a flat electrode.37 If this assumption is applied to nanoporous Cu with the identical structure, it is expected that 500 nm thick nanoporous Cu exhibits about 500 mV positive shift, which is comparable to electrocatalytic capability of flat Pt.145 More straightforward guideline is required to design the optimal nanoporous structure that will be able to minimize the expense of trial-and-error.
The improvement of a fabrication technique to prepare nanoporous non-noble metal electrodes with highly ordered geometry is in demand to confirm general validity of the structural effect of nanoporous electrodes. The noble metals (e.g.Pt, Au, Pd, etc.) were previously reported to have their own nanoporous structures with less than 10 nm in diameter by employing diverse methods (e.g. dealloying, surfactant, block copolymer, silica super crystal, etc.). However, non-noble metals, such as Ni, Cu, Fe, and Co, are not the case. It is difficult to make ordered and interconnected mesoporous structures of non-noble metals because their nanoporous structures tend to easily collapse by metal oxides formed during cleaning procedure and electrochemical processes.146 Underpotential deposition (UPD) of noble metals on porous non-noble metals could be a plausible solution. Even in this case the use of a noble metal is inevitable.
Another issue is the theoretical approach to interpret electrochemical responses produced by nanoporous electrodes. For instance, a generalized theory for a potential sweep method like cyclic voltammetry is needed to extract electrokinetic parameters of nanoporous electrodes from the experimental data. Although the classical theory for porous electrodes was established for the pores with the micrometre-scale or larger, it is inappropriate to address the crucial issues on nanoporous electrochemistry such as Knudsen diffusion, Brownian motion, surface diffusion, EDL overlapping, size effect of redox species, and surface charge effect of electrode within the pores below several tens of nanometres in diameter. The advanced model for nanoporous electrodes taking account of these factors is indispensable for accurate and correct interpretation of electrochemical responses from nanoporous electrodes.
Electrokinetic enhancement at nanoporous electrodes involves a physicochemical issue more than surface area and crystalline facets. The origin of extra enhancement should be found in the structural effect on molecular dynamics within nano-confined space surrounded by the electrified surface. Witnessing the current progress for synthetic technology of nanomaterials, electrochemistry at nanoporous structure is just beginning. Nanoporous electrochemistry proposes another direction toward innovative electrocatalysts beyond classic electrochemistry and conventional strategies based on surface area enlargement and crystalline facet control.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MEST) (No. 2011-0001218), by Mid-career Researcher Program (No. 2010-0011751), and by the Public welfare & Safety research program (No. 2011-0021117) through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology.
Notes and references
D. R. Rolison, J. W. Long, J. C. Lytle, A. E. Fischer, C. P. Rhodes, T. M. McEvoy, M. E. Bourg and A. M. Lubers, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 226–252 RSC .
A. G. Pandolfo and A. F. Hollenkamp, J. Power Sources, 2006, 157, 11–27 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lang, A. Hirata, T. Fujita and M. Chen, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 232–236 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shin and S. Lee, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3171–3173 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, Z. Bian, J. Zhu, Y. Huo, H. Li and Y. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 4538–4539 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, D. F. Thomas and A. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2008, 80, 997–1004 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, R. Hu and J. Deng, Anal. Chem., 1997, 69, 2343–2348 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Joo, S. J. Choi, I. Oh, J. Kwak, Z. Liu, O. Terasaki and R. Ryoo, Nat. Chem., 2001, 412, 169–172 Search PubMed .
R. Szamocki, S. Reculusa, S. Ravaine, P. N. Bartlett, A. Kuhn and R. Hempelmann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 1317–1321 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Guo, G. Zhu, B. Gao, D. Zhang, G. Tian, Y. Chen, W. Zhang and S. Qiu, Carbon, 2005, 43, 2344–2351 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, W. Yan and S. Dai, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 11999–12006 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ji, K. T. Lee, R. Holden, L. Zhang, J. Zhang, G. A. Botton, M. Couillard and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 286–293 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Chiu, Y. Li, L. Ruan, X. Ye, C. B. Murray and Y. Huang, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 393–399 CrossRef CAS .
N. Tian, Z.-Y. Zhou, S.-G. Sun, Y. Ding and Z. L. Wang, Science, 2007, 316, 732–735 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zeng, Y. Zheng, M. Rycenga, J. Tao, Z.-Y. Li, Q. Zhang, Y. Zhu and Y. Xia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8552–8553 CrossRef CAS .
K. Gong, D. Su and R. R. Adzic, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14364–14366 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, C. Wang, W.-B. Cai and Y. Ding, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1845–1848 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xing, Y. Cai, M. B. Vukmirovic, W.-P. Zhou, H. Karan, J. X. Wang and R. R. Adzic, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 3238–3242 Search PubMed .
J. Kim, Y. Lee and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 4996–4997 CrossRef CAS .
V. Stamenkovic, B. S. Mun, K. J. J. Mayrhofer, P. N. Ross, N. Markovic, J. R. Greeley and J. K. Nørskov, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 2897–2901 CrossRef CAS .
K. Gong, F. Du, Z. Xia, M. Durstock and L. Dai, Science, 2009, 323, 760–764 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xiong, F. Du, Y. Liu, J. Albert Perez, M. Supp, T. S. Ramakrishnan, L. Dai and L. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 15839–15841 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Gasteiger and N. M. Markovic, Science, 2009, 324, 48–49 CrossRef CAS .
K. Malek and M.-O. Coppens, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 87, 125505 Search PubMed .
R. J. White and H. S. White, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77, 214A–220A CAS .
I. Medved and R. Cerny, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2011, 142, 405–422 Search PubMed .
D. B. Robinson, C. A. M. Wu, M. D. Ong, B. W. Jacobs and B. E. Pierson, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 6797–6803 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Hou, P. Taboada-Serrano, S. Yiacoumi and C. Tsouris, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 129, 224703 Search PubMed .
S. Sigalov, M. D. Levi, G. Salitra, D. Aurbach and J. Maier, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 1718–1721 Search PubMed .
H. Boo, S. Park, B. Y. Ku, Y. Kim, J. H. Park, H. C. Kim and T. D. Chung, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 4524–4525 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Han, E. Lee, S. Park, R. Chang and T. D. Chung, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 9546–9553 Search PubMed .
J. A. Keith and T. Jacob, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 1–6 .
A. E. Baber, T. J. Lawton and E. C. H. Sykes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 9157–9163 Search PubMed .
S. Park, H. Boo and T. D. Chung, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2006, 556, 46–57 CrossRef .
P. Levitz, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 3813–3818 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mu, Z.-S. Liu, C. Huang and N. Djilali, Microfluid. Nanofluid., 2008, 4, 257–260 Search PubMed .
Y. Nakano, S. Iwamoto, I. Yoshinaga and J. W. Evans, Chem. Eng. Sci., 1987, 42, 1577–1583 Search PubMed .
B. D. Eldridge and L. F. Brown, AIChE J., 1976, 22, 942–944 Search PubMed .
K. Malek and M.-O. Coppens, J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 119, 2801–2810 CrossRef CAS .
K. Malek and M.-O. Coppens, Colloids Surf., A, 2002, 206, 335–348 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Santra and B. Sapoval, Phys. Rev. E: Stat. Phys., Plasmas, Fluids, Relat. Interdiscip. Top., 1998, 57, 6888–6896 Search PubMed .
S. C. Reyes, J. H. Sinfelt and G. J. DeMartin, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 5750–5761 CrossRef CAS .
R. Raccis, A. Nikoubashman, M. Retsch, U. Jonas, K. Koynov, H.-J. Butt, C. N. Likos and G. Fytas, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4607–4616 Search PubMed .

          D. M. Ruthven, Principles of Adsorption and Adsorption Processes, Wiley, New York,  1984 Search PubMed .

          D. D. Do, Adsorption Analysis: Equilibria and Kinetics, Imperil College Press, London,  1998 Search PubMed .
H. Komiyama and J. M. Smith, AIChE J., 1974, 20, 1110–1117 CrossRef CAS .
B. G. Briner, M. Doering, H.-P. Rust and A. M. Bradshaw, Science, 1997, 278, 257–260 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Harikumar, J. C. Polanyi, A. Zabet-Khosousi, P. Czekala, H. Lin and W. A. Hofer, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 400–408 Search PubMed .
K. Miyabe and G. Guiochon, Adv. Chromatogr., 2000, 40, 1–113 Search PubMed .
K. Miyabe and G. Guiochon, J. Chromatogr., A, 2010, 1217, 1713–1734 Search PubMed .
A. Kapoor and R. T. Yang, Chem. Eng. Sci., 1991, 46, 1995–2002 Search PubMed .
K. Wang and D. D. Do, Adsorption, 1999, 5, 25–37 Search PubMed .
D. D. Do and K. Wang, AIChE J., 1998, 44, 68–82 Search PubMed .
R. G. Peel, A. Benedek and C. M. Crowe, AIChE J., 1981, 27, 26–32 Search PubMed .
T. Kobayashi, P. K. Babu, L. Gancs, J. H. Chung, E. Oldfield and A. Wieckowski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 14164–14165 CrossRef CAS .
D.-W. Wang, F. Li, H.-T. Fang, M. Liu, G.-Q. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 8570–8575 CrossRef CAS .
H. Q. Li, J. Y. Luo, X. F. Zhou, C. Z. Yu and Y. Y. Xia, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, A731–A736 CrossRef CAS .
G. Sun, J. Wang, X. Liu, D. Long, W. Qiao and L. Ling, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 18745–18751 Search PubMed .
S. Park, Y. J. Song, J.-H. Han, H. Boo and T. D. Chung, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 2029–2035 Search PubMed .

          A. J. Bard and L. R. Faulkner, Electrochemical Methods Fundamentals and Applications, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,  2001 Search PubMed .
J. S. Huang, B. G. Sumpter and V. Meunier, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 6614–6626 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kiyohara, T. Sugino and K. Asaka, J. Chem. Phys., 2011, 134, 154710 Search PubMed .
D. Henderson and D. Boda, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 3822–3830 RSC .
K. L. Yang, S. Yiacoumi and C. Tsouris, J. Chem. Phys., 2002, 117, 8499–8507 Search PubMed .
G. Feng, R. Qiao, J. S. Huang, B. G. Sumpter and V. Meunier, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2382–2390 Search PubMed .
J. W. Halley, B. Johnson, D. Price and M. Schwalm, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1985, 31, 7695–7709 Search PubMed .
L. B. Bhuiyan, C. W. Outhwaite, D. Henderson and M. Alawneh, Mol. Phys., 2007, 105, 1395–1402 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lin, J. A. Ritter and B. N. Popov, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1999, 146, 3639–3643 Search PubMed .
C. H. Hou, P. Taboada-Serrano, S. Yiacoumi and C. Tsouris, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 128, 044705 CrossRef .
K. L. Yang, S. Yiacoumi and C. Tsouris, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2003, 540, 159–167 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Hou, C. D. Liang, S. Yiacoumi, S. Dai and C. Tsouris, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2006, 302, 54–61 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yamada, H. Nakamura, F. Nakahara, I. Moriguchi and T. Kudo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 227–233 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Hou, X. Q. Wang, C. D. Liang, S. Yiacoumi, C. Tsouris and S. Dai, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 8563–8570 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Yang, S. Yiacoumi and C. Tsouris, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 1433–1437 Search PubMed .
L. Eliad, G. Salitra, A. Soffer and D. Aurbach, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 6880–6887 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Levi, S. Sigalov, G. Salitra, R. Elazari and D. Aurbach, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 120–124 Search PubMed .
J. Koresh and A. Soffer, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1983, 147, 223–234 Search PubMed .
V. Vlachy and A. D. J. Haymet, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1990, 283, 77–85 Search PubMed .
K. Kiyohara, T. Sugino and K. Asaka, J. Chem. Phys., 2010, 132, 144705 CrossRef .
J. Chmiola, G. Yushin, Y. Gogotsi, C. Portet, P. Simon and P. L. Taberna, Science, 2006, 313, 1760–1763 CrossRef CAS .
C. Largeot, C. Portet, J. Chmiola, P. L. Taberna, Y. Gogotsi and P. Simon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2730–2731 CrossRef CAS .

          A. D. Carbo, Electrochemistry of porous materials, CRC press,  2010 Search PubMed .
R. d. Levie, Electrochim. Acta, 1963, 8, 751–780 CrossRef .

          E. Barsoukov and J. R. Macdonald, Impedance Spectroscopy Theory, Experiment, and Applications, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken,  2005 Search PubMed .
J. Bisquert, G. Garcia-Belmonte, F. Fabregat-Santiago, N. S. Ferriols, P. Bogdanoff and E. C. Pereira, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 2287–2298 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisquert, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2000, 2, 4185–4192 RSC .
M. Itagaki, Y. Hatada, I. Shitanda and K. Watanabe, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 6255–6262 Search PubMed .
J. M. Elliott and J. R. Owen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2000, 2, 5653–5659 RSC .
J. H. Bae and T. D. Chung, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 1947–1954 Search PubMed .
J. H. Jang and S. M. Oh, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, A571–A577 Search PubMed .
F. Fabregat-Santiago, G. Garcia-Belmonte, J. Bisquert, A. Zaban and P. Salvador, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 334–339 CrossRef CAS .
K. Honda, M. Yoshimura, R. Uchikado, T. Kondo, T. N. Rao, D. A. Tryk, A. Fujishima, M. Watanabe, K. Yasui and H. Masuda, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 47, 4373–4385 Search PubMed .
D. B. Robinson, C. A. M. Wu and B. W. Jacobs, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, A912–A918 Search PubMed .

          D. T. Sawyer, A. Sobkowiak and J. L. Roberts, Electrochemistry for chemists, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York,  1995 Search PubMed .
G. K. Kiema, M. Aktay and M. T. McDermott, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2003, 540, 7–15 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Weidner and P. S. Fedkiw, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1991, 138, 2514–2526 Search PubMed .
A. Srikumar, T. G. Stanford and J. W. Weidner, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1998, 458, 161–173 Search PubMed .
C. H. Wen and D. J. Curran, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 884–888 Search PubMed .
I. Streeter, G. G. Wildgoose, L. D. Shao and R. G. Compton, Sens. Actuators, B, 2008, 133, 462–466 CrossRef .
D. Menshykau and R. G. Compton, Electroanalysis, 2008, 20, 2387–2394 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Davies, C. E. Banks and R. G. Compton, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2005, 9, 797–808 CrossRef CAS .
C. Punckt, M. A. Pope, J. Liu, Y. H. Lin and I. A. Aksay, Electroanalysis, 2010, 22, 2834–2841 Search PubMed .
J. N. Soderberg, A. C. Co, A. H. C. Sirk and V. I. Birss, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 10401–10410 CrossRef CAS .

          R. D. Levie, Electrochemical Response of Porous and Rough Electrodes, in Advances in Electrochemistry and Electrochemical Engineering, John Wiley & Sons, New York,  1967 Search PubMed .

          J. O. M. Bockris and S. U. M. Khan, Surface Electrochemistry: A Molecular Level Approach, Plenum Press, New York, London,  1993 Search PubMed .
D. A. Buttry and M. D. Ward, Chem. Rev., 1992, 92, 1355–1379 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Levi, G. Salitra, N. Levy, D. Aurbach and J. Maier, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 872–875 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Levi, N. Levy, S. Sigalov, G. Salitra, D. Aurbach and J. Maier, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13220–13222 Search PubMed .
M. D. Levi, S. Sigalov, G. Salitra, D. Aurbach and J. Maier, ChemPhysChem, 2011, 12, 854–862 Search PubMed .
A. D. Clegg, N. V. Rees, O. V. Klymenko, B. A. Coles and R. G. Compton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 6185–6192 CrossRef CAS .
H. Du, L. Gan, B. Li, P. Wu, Y. Qiu, F. Kang, R. Fu and Y. Zeng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 2040–2043 CrossRef CAS .
J. Maruyama, K.-i. Sumino, M. Kawaguchi and I. Abe, Carbon, 2004, 42, 3115–3121 Search PubMed .
G. S. Chai, S. B. Yoon, J.-S. Yu, J.-H. Choi and Y.-E. Sung, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 7074–7079 CrossRef CAS .
L. B. Okhlopkova, A. S. Lisitsyn, V. A. Likholobov, M. Gurrath and H. P. Boehm, Appl. Catal., A, 2000, 204, 229–240 Search PubMed .
H. Zhang, X. Yu and P. V. Braun, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 277–281 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bonakdarpour, M. Lefevre, R. Yang, F. Jaouen, T. Dahn, J.-P. Dodelet and J. R. Dahna, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2008, 11, B105–B108 CrossRef CAS .
A. Schneider, L. Colmenares, Y. E. Seidel, Z. Jusys, B. Wickman, B. Kasemo and R. J. Behm, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 1931–1943 RSC .
R. W. Lindstrom, Y. E. Seidel, Z. Jusys, M. Gustavsson, B. Wickman, B. Kasemo and R. J. Behma, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2010, 644, 90–102 CrossRef .
G. S. Attard, P. N. Bartlett, N. R. B. Coleman, J. M. Elliott, J. R. Owen and J. H. Wang, Science, 1997, 278, 838–840 CrossRef CAS .
K.-S. Choi and E. W. McFarland, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 2018–2021 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park, S. Y. Lee, H. Boo, H.-M. Kim, K.-B. Kim, H. C. Kim, Y. J. Song and T. D. Chung, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 3373–3375 CrossRef CAS .
A. Takai, Y. Yamauchi and K. Kuroda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 208–214 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park, T. D. Chung and H. C. Kim, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75, 3046–3049 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Birkin, J. M. Elliott and Y. E. Watson, Chem. Commun., 2000, 1693–1694 RSC .
S. A. G. Evans, J. M. Elliott, L. M. Andrews, P. N. Bartlett, P. J. Doyle and G. Denualt, Anal. Chem., 2002, 74, 1322–1326 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park, H. Boo, Y. Kim, J.-H. Han, H. C. Kim and T. D. Chung, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77, 7695–7701 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Han, S. Park, H. Boo, H. C. Kim, J. Nho and T. D. Chu, Electroanalysis, 2007, 19, 786–792 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Han, H. Boo, S. Park and T. D. Chung, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 52, 1788–1791 Search PubMed .
J. Snyder, T. Fujita, M. W. Chen and J. Erlebacher, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 904–907 CrossRef CAS .
H. Muguruma, N. Itazu and S. Miura, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 18839–18845 Search PubMed .
Y. X. Li and T. Ito, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 851–855 CrossRef CAS .
M. Etienne, A. Quach, D. Grosso, L. Nicole, C. Sanchez and A. Walcarius, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 844–856 CrossRef CAS .
A. Calvo, B. Yameen, F. J. Williams, G. J. A. A. Soler-Illia and O. Azzaroni, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 10866–10868 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Taffa, M. Kathiresan, L. Walder, B. Seelandt and M. Wark, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 1473–1482 RSC .
B. Zhang, Y. Zhang and H. S. White, Anal. Chem., 2006, 78, 477–483 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. Wang, B. Zhang, J. R. Wayment, J. M. Harris and H. S. White, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7679–7686 CrossRef CAS .
R. W. Murray, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2688–2720 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. G. Zevenbergen, D. Krapf, M. R. Zuiddam and S. G. Lemay, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 384–388 Search PubMed .
M. A. G. Zevenbergen, B. L. Wolfrum, E. D. Goluch, P. S. Singh and S. G. Lemay, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 11471–11477 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sun and M. V. Mirkin, J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 2008, 130, 8241–8250 CrossRef CAS .
S. Amemiya, A. J. Bard, F. R. F. Fan, M. V. Mirkin and P. R. Unwin, Annu. Rev. Anal. Chem., 2008, 1, 95–131 Search PubMed .
X. Zhang, W. Lu, J. Dai, L. Bourgeois, N. Hao, H. Wang, D. Zhao and P. A. Webley, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 10101–10105 Search PubMed .
G. Meng, Y. J. Jung, A. Cao, R. Vajtai and P. M. Ajayan, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 7074–7078 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park, Y. J. Song, H. Boo, J.-H. Han and T. D. Chung, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 2225–2228 Search PubMed .
F. King, M. J. Quinn and C. D. Litke, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1995, 385, 45–55 Search PubMed .
F. Bender, R. K. Mankelow, D. B. Hibbert and J. J. Gooding, Electroanalysis, 2006, 18, 1558–1563 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © the Owner Societies 2012
Table Content:

Je Hyun Bae
	Je Hyun Bae graduated summa cum laude in chemistry from Chung-Ang University in Korea with his BS and MS jointly in 2008. He is currently a PhD student at the Department of Chemistry, Seoul National University under the supervision of Prof. Taek Dong Chung. His scientific interests include nanoporous electrochemistry and neuro-electronic interface.

Ji-Hyung Han
	Ji-Hyung Han received her MS degrees in Chemistry from the Sungshin Women's University in Korea in 2006 under the supervision of Prof. Taek Dong Chung. She is now PhD candidate at the Seoul National University in Korea under the supervision of Prof. Taek Dong Chung. Her research interests include nanoporous electrochemistry, iontronics, and nanophotonics for applications in energy harvesting systems.

Taek Dong Chung
	Prof Taek-Dong Chung received his BS in chemistry from Seoul National University in 1991 and his PhD in Electrochemistry at the Department of Chemistry, Seoul National University in 1997. He worked as a researcher at the Medical Research Center, Seoul National University, before joining Prof. Fred Anson's group at California Institute of Technology in 1998. After working as a postdoc researcher at Oak Ridge National Laboratory with Dr J. Michael Ramsey, he started his independent research career as an assistant professor at Sungshin Women's University in 2002. He moved to Seoul National University in 2007 and has been conducting research on nanoporous electrochemistry, bioanalytical tools based on nano/microfluidics and neuro-electronic interface.

 	Fig. 1  Schemes for the effect of nanoporous structure on electrochemical reaction. Movement of molecules inside the pores, EDL profile, accessibility into pore entrance, and even surface charge should be taken into account to understand the electrokinetics at nanoporous electrodes and design better electrodes.	 

 	Fig. 2  Knudsen diffusion in a nanopore.	 

 	Fig. 3  Nano-confined molecular dynamics in Brownian motion.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic diagram displaying the shapes of the electrical double layers that depend on the electrolyte concentration. (b) Differential capacitances (Cd) of flat and nanoporous Pt electrodes in various electrolyte concentrations at −0.5 V versusHg/Hg2SO4. Cd's were calculated with respect to geometric area (flat electrode, 3.14 × 10−2 cm2; porous electrode, 7.85 × 10−3 cm2).30	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 5  (a) The equivalent circuits for the impedance of a flat electrode (top) and a nanoporous electrode (down) based on the simplest model. (b) Corresponding Nyquist plots for the equivalent circuits of a flat electrode (top) and a nanoporous electrode (down).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) TEM image of the L2-ePt surface. The scale bar is 10 nm. (b) Schematic view of the L2-ePt thin film. (c) Schemes for the confinement effect of nanoporous Pt. Adopted from ref. 31.	 

 	Fig. 7  The results of chronoamperometry of O2reduction at flat and nanoporous Pt electrodes at various electrolyte concentrations. The concentration of O2 is ca. 1 mM. Step potential is −0.75 V versusHg/Hg2SO4. Sampling time is 11 ms.30	 

 	Fig. 8  The penetration depth of reactant molecules according to the kinetics of electrochemical reaction. Adopted from ref. 59.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2012
