A facile chemical-mechanical polishing lift-off transfer process toward large scale Cu(In,Ga)Se 2 thin-film solar cells on arbitrary substrates   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5NR07008B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5NR07008B
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 5181-5188A facile chemical-mechanical polishing lift-off transfer process toward large scale Cu(In,Ga)Se2 thin-film solar cells on arbitrary substrates†

        
          
            Kuan-Chun 
            Tseng
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yu-Ting 
            Yen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Stuart R. 
            Thomas
          
        
      ba, 
      
        
          
            Hung-Wei 
            Tsai
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Cheng-Hung 
            Hsu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wen-Chi 
            Tsai
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chang-Hong 
            Shen
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Jia-Min 
            Shieh
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Zhiming M. 
            Wang
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Yu-Lun 
            Chueh
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, 30013, Taiwan, Republic of China. E-mail: ylchueh@mx.nthu.edu.tw
bInstitute of Fundamental and Frontier Sciences, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, People's Republic of China
cNational Nano Device Laboratories, No. 26, Prosperity Road 1, Hsinchu 30078, Taiwan, Republic of China
Received 
      10th October 2015
    , Accepted 30th November 2015First published on 30th November 2015AbstractThe fabrication of Cu(In,Ga)Se2 (CIGS) solar cells on flexible substrates is a non-trivial task due to thermal and ion diffusion related issues. In order to circumvent these issues, we have developed a chemical-mechanical polishing lift-off (CMPL) transfer process, enabling the direct transfer of CIGS solar cells from conventional soda-lime glass (SLG) onto arbitrary flexible substrates up to 4 cm2 in size. The structural and compositional nature of the pre- and post-transferred films is examined using electron microscopy, X-ray diffraction analysis, Raman and photoluminescence spectroscopy. We demonstrate the fabrication of solar cells on a range of flexible substrates while being able to maintain 75% cell efficiency (η) when compared to pre-transferred solar cells. The results obtained in this work suggest that our transfer process offers a highly promising approach toward large scale fabrication of CIGS-based solar cells on a wide variety of flexible substrates, suitable for use in the large scale CIGS photovoltaic industry.
1. Introduction
Flexible thin-film solar cell technologies have attracted much attention recently as a favourable source for low-cost energy production due to their reduced material costs and suitability for non-conventional applications where fragile glass substrates are vulnerable to damage.1 Their potential economic benefits, along with their robustness make them well suited to a wide variety of applications from portable devices to aerospace applications. Thin-film solar cells based on the chalcopyrite absorber CIGS offer a promising technology choice for application on flexible substrates due to their high absorption coefficient, direct and tuneable band gap properties2 and excellent stability in the presence of high energy radiation.3
Typically, a stacked film structure (glass/Mo/CIGS/CdS/i-ZnO/ZnO:Al) is utilized in CIGS devices,4,5 and to date the highest efficiency (η) reported for lab fabricated devices is 21.7%.6 Due to the high-temperature nature of the selenization process required to form high quality CIGS films (∼600 °C), matching the substrate coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE) to that of the CIGS is important when considering device fabrication on flexible substrates. This is needed to minimize the possibility of crack formation and to lessen adhesion related issues. Substrates with CTEs ranging between 4 × 10−6 to 12 × 10−6 K−1 are generally considered suitable.7 Unfortunately, this precludes the use of many polymer substrates such as polyimide (PI) or polyethylene terephthalate (PET), likewise most polymer substrates will not withstand such high temperatures. Low temperature approaches used to circumvent such issues lead to poor quality film formation and in turn poorer device performance,8 whereas metal foil type substrates with more suitable CTEs and high temperature stability (e.g. steel) suffer from iron diffusion between the substrate and the CIGS films, also leading to defects and reduced device performance.9
Previously, Konagai et al. have demonstrated an epitaxial lift-off (ELO) process on GaAs solar cells in 1978,10 while Si and InP solar cells transferred using ELO have also been demonstrated.11,12 Larger scale 8 inch monocrystalline Si layers have also been transferred using an Epitaxial Layer TRANsfer (ELTREN) method developed by Canon Inc.13 Other lift-off processes such as crack formation to control spalling,14 peel-and-stick with water-assistance15 and laser triggered peel-off16 have also been developed for thin-film solar cells. For CIGS-based devices, mechanical lift-off utilizing various adhesive coated transfer substrates has been demonstrated, although crack formation during the lift-off process still poses numerous issues.17,18 A GaSe release layer between the interface of the Mo/CIGS has been developed making the detachment of the CIGS film easier while decreasing the crack formation density,19 whilst Tiwari et al. have demonstrated a transfer method that utilises a sacrificial NaCl layer for removal of the polymer substrate CIGS solar cells fabricated on glass. Although the device performance demonstrated is good, the use of a polymer substrate with a glass transition temperature of 400 °C poses limitations of the selenization temperature that can be applied.20 The search for a facile and novel transfer processing or printing method with which CIGS solar cell devices can be fabricated on suitable rigid substrates followed by transfer to a flexible substrate is imperative to avoid such issues. In this regard, we demonstrate here an entirely new lift-off approach combining chemical etching and mechanical grinding to transfer whole CIGS devices from SLG substrates onto arbitrary flexible substrates. The qualities of the transferred CIGS devices and their relevant interfaces were examined and investigated. The devices were fabricated and transferred onto different kinds of flexible substrates with only a minimal reduction in cell efficiency (65% worst, 75% best). Importantly, we illustrate the effectiveness of this method for large-area solar cell production by demonstrating transferred flexible CIGS solar cells up to 4 in2.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Device fabrication
Our CIGS solar cell devices were fabricated on soda lime glass (SLG) utilising the structure illustrated in Fig. 1(a) comprising of a Mo/CIGSe/CdS/i-ZnO/ITO film stack with a top aluminium contact. SLG was chosen as the substrate due to its moderate concentration of Na ions,21 which is known to enhance solar cell open circuit voltages. A 0.6 μm double layer Mo was deposited on the SLG by a two-stage sputtering process for the back electrode.22 The CIGS absorber layer was prepared by DC sputtering Cu, Ga and In metallic targets alternately layer by layer to achieve a total thickness of ∼1.2 μm, followed by a plasma selenization process under gaseous N2/H2.23 The process involved an initial 60 min ramp to 250 °C, after which a Se source was introduced, followed by a further 50 min ramp to 610 °C at which the plasma was applied at a power of 300 W. The Se source, temperature and plasma were maintained for a further 40 min before shutting down the process and leaving the films cool back to room temperature, taking 100 min. A ∼80 nm CdS buffer layer was deposited by chemical bath deposition. DC sputtered intrinsic ZnO (70 nm) and ITO (550 nm) were deposited followed by a final 1 μm Al top/front electrode also deposited by DC sputtering.
 Fig. 1  Illustration of the chemical-mechanical polishing lift-off (CMPL) process showing (a) a conventional CIGSe device fabricated on a glass substrate, (b) attachment of the quartz support using EVA (Ethylene Vinyl Acetate) to form a protective layer, (c) suspension etching of the glass substrate in HF for one hour, (d) grinding to remove non-uniform remains of the soda lime glass substrate, (e) attachment to an arbitrary substrate using M-bond 610 following drying in air for 12 hours, and (f) removal of quartz by heating the sample to 145 °C to melt EVA followed by mechanical peeling and final EVA removal by acetone wash. 
2.2. Transfer process
Our chemical-mechanical polishing lift-off (CMPL) transfer process is illustrated schematically in Fig. 1. On top of our CIGS solar cells we applied an Ethylene Vinyl Acetate (EVA) mask to form a protection layer during the acid etching and grinding processes.24,25 The EVA also acts as a bonding agent for the attachment of a quartz structural support layer applied in Fig. 1(b). A 20% v/v solution of hydrogen fluoride (HF) and water (H2O) was prepared as an etchant. The solar cells were placed on a square polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) sample holder, suspending the devices to minimize any contact between the HF and the films. The films were then lowered into the HF solution so that contact was made between the HF solution and the SLG external surface (Fig. 1(c)). Following one hour of etching, we performed a grinding process (30 minutes) to remove any non-uniformity of the etched SLG (Fig. 1(d)). We then repeated the procedures in Fig. 1(c) and (d), typically 2 times, until we achieved SLG free solar cells. M-bond 610, a commercially available adhesive, was then applied to the Mo side of the device in order to bond the devices to a number of different substrates including polyimide, aluminium (Al) foil, stainless steel foil, polyethylene terephthalate (PET) and paper (Fig. 1(e)). The supporting quartz layer was removed for reuse by applying a simple vertical mechanical force while heating the sample to ∼145 °C to melt the EVA. The final EVA free sample was achieved using a 10 min acetone wash in order to totally remove any final remnants of the adhesive (Fig. 1(f)). As this work is essentially a proof of concept, we utilised 1.1 mm SLG substrates for convenience. However, as this is wasteful and time consuming, we would recommend the use of ultrathin SLG, typically available in <0.3 mm thickness, for any future work.
2.3. Characterisation
The surface morphologies and cross-section structures of the transferred devices were examined using a Hitachi S-8010 field-emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM). Raman spectra for the CIGS films were obtained using a Horiba Jobin-Yvon, LabRAM HR800 system, equipped with a 632.8 nm laser. The quality and crystal structure of the films were confirmed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) using a Shimadzu XRD-6000 with Cu Kα radiation (0.154 nm). Optical reflectance was measured using a Hitachi U-4100 UV–Visible-NIR Spectrometer. Photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectroscopy were used to identify electron–hole recombination and the photo-excited carrier lifetime using a 638 nm wavelength laser pulsed at 10 MHz at an intensity of 1 mW. The current–voltage characteristics and sheet resistance were measured using a Keithley 4200-SCS parameter analyzer and a Hong-Ming Tech MFS-PV-Basic class AAA AM 1.5 G solar simulator at a constant temperature of 25 °C.
3. Results
3.1. Film morphology analysis
To assess the impact of the CMPL transfer process on the quality of the CIGS films, the surface morphologies were investigated via scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Fig. 2(a) and (b) show the top views of the non-transferred pristine CIGS film on the SLG substrate and a CIGS film after the CMPL transfer process on an Al foil substrate, respectively. Note that for the transferred CIGS film, the full HF etching/grinding process was used, followed by bonding the CIGS film onto an Al foil and removal of the EVA/quartz by heating, mechanical force and a final acetone wash processes. No damage was observed on any part of the CIGS film following transfer to the Al foil and the grain sizes remain constant in the ∼320 nm range when compared to the pristine CIGS film, suggesting that the acid etching solution was successfully isolated from the CIGS surface by the EVA/quartz after the SLG removal. The cross sectional images in Fig. 2(c) and (d) for pristine and post-transferred CIGS films do show a small reduction in the film thickness, which may result from the removal of some of the top surfaces of the CIGS. However, this was not observed to be the case when a complete film stack was utilised. In addition, Fig. S1(a) and S1(b)† show lower resolution top view SEM images, pre- and post-transfers, confirming no significant damage, cracking or morphology changes as a result of the process. Similarly, no cracks or damage are observed from the top surface of the films under an optical microscope or with the naked eye. From these images we concluded that neither the SLG removal, transfer step nor the EVA/quartz removal step has any significant impact on the film morphology.
 Fig. 2  FE-SEM top image of the CIGSe film layer without transparent conducting oxide layers (a) before and (b) following transfer to the flexible aluminum substrate. FE-SEM cross-section images of the CIGSe film layers without transparent conducting oxide layers, (c) before and (d) after transfer to the flexible aluminum substrate, and (e) the cross-section image of the complete device structure following transfer to the aluminum substrate. 
To confirm the quality of the film stack of a completed device structure, cross sectional images of the entire film stack (Mo/CIGSe/CdS/ZnO/ITO) were taken, following the CMPL transfer process onto an Al foil substrate (Fig. 2(e)). It can be seen that the film stack remains intact and no detrimental effects result from the SLG removal, the film transfer or the EVA/quartz removal processes. To help illustrate the importance of the EVA/quartz protective layer, we also performed the CMPL transfer process on the non-protected complete devices. The cross sectional images in Fig. S2† offer a comparison between the protected (Fig. S2(a)†) and non-protected (Fig. S2(b)†) transferred films. Severe degradation can be seen in the film thickness owing to the loss of the uppermost oxide layers being etched away by the HF solution.
3.2. Raman and XRD analysis
The Raman spectra for pristine and transferred CIGS films (excluding the CdS/ZnO/ITO stack) on the Al foil and the polyimide substrate are shown in Fig. 3(a). A Raman peak located at 172.2 cm−1 appears constant in terms of both position and intensity for all transferred CIGS films on all substrates. Note that the surfaces of the CIGS films are likely somewhat Cu-deficient, leading to a small blue shift of the Raman spectra.26,27 However, it can be generally observed that during our CMPL transfer process, the quality of the CIGS film can be maintained. In order to assess the impact of the CMPL transfer process on the crystalline properties of the films, we performed XRD analysis pre- and post-transfers to a number of different substrates, the results of which are shown in Fig. 3(b). The clear peaks at ∼26.78° and ∼44.53° can be indexed to the (112), (220/204) lattice planes of CIGS, respectively (JCPDs card 35-1102) while the peak at ∼44.5° is attributed to the Mo (110) lattice plane. The stronger Mo (110) peak in the CIGS film transferred to the polyimide substrate suggests that the selenization process is not as successful prior to transfer, leading to a relative reduction in the CIGS-related (112) peak intensity. A small amount of broadening behavior can be seen in the CIGS-related peaks after transferring the CIGS films to various substrates, suggesting a small reduction in the crystallite domain size caused by the mechanical stress employed during the lift-off and the removal processes. No secondary phase related peaks were observed during the measurements of any CIGS films.
 Fig. 3  (a) Raman spectra, (b) X-ray diffraction data, (c) optical reflectance measurements and (d) optical band-gap calculations for pristine (pre-transfer) films and films transferred onto aluminum and polyimide substrates. 
3.3. Optical properties of films
Optical reflectance measurements were conducted on the complete CIGS device structures. Across the visible spectrum the reflectance remains (Fig. 3(c)) low at ∼7%, indicating excellent light absorption suitable for commercial application. In the infrared wavelength region, there is a small variation seen in the Fabry–Pérot related oscillations attributed to the influence of the different substrate materials. As a result, it appears that the EVA protection layer was removed completely during the acetone wash and the device surface morphology maintains the same anti-reflective properties as shown in the post-transferred films. Utilizing the reflectance measurements of the CIGS films, we are able to assess the optical band gap, Eg, using αhν = A(hν – Eg)1/2 and  where R refers to the reflectance, A is a constant related to the transition nature, α is the absorption coefficient and t is the thickness of CIGS, respectively. Therefore, we can extract Eg by extrapolating the slope of (αhν)2 to the x-axis (eV). The extracted values for the pre- and post-transferred CIGS films on an Al foil and a polyimide substrate are shown in Fig. 3(d).28 Clearly, Eg for the pristine and transferred CIGS films remains relatively constant at ∼1.0 eV, corresponding to the Cu-deficient CIGS,29 confirming our previous findings observed by Raman spectroscopy. In general, our results suggest that the quality of the CIGS films can be maintained after the CMPL transfer process, as confirmed by FE-SEM, Raman and reflectance measurements while a small broadening in the XRD diffraction peaks suggest that the mechanical stress applied during the CMPL transfer process may lead to a small reduction in the crystalline quality of CIGS films.
In order to shed light on the excitation and recombination of electron–hole pairs of the pre- and post-transferred devices, we performed both photoluminescence spectroscopy (PL) and time-resolved photoluminescence spectroscopy (TRPL). Fig. 4(a) shows the PL spectra obtained from CIGS films before and after the etching process. In each case, the EVA/quartz protection layer was left on top of the complete device structure. A single broad peak was observed for both films between 0.95 and 1.25 eV. No change in the PL spectra can be seen after the HF/grinding and SLG removal processes, suggesting that the removal process has no effect on the quality of the CIGS film. Fig. 4(b) shows the PL spectra obtained from CIGS films before and after transfer and following removal of the EVA/quartz protection layer. In this case, a small intensity reduction with a slight peak shift in the PL spectra was observed. The peak shift is attributed to the loss of some of the top layers of the CIGS, exposing an underlying layer with a slight compositional variation. This has been studied in our previous work where we observed a reduction in the Ga content within the first ∼50 nm as we move through the film toward the Mo back contact. A reduction in the Ga content will reduce the bandgap and this, we believe, is the cause of the observed shift in the PL spectra.30 The reduced peak intensity is attributed to the mechanical stress (stretching/bending) triggered during both the transfer/bonding processes. These processes will lead to increased defect formation in the CIGS film, resulting in the increased non-radiative recombination centers.31,32 These results correspond to our observed broadening in the XRD diffraction peaks for the transferred films.
 Fig. 4  Photoluminescence spectra for (a) the complete device before and after SLG removal by etching/grinding and the EVA/quartz protection layer remains on each complete device structure, (b) photoluminescence spectra for the complete device before and after SLG removal by etching/grinding and following transfer to an aluminium substrate where the EVA/quartz protection layer was removed and (c) time-resolved photoluminescence spectra for the complete device before and after the complete transfer process to the aluminium substrate. 
TRPL analysis of the post-transfer films shows a small reduction in the carrier lifetime as shown in Fig. 4(c). Note that τ1 and τ2, can be extracted from the decay curves by I(t) = C1et/τ1 + C2et/τ2 where I(t) is the PL intensity at time t, C1 and C2 are constants, τ1 and τ2 are the fast and slow decay times and t is the time after the laser pulse excitation, respectively. A negligible reduction in the τ1 lifetime is observed while a significant reduction can be found in the τ2 decay lifetime following the transfer process. A reduction in the τ2 decay lifetime is reported to be related to an increase of the non-radiative recombination centers.33,34
3.4. Solar cell characterisation and analysis

Fig. 5(a–c) show the current density–voltage (J/V) characteristics of CIGS solar cell devices prior to and following the CMPL transfer process onto stainless steel, polyimide and paper substrates, with the corresponding optical images of the fabricated devices as shown in Fig. 5(d). In addition, Table 1 shows a summary of the measured results, including the short circuit current (JSC), open circuit voltage (VOC), fill factor (FF) and conversion efficiency (η), respectively. We can observe a small reduction in VOC between approximately 5–10% for each of the transferred device. VOC is often correlated to the compositional nature of the CIGS films. However, based on our combined previous analysis, this is not a contributing factor in this work. The source of this reduction may be attributed to a number of factors. As the VOC is sensitive to the interface between each material layer, the overall etching and removal process is likely to deteriorate the quality of each of these interfaces to some degree. However, we believe that the increased sheet resistance of the Mo contact and also the quality of the Mo/CIGS interface post-SLG removal to be the main contributing factors. The interface between the Mo and the SLG has intrinsic stress but remains smooth when they are attached to each other. However, once the SLG is etched away, the intrinsic stress is released, resulting in a wrinkled Mo film. Fig. S3(a) and S3(b)† show an optical image and a magnified optical microscopy image, respectively, of the film following removal of the SLG, where we can observe the rippling effect caused by the release of the intrinsic stress. This leads to a measured increase in the Mo sheet resistance, rising from 1.22 Ω □−1 for the pristine Mo film to 1.98 Ω □−1 for the transferred film. This parasitic resistance is believed to be the main contributing factor toward the reduced FF also.
 Fig. 5  Current density–voltage (J/V) characteristics of (0.5 cm2) solar cell devices before and after transfer to a range of substrates including (a) stainless steel, (b) polyimide, (c) paper, and (d) the corresponding optical images for devices fabricated on SLG and following transfer to stainless steel, polyimide and paper, respectively. 
Table 1 Extracted device parameters for devices




 

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF (%)

η (%)




Pristine
27.47
0.52
0.46
6.63


Stainless steel
24.09
0.48
0.38
4.43


Pristine
26.64
0.49
0.53
6.92


Polyimide
21.23
0.47
0.45
4.56


Pristine
29.01
0.54
0.46
7.24


Paper
27.22
0.50
0.38
5.48




The reduced PL spectra intensity and peak broadening in the XRD data for CIGS films after transfer and EVA/quartz removal suggest the generation of mechanical stress during these stages, leading to degradation in the crystalline quality of the CIGS films. Therefore, it can be considered that the reduction in the crystalline quality may increase in the recombination centers in the CIGS film to be one of the main contributing factors toward the reduced JSC. Additionally, as the SLG removal (particularly the release of the intrinsic stress at the Mo/SLG interface) could also lead to deterioration in the quality of the interface between the Mo back contact and the CIGS absorber, we expect some losses in the longer wavelength region that could also contribute to a reduced JSC.31 Our SEM and reflectance measurements suggest that the top surfaces of our devices remain relatively unchanged following transfer to each type of substrate. We believe that our EVA/quartz protection layer provides an effective barrier between the Mo/CIGS/CdS/ZnO/ITO film stack and the HF etchant during SLG removal. However, we do not rule out the possibility that the quality of the uppermost interfaces within the device (CIGS/CdS/ZnO/ITO) may be influenced during the CMPL process. From these results, we conclude that the effect of the increased RS and in turn the reduced FF in combination with the reduced JSC are the main contributing factors in determining the observed reduction in device performance. Typically, we see a decrease in the device conversion efficiency of ∼25–35% when compared with the pristine devices on the SLG substrates. Importantly, we have also been able to demonstrate the flexibility of our CMPL transfer process toward commoditized substrates such as PET (Fig. S4†) whilst still being able to maintain a conversion efficiency of ∼70%. We believe that this is an acceptable range since this is an entirely new process that is highly adaptable to practically any type of substrate material.
Finally, to demonstrate the suitability of our CMPL toward flexible large area solar cell processing, we fabricated solar cell devices on a 4 in2 SLG substrate and successfully transferred them to a flexible PI substrate. Fig. S5(a and b)† show the optical images before and after the transferred devices on SLG and PI substrates, illustrating both their size and flexibility. Fig. S5(c)† shows the J/V characteristics obtained from our best device following the CMPL transfer. The short table below the J/V data summarizes the measurements. We obtain a maximum conversion efficiency of 6.61% following the CMPL transfer. This equates to an exceptionally low reduction in the conversion efficiency of only ∼1.8% post transfer. However, there is variation in the performance of the transferred devices and in the worst case, we observe a ∼50% reduction in conversion efficiency. Nonetheless, our results demonstrate that with further enhancement of the CMPL transfer process and under optimum conditions, we can expect an almost negligible loss in device performance. We also would like to point out that this is currently a lab based process and the quality of the final devices is partially related to the skillfulness of the person performing the SLG removal and transfer process. As such, we expect that with further refinement and higher quality pristine starting samples, a much smaller post transfer loss and a higher outright efficiency can be achieved.
Conclusions
In summary, we have developed and successfully demonstrated a new transfer deposition method for the fabrication of high performance CIGS solar cells on arbitrary flexible substrates. Our CMPL transfer process allows us to circumvent many of the thermal and ion diffusion related complications associated with direct deposition of CIGS films on arbitrary flexible substrates. Following the HF chemical etching and EVA cleaning steps, our analysis shows no detrimental effects on the compositional nature of the transferred films suggesting that the protective steps (application of EVA/quartz protective layer) applied during processing are sufficient. Only a small loss in solar cell performance is observed during the process, which we correlate to the release of intrinsic stress within the Mo contact layer following SLG removal, resulting in increased RS, and also as a result of the mechanical stresses involved during transfer processing which can be observed through the changes in the XRD diffraction data and intensities of the PL spectra. Most importantly, we are able to demonstrate the scalability of this approach through the fabrication of large 4 × 4 cm2 solar cells on flexible substrates. The results obtained in this work suggest that our transfer process offers a highly promising approach toward large scale fabrication of CIGS-based solar cells on a wide variety of flexible substrates suitable to numerous application areas.
Acknowledgements
The research is supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology through Grant No. 104-2628-M-007-004-MY3, 104-2221-E-007-048-MY3, 104-2633-M-007-001, 104-2622-M-007-002-CC2, and the National Tsing Hua University through Grant no. 104N2022E1. Y.L. Chueh greatly appreciates the use of facility at CNMM, National Tsing Hua University through Grant No. 104N2744E1.
Notes and references
M. Pagliaro, R. Ciriminna and G. Palmisano, ChemSusChem, 2008, 1, 880–891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Wei, S. B. Zhang and A. Zunger, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 72, 3199–3201 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jasenek, U. Rau, K. Weinert, I. M. Kotschau, G. Hanna, G. Voorwinden, M. Powalla, H. W. Schock and J. H. Werner, Thin Solid Films, 2001, 387, 228–230 CrossRef CAS .
I. Repins, M. A. Contreras, B. Egaas, C. DeHart, J. Scharf, C. L. Perkins, B. To and R. Noufi, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2008, 16, 235–239 CAS .
A. Chirila, S. Buecheler, F. Pianezzi, P. Bloesch, C. Gretener, A. R. Uhl, C. Fella, L. Kranz, J. Perrenoud, S. Seyrling, R. Verma, S. Nishiwaki, Y. E. Romanyuk, G. Bilger and A. N. Tiwari, Nat. Mater, 2011, 10, 857–861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Jackson, D. Hariskos, R. Wuerz, O. Kiowski, A. Bauer, T. M. Friedlmeier and M. Powalla, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2015, 9, 28–31 CrossRef CAS .
F. Kessler and D. Rudmann, J. Sol. Energy, 2004, 77, 685–695 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Faraj, K. Ibrahim and A. Salhin, Int. J. Polym. Mater., 2011, 60, 817–824 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wuerz, A. Eicke, F. Kessler and F. Pianezzi, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 130, 107–117 CrossRef CAS .
K. Makoto, S. Mitsunori and T. Kiyoshi, J. Cryst. Growth, 1978, 45, 277–280 CrossRef .
J. Yoon, A. J. Baca, S.-I. I. Park, P. Elvikis, J. B. Geddes, L. Li, R. H. Kim, J. Xiao, S. Wang, T.-H. H. Kim, M. J. Motala, B. Y. Ahn, E. B. Duoss, J. A. Lewis, R. G. Nuzzo, P. M. Ferreira, Y. Huang, A. Rockett and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 907–915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Kyusang, S. Kuen-Ting, D. Z. Jeramy, K. R. Christopher and R. F. Stephen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 101107 CrossRef .

          F. Balestra, A. Nazarov, V. S. Lysenko, Y. Takao and S. Kifofumi, Progress in SOI Structures and Devices Operating at Extreme Conditions, Springer,  2002, pp. 39–86 Search PubMed .
S. W. Bedell, D. Shahrjerdi, B. Hekmatshoar, K. Fogel, P. A. Lauro, J. A. Ott, N. Sosa and D. Sadana, IEEE J. Photovoltaics, 2012, 2, 141–147 CrossRef .
C. H. Lee, D. R. Kim, I. S. Cho, N. William, Q. Wang and X. Zheng, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 1000 Search PubMed .
G. J. Hayes and B. M. Clemens, Mrs Commun., 2015, 5, 1–5 CrossRef CAS .
T. Anegawa, Y. Oda, T. Minemoto and H. Takakura, J. Cryst. Growth, 2009, 311, 742–745 CrossRef CAS .
T. Minemoto, Y. Abe, T. Anegawa, S. Osada and H. Takakura, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 49, 04DP06 Search PubMed .
B. Fleutot, D. Lincot, M. Jubault, Z. J. Li Kao, N. Naghavi, J.-F. Guillemoles and F. Donsanti, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 1, 1400044 Search PubMed .
A. N. Tiwari, M. Krejci, F. J. Haug and H. Zogg, Prog. Photovoltaics, 1999, 7, 393–397 CAS .
A. Rockett, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 480–481, 27 Search PubMed .
Y. Ju-Heon, C. Sunghun, K. Won Mok, P. Jong-Keuk, B. Young-Joon, L. Taek Sung, S. Tae-Yeon and J. Jeung-hyun, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 29592964 Search PubMed .
T. T. Wu, F. Hu, J. H. Huang, C. H. Chang, C. C. Lai, Y. T. Yen, H. Y. Huang, H. F. Hong, Z. M. Wang, C. H. Shen, J. M. Shieh and Y. L. Chueh, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 4842–4849 CAS .
A. W. Czanderna and F. J. Pern, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1996, 43, 101–181 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Pern, S. H. Glick and A. W. Czanderna, Renewable Energy, 1996, 8, 367–370 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wolfram, K. Robert and P. Michael, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 517, 867869 Search PubMed .
C. M. Ruiz, X. Fontané, A. Fairbrother, V. Izquierdo-Roca, C. Broussillou, S. Bodnar, A. Pérez-Rodríguez and V. Bermúdez, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 91106 CrossRef .
V. Kumar, S. Kr. Sharma, T. P. Sharma and V. Singh, Opt. Mater., 1999, 12, 115–119 CrossRef CAS .
S.-U. Park, R. Sharma, K. Ashok, S. Kang, J.-K. Sim and C.-R. Lee, J. Cryst. Growth, 2012, 359, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
T.-T. Wu, J.-H. Huang, F. Hu, C.-h. Chang, W.-L. Liu, T.-H. Wang, C.-H. Shen, J.-M. Shieh and Y.-L. Chueh, Nano Energy, 2014, 10, 28–36 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Cao, O. Gunawan, M. Copel, K. B. Reuter, S. J. Chey, V. R. Deline and D. B. Mitzi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 845–853 CrossRef CAS .
U. Rau, K. Taretto and S. Siebentritt, Appl. Phys. A, 2009, 96, 221–234 CrossRef CAS .
S. Takeaki, T. Keiki, I. Muhammad Monirul, I. Shogo, Y. Akimasa, M. Koji, N. Shigeru and A. Katsuhiro, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 50, 05FC01 CrossRef .
J. Chantana, D. Hironiwa, T. Watanabe, S. Teraji, K. Kawamura and T. Minemoto, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 130, 567–572 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Fig. S1: Cross sectional SEM images, Fig. S2: Optical images of solar cells, Fig. S3: Large area device images and performance data. See DOI: 10.1039/c5nr07008bThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Illustration of the chemical-mechanical polishing lift-off (CMPL) process showing (a) a conventional CIGSe device fabricated on a glass substrate, (b) attachment of the quartz support using EVA (Ethylene Vinyl Acetate) to form a protective layer, (c) suspension etching of the glass substrate in HF for one hour, (d) grinding to remove non-uniform remains of the soda lime glass substrate, (e) attachment to an arbitrary substrate using M-bond 610 following drying in air for 12 hours, and (f) removal of quartz by heating the sample to 145 °C to melt EVA followed by mechanical peeling and final EVA removal by acetone wash.	 

 	Fig. 2  FE-SEM top image of the CIGSe film layer without transparent conducting oxide layers (a) before and (b) following transfer to the flexible aluminum substrate. FE-SEM cross-section images of the CIGSe film layers without transparent conducting oxide layers, (c) before and (d) after transfer to the flexible aluminum substrate, and (e) the cross-section image of the complete device structure following transfer to the aluminum substrate.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Raman spectra, (b) X-ray diffraction data, (c) optical reflectance measurements and (d) optical band-gap calculations for pristine (pre-transfer) films and films transferred onto aluminum and polyimide substrates.	 

 	Fig. 4  Photoluminescence spectra for (a) the complete device before and after SLG removal by etching/grinding and the EVA/quartz protection layer remains on each complete device structure, (b) photoluminescence spectra for the complete device before and after SLG removal by etching/grinding and following transfer to an aluminium substrate where the EVA/quartz protection layer was removed and (c) time-resolved photoluminescence spectra for the complete device before and after the complete transfer process to the aluminium substrate.	 

 	Fig. 5  Current density–voltage (J/V) characteristics of (0.5 cm2) solar cell devices before and after transfer to a range of substrates including (a) stainless steel, (b) polyimide, (c) paper, and (d) the corresponding optical images for devices fabricated on SLG and following transfer to stainless steel, polyimide and paper, respectively.	 

Pristine	27.47	0.52	0.46	6.63
Stainless steel	24.09	0.48	0.38	4.43
Pristine	26.64	0.49	0.53	6.92
Polyimide	21.23	0.47	0.45	4.56
Pristine	29.01	0.54	0.46	7.24
Paper	27.22	0.50	0.38	5.48
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Fig. S1: Cross sectional SEM images, Fig. S2: Optical images of solar cells, Fig. S3: Large area device images and performance data. See DOI: 10.1039/c5nr07008b

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
