Frontiers of solvent-free functional molecular liquids  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CC05883G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CC05883G
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 10344-10357Frontiers of solvent-free functional molecular liquids

        
          
            Avijit 
            Ghosh
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Takashi 
            Nakanishi
          
          
        
      *
      International Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics (WPI-MANA), National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), 1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba 305-0044, Japan. E-mail: NAKANISHI.Takashi@nims.go.jp;   Tel: +81-29-860-4740
Received 
      28th July 2017
    , Accepted 25th August 2017First published on 25th August 2017AbstractThe chemistry of functional molecular liquids (FMLs) is a recently developed research area that describes the unique properties of the liquid physical state of the materials under solvent-free conditions. FMLs are generally composed of uncharged molecular units and exist in free-flowing as well as amorphous states in nature under ambient conditions. Attachment of flexible and bulky alkyl chains to a π-conjugated chromophore is the most common method for producing such molecular liquids. FMLs exhibit many uncommon phenomena, including inherent molecular properties which have rarely been observed for conventional organic condensed materials. In the last decade, these optoelectronically active alkylated-π liquids have attracted significant attention because of their applicability to flexible/foldable electronic devices with high stability towards photo-oxidation and thermal decomposition, as well as facile processability into devices. Besides these π-conjugated chromophore-based liquids, a few other types of fluidic materials such as liquid biomaterials and liquid metals also exhibit many attractive functions in their solvent-free state. The breakthrough of FMLs in cutting-edge research and their fundamental liquid features on the basis of intermolecular architectures are highlighted in this Feature Article. It is expected that this Feature Article will encourage the understanding of liquid properties as a consequence of intermolecular interactions and inspire the development of molecular architectures that could be useful for designing more attractive FMLs with specific functions in the future.
Avijit Ghosh
Avijit Ghosh obtained his PhD in 2013 from Indian Institute of Technology Bombay (IIT Bombay, India) under Prof. Mangalampalli Ravikanth. His doctoral research focused on designing and investigation of optoelectronic functions of metalloporphyrins and phosphorous(V)-corroles. In 2013, as a post-doctoral fellow, he joined the research group of Prof. Tahsin J. Chow at the Academia Sinica, Taiwan, to work on optoelectronic devices based on higher analogue acene derivatives. At present, he is a postdoctoral researcher in the research team of Dr Takashi Nakanishi at the National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), Japan, since 2014. His current research involves investigating and fundamental understanding of solvent-free functional liquid-porphyrins.
Takashi Nakanishi
Takashi Nakanishi joined the National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), Japan, in 2004 after JSPS postdoctoral research at Houston University (Prof. Karl M. Kadish), USA, and at Oxford University (Prof. Harry L. Anderson), UK. Before that he completed the doctoral course in shorter period at Nagasaki University (Prof. Naotoshi Nakashima), Japan, in 2000. Since 2016, he has been in his current position as a group leader at NIMS. In 2007–2010, he was also a group leader at the Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces (Prof. Helmuth Möhwald), Germany, and in 2007–2011, he was a researcher of PRESTO, Japan Science and Technology Agency. He also has several visiting professor experiences at Warsaw University of Technology in Poland, Institute for Molecular Science in Japan, and Shenzhen University in China. His research interests centre around functional organic soft materials with precisely controlled self-assembly and their optoelectronic functions.
1. Introduction
Soft-materials such as ionic liquids (ILs), liquid crystals (LCs), gels, and deformable molten polymers are a class of innovative organic/polymeric materials which have had a significant impact in various fields of chemistry, physics, electronics, and life and material sciences.1 Tractable handling, excellent processability, free deformability, and environmentally advantageous solvent-less applications, in addition to non-volatility and tunable optoelectronic properties justify the quick popularity of such materials in the research areas of material design, synthesis, catalysis, and electronics.2 Recently, a new generation of solvent-free fluidic materials termed as “functional molecular liquids” (FMLs),3 in particular alkylated-π molecular liquids, have been classified into a different category to that of the above mentioned soft-materials. These FMLs are basically non-ionic and hydrophobic, and possess very low glass transition temperatures (Tg). Thus, they can flow freely at room temperature and can be directly placed on and filled into various shapes and geometries of the substrate, which is desirable for maintaining continuous active layers in foldable-devices.4 General molecular design for FMLs with bulky and flexible alkyl side chains provides additional features like high photochemical and thermal stability which are hardly achieved in most π-conjugated dye compounds. Furthermore, the wrapping of π-cores with alkyl side chains can isolate the core unit which reveals the inherent single molecular functions in bulk state. Therefore, FMLs possessing molecular functions can be utilized in applications without additional characterization.
In the last couple of years, FMLs have attracted significant attention in various research fields including luminescent inks,5 host–guest rotaxanes,6 metal–organic-framework (MOF) like liquids with permanent porosity,7 liquid semiconductors,8 and energy conversion systems of organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs),9 dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs),10 photon upconversions (UCs),11 as well as optical lasers12 owing to their many advantages and huge technological potential. Besides these FMLs, solvent-free fluidic inorganic-nanoparticles,13 liquid metals,14 and liquid biomolecules15 also exhibit fascinating properties apart from their solid analogues. The research area of FMLs has just started its development, therefore a brief overview on going and cutting age sciences at the current stage is highly wanted. Herein, we mainly focus on the design, recent developments, and implementation of FMLs in various aspect of researches with modern and advance science and technology.
2. Novel molecular design and perspective
2.1 Alkylated π-conjugated molecular liquids
π-Conjugated chromophores tend to form aggregates via π–π interactions and they exist mostly as crystals or randomly organized solids at room temperature. In addition, non-covalent interactions such as hydrogen bonding, CH–π, dipole–dipole, and van der Waals interactions can enhance their π–π stacking. Alkyl chains derivatization on a π-unit is a common strategy for softening materials by controlling the π–π interactions and the orientation of assembled π-units.16,17 For further softening such materials, our group has invested substantial effort toward engineering FMLs with alkyl chains attached on the periphery of π-chromophores.18 Our investigations revealed that in a π-alkylated molecular system, the balance between π–π interactions and van der Waals interactions (governed by the alkyl chain part) are the crucial factors that dictate their liquid physical state at room temperature. In contrast to linear chains, branched alkyl (BA) chains proved to be more powerful for creating greater disorder (a more amorphous state), which in turn entropically influenced the liquid properties.19 Both the flexibility and bulkiness of BA chains are suitable for effective disruption of the π–π interactions between π-chromophores.

2.1.1 Liquid fullerenes. 
During the studies on morphology-controlled self-assemblies of alkylated-C60 derivatives,17 our serendipitous discovery of 2,4,6-tris(alkyloxy)-phenyl substituted C60-fulleropyrrolidines in their liquid physical state, was the first example of experimentally confirmed alkylated-π molecular liquids at room temperature.20 Further detailed investigations and analyses of the liquid C60 derivatives were designed by modification of the alkyloxyphenyl group with both linear (1–6) and branched (7–9) alkyl chains attached to the C60 moiety (Fig. 1).16,20,21 Wrapping C60 with alkyl chains significantly weakened the C60–C60 (π–π) interactions and resulted in an efficient disruption of C60 aggregation. However, only an optimum chain length was found to be effective for producing these liquid fullerenes at room temperature. For instance, with shorter chain lengths such as n-octyl chains, high melting points were observed because of the relatively strong π–π interactions between the adjacent C60 units, which led to their solid state at room temperature. With chain lengths longer than those of n-dodecyl the van der Waals interactions between the adjacent alkyl chains predominated and consequently elevated the melting point.20 However, with optimum medium chain lengths, a moderate balance between these two different intermolecular forces (π–π and van der Waals) led to a decrease in the melting points and produced low viscosity liquid C60 derivatives at room temperature. The substitution pattern (2,4,6-positions in this case) of the alkyl chains was also an influencing factor for effective wrapping of the C60 moiety, which controlled their liquid properties. Interestingly, despite being a liquid, a relatively high carrier mobility of ∼0.03 cm2 V−1 s−1 was observed in 5, which indirectly indicated the partial isolation of the C60 moiety with a certain π–π overlap among the C60 units. This partial π–π overlap has resulted in semiconducting properties.20
 Fig. 1  Chemical structures of liquid N-methylfulleropyrrolidine derivatives (1–9: C60-derivatives and 10–12: C70-derivatives) substituted with various alkyloxyphenyl groups. 
Replacement of linear chains with the BA chains proved to be more effective and an efficient means for transforming alkylated N-methylfulleropyrrolidines into soft, lower-viscosity liquids.16,19,21 For example, N-methylfulleropyrrolidines substituted with Guerbet-alcohol22 based BA chains such as the 2-decyltetradecyloxy chain at the 3,5-positions (7, η* ∼1500 Pa s) and 2-octyldodecyloxy chain at the 2,5-positions (8, η* ∼260 Pa s) of the phenyl group easily produced low-viscosity liquid-fullerenes. Similarly, the hyperbranched (hyper-BA) chains at 2,4,6-positions of the phenyl group also produced liquid C60-derivative (9) efficiently. A higher viscosity (η* ∼128000 Pa s) was observed for liquid 9, likely due to the internal friction and lesser flexibility of hyper-BA chains.
Relatively larger π-system such as C70 substituted with the 2,4,6-tris(alkyloxy)phenyl unit21 (under the Prato conditions23) (10–12, Fig. 1), also revealed an increasing melting point and a decreasing complex viscosity with increasing alkyl chain lengths from n-octadecyl (10) to n-docosanyl (12).
Furthermore, by taking the advantage of the liquid state and the electron-accepting property, 5 was used as a dispersion medium for electron-donating cadmium selenide (CdSe) nanocrystals (NCs), resulting in a pasty photoconductive composite material.24 The favourable van der Waals interactions between the n-hexadecyl amine ligands of CdSe NCs and alkyl chains of 5 led to the formation of a well-mixed cluster of these two components. This resulted in the quenching of photoluminescence of CdSe NCs by the transfer of the electron to the C60-moiety. There was a 200% enhancement in the photocurrent under white-light illumination in the donor–acceptor composite film containing 25 wt% CdSe NCs in 5 as compared to a film composed of pristine CdSe NCs.


2.1.2 Directed assembly from an amorphous phase. 
For the development of molecular optoelectronics such as heterojunction organic solar cells and organic field-effect transistors (OFETs), it is essential to have control over the orientation and packing distance of the π-conjugated molecules. A suitable ordered organization of the π-conjugated units directly influences their device performance.25 The thermodynamic origin of many self-assembled structures is the balance between the hydrophilic and hydrophobic segments of the molecule. This concept can also be generalized to state that self-assembly is driven by the balance between the solvophobic and solvophilic components of fully hydrophobic alkylated fullerene (C60 or C70) liquids. Addition of either solvophobic or solvophilic components of the parent liquid-fullerene molecule can direct the formation of well-ordered assemblies. For demonstrating this novel approach, we designed the hydrophobic alkylated-C60 amphiphile derivatives 13 and 14 (Fig. 2) with the BA and hyper-BA chains, respectively.26 Both compounds were obtained as liquid and disordered amorphous materials at room temperature. However, the addition of n-decane to 13 led to the formation of polydispersed spherical core–shell micelles (average diameter of 2.5 ± 0.3 nm) with a C60 rich core content. In contrast, the addition of n-decane to 14 resulted in the formation of hexagonally packed gel-fibres that were composed of cylindrical micelles (average diameter 3.2 nm) containing insulated C60 nanowires (Fig. 3). The extent of the formation of favourably ordered self-assembly depended upon the solvophobic nature of the alkane solvents (n-hexane, n-octane, n-decane etc.) and was reflected by the difference in the cohesive energies between the C60 molecules in 13/14 and the respective solvent.27 Similarly, additives with higher affinities for the C60 part compared to the alkyl chains are also expected to direct assembled structures. For instance, the addition of pristine C60 to 13 in a particular ratio (C60:13; 1:2 or 1:10) turned the assembly into lamellar-type nano-sheets. Interestingly, the directed self-assembled gel obtained from the composite mixture of C60 and 14 exhibited a high photoconductivity ϕΣμmax = 3.5 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1, which was of similar order as observed for solid crystalline C60 derivatives including [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM, 2.8–14 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1).28 Moreover, this approach was shown to be applicable for several other alkylated π-conjugated molecular systems such as PC61BM, azobenzene, and fullerene-C70 derivatives (15–17, Fig. 2). The molecular design of such additive-directed assemblies could be a novel approach to construct assembled π-functional materials from their disordered liquid/amorphous systems.
 Fig. 2  Chemical structures of alkylated-C60 (13–15), azobenzene (16) and C70-derivaties (17) designed for directed assembly of liquid/amorphous-π systems. 
 Fig. 3  Formation of gel (a) and lamellar mesophase structure (b) by 14 in presence of n-alkanes and pristine C60 respectively. Photographs in (b) showing the gelated and sol states obtained by adding 14 in n-decane. (c) Schematic presentation of micelles and gel-fibres obtained in the system by addition of n-hexane in 14. Figures reproduced from ref. 26 with permission from the © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. 


2.1.3 Blue-colour fluorophore based liquids with core-isolation strategy. 
During the studies of FMLs, we realized that the proper design of luminescent π-conjugated molecular liquids could be an alternative emitting component for luminescent devices (vide infra, Section: 3.1).29 The primary essential conditions demanded from such luminescent soft materials include as colour tunability and purity, photochemical and thermal stability, and easy processability. For further understanding of alkylated-π FMLs, in particular the luminescent π-conjugated molecular system, we chose a very simple molecular liquid system of oligo(p-phenylenevinylenes)s (OPVs) decorated with BA and hyper-BA chains (18–21, Fig. 4a).30
 Fig. 4  (a) Chemical structures of liquid OPV-derivatives 18–21. (b) Schematic 3D chemical structures of 21 showing the isolation of OPV-core wrapped by branched alkyl chains. (c) Photo image of 19 showing blue luminescence under UV light (365 nm). Comparison of normalized (d) UV-vis absorption and (e) emission spectra of 21 in solvent-free liquid state (dashed line) and dichloromethane solution (solid line, concentration = 10−5 M). Reproduced from ref. 30 with permission © 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
The liquid properties of these OPVs were found to be dependent on the substitution position as well as the branching pattern of the alkyl chains. For instance, 2,4,6-substituted-phenyl groups with the BA chains exhibited much lower viscosity (0.64 Pa s for 21) than the corresponding 3,5-derivatives with hyper-BA chains (34.6 Pa s for 18), which indicated an effective isolation of the π-chromophore in the former. The effect of core isolation with reduced intermolecular forces was also reflected in their lower Tg values, which were in the range of −44 to −55 °C.
The almost identical UV-visible absorption and fluorescence spectral features of these liquid OPVs in their solvent-free state and in dilute solutions (Fig. 4d and e) revealed their monomeric character in the solvent-free liquid state. Additionally, the retention of blue luminescence (Fig. 4e) and high fluorescence quantum yield (48% in 21) in the liquid state further indicated that these molecular luminescent properties of 21 are essentially inherent. Owing to their solvent-like liquid nature, the blue emission of the liquid OPVs (19 or 21) could be changed to greenish blue emission by simple blending with the green luminescent compound tris(8-hydroxyquinolinato)aluminium (Alq3). Further blending with an orange luminescent rubrene produced a white emitting liquid-composite in the solvent-free condition (Fig. 5a). These results enable the potential use of such liquid composites as luminescent inks for writing or painting. For example, by simply coating this liquid composite on a commercially available UV-LED, a prototype white-colour emitting LED can be produced in a facile manner (Fig. 5c).
 Fig. 5  (a) Presentation of producing solvent-free white-emitting liquid composite of OPV-derivatives blending together with Alq3 and rubrene. (b) Emission spectrum of the composite of 19/rubrene/Alq3 in liquid state. (c) A photo image of a commercially available UV-LED (375 nm) with coating of the above liquid composite which produced white-emitting light. Adapted with permission from ref. 30 © 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) such as anthracenes tend to form aggregates via strong π–π interactions. The BA side chains were utilized for preventing these π–π interactions which otherwise enable several inherent molecular functions. Furthermore, the importance of using anthracene was to show the generality of core-isolation strategy by employing a common dye molecule for developing multi-colour luminescent liquid materials.5
The covalent attachments of the BA and hyper-BA chains to the anthracene moiety led to the production of transparent and viscous liquids 22 and 23 (Fig. 6a), respectively.5 The core-isolation effect and the flexibility of the BA and hyper-BA chains contribute toward the formation of an isotropic liquid phase with relatively lower viscosity values of 0.28 Pa s for 22 and 84.0 Pa s for 23 and low Tg values ranging from −59.6 to −32.4 °C. Similar to liquid OPVs, the identical absorption and emission features of these liquid anthracenes in solvent-free and dilute solution indicated the presence of an isolated monomeric anthracene unit in the liquid state. Generally, the protection of acene based compounds like anthracenes from aerial oxidation and light induced photo-dimerization is a big challenge.31 Compared with pristine 9,10-diphenylanthracene (DPA) as a reference molecule, these liquid anthracenes showed ca. 5 to 10 times more enhanced photostability both in the liquid state and in the dilute solution. For instance, 22 remained fluorescent for up to 4 h under 365 nm filtered Xe light irradiation and for 15 h in a dilute dichloromethane solution. 13C NMR investigations confirmed the absence of photo-dimerization of these liquid anthracenes, although some photo-oxidation could be observed.
 Fig. 6  (a) Chemical structures of the liquid anthracene derivatives 22 and 23. (b) A photo image of blue luminescence from 23 under UV light (365 nm). (c) Photo images of the luminescence colour tuning of the composites 22 by varying the mol% of D1 and D2 as well as by thermal treatment. Reproduced with permission from ref. 5 © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
Similar to the above mentioned liquid OPVs, these blue-emitting liquid anthracenes (Fig. 6a) were used for the preparation of multi-colour luminescent liquid-composites via simple physical blending with other luminescent dopants. In this case, blending 22 with greenish luminescent dopants 9,10-bis(phenylethynyl) anthracene (D1) and reddish luminescent tris(1,3-diphenyl-1,3-propanedionato)(1,10-phenanthroline)-europium(III) (D2) resulted in the production of multiple-luminescent colours because of ‘Förster resonance energy transfer’ (FRET) from liquid anthracene to the acceptor component(s). The emission colour was tuned by varying the mol% of the respective dopants, as depicted in Fig. 6c. Furthermore, the blending of 0.5 mol% of D1 and 5 mol% of D2 together with 22 resulted in a thermo-responsive composite with red emission. With increasing temperature, this red colour emission changed to yellow at 50 °C and to emerald green on further increasing temperature to 100 °C (Fig. 6c). Thus, the obstacles faced toward the preparation of homogeneous thin films from crystalline materials and their limited emitting colour tunability could be overcome by using such liquid systems.
Interestingly, by using a similar type of alkylated-DPA liquid as an acceptor, Yanai and Kimizuka et al. have developed a solvent-free photon UC molecular network without any matrix in conjunction with Pt(II) porphyrin as a triplet sensitizer (donor).11 The composite containing 1 mol% of the donor exhibited a high UC quantum yield of 28% even in presence of air. The UC emission observed below Tg (−59 °C) clearly indicated that triplet energy migration takes place without molecular diffusion in the frozen state. More importantly, this UC system works efficiently even under air and was found to be stable for about two weeks without any loss of quantum efficiency. This unique solvent-free UC system has illustrated the means to overcome significant deactivation of the triplet states observed in solution as well as a solid polymer matrix.32
In the similar context of core-isolation strategy, a series of liquid tetraphenylethene (TPE) derivatives 24–27 (Fig. 7a) with BA chains have recently been reported.33a These liquids exhibited low Tg values in the range of −60 to −56 °C. TPE is a well-known fluorophore which exhibits an enhancement in its emission by hindering non-radiative deactivation pathway via the restriction of molecular motion (RIM). Both the viscous properties that favoured the RIM process and the isolated TPE unit which was wrapped by the bulky BA chains were likely responsible for the high photoluminescence properties compared to those of the solid TPE derivatives. It is worth mentioning that a few organic fluorescent liquids 28 and 29 (Fig. 7a) based on the tetrazine core have recently been reported.33b Compounds 28 and 29 exhibited very low viscosities of 28 and 58 mPa s, respectively. Another liquid consisting of oligo(p-phenylene ethynylene)s (OPEs, 30, in Fig. 7a) with BA side chains exhibited a red-shifted fluorescence peak with significant broadening in the liquid state. This observation suggested the dominance of excimer-like excited-state structures with π–π interactions between the planar OPE units.34
 Fig. 7  (a) Chemical structures of (a) liquid TPE derivatives 24–27, liquid tetrazines 28-29, an OPE 30, (b and c) liquid pyrenes 31–37. (d) Schematic illustration of the change in the 31/C12E6/D2O microemulsion droplets with increasing concentration of dye 31 loaded. The oil/surfactant ratio represented by X = [31]/[C12E6]. (e) Photo images of the liquid pyrenes 35–37 under UV-light (365 nm). Excimer, intermediate and monomer represent their corresponding excited-state. The η* values present their corresponding complex viscosity in Pa s. Adapted with permission from ref. 35a and c © Royal Society of Chemistry 2016 and © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, respectively. 


2.1.4 Liquid pyrenes. 
Another attractive PAH is pyrene which exhibits its monomeric and excimeric dual luminescence feature depending on the intermolecular pyrene–pyrene interactions in its excited state. A 2-decyltetradecyl chain substituted pyrene compound 31 (Fig. 7b), which exhibits excimer-like luminescence properties in its liquid state, was recently reported by Hollamby and co-workers.35a Interestingly, 31 was further employed as the sole oil phase for preparing oil-in-water (o/w) type microemulsions by using a nonionic hexaethylene glycol monododecyl ether (C12E6) surfactant. The size of the microemulsion droplet was found to depend on the amount of 31 loaded to the mixture. The bright photoluminescence of liquid 31 was retained in the 31/C12E6/water microemulsion droplets. The increased excimer emission with increasing droplet size was attributed to the solvophobicity-driven assembly.29 The results of this study suggest that it is possible to develop the hydrophobic alkylated-FMLs such that they can be utilized in aqueous media and eventually for biomedical applications. Recently Yamaguchi and co-workers have reported similar o/w fluorescent nanoparticles composed of trialkylsilyl-substituted pyrenes 32–34 (Fig. 7b) which were encapsulated by a mixture of phosphatidylcholine (DSPC) and cholesterol.35b The externally added hydrophobic dopant dyes such as green-emissive C545T and red-emissive DCJTB were spontaneously incorporated into the nanoparticles in their aqueous solution. An efficient FRET takes place from the pyrene excimer to the dopant dyes. A continuous emission colour tuning of the nanoparticles was achieved by simply changing their concentration and the combination of dopants.
Recently, we have reported a series of Newtonian type alkylated pyrene liquids 35–37 (Fig. 7d) with tailorable physicochemical properties.35c The dual emission properties of pyrenes were used as a probe for elucidating the π–π interactions in the solvent-free liquid state. The BA chain lengths and substitution pattern of the phenyl substituents were crucial for tailoring their liquid physical and optical properties. For example, liquid 36 exhibited a relatively higher viscosity (58 Pa s) compared to the other two compounds (∼6 Pa s) (Fig. 7e). While the liquids 35 and 37 behaved as excimer and monomer-like species, respectively, in their excited state, 36 showed unconventionally weaker excimer features (Fig. 7e). The most important finding of this study was the presence of non-homogeneity of the pyrene units in their liquid state for compounds 35 and 36, even though they were assigned as Newtonian-type liquids.

2.2 Low-melting phthalocyanines and porphyrins
The tendency of large planar aromatic macrocycles such as phthalocyanine (Pc) and porphyrin (Por) to form π–π stacked aggregates results in their low solubility in various solvents.36 In fact, Pc is known to exhibit high degrees of order in both solid37 and liquid crystalline38 states, and thereby has a significantly high melting point. These ordered assemblies are essential and useful in optoelectronic applications such as optical limiting devices.39 However, for applications associated with optical transparency, the existence of even a small number of ordered domains causes optical scattering.40 Thus, the design of fluidic-Pcs with lesser aggregation and lower melting points was investigated to improve their performance.
Snow et al. showed that the presence of ethylene oxide oligomer substituents on the periphery of the Pc-ring resulted in fluidic-Pc compounds at room temperature.41 A good optical limiting was maintained in the pristine fluidic Pc. Replacement of the peripheral ethylene oxide oligomers with methyl-terminated oligooxyethylene (CH3(OCH2CH2)nO, n = 8.8)-substituents (38–39, Fig. 8a) at four β- and α-positions also led to the production of fluidic Pcs.42 These fluidic Pcs exist in their solvent-free liquid state at above 10 °C, behave as optically transparent fluids, and can be processed into thin film cells by capillary action.
 Fig. 8  Chemical structures of (a) fluidic phthalocyanines 38–48 and (b) alkylated liquid porphyrin derivatives 49–53. 
During their studies on liquid crystalline Pc materials, Ahsen et al.43a found that tetra(13,17-dioxanonacosane-15-hydroxy)-substituted metal-free as well as Ni(II) and Zn(II) Pc derivatives 40–42 (Fig. 8a) with a non-peripheral substitution pattern were fluidic at room temperature. In contrast, their peripheral substitution pattern turned them to ordered discotic hexagonal columnar LC mesophases. Copper(II) complexes of Pc 43 and 44 (Fig. 8a) were also found to be viscous fluids at room temperature, as reported by Ohta and co-workers.43b
Maya and co-workers have reported a series of polysiloxane-substituted fluidic Pcs and their lead(II) complexes (45–48, Fig. 8a) with very low Tg (−122 and 16 °C).44a,b These fluidic Pcs exhibited a unique nonlinear absorption characteristic derived from the Pc core and exceptionally large nonlinear thermo-refractive properties typical of siloxanes. In addition, the optical transparency, photo-oxidative stability, and processability of these fluidic Pc compounds could contribute to their optical limiting device applications.
Almost at the same time, Gryko et al.44c and Maruyama et al.44d independently reported the synthesis of a series of liquid 5,10,15,20-tetraphenylporphyrin (H2TPP)-substituted with linear and long-alkyloxy chains at the 3,4,5-positions of the meso-phenyl groups (49–53, Fig. 8b). The 5,10,15,20-tetrakis(3,4,5-tri(undecyloxy)phenyl)porphyrin 50 and its decyloxy analogue 49 were found to exhibit very low melting points of −24 and −55 °C, respectively.44c,e,f The observed higher loss modulus (G′′) over storage modulus (G′) in the range of the measured angular frequency (ω) and strain amplitude (γ) of 10, 100, and 1000% verified their liquid properties. Furthermore, the spectroscopic feature of these liquids in solvent-free and dilute solutions were very similar, which indicated the presence of less aggregated Por-rings. These liquid Pors were also employed as a dispersion medium for C60 and/or carbon nanotubes via intermolecular donor–acceptor and/or π–π interactions.44d There was a little discrepancy in the observations of these two groups about the physical state of the same Por compounds, which arose because of the deficiency in their design and the environments from which these compounds were obtained. For example, the obtained dodecyl analogue 51 was reported as a solid in one report,44c whereas in the other report,44d the same compound was described as a viscous oil. At this point, it is quite clear that these liquid porphyrins have two phases which can be easily transformed into to each other. These liquids might be expected to turn into a more ordered crystalline state on long storage. Therefore, it is a real challenge and more desirable to develop pure liquid-physical states with low viscosity of large π-conjugated macrocyclic systems such as Pc and Por. Recently reported low-melting and highly stable corrole derivatives have encouraged further efforts into designing stable liquid corroles with specific functions.44g
2.3 Microporous liquids

2.3.1 Molecular liquids with a cavity. 
In general, conventional liquids contain small, flexible, and transient cavities between their molecules, which is also called as “extrinsic” porosity. If an empty pore, whose size does not exceed 2 nm, exists permanently between the liquid molecules in a solvent-free condition, it would be considered as a microporous liquid having “intrinsic” porosity.45a In contrast to porous solid materials such as MOFs and mesoporous silica, the intentional design of a porous liquid with permanent, well-defined, and empty micropores is more challenging. Although the concept of microporous liquids is not new, it has received significantly more attention in recent times.7 A few conceptual designs and syntheses have already been reported and investigated thoroughly with the aid of computer simulations.45b Typically, in the process of molecular design for microporous liquids, researchers have either utilized alkylated rigid cage molecules or rigid host-molecules/porous-framework materials that are dissolved/dispersed in hindered solvents.45 Several attempts have been made to produce porous liquids based on the rigid cage molecules (54–61, Fig. 9).45 However, these studies also show that the developed methods are non-trivial and inconvenient because of tedious sample preparation, intra/intermolecular alkyl chain self-filling into the pores, flexible cage molecular structures, and decomposition of host systems.46
 Fig. 9  Chemical structures of the molecular cages 54–61 designed for preparing porous liquids. 
Thus, it was challenging to produce liquids with a permanent porosity until James et al. reported a novel molecular design based on a rigid molecular cage with six crown ether units (62, Fig. 10a).7 The rigid cage molecule 62 was obtained as a solid but behaves as a molecular pore space when it is dissolved even at a high concentration in 15-crown-5. The latter was used as the solvent which is too large to enter the cage pore of 62 (schematic presentation, Fig. 10b). Therefore, the pores in the cages of this unique liquid composite remain empty and maintain permanent porosity, even in the condensed bulk solution state. The crown-ether groups at the exterior of the cage molecules have a good affinity to the bulky 15-crown-5 solvent. Thus, only twelve solvent molecules dissolve each cage molecule (62) by producing a highly concentrated liquid phase (44 wt%) which can flow at room temperature. Depending on the cage concentration, the viscosity of this liquid ranged from 20 cP to >140 cP, measured at temperatures 25–50 °C. Compared to the solvent, the probable high capacity of this porous liquid for dissolving solute molecules of maximum diameter ∼0.5 nm was confirmed by both molecular dynamics simulation and positron (e+) annihilation lifetime spectroscopy (PALS).
 Fig. 10  (a) Chemical structure of rigid diamine-crown-ether cage containing six crown ether units 62. (b) Schematic representation for composing porous liquid with permanent porosity. Cage 62 provides empty pore space. The solvent 15-crown-5 provides fluidity but unable to enter in the cage cavity. The resulted solution behaved as porous liquid with permanent porosity. Adapted with permission from ref. 7 © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. 


2.3.2 Cyclic host liquids. 
In a host–guest complexation event in solution, the solvent acts as a barrier for complex stability and efficiency of host–guest complexation because of the relatively lesser concentration of these solutes. In other words, because of the solvation of the host and/or guest molecules, the solvent molecule inhibits the host and guest molecules from approaching each other. In order to overcome this problem, solvent-free fluidic FMLs can be used as substrates and as a medium for dispersing or dissolving solutes. Ogoshi and co-workers have designed non-volatile, recyclable, and thermally stable cyclic host liquids 63–66 (Fig. 11) from cyclic pillar[5]arene and cyclodextrin (CD).6,47a,b These liquid hosts can directly encapsulate the guest molecules to form stable host–guest [2]rotaxane/[2]pseudorotaxane complexes. The liquid characteristics of these cyclic hosts were maintained even at −50 °C and were stable up to 250 °C. Surprisingly, by using 63 as a solvent-come-host in presence of a guest 1,12-dibromododecane, the conversion efficiency of the liquid [2]rotaxanes reached up to 97%.6 In contrast, host–guest complexation in the presence of a small amount of CDCl3 solvent yielded only 8% of the complex because of its low association constant (K = 16.9 ± 1.0 M−1) in CDCl3. These authors also reported another set of pillar[5]arene-based polyrotaxanes which were synthesized in the presence of liquid cyclic hosts 67 and 68 (Fig. 11) via a direct reaction between the azido moiety of polytetrahydrofuran and a terminal alkyne stopper under the Sharpless click reaction conditions.47b The conversion efficiencies of these nonionic polyrotaxanes under solvent-free conditions were 35–44%, which are relatively higher than those observed in common organic solvents (22%).
 Fig. 11  Chemical structures of pillar[5]arene-based (63, 67–68) and CD based (64–66) cyclic host liquids. 

2.4 Photochemical switchable azobenzene based liquids
Photochemical isothermal liquefaction of azobenzene derivatives is an attractive attribute for liquid systems because of the reported photo-controllable adhesive properties,48 crystallization,49 selective etching,50 solar thermal fuel,51 and remote-shutter52 applications. The attachment of BA groups to the azobenzene moiety leads to lowering of the melting temperature of the corresponding cis-isomer and asymmetric substitutions are found to be favourable for photo-induced dynamic processes during phase transitions. Akiyama and co-workers48 have demonstrated the photo-induced crystal to liquid phase transitions in a series of sugar alcohols that were modified with multi-azobenzenes (69–75, Fig. 12). The yellow solid crystals of 69–75 gradually changed to orange liquid droplets upon UV light irradiation for an hour. The reversible isothermal phase transition enables these azobenzene derivatives to be applied as photoresponsive adhesives.48b
 Fig. 12  Chemical structures of photochromic azobenzene derivatives 69–87, which showed a reversible solid–liquid phase transition on photo-irradiation. A liquid solar thermal fuel was described by using compound 87. 
Norikane and co-workers have reported a series of photo-irradiated crystal to liquid phase transitions of alkylated macrocyclic (76–79, Fig. 12)49 and asymmetrically substituted rod-shaped (80–82, Fig. 12)50 azobenzene derivatives. These studies revealed that the molecular orientations in the crystal can be interrupted by the irradiation of light, which are responsible for such crystal-liquid phase transitions. Furthermore, a photoresist film of 82 was spin-coated on a copper substrate and exposed to light through a mask to produce the desired pattern in a facile method. A similar type of solid–liquid phase transition has also been reported for a series of photochromic azobenzenes/azopyridine derivatives (83–86, Fig. 12), which exhibited photo-controlled adhesive properties.53
Upon photo-irradiation of azobenzene derivatives, the photochemically generated high-energy metastable cis-isomer is capable of storing the photon energy as molecular strain energy (ΔH = ∼50 kJ mol−1) which can be released in the form of heat following the cis to trans thermal isomerization.54 Kimizuka and co-workers51 have designed a 2-ethylhexyl chain substituted azobenzene liquid 87 (Fig. 12) and used it as a solar thermal fuel under solvent-free liquid conditions. The trans-87 isomer with a low Tg of −63 °C was stable up to 220 °C without any decomposition on heating. The isomerization enthalpy (ΔH) and bulk energy density corresponding to 100% of the cis isomer were calculated to be 52 kJ mol−1 and 47 W h kg−1, respectively. The photo-isomerization process in the liquid state effectively avoids the loss of net energy by dilution, which is common in conventional solid systems. Therefore, liquid 87 is a potential candidate for solar thermal energy storage materials.
The amphiphilic photochromic azobenzene system 88 (Fig. 13a) was used for demonstrating a remote-controllable light shutter by photo-induced isothermal phase transition between its crystalline and liquid states.52 The yellow crystal of 88 rapidly turns into an orange liquid upon UV light irradiation for 20 s at room temperature (Fig. 13b). For testing the light shuttering properties by altering UV and visible light, 88 was directly fabricated on an optical test cell of 50 μm thickness and 10 × 10 mm2 dimensions. By controlling the light wavelength, the opaque crystal and the transparent liquid states shuttled between one another in less than 5 s (Fig. 13d and e). As shown in Fig. 13d, the image of “azobenzene” behind the light shutter is clearly visible in the transparent liquid state whereas the image is not visible in the opaque solid state because the liquid state of the film is capable of transmitting incident light. Another amphiphilic azobenzene derivative 89 (Fig. 13a) was also found to exhibit similar photo-irradiated phase transitions at room temperature.55
 Fig. 13  (a) Chemical structures of amphiphilic azobenzene derivatives (88 and 89) exhibited liquefaction on photo-irradiation at room temperature. (b) Stepwise solid to liquid phase transition of 88 under UV light irradiation for 30 s and (c) the reverse liquid to solid transformation upon exposure of visible light for 10 s. (d) Graphical presentation of the reversible light shuttering on photo-irradiation at room temperature. Shuttle between opaque and transparent states was achieved by tuning the wavelength of light at room temperature. (e) Schematic presentation of the solid–liquid phase transition of 88 on photo-irradiations. Reproduced with permission from ref. 52 © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015. 
Wu and coworkers have recently demonstrated that the azopolymers of polyacrylates with a flexible spacer and an azobenzene unit on the polymer side chain are capable of exhibiting reversible solid-to-liquid phase transition because of a photoswitchable Tg.56 Upon UV light irradiation, photoisomerization takes place from trans- to cis-forms and is responsible for the phase transition from solid-to-liquid or vice versa. Thus, the concept of photoswitching Tg was shown to be an effective new strategy for healing polymers at room temperature without the use of any plasticizing solvents.
3. Aspect of energy conversion
3.1 Organic light emitting diodes and lasers
The continuously growing projected energy requirements for sustaining future societies and the anticipated crises have motivated several researchers to develop alternative renewable energy resources such as various photovoltaic, solar-energy storage, and water-splitting systems.57,58 Recently, a variety of solvent-free optoelectronic devices including photovoltaics, photorefractive devices, bi-stable memory devices, optically pumped lasers, and organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs) have been developed, which utilize FMLs as alternatives to existing conventional solid materials.9,12,59–70 In most of these devices, a liquid carbazole consisting of 9-(2-ethylhexyl)carbazole (EHCz)5990 (Fig. 14a) was doped with conventional laser dyes. This compound (90) exists as a liquid with a Tg below 0 °C and emits blue colour with photoluminescence quantum yield (ΦFL) of 45%. This fluidic 90 was first introduced as “solvent” during ellipsometry measurements to determine the electric field induced bi-refringence of a photorefractive material. The plasticizing effect of liquid 90 was used for charge trapping in a C60 sensitized poly(N-vinylcarbazole) (PVK)-based photorefractive polymer material.60 The charge carrier mobility (4 × 10−6 cm2 V−1 s−1) in liquid 90, although not quite sufficiently high, allows it to be used for electroactive optoelectronic applications.61 Various liquid OLEDs have been successfully composed by using 90 doped with different guest emitters.62,63
 Fig. 14  (a) Chemical structures of organic liquids employed as emitting layer in various energy conversion systems: carbazole derivatives (90–91, 94), pyrene derivatives (92–93) and fluorine derivatives (95–97). Photographs (b) the fabricated microchannel structure by using liquid 93 and (c) the fabricated large area flexible microfluidic OLED under UV irradiation (365 nm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 9a © 2014 Elsevier B.V. (d) Photo images of red, green and blue liquid organic DFB lasers under UV light (365 nm) and (e) schematic presentation for the preparation of liquid DFB laser by capillary action of solvent-free liquid semiconductor 90. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69b © 2015 AIP Publishing LLC. 
The replacement of the BA chain in 90 with a linear poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) chain resulted in a liquid carbazole, 91 (Fig. 14a). This liquid substance shows a significant increase in their carrier injection and the external electroluminescence quantum efficiency (ΦEL) of 0.75% is 25 times higher than that of 90.64 Interestingly, a liquid pyrene 92 (Fig. 14a) was fitted as an emitting layer of a refreshable OLED which was then integrated with a liquid reservoir in the back side of the cathode for easy convection of the liquid emitter.65 In such a refreshable OLED, the decreased device luminescence due to the decomposition of the liquid emitter could be recovered quickly to its initial state by concomitant replacement with the fresh liquid from the reservoir. Later, improved device lifetimes and stabilities of liquid OLEDs were achieved by applying the liquids of 1-pyrenebutyric acid 2-ethylhexylester 93 (PLQ) and 9,9′-(2-(2-(2-methoxyethoxy)ethoxy)ethyl)-3,3′-bis(9H-carbazole) 94 (Fig. 14a).66,67 The liquid emitter 93 was also successfully employed for fabricating a large-area flexible microfluidic OLED9a (Fig. 14b and c) as well as multi-colour microfluidic OLEDs9b (Fig. 15a–d). A maximum luminescence of 26.0 cd m−2 at an applied voltage of 61 V could be obtained for the microfluidic OLEDs with 2.5 μm thickness of the PLQ layer. It is noteworthy that the decreased electroluminescence could be recovered easily by replacing the degraded emitting layer with a fresh liquid emitter (Fig. 15e and f). Recently, the liquid emitter PLQ was used for demonstrating a microfluidic white OLED which could be useful as the subpixels for liquid-based microdisplays.9c
 Fig. 15  Physical state of pyrene based liquid emitters (PLQ, DPT-PLQ, rubrene-PLQ and DBP-PLQ) prepared for microfluidic OLEDs: (a) under visible light and (b) under UV (365 nm) light; where DPT = 5,12-diphenyltetracene and DBP = tetraphenyldibenzoperiflanthene. (c) Photo image of the PL emission from the liquid emitting layers of PLQ, rubrene-doped PLQ and DBP-doped PLQ, which were patterned separately on a single microfluidic device. (d) Multi-colour electroluminescence (EL) obtained by using PLQ, rubrene-doped PLQ and BDP-doped PLQ as solvent-less liquid emitters in the microfluidic OLED. Schematic illustrations of (e) luminance degradation as time passes and (f) subsequent recovery by injection of fresh PLQ of a 6 μm thick microfluidic OLED. Reproduced with permission from ref. 9b © 2014 Elsevier B.V. 
Besides its OLED applications, 90 was also employed in a non-volatile, re-writable bi-stable memory device68 and in optically pumped low threshold lasers.12,69 Both Fabry–Perot-type microcavity69a and distributed feedback69b (DFB) structures were prepared by following the capillary action of the liquid semiconductor and used for tuning the lasing wavelength from blue to green to red regions across the visible spectrum (Fig. 14d). In DFBs, a very high ΦFL of 85% and low amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) threshold of 0.42 μJ cm−2 could be achieved under pulsed optical pumping by using a blend of 90 with heptafluorene. Very recently, Adachi and co-workers have developed a solvent-free DFB laser with improved quasi-continuous-wave lasing properties by using molecular oxygen as the triplet quencher.12 A composite mixture of 90 blended with a blue fluorescent heptafluorene derivative was used as a solvent-free gain medium. A series of liquid fluorene derivatives 95–97 (Fig. 14a) containing siloxane chains were used for constructing DFB lasers with excellent ΦFL and low ASE thresholds.70 Compounds 96 and 97 have low Tg of −62 and −42 °C respectively. In contrast, 95 behaves as an amorphous liquid even below −80 °C. Interestingly, the observed hole and electron mobilities of 97 (1.30 × 10−4 and 1.53 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively) were slightly higher than those of liquid triarylamine derivatives (vide infra).
3.2 Triarylamine-based liquid semiconductors
Triarylamine-based organic semiconductors have also been synthesized as solvent-free liquid substances 100–113 (Fig. 16) and successfully employed in many optoelectronic devices.71 In most of the cases, chemically inert and stable siloxane moieties were employed for imparting fluidity to these hybrid-triarylamines.71b–e The macroscopic charge transport properties of these molecular liquids are not significantly affected by the molecular motion. Therefore, the conventional charge transporting behaviour makes these liquid semiconductors suitable for integration into flexible electronic devices.71e Compound 106 was found to have a maximum hole mobility of about 1 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 among the three siliconized liquids 106, 110, and 111. The liquid triarylamine derivative tris[4-(2-methoxyethoxy)phenyl]amine (113) doped with nitrosonium tetrafluoroborate (NOBF4) was successfully employed as an electron donating/hole-transporting component in DSSCs.10 This liquid nanostructured DSSC was showed 2.4% power conversion efficiency with the incident photon-to-electron quantum efficiency of 50%.
 Fig. 16  Chemical structures of liquid triarylamine derivatives (100–113) designed for organic liquid semiconductors. 
4. Other type of liquids
4.1 Solvent-free liquid biomaterials
Unlike the alkylated-π FMLs discussed above, there are a few different classes of liquids related to biomaterials and metals with discrete functionalities that are useful for many research applications typically not accessible with alkylated-π FMLs.72a The presence of solvents such as water in proteins is essential for maintaining their structural and functional properties and their stability via intra- and intermolecular forces. The preparation of a highly concentrated protein solution for effective functionality is quite difficult because of solubility and aggregation restrictions. Therefore, it was quite surprising when Mann and co-workers72b surface engineered a globular protein and reported a solvent-less liquid protein comprising very high concentrations of structurally and functionally intact protein molecules. The synthetic strategy used for constructing such liquid proteins involves manipulating the electrostatic interactions between a cationic surface-modified ferritin protein and the anionic polymer-surfactant molecules in a stoichiometric ratio. Thermally-induced melting of this resultant electrostatic complex after lyophilization produces a liquid protein. As another example, similar electrostatically complexed myoglobin-based solvent-free liquid proteins, which retain their native globular structure and functionally active metallocenter, are capable of reversible non-cooperative dioxygen binding in the solvent-free state.15 These myoglobin-based liquid proteins exhibit hyper-thermophilic behaviour and temperature-dependent reversible re-folding properties.72c The enzymatic activity of self-contained biofluids based on solvent-free melts of the lipase–polymer surfactants have also been explored for solubilizing substrates and catalysing reactions.72d Solid-state DNA is generally degraded at elevated temperatures and pristine DNA is unable to undergo phase transitions to a liquid-crystalline or liquid phase because of the exceeding dimension of intermolecular forces. Thus, the challenge of fabricating solvent-free DNA in the fluid state was successfully met by electrostatic complexation of a single-strand oligonucleotide with dialkylated cationic surfactants.72e,f The significant reduction in the hydrogen-bonding interactions between the DNA strands as well as the increase in the van der Waals forces enabled these DNA derivatives to exist as fluids. These soft DNAs showed phase transitions from a solid crystal to liquid crystal and to isotropic liquid phases in the temperature range of −20 to 130 °C. These solvent-free liquid biomolecules have opened new directions for explorations of novel functions of nano-structures and nano-objects in the field of bionanotechnology.
4.2 Liquid metals
Another promising research area in the field of functional liquid materials is that of liquid metals, which have attracted significant attention in recent years because of their incredible versatility and potential for the development of flexible and stretchable electronics.14 In addition, the utility of these liquid metals in patterning of microfluidic-channels by following unconventional fabrication techniques, even in three-dimensional structures, has made them a viable alternative to the existing technology. Mercury (Hg) has a melting point of −38.8 °C and is known to exist in the liquid state at room temperature. It has been widely used in electrochemical measurements, thermometers, thermostat switches, fluorescent lamps, and micro-electromechanical systems (MEMS).73 However, its use is now restricted because of its severe toxicity. Similarly, the other metals that exist as liquids close to the room temperature, namely, francium (Fr), cesium (Cs), and rubidium (Rb), have also been restricted for widespread applications because of their radioactivity and high reactivity. In contrast, Dickey,74a–c,75a,b Majidi,74d,75c Kramer,74e and others74f,g have found suitable, less toxic, gallium-based metal alloys such as eutectic gallium indium (EGaIn) (Fig. 17) and gallium indium tin (Galinstan), which can be used as alternatives to mercury. These alloys exist in the liquid state; the melting points of EGaIn and Galinstan are 15.5 and −19 °C, respectively, and they have essentially no vapor pressure at room temperature. Interestingly, these Ga-based alloys form a spontaneous oxide coating layer when exposed to air, which behaves as an elastic material and prevents these liquids from moulding into spherical shapes. Beyond a surface stress of 500–600 mN m−1, this oxide-skin breaks and allow the liquids to flow.14b Taking advantage of the mechanical stability of the surface oxide, several patterning techniques14 including direct writing and other potential applications75 (Fig. 17) of these liquid metals are being explored extensively.
 Fig. 17  (a) An example of 3D printing of free-standing liquid metal structures with stacks of liquid metal droplets. Photo images of stretchable, flexible and durable antennas composed of PDMS microfluidic channels containing liquid metal EGaIn: (b) dipole antenna and (c) unbalanced loop antenna. Adapted with permission from ref. 75a © 2014 American Chemical Society. (d) Pictorial illustration of oxidative spreading of a drop of liquid metal EGaIn in 1 M NaOH solution. (left column) A needle was used as a top electrical contact to the droplet. (right column) A wire was placed as a bottom electrical contact to the droplet. (i) Because of large surface tension, initially the drop appeared as spherical shape; (ii) by applying an oxidative potential, the liquid metal drop changed into new shape; (iii) the drop flattened and spread freely above a critical potential. Adapted with permission from ref. 74c. Copyright © 2014 National Academy of Sciences. 
5. Conclusions and outlook
In this feature article, we have described the design, developments, and advances in the field of FMLs, which can be employed as alternatives to the existing soft materials such as ILs, LCs, and gels. Attachment of either flexible, bulky alkyl chains or siloxane chains on the π-chromophore are the most common approaches for the liquefaction of dye molecules. Wrapping of the molecule with such flexible chains can help protect its π-unit from photo-oxidation and dimerization reactions, and such isolation of the π-core is essential for the inherent functions of the molecule in its solvent-free liquid state. The partially isolated π-core can be directed into a more ordered state in the presence of a segment of the alkylated-π molecules and made viable for carrier transporting functions such as photo-conductivity. Liquefaction of large π-surfaces such as porphyrinoids has been shown to result in an enhanced optical transparency that is suitable for optical limiting device applications. Reversible crystal-liquid phase transitions of azobenzene derivatives illustrate their potential in storing energy, photolithographic processes, and photo-responsive adhesives. The fluidic feature of FMLs facilitates the fabrication of flexible and foldable devices with features such as easy handling, degradation-free high durability, a continuous active layer, and improved charge transport properties. These advantageous attributes are indicative of the future direction of FMLs in the field of optoelectronics.76 Developments in liquid biomolecules and liquid metals are further livening up the current scene in liquid sciences. Organic supercooled liquids are yet another category of liquid materials that are capable of exhibiting unique phase transition phenomena and structural relaxation dynamics.77 In many electronic devices, the device failure because of crystallization during operation can be prevented by using thermally stable supercooled liquids.
As mentioned before, the main disadvantages of alkylated FMLs are their decreased conductivity (as a result of the isolation of the π-core which is wrapped with insulating alkyl chains) and the inconvenient purification process. Despite these disadvantages, understanding the design principles and the fundamental properties including the structure–function relationships of the alkylated FMLs are necessary because of its high potentials. The possibility of nanoscopic, short-range ordering in these liquid molecules offers new avenues for exploration in contrast to the well-researched LCs or ILs.35c Therefore, the true potential of these FMLs in realistic device applications should be investigated in the near future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was partially supported by Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research (JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number JP25104011 and JP15H03801) from MEXT, Japan and TIA collaborative research promotion program “KAKEHASHI”.
Notes and references

  (a) Q. Zhang and J. M. Shreeve, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 10527–10574 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) K. Goossens, K. Lava, C. W. Bielawski and K. Binnemans, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 4643–4807 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) R. Hayes, G. G. Warr and R. Atkin, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 6357–6426 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) R. G. Weiss, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7519–7530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) W. Xu, P. A. Ledin, V. V. Shevchenko and V. V. Tsukruk, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 12570–12596 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) M. Hird, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 2070–2095 RSC ; 
  (c) A. Döring, W. Birnbaum and D. Kuckling, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 7391–7420 RSC .
S. S. Babu and T. Nakanishi, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 9373–9382 RSC .

  (a) M. Nogi and H. Yano, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1849–1852 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Nogi, S. Iwamoto, A. N. Nakagaito and H. Yano, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1595–1598 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) S. Bae, H. Kim, Y. Lee, X. Xu, J.-S. Park, Y. Zheng, J. Balakrishnan, T. Lei, H. R. Kim, Y. I. Song, Y.-J. Kim, K. S. Kim, B. Özyilmaz, J.-H. Ahn, B. H. Hongand and S. Iijima, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 574–578 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) M. Berggren, D. Nilsson and N. D. Robinson, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 3–5 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Babu, M. J. Hollamby, J. Aimi, H. Ozawa, A. Saeki, S. Seki, K. Kobayashi, K. Hagiwara, M. Yoshizawa, H. Möhwald and T. Nakanishi, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1969 Search PubMed .
T. Ogoshi, T. Aoki, R. Shiga, R. Iizuka, S. Ueda, K. Demachi, D. Yamafuji, H. Kayama and T. Yamagishi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 20322–20325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Giri, M. G. D. Pópolo, G. Melaugh, R. L. Greenaway, K. Rätzke, T. Koschine, L. Pison, M. F. C. Gomes, A. I. Cooper and S. L. James, Nature, 2015, 527, 216–220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. G. Plint, B. A. Kamino and T. P. Bender, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 1676–1682 CAS .

  (a) M. Tsuwaki, T. Kasahara, T. Edura, S. Matsunami, J. Oshima, S. Shoji, C. Adachi and J. Mizuno, Sens. Actuators, A, 2014, 216, 231–236 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) T. Kasahara, S. Matsunami, T. Edura, R. Ishimatsu, J. Oshima, M. Tsuwaki, T. Imato, S. Shoji, C. Adachi and J. Mizuno, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 207, 481–489 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) N. Kobayashi, T. Kasahara, T. Edura, J. Oshima, R. Ishimatsu, M. Tsuwaki, T. Imato, S. Shoji and J. Mizuno, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 14822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Snaith, S. M. Zakeeruddin, Q. Wang, P. Péchy and M. Grätzel, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2000–2003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Duan, N. Yanai and N. Kimizuka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 19056–19059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. D. Sandanayaka, L. Zhao, D. Pitrat, J. C. Mulatier, T. Matsushima, C. Andraud, J. H. Kim, J. C. Ribierre and C. Adachi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 223301 CrossRef .

  (a) A. B. Bourlinos, R. Herrera, N. Chalkias, D. D. Jiang, Q. Zhang, L. A. Archer and E. P. Giannelis, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 234–237 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) P. Agarwal, H. Qi and L. A. Archer, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 111–115 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) D. Kim, Y. Kim and J. Cho, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 3834–3843 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) N. J. Fernandes, T. J. Wallin, R. A. Vaia, H. Koerner and E. P. Giannelis, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 84–96 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) F. Shi, J. Zhou, L. Zhang, Y. Huang, D. Tian, H. Deng and H. Li, Small, 2014, 10, 3901–3906 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (f) J. Zhang, S.-H. Chai, Z.-A. Qiao, S. M. Mahurin, J. Chen, Y. Fang, S. Wan, K. Nelson, P. Zhang and S. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 932–936 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) D. P. Parekh, C. Ladd, L. Panich, K. Moussa and M. D. Dickey, Lab Chip, 2016, 16, 1812–1820 RSC ; 
  (b) I. D. Joshipura, H. R. Ayers, C. Majidi and M. D. Dickey, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 3834–3841 RSC .
A. W. Perriman, A. P. S. Brogan, H. Cölfen, N. Tsoureas, G. R. Owen and S. Mann, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 622–626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, S. S. Babu, S. T. Turner, D. Neher, M. J. Hollamby, T. Seki, S. Yagai, Y. Deguchi, H. Möhwalda and T. Nakanishi, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 1943–1951 RSC .
T. Nakanishi, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3425–3436 RSC .

  (a) F. Lu and T. Nakanishi, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2015, 16, 014805 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) A. Zielinska, M. Leonowicz, H. Li and T. Nakanishi, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2014, 19, 131–139 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Hollamby and T. Nakanishi, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 6178–6183 RSC .
T. Michinobu, T. Nakanishi, J. P. Hill, M. Funahashi and K. Ariga, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 10384–10385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Michinobu, K. Okoshi, Y. Murakami, K. Shigehara, K. Ariga and T. Nakanishi, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 5337–5344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Guerbet, C. R. Chim., 1909, 149, 129–132 CAS .
M. Prato and M. Maggini, Acc. Chem. Res., 1998, 31, 519–526 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Kramer, S. S. Babu, A. Saeki, S. Seki, J. Aimi and T. Nakanishi, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 22370–22373 RSC .
W. Pisula, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3634–3649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Hollamby, M. Karny, P. H. H. Bomans, N. A. J. M. Sommerdjik, A. Saeki, S. Seki, H. Minamikawa, I. Grillo, B. R. Pauw, P. Brown, J. Eastoe, H. Möhwald and T. Nakanishi, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 690–696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) Y.-W. Zhong, Y. Matsuo and E. Nakamura, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 3052–3053 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) R. S. Ruoff, D. S. Tse, R. Malhotra and D. C. Lorents, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 3379–3383 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) S. S. Babu, A. Saeki, S. Seki, H. Möhwald and T. Nakanishi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 4830–4834 RSC ; 
  (b) X. Zhang, T. Nakanishi, T. Ogawa, A. Saeki, S. Seki, Y. Shen, Y. Yamauchi and M. Takeuchi, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 8752–8754 RSC .
L. Maggini and D. Bonifazi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 211–241 RSC .
S. S. Babu, J. Aimi, H. Ozawa, N. Shirahata, A. Saeki, S. Seki, A. Ajayaghosh, H. Möhwald and T. Nakanishi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 3391–3395 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Fudickar and T. Linker, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 13661–13664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) T. N. Singh-Rachford and F. N. Castellano, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2010, 254, 2560–2573 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Z. Jiang, M. Xu, F. Y. Li and Y. L. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16446–16453 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) A. Monguzzi, M. Frigoli, C. Larpent, R. Tubino and F. Meinardi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 139–143 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) T. Machida, R. Taniguchi, T. Oura, K. Sada and K. Kokado, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 2378–2381 RSC ; 
  (b) C. Allain, J. Piard, A. Brosseau, M. Han, J. Paquier, T. Marchandier, M. Lequeux, C. Boissière and P. Audebert, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 19843–19846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Adachi, R. Itagaki, M. Sugeno and T. Norioka, Chem. Lett., 2014, 43, 1770–1772 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. J. Hollamby, A. E. Danks, Z. Schnepp, S. E. Rogers, S. R. Hart and T. Nakanishi, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 7344–7347 RSC ; 
  (b) M. Taki, S. Azeyanagi, K. Hayashi and S. Yamaguchi, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 2142–2148 RSC ; 
  (c) F. Lu, T. Takaya, K. Iwata, I. Kawamura, A. Saeki, M. Ishii, K. Nagura and T. Nakanishi, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 3416 CrossRef PubMed .

Porphyrin Handbook, ed. K. M. Kadish, K. M. Smith and R. Guilard, Academic Press, San Diego, CA,  2000, vol. 1–20 Search PubMed .
M. K. Engel, Rep. Kawamura Inst. Chem. Res., 1996, 8, 11 Search PubMed .

  (a) 
            N. B. McKeown, Phthalocyanine Materials: Synthesis, Structure and Function, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,  1998, pp. 60–87 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) E. Venuti, R. G. D. Valle, I. Bilotti, A. Brillante, M. Cavallini, A. Calò and Y. H. Geerts, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 12150–12157 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) 
            H. S. Nalwa and J. S. Shirk, in Phthalocyanines: Properties and Applications, ed. C. C. Leznoff and A. B. P. Lever, VCH, New York,  1996, vol. 4, pp. 79–181 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) G. de la Torre, P. Vázquez, F. A. López and T. Torres, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 3723–3750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) M. Calvete, G. Y. Yang and M. Hanack, Synth. Met., 2004, 141, 231–243 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Pawlicki, H. A. Collins, R. G. Denning and H. L. Anderson, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 3244–3266 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) C. W. Spangler, J. Mater. Chem., 1999, 9, 2013–2020 RSC ; 
  (d) J. E. Ehrlich, X. L. Wu, I.-Y. S. Lee, Z.-Y. Hu, H. Rockel, S. R. Marder and J. W. Perry, Opt. Lett., 1997, 22, 1843–1845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) S. R. Flom, R. G. S. Pong, J. S. Shirk, F. J. Bartoli, R. F. Cozzens, M. E. Boyle and A. W. Snow, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc., 1997, 479, 23 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) R. G. S. Pong, J. S. Shirk, S. R. Flom and A. W. Snow, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc., 1997, 479, 53 CrossRef CAS .
A. W. Snow, J. S. Shirk and R. G. S. Pong, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2000, 4, 518–524 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. Durmus, C. Lebrun and V. Ahsen, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2004, 8, 1175–1186 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Ichihara, A. Suzuki, K. Hatsusaka and K. Ohta, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2007, 11, 503–512 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) E. M. Maya, J. S. Shirk, A. W. Snow and G. L. Roberts, Chem. Commun., 2001, 615–616 RSC ; 
  (b) E. M. Maya, A. W. Snow, J. S. Shirk, R. G. S. Pong, S. R. Flom and G. L. Roberts, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 13, 1603–1613 RSC ; 
  (c) A. Nowak-Król, D. Gryko and D. T. Gryko, Chem. – Asian J., 2010, 5, 904–909 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (d) S. Maruyama, K. Sato and H. Iwahashi, Chem. Lett., 2010, 39, 714–716 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) D. Koszelewski, A. Nowak-Król, M. Drobizhev, C. J. Wilson, J. E. Haley, T. M. Cooper, J. Romiszewski, E. Górecka, H. L. Anderson, A. Rebane and D. T. Gryko, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 2044–2053 RSC ; 
  (f) C. A. Henriques, S. M. A. Pinto, J. Canotilho, M. E. S. Eusébio and M. J. F. Calvete, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2016, 20, 843–854 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) A. Nowak-Króla, E. Fourie, C. C. Joubert, D. Gryko, D. T. Gryko and J. C. Swarts, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2016, 20, 1244–1255 CrossRef .

  (a) N. ÓReilly, N. Giri and S. L. James, Chem. – Eur. J., 2007, 13, 3020–3025 CrossRef PubMed  and references cited therein; 
  (b) G. Melaugh, N. Giri, C. E. Davidson, S. L. James and M. G. D. Pópolo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 9422–9431 RSC ; 
  (c) N. Giri, C. E. Davidson, G. Melaugh, M. G. D. Pópolo, J. T. A. Jones, T. Hasell, A. I. Cooper, P. N. Horton, M. B. Hursthouse and S. L. James, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 2153–2157 RSC ; 
  (d) M. Yamada, M. Arai, M. Kurihara, M. Sakamoto and M. Miyake, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 9482–9483 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (e) A. Devaux, Z. Popovic, O. Bossart, L. De Cola, A. Kunzmann and G. Calzaferri, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2006, 90, 69–72 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) T. Tozawa, J. T. A. Jones, S. I. Swamy, S. Jiang, D. J. Adams, S. Shakespeare, R. Clowes, D. Bradshaw, T. Hasell, S. Y. Chong, C. Tang, S. Thompson, J. Parker, A. Trewin, J. Bacsa, A. M. Z. Slawin, A. Steiner and A. I. Cooper, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 973–978 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) G. D. Enright, E. B. Brouwer, P. A. Halchuk, K. J. Ooms, M. J. Ferguson, K. A. Udachin and J. A. Ripmeester, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. A: Found. Crystallogr., 2002, 58, c310 CrossRef ; 
  (c) J. L. Atwood, L. J. Barbour, A. Jerga and B. L. Schottel, Science, 2002, 298, 1000–1002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) T. Ogoshi, Y. Tamura, D. Yamafuji, T. Aoki and T.-A. Yamagishi, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 10297–10300 RSC ; 
  (b) T. Ogoshi, T. Aoki, S. Ueda, Y. Tamura and T. Yamagishi, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 6607–6609 RSC .

  (a) H. Akiyama and M. Yoshida, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2353–2356 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) H. Akiyama, S. Kanazawa, Y. Okuyama, M. Yoshida, H. Kihara, H. Nagai, Y. Norikane and R. Azumi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 7933–7941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) Y. Norikane, Y. Hirai and M. Yoshida, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 1770–1772 RSC ; 
  (b) E. Uchida, K. Sakaki, Y. Nakamura, R. Azumi, Y. Hirai, H. Akiyama, M. Yoshida and Y. Norikane, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 17391–17397 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) M. Hoshino, E. Uchida, Y. Norikane, R. Azumi, S. Nozawa, A. Tomita, T. Sato, S. Adachi and S. Koshihara, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 9158–9164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Norikane, E. Uchida, S. Tanaka, K. Fujiwara, E. Koyama, R. Azumi, H. Akiyama, H. Kihara and M. Yoshida, Org. Lett., 2014, 16, 5012–5015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Masutani, M. Morikawa and N. Kimizuka, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 15803–15806 RSC .
D. Y. Kim, S. A. Lee, H. Kim, S. M. Kim and K. U. Jeong, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 11080–11083 RSC .
Y. Chen, H. Yu, M. Quan, L. Zhang, H. Yang and Y. Lu, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 4675–4680 RSC .

  (a) T. J. Kucharski, Y. Tian, S. Akbulatov and R. Boulatov, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4449–4472 RSC ; 
  (b) T. J. Kucharski, N. Ferralis, A. M. Kolpak, J. O. Zheng, D. G. Nocera and J. C. Grossman, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 441–447 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) K. Ishiba, M. Morikawa, C. Chikara, T. Yamada, K. Iwase, M. Kawakita and N. Kimizuka, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 1532–1536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Okui and M. Han, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 11763–11765 RSC .
H. Zhou, C. Xue, P. Weis, Y. Suzuki, S. Huang, K. Koynov, G. K. Auernhammer, R. Berger, H.-J. Butt and S. Wu, Nat. Chem., 2017, 9, 145–151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) T. R. Cook, D. K. Dogutan, S. Y. Reece, Y. Surendranath, T. S. Teets and D. G. Nocera, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6474–6502 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) V. Artero, M. Chavarot-Kerlidou and M. Fontecave, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7238–7266 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) X. Sala, I. Romero, M. Rodriguez, L. Escriche and A. Llobet, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 2842–2852 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) M. D. Kärkäs, O. Verho, E. V. Johnston and B. Åkermark, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11863–12001 CrossRef PubMed .

  (a) J. Yang, D. Yan and T. S. Jones, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 5570–5603 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 908–918 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) O. Ostroverkhova, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 13279–13412 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) A. W. Hains, Z. Liang, M. A. Woodhouse and B. A. Gregg, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6689–6735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) E. Hendrickx, B. D. Guenther, Y. Zhang, J. F. Wang, K. Staub, Q. Zhang, S. R. Marder, B. Kippelen and N. Peyghambarian, Chem. Phys., 1999, 245, 407–415 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) T. Sassa, T. Muto and T. Wada, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 2004, 21, 1255–1261 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Ribierre, T. Aoyama, T. Kobayashi, T. Sassa, T. Muto and T. Wada, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 102, 033106 CrossRef .
J. C. Ribierre, T. Aoyama, T. Muto, Y. Imase and T. Wada, Org. Electron., 2008, 9, 396–400 CrossRef CAS .
D. Xu and C. Adachi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 053304 CrossRef .
S. Hirata, K. Kubota, H. H. Jung, O. Hirata, K. Goushi, M. Yahiro and C. Adachi, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 889–893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kubota, S. Hirata, Y. Shibano, O. Hirata, M. Yahiro and C. Adachi, Chem. Lett., 2012, 41, 934–936 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Shim, S. Hirata, J. Oshima, T. Edura, R. Hattori and C. Adachi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 113302 CrossRef .
T. Kasahara, S. Matsunami, T. Edura, J. Oshima, C. Adachi, S. Shoji and J. Mizuno, Sens. Actuators, A, 2013, 195, 219–223 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hirata1, H. J. Heo1, Y. Shibano, O. Hirata, M. Yahiro and C. Adachi, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 51, 041604 Search PubMed .
J. C. Ribierre, T. Aoyama, T. Muto and P. Andre, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 1800–1805 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) E. Y. Choi, L. Mager, T. T. Cham, K. D. Dorkenoo, A. Fort, J. W. Wu, A. Barsella and J. C. Ribierre, Opt. Express, 2013, 21, 11368–11375 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) J. H. Kim, M. Inoue, L. Zhao, T. Komino, S. Seo, J. C. Ribierre and C. Adachi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 053302 CrossRef .
J. C. Ribierre, L. Zhao, M. Inoue, P. O. Schwartz, J. H. Kim, K. Yoshida, A. S. D. Sandanayaka, H. Nakanotani, L. Mager, S. Méry and C. Adachi, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 3103–3106 RSC .

  (a) T. P. Bender, J. F. Graham and J. M. Duff, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 4105–4111 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) B. A. Kamino, J. Castrucci and T. P. Bender, Silicon, 2011, 3, 125–137 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) B. A. Kamino, J. B. Grande, M. A. Brook and T. P. Bender, Org. Lett., 2011, 13, 154–157 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) B. A. Kamino, B. Mills, C. Reali, M. J. Gretton, M. A. Brook and T. P. Bender, J. Org. Chem., 2012, 77, 1663–1674 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) B. A. Kamino, T. P. Bender and R. A. Klenkler, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1002–1006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) A. W. Perriman and S. Mann, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6085–6091 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) A. W. Perriman, H. Cölfen, R. W. Hughes, C. L. Barrie and S. Mann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 6242–6246 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) A. P. S. Brogan, G. Siligardi, R. Hussain, A. W. Perriman and S. Mann, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 1839–1846 RSC ; 
  (d) A. P. S. Brogan, K. P. Sharma, A. W. Perriman and S. Mann, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5058 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) K. Liu, D. Pesce, C. Ma, M. Tuchband, M. Shuai, D. Chen, J. Su, Q. Liu, J. Y. Gerasimov, A. Kolbe, W. Zajaczkowski, W. Pisula, K. Müllen, N. A. Clark and A. Herrmann, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2459–2465 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (f) K. Liu, M. Shuai, D. Chen, M. Tuchband, J. Y. Gerasimov, J. Su, Q. Liu, W. Zajaczkowski, W. Pisula, K. Müllen, N. A. Clark and A. Herrmann, Chem. – Eur. J, 2015, 21, 4898–4903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) R. J. Whitney, J. Physiol., 1953, 121, 1–27 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) G. Beni, S. Hackwood and J. L. Jackel, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1982, 40, 912–914 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) T. Liu, P. Sen and C.-J. Kim, J. Microelectromech. Syst., 2012, 21, 443–450 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. R. Khan, C. Trlica and M. D. Dickey, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 671–678 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C. Ladd, J.-H. So, J. Muth and M. D. Dickey, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5081–5085 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) M. R. Khan, C. B. Eaker, E. F. Bowden and M. D. Dickey, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 14047–14051 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) T. Lu, J. Wissman Ruthika and C. Majidi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 26923–26929 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) J. W. Boley, E. L. White, G. T.-C. Chiu and R. K. Kramer, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 3501–3507 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) A. Hirsch, H. O. Michaud, A. P. Gerratt, S. D. Mulatier and S. P. Lacour, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4507–4512 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (g) R. C. Gough, J. H. Dang, M. R. Moorefield, G. B. Zhang, L. H. Hihara, W. A. Shiroma and A. T. Ohta, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 6–10 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) M. D. Dickey, Adv. Mater., 2017, 1606425 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) M. D. Dickey, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 18369–18379 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) N. Kazem, T. Hellebrekers and C. Majidi, Adv. Mater., 2017, 1605985 CrossRef PubMed .

  (a) H. Schmidt and A. R. Hawkings, Nat. Photonics, 2011, 5, 598–604 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) G. M. Whitesides, Nature, 2006, 442, 368–373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) K. Chung, M. S. Kwon, B. M. Leung, A. G. Wong-Foy, M. S. Kim, J. Kim, S. Takayama, J. Gierschner, A. J. Matzger and J. Kim, ACS Cent. Sci., 2015, 1, 94–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) P. G. Debenedetti and F. H. Stillinger, Nature, 2001, 410, 259–267 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) M. D. Ediger, C. A. Angell and S. R. Nagel, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 13200–13212 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) L.-M. Wang, C. A. Angell and R. Richert, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 125, 074505 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (e) T. Hecksher, A. I. Nielsen, N. B. Olsen and J. C. Dyre, Nat. Phys., 2008, 4, 737–741 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Avijit Ghosh
	Avijit Ghosh obtained his PhD in 2013 from Indian Institute of Technology Bombay (IIT Bombay, India) under Prof. Mangalampalli Ravikanth. His doctoral research focused on designing and investigation of optoelectronic functions of metalloporphyrins and phosphorous(V)-corroles. In 2013, as a post-doctoral fellow, he joined the research group of Prof. Tahsin J. Chow at the Academia Sinica, Taiwan, to work on optoelectronic devices based on higher analogue acene derivatives. At present, he is a postdoctoral researcher in the research team of Dr Takashi Nakanishi at the National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), Japan, since 2014. His current research involves investigating and fundamental understanding of solvent-free functional liquid-porphyrins.

Takashi Nakanishi
	Takashi Nakanishi joined the National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), Japan, in 2004 after JSPS postdoctoral research at Houston University (Prof. Karl M. Kadish), USA, and at Oxford University (Prof. Harry L. Anderson), UK. Before that he completed the doctoral course in shorter period at Nagasaki University (Prof. Naotoshi Nakashima), Japan, in 2000. Since 2016, he has been in his current position as a group leader at NIMS. In 2007–2010, he was also a group leader at the Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces (Prof. Helmuth Möhwald), Germany, and in 2007–2011, he was a researcher of PRESTO, Japan Science and Technology Agency. He also has several visiting professor experiences at Warsaw University of Technology in Poland, Institute for Molecular Science in Japan, and Shenzhen University in China. His research interests centre around functional organic soft materials with precisely controlled self-assembly and their optoelectronic functions.

 	Fig. 1  Chemical structures of liquid N-methylfulleropyrrolidine derivatives (1–9: C60-derivatives and 10–12: C70-derivatives) substituted with various alkyloxyphenyl groups.	 

 	Fig. 2  Chemical structures of alkylated-C60 (13–15), azobenzene (16) and C70-derivaties (17) designed for directed assembly of liquid/amorphous-π systems.	 

 	Fig. 3  Formation of gel (a) and lamellar mesophase structure (b) by 14 in presence of n-alkanes and pristine C60 respectively. Photographs in (b) showing the gelated and sol states obtained by adding 14 in n-decane. (c) Schematic presentation of micelles and gel-fibres obtained in the system by addition of n-hexane in 14. Figures reproduced from ref. 26 with permission from the © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Chemical structures of liquid OPV-derivatives 18–21. (b) Schematic 3D chemical structures of 21 showing the isolation of OPV-core wrapped by branched alkyl chains. (c) Photo image of 19 showing blue luminescence under UV light (365 nm). Comparison of normalized (d) UV-vis absorption and (e) emission spectra of 21 in solvent-free liquid state (dashed line) and dichloromethane solution (solid line, concentration = 10−5 M). Reproduced from ref. 30 with permission © 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Presentation of producing solvent-free white-emitting liquid composite of OPV-derivatives blending together with Alq3 and rubrene. (b) Emission spectrum of the composite of 19/rubrene/Alq3 in liquid state. (c) A photo image of a commercially available UV-LED (375 nm) with coating of the above liquid composite which produced white-emitting light. Adapted with permission from ref. 30 © 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Chemical structures of the liquid anthracene derivatives 22 and 23. (b) A photo image of blue luminescence from 23 under UV light (365 nm). (c) Photo images of the luminescence colour tuning of the composites 22 by varying the mol% of D1 and D2 as well as by thermal treatment. Reproduced with permission from ref. 5 © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Chemical structures of (a) liquid TPE derivatives 24–27, liquid tetrazines 28-29, an OPE 30, (b and c) liquid pyrenes 31–37. (d) Schematic illustration of the change in the 31/C12E6/D2O microemulsion droplets with increasing concentration of dye 31 loaded. The oil/surfactant ratio represented by X = [31]/[C12E6]. (e) Photo images of the liquid pyrenes 35–37 under UV-light (365 nm). Excimer, intermediate and monomer represent their corresponding excited-state. The η* values present their corresponding complex viscosity in Pa s. Adapted with permission from ref. 35a and c © Royal Society of Chemistry 2016 and © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 8  Chemical structures of (a) fluidic phthalocyanines 38–48 and (b) alkylated liquid porphyrin derivatives 49–53.	 

 	Fig. 9  Chemical structures of the molecular cages 54–61 designed for preparing porous liquids.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Chemical structure of rigid diamine-crown-ether cage containing six crown ether units 62. (b) Schematic representation for composing porous liquid with permanent porosity. Cage 62 provides empty pore space. The solvent 15-crown-5 provides fluidity but unable to enter in the cage cavity. The resulted solution behaved as porous liquid with permanent porosity. Adapted with permission from ref. 7 © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 11  Chemical structures of pillar[5]arene-based (63, 67–68) and CD based (64–66) cyclic host liquids.	 

 	Fig. 12  Chemical structures of photochromic azobenzene derivatives 69–87, which showed a reversible solid–liquid phase transition on photo-irradiation. A liquid solar thermal fuel was described by using compound 87.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Chemical structures of amphiphilic azobenzene derivatives (88 and 89) exhibited liquefaction on photo-irradiation at room temperature. (b) Stepwise solid to liquid phase transition of 88 under UV light irradiation for 30 s and (c) the reverse liquid to solid transformation upon exposure of visible light for 10 s. (d) Graphical presentation of the reversible light shuttering on photo-irradiation at room temperature. Shuttle between opaque and transparent states was achieved by tuning the wavelength of light at room temperature. (e) Schematic presentation of the solid–liquid phase transition of 88 on photo-irradiations. Reproduced with permission from ref. 52 © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Chemical structures of organic liquids employed as emitting layer in various energy conversion systems: carbazole derivatives (90–91, 94), pyrene derivatives (92–93) and fluorine derivatives (95–97). Photographs (b) the fabricated microchannel structure by using liquid 93 and (c) the fabricated large area flexible microfluidic OLED under UV irradiation (365 nm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 9a © 2014 Elsevier B.V. (d) Photo images of red, green and blue liquid organic DFB lasers under UV light (365 nm) and (e) schematic presentation for the preparation of liquid DFB laser by capillary action of solvent-free liquid semiconductor 90. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69b © 2015 AIP Publishing LLC.	 

 	Fig. 15  Physical state of pyrene based liquid emitters (PLQ, DPT-PLQ, rubrene-PLQ and DBP-PLQ) prepared for microfluidic OLEDs: (a) under visible light and (b) under UV (365 nm) light; where DPT = 5,12-diphenyltetracene and DBP = tetraphenyldibenzoperiflanthene. (c) Photo image of the PL emission from the liquid emitting layers of PLQ, rubrene-doped PLQ and DBP-doped PLQ, which were patterned separately on a single microfluidic device. (d) Multi-colour electroluminescence (EL) obtained by using PLQ, rubrene-doped PLQ and BDP-doped PLQ as solvent-less liquid emitters in the microfluidic OLED. Schematic illustrations of (e) luminance degradation as time passes and (f) subsequent recovery by injection of fresh PLQ of a 6 μm thick microfluidic OLED. Reproduced with permission from ref. 9b © 2014 Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 16  Chemical structures of liquid triarylamine derivatives (100–113) designed for organic liquid semiconductors.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) An example of 3D printing of free-standing liquid metal structures with stacks of liquid metal droplets. Photo images of stretchable, flexible and durable antennas composed of PDMS microfluidic channels containing liquid metal EGaIn: (b) dipole antenna and (c) unbalanced loop antenna. Adapted with permission from ref. 75a © 2014 American Chemical Society. (d) Pictorial illustration of oxidative spreading of a drop of liquid metal EGaIn in 1 M NaOH solution. (left column) A needle was used as a top electrical contact to the droplet. (right column) A wire was placed as a bottom electrical contact to the droplet. (i) Because of large surface tension, initially the drop appeared as spherical shape; (ii) by applying an oxidative potential, the liquid metal drop changed into new shape; (iii) the drop flattened and spread freely above a critical potential. Adapted with permission from ref. 74c. Copyright © 2014 National Academy of Sciences.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
