Graphene, an epoch-making material in RFID technology: a detailed overview  - New Journal of Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1NJ03226G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1NJ03226G
(Perspective)
New J. Chem., 2021, 45, 18700-18721Graphene, an epoch-making material in RFID technology: a detailed overview

        
          
            Yongfang 
            Yao
          
        
      abc, 
      
        
          
            Sayan 
            Chakraborty
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Abhishek 
            Dhar
          
        
      *e, 
      
        
          
            Chetan B. 
            Sangani
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            Yongtao 
            Duan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Bhavesh R. 
            Pansuriya
          
        
      g and 

        
          
            Rohit L. 
            Vekariya
          
        
      *h
aHenan Provincial Key Laboratory of Pediatric Hematology, Children's Hospital Affiliated to Zhengzhou University, Henan Children's Hospital, Zhengzhou Children's Hospital, Zhengzhou 450018, China
bSchool of Pharmaceutical Science, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan 450001, China
cKey Laboratory of Advanced Drug Preparation Technologies (Zhengzhou University), Ministry of Education of China, Zhengzhou 450001, China
dSchool of Illumination Science, Engineering and Design, Jadavpur University, Kolkata 700032, India
eDepartment of Applied Sciences and Humanities, Modern Institute of Engineering and Technology, Rajhat, Hooghly, 712123, West Bengal, India. E-mail: abhidhar2000@gmail.com
fDepartment of Chemistry, Shri Maneklal M Patel Institute of Sciences & Research, KadiSarvaVishwavidhyalaya, Gandhinagar, Gujarat, India
gShri M. P. Pandya Science College, Shri Govind Guru University, Lunawada-389230, Godhra, Gujarat, India
hOrganic Chemistry Department, Institute of Science & Technology for Advanced Studies & Research (ISTAR), CVM University, Vallabh Vidyanagar - 388 120, Gujarat, India. E-mail: rohit.vekariya@cvmu.edu.in
Received 
      3rd July 2021
    , Accepted 10th September 2021First published on 16th September 2021AbstractMany researchers claim that graphene, a specially studied carbon allotrope, has a single layer of atoms organized in a two-dimensional honeycomb lattice. Because of its exceptional electronic and mechanical properties, it has a significant job to perform in redefining future technologies. Although graphene has made a major breakthrough to be considered for a wide area of applications, most of the interesting properties of graphene are still at the early stage of research. Graphene dependent attenuators and single and multi-frequency constructible antennas are designed employing the tunability of graphene. As the name indicates, the form of RF technology that uses electromagnetic fields for automatic identification purposes of tags attached to objects is termed as radio frequency identification (RFID). For years, the use of pricy raw materials and intricate fabrication processes in metal coating and metal based conductive inks in printed electronics kept the involved cost very high. So, it is inevitable to replace the existing fabrication process with cheaper materials and simpler techniques. Researchers assert that printed graphene has the potential to be a competent alternative for RFID applications.
Introduction
Nowadays researchers claim that graphene, an allotrope of carbon, containing a single sheet of atoms arranged in a two-dimensional honeycomb lattice, owing to its exceptional electronic and mechanical features, has an important role to play in redefining future technologies. There are many applications in our day-to-day life that can be reshaped and developed by utilizing those distinctive properties of graphene. Though graphene has made a major breakthrough in being considered for a wide area of applications, most of the interesting properties of graphene are still at the early stage of research. Graphene made attenuators and single and multi-frequency redesignable antennas are designed employing the tunability of graphene. As a result, the feasibility of application of one-layer graphene sheets in radio frequency applications and antenna designs is observed. Also, graphene flakes have been used as a base material to make graphene conductive ink and the developed screen-printed material has been made more conductive with the help of a compression process. It is an economical and efficient technique and the printed products are environment friendly, also having better flexibility. Printed graphene technology can also be used in development and use of ultra high frequency (UHF) radio frequency identification (RFID) antennas and near field communication (NFC) antennas. Researches prove that this technology significantly reduces the cost for RFID applications. Furthermore, RF enabled humidity sensors are designed applying basic experiments on graphene oxide (GO) dielectric properties expressed in the range of GHz. Wireless graphene security networks pave a path to the prospects of using printed graphene technology in internet of things (IoT) and wireless communication applications.
Andre Geim and Konstantin Novoselov were honoured with the prestigious Nobel Prize in the year of 2010 for discovering graphene in 2004 and bringing a renaissance in the field of two-dimensional materials. From the beginning of coming into the picture, graphene has drawn attention of researchers. A vast variety of applications could use this noble element to improve the current technology by a long way if successful. For a long time, most researchers were keeping their focus on the fundamentals of the associated physics and characteristics of graphene. However, the industrial scale application of this carbon allotrope has yet to be realized.
Graphene, being the first discovered two-dimensional material in nature, which has astonishing electrical and mechanical properties including high electrical and thermal conductivity, and higher electron mobility, has drawn attention from researchers, leading them to publish several studies and explore newer areas of application utilizing the extraordinary inherent properties. Due to its one atom structure, graphene has loss in the microwave region. This property can still be utilized and combined into current structures for designing reconfigurable antennas. The metal antenna acts as the main radiator for better efficiency. On the other hand, tunability is achieved in fabricating reconfigurable antennas by graphene. The size reduction of electronic devices is achieved very subtly by incorporating graphene into them. Graphene based devices attain a thickness of only 0.34 nm without changing the design dimensions of a circuit.
As the name indicates, the form of RF technology that uses electromagnetic fields for automatic identification purposes of tags attached to objects is known as radio frequency identification. For years, the use of pricy raw materials and intricate fabrication processes in metal coating and metal based conductive inks in printed electronics kept the involved cost very high. So, it is inevitable to replace the existing fabrication process with cheaper materials and simpler techniques. Researchers assert that printed graphene has the potential to be a competent alternative for RFID applications. Graphene flakes make the printed material much more conductive and in turn efficient, at the same time reducing the cost and increasing flexibility. The results of many research studies validate the use of graphene-based ink to fabricate small and compact size RFID antenna applications. Further, printed graphene ink technology can be combined with internet of things (IoT) and wireless communication technology to construct a graphene dependent wireless security network. The pioneering introductory work of screen-printed graphene antennas, wireless sensors and wireless graphene security networks will initiate upcoming developments and also the association with other two-dimensional sensing materials together to formulate drastic development of wireless sensing applications and cheaper communication systems.
In the present review, we have tried to summarize some important modern day approaches of graphene related material in RFID technology and the special features of the material to be applied in such a field.8,12,17,23
Graphene
Elements which are mechanically less robust are highly eligible to be used in electronics applications. Malleability and elasticity are two important characteristics of an element to be used in applications like sensors, biomedical devices etc. Of late, during electronic-device design, apart from mechanical flexibility and optimum electronics performance of the component material, a few more factors are highly considered – high conductivity and abundant electron mobility, keeping the dimension of the device almost intact – which graphene provides. Graphene can be easily integrated into an existing circuit by changing the thickness of the circuit to around 0.34 nm only.1,2
The use of inorganic-based electronics materials confines the applications of flexible electronics due to their mechanical distortion. Studies, driven by concern to address this issue, have shown that graphene is a leading alternative in various applications like energy harvesting devices,3 transistors,4 flexible electronics,5 photonic devices,6,7 touch panels8etc. For practical applications CVD grown graphene is taken into account instead of pristine graphene, which includes size limitation and fabrication troubles.9,10
Graphene, at a glance

Fig. 1(b) depicts the electronic band configuration of the wonder material, graphene. The valence and conduction bands of graphene come across at zero energy at the Dirac points. The dispersion relation is observed to behave linearly for low energies near the Dirac points. As a result, the behaviour of charge carriers in an ideal graphene sheet resembles massless Dirac fermions. Hence, graphene acts as a Dirac equation governed13 semiconductor or semimetal having zero bandgap and this feature favors its application in the field of RFID by resulting in its excellent conducting property.
 Fig. 1  (a) sp2 and p orbitals of carbon atoms in graphene.12 (b) Left: Band structure of graphene showing six Dirac (K and K+) points and a linear dispersion relationship around them. Right: Zoomed picture of the linear energy band near the Dirac points.11 (c) Honeycomb hexagonal graphene lattice. 
Mechanical and thermal properties of graphene
The thickness of one-atom-thick graphene is found to have a value of 0.345 nm, making it the thinnest material ever produced.14,15 When traditional silicon transistors are on the nanometre scale, their performance and device dimensions, the channel length to be specific, do not hold a proportional relation.16 This leads to problems in power dissipation as well as self-heating. These extraordinary characteristics are utilized in scaling down transistor technology and alleviate issues like self-heating in many high power electrical and optical devices.
Surprisingly, the average size and the orientation of graphene flakes were found to be more determining parameters for the heat conduction, instead of the mass density of the graphene laminate. It has been experimentally tested that the scaling up of heat conductance is a linear function of the average size of graphene flakes for both compressed laminates as well as uncompressed laminates. Compressed laminates possess higher conductivity than uncompressed ones having the same flake size, because of the better flake arrangement.
Electronic properties and applications
The exceptional electronic and optical characteristics of graphene crystallites put graphene far ahead in practical and conceptual considerations than other available two-dimensional materials. A long free mean path of the graphene electrons (π-electrons) is present that does not disturb the electron–electron interaction. This results in a remarkable difference in electronic and other qualities of graphene compared to other 2D materials (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  π-Orbital system in a 2D graphene sheet. 
Photodetectors
Photodetectors must have high responsivity and fast photodetection to perform the detection of broad spectral ranges of light. Optoelectronic applications like sensing, spectroscopy, imaging and communications require fast and accurate photodetection of a wide-ranging spectrum. Researchers suggested many conventional semiconductors for photodetection in the range between the mid-infrared region and far-infrared region. Semiconductor compounds with narrow bandgaps, such as lead selenide (PbSe), indium antimonide (InSb), and mercury cadmium telluride (HgCdTe), are widely used nowadays for the same.18–20 But these are costly and their complex fabrication process limits their use21 in practical applications, and opens a wider prospect for graphene to come into focus. The ability of graphene to absorb an ultrabroad optical spectrum and the better electron and hole mobility at high temperature make graphene advantageous compared to narrow bandgap semiconductors.
Light-emitting diodes
Solid-state light emitting diodes (LEDs) because of their incredible electronic properties have gained a worthy place to be used in the semiconductor industry. LEDs are almost seen in every electronic application like smart displays, opto-electronics, optical communications22–25etc. Some of the key variables to determine the functioning of LEDs are the current efficiency, power efficiency and external quantum efficiency (EQE).
Among these factors, the EQE is dependent upon the light extraction efficiency, and also upon the internal quantum efficiency.26
LEDs’ internal quantum efficiency has been so enhanced that the theoretical limit, i.e. greater than 90%,27 of it has already been achieved. But the light extraction efficiency is yet to achieve the theoretical limit. So, it is clear that to obtain higher EQE, the augmentation of the light extraction efficiency is necessary. Better light extraction efficiency is achieved by higher optical lucidity, high reliability and lower sheet resistance. Indium tin oxide (ITO), due to high optical transmittance (more than 80% at a wavelength ranging from 450 nm to 550 nm), besides low sheet resistance,28,29 has extensive usage for the same. But the mechanical fragility, higher cost30 and other disadvantages of ITO restricted its practical use. Further studies suggested that graphene can be a good alternative to ITO.31–35
Solar cells
Several inherent features like large power conversion efficiencies (PCEs), intense light absorption, longer carrier diffusion length and simple fabrication36–43 cause several cheaper perovskite solar cells to be analysed very carefully for practical applications. The perovskite solar cell (PSC) active device layers are placed in between electron and hole transport layers (ETL and HTL, respectively).44–46 The morphology of perovskite solar cells and various interfaces’ electronic structures affect the charge carrier transport properties.47,48 Graphene and related two-dimensional materials (GRMs)49–54 have vast utility to regulate the interfacial properties and architecture of PSCs.
GRMs are rapidly used in solar cells in order to improve efficient charge transfer. To attain this, GRMs are placed in between the ETL/HTL and perovskite layer as a separate layer and are integrated with the ETL/HTL.55,56
Thermal sensors
Single layer graphene shows excellent thermal characteristics, for which its use in heat management and temperature sensing applications is increasing. Ref. 57 shows fabrication and comparison of micro patterned SLGs on silicon dioxide (SiO2), a silicon nitride layer, and a Si wafer having etched rectangular shaped boxes. The graphene made sensor manufactured upon a silicon nitride membrane has a significantly faster response time, finer sensitivity due to the smaller value of the thermal mass, and greater mechanical stability than most other graphene-based sensors. This gives opportunities of using SLGs on silicon nitride for the applications of high sensitivity and high response speed.
Thermoelectric sensors
Besides thermal sensors, graphene can be used in many other critical sensor applications too. Detection at room temperature where the radiation is in the terahertz range is a very critical job58 but extensive use of terahertz radiation is present.59 Cai et al. in ref. 60 successfully published their work on a graphene thermoelectric terahertz photodetector with low noise-equivalent power and better sensing ability. They took the incident or absorbed power as the reference.
The electron–electron interactions are responsible for the quick heat gain61,62 of photo excited carriers, and subsequently the lattice energy decreases more slowly.61,63 A temperature gradient of electrons causes the diffusion of electrons. It generates a net current by local gating asymmetry64,65 or dissimilar contact metals.66 There are plenty of similarities between the operation of graphene-based sensors and modern room temperature terahertz detectors.67 However, graphene-based sensors have a capability of obtaining time-resolved measurements far quicker than the latter one.65,68 The identification, control and generation of plasmons69–71 are some of the foremost necessary things to be considered in nano-optical on-chip processing. In this context graphene shows controllable electrostatic field induced plasmons.72–75 Lundeberg et al.76 used the thermoelectric effect77,78 to generate a voltage by converting the natural decay product of the plasmon and developed a graphene-based plasmon detector. In this detector which operates at room temperature, graphene was encapsulated in hexagonal boron nitride. The most exciting feature of this detector was that only one leaf of graphene played the role of both the detector and plasmonic medium.
Biomolecule sensors
Application of sensors based on graphene for faster, accurate and trusted detection of diseases is a cost-effective and reliable approach. In ref. 79 Wu and others depicted how an electrochemical sensor array system made of graphene for cell sensing can be fabricated. The graphene-based chemical nose/tongue system has the ability to detect 100 cell samples that consist of (i) different cell types having almost 100% classification accuracy, (ii) artificial circulating tumour cells (CTCs) and (iii) cancerous, multidrug-resistant cancerous and metastatic human breast cells.
Gas molecule sensors
Many studies have been published that show the combination of graphene-incorporated mobile gas sensors with new age technologies viz. smart phones, cloud computing and the internet of things (IoT). Zanjani et al. fabricated a pioneering monolithically incorporated CMOS-single layer graphene gas sensor. This had a very minimum amount of after CMOS processing algorithms.80 Pour et al. conducted research and enhanced the electrical conductivity of graphene nanoribbons by lateral extension81. Lateral extension leads to a decrement of the band gap and electrical conductivity increases.
Electronic sensors
Electronic sensors are another field of utilization of graphene. Healthcare applications82–84 include tactile pressure sensors based on piezo-resistivity,85,86 piezoelectricity,82,83 field-effect transistors87–89 and capacitance.90,91 Graphene based piezoresistive type pressure sensors have been fabricated with hot-filament thermal chemical vapour deposition (HFTCVD).92 Haniff et al. realized that the sensing ability of this type of pressure detecting device could be tuned using this method (graphene sedimented at lower temperature has a higher sensing capability than graphene sedimented at a higher temperature). Liu et al. explained in ref. 93 the formation of a malleable and highly sensitive piezoresistive pressure sensing device which uses an ultrathin wrinkled graphene film (WGF), polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) NWs, inter digital electrodes (IDEs) and an interlinked isolation effect. In Fig. 3, the mechanism of sensing and the current variation expressed in amperes with time expressed in seconds in response to loading and unloading are depicted. The WGF and interconnected PVA NWs are responsible for the ultra-sensitivity, mechanical robustness and reliability. Shin et al. led the research in applying pressure sensors in a wide area ranging from healthcare to automobiles.94
 Fig. 3  Sensing mechanism of a piezoresistive pressure sensor and current response to loading and unloading.94 
RFID tags
Nowadays, RFID tag fabrication is another branch of electronics in which scientists are massively adopting graphene for manufacturing processes due to its tiny size and low resistivity. The antenna of the tag must be of low resistivity; hence, silver and copper nanoparticles are the most suitable options for the manufacture of RFID tags by printing antennas on several substrate materials like plastic and paper with metallic nanoparticles as printing ink. But silver being an expensive choice for this process, a genuine need of replacement of silver and other metallic nano-inks became inevitable. This growing concern among researchers paved the path for graphene to be used in direct inkjet printing of low-cost RFID antennas. Presently, three types of RFID tags (based on nano carbon materials) are broadly used – a. graphene based, b. Single walled CNT based and c. multi walled CNT based.
RFID
The basic idea of RFID refers to Brard's idea of a type of communication established through transmission of radio waves between a transmitter, later known as an “RFID reader”, and a device, later known as an “RFID tag” (BRA 24). The transmitter acts as a distant power source to the tag. The constituents are a tuneable resonant circuit and a switch. The switch modifies the wave deflected 180 degrees by the tag and ensures a signal modulation so that better conveyance can be set up. The basic mechanism of RFID remains unchanged in the existing setup: an elementary tag is distantly powered by the reader, with two distinct states to set up communication.
In later times, during World War II, radar development was given high focus in order to utilize RFID technology for war purposes. Surprisingly, many technological advancements including RFID happened during this time of unrest. British researchers discovered the identification of friend and foes (IFF) system, a radio frequency transmitter system which used encoded signals to identify enemy planes.
Again, some major improvements and developments were achieved in the 1970s and the journey continues to date, making RFID technology an indispensable part of our everyday life. The widespread applications of RFID include advanced applications like logistics, inventory management, support systems for disabled people, household security, distributed sensor meshes,95 and healthcare mobility.96
It is anticipated by researchers that radio-frequency identification (RFID) systems will exist predominantly in future communications. Researchers are conducting experiments to introduce further advanced utility of RFID systems, viz. electronic toll collection, asset recognition, retail goods management, animal tracking, and vehicle safety.
According to an application perspective, in an open system the tag ID is universal and the correlation between the ID and the object can be found on a distant server. A very famous instance of an open system is the barcode, where articles are identified in a universal way. ID management in a closed system is processed internally and can’t be accessed externally. Thus, the framework of a closed-circuit network ceases at a local network accumulating information in a private database. On account of achieving a higher level of security, where IDs are to be kept confidential and not to be disclosed to the public, closed loop systems are necessarily used.
Logistics companies and distribution markets have opted out from conventional barcode systems and adapted RFID systems in order to improve efficiency and convenience due to the following pros of RFID systems over barcode-based systems – better, faster and more accurate identification capability, semi-permanent resilience, longer range data transmission, and pliability.
A simple and basic RFID system is made of a radio-scanner unit, namely a reader, and a remote transponder kit, namely tags. Two integrants of tags are an antenna and a microchip transmitter integrated with read/write memory.
Based on the power supply manner, RFID tags are classified into three types –
1. Passive tags – ones which use the electromagnetic field of the reader as a power source.
2. Semi-passive tags – they use the energy of the reader itself to respond to a signal from the reader. But, surprisingly, other ingredients of the chip viz. the microcontroller and the memory are supplied through a battery.
3. Active tags – in this case a battery is a stand-alone power source.
An active tag acknowledges the reader signal from its energy using a radio frequency front end. The action of writing and remotely fetching data from items with such tags attached is provided by an RFID (radio frequency identification) tag. RFID tags are made of a silicon microchip and an antenna. This antenna acts as a power supply to the tag and sets up communication with a reading device.97,98 For the production of economical RFID tags, the printing process generally includes direct inkjet printing on plastic and paper substrates using metal NP inks.
As the resistivity of the antenna is very low, because of the dependency of the read distance upon the antenna conductivity, silver and copper nano particulate inks are preferable. Many researchers report appropriate processes for antenna printing with the use of such inks.97–102 However, as has been already stated above, metallic nano inks are hardly used in this field, because of the huge price of silver, which is predominantly a commercially available material; instead, graphene-based RFID antennas are coming into the limelight.103
In today's era of technology, the application area of RFID is getting wider day-by-day due to its low sheet resistance, tunability and proper impedance matching between the load and source. RFID uses signals in the radio frequency range for automated detection of objects. RFID tags are applied widely in technologically advanced sectors of electronic toll collection, asset detection, manual fruit harvesting [rfid5] and many others applications. In an RFID system the reader acts as the interrogator and the tag basically acts as a transponder. A passive tag is constructed of an antenna and an application specific integrated circuit (ASIC) known as a chip. Passive ultra-high frequency (UHF) RFID systems are elucidated as long-range systems because their read range is longer than 1 meter. The different operating UHF centre frequencies are 866 MHz (Europe), 915 MHz (America), and 950 MHz (Asia and Australia).104
As per the different frequency of operation, there are specific physical principles involved. This results in variation in operation with respect to the following parameters – reading range, tag positioning, unit cost and susceptibility to the environment, as shown in Table 1.
Table 1 Usage frequency based classification of RFID technology105




Classification name
Range
Coding capacity
Confidentiality type
Access type
Positioning
Susceptibility
Tag cost




LF, HF
<1 m
Some kbits
High
Read/write
Polarization independent
Metal at 13.56 MHz
>0.4 euros


UHF, SHF
1–100 m
Some kbits
Low
Read/write
Polarization dependent
Metal and liquids
>0.1 euros


UWB
<60 m
Some bits
Good
Read/write
Polarization dependent
Metal and liquids
>0.3 euros


Chip less
<1 m
256 bits
None
Read/write
Polarization dependent
Metal and liquids
>0.005 euros




UHF RFID tag antenna design and measurement
The tag antenna is a leading element that directly manipulates the reading range in a verbatim manner as the activation power of the chips. The salient parameters to assess while designing the antenna of an RFID tag are:
– The efficiency.
– The radiation pattern.
– The matching.
– The disparity in the radar cross-section (RCS) between the two impedance states (delta RCS).
The main components by virtue of which an entire RFID system works are the RFID reader antenna, RFID tags, signal processing, user interface, etc. The Friis free space formula in eqn (1) gives an approximation of the reading range r of an RFID system – (1)where λ denotes the wavelength,

P
t denotes the transmitted power from the reader antenna,

G
t refers to the gain of the reader antenna,

G
r refers to the gain of the tag antenna,

P
th refers to the threshold power of activation of the RFID chips,
and τ is defined as the matching factor, which describes the conjugate impedance matching between the tag antenna and IC chip. The impedance matching factor τ is given as: (2)where Zc = Rc + jXc is the impedance of the chip and Za = Ra + jXa is the tag antenna impedance. Fig. 4 shows the equivalent circuit of an RFID tag.
 Fig. 4  Equivalent circuit of an RFID tag. 
The impedance matching factor τ in eqn (2) ranges between 0 and 1. For the condition Rc = Ra and Xc = Xa, then τ = 1, and the best impedance matching for maximum power transmission is achieved when conjugate impedance matching of the IC chip and the RFID tag happens. A high matching factor and high gain are accomplished by tuning the structural parameters of the tag during the design process. Fig. 5 shows the qualitative performance of the antenna impedance, chip impedance, and read range as functions of frequency for an archetypal RFID tag. The frequency at which the peak range occurs is designated as the resonance frequency. The frequency band in which the tag furnishes an allowable minimum reading range is defined as the range bandwidth. Tag resonance occurs for the best impedance match between the chip and antenna, i.e. for a matching factor value τ = 1, and the tag offers the best performance.
 Fig. 5  Frequency dependence of the antenna frequency, chip frequency and range.106 
It is concluded from eqn (1) that the reading range is formulated by the algebraic product of the reader antenna gain (Gt) and its input power (Pt). This limit is defined as the equivalent isotopically radiated power and the mathematical expression is given as EIRP = PtGt(3)The typical limit of the EIRP is up to 3.3 W. However, the tag antenna gain Gr and sensitivity of the RFID chip Pth are also equally important to be considered for the reading range. The RFID tag design with given chips and under EIRP regulations is equivalent to design of a structure which has both high gain and a high impedance matching factor at the required frequency band under the size requirement.
The controlled environment of an anechoic chamber as shown in Fig. 6 is best for the measurement of the tag read range.
 Fig. 6  Anechoic chamber used for RFID tag range measurements.106 
The diagram in Fig. 6 is of a typical anechoic chamber in which the tag is positioned at an invariable distance d from the reader antenna. The distance must necessarily be chosen in such a manner that the tag will be in the far field and will respond simultaneously. The least amount of power required to set up the conveyance with the tag Pmin is logged at each frequency. The tag necessarily needs to be calibrated to eliminate multipath. Hence, the tag range for any EIRP can be found from modification of eqn (1) and is shown in eqn (4) as (4)where.

L stands for the loss of the connecting cable,

G
t is the gain of the transmitting antenna and.

d measures the distance to the tag.
Methods for conjugate impedance matching
It has been described that the received power at the chip level is the foremost indispensable criterion to be considered while defining the reading range. Just a sample amount of energy transmission to the chip also necessarily needs to be achieved. Hence, the matching muddles between the chip and the antenna are to be addressed very carefully. As discussed earlier, complex conjugate matching is performed to optimize the energy shifting between the antenna within the tag and the chip, which in this case acts as the load. It is observed in complex conjugate matching that the chip causes the dissipation of half of the energy. The antenna resistance dissipates the rest. The antenna resistance is made of two components:
i. a radiation resistance and.
ii. a resistance representing the losses in the antenna (Joule loss and dielectric loss).
In case of cheap and economic devices, it is difficult to make use of extraneous matching networks incorporating lumped components. Accordingly, it is essential to embed the matching mechanisms within the tag's antenna formation. Most of the sundry feeding approaches that are espoused for the tuning of the antenna are amended versions of the well-known.
i. T-match.
ii. proximity coupling to a small loop and.
iii. comprehension of structured slots.
The configuration is considered to be useful if it is possible to tune the resistance and reactance completely independent while adjusting the geometrical parameters of the tag. Hence some matching methodologies have been analysed and juxtaposed in this review. For better coherence, the overall size is not given consideration. Instead, the maximum size of the antenna is allotted at half a wavelength. But this could be eventually not feasible for practical applications. We have reviewed miniaturization techniques afterwards. The matching capabilities of the feeding have been a bridged with the discussion of impedance charts, where the input resistance and reactance are a function of alteration of apposite geometrical parameters. Such a matching methodology is more limber, owing to the nature of the iso-line plots for resistance and reactance being mutually parallel.
Some non-commercial examples have been taken into account for the purpose of illustrating the basic matching schemes.
T-Match

Fig. 7 shows the input impedance variation of a (planar) dipole of length l when a centred short-circuit stub is brought in. A detailed explanation of the same is given in an earlier book,107 and in a newer one.108 A connection is established between the antenna source and a second dipole having a length a < l. The distance between the two dipoles, b, is kept very short. The size of the transverse sections of the two main radiators regulates the electric current distribution along them. It has been shown in ref. 107 and 108 that the magnitude of the impedance at the source point is given by eqn (5), (5)where.
 Fig. 7  T-Match configuration for planar dipoles and the equivalent circuit.107,108 

Z
t = jZo tan kα/2 refers to the input impedance of the short-circuit stub caused by the T-match conductors and part of the dipole;

 refers to the characteristic impedance of the two-conductor transmission line with spacing b;

Z
A is defined as the dipole impedance at its centre while the T-match connection is not present;

r
e = 0.25 w and  give the measurement of the equivalent radii of the dipole and the matching stub, supposed to be planar traces; and.

 corresponds to the current division factor between the two conductors.
Adjustment is done for the geometrical parameters a, b and the trace width w′ in order to make a match with the magnitude of the complex chip impedance, Zchip. The geometrical parameters a, b, and the trace width, w′, can be adjusted to match the complex chip impedance, Zchip. The T-match acts as an impedance transformer (Fig. 7). It is observed that the inductive nature of the input impedance at the T-match port is dominant for half-wavelength dipoles. On the other hand, smaller dipoles’ total input impedance shows both an inductive as well as a capacitive nature. For example, in Fig. 8, a matching chart is shown for the T-match layout for l = λ/2, w = λ/100, and Za = 75 Ω and the ratio of the dipoles' cross sections has been kept as w/w' = 3. Notably, stub sizes a and b both take part in governing the input resistance and inductance, although with different principles. From our previous knowledge, we derive that the cross-sectional area of the second conductor has remarkable governance of the resulting antenna impedance. From eqn (5), it can be easily corroborated that the impedance values are directly proportional to the w/w′ ratio. Also, the isoline plot for the resistance and reactance results in almost vertical and mutually parallel lines (stringently regulated by the size of b), which in turn results in a shrunken matching celerity. Sometimes, a bit of shape alteration of the main radiator needs to be done necessarily because of impedance mismatch to the real microchip transmitter. This is caused due to cases where small magnitudes of a and b give larger values of input resistance.
 Fig. 8  Matching chart for T-match in Fig. 4.107 
Hence, it can be concluded that a single T-match setup might be insufficient for matching high-impedance-phase-angle microchips. In alike cases, incorporation of multiple T-match stages and in turn further degrees of freedom needs to be added. A compact structure is attained by embedding the T-match geometry within the main radiator, as shown in Fig. 9.
 Fig. 9  An example of an embedded T-match feed.108 
Inductively coupled loops
There are cases where small inductively coupled loops109 are used as a source for the radiating dipole. They are placed in the close vicinity of the radiating body (Fig. 10). The terminals of the small loop are directly connected to the microchip. Such a typical form of layout performs addition of an equivalent inductance to the antenna. The vigour of the coupling, and consequently of the added reactance, is governed by two factors –
 Fig. 10  Equivalent circuit of an inductively coupled loop.107,111 
i. the separation between the loop and the radiating body, and.
ii. the shape factor of the loop.
The inductive coupling model is represented by a transformer, and the equivalent input impedance if observed from the loop's terminals is given by (6)where Zloop= j2πLloop is the impedance of the loop. The total input reactance is a function of only the loop inductance, Lloop, irrespective of whether the dipole is or isn’t at resonance. But, on the other hand, the resistance is allied to the mutual inductance M of the transformer. Hence, the mathematical expressions are given as: (7)For a typical case, where the length of the radiating body is assumed to be infinite, the loop's inductance (Lloop) and the mutual coupling (M) can be formulated in the matter of the size of the loop and the interspacing from the dipole through analytical formulas.110 It is notable that the mutual coupling and hence the total input resistance are functions of the loop–dipole gap and the shape of the loop. But, however, the loop's aspect ratio solemnly governs the inductance Lloop.
For a distinct case of a resonant dipole and a square loop (a = b), the matching chart of a loop driven dipole is shown in Fig. 11. The method of moments111 has been used to compute the chart. From eqn (3) it is evident that the loop–dipole distance has no effect on the input reactance, and the corresponding isolines are vertical. In the case of a fixed loop size, the resistance is inversely proportional to the loop–dipole distance – an increment in the loop–dipole distance results in reduction of the resistance. Therefore, at the very initial stage of the design procedure, in order to cancel the chip's capacitive reactance, the interspacing between the loop and the dipole should be chosen effectively and carefully to match the chip's resistance. This design configuration is suitable for microchips with high impedance phase angles.
 Fig. 11  Matching chart of a square loop fed resonant dipole.108,110 
Nested slot
An entirely different matching strategy has to be employed for tags which are fabricated with colossal planar dipoles or suspended patches.112,113 There is a probability that this strategy employs a nested slot which also has a proper shape (Fig. 12). The tags may be attached onto a high-permittivity substrate, for example the human body. This feeding method is sufficiently adept at complex impedance matching, even in that case also. Fig. 13 shows a typical example. A tooth or discontinuity in the slot-line impedance transformer acts as an energy storage and radiation system. As the number of teeth is increased, consequently it incorporates additional degrees of freedom. This enhances the likelihood of better miniaturization of tags and additionally gaining features like multi-band operation.114 The slot sizes and patch surfaces may be juxtaposed with an intention of comparison. Hence, the radiation features connect to both the objects. The patch side, l, plays the prime role in determining the maximum antenna gain. But, at the same time, modification of the dimensions a and b and the slot's aspect ratio brings changes in the impedance tuning. The structure and dimensions of the internal slot determine the action of the antenna.
 Fig. 12  Shape and measurement of a nested shaped slot.112 
 Fig. 13  Suitable tag size to be attached onto a human body.113 
i. as an H slot,
ii. as a broadband dipole, or.
iii. as a doubly folded dipole.
A representative of RLC behaviour containing sharp reactance apexes can be observed provided the slot width, b, must assume a far lesser value in comparison to the external side, l. As and when the magnitude of the slot width is enhanced, the resonance shifts in the direction of dc, with a reduction in the reactance crest.
In ref. 112 it has been stated that the input reactance varies slowly and good tuning of the tag within a wide band can be retained when the side of the antenna and the slot's width are more or less equal. With the increment in the sizes of a and b (2b ≈ a ≈ 1) till the surface of the entire patch is almost completely filled, a folded-dipole mode is accomplished. Fig. 14 illustrates the matching chart of the nested-slot suspended patch with the gradual variation of the aspect quotient of H slot{a,b}. It can be figured out that the reactance almost linearly varies with the values of both a and b. But, on the other hand, the resistance is mostly dependent on the slot's width, b, and not on a. The impedance iso-lines are as if producing a close to orthogonal grid. Hence, broad resistance dynamics is acquired for any particular value of the reactance, along with a high degree of matching competence.
 Fig. 14  Matching chart for a nested slot suspended patch.111–114 
Method of size reduction
There are applications where UHF RFID tags need to be fastened to small objects with an objective of inventory tracking. There will be remarkable deterioration of the radiation gain and efficiency because of the compensation between the antenna geometry and the performance. Hence, it has become a prime concern for RFID researchers to diminish and miniaturize the size of the tag antenna in a mode such that there is no degradation in performance.
Among many, meandering and inverted-F structures are two successfully and extensively utilized strategies in design of RFID tags. In this review we have illustrated the above two strategies.
The common feature of the two is the requirement of one or even more than one overlap of the radiating body, with the difference lying in the additional demand of a enough number of experimental evidence of the ground plane of the inverted-F structure. Although designing simple tag layouts can be gained utilizing matching charts and geometries having a large number of parameters, it is remarkable that the requirement of non-deterministic optimization tools which follow genetic algorithms is still prevailing.115
The meandering line's structure is a very popular method of miniaturization of the antennas. But two major drawbacks of this strategy are.
i. it can only accomplish low gain and.
ii. attain a narrow bandwidth.
On the contrary, the inverted-F structure possesses high gain, but the additional ground plane increases the manufacturing perplexities. As a result, it is not felicitous for production in large quantity.116
Meandering
As proposed by ref. 117, if the limbs of a dipole antenna can be folded along a meandered path as shown in Fig. 15, a wire configuration with capacitive reactance and inductive reactance as distributed parameters is produced. This particular type of configuration affects the antenna's input impedance. It is found that there is a phase reversal among the currents through the adjacent horizontal segments of meander-line antennas (MLA). This observation is present only up to the first antenna resonance. These transmission-line currents do not have any extraordinary offering to the radiated power. Instead, they eventually incur power losses. In the meandering process, much lower frequencies result in resonances, in comparison to straight dipoles of same height, at the cost of a narrow bandwidth and low gain.
 Fig. 15  Geometry of a meander-line antenna.117 
The meanders can be of any shape. In order to match distinct impedance, the meanders may be either periodic, or discretely optimized. To solve this impetus, to produce the requisite inductive reactance a wire (or strip) conductor having a length greater than half a wavelength is placed in a nutshell in much less space. There are cases, shown in Fig. 16, when the antenna height is reduced down to fractions of a wavelength. In this case, the genetic algorithm procedure117 has been chosen in order to determine the meander line shape.
 Fig. 16  Meander-line antenna with the size reduced to a fraction of a wavelength.117 
The main objective behind this is to enhance the realized gain, τGtag, till it attains a maximum value, keeping the tag size fixed within a square of λ/5 × λ/5. Generally, the linear conductor length for an optimized meander-line antenna is greater than that of half a wavelength. Hence, the maximum value of the gain of the tag is almost equal to a regular resonant dipole even if compatible size trimming prevails.
Inverted-F configuration
The inverted-L structure is produced by creasing a portion of the wire parallel to the ground. Such a structure has capacitive dominant reactance and a low resistance. Another motive of creating a similar structure is to deduct the size of the vertical wire monopole. Attachment of a shorting pin is done to serve two purposes – one is providing tuning freedom and the other is to provide an F-type (inverted F antenna, IFA) configuration, as described in Fig. 17. This can be also perceived as a monopole variety of the T-match, where folds are made in the radiating body with an aspiration of cutting down the space occupied. In such an inverted structure, the conductors that are orthogonal to the ground plane mainly are the radiating elements. The folded conductor along with its replica gives rise to a transmission-line current mode. Also, it produces power dissipation and an infinitesimally small amount of radiation. Hence, it is needless to state that this category of geometry does not evince higher efficiency. The antenna bandwidth can be bettered by the use of large strips containing wires, defined as the planar inverted-F antenna, PlFA. The residence of a ground plane is advantageous for being tagged over an object that has a high conductance value, and also for anchoring auxiliary electronics and sensors. By adding extra conductors and keeping orthogonal to the ground, multi-band tags can be permitted. Another form of structure in which the inverted-F and the ground plane are kept in one single layer only is called the co-planar geometry. Simplification of the fabrication process is the main objective of such an arrangement besides microchip connection. In alike cases, the finally evolving geometry is like an asymmetric dipole, in which the arms correspond to the inverted F structure and the ground plane. This sort of dipole has a size of about a quarter of a wavelength. With the variation of the geometrical parameters {a, b, d}, it is possible to obtain a spacious spectrum of composite input impedances. Fig. 18 illustrates that the increment of the input inductive reactance with both b and d is monotonical in nature. On the contrary, the resistance value elevates with d, while it undergoes alteration with respect to b around the value observed to be the local minimum. Therefore, for a given input impedance two separate useful layouts are achievable. The conductors which are parallel to the ground in both the layout schemes differ in their length. The segment of the antenna which is folded goes away from that ground plane. As a result, the ‘a’ value of the radiating conductor increases, and in turn the antenna becomes more inductive. The matching dynamics of this and the nested-slot suspended-patch configuration might be comparable.
 Fig. 17  Shorting pin attached to the folded antenna giving an inverted-F structure.118 
 Fig. 18  Variation of the input inductive reactance and resistance.118 
Bandwidth issues
Though antenna miniaturization reduces the size of the tag to be fitted even in very small objects that need to be identified and tracked, a reduction in bandwidth is there, which is a matter of concern among RFID researchers and is being addressed cautiously. It is an easy task to detune the tag impedance by linking with the objects to be tagged, as well as by inter linkage with the characteristic structure. As a result of this, the reading range degrades significantly.
The realized gain becomes the most useful parameter in defining the RFID tag bandwidth, not the return loss as in the case of 50 Ω-matched antennas. In fact, the tag bandwidth is a function of the application specific required minimum reading range. Once firmed by the power limitations, this can therefore be connected to the system parameter τGtag. The stability of the realized gain instead of frequency indeed gives the range-width of the reader–tag system.
In order to generalize the bandwidth definition to be independent of the specific and distinctive application, a precisely matched isotropic antenna ([τGtag]0 = 1) is elected as a base. Thetag's band then corresponds to the frequency range, [fmin, fmax], where the following condition holds firmly: [τGtag](f) = 0.5[τGtag]0(fc)(8)where fc is defined as the middle-band frequency. With this condition taken into consideration, the activation range falls to not greater than 70% of the activation range of the base antenna. This definition allows the comparative analysis of the features of several tags differing in transmitter power and the microchip sensing capability.
Antenna fabrication
It has been more than 30 years since the application of RFID has been started, and the area of application has spread so rapidly that almost in every purpose of identification and tracking RFID is being used.119 Etching is the conventional method of tag fabrication. But this traditional way involves huge amounts of chemicals and energy and produces waste material. Hence the method is considered to be wasteful as well as costly,120 due to the involvement of expensive raw materials and production lines. Thus, researchers have come up with an idea of printing silver nanoparticle based conductive ink with low-cost mass production screen printing. But owing to the cost effective silver ink in comparison to metal etching tags even the production line is simpler and cheaper.121
Nowadays, in retail supply chains, keeping track of objects from shipment to delivery is necessary. Thus, to enhance security and avoid theft RFID is already well established. If we compare a barcode system to an RFID system, among many, some notable advantages of the RFID system can be listed:
i. better capability of identification,
ii. faster identification speed,
iii. longer range,
iv. semipermanent durability, and.
v. flexibility.122
Hence for these many reasons logistics companies, distribution markets, and other companies for identification and tracking purposes are gradually shifting towards the application of RFID from the existing barcode system. This gives better efficiency, reliability speed and accuracy. But the prime hindrance in making the transformation is the high cost of RFID systems. Hence it is inevitable to lower the cost of RFID tags in order to make mass production feasible and make them affordable to everyone. However, printed graphene seems to be a good alternative to metal etching, because it is not only cheaper but also does not have a bad impact on the environment.
Etching
Namely, the existing two types of etching process are as follows:
i. wet etching and.
ii. dry etching.
The names of the processes give an idea of the method adopted for the corresponding process. For example, in wet etching liquid chemicals technically termed as etchants are used to abolish metallic substrates. The pattern which is needed on the substrate is possible to shield. A photoresist mask does the job. The process of wet etching is tri-step:
1. the etchant is applied on to the surface;
2. a reaction happens between the etchant and the material to be taken out; and.
3. the by-products formed due to the reaction diffuse from the surface, which take part in the reaction.
Again, going by the name helps to have an idea of the basic methodology adopted for the process. In the dry etching process, no chemical liquid or etchants are used. Instead, it can be performed using any of the three following methods:
1. by the use of chemically reactive gases or plasma;
2. by physical removal of the material, mainly adopting momentum transfer; or.
3. by the fusion of the above two.123
The definition of the etch rate is portrayed as the rate of material removal. The unit of the etch rate is given as μm min−1. The etch selectivity is said to be the potential of the reactive chemical to etch away the required material only, keeping all other materials as is.124
Wet and dry etching have application specific characteristics. Wet etching is an isotropic, faster, simple, cheap and economic process. On the other hand, dry etching is an anisotropic process. The advantage of using wet etching is that it has a large etching rate and a good selectiveness property for most of the materials used. To discuss the disadvantages, it is insufficient for describing attributes which are less than 1 μm and may create chemical hazards. In the wet etching method, the required supplies are listed below:
• the solvent/development chemical,
• the acid/etchant,
• the substrate,
• a transparency sheet,
• the photoresist varnish,
• a heating chamber, and.
• an ultraviolet (UV) machine.
Dry etching has the ability to define traits smaller than 100 nm, but with a relatively high cost. Implementation of dry etching is comparatively tough. Moreover, it offers poor etching selectivity, and also can cause radiation damage.125 Hence, as stated above, metal etching is not congruous to use for production of tags in large quantities due to its wasteful and hazardous nature. In etching, a very small fraction of the raw materials is used and most of the other materials are either recycled or just get wasted, leading to a high production cost of the process. Additionally, the cleaning of the highly reactive materials should also be taken care of, to avoid any sort of damage. Hence, in short, etching is undoubtedly not an environment friendly procedure. Etching is useful on substrates that have tolerance towards chemical baths.
Printing
While etching is a subtractive process, printing is an additive process. In printing, it is possible to imprint designs onto certain areas according to the requirement. In the imprint process a stencil is cut out and a layer of conductive material is applied. Clothing and PCBs have well established application of printing. Because of good flexibility printing can be done to almost any type of material and surface. Researchers claim that printing has huge potential to be used in RFID antenna fabrication. Screen printing is better than the conventional etching method of fabrication from various aspects. Screen printing is advantageous in stability, flexibility, reliability and cost-effectiveness. But, above all results shows a very low impact on the environment than the earlier.126 In the process of printing, it is possible to fabricate complex and minute detailing, although conductivity is maintained throughout the design. In printing, the coating of conductive ink can be reduced, in turn reducing the amount of raw material required. Hence, it is clear that the production cost is very low and it offers the best cost per development ratio, making it affordable for almost everyone who needs it. The substrate or material used in printing can be anything like plastic, metal and paper as per the requirement. The commonly available printing techniques are –
i. flexography,
ii. screen printing,
iii. inkjet and.
iv. gravure.
The resolution of screen printing is limited to a maximum 50 lines per centimeter.127 Although conductive inks cause less decrease in antenna gain than pure metals, i.e. copper or aluminium, they affect the input impedance and generate higher resistivity. But it is to be noted that these variations barely affect the read ranges of the tag antenna.128 The preservation process of the conductive ink using a heating method is known as curing. Curing is adopted in order to keep the conductive inks imprinted onto the surface. The mechanism of the curing process basically involves shrinking of polymers through heating the conductive ink and making bonds with vicinal polymers such that a conducting path is formed throughout. While fabricating RFID tags, two important parameters related to curing must necessarily be considered. One is the curing temperature and the other is the curing time.128 As mentioned before, there are other methods available for printing. Among all, screen printing is the most economical and less costly alternative for laboratory-level prototyping. In the screen printing process of RFID tag fabrication, the required supplies are:
i. a heating chamber,
ii. conductive ink,
iii. a substrate, and.
iv. a screen-printing machine.
A comparative study between aluminium etching and graphene printing is illustrated in Table 2.
Table 2 Comparative study between aluminium etching and graphene printing adopted for fabrication of RFID tag antenna fabrication119–128




Method adopted for fabrication
Advantages
Disadvantages




Aluminium etching
High fabrication resolution can be achieved easily.
Wasteful process;




high cost or expensive;




limited substrate selection;




high impact on the environment.






Graphene printing
Economic;
Comparatively low resolution compared to etching.


no substrate selection limitation;




environment friendly;




high flexibility;




much less wastage of material.






Prototype RFID tag fabrication example

Fig. 19 shows two designs of RFID tags which are made in order to operate at two different frequencies; i.e. 886 MHz and 915 MHz. The HFSS software package129 has been used in the design process. Paper, PET, fabric and a thin transparent film have been used as different substrates for the fabrication of each design. Table 3 shows different data of the fabricated tags. The operational facet of the two tags has been measured using a VoyanticTagformance reader.130 The original final tag was made using copper as a conducting material and as a substrate PET was used. This was one of the reason for longest reading range of this design. However, from Table 1 it can be concluded that only PET and the thin film have been used with etching because of their tolerance with the chemical bath.
 Fig. 19  (left) RFID tag designed to operate at 886 MHz128–130 and (right) RFID tag designed to operate at 915 MHz128–130 (all dimensions are in mm). 
Table 3 Different data of fabricated tags119–130




Serial no. of tags
Substrate used
Conductive material
Fabrication process adopted
Read range (meter)
Operating frequency (MHz)




1
PET
Copper
Etching
12.5
886


2
Thin film
Silver ink
Screen printing
9.5
886


3
Paper
Silver ink
Screen printing
9
886


4
Fabric
Silver ink
Screen printing
11.2
886


5
Thin film
Aluminium
Etching
9
886


6
Fabric
Silver ink
Screen printing
7
915


7
Thin film
Silver ink
Screen printing
6
915




Incorporation of graphene

Graphene based conductive ink. 
For the past few years, printed electronics has achieved quick development by virtue of its economical mass production ability. Hence, engaging a detailed, analytical and research-based study for enlarging the applications of printed electronics is necessary. Presently some of the applications include biomedical and biochemical sensors, PCBs, wearable electronics, flexible displays, smart labels etc.131 Printed electronics technology nowadays is predominantly applied in radio frequency identification (RFID) tag-antenna set-up. Achieving flexibility is of utmost importance for the commercialized application of these devices. Hence the use of flexible substrates for the production of such devices gives worth to use flexibility.132 Conductive-ink based screen-printing can imprint patterned structures in huge amounts. This is the reason screen printing is a chosen as the main alternative in printed electronic circuits and antennas.133 In this technique, conductive inks are transferred onto the designed patterns of the substrate through a mesh in order to form printed electronics. The available and popular conductive inks are generally divided into three types:
i. conductive polymers,
ii. noble metals, and
iii. carbon nanomaterials.
Silver nanoparticles have been thoroughly used as a conductive material for years due to two advantages:
i. the conductivity of silver is very high and
ii. its conductance does not decline significantly owing to oxidation. Rather, silver oxide is itself a good conducting material.
But the high cost of silver creates hindrances in the application of silver nanomaterials as conductive inks for mass production purposes.134 Therefore, while searching for other suitable conductive materials for ink and at the same time reducing cost, a proposal was given in favour of copper and aluminium. But copper and aluminium based conductive inks tend to get oxidized quickly. Moreover, unlike silver oxide, these oxides are non-conductive in nature. Hence the conductivity, performance and overall efficiency of the final product are reduced remarkably.135 Although it is possible to prevent oxidation by coating other materials on the surface to protect it from the air and humidity, this again incurs extra cost for both manufacturing and maintenance.136 So, the objective of cost reduction may not be achieved. Initially conductive polymers were assumed to be a good option for conductive ink materials. But later, studies found that owing to the lower conductivity and chemical and thermal instability they can be hardly used for RF applications.132 Carbon nanomaterials, i.e. carbon nanotubes, have a very low inherent resistivity of 10−8 Ω m and are intended to oxidise less even at high temperature.137 But the high sheet resistance of these having a value greater than 50 Ω sq−1 makes them a bad choice for RF applications. The high sheet resistance of printed antenna pattern makes the difficulty for radiation.138
To overcome all these difficulties and find a good alternative to silver, studies on graphene showed some promising outcomes. The high conductance of graphene drew attention and the idea of graphene based conductive ink has been developed. Graphene is an allotrope of carbon. Graphene atoms are single layered unlike junctions of carbon nanotubes and are arranged in a 2-D honeycomb lattice. Such an arrangement of atoms in graphene provides high resistance against oxidation and this along with high conductivity makes graphene a choice as a material of conductive ink. Experiments and research evaluate the conductivity of graphene as very high and almost independent of frequency in the microwave region.139–147 Graphene is regarded as a “wonder material” due to its unique characteristics. Graphene based conductive ink is one among the foremost commercial products which have been made from this wonder material. Here “graphene based” means that graphene flakes have been utilized as the base material to produce the ink without adding any binder material. The main purpose of adding binder materials in conductive inks is to improve the conductivity of the final product. But it has to be treated at a high temperature of 250 °C, called annealing. Due to this high temperature annealing process, substrate materials such as plastic or paper get destroyed. Therefore, the choice of substrate materials becomes limited. Hence, graphene based conductive inks which are binder-free are advantageous concerning low temperature processing but have the disadvantage of low conductivity, which is subject to improvement.
To achieve an enhancement in the conductivity of binder-free materials, the rolling compression method is adopted. This requires no high temperature annealing in the fabrication process. Moreover, it can be used in industrial-level screen printing. The conductance of the prototype can be increased more than 4 times compared to that of pure graphene. The conductivity is significantly improved and is enough for RF application. The rolling compression method alleviates the limitation of substrate material choice and the production cost significantly reduces. Thus binder-free graphene-based ink and screen printing are a perfect duo for high-throughput and mass production of low-cost RFID tag antennas.148 It is speculated that graphene screen printed RFID tags possess the potential of making a revolution in the RFID industry.
Silver or aluminium based inks enhance the cost of the tags and the system severally. It has a slim profit margin. Moreover, any sort of development to increase the conductivity will further increase the cost. Because of these many disadvantages it became indispensable to search for a lower cost material which will also achieve the conductivity requirement. Thus, the innovation of screen-printed graphene technology in combination with binder-free graphene and the rolling compression method to increase the conductivity happened.148,149Fig. 20 shows the process of fabrication. According to Fig. 21(a) some patterns were printed on paper followed by compression. The adhesive property and the high flexibility of the printed graphene allow it to stay on paper as shown in Fig. 21(b) and make printed graphene a leading alternative in RFID, EMI shielding, wearable communications etc. Due to the superior flexibility the products are easy to bend and attach to any required object surface. Besides, graphene being an environment friendly material, the products are disposable. Anti-tampering tags, which, if tampered with once, the reader will notice, are made by this.
 Fig. 20  Step-by-step fabrication of graphene printed RFID tags. 
 Fig. 21  Printed graphene laminated on paper and its flexibility.140–144 


Printed graphene chip-less RFID. 
RFID tags, also known as transponders, comprise three parts:
i. an antenna,
ii. an integrated circuit (IC) chip and
iii. the substrate.
Depending on the power source, tags can either be active, passive or semi-passive. In passive tags, the antenna receives then reflects the signal back to the reader. The IC chip gets power supplied from the signal transmitted by the RFID reader. An IC is a small microprocessor which has thousands of transistors. These ICs are responsible for the tags operating at a single frequency and provide re-programmability. Moreover, the cost involved to assemble and implement those chips onto the tag antenna, along with transportation costs, makes the process as a whole an expensive one. Statistics show that production of transponder inlay antennas is relatively cheaper than IC chips. ICs are very small in size. To connect these to the antenna requires very precise and sophisticated equipment. This in turn increases the cost of assembly.150 These cost issues led researchers to generate and implement a thought of developing RFID tags without any chip in order to eradicate complexity and reduce the cost.
There are applications such as small and medium business where a large ID string is not necessary; rather one with several data bits is enough. Also, for small business applications, cost reduction is always a primary focus. Therefore, a passive, screen printed chip-less RFID tag is the best solution in terms of both lower cost and higher reliability. Chip-less RFID tags having good flexibility can be directly printed on objects or inventory items required for tracking and thus are gradually replacing the conventional IC chip-based RFID tags.151–153 But, although the cost has been reduced and the IC chip has been removed, challenges come in the design of the tag structure. The structure should be designed in a manner that it can respond well to the stored information. Therefore, to work with few IDs, frequency selective surface periodic arrays are used in RFID tag design and this is combined with screen printed graphene technology to extract the best performance for small and medium business at the lowest possible cost.


Compact RFID reader system. 
This is an excellent invention using graphene printed RFID technology. In this system the transmitting antenna and the RFID tags both have printed graphene. A host computer is used to read the tag and the information stored in it. A compact size RFID reader is connected to the transmitting antenna. Wi-Fi signals are used to transmit information wirelessly and securely through servers. Fig. 20 shows a prototype of a Wi-Fi integrated compact RFID reader system.
In the small calculator sized compact reader system, the RF port is connected to the graphene printed antenna, acting as an RFID reader antenna. Such antennas have very low fabrication cost in comparison to the traditional ways available for fabrication. In addition, they can perform almost equivalently to those. Embedding this compact size RFID reader–tag system in transport tickets and other commercial product labels has become very much popular these days with a cost less than almost one tenth of a commercial RFID system.
According to Fig. 22, the reader antenna is basically a meandered line antenna. But this prototype is just a primitive implementation of the concept of the compact RFID reader system. Further improvement in performance and efficiency has been incorporated later.
 Fig. 22  Prototype of a Wi-Fi integrated compact RFID reader system.149,150 
The basic system architecture is shown in Fig. 23. Through an RS232 communication port, the Wi-Fi module is connected. There are two modes of operation of the Wi-Fi module:
 Fig. 23  Basic system architecture. 
i. AP mode; and
ii. STA mode.
The AP mode gives a wireless access point for other devices, allowing them to access the data. Here the access points are nothing but the Wi-Fi embedded readers. The control PC is located at the centre of the Wi-Fi coverage area to facilitate robust data transmission for all readers.
The STA mode does not engage any wireless access. But it can be connected to AP. The location of the control PC can be anywhere in the Wi-Fi coverage area. There is no requirement of cable installation in data transmission, expect for the power source of the reader. The information is transferred wirelessly via the Wi-Fi module to the host PC. Hence maintenance of the system is very simple and cost saving.

Graphene security lighting

Smart panel light integrated with an RFID reader antenna. 
The compact RFID reader system itself is a magnificent innovation in RFID technology. Application of this is even more incredible. Researchers applied this concept and module in developing graphene security lighting. This security lighting comprises a graphene light bulb panel light154,155 in combination with an RFID reader antenna and circularly polarized antennas. Graphene LEDs have been used in the panel light and the polarized antenna is integrated on the back of the light. Fig. 24 shows the prototype of the system. As the light has a dielectric board in the front along with metal on the back, the operating frequency of the antenna gets affected. Hence, the circularly polarized antenna is so designed that it can address both these factors and optimize the operating frequency as and when required. Again, due to the less vertical space at the back of the panel light, it is inescapable to make an ultra-thin antenna. Therefore, a patch antenna structure is chosen. This reader antenna is covers a wide band of frequency from 850 MHz to 950 MHz, as the RFID regulatory frequencies are concerned. The read range of this graphene based security lighting is very high, almost 10 meters. An office building environment in Sackville Street Building is where the prototype was first tested. Here, the RF port is connected to the circularly polarized graphene printed antenna. When interrogation starts, if any movement of the object having a tag attached to it happens, the system detects it and displays the tag ID on the user interface. Thus, this system is highly reliable in case of theft detection or keeping track of any valuable object of an indoor space.
 Fig. 24  Prototype of the smart panel light integrated with an RFID reader antenna.147 


Tracking system architecture. 
The system architecture of a smart panel light tracking system with wireless communications was proposed, designed and implemented as illustrated in Fig. 25. The reader module, connected to the circularly polarized reader antenna which is integrated with the light, is kept on the top of the light. A Wi-Fi enabled camera is kept on the edge of the panel light. This camera operates in power saving mode with the aim of energy saving. The camera starts recording whenever the reader detects any suspected movement or in cases of desired movement of tags in the monitoring area. The recorded footage of the camera is sent to the main frame via a Wi-Fi module.
 Fig. 25  Tracking system architecture.147 
It is quite clear from Fig. 26 that the patch antenna has been well hidden within the panel light in such a manner as if the whole tracking system can be disguised just as everyday lighting equipment. The objective of choosing a graphene LED is
 Fig. 26  RFID reader antenna integrated smart panel light.146,147 
i. the graphene LED light has lower energy emission,
ii. the manufacturing cost is much less,154
iii. graphene LEDs have a comparatively longer lifetime, and
iv. graphene is an environment-friendly material.156
One of the very important features of this security lighting system is that it is concealed and hidden. Also, it being wireless in structure it is difficult to destroy this physically. Most of the components of this system are made of flexible and cheaper graphene on pieces of paper. Hence the system is very economical and affordable for any amount of budget, i.e. from large industries to household security.

Conclusion
This review unfolds the possibility for low cost RFID sensors by the staggering material graphene. The basic and electromagnetic properties of monolayer graphene, printed graphene and graphene oxide (GO) are investigated and applied to fabricate 2D material frequency tunable antennas, RFID antennas, humidity sensing applications and wireless communication systems. RF attenuator transmission lines are designed by tunable conductivity of monolayer graphene under different voltages. The variable conductivity of graphene biased by an external voltage results in its tunability. The working frequency of the antenna can be altered by applying graphene switches which are responsible for varying the effective length of the antennas. A single frequency reconfigurable dipole antenna is developed and gradually a dual frequency reconfigurable antenna is introduced.
Different experiments and full electromagnetic wave simulations have been applied to analyse the potential for printed graphene applications and the possibility to merge with other 2D materials such as GO. It is evident that the electrical permittivity of GO in GHz enhances with increasing water uptake from humidity. An RFID humidity sensor is developed by tagging a printed graphene RFID tag and coated GO layer. The backscattered phase from the reflection of the RFID sensor can be measured and analysed by a commercial RFID reader to retrieve the surrounding humidity information.
The tagging of graphene and other 2D materials for health, environment sensing or tunable RF devices has ample scope to be further investigated. The RFID enabled sensing idea could be more exclusively used in monitoring applications. Printed graphene NFC coil antennas have a huge application. More research is needed to enhance the performance, along with integration of the design with sensors. NFC could play an important role in wearable electronics due to its simplicity. There are various IC sensors such as temperature and humidity sensors that could integrate with NFC tags. More bits need to be encoded to explore the possibility in commercial applications. Printed graphene antennas and systems for RFID applications are often complicated these days. Also in terms of the performance, the resonant peak is not too convincing yet. Intense investigation is still needed here.
The low cost wireless security network decorated with printed graphene is a successful example of a communication system built based on printed graphene UHF antennas. The next challenge is to bring NFC designs and compact designs into the system. More variations of RFID applications using printed graphene can be commercially adopted for IoT applications in various aspects like smart anticounterfeiting and alarms. An ecosystem built with low cost printed graphene could occur in the near future. Printed tags and antennas can be used in ticketing services and low cost wearable electronics and can be easily disposed of after use as they are non-hazardous. The RFID application is highly helpful to resolve the current environmental problems and will be green impact on the ecosystem as well.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Project No. 81903623 and 22007086), the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (No. 2019M652586 and 2020M670083ZX), Henan science and technology key project (No. 202102310148), and Henan Medical Science and Technology Program (No. 2018020601 and SBGJ202003051).
References

          W. S. Wong and A. Salleo, Flexible Electronics: Materials and Applications, Springer, New York,  2009 Search PubMed .
J. A. Rogers, T. Someya and Y. Huang, Science, 2010, 327, 1603–1607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, 
            et al.
          , Nature, 2012, 490, 192–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yan, 
            et al.
          , Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4870–4882 RSC .
S.-H. Bae, 
            et al.
          , ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3130–3138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Blake, 
            et al.
          , Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1704–1708 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Bonaccorso, 
            et al.
          , Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 611–622 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bae, 
            et al.
          , Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 574–578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, 
            et al.
          , Science, 2009, 324, 1312–1314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Reina, 
            et al.
          , Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 30–35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. CNeto, F. Guinea and N. M. R. Peres, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2009, 81, 109 CrossRef .
M. C. Lemme, Solid State Phenom., 2010, 156, 499–509 Search PubMed .
A. K. GeimK and S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef PubMed .

          S. Y. Jun, Electronic transport of graphene devices[D],  2012 Search PubMed .
S. Ghosh, I. Calizo and D. Teweldebrhan, 
            et al.
          , Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 151911 CrossRef .

          V. F. Dorgan, Mobility and Saturation Velocity in Graphene on Silicon Dioxide[D]. University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,  2010 Search PubMed .
H. Malekpour, K. Chang, J. Chen, C. Lu, D. Nika, K. Novoselov and A. Balandin, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5155–5161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. V. Kershaw, A. S. Susha and A. L. Rogach, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3033–3087 RSC .
C. Musca, J. Antoszewski, J. Dell, L. Faraone, J. Piotrowski and Z. Nowak, J. Electron. Mater., 1998, 27, 740–746 CrossRef CAS .
S. Taojian, C. Haijuan, F. Chunjie, H. Bo, L. Weile, X. Junfeng, T. Yi, Y. Shengyi and Z. Bingsuo, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 165202 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Lhuillier, S. Keuleyan, P. Zolotavin and P. Guyot-Sionnest, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 137–141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ge, E. Lee, L. Yang, Y. Cho, M. Li, D. S. Gianola and S. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2489–2495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, W. K. Cho, B. Hussain, H. S. Kwok and C. P. Yue, SID Int. Symp. Dig. Tech. Pap., 2018, 49, 876–879 CrossRef .
I. Dursun, C. Shen, M. R. Parida, J. Pan, S. P. Sarmah, D. Priante, N. Alyami, J. Liu, M. I. Saidaminov and M. S. Alias, 
            et al.
          , ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 1150–1156 CrossRef CAS .
Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman and M. S. Strano, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Pramanick, L. B. Cadenas, D.-M. Kim, W. Lee, Y.-B. Shim, S. O. Martinez-Chapa, M. J. Madou and H. Hwang, Carbon, 2016, 107, 872–877 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Park, A. Roy, S. Beaupré, S. Cho, N. Coates, J. S. Moon, D. Moses, M. Leclerc, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 297 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Kulkarni, K. H. Schulz, T. S. Lim and M. Khan, Thin Solid Films, 1999, 345, 273–277 CrossRef .
T. Margalith, O. Buchinsky, D. A. Cohen, A. C. Abare, M. Hansen, S. P. DenBaars and L. A. Coldren, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 74, 3930–3932 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Hecht, L. Hu and G. Irvin, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1482–1513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Kim, Y. Zhao, H. Jang, S. Y. Lee, J. M. Kim, K. S. Kim, J.-H. Ahn, P. Kim, J.-Y. Choi and B. H. Hong, Nature, 2009, 457, 706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhou, H.-Y. Xiang, S. Shen, Y.-Q. Li, J.-D. Chen, H.-J. Xie, I. A. Goldthorpe, L.-S. Chen, S.-T. Lee and J.-X. Tang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 12796–12805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, S. Oida, G. S. Tulevski, S.-J. Han, J. B. Hannon, D. K. Sadana and T.-C. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2294 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wu, Z. Chen, X. Du, J. M. Logan, J. Sippel, M. Nikolou, K. Kamaras, J. R. Reynolds, D. B. Tanner and A. F. Hebard, 
            et al.
          , Science, 2004, 305, 1273–1276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-Y. Lee, S. T. Connor, Y. Cui and P. Peumans, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 689–692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Green and A. Ho-Baillie, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 822–830 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zuo, H. J. Bolink, H. Han, J. Huang, D. Cahen and L. Ding, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500324 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Science, 2013, 342, 344–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Ball, M. M. Lee, A. Hey and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1739–1743 RSC .
H. J. Snaith, Perovskites, 2013, 4, 3623–3630 CAS .
W. Ke, G. Fang, Q. Liu, L. Xiong, P. Qin, H. Tao, J. Wang, H. Lei, B. Li and J. Wan, 
            et al.
          , J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 6730–6733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhou, X. Li, M. Cai, F. Xie, Y. Wu, Z. Lan, X. Yang, Y. Qiang, A. Islam and L. Han, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700763 CrossRef .
G. Kakavelakis, T. Maksudov, D. Konios, I. Paradisanos, G. Kioseoglou, E. Stratakis and E. Kymakis, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602120 CrossRef .
O. Malinkiewicz, A. Yella, Y. H. Lee, G. M. Espallargas, M. Graetzel, M. K. Nazeeruddin and H. J. Bolink, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 8, 128 CrossRef .
A. L. Palma, L. Cinà, S. Pescetelli, A. Agresti, M. Raggio, R. Paolesse, F. Bonaccorso and A. Di Carlo, Nano Energy, 2016, 22, 349–360 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-K. Wang, M. Li, D.-X. Yuan, X.-B. Shi, H. Ma and L.-S. Liao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 9645–9651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhu, J. Ma, Z. Wang, C. Mu, Z. Fan, L. Du, Y. Bai, L. Fan, H. Yan and D. L. Phillips, 
            et al.
          , J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 3760–3763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Fang, J. Ding, N. Yuan, P. Sun, M. Lv, G. Ding and C. Zhu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 6057–6063 RSC .
C. Petridis, G. Kakavelakis and E. Kymakis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1030–1061 RSC .
K. T. Cho, G. Grancini, Y. Lee, D. Konios, S. Paek, E. Kymakis and M. K. Nazeeruddin, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 3040–3044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-C. Chung, S. Narra, E. Jokar, H.-P. Wu and E. Wei-GuangDiau, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 13957–13965 RSC .
A. Abrusci, S. D. Stranks, P. Docampo, H.-L. Yip, A. K. Y. Jen and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3124–3128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, T. Liu, L. Liu, M. Hu, Y. Yang, A. Mei and H. Han, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9165–9170 RSC .
K. Yan, Z. Wei, J. Li, H. Chen, Y. Yi, X. Zheng, X. Long, Z. Wang, J. Wang and J. Xu, 
            et al.
          , Small, 2015, 11, 2269–2274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Davaji, H. D. Cho, M. Malakoutian, J.-K. Lee, G. Panin, T. W. Kang and C. H. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 8811 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Wai Lam, D. Jason and M. M. Daniel, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2007, 70, 1325 CrossRef .
M. Tonouchi, Nat. Photonics, 2007, 1, 97 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cai, A. B. Sushkov, R. J. Suess, M. M. Jadidi, G. S. Jenkins, L. O. Nyakiti, R. L. Myers-Ward, S. Li, J. Yan and D. K. Gaskill, 
            et al.
          , Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Breusing, C. Ropers and T. Elsaesser, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 102, 086809 CrossRef PubMed .
W.-K. Tse, E. H. Hwang and S. D. Sarma, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 023128 CrossRef .
C. H. Lui, K. F. Mak, J. Shan and T. F. Heinz, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 127404 CrossRef PubMed .
N. M. Gabor, J. C. W. Song, Q. Ma, N. L. Nair, T. Taychatanapat, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, L. S. Levitov and P. Jarillo-Herrero, Science, 2011, 334, 648–652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. W. Graham, S.-F. Shi, D. C. Ralph, J. Park and P. L. McEuen, Nat. Phys., 2012, 9, 103 Search PubMed .
F. Xia, T. Mueller, R. Golizadeh-Mojarad, M. Freitag, Y.-M. Lin, J. Tsang, V. Perebeinos and P. Avouris, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1039–1044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Sizov and A. Rogalski, Prog. Quantum Electron., 2010, 34, 278–347 CrossRef .
M. H. Kim, J. Yan, R. J. Suess, T. E. Murphy, M. S. Fuhrer and H. D. Drew, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2013, 110, 247402 CrossRef PubMed .
D. K. Gramotnev and S. I. Bozhevolnyi, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 83 CrossRef CAS .
A. Vakil and N. Engheta, Science, 2011, 332, 1291–1294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Dyakonov and M. Shur, IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., 1996, 43, 380–387 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wunsch, T. Stauber, F. Sols and F. Guinea, New J. Phys., 2006, 8, 318 CrossRef .
E. H. Hwang and S. Das Sarma, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 205418 CrossRef .
M. Jablan, H. Buljan and M. Soljacic, Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 245435 CrossRef .
A. N. Grigorenko, M. Polini and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 749 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Lundeberg, Y. Gao, A. Woessner, C. Tan, P. Alonso-González, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, J. Hone, R. Hillenbrand and F. H. L. Koppens, Nat. Mater., 2016, 16, 204 CrossRef PubMed .
R. A. Innes and J. R. Sambles, Solid State Commun., 1985, 56, 493–496 CrossRef CAS .
J.-C. Weeber, K. Hassan, A. Bouhelier, G. Colas-des-Francs, J. Arocas, L. Markey and A. Dereux, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 031113 CrossRef .
L. Wu, H. Ji, Y. Guan, X. Ran, J. Ren and X. Qu, NPG Asia Mater., 2017, 9, e356 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. MortazaviZanjani, M. Holt, M. M. Sadeghi, S. Rahimi and D. Akinwande, Mater. Appl., 2017, 1, 36 Search PubMed .
M. Mehdi Pour, A. Lashkov, A. Radocea, X. Liu, T. Sun, A. Lipatov, R. A. Korlacki, M. Shekhirev, N. R. Aluru and J. W. Lyding, 
            et al.
          , Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 820 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zang, F. Zhang, C.-A. Di and D. J. M. H. Zhu, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 140–156 RSC .
Y. Zang, F. Zhang, D. Huang, X. Gao, C.-A. Di and D. J. Zhu, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 140–156 RSC .
W. Honda, S. Harada, T. Arie, S. Akita and K. Takei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 3299–3304 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jung, J. H. Kim, J. Kim, S. Choi, J. Lee, I. Park, T. Hyeon and D. H. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4825–4830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tian, Y. Shu, X.-F. Wang, M. A. Mohammad, Z. Bie, Q.-Y. Xie, C. Li, W.-T. Mi, Y. Yang and T.-L. Ren, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 8603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Takei, T. Takahashi, J. C. Ho, H. Ko, A. G. Gillies, P. W. Leu, R. S. Fearing and A. Javey, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Sun, D. H. Kim, S. S. Park, N. Y. Lee, Y. Zhang, J. H. Lee, K. Cho and J. H. Cho, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4735–4740 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Honda, S. Harada, T. Arie, S. Akita and K. Takei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 3299–3304 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Mannsfeld, B. C. Tee, R. M. Stoltenberg, C. V. H. Chen, S. Barman, B. V. Muir, A. N. Sokolov, C. Reese and Z. Bao, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 859 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Lipomi, M. Vosgueritchian, B. C. Tee, S. L. Hellstrom, J. A. Lee, C. H. Fox and Z. Bao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. S. Mohammad Haniff, S. Muhammad Hafiz, K. A. A. Wahid, Z. Endut, H. Wah Lee, D. C. S. Bien, I. Abdul Azid, M. Z. Abdullah, N. Ming Huang and S. Abdul Rahman, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 14751 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Liu, N. Liu, Y. Yue, J. Rao, F. Cheng, J. Su, Z. Liu and Y. Gao, Small, 2018, 14, 1704149 CrossRef PubMed .
S.-H. Shin, S. Ji, S. Choi, K.-H. Pyo, B. Wan An, J. Park, J. Kim, J.-Y. Kim, K.-S. Lee and S.-Y. Kwon, 
            et al.
          , Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. Nambi, S. Nyalamadugu, S. M. Wentworth and B. A. Chin, Proc. 7th World Multiconf. Systemics, Cybernetics & Informatics (SCI 2003), Orlando, FL, June 2003, 386-390.
R. S. Sangwan, R. G. Qiu and D. Jessen, IEEE Int. Conf. Networking Sensing and Control, 2005, 1070–1074 Search PubMed .

          V. Subramanian, in Inkjet-Based Micromanufacturing, ed. J. P. Korvink, P. J. Smith and D.-Y. Shin, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany,  2012, pp. 313–329 Search PubMed .
V. Subramanian, J. M. J. Fréchet, P. C. Chang, D. C. Huang, J. B. Lee, S. E. Molesa, A. R. Murphy, D. R. Redinger and S. K. Volkman, IEEE Proc., 2005, 93, 1330 CAS .
M. Grouchko, A. Kamyshny and S. Magdassi, Materials, 2010, 3, 4626 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Grouchko, A. K amyshny and S. Magdassi, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 3057 RSC .
M. L. Allen, K. Jaakkola, K. Nummila and H. Seppa, IEEE Trans. Comp. Packag. Technol., 2009, 32, 325 CAS .

          S. Magdassi, M. Grouchko and A. Kamyshny, N IP25: Intern. Conf. on Digital Printing Technologies and Digital Fabrication, Proceeding 2009, 611.
K.-Y. Shin, J.-Y. Hong and J. Jang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. V. S. Rao, P. V. Nikitin and S. F. Lam, Antenna Design for UHF RFID Tags: A Review and a Practical Application, IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., 2005, 53, 3870–3876 Search PubMed .
“Chipless RFID based on RF Encoding Particle, Realization, Coding, ReadingSystem”, Arnaud Vena, Etienne Perret, SmailTedjini, Elsevier.
K. Rao, P. Nikitin and S. Lam, Antenna design for UHF RFID tags: a review and a practical application, IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., 2005, 53(12), 3870–3876 Search PubMed .

          S. Uda and Y. Mushiake, Yagi-Uda Antenna, Tokyo, Sasaki Printing and Publishing Co.,  1954, 119-13 1 Search PubMed .

          C. A. Balanis, Antenna Theory, Analysis and Design, Second Edition, New York, John Wiley & Sons Inc.,  1997 Search PubMed .
H. W. Son and C. S. Tyo, Electron. Lett., 2005, 41, 994–996 CrossRef .

          Y. Lee, Antenna Circuit Design for RFID Applications, Microchip Technology Inc., Application Note AP7 10, 2003, available at http://wwl.microchip.com/downloads/en/AppNotes/00710c.pdf.
EM Software & Systems-S.A. (Pty) Ltd., FEKO User's Manual, Suite 5. 1, Stellenbosch, South Africa, December 2005, available at http://www.feko. Info.

          G. Marrocco, Body-Matched Antennas for Wireless Biometry, European Conference on Antennas and Propagation, Nice, France, November 2006, 795.
G. Marrocco, RFID Antennas for the UHF Remote Monitoring of Human Subjects, IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., 2007, AP-55(6), 1862–1870 Search PubMed .

          G. Marrocco and C. Calabrese, Automatic Design of Miniaturized Slot-Line RFID Antennas, Second European Conference on Antennas and Propagation (EUCAP), Edinburgh, Scotland, November 2007.
D. S. Weile and E. Michielsen, Genetic Algorithm Optimization Applied to Electromagnetics: A Review, IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., 1997, AP-45(3), 343–353 CrossRef .
G. Marrocco, The art of UHF RFID antenna design: Impedance matching and size-reduction techniques, IEEE Antennas Propag. Mag., 2008, 50, 66–79 Search PubMed .
G. Marrocco, Gain-Optimnized Self-Resonant Meander Line Antennas for RFID Applications, IEEE Antennas Wireless Propag. Lett., 2003, 2, 302–305 Search PubMed .
G. Marrocco, The art of UHF RFID antenna design: Impedance-Matching and Size Reduction Techniques, IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. Mag., 2008, 50(1), 66–79 Search PubMed .

          K. Finkenzeller, RFID handbook. Oxford, Wiley-Blackwell,  2010 Search PubMed .

          A. Syed, K. Demarest and D. D. Deavours, Effects of Antenna Material on the Performance of UHF RFID Tags, 2007 IEEE International Conference on RFID, Grapevine, TX, 2007, 57-62.

          B. Gao and M. M. F. Yuen, Optimization of silver paste printed passive UHF RFID tags, 2009 International Conference on Electronic Packaging Technology & High Density Packaging, Beijing, 2009, 512-515.
Y. Ampatzidis and S. Vougioukas, Comput. Electron. Agric., 2009, 66, 166–172 CrossRef .
“Wet Etching,” http://www.siliconfareast.com/wetetch.htm, “Dry Etching,” http://www.siliconfareast.com/dryetch.html.

          A. G. Andreou and J. Wang, “Wet Etching,” Advanced Topics in Fabrictaion and Microengineering.
“(WO/1990/013443) Etchant Solution for Photoresisit-Patterned Metal Layer,” http://www.wipo.int/pctdb/en/wo.jsp?IA=US1989005264&DISPLAY=DESC.
J. Costenoble, “Rotary screen printing: the productive solution for HF/UHF RFID labels,”, SGIA J., 2005, 7–10 Search PubMed .

          T. L. Landers, D. B. Brown, E. W. Fant, E. M. Malstrom and N. M. Schmitt, Electronics
Manufacturing Processes, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA,  1994 Search PubMed .
S. Merilampi, L. Ukkonen, L. Sydanheimo, P. Ruuskanen and M. Kivikoski, Analysis of Silver Ink Bow-Tie RFID Tag Antennas Printed on Paper Substrates, Int. J. Antennas Propag., 2007, 2007, 1–9 CrossRef .

          K. ElMahgoub, T. Elsherbeni, F. Yang, A. Elsherbeni, L. Sydänheimo and L. Ukkonen, “Logo-Antenna Based RFID Tags for Advertising Application”, 25th Annual Review of Progress in Applied Computational Electromagnetics, 801–805, 2009.
VoyanticTagformanceTMLite: http://www.voyantic.com.
S. Azoubel, S. Shemesh and S. Magdassi, Flexible electroluminescent device with inkjet-printed carbon nanotube electrodes, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 344003 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Kamyshny and S. Magdassi, Conductive Nanomaterials for Printed Electronics, Small, 2014, 10, 3515–3535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. Blayo and B. Pineaux, Printing processes and their potential for RFID printing, Proceedings of the 2005 joint conference on Smart objects and ambient intelligence innovative context-aware services: usages and technologies - sOc-EUSAI '05, 2005.

          Y. Li, D. Lu and C. Wong, Electrical conductive adhesives with nanotechnologies. New York, Springer,  2009 Search PubMed .

          R. Doering and Y. Nishi, Handbook of semiconductor manufacturing technology. Boca Raton, CRC/Taylor & Francis,  2007 Search PubMed .
J. Song, L. Wang, A. Zibart and C. Koch, Corrosion Protection of Electrically Conductive Surfaces, Metals, 2012, 2, 450–477 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hecht, L. Hu and G. Irvin, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1482–1513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hellstrom, H. Lee and Z. Bao, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1423–1430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, C. Jang, S. Xiao, M. Ishigami and M. Fuhrer, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 206–209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Hanson, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 103(6), 064302 CrossRef .
Y. Padooru, A. Yakovlev, C. Kaipa, G. Hanson, F. Medina and F. Mesa, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 11 CrossRef .
X. Huang, Z. Hu and P. Liu, AIP Adv., 2014, 4, 117103 CrossRef .
K. Pan, Y. Fan, T. Leng, J. Li, Z. Xin, J. Zhang, L. Hao, J. Gallop, K. S. Novoselov and Z. Hu, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 5197 CrossRef PubMed .
D. S. Saidina, N. Eawwiboonthanakit, M. Mariatti, S. Fontana and C. Hérold, J. Electronic Mater., 2019, 48, 3428–3450 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ding, P. He, J. Yang, C. Liu, H. Zhao and B. Derby, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2020, 53, 45 CrossRef .
P. He, J. Cao, H. Ding, C. Liu, J. Neilson, Z. Li, I. A. Kinloch and B. Derby, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11(35), 32225–32234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhang, X. Tang, J. Zhang, C. Liu, D. He and Z. P. Wu, Long read range and flexible UHF RFID tag antenna madeof high conductivity graphene-based film, INT J RF MICROW C E, 2020, 30(1), e21993 Search PubMed .
T. Leng, X. Huang, K. Chang, J. Chen, M. Abdalla and Z. Hu, Graphene Nanoflakes Printed Flexible Meandered-Line Dipole Antenna on Paper Substrate for Low-Cost RFID and Sensing Applications, IEEE Antennas Wireless Propaga. Lett., 2016, 15, 1565–1568 Search PubMed .

          K. Finkenzeller and D. Müller, RFID handbook, Chichester, Wiley,  2012 Search PubMed .
F. Costa, S. Genovesi and A. Monorchio, A Chipless RFID Based on Multiresonant High-Impedance Surfaces, IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., 2013, 61(1), 146–153 Search PubMed .
X. J. Huang, T. Leng, X. Zhang, J. Chen, K. Chang, A. Geim, K. Novoselov and Z. Hu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 203105 CrossRef .

          G. Dong, Y. Shen, H. He, J. Virkki and S. Hu, Chipless graphene tag and dual-CP reader for Internet of Things. 2017 International Applied Computational Electromagnetics Society Symposium (ACES). IEEE Xplore: 28 September 2017.

          M. Akbari, J. Virkki, L. Sydänheimo and L. Ukkonen, Towards Graphene-Based Passive UHF RFID Textile Tags: A Reliability Study. DOI: 10.1109/TDMR.2016.2582261.

          T. Leng, Printed Graphene Antennas and Systems for RFID Applications. School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering. The university of Manchester.
A. Scidà, S. Haque, E. Treossi, A. Robinson, S. Smerzi, S. Ravesi, S. Borini and V. Palermo, Mater. Today, 2018, 21, 223–230 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, G. Yun Tian, A. M. J. Marindra, A. Imam Sunny and A. B. Zhao, Sensors, 2017, 17, 265 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) sp2 and p orbitals of carbon atoms in graphene.12 (b) Left: Band structure of graphene showing six Dirac (K and K+) points and a linear dispersion relationship around them. Right: Zoomed picture of the linear energy band near the Dirac points.11 (c) Honeycomb hexagonal graphene lattice.	 

 	Fig. 2  π-Orbital system in a 2D graphene sheet.	 

 	Fig. 3  Sensing mechanism of a piezoresistive pressure sensor and current response to loading and unloading.94	 

LF, HF	<1 m	Some kbits	High	Read/write	Polarization independent	Metal at 13.56 MHz	>0.4 euros
UHF, SHF	1–100 m	Some kbits	Low	Read/write	Polarization dependent	Metal and liquids	>0.1 euros
UWB	<60 m	Some bits	Good	Read/write	Polarization dependent	Metal and liquids	>0.3 euros
Chip less	<1 m	256 bits	None	Read/write	Polarization dependent	Metal and liquids	>0.005 euros
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 4  Equivalent circuit of an RFID tag.	 

 	Fig. 5  Frequency dependence of the antenna frequency, chip frequency and range.106	 
EIRP = PtGt	(3)

 	Fig. 6  Anechoic chamber used for RFID tag range measurements.106	 
	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 7  T-Match configuration for planar dipoles and the equivalent circuit.107,108	 

 	Fig. 8  Matching chart for T-match in Fig. 4.107	 

 	Fig. 9  An example of an embedded T-match feed.108	 

 	Fig. 10  Equivalent circuit of an inductively coupled loop.107,111	 
	(6)
	(7)

 	Fig. 11  Matching chart of a square loop fed resonant dipole.108,110	 

 	Fig. 12  Shape and measurement of a nested shaped slot.112	 

 	Fig. 13  Suitable tag size to be attached onto a human body.113	 

 	Fig. 14  Matching chart for a nested slot suspended patch.111–114	 

 	Fig. 15  Geometry of a meander-line antenna.117	 

 	Fig. 16  Meander-line antenna with the size reduced to a fraction of a wavelength.117	 

 	Fig. 17  Shorting pin attached to the folded antenna giving an inverted-F structure.118	 

 	Fig. 18  Variation of the input inductive reactance and resistance.118	 
[τGtag](f) = 0.5[τGtag]0(fc)	(8)

Aluminium etching	High fabrication resolution can be achieved easily.	Wasteful process;

	high cost or expensive;

	limited substrate selection;

	high impact on the environment.


Graphene printing	Economic;	Comparatively low resolution compared to etching.
no substrate selection limitation;	

environment friendly;	

high flexibility;	

much less wastage of material.	


 	Fig. 19  (left) RFID tag designed to operate at 886 MHz128–130 and (right) RFID tag designed to operate at 915 MHz128–130 (all dimensions are in mm).	 

1	PET	Copper	Etching	12.5	886
2	Thin film	Silver ink	Screen printing	9.5	886
3	Paper	Silver ink	Screen printing	9	886
4	Fabric	Silver ink	Screen printing	11.2	886
5	Thin film	Aluminium	Etching	9	886
6	Fabric	Silver ink	Screen printing	7	915
7	Thin film	Silver ink	Screen printing	6	915

 	Fig. 20  Step-by-step fabrication of graphene printed RFID tags.	 

 	Fig. 21  Printed graphene laminated on paper and its flexibility.140–144	 

 	Fig. 22  Prototype of a Wi-Fi integrated compact RFID reader system.149,150	 

 	Fig. 23  Basic system architecture.	 

 	Fig. 24  Prototype of the smart panel light integrated with an RFID reader antenna.147	 

 	Fig. 25  Tracking system architecture.147	 

 	Fig. 26  RFID reader antenna integrated smart panel light.146,147	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2021
