Digital polymerase chain reaction technology – recent advances and future perspectives  - Lab on a Chip (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8LC00990B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8LC00990B
(Critical Review)
Lab Chip, 2018, 18, 3717-3732Digital polymerase chain reaction technology – recent advances and future perspectives

        
          
            Kamalalayam Rajan 
            Sreejith
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Chin Hong 
            Ooi
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jing 
            Jin
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Dzung Viet 
            Dao
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Nam-Trung 
            Nguyen
          
        
      *
      Queensland Micro- and Nanotechnology Centre, Griffith University, 170 Kessels Road, 4111 Queensland, Australia. E-mail: nam-trung.nguyen@griffith.edu.au
Received 
      19th September 2018
    , Accepted 28th October 2018First published on 29th October 2018AbstractDigital polymerase chain reaction (dPCR) technology has remained a “hot topic” in the last two decades due to its potential applications in cell biology, genetic engineering, and medical diagnostics. Various advanced techniques have been reported on sample dispersion, thermal cycling and output monitoring of digital PCR. However, a fully automated, low-cost and handheld digital PCR platform has not been reported in the literature. This paper attempts to critically evaluate the recent developments in techniques for sample dispersion, thermal cycling and output evaluation for dPCR. The techniques are discussed in terms of hardware simplicity, portability, cost-effectiveness and suitability for automation. The present paper also discusses the research gaps observed in each step of dPCR and concludes with possible improvements toward portable, low-cost and automatic digital PCR systems.
1. Introduction
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is an artificial method for DNA amplification invented by Kary Mullis in 1985.1 In a conventional PCR, template DNA, primers, DNA polymerase, deoxyribonucleotide triphosphates (dNTPs) and buffer solution are combined in a mixture to undergo a series of thermal cycles to generate millions of copies of a template DNA. The first stage of a thermal cycle begins with a process called initialization, also known as a hot start, to activate the polymerase. It is conducted at a temperature of from 94 °C to 96 °C for a duration of between 1 min and 10 min depending on the template DNA and the type of polymerase. It is followed by a denaturation step conducted typically at a temperature between 93 °C and 98 °C. The hydrogen bonds in double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) are broken resulting in the formation of two single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) molecules from each dsDNA (denaturation step). The temperature is then lowered to a primer-specific annealing temperature in the range from 55 °C to 65 °C so that the primers are annealed to complementary sequences of the single-stranded DNA molecules (annealing step). Subsequently the PCR mixture is heated up to temperature between 72 °C and 80 °C based on the polymerase used. During this step the incomplete DNA sequence is extended by a polymerase in the presence of free deoxynucleotide triphosphates (dNTPs) synthesizing a new double-stranded DNA, a copy of the original DNA template (extension step). These last three steps (denaturation, annealing and extension) are repeated to produce multiple copies of the original DNA.2–4 The process of polymerase chain reaction is depicted in Fig. 1(a). Right from its inception, PCR has found applications in various fields such as biotechnology, cell biology, genetic engineering, forensic science, medical science, drug discovery research etc.5–11 Finely optimized methods have evolved over the last three decades to perform PCR efficiently. These methods are generally categorized as end-point PCR, quantitative PCR (qPCR) and digital PCR (dPCR).12
 Fig. 1  a) Various stages of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and b) different phases of a real-time polymerase chain reaction. Digital polymerase chain reaction is carried out up to the linear phase of the fluorescence and obtains either a positive or a negative fluorescence. 
The outcome of end-point PCR is analysed at the end of the entire reaction process, typically using gel or capillary electrophoresis to quantify the outcome of end-point PCR,13,14 such as the presence or absence of a target DNA.15,16 The end-point PCR technique also finds applications in gene editing,17 genotyping18etc. In qPCR or real-time PCR, the products are continuously monitored throughout the reaction cycles using fluorescent dyes. There are four phases in the qPCR process: (i) initiation (baseline), (ii) exponential, (iii) linear and (iv) plateau.19 During the first initiation phase, the number of DNA molecules doubles (ideally) during each PCR cycle, but the fluorescence induced by their concentration is below the threshold level of the fluorescence imaging (detection) system. Nevertheless, its amplitude is used for normalization of the PCR curve. Thus, the initiation phase is also called the baseline phase. The exponential phase follows next and doubles the number or DNA molecules during each PCR cycle, but the fluorescence induced by the DNA concentration is above the system detection limit (exponential phase). Next, the amplification efficiency is reduced due to the limited availability of primers and dNTPs. There are not enough materials to double the number of DNA molecules in each cycle. Thus, the fluorescence does not increase exponentially anymore, but linearly. Finally, the solution is totally depleted and the fluorescence does not increase anymore (plateau phase). The cycle threshold (Ct) is an artificially set threshold to compare qPCR curves for templates with different known initial numbers of DNA copies and create the PCR standard curve. The initial quantity of the DNA template can be determined by comparing the fluorescence output curve of the qPCR with a standard curve. The qPCR technique is more accurate than end-point PCR. qPCR finds application in gene expression profiling,20 copy number variation detection,21 molecular diagnosis22 and genotyping.23
The term “digital PCR” was coined by Vogelstein and Kinzler in 1999.24 Their seminal paper reported a novel approach for converting the exponential analog nature of PCR to a linear digital signal which is essential and most suitable for identification of genetic mutation and for a variety of other research and clinical applications. Experiments were carried out with stool specimens of patients with colorectal cancer on a commercially available 384 well plate. The experiments successfully demonstrated the presence of mutant c-Ki-Ras genes in the stool sample of patients suffering from colorectal cancer. In dPCR, the polymerase chain reaction mixture along with the necessary fluorophore is compartmentalized into several smaller units, and each unit undergoes the same thermal cycles as in the case of a conventional PCR. Each unit is expected to have a single template DNA and some units may not even contain a template DNA. The units which have undergone a positive PCR reaction can be identified by the fluorescent dye. A positive fluorescence from a unit is regarded as ‘1’, while no fluorescence or negative fluorescence is considered a ‘0’, similar to signals in digital electronics.25,26 The compartmentalization of a PCR mixture into smaller units increases the relative concentration of the target DNA sequence in each unit, reducing the “template competition effect”, which in turn helps in the detection of rare mutations among other wild-type sequences.19 The key difference between qPCR and dPCR is that the fluorescence output is monitored throughout the qPCR process, while it is done only during the exponential phase in dPCR. Poisson distribution is used for the quantification of the total number of target molecules within the sample. The target concentration C can be estimated as27 C = λ/V(1)where λ is defined as the mean copies per partition λ = −ln(z/n)(2)and z is the number of units with negative fluorescence, n is the total number of units and V is the volume of PCR reagents in each unit. It should be noted that the Poisson statistics-based model for estimating the concentration of the target molecule assumes a uniform volume for all units present in a typical dPCR experiment. Any violations in this assumption can affect the quantification accuracy of the technique. Majumdar et al. suggested a “Poisson plus” model for effectively addressing this issue in 2017.28
Digital PCR is considered as the most precise PCR technique compared to qPCR and end-point PCR.29,30 The dPCR technique has demonstrated a comparable sensitivity with qPCR in several potential clinical applications.31,32 One of the major advantages of dPCR over qPCR is the reduced possibility of PCR inhibition.33,34 In addition, dPCR offers good repeatability and reproducibility for some applications.35 With these advantages, digital PCR has gained popularity, and thus a number of significant advancements have been achieved in digital PCR technology over the last two decades. However, digital PCR technology still requires complex, bulky hardware, and a laboratory setup to carry out the desired operation. The process of PCR is time-consuming, laborious and requires a significant amount of manual interventions at various stages. Commercially available dPCR machines and various dPCR techniques reported in scientific journals also suffer the above-mentioned shortcomings. In addition, the cost of the PCR machines reported to date are not favorable to make it an affordable technology for most applications, especially point-of-care clinical applications. The development of a simple, compact, automatic and cost-effective digital PCR technology with reasonable throughput, sensitivity, precision, and inhibition resistance still remains as a research gap. Fig. 2 illustrates the conceptual diagram of the workflow of three different types of PCR techniques.
 Fig. 2  Concept and workflow of a) end-point PCR, b) qPCR or real time PCR and c) digital PCR (dPCR). 
Digital PCR is fundamentally a three-step process,25 namely (i) sample dispersion, (ii) PCR thermal cycling (amplification), and (iii) output monitoring. A systematic engineering approach towards each of these processes could possibly result in a simple, compact, automatic and cost-effective PCR platform. The present review concentrates on the critical evaluation of recent engineering advances of these processes in terms of operation simplicity, compactness, the suitability for automation and integration and cost-effectiveness. The review concludes by summarizing the research gaps in each of these processes and providing a few possible research perspectives to fill these gaps.
2. Sample dispersion techniques
Sample dispersion is the process in which the PCR mixture is compartmentalised into smaller units for undergoing thermal cycling. Each dPCR sample compartment is expected to possess a maximum of one nucleic acid template to warrant the high accuracy of the measurement. Even if the compartment consists of more than one nucleic acid template, it will give a positive fluorescence (digital ‘1’) during readout, leading to errors in the output quantification. Thus, it is desirable to reduce the sample volume in each compartment to the minimum so that the probability of multiple template DNAs in one compartment is less. A notable cycle threshold reduction is also possible in small volume droplets.36 A major problem is the contamination of the sample. If liquid handling and compartmentalisation are not properly implemented, the PCR reagents may become contaminated, leading to no amplification of target nucleic acid or the amplification of undesirable nucleic acid molecules. Undesirable coalescence of reagents in different compartments is another prospective issue of the sample dispersion process. The coalescence of reagents in different compartments may occur as a result of poor design of the compartmentalisation. Some popular methods for sample dispersion and compartmentalisation are discussed in the following subsections.
2.1. Droplet-based sample dispersion
The field of microfluidics has advanced in the last three decades.37,38 Droplet-based microfluidics is a subfield of microfluidics in which minute sample volumes (10−9 to 10−18 liters) generated as droplets are dispersed in another immiscible liquid.38–40 Advancements in droplet-based microfluidics have revolutionized the PCR sample dispersion process. Production and manipulation of droplets down to volumes on the order of attoliters have been reported in the literature.41,42 The ability to produce droplets in very small volumes considerably reduced the possibility of contamination and decreased the probability of multiple template nucleic acids in a single droplet. Reduction in droplet volume also increases the number of simultaneous reactions and consequently the throughput of digital PCR. The high-throughput capability of microfluidic devices43 also makes them a good choice for dPCR. The most commonly used configurations to create droplets with a given volume are T-junction configuration,44–46 flow-focusing configuration,47–49 and co-flow configuration.50,51 Active droplet generation methods include dielectrophoresis-based droplet generation52–54 and electrowetting-based droplet generation.55–57 Microfluidic droplet generation using T-junction, flow-focusing and co-flow configurations are the most commonly used methods in digital PCR platforms (Fig. 3a–c) as the requirement for instrumentation is relatively simple compared to other methods. In these techniques, the PCR mixture forms immiscible droplets in an oil phase and subsequently undergoes thermal cycling. The major advantage of this method is the protection of the PCR mixture from contamination. The oil phase also prevents the droplets of a PCR mixture from evaporation. The availability of various actuation methods such as pneumatic,58 electrostatic59,60 and magnetic61 manipulation makes microfluidics-based sample dispersion more popular for PCR.
 Fig. 3  PCR sample dispersion a) by droplets formed by a flow focusing device, b) by droplets formed by a T-junction microfluidic device, c) by droplets formed by a co-flow type microfluidic device, d) in microwells created on a base substrate, e) by channels created on a base substrate, and f) by printing the PCR mixture (step 2) on pre-deposited oil droplets (step 1) with the help of print heads. 
Beer et al. reported the design and development of a real-time on-chip droplet-based PCR device in 2007. The PCR reaction was carried out in water-in-oil droplets with an average volume of 13 picolitres.36 The smaller droplet size was achieved using an on-chip hydrophobic T-junction channel with a junction size of 60 μm. The channel size increases to 300 μm downstream of the junction to improve the field of view of the fluorescence monitoring system. Syringe pumps were used for delivering the liquids into the device. The PCR mixture was pumped at a flow rate of 2.3 mL h−1. The flow rate of the oil phase was 0.3 μL h−1. This type of pumps provides a better control over the flow rates and allows for their optimization to achieve monodisperse droplets with a desirable size. The frequency of droplet generation is also an important aspect of microfluidic droplet generation as it is directly related to the possibility of droplet coalescence. The frequency of droplet generation can be controlled by adjusting the flow rates. However, the lack of a feedback system for monitoring the droplet size and the frequency of its formation limits the reliability of such devices. Crawford62et al. reported a feedback control system that may be helpful to produce highly monodisperse PCR reagent droplets with the desired frequency. The possibility of droplet coalescence and cross-contamination can thus be reduced. Automation of a syringe pump-based microfluidic system is relatively simple. The syringe pumps can be programmed to provide a closed-loop feedback for the droplet production process.
Most automated microfluidic droplet generation systems reported in the literature used a computer and commercial software (MATLAB, LabVIEW etc.) for their operation.63,64 The use of third-party software increases the cost and complexity of the PCR device. Syringe pumps and associated tubing make the system bulky and difficult to use. Moreover, there is a high probability that the pumping system is contaminated after the first use, making it difficult to use the same system for different samples. The ‘single use and throw’ type of devices may increase the overhead expenses if such systems are commercialized. Moreover, the manufacturing process of disposable microfluidic chips could be tedious and time-consuming.
Tanaka et al. (in 2015) came up with a hands-free method to prepare highly monodisperse water in droplets using PDMS microfluidic chips for droplet digital PCR.65 The design essentially consisted of a T-junction microfluidic chip with 50 μm width at the junction and 250 μm width at the upstream and downstream regions. The channels were connected to two inlet reservoirs and one outlet reservoir. The pumping mechanism of the device is designed by exploiting the gas porosity of PDMS. When a degassed PDMS chip is brought back into standard atmospheric pressure, atmospheric gas diffuses into the PDMS chip. Thus, if the inlet reservoirs are filled with oil and PCR mixture, the liquids would automatically be pumped to the outlet reservoir through the channel, producing monodisperse PCR mixture droplets in oil. The group successfully demonstrated the tunability of the droplet size by varying the channel dimensions. For a typical experimental setup, 90.5% of the droplets have no DNA molecule, 9% a single DNA and 0.5% multiple DNA templates. This shows a better performance in terms of the undesired condition of multiple DNA in a single droplet as discussed previously. Another advantage of this device is that it does not require a pumping mechanism for droplet generation. However, the tedious and time-consuming process of degassing of the PDMS chip prior to use is necessary. Also, the frequency of droplet generation and droplet speed may reduce over time. The possibility of coalescence of droplets is high with the reduced speed of droplets through the channel. The absence of external pumping and tubing makes this device compact. However, manual intervention and tedious preprocessing steps of the chip make it less viable for a practical PCR device. Using the same concept, this team also designed a flow-focusing configuration for generating monodisperse PCR sample droplets in oil.
2.2. Microwell-based sample dispersion
The basic idea of microwell-based PCR systems is to make micro-/nano-sized reaction chambers in a base substrate and fill them with the PCR mixture for thermal cycling. Fig. 3d shows a microwell configuration for dPCR. A top cover or oil was used to prevent evaporation of the reagents during thermal cycling. Microwell-based digital PCR platforms allow for high parallelism, robustness and sensitivity in measurement compared to droplet-based digital PCR platforms.66 A physical boundary between the wells provides a better isolation between samples compared to the droplet-based digital PCR method.
Lindstrom et al. were successful in demonstrating the PCR amplification and genetic analysis in a specially designed 672 microwell chip.67 The team demonstrated the possibility of heterogeneous operations in a single microwell. The microwell had sloped walls, 650 × 650 μm2 bottom and 1360 × 1360 μm2 top and a volume of 500 nL.68 The device was used to analyse two human cell lines, one wild type and one with a single-base mutation in the p53 gene. The method involved cell cultivation, cell lysis, PCR, the capture of PCR products on beads, denaturation, and mini-sequencing, all performed in individual wells on-chip. The possibility of heterogeneous operations with a single cell is an advantage of microwell-based PCR compared to droplet-based PCR.66 Conversely, multiple operations in droplet samples require complex system design and processes.69 Another advantage of a microwell-based PCR system is the easy and inexpensive integration of a heater and a fluorescence monitoring system.
One of the major problems faced during the PCR process is the difficulty in handling cells and DNA samples. Mostly, pre-processing is required to enrich the sample with target DNA. The possibility of contamination is high during the pre-processing. Microwell-based PCR systems can be engineered for the hassle-free handling of samples. Cai et al. had successfully developed a point-of-care pathogen detection device with a multiplex PCR array and integrated dielectrophoresis.70 The device consists of two hydrophobic glass plates; the bottom plate has five microchannels (800 μm wide, 15 μm deep) each with PCR reaction chambers (800 μm × 800 μm in size, 135 μm in depth). The top plates are integrated with electrodes to perform dielectrophoresis. The device successfully detects pathogens in complex samples such as human blood in a relatively short time. The major advantage of this device is that human blood can be directly fed into the microfluidic device without any pre-processing. The target pathogens were separated inside the microfluidic device using dielectrophoresis. The pathogens were then mixed with PCR reagents using slip-chip technology and subsequently underwent thermal cycling. Easy and contamination-free processing is possible since the pathogen extraction and PCR are carried out inside the device. Slip-chip technology was introduced in 2009 by Du et al.71 The device has two plates in contact with each other. The bottom plate usually contains wells with preloaded reagents, and the top plate acts as a lid for the well with reagents. The device also has fluidic channels with ducts on the bottom plate and wells on the top plate, which are connected when the top and bottom plates are aligned in a particular configuration. The device does not require complex pumps or valves for its operation. The major advantage of slip-chip technology in PCR is its ability to conduct multiplexed reactions. It is easy to expose the same reagents to multiple nucleic acid templates or vice versa. Fig. 4 illustrates the operation concept of the slip-chip technology.
 Fig. 4  Concept diagram of slip-chip technology. 
Shen et al. used a slip-chip microfluidic device to conduct PCR and to quantify nucleic acids.72,73 The device utilised two plates with wells for PCR sample loading and circular reservoirs preloaded with oil to conduct PCR. A fluidic channel was integrated with the wells for sample loading. The wells were elongated and overlapped on sample loading. A simple relative slip of one plate will disconnect the elongated wells from the fluid channel and makes them overlap with the circular reservoir. Thermal cycling was carried out, and the reaction outcome was monitored using fluorescent dyes. The device is composed of 1280 2.6 nL compartments.72 A microfluidic real-time PCR rotational slip-chip device was also reported in 2011 for multiplexed quantification of nucleic acids.74
The throughput of microwell-based dPCR is limited by its design as compared to microfluidic droplet-based PCR. Droplet-based dPCR systems can handle smaller volumes. However, modern fabrication technologies and highly optimised designs can remove these limitations. Dimov et al. were successful in performing multiplex single-cell RNA cytometry in a microwell array of 60000 chambers with a volume as small as 20 pL.75 100-plex amplification of pneumonia pathogens was successfully demonstrated by Li et al. in 2011.76 Heyries et al. reported a megapixel digital PCR device which uses surface tension-based sample partitioning. The device has 1000000 reactor chambers with a volume of only a few picolitres. The device was reported to have a dynamic range of 107.5 Sefrioui et al. developed a chip-based digital PCR platform to detect circulating DNA metastatic colorectal cancer.77 Witters et al. followed a complex fabrication procedure to develop a microwell array of 38 fL volume each. The device utilised magnetic beads for the detection of single DNA with a concentration as low as 10 aM.78
2.3. Channel-based sample dispersion
The fundamental building block of a channel-based digital PCR system is a microfluidic device with thin mutually independent microfluidic channels. Each channel is connected with a number of reaction chambers. The PCR sample is prepared outside of the microfluidic device and subsequently fed into the microchannels. The sample flows through the microchannel and fills the chamber where PCR thermal cycling is carried out. Each channel and the associated chambers are separated from each other by means of a thin layer of microfluidic valves. The separation between chambers helps in reducing cross-contamination and sample coalescence. Fig. 3e shows the conceptual diagram of the channel-based sample dispersion method. High parallelism and the possibility of multiple cell processes are the advantages of this sample dispersion technique.
The high-throughput microfluidic single cell digital polymerase chain reaction platform reported by White et al.79 is a good example of this category. The device performs parallel processing of single cells and is capable of executing all the processes such as cell capture, washing, lysis, reverse transcription, and digital PCR. The device is composed of 1020 25 pL chambers. The device is capable of running 204000 digital PCR reactions for a device footprint of 10 cm2. Tian et al. successfully developed an integrated microfluidic system for bovine DNA purification and digital PCR detection.80 The device integrates a nucleic acid extraction module and dPCR module in a single chip. The dPCR module is composed of 650 chambers of 200 μm diameter and 230 μm depth. In 2017, Fu et al. demonstrated a microfluidic chip with 10000 0.785 nL compartments that are connected by narrow channels. The specially designed pre-degassed PDMS chip was able to load and compartmentalise the sample autonomously. The authors successfully demonstrated dPCR on this device.81
Ramakrishnan et al. reported a microfluidic device for digital PCR.82 The device was based on the commercialised digital PCR technology of Fluidigm Corporation. The Fluidigm device has 48 individual panels with 770 reaction chambers per panel for digital PCR. The reaction volume of each chamber is approximately 0.8 nL, and the reaction chambers are isolated from each other by pressure-controlled valves.82
In most of the channel-based PCR platforms, the microcompartments are connected in series with microchannels. The reagents enter through an inlet at one end and fill the compartments serially. The remaining reagents would come out through the outlet. This process may cause sample loss and inaccuracy in detection.79,83 Zhu et al. reported a device with a novel scalable self-priming fractal branching microchannel network for dPCR in 2017.84 The device design was inspired by a natural fractal-tree-based structure which enables even distribution and 100% compartmentalisation of the sample without any loss. The device rectified the need for precise control systems and complicated tubing connection. Also, the device used only oil to separate the compartments instead of the conventional valves.
2.4. Printing-based sample dispersion
Printing-based sample dispersion is a relatively simple technique compared to the other methods discussed above. The PCR mixture is deposited on top of a base substrate which is pre-deposited with an oil drop. The PCR mixture is deposited in such a way that it is covered by the oil drop. The oil prevents evaporation of the PCR mixture during thermal cycling. An automated inkjet printing technique can be used for depositing the oil and the PCR mixture. Fig. 3f depicts the concept of printing-based PCR sample dispersion. This technique possesses a number of advantages over the other methods. (i) Unlike polymeric microfluidic devices, silicon, glass or other non-reactive materials are used as the base substrate, which can be reused after proper cleaning. This reduces the overhead cost of the PCR technique. (ii) The deposition method can be precisely controlled using the necessary electronic control.85 This reduces the possibility of cross-contamination and opens the possibility of a completely automated PCR system. (iii) The oil droplet covering the PCR mixture reduces the possibility of contamination from the ambience. (iv) Integration of the heater with the substrate is relatively easy. (v) The fluorescence detection system can be integrated without much engineering complexity. (vi) Injection of multiple reagents is possible at any time.
Sun et al. proposed a novel double inkjet printing-based platform for parallel PCR in picolitre droplets.86 The device utilises piezoelectric inkjet printing to deposit oil droplets on top of a hydrophobic and oleophobic substrate. PCR reagents are subsequently deposited on top of the oil using the same printing technology. Zhu et al. reported a two-dimensional array for reverse transcription PCR.87 A sequential-operation droplet-array-based microfluidic robotic system was used to print PCR mixture droplets with 50 nL volume on an oil-filled microchip. Zhang et al. reported the use of inkjet printing technology to generate highly monodisperse droplets in an oil-filled glass capillary instead of a substrate to perform PCR in 2018.88
3. Thermal cycling methods
Thermal cycling is the process in which the dispersed PCR reagents undergo heating at various temperatures. Conventional PCR uses programmed thermal cyclers with highly accurate temperature control to perform thermal cycling. Being the key stage of any PCR process, the thermal cycling technique deserves an intense review in this context. The ability to maintain the accurate temperature for an exact duration of time determines the amplification efficiency of PCR. The ramping rate during the heating and especially the cooling period is another important parameter affecting the overall efficiency and specificity of PCR. The ramping rate determines the overall time required to complete the polymerase chain reaction. The time required to complete the desired number of cycles of PCR would be higher with a thermal cycling technique with a poor ramping rate. It should be noted that a lower ramping rate of heating may only delay the PCR cycles, while a poor cooling rate would sacrifice the amplification specificity. If the cooling time of thermal cycling is not optimised, the ssDNAs formed after denaturation may undergo hybridisation before reaching the annealing temperature, resulting in a reduced yield in each cycle. Hence, the thermal cycling subsystem plays an important role in developing a simple, compact and low-cost digital PCR system. Various novel methods for performing thermal cycling in digital PCR devices have been reported in the literature. These methods can be classified as Joule heating, thermoelectric, photonic, acoustic, inductive, microwave-based and solar heating. Each of these methods and their use for thermal cycling in a simple, compact and low-cost digital PCR system are discussed in the subsequent subsections.
3.1. Joule heating
Joule heating relies on an electric current passing through an ohmic conductor, also called the resistive heater. The heat energy generated is proportional to the square of the electric current and the resistance of the ohmic conductor. Either a stand-alone or an integrated resistive heater can be used for thermal cycling of the PCR mixture. In stand-alone heaters, the heating element and the PCR reaction chamber are developed separately and then made to come in contact physically for thermal cycling. The heating element material can be deposited on a base substrate using various physical or chemical deposition strategies. The base substrate is subsequently attached to the PCR reaction chamber for thermal cycling.89 Different microheaters can be integrated in the reaction chambers.90 Micro-machined resistive heaters can also serve as a heating element for PCR.91 In the case of an integrated device, the material of the resistive heater is directly deposited on the surface of the PCR chamber. Fig. 5a depicts the concept of a typical Joule heating-based thermal cycler.
 Fig. 5  Thermal cycling in digital PCR platform using a) Joule heating technique, b) TEC heating, c) surface acoustic wave technology, d) contact type photonic heating, e) non-contact type photonic heating, f) direct photonic heating with a thin layer of gold coating in a microchip, g) induction heating, h) microwave heating and i) solar heating. 
El-Ali et al. developed an SU-8 based PCR chip with an integrated platinum heater and a temperature sensor in 2004.92 The device was the first polymer-based PCR chamber with integrated heater and temperature sensor. The chip has a chamber volume of 20 μl with fast heating and cooling rates of 50 and 30 K s−1, respectively. The team successfully demonstrated the amplification of yeast gene ribosomal protein S3 and Campylobacter gene cadF. Liao et al. reported a PDMS-based real-time PCR chip with integrated platinum microheaters and a platinum temperature sensor.93 The heating and cooling rates of the system were 20 and 10 K s−1, respectively. The system successfully amplified and detected dengue virus type 2 and enterovirus 71 (EV 71).
Neuzil et al. presented a low-cost lab-on-a-chip micro PCR device.91 The device consisted of a microscope glass coverslip placed on top of a micromachined silicon chip. The silicon chip has integrated heaters and temperature sensors. A single 1 μl PCR sample droplet was placed over the glass slip and covered with mineral oil to prevent evaporation. Mineral oil serves as the thermal contact between the PCR sample droplet on the glass coverslip and the micromachined silicon chip. The device takes half a second to heat up from 72 °C to 94 °C and two seconds to cool from 94 °C to 55 °C. The glass slip on which the PCR sample is placed is disposable so that the device is highly efficient in eliminating cross-contamination of samples during the tests.
Joule heating-based thermal cycling has the following advantages: (i) easy to integrate with the PCR chamber; (ii) heat energy variation is directly proportional to the applied electric current, which makes precise temperature control relatively simple; (iii) the heater element and associated control elements can be miniaturised to eliminate the overall system complexity and size; (iv) multiple heating elements can be used on a substrate to provide multiple temperature regimes. This ability can be exploited for a PCR platform; (v) minimum cost. Non-uniform heating of the target is the major disadvantage of resistive heaters. An array of microheaters can eliminate this problem to a greater extent. However, the array may increase the complexity of the system. The ramping rates of heating and cooling are limited in thermal cyclers based on Joule heating. The cooling rate can be increased by a cooling fan or thermoelectric coolers.
3.2. Thermoelectric heating
When an electric current passes through the junction of two dissimilar metals, one junction experiences cooling while the other junction experiences heating. This effect is known as the Peltier effect, discovered by Jean Charles Athanase Peltier in 1834.94 Peltier effect-based thermoelectric modules (TEC) in various specifications are commercially available. A number of thermal cyclers using thermoelectric heating have been implemented in end-point PCR and qPCR technology.95–97Fig. 5b shows the basic arrangement of thermal cycling using a TEC. The major advantage of a TEC is its ability to reverse the thermal effect based on the polarity of the input bias voltage. This characteristic can be utilised to reduce the cooling time of the thermal cycle, which in turn reduces the overall cycling time. The major disadvantage of thermoelectric modules is the high thermal inertia. The thermal response of a system based on the Peltier effect can be improved by optimising the PCR chamber. Shigeo et al. sandwiched a copper PCR tube tip directly between the p-type and the n-type thermoelectric material.96 This design demonstrated considerable improvements in thermal response of the overall system.
Thermoelectric modules and Joule heating modules can work together in a hybrid thermal cycler. The high ramping rate of the Joule heating module is beneficial to reduce the cycle time. The TEC can be used for forced cooling during the cooling cycle, which also reduces the overall cycle time.
3.3. Acoustic heating
Longitudinal waves traveling on the surface of a material is known as surface acoustic waves (SAWs). Due to the energy dissipation, the liquid over the SAW transmitting surface can be heated. The temperature of the liquid can be controlled by the applied voltage and the duty cycle of the SAW generator.98,99 Later in 2009, Kondoh et al. developed a temperature control system for liquid droplets using SAW.100 The team successfully demonstrated the thermal cycling for PCR by controlling the duty cycle of the SAW generator.
Shilton et al. demonstrated controllable heating using SAWs in 2015.101 The device consisted of a gold patterned lithium niobate (LN) substrate mounted on a TEC. The piezoelectric material LN was responsible for generating surface acoustic waves with excitation from a radio frequency (RF) source. The surface acoustic waves propagating along the substrate heat up the substrate. Water droplets of 1 μL volume were placed over the substrate. The SAW-driven temperature changes in the droplets achieved the corresponding set value within 150 ms and the temperature overshoot in the microdroplets was within 12 K. The fastest heating rate in the experiments was reported to be 70 K s−1. A short settling time is essential for a better yield in each cycle of the reaction. Furthermore, the short settling time may help in protecting the nucleic acid template from degradation. A fast ramping rate is the key factor for reducing the overall time duration of the PCR. However, this method is not directly applicable to PCR as the liquid droplet is kept in an open environment and prone to contamination and evaporation. A suitable system should be designed in association with this thermal cycling method to prevent contamination of the reaction mixture. Using liquid marbles as a microreactor102–104 for carrying out PCR is a good option as it needs little modification to prevent contamination.105
Ha et al. reported acoustic heating of a polydimethylsiloxane microfluidic system for PCR.106 Although the system could be categorised as a continuous-flow PCR system, the PCR achieved a billion-fold amplification of a 134 amplicon DNA in less than 3 minutes. The heating mechanism was based on the damping of the acoustic wave in PDMS. The high-frequency waves were generated from a conventional SAW generator. Fig. 5c shows the conceptual diagram of a SAW-based thermal cycler for PCR.
3.4. Photonic heating
Photonic heating converts the energy of light into heat. Generally, laser or light-emitting diodes (LEDs) serve as the source of light. Roche et al. demonstrated a plasmonic thermocycler for the amplification of human androgen receptor DNA.107 This is the first paper reporting the practical application of photonic thermal cycling. Gold nanoparticles with an average diameter of 60 nm were used to produce heat energy when activated with a 532 nm laser. A cooling fan was used to achieve rapid cooling. The heating and cooling rates are reported to be 7.62 ± 0.81 K s−1 and 3.33 ± 0.24 K s−1, respectively. Thermal cycling was implemented in contact and non-contact setups. The gold nanoparticles were separated from the PCR reagents in the non-contact setup, while gold nanoparticles were dispersed in the PCR reagents in the contact type setup. The team successfully demonstrated PCR in both setups. Fig. 5d and e depict the conceptual diagram of the experimental setup. However, non-contact plasmonic thermal cycling requires a large number of gold nanoparticles to heat up a small amount of PCR reagents. Moreover, the actual cost of this method should also include the high cost of the laser source, which makes this method impractical for desktop and portable use.
Son et al. reported in 2015 an ultrafast photonic PCR.108 The device utilised plasmonic photothermal conversion using a photon–electron–phonon coupling. The plasmon-assisted optical absorption capacity of a thin gold film was utilised for thermal cycling. The thickness of the gold film was observed to be 120 nm for optimum results. Light-emitting diodes (LEDs) with a wavelength of 450 nm were used as the source of light. The use of LEDs significantly reduced the cost of the device. LEDs consume less power than conventional lasers. The heating and cooling rate of the device was reported to be 12.79 ± 0.93 K s−1 and 6.6 ± 0.29 K s−1, respectively. This PCR platform can be considered as low-cost, ultrafast and compact.
3.5. Induction heating
Induction heating is the process wherein an electrically conductive metal is heated when it is placed in a varying magnetic field. The eddy currents produced by electromagnetic induction are responsible for the heating of metal. A coil powered with an AC power supply is used to generate the varying magnetic field. Fig. 5g depicts the concept of induction heating. The heating efficiency of inductive heating is a function of the frequency of the AC source, the relative permeability and the resistivity of the target material.109,110 This heating method has been used for biological applications111,112 including the thermal cycling of a PCR mixture. Pal and Venkataraman reported an induction-based portable, battery-operated thermal cycler.113 The setup consists of two subsystems: (i) a magnetic field generator: a 10 mm long coil made by winding 2 mm enameled copper wire on a 10 mm diameter ferrite core. The coil has an inductance of 203 μH at 100 kHz; (ii) PCR chips fixed on a metal ring: the PCR chip is made by anodically bonding a 3 mm × 3 mm Pyrex glass slide to silicon. A 1 mm deep hole drilled in the glass served as the reaction chamber. The heating and cooling rates were 6.5 and 4.2 K s−1, respectively, for a 0.2 mm metal sheet. A simple K type thermocouple and the simple ON–OFF strategy were adopted for temperature control. The setup was powered by a 12 V battery. The power consumption of each chip was reported to be 2 mW.
Pal et al. used a similar induction heating technology to amplify a 350 bp segment from a plasmid and a human sex-determining gene.114 Although the reported technology was designed for end-point PCR, it also has the potential to be used in digital PCR. The lack of a complex control circuitry and the use of rechargeable battery make this method an attractive candidate for a portable and inexpensive digital PCR system. The major disadvantage is the complex fabrication procedure of the microchip. Similar to other microfluidic chips, the device also poses the risk of contamination after the first use. However, this heating method combined with a suitable sample handling technique may yield an effective dPCR platform. Bio Molecular Systems has commercialised the world's first qPCR thermal cycler based on magnetic induction technology (https://biomolecularsystems.com).
3.6. Microwave heating
Microwave heating has been extensively used in lab-on-a-chip devices assisting biological processes and biochemical reactions. The major disadvantage of conventional thermal cycling methods including Joule heating is the thermal inertia associated with the heating block. The heating block takes a substantial amount of time to reach the setpoint temperatures due to its high thermal inertia. The low thermal inertia and higher energy density of microwave heating make it suitable for rapid thermal cycling.115 The absence of the wall effect116 in microwave heating can accelerate the speed of PCR. Fermer et al. demonstrated the use of microwave for thermal cycling.115 The team used a commercially available single-mode microwave cavity (Microwell 10) to amplify a 220-base pair segment of the chromosomal 23S rRNA gene of thermophilic campylobacters. The conventional end-point PCR successfully amplified the target DNAs using microwave heating. Orrling et al. successfully demonstrated PCR thermal cycling with external single cavity resonators in milliliter scale.117 Garg et al. successfully developed a low-cost, low-power, programmable PCR thermal cycler for point-of-care devices.118 A copper microstrip transmission line was used to provide 0.7 W power to a chamber with 4 μL capacity. The whole system was incorporated in a polycarbonate substrate. Temperature programmability was achieved by tuning the amplitude and frequency of the microwave. Fig. 5h shows the conceptual diagram of microwave heating on the microchip. A similar device was reported by Marchiarullo, who successfully conducted thermal cycling of 1 μL PCR mixture containing a fragment of the lambda-phage genome, proving the ability of microwave heating to be incorporated into a portable lab-on-a-chip device.119
Compared to conventional thermal cycling, microwave heating stands out with its higher ramping rate. However, proper impedance matching between the target PCR mixture and the microwave resonator is necessary for optimum heating efficiency. The possibility of variation in permittivity of the PCR mixture with rising temperature may degrade the efficiency of microwave heating.119 Also, it would be difficult to design an efficient microwave heating-based thermal cycling system for PCR of a wide range of target volumes. In other words, the operation is limited to a narrow range of volumes and a typical microwave frequency. In the near future, we may expect the development of a generic microwave thermal cycling technique with a wider range of target volumes, simple design, efficient temperature control and low cost for portable digital PCR devices.
3.7. Solar heating
Conventional PCR techniques require an electricity supply. Thus, it is difficult to use conventional PCR machines or techniques in areas where electric power is unavailable or not stable. The major part of the power is consumed by the thermal cycling subsystem of the PCR machine.120–122 Recent studies showed promising results in using solar thermal energy as a source for PCR thermal cycling.123–127 Jiang et al. reported the use of solar thermal energy in the detection of Kaposi's sarcoma herpesvirus (KSHV/HHV-8) using PCR in a couple of papers published in 2013 and 2014. The authors used a combination of collimating lens, aluminium foil mask, and a microfluidic device to achieve solar thermal cycling of a PCR mixture. The collimating lens focuses light on to the microfluidic device containing the PCR mixture through the aluminium foil mask. The mask contains a circular opening through which the passage of solar energy and the temperature at various regions of the microfluidic device are controlled. The distance between the lens and the aluminium mask can be varied to control the temperature of each region. This research group used smartphone technology for monitoring the temperature of the thermal cycle. Fig. 5i depicts the concept of solar thermal cycling.
The solar heating technique utilizes inexpensive hardware components such as a collimating lens and an aluminium foil mask. The temperature control was obtained by varying the relative position between the lens and the microfluidic chip. Thus, solar thermal cycling could be considered for designing a portable, cost-effective digital PCR device. However, solar thermal PCR systems reported to date are end-point PCR systems. No research has been reported on the use of solar thermal energy for digital PCR systems. One of the major engineering challenges of using solar thermal energy in a digital PCR system is the possibility of light interference and probability of noise in the fluorescence detection system by the sunlight. However, optimised systems could be designed to isolate the solar thermal cycling and fluorescence detection to avoid the possibility of errors in detection. Using microchannel geometry and dimension to control the period of thermal cycles sacrifice the broader range of applications. Table 1 provides the qualitative comparison of various aspects of the thermal cycling techniques discussed in this paper.
Table 1 Qualitative comparison of various thermal cycling techniques (number of * represent the points out of 5)




Techniques
Heating form
Ramping rate
Portability
Cost
Drawbacks




Joule
Conduction
****
*****
Low
—


Thermoelectric
Conduction
***
*****
Low
Higher thermal inertia


Acoustic
Conduction
***
***
High
Complex


Photonic
Radiation
*****
**
Low–high
Complex, bulky and expensive


Inductive
Radiation
*****
***
Medium
Complex


Microwave
Radiation
*****
**
High
Complex and lacks universality


Solar
Radiation
**
**
Medium
Lacks universality




4. Output monitoring techniques
Successful thermal cycling of the PCR mixture yields amplification and fluorescence in each microreactor. Detection and quantification of the amplified DNAs is the final stage of a PCR process. Two techniques are widely used for the detection of the fluorescence output: (i) using sensors such as a photodiode, phototransistor and photomultiplier tubes; (ii) using scanning devices such as charge-coupled devices (CCD) or complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) sensors.
The photomultiplier tube (PMT) captures fluorescent light emitted by fluorophores in the target and converts it into electrical signals corresponding to the intensity of the light. This method is well suited for fluorescence probing in droplet-based microfluidic devices.128,129Fig. 6a shows the concept of a PMT-based output monitoring system.
 Fig. 6  Fluorescence detection using a) a photomultiplier tube and b) a camera. 
Mazutis et al. reported the kinetic analysis of an in vitro translated enzyme.128 The work utilised photomultiplier tube-based fluorescence detection for laccase activity in the reaction mixture. Pekin et al. used the same setup to quantify the mutated oncogene in gDNA.130 The experimental setup consisted of two laser beams for exciting the target droplets containing PCR products of a mutated gene, wild-type DNA and corresponding fluorophores. The amplified mutant gene emits green light while the wild type produces red light. The red and green lights were captured using two photomultiplier tubes. The voltage output of PMTs were used to quantify the mutant gene. LabVIEW software was used for data processing.
Zhong et al. demonstrated the use of photomultiplier tubes for multiplex PCR.131 The paper reported a novel method of multiplex digital PCR in droplets. The team verified the accurate multiplexed measurement of gene copy numbers for different targets and one reference. The instrumentation for fluorescence detection consisted of a 2× expanded, 20 mW, 480 nm laser source, which is focused onto the microchannel using the objective lens of a microscope. The fluorescence detected from the droplets was discriminated by two bandpass filters. Data processing was done by LabVIEW software. The colour and intensity of fluorescence were used to identify and quantify the different targets. Error due to coalescence and doublets were rectified by analysing the duration and amplitude of the fluorescence burst.
Quantification using a photomultiplier tube is advantageous for use with microfluidic devices. Errors due to false positives and doublets can be reduced by optimising the signal conditioning and detection algorithms. The major disadvantage of PMT-based detection is the low throughput. PMT-based quantification is a sequential method wherein only one droplet can be evaluated at a time. This characteristic makes the method not suitable for simultaneous quantification of high throughput digital PCR platforms. Although the photomultiplier tubes and corresponding electronics are economical, the laser excitation source and software used for data processing are costly, resulting in a relatively expensive detection system. Advancements achieved in the fields of flexible electronics and integrated sensors132–135 are yet to be exploited for developing simple, inexpensive dPCR quantification methods. A less expensive light source could replace lasers as the excitation source. Inexpensive microcontrollers for data processing may make PMT-based quantification systems more compact and affordable.
Camera-based fluorescence detection is a three-step process: (i) fluorescent excitation of PCR microreactors with a light source; (ii) scanning the fluorescence using a CCD/CMOS camera; (iii) image/data processing of the scanned image and subsequent quantification. Mercury vapour or laser lights are the conventional sources of light, which are bulky and expensive.136 LED can considerably reduce the size and cost of the light source in a PCR fluorescence detection system. The camera-based fluorescence detection system is advantageous, as it scans the entire reaction platform at once resulting in reduced detection time as compared to its PMT-based counterparts. Although the primary detection is quick, PCR quantification may take longer, depending on the speed and the efficiency of the image processing algorithm. Also, a camera-based system is capable of handling high-throughput digital PCR fluorescence output. Fig. 6b depicts the concept of camera-based fluorescence detection.
Hatch et al. reported a 1-million droplet array with wide-field fluorescence imaging for digital PCR.137 The device is a droplet-based microfluidic platform with fluorescence imaging. Wide-field images of the droplet array were captured by a 21-megapixel digital camera (Canon 5D Mark II) with a CMOS sensor and an f/2.8 USM macro lens. A 350 W Omniprint-1000 portable light source with 3 mm fiber optic cable and a 25 mm filter kept at 5–8 inches above the microfluidic reaction chamber at an angle of 30–45° was used to illuminate the reaction chamber. The camera was positioned vertically above the reaction chamber. The setup was capable of imaging areas of 8.6 and 17.2 cm2 with 1× and 0.5× magnification, respectively. The device successfully captured 1 million 50 picolitre drops in an 11 cm2 viewing area with a resolution of 15–20 pixels per droplet. Image and data processing were carried out using ImageJ and MATLAB. The image quantification required 0.5–1.5 hours depending on droplet lattice uniformity, fluorescence uniformity, the degree of droplet overlap and the percentage of amplified droplets.
In summary, fluorescence detection systems used in most digital PCR platforms reported to date are not well optimised in terms of size and cost. Reduction of size and cost of the fluorescence detection system is important for the design and development of a simple, compact, fully automated and cost-effective digital PCR platform. Novak et al. observed that the integration of conventional fluorescence detection methods with lab-on-a-chip devices actually makes the system a “chip-in-lab”.136 The authors developed a compact and integrated fluorescence detection system using a LED as a source of excitation and a photodiode as a detector. The system incorporates all the necessary electronics and optics for efficient detection of fluorescence within a device dimension of 30 mm × 30 mm × 11 mm. Peham et al. demonstrated in 2011 fluorescence detection of end-point PCR using a LED–photodiode sensor system.138 Recent developments of the integration of conventional as well as organic LEDs and photodetectors on lab-on-a-chip devices indicate the high potential that they may be exploited for compact and inexpensive quantification strategies of digital PCR.139,140
5. Conclusions and future perspectives
The present paper reviews recent advances in the area of digital PCR. The review evaluates this technology in terms of simplicity of operation, compactness, possibility of automation and cost. The main processes involved in digital PCR are sample dispersion, thermal cycling, and output monitoring. Research advances reported in each of these processes were critically evaluated.
The scope of droplet-based sample dispersion, microwell-based sample dispersion, and channel-based sample dispersion is limited due to their complexity in manufacturing and associated hardware requirements. Extensive overhead cost for these technologies once commercialised is also a drawback. Special arrangements and care are required to prevent evaporation and contamination. Printing-based sample dispersion is found to be better compared to other methods of dispersion. The possibility of automation and reuse of this platform makes it a relatively good choice of sample dispersion. However, the system requires an oil phase to prevent contamination and evaporation. Liquid marble is a different sample dispersion method that could meet all the requirements of a handheld dPCR device. Liquid marbles are formed by coating an inert hydrophobic substance on liquid droplets.141 Hydrophobic powder coating on liquids can be done by rolling the liquid droplets on a hydrophobic powder bed. This technique can be used to make liquid marbles containing a PCR mixture. Systems for keeping these liquid marbles for thermal cycling are relatively simple. Moreover, the inert hydrophobic powder does not react with the PCR mixture. The hydrophobic powder coating prevents contamination of the PCR mixture. Liquid marbles are extensively used as microreactors for biochemical reactions, cell biology, bioengineering, biomedicine, and genetic analysis.102,142–147 Various mobility manipulation techniques102,142,148–152 are available for manipulating liquid marbles. The major challenge in using liquid marbles as a dPCR reactor is the possibility of evaporation of the PCR mixture during thermal cycling. However, our earlier studies showed promising results on the evaporation stability of liquid marbles at high temperatures.105
Joule heating is the simplest method for thermal cycling. It is easy for an engineer to control the heating time of Joule heating elements. However, the cooling time depends on the system thermal time constant as heat is removed only by natural convection. A combination of Joule heating and active TEC could be an ideal method for thermal cycling of dPCR. This technology may reduce the unnecessary lag in completing one thermal cycle. Moreover, the optimum ramping rate of heating and cooling optimises the amplification efficiency. Many commercially available PCR machines use a combination of Joule heating and TEC to optimise the cycling time. Joule heating elements and TEC are relatively cheap and easy to integrate into a compact system. Photonic- and surface acoustic-based heating methods are costly and require complex and expensive setups. Microwave heating suffers from the drawback of hardware complexity. The efficiency of heating is limited to a narrow range of sample volumes for a typical microwave-based thermal cycling system. The solar heating technique is bulky and its current form lacks universality to be considered as a serious heating method for a simple, cost-effective and handheld dPCR system.
Output monitoring systems for dPCR need more optimisation in terms of hardware simplicity, cost, and compactness. LED-based illumination systems can meet almost all the requirements to be used in future dPCR systems. A low-cost digital camera can serve as the detector. The data processing module and the control of the entire device can be conducted by an inexpensive microcomputer board such as Raspberry Pi, Beagle Bone etc. The use of indigenously developed open source software for image processing and output quantification can considerably reduce the cost of the system. Smartphone-based fluorescence detection153–157 is also an option for reducing the hardware complexity and cost.
Ahrberg et al. reported in 2016 a handheld qPCR machine.158 This portable real-time PCR device is the first of its kind ever reported. Ahram Biosystems has developed a handheld PCR device called Palm PCR. The device claims to be capable of amplifying almost all kinds of DNA within 25–30 minutes. Even though the system claims to be a miniature handheld PCR, it should be noted that the system does not incorporate the monitoring part of the PCR. It is just a battery-operated thermal cycler where the output should be quantified separately using gel electrophoreses. We conclude that extensive research is still needed to design and develop a simple, inexpensive and portable digital PCR system with a reasonable accuracy, precision, and throughput.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the Australian Research Council for funding support through grant DP170100277.
References
K. Mullis, F. Faloona, S. Scharf, R. Saiki, G. Horn and H. Erlich, Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol., 1986, 51(1), 263–273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          D. P. Clark and N. J. Pazdernik, in Molecular Biology (Second Edition), ed. D. P. Clark and N. J. Pazdernik, Academic Press, Boston,  2013, pp. e55–e61,  DOI:10.1016/B978-0-12-378594-7.00030-5 .

          J. M. Butler, in Advanced Topics in Forensic DNA Typing: Methodology, ed. J. M. Butler, Academic Press, San Diego,  2012, pp. 69–97,  DOI:10.1016/B978-0-12-374513-2.00004-X .

          A. Najafov and G. Hoxhaj, in PCR Guru, ed. A. Najafov and G. Hoxhaj, Academic Press,  2017, pp. 1–6,  DOI:10.1016/B978-0-12-804231-1.00001-8 .
K. A. Heyries, C. Tropini, M. Vaninsberghe, C. Doolin, O. I. Petriv, A. Singhal, K. Leung, C. B. Hughesman and C. L. Hansen, Nat. Methods, 2011, 8, 649–651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, G. Jenkins, Y. Zou, Z. Zhu and C. J. Yang, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 3599–3606 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Baker, Nat. Methods, 2010, 7, 351–356 CrossRef CAS .
F. Postollec, H. Falentin, S. Pavan, J. Combrisson and D. Sohier, Food Microbiol., 2011, 28, 848–861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Girones, M. A. Ferrus, J. L. Alonso, J. Rodriguez-Manzano, B. Calgua, A. Correa Ade, A. Hundesa, A. Carratala and S. Bofill-Mas, Water Res., 2010, 44, 4325–4339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Horsman, J. M. Bienvenue, K. R. Blasier and J. P. Landers, J. Forensic Sci., 2007, 52, 784–799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Liu, X. Li, S. A. Greenspoon, J. R. Scherer and R. A. Mathies, Lab Chip, 2011, 11, 1041–1048 RSC .
A. A. Morley, Biomol. Detect. Quantif., 2014, 1, 1–2 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Muyzer, E. C. de Waal and A. G. Uitterlinden, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 1993, 59, 695–700 CAS .
F. C. Tenover, R. D. Arbeit, R. V. Goering, P. A. Mickelsen, B. E. Murray, D. H. Persing and B. Swaminathan, J. Clin. Microbiol., 1995, 33, 2233–2239 CAS .
M. Orita, Y. Suzuki, T. Sekiya and K. Hayashi, Genomics, 1989, 5, 874–879 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Gilliland, S. Perrin, K. Blanchard and H. F. Bunn, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1990, 87, 2725 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Ousterout, A. M. Kabadi, P. I. Thakore, W. H. Majoros, T. E. Reddy and C. A. Gersbach, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shin, R. A. Soo, J. Yoon, A. Promoda Perera, Y. J. Yoon and M. K. Park, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 68, 107–114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P.-L. Quan, M. Sauzade and E. Brouzes, Sensors, 2018, 18, 1271 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Perchet, S. Chea, M. Hasan, A. Cumano and R. Golub, J. Visualized Exp., 2017, 119 DOI:10.3791/54858 .
R. Tremmel, K. Klein, S. Winter, E. Schaeffeler and U. M. Zanger, Pharmacogenomics J., 2016, 16, 551–558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V. Easton, R. G. Oliveira, E. M. O'Connell, S. Kepha, C. S. Mwandawiro, S. M. Njenga, J. H. Kihara, C. Mwatele, M. R. Odiere, S. J. Brooker, J. P. Webster, R. M. Anderson and T. B. Nutman, Parasites Vectors, 2016, 9, 38 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Toppinen, P. Norja, L. M. Aaltonen, S. Wessberg, L. Hedman, M. Soderlund-Venermo and K. Hedman, J. Virol. Methods, 2015, 218, 40–45 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Vogelstein and K. W. Kinzler, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1999, 96, 9236–9241 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cao, X. Cui, J. Hu, Z. Li, J. R. Choi, Q. Yang, M. Lin, L. Ying Hui and F. Xu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 90, 459–474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-Q. Fan, M. Wang, F. Gao, J. Zhuang, G. Tang and Y.-J. Zhang, Chin. J. Anal. Chem., 2016, 44, 1300–1307 CAS .
N. Majumdar, T. Wessel and J. Marks, PLoS One, 2015, 10, e0118833 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Majumdar, S. Banerjee, M. Pallas, T. Wessel and P. Hegerich, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 9617 CrossRef PubMed .
A. S. Whale, J. F. Huggett, S. Cowen, V. Speirs, J. Shaw, S. Ellison, C. A. Foy and D. J. Scott, Nucleic Acids Res., 2012, 40, e82 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Hindson, K. D. Ness, D. A. Masquelier, P. Belgrader, N. J. Heredia, A. J. Makarewicz, I. J. Bright, M. Y. Lucero, A. L. Hiddessen, T. C. Legler, T. K. Kitano, M. R. Hodel, J. F. Petersen, P. W. Wyatt, E. R. Steenblock, P. H. Shah, L. J. Bousse, C. B. Troup, J. C. Mellen, D. K. Wittmann, N. G. Erndt, T. H. Cauley, R. T. Koehler, A. P. So, S. Dube, K. A. Rose, L. Montesclaros, S. Wang, D. P. Stumbo, S. P. Hodges, S. Romine, F. P. Milanovich, H. E. White, J. F. Regan, G. A. Karlin-Neumann, C. M. Hindson, S. Saxonov and B. W. Colston, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 8604–8610 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Hindson, J. R. Chevillet, H. A. Briggs, E. N. Gallichotte, I. K. Ruf, B. J. Hindson, R. L. Vessella and M. Tewari, Nat. Methods, 2013, 10, 1003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. H. Sedlak, L. Cook, A. Cheng, A. Magaret and K. R. Jerome, J. Clin. Microbiol., 2014, 52, 2844–2848 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Hoshino and F. Inagaki, Syst. Appl. Microbiol., 2012, 35, 390–395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. C. Dingle, R. H. Sedlak, L. Cook and K. R. Jerome, Clin. Chem., 2013, 59, 1670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Pavšič, A. Devonshire, A. Blejec, C. A. Foy, F. Van Heuverswyn, G. M. Jones, H. Schimmel, J. Žel, J. F. Huggett, N. Redshaw, M. Karczmarczyk, E. Mozioğlu, S. Akyürek, M. Akgöz and M. Milavec, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2017, 409, 2601–2614 CrossRef PubMed .
N. R. Beer, B. J. Hindson, E. K. Wheeler, S. B. Hall, K. A. Rose, I. M. Kennedy and B. W. Colston, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79, 8471–8475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Teh, R. Lin, L. H. Hung and A. P. Lee, Lab Chip, 2008, 8, 198–220 RSC .
G. M. Whitesides, Nature, 2006, 442, 368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Atencia and D. J. Beebe, Nature, 2004, 437, 648 CrossRef PubMed .
H. A. Stone, A. D. Stroock and A. Ajdari, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech., 2004, 36, 381–411 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, B. Zhu, Y. Liu and G. Wittstock, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Shui, A. van den Berg and J. C. T. Eijkel, Microfluid. Nanofluid., 2011, 11, 87–92 CrossRef .
P. Zhu and L. Wang, Lab Chip, 2017, 17, 34–75 RSC .
J. H. Xu, S. W. Li, J. Tan, Y. J. Wang and G. S. Luo, AIChE J., 2006, 52, 3005–3010 CrossRef CAS .
T. Thorsen, R. W. Roberts, F. H. Arnold and S. R. Quake, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 86, 4163–4166 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Priest, S. Herminghaus and R. Seemann, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 024106 CrossRef .
C. Zhou, P. Yue and J. J. Feng, Phys. Fluids, 2006, 18, 092105 CrossRef .
A. Woodward, T. Cosgrove, J. Espidel, P. Jenkins and N. Shaw, Soft Matter, 2007, 3, 627–633 RSC .
L. Yobas, S. Martens, W.-L. Ong and N. Ranganathan, Lab Chip, 2006, 6, 1073–1079 RSC .
L. Shang, Y. Cheng and Y. Zhao, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 7964–8040 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Cramer, P. Fischer and E. J. Windhab, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2004, 59, 3045–3058 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ahmed and T. B. Jones, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2007, 17, 1052–1058 CrossRef .
T. B. Jones, M. Gunji, M. Washizu and M. J. Feldman, J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 89, 1441–1448 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Wang, T. B. Jones and A. Raisanen, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2007, 17, 76 CrossRef .
C. Peng, Z. Zhang, C. J. Kim and Y. S. Ju, Lab Chip, 2014, 14, 1117–1122 RSC .
J.-M. Roux, Y. Fouillet and J.-L. Achard, Sens. Actuators, A, 2007, 134, 486–493 CrossRef CAS .
J. Berthier, P. Clementz, O. Raccurt, D. Jary, P. Claustre, C. Peponnet and Y. Fouillet, Sens. Actuators, A, 2006, 127, 283–294 CrossRef CAS .
S. Köster, F. E. Angilè, H. Duan, J. J. Agresti, A. Wintner, C. Schmitz, A. C. Rowat, C. A. Merten, D. Pisignano, A. D. Griffiths and D. A. Weitz, Lab Chip, 2008, 8, 1110–1115 RSC .
W. Cheng, G. Yandong, N. Nam-Trung, W. Teck Neng, Y. Chun and O. Kim Tiow, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2005, 15, 2289 CrossRef .
F. Zhang, Y. Daghighi and D. Li, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 364, 588–593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-P. Zhu, N.-T. Nguyen, R. V. Ramanujan and X.-Y. Huang, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 14834–14841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. F. Crawford, C. A. Smith and G. Whyte, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 10545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          T. M. Tran, S. C. Kim and A. R. Abate, bioRxiv,  2018 Search PubMed.
C. J. Hayes and T. M. Dalton, Biomol. Detect. Quantif., 2015, 4, 22–32 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tanaka, S. Yamamoto, A. Nakamura, Y. Nakashoji, N. Okura, N. Nakamoto, K. Tsukagoshi and M. Hashimoto, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 4134–4143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lindstrom and H. Andersson-Svahn, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 2011, 1810, 308–316 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Lindstrom, M. Hammond, H. Brismar, H. Andersson-Svahn and A. Ahmadian, Lab Chip, 2009, 9, 3465–3471 RSC .
S. Lindstrom, R. Larsson and H. A. Svahn, Electrophoresis, 2008, 29, 1219–1227 CrossRef PubMed .
S. C. Kim, I. C. Clark, P. Shahi and A. R. Abate, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 1273–1279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Cai, M. Xiao, P. Xu, Y. C. Xu and W. Du, Lab Chip, 2014, 14, 3917–3924 RSC .
W. Du, L. Li, K. P. Nichols and R. F. Ismagilov, Lab Chip, 2009, 9, 2286–2292 RSC .
F. Shen, W. Du, J. E. Kreutz, A. Fok and R. F. Ismagilov, Lab Chip, 2010, 10, 2666–2672 RSC .
F. Shen, W. Du, E. K. Davydova, M. A. Karymov, J. Pandey and R. F. Ismagilov, Anal. Chem., 2010, 82, 4606–4612 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Shen, B. Sun, J. E. Kreutz, E. K. Davydova, W. Du, P. L. Reddy, L. J. Joseph and R. F. Ismagilov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 17705–17712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. K. Dimov, R. Lu, E. P. Lee, J. Seita, D. Sahoo, S. M. Park, I. L. Weissman and L. P. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3451 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, S. J. Guo, N. Shao, S. Tu, M. Xu, Z. R. Ren, X. Ling, G. Q. Wang, Z. X. Lin and S. C. Tao, Lab Chip, 2011, 11, 3609–3618 RSC .
D. Sefrioui, N. Sarafan-Vasseur, L. Beaussire, M. Baretti, A. Gangloff, F. Blanchard, F. Clatot, J. C. Sabourin, R. Sesboue, T. Frebourg, P. Michel and F. Di Fiore, Dig. Liver Dis., 2015, 47, 884–890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Witters, K. Knez, F. Ceyssens, R. Puers and J. Lammertyn, Lab Chip, 2013, 13, 2047–2054 RSC .
A. K. White, K. A. Heyries, C. Doolin, M. Vaninsberghe and C. L. Hansen, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 7182–7190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Tian, Y. Mu, Y. Xu, Q. Song, B. Yu, C. Ma, W. Jin and Q. Jin, Anal. Biochem., 2015, 491, 55–57 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fu, H. Zhou, C. Jia, F. Jing, Q. Jin, J. Zhao and G. Li, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 245, 414–422 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ramakrishnan, J. Qin, R. C. Jones and L. S. Weaver, Methods Mol. Biol., 2013, 949, 423–431 CrossRef PubMed .
A. M. Thompson, A. Gansen, A. L. Paguirigan, J. E. Kreutz, J. P. Radich and D. T. Chiu, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 12308–12314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhu, Y. Xu, L. Qiu, C. Ma, B. Yu, Q. Song, W. Jin, Q. Jin, J. Liu and Y. Mu, Lab Chip, 2017, 17, 1655–1665 RSC .
A. Gross, J. Schöndube, S. Niekrawitz, W. Streule, L. Riegger, R. Zengerle and P. Koltay, J. Lab. Autom., 2013, 18, 504–518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, X. Zhou and Y. Yu, Lab Chip, 2014, 14, 3603–3610 RSC .
Q. Zhu, L. Qiu, B. Yu, Y. Xu, Y. Gao, T. Pan, Q. Tian, Q. Song, W. Jin, Q. Jin and Y. Mu, Lab Chip, 2014, 14, 1176–1185 RSC .
W. Zhang, N. Li, D. Koga, Y. Zhang, H. Zeng, H. Nakajima, J.-M. Lin and K. Uchiyama, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 5329–5334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. P. Dinca, M. Gheorghe, M. Aherne and P. Galvin, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2009, 19, 065009 CrossRef .
K.-Y. Lien, S.-H. Lee, T.-J. Tsai, T.-Y. Chen and G.-B. Lee, Microfluid. Nanofluid., 2009, 7, 795–806 CrossRef CAS .
P. Neuzil, J. Pipper and T. M. Hsieh, Mol. BioSyst., 2006, 2, 292–298 RSC .
J. El-Ali, I. R. Perch-Nielsen, C. R. Poulsen, D. D. Bang, P. Telleman and A. Wolff, Sens. Actuators, A, 2004, 110, 3–10 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Liao, G. B. Lee, H. S. Liu, T. M. Hsieh and C. H. Luo, Nucleic Acids Res., 2005, 33, e156 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Goupil, W. Seifert, K. Zabrocki, E. Müller and G. J. Snyder, Entropy, 2011, 13, 1481–1517 CrossRef .
J.-D. Kim, Y.-S. Kim, H.-J. Song, J.-M. Kim, J. Kim and C.-Y. Park, Int. J. Multimed. Ubiquitous Eng., 2012, 7, 389–394 Search PubMed .
Y. Shigeo, S. Tadzunu, I. Kazuhito and A. Yoshitaka, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 54, 057001 CrossRef .

          Q. Xianbo and Y. Jingqi, Proceedings of 27th Annual IEEE Conference on Engineering in Medicine and Biology, IEEE, Shanghai,  2006 Search PubMed.
J. Kondoh, N. Shimizu, Y. Matsui and S. Shiokawa, IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq. Control, 2005, 52, 1881–1883 Search PubMed .
A.-L. Zhang, J.-S. Zhang, X.-T. Fu and Y. Zha, Ferroelectrics, 2015, 486, 41–48 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kondoh, N. Shimizu, Y. Matsui, M. Sugimoto and S. Shiokawa, Sens. Actuators, A, 2009, 149, 292–297 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Shilton, V. Mattoli, M. Travagliati, M. Agostini, A. Desii, F. Beltram and M. Cecchini, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5895–5901 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xue, H. Wang, Y. Zhao, L. Dai, L. Feng, X. Wang and T. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4814–4818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Arbatan, L. Li, J. Tian and W. Shen, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2012, 1, 80–83 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Sarvi, T. Arbatan, P. P. Y. Chan and W. Shen, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 14501 RSC .
K. R. Sreejith, C. H. Ooi, D. V. Dao and N.-T. Nguyen, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 15436–15443 RSC .
B. H. Ha, K. S. Lee, G. Destgeer, J. Park, J. S. Choung, J. H. Jung, J. H. Shin and H. J. Sung, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 11851 CrossRef PubMed .
P. J. Roche, L. K. Beitel, R. Khan, R. Lumbroso, M. Najih, M. C. Cheung, J. Thiemann, V. Veerasubramanian, M. Trifiro, V. P. Chodavarapu and A. G. Kirk, Analyst, 2012, 137, 4475–4481 RSC .
J. H. Son, B. Cho, S. Hong, S. H. Lee, O. Hoxha, A. J. Haack and L. P. Lee, Light: Sci. Appl., 2015, 4, e280 CrossRef CAS .

          V. Rudnev, D. Loveless and R. Cook, Handbook of Induction Heating, 2nd edn,  2017 Search PubMed .

          S. Semiatin, Elements of induction heating : design, control, and applications, ed. S. Zinn and S. L. Semiatin,  2018 Search PubMed .
S.-k. Baek, J. Min and J.-H. Park, Lab Chip, 2010, 10, 909–917 RSC .
M.-H. Ahn, S.-K. Baek, J. Min and J.-H. Park, BioChip J., 2016, 10, 208–214 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pal and V. Venkataraman, Sens. Actuators, A, 2002, 102, 151–156 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pal, V. Venkataraman, K. N. Mohan, H. S. Chandra and V. Natarajan, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2004, 75, 2880–2883 CrossRef CAS .
C. Fermér, P. Nilsson and M. Larhed, Eur. J. Pharm. Sci., 2003, 18, 129–132 CrossRef .
C. R. Strauss and R. W. Trainor, Aust. J. Chem., 1995, 48, 1665–1692 CrossRef CAS .
K. Orrling, P. Nilsson, M. Gullberg and M. Larhed, Chem. Commun., 2004, 790–791,  10.1039/B317049G .

          P. Garg, M. M. Hella, D. A. Borca-Tasiuc and H. Mohamed, DNA amplification by PCR using low cost, programmable microwave heating,  2008 Search PubMed .
D. J. Marchiarullo, A. H. Sklavounos, K. Oh, B. L. Poe, N. S. Barker and J. P. Landers, Lab Chip, 2013, 13, 3417–3425 RSC .
C. D. Chin, V. Linder and S. K. Sia, Lab Chip, 2012, 12, 2118–2134 RSC .
F. Ahmad and S. A. Hashsham, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2012, 733, 1–15 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yager, G. J. Domingo and J. Gerdes, Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng., 2008, 10, 107–144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Snodgrass, A. Gardner, L. Jiang, C. Fu, E. Cesarman and D. Erickson, PLoS One, 2016, 11, e0147636 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Gumus, S. Ahsan, B. Dogan, L. Jiang, R. Snodgrass, A. Gardner, Z. Lu, K. Simpson and D. Erickson, Biomed. Opt. Express, 2016, 7, 1974–1984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jiang, M. Mancuso, Z. Lu, G. Akar, E. Cesarman and D. Erickson, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4137 CrossRef PubMed .

          L. Jiang, Z. Lu, M. Mancuso and D. Erickson, Proceedings of the Conference on Lasers and Electro Optics (CLEO), Optical Society of America, San Jose, California,  2013 Search PubMed.

          A. L. Gardner, L. Jiang, Z. Lu, G. Akar, E. Cesarman and D. Erickson, KS-detect: A solar-powered smartphone-based system for diagnosing Kaposi's sarcoma in resource-limited settings,  2014 Search PubMed .
L. Mazutis, J. C. Baret, P. Treacy, Y. Skhiri, A. F. Araghi, M. Ryckelynck, V. Taly and A. D. Griffiths, Lab Chip, 2009, 9, 2902–2908 RSC .
L. Mazutis, J. Gilbert, W. L. Ung, D. A. Weitz, A. D. Griffiths and J. A. Heyman, Nat. Protoc., 2013, 8, 870–891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Pekin, Y. Skhiri, J. C. Baret, D. Le Corre, L. Mazutis, C. B. Salem, F. Millot, A. El Harrak, J. B. Hutchison, J. W. Larson, D. R. Link, P. Laurent-Puig, A. D. Griffiths and V. Taly, Lab Chip, 2011, 11, 2156–2166 RSC .
Q. Zhong, S. Bhattacharya, S. Kotsopoulos, J. Olson, V. Taly, A. D. Griffiths, D. R. Link and J. W. Larson, Lab Chip, 2011, 11, 2167–2174 RSC .
G. Barillaro, S. Merlo, S. Surdo, L. M. Strambini and F. Carpignano, Microfluid. Nanofluid., 2011, 12, 545–552 CrossRef .
X. Wang, O. Hofmann, R. Das, E. M. Barrett, A. J. deMello, J. C. deMello and D. D. Bradley, Lab Chip, 2007, 7, 58–63 RSC .
S. Janz, D. X. Xu, M. Vachon, N. Sabourin, P. Cheben, H. McIntosh, H. Ding, S. Wang, J. H. Schmid, A. Delâge, J. Lapointe, A. Densmore, R. Ma, W. Sinclair, S. M. Logan, R. MacKenzie, Q. Y. Liu, D. Zhang, G. Lopinski, O. Mozenson, M. Gilmour and H. Tabor, Opt. Express, 2013, 21, 4623–4637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kamei, B. M. Paegel, J. R. Scherer, A. M. Skelley, R. A. Street and R. A. Mathies, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75, 5300–5305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Novak, P. Neuzil, J. Pipper, Y. Zhang and S. Lee, Lab Chip, 2007, 7, 27–29 RSC .
A. C. Hatch, J. S. Fisher, A. R. Tovar, A. T. Hsieh, R. Lin, S. L. Pentoney, D. L. Yang and A. P. Lee, Lab Chip, 2011, 11, 3838–3845 RSC .
J. R. Peham, M. J. Vellekoop, C. Nöhammer and H. Wiesinger-Mayr, Procedia Eng., 2011, 25, 936–939 CrossRef CAS .
G. Williams, C. Backhouse and H. Aziz, Electronics, 2014, 3, 43 CrossRef .
N. Pires, T. Dong, U. Hanke and N. Hoivik, Sensors, 2014, 14, 15458 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Aussillous and D. Quéré, Nature, 2001, 411, 924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, Z. Xu, M. Parhizkar, J. Fang, X. Wang and T. Lin, Microfluid. Nanofluid., 2012, 13, 555–564 CrossRef CAS .
E. Bormashenko, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 663–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. M. Oliveira, C. R. Correia, R. L. Reis and J. F. Mano, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2015, 4, 264–270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. K. Vadivelu, H. Kamble, A. Munaz and N. T. Nguyen, Biomed. Microdevices, 2017, 19, 31 CrossRef PubMed .
R. K. Vadivelu, C. H. Ooi, R. Q. Yao, J. Tello Velasquez, E. Pastrana, J. Diaz-Nido, F. Lim, J. A. Ekberg, N. T. Nguyen and J. A. St John, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 15083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Bormashenko, R. Balter and D. Aurbach, Int. J. Chem. React. Eng., 2011, 9, 1 Search PubMed .
L. Mahadevan and Y. Pomeau, Phys. Fluids, 1999, 11, 2449–2453 CrossRef CAS .
E. Bormashenko, R. Pogreb, R. Balter, O. Gendelman and D. Aurbach, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 151601 CrossRef .
E. Bormashenko, R. Pogreb, T. Stein, G. Whyman, M. Schiffer and D. Aurbach, J. Adhes. Sci. Technol., 2012, 25, 1371–1377 CrossRef .
M. K. Khaw, C. H. Ooi, F. Mohd-Yasin, R. Vadivelu, J. S. John and N. T. Nguyen, Lab Chip, 2016, 16, 2211–2218 RSC .
L. Zhang, D. Cha and P. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4756–4760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Balsam, H. A. Bruck and A. Rasooly, Methods Mol. Biol., 2015, 1256, 231–245 CrossRef PubMed .
K. E. McCracken, T. Tat, V. Paz and J.-Y. Yoon, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 9237–9243 RSC .
A. Priye, S. W. Bird, Y. K. Light, C. S. Ball, O. A. Negrete and R. J. Meagher, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 44778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bueno, R. Muñoz and J. L. Marty, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 232, 462–468 CrossRef CAS .

          Z. Cao, H. Tseng, K. Salvante, P. Nepomnaschy and M. A. Parameswaran, Proceedings of IEEE Sensors, IEEE, Orlando,  2016 Search PubMed.
C. D. Ahrberg, B. R. Ilic, A. Manz and P. Neuzil, Lab Chip, 2016, 16, 586–592 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  a) Various stages of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and b) different phases of a real-time polymerase chain reaction. Digital polymerase chain reaction is carried out up to the linear phase of the fluorescence and obtains either a positive or a negative fluorescence.	 
C = λ/V	(1)
λ = −ln(z/n)	(2)

 	Fig. 2  Concept and workflow of a) end-point PCR, b) qPCR or real time PCR and c) digital PCR (dPCR).	 

 	Fig. 3  PCR sample dispersion a) by droplets formed by a flow focusing device, b) by droplets formed by a T-junction microfluidic device, c) by droplets formed by a co-flow type microfluidic device, d) in microwells created on a base substrate, e) by channels created on a base substrate, and f) by printing the PCR mixture (step 2) on pre-deposited oil droplets (step 1) with the help of print heads.	 

 	Fig. 4  Concept diagram of slip-chip technology.	 

 	Fig. 5  Thermal cycling in digital PCR platform using a) Joule heating technique, b) TEC heating, c) surface acoustic wave technology, d) contact type photonic heating, e) non-contact type photonic heating, f) direct photonic heating with a thin layer of gold coating in a microchip, g) induction heating, h) microwave heating and i) solar heating.	 

Joule	Conduction	****	*****	Low	—
Thermoelectric	Conduction	***	*****	Low	Higher thermal inertia
Acoustic	Conduction	***	***	High	Complex
Photonic	Radiation	*****	**	Low–high	Complex, bulky and expensive
Inductive	Radiation	*****	***	Medium	Complex
Microwave	Radiation	*****	**	High	Complex and lacks universality
Solar	Radiation	**	**	Medium	Lacks universality

 	Fig. 6  Fluorescence detection using a) a photomultiplier tube and b) a camera.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
