Hole-induced large-area homoepitaxial growth of CdSe nanowire arrays for photovoltaic application   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3TA10771J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3TA10771J
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 6313-6319Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsHole-induced large-area homoepitaxial growth of CdSe nanowire arrays for photovoltaic application†

        
          
            Liang 
            Bian
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiwei 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chunyan 
            Luan
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Juan Antonio 
            Zapien
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Xiaozhen 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yiming 
            Wu
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Jiansheng 
            Jie
          
        
      *a
aInstitute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Carbon-Based Functional Materials & Devices, Soochow University, Suzhou, Jiangsu 215123, P. R. China. E-mail: jsjie@suda.edu.cn
bCenter Of Super-Diamond and Advanced Films (COSDAF), Department of Physics and Materials Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, P. R. China. E-mail: apjazs@cityu.edu.hk
Received 
      22nd February 2013
    , Accepted 22nd March 2013First published on 25th March 2013AbstractTraditionally, lattice-matched substrates are a requisite for the epitaxial growth of one-dimensional (1D) semiconductor nanostructure arrays, while the lack of suitable substrates seriously limits the nanowire (NW) arrays available for future nanoelectronic and nano-optoelectronics applications. In this work, we reported a new strategy for achieving the one-step homoepitaxial growth of highly aligned CdSe NW arrays by utilizing porous silicon as substrates. The porous Si with dense holes could promote the nucleation of CdSe micro-crystals at the early stage of vapor phase transport owing to its high surface energy. Subsequently, the epitaxial growth of CdSe NW arrays would take place on the top surfaces of the micro-crystals, resulting in large-area highly aligned NW arrays. As compared with the conventional epitaxial methods, the hole-induced method is greatly simplified because no lattice-matched substrates or catalysts are needed; furthermore, the universality of the proposed method was demonstrated for a variety of II–VI NW arrays. As a demonstration of the potential applications, preliminary studies on CdSe NW array/Si p–n heterojunction solar cells were shown with an efficiency of ∼0.43% under AM 1.5G illumination.
1 Introduction
One-dimensional (1D) semiconductor nanostructures have drawn considerable research attention over the past decade because of their unique properties and tremendous potential in diverse fields such as nanoelectronics, nano-optoelectronics, and sensors.1–3 However, most of the 1D nanostructures are synthesized in such a manner that they are disorderly distributed on the substrate or in solution without any orientation.4,5 The large property fluctuation caused by the inhomogeneous size, length, and orientation distribution of the nanostructures has greatly impeded their practical applications. To address this issue, post-growth assembly methods, including the Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) technique,6 microfluidic-assisted nanowire (NW) alignment,7 and electric/magnetic field alignment, etc.,8–10 have been developed to align/pattern the 1D nanostructures, promoting their applications in integrated devices such as field-effect transistors (FETs),11 photosensors,12 logic circuits13 and so on. Despite much progress, these methods are rather complicated and difficult to utilize on a large scale. As an alternative, 1D nanostructure arrays, nanostructures with uniform size and orientation, have attracted great interest due to the amazing properties arising from their distinct array structure.14,15 For instance, the nanoarrays are easy to manipulate and transfer, offering the possibility for a host of novel flexible devices.12,16 The strong light trapping effect and low laser emission threshold also make them promising candidates for high-performance solar cell and laser applications.17,18 Not surprisingly, then, semiconductor NW arrays open up new opportunities for a vast variety of applications in nanoelectronics and nano-optoelectronics.
There are currently two main methods used to fabricate NW arrays namely epitaxial growth and template-assisted methods.19,20 Lattice-matched substrates are a requisite to achieve the epitaxial growth of NW arrays in the epitaxial growth method; however, the lack of suitable substrates limits the NW arrays available.21 As for the latter, polycrystalline NWs instead of single-crystalline NWs are usually fabricated because of the low-temperature and solution-based growth method.22 Therefore, it remains a critical challenge to develop a general method for large-scale synthesis of single-crystalline NW arrays. To relieve the difficulty in preparing lattice-matched substrates, Li et al. reported the epitaxial growth of ordered CdSe branched NW arrays on pre-prepared large CdSe microrods.23 We have also fabricated highly aligned ZnS NW arrays using single-crystalline ZnS nanoribbons (NRs) as epitaxial substrates.24 However, a two-step growth technique is normally adopted in the above works, which will inevitably increase the complexity and decrease the reproducibility of the NW array growth. Recently, Utama et al. demonstrated the van der Waals epitaxy of cadmium chalcogenide NW arrays on the (001) muscovite mica substrate,25 but the use of insulating muscovite mica may hinder some nanodevice applications.
CdSe is a well-known excellent semiconductor with unique optical and electronic properties;26 several methods including hydrothermal/solvothermal techniques,27 electrochemical deposition,28,29 vapor phase transport,30 and colloidal synthesis,31 among others, have been developed to synthesize CdSe NWs and NRs. CdSe NW arrays exhibit great potential for high-efficiency solar cell applications, given its band-gap, ∼1.7 eV, which is highly suited for efficient sunlight absorption. Nevertheless, single-crystalline CdSe NW arrays are seldom reported due to the lack of suitable epitaxial substrates and difficulties in controlling the array growth.32 On the other hand, direct growth of CdSe NW arrays without a catalyst is of particular interest due to its processing simplicity and metal-free growth environment. This is because the potential incorporation of deep level impurities from metal catalysts, such as Au used in vapor–liquid–solid (VLS) growth, may degrade the performance of photovoltaic (PV) devices by reducing the minority carrier lifetime.33 Herein, we develop a feasible method for one-step catalyst-free preparation of large-area, highly aligned CdSe NW arrays. Differing from the conventional methods, the use of porous Si substrates, instead of polished Si wafers, is demonstrated to be an effective approach to promote the ordered NW array nucleation and growth. We further demonstrate that this method provides great flexibility and can be applied to fabricate a variety of binary or ternary II–VI NW arrays. The proposed technique has been applied to develop CdSe NW array/Si p–n heterojunctions that present pronounced photovoltaic characteristics.
2 Experimental details
2.1 Fabrication of porous Si substrates
Porous Si was fabricated on an n-type Si (100) wafer (phosphorus doped, resistivity 1–10 Ω cm) via an electrochemical etching method. Normally, random hole channels are obtained on Si during the electrochemical etching process;34 however, by choosing the Si wafer with proper conduction type and resistivity range, i.e., n-type and resistivity 1–10 Ω cm, porous Si with highly ordered hole channels can be obtained.35 The hole size and depth can be readily tuned by adjusting the etching parameters such as current flow and time. In this experiment, etching was carried out in a Teflon cell using a Pt cathode under backside illumination with a halogen lamp (ESI, Fig. S1†). The etching solution contained hydrogen fluoride (40% aqueous solution) and ethanol, and the anodization current density was kept constant at 40 mA cm−2. After 4 min of etching, the Si wafer was cleaned with deionized (DI) water several times and the amorphous Si layer on the hole side walls was removed by immersing the wafer in NaOH solution (5 mol L−1 aqueous solution) for 15 s. The as-synthesized porous Si substrate presents square-shaped nanopores with side length ∼0.8 to 1.2 μm and depth 10–15 μm.
The fabrication of n-CdSe NW array/p-Si heterojunctions also relied on the nanoporous strategy; however it was found that the heavy-doped p-type Si wafer (resistivity 0.018–0.02 Ω cm) was unsuitable for the electrochemical method mentioned above. Alternatively, reactive ion etching (RIE, Oxford Plasmalab 80 plus) was applied to fabricate the porous Si substrate with micro-sized holes as follows: (i) first, photolithography (MJB4, SUSS MicroTec) was performed to fabricate the hole patterns with a diameter of 3 μm and interspace ∼6 μm on a p-type Si wafer using a positive photoresist (ALLRESIST AR-5350); (ii) the patterned wafer was loaded into the RIE chamber where a gas mixture of O2 and SF6 gas (volume ratio 1:6) was used as the reaction gas; (iii) etching proceeded at 120 W for 9 min and hole patterns with a depth of ∼9 μm were obtained.
2.2 Synthesis and characterization of CdSe NW arrays
Synthesis of large-area aligned CdSe NW arrays was conducted in a horizontal quartz tube furnace via a vapor phase transport method as schematically illustrated in Fig. 1a. An alumina boat loaded with 0.3 g CdSe powder (99.99%, Aldrich) was transferred to the central region of the furnace and a porous Si substrate was placed in the downstream direction ∼10 cm from the CdSe source. After evacuating to a base pressure of 5.3 × 10−3 Pa, the tube was flushed with 60 sccm H2 gas (5% in Ar) for 10 min and then backfilled to a pressure of 150 Torr using differential pumping. The CdSe powder was then heated to 950 °C in 40 min and maintained at that temperature for 45 min. The Si substrate temperature was ∼500 °C during the experiment. The system was evacuated to vacuum right after the 45 min growth period and allowed to cool down to room temperature naturally. A layer of dark product could be observed on the surfaces of the retrieved porous Si substrates.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of the experimental setup for the CdSe NW array growth. SEM images of the (b) top view and (c) cross-sectional view of the porous silicon substrate. 
To tune the electrical properties of the CdSe NW arrays, gallium (Ga)-doped CdSe NW arrays were also synthesized.33 For this purpose a powder mix of CdSe, Ga and Ga2O3 (molar ratio 15:4:1, 0.3 g) was used as the evaporation source and all other parameters were kept as before. Further experimental details can be found in ref. 36.
Besides CdSe NW arrays, both ZnSe and CdxZn1−xSe NW arrays were synthesized using the method described above except for the evaporation sources and temperatures. For ZnSe NW arrays, 0.5 g ZnSe powder (99.99%, Aldrich) was evaporated at 1050 °C while the mixed powder of CdSe and ZnSe (molar ratio 1:1) and a temperature of 1000 °C were adopted for the CdxZn1−xSe NW arrays.
The morphologies and structures of the products were characterized by field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, Quanta 200F), X-ray diffraction (XRD, Shimadzu XRD-6000), high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM, Philips CM300). The components were detected by energy dispersive X-ray spectrometry (EDS) in SEM and TEM. Optical properties were characterized using a fluorescence luminescence spectrophotometer (PL, FLWOROMAX-4), cathode luminescence (Oxford, Mono CL) attached to the SEM, and an ultraviolet-visible near-infrared spectrophotometer (LAMBDA 750).
2.3 CdSe:Ga NW array/Si p–n heterojunctions
The CdSe:Ga NW array/Si p–n heterojunctions were fabricated using p-type porous Si substrates fabricated by RIE as the growth substrates. The top contact was fabricated from a 13 nm thick indium (In) film deposited on the CdSe:Ga NW array while 30 nm Au was deposited on the rear side of the porous Si via electron-beam evaporation (Kurt J. Lesker PVD 75) as the bottom contact. A solar simulator equipped with a 300 W xenon lamp and an AM 1.5G filter (Newport 91160) was used for detecting the photovoltaic characteristics of the heterojunction arrays. The irradiation intensity was 100 mW cm−2 calibrated using a Newport standard Si solar cell 91150.
3 Results and discussion
3.1 Characterizations of the CdSe NW arrays

Fig. 2a–c show the typical SEM images of the CdSe NW arrays fabricated on the porous Si substrate. We emphasize that there was no catalyst present on the substrate before NW array growth. It is seen that domains of vertically aligned CdSe NW arrays are formed with an average domain size of ∼10 × 10 μm2. Although the NW orientations are not identical across domains, each of them consists of NWs aligned with the same orientation and very high density. The diameter and length of the NWs are 50–100 nm and 3–5 μm, respectively. The cross-sectional SEM image in Fig. 2c reveals that the NW arrays do not grow directly on the porous Si but on a polycrystalline CdSe layer, thickness ∼10 μm, which serves as a buffer layer for the NW array growth. It is worth noting that the presence of porous Si is crucial to the growth of NW arrays; control experiments without porous Si, but with other conditions unchanged, resulted in the growth of a layer of large CdSe crystals on the smooth Si surface (ESI, Fig. S2†). The density of the NW arrays can be controlled by adjusting the growth temperature as well as the gas pressure; the lower growth temperature/pressure leads to the growth of more sparse NW arrays (Fig. S3†). On the other hand, by tuning the growth conditions, CdSe NW arrays with distinct morphologies and structures could be obtained as shown in Fig. S4.†Fig. 2d shows the XRD pattern of the CdSe NW arrays. A strong diffraction peak located at 25.39 degrees, which represents the (002) diffraction of wurtzite CdSe, could be observed in the pattern, implying that the CdSe NW arrays have a preferred growth orientation along the c-axis.
 Fig. 2  (a) Top-view SEM image of CdSe NW arrays grown on a porous Si substrate, (b) enlarged SEM image of the NW arrays, (c) cross-sectional view SEM image of the NW arrays and (d) XRD pattern of the CdSe NW arrays. 
A low-magnification TEM image, Fig. 3a, of a CdSe NW array taken from the sample in Fig. 2a–c, shows the densely arrayed structure of the NW domain which appears to grow from a common ground. The TEM image of a single CdSe NW, Fig. 3b, reveals that the NW has uniform diameter along its main body and is terminated by a sharp tip. An important feature from the TEM image is the absence of metal catalyst at the tip of the NW that is characteristically found in a conventional VLS growth process. Interestingly, HRTEM images (Fig. 3c–e), and fast Fourier transform (FFT) patterns (insets in Fig. 3c and d), reveal the distinct phase structures between the NW body, which presents a wurtzite (WZ) phase, and the tip, which presents a zinc blende (ZB) phase. The growth direction of the NW could be assigned to [0001] for the WZ and [11] for ZB, [0001]WZ//[11]ZB, since the (0001) planes of the WZ phase are parallel to the (11) planes of the ZB phase. We also note that the transition from the WZ phase to the ZB phase at the tip position is very abrupt with an atomically smooth interface, as shown in Fig. 3e. This could be attributed to the perfect lattice matching between WZ and ZB phases; the WZ phase differs from the ZB phase only in the stacking sequence of the lattice planes: ABAB… along the 〈0001〉 directions of WZ and ABCABC… along the 〈111〉 directions of ZB. The crystal structure of the CdSe NW is illustrated in Fig. 3g. The variation of stacking sequence may induce a large difference in the electronic structures of WZ and ZB phases,37 therefore the CdSe NWs in this work possess a phase heterojunction structure along the NW growth direction. This heterojunction is expected to be free of stress and dangling bonds and may have interesting applications in future nanoelectronics. The EDS spectrum from the tip position is shown in Fig. 3f, where only Cd, Se, C, and Cu peaks are detected. The C and Cu peaks originate from the TEM grid. In addition, the atomic ratio of the Cd and Se elements is approximated as 1:1 within the instrumental error for standard quantitative analysis. The absence of metal element at the tip further confirms that the NW growth is not a VLS mechanism.
 Fig. 3  (a) Low-magnification TEM image of the CdSe NW array. (b) TEM image of an individual CdSe NW. HRTEM image taken from (c) the tip, (d) the main body, and (e) the interface of the tip and body of the NW as marked in (b). (f) EDS spectrum of the NW at the tip position. (g) Schematic illustration shows the crystal structure of the CdSe NW. 
3.2 Growth mechanism of the CdSe NW arrays
The products obtained at different stages of the vapor transport deposition were investigated to study the growth mechanism of the CdSe NW arrays on porous Si. We note that the primary porous Si substrate consists of dense square-shaped pores. In the initial growth stage, 15 min after reaching the temperature set value (950 °C), a layer of micro-sized CdSe crystals with flat top surfaces was formed on the porous Si (Fig. 4b). The micro-crystal surfaces are oriented at an angle between ∼30 and ∼60 degrees relative to the normal direction of the substrate. Close investigation reveals the existence of many small protuberances on the top surfaces of the micro-crystals, which become more apparent after 25 min growth (Fig. 4c). After 35 min of growth, Fig. 4d, the protuberances extend along the normal direction of the micro-crystals and eventually form dense NW arrays at 45 min (Fig. 4e). However, when the growth time increases to 60 min, the NWs merge together and form lotus root-like porous CdSe micro-crystals (Fig. 4f).
 Fig. 4  Schematic illustrations, together with the corresponding SEM images, show the different stages of the CdSe NW array growth. (a) The porous Si substrate before growth and the product after (b) 15 min, (c) 25 min, (d) 35 min, (e) 45 min, and (f) 60 min growth. 
The above results suggest that the CdSe NW arrays grow via a vapor-phase (VS) process, rather than VLS, according to the following steps. First, initial growth of the CdSe micro-crystals occurs when the CdSe vapor transfers to the porous Si. At that time, the temperature of the CdSe source just reaches the set value, but the temperature of the porous Si substrate is still lower than the maximum value due to the temperature gradient in the tube furnace; under these conditions fast nucleation and growth take place due to the high surface energy of the porous Si. The micro-crystals grow along the [0001] direction, which is the preferential growth orientation for the wurtzite II–VI semiconductors.38 As the substrate temperature increases, however, incoming CdSe vapor tends to nucleate on the flat (0001) surfaces of the micro-crystals, forming the small protuberances seen in Fig. 4b and c. Further CdSe incorporation can thus promote the epitaxial growth of the CdSe protuberances along the [0001] direction on the micro-crystals, Fig. 4d, eventually resulting in bundles of dense CdSe NW arrays as in Fig. 4e. Nevertheless, the radial expansion of the NWs results in merging of the NW array for growth times longer than ∼60 min, leading to lotus root-like porous CdSe micro-crystals (Fig. 4f). In contrast, the ZB phase tips are likely to be generated during the sample cooling stage, this is because residual CdSe vapor in the reaction chamber allows the ZB phase tips to be formed at a relatively lower growth temperature since the ZB phase is more stable at relatively low temperature.39
3.3 Optical properties of the CdSe NW arrays
The room temperature PL spectrum of the CdSe NW arrays was recorded using the 525 nm excitation wavelength of a Xe lamp. As shown in Fig. 5a, a strong red emission peak centered at ∼725 nm is observed, which is consistent with the band-gap of CdSe (1.7 eV) and ascribed to the near band-edge (NBE) emission of the NWs. The emission peak has a relative small full width at half-maximum (FWMH) of 20 nm. Also, no defect-related emission peak can be found in the PL spectrum, indicating the relatively high quality of the as-synthesized CdSe NW arrays. Cathodoluminescence (CL) was also carried out to study the origin of the luminescence in the nanostructures; the CL spectra in Fig. 5b show a strong emission centered at ∼726 nm, which is in good agreement with the PL investigation. Moreover, the peak intensity increases with the increase of acceleration voltage from 10 to 20 kV because more excitons can be generated in the NW arrays at higher acceleration voltage. Interestingly, comparison of the SEM and the relevant CL images reveals that the luminescence of the underlying CdSe crystal grains is more intense than the NW arrays (Fig. 5c and d). This can be understood by the fact that, the NWs have a larger surface area-to-volume ratio and consequently a larger number of surface defects, which can serve as nonradiative recombination centres to effectively reduce its emission intensity.
 Fig. 5  (a) PL spectrum of the CdSe NW arrays. (b) CL spectra of the NW arrays measured under different acceleration voltage. (c) SEM image and corresponding (d) CL image of the NW arrays. 
3.4 Flexibility of the hole-induced growth method
From the above results, it is clear that the existence of holes on the Si substrate is vital to initiate the nucleation of CdSe crystal grains which subsequently promote the homoepitaxial growth of NW arrays on the grains. Differing from conventional epitaxial growth methods, no pre-selected matched substrate is needed in the hole-induced method described above. This means that this method may be a universal technique for the growth of various semiconductor NW arrays. To prove this point, we demonstrate the growth of a variety of II–VI NW arrays. At first, n-type gallium doped CdSe NW arrays were fabricated to tune their electrical properties. The experimental conditions were kept unchanged except for the use of Ga, Ga2O3, and CdSe mixed powder in the evaporation source. As shown in Fig. 6a, doping on the CdSe NW arrays has little influence on their morphologies and structures. From the EDS spectrum in Fig. 6b, the content of Ga was estimated to be ∼1.2 at%. Furthermore, NW arrays based on other II–VI semiconductors, such as binary semiconductor ZnSe and ternary semiconductor ZnxCd1−xSe, were also fabricated as demonstrated by the SEM images in Fig. 6c and e, respectively. While these structures present similar morphologies as compared to the CdSe NW arrays, Fig. 2, the differences in composition are revealed by the corresponding EDS spectra in Fig. 6d and f. These results demonstrate that the hole-induced NW array growth method is robust and could be readily extended to other semiconductor NW arrays, thus opening up the opportunities for a host of important applications.
 Fig. 6  SEM images of (a) Ga-doped CdSe NW arrays, (c) ZnSe NW arrays, and (e) ZnxCd1−xSe NW arrays. Scale bars in insets of (a), (b) and (c) are 1, 5, and 2 μm, respectively. Their corresponding EDS spectra are shown in (b), (d), and (f), respectively. 
3.5 CdSe NW array/Si p–n heterojunctions and their photovoltaic characteristics
The porous Si substrate fabricated via electrochemical etching possesses a high porosity density (∼70% substrate surface), however, as we will discuss below, the hole-induced method shows a large tolerance in the porosity density. Instead of the porous n-Si with random holes and ∼1 μm lateral dimension (Fig. 1), we used a substrate comprised of p-Si with regular micro-sized holes that fabricated via RIE etching, as shown in Fig. 7a and b, to grow CdSe:Ga NW arrays. The hole diameter is 3 μm and the hole interspaces is 6 μm, giving rise to a porosity density of ∼12% substrate surface. From Fig. 7c, it is seen that the whole substrate surface is covered by CdS:Ga NW arrays except for the center areas of holes. The NW array in each bundle remains highly aligned, suggesting that the hole-induced growth method is effective, however, the bundle sizes are smaller than that on the porous n-Si, which is attributed to the lower porosity density and corresponding smaller sizes of the underlying CdSe micro-crystals. Fig. 7d shows the absorption spectrum of the CdSe:Ga NW arrays, along with the spectra of bare Si and the porous Si substrate for comparison. It is clear that the CdSe:Ga NW arrays exhibit the best light absorption owing to the combined effect of NW arrays and porous Si. In particular, light absorption in the short wavelength range from 400 to 700 nm is remarkably enhanced as compared to Si because of the existence of the CdSe:Ga NW arrays.
 Fig. 7  (a) Top-view and (b) cross-sectional view SEM images of the porous p-Si substrate fabricated by RIE etching. (c) SEM image of the CdSe:Ga NW arrays grown on the porous Si substrate. The inset shows an enlarged SEM image of the NW array; scale bar is 1 μm. (c) Absorption spectrum of the CdSe:Ga NW array, along with the spectra of a bare Si wafer and a porous Si substrate for comparison. 
The n-type CdSe:Ga NW arrays on the p-type porous Si substrate constitute a p–n heterojunction, which has potential applications in high-efficiency solar cells.40 Inset in Fig. 8a illustrates the device structure of a solar cell based on such heterojunctions. The corresponding current density versus voltage (J–V) characteristics under AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2) show, Fig. 8a, a clear photovoltaic behavior, indicating that a high quality p–n heterojunction is formed between n-CdSe NW arrays and the p-Si substrate, despite the expected significant lattice mismatch. The open circuit voltage (VOC), short circuit current density (JSC), and fill factor (FF) are estimated to be ∼0.14 V, ∼10.03 mA cm−2, and ∼0.30, respectively, yielding a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of ∼0.43%. In contrast, the device counterpart fabricated on intrinsic CdSe NW arrays exhibits a much lower efficiency of 0.1%. This could be attributed to the poor electrical conductivity of CdSe NW arrays without doping.
 Fig. 8  (a) Photovoltaic characteristics of the CdSe:Ga NW array/porous Si p–n heterojunctions. The device counterpart based on undoped CdSe NW arrays was measured for comparison. Inset shows the schematic illustration of the solar cells. (b) Energy band diagram of the heterojunction. 
The photovoltaic characteristics of the CdSe NW array/Si p–n heterojunction can be understood qualitatively by plotting the energy band diagram as shown in Fig. 8b. Absorption of the incident light will result in the generation of electron–hole pairs in both the porous Si and the CdSe NW array sides. Considering the large difference in the band-gap, the CdSe:Ga NW arrays will mainly absorb light with shorter wavelength, while Si can absorb longer wavelength light. The distinct device structure of the CdSe:Ga NW array/Si heterojunction can potentially promote efficient absorption and conversion over a wide spectral range thus potentially offering significant advantages with respect to conventional Si solar cells which show limited absorption in the short wavelength range. Once the electron–hole pairs diffuse to the interface of the junction, they will be separated by the built-in electric field there and contribute to an external photocurrent. While the performance of the heterojunction solar cell in Fig. 8 is still less than ideal, we note that there are many opportunities for improvement and optimization. For example, the device performance could be further enhanced by means of optimizing the NW array growth, using appropriate surface passivation, and improving the electrical contacts to avoid interface/surface recombination and optimize charge extraction.41–43
4 Conclusions
In summary, we demonstrate a new approach for large-area synthesis of highly aligned and dense CdSe NW arrays via vapor phase transport using porous Si to promote the nucleation and growth of NW arrays. This approach represents a versatile method that overcomes known limitations of conventional epitaxial techniques that require lattice-matched substrates. The assembled CdSe NW arrays are composed of WZ-phase bodies terminated on ZB-phase tips thus forming a phase heterojunction in an individual NW. The optical properties of the NW arrays were studied by PL and CL and indicate the relatively high crystal quality of the as-synthesized NW arrays. Furthermore, the same growth strategy was proved to be efficient for the fabrication of a variety of other II–VI NW arrays. As an example of application, heterojunction solar cells fabricated from n-type CdSe:Ga NW arrays on p-type porous Si were constructed by the proposed hole-induced approach. The unoptimized solar cells exhibited clear photovoltaic behavior with efficiency ∼0.43% under AM 1.5G illumination. This work can be of use for large-area fabrication of semiconductor NW arrays for future nanoelectronic and nano-optoelectronic applications.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Basic Research Program of China (2012CB932400, 2013CB933500, 2010CB934500, 2011CB808400), the Major Research Plan of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 91233110, 91027021), and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Nos. 51172151, 51173124). We also thank a Project Funded by the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education.
Notes and references
M. H. Huang, S. Mao, H. Feick, H. Q. Yan, Y. Y. Wu, H. Kind, E. Weber, R. Russo and P. D. Yang, Science, 2001, 292, 1897 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Duan, Y. Huang, R. Agarwal and C. M. Lieber, Nature, 2003, 421, 241 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, C. J. Summers and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 423 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Zhang, J. S. Jie, Z. Wang, C. Y. Wu, L. Wang, Q. Peng, Y. Q. Yu, P. Jiang and C. Xie, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6736 RSC .
B. Mayers and Y. Xia, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 1875 RSC .
D. Whang, S. Jin, Y. Wu and C. M. Lieber, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1255 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, X. F. Duan, Q. Q. Wei and C. M. Lieber, Science, 2001, 291, 630 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Smith, C. D. Nordquist, T. N. Jackson, T. S. Mayer, B. R. Martin, J. Mbindyo and T. E. Mallouk, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 77, 1399 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Fan, J. C. Ho, Z. A. Jacobson, R. Yerushalmi, R. L. Alley, H. Razavi and A. Javey, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 20 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Yu, A. Y. Cao and C. M. Lieber, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 372 CrossRef CAS .
T. Takahashi, K. Takei, J. C. Ho, Y. L. Chueh, Z. Y. Fan and A. Javey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2102 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Fan, J. C. Ho, Z. A. Jacobson, H. Razavi and A. Javey, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 11066 CrossRef CAS .
K. Takei, T. Takahashi, J. C. Ho, H. Ko, A. G. Gillies, P. W. Leu, R. S. Fearing and A. Javey, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 821 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Cao, Y. Jiang, C. Wang, W. H. Wang, L. Z. Wang, M. Niu, W. J. Zhang, Y. Q. Li and S. T. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1501 CrossRef CAS .
X. S. Fang, L. M. Wu and L. F. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 585 CrossRef CAS .
M. Egard, S. Johansson, A. C. Johansson, K. M. Persson, A. Dey, B. Borg, C. Thelander, L. E. Wernersson and E. Lind, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 809 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Kelzenberg, S. W. Boettcher, J. A. Petykiewicz, D. B. Turner-Evans, M. C. Putnam, E. L. Warren, J. M. Spurgeon, R. M. Briggs, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 239 CrossRef CAS .
H. Q. Yan, R. R. He and P. D. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 4728 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Shin, K. H. Kim, K. J. Yu, H. F. Hu, L. J. Yin, C. Z. Ning, J. A. Rogers, J. M. Zuo and X. L. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4831 CrossRef CAS .
T. Shimizu, T. Xie, J. Nishikawa, S. Shingubara, S. Senz and U. Gösele, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 917 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, Y. Tao and S. Hark, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 5751 RSC .
X. L. He, G. B. Yue, Y. F. Hao, Q. L. Xu, Q. Wei, X. G. Zhu, M. G. Kong, L. Zhang and X. Li, J. Cryst. Growth, 2008, 310, 3579 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Li, T. Y. Zhai, Y. Jiang, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 9740 CAS .
Y. Jiang, W. J. Zhang, J. S. Jie, X. M. Meng, J. A. Zapien and S. T. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1527 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. B. Utama, Z. Peng, R. Chen, B. Peng, X. L. Xu, Y. J. Dong, L. M. Wong, S. J. Wang, H. D. Sun and Q. H. Xiong, Nano Lett., 2010, 11, 3051 CrossRef .
L. J. Zhao, L. F. Hu and X. S. Fang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1551 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Peng, Y. J. Dong, Z. X. Deng, X. M. Sun and Y. D. Li, Inorg. Chem., 2001, 40, 3840 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Xu, X. Shi, G. L. Guo, L. L. Gui and Y. Q. Tang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 5061 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Sun, X. H. Li, Y. Chen, D. F. Gao, Y. W. Xie, W. Li, B. T. Liu and X. Y. Zhang, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 425603 CrossRef .
C. Ma, Y. Ding, D. Moore, X. D. Wang and Z. L. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 708 CrossRef CAS .
L. Manna, E. C. Scher, L. S. Li and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 7136 CrossRef CAS .
R. Venugopal, P. I. Lin, C. C. Liu and Y. T. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 11262 CrossRef CAS .
A. Deinega and S. John, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 112, 074327 CrossRef .
R. Herino, G. Bomchil, K. Barla, C. Bertrand and J. Ginoux, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1987, 134, 1994 CrossRef CAS .
G. Bomchil, A. Halimaoui and R. Herino, Microelectron. Eng., 1988, 8, 293 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Z. Hu, X. J. Zhang, C. Xie, C. Y. Wu, L. Bian, Y. M. Wu, L. Wang, Y. P. Zhang and J. S. Jie, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4798 RSC .
L. Patrick, D. Hamilton and W. Choyke, Phys. Rev., 1966, 143, 526 CrossRef CAS .
Z. F. Feng, Q. B. Zhang, L. L. Lin, H. H. Guo, J. Z. Zhou and Z. K. Lin, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 2705 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Humphreys, D. Bimberg and W. J. Choyke, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 1980, 49(suppl. A), 519 Search PubMed .
B. Q. Sun, A. T. Findikoglu, M. Sykora, D. J. Werder and V. I. Klimov, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1235 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Shen, B. Q. Sun, D. Liu and S. T. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19408 CrossRef CAS .
K. Q. Peng, X. Wang, X. L. Wu and S. T. Lee, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3704 CrossRef CAS .
X. X. Jiang, F. Chen, W. M. Qiu, Q. X. Yan, Y. X. Nan, H. Xu, L. G. Yang and H. Z. Chen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 2223 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Schematic illustration of the experimental setup for the fabrication of porous n-Si via electrochemical etching. An SEM image of the product obtained on a smooth Si substrate. SEM images of the CdSe NW arrays grown at lower temperature and pressure. CdSe NW arrays with distinct morphologies and structures obtained under various growth conditions. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ta10771jThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of the experimental setup for the CdSe NW array growth. SEM images of the (b) top view and (c) cross-sectional view of the porous silicon substrate.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Top-view SEM image of CdSe NW arrays grown on a porous Si substrate, (b) enlarged SEM image of the NW arrays, (c) cross-sectional view SEM image of the NW arrays and (d) XRD pattern of the CdSe NW arrays.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Low-magnification TEM image of the CdSe NW array. (b) TEM image of an individual CdSe NW. HRTEM image taken from (c) the tip, (d) the main body, and (e) the interface of the tip and body of the NW as marked in (b). (f) EDS spectrum of the NW at the tip position. (g) Schematic illustration shows the crystal structure of the CdSe NW.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic illustrations, together with the corresponding SEM images, show the different stages of the CdSe NW array growth. (a) The porous Si substrate before growth and the product after (b) 15 min, (c) 25 min, (d) 35 min, (e) 45 min, and (f) 60 min growth.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) PL spectrum of the CdSe NW arrays. (b) CL spectra of the NW arrays measured under different acceleration voltage. (c) SEM image and corresponding (d) CL image of the NW arrays.	 

 	Fig. 6  SEM images of (a) Ga-doped CdSe NW arrays, (c) ZnSe NW arrays, and (e) ZnxCd1−xSe NW arrays. Scale bars in insets of (a), (b) and (c) are 1, 5, and 2 μm, respectively. Their corresponding EDS spectra are shown in (b), (d), and (f), respectively.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Top-view and (b) cross-sectional view SEM images of the porous p-Si substrate fabricated by RIE etching. (c) SEM image of the CdSe:Ga NW arrays grown on the porous Si substrate. The inset shows an enlarged SEM image of the NW array; scale bar is 1 μm. (c) Absorption spectrum of the CdSe:Ga NW array, along with the spectra of a bare Si wafer and a porous Si substrate for comparison.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Photovoltaic characteristics of the CdSe:Ga NW array/porous Si p–n heterojunctions. The device counterpart based on undoped CdSe NW arrays was measured for comparison. Inset shows the schematic illustration of the solar cells. (b) Energy band diagram of the heterojunction.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Schematic illustration of the experimental setup for the fabrication of porous n-Si via electrochemical etching. An SEM image of the product obtained on a smooth Si substrate. SEM images of the CdSe NW arrays grown at lower temperature and pressure. CdSe NW arrays with distinct morphologies and structures obtained under various growth conditions. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ta10771j

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
