Recent advancement of biomass-derived porous carbon based materials for energy and environmental remediation applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TA10269A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TA10269A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 6965-7005Recent advancement of biomass-derived porous carbon based materials for energy and environmental remediation applications

        
          
            Rishika 
            Chakraborty†
a, 
      
        
          
            Vilya 
            K†
b, 
      
        
          
            Mukul 
            Pradhan
          
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Arpan Kumar 
            Nayak
          
          
        
      *b
aDepartment of Chemistry, National Institute of Technology Meghalaya, Shillong, 793003, Meghalaya, India
bDepartment of Physics, School of Advanced Sciences, Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, 632014, Tamil Nadu, India. E-mail: arpankumar.nayak@vit.ac.in; aknayakju@gmail.com
cDepartment of Chemistry, National Institute of Technology Warangal, Warangal, 506004, Telangana, India
Received 
      5th January 2022
    , Accepted 28th February 2022First published on 10th March 2022AbstractIn recent times, increasing environmental pollution alongside depletion of fossil fuel reserves has led to a rejuvenated interest in utilizing biomass and waste materials. Advanced porous carbons derived from such abundantly available and carbon rich feedstock precursors have been extensively used for clean energy storage and environmental remediation applications. This is credited to the exclusive properties like high specific surface area with tunable pore size, developed pore architecture and chemical stability. Simultaneously, several techniques have been progressively designed and upgraded for pollutant abatement in terms of economical and facile methodologies. The review aims to highlight the importance of biomass/waste-derived nanoporous carbon materials for energy and environmental applications. Various bio-synthetic activation methods and up to date research activities in the design and sustainable development of such state-of-the-art materials have been introduced. In addition, promising applications of nanoporous carbons in electrochemical systems and for environmental protection are briefly reviewed. Finally, current challenges and strategies for future research are summarized. It is expected that this review paper would assist the reader to acquire concise and systematic information as well as contribute novel ideas over a wide spectrum of disciplines.Rishika ChakrabortyRishika Chakraborty is currently a PhD candidate in the Department of Chemistry, National Institute of Technology (NIT) Meghalaya, India. She obtained her Master in Science degree in chemistry from North Eastern Hill University (NEHU), Shillong, India. Her research interest focuses on the design, synthesis and characterization of anisotropic nanomaterials and porous-carbon-based nanostructures for energy applications (supercapacitor and oxygen reduction reaction).Vilya KVilya. K is a freelance artist. She completed her Master in Science degree in Physics from Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, India. She completed her Master in Science project thesis under the guidance of Dr Arpan Kumar Nayak. Her research interest focuses on nanostructured carbon materials from biodegradable waste for supercapacitor applications.Mukul PradhanMukul Pradhan received his PhD degree in ‘Anisotropically grown metal and metal oxides nanomaterials for spectroscopic and catalytic application’, from Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Kharagpur, India. He was a postdoctoral fellow in the Department of Chemistry, Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), Pohang, South Korea. He is currently an Associate Professor at Department of Chemistry, National Institute of Technology (NIT) Warangal, India. His current research areas include synthesis of novel nanocomposites for energy harvesting (catalyst for generation of hydrogen from water) and storage (supercapacitor and battery) applications.Arpan Kumar NayakArpan Kumar Nayak received his PhD degree (2018) from Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur (IIT-KGP), India in tungsten based nanostructured materials for energy and environmental remediation applications. He was a post-doctoral fellow at Hanyang University, Seoul, South Korea. Currently he is working as Assistant Professor at Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, India. His current research mainly focuses on the synthesis of various nanostructured materials towards environment and energy applications. He has published more than 50 articles in various international journals (Google scholar citation count: 1030, h-index: 19) and edited 3 books in Elsevier, IOP and IOR. He was assigned as Editor-in-chief in the International Research Journal of Multidisciplinary Technovation, Bulletin of Scientific Research and Associate editor in Nanoscale report.
1. Introduction
1.1 Background
In the past few years, the worldwide energy crisis and environmental pollution due to existing over-dependence of fossil fuels have become increasingly alarming and brought along with them significant governance costs. Consequently, design and development of green energy systems and examination of energy efficiency have gained all-inclusive concern. Nevertheless, long-time issues such as limitations of the energy storage systems and unsatisfactory commercial progress among many other factors need to be fixed. Simultaneously, scientists continue to discover favourable strategies and design novel materials so to reduce ecological pollution and ensure efficient transformation and utilization of resources. In line with this, there has been substantial enhancement in the generation of clean energy and subsequent usage in electric vehicles and in different equipment. However, the energy efficiency is restricted by irregular spatial and temporal distribution. Therefore, alternative energy storage approaches and effective energy conversion technologies are in need of the hour. Power generation discontinuity by renewable energy resources is fully utilized by energy storage and conversion systems like solar cells, lithium ion batteries, supercapacitors and photocatalysis. Among these, supercapacitor is considered as a promising candidate for high energy and power supply.1 Also, over the years photocatalytic reactions have demonstrated excellent performances in generating light-induced clean energy source like molecular hydrogen2 as well as for pollutant mitigation.3 For further detailed information on the fundamentals of supercapacitor and photocatalysis, readers are kindly referred to excellent literature overviews.4–11 On the other hand, rapid urbanization, modernization and industrialization have contributed to serious environmental issues such as biosphere deterioration. This is mostly due to emerging industrial pollutants like heavy metal ions, dyes, pharmaceuticals, organic compounds, etc., which are toxic and non-biodegradable in nature. Similarly, excessive emissions of CO2 have led to global warming and climate change. The most tangible and irreversible long-term impact of a polluted habitat, is on the living system, be it aquatic organisms or human beings. Accordingly, removal of such contaminants has become imperative to necessitate the reinforcement of a sustainable, adequate and adjustable treatment method.
As one of the most remarkable chemical element, carbon plays an important part in the earth's civilization. Ever since the global recognition of carbon nanomaterials, nanoporous carbons based on the parent discoveries of fullerene, carbon nanotube and graphene have gained intense popularity. This is credited to their unique nanostructures and attractive functionalization patterns. Analogously, carbon based nanomaterials directly affect the energy efficiency of storage and conversion systems as well as play a crucial role in environmental protection. The typical representative of carbon nanomaterials such as graphene has not yet met the macro demand requirement of large-scale industrialization production owing to its chemical inertness and agglomeration tendency. Moreover, functional integration between graphene and other materials is still a persistent problem.12 Similarly, traditional activated carbon (AC) exhibits relatively small specific surface area (SSA) coupled with poor conductivity, which will result in only short-term benefits.13 Additionally, the high-cost involved in their sophisticated synthesis together with harsh and energy intensive experimental conditions have always been a pressing issue.
With the advances of modern science and technology, the development of high-quality nanocarbons derived from inexhaustible biomass and waste materials have acquired foremost consideration by the international community for energy security and environmental remediation applications. Such materials have emerged on the other side with unfolded possibilities due to its inherent physicochemical characteristic features like tunable surface area and rich porosity parameters, good adsorption capacity, easy renewal, low-cost, high chemical and thermal stability.14 Therefore, these evolving advanced nanoporous materials can create a new dimension to the field of material science research.
1.2 Importance of biomass and waste materials
Biomass constitutes all organic matter from plants,15,16 animals,17,18 microorganisms,19,20 including the by-products and metabolites produced by such organisms present in the biosphere.21,22 Global biomass consists of nearly 550 gigaton of carbon, of which around 80% represent plant sources followed by 15% of bacteria and remaining 10% are animals, fungi and viruses.23 The biomass sources are clean, abundantly distributed, renewable, inexpensive and varied, which can be used as forerunners for the preparation of carbon-based nanomaterials. The extraction processes such as from agricultural waste and forestry biomass are comparatively facile, such that it provides an attractive method of natural procurement.24 In recent years, a series of biomass-derived nanoporous carbon materials with unique physical and chemical characteristics have been extensively developed for different energy and environmental applications.25–27 For instance, bamboo fibre-derived porous carbon having exclusive sheet-like microstructure exhibited large SSA and high specific capacitance.28 Similarly, bio-carbon dots prepared from palm powders presented high photocatalytic activity towards degradation of harmful rhodamine B (RhB) dye under visible-light irradiation.29
Biomass composition from woody plants primarily consists of carbon reservoir biopolymers such as cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin,30 which serve as excellent carbon skeleton framework for fabrication of carbonaceous electrode materials. Examples include acacia tree bark,31 corncob,32 cotton rose,33Arundo donax,34 pinewood,35etc. A wide range of biomass precursors rich in biomolecules like carbohydrates, chitin, proteins and tannins have also made remarkable scientific progress for the design of functional biomass-based carbon.36–39 Also in particular, there are several biomass sources wherein the synthesized porous carbon contains a large quantity of surface functional groups (like carboxylic, pyridinic, pyrrolic, etc.) and doped heteroatoms (like O, N, S, P).40 Here, the doping is categorized under two ways: external doping and self-doping. The artificial doping involves use of doping agents like melamine, thiourea, phosphoric acid, etc., for introducing heteroatoms externally to the carbon framework41–43 while self-doped nanoporous carbon is derived from biomass precursors enriched with naturally available heteroatom rich functional groups.44,45 These functional groups and heteroatoms in such bionic structures of biomass are conducive towards providing high rate performance of the materials with respect to enhanced surface wettability and improved conductivity.46
The rational application of porous nanostructured carbons for waste management and reuse has also shown impressive prospects. In general, waste based feedstock is classified into natural and man-made wastes, which has promising capability of systematic conversions into value-added porous carbon materials. Several natural biomass wastes have been successfully employed as carbon precursors for the generation of nanoporous carbons. Current examples include onion peel waste,47 sawdust,48 textile waste,49 apple peel50 and tire rubber,51etc. Likewise, animal source wastes such as from eggshells are rich sources of calcium, which can be used in the design of hydroxyapatite nanoporous materials without requiring any costly calcium precursors.52 On the other hand, man-made wastes such as plastics and electronic wastes give rise to detrimental effects on the environment if not reprocessed or rehabilitated into suitable products. In this regard, several noteworthy progresses have been carried out wherein excellent results have been achieved. For instance, waste polyethylene terephthalate (PET) beverage bottles have been converted into porous carbon nanosheet with large surface area for high-performance supercapacitor application.53 Similarly, nanoporous carbons derived from industrial wastes like expired carbonated drinks and artificial fruit juices demonstrated exceptional CO2 capture along with energy storage application.54 The studies indicate that utilizing waste resources not only boosts the economic value but simultaneously allows for the effective construction of zero pollution sustainable technologies that are much desired for today and for the near future.
Thus, nanoporous carbons acquired from biomass and waste feedstock sources can be considered as highly relevant next generation value-added materials having promising prospects and benefits in the fields of sustainable energy and environmental applications (Fig. 1). This can also pave way towards scaling up of low-carbon bioeconomy. Although, such carbon materials have proven their worth in research, continuous efforts are still required to expand avenues for bulk-scale synthesis, optimised development and advanced commercial applications.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration showing the structural properties and applications of biomass/waste-derived nanoporous carbons. 
2. Synthesis methods for preparation of nanoporous carbons
From a sustainability perspective, the search for biomass/waste-derived nanoporous carbons with favourable surface area, optimal heteroatom functional groups, tailored porosity and balanced pore structure has been the central driving force towards finding the most appropriate processing strategies. Also, majority of the untreated biomass/waste materials are hard and seat an enormous quantity of impurities, which make their direct use unbecoming.
A rational synthetic strategy is an essential requisite for the production of highly efficient biomass/waste-derived nanoporous carbons. It is more so crucial to entirely comprehend the methods and the corresponding mechanisms before the raw resources are processed. In this regard, few promising examples in each category have also been introduced in the forthcoming sections for better conception. At present, the chief synthetic approaches for synthesizing ACs are pyrolysis, activation and hydrothermal carbonization. Other preparation methods include soft- and hard-templating and mechanochemical syntheses.
2.1 Pyrolysis carbonization
Pyrolysis involves the direct conversion of dried biomass materials into biochars (carbon-rich residue) by thermal treatment at moderate to elevated temperatures (300–1000 °C) under inert gas environment (such as N2/Ar). The process enables irreversible changes within the chemical structure of the initial raw materials. The method is most commonly used owing to its fluidity with biomass feedstock sources and flexible operating conditions. Various biomass raw materials like crab shell,55 rice straw, eucalyptus leaves and vetiver grass,56Caragana korshinskii,57 corn stalk and polyethylene,58etc., have favourably been converted into porous carbons by pyrolysis. The conversion involves reactions like dehydration, condensation, crosslinking, depolymerization, fragmentation and isomerization. For example, the pyrolysis of lignocellulosic biomass materials has three stages. At the first stage (less than 200 °C), moisture and light volatiles are removed.59 In the second stage (200–500 °C), degradation of hemicellulose and cellulose occurs at fast rate, wherein oxygen atoms are released as CO and CO2. The last stage (more than 500 °C) involves the dissociation of lignin and evaporation of the volatile matter.60 The end product generally includes gases (H2, H2O, CH4, CO, etc.), bio-oil and biochar residues. The amount of each product formed will be determined by the synthetic conditions like temperature, pressure, heating duration, etc. As presented in Table 1, the slow pyrolysis or the carbonization pyrolysis gives the maximum biochar yield of ∼35.0% from the dried biomass weight because of longer duration and slower rates in comparison to fast pyrolysis and gasification process.
Table 1 Different types of pyrolysis conditions150




Pyrolysis process
Temperature (°C)
Heating rate
Residence time
Percentage proportion of products (%)


Bio-oil
Syngas
Biochar




Slow/carbonization
350–800
Less than 10 °C min−1
Seconds-hours
30
35
35


Fast process
400–600
10–200 °C s−1
Seconds
70–75
13–20
10–12


Gasification
700–1500
∼1000 °C s−1
Seconds-minutes
2–5
85
10




Subsequent release of the gases and decomposition of the organic compounds during the calcination process result in the formation of pores within the biochars, especially narrow pores with small size called as micropores (internal diameters less than 2 nm).61 The micropores typically exhibit SSA in the range of 10–300 m2 g−1 and thus contribute to poor and limited porosity in the carbon product.62 Even though biomass-derived carbons prepared under direct carbonization have shown improved SSA and porosity, the incomplete degradation of the intricate biomass constituents into low molecular-weight elements hinders the overall development for a favourable porous structure. The textural and structural features of a biochar are primarily reliant on the carbonization temperature and the type of precursors used as shown in Fig. 2a.63 Temperature controls the assembly and functioning of the end product. In addition, higher temperature (with certain limitations) allows for higher SSA and better porosity for the biomass-derived carbon due to larger release of volatile components. For example, single-step pyrolysis of dead plant leaves at 600 °C displayed higher SSA (49 m2 g−1) than at 1000 °C (1230 m2 g−1) (Fig. 2b).64 Similarly, the biomass feedstock source employed affects the end-product in terms of composition and textural properties of the carbon residue. Agricultural based biomass, which are traditionally categorized to be lignocellulosic in nature, in most cases give rise to macro/microporous structure with higher carbon content in comparison to those processed from animals, which are rich with volatile organic/inorganic compounds.65 Beyond biomass, the pyrolysis process has also been used for the conversion of industrial wastes like dental molds into porous carbon which shows a high SSA of nearly 1000 m2 g−1.66
 Fig. 2  (a) Pyrolysis temperatures of lignocellulosic biomass. Adapted from ref. 63 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020 and (b) schematic diagram for the preparation of functional carbon from neem dead leaves and their supercapacitor measurements. Adapted from ref. 64 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2013. 
Currently, direct activation/reactivation of the carbon precursors during pyrolysis is commonly used to optimize the internal pore structure of the materials, which is not achieved by direct calcination.
2.2 Activation
The activation process carried out to the carbonaceous materials ensures further generation of controlled porosity in the AC. This promotes the synthesis of modified porous carbons with high SSA and favourable morphology, presence of rich functional groups and heteroatom doping. Since the pyrolysis process generates organic residues which can hinder the porous channels, it is usually performed before the activation process. Physical, chemical and self-activation are the three different activation strategies for the fabrication of porous carbons from carbon-rich bio-sources, including waste precursors. The activation processes induce tunable hierarchical porosity and high SSA, which can enhance the overall physicochemical aspects of the synthesized nanoporous carbon materials. There are other activation methods like microwave-induced activation and other physicochemical activation that are also widely used.67 Pore formation by the activation process is briefly explained as follows: at first, the previously existing inaccessible pores on the surface of the carbon microcrystals are exposed by the disordered carbon atoms and the heteroatoms. The exposed carbon atoms are in turn further annealed that increases the size of the original pores. Finally, the irregular combustion on the surface brings on the generation of new pores such that the pore walls between neighbouring micropores collapse to give rise to larger pores.

2.2.1 Physical activation. 
Physical activation process is a frequently used top-down method. The process involves a two-step process: (i) carbonization of the carbon sources at a suitable temperature and (ii) activation of the carbonized biomass at elevated temperatures (800–1000 °C) for a certain period of time in presence of either CO2, steam or air. The products formed on the surface from the initial carbonization react with the oxidizing environment to form multiple pores. In the meantime, the gaseous atmosphere will react further with carbon and form carbon oxides. This in turn creates pores on the surface as well as inside the bulk material by releasing the gases as shown in equations below:68 C + CO2 → 2CO(1) C + H2O → CO + H2(2)
CO2 is generally the desired choice due to easy handling, flexible parameters and slower reaction rate. Additionally, majority of the reactive carbon atoms can be selectively eliminated from the biochar by the CO2 activation. For example, AC prepared by Pallarés and co-workers from barley straw using CO2 activation showed significant surface area of up to 789 m2 g−1 and micropore volume of 0.3268 cm3 g−1.69 Similarly, Yu et al. used cattail biomass to synthesize porous carbon with surface area of 441.12 m2 g−1, which showed outstanding malachite green (MG) dye adsorption capacity of 210.18 mg g−1.70 Steam activation has also attracted great attention owing to its non-polluting nature, facile process and less operation difficulty. It does not only increase the porosity but also the oxygen functionalities on the surfaces of the porous carbon materials. Qin et al. demonstrated the preparation of porous AC from pine nut shell waste through steam activation at 850 °C. In this case, a specific surface area of 956 m2 g−1 and mesoporous ratio of 37.1% was obtained.71 Likewise, biomass soot and tire carbon black activated by steam exhibited high filter efficiencies of 95% for both phenol and chlorine removal from water due to high amount of macropores.72 Although air is a free and most easily available gaseous oxidant, its direct use for activation may cause unwarranted combustion of the raw precursors and thus result in poor pore formation. Ma and group successfully prepared AC monoliths from air-treated rose wood, which presented a SSA of nearly 567 m2 g−1 along with a microporosity of 86%.73
As can be noted, the method (Fig. 3) can efficiently tailor the pore-size distribution and thus allow formation of nanopores on the surfaces of the carbon materials. Besides, the activation approach reduces the particle and microdomain sizes of the ACs.74 In spite of the advantages, physical activation requires high activation temperatures and lengthy activation duration. Furthermore, the resultant carbon materials show low tap density, relatively poor yields, miniature pore sizes and low SSA. Nevertheless, from production perspective, the activation method has minimum corrosion towards the reactors, simple and low production cost and therefore presents a broad commercial value. By increasing the reaction speed, reducing the reaction cycle and minimizing the energy consumption, the limitations of the physical activation method can be improved.
 Fig. 3  Synthesis of AC by physical activation. 


2.2.2 Chemical activation. 
In chemical activation method, the carbon sources are impregnated with chemical activators (like acids, bases or salts) before or after the mixtures are carbonized at high temperatures under inert gas environment. Herein, the activators act as dehydrating agents to eliminate any residual water molecules from the carbon precursors and also function as oxidants to form the resultant nanoporous carbon materials. The temperature range (450–1000 °C) is usually dependent on the type of precursors and the activators that are used. The activation process simultaneously proceeds with the carbonization such that both influence the degradation of the precursors and allow rearrangement of the subsequent carbon moieties into an aromatic carbon skeleton. In comparison to the physical activation process, chemical activation has the benefits of facile activation reaction, small activation duration, flexible pore size distribution, high productivity, better yield, large SSA and high mesopore ratio in the final product.75 Owing to such advantages, the process is considered to be the chief preparation process of highly ACs. Additionally, the activation process incorporates functional groups (like –OH, –COOH or –NH) on the surfaces of the nanoporous carbons. Despite this, the crystallinity of the porous carbons is reduced to a large extent because of constant dehydration and oxidation of the carbon raw material with the catalysts, which results in defects alongside the walls of the final carbon product. In some cases, the chemical activation process may incorporate immoderate amount of functional groups, which can result in unrestrained pore size distribution.
2.2.2.1 Chemical activation by KOH. 
A vast number of research works have demonstrated the preparation of chemically activated nanoporous carbons with generous choice of activating agents such as potassium hydroxide (KOH), zinc chloride (ZnCl2), potassium carbonate (K2CO3), phosphoric acid (H3PO4), ammonia (NH3), etc.76 Among these, alkali activation by KOH is the most common and widely used oxidant. When KOH is used as an activator, there is reduced tar formation, enhanced reaction and conversion rates, high SSA and well-developed porosity are achieved in the resultant carbon materials. The activation etching mechanism is believed to be as follows: (i) KOH and the carbon precursor react to give K2CO3 or K2O at the active sites as: 6KOH + 2C → 2K + 3H2↑ + 2K2CO3(3)
Here, KOH begins its conversion at around 400 °C into K2CO3 and by 600 °C, KOH is entirely consumed, (ii) K2CO3 further dissociates to give volatile intermediates such as H2O CO2 and CO, which further react with the carbon atoms to generate micropores,77 6KOH + 2C → 2K + 3CO(4)
(iii) When the activation temperature exceeds above 762 °C (boiling point of metallic potassium), potassium vapour intercalates into different layers of carbon material, which twists and expands to create new pore channels78 and (iv) finally, the alkalis and metal salts can be removed by acid and water washing. There are several examples of KOH activated biomass/waste-derived porous carbons with varied morphologies and pore textures.79–81 Khan et al. synthesized porous carbon using tea-waste by simple KOH activation. The obtained porous carbon exhibited high surface area of 1610 m2 g−1 while without KOH activation, a surface area of 1014 m2 g−1 was achieved. Additionally, the hierarchically microporous structure showed high electrochemical performance (Fig. 4a).82 Likewise, KOH mediated AC from bamboo chip presented high surface area of 720.69 m2 g−1 for methylene blue (MB) adsorption.83 According to a recent study by Chen and co-workers, a possible chemical pathway between KOH and oxygen containing functional groups in bamboo waste was proposed for the first time, as presented in Fig. 4b. During pyrolysis, KOH reacts with oxygen rich moieties in the carbon precursor, which are removed to a large extent to generate a number of vacancies. Furthermore, more vacancies are created from the reaction between KOH and active carbon fragments. This results in OH−-occupied vacancies to introduce more oxygen content (23.68 wt%) and form large amount of new oxygen-rich functional groups in the biochar along with enhanced SSA of 1351.13 m2 g−1.84 KOH activation also provides a simple and direct approach for the fabrication of heteroatom functionalized nanoporous carbons, which is beneficial for energy storage devices.85 For instance, oxygen and nitrogen doped AC from squid gladius chitin through KOH activation exhibited developed microporous network, large surface area of 1129 m2 g−1 and favourable nitrogen content (reaching up to 4.04%) as pyridine/pyrrole-N, graphite-N and N-oxide functional groups.86 Similarly, O, N, S ternary-doped carbon nanosheets were prepared using fish skin via KOH activation. The low carbonization temperature (600 °C) retain many of the O, N and S heteroatoms and results in the formation of numerous micro–mesopores as well as a high SSA of 1017 m2 g−1.87
 Fig. 4  (a) Electrochemical measurements of tea-waste-derived carbon electrodes. Adapted from ref. 82 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020 and (b) proposed reaction mechanism of KOH activation during pyrolysis. Adapted from ref. 84 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020. 
NaOH, NaHCO3 and KHCO3 are also used as activating agents to optimize the structure of the carbon material.88–90 Porous carbon synthesized by Yang et al. from jujube fruits through NaOH activation (mass ratio of alkali to carbon is 3.5:1) showed maximum SSA of 1135 m2 g−1 with microporous network.91 Similarly, NaOH activated coffee waste exhibited higher SSA of 655.4 m2 g−1 and total pore volume of 0.456 cm3 g−1 than that of pristine coffee waste (SSA 62.0 m2 g−1; total pore volume 0.032 cm3 g−1).92 Dual chemical activation by KOH and NaOH (mass ratio of KOH to NaOH is 2:1.5) on rice husk precursor resulted in microporous structured carbon with high SSA of 3043 m2 g−1.93 Wang et al. compared the effects of KOH, NaOH and dual activation on rice husk. It was observed that the AC exhibited SSAs of 1702, 2260 and 2747 m2 g−1; pore volumes of 0.74, 1.31 and 1.40 cm3 g−1, respectively. Interestingly, the dual activated porous carbon showed the maximum developed pore structure along with widest pore-size distribution among the obtained carbon materials.94
2.2.2.2 Chemical activation by ZnCl2. 
ZnCl2 is still one of the most frequently used activating agent because of its dehydrating and oxidizing ability for forming nanocarbon materials with controlled porosity. Primarily, ZnCl2 converts to hydrate zinc chloride (ZnCl2·nH2O) below 600 °C. This is likely followed by hydrolysis of ZnCl2·nH2O into oxychloride, which further decomposes to zinc oxide during the thermal process. The zinc oxide etches the carbon atom and as a result facilitates the formation of micropores on the outer surfaces of the carbon materials. The mechanism is expressed by the following equations,95 ZnCl2 + 1/2O2 → ZnOCl + 1/2Cl2(5) 2ZnO + C → 2Zn + CO2↑(6)
Lin et al. used ZnCl2 activator to synthesize porous carbon from hemicellulose rich pomelo peel at a low temperature of 500 °C with SSA up to 1361 m2 g−1, as indicated in Fig. 5a.96 Likewise, there are several other studies reported on the chemical activation of biomass/waste raw materials by ZnCl2 for the synthesis of high surface area nanoporous carbons.97,98 Yagmur et al. studied the co-activation effect of both KOH and ZnCl2 on oleaster fruit fractions. The synthesized nanoporous carbon showed high surface area of 1816 and 2021 m2 g−1, respectively with tunable porosity.99 Fe(II)/(III) salts have also been used for chemical activation.100–102 For example, AC material prepared from subtropical macroalgae (Sargassum horneri) through mixed-metal salts of FeCl3 and ZnCl2 immobilized the activity and stability of TiO2 towards photocatalytic degradation of naphthalene under sunlight irradiation in aquatic environment.103 Ferric nitrate–ZnCl2 mixture as an activator has been used on Eupatorium adenophorum (weed) to give a photocatalyst-adsorbent composite with a high surface area of 1565.14 m2 g−1.104
 Fig. 5  (a) The synthetic representation process of pomelo peel-derived carbon materials. Adapted from ref. 96 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020 and (b) schematic illustration for the synthesis of porous carbon from sawdust biomass. Adapted from ref. 112 with permission from Springer, copyright 2020. 
2.2.2.3 Chemical activation by H3PO4. 
A series of biomass/waste-derived AC through H3PO4 activation with excellent properties and multiple applications have been prepared over the years.105 H3PO4 impregnation provides better benefits than ZnCl2 with regard to pollution, yield and cost, and therefore mostly used for industrial production.106 The principle of H3PO4 activation is briefly divided as: (i) hydrolysis of oligosaccharides (cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin) into monosaccharide products, (ii) catalytic dehydration of oligosaccharides and their corresponding decomposed products, (iii) cross-linking reactions take place during pyrolysis between H3PO4 and biopolymers to give rise to a developed porous structure, which differs in case of ZnCl2 activation, (iv) aromatization of the precursor carbon atoms and condensation of the aromatic rings and (v) finally, H3PO4 molecules aggregates to arrange sites, wherein the nascent carbon atoms from the biomass precursors are accumulated and the voids after H3PO4 removal become the pores of the ACs. It is important to note that for carbonization temperatures above 750 °C, the gas evolved from the partial dissociation of H3PO4 will promote the development of porous structure as expressed by the equation,107 4H3PO4 + 10C → P4 + 10CO↑ + 6H2O(7)
Again, at elevated temperatures (1000 °C), the gas is released rapidly, which destroys the preliminary structural framework of the AC. Ahmad and group used egg shell as precursor to prepare AC by H3PO4 activation for photocatalytic dye degradation under light irradiation.108 H3PO4-meditated yellowhorn based AC exhibited high surface area of 1530.18 m2 g−1 along with high pore volume of 0.97 cm3 g−1. It is suggested that reaction between H3PO4 and the oxygen-rich functional groups on the surfaces of the precursor carbon atoms and subsequent release of volatile gases leads to the generation of pores.109 Li et al. synthesized a three-dimensional hierarchical porous carbon with high SSA of 1728 m2 g−1 from furniture factory waste residues (pinewood, candlenut and cedarwood) using two-step activation steps by H3PO4 and KOH. They concluded that H3PO4 reduces the activation temperature, minimizes the activation time and lower the required amount of KOH while KOH simultaneously creates more number of suitable pores on the carbon material.110
H3PO4 not only acts as an activating agent, but also facilitates doping of P in the carbon material. For instance, P-doped porous carbon prepared from sawdust biomass via H3PO4 activation exhibited surface area as high as 1281.6 m2 g−1 and high micropore volume of 0.535 cm3 g−1. The doped heteroatom is advantageous for fast charge transfer reactions and offer charge-rich defect sites in the carbon matrix.111 As shown in Fig. 5b, Zhou et al. synthesized N, S, P self-doped porous carbon (1809.32 m2 g−1) using durian peel by chemical activation at 700 °C. The N (0.97%) and S (0.23%) heteroatoms were inherently present in the biomass while the O (12.27%) and P (0.21%) doping occurred from the dissolved oxygen and the H3PO4 activator, respectively.112
2.2.2.4 Microwave assisted chemical activation. 
In microwave assisted activation method, the microwave radiations are converted into heat energy by reacting with dielectric materials. Highly polar activators (like KOH, H3PO4, and ZnCl2, etc.) get adsorbed by the capillary walls of the carbon material and are heated under microwave irradiation. Also, the carbon raw materials are believed to act as dielectrics due to the presence of de-localized π-electrons. It assists the reaction between the biomass and the activator, which eventually leads to the formation of the porous carbon.113 Microwave induced activation offers advantages like selectivity, fast and highly efficient heat transfer, short treatment duration and controllability of equipment. In particular, Chen et al. prepared waste lignin-based hierarchical porous carbon with high SSA of 3065 m2 g−1 and excellent meso/macropores percentage ratio of 64% through microwave-assisted KOH activation, as displayed in Fig. 6a. The rapid heating rate, KOH activator and integrated one-step carbonization and activation strategy led to the reaction completion in 10–30 min.114 Likewise, microwave-induced H3PO4 activation was adapted to convert Douglas fir into mesoporous AC with high surface area of 1726.5 m2 g−1.115 Villota et al. evaluated the effect of microwave-assisted carbonization as well as performed comparative study on KOH and H3PO4 as chemical activating agents on waste cocoa pod husks. H3PO4-activated porous carbon achieved higher yield, surface area (1237.47 m2 g−1) and total pore volume (1.11 cm3 g−1) over KOH-activated porous carbon.116 AC prepared from sesame shell precursor by microwave and conventional heating assisted ZnCl2 activation showed high SSA of 1254 m2 g−1.117 Even so, commercial and bulk-scale development of microwave-assisted porous carbons have certain drawbacks, therefore further examination will be necessary in this area.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic representation of the conversion for porous carbons from lignin under microwave heating. Adapted from ref. 114 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020, (b) preparation steps of porous carbons from wine stone. Adapted from ref. 118 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019 and (c) schematic illustration of the preparation of rape pollen-derived porous carbon. Adapted from ref. 121 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2018. 
2.2.2.5 Self-chemical activation. 
In self-chemical activation process, no external chemical activation reagents are required for activating the biomass precursor. The biomass sources rich in inherently existing inorganic compounds activates the carbon precursor in situ to porous carbon. For example, wine stone based AC with high specific surface area of 1814.6 m2 g−1 was prepared by simple heat treatment process (Fig. 6b). The wine stone formed in wine fermentation tanks during wine processing consists of potassium hydrogen tartrate (KHC4H4O6), which decomposes into K2CO3, K2O, metallic K and volatile gases at different stages of the pyrolysis process. This results in the formation of a highly porous carbon.118 Likewise, Gao et al. used different types of marine biomass wastes (kelp, Undaria pinnatifida and Enteromorpha prolifera) as carbon precursors for the synthesis of biochar having SSA as high as 1140 m2 g−1via in situ self-activation strategy.119 The self-activation approach is found to be more environmentally benign and cost effective over the conventionally used chemical activation approach. However, the pore size and SSA achieved in self-activated porous carbons is lower compared to the porous carbon formed via the use of additional chemical activating agents.
2.2.2.6 Chemical activation by molten-salt etching. 
Molten salt activation method uses salt melts that react with the carbon precursors under high temperatures to produce value-added porous carbons. The over-volatilization of reactive compounds is restricted in the molten salts, which is conducive for the yield of porous carbon materials during the carbonization process.120 As an example, spherical shaped porous carbon prepared from rape pollen biomass using CuCl2 etching activation exhibited high SSA of 2488 m2 g−1 along with high N (4%) and S (1.1%) content (Fig. 6c). Importantly, the CuCl2 activated porous carbon achieved a higher yield of 37.6% than that from ZnCl2 (28.3%) and KOH (1.4%) mediated AC.121 The mechanism of CuCl2 activation is as follows,122 C + 3CuCl2 + 2H2O → Cu + 2CuCl + CO2↑ + 4HCl(8) C + 4CuCl + 2H2O → 4Cu + CO2↑ + 4HCl(9)
Tian et al. prepared N-doped hierarchical porous carbon with high SSA of 1095 m2 g−1 from milk powder using NaCl–Na2CO3 molten salt strategy. The molten salt provided uniform conduction of heat and protected the active precursor from getting oxidized under air at high temperature (700 °C).123 Similarly, coal tar pitch-based AC was prepared in eutectic salt (NaCl–ZnCl2) with KOH activator. The hierarchical porous carbon showed high SSA of 2984 m2 g−1 and wide pore size distribution. During the synthesis process, the molten salt mixture provides a catalytic liquid reaction environment for high-rate cross-linking polymerization of the precursor as well provide template for pore generation.124 Yang et al. prepared porous carbon from wood sawdust waste by molten salt (KCl–KOH) synthesis. The authors investigated the effect of different compounding ratios of KCl and KOH on the carbon morphology such that a maximum surface area of 1998 m2 g−1 was achieved along with large number of micropores and mesopores.125 Similarly, KNO3 modified KCl–LiCl molten salt was explored for fabrication of N-doped carbon nanosheets using agar precursor. The obtained AC exhibited high surface area (1376 m2 g−1), high microporosity (72%) and high N-doping content (4 at%).126 Molten salt mixtures of NaCl–KCl have also been explored for the fabrication of porous carbons. For instance, N, S-co-doped porous carbon nanosheets synthesized from ginger by NaCl–KCl molten salt mixture at 800 °C presented unique worm-like porous structure with interconnected cavities that are beneficial for charge storage application.127 Even with the growing demand of the methodology, aspects like high cost of the molten salts, recycling process and material dimension still further needs to be examined.
2.2.2.7 Chemical activation by decomposable salt etching. 
Decomposable salts releases gases during degradation, which can etch carbon framework to generate pores. In general, Zn salts act as dehydrating agents wherein the mechanism involves double bond formation between the precursors of carbon atoms from trapping water molecules for the organic compounds present in the carbon source.128 Furthermore, condensation reactions for aromatic hydrocarbons (alkylation and acylation) increase in the presence of Zn salt.129 For instance, polyacrylonitrile (PAN)/pitch/lignin-based carbon nanofibers with ZnO was prepared from electrospinning mixture of PAN, pitch, lignin and Zn(CH3CO2)2. The obtained porous carbon exhibited higher SSA of 1194 m2 g−1 than that fabricated without Zn(CH3CO2)2 (630 m2 g−1).130 Li et al. designed a cross-coupled macro-mesoporous carbon framework with large SSA (2872.2 cm3 g−1), N-self doping and low oxygen content (2.24%) using salt-template strategy from NaNO3–gelatin biopolymer, as illustrated in Fig. 7a. It is proposed that NaNO3 displayed a dual role of template and chemical activator for the formation of macropores and mesopores, respectively.131 Yi et al. prepared hollow-tubular porous carbon with SSA of 1508 m2 g−1 from NaH2PO4 protected cotton fiber through carbonization and activation (KOH–KNO3) process. Here, the NaH2PO4 layer serves as a dehydrating agent, which facilitates the degradation of the cotton fibres under low temperatures. This in turn restricts the generation of the volatile carbonaceous gases and improves the quality and yield efficiency of the carbon.132 Other examples include N-doped porous carbon prepared from soybean precursor via tetraethoxysilane-KOH templating carbonization process133 and N-self-doped hierarchical porous carbon from pine pollen via MgCO3 activation.134 Few more examples of decomposable salts as hard-templates have been discussed in details in the later sections.
 Fig. 7  (a) Synthetic diagram of 3D cross-coupled porous carbon by NaNO3 template approach. Adapted from ref. 131 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2018, (b) schematic illustration for the preparation of porous carbons from sodium alginate. Adapted from ref. 137 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019 and (c) preparation method for obtaining cork-derived porous carbons by KMnO4 activation and supercapacitor application. Adapted from ref. 138 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019. 
2.2.2.8 Chemical activation by oxidative salt etching. 
Oxidative agents also help in the synthesis of porous carbons by oxidizing the carbon precursors at room/high annealing temperatures. Arango et al. prepared palm kernel shell waste-based activated porous carbon by HNO3 treatment. It is expected that HNO3 can modify the surface area as well as introduce favourable oxidized functional groups (carbonyl and N–O groups) on the carbon matrix.135 Similarly, gulfweed-based porous carbon prepared by two-step acid treatment (HF and HNO3) exhibited high SSA of 2970 m2 g−1 and mesopore volume ratio of 56%. The results are attributed to the etching effect of the acids on the non-porous segment of the material.136 The explosive characteristic of KNO3 has proved advantageous for volume expansion of carbon when treated at high temperatures under inert atmosphere. Wang and group used KNO3 oxidant and KOH activator to prepare porous carbon nanosheets from sodium alginate (natural polysaccharide present in brown algae) (Fig. 7b). The obtained carbon exhibited high SSA of 2788 m2 g−1, large C/O ratio and numerous mesopore channels.137 KMnO4 is a well-known efficient porogen for fabrication of porous carbon. With KMnO4 as an activator, O-rich hierarchical porous carbon derived from cork (outer bark of Quercus suber L.) (Fig. 7c) demonstrated more number of macropores and mesopores as described by the equations, 2KMnO4 → K2MnO4 + MnO2 + O2↑(10) K2MnO4 + C → K2CO3 + MnO(11) 2MnO2 + C → 2MnO + CO2↑(12)
The products from KMnO4 decomposition brings about etching of the carbon skeleton and generates the meso/microporous structure. The obtained AC exhibited a SSA of 1199 m2 g−1 and a pore volume of 11.7 cm3 g−1.138 Another typical representative of oxidative activation agent is ammonium persulfate, (NH4)2S2O8. The decomposition reaction is expressed as,139 (13) (14)
Camellia petals as biomass precursor was used for the preparation of N, S co-doped porous carbon nanosheets by carbonization with (NH4)2S2O8 at high temperature. The prepared porous carbon have high specific surface of 1122 m2 g−1 with good S (1.34%) and N (4.89%), contents. The role of (NH4)2S2O8 has been explained as an explosive and a dopant precursor, where the expansion effect from the decomposition products of (NH4)2S2O8 provide S and N doping within the carbon nanosheets as well as aid in pore formation.140
Even with the advancement of chemical activation method, the challenge still remains for obtaining tailored porous carbons owing to the intricate microarchitecture and strong chemical interactions that exist between the different components present in biomass/waste raw materials.

2.3 Hydrothermal carbonization (HTC)
HTC conversion process or wet pyrolysis is usually accomplished under mild temperatures (120–250 °C) in water reaction medium without using any chemical catalysts. The experimental process occurs in a closed vessel or otherwise known as an autoclave under self-generated pressure. Since HTC does not involve extreme operation conditions and dried biomass/biowaste materials, it offers advantages in terms of high efficiency, low temperature, and facile processing. Further, it facilitates the physiochemical interactions between the carbon reagents and the aqueous medium, leading to the formation of value-added carbon materials. Hence, HTC is a rising bio-synthetic method.
Previously, the method was employed for the processing of biogas and biofuels from activated charcoal.141 In recent years, the method has branched out for conversion of carbonaceous precursors, especially decomposable and readily soluble raw materials into functional nanoporous carbons like peanut shell,142 corn stover,143 tobacco stalks,144 macroalgae,145 montmorillonite,146etc. Water serves as a catalyst due to its high ionization constant and promotes the hydrolysis and bond cleavage of the different chemical constituents present in the biomass such as oligomers and monomers into smaller units. The organic acids (like formic, acetic, lactic or levulinic) formed during the reaction, which further accelerates the catalytic process and finally results in a complete in situ breakdown of the physical form of the biomass feedstock. With increase in the reaction temperature (∼220 °C) and pressure (∼20 bar), gases like CO2, CH4 (nearly 1–5%) are typically generated and the organic compounds get altered into insoluble carbon-rich solid-phase products. The main products so formed are called as hydrochars, which are rich in aromatic structures and have numerous oxygen-containing surface functional groups.147 The by-products mostly consist of furfural, hydroxymethyl furfural (HMF), aldehydes, etc.148 Apart from the hydrolysis process; other reactions that occur simultaneous during HTC are dehydration, decarboxylation, polymerization, condensation and aromatization.149 The governing HTC mechanism as well as the structure and morphologies of the hydrochars are dependent on the nature, primary structure, chemical composition of the precursors and reaction temperature. For example, pentose-based carbons are mostly separated carbon spheres, while the HTC based hexose-carbons exist as interconnected spherical particles owing to the high solubility of HMF intermediates in the water medium. Similarly, hydrochars of pure carbohydrates (like starch, fructose and glucose) are characterized by monodispersed spheres with diameters up to a few micrometers, as can be seen in Fig. 8a–c. However, biopolymers (such as cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin) exhibit either fibrous morphology or polydispersed spherical morphology (Fig. 8d–f) due to their high degree of structural stability and insolubility of the intermediate products in most solvents.150 Furthermore, a suitable HTC treatment temperature results in larger sized particles along with better uniform average size, more carbon content and higher aromaticity. However, at higher temperatures, the char yield is observed to be low due to heightened dehydration rate. The hydrochars obtained from direct HTC process have lower surface area, smaller pore volume and inhomogeneous porosity compared to the biomass precursors. Hence, the porosity and accordingly the surface area can be strongly upgraded by introducing pyrolysis or chemical activation steps.
 Fig. 8  (a) Scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of (a) glucose, (b) sucrose, (c) starch, (d) cellulose, (e) rye straw and (f) rice grain based insoluble carbohydrates. Adapted from ref. 150 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2020 and (b) fabrication of rice husk-based porous carbons by HTC treatment. 
Even though the HTC method can be well accomplished without using any catalyst, such as the case of kiwifruit-derived porous carbon aerogels by Wang et al., wherein results from high-resolution transmission electron microscope (HRTEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD) and Raman spectroscopy analyses reveal the amorphous structure, intra-layer condensation form and graphitic nature, respectively, of the carbonaceous nanospheres,151 there are some reports that examined the influence of catalysts on the morphological aspect of the hydrochars as well as on the reaction rates.152 Common catalysts include acidic catalysts like HCl, H2SO4, H2O2 and H3PO4 that can accelerate the hydrolysis and dehydration reaction rates.153–155 Similarly, citric and ascorbic acid-assisted HTC obtained hydrochar from Malaysian oil palm residues exhibited excellent yield and high thermal stability.156 Besides the traditional acid catalysts, metal-salts (like KOH, ZnCl2, FeCl3, etc.) are often used. For example, Manasa et al. fabricated super AC from recycled jute by HTC method and was further chemically activated by KOH to produce porous carbon with high SSA of 1903.48 m2 g−1 and high electrochemical performance.157 Likewise, hydrochar derived from sewage sludge and coconut shell by HTC technology and KOH activation revealed large surface area and highly porous structure.158 Waste rice husk-based magnetic porous carbon was synthesized by combined HTC and alkali leaching (FeCl3 and ZnCl2) treatment. Through this method, the sample exhibited high SSA of 1835.90 m2 g−1 and total pore volume of 0.9460 cm3 g−1.159 As presented in Fig. 8b, Zhang et al. designed N and O self-codoped porous carbon from chitosan by using HTC treatment and ZnCl2 activation. The resultant carbon material showed hierarchical porous structure, high N 7.35 at% and O 8.96 at% contents and SSA of 1679 m2 g−1.160 In terms of energy-saving issues and reduced residence times, Liu et al. adopted and reported a microwave-assisted HTC activation strategy for the synthesis of hierarchical porous carbon derived from corn straw. The as-obtained ordered microcrystalline carbon layer exhibited a high SSA of 1781 m2 g−1 and total pore volume of 1.21 cm3 g−1. The authors have suggested that the microwave irradiation not only increases the rate of the hydrolysis reaction, which is significant for the depolymerization and rearrangement of the precursor carbon skeleton, but also offers a graphitization effect by facilitating the motion of the catalyst (potassium; 30 wt%) in between the carbon layers.161 Likewise, P, N-rich agricultural (rapeseed) and antibiotic (lincomycin) residual feedstocks were used for the preparation of hydrochars via microwave-assisted HTC method for environmental applications.162
The advantages of HTC process over pyrolysis include improved energy consumption, minimized toxic wastes generation, higher yield (∼30–60 wt%), retention of surface hydroxyl and carboxylic functional groups and doping of heteroatoms. Even then to meet certain special standards for few applications, template and additive additions are also considered as powerful tools for tuning the pore size ordering and microporosity in the obtained carbon products.
2.4 Template method
Template technology is an effective method for the development of pores (size ranging between 1–200 nm) and for balancing an ordered microstructure, which otherwise is a formidable task to carry through conventional activation methods. It is generally classified as hard and soft templates strategies in accordance with the nature of the templates applied. Both the techniques need sacrificial agents with explicit features, followed by removal of the templates either by heat or chemical treatment.

2.4.1 Hard templating. 
In this method, a pre-formed solid material with well-defined porous structure is impregnated within the original parent (nanocasting), wherein the template dehydrates as well as carbonizes at high temperature zone under inert atmospheres. At the end, the porous carbon material or the reverse replica is formed after the exclusion of the precursor. A series of various materials like silicas,163 zeolites,164 metal oxides (MgO,165 ZnO,166 Fe2O3,167etc.) and others of distinct shapes have been adequately used, yielding highly ordered/disordered porous carbons. Among them, different silica based hard-templates have mostly been used because of their highly ordered mesoporous architectures, which results in the synthesis of alike carbon products with tunable mesopore sizes. For example, Ikeda et al. fabricated glucose-derived hollow carbon spheres having porous shells from amino-functionalized core–shell structured silica spheres as hard templates,168 as shown in Fig. 9a. Likewise, monodispersed silica spheres (30–100 nm) have also been utilized as hard templates for the fabrication of porous carbons using sucrose and glucose precursors.169 However, the etching of such sacrificial templates require corrosive reagents (like HF or NaOH), which contradicts the issues pertaining to environmental protection.
 Fig. 9  (a) SEM images of nSiO2 (A) before and (B) after hydrothermal treatment with glucose solution and (C) NH2-nSiO2 after the same treatment (scale bars correspond to 200 nm). Adapted from ref. 168 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2007, (b) TEM images of (a and b) zeolites and (c and d) templated carbons. Adapted from ref. 164 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2014, (c) schematic illustration for the preparation of porous carbons from starch. Adapted from ref. 165 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018, (d) the fabrication process of N, S-co-doped porous carbon by double salt-template strategy. Adapted from ref. 182 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019, (e) (i) preparation process of rice-husk based AC and (ii) N2 adsorption curves. Adapted from ref. 183 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020, (f) SEM images of (a and b) carbonized silk fabric (CSC) and (c and d) CSC@Ti3C2Tx. Adapted from ref. 185 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018 and (g) fabrication of (a) wood-derived carbon aerogel, (b) TEM image of cellulose nanofibers and SEM image of (c and d) carbon aerogels. Adapted from ref. 187 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2020. 
Zeolite based templated carbons are also regarded as an important category of hard templates. They are crystalline aluminosilicates having ordered microporous structure with narrow pore walls of thickness less than 2 nm. Thus, the microporous carbons prepared from such templates demonstrate high surface areas (nearly reaching 4000 m2 g−1) and large micropore volumes (up to 1.7 cm3 g−1).170 The initial synthesis of zeolites included precursors like poly(acrylonitrile), poly(furfuryl alcohol) and furfuryl alcohol.171,172 At present, biomass-derived carbon precursors like lignin,173 glucose174 and sucrose175 have also been explored. For example, Rosas et al. reported the synthesis of lignin-derived hierarchically porous carbons with SSA of 950 m2 g−1 using Y- and β-zeolites as hard templates. The resulting templated carbons presented average micropore size of 1.2 and 1.3 nm, respectively, which is dependent on the thicknesses of the zeolite crystal frameworks. Also, the TEM images in Fig. 9b clearly show the replication of the external and internal morphologies for the analogous zeolite crystals.164 Nonetheless, it is still a challenge to fabricate zeolite-based carbons with uniform mesoporosity. Detailed studies on the synthetic strategies and applications of zeolite-templating method can be found in a recent review paper.176
Non-siliceous nanostructured metal-oxides as templates have also been used for the fabrication of mesoporous carbon materials from different biomass sources. Such templates can be easily removed by the action of dilute acids in contrary to the silica-based templates. Nevertheless, the replication of the templates is not a simple task as compared to the silica-based ones. Besides, the homogeneity of the mesopores generated is not as precise as that achieved in the silica-resulting replicas. As an example, Cao et al. designed hierarchical porous carbon with high SSA of 2300 m2 g−1 using starch precursor and MgO template. Herein, the starch serves as a carbon source as well as a reductant, while Mg(NO3)2 provides the template for pore generation. A vigorous exothermic pyrolysis process introduces the MgO@C porous precursor containing meso- and macropores within the carbon framework. With subsequent high-temperature carbonization and acid washing of the template, numerous interconnected pores are further created, as illustrated in Fig. 9c.165 Likewise, Zeng et al. have synthesized hierarchical porous carbon with large specific surface of 1091 m2 g−1 from gelatin and graphene oxide by using CaCO3 template in combination with KOH activation.177 Carbide is another such hard template used for the synthesis of porous carbons. Tang et al. reported a hierarchical porous carbon/SiC from waste bamboo shoot shell and KOH as carbon source and etching agent, respectively. The obtained product possessed a large surface area of 1357.9 m2 g−1.178
The hard templating approach suffers from drawbacks such as its tedious nature, high template cost, cannot effectively adjust the pore wall thickness and use of extremely toxic chemicals, which restrains its accessibility for scale-up production. In order to overcome these drawbacks, soft templating method is a good alternative choice since it calls for less synthetic steps, is relatively less expensive and moderately harmless.


2.4.2 Soft templating. 
In soft template directed synthesis, the templates are common supermolecules or organic molecules having functional groups. It is centred on the self-assembly of block copolymer or surfactant micelles and is viewed to be more suited for the preparation of ordered mesoporous carbons. The molecules or moieties present in the templates contribute towards strong interactive forces like hydrophilic/hydrophobic/electrostatic interactions and hydrogen bonding. Once an apt solution is placed, ordered micelles would be formed spontaneously from the templates in the aqueous solvent, which in turn unite with the carbon precursors to form heterogeneous composites. Finally, the porous carbon materials with special mesoporous architectures are produced during the carbonization process. Additionally, the pore size can be tuned by modulating the ratio between the solvents and the micelles.179 Thus, the chemical interfaces between the templates and the carbon sources have a vital part in the synthesis of soft-templates. However, the process for a successful soft template development is rigorous and intricate. It must fulfil the following requirements:180 (i) capacity of the precursor to self-assemble into nanostructures, (ii) presence of one component that can change into pores and one component that can form the carbon skeleton, (iii) stability of the porogen component against the carbonization temperature and (iv) capability of the carbon-forming component to give rise to a cross-linked polymer. In principle for the fabrication of mesoporous carbons, soft templating approach is more convenient than hard templates since the process of template removal by harsh chemicals is not required. However, most of the biomass/waste materials are inert or insoluble and cannot create stable colloids with surfactants. Moreover, the surfactants are expensive and non-recoverable, restricting its applications. Even so, there are few examples citing the use of soft templates. For example, Zheng et al. fabricated mesoporous carbon material from batatas biomass using F127 (polyethylene-polypropylene glycol) as soft template.181 Similarly, Sun et al. synthesized N, S co-doped honeycomb-like hierarchical porous carbon from chitosan employing a soft-template strategy (Fig. 9d), where F127 and sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) acted as soft templates. The solubility of chitosan was achieved by protonation using sulfuric acid. Driven by hydrogen bonding, van der Waals force and charge attraction, the protonated chitosan, F127 and SDS spontaneously aggregates to form micelles, which eventually undergo pyrolysis to produce the porous carbons. The removal of the templates during pyrolysis creates the meso- and macropores while the micropores are formed by the release of NH3 and SO2 gases during decomposition of protonated chitosan.182


2.4.3 Novel evolving templates. 
In recent times, novel templates like ethylenediamine tetraacetate (EDTA)-based salts,183 melamine,184 MXene,185 ice templating,186etc., have been employed to fabricate functional nanoporous carbons. For example as illustrated in Fig. 9e, Lv et al. designed rice husk-based microporous carbon via pyrolysis and simultaneous activation and modification by KOH and EDTA-4Na, respectively. In situ modification of the carbon precursor with EDTA at high temperature lead to the incorporation of N-rich functional groups to the AC and high SSA of 1368 m2 g−1.183 Wu et al. fabricated hierarchical porous carbon structure using melamine foam as template and waste liquid (from vitamin C) as carbon source together with KOH-assisted activation. The melamine template is not only inexpensive and environmental-friendly, it also has highly porous interconnected fibrous network. In the carbonization step, the methylene bridges and triazine ring of the melamine foam decomposes, which leads to the pore formation. The etching effect of KOH further leads to the generation of more number of pores. Therefore, the obtained carbon product has high SSA of 3837 m2 g−1 and wide pore distribution.184 MXenes are also used as templates for the synthesis of porous carbons owing to its rich surface terminations and two-dimensional morphology. Hu et al. prepared MXene-coated carbon cloth from silk fabrics (Fig. 9f), which possessed large carbon content and delivered excellent mechanical performance.185 Similarly ice-templating or freeze-casting approach has also been explored to develop controllable morphology and macroporosity in carbonaceous materials. For instance, tremella-derived hierarchical porous carbon prepared via microwave pre-treatment and freeze-casting methods exhibited high heteroatom doping and ordered microstructure. The ice-templating technique sustains the uniform dispersion of KOH with the tremella cells and avoids the aggregation of the cell walls by ice sublimation that can otherwise occur by conventional drying.184 Chen et al. fabricated wood-derived graphitized carbon aerogel through freeze-casting and carbonization processes, wherein ordered tracheid-like stable structure, high carbon content, SSA of 950.4 m2 g−1 and wide range of pores were obtained (Fig. 9g).187 Although, the newly evolving template techniques are adept in engineering functional macroporous carbons, accomplishing enhanced textural properties in ACs besides the commercial potential standpoint is still being worked on.

2.5 Additive addition method
Additive-assisted methodology furnishes more possibilities to modulate the physiochemical properties of porous carbons with regard to surface refinement, in situ doping and structure orientation. Chang et al. fabricated interconnected hierarchical porous carbon from Chinese parasol fluff via metal-ion supported activation by CO2 and KOH. Co2+ served as the ion additive for carbon graphitization such that the as-prepared porous material presented high SSA of 1449 m2 g−1 and rich heteroatom content.188 Likewise, acetic acid mediated synthesis of chitosan-based hierarchical porous carbon showed unique honeycomb-like structure and high surface area of 3532 m2 g−1 (Fig. 10a). The exceptional result was credited to the usage of acetic acid as an additive for HTC process, which not only offered an environment conducive for easy accessibility of KOH activator, but also led to the development of a rigid semi-carbonized substrate that was favourable for achieving ultra-porosity.189 Another two distinctive cases with regard to additive-assisted HTC involves borax and phenols, which results in carbon aerogels.190,191 Although few promising results have been attained so far, more break-through work should be overseen to diversify the additive-assisted synthetic methods.
 Fig. 10  (a) Synthesis of chitosan-based porous carbons. Adapted from ref. 189 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017 and (b) typical mechanochemical reaction. Adapted from ref. 150 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2020. 
2.6 Mechanochemical method
Mechanochemical synthesis method is a simple and powerful green technique where the chemical conversion reaction is carried out under mechanical forces imparted by grinding, milling or shearing. The chief advantage of this strategy over other conventional ones is the rapid completion of reactions using lesser amount of solvent or in the complete absence of solvents, which ensures reduced liquid waste generation and minimized synthesis duration. Furthermore, it also enables the preparation of superior carbon-based products with better yields than the solution-dependent processes. The most common fabrication tool is the utilization of ball-milling process, which results in several surfaces and bulk defects to the treated solids. Here, the high-energy mechanochemical forces from the mobile balls are administered into the concealed container enclosing the solid reactants, as presented in Fig. 10b.150,192 It was observed that without any external alkali activation, coconut shell-derived hierarchical porous carbon obtained from mechanochemistry and direct carbonization exhibited large surface area of 1771 m2 g−1 and high pore volume of 1.88 cm3 g−1.193 As a result of the mechanochemical process, the biomass undergoes breakdown into fine microparticles, which aids in the release of volatile components formed during the carbonization process and as a consequence the surface area is enhanced. In the same way, biomass raw materials like fallen flowers,194 lignin,195Myriophyllum aquaticum,196etc., along with different activators are ball milled together to form homogeneous mixtures, which go through carbonization to give rise to hierarchical porous carbons. The mechanical forces from ball milling promote the crystals of the activating agents to get embedded into the biomass framework, which leads to the generation of macropores. Readers can find the elaborate review on mechanochemistry in previous literature.197
In summary, the fabrications of porous carbons from a wide range of biomass/waste raw materials by diverse synthetic techniques offer fascinating and unique characteristics as presented in Table 2. However, most of the techniques may release large quantities of contaminants as by-products that are usually highly alkaline and polluting along with toxic gases that need further treatment and decontamination and are therefore not environmentally friendly in the truest sense. At the same time, high-temperature requirement and usage of toxic chemicals in few of the discussed methodologies implies high energy consumption and a corrosive environment toward reactors. Likewise, handling the waste disposal and post-treatment of the spent materials is a growing concern with regard to environmental pollution. Thus, the environmental impacts of these preparation methods still need re-evaluation. Even so, with the growing demand for devices today, there is still ample of improvements required to prevail over technology limitations and processing inefficiency for the synthesis of optimized porous carbon materials having ideal properties. In the upcoming section, we review some of the recent literature published on the promising applications of biomass/waste-derived nanoporous carbon materials for selected energy and environmental applications.
Table 2 List of biomass/waste-derived porous carbons with its activation treatments, SSA and their applications




Carbon precursor
Synthesis method
Activation agents
Surface area (m2 g−1)
Intended application
Ref.




European deciduous trees
Pyrolysis and cavitation
HNO3 and H2SO4
614
Supercapacitor

26



Lotus leaves
HTC and double chemical activation
HNO3 and KOH
2351
Supercapacitor

27




Chlorella zofingiensi

Carbonization and chemical activation
KOH
1337.9
Supercapacitor

28




Pythium oligandrum

Freeze drying and calcination
—
—
Photocatalytic H2 evolution

29




Arundo donax

Solid-state chemical activation
ZnCl2/KOH
582
CO2 capture

35



982


Fabric waste
Molten salt pyrolysis
LiCl/KCl
1975.2
Supercapacitor

50



PET waste
Catalytic carbonization and chemical activation
KOH
2236
Supercapacitor

54



Carrot waste
Chemical activation
ZnCl2
1509.7
Dye degradation

46



Tangerine seed waste
Chemical activation
H3PO4
659.62
Adsorption

198



Corn stover
HTC and chemical activation
KOH
2442
CO2 capture

143



Fir bark
Microwave-assisted HTC and pyrolysis
—
955
Supercapacitor

199



Camellias, azalea leaves, green grocery and apple pulps
Dual-templating and carbonization
Mg5(OH)2(CO3)4/ZnCl2
1650
Adsorption

200



Fungus waste
Chemical activation
KOH
3076
Supercapacitor

201



Casein
Solid-state chemical activation
K3C6H5O7
2212
CO2 capture

202



Supercapacitor


Sorghum waste
Chemical activation and carbonization
KOH
1681
Waste-water treatment

203




Caragana korshinskii

Pyrolysis
—
133.491
Adsorption

58



Bottlebrush flower
Thermal chemical activation
NaHCO3
2025
Adsorption and catalytic degradation

204



Mixed plastic wastes
Catalytic carbonization and chemical activation
KOH
2198
Supercapacitor

205



Sunflower
Pyrolysis and chemical activation
KOH
3072
CO2 storage

206



Iodine capture


Waste-water treatment


Packaging waste
Pyrolysis and chemical activation
KOH
1383
CO2 capture

207



Lignin
Oxidative pre-treatment and chemical activation
KOH
3094
Supercapacitor

208





3. Applications of nanoporous carbons
3.1 Energy storage: supercapacitors
The design and fabrication of integrated high energy and power density storage systems from easily accessible economical precursors centred on biomass/waste-derived porous carbon materials have been gaining considerable momentum in recent years. As discussed previously, biomass/waste raw materials are considered to be the finest choice as carbon source for the development of lost-cost electro-active materials. However, the electrochemical performance of untreated bio-resources is quite unsatisfactory and therefore different synthetic methodologies have been developed and modified over the years to ensure optimal graphitization and porosity in the resultant carbonaceous material. This ensures improved conductivity and facile diffusion of ions, both of which are dependent on parameters like SSA, surface functionality, pore size distribution and the type of electrolyte in regulating the best electrochemical performance of the carbon materials. The electrochemical performance of a material is determined and analysed mainly by three-electrode and two-electrode systems. Voltammetric methods like cyclic voltammetry (CV), galvanostatic charge–discharge (GCD) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) provide information on the electron transfer process, which in turn substantiates the material quality for practical applications.
In light of the various preparation strategies discussed in the previous section, we can instantaneously apprehend that large differences are observed in the porous carbons obtained by different techniques with regard to their physiochemical properties. Furthermore, chemical activation process has been found to be particularly significant. For example in Fig. 11a, Neolamarckia cadamba or commonly known as burflower-tree when treated with KOH gave rise to a hierarchical porous carbon (NC-4700), which exhibited SSA as high as 3192 m2 g−1 and high pore volume of 1.38 cm3 g−1. As an electro-active material, NC-4700 exhibited a high specific capacitance of 411 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1 in a three-electrode configuration system using 6 M KOH electrolyte.209 Common polystyrene waste was converted into porous carbon from Fe2O3 catalyst/template-assisted KOH activation process. The optimized carbon product possessed high SSA of 2100 m2 g−1 together with wide pore distribution. As displayed in Fig. 11b, the assembled symmetrical supercapacitor showed a high energy density of 19.2 W h kg−1 as well as high power density of 4 kW kg−1 in 1 M Li2SO4 electrolyte.210E. prolifera (marine macroalgae) as carbon precursor was successfully converted into AC through freeze-drying assisted pre-treatment and ZnCl2 activation method (Fig. 11c). The hierarchical porous carbon presented high surface area (1910.84 m2 g−1) and high total pore volume (2.86 cm3 g−1), which reflected in its electrochemical performance (332.4 F g−1 at 0.2 A g−1 in 1 M H2SO4).211
 Fig. 11  (a) (i) Schematic illustration of the preparation of Neolamarckia cadamba based porous carbon, (ii) pore size distribution graph and (iii) CD curves at different current densities. Adapted from ref. 209 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019, (b) Ragone plot of waste polystyrene-derived porous carbon. Adapted from ref. 210 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020, (c) schematic illustration of pore derivation mechanism in E. prolifera-derived porous carbon, (d) X-ray photoelectron spectra (XPS) of N 1s for grape marcs-derived porous carbon. Adapted from ref. 212 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021 and (e) cycling stability plot of N, O-co-doped porous carbon. Adapted from ref. 216 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020. 
It is worth mentioning again that presence of heteroatoms either by external or self-doping can essentially upgrade cyclability and rate-capability of electro-active materials by providing improved surface functionality and wettability, tunable conductivity and more redox active surface sites in the porous carbons. As presented in Fig. 11d, N-doped porous carbons is one of the most extensively studied carbon material for supercapacitor application due to the presence of functional groups like pyridinic-N-oxide, graphitic N, pyridinic and pyrrolic, which facilitates facile electron transport as well as serve as faradaic active sites within the carbon electrode. Zhang et al. used grape marc waste for the preparation of N-doped porous carbon by using urea as the doping agent and KOH as the activator. The as-prepared carbon exhibited suitable N-doped content (2.04 at%) and high SSA of 2221.4 m2 g−1, which resulted in the specific capacitance of 446.0, 345.5 and 310.0 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 in 1 M H2SO4, 6 M KOH and 1 M Na2SO4 electrolytes, respectively.212 Likewise, N-doped porous carbon prepared by integrated salt templating (KCl/ZnCl2) and silicon hard templating by pyrolysis of wheat straw waste, showed 7.78% of N content (melamine as N precursor) and excellent specific capacitance of 223.9 F g−1 at scan rate of 5 mV s−1 in 6 M KOH.213 Another interesting example is that of corn silk-derived hierarchical hollow porous carbon prepared via KOH activation, which not only exhibited a tube-like morphology but also possessed a large SSA of 1962.4 m2 g−1 and self-doped N content of 2.07%. The electrode material in two-electrode system exhibited impressive capacitance retention of 81.6% over 10000 cycles at 4 A g−1.214 In comparison to single atom doping, dual doping (e.g., O, N, P, etc.) can also provide a significant impact on the electrochemical properties of porous carbons. Guo et al. fabricated N, P, S co-doped porous carbon from walnut shell by a simple H3PO4-assisted activation route. The resultant porous carbon showed microporous structure, abundant heteroatoms (the atomic content ratio of N, P and S was nearly 10.3%), high SSA of 2583 m2 g−1 and pore volume of up to 1.236 cm3 g−1. Meanwhile, the assembled symmetrical supercapacitor device exhibited maximum gravimetric specific energy of ∼14.08 W h kg−1 and high gravimetric specific power of 7 kW kg−1. Additionally, the device presented outstanding cyclic stability and capacitance retention of 90.2% after 8000 GCD cycles.44 Yu et al. reported the synthesis of N, O, P, S-doped soybean-derived porous carbon from combined pre-carbonization, hydrothermal stabilization and KOH activation processes. The porous carbon demonstrated an ultra-high specific capacitance of 685.1 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 in 2 M KOH and 439.5 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 in 1 M H2SO4 electrolytes under three-electrode setup. The outstanding result was especially credited to the HTC method that could stabilize the heteroatom (N, O and P) content in the carbon framework as well enhance the graphitization of the carbon material.215 Wang et al. designed an effective method to optimize the porosity of peach gum-derived carbon material by performing carbonization using molten salt [(Mn(CH3COO)2, KCl and CO(NH2)2)] both as catalyst and template. The obtained N, O-codoped lamellar porous carbon showed rich heteroatom content (O is 9.53 at%; N is 14.04 at%) and large SSA of 1372 m2 g−1. In 6 M KOH electrolyte, the carbon electrode demonstrated a specific capacitance of 402 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 and long cyclic stability of 99.5% after 10000 cycles (Fig. 11e).216 Porous carbon enriched in N/O co-doping was prepared from corn-cob by Wang et al. via microwave treatment. The obtained AC possessed SSA of 2508 m2 g−1 and hierarchical micro- and mesoporosity, which is useful for the electrochemical performance. As a symmetric supercapacitor, the fabricated electrode in 6 M KOH electrolyte demonstrated a maximum energy density of 9.24 W h kg−1 at a power density of 250 W kg−1.217
The promising performances suggest that biomass/waste-derived nanostructured porous carbons exhibiting controlled porosity, graphitization and surface functionality is the key to improve the electrochemical storage performance of supercapacitors. Table 3 summarizes the supercapacitor performance of different biomass/waste-derived porous carbon materials in the past three years.
Table 3 List of biomass/waste-derived porous carbons as electro-active materials for supercapacitor applicationa




Carbon precursor
Synthesis method
Specific surface area (m2 g−1)
Pore volume (cm3 g−1)
Specific capacitance (Csp) F g−1 in 3E
Current density (A g−1) in 3E
Electrolyte in 3E
Highest energy density (W h kg−1)
Highest power density (kW kg−1)
Ref.





a Where, 3E = three-electrode configuration. 2E = two-electrode configuration.





Lotus seed shell

In situ hard templating, carbonization and chemical activation
3188
3.2
286
0.5
6 M KOH
10.9
102.6

218



Low-density polyethylene
Autogenic pressure carbonization and chemical activation
3059
1.73 m3 g−1
355
0.5
6 M KOH
9.81
450 W kg−1

219



Soybean root
HTC and chemical activation
2690
1.9
328
1
6 M KOH
46.7
27.3

220



Tamarind leaves
Chemical activation
1212
0.71
370
1
0.5 M H2SO4
36.96
4.49

221



293
0.5 M Na2SO4


193
6 M KOH


Wood carbon waste
Pre-carbonization and chemical activation
2943
1.83
588
0.5
6 M KOH
32.9
248.8 W kg−1

222




Saccharum spontaneum

Chemical activation and carbonization
1590
0.895
561
1
1 M H2SO4
13.2
5607 W kg−1

223



Flaxseed residue
Carbonization and chemical activation
3326
1.56
369
0.5
6 M KOH
61.2
13.3

224



398
1 M H2SO4


Peach gum
Template-assisted HTC and carbonization
1161.4
1.67
426
0.5
6 M KOH
30.28
350 W kg−1

225



Phoenix tree fruits
Carbonization and activation
3463
1.53
462
0.5
Mixed alkaline (KOH and ChOH)
19.7
12.2

226



Garlic peel
Carbonization and ultrasonic-assisted chemical activation
3887
2.242
—
—
6 M KOH in 2E
59.57
16.24

227




Eucalyptus globulus seed
HTC and chemical activation
2388.38
—
175.33
1
1 M KOH
—
—

228



Lotus leaf
Freeze-drying, pre-carbonization and chemical activation
4482
—
225
0.5
1 M NaCl
—
—

229



289
6 M KOH


Cashew nut husk
Chemical activation
2742
1.528
305.2
1
6 M KOH
11.2
—

230



Chitin
Carbonization and template-assisted chemical activation
1488.3
1.286
412.5
0.5
6 M KOH
9.67
—

231



Pectin

In situ template and chemical activation
2928
1.60
338
1
6 M KOH
22.4
8979 W kg−1

232



Alginate
Nano-hard templating and HTC-assisted chemical activation
2589
1.875
316
0.5
6 M KOH
16.1
2.5

166





3.2 Environmental remediation
Plethora of porous carbon materials extracted from biomass and waste resources as carbon precursors have been effectively employed over the recent years for sustainable removal of toxic environmental contaminants such as dyes, pharmaceuticals, and heavy metals, etc. This is attributed to the advantages of the porous carbons with regard to its excellent surface properties like large SSA, high pore volume, heteroatom functionalities and tunable micro/mesoporosity along with hierarchical porous structure. Adsorption using porous carbon materials is the most general method for removing field and industrial pollutants from air and water. It is based on mechanisms like electrostatic attractions, ion-exchange adsorption, hydrogen bonding, pore-filling mechanism, surface complexation and intermolecular interactions.233 In this sub-section, we will cover discussion based on the adsorption of commonly occurring water/soil-soluble and air contaminants by various biomass/waste-derived porous materials.

3.2.1 Removal of heavy metal and metal ion pollutants. 
Toxic metals such as arsenic (As), cadmium (Cd), lead (Pb), chromium (Cr), mercury (Hg), etc., generally originates from industrial activities and become contaminants when discharged directly into water/soil environments. These ions have alarming health risks, which have led to the development of analytical methodologies to minimize the concentration of these pollutants. Among various strategies employed, adsorption using porous carbons as adsorbents has been considered as the most promising and effective method. The adsorption capacity is mostly affected by the solution pH, the type of metal ions and their respective concentrations and surface charge present in the adsorbent. For example, when the solution pH is 1, high adsorption of Cr(VI) occur while for pH ranging between 3 to 6, adsorption of Co(II), Cd(II), Cu(II), Cr(III), and Ni(II) ions are achieved. Furthermore, studies have revealed that adsorption temperature as well as particle sizes of the adsorbents also influence the adsorption capacity. Hence, it is vital to adjust the adsorption parameters in order to accomplish the best results.234
Inorganic As(III) and As(V) are thought to be the most lethal contaminant for human health. As such, more efforts are being carried out for the removal of more hazardous As(III) from drinking water. To this end, Cui et al. showed that palm waste-derived magnetic nanocomposite demonstrated exceptional As(III) removal from soil with high adsorption capacity of 16.23 mg g−1.235 Pb(II) and Cd(II) have also been accepted as classic harmful contaminants. Wang et al. demonstrated that lignin-based porous carbon exhibited effective adsorption capacities of 250.5 mg g−1 and 126.4 mg g−1 for Pb(II) and Cd(II), respectively, from aqueous solution together with excellent recyclability. The result was credited to the porous graphene-like structure of the carbon material (Fig. 12a), which facilitated the facile diffusion and immobilization of the metal ions.236 Shahraki studied the comparative adsorption efficiency between tire-derived activated carbon (TAC) and commercial activated carbon (CAC) for the removal of Pb2+, Cu2+ and Zn2+ ions from aqueous solution. The adsorption tests demonstrated that TAC presented higher adsorption capacities for all the ions over CAC due to elevated electrostatic attraction and higher surface coordination with the heavy metals (Fig. 12b).237
 Fig. 12  (a) SEM image of lignin-based porous carbon and (b) schematic representation for synthesis of tire-derived AC and its absorption mechanism. Adapted from ref. 237 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021. 
Heteroatom-rich porous carbon materials play a significant role in tuning the adsorption of toxic metal ions. In a study recently conducted in 2021, starch-derived S, N, O-co-doped porous carbon spheres having large SSA of 2617 m2 g−1 served as an excellent adsorbent for Cr(VI) removal from wastewater with 97% removal efficiency. The synergistic effect of the surface functionalities notably enhanced the Cr(VI) adsorption. Also, reducing functional groups (like C–H, C–SH, C–OH and –NH–) could act as electron donors for the reduction of the adsorbed Cr(VI) into Cr(III).238 Likewise, elemental Hg is known to have stable physical and chemical properties, which makes the removal process difficult. In this regard, Li et al. developed porous carbon from rice straw by microwave activation and H2O2 impregnation such that high adsorption capacity of 1485.61 μg g−1 was achieved. The exceptional result was attributed to the C–O functional groups and chemisorbed oxygen present on the modified carbon surface.239
Even though metal adsorption is a complex process, the aforementioned studies demonstrate that biomass/waste-derived porous carbons with suitable modifications are highly desired to accomplish best performances towards the removal of the toxic metal ions. Table 4 summarizes the adsorption capacity of different biomass/waste-derived porous carbon materials toward detoxification from toxic metal ions.
Table 4 Summary of biomass/waste-derived porous carbons with its synthesis methods, SSA and contaminant adsorption capacity




Carbon precursor
Synthesis method
Specific surface area (m2 g−1)
Targeted metal ion
Adsorption capacity (mg g−1)
Experimental parameters
Ref.




Silkworm cocoon
Pyrolysis and chemical activation
3134
Pb(II)
91.02
Ion concentration = 100 mg L−1

240



Cu(II)
87.31
30 °C


Zn(II)
56.4
pH = 6 (for Cr(III) at pH = 5)


Cd(II)
77.42


Cr(III)
51.45


Orange peel
Chemical activation, carbonization and phosphorylation
378.5
U(VI)
552.6
pH = 6.0298.15 K

241



Spruce sawdust
Carbonization and physical activation
1010
Zn(II)
17.2
Ion concentration = 30 mg L−1

242



Ni(II)
6.6
Room temperature pH = 7


Co(II)
4.5


Kitchen waste
Carbonization and chemical activation
2417
Cr(VI)
526.1
pH = 2

243



Glucose
HTC and chemical activation
1600.67
Cr(VI)
230.15
Ion concentration = 200 mg L−1

244



25 °C


pH = 2


Luffa sponge
Pyrolysis, chemical activation and HTC
1525.45
Cr(VI)
312.50
Ion concentration = 200 mg L−1

245



318 K


pH = 2


Corn cob rice husk
Chemical activation
2381 ± 83
Pb(II)
381 ± 10
Ion concentration = 500 mg L−1

246



2786 ± 94
492 ± 15
Room temperature


Corn stalk
Chemical activation and carbonization
566.1
Cr(VI)
89.5
Ion concentration = 300 mg L−1

247



pH = 4.5


Cork
Slow pyrolysis
392.5
Cu(II)
18.5
Ion concentration = 200 mg L−1

248



20 °C


Acai seed
Microwave heating and chemical activation
2774
Pb(II)
86%
Ion concentration = 30 mg L−1

249



Fe(II)
69%


Mg(II)
8%


Removal efficiency



Salicornia brachiata

Self-templating and pyrolysis
700
Pb(II)
55
30 °C ± 5 °C

250



Hg(II)
∼100
pH = 6.5 ± 0.2


Cd(II)
∼250






3.2.2 Dye adsorption. 
Dye industry is recognized as the tenth most polluting industry since 17–20% of the water pollution is handed out by textile dyeing process. As a consequence of their far-ranging usage, roughly 5000–10000 tons of dyes are introduced into the water bodies annually.251 MB, methyl orange (MO), RhB, etc., are few of the most consumed dyes in textile sector and are counted as unsafe because of their toxic and carcinogenic character. Mainly dyes are classified into anionic, cationic, dispersive, direct, etc., depending on their use. As mentioned previously, adsorption based on porous carbon materials is one of the most preferred separation techniques for dye removal.
As shown in Fig. 13a, Wang et al. prepared porous carbon fibres from seed hair fibers of Metaplexis japonica through carbonization and H3PO4 activation, which exhibited a high amount of adsorbed MB (943.372 mg g−1) from aqueous solution. The impressive adsorption performance was credited to the hollow tubular structure, high SSA (1882.003 m2 g−1), large pore volume (1.613 cm3 g−1), low density characteristics of the adsorbent and the high-efficiency penetrant of H3PO4.252 Other carbon precursors recently explored for MB removal include mixture of cyanobacteria and polypropylene plastics,253 grass waste254 and cotton stalk.255 Nguyen and co-workers investigated MO adsorption from agro-waste and invasive plants such that maximum adsorption capacity of 12.3 mg g−1 was obtained for mimosa biochar at optimal pH 2–7.256 Likewise, pyrolysis-thermal activated PET waste based carbon adsorbent showed 99.8% MO adsorbance, which is chiefly driven by π–π interactions between the porous carbon and π electron-rich benzene rings of the MO molecules.257 Another noteworthy example is that of HTC mediated hierarchical porous carbon prepared from bamboo shoot waste, which demonstrated maximum capacity as high as 5398 mg g−1 towards RhB adsorption. The synergetic effects of large surface area (3250 m2 g−1), hierarchical architecture and pyrrolic-N species contributed for high concentration of RhB removal.258 Similarly, Liu et al. combined carbonization and KOH activation to synthesize O, N, S self-doped porous carbon from lotus leaves. The resultant material presented interconnected micro/meso/macroporous structure with high surface area of 3601 m2 g−1 and wide pore size distribution, which was examined as a superadsorbent for RhB removal. From Fig. 13b, it can be observed that an ultrahigh adsorption of 9444.39 mg g−1 and reliable capacitance retention of >97% were obtained even after 10 cycles.259
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic diagram for the preparation of porous carbon from Metaplexis japonica fibers. Adapted from ref. 252 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020, (b) recycling of lotus leaves-derived porous carbon for RhB adsorption. Adapted from ref. 259 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020 and (c) proposed adsorption mechanism of litchi peel-derived porous carbon for CR and MG dyes. Adapted from ref. 261 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020. 
Solution pH has a critical influence on the dye adsorption process, wherein higher pH is suitable for adsorption of cationic dyes due to electrostatic force of attraction between the dye molecules and the negatively charged surface of the adsorbent. While, under same conditions, the adsorption ability of anionic dyes decreases because of electrostatic repulsive forces. For example, Sukhbaatar et al. investigated the effect of pH towards the adsorption of MB by spent coffee grounds-derived porous carbon material. It was observed that the adsorption capacity increased with pH such that maximum absorbance quotient was obtained at pH 10 due to enhanced electrostatic interactions between MB molecules and oxygen-containing functional groups on the adsorbent surface introduced by KOH–NaOH activation.260
Biomass/waste-derived porous carbons have also been explored for mixed dyes removal from wastewater. Wu et al. reported high adsorption capacity of two kinds of organic dyes, congo red (404.4 mg g−1) (CR) and MG (2468 mg g−1) on activated porous carbon derived from HTC processed litchi peel. The superior adsorption performance is attributed to the high SSA (1006 m2 g−1), abundant microporous structure and surface functional groups possessed by the biochar. This results in electrostatic interactions, hydrogen bonding, pore-filling and π–π interactions between the dye molecules and the biochar, as illustrated in Fig. 13c.261 In another example, graphene-like porous carbon was prepared from Bengal gram bean husk through carbonization and KOH activation process, which reportedly exhibited exceptional adsorption capacity of MB (469 mg g−1) and MO (418 mg g−1) dyes. The trapping of the dye molecules on the π-electron rich graphitic domains, presence of oxygen functionalities, noteworthy textural properties and systematic distribution of micro/mesopores facilitated the high adsorption of the dyes.262
Although significant progress has been made over the years (Table 5), challenges like reusability of the adsorbents as well as selectivity of the carbon materials toward the target pollutants still needs to be focused on.263
Table 5 Adsorption capacity of biomass/waste-derived porous carbons on dyesa




Carbon precursor
Synthesis method
Specific surface area (m2 g−1)
Targeted dye
Adsorption capacity (mg g−1)
Experimental parameters
Ref.





a Where, C0 = dye concentration.





White sugar
Acid dehydration and chemical activation
1144.77
RhB
123.46

C
0 (RhB) = 50 mg L−1

264



25 °C


Cow hairs
Direct pyrolysis, chemical activation, and hard-templating
1753.075
Direct blue
1477

C
0 (direct blue) = 50 g L−1

265




Azolla

Pre-carbonization and chemical activation
1437
MB
1930

C
0 (MB) = 400 mg L−1

266



Sugarcane bagasse
Soft-templating and pyrolysis
645
MB
101.14

C
0 (MB) = 40 mg L−1

267



30 ± 2 °C


pH = 6.8


Edible fungus substrate
Carbonization and chemical activation
2767.3
RhB
1497

C
0 (RhB) = 50 mg L−1

268



303 K


pH = 9



Physalis alkekengi L. husk
Carbonization and chemical activation
3502
MG
1989
pH = 9

269



Lotus leaf
Freeze-drying, pre-carbonization and chemical activation
4482
MB
4181.2

C
0 (MB) = 200 mg L−1

229



298 K


Glucose
Explosion-assisted strategy and high-temperature carbonization
1378
MB
561

C
0 (MB) = 50 mg L−1

270



25 °C


Chitosan
HTC and chemical activation
2463.9
MB
1599.03

C
0 (MB) = 100 mg L−1

271



45 °C


PET
Pyrolysis and thermal activation
644
MO
59.5

C
0 (MO) = 100 mg L−1

257



pH = 5.75


Vinasse waste
Carbonization and chemical activation
2015
MB
2251

C
0 (MB) = 400 mg L−1

272



25 °C


pH = 7


Coal gangue
Activation and calcination
2012.7
Cr(VI)
320.51

C
0 (RhB) = 400 mg L−1

273



RhB
3086.42
pH = 2 (Cr(VI))


pH = 4 (RhB)



Fomes fomentarius

Carbonization and chemical activation
3352
Brilliant green
3166
pH = 9

274







3.2.3 Removal of pharmaceuticals and other miscellaneous pollutants. 
Pharmaceuticals have been identified as emerging micropollutants due to their high degree of non-degradability and continuous release in aquatic environments and sediments. Remarkably, they accumulate in marine organisms and pose high ecological risk even if present in low concentration (ng L−1 to μg L−1). Antibiotics are the primary pharmaceutical pollutants, succeeded by non-steroidal anti-inflammatories, β-blockers, antidepressants, lipid regulators and hormones. Keeping in mind of the low processing cost, great elimination efficiency and less production of secondary pollutants, adsorption based on biomass/waste-derived porous carbons is a promising technology for contaminant remediation.
Waste garlic skin-derived porous carbon employed as an adsorbent for the removal of tetracycline hydrochloride (TCH) antibiotic demonstrated excellent equilibrium adsorption capacity of 1911.8 mg g−1 (Fig. 14a). The porous carbon used for this study was activated by KOH, which exhibited micro/mesoporosity with ultra-high surface area (3686 m2 g−1) and oxygen-containing functional groups on their porous surface. Such remarkable physiochemical properties aided in delivering the high adsorption performance.275 Yang et al. fabricated porous carbon sheet from cattail powders using K2CO3 activation process and studied the same for levofloxacin (LFC) removal. The as-prepared defect-rich material provided high adsorption capacity of 754.12 mg g−1, a maximum efficiency of 99.64% in 10 min, broad pH range and good selectivity. Furthermore, density-functional-theory (DFT) calculations presented that the various chemical forms of LFC have significant interactions with the adsorbent. As exhibited in Fig. 14b, the closest interaction distance is 2.52 Å through π–π stacking configurations, corresponding to high adsorption performance.276 Sludge-based adsorbent derived from beverage industry demonstrated removal of almost 85.16% of ibuprofen, ketoprofen and paracetamol compounds.277 Similarly, functionalized ACs prepared from paper mill exhibited distinct adsorption selectivity for six different pharmaceuticals. It was observed that thiol functionalized carbon presented the highest percentage removal of sulfamethoxazole (SMX) in wastewater. Even though amine functionalized carbon delivered the poorest adsorptive performance, it showed high selectivity for paroxetine (PAR) and venlafaxine (VEN).278 Recently reported examples for the elimination of pharmaceuticals using carbon precursors include cotton textile waste,279 carob waste,280 pomegranate peel,281 cherry kernels282 and argan nutshells.283
 Fig. 14  (a) Effect of TCH initial concentration on the adsorption property of garlic skin-derived porous carbon and raw biomass. Adapted from ref. 275 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2020, (b) optimized geometry for the levofloxacin (NH+) cation absorbtion on the cattail powder-derived porous sheet surface. Adapted from ref. 276 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020 and (c) maximum absorption capacities of the superhydrophobic carbon aerogel towards different organic compounds based on Sisal and Premna microphylla leaves. Adapted from ref. 289 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019. 
Apart from pharmaceutical compounds, biomass/waste-derived porous carbons have also been inspected by many researchers for the removal of pesticides,284 phosphates,285 caffeine286 and oil pollutants.287 To that end, Cansado et al. developed chemically AC from a mixture of synthetic polymers (PET and polyacrylonitrile (PAN)) by KOH and K2CO3 treatment with high surface area of 2828 m2 g−1. The as-obtained material was utilized as an efficient adsorbent toward pesticide (2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D) and 4-chloro-2-methylphenoxyacetic acid (MCPA)) removal and demonstrated better results than commercial AC.288Premna microphylla leaves-derived hierarchical porous carbon aerogels by freeze-drying and carbonization processes demonstrated high oil absorption capacities of carbon tetrachloride (147.3 g g−1) and soybean oil (146.7 g g−1) along with excellent oil recoverability and regenerability performances (Fig. 14c).289 More such representative examples are presented in Table 6.
Table 6 Performance of porous carbons from various biomass/waste precursors as adsorbents for removal of pharmaceuticals and other pollutants




Carbon precursor
Synthesis method
Specific surface area (m2 g−1)
Targeted pollutant
Adsorption capacity (mg g−1)
Experimental parameters
Ref.




Tea and plane tree leaves
Carbonization, impregnation and activation
1151
Pramipexole dihydrochloride (PRM)
112

C
0 (PRM) = 200 mg L−1

290



1105
101
pH = 3


Soybean oil
Pyrolysis
365.27
Tetracycline (TC)
121.51

C
0 (TC) = 20 mg L−1

291



Waste lignin
Chemical activation
1305.5
Chloramphenicol (CAP)
534

C
0 (CAP) = 120 mg L−1

292



303 K


Palm kernel shells
HTC and physical activation
131
Diclofenac (DCF)
13.16

C
0 (DCF) = 15 mg L−1

293



25 °C


pH = 2



Lantana camara stem
Hydrothermal pre-carbonization, pyrolysis and chemical activation
677.7
Ibuprofen (IBP)
106.3

C
0 (IBP) = 30 mg L−1

294



273 K


Glucose
Molten salt-assisted carbonization
914
Diclofenac sodium (DFC)
250

C
0 (DFC) = 50 mg L−1

295



25.0 °C


pH = 5


Pharmaceutical sludge
Dry mixing chemical activation
756.35
TC
379.78

C
0 (TC) = 200 mg L−1

296



Impregnation method
814.36
361.84
25 °C


Kernel of Argania Spinosa fruit
Chemical activation
1618
Amoxicillin (AMX)
303.03

C
0 (AMX) = 200 mg L−1

297



pH = 6


Dates stem
Carbonization and activation
1704
Mebeverine hydrochloride
4105
pH = 5.8

298



25 °C



Jacaranda mimosifolia seed pods
Chemical activation and pyrolysis
928
Ketoprofen
303.9
pH = 2

299





The above mentioned literature studies demonstrate that biomass/waste based carbon precursors towards the preparation of porous carbon materials show exceptional performance for the removal of pharmaceuticals and other contaminants from wastewater and soil systems.


3.2.4 Removal of phenolic compounds. 
According to United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) and European Union (EU), phenol based compounds or aromatic pollutants are categorized as high priority unsafe chemicals due to their drastic toxicity to living beings.300 Phenolic compounds have had wide applications in different sectors and its inevitable discharge into the environment have initiated extensive research. Even though commercial AC as adsorbent is generally preferred for phenol removal, its operation is limited to a large extent due to the high cost. Therefore, over the years, porous carbon based adsorbents developed from biomass/waste resources have shown impressive removal efficiency for some specific phenols.
Few promising results have been recently reported based on phenol removal by porous carbon materials derived from oil palm,301 bark waste of Acacia mangium302 and coconut spathe.303 It is important to understand that both high SSA and optimal pore size results in enhanced phenol adsorption efficiency and design of porous carbons focused on one particular feature is not sufficient to get the desired results. Kong et al. prepared cost-effective porous carbon from Toona sinensis leaves by NaOH activation. It was found that the as-obtained material exhibited high surface area of 2719 m2 g−1 and large pore volume of 1.640 cm3 g−1 such that maximum adsorption capacity of 325 mg g−1 for 800 mg L−1 of phenol was obtained from aqueous solution at 25 °C as shown in Fig. 15a.304
 Fig. 15  (a) Adsorption capacity of Toona sinensis leaves-derived porous carbon during prolonged time. Adapted from ref. 304 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020 and (b) (i) molecular dynamics adsorption of corn straw (CS)–FeCl3·ZnCl2-900C and sign(λ2)ρ vs. reduced density gradient (RDG) of phenol adsorption by CS-derived biochar (ii) C42H16⋯phenol, (iii) C42H14–OH–CHO⋯phenol and (iv) C42H15–OH⋯phenol. Adapted from ref. 307 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021. 
Phenol adsorption is also influenced by the solution pH wherein it was found that at pH 10, the adsorption is free from the solution pH. Conversely, phenol adsorption decreases remarkably with pH values higher than 10. Hence, designing of basic porous carbons along with lower solution pH are considered to be ideal candidates for highly efficient phenol adsorption.305 Controlled morphology and structure of porous carbon materials can also regulate the corresponding adsorption properties. In this context, Li and co-workers successfully fabricated nanoporous N-doped biochar from bamboo chips by pyrolysis and activation (K2C2O4 and KHCO3) methods under ammonia environment for phenol adsorption. The material featured exclusive bamboo tubular morphology and hierarchical pores, which enhances the mass transfer of ions and adsorbates such that a high adsorption capacity of 169.5 mg g−1 was achieved. Additionally, the presence of high N content (15.6 at%) also contributed towards its excellent performance.306 Similarly, Feng et al. examined the structure–activity relationship between corn straw-derived hierarchical-functionalized biochar and phenol by molecular dynamics and quantum chemical simulations (Fig. 15b). The results demonstrated that the key desorption stage of phenol occurs at 100–225 °C and gets completed above 300 °C. The mesoporous structure facilitates the adsorption of phenol, the hydroxyl groups strengthen the adsorption because of the electron pairs present in the ortho-site of the carbon atom and the N-6 improves the van der Waals force for changing the adsorption positions, thereby strengthening the process of adsorption.307
Thus, porous carbons using carbon precursors show outstanding performance for the removal phenols from aqueous environments representing the wastewater system, as illustrated in Table 7.
Table 7 Studies of using biomass/waste-derived porous carbons on phenolic compounds




Carbon precursor
Synthesis method
Specific surface area (m2 g−1)
Targeted pollutant
Adsorption capacity (mg g−1)
Experimental parameters
Ref.




Chitosan
HTC and chemical activation
2189.88
Phenol
254.45
298 K

308



Bisphenol A
675.68


2,4-Dichlorophenol
892.86


Food waste
Pyrolysis and physical activation
745
Phenol
568
298 K

309




Halodule uninervis waste
Chemical and thermal activation
1118.98
2,4-Dimethylphenol (DMP)
364

C
0 (DMP/DCP) = 20 mg L−1

310



2,4-Dichlorophenol (DCP)
333
pH = 5.76


24 °C


Sugarcane bagasse
Thermo-chemical activation and pyrolysis
1925
Phenol
185.2
pH = 6.3 (±0.2)

311



25 (±1) °C


Fruit wastes from Ceiba speciosa
Chemical activation and pyrolysis
842
Phenol
156.7
298 K

312



145
328 K


Chicken feathers
Carbonization and activation
1383.5
Bisphenol F
295.8
Pollutant aqueous solution = 110 mg L−1

313



Bisphenol S
308.7
pH = 7.0 ± 0.1


298 ± 1 K


Sodium alginate
Chemical activation
1073.40
Bisphenol A
632.91
308 K

314



Pine-fruit shell
HTC assisted chemical activation
2220
Bisphenol A
708
pH = 7

315







3.2.5 Adsorption of VOCs. 
Volatile organic compounds (VOCs) are chemical compounds of carbon (up to C20) (like benzene, formaldehyde, acetone, etc.) with variable volatility and lipophilicity. The natural emission of VOCs comes from plants, animals and microorganisms while artificial sources include mainly chemical, automobile and textile industries, petroleum refineries, pharmaceutical plants, solvents processes, etc. VOCs are a serious menace to the environment and human health since majority of them are toxic and carcinogenic. With the continuing rise of VOCs emission, adsorption technology based on porous carbons is regarded to be a methodical and economical strategy in terms of reuse and recovery of the adsorption materials as well as the VOCs.
Tang's group has reported the preparation of N-doped hierarchical porous carbon from cellulose for toluene and benzene adsorption. As given in Fig. 16a, their 3D-interconnected macroporous framework and nitrogen functionalities, the as-obtained carbon material presented a high adsorption capacity of 272 mg g−1 and 151 mg g−1 for toluene and benzene, respectively.316 A similar investigation was also performed by Tehrani et al. using petroleum waste-derived nanoporous carbon via melamine modification.317 Yu and co-workers have successfully synthesized porous carbon by KOH activation of hydrothermal treated sucrose. In their work, the resultant porous material exhibited large surface area of 2604 m2 g−1 and high pore volume of 1.685 cm3 g−1, which endowed the material with excellent adsorptive capacity and high selectivity toward acetone, toluene and acetic ether.318 Ge et al. reported a new strategy for the development of cotton based porous structured AC fiber through H3PO4 activation and carbonization. The study inspected the influence of the textural properties of the carbon material on benzene adsorption where it was observed that decrease in pore size of micropores interestingly enhanced the affinity of the adsorbent to benzene by providing more conducive binding sites.319 A similar study was carried out by He's group wherein a high adsorption capacity of 1244.9 mg g−1 was accomplished for gaseous benzene by KOH activated lignin-based pitch.320 Ji et al. have investigated the effect of tuning selective nitrogen species by carbonization temperature on bagasse-derived porous carbon. Molecular simulations on porous carbon–acetone interaction revealed that amide nitrogen (5.821 kcal) displayed stronger adsorption with acetone over pyridinic nitrogen (1.382 kcal), which resulted in better adsorption capacity and rate (Fig. 16b).321 Adsorption of chlorinated VOCs such as dichloromethane (DCM) and chlorobenzene (CB) by fungi feedstock based highly porous carbon have been explored by Chen and group. Fig. 16c shows that the as-obtained carbon material exhibited highest adsorption capacities of 716.9 mg g−1 and 641.7 mg g−1 for DCM and CB respectively, which is nearly 13 and 6 times higher than commercial AC. The outstanding result was credited to the hierarchical porous channels, high surface area (3463.3 m2 g−1), abundant micropores (76%) and self-doped nitrogen (1.28 at%) in the carbon material.322 Other notable works of porous carbon based adsorbents include waste tobacco stem,323 rice husk,324 food wastes325 and marine algae.326
 Fig. 16  (a) (i) SEM image and (ii) curve fitting results and elemental analysis from XPS spectra for N-doped porous carbon. Adapted from ref. 316 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020, (b) molecular model and interaction between acetone and porous carbons. Adapted from ref. 321 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020 and (c) comparison of fungi residue and cotton seed husk-derived carbon and commercial carbon for (a) DCM and (b) CB adsorption. Adapted from ref. 322 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020. 
Thus with tremendous efforts, various synthesized porous carbon biomaterials with novel properties have shown high removal rates for toxic organic wastes. Table 8 presents recent studies for VOC adsorption using biomass/waste.
Table 8 Selected studies using biomass/waste-derived porous carbons on VOCs




Carbon precursor
Synthesis method
Specific surface area (m2 g−1)
Targeted pollutant
Adsorption capacity (mg g−1)
Experimental parameters
Ref.





Phanerochaete chrysosporium

Pre-treatment and chemical activation
2202
Toluene
252
293 K

327



Corn bran
Carbonization and activation
1896
Toluene
237
25.0 ± 0.5 °C

328



Mango seed shells
HTC and chemical activation
2218
Acetone
472
30 °C

329



363
50 °C


Tobacco stem
Chemical activation
1347
Acetone
312
298 K

330



Coconut shell
Heating and chemical activation
2648
Benzene
1419
298 K

331



Rape straw corn cob
HTC and chemical activation
1281
Naphthalene
592.97
298.15 K

332



1069
Acenaphthene
480.27


Phenanthrene
692.27


Hickory wood chips and peanut shell
HTC and physical activation
1308
Acetone
121.74
20 °C

333



Cyclohexane
39.42






3.2.6 Capture of air pollutants. 
The escalating emission of anthropogenic CO2 in the atmosphere from fossil fuel combustion has become a critical matter on account of its environmental and social implications. Over the years, porous carbonaceous adsorbents have presented optimistic results for CO2 capture. More notably, porous carbons derived from biomass/waste carbon precursors not only show high adsorptive removal of CO2 but also provide a cost-effective approach, which is particularly a central concern in industrial operations. A myriad of literature reports exist on CO2 capture by tailor-made porous carbons from biomass/waste raw materials than can bind CO2 effectively on the adsorbent–gas interfaces.334 In order to achieve a high uptake value of CO2, a potential adsorbent relies largely on having a high surface area followed by in-house developed porosity and presence of surface functionalities. A few recent scientific results in the field of CO2 capture are discussed below.
Singh et al. prepared highly nanoporous KOH-activated biocarbon from alligator weed with high SSA of 3106 m2 g−1, high pore volume of 1.62 cm3 g−1 and tunable microporosity as well as optimised surface oxygen functionalization. Given their rich textural features, the resultant material demonstrated a higher amount of CO2 at 0 °C (30.4 mmol g−1), 10 °C (27.7 mmol g−1) and 25 °C (23.3 mmol g−1) at 30 bar (Fig. 17a) over their AC, ordered nanoporous carbon and mesoporous silica counterparts.335 Similarly, at 0 °C and at 1 bar, an impressive CO2 adsorption capacity of 6.4 mmol g−1 was obtained. Rice husk feedstock was converted into hierarchical porous structure using chitosan-KOH surface modification process such that high CO2 capture capacity of 5.83 mmol g−1 and 3.68 mmol g−1 was achieved at 273 K and 298 K, respectively. Additionally, both adsorption isotherm model fitting and isosteric heat analysis (Fig. 17b) have revealed that the CO2 adsorption involves both physisorption and chemisorption along with good adsorption selectivity. The remarkable results are credited to the high contents of pyridinic-N (32.96 peak area ratio%) and pyrrolic-N (56.82 peak area ratio%) present on the surface of the carbon material.336 In an interesting study by Ma's group, it was established that in HTC treated tobacco stem-derived porous carbon both nitrogen and oxygen functional groups exerted a significant influence on the CO2 adsorption (4.33 mmol g−1 at 25 °C and 6.54 mmol g−1 at 0 °C) as well as resulted in high CO2/N2 selectivity.337
 Fig. 17  (a) CO2 adsorption of nanoporous activated biocarbon (NAB)800-3. Adapted from ref. 335 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021, (b) CO2 adsorption isotherms of (i) AC-5 and (ii) chemically activated carbon (CAC)-5 at 273 and 298 K fitted with different isotherm models. Adapted from ref. 336 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021 and (c) saturated sulfur and breakthrough sulfur capacity of samples prepared by different treatment approaches on waste PU foams. Adapted from ref. 338 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020. 
Along with CO2, sulphur-containing compounds like H2S and SO2 are also considered as major air pollutants due to their highly toxic and corrosive nature, even at low concentrations. Chen and group reported the synthesis of N-doped porous carbon from waste polyurethane by HTC and activation processes. The hierarchical porous carbon showed high SSA (1419 m2 g−1), large total pore volume (0.80 cm3 g−1) and high N content (2.8 wt%). These features greatly influenced the H2S adsorption capacity to reach as high as 205.06 mg g−1, as presented in Fig. 17c.338 Likewise, N-rich hierarchical porous carbon from waste cypress sawdust exhibited sulfur capacity of nearly 426.2 mg g−1 at room temperature together with high regeneration ability.339 Cellulosic jute thread waste was used for synthesizing N, S-rich nanoporous carbon that can be employed as nanoadsorbents for the removal of CO2 and H2S from gaseous stream. As was experimentally examined, the as-obtained material displayed ultrahigh CO2 and H2S adsorption capacity (8.05 mmol g−1 for CO2 and 17.19 mmol g−1 for H2S) at 1 bar, (20.53 mmol g−1 for CO2 and 29.26 mmol g−1 for H2S) at 10 bar and (30.36 mmol g−1 for CO2 and 40.41 mmol g−1 for H2S) at 35 bar. Additionally, DFT results revealed that the atoms of the pyrrolic-N have a substantial effect on gas adsorption for all the cases. Interestingly, the existence of S atoms around the pyrrolic-N atoms could possibly change the adsorption mechanism from chemisorption of H2S (Ead = −336.28 kJ mol−1) to physisorption (Ead = −23.92 kJ mol−1) with increased S/N ratio in the adsorbent.340 Kuśmierek and co-workers exploited discarded tyre wastes to produce AC and assessed their prospects for removal of NOx, SO2 and CO2. Further, the carbon adsorbent was evaluated for VOC adsorption as well as for Hg(0), HgCl2, As, dioxin and furan adsorption.341 Other unique precursors investigated for capture of air contaminants are rambutan peel,342 caltrop shell,343 palm kernel shell344 and peanut shell.345
Although there are many biomass/waste-derived carbon materials available for the removal of air pollutants, as presented in Table 9, the porous carbon based adsorbents with exclusive microporous structure and surface functionalization on the carbon framework along with high surface area are deemed to be the best choice for the gas adsorption application.
Table 9 Summary of some representative works on capture of air pollutants with porous carbons




Carbon precursor
Synthesis method
Specific surface area (m2 g−1)
Targeted pollutant
Adsorption (mmol g−1)
Experimental parameters
Ref.





Citrus aurantium waste leaves and spirulina
HTC and chemical/physical activation
937
CO2
8.43
273 K

346



Tobacco stem
Carbonization and chemical activation
3839
Acetone
26.2
18 kPa and 25 °C

347



CO2
29.5
30 bar and 25 °C


C2H2
7.19
1 bar and 25 °C


C3H8
12.02


CH4
1.26


Tobacco stalk
HTC and chemical activation
1498
CO2
7.35
0 °C

348



4.83
25 °C


Cork waste
Carbonization and chemical activation
2010
CO2
7.82
0 °C

349



4.27
25 °C


Poplar wood
HTC and chemical activation carbonization
2153
CO2
217 mg g−1
273 K and 1 bar

350



Corncobs
Physical activation and chemical impregnation
755.35
SO2
156.22 mg g−1
393 K

351






3.3 Catalysis: photocatalysis
In the present times, the requirement of sustainable photocatalysts from biodegradable and renewable resources for the application of photocatalysis in effective environmental control and energy process has been in high demand. Semiconductors as heterogeneous photocatalysts have been mostly used owing to their energy band profiles, which allow utilisation of light energy and subsequently induce interesting redox reactions. Among the many semiconductor oxides, titania is considered to be the most favourable photocatalyst for various environmental remediation applications due to its different desirable properties. Even so, in order to complement and overcome the mislaid properties of titania, which comprises poor SSA, there is a renewed interest in the design and fabrication of carbon-based photocatalyst with the sole aim of improving the photocatalytic activity.352 In this regard, porous carbons derived from non-toxic and compatible biomass/waste raw materials have emerged as favourable photocatalysts and catalyst supports for different photocatalytic oxidations. This is due to their unique physiochemical properties that can contribute toward efficient mass reagent diffusion, enhanced stable active site accessibility and improved light harvesting response. Hence, porous carbons on combining with photocatalysts exhibit a “synergistic benefit” of adsorption and photocatalysis.
Yan et al. used straw waste as a low-cost carbon precursor to prepare N-doped hierarchical porous carbon from HTC strategy, which has been used as a bifunctional-photocatalyst for the removal of chlortetracycline (CTC) and Cr(VI) under visible-light irradiation. The as-obtained material not only exhibited large surface area but also showed improved separation efficiency of photogenerated charge-carriers (e− and h+), which translated into high removal efficiencies of 93.1% (CTC) and 96.9% (Cr(VI)).353 Han and co-workers explored the photocatalytic activity of N-containing hollow carbon derived from Lentinus edodes biomass through a simple HTC process via Fe(NO3)3 catalyst (Fig. 18a). The as-prepared catalyst demonstrated photodegradation rate of 56.28% for phenol under visible-light irradiation. The impressive photocatalytic performance was attributed to the presence of the superoxide active radical ˙O2− and graphitic N in the carbon material.354 Similarly, Shirvanimoghaddam et al. demonstrated waste cotton-derived carbon microtube as visible-light harvesting photocatalyst for the removal of bisphenol A in wastewater.355
 Fig. 18  (a) Graphical representation for preparation of Lentinus edodes-derived porous carbon and its photocatalytic performance. Adapted from ref. 354 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021, (b) photocatalytic degradation efficiency of (i) MB and (ii) MG as variation of C/C° with irradiation time for different PET-derived porous carbons, (c) UV-vis-diffused reflectance spectral (DRS) spectra of (i) bare BiOBr and (ii) AC-BiOBr composite catalyst. Adapted from ref. 363 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018, (d) schematic diagram showing chitin-derived carbon/g-C3N4 heterojunction for RhB photodegradation. Adapted from ref. 37 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020 and (e) photocatalytic H2 evolution of Cu NPs and porous graphene nanosheet (PGS)-2-Y using Plumeria rubra biomass. Adapted from ref. 369 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. 
Biomass/waste carbon precursors have also been employed as bio-nanocomposite based photocatalysts with semiconductor materials. For instance, fabrication of TiO2 photocatalysts with porous carbon structures have shown enhanced mass diffusion properties. In this regard, Donar et al. have synthesized lignin-based porous carbon by HTC technique, which has been used as a catalyst support for TiO2 nanoparticle towards the effective degradation of MB and phenol. The mesoporous structure together with the electronegative surface functionalities in the AC allow chemical interactions to occur between the carboxyl groups and the metallic centre of TiO2. This in turn brings forth longer lifetime of the oxidative species as well as provide the sensitization effect under visible-light illumination.356 A similar study has been performed with nitric acid treated porous carbon from drinking water sludge with TiO2 nanoparticle such that the composite demonstrated high RB photodegradation of 99.85% by UV/H2O2 irradiation with first-order rate kinetics.357 Alikhani and co-workers introduced cost effective date stone-derived AC for the fabrication of reusable TiO2/BiOBr/Bi2S3/AC heterojunction nanostructured photocatalyst. Results based on response surface methodology (RSM) showed complete photodegradation of 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D) under visible-light.358 In yet another interesting work, a 3D hierarchical porous carbon was derived from low-cost pinecone raw material via KOH activation as a potential photocatalyst support for remediation of TC antibiotic. The optimized material with abundant micro/mesopores assisted in improved visible-light absorption and rapid interfacial charge transfer, which subsequently resulted in high photocatalytic activity toward degradation of TC.359
Mohamed et al. successfully reported the synthesis of ZnO-mesoporous carbon nanocomposite from Zn dust/PET bottle mixed waste material by thermal decomposition. The obtained material was found to possess carbon nano-sheet morphology and large surface area (684.5 m2 g−1). As can be noted from (Fig. 18b), the photocatalytic degradation for MB and MG dyes under UV irradiation was found to be completed after 60–70 min. The high performance was attributed to the electronic interaction between ZnO and graphitic C together with π–π conjugation system.360 In similar studies, ZnO composites in synergy with pecan nutshell361 and sewage sludge362-derived porous carbons have been explored as photocatalysts for the oxidative degradation of Reactive Red 97 and Acid Orange 7 azo dyes from aqueous solutions, respectively.
A breakthrough in the synthesis of porous carbon from waste polyurethane foam incorporated with BiOBr by HTC process was demonstrated by Nethaji et al. From Fig. 18c, it can be observed that the prepared hybrid material had lower band gap energy (2.64 eV) compared to pristine BiOBr (2.84 eV). In addition, the nanophotocatalyst presented synergistic adsorption and photocatalytic degradation efficiencies of MG dye under visible-light irradiation in aqueous solution.363 Besides, N-doped hierarchical porous carbon (NHC) prepared from withered typha grass (biomass waste) was used for loading of BiOI semiconductor such that good interface contact was achieved between them. This resulted in Bi4O5I2/NHC to show two times higher MO degradation rate (87.4% in 2 h) over BiOI and Bi4O5I2 in visible-light.364
Synergistic coupling effect between carbonaceous materials and metal-free organic semiconductors like graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) has been examined for different photocatalytic reactions. Toward this end, He et al. revealed how chitin-derived porous carbon/g-C3N4 heterojunction could be employed as a useful visible-light active photocatalyst for degradation of RhB (Fig. 18d). The modification of g-C3N4 by chitin precursor not only resulted in improved surface area but also narrowed the band gap energy, which favoured the adsorption of RhB reactants and brought about high degradation rate of 93.7%.37 Other carbon precursors recently incorporated with g-C3N4 for enhanced photocatalytic performance include corncob for removal of 2-mercaptobenzothiazole,365 sawdust for degradation of atrazine366 and yeast for removal of TC and Cr(VI).20
Recently, porous carbon-based materials derived from biomass/waste sources can be utilized as co-catalysts for photocatalytic generation of H2 under solar light irradiations. The carbon framework support provides high surface area as well as porosity that can be further tuned to provide high electrical conductivity and stability. Xie et al. prepared Ni/NiO supported on cellulose-derived porous carbon for photocatalytic H2 evolution from water in presence of Eosin Y and triethanolamine as photosensitizer and sacrificial agent, respectively. Due to the facile transfer of photo-generated electrons by the carbon support, the hybrid nanostructure achieved higher H2 evolution rate of 13.5 mmol gcat−1 h−1 in the first hour under visible-light than that of commercial Pt (20 wt%)/C catalyst (11.4 mmol gcat−1 h−1). From this study, the importance of employing sustainable and inexpensive cellulose as raw material for the fabrication of high-performing photocatalyst systems is emphasized.367 In another instance, MnO2-decorated neem leaves-derived porous carbon nanocomposite displayed impressive photocatalytic hydrogen production rate (395 mL h−1) from sulphide wastewater under visible-light illumination. The result was credited to the high conductivity and porosity of the nanocomposite system.368 A pioneering work of Wang et al. worth mentioning is the design of porous graphene nanosheets (PGS) through gas-exfoliation and KOH activation processes performed on Plumeria rubra. The resultant material possessed a hierarchical structure, ultra-high specific surface (1581 m2 g−1) and high pore volume (0.916 cm3 g−1). As presented in Fig. 18e, PGS together with Cu nanoparticles demonstrated a four-fold increase in H2 evolution rate (4.87 mmol g−1 h−1) than that of Cu nanoparticles along with high photostability. Upon investigation it was concluded that the unique structure of PGS allowed it to serve as an electron transport bridge for enhanced charge-carrier pair separation, thus facilitating the water-splitting reaction under solar light.369
These results reveal that biomass/waste-derived porous carbonaceous materials as photocatalysts and catalyst supports can undoubtedly strengthen the photocatalytic activity for energy and environmental related applications. However, binding mechanism and optimization of nanocomposite properties is further required. Table 10 lists the photocatalytic degradation of toxic pollutants using biomass/waste-derived porous carbons.
Table 10 Degradation of toxic pollutants under irradiation using biomass/waste-based porous carbon




Photocatalyst/carbon precursor
Synthesis method of porous carbon
Light source
Specific surface area (m2 g−1) of the porous carbon
Targeted pollutant
Initial pollutant concentration (mg L−1)
Degradation efficiency (%)
H2 production (mmol g−1 h−1)
Ref.




BiOBr/wood flour
Pyrolysis
Visible-light
222.391
RhB
20
Complete removal; 90 min
—

370



Cr(VI)
5


TiO2/plane tree fluff
Hard-templating
Ultra-visible-light
588.6
—
—
—
5.4

371



Visible-light
0.09


Ag/jute stick
Chemical activation
Solar light
570.67
Malachite green oxalate
10
98; 90 min
—

372



Clofibric acid
97; 80 min


Bi2WO6/bamboo leaves
Chemical activation
Visible-light
27.2093
TC
20
85.4; 90 min
—

373



BiPO4/winter melon
Hydrothermal and vacuum freeze-drying
Visible-light
—
MB
10
93.51; 180 min
—

374



TiO2/hazelnut shell
HTC
Visible-light
—
MB
10 ppm
96.97; 420 min
—

375



TiO2/olive residue
83.30; 420 min


TiO2/date seeds
Sonication and pyrolysis
Visible-light
—
Cr(VI)
29.5 ppm
94.7%; 25 min
—

376



SnS2/root of the Magnolia wulin
Carbonization
Visible-light
—
As(III)
7500 μg L−1
95.1%; 55 min
—

377



ZnO/lignin
Template-assisted carbonization
Sunlight
827
Sulfamethazine
20
>95; 3 h
29.0 μmol h −1

378



TiO2/lignin
HTC
Ultra-visible-light
—
Phenol
120 ppm
53 and 100; 1 h under UVA
—

357



Visible-light
MB
10 ppm
17.6 and 57.8; 2 h under VS




3.4 Other miscellaneous applications

3.4.1 Electromagnetic wave absorption. 
Currently, the rapid global informatization of electromagnetic wave (EMW) technology in modern military and civil sectors have resulted in serious electromagnetic pollution i.e., EM wave interference (EMI) and radiation. Consequently, fabricating lightweight and thin absorbers with excellent absorbing capability over wide frequency range, large surface area along with good chemical stability are highly desirable to minimize the harmful effects of EMWs. In this regard, carbonaceous materials such as graphene, carbon nanotube and metal-incorporated reduced graphene oxide compounds have been previously explored due to their high surface areas, excellent electric conductivity and low sample density. In view of the high-priced raw materials and cumbersome preparation process, biomass/waste-derived porous carbon materials are promising candidates in terms of their low production cost, lightweight characteristics and tunable physiochemical properties. Several biomass resources like pomelo peel,379 poplar catkin,380 puffed-rice,381 waste reed,382 wheat straw,383etc., have been transformed into high-performing EMI materials. For example, carbon-based absorbents with holey structures prepared by Wang et al. from waste biomass materials (corn cobs, bagasse and grapefruit peels) under air-calcination, showed a wide bandwidth of 5.5 GHz at a low filler loading of 8 wt% for microwave absorption.384 Another interesting study by Zhou and group demonstrated the application of highly porous cotton linters-derived carbon aerogels towards EMI shielding. The conductive aerogel with reduced pore size and dense 3D sheet-like network exhibited a low density of 0.079 g cm−3 and high EMI shielding effectiveness of 93.1 dB along with EMW absorption in the frequency range of 8.2–12.4 GHz.385 Zhang's group designed lightweight EMW porous carbon microwave absorber through KOH activation from pumpkin seed shell waste, which presented maximum absorption bandwidth of 7.4 GHz at a thickness of 2.6 mm.386 Similarly, N-doped carbon aerogels derived from chitosan via freeze casting and annealing methods exhibited excellent microwave absorption of −68.8 dB and effective absorption band over the entire X-band at 5.1 mm. The remarkable results were attributed due to the synergistic effect of hierarchically tailored structure and self-doped N-heteroatom.387
The above examples indicate that biomass/waste-derived carbons are exceedingly promising materials to serve for highly efficient EMI shielding application.


3.4.2 Capacitive deionization (CDI). 
Ever-increasing global population and subsequent overexploitation of groundwater has led to an alarming shortage of suitable freshwater supply for human consumption. Seawater desalination techniques like reverse osmosis, electrodialysis, thermal distillation, etc., are considerably feasible solutions.388 Regrettably, shortcomings concerning secondary pollution, low efficiency, high energy requirement and pricey nature impede their application. With this regard, CDI being cost-effective and more energy-efficient has emerged as a promising technology for saltwater treatment as well as for removal of toxic pollutants. Carbon-based materials (graphene, CNTs, metal–organic framework, etc.) are mostly studied as CDI cell electrodes. However, inappropriate porous structure, expensive and toxic precursors, low SSA, poor recyclability, complex synthesis process, etc., limit their large-scale and practical application. Therefore, a major part of CDI research has been directed on fabricating porous carbons with high SSA from viable and cost-effective precursors like pinecone,389 chitin,390 leather waste,391 straw waste,392 bagasse,393 and many more. For instance, date palm leaflets-derived AC displayed maximum adsorption capacity of 5.38 mg g−1 for NaCl solution (100 ppm). Furthermore, electrosorption and electrodegradation of MB dye conducted by the same porous carbon-based CDI electrode showed 85% dye degradation in 130 min of duration.394 Likewise, N, S, O-co-doped porous carbon with high SSA and interconnected micro/mesoporous structure from buckwheat husk waste through KOH activation presented high electrosorption capacity of 12.7 mg g−1 at 1.2 V in 500 mg L−1 of NaCl solution, impressive charge efficiency (greater than 0.9) and remarkable electrosorption capacity retention of 96% after 30 cycles.395 Wood's group tested solar-powered desalination performance of firewood-based bread CDI electrodes in a reservoir of brackish water with salt concentration of 1200 mg L−1. The fabricated hierarchical porous carbon in CDI system successfully reduced the salt concentration by almost 60% with an impressive recovery yield of 56%.388
Therefore, biomass/waste-derived porous carbons are promising economical electrodes for driving high-performance CDI application.

4. Summary and future perspectives
The review summarizes in detail the recent advancements for the past three years in the design and major development of favourable nanoporous carbon materials built through a plethora of biomass and waste feedstocks and their corresponding application progress in a broad spectrum of energy and environmental sectors. There exists a substantial quantity of research devoted to biomass/waste-based carbonaceous materials. Especially the last decade has witnessed an explosive growth of carbon-rich precursors as most promising and commercially viable option for synthesis of next-generation high-performing sustainable porous materials.
The synthesis of porous carbons through traditional strategies such as carbonization and physical/chemical activation as well as novel emerging techniques like templating and mechanochemical processes have been presented with mechanisms and valuable examples. Also, the impact of the different production methods on the physicochemical properties of the porous carbon materials ranging from surface area, surface/network functionalities, pore geometry to hierarchical porous structure are elaborately reviewed. For example, the presence of either self-doped or externally incorporated heteroatoms in a carbon framework increases the wettability and hydrophilicity of the porous carbons such as in the cases of rose multiflora, elm flower, walnut shell, raw ginger, etc. Based on the type of the biomass/waste precursor, conveniently adjusted processing approach and the desirable textural properties obtained in the resultant porous carbons, their excellent performances in different advanced areas of energy storage (supercapacitor), environmental mitigation (adsorption, removal and degradation) and photocatalysis have been outlined where applicable.
Even though great achievements have been accomplished in assembling advanced nanoporous carbons with multifunctional properties in versatile fields, there still exists a great deal of improvement in the development of more sophisticated structure design, especially with regard to both theoretical fundamentals and licensable commercialization. Few current challenges and their related future outlook are worth highlighting:
(1) Limited productivity: development of more optimised and simplified operation methods based on the principles of green chemistry should be devoted for increased yield of the processed carbon materials for their scaled-up production.
(2) Tunable porous structure: precise regulation of proper material design with controlled porosity and morphology in tailored nanoporous carbons must be examined to satisfy specific hi-tech applications. For instance, from a materials viewpoint, a suitable choice of chemical activators can possibly set forth a hybrid porous character in the prepared ACs. This could in turn incite in a more thorough, steadfast and reproducible data which can assist in improving the performance of the materials for the aimed application.
(3) Carbon emissions: inspection of novel environmentally benign activation protocols could be further exerted in order to alleviate the release of harmful emissions during the activation of the carbon raw materials. Additionally, special emphasis must also be placed on the recycling and disposal of any residual wastes along with reduced energy consumption.
(4) Heteroatom doping: the domain of doping in biomass/waste-derived nanoporous carbon materials and their underlying mechanisms in terms of structure–performance relationship needs to be fully explored at the molecular level by theoretical calculations subjected to more real experimental parameters and in situ techniques. Furthermore, there are limited studies available on the in-depth mechanisms involving formation of porous carbons from biomass/waste materials. Thus, more research on the fundamentals of the activation methods like pyrolysis will provide better insight into the mechanistic aspects, which will aid in the designing of state-of the-art carbon materials. Other issues like agglomeration of the porous carbon layers and packing density are also required to be addressed.
(5) Hybrid nanostructured composites: the value of biomass/waste-based porous carbons can be elevated further by coupling them with organic and inorganic nanostructures (such as graphene, quantum and carbon dots, metal chalcogenides, etc.) through well-designed experiments. Such hybrid products with interesting properties and new functionalities might expand the working conditions for diverse applications and improve their overall performance.
In conclusion, undoubtedly biomass/waste-derived nanoporous carbons have had an extensive account of dedicated research and are incessantly evolving. It is believed that screening out new biomass/waste raw materials with rich carbon content together with appropriate synthetic strategies to realize bulk-scale production will gain more momentum in the future years. Also, it will be necessary to get a systematic perception of the structure–function relationship for future development of desired functionalized nanoporous carbons and their target-specific energy and environmental applications.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing interests.
Acknowledgements
Authors are thankful to Department of Chemistry, NIT Warangal and NIT Meghalaya for providing research platform and DST INSPIRE grant (DST/INSPIRE Faculty Award/2016/DST/INSPIRE/04/2015/003227) for financial support. This work was supported by Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB), Department of Science and Technology, Government of India, DST-SERB sanction order No.: SRG/2020/001737 and VIT SEED GRANT. RC is grateful to the Ministry of Human Resource and Development (MHRD), Government of India for Senior Research Fellowship.
References
Y. C. Li, M. P. Paranthaman, K. Akato, A. K. Naskar, A. M. Levine, R. J. Lee, S. O. Kim, J. S. Zhang, S. Dai and A. Manthiram, J. Power Sources, 2016, 316, 232–238 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Chakraborty, M. Pradhan and K. Debnath, Band-gap Engineering Using Metal-Semiconductor Interfaces for Photocatalysis and Supercapacitor Application: a Nanoparticle Reinforced Ceramic Composite Perspective, Woodhead Publishing Series in Composites Science and Engineering,  2020 Search PubMed .
P. Khare, A. Singh, S. Verma, A. Bhati, A. K. Sonker, K. M. Tripathi and S. K. Sonkar, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 579–589 CrossRef CAS .
A. Muzaffar, M. B. Ahamed, K. Deshmukh and J. Thirumalai, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2019, 101, 123–145 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yan, S. Li, B. Lan, Y. Wu and P. S. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1902564–1902599 CrossRef CAS .
P. Naskar, A. Maiti, P. Chakraborty, D. Kundu, B. Biswas and A. Banerjee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 1970–2017 RSC .
U. Ulmer, T. Dingle, P. N. Duchesne, R. H. Morris, A. Tavasoli, T. Wood and G. A. Ozin, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3169–3181 CrossRef PubMed .
A. H. Mamaghani, F. Haghighat and C. S. Lee, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 203, 247–269 CrossRef CAS .
L. V. Bora and R. K. Mewada, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 76, 1393–1421 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Miseki and K. Sayama, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1801294–1801309 CrossRef .
K. Afroz, M. Moniruddin, N. Bakranov, S. Kudaibergenov and N. Nuraje, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 21696–21718 RSC .
Y. Zhu, T. Cao, C. Cao, X. Ma, X. Xu and Y. Li, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 3088–3095 CrossRef CAS .
D. Qu, J. Power Sources, 2002, 109, 403–411 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Hao, G. H. Jia, W. Wei, A. Vinu, Y. Wang, H. Arandiyan and B. J. Ni, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 18–37 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, H. Jiang, S. Ye, J. Zhou, J. Chen, Q. Zeng, H. Yang and T. Liang, Funct. Mater. Lett., 2019, 12, 1950042–1950060 CrossRef CAS .
D. He, W. Zhao, P. Li, S. Sun, Q. Tan, K. Han, L. Liu, L. Liu and X. Qu, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 773, 11–20 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fu, W. Chen, X. Zhu, B. Yang and Q. Liu, Carbon, 2019, 141, 748–757 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pontiroli, S. Scaravonati, G. Magnani, L. Fornasini, D. Bersani, G. Bertoni, C. Milanese, A. Girella, F. Ridi, R. Verucchi, L. Mantovani, A. Malcevschi and M. Riccò, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2019, 285, 161–169 CrossRef CAS .
H. Che, G. Che, P. Zhou, C. Liu and H. Dong, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 546, 262–275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhang, M. Liu, M. Si, Z. Wang, S. Zhuo, L. Chai and Y. Shi, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 1732–1742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Hong, L. Wang, K. Liu, X. Han, Y. Zhou, P. Gao, R. Ding and E. Liu, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 746, 292–300 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Mo, Y. Zhao, M. M. Zhao, M. Wu, C. Wang, J. P. Li, S. Kuga and Y. Huang, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 346, 104–112 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Bar-On, R. Phillips and R. Milo, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 6506–6511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Singh, K. S. Lakhi, S. Sil, S. V. Bhosale, I. Kim, K. Albahily and A. Vinu, Carbon, 2019, 148, 164–186 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jain, M. Ghosh, M. Krajewski, S. Kurungot and M. Michalska, J. Energy Storage, 2021, 34, 102178–102187 CrossRef .
Q. Lu, S. Zhou, B. Li, H. Wei, D. Zhang, J. Hu, L. Zhang, J. Zhang and Q. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 333, 135481–135511 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zheng, P. Wang, Y. Zhu, B. Ji, T. Mao, Y. Fang, X. Zhang, Z. Wang and H. Yang, Mater. Lett., 2021, 284, 128939–128949 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ji, B. Wang, Y. Yu, N. Wang and J. Zhao, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 331, 135348–135393 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhu, P. Yang, X. Li, M. Luo, W. Zhang, M. Chen and X. Zhou, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2020, 227, 117659–117689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Tursi, Biofuel Res. J., 2019, 6, 962–979 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Gunasekaran, S. K. Elumalali, T. K. Kumaresan, R. Meganathan, A. Ashok, V. Pawar, K. Vediappan, G. Ramasamy, S. Z. Karazhanov, K. Raman and R. Subashchandra Bose, Mater. Lett., 2018, 218, 165–168 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang and K. Zhang, Nanomaterials, 2018, 8, 181–191 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ma, D. Yao, H. Liang, J. Yin, Y. Xia, K. Zuo and Y. P. Zeng, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 352, 136452–136494 CrossRef CAS .
G. Singh, K. S. Lakhi, D. H. Park, P. Srivastava, R. Naidu and A. Vinu, ChemNanoMat, 2018, 4, 281–290 CrossRef .
R. Jaswal, A. Shende, W. Nan, V. Amar and R. Shende, Energy Fuels, 2019, 33, 6454–6462 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hou, K. Jiang, M. Tahir, X. Wu, F. Idrees, M. Shen and C. Cao, J. Power Sources, 2017, 371, 148–155 CrossRef CAS .
B. He, M. Feng, X. Chen, D. Zhao and J. Sun, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 527, 146737–146768 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kandasamy, T. Ramasamy, A. Samrin, P. Narayanasamy, R. Mohan, O. Bazaka, I. Levchenko, K. Bazaka and M. Mohandas, Nanomaterials, 2020, 10, 1178–1194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hu, L. Zang, J. Yang, Q. Liu, X. Qiao, J. Qiu, C. Yang and H. Li, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2020, 856, 113693–113701 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gopalakrishnan and S. Badhulika, J. Power Sources, 2020, 480, 228830–228847 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gopalakrishnan, A. Yu and S. Badhulika, Int. J. Energy Res., 2020, 44, 7242–7253 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gopalakrishnan, T. D. Raju and S. Badhulika, Carbon, 2020, 168, 209–219 CrossRef CAS .
D. Guo, Z. Li, P. Liu and M. Sun, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46, 8197–8209 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Chen, J. Sun, Z. Wang, Z. Zhao, Y. Zhang, Y. Liu, L. Hou and C. Yuan, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 9181–9191 RSC .
S. A. Hira, M. Yusuf, D. Annas, H. S. Hui and K. H. Park, Process, 2020, 8, 926–937 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, M. Liu, X. Deng, L. Miao, P. K. Tripathi, X. Ma, D. Zhu, Z. Xu, Z. Hao and L. Gan, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 153, 448–455 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Mehare, A. D. Deshmukh and S. J. Dhoble, J. Mater. Sci., 2020, 55, 4213–4224 CrossRef CAS .
D. Guo, R. Xin, Y. Wang, W. Jiang, Q. Gao, G. Hu and M. Fan, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2019, 279, 323–333 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zeng, S. Wang, J. Peng, Y. Gui, H. Liu, F. Yang and M. Li, ChemistrySelect, 2019, 4, 7649–7658 CrossRef CAS .
R. Aggarwal, D. Saini, B. Singh, J. Kaushik, A. Kumari, G. Sumit and K. Sonkar, Sol. Energy, 2020, 197, 326–331 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. S. Escobar, L. R. C. Rivera, F. E. L. Suarez, M. J. I. Gómez, K. S. G. Hernandez and J. S. C. Morales, Top. Catal., 2021, 64, 51–64 CrossRef .
M. R. Benzigar, G. P. Mane, S. N. Talapaneni, S. Varghese, C. Anand, S. S. Aldeyab, V. V. Balasubramanian and A. Vinu, Chem. Lett., 2012, 41, 458–460 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wen, K. Kierzek, J. Min, X. Chen, J. Gong, R. Niu, X. Wen, J. Azadmanjiri, E. Mijowska and T. Tang, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2020, 137, 48338–48348 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) S. Joseph, M. R. Benzigar, H. Ilbeygi, S. A. Gopalan, K. S. Lakhi, K. Ramadass, S. N. Talapaneni and A. Vinu, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2018, 18, 7830–7837 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. Joseph, D. M. Kempaiah, M. R. Benzigar, H. Ilbeyg, G. Singh, S. N. Talapaneni, D. H. Park and A. Vinu, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2019, 280, 337–346 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sebestyén, E. Jakab, A. Domán, P. Bokrossy, I. Bertóti, J. Madarász and K. László, J. Therm. Anal. Calorim., 2020, 142, 301–308 CrossRef .
W. Dai, M. Xu, Z. Zhao, J. Zheng, F. Huang, H. Wang, C. Liu and R. Xiao, Arabian J. Chem., 2021, 14, 103119–103130 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, J. Zheng, H. Liu, Q. Peng, H. Zhou and X. Zhang, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2021, 28, 13800–13818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Fan, Y. Sun, T. Yang, Y. Chen, B. Yan, R. Li and G. Chen, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 6362–6376 RSC .
A. Tomczyk, Z. Sokołowska and P. Boguta, Rev. Environ. Sci. Biotechnol., 2020, 19, 191–215 CrossRef CAS .
E. C. Aguiar, G. Gascó, J. P. Ferreiro and A. Méndez, Int. Biodeterior. Biodegrad., 2017, 124, 223–232 CrossRef .
S. Rangabhashiyam and P. Balasubramanian, Ind. Crops Prod., 2019, 128, 405–423 CrossRef .
S. Y. Foong, R. K. Liew, Y. Yang, Y. W. Cheng, P. N. Y. Yek, W. A. Wan Mahari, X. Y. Lee, C. S. Han, D. V. N. Vo, Q. Van Le, M. Aghbashlo, M. Tabatabaei, C. Sonne, W. Peng and S. S. Lam, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 389, 124401–124421 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, D. Guo, Y. Liu, H. Wang and L. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 397, 125418–125453 CrossRef CAS .
M. Biswal, A. Banerjee, M. Deo and S. Ogale, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1249–1259 RSC .
Q. Sarfaraz, L. Silva, G. Drescher, M. Zafar, F. Severo, A. Kokkonen, G. Molin, M. Shafi, Q. Shafique and Z. Solaiman, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 955–964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Mi and W. Chen, Mater. Lett., 2014, 114, 129–132 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Liew, E. Azwar, P. N. Y. Yek, X. Y. Lim, C. K. Cheng, J. H. Ng, A. Jusoh, W. H. Lam, M. D. Ibrahim, N. L. Ma and S. S. Lam, Bioresour. Technol., 2018, 266, 1–10 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Jeon, L. Zhang, J. L. Lutkenhaus, D. D. Laskar, J. P. Lemmon, D. Choi, M. I. Nandasiri, A. Hashmi, J. Xu, R. K. Motkuri, C. A. Fernandez, J. Liu, M. P. Tucker, P. B. McGrail, B. Yang and S. K. Nune, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 428–432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Pallarés, A. G. Cencerrado and I. Arauzo, Biomass Bioenergy, 2018, 115, 64–73 CrossRef .
M. Yu, Y. Han, J. Li and L. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 317, 493–502 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qin, Z. Hou, S. Lu, S. Liu, Z. Liu and E. Jiang, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2019, 14, 8907–8918 CrossRef CAS .
A. Trubetskaya, J. Kling, O. Ershag, T. M. Attard and E. Schröder, J. Hazard. Mater., 2019, 365, 846–856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ma, H. Liang, J. Yin, D. Yao, Y. Xia, K. Zuo and Y. P. Zeng, RSC Adv., 2021, 11, 15118–15130 RSC .
D. W. Kim, H. S. Kil, K. Nakabayashi, S. H. Yoon and J. Miyawaki, Carbon, 2017, 114, 98–105 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Prauchner and F. R. Reinoso, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2012, 152, 163–171 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, K. Yu, Z. Wang and H. Xu, Carbon, 2003, 41, 1645–1648 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, H. Wang, B. Dang, Z. Wang, X. Shen, C. Li and Q. Sun, Renewable Energy, 2020, 156, 370–376 CrossRef CAS .
B. Xu, Y. Chen, G. Wei, G. Cao, H. Zhang and Y. Yang, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2010, 124, 504–509 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Borghei, M. H. Zare, M. Ahmadi, M. H. Sadeghi, A. Marjani, S. Shirazian and M. Ghadiri, Arabian J. Chem., 2021, 14, 102958–102974 CrossRef CAS .
J. Han, K. Lee, M. S. Choi, H. S. Park, W. Kim and K. C. Roh, Carbon Lett., 2019, 29, 167–175 CrossRef .
A. A. Mas, L. Alcaraz, P. A. Cid, F. A. L. Gómez and F. Montemor, J. Waste Manage., 2021, 120, 280–289 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Khan, R. A. Senthil, J. Pan, S. Osman, Y. Sun and X. Shu, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 335, 135588–135598 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. Jawad and A. S. Abdulhameed, Energy Ecol. Environ., 2020, 5, 456–469 CrossRef .
W. Chen, M. Gong, K. Li, M. Xia, Z. Chen, H. Xiao, Y. Fang, Y. Chen, H. Yang and H. Chen, Appl. Energy, 2020, 278, 115730–115742 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, J. Wang, Z. Chang, B. Ding, Y. Wang, L. Shen, C. Mi, H. Dou and X. Zhang, Chem.–Eur. J., 2016, 22, 1–8 CrossRef .
C. J. Raj, M. Rajesh, R. Manikandan, K. H. Yu, J. R. Anusha, J. H. Ahn, D. W. Kim, S. Y. Park and B. C. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2018, 386, 66–76 CrossRef CAS .
J. Niu, M. Liu, F. Xu, Z. Zhang, M. Dou and F. Wang, Carbon, 2018, 140, 664–672 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu, N. Qiao, D. Wang, Q. Zhu, F. Fu, R. Cao, R. Wang, W. Liu and B. Xu, Bioresour. Technol., 2019, 285, 121340–121350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Deng, T. Xiong, F. Xu, M. Li, C. Han, Y. Gong, H. Wang and Y. Wang, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 4053–4060 RSC .
Y. Zhang, X. Song, Y. Xu, H. Shen, X. Kong and H. Xu, J. Cleaner Prod., 2019, 210, 366–375 CrossRef CAS .
V. Yang, R. A. Senthil, J. Pan, T. R. Kumar, Y. Sun and X. Liu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 579, 347–356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shin, J. Kwak, Y. G. Lee, S. Kim, M. Choi, S. Bae, S. H. Lee, Y. Park and K. Chon, Environ. Pollut., 2021, 270, 116244–116255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. L. Van and T. L. T. Thu, J. Chem., 2019, 2019, 1–11 CrossRef .
C. Wang, D. Wang, S. Zheng, X. Fang, W. Zhang, Y. Tian, H. Lin, H. Lu and L. Jiang, Chem. Res. Chin. Univ., 2018, 34, 983–988 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kim, B. T. N. Ngoc, K. S. Yang, M. Kojima, Y. A. Kim, Y. J. Kim, M. Endo and S. C. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2341–2346 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lin, Y. Liu, Z. Chang, S. Yan, S. Liu and S. Han, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2020, 292, 109707–109717 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sheng, Y. Y. Zhao, B. Q. Hou, Z. P. Xiao, L. L. Jiang and Z. J. Fan, New Carbon Mater., 2021, 36, 179–188 CrossRef .
X. L. Duan, C. G. Yuan, T. T. Jing and X. D. Yuan, Fuel, 2019, 239, 830–840 CrossRef CAS .
E. Yagmur, Y. Gokce, S. Tekin, N. I. Semerci and Z. Aktas, Fuel, 2020, 267, 117232–117240 CrossRef CAS .
D. Tian, Z. Xu, D. Zhang, Y. Zhou and Z. Sun, Colloids Surf., A, 2020, 598, 124756–124768 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xu, Y. Zhou, Z. Sun, D. Zhang, Y. Huang, S. Gu and W. Chen, Chemosphere, 2020, 241, 125120–125157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, H. Lei, S. Qi, F. Ren, H. Peng, F. Wang, L. Li, W. Zhang and G. Ma, J. Energy Storage, 2020, 32, 101970–101980 CrossRef .
G. Zeng, H. You, M. Du, Y. Zhang, Y. Ding, C. Xu, B. Liu, B. Chen and X. Pan, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 412, 128498–128508 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cheng, W. Hu, C. Srinivasakannan, H. Xia, L. Zhang, J. Peng, J. Zhou, G. Lin and Q. Zhang, J. Cleaner Prod., 2019, 222, 710–721 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nowrouzi, H. Younesi and N. Bahramifar, Fuel, 2018, 223, 99–114 CrossRef CAS .
Z. A. ALOthman, M. Naushad and R. Ali, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2013, 20, 3351–3365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Nirosha, R. Selvakumar, J. Jeyanthi and S. Vairam, New J. Chem., 2020, 44, 181–193 RSC .
A. Ahmad, D. Jini, M. Aravind, C. Parvathiraja, R. Ali, M. Z. Kiyani and A. Alothman, Arabian J. Chem., 2020, 13, 8717–8722 CrossRef CAS .
F. Luo, Y. Iradukunda, K. Yi, Y. Hu, X. Li, G. Wang and G. Shi, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2021, 16, 210325–210337 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, K. Han, J. Qi, Z. Teng, M. Li and M. Wang, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2019, 30, 19415–19425 CrossRef CAS .
G. Lin, Q. Wang, X. Yang, Z. Cai, Y. Xiong and B. Huang, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 17768–17776 RSC .
N. Zhou, J. Zu, F. Xu, Y. Wang, Y. Luo, S. Li, J. Tang, Z. Zhou and M. Zhong, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2020, 31, 12961–12972 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Atwater and R. R. Wheeler Jr, Appl. Phys. A, 2004, 79, 125–129 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, M. Luo, K. Yang and X. Zhou, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2020, 300, 110178–110188 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Villota, H. Lei, M. Qian, Z. Yang, S. Marie, A. Villota, Y. Zhang and G. Yadavalli, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 1318–1326 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Villota, H. Lei, E. Villota, M. Qian, J. Lavarias, V. Taylan, I. Agulto, W. Mateo, M. Valentin and M. Denson, ACS Omega, 2019, 4, 7088–7095 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Sharif, C. Saka, O. Baytar and Ö. Şahin, Anal. Lett., 2018, 51, 2733–2746 CrossRef .
H. Arslanoğlu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2019, 374, 238–247 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Gao, R. Sun, A. Li and G. Ji, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2021, 882, 114986–114996 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Wang, Z. Y. Xu, Y. Lian, C. L. Ban and H. H. Zhang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 542, 400–409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, Y. Liang, W. Zhou, W. Hu, H. Dong, M. Zheng, H. Hu, B. Lei, Y. Xiao and Y. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 12046–12055 RSC .
Y. X. Tian, C. Xiao, J. Yin, W. Zhang, J. P. Bao, H. Lin and H. Lu, ChemistrySelect, 2019, 4, 2314–2319 CrossRef CAS .
P. Tian, Y. Wang, S. Jia, H. Gao, S. Zhou, H. Xu, S. Song and J. Zang, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 806, 650–659 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, H. Song, W. Hou, Y. Chang, Y. Zhang, Y. Li, Y. Zhao and G. Han, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2021, 265, 124491–124499 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, J. Qiu, Y. Wang, S. Guo, Y. Feng, D. Dong and J. Yao, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2020, 856, 113673–113680 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu, Y. Zhang, H. Zhong, L. Yang, X. Xu, H. Liu and C. Yuan, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2019, 230, 178–186 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gopalakrishnan, T. D. Raju and S. Badhulika, Carbon, 2020, 168, 209–219 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ahmadpour and D. D. Do, Carbon, 1996, 34, 471–479 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, M. Antonietti and C. Giordano, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 2021–2027 CrossRef CAS .
S. I. Yun, S. H. Kim, D. W. Kim, Y. A. Kim and B. H. Kim, Carbon, 2019, 149, 637–645 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, N. Wang, J. Tian, W. Qian and W. Chu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1806153–1806162 CrossRef .
J. Yi, Y. Qing, C. T. Wu, Y. Zeng, Y. Wu, X. Lu and Y. Tong, J. Power Sources, 2017, 351, 130–137 CrossRef CAS .
G. Lin, R. Ma, Y. Zhou, Q. Liu, X. Dong and J. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 261, 49–57 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wan, P. Song, J. Liu, D. Chen, R. Xiao, Y. Zhang, J. Chen, M. Xie and C. Du, J. Power Sources, 2019, 438, 227013–227035 CrossRef CAS .
D. I. Arango, Z. Z. Benabithe, E. C. Arenas and J. C. P. Osorno, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2018, 29, 15557–15569 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, K. Han, P. Si, J. Li and C. Lu, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2018, 820, 103–110 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, J. Nai, L. Xu and T. Sun, J. Energy Storage, 2019, 24, 100764–100773 CrossRef .
D. Qiu, N. Guo, A. Gao, L. Zheng, W. Xu, M. Li, F. Wang and R. Yang, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 294, 398–405 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tang, Y. Liu, J. Wang, G. Zeng, Y. Deng, H. Dong, H. Feng, J. Wang and B. Peng, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 231, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wei, X. Wei, L. Yang, H. Xiao, Y. Gao and H. Li, J. Power Sources, 2016, 331, 373–381 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Titirici and M. Antonietti, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 103–116 RSC .
X. Jiang, F. Guo, X. Jia, S. Liang, K. Peng and L. Qian, Ion, 2020, 26, 3655–3668 CrossRef CAS .
F. Shen, Y. Wang, L. Li, K. Zhang, R. L. Smith and X. Qi, Chem. Eng. Commun., 2018, 205, 423–431 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Huang, C. Qin, J. Wang, L. Cao, Z. Ma, Q. Yuan, Z. Lin and P. Zhang, Materials, 2021, 14, 1714–1727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ren, Z. Jia, Z. Tian, D. Lopez, J. Cai, M. M. Titirici and A. B. Jorge, ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5, 2686–2693 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, Z. Ren, Z. Ying, X. Liu and H. Wan, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 743, 44–51 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jain, R. Balasubramanian and M. P. Srinivasan, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 283, 789–805 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sevilla and A. B. Fuertes, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 4195–4203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fang, L. Zhan, Y. S. Ok and B. Gao, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2018, 57, 15–21 CrossRef CAS .
B. Szczęśniak, J. Phuriragpitikhon, J. Choma and M. Jaroniec, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 18464–18491 RSC .
C. Wang, Y. Xiong, H. Wang, C. Jin and Q. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 15759–15770 RSC .
Y. Zhang, W. Hou, H. Guo, S. Shi and J. Dai, J. Renewable Mater., 2019, 7, 1309–1319 CAS .
X. Lu, J. R. V. Flora and N. D. Berge, Bioresour. Technol., 2014, 154, 229–239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Jain, R. Balasubramanian and M. P. Srinivasan, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 273, 622–629 CrossRef CAS .
F. Q. Plata, R. R. Rosas, E. Morallón and D. C. Amorós, ChemPlusChem, 2016, 81, 1349–1359 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Ameen, N. M. Zamri, S. T. May, M. T. Azizan, A. Aqsha, N. Sabzoi and F. Sher, Biomass Convers. Biorefin., 2022, 12, 103–114 CrossRef CAS .
P. Manasa, Z. J. Lei and F. Ran, J. Energy Storage, 2020, 30, 101494–101505 CrossRef .
W. Tu, Y. Liu, Z. Xie, M. Chen, L. Ma, G. Du and M. Zhu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 593, 390–407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, S. Zhu, H. Zhang, X. Liu and Y. Xiong, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2020, 147, 104806–104815 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Zhang, C. N. Feng, H. P. Li and X. C. Zheng, Cellulose, 2021, 28, 437–451 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, Y. Wang, B. Jia, J. Wei, C. Liu, J. Zhu, S. Tang, Z. Wu and G. Chen, ACS Omega, 2020, 5, 26084–26093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ahmad, X. Zhu, X. Wei and S. Zhang, Energy Fuels, 2020, 34, 11154–11164 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ryoo, S. H. Joo and S. Jun, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 7743–7746 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Rosas, M. J. V. Romero, D. S. Torres, J. R. Mirasol, T. Cordero, E. Morallón and D. C. Amorós, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 1458–1467 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Cao, C. Zhu, Y. Aoki and H. Habazaki, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 7292–7303 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qin, Z. Xiao, S. Zhai, S. Wang, H. Wang, G. Wang, W. Cai, Z. Li and Q. An, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2020, 167, 040505–040517 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shi, H. Cui, J. Xu, N. Yan and Y. Liu, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 389, 124459–124467 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ikeda, K. Tachi, Y. Hau Ng, Y. Ikoma, T. Sakata, H. Mori, A. Takashi Harada and M. Matsumura, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4335–4340 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, F. Qi and Y. Liu, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 11210–11218 RSC .
V. Malgras, J. Tang, J. Wang, J. Kim, N. Torad, S. Dutta, K. Ariga, M. Hossain, Y. Yamauchi and K. Wu, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2019, 19, 3673–3685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kyotani, T. Nagai, S. Inoue and A. Tomita, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 609–615 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nishihara, H. Fujimoto, H. Itoi, K. Nomura, H. Tanaka, M. T. Miyahara, P. A. Bonnaud, R. Miura, A. Suzuki, N. Miyamoto, N. Hatakeyama, A. Miyamoto, K. Ikeda, T. Otomo and T. Kyotani, Carbon, 2018, 129, 854–862 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. V. Romero, E. M. M. Franco, J. Bedia, J. R. Mirasol and T. Cordero, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2014, 196, 68–78 CrossRef .
J. Shi, W. Li and D. Li, Colloids Surf., A, 2015, 485, 11–17 CrossRef CAS .
F. Su, L. Lv, T. M. Hui and X. S. Zhao, Carbon, 2005, 43, 1156–1164 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nishihara and T. Kyotani, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 5648–5673 RSC .
R. Zeng, X. Tang, B. Huang, K. Yuan and Y. Chen, ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5, 515–522 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tang, X. Chen, D. Zhou and C. Liu, Colloids Surf., A, 2021, 620, 126567–126577 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yin, W. Zhang, N. A. Alhebshi, N. Salah and H. N. Alshareef, Small Methods, 2020, 4, 1900853–1900884 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liang, Z. Li and S. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3696–3717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zheng, B. Zhao, Y. Guo, Y. Guo, T. Pak and G. Li, Sci. Total Environ., 2021, 787, 147397–147407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Sun, Y. Zhou, L. Li, H. Zhou, X. Liu, Q. Zhang, B. Gao, Z. Meng, D. Zhou and Y. Ma, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 467, 382–390 CrossRef .
S. Lv, C. Li, J. Mi and H. Meng, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 510, 145425–145437 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, J. P. Cao, Q. Q. Zhuang, X. Y. Zhao, Z. Zhou, Y. L. Wei, M. Zhao and H. C. Bai, Electrochim. Acta, 2021, 371, 137825–137835 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hu, T. Hu, R. Cheng, J. Yang, C. Cui, C. Zhang and X. Wang, J. Energy Chem., 2018, 27, 161–166 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, S. Yang, S. Wang, X. Liu and L. Li, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 18, 447–455 CrossRef .
Z. Chen, H. Zhuo, Y. Hu, H. Lai, L. Liu, L. Zhong and X. Peng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910292–1910303 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chang, H. Wang, Y. Zhang, S. Wang, X. Liu and L. Li, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 10763–10772 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, Y. Liang, H. Hu, S. Liu, Y. Cai, H. Dong, M. Zheng, Y. Xiao and Y. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 24775–24781 RSC .
T. P. Fellinger, R. J. White, M. M. Titirici and M. Antonietti, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3254–3260 CrossRef CAS .
N. Brun, S. A. Wohlgemuth, P. Osiceanu and M. M. Titirici, Green Chem., 2013, 15, 2514–2524 RSC .
C. Xu, S. Deb, A. M. Balu, M. Ojeda and R. Luque, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 6698–6713 RSC .
X. Lin, Y. Liang, Z. Lu, H. Lou, X. Zhang, S. Liu, B. Zheng, R. Liu, R. Fu and D. Wu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 8535–8540 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qi, W. Zhang and L. Xu, Chemistry, 2018, 24, 18097–18105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Schneidermann, N. Jackel, S. Oswald, L. Giebeler, V. Presser and L. Borchardt, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 2416–2424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Shen, L. Zhu and X. Qi, ChemistrySelect, 2018, 3, 11350–11356 CrossRef CAS .
F. Shen, X. Xiong, J. Fu, J. Yang, M. Qiu, X. Qi and D. C. W. Tsang, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2020, 130, 109944–109964 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, S. L. Wang, T. Xie and J. Cao, Bioresour. Technol., 2020, 316, 123929–123940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Luo, Y. Zhou, W. Yan, X. Wu, S. Wang and W. Zhao, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 360, 137010–137021 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Du, H. Chen, X. Xu, C. Wang, F. Zhou, Z. Zeng, W. Zhang and L. Li, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2020, 293, 109831–109840 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Z. Su, P. Liang and J. Zhang, Biomass Convers. Biorefin., 2021, 1–12 Search PubMed .
G. Singh, R. Bahadur, A. M. Ruban, J. M. Davidraj, D. Su and A. Vinu, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 5571–5583 RSC .
J. Hou, Y. Liu, S. Wen, W. Li, R. Liao and L. Wang, ACS Omega, 2020, 5, 13548–13556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Tian, H. Sun, X. Duan, H. Zhang, Y. Ren and S. Wang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 389, 121881–121905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wen, K. Kierzek, X. Chen, J. Gong, J. Liu, R. Niu, E. Mijowska and T. Tang, J. Waste Manage., 2019, 87, 691–700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sun, B. Yang and A. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 372, 65–73 CrossRef CAS .
M. Idrees, V. Rangari and S. Jeelani, J. CO2 Util., 2018, 26, 380–387 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wan, F. Shen, J. Hu, M. Huang, L. Zhao, Y. Zeng, D. Tian, G. Yang and Y. Zhang, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2021, 180, 51–60 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Hu, J. Huang, P. Yu, M. Zheng, Y. Xiao, H. Dong, Y. Liang, H. Hu and Y. Liu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 15385–15393 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ma, J. Min, J. Gong, X. Liu, X. Mu, X. Chen and T. Tang, Chemosphere, 2020, 253, 126755–126765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Xie, J. Wang, X. Liu, Y. Shang, C. Ma, L. Su and L. Gong, Ion, 2020, 26, 403–413 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, H. Chen, J. Bai, M. Xu, C. Luo, L. Yang, L. Bai, D. Wei, W. Wang and H. Yang, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 854, 157207 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, K. Tian, B. H. Cheng and H. Jiang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 6682–6691 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, S. Yuan, C. Lu, M. Yang and Y. Song, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2020, 878, 114704–114714 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, X. Li, Z. Cui, D. Chen, X. Pang, Q. Zhang, F. Shao, H. Dong, L. Yu and L. Dong, Renewable Energy, 2021, 163, 375–385 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, B. Su, X. Zhao, X. Li, S. Han and J. Jiang, Energy Fuels, 2020, 34, 8956–8965 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, F. Zheng, J. Jiang, Y. Li, Y. Luo, K. Chen, J. Du, Y. Huang, Q. Li and H. Wang, Energy Fuels, 2021, 35, 8334–8344 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hu, Q. Zhu, Q. Wu, D. Li, Z. An and B. Xu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 13949–13959 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, X. L. Zhou, L. M. Shao, F. Lü and P. J. He, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 3801–3810 CrossRef CAS .
N. Guo, W. Luo, R. Guo, D. Qiu, Z. Zhao, L. Wang, D. Jia and J. Guo, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 834, 155115–155126 CrossRef CAS .
R. Chakraborty, P. K. Maji, C. Verma, A. K. Nayak, S. S. Singha and M. Pradhan, Energy Technol., 2021, 9, 2000734–2000746 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Selvaraj, A. Muthusamy, I. H. Cho, H. J. Kim, K. Senthil and K. Prabakar, Carbon, 2021, 174, 463–474 CrossRef CAS .
R. Samantray, M. Karnan, Vivekanand, K. Subramani, C. J. Anjeline, S. C. Mishra and M. Sathish, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2021, 5, 518–531 RSC .
Y. Li, D. Zhang, Y. Zhang, J. He, Y. Wang, K. Wang, Y. Xu, H. Li and Y. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2020, 448, 227396–227405 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, Z. Chen, C. Yu and W. Zhong, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 334, 135615–135629 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yang, D. Zhang, W. She, J. Wang, S. Gao, Y. Wang and K. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2021, 492, 229666–229678 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Teng, K. Han, J. Li, Y. Gao, M. Li and T. Ji, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2020, 60, 104756–104765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Rajasekaran and V. Raghavan, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2020, 109, 108038–108047 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, L. Qiu, H. Deng, J. Wang, L. Yao and L. Deng, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 524, 146485–146495 CrossRef CAS .
N. Cai, H. Cheng, H. Jin, H. Liu, P. Zhang and M. Wang, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2020, 861, 113933–113940 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, R. Liu, Y. Tian, Z. Sun, Z. Huang, X. Wu and B. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 384, 123263–123273 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, X. Ren, Y. Du, Y. Jiang, J. Wan and F. Ma, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 355, 136801–136814 CrossRef CAS .
S. Joseph, G. Saianand, M. R. Benzigar, K. Ramadass, G. Singh, A. I. Gopalan, J. H. Yang, T. Mori, A. a. H. A. Muhtaseb, J. Yi and A. Vinu, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2020, 5, 2000169–2000199 CrossRef .
F. Di Natale, A. Erto, A. Lancia and D. Musmarra, J. Hazard. Mater., 2015, 281, 47–55 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cui, Q. Jin, Y. Li and F. Li, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2019, 6, 478–488 RSC .
A. Wang, Z. Zheng, R. Li, D. Hu, Y. Lu, H. Luo and K. Yan, Green Energy Environ., 2019, 4, 414–423 CrossRef .
R. S. Shahraki, C. Benally, M. G. El-Din and J. Park, Chemosphere, 2021, 264, 128455–128470 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Li, N. Li, P. Zuo, S. Qu and W. Shen, Colloids Surf.,
A, 2021, 618, 126502–126511 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Y. Liu, W. Yang, L. Liu and J. Pan, Fuel, 2021, 291, 120152–120164 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sun, M. Li, Z. Zhang and J. Guo, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 471, 615–620 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, H. Zhang, N. Yuan, Y. Ge, Y. Dai, Z. Yang and L. Lu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 413, 125282–125293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tuomikoski, H. Runtti, H. Romar, U. Lassi and T. Kangas, Water Environ. Res., 2021, 93, 1303–1314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Li, M. Hu, J. Suo, Y. Xie, W. Hu, X. Wang, Y. Wang and Y. Zhang, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2020, 27, 5433–5445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xu, Y. Liu, H. Liang, C. Gao, J. Qin, L. You, R. Wang, J. Li and S. Yang, Sci. Total Environ., 2021, 759, 143457–143494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Chen, M. Zhang, L. Ma, J. Ren, P. Ma, B. Li, N. Wu, Z. Song and L. Huang, Sci. Total Environ., 2020, 730, 138930–138946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, X. Song, P. Zhang, H. Gao, C. Ou and X. Kong, Chemosphere, 2020, 245, 125587–125596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, L. Yu, H. Ma, F. Zhou, K. Yang and G. Wu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 578, 650–659 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, Z. Lai, J. Mu, D. Chu and X. Zang, J. Waste Manage., 2020, 105, 102–109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. S. Queiroz, L. K. C. de Souza, K. T. C. Thomaz, E. T. L. Lima, G. N. d. R. Filho, L. A. S. do Nascimento, L. H. d. O. Pires, K. d. C. F. Faial and C. E. F. da Costa, J. Environ. Manage., 2020, 270, 110868–110876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mahto, A. Singh, K. Aruchamy, A. Maraddi, G. R. Bhadu, N. S. Kotrappanavar and R. Meena, Sustainable Mater. Technol., 2021, 29, 292–301 Search PubMed .
A. Pirkarami and M. E. Olya, J. Saudi Chem. Soc., 2017, 21, 179–186 CrossRef .
D. Wang, Z. Wang, X. Zheng and M. Tian, Ind. Crops Prod., 2020, 148, 112319–112328 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, J. Wang, C. Jia, Y. Lv and Y. Liu, J. Water Proc. Eng., 2021, 39, 101753–101759 CrossRef .
A. S. Abdulhameed, N. N. M. F. Hum, S. Rangabhashiyam, A. H. Jawad, L. D. Wilson, Z. M. Yaseen, A. A. A. Kahtani and Z. A. Alothman, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 105530–105542 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, J. Tan, G. Xing, X. Dou and X. Guo, Bioresour. Bioprocess., 2021, 8, 10–21 CrossRef .
X. C. Nguyen, T. T. H. Nguyen, T. H. C. Nguyen, Q. V. Le, T. Y. B. Vo, T. C. P. Tran, D. D. La, G. Kumar, V. K. Nguyeng, S. W. Chang, W. J. Chung and D. D. Nguyen, Chemosphere, 2021, 282, 131009–131020 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Wei and A. R. Kamali, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2020, 107, 107914–107915 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, G. Huang, Q. Zhang, Y. Yang, J. Zhou and J. Cai, J. Mol. Liq., 2021, 330, 115580–115587 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, C. Xu, Y. Ren, D. Tang, C. Zhang, F. Li, X. Wei, C. Huo, X. Li and R. Zhang, ACS Omega, 2020, 5, 27032–27042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Sukhbaatar, B. Yoo and J. H. Lim, RSC Adv., 2021, 11, 5118–5127 RSC .
J. Wu, J. Yang, P. Feng, G. Huang, C. Xu and B. Lin, Chemosphere, 2020, 246, 125734–125744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Gupta, D. Gupta and O. P. Khatri, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 476, 647–657 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tian, H. Zhang, X. Duan, H. Sun, G. Shao and S. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1909265–1909306 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xiao, Z. N. Garba, S. Sun, I. Lawan, L. Wang, M. Lin and Z. Yuan, J. Cleaner Prod., 2020, 253, 119989–119999 CrossRef CAS .
J. Song, Y. Li, Y. Wang, L. Zhong, Y. Liu, X. Sun, B. He, Y. Li and S. Cao, Mater, 2021, 14, 1690–1704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. M. Emrooz, M. Maleki, A. Rashidi and M. Shokouhimehr, Biomass Convers. Biorefin., 2021, 11, 943–954 CrossRef .
R. Kueasook, N. Rattanachueskul, N. Chanlek, D. Dechtrirat, W. Watcharin, P. Amornpitoksuk and L. Chuenchom, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2020, 296, 110005–110020 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, B. Zhang, Y. Xia, H. Chen, G. Chen and S. Tang, Colloids Surf., A, 2021, 609, 125675–125686 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhang, Y. Jin, J. Qi, H. Chen, G. Chen and S. Tang, Environ. Technol. Innovation, 2021, 21, 101343–101357 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Cheng, Z. Wang, P. Wu, Y. Wang and J. Fu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 529, 147079–147119 CrossRef CAS .
W. Deng, S. Tang, X. Zhou, Y. Liu, S. Liu and J. Luo, Carbohydr. Polym., 2020, 247, 116736–116773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, M. Wu, C. Song, L. Liu, W. Gong, Y. Ding and J. Yao, Bioresour. Technol., 2021, 322, 124540–124548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, X. Yan, L. Li, J. Gu, T. Zhang, L. Tian, X. Su and Z. Lin, Chemosphere, 2021, 275, 130008–130016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xia, Y. Jin, J. Qi, H. Chen, G. Chen and S. Tang, Environ. Technol. Innovation, 2021, 23, 101659–101678 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, M. Pan, Z. Feng, Y. Qin, Y. Wang, L. Tanc and T. Sun, New J. Chem., 2020, 44, 1097–1106 RSC .
D. Yang, J. Li, L. Luo, R. Deng, Q. He and Y. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 387, 124103–124149 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. M. Streit, G. C. Collazzo, S. P. Druzian, R. S. Verdi, E. L. Foletto, L. F. S. Oliveir and G. L. Dotto, Chemosphere, 2021, 262, 128322–128331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Jaria, M. A. O. Lourenço, C. P. Silva, P. Ferreira, M. Otero, V. Calisto and V. I. Esteves, J. Mol. Liq., 2020, 299, 112098–112139 CrossRef CAS .
F. Akkouche, F. Boudrahem, I. Yahiaoui, C. Vial, F. Audonnet and F. A. Benissad, Water Environ. Res., 2021, 93, 464–478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. M. C. Viegas, A. S. Mestre, E. Mesquita, M. Campinas, M. A. Andrade, A. P. Carvalho and M. J. Rosa, Sci. Total Environ., 2020, 743, 140791–140830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. Bidhendi, Z. Poursorkh, H. Sereshti, H. R. Nodeh, S. Rezania and M. A. Kamboh, Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health, 2020, 17, 4223–4237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pap, M. A. Taggart, L. Shearer, Y. Li, S. Radovic and M. T. Sekulic, Chemosphere, 2021, 264, 128439–128453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mokhati, O. Benturki, M. Bernardo, Z. Kecira, I. Matos, N. Lapa, M. Ventura, O. S. G. P. Soares, A. M. B. do Rego and I. M. Fonseca, J. Mol. Liq., 2021, 326, 115368–115381 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. d. O. Salomón, J. Georgin, D. S. P. Franco, M. S. Netto, D. G. A. Piccilli, E. L. Foletto, L. F. S. Oliveira and G. L. Dotto, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 104911–104922 CrossRef .
G. J. Jiao, J. Ma, Y. Li, D. Jin, Y. Guo, J. Zhou and R. Sun, Sci. Total Environ., 2021, 761, 143217–143267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. d. S. V. de Almeida, W. T. Vieira, M. D. Bispo, S. F. de Melo, T. L. da Silva, T. L. Balliano, M. Gurgel, A. Vieira and J. I. Soletti, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 104891–104901 CrossRef .
H. Rezazad, S. V. Khajeh and B. E. Sis, J. Porous Mater., 2020, 27, 1439–1446 CrossRef CAS .
I. P. P. daCansado, C. R. Belo and P. A. M. Mourão, Environ. Nanotechnol. Monit. Manag., 2019, 12, 100261–100293 Search PubMed .
T. Zhang, D. Yuan, Q. Guo, F. Qiu, D. Yang and Z. Ou, Food Bioprod. Process., 2019, 114, 154–162 CrossRef CAS .
E. V. Liakos, K. Rekos, D. A. Giannakoudakis, A. C. Mitropoulos, J. Fu and G. Z. Kyzas, Antibiotics, 2021, 10, 65–81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shen, K. Zhu, D. He, J. Huang, H. L. HeLei and W. Chen, J. Environ. Sci., 2022, 111, 351–366 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Chen, J. Pang, X. Wei, B. Chen and Y. Xie, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2021, 28, 27398–27410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. B. K. Yaah, M. Zbair, S. B. de Oliveira and S. Ojala, Nanotechnol. Environ. Eng., 2021, 6, 3–15 CrossRef .
S. Ganesan, M. Eswaran, B. Chokkiah, R. Dhanusuraman, A. P. Lingassamy, V. K. Ponnusamy, G. Kumar and A. Pugazhendhi, Int. J. Energy Res., 2020, 45, 17440–17449 CrossRef .
N. A. E. Youssef, E. Amer, A. O. A. E. Naga and S. A. Shaban, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 2020, 113, 114–125 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, G. Xu and G. Li, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 587, 271–278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Belhamdi, H. Laksaci, C. Belabed, Z. Merzougui, S. Boudiaf, R. Tir and M. Trari, Biomass Convers. Biorefin., 2021, 1–15 Search PubMed .
A. Djebri, Z. Sadaoui, M. Belmedani, L. Domergue and M. Trari, J. Environ. Health Sci. Eng., 2021, 19, 917–931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Georgin, Y. L. d. O. Salomón, D. S. P. Franco, M. S. Netto, D. G. A. Piccilli, D. Perondi, L. F. O. Silva, E. L. Foletto and G. L. Dotto, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 105676–105686 CrossRef CAS .
J. Michałowicz and W. Duda, Pol. J. Environ. Stud., 2007, 16, 347–362 Search PubMed .
A. A. Lawal, M. A. Hassan, M. R. Zakaria, M. Zulkhairi, M. Yusoff, M. N. F. Norrrahim, M. N. Mokhtar and Y. Shirai, Bioresour. Technol., 2021, 332, 125070–125077 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, S. Zhang, L. Chen, Z. Liu and J. Qin, Ind. Crops Prod., 2021, 160, 113157–113167 CrossRef CAS .
T. K. M. P. Kumar, S. K. A. Kumar and S. K. Sahoo, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 1434–1442 CrossRef .
X. Kong, H. Gao, X. Song, Y. Deng and Y. Zhang, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2020, 739, 137046–137052 CrossRef CAS .
B. Abussaud, H. A. Asmaly, Ihsanullah, T. A. Saleh, V. K. Gupta, T. Laoui and M. A. Atieh, J. Mol. Liq., 2016, 213, 351–359 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Z. Li, B. Xing, H. Li, Z. Ma, W. Zhang, P. Reubroycharoen and S. Wang, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2021, 155, 105072–105082 CrossRef CAS .
D. Feng, D. Guo, Y. Zhang, S. Sun, Y. Zhao, Q. Shang, H. Sun, J. Wu and H. Tan, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 410, 127707–127738 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, L. Li, Z. Duan, Q. You, G. Liao and D. Wang, Colloids Surf., A, 2021, 610, 125728–125741 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yu, D. P. Gamliel, B. Markunas and J. A. Valla, ACS Omega, 2021, 6, 8870–8883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Nazal, D. R. Gijjapu and N. Abuzaid, Colloids Interface Sci. Commun., 2021, 41, 100370–100378 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. S. Khalil, M. Khairy, O. A. S. Allam and M. K. Khalil, Int. J. Environ. Sci. Technol., 2021, 1–14 Search PubMed .
D. S. P. Franco, J. Georgin, M. S. Netto, D. Allasia, M. L. S. Oliveira, E. L. Foletto and G. L. Dotto, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 105927–105937 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, L. Xue, L. Zheng, S. Bao, Y. Liu, T. Fang and B. Xing, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 416, 126126–126135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Chen, Y. Xie, X. Wei, B. Chen and J. Pang, J. Chem. Eng. Data, 2021, 66, 1101–1109 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. C. de Lima, M. E. G. Llop, R. d. S. Maniezzo, M. P. Moisés, V. Janeiro, P. A. Arroyo, M. R. Guilherme and A. W. Rinaldi, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 416, 126167–126177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tang, X. Huang, Y. Peng and S. Lu, Fuel, 2020, 270, 117478–117487 CrossRef CAS .
N. H. M. H. Tehrani, M. S. Alivand, A. Rashidi, K. R. Shamskar, M. Samipoorgiri, M. D. Esrafili, D. M. Maklavany and M. S. Alavijeh, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 384, 121317–121330 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Yu, S. Liu, G. Lin, Y. Yang, S. Zhang, H. Zhao, C. Zheng and X. Gao, Colloids Surf., A, 2020, 588, 124372–124381 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ge, I. Akpinar, Z. Li, S. Liu, J. Hua, W. Li, T. Zhao and X. Hu, Chemosphere, 2021, 282, 131110–131118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. He, G. Shi, H. Xiao, G. Sun, Y. Shi, G. Chen, H. Dai, B. Yuan, X. Chen and X. Yang, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 410, 128286–128303 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ji, S. Wang, Y. Dong, L. Li, L. Li, X. Feng, X. Lu and L. Mu, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2020, 253, 123338–123370 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chen, H. Yu, F. Lin, Z. Zhang, B. Yan and Y. Song, Sci. Total Environ., 2020, 727, 138475–138487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhou, W. Ma, Z. Zeng, R. Chen, X. Xu, B. Liu, H. Li, H. Li and L. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 387, 124173–124183 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cheng, Y. Sun, X. Wang, S. Zou, G. Ye, H. Huang and D. Ye, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 392, 122298–122306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, B. Lin, C. Sun, M. Tang, S. Lu, Q. Huang and J. Yan, Sci. Total Environ., 2021, 773, 145453–145464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ji, Y. Wu, Y. Bian, Y. Song, Q. Sun, X. Jiang, L. Zhang, J. Han and H. Cheng, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 407, 124785–124834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cheng, G. Ye, X. Wang, C. Su, W. Zhang, F. Yao, Y. Wang, Y. Jiao, H. Huang and D. Ye, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 105054–105062 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, H. Cheng, G. Ye, F. Yao, Y. Wang, Y. Jiao, W. Zhu, B. Lan, H. Huang and D. Ye, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2021, 28, 46186–46195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. C. de Andrade, R. S. G. Menezes, R. A. Fiuza Jr and H. M. C. Andrade, Carbon Lett., 2020, 31, 779–793 CrossRef .
R. Chen, N. Han, L. Li, S. Wang, X. Ma, C. Wang, H. Li, H. Li and L. Zeng, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 508, 145211–145218 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, Y. Lei, D. Li, J. Zhao, Y. Wang, G. Zhou, C. Yan and Q. He, Renewable Energy, 2020, 153, 1091–1099 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cheng, Y. Bian, F. Wang, X. Jiang, R. Ji, C. Gu, X. Yang and Y. Song, Bioresour. Technol., 2019, 284, 1–8 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, W. Xiang, B. Wang, J. Fang, W. Zou, F. He, Y. Li, D. C. W. Tsang, Y. S. Ok and B. Gao, Chemosphere, 2020, 245, 125664–125673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Singh, K. S. Lakhi, S. Sil, S. V. Bhosale, I. Y. Kim, K. Albahily and A. Vinu, Carbon, 2019, 148, 164–186 CrossRef CAS .
G. Singh, R. Bahadur, J. M. Lee, I. Y. Kim, A. M. Ruban, J. M. Davidraj, D. Semit, A. Karakoti, A. H. Al Muhtaseb and A. Vinu, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 406, 126787–126798 CrossRef CAS .
S. He, G. Chen, H. Xiao, G. Shi, C. Ruan, Y. Ma, H. Dai, B. Yuan, X. Chen and X. Yang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 582, 90–101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ma, C. Su, B. Liu, Q. Wu, K. Zhou, Z. Zeng and L. Li, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2021, 259, 118065–118073 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, G. Zhang, D. Li, S. Ma, B. Wang and X. Jiang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2020, 59, 7447–7456 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, J. Yuan, T. Li, X. Jiang, S. Ma, W. Cen and W. Jiang, Sci. Total Environ., 2021, 768, 144452–144462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ahmadi, M. S. Alivand, N. H. M. H. Tehrani, M. Ardjmand, A. Rashidi, M. Rafizadeh, A. Seif, F. Mollakazemi, Z. Noorpoor and J. Rudd, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 415, 129076–129091 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kuśmierek, A. Świątkowski, T. Kotkowski, R. Cherbański and E. Molga, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2021, 157, 105205–105220 CrossRef .
N. A. Zubbri, A. R. Mohamed, P. Lahijani and M. Mohammadi, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 105074–105092 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhao, C. Ma, F. Chen, G. Xu, R. Pang, X. Qian, J. Shao and X. Hu, Biomass Bioenergy, 2021, 145, 105969–105979 CrossRef CAS .
T. Y. Chin, I. Yakub and T. Y. Y. Hin, Emiss. Control Sci. Technol., 2020, 6, 336–344 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, H. Nam and H. Nam, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 103683–103694 CrossRef CAS .
S. Balou, S. E. Babak and A. Priye, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 42711–42722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ma, R. Chen, K. Zhou, Q. Wu, H. Li, Z. Zeng and L. Li, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 11721–11728 CrossRef CAS .
F. Huang, D. Li, L. Wang, K. Zhang, L. Fu, Z. Guo, M. Liang, B. Wang, D. Luo and B. Li, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2021, 157, 105047–105056 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, I. Elsayed, X. Song, R. Shmulsky and E. B. Hassan, Sci. Total Environ., 2020, 748, 142465–142477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Shao, Y. Sang, N. Liu, J. Liu, P. Zhan, J. Huang and J. Chen, ACS Omega, 2020, 5, 17450–17462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shao, J. Zhang, X. Zhang, Y. Feng, H. Zhang, S. Zhang and H. Chen, Fuel, 2018, 224, 138–146 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Hu, Z. Shen and J. C. Yu, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2017, 51, 7076–7083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yan, R. Li, Z. Yang, X. Li, Y. Wang and G. Wu, iScience, 2021, 24, 102421–102456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Han, P. Zhang, L. Li, S. Lu, B. Su, X. An and Z. Lei, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 543, 148752–148763 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shirvanimoghaddam, B. Czech, G. Wójcik and M. Naebe, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 539, 425–432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. O. Donar, S. Bilge and A. Sinağ, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2020, 118, 105151–105159 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Rashed, M. A. E. D. El Taher and S. M. M. Fadlalla, Manag. Environ. Qual., 2021, 1–12 Search PubMed .
N. Alikhani, M. Farhadian, A. Goshadrou, S. Tangestaninejad and P. Eskandari, Environ. Nanotechnol. Monit. Manag., 2021, 15, 100415–100428 Search PubMed .
S. O. Sanni, E. L. Viljoen and A. E. Ofomaja, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 8717–8728 RSC .
H. H. Mohamed, A. A. Alsanea, N. A. Alomair, S. Akhtar and D. W. Bahnemann, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2019, 26, 12288–12301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Leichtweis, S. Silvestri and E. Carissimi, Biomass Bioenergy, 2020, 140, 105648–105660 CrossRef CAS .
K. Guan, P. Zhou, J. Zhang and L. Zhu, J. Mol. Struct., 2020, 1203, 127425–127463 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nethaji, G. Tamilarasan, P. Neehar and A. Sivasamy, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 3735–3744 CrossRef CAS .
T. Jiang, J. Jin, J. Hou, M. Tahir and F. Idrees, Chemosphere, 2019, 229, 426–433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yu, Z. Liu, Y. Wang, H. Luo and X. Tang, New J. Chem., 2020, 44, 15908–15918 RSC .
D. D. J. Marie, Y. Gong, G. B. Noumi, J. M. Sieliechi, X. Zhao, N. Ma, M. Yang and J. B. Tchatchueng, Chemosphere, 2019, 217, 833–842 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Xie, P. Guo, Z. Xiong, S. Sun, H. Wang and Y. Gao, J. Mater. Sci., 2021, 56, 12775–12788 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sekar, S. Lee, P. Vijayarengan, K. M. Kalirajan, T. Santhakumar, S. Sekar and S. Sadhasivam, Nanomaterials, 2020, 10, 1610–1622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, T. Song, P. Zhang, T. Huang, T. Wang, T. Wang and H. Zeng, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 11536–11546 CrossRef CAS .
A. Geng, L. Xu, L. Gan, C. Mei, L. Wang, X. Fang, M. Li, M. Pan, S. Han and J. Cui, Chemosphere, 2020, 250, 126291–126299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. S. Das, J. P. Shim, A. Bhatnagar, K. M. Tripathi and T. Young, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 15084–15093 CrossRef PubMed .
T. B. Devi, D. Mohanta and M. Ahmaruzzaman, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2019, 76, 160–172 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liang, J. Pan, X. Duan, H. Tang, J. Xu and G. Tang, Ceram. Int., 2020, 46, 3623–3630 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wei, H. Hu, Z. Huang, Z. Jiang, X. Lv, J. Xie and L. Kong, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2019, 147, 33–41 CrossRef CAS .
Y. O. Donar, S. Bilge, A. Sınağ and O. Pliekhov, ChemCatChem, 2018, 10, 1134–1139 CrossRef CAS .
M. Alsaiari, Arabian J. Chem., 2021, 14, 103258–103272 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xue, J. Wang, R. He, T. Yang, Y. Yan, Y. Peng, U. Omeoga and W. Wang, Sci. Total Environ., 2020, 732, 138963–138976 Search PubMed .
B. Zhang, D. Yang, X. Qiu, Y. Qian, H. Wang, C. Yi and D. Zhang, Carbon, 2020, 162, 256–266 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhao, Y. Cheng, Z. Zhang, B. Zhang, C. Pei, F. Fan and G. Ji, Carbon, 2021, 173, 501–511 CrossRef CAS .
F. Huang, S. Wang, W. Ding, M. Zhang, X. Kong, Z. Sheng and Q. Liu, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2021, 32, 6260–6268 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Xie, B. Zhang, Q. Wang, X. Zhao, D. Wu, H. Wu, X. Sun, C. Hou, X. Yang, R. Yu, S. Zhang, V. Murugadoss and W. Du, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 594, 290–303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, X. Pang, M. Cao, X. Liu and X. Li, Ind. Crops Prod., 2021, 171, 113814–113824 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Aslam, W. Ding, S. ur Rehman, A. Hassan, Y. Bian, Q. Liu and Z. Sheng, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 543, 148785–148793 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, Q. Li, K. Hu, S. Wang, Q. Liu and X. Kong, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 544, 148891–148899 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Zhou, Y. Liang, H. D. Huang, L. Li, B. Yang, M. Z. Li, D. X. Yan, J. Lei and Z. M. Li, Carbon, 2019, 152, 316–324 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, H. Zhao, W. Gu, L. Yang and B. Zhang, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 18617–18627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tian, D. Estevez, H. Wei, M. Peng, L. Zhou, P. Xu, C. Wu, M. Yan, H. Wang, H. X. Peng and F. Qin, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 421, 129781–129794 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Wood, R. Garg, T. C. Karni, A. J. Russell and P. LeDuc, RSC Adv., 2021, 11, 9628–9637 RSC .
W. Xing, M. Zhang, J. Liang, W. Tang, P. Li, Y. Luo, N. Tang and J. Guo, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2020, 251, 117357–117366 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li, T. Feng, Z. Song, Y. Tan and W. Luo, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 30077–30086 RSC .
Y. Liu, X. Zhang, X. Gu, N. Wu, R. Zhang, Y. Shen, B. Zheng, J. Wu, W. Zhang, S. Li and F. Huo, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2020, 303, 110303–110311 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, T. Yan, J. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Shi and D. Zhang, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2020, 7, 317–326 RSC .
S. H. Liu and Y. H. Tang, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2020, 878, 114587–114594 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Kyaw, S. M. A. Mashaikhi, M. T. Z. Myint, S. A. Harthi, E. S. I. E. Shafey and M. A. Abri, Chem. Eng. Process., 2021, 161, 108311–108321 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, F. Yang, L. Wu, L. Qian, X. Hu, Z. Wang and W. Chen, New J. Chem., 2021, 45, 10432–10447 RSC .

Footnote† Equal contribution.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
Rishika Chakraborty	Rishika Chakraborty is currently a PhD candidate in the Department of Chemistry, National Institute of Technology (NIT) Meghalaya, India. She obtained her Master in Science degree in chemistry from North Eastern Hill University (NEHU), Shillong, India. Her research interest focuses on the design, synthesis and characterization of anisotropic nanomaterials and porous-carbon-based nanostructures for energy applications (supercapacitor and oxygen reduction reaction).
Vilya K	Vilya. K is a freelance artist. She completed her Master in Science degree in Physics from Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, India. She completed her Master in Science project thesis under the guidance of Dr Arpan Kumar Nayak. Her research interest focuses on nanostructured carbon materials from biodegradable waste for supercapacitor applications.
Mukul Pradhan	Mukul Pradhan received his PhD degree in ‘Anisotropically grown metal and metal oxides nanomaterials for spectroscopic and catalytic application’, from Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Kharagpur, India. He was a postdoctoral fellow in the Department of Chemistry, Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), Pohang, South Korea. He is currently an Associate Professor at Department of Chemistry, National Institute of Technology (NIT) Warangal, India. His current research areas include synthesis of novel nanocomposites for energy harvesting (catalyst for generation of hydrogen from water) and storage (supercapacitor and battery) applications.
Arpan Kumar Nayak	Arpan Kumar Nayak received his PhD degree (2018) from Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur (IIT-KGP), India in tungsten based nanostructured materials for energy and environmental remediation applications. He was a post-doctoral fellow at Hanyang University, Seoul, South Korea. Currently he is working as Assistant Professor at Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, India. His current research mainly focuses on the synthesis of various nanostructured materials towards environment and energy applications. He has published more than 50 articles in various international journals (Google scholar citation count: 1030, h-index: 19) and edited 3 books in Elsevier, IOP and IOR. He was assigned as Editor-in-chief in the International Research Journal of Multidisciplinary Technovation, Bulletin of Scientific Research and Associate editor in Nanoscale report.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration showing the structural properties and applications of biomass/waste-derived nanoporous carbons.	 


Slow/carbonization	350–800	Less than 10 °C min−1	Seconds-hours	30	35	35
Fast process	400–600	10–200 °C s−1	Seconds	70–75	13–20	10–12
Gasification	700–1500	∼1000 °C s−1	Seconds-minutes	2–5	85	10

 	Fig. 2  (a) Pyrolysis temperatures of lignocellulosic biomass. Adapted from ref. 63 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020 and (b) schematic diagram for the preparation of functional carbon from neem dead leaves and their supercapacitor measurements. Adapted from ref. 64 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2013.	 
C + CO2 → 2CO	(1)
C + H2O → CO + H2	(2)

 	Fig. 3  Synthesis of AC by physical activation.	 
6KOH + 2C → 2K + 3H2↑ + 2K2CO3	(3)
6KOH + 2C → 2K + 3CO	(4)

 	Fig. 4  (a) Electrochemical measurements of tea-waste-derived carbon electrodes. Adapted from ref. 82 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020 and (b) proposed reaction mechanism of KOH activation during pyrolysis. Adapted from ref. 84 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020.	 
ZnCl2 + 1/2O2 → ZnOCl + 1/2Cl2	(5)
2ZnO + C → 2Zn + CO2↑	(6)

 	Fig. 5  (a) The synthetic representation process of pomelo peel-derived carbon materials. Adapted from ref. 96 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020 and (b) schematic illustration for the synthesis of porous carbon from sawdust biomass. Adapted from ref. 112 with permission from Springer, copyright 2020.	 
4H3PO4 + 10C → P4 + 10CO↑ + 6H2O	(7)

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic representation of the conversion for porous carbons from lignin under microwave heating. Adapted from ref. 114 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020, (b) preparation steps of porous carbons from wine stone. Adapted from ref. 118 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019 and (c) schematic illustration of the preparation of rape pollen-derived porous carbon. Adapted from ref. 121 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2018.	 
C + 3CuCl2 + 2H2O → Cu + 2CuCl + CO2↑ + 4HCl	(8)
C + 4CuCl + 2H2O → 4Cu + CO2↑ + 4HCl	(9)

 	Fig. 7  (a) Synthetic diagram of 3D cross-coupled porous carbon by NaNO3 template approach. Adapted from ref. 131 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2018, (b) schematic illustration for the preparation of porous carbons from sodium alginate. Adapted from ref. 137 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019 and (c) preparation method for obtaining cork-derived porous carbons by KMnO4 activation and supercapacitor application. Adapted from ref. 138 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019.	 
2KMnO4 → K2MnO4 + MnO2 + O2↑	(10)
K2MnO4 + C → K2CO3 + MnO	(11)
2MnO2 + C → 2MnO + CO2↑	(12)
	(13)
	(14)

 	Fig. 8  (a) Scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of (a) glucose, (b) sucrose, (c) starch, (d) cellulose, (e) rye straw and (f) rice grain based insoluble carbohydrates. Adapted from ref. 150 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2020 and (b) fabrication of rice husk-based porous carbons by HTC treatment.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) SEM images of nSiO2 (A) before and (B) after hydrothermal treatment with glucose solution and (C) NH2-nSiO2 after the same treatment (scale bars correspond to 200 nm). Adapted from ref. 168 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2007, (b) TEM images of (a and b) zeolites and (c and d) templated carbons. Adapted from ref. 164 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2014, (c) schematic illustration for the preparation of porous carbons from starch. Adapted from ref. 165 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018, (d) the fabrication process of N, S-co-doped porous carbon by double salt-template strategy. Adapted from ref. 182 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019, (e) (i) preparation process of rice-husk based AC and (ii) N2 adsorption curves. Adapted from ref. 183 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020, (f) SEM images of (a and b) carbonized silk fabric (CSC) and (c and d) CSC@Ti3C2Tx. Adapted from ref. 185 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018 and (g) fabrication of (a) wood-derived carbon aerogel, (b) TEM image of cellulose nanofibers and SEM image of (c and d) carbon aerogels. Adapted from ref. 187 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Synthesis of chitosan-based porous carbons. Adapted from ref. 189 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017 and (b) typical mechanochemical reaction. Adapted from ref. 150 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2020.	 

European deciduous trees	Pyrolysis and cavitation	HNO3 and H2SO4	614	Supercapacitor	
26

Lotus leaves	HTC and double chemical activation	HNO3 and KOH	2351	Supercapacitor	
27


Chlorella zofingiensi
	Carbonization and chemical activation	KOH	1337.9	Supercapacitor	
28


Pythium oligandrum
	Freeze drying and calcination	—	—	Photocatalytic H2 evolution	
29


Arundo donax
	Solid-state chemical activation	ZnCl2/KOH	582	CO2 capture	
35

982
Fabric waste	Molten salt pyrolysis	LiCl/KCl	1975.2	Supercapacitor	
50

PET waste	Catalytic carbonization and chemical activation	KOH	2236	Supercapacitor	
54

Carrot waste	Chemical activation	ZnCl2	1509.7	Dye degradation	
46

Tangerine seed waste	Chemical activation	H3PO4	659.62	Adsorption	
198

Corn stover	HTC and chemical activation	KOH	2442	CO2 capture	
143

Fir bark	Microwave-assisted HTC and pyrolysis	—	955	Supercapacitor	
199

Camellias, azalea leaves, green grocery and apple pulps	Dual-templating and carbonization	Mg5(OH)2(CO3)4/ZnCl2	1650	Adsorption	
200

Fungus waste	Chemical activation	KOH	3076	Supercapacitor	
201

Casein	Solid-state chemical activation	K3C6H5O7	2212	CO2 capture	
202

Supercapacitor
Sorghum waste	Chemical activation and carbonization	KOH	1681	Waste-water treatment	
203


Caragana korshinskii
	Pyrolysis	—	133.491	Adsorption	
58

Bottlebrush flower	Thermal chemical activation	NaHCO3	2025	Adsorption and catalytic degradation	
204

Mixed plastic wastes	Catalytic carbonization and chemical activation	KOH	2198	Supercapacitor	
205

Sunflower	Pyrolysis and chemical activation	KOH	3072	CO2 storage	
206

Iodine capture
Waste-water treatment
Packaging waste	Pyrolysis and chemical activation	KOH	1383	CO2 capture	
207

Lignin	Oxidative pre-treatment and chemical activation	KOH	3094	Supercapacitor	
208


 	Fig. 11  (a) (i) Schematic illustration of the preparation of Neolamarckia cadamba based porous carbon, (ii) pore size distribution graph and (iii) CD curves at different current densities. Adapted from ref. 209 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019, (b) Ragone plot of waste polystyrene-derived porous carbon. Adapted from ref. 210 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020, (c) schematic illustration of pore derivation mechanism in E. prolifera-derived porous carbon, (d) X-ray photoelectron spectra (XPS) of N 1s for grape marcs-derived porous carbon. Adapted from ref. 212 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021 and (e) cycling stability plot of N, O-co-doped porous carbon. Adapted from ref. 216 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020.	 


Lotus seed shell	
In situ hard templating, carbonization and chemical activation	3188	3.2	286	0.5	6 M KOH	10.9	102.6	
218

Low-density polyethylene	Autogenic pressure carbonization and chemical activation	3059	1.73 m3 g−1	355	0.5	6 M KOH	9.81	450 W kg−1	
219

Soybean root	HTC and chemical activation	2690	1.9	328	1	6 M KOH	46.7	27.3	
220

Tamarind leaves	Chemical activation	1212	0.71	370	1	0.5 M H2SO4	36.96	4.49	
221

293	0.5 M Na2SO4
193	6 M KOH
Wood carbon waste	Pre-carbonization and chemical activation	2943	1.83	588	0.5	6 M KOH	32.9	248.8 W kg−1	
222


Saccharum spontaneum
	Chemical activation and carbonization	1590	0.895	561	1	1 M H2SO4	13.2	5607 W kg−1	
223

Flaxseed residue	Carbonization and chemical activation	3326	1.56	369	0.5	6 M KOH	61.2	13.3	
224

398	1 M H2SO4
Peach gum	Template-assisted HTC and carbonization	1161.4	1.67	426	0.5	6 M KOH	30.28	350 W kg−1	
225

Phoenix tree fruits	Carbonization and activation	3463	1.53	462	0.5	Mixed alkaline (KOH and ChOH)	19.7	12.2	
226

Garlic peel	Carbonization and ultrasonic-assisted chemical activation	3887	2.242	—	—	6 M KOH in 2E	59.57	16.24	
227


Eucalyptus globulus seed	HTC and chemical activation	2388.38	—	175.33	1	1 M KOH	—	—	
228

Lotus leaf	Freeze-drying, pre-carbonization and chemical activation	4482	—	225	0.5	1 M NaCl	—	—	
229

289	6 M KOH
Cashew nut husk	Chemical activation	2742	1.528	305.2	1	6 M KOH	11.2	—	
230

Chitin	Carbonization and template-assisted chemical activation	1488.3	1.286	412.5	0.5	6 M KOH	9.67	—	
231

Pectin	
In situ template and chemical activation	2928	1.60	338	1	6 M KOH	22.4	8979 W kg−1	
232

Alginate	Nano-hard templating and HTC-assisted chemical activation	2589	1.875	316	0.5	6 M KOH	16.1	2.5	
166


 	Fig. 12  (a) SEM image of lignin-based porous carbon and (b) schematic representation for synthesis of tire-derived AC and its absorption mechanism. Adapted from ref. 237 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021.	 

Silkworm cocoon	Pyrolysis and chemical activation	3134	Pb(II)	91.02	Ion concentration = 100 mg L−1	
240

Cu(II)	87.31	30 °C
Zn(II)	56.4	pH = 6 (for Cr(III) at pH = 5)
Cd(II)	77.42
Cr(III)	51.45
Orange peel	Chemical activation, carbonization and phosphorylation	378.5	U(VI)	552.6	pH = 6.0298.15 K	
241

Spruce sawdust	Carbonization and physical activation	1010	Zn(II)	17.2	Ion concentration = 30 mg L−1	
242

Ni(II)	6.6	Room temperature pH = 7
Co(II)	4.5
Kitchen waste	Carbonization and chemical activation	2417	Cr(VI)	526.1	pH = 2	
243

Glucose	HTC and chemical activation	1600.67	Cr(VI)	230.15	Ion concentration = 200 mg L−1	
244

25 °C
pH = 2
Luffa sponge	Pyrolysis, chemical activation and HTC	1525.45	Cr(VI)	312.50	Ion concentration = 200 mg L−1	
245

318 K
pH = 2
Corn cob rice husk	Chemical activation	2381 ± 83	Pb(II)	381 ± 10	Ion concentration = 500 mg L−1	
246

2786 ± 94	492 ± 15	Room temperature
Corn stalk	Chemical activation and carbonization	566.1	Cr(VI)	89.5	Ion concentration = 300 mg L−1	
247

pH = 4.5
Cork	Slow pyrolysis	392.5	Cu(II)	18.5	Ion concentration = 200 mg L−1	
248

20 °C
Acai seed	Microwave heating and chemical activation	2774	Pb(II)	86%	Ion concentration = 30 mg L−1	
249

Fe(II)	69%
Mg(II)	8%
Removal efficiency

Salicornia brachiata
	Self-templating and pyrolysis	700	Pb(II)	55	30 °C ± 5 °C	
250

Hg(II)	∼100	pH = 6.5 ± 0.2
Cd(II)	∼250

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic diagram for the preparation of porous carbon from Metaplexis japonica fibers. Adapted from ref. 252 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020, (b) recycling of lotus leaves-derived porous carbon for RhB adsorption. Adapted from ref. 259 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020 and (c) proposed adsorption mechanism of litchi peel-derived porous carbon for CR and MG dyes. Adapted from ref. 261 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020.	 


White sugar	Acid dehydration and chemical activation	1144.77	RhB	123.46	
C
0 (RhB) = 50 mg L−1	
264

25 °C
Cow hairs	Direct pyrolysis, chemical activation, and hard-templating	1753.075	Direct blue	1477	
C
0 (direct blue) = 50 g L−1	
265


Azolla
	Pre-carbonization and chemical activation	1437	MB	1930	
C
0 (MB) = 400 mg L−1	
266

Sugarcane bagasse	Soft-templating and pyrolysis	645	MB	101.14	
C
0 (MB) = 40 mg L−1	
267

30 ± 2 °C
pH = 6.8
Edible fungus substrate	Carbonization and chemical activation	2767.3	RhB	1497	
C
0 (RhB) = 50 mg L−1	
268

303 K
pH = 9

Physalis alkekengi L. husk	Carbonization and chemical activation	3502	MG	1989	pH = 9	
269

Lotus leaf	Freeze-drying, pre-carbonization and chemical activation	4482	MB	4181.2	
C
0 (MB) = 200 mg L−1	
229

298 K
Glucose	Explosion-assisted strategy and high-temperature carbonization	1378	MB	561	
C
0 (MB) = 50 mg L−1	
270

25 °C
Chitosan	HTC and chemical activation	2463.9	MB	1599.03	
C
0 (MB) = 100 mg L−1	
271

45 °C
PET	Pyrolysis and thermal activation	644	MO	59.5	
C
0 (MO) = 100 mg L−1	
257

pH = 5.75
Vinasse waste	Carbonization and chemical activation	2015	MB	2251	
C
0 (MB) = 400 mg L−1	
272

25 °C
pH = 7
Coal gangue	Activation and calcination	2012.7	Cr(VI)	320.51	
C
0 (RhB) = 400 mg L−1	
273

RhB	3086.42	pH = 2 (Cr(VI))
pH = 4 (RhB)

Fomes fomentarius
	Carbonization and chemical activation	3352	Brilliant green	3166	pH = 9	
274


 	Fig. 14  (a) Effect of TCH initial concentration on the adsorption property of garlic skin-derived porous carbon and raw biomass. Adapted from ref. 275 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2020, (b) optimized geometry for the levofloxacin (NH+) cation absorbtion on the cattail powder-derived porous sheet surface. Adapted from ref. 276 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020 and (c) maximum absorption capacities of the superhydrophobic carbon aerogel towards different organic compounds based on Sisal and Premna microphylla leaves. Adapted from ref. 289 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019.	 

Tea and plane tree leaves	Carbonization, impregnation and activation	1151	Pramipexole dihydrochloride (PRM)	112	
C
0 (PRM) = 200 mg L−1	
290

1105	101	pH = 3
Soybean oil	Pyrolysis	365.27	Tetracycline (TC)	121.51	
C
0 (TC) = 20 mg L−1	
291

Waste lignin	Chemical activation	1305.5	Chloramphenicol (CAP)	534	
C
0 (CAP) = 120 mg L−1	
292

303 K
Palm kernel shells	HTC and physical activation	131	Diclofenac (DCF)	13.16	
C
0 (DCF) = 15 mg L−1	
293

25 °C
pH = 2

Lantana camara stem	Hydrothermal pre-carbonization, pyrolysis and chemical activation	677.7	Ibuprofen (IBP)	106.3	
C
0 (IBP) = 30 mg L−1	
294

273 K
Glucose	Molten salt-assisted carbonization	914	Diclofenac sodium (DFC)	250	
C
0 (DFC) = 50 mg L−1	
295

25.0 °C
pH = 5
Pharmaceutical sludge	Dry mixing chemical activation	756.35	TC	379.78	
C
0 (TC) = 200 mg L−1	
296

Impregnation method	814.36	361.84	25 °C
Kernel of Argania Spinosa fruit	Chemical activation	1618	Amoxicillin (AMX)	303.03	
C
0 (AMX) = 200 mg L−1	
297

pH = 6
Dates stem	Carbonization and activation	1704	Mebeverine hydrochloride	4105	pH = 5.8	
298

25 °C

Jacaranda mimosifolia seed pods	Chemical activation and pyrolysis	928	Ketoprofen	303.9	pH = 2	
299


 	Fig. 15  (a) Adsorption capacity of Toona sinensis leaves-derived porous carbon during prolonged time. Adapted from ref. 304 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020 and (b) (i) molecular dynamics adsorption of corn straw (CS)–FeCl3·ZnCl2-900C and sign(λ2)ρ vs. reduced density gradient (RDG) of phenol adsorption by CS-derived biochar (ii) C42H16⋯phenol, (iii) C42H14–OH–CHO⋯phenol and (iv) C42H15–OH⋯phenol. Adapted from ref. 307 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021.	 

Chitosan	HTC and chemical activation	2189.88	Phenol	254.45	298 K	
308

Bisphenol A	675.68
2,4-Dichlorophenol	892.86
Food waste	Pyrolysis and physical activation	745	Phenol	568	298 K	
309


Halodule uninervis waste	Chemical and thermal activation	1118.98	2,4-Dimethylphenol (DMP)	364	
C
0 (DMP/DCP) = 20 mg L−1	
310

2,4-Dichlorophenol (DCP)	333	pH = 5.76
24 °C
Sugarcane bagasse	Thermo-chemical activation and pyrolysis	1925	Phenol	185.2	pH = 6.3 (±0.2)	
311

25 (±1) °C
Fruit wastes from Ceiba speciosa	Chemical activation and pyrolysis	842	Phenol	156.7	298 K	
312

145	328 K
Chicken feathers	Carbonization and activation	1383.5	Bisphenol F	295.8	Pollutant aqueous solution = 110 mg L−1	
313

Bisphenol S	308.7	pH = 7.0 ± 0.1
298 ± 1 K
Sodium alginate	Chemical activation	1073.40	Bisphenol A	632.91	308 K	
314

Pine-fruit shell	HTC assisted chemical activation	2220	Bisphenol A	708	pH = 7	
315


 	Fig. 16  (a) (i) SEM image and (ii) curve fitting results and elemental analysis from XPS spectra for N-doped porous carbon. Adapted from ref. 316 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020, (b) molecular model and interaction between acetone and porous carbons. Adapted from ref. 321 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020 and (c) comparison of fungi residue and cotton seed husk-derived carbon and commercial carbon for (a) DCM and (b) CB adsorption. Adapted from ref. 322 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020.	 


Phanerochaete chrysosporium
	Pre-treatment and chemical activation	2202	Toluene	252	293 K	
327

Corn bran	Carbonization and activation	1896	Toluene	237	25.0 ± 0.5 °C	
328

Mango seed shells	HTC and chemical activation	2218	Acetone	472	30 °C	
329

363	50 °C
Tobacco stem	Chemical activation	1347	Acetone	312	298 K	
330

Coconut shell	Heating and chemical activation	2648	Benzene	1419	298 K	
331

Rape straw corn cob	HTC and chemical activation	1281	Naphthalene	592.97	298.15 K	
332

1069	Acenaphthene	480.27
Phenanthrene	692.27
Hickory wood chips and peanut shell	HTC and physical activation	1308	Acetone	121.74	20 °C	
333

Cyclohexane	39.42

 	Fig. 17  (a) CO2 adsorption of nanoporous activated biocarbon (NAB)800-3. Adapted from ref. 335 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021, (b) CO2 adsorption isotherms of (i) AC-5 and (ii) chemically activated carbon (CAC)-5 at 273 and 298 K fitted with different isotherm models. Adapted from ref. 336 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021 and (c) saturated sulfur and breakthrough sulfur capacity of samples prepared by different treatment approaches on waste PU foams. Adapted from ref. 338 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020.	 


Citrus aurantium waste leaves and spirulina	HTC and chemical/physical activation	937	CO2	8.43	273 K	
346

Tobacco stem	Carbonization and chemical activation	3839	Acetone	26.2	18 kPa and 25 °C	
347

CO2	29.5	30 bar and 25 °C
C2H2	7.19	1 bar and 25 °C
C3H8	12.02
CH4	1.26
Tobacco stalk	HTC and chemical activation	1498	CO2	7.35	0 °C	
348

4.83	25 °C
Cork waste	Carbonization and chemical activation	2010	CO2	7.82	0 °C	
349

4.27	25 °C
Poplar wood	HTC and chemical activation carbonization	2153	CO2	217 mg g−1	273 K and 1 bar	
350

Corncobs	Physical activation and chemical impregnation	755.35	SO2	156.22 mg g−1	393 K	
351


 	Fig. 18  (a) Graphical representation for preparation of Lentinus edodes-derived porous carbon and its photocatalytic performance. Adapted from ref. 354 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021, (b) photocatalytic degradation efficiency of (i) MB and (ii) MG as variation of C/C° with irradiation time for different PET-derived porous carbons, (c) UV-vis-diffused reflectance spectral (DRS) spectra of (i) bare BiOBr and (ii) AC-BiOBr composite catalyst. Adapted from ref. 363 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018, (d) schematic diagram showing chitin-derived carbon/g-C3N4 heterojunction for RhB photodegradation. Adapted from ref. 37 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020 and (e) photocatalytic H2 evolution of Cu NPs and porous graphene nanosheet (PGS)-2-Y using Plumeria rubra biomass. Adapted from ref. 369 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018.	 

BiOBr/wood flour	Pyrolysis	Visible-light	222.391	RhB	20	Complete removal; 90 min	—	
370

Cr(VI)	5
TiO2/plane tree fluff	Hard-templating	Ultra-visible-light	588.6	—	—	—	5.4	
371

Visible-light	0.09
Ag/jute stick	Chemical activation	Solar light	570.67	Malachite green oxalate	10	98; 90 min	—	
372

Clofibric acid	97; 80 min
Bi2WO6/bamboo leaves	Chemical activation	Visible-light	27.2093	TC	20	85.4; 90 min	—	
373

BiPO4/winter melon	Hydrothermal and vacuum freeze-drying	Visible-light	—	MB	10	93.51; 180 min	—	
374

TiO2/hazelnut shell	HTC	Visible-light	—	MB	10 ppm	96.97; 420 min	—	
375

TiO2/olive residue	83.30; 420 min
TiO2/date seeds	Sonication and pyrolysis	Visible-light	—	Cr(VI)	29.5 ppm	94.7%; 25 min	—	
376

SnS2/root of the Magnolia wulin	Carbonization	Visible-light	—	As(III)	7500 μg L−1	95.1%; 55 min	—	
377

ZnO/lignin	Template-assisted carbonization	Sunlight	827	Sulfamethazine	20	>95; 3 h	29.0 μmol h −1	
378

TiO2/lignin	HTC	Ultra-visible-light	—	Phenol	120 ppm	53 and 100; 1 h under UVA	—	
357

Visible-light	MB	10 ppm	17.6 and 57.8; 2 h under VS
Footnote
† Equal contribution.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
