Materials chemistry and engineering in metal halide perovskite lasers  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9CS00598F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9CS00598F
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 951-982Materials chemistry and engineering in metal halide perovskite lasers

        
          
            Haiyun 
            Dong
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chunhuan 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaolong 
            Liu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jiannian 
            Yao
          
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Yong Sheng 
            Zhao
          
          
        
      *ab
aKey Laboratory of Photochemistry, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China. E-mail: yszhao@iccas.ac.cn
bSchool of Chemical Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
Received 
      28th August 2019
    First published on 21st January 2020AbstractThe invention and development of the laser have revolutionized science, technology, and industry. Metal halide perovskites are an emerging class of semiconductors holding promising potential in further advancing the laser technology. In this Review, we provide a comprehensive overview of metal halide perovskite lasers from the viewpoint of materials chemistry and engineering. After an introduction to the materials chemistry and physics of metal halide perovskites, we present diverse optical cavities for perovskite lasers. We then comprehensively discuss various perovskite lasers with particular functionalities, including tunable lasers, multicolor lasers, continuous-wave lasers, single-mode lasers, subwavelength lasers, random lasers, polariton lasers, and laser arrays. Following this a description of the strategies for improving the stability and reducing the toxicity of metal halide perovskite lasers is provided. Finally, future research directions and challenges toward practical technology applications of perovskite lasers are provided to give an outlook on this emerging field.
Haiyun Dong
Haiyun Dong received his BS degree in applied chemistry from Northeast Forestry University in 2011 and PhD degree in materials chemistry from Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2017. His research interests are photonic and optoelectronic properties of organic and organic–inorganic hybrid nanomaterials.
Chunhuan Zhang
Chunhuan Zhang received her PhD degree in chemistry from the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICCAS) in 2017. She is currently a postdoctoral research fellow in Prof. Jiannian Yao's group at ICCAS. Her research interests are photonic and optoelectronic properties of organic nanomaterials.
Xiaolong Liu
Xiaolong Liu received his BS and MS degrees from Shandong University in 2013 and 2016, respectively. He is pursuing his PhD under the supervision of Prof. Yong Sheng Zhao at ICCAS. His research interests include optoelectronic properties and applications of crystalline organic–inorganic hybrid materials.
Jiannian Yao
Jiannian Yao received his PhD degree from Tokyo University in 1993. He is currently a professor of chemistry and materials science at the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences and serves as the president of Chinese Chemical Society. His research interests relate to photofunctional and optoelectronic materials.
Yong Sheng Zhao
Yong Sheng Zhao received his PhD degree in 2006 from ICCAS. After that, he joined the University of California at Los Angeles and Northwestern University as a postdoctoral fellow. In 2009, he returned to ICCAS as a Professor of Chemistry. His research interests are in the areas of molecular electronics and photonics, currently focusing on organic micro/nanoscale lasers towards applications in displays and sensing.
1. Introduction
Laser technology has become ubiquitous in every section of modern society, such as scientific research, manufacturing, communication, medicine, and so on.1 A laser is a strong coherent light source consisting of a gain medium, a pump source, and an optical cavity.2,3 The gain medium is a material capable of amplifying light through stimulated emission. The development and innovative use of optical gain materials play important roles in laser performance improvement and functionality extension, which contribute to both the growth of existing industries and the emergence of new industries.1 Hence, new optical gain materials have always been pursued with the expectation of triggering the next revolution in the laser and related fields.
Metal halide perovskites have rapidly emerged as an outstanding class of semiconductors for optoelectronics, such as photovoltaics,4–18 photodetectors,19–23 light-emitting diodes,4,24–32 and lasers,24,25,33–43 because they combine the facile fabrication with excellent optoelectronic properties. The low-temperature solution-processability makes metal halide perovskites promising materials for low-cost and large-area optoelectronic applications. The high carrier mobility and low trap state density facilitate both carrier extraction and injection, and therefore realization of high-efficiency optoelectronic devices. The metal halide perovskites gained worldwide attention initially because of their unprecedented success in photovoltaics. The power conversion efficiencies have increased up to 24% in just ten years after the first perovskite solar cell.44–53 Soon the metal halide perovskites were proven to be good light-emitting materials with direct bandgap and high luminescence efficiency. The external quantum efficiencies of perovskite light-emitting diodes have exceeded 20% over a four-year period of academic research.54–60
As direct-bandgap semiconductors, the metal halide perovskites are an excellent class of optical gain media for lasers. The high optical gain coefficients of metal halide perovskites are comparable to that of the industry reference materials, such as gallium arsenide.61 One of the most attractive features of metal halide perovskites as gain media is their widely tailorable bandgaps, supporting tunable lasing from visible to near-infrared spectral regions. Due to their excellent processability, the metal halide perovskites can not only be fabricated into diverse optical microcavities but can also be integrated with various commercial optical cavities to construct lasers. More importantly, the metal halide perovskites hold great promise for electrically pumped laser devices because of their high and balanced charge carrier mobility.62
As early as 1998, amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) was demonstrated in two-dimensional (2D) perovskite films,63 but didn’t receive much attention due to cryogenic operation. It was not until 2014 that Xing et al. reported the room-temperature ASE from three-dimensional (3D) organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite films,64 and since then extensive research has been directed towards exploring perovskite materials for laser applications. Soon after, the lasing action was realized by embedding mixed-halide perovskites between a dielectric mirror and a gold mirror.65 In the same year, the first perovskite nanolaser was achieved based on chemical-vapor-deposited hybrid perovskite nanoplatelets.66 In 2015, solution-phase grown perovskite micro/nanocrystal lasers were demonstrated.67,68 In 2016, the perovskite based distributed feedback (DFB) laser and distributed Bragg reflector (DBR) laser were reported.69,70 Since then, the field of metal halide perovskite lasers has been experiencing an explosive growth. Great progress has been made in improving the performances and expanding the capabilities of perovskite lasers through materials engineering. For example, replacement of methylammonium cations with formamidinium and cesium cations significantly increased the stability of perovskite lasers.71,72 Composition-graded perovskite nanowires gave rise to the tunable dual-color lasing.73 Coupled perovskite microdisk cavities supported single-mode lasing.74 The dynamical phase mixture of the perovskite enabled continuous-wave (c.w.) laser operation.75 This is a significant step towards electrically pumped lasers that is expected to unlock a wide range of laser applications in information technology, manufacturing and sensing.76
In this Review, we aim to provide a comprehensive overview of metal halide perovskite lasers from the viewpoint of materials chemistry and engineering. We start with an introduction to the materials chemistry and physics of metal halide perovskites in Section 2, including crystal structure, material fabrication and processing, and electronic band structure and photophysics. The lasing mechanism of the metal halide perovskites is discussed in detail. Following this is a presentation of diverse optical cavities for perovskite lasers in Section 3, including intrinsic and extrinsic cavities. The growth mechanism of perovskite microcrystals is revealed based on a kinetically controlled crystal growth model. We then comprehensively discuss various perovskite lasers with particular functionalities in Section 4, that is, tunable lasers, multicolor lasers, continuous-wave lasers, single-mode lasers, subwavelength lasers, random lasers, polariton lasers, and laser arrays. Special emphasis is put on the laser function/performance-oriented composition and structure engineering of metal halide perovskites. In Section 5, we describe the strategies for improving the stability and reducing the toxicity of metal halide perovskite lasers. Finally, we give the conclusion as well as the prospect of future research directions in this promising field.
2. Material chemistry and physics
2.1. Crystal structure
Metal halide perovskites are a class of crystalline semiconducting materials with the general chemical structure of ABX3 (Fig. 1A and B), where A is a monovalent cation (typically CH3NH3+ (MA+), NH2CHNH2+ (FA+) or Cs+), B is a divalent metal cation (typically Pb2+ or Sn2+), and X is a halide anion (Cl−, Br−, I−).77–79 According to the A-site cation, the metal halide perovskites can be divided into two types, organic–inorganic hybrid and all-inorganic perovskites. The perovskite crystal structure is characterized by a three-dimensional (3D) network of corner- sharing [BX6]4− octahedra, where the [BX6]4− octahedron is formed through the six-coordination of the divalent metal cation with the halide anion, and the cuboctahedral void surrounded by eight octahedra is occupied by the monovalent cation. The perovskite usually adopts a high-symmetry cubic or tetragonal crystal structure at high temperature, while it may convert into a low-symmetry tetragonal or orthorhombic phase by the distortion of the [BX6]4− octahedra at low temperature.80,81
 Fig. 1  Perovskite crystal structure. (A and B) Schematic diagram of the perovskite unit cell and crystal packing. (C) Illustration of 2D RP perovskites with different numbers of perovskite layers (n). 
2D Ruddlesden–Popper (RP) perovskites are formed when the small monovalent cations are replaced partially or completely by large monovalent or divalent organic ammonium cations (Fig. 1C).14,82–89 The 2D metal halide perovskite has the chemical structure of (LA)m(A)n−1BnX3n+1, where LA is the large ammonium cation, m = 2 for monovalent LA or m = 1 for divalent LA, and n is an integer. The crystal structure consists of 2D sheets of corner-sharing [BX6]4− octahedra separated by the large LA cation layers. The 2D perovskite with alternating double layers naturally forms a multiple-quantum-well structure.
2.2. Material fabrication and processing
In general, the metal halide perovskites are synthesized through a simple chemical reaction between the organic ammonium/cesium halide and lead/tin halide: AX + BX2 → ABX3(2.1)This reaction can be conducted not only in gas-, liquid- and solid-phases but also at liquid–solid and gas–solid interfaces. The low-temperature solution-processing is certainly the most attractive fabrication technique of metal halide perovskites because of its great potential in scalable and commercial optoelectronic applications. Such versatile fabrication makes it possible to obtain desired perovskite materials for researchers in almost all fields, including physics, chemistry, and materials science.
The metal halide perovskites usually exist in two types of morphologies, crystalline films and single crystals. The fabrication methods of perovskite films include spin-coating, blade-coating, spray-coating, vacuum thermal evaporation, atomic layer deposition, pulsed laser deposition, and so on (Fig. 2A).17,18,90 Considering that many reviews have covered the fabrication of perovskite films, we won’t go into the details of all these methods. Nevertheless, it is necessary to give a brief introduction to the spin-coating technique of metal halide perovskites, which is the simplest and most commonly used method for fabricating perovskite films for laser applications. The spin-coating of perovskites is usually accompanied by an antisolvent dripping and a thermal annealing process. The dripping of antisolvent accelerates nucleation through inducing supersaturation of the precursor solution.91 The high nucleation density yields flat and uniform perovskite films. The thermal annealing removes residual solvent, assists in perovskite nucleation and growth, and coarsens the grains.
 Fig. 2  Fabrication and processing of metal halide perovskites. (A) Schematic diagrams of fabrication techniques of perovskite films: (i) spin-coating, (ii) spray-coating, (iii) inkjet-printing, (iv) blade-coating, and (v) vapor-phase deposition. (B) Schematic of synthesis methods of perovskite micro/nanocrystals: (i) liquid-phase assembly and (ii) chemical vapor deposition. (C) Illustration of reprocessing techniques of perovskites: (i) ion exchange, (ii) imprinting, and (ii) lithography. 
For laser applications, the metal halide perovskite crystals can be classified into three categories according to crystal size: bulk crystals, microcrystals (three dimensions larger than λ/2n), and nanocrystals (at least one dimension less than λ/2n). The difference between microcrystals and nanocrystals is that the microcrystals can support optical modes, while the nanocrystals with dimensions below the diffraction limit cannot. Thus, the perovskite microcrystals naturally constitute optical microcavities with well-defined crystal surfaces serving as reflecting mirrors. The nanocrystals need to be incorporated into external cavities to achieve lasing oscillations. The bulk crystals are not utilized directly for laser applications because intense multimode competition and high self-absorption loss originating from the overlarge optical cavity structures are detrimental for laser generation. For the syntheses of bulk crystals and nanocrystals, we refer the interested readers to several recent reviews.92–97 Here, we focus our discussion on the syntheses of microcrystals of metal halide perovskites.
The metal halide perovskite microcrystals can be synthesized in gas and liquid phases, and at gas– and liquid–solid interfaces. The liquid-phase method denotes the self-assembly of metal halide perovskites in solution (Fig. 2Bi).68 The driving force of self-assembly is supersaturation induced by solvent evaporation or antisolvent introduction. In the solution with increasing supersaturation, the organic ammonium/cesium halide rapidly intercalates into the lead halide, resulting in the direct formation of perovskites. The liquid–solid interface approach involves a solution-phase recrystallization growth process.98,99 When the lead halide/acetate film is dipped into the solution of organic ammonium/cesium halide, the lead halide/acetate first reacts with the halide anion to produce a soluble intermediate at the liquid–solid interface. The intermediate further reacts with the ammonium/cesium cation to generate the insoluble perovskite. PbY2(s) + 4X−(l) → [PbX4]2−(l) + 2Y−(l)(2.2) [PbX4]2−(l) + A+(l) → APbX3(s) + X−(l)(2.3)where Y is the halide or acetate anion, and s and l stand for the solid and liquid phases, respectively. The slow generation and release of the [PbI4]2− precursor helps to maintain a low supersaturation condition and produce high-quality perovskite microcrystals.
The gas-phase method denotes the chemical vapor deposition (CVD) process (Fig. 2Bii).100–103 Unlike traditional semiconductors requiring ultrahigh growth temperature, the metal halide perovskites with lower melting points can be synthesized through a relatively low-temperature CVD method. The vapor-phase grown metal halide perovskites have superior crystalline quality and lower defect densities than those grown by solution methods. However, the direct vapor-phase growth of organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites is challenging because thermal decomposition occurs before evaporation. Fortunately, the ion migration behavior enables a two-step vapor-phase method for synthesizing hybrid perovskites.66,104 The lead halide microcrystals are first prepared through a physical vapor deposition method, and then exposed to gaseous methylammonium halide. The intercalation and diffusion of methylammonium halide into the lead halide microcrystals result in the formation of organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite microcrystals. The fast ion migration behavior ensures the complete conversion of lead halide into hybrid perovskite microcrystals.
The metal halide perovskites possess soft lattices, providing a possibility of designing and controlling the material composition and structure through reprocessing the as-prepared perovskites. For example, the halide anion exhibits high mobility in the relatively stable cationic sublattice of perovskites (Fig. 2Ci). Therefore, the existing halide anions in perovskites can be partially or completely replaced by another type of halides through ion-exchange reactions in vapor, liquid and solid phases.72,105–110 ABX3 + yX′− → ABX3−yX′y + yX−(2.4)Such composition control leads to bandgap and luminescence tunability of metal halide perovskites. Besides the chemically tailorable composition, the as-prepared metal halide perovskites can be reprocessed into specific structures through the microfabrication technology. For instance, the distributed feedback structure can be patterned onto the perovskite film directly by using a nanoimprint technique because of the soft nature of perovskites (Fig. 2Cii).111 In addition, both the perovskite films and crystals can be processed into nearly any shape through top-down techniques, such as typical electron beam lithography and direct laser ablation (Fig. 2Ciii).112,113
2.3. Electronic structure and photophysics

2.3.1. Electronic band structure. 
Electronic band structure not only rationalizes the unique photonic and optoelectronic properties of perovskites, including carrier recombination, mobility, and lifetime, but also guides the design of novel perovskite materials and devices. To provide an insight into the electronic band structure of metal halide perovskites, we begin our discussion by introducing the bonding mechanism of the zero-dimensional (0D) [BX6]4− octahedron, as its electronic character will be largely retained in the ABX3. For [PbI6]4−, the Pb 6s–I 5p σ-antibonding orbital is the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO), while Pb 6p–I 5p π-antibonding and Pb 6p–I 5s σ-antibonding orbitals constitute the lowest unoccupied molecular orbitals (LUMOs), as shown in Fig. 3A.114 A large number of HOMOs and LUMOs form the valence band maximum (VBM) and conductance valence minimum (CBM), respectively. Fig. 3B shows the electronic band structure of cubic-phase MAPbI3 calculated with the many-body perturbation theory in the GW approximation.115 The VBM consists of 70% I 5p and 25% Pb 6s orbits, while the CBM consists of almost entirely the Pb 6p orbit. The elemental contributions to each band can be demonstrated more clearly by projecting the total density of states of MAPbI3 into lead, iodine, carbon, nitrogen, and hydrogen atoms (Fig. 3C).116 The [PbI6]4− octahedron gives rise to the CBM and VBM, whereas CH3NH3+ contributes little to the frontier orbits.
 Fig. 3  Electronic structure of metal halide perovskites. (A) Bonding diagram of the 0D [BX6]4− cluster. (B) Electronic band structure of MAPbI3 calculated using the QSGW formalism. Orbital contributions are indicated by I 5p (green), Pb 6p (red), and Pb 6s (blue). (C) Density of states (DOS) of tetragonal MAPbI3 calculated with semilocal density functional theory (DFT). (A) Reprinted with permission from ref. 114. Copyright 2003 American Physical Society. (B) Reprinted with permission from ref. 115. Copyright 2014 American Physical Society. (C) Reprinted with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The band structure indicates that the bandgap of MAPbI3 perovskite is direct, but shifted slightly away from the R point owing to the spin–orbit coupling. The direct bandgap is a key ingredient for efficient luminescence and high optical gain. The measured value of the optical gain in MAPbI3 perovskites is as high as 3200,61 which is comparable to that of the industry reference materials, such as single-crystal gallium arsenide. Such high optical gain facilitates the low-threshold lasing in metal halide perovskites.
Because the electronic band structure is mostly composed of frontier orbits of divalent metal and halide ions, the bandgap (Eg) of perovskites is essentially controlled by the divalent metal and halide ions. With the X-site halogen changing from chlorine to iodine, the VBM of perovskites moves upwards with the halide p orbits, while the CBM shows little variation. As a result, the bandgap of the metal halide perovskite follows the trend of EgCl > EgBr > EgI. The emission wavelength of MAPbX3 can be continuously tailored from 390 to 790 nm through the halide anion mixing strategy.64 When substituting lead with tin at the B-site, the CBM of perovskites decreases with the divalent metal p orbit more significantly than the VBM with the divalent metal s orbit. Therefore, the tin perovskite or tin–lead mixed perovskites have narrower bandgap than the lead perovskite. The emission wavelength of mixed-halide tin perovskites ranges from 700 to 950 nm.117
The atom-projected density of states shows that the electronic contributions of the A-site cation locate several electronvolts below the VBM, indicating that the A-site cation doesn’t directly dictate the optoelectronic and photonic properties of metal halide perovskites. Accordingly, the homologous perovskites with different A-site cations usually exhibit very similar luminescence properties.118 The A-site component principally serves as a counterion for charge balance and structure stability of perovskites. The A-site cation can indirectly affect the electronic structure of perovskites through interacting with the [PbI6]4− octahedron, which ultimately expands and contracts the perovskite lattice. With the decrease of the A-site cation radius, the perovskite lattice contracts, leading to an increase of the bandgap. Nevertheless, the bandgap variation caused by the A-site cation is much less compared with the B-site metal cation and the X-site halide anion.


2.3.2. Photophysical process. 
A detailed understanding of the outstanding optoelectronic and photonic properties exhibited by metal halide perovskites comes from a meaningful analysis of the dynamics of photoexcited states, including carrier generation, thermalization, cooling, scattering and recombination.119–123 Here, we mainly discuss the recombination mechanism of photoexcited states, which directly determines the perovskite laser performances. Generally speaking, metal halide perovskites show modest exciton binding energies, 50–120, 20–100, and 2–80 meV for ABCl3, ABBr3, and ABI3, respectively.123 The large variation in experimentally determined values of exciton binding energies for each kind of perovskites results from the differences in material quality and measurement methods and inaccurate assumptions in theoretical models and calculations. Today, values in the lower range are more accepted. The modest exciton binding energies indicate that the excitons and free charge carriers coexist in perovskites at room temperature. Under thermodynamic equilibrium, the population distribution between excitons and free carriers is determined by the Saha–Langmuir equation:124–126 (2.5)where Φfc is the fraction of free carriers, n is the total excitation density, h is the Planck constant, mr is the reduced exciton mass, and EB is the exciton binding energy. Fig. 4A plots the calculated free charge fraction over the total excitation density at room temperature for different exciton binding energies.127 At low excitation densities, almost all photoexcited states are free electrons and holes, which rationalizes the efficient charge carrier extraction for photovoltaics (n ≤ 1015 cm−3). With the increase of excitation density, the exciton fraction increases at the expense of free charge carriers. However, the Saha–Langmuir equation becomes invalid at high carrier densities due to many-body effects. The semiconductors undergo a Mott transition from the exciton to free carrier regime at high excitation densities because the attractive force between an electron and hole is mitigated by the Coulomb Screening of other charge carriers.128 The Mott transition occurs at a critical carrier density (ncrit), usually referred to as the Mott density.
 Fig. 4  Photophysics in metal halide perovskites. (A) Free charge fraction over the total excitation density at room temperature for different exciton binding energies calculated through the Saha–Langmuir equation, with mr = 0.1 m0. (B) Time-resolved lasing spectrum of CsPbBr3 nanowires. (C) Schematic of stimulated emission from electron–hole plasma coupled with plasmon emission. (D) Cartoon of polaron formation through the interaction of the electron/hole with the lead-halide lattice. (A) Reprinted with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (B and C) Reprinted with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2014 Springer Nature. (D) Reprinted with permission from ref. 164. Copyright 2014 John Wiley and Sons. 
The reported Mott densities of perovskites exhibited a large variation as well,129 which is caused by incorrect Mott density equations. The equation derivation errors mainly arise from the confusion between two different systems of units (International System of Units (SI) and Gaussian units) and the confusion between charge carrier and electron–hole pair densities. Here, we provide a derivation of the Mott density equation in both SI and Gaussian units. The critical carrier density can be estimated through the Mott criterion130 aBlD−1 = 1.19(2.6)where aB is the exciton Bohr radius and lD is the Debye screening length of semiconductors. According to the Wannier–Mott hydrogenic model, the exciton Bohr radius,127,131–133 exciton binding energy,30,119,127,131–134 and Debye screening length131,132,135–139 are given by (2.7) (2.8) (2.9)where ℏ is the reduced Planck constant, ε is the relative dielectric constant, ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, mr is the reduced mass of the electron and hole, e is the elementary charge, kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature, and n is the charge carrier concentration. Noteworthily, the equations with and without the (4πε0) correspond to SI and Gaussian units, respectively. In both systems of units, the same Mott density equation can be obtained as follows: (2.10)
The Mott density of MAPbI3 is estimated to be ∼4 × 1017 cm−3.127,140 As shown in Fig. 4A, the free carriers dominate in MAPbI3 even below the Mott density due to small exciton binding energy (only a few millielectronvolts). Thus, we can argue that the lasing originates from bimolecular electron–hole recombination from a theoretical point of view, although the exact lasing mechanism needs further experimental investigations. The situation becomes complicated for CsPbBr3, for which the Mott density is ∼2 × 1017 cm−3.99,100 The reported threshold carrier densities of CsPbBr3 lasers just locate in the vicinity of the Mott density ranging from 0.7 × 1017 to 6 × 1017 cm−3,99,100,129,141 where the excitons and free carriers share similar population as a result of a modest exciton binding energy. It is difficult to attribute the lasing to a certain recombination mechanism according to the population distribution between the exciton and free carrier. Note that a blue-shift of the lasing modes with excitation density is ubiquitous in perovskite lasers.72,99–101,105,142 The mode blue-shift is a typical characteristic of lasing in the electron–hole plasma regime. Therefore, the electron–hole plasma recombination is more likely to be responsible for the stimulated emission in metal halide perovskites.
Very recently, Schlaus et al. provided a clear picture of the lasing mechanism in CsPbBr3 nanowires.141 The laser dynamics in CsPbBr3 nanowires was probed using ultrafast spectroscopy (Fig. 4B). Upon excitation, a short-lived broad lasing spectrum emerges first, which can be attributed to hot carrier recombination. Then spectral narrowing and bathochromic-shift occur owing to the hot carrier cooling process. As the carrier density decreases significantly, the optical gain profile blue-shifts towards the peak energy of spontaneous emission. This signifies that the stimulated emission of electron–hole plasma involves the emission of a plasmon quanta. The plasmon quanta is a collective oscillation of electron–hole plasma with frequency proportional to the square root of carrier density. In a word, the lasing in CsPbBr3 nanowires originates from the stimulated emission of electron–hole plasma coupled with plasmon emission (Fig. 4C).
With larger exciton binding energies, the chloride perovskites probably support excitonic lasing, but this remains to be verified experimentally. The low-dimensional perovskite materials, such as perovskite quantum dots (QDs) and 2D RP perovskites, have large exciton binding energies due to the quantum confinement.94 Size-dependent bandgaps manifested the quantum confinement effect in perovskite nanocrystals.143–146 The lasing actions have been reported in many kinds of perovskite nanocrystal films.109,147–149 Different gain mechanisms were put forward to account for the lasing actions in perovskite nanocrystals, including exciton, biexciton and trion gains.150–157 Note that so far the lasing actions are mainly realized in perovskite nanocrystals with weak quantum confinement, which would not significantly increase the binding energies of the exciton, biexciton and trion. The exact lasing mechanism in perovskite nanocrystal films remains open to question. The 2D RP perovskites have multiple quantum well structures, exhibiting obvious perovskite layer number-dependent exciton absorption and emission. In such RP perovskites, the excitonic lasing has been demonstrated unambiguously.158–162
The charge carriers in metal halide perovskites exist as large polarons.163 A polaron is a quasiparticle consisting of an electron or hole dressed by its self-induced lattice polarization in polar semiconductors, as illustrated in Fig. 4D.164 There are two types of polarons, i.e. small and large polarons, formed through two fundamental interaction potentials, i.e. long-range Coulomb potential and short-range deformation potential, respectively.165 The polarons in metal halide perovskites were proved as large polarons formed predominantly from the deformation of lead halide sublattice [PbX6]4− frameworks.166 A direct consequence of large polaron formation is the efficient screening of the Coulomb potential. All events requiring the Coulomb potential, such as scattering of a charge carrier with charged defects or other charge carriers, are inhibited. Accordingly, the trap-assisted nonradiative recombination and many-body Auger recombination are suppressed effectively in metal halide perovskites. The protection of charge carriers as large polarons results in the excellent optoelectronic and photonic properties of metal halide perovskites, such as ambipolar carrier transport and high-efficiency luminescence.

3. Optical cavities
An optical cavity (or resonator) is required to provide optical feedback for laser oscillation. There are mainly two kinds of optical microcavities for metal halide perovskite lasers, intrinsic and extrinsic cavities. The intrinsic cavity is composed of the gain medium itself with a particular structure capable of providing the optical feedback. The extrinsic cavity denotes an additional geometry that induces the optical feedback. The intrinsic optical cavities for perovskite lasers can be further divided into two categories, self-organized and processed ones. The self-organized intrinsic cavity denotes the naturally formed optical feedback structure from the gain medium. The processed intrinsic cavity corresponds to the externally induced optical feedback structure on the gain medium.
3.1. Intrinsic optical cavities

3.1.1. Self-organized intrinsic cavities. 
Metal halide perovskites are a typical class of crystalline semiconductors. Any crystalline material has a tendency to spontaneously form a convex polyhedron in the crystallization process. It is well-known that the appropriate crystals can function as optical cavities with crystal surfaces as reflecting mirrors. Fig. 5A presents several typical kinds of metal halide perovskite micro/nanocrystals, including one-dimensional (1D) nanowires,102 2D triangular, tetragonal, hexagonal, and octagonal microdisks,66,68,167 and 3D microspheres,168 synthesized through bottom-up methods, including liquid-phase assembly and vapor-phase growth. The single-crystal perovskite microresonators possess both large optical gains and high quality (Q) factors due to their low trap state densities and atomically flat surfaces. The perovskite nanowire crystals usually constitute Fabry–Pérot (F–P) cavities with two end-facets as mirrors, while other perovskite crystals constitute whispering–gallery–mode (WGM) cavities with crystal lateral surfaces as mirrors. Noteworthily, under special conditions, especially when using focused laser excitation, the perovskite microwires with rectangular cross section can support WGM lasing with four lateral facets as mirrors,169–171 and likewise the rectangular perovskite microplates can support F–P lasing with two parallel lateral faces as mirrors.172 The F–P cavities exhibit efficiently directional output, which is beneficial for on-chip photonic integrations, but suffers from relatively low Q factors. The WGM cavities possess high Q factors, and therefore support low-threshold lasing and ultrasensitive sensing, but are subjected to the limitation of isotropic output.173,174
 Fig. 5  Self-organized intrinsic cavities of metal halide perovskites. (A) Perovskite crystals with different morphologies, including 1D (i) nanowires, 2D (ii) triangular, (iii) tetragonal, (iv) hexagonal, and (v) octagonal microdisks, and 3D (vi) microspheres. (B) Optical trajectories and (C) simulated field distributions in wire, triangular, tetragonal, hexagonal, octagonal, and circular perovskite cavities. (Ai) Reprinted with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (Aii and iv) Reprinted with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (Aiii) Reprinted with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2015 John Wiley and Sons. (Av) Reprinted with permission from ref. 167. Copyright 2016 John Wiley and Sons. (Avi) Reprinted with permission from ref. 168. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
In the early stage, the researchers encountered a problem in the growth processes of perovskite microcrystals in that the nanowires and tetragonal microdisks always grew concurrently. Zhang et al. proposed a surfactant assisted liquid-phase self-assembly strategy to grow MAPbBr3 nanowires and square microplates separately.175 Two different organic ammonium compounds, octadecylammonium bromide (OTDB) and dodecylammonium bromide (DODB), were synthesized as surfactants to modulate the kinetic growth process of MAPbBr3. The OTDB and DODB surfactants selectively bind to and impede the growth of (110) and (001) crystal facets, respectively. Consequently, the MAPbBr3 crystals evolve into nanowires and microplates, respectively. In the same year, Zhou et al. reported the controllable fabrication of CsPbBr3 nanorods and microplates via a CVD method.102 The cubic-phase microplates were formed at high growth temperature, while monoclinic-phase nanorods were formed at low growth temperature.
Although many approaches have been developed to synthesize various perovskite microcrystals, there is still a lack of understanding on the microcrystal growth mechanism, especially the microcrystal growth kinetics of metal halide perovskites. Here, we attempt to elucidate the growth mechanism of perovskite microcrystals to some extent based on a kinetically controlled crystal growth model. All metal halide perovskites with different compositions and crystal phases share very similar crystal structures. Similar crystal growth mechanisms are expected for diverse perovskites. We selected the most widely studied cubic-phase CsPbBr3 as the research model. Fig. 7 displays the theoretical morphology of the CsPbBr3 crystal calculated based on the Bravais–Friedel–Donnay–Harker method.176 Very similar theoretical morphologies can be obtained for almost all metal halide perovskites. According to the theoretical prediction, the perovskites tend to grow into cubic structures with six identical {100} crystal faces dominating the crystal morphology. On the one hand, such cubic structure is the growth morphology of perovskite crystal because the six identical {100} crystal faces have the same growth velocity. On the other hand, this regular hexahedron is also the equilibrium morphology of perovskite crystal because it has the smallest surface free energy per unit volume compared with other convex polyhedra, such as nanowires and microplates. This was proven experimentally by the structural transformation of CsPbBr3 crystals from 1D nanowires with high surface energy to 3D hexahedra with low surface energy.99
In practice, the ideal 3D cubic equilibrium shape is rarely achieved. The crystal growth is a kinetic process which is highly dependent on the growth environment.177 Influenced by solvent, impurity, substrate, and even environment fluctuation, the crystals are prone to deviate from the equilibrium morphology. The achievement of ideal equilibrium morphology requires that the crystal has an infinite self-adjusting ability to the morphology deviation. It means that the crystal can adjust its shape back to equilibrium morphology through addition or removal of an infinite amount of components,176 which is difficult to be achieved in practical experiments. Therefore, the large-scale preparation of cubic perovskite microcrystals is challenging. The most common morphologies of perovskite microcrystals are irregular hexahedra, such as nanowires and microplates. For the same reason, the ideal 2D square morphology and the ideal 1D wire morphology with square cross section are rarely obtained as well. In general, without a strong external intervention, perovskite microcrystal products are usually a mixture of different structures, including 1D nanowires, 2D microplates, and 3D microhexahedra due to the random environment fluctuations.
Through a comprehensive analysis of a large number of experimental results, we found that there are certain rules underlying the perovskite microcrystal growth. The perovskite microcrystal products are dominated by 2D microplates for the liquid-phase self-assembly,68,74,178,179 1D nanowires for the liquid–solid interface growth,71,72,98,99,180,181 and 2D microplates and 1D nanowires for relatively high- and low temperature CVD.102 Various perovskite microcrystal morphologies arise from the growth inhibition of particular crystal faces. As shown in Fig. 7, the perovskite microcrystal growth can be divided into eight kinds: growth inhibition of (1) zero crystal face; (2) one crystal face; (3) two opposite crystal faces; (4) two adjacent crystal faces; (5) three adjacent crystal faces surrounding one vertex; (6) four lateral crystal faces; (7) four adjacent crystal faces surrounding one edge; (8) five crystal faces. The consequent morphology is (1) and (5) 3D hexahedron; (2), (3), and (7) 2D plate; (4) 1D wire with triangular cross section; and (6) and (8) 1D wire with rectangular cross section.
In the liquid-phase self-assembly process, the perovskite nucleates and grows on the substrate with one crystal face parallel to the substrate.68,74,178,179 With one crystal face protected by the substrate, the growth along other five crystal faces generates dominant perovskite microplates. As an extreme case of the 2D microplate, namely, the microplate with a large length/width ratio, a relatively small number of nanowires are bound to emerge in this situation. In the surfactant assisted self-assembly process, the rod-like OTDB micelles selectively inhibit the growth of four {110} crystal faces, while the laminar DODB micelles selectively inhibit the growth of (001) and (00−1) crystal faces.175 As a result, the MAPbBr3 crystals evolve into nanowires and microplates, respectively. Because of the strong growth control induced by the surfactants, the as-prepared nanowires and microplates are very close to the ideal 1D wire and 2D plate morphologies, respectively (Fig. 5B and C).
In the CVD process, the perovskite crystals grow with (100) and (011) crystal faces parallel to the substrate at relatively high and low growth temperatures, respectively,102 even though the mechanism is still unclear. At high growth temperature, perovskite microplates are formed due to the growth inhibition of the (100) crystal face (Fig. 6E). At low growth temperature, the direct contact of the (011) crystal face with the substrate suppresses the growth of both (010) and (001) faces, leading to the formation of nanowires with triangular cross section (Fig. 6F).
 Fig. 6  Controllable syntheses of perovskite microcrystals with particular morphologies. (A) Schematic illustration showing the surfactant assisted self-assembly mechanism of MAPbBr3 microcrystals. (B and C) Photoluminescence (PL) images of MAPbBr3 nanowires and square microplates. Insets: Corresponding bright-field optical images. (D) Schematic diagram of the experimental set-up used for the CVD growth of CsPbBr3 microcrystals. (E and F) Scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of CsPbBr3 microplates and nanorods. (A–C) Reprinted with permission from ref. 175. Copyright 2016 John Wiley and Sons. (D–F) Reprinted with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 7  Crystal growth kinetics of metal halide perovskites. The central panel is a simulated crystal morphology of the cubic-phase CsPbBr3 perovskite based on the Bravais–Friedel–Donnay–Harker method. The dark arrows denote the growth faces. The surrounding panels exhibit four kinds of theoretically predicted crystal morphologies. 
In the liquid–solid interface growth process, a dense polycrystalline perovskite thin film is first formed on the surface of the lead halide/acetate film.71,72,98,99,180,181 This polycrystalline perovskite film serves as a seed to initiate the crystal growth. The growth of all faces of the perovskite crystallites within and below the plane of the polycrystalline film is inhibited spatially. The perovskite crystals can only grow upwards along the exposed faces of seed crystallites. In the polycrystalline film, there are three kinds of seed crystallites with one, two and three faces exposed. The exposure of one crystal face supports only 1D wire growth, while the exposure of two adjacent crystal faces supports both 1D wire and 2D plate growth, and the exposure of three adjacent crystal faces surrounding one vertex supports all 1D wire, 2D plate, and 3D hexahedron growth. Such a growth mechanism is well consistent with the experimental results that the 1D nanowires dominate the perovskite microcrystal products and that all perovskite microcrystals are free-standing with one crystal face, edge, and vertex in contact with the polycrystalline film or substrate for nanowires, microplates, and microhexahedra, respectively.


3.1.2. Processed intrinsic cavities. 
The metal halide perovskites can be readily processed into cavity geometries through microfabrication technology owing to their structural softness. Fig. 8 displays various microfabricated perovskite cavities, including microdisk and microring WGM cavities and 1D and 3D photonic crystal (distributed feedback, DFB) cavities. The perovskite microfabrication techniques mainly include lithography and molding. These microfabrication techniques exhibit high controllability and reproducibility in the preparation of perovskite cavities. The top-down lithography is a standard process in the fields of microelectronics and on-chip photonics. Hence, it is of crucial importance to develop top-down lithography techniques for fabricating perovskite lasers towards practical applications. Zhang et al. reported a strategy to process the lamellar single crystals of hybrid perovskites into high-Q microdisk cavities through electron beam lithography and inductively coupled plasma etching (Fig. 8A and B).112 With the same fabrication conditions and parameters, the obtained perovskite microdisks exhibit almost the same lasing characteristics. Besides the high reproducibility, this top-down lithography in principle can be utilized to fabricate various microdisk cavities with different morphologies. For example, a deformed perovskite microdisk cavity was fabricated, which exhibited directional laser output. Very recently, a laser ablation approach was developed to fabricate perovskite microdisk cavities from hybrid perovskite films (Fig. 8C and D).113 An optical vortex laser beam with a donut-shaped lateral intensity profile was designed as the light source. Under the irradiation of the optical vortex laser beam, a perovskite microdisk cavity forms after a ring of hybrid perovskites is being ablated completely.
 Fig. 8  Processed intrinsic cavities of metal halide perovskites. (A) SEM image of a lamellar MAPbBr3 single crystal. (B) SEM image of an etched MAPbBr3 microdisk. (C) Schematic illustration showing the fabrication of perovskite microdisks through laser ablation with a donut-shaped femtosecond laser beam. (D) False-color SEM image of the laser imprinted MAPbI3 microdisks. (E) Schematic diagram of template-induced solution growth of perovskite microring cavities. (F and G) PL and SEM images of RP perovskite microrings. (H) Schematic of patterning DFB grating onto the perovskite film through nanoimprint lithography. (I) Simulated TE0 mode profile in the nanoimprinted DFB cavity. (J) SEM images of the nanoimprinted MAPbI3 DFB cavity. (K) Cartoon showing the preparation route for 3D perovskite photonic crystals. (L) SEM image of the MAPbBr3 photonic crystal cavity. Inset: SEM image of the artificial opal template of polystyrene. (A and B) Reprinted with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2017 John Wiley and Sons. (C and D) Reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (E–G) Reprinted with permission from ref. 159. Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons. (H–J) Reprinted with permission from ref. 184. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (K) Reprinted with permission from ref. 186. Copyright 2015 John Wiley and Sons. (L) Reprinted with permission from ref. 187. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
With structural softness, the metal halide perovskites are compatible with the imprinting and molding techniques. Wang et al. first applied the nanoimprint lithography to directly pattern highly ordered nanostructures onto the hybrid perovskites.111 Afterwards, the perovskite DFB cavities were successfully fabricated by using the nanoimprint lithography (Fig. 8H–J).182–185 Interestingly, the imprinted perovskite film has better morphology with larger grain size and higher flatness. As a result, the imprinted perovskite film exhibits improved luminescence properties. Molding is a very facile process to shape pliable materials. As early as 2015, Chen et al. reported a molding method to prepare 3D photonic crystals of perovskites in the form of inverse opals using artificial colloidal crystals as templates (Fig. 8K).186 Such perovskite photonic crystals can function as DFB cavities providing optical feedback for laser oscillation (Fig. 8L).187 Recently, a soft template assisted bottom-up technique was developed to fabricate RP perovskite microring cavities (Fig. 8E–G).159,160 A polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) template with microring shaped grooves is pressed on the top of perovskite precursor solution on a substrate. The spatial confinement induces the formation of RP perovskite microring cavities.

3.2. Extrinsic optical cavities
The extrinsic optical cavities for metal halide perovskite lasers mainly include microsphere and capillary cavities, DFB cavity, and distributed Bragg reflector (DBR) cavity, as shown in Fig. 9 and 10. The metal halide perovskites as gain media can be integrated with the extrinsic cavities through various techniques, such as drop-casting, spin-coating, inkjet-print, vacuum thermal evaporation, and atomic layer deposition.65,69,70,75,117,150,151,153,154,156,185,188–197 The silica microspheres and capillaries can function as WGM optical microcavities (Fig. 9).150,188 One of the most attractive advantages of microsphere and capillary cavities is the low-cost commercial availability. They provide an ideal platform for demonstrating the lasing action of a certain gain medium. Both perovskite and perovskite nanocrystal films coated on the microspheres and capillaries show low-threshold lasing action.150,151,153,188
 Fig. 9  Extrinsic optical microcavities for metal halide perovskite lasers. (A and B) Side-view and cross-section SEM image of a microsphere cavity coated with MAPbI3. (C and D) Schematic diagrams of perovskite-coated microsphere and capillary cavities with circular WGM laser resonances. (A–C) Reprinted with permission from ref. 188. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (D) Reprinted with permission from ref. 150. Copyright 2015 John Wiley and Sons. 
 Fig. 10  Extrinsic DFB and DBR cavities for metal halide perovskite lasers. (A) Schematic diagram of a generic DFB cavity. (B) SEM image of a 1D DFB cavity engraved onto a fused quartz substrate. Inset: Cross-sectional image of the FAPbX3 perovskite-coated 1D DFB device. (C) Photograph of the far-field beam pattern of the 1D second-order DFB lasers. (D) SEM of a 2D DFB cavity patterned on a quartz substrate. Inset: Cross-sectional image of the MAPbI3 perovskite-coated 2D DFB device. (E) Far-field beam pattern of the 2D DFB lasers. (F) Schematic fabrication of perovskite DBR lasers. The three panels show a DBR, a perovskite-coated DBR, and a perovskite DBR laser, respectively. (G) Cross-sectional SEM image of a perovskite DBR laser device. (H) Far-field beam pattern of the perovskite DBR lasers. (I) Schematic of a hybrid cavity comprising a DBR and a gold mirror for perovskite lasers. (A) Reprinted with permission from ref. 192. Copyright 2016 John Wiley and Sons. (B) Reprinted with permission from ref. 195. Copyright 2017 John Wiley and Sons. (C) Reprinted with permission from ref. 191. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (D and E) Reprinted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (F–H) Reprinted with permission from ref. 196. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (I) Reprinted with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
Nowadays, both DFB and DBR cavities are standard devices for semiconductor lasers.198–200 As the name implies, the optical feedback necessary for laser oscillation in the DFB and DBR lasers is not localized at the cavity facets but is distributed throughout the cavity length. The DFB cavity is composed of a periodically structured element, i.e. photonic crystal (Fig. 10A), from which the diffracted wave feeds backwards. According to the dimension of the photonic crystal, the DFB cavities can be classified into three categories, 1D (Fig. 8J and 10B), 2D (Fig. 10D), and 3D (Fig. 8L) DFB cavities. The most commonly used DFB cavities are the 1D Bragg diffraction gratings. The resonant wavelength in the DFB cavity is given by Bragg conditions expressed as 2neffΛ = mλBragg(3.1)where neff is the effective refractive index, Λ is the periodicity of the grating, m is the diffraction order, and λBragg is the Bragg wavelength. The first- and second-order DFB cavities lead to edge- and surface-emitting lasers, respectively. The DBR is a dielectric mirror formed from multiple layers of alternating materials with different refractive indices (Fig. 10F). Each layer boundary causes a partial reflection of an optical wave. For waves with wavelength close to four times the optical thickness of the layers, the many reflections combine with constructive interference, leading to high reflection. The range of wavelengths that are reflected is called the photonic stopband. A pair of DBRs parallel to each other form the DBR cavity (Fig. 10F and G). Besides, a DBR together with a gold mirror can constitute a hybrid cavity architecture, as illustrated in Fig. 10I.65
The metal halide perovskites can be easily combined with the DFB and DBR cavities through but not limited to spin-coating. Compared with those on-chip optical microcavity lasers, the DFB and DBR perovskite lasers have many advantages. The first one is the high reproducibility in device fabrication, which enables the pre-set and tuning of lasing wavelength. The second one is the single-mode operations. The DFB cavities support single-mode lasing because only the wave satisfying the Bragg condition can obtain optical feedback. The single-mode lasing from DBR cavities is attributed to very short cavity lengths, corresponding to mode spacing larger than the gain profile or cavity bandwidth. The third one is the well-defined spatially coherent laser output with small divergence angles. The 1D second-order DFB perovskite lasers exhibit a stripe-shaped (double-lobed or fan-like) far-field beam profile (Fig. 10C),75,191 while the 2D second-order DFB and DBR perovskite lasers exhibit a Gaussian beam profile in far field (Fig. 10E and H).69,70,154,156,196
4. Materials engineering in perovskite lasers
4.1. Composition engineering

4.1.1. Tunable lasers. 
A major advantage of metal halide perovskites for laser application is the broad wavelength tunability based on controllable stoichiometry. As discussed in Section 2.3.1, the perovskite bandgap highly depends on its material composition, that is, A-site monovalent cation, B-site divalent cation, and X-site halide anion. Accordingly, the lasing wavelength from the perovskite can be easily modified by changing its material composition (Fig. 11). Halide anion mixing is the most effective strategy for tailoring the output wavelength of the perovskite lasers. As shown in Fig. 11A–D, for all kinds of metal halide perovskites, including organic–inorganic hybrid and all-inorganic perovskites, the lasing wavelength can be tuned over ∼300 nm by simply changing the stoichiometric ratios of different halide anions.
 Fig. 11  Tunable metal halide perovskite lasers. Lasing spectra from single-crystal nanowires of (A) methylammonium lead perovskites, (B) MABr-stabilized formamidinium lead perovskites, and (C) cesium lead perovskites with different stoichiometric ratios of halide anions. (D) ASE spectra from cesium tin perovskite films with different stoichiometric ratios of halide anions. (A) Reprinted with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2015 Springer Nature. (B) Reprinted with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (C) Reprinted with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (D) Reprinted with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2016 John Wiley and Sons. 
The wide-wavelength tunability of perovskite lasers was initially demonstrated in single-crystal nanowires of methylammonium lead halide (MAPbX3) perovskites (Fig. 11A).67 The laser output covers the whole spectral region from 500 to 790 nm except for a gap from 580 to 670 nm, corresponding to MAPbBryI3−y with 1.6 < y < 2.8. The failure of the mixed-halide MAPbBryI3−y perovskites to lase is caused by photo-induced phase segregation between Br-rich and Br-poor phases via ion-migration, which shifts the emission wavelength gradually. The formamidinium lead halide (FAPbX3) perovskites have better phase stability because strong hydrogen bonding between the FA cations and halide ions suppresses ion migration. Therefore, the FA-based lead halide perovskite alloys, (FA,MA)Pb(I,Br)3, fill in the gap of lasing wavelength unavailable with MA-based perovskites (Fig. 11B).71 In addition, with narrower bandgap, the FA-based perovskite alloys broaden the wavelength tuning range of perovskite lasers towards the near-infrared spectral region up to 824 nm. Noteworthily, the blue spectral region (<500 nm) cannot be accessed at room temperature for organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite lasers. The blue emission is available from Cl-rich perovskites, but suffers from low luminescence efficiency due to high defect density. The full substitution of the organic ammonium cation with cesium cation significantly enhances the luminescence of perovskites. Hence, lasing actions spanning the entire visible spectrum from 420 to 710 can be realized in all-inorganic CsPbX3 perovskites (Fig. 11C).72 An approach to further broaden the wavelength tuning range of perovskite lasers is by substituting lead with tin, which largely reduces the bandgap of perovskites. The lasing wavelength of tin-based perovskites locates in the near-infrared spectral region from 700 to 950 nm (Fig. 11D).117 All in all, the output wavelength of metal halide perovskites covers the whole visible region and part of the near-infrared region ranging from 420 to 950 nm. The green perovskite lasers are particularly important because they may address the ‘green gap’ issue encountered in III–V semiconductor lasers.201


4.1.2. Multicolor lasers. 
With wide wavelength tunability, metal halide perovskites hold great potential for monolithic multicolor lasers that are useful in a wide range of applications, such as chemical and biological sensing, laser display, and on-chip optical communication.202,203 Several attempts have been made to create perovskite heterojunctions based on post-treatment of synthesized homogeneous perovskite nanowires, such as local ion exchange and induced phase segregation.110,204–208 Yet lasing action has never been demonstrated in these perovskite nanowire heterojunctions, which might be attributed to the introduction of defects in the post-treatment processes. Hence, the direct synthesis of perovskite heterojunctions is essential for multicolor lasing, but this poses a great challenge because the rapid ion exchange and migration leads to the formation of homogeneous alloys. Recently, Huang et al. reported a direct synthesis of composition-graded CsPbBrxI3−x nanowires through a vapor-phase epitaxial growth method (Fig. 12A).73 The relatively high phase stability of all-inorganic CsPbX3 perovskite provides the possibility for obtaining stable heterojunctions. Precise control of growth temperature and time in the epitaxial process is key for the fabrication of composition-graded CsPbBrxI3−x nanowires because either high temperature or long time facilitates the formation of homogeneous alloys. The as-prepared CsPbBrxI3−x nanowire heterojunctions exhibit a gradually decreased bandgap and therefore blue-shifted emission from center to end (Fig. 12B and C). As a result, the composition-graded CsPbBrxI3−x nanowires support a position-dependent lasing action, namely, short-wavelength lasing at nanowire ends, long-wavelength lasing at the nanowire center, and dual-wavelength lasing at the intermediate position between nanowire center and edge (Fig. 12D).
 Fig. 12  Dual-color lasing from composition-graded perovskite nanowires. (A) Schematic illustration of the growth process of composition-graded CsPbBrxI3−x nanowires. (B) Schematic of the CsPbBrxI3−x nanowire heterojunction with graded bandgap. (C) Merged confocal laser scanning microscope images in green and yellow channels. (D) Lasing spectra collected from different positions of a CsPbBrxI3−x nanowire heterojunction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons. 


4.1.3. Continuous-wave lasers. 
The development of an electrically injected laser is a long-standing and elusive goal in solution-processed optoelectronics. The c.w. lasing is widely regarded as a key stepping stone on the path to a laser diode. Leading contenders for such lasers include organic semiconductors, inorganic colloidal nanocrystals and metal halide perovskites. So far, c.w. lasing has never been demonstrated in organic semiconductors due to triplet absorption.209 The triplet absorption is less of an issue for conventional inorganic semiconductors and metal halide perovskites because strong spin–orbit coupling and small exciton binding energies frustrate spin-conservation. Recently, c.w. lasing was realized in inorganic colloidal nanocrystals after two decades of investigations.210–214 Nevertheless, further progress towards electrically injected lasing is highly challenging for inorganic colloidal nanocrystals because of their limited charge carrier mobility.
Metal halide perovskites are promising for solution-processed electrically injected lasers because they combine large optical gains with high and balanced charge carrier mobility. The initial attempt to realize the c.w. perovskite laser was made by Jia et al. based on a second-order DFB laser architecture consisting of a silicon grating coated successively with a gold layer, an alumina layer, and a MAPbI3 film (Fig. 13A).191 The gold layer is used on the one hand to reduce cavity mode overlap with the light-absorbing silicon and on the other hand to improve thermal conductivity. The alumina layer suppresses the surface recombination of perovskites. Quasi-c.w. lasing was achieved in this DFB laser device under the excitation of an InGaN diode laser with 25 ns pulse duration and 2 MHz repetition rate (Fig. 13B). Unfortunately, true c.w. lasing was not possible, as the lasing action ceases ∼25 ns after pump turn-on (Fig. 13C). The origin of this lasing death phenomenon remains unclear at present, although thermal runaway and Auger recombination have been ruled out.
 Fig. 13  Continuous-wave lasing in metal halide perovskites. (A) Cross-section SEM image of a second-order DFB laser architecture consisting of a silicon grating coated successively with a gold layer, an alumina layer, and a MAPbI3 film. (B) Output intensity of the perovskite DFB laser under the excitation of an InGaN diode laser (25 ns pulse duration, 1 kHz/2 MHz repetition rate) with increasing power at low temperature T = 160 K. (C) Time-resolved emission (red line) of the DFB perovskite laser pumped by a 195 nm duration pulse (blue line). (D) Cross-section SEM image of a second-order DFB laser device comprising a MAPbI3 film deposited on an alumina grating on a sapphire substrate. (E) Time-resolved emission spectra of the MAPbI3 film at a temperature of T = 106 K. (F) Emission spectra from the DFB perovskite laser under c.w. excitation by a 445 nm InGaN pump diode at 102 K. (G) Atomic force microscope (AFM) image of the Cs0.1(MA0.17FA0.83)0.9Pb0.84(I0.84Br0.16)2.68 perovskite film. (H) Normalized emission spectra of the mixed-cation perovskite film under c.w. excitation of increasing power. (I) Excitation intensity-dependent emission intensity and full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the mixed-cation perovskite film. (A–C) Reprinted with permission from ref. 191. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (D–F) Reprinted with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2017 Springer Nature. (G–I) Reprinted with permission from ref. 215. Copyright 2019 Springer Nature. 
Subsequently, they successfully realized c.w. lasing in the same MAPbI3 perovskite below the phase-transition temperature (T = 160 K) from tetragonal to orthorhombic (Fig. 13D–F).75 The c.w. optical gain originates from a small amount of photogenerated tetragonal-phase inclusions in a predominantly orthorhombic-phase MAPbI3. With temperature cooling down to ∼100 K, the MAPbI3 perovskite reaches the orthorhombic phase. Upon c.w. excitation above a threshold, a tetragonal phase forms inside the orthorhombic lattice dynamically (Fig. 13E). These narrow-bandgap tetragonal-phase inclusions act as carrier sinks within the wide-bandgap orthorhombic-phase host matrix, facilitating population inversion in a fashion analogous to organic host–guest materials and inorganic quantum wells. This mixed-phase MAPbI3 perovskite can sustain continuous lasing for over an hour. This finding represents a significant step towards the ultimate goal of a perovskite laser diode.
Despite this impressive achievement, the pure-phase perovskites seem more practically useful for electrically injected lasers. Very recently, Brenner et al. reported c.w. ASE in phase-stable lead halide perovskites (Fig. 13G–I).215 To achieve phase stability, they employed a triple-cation perovskite, Cs0.1(MA0.17FA0.83)0.9Pb0.84(I0.84Br0.16)2.68, as the gain medium. No phase transition occurs in such perovskites, in which organic ammonium cations are partially replaced by inorganic cesium cations. In addition, the incorporation of cesium and a deficiency of lead are beneficial for lowering lasing thresholds and for improving the photo- and thermal stability of the perovskites. As a result, this phase-stable perovskite can sustain c.w. optical gain at any temperature up to 120 K. This work further demonstrates the huge potential of metal halide perovskites for practical c.w. and electrically injected lasers.

4.2. Structure engineering

4.2.1. Single-mode lasers. 
The controllable output of laser modes is of high interest in laser physics and applications. Single-mode lasers are particularly important for application in sensing, optical communication and spectroscopy. The single-mode operation can be readily obtained in macroscopic laser devices by using the DFB and DBR cavities, as discussed in Section 3.2. In contrast, the micro/nanocrystal cavities usually support multimode oscillations resulting from their wide bandwidths. The simplest approach to achieve single-mode miniaturized lasers is by reducing the cavity size to enlarge the mode spacing. As shown in Fig. 14A–C, the single-mode lasing was successfully realized in CsPbBr3 nanocrystals.216 The nanocuboids have a typical size of ∼400 nm, which results in a mode spacing (estimated to be ∼100 nm) much larger than the gain profile of CsPbBr3 perovskites. However, the single-mode lasing is realized at the expense of laser performance. The lasing threshold rises because the decrease of cavity size reduces the Q factors and optical gains of microcavities. This issue can be mitigated to some extent by fabricating high-Q microcavities. Tang et al. synthesized the submicron CsPbBr3 spheres via the CVD method, which function as ultrahigh-Q WGM cavities.168 The Q factors of these CsPbBr3 spherical cavities are the highest (up to 1.5 × 104) among all perovskite micro/nanocrystal cavities.217 As a result, low-threshold single-mode lasing was obtained from these CsPbBr3 spherical cavities.
 Fig. 14  Single-mode perovskite micro/nanolasers. (A) SEM image of CsPbBr3 nanocuboids. (B) Emission spectra of a single CsPbBr3 nanocuboid at different excitation intensities. (C) Integrated emission intensity from the nanocuboid as a function of pump fluence. (D) SEM image of MAPbI3 microdisks. (E) Emission spectra of a single MAPbI3 microdisk at different excitation intensities. (F) Integrated emission intensity from the microdisk as a function of pump fluence. (G) SEM image of a perovskite coupled cavity comprising two rectangular MAPbBr3 microplates. (H) Emission spectra of a MAPbBr3 coupled cavity at different excitation intensities. (I) Integrated emission intensity from the coupled cavity as a function of pump fluence. (A–C) Reprinted with permission from ref. 216. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (D–F) Reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (G–I) Reprinted with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
One alternative strategy to realize single-mode lasing is based on the introduction of mode-selection structures onto the microcavities. As discussed in Section 3.1.2, a type of microdisk cavities were fabricated from organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite films via laser ablation.113 These MAPbI3 microdisks have rough side walls (Fig. 14D), which suppress the multimode competition by selectively filtering out low-Q modes. Single-mode lasing can be observed from these MAPbI3 microdisks (Fig. 14E and F). Unfortunately, these perovskite microdisks are subjected to the reduction of Q factors because of the roughness induced optical scattering. The coupled cavity provides an ideal platform for fulfilling single-mode operation of miniaturized lasers without sacrificing laser performances.218 Within the coupled cavity system, one component cavity functions as a filter to the resonant mode of the other, leading to mode spacing enlargement and consequently single-mode lasing. Liu et al. constructed a perovskite coupled cavity by integrating two MAPbBr3 microplates via micromanipulation (Fig. 14G).74 The constructed perovskite coupled cavity exhibited stable single-mode lasing (Fig. 14H and I).
Laser mode tuning is required for directly manipulating communication channels in ultrafast optical networks.219–221 The coupled cavity system provides a possibility for laser mode tuning by introducing a tunable optical microcavity. Zhao et al. constructed a hybrid coupled cavity comprising a perovskite nanowire and a stimuli-responsive polystyrene microdisk (Fig. 15A).222 The MAPbBr3 nanowire serves as a laser cavity, while the polystyrene microdisk serves as a filter cavity. The laser modes in the MAPbBr3 nanowire can be selectively filtered out through adjusting the resonance modes of the polystyrene microdisk (Fig. 15B). Here, the resonance modes were adjusted by introducing acetone vapor to change the effective radius of the polystyrene microdisk. As a result, a reversibly switchable single-mode lasing behavior was demonstrated from the hybrid coupled cavity (Fig. 15C). Very recently, Yang et al. reported piezoelectric-induced dynamic modulation of single-mode perovskite microwire lasers (Fig. 15D–G).170 The selected CsPbBr3 microwire exhibits single-mode lasing with the four lateral facets constituting a small-size WGM cavity. By applying tensile and compressive strains onto the CsPbBr3 microwire, the piezoelectric polarization effect induced the variation of the refractive index (Fig. 15F and G). The tensile and compressive strain leads to red- and blue-shift of the lasing mode, respectively. This enables an effective tuning of the lasing mode position up to 8.5 nm for the CsPbBr3 microwire with an externally applied strain ranging between −0.96% and 1.06%.
 Fig. 15  Tunable single-mode perovskite micro/nanolasers. (A) Optical image of a MAPbBr3 nanowire coupled with a polystyrene microdisk. (B) Simulated electric field distributions of two modes in a wire-disk coupled cavity under air and acetone atmospheres. (C) Lasing spectra (top) of a nanowire laser coupled with a tunable microdisk cavity. Transmittance spectra (bottom) of the coupled microcavity before and after acetone treatment showing the mode filtering effect. (D) Schematic diagram showing piezoelectric-induced dynamic modulation of single-mode perovskite microwire lasers. (E) Single-mode lasing from a perovskite microwire under different tensile and compressive strains. (F) Schematic illustration of piezoelectric polarization resulting from Pb and Br displacements (left panel) and PbBr6 octahedron distortion (right panel) under a tensile stress. (G) Piezoelectric-induced refractive index change for the lasing modes. (A–C) Reprinted with permission from ref. 222. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (D–G) Reprinted with permission from ref. 170. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons. 


4.2.2. Subwavelength lasers. 
From inception to present, the miniaturization of lasers has always been pursued because the ever-smaller lasers have opened up a plenty of new application areas.174,223–225 The metal halide perovskites have shown the potential for miniaturized lasers as various perovskite microcrystals function as optical gain media and microcavities simultaneously. However, such dielectric lasers are restricted by the diffraction limit (half the wavelength of light in medium) in both physical device dimension and optical mode volume. Surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs), the collective oscillations of electrons on the surface of a metal, can tightly confine light far below the optical diffraction limit.226 The hybrid metal–dielectric geometry provides a platform for creating subwavelength lasers.227,228 A facile approach to achieve subwavelength coherent light sources is by integrating the dielectric laser with the subwavelength plasmonic waveguide (Fig. 16A).172 Li et al. developed an epitaxial growth technique of perovskites on subwavelength silver nanowires to construct the hybrid metal–perovskite heterostructures (Fig. 16B and C). The excellent laser performance of the perovskites is retained in such heterostructures (Fig. 16D and E). In addition, the embedded heterostructures have a good connection between the perovskite crystal and the Ag nanowire, facilitating effective photon–plasmon coupling. From the perovskite microcrystal, the WGM laser modes were outcoupled into the subwavelength Ag nanowire as SPP modes (Fig. 16F and G). The intrinsic laser characteristics (e.g. wavelength and polarization) of the perovskite microcrystal are maintained in the subwavelength plasmonic waveguide.
 Fig. 16  Subwavelength lasers based on metal halide perovskites. (A) Schematic diagram of an embedded dielectric/metal heterostructure for subwavelength output of a perovskite laser. (B) Schematic illustration showing the epitaxial growth of the perovskite on the silver nanowire. (C) SEM image of perovskite/Ag heterostructures. (D) Bright-field and PL images of a perovskite/Ag heterostructure. (E–G) Emission spectra collected from the perovskite microcrystals and Ag nanowire tips. Inset: Polarization profiles of the lasing modes. (H) Schematic of a plasmonic laser consisting of a MAPbI3 nanowire on an Ag film coated with a MgF2 spacer layer. (I) Simulated electric field distribution in the plasmonic laser with a 10 nm spacer layer. (J) Calculated effective mode index as a function of the nanowire height for a plasmonic and photonic laser geometry. (K) Emission spectra of a perovskite plasmonic laser at different pump intensities. Inset: PL image of the perovskite nanowire based plasmonic laser. (A–G) Reprinted with permission from ref. 172. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (H–K) Reprinted with permission from ref. 232. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Although providing subwavelength coherent light sources, the metal–dielectric heterostructures have overall device sizes larger than half the wavelength because the dielectric laser part is restricted by the diffraction limit. A way of addressing this issue is to construct plasmonic lasers, where the SPPs are directly amplified by the stimulated emission of gain medium.229,230 The principal challenge in achieving a plasmonic laser is to overcome the intrinsic Ohmic loss of the metal.231 Metal halide perovskites are promising candidates for plasmonic lasers because of their high optical gains. A hybrid plasmonic waveguide cavity geometry was adopted by inserting a nanoscale insulating dielectric layer between the metal and the perovskite nanowire to minimize this loss (Fig. 16H).232–235 The coupling between the plasmonic and waveguide modes enables the optical confinement in the non-metal gap region (Fig. 16I), thereby effectively reducing the Ohmic loss. Unlike the photonic lasers constrained by the diffraction limit, the plasmonic lasers do not experience mode cutoff with the decrease of physical device dimension (Fig. 16J). This hybrid metal–dielectric cavity geometry enables the realization of true subwavelength perovskite lasers (Fig. 16K). Furthermore, the perovskite plasmonic lasers possess a strictly longitudinal polarization. These perovskite-based subwavelength coherent light sources not only significantly increase the integration level of photonic devices and circuits, but also benefit the optoelectronic interconnects and hybrid optoelectronic integration due to the similar dimension with electronic elements.


4.2.3. Random lasers. 
A random laser is a special type of laser where the optical feedback is provided via multiple scattering, as illustrated in Fig. 17A.236,237 Like the conventional lasers, the random lasers exhibit high energy conversion efficiencies. Nevertheless, they show low spatial coherence because the random scattering produces many uncorrelated optical modes emitting in all directions. Therefore, the random laser is an advanced lighting source for laser illumination and speckle-free imaging.238,239 Another unique advantage of random lasers lies in their low-cost and simple processing technology as they can be realized by coating gain media on the surfaces of arbitrary shapes. The crystalline nature makes the metal halide perovskites a promising candidate for random lasing because the grains in perovskite films can serve as scattering centers for the optical feedback.240–242 The first perovskite random lasing was demonstrated in MAPbI3 microcrystal networks in 2014.243
 Fig. 17  Random lasing from metal halide perovskites. (A) Schematic illustration of a random laser. (B) SEM images of MAPbI3 thin films. (C) Emission spectra of the MAPbI3 film at different pump energies. (D) Lasing emission spectra of the MAPbI3 film taken from different angles. (I) Lasing threshold as a function of the excitation area. (F) MAPbBr3 film on a polyimide substrate before and after bending. (G) Schematic diagram of excitation and emission of a flexible perovskite random laser under the bending condition. (H and I) Optical images of the MAPbBr3 film surfaces on flat and curved substrates. (J) Calculated scattered fields on the MAPbBr3 film with enhanced edges above the threshold. (K) Schematic illustration of the synthetic strategy of CsPbBr3 QDs on aminated silica spheres. (L) TEM image of a single silica sphere coated with CsPbBr3 QDs. (M) SEM image of the final CsPbBr3 QDs/A-SiO2 composites. (N) A schematic optical loop in the CsPbBr3 QDs/A-SiO2 composites. (A) Reprinted with permission from ref. 236. Copyright 2012 Springer Nature. (B–E) Reprinted with permission from ref. 244. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry. (F–J) Reprinted with permission from ref. 245. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (K–N) Reprinted with permission from ref. 247. Copyright 2017 John Wiley and Sons. 
A detailed investigation of the characteristics of perovskite random lasers was first made by Shi et al. in 2016.244 The MAPbI3 polycrystalline film (Fig. 17B) was fabricated through a two-step spin-coating method. The perovskite grains have an average size of ∼200 nm and thus are unable to support stable optical resonances, neither F–P nor WGM ones. Under optical excitation with increasing power, the emission from the MAPbI3 polycrystalline film underwent an evolution from a smooth and broad band to a set of sharp peaks (Fig. 17C), accompanied by a dramatic increase of emission intensity, which clearly demonstrate the onset of lasing. This perovskite random laser shows unique characteristics different from conventional lasers. The laser modes are irregular and randomly change with the pump energy (Fig. 17C). The laser emission occurs towards all directions (Fig. 17D). The laser threshold is highly dependent on the excitation area (Fig. 17E)
Recently, flexible perovskite random lasing was demonstrated in MAPbBr3 films on a polyimide substrate (Fig. 17F–J).245 Such perovskite films can support random lasing under both flat and curved conditions (Fig. 17F and G). The compact and smooth perovskite film with well-interconnected grain boundaries facilitates high emission efficiency (Fig. 17H). The optical feedback originates from the multiple scattering at the internal grain boundaries and surface cracks. Bending the polyimide substrate makes the cracks more abundant and pronounced, leading to stronger scattering (Fig. 17H–J). Therefore, the laser threshold decreases with the bending radii. These perovskite random lasers exhibited low spatial coherence and facilitated the speckle reduction in imaging projection.
Besides the intrinsic perovskite grains, other scattering particles can provide optical feedback for random lasing. For example, a light wave that passes through a silica/polystyrene sphere film will undergo strong multiple scattering.246 Li et al. directly synthesized CsPbBr3 QDs on monodispersed silica spheres through an amination-mediated nucleation and growth process (Fig. 17K–M).247 The anchoring and separation of CsPbBr3 QDs on the silica spheres significantly improved the stability of CsPbBr3 QDs because of the inhibition of photoinduced regrowth and deterioration. As a result, the CsPbBr3 QDs/silica sphere composite film exhibited highly stable random lasing with the silica spheres serving as scattering centers (Fig. 17N).


4.2.4. Polariton lasers. 
Polaritons are bosonic quasiparticles formed from the strong coupling of elementary excitations (e.g. phonon and exciton) with electromagnetic waves. When the de Broglie wavelength becomes comparable to particle distance above a critical excitation density (or equivalently below a critical temperature), a large fraction of bosons condenses into the lowest quantum state, resulting in a spontaneous macroscopic coherence. This process is called as Bose–Einstein condensation (BEC). Polariton lasers are a type of coherent light sources that exploit the coherent nature of Bose–Einstein condensates of cavity exciton-polaritons (Fig. 18A).248 A major attraction of polariton lasers is the potential to achieve much lower thresholds since no population inversion is required.249 An ideal material for BEC has a large exciton binding energy to support high polariton density and a strong Coulomb interaction to drive efficient polariton condensation. However, there is a trade-off between the exciton binding energy and Coulomb interaction. The Wannier–Mott excitons in traditional inorganic semiconductors have small exciton binding energies (∼10 meV) and strong Coulomb interactions. The strong Coulomb interactions contribute to polariton–polariton interactions, leading to effective relaxation to the ground state.250–253 Due to small exciton binding energies, the polariton lasing from traditional inorganic semiconductors has mostly been observed at cryogenic temperatures and/or complex quantum structures. In contrast, the Frenkel excitons in organic semiconductors have large binding energies (≥100 meV) and weak Coulomb interactions. The large exciton binding energies enable room-temperature polariton lasing.254–256 Nevertheless, the weak Coulomb interactions result in high polariton lasing threshold and weak nonlinear behavior of the polaritons.
 Fig. 18  Polariton lasers based on metal halide perovskites. (A) Schematic formation of exciton polaritons in a planar DBR cavity. (B) Schematic of a planar perovskite polariton laser comprising a CsPbCl3 nanoplatelet embedded in a DBR cavity. (C) Absorption and emission spectra of the CsPbCl3 nanoplatelet and polariton emission of the CsPbCl3 nanoplatelet embedded in the cavity. (D–F) Angle-resolved emission spectra of the CsPbCl3 nanoplatelet embedded in the cavity recorded at increasing pump powers. (G) Schematic formation of exciton polaritons in a nanowire cavity. (H–J) Dispersion curves of the lasing modes in CsPbCl3, CsPbBr3, and CsPbI3 nanowires. (K–N) Dispersion curves of polariton modes in CsPbBr3 nanowires with a width of 3.31, 1.99, 1.19, and 0.78 μm and a length of 11.01, 14.02, 16.41, and 20.77 μm. (A) Reprinted with permission from ref. 251. Copyright 2006 Springer Nature. (B–F) Reprinted with permission from ref. 257. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (G) Reprinted with permission from ref. 260. Copyright 2012 John Wiley and Sons. (H–J) Reprinted with permission from ref. 267. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (K–N) Reprinted with permission from ref. 269. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
The metal halide perovskites are ideal alternatives to traditional inorganic and organic semiconductors for BEC because of their modest exciton binding energies and Coulomb interactions. The first perovskite polariton lasing was reported by Su et al. in a perovskite embedded DBR cavity at room temperature (Fig. 18B–F).257 The CVD synthesized CsPbCl3 nanoplatelet was selected as the excitonic material owing to its large exciton binding energy (∼72 meV) and high crystal quality.100 The emission of the CsPbCl3 nanoplatelet is centered at ∼2.99 eV with a fwhm of 80 meV, while the polariton emission from the CsPbCl3 nanoplatelet embedded DBR microcavity shifts to ∼2.9 eV with the fwhm narrowing to 9.7 meV (Fig. 18C). At low pump fluence, the polaritons exhibit a broad emission distribution in both energy and momentum (Fig. 18D). Upon reaching a threshold, the polaritons exhibit a much stronger emission near the zero-momentum (k‖ = 0) ground state, indicating the onset of polariton condensation. At higher pump fluence, polaritons macroscopically occupy the ground state. This nonlinear behavior is caused by the stimulated scattering of polaritons into the lowest quantum state. Recently, the polariton condensation was demonstrated in CsPbBr3 perovskites embedded in planar cavities.258,259 More interesting polariton condensation phenomena have been realized in these CsPbBr3 cavities, such as long-range coherent exciton polariton condensate flow and Rydberg exciton polariton condensation.
The polariton condensations have been mainly demonstrated in the planar DBR cavities, which suffer from sophisticated fabrication techniques. With easy accessibility and integrability, the nanowire cavities have attracted much research interest for the exciton–photon coupling and polariton condensation (Fig. 18G).260–263 Park et al. first discovered the strong exciton–photon interaction in perovskite nanowire lasers.101 The F–P mode spacing of the perovskite nanowire lasers dramatically decreases with the wavelength. Such unequal mode spacings correspond to a strong dependency of light propagation speed on the photon frequency, which is a typical characteristic of polaritons. The coupling strength between the exciton and photon determines the Rabi splitting energy (Ω) between the lower and upper polariton branches, which is a function of the exciton oscillator strength (f) and cavity mode volume (Vm) as Ω ∝ (fVm)1/2.264 The exciton oscillator strength has a positive correlation with exciton binding energy.265,266 The relationship between the exciton–photon coupling strength and exciton binding energy was demonstrated by Wang et al. in experiment.267 With similar cavity geometries, the exciton–photon coupling strengths in all-inorganic perovskite nanowires follow the same trend as exciton binding energies (Fig. 18H–J). Another advantage of the nanowire cavity for exciton–polariton coupling is the small mode volume, which significantly enhances light–matter interactions. Zhang, Liu and coworkers reported that the coupling strengths between the exciton and photon in perovskite nanowires increase with the decrease of nanowire dimension (Fig. 18K–N).268,269 More importantly, the enhanced exciton–photon coupling strength results in a significant reduction of the lasing threshold. Recently, Evans et al. realized c.w. lasing from the CsPbBr3 nanowire, which originates from polariton modes.181 Although the exciton polaritons play an important role in perovskite nanowire lasers, no conclusive evidence of polariton condensation has been demonstrated so far. One possibility is that polariton condensation occurred but was not detected due to the lack of measurement methods for directly obtaining angle/momentum-resolved spectra of nanowire cavities. Another possibility is that polariton condensation did not occur, which might be attributed to low cavity Q factors resulting from the low end-facet reflectivity of the nanowires. The rate of polaritons leaking out of the cavity as photons is much faster than that of condensation. More research effort is needed to explore the polariton condensation in perovskite nanowire cavities, including the development of measurement methods and the optimization of material systems.

4.3. Laser arrays
The laser array concept was initially proposed for power scaling of semiconductor lasers.199 From then on, the laser arrays have enabled many new technologies, such as laser printing, medical therapy, on-chip optical interconnects, laser imaging detection and ranging, among others.200 Due to the great potential in various applications, the monolithic integration of metal halide perovskite lasers has captured much research interest. Actually, the perovskite arrays have been widely explored for optoelectronic and photonic applications, including solar cells, photodetectors, light-emitting diodes, and lasers.270–273 Here, we focus our discussion on the controllable fabrication of perovskite laser arrays. So far, many fabrication techniques have been developed to obtain perovskite laser arrays based on liquid-phase self-assembly, vapor-phase growth, and top-down fabrication.
The key of the liquid-phase method for fabricating perovskite laser arrays is the regular splitting and positioning of perovskite precursor solution. Feng et al. developed a type of wettability-mediated micropillar-structured silicon templates to regularly split perovskite precursor solution and locate the solution microdomains (Fig. 19A and B).273 The regularly arranged micropillars have asymmetric wettability, lyophilic tops and lyophobic sidewalls. When in contact with the micropillars, the perovskite precursor solution wets the tops but is blocked by the sidewalls. Because the liquid cohesion is smaller than the adhesion between the liquid and pillar tops, a concave meniscus forms above the micropillars, which splits the perovskite precursor solution into regular microdomains. The nucleation and growth of perovskites are confined in the microdomains, leading to the formation of single-crystal perovskite microlaser arrays (Fig. 19C and D).
 Fig. 19  Metal halide perovskite laser arrays. (A) Schematic experimental set-up for wettability-assisted liquid-phase growth of perovskite laser arrays. (B) Simulated fluid dynamics showing the regular splitting and positioning of perovskite precursor liquid. (C) In situ optical microscopy images of microdomains of perovskite precursor solution after 4, 6, 7, and 8 h solvent evaporation. (D) SEM image of single-crystal MAPbBr3 microdisk arrays. (E) Schematic illustration of preparation of single crystal perovskite microlaser arrays by inkjet printing. (F) In situ optical microscopy images of a perovskite precursor microdroplet on a lyophobic substrate after 0, 60, 180, and 215 s solvent evaporation. (G) SEM image of printed single-crystal CsPbBr3 microdisk arrays. (H) Schematic illustration of the template-assisted vapor-phase growth of perovskite microlaser arrays. (I) SEM images of MAPbI3 microdisk arrays. (J) Fabrication of large-scale perovskite microlaser arrays via laser ablation. Right panel: False-color SEM image and photograph of a 1 × 1 cm2 array of perovskite microlasers. (A–D) Reprinted with permission from ref. 273. Copyright 2016 John Wiley and Sons. (E and G) Reprinted with permission from ref. 178. Copyright 2016 John Wiley and Sons. (H and I) Reprinted with permission from ref. 277. Copyright 2016 John Wiley and Sons. (J) Reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 
Afterwards, a more robust and flexible strategy was proposed to fabricate perovskite laser arrays by using a soft PDMS template to split and confine the perovskite precursor solution.105 The PDMS templates have regular cylindrical hole arrays. When pressing the soft PDMS template onto the perovskite precursor solution spread on a substrate, the solution is directly split by and confined in the cylindrical holes of the template. A large-scale perovskite microdisk laser array forms after the complete evaporation of the solvent. This space-confined strategy has a great controllability on the dimension, position, density, and especially morphology of the perovskite crystals. For example, the growth of perovskite nanowire laser arrays can be realized by adjusting the PDMS templates.170,274
Another strategy to split the perovskite precursor solution relies on periodically patterned substrates.275 First, silica microdisk arrays were fabricated on silicon substrates through standard photolithography. Then, MAPbBr3 solution was spin-coated onto the patterned substrates. During the solvent evaporation, surface tension drove the precursor solution on the top of each silica microdisk to assemble into a polycrystal microdisk. The obtained MAPbBr3 microdisk array exhibited uniform WGM lasing with peak positions nearly the same.
Inkjet printing is the most direct approach to pattern the liquid droplets. Gu et al. demonstrated the inkjet printing technique for fabricating perovskite laser arrays (Fig. 19E).178 The perovskite precursor solution as ink was programmatically printed onto a lyophobic substrate. The lyophobic effect induces the formation of semispherical microdroplets of perovskite precursor solution. The perovskite self-assembly confined in the well-patterned microdroplets produces single-crystal perovskite laser arrays (Fig. 19F and G). One major superiority of the inkjet printing in fabricating laser arrays is the multicolor laser integration.276 Full-color perovskite laser arrays can be easily obtained by successively patterning different perovskite inks.
The key of the vapor-phase method for fabricating perovskite laser arrays is the periodically patterned nucleation centers for heteroepitaxy. Liu et al. developed a template-assisted vapor deposition method to fabricate large-scale perovskite laser arrays, as illustrated in Fig. 19H.277 Monolayer boron nitride films were transferred onto SiO2/Si substrates and processed into regularly arranged arrays. The well patterned boron nitrides serve as heterogeneous nucleation centers of metal halide perovskites, and lead to the vapor-phase heteroepitaxial growth of perovskite laser arrays (Fig. 19I).
The top-down lithography techniques can be used to process the perovskite films into laser arrays. For example, large-scale perovskite microlaser arrays were successfully fabricated by using a direct laser ablation method (Fig. 19J).113 The detailed discussion on the laser ablation technique can be found in Section 3.1.2. The laser ablation exhibits high processing speed, reproducibility, and addressability, making it possible to fabricate centimeter-sized arrays of perovskite microdisk lasers. Similarly, the perovskite QD laser arrays can be fabricated through an orthogonal lithography approach.278 As a sacrificial layer, a fluorinated polymer was patterned on the substrates via photolithography. Then, CsPbBr3 QDs were spin-coated onto the patterned substrates. Finally, the CsPbBr3 QDs attached to the photoresist/fluorinated polymer bilayer were lifted off by dissolving the fluorinated polymer. As a result, large-area perovskite QD laser arrays were obtained.
5. Stability and toxicity of perovskite lasers
5.1. Stability
An important aspect of lasers relevant to practical application is the device lifetime. Although exhibiting excellent laser performances, the metal halide perovskites suffer from poor stability.279,280 The metal halide perovskites degrade when exposed to moisture, oxygen, light, and heat. We first briefly discuss the degradation mechanism of MAPbI3 perovskites, which guides the development of stable perovskite lasers. Water reacts with MAPbI3, producing volatile methylamine and hydrogen iodine. Oxygen penetrates the perovskite through iodide vacancies and traps electron forming the highly reactive superoxide anion. The superoxide anion decomposes MAPbI3 into lead iodide, neutral iodine, and water. Similarly, the photogenerated holes decompose MAPbI3 into neutral lead and iodine, and methylammonium iodide. The presence of both oxygen and light dramatically accelerates the degradation of MAPbI3. The thermal degradation of MAPbI3 proceeds through chemical decomposition, followed by the sublimation of methylamine and hydrogen iodide.
Various strategies have been developed to improve the stability of metal halide perovskite lasers. The first one is to synthesize perovskite single crystals for stable lasing because the low trap density can inhibit the oxygen- and light-induced degradation of perovskite structures. As shown in Table 1, the monocrystal perovskite lasers have much longer device lifetimes than their polycrystal counterparts. The second strategy is based on the composition engineering of metal halide perovskites. From the degradation mechanism of perovskites, it can be concluded that the A-site cation has the largest effect on the stability of perovskites. A-site cation substitution provides the most effective way for improving the stability of perovskite lasers. Compared with the methylammonium cation, the formamidinium cation has low acidity, large size, and strong hydrogen bonding with the [BX6]4− framework,281 which suppress hydrolysis reaction and decomposition of the metal halide perovskites. As a result, the formamidinium perovskite lasers are more stable than the methylammonium ones (Table 1).71,282 The partial substitution of methylammonium and formamidinium cations with even larger organic ammonium cations further improves the stability of perovskites because the large organic ammonium cations not only suppress the decomposition of perovskites but also inhibit the penetration of water molecules into perovskite structures due to their hydrophobicity. Therefore, 2D hybrid perovskite lasers exhibit better stability than their 3D counterparts (Table 1).158–161 Furthermore, the complete substitution of the organic ammonium cation with the cesium cation produces all-inorganic perovskites, which exhibit the highest stability for laser applications because of the much lower reactivity and volatility of the cesium cation.72,99 The third strategy for improving perovskite stability is packaging,31,283 which avoids the direct exposure to oxygen and moisture, preventing the irreversible loss of photo- and heat-generated volatile species. As shown in Table 1, the perovskite lasers show much better stability under the protection of polymers, boron nitride films, and DBR cavities. The fourth approach for improving the stability of perovskite lasers is by increasing heat dissipation to reduce the thermal degradation of perovskites. The high-thermal-conductivity sapphire substrates can be used to assist heat dissipation.75,191 In addition, the encapsulation of perovskite lasers with high-thermal-conductivity boron nitride films can accelerate the thermal dissipation as well.284
Table 1 Device lifetime of metal halide perovskite lasers




Material
Morphology
Crystallinity
Protection
Atmosphere
Pump source
Lifetime (Laser short)
Ref.




MAPbBr3
Nanowire
Polycrystal
—
Air
400 nm, 150 fs, 1 kHz
∼1–4 × 107

274



MAPbBr3
Film
Polycrystal
SiO2/HfO2 DBR
Air
355 nm, 0.34 ns, 1 kHz
>6.48 × 107

196



MAPbBr3
Microdisk
Monocrystal
PMMA/PS
Air
400 nm, 150 fs, 1 kHz
>3.6 × 107

167



MAPbI3
Film
Polycrystal
—
Vacuum
600 nm, 150 fs, 1 kHz
>9 × 107

64



MAPbI3
Film
Polycrystal
CYTOP
Air
515 nm, 200 fs, 20 kHz
>1.5 × 108

193



MAPbI3
Film
Polycrystal
PMMA + GaN DBR
Air
532 nm, 0.34 ns, 1 kHz
>1.32 × 107

70



MAPbI3
Film
Polycrystal
PMMA
Air
532 nm, 270 ps, 1 kHz
>6 × 106

69



MAPbI3
Film
Polycrystal
PMMA
Air
400 nm, 150 ps, 1 kHz
∼2.16 × 107

282



MAPbI3
Film
Polycrystal
—
N2
532 nm, 1 ns, 5 kHz
>3 × 107

197



MAPbI3
Nanowire
Monocrystal
—
N2
402 nm, 150 fs, 250 kHz
∼1.5 × 107

71



FAPbI3
Film
Polycrystal
PMMA
Air
400 nm, 150 fs, 1 kHz
>2.16 × 107

282



FAPbI3
Nanowire
Monocrystal
—
N2
402 nm, 150 fs, 250 kHz
∼6.75 × 108

71



CsPbCl3
Nanowire
Monocrystal
—
Air
355 nm, 150 fs, 100 kHz
∼3.65 × 108

101



CsPbBr3
Nanowire
Monocrystal
—
Air
355 nm, 150 fs, 100 kHz
>7.2 × 108

101



CsPbBr3
Nanowire
Monocrystal
—
N2
402 nm, 150 fs, 250 kHz
>7.2 × 109

72



CsPbBr3
Nanowire
Monocrystal
—
N2
400 nm, 150 ps, 295 kHz
>1.1 × 109

99



—
Air
>1.1 × 109


CsPbBr3
Rod
Monocrystal
—
Air
800 nm, 35 fs, 1 kHz
>1.5 × 108

285



CsPbBr3
Microsphere
Crystalline
—
Vacuum
400 nm, 40 fs, 10 kHz
∼3.6 × 107

168



CsPbBr3
Nanocrystal film
Crystalline
—
Air
400 nm, 100 fs, 1 kHz
>1.6 × 107

150



CsPbBr3
Microcube film
Crystalline
—
Air
800 nm, 80 fs, 250 kHz
>3.6 × 107

286



CsPbBr3
Nanocrystal film
Crystalline
Surfactant
Air
400 nm, 35 fs, 1 kHz
>1.2 × 108

147



CsPbBr3
Nanocrystal film
Crystalline
CdS
Air
400 nm, 35 fs, 1 kHz
>1.1 × 108

287



CsPbBr3
Nanocrystal film
Crystalline
DBR
Air
400 nm, 50 fs, 1 kHz
>2.16 × 107

154



CsPbI3
Nanowire
Monocrystal
—
Air
355 nm, 150 fs, 100 kHz
>3.65 × 108

101



CsPbI3
Microdisk
Monocrystal
BN
Air
532 nm, 4.5 ns, 1.15 kHz
>1 × 108

284



(BA)2(MA)5Pb6Br19
Microring
Polycrystal
—
Air
400 nm, 150 fs, 1 kHz
>3.6 × 106

159



(BA)2(FA)2Pb3Br10
Nanowire
Polycrystal
—
Air
400 nm, 150 fs, 1 kHz
>2.16 × 107

160



(OA)2(MA)n−1PbnBr3n+1
Microplatelet
Polycrystal
—
Air
400 nm, 150 fs, 1 kHz
>4 × 107

161



(NMA)2(FA)Pb2Br1I6
Film
Polycrystal
—
Air
400 nm, 150 fs, 1 kHz
>1.2 × 108

158





5.2. Toxicity
The toxicity of lead is a major obstacle limiting the practical application of perovskites. The device encapsulation is the simplest approach to avoid human exposure to the toxic lead. Accordingly, the recycling technology of lead perovskites is required for the prevention of environmental pollution. Another way to solve this problem is by substituting lead with nontoxic elements.288,289 A successful case is tin halide perovskites, from which near-infrared lasing was demonstrated. However, the tin perovskites suffer from poor stability and optoelectronic properties compared with lead perovskites. Fortunately, the chemical diversity of metal halide perovskites provides a promising material platform for exploring lead-free perovskites for laser applications.290
6. Summary and outlook
Over the past five years, we have witnessed explosive progress in the field of metal halide perovskite lasers. Numerous studies focused on the materials engineering of metal halide perovskites for high-performance lasers. A set of controllable fabrication and processing techniques were developed for obtaining perovskite lasers. By engineering the composition and structure of metal halide perovskites, great progress has been made in improving the performance and expanding the functionalities of perovskite lasers, such as lowering the lasing threshold down to hundreds of nJ cm−2, broadening the wavelength tuning range over ∼530 nm, enabling multiwavelength output and continuous-wave operation, improving the spectral purity (single-mode output) and the temporal coherence (linewidth narrowing to ∼0.09), reducing the device dimension down to subwavelength scales, and prolonging device lifetime up to dozens of hours in continuous operation. This Review comprehensively discussed the metal halide perovskite lasers from the viewpoint of materials chemistry and engineering. Special emphasis is put on gaining insight into the structure–property relationship in perovskite lasers, which we hope could promote and guide the research and exploration of new type of perovskite lasers. Although great progress has been made in exploring the metal halide perovskite lasers, difficult challenges remain on many fronts.
The lasing mechanism of metal halide perovskites is not entirely clear yet. Central to the debate on the lasing mechanisms is whether the stimulated emission of perovskites originates from free charge carriers or excitons. A major reason for the debate is the lack of accurate physical parameters of perovskites, such as exciton binding energy, exciton Bohr radius, Mott density, among others. The exciton binding energy determines the population distribution between excitons and free charge carriers. However, the accurate determination of exciton binding energy of perovskites remains a tough challenge. The large variation in experimentally determined values of exciton binding energies for each kind of perovskites results from the differences in material quality and measurement methods and inaccurate assumptions in theoretical models and calculations. The improvement of existing measurement methods and development of new characterization approaches are highly desired for obtaining accurate exciton binding energies of metal halide perovskites. The Mott density is another parameter affecting the population distribution between excitons and free charge carriers. It is a function of exciton Bohr radius and binding energy. Besides the lack of accurate exciton binding energies, the determination of the exciton Bohr radius of perovskites is rarely reported, even though it is important for revealing the lasing mechanism. More research effort should be devoted to determining the exciton Bohr radius of metal halide perovskites. The investigation of photoexcited state dynamics by using ultrafast spectroscopy offers a way to discovering the lasing mechanism in metal halide perovskites. However, such investigations mainly focused on two kinds of perovskites currently, that is, all-inorganic CsPbBr3 and organic–inorganic hybrid 2D RP perovskites. More laser dynamics investigations should be performed on different perovskite materials and devices to provide a detailed understanding of the lasing mechanism in metal halide perovskites, which is helpful for guiding the design of perovskite lasers towards practical applications.
The electrically pumped perovskite laser is a next frontier because electrical injection is almost a necessity for all semiconductor laser applications. With high optical gains and balanced carrier mobility, the metal halide perovskites are promising for electrically pumped lasers. The recent realization of c.w. lasing further demonstrated the great potential of perovskites for electrically pumped lasers. However, there are many challenges ahead of us in reaching electrically pumped perovskite lasers. The first one is that the c.w. lasing in perovskites only operates at cryogenic temperature so far. The origin of c.w. lasing death in perovskites at room temperature remains unclear. Both theoretical and experimental investigations should be performed to uncover the c.w. lasing death mechanism to provide a guidance for the design of perovskites towards room-temperature c.w. lasing. The second challenge is the heat management in perovskite laser devices. Due to diffusive phonon transport, metal halide perovskites have low thermal conductivity ranging from 10−1 to 100 W m−1 K−1,291–294 which is one to two orders of magnitude lower than that in conventional inorganic semiconductors.295 Hence, the optimization of the device architecture is imperative for mitigating heat accumulation in the perovskite active layer towards electrically injected perovskite lasers. For example, the thin perovskite layer and high-thermal-conductivity substrate and carrier transport layer might be helpful for increasing heat dissipation. The third challenge is about lasing threshold of metal halide perovskites. The current density required for electrically injected lasing can be estimated based on the threshold pump fluence of optically pumped laser. Most of optically pumped perovskite lasers exhibited threshold pump fluences in the order of 103 nJ cm−2. The corresponding threshold current density is about 103 A cm−2,38,296 which is far beyond the capabilities of current perovskite electroluminescence devices. For one thing, the lasing thresholds of perovskites need to be further reduced. Without careful control of composition and structure, the metal halide perovskites usually exhibit limited luminescence efficiencies. Nevertheless, this problem has long been overlooked in the field of perovskite lasers. Actually, a number of strategies have been developed to enhance the luminescence of perovskites that make use of quantum effect, ion doping, and surface passivation.30,94,297,298 We hope to see that similar or other new strategies will be applied to increase the optical gains of perovskites for low-threshold lasing. For another thing, the carrier injection efficiency needs to be improved, which can be realized by engineering interfacial layers. For the interfacial layer engineering in perovskite electroluminescence devices, we refer the interested readers to several specialized reviews.30,299,300
The design and development of new metal halide perovskites has been and continues to be a research focus for laser applications. The chemical and structural diversity of metal halide perovskites provides a promising material platform for exploring various new perovskites for high-performance and multifunctional lasers. Lead-free perovskites are particularly important for solving the toxicity problem. There are plenty of metal ions that have potential to replace the toxic lead ions for perovskite lasers, such as tin, germanium, and silver/bismuth double-metal, among others.288–290 In addition, the synthesis of composite perovskite materials by integrating perovskites with other materials, such as traditional organic and inorganic semiconductors, is a promising research direction because they not only combine the advantages of each component, but also generate new functionalities based on the interactions between the component materials.301,302
The demonstration of applications of metal halide perovskite lasers is another research frontier. With outstanding performances, perovskite lasers have great potential in a wide range of applications, such as laser illumination, display, imaging, biological and chemical sensing, on-chip photonic integration, and so on. However, the application demonstration of perovskite lasers remains very limited so far. More research efforts should be directed to implementing perovskite lasers into various photonic applications.
In summary, the metal halide perovskites exhibited many characteristics that an ideal optical gain medium should have, such as high optical gains and balanced carrier mobility. In addition, the low-temperature solution-processability makes the perovskites promising materials for low-cost and large-area laser applications. The chemically tailorable bandgap of perovskites enables tunable lasing from visible to near-infrared spectral regions. Meanwhile, there are several drawbacks of metal halide perovskites for laser applications, including poor stability, toxicity and low thermal conductivity. Fortunately, these problems have been becoming less serious gradually. For example, the stability of perovskite lasers has been improved significantly through composition engineering and the encapsulation strategy. It is anticipated that more researchers will be drawn to this emerging and interesting field of perovskite lasers. We believe all problems encountered in perovskite lasers will be settled finally with the collective efforts of researchers from different academic communities of chemistry, materials science, and physics. The perovskite lasers will find many applications in the near future.
Abbreviations

0DZero-dimensional
1DOne-dimensional
2DTwo-dimensional
3DThree-dimensional
ASEAmplified spontaneous emission
BECBose–Einstein condensation
CBMConductance valence minimum
CVDChemical vapor deposition
c.w.Continuous-wave
DBRDistributed Bragg reflector
DFBDistributed feedback
FAFormamidinium
F–PFabry–Pérot
HOMOHighest occupied molecular orbital
LOMOLowest unoccupied molecular orbital
MAMethylammonium
PDMSPolydimethylsiloxane
PMMAPoly(methyl methacrylate)
PSPolystyrene

Q factorQuality factor
QDQuantum dot
RPRuddlesden–Popper
SIInternational System of Units
SPPSurface plasmon polariton
VBMValence band maximum
WGMWhispering–gallery–mode

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology of China (Grant No. 2017YFA0204502) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 21533013, 21790364 and 51903238).
References

          National Research Council, Optics and photonics: Essential technologies for our nation, National Academies Press,  2013 Search PubMed .

          M. Csele, Fundamentals of light sources and lasers, John Wiley & Sons,  2011 Search PubMed .

          S. C. Singh, H. Zeng, C. Guo and W. Cai, Lasers: Fundamentals, Types, and Operations, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,  2012 Search PubMed .
S. D. Stranks and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, M. O. Tade and Z. Shao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5371–5408 RSC .
R. Gottesman and A. Zaban, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 320–329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Lin, A. Armin, P. L. Burn and P. Meredith, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 545–553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. G. Park, M. Gratzel, T. Miyasaka, K. Zhu and K. Emery, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16152 CrossRef CAS .
J. Seo, J. H. Noh and S. I. Seok, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 562–572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, G. E. Eperon and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16048 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao and K. Zhu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 655–689 RSC .
J. Huang, Y. Yuan, Y. Shao and Y. Yan, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17042 CrossRef CAS .
J. Peng, Y. Chen, K. Zheng, T. Pullerits and Z. Liang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 5714–5729 RSC .
P. Gao, A. R. Bin Mohd Yusoff and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 5028 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Zhang, J. Wu, T. Zhang, Y. Wang, D. Liu, H. Chen, L. Ji, C. Liu, W. Ahmad, Z. D. Chen and S. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703737 CrossRef PubMed .
A. K. Jena, A. Kulkarni and T. Miyasaka, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 3036–3103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jung, S. G. Ji, G. Kim and S. I. Seok, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2011–2038 RSC .
H. Zhang, M. K. Nazeeruddin and W. C. H. Choy, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805702 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Ahmadi, T. Wu and B. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605242 CrossRef PubMed .
F. P. García de Arquer, A. Armin, P. Meredith and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 16100 CrossRef .
H. Wang and D. H. Kim, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 5204–5236 RSC .
J. Zhou and J. Huang, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700256 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Xie, C. K. Liu, H. L. Loi and F. Yan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 1903907 CrossRef .
B. R. Sutherland and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 295–302 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Veldhuis, P. P. Boix, N. Yantara, M. Li, T. C. Sum, N. Mathews and S. G. Mhaisalkar, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6804–6834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cho, Y. H. Kim, C. Wolf, H. D. Lee and T. W. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704587 CrossRef PubMed .

          T. Geske, S. G. R. Bade, M. Worden, X. Shan, J. Li and Z. Yu, Organometal Halide Perovskites for Next Generation Fully Printed and Flexible LEDs and Displays, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,  2018 Search PubMed .
L. N. Quan, F. P. Garcia de Arquer, R. P. Sabatini and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801996 CrossRef .
M. Lu, Y. Zhang, S. X. Wang, J. Guo, W. W. Yu and A. L. Rogach, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1902008 CrossRef .
L. N. Quan, B. P. Rand, R. H. Friend, S. G. Mhaisalkar, T. W. Lee and E. H. Sargent, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 7444–7477 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wei, Z. Cheng and J. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 310–350 RSC .
S. D. Stranks, R. L. Z. Hoye, D. Di, R. H. Friend and F. Deschler, Adv. Mater., 2019, e1803336 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, J. Liu, Z. Wang, Y. Xue, Q. Ou, L. Polavarapu, J. Zheng, X. Qi and Q. Bao, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 13637–13655 RSC .
S. Chen and A. V. Nurmikko, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2017, 23, 1–14 Search PubMed .
Q. Zhang, R. Su, W. Du, X. Liu, L. Zhao, S. T. Ha and Q. Xiong, Small Methods, 2017, 1, 1700163 CrossRef .
S. Makarov, A. Furasova, E. Tiguntseva, A. Hemmetter, A. Berestennikov, A. Pushkarev, A. Zakhidov and Y. Kivshar, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 7, 1800784 CrossRef .
K. Wang, S. Wang, S. Xiao and Q. Song, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1800278 CrossRef .
Q. Liao, X. Jin and H. Fu, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1900099 CrossRef .
Q. Wei, X. Li, C. Liang, Z. Zhang, J. Guo, G. Hong, G. Xing and W. Huang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1900080 CrossRef .
Y. Mi, Y. Zhong, Q. Zhang and X. Liu, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1900544 CrossRef .
C. Li, Z. Liu, Q. Shang and Q. Zhang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1900279 CrossRef .
A. P. Schlaus, M. S. Spencer and X. Y. Zhu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 10, 2950–2959 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M. Stylianakis, T. Maksudov, A. Panagiotopoulos, G. Kakavelakis and K. Petridis, Materials, 2019, 12, 859 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Im, C. R. Lee, J. W. Lee, S. W. Park and N. G. Park, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4088–4093 RSC .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, Q. Chen, G. Li, S. Luo, T.-b. Song, H.-S. Duan, Z. Hong, J. You, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, Science, 2014, 345, 542–546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Nature, 2015, 517, 476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, D. Bi, C. Yi, J. D. Decoppet, J. Luo, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt and M. Gratzel, Science, 2016, 353, 58–62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Yang, B.-W. Park, E. H. Jung, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, D. U. Lee, S. S. Shin, J. Seo, E. K. Kim, J. H. Noh and S. I. Seok, Science, 2017, 356, 1376–1379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Jiang, Y. Zhao, X. Zhang, X. Yang, Y. Chen, Z. Chu, Q. Ye, X. Li, Z. Yin and J. You, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 460–466 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kim, G.-H. Kim, T. K. Lee, I. W. Choi, H. W. Choi, Y. Jo, Y. J. Yoon, J. W. Kim, J. Lee, D. Huh, H. Lee, S. K. Kwak, J. Y. Kim and D. S. Kim, Joule, 2019, 9, 2179–2192 CrossRef .
Z.-K. Tan, R. S. Moghaddam, M. L. Lai, P. Docampo, R. Higler, F. Deschler, M. Price, A. Sadhanala, L. M. Pazos, D. Credgington, F. Hanusch, T. Bein, H. J. Snaith and R. H. Friend, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 687–692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cho, S.-H. Jeong, M.-H. Park, Y.-H. Kim, C. Wolf, C.-L. Lee, J. H. Heo, A. Sadhanala, N. Myoung, S. Yoo, S. H. Im, R. H. Friend and T.-W. Lee, Science, 2015, 350, 1222–1225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Wang, L. Cheng, R. Ge, S. Zhang, Y. Miao, W. Zou, C. Yi, Y. Sun, Y. Cao, R. Yang, Y. Wei, Q. Guo, Y. Ke, M. Yu, Y. Jin, Y. Liu, Q. Ding, D. Di, L. Yang, G. Xing, H. Tian, C. Jin, F. Gao, R. H. Friend, J. Wang and W. Huang, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 699 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yuan, L. N. Quan, R. Comin, G. Walters, R. Sabatini, O. Voznyy, S. Hoogland, Y. Zhao, E. M. Beauregard, P. Kanjanaboos, Z. Lu, D. H. Kim and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 872 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xiao, R. A. Kerner, L. Zhao, N. L. Tran, K. M. Lee, T.-W. Koh, G. D. Scholes and B. P. Rand, Nat. Photonics, 2017, 11, 108–115 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cao, N. Wang, H. Tian, J. Guo, Y. Wei, H. Chen, Y. Miao, W. Zou, K. Pan, Y. He, H. Cao, Y. Ke, M. Xu, Y. Wang, M. Yang, K. Du, Z. Fu, D. Kong, D. Dai, Y. Jin, G. Li, H. Li, Q. Peng, J. Wang and W. Huang, Nature, 2018, 562, 249–253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Lin, J. Xing, L. N. Quan, F. P. G. de Arquer, X. Gong, J. Lu, L. Xie, W. Zhao, D. Zhang, C. Yan, W. Li, X. Liu, Y. Lu, J. Kirman, E. H. Sargent, Q. Xiong and Z. Wei, Nature, 2018, 562, 245–248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. R. Sutherland, S. Hoogland, M. M. Adachi, P. Kanjanaboos, C. T. Wong, J. J. McDowell, J. Xu, O. Voznyy, Z. Ning, A. J. Houtepen and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 53–58 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Brenner, D. A. Egger, L. Kronik, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 15007 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kondo, T. Azuma, T. Yuasa and R. Ito, Solid State Commun., 1998, 105, 253–255 CrossRef CAS .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. S. Lim, N. Yantara, X. Liu, D. Sabba, M. Gratzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 476–480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Deschler, M. Price, S. Pathak, L. E. Klintberg, D.-D. Jarausch, R. Higler, S. Hüttner, T. Leijtens, S. D. Stranks, H. J. Snaith, M. Atatüre, R. T. Phillips and R. H. Friend, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1421–1426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, S. T. Ha, X. Liu, T. C. Sum and Q. Xiong, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5995–6001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, Y. Fu, F. Meng, X. Wu, Z. Gong, Q. Ding, M. V. Gustafsson, M. T. Trinh, S. Jin and X. Y. Zhu, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 636–642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liao, K. Hu, H. Zhang, X. Wang, J. Yao and H. Fu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3405–3410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, K. Roh, J. Lee, W. K. Chong, Y. Lu, N. Mathews, T. C. Sum and A. Nurmikko, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3959–3967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, C. Zhang, J. Lee, J. Han and A. Nurmikko, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604781 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Fu, H. Zhu, A. W. Schrader, D. Liang, Q. Ding, P. Joshi, L. Hwang, X. Y. Zhu and S. Jin, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1000–1008 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fu, H. Zhu, C. C. Stoumpos, Q. Ding, J. Wang, M. G. Kanatzidis, X. Zhu and S. Jin, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7963–7972 CrossRef CAS .
L. Huang, Q. Gao, L. D. Sun, H. Dong, S. Shi, T. Cai, Q. Liao and C. H. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800596 CrossRef .
S. Liu, W. Sun, Z. Gu, K. Wang, N. Zhang, S. Xiao and Q. Song, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 50553–50558 RSC .
Y. Jia, R. A. Kerner, A. J. Grede, B. P. Rand and N. C. Giebink, Nat. Photonics, 2017, 11, 784–788 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Gather, Nat. Photonics, 2017, 11, 745–747 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, Z. M. Wang, F. Deschler, S. Gao, R. H. Friend and A. K. Cheetham, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 16099 CrossRef .
G. Grancini and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 4, 4–22 CrossRef .
Y. Fu, H. Zhu, J. Chen, M. P. Hautzinger, X. Y. Zhu and S. Jin, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2019, 4, 169–188 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Stoumpos, C. D. Malliakas and M. G. Kanatzidis, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 9019–9038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Xu, S. Kopyl, A. Kholkin and J. Rocha, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2019, 387, 398–414 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, L. Yan and W. You, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802041 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Mao, C. C. Stoumpos and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 1171–1190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Shi, Y. Gao, B. P. Finkenauer, Akriti, A. H. Coffey and L. Dou, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6046–6072 RSC .
M. D. Smith, E. J. Crace, A. Jaffe and H. I. Karunadasa, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2018, 48, 111–136 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Smith and H. I. Karunadasa, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 619–627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fakharuddin, U. Shabbir, W. Qiu, T. Iqbal, M. Sultan, P. Heremans and L. Schmidt-Mende, Adv. Mater., 2019, e1807095 CrossRef .
C. Katan, N. Mercier and J. Even, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 3140–3192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Smith, B. A. Connor and H. I. Karunadasa, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 3104–3139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. A. Dunlap-Shohl, Y. Zhou, N. P. Padture and D. B. Mitzi, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 3193–3295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. V. Kovalenko, L. Protesescu and M. I. Bodnarchuk, Science, 2017, 358, 745–750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. A. Akkerman, G. Raino, M. V. Kovalenko and L. Manna, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 394–405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shamsi, A. S. Urban, M. Imran, L. De Trizio and L. Manna, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 3296–3348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dang, D. Ju, L. Wang and X. Tao, CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 4476–4484 RSC .
R. Babu, L. Giribabu and S. P. Singh, Cryst. Growth Des., 2018, 18, 2645–2664 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Z. Yang and S. F. Liu, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700471 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhu, Y. Fu, F. Meng, X. Wu, Z. Gong, Q. Ding, M. V. Gustafsson, M. T. Trinh, S. Jin and X. Y. Zhu, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 636–642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Eaton, M. Lai, N. A. Gibson, A. B. Wong, L. Dou, J. Ma, L.-W. Wang, S. R. Leone and P. Yang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 1993–1998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, R. Su, X. Liu, J. Xing, T. C. Sum and Q. Xiong, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 6238–6245 CrossRef CAS .
K. Park, J. W. Lee, J. D. Kim, N. S. Han, D. M. Jang, S. Jeong, J. Park and J. K. Song, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 3703–3710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, S. Yuan, X. Wang, T. Xu, X. Wang, H. Li, W. Zheng, P. Fan, Y. Li, L. Sun and A. Pan, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 1189–1195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Guo, M. K. Hossain, X. Shen, H. Sun, W. Yang, C. Liu, C. Y. Ho, C. K. Kwok, S.-W. Tsang, Y. Luo, J. C. Ho and K. M. Yu, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1700993 CrossRef .
J. Xing, X. F. Liu, Q. Zhang, S. T. Ha, Y. W. Yuan, C. Shen, T. C. Sum and Q. Xiong, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 4571–4577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. He, P. Liu, H. Zhang, Q. Liao, J. Yao and H. Fu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604510 CrossRef PubMed .
X. X. He, P. Liu, S. N. Wu, Q. Liao, J. N. Yao and H. B. Fu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 12707–12713 RSC .
Q. A. Akkerman, V. D’Innocenzo, S. Accornero, A. Scarpellini, A. Petrozza, M. Prato and L. Manna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10276–10281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Nedelcu, L. Protesescu, S. Yakunin, M. I. Bodnarchuk, M. J. Grotevent and M. V. Kovalenko, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5635–5640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Imran, V. Caligiuri, M. Wang, L. Goldoni, M. Prato, R. Krahne, L. De Trizio and L. Manna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 2656–2664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Pan, Y. Fu, J. Chen, K. J. Czech, J. C. Wright and S. Jin, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 1807–1813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, R. Haroldson, B. Balachandran, A. Zakhidov, S. Sohal, J. Y. Chan, A. Zakhidov and W. Hu, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 10921–10928 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhang, W. Sun, S. P. Rodrigues, K. Wang, Z. Gu, S. Wang, W. Cai, S. Xiao and Q. Song, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606205 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Zhizhchenko, S. Syubaev, A. Berestennikov, A. V. Yulin, A. Porfirev, A. Pushkarev, I. Shishkin, K. Golokhvast, A. A. Bogdanov, A. A. Zakhidov, A. A. Kuchmizhak, Y. S. Kivshar and S. V. Makarov, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 4140–4147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Umebayashi, K. Asai, T. Kondo and A. Nakao, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 67, 155405 CrossRef .
F. Brivio, K. T. Butler, A. Walsh and M. van Schilfgaarde, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 155204 CrossRef .
M. H. Du, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9091–9098 RSC .
G. Xing, M. H. Kumar, W. K. Chong, X. Liu, Y. Cai, H. Ding, M. Asta, M. Gratzel, S. Mhaisalkar, N. Mathews and T. C. Sum, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8191–8196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, M. T. Trinh, J. Wang, Y. Fu, P. P. Joshi, K. Miyata, S. Jin and X. Y. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603072 CrossRef PubMed .
L. M. Herz, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2016, 67, 65–89 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 146–154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saba, F. Quochi, A. Mura and G. Bongiovanni, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 166–173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. C. Sum, N. Mathews, G. Xing, S. S. Lim, W. K. Chong, D. Giovanni and H. A. Dewi, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 294–302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiang, X. Wang and A. Pan, Adv. Mater., 2019, e1806671 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Saha Meghnad and A. Fowler, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1921, 99, 135–153 CrossRef .
R. Cingolani, L. Calcagnile, G. Colí, R. Rinaldi, M. Lomoscolo, M. DiDio, A. Franciosi, L. Vanzetti, G. C. LaRocca and D. Campi, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 1996, 13, 1268–1277 CrossRef CAS .
V. D'Innocenzo, G. Grancini, M. J. Alcocer, A. R. Kandada, S. D. Stranks, M. M. Lee, G. Lanzani, H. J. Snaith and A. Petrozza, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3586 CrossRef PubMed .
J. S. Manser, J. A. Christians and P. V. Kamat, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 12956–13008 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          N. Mott, Metal-insulator transitions, CRC Press,  1990 Search PubMed .
W. Du, S. Zhang, Z. Wu, Q. Shang, Y. Mi, J. Chen, C. Qin, X. Qiu, Q. Zhang and X. Liu, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 3145–3153 RSC .
J. Collet, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1985, 46, 417–422 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Cardona and Y. Y. Peter, Fundamentals of semiconductors, Springer,  2005 Search PubMed .

          B. K. Ridley, Quantum processes in semiconductors, Oxford University Press,  2013 Search PubMed .

          P. Harrison, Quantum wells, wires and dots, Wiley Online Library,  2016 Search PubMed .
A. Miyata, A. Mitioglu, P. Plochocka, O. Portugall, J. T.-W. Wang, S. D. Stranks, H. J. Snaith and R. J. Nicholas, Nat. Phys., 2015, 11, 582–587 Search PubMed .
R. B. Dingle, Philos. Mag., 1955, 46, 831–840 CAS .
D. L. White, J. Appl. Phys., 1962, 33, 2547–2554 CrossRef .
J. C. Manifacier and H. K. Henisch, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1980, 41, 1285–1288 CrossRef CAS .
P. T. Landsberg, Eur. J. Phys., 1981, 2, 213–219 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Kulkarni and Z. Zhong, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 719–723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Manser and P. V. Kamat, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 737–743 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Schlaus, M. S. Spencer, K. Miyata, F. Liu, X. Wang, I. Datta, M. Lipson, A. Pan and X. Y. Zhu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 265 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, H. Chen, H. Zhou, X. Wang, S. Yuan, Z. Yang, X. Zhu, R. Ma and A. Pan, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 2393–2400 RSC .
Y. Bekenstein, B. A. Koscher, S. W. Eaton, P. Yang and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 16008–16011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Protesescu, S. Yakunin, M. I. Bodnarchuk, F. Krieg, R. Caputo, C. H. Hendon, R. X. Yang, A. Walsh and M. V. Kovalenko, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3692–3696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Butkus, P. Vashishtha, K. Chen, J. K. Gallaher, S. K. K. Prasad, D. Z. Metin, G. Laufersky, N. Gaston, J. E. Halpert and J. M. Hodgkiss, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 3644–3652 CrossRef CAS .
G. Almeida, L. Goldoni, Q. Akkerman, Z. Dang, A. H. Khan, S. Marras, I. Moreels and L. Manna, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 1704–1711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Pan, S. P. Sarmah, B. Murali, I. Dursun, W. Peng, M. R. Parida, J. Liu, L. Sinatra, N. Alyami, C. Zhao, E. Alarousu, T. K. Ng, B. S. Ooi, O. M. Bakr and O. F. Mohammed, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 5027–5033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tong, E. Bladt, M. F. Ayguler, A. Manzi, K. Z. Milowska, V. A. Hintermayr, P. Docampo, S. Bals, A. S. Urban, L. Polavarapu and J. Feldmann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 13887–13892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Vybornyi, S. Yakunin and M. V. Kovalenko, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 6278–6283 RSC .
Y. Wang, X. Li, J. Song, L. Xiao, H. Zeng and H. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7101–7108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yakunin, L. Protesescu, F. Krieg, M. I. Bodnarchuk, G. Nedelcu, M. Humer, G. De Luca, M. Fiebig, W. Heiss and M. V. Kovalenko, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Protesescu, S. Yakunin, M. I. Bodnarchuk, F. Bertolotti, N. Masciocchi, A. Guagliardi and M. V. Kovalenko, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 14202–14205 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, Q. Chen, C. Zhang, R. Wang, H. Wu, X. Zhang, G. Xing, W. W. Yu, X. Wang, Y. Zhang and M. Xiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 3761–3768 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-Y. Huang, C. Zou, C. Mao, K. L. Corp, Y.-C. Yao, Y.-J. Lee, C. W. Schlenker, A. K. Y. Jen and L. Y. Lin, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4, 2281–2289 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Veldhuis, Y. K. E. Tay, A. Bruno, S. S. H. Dintakurti, S. Bhaumik, S. K. Muduli, M. Li, N. Mathews, T. C. Sum and S. G. Mhaisalkar, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 7424–7432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. M. Li, V. Nalla, H. Zeng and H. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1605088 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, M. Zhi, Y. Q. Chang, J. P. Zhang and Y. Chan, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 4976–4984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, Q. Gao, P. Liu, Q. Liao, H. Zhang, J. Yao, W. Hu, Y. Wu and H. Fu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1707006 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, Q. Liao, Y. Wu, Z. Zhang, Q. Gao, P. Liu, M. Li, J. Yao and H. Fu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706186 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhang, Y. Wu, Q. Liao, Z. Zhang, Y. Liu, Q. Gao, P. Liu, M. Li, J. Yao and H. Fu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 7748–7752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, Q. Wei, S. K. Muduli, N. Yantara, Q. Xu, N. Mathews, S. G. Mhaisalkar, G. Xing and T. C. Sum, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1707235 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liang, Q. Shang, Q. Wei, L. Zhao, Z. Liu, J. Shi, Y. Zhong, J. Chen, Y. Gao, M. Li, X. Liu, G. Xing and Q. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1903030 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Miyata, T. L. Atallah and X.-Y. Zhu, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1701469 CrossRef PubMed .
S. A. Bretschneider, I. Ivanov, H. I. Wang, K. Miyata, X. Zhu and M. Bonn, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1707312 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Y. Zhu and V. Podzorov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4758–4761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Miyata, D. Meggiolaro, M. T. Trinh, P. P. Joshi, E. Mosconi, S. C. Jones, F. De Angelis and X.-Y. Zhu, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1701217 CrossRef PubMed .
H. H. Zhang, Q. Liao, X. D. Wang, J. N. Yao and H. B. Fu, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2016, 4, 1718–1725 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tang, H. Dong, L. Sun, W. Zheng, Q. Wang, F. Sun, X. Jiang, A. Pan and L. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 10681–10688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, Z. Gu, S. Liu, J. Li, S. Xiao and Q. Song, Opt. Lett., 2016, 41, 555–558 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, J. Lu, M. ZhuGe, Y. Cheng, J. Hu, F. Li, S. Qiao, Y. Zhang, G. Hu, Q. Yang, D. Peng, K. Liu and C. Pan, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1900647 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Zhang, Y. Fan, K. Wang, Z. Gu, Y. Wang, L. Ge, S. Xiao and Q. Song, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1770 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. J. Li, Y. Lv, C. L. Zou, W. Zhang, J. Yao and Y. S. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2122–2125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, Y. Wang and H. Sun, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 1136–1162 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, J. Yao and Y. S. Zhao, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 1691–1700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, L. Peng, J. Liu, A. Tang, J. S. Hu, J. Yao and Y. S. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4040–40466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Winn and M. F. Doherty, AIChE J., 2000, 46, 1348–1367 CrossRef CAS .

          K. A. Jackson, Kinetic Processes: crystal growth, diffusion, and phase transformations in materials, John Wiley & Sons,  2006 Search PubMed .
Z. Gu, K. Wang, H. Li, M. Gao, L. Li, M. Kuang, Y. S. Zhao, M. Li and Y. Song, Small, 2017, 13, 1603217 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Gu, Z. Huang, C. Li, M. Li and Y. Song, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaat2390 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Fu, T. Wu, J. Wang, J. Zhai, M. J. Shearer, Y. Zhao, R. J. Hamers, E. Kan, K. Deng, X. Y. Zhu and S. Jin, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4405–4414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. J. S. Evans, A. Schlaus, Y. Fu, X. Zhong, T. L. Atallah, M. S. Spencer, L. E. Brus, S. Jin and X. Y. Zhu, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1700982 CrossRef .
N. Pourdavoud, S. Wang, A. Mayer, T. Hu, Y. Chen, A. Marianovich, W. Kowalsky, R. Heiderhoff, H.-C. Scheer and T. Riedl, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605003 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Gharajeh, R. Haroldson, Z. Li, J. Moon, B. Balachandran, W. Hu, A. Zakhidov and Q. Gu, Opt. Lett., 2018, 43, 611–614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, J. Moon, A. Gharajeh, R. Haroldson, R. Hawkins, W. Hu, A. Zakhidov and Q. Gu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 10968–10976 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Pourdavoud, T. Haeger, A. Mayer, P. J. Cegielski, A. L. Giesecke, R. Heiderhoff, S. Olthof, S. Zaefferer, I. Shutsko, A. Henkel, D. Becker-Koch, M. Stein, M. Cehovski, O. Charfi, H. H. Johannes, D. Rogalla, M. C. Lemme, M. Koch, Y. Vaynzof, K. Meerholz, W. Kowalsky, H. C. Scheer, P. Gorrn and T. Riedl, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1903717 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Chen and H. Tuysuz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 13806–13810 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Schünemann, S. Brittman, K. Chen, E. C. Garnett and H. Tüysüz, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4, 2522–2528 CrossRef .
B. R. Sutherland, S. Hoogland, M. M. Adachi, C. T. O. Wong and E. H. Sargent, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 10947–10952 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Brenner, M. Stulz, D. Kapp, T. Abzieher, U. W. Paetzold, A. Quintilla, I. A. Howard, H. Kalt and U. Lemmer, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 141106 CrossRef .
H. Cha, S. Bae, M. Lee and H. Jeon, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 181104 CrossRef .
Y. Jia, R. A. Kerner, A. J. Grede, A. N. Brigeman, B. P. Rand and N. C. Giebink, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4624–4629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saliba, S. M. Wood, J. B. Patel, P. K. Nayak, J. Huang, J. A. Alexander-Webber, B. Wenger, S. D. Stranks, M. T. Horantner, J. T. Wang, R. J. Nicholas, L. M. Herz, M. B. Johnston, S. M. Morris, H. J. Snaith and M. K. Riede, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 923–929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. L. Whitworth, J. R. Harwell, D. N. Miller, G. J. Hedley, W. Zhang, H. J. Snaith, G. A. Turnbull and I. D. W. Samuel, Opt. Express, 2016, 24, 23677–23684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Alias, Z. Liu, A. Al-Atawi, T. K. Ng, T. Wu and B. S. Ooi, Opt. Lett., 2017, 42, 3618–3621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cha, S. Bae, H. Jung, M. J. Ko and H. Jeon, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1700545 CrossRef .
S. Chen and A. Nurmikko, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4, 2486–2494 CrossRef CAS .
F. Mathies, P. Brenner, G. Hernandez-Sosa, I. A. Howard, U. W. Paetzold and U. Lemmer, Opt. Express, 2018, 26, A144–A152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. E. Carroll, J. Whiteaway, D. Plumb and R. Plumb, Distributed feedback semiconductor lasers, IET,  1998 Search PubMed .

          G. P. Agrawal and N. K. Dutta, Semiconductor lasers, Springer US, Boston, MA,  2013 Search PubMed .

          A. Baranov and E. Tournie, Semiconductor lasers: Fundamentals and applications, Elsevier,  2013 Search PubMed .
A. Laubsch, M. Sabathil, J. Baur, M. Peter and B. Hahn, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2010, 57, 79–87 CAS .
H. Dong, C. Zhang and Y. S. Zhao, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1900037 CrossRef .
X. Zhuang, Y. Ouyang, X. Wang and A. Pan, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1900071 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, J. Liu, Z.-Q. Xu, Y. Xue, L. Jiang, J. Song, F. Huang, Y. Wang, Y. L. Zhong, Y. Zhang, Y.-B. Cheng and Q. Bao, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 6258–6264 RSC .
L. Dou, M. Lai, C. S. Kley, Y. Yang, C. G. Bischak, D. Zhang, S. W. Eaton, N. S. Ginsberg and P. Yang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 7216–7221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Tian, J. Leng, C. Zhao and S. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 579–582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Z. Chen, F. Deschler, X. Sun, T.-M. Lu, E. A. Wertz, J.-M. Hu and J. Shi, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 3355–3364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Kong, W. Lee, M. Lai, C. G. Bischak, G. Gao, A. B. Wong, T. Lei, Y. Yu, L.-W. Wang, N. S. Ginsberg and P. Yang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 8889–8894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Kuehne and M. C. Gather, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 12823–12864 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Q. Grim, S. Christodoulou, F. Di Stasio, R. Krahne, R. Cingolani, L. Manna and I. Moreels, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Adachi, F. Fan, D. P. Sellan, S. Hoogland, O. Voznyy, A. J. Houtepen, K. D. Parrish, P. Kanjanaboos, J. A. Malen and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Fan, O. Voznyy, R. P. Sabatini, K. T. Bicanic, M. M. Adachi, J. R. McBride, K. R. Reid, Y. S. Park, X. Li, A. Jain, R. Quintero-Bermudez, M. Saravanapavanantham, M. Liu, M. Korkusinski, P. Hawrylak, V. I. Klimov, S. J. Rosenthal, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, Nature, 2017, 544, 75–79 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Geiregat, A. J. Houtepen, L. K. Sagar, I. Infante, F. Zapata, V. Grigel, G. Allan, C. Delerue, D. Van Thourhout and Z. Hens, Nat. Mater., 2017, 17, 35 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yang, M. Pelton, I. Fedin, D. V. Talapin and E. Waks, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 143 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Brenner, O. Bar-On, M. Jakoby, I. Allegro, B. S. Richards, U. W. Paetzold, I. A. Howard, J. Scheuer and U. Lemmer, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 988 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Liu, J. Yang, J. Du, Z. Hu, T. Shi, Z. Zhang, Y. Liu, X. Tang, Y. Leng and R. Li, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 5923–5931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Tang, L. Sun, W. Zheng, H. Dong, B. Zhao, Q. Si, X. Wang, X. Jiang, A. Pan and L. Zhang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1800391 CrossRef .
C. Zhang, C.-L. Zou, H. Dong, Y. Yan, J. Yao and Y. S. Zhao, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700225 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Eldada, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2004, 75, 575–593 CrossRef CAS .
E. B. Desurvire, J. Lightwave Technol., 2006, 24, 4697–4710 Search PubMed .
J. Madeo, P. Cavalie, J. R. Freeman, N. Jukam, J. Maysonnave, K. Maussang, H. E. Beere, D. A. Ritchie, C. Sirtori, J. Tignon and S. S. Dhillon, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 519–524 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, Y. Yan, C. Wei, W. Zhang, Z. Gao and Y. S. Zhao, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 1241–1245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Hill and M. C. Gather, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 908–918 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Eaton, A. Fu, A. B. Wong, C.-Z. Ning and P. Yang, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16028 CrossRef CAS .
R.-M. Ma and R. F. Oulton, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2019, 14, 12–22 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V. Zayats, I. I. Smolyaninov and A. A. Maradudin, Phys. Rep., 2005, 408, 131–314 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, W. Wang, M. P. Knudson, G. C. Schatz and T. W. Odom, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 2865–2881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wu, Y. Gao, P. Z. Xu, X. Guo, P. Wang, D. Dai and L. Tong, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1900334 CrossRef .
M. A. Noginov, G. Zhu, A. M. Belgrave, R. Bakker, V. M. Shalaev, E. E. Narimanov, S. Stout, E. Herz, T. Suteewong and U. Wiesner, Nature, 2009, 460, 1110–1112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. F. Oulton, V. J. Sorger, T. Zentgraf, R. M. Ma, C. Gladden, L. Dai, G. Bartal and X. Zhang, Nature, 2009, 461, 629–632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. F. Oulton, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 219–221 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yu, K. Ren, Q. Wu, J. Wang, J. Lin, Z. Wang, J. Xu, R. F. Oulton, S. Qu and P. Jin, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 19536–19540 RSC .
C. Huang, W. Sun, Y. Fan, Y. Wang, Y. Gao, N. Zhang, K. Wang, S. Liu, S. Wang, S. Xiao and Q. Song, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 3865–3874 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wu, J. Chen, Y. Mi, X. Sui, S. Zhang, W. Du, R. Wang, J. Shi, X. Wu, X. Qiu, Z. Qin, Q. Zhang and X. Liu, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1800674 CrossRef .
K. Ren, J. Wang, S. Chen, Q. Yang, J. Tian, H. Yu, M. Sun, X. Zhu, S. Yue, Y. Sun, K. Liu, M. Azam, Z. Wang, P. Jin, S. Qu and Z. Wang, Laser Photonics Rev., 2019, 13, 1800306 CrossRef .
B. Redding, M. A. Choma and H. Cao, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 355–359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Sapienza, Nat. Rev. Phys., 2019, 1, 690–695 CrossRef .
S. W. Chang, W. C. Liao, Y. M. Liao, H. I. Lin, H. Y. Lin, W. J. Lin, S. Y. Lin, P. Perumal, G. Haider, C. T. Tai, K. C. Shen, C. H. Chang, Y. F. Huang, T. Y. Lin and Y. F. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 2720 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Redding, H. Cao and M. A. Choma, Opt. Photonics News, 2012, 23, 30 CrossRef .
T. S. Kao, Y. H. Chou, K. B. Hong, J. F. Huang, C. H. Chou, H. C. Kuo, F. C. Chen and T. C. Lu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 18483–18488 RSC .
S. Liu, W. Sun, J. Li, Z. Gu, K. Wang, S. Xiao and Q. Song, Opt. Eng., 2016, 55, 057102 CrossRef .
A. Safdar, Y. Wang and T. F. Krauss, Opt. Express, 2018, 26, A75–A84 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Dhanker, A. N. Brigeman, A. V. Larsen, R. J. Stewart, J. B. Asbury and N. C. Giebink, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 151112 CrossRef .
Z.-F. Shi, X.-G. Sun, D. Wu, T.-T. Xu, Y.-T. Tian, Y.-T. Zhang, X.-J. Li and G.-T. Du, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 8373–8379 RSC .
Y. C. Wang, H. Li, Y. H. Hong, K. B. Hong, F. C. Chen, C. H. Hsu, R. K. Lee, C. Conti, T. S. Kao and T. C. Lu, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 5421–5429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gottardo, R. Sapienza, P. D. García, A. Blanco, D. S. Wiersma and C. López, Nat. Photonics, 2008, 2, 429–432 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Y. Wang, H. Sun and H. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701185 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Byrnes, N. Y. Kim and Y. Yamamoto, Nat. Phys., 2014, 10, 803 Search PubMed .
H. Deng, G. Weihs, D. Snoke, J. Bloch and Y. Yamamoto, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2003, 100, 15318–15323 CrossRef CAS .
H. Deng, G. Weihs, C. Santori, J. Bloch and Y. Yamamoto, Science, 2002, 298, 199–202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kasprzak, M. Richard, S. Kundermann, A. Baas, P. Jeambrun, J. M. J. Keeling, F. M. Marchetti, M. H. Szymanska, R. Andre, J. L. Staehli, V. Savona, P. B. Littlewood, B. Deveaud and L. S. Dang, Nature, 2006, 443, 409–414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Das, J. Heo, M. Jankowski, W. Guo, L. Zhang, H. Deng and P. Bhattacharya, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 107, 066405 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Schneider, A. Rahimi-Iman, N. Y. Kim, J. Fischer, I. G. Savenko, M. Amthor, M. Lermer, A. Wolf, L. Worschech, V. D. Kulakovskii, I. A. Shelykh, M. Kamp, S. Reitzenstein, A. Forchel, Y. Yamamoto and S. Höfling, Nature, 2013, 497, 348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kéna-Cohen and S. R. Forrest, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 371–375 CrossRef .
J. D. Plumhof, T. Stöferle, L. Mai, U. Scherf and R. F. Mahrt, Nat. Mater., 2013, 13, 247 CrossRef PubMed .
K. S. Daskalakis, S. A. Maier, R. Murray and S. Kéna-Cohen, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Su, C. Diederichs, J. Wang, T. C. H. Liew, J. Zhao, S. Liu, W. Xu, Z. Chen and Q. Xiong, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3982–3988 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Su, J. Wang, J. Zhao, J. Xing, W. Zhao, C. Diederichs, T. C. H. Liew and Q. Xiong, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaau0244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Bao, X. Liu, F. Xue, F. Zheng, R. Tao, S. Wang, Y. Xia, M. Zhao, J. Kim, S. Yang, Q. Li, Y. Wang, Y. Wang, L. W. Wang, A. H. MacDonald and X. Zhang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2019, 116, 20274–20279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yan and Y. S. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1330–1332 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fischer, I. G. Savenko, M. D. Fraser, S. Holzinger, S. Brodbeck, M. Kamp, I. A. Shelykh, C. Schneider and S. Höfling, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 113, 203902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Xu, W. Xie, W. Liu, J. Wang, L. Zhang, Y. Wang, S. Zhang, L. Sun, X. Shen and Z. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 082101 CrossRef .
J.-W. Kang, B. Song, W. Liu, S.-J. Park, R. Agarwal and C.-H. Cho, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaau9338 CrossRef PubMed .
J. P. Reithmaier, G. Sęk, A. Löffler, C. Hofmann, S. Kuhn, S. Reitzenstein, L. V. Keldysh, V. D. Kulakovskii, T. L. Reinecke and A. Forchel, Nature, 2004, 432, 197–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Deng, H. Haug and Y. Yamamoto, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2010, 82, 1489–1537 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dvorak, S. H. Wei and Z. Wu, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2013, 110, 016402 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, M. Shoaib, X. Wang, X. Zhang, M. He, Z. Luo, W. Zheng, H. Li, T. Yang, X. Zhu, L. Ma and A. Pan, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 6170–6178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, Q. Shang, W. Du, J. Shi, Z. Wu, Y. Mi, J. Chen, F. Liu, Y. Li, M. Liu, Q. Zhang and X. Liu, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1701032 CrossRef .
W. Du, S. Zhang, J. Shi, J. Chen, Z. Wu, Y. Mi, Z. Liu, Y. Li, X. Sui, R. Wang, X. Qiu, T. Wu, Y. Xiao, Q. Zhang and X. Liu, ACS Photonics, 2018, 5, 2051–2059 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, F. J. Ye, W. Q. Yang, Z. J. Xu, D. Y. Luo, R. Su, Y. F. Zhang, R. Zhu and Q. H. Gong, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 4590–4596 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wu, X. Wang, X. Han, Z. Yang, G. Gao, Y. Zhang, J. Hu, Y. Tan, A. Pan and C. Pan, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1805913 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lei, Y. Chen, Y. Gu, C. Wang, Z. Huang, H. Qian, J. Nie, G. Hollett, W. Choi, Y. Yu, N. Kim, C. Wang, T. Zhang, H. Hu, Y. Zhang, X. Li, Y. Li, W. Shi, Z. Liu, M. J. Sailor, L. Dong, Y. H. Lo, J. Luo and S. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1705992 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Feng, X. Yan, Y. Zhang, X. Wang, Y. Wu, B. Su, H. Fu and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3732–3741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Liu, X. He, J. Ren, Q. Liao, J. Yao and H. Fu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5766–5773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Duan, Y. Wang, G. Li, S. Wang, N. Yi, S. Liu, S. Xiao and Q. Song, Laser Photonics Rev., 2018, 12, 1700234 CrossRef .
J. Zhao, Y. Yan, Z. Gao, Y. Du, H. Dong, J. Yao and Y. S. Zhao, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 870 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Liu, L. Niu, C. Wu, C. Cong, H. Wang, Q. Zeng, H. He, Q. Fu, W. Fu, T. Yu, C. Jin, Z. Liu and T. C. Sum, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1600137 CrossRef PubMed .
C. H. Lin, Q. Zeng, E. Lafalce, S. Yu, M. J. Smith, Y. J. Yoon, Y. Chang, Y. Jiang, Z. Lin, Z. V. Vardeny and V. V. Tsukruk, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1800474 CrossRef .
C. C. Boyd, R. Cheacharoen, T. Leijtens and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 3418–3451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. W. Park and S. I. Seok, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805337 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Amat, E. Mosconi, E. Ronca, C. Quarti, P. Umari, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Gratzel and F. De Angelis, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3608–3616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yuan, Z. Wu, H. Dong, J. Xi, K. Xi, G. Divitini, B. Jiao, X. Hou, S. Wang and Q. Gong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 15318–15325 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lv, L. Li, M. Xu, J. Hong, X. Tang, L. Xu, Y. Wu, R. Zhu, R. Chen and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1900682 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yu, X. Cheng, Y. Wang, Y. Liu, K. Rong, Z. Li, Y. Wan, W. Gong, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, S. Wang, J. Chen, Y. Ye and L. Dai, ACS Photonics, 2018, 5, 4520–4528 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhao, W. Tian, J. Liu, Q. Sun, J. Luo, H. Yuan, B. Gai, J. Tang, J. Guo and S. Jin, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 2357–2362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Hu, Z. Liu, Y. Bian, D. J. Liu, X. Tang, W. Hu, Z. Zang, M. Zhou, L. Sun, J. Tang, Y. Q. Li, J. Du and Y. Leng, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1700419 CrossRef .
X. Tang, J. Yang, S. Li, Z. Liu, Z. Hu, J. Hao, J. Du, Y. Leng, H. Qin, X. Lin, Y. Lin, Y. Tian, M. Zhou and Q. Xiong, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hu, B. Dong and W. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11436–11449 RSC .
M. Lyu, J.-H. Yun, P. Chen, M. Hao and L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602512 CrossRef .
W. Ning and F. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1900326 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Pisoni, J. Jacimovic, O. S. Barisic, M. Spina, R. Gaal, L. Forro and E. Horvath, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2488–2492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Guo, S. J. Yoon, J. S. Manser, P. V. Kamat and T. Luo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 6394–6401 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kovalsky, L. Wang, G. T. Marek, C. Burda and J. S. Dyck, J. Phys. Chem.
C, 2017, 121, 3228–3233 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lee, H. Li, A. B. Wong, D. Zhang, M. Lai, Y. Yu, Q. Kong, E. Lin, J. J. Urban, J. C. Grossman and P. Yang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 8693–8697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. Levinshtein, S. Rumyantsev and M. Shur, Handbook series on semiconductor parameters, World Scientific,  1996 Search PubMed .
M. R. Leyden, S. Terakawa, T. Matsushima, S. Ruan, K. Goushi, M. Auffray, A. S. D. Sandanayaka, C. Qin, F. Bencheikh and C. Adachi, ACS Photonics, 2019, 6, 460–466 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, L. Li, Z. Sun and J. Luo, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 517–539 RSC .
Y. H. Kim, J. S. Kim and T. W. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2019, e1804595 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Schulz, D. Cahen and A. Kahn, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 3349–3417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. H. Han, S. Tan, J. Xue, L. Meng, J. W. Lee and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2019, e1803515 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhang, H. Dong and Y. S. Zhao, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1701193 CrossRef .
H. Dong, C. Zhang and Y. S. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 5600–5609 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Haiyun Dong
	Haiyun Dong received his BS degree in applied chemistry from Northeast Forestry University in 2011 and PhD degree in materials chemistry from Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2017. His research interests are photonic and optoelectronic properties of organic and organic–inorganic hybrid nanomaterials.

Chunhuan Zhang
	Chunhuan Zhang received her PhD degree in chemistry from the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICCAS) in 2017. She is currently a postdoctoral research fellow in Prof. Jiannian Yao's group at ICCAS. Her research interests are photonic and optoelectronic properties of organic nanomaterials.

Xiaolong Liu
	Xiaolong Liu received his BS and MS degrees from Shandong University in 2013 and 2016, respectively. He is pursuing his PhD under the supervision of Prof. Yong Sheng Zhao at ICCAS. His research interests include optoelectronic properties and applications of crystalline organic–inorganic hybrid materials.

Jiannian Yao
	Jiannian Yao received his PhD degree from Tokyo University in 1993. He is currently a professor of chemistry and materials science at the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences and serves as the president of Chinese Chemical Society. His research interests relate to photofunctional and optoelectronic materials.

Yong Sheng Zhao
	Yong Sheng Zhao received his PhD degree in 2006 from ICCAS. After that, he joined the University of California at Los Angeles and Northwestern University as a postdoctoral fellow. In 2009, he returned to ICCAS as a Professor of Chemistry. His research interests are in the areas of molecular electronics and photonics, currently focusing on organic micro/nanoscale lasers towards applications in displays and sensing.

 	Fig. 1  Perovskite crystal structure. (A and B) Schematic diagram of the perovskite unit cell and crystal packing. (C) Illustration of 2D RP perovskites with different numbers of perovskite layers (n).	 
AX + BX2 → ABX3	(2.1)

 	Fig. 2  Fabrication and processing of metal halide perovskites. (A) Schematic diagrams of fabrication techniques of perovskite films: (i) spin-coating, (ii) spray-coating, (iii) inkjet-printing, (iv) blade-coating, and (v) vapor-phase deposition. (B) Schematic of synthesis methods of perovskite micro/nanocrystals: (i) liquid-phase assembly and (ii) chemical vapor deposition. (C) Illustration of reprocessing techniques of perovskites: (i) ion exchange, (ii) imprinting, and (ii) lithography.	 
PbY2(s) + 4X−(l) → [PbX4]2−(l) + 2Y−(l)	(2.2)
[PbX4]2−(l) + A+(l) → APbX3(s) + X−(l)	(2.3)
ABX3 + yX′− → ABX3−yX′y + yX−	(2.4)

 	Fig. 3  Electronic structure of metal halide perovskites. (A) Bonding diagram of the 0D [BX6]4− cluster. (B) Electronic band structure of MAPbI3 calculated using the QSGW formalism. Orbital contributions are indicated by I 5p (green), Pb 6p (red), and Pb 6s (blue). (C) Density of states (DOS) of tetragonal MAPbI3 calculated with semilocal density functional theory (DFT). (A) Reprinted with permission from ref. 114. Copyright 2003 American Physical Society. (B) Reprinted with permission from ref. 115. Copyright 2014 American Physical Society. (C) Reprinted with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
	(2.5)

 	Fig. 4  Photophysics in metal halide perovskites. (A) Free charge fraction over the total excitation density at room temperature for different exciton binding energies calculated through the Saha–Langmuir equation, with mr = 0.1 m0. (B) Time-resolved lasing spectrum of CsPbBr3 nanowires. (C) Schematic of stimulated emission from electron–hole plasma coupled with plasmon emission. (D) Cartoon of polaron formation through the interaction of the electron/hole with the lead-halide lattice. (A) Reprinted with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (B and C) Reprinted with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2014 Springer Nature. (D) Reprinted with permission from ref. 164. Copyright 2014 John Wiley and Sons.	 
aBlD−1 = 1.19	(2.6)
	(2.7)
	(2.8)
	(2.9)
	(2.10)

 	Fig. 5  Self-organized intrinsic cavities of metal halide perovskites. (A) Perovskite crystals with different morphologies, including 1D (i) nanowires, 2D (ii) triangular, (iii) tetragonal, (iv) hexagonal, and (v) octagonal microdisks, and 3D (vi) microspheres. (B) Optical trajectories and (C) simulated field distributions in wire, triangular, tetragonal, hexagonal, octagonal, and circular perovskite cavities. (Ai) Reprinted with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (Aii and iv) Reprinted with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (Aiii) Reprinted with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2015 John Wiley and Sons. (Av) Reprinted with permission from ref. 167. Copyright 2016 John Wiley and Sons. (Avi) Reprinted with permission from ref. 168. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Controllable syntheses of perovskite microcrystals with particular morphologies. (A) Schematic illustration showing the surfactant assisted self-assembly mechanism of MAPbBr3 microcrystals. (B and C) Photoluminescence (PL) images of MAPbBr3 nanowires and square microplates. Insets: Corresponding bright-field optical images. (D) Schematic diagram of the experimental set-up used for the CVD growth of CsPbBr3 microcrystals. (E and F) Scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of CsPbBr3 microplates and nanorods. (A–C) Reprinted with permission from ref. 175. Copyright 2016 John Wiley and Sons. (D–F) Reprinted with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Crystal growth kinetics of metal halide perovskites. The central panel is a simulated crystal morphology of the cubic-phase CsPbBr3 perovskite based on the Bravais–Friedel–Donnay–Harker method. The dark arrows denote the growth faces. The surrounding panels exhibit four kinds of theoretically predicted crystal morphologies.	 

 	Fig. 8  Processed intrinsic cavities of metal halide perovskites. (A) SEM image of a lamellar MAPbBr3 single crystal. (B) SEM image of an etched MAPbBr3 microdisk. (C) Schematic illustration showing the fabrication of perovskite microdisks through laser ablation with a donut-shaped femtosecond laser beam. (D) False-color SEM image of the laser imprinted MAPbI3 microdisks. (E) Schematic diagram of template-induced solution growth of perovskite microring cavities. (F and G) PL and SEM images of RP perovskite microrings. (H) Schematic of patterning DFB grating onto the perovskite film through nanoimprint lithography. (I) Simulated TE0 mode profile in the nanoimprinted DFB cavity. (J) SEM images of the nanoimprinted MAPbI3 DFB cavity. (K) Cartoon showing the preparation route for 3D perovskite photonic crystals. (L) SEM image of the MAPbBr3 photonic crystal cavity. Inset: SEM image of the artificial opal template of polystyrene. (A and B) Reprinted with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2017 John Wiley and Sons. (C and D) Reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (E–G) Reprinted with permission from ref. 159. Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons. (H–J) Reprinted with permission from ref. 184. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (K) Reprinted with permission from ref. 186. Copyright 2015 John Wiley and Sons. (L) Reprinted with permission from ref. 187. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Extrinsic optical microcavities for metal halide perovskite lasers. (A and B) Side-view and cross-section SEM image of a microsphere cavity coated with MAPbI3. (C and D) Schematic diagrams of perovskite-coated microsphere and capillary cavities with circular WGM laser resonances. (A–C) Reprinted with permission from ref. 188. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (D) Reprinted with permission from ref. 150. Copyright 2015 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 10  Extrinsic DFB and DBR cavities for metal halide perovskite lasers. (A) Schematic diagram of a generic DFB cavity. (B) SEM image of a 1D DFB cavity engraved onto a fused quartz substrate. Inset: Cross-sectional image of the FAPbX3 perovskite-coated 1D DFB device. (C) Photograph of the far-field beam pattern of the 1D second-order DFB lasers. (D) SEM of a 2D DFB cavity patterned on a quartz substrate. Inset: Cross-sectional image of the MAPbI3 perovskite-coated 2D DFB device. (E) Far-field beam pattern of the 2D DFB lasers. (F) Schematic fabrication of perovskite DBR lasers. The three panels show a DBR, a perovskite-coated DBR, and a perovskite DBR laser, respectively. (G) Cross-sectional SEM image of a perovskite DBR laser device. (H) Far-field beam pattern of the perovskite DBR lasers. (I) Schematic of a hybrid cavity comprising a DBR and a gold mirror for perovskite lasers. (A) Reprinted with permission from ref. 192. Copyright 2016 John Wiley and Sons. (B) Reprinted with permission from ref. 195. Copyright 2017 John Wiley and Sons. (C) Reprinted with permission from ref. 191. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (D and E) Reprinted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (F–H) Reprinted with permission from ref. 196. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (I) Reprinted with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 
2neffΛ = mλBragg	(3.1)

 	Fig. 11  Tunable metal halide perovskite lasers. Lasing spectra from single-crystal nanowires of (A) methylammonium lead perovskites, (B) MABr-stabilized formamidinium lead perovskites, and (C) cesium lead perovskites with different stoichiometric ratios of halide anions. (D) ASE spectra from cesium tin perovskite films with different stoichiometric ratios of halide anions. (A) Reprinted with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2015 Springer Nature. (B) Reprinted with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (C) Reprinted with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (D) Reprinted with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2016 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 12  Dual-color lasing from composition-graded perovskite nanowires. (A) Schematic illustration of the growth process of composition-graded CsPbBrxI3−x nanowires. (B) Schematic of the CsPbBrxI3−x nanowire heterojunction with graded bandgap. (C) Merged confocal laser scanning microscope images in green and yellow channels. (D) Lasing spectra collected from different positions of a CsPbBrxI3−x nanowire heterojunction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 13  Continuous-wave lasing in metal halide perovskites. (A) Cross-section SEM image of a second-order DFB laser architecture consisting of a silicon grating coated successively with a gold layer, an alumina layer, and a MAPbI3 film. (B) Output intensity of the perovskite DFB laser under the excitation of an InGaN diode laser (25 ns pulse duration, 1 kHz/2 MHz repetition rate) with increasing power at low temperature T = 160 K. (C) Time-resolved emission (red line) of the DFB perovskite laser pumped by a 195 nm duration pulse (blue line). (D) Cross-section SEM image of a second-order DFB laser device comprising a MAPbI3 film deposited on an alumina grating on a sapphire substrate. (E) Time-resolved emission spectra of the MAPbI3 film at a temperature of T = 106 K. (F) Emission spectra from the DFB perovskite laser under c.w. excitation by a 445 nm InGaN pump diode at 102 K. (G) Atomic force microscope (AFM) image of the Cs0.1(MA0.17FA0.83)0.9Pb0.84(I0.84Br0.16)2.68 perovskite film. (H) Normalized emission spectra of the mixed-cation perovskite film under c.w. excitation of increasing power. (I) Excitation intensity-dependent emission intensity and full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the mixed-cation perovskite film. (A–C) Reprinted with permission from ref. 191. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (D–F) Reprinted with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2017 Springer Nature. (G–I) Reprinted with permission from ref. 215. Copyright 2019 Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 14  Single-mode perovskite micro/nanolasers. (A) SEM image of CsPbBr3 nanocuboids. (B) Emission spectra of a single CsPbBr3 nanocuboid at different excitation intensities. (C) Integrated emission intensity from the nanocuboid as a function of pump fluence. (D) SEM image of MAPbI3 microdisks. (E) Emission spectra of a single MAPbI3 microdisk at different excitation intensities. (F) Integrated emission intensity from the microdisk as a function of pump fluence. (G) SEM image of a perovskite coupled cavity comprising two rectangular MAPbBr3 microplates. (H) Emission spectra of a MAPbBr3 coupled cavity at different excitation intensities. (I) Integrated emission intensity from the coupled cavity as a function of pump fluence. (A–C) Reprinted with permission from ref. 216. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (D–F) Reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (G–I) Reprinted with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 15  Tunable single-mode perovskite micro/nanolasers. (A) Optical image of a MAPbBr3 nanowire coupled with a polystyrene microdisk. (B) Simulated electric field distributions of two modes in a wire-disk coupled cavity under air and acetone atmospheres. (C) Lasing spectra (top) of a nanowire laser coupled with a tunable microdisk cavity. Transmittance spectra (bottom) of the coupled microcavity before and after acetone treatment showing the mode filtering effect. (D) Schematic diagram showing piezoelectric-induced dynamic modulation of single-mode perovskite microwire lasers. (E) Single-mode lasing from a perovskite microwire under different tensile and compressive strains. (F) Schematic illustration of piezoelectric polarization resulting from Pb and Br displacements (left panel) and PbBr6 octahedron distortion (right panel) under a tensile stress. (G) Piezoelectric-induced refractive index change for the lasing modes. (A–C) Reprinted with permission from ref. 222. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (D–G) Reprinted with permission from ref. 170. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 16  Subwavelength lasers based on metal halide perovskites. (A) Schematic diagram of an embedded dielectric/metal heterostructure for subwavelength output of a perovskite laser. (B) Schematic illustration showing the epitaxial growth of the perovskite on the silver nanowire. (C) SEM image of perovskite/Ag heterostructures. (D) Bright-field and PL images of a perovskite/Ag heterostructure. (E–G) Emission spectra collected from the perovskite microcrystals and Ag nanowire tips. Inset: Polarization profiles of the lasing modes. (H) Schematic of a plasmonic laser consisting of a MAPbI3 nanowire on an Ag film coated with a MgF2 spacer layer. (I) Simulated electric field distribution in the plasmonic laser with a 10 nm spacer layer. (J) Calculated effective mode index as a function of the nanowire height for a plasmonic and photonic laser geometry. (K) Emission spectra of a perovskite plasmonic laser at different pump intensities. Inset: PL image of the perovskite nanowire based plasmonic laser. (A–G) Reprinted with permission from ref. 172. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (H–K) Reprinted with permission from ref. 232. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 17  Random lasing from metal halide perovskites. (A) Schematic illustration of a random laser. (B) SEM images of MAPbI3 thin films. (C) Emission spectra of the MAPbI3 film at different pump energies. (D) Lasing emission spectra of the MAPbI3 film taken from different angles. (I) Lasing threshold as a function of the excitation area. (F) MAPbBr3 film on a polyimide substrate before and after bending. (G) Schematic diagram of excitation and emission of a flexible perovskite random laser under the bending condition. (H and I) Optical images of the MAPbBr3 film surfaces on flat and curved substrates. (J) Calculated scattered fields on the MAPbBr3 film with enhanced edges above the threshold. (K) Schematic illustration of the synthetic strategy of CsPbBr3 QDs on aminated silica spheres. (L) TEM image of a single silica sphere coated with CsPbBr3 QDs. (M) SEM image of the final CsPbBr3 QDs/A-SiO2 composites. (N) A schematic optical loop in the CsPbBr3 QDs/A-SiO2 composites. (A) Reprinted with permission from ref. 236. Copyright 2012 Springer Nature. (B–E) Reprinted with permission from ref. 244. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry. (F–J) Reprinted with permission from ref. 245. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (K–N) Reprinted with permission from ref. 247. Copyright 2017 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 18  Polariton lasers based on metal halide perovskites. (A) Schematic formation of exciton polaritons in a planar DBR cavity. (B) Schematic of a planar perovskite polariton laser comprising a CsPbCl3 nanoplatelet embedded in a DBR cavity. (C) Absorption and emission spectra of the CsPbCl3 nanoplatelet and polariton emission of the CsPbCl3 nanoplatelet embedded in the cavity. (D–F) Angle-resolved emission spectra of the CsPbCl3 nanoplatelet embedded in the cavity recorded at increasing pump powers. (G) Schematic formation of exciton polaritons in a nanowire cavity. (H–J) Dispersion curves of the lasing modes in CsPbCl3, CsPbBr3, and CsPbI3 nanowires. (K–N) Dispersion curves of polariton modes in CsPbBr3 nanowires with a width of 3.31, 1.99, 1.19, and 0.78 μm and a length of 11.01, 14.02, 16.41, and 20.77 μm. (A) Reprinted with permission from ref. 251. Copyright 2006 Springer Nature. (B–F) Reprinted with permission from ref. 257. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (G) Reprinted with permission from ref. 260. Copyright 2012 John Wiley and Sons. (H–J) Reprinted with permission from ref. 267. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (K–N) Reprinted with permission from ref. 269. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  Metal halide perovskite laser arrays. (A) Schematic experimental set-up for wettability-assisted liquid-phase growth of perovskite laser arrays. (B) Simulated fluid dynamics showing the regular splitting and positioning of perovskite precursor liquid. (C) In situ optical microscopy images of microdomains of perovskite precursor solution after 4, 6, 7, and 8 h solvent evaporation. (D) SEM image of single-crystal MAPbBr3 microdisk arrays. (E) Schematic illustration of preparation of single crystal perovskite microlaser arrays by inkjet printing. (F) In situ optical microscopy images of a perovskite precursor microdroplet on a lyophobic substrate after 0, 60, 180, and 215 s solvent evaporation. (G) SEM image of printed single-crystal CsPbBr3 microdisk arrays. (H) Schematic illustration of the template-assisted vapor-phase growth of perovskite microlaser arrays. (I) SEM images of MAPbI3 microdisk arrays. (J) Fabrication of large-scale perovskite microlaser arrays via laser ablation. Right panel: False-color SEM image and photograph of a 1 × 1 cm2 array of perovskite microlasers. (A–D) Reprinted with permission from ref. 273. Copyright 2016 John Wiley and Sons. (E and G) Reprinted with permission from ref. 178. Copyright 2016 John Wiley and Sons. (H and I) Reprinted with permission from ref. 277. Copyright 2016 John Wiley and Sons. (J) Reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

MAPbBr3	Nanowire	Polycrystal	—	Air	400 nm, 150 fs, 1 kHz	∼1–4 × 107	
274

MAPbBr3	Film	Polycrystal	SiO2/HfO2 DBR	Air	355 nm, 0.34 ns, 1 kHz	>6.48 × 107	
196

MAPbBr3	Microdisk	Monocrystal	PMMA/PS	Air	400 nm, 150 fs, 1 kHz	>3.6 × 107	
167

MAPbI3	Film	Polycrystal	—	Vacuum	600 nm, 150 fs, 1 kHz	>9 × 107	
64

MAPbI3	Film	Polycrystal	CYTOP	Air	515 nm, 200 fs, 20 kHz	>1.5 × 108	
193

MAPbI3	Film	Polycrystal	PMMA + GaN DBR	Air	532 nm, 0.34 ns, 1 kHz	>1.32 × 107	
70

MAPbI3	Film	Polycrystal	PMMA	Air	532 nm, 270 ps, 1 kHz	>6 × 106	
69

MAPbI3	Film	Polycrystal	PMMA	Air	400 nm, 150 ps, 1 kHz	∼2.16 × 107	
282

MAPbI3	Film	Polycrystal	—	N2	532 nm, 1 ns, 5 kHz	>3 × 107	
197

MAPbI3	Nanowire	Monocrystal	—	N2	402 nm, 150 fs, 250 kHz	∼1.5 × 107	
71

FAPbI3	Film	Polycrystal	PMMA	Air	400 nm, 150 fs, 1 kHz	>2.16 × 107	
282

FAPbI3	Nanowire	Monocrystal	—	N2	402 nm, 150 fs, 250 kHz	∼6.75 × 108	
71

CsPbCl3	Nanowire	Monocrystal	—	Air	355 nm, 150 fs, 100 kHz	∼3.65 × 108	
101

CsPbBr3	Nanowire	Monocrystal	—	Air	355 nm, 150 fs, 100 kHz	>7.2 × 108	
101

CsPbBr3	Nanowire	Monocrystal	—	N2	402 nm, 150 fs, 250 kHz	>7.2 × 109	
72

CsPbBr3	Nanowire	Monocrystal	—	N2	400 nm, 150 ps, 295 kHz	>1.1 × 109	
99

—	Air	>1.1 × 109
CsPbBr3	Rod	Monocrystal	—	Air	800 nm, 35 fs, 1 kHz	>1.5 × 108	
285

CsPbBr3	Microsphere	Crystalline	—	Vacuum	400 nm, 40 fs, 10 kHz	∼3.6 × 107	
168

CsPbBr3	Nanocrystal film	Crystalline	—	Air	400 nm, 100 fs, 1 kHz	>1.6 × 107	
150

CsPbBr3	Microcube film	Crystalline	—	Air	800 nm, 80 fs, 250 kHz	>3.6 × 107	
286

CsPbBr3	Nanocrystal film	Crystalline	Surfactant	Air	400 nm, 35 fs, 1 kHz	>1.2 × 108	
147

CsPbBr3	Nanocrystal film	Crystalline	CdS	Air	400 nm, 35 fs, 1 kHz	>1.1 × 108	
287

CsPbBr3	Nanocrystal film	Crystalline	DBR	Air	400 nm, 50 fs, 1 kHz	>2.16 × 107	
154

CsPbI3	Nanowire	Monocrystal	—	Air	355 nm, 150 fs, 100 kHz	>3.65 × 108	
101

CsPbI3	Microdisk	Monocrystal	BN	Air	532 nm, 4.5 ns, 1.15 kHz	>1 × 108	
284

(BA)2(MA)5Pb6Br19	Microring	Polycrystal	—	Air	400 nm, 150 fs, 1 kHz	>3.6 × 106	
159

(BA)2(FA)2Pb3Br10	Nanowire	Polycrystal	—	Air	400 nm, 150 fs, 1 kHz	>2.16 × 107	
160

(OA)2(MA)n−1PbnBr3n+1	Microplatelet	Polycrystal	—	Air	400 nm, 150 fs, 1 kHz	>4 × 107	
161

(NMA)2(FA)Pb2Br1I6	Film	Polycrystal	—	Air	400 nm, 150 fs, 1 kHz	>1.2 × 108	
158

0D	Zero-dimensional
1D	One-dimensional
2D	Two-dimensional
3D	Three-dimensional
ASE	Amplified spontaneous emission
BEC	Bose–Einstein condensation
CBM	Conductance valence minimum
CVD	Chemical vapor deposition
c.w.	Continuous-wave
DBR	Distributed Bragg reflector
DFB	Distributed feedback
FA	Formamidinium
F–P	Fabry–Pérot
HOMO	Highest occupied molecular orbital
LOMO	Lowest unoccupied molecular orbital
MA	Methylammonium
PDMS	Polydimethylsiloxane
PMMA	Poly(methyl methacrylate)
PS	Polystyrene

Q factor	Quality factor
QD	Quantum dot
RP	Ruddlesden–Popper
SI	International System of Units
SPP	Surface plasmon polariton
VBM	Valence band maximum
WGM	Whispering–gallery–mode

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
