A review of fabrication and applications of carbon nanotube film-based flexible electronics  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3NR33560G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3NR33560G
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 1727-1752Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsA review of fabrication and applications of carbon nanotube film-based flexible electronics

        
          
            Steve 
            Park†
a, 
      
        
          
            Michael 
            Vosguerichian†
b and 

        
          
            Zhenan 
            Bao
          
          
        
      *b
aDepartment of Materials Science & Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
bDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. E-mail: zbao@stanford.edu
Received 
      9th November 2012
    , Accepted 17th December 2012First published on 8th January 2013AbstractFlexible electronics offer a wide-variety of applications such as flexible circuits, flexible displays, flexible solar cells, skin-like pressure sensors, and conformable RFID tags. Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are a promising material for flexible electronics, both as the channel material in field-effect transistors (FETs) and as transparent electrodes, due to their high intrinsic carrier mobility, conductivity, and mechanical flexibility. In this feature article, we review the recent progress of CNTs in flexible electronics by describing both the processing and the applications of CNT-based flexible devices. To employ CNTs as the channel material in FETs, single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) are used. There are generally two methods of depositing SWNTs on flexible substrates—transferring CVD-grown SWNTs or solution-depositing SWNTs. Since CVD-grown SWNTs can be highly aligned, they often outperform solution-processed SWNT films that are typically in the form of random network. However, solution-based SWNTs can be printed at a large-scale and at low-cost, rendering them more appropriate for manufacturing. In either case, the removal of metallic SWNTs in an effective and a scalable manner is critical, which must still be developed and optimized. Nevertheless, promising results demonstrating SWNT-based flexible circuits, displays, RF-devices, and biochemical sensors have been reported by various research groups, proving insight into the exciting possibilities of SWNT-based FETs. In using carbon nanotubes as transparent electrodes (TEs), two main strategies have been implemented to fabricate highly conductive, transparent, and mechanically compliant films—superaligned films of CNTs drawn from vertically grown CNT forests using the “dry-drawing” technique and the deposition or embedding of CNTs onto flexible or stretchable substrates. The main challenge for CNT based TEs is to fabricate films that are both highly conductive and transparent. These CNT based TEs have been used in stretchable and flexible pressure, strain, and chemical and biological sensors. In addition, they have also been used as the anode and cathode in flexible light emitting diodes, solar cells, and supercapacitors. In summary, there are a number of challenges yet to overcome to optimize the processing and performance of CNT-based flexible electronics; nonetheless, CNTs remain a highly suitable candidate for various flexible electronic applications in the near future.Steve Park received his BA in Physics from Knox College and his BS in Materials Science and Engineering from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign in 2005. He then worked at NanoInk Inc. as an engineer until 2008. Subsequently, he joined Professor Zhenan Bao's group in the department of Chemical Engineering as a doctoral student. His research interests are the utilization of lithography and printing technologies such as dip-pen nanolithography and nanotransfer printing to generate electrical contacts to various nanostructures, and the processing and characterization of single-walled carbon nanotubes for field-effect transistors and infrared photodetectors.Michael Vosgueritchian received his BS in Chemical Engineering and Materials Science from the University of California at Berkeley in 2006. Subsequently, he worked for two years as a process engineer at Samsung Austin Semiconductors in Austin, Texas. In 2008, he joined Professor Zhenan Bao's group in the department of Chemical Engineering at Stanford University as a doctoral student. His research is focused on using carbon nanotubes in device applications, such as transistors, electrodes, solar cells, and stretchable electronics.Zhenan Bao is a Professor of Chemical Engineering at Stanford University. Prior to joining Stanford in 2004, she was a Distinguished Member of Technical Staff in Bell Labs, Lucent Technologies from 1995–2004. She has over 280 refereed publications and 39 US patents. She is a Fellow of SPIE, ACS and AAAS. She is a recipient of the ACS Polymer Division Carl S. Marvel Creative Polymer Chemistry Award 2013, ACS Author Cope Scholar Award 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry Beilby Medal and Prize 2009, IUPAC Creativity in Applied Polymer Science Prize 2008, American Chemical Society Team Innovation Award 2001, R&D 100 Award 2001.
1 Introduction
Flexible electronics offer a wide-variety of novel applications such as flexible circuits,1 conformable RFID tags,2 flexible displays,3 flexible solar cells,4,5 electronic paper,6 touch screens,7 implantable medical devices,8 and robotic systems with skin-like sensing capabilities.9–13 Carbon nanotubes (CNTs), tubular carbon-based nanostructures that can be envisioned as graphene rolled up into a seamless cylinder, are an ideal candidate for use in flexible electronics due to their unique properties such as their high intrinsic carrier mobility and conductivity, mechanical flexibility, and the potential for production at low cost.14–16 Although devices composed of individual CNTs have been considered as an option to enable some of these applications, they have been deemed impractical for commercialization due to the difficulty of placing individual CNTs at desired locations and the variability of CNTs' electrical property depending on the their chirality and diameter. Thin-film based CNT devices, on the other hand, offer a practical route to commercialization as these devices are relatively uniform due to the averaging of electrical properties of CNTs in the film and due to their ease of fabrication via conventional lithography or printing technology.
In this report, we survey the fabrication techniques and potential applications of carbon nanotube film-based flexible electronics. This review is organized as follows. In Section 2, we review the fabrication of thin films of single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) for flexible field-effect transistors. Herein, we show that there are many strategies used to grow, align, deposit, and sort SWNTs for use as transistors. In Section 3, we emphasize the importance of the electrodes and dielectric materials in enabling the successful fabrication of flexible SWNT-based transistors. In Section 4, we highlight various applications of flexible SWNT-based thin-film transistors such as flexible circuits, displays, radio frequency devices, and sensors. In Section 5, we switch over to discuss the use of CNT (single-walled and multi-walled) films as transparent electrodes (TEs). Here, we discuss the fabrication of CNT-based TEs and their applications in sensors, LEDs, supercapacitors, and solar cells. Finally in Section 6, we conclude by comparing CNT based flexible electronics to other material candidates and the future prospects of CNT based flexible electronics.
2 Fabrication of thin-films of semiconducting SWNTs for flexible field-effect transistors
SWNT-based thin-film transistors (TFTs) are transistors where the channel region is composed of numerous SWNTs assembled into a two-dimensional film. As already mentioned in the introduction, TFTs have advantages over individual SWNT-based electronics due to their relatively high device-to-device uniformity and the ease of fabrication using conventional lithography or printing technology. In addition, thin films of SWNTs can withstand a higher degree of strain compared to individual SWNTs as they can deform and recover by changing the respective orientations of the individual SWNTs in the film, greatly reducing the tensile and compressive stress applied directly onto individual SWNTs. These properties together are highly desirable for flexible electronics applications.
In order to use SWNT-films as channel material in thin-film transistors, they must not only have the necessary electrical performance such as high mobility, on/off ratio and on-current, but the fabrication process must be facile, reliable, and scalable to large area. In this section, we discuss how SWNT films are grown, processed, and placed on flexible substrates for use as channel material in thin-film transistors and how their properties can be modified and enhanced. In Section 2.1.1, we review the growth and alignment of SWNTs grown via chemical vapour deposition (CVD), and in Section 2.1.2, we review the removal of metallic SWNT in such films. In Section 2.1.3, we discuss how the CVD-grown films are transferred onto flexible substrates. In Section 2.2, we review the processing and deposition of solution-based SWNTs: various sorting methods (Section 2.2.1 and 2.2.2), deposition techniques with a focus on ink-jet/aerosol printing (Section 2.2.3), and alignment strategies (2.2.4) are reviewed. Finally, in Section 2.3, we discuss various n-type doping methods that enable n-type SWNT transistors for complementary integrated circuits.
2.1 CVD-grown SWNTs

2.1.1 Growth and alignment of CVD-grown SWNTs. 
One of the most widely used methods to fabricate SWNTs for electronic devices is chemical vapour deposition or CVD. In CVD growth, a substrate with catalyst particles is placed in a furnace (generally at temperatures >800 °C) with a supply of carbon feedstock gas and hydrogen gas; the SWNTs are consequently grown directly on the surface of the substrate. The main advantage of CVD-grown SWNTs is that they have superior electrical performance compared to SWNTs made by other methods. Previous reports indicate that some of the highest mobilities of approximately 103 to 105 cm2 V−1 s−1 with high on/off ratio ∼104 to 106 for single SWNT transistors were obtained using CVD-grown SWNTs.17–19 The high performance of the CVD-grown SWNTs is due to the fact that they can be made relatively long (from tens to hundreds of microns) and are nearly absent of bundles. These properties are advantageous in obtaining high performance thin-film transistors because tube–tube junctions and bundles have been shown to significantly increase the resistance of SWNT films.20–25
There are two ways to deposit the catalyst on a substrate for the CVD growth of SWNTs. To generate a random network of SWNT film, a catalyst solution consisting of metal oxides26,27 or ferritin1,27,28 is spin-cast onto a substrate (i.e. Si or SiO2) and subsequently reduced at elevated temperatures under hydrogen gas. Depending on the concentration of the catalyst solution, the type of catalyst used, and the duration of growth, the density of the SWNT film can be controlled. The catalyst can also be deposited by evaporating 0.2–0.5 nm of metal (typically iron) using e-beam evaporation directly onto the surface.28–31Fig. 1a shows an SEM image of a random network of CVD-grown SWNT film on quartz substrate made by using e-beam evaporated Fe as the catalysts. The density of SWNTs in the film was ∼5 to 7 SWNTs per μm,2 whereas the field-effect mobility was in the range of 16–22 cm2 V−1 s−1 (the on/off ratio ranged from 100 to 104 depending on the channel length. Ways to improve on/off ratio is discussed below in Section 2.1.2).31
 Fig. 1  (a) A random network of CVD-grown SWNT film grown on quartz substrate. E-beam evaporated Fe particles were used as catalysts. (b) Aligned SWNT film using surface-oriented growth. The bright horizontal lines are the patterned catalyst strips. (c) The random network of CVD-grown SWNT film in (a) after striping. The bright vertical lines are where the SWNTs were etched away. Reproduced with permission from ref. 29 and 31. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society and 2007 Nature Publishing Group. 
One of the biggest advantages of CVD grown SWNTs is the ease in which the SWNTs can be aligned. The alignment of SWNTs can drastically enhance the electrical properties of the thin film by reducing the number of tube–tube junctions. Generally, aligned SWNT film devices have mobilities of about 10–40 times higher than random network SWNT film devices.1,14,29–31 The alignment of SWNTs can be achieved via directed growth methods using electric field,32,33 laser ablation,34 or gas-flow.35–39 However, a more straightforward method that is commonly used is the surface-oriented growth of SWNTs.29,40–47 This method also typically results in highly dense and well-aligned SWNTs compared to the other alignment techniques. Generally, a denser array of SWNTs is preferred for thin-film transistor applications because it increases the current density of the film, which directly correlates to faster operating speed and lower power consumption of the device. In surface-oriented growth, a sapphire or quartz substrate is used to induce a particular growth direction of SWNTs based on the atomic steps or anisotropic lattice of the substrate surface. Typically, metal catalyst is deposited and patterned into small strips perpendicular to the growth direction of the SWNTs.28–30,48 The SWNTs preferentially grow towards the areas free of catalysts and along the growth direction on the surface, resulting in densely aligned SWNTs between the patterned strips of catalyst. Typical densities of surface-oriented grown SWNTs are between 1 and 10 SWNTs per μm,28–30,48 although densities of 22 SWNTs per μm (ref. 43) to as high as 45 SWNTs per μm (ref. 49 and 50) has been achieved by using successive growth methods. Fig. 1b shows an SEM image of an aligned SWNT film on a quartz substrate that was formed using surface-oriented growth.29 The bright horizontal lines are the patterned catalyst strips. Evidently, the SWNTs were well aligned-with a density of approximately 5 SWNTs per μm. Consequently, the mobility of these devices was ∼1100 cm2 V−1 s−1 (the channel width set as the width of the electrodes), which is much larger than what can be achieved using random network SWNT films.


2.1.2 Post deposition removal of metallic SWNTs. 
One disadvantage to CVD-grown SWNTs is the presence of metallic SWNTs in the film. Assuming that all possible chiralities are grown with equal probability, one-third of the grown SWNTs are metallic SWNTs (m-SWNT) and two-thirds semiconducting SWNTs (sc-SWNT). In random networks of SWNT films, although m-SWNTs generally increase the current density of the film due to the higher current carrying capacity of m-SWNTs compared to sc-SWNTs, if a percolation path of m-SWNTs is created from source to drain electrodes, the device will be shorted. Hence, the presence of m-SWNTs sets a limit on the density of the film in these mixed networks: an increase in mobility of the film due to the increase in the current carrying capacity is offset by the decrease in the on/off ratio.14 The presence of m-SWNTs also sets a limit on the channel length of the device because shorter channels increase the probability of generating a percolating path of m-SWNTs between the source/drain contacts. The effect of the m-SWNTs is even more pronounced in aligned SWNT films as most of the SWNTs are directly connecting the source/drain electrodes. In this device architecture, even 1% m-SWNTs can decrease the on/off ratio by three orders of magnitude.51 These examples highlight the importance of eliminating m-SWNTs in a highly efficient manner.
One of the common methods to remove m-SWNTs in thin-films of random networks or aligned SWNTs is the selective electrical burning of m-SWNTs.29,45,52–55 In electrical burning, a positive gate voltage is applied to ‘turn-off’ the sc-SWNTs; then, a large drain/source voltage (>30 V) is applied to selectively burn-off the m-SWNTs. Although this method is relatively easy to conduct, it has several disadvantages. First, due to the local heating near the m-SWNTs, the adjacent sc-SWNTs are also damaged. Shekhar et al. have shown that the damage to the neighbouring SWNTs is correlated to the electrostatic field of the broken nanotubes that produces inhomogeneous current and Joule's heating distribution.56 Such a collateral damage of sc-SWNTs is more severe for denser films due to the SWNTs' close proximity to each other. In addition, electrical burning method is a relatively slow process since the m-SWNTs on each transistor on the substrate have to be sequentially removed. The process can be sped up by using computer algorithm to compare and self-check the device parameters to preset criteria after each successive burning,57,58 or by using circuit layouts that enable electrical burning of multiple transistors in a parallel manner.58
Another commonly used method to remove the effects of m-SWNTs, particularly for random network of SWNTs, is the strip method.1,31,59,60 Strip method simply fabricates the SWNT film into narrow strips using conventional lithography and reactive-ion etching. Fig. 1c is an SEM image of a random network of CVD-grown SWNT film after striping; the vertical bright lines are where the SWNTs were etched away.31 The stripping of SWNT film disrupts the m-SWNT percolation, and by optimizing the width of the strips, the on/off ratio of the film can be significantly increased with minimal sacrifice to its mobility.
Other than the methods mentioned above, methods such as selective plasma/gas etching,61–63 light irradiation,64,65 chemical surface reaction,66–73 and selective chiral growth74–77 have also been developed to selectively remove m-SWNTs. These techniques have exhibited some success by fully or partially removing m-SWNTs; however, their utilization in large-scale flexible SWNT thin-film transistor applications has not yet been demonstrated. Therefore, further investigation of some of these techniques as a reliable, reproducible, and a low-cost option to selectively remove m-SWNT should be considered as an important subject of research moving forward.


2.1.3 Transferring of CVD-grown SWNT films onto flexible substrates. 
Fabricating transparent transistors on CVD-grown SWNTs is relatively simple since these SWNTs can already be grown on quartz, a transparent substrate. Hence, by patterning indium tin oxide (ITO) as the source/drain/gate electrodes,30,31,48 ‘invisible’ transistors have previously been fabricated. On the other hand, to fabricate flexible electronics, the SWNT films have to be transferred to flexible substrates since flexible substrates are not compatible with the high temperature processing of CVD. Typically used flexible substrates are poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET),26,27,78,79 polycarbonate,80 polyethylene naphthalate,81,82 and polyimide.83–85 There are a number of reported methods to transfer CVD-grown SWNTs. Commonly, a metal layer27,48,86 (i.e. Au) is deposited on top of the SWNT film and a ‘transfer substrate’ such as PDMS27,28,86 or heat release tape45,48 is used to transfer the Au/SWNT layer from the original to the receiving substrate. On the receiving substrate, the metal layer is removed using chemical etchants. Fig. 2 shows a schematic diagram of one of these transferring techniques in which Au is evaporated on top of the SWNT film and heat-release tape is used to transfer the SWNT film from quartz (original) to glass or PET (receiving) substrate. The Au was subsequently removed using KI/I2 Au etchant. Other groups have spin-coated PMMA,87,88 polyimide29 or PVA (poly(vinyl alcohol))89 directly onto the SWNTs and used it as the transfer substrate. Apart from these techniques that use a transfer substrate, direct transferring techniques from the original to the receiving substrate have also been demonstrated using moderate temperature annealing.1,80
 Fig. 2  Schematic diagram of a CVD-grown SWNT film transfer from quartz substrate to glass or PET. Au is evaporated on top of the SWNTs, and heat-release tape is used to transfer the Au/SWNT layer to the receiving substrate. The Au is subsequently removed using wet chemical etching. Reproduced with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. 
As a final note, although CVD-grown SWNTs generally yield better electrical performance, their processing conditions are relatively laborious and difficult to implement to large-area fabrication. This challenge is projected to be a limiting factor in transitioning CVD-grown SWNT flexible electronics from laboratory to commercial applications. In the next section, we introduce solution processing of SWNTs, which has relatively facile processing conditions with a potential for low-cost and large-area fabrication.

2.2 Solution processed single-walled carbon nanotubes
SWNTs synthesized using arc-discharge, laser ablation, and high pressure carbon monoxide (HiPCO) are generated in powder form; hence, these SWNTs are purified (removed of amorphous carbon and catalysts) and dissolved in solution prior to deposition. Because these SWNTs are dissolved in a solution, industrially well-established solution deposition methods such as ink-jet/aerosol printing90,91 can be used to deposit SWNTs onto flexible substrates. In addition, by sorting the SWNTs by electric type during or prior to deposition, the removal of m-SWNTs after deposition can be obviated. These processing conditions are exceedingly promising in terms of enabling practically low-cost and large-area fabrication onto flexible substrates.

2.2.1 Self-sorting of SWNTs via selective surface interaction. 
Previously reported work have shown that amine moieties selectively interact with sc-SWNTs.92 Our group used such a selective interaction to develop a simple sorting and deposition technique.93,94 In this work, we first coated Si/SiO2 surfaces with APTMS (3-aminopropyltrimeoxysilane), generating an amine-terminated self-assembled monolayer (SAM). Then, the substrate was spun, and drops of arc-discharge SWNT in NMP (1-methyl-2-pyrrolidone) were cast onto the amine-terminated surface. Interestingly, the amine-surface exhibited preferential binding to sc-SWNTs, as verified via resonant Raman spectroscopy (RRS) and transistor characteristics. In addition, the spin-cast technique radially aligned the SWNTs due to the centrifugal force of the rotating substrate. Fig. 3a on the top left depicts the self-sorting technique, and the image on the top right is an AFM image of the surface after spin-casting SWNTs showing the alignment of SWNTs. The plot on the bottom in Fig. 3a is the mean transfer characteristics of the devices that were measured. The thin-film transistors had mobilities in the range of 1–5 cm2 V−1 s−1 with an average on/off ratio of ∼105 at channel lengths ≥15 μm. This technique was also applied to fabricate flexible transistors by using PET, ITO (indium tin oxide), and PVP (poly(4-vinylphenol)) as the substrate, gate electrode, and gate dielectric, respectively.95 The PVP surface was treated with amine and the aforementioned methodology was carried out to obtain sorting and alignment of SWNTs on the PVP surface. The mobility was as high as 13.4 cm2 V−1 s−1 with on/off ratios ∼103. In our most recent work, nitrile terminating SAMs have also shown to selectively bind to sc-SWNTs.96 The nitrile terminating SAMs not only absorbed higher density of SWNTs with efficient sorting of sc-SWNT, but their formation was more controllable and reproducible. This result expanded the applicability of surface sorting using other organic moieties and opened up the possibility of potentially using various surface interactions to control both the density and the respective amounts of sc- and m-SWNTs in the film.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic diagram of the surface self-sorting technique (top left), an AFM image of the surface after spin-casting SWNTs (top right) showing SWNT alignment, and a plot of the mean transfer characteristics (bottom). (b) Schematic of selective SWNT removal by electric type using functionalized scotch tape (top). Amine functionalized tape selectively bound to sc-SWNTs, leaving behind m-SWNTs on the substrate. In contrast, phenyl functionalized tape selectively bound to m-SWNTs, leaving behind sc-SWNTs on the substrate. The bottom plot is a histogram representing the respective amounts of sc- and m-SWNTs on the substrate after treating it with amine-terminated tape, verifying that most of the sc-SWNTs were removed by the tape. Reproduced with permission from ref. 93 and 97. Copyright 2008 The American Association for the Advancement of Science and 2011 John Wiley and Sons. 
In addition to our work, Hong et al. applied PDMS-based tape onto aligned SWNT films and peeled it off, leaving behind sc- or m-SWNTs on the substrate depending on whether the tape was functionalized with a phenyl or amine terminated SAM, respectively.97Fig. 3b on the top is a schematic of this process. The plot on the bottom of Fig. 3b is a histogram representing the respective amounts of sc- and m-SWNTs on the substrate after applying and peeling off an amine-terminated tape, verifying that most of the sc-SWNTs were removed by the tape. This work further validated the efficacy of using functional groups to bind onto SWNT by electric type while introducing a facile alternative method to selective surface sorting.


2.2.2 Solution-based sorting of semiconducting SWNTs. 
There have been a variety of reported methods to enrich the SWNT solution with sc-SWNTs. Such enrichment techniques typically rely on the use of polymer dispersants that exhibit selective interaction with certain chiralities of SWNTs. Some of these techniques include DNA-assisted sorting,98–100 conjugated polymer-assisted sorting,101 porphyrins-assisted sorting,102 sorting using copolymers,103 gel chromatography,104–106 and density gradient ultracentrifugation (DGU).107Fig. 4 summarizes the experimental results of some of these solution sorting techniques, depicting molecular simulations of the polymer wrapping around SWNTs, chemical structures of the polymers, and representative data that verify the selective dispersion and sorting of sc-SWNTs. In particular, work conducted by Nishi et al. (Fig. 4c) used poly(9,9-dioctylfluorenyl-2,7-diyl) or PFO to disperse sc-SWNTs of chirality (7,5) with very high selectivity as validated via Raman spectra and photoluminescence excitation/emission spectra. However, since this method yielded relatively low amounts of SWNTs, the use of this method for large-scale fabrication was deemed difficult. DGU generated sc-SWNTs, on the other hand, have been widely used for thin-film transistor applications due to its commercial availability and its relatively high percentage of sc-SWNTs (up to 99% purity as determined by optical spectroscopic techniques).107 In DGU, SWNTs are separated according to their buoyant densities, which are caused by the differences in their diameter. However, by using two different surfactants, separation by electric type was attained. This was attributed to the differences in the binding interaction of the two surfactants based the electric type of the SWNTs, which resulted in differences in the buoyant densities of the SWNT/surfactant hybrid structures.108Fig. 4d shows an optical image of the coloured bands after density gradient centrifugation with their corresponding optical absorption data, showing SWNT separation by diameter, band gap, and electrical type.
 Fig. 4  Summary of results of various solution sorting techniques. (a) SWNT sorting using poly[(9,9-dioctylfluorenyl-2,7-diyl)-alt-co-1,1,2,2-tetramethyldisilane] or P1.103 Molecular simulation of P1 wrapping around a SWNT (left) and the chemical structure of P1 (right) on the top. On the bottom is a histogram of on/off ratios of thin-film devices consisting of pristine and P1-sorted SWNTs showing a much higher on/off ratio for devices fabricated with P1-sorted SWNTs. (b) Molecular simulation of DNA wrapping around SWNT (top) along with optical absorption data showing selective dispersion of certain chiralities of SWNTs based on different DNA sequencing (bottom).100 (c) Chemical structure of poly(9,9-dioctylfluorenyl-2,7-diyl) or PFO (left), and the molecular simulation of PFO wrapping around a SWNT (right) on the top. Raman spectra data showing the removal of m-SWNTs when dispersed in PFO on the bottom.101 (d) Optical image of coloured bands after density gradient centrifugation and their corresponding optical absorption data showing SWNT separation by diameter, band gap, and electric type.107 Reproduced with permission from ref. 100, 101, 103 and 107. Copyright 2009 Nature Publishing Group, 2007 Nature Publishing Group, 2011 John Wiley and Sons, and 2006 Nature Publishing Group. 
Flexible thin-film transistors fabricated using DGU-purified SWNT solution typically resulted in relatively high mobilities, in the range of 10–50 cm2 V−1 s−1.83,91,109,110 However, it was also found that the on/off ratio increased significantly as the channel length decreased or as the density of the film increased.14 These observations indicate that m-SWNTs are still present in the solution, which decreases the on/off ratio due to the formation of m-SWNT percolation paths from source to drain electrodes. Because there is limitation on the film density and channel dimensions, the development of certain applications that require high current density, small device dimensions, and high on/off ratio can be difficult to achieve.
In light of such limitations set forth by the presence of m-SWNTs in the solution, our group has recently developed a novel selective dispersion technique that utilizes a thiophene derivative, regioregular poly(3-dodecylthiophene) (rr-P3DDT).111 In this technique, rr-P3DDT and SWNTs are dispersed in toluene using sonication, followed by ultracentrifugation. Because rr-P3DDTs selectively ‘wrap around’ and disperse certain SWNT chiralities (all of which are sc-SWNTs), sc-SWNTs were successfully separated out as the supernatant after ultracentrifugation. In addition, the yield for the sorted sc-SWNTs was quite high at 19% in weight, validating the large-scale manufacturability of this technique.
Both spectroscopy and thin-film transistor data indicated the high-sorting efficiency of our technique. Fig. 5a shows a schematic depiction of rr-P3DDT wrapping around a SWNT to disperse it in the solution. Fig. 5b shows resonant Raman spectra at excitation energy of 1.96 eV, showing the disappearance of metallic peak after sorting. To quantitatively verify the sorting efficiency of our technique, we have characterized as many as 190 SWNTs using short-channel devices and have verified that all 190 SWNTs were semiconducting.112Fig. 5c shows a histogram of the on/off ratios of individually characterized SWNTs: the on/off ratio was no less than 103 for all of the SWNTs that were measured with an average value of 106. The average thin-film transistor mobility was 8.5 cm2 V−1 s−1 with an average on/off ratio of 3 × 106 at channel lengths as small as 1.5 μm. Fig. 5d shows the transfer curve of one of these devices, with mobility and on/off ratio of 12 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 106, respectively.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic depiction of rr-P3DDT polymer wrapping around a SWNT to disperse it in solution; molecular structure of rr-P3DDT (right). (b) Resonant Raman spectroscopy (RRS) at excitation energy of 1.96 eV showing the disappearance of the m-SWNT peak after sorting. (c) Histogram of on/off ratios of individually characterized SWNTs using short-channel devices. All of the SWNTs that were characterized had on/off ratio no less than 103 with an average value of 106. (d) Transfer curve of a thin-film transistor device showing mobility of 12 cm2 V−1 s−1 and on/off ratio of 106. Reproduced with permission from ref. 111 and 112. Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group and 2012 American Chemical Society. 


2.2.3 Ink-jet and aerosol printing of SWNTs. 
One of the common solution deposition techniques demonstrated in literature for fabricating flexible SWNT-based transistors is the soaking method83,85,110,111,113,114 in which the substrate is immersed into the SWNT solution for a certain period of time. By controlling the solution concentration, duration of soaking, and the coverage of self-assembled monolayer on the surface,110 the film density can be controlled. Then conventional photolithography and reactive ion etching are conducted to remove the unwanted SWNTs on the surface.
Although the soaking technique is a relatively simple method to deposit SWNTs onto a surface, it does not fully utilize the processing advantages of SWNT solutions due to its low throughput. As we have mentioned previously, one of the potential advantages of solution processing SWNTs is the possibility of implementing ink-jet/aerosol printing to enable high-throughput large-area fabrication. Using such an ‘additive’ lithographic technique, one can also avoid the wasting of material and the use of photolithography or other expensive lithographic tools, potentially reducing the fabrication cost. In this regard, several research groups have published promising results demonstrating the use of ink-jet/aerosol printing to make SWNT flexible electronics.2,84,90,91,115–123 These demonstrations have engendered optimism for the commercialization of printed SWNT-electronics in the near future.
In 2006, Kordás et al. reported large-area patterning of carbon nanotubes on paper and on polymeric flexible substrates using a commercially available desktop ink-jet printer.124 In the following years, SWNTs were ink-jet printed onto pre-patterned source/drain electrodes to demonstrate the proof-of-concept of potentially ink-jet printing SWNT-transistors.117,123 However, due to the use of unsorted SWNT solutions and high SWNT network density, low on/off ratios were typically observed in these devices. Recently, by controlling the density of the ink-jet printed SWNTs, high on/off ratios of ∼104 were attained with reasonably high mobilities of ∼1.6 to 4.2 cm2 V−1 s−1.122Fig. 6a shows a schematic diagram of this process in which different drops of the SWNT solution was inkjet printed to control the density of the film. The source and drain SWNT electrodes were generated by depositing highly dense areas of SWNT-networks connecting the channel regions.122 In a related work, Ha et al. have reported aerosol-jet printing of sc-SWNT enriched solution onto pre-patterned Cr/Au electrodes on polyimide, followed by the aerosol printing of ion gel and PEDOT:PSS as dielectric and gate electrode, respectively.90,125 These devices exhibited mobilities in the range of 20–50 cm2 V−1 s−1 and on/off ratios in the range of 103 to 105. Furthermore, inverters, NAND devices, and ring oscillators were successfully demonstrated using these devices. Other groups have demonstrated fully ink-jet/aerosol printed SWNT-devices in which all components (gate electrode, dielectric, source/drain electrodes) of the transistor were deposited using ink-jet/aerosol printing.84,91,120 In particular, Chen et al.91 printed silver nanoparticle solution as gate/source/drain electrodes and PEI/LiClO4 as the dielectric layer. Fig. 6b shows the schematic of this process with an optical image of the device on the right. These devices exhibited excellent current density (1–10 μA/V), mobility (10–30 cm2 V−1 s−1) and on/off ratios (104 to 107), which they have successfully used to control organic light emitting diodes. To demonstrate the potential for mass produced fully printed SWNT-based electronics, Noh and Jung et al.2,126 have combined roll-to-roll gravure printing with ink-jet printing to print SWNT devices on PET. Roll-to-roll printing was used to print the gate electrode, dielectric layer and source/drain electrodes, followed by the ink-jet printing of SWNTs. Fig. 6c show the optical images of these mass-produced devices along with SEM images of the channel region. Using these devices, they have successfully built inverters, ring oscillators and 1 bit RFID tags. The transistors exhibited moderate variation in the output and transfer characteristics, which was attributed to the misalignment of printed source/drain electrodes (which causes uneven parasitic capacitances) and the variation in the roughness of the dielectric layer. Hence, they have deemed printing registration accuracy and controlling the roughness of the dielectric layer as being highly important in moving forward to commercialization.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of ink-jet printing of SWNTs with tunable density by dropping different number of droplets. The highly dense areas at the ends function as S/D electrodes. (b) Schematic of fully printed SWNT device, with Ag and ion-gel (PEI/LiClO4) used as S/D/G electrodes and dielectric layer, respectively. An optical image of the fully printed SWNT device that was used to control an organic light emitting diode (right). (c) Combined roll-to-roll and ink-jet printed SWNT flexible devices: optical image of the devices (left) and SEM images of the channel region (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 91, 122 and 126. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society, 2010 John Wiley and Sons, and 2011 Elsevier. 


2.2.4 Alignment of solution-based SWNTs. 
As previously mentioned, deposition techniques such as solution soaking and ink-jet/aerosol printing generate a random network of SWNT films. As in CVD-grown SWNTs, the mobility of solution processed SWNTs can potentially be improved by aligning the SWNTs in the film. The number of tube-to-tube junctions, which limits the charge transport through the film,20–22,24,25 can be reduced by controlling the alignment of SWNTs, thereby improving the mobility of the film. For short-channel devices where the channel length is comparable to the length of the SWNTs, higher degree of alignment generally increases the thin-film mobility as more SWNTs contribute to drain/source current with a lower number of tube-to-tube junctions.14 On the other hand, for large channel lengths, since a certain number of tube-to-tube junctions are necessary to generate percolating paths from source to drain electrodes, optimal thin-film mobility exists in between perfectly aligned and perfectly random network of SWNTs. The alignment of SWNTs is achieved either by an application of an external force such as electric field (ac-dielectrophoresis),51,127–132 liquid flow,133–136 and centrifugal force (spin-coating),93,95 or by inducing self-assembly using methods such as convective flow137–139 and Langmuir–Blodgett assembly.140 (For a complete review of various SWNT alignment methods, we refer the reader to the following set of excellent review papers.14,141–143). Fig. 7 depicts some of these alignment techniques. One notable alignment method is ac-dielectrophoresis or DEP, where ac-voltage is applied between two electrodes to align SWNTs (Fig. 7a). This method proved to generate highly aligned SWNTs with controllable SWNT density by varying the solution concentration or the ac-voltage frequency.51,127 At high SWNT densities (∼25 SWNTs per μm), current density as high as 16 μA per μm was attained.51 Despite its effectiveness in aligning SWNTs, DEP preferentially attracts and aligns m-SWNT, which results in transistors with low on/off ratios even with sc-enriched solutions.51,144 Another interesting method to generate a highly dense array of SWNTs was reported by Engel et al. in 2008 (Fig. 7c)139 and by Shastry et al.145 They used evaporation-driven self-assembly to generate regularly spaced strips and continuous films of densely aligned SWNTs (10–20 SWNT per μm) over a large area. The self-assembled alignment of SWNTs renders this method simple and cost effective. However, it is difficult to control the density of the SWNTs with this method, which may be its limitation with respect to tuning the electrical properties of the devices.
 Fig. 7  Various SWNT alignment techniques. (a) ac-dielectrophoresis. (b) Langmuir–Blodgett assembly. (c) Evaporation-driven self-assembly. Reproduced with permission from ref. 127, 139 and 140. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society, 2008 American Chemical Society, and 2007 American Chemical Society. 
The most important criteria for an alignment method to be implemented to large-scale manufacturing of SWNT electronic devices are the ease of processability and scalability. In addition, the density of the SWNTs should be controllable and uniform throughout the substrate, which is directly correlated to the tunability and homogeny of SWNT transistors on the substrate. It is unclear which of the alignment techniques will ultimately be used in large-scale manufacturing or will even be used at all. Their use will depend on how much improvement in the electrical properties the aligned SWNTs films can bring and at what manufacturing cost.

2.3 N-type doping of SWNTs
To enable various applications such as pn-diodes and complementary logic circuits, it is important to be able to generate n-type SWNT transistors. SWNTs typically exhibit unipolar p-type behaviour, which has been attributed to the doping of SWNTs by oxygen in air146 or by oxidizing acids during solution processing.112,147 In addition, p-type behaviour of SWNTs was reported due to the relatively small schottky barrier for the holes at the contacts.148–152 The change in the threshold voltage is a signature of change in the nanotube fermi-level; hence, threshold voltage shifts can be used to determine the relative degrees of the SWNT doping and the change in the schottky barrier height.152 Many techniques have been used to switch SWNT devices from p-type to n-type. One way is to change the contact metals from high work function metals to low work function metals, such as Al, Ca, and Sc, which aligns the metal fermi level closer to the conductance band and reduces the barrier for electrons at the contacts.151,153–158 Other techniques include electrostatic doping,159,160 annealing in hydrogen18 or in vacuum,152,161 passivation with inorganic oxides,162 and chemical doping with potassium,149,152,161,163–165 PEI (polyethyleneimine),166–168 hydrazine,169 polymer electrolyte,170 viologen,171,172 and NADH.173
3 Source/drain/gate electrodes and dielectrics for SWNT-based flexible transistors
In Section 2, we discussed various methods to grow and align SWNTs on substrates using CVD and the dispersion and sorting of SWNTs in solution using various solution processing techniques. In addition, we discussed various methods to transfer or deposit SWNT films onto flexible substrates and how their electrical properties can be optimized. In this section, we will discuss the other components necessary to assemble SWNT flexible transistors such as the source, drain and gate (S/D/G) electrodes (Section 3.1) and the dielectric layer (Section 3.2). The importance of these components should not be undermined as they also heavily dictate the electrical performance of the SWNT transistors. In addition, their mechanical flexibility must also be carefully considered as they are often responsible for device failure at high bending angles.
3.1 Source/drain/gate electrodes in SWNT-based flexible transistors
First, it is important to consider the mechanical flexibility and durability of the material for source, drain, and gate (S/D/G) electrodes. One of the most commonly used materials for S/D/G electrodes is thin films of metals because they have been experimentally demonstrated to have reasonably high flexibility and durability.1,29,79,80,83,86,113,174 For example, work done by Wang et al.83 used high work function metals (i.e. Au, Pd) with a thin layer of Ti metal as the S/D/G electrodes and were electrically stable on devices up to a radius of curvature of 1.27 mm. The top image of Fig. 8a shows a demonstration of these devices being wrapped around a rod of diameter 2.5 mm; the bottom image is a schematic of the device architecture. (Note: in literature, bendability of the device is commonly described either as strain or radius of curvature. The relation ε = ts/2R can be used to convert from one to the other, where ε is the strain, ts is the thickness of the substrate and R is the radius of curvature.)
 Fig. 8  Demonstration of the bendability of various devices with schematics of the device architectures on the bottom. (a) SWNT flexible circuit being wrapped around a rod of diameter 2.5 mm. (b) Bending test of SWNT flexible device in which S/D/G electrodes and the channel are all composed of SWNTs. (c) SWNT device fabricated on PVA substrate being wrinkled. The S/D/G electrodes and the dielectric layer are composed of SWNTs and PVA, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 27, 83 and 89. Copyright 2006 John Wiley and Sons, 2011 American Chemical Society, and 2012 American Institute of Physics. 
ITO is another commonly used material for source, drain, or gate electrodes. Their use is to enable optical transparency along with reasonably high flexibility.29,48,86,174 For example, Kang et al. used Pd/Ti as the source drain electrodes and ITO as the gate electrode on PET substrates.29 They have observed no apparent changes in the mobility of the devices under a strain as much as 2.6%. In their analysis, they have attributed the cracking of ITO gate as the reason for their devices' failure. Similarly, work conducted by Hur et al. used Au/Ti as source drain electrodes and ITO as the common back gate and have also determined ITO as the limit of their devices' bendability.86 As a matter of fact, ITO was previously reported of cracking at tensile strains at as low as 0.9%,175 which would indeed significantly limit its use in flexible electronics.
To make the transistors transparent without the flexibility limitation set forth by ITO, graphene26,78,176 and SWNTs27,80,89,177 have been explored as S/D/G electrodes. These electrodes were generally generated by growing graphene or SWNT via CVD, transferring them to flexible substrates, and patterning them using photolithography and reactive-ion etching. As a demonstration of high flexibility of such devices, Cao et al. have made S/D/G electrodes with a random network of CVD-grown SWNTs and have demonstrated electrical stability of the device at radius of curvature as low as ∼3.3 mm (calculated from given strain value).27 The image of the bending test (top) and the schematic of the device architecture (bottom) for this device are depicted in Fig. 8b. Alternatively, Yu et al.26,176 have used graphene as the S/D/G electrodes and observed negligible changes in the on and off current at a radius of curvature of 8 mm, even after 1000 cycles of bending and relaxing. More recently, as depicted in Fig. 8c, highly deformable transistors were made by Aikawa et al. by using SWNTs as S/D/G electrodes and a thin layer of PVA (poly(vinyl alcohol)) as the dielectric layer and substrate.89 These devices were bent to exceedingly high radius of curvatures (up to 1 mm) and were even wrinkled multiple times while the stability in the electrical performance was observed. Such a high stability was attributed to the thinness of the substrate, considerably reducing the bending stress.
The S/D/G electrodes are patterned either using photolithography or e-beam lithography to generate short-channels (several to sub-microns) or thermal evaporation through shadow-masking or inkjet/aerosol printing for larger channel lengths (tens to hundreds of microns). Metal contacts can also be patterned using nano-transfer printing (nTP) in which PDMS or Si mold with a thin layer of metal (typically Au) evaporated on top is brought in contact on top of the receiving substrate with the metal layer surface faced down. Subsequent removal of the mold transfers the metal that is on the protruding regions of the mold onto the receiving substrate.59,86,109,178 The advantage of nTP is that photolithography or e-beam lithography need not be used to generate channels of several to sub microns, which would reduce fabrication costs. One critical disadvantage of nTP and shadow masking, however, is the difficulty of multilayer alignment. Hence, transistors made using these methods generally used a common bottom gate to demonstrate their performance. However, for practical applications, the gate electrodes must be patterned and registered to within the channel region. Hence, only transistors made using photolithography, e-beam lithography or the ink-jet/aerosol printed transistors have been demonstrated of practical applications such as logic gates and radio frequency devices.
Contact resistance must also be considered for source/drain electrodes. For short-channel devices, the contact effects become more significant and typically limit the conductivity of the transistor.147,149,151,152,179–182 As mentioned previously, SWNTs typically exhibit p-type behaviour in air due to the doping of SWNTs by oxygen.146,149,152 Hence, high work function materials need to be used to lower the schottky barrier height from the fermi-level of the electrode to the valence band of the SWNTs.151,153 In addition to the fermi-level alignment, interfacial interaction between the SWNT and the contact material must be considered as poor interaction between them can generate a pure tunnelling barrier due to a vacuum formation at the interface and prevent efficient charge injection.180 For metals, it is generally agreed that Pd is the best contact material as it has both a high work function and a strong binding energy to SWNTs.183
3.2 Dielectric materials in SWNT-based flexible transistors
The most common dielectric layers used in flexible SWNT transistors are oxides such as Al2O3 (εr ∼ 9.3 to 11.54)26,31,79,81,83,110,113,176 and HfO2 (εr ∼ 25).1,29,30 These oxides are deposited using atomic layer deposition either on top or below the SWNTs. The reason for their common use is due to their high dielectric constant and conformal coverage on the SWNTs or on the substrate surface, enabling transistor operation at low gate voltages with low gate leakage current. To this point, some of the highest reported transconductance and sub-threshold slopes in SWNT transistors were obtained using such high-k dielectric oxide materials.1,30,31,83 Other than inorganic oxides, polymers such as polyimide (εr ∼ 3.2 to 3.5),82,184 Epoxy (SU-8) (εr ∼ 3.2 to 4.1),27,48,86 PDMS (εr ∼ 2.3 to 2.8),27 and PMMA (εr ∼ 2.6)80 have also been commonly used as dielectric layers. The advantage of such polymeric dielectric materials is that they can be spin-coated, rendering them relatively easy to deposit onto the substrates. In 2008, Frisbie and co-workers reported a novel dielectric material, known as an ion-gel, that was formed by dissolving a triblock copolymer in an ionic liquid.125 These ion-gels had capacitances in the range of 20–30 μF cm−2 with operation frequencies as high as 10 kHz, owing to the formation of nanometre-thick double layers at the electrode–electrolyte interfaces and fast polarization response.125 SWNTs transistors with these ion-gels as the dielectric layer operated at gate voltages of −1 to 1 V with sub-threshold swing of 130 mV per decade.90 In addition, five stage ring oscillators reaching frequencies of 2 kHz at supply voltages of 2.5 V were demonstrated.90
Interestingly, some groups have used a bilayer of organic-inorganic dielectric materials to enhance the performance of their devices.29,174 For example, Cao et al. have used a combination of HfO2 and Epoxy (SU-8) and have achieved large capacitance (∼330 nF cm−2) and low leakage current (∼10−8 A cm−2) in their devices. In addition, hysteresis of these devices was much smaller than that of other devices made with either purely oxide or purely polymer dielectrics. This result was attributed to the reduction in the electric field near the SWNTs due to the low operating voltages and the reduction of traps in the dielectrics.16
Apart from their dielectric properties, it is also extremely important to consider the stability of the dielectric layer under mechanical bending. The flexibility of the transistor not only depends on the channel and the S/D/G electrodes, but also on the dielectric layer. In fact, in several cases, the devices were observed to fail due to the dielectric layer breakdown, as evidenced by the increase in the gate leakage at high strains.27,78,83 For example, Wang et al. have attributed the failure of their devices at high bending angles to the cracking of the relatively fragile dielectric layer (i.e. SiO2 and AlO2).83 In another study, devices made with epoxy (SU-8) dielectric were only able to withstand ∼2% strains, whereas devices made with PDMS dielectric were able to withstand ∼3.5% strains.27 These studies reiterated the importance of the dielectric layer flexibility as it can set the flexibility limit of the device.
As we have alluded in this section, when flexible transistors are designed and made, it is important to consider the mechanical properties of all of the components of the transistor as any of these components can set the flexibility limit. In addition, one must also consider how each of the components are bonded together at the interfaces and how such interfaces will react to mechanical stresses. In moving forward, more elaborate mechanical tests are needed beyond simple bending tests to analyze the devices' electrical and mechanical stability under practical conditions. In addition, theoretical and simulative work that would enable the prediction of device failure will be essential in transitioning SWNT-based flexible electronics from research labs to the market place.
4 Applications of SWNT-based flexible transistors
In Sections 2 and 3, we discussed various strategies to make flexible SWNT-based transistors. We now move on to discuss various applications of SWNT-based integrated circuits. In Section 4.1, we will review the implementation of SWNT-based flexible transistor into logic gates, with an emphasis on inverters. Also in Section 4.1, we will briefly discuss the implementation of SWNT transistors in active matrix light emitting diode displays. In Section 4.2, we will discuss the application of SWNT-based flexible transistors in radio frequency applications. Finally, in Section 4.3 we will discuss chemical and biological sensors based on SWNT TFTs.
4.1 SWNT-based transistors for logic circuits and flexible displays
The inverter is one of the basic and quintessential elements of logic circuits. Inverters can be made using a single type of transistor in series (i.e. p-channel metal oxide semiconductor or PMOS) or using p- and n-type transistors in series (complementary metal oxide semiconductors or CMOS). The quality of an inverter can be extracted from the voltage transfer curve (VTC) (Voutversus Vin). For optimal circuit operation, it is desirable to have a narrow and steep transition region, which would maximize the noise tolerance and the voltage gain (∂Vout/∂Vin). The transistor characteristics that lead to narrow and steep transition region in the VTC curve are large transconductance (∂Ids/∂Vgs), high subthreshold slope, low leakage current in the off-state, and a small output conductance (∂Ids/∂Vds) in the saturation regime. For CMOS, the threshold voltages of p- and n-type transistors can also be tuned to achieve a high voltage gain.185 It is possible to change the gate electrode,186,187 modify the dielectric surface,188 or lightly dope the SWNTs to adjust the threshold voltage.81 Also, it is desirable that the transition region be located near Vin = Vdd/2. Particularly for CMOS, this condition requires symmetric output characteristics of the p-type and n-type transistors. The output curves can be made symmetric by tuning the doping levels or by adjusting the device dimensions (i.e. L and W). To maximize the inverter speed and minimize power consumption, the on-current (ION) needs to be maximized while minimizing capacitance, off-current (IOFF), and Vdd. Therefore, it is beneficial to use highly dense SWNT films to generate a large current at low Vdd and at reduced channel dimensions (W and L). However, as mentioned before, an increase in SWNT film density and decrease in channel length is compensated by an increase in IOFF when m-SWNTs are present in the film. Hence, it is important to carefully control the SWNT film density and the channel dimensions so that ION and IOFF are optimally set.
Several groups have demonstrated SWNT-based CMOS inverters.29,45,59,158–161,164,174,185,189 The benefit of using CMOS inverters to build logic circuits is their low power consumption and the need of smaller number of transistors. One of the most commonly used methods to make n-type transistors is to dope the SWNTs with polyethyleneimine or PEI.54,59,166,174,185,189 For example, using PEI doped n-channel transistors in series with p-channel transistors, Nouchi et al. have fabricated CMOS inverters with voltage gain as high as 20.185 In a similar work, Cao et al. have fabricated CMOS inverters on PET using PEI doping to make the n-type transistor; their CMOS inverters yielded a maximum gain of 8, owing to the high transconductance and on/off ratios of their transistors.174
Despite their advantages, CMOS inverters suffer from air-instability of the n-type transistors and/or the difficulty of locally and selectively doping transistors on a large scale. In contrast, making logic circuits with PMOS inverters can circumvent such issues and generate medium to large scale circuits with simple processing steps and at low cost. Several groups have demonstrated various logic gates (i.e. inverter, NOR, NAND gates) and integrated circuits using PMOS.1,48,81,83,190 In particular, Cao et al. have used top-gated geometry of CVD-grown SWNT transistors on polyimide to build logic circuits based on PMOS.1Fig. 9a is the PMOS inverter diagram and Fig. 9b is one of the inverter's VTC curve. The black plot is the Voutversus Vin curve and the blue plot is the gain (∂Vout/∂Vin) versus Vin curve. The high mobility, transconductance, subthreshold slope, and on/off ratio of their transistors lead to inverters with a relative high voltage gain of ∼4 with switching speeds in the kilohertz regime even at channel lengths as high as 100 μm. Their largest circuit was composed of 88 transistors that functioned as a four-bit decoder. The uniformity and reproducibility of their transistor characteristics enabled simulation models such as SPICE (simulation program for integrated circuits emphasis) to predict the behaviour of their integrated circuits. Fig. 9c is an optimal micrograph of their integrated circuit bonded to a curved surface, demonstrating both the high electrical performance and the flexibility of their integrated circuits.
 Fig. 9  (a) PMOS inverter circuit diagram and (b) an inverter's voltage transfer curve. (c) Optical micrograph of the flexible integrated circuit on a curved surface. (d) Schematic diagram of a AMOLED pixel and the demonstration of (e) light intensity modulation of an OLED by varying the voltage going into the switching transistor. (f) Optical image of 7 AMOLED elements, each with 20 × 25 pixels. Reproduced with permission from ref. 1 and 110. Copyright 2008 Nature Publishing Group and 2011 American Chemical Society. 
Rather than using p- and n-type transistors to make CMOS logic circuits, some groups have generated complementary-like functionalities of their logic gates by solely using ambipolar SWNT transistors.90,191,192 For example, by depositing Al2O3via ALD on top of the SWNTs, Yu et al. have attained ambipolar behaviour in their transistors.191 Using such ambipolar transistors, complementary like inverters were made, along with adaptive NAND and NOR gates with one set of logic gates.191 Additionally, Ha et al.90 obtained ambipolar SWNT transistors with ion gel as the dielectric layer and used them to build complementary-like logic gates. Their inverters achieved gain as high as 58. In another set of work conducted at Peking University, Ding et al. have built integrated circuits using pass-transistor logic (PTL) configuration, which greatly simplified the circuit compared to CMOS configuration.193 For example, they were able to build a full adder using only 3 pairs of n- and p-type transistors; whereas, 28 transistors would have been needed using CMOS configuration. With further research, these new circuit designs can enable simplified logic circuits with low power consumption and low-cost fabrication processes.
Because the SWNTs transistors can be made flexible and transparent, their implementation into active-matrix organic light-emitting diode displays (AMOLED) enable flexible and transparent display applications. As a proof of concept, Kim et al.31 and Ishikawa et al.48 have made fully transparent SWNT transistors on glass with ITO as the S/D/G electrodes and have demonstrated their ability to control LEDs with significant light intensity modulation. The combination of high on-current, mobility, and on/off ratio of the transistors enabled such an implementation. In a related work, Chen et al.91 demonstrated fully printed SWNT transistors by ink-jet printing silver nanoparticle solution, DGU-sorted SWNTs, and ionic-gel (PEI/LiClO4) as the S/D/G electrodes, channel, and the dielectric layer, respectively. Subsequently, these transistors were connected externally to OLEDs to modulate the light intensity. The same group also demonstrated monolithically integrated AMOLED display elements using photolithography with 500 pixels driven with 1000 SWNT transistors.110Fig. 9d is a schematic diagram of an AMOLED pixel, and Fig. 9e depicts the light intensity modulation of an OLED by varying the voltage going into the switching transistor. Fig. 9f is an optical image of an AMOLED substrate with 7 AMOLED elements, each with 20 × 25 pixels. In another work published most recently, Zhang et al. have used SWNT film-based transistors to build flexible and transparent OLED control circuits.194 The fabrication process consisted of spin-coating a thin layer of polyimide (PI) on a Si wafer, followed by the sputtering and patterning of ITO as the gate electrode and ALD and e-beam evaporation of Al2O3 and SiO2 respectively to form the dielectric layer. Next, DGU-sorted SWNTs were deposited by soaking, and metal (Au or Pd) followed by ITO was patterned as the source and drain electrodes. Finally, the PI was peeled off and transferred to a PET substrate to complete the fabrication process. This work and others collectively demonstrated the feasibility of integrating SWNT transistors into AMOLEDs and onto flexible substrates, further qualifying SWNT transistors as a viable component for next generation flexible and transparent display applications.
4.2 SWNT-based transistors for radio frequency applications
The high field-effect mobility, high current density, and small intrinsic capacitance of SWNTs render them an excellent candidate as components in future flexible radio frequency (RF) devices. To obtain the best possible RF performance, it is essential to maximize the cut-off frequency fT (frequency where the current gain, h21 = 1) and the maximum frequency of oscillation fmax (frequency where unilateral power gain, U = 1). Maximizing these frequency values require minimizing the parasitic capacitances as they can lower the frequency values by several orders of magnitude.195 One of the ways to minimize the parasitic capacitances is by ensuring that the gate length does not exceed the channel length. This can be accomplished by purposefully fabricating the gate length to be slightly smaller than the channel length.83
For long gate lengths, the intrinsic fT and fmax can be written asfT = μ(Vgs − Vth)/Lgate2fmax = fT/{2[gd(Rgate + Rp,s) + 2πfTCp,gdRgate]1/2}where μ is the mobility of the film, Vgs is the gate-source voltage, Vth is the threshold voltage, Lgate is the gate length, gd is the drain transconductance, Rgate is the gate resistance, Rp,s is the parasitic source resistance, and Cp,gd is the parasitic gate-drain capacitance. For short-channel devices, fT = vdrift/2πLgate, where vdrift is the saturation drift velocity. As evident in the equations above, frequency can be maximized by decreasing the gate length and/or by increasing the mobility of the film. As we have already proposed in this article, the best way to increase the mobility of the film is to align the SWNTs and increase the density of the SWNTs in the film. Furthermore, because the presence of m-SWNTs leads to a nonzero gd (which consequently decreases fmax), it is also important to enrich the film with sc-SWNTs.
There have been many reports of high frequency operation of SWNTs devices. For example, Chimot et al. have deposited densely aligned unsorted SWNTs using ac-dielectrophoresis on a flexible PET substrate and have attained extrinsic fT as high as 1 GHz.79 The high impedance of their film enabled them to study their devices using direct scattering parameter measurements. The presence of m-SWNTs and the parasitic capacitance due to the overlap of gate and the source/drain electrodes were deemed as the limitation in their frequency measurements. Bending test has confirmed constant transconductance down to a radius of curvature as low as 3.3 nm, demonstrating both high device performance and mechanical flexibility. In another work, Kocabas et al. used aligned CVD-grown SWNT films to obtain fT and fmax of 5 and 9 GHz, respectively.196 The frequencies obtained despite the use of low density SWNT film (5 SWNTs per μm) were quite high compared to other densely aligned SWNT films, which indicated that the CVD-grown SWNTs were of high structural quality with high mobility.
Apart from high frequency demonstrations, SWNT-based RF devices have also been demonstrated of practical applications. For example, Kobacas et al. have used SWNT thin-film transistors to build power amplifiers and connected it to an antenna and a speaker to receive signal from a local radio station.197 Further improvement of the amplifier and making the other components of the radio such as battery and antenna flexible may someday enable light-weight flexible radios. In another work, Jung et al. have made all-printed RFID reader and ring oscillator on flexible substrates by combining roll-to-roll printing and ink-jet printing, where the active layer and the source and drain electrodes were composed of ink-jet printed SWNTs (Fig. 6c).2,126 They have demonstrated 13.56 MHz-operated 1 bit RF tags that generated 102.8 Hz of clock signal. Such a demonstration opened up the possibility of manufacturing low-cost printed RFID tags and sensors for various identification applications in the future.
In order to realize the commercialization of SWNT-based RF devices, optimizing the device performance and minimizing the manufacturing cost is critical. To optimize the device performance, it is important to get highly dense and aligned SWNT films with enriched sc-SWNTs. In terms of the manufacturing cost, printing technology that could print and integrate all components of the device without having to use expensive lithographic tools or wire-bonding is needed. In addition, the registration and resolution of printing technology must be improved as misaligned transistor components and large channel lengths decrease the frequency values that can be attained. The solutions to these issues are still under research; however, the advances that have been made thus far in sorting and depositing SWNTs and in printing technologies show potential for rapid and significant improvement of SWNT-based RF devices in the near future.
4.3 SWNT-based flexible field-effect transistors as chemical and biological sensors
SWNT-based field-effect transistors have been used to sense various chemical and biological species such nitrogen dioxide (NO2),198 ammonia (NH3),198 dimethyl methylphosphonate (DMMP),199 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene (TNT),200 carbon monoxide,201 glucose,202 and hydrogen.203–205 SWNTs are an ideal material for chemical/biological sensors as they consist entirely of surface atoms, rendering them highly sensitive to changes in the surrounding environment. For instance, Kong et al. used SWNT transistors to sense NO2 at concentration as low as 2 ppm,198 while Sun and Wang used Pd decorated SWNTs to detect hydrogen at concentrations down to 100 ppm.205
Fabricating chemical and biological sensors on flexible substrates can further broaden their applications. Making sensors flexible improves portability and sturdiness, while enabling them to be fabricated on curved and flexible surfaces such as textiles. In 2010, Chen et al. transferred aligned sc-SWNTs onto cloth fabric and made SWNT FETs sensitive to TNT.200 Their fabrication involved transferring CVD-grown aligned SWNT film onto a textile fabric that had patterned Ti electrodes and SU-8 as the gate and dielectric layer, respectively. Ti/Pd electrodes were consequently patterned as the source and drain electrodes. TNT concentration as low as 8 ppb in air was detected, which was close to the standard of 1.5 ppb TNT set forth by the U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration. The mechanism of detection was analyzed as NO, one of the dominating decompositions of TNT molecules, donating electrons to SWNTs, which decreases the conductivity of the SWNT film (because SWNTs were p-type, the increase in electron concentration resulted in a decrease in current). In another work, SWNT devices fabricated on PET were used to detect carbon monoxide (CO) at concentrations as low as 1 ppm.201 In their analysis, the functionalization of SWNT walls with carboxylic groups (–COOH) was critical to the detection of CO. Their experimental results were supported by the theoretical study that CO and carboxylic acid interaction alters the carrier scattering probability, which changes the resistance of the SWNTs.
These examples and others mentioned above strongly substantiate SWNTs as a legitimate material to be used in future chemical/biological sensors. SWNT-based chemical/biological sensors have the potential to be highly sensitive, flexible, light-weight, and manufacturable at a low-cost, which can enable novel and practically significant sensing applications. With further research and development, SWNT-based chemical/biological sensors can find their way to the market in the near future.
5 Stretchable and flexible CNT electrodes
In Sections 2–4 we have discussed the fabrication and use of SWNTs in flexible transistor applications. In this section, we describe the use of carbon nanotubes (single- or multi-walled) in flexible and stretchable transparent electrode applications. In Section 5.1 we describe the fabrication of these flexible and stretchable CNT transparent electrodes. Subsequently, we describe the use of these CNT transparent electrodes in flexible or stretchable pressure and strain sensors (Section 5.2), biological and chemical sensors (Section 5.3), light emitting diodes (Section 5.4), and supercapacitors and solar cells (Section 5.5).
5.1 Fabrication of flexible and stretchable conducting CNT films for transparent electrodes
The two important requirements in transparent electrodes (TEs) are high conductivity and transparency.206 Currently, indium tin oxide (ITO) is the material used as the transparent electrode in most optoelectronic devices due to its excellent optoelectronic properties, with a sheet resistance (Rs) on the order of 10 Ω per square (Ω □−1) at about 90% transparency (T).207 However, the increasing price and scarcity of the indium in ITO and the brittleness of ITO films make ITO unsuitable for next generation electronics that require large scale and low-cost manufacturing and the ability to be mechanically compliant.208 In contrast, CNTs are an ideal candidate for electrodes for these devices due to their unique properties, such as their high intrinsic conductivity, solution processability, flexibility, and the potential for production at low cost.14–16
To date, two main strategies have been implemented to fabricate highly conductive, transparent, and compliant (stretchable or flexible) films of CNTs: (1) superaligned films of CNTs drawn from vertically grown CNT forests using the “dry-drawing” technique,209–211 and (2) the deposition or embedding of CNTs onto flexible or stretchable substrates such as PET and PDMS.212–215 Both these techniques have shown great promise in using CNTs in next-generation stretchable devices such as pressure and strain sensors,216–218 chemical or biological sensors,219 displays,220 touch screens, loudspeakers,221 and as electrodes for flexible solar cells and supercapacitors.222,223
To make superaligned films of CNTs, vertically aligned forests of CNTs are grown on silicon wafers as large as 8 in. using a metal catalyst with a high nucleation density and narrow size distribution.209 A low-pressure chemical vapour deposition system is used to grow the CNTs with good uniformity and a low level of defects. However, the CNTs grown in this process are multi-walled, which limit their use as TFTs. Ongoing research is working on developing SWNTs films using smaller sized catalyst, and recently, researchers have demonstrated a triple-walled CNT array using this method.224 The as-grown CNTs can easily be converted to films by using a tweezer to remove a CNT bundle from the wafer. The CNT bundles will be continuously drawn out from the substrate as the end of one CNT bundle removes another CNT bundle, and so on. The width of these films will reflect the width of the substrate as 200–300 m long films have been drawn using this method. They can be used as is or placed on flexible or elastomeric substrates. Typical thicknesses of these films are on the order of tens of nanometres with a transparency of 78% (at 550 nm) and sheet resistance of 700–1500 Ω □−1 for a single layer film. However, post processing methods and doping can significantly improve both the transparency and conductivity of these films. Fig. 10 shows the typical processing scheme and films produced.224,225
 Fig. 10  Processing method and films produced by the superaligned method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 209. Copyright 2011 John Wiley and Sons. 
Embedding or depositing CNTs from solution directly on flexible substrates is another commonly used strategy to utilize the flexibility of CNTs.28 Deposition of CNTs on PET substrates, similarly as those mentioned previously for TFTs, has been used to make flexible TEs.213,215 More importantly, the use of elastomeric substrates with CNTs has provided films that are not only flexible, but also stretchable. The most commonly used elastomeric substrate is PDMS,212,226,227 even though other materials have been used as well.228–230 The CNTs can be deposited on the substrate by simple solution deposition methods such as slot dye coating or spray coating. Alternatively, the CNTs can be embedded in the elastomeric substrates by directly curing the elastomeric material on a SWNT films or by premixing the CNTs and the elastomer, followed by film curing.231–233
In our group, we have developed transparent, conducting spray-deposited films of the SWNTs on a PDMS substrate that can be rendered stretchable by applying strain along an axis, and then releasing this strain.234 This process produced films that accommodated strains of up to 150% and demonstrated conductivities as high as 2200 S cm−1 in the stretched state, which are the most conductive stretchable CNT films in the literature and are biaxially stretchable. Fig. 11 presents the evolution of the change in resistance (ΔR/R0) as a function of strain for seven stages of applied strain and relaxation: 0% → 50% → 0% → 100% → 0% → 150% → 0% → 200%. With the first application of strain (50%), R increases due to irrecoverable loss of junctions between nanotubes. Following the application of 100% strain, the resistance retraces itself until it reaches 50% (the previous maximum strain), after which the slope of ΔR/R0 increases. We observed similar behaviour when we relax the film upon reaching strains of 100% and 150%. The maximum strain obtained was 170%, beyond which the resistance of the film increased irreversibly by several orders of magnitude. The effect of strain history on resistance implies that these nanotube films can be ‘programmed’ by the first cycle of strain and release, to be reversibly stretchable within the range defined by the first strain. Cycling tests showed a small change in R, showing the resiliency of these films (Fig. 11b). Other groups have shown a similar mechanism by either depositing films of CNTs on PDMS or embedding them into the PDMS matrix. Zhu and Xu used superaligned CNT films on PDMS with the same buckling mechanism we have developed in our group to produce films that can accommodate strains of 160%.235 Sekitani et al. used millimetre-long SWNTs embedded in a vinylidene fluoride-hexafluoropropylene copolymer matrix that were biaxially stretchable and could accommodate strains of 134%.236 Yamada et al. embedded vertically aligned CNTs in PDMS to produce stretchable CNT films that can accommodate strains of 280%,237 and Hu et al. have shown CNT based films that can accommodate strains of 700% with the use of specialized substrates.214
 Fig. 11  (a) Change in resistance versus strain for CNT film on PDMS substrate, (b) cycling test for films stretched to 50%, (c) schematic and AFM image of buckled CNT film on PDMS. Reproduced with permission from ref. 234. Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group. 
5.2 CNT-based flexible conducting films in pressure and strain sensors
One of the most promising applications of stretchable CNT electrodes is in their use as pressure or strain sensors.218,238 In fact, the intrinsic flexibility of CNTs enables them to be used for these types of sensors. Recently, we have fabricated devices comprised of two strips of PDMS bearing stretchable nanotube films, which were laminated together, face-to-face, with Ecoflex silicone elastomer.234 The capacitance of a parallel-plate capacitor is proportional to 1/d, where d is the spacing between plates. Application of pressure (Fig. 12, b (left), d and f) and tensile strain (Fig. 12, b (right), e and g) both resulted in a shortened distance between the electrodes (d′). Capacitance C was linearly dependent on pressure to 1 MPa (Fig. 12d) and strain to 50% (Fig. 12e) over the ranges tested. An array of 64 capacitors (‘pixels’) were fabricated using an 8 × 8 array of nanotube lines, with width and spacing of 2 mm. Using this array we were able to measure changes in capacitance due to pressure with little crosstalk, highlighting the advantage of using a material that is stretchable. In addition, the transparency across the array was 88% to 95% (Fig. 12a), which would make this functional device useful for applications that require transparency, such as in touch screen displays. Other groups have demonstrated strain sensors using similar processes.226,235
 Fig. 12  (a) Photograph of 8 × 8 sensor array adhered on backlit display (b) schematic showing capacitor structure and the effect of pressure and strain (c) pressure profile of a pixel surrounded by its four nearest pixels (scale 2 mm) (d) change in capacitance versus pressure (e) change in capacitance versus stain (f and g) Cycling tests for applications of pressure and strain. Reproduced with permission from ref. 234. Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group. 
In addition, Chang et al. have shown the use of millimetre-long SWNTs that were transferred to flexible substrates to fabricate highly sensitive strain sensors that can measure strains of 0.004%.217 Choi et al. used transferred, solution processed CNT films on PDMS and PET substrates to form both a compressive pressure sensor and a five-wire resistive touch sensor.239 Yamada et al. fabricated aligned SWNT strain sensors that can accommodate strains of 280% by transferring CVD grown films to PDMS substrates.237 They used these films in a variety of strain sensors that can measure human motion by assembling devices as bandages or on clothing. Furthermore, these strain sensors were used to measure biological signals on the human body such as breathing and phonation. As a result, CNT based biological sensors can be potentially incorporated in clothing or directly on the human body, enabling real time monitoring of biological signals.
In addition, CNT based pressure and touch sensors can be implemented in touch screen panels and displays.240,241 Touch screen panels are perhaps the first commercial products in which flexible or stretchable TE films of CNTs will be incorporated into due to their simple structure and the need for a less stringent electronic performance when compared to other devices. Hecht et al. used solution processed CNT films on PET as the touch electrode in four-wire resistive touch panel. These devices showed much improved mechanical stability performance over ITO, with no loss in device performance after 3 million actuations.242 Currently, touch screen displays only “sense” touch, but not pressure. However, using CNT based sensors that can not only sense touch, but also pressure, touch panels can be made with increased functionality by having difference responses due to the amount of pressure applied.
5.3 CNT-based flexible conducting films in biological and chemical sensors
Flexible or stretchable chemical or biological sensors (made using conducting CNT films as opposed to FET based SWNT films as described in Section 4.3) can be useful in applications that require the devices to be amenable to flexing, such as devices that need to be placed on biological surfaces, the human body, or in aerospace applications. Li et al. embedded vertically grown CVD SWNTs into a PDMS matrix that were used as ethanol gas sensors.243 Nasibulin et al. have fabricated flexible free standing SWNT films by an aerosol CVD synthesis method, which were then collected on filters.244 These films can then be transferred to any desired flexible substrate, and with doping, they have been shown to have a record sheet resistance of 84 Ω □−1 at 90% transparency. They demonstrated these films as sensors in the electrochemical detection of dopamine (Fig. 13a), speakers, gas flowmetres, and gas heaters. Other groups have also demonstrated flexible gas sensors using CNTs for the detection of organic and nerve agents,245–247 NH3,248,249 NO2,250,251 H2,252,253 glucose,254 and other various gases and analytes.255–257 More detailed reviews on CNT based chemical and biological sensors can be found elsewhere.16,258
 Fig. 13  (a) CNT based flexible dopamine sensor (b) flexible all carbon nanotube based LED (c) flexible organic solar with a CNT based electrode (d) stretchable supercapacitor with CNT electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 223, 244, 267 and 282. Copyright John Wiley and Sons, 2011 American Chemical Society, 2012 John Wiley and Sons, and 2006 American Institute of Physics. 
5.4 CNT-based flexible conducting films in LEDs
Flexible or stretchable displays and LEDs (or electroluminescent devices, ELDs) are particularly interesting because they can conform to surfaces that are not flat, such as on structures inside and outside of buildings and homes. In addition, they would have increased durability.259 As a result, CNTs are a promising nanomaterial for use in these devices.260 Primarily, the role of the CNTs films in these devices thus far has been limited to their use as electrodes (anode or cathode),232,261–266 however, more recently, Jeong et al. have demonstrated an all carbon LED, where the researchers used SWNTs on PET substrates to fabricate flexible all carbon field-emission displays using spray coated SWNTs as the anode and cathode and a tetraethylorthosilicate–SWNT composite as the field emitter (Fig. 13b).267 Roll-to roll super-aligned CNT arrays and deposited CNTs on flexible substrates using spray coating, dip coating, and filtering have also been used for anode and cathodes for LEDs.268–271 However, adhesion problems between the CNTs and the substrates have been an issue that has limited the performance of these devices. As a result, direct growth of CNT emitters on a polyimide substrate by using plasma enhanced CVD and a microwave welding technique has been developed as well.272–275 As a demonstration of how flexible these LED can be, Xu et al. used a combination of the “dry-drawing” method and the use of a pre-strained PDMS substrate to fabricate an LED that can accommodate a 360 degree twist and strains of 100%, with no noticeably change in illumination intensity.226 Someya's group have used a gel like suspension of SWNTs that were dispersed in a fluorinated rubber to manufacture elastic conductors that were used in organic LEDs and displays that could be stretched 30–50% and spread over curved objects without any damage.276 CNTs have also been demonstrated in flexible displays as the transistors in the backplane and used as an aligning layer in liquid crystal displays.13,277,278
5.5 CNT-based flexible conducting films in super capacitors and solar cells
Flexible energy devices, such as supercapacitors and solar cells, are another important category of devices that can utilize the flexibility of CNTs. Although these devices thus far have shown performances less than more established designs, the flexibility of these devices imparts their use in niche applications where more rigid devices would not be able to be sustained, such as placing them on curved structures or mechanically moving parts.5 In addition, they would enable manufacturing using a printing process that would make them low-cost.
Similarly to LEDs, the role of the SWNT films in solar cells thus far has been limited to their use as electrodes (anode or cathode). However, the development of pure semiconducting SWNTs has opened up the door in using the SWNTs as the active layer as well as discussed in previous sections.279,280 Yang et al. have fabricated SWNT films on flexible substrates as counter electrodes in dye synthesized solar cells.281 The SWNT films were subjected to bending cycles without observable structural damage or change in conductivity. Rowell et al. have shown the use of SWNT films as anodes in flexible bulk-heterojunction (BHT) organic solar cells (Fig. 13c).282 In this work, the SWNTs were vacuum filtered from solution, followed by transfer to a PET substrate using patterned PDMS stamps to form SWNT films on the flexible substrate. PEDOT:PSS was then spin-coated on top of the surface to reduce the roughness of the film, which can cause shorting in the device. The devices were shown to be much more flexible than the traditionally used ITO anode with power conversions efficiencies of 2.5%. Other groups have also used flexible CNT films as counter electrodes in dye sensitized or organic solar cells with efficiencies approaching that of traditional electrodes.282–284 In addition, Chen et al. have used purified semiconducting SWNT fibres as the active layer in a flexible organic solar cell.285 Even though no stretchable solar cells have been developed using CNT films, we have recently developed a stretchable solar cell using the conducting polymer PEDOT:PSS by a PDMS buckling method that is similar to many of the methods used to make CNT films stretchable.4,286 Therefore, it is conceivable that stretchable CNT electrodes can be used in solar cells to make stretchable solar cell devices as well.
Finally, flexible and stretchable films of CNTs have also been incorporated in energy storage devices, such as supercapacitors.287,288 Kaempgen et al. used thin films of spray coated CNTs as both the electrodes and the charge collectors in conjunction with a printable gel electrolyte.222 These thin supercapacitors showed high performance with an energy density of 6 W h kg−1 and a power density 23 kW kg−1 and were made on PET substrates, which allowed them to be flexible. Using a buckled CNT film on PDMS substrates, Yu et al. fabricated supercapacitors that were stretchable up to 30% with no change in device performance (Fig. 13d).223 The devices were composed of two SWNT films, an organic electrolyte, and a polymeric separator, with excellent power and energy densities. The mechanical compliance of CNTs and their incorporation in supercapacitors can allow unique design and structures and possibly reduce the cost of charge storage devices.
6 Future prospects of flexible electronics and conclusions
So far, we have described the deposition and applications of carbon nanotubes in flexible devices as both transistors and electrodes. In this section, we conclude by comparing carbon nanotubes to other materials in flexible electronics (Section 6.1) and the prospects of carbon nanotube based flexible electronics (Section 6.2).
6.1 A survey of other materials as flexible electronics
A number of emerging materials are in direct competition with CNTs in the field of flexible electronics including organic polymers and small molecules,289–291 inorganic nanowires,292–295 metallic nanowires,296–298 and graphene.299–303 Each of these materials possesses their own unique advantages and disadvantages when compared to CNTs. Perhaps the most promising of these materials are organic polymers and small molecules because they can be intrinsically flexible or stretchable. In addition, because they are synthesized from basic building blocks, they can be tuned to have specifically tailored chemical, physical, and electronic properties.304 However, these materials often have a lower mobility and conductivity when compared to their inorganic counterparts.305 In addition, their poor chemical stability in ambient conditions limits their lifetime, and thus, their use in practical applications. Stability issues are especially problematic in n-type organic semiconductors; however, ongoing research has been focusing on the improvement of the stability of these materials.306–308 Conducting polymers have shown promise for use as TEs. Thus far, they have only found uses in niche applications, such as in antistatic coatings and inorganic electroluminescent lamps.309 In particular, poly-(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) has been the most successful conducting polymer due to its high conductivity and solution processability.310 However, films made from PEDOT, and other conducting polymers, tend to have a bluish tint, which limits their use in displays. In addition, similarly to semiconducting polymers, stability issues have limited their use in LEDs and solar cells. Despite these challenges, ongoing research continues to produce better electrically performing and more stable organic semiconductors and conductors towards the fabrication of practical flexible and stretchable electronic devices based on organic materials. In fact, in our group, we have demonstrated the use of highly conductive PEDOT films as stretchable electrodes for stretchable organic solar cells.4,286,311
One of the most recent advances in the field of flexible and stretchable electronics is the use of normally brittle and non-flexible inorganic materials.312 To overcome their inherent brittleness, researchers utilized buckling effects of thin single crystals of these materials on flexible or stretchable substrates to impart compliance.313 Rogers and co-workers have demonstrated stretchable silicon and gallium arsenide based electronics relying on wavy metal interconnects integrated on stretchable substrates that can be laminated onto human skin to measure certain body functions.314 These devices have shown good electronic and physical performance, despite the fact that there are limited data on their electrical and physical properties due to their relatively recent discovery. Complicated fabrication and transfer methods may also limit their scaling up or integration in large area devices. Inorganic semiconducting nanowires are also of interest for use as flexible electronics due to their flexibility and high electronic performance.293 Some of the most common examples include Si,315 GaAs,316 Ge317 and InAs nanowires.318 Due to their similarity in structure to CNTs, they have similar processing and deposition issues. In addition, the synthesis of these nanowires can be challenging. Despite these challenges, the superior electronic behaviour of flexible inorganic materials makes them a strong candidate for their utilization into marketable flexible electronics, especially in higher end devices.
Inorganic metal oxides are also strong candidates for use in flexible electronics.9 These materials, particularly zinc oxide, can be solution processable or deposited by low temperature processes in addition to having high electrical and physical performance.319,320 The mobilities that can be achieved using metal oxides are less than other inorganic semiconductors but tend to be higher than most organic materials. In addition, due to their large bandgap, they are transparent, which makes them particularly attractive for use as transparent electronics, such as in smart windows. However, high temperature annealing steps are often required to obtain high performance films, as solution processed versions tend to have lower device performance.321
Metallic nanowires, particularly made from silver, are particularly attractive for TEs because they have very high conductivities, with values exceeding that of ITO.297 However, the roughness, haze, and stability issues have hindered their emergence in industry. Ongoing efforts are working on improving the stability of silver nanowires films and utilizing them in flexibly electronic applications.322 A recent publication shows the promise of metallic nanowires, as Lee et al. demonstrated films of long Ag nanowires that can accommodate strains of over 460% while still maintaining a sheet resistance of 9 Ω □−1 at 90% T.323
Graphene, despite its relatively recent discovery, has attracted a lot of attention for its use as a TE due to its high conductivity and excellent chemical and physical properties. In fact, Bae et al. have demonstrated large area doped graphene sheets using a roll-to-roll transfer process to give an Rs of 30 Ω □−1 at 90% T.7 However, it is difficult to produce such high quality films in large quantities due to a laborious transfer and etching process that must be tightly controlled, and the doping effects in doped graphene films have yet been shown to be stable. Therefore, scalability and dopant stability issues must be first overcome in graphene before it emerges in industrial TE applications of flexible electronics. Graphene has also been demonstrated for applications in flexible transistor applications. However, these devices suffer from poor on/off ratios due to their semi-metallic nature.324,325 Enhanced semiconducting properties can be achieved by opening a band gap in this material by making thin nanoribbons (<10 nm).326,327 However, fabrication and processing issues have limited their use in practical device application. As a result, graphene will most likely be used in lower end flexible electronic devices, such as transparent electrodes. Table 1 compares CNTs to other materials as prospective materials in flexible electronics.
Table 1 Comparison of CNTs and other materials for use as flexible electronics




Material
Transistor properties
Conductivity (for TE)
Flexibility
Transparency
Cost
Processability
Stability




CNTs
Good
Good
Excellent
Good
Good
Average
Excellent


Organics
Average
Good
Good
Good
Good
Excellent
Average


Inorganics
Excellent
N/A
Good
Poor
Average
Average
Excellent


Metal oxides
Good
Excellent
Good
Excellent
Good
Good
Good


Metal NWs
N/A
Excellent
Good
Poor
Good
Good
Average


Graphene
Poor
Excellent
Excellent
Excellent
Good
Average
Excellent




6.2 Future prospects of CNT based flexible electronics
It is not clear if CNTs or any of the materials described in the proceeding section will dominate the flexible electronics market, which undoubtedly will continue to grow. In fact, according to a report by the consulting company IDTechEx, the market share for flexible and printed electronics was $9.46 billion in 2012 and will be $63.28 billion by 2022.328 The main challenges facing CNTs are in the scalable and cost effective means of the separation of metallic and semiconducting CNTs and the processing and controlled deposition of CNTs onto flexible substrates. As described, ongoing research has been continually tackling these issues. Most likely, the first commercial emergence of CNTs in flexible electronics will be as transparent electrodes in touch screens or other simple devices. CNT TFTs in cheap flexible electronics such as in sensors or RF applications are other fields in which CNTs are more likely to be successfully at the commercial level. More complicated systems such as in flexible logic circuits or memory are less likely to utilize CNTs due to the issues described. However, hybrid devices with CNTs and other materials are being investigated in all of the devices described here that may overcome some of these issues.269,329–331
Acknowledgements
We thank the financial support from GCEP and National Science Foundation (Award Number: 1059020, ECCS 0901414).
References
Q. Cao, H.-S. Kim, N. Pimparkar, J. P. Kulkarni, C. Wang, M. Shim, K. Roy, M. A. Alam and J. A. Rogers, Nature, 2008, 454, 495–500 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jung, J. Kim, J. Noh, N. Lim, C. Lim, G. Lee, J. Kim, H. Kang, K. Jung, A. D. Leonard, J. M. Tour and G. Cho, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2010, 57, 571–580 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Gelinck, H. E. A. Huitema, E. van Veenendaal, E. Cantatore, L. Schrijnemakers, J. B. P. H. van der Putten, T. C. T. Geuns, M. Beenhakkers, J. B. Giesbers, B.-H. Huisman, E. J. Meijer, E. M. Benito, F. J. Touwslager, A. W. Marsman, B. J. E. van Rens and D. M. de Leeuw, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 106–110 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Lipomi, B. C. K. Tee, M. Vosgueritchian and Z. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1771–1775 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Lipomi and Z. Bao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3314–3328 CAS .
J. A. Rogers, Z. Bao, K. Baldwin, A. Dodabalapur, B. Crone, V. R. Raju, V. Kuck, H. Katz, K. Amundson, J. Ewing and P. Drzaic, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2001, 98, 4835–4840 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bae, H. Kim, Y. Lee, X. Xu, J.-S. Park, Y. Zheng, J. Balakrishnan, T. Lei, H. Ri Kim, Y. I. Song, Y.-J. Kim, K. S. Kim, B. Ozyilmaz, J.-H. Ahn, B. H. Hong and S. Iijima, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 574–578 CrossRef CAS .
D.-H. Kim, J. Viventi, J. J. Amsden, J. Xiao, L. Vigeland, Y.-S. Kim, J. A. Blanco, B. Panilaitis, E. S. Frechette, D. Contreras, D. L. Kaplan, F. G. Omenetto, Y. Huang, K.-C. Hwang, M. R. Zakin, B. Litt and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 511–517 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun and J. A. Rogers, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1897–1916 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ilievski, A. D. Mazzeo, R. F. Shepherd, X. Chen and G. M. Whitesides, Angew. Chem., 2011, 123, 1930–1935 CrossRef .
J. A. Rogers, T. Someya and Y. Huang, Science, 2010, 327, 1603–1607 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sekitani and T. Someya, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2228–2246 CrossRef CAS .
T. Takahashi, K. Takei, A. G. Gillies, R. S. Fearing and A. Javey, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5408–5413 CrossRef CAS .
N. Rouhi, D. Jain and P. J. Burke, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8471–8487 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hu, D. S. Hecht and G. Gruner, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 5790–5844 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Cao and J. A. Rogers, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 29–53 CrossRef CAS .
T. Durkop, S. A. Getty, E. Cobas and M. S. Fuhrer, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 35–39 CrossRef .
A. Javey, H. Kim, M. Brink, Q. Wang, A. Ural, J. Guo, P. McIntyre, P. McEuen, M. Lundstrom and H. J. Dai, Nat. Mater., 2002, 1, 241–246 CrossRef CAS .
A. Javey, J. Guo, Q. Wang, M. Lundstrom and H. J. Dai, Nature, 2003, 424, 654–657 CrossRef CAS .
P. N. Nirmalraj, P. E. Lyons, S. De, J. N. Coleman and J. J. Boland, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3890–3895 CrossRef CAS .
A. Buldum and J. P. Lu, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 63, 161403 CrossRef .
M. P. Garrett, I. N. Ivanov, R. A. Gerhardt, A. A. Puretzky and D. B. Geohegan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 163105 CrossRef .
S. N. Barman, M. C. LeMieux, J. Baek, R. Rivera and Z. Bao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 2672–2678 CAS .
M. S. Fuhrer, J. Nygard, L. Shih, M. Forero, Y. G. Yoon, M. S. C. Mazzoni, H. J. Choi, J. Ihm, S. G. Louie, A. Zettl and P. L. McEuen, Science, 2000, 288, 494–497 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Odintsov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 85, 150–153 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Yu, S. H. Chae, S. Y. Lee, D. L. Duong and Y. H. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1889–1893 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Cao, S. H. Hur, Z. T. Zhu, Y. G. Sun, C. J. Wang, M. A. Meitl, M. Shim and J. A. Rogers, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 304–309 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Kang, C. Kocabas, H.-S. Kim, Q. Cao, M. A. Meitl, D.-Y. Khang and J. A. Rogers, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3343–3348 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Kang, C. Kocabas, T. Ozel, M. Shim, N. Pimparkar, M. A. Alam, S. V. Rotkin and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 230–236 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, S. Ju, J. H. Back, Y. Xuan, P. D. Ye, M. Shim, D. B. Janes and S. Mohammadi, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 564–568 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, S. Kim, J. Park, S. Ju and S. Mohammadi, ACS Nano, 2009, 4, 2994–2998 CrossRef .
E. Joselevich and C. M. Lieber, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 1137–1141 CrossRef CAS .
Y. G. Zhang, A. L. Chang, J. Cao, Q. Wang, W. Kim, Y. M. Li, N. Morris, E. Yenilmez, J. Kong and H. J. Dai, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 3155–3157 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kocabas, M. A. Meitl, A. Gaur, M. Shim and J. A. Rogers, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 2421–2426 CrossRef CAS .
S. Huang, M. Woodson, R. Smalley and J. Liu, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1025–1028 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jin, H. Chu, J. Wang, J. Hong, W. Tan and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2073–2079 CrossRef CAS .
S. Huang, X. Cai and J. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 5636–5637 CrossRef CAS .
L. Huang, B. White, M. Y. Sfeir, M. Huang, H. X. Huang, S. Wind, J. Hone and S. O'Brien, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 11103–11109 CrossRef CAS .
S. Huang, B. Maynor, X. Cai and J. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1651–1655 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ismach, D. Kantorovich and E. Joselevich, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 11554–11555 CrossRef CAS .
S. Han, X. Liu and C. Zhou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5294–5295 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kocabas, S.-H. Hur, A. Gaur, M. A. Meitl, M. Shim and J. A. Rogers, Small, 2005, 1, 1110–1116 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ding, D. Yuan and J. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5428–5429 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yu, G. Qin, H. Li, Z. Xia, Y. Nian and S.-S. Pei, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 22676–22680 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ryu, A. Badmaev, C. Wang, A. Lin, N. Patil, L. Gomez, A. Kumar, S. Mitra, H. S. P. Wong and C. Zhou, Nano Lett., 2008, 9, 189–197 CrossRef .
A. Ismach, L. Segev, E. Wachtel and E. Joselevich, Angew. Chem., 2004, 116, 6135–6135 CrossRef .
C. Kocabas, M. Shim and J. A. Rogers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4540–4541 CrossRef CAS .
F. N. Ishikawa, H.-K. Chang, K. Ryu, P.-C. Chen, A. Badmaev, L. Gomez De Arco, G. Shen and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2008, 3, 73–79 CrossRef .
S. W. Hong, T. Banks and J. A. Rogers, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1826–1830 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhou, L. Ding, S. Yang and J. Liu, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3849–3857 CrossRef CAS .
B. K. Sarker, S. Shekhar and S. I. Khondaker, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6297–6305 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. Collins, M. S. Arnold and P. Avouris, Science, 2001, 292, 706–709 CrossRef CAS .
R. Seidel, A. P. Graham, E. Unger, G. S. Duesberg, M. Liebau, W. Steinhoegl, F. Kreupl, W. Hoenlein and W. Pompe, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 831–834 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, A. Gaur, S.-H. Hur, C. Kocabas, M. A. Meitl, M. Shim and J. A. Rogers, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 2031–2035 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, I. S. Park, H.-J. Kwon, W.-J. Chang and S. W. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 173102 CrossRef .
S. Shekhar, M. Erementchouk, M. N. Leuenberger and S. I. Khondaker, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 243121 CrossRef .

          I. Amlani, N. Pimparkar, K. Nordquist, D. Lim, S. Clavijo, Q. Zhengfang, R. Emrick, in 8th IEEE Conference on Nanotechnology, Arlington, TX,  2008 Search PubMed .
B. Gyoung-Ho, H. Jea-Ho, J. Eun-Kyoung, S. Hye-Mi, O. L. Jeong, K. Ki-jeong and C. Hyunju, IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol., 2008, 7, 624–627 CrossRef .
S. H. Hur, C. Kocabas, A. Gaur, O. O. Park, M. Shim and J. A. Rogers, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98, 114302 CrossRef .
N. Pimparkar, Q. Cao, J. A. Rogers and M. A. Alam, Nano Res., 2009, 2, 167–175 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, P. Qi, X. Wang, Y. Lu, X. Li, R. Tu, S. Bangsaruntip, D. Mann, L. Zhang and H. Dai, Science, 2006, 314, 974–977 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hassanien, M. Tokumoto, P. Umek, D. Vrbanic, M. Mozetic, D. Mihailovic, P. Venturini and S. Pejovnik, Nanotechnology, 2005, 16, 278–281 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Yang, K. H. An, J. S. Park, K. A. Park, S. C. Lim, S. H. Cho, Y. S. Lee, W. Park, C. Y. Park and Y. H. Lee, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 73, 075419 CrossRef .
H. Huang, R. Maruyama, K. Noda, H. Kajiura and K. Kadono, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 7316–7320 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, X. Xian, J. Zhang and Z. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 3849–3856 CAS .
M. S. Strano, C. A. Dyke, M. L. Usrey, P. W. Barone, M. J. Allen, H. W. Shan, C. Kittrell, R. H. Hauge, J. M. Tour and R. E. Smalley, Science, 2003, 301, 1519–1522 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kanungo, H. Lu, G. G. Malliaras and G. B. Blanchet, Science, 2009, 323, 234–237 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, Q. Cao, T. Ozel, A. Gaur, J. A. Rogers and M. Shim, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 11460–11468 CrossRef CAS .
S. Banerjee and S. S. Wong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 2073–2081 CrossRef CAS .
C. Manard-Moyon, N. Izard, E. Doris and C. Mioskowski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 6552–6553 CrossRef .
C.-M. Yang, J. S. Park, K. H. An, S. C. Lim, K. Seo, B. Kim, K. A. Park, S. Han, C. Y. Park and Y. H. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 19242–19248 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wunderlich, F. Hauke and A. Hirsch, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 1493–1497 RSC .
S.-M. Yoon, S. J. Kim, H.-J. Shin, A. Benayad, S. J. Choi, K. K. Kim, S. M. Kim, Y. J. Park, G. Kim, J.-Y. Choi and Y. H. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2610–2616 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ding, A. Tselev, J. Wang, D. Yuan, H. Chu, T. P. McNicholas, Y. Li and J. Liu, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 800–805 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yao, C. Feng, J. Zhang and Z. Liu, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1673–1677 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Wang, X. D. Bai, K. H. Liu, Z. Xu, D. Golberg, Y. Bando and E. G. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 6530–6531 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hong, B. Zhang, B. Peng, J. Zhang, W. M. Choi, J.-Y. Choi, J. M. Kim and Z. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 14642–14643 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jang, H. Jang, Y. Lee, D. Suh, S. Baik, B. H. Hong and J.-H. Ahn, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 425201 CrossRef .
N. Chimot, V. Derycke, M. F. Goffman, J. P. Bourgoin, H. Happy and G. Dambrine, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 153111 CrossRef .
S. H. Tseng and N. H. Tai, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 204104 CrossRef .
D.-M. Sun, M. Y. Timmermans, Y. Tian, A. G. Nasibulin, E. I. Kauppinen, S. Kishimoto, T. Mizutani and Y. Ohno, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 156–161 CrossRef CAS .
T. Takenobu, T. Takahashi, T. Kanbara, K. Tsukagoshi, Y. Aoyagi and Y. Iwasa, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 033511 CrossRef .
C. Wang, J.-C. Chien, K. Takei, T. Takahashi, J. Nah, A. M. Niknejad and A. Javey, Nano Lett., 2011, 12, 1527–1533 CrossRef .
J. Vaillancourt, H. Zhang, P. Vasinajindakaw, H. Xia, X. Lu, X. Han, D. C. Janzen, W.-S. Shih, C. S. Jones, M. Stroder, M. Y. Chen, H. Subbaraman, R. T. Chen, U. Berger and M. Renn, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 243301 CrossRef .
E. S. Snow, P. M. Campbell, M. G. Ancona and J. P. Novak, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 033105 CrossRef .
S. H. Hur, O. O. Park and J. A. Rogers, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 243502 CrossRef .
L. Jiao, B. Fan, X. Xian, Z. Wu, J. Zhang and Z. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 12612–12613 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jiao, X. Xian, Z. Wu, J. Zhang and Z. Liu, Nano Lett., 2008, 9, 205–209 CrossRef .
S. Aikawa, E. Einarsson, T. Thurakitseree, S. Chiashi, E. Nishikawa and S. Maruyama, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 063502 CrossRef .
M. Ha, Y. Xia, A. A. Green, W. Zhang, M. J. Renn, C. H. Kim, M. C. Hersam and C. D. Frisbie, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4388–4395 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chen, Y. Fu, R. Aminirad, C. Wang, J. Zhang, K. Wang, K. Galatsis and C. Zhou, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5301–5308 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chattopadhyay, I. Galeska and F. Papadimitrakopoulos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 3370–3375 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. LeMieux, M. Roberts, S. Barman, Y. W. Jin, J. M. Kim and Z. Bao, Science, 2008, 321, 101–104 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. LeMieux, S. Sok, M. E. Roberts, J. P. Opatkiewicz, D. Liu, S. N. Barman, N. Patil, S. Mitra and Z. Bao, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 4089–4097 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Roberts, M. C. LeMieux, A. N. Sokolov and Z. Bao, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2526–2531 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Opatkiewicz, M. C. LeMieux, D. Liu, M. Vosgueritchian, S. N. Barman, C. M. Elkins, J. Hedrick and Z. Bao, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4845–4853 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hong, M. Zhou, R. Zhang, S. Hou, W. Choi, Y. S. Woo, J.-Y. Choi, Z. Liu and J. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 6819–6823 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ming, A. Jagota, E. D. Semke, B. A. Diner, R. S. McLean, S. R. Lustig, R. E. Richardson and N. G. Tassi, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 338–342 CrossRef .
M. Zheng and E. D. Semke, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 6084–6085 CrossRef CAS .
X. M. Tu, S. Manohar, A. Jagota and M. Zheng, Nature, 2009, 460, 250–253 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nish, J. Y. Hwang, J. Doig and R. J. Nicholas, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 640–646 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, B. Zhou, Y. Lin, L. Gu, W. Wang, K. A. S. Fernando, S. Kumar, L. F. Allard and Y.-P. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 1014–1015 CrossRef CAS .
W. Z. Wang, W. F. Li, X. Y. Pan, C. M. Li, L.-J. Li, Y. G. Mu, J. A. Rogers and M. B. Chan-Park, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1643–1651 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tanaka, H. Jin, Y. Miyata, S. Fujii, H. Suga, Y. Naitoh, T. Minari, T. Miyadera, K. Tsukagoshi and H. Kataura, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1497–1500 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, Y. Feng, T. Tanaka, Y. Urabe and H. Kataura, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 9270–9276 CAS .
H. Liu, D. Nishide, T. Tanaka and H. Kataura, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 309 CrossRef .
M. S. Arnold, A. A. Green, J. F. Hulvat, S. I. Stupp and M. C. Hersam, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2006, 1, 60–65 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Hersam, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 387–394 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shi, C. X. Guo, M. B. Chan-Park and C. M. Li, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 358–361 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Y. Fu, C. Wang, P.-C. Chen, Z. Liu, W. Wei, C. Wu, M. E. Thompson and C. Zhou, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4852–4858 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Lee, Y. Yoon, S. Park, J. H. Oh, S. Hong, L. S. Liyanage, H. Wang, S. Morishita, N. Patil, Y. J. Park, J. J. Park, A. Spakowitz, G. Galli, F. Gygi, P. H. S. Wong, J. B. H. Tok, J. M. Kim and Z. Bao, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 541 CrossRef .
S. Park, H. W. Lee, H. Wang, S. Selvarasah, M. R. Dokmeci, Y. J. Park, S. N. Cha, J. M. Kim and Z. Bao, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2487–2496 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chandra, H. Park, A. Maarouf, G. J. Martyna and G. S. Tulevski, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 072110 CrossRef .
L. S. Liyanage, H. Lee, N. Patil, S. Park, S. Mitra, Z. Bao and H.-S. P. Wong, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 451–458 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, T. Unander, A. L. Cabezas, B. Shao, Z. Liu, Y. Feng, E. B. Forsberg, Z.-B. Zhang, I. Jogi, X. Gao, M. Boman, L.-R. Zheng, M. Ostling, H.-E. Nilsson and S.-L. Zhang, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 109, 084915 CrossRef .
H. Okimoto, T. Takenobu, K. Yanagi, Y. Miyata, H. Kataura, T. Asano and Y. Iwasa, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 48, 06FF03 CrossRef .
P. Beecher, P. Servati, A. Rozhin, A. Colli, V. Scardaci, S. Pisana, T. Hasan, A. J. Flewitt, J. Robertson, G. W. Hsieh, F. M. Li, A. Nathan, A. C. Ferrari and W. I. Milne, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 102, 043710 CrossRef .
T. Takenobu, N. Miura, S.-Y. Lu, H. Okimoto, T. Asano, M. Shiraishi and Y. Iwasa, Appl. Phys. Express, 2009, 2, 025005 CrossRef .
Y. Nobusa, Y. Yomogida, S. Matsuzaki, K. Yanagi, H. Kataura and T. Takenobu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 183106 CrossRef .
C. S. Jones, X. Lu, M. Renn, M. Stroder and W.-S. Shih, Microelectron. Eng., 2009, 87, 434–437 CrossRef .
J. Zhao, Y. Gao, J. Lin, Z. Chen and Z. Cui, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2051–2056 RSC .
H. Okimoto, T. Takenobu, K. Yanagi, Y. Miyata, H. Shimotani, H. Kataura and Y. Iwasa, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3981–3986 CrossRef CAS .
X. Han, D. C. Janzen, J. Vaillancourt and X. Lu, Micro Nano Lett., 2007, 2, 96–98 CAS .
K. Kordás, T. Mustonen, G. Tóth, H. Jantunen, M. Lajunen, C. Soldano, S. Talapatra, S. Kar, R. Vajtai and P. M. Ajayan, Small, 2006, 2, 1021–1025 CrossRef .
J. H. Cho, J. Lee, Y. Xia, B. Kim, Y. He, M. J. Renn, T. P. Lodge and C. Daniel Frisbie, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 900–906 CrossRef CAS .
J. Noh, M. Jung, K. Jung, G. Lee, S. Lim, D. Kim, S. Kim, J. M. Tour and G. Cho, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 2185–2191 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shekhar, P. Stokes and S. I. Khondaker, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 1739–1746 CrossRef CAS .
P. Stokes, E. Silbar, Y. M. Zayas and S. I. Khondaker, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 113104 CrossRef .
A. H. Monica, S. J. Papadakis, R. Osiander and M. Paranjape, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 085303 CrossRef CAS .
R. Krupke, F. Hennrich, M. M. Kappes and H. V. Lohneysen, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1395–1399 CrossRef CAS .
R. Krupke, S. Linden, M. Rapp and F. Hennrich, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1468–1470 CrossRef CAS .
C. Rutherglen, D. Jain and P. Burke, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 083119 CrossRef .
J. U. Park, M. A. Meitl, S. H. Hur, M. L. Usrey, M. S. Strano, P. J. A. Kenis and J. A. Rogers, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 581–585 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kim, S. Baik and K. Y. Suh, Small, 2008, 4, 92–95 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xin and A. T. Woolley, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1481–1484 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Lay, J. P. Novak and E. S. Snow, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 603–606 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shimoda, S. J. Oh, H. Z. Geng, R. J. Walker, X. B. Zhang, L. E. McNeil and O. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 899–901 CrossRef CAS .
V. V. Tsukruk, H. Ko and S. Peleshanko, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 92, 065502 CrossRef .
M. Engel, J. P. Small, M. Steiner, M. Freitag, A. A. Green, M. C. Hersam and P. Avouris, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 2445–2452 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, L. Zhang, X. Wang, I. Shimoyama, X. Sun, W.-S. Seo and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 4890–4891 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lan, Y. Wang and Z. F. Ren, Adv. Phys., 2011, 60, 553–678 CrossRef CAS .
T. Druzhinina, S. Hoeppener and U. S. Schubert, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 953–970 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, L. Jiao, Y. Yao, X. Xian and J. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 22, 2285–2310 CrossRef .
R. Krupke, F. Hennrich, H. von Lohneysen and M. M. Kappes, Science, 2003, 301, 344–347 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Shastry, J.-W. T. Seo, J. J. Lopez, H. N. Arnold, J. Z. Kelter, V. K. Sangwan, L. J. Lauhon, T. J. Marks and M.
C. Hersam, Small, 2013, 9, 45–51 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Collins, K. Bradley, M. Ishigami and A. Zettl, Science, 2000, 287, 1801–1804 CrossRef CAS .
R. Martel, T. Schmidt, H. R. Shea, T. Hertel and P. Avouris, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 73, 2447–2449 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Tans, A. R. M. Verschueren and C. Dekker, Nature, 1998, 393, 49–52 CrossRef CAS .
S. Heinze, J. Tersoff, R. Martel, V. Derycke, J. Appenzeller and P. Avouris, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2002, 89, 4 CrossRef .
N. Park and S. Hong, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 045408 CrossRef .
Y. Nosho, Y. Ohno, S. Kishimoto and T. Mizutani, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 3412–3415 CrossRef CAS .
V. Derycke, R. Martel, J. Appenzeller and P. Avouris, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 2773–2775 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Chen, J. Appenzeller, J. Knoch, Y. M. Lin and P. Avouris, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1497–1502 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Hu, K. Yao, S. Wang, Z. Y. Zhang, X. L. Liang, Q. Chen, L. M. Peng, Y. G. Yao, J. Zhang, W. W. Zhou and Y. Li, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 223116 CrossRef .
Y. Nosho, Y. Ohno, S. Kishimoto and T. Mizutani, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 073105 CrossRef .
S. J. Wind, J. Appenzeller, R. Martel, V. Derycke and P. Avouris, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 3817–3819 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, S. Wang, L. Ding, X. Liang, T. Pei, J. Shen, H. Xu, Q. Chen, R. Cui, Y. Li and L.-M. Peng, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3696–3701 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liang, S. Wang, X. Wei, L. Ding, Y. Zhu, Z. Zhang, Q. Chen, Y. Li, J. Zhang and L.-M. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1339–1343 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bachtold, P. Hadley, T. Nakanishi and C. Dekker, Science, 2001, 294, 1317–1320 CrossRef CAS .
A. Javey, Q. Wang, A. Ural, Y. Li and H. Dai, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 929–932 CrossRef CAS .
V. Derycke, R. Martel, J. Appenzeller and P. Avouris, Nano Lett., 2001, 1, 453–456 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kaminishi, H. Ozaki, Y. Ohno, K. Maehashi, K. Inoue, K. Matsumoto, Y. Seri, A. Masuda and H. Matsumura, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 113115 CrossRef .
M. Radosavljevic, J. Appenzeller, P. Avouris and J. Knoch, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 3693–3695 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Liu, C. Lee, C. W. Zhou and J. Han, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 3329–3331 CrossRef CAS .
A. Javey, R. Tu, D. B. Farmer, J. Guo, R. G. Gordon and H. J. Dai, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 345–348 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shim, A. Javey, N. W. Shi Kam and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 11512–11513 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nakamura, M. Ohishi, M. Shiraishi, T. Takenobu and Y. Iwasa, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 013112 CrossRef .
M. Shim, T. Ozel, A. Gaur and C. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7522–7530 CrossRef CAS .
C. Klinke, J. Chen, A. Afzali and P. Avouris, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 555–558 CrossRef CAS .
G. P. Siddons, D. Merchin, J. H. Back, J. K. Jeong and M. Shim, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 927–931 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Kim, J. H. Jang, K. K. Kim, H. K. Park, J. J. Bae, W. J. Yu, I. H. Lee, G. Kim, D. D. Loc, U. J. Kim, E.-H. Lee, H.-J. Shin, J.-Y. Choi and Y. H. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 131, 327–331 CrossRef .
C. Biswas, S. Y. Lee, T. H. Ly, A. Ghosh, Q. N. Dang and Y. H. Lee, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9817–9823 CrossRef CAS .
B. R. Kang, W. J. Yu, K. K. Kim, H. K. Park, S. M. Kim, Y. Park, G. Kim, H.-J. Shin, U. J. Kim, E.-H. Lee, J.-Y. Choi and Y. H. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2553–2559 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Cao, M. G. Xia, M. Shim and J. A. Rogers, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 2355–2362 CrossRef CAS .
E. Menard, R. G. Nuzzo and J. A. Rogers, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 093507 CrossRef .
W. J. Yu, S. Y. Lee, S. H. Chae, D. Perello, G. H. Han, M. Yun and Y. H. Lee, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1344–1350 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Hellstrom, R. Z. Jin, R. M. Stoltenberg and Z. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4204–4208 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Hur, D. Y. Khang, C. Kocabas and J. A. Rogers, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 5730–5732 CrossRef CAS .
J. Appenzeller, J. Knoch, V. Derycke, R. Martel, S. Wind and P. Avouris, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2002, 89, 4 CrossRef .
W. Kim, A. Javey, R. Tu, J. Cao, Q. Wang and H. J. Dai, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 3 Search PubMed .
C. W. Zhou, J. Kong and H. J. Dai, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 76, 1597–1599 CrossRef CAS .
A. W. Cummings and F. Leonard, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4494–4499 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, N. W. Franklin, R. J. Chen and H. J. Dai, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2000, 331, 35–41 CrossRef CAS .
K. Bradley, J.-C. P. Gabriel and G. Gruner, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1353–1355 CrossRef CAS .
R. Nouchi, H. Tomita, A. Ogura, H. Kataura and M. Shiraishi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 253507 CrossRef .
J. Xiang, W. Lu, Y. J. Hu, Y. Wu, H. Yan and C. M. Lieber, Nature, 2006, 441, 489–493 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Chen, J. Appenzeller, Y. M. Lin, J. Sippel-Oakley, A. G. Rinzler, J. Y. Tang, S. J. Wind, P. M. Solomon and P. Avouris, Science, 2006, 311, 1735 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chung, E. Verploegen, A. Vailionis, Y. Sun, Y. Nishi, B. Murmann and Z. Bao, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1161–1165 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Hur, M.-H. Yoon, A. Gaur, M. Shim, A. Facchetti, T. J. Marks and J. A. Rogers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 13808–13809 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, J. Zhang and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 7123–7132 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Yu, U. J. Kim, B. R. Kang, I. H. Lee, E.-H. Lee and Y. H. Lee, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1401–1405 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ganzhorn, A. Vijayaraghavan, A. A. Green, S. Dehm, A. Voigt, M. Rapp, M. C. Hersam and R. Krupke, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1734–1738 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ding, Z. Zhang, S. Liang, T. Pei, S. Wang, Y. Li, W. Zhou, J. Liu and L.-M. Peng, Nat. Commun., 2011, 3, 677 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, C. Wang and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7412–7419 CrossRef CAS .
C. Rutherglen, D. Jain and P. Burke, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 811–819 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kocabas, S. Dunham, Q. Cao, K. Cimino, X. Ho, H.-S. Kim, D. Dawson, J. Payne, M. Stuenkel, H. Zhang, T. Banks, M. Feng, S. V. Rotkin and J. A. Rogers, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1937–1943 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kocabas, H.-S. Kim, T. Banks, J. A. Rogers, A. A. Pesetski, J. E. Baumgardner, S. V. Krishnaswamy and H. Zhang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 1405–1409 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kong, N. R. Franklin, C. Zhou, M. G. Chapline, S. Peng, K. Cho and H. Dai, Science, 2000, 287, 622–625 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yu, Q. Hao, S. Saha, L. Shi, X. Kong and Z. L. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 063101 CrossRef .
P.-C. Chen, S. Sukcharoenchoke, K. Ryu, L. Gomez de Arco, A. Badmaev, C. Wang and C. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1900–1904 CrossRef CAS .
D. Fu, H. Lim, Y. Shi, X. Dong, S. G. Mhaisalkar, Y. Chen, S. Moochhala and L.-J. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 650–653 CAS .
D. Lee and T. Cui, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2010, 25, 2259–2264 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kong, M. G. Chapline and H. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1384–1386 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mubeen, T. Zhang, B. Yoo, M. A. Deshusses and N. V. Myung, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 6321–6327 CAS .
Y. Sun and H. H. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 213107 CrossRef .
D. S. Hecht, L. Hu and G. Irvin, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1482–1513 CrossRef CAS .
T. Radhouane Bel Hadj, B. Takayuki, O. Yutaka and T. Yasutaka, J. Appl. Phys., 1998, 83, 2631–2645 CrossRef .
R. C. Darran, P. W. Richard, II, K. S. Daniel, M. S. Suzanne, C. P. David, P. C. Gregory and R. R. Newton, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 76, 1425–1427 CrossRef .
K. Jiang, J. Wang, Q. Li, L. Liu, C. Liu and S. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1154–1161 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. In, D. Lee, F. Fornasiero, A. Noy and C. P. Grigoropoulos, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7858–7866 CrossRef CAS .
J. Di, D. Hu, H. Chen, Z. Yong, M. Chen, Z. Feng, Y. Zhu and Q. Li, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5457–5464 CrossRef CAS .
D.-Y. Khang, J. Xiao, C. Kocabas, S. MacLaren, T. Banks, H. Jiang, Y. Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Nano Lett., 2007, 8, 124–130 CrossRef .
B. Dan, G. C. Irvin and M. Pasquali, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 835–843 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hu, W. Yuan, P. Brochu, G. Gruner and Q. Pei, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 161108 CrossRef .
Q. Liu, T. Fujigaya, H.-M. Cheng and N. Nakashima, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16581–16586 CrossRef CAS .
I. Kang, M. J. Schulz, J. H. Kim, V. Shanov and D. Shi, Smart Mater. Struct., 2006, 15, 737–748 CrossRef CAS .
N.-K. Chang, C.-C. Su and S.-H. Chang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 063501 CrossRef .
D. Lee, H. P. Hong, C. J. Lee, C. W. Park and N. K. Min, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 455301 CrossRef .
W. Cheung, P. L. Chiu, R. R. Parajuli, Y. Ma, S. R. Ali and H. He, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 6465–6480 RSC .
J. Li, L. Hu, L. Wang, Y. Zhou, G. Gruner and T. J. Marks, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2472–2477 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xiao, Z. Chen, C. Feng, L. Liu, Z.-Q. Bai, Y. Wang, L. Qian, Y. Zhang, Q. Li, K. Jiang and S. Fan, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4539–4545 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kaempgen, C. K. Chan, J. Ma, Y. Cui and G. Gruner, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1872–1876 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yu, C. Masarapu, J. Rong, B. Wei and H. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4793–4797 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liu, Y. Sun, L. Chen, C. Feng, X. Feng, K. Jiang, Y. Zhao and S. Fan, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 700–705 CrossRef CAS .
C. Feng, K. Liu, J.-S. Wu, L. Liu, J.-S. Cheng, Y. Zhang, Y. Sun, Q. Li, S. Fan and K. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 885–891 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xu, X. Wang, Y. Zhu and Y. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1279–1283 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Harris, G. R. S. Iyer, A. K. Bernhardt, J. Y. Huh, S. D. Hudson, J. A. Fagan and E. K. Hobbie, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 881–887 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Kim, H. S. Kim, S. S. Lee and M. Park, Carbon, 2011, 50, 444–449 CrossRef .
Y. I. Song, C.-M. Yang, D. Y. Kim, H. Kanoh and K. Kaneko, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2008, 318, 365–371 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li and H. Shimizu, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 2587–2593 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, C. J. Sheehan, J. Zhai, G. Zou, H. Luo, J. Xiong, Y. T. Zhu and Q. X. Jia, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3027–3031 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Kim, M. Vural and M. F. Islam, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2865–2869 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ata, K. Kobashi, M. Yumura and K. Hata, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2710–2716 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Lipomi, M. Vosgueritchian, B. C. K. Tee, S. L. Hellstrom, J. A. Lee, C. H. Fox and Z. Bao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 788–792 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu and F. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1073–1077 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sekitani, Y. Noguchi, K. Hata, T. Fukushima, T. Aida and T. Someya, Science, 2008, 321, 1468–1472 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yamada, Y. Hayamizu, Y. Yamamoto, Y. Yomogida, A. Izadi-Najafabadi, D. N. Futaba and K. Hata, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 296–301 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Cohen, D. Mitra, K. Peterson and M. M. Maharbiz, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1821–1825 CrossRef CAS .

          E. -S. Choi, M. -H. Jeong, K. W. Choi, k. Lim and S. -B. Lee, 3rd International IEEE International NanoElectronics Conference, Hong Kong,  2010 Search PubMed .
K. Kim, K. Shin, J. H. Han, K. R. Lee, W. H. Kim, K. B. Park, B. K. Ju and J. J. Pak, Electron. Lett., 2011, 47, 118–120 CrossRef CAS .
E. Choi, J. Kim, S. Chun, A. Kim, K. Lee, M. Jeong, C. Lim, T. Isoshima, M. Hara and S.-B. Lee, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2011, 11, 5845–5849 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. David, T. David, H. Liangbing, L. Corinne, L. Tom, P. Youngbae, I. Glen and D. Paul, Inf. Disp., 2009, 17, 941–946 CrossRef .
B. Li, M. G. Hahm, Y. L. Kim, H. Y. Jung, S. Kar and Y. J. Jung, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4826–4834 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Nasibulin, A. Kaskela, K. Mustonen, A. S. Anisimov, V. Ruiz, S. Kivisto, S. Rackauskas, M. Y. Timmermans, M. Pudas, B. Aitchison, M. Kauppinen, D. P. Brown, O. G. Okhotnikov and E. I. Kauppinen, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3214–3221 CrossRef CAS .
K. Parikh, K. Cattanach, R. Rao, D.-S. Suh, A. Wu and S. K. Manohar, Sens. Actuators, B, 2006, 113, 55–63 CrossRef .
K. Cattanach, D. K. Rashmi, M. Kozlov and S. K. Manohar, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 4123–4128 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Z. Yang, Z. Hou, D. Xu, L. Wei, E. S.-W. Kong and Y. Zhang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2010, 150, 708–714 CrossRef .
C.-S. Woo, C.-H. Lim, C.-W. Cho, B. Park, H. Ju, D.-H. Min, C.-J. Lee and S.-B. Lee, Microelectron. Eng., 2007, 84, 1610–1613 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, G. Li, R. Liu, H. Ding and T. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 21824–21827 RSC .
J. Mäklin, T. Mustonen, K. Kordás, S. Saukko, G. Tóth and J. Vähäkangas, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2007, 244, 4298–4302 CrossRef .
P.-G. Su, C.-T. Lee, C.-Y. Chou, K.-H. Cheng and Y.-S. Chuang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2009, 139, 488–493 CrossRef .
Y. Sun and H. H. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2818–2823 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, H. H. Wang and M. Xia, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 1250–1259 CAS .
X. B. Yan, X. J. Chen, B. K. Tay and K. A. Khor, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 1269–1275 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ferrer-Anglada, M. Kaempgen and S. Roth, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2006, 243, 3519–3523 CrossRef CAS .
J. Koh, M. Yi, B. Y. Lee, T. H. Kim, J. Lee, Y. M. Jhon and S. Hong, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 505502 CrossRef .
B.-K. Kim, N. Park, P. S. Na, H.-M. So, J.-J. Kim, H. Kim, K.-J. Kong, H. Chang, B.-H. Ryu, Y. Choi and J. O. Lee, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 496 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yun, Z. Dong, V. Shanov, W. R. Heineman, H. B. Halsall, A. Bhattacharya, L. Conforti, R. K. Narayan, W. S. Ball and M. J. Schulz, Nano Today, 2007, 2, 30–37 CrossRef .
K. A. Sierros, D. S. Hecht, D. A. Banerjee, N. J. Morris, L. Hu, G. C. Irvin, R. S. Lee and D. R. Cairns, Thin Solid Films, 2010, 518, 6977–6983 CrossRef CAS .
J. Opatkiewicz, M. C. LeMieux and Z. Bao, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2975–2978 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Su, J. Du, S. Pei, C. Liu and H.-M. Cheng, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4571–4574 RSC .
L. Hu, J. Li, J. Liu, G. Grüner and T. Marks, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 155202 CrossRef .
D. Zhang, K. Ryu, X. Liu, E. Polikarpov, J. Ly, M. E. Tompson and C. Zhou, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1880–1886 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Aguirre, S. Auvray, S. Pigeon, R. Izquierdo, P. Desjardins and R. Martel, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 183104 CrossRef .
A. Schindler, J. Brill, N. Fruehauf, J. P. Novak and Z. Yaniv, Phys. E, 2007, 37, 119–123 CrossRef CAS .
S. Azoubel, S. Shemesh and S. Magdassi, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 344003 CrossRef .
H. J. Jeong, H. D. Jeong, H. Y. Kim, J. S. Kim, S. Y. Jeong, J. T. Han, D. S. Bang and G.-W. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1526–1532 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhu, Y. Sun, D. W. Hess and C.-P. Wong, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 243–247 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Jung, S. Kar, S. Talapatra, C. Soldano, G. Viswanathan, X. Li, Z. Yao, F. S. Ou, A. Avadhanula, R. Vajtai, S. Curran, O. Nalamasu and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 413–418 CrossRef CAS .
T. Y. Tsai, C. Y. Lee, N. H. Tai and W. H. Tuan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 013107 CrossRef .
S. M. Lyth and S. R. P. Silva, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 173124 CrossRef .
S. Hofmann, C. Ducati, B. Kleinsorge and J. Robertson, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83, 4661–4663 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Wang, T. H. Chen, S. C. Chang, T. S. Chin and S. Y. Cheng, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 103111 CrossRef .
T. J. Imholt, C. A. Dyke, B. Hasslacher, J. M. Perez, D. W. Price, J. A. Roberts, J. B. Scott, A. Wadhawan, Z. Ye and J. M. Tour, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 3969–3970 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, S. Fang, A. A. Zakhidov, S. B. Lee, A. E. Aliev, C. D. Williams, K. R. Atkinson and R. H. Baughman, Science, 2005, 309, 1215–1219 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sekitani, H. Nakajima, H. Maeda, T. Fukushima, T. Aida, K. Hata and T. Someya, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 494–499 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, J. Zhang, K. Ryu, A. Badmaev, L. G. De Arco and C. Zhou, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4285–4291 CrossRef CAS .
W. Fu, L. Liu, K. Jiang, Q. Li and S. Fan, Carbon, 2010, 48, 1876–1879 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Arnold, J. D. Zimmerman, C. K. Renshaw, X. Xu, R. R. Lunt, C. M. Austin and S. R. Forrest, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3354–3358 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Bindl, M.-Y. Wu, F. C. Prehn and M. S. Arnold, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 455–460 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, T. Chen, R. He, G. Guan, H. Li, L. Qiu and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5436–5439 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Rowell, M. A. Topinka, M. D. McGehee, H.-J. Prall, G. Dennler, N. S. Sariciftci, L. Hu and G. Gruner, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 233506 CrossRef .
W. J. Lee, E. Ramasamy, D. Y. Lee and J. S. Song, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 1145–1149 CAS .
J. Chen, K. Li, Y. Luo, X. Guo, D. Li, M. Deng, S. Huang and Q. Meng, Carbon, 2009, 47, 2704–2708 CrossRef CAS .
T. Chen, S. Wang, Z. Yang, Q. Feng, X. Sun, L. Li, Z.-S. Wang and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 1815–1819 CrossRef CAS .
M. Vosgueritchian, D. J. Lipomi and Z. Bao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 421–428 CrossRef CAS .
A. Izadi-Najafabadi, T. Yamada, D. N. Futaba, M. Yudasaka, H. Takagi, H. Hatori, S. Iijima and K. Hata, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 811–819 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hu, R. Rajamani and X. Yu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 104103 CrossRef .
S. Logothetidis, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2008, 152, 96–104 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Forrest, Nature, 2004, 428, 911–918 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Kelley, P. F. Baude, C. Gerlach, D. E. Ender, D. Muyres, M. A. Haase, D. E. Vogel and S. D. Theiss, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4413–4422 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Baca, J.-H. Ahn, Y. Sun, M. A. Meitl, E. Menard, H.-S. Kim, W. M. Choi, D.-H. Kim, Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 5524–5542 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, Y.-Z. Long, L. Liao, X. Duan and Z. Fan, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1888–1900 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ju, A. Facchetti, Y. Xuan, J. Liu, F. Ishikawa, P. Ye, C. Zhou, T. J. Marks and D. B. Janes, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 378–384 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. McAlpine, H. Ahmad, D. Wang and J. R. Heath, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 379–384 CrossRef CAS .
S. De, T. M. Higgins, P. E. Lyons, E. M. Doherty, P. N. Nirmalraj, W. J. Blau, J. J. Boland and J. N. Coleman, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1767–1774 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hu, H. S. Kim, J.-Y. Lee, P. Peumans and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2955–2963 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Rathmell, S. M. Bergin, Y.-L. Hua, Z.-Y. Li and B. J. Wiley, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3558–3563 CrossRef CAS .
I. Khrapach, F. Withers, T. H. Bointon, D. K. Polyushkin, W. L. Barnes, S. Russo and M. F. Craciun, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2844–2849 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yu, L. Hu, M. Vosgueritchian, H. Wang, X. Xie, J. R. McDonough, X. Cui, Y. Cui and Z. Bao, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2905–2911 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gomez De Arco, Y. Zhang, C. W. Schlenker, K. Ryu, M. E. Thompson and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2865–2873 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Kim, Y. Zhao, H. Jang, S. Y. Lee, J. M. Kim, K. S. Kim, J.-H. Ahn, P. Kim, J.-Y. Choi and B. H. Hong, Nature, 2009, 457, 706–710 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yin, S. Sun, T. Salim, S. Wu, X. Huang, Q. He, Y. M. Lam and H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5263–5268 CrossRef CAS .
F. Garnier, A. Yassar, R. Hajlaoui, G. Horowitz, F. Deloffre, B. Servet, S. Ries and P. Alnot, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 8716–8721 CrossRef CAS .
S. Logothetidis and A. Laskarakis, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 518, 1245–1249 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Jones, M. J. Ahrens, M.-H. Yoon, A. Facchetti, T. J. Marks and M. R. Wasielewski, Angew. Chem., 2004, 116, 6523–6526 CrossRef .
C. R. Newman, C. D. Frisbie, D. A. da Silva Filho, J.-L. Bredas, P. C. Ewbank and K. R. Mann, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4436–4451 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Anthony, A. Facchetti, M. Heeney, S. R. Marder and X. Zhan, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3876–3892 CrossRef CAS .
A. Elschner and W. Lovenich, Mater. Res. Bull., 2011, 36, 794–798 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. MacDiarmid, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2001, 1, 269–279 CrossRef .
D. J. Lipomi, J. A. Lee, M. Vosgueritchian, B. C. K. Tee, J. A. Bolander and Z. Bao, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 373–382 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, W. M. Choi, H. Jiang, Y. Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2006, 1, 201–207 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu and Y. Xia, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2006, 1, 163–164 CrossRef CAS .
D.-H. Kim, N. Lu, R. Ma, Y.-S. Kim, R.-H. Kim, S. Wang, J. Wu, S. M. Won, H. Tao, A. Islam, K. J. Yu, T.-I. Kim, R. Chowdhury, M. Ying, L. Xu, M. Li, H.-J. Chung, H. Keum, M. McCormick, P. Liu, Y.-W. Zhang, F. G. Omenetto, Y. Huang, T. Coleman and J. A. Rogers, Science, 2011, 333, 838–843 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fan, J. C. Ho, Z. A. Jacobson, R. Yerushalmi, R. L. Alley, H. Razavi and A. Javey, Nano Lett., 2007, 8, 20–25 CrossRef .
N. Han, F. Wang, A. T. Hui, J. J. Hou, G. Shan, F. Xiu, T. Hung and J. C. Ho, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 285607 CrossRef .
D. A. Smith, V. C. Holmberg and B. A. Korgel, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2356–2362 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ford, J. Ho, Z. Fan, O. Ergen, V. Altoe, S. Aloni, H. Razavi and A. Javey, Nano Res., 2008, 1, 32–39 CrossRef CAS .
M.-G. Kim, M. G. Kanatzidis, A. Facchetti and T. J. Marks, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 382–388 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Schneider, R. C. Hoffmann, J. Engstler, O. Soffke, W. Jaegermann, A. Issanin and A. Klyszcz, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3383–3387 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sun and H. Sirringhaus, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2408–2413 CrossRef CAS .
B. Stahlmecke, F. J. M. z. Heringdorf, L. I. Chelaru, M. H.-V. Hoegen, G. Dumpich and K. R. Roos, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 053122 CrossRef .
P. Lee, J. Lee, H. Lee, J. Yeo, S. Hong, K. H. Nam, D. Lee, S. S. Lee and S. H. Ko, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3326–3332 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Kim, H. Jang, S.-K. Lee, B. H. Hong, J.-H. Ahn and J. H. Cho, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3464–3466 CrossRef CAS .
G. Eda, G. Fanchini and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 270–274 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, X. Wang, L. Zhang, S. Lee and H. Dai, Science, 2008, 319, 1229–1232 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xia, D. B. Farmer, Y.-M. Lin and P. Avouris, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 715–718 CrossRef CAS .

          P. Harrop and R. Das, Printed Electronics – Customer Sourcebook & Routes to Profit, IDTechEx,  2012 Search PubMed .
V. C. Tung, L.-M. Chen, M. J. Allen, J. K. Wassei, K. Nelson, R. B. Kaner and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1949–1955 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. M. Reddy, M. M. Shaijumon, S. R. Gowda and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1002–1006 CrossRef CAS .
H. E. Unalan, P. Hiralal, D. Kuo, B. Parekh, G. Amaratunga and M. Chhowalla, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 5909–5912 RSC .

Footnote† Equal contribution.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
	Steve Park received his BA in Physics from Knox College and his BS in Materials Science and Engineering from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign in 2005. He then worked at NanoInk Inc. as an engineer until 2008. Subsequently, he joined Professor Zhenan Bao's group in the department of Chemical Engineering as a doctoral student. His research interests are the utilization of lithography and printing technologies such as dip-pen nanolithography and nanotransfer printing to generate electrical contacts to various nanostructures, and the processing and characterization of single-walled carbon nanotubes for field-effect transistors and infrared photodetectors.
	Michael Vosgueritchian received his BS in Chemical Engineering and Materials Science from the University of California at Berkeley in 2006. Subsequently, he worked for two years as a process engineer at Samsung Austin Semiconductors in Austin, Texas. In 2008, he joined Professor Zhenan Bao's group in the department of Chemical Engineering at Stanford University as a doctoral student. His research is focused on using carbon nanotubes in device applications, such as transistors, electrodes, solar cells, and stretchable electronics.
	Zhenan Bao is a Professor of Chemical Engineering at Stanford University. Prior to joining Stanford in 2004, she was a Distinguished Member of Technical Staff in Bell Labs, Lucent Technologies from 1995–2004. She has over 280 refereed publications and 39 US patents. She is a Fellow of SPIE, ACS and AAAS. She is a recipient of the ACS Polymer Division Carl S. Marvel Creative Polymer Chemistry Award 2013, ACS Author Cope Scholar Award 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry Beilby Medal and Prize 2009, IUPAC Creativity in Applied Polymer Science Prize 2008, American Chemical Society Team Innovation Award 2001, R&D 100 Award 2001.

 	Fig. 1  (a) A random network of CVD-grown SWNT film grown on quartz substrate. E-beam evaporated Fe particles were used as catalysts. (b) Aligned SWNT film using surface-oriented growth. The bright horizontal lines are the patterned catalyst strips. (c) The random network of CVD-grown SWNT film in (a) after striping. The bright vertical lines are where the SWNTs were etched away. Reproduced with permission from ref. 29 and 31. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society and 2007 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic diagram of a CVD-grown SWNT film transfer from quartz substrate to glass or PET. Au is evaporated on top of the SWNTs, and heat-release tape is used to transfer the Au/SWNT layer to the receiving substrate. The Au is subsequently removed using wet chemical etching. Reproduced with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic diagram of the surface self-sorting technique (top left), an AFM image of the surface after spin-casting SWNTs (top right) showing SWNT alignment, and a plot of the mean transfer characteristics (bottom). (b) Schematic of selective SWNT removal by electric type using functionalized scotch tape (top). Amine functionalized tape selectively bound to sc-SWNTs, leaving behind m-SWNTs on the substrate. In contrast, phenyl functionalized tape selectively bound to m-SWNTs, leaving behind sc-SWNTs on the substrate. The bottom plot is a histogram representing the respective amounts of sc- and m-SWNTs on the substrate after treating it with amine-terminated tape, verifying that most of the sc-SWNTs were removed by the tape. Reproduced with permission from ref. 93 and 97. Copyright 2008 The American Association for the Advancement of Science and 2011 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 4  Summary of results of various solution sorting techniques. (a) SWNT sorting using poly[(9,9-dioctylfluorenyl-2,7-diyl)-alt-co-1,1,2,2-tetramethyldisilane] or P1.103 Molecular simulation of P1 wrapping around a SWNT (left) and the chemical structure of P1 (right) on the top. On the bottom is a histogram of on/off ratios of thin-film devices consisting of pristine and P1-sorted SWNTs showing a much higher on/off ratio for devices fabricated with P1-sorted SWNTs. (b) Molecular simulation of DNA wrapping around SWNT (top) along with optical absorption data showing selective dispersion of certain chiralities of SWNTs based on different DNA sequencing (bottom).100 (c) Chemical structure of poly(9,9-dioctylfluorenyl-2,7-diyl) or PFO (left), and the molecular simulation of PFO wrapping around a SWNT (right) on the top. Raman spectra data showing the removal of m-SWNTs when dispersed in PFO on the bottom.101 (d) Optical image of coloured bands after density gradient centrifugation and their corresponding optical absorption data showing SWNT separation by diameter, band gap, and electric type.107 Reproduced with permission from ref. 100, 101, 103 and 107. Copyright 2009 Nature Publishing Group, 2007 Nature Publishing Group, 2011 John Wiley and Sons, and 2006 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic depiction of rr-P3DDT polymer wrapping around a SWNT to disperse it in solution; molecular structure of rr-P3DDT (right). (b) Resonant Raman spectroscopy (RRS) at excitation energy of 1.96 eV showing the disappearance of the m-SWNT peak after sorting. (c) Histogram of on/off ratios of individually characterized SWNTs using short-channel devices. All of the SWNTs that were characterized had on/off ratio no less than 103 with an average value of 106. (d) Transfer curve of a thin-film transistor device showing mobility of 12 cm2 V−1 s−1 and on/off ratio of 106. Reproduced with permission from ref. 111 and 112. Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group and 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of ink-jet printing of SWNTs with tunable density by dropping different number of droplets. The highly dense areas at the ends function as S/D electrodes. (b) Schematic of fully printed SWNT device, with Ag and ion-gel (PEI/LiClO4) used as S/D/G electrodes and dielectric layer, respectively. An optical image of the fully printed SWNT device that was used to control an organic light emitting diode (right). (c) Combined roll-to-roll and ink-jet printed SWNT flexible devices: optical image of the devices (left) and SEM images of the channel region (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 91, 122 and 126. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society, 2010 John Wiley and Sons, and 2011 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  Various SWNT alignment techniques. (a) ac-dielectrophoresis. (b) Langmuir–Blodgett assembly. (c) Evaporation-driven self-assembly. Reproduced with permission from ref. 127, 139 and 140. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society, 2008 American Chemical Society, and 2007 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Demonstration of the bendability of various devices with schematics of the device architectures on the bottom. (a) SWNT flexible circuit being wrapped around a rod of diameter 2.5 mm. (b) Bending test of SWNT flexible device in which S/D/G electrodes and the channel are all composed of SWNTs. (c) SWNT device fabricated on PVA substrate being wrinkled. The S/D/G electrodes and the dielectric layer are composed of SWNTs and PVA, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 27, 83 and 89. Copyright 2006 John Wiley and Sons, 2011 American Chemical Society, and 2012 American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) PMOS inverter circuit diagram and (b) an inverter's voltage transfer curve. (c) Optical micrograph of the flexible integrated circuit on a curved surface. (d) Schematic diagram of a AMOLED pixel and the demonstration of (e) light intensity modulation of an OLED by varying the voltage going into the switching transistor. (f) Optical image of 7 AMOLED elements, each with 20 × 25 pixels. Reproduced with permission from ref. 1 and 110. Copyright 2008 Nature Publishing Group and 2011 American Chemical Society.	 
fT = μ(Vgs − Vth)/Lgate2
fmax = fT/{2[gd(Rgate + Rp,s) + 2πfTCp,gdRgate]1/2}

 	Fig. 10  Processing method and films produced by the superaligned method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 209. Copyright 2011 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Change in resistance versus strain for CNT film on PDMS substrate, (b) cycling test for films stretched to 50%, (c) schematic and AFM image of buckled CNT film on PDMS. Reproduced with permission from ref. 234. Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Photograph of 8 × 8 sensor array adhered on backlit display (b) schematic showing capacitor structure and the effect of pressure and strain (c) pressure profile of a pixel surrounded by its four nearest pixels (scale 2 mm) (d) change in capacitance versus pressure (e) change in capacitance versus stain (f and g) Cycling tests for applications of pressure and strain. Reproduced with permission from ref. 234. Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) CNT based flexible dopamine sensor (b) flexible all carbon nanotube based LED (c) flexible organic solar with a CNT based electrode (d) stretchable supercapacitor with CNT electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 223, 244, 267 and 282. Copyright John Wiley and Sons, 2011 American Chemical Society, 2012 John Wiley and Sons, and 2006 American Institute of Physics.	 

CNTs	Good	Good	Excellent	Good	Good	Average	Excellent
Organics	Average	Good	Good	Good	Good	Excellent	Average
Inorganics	Excellent	N/A	Good	Poor	Average	Average	Excellent
Metal oxides	Good	Excellent	Good	Excellent	Good	Good	Good
Metal NWs	N/A	Excellent	Good	Poor	Good	Good	Average
Graphene	Poor	Excellent	Excellent	Excellent	Good	Average	Excellent
Footnote
† Equal contribution.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
