Delocalized quantum states enhance photocell efficiency  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4CP05310A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4CP05310A
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 5743-5750Delocalized quantum states enhance photocell efficiency

        
          
            Yiteng 
            Zhang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Sangchul 
            Oh
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Fahhad H. 
            Alharbi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Gregory S. 
            Engel
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Sabre 
            Kais
          
        
      *ab
aQatar Environment and Energy Research Institute, Qatar Foundation, Doha, Qatar. E-mail: kais@purdue.edu
bDepartment of Chemistry, Physics and Birck Nanotechnology Center, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA
cDepartment of Chemistry, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA
Received 
      14th November 2014
    , Accepted 16th January 2015First published on 16th January 2015AbstractThe high quantum efficiency of photosynthetic complexes has inspired researchers to explore new routes to utilize this process for photovoltaic devices. Quantum coherence has been demonstrated to play a crucial role in this process. Herein, we propose a three-dipole system as a model of a new photocell type which exploits the coherence among its three dipoles. We have proved that the efficiency of such a photocell is greatly enhanced by quantum coherence. We have also predicted that the photocurrents can be enhanced by about 49.5% in such a coherent coupled dipole system compared with the uncoupled dipoles. These results suggest a promising novel design aspect of photosynthesis-mimicking photovoltaic devices.
1. Introduction
Long-lived quantum coherence is observed in photosynthesis after laser excitation.1–7 This has attracted much attention on how quantum coherence could be enhanced in a complex biological environment and how it may play a key role in efficient exciton transport processes.8–12 It is well known that the photon-to-charge conversion quantum efficiency of photosynthesis in plants, bacteria, and algae can be almost 100% under certain conditions. While photosynthesis converts sunlight into chemical energy, solar cells convert sunlight into electric energy. According to Shockley and Queisser, the efficiency of photovoltaic energy conversion is limited to 33%, based on the energy band gap and the solar spectrum, due to the radiative recombination of electron–hole pairs, thermalization, and unabsorbed photons.13 Various attempts have been made to improve the performance of photovoltaic devices.14–18 Mimicking photosynthesis presents a promising route to increase the efficiency of the current solar cell technology.19 Consequently, there has been a long-standing and increasing interest in the understanding of the physics describing the energy conversion within photosynthesis. Recently, quantum coherence has demonstrated its crucial role in the energy conversion during photosynthesis.1–12 Similarly, it has been shown that quantum coherence can be used to alter the conditions of the detailed balance and thereby enhance the quantum efficiency in photocells.20–25 In principle, the Shockley–Queisser model is a two-extended-level model. By incorporating more levels and tuning them carefully, the conversion efficiency can be improved.
Recently, Creatore et al.24 showed that the delocalized quantum state is capable of improving the photocurrent of a photocell by at least 35% in compared with a photocell with the localized quantum state when treating the photon-to-charge conversion as a continuous Carnot-like cycle.26 Within their model, the two delocalized states, called the bright and dark states, of the dipole–dipole interacting two donors play a key role in improving the efficiency of the PV cell. Due to the constructive interference, the optical transition rate between the ground and bright states becomes two times stronger than the uncoupled donor case. While it is blocked through the bright state due to the destructive interference, the electron transition from the excited donor to the acceptor is made only through the dark state and its rate is two times larger than the uncoupled donor case, due to the constructive interference. Consequently, the presence of quantum coherence of the delocalized donor states alters the conditions for the thermodynamic detailed balance; this results in the enhancement of the efficiency of the photocell.
In this paper, we show that a photocell with three suitably arranged electron donors coupled via dipole–dipole interactions can result in an enhancement of photocurrents by about 49.5% over a classical photocell. While inspired by Creatore et al.,24 our three coupled donors, rather than the two coupled ones, make another big improvement in the efficiency of a PV cell. The origin of the photocurrent enhancement is explained by the key roles of the delocalized excited states of the donor system. The dipole–dipole coupling between donors makes three degenerate and localized one-exciton levels to split into three delocalized levels: the bright, almost-dark, and dark states. The photon absorption and emission rates between the ground and bright excited states become larger by about 2.91 times than those of the uncoupled donor case, which is due to the constructive interference of three donors. While the electron transferring from the donor to the acceptor through the almost-dark state is enhanced by about 2.91 times compared to the uncoupled donor case, it is almost blocked through the bright state, which is also due to the constructive and destructive interferences of the delocalized donor states. Basically, essential physics of our triple-donor model is similar to that of Creatore et al.'s two donor model, but more enhanced by collective properties. While it seems challenging, our proposed model could be realized by nanotechnologies inspired by natural light-harvesting structures.
2. PV models with two donors
Before introducing a photovoltaic cell model with three donors, we discuss in detail how a configuration of two dipole moments of two donors affects the efficiency of a PV cell used in Creatore et al.'s model.24 The excitation of a molecule is simply modeled as a two-level system with the ground state |b〉 and the excited state |a〉. The optical transition between them is characterized by the optical dipole moment μ = e〈a| r |b〉. For a molecular aggregate composed of electric neutral molecules, the intermolecular interaction is given by the electrostatic dipole–dipole coupling3 (1)where the dipole moment μ1 is located at r1, μ2 at r2, and r = r2 − r1 is the radius vector from μ1 to μ2. Typically, the strength of J12 is much weaker than the excitation energy ℏω = Ea − Eb. The exciton dynamics of the aggregate is described by Hamiltonian27 (2) where σ+ = |a〉 〈b| and σ− = |b〉 〈a| are the Pauli raising and lowering operators, respectively.
According to eqn (1) the strength of J12 depends on how dipole moments are aligned. In Creatore et al.'s paper,24 the donor is a dimer where the dipole moment μ1 is always perpendicular to the radius vector r, so the second term in eqn (1) vanishes. The dipole–dipole coupling is given by J12 ∝ μ1·μ2 = μ1μ2cosθ with angle θ between two dipole moments. This gives rise to the simple angle-dependence energy gap ΔE = 2J012|cosθ| between the symmetric and antisymmetric excited states. The spontaneous decay rates are also proportional to |μ|2(1 ± cosθ).
Molecules in aggregates, however, have more probability to be aligned collectively, not independently. We study how the H and J-aggregate donor alignments affect the efficiency of PV cells. As illustrated in Fig. 1, we consider the two dipole moments tilted at the same angle θ with respect to the vertical axis. The angle dependence of the dipole–dipole coupling of eqn (1) becomes (3)
 Fig. 1  Alignment of two dipole moments for (a) the H-aggregate and (b) the J-aggregate. Energy level diagrams and electron transition paths of (c) the H-aggregate and (d) the J-aggregate. The symmetric state |+〉 is optically bright and has the absorption and emission rates γh, but has no electron transition channel to the donor. The antisymmetric state |−〉 is dark but has the electron transfer path to the donor. The electron transition rate γx between the bright state |+〉 and the dark state |−〉 is caused by thermal phonons. 
This implies the angle dependence of the Davidov energy splitting ΔE(θ) = 2|J12(θ)| between the symmetric and antisymmetric states. Also it explains the transition between the H-aggregate and the J-aggregate at the magic angle  when the angle is measured from r. Here the angle is measured with respect to the vertical axis so one has the magic angle θc ≈ 35.26° as shown in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  (a) Energy gap ΔE between the bright and dark states and (b) the current enhancement as a function of the tilt angle θ with respect to the vertical axis. In (a) the alignment of two dipole moments is shown as the blue arrows. The two parallel dipole moments are aligned in head-to-head manner (H-aggregate) at θ = 0 and in head-to-tail manner (J-aggregate) at θ = π/2. In (b) the black arrow points to the magic angle θc ≈ 35.26°. 
In contrast to Creatore et al.'s configuration, the symmetric state  in our model is always an optically active state (bright state).28 For angles less than θc, this level is higher than the antisymmetric (dark) state , so the optical transition is shifted to blue (H-aggregate). On the other hand, for angles greater than θc, the antisymmetric state is higher, so the optical transition is changed to red (J-aggregate). Note that classically the total dipole moment is always 2|μ| because the two dipole moments point to the same direction. The dipole matrix element between the ground and bright states is  so the optical transition rate γh, proportional to the square of the dipole matrix element, becomes doubled, i.e., γh = 2γ1h, compared with an uncoupled donor case. We calculate how the current enhancement is dependent on angle θ, as plotted in Fig. 2. The two energy levels E± for the symmetric and antisymmetric states move to (Ea − Eb)/2 as the angle θ increases. This affects the Bose–Einstein distributions, nh of thermal photons, and nx and nc of thermal phonons through the gaps E+ − Eb, E+ − E−, and E± − Eα, respectively. Because of (Ea − Eb) ≫ J, the distribution nh is little dependent on angle θ. However, nx and nc are strongly affected by angle θ causing drastic changes in current enhancement. For the H-aggregate case (θ < θc), nx increases but nc decreases as angle θ increases. So the current enhancement decreases as angle θ increases. For the J-aggregate case (θ > θc), the bright state is lower than the dark state. An electron in the bright state jumps to the dark state via only the absorption γx of thermal phonons (in the H-aggregate case, the transition from the bright to dark states can be done via the stimulated and spontaneous emissions of thermal phonons, γx(1 + nx)). Thus, the transition from the donor to the acceptor is very low, and the current enhancement is negative as shown in Fig. 2. In our model as well as Creatore et al.'s model,24 two donors are coupled to the acceptor so the bright state has no electron transferring channel to the acceptor because of the destructive interference. If a donor system is composed of many molecules (for example, a linear chain), it is likely that only some donor molecules (or the molecules at the end site) are coupled to the acceptor so the transition path of the bright state to the donor would not be blocked.
3. PV model with three dipole donors
3.1 Model
The photocell model, proposed here, is depicted in Fig. 3. The picture of a classical cyclic engine is described as the following: D1, D2, and D3 represent three identical and initially uncoupled donor molecules which are aligned around an acceptor molecule A. Initially, the system starts in the ground state |b〉. The cycle of electron transport begins with the absorption of solar photons populating the uncoupled donor excited states |a1〉, |a2〉, and |a3〉. Then the excited electrons can be transferred to the acceptor molecule, the charge-separated state |α〉, with any excess energy radiated as a phonon. The excited electron is then assumed to be used to perform work, leaving the charge-separated state |α〉 decaying to the sub-stable state |β〉. The recombination between the acceptor and the donor is also considered with a decay rate of Γα→b = χΓ, where χ is a dimensionless fraction. This loss channel brings the system back into the ground state without producing a work current, which could be a significant source of inefficiency. Finally, the state |β〉 decays back to the charge neutral ground state, closing the cycle. If the quantum effects resulting from the long-range dipole–dipole interaction are considered, the new element of the system is the formation of new optically excitable states through strong exciton coupling among the donor molecules.24
 Fig. 3  Schematics of our PV cell. Three optically active donors, denoted D1, D2, D3, become excited by absorbing incident photons and their excited electrons are transferred to the acceptor A. The pink and blue shadowed regions surrounding the molecules represent the molecular orbitals representing the spatial distribution of electron density. 
For simplicity, we assume that all three donors (D1, D2 and D3) are identical and degenerate, so the uncoupled excited states |a1〉, |a2〉 and |a3〉 of the three donors have the same excitation levels E1 = E2 = E3 = ℏω. Furthermore, their dipole moments are aligned in the same direction, μ1 = μ2 = μ3 = μ as depicted in Fig. 3. We assume the dipole–dipole interaction between only the nearest neighbors. The dipole–dipole couplings between D1 and D2, and D2 and D3 are denoted by J, but there is no coupling between D1 and D3. The Hamiltonian for the system of three interacting donors is written as (4) It is straightforward to obtain the three single-excitation states of Hamiltonian (4): , , and . The corresponding eigenvalues are obtained as , and .
The dipole moment between the state |x1〉/|x3〉 and the ground state |0〉 is enhanced/weakened by constructive interference between the individual transition dipole matrix elements, , while the dipole moment of the state |x2〉 cancels out due to destructive interference. This means the state |x2〉, comprised of the antisymmetric combination of the uncoupled |a1〉 and |a3〉 states, describes an optically forbidden dark state. In contrast, the |x1〉 and |x3〉 states describe two optically active bright states with photon absorption and emission rates  and , respectively, compared with the uncoupled case, γh ∝ |μ|2. In other words, |x1〉 is much brighter than |x3〉, as the photon absorption and emission rates of |x1〉 are enhanced while that of |x3〉 is weakened. Obviously, the dark state |x2〉 has a resultant charge transfer matrix element equal to zero.
The intermolecular dipole interaction will also modify the transition rate between the donors and acceptors. The electron transfer matrix elements leading to charge separation have been chosen to have the same magnitudes |tD1A| = |tD2A| = |tD3A| = t. Also, we assume that the acceptor molecule hosts an electron within its lowest unoccupied molecular orbital, which is characterized by the shape of the d-orbitals (see Fig. 3). We have also assumed that the donor molecules are located close to different lobes of the acceptor molecular orbital; this leads to electron transfer matrix elements with the same magnitudes but different signs, i.e., tD1A = −tD2A = tD3A = t. Due to effects of the dipole–dipole interactions, the eigenstates of the three optically excited donors are no longer uncoupled, but are coherent exciton states. The bright states |x1〉/|x3〉 have matrix elements , giving decreased/enhanced electron transfer rates of , compared with the uncoupled case γc ∝ |t|2. These modifications of electron transfer matrix elements play a crucial role in the enhancement of photocurrents within our photocell model. The assumptions surrounding the electron transfer matrix elements are identical to those in ref. 24.
Another crucial procedure in our model is phonon-mediated energy relaxation, which can be very effective between exciton states with a strong pigment overlap.24,29 These relaxations are included in our kinetic model via the relaxation rates γ12, γ13, and γ23. Assuming that the new donor states are directly populated by the absorption of weak incoherent solar photons, the kinetics of the optically excited states obey the Pauli master equation (PME) by treating the donor-light, electron transfer, and bright-dark relaxation coupling by second-order perturbations.24
The PMEs for the uncoupled case, describing the processes as shown in Fig. 4(a), are written as (5)where we use the notation pi = ρi,i with indices i running as b,1 = a1,2 = a2,3 = a3,α,β. Similarly, the PMEs for the dipole–dipole coupled case, whose processes are shown in Fig. 4(b), are given by (6)where index i of pi runs as b,1 = x1,2 = x2,3 = x3,α,β. In eqn (5) and (6), the equation of motion for pb = ρbb is determined by the conservation of the probability, . In eqn (5) and (6), nh and n1h (n3h) stand for the average number of photons with frequencies matching the transition energies from the ground state |b〉 to the excited states |ai〉 and |x1〉 (|x3〉), respectively. nc and n1c (n3c) are the thermal occupation numbers of ambient phonons at room temperature, Ta = 300 K, with energies E − Eα in eqn (5) and Ex1 − Eα (Ex3 − Eα) in eqn (6). n12, n13, and n23 represent the corresponding thermal occupations at Ta with energies Ex1 − Ex2, Ex1 − Ex3, and Ex2 − Ex3, respectively. Nc is the corresponding thermal occupation at Ta with the energy Eβ − Eb. The rates in eqn (5) and (6) obey local detailed balance and correctly lead to a Boltzmann distribution for the level population if the thermal averages for the photon and phonon reservoirs are set to a common temperature, such as room temperature. We consider the initial condition to be a fully occupied ground state, i.e., ρbb(t = 0) = 1.
 Fig. 4  Energy levels of the PV models (a) with the acceptor and three uncoupled donors and (b) with the acceptor and three dipole–dipole coupled donors. Black arrows indicate possible electron-transition paths. In (a) all the three donors are uncoupled and identical, so they have the same excitation energies (Ei), the same photon absorption and emission rates γh between the ground state |b〉 and the excited state |ai〉, and the same electron transfer rates γc between the excited donor (|ai〉) and the acceptor (|α〉). In (b) due to the dipole–dipole couplings between three donors, the three degenerate excited levels in (a) split, denoted |xi〉. The dark level (|x2〉) is optically forbidden and has no electron transfer path to the donor (|α〉). 
3.2 Results
To calculate the population of each state, we use the following parameters.20,23,24 The energy levels are E − Eb = 1.8 eV, E − Eα = Eβ − Eb = 0.2 eV, and J12 = J23 = J = 0.015 eV. The transfer rates are taken as γh = 0.62 × 10−6 eV, γc = 6 meV, Γ = 0.12 eV, and Γc = 0.025 eV We assume that the superposition states are stable under the steady-state operation, so that γ13, γ12, and γ23 have to satisfy the relationship: .30 Here, we choose as a limiting condition: . We also employed this as a limiting condition for Creatore et al.'s model, to create an appropriate comparison with our model. Fig. 5(a) and (b) show the populations of each state in the absence and presence of coupling. Due to the dipolar interaction between donors, the populations of the donors' ground state, |b〉, is significantly decreased while the populations of the acceptors' states, |α〉 and |β〉, are notably increased in the presence of coherence when the system reaches the steady-state operation. These changes are responsible for the enhanced photocurrents.
 Fig. 5  (a) Time-evolution of the populations pi of the levels from the numerical solution of the Pauli master equation (eqn (5)) for uncoupled donors. (b) Numerical solutions of the Pauli master equation (eqn (6)) for coupled donors. 
We would like to emphasize that our model as well as Creatore et al.'s24 solves the Pauli master equation for the diagonal components pi = ρi,i, but not for the off-diagonal components ρi,j (i ≠ j) of the density operator. The quantum coherence between delocalized excited donor states, represented by the off-diagonal components such as ρx1,x2, does not play the key role in increasing the efficiency of the solar cell. The enhancement comes from the large optical transition rate between the ground level b and the excited level x1, the forbidden transition between the ground level b and the excited level x2, and the constructive and destructive paths between the donor and the acceptor. One may think of dephasing of each delocalized state. For example, when |x1〉 becomes mixed, it will be the mixture of three bare states, |a1〉, |a2〉 and |a3〉. The diagonal component px1 = ρx1,x1 can be expressed in terms of the diagonal and off-diagonal components with the bare states . For a mixed state x1, it becomes (7) However, the energy of the mixed state E = Tr(Hx1,x1) becomes just ωℏ for the uncoupled donor, not  for the energy level of the coupled one. Thus as long as the coupling between donor molecules is strong enough, the excited energy levels are well defined and the delocalized states are in a pure state as we assume.
In the quantum heat engine model of a solar cell, the acceptor's states |α〉 and |β〉 represent the conduction band α of a cathode and the valence band β of an anode. The resistance of an external load connected to them is characterized by the decay rate Γ of electrons from α to β. The current flows from the lead β to α and is given by j = eΓρα,α = eΓpα, where −e is the fundamental charge of an electron. The voltage across the solar cell is defined as the chemical potential difference between the two leads α and β, eV ≡ e(Vβ − Vα) = μβ − μα. Using the Boltzmann distributions for levels α and β, pα = e−(Eα−μα)/kBTa and pβ = e−(Eβ−μβ)/kBTa, the voltage of the solar cell is expressed in terms of energy levels and populations.20,24,34 (8) The current and voltage are evaluated using the steady-state solutions of the PMEs.
Taking a modest recombination rate Γa→b = χΓ with χ = 20%, Fig. 6 shows the current enhancement as a function of the transition rate, γc, using the other parameters listed before. Under the upper limit condition, when γc = γ12 = γ23, there is no current enhancement. This means that the charge transfer via the channels |x1〉 → |α〉, |x1〉 → |x3〉 → |α〉, and |x1〉 → |x2〉 → |x3〉 → |α〉 are as fast as the combined transfer through the independent channels |a1〉 → |α〉, |a2〉 → |α〉, and |a3〉 → |α〉. However, when γc<γ12 = γ23, the coherent coupling leads to substantial current enhancements when compared to the configuration without coupling. Fig. 6 also shows that the current enhancement may reach as high as 49.5%, compared with 35% in Creatore et al.'s model. This can be explained by two factors: (i) the optical transition rate between the ground and bright states is enhanced from 2 times to 2.9 times. (ii) The electron transition from the almost-dark state (dark state in ref. 24) to the acceptor is increased from 2 times to 2.9 times. So a simple calculation shows the enhancement of the PV model, .
 Fig. 6  Relative current enhancement (j − j′)/j′ as a function of the transition rate γc between the donors and the acceptor. Using the upper limit condition for γ12, γ23, and γ13, we can get a current enhancement as high as 49.5%. On the other hand when γc = γ12 = γ23, there is no current enhancement. 
We have also explored the effect of the recombination rate, Γa→b = χΓ, on the current enhancement. In Fig. 7, we show not only the current enhancement for the system comprised of three donors, (which is proposed here,) but also the current enhancement for the system with two donors, (that proposed in ref. 24,) under similar electron transfer rate conditions. The results show that although the overall current is lower for faster recombination, the relative enhancement of the photocurrent is actually slightly larger for strong recombination. This behavior is analogous to that in the system with two donors.24 From Fig. 7, we also notice that the current enhancement in our three-donor system is much larger than that in Creatore et al.'s two-donor system at any value of the recombination rates. However, the current enhancement, on the order of 10−3, from the two-coupled-donor model to the three-coupled-donor model is very small.
 Fig. 7  Relative current enhancement (j − j′)/j′ as a function of the recombination rate χ using γc = 6 meV. j and j′ are the electric currents in the excitonically coupled and uncoupled cases, respectively, when the system reaches a steady-state operation. The red line represents the current enhancement of the system with three donors; the blue line represents the current enhancement of the system with two donors proposed by Creatore et al.;24 the black line represents the current enhancement of our model compared to Creator's model in the presence of dipolar coupling. 
The current–voltage (j–V) characteristic at the steady state is obtained by changing the rate Γ, while other parameters are fixed, from Γ = 0 (the open circuit regime where j = 0 and V = Voc) to large Γ (the short circuit regime where j → jsc and V → 0). The power P is evaluated using the formula P = j·V. Fig. 8 shows the steady-state current and power as a function of the voltage for three configurations of the donor: three uncoupled dipoles, two coupled dipoles, and three coupled dipoles. We find that the peak current of the solar cell with the three coupled dipoles (J ≠ 0) increases by roughly 23.4% compared with the uncoupled three dipoles (J = 0). Consequently, the donor with the three coupled dipoles enhances the peak delivered power by about 23.0% relative to the uncoupled case. When compared to the two coupled dipole donor,24 also depicted in Fig. 8, the three coupled dipole donor has an enhancement of 6.3% in both peak current and peak delivered power.
 Fig. 8  Current j and power Pout as a function of induced cell voltage V at room temperature for three configurations of donor dipoles. The blue lines and prime denote the case of three uncoupled dipoles (J = 0). The red lines represent the system with three coupled dipoles (J ≠ 0). The green lines and double prime correspond to the case of two coupled dipoles.24 
One may wonder whether a donor with large N coupled dipoles could give rise to higher efficiency compared to two coupled dipoles24N = 2 or three coupled dipoles N = 3 studied here. Almost 60 years ago, Dicke32 predicted the superradiance as the collective effect of N two-level atoms coupled with a radiation field. Recently Higgins et al.33 proposed superabsorption of light via quantum engineering. This concept would be useful in enhancing the efficiency of the solar cell.
While the single donor–acceptor unit considered here shows high efficiency, a practical solar cell would be composed of a large number of inhomogeneous donor–acceptor units, so the overall enhancement could be affected. Specifically, all dipole molecules may neither be aligned in the same direction nor be equally spaced. One possible configuration is that the donor k has the uniform coupling J(k) = J(k)12 = J(k)23 among three dipoles but it is different from donor to donor, J(k) ≠ J(l) for k ≠ l. To calculate the ensemble average of the current–voltage characteristic, J(k) of donor k could be sampled from the Gaussian distribution. In this case, the enhancement would be preserved because the energy level structure (dark, bright, and almost dark states) of each donor does not change. On the other hand, if three dipoles of each donor are coupled randomly, i.e., J(k)12 ≠ J(k)23, the excited states and the optical transition rate will be different from that of the uniform coupling case. Some donor–acceptor units with non-uniform dipole couplings would not show high efficiency. To understand the effects of inhomogeneous donor–acceptor units on the efficiency of the solar cell, one could do similar numerical calculations as done with the Heisenberg spin chain with random exchange couplings by Oh et al.35
4. Conclusion
The study of photosynthesis has inspired a new method by which we may harness quantum effects and coherent coupling amongst chromophores for the formation of coherent superposition to realize an artificial light-harvesting system at the molecular scale. In this paper, we propose a simple model to improve the performance of a theoretical photocell system. With suitably arranged electron donors, the photocurrents and power can be greatly enhanced through harnessing quantum effects.
The studied system is a photocell where the excitations are assumed to be resonant; for solar cells the excitation is done by solar radiation which has a broad spectrum. However, the presented approach can be utilized in solar cells in different ways. One approach is to extend the system into N-dipole (extended bands) and use solar radiation for excitation. Another possibility is to host the dipole aggregates in solar cell materials close to the LUMO to suppress recombination and hence increase the collected photogenerated carriers.31
Developing new concepts to harvest and utilize energy based on lessons learned from Nature like those in photosynthesis is of great current interest. Examining the current–voltage characteristic and power generated for the system with three coherent dipoles, we have found an efficiency enhancement of about 6.3% compared with two coherent dipoles. This encouraging trend suggests a promising novel design aspect of photosynthesis-mimicking photovoltaic devices.
References
G. S. Engel, T. R. Calhoun, E. L. Read, T.-K. Ahn, T. Mančal, Y.-C. Cheng, R. E. Blankenship and G. R. Fleming, Nature, 2007, 466, 782 CrossRef PubMed .
T. R. Calhoun, N. S. Ginsberg, G. S. Schlau-Cohen, Y. C. Cheng, M. Ballottari, R. Bassi and G. R. Fleming, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 16291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Abramavicious, B. Palmieri and S. Mukamel, Chem. Phys., 2009, 357, 79 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Panitchayangkoon, D. Hayes, K. A. Fransted, J. R. Caram, E. Harel, J. Wen, R. E. Blankenship and G. S. Engel, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 12766 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Harel, A. F. Fidler and G. S. Engel, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 16444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Hayes, G. B. Griffin and G. S. Engel, Science, 2013, 340, 1431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Romero, R. Augulis, V. I. Novoderezhkin, M. Ferretti, J. Thieme, D. Zigmantas and R. van Grondelle, Nat. Phys., 2014, 10, 676 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mohseni, P. Rebentrost, S. Lloyd and A. Aspuru-Guzik, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 129, 174106 CrossRef PubMed .
M. B. Plenio and S. F. Huelga, New J. Phys., 2008, 10, 113019 CrossRef .
P. Rebentrost, M. Mohseni, I. Kassal, S. Lloyd and A. Aspuru-Guzik, New J. Phys., 2009, 11, 033003 CrossRef .
J. Zhu and S. Kais, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2011, 115, 1531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-H. Yeh and S. Kais, J. Chem. Phys., 2012, 137, 084110 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          P. Würfel, Physics of Solar Cells, Wiley-VCH, Berlin,  2009 Search PubMed .

          Quantum Efficiency in Complex Systems, Part II: From Molecular Aggregates to Organic Solar Cells, in Semiconductors and Semimetals, ed. U. Würfel, M. Thorwart and E. R. Weber, Academic Press, San Diego,  2011, vol. 85 Search PubMed .
O. D. Miller, E. Yablonovitch and S. R. Kurtz, IEEE J. Photovoltaics, 2012, 2, 303 CrossRef .
F. H. Alharbi, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2013, 46, 125102 CrossRef .
F. H. Alharbi and S. Kais, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 43, 1073 CrossRef PubMed .
R. E. Blankenship, D. M. Tiede, J. Barber, G. W. Brudvig, G. Fleming, M. Ghirardi, M. R. Gunner, W. Junge, D. M. Kramer, A. Melis, T. A. Moore, C. C. Moser, D. G. Nocera, A. J. Nozik, D. R. Ort, W. W. Parson, R. C. Prince and R. T. Sayre, Science, 2011, 332, 811 CrossRef PubMed .
M. O. Scully, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 104, 207701 CrossRef .
M. O. Scully, K. R. Chapin, K. E. Dorfman, M. B. Kim and A. Svidzinsky, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 15097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Svidzinsky, K. E. Dorfman and M. O. Scully, Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys., 2011, 84, 053818 CrossRef .
K. E. Dorfman, D. V. Voronine, S. Mukamel and M. O. Scully, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, 2746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Creatore, M. A. Parker, S. Emmott and A. W. Chin, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2013, 111, 253601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          N. Killoran, S. F. Huelga and M. B. Plenio, arXiv 1412.4136v1.
It should be noted that this efficiency may not be analogous to the Shockley Quisser limit.13.
The Hamiltonian (2) is identical to an XY spin Hamiltonian. One exciton state corresponds to the one spin flipped state.
The single exciton eigenstates of Hamiltonian (2) are given explicitly as . For simplicity, these are written as .

          H. van Amerongen, L. Valkunas and R. van Grondelle, Photosynthetic Excitons, World Scientific, Singapore,  2000 Search PubMed .
A. Shnirman, Y. Makhlin and G. Schön, Phys. Scr., 2002, T102, 147 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Saikin, A. Eisfeld, S. Valleau and A. Aspuru-Guzik, Nanophotonics, 2013, 2, 21 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. H. Dicke, Phys. Rev., 1954, 93, 99 CrossRef CAS .
K. D. J. Higgins, S. C. Benjamin, T. M. Stace, G. J. Milburn, B. W. Lovett and E. M. Gauger, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
If instead of the Boltzmann distribution, the Fermi–Dirac distribution  is used, the voltage formula will be modified as . This gives rise to slightly different I–V characteristics.
S. Oh Y.-P. Shim, J. Fei, M. Friesen and X. Hu, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 224418 CrossRef .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2015
Table Content:
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 1  Alignment of two dipole moments for (a) the H-aggregate and (b) the J-aggregate. Energy level diagrams and electron transition paths of (c) the H-aggregate and (d) the J-aggregate. The symmetric state |+〉 is optically bright and has the absorption and emission rates γh, but has no electron transition channel to the donor. The antisymmetric state |−〉 is dark but has the electron transfer path to the donor. The electron transition rate γx between the bright state |+〉 and the dark state |−〉 is caused by thermal phonons.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Energy gap ΔE between the bright and dark states and (b) the current enhancement as a function of the tilt angle θ with respect to the vertical axis. In (a) the alignment of two dipole moments is shown as the blue arrows. The two parallel dipole moments are aligned in head-to-head manner (H-aggregate) at θ = 0 and in head-to-tail manner (J-aggregate) at θ = π/2. In (b) the black arrow points to the magic angle θc ≈ 35.26°.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematics of our PV cell. Three optically active donors, denoted D1, D2, D3, become excited by absorbing incident photons and their excited electrons are transferred to the acceptor A. The pink and blue shadowed regions surrounding the molecules represent the molecular orbitals representing the spatial distribution of electron density.	 
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)

 	Fig. 4  Energy levels of the PV models (a) with the acceptor and three uncoupled donors and (b) with the acceptor and three dipole–dipole coupled donors. Black arrows indicate possible electron-transition paths. In (a) all the three donors are uncoupled and identical, so they have the same excitation energies (Ei), the same photon absorption and emission rates γh between the ground state |b〉 and the excited state |ai〉, and the same electron transfer rates γc between the excited donor (|ai〉) and the acceptor (|α〉). In (b) due to the dipole–dipole couplings between three donors, the three degenerate excited levels in (a) split, denoted |xi〉. The dark level (|x2〉) is optically forbidden and has no electron transfer path to the donor (|α〉).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Time-evolution of the populations pi of the levels from the numerical solution of the Pauli master equation (eqn (5)) for uncoupled donors. (b) Numerical solutions of the Pauli master equation (eqn (6)) for coupled donors.	 
	(7)
	(8)

 	Fig. 6  Relative current enhancement (j − j′)/j′ as a function of the transition rate γc between the donors and the acceptor. Using the upper limit condition for γ12, γ23, and γ13, we can get a current enhancement as high as 49.5%. On the other hand when γc = γ12 = γ23, there is no current enhancement.	 

 	Fig. 7  Relative current enhancement (j − j′)/j′ as a function of the recombination rate χ using γc = 6 meV. j and j′ are the electric currents in the excitonically coupled and uncoupled cases, respectively, when the system reaches a steady-state operation. The red line represents the current enhancement of the system with three donors; the blue line represents the current enhancement of the system with two donors proposed by Creatore et al.;24 the black line represents the current enhancement of our model compared to Creator's model in the presence of dipolar coupling.	 

 	Fig. 8  Current j and power Pout as a function of induced cell voltage V at room temperature for three configurations of donor dipoles. The blue lines and prime denote the case of three uncoupled dipoles (J = 0). The red lines represent the system with three coupled dipoles (J ≠ 0). The green lines and double prime correspond to the case of two coupled dipoles.24	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2015
