Graphene nanoparticles-decorated silicon nanowires with tungsten oxide counter electrode for quasi-solid state hybrid solar cells   - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0SE01605E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0SE01605E
(Paper)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2021, 5, 1874-1891Graphene nanoparticles-decorated silicon nanowires with tungsten oxide counter electrode for quasi-solid state hybrid solar cells†

        
          
            Ankita 
            Kolay
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Manoranjan 
            Ojha
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Melepurath 
            Deepa
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad, Kandi, Sangareddy, Telangana 502285, India. E-mail: mdeepa@chy.iith.ac.in
Received 
      28th October 2020
    , Accepted 17th February 2021First published on 18th February 2021AbstractAnchoring ionic liquid-functionalized graphene nanoparticles (IL-GNP) to silicon nanowires (SiNW) improves the solar spectral utilization from the visible to the near-infrared (NIR). Due to the bandgap of IL-GNP in the visible region, their p-type semiconducting nature and favorably aligned energy levels of SiNW and IL-GNP, the IL-GNP not only inject the intrinsically photogenerated electrons into SiNW upon photoexcitation but more importantly they efficiently channelize the hole transfer from SiNW to the liquid or gel hole transport layer (HTL). The HTL, which is an iodide-based ionic liquid gel electrolyte with SiO2 nanoparticles as the gelatinizing agent, also restricts the light or chemical-induced degradation of the photoanode. Tungsten oxide (WO3) film is employed as an optically transparent promising electrocatalytic counter electrode (CE) that is chemically compatible with the gel electrolyte. The quasi-solid solar cell with the following architecture: IL-GNP@SiNW/I2,I− gel/WO3 delivers the best power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 7.93%, with an average value of 7.26%. This high-performance, low-cost solar cell shows good reproducibility and excellent stability. The reason for the improved solar cell performance in the presence of IL-GNP and replacing the liquid electrolyte by gel is furnished in detail through meticulous characterization.
Introduction
Multicrystalline silicon (mc-Si) solar cells currently dominate the photovoltaic commercial space despite the steep cost and the high sensitivity of mc-Si to impurities that impact the overall conversion efficiency of solar energy to electricity.1 For silicon solar cell technology to be economically more viable, cells are required to be efficient and cost-effective at the same time. To this end, silicon nanowires (SiNW)-based solar cells are attractive since SiNW are not only promising visible-to-near-infrared (NIR) light optical absorbers, but they are also less sensitive to impurities or defects, thereby allowing effective electron–hole separation and maximizing the power conversion efficiency (PCE) output of the cell.2,3 Contrasting strongly with the planar silicon solar cells, the beneficial attributes of vertically aligned SiNW are as follows: (1) light-trapping along the lengths of the nanowires, enabling enhanced optical absorption due to increased optical path length; (2) reduced electron–hole recombination owing to shorter distance travelled for both electrons and holes; (3) increased absorptivity and an increased number of p/n junctions that can be formed, induced by the large surface area due to the high aspect ratio of the wires.4,5 These benefits when tapped in a solar cell greatly enhances its PCE as compared to planar Si solar cells. These aspects furnish the foundation to develop innovative cell architectures at reduced costing while simultaneously presenting avenues for cell performance optimization.
A comparison of the diverse SiNW solar cell architectures reported in literature6–16 and the issues faced by them with the salient features of the solar cell fabricated in this work, and how this cell circumvents many of the reported issues, thereby offering a good compromise between stability, ease of processing, cost, and efficiency are evidenced from the schematics presented in Scheme 1. The schematics illustrate that the following main issues as reported in the literature, can be overcome to a great extent, by the cell design implemented in this work (1) the rapid dissolution of the SiNW array in the widely used highly corrosive HBr/Br2 electrolyte,7,10 (2) the use of expensive Pt or Au nanoparticles (NPs) in the photoanode to improve charge separation,7,15,16 (3) the use of liquid electrolytes, which disables the fabrication of leak-proof sealed devices,7,10,14 (4) the surface defects of NWs, which accelerate recombination rates,10 and (5) the use of complex cell processing methods.8,10
 Scheme 1  Schematics of a wide range of SiNW solar cell configurations adapted from literature (a–f, h–l), and the comparison of the architectures and features of the reported solar cells (a–f, h–l) with those of the solar cell configuration fabricated in this study (g). Cartoons (a–f) and (h–l) are adapted from articles [6–11] and [12–16] respectively. The acronyms used are defined as follows: PCE: power conversion efficiency, TCO: transparent conducting coating, NP: nanoparticle, C@TeNR: carbon-coated Te nanorod, IL-GNP: ionic liquid-functionalized graphene nanoparticles, CE: counter electrode, PEDOT:PSS: poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(4-styrenesulfonate), atm: atmosphere, VLS: vapor–liquid–solid, ND: nanodots. 
An improvised approach involves combining the merits of n-SiNW, like high carrier mobility, solution-phase processability, broad band absorption and short carrier diffusion distance,17 with those of p-type absorbers with a shallower valence band (VB) as compared to n-SiNW, to enable efficient hole extraction, and then assembling a cell with an ionic liquid (IL)-based hole transport layer (HTL). Relying on this strategy, here, IL-functionalized graphene nanoparticles (IL-GNP) were used as co-sensitizers and anchored to n-SiNW. This p/n heterojunction has favorably aligned energy levels, which permits maximum electron–hole separation.
Here, the use of the easily processable IL-GNP, for the first time, as an efficient hole transport material sandwiched between the electrolyte and SiNW, allows enhanced charge separation, contrasting with the rare and expensive Se or Te or Pt nanostructures used in earlier works.7,10,11,15,16 Further, an iodide-based IL gel is used in conjunction with the p-IL-GNP-decorated n-SiNW as the HTL, and its components offer the following benefits. (a) SiO2 nanoparticles impart a passivating effect to the SiNW array besides serving as a gelatinizing agent and endowing stability to the cell. (b) Poly(AMPS), a poly(electrolyte) enhances the ionic conductivity of the gel. (c) The redox couple with an iodide-based ionic liquid is non-corrosive (contrasting strongly with the widely employed HBr7,10,11,14,15), and also offers the additional advantages of a wide electrochemical potential stability window, non-volatility, and thermal and chemical stability. Imidazolium ILs are also known to be thermally stable and provide high ionic conductivity as well,18–20 thereby rendering them to be suitable for energy conversion or storage devices. The gel allows the facile extraction of holes from the IL-GNP to the reduced redox species at the photoanode/electrolyte interface.
By factoring in another component into the cell design, the cell performance was further enhanced. This was accomplished by employing an electrocatalytic counter electrode (CE), a tungsten oxide (WO3) film, which is also chemically compatible with the gel. The choice of the CE, WO3, is again based on the facile synthesis in the form of transparent films, ease of scale-up, and high electrocatalytic activity towards tri-iodide reduction at the gel/WO3 interface, thus allowing the fabrication of quasi-solid state devices with ease of light penetration via front illumination. This CE surmounts the disadvantages posed by its counterparts like metallic fingers or contacts or tips7,14,15 which reduce the illumination area, and Pt mesh7,14,15 or C-fabric10,11 which are opaque and do not allow the fabrication of planar usable devices for practical applications. Here, the planar p-IL-GNP@n-SiNW/I2,I− gel/WO3 cell shows an excellent solar conversion efficiency and provides a robust cell performance as compared to the cells reported in the literature based on the HBr/Br2 HTL. Further, this cell is composed of low-cost components, is easy to assemble, and has a configuration that has not been reported to date. Elaborate analyses of the photoanode and the CE are presented and they assist in unravelling how this unique cell architecture achieves this performance.
Experimental
Chemicals
Silicon wafers (n-type, CZ, resistivity 5–10 Ω cm) were procured from Siegert wafer. Ionic liquids: 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide (BMIM-TFSI), 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide (BMIM+I−), silver nitrate (AgNO3), tungsten metal powder, iodine, poly(ethyleneglycol) (PEG400), and isopropanol were purchased from Aldrich. Sulfuric acid (H2SO4, 98%), nitric acid (HNO3, 69%), hydrogen peroxide (H2O2, 30%), hydrofluoric acid (HF, 40%), ethanol and acetone were purchased from Merck. Deionized water with a resistivity of ∼18.2 MΩ cm was obtained through a Millipore Direct-Q3 UV system.
Synthesis of ionic liquid-functionalized graphene nanoparticles (IL-GNP)
IL-GNP were synthesized by the electrolytic oxidative exfoliation of solid graphite in an ionic liquid medium using a method adapted from an earlier report.21 A smooth graphite rod of ∼1 cm diameter and 7 cm length immersed in a solution of 3 M IL: 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide in 20 mL of ethanol and 5 mL of deionized water was employed as the working electrode. A platinum rod was used as the counter electrode. A fixed dc potential of +15 V was applied to the working electrode for 5 min using a Tarsons MC-51 electrophoresis power supply. The graphite rod was exfoliated and the product was released into the bath. The resulting black suspension was centrifuged, the sediment was discarded and the supernatant liquid was a dispersion of IL-GNP, which can be seen in Scheme 2a.
 Scheme 2  (a) Preparation scheme of the photoanodes: SiNW and IL-GNP@SiNW. (b) Cartoon representation of the fabrication of WO3 films. (c) Composition of the I2,I− gel electrolyte used in the solar cells, and (c′) photographs of the solar cells with SiNW and IL-GNP@SiNW photoanodes. 
SiNW and IL-GNP@SiNW photoanodes
SiNW were grown over single-crystalline n-Si wafers of 2′′ diameter, by using a previously reported silver seeds-assisted chemical etching methodology.22 n-Si wafers were pre-cleaned sequentially in deionized water, acetone, ethanol, and finally boiled in a Piranha solution having a composition of H2SO4:H2O2, mixed in a 4:1 v/v ratio. Scheme 1a displays the step-wise formation of SiNW over an n-Si wafer. Cleaned and polished n-Si wafers were kept immersed in an aqueous solution of 0.01 M AgNO3 and 4.8 M HF for 2 min to allow the deposition of Ag seeds on the surface of the wafers. The Ag@n-Si wafer substrate was imminently transferred into another beaker containing an aqueous etching solution of 0.2 M H2O2 and 4.8 M HF and it was left undisturbed for 2 h to allow the growth of SiNW. The n-Si wafer turned turbid white with continuous bubbling indicating the removal of Si in the form of SiF62−. The trapped Ag seeds were removed by their dissolution, achieved by soaking the wafers in concentrated HNO3. SiNW electrodes were washed in deionized water, then soaked in a dilute aqueous HF solution (H2O:HF = 50:1, v/v) for the removal of the SiO2 layer, dried at ambient temperature and then used. SiNW were obtained in the form of a uniform black-colored coating over the Si wafer. The SiNW electrode or FTO was used as the working electrode, with Pt rod as the counter electrode, and immersed in the IL-GNP dispersion. By applying a dc potential of 20 V for 5 min, the IL-GNP were electrophoretically deposited over the SiNW or FTO, which yielded the IL-GNP@SiNW or IL-GNP@FTO electrodes after rinsing with ethanol and drying in air at room temperature.
Fabrication of tungsten oxide (WO3) films
WO3 films were fabricated by cathodic electrodeposition from a peroxopolytungstate (PT) solution.23 Tungsten metal powder (3 g) was added in a step-wise manner to a H2O2 (30%, 20 mL) solution in a tall glass beaker. The dissolution was exothermic at room temperature and occurred over 2 h, resulting in a white turbid solution. After filtration through Whatman filter paper, the filtrate was heated in a water bath at 50–60 °C for 10 h, to allow the decomposition of excess H2O2. The resulting pale yellow solution was again filtered, and to the filtrate, 10 mL of isopropanol and 2 mL of poly(ethyleneglycol) (PEG400) were added to yield a clear solution of peroxopolytungstate ions. FTO substrate, pre-cleaned with soap solution, dilute HCL, distilled water, and acetone was used as the working electrode, and immersed in the PT bath. A Pt rod and Ag/AgCl/KCl served as the counter and reference electrodes, respectively. Under potentiostatic conditions, a reduction potential of −0.5 V was applied to FTO for 5 min. A dull-blue-colored film formed on the surface of FTO, signalling the reduction of PT or (W2O11)2− species to WO3. The WO3 films were rinsed in ethanol and dried in air for 12 h, heated at 100 °C for 2 h and pale yellow, uniform and optically transparent films of WO3@FTO were obtained with an active area of ∼9 cm2, which were stored in a Petri dish at room temperature. Scheme 2b illustrates the fabrication of WO3 films.
Fabrication of solar cells
Non-aqueous liquid electrolyte was prepared at room temperature by dissolving 1 M 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide (BMIM+I−), 0.05 M solid iodine (I2) and 2 wt% of poly(AMPS) in 20 mL of propylene carbonate (PC). The liquid electrolyte was converted into a viscous gel by dispersing 7 wt% of fumed silica in the liquid via continuous stirring at room temperature for 3 h. The gel electrolyte components can be visualized in Scheme 2c′. For solar cell fabrication, a double-sided adhesive spacer was applied over the FTO or WO3@FTO electrodes, and the orange-brown-colored liquid or gel electrolyte, which also serves as the hole transport layer, was filled carefully using a dropper (liquid) or a glass rod (gel) in the rectangular cavity created by the spacer. The SiNW electrode was then affixed over this assembly with the wires facing inwards, or the electrolyte, to yield the solar cells. The edges were sealed by applying a thin layer of a cyanoacrylate sealant after 24 h. The cells with the following configuration WO3@FTO//SiNW and FTO//SiNW containing the I−/I2 gel can be seen in Scheme 2c. Electrical contacts were taken by pinning a Cu wire with Ag paste on the back side of the wafer, allowing the paste to dry and then applying an epoxy sealant over the wire/Ag paste to firm the contact.
Instrumental techniques
TEM images were acquired on a JEOL 2100 microscope operating at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. For TEM, a thin layer of the sample was cautiously extracted, using forceps, into ethanol and then transferred onto a carbon-coated copper grid (∼3.05 mm diameter) and the solvent was evaporated. Surface morphology analysis of the electrodes was performed using a field emission scanning electron microscope (Carl Zeiss Supra 40 FE-SEM). X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were recorded on a PANalytical, X'PertPRO instrument with Cu-Kα (λ = 1.5406 Å) radiation and Raman spectra were obtained on a Bruker Senterra Dispersive Raman Microscope spectrometer; the laser excitation wavelength was fixed at 532 nm. Optical absorption spectra were measured on a UV-Vis-NIR spectrophotometer (Shimadzu UV-3600) in absorption mode or diffuse reflectance mode and converted to absorbance using the Kubelka–Munk function. Photoluminescence spectra were recorded on a Horiba Flouromax-4 fluorescence spectrometer; an appropriate filter was employed during the measurement and background correction was also applied. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) images and Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) data were obtained on a Bruker, Multimode 8 with ScanAsyst and Nanoscope 8.10 software. KPFM, cantilevers were made of antimony-doped silicon (n-doped; resistivity ∼0.01–0.025 Ω cm) coated with Pt/Ir (20 nm) on the front and backside, having a resonant frequency of ∼70 kHz, spring constant: 1–5 N m−1, lever thickness: 2.5–3.5 μm, lever length: 200–250 μm, a lever width of 23–33 μm, and the tip radius was ∼30 nm. The sample was attached to a stainless steel support with conducting carbon tape. Silver paste was used for making contacts. The height data or topography was measured in the first pass in the tapping mode for every scan line. In the second pass, the tip lifts above the surface to an adjustable lift height, which was held at 50 nm, and scans the same line while following the height profile recorded in the first pass. Potential maps were taken in interleave mode. An ac bias was applied to the tip and consequently, an electrostatic force was produced between the tip and sample. This is the contact potential difference (CPD). A dc voltage of the same magnitude but reverse polarity was applied by the instrument to cancel out the CPD, which is equal to the work function difference between the sample and the tip. Since Vdc was attained at every point on the surface of the sample, the ensuing image is a map of surface potentials or work function as a function of distance. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was performed on an ESCA + Oxford Instruments system operating at a base pressure of ∼5 × 10−11 torr with a MgKα source at 1253.6 eV. The survey spectra were obtained with 100 eV pass energy with a 1 eV resolution. The core-level spectra were deconvoluted using a non-linear iterative least-squares Gaussian fitting procedure after appropriate background subtraction. Corrections due to charging effects were made by using C(1s) as an internal reference and the Fermi edge of a gold sample placed in electrical contact with the sample. A Jandel Peak FitTM (version 4.01) program was used for the analysis. Current versus potential (I–V) data were obtained using a Newport Oriel 3A solar simulator coupled with a digital source meter (Keithley 2420). A 450 W xenon arc lamp served as the light source and provided a collimated light beam output with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2 (≈1 sun) and Air Mass (AM) 1.5G illumination. Spatial uniformity of irradiance was confirmed by calibrating with a 2 cm × 2 cm Si reference cell traceable to NREL and re-affirmed with a Newport power meter. A mask was used during the measurement (top illumination) and the exposed area was maintained at 1 cm2. A white LED was employed as an excitation source and the intensity incident on the measuring cell was adjusted with respect to a reference standard Si solar cell to approximately one sun (100 mW cm−2) for the photocurrent and photovoltage measurements. Incident photon to current conversion (IPCE) versus wavelength was measured on a Newport instrument with a 300 W Xe lamp as the light source. Photocurrent or photovoltage versus time plots were made on an Autolab PSTAT 302N associated with Nova 1.9 software. Electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) were obtained for the cells by superimposing an ac voltage of 20 mV over a dc (open-circuit) bias, applied to the working electrode and Z′′ versus Z′ plots were obtained over a frequency range of 106 Hz to 10−2 Hz using the frequency response analyzer (FRA) mode of the same workstation, so were cyclic voltammetry (CV) and linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) plots.
Results and discussion
SEM studies of the photoanode
The SEM image top view of the SiNW electrode shows the tips of bunches of nanowires uniformly spread across multiple micron lengths separated by macro-pores in Fig. 1a. These pores allow the permeation of the IL-GNP dispersion during electrophoresis and their tethering to the wires. The cross-sectional views show bunches of nanowires oriented vertically but along multiple directions over the Si-wafer in Fig. 1b and c. The wires are bunched up due to van der Waals attractive forces. The porosity in the morphology and the length of the nanowires that predominantly varies from 9 to 10 μm are controlled by the etching duration.22 In the first step, HF, despite being a weak reducing agent, reduces Ag+ ions to Ag seeds that deposit over the n-Si surface. This reaction is driven by the high reduction potential of Ag+ ions (∼0.8 V versus the normal hydrogen electrode (NHE)). In the next step, upon exposure to the HF/H2O2 solution mixture, the Si at the Ag@Si interface is oxidized by H2O2, and then the oxide layer is dissolved by HF. Ag seeds that assist in the anisotropic Si etching tend to stick to the Si walls and the bottoms of the long tunnels created by Si etching. The dopant-induced defect sites on n-Si also act as nucleating sites for attracting Ag seeds and etching. Once the desired lengths are achieved, the Ag seeds are washed away in nitric acid.
 Fig. 1  SEM images showing the (a) top view and (b and c) side views of SiNW. SEM images: (d and e) side/planar views of IL-GNP@SiNW. (f) TEM image of IL-GNP (inset shows a magnified view) and (g) lattice scale image of IL-GNP@SiNW. (h) XRD pattern and (i) Raman spectrum of IL-GNP@SiNW (inset shows the deconvoluted D and G bands from IL-GNP). AFM top view images of (j) SiNW and (j′) IL-GNP@SiNW. 
The SEM side view of the IL-GNP@SiNW electrode shows clumps of nanowires coated with IL-GNP sol (Fig. 1d). The vacant tunnels formed between the nanowires are filled with the IL-GNP. The top view shows that the wires have a fuzzy texture, unlike the distinct wire boundaries that were observed for the bare SiNW, indicative of the coating by the IL-GNP (Fig. 1e). The voids between the wires also appear to have been filled.
TEM studies of the photoanode
The TEM image of the IL-GNP (Fig. 1f) shows uniformly distributed GNP, having distorted spherical shapes with dimensions of 20–50 nm. One representative GNP is shown as an inset and the inter-fringe distance is 0.34 nm, matching with the (200) graphitic plane. Scheme 3 of IL-GNP shows a graphitic network functionalized by oxygen-containing functional groups (–OH, –COOH, –O–); these were introduced during the electrochemical oxidation of graphite by oxygen radicals under bias. This graphitic structure was further modified by electrostatic coulombic attraction between the IL-based BMIM+ cations and the electron-rich oxygen groups and via π–π stacking-type interactions between the conjugated network of benzoid rings on functionalized graphite and the imidazolium rings. The inclusion of the IL cation (BMIM+) and the IL anion (TFSI− or N(CF3SO2)2−) in the structure of IL-GNP (which afforded its label) was further confirmed by elaborate XPS studies. Similar TEM images have been observed for the carbon quantum dots/graphene oxide/IL:1-(3-aminopropyl)-3-methylimidazolium bromide nanocomposite.24
 Scheme 3  Schematic illustrating the chemical composition of IL-GNP. 
The lattice scale image of the IL-GNP@SiNW heterojunction (Fig. 1g), shows the IL-GNP anchored to the SiNW, and a thin coating of an amorphous SiO2 flanking the SiNW is also perceptible. The axial growth direction of SiNW is the 〈111〉 plane, which aligns well with the structure reported for SiNWs prepared by different methods.25,26 This corresponds to the cubic phase of Si, a = 0.407 nm, space group Fmm (PDF: 04-001-2616), with the main inter-planar (d) spacing of 0.313 nm, indexed to the 〈111〉 plane. The growth axis is governed by the creation of a sole lowermost free energy solid/liquid interface parallel to a single 〈111〉 plane.26 Discrete IL-GNP crystallites with well-defined lattice fringes of about 3–6 nm dimensions are also observed. The inter-fringe separation on the IL-GNP was found to be 0.40 nm, and is slightly larger than the graphitic inter-planar spacing of 0.34 nm as per JCPDS 75-1621 of hexagonal graphite. The enhanced inter-planar spacing is indicative of the permeation of the BMIM+ and TFSI− ions in-between the graphitic layers, thus expanding the gap in between. A similar expansion of graphene layers caused by the intercalation of the IL between the graphene layers has been reported in the past for imidazolium-based IL-functionalized graphene oxide (GO).27 Authors also observed that the incorporation of the IL in the GO structure also assisted in stabilizing the sheets and inhibited their aggregation by minimizing the strong interactions between the polar groups on the GO sheets.27
XRD and Raman studies of the photoanode
The XRD pattern of IL-GNP@SiNW (Fig. 1h) shows a sharp, strong peak at 2θ = 69.4°, and a less intense one at 29.65°, which match with the (400) and (111) orientations of cubic crystalline silicon (JCPDS no. 27-1402), having d-spacings of 1.36 and 3.02 Å, respectively. Besides the Si peaks, two low-intensity broad peaks at 10.06° and 25° are also observed. The latter peak corresponds to d = 0.35 nm, concurring with the inter-fringe distance of 0.4 nm obtained in the HRTEM image of IL-GNP. This peak is attributed to the graphitic structure. The first peak in the low 2θ region indicates that in some regions, the separation between the graphitic planes is further enhanced (to ∼0.9 nm), possibly by the presence of the IL cations. This is supplemented by the Raman spectral data of IL-GNP@SiNW. Fig. 1i shows a strong peak at 523 cm−1, which is assigned to the scattering of the first-order optical phonons of crystalline Si. Broad peaks observed at 300 and 970 cm−1 are attributed to the scattering of two transverse acoustic (2TA) phonons and two transverse optical (2TO) phonons respectively.28 Peaks at 1349 and 1580 cm−1 arise from the D- and G-bands due to the single phonon inter-valley scattering process caused by defects,29 and due to the in-plane vibration of the sp2 hybridized C-atoms.30 This one-phonon process involves the E2g optical phonons. These bands are typical of graphene oxide, thus implying that the graphene network here is ruptured to some extent by the oxygen-containing functional groups. AFM images of the surfaces of SiNW and IL-GNP@SiNW are shown in two panels (Fig. 1j and j′). The top panel for SiNW shows the bunches of SiNW tips, and after the IL-GNP coating, the grain boundaries become indistinct. The root mean square roughness is in the range of 5–14 nm for SiNW and it decreases to 2–7 nm after IL-GNP are incorporated over and in-between the nanowires.
XPS analysis of the IL-GNP@SiNW photoanode
The composition of the IL-GNP@SiNW electrode was further confirmed by XPS. The survey spectrum (Fig. 2a) reveals multiple signals arising from Si2p, Si2S, S2p, C1s, F1s, N1s and O1s indicating the presence of the IL BMIM+ cation and N(CF3SO2)2− anion in the electrode. The C1s core level spectrum (Fig. 2b) upon deconvolution yields five singular components at 284.8, 286.1, 287.2, 289.4, and 292.6 eV, assigned to C–C, C–N, C–O, C–F bonds and the satellite peak of carbon. While C–N originates from both the BMIM+ cation and the TFSI− anion, the C–F exclusively emanates from the N(CF3SO2)2− anion, which has twin CF3 groups. The O1s signal (Fig. 2c) is a broad one, with three components at 530.2, 531.2, 532 eV that stem from the Si–O, C–O and S–O, respectively. The SiNW are slightly oxidized, and this is reflected in the O1s signal; while ISi–O stands at 68.3%, IC–O + IS–O is 31.7%, reflecting that the IL-GNP have sufficiently infiltrated the SiNW matrix. The Si2p signal (Fig. 2d) shows a doublet, and upon deconvolution, the spin-orbital coupling components of Si2p3/2 and Si2p1/2 can be identified for the bulk SiNW and the Si–O coating over the wires. ISi–O and ISi proportions are 40% and 60%, respectively, indicating that the top few nanometres of thickness is due to the oxide overlayer. The lower energy couple (at 98.6 and 99.7 eV) originates from Si0, which the wires are predominantly composed of, and the higher energy couple (at 102 and 103.2 eV) arises from the SiO2 coating formed over the wires. A similar set of two peaks at 99.7 and 103.8 eV with assignments of non-oxidized Si and oxide was previously reported for nanowires/nanowalls and were generated on a silicon wafer through a chemical etching method.31
 Fig. 2  (a) XPS-survey spectrum, deconvoluted core level spectra of (b) C1s, (c) O1s, (d) Si2p, (e) S2p, (f) N1s and (g) F1s and (h) valence band spectrum of IL-GNP@SiNW. (i) Energy level diagram of IL-GNP@SiNW/I2,I−/WO3 solar cell configuration. 
The S2p signal (Fig. 2e) that specifically arises from the S–O bonds of the IL-based TFSI− anion is also deconvoluted into the S2p3/2 and S2p1/2 split components at 161.1 and 162.5 eV. The N1s signal (Fig. 2f) is highly asymmetric, and three components are identified at 398.9, 400.5, and 401.6. The first two are due to S–N and C–N with % contributions of 8.1% and 55.6% from the TFSI− and BMIM+ ions, and the C–N+ with 36.3% proportion from the BMIM+ cations. For few-layer-graphene nanosheets prepared by the direct exfoliation of graphite through ultrasonication in the same IL: BMIM+TFSI−, the N1s signal was found to contain two components. Their XPS results formed the basis for their concluding the incorporation of the IL in graphene through covalent-linking and non-covalent interactions.32 Here, the C–F bonds in TFSI− produced a peak at 690.1 eV (Fig. 2g). The peaks obtained from S–N, C–F, S–O and C–N linkages ratify the incorporation of the ionic liquid anions and cations in the GNP. These could be through van der Waals interactions like coulombic Keesom forces between the charged BMIM+ cations and the oxygens on the polar –C–OH, –COOH, –C–O–C bonds. The π–π interactions between the aromatic graphitic planes and the imidazolium ring on the BMIM+ cation also contribute to preserving the IL within the GNP structure. The N(CF3SO2)2− anion tends to remain attracted to the BMIM+ cation, thus allowing its inclusion in the structure. These interactions are shown in Fig. 1i′. XPS analysis carried out for functionalized graphene synthesized by electrochemical exfoliation of graphite in an IL (BMIM+ tetrafluoroborate or BF4−)/water mixture revealed that the IL ions are entrapped by interactions with the electronic surface of the graphene sheets by cation–π and/or π–π interactions. Their conclusions were founded on the survey spectrum that contained B1s and F1s signatures, and the C1s core level that was made up of peaks from C–O, CO and COOH linkages.21
The valence band (VB) spectrum of this electrode in Fig. 2h shows the density of states (DOS) versus energy, and 0 eV is assumed to be the Fermi energy level (EF). The VB is said to be the position at which the DOS begins to increase, and this is approximately poised at ∼0.5 eV from the EF. The VB levels of SiNW and IL-GNP@SiNW with respect to vacuum were determined independently by cyclic voltammetry by using them as working electrodes, Ag/AgCl/KCl as the reference, and Pt as the counter electrode (CE). SiNW is oxidized at ∼+0.46 V versus Ag/Ag+, and this oxidation potential is enhanced by +0.08 V, indicating that the IL-GNP coating makes the SiNW resistive to oxidation. The VB positions are 5.16 and 5.24 eV for SiNW and IL-GNP@SiNW respectively. The EF is therefore at 4.74 eV, obtained by subtracting 0.5 eV from the VB at 5.24 eV, as shown in the schematic in Fig. 2i. Fig. 2i shows the energy level diagram for the IL-GNP@SiNW/I2,I− gel/WO3 solar cell. All the VB and conduction band (CB) positions were determined by using the data obtained from CV (Fig. S1(a–c), ESI†) and optical band gaps. The work function (ϕ) of WO3 was determined to be 4.715 eV by Kelvin probe force microscopy studies. The surface potential or CPD maps and the detailed explanation are provided in the ESI† (Fig. S2). Briefly, the surface potential map of WO3 shows bright and dark domains, and the brighter regions have higher CPD as compared to the darker regions. The CPD is 129 mV, and was determined by using the equationϕWO3 = 4.6 + CPDHOPG − CDPWO3,where HOPG is highly ordered pyrolytic graphite with a known work function of 4.6 eV, and is used as a standard to calibrate the KPFM-tip. HOPG was found to have a CPD of 244 mV (Fig. S2†), and by plugging these values into the said equation, the work function of WO3 was estimated to be 4.715 eV.
In this cell, upon illumination, IL-GNP and SiNW undergo photo-excitation and electron–hole pairs are produced. Electrons are injected from the CB of IL-GNP to the CB of SiNW and, through the external circuit, these electrons reach the counter electrode of WO3 and are accepted by the I3− species at the WO3/electrolyte interface, and reduced to I−. The iodide ions diffuse to the photoanode where they scavenge the holes from IL-GNP or SiNW, and regenerate the sensitizers. The ability of IL-GNP to scavenge holes from SiNW was established from the Mott–Schottky plot shown in Fig. S1(d and e).† The plot shows a clearly negative slope, implying that IL-GNP is a p-type semiconductor. The hole density is ∼6.3 × 1013/cm3, which matches the hole density reported in the past for graphene. Hall coefficient measurements on FeCl3-doped few-layer graphene revealed that the hole density ranges from 3 × 1014 cm−2 to 8.9 × 1014 cm−2, depending on the number of layers.33
Optical properties of the photoactive materials
The absorbance spectra of SiNW, IL-GNP and IL-GNP@SiNW are shown in Fig. 3a. SiNW shows a strong broad optical absorption band stretching from the visible to the NIR region, with an absorption edge at ∼1138 nm corresponding to a bandgap of 1.09 eV, which agrees well with the reported bandgap of 1.2 eV for SiNW.34,35 For IL-GNP, a strong peak is observed with λmax at 300 nm, due to the π–π* transitions of the aromatic C–C bonds followed by another distinct peak at 356 nm assigned to the n–π* transitions of the CO bonds.36 Furthermore, a relatively less intense but distinct peak is also observed in the visible region, having a λmax of 466 nm, and it tapers off at 564 nm, implying a bandgap of 2.2 eV. Enhanced absorption has been observed in the past for graphene functionalized with a polymeric ionic liquid containing bromide anions in the visible region,37 and this matches with our observation. The presence of the peak at 300 nm indicates that electronic conjugation can contribute to good electrical conduction, and functionalization with IL allows for light harvesting by IL-GNP, which is also discussed later in this section. The IL-GNP@SiNW electrode shows a cumulative response encompassing the absorption profiles of IL-GNP and SiNW, with the dominant features of SiNW, the primary light absorber in this composite. The improved absorption over the 423 to 555 nm in the visible region for this composite electrode, compared to the SiNW electrode stems specifically from the visible light absorption of IL-GNP.
 Fig. 3  (a) Absorbance spectra and (b) fluorescence spectra (λex: 300 nm) of photoactive components. The inset of (a) shows an enlarged view of the visible light absorption of IL-GNP. (c) Dark and light dc-I–V responses of IL-GNP film. (d) J–V characteristics of an IL-GNP/BMIM + I−,I2 gel/WO3 solar cell in the dark, and under irradiance (1 sun = 100 mW cm−2); insets are photographs of the IL-GNP film and the corresponding solar cell. 
IL-GNP are also fluorescent, and this is reflected in the fluorescence spectrum displayed in Fig. 3b. Two strong peaks, a sharp one with a λmax at 368 nm, followed by a broad peak spanning a wavelength range of 377–500 nm, having a λmax at 409 nm, are observed. In the IL-GNP, the structural defects introduced into the π-conjugated graphitic system in the form of covalently bound oxygen functionalities and the non-covalently entrapped IL cationic (BMIM+) and anionic (TFSI−) species, not only create low energy bandgaps for emissive electronic transitions, but also contribute directly to the bright photoluminescence emissions.38 A similar broad peak over 400 to 600 nm has been observed in the past for graphene functionalized with IL: BMIM+BF4−.21 SiNW exhibits an intense emission peak with a λmax at ∼421 nm. A blue emission peak has been observed for SiNW in the past, and it is attributed to oxygen vacancies.39,40 When the IL-GNP are tethered to the SiNW, the blue emission of SiNW is considerably quenched relative to pristine SiNW, and slightly enhanced compared to IL-GNP. This intensity, which is intermediary to that of the two components, is because of two competing effects: (1) photo-excited electron transfer from IL-GNP to SiNW, which is expected to reduce emission intensity. (2) Simultaneously, SiNW now have a higher proportion of excited electrons, which again radiatively recombine with the holes in the VBs of SiNW and IL-GNP, thus increasing the emission intensity. The UV-emission peak observed at ∼370 nm in IL-GNP, also experiences a decrease in intensity to a small extent in the IL-GNP@SiNW composite. Similar quenching was observed when graphene quantum dots-poly(ethyleneimine) (GQDPEI) were incorporated in SiNW, relative to SiNW over a wavelength range of 420–520 nm.36 Authors postulated that the way light is captured and absorbed within the nanowire arrays relative to the planar surface causes the profile of the composite (in this case IL-GNP@SiNW) to be slightly modified compared to pristine IL-GNP. These emission responses confirm the ability of IL-GNP to undergo charge separation upon illumination and further allow charge injection to SiNW.
Properties of IL-GNP
To unambiguously conclude that IL-GNP can work as photosensitizers and charge conduits, photoconduction and photovoltaic measurements were performed. With IL-GNP@FTO using two oil pin probes, dc measurement of the current produced versus applied bias was carried out by illumination under white light (intensity: 50 mW cm−2) and in the dark (Fig. 3c). Both dark- and photo-currents showed linear dependence under positive and negative potentials, over a range of −1.0 to +0.5 V. In the dark, the charge carriers injected by the source are transported via the overlapping unhybridized p-orbitals, over the graphitic network in IL-GNP and this is permitted by the particles since they are closely packed in the film across the two probes. Upon illumination, the currents increased since, besides the extrinsic carriers, intrinsic carriers are also produced. This happens via exciton generation in the semiconducting IL-GNP, which are then dissociated into free charge carriers that propagate easily in the film. Dark- and photo-conductances of 2.2 and 2.9 mS were obtained from the slopes of the two plots, thereby affirming that IL-GNP can transport charges.
Solar cell performance was also studied in order to confirm that IL-GNP can work as sole-photosensitizers (Fig. 3d). A solar cell was fabricated with IL-GNP@FTO as the photoanode, a WO3@FTO film as the counter electrode (CE) and the BMIM+I−/I2/poly(AMPS)/SiO2 gel as the hole transport layer. Current density (J)–potential (V) curves were measured in the dark and under 1 sun irradiance (100 mW cm−2). The photo-current response is 90 times greater than the dark current density, clearly implying that the generation of electron–hole pairs in IL-GNP is a light-driven process. Light and dark short-circuit current densities (JSC) were 1.65 and 0.018 mA cm−2, and the open-circuit voltages (VOC) under dark and light conditions were 0.265 and 0.413 V, respectively. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the IL-GNP//WO3 cell was 0.24%, which is larger than the PCEs achieved in earlier reports for cells based on GQDs or graphene.41
The role of tungsten oxide as the counter electrode
Tungsten oxide film was employed as the counter electrode (CE) in the n-SiNW solar cells, and the role of WO3 in ameliorating the cell performance was studied by comparing it with the bare FTO as the CE. The thickness of the electrodeposited WO3@FTO CE film was approximately 730 nm, estimated from the cross-sectional SEM image (Fig. S3a, ESI†) This thickness of 730 nm was optimized on the basis of solar cell performance (Fig. S3b†), and controlled by the duration of electrodeposition. Thinner films were obtained under an electrodeposition duration of ∼3 min, and thicker films at ∼8 min. PCE values were found to be 2.15, 4.73 and 2.41%, respectively, for SiNW/gel/WO3 cells, having thick (8 min), optimum thickness (5 min) and thin (3 min) WO3 films as CEs. The resistance to charge transfer increased with thickness, which resulted in lower PCE, and at a lower thickness, the PCE was again low due to the reduced electrocatalytic activity of WO3. From EIS studies for symmetric cells based on WO3 films of different thicknesses (Fig. S3c†), it was observed that for the thick WO3 film, the resistance to electron transport (Re) was found to be 710 Ω cm2 much greater than the thin/optimum thickness films. Although the thin WO3 film showed a lower Re (44 Ω cm2) compared to the one with optimum thickness (206 Ω cm2), its poor electrocatalytic response lowered the PCE. From the I–V plots (Fig. S3d†), the peak current density for tri-iodide reduction was ∼4 times greater for WO3 with the optimum thickness as compared to the thin WO3 film, thus resulting in the highest PCE among the WO3 CEs of varying thicknesses.
The 2D-AFM images of FTO and WO3@FTO are shown in Fig. 4a and b. The FTO substrate was composed of closely packed grains of the oxide, and the texture was smooth, with a root mean square roughness (Rrms) that varied between 3 to 9.5 nm, and this range did not vary when the WO3 film was deposited over FTO. The WO3 particles appeared to be smaller, with slightly elongated shapes and were compactly packed over the FTO substrate. The SEM image of WO3 also showed a similar morphology (inset of Fig. 4c). A similar image of interconnected particles for FTO was obtained for flat FTO substrates in an earlier study, with Rrms of 8.5 nm, and the authors observed that after coating TiO2, the Rrms was reduced to 6.9 nm.42 The XRD pattern of WO3 (Fig. 4c) showed multiple peaks, with a strong, intense peak at 2θ = 23.3° and d = 3.66 Å, corresponding to the (200) plane of the orthorhombic WO3 (PDF: 20-1324), indicating a preferred orientation along this direction. However, additional prominent peaks at 2θ = 23.14°, 26.5°, 34.16°, 37.8°, 49.9° and 55.9°, indexed to the (001), (120), (220), (121), (140) and (141) planes of o-WO3, respectively, and a few more low intensity indexed peaks, confirmed the polycrystalline nature of WO3.
 Fig. 4  AFM-topography of (a) FTO and (b) WO3@FTO electrodes and their representative section profiles (a′ and b′). (c) XRD pattern of a WO3 film; inset is a SEM image. (d) CV plots of a WO3 film recorded at different scan rates to demonstrate its redox activity. (e) I–V characteristics of FTO and WO3@FTO. (f) J–V characteristics of an IL-GNP@SiNW/BMIM+I−,I2 gel/CE solar cell under irradiance (1 sun = 100 mW cm−2) with WO3 and FTO as the CEs; inset shows the photograph of the cell with WO3 as CE. (g) LSV plots comparing the tri-iodide reduction capability of WO3 and FTO. (h) Nyquist plots of symmetric cells of CEs with the BMIM+I−/I2 gel; inset is the equivalent circuit used for fitting the data and (i) Bode-phase plots of the same cells. 
The electrochemical activity of WO3 was examined by measuring CV plots in an electrolyte of 1 M LiClO4 in PC, with Ag/AgCl/KCl as the reference and a Pt rod as the CE (Fig. 4d). CV plots were recorded at different scan rates over a potential window of −1 to + 1 V. The plots showed a response, typical of WO3 films, with a broad oxidation peak that shifted to increasing positive potential as a function of the scan rate. This profile captures the reversible intercalation (reduction) and deintercalation (oxidation) of Li+ ions, through the following reaction: WO3 (pale-yellow or colorless) + xLi+ + xe− ⇆ LixWO3 (blue)(1)
Similar CV plots have been observed for WO3 films grown by a sol–gel route by using a sol formed after the hydrolysis of tungsten ethoxide in ethanol and water.43 Here, the anodic peak signifying the extraction of Li-ions from the WO3 film, shifted from −0.07 V to +0.33 V, when the scan rate was raised from 10 to 100 mV s−1. The peak shift is attributed to the preponderance of the diffusion mechanism operative in the film for the redox reaction, and this was confirmed by the quasi-linear dependence of the anodic peak current density on the square root of the scan rate (Fig. S4, ESI†). The large area enclosed in the voltammograms, especially at a high scan rate, also evidenced the good redox activity of the WO3 film. To evaluate the impact of the WO3 coating on the electrical conductance of the electrode, I–V characteristics of FTO and WO3@FTO were compared (Fig. 4e). Both electrodes showed straight-line plots, indicating ohmic behavior. The electrical conductances estimated from the slopes of the linear fits were 4 and 1.8 mS, which indicate that the electron conduction capability did not decrease much, even when the semiconducting WO3 was coated over FTO.
On comparing the solar cell performances vis-à-vis the J–V curves based on the two CEs: IL-GNP@SiNW//WO3@FTO versus IL-GNP@SiNW//FTO (Fig. 4f), it was observed that with the WO3 electrode, JSC, VOC and PCE of 18.4 mA cm−2, 768 mV and 7.93% were achieved, respectively, and without WO3, these values were significantly lower (13.94 mA cm−2, 666 mV and 3.69%, respectively). The electrolyte was comprised of BMIM+I−, I2 and poly(AMPS) and SiO2. While poly(AMPS) contributes to the overall ionic conductivity due to the presence of mobile protons, SiO2 is the inert gelatinizing agent, which just increases the viscosity of the electrolyte and enables the fabrication of a quasi-leak-proof device. In this electrolyte, firstly, I− immediately combined with I2 to form the I3− ions. This is a spontaneous thermodynamically favourable chemical reaction. It is followed by the main redox process that occurs at the electrolyte/CE interface, which is the reduction of the tri-iodide ions via the following reaction: 1/2I3− + e− (WO3 or FTO) → 3/2I−. The efficacy of this reaction controls the PCE of the solar cell. The above performance differential clearly reflects that WO3 plays a vital role in improving the cell performance. This is accomplished by (1) faster and more efficient electron transfer at the I3−/WO3@FTO interface relative to that at the I3−/FTO interface, and (2) a lower overpotential for this reaction offered by WO3. The overpotentials for bringing about this reduction of I3− to I− species for the two electrodes were experimentally determined by measuring LSV plots in the BMI+I−/I2 gel electrolyte with WO3@FTO or FTO as the working electrode, Pt as the CE and Ag/AgCl as the reference (Fig. 4g). The standard redox potential of the I3−/I2 redox couple was ∼+0.54 V versus NHE, and with respect to the Ag/AgCl electrode, this was ∼+0.335 V. In this case, the LSV plot showed a strong, broad reduction peak corresponding to the I3− to I− reduction at the WO3@FTO interface, with Ered = +0.39 V versus Ag/AgCl. This reduction peak appeared almost like a shoulder peak when only FTO was used (in the absence of WO3), and the Ered = +0.29 V. It is evident from the magnitudes of the reduction potentials that WO3 increased the ease of reduction of I3− ions since Ered > Eored (standard). However, with FTO, an overpotential of 0.05 V was observed since Ered < Eored. More importantly, the peak current density for the tri-iodide reaction was six-fold times larger with WO3 than with FTO, suggestive of the high electrocatalytic area afforded by WO3, which enhanced the proportion of I− ions produced at the interface. In the solar cell (as in Fig. 4f), these ions diffused to the photoanode (IL-GNP@SiNW), where more holes were effectively scavenged relative to that achieved with the bare FTO. In the overall working of the solar cell, WO3 improved charge separation, increased the JSC and VOC and thus, the PCE.
The effects of WO3 on charge transfer and transport were studied by analysing the Nyquist plots of symmetric cells with the following configurations: FTO@WO3//WO3@FTO and FTO//FTO, where both cells contained the same BMIM+I−/I2 gel. Nyquist plots were recorded in the dark over an applied frequency of 1 MHz to 0.01 Hz at the respective open-circuit potentials. The plots were comprised of two semi-circles, and they were fitted into the equivalent circuit of [R1{R2C2}{R3C3}], where R1, R2, R3 are the bulk resistance, the electron transport resistance through the bulk of the electrode, and the resistance to charge transfer at the electrode/electrolyte interface. The fitted parameters are summarized in Table S1 (ESI†). The electron transport resistance (R2) is lower for FTO//FTO as compared to the FTO@WO3//WO3@FTO cell. This is primarily because FTO is an electron conductor (also evidenced by its higher electrical conductance), whereas WO3 is semiconducting and as a consequence, the WO3 particles offer a finite resistance to ion-transport across the cross-section before they reach the electrolyte layer at the interface containing the I3− ions. However, the charge transfer resistance operative at the WO3/I3− interface is almost fourteen times lower as compared to that at the FTO/I3− interface. The corresponding Bode phase plots (phase angle versus log(frequency)) for the two cells are shown in Fig. 4i. By using the relation: τ = 1/2πf, where “f” is the knee frequency, the time constants (τ) for the two processes were calculated. For the electron injection or transport over the high-frequency range, τ1 was found to be longer for WO3 (0.6 ms) as compared to FTO (0.17 ms), which matches the larger resistance offered by the film for injected charge movement. However, for charge transfer observed over the intermediate to low frequency domain, τ2 was found to be shorter for WO3 (0.4 s) relative to FTO (0.72 s), complementing the smaller resistance observed earlier for WO3.
It was also observed that the physicochemical processes, i.e., physical and chemical processes that occurred in the CE during the solar cell operation, did not change the intrinsic properties of the material, which was confirmed from the transmittance spectra of the WO3@FTO CE film measured before and after the cell testing. The recorded profiles closely match, with a very negligible dip due to the faint staining of the gel that was retained over the film after disassembling the cell (Fig. S5, ESI†). The XRD profile of WO3 showed no significant change, except for a slight broadening of the peaks before and after the testing thus confirming the retention of the orthorhombic structure.
Quasi-solid-state solar cells and their J–V characteristics
Solar cells were fabricated with liquid and gel electrolytes as the hole transport layers, and with and without the p-type-IL-GNP. Such a comparison enabled us to analyze the role of SiO2 and IL-GNP independently in governing cell performance. J–V characteristics were measured under AM 1.5G conditions by impinging an irradiance power of 100 mW cm−2 (1 sun) from the front sides of the cells (Fig. 5a), and the same measurements were done in the dark (Fig. 5b). The photographs of the cells are shown in Scheme 1. The exposed area was maintained at 1 cm2 by using a mask, and cells were illuminated from the front side. The solar cell configurations were as follows: IL-GNP@SiNW/gel/WO3, IL-GNP@SiNW/liquid/WO3, SiNW/gel/WO3 and SiNW/liquid/WO3. While the liquid HTL contained BMIM+I−, I2 and poly(AMPS) dissolved in PC, the gel HTL was prepared by dispersing SiO2 homogeneously in the liquid electrolyte. The 5-cell averages with standard deviation are provided in Table S2 in the ESI,† and the champion cell parameters for each cell are listed in Table 1. For a given pair of photoanode-CE, the cell with the gel HTL outperformed the cell with the liquid HTL. The best cell was IL-GNP@SiNW/gel/WO3, in terms of solar cell parameters, with average values of JSC, VOC, FF and PCE being 17.53 mA cm−2, 743 mV, 0.56 and 7.26%, respectively. When for the same cell the gel HTL was replaced by the liquid HTL, all the three major parameters declined to 16.19 mA cm−2, 711 mV and 0.47, causing the average PCE to drop by 25% to ∼5.44%. This trend was retained even when SiNW (devoid of IL-GNP coating) was used as the photoanode. For the SiNW/gel/WO3 cell, JSC of 12.9 mA cm−2, VOC of 700 mV, FF of 44.4%, and a PCE of 4.02% were the averages achieved. The average PCE experienced a steep drop by ∼40%, and was found to be ∼2.4% with the liquid HTL. The dark current density profiles for the same cells were noticeably much smaller by many orders of magnitude, indicating that the light-driven process largely did not brook any interference in the form of any side-reactions or parasitic-processes. The dark JSC magnitude was the least for IL-GNP@SiNW/gel/WO3, and only slightly higher for SiNW/gel/WO3.
 Fig. 5  
J–V characteristics of solar cells with SiNW and IL-GNP@SiNW photoanodes, with BMIM+I−/I2-based gel and liquid electrolytes, and WO3@FTO as the CEs under (a) irradiance (1 sun: 100 mW cm−2) and (b) dark conditions. (c) Potential and (d) current density transients under light on–off cycles under 1 sun irradiance for the same solar cells. (e) Stability of the IL-GNP@SiNW/gel/WO3 cell: variation of solar cell parameters with illumination time. 
Table 1 Solar cell parameters of the champion cells, and the average values for each parameter in parentheses




Cells

V
OC (mV)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)




SiNW/gel/WO3
754 (700)
13.62 (12.86)
0.461 (0.444)
4.73 (4.02)


SiNW/liquid/WO3
731 (683)
12.22 (11.39)
0.316 (0.306)
2.83 (2.39)


IL-GNP@SiNW/gel/WO3
768 (743)
18.39 (17.53)
0.562 (0.557)
7.93 (7.26)


IL-GNP@SiNW/liquid/WO3
761 (711)
17.23 (16.19)
0.487 (0.471)
6.39 (5.44)




The corresponding cells with the liquid HTL showed greater values. On assessing these photo- and dark-responses, the following conclusions were reached. (1) IL-GNP improves the solar cell performance by virtue of its ability to harvest light due to a bandgap in the visible region and more significantly, its ability to transmit the photo-generated holes efficiently from SiNW to the liquid or gel HTL (this is permitted by the thermodynamically favorably aligned VB levels of SiNW and IL-GNP, Fig. 2i). Due to the latter property, recombination was effectively suppressed and charge separation was maximized, resulting in improved cell performance. IL-GNP being a p-type semiconductor easily scavenged the holes from SiNW. (2) The gel HTL due to the presence of SiO2 nanoparticles, which are well-established in liquid junction solar cells as passivating agents,44 not only passivated the surface states on IL-GNP and SiNW, but also prevented the corrosion or dissolution or delamination of the IL-GNP or SiNW from the photoanode into the electrolyte. They serve as a protective sheath, thin enough for facile charge transfer at the interface but thick enough to prevent the I−/I2 electrolyte from corroding the photoanode via photo–chemical reactions. These factors not only allow the gel HTL-based solar cells to surpass the photo-response obtained with the liquid HTL, they also ensure that the gel minimizes any undesirable chemical or redox reactions at the photoanode/electrolyte interface, thus resulting in much lower dark short circuit current densities compared to that obtained with the liquid HTL. Our values of efficiencies for the best performing quasi-solid solar cell with the IL-GNP/SiNW heterojunction are quite impressive as compared to different cells reported in the literature (Table S3, ESI†), particularly in view of the low cost of cell-assembly.
Cost aspects of the solar cell
The laboratory-scale fabrication of the electrodes based on the composites is low-cost since the overall expense is not very high, neither is the preparation of the materials cumbersome. The metal-assisted chemical etching of the silicon wafer to grow the nanowires (SiNW) is the most widely used method in SiNWs-based solar cells. The exfoliation of graphite rods in IL to obtain the IL-GNP, followed by its electrophoretic deposition at a fixed dc potential, as well as the cathodic electrodeposition of WO3 over FTO, are very simple techniques used in the preparation of electrodes for a hybrid solar cell. An inert atmosphere is not required for any of these steps, neither is high-temperature annealing, nor any sophisticated instrument. A single 2-inch Si wafer that is used as the photoanode, costs only ∼US$23. Pilkington FTO glass (TEC 15) L × W × D 300 mm × 300 mm × 2.3 mm with surface resistivity of ∼13 Ω sq−1 for solar applications is ∼US$86, so for a 9 cm2 active area device, at least 3 CE can be made from one piece of FTO. The maximum volume of ethanol used in graphite rod exfoliation, or H2O2 used for the peroxopolytungstate (PT) solution in CE preparation, or even propylene carbonate for the electrolyte is 20 mL. The IL-GNP dispersion and the PT solution were a one-time synthesis since the same solutions were reused for fresh electrode preparation. Every other chemical, be it AgNO3 for Si wafer etching or W metal powder for CE or even the two ILs, BMIM-TFSI, BMIM+I− for IL-GNP and electrolyte respectively were consumed in very small amounts.
More PV properties
In the solar cell, the spacer ensures that the device does not short, and also seals the cells. The IPCE for the IL-GNP@SiNW/gel/WO3 hybrid solar cell ranges over the entire visible region extending up to 1200 nm in NIR, as can be judged from Fig. S6 (ESI†). The IPCE maxima is 57.5%. The JSC extracted from the integrated IPCE values is 18.06 mA cm−2, which is almost equal to the JSC obtained from the J–V curve for the IL-GNP@SiNW/gel/WO3 hybrid solar cell, 18.39 mA cm−2. The photovoltage and photocurrent density profiles measured under repetitive light on–off cycles under zero external current and bias respectively, for the four cells are compared in Fig. 5c and d. The photovoltage or photocurrent density increased abruptly when the light was switched on, and they dropped when the light was switched off. The values reached saturation within a few seconds and the gel again showed a better performance than the liquid. Notably, for the IL-GNP@SiNW/liquid/WO3 cell, the maximum photovoltage decayed with cycling, indicative of photo-corrosion and the possible chemical erosion of both IL-GNP and SiNW. The values in the dark also did not reach 0 V for this cell in particular, with a value as high as ∼0.1 V being retained. The gel-based cells showed a stable response. The photocurrent densities acquired under 1 sun irradiance were close to the short circuit current densities for the cells, and the current response appeared to be more stable than the voltage response.
The stability of the IL-GNP@SiNW/gel/WO3 cell was also monitored by subjecting it to discontinuous illumination for ∼2 days. There was only a 10% drop in PCE, of which 8% loss occurred within the first two hours, and thereafter there was no significant erosion of SiNW (Fig. 5e). The electrode remained stable, indicating the role of the gel in preserving the power output of the solar cell.
Charge transfer and transport studies
To better discern the charge transfer and transport mechanisms in the four cells, Nyquist plots were recorded under open-circuit potentials over an applied frequency window of 1 MHz to 0.10 Hz under dark conditions and under a white light irradiance of 30 mW cm−2 using a LED lamp. The plots acquired under dark and light conditions, the equivalent circuits used for fitting the experimental data, as well as the corresponding Bode phase graphs are shown in Fig. 6. The data can be best described as a composite of two distorted semi-circles for most of the systems, and the fitted parameters are provided in Table 2.
 Fig. 6  Nyquist plots of solar cells with SiNW and IL-GNP@SiNW photoanodes, with BMIM+I−/I2 based gel and liquid electrolytes, and WO3@FTO as the CEs under (a) dark conditions and (b) irradiance (30 mW cm−2). (c and d) Equivalent circuits used for fitting the data. Bode-phase plots for the same cells under (e) dark conditions and (f) irradiance (30 mW cm−2). 
Table 2 Fitted parameters for Nyquist plots for solar cells based on the liquid or gel electrolyte composed of 1 M BMIM+I−, 0.05 M I2, 2 wt% poly(AMPS) and 7 wt% SiO2 in PC. The liquid electrolyte did not contain SiO2




Parameters
SiNW/gel/WO3
SiNW/liquid/WO3
IL-GNP@SiNW/gel/WO3
IL-GNP@SiNW/liquid/WO3





Dark




R
s (Ω cm2)
1.5
1.4
2
2.3



R
ct (Ω cm2)
47
6
13.3
99



R
rec (Ω cm2)
733
346
986
453



Y
o1/Cdl, (× cm2), n
2.77 μF, 1
0.118 μS, 1
0.25 μS, 1
45.75 μS, 1



Y
o2/Co, (× cm2), n
9.2 × 10−12 F
0.33 μS, 0.6
0.22 μS, 0.7
6.8 × 10−9 nS, 0.7






Light




R
s (Ω cm2)
1.6
1.35
1.8
2.5



R
ct (Ω cm2)
11.1
12
9
8.5



R
rec (Ω cm2)
146
83
155
95



Y
o1/Cdl, (× cm2), n
16 pF
1.2 μS, 0.9
26.5 nS, 0.9
0.23 μS, 0.8



Y
o2/Co, (× cm2), n
15 pF
49 pS, 0.9
18.8 nS, 0.7
5.4 nS, 0.56




Classically, a Nyquist plot consists of three semicircles at the open circuit potential and two at the knee voltage. The high-frequency region before the beginning of the curve depicts the series resistance. The first semicircle at high frequency is associated with the counter electrode, the second semicircle is associated with the semiconductor–electrolyte interface, and the last semicircle at low frequency is associated with the diffusion of the electrolyte. Depending on the frequency, two obvious semicircles in the Nyquist plots are generally observed in most literature. The small semicircle in the high-frequency region represents the electron transfer resistance at the CE/electrolyte interface, while the large semicircle in the middle frequency region represents the charge transfer resistance at the photoanode/electrolyte interface. The third semicircle at low frequencies is not observed in the plots as it is observed at higher applied voltage and for frequencies lower than the frequency range between 1 MHz and 0.1 Hz used in the experiments provided here. There are several reasons for only one or two semicircles in the EIS plot. If the time constants of the processes are the same or similar, then two semicircles will merge to one; if one of the processes is much larger than the other, then the smaller one might be difficult to detect.45
The first arc is attributed to the charge transfer at the WO3/electrolyte interface, and the second one to the resistance to back-electron transfer at the photoanode/electrolyte interface. The SiNW/gel/WO3 cell exhibited two distinct semi-circles in both light and dark conditions, and could therefore be fitted into a conventional [R{RC}{RC}] circuit. For all the remaining cells, under the light/dark conditions, the data were best fit only when the capacitances were replaced by constant phase elements. Firstly, the resistances offered by the WO3/electrolyte interface were very low, be it the liquid or the gel electrolyte, and the value changed slightly in the light. Recombination resistances are higher in the dark as compared to the light. Recombination resistances are larger with gel electrolyte as compared to the liquid, suggestive of the active role played by the SiO2 nanoparticles in suppressing back-electron transfer from the CB of SiNW or IL-GNP to the oxidized I3− species at the photoanode/electrolyte interface. IL-GNP also assists in increasing the recombination resistance at the photoanode/I2,I− interface in both liquid and gel-based devices under dark conditions and irradiance. IL-GNP are conducive to hole transport as well, which is evident from the energy level diagram in Fig. 2i. The deposition of IL-GNP is through wet chemical processing; herein, electrodeposition ensures good contact between the Si nanowires and the GNPs, thereby allowing unhindered hole propagation. The energy differential is thermodynamically favorable for this process at the IL-GNP/SiNW interface, and electron transfer is also energetically favored, which in turn increases the Rrec in the IL-GNP@SiNW/gel/WO3 cell. The high conductance of WO3@FTO, 1.8 mS, promotes facile charge transfer at the CE/electrolyte interface, which in a way contributes to minimising the Rct. These studies show that the use of this gel electrolyte is an effective strategy for developing solar cells that can deliver high performances as opposed to liquid electrolytes.
Conclusions
In summary, IL-functionalized graphene nanoparticles collected from the exfoliation of graphite when decorated over Si NW act as co-sensitizers for n-SiNW. The IL-GNP are p-type semiconductors and visible light harvesters with a bandgap of 2.2 eV. The iodide-based ionic liquid gel electrolyte, comprised of BMIM+I−, I2 and poly(AMPS) and SiO2 is an ion-conducting medium, as well as an HTL. The SiO2 nanoparticles impart a passivating effect to IL-GNP and SiNW and prevent them from photocorrosion and/or chemical dissolution. The highest PCE of 7.93% was recorded with electrocatalytic WO3 film deposited over FTO as the CE. This IL-GNP@SiNW/I2,I− gel/WO3 quasi-solid state solar cell configuration is novel and economical, yet it exhibited superior photovoltaic performance and excellent stability. The IL-GNP/SiNW p/n heterojunction with suitably aligned energy levels allows maximum electron–hole separation by photo-excited electron transfer from IL-GNP to SiNW, followed by facile hole scavenging from SiNW via IL-GNP to the redox electrolyte species. The lower efficiencies obtained for the IL-GNP@SiNW/liquid/WO3 cells, tested alongside SiNW/gel/WO3 cells, determined the beneficial role of IL-GNP and gel HTL with SiO2 gelatinizing agent in the best cell assembly. This work demonstrates that the strategic engineering of each component in SiNW-based solar cells results in unhindered charge propagation that contributes to further pushing the solar conversion efficiencies to higher values in the near future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Financial support from the Ministry of Education-Scheme for Transformational and Advanced Research in Sciences (MOE-STARS, grant number: STARS/APR2019/CS/375) India, is gratefully acknowledged. Authors A. K. and M. O. are thankful to University Grants Commission (UGC) of India for the grant of senior research fellowships.
References
O. Schultz, S. W. Glunz and G. P. Willeke, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2004, 12, 553–558 CAS .
K. Q. Peng and S. T. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 198–215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Maiolo, B. M. Kayes, M. A. Filler, M. C. Putnam, M. D. Kelzenberg, H. A. Atwater and N. S. Lewis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 12346–12347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Sahoo and P. Kale, J. Mater., 2019, 5, 34–48 Search PubMed .
X. Shen, B. Sun, F. Yan, J. Zhao, F. Zhang, S. Wang, X. Zhu and S. Lee, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5869–5876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Stelzner, M. Pietsch, G. Andra, F. Falk, E. Ose and S. Christiansen, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 295203 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Q. Peng, X. Wang, X. L. Wu and S. T. Lee, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3704–3709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Al-Ghzaiwat, M. Foldyna, T. Fuyuki, W. Chen, E. V. Johnson, J. Meot and P. Roca i Cabarrocas, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 1651 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Garnett and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1082–1087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kolay, D. Maity, P. Ghosal and M. Deepa, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 14, 8614–8622 CrossRef .
A. Kolay, D. Maity, P. Ghosal and M. Deepa, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 47972–47983 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Rui, T. Zhang, D. Zhu, Y. Feng, A. N. Cartwright, M. T. Swihart, Y. Yang, T. Zhang, C. Huang, H. Wang and D. Gu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 4664–4673 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tian, X. Zheng, T. J. Kempa, Y. Fang, N. Yu, G. Yu, J. Huang and C. M. Lieber, Nature, 2007, 449, 885–890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Peng, X. Wang and S. T. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 163103 CrossRef .
X. Wang, K. Q. Peng, X. J. Pan, X. Chen, Y. Yang, L. Li, X. M. Meng, W. J. Zhang and S. T. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 9861–9865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Shen, B. Sun, F. Yan, J. Zhao, F. Zhang, S. Wang, X. Zhu and S. Lee, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5869–5876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhang, J. Jie, X. Zhang, X. Ou and X. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 34527–34543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Su, H. Wang, J. Zhao, M. H. Rummeli, Y. Gao, Y.-B. Jiang, L. Zhang and G. Zou, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 280, 258–265 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cong, Q. Yi, Y. Wang, J. Zhao, Y. Sun and G. Zou, J. Power Sources, 2015, 280, 90–96 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gao, Y. Wang, Q. Yi, Y. Su, P. Sun, X. Wang, J. Zhao and G. Zou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 20541–20546 RSC .
J. Lu, J. x. Yang, J. Wang, A. Lim, S. Wang and K. P. Loh, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2367–2375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhang, S. Wu, J. Xu, R. Zheng and G. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 433–441 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kolay, A. Das, P. Ghosal and M. Deepa, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 4084–4095 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, X. Zhuang, J. Zhai, Y. Zheng, H. Lu and L. Chen, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 255, 1500–1506 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chern, K. Hsu, I. S. Chun, B. P. de Azeredo, N. Ahmed, K. H. Kim, J. M. Zuo, N. Fang, P. Ferreira and X. Li, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1582–1588 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, Y. Cui, L. Huynh, C. J. Barrelet, D. C. Bell and C. M. Lieber, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 433–436 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zheng, R. Tan, S. Yin, Y. Zhang, G. Zhao, Y. Chen and D. Yin, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2015, 5, 2092–2102 RSC .
B. Li, D. Yu and S. L. Zhang, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 59, 1645–1648 CrossRef CAS .
D. López-Díaz, M. López Holgado, J. L. García-Fierro and M. M. Velázquez, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 20489–20497 CrossRef .
D. A. Sokolov, K. R. Shepperd and T. M. Orlando, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2633–2636 CrossRef CAS .
B. S. Yilbas, B. Salhi, M. R. Yousaf, F. Al-Sulaiman, H. Ali and N. Al-Aqeeli, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 38678 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, P. F. Fulvio, G. A. Baker, G. M. Veith, R. R. Unocic, S. M. Mahurin, M. Chi and S. Dai, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 4487–4489 RSC .
I. Khrapach, F. Withers, T. H. Bointon, D. K. Polyushkin, W. L. Barnes, S. Russo and M. F. Craciun, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2844–2849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Hutagalung, M. M. Fadhali, R. A. Areshi and F. D. Tan, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2017, 12, 425 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Nolan, S. O'Callaghan, G. Fagas, J. C. Greer and T. Frauenheim, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 34–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Mihalache, A. Radoi, R. Pascu, C. Romanitan, E. Vasile and M. Kusko, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 29234–29247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, S. Wu, L. Zhang, J. Lu, F. Verproot, Y. Liu, Z. Xing, J. Li and X. M. Song, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2011, 26, 2632–2637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cao, M. J. Meziani, S. Sahu and Y. P. Sun, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 171–180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qi, J. M. White, A. M. Belcher and Y. Masumoto, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 372, 763–766 CrossRef CAS .
Z. G. Bai, D. P. Yu, J. J. Wang, Y. H. Zou, W. Qian, J. S. Fu, S. Q. Feng, J. Xu and L. P. You, J. Mater. Sci. Eng. B, 2000, 72, 117–120 CrossRef .
M. Dutta, S. Sarkar, T. Ghosh and D. Basak, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 20127–20131 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cojocaru, S. Uchida, P. V. V. Jayaweera, S. Kaneko, H. Wang, J. Nakazaki, T. Kubo and H. Segawa, Energy Technol., 2017, 5, 1762–1766 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wei, X. Yan, Q. Wang, S. Wu, Y. Mao, Z. Luo, H. Chen, L. Sun, S. Wei and Z. Guo, Energy Environ., 2013, 2, 112–120 Search PubMed .
H. Wei, G. Wang, J. Shi, H. Wu, Y. Luo, D. Li and Q. Meng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 14194–14203 RSC .

          I. Mora-Seró and J. Bisquert, Impedance characterization of quantum dot sensitized solar cells. Frontiers of Quantum Dot Solar Cells. CMC Publishing Co., Ltd, Japan 2012, pp. 162–175 Search PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Cyclic voltammograms of SiNW, IL-GNP and IL-GNP@SiNW; Mott–Schottky plots of SiNW and IL-GNP; topography and surface potential maps and cross section of WO3 film, optimization of WO3 CE, current density versus square root of scan rate plot for WO3 film; table of fitted parameters for Nyquist plots of symmetric cells; transmittance of WO3 film, table of solar cell parameters with their average and standard deviation; table of photovoltaic parameters for comparison between literature reports and this work, IPCE plot of the champion cell. See DOI: 10.1039/d0se01605eThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Schematics of a wide range of SiNW solar cell configurations adapted from literature (a–f, h–l), and the comparison of the architectures and features of the reported solar cells (a–f, h–l) with those of the solar cell configuration fabricated in this study (g). Cartoons (a–f) and (h–l) are adapted from articles [6–11] and [12–16] respectively. The acronyms used are defined as follows: PCE: power conversion efficiency, TCO: transparent conducting coating, NP: nanoparticle, C@TeNR: carbon-coated Te nanorod, IL-GNP: ionic liquid-functionalized graphene nanoparticles, CE: counter electrode, PEDOT:PSS: poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(4-styrenesulfonate), atm: atmosphere, VLS: vapor–liquid–solid, ND: nanodots.	 

 	Scheme 2  (a) Preparation scheme of the photoanodes: SiNW and IL-GNP@SiNW. (b) Cartoon representation of the fabrication of WO3 films. (c) Composition of the I2,I− gel electrolyte used in the solar cells, and (c′) photographs of the solar cells with SiNW and IL-GNP@SiNW photoanodes.	 

 	Fig. 1  SEM images showing the (a) top view and (b and c) side views of SiNW. SEM images: (d and e) side/planar views of IL-GNP@SiNW. (f) TEM image of IL-GNP (inset shows a magnified view) and (g) lattice scale image of IL-GNP@SiNW. (h) XRD pattern and (i) Raman spectrum of IL-GNP@SiNW (inset shows the deconvoluted D and G bands from IL-GNP). AFM top view images of (j) SiNW and (j′) IL-GNP@SiNW.	 

 	Scheme 3  Schematic illustrating the chemical composition of IL-GNP.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) XPS-survey spectrum, deconvoluted core level spectra of (b) C1s, (c) O1s, (d) Si2p, (e) S2p, (f) N1s and (g) F1s and (h) valence band spectrum of IL-GNP@SiNW. (i) Energy level diagram of IL-GNP@SiNW/I2,I−/WO3 solar cell configuration.	 
ϕWO3 = 4.6 + CPDHOPG − CDPWO3,

 	Fig. 3  (a) Absorbance spectra and (b) fluorescence spectra (λex: 300 nm) of photoactive components. The inset of (a) shows an enlarged view of the visible light absorption of IL-GNP. (c) Dark and light dc-I–V responses of IL-GNP film. (d) J–V characteristics of an IL-GNP/BMIM + I−,I2 gel/WO3 solar cell in the dark, and under irradiance (1 sun = 100 mW cm−2); insets are photographs of the IL-GNP film and the corresponding solar cell.	 

 	Fig. 4  AFM-topography of (a) FTO and (b) WO3@FTO electrodes and their representative section profiles (a′ and b′). (c) XRD pattern of a WO3 film; inset is a SEM image. (d) CV plots of a WO3 film recorded at different scan rates to demonstrate its redox activity. (e) I–V characteristics of FTO and WO3@FTO. (f) J–V characteristics of an IL-GNP@SiNW/BMIM+I−,I2 gel/CE solar cell under irradiance (1 sun = 100 mW cm−2) with WO3 and FTO as the CEs; inset shows the photograph of the cell with WO3 as CE. (g) LSV plots comparing the tri-iodide reduction capability of WO3 and FTO. (h) Nyquist plots of symmetric cells of CEs with the BMIM+I−/I2 gel; inset is the equivalent circuit used for fitting the data and (i) Bode-phase plots of the same cells.	 
WO3 (pale-yellow or colorless) + xLi+ + xe− ⇆ LixWO3 (blue)	(1)

 	Fig. 5  
J–V characteristics of solar cells with SiNW and IL-GNP@SiNW photoanodes, with BMIM+I−/I2-based gel and liquid electrolytes, and WO3@FTO as the CEs under (a) irradiance (1 sun: 100 mW cm−2) and (b) dark conditions. (c) Potential and (d) current density transients under light on–off cycles under 1 sun irradiance for the same solar cells. (e) Stability of the IL-GNP@SiNW/gel/WO3 cell: variation of solar cell parameters with illumination time.	 

SiNW/gel/WO3	754 (700)	13.62 (12.86)	0.461 (0.444)	4.73 (4.02)
SiNW/liquid/WO3	731 (683)	12.22 (11.39)	0.316 (0.306)	2.83 (2.39)
IL-GNP@SiNW/gel/WO3	768 (743)	18.39 (17.53)	0.562 (0.557)	7.93 (7.26)
IL-GNP@SiNW/liquid/WO3	761 (711)	17.23 (16.19)	0.487 (0.471)	6.39 (5.44)

 	Fig. 6  Nyquist plots of solar cells with SiNW and IL-GNP@SiNW photoanodes, with BMIM+I−/I2 based gel and liquid electrolytes, and WO3@FTO as the CEs under (a) dark conditions and (b) irradiance (30 mW cm−2). (c and d) Equivalent circuits used for fitting the data. Bode-phase plots for the same cells under (e) dark conditions and (f) irradiance (30 mW cm−2).	 


Dark


R
s (Ω cm2)	1.5	1.4	2	2.3

R
ct (Ω cm2)	47	6	13.3	99

R
rec (Ω cm2)	733	346	986	453

Y
o1/Cdl, (× cm2), n	2.77 μF, 1	0.118 μS, 1	0.25 μS, 1	45.75 μS, 1

Y
o2/Co, (× cm2), n	9.2 × 10−12 F	0.33 μS, 0.6	0.22 μS, 0.7	6.8 × 10−9 nS, 0.7


Light


R
s (Ω cm2)	1.6	1.35	1.8	2.5

R
ct (Ω cm2)	11.1	12	9	8.5

R
rec (Ω cm2)	146	83	155	95

Y
o1/Cdl, (× cm2), n	16 pF	1.2 μS, 0.9	26.5 nS, 0.9	0.23 μS, 0.8

Y
o2/Co, (× cm2), n	15 pF	49 pS, 0.9	18.8 nS, 0.7	5.4 nS, 0.56
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Cyclic voltammograms of SiNW, IL-GNP and IL-GNP@SiNW; Mott–Schottky plots of SiNW and IL-GNP; topography and surface potential maps and cross section of WO3 film, optimization of WO3 CE, current density versus square root of scan rate plot for WO3 film; table of fitted parameters for Nyquist plots of symmetric cells; transmittance of WO3 film, table of solar cell parameters with their average and standard deviation; table of photovoltaic parameters for comparison between literature reports and this work, IPCE plot of the champion cell. See DOI: 10.1039/d0se01605e

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
