Exploring the interfaces between metal electrodes and aqueous electrolytes with electrochemical impedance spectroscopy  - Analyst (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3AN00791J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3AN00791J
(Critical Review)
Analyst, 2013, 138, 5540-5554Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsExploring the interfaces between metal electrodes and aqueous electrolytes with electrochemical impedance spectroscopy

        
          
            Aliaksandr S. 
            Bandarenka
          
          
        
      *
      Center for Electrochemical Sciences, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Universitätstr. 150, D-44780, Bochum, Germany. E-mail: aliaksandr.bandarenka@rub.de
Received 
      20th April 2013
    , Accepted 7th July 2013First published on 8th July 2013AbstractElectrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) is one of the oldest electroanalytical techniques. With respect to the investigation of the electrode–electrolyte interfaces, it has gained wide popularity as a non-destructive, sensitive and highly informative method. A particularly attractive advantage is that it provides a unique opportunity to distinguish contributions from different processes which take place simultaneously at the electrode surface. During the past decade, considerable progress has been made in the field of impedance spectroscopy to advance data acquisition, modelling and spectra analysis. EIS has evolved from slow data acquisition procedures with semi-quantitative interpretation to innovative methodologies which allow simple operation and accurate analysis using hundreds or even thousands of spectra; these spectra can often be recorded as a result of a single experiment. Impedance spectroscopy is nowadays widely combined with other techniques, with successful application in areas ranging from analytical and physical chemistry to localized impedance microscopies. The focus of this review is on recent experimental and theoretical achievements in the characterisation of the interfaces between metal electrodes and aqueous electrolytes using EIS. Some key challenges to further increase the informative power of electrochemical impedance spectroscopy are also outlined.Aliaksandr S. BandarenkaAliaksandr Bandarenka received his diploma in Chemistry (2002) and PhD (2005) from Belarusian State University (Belarus). After working as a postdoc at the University of Twente (The Netherlands) and Technical University of Denmark, he became the leader of the group “Adsorption and Electrocatalysis” at the Center for Electrochemical Sciences, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Germany (2010). His research focuses on electrocatalysis, adsorption phenomena at the electrode surface, and developing methods for detailed in situ characterisation of the electrode–electrolyte interface.
1 Introduction
Progress in the field of analytical chemistry is strictly dependent on the development of advanced, but affordable techniques and methodologies.1–3 In electro-analytical chemistry and electrochemistry, the development of efficient characterisation methods to better understand the boundaries between electronically conducting electrodes and ionically conducting electrolytes plays a crucial role.4–8 The properties of this “electrochemical interface” determine the performance of many important energy conversion and storage devices,9–12 such as fuel cells,13–15 batteries,16,17 and capacitors.18–20 In a wider context, insight into the electrode–electrolyte interface is vital for a variety of areas of modern science and technology, from the development of new generations of sensitive and selective sensors21–24 to corrosion protection technologies.25–27
Nowadays, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) is one of the most informative techniques for the characterisation of the electrochemical interface.28–35 This method is based on the analysis of the response of the system under investigation to alternating current (ac) probing signals. The term “impedance” was introduced by Heaviside at the end of the 19th century to extend the concept of electrical resistance to ac circuits.29 In this framework, the impedance is a measure of the opposition of a system to the alternating current.
In different historical periods, progress in the field of EIS was stimulated by the dominant tendencies in physical and analytical chemistry, solid state physics, biology and other disciplines. The first significant breakthrough in the theoretical description of electrochemical systems under ac-probing was made by E. Warburg who derived the analytical equation for impedance caused by diffusional transport of electroactive species to an electrode surface.36 From a historical standpoint, this was probably the first deep analysis of the phenomena induced by an alternating current in an electrochemical environment. The next milestone in the development of the technique is associated with the work of Dolin and Erschler in 1940 (ref. 37) and Randles in 1947.38 They established a paradigm in which the response of an electrode in contact with an electrolyte was considered as the sum of two formally independent constituents: the response of the double layer (or the interface itself) and the response of the electrochemical (Faradaic) reactions. This idea has been successfully used since that time to describe the behaviour of the electrode–electrolyte interface.
The invention of the first potentiostat by Hickling in 1941 (ref. 39) and, further, the development of frequency response analysers in the 1970s started a new era in EIS data acquisition. Capitalizing on these inventions, modern equipment can now record hundreds of impedance spectra during a single electrochemical experiment. Amazing progress in data acquisition has also stimulated the rapid development of advanced theoretical frameworks32,34,35 and software to interpret and process impedance spectra more efficiently.40–43
During the past decade, EIS methodology has gradually moved from the analysis of a few spectra to the processing of large EIS datasets recorded as a function of many parameters, such as electrode potential, time, or spatial coordinates.44–55 Nowadays, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy is frequently combined with other analytical techniques to perform several parallel measurements in one experiment.56–63 These “hyphenated” techniques were shown to allow physical models of the electrochemical interfaces to be established with much greater ease, which provides deeper insight into the complex processes at the electrode surfaces.
The focus of this review is to analyse and illustrate some recent experimental and theoretical achievements which have significantly improved the informative power of electrochemical impedance spectroscopy, particularly in the characterisation of interfaces between metal electrodes and aqueous electrolytes. Section 2 analyses the opportunities provided by “dynamic” impedance measurements, where data are acquired and analysed as a function of electrode potential. Some recent illustrative examples of the combination of EIS with other essentially electrochemical techniques are discussed in Section 3. Advances in the field of localised impedance measurements are summarized in Section 4. Finally, some key challenges necessary to improve EIS efficiency are outlined.
2 Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy becomes “dynamic”
2.1 EIS: probing signals and responses
A common EIS experiment normally assumes the use of three electrodes: a working electrode (the object under investigation), a counter electrode (to apply the electric current) and a reference electrode (provides a known reference point which is constant in time). A potentiostat establishes the required potential of the working electrode, E0, versus the reference electrode and maintains it. Then, a probing signal of different frequencies is applied E(t) = E0 + Emsin(ωt), where t is the time, Em is the amplitude of the probing signal (typically Em ≤ 10 mV), and ω is the angular frequency. Due to specific properties of the electrochemical systems, the current response will depend on the applied frequency and will be shifted in time with respect to the probing signal: I(t) = I0 + Imsin(ωt + φ), where I0 is the direct current (which can also be a function of time), Im is the amplitude of the ac response and φ is the phase shift between the probing signal and the response.†
The EIS data acquisition systems estimate the absolute values of the impedance |Z| = Em/Im and corresponding phase shifts φ at different frequencies within a selected frequency range. The spectra are commonly represented using several types of plots. Fig. 1A and B show an impedance spectrum using the so-called Bode plots: i.e. the dependence of |Z| and φ on the logarithm of frequency. Alternatively, Fig. 1C represents the same data using a 3D plot, as the dependence of the real part of impedance, ReZ = |Z|cosφ, and imaginary part of impedance, ImZ = |Z|sinφ, on frequency. A more compact way of presenting the data shown in Fig. 1C is to use a Nyquist plot (Fig. 1D), where the spectrum is represented as the dependence of ImZ on ReZ. Other types of EIS data representations are also used, depending on the properties of the systems under investigation. In general, the choice of the graphical representation of the data is also dependent on particular research targets. In some cases, it is convenient to represent the data utilizing other basic formalisms, for instance using the complex admittances, Y, the complex permittivity, ε, or the complex modulus, M, (where M = jωC0Z, with C0 being the vacuum capacitance of the cell).64
 Fig. 1  A typical impedance spectrum represented using (A and B) Bode plots, (C) a 3D graph and (D) a Nyquist plot. 
The ultimate goal of the analysis of impedance spectra is to elucidate a physical model of the system and estimate its parameters. Unfortunately, unambiguous elucidation of the model and further data interpretation are not trivial tasks, if just one impedance spectrum (e.g. at some given electrode potential) is available.65 In order to facilitate these procedures, it is often necessary to examine how the impedance values and the shape of the spectra change as a function of some other key parameters. Additional methodological and experimental complications arise when the properties of the electrochemical system can irreversibly change with time during the measurements. Both issues certainly require that the impedance spectra should be acquired as quickly as possible.66,67 In the former situation, this would reduce the time of the experiment; while in the latter case, the spectra would be recorded before the properties of the system change significantly. During the past decade, relatively fast acquisition of large experimental datasets in EIS (as a function of different parameters) has become widely possible leading to unique and, previously, inaccessible opportunities, particularly in the field of electroanalytical chemistry.
2.2 “Dynamic” EIS: data acquisition schemes
In electrochemistry, the electrode potential is the parameter which determines the status of the system.68 Therefore, a number of attempts were undertaken to enable acquisition of impedance spectra as a function of the electrode potential at potential scan rates comparable to those commonly used in the potentiodynamic voltammetry.69–77 Importantly, the scan rate and the frequency range must satisfy the quasi-stationarity criteria, i.e. the mean values of the parameters which define the system properties (such as surface concentration, electrode surface area, adsorbate surface coverage, etc.) should change only slightly or, ideally, not change at all during the acquisition of a single spectrum.67
Apart from simplicity of the above-mentioned idea, the way to its realisation was not straightforward. Perhaps the first illustrative demonstration of this concept was performed by Smith et al. in 1977.78,79 It was further elaborated in 1997 by Házì et al.80 to convert this approach to an affordable technique; only once computers and their performance could largely facilitate and optimise acquisition and analysis of large experimental datasets. To decrease the measurement time, Házì et al. used complex probing signals composed of tens of periodic functions with different frequencies, phases and amplitudes. The probing signal was then periodically superimposed onto a staircase potential scan. The response of the system at each of the potential steps was analysed using fast Fourier transform (FFT) algorithms to obtain the ac-current amplitudes, phase shifts and, consequently, the impedance spectra. As a result, complex dependencies of the impedance spectra on the electrode potential were obtained. Fig. 2A shows one example of these dependencies, where the real part of impedance is plotted as a function of the logarithm of frequency and the electrode potential.
 Fig. 2  (A) Three-dimensional plot of the real part of impedance as a function of frequency and applied electrode potential for the oxidation of 1 mM ferrocene at a 1 mm diameter platinum disc electrode in acetonitrile (0.1 M Et4NClO4). Electrode potential steps of 10 mV were applied at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 80 © Elsevier 1997. (B) Series of impedance spectra obtained as a function of the electrode potential for a polycrystalline zinc electrode in 0.01 M KOH. The arrow indicates the scan direction. dE/dt = 50 mV s−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89 © American Chemical Society 2012. 
The first potentiodynamic impedance measurements were performed with a potential scan rate of ∼2 mV s−1. The current FFT-approach allows reliable acquisition of impedance spectra with scan rates close to those frequently applied in potentiodynamic voltammetries (∼50 mV s−1). An illustrative example of a potentiodynamic impedance dataset is shown in Fig. 2B characterising anodic oxidation of a Zn electrode surface in an alkaline solution. This is a typical example of an “intrinsically dynamic” system where the electrode surface can change its properties markedly fast during the experiment, and where classical slow impedance measurement schemes often experience serious complications, particularly in spectra interpretation.
Despite the fact that the FFT-EIS has a number of advantages, this approach is sensitive to noise effects: the main problem comes from the low intensity of the constituent responses and their non-uniformity.32,70,81 One possible way to overcome these limitations is to accurately optimize the probing signal to maximize the intensity of the constituents of the current response.32,70 Another approach has been proposed to use frequency-by-frequency probing (similar to the classical experiments), however, with optimisations at the computer-hardware level combined with fast algorithms of the response analysis in real time.49 These relatively simple optimisations have resulted in the possibility of accurately recording impedance spectra for a variety of systems at the scan rates in the range between 0.5 mV s−1 and 10 mV s−1, maintaining the potential steps of the staircase potential scan as low as 2 mV.82–88
Unfortunately, there are some methodological limitations of the “potentiodynamic” approach in EIS. These limitations originate from the fact that the potential scan rate controls the lowest probing frequency and, hence, limit the frequency range. Practically, this means that some phenomena (e.g. associated with the mass transport), which mainly manifest themselves at low ac frequencies, can be overlooked. One of the ways to decrease the probability of mistakes in data interpretation is to record the impedance spectra over a wider frequency range (including lower frequencies) at a few key points in a staircase potential scan.54 At these points, the potential step could be asymmetric: with increased step heights and, correspondingly, wider time windows the ac-probing could be performed. An alternative and promising approach to overcome many methodological limitations of potentiodynamic EIS is to use so-called “hyphenated” techniques which involve (in a single experiment) impedance spectroscopy measurements and measurements performed using other techniques to collect the maximum amount of independent data about the interface status and its properties; this will be discussed in Section 3.
It should be briefly noted here that advances in fast spectra acquisition also facilitated the investigation of electrochemical systems that change their properties with time at a constant electrode potential.59,90,91 For that, impedance spectra are recorded periodically at short-time intervals. This approach has recently been used to monitor the interface status during metal electrodeposition59,90 and intercalation.61
Apart from state-of-the-art acquisition schemes and advanced hardware, the key to determine the performance of an analytical technique is the ability to extract the maximum amount of valuable information from the measured response. A drastic increase in the amount of spectra recorded in modern EIS experiments has resulted in the development of new approaches and algorithms to facilitate modelling, processing and data analysis.
2.3 Data analysis and interpretation
The overall scheme of the analysis and interpretation of EIS data is similar to that used in other analytical methods (Fig. 3A): the object under investigation represents a “black box” with unknown properties. Essentially, the analysis of EIS data is the solution of the inverse problem.92 Based on the measured response, it is necessary to elucidate the model of the system and estimate its parameters by fitting the spectra to the model using special software.40–43,92,93
 Fig. 3  (A) A common scheme used in an experimental investigation of real-world systems. (B) Modelling of the working metal electrode–aqueous electrolyte interface in EIS assumes that under the 3-electrode configuration, the measured impedance spectra mainly contain three contributions: (i) the response of the interface itself (particularly, the double layer response), (ii) the contribution from electrochemical reactions (which is superimposed onto the above-mentioned pure interfacial response) and (iii) the response of the volume of an electrolyte located between the working and reference electrodes. (C) An example of a common physical model (an equivalent circuit) of the metal electrode–aqueous electrolyte interface constructed according to the general rules described in (B): the response of the interface (the double layer) is modelled by an ideal capacitor, Cdl; the response of an electrochemical reaction is modelled by a series combination of the charge transfer resistance Rct and diffusional Warburg impedance, ZW; and the response of a liquid electrolyte is approximated by a resistance Rel. See the text for further details. 
It should be noted that before the actual modelling starts, experimental impedance spectra should be carefully inspected to satisfy at least three common criteria: (i) causality (i.e. the measured ac response is only due to the applied perturbation); (ii) linearity (i.e. the ac response follows the principle of superposition); and stability (i.e. the system does not significantly change with time during acquisition of one spectrum). Modern Kramers–Kronig transformation (KKT) algorithms provide a check on the validity of EIS datasets obtained over a wide range of probing frequencies. Practically, the Kramers–Kronig check aims at proving the basic hypotheses using relatively simple rules like, e.g. for a valid EIS dataset it is possible to accurately calculate the real part of the impedance from the imaginary part and vice versa. Alternatively, it should be possible to calculate the phase shift from the magnitude of the impedance. Further details on KKT in EIS data analysis, recent achievements in the development of the Kramers–Kronig check algorithms as well as some interesting KKT-related applications can be found in ref. 35,94–102.
After the Kramers–Kronig check confirms the validity of EIS datasets, further modelling and analysis are possible. Perhaps largely due to historical reasons, the modelling of electrochemical systems in EIS is nowadays commonly performed using so-called equivalent electric circuits (EEC).29 The equivalent circuits can be considered as a schematic (graphical) representation of complex equations which describe the electrochemical system.93 Undoubtedly, the description of systems using only mathematical equations is much more universal: in some cases it is not possible to represent equations by a common EEC. However, the widespread use of equivalent circuits appeared to be convenient in everyday laboratory practice.
Obviously, while the forward problem has (in deterministic physics) a unique solution, the inverse problem, unfortunately, does not.103 In general, there could be a variety of equations and, correspondingly, EECs, which can describe the measured response. Therefore, similar to other techniques, modelling and data analysis in EIS is often a demanding procedure.
Typically, the models can be classified as (i) physical (or physico-chemical, or structural) and (ii) formal.103 Physical EIS models link measured EIS data with physico-chemical parameters of the process (kinetic parameters, concentrations, diffusion coefficients, etc.). Formal models describe the experimental impedances in order to obtain a good fit between the calculated and experimental impedances. The parameters obtained as a result of this procedure do not necessarily have clear physico-chemical significance. In order to gain deeper insight into the processes taking place at the electrode–electrolyte interface, elucidation of physical models is mandatory. It should be noted that the physical models can be in many cases adequately expressed either by EECs or mathematical equations, depending on the particular properties of systems or methodologies used.
According to the current understanding of the interfaces between metal electrodes and aqueous electrolytes, the measured electrochemical impedance spectra contain three main contributions: the response of the interface itself (with the impedance Zint), the response due to electrochemical reactions (with the impedance ZF) and the response due to the electrolyte (with the impedance Zel) (Fig. 3B).32 Therefore, a typical model of the working electrode–electrolyte interface in the presence of an electrochemical reaction will consist of at least three parts, connected as shown schematically in Fig. 3B, according to the general assumptions by Randles, Dolin, and Erschler, as discussed in Section 1. The goal is then to elucidate particular equations for these three constituents Zint, ZF and Zel. For instance, if the electrolyte is liquid, its impedance can be expressed through a resistance Zel = Rel. The latter depends on the electrolyte conductivity and relative positions of the electrodes.‡
Elucidation of the equations for ZF frequently requires an accurate analysis of all a priori available chemical data. In one of the important but relatively simple cases of so-called outer sphere reactions,§ analytical equations for the Faradaic impedance were derived a few decades ago as ZF = Rct + AW/(jω)0.5,33–35 where j is the imaginary unit, Rct is the charge transfer resistance and AW is the diffusional Warburg coefficient. Assuming that there is only the oxidized form of electroactive species initially in the solution, the transfer coefficient, α, is equal to 0.5 and the diffusion coefficients for the oxidized and reduced species are equal, Rct can be described by the following equation: (1)and the diffusional Warburg coefficient, AW, is given in this case as (2)
In the equations given above, n is the number of electrons involved in the electrochemical reaction, F is the Faraday constant, S is the electrode surface area, k0 is the standard rate constant, Dox is the diffusion coefficient of oxidised species, cox is the bulk concentration of oxidised species, R is the gas constant, T is the absolute temperature, α is the transfer coefficient and E1/2 is the reversible half-wave potential. Relevant equations for ZF describing some other common particular cases are discussed in detail in ref. 33–35.
The response of the interface itself (particularly, the response of the electric double layer) is frequently similar to the response of a capacitor.104 Therefore, as the first simple approximation, one can assume that Zint = (jωCdl)−1, where Cdl is the double layer capacitance (issues related to the double layer capacitance and capacitances associated with specific adsorption will be discussed later in this section and in Section 3). An EEC describing the ac-response of electrochemical systems in the presence of an outer sphere electrochemical reaction with diffusion limitations is shown in Fig. 3C. It should be noted that in the framework of the present discussion, the equivalent circuit shown in Fig. 3C has been exclusively constructed based on a priori knowledge about the system: the type of the reaction, the composition of the electrolyte and the properties of the working electrodes have been taken into account before actual measurements. However, fitting of the experimental spectra to the EEC and analysis of the resultant parameter values of the model, as well as other independently available information, are necessary to validate the model for each particular experimental set. In many cases, however, the amount of a priori and experimental information obtained solely by EIS is not enough for unambiguous elucidation of the model.
Depending on the particular target of the research, the analysis of real-world impedance data is frequently focused on certain parts or parameters of the model. Most of the studies reported in the literature focus either on electrochemical reactions (i.e. where the analysis of ZF is dominant), the double layer response (i.e. investigations are mainly focused on the Zint) or bulk properties of materials97 (for instance to study conductive and capacitive properties of membranes and cementitious materials).
The ability to perform potentiodynamic EIS experiments drastically simplifies the analysis of both ZF and Zint, increases its accuracy and provides more valuable information about the interface. Fig. 4 demonstrates these advances using a relatively simple example, which deals with the effect of adsorbed 1-thioglycerol on the interfacial charge transfer in the case of a well-known outer sphere reaction.105 Notably, the dependencies shown in Fig. 4 are the result of the solution of the inverse problem in EIS. The required fitting of large potentiodynamic EIS datasets to the EEC (shown in Fig. 3C) has been performed in this case using specially developed algorithms, which routinely solve this rather complex chemometric task in a semi-automatic mode.92
 Fig. 4  The effect of 1-thioglycerol adsorbed on a Pt electrode on inverse of (a) Warburg coefficient and (b) the charge transfer resistance. Electrolyte: 5.2 mM K3[Fe(CN)6] + 1 M KCl, dE/dt = 1.8 mV s−1. Solid lines were obtained by fitting experimental data to eqn (1) and (2). The potentials are given versus an Ag/AgCl reference electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 105 © Elsevier 2005. 
From the analysis of eqn (1) and (2), it is evident that for many outer sphere reactions the constituent parameters of the Faradaic impedance, namely, the charge transfer resistance and diffusional Warburg coefficient depend on the electrode potential. Remarkably, the information about the kinetics of the common type of outer sphere reactions (reversible reactions, with α = 0.5) is practically available from Rct, which depends on the heterogeneous rate constant k0 and the transfer coefficient α. The Warburg coefficient gives key information about the mass transport of the electroactive species through the Dox. Adsorbed 1-thioglycerol, indeed, influences only the experimental dependence of the charge transfer resistance on the electrode potential in the cathodic reduction of [Fe(CN)6]3− at Pt electrodes; the AW-dependencies do not change significantly, as expected (Fig. 4, the dependencies in the figure are plotted as the inverse of the corresponding parameters). Further fitting of the dependencies shown in Fig. 4 to the corresponding equations (1) and (2) gives values of k0, α and Dox with high accuracy.
Recently, the advantages of the modern EIS to acquire and analyse large experimental datasets have been demonstrated for detailed investigation of the kinetics of different classes of electrochemical processes, for instance surface limited adsorption,45,65 electrocatalysis,54 metal deposition,59 degradation of coatings, etc.57 In most cases, these experiments would be extremely difficult to perform in the framework of the classical EIS methodology even 15 years ago. It can be envisioned that the combination of the well-developed theory of the Faradaic impedance with advanced experimental procedures will gradually improve our understanding of a variety of important electrochemical reactions.
While the theories, which describe the Faradaic impedance, ZF, are relatively well-developed, covering different reaction mechanisms,106 diffusion limitations, adsorption, etc., the interpretation of the impedance response of the interface itself is often not easy.107 The difficulties with interpretation are caused by so-called “frequency dispersion”, when the measured values of the double layer capacitance depend on the frequency of the probing ac-signal.32,108–111 These difficulties essentially result from the fact that the representation of the double layer as a simple ideal capacitance is not adequate for numerous electrochemical systems. These discrepancies can, in general, be caused by different reasons, which are not easy to predict. Due to these complexities, the part of the response related to the interface itself is often omitted from detailed considerations and discussions in impedance spectroscopy.107 It should be, however, noted here that the frequency dispersion is not specific only to the double layer capacitance. This phenomenon is frequently observed in ac-investigations of considerably different electrochemical processes, see ref. 112 and 113.
Formally, to account for the frequency dispersion of the double layer, the impedance of the interface is approximated by a constant phase element (CPE): Zint = C′dl−1(jω)−ϕ, where C′dl is the parameter, which is proportional to the double layer capacitance, and ϕ < 1 is the CPE-exponent, which is directly related to the “frequency dispersion”. When ϕ = 1, this corresponds to the pure ideal capacitive behaviour. Introduction of the semi-empirical CPE represents the fact that the double layer and the interface itself do dissipate the energy of the probing ac-signals even in the absence of Faradaic reactions. The fraction of the dissipated energy, DissCPE, in one harmonic cycle depends on the CPE exponent ϕ as follows:112 DissCPE (%) = cos(ϕπ/2)100%(3)
Several hypotheses attempted to explain the frequency dispersion, such as the influence of surface roughness,114–116 an effect of the fractal nature of electrode surfaces,117 a non-uniform current distribution in electrochemical systems,118 the effect of specific adsorption of electrolyte components, etc.119–121 However, most likely, there is more than one factor which contributes to the observed non-ideal behaviour of the electrochemical interface. During the last two decades, there were a number of attempts to address issues related to the frequency dispersion of the double layer and acquire more interpretable information from this part of the ac-response.32,34,109,121 Arbitrarily, one can distinguish at least two types of approaches implemented recently.121 The first approach takes into account a variety of cases due to artifacts produced by the non-uniform distribution of electric fields across the electrode surface or due to dispersion of time constants for solution resistances and the interfacial capacitances. Another approach is based on experiments with well-defined model systems, often using single crystal electrodes to address “kinetic” dispersion effects or effects due to specific adsorption of electrolyte components. Those experiments resulted in important findings that in many cases 2D and 3D structuring effects at the interface, particularly in the double layer, hinder its ability to respond to the ac-probing as an ideal capacitor. Ordering at the surface causes a relatively slow exchange of ions between the outer and inner Helmholtz planes of the double layer and slow reorientation of H2O molecules at the electrode surface, as the interface is close to a local energy minimum.109 The latter fact leads to dissipation of the energy of the probing signal and is responsible for the CPE behaviour.

Fig. 5 illustrates the above-mentioned finding, taking the interface between a single crystal Au(210) electrode and aqueous KBr electrolyte as an example.122
 Fig. 5  Characterisation of the Au(2 1 0)/aqueous KBr electrolyte interface: (a) cyclic voltammograms (solid line: 5 mM; dashed line: 56 mM); (b) dependence of the constant phase element parameter, C′dl, which is proportional to the double layer capacitance on the electrode potential; (c) dependence of the constant phase element exponent on the electrode potential. (○) 5 mM, (▲) 10 mM, (Δ) 18 mM, (♦) 32 mM and (×) 56 mM. Reproduced with permission from ref. 122 © Elsevier 2006. 
Cyclic voltammograms presented in Fig. 5A reveal specific adsorption/desorption of Br− at the surface of the Au(210) electrode. Particularly, the successive peaks observed in the potential region and designated by (B) in Fig. 5A are related to phase transitions in the bromide adsorbed layer. The measured C′dl(E) dependencies shown in Fig. 5B follow the same trend as the cyclic voltammograms. Interestingly, the dependence of ϕ(E) shows that the most non-ideal behaviour of the double layer is observed not at the highest voltammetric currents, where it may be intuitively expected, but in the potential region where phase transitions in the adsorbate layer take place (Fig. 5C).
Another example deals with a Pt(111) single crystal electrode in contact with an aqueous solution of H2SO4.107 Independent experiments using electrochemical scanning tunnelling microscopy (EC-STM)123 reveal the formation of an ordered sulfate adlayer superstructure (√3 × √7) R19.1° with H2O formed at Pt(111) facets at a certain potential region, as schematically shown in Fig. 6A. The disorder/order phase transition that causes the appearance of the sharp peak in the voltammogram shown in Fig. 6A at approximately 0.52 V significantly decreases the CPE exponent (Fig. 6B). Further drastic decrease in the exponent is observed between ∼0.7 V and ∼0.8 V (Fig. 6B), where independent EC-STM measurements detect a second phase transition triggered by further adsorption of the hydroxyl.
 Fig. 6  (A) Typical CV of a Pt(111) single crystal in 0.05 M H2SO4 (dE/dt = 50 mV s−1). (B) The dependence of the constant phase element exponent on the electrode potential. The inset shows the model of the sulfate adlayer superstructure (√3 × √7) R19.1° with H2O formed at Pt(111) facets in H2SO4 in the potential region marked with grey colour. Reproduced with permission from ref. 107 © Elsevier 2013. 
The examples shown above and also reported recently54 in the literature show promise that parameters of the CPE obtained as a function of the electrode potential can be reasonably used to detect phase transitions at the electrode–electrolyte interfaces.107 This would provide better insight into the interface and increase the impact of measurements made by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. However, while the accurate analysis and reliable interpretation of the parameters describing the Faradaic and double layer responses become more and more affordable when the physical model of the system is known, elucidation of the physical models themselves still represents a significant challenge.65 One of the possible ways to increase the efficiency of this procedure is to use independent information obtained during the same experiment by other techniques.
3 Towards more informative approaches in EIS: “hyphenated” techniques
Commonly, well-established analytical techniques have their known advantages, drawbacks and conventional areas of application. In electrochemical research, a variety of methods are available; however, each of these normally deals with a certain class of objects, processes and responses. The everyday practice in electrochemical laboratories creates a necessity to use different techniques sequentially, one-by-one, in order to elucidate the model of the system and get more comprehensive information about it. If the latter can irreversibly change its properties during the experiment, the disintegration between methods is a serious impediment for a detailed characterisation of these complex objects. Two viable approaches are used in modern EIS to overcome these issues. One of them is to combine EIS and non-electrochemical techniques, for instance photocurrent spectroscopy, or various in situ optical spectroscopies (these combinations are outside the scope of this review). Another approach is to combine essentially electrochemical methods to form “hyphenated” electrochemical techniques (i.e. the techniques combining two or more electrochemical methods, which complement each other in one experiment).
While EIS is considered one of the most informative techniques, potentiodynamic cyclic voltammetry (CV)124 is perhaps the most popular electroanalytical method due to its relative experimental simplicity and ability to provide the first overview of the system properties. This method uses a cyclic linear change of the electrode potential as a probing signal and analyses the direct current (dc) flowing through the system. It should be noted here that this approach is not entirely identical to the potentiodynamic EIS discussed in Section 2.2, as the potentiodynamic EIS measurements are not necessarily accompanied by dc voltammetric measurements. The idea to combine the two methods, EIS and CV, and perform the measurements in cyclic electrode potential scans has attracted noticeable attention recently, as it would facilitate the modelling, and enable a more detailed characterisation, of electrode–electrolyte interfaces using both ac and dc responses simultaneously.65,77,105,125,126
Practically, acquisition of a dc voltammogram can be performed during potentiodynamic EIS experiments with relative ease. With a few modifications of the measurement protocol and data analysis, it is normally possible to extract the dc response from the overall current measured during the potentiodynamic scan.48,49,105 As a result, EIS and CV datasets are available simultaneously, describing how the constituents of the electrochemical impedance and direct current depend on the electrode potential in a cyclic potential scan. The ability to perform the parallel measurements in cyclic potential scans is especially important for systems which do not demonstrate the same properties in the forward and backward scans and also in cycle-to-cycle sequences. Possible reasons for this kind of behaviour include alloying, dielectric film growth, electrode surface oxidation, intercalation, etc.

Fig. 7 shows one example of a CV-EIS experimental dataset obtained in a cyclic potential scan for a glassy carbon electrode in a 5.2 mM K3[Fe(CN)6]+1 M KCl electrolyte at the scan rate of 4 mV s−1.105 In Fig. 7, a typical cyclic voltammogram for this system is shown on the front facet, while the impedance spectra obtained in the same cyclic scan are shown behind the CV in the Nyquist coordinate system. It is notable that, while the CV shows considerable differences in the cathodic and anodic scans, the impedance spectra corresponding to the same electrode potential are practically the same, irrespective of the scan direction (due to the reversibility of the redox transformations). Importantly, simultaneous analysis of EIS and CV datasets gives, in this case, a more objective electrochemical picture of the system. EIS helps in elucidation of the interface model, while monitoring the charge passed through the system (obtained from the CVs) compensates possible weaknesses of EIS to detect relatively fast but at the same time irreversible changes at the electrode surface during the experiments. However, even with these opportunities, CV-EIS can still “overlook” some processes which do not contribute to ac and dc responses. The latter fact can seriously complicate understanding of the properties of the interface and lead to incorrect models of the system. Therefore, optimal “hyphenated” techniques are normally necessary, where a few methods are combined to maximally compensate their known disadvantages and reveal all important properties of the system. Consequently, the task for the experimental (electro)analytical chemistry in this case is to combine several techniques to obtain the maximum amount of independent and self-consistent data from the minimum number of parallel measurements.65
 Fig. 7  Cyclic potentiodynamic EIS spectrum of the [Fe(CN)6]3−/[Fe(CN)6]4− system on a glassy carbon electrode recorded together with CV. Electrolyte: 5.2 mM K3[Fe(CN)6]+1 M KCl, dE/dt = 4 mV s−1. The CV shown on the transparent front facet of the parallelepiped and the impedance spectrum belong to the same potential scan. Reproduced with permission from ref. 105 © Elsevier 2005. 
One of the above-mentioned combinations includes simultaneous monitoring of the electrode mass change performed in parallel with CV and EIS measurements. Nowadays, in situ electrochemical gravimetry is performed using the so-called electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance (EQCM)¶. The latter is a sensitive technique capable of measuring sub-monolayer changes in mass on an electrode surface.127 A common EQCM sensor is composed of a piezoelectric quartz crystal, coated with a metal on both sides and built into a high-frequency oscillator. One of the coated crystal faces is exposed to the electrolyte solution and acts as the working electrode. A change in the mass of the working electrode, Δm, leads to a linear change in the resonant frequency of the quartz crystal, Δf, with the relationship: Δf = −CfΔm(4)where Cf is the sensitivity factor, which is a fundamental property of the quartz crystal. The analysis of Δf can therefore be used to elucidate mass loading at the electrode surface during electrochemical processes. It should be noted that the high-frequency QCM resonant circuits (the frequencies are typically higher than 5 MHz) normally do not interfere with the measurements of the electrochemical impedance, which are typically performed at frequencies lower than 100 kHz using liquid electrolytes.
EQCM introduces a new direction to the characterisation of the electrode–electrolyte interfaces with the ability to detect changes of electrode mass within the nanogram range. This method makes the electrochemical investigation more objective, as it is possible to detect mass changes which do not contribute to the current response.128–131 The first realisation of a “hyphenated” technique combining impedance and gravimetric measurements in a cyclic potential scan was reported by Berkes et al.132 and further elaborated to investigate different classes of electrochemical objects and processes.58–61,65 These first experiments have indeed confirmed that analysis of the ac and dc responses, strengthened with gravimetric data, allows a relatively easy elucidation of the physical models and increases the objectiveness of data interpretation.
As an example illustrating the developed approach, Fig. 8 summarises essential information obtained by EQCM-EIS about electrochemical underpotential deposition (UPD)|| and oxidation of atomic layers of Pb on superstructures formed by Ag overlayers on Au electrodes.133 The Pbad/Agad/Au system has shown promising catalytic activity for the electrochemical reduction of NO3−.134 It should be noted here that the latter is of particular importance, as it has been recently pointed out that unbalanced release of nitrates may lead to ecological problems as serious as those caused by the unbalanced CO2 emission.135–138 Therefore, optimisation of the electrode surfaces to improve their activity towards nitrate reduction is important.9,139
 Fig. 8  EQCM-EIS data for Pb UPD on the Agad/Au electrode in 0.1 M HClO4 + 1 mM Pb2+. dE/dt = 0.25 mV s−1, qa in (c) denotes the charge to form a Pb monolayer, and θ is the Pb surface coverage 0 ≤ θ ≤ 1. Note that the particular equations for Rct and AW in the case of surface limited Pb UPD will be different from those given as equations (1) and (2). Reproduced from ref. 133 © 2012 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The catalytic properties of the Pbad/Agad/Au system drastically depend on the Pb surface coverage as well as on the preparation protocol.133,134 Therefore, a detailed in situ characterisation of the electrode–electrolyte interface during the catalyst formation is vital. EQCM-EIS in this case helps in elucidation of the physical model of this complex system and provides unique information about different aspects of the catalyst layer assembly. Fig. 8 shows how (i) the electrode mass, (ii) kinetic parameters characterising “site-specific” deposition of Pb adatoms and (iii) a parameter which is related to the adatom-electrode reversible charge transfer change with the potential.133
The analysis of the massograms shown in Fig. 8A together with the available voltammetric charge obtained in parallel (data not shown) answers several questions. Particularly, it helps in estimation of the real adsorbate surface coverage at each of the electrode potentials, gives information about possible co-adsorption of electrolyte components, other than Pbad, and provides an overview of the system “reversibility” in the forward and backward scans. Together with electrochemical impedance spectra, these data are essential in elucidation of the EEC. Consequently, the parameters of the EEC can be further used to estimate the apparent rate coefficient, kif(θ),45 for Pbad deposition (see the corresponding dependencies and the equation in Fig. 8B). Finally, Fig. 8C shows the dependencies of the Pb adsorption capacitance, Ca, on the potential (see the equation in Fig. 8C). The latter dependencies, being analysed together with other EQCM-EIS data can provide further insight into the adsorbate–substrate and the adsorbate–adsorbate interactions. For instance, integration of the Ca(E) curves gives information about the charge transferred through the interface during reversible Pb adsorption/desorption taking place during ac-probing at a given potential. This charge being compared with actual Δm values gives the charge transferred through the electrochemical interface per adsorbate species at each potential, both in the cathodic and anodic scans. Simultaneous analysis of the information presented in Fig. 8 was used by Huang et al.133 to accurately control the Pbad/Agad/Au catalyst assembly for NO3− electrochemical reduction.
Other recent strategies to construct “hyphenated” techniques with EIS have reported the use of UV/Vis and EIS to study the reactivity of Ag nanoparticles,140 and different combinations of scanning probe techniques with simultaneous impedance measurements, as reviewed in detail recently.141
In summary, the development of “hyphenated” electrochemical techniques based on EIS has shown great promise for a detailed characterisation of the interfaces between metal electrodes and aqueous electrolytes. Their particular power is in more efficient elucidation of the physical models of electrochemical systems. However, this approach is in its infancy. New methodologies for more efficient and objective data analysis and interpretation are still necessary. To date, “hyphenated” EIS techniques have been applied using a few model systems and only several classes of electrochemical processes. Nevertheless, one can foresee that wider application of this approach in the future to investigate other real-world complex systems will rapidly advance the associated methodologies and experimental protocols.
4 Electrochemical impedance microscopies
Recent experimental and theoretical advances discussed in Sections 2 and 3 deal with “global” electrochemical impedance spectroscopy, where the data give averaged information about the whole sample surface. While many surfaces of single crystal electrodes can be considered as uniform, the surfaces of real-world functional materials are frequently non-homogeneous. In order to obtain spatial distribution information of the impedance for these kinds of samples, localized impedance measurements should be performed. This information is particularly important in electrocatalysis,142 bio-(electro)chemistry6,143 and corrosion science.144
One can distinguish several ways to generate the localized impedance data, which have been reported in the literature. Among them are vibrating probe techniques,145–147 microcapillary-based techniques,148 bi-electrode probe techniques,144,149 and techniques based on the application of scanning electrochemical microscopes (SECM).6 Clearly, these methods have their advantages and drawbacks and, therefore, the particular choice of the experimental scheme in localized impedance measurements depends on the properties of the sample and specific goals of the research.
Perhaps, the least demanding experimental protocol, which generates a wealth of information as a result of the relatively simple experiments, is the one based on ac-SECMs. The particular advantage of this method is that spatial distributions of the impedance at different ac-frequencies are available in high x–y resolution as a result of a single 2D scan. Notably, while other electrochemical scanning probe techniques, such as atomic force microscopy or scanning tunnelling microscopy, provide information about the surface,150,151 few methods are capable of giving such information about the properties of the solid–liquid interface as a function of spatial coordinates.142 The ac-SECMs enable visualization of microscopic domains with different interfacial properties at different ac-frequencies.6 Importantly, they are robust and can be used for imaging the samples of significantly different properties, in low conductivity solutions, either in the absence or presence of redox mediators. In ac-SECM experiments, a Pt-disk electrode (typically with diameter ∼10–30 μm) shielded by a cylindrical glass shaft is used as a probe. An important peculiarity of the ac-SECMs is that the sample is not connected to a potentiostat**, which makes it unique for specific applications, such as corrosion studies under real conditions (practically, in this case only the probe can govern the local properties of the sample–electrolyte interface).6

Fig. 9A shows a scheme of the localized ac-SECM experiments with a detailed EEC explaining the measured response. The tip, playing the role of a probing working electrode, is positioned close to the surface and ac-probing signals of different frequencies are applied to the tip. As a result, impedance spectra can be obtained at each of the positions of the tip during just one complete x–y scan.
 Fig. 9  (A) Schematic representation of the localized impedance experiments with a detailed EEC describing the measured response. (B) A simplified EEC describing the contributions of the sample (Csample, Rsample) and the tip (Ztip) responses; an inductance L is necessary to account for the effects of the potentiostat at higher frequencies. WE, RE, and CE denote the working, reference, and counter electrodes, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 142 © American Chemical Society 2013. 
When the tip is close enough to the surface of the sample, the measured EIS response will contain not only information about the tip itself (including contributions of the Pt-electrode–electrolyte interface, e.g. Ctip and Rtip in Fig. 9A), but also information about the “overall” sample–electrolyte interface (e.g. C′sample and R′sample in Fig. 9A), information about the “localized” sample–electrolyte interface (mainly related to the specific area that is covered by the glass shield of the tip, e.g. Csample and Rsample in Fig. 9A) and the electrolyte resistance, which depends on the position of the tip relative to the reference electrode (Rsol in Fig. 9A). Under certain circumstances, when there are no Faradaic reactions at the tip and when the overall impedance related to the whole sample is small, the EEC can be significantly simplified. A simplified equivalent circuit in this case is shown in Fig. 9B. In that EEC, the impedance due to the tip itself and the tip–electrolyte interface, Ztip, is approximated by the CPE.
The dependencies of the measured impedance at different ac-frequencies can be successfully used to visualize some properties of the sample–electrolyte interface. An example shown in Fig. 10 illustrates how the actual ac-SECM picture depends on the applied frequency. From this example, it is evident that for many applications visualization at some selected frequencies would be appropriate. However, potentially much deeper insight into interfacial processes can be achieved by fitting all available impedance data to a physical model (EEC). This additionally eliminates some methodological issues related to the interpretation of the frequency dependence of the actual pictures.
 Fig. 10  3D maps obtained as a result of ac-SECM measurements using a 1 cm2 sample made of 304 stainless steel in 1 mM KClO4 solution, 3D maps are displayed for the selected frequencies, as indicated in the figure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 143 © 2008 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. 

Fig. 11 shows the dependencies of key parameters of the EEC shown in Fig. 9B as a function of spatial coordinates for a model metal sample coated with a polymer protecting film and introduced into an air-saturated electrolyte.142 To initiate some corrosion processes at the sample surface, a small circular defect of ∼220 μm diameter was introduced. The dependencies shown in Fig. 11 were obtained by semi-automatic fitting of more than 1500 localized impedance spectra to the EEC (Fig. 9B) using advanced minimisation algorithms developed recently.93 Essentially, these dependencies visualize spatial distributions of the key parameters that describe the solid–liquid interface, such as the interfacial capacitance (Fig. 11A), the inverse of the charge transfer resistance (which also contains a contribution originating from the electrolyte resistance, Fig. 11B), and also the contribution of the tip itself (Fig. 11C).
 Fig. 11  (A and B) Spatial distributions of the key parameters describing solid–liquid interfaces: (A) the electric double layer capacitance and (B) the inverse of the charge transfer resistance (which also contains a contribution originating from the electrolyte resistance); (C) also shows the contribution of the tip which is dependent on the position of the tip and which is separated by means of the spectra fitting procedures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 142 © American Chemical Society 2013. 
As can be seen from Fig. 11, the parameters obtained after the data fitting are different and depend on the position of the tip. Fig. 11A shows local variation of the interfacial capacitance of the sample. The capacitance values obtained over the sample surface coated with the protective film is close to ∼45 nF, which is close to the expected values taking into account the properties of the sample and the effective dimensions of the probe (tip and glass shield). In approximately the middle of the scanned area, where the defect was introduced, the local capacitance values increase up to 70–100 nF, as a partially exposed metallic surface can directly form a more compact double layer consisting of water molecules, anions and cations from the electrolyte.
The dependence of the inverse of the resistance is shown in Fig. 11B; this contains contributions originating from the electrolyte resistance and the local charge transfer on spatial coordinates, x and y. The measured values outside the area over the artificial pinhole mainly originate from the resistance of the electrolyte, Rsol. The latter varies with the tip position relative to the reference electrode. In the area over the defect, Rsample&sol−1(x,y) increases identifying some electrochemical processes at the exposed metallic surface. The exposed metal surface is electroactive under the ac-perturbation due to slow corrosion, reactions with dissolved O2, etc. Having corrected the dependence shown in Fig. 11B by the contribution from Rsol, unique information about the charge transfer resistance Rct of the local electrochemical processes can be obtained:Rsample&sol−1 (corrected) ≈ Rct−1 ≈ (∂iFaradaic/∂E)where iFaradaic is the local current due to a Faradaic reaction. Finally, Fig. 11C shows the contribution of the capacitive effects of the tip which is also dependent on the position of the tip due to different reasons, such as various contributions from metal cations released by the sample at the defect site to the electrolyte, possible random contamination, different parasitic capacitance, etc. Thus, the example shown in Fig. 11 demonstrates how recent advances in impedance data acquisition as well as spectra fitting and analysis allowed unique insight into the localised behaviour of complex heterogeneous interfaces.
Localized impedance measurements when compared with the “global” impedance of the sample can give a lot of valuable information where bi-electrode probe techniques are used. Particularly, the localized impedance measurements were shown to be helpful in distinguishing the origin of the “global” CPE-behaviour of the interface.152 If the localized impedance measurements reveal no CPE-behaviour, the origin of the global CPE could be attributed to the geometry-induced non-uniform potential and current distributions. In contrast, if the localized impedance measurements show the local CPE-behaviour of the interface, this can be used to extract additional valuable information about the samples, particularly, distributions of conductivity of coatings formed at the electrode surface.152
In general, electrochemical impedance microscopies are becoming more and more popular for numerous applications ranging from electroanalysis to bio-medicine.6,142–144,153–155 With the increased power of actuators and data processing methods, it is clear that these techniques will play an increasingly important role in the future.
5 Summary and outlook
Through the years, analytical techniques based on ac-probing signals have proved to give affordable and efficient means for characterisation of the electrode–electrolyte interfaces. EIS, despite being one of the oldest of these methods, nowadays keeps leading positions in electroanalytical chemistry. However, with new challenges which currently face electroanalysis, electrochemistry and materials science, for instance in the development of efficient functional materials for sustainable energy conversion and provision, this technique increasingly needs development of new advanced experimental protocols and methodologies as well as data analysis procedures.
The current stage in the development of EIS is largely influenced by the fact that the systems under investigation become more complex, while the required level of understanding gradually increases. On the one hand, this leads to a necessity for novel, viable and efficient methodologies for elucidation of physical models of the electrochemical interfaces. On the other hand, as modern EIS experiments become more and more sophisticated, they often require an efficient and accurate analysis of exceedingly large experimental datasets. These two key elements will likely determine the progress in the field of electrochemical impedance spectroscopy in the nearest future.
One straightforward way to facilitate and advance the modelling of the electrode–electrolyte interfaces is to combine EIS with other methods to construct new efficient “hyphenated” electrochemical techniques as well as methods combining electrochemical and non-electrochemical approaches. Additionally, the development of electrochemical impedance microscopies in order to obtain local information on non-homogeneous samples is necessary to make this modelling more objective and accurate.
The development of new universal or special fitting strategies capable of processing hundreds, or even thousands, of spectra automatically is of particular importance. It should be noted that while modern equipment allows the acquisition of large amounts of data fast enough to investigate markedly dynamic systems, their fitting still represents a challenge in many cases. Practically, this means that due to complexities in the analysis of large EIS datasets, the opportunities which are provided by modern equipment are not fully used.
Nevertheless, the history of the methods and the current success of the EIS in solving many important and complicated analytical tasks allow us to be optimistic about the future of the development of this method.
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Dr John Henry (University of Edinburgh) for valuable suggestions concerning this manuscript. Financial support from the Cluster of Excellence RESOLV (EXC 1069) funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft and in the framework of Helmholtz-Energie-Allianz “Stationäre elektrochemische Speicher und Wandler” (HA-E-0002) is gratefully acknowledged.
References
F. Zaera, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 2920 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Mojet, S. D. Ebbesen and L. Lefferts, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4643 RSC .
C. Batchelor-McAuley, E. J. F. Dickinson, N. V. Rees, K. E. Toghill and R. G. Compton, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 669 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Kolb, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 1162 CrossRef CAS .
B. E. Conway, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2002, 524–525, 4 CrossRef CAS .
K. Eckhard and W. Schuhmann, Analyst, 2008, 133, 1486 RSC .
M. T. M. Koper, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 2054 RSC .

          E. Gileadi, Physical Electrochemistry, Wiley, Weinheim,  2011 Search PubMed .
F. Calle-Vallejo, M. T. M. Koper and A. S. Bandarenka, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 5210 RSC .
A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7559 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Gilliam, D. W. Kirk and S. J. Thorpe, Electrocatalysis, 2011, 2, 1 CrossRef CAS .
D. Strmcnik, K. Kodama, D. van der Vliet, J. Greeley, V. R. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 466 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Gasteiger and N. M. Markovic, Science, 2009, 324, 48 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rabis, P. Rodriguez and T. J. Schmidt, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 864 CrossRef CAS .
X. Dominguez-Benetton, S. Sevda, K. Vanbroekhoven and D. Pant, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7228 RSC .
D. Aurbach, B. Markovsky, G. Salitra, E. Markevich, Y. Talyossef, M. Koltypin, L. Nazar, B. Ellis and D. Kovacheva, J. Power Sources, 2007, 165, 491 CrossRef CAS .
K. Leung, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 1539 CAS .
G. Wang, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 797 RSC .
G. Yu, X. Xie, L. Pan, Z. Bao and Y. Cui, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 213 CrossRef CAS .
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 845 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Prodromidis, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 4227 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Daniels and N. Pourmand, Electroanalysis, 2007, 19, 1239 CrossRef CAS .
E. P. Randviir, J. P. Metters, J. Stainton and C. E. Banks, Analyst, 2013, 138, 2970 RSC .
M. Tolba, M. U. Ahmed, C. Tlili, F. Eichenseher, M. J. Loessner and M. Zourob, Analyst, 2012, 137, 5749 RSC .
V. Maurice and P. Marcus, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 84, 129 CrossRef CAS .

          P. Marcus, Corrosion mechanics in theory and practice, in Corrosion Technology, ed. P. A. Schweitzer, Marcel-Dekker, New York, NY, USA, 2nd edn,  2002 Search PubMed .
C. D. Taylor, Int. J. Corros., 2012, 2012, 204640 Search PubMed .
E. P. Randviir and C. E. Banks, Anal. Methods, 2013, 5, 1098 RSC .
D. D. Macdonald, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51, 1376 CrossRef CAS .
B.-Y. Chang and S.-M. Park, Annu. Rev. Anal. Chem., 2010, 3, 207 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gebala and W. Schuhmann, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 14933 RSC .
K. M. Nam, D. H. Shin, N. Jung, M. G. Joo, S. Jeon, S. M. Park and B. Y. Chang, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 2246 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Lasia, in Modern Aspects of Electrochemistry, ed. B. E. Conway and R. E. White, Kluwer/Plenum, New York,  2002, vol. 35, p. 1 Search PubMed .

          M. E. Orazem and B. Tribollet, Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy, John Wiley & Sons, New Jersey,  2008, p. 560 Search PubMed .

          E. Barsoukov and J. R. Macdonald, Impedance Spectroscopy: Theory, Experiment, and Applications,  2005, Wiley, New Jersey, p. 616 Search PubMed .
E. Warburg, Ann. Phys. Chem., 1899, 67, 493 Search PubMed .
P. I. Dolin and B. V. Ershler, Acta Physicochem. U. R. S. S., 1940, 13, 747 CAS .
J. E. B. Randles, Discuss. Faraday Soc., 1947, 1, 11 RSC .
A. Hickling, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1942, 38, 27 RSC .
B. A. Boukamp, Solid State Ionics, 1986, 20, 31 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Boukamp, Solid State lonics, 1986, 18–19, 136 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Macdonald and L. D. Potter, Jr, Solid State Ionics, 1987, 24(1), 61 CrossRef .
J. R. Macdonald, Solid State Ionics, 1992, 58(1–2), 97 CrossRef CAS .
A. I. Mardare, A. Ludwig, A. Savan and A. W. Hassel, Electrochim. Acta, 2013 DOI:10.1016/j.electacta.2013.03.065  , in press.
Z. Kerner and T. Pajkossy, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 47, 2055 CrossRef CAS .
O. L. Blajiev, T. Breugelmans, R. Pintelon, H. Terryn and A. Hubin, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 7451 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Garland, K. A. Assiongbon, C. M. Pettit, S. B. Emery and D. Roy, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 47, 4113 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Pettit, P. C. Goonetilleke, C. M. Sulyma and D. Roy, Anal. Chem., 2006, 78, 3723 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Ragoisha and A. S. Bondarenko, Solid State Phenom., 2003, 90–91, 103 CrossRef CAS .
K. Darowicki and P. Slepski, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2003, 547, 1 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Walters, J. E. Garland, C. M. Pettit, D. S. Zimmerman, D. R. Marr and D. Roy, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2001, 499, 48 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Pettit, J. E. Garland, M. J. Walters and D. Roy, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 49, 3293 CrossRef CAS .
K. J. P. Schouten, M. J. T. C. van der Niet and M. T. M. Koper, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 15217 RSC .
A. S. Bondarenko, I. E. L. Stephens, H. A. Hansen, F. J. Perez-Alonso, V. Tripkovic, T. P. Johansson, J. Rossmeisl, J. K. Nørskov and I. Chorkendorff, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 2058 CrossRef CAS .
C. Désilets and A. Lasia, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 78, 286 CrossRef .
M. Keddam, N. Portail, D. Trinh and V. Vivier, ChemPhysChem, 2009, 10, 3175 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sabot and S. Krause, Anal. Chem., 2002, 74, 3304 CrossRef CAS .
M. Huang, J. B. Henry, P. Fortgang, J. Henig, N. Plumeré and A. S. Bandarenka, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 10994 RSC .
B. B. Berkes, J. B. Henry, M. Huang and A. S. Bondarenko, ChemPhysChem, 2012, 13, 3210 CrossRef CAS .
B. B. Berkes, G. Inzelt, W. Schuhmann and A. S. Bondarenko, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 10995 CAS .
M. Huang, A. Maljusch, J. B. Henry, W. Schuhmann and A. S. Bondarenko, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 20, 92 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Bondarenko, I. E. L. Stephens, L. Bech and I. Chorkendorff, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 82, 517 CrossRef CAS .
E. Briand, M. Zach, S. Svedhem, B. Kasemo and S. Petronis, Analyst, 2010, 135, 343 RSC .
I. M. Hodge, M. D. Ingram and A. R. West, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1976, 74, 125 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Huang, J. B. Henry, B. B. Berkes, A. Maljusch, W. Schuhmann and A. S. Bondarenko, in Lecture Notes on Impedance Spectroscopy. Measurement, Modeling and Applications, ed. O. Kanoun, CRC Press, Tailor and Francis Group, London,  2012, vol. 3, pp. 35–41 Search PubMed .
G. S. Popkirov and R. N. Schindler, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 1992, 63, 5366 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Popkirov, Electrochim. Acta, 1996, 41, 1023 CrossRef CAS .

Handbook of Electrochemistry, ed. C. G. Zoski, Elsevier, 1st edn,  2007 Search PubMed .
G. S. Popkirov and E. Barsoukov, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1995, 383, 155 CrossRef .
J. Schiewe, J. Házı, V. A. Vicente-Beckett and A. M. Bond, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1998, 451, 129 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Ragoisha and A. S. Bondarenko, Electrochem. Commun., 2003, 5, 392 CrossRef CAS .
J.-S. Yoo and S.-M. Park, Anal. Chem., 2000, 72, 2035 CrossRef CAS .
R. Jurczakowski and A. Lasia, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76, 5033 CrossRef CAS .
B.-Y. Chang and S.-M. Park, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79, 4892 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Ragoisha and A. S. Bondarenko, Surf. Sci., 2004, 566–568, 315 CrossRef CAS .
K. Darowicki, S. Krakowiak and P. Ślepski, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 49, 2909 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Bond, N. W. Duffy, S. X. Guo, J. Zhang and D. Elton, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77, 186A CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Schwall, A. M. Bond and D. E. Smith, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1977, 85, 217 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Bond, R. J. Schwall and D. E. Smith, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1977, 85, 231 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hazi, D. M. Elton, W. A. Czerwinski, J. Schiewe, V. A. Vicente-Beckett and A. M. Bond, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1997, 437, 1 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Garland, C. M. Pettit and D. Roy, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 49, 2623 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Ragoisha, E. A. Streltsov, S. M. Rabchynski and D. K. Ivanou, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 3562 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Ragoisha, N. P. Osipovich, A. S. Bondarenko, J. Zhang, S. Kocha and A. Iiyama, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2010, 14, 531 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Ragoisha, A. S. Bondarenko, N. P. Osipovich, S. M. Rabchynski and E. A. Streltsov, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 3879 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Bondarenko, G. A. Ragoisha, N. P. Osipovich and E. A. Streltsov, Electrochem. Commun., 2006, 8, 921 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Bondarenko, G. A. Ragoisha, N. P. Osipovich and E. A. Streltsov, Electrochem. Commun., 2005, 7, 631 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Bondarenko and G. A. Ragoisha, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2005, 9, 845 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Ragoisha, A. S. Bondarenko, N. P. Osipovich and E. A. Streltsov, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2004, 565, 227 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ko and S.-M. Park, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 7260 CAS .
A. Valiuniene, G. Baltrunas, R. Valiunas and G. Popkirov, J. Hazard. Mater., 2010, 180, 259 CrossRef CAS .
K. Darowicki and P. Ślepski, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 49, 763 CrossRef CAS .

          A. S. Bondarenko and G. A. Ragoisha, Inverse Problem in Potentiodynamic Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy, in Progress in Chemometrics Research, ed. A. L. Pomerantsev, Nova Science Publishers, New York,  2005, pp. 89–102 Search PubMed .
A. S. Bondarenko, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2012, 743, 41 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Popkirov and R. N. Schindler, Electrochim. Acta, 1994, 39, 2025 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Popkirov and R. N. Schindler, Electrochim. Acta, 1995, 40, 2511 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Boukamp, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, 1885 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Boukamp, Solid State Ionics, 2004, 169, 65 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sadkowski, Solid State Ionics, 2005, 176, 1997 CrossRef .
A. Sadkowski, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2004, 573, 241 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Schiller, F. Richter, E. Gülzow and N. Wagner, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2001, 3, 374 RSC .
T. Breugelmans, E. Tourwe, Y. Van Ingelgem, J. Wielant, T. Hauffman, R. Hausbrand, R. Pintelon and A. Hubin, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 2 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hirschorn and M. E. Orazem, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, C345 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Tarantola, Inverse problem theory and methods for model parameter estimation, Siam, Philadelphia, 1st edn,  2005, p. 342 Search PubMed .
J. R. Macdonald and C. A. Barlow, J. Chem. Phys., 1962, 36, 3062 CrossRef .
G. A. Ragoisha and A. S. Bondarenko, Electrochim. Acta, 2005, 50, 1553 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Harrington and B. E. Conway, Electrochim. Acta, 1987, 32, 1703 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tymoczko, W. Schuhmann and A. S. Bandarenka, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 27, 42 CrossRef CAS .
T. Pajkossy, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1994, 364, 111 CrossRef CAS .
T. Pajkossy and D. M. Kolb, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 7403 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Brug, A. L. G. Van Den Eeden, M. Sluyters-Rehbach and J. H. Sluyters, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1984, 176, 275 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zoltowski, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1998, 443, 149 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sadkowski, A. J. Motheo and R. S. Neves, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1998, 455, 107 CrossRef CAS .
E. K. Lenzi, L. R. Evangelista and G. Barbero, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 11371 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Kerner and T. Pajkossy, Electrochim. Acta, 2000, 46, 207 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Larsen, D. G. Grier and T. C. Halsey, Phys. Rev. E: Stat. Phys., Plasmas, Fluids, Relat. Interdiscip. Top., 1995, 52, R2161 CrossRef CAS .
T. I. Borisova and B. V. Ershler, Zh. Fiz. Khim., 1950, 25, 337 Search PubMed .
A. Le Mehaute and G. Crepy, Solid State Ionics, 1983, 9–10, 17 CrossRef .
J. Newman, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1970, 117, 198 CrossRef CAS .
T. Pajkossy, Th. Wandlowski and D. M. Kolb, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1996, 414, 209 Search PubMed .
E. D. Bidóia, L. O. S. Bulhões and R. C. Rocha-Filho, Electrochim. Acta, 1994, 34, 763 CrossRef .
M. H. Martin and A. Lasia, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 8058 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Neves, E. De Robertis and A. J. Motheo, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51, 1215 CrossRef CAS .
B. Braunschweig and W. Daum, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 11112 CrossRef CAS .

          R. G. Compton and C. E. Banks, Understanding voltammetry, World Scientific, Singapore,  2007, p. 371 Search PubMed .
C. M. Pettit, P. C. Goonetilleke, C. M. Sulyma and D. Roy, Anal. Chem., 2006, 78, 3723 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Pettit, P. C. Goonetilleke and D. Roy, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2006, 589, 219 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Hillman, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2011, 15, 1647 CrossRef CAS .

          G. Inzelt, Electrochemical Quartz Crystal Nanobalance in Electroanalytical Methods, ed. F. Scholz, Part. II.10, Springer, 2nd edn,  2010 Search PubMed .
H. Uchida, M. Hiei and M. Watanabe, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1998, 452, 97 CrossRef CAS .
G. Inzelt, B. B. Berkes and A. Kriston, Pure Appl. Chem., 2010, 76, 1139 Search PubMed .
A. Sabot and S. Krause, Anal. Chem., 2002, 74, 3304 CrossRef CAS .
B. B. Berkes, A. Maljusch, W. Schuhmann and A. S. Bondarenko, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 9122 CAS .
M. Huang, J. B. Henry, B. B. Berkes, A. Maljusch, W. Schuhmann and A. S. Bondarenko, Analyst, 2012, 137, 631 RSC .
S. Hwang, J. Lee and J. Kwak, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2005, 579, 143 CrossRef CAS .
M. Duca, B. van der Klugt and M. T. M. Koper, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 68, 32 CrossRef CAS .
M. Duca and M. T. M. Koper, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9726 CAS .
M. Duca, M. O. Cucarella, P. Rodriguez and M. T. M. Koper, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 18042 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Figueiredo, J. Solla-Gullón, F. J. Vidal-Iglesias, V. Climent and J. M. Feliu, Catal. Today, 2013, 202, 2 CrossRef CAS .
F. Calle-Vallejo, M. Huang, J. B. Henry, M. T. M. Koper and A. S. Bandarenka, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 3196 RSC .
K. Yliniemi, B. Özkaya, N. Alissawi, V. Zaporojtchenko, T. Strunskus, B. P. Wilson, F. Faupel and G. Grundmeier, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2012, 134, 302 CrossRef CAS .
M. Keddam, N. Portail, D. Trinh and V. Vivier, ChemPhysChem, 2009, 10, 3175 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Bandarenka, K. Eckhard, A. Maljusch and W. Schuhmann, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 2443 CrossRef CAS .
K. Eckhard, T. Erichsen, M. Stratmann and W. Schuhmann, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 3968 CrossRef CAS .
V. M. Huang, S.-L. Wua, M. E. Orazem, N. Pébère, B. Tribollet and V. Vivier, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 8048 CAS .
E. Bayet, F. Huet, M. Keddam, K. Ogle and H. Takenouti, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, L87 CrossRef CAS .
E. Bayet, F. Huet, M. Keddam, K. Ogle and H. Takenouti, Electrochim. Acta, 1999, 44, 4117 CrossRef CAS .
I. Frateur, V. M. Huang, M. E. Orazem, B. Tribollet and V. Vivier, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154(12), C719 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pilaski, T. Hamelmann, A. Moehring and M. M. Lohrengel, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 47, 2127 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Lillard, P. J. Moran and H. S. Isaacs, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1992, 139, 1007 CrossRef CAS .

          O. Magnussen, in Electrochemistry at the Nanoscale, ed. P. Schmuki and S. Virtanen, Springer Science+Business Media, New York,  2009 Search PubMed .

          A. J. Bard and L. R. Faulkner, Electrochemical methods. Fundamentals and Applications, Wiley, 2nd edn,  2001 Search PubMed .
J.-B. Jorcin, M. E. Orazem, N. Pebere and B. Tribollet, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51, 1473 CrossRef CAS .
B. B. Katemann, A. Schulte, E. J. Calvo, M. Koudelka-Hep and W. Schuhmann, Electrochem. Commun., 2002, 4, 134 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gebala, W. Schuhmann and F. La Mantia, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 689 CrossRef CAS .
A. Schulte, S. Belger, M. Etienne and W. Schuhmann, Mater. Sci. Eng., A, 2004, 378, 523 CrossRef .

Footnotes† It should be noted that in some experimental protocols, the probing signal is the current while the measured response is the changing electrode potential. See recent updates of this approach in ref. 27.‡ If the electrolyte is a solid, Zel becomes a complex function of many other specific parameters, which takes into account ionic and electronic conductivities of solid electrolytes and the response of the grain boundaries. Basically, the physical state of the electrolyte largely defines the specific target of the EIS investigation of electrochemical systems. Additionally, in thin cell configurations, the electrolyte impedance is often approximated as a non-ohmic complex function. This is typically used in the EIS of dye sensitized solar cells.§ Outer sphere reactions involve those where no bonds are broken or formed during the reaction, and the electron transfer between the electrode and the electroactive species in the electrolyte proceeds through the interfacial, e.g. water layer. The orientation of the ligands around the central atom does not change during outer-sphere electron transfer.¶ Electrochemical gravimetry in this context should probably be called “electrochemical quartz crystal nanobalance” (EQCN), as its sensitivity is, nowadays, in the nanogram range. The abbreviation “EQCM” is widely used in the literature for historical reasons.|| UPD is the electrochemical deposition of atomic layers at electrode potentials which are more positive than the potential required for the deposition of the corresponding bulk phase. UPD is possible if the first layer of a foreign deposit can be bound to the electrode surface with a greater bonding energy than the bonding in the corresponding bulk phase lattice.** While this issue is critical in corrosion studies, where the measurements should often be performed close to the open circuit voltage (OCV, which is frequently a complex function of time), it complicates the potential control in other electrochemical studies. One of the possible alternatives in this case is to add some potential determining species (e.g. dissolved H2 or O2), which would change the OCV of the sample within a certain range.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
Aliaksandr S. Bandarenka	Aliaksandr Bandarenka received his diploma in Chemistry (2002) and PhD (2005) from Belarusian State University (Belarus). After working as a postdoc at the University of Twente (The Netherlands) and Technical University of Denmark, he became the leader of the group “Adsorption and Electrocatalysis” at the Center for Electrochemical Sciences, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Germany (2010). His research focuses on electrocatalysis, adsorption phenomena at the electrode surface, and developing methods for detailed in situ characterisation of the electrode–electrolyte interface.

 	Fig. 1  A typical impedance spectrum represented using (A and B) Bode plots, (C) a 3D graph and (D) a Nyquist plot.	 

 	Fig. 2  (A) Three-dimensional plot of the real part of impedance as a function of frequency and applied electrode potential for the oxidation of 1 mM ferrocene at a 1 mm diameter platinum disc electrode in acetonitrile (0.1 M Et4NClO4). Electrode potential steps of 10 mV were applied at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 80 © Elsevier 1997. (B) Series of impedance spectra obtained as a function of the electrode potential for a polycrystalline zinc electrode in 0.01 M KOH. The arrow indicates the scan direction. dE/dt = 50 mV s−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89 © American Chemical Society 2012.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) A common scheme used in an experimental investigation of real-world systems. (B) Modelling of the working metal electrode–aqueous electrolyte interface in EIS assumes that under the 3-electrode configuration, the measured impedance spectra mainly contain three contributions: (i) the response of the interface itself (particularly, the double layer response), (ii) the contribution from electrochemical reactions (which is superimposed onto the above-mentioned pure interfacial response) and (iii) the response of the volume of an electrolyte located between the working and reference electrodes. (C) An example of a common physical model (an equivalent circuit) of the metal electrode–aqueous electrolyte interface constructed according to the general rules described in (B): the response of the interface (the double layer) is modelled by an ideal capacitor, Cdl; the response of an electrochemical reaction is modelled by a series combination of the charge transfer resistance Rct and diffusional Warburg impedance, ZW; and the response of a liquid electrolyte is approximated by a resistance Rel. See the text for further details.	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 4  The effect of 1-thioglycerol adsorbed on a Pt electrode on inverse of (a) Warburg coefficient and (b) the charge transfer resistance. Electrolyte: 5.2 mM K3[Fe(CN)6] + 1 M KCl, dE/dt = 1.8 mV s−1. Solid lines were obtained by fitting experimental data to eqn (1) and (2). The potentials are given versus an Ag/AgCl reference electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 105 © Elsevier 2005.	 
DissCPE (%) = cos(ϕπ/2)100%	(3)

 	Fig. 5  Characterisation of the Au(2 1 0)/aqueous KBr electrolyte interface: (a) cyclic voltammograms (solid line: 5 mM; dashed line: 56 mM); (b) dependence of the constant phase element parameter, C′dl, which is proportional to the double layer capacitance on the electrode potential; (c) dependence of the constant phase element exponent on the electrode potential. (○) 5 mM, (▲) 10 mM, (Δ) 18 mM, (♦) 32 mM and (×) 56 mM. Reproduced with permission from ref. 122 © Elsevier 2006.	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) Typical CV of a Pt(111) single crystal in 0.05 M H2SO4 (dE/dt = 50 mV s−1). (B) The dependence of the constant phase element exponent on the electrode potential. The inset shows the model of the sulfate adlayer superstructure (√3 × √7) R19.1° with H2O formed at Pt(111) facets in H2SO4 in the potential region marked with grey colour. Reproduced with permission from ref. 107 © Elsevier 2013.	 

 	Fig. 7  Cyclic potentiodynamic EIS spectrum of the [Fe(CN)6]3−/[Fe(CN)6]4− system on a glassy carbon electrode recorded together with CV. Electrolyte: 5.2 mM K3[Fe(CN)6]+1 M KCl, dE/dt = 4 mV s−1. The CV shown on the transparent front facet of the parallelepiped and the impedance spectrum belong to the same potential scan. Reproduced with permission from ref. 105 © Elsevier 2005.	 
Δf = −CfΔm	(4)

 	Fig. 8  EQCM-EIS data for Pb UPD on the Agad/Au electrode in 0.1 M HClO4 + 1 mM Pb2+. dE/dt = 0.25 mV s−1, qa in (c) denotes the charge to form a Pb monolayer, and θ is the Pb surface coverage 0 ≤ θ ≤ 1. Note that the particular equations for Rct and AW in the case of surface limited Pb UPD will be different from those given as equations (1) and (2). Reproduced from ref. 133 © 2012 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) Schematic representation of the localized impedance experiments with a detailed EEC describing the measured response. (B) A simplified EEC describing the contributions of the sample (Csample, Rsample) and the tip (Ztip) responses; an inductance L is necessary to account for the effects of the potentiostat at higher frequencies. WE, RE, and CE denote the working, reference, and counter electrodes, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 142 © American Chemical Society 2013.	 

 	Fig. 10  3D maps obtained as a result of ac-SECM measurements using a 1 cm2 sample made of 304 stainless steel in 1 mM KClO4 solution, 3D maps are displayed for the selected frequencies, as indicated in the figure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 143 © 2008 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.	 

 	Fig. 11  (A and B) Spatial distributions of the key parameters describing solid–liquid interfaces: (A) the electric double layer capacitance and (B) the inverse of the charge transfer resistance (which also contains a contribution originating from the electrolyte resistance); (C) also shows the contribution of the tip which is dependent on the position of the tip and which is separated by means of the spectra fitting procedures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 142 © American Chemical Society 2013.	 
Rsample&sol−1 (corrected) ≈ Rct−1 ≈ (∂iFaradaic/∂E)
Footnotes
† It should be noted that in some experimental protocols, the probing signal is the current while the measured response is the changing electrode potential. See recent updates of this approach in ref. 27.
‡ If the electrolyte is a solid, Zel becomes a complex function of many other specific parameters, which takes into account ionic and electronic conductivities of solid electrolytes and the response of the grain boundaries. Basically, the physical state of the electrolyte largely defines the specific target of the EIS investigation of electrochemical systems. Additionally, in thin cell configurations, the electrolyte impedance is often approximated as a non-ohmic complex function. This is typically used in the EIS of dye sensitized solar cells.
§ Outer sphere reactions involve those where no bonds are broken or formed during the reaction, and the electron transfer between the electrode and the electroactive species in the electrolyte proceeds through the interfacial, e.g. water layer. The orientation of the ligands around the central atom does not change during outer-sphere electron transfer.
¶ Electrochemical gravimetry in this context should probably be called “electrochemical quartz crystal nanobalance” (EQCN), as its sensitivity is, nowadays, in the nanogram range. The abbreviation “EQCM” is widely used in the literature for historical reasons.
|| UPD is the electrochemical deposition of atomic layers at electrode potentials which are more positive than the potential required for the deposition of the corresponding bulk phase. UPD is possible if the first layer of a foreign deposit can be bound to the electrode surface with a greater bonding energy than the bonding in the corresponding bulk phase lattice.
** While this issue is critical in corrosion studies, where the measurements should often be performed close to the open circuit voltage (OCV, which is frequently a complex function of time), it complicates the potential control in other electrochemical studies. One of the possible alternatives in this case is to add some potential determining species (e.g. dissolved H2 or O2), which would change the OCV of the sample within a certain range.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
