Thermally controlled growth of photoactive FAPbI 3 films for highly stable perovskite solar cells   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2EE01196D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2EE01196D
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 3862-3876Thermally controlled growth of photoactive FAPbI3 films for highly stable perovskite solar cells†

        
          
            Sandy 
            Sánchez
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Stefania 
            Cacovich
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Guillaume 
            Vidon
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Jean-François 
            Guillemoles
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Felix 
            Eickemeyer
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shaik M. 
            Zakeeruddin
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jürgen E. K. 
            Schawe
          
        
      ef, 
      
        
          
            Jörg F. 
            Löffler
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Cyril 
            Cayron
          
        
      g, 
      
        
          
            Pascal 
            Schouwink
          
        
      h and 

        
          
            Michael 
            Graetzel
          
        
      a
aLaboratory of Photonics and Interfaces, Institute of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. E-mail: sandy.sanchezalonso@epfl.ch
bLaboratory for Molecular Engineering of Optoelectronic Nanomaterials, Institute of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
cCNRS, Institut Photovoltaïque d’Île de France (IPVF), UMR 9006, 18 boulevard Thomas Gobert, 91120 Palaiseau, France
dIPVF, 18, boulevard Thomas Gobert, 91120 Palaiseau, France
eLaboratory of Metal Physics and Technology, Department of Materials, ETH Zurich, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland
fMettler-Toledo GmbH, Analytical, 8606 Nänikon, Switzerland
gLaboratory of Thermomechanical Metallurgy (LMTM), PX Group Chair, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Rue de la Maladière 71b, 2022 Neuchâtel, Switzerland
hInstitute of Chemical Sciences and Engineering, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), 1950 Sion, Switzerland
Received 
      12th April 2022
    , Accepted 7th July 2022First published on 7th July 2022AbstractWe employ flash infrared annealing to investigate the phase transition of formamidinium lead triiodide (FAPbI3) thin films for their solar cell applications. Measuring the enthalpy changes of the FAPbI3 composition at different heating rates allows us to calculate an activation energy of 1.8 eV for the black perovskite phase transition. We explore different heating regimes for triggering the phase transformation and analyze the evolution of the microstructure with an empirical calculation of the average crystal growth velocity required to form a compact film on the micron and submicron scales. The films were then optoelectronically and structurally correlated by mapping the typical spherulite microstructure of grain domains, indicating a direct relationship between film homogeneity and higher crystal growth rate. Accordingly, we manufactured highly stable black FAPbI3-based perovskite solar cells using the optimal film crystallization processing parameters, with an annealing time of just 640 ms. We achieve a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 18.5% using the champion device in the absence of any additives, incurring merely a 10% loss in the PCE during maximum power point tracking for 1500 h under full solar intensity exposure of the devices.

Broader context
Metal halide perovskite solar cells have achieved record efficiencies of over 25%, comparable to the mainstream silicon solar cells. However, the processing method and operational stability need further development to bring this technology to commercialization. In this context, we use a flash-infrared annealing method, which is environmentally friendly and rapid processing, without the use of toxic chlorobenzene, to process highly stable perovskite solar cells. Within this work, we reveal the phase stabilization mechanism related to the parameters of the thin film process through thermodynamic, structural, and photophysical analyses. This work represents a step toward reaching the commercialization stage of perovskite solar cells.

Introduction
The next generation of thin-film solar cells is believed to be largely based on perovskite halide materials, with the current disruptive increment of their power conversion efficiency (PCE) compared to other photovoltaic (PV) technologies.1–3 The recent advance in the stability of the manufactured devices, as a bottleneck of this PV technology, shows a promising way to implement future upscaling.4–7 However, processing methods, compositional engineering, and other approaches need further development to compete with the most stable PV devices such as silicon solar cells.8,9 In this effort, the black phase of the FAPbI3 chemical composition has emerged as one of the most promising within the perovskite halide families to boost the PCE and the final stability of the device under operation.1,10–12
FAPbI3 thin films have attractive semiconductor properties for solar harvesting, but the desired perovskite phase is not stable at room temperature, where it converts to a “yellow” δ-non-perovskite phase that is not only photovoltaically inactive but also reduces the PCE by accelerating nonradiative electron–hole recombination. FAPbI3 has been reported to be cubic Pmm by neutron diffraction at room temperature,13 and tetragonal P4mm at 400 K by XRD.13,14 It crystallizes in a face sharing PbI6 cage at room temperature as a non-perovskite, hexagonal yellow phase (δ-phase), in the space group P63mc.13 For perovskite solar cell (PSC) applications, researchers have proposed to use the XRD patterns as the main characterization tool to ascertain the formation of the alpha FAPbI3 phase.15–19 However, observing a black photoactive phase with the characteristic Bragg reflection position peaks does not necessarily prove the presence of a cubic or pseudocubic system. Primarily, it means that a 3D perovskite structure is present, albeit with a lower than cubic symmetry if the peaks do not fit the used refinement model. In such a case, additional measurements, such as advanced transmission electron microscopy (TEM) techniques and intrinsic strain determination and symmetry analysis, would be needed for the unambiguous assignment of the phase.20–23 However, the beam-sensitive nature of the perovskite is also a limitation for these observations, since an electron beam could quickly damage the surface of the material.24,25
Several approaches have been developed to stabilize the FAPbI3 black phase, mainly with compositional engineering by chemically altering the kinetics of structural perovskite formation.10,18,19,26–33,96 Among them, an anion engineering concept was introduced by Jeon et al.34 that uses the pseudo-halide anion formate (HCOO−) to suppress anion-vacancy defects and boosts the performance of PSCs up to an outstanding certified power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 25.2%. All these approaches have demonstrated the enormous potential of this perovskite composition assisted by chemical additives and solvent engineering. Polytype formation and other intermediate non-photoactive phases have to be avoided in the final material in order to obtain a high-performance device.35–39 Nevertheless, it has also been demonstrated that the control of the thermal phase transformation can result in a metastable photoactive FAPbI3 phase.40 For instance, Vanessa L. Pool et al.41 demonstrated for the first time that a controlled approach can stabilize FAPbI3 by applying radiative heat up to 170 °C for 40 s.
But so far, none of these approaches have involved a rapid, controlled, and simplified processing, and in addition a direct observation of material properties related to processing parameters. The fact of having an optically observable microstructure such as spherulite in our work simplifies further structural analysis. It helps in understanding the causes and correlations of the crystal growth and material properties, which also provides insight into possible phenomena at the nanoscale. Therefore, in this work, we revert “again” to our homemade photonic processing system, the so-called FIRA,42–46 to stabilize the FAPbI3 black phase, based on a sustainable, low-cost and short-time processing approach. We are able to stabilize the black phase by the thermally controlled growth of a deposited wet film in a rapid photonic processing of 640 ms. We discover that the heating rate of the radiative pulse is a determinant for the FAPbI3 perovskite phase transformation. Accordingly, by temperature quenching, i.e., an IR radiative pulse that can transmit a high heating rate over a short time, it is possible to reach approximately 120 °C on the surface (top) of the perovskite film that in turn has a similarly fast cooling rate. This fine control of the heating rate via photonic annealing allows shaping of the perovskite films into a compact and homogeneous spherulite microstructure that enables manufacturing of high-performance solar cells.43,46
In this work, we are able to manufacture FAPbI3-based PSCs that reach an PCE of 18.5%, with perovskite film crystallization taking less than 1 s. Furthermore, a long-term stabilized power output (SPO) shows that the cell maintains 90% of its initial PCE for 1500 h, notably one of the most stable for FAPbI3-based perovskite devices reported in the literature. With previous studies also based on the FIRA method, we already reached highly efficient devices,42,45,46 but with this work we elucidate the dependence between the heating rate and the FAPbI3 perovskite phase transformation, which brings a new relationship with the crystal growth parameters. Therefore, our investigations demonstrate the relationship between process parameters for rapid photonic annealing and film performance, via material characterization and further analysis. The key to these analyses is the image-processing of the grain domain shapes which allows us to obtain an empirical relationship between the parameters that govern the crystal growth.47 Hence, we demonstrate that the photonic annealing approach is a powerful method for film phase transition studies (thermodynamic and structural) and the manufacturing of high-performance devices as the subsequent step.48
Results and discussion
1. Phase transformation of FAPbI3 films under rapid annealing
During heating and cooling at specific temperatures, a phase transformation occurs, accompanied by enthalpic and entropic thermodynamic changes.49–51 Phase transitions can emerge via different kinetics pathways, for example, when applying rapid thermal annealing and quenching processes at different rates.52–58 Accordingly, we applied 17 pulse times and respective intensities to the spin-coated FAPbI3 wet films using our IR photonic annealing method.43,59 The IR pulse incident on the film has an estimated power density of 58.3 W cm−2, and rapid cooling was ensured by opening the annealing chamber after light pulsing (see Methods section and Fig. SI1, ESI†). A temperature profile of 8 selected annealed films and their respective phase transitions as a function of the heating rates is shown in Fig. 1(a). Note that the temperature evolution was measured on the surface of the film using an IR pyrometer (see Methods section), and we used the slope of the curve until quenching as a reference for all heating rates for simplification. We identified three main regimes at this step, from the black perovskite and mixed brown phases to the yellow non-perovskite phases, denoting the enthalpic and entropic effect on the phase transitions. The inset of Fig. 1(a) denotes an inhomogeneous yellow FAPbI3 film processed with the lowest heating rate.
 Fig. 1  (a) Temperature profile of the studied films at different heating rates with their respective linear fitting. Inset: Optical image of a film processed with the lowest heating rate. (b) and (c) X-ray diffraction patterns of the selected films labeled with the respective heating-rate slope. (The asterisk over the peaks highlights the δ phase.) (d) Selected FDSC curves performed on FAPbI3 films. (e) Kissinger plot to determine the activation energy of the FAPbI3 phase formation. (f) Schematic of the reaction coordinate for the formation of the black and δ FAPbI3 phases. 
The structural phases of the processed films have been characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD). The XRD patterns of the perovskite and non-perovskite regimes are shown in Fig. 1(b) and (c), respectively; the XRD pattern of the 17 processed films with their respective heating rates is shown in Fig. SI2 (ESI†). The patterns of the black phase regime evidence the absence of both PbI2 and other impurities. The lattice parameters are extracted from a refinement of the XRD patterns with a profile fit (see Table SI1, ESI† and Methods section). To test the phase stability of the black perovskite films processed with the highest heating rate (slope 111.01), they were aged for ten months. XRD measurements were performed every month, Fig. SI3 (ESI†), revealing a stable 3D perovskite phase throughout the entire period.
FAPbI3 has been reported as cubic by neutron diffraction at room temperature,13 but many other authors have claimed an alpha cubic phase by XRD characterization without an in-depth structural and symmetry analysis. In geometrical terms, the Pmm–I4/mcm phase transition has been widely observed in oxide perovskite materials, such as SrTiO3, due to lattice instabilities,60 and in perovskite halides where strain can accumulate in the lattice upon substrate cooling.23,61,62 For instance, Arakcheeva et al.63 have studied the crystal structures of pristine and aged CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3) crystals at 293 K by high-precision single-crystal X-ray diffraction, showing that they are characterized by an identical I4/mcm tetragonal unit cell but different space groups, such as I422 and P42212. For our case, the used refinement model (see the Methods section) does not accurately match the cubic phase to our processed black films (in terms of peak positions); instead, a tetragonal, primitive unit cell matched the peak position best. Besides, small octahedral tilting at room temperature can result in a noncubic structure, as S. Doherty et al.64 have reported a FA+-rich perovskite composition. Therefore, in our work, we will refer to the black perovskite photoactive phase (which fits with a tetragonal state) instead of a cubic alpha phase. The nature of this structural phase and the symmetry-related aspects remain as further work.
Fast differential scanning calorimetry (FDSC) measurements were performed at various heating rates, β (10 °C s−1 ≤ β ≤ 1000 °C s−1), to study the kinetics of the FAPbI3 phase transformation (Fig. 1(d)). Formamidinium iodide (FAI) and PbI2 mixed precursor films were used for dry-film deposition on the sample side of the FDSC sensors (no formed perovskite yet, see the Methods section). The temperature of the endothermal peak, Tp, of the phase formation increases with increasing heating rate. The activation energy, Ea, of the solid–solid transformation is determined by the heating-rate dependent peak temperature from the slope in a Kissinger plot, as shown in Fig. 1(e).65 The diagram reveals a change for the activation energy of the solid–solid transformation at 117 °C. At lower temperatures, Ea is 2.9 eV and at higher temperatures it is 1.8 eV. This result indicates that the formation of the most stable yellow δ phase occurs at low heating rates (below approximately 100 °C s−1) with a high activation energy. At higher heating rates, the metastable black perovskite phase forms.
There is a discrepancy between the critical heating rates of the solid–solid transformation between the FDSC measurement (100 °C s−1) and the measurements using a pyrometer in the annealing chamber (8 °C s−1). The reason is due to the different experimental conditions as explained in the Methods section under the header: “Heating-rate discrepancy”. The discrepancy has also been influenced by a relatively large response time of 150 ms of the pyrometer used. Other than this, both techniques show an agreement in phase identification with increasing heating rate. This phase behavior can be interpreted as a two-step process. At slow rates, the time for the transformation is long enough (in the order of 0.2 s) for a transformation into the stable δ modification. At higher heating rate, the transformation time decreases to approximately 0.05 s and the transformation temperature increases by ca. 15 K, allowing for the modification of the metastable black perovskite. A schema for the reaction coordinate diagram of the transformation into the black and δ phases is shown in Fig. 1(f). The activation energy of 1.8 eV to form the black modification is relatively high compared with data reported in the literature, where different conditions (no rapid thermal annealing) have been studied.66 In this regard, Ahwalat et al.66 reported a low-temperature crystallization pathway for α-FAPbI3, but deposited in a two-step process, with PbI2 first. In our case of a one-step process (from solution precursors), the fast kinetic pathway implies a relatively high activation energy as a potential barrier to reach the final thermodynamic state, conveying a 2D PbI2 octahedral rotation to a 3D perovskite transformation by intercalation of the FA+ cation.48,67,68
2. Black phase regime: heating rate and microstructure evolution
We now focus on the black-phase regime to identify the optimal film microstructure for manufacturing perovskite solar cells and to elucidate the relationship between process parameters and film compactness. For this examination, a total of fourteen heating rates have been analyzed (Fig. SI4, ESI†), which can be identified by the slope of the linear fit and with the faster rate corresponding to 111.01. The optical images taken (at 10× scale) for three slope rates, as shown in Fig. 2(a), denote a dependence of the film coverage (top-view) as a function of the heating rate. Specifically, we quantified the percentage gap ratio (voids) between the grain domain boundaries as a quantity from the optical images to determine the microscale film compactness. The grain domain shape shows a spherulite microstructure (like polymeric materials69,70), possessing a radial texture.71 The average diameter of these micro-shaped grain domains from a nucleation center (spherulite core) is in the order of a hundred of micrometers.
 Fig. 2  (a) Optical images of three different heating-rate processed films. (b) 3D topographic map of films processed at a similar heating-rate than in (a), where Ra represents the average roughness (different films were analyzed in (a) and (b)). (c) The slope of the heating rates as a function of the compact area of the micro-structured films, and (d) an extrapolation to determine the average growth velocity with an indexed microscopy image of an analyzed grain domain. 
Following the previous analysis, Fig. 2(b) shows a 3D topographic map across a 1 mm2 area of the processed films (as shown in Fig. 2(a)) as evidence of the different crystal growth directions forming inhomogeneities. The calculated roughness increases with lower heating rates, from 97.07 nm to 216 nm, denoting a higher in-plane growth velocity for the fastest heating-rate processed film. The evidence of cross-boundary domain gaps can also be discerned on topographic maps for samples referenced with slopes 77.60 and 49.96. More results of the topographic analysis are found in Table SI2 (ESI†). Despite the increase of inhomogeneities at a lower heating rate, there is no evident change in the structural phase among the different annealed films. GIWAXS measurements were performed to detect any texture change in the films. In the images shown in Fig. SI5 (ESI†), no significant texture is observed, nor any evidence of a secondary phase such as PbI2, which is in agreement with the XRD out-of-plane diffraction patterns displayed in Fig. 1(b). Other processed films with a heating rate in the black-phase regime also showed an optical response corresponding to the FAPbI3 perovskite, as shown in Fig. SI6 (ESI†).
To elucidate the relationship between rapid annealing and film microstructure evolution, Fig. 2(c) shows a plot of the compact area distribution as a function of the heating rate following the gap ratio analysis performed in Fig. 2(a). Note that a similar wet film was deposited for all samples onto an FTO/TiO2 electrode (see the Methods section), and we only consider temperature evolution as the changing variable. Heat treatments on polymeric materials have shown that the local growth and rate are dependent on temperature, while the complex pattern of a polycrystalline spherulite morphology is dependent on temporal thermal variations.72,73 Thus, we analyzed 10 films per each of the 14 used heating rates, with a total of 140 processed optical images and the subsequently performed gap ratio analysis (140 data points), which can be found in an open access repository.74 The fitting of the curve (see Table SI3, ESI†) shows an exponential dependence for thermally controlled growth films from the precursor solution (wet film). Next, extrapolation was made to estimate the in-plane growth velocity required to form a compact film (black-phase regime), Fig. 2(d), considering an average velocity for radial growth as the main condition for simplification.
With the assumption of circular grain domains and from the fastest rate (where grain domains are fully compact), we extracted the domain average area from the ten processed images, giving 52.7 ± 5.4 μm as an average radius (see Table SI4, ESI†). Furthermore, the measured time to reach the temperature peak for the fastest rate was 1.12 s (Fig. 1(a)), and taking 150 ms for the pyrometer's delay as a correction factor this results in 0.97 s. We assume that this is the time to grow a 52.7 μm radius of the grain domain. Thus, the average growth velocity (from the nucleation center to the domain boundary) gives 54.3 μm s−1 at the chosen heating rate, as shown in the gray-scale inset optical image of the film in Fig. 2(d). It is important to point out that this rapid solidification occurs out of equilibrium, and considering an average velocity for crystal growth simplifies our empirical approach. We extrapolated the fitted exponential function with a scale factor to give 54.3 with respect to the 111.01 slope value at the 100% grain domain compact area. Accordingly, the right plot of Fig. 2(d) gives us the average growth velocity dependence to form a compact film as a function of the heating rate and under rapid IR thermal annealing, notably in the order of 50 μm s−1.
3. More details on film microstructure: oriented crystal growth and photophysical behavior
The microstructure evolution can also be derived from Fig. 3(a), where the SEM images show the micro-shaped films. As mentioned earlier, in the enlarged image from right to left, the formation of grain micro-domains can be seen, with four radial growth axes and a well-defined small center where the nucleation site begins to grow. Zooming in on one of the quarter areas, we observe a compact internal structure with higher roughness, as previously observed in Fig. 2(b), than that obtained with other methods such as antisolvent crystallization.75 The disorder of these structures has been reported to arise through growth front nucleation, leading to a local random crystallographic orientation, competing for space and concerning while maintaining large-scale isotropy.76,77 To further probe the local properties of such microstructured systems, we performed electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) and time-resolved and continuous wave photoluminescence (PL) mapping in films with three different heating rates, namely by the fitted slope: 111.01, 77.60 and 49.96, as shown in the right, middle and left column of Fig. 3(b)–(d), respectively.
 Fig. 3  (a) SEM top-view images of the crystal growth at different micro-scales. (b) Electron backscatter diffraction (EBDS), (c) decay time composite image, and (d) steady-state emission mapping for three selected films with different heating rates. (The different mappings were not taken at the same film location – except for steady-state PL, but with similar processed films.) 
EBSD maps show that the thin films have a fiber texture 〈111〉‖Z, where Z is normal to the thin film. Careful analysis revealed that the radial directions of nearly all the grains in the spherulites are 〈110〉. The elongated directions of the grains in blue in the EBSD map are the radial directions of the spherulites; they are indexed as the 〈110〉 axes perpendicular to the 〈111〉‖Z fiber texture. A magnified map ×500 and its 〈110〉 and 〈111〉 pole figures are shown in Fig. SI7 (ESI†) to distinguish branching and twist defects and their potential effect on the PL emission. All cases tend to grow along preferred crystal orientations to minimize the surface areas with higher surface energy.78,79 However, there is clear evidence of the increases in inhomogeneities and growth in different directions from the highest to the lowest heating rates, which can generate spikes and voids on the spherulite branch, as previously shown in the 3D topographic map of Fig. 2(b).
The PL of the samples was measured using both time-resolved and continuous wave excitation. In Fig. 3(c), we show the maps of the characteristic decay time for the three samples. We observe that the cores of the grain micro-domains generally show higher decay times, around 500 ns, than the rest of the micro-domain – particularly the “valleys” that have a decay time of around 250 ns (see the dark blue regions in Fig. 3(c)). Moreover, we observe that, for some micro-domains, the decay time is not similar in all its four quadrants (see in the center image). This can be directly linked to the EBSD measurements where some branches have different crystalline orientations but also to the topographic maps in Fig. 2(b). We argue that there are hints that the valley regions are more defective than the core of the microdomains. To do so, we discuss the impact of thickness on the measured decay time in the ESI.† We use a well-known and simple model to link the effective decay time τ to the bulk SRH lifetime τbulk, the local thickness d, and the local top surface recombination S in the case of negligible bottom surface recombination:80  
With this model and the observed typical values for decay times and thicknesses shown in Fig. 3(c) and 2(b) respectively, we suggest that the valleys are not only thinner than the core of the micro-domains, but also more defective.
The continuous wave mappings are shown in Fig. 3(d). The first row corresponds to the emission images at a peak energy of 1.53 ± 0.01 eV (∼810 nm), normalized by each of the maximal intensities of the maps. We observe regions that have higher emissions than others in the same micro-domain. For instance, in the left image, we see an emission reduced in the lower quadrant of the displayed micro-domain. In the right image, we see regions in the space between micro-domains that have a lower emission intensity. These lower intensities of emission could be caused by a local decrease of the thickness and/or by a local increase of the defect density but this measurement alone cannot discriminate between the two. The images for other photon energies are shown in Fig. SI11 (ESI†). In Fig. 3(d), the second row of images corresponds to the ratio between two images: the image of emission at 1.45 ± 0.01 eV divided by the image of emission at 1.53 ± 0.01 eV, i.e. by the first row of images, while in Fig. SI12 (ESI†) we show the same ratio images at different energies. This second row shows regions of each sample that emits around 1.45 eV, taking the local intensity of emission at a peak energy of 1.53 eV as the reference. Brighter regions in these images therefore correspond to regions that have a higher sub-bandgap emission than their darker counterparts. We observe that this below-bandgap emission concerns multiple regions of the sample: inter-domain regions (see the center and right images), and even within a single micro-domain, in the domain-center and near the core (see the left image). The presence of this sub-bandgap emission suggests another photo-active “phase” of the sample with a slightly lower bandgap that seems to be linked with the inter micro-domain space. This photo-active “phase” is unlikely to be a secondary structural phase, as we did not detect any using XRD and GIWAXS measurements.
Thus, we found a correlation between the decay time composite and EBSD mapping, where the growth velocity of the black perovskite phase can determine the highest crystalline region. Some amorphous-low sites increase in the 〈101〉 in-plane direction, with poorer crystallinity and higher void concentration at submicron scales, growing in the out-of-plane radial direction. The recombination velocity could be higher at the isolated grain boundaries, meaning that the film coverage is the main factor for these differences. These analyses indicate a direct relationship between defect-tolerant films and the average velocity of the crystal growth.81,82
4. Fabricating devices and the FAI posttreatment approach
We now focus on manufacturing perovskite solar cells without altering the chemical composition of the FAPbI3 absorber film (i.e., with no extra additives) to demonstrate the intrinsic thermodynamic stability of the processed material. To follow this approach, we choose an FAI solution (2 mg ml−1) deposition posttreatment to the perovskite film surface followed by an extremely short (300 ms) post-annealing step allowing for the diffusion of this extra FA+ cation after deposition (see the Methods section). The posttreatment has been performed in the fastest annealed films (111.01 slope). The PLQY and TRPL measurements of the posttreated and pristine films are presented in Fig. 4(a) and Fig. SI13 (ESI†). The FAI posttreatment shows a PLQY average of 4.2 ± 0.2% and a TRPL decay time of 1273 ± 149.8 ns, whereas the pristine films show a PLQY of 3.4 ± 0.2% and a decay time of 965 ± 106.8 ns (see Tables SI5 and 6, ESI†). These results demonstrate a passivation effect on the surface of the film by the posttreatment procedure, with a high optical film quality comparable to the best antisolvent-made films reported in the literature.11,34,83,84 This can be seen in Fig. 4(b), where the optical images of the pristine and posttreated films show a highly compact and homogeneous grain-domain and with a slightly stronger optical abortion for the second one as expected. There are no microscopically visible changes in the spherulite grain domain on both images, and any passivation effects occur at lower dimensional scales. Hence, the perovskite film microstructure is good enough for our PV applications.
 Fig. 4  (a) Absolute spectral photon flux ΦPL(E) measurements of perovskite films on TiO2/FTO electrodes at 1 sun excitation from which the photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQY) is determined (up) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) measurements (down), and (b) optical images taken in the transmission mode (left) and its optical absorption spectra (right), for the pristine and pretreated FAPbI3 films (both measurements were taken on the same film site). (c) Statistical analysis of the JV parameters of devices subjected to two different heating rates during films processing and for a third one that underwent posttreatment with FAI. All three devices had a similar architecture. (d) JV curves of the champion device using an FAI posttreatment procedure. The inset shows the MPP tracking of the device within the first 30 s under ambient air and the collected parameters in the backward-direction scan in the indexed table. (e) IPCE and integrated Jsc curves of the champion device. (f) Cross-sectional SEM image of the manufactured solar cell with perovskite film posttreatment as the champion device. 
Note that the perovskite/HTM interface could be improved by choosing the art of passivation agents and interfacial engineering, which remains a further step for subsequent studies. However, through this work, it is important to investigate the intrinsic stability of the perovskite material and how this affects the stability of the manufactured device. To further discern pretreated films compared to different heating-rate processed ones, we manufactured devices with conventional p–i–n junctions. Thus, Fig. 4(c) shows a statistical distribution of the PV parameters, collected to 30 manufactured PSCs with two heating rates and the FAI posttreatment approach. Overall, the films processed with the lowest heating rate (77.60 slope) have poor performance, as expected from the previous analysis, where inhomogeneities and sub-bandgap states (at the inter-micro domain) can create non-radiative recombination centers. Notably, the Voc (mV) values increase from an average of 859.80 ± 28.91, 965.812 ± 15.45, and 978.65 ± 15.30 and FF (%) of 50.61 ± 2.33, 63.28 ± 3.28, and 69.25 ± 5.35 for 77.60 and 111.01 heating-rate slopes and pretreated films, respectively. These parameter values have the highest difference between the three groups, which agrees with the lack of coverage previously discussed, and the high film surface roughness damaging the HTM interconnection.
Therefore, the JV curve of the obtained champion cell denotes a PCE of 18.5%, which is relatively high for the state of the art,15,16,18,19 considering no additional additives or interfacial engineering procedures, Fig. 4(d), and an stabilized power output (SPO) of over 16%, denoting a more realistic and stable device behavior.30 The IPCE in Fig. 4(e) demonstrates the high Jsc observed in the JV curve, with quite balanced photoconversion for all absorbed wavelengths and in agreement with the optical bandgap shown in the optical measurements (Fig. 4(a) and (b)). Finally, the SEM cross-sectional image (Fig. 4(f) shows a homogeneous and monolithic perovskite film with a thickness of ∼700 nm. A high visible roughness can also be seen at the HTM interface compared to films made with anti-solvent and typical of rapid IR-annealed perovskite materials, as shown above on the 3D topographic map (Fig. 2(b)).43
5. Testing the operational stability of the devices
We examine first the SPO measurement taken under MPPT tracking to the posttreated FAPbI3 films and based on PSCs, Fig. 5(a), for 1500 h at 1 sun, 25 °C, and under a continuous flow of N2 gas. The evolution of the JV parameters and the SPO values can be seen in Fig. SI14 and 15 (ESI†), respectively, while Fig. SI16 (ESI†) shows a comparison between the pristine and the 1500 h stressed plus overnight JV curves. The plot shows a slight increase of the curve for the first 100 h, which has been distinctive for the rich FAPbI3-based perovskite and FIRA-processed devices. A light-soaking effect might be related to the relatively poor HTM interconnection, as can be seen as well in the SPO measured for the champion device in Fig. 4(d). For instance, C. Lowell Watts et al.85 show an increase in photoconductance after 18 h of light-soaking, with materials structure unaffected but likely due to multiple competing factors. Afterward, there is a decrease in the PCE till 900 h, where a step remains almost constant in the efficiency till 1000 h, to finally decrease till 1500 h, losing in total 10% of the initial PCE. Besides, we emphasize the similar FAPbI3 PSC to 4 suns and 50 °C under more extreme conditions, also in an inert atmosphere and in an MPPT scan for 500 h. The result displays a decrease of 28% of their initial efficiency, which still denotes a robust photothermal behavior of the FAPbI3 films.
 Fig. 5  Stability measurements of the manufactured solar cells. (a) SPO for 1500 h of the champion FAPbI3-based PSCs (1 sun), and 500 h scan for similar processed PSCs (4-fold concentrated sun) under different atmospheric conditions. (b) Normalized PCE of 9 measured devices with three different perovskite compositions, and (c) pristine and stressed optical images of the perovskite grain domain in the active area of the solar cell. 
Overall, these results show a highly stable device, among the best reported for pure FAPbI3 based PSCs in the absence of passivation agents (that can slightly modify the material structure).30,86–89 A similar trend has been observed with other FAPbI3-based devices, as shown in the normalized PCE for three of them in Fig. 5(b). Furthermore, we compare FAPbI3 with other perovskite absorber compositions in a similar p–i–n heterojunction to validate how robust this material is. This comparison can be seen in Fig. 5(b), where two more compositions, MAPbI3 and FA0.95Cs0.05PbI3 (all FIRA processing), were subjected to a medium-term (500 h) stability measurement. The plot shows that only MAPbI3-based devices decrease continuously, losing a 40% average of the initial PCE, unlike the devices based on FAPbI3, with losses of less than 9% of the initial PCE. As shown in Fig. 5(c), optical images were taken in the same grain domain for pristine and stressed samples (see Fig. SI17, ESI†) to confirm any evidence of film degradation, only displaying degraded micro-spots in the MAPbI3 samples, as expected.
Concluding remarks
In this work, we identified three heating rate regimes, unveiling the FAPbI3 phase transition from black to yellow film formation. The fast heating rate and temperature quenching play a fundamental role in the thermodynamic change of the final product, where thermal kinetics pathways are key to discovering metastable phases, hidden from most traditional crystallization procedures such as the antisolvent. For the identified black regime, the rapid heating rate allows the growth of a compact morphology required for defect-tolerant FAPbI3 films and, consequently, high-performance solar cells with low non-radiative energetic losses.
Therefore, two mechanisms have been investigated and correlated, the kinetics and activation energy, to obtain the perovskite black phase and the crystal growth velocity, and thus to achieve compact and topographically homogeneous perovskite solid films from solution precursors, deposited as wet film. We found that there is a direct relationship between average growth velocity and microstructured compact film area formation. This resulted in an average velocity of the order of 50 μm s−1 to form a compact film under rapid IR photonic annealing. Materials property correlations were revealed by processing films at three different heating rates in combination with spatially and temporally resolved PL mapping and EBSD observations. From this data, it can be inferred that the fastest heating rate can mitigate inhomogeneities during crystal growth dynamics. Also, sub-bandgap states related to defects generated during the crystal growth at a lower heating rate seem to be acting as non-radiative charge carrier recombination centers.
We next manufactured PSCs with the best produced films, and analyzed their PV parameters and long-term stability, comparing them with other perovskite compositions. The champion cell achieved a PCE of 18.5%, with a stabilized power output (SPO) of 16.5% under MPPT scan conditions (ambient air, AM 1.5 simulated spectrum). This is one of the best antisolvent-free (crystallization procedure) results reported in the literature so far for the pure FAPbI3 composition and also considering the rapidness of the process.90 The long-term SPO performed at 1 sun, under a N2 atmosphere at 35 °C in an MPPT scan, shows losses of less than 10% of the pristine PCE after 1500 h of measurement. This is also in between the best results reported for pure FAPbI3-based PSCs.
Overall, the high average roughness, in the order of 100 nm, directly affects the PCE of the devices, but not necessarily the long-term stability, which has also the potential to be improved. Hence, we conclude that interfacial engineering and passivation (bulk and surface) are necessary to increase the efficiency of fabricated solar cells, suppressing ion diffusion and recombination losses in perovskite film vacancies and at the HTM interface. Regardless, revealing the thermodynamic mechanism of FAPbI3 perovskite phase stabilization and the kinetics of the phase transformation is a step forward to improve long-term stability in high-performance PSCs (stable enough for photovoltaic applications). Furthermore, photonic annealing demonstrates that an appropriate thermal control of crystal growth paves the way for rapid processing of thin-film absorbers to fabricate high-performance PSCs.
Methods
Perovskite device preparation
Photovoltaic devices were fabricated on FTO-coated glass (Pilkington NSG TEC™). The substrates were cleaned using a Hellmanex solution (2% in water), followed by 30 min sonication in a similar Hellmanex 2% water solution, 15 min sonication in IPA, and 5 min of oxygen plasma etching. Then, 30 nm thick TiO2 compact layers were deposited onto FTO by spray pyrolysis at 450 °C from a precursor solution of titanium diisopropoxide bis (acetylacetonate) in anhydrous ethanol and acetylacetone. After spraying, the FTO substrates were left at 450 °C for 5 min before cooling to room temperature. A mesoporous TiO2 layer was deposited by spin-coating for 10 s at 4000 rpm with a ramp of 2000 rpm, using a 30 nm particle size TiO2 paste (Dyesol 30 NR-D) diluted in ethanol to 75 mg ml−1, to produce 150–200 nm thick mesoporous layers. After spin-coating, the FTO substrates were dried at 100 °C for 10 min, and the films were annealed using a programmable hotplate (2000 W, Harry Gestigkeit GmbH) to crystallize TiO2 at 450 °C for 30 min under dry air flow.
The mixed A-cation hybrid perovskite precursor solution was deposited from a precursor solution containing FAI (1.2 M), PbI2 (1.4 M), and CsI (0.21 M) in anhydrous DMF:DMSO (from Merck) 3:1 (v:v). All the organic salts were acquired from Greatcell Solar, while TCI provided lead halides and Merck provided DMSO and DMF solvents. The hybrid perovskite precursor solutions were deposited from a precursor solution containing FAI and PbI2 (1.5 M), in anhydrous DMF/DMSO 3:1 (v/v).
A FIRA method for perovskite thin-film sintering
The films made by the FIRA method include spin-coating of the perovskite solution in a single step at 4000 rpm for 10 s. The substrates were then IR irradiated with a 640 ms pulse in the FIRA oven, pulling them out immediately after the heating. The films were then placed onto a hotplate at 100 °C for 15 min to complete the solvent removal. FIRA processing was carried out in a glovebox filled with a N2 atmosphere. The FIRA engineering setup is reported elsewhere.43
FAI posttreatement procedure, HTM and ohmic contact deposition
A solution containing 2 mg ml−1 formamidinium iodide in isopropanol solvent was dropped onto the perovskite film with a waiting time of 5 s prior to spin coating. Afterward, a 300 ms pulse was applied by FIRA sintering (IR irradiation), and then the films were placed onto a hotplate at 100 °C for 25 min for the complete solvent removal. Immediately after cooling the perovskite films, a spiro-OMeTAD (Merck) solution (70 × 10−3 M in chlorobenzene) was deposited by spin-coating at 4000 rpm for 20 s. Spiro-OMeTAD was doped with Li-TFSI (Sigma Aldrich) and 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP, Sigma-Aldrich). The molar ratios of the additives to spiro-OMeTAD were 0.5 and 3.3 for Li-TFSI and TBP, respectively. Finally, an 80 nm thick gold layer was evaporated on the top of the film using a Leika system, in a vacuum of 10−4 Pa.
Photovoltaic device testing
For photovoltaic measurements, a solar simulator from ABET Technologies (Model 11016 Sun 2000) using a xenon arc lamp was used, and the solar cell response was recorded using a Metrohm PGSTAT302N Autolab. The intensity of the solar simulator was calibrated to 100 mW cm−2 using a silicon reference cell from ReRa Solutions (KG5 filtered). J–V curves were measured at the reverse and forward biases at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1; this slow scan rate was used in all JV measurements to minimize hysteresis effects. A black, non-reflective metal mask with an aperture area of 0.1024 cm2 was used to cover the active area of the device. In this way, the active area of the devices was fixed avoiding artifacts produced by the scattered light. The IPCE was measured using a commercial apparatus (Arkeo-Ariadne, Cicci Research s.r.l.) based on a 300 W Xenon lamp and able to acquire the spectrum from 300 to 1100 nm with 2 nm of resolution. It was recorded as a function of the wavelength at a constant white light bias of approximately 5 mW cm−2 supplied by an array of white-light emitting diodes. All measurements were conducted using a non-reflective metal mask with an aperture area of 0.1024 cm2 to cover the active area of the device and avoid light scattering through the sides.
The solar cell current transient dynamics (potentiostatic) and the maximum power point tracking data were measured under 1 sun equivalent white LED illumination using an SP300 biologic potentiostat. The maximum point tracking was performed using a home-developed program, which would keep the devices at a maximum power point by creeping oscillation in voltage and which would measure a full J–V curve every 10 min. The devices were placed inside an in-house-developed airtight sample holder, which allowed them to be kept under an inert, nitrogen atmosphere. Additionally, the backside metal electrode of the devices was placed against a Peltier element, which, with the use of a PID controller, would keep the actual temperature of the device at 25 °C regardless of the illumination or ambient temperature.
Materials characterization
Scanning electron microscopy was carried out using a Tescan MIRA 3 LMH with a field emission source operated at an acceleration voltage of 10 kV. Film X-ray diffraction was performed in reflection spin mode using an Empyrean system (Theta–Theta, 240 mm) equipped with a PIXcel-1D detector, and Bragg–Brentano beam optics (including a hybrid monochromator). GIWAXS images were collected at an incident angle of 2° using a Bruker Discover Plus equipped with a rotating anode and a Dectris Eiger2 500 K detector operating in the 2D mode. Collimating optics of 300 microns were used to select the beam shape. Optical transmission measurements were performed using a Zeiss Axio-Scope A1 Pol with Zeiss EC Epiplan-Apochromat 10×, 50× and 100× objectives and a Xenon light source (Ocean Optics HPX-2000). For spectroscopic measurements, an optical fiber (QP230-2-XSR, 230 μm core) collected the transmitted light from the sample. The spectra were recorded using a spectrometer (Ocean Optics Maya2000 Pro). All spectra were obtained at room temperature in transmission. The TRPL spectra were recorded using a LifeSpec II TCSPC (Edinburgh Instruments) with 506 nm excitation wavelength and stopping at 104 counts. The photon flux per pulse was 1.17 × 1010 photons per cm2.
EBSD maps were acquired using a field emission gun (FEG) scanning electron microscope (SEM) Gemini450 from Zeiss equipped with a CMOS Symmetry EBSD camera from Oxford Instruments, with an acceleration voltage of 25 kV and a current of 20 nA. Ten Kikuchi patterns per point were captured in the “sensitivity mode” and averaged to determine the orientations. The patterns were indexed with the FAPbI3 alpha cubic structure space group: Pm3m, lattice parameter a = 6.31 Å, cell volume: 251 Å3. The EBSD maps and pole figures were treated with the AZtecCrystal software from Oxford Instruments.
FDSC measurements were performed using a Flash DSC 2+ (Mettler-Toledo) with a UFH 1 sensor and a TC100 cooler (Huber).91,92 The sensor support temperature was set to 15 °C to exchange the sensors without waiting time. Due to the cavity of the sensor, the samples were spin coated on the backside of the sensor on the membrane of the chip calorimeter's sample side. After the measurement, the sensor was washed with a DMF solvent, dried and cleaned with UV plasma for a fresh sample preparation. A potential systematic influence of thermal history on the measurement results was avoided by performing non-sequential measurements. The temperature of the perovskite film in the annealing chamber was measured using a CT-SF22-C3 Miniature Infrared Pyrometer and a germanium window for IR transmission. The temperature range is −50 to 975 °C with an optical resolution of 22:1, a spectral range of 8–14 μm, a focus of 0.6 mm at 10 mm distance, a response time of 150 ms, a temperature resolution of 0.1 °C, a system accuracy of ±1% or ±1 °C, an emissivity/gain of 0.100 to 1.100, and a transmissivity/gain of 0.100 to 1.100. The distance from the front edge of the CT-SF22 device to the measurement object is 30 mm and this distance from the spot size has a diameter of 5 mm. A PID (proportional-integral-derivative) regulation mode was set to control the power of the lamps, where the output signal taken using a pyrometer will oscillate around the set point with a decaying sinusoidal amplitude. A LabVIEW GUI adjusts the PID values for the larger sinusoidal amplitude ending in shorter ones to guarantee a stable system.
For the profilometry analysis, we used a DektakXT® stylus surface profiler. Being available with an automatic X–Y and theta stage, it provides a step-height repeatability of 5 Å. The stylus is linked to a linear variable differential transformer, and the Vision64 application calculates and displays the results of user-selected analytical functions for measuring the surface texture and other parameters to characterize the profile data. The measurement was set up with a high-resolution range of 6 μm in the Z-axis, 0.07 μm s−1 of data points, 1000 traces and a stylus radius of 7 μm.
The TR-FLIM imaging system records a luminescence intensity signal along three dimensions {x, y, t} after a pulsed excitation. Wide-field illumination imaging was realized. The system is composed of a pulsed laser Talisker (λ = 532 nm, f = 40 kHz, fluence of 1011 photons per cm2 per pulse), an intensified electron-multiplied camera CCD (em-ICCD, PIMAX4, Princeton Instruments) and a home-built opto-mechanical excitation-collection set-up. The camera gating time was varied, and the integration time and the complete list are described in the ESI.† The photoluminescence was collected through a ×50 (Olympus) long working distance objective lens. The samples were measured using a cryostat at room temperature with a constant N2 flux input. The PL is filtered through a long-pass filter (DMLP650R, Thorlabs) for the PL images, while the filter is taken out to observe the laser reflection images. Acquisitions are post-treated using Matlab. The maps of Fig. 3 are composite maps merging two images: the image of the laser reflection that shows the morphology of the sample and the image of the decay time itself, both of which are displayed separately in Fig. SI8 and SI9 (ESI†). More details on the merging procedure and on the measuring procedure are given in the ESI.†
The hyperspectral imaging system records a luminescence intensity signal along three dimensions {x, y, λ}. The set-up is composed of a home-built microscope with Thorlabs optomechanical elements, a 2D band pass filtering system from the company Photon Etc with 2 nm resolution, and a 1 Mpix silicon-based CCD camera PCO1300. The sample was illuminated via a blue LED (λ = 405 nm) through an infinity-corrected ×50 Nikon objective with a numerical aperture of 0.6, and the luminescence was collected through the same objective. The excitation beam and luminescence signals are separated with an appropriate Thorlabs dichroic beam splitter (DMLP 495) and filters (FESH 450, FELH 450). The 2D luminescence signal is corrected for each pixel of the sensor from the spectral transmissions along all the optical paths, from the read noise and dark current noise of the camera. All the acquisitions were performed under nitrogen atmosphere. Acquisitions are posttreated using Matlab.
Heating-rate discrepancy
For FDSC, the sample was placed on the silicon oxide side of a free-standing silicon nitrate/silicon oxide membrane with an incorporated electrical heater. The heat transfer occurs by conduction via a relatively large solid–solid contact area. However, in the case of IR annealing heat transport takes place due to irradiation (see the Methods section). Here, the wet film does not absorb the IR light, and only the FTO is able to quickly heat up the film.40,42 The real heating rate can also be influenced by the delay time for the full glow of the halogen lamp (the filament has to reach a high temperature, Fig. SI1, ESI†) and the low thermal conductivity of the perovskite material (from which the temperature was measured).93–95
Image processing
Using MATlab scripts we segmented batches of images and processed them later for acquiring the statistical distribution of the micro-shaped films. These analyses were performed using a two-step image processing; first a gray-scale image batch conversion and second a binary color threshold procedure. The results can be found in an open access repository: https://zenodo.org/record/5500420#.Yg-f_OiZOUk.
Lattice parameter calculation
Data were fitted using the Le Bail method using Topas 5. The zero-shift of the detector was previously determined using a standard, and the vertical sample displacement was refined along with the background. The zero-shift of the detector was also previously determined using a standard, and the vertical sample displacement was refined along with the background. A Pmm model was tested but observed peak positions did not match well. A tetragonal distortion (primitive unit cell) provided a better fit, as did the space group I4/mcm in which MAPbI3 crystallizes in, albeit not perfect. Furthermore, the octahedral tilts that tend to lower the symmetry in perovskites at certain tolerance factors are absent in FAPbI3, and it is unlikely that such tilts, which are commonly governed by A-cation size effects, would be introduced by strain due to the substrate mismatch. A primitive tetragonal cell appears more likely in this respect. It is assumed that straining is not fully understood and forms part of a separate study.
Author contributions
S. S. conceived the idea, designed the project, carried out investigations of materials and devices, analyzed the data, and coordinated the project. S. C., G. V., C. C., J. S. and P. S. were also involved in initial scientific discussions and data analysis. J. S. performed the FDSC measurements and analyses. S. C. and G. V. performed the steady-state and time-resolved PL measurements and analyses. C. C. performed the EBSD measurements and analyses. P. S. performed the structural measurements and analyses of the films. F. E. performed the PLQY measurements and analyses. M. G., S. Z., J. F. G. and J. L. were involved in scientific discussions and interpretations of the results. S. S. wrote the manuscript with contributions from all authors.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
S. S. acknowledges the projects WASP (Horizon 2020) and A3P (SNF) which have received funding from the European Union's Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Programme under grant agreement no. 825213 and from the Swiss National Science Foundation with project number 40B2-0_203626, respectively. S. C. would like to acknowledge funding from the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie Skłodowoska-Curie Grant No. 845612. We thank Prof. Michel Rappaz for his support and discussions on solidification.
References

          S. Ahmad, S. Kazim and M. Grätzel, Perovskite Solar Cells: Materials, Processes, and Devices, John Wiley & Sons,  2021 Search PubMed .

          K. Fu, A. W. Ho-Baillie, H. K. Mulmudi and P. T. T. Trang, Perovskite Solar Cells: Technology and Practices, CRC Press,  2019 Search PubMed .
P. Kwaśnicki, III Generation solar cell., intechopen, 2021 DOI:10.5772/intechopen.95289 .
S. Emami, L. Andrade and A. Mendes, Recent progress in long-term stability of perovskite solar cells, U. Porto J. Eng., 2018, 1, 52–62 CrossRef .
B. G. Krishna, B. Gopal Krishna, D. S. Ghosh and S. Tiwari, Progress in ambient air-processed perovskite solar cells: Insights into processing techniques and stability assessment, Sol. Energy, 2021, vol. 224, 1369–1395 CrossRef .
A. E. Shalan, Challenges and approaches towards upscaling the assembly of hybrid perovskite solar cells, Mater. Adv., 2020, 1, 292–309 RSC .
D. Jang, F. Yang, L. Dong, C. J. Brabec and H. Egelhaaf, Upscaling of perovskite photovoltaics, Perovskite Sol. Cells, 2021, 453–496,  DOI:10.1002/9783527825790.ch14 .

          J. K. Roy, S. Kar and J. Leszczynski, Development of Solar Cells: Theory and Experiment, Springer Nature,  2021 Search PubMed .

          N.-G. Park, M. Grätzel and T. Miyasaka, Organic–Inorganic Halide Perovskite Photovoltaics: From Fundamentals to Device Architectures, Springer,  2016 Search PubMed .
K. M. M. Salim, 
            et al., Boosting long-term stability of pure formamidinium perovskite solar cells by ambient air additive assisted fabrication, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 3511–3521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Krishna, 
            et al., Nanoscale interfacial engineering enables highly stable and efficient perovskite photovoltaics, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 5552–5562 RSC .
H. Lu, 
            et al., Vapor-assisted deposition of highly efficient, stable black-phase FAPbI perovskite solar cells, Science, 2020, 370, 6512,  DOI:10.1126/science.abb8985 .
M. T. Weller, O. J. Weber, J. M. Frost and A. Walsh, Cubic perovskite structure of black formamidinium lead iodide, α-[HC(NH2)2]PbI3, at 298 K, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3209–3212 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Stoumpos, C. D. Malliakas and M. G. Kanatzidis, Semiconducting tin and lead iodide perovskites with organic cations: Phase transitions, high mobilities, and near-infrared photoluminescent properties, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 9019–9038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, 
            et al., Achieving reproducible and high-efficiency (>21%) perovskite solar cells with a presynthesized FAPbI3 powder, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 360–366 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, 
            et al., Spontaneous low-temperature crystallization of α-FAPbI3 for highly efficient perovskite solar cells, Sci. Bull., 2019, 64, 1608–1616 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, 
            et al., Room temperature formation of semiconductor grade α-FAPbI3 films for efficient perovskite solar cells, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2020, 1, 100205 CrossRef .
J. Xue, 
            et al., Surface ligand management for stable FAPbI3 perovskite quantum dot solar cells, Joule, 2018, 2, 1866–1878 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, 
            et al., Polymerization stabilized black-phase FAPbI3 perovskite solar cells retain 100% of initial efficiency over 100 days, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 419, 129482 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, 
            et al., Strain in perovskite solar cells: Origins, impacts and regulation, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2021, 8, nwab047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhan, 
            et al., Elastic lattice and excess charge carrier manipulation in 1D–3D perovskite solar cells for exceptionally long-term operational stability, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, e2105170 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhu, 
            et al., Strain engineering in perovskite solar cells and its impacts on carrier dynamics, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Liu, 
            et al., Strain analysis and engineering in halide perovskite photovoltaics, Nat. Mater., 2021, 20, 1337–1346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Jeangros, 
            et al., In situ TEM analysis of organicinorganic metal-halide perovskite solar cells under electrical bias, Nano Lett., 2016, 16(11), 7013–7018,  DOI:10.1021/acs.nanolett.6b03158.s001 .

          M. Pazoki, A. Hagfeldt and T. EdvinssonCharacterization Techniques for Perovskite Solar Cell Materials, Elsevier,  2019 Search PubMed .
H. Chen, 
            et al., Advances to high-performance black-phase FAPbI3 perovskite for efficient and stable photovoltaics, Small Struct., 2021, 2, 2000130 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, 
            et al., Stabilization of highly efficient and stable phase-pure FAPbI perovskite solar cells by molecularly tailored 2D-overlayers, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 15688–15694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Masi, A. F. Gualdrón-Reyes and I. Mora-Seró, Stabilization of black perovskite phase in FAPbI3 and CsPbI3, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1974–1985 CrossRef CAS .
S. Akin, E. Akman and S. Sonmezoglu, FAPbI3-based perovskite solar cells employing hexyl-based ionic liquid with an efficiency over 20% and excellent long-term stability, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2002964 CrossRef CAS .
D. Barrit, 
            et al., Room-temperature partial conversion of α-FAPbI3 perovskite phase via PbI2 solvation enables high-performance solar cells, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1907442 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, X. Lei, T. He, Y. Jiang and M. Yuan, Recent progress on formamidinium-dominated perovskite photovoltaics, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 2100690 Search PubMed .
H. Zhang, 
            et al., Multimodal host–guest complexation for efficient and stable perovskite photovoltaics, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 3383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-W. Park, 
            et al., Stabilization of formamidinium lead triiodide α-phase with isopropylammonium chloride for perovskite solar cells, Nat. Energy, 2021, 6, 419–428 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jeong, 
            et al., Pseudo-halide anion engineering for α-FAPbI perovskite solar cells, Nature, 2021, 592, 381–385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Gratia, 
            et al., The many faces of mixed ion perovskites: Unraveling and understanding the crystallization process, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2686–2693 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, J.-S. Park and A. Walsh, Evolutionary exploration of polytypism in lead halide perovskites, Chem. Sci., 2021, 12, 12165–12173 RSC .
C. C. Stoumpos, L. Mao, C. D. Malliakas and M. G. Kanatzidis, Structure-band gap relationships in hexagonal polytypes and low-dimensional structures of hybrid tin iodide perovskites, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 56–73 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kosar, 
            et al., Unraveling the varied nature and roles of defects in hybrid halide perovskites with time-resolved photoemission electron microscopy, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 6320–6328 RSC .
S. Sánchez, L. Pfeifer, N. Vlachopoulos and A. Hagfeldt, Rapid hybrid perovskite film crystallization from solution, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50(12), 7108–7131,  10.1039/D0CS01272F .
G. Murugadoss, 
            et al., Crystal stabilization of α-FAPbI3 perovskite by rapid annealing method in industrial scale, J. Jpn. Res. Inst. Adv. Copper-Base Mater. Technol., 2021, 12, 1924–1930 CrossRef CAS .
V. L. Pool, 
            et al., Thermal engineering of FAPbI perovskite material via radiative thermal annealing and in situ XRD, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sánchez, J. Jerónimo-Rendon, M. Saliba and A. Hagfeldt, Highly efficient and rapid manufactured perovskite solar cells via Flash InfraRed Annealing, Mater. Today, 2020, 35, 9–15 CrossRef .
S. Sanchez, 
            et al., Flash infrared pulse time control of perovskite crystal nucleation and growth from solution, Cryst. Growth Des., 2020, 20(2), 670–679 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sánchez, 
            et al., Flash infrared annealing as a cost-effective and low environmental impact processing method for planar perovskite solar cells, Mater. Today, 2019, 31, 39–46 CrossRef .
S. Sanchez, 
            et al., Flash infrared annealing for antisolvent-free highly efficient perovskite solar cells, Adv. Energy, 2018, 8, 1702915 CrossRef .
S. Sanchez, 
            et al., Efficient and stable inorganic perovskite solar cells manufactured by pulsed flash infrared annealing, Adv. Energy, 2018, 8, 1802060 CrossRef .
S. Sánchez, 
            et al., Thermodynamic stability screening of IR-photonic processed multication halide perovskite thin films, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 26885–26895 RSC .
S. Sanchez, U. Steiner and X. Hua, Phase evolution during perovskite formation—insight from pair distribution function
analysis, Chem. Mater., 2019, 9(31), 3498–3506 CrossRef .
C. M. M. Soe, 
            et al., Room temperature phase transition in methylammonium lead iodide perovskite thin films induced by hydrohalic acid additives, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 2656–2665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. K. Singh, R. Kumar, N. Jain, J. Singh and S. K. Mishra, Structural and thermodynamic aspects of organic-inorganic mixed halide (CH3NH3PbI3−xBrx) perovskite, AIP Conf. Proc., 2018, 1953, 1,  DOI:10.1063/1.5032825 .
S. Nie, L. Wu, L. Zhao and P. Zhang, Enthalpy-change driven synthesis of high-entropy perovskite nanoparticles, Nano Res., 2021, 15, 4867–4872,  DOI:10.1007/s12274-021-3803-3 .
T. Higuchi, 
            et al., Phase transition and phase transformation in block copolymer nanoparticles, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2010, 31, 1773–1778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, 
            et al., Shortening nucleation time to enable ultrafast phase transition in ZnSbTe pseudo-binary alloy, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 15143–15149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Paik, 
            et al., Solution-processed phase-change VO(2) metamaterials from colloidal vanadium oxide (VO(x)) nanocrystals, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 797–806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Singh, P. Srivastava, S. Ghosh, S. A. Khan and G. Vijaya Prakash, Phase stabilization by rapid thermal annealing in amorphous hydrogenated silicon nitride film, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2009, 21, 095010 CrossRef PubMed .
É. O’Connor, 
            et al., Stabilization of ferroelectric HfxZr1−xO2 films using a millisecond flash lamp annealing technique, APL Mater., 2018, 6, 121103 CrossRef .
M. Salinga, 
            et al., Measurement of crystal growth velocity in a melt-quenched phase-change material, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2371 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Szostak, 
            et al., Revealing the perovskite film formation using the gas quenching method by in situ GIWAXS: Morphology, properties, and device performance, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2007473 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. V. Ling, A. Hagfeldt and S. Sanchez, Flash infrared annealing for perovskite solar cell processing, J. Vis. Exp., 2021, 168, e61730,  DOI:10.3791/61730 .
S. A. Hayward, 
            et al., Cubic-tetragonal phase transition in KMnF3: Excess entropy and spontaneous strain, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2000, 12, 1133–1142 CrossRef CAS .
W. A. Saidi and J. J. Choi, Nature of the cubic to tetragonal phase transition in methylammonium lead iodide perovskite, J. Chem. Phys., 2016, 145, 144702 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Comin, Lattice dynamics and the nature of structural transitions in organolead halide perovskites, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 94, 9,  DOI:10.1103/PhysRevB.94.094301 .
A. Arakcheeva, D. Chernyshov, M. Spina, L. Forró and E. Horváth, CHNHPbI: Precise structural consequences of water absorption at ambient conditions, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Sci., Cryst. Eng. Mater., 2016, 72, 716–722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. A. S. Doherty, 
            et al., Stabilized tilted-octahedra halide perovskites inhibit local formation of performance-limiting phases, Science, 2021, 374, 1598–1605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. E. Kissinger, Reaction kinetics in differential thermal analysis, Anal. Chem., 1957, 29(11), 1702–1706 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ahlawat, 
            et al., A combined molecular dynamics and experimental study of two-step process enabling low-temperature formation of phase-pure α-FAPbI, Sci. Adv., 2021, 7, 17 Search PubMed .
T. M. Brenner, 
            et al., Conversion of single crystalline PbI2 to CH3NH3PbI3: Structural relations and transformation dynamics, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 6501–6510 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Whitfield, 
            et al., Structures, phase transitions and tricritical behavior of the hybrid perovskite methyl ammonium lead iodide, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 35685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Crist and J. M. Schultz, Polymer spherulites: A critical review, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2016, 56, 1–63 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Bassett, Polymer spherulites: A modern assessment, J. Macromol. Sci., Part B: Phys., 2003, 42, 227–256 CrossRef .
L. A. Muscarella, 
            et al., Crystal orientation and grain size: Do they determine optoelectronic properties of MAPbI3 perovskite?, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 6010–6018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Gránásy, T. Pusztai, G. Tegze, J. A. Warren and J. F. Douglas, Growth and form of spherulites, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2005, 72, 011605 CrossRef PubMed .
F. P. Price, Growth and organization of high-polymer spherulites, Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., 2006, vol. 83, 20–26 CrossRef .
S. Sanchez, Images processing FAPbI3 films, Zenodo, 2021 DOI:10.5281/ZENODO.5500420 .
Z. Xiao, 
            et al., Efficient perovskite light-emitting diodes featuring nanometre-sized crystallites, Nat. Photonics, 2017, 11, 108–115 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Sun, 
            et al., Crystal nucleation and growth of spherulites demonstrated by coral skeletons and phase-field simulations, Acta Biomater., 2021, 120, 277–292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. E. S. Van Driessche, M. Kellermeier, L. G. Benning and D. Gebauer, New Perspectives on Mineral Nucleation and Growth: From Solution Precursors to Solid Materials, Springer,  2016 Search PubMed .
M. E. Glicksman, Rapid Solidif. Process.: Princ. Technol., Proc. Int. Conf., 2011, 427–446,  DOI:10.1007/978-1-4419-7344-3_17 .

          A.-A. Bogno, J. Valloton, D. D. Jimenez, M. Rappaz and H. Henein, Rapid solidification of Al-Cu droplets of near eutectic composition, IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering, 2019, vol. 529, p. 012021.
R. K. Ahrenkiel, Measurement of minority-carrier lifetime by time-resolved photoluminescence, Solid-State Electron., 1992, 35, 239–250 CrossRef CAS .
G. W. P. Adhyaksa, 
            et al., Understanding detrimental and beneficial grain boundary effects in Halide perovskites, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1804792 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Jariwala, 
            et al., Local crystal misorientation influences non-radiative recombination in Halide perovskites, Joule, 2019, 3, 3048–3060 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lu, A. Krishna, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Compositional and interface engineering of organic-inorganic lead halide perovskite solar cells, iScience, 2020, 23, 101359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hong, 
            et al., Guanine-stabilized formamidinium lead iodide perovskites, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 4691–4697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. Watts, 
            et al., Light soaking in metal halide perovskites studied via steady-state microwave conductivity, Commun. Phys., 2020, 3, 73 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Jiang, 
            et al., Surface passivation of perovskite film for efficient solar cells, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 460–466 CrossRef CAS .
H. Min, 
            et al., Efficient, stable solar cells by using inherent bandgap of α-phase formamidinium lead iodide, Science, 2019, 366, 749–753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jeong, 
            et al., Stable perovskite solar cells with efficiency exceeding 24.8% and 0.3 V voltage loss, Science, 2020, 369, 1615–1620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-W. Jang, 
            et al., Intact 2D/3D halide junction perovskite solar cells via solid-phase in-plane growth, Nat. Energy, 2021, 6, 63–71 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, 
            et al., A vacuum flash-assisted solution process for high-efficiency large-area perovskite solar cells, Science, 2016, 353, 58–62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. E. K. Schawe and S. Pogatscher, Material characterization by fast scanning calorimetry: Practice and applications, Fast Scanning Calorimetry, Springer International Publishing,  2016, pp. 3–80 Search PubMed .
J. E. K. Schawe and J. F. Löffler, Existence of multiple critical cooling rates which generate different types of monolithic metallic glass, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1337 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Haeger, R. Heiderhoff and T. Riedl, Thermal properties of metal-halide perovskites, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 14289–14311 RSC .
Z. Guo, S. J. Yoon, J. S. Manser, P. V. Kamat and T. Luo, Structural phase- and degradation-dependent thermal conductivity of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite thin films, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 6394–6401 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Haque, S. Kee, D. R. Villalva, W.-L. Ong and D. Baran, Halide perovskites: Thermal transport and prospects for thermoelectricity, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1903389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Roß, 
            et al.,
Co-evaporated formamidinium lead iodide based perovskites with 1000 h constant stability for fully textured monolithic perovskite/silicon tandem solar cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2101460 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ee01196dThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Broader context
Metal halide perovskite solar cells have achieved record efficiencies of over 25%, comparable to the mainstream silicon solar cells. However, the processing method and operational stability need further development to bring this technology to commercialization. In this context, we use a flash-infrared annealing method, which is environmentally friendly and rapid processing, without the use of toxic chlorobenzene, to process highly stable perovskite solar cells. Within this work, we reveal the phase stabilization mechanism related to the parameters of the thin film process through thermodynamic, structural, and photophysical analyses. This work represents a step toward reaching the commercialization stage of perovskite solar cells.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Temperature profile of the studied films at different heating rates with their respective linear fitting. Inset: Optical image of a film processed with the lowest heating rate. (b) and (c) X-ray diffraction patterns of the selected films labeled with the respective heating-rate slope. (The asterisk over the peaks highlights the δ phase.) (d) Selected FDSC curves performed on FAPbI3 films. (e) Kissinger plot to determine the activation energy of the FAPbI3 phase formation. (f) Schematic of the reaction coordinate for the formation of the black and δ FAPbI3 phases.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Optical images of three different heating-rate processed films. (b) 3D topographic map of films processed at a similar heating-rate than in (a), where Ra represents the average roughness (different films were analyzed in (a) and (b)). (c) The slope of the heating rates as a function of the compact area of the micro-structured films, and (d) an extrapolation to determine the average growth velocity with an indexed microscopy image of an analyzed grain domain.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) SEM top-view images of the crystal growth at different micro-scales. (b) Electron backscatter diffraction (EBDS), (c) decay time composite image, and (d) steady-state emission mapping for three selected films with different heating rates. (The different mappings were not taken at the same film location – except for steady-state PL, but with similar processed films.)	 

 		 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Absolute spectral photon flux ΦPL(E) measurements of perovskite films on TiO2/FTO electrodes at 1 sun excitation from which the photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQY) is determined (up) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) measurements (down), and (b) optical images taken in the transmission mode (left) and its optical absorption spectra (right), for the pristine and pretreated FAPbI3 films (both measurements were taken on the same film site). (c) Statistical analysis of the JV parameters of devices subjected to two different heating rates during films processing and for a third one that underwent posttreatment with FAI. All three devices had a similar architecture. (d) JV curves of the champion device using an FAI posttreatment procedure. The inset shows the MPP tracking of the device within the first 30 s under ambient air and the collected parameters in the backward-direction scan in the indexed table. (e) IPCE and integrated Jsc curves of the champion device. (f) Cross-sectional SEM image of the manufactured solar cell with perovskite film posttreatment as the champion device.	 

 	Fig. 5  Stability measurements of the manufactured solar cells. (a) SPO for 1500 h of the champion FAPbI3-based PSCs (1 sun), and 500 h scan for similar processed PSCs (4-fold concentrated sun) under different atmospheric conditions. (b) Normalized PCE of 9 measured devices with three different perovskite compositions, and (c) pristine and stressed optical images of the perovskite grain domain in the active area of the solar cell.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ee01196d

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
