Electronic properties and applications of MXenes: a theoretical review  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TC00140A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TC00140A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 2488-2503Electronic properties and applications of MXenes: a theoretical review

        
          
            Mohammad 
            Khazaei
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Ahmad 
            Ranjbar
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Masao 
            Arai
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Taizo 
            Sasaki
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Seiji 
            Yunoki
          
          
        
      acd
aComputational Materials Science Research Team, RIKEN Advanced Institute for Computational Science (AICS), Kobe, Hyogo 650-0047, Japan. E-mail: khazaei@riken.jp;  Fax: +81 78 304 4961;   Tel: +81 78 940 5748
bInternational Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics, National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), 1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba 305-0044, Ibaraki, Japan
cComputational Condensed Matter Physics Laboratory, RIKEN, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan
dComputational Quantum Matter Research Team, RIKEN Center for Emergent Matter Science (CEMS), Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan
Received 
      10th January 2017
    , Accepted 14th February 2017First published on 14th February 2017AbstractThe recent chemical exfoliation of layered MAX phase compounds to novel two-dimensional transition metal carbides and nitrides, the so-called MXenes, has brought a new opportunity to materials science and technology. This review highlights the computational attempts that have been made to understand the physics and chemistry of this very promising family of advanced two-dimensional materials, and to exploit their novel and exceptional properties for electronic and energy harvesting applications.
Mohammad Khazaei
Mohammd Khazaei is currently a research scientist at RIKEN Advanced Institute for Computational Science, Japan. He obtained his PhD in materials science and engineering from Tohoku University, Japan in 2005, and MSc and BSc in condensed matter physics from Sharif University of Technology and Isfahan University of Technology in Iran, respectively. He worked as a postdoctoral researcher at the National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS) and Institute for Materials Research (IMR) in Japan. His research interest is to investigate the emergent quantum phenomena at the nanoscale using first-principles calculations so as to design and tailor advanced functional materials both for fundamental research and applications in electronic and energy devices.
Ahmad Ranjbar
Ahmad Ranjbar received his BSc and MSc in Physics from Ferdowsi University of Mashhad, and Sharif University of Technology, in Iran in 2003 and 2006, respectively. In 2007, he was awarded the Japanese Government Scholarship for a PhD program at Institute for Materials Research, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan. After getting his PhD in materials science in 2011 he received the prestigious JSPS postdoctoral fellowship which he held at Tohoku University. He then moved in 2014 to AICS, RIKEN, Japan as a postdoctoral researcher. He performs atomistic modelling of the properties of materials from first-principles. His current research interests are magnetism, ferroelectric materials, topological insulators, and quantum transport.
Masao Arai
Masao Arai received his PhD degree in applied physics from the University of Tokyo, Japan in 1994. He is a chief researcher at International Center for Materials Nanoarchitechtonics (MANA) at National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS) in Japan. His current research interest is to determine the electronic properties of materials from first-principles calculations and to predict new exotic materials such as topological insulators.
Taizo Sasaki
Taizo Sasaki is a principal investigator at International Center for Materials Nanoarchitechtonics (MANA) in National Institute for Materials Science in Japan. He received his degree of Doctor of Science (1987) from the Faculty of Science at Tohoku University. His research interest includes the first-principles theory of material properties, especially, the nano-structured materials. His recent targets are electronic and structural properties of layered materials, and dynamics of atoms in materials with nanostructures.
Seiji Yunoki
Seiji Yunoki is a team leader of the Computational Materials Science Research Team in RIKEN Advanced Institute for Computational Science (AICS) and Computational Quantum Matter Research Team in RIKEN Center for Emergent Matter Science (CEMS). He is also an associate chief scientist at Computational Condensed Matter Physics Laboratory in RIKEN. He received his PhD degree from the Department of applied physics, Nagoya University in 1996. He stayed abroad in three different countries over 12 years before joining RIKEN in 2008. His main interests include strongly correlated quantum systems and computational materials science.
1 Introduction
It has been demonstrated in recent extensive studies that low-dimensional systems containing transition metals with open d-orbital shells may exhibit a multitude of interesting properties because of different oxidation and spin states, and relatively large spin–orbit coupling of the transition metals. Hence, transition metal-based low-dimensional systems provide an excellent ground for exploring and exploiting the internal degrees of freedom of electrons – charge, orbital, and spin – and their interplay for fundamental research and device applications.1–4 There are many transition metal-based low dimensional systems in the literature, e.g. dichalcogenides, which have been or may potentially be exfoliated in experiments.5,6 Among them, nowadays, MXenes7,8 are truly at the cutting edge of materials research and promise new scientific and technological horizons.
MXenes7,8 are a new class of two-dimensional (2D) transition metal carbides and nitrides with the chemical formula Mn+1Xn (M = Sc, Ti, V, Cr, Zr, Nb, Mo, Hf, Ta; X = C, N; n = 1–3) that have recently been synthesized by etching MAX phases.9–14 These 2D systems have been named MXenes because they originate from the MAX phases by removing “A” elements and because they are structurally analogous to graphene.7,8 Very recently, significant progress in the growth of high quality crystalline MXenes has been achieved by the chemical vapor deposition technique.15,16 Moreover, the family of MXenes has been lately expanded to ordered double transition metal carbides M′2M′′C2 and M′2M′′2C3.17 Considering the large number of compositional variety of MAX phase compounds, a large number of 2D MXenes with unprecedented properties is expected to be produced.
Experimentally, MXenes have already found applications as transparent conductors,18–20 field effect transistors,21 supercapacitors,22–24 Li ion batteries,25,26 electromagnetic interface shielders,27 fillers in polymeric composites,28 hybrid nanocompositites,29 purifiers,30,31 dual-responsive surfaces,32 suitable substrates for dyes,33 catalysts,34,35 promising materials for methane storage,36 and photocatalysts for hydrogen production,37 as well as being ceramic biomaterials with high photothermal conversion efficiency for cancer therapy.38 Theoretically, many applications have been proposed for MXenes in electronic,39–43 magnetic,44–48 optical,49,50 thermoelectric,51–56 and sensing devices,57 as well as being new potential materials for catalytic and photocatalytic reactions,58–63 hydrogen storage media,64,65 and nanoscale superconductivity.66 Some of the MXenes are predicted to be topological insulators with large band gaps involving only d orbitals.67–71 MXenes are also expected to be used as ultralow work function materials72 and Schottky barrier junctions.73–76
As the experimental and theoretical studies described above have already suggested, MXenes are appealing 2D systems because of the following reasons. (1) Owing to their ceramic nature, MXenes are chemically and mechanically stable. (2) MXenes can be found in different forms including monolayered, with few layers, and multilayered. (3) MXenes can be synthesized as complex materials made of a mixture of light and heavy transition metals, which makes it possible to tune the number of valence electrons and the relativistic spin–orbit coupling (SOC). This enhances their electronic functionality and mechanical stability. (4) The thickness of MXene monolayers is controllable. This allows us to examine the quantum confinement related phenomena. (5) The surfaces of MXenes can be functionalized with various chemical groups, which offers possibilities for surface state engineering. (6) Similar to graphene, some of the MXenes exhibit massless Dirac dispersions in their band structures near the Fermi level.67–70,77 This opens broad possibilities for Dirac-based physics and applications.67–70 These properties make MXenes unique among other known 2D materials although some of them have not been experimentally observed yet.
This article reviews the current status of theoretical studies on MXenes, highlighting the recent progress based on first-principles calculations. It updates and comprehends the previous excellent theoretical reviews in ref. 78 and 79 by providing insights into many physical and chemical characteristics and applications of MXenes. For the experimental progress on MXenes, one can find comprehensive reviews in ref. 80–84. The rest of this review is organized as follows. Section 2 summarizes computational methods employed to obtain the theoretical results discussed in this review. Section 3 briefly discusses the structural, mechanical, and electronic properties of the parent structures of MXenes, i.e., MAX phases. Section 4 explains first why the surfaces of 2D MXenes are usually saturated with chemical groups. Then, the effects of surface functionalization on the mechanical, electronic, magnetic, and optical properties, transport, and surface states of MXenes are discussed. Some of the proposed applications of 2D MXenes as low work function electron emitters, catalysts for hydrogen evolution, promising thermoelectric materials, and energy storage media are also described. Section 5 summarizes the electronic structures of MXenes in the form of nanoribbons, nanotubes and heterostructures. Finally, the outlook for future research on MXenes is provided in Section 6.
2 Computational methods
Before discussing the properties and applications of MXenes, it is worth summarizing briefly computational methods employed in the following theoretical studies of this review. Among the different methods, density functional theory (DFT) has proven to be a reliable method to predict various physical and chemical phenomena on the atomic scale. Hence, DFT calculations are performed to examine many properties and applications of MXenes. However, it is known that the simple DFT method may fail in predicting the values of band gaps and van der Waals interactions, and the properties of strongly correlated materials. For instance, the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) version of the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) for the exchange–correlation functional,85 which is most often used in this review, underestimates the band gap. Hence, in some of the studies discussed below, the hybrid functional [Heyd–Scuseria–Ernzerhof (HSE06)]86,87 is employed to improve the estimation of the band gap, and the semi-empirical DFT-D2 method (Grimme method)88 is used to treat properly the van der Waals interaction. Furthermore, the DFT+U method89,90 is applied to correctly obtain magnetic order when the electron correlation in transition metals is important. Because of the approximate nature of the DFT-based methods,91 this review mainly focuses on the general trends, which are expected in the physics and chemistry of MXenes, rather than emphasizing quantitatively the exact values of various properties. In the following, the DFT-PBE method is employed for the theoretical studies, unless otherwise stated.
3 MAX phases
MAX phases are a large family of hexagonal layered ceramic compounds with the symmetry group P63/mmc and the chemical formula Mn+1AXn (n = 1–3), where “M”, “A”, and “X” represent an early transition metal (Sc, Ti, V, Cr, Zr, Nb, Mo, Hf, and Ta), an element from groups 13–16 (Al, Si, P, S, Ga, Ge, As, In, and Sn) in the periodic table, and carbon and/or nitrogen, respectively.9–14Fig. 1(a) shows the typical crystal structure of M2AX MAX phase compounds. Over 60 different MAX phase compounds have already been synthesized experimentally.10,11 MAX phases typically exhibit the favorable properties of ceramics such as high structural stiffness, and also the favorable properties of metals such as good electrical and thermal conductivity.12 MAX phases have potential applications such as wear and corrosion protection, heat exchangers, lubricants, nozzles, and kiln furniture.10,11
 Fig. 1  (a) Typical structure of M2AX MAX phases. (b) Projected density of states [PDOS (states per eV per cell)] and (c) the projected band structure of Ti2AlC.12 For clarity, the PDOS for Al is scaled by a factor of 3. The Fermi energy is located at zero energy. Γ(0,0,0), M(1/2,0,0), K(1/3,1/3,0), A(0,0,1/2), Λ(1/2,0,1/2), and H(1/3,1/3,1/2) are high symmetric momenta in the Brillouin zone of Ti2AlC. 
Based on first-principles calculations, elastic constants of more than 240 different M2AC and M2AN compounds with various M and A elements have been theoretically studied so far.9 Among these, many of the compounds are found to satisfy the mechanical stability criteria for hexagonal structures: C11 > |C12|, C66 > 0, and (C11 + C12)C33 − 2C132 > 0, where Cij is the second rank tensor of the elastic constant.92 Therefore, many of them are elastically stable and have a great chance to be realized under appropriate experimental conditions. Another computational screening study has analyzed the formation energies of 216 pure M2AX compounds and 10314 solid solution (MM′)2(AA′)(XX′),14 and found that 3140 compounds, including 49 experimentally known M2AX phases, exhibit formation energies of less than −30 meV per atom. A significant subset of 301 compositions with formation energies lower than −100 meV per atom exhibit favorable synthesis conditions.
Recently, the family of MAX phases has also been theoretically extended to M2AlB compounds.12 The formation energy (Ef) calculations find that Ef(M2AlN) < Ef(M2AlC) < Ef(M2AlB).12 This indicates that the M2AlN phases will likely be obtained with higher purity in experiments. This trend of the formation energies for MAX phases is understood by considering several entangled factors, i.e., (1) the strength of hybridization between the d orbitals of M and others (p orbitals of Al, and s and p orbitals of X), (2) the number of valence electrons that fill the bonding, nonbonding, and antibonding states, and (3) the required energy for volume expansion of the transition metals to host the X elements.12
The first-principles calculations find that M2AlB, M2AlC, and M2AlN are all metallic.12 As shown in Fig. 1(b) and (c) for Ti2AlC, the states around the Fermi energy of these compounds are mainly dominated by d orbitals of the transition metals. The common features of hybridization are evident in these compounds, where bonding (antibonding) states between the d orbitals of M and the p orbitals of Al or p orbitals of X are located below (above) the Fermi energy. Between these bonding and antibonding states, nonbonding states of M are located near the Fermi energy. More detailed analysis shows that the number of valence electrons per unit cell (valence electron concentration), which fill the bonding and antiboding states, can affect and control the formation energy and the mechanical properties of MAX phases significantly.12
4 2D MXenes
2D MXenes are experimentally obtained when the “A” element is washed out from the MAX phases upon applying an appropriate acid solution such as HF.7,8 This is possible because in some of the MAX phases the bonding between elements A and M is weaker than those between elements M and X. However, it is experimentally observed that the outer layers are often saturated with F, O, and/or OH groups when MXenes are chemically exfoliated by HF acid solutions to eliminate the “A” element.93–97
The exfoliation process of Ti3AlC2 to Ti3C2 has been theoretically studied in the presence of water and HF acid using ab initio molecular dynamics simulations.98,99 There, it is shown that the spontaneous dissociation of HF and subsequent termination with H or F at the edge of Ti atoms make the Al–M bonding weak, consequently opening the interlayer gap. The further insertion of HF is facilitated through the interlayer gap. This leads to the formation of AlF3 and H2, which eventually come out of the MAX phase. After these processes, the fluorinated MXene is left behind.98,99
Experimentally, MXenes of Ti2C,8 V2C,25 Nb2C,25 Mo2C,100 Ti3C2,7 Zr3C2,101 Nb4C3,102 Ta4C3,8 and Ti4N3,103 as well as of TiNbC,8 (Ti0.5Nb0.5)2C,8 (V0.5Cr0.5)3C2,8 Ti3CN,8 Mo2TiC2,17 Mo2ScC2,104 Cr2TiC2,17 Mo2Ti2C3,17 (Nb0.8Ti0.2)4C3,102 and (Nb0.8Zr0.2)4C3,102 have already been synthesized. There are comprehensive reviews on the synthesis and the current experimental status of MXenes.80–84 The crystal structures of 2D M2X, M3X2, M4X3, M′2M′′X2, and M′2M′′2X3 are shown in Fig. 2 and 3.
 Fig. 2  Top and side views of (a) pristine MXene M2X. Top and side views of (b) model 2 and (c) model 4 for functionalized MXene (see the text). A and B indicate different types of hollow sites in (a). M, X, and T denote transition metal (green), C/N (blue), and attached chemical groups such as F, O, and OH (red), respectively. 
 Fig. 3  Side views of pristine (a) M3X2, (b) M4X3, (c) M′2M′′X2, and (d) M′2M′′2X3 MXenes, where M, M′, and M′′ denote transition metals, and X represents C or N. 
4.1 Structural and mechanical properties
The model structures for 2D MXene systems can be constructed by removing the “A” element from the bulk MAX phases. Since the MAX phases have hexagonal symmetry, the derived MXene systems form hexagonal lattices with the same symmetry. As schematically shown in Fig. 2(a), the 2D M2X MXene consists of trilayer sheets with a hexagonal-like unit cell, where the “X” layer is sandwiched by two “M” transition metal layers. Since the coordination number of a transition metal ion is often six, it is natural to assume that the transition metals in MXenes make six chemical bonds with the neighboring X atoms and the attached chemical groups on the surfaces, resulting in the formation of M2XF2, M2X(OH)2, and M2XO2.39
On the surfaces of M2X, two types of hollow sites exist: hollow sites (A) under which there is no “X” atom between the transition metal layers and hollow sites and (B) under which there is an “X” atom, as indicated in the lower panel of Fig. 2(a). Therefore, depending on the relative positions of the termination groups attached to the transition metal atoms, four different configurations are possible for the chemical termination of the M2X system. Model 1: two functional groups located on top of the two transition metals. Model 2: two functional groups on top of a hollow site A. Model 3: one of the functional groups located on top of a hollow site A and the other functional group on top of a hollow site B. Model 4: the two functional groups located on top of a hollow site B. Fig. 2(b) and (c) show the schematic top and side views of models 2 and 4, respectively.
These four models should be considered for each type of functional group with fully relaxing atomic positions to determine the most stable structure. As a general trend in functionalized MXenes, model 1 is energetically less stable than the other three models and in many cases it is transformed into one of the models 2–4 during structure optimization. It is also found that the relative structural stabilities of models 2–4 depend mainly on the possible ionic state(s) of the transition metals on the surfaces.39 If the transition metals can provide sufficient electrons to both X and the attached functional groups, model 2 becomes the most stable configuration.39 Otherwise, either model 3 or model 4 is a more stable configuration.39
In order to understand the stability of functionalized MXenes, the formation energy has to be evaluated. First-principles calculations show that MXenes can gain a very large amount of negative formation energy when the surfaces are functionalized.39 This indicates the formation of strong bonds between the transition metals and the attached groups, which encourages synthesizing MXenes with specific surface functionalization.39 It has also been examined whether the surfaces of fully functionalized MXenes are thermodynamically more favorable than those of less functionalized MXenes.39,105 It is indeed shown theoretically that the surfaces are fully functionalized at particular chemical potentials in some of the MXene systems.39,105 Phonon frequency analyses have proved that many of these MXenes with full surface functionalization are locally stable.39,68,72,106,107 Therefore, various fully functionalized MXenes can be realized experimentally under appropriate conditions although there are still some challenges.
The effect of surface functionalization on the elastic constant C11 of MXenes has been studied using first-principles calculations.108,109 It is found that oxygen functionalized MXenes exhibit smaller lattice parameters and a larger C11 as compared to those functionalized with F or OH.109 This is due to the stronger bonding between O and surface transition metals.
In another theoretical study, the thickness dependence of the mechanical properties of pristine 2D Tin+1Cn (n = 1, 2, and 3) has been investigated using molecular dynamics simulations. The Young's moduli, extracted from the slope of strain–stress curves, are found to be 597, 502, and 534 GPa for Ti2C, Ti3C2, and Ti4C3, respectively,110 and thus the highest value is for for the thinnest MXene. It is also observed that Ti2C and Ti3C2 show similar behavior under high tensile stress: the bond breaking begins in the outermost regions of the layer at the point of the highest local stress and propagates deeper into the center of the system. The crack propagation in these systems is accompanied by crumpling and folding of the layer near the growing gap.110 In contrast, cracks in Ti4C3 occur first in the central region of the layer. At larger stress, these cracks grow in size, leading to the complete fracture of the sample with the formation of several Ti4C3 fragments.110
The effect of F, OH, and O functionalization on the response of Tin+1Cn (n = 1, 2, and 3) to tensile stress has also been investigated theoretically to show that Ti2CO2 can sustain large strain under biaxial and uniaxial tension much better than graphene.111 On the other hand, pristine 2D Tin+1Cn (n = 1, 2, and 3) is vulnerable to tensile strain because the surface atomic layer collapses easily. However, the surface functionalization can slow down this collapse and thus improves the mechanical flexibility.111 The unique strengthening by oxygen functionalization is attributed to the significant charge transfer from the inner Ti–C bonds to the outer Ti–O surface ones.112
Although the F, O, and OH terminations weaken the interlayer coupling as compared with the pristine counterparts, the interlayer coupling is still significantly stronger than van der Waals bonding as specified by the fact that the binding energies of stacked Tin+1CnT2 (T = F, OH, or O) are 2–6 times larger than those of well-known graphite and MoS2 with weak interlayer coupling.113 Therefore, the successful exfoliation of stacked Tin+1CnT2 with binding energies in the range of 1–1.33 J m−2 into monolayers invariably requires further weakening of the interlayer coupling.113 The interlayer coupling in the OH-terminated Tin+1Cn is stronger than that in the F- or O-terminated one because of the formation of hydrogen bonds between the layers in the former.113
It should be noted that the experimentally obtained MXenes are not structurally perfect. The recent scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) and electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) experiments show that point defects are present on the surfaces that can affect the local surface chemistry.114,115 The defects are formed when the surface transition metals are etched/removed by HF in the etchant solution. Thus, changing the HF concentration in the etchant should vary the defect concentration.115 This gives us the ability to control the surface properties for catalytic, energy storage, and other applications. However, the existence of a defect does not significantly affect the metallic properties of MXenes.115
Although MXenes are made by chemical exfoliation of MAX phases, their synthesis through mechanical exfoliation of MAX phases may also be possible. This is because in some of the MAX phases elastic constants satisfy C11 > C33, which indicates that the overall bonding along the ab plane is stronger than the c direction.12,13,116 Therefore, if C33 is smaller than C11, it might be more feasible to break the M–A–M bonds under appropriate mechanical tension without significantly damaging the M–X–M bonds.12,13
4.2 Electronic properties
Similar to MAX phases, the pristine MXenes are all metallic. However, upon surface functionalization, some of the MXenes become semiconducting. As will be discussed below, theoretical investigations have shown that the MXenes can be divided into two categories, topologically trivial39 and nontrivial67–71 metal/semimetal or semiconductor, depending on the strength of relativistic SOC in these systems.

4.2.1 Topologically trivial metals and semiconductors. 
While most of the functionalized MXenes are metallic, Sc2CT2 (T = F, OH, and O), Ti2CO2, Zr2CO2, and Hf2CO2 become semiconducting with surface functionalization. The energy gaps are estimated to be 1.03, 0.45, and 1.8 eV for Sc2CT2 with T = F, OH, and O, respectively, 0.24 eV for Ti2CO2, 0.88 eV for Zr2CO2, and 1.0 eV for Hf2CO2 within the general gradient approximation (GGA).39 The band structure calculations reveal that Sc2C(OH)2 has a direct band gap and the other semiconductors have indirect band gaps. Since Ti, Zr, and Hf are in the same group in the periodic table with the same number of electrons in the outermost partially filled atomic orbital shell ([Ar]3d24s2, [Kr]4d25s2, and [Xe]4f145d26s2), the corresponding MXene systems exhibit similar metallic to semiconducting behavior upon the same type of functionalization. It is also predicted that both F and OH groups affect similarly the electronic structure of a pristine MXene system.39 This is simply because each F or OH group is capable of receiving only one electron from the surfaces. By the same token, the O group differs from the F and OH groups because it demands two electrons from the surfaces to be stabilized.39
In order to understand why some of the MXenes become semiconducting, the electronic structures of MXenes with and without surface functionalization have been systematically studied.39 The calculations show that pristine M2X (X = C or N) systems are all metallic with the Fermi energy locating at the d bands of transition metal M. In most MXenes, the p bands of carbon/nitrogen X appear below the d bands separated by a small band gap. With F, OH, or O functionalization, new bands are generated below the Fermi energy, resulting from F or O p orbitals hybridized with M d orbitals. Sc2CT2 (T = F, OH, or O), Ti2CO2, Zr2CO2, and Hf2CO2 transform into semiconductors because the functionalization shifts the Fermi energy to the center of the gap between the M d bands and X p bands. As examples, Fig. 4 shows the projected density of states and the projected band structures of Ti2C, Ti2CF2, and Ti2CO2. It has also been shown that the band gap of Ti2CO2 and Sc2CO2 can be significantly varied by applying either strain117,118 or an external electric field.119,120
 Fig. 4  Projected density of states [PDOS (states per eV per cell)] and projected band structures for (a) Ti2C, (b) Ti2CF2, and (c) Ti2CO2.39 The Fermi energy is located at zero energy. 


4.2.2 Topologically non-trivial semimetals and semiconductors. 
Since many of the MXenes contain heavy 4d and 5d transition metals, the relativistic SOC affects the electronic structures significantly. As shown in Fig. 5, without considering the SOC, M2CO2 (M = Mo, W) and M′2M′′C2O2 (M′ = Mo, W; M′′ = Ti, Zr, W) are semiconducting with a zero energy gap (semimetallic) because the topmost valence band and the lowest conduction band touch only at the Γ point, around which the valence and conduction bands are both parabolic. The projected band structure calculations reveal that the bands near the Fermi energy originate from the d orbitals of transition metals M, or M′ and M′′. Upon considering the SOC, the degeneracy of the topmost valence band and the lowest conduction band at the Fermi energy is lifted and the band gap is open at the Γ point (see the lower panels in Fig. 5). Consequently, M2CO2 and M′2M′′C2O2 transform into semiconductors with indirect band gaps.67,68 The induced band gap is larger as the SOC is larger.68 It is found that the band gaps can be as large as 0.194 eV (0.472 eV) for W2CO2 and 0.285 (0.401 eV) for W2HfC2O2 within the generalized gradient approximation (hybrid functional HSE06).67,68 Although similar features are observed for M′2M′′2C3O2 (M′ = Mo, W; M′′ = Ti, Zr, Hf), these systems are still semimetallic even with considering the SOC (see the rightmost panels in Fig. 5).68
 Fig. 5  Top (bottom) panels: Projected band structures for W2CO2, W2HfC2O2, and W2Hf2C3O2 calculated without (with) the relativistic spin–orbit coupling.67,68 The Fermi energy is located at zero energy. 
The SOC lifts the degeneracy of the bands at the Γ point by inducing a finite gap. The nature of these bands around the Fermi energy can be characterized by the Z2 topological invariant. Since all the M2CO2, M′2M′′C2O2, and M′2M′′2C3O2 MXenes have inversion symmetry, the Z2 topological invariant can be simply calculated from the parity of the valence band wave functions at the time reversal invariant momentum (TRIM) points of the Brillouin zone.121,122 For the hexagonal structure, the TRIM points are located at Γ: k1 = (0, 0), M1: k2 = (0, 0.5), M2: k3 = (0.5, 0), and M3: k4 = (0.5, 0.5), and therefore the Z2 index ν (=0, 1) is evaluated using , where , ηn(ki) (=±1) is the parity of the nth valence band at TRIM ki, and N is the number of occupied valence bands.121,122 The trivial and nontrivial topological phases are identified with ν = 0 and 1, respectively. The parity analysis of the occupied bands at the TRIM points finds that ν = 1 for all the systems discussed here, and therefore M2CO2 (M = Mo, W) and M′2M′′C2O2 (M′ = Mo, W; M′′ = Ti, Zr, Hf) are topological insulators and M′2M′′2C3O2 are topological semimetals.67,68 The 2D topological insulators display intriguing conducting edge states in which electrons with opposite spins propagate in the opposite directions and thus they are robust against non-magnetic impurities and disorders.123–126 It should also be emphasized that band inversion occurs in these topologically non-trivial MXenes mostly among d orbitals (more precisely, dz and dxy/dx2−y2 orbitals) of the transition metals,67,68 not involving s and p orbitals as in the previously known or predicted topological insulators.123–126

4.3 Surface state properties
The careful examination of the projected band structures of the OH-terminated MXenes has revealed that some of the states around the Γ point, near and above the Fermi energy, do not constitute any of the composed elements.42 As examples, the projected band structures of Sc2C(OH)2 and Hf2C(OH)2 are shown in Fig. 6. These states are mainly distributed in the vacuum region outside the hydrogen atoms and, more interestingly, they have nearly free electron (NFE) characteristics with parabolic energy dispersions with respect to the crystal wave vector.42
 Fig. 6  Projected band structures on each constituent atoms for eight different systems indicated in the figures.42 The position of the lowest energy nearly free state (NFE) near the Fermi energy at the Γ point is indicated by an arrow. The Fermi energy is located at zero energy. 
The electron localization function (ELF) analysis127 in Fig. 7 shows clearly that there exists a uniform floating electron gas above the hydrogen atoms in the MXenes such as Hfn+1Cn(OH)2 (n = 1, 2, and 3) with partially occupied NFE states. It has been shown that Ti2C(OH)2, Zr2C(OH)2, Zr2N(OH)2, Hf2N(OH)2, Nb2C(OH)2, and Ta2C(OH)2 also possess partially occupied NFE states.42 The lowest energy NFE states in Sc2C(OH)2, Ti2N(OH)2, and V2C(OH)2 are unoccupied and located above the Fermi energy, but in much lower energy than those of graphene, graphane, BN, and MoS2 (see Fig. 6). Therefore, these unoccupied NFE states in OH-terminated MXenes should be accessible more easily than those in other known 2D systems.42
 Fig. 7  Electron localization function (ELF) for Hfn+1Cn(OH)2 (n = 1, 2, and 3) MXenes with different thicknesses.42 
Similarly to the OH-terminated MXenes, the F- and O-terminated MXenes also exhibit NFE states. However, the NFE states in the F- and O-terminated MXenes are located at much higher energies. For example, as shown in Fig. 6, the lowest energy NFE states of Hf2CF2 and Hf2CO2 appear around 3 and 5 eV above the Fermi energy, respectively. This already implies that the NFE states of the F- and O-terminated MXenes are not suitable for application purposes. The NFE states in the OH-terminated MXenes are found near the Fermi energy because there exist positively charged hydrogen atoms at the surfaces.42 As shown in Fig. 7, the presence of the NFE states and the location relative to the Fermi energy do not depend significantly on the thickness of the MXenes. This is simply because the thickness of the MXenes cannot essentially change the nature of surface charges, i.e., the surface of the OH-terminated (F and O-terminated) MXenes remains positively (negatively) charged, independent of the thickness.
The partially occupied NFE states near the Fermi energy are sensitive to the circumstances, and indeed they diminish by applying large compressive or tensile strains, adsorbing molecules such as O2, N2, and CO, or hetrostructuring the MXenes with graphene, BN, or graphane.42 It has also been proposed that due to their localized states that appear above the hydrogen atoms, the OH-terminated MXenes may have potential applications in Pb and heavy metal purification for environmental remediation.30,31
4.4 Optical properties
Very few theoretical and experimental studies exist on the optical properties of MXenes. Experimental studies on thin films of Ti3C2Tx (T: a mixture of F, OH, or O) are available.18,19 It has been observed that Ti3C2Tx obtains 77% transmittance in visible light with a wavelength of 550 nm.19 The intercalated Ti3C2Tx with NH4HF2 (Ti3C2.3O1.2F0.7N0.2) possesses 90% transmittance, while the transmittance for a thin film of the Ti3AlC2 MAX phase is 30%, which is the least transparent.18 It has also been observed that the absorbance is linearlly dependent on the thickness of Ti3C2Tx and the intercalated films.18
Theoretically, optical properties such as transmittance, absorption, and reflection can be evaluated from the imaginary part of the dielectric function tensor calculated as a function of the photon wavelength.49,50 Thus far, the energy loss function, reflectivity, and absorption spectrum of pristine Ti2C, Ti2N, Ti3C2, and Ti3N2 have been studied. Using the reflectivity and energy loss curves, the plasmon energy is estimated to be 10.00, 11.63, 10.81, and 11.38 eV for these systems listed above, respectively, when the electric field is applied parallel to the surface.49 It has also been found that, at an extremely low energy of less than 1 eV, the reflectivity becomes 100% (less than 50%) for these systems when the electric field is applied parallel (perpendicular) to the surface.49 This indicates the capability of these systems to transmit electromagnetic waves.49
In other theoretical studies, the optical properties of pristine and functionalized Ti2C and Ti3C2 with F, OH, and O have been examined.50 It is shown that, in the range of infrared to ultraviolet light including visible light, the in-plane absorption coefficients are lower for the F and OH functionalized MXenes than the bare and O functionalized ones.50 By analyzing the refractivity, it is concluded that F and OH functionalized Ti2C and Ti3C2 should exhibit white color.50
4.5 Magnetic properties
The spin-polarized density functional calculations indicate that the ground states of the majority of the pristine and functionalized MXenes are nonmagnetic because of the strong covalent bonding between the transition metal and the X element as well as the attached chemical groups. However, the covalency of the bonds can be tuned by applying external strain, which results in the release of d electrons and consequently the appearance of magnetism even in the otherwise nonmagnetic systems.128
Many of the pristine MXenes are intrinsically magnetic. For example, pristine Ti2C and Ti2N exhibit nearly half-metallic ferromagnetism with the magnetic moments of 1.91 and 1.00 μB per formula unit. The nearly half metallic ferromagnetic monolayer Ti2C transforms into a perfect half-metal, a spin-gapless semiconductor, and then a metal, with the continuous increase of the biaxial strain, although the monolayer Ti2N remains nearly half-metallic under similar biaxial strain.47
The monolayers of V2C and V2N are antiferromagnetic and nonmagnetic metals, respectively. The biaxial tensile and compressive strains induce a large magnetic moment in monolayered V2C and V2N, respectively.47 Upon F or OH functionalization, V2C becomes a small-gap antiferromagnetic semiconductor.129
Pristine Cr2C and Cr2N are both magnetic. The magnetism results from d electrons of Cr. Cr2C is a half-metallic ferromagnetic. However, with F, Cl, OH, or H functinalization, Cr2C is transformed into an antiferreomagnetic semiconductor.44 The electronic structure of Cr2CF2 is shown in Fig. 8. Cr2N has a larger number of valence electrons than Cr2C. Hence, in contrast to Cr2C, the ground state of Cr2N is antiferreomagnetic. However, the half-metallicity appears in Cr2N upon various surface functionalizations with F, O, or OH.130 This is important because the synthesis of pristine half-metallic MXenes such as Cr2C is difficult when the etching technique is employed. It is also found that the energy difference between the magnetic and non-magnetic states of the Cr-based MXenes is so large that these systems might probably retain their magnetism up to near room temperature.39 Thus, these MXenes are promising materials for spintronic devices.
 Fig. 8  Electronic structure of antiferromagnetic Cr2CF2 obtained using the GGA: (a) spin projected density of states [TDOS (states per eV per cell)], (b) band structure, and (c) top and side views of spin density. The Fermi energy is located at zero energy in (a) and (b). Blue and yellow colors indicate spin-up and spin-down densities, respectively, in (c). 
Recently, non-symmetrically functionalized graphene has been realized and named Janus graphene.131 Janus materials possess distinct surfaces because their opposite faces are functionalized with two different chemical groups. Motivated by this, the magnetic properties of the MXene version of Janus graphene have been studied.45,46 It is shown that Cr2CFCl, Cr2CHF, Cr2CFOH, and V2CFOH can be antiferromagnetic semiconductors.45
There are also attempts to induce magnetism in nonmagnetic MXenes such as Sc2CT2 (T = F, OH, and O) by doping with Ti, V, Cr, or Mn. It is found that Mn and Cr are promising dopants for achieving magnetic Sc2CT2.132
More recently, the magnetic properties of ordered double transition metal carbide MXenes, Cr2M′′C2T2 (M′′ = Ti and V, T = F, OH, and O), have been investigated.133 It is found that Cr2M′′C2T2 can be nonmagnetic, anti-ferromagnetic, or ferromagnetic and either semiconducting or metallic, depending on M′′ and T. It is also shown that Cr2TiC2O2 is nonmagnetic, whereas Cr2TiC2F2 and Cr2TiC2(OH)2 are anti-ferromagnetic, and Cr2VC2(OH)2, Cr2VC2F2, and Cr2VC2O2 are ferromagnetic. The Curie temperatures of Cr2VC2(OH)2 and Cr2VC2F2 are estimated to be up to 618.36 and 695.65 K, respectively.133 Another intensive study has found robust ferromagnetism in Hf2MnC2O2 and Hf2VC2O2, as well as in Ti2MnC2T2 (T = F, OH, and O). In these systems, a large magnetic moment of 3–4 μB per cell and a high Curie temperature of 495–1133 K are predicted.134
4.6 Transport properties
There are very few theoretical studies on the electron transport properties of MXenes. The coherent transport calculations using the non-equilibrium Green's function (NEGF) scheme have shown that metallic MXenes are highly conductive.42,135 According to the analyses of pristine and functionalized Ti3C2, the type of surface functionlization has a considerable impact on the electron transport. For example, the current at a given bias voltage in Ti3C2F2 can be up to 4 times larger than that of pristine Ti3C2.135 The current increase is due to the emergence of extended electronic states and also due to the smaller variation of the electrostatic profile.135 Through first-principles calculations, it has been demonstrated that the conduction in stacked Ti3C2T2 (T = F, OH, or OH) is significantly anisotropic due to different effective masses of electrons and holes along different lattice directions.136 Such anisotropic electronic conduction was evidenced by in situ I–V measurements, in which the in-plane electrical conduction is at least one order of magnitude higher than that observed vertical to the basal plane.136 It is also reported that the half metallicity of Cr2NO2 is robust with 100% polarization for a wide range of applied voltages.130
The electron transport properties of the MXenes with partially occupied NFE states have also been studied.42 The calculations have shown the signature of the NFE states in electron conduction.42 In general, better electron transport is expected for MXenes with NFE states because these states extend above the MXene surfaces (see Fig. 9) and can conduct electrons through the nearly free channels without being significantly scattered by surface vibrations at finite temperatures. The transmission analysis indeed clearly shows that the NFE states can act as both hole and electron channels at low bias voltages, thus suitable for applications in low-power nanoelectronic devices.42
 Fig. 9  Top and side views of one of the eigenvectors of the transmission matrix with NFE characteristics for Hf2C(OH)2.42 L and R indicate the left and right electrodes, respectively. Since the transmission eigenvector is complex, the absolute value of the eigenvector is shown by the isosurface and the phase is indicated by the color of the isosurface. 
The effect of NH3, H2, CH4, CO, CO2, N2, NO2, and O2 absorption on the electron transport of Ti2CO2 has also been investigated theoretically to exploit its potential applications as a gas sensor or capturer.57 Among all these gas molecules, only NH3 could be chemisorbed on Ti2CO2 with an apparent charge transfer of 0.174 e. The electron transport exhibits distinct responses with a drastic change in I–V characteristics when NH3 is adsorbed onto Ti2CO2. Thus, Ti2CO2 could be a promising candidate for NH3 sensors with high selectivity and sensitivity.57
4.7 Applications
There have been many proposed applications for 2D MXenes in the literature. Here, we shall focus only on those with electronic and energy harvesting applications.

4.7.1 Low work function electron emitters. 
Various metallic substrates of transition metal carbides and nitrides provide the high stability, high melting point, and relatively low work function that have increasingly attracted attention as being suitable for field emitters. Considering the properties of MXenes, members of this family can be good candidates for materials with low work function because of the following two reasons. First, MXenes offer tunability of the work function by choosing the appropriate transition metal as well as the X element, usually carbon or nitrogen. In addition, such compositional tunability provides a possibility to adjust other properties such as thermal, mechanical, and chemical stabilities, and toxicity. Second, during the synthesis of MXenes, their surfaces are functionalized naturally, which changes the electrostatic potential near the surfaces and affects the electronic structures, especially, giving rise to the shift of the Fermi level. These two features have significant effects on the work function.72
The work function is defined as the energy difference between the Fermi energy and the vacuum level (electrostatic potential away from the surface). From the work function calculations of M2C and M10C9 (M = Sc, Ti, Zr, Hf, V, Nb, Ta) as well as of M′2N and M′10N9 (M′ = Ti, Zr, and Hf) functionalized with F, OH, and O, it is found that the work functions of the bare MXenes and the functionalized ones with F, OH and O are distributed in the range of 3.3–4.8, 3.1–5.8, 1.6–2.8, and 3.3–6.7 eV, respectively.72 It is also shown that work functions always decrease following functionalization with OH. This is in remarkable contrast with the systems functionalizated with F or O, in which the work functions increase or decrease depending on the type of transition metal. Interestingly, M2C(OH)2, M10C9(OH)2, M′2N(OH)2 and M′10N9(OH)2 all exhibit ultralow work functions, as compared with the corresponding bare and the functionalized ones with F and O.72 The thickness dependence of the work function for Tin+1Cn (n = 1–9) functionalized with F, OH and O has been systematically studied, and it was shown that, regardless of the thickness, a family of Tin+1Cn(OH)2 exhibits an ultralow work function.72
The work function properties of MXenes can be well understood by the surface dipole moments because the change in the work function (ΔΦ) upon functionalization is linearly correlated with the change in the surface dipole moment (ΔP). It has been shown in ref. 137 that ΔΦ = −e/ε0ΔP = −180.95ΔP with ΔΦ = Φ − Φ0 and ΔP = p − p0. Here, e (C) is the charge of the electron, ε0 (C V−1 Å−1) is the vacuum permittivity, and Φ0 (Φ) and p0 (p) are the work function and the surface dipole moment without (with) functionalization, respectively. A positive (negative) value of ΔΦ corresponds to an increase (decrease) of the work function when the surface is functionalized. As shown in Fig. 10, MXenes also follow this rule because it is found that ΔΦ correlates with ΔP almost linearly with the slope of −170.012 V Å−1.72
 Fig. 10  The change in the work function (ΔΦ) of M10C9 and M′10N9 (M = Sc, Ti, Zr, Hf, V, Nb, Ta; M′ = Ti, Zr, Hf) functionalized with F, OH, and O as a function of the change in the surface dipole moment (ΔP).72 The solid line (ΔΦ = −170.01ΔP) indicates the linear fit to the results. The dashed line (ΔΦ = −180.95ΔP) is the linear relation reported previously for three-dimensional bulk systems.137 
In general, three main factors control the surface dipole moment upon deposition of any element: (i) the redistribution of the electron charge between the surface and the adsorbates, (ii) the surface relaxation caused by the adsorbates, and (iii) the polarity of the adsorbates.72,137 Further analysis of the MXenes indicates that the work function of F and O functionalized MXenes is controlled by two factors, i.e., the dipole moment induced by the charge transfer between F/O and the substrate, and the change in the total surface dipole moment caused by surface relaxation upon functionalization. Besides these two factors, the intrinsic dipole moment of the OH group plays the most important role in determining the total dipole moment, which consequently justifies the ultralow work function found in the OH terminated MXenes.72


4.7.2 Promising catalysts and photocatalysts for hydrogen evolution. 
Hydrogen is one of the most promising alternative sources of clean energy because the burning of hydrogen produces no pollution.138 Despite its abundance in water and many hydrocarbons, hydrogen is not found in the gas form with high density in nature. A hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) is the production of hydrogen through the electrocatalysis/photocatalysis process of water or any other inorganic molecules containing hydrogen.
Platinum is one of the most efficient catalysts for hydrogen evolution. However, the usage of platinum is restricted because of its high cost and resource limitation. Recently, MXenes have attracted much attention both experimentally and theoretically because MXenes can be efficient catalysts or photocatalysts for HER. The HER activities of Ti2CTx, Ti3C2Tx, and Mo2CTx (T: a mixture of O and OH) have been measured experimentally.34,35,97 It is found that Mo2CTx exhibits higher HER activity than Ti2CTx for hydrogen production from water,35 while Ti3C2Tx can enhance the catalytic activity for hydrogen production from ammonia borane.34 Theoretically, it is demonstrated that many MXenes are conductive under standard conditions (pH = 0). Therefore, this enables MXenes to transfer charge during the HER. Moreover, it is shown theoretically that the Gibbs free energy for hydrogen absorption on some of the O-terminated MXenes such as Ti2CO2 and W2CO2 is close to the ideal value of 0 eV.60,61 Considering the Gibbs free energy and the number of electrons captured by oxygen atoms on the O-terminated MXenes, it is predicted that O-terminated MXenes with 0.895–0.977 electrons captured per oxygen atom can be promising 2D catalysts for hydrogen production.60
More recent theoretical studies have shown that M2CO2 (M = Ti, Zr, and Hf) exhibits a band gap in the range of 0.92–1.75 eV (calculated using the HSE06 method)63 with very good light absorbance at wavelengths from 300 to 500 nm.62 Moreover, it is found that Zr2CO2 and Hf2CO2 exhibit high and directionally anisotropic carrier mobility.62 The large and anisotropic carrier (electron and hole) mobility in these systems facilitate the migration and separation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs.62 Therefore, Zr2CO2 and Hf2CO2 can be used as photocatalysts for hydrogen generation from water.62


4.7.3 Energy conversion: thermoelectric devices. 
Owing to their intrinsic ceramic nature, MXenes may be suitable as thermoelectric materials for energy conversion applications at high temperatures. The performance of thermoelectric materials is quantified through the dimensionless figure of merit ZT given as S2σT/K, where S, σ, T, and K (=kl + ke) are the Seebeck coefficient, electrical conductivity, temperature, and thermal conductivity with both lattice (kl) and electronic (ke) contributions, respectively. Generally, ZT can be maximized when the power factor (S2σ) is maximized and at the same time the thermal conductivity is minimized. The thermal conductivity can be minimized efficiently by enhancing the phonon scattering in the presence of edges, interfaces, grain boundaries, and embedded nanostructures.139 However, maximizing S2σ is not straightforward because both S and σ are strongly coupled to the electronic structure of the system and usually behave inversely: materials that have a high Seebeck coefficient have poor electrical conductivity, and vice versa. Therefore, the balance between the Seebeck coefficient and the electrical conductivity at a particular p- or n-type carrier concentration is required so as to maximize the power factor.
Based on the Boltzmann theory and first-principles electronic structure calculations, the power factor S2σ of monolayered and multilayered M2C (M = Sc, Ti, V, Zr, Nb, Mo, Hf, Ta) and M2N (M = Ti, Zr, Hf) MXenes functionalized with F, OH, and O groups has already been explored.51 It has been shown that the metallic (semiconducting) MXenes are poor (good) thermoelectric materials.51 For example, as shown in Fig. 11 for Nb2CF2, metallic MXenes exhibit excellent electrical conductivity, but very poor Seebeck coefficient, and consequently a very poor power factor. On the other hand, semiconducting MXenes show relatively poor electrical conductivity, but excellent Seebeck coefficient, resulting in a relatively good power factor. Among the semiconducting MXenes, Mo2CF2 (see Fig. 11) acquires a superior power factor over other MXenes and thus it is a potential thermoelectric material in the MXene family.51 The exceptionally superior thermoelectric property of Mo2CF2 is attributed to the peculiar band structure near the band edge, where flat and dispersive bands are merged. This type of band shape allows for a large Seebeck coefficient and simultaneously good electrical conductivity at low carrier concentrations.140–142
 Fig. 11  Band structure, density of states (DOS [states per eV per cell]), Seebeck coefficient (S [μV K−1]), electrical conductivity (σ/τ [1017 Ω−1 cm−1 s−1]), and power factor (S2σ/τ [1014 μW cm−1 K−2 s−1]) as a function of chemical potential μ at various temperatures (indicated in the figures) for Nb2CF2 (upper panels) and Mo2CF2 (lower panels).51 Here, τ is the relaxation time. The band structure and DOS are calculated at zero temperature. μ = 0 corresponds to the Fermi energy at zero temperature in DOS, Seebeck coefficient, electrical conductivity, and power factor. 
The thermal conductivity of various MXenes, e.g., M2CO2 (M = Ti, Zr, Hf),52,55 Sc2CT2 (T = F, O, OH),53,54 and Mo2C,56 have also been studied by taking into account both phonon and electron contributions. These MXenes are all semiconducting except for pristine Mo2C which is metallic. The thermal conductivity is in general anisotropic along the armchair and zigzag directions.55 Among M2CO2 (M = Ti, Zr, Hf), Ti2CO2 and Hf2CO2 exhibit the lowest and the highest lattice thermal conductivities, respectively, in the temperature range of 300–700 K. Consequently, Ti2CO2 achieves a higher figure of merit ZT for thermoelectric applications (ZT = 0.45 for 14.0 × 1020 cm−3 n-doping and ZT = 0.27 for 1.7 × 1020 cm−3 p-doping52) because of the low thermal conductivity and the high carrier mobility.52,55 The room temperature thermal conductivity of Hf2CO2 is 62.12–131.2 (27.63–53.03) W m−1 K−1 along the armchair (zigzag) flake length of 1–100 μm.55 Among Sc2CT2 (T = F, O, OH), Sc2C(OH)2 is predicted to be a candidate for thermoelectric applications at elevated temperatures higher than 300 K due to a relatively good Seebeck coefficient, high electrical conductivity, and very low lattice thermal conductivity.53 At room temperature, the thermal conductivity of Sc2C(OH)2 along the armchair (zigzag) direction can be as large as 123–245 (78.5–148) W m−1 K−1 when the flake length increases from 1 to 50 μm.54 The room temperature thermal conductivity of Mo2C is also evaluated to be 48.4 (64.7) W m−1 K−1 for the armchair (zigzag) flake length of 100 μm.56


4.7.4 Energy storage: hydrogen storage, ion batteries, and supercapacitors. 
There is a worldwide contest to develop alternative clean energy resources. In this regard, alkali metal batteries, supercapacitors, fuel cells, and hydrogen fuels are among the most important candidates, although each of these faces its challenges. For instance, there is a major challenge to find appropriate materials with high storage capacity. 2D materials with large surface areas are most promising for hydrogen storage.143,144 The calculations show that pristine Sc2C, Ti2C, and V2C might be used as hydrogen storage media.64,65 Sc2C with the largest surface area among all MXenes possesses a storage capacity of 9.0 wt%, which is higher than the gravimetric storage capacity target, 5.5 wt% by 2015, set by the United States Department of Energy. It has also been shown that the hydrogens are bound to Sc2C by chemical, physical, and Kubas-type interactions with the binding energies of 4.703, 0.087, and 0.164 eV, respectively.65 Note, however, that when the hydrogens are bound to the surfaces strongly, it is very difficult to take them out from the storage media. Therefore, these hydrogens cannot be used for energy production.
Li-ion batteries can produce high gravimetric energy density and high voltage as large as 110–160 W h kg−1145 and 3.6 V,146 respectively. Therefore, there are extensive theoretical and experimental studies to design novel alkali-based batteries with high gravimetric energy density and voltage.147–150 Recently, the intercalation between 2D Ti3C2Tx MXene layers and several ions such as Li+, Na+, Mg2+, K+, NH4+, and Al3+ has been reported to induce a high capacitance of up to 350 F cm−3.22 Moreover, Li ion batteries with Ti2C, Ti3C2, Ti3CN, and TiNbC have been experimentally examined.151,152 It is found that Ti3C2 shows an excellent Li-ion steady-state capacity of 410 mA h g−1 at a one-cycling rate.152
These important experimental achievements have triggered many further theoretical studies on the supercapacitance and alkali-metal ion battery properties of MXenes.26,129,153–167 In these theoretical studies, the effect of functionalization on the mobility of various alkali-metals and ions (Li, Na, K, Ca) in pristine MXenes, Ti2C, Zr2C, V2C, Nb2C, Cr2C, Ti2N, V2N, Ta2N, Ti3C2, V3C2, and V3N2, as well as functionalized MXenes with F, O, OH, O, S, Se, and Te have been systematically studied. For instance, M2C (M = Sc, Ti, V, and Cr) has a gravimetric capacity over 400 mA h g−1, which is higher than the gravimetric capacity of graphite.159 The simulations on Li storage in Ti3C2 indicate that pristine MXenes have a low diffusion barrier (0.07 eV) and a high Li storage capacity.153 It should be recalled that the Li storage capacity of graphite is 372 mA h g−1 in LiC6153 and the diffusion barrier for Li in graphite is ∼0.3 eV.168–170 These facts suggest that MXenes may be superior to graphite electrodes. However, in functionalized Ti3C2, due to steric hindrance induced by F, OH, and O groups, Li ions face higher diffusion barriers as large as 0.36,153 1.02,153 and 0.62159 eV, respectively. Consequently, the Li storage in the functionalized MXenes with F, O, and OH decreases as compared with the pristine MXenes. Various theoretical studies have shown that MXenes, particularly pristine ones, are overall promising in increasing the battery performance.26,153

5 Nanoribbon, nanotube, and heterostructure MXenes
Although there is no experimental report on the formation of nanotubes, nanoribbons, or heterostructures of MXenes, there exist many positive signs to expect that they might be realized experimentally. In fact, experiments have observed that MXenes can be formed in conical scrolls,7 and demonstrated that MXenes can be used as fillers in polymer composites.28 Moreover, the chemical vapor deposition technique can be employed to synthesize MXenes.15 On the other hand, there have been several theoretical studies on nanoribbon, nanotube, and heterostructure MXenes. For example, the electronic structure and formation energy calculations on pristine and functionalized Sc2C nanotubes indicate that the stability and the band gap of the MXene nanotubes can be controlled significantly by their radii.171 Another study has shown that the strain energies of Ti2C nanotubes are always positive, whereas those of Ti2CO2 nanotubes become negative when the diameter is beyond 2.5 nm. This indicates that 2D Ti2CO2 can possibly be folded into a nanotube form.172
The first-principles calculations for armchair and zigzag nanoribbons of pristine and functionalized Ti2C, Ti3C2, and V2C173 have shown that (i) there is a remarkable atomic reconstruction at the edges of nanoribbons, (ii) hydrogen functionalization can increase the magnetic moment as compared with a pristine nanoribbon, and (iii) an armchair Ti2CO2 nanoribbon with a width of 7.34 Å exhibits a band gap of ∼1.0 eV, which is significantly larger than that of 2D Ti2CO2 (∼0.24 eV).39 It is also shown that the hole and electron carrier mobility of the Ti2CO2 nanoribbon can be tuned by width as well as edge engineering.174 More comprehensive calculations reveal that the band gap of semiconducting MXene nanoribbons is determined by a combination of factors such as the quantum confinement, the energy location of edge states, and the strength of d–d hybridization.175
Fabricating van der Waals heterostructures of MXenes, and their stacking with chalcogenides, graphene or other 2D systems can be an innovative route to develop materials with exotic properties. This is promising since similar complex systems have been experimentally realized.176–178 The basic idea behind the stacking of different 2D layers is band gap engineering and combining the electronic properties of different 2D layers together into a single 3D crystalline composite with substantially tailored electronic properties. For example, the electronic structures of graphene/Hf2C(OH)2,42 MoS2/Ti2C, MoS2/Ti2CT2 (T = F and OH),73 silicine/Sc2CF2,74 Sc2CF2/Sc2CO2,75 and various transition metal dichalcogenides/M2CO2 (M = Sc, Ti, Zr, and HF)179,180 heterostructures have been studied based on first-principles calculations.
Among these studies, it has been found that the transition metal dichalcogenides/Sc2CO2 heterostructures show indirect band gaps in the range of 0.13–1.18 eV, which are suitable for electronic device applications.179Fig. 12 shows the density of states, projected band structure, excess–depletion charge density (Δρ), and electron localization function (ELF) for the graphene/Hf2C(OH)2 heterostructure.42 These results clearly show that the graphene is n-doped by Hf2C(OH)2 and this is simply because of the ultralow work function of Hf2C(OH)2 (∼2.32 eV) as compared with graphene (∼4.26 eV).42 However, the Dirac-cone like energy dispersion of graphene remains intact [see Fig. 12(b)], and is simply shifted to lower energies at −1.1 eV by receiving electrons from Hf2C(OH)2. Fig. 12(c) and (d) show that electrons are mainly transferred from OH bonds in Hf2C(OH)2 to π-states of graphene. Since graphene and Hf2C(OH)2 are semi-metallic and metallic, respectively, it is expected that the graphane/Hf2C(OH)2 heterostructure exhibits metallic current–voltage characteristics. Due to the small distance between hydrogen atoms and graphene (2.27 Å), the electrons are localized either on Hf2C(OH)2 or on graphene. However, it is clear that the NFE state remains stable on the other side of Hf2C(OH)2 without graphene. Moreover, the ELF analysis indicates that there is no chemical bond between graphene and Hf2C(OH)2.72
 Fig. 12  (a) Density of states (DOS) in states per eV per cell and (b) the projected band structure of the graphene/Hf2C(OH)2 heterostructure.42 Arrows in (b) indicate the position of the Dirac cone at the K point and the nearly free electron band at the Γ point. The Fermi energy is located at zero energy. (c) Electron localization function (ELF) counter plot and (d) charge transfer (Δρ) isosurfaces with ±0.005 e Å−3 for graphene/Hf2C(OH)2.42 The excess and depleted charges (electrons) are shown in dark orchid and deep pink colors, respectively, in (d). 
6 Outlook
The research on low-dimensional materials is still at a preliminary stage and will remain as a very exciting field of science and technology for many years. In particular, the MXene era has just emerged in the cutting-edge materials research arena. It has already been proved that MXenes are suitable materials for interdisciplinary research and collaboration between academia and industry. Synthesizing MXenes with a particular surface functionalization is one of the main experimental challenges in this field. Since some of the MAX phases (Mo2GaC) are low temperature superconductors,181 it is timely to examine the superconductivity properties of various MXenes. Our knowledge about the photonic properties and solar harvesting applications of MXenes is still limited. It might be possible to grow lateral MXenes using the chemical vapor deposition technique. Therefore, it might be interesting to study the lateral MXene heterostructures computationally. It has been demonstrated theoretically that 2D topological insulators might be promising thermoelectric materials.182 Thus, it is worth examining the theormoelectric properties of topological MXenes. Catalytic and nanostructure properties of MXenes have not been well studied yet. There are still very few theoretical studies on the electron transport, optical, and magnetic properties of MXenes. We hope that this review could provide a broad insight into the current status of research and applications of MXenes, and stimulate further studies.
References
Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman and M. S. Strano, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Z. Butler, S. M. Hollen, L. Cao, Y. Cui, J. A. Gupta, H. R. Gutiérrez, T. F. Heinz, S. S. Hong, J. Huang, A. F. Ismach, E. Johnston-Halperin, M. Kuno, V. V. Plashnitsa, R. D. Robinson, R. S. Ruoff, S. Salahuddin, J. Shan, L. Shi, M. G. Spencer, M. Terrones, W. Windl and J. E. Goldberger, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Fiori, F. Bonaccorso, G. Iannaccone, T. Palacios, D. Neumaier, A. Seabaugh, S. K. Banerjee and L. Colombo, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 768 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. R. Bhimanapati, Z. Lin, V. Meunier, Y. Jung, J. Cha, S. Das, D. Xiao, Y. Son, M. S. Strano, V. R. Cooper, L. Liang, S. G. Louie, E. Ringe, W. Zhou, S. S. Kim, R. R. Naik, B. G. Sumpter, H. Terrones, F. Xia, Y. Wang, J. Zhu, D. Akinwande, N. Alem, J. A. Schuller, R. E. Schaak, M. Terrones and J. A. Robinson, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Coleman, M. Lotya, A. O'Neill, S. D. Bergin, P. J. King, U. Khan, K. Young, A. Gaucher, S. De, R. J. Smith, I. V. Shvets, S. K. Arora, G. Stanton, H.-Y. Kim, K. Lee, G. T. Kim, G. S. Duesberg, T. Hallam, J. J. Boland, J. J. Wang, J. F. Donegan, J. C. Grunlan, G. Moriarty, A. Shmeliov, R. J. Nicholls, J. M. Perkins, E. M. Grieveson, K. Theuwissen, D. W. McComb, P. D. Nellist and V. Nicolosi, Science, 2011, 331, 568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Naguib, M. Kurtoglu, V. Presser, J. Lu, J. Niu, M. Heon, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Naguib, O. Mashtalir, J. Carle, V. Presser, J. Lu, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. Cover, O. Warschkow, M. M. M. Bilek and D. R. McKenzie, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2009, 21, 305403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. W. Barsoum, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2000, 28, 201 CrossRef CAS .
Z. M. Sun, Int. Mater. Rev., 2011, 56, 143 CrossRef CAS .
M. Khazaei, M. Arai, T. Sasaki, M. Estili and Y. Sakka, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2014, 26, 505503 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Khazaei, M. Arai, T. Sasaki, M. Estili and Y. Sakka, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2014, 15, 014208 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Ashton, R. G. Hennig, S. R. Broderick, K. Rajan and S. B. Sinnott, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 94, 054116 CrossRef .
C. Xu, L. Wang, Z. Liu, L. Chen, J. Guo, N. Kang, X.-L. Ma, H.-M. Cheng and W. Ren, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Geng, X. Zhao, L. Li, P. Song, B. Tian, W. Liu, J. Chen, D. Shi, M. Lin, W. Zhou and K. P. Loh, 2D Mater., 2017, 4, 011012 CrossRef .
B. Anasori, Y. Xie, M. Beidaghi, J. Lu, B. C. Hosler, L. Hultman, P. R. C. Kent, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Halim, M. Lukatskaya, K. M. Cook, J. Lu, C. R. Smith, L. Å. Näslund, S. J. May, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi, P. Eklund and M. W. Barsoum, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 2374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mariano, O. Mashtalir, F. Q. Antonio, W.-H. Ryu, B. Deng, F. Xia, Y. Gogotsi and A. D. Taylor, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 16371 RSC .
Y. Yang, S. Umrao, S. Lai and S. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 859 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lai, J. Jeong, S. K. Jang, J. Xu, Y. J. Choi, J.-H. Park, E. Hwang and S. Lee, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 19390 RSC .
M. R. Lukatskaya, O. Mashtalir, C. E. Ren, Y. Dall'Agnese, P. Rozier, P. L. Taberna, M. Naguib, P. Simon, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2013, 341, 1502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chidiu, M. R. Lukatskaya, M.-Q. Zhao, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Nature, 2014, 516, 78 Search PubMed .
R. B. Rakhi, B. Ahmed, M. N. Hedhili, D. H. Anjum and H. N. Alshareef, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 5314 CrossRef CAS .
M. Naguib, J. Halim, J. Lu, K. M. Cook, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xie, Y. Dall'Agnese, M. Naguib, Y. Gogotsi, M. W. Barsoum, H. L. Zhuang and P. R. C. Kent, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9606 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Shahzad, M. Alhabeb, C. B. Hatter, B. Anasori, S. M. Hong, C. M. Koo and Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2016, 353, 1137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, J. Xu, H. Wang, J. Zhang, H. Yan, B. Pan, J. Zhou and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 4361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xue, Z. Wang, F. Yuan, X. Zhang, W. Wei, H. Tang and C. Li, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 4312 RSC .
Q. Peng, J. Guo, Q. Zhang, J. Xiang, B. Liu, A. Zhou, R. Liu and Y. Tian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 4113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Guo, Q. Peng, H. Fu, G. Zou and Q. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 20923 CAS .
J. Chen, K. Chen, D. Tong, Y. Huang, J. Zhang, J. Xue, Q. Huang and T. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 314 RSC .
O. Mashtalir, K. M. Cook, V. N. Mochalin, M. Crowe, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 14334 CAS .
G. Fan, X. Li, Y. Ma, Y. Zhang, J. Wu, B. Xu, T. Sun, D. Gao and J. Bi, New J. Chem., 2017 10.1039/C6NJ02695H .
Z. W. Seh, K. D. Fredrickson, B. Anasori, J. Kibsgaard, A. L. Strickler, M. R. Lukatskaya, Y. Gogotsi, T. F. Jaramillo and A. Vojvodic, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 589 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, A. Zhou, J. Chen, J. Cao, L. Wang and Q. Hu, Adsorption, 2016, 22, 915 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ran, G. Gao, F.-T. Li, T.-Y. Ma, A. Du and S.-Z. Qiao, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 13907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lin, X. Wang, L. Yu, Y. Chen and J. Shi, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 2017 Search PubMed .
M. Khazaei, M. Arai, T. Sasaki, C.-Y. Chung, N. S. Venkataramanan, M. Estili, Y. Sakka and Y. Kawazoe, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2185 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Enyashin and A. L. Ivanovskii, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 13637 CAS .
Y. Xie and P. R. C. Kent, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 235441 CrossRef .
M. Khazaei, A. Ranjbar, M. Ghorbani-Asl, M. Arai, T. Sasaki, Y. Liang and S. Yunoki, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 93, 205125 CrossRef .
L. Feng, X.-H. Zha, K. Luo, Q. Huang, J. He, Y. Liu, W. Deng and S. Du, J. Electron. Mater., 2017 DOI:10.1007/s11664-017-5311-5 .
C. Si, J. Zhou and Z. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 17510 CAS .
J. He, P. Lyu, L. Z. Sun, Á. M. García and P. Nachtigall, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 6500 RSC .
M. Je, Y. Lee and Y.-C. Chung, Thin Solid Films, 2016, 619, 131 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gao, G. Ding, J. Li, K. Yao, M. Wu and M. Qian, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 8986 RSC .
J. Yang, X. Luo, S. Zhang and L. Chen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 12914 RSC .
H. Lashgari, M. R. Abolhassani, A. Boochani, S. M. Elahi and J. Khodadadi, Solid State Commun., 2014, 195, 61 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bai, K. Zhou, N. Srikanth, J. H. L. Pang, X. He and R. Wang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 35731 RSC .
M. Khazaei, M. Arai, T. Sasaki, M. Estili and Y. Sakka, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 7841 RSC .
A. N. Gandi, H. N. Alshareef and U. Schwingenschlögl, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 1647 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kumar and U. Schwingenschlögl, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 94, 035405 CrossRef .
X.-H. Zha, J. Zhou, Y. Zhou, Q. Huang, J. He, J. S. Francisco, K. Luoa and S. Du, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 6110 RSC .
X.-H. Zha, Q. Huang, J. He, H. He, J. Zhai, J. S. Francisco and S. Du, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 27971 CrossRef PubMed .
X.-H. Zha, J. Yin, Y. Zhou, Q. Huang, K. Luo, J. Lang, J. S. Francisco, J. He and S. Du, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 15082 CAS .
X.-F. Yu, Y. Li, J.-B. Cheng, Z.-B. Liu, Q.-Z. Li, W.-Z. Li, X. Yang and B. Xiao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 13707 CAS .
L.-Y. Gan, D. Huang and U. Schwingenschlögl, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 13672 CAS .
C. Ling, L. Shi, Y. Ouyang, Q. Chen and J. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1600180 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Ling, L. Shi, Y. Ouyang and J. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 9026 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gao, A. P. O'Mullane and A. Du, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 494 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Guo, J. Zhou, L. Zhua and Z. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 11446 CAS .
H. Zhang, G. Yang, X. Zuo, H. Tang, Q. Yang and G. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 12913 CAS .
Q. Hu, H. Wang, Q. Wu, X. Ye, A. Zhou, D. Sun, L. Wang, B. Liu and J. He, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2013, 117, 14253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Hu, H. Wang, Q. Wu, X. Ye, A. Zhou, D. Sun, L. Wang, B. Liu and J. He, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 10606 CrossRef CAS .
J.-J. Zhang and S. Dong, J. Chem. Phys., 2017, 146, 034705 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Weng, A. Ranjbar, Y. Liang, Z. Song, M. Khazaei, S. Yunoki, M. Arai, Y. Kawazoe, Z. Fang and X. Dai, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 92, 075436 CrossRef .
M. Khazaei, A. Ranjbar, M. Arai and S. Yunoki, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 94, 125152 CrossRef .
L. Li, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2016, 124, 8 CrossRef CAS .
C. Si, K.-H. Jin, J. Zhou, Z. Sun and F. Liu, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 6584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Si, J. You, W. Shi, J. Zhou and Z. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 11524 RSC .
M. Khazaei, M. Arai, T. Sasaki, A. Ranjbar, Y. Liang and S. Yunoki, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 92, 075411 CrossRef .
L.-Y. Gan, Y.-J. Zhao, D. Huang and U. Schwingenschlögl, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 245307 CrossRef .
H. Zhao, C. Zhang, S. Li, W. Ji and P. Wang, J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 117, 085306 CrossRef .
Y. Lee, Y. Hwang and Y. C. Chung, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 7163 CAS .
Y. Liu, H. Xiao and W. A. Goddard III, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 15853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Fashandi, V. Ivády, P. Eklund, A. L. Spetz, M. I. Katsnelson and I. A. Abrikosov, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 92, 155142 CrossRef .
A. L. Ivanovskii and A. N. Enyashin, Russ. Chem. Rev., 2013, 82, 735 CrossRef .
Q. Tang, Z. Zhou and Z. Chen, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Comput. Mol. Sci., 2015, 5, 360 CrossRef CAS .
M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Naguib and Y. Gogotsi, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-C. Lei, X. Zhang and Z. Zhou, Front. Phys., 2015, 10, 276 CrossRef .
V. M. H. Ng, H. Huang, K. Zhou, P. S. Lee, W. Que, Z. J. Xu and L. B. Kong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3039 Search PubMed .
B. Anasori, M. R. Lukatskaya and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Rev., 2017, 1, 16098 Search PubMed .
J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 77, 3865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Heyd, G. E. Scuseria and M. Ernzerhof, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 124, 219906 CrossRef .
S. Baroni, S. de Gironcoli, A. Dal. Corso and P. Gianozzi, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2001, 73, 515 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Grimme, Comput. Chem., 2006, 27, 1787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. I. Liechtenstein, V. I. Anisimov and J. Zaane, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1995, 52, R5467 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Dudarev, G. A. Botton, S. Y. Savrasov, C. J. Humphreys and A. P. Sutton, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1998, 57, 1505 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Cohen, P. Mori-Sáchez and W. Yang, Science, 2008, 321, 729 Search PubMed .

          J. F. Nye, Physical Properties of Crystals: Their Representation by Tensors and Matrices, Oxford University Press, New York,  2010 Search PubMed .
M. A. Hope, A. C. Forse, K. J. Griffith, M. R. Lukatskaya, M. Ghidiu, Y. Gogotsi and C. P. Grey, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 5099 RSC .
H. W. Wang, M. Naguib, K. Page, D. J. Wesolowski and Y. Gogotsi, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 349 CrossRef CAS .
G. Sharma, M. Naguib, D. Feng, Y. Gogotsi and A. Navrotsky, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 28131 CAS .
D. Magne, V. Mauchamp, S. Céléirer, P. Chartier and T. Cabioćh, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 30946 RSC .
K. D. Fredrickson, B. Anasori, Z. W. Seh, Y. Gogotsi and A. Vojvodic, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 28432 CAS .
P. Srivastava, A. Mishra, H. Mizuseki, K.-R. Lee and A. K. Singh, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 24256 CAS .
A. Mishra, P. Srivastava, H. Mizuseki, K.-R. Lee and A. K. Singh, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 11073 RSC .
R. Meshkini, L.-Å. Näslund and J. Halim, Scr. Mater., 2015, 108, 147 CrossRef .
J. Zhou, X. Zha, F. Y. Chen, Q. Ye, P. Eklund, S. Du and Q. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 5008 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, M. Naguib, M. Ghidiu, L.-M. Pan, J. Gu, J. Nanda, J. Halim, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2016, 99, 660 CrossRef CAS .
P. Urbankowski, B. Anasori, T. Makaryan, D. Er, S. Kota, P. L. Walsh, M. Zhao, V. B. Shenoy, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 11385 RSC .
R. Meshkian, Q. Tao, M. Dahlqvist, J. Lu, L. Hultman and J. Rosen, Acta Mater., 2017, 125, 476 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ashton, K. Mathew, R. G. Hennig and S. B. Sinnott, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 3550 CAS .
T. Hu, J. Wang, H. Zhang, Z. Li, M. Hu and X. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 9997 RSC .
U. Yorulmaz, A. Özden, N. K. Perkgöz, F. Ay and C. Sevik, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 335702 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Kurtoglu, M. Naguib, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, MRS Commun., 2012, 2, 133 CrossRef CAS .
X.-H. Zha, K. Luo, Q. Li, Q. Huang, J. He, Xi. Wen and S. Du, Europhys. Lett., 2015, 111, 26007 CrossRef .
V. N. Borysiuk, V. N. Mochalin and Y. Gogotsi, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 265705 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Guo, J. Zhou, C. Si and Z. Sun, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 15348 RSC .
Z. H. Fu, Q. F. Zhang, D. Legut, C. Si, T. C. Germann, T. Lookman, S. Y. Du, J. S. Francisco and R. F. Zhang, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 94, 104103 CrossRef .
T. Hu, M. Hu, Z. Li, H. Zhang, C. Zhang, J. Wang and X. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 20256 RSC .
L. H. Karlsson, J. Birch, J. Halim, M. W. Barsoum and P. O. Å. Persson, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 4955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Sang, Y. Xie, M.-W. Lin, M. Alhabeb, K. L. Van Aken, Y. Gogotsi, P. R. C. Kent, K. Xiao and R. R. Unocic, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 9193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Guo, L. Zhu, J. Zhou and Z. Sun, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 25403 RSC .
Y. Lee, S. B. Cho and Y.-C. Chung, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 14724 CAS .
X.-F. Yu, J.-B. Cheng, Z.-B. Liu, Q.-Z. Li, W.-Z. Li, X. Yang and B. Xiao, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 30438 RSC .
Y. Lee, Y. Hwang, S. B. Cho and Y.-C. Chung, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 26273 RSC .
L. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 24857 CAS .
L. Fu, C. L. Kane and E. J. Mele, Topological insulators in three dimensions, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 106803 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Fu and C. L. Kane, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 045302 CrossRef .
M. Z. Hasan and C. L. Kane, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2010, 82, 3045 CrossRef CAS .
X.-L. Qi and S.-C. Zhang, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2011, 83, 1057 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yan and S.-C. Zhang, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2012, 75, 096501 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Weng, R. Yu, X. Hu, X. Dai and Z. Fang, Adv. Phys., 2015, 64, 227 CrossRef .
B. Silvi and A. Savin, Nature, 1994, 371, 683 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhao, W. Kang and J. Xue, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 133106 CrossRef .
J. Hu, B. Xu, C. Ouyang, S. A. Yang and Y. Yao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 24274 CAS .
G. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 18850 CAS .
L. Zhang, J. Yu, M. Yang, Q. Xie, H. Peng and Z. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1443 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yang, X. Luo, S. Zhang and L. Chen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 12914 RSC .
J. Yang, X. Zhou, X. Luo, S. Zhang and L. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 203109 CrossRef .
L. Dong, H. Kumar, B. Anasori, Y. Gogotsi and V. B. Shenoy, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. R. Berdiyorov, Europhys. Lett., 2015, 111, 67002 CrossRef .
T. Hu, H. Zhang, J. Wang, Z. Li, M. Hu, J. Tan, P. Hou, F. Li and X. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 16329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. C. Leung, C. L. Kao, W. S. Su, Y. J. Feng and C. T. Chan, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 68, 195408 CrossRef .

          http://www.renewableenergyworld.com/hydrogen/tech.html
        .
M. Zebarjadi, K. Esfarjani, M. S. Dresselhaus, Z. F. Ren and G. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5147 Search PubMed .
D. J. Singh and I. I. Mazin, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1997, 56, 1650 CrossRef .
A. F. May, D. J. Singh and G. J. Snyder, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 153101 CrossRef .
D. J. Singh, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 195217 CrossRef .
M. Khazaei, M. S. Bahramy, N. S. Venkataramanan, H. Mizuseki and Y. Kawazoe, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 094303 CrossRef .
N. S. Venkataramanan, M. Khazaei, R. Sahara, H. Mizuseki and Y. Kawazoe, Chem. Phys., 2009, 359, 173 CrossRef CAS .

Handbook of batteries, ed. D. Linden and T. B. Reddy, McGraw-Hill, New York, 3rd edn,  2001 Search PubMed .
J.-M. Tarascon, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Bui, V. A. Dinh and T. Ohno, Appl. Phys. Express, 2012, 5, 125802 CrossRef .
M. S. Islam and C. A. J. Fisherb, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 185 RSC .
K. M. Bui, V. A. Dinh, S. Okadab and T. Ohno, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 30433 RSC .
K. M. Bui, V. A. Dinh, S. Okada and T. Ohno, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 27226 RSC .
J. Come, M. Naguib, P. Rozier, M. W. Barsoum, Y. Gogotsi, P.-L. Taberna, M. Morcrette and P. Simon, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, A1368 CrossRef CAS .
O. Mashtalir, M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, Y. Dall'Agnese, M. Heon, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1716 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Tang, Z. Zhou and P. Shen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Er, J. Li, M. Naguib, Y. Gogotsi and V. B. Shenoy, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 11173 CAS .
Y. Xie, M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, M. W. Barsoum, Y. Gogotsi, X. Yu, K.-W. Nam, X.-Q. Yang, A. I. Kolesnikov and P. R. C. Kent, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Eames and M. Saiful Islam, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 16270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Yang, H. Ji, J. Kim, H. Kim and Y. Jung, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 5000 RSC .
H. Pan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 21486 CAS .
M. Ashton, R. G. Hennig and S. B. Sinnott, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 023901 CrossRef .
X. Ji, K. Xu, C. Chen, B. Zhang, Y. Ruan, J. Liu, L. Miao and J. Jiang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 4460 RSC .
Y. Ando and S. Watanabe, Appl. Phys. Express, 2016, 9, 015001 CrossRef .
Y.-X. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 5288 CAS .
J. Hu, B. Xu, C. Ouyang, Y. Zhang and S. A. Yang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 27467 RSC .
L. Bai, H. Yin and X. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 54999 RSC .
F. Li, C. R. Cabrera, J. Wang and Z. Chen, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 81591 RSC .
J. Zhu, A. Chroneos, J. Eppinger and U. Schwingenschlögl, Appl. Mater. Today, 2016, 5, 19 CrossRef .
X. Chen, Z. Kong, N. Li, X. Zhao and C. Sun, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 32937 RSC .
K. Persson, Y. Hinuma, Y. S. Meng, A. Van der Ven and G. Ceder, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 125416 CrossRef .
K. Toyoura, Y. Koyama, A. Kuwabara and I. Tanaka, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 2375 CAS .
K. Persson, V. A. Sethuraman, L. J. Hardwick, Y. Hinuma, Y. S. Meng, A. van der Ven, V. Srinivasan, R. Kostecki and G. Ceder, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 1176 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Z. Ma, X. Zhao, Q. Tang and Z. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 4960 CAS .
X. Guo, P. Zhang and J. Xue, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 5280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhao, W. Kang and J. Xue, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 879 RSC .
X. Zhang, X. Zhao, D. Wu, Y. Jing and Z. Zhou, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 16020 RSC .
H. Hong, R. F. Klie and S. Ogut, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 93, 115412 CrossRef .
L. A. Ponomarenko, A. K. Geim, A. A. Zhukov, R. Jalil, S. V. Morozov, K. S. Novoselov, I. V. Grigorieva, E. H. Hill, V. V. Cheianov, V. I. Fal'ko, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi and R. V. Gorbachev, Nat. Phys., 2011, 7, 958 CrossRef CAS .
L. Britnell, R. V. Gorbachev, R. Jalil, B. D. Belle, F. Schedin, M. I. Katsnelson, L. Eaves, S. V. Morozov, N. M. R. Peres, J. Leist, A. K. Geim, K. S. Novoselov and L. A. Ponomarenko, Science, 2012, 335, 947 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Geiim and I. V. Grigorieva, Nature, 2013, 499, 419 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Ma, Z. Hu, X. Zhao, Q. Tang, D. Wu, Z. Zhou and L. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 5593 CAS .
A. N. Gandi, H. N. Alshareef and U. Schwingenschlögl, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2017, 29, 035504 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Jeitschko, H. Nowotny and F. Benesovsky, Monatsh. Chem., 1963, 94, 672 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, Z. Gan and S.-C. Zhang, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 112, 226801 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Mohammad Khazaei
	Mohammd Khazaei is currently a research scientist at RIKEN Advanced Institute for Computational Science, Japan. He obtained his PhD in materials science and engineering from Tohoku University, Japan in 2005, and MSc and BSc in condensed matter physics from Sharif University of Technology and Isfahan University of Technology in Iran, respectively. He worked as a postdoctoral researcher at the National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS) and Institute for Materials Research (IMR) in Japan. His research interest is to investigate the emergent quantum phenomena at the nanoscale using first-principles calculations so as to design and tailor advanced functional materials both for fundamental research and applications in electronic and energy devices.

Ahmad Ranjbar
	Ahmad Ranjbar received his BSc and MSc in Physics from Ferdowsi University of Mashhad, and Sharif University of Technology, in Iran in 2003 and 2006, respectively. In 2007, he was awarded the Japanese Government Scholarship for a PhD program at Institute for Materials Research, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan. After getting his PhD in materials science in 2011 he received the prestigious JSPS postdoctoral fellowship which he held at Tohoku University. He then moved in 2014 to AICS, RIKEN, Japan as a postdoctoral researcher. He performs atomistic modelling of the properties of materials from first-principles. His current research interests are magnetism, ferroelectric materials, topological insulators, and quantum transport.

Masao Arai
	Masao Arai received his PhD degree in applied physics from the University of Tokyo, Japan in 1994. He is a chief researcher at International Center for Materials Nanoarchitechtonics (MANA) at National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS) in Japan. His current research interest is to determine the electronic properties of materials from first-principles calculations and to predict new exotic materials such as topological insulators.

Taizo Sasaki
	Taizo Sasaki is a principal investigator at International Center for Materials Nanoarchitechtonics (MANA) in National Institute for Materials Science in Japan. He received his degree of Doctor of Science (1987) from the Faculty of Science at Tohoku University. His research interest includes the first-principles theory of material properties, especially, the nano-structured materials. His recent targets are electronic and structural properties of layered materials, and dynamics of atoms in materials with nanostructures.

Seiji Yunoki
	Seiji Yunoki is a team leader of the Computational Materials Science Research Team in RIKEN Advanced Institute for Computational Science (AICS) and Computational Quantum Matter Research Team in RIKEN Center for Emergent Matter Science (CEMS). He is also an associate chief scientist at Computational Condensed Matter Physics Laboratory in RIKEN. He received his PhD degree from the Department of applied physics, Nagoya University in 1996. He stayed abroad in three different countries over 12 years before joining RIKEN in 2008. His main interests include strongly correlated quantum systems and computational materials science.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Typical structure of M2AX MAX phases. (b) Projected density of states [PDOS (states per eV per cell)] and (c) the projected band structure of Ti2AlC.12 For clarity, the PDOS for Al is scaled by a factor of 3. The Fermi energy is located at zero energy. Γ(0,0,0), M(1/2,0,0), K(1/3,1/3,0), A(0,0,1/2), Λ(1/2,0,1/2), and H(1/3,1/3,1/2) are high symmetric momenta in the Brillouin zone of Ti2AlC.	 

 	Fig. 2  Top and side views of (a) pristine MXene M2X. Top and side views of (b) model 2 and (c) model 4 for functionalized MXene (see the text). A and B indicate different types of hollow sites in (a). M, X, and T denote transition metal (green), C/N (blue), and attached chemical groups such as F, O, and OH (red), respectively.	 

 	Fig. 3  Side views of pristine (a) M3X2, (b) M4X3, (c) M′2M′′X2, and (d) M′2M′′2X3 MXenes, where M, M′, and M′′ denote transition metals, and X represents C or N.	 

 	Fig. 4  Projected density of states [PDOS (states per eV per cell)] and projected band structures for (a) Ti2C, (b) Ti2CF2, and (c) Ti2CO2.39 The Fermi energy is located at zero energy.	 

 	Fig. 5  Top (bottom) panels: Projected band structures for W2CO2, W2HfC2O2, and W2Hf2C3O2 calculated without (with) the relativistic spin–orbit coupling.67,68 The Fermi energy is located at zero energy.	 

 	Fig. 6  Projected band structures on each constituent atoms for eight different systems indicated in the figures.42 The position of the lowest energy nearly free state (NFE) near the Fermi energy at the Γ point is indicated by an arrow. The Fermi energy is located at zero energy.	 

 	Fig. 7  Electron localization function (ELF) for Hfn+1Cn(OH)2 (n = 1, 2, and 3) MXenes with different thicknesses.42	 

 	Fig. 8  Electronic structure of antiferromagnetic Cr2CF2 obtained using the GGA: (a) spin projected density of states [TDOS (states per eV per cell)], (b) band structure, and (c) top and side views of spin density. The Fermi energy is located at zero energy in (a) and (b). Blue and yellow colors indicate spin-up and spin-down densities, respectively, in (c).	 

 	Fig. 9  Top and side views of one of the eigenvectors of the transmission matrix with NFE characteristics for Hf2C(OH)2.42 L and R indicate the left and right electrodes, respectively. Since the transmission eigenvector is complex, the absolute value of the eigenvector is shown by the isosurface and the phase is indicated by the color of the isosurface.	 

 	Fig. 10  The change in the work function (ΔΦ) of M10C9 and M′10N9 (M = Sc, Ti, Zr, Hf, V, Nb, Ta; M′ = Ti, Zr, Hf) functionalized with F, OH, and O as a function of the change in the surface dipole moment (ΔP).72 The solid line (ΔΦ = −170.01ΔP) indicates the linear fit to the results. The dashed line (ΔΦ = −180.95ΔP) is the linear relation reported previously for three-dimensional bulk systems.137	 

 	Fig. 11  Band structure, density of states (DOS [states per eV per cell]), Seebeck coefficient (S [μV K−1]), electrical conductivity (σ/τ [1017 Ω−1 cm−1 s−1]), and power factor (S2σ/τ [1014 μW cm−1 K−2 s−1]) as a function of chemical potential μ at various temperatures (indicated in the figures) for Nb2CF2 (upper panels) and Mo2CF2 (lower panels).51 Here, τ is the relaxation time. The band structure and DOS are calculated at zero temperature. μ = 0 corresponds to the Fermi energy at zero temperature in DOS, Seebeck coefficient, electrical conductivity, and power factor.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Density of states (DOS) in states per eV per cell and (b) the projected band structure of the graphene/Hf2C(OH)2 heterostructure.42 Arrows in (b) indicate the position of the Dirac cone at the K point and the nearly free electron band at the Γ point. The Fermi energy is located at zero energy. (c) Electron localization function (ELF) counter plot and (d) charge transfer (Δρ) isosurfaces with ±0.005 e Å−3 for graphene/Hf2C(OH)2.42 The excess and depleted charges (electrons) are shown in dark orchid and deep pink colors, respectively, in (d).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
