Substitution engineering of lead-free halide perovskites for photocatalytic applications assisted by machine learning   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3CP00003F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D3CP00003F
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2023, 25, 12450-12457Substitution engineering of lead-free halide perovskites for photocatalytic applications assisted by machine learning†

        
          
            Tao 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shuxin 
            Fan
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Hao 
            Jin
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Yunjin 
            Yu
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Yadong 
            Wei
          
        
      *a
aCollege of Physics and Optoelectronic Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, China. E-mail: jh@szu.edu.cn; ywei@szu.edu.cn
bCollege of Arts and Sciences, Beijing Normal University, Zhuhai 519087, China
Received 
      1st January 2023
    , Accepted 9th April 2023First published on 10th April 2023AbstractLead-free perovskites (A3B2X9) have drawn much attention in recent years. However, a thorough understanding of these materials is still in its early stages. This is because A3B2X9 perovskites have large-scale component tunability, in which the A+, B3+, and X− ions can be replaced or partially substituted with other elements. Here, based on density functional theory and machine learning techniques we propose a data-driven method to find suitable configurations for photocatalytic water splitting. By replacing atoms in A3B2X9, 3.4 million configurations are constructed and studied. Our results show that the substitutional position plays an important role in determining the photocatalytic performance. Specifically, the co-existence of Br and I elements is favorable for X-sites, while for B-site atoms, it is better to choose atoms from groups IIIB and IIIA with a period greater than 3. Considering their rarity and toxicity, we believe that In is a good choice for B-sites and propose CsRb2BiInBr5I4 as a promising candidate. These results may provide guidance for the discovery of novel lead-free perovskites for photocatalytic applications.
Introduction
In the past few years, all-inorganic lead perovskites have become key materials for many technologies essential in our modern society, for example, piezoelectrics,1–4 multiferroic magnetoelectrics,5–8 and photovoltaic absorbers.9–12 However, there are two key challenges that limit the usage of these materials in practical applications. First, they are toxic due to the presence of lead (Pb). Second, they tend to decompose partially on exposure to air, water, ultra-violet light, or heat.13 Accordingly, replacement of lead with less toxic elements is important and has attracted much attention in the materials science community. To obtain a lead-free perovskite, the most direct solution is via iso-valent substitution, i.e., replacing Pb with Sn or Ge elements, which belong to the same group. Nevertheless, this kind of material suffers from poor performance. Fortunately, researchers have found that rather than restricting to group 14 elements, substituting three Pb2+ cations with two trivalent B+ cations is a promising way to obtain lead-free perovskites.14–16 Because of their higher trivalent oxidation state, A3B2X9 becomes the stable stoichiometry.15 Compared with lead-based perovskites, lead-free A3B2X9 materials have better stability. For example, Cs3Bi2I9 can maintain its initial conversion efficiency even after one month of preparation, and after 60 days of stability test, the XRD spectrum of Cs3Sb2I9 remains largely unchanged.
Recently, it has been found that A3B2X9 perovskites can be applied in photocatalytic applications for water splitting.17 However, the photocatalytic efficiency of A3B2X9 perovskites is not ideal since electrons and holes can easily recombine.18 To optimize the photocatalytic properties, different methods have been applied.19,20 One of the promising solutions is via substitution engineering. For example, Chen et al. reported that Cs3Bi2xSb2−2xI9 (x = 0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, and 0.9) shows better catalytic performance. The hydrogen evolution rate can be up to 92.6 μmol h−1, which is significantly higher than that of (CH3NH3)PbI3 powders.19 Although many A3B2X9 perovskites have been fabricated and studied experimentally, a thorough understanding of this kind of material is still in its early stage. This is because A3B2X9 perovskites have large-scale component tunability, in which the A+, B3+, and X− ions can be replaced or partially substituted with other equivalent ions.21,22 Considering the vast number of possible combinations, the number of A3B2X9 perovskites could be huge and possibly interesting systems are still awaiting discovery. This means one should explore thousands of structures simultaneously, which is a great challenge for the traditional trial-and-error method. Fortunately, advanced machine learning (ML) techniques provide an alternative way to accelerate material discovery.23–26
In this work, we propose a data-driven method to find suitable configurations for photocatalytic water splitting in A3B2X9 perovskites based on a combination of high throughput density functional theory (DFT) calculations and ML techniques. By replacing the atoms in A3B2X9, we built 3.4 million hybrid AxA′3−xByB′2−yXzX′9−z structures. We first generated 3.4 million unique AxA′3−xByB′2−yXzX′9−z structures, and 1000 structures from them were randomly selected and calculated via the high-throughput DFT method, and were used to generate a training dataset for the ML model. Then, we selected 21 features based on elemental properties and crystal structures to describe hybrid AxA′3−xByB′2−yXzX′9−z structures. The trained ML model was used to predict the electronic properties for the remaining 3.4 million configurations based on the gradient boosting regression (GBR) algorithm. After that, a screening procedure was employed, and three hundred thousand configurations were selected as photocatalytic candidates. Finally, we calculated the solar-to-hydrogen (STH) conversion efficiency of these materials and performed a statistical analysis for these obtained data. Our results suggest that the substitutional position plays an important role in determining the STH. As such, the photocatalytic performance varies even among perovskites with the same stoichiometry. Nevertheless, some general trends can be obtained based on the ML results. For X-sites, the co-existence of Br and I elements is favorable, while for B-site atoms, it is better to choose atoms that are located in groups IIIB and IIIA and have a period greater than 3. Furthermore, considering their rarity and toxicity, the In element was considered as a good choice for B-sites. These selection criteria will allow lead-free perovskites to exhibit high solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency.
Results and discussion
Design framework
In this work, the material discovery design framework combined with ML techniques and DFT calculations consists of four main components: (1) input data, (2) ML algorithm, (3) screening procedure and (4) STH calculation and statistical analysis. The workflow is schematically illustrated in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  The material discovery workflow combined with ML techniques and DFT calculations to efficiently search for hybrid AxA′3−xByB′2−yXzX′9−z perovskites for photocatalytic applications. 
Input data
Since B3+ atoms have an important influence on photocatalytic performance, in this work, we chose 2 A+ atoms, 42 B3+ atoms, and 4 X− atoms to form hybrid AxA′3−xByB′2−yXzX′9−z perovskites. The unit-cell of the A3B2X9 perovskite (P3m1, no. 164) is shown in Fig. 2(a). In A3B2X9 perovskites, the A+, B3+, and X− ions can be replaced or partially substituted with other equivalent ions, inducing more changes in the crystal structures and electronic structures. Thus, we built 3.4 million unique configurations, and 1000 structures were randomly selected for high-throughput DFT calculations, which were implemented in the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP). More calculation details can be found in the Computational methods section. Once the calculations were finalized, these data were divided into the training dataset (80%) and test dataset (20%) for the ML model.
 Fig. 2  (a) Side view of A3B2X9 perovskites. The A-site elements (blue), B-site elements (red) and X-site elements (gray) that can be substituted in the perovskites are listed in (b) periodic table. 
A successful ML model for predicting material properties requires appropriate features as input data. These features should well describe the physical and chemical properties of the materials. For different prediction targets, different features are chosen. For example, the good features describing the formation energy of materials are based on the electronegativity of the compositions, while the best features for describing the melting temperature are the atomic number, atomic mass, and differences between atomic radii.27,28 However, most features are based on the information of the constituent elements in the previous work. In our studies, due to the different atomic sites, the local atomic environment of the materials was considered. And several different strategies for describing crystal structures have been proposed: Coulomb-matrix (CM)-based representation,29 partial radial distribution function (PRDF)-based representation,30 and Voronoi tessellation-based representation. Previous work showed that the Voronoi method is more accurate in cross-validation than CM and PRDF.31 More importantly, the features based on the Voronoi method are insensitive to changes in the volume of structures, which makes it useful to predict the properties of materials without the need for the DFT-structure optimization process.
Here, we generated 273 initial features based on the information of constituent elements and Voronoi method.32 In order to avoid the curse of dimensionality, the number of features should be far less than the number of input data. Therefore, we evaluated these initial features via the GBR algorithm. Then, according to the scores obtained using the GBR algorithm, the forward selection was made to exclude the features that had little effect on the bandgaps. Finally, 21 important features were chosen as input variables for our ML, which are listed in Table S2 (ESI†). Fig. 3(a) shows the plot of the feature importance percentage of these 21 features. Clearly, the average deviation of the columns of the constituent atoms plays the most important role in determining the bandgap, followed by the possible compound (determining whether the material is ionically bonded or not), the range of the Mendeleev numbers of the constituent atoms, and the average deviation of the space group number. Note that features 1, 2 and 3 are related to the local environment of the atoms, which means different substituted sites have great influences on the bandgaps of the materials. To determine the correlation between the features, we also calculated the Pearson correlation coefficient matrices, which are defined as p = cov(xi, xj)/(σxiσxj). If p = 0, it means that there is no linear correlation between the two variables. Here, xi/xj are different features; cov and σxi/xj are the covariance and the standard deviation of xi/xj, respectively. As shown in Fig. 3(b), a low linear correlation is observed for most of the features, indicating that the redundant and irrelevant features have been successfully removed.
 Fig. 3  (a) Importance of the selected features. (b) Pearson correlation coefficient matrices of the selected features. (c) Comparison between the predicted bandgap and DFT-calculated bandgap. (d) Distribution of differences between the bandgap and DFT-calculated bandgap. 
ML algorithm
In a ML model, the algorithm is an important factor. In this work, we have evaluated several ML algorithms, such as GBR, random forest regressor, AdaBoost regressor, and support vector regressor. The performances of the models were evaluated based on the 5-fold cross-validation. In this process, the data are randomly divided into 5 parts, each part is used as the test set, and the remaining four parts are used as the training set. Accordingly, five models are fitted, and their average scores are used as the final evaluation score. Based on this evaluation process, we found that GBR has the best performance among all studied ML models. Therefore, we chose GBR as the ML algorithm in our following work. All parameters of the GBR algorithm were tested to optimize the performance of the model using a grid search technique based on the 5-fold cross-validation score. In addition, to evaluate the model performance, two indexes were employed, that is, the coefficient of determination (R2) and root mean square error (RMSE). The detailed parameters of GBR, 5-fold cross-validation, R2 and RMSE are shown in the section of Computational methods and ESI.†
Accordingly, we obtained R2 = 0.915 and RMSE = 0.402 eV, suggesting outstanding performance of our ML model. Furthermore, a comparison between the predicted bandgap and DFT-calculated bandgap is shown in Fig. 3(c), which shows a good agreement. Fig. 3(d) shows the plot of the distribution of differences between the predicted bandgap and DFT-calculated bandgap, from which we can see that most of the residuals are concentrated near zero. These results show that the model has good ability of generalization. Then, we used the trained ML model to predict the bandgaps of the remaining 3.4 million configurations.
Screening procedure
The bandgap is an important property for photocatalysts. In order to effectively absorb sunlight, the bandgap should be within 1.23–3.0 eV. Since the calculations based on DFT underestimate the bandgaps, in order to include more potential materials, we adjusted the range of bandgaps to 0.6–2.4 eV as our condition for screening potential photocatalytic materials. Then, the tolerance factor (Tf) and octahedral factor (Of) were used to predict the stability of the perovskite structure. Tf should be between 0.8 and 1.2, and Of should range from 0.4 to 0.7.23,33,34
Importantly, as mentioned above, the photocatalyst material needs to have suitable band edge positions. At the zero-charge point, we can use the empirical formula to estimate the conduction band edge (E0CB) and valence band edge (E0VB):35 (1) (2)where Eg is the bandgap energy of the materials and Ee is the energy of free electron on the hydrogen scale (4.44 eV). χ(S) is the electronegativity of the compound, which is calculated according to the following formula:36 (3)where χn and N are the electronegativities of the constituent atoms, and the total number of the atoms in materials, respectively. Under the standard of the normal hydrogen electrode, E0CBM ≤ 0 and E0CBM ≥ 1.23 should be satisfied for overall photocatalytic water splitting. From eqn (1) and (2), we find that the range of χ(S) is approximately 4 to 6 (under the condition that Eg is from 1.23 to 3.0 eV), which is used as a filter. After preliminary screening, only one tenth of the configurations remained as the potential photocatalytic candidates, which means that the space for research was greatly reduced.
STH calculation and statistical analysis
In order to predict the catalytic performance, we used the following formula to calculate the STH efficiency (ηSTH):37 ηSTH = ηabsηcu(4)where ηabs is the efficiency of light absorption, which is defined as: (5)here, P(hω) is the AM1.5G solar energy flux at the photon energy hω, and Eg is the bandgap of materials. The numerator represents the power density that can be absorbed by materials, and the denominator represents the total power density of sunlight. Then, ηcu is the efficiency of light absorption, which is defined as: (6)where ΔG is the potential difference of 1.23 eV for water splitting and E is the energy of photons that can actually be utilized for water splitting. According to previous studies, E is determined as follows:37 (7)where χ(H2) and χ(O2) are overpotential of the HER and OER, respectively. According to these equations, ηSTH is calculated for these configurations.
As has been discussed above, different substituted sites have different influences on the properties of the materials (see Fig. S2 in ESI†). However, exact substitution is a challenge for material fabrication since it is difficult to precisely replace the atoms, thus making it difficult to obtain ideal systems. Therefore, one should substitute the system with those elements that have large probabilities to show high ηSTH. Since Bi-based materials have been successfully synthesized through experiments,19 we thus take Bi-based materials as an example and illustrate the substitution rules. Fig. 4(a) shows the average values of ηSTH as a function of bandgaps and electronegativity. Clearly, there exists a triangular region. Within this region, a high ηSTH with a value over 10% is exhibited. We then plotted the numbers of B-site and X-site substituted Bi-based CsxRb′3−xBiyB′2−yXzX′9−z perovskites whose ηSTH is lying in this triangular region, which is shown in Fig. 4(b). It can be considered as the probability of obtaining high-performance materials, and thus the material composition should be chosen from the dark blue area. Our results suggest that the halide X atoms have a preference for Br and I atoms. It can be attributed to the fact that materials containing Br or I atoms have smaller bandgaps and can better absorb sunlight. For B-site atoms, for clarity, the potential B-site atoms are marked in the periodic table as shown in Fig. S3 (ESI†). The results suggest that we should choose those elements that are located in groups IIIB and IIIA and have a period greater than 3. However, it should be noted that there are some unexpected situations that do not conform to the general trend. For example, in the Ce- and Yb-substituted systems, the ηSTH is relatively low. In this work, we also examined the effects of concentration of X atoms on ηSTH. As shown in Fig. 5, at different substitutional concentrations, the co-existence Br and I elements is favorable for X sites, which can show better photocatalytic performance.
 Fig. 4  (a) Average values of ηSTH as a function of bandgaps and electronegativity. (b) Number of configurations of doped A3BiiB2−iXjX9−j in a triangular region. 
 Fig. 5  Data visualization of ηSTH with concentration of halogen atoms. 
To guarantee that the selected candidates contain environmentally friendly elements with relatively high abundance, we require that a candidate should not contain any radioactive element, toxic element, or rare earth element. Therefore, based on Fig. 4, we considered In to be a good dopant for B-sites, and the halide X atoms tend to favor Br and I atoms. In order to understand the electronic and optical properties of CsxRb′3−xBiIn′BrzI′9−z systems, one configuration, i.e. CsRb2BiInBr5I4 (see Fig. 6(a)) is selected for discussion. The density of states (DOS) and band structure are shown in Fig. 6(b) and (c). We can see that the CsRb2BiInBr5I4 configuration has a direct bandgap of 1.45 eV, where the valence band maximum (VBM) and conduction band minimum (CBM) are both located at the A point. The CBM is mainly contributed by B-site (Bi and In) and X-site (Br and I) atoms, while the VBM is dominated by X-site atoms. These results suggest that B-site and X-site atoms exert a great influence on energy band edges, which are important for light absorption. Then, we plotted the absorption coefficient of the configuration. As shown in Fig. 6(d), the system shows a high light harvesting ability in the visible solar spectrum. Furthermore, the STH was evaluated, with an efficiency up to 16.87%. The good optical adsorption combined with large ηSTH value suggests that our proposed candidate indeed exhibits high photocatalytic performance.
 Fig. 6  (a) The side view, (b) DOS, (c) band structure, and (d) absorption coefficient of the CsRb2BiInBr5I4 configuration. 
Conclusion
In summary, we used a data-driven method to explore hybrid perovskites based on the combination of high throughput DFT calculations and ML techniques. By replacing the atoms in A3B2X9, 3.4 million hybrid AxA′3−xBiyB′2−yXzX′9−z structures were built. The GBR model was used to rapidly and accurately predict the bandgap of materials. After screening, we obtained more than 300000 potential photocatalytic materials and their ηSTH was evaluated. Although less obvious correlations between dopants and ηSTH are exhibited, some general trends can still be observed: the co-existence of Br and I elements is favorable for X sites, while for B-sites, atoms that are located in groups IIIB and IIIA and have a period greater than 3 are preferred. These selection criteria allow the material to exhibit high ηSTH. Considering the rarity and toxicity, In element was selected as a favorable choice for B-sites and a promising candidate was also proposed. Our work may pave the way to explore novel lead-free perovskite photocatalysts with high efficiency.
Computational methods
Density functional theory
All DFT calculations were implemented in VASP. The projected augmented wave (PAW) and generalized gradient approximation with the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) were used to describe electron-ion potential and the exchange-correlation function, respectively. A plane-wave cutoff energy of 400 eV was selected. A 4 × 4 × 3 K-point mesh was set for Brillouin zone integration during the structure optimization process. The energy and force convergence limits were 10−5 eV per atom and 0.01 eV A−1, respectively.
Hyper-parameter selection
Scikit-learn was employed for ML operations, and six hyper-parameters of the GBR model were optimized by grid searching. The optimal hyper-parameter settings were as follows: learning_rate = 0.1, loss = ‘lad’, max_depth = 12, min_samples_leaf = 6, min_samples_split = 2, n_estimators = 300.
5-fold cross-validation
The data set was randomly divided into 5 parts, each part was used to validate the model, and the remaining four parts were used to train the models. Therefore, in this 5-fold cross-validation process, five models were fitted, and their average score was used as the final score.
Model evaluation

R
2 is the proportion of dependent variables (y) that can be explained using independent variables (x): (8)where , , and ŷi,  are the predicted value and average of y, respectively.
RMSE is the standard deviation of the prediction errors: (9)
Data availability
Data of predicted hybrid perovskites and the codes developed in this paper are available from the corresponding author on request.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong Province (grant no. 2022A1515012006), and the Natural Science Foundation of Shenzhen (grant no. JCYJ20190808152801642 and no. JCYJ20190808115415679).
References
G. Huang, S. Rassel, J. Qu, S. Xu, C. Wang and D. Ban, Manipulation of spin splitting in two-dimensional lead bromide perovskite rashba piezoelectrics, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2021, 3, 285–291 CrossRef CAS .
D. Singh, M. Ghita, S. Halilov and M. Fornari, The role of Pb in piezoelectrics and possible substitutions for it, J. Phys. IV, 2005, 128, 47–53 CAS .
Z.-X. Zhang, H.-Y. Zhang, W. Zhang, X.-G. Chen, H. Wang and R.-G. Xiong, Organometallic-based hybrid perovskite piezoelectrics with a narrow band gap, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 17787–17794 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hao, W. Li, J. Zhai and H. Chen, Progress in high-strain perovskite piezoelectric ceramics, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2019, 135, 1–57 CrossRef .
E. Bousquet and A. Cano, Non-collinear magnetism in multiferroic perovskites, J. Phys.-Condes. Matter, 2016, 28, 123001 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Hammouri, E. Fohtung and I. Vasiliev, Ab initio study of magnetoelectric coupling in La0.66Sr0.33MnO3/PbZr0.2Ti0.8O3 multiferroic heterostructures, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2016, 28, 396004 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Fu, Z. Hou, Y. He, J.-C. Liu, H.-P. Lv and Y.-Y. Tang, Multiaxial ferroelectricity and ferroelasticity in a chiral perovskite, Chem. Mater., 2022, 34, 3518–3524 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fechner, S. Ostanin and I. Mertig, Effect of the surface polarization in polar perovskites studied from first principles, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 094112 CrossRef .
N. Liu and C. Yam, First-principles study of intrinsic defects in formamidinium lead triiodide perovskite solar cell absorbers, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 6800–6804 RSC .
D. Azulay, I. Levine, S. Gupta, E. Barak-Kulbak, A. Bera, G. San, S. Simha, D. Cahen, O. Millo, G. Hodes and I. Balberg, On the influence of multiple cations on the in-gap states and phototransport properties of iodide-based halide perovskites, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 24444–24452 RSC .
M. Aldamasy, Z. Iqbal, G. Li, J. Pascual, F. Alharthi, A. Abate and M. Li, Challenges in tin perovskite solar cells, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2021, 23, 23413–23427 RSC .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, Organometal halide perovskites as visible-light sensitizers for photovoltaic cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Song, A. Abate, S. C. Watthage, G. K. Liyanage, A. B. Phillips, U. Steiner, M. Graetzel and M. J. Heben, Perovskite solar cell stability in humid air: partially reversible phase transitions in the PbI2-CH3NH3I-H2O system, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600846 CrossRef .
B. W. Park, B. Philippe, X. Zhang, H. Rensmo, G. Boschloo and E. Johansson, Bismuth based hybrid perovskites A3Bi2I9 (A: methylammonium or cesium) for solar cell application, Adv. Mater., 2016, 27, 6806–6813 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Saparov, F. Hong, J.-P. Sun, H.-S. Duan, W. Meng, S. Cameron, I. G. Hill, Y. Yan and D. B. Mitzi, Thin-film preparation and characterization of Cs3Sb2I9: A lead-free layered perovskite semiconductor, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 5622–5632 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pal, S. Manna, A. Mondal, S. Das, K. V. Adarsh and A. Nag, Colloidal synthesis and photophysics of M3Sb2I9 (M = Cs and Rb) nanocrystals: Lead-free perovskites, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 14187–14191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, G. Liu, Z. Li, Y. Lou, J. Chen and Y. Zhao, Stable Lead-free (CH3NH3)3Bi2I9 perovskite for photocatalytic hydrogen generation, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 15080–15085 CrossRef CAS .
J.-C. Hebig, I. Kuhn, J. Flohre and T. Kirchartz, Optoelectronic properties of (CH3NH3)3Sb2I9 thin films for photovoltaic applications, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 309–314 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chen, P. Wang, Y. Wu, Q. Zhang, Q. Wu, Z. Wang, Z. Zheng, Y. Liu, Y. Dai and B. Huang, Lead-free halide perovskite Cs3Bi2xSb2-2xI9 (x approximate to 0.3) possessing the photocatalytic activity for hydrogen evolution comparable to that of (CH3NH3)PbI3, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2001344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Hu, H. Zhao, Z. Cheng, J. Ding, H. Gao, Y. Han, S. Wang, Z. Xu, Y. Zhou, T. Jia, H. Kimura and M. Osada, van der Waals force layered multiferroic hybrid perovskite (CH3NH3)2CuCl4 single crystals, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 4235–4239 RSC .
X. Zheng, C. Wu, S. K. Jha, Z. Li, K. Zhu and S. Priya, Improved phase stability of formamidinium lead triiodide perovskite by strain relaxation, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1014–1020 CrossRef CAS .
O. J. Weber, D. Ghosh, S. Gaines, P. F. Henry, A. B. Walker, M. S. Islam and M. T. Weller, Phase behavior and polymorphism of formamidinium lead iodide, Chem. Mater., 2018, 8b00862 Search PubMed .
S. Lu, Q. Zhou, Y. Ouyang, Y. Guo, Q. Li and J. Wang, Accelerated discovery of stable lead-free hybrid organic-inorganic perovskites via machine learning, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3405 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Yuan, Z. Liu, P. Balachandran, D. Xue, Y. Zhou, X. Ding, L. Juan, D. Xue and T. Lookman, Accelerated discovery of large electrostrains in BaTiO3-based piezoelectrics using active learning, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1702884 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Jin, H. Zhang, J. Li, T. Wang, L. Wan, H. Guo and Y. Wei, Data-driven systematic search of promising photocatalysts for water splitting under visible light, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 5211–5218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. Davies, K. T. Butler and A. Walsh, Data-driven discovery of photoactive quaternary oxides using first-principles machine learning, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 7221–7230 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Ghiringhelli, J. Vybiral, S. V. Levchenko, C. Draxl and M. Scheffler, Big data of materials science: Critical role of the descriptor, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2015, 114, 105503 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Seko, T. Maekawa, K. Tsuda and I. Tanaka, Machine learning with systematic density-functional theory calculations: Application to melting temperatures of single- and binary-component solids, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 054303 CrossRef .
F. Faber, A. Lindmaa, O. A. von Lilienfeld and R. Armiento, Crystal structure representations for machine learning models of formation energies, Int. J. Quantum Chem., 2015, 115, 1094–1101 CrossRef CAS .
K. T. Schütt, H. Glawe, F. Brockherde, A. Sanna, K. R. Müller and E. K. U. Gross, How to represent crystal structures for machine learning: Towards fast prediction of electronic properties, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 205118 CrossRef .
L. Ward, R. Liu, A. Krishna, V. I. Hegde, A. Agrawal, A. Choudhary and C. Wolverton, Including crystal structure attributes in machine learning models of formation energies via Voronoi tessellations, Phys. Rev. B, 2017, 96, 024104 CrossRef .
L. Ward, A. Dunn, A. Faghaninia, N. E. R. Zimmermann, S. Bajaj, Q. Wang, J. Montoya, J. Chen, K. Bystrom, M. Dylla, K. Chard, M. Asta, K. A. Persson, G. J. Snyder, I. Foster and A. Jain, Matminer: An open source toolkit for materials data mining, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2018, 152, 60–69 CrossRef .
A. E. Fedorovskiy, N. A. Drigo and M. K. Nazeeruddin, The role of goldschmidt's tolerance factor in the formation of A2BX6 double halide perovskites and its optimal range, Small Methods, 2020, 4, 1900426 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kieslich, S. Sun and A. K. Cheetham, An extended Tolerance Factor approach for organic–inorganic perovskites, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 3430–3433 RSC .

          S. R. Morrison, Electrochemistry at semiconductor and oxidized metal electrodes, Plenum Press,  1980 Search PubMed .

          R. T. Sanderson, Chemical periodicity, Reinhold: New York,  1960, vol. 270 Search PubMed .
C.-F. Fu, J. Sun, Q. Luo, X. Li, W. Hu and J. Yang, Intrinsic electric fields in two-dimensional materials boost the solar-to-hydrogen efficiency for photocatalytic water splitting, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 6312–6317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3cp00003fThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2023
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  The material discovery workflow combined with ML techniques and DFT calculations to efficiently search for hybrid AxA′3−xByB′2−yXzX′9−z perovskites for photocatalytic applications.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Side view of A3B2X9 perovskites. The A-site elements (blue), B-site elements (red) and X-site elements (gray) that can be substituted in the perovskites are listed in (b) periodic table.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Importance of the selected features. (b) Pearson correlation coefficient matrices of the selected features. (c) Comparison between the predicted bandgap and DFT-calculated bandgap. (d) Distribution of differences between the bandgap and DFT-calculated bandgap.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
ηSTH = ηabsηcu	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)

 	Fig. 4  (a) Average values of ηSTH as a function of bandgaps and electronegativity. (b) Number of configurations of doped A3BiiB2−iXjX9−j in a triangular region.	 

 	Fig. 5  Data visualization of ηSTH with concentration of halogen atoms.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) The side view, (b) DOS, (c) band structure, and (d) absorption coefficient of the CsRb2BiInBr5I4 configuration.	 
	(8)
	(9)
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3cp00003f

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2023
