Evolution of polymer photovoltaic performances from subtle chemical structure variations   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CP42935G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CP42935G
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 15127-15134Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsEvolution of polymer photovoltaic performances from subtle chemical structure variations†

        
          
            Han 
            Yan
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Denghua 
            Li
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Kun 
            Lu
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Xiangwei 
            Zhu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yajie 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yanlian 
            Yang
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Zhixiang 
            Wei
          
        
      *a
aNational Center for Nanoscience and Technology, Beijing 100190, P. R. China. E-mail: weizx@nanoctr.cn; lvk@nanoctr.cn; yangyl@nanoctr.cn;  Fax: +86-10-62656765;   Tel: +86-10-82545565
bThe Graduate School of the Chinese Academy of Science, Beijing 100039, P. R. China
Received 
      21st August 2012
    , Accepted 29th August 2012First published on 30th August 2012AbstractConjugated polymers are promising replacements for their inorganic counterparts in photovoltaics due to their low cost, ease of processing, and straightforward thin film formation. New materials have been able to improve the power conversion efficiency of photovoltaic cells up to 8%. However, rules for rational material design are still lacking, and subtle chemical structure variations usually result in large performance discrepancies. The present paper reports a detailed study on the crystalline structure, morphology, and in situ optoelectronic properties of blend films of polythiophene derivatives and [6,6]-phenyl C61-butyric acid methyl ester by changing the alkyl side chain length and position of polythiophene. The correlation among the molecular structure, mesoscopic morphology, mesoscopic optoelectronic property and macroscopic device performance (highest efficiency above 4%) was directly established. Both solubility and intermolecular interactions should be considered in rational molecular design. Knowledge obtained from this study can aid the selection of appropriate processing conditions that improve blend film morphology, charge transport property, and overall solar cell efficiency.
Introduction
Solar energy, as an alternative to fossil fuels, given its abundance, safety, renewability, and cleanliness, is a promising answer to the global energy crisis. However, the high cost of solar cell components and their complicated fabrication process limit the application of solar energy. Thus, although silicon solar cells are widely used, researchers are still searching for new materials that are more economical and consist of thin film device structures with fewer semiconductors. Organic and polymeric materials are promising candidates for photovoltaics due to their low cost, ease of processing, and straightforward thin film formation.1–5 Recently, polymer solar cells (PSCs) have drawn much attention of both academic and industrial researchers.6–11
Alkylation of conjugated units is the most important modification approach for realisation of the low-cost solution-processed devices. Alkylation helps improve the solubility and processability of materials. Thus, alkyl sequences in side chains are very important in optimising the properties of such materials. Previous studies have reported the effect of the alkyl side chain length on crystallisation and charge carrier transport properties. As an excellent optoelectronic material, the crystalline structure of alkyl-substituted polythiophene has been studied by several groups,12–15 reaching an agreement that these systems are semi-crystalline. The crystalline fraction consists of stacked layers of comb-like polymer chains arranged side-by-side. The flexible alkyl side chains serve as spacers between the stiffer polythiophene main chains. The separation distance depends on the alkyl side chain length and planarity of the backbone. Thus, a wide variety of polythiophenes with different side chains can display various miscible and conducting properties depending on the structure of the individual polymers.16–19 In organic photovoltaic (OPV) systems, morphology is another factor that should also be taken into account. The ideal morphology of an organic photovoltaic is often presented as a bicontinuous interpenetrating network with both phases about 20 nm in size. However, previous studies have mainly focused on the effects of macroscopic crystallisation and charge transport properties on the overall photovoltaic performance.20–22 A relationship among the molecular structure, mesoscopic morphology, mesoscopic optoelectronic property, and macroscopic device performance has yet been directly established.
In the study of the photo-physical process on the active layer, many techniques have been applied to correlate morphology and device efficiency, including transmission electron microscopy (TEM),23–25 X-ray methods,26–29 and other high-technology ones.30,31 Recently, two types of atomic force microscopies (AFM) with a conductive probe in contact mode, namely conductive (c-AFM) and photoconductive AFM (pc-AFM), were used to measure simultaneously the topography and photocurrent generated by a sample under illumination. Great efforts have been made to probe the active layer of the organic solar cell by using an AFM technique since 2007.32–38 The two-dimensional mapping of nanoscale photocurrent has been successfully demonstrated, clearly revealing the charge generation and transport characteristics in different polymer:[6,6]-phenyl C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) systems.
In the present article, we used the extensively studied thiophene-based polymers as the donor materials in OPV devices and PCBM as the acceptor. We report the characterisation of bulk heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells fabricated using polymers with essentially identical polymer main chains while different side chains. We find that both the length and position of the alkyl side chains can influence the nanoscale thin film morphologies and the microscopic blend structures. Using c-AFM and pc-AFM, the in situ charge injection and transport properties are probed. Subsequently, we directly establish the relationship between mesoscopic optoelectronic properties and the overall device performance. This study highlights the impact of the side chains on intermolecular packing, BHJ morphology, charge transport property, and device performance. The results would be beneficial for designing novel solution-processed materials for solar cells with further improved conversion efficiencies.
Experimental
Materials
Poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT; Mn » 64000, 98.5% regioregular) and poly(3-dodecylthiophene) (P3DDT; Mn » 60000, 98.5% regioregular) were obtained from Sigma–Aldrich. PCBM (99.5%) was from American Dye Source, Inc. All were used as received. Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) (Baytron PVP Al 4083) was purchased from H. C. Stark. 1,2-Dichlorobenzene (ODCB) was distilled prior to use. Poly(3-dodecylthienylene-thiophene) (P3DDTT) was synthesised in our laboratory (Mn » 57000). All pertinent material information is listed in the ESI.†
Fabrication of PSCs
Indium-tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass (15 Ω sq−1) was cleaned successively with deionised water, ethanol, acetone, and isopropyl alcohol three times for 15 min, and then dried at 150 °C for 30 min. After complete drying, the ITO glass was exposed to UV-ozone for 15 min. PEDOT:PSS was filtered through a 0.45 μm syringe filter, spin coated to 40 nm thickness, and annealed at 120 °C for 1 h in an ambient atmosphere. The polymers and PCBM (fixed at 15 mg mL−1) were dissolved in ODCB. The solutions were stirred for at least 14 h at 40 °C. The PSCs were processed in an N2-filled glove box. The spin-coated PSCs were fabricated using the solutions with different polymers. To improve device performance, thermal annealing was performed prior to electrode deposition under different conditions for each polymer. After the entire film-forming process, Ca (20 nm) and Al (80 nm) were thermally evaporated on top of the active layer under a vacuum lower than 2 × 10−6 mbar. The active area of the standard PSC device was 0.04 cm2.
Measurements and characterisations
For in situ measurement and characterisation, the samples were processed using the same method as that for the PSC production. X-ray diffraction (XRD) was conducted directly on the film samples using a Philips X'Pert X-ray diffractometer (Cu Kα line, 0.15419 nm). The optical absorption spectra of the samples were recorded on a UV-vis-NIR spectrometer (PE Lambda 950 UV-vis spectrophotometer). The corresponding photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the samples were measured by using a PL spectrophotometer (LS-45/55 fluorescence spectrometer) with a Xe lamp. The morphology of the active layer was observed using tapping-mode AFM (Dimension Icon, Bruker Nano). c-AFM and pc-AFM investigations were performed in the dark and under laser illumination at 532 nm using a commercial diode-pumped solid-state laser at 50 mW. This wavelength was chosen because it fits well the absorption band of the polymers. The photovoltaic performance was measured using a Keithley 2400 source meter with an AM1.5G (100 mW cm−2) solar simulator (Newport Oriel). Prior to measurement, the light intensity was calibrated using a photodiode and a light source meter.
Results and discussions
Structure and optical characterisation
The chemical structures of the studied polymers are shown in Fig. 1a. Compared with the reference (P3HT), we increase the alkyl chain length to C12H25 (P3DDT) and change the alkyl chain position while keeping the entire alkyl chain ratio identical (P3DDTT). In solution-processed PSCs, the solubility and stacking regularity of the polymer are the most important parameters. The length and position of the alkyl side chains are responsible for these two parameters. To study the relationship between the crystallinity and molecular structure of the thiophene-based polymers, the XRD patterns were obtained, as shown in Fig. 1b. Four crystalline XRD peaks of P3HT are observed at 5.12°, 10.47°, 15.59°, and 22.71°, corresponding to the (100), (200), (300), and (020) reflections, respectively. The lattice constants of P3HT are estimated to be a = 17.24 Å and b = 3.91 Å, suggesting a lamellar crystalline structure. For P3DDT with longer alkyl side chains, the thiophene-units become more loosely packed in the [100] direction. The peak positions also change to 3.24°, 6.62°, 9.86°, and 22.95°. The lattice constants are estimated to be a = 27.25 Å and b = 3.87 Å. The increase in the lattice constant a is associated with the increased interdistance of backbones by longer side chains. By changing the position of the side chain, only one diffraction peak at 3.34° is observed for P3DDTT with a d-spacing of 26.43 Å owing to the relatively random molecular arrangement. The transport of the hole and electron through each phase is strongly influenced by the local order and crystallisation within each phase, with the crystalline morphology generally leading to the highest charge carrier mobility. Moreover, we suggest that the intensity of the conjugated backbone packing has a significant effect on the material absorption per unit volume. Assuming that for an equal volume, a loosened backbone packing indicates fewer thiophene units; thus, less photons are absorbed. This situation significantly reduces the number of excitons in the active layer, further trading off the short circuit-current.
 Fig. 1  (a) Chemical structures of the three polymers used in the experiment. (b) XRD patterns of pure polymer films (annealed at 150 °C for 30 min). (c) UV-vis spectrum of the polymers in solution. (d) Corresponding UV-vis spectrum in ODCB-cast films (annealed at 150 °C for 30 min). 

Fig. 1c shows the evolution of the maximum absorption peak position during the alteration of the alkyl side chain. The maximum absorption peaks for P3HT and P3DDT in solution are at 450 and 452 nm, respectively. Thus, the length of the side chain does not have a significant impact on the absorption positions. After changing the position of the side chain, red shift of the absorption peak to 462 nm can be obviously observed. We could also clearly see an absorption tailing, which is ascribed to the poor solubility of P3DDTT. The spectrum of the P3HT film (Fig. 1d) is dominated by a long wavelength absorption, with clear A0–1 and A0–0 (subscripts denote the respective vibronic transitions) peaks at 552 and 610 nm, respectively.39,40 The same phenomenon is also observed in the P3DDT film, i.e., a relative red-shifted absorption peak (563 and 620 nm). The long wavelength absorbance comprising distinct vibronic peaks is attributed to chains in the crystalline states (extended π-stacked chains that form H-aggregates).41 The self-assembly of a linear conjugated polymer is mainly enthalpy driven, and coil-to-rod transformation in solution is quite significant in this process. The alkyl side chain, which provides good solubility, promotes this transformation. Thus, the formation of regular molecular packing during the drying process is preferred. For the P3DDTT film, there is no obvious shoulder in the spectrum, which indicates that the polymer chains are less regularly packed consistent with the XRD pattern. The decreased ordering in the P3DDTT film could also be attributed to the poor solubility of P3DDTT (Fig. 1c), which significantly reduces the molecular degrees of freedom, thus inhibiting the ordered self-assembly. Given that red shifts in absorption spectra are always related to crystallinity and charge-transport properties, modifications in the molecular side chain have a strong potential impact on the performance of organic BHJ devices.
Device performances of the PSCs

Fig. 2a shows the evolution of the absorption spectrum of the blend films by adjusting the alkyl side chain. The influence of the film thickness is excluded by dividing the absorption intensity by the thickness (about 150 nm for P3HT–PCBM, 80 nm for P3DDT–PCBM, and 70 nm for P3DDTT–PCBM). The absorption peaks at 340 and 510 nm were due to the contributions of PCBM and polythiophenes, respectively. The blended absorption spectra follow a simple superposition of pristine PCBM and polythiophenes. No additional feature is identified, indicating that no significant ground-state charge transfer occurs. P3HT and P3DDT still show a good assembly performance in the blend films. Interestingly, we notice that the relative absorption intensities of the polymers to PCBM are different: 0.86 for P3HT, 0.76 for P3DDTT, and 0.53 for P3DDT. We attribute this finding to the decreased density of the thiophene units in the blend film caused by the large lamellar space, as revealed by the XRD results. A series of OPV devices were fabricated to examine the effects of the alkyl side chain on the photovoltaic efficiency of the blend films. The device performances measured under AM 1.5G illumination at an intensity of 100 mW cm−2 are summarised in the ESI† (Tables S1–S3). A series of typical illuminated J–V characteristics are also shown in Fig. 2b. The highest PCE (1.37%) of the as-cast device belongs to P3HT. Increased alkyl side chain length or altered position decreases the PCE to 0.73% and 0.24%, respectively. The decreased overall PCE is mainly caused by the decreased short-circuit current density (Jsc) and fill factor (FF) of the device. However, the mechanisms responsible for the decreased performance cannot be determined from the J–V characteristics alone because all the parameters change at the same time.
 Fig. 2  (a) and (c) UV-vis spectrum of polymer-PCBM blend films (1:1 by weight ratio) spin-coated from ODCB and after thermal-annealing at optimised temperatures (P3HT: 150 °C for 30 min; P3DDT: 70 °C for 60 min; and P3DDTT: 150 °C for 60 min). (b) and (d) Corresponding J–V curves for the devices before and after optimisation. 
Thermal annealing is a common technique for improving device performance. We used a series of thermal annealing conditions for the three material systems. The absorption spectrum of the optimised blend film is shown in Fig. 2c. Compared with the non-annealed samples, there is no obvious peak shift in all systems after optimisation. However, we notice that the relative absorption intensities of the polymers to PCBM significantly change. The value increases to 1.49, 0.53, and 2.61 for P3HT, P3DDT, and P3DDTT, respectively. These results are mainly induced by the decreased PCBM absorption intensity. From Fig. S1 (ESI†), we deduce that the aggregation of PCBM allows more light to transmit through the blend film, which decreases the effective absorption intensity of PCBM. As reported previously, the absorption coefficient of polythiophenes increases by more than 30% after thermal annealing due to increased crystallisation.42,43 The corresponding J–V characteristics are also shown in Fig. 2d. More than 100% enhancement is obtained for each material system after optimisation. We emphasise that the optimisation conditions are different for each system. The best performances are obtained after 30 min of annealing at 150 °C for the P3HT blend (4.43%), 60 min at 70 °C for P3DDT (1.80%), and 60 min at 150 °C for P3DDTT (0.72%). We generally ascribe the discrepancies to the different crystalline structures of the polymers and diffusion of PCBM. The XRD patterns and absorption spectra (Fig. 1) suggest that the crystalline order is P3DDT > P3HT > P3DDTT. Thus, based on the molecular arrangement angles, P3DDT requires the lowest annealing temperature. The large spaces between neighbouring thiophene backbones prefer PCBM diffusion, leading to the easy formation of the interpenetrating networks in the active layer.20 We still cannot clearly understand the significant difference among the PCEs only from the absorption and crystallisation discrepancies. Morphological variations should also be investigated.
Morphology characterisations of the active layer
In another series of experiments, we examined both the microscopic morphology and BHJ nanostructure of spin-coated polythiophene:PCBM thin films. We employed tapping mode AFM to obtain phase images (Fig. 3 and Fig. S2 in the ESI†). The phase images shown in Fig. 3a–c demonstrate the film morphology before thermal annealing, when the morphology is mainly controlled by the kinetic factor. The P3HT–PCBM blend film (Fig. 3a) shows nanowire-like phases, which are identified as P3HT phases. The dark and bright areas indicate that PCBM distribution is not uniform throughout the film. For the P3DDT–PCBM blend film (Fig. 3b), sphere-like aggregations are observed on the surface. As previously reported, the large dodecyl side chains endow P3DDT with a good solubility at the cost of decreased main chain interactions. Therefore, P3DDT usually crystallises into nanocrystallites rather than nanowhiskers in a kinetic-controlled self-assembly process.44Fig. 3c reveals a featureless phase image indicative of less crystalline phase, which is consistent with the XRD and absorption characterisations. Also signifying non-uniform PCBM distribution throughout the film. The kinetic-controlled nanoscale structure may not be thermodynamically stable and can be altered by diffusion or crystallisation over time. This phenomenon is a guide for further optimising the device performance. As shown in Fig. 3d–f, uniform morphologies with interpenetrating mesoscopic polymers and PCBM domains have been achieved by thermal annealing, consistent with the highest efficiencies achieved in this study. The morphologies are mainly adjusted by the thermodynamic process. Owing to the statistical nature of nuclei formation, there is no orientation correlation between neighbouring crystalline domains. Generally, the prediction of when and where crystals start to grow is not possible. Fig. 3d–f show that the widths of the nanowires are quite different for each polymer, i.e., 10–15 nm for P3HT, 15–20 nm for P3DDT, and about 35–40 nm for P3DDTT. For typical soluble organic materials such as polymers, the exciton diffusion length is relatively small (in the order of 10 nm or so). If an exciton does not encounter a donor/acceptor interface during its lifetime, it can undergo non-radiative decay in a loss mechanism for the cell. The differences in BHJ nanostructures are strongly correlated with the measured device characteristics. The P3HT–PCBM blend film having nanowires with smaller widths shows 53% and 255% higher Jsc values than P3DDT and P3DDTT. The effect of the domain size on the charge generation well fitted the length of exciton diffusion, which can be an important limitation on PCE enhancement.
 Fig. 3  Tapping-mode AFM (2 μm × 2 μm) phase images with various polymer/PCBM blend films (1:1 by weight ratio): (a) as-cast P3HT–PCBM blend film; (b) as-cast P3DDT–PCBM blend film; (c) as-cast P3DDTT–PCBM blend film; (d) P3HT–PCBM blend film annealed at 150 °C for 30 min; (e) P3DDT–PCBM blend film annealed at 70 °C for 1 h; and (f) P3DDTT–PCBM blend film annealed at 150 °C for 1 h. The z scale bar is identical for all the images shown above. 
Characterisation of hole transporting pathways
To study the effect of mesoscopic morphology on the performance of macroscopic devices, we used c-AFM and pc-AFM to obtain images of the dark current and photocurrent distributions and better understand the performance changes at the nanoscale level. A 532 nm laser beam was directed onto the active layer to illuminate the tip scanning areas. This wavelength was chosen to match the absorbance peak of the three polymers. Considering the alignment of the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the donor material, as well as the work functions of the transparent electrode (ITO/PEDOT:PSS) and Pt-coated AFM tip, holes were injected into the device either from the tip or substrate depending on the bias polarity applied in the dark. We expect to distinguish between materials having different electrical properties by these techniques. Thus, the tip is positioned on a donor-rich region when a positive current is observed, and on an acceptor-rich region when a negative current is observed.

Fig. 4a–c show the typical film topographies for P3HT, P3DDT and P3DDTT with variation of the alkyl side chains. Fig. 4a shows barely visible sharp phase boundaries in the P3HT–PCBM blend film. After increasing the alkyl side chain length, more domain boundaries in the P3DDT blend system appear. On the other hand, changing the position of the alkyl side chains produces the sharpest domain boundaries (Fig. 4c). We could simply attribute this phenomenon to the compatibility of the polymers and PCBM (Fig. S3, ESI†). To obtain more specific information on the material distribution and hole transporting networks, a +1 V bias is applied on the tip while keeping the substrate grounded. This bias is added to make the device a hole-only transporter. From Fig. 4d and e, we infer that distinct dark spots in the current images correspond to the fullerene-rich phases, whereas the bright spots are assigned to polymer-rich domains. The average current (Avg. C.) in the dark decreases from 9.2 pA to 5.1 pA with increased side chain length, and finally to an undetectable region only by changing the side chain position. This phenomenon demonstrates that both the optimised P3HT and P3DDT blend films can effectively transport holes, and that hole-transporting pathways hardly exist in the P3DDTT blend films. When a 532 nm laser illuminates the blend films, the Avg. C. is increased from 9.2 pA to 48.3 pA for P3HT, from 5.1 pA to 19.5 pA for P3DDT, which is ascribed to the photo-generated hole current from the polymer regions. Heterogeneities can be clearly observed at a high resolution. We can observe more P3DDT on the surface than P3HT in the blend film. This vertical phase distribution may be one reason for the lower dark current and photocurrent of P3DDT than those of P3HT. The pc-AFM image of P3DDTT blend film is still featureless.
 Fig. 4  (a–c) AFM height images of various polymer–PCBM blend films (1:1 by weight ratio): (a) P3HT–PCBM, (b) P3DDT–PCBM, and (c) P3DDTT–PCBM. (d–f) c-AFM images (in the dark) of different polymer–PCBM blend films at +1 V tip bias with a grounded substrate. (g–i) pc-AFM images (under illumination) of different polymer–PCBM blend films at +1 V tip bias with a grounded substrate. All the samples annealed under optimal device conditions and the scanning size of the images is 1 μm × 1 μm. 
Characterisation of electron transporting pathways
When imaging an ambipolar matrix in our experiments, obtaining an electron current injected from the tip was possible with the tip negatively biased relative to the grounded substrate. Thus, the electron transport pathways can also be studied and compared with the hole transport behaviour. In this situation, a −1 V bias was applied to the conductive tip. We attribute the bright spots to PCBM-rich domains, and the dark spots to polymer-rich regions (Fig. 5a–c). We can observe almost the same phenomenon in the blend films. When the surface is illuminated with a 532 nm laser, the electron photocurrent increases from 5.2 pA to 11.4 pA for P3HT, and 9.3 pA to 29.8 pA for P3DDT. The bias current is dominated by the series resistance and has an inverse effect on the FF. This phenomenon is consistent with the macroscopic device performance. Still, we cannot observe any feature in the P3DDTT blend films, indicating the lack of efficient electron transport paths. Interestingly, we find that the electron current is smaller than the hole current for P3HT but larger for P3DDT. We attribute this to the diode rectifying behaviour originating from the vertical distribution of the polymers and PCBM. Obviously, the polymers aggregate more at the ITO electrode. The increased electron current and photocurrent for P3DDT could be attributed to the PCBM.
 Fig. 5  (a–c) c-AFM images (in the dark) of different polymer–PCBM blend films (1:1 by weight ratio) at −1 V tip bias with a grounded substrate. (a) P3HT–PCBM; (b) P3DDT–PCBM; (c) P3DDTT–PCBM. (d–f) pc-AFM images (under illumination) of different polymer–PCBM blend films at −1 V tip bias with grounded substrate. (d) P3HT–PCBM; (e) P3DDT–PCBM; (f) P3DDTT–PCBM. All the samples annealed under optimal device conditions and the scanning size of the images is 1 μm × 1 μm. 
A comparison of Fig. 4 and 5 reveals critical issues. The c-AFM and pc-AFM images show that the regions of maximum hole current in the dark, maximum reverse electron current, and corresponding maximum photocurrent that develop upon changing the alkyl side chains are not spatially correlated. This phenomenon is consistent with previous reports,34,36,37 and can mainly be explained by the different transporting pathways for holes, electrons, and photo-generated charges. The regions of the film that exhibit the largest hole currents in the dark are those that support facile hole injection and well-connected pathways of polymers. Likewise, the regions of the largest local electron currents are those with the lowest barriers to electron injection and continuous electron transport paths. On the other hand, the photocurrents are associated with the interfacial regions between them or regions that show some preferential orientations. This result indicates that for efficient photocurrent transport, continuous phase interfaces may be more important than isolated continuous charge transport pathways in the traditional concept.
Conclusion
We have systematically studied the effect of the length and position of alkyl side chains in OPV devices. The XRD and absorption spectrum results show that the molecular assembly property greatly varies by changing the alkyl side chain from P3HT to P3DDTT. We demonstrate that the closely packed backbones can effectively improve the intensity of absorption per unit volume. Both microscopic and mesoscopic images were probed, and all polymers are found to be able to assemble well into nanowires under optimal conditions, although the widths significantly vary. Different microscopic phase separation behaviours are also revealed. Microscale PCBM aggregations appear in the P3HT blend film; both microscale polymer and PCBM aggregations are observed in the P3DDTT blend film; and a featureless morphology is observed in the P3DDT blend film. We attribute these findings to the degree of difficulty for polymer aggregation and PCBM diffusion in the polymer matrix. Combined with c-AFM and pc-AFM, the in situ hole and electron injection as well as transporting performances were carefully studied. Continuous dark current and photocurrent pathways are observed in both P3HT and P3DDT blend films, and we attribute the Jsc difference mainly to the absorption intensity. Neither electron nor hole transporting pathways can be clearly observed in the P3DDTT system.
We summarise two key points as follows. First, the alkyl side chain length can improve the solubility and intermolecular interactions, thereby promoting ease of assembly. Long side chains can significantly reduce the effective absorption intensity in the blend film and further change the vertical phase separation, thus inducing the diode-rectifying effect. Second, changing the side chain position by moving it to the neighbouring alkyl chain reduces the solubility, effective absorption per unit volume and disturbs the packing behaviour of the molecules, resulting in discontinuous charge transporting pathways on the active layer. This work demonstrates the subtle role of molecular design in determining OPV performance and can serve as a guide for optimising other material systems to achieve high PCEs.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grants 20974029, 91027031), The Ministry of Science and Technology of China (2009CB930400, 2010DFB63530, 2011CB932300), and Chinese Academy of Sciences (KJCX2-YW-M13).
Notes and references
J. D. Servaites, M. A. Ratner and T. J. Marks, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4410–4422 CAS .
Y. Li, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 723–733 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Thompson and J. M. J. Frechet, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 58 CrossRef CAS .
G. Dennler, M. C. Scharber and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1323 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Chen, Z. Hong, G. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1434 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, V. Shrotriya, J. Huang, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 864 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Kim, K. Lee, N. E. Coates, D. Moses, T. Q. Nguyen, M. Dante and A. J. Heeger, Science, 2007, 317, 222 CrossRef CAS .
W. Y. Wong, X. Z. Wang, Z. He, A. B. Djurisic, C. P. Yip, K. Y. Cheung, H. Wang, C. S. K. Mak and W. K. Chan, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 521 CrossRef CAS .
J. Peet, J. Y. Kim, N. E. Coates, W. L. Ma, D. Moses, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 497 CrossRef CAS .
L. Huo, S. Zhang, X. Guo, F. Xu, Y. Li and J. Hou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 9697 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dou, J. You, J. Yang, C. Chen, Y. He, S. Murase, T. Moriarty, K. Emery, G. Li and Y. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 180 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pal and A. K. Nandi, Macromolecules, 2003, 36, 8426 CrossRef CAS .
V. Causin, C. Marega, A. Marigo, L. Valentini and J. M. Kenny, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 409 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jaczewska, A. Budkowski, A. Bernasik, E. Moons and J. Rysz, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 4802 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pankaj, E. Hempel and M. Beiner, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 716 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Chen, X. Wu and R. D. Rieke, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 233 CrossRef CAS .
A. Babel and S. A. Jenekhe, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 1749 CrossRef CAS .
Y. D. Park, D. H. Kim, Y. Jang, J. H. Cho, M. Hwang, H. S. Lee, J. A. Lim and K. Cho, Org. Electron., 2006, 7, 514 CrossRef CAS .
W. D. Oosterbaan, J. C. Bolsee, A. Gadisa, V. Vrindts, S. Bertho, J. D. Haen, T. J. Cleij, L. Lutsen, C. R. McNeil, L. Thomsen, J. V. Manca and D. Vanderzande, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 792 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Nguyen, H. Hoppe, T. Erb, S. Gunes, G. Gobsch and N. S. Sariciftci, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1071 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gadisa, W. D. Oosterbaan, K. Vandewal, J. C. Bolsee, S. Bertho, J. D. Haen, L. Lutsen, D. Vanderzande and J. V. Manca, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3300 CrossRef CAS .
B. Friedel, C. R. McNeil and N. C. Greenham, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 3389 CrossRef CAS .
B. V. Andersson, A. Herland, S. Masich and O. Inganas, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 853 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Bavel, E. Sourty, G. With and J. Loos, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 507 CrossRef .
S. D. Oosterhout, M. M. Wienk, S. S. Bavel, R. Thiedmann, L. J. A. Koster, J. Gilot, J. Loos, V. Schmidt and R. A. J. Janssen, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 818 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Woo, B. C. Thompson, B. J. Kim, M. F. Toney and J. M. J. Frechet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16324 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chiu, U. Jeng, C. Su, K. S. Liang and K. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2573 CrossRef CAS .
B. Watts, W. J. Belcher, L. Thomsen, H. Ade and P. C. Dastoor, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 8392 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chiu, U. Jeng, M. Su and K. Wei, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 428 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, A. Nakahara, D. Wei, D. Nordlund and T. P. Russell, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 561 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, F. Liu, C. Wang, A. Nakahara and T. P. Russell, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2071 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Coffey, O. G. Reid, D. B. Rodovsky, G. P. Bartholomew and D. S. Ginger, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 738 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Bull, L. S. C. Pingree, S. A. Jenekhe, D. S. Ginger and C. K. Luscombe, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 627 CrossRef CAS .
L. S. C. Pingree, O. G. Reid and D. S. Ginger, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2946 CrossRef CAS .
B. H. Hamadani, S. Jung, P. M. Haney, L. J. Richter and N. B. Zhitenev, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1611 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xin, O. G. Reid, G. Ren, F. S. Kim, D. S. Ginger and S. A. Jenekhe, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1861 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. Rice, R. Giridharagopal, S. X. Zheng, F. S. Ohuchi, D. S. Ginger and C. K. Luscombe, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3132 CrossRef CAS .
M. Guide, X. Dang and T. Nguyen, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2313 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Brown, D. S. Thomas, A. Kohler, J. S. Wilson, J. Kim, C. M. Ramsdale, H. Sirringhaus and R. H. Friend, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 67, 064203 CrossRef .
W. Xu, L. Li, H. Tang, H. Li, X. Zhao and X. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2011, 115, 6412 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, T. P. Martin, E. T. Niles, A. J. Wise, A. K. Thomas and J. K. Grey, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 15121 CAS .
M. A. Ruderer, S. Guo, R. Meier, H. Y. Chiang, V. Korstgens, J. Wiedersich, J. Perlich, S. V. Roth and P. M. Buschbaum, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3382 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, A. J. Pearson, D. G. Lidzey and R. A. L. Jones, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1383 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nakazono, T. Kawai and K. Yoshino, Chem. Mater., 1994, 6, 864 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2cp42935gThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2012
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Chemical structures of the three polymers used in the experiment. (b) XRD patterns of pure polymer films (annealed at 150 °C for 30 min). (c) UV-vis spectrum of the polymers in solution. (d) Corresponding UV-vis spectrum in ODCB-cast films (annealed at 150 °C for 30 min).	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) and (c) UV-vis spectrum of polymer-PCBM blend films (1:1 by weight ratio) spin-coated from ODCB and after thermal-annealing at optimised temperatures (P3HT: 150 °C for 30 min; P3DDT: 70 °C for 60 min; and P3DDTT: 150 °C for 60 min). (b) and (d) Corresponding J–V curves for the devices before and after optimisation.	 

 	Fig. 3  Tapping-mode AFM (2 μm × 2 μm) phase images with various polymer/PCBM blend films (1:1 by weight ratio): (a) as-cast P3HT–PCBM blend film; (b) as-cast P3DDT–PCBM blend film; (c) as-cast P3DDTT–PCBM blend film; (d) P3HT–PCBM blend film annealed at 150 °C for 30 min; (e) P3DDT–PCBM blend film annealed at 70 °C for 1 h; and (f) P3DDTT–PCBM blend film annealed at 150 °C for 1 h. The z scale bar is identical for all the images shown above.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a–c) AFM height images of various polymer–PCBM blend films (1:1 by weight ratio): (a) P3HT–PCBM, (b) P3DDT–PCBM, and (c) P3DDTT–PCBM. (d–f) c-AFM images (in the dark) of different polymer–PCBM blend films at +1 V tip bias with a grounded substrate. (g–i) pc-AFM images (under illumination) of different polymer–PCBM blend films at +1 V tip bias with a grounded substrate. All the samples annealed under optimal device conditions and the scanning size of the images is 1 μm × 1 μm.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a–c) c-AFM images (in the dark) of different polymer–PCBM blend films (1:1 by weight ratio) at −1 V tip bias with a grounded substrate. (a) P3HT–PCBM; (b) P3DDT–PCBM; (c) P3DDTT–PCBM. (d–f) pc-AFM images (under illumination) of different polymer–PCBM blend films at −1 V tip bias with grounded substrate. (d) P3HT–PCBM; (e) P3DDT–PCBM; (f) P3DDTT–PCBM. All the samples annealed under optimal device conditions and the scanning size of the images is 1 μm × 1 μm.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2cp42935g

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2012
