Torsional artificial muscles  - Materials Horizons (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9MH01441A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9MH01441A
(Review Article)
Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 667-693Torsional artificial muscles

        
          
            Shazed 
            Aziz
          
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Geoffrey M. 
            Spinks
          
          
        
      *a
aARC Centre of Excellence for Electromaterials Science and Intelligent Polymer Research Institute, University of Wollongong, Innovation Campus, Squires Way, North Wollongong, NSW 2522, Australia. E-mail: gspinks@uow.edu.au
bSchool of Chemical Engineering, The University of Queensland, Don Nicklin Building (74), QLD 4072, Australia. E-mail: shazed.aziz@uq.edu.au
Received 
      12th September 2019
    , Accepted 24th October 2019First published on 24th October 2019AbstractLarge stroke torsional actuators are the newest class of artificial muscle technology that produces rotary motion or generate torque in response to various stimuli. A number of materials comprising twisted fibres or filaments have been shown to display high degrees of reversible untwist and retwist under various experimental conditions such as heating, electrochemical charging, chemical absorption or photonic excitation. Torsional actuators are of potential application in areas that include microfluidic mixing, microsensors, photonic displays, and energy-harvesting devices. Furthermore, the torsional actuation in fibres can be translated into a linear, or tensile, actuation when the fibres are formed into coils. These coil tensile artificial muscles are of potential use in soft and wearable robotics, medical devices and prosthetics. This review will provide a comprehensive overview of torsional actuators constructed from different functional materials, their actuating mechanism, potential applications, and their current limitations. The review will conclude with recent developments and future trends of torsional actuators as well as critical issues that need to be addressed and resolved.
Shazed Aziz
Shazed Aziz is a Postdoctoral Researcher at The University of Queensland, Australia. His current research aims to manufacture nano-particle and nano-fibre reinforced polymer composites for aerospace and automobile applications. His research focus also includes various aspects of fundamental and applied polymer science with a particular emphasis on polymeric actuators (artificial muscles) for soft robotics, energy harvesting, and wearable and implantable bio-devices.
Geoffrey M. Spinks
Geoffrey M. Spinks is a Senior Professor at Australian Institute for Innovative Materials at the University of Wollongong, Australia. His primary research interest is the development and application of bionic artificial muscles from stimuli-responsive materials that can match or exceed the performance of natural skeletal muscle. He has extensively investigated thermo-responsive polymers, conducting polymers, hydrogels, carbon nanotubes and graphene for artificial muscles and other smart material applications.
1. Introduction
New discoveries in smart materials fuel the continual advancement of artificial muscles that mimic the performance of skeletal muscles. One significant advantage of artificial muscles over conventional actuators such as electric motors and combustion engines is their potential for miniaturisation without the sacrifice of power generated per mass. Artificial muscles have been developed that can reversibly simulate muscle-like motions such as contraction, expansion, bending, and rotation.1–5 Many different materials have been developed for artificial muscles, including shape memory alloys (SMAs),6–17 electroactive polymers (EAPs)18–24 and piezoelectric and dielectric materials.25–30 The performance of artificial muscles can be evaluated against a number of parameters, including force and displacement generated and speed of response. In many of these areas, artificial muscle performance surpasses that of natural skeletal muscle, making them significantly attractive to use in applications where a muscle-like response is required. Commercial development and use of these materials are at the primary stage, and only a few types are commercially exposed. However, there is a need for continued improvement in artificial muscles systems since applications areas can be expanded by reducing overall system mass and volume, reducing driving voltages, increasing actuation rates, cycle-life and power density.1,31,32
Like a natural skeletal muscle, artificial muscles are characterised by a reciprocating or oscillatory type of motion that may be evident as tensile, bending, torsion or a combination of these processes. Fig. 1 summarises the general actuation types of artificial muscles. Simple volume change materials can generate tensile actuation strokes [Fig. 1(a)], and the coupling of an active volume change material to a flexible support structure converts the volume change into a bending displacement [Fig. 1(b)]. Examples include bimetallic strips and similar laminate structures. Helically twisted fibres or yarns can generate torsional rotation depending on their volume changes once activated [Fig. 1(c)]. Additionally, twist induced coiled fibres can generate contractile motion when the degree of inserted twists changes [Fig. 1(d)]. This review article concentrates explicitly on these ‘torsional’ artificial muscles and aims to understand better the mechanisms that produce high torsional strokes. Fig. 2 charts the recent evolution of torsional actuators which shows an increase of published work over the past decade.
 Fig. 1  Actuation capabilities of differently structured materials: (a) linear actuation, (b) bending motion, (c) torsional rotation and (d) torsion induced linear actuation. Calculations of: (e) fractional change in fibre twist and (f) absolute change in twist for three fibres having different initial twist densities when calculations assume isotropic volume expansion and were based on fibres of 1 mm initial diameter, 100 mm initial length and initial inserted twists of T0 = 180, 264, and 357 turns per m. Reproduced with permission.35 Copyright 2016, Cambridge University Press. 
 Fig. 2  Development progression of torsional actuators constructed of different materials. 
Torsional actuation of a material can be defined as in ‘torsion mechanics’ which describes the angular rotation of one part of a slender beam when a torque is applied and where the rotation occurs around the beam's long axis. Torsional actuators show such rotations in fibres, wires, films and strips in specific materials when exposed to various stimuli. Most recent interest has considered the torsional actuation in highly twisted fibres and yarns mainly because of the large torsional rotations generated. These twisted fibre torsional actuators have been successfully analysed by considering the changes in a helix geometry due to a volume increase such as when twisted yarns or fibres are heated, absorb solvent or are electrochemically charged. The helically wound filaments can be considered as inextensible and the change in twist can be estimated from the known helix length and diameter changes.33–35 For example, the effect of inserted twist on the torsional actuation stroke of isotropically expanding helices is shown in Fig. 1(e) as denoted by the fractional change in twist (T) normalized to the initial twist T0 = n0/l0. Regardless of the twist count, an isotropic volume increase causes an untwist in the fibre where again the ‘string’ length is considered unaffected. A smaller fractional change in torsional stroke occurs with a higher inserted twist. However, the absolute torsional actuation stroke shows a smaller dependency on the initially inserted twist, as shown in Fig. 1(f), since the higher amount of twist partially offsets the reduced fractional change in twist during isotropic volume expansion.
Torsional actuation can be used to develop useful oscillatory rotations, but the most significant application area is in tensile actuation of coil structures that are driven by torsion in the coil fibre or wire. The well-established spring mechanics36 shows that stretching a coiled fibre that is tethered to prevent end rotation produces a change in the fibre's twist as given by: (1)where ΔT is the change in twist (turns per m) of the fibre of length l that forms a coil of N turns and when the coil length changes by ΔL. Coils made from torsionally actuating fibres generate large coil tensile actuation. Tensile strokes as high as ∼50% were reported for twisted and coiled nylon 6,6 fibres, delivering power densities over 5.3 kW kg−1 with 2.48 kJ kg−1 contractile work capacity and greatly exceeding that produced by natural skeletal muscle (39 J kg−1).37,38
Applications that exploit the rotating action of torsional actuators have employed tethering at either one end or both ends. The latter requires some asymmetry in the actuator to allow rotation, and most typically this has been achieved by connecting the actuating material in series to a non-actuating material. The non-actuating material also operates as a ‘return spring’ mechanism that can improve the reversibility of the actuation when the actuating stimulus is removed. The mechanics of torsional actuation is first described regarding reversible rotation for an actuating fibre tethered at one end only. A vertically hanging fibre of length l that is clamped at the top end and free to rotate at the opposite end can be treated as a torsional shaft. The rotation of the free end with regard to the clamped end is ϕ(l) =τ/S, where τ is the torque applied to the free end and S is the torsional rigidity of the fibre. The actuating fibre generates an internal torque causing a rotation per yarn length of θ at the free end. The rotation at any distance x from the tethered end to the free fibre end is: ϕ(x) = xΔθ(2)
Torsional rotation of a fibre clamped at both ends and subjected to constant tensile load is measured using a paddle attached to the fibre at a distance x from one end. Clamping at both ends does not allow any rotation at either end; hence, rotation is only possible if the fibre is actuated along only part of its length. Here, rotation of the actuating segment of the fibre mechanically introduces rotation to the non-actuating segment, thereby generating an increasing opposing torque in the non-actuating segment as the torsional rotation proceeds. Therefore, tethering the fibre at both ends restricts rotation at all points along the fibre compared to the free rotation by producing this equal and opposite residual torques in the actuating and non-actuating segments. The net rotation, ϕ(x) occurring at any point x along the actuating segment is given by: (3)where β is the ratio of the torsional modulus of the actuating and non-actuating segments; γ is the ratio of the actuating segment length to non-actuating segment length; and x varies from zero to l, where l is the length of the actuating segment.
These principles of torsional mechanics provide a framework for the comparison of various reported torsional actuators. The inherent torsional actuation properties are described by Δθ, the torsional stiffness and the rates of response. Where available these parameters are described below for different torsional actuators and related to the different functional mechanisms of actuation. These principles then provide guidance for the design of actuator systems and provide knowledge about their current and potential applications.
2. Types of torsional actuators
2.1 Shape memory alloy (SMA) torsional actuators
Shape memory alloys (SMAs) are a group of metallic materials that offers the ability to recover a former length or shape when heated. Although a wide range of alloys exhibits the shape memory effect, only those that can recover from a large amount of plastic strain are of practical interest. Among several industrially developed SMAs (such as Cu–Zn–Al, Cu–Al–Ni, and Ni–Ti), the most common SMA is Ni–Ti (nitinol) alloy used for its high ductility and fatigue and corrosion resistance.14,39–41 In addition, nitinol offers design flexibility in the form of rods,42,43 tubes,12 sheets,10,44 strips,45 wires,7,13,46–48 twisted wires49 and coils.50–52
Torsional actuation has been demonstrated in both thin SMA strips and wires. Tobushi et al.53 have conducted torsion, recovery torque and torsion fatigue tests with a TiNi SMA thin strip to evaluate the essential torsion characteristics based on thermal recovery. When the strip was twisted, torque and recovery torque were found to increase in proportion to the angle of twist and temperature. A rotation of 90° was achieved through shape recovery in a 40 mm long strip operated in the one-end-tethered mode. Some other works were conducted with similar TiNi tape; however, they used a return spring mechanism for achieving two-way actuation.54,55 Here the twisted strip was connected to a superelastic alloy strip that acted as a return spring in the two-end-tethered configuration [Fig. 3(a)]. A linear relationship was observed between torque and angle of twist per unit length of the strip under a constant loading process. The alternating torsional response were found to be symmetric with respect to an origin [Fig. 3(b)].
 Fig. 3  Micro-rotary actuator; (a) schematic illustration showing clamping yoke, torsionally strained SMA wire and electronics for differential heating, (b) angular deformation vs. pre-clamped twist (turns per cm) for a 10 mm long, 100 μm diameter piece of SMA wire being heated by a 200 mA current. Reproduced with permission.55 Copyright 1988, Elsevier. Soft twisting actuator; (c) fabrication method of a twisting actuator by clamping the SMA wire with torsional strain, then positioning the SMA wire onto the mold, and finally, close the upper mold and inject siloxane elastomer, (d) twisting angle and twisting moment depending on the elastomer layer thickness. Reproduced with permission.9 Copyright 2015, IOP Publishing. 
Similar torsional actuation mechanisms have recently been reported9,56 where a twisting SMA rod was embedded in an elastomeric sheet. These composite actuator systems used the SMA rod as a one-end-tethered torsional actuator and the elastomer sheet as a ‘return spring’ mechanism to enable two-way actuation [Fig. 3(c)]. Joule heating of the SMA wire generated twisting of the elastomer sheet to ∼1° per mm of 3 mm thick sample [Fig. 3(d)].9 Increasing actuator thicknesses to 5 and 7 mm where the width and length of the actuator were fixed at 15 and 70 mm reduced the torsional stroke, but the blocked torque remained unchanged.
Despite having a significant number of advantages, control challenges exist in SMA actuators due to their undesired nonlinear characteristics. Conventional solutions using digital encoders remain unfeasible at this scale. Therefore, miniature and low-weight sensors need to be integrated for accurate measurement of torsional actuation. Moreover, power consumption is another concern with SMA actuators, that becomes more significant as the number of actuators grows.57 Another major limitation is having low torsional stroke (maximum of ∼4.5° per mm) which makes the SMA torsional actuators less feasible for real-life applications.
2.2 Piezoelectric torsional actuators
Piezoelectric and electrostrictive materials are a natural choice for precision displacement transducers or actuators. They utilise the strain induced piezoelectric effect by an electric field to provide static structural deformation.58–60 A number of materials show piezoelectricity such as piezoelectric ceramics (lead zirocondate titanate, PZT), piezoelectric polymers (polyvinylidene fluoride, PVDF), and piezoelectric ceramic/polymer composites. Actuators made of piezoelectric ceramic materials are now being widely used for numerous applications, such as precision positioning, noise and vibration sensing and cancellation, ultrasonic motors, and controlling hydraulic valves.
Due to their increasing demand, piezoelectric torsional actuators have been studied for many years. Morita et al.61 developed a torsional actuator from multi-layered and assembled piezo-ceramic cylinder which was able to harvest shear strain directly. However, the manufacturing process of the actuator was reasonably complex and seemed challenging to be used in mini or micro-sized torsional actuators. Therefore, Kim et al.62 presented the design, test and improvement of a piezoelectric torsional actuator using piezoceramics and a torsion bar which was comparatively easy to construct. The proposed cylindrical actuator directly invokes the shear mode of the piezoelectric material; hence, no complicated additional mechanism is needed [Fig. 4(a)]. However, a small angular displacement of just 0.18° was achieved from a 25 mm long tube. Glazounov et al.63 described a similar kind of actuator where the conversion of shear piezoelectric strain of a tubular structure was converted into angular displacement. Fig. 4(b) shows a tube structure actuator consisted of an even number of piezoelectric ceramic segments which were poled in such a way that the remnant polarization, Pr, is directed along the length of each segment. The joints between the segments act as electrodes to apply an electric driving field, E. The segments were electrically connected in parallel and provide coherent shear strain, S, by the applied electric field in all the segments. Due to the cylindrical structure of the actuator, the shear strain was directly transformed into the angular displacement, β.
 Fig. 4  Tubular piezoelectric torsional actuator: (a) piezoceramic based torsion bar (front and top view). Reproduced with permission.62 Copyright 2001, IOP Publishing. (b) Piezoelectric ceramic segments are bonded together to form a tube structured torsional actuator. Redrawn from ref. 63. Copyright 2000, SAGE Publications. (c) Proposed helical electrode actuator model for controlled performance and (d) planar form of the torsional actuator made of tubular fibre showing the electric field direction. Reproduced with permission.65 Copyright 2008, Elsevier. Schematic illustration of multilayer piezoelectric torsional actuator: (e) the fibre directions of the two FRC outer layers (with oriented at angle ±α to the longitudinal axis of the actuator) with embedded piezo layer and (f) a 3-D and end-on view of a twisting actuator with twist angle θtwist. 
Pan et al. reported a torsional actuator with helical electrodes64,65 that involves a very simple structure [Fig. 4(c)]. A tubular PZT was wrapped with a pair of parallel electrodes on its surface to transform into a torsional actuator. The parallel wound electrode formed a helical structure with interweaving similar to the interdigitated electrodes (IDEs). When this helically structured assembly is put into use, usually one end is fixed to a steady object and the other end is free to move. If the tubular fibre is assumed to be cut along the longitudinal section and opened into a planar form [Fig. 4(d)], then the actuator will appear like a piezoceramic layer covered with parallel electrode lines on its external surface. The electrode lines are arranged as alternating positive and negative electrodes, which are the same as the IDEs. The poling and driving electric field direction can be assumed from this planer form which is responsible for the torsional movement. A small torsional angle of about 1.7° was observed from a 40 mm long tube when the driving voltage changes from −500 to +500 V. This helical structure is very suitable for fabricating tiny torsional actuators using piezoelectric hollow or solid fibres, which can be produced by several conventional methods, for example, microfabrication by co-extrusion and viscous–suspension–spinning process.61,66
Apart from tubular piezoelectric torsional actuators, twisting motion can be obtained with a single piezoelectric layer by laminating antisymmetric top and bottom fibre reinforced composite (FRC) layers [Fig. 4(e)]. An actuator of specific dimension can attain a rotation angle of θtwist [Fig. 4(f)] by applying a voltage across the piezoelectric layer, using the conductive FRC layers as electrodes. Finio et al.67 have modelled a twisting sheet based piezoelectric actuator on achieving controlled performance that can be applied in the micro-robotic field. A theoretical model was developed which successfully predicts torsional rotation, torque and energy density of piezoelectric twisting actuator; and optimises these values by accounting for actuator geometry such as reinforced fibre orientation angle α.67
Despite of significant number of works conducted and published there still remain several restrictions of piezoelectric materials which limit their usability in modern day torsional actuator systems.68,69 For example, piezoelectric ceramics are stiff and brittle, and cannot be coated onto non-uniform surfaces, which restricts the design flexibility in the transducer. Similar to SMA torsional actuators they also produce minimal material deformation compared to charge input; hence they are not suitable in many of those relevant fields where large torsional movement is required, specifically, in impact rotating motors and robotics.60,70,71
2.3 Multilayer torsional ribbons
The mechanical principles of residual stress or strain-induced bending of multilayer structures have been exploited to manufacture micro- and macroscale torsional actuators. For instance, net shape helical structures made of bimorph strips were successfully developed by Pearce et al.,72 Mohammadi et al.73 and Bell et al.74 The helical ribbons were produced by inducing a bending action within the bimorph structure where the bending direction did not coincide with the long axis of the bimorph ribbon. The bending angle can be controlled by manipulating the anisotropic properties of one of the bimorph layers. For example, epitaxial deposition of InAs/GaAs using AlAs as a sacrificial layer dictated that the 〈100〉 direction is the preferred roll-up direction when the patterned bilayers were released by wet etching. Helical ribbons with different pitches and helix angles form depending on the misorientation angle of the ribbon's geometric axes and the bending direction [Fig. 5(a)]. The angle between the patterned stripe and the closest 〈100〉 direction determines the pitch between turns of the resulting helical structures. This effect is illustrated by the images in Fig. 5(b).
 Fig. 5  Net shape helically structured bimorph strips: (a) basic process sequence and schematic top view: initial planar bilayer, patterned through conventional microfabrication technique, and (b) digital microscope image with released helical structures and the different orientations of the initial pattern result in helical structures with different pitches. Reproduced with permission.74 Copyright 2006, American Chemical Society. Fabrication of VO2 based bimorph coils: (c) schematic of the microfabrication process of a dual coil, (d) rotation of a single coil removed from as-fabricated dual coil operated at various temperatures in a heating/cooling cycle, and (e) temperature dependence of specific rotation and spring constant in the heating half-cycle. Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2013, John Wiley and Sons. 
Liu et al.75 built a micro-scale torsional muscle actuated by the phase transition of VO2, with a simple bimorph design. The actuator was constructed by releasing a long “V”-shaped Cr/VO2 bimorph structure where VO2 thin films were initially grown by pulsed laser deposition on Si substrates. The exposed area of VO2 was etched away by reactive ion etching (RIE). Then the “V”-shaped Cr/VO2 area was shielded by photoresist with the same pattern, and the exposed SiO2 and the underneath Si were deep-etched by RIE. Upon removal of the photoresist and under-etching of the SiO2 layer beneath the Cr/VO2, “V”-shaped Cr/VO2 bimorph ribbon were released [Fig. 5(c)]. The final structure is a suspended bimorph helix consisting of two symmetric coils naturally connected to the two Cr electrode pads. Fig. 5(d) shows a single coil being actuated by global heating with the specific rotation amplitude of ∼1000° per mm of coil length that is reduced by half from that of a dual coil [Fig. 5(e)]. This system includes all the functions including torsional actuator, memristor, and proximity sensor, showing great possibilities in applications that require a high level of functionality integration in a tiny space. The torsional muscles simulate active neuromuscular systems with all-inorganic materials by sensing a distanced remote substance and responding by rotating to a different configuration.75
Overall, multilayer bimorphs strips were able to provide significant torsional deformation; however, since the spring constant varies with the change in strip geometry additional tuning is necessary by optimising the dimensions of the bimorphs as well as the spring length. Additionally, they must be constrained from translational movement perpendicular to the axial direction which adds to system complexity.
2.4 Electroactive polymer (EAP) torsional actuators
Electroactive polymers (EAPs) are functional materials that are often used as actuators in adaptive structures, in particular when large deformations are required. In EAPs, electric energy is directly converted into mechanical work and some EAPs can create large strains of more than 10%. Typical EAPs are described briefly below followed by examples of their application to generate torsional actuation.
Dielectric elastomer EAPs have been widely studied in recent years for developing electroactive actuators due to their excellent overall performance, including large elongation, high energy density, good energy conversion efficiency and fast response.4,76–78 Application of an electric field using compliant electrodes on both sides of an elastomer film results in its deformation according to Maxwell's pressure and the nearly incompressible properties of the material. Considerable strains can be achieved in comparison to other common actuators, such as piezoelectric devices.28 Dielectric elastomers are frequently being used as actuators in many technological fields such as mobile mini- and micro-robots, micro-pumps, micro air vehicles, disk drive, prosthetic devices, flat panel loudspeakers and optical fibre positioning.76,79,80
Conducting polymers are another class of EAPs which structurally feature a conjugated backbone and are electronically conductive. Upon oxidation or reduction of the polymer, conductivity is increased and leads to a charge imbalance which results in a flow of ions into the material from an external electrolyte so as to balance charge. Conducting polymer actuators are generally designed by immersing the polymer in a bulk liquid electrolyte environment.81,82 The ions or dopants enter the polymer from a surrounding electrolyte medium which typically remains in the form of gel, solid, or liquid. Contraction or expansion of the polymer occurs due to the mass transfer of ions between the polymer and the electrolyte. Typical volume changes are about 10%, and length changes are hence on the order of 3%.83,84 Nevertheless, the dimensional changes of a single piece of the conductive polymer during redox can be exploited to produce better linear motion.32 On the other hand, a conjugated-polymer layer bonded to a non-swelling layer85 or another conjugated-polymer layer, but with different swelling86,87 results in significant bending motion. These configurations have been explored in various biomedical,85 biological,88 microfluidic89,90 and robotic91,92 applications.
A dielectric elastomer actuating motors that continuously rotate a shaft have been described by Anderson et al.93,94 and Heim et al.95 A variation described recently by Wache et al. describes the oscillatory torsional motion of dielectric elastomer actuators.96 The governing principle behind this new rotational motion is the creation of asymmetric electrodes, which induce twisting of the actuator centre. The two different kinds of samples were investigated where in the first kind, the rigid external frames supporting a free-standing, pre-stretched film of VHB acrylic elastomer have a square shape with an inner side where four rectangular electrodes located at the corners of the frame. In the second assembly, the elastomer film is enclosed by circular frames instead of the square ones, with a fixed inner diameter. The samples were fixed in a dark chamber with continuous illumination applied by light emitting diodes (LEDs). Rotation is observed depending on the intensity of the field applied, and among the tested configurations, a maximum rotation of 10° was achieved.
Liwen et al. has reported a new method of achieving electrically induced torsional deformation of a fibre reinforced actuator made by embedding a set of helical fibres into a dielectric elastomer tube (Fig. 6).97 Torsional strokes of up to 2.5° per mm were found. As illustrated in Fig. 6(a), in the reference configuration Br, the actuator is undeformed and uncharged, and of fibre angle Θ. The external and internal surfaces of the actuator are considered coated with compliant electrodes. When an axial force, a torque and a direct-current voltage is applied through the width, the reference configuration is transformed to an actuated state B with deformed fibre angle θ, or called the current configuration. The effects of the fibre stiffness and helical angle as well as externally applied mechanical loads on the torsional deformation were also studied, and it was found that when snap-through instability occurs, the voltage-induced twist angle changed to a higher value when deformation occurred which can be tuned by varying the fibre stiffness and helical angle [Fig. 6(b)]. The demonstrated results are expected to provide guide for the future rational design of fibre-reinforced torsional dielectric elastomer actuators.
 Fig. 6  Schematic figure of a helical fibre reinforced tubular dielectric elastomer actuator: (a) the reference and current configurations, and (b) the snap-through instability phenomenon of the tubular DE actuator reinforced by a family of helical fibres. Reproduced with permission.97 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. 
A few studies have reported the development of rotary actuators based on conductive polymers. Hunter et al. applied a polyaniline-based linear actuator to rotate a crank for rotary motion in one direction.98 Fang et al. proposed a novel conjugated-polymer-based reversible oscillatory torsional actuator by embedding helically wound fibres into a conjugated-polymer tube.99 In this configuration, the fibres are confined and have little room for extension. Therefore, they impose directional constraints for swelling of the material matrix, which causes complex deformation resulted by the fibre-matrix orientation. The torsion, elongation, and dilation of the tube are predicted by developing and utilising a nonlinear elasticity-based theoretical model. A prototype for the proposed torsional actuator was constructed by helically embedding platinum fibres into a polypyrrole (PPy) hollow tube during the PPy deposition. Application of a positive charge between the fibre-directed PPy tube and an electrolyte causes the movement of anions in the electrolyte toward the PPy/electrolyte interface. This results in a double layer of charges on the interface and then, diffusion of highly concentrated ions in the double layer into the PPy. Application of a negative voltage causes the PPy to be reduced, and the previously absorbed ions will be returned back to the electrolyte. Mass transfer of ions in and out of the polymer causes swelling and deswelling of the tube, which subsequently leads to torsional motion. The measured maximum peak-to-peak torsion was about ∼0.01° per mm of actuator length. Recently, Martinez et al.100 reported the electrochemically activated torsional movement of electropolymerized PPy coated textile yarns, Fig. 7(a) shows the SEM images of used PPy coated yarns: (1) polyamide/carbon, (2) silicon/carbon, (3) silver coated polyamide, (4) cellulose/carbon, (5) polyester/INOX, (6) polyester/Cu/Sn, and (7) gold coated polyester. A reversible torsional rotation up to 1° was achieved from PPy coated gold/polyester yarn. The torsional movement was explained as the effect of pre-twisting which was present in some of the bare yarns [Fig. 7(b)].
 Fig. 7  Electropolymerized PPy coated textile yarn actuators: (a) SEM images of used PPy coated yarns: (1) polyamide/carbon, (2) silicon/carbon, (3) silver coated polyamide, (4) cellulose/carbon, (5) polyester/INOX, (6) polyester/Cu/Sn, and (7) gold coated polyester, and (b) electrochemically induced torsional rotation of corresponding PPy coated yarns. Reproduced from ref. 100 Copyright 2018, IOP Publishing. 
Despite having several advantages, EAPs have a number of issues yet to be addressed to use them as practical actuator systems.101 Both the EAPs torsional actuators described here showed very small torsional rotation when operated as oscillatory torsional actuators. In past two decades, some dielectric elastomer actuators have demonstrated extensions up to three times their initial lengths, satisfactory efficiencies and high specific energy densities. However, in most experiments actuator life was a serious concern. In some applications dielectric elastomers still lack several important properties such as low voltage operation.102 Use of conductive polymers as actuators require significantly less voltage; however, the response time of these actuators is long, and a low actuation force is generated which limits the practical applications.103,104 One potential way of improving their actuation speed is to use a core material that is coated with conductive polymer. Several patterns such as twisted, knitted, or weaved structures could be constructed to amplify the actuation efficiency.
2.5 Fluidic torsional actuators
Fluidic artificial muscles, also familiar as McKibben muscles, have been extensively studied in both analytical and experimental aspects.105–108 Fluidic artificial muscles are constructed in a very simple way and consist of internal elastomer bladder surrounded by a helically braided outer sleeve. Commonly, one end of the muscle is connected to a fluid port through which pressurised working fluid flow in and out of the muscle, while the other end of the muscle is closed by a plug, crimp or another blocking device. These muscles work by using pressurised fluid to expand the internal elastic tube such that the outer braided sleeve of inextensible fibres causes linear contraction of the whole muscle unit. Pneumatic or air filled muscle is the most common type of fluidic artificial muscle and these systems have demonstrated many of the distinctive features found in a real muscle.105,109–112 Some researchers107,113–115 have also investigated hydraulic artificial muscles and shown that an antagonistic pair of the hydraulic actuator is able to deliver force to weight ratios more than six times higher than a traditional double-acting hydraulic cylinder while attaining similar tensile stroke and maximum force output.107 These attractive features make fluidic artificial muscles a suitable actuation choice for bioinspired robot designs,113,116–118 powered prosthetics,119–122 or robots designed to interact closely with humans.112,115,123
While axial movement of fluidic artificial muscles has been studied and developed fairly comprehensively, much less research has been conducted to construct simple fluidic actuators that can provide rotary actuation.124–126 In one example, Sanan et al.124 have assembled two differently shaped structures into a single configuration (having a shape like ‘S’) along a shared geometric centre to make pneumatic torsional actuators. The two helices were joined along the central axis of the two shapes. The fabric used to make the muscle was inextensible; therefore, the common central axis length remained constant and accordingly the length of the whole actuator was held constant during the movement. Consequently, the motion between the ends of the torsion shape actuator moves toward pure rotating motion with negligible axial movement. One of the prototypes developed a torsional rotation of nearly 0.4° per mm of actuator length. Similar work has been reported by Yan et al.126 where a new spiral driven soft torsional module has been designed based on the design idea of screw type twisting [Fig. 8(a)]. First, finite element modelling of the actuator was performed and then fabrication was carried out by two stages. A kinematic model, which is the relationship between the air pressure and the twist angle, was also established by means of experimental calibration. Finally, a test platform was fabricated and used to evaluate the actuation performance of the designed module [Fig. 8(b)]. The torsional module was inflated to a few specific angles and the air pressure was recorded. The data on air pressure/torsion angle [Fig. 9(c)] were obtained by averaging the values of five measurements. The result of kinematic fitting as shown by the green and red line has been found consistent with the measured curve (blue). To clarify the effect of elastic deformation on the module, a segmentation linear function has been described for each corresponding relationship separately when the angle was within the range 0–20° and more than 20°. Despite having novelty in these particular works, an issue was overlooked is the structural role of the actuator if it is to be used in a soft-bodied robot. In particular, the load bearing central axis structure needs to be sufficiently stiff to linear and bending forces but compliant to torsional loads, hence, the design requires a careful investigation and selection of the central axis material.
 Fig. 8  Spiral driven torsional soft actuator: (a) CAD design and a protype, (b) test platform, and (c) validation of theoretically modelled and experimentally evaluated results of the actuator with torsion angle <20° (segment 1) and <20° (segment 2). Reproduced with permission.126 Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. 
 Fig. 9  Characteristics and performance of V-SPTAs: (a) actuated state of a V-SPTA, (b) angle change α and height change ΔH with different initial heights H0, and (c) angle change α and height change ΔH with different initial angles β. Reproduced with permission.127 Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons. 
In another work, Connolly et al.125 demonstrated that a wide range of motions, including linear extension, radial expansion, and rotational motion could be achieved from fibre-reinforced soft fluidic artificial muscles by merely controlling the fibre angle.125 To illustrate the effect of fibre angles (ranged from 0° to 90°) on the response of the actuators, a numerical study was conducted using finite element analysis. To verify the finite element results, numerical predictions and experimental data were compared for two actuators having fibre angles of −3° and 70°. Understanding the effect of tailoring the fibre angle provides a quantitative prediction of motion of the soft actuators and exploration of the design space for this class of actuators. A small magnitude of torsional rotation of ∼1.75° per mm of actuator length was reported in this work. A higher torsional movement has been reported by Jiao et al.127 where a novel vacuum-powered soft pneumatic twisting actuator (V-SPTA) has produced ∼2° twisting motion per mm of actuator length (Fig. 9). The authors have investigated the effect of the initial height H0 of V-SPTA by varying H0 from 20 to 60 mm. Fig. 9(b) shows the angle change α and the height change ΔH increased with an increase of H0. This is due to the unique design and structure of the actuated V-SPTA, where the top and bottom end sections were compressed against the top or bottom surface [Fig. 9(a)]. The effect of the initial angle β of the V-SPTA by varying β from 15° to 90° was also studied which had little effect on the change of angle α and height ΔH [Fig. 9(c)].
All the reported amount of torsional actuation from fluidic actuators have been very small compared to their actual volume and material content hence reducing the practical applicability. Another limitation includes the requirement of the fluidic pump to the actuator set-up which makes it unsuitable for microscopic operations.
2.6 Torsional carbon nanotube (CNT) artificial muscles
Linear and bending modes of CNT actuators are well known by using different stimuli such as electricity, fuels, light, magnetic fields or heat.128,129 Electrostatic attraction and repulsion between two nanotubes have been used for cantilever-based nano-tweezers130 and mechanically functional switches and logic elements.131,132 On the macroscale, electrically powered133–138 and fuel-powered139,140 electrochemical CNT actuators provide a small expansion stroke and over a hundred times higher stress generation than natural muscle. CNTs also have been used as additives that act in conjunction with organic polymers to provide photo-responsive,141 shape memory,142,143 electrochemical144 and electromechanical145,146 actuators. Fennimore et al. demonstrated electromechanically powered torsional and rotational motors by using a single multi-walled nanotube as a low-friction shaft with attached magnetic rotor where repeated rotation of 360° was achieved without having any wear or fatigue.147
Foroughi et al. were first to demonstrate an electrolyte-filled twist-spun multi-walled CNT yarn acted as a torsional artificial muscle.148 They used a conventional three-electrode electrochemical set-up, and produce a reversible 250° rotation per mm of sample length and a peak rotation speed of 590 revolutions per minute (rpm).148 The muscles operated by electrochemical double-layer charge injection, as demonstrated in carbon nanotube supercapacitors-based reports.149–153 Immersion of a twisted multi-walled CNT yarn and a counter electrode in an electrolyte and applying a voltage between these electrodes causes the yarn to rotate in the untwist direction. To improve reversibility, the yarn was tethered at both ends to prohibit end rotation and a paddle was attached near yarn centre with only one-half of the yarn immersed in the electrolyte and used as a torsional muscle. Despite having a smaller torsional rotation than the same length of CNT yarn that was tethered at only one end, the reversibility of the actuation was improved because the non-actuating section of the yarn functioned as a torsional return spring to rotate the paddle to its initial angle (Fig. 10).
 Fig. 10  Torsional CNT artificial muscle: (a) scanning electron micrograph of a CNT yarn that was symmetrically twist-spun (twist angle, α) from a multi-walled CNT forest, (b) illustration of electrochemical cell configurations used for characterizing torsional actuation or the combination of torsional and tensile actuation, where the Ag/Ag+ reference electrode, actuating yarn electrode, and Pt mesh counter-electrode are shown from left to right, (c) both end tethered yarn configuration with actuating yarn length, LA and non-actuating yarn length, LN, and (d) torsional rotation (black) and axial length actuation (blue) versus time for a yarn (length = 120 mm, diameter = 12 mm, α = 40°). Reproduced with permission.148 Copyright 2011, The American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Electrochemical actuation of CNT yarn relies on the use of electrolytes; hence, the actuating system is restricted to a wet environment or the use of gel-based electrolytes. Electrolytes also put a narrow boundary on operating temperature, application of voltage, and rate of actuation. Furthermore, special packaging is needed which adds extra weight and volume, and reduces the work density of the actuator system. To overcome these limitations, Lima et al. have designed guest-filled, electrolyte-free, twisted CNT yarn muscles that provide high speed torsional and tensile stroke, in which a muscle spins a rotor at an average 11500 revolutions per minute or provides ∼3% tensile actuation at 1200 cycles per minute.154 Electrically, chemically, or photonically induced volume change of guest material generates torsional rotation and tensile contraction of the CNT yarn host. However, these wax-infiltrated, electro-thermally powered artificial muscles are torsionally underdamped, thereby experiencing dynamic oscillations that complicate positional control.
Chun et al. developed an ultrafast hybrid CNT yarn muscle that produced a torsional rotation of 9800revolutions per minute without noticeable oscillation by using a similar mechanism in spider silk to reduce uncontrolled spinning of the spider at the end of dragline silk.155 A viscoelastic material, containing paraffin wax and polystyrene–poly(ethylene–butylene)–polystyrene copolymer (SEBS), was used as the yarn guest material to produce an overdamped dynamic oscillating response. The thermally-induced volume increase of the wax/polymer composite within the CNT yarn causes the yarn length to contract and the yarn to partially untwist to generate torsional rotation.
In another article, Lee et al. demonstrated electrochemically induced, all-solid-state torsional and tensile artificial yarn muscles using a spinnable CNT sheet and received large torsional rotation (53° per mm) without using the relatively complicated three-electrode electrochemical system, a liquid electrolyte, or heavy packaging.156 Anode and cathode yarns were fabricated by infiltrating the solid electrolyte (poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-hexa-fluoropropylene)), PVdF-co-HFP, containing tetraethylammonium tetrafluoroborate (TEABF4) with propylene carbonate (PC) to obtain an electrical insulation electrolyte layer on the yarn surface. These two yarns were then plied together using an opposite twist direction of yarn plying than for the initially introduced yarn twist. Penetration of ions and solvating species from exterior electrolytes into the anode and cathode yarns causes the increase in hybrid yarn volume and produces yarn untwist and yarn contraction. Torsional actuation study of CNT yarn has also been conducted by utilising environment's temperature variation.158 In the example studied, twisted CNT yarn was employed as the backbone for torsional actuation driven by the volume change of infiltrated a phase change material (PCM). When the specific volume of CNT yarn varies drastically at the phase-transition temperature, torsional actuation has occurred. A maximum of 8° per mm rotation was observed when the temperature varies from 27 to 40 °C. Recently, solvent or vapour driven torsional multi-walled CNT yarn muscles have been reported by a few researchers. Chen et al.157 showed that a compact coil of multiple twisted multi-walled CNT yarns consisting of nanoscale gaps between the nanotubes and micrometre-scale gaps among the twisted fibres contribute to the rapid response and large actuation stroke of the actuating fibres. Upon exposure to ethanol vapour, a coil of 20 multi-walled CNT yarn reversibly rotated a 570 times heavier paddle by 380° per mm of muscle length with a maximum rotational speed of ∼6361 rpm (Fig. 11). A maximum tensile contraction of ∼10% was also generated during the rotation.
 Fig. 11  Actuation performances of helical coiled multi-walled CNT yarn: (a) schematic illustration of the contractive and rotary actuators where a copper paddle with a mass of 75 mg was fixed at the end of the sample, and (b) rotary speeds generated by the coiled sample upon the absorption of ethanol. The coiled sample was made from 20 twisted yarns. Reproduced with permission.157 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. 
In another work, Di et al.159 demonstrated an incandescent tension annealing process (ITAP) for stabilising both twisted and coiled multi-walled CNT yarns with respect to unwanted irreversible untwist, thereby avoiding the need to tether torsional artificial muscles, and increasing the mechanical loads that can be driven by these muscles. This ITAP involves thermally annealing twisted CNT yarns at a temperature of about 2000 °C while these yarns are under tensile loads (Fig. 12). When exposed to acetone vapour, a 24 mm-long, 100 μm-thick coiled ITAP yarn reversibly rotated a 6100 times heavier rotor by 630° (corresponding to a rotation of 26° per mm of muscle length). The maximum rotational speed of the rotor was 44 rpm, and the muscle lifted a weight corresponding to a 2.9 MPa load by about 0.7% of the yarn length [Fig. 12(d)]. Multi-walled CNT twisted yarns have been the most extensively studied for torsional actuator showing high performance in terms of large torsional strokes and high-speed actuation.
 Fig. 12  Acetone vapour induced torsional CNT artificial muscle: (a) setup for applying ITAP to multi-walled CNT yarns, (b) SEM images of the effects of an applied freely rotating load on a nontethered, non-ITAP coiled yarn, (c) SEM images of the effects of a nontethered, coiled ITAP yarn, showing that the ITAP stabilises the coiled yarn with respect to untwisting, and (d) weight rotation in degrees (normalised to yarn length) versus time for a one-end-tethered, coiled ITAP yarn when driven by acetone vapour absorption/desorption. Reproduced with permission.159 Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons. 
A summary of works on torsional CNT yarn artificial muscles is provided in Table 1. Compared with other torsionally actuating materials, CNT yarns demonstrate several advantages such as actuation under low voltages, ultra-high speed response, and millions of cycle-life which mainly originates from unique electronic properties, large surface area, and excellent chemical and thermal stability of CNT yarns. Torsional CNT artificial muscles have potential application in microfluidic mixing,148 torsional motors,154 torsional pumps,155 and micro-electromechanical systems.148,156,161 Integration of CNT yarn with textile threads by means of winding, or wrapping could open their potential in smart textiles and exoskeleton applications.
Table 1 Torsional CNT yarn artificial muscles and corresponding performances




Materials
Tethering system
Actuation principle
Maximum reversible torsional rotation
Tensile contraction (%)


Stroke (degree per mm)
Speed (rpm)




Multi-walled CNT yarn148
Two-end
Electrochemical double-layer charge injection
∼250
∼590
∼1


Host: multi-walled CNT yarn/guest: paraffin wax154
Two-end
Thermal, or electro-thermal, or photo-thermal
∼180
∼11500
∼3


Host: multi-walled CNT yarn/guest: paraffin wax + SEBS copolymer155
Two-end
Electro-thermal
∼85
∼9800
Not reported


Electrolyte (PVdF-co-HFP + TEABF4 + PC) infiltrated twisted CNT yarn156
One-end
Electrochemical
∼53
Not reported
∼0.7


PCM (icosane) infiltrated CNT yarn158
Two-end
Thermal
∼8
∼0.1
Not reported


Incandescent tension annealed coiled multi-walled CNT yarn159
One-end
Chemical (acetone vapour)
∼26
∼44
0.7


Multi-walled CNT fibre160
Two-end
Electromechanical
Not reported
∼2700
∼2


Hierarchically made multi-walled CNT yarn coil157
One-end
Chemical (ethanol vapour)
∼380
∼6361
∼10


NdFeB magnetic particle bi-scrolled multi-walled CNT yarn129
Two-end
Magnetic
∼71
∼11500
Not reported




2.7 Graphene-fibre torsional actuator
The significant potential of graphene fibres stems from the characteristic they combine the high mechanical strength and flexibility of fibres with the extraordinary electronic and thermal properties of graphene.162–164 Recently, a number of graphene fibre based hybrid torsional actuators has been reported that can be induced chemically,165,166 or thermally.167 These fibres with in-line oriented graphene sheets offer the great capability to develop unconventional fibre-based devices. Recently, a spinning technique for constructing graphene fibres directly from graphene oxide dispersions has stimulated research in this field, as this delivers a large-scale and inexpensive route to fibres with a variety of different functionalities that could be useful in textiles for wearable electronics.168,169
Expanding the scope of graphene fibres and exploring the unconventional potential of graphene fibres, Cheng et al. achieved a novel moisture-driven rotational motor by twisting the as-spun graphene oxide fibre hydrogel.166,170 This twisted configuration with rearranged graphene sheets within the fibres offers excellent performance as a reversible rotary actuator showing a rotary speed of up to ∼5190 revolutions per minute under relative humidity fluctuation (Fig. 13). Torsional rotation of ∼588° per mm was observed by using a 200 mm long twisted sample. Although the amount of measured rotation is more than twice CNT yarn torsional actuator (∼250° per mm),148 this one-end-tethered system may have limited practical usability due to the uncontrolled mobility to any direction.
 Fig. 13  Torsional graphene fibre actuator: (a) schematic rotation of a twisted graphene oxide fibre with a paddle at low (left) and high (right) humidity, (b) SEM images of the initially twisted graphene oxide fibre at relative humidity = 20% (1), after exposure to high humidity of 85% (2), and the final state of twisted graphene oxide fibre as the humidity goes back to the initial relative humidity = 20% (3); scale bar: 100 μm, and (c) the durability test of twisted graphene oxide fibre (>5000 turns per meter) undergoing repeated relative humidity changes, showing forward (the environment humidity changed from relative humidity = 20% to 85%) and backward (relative humidity = 85% to 20%) rotation speed versus cycle numbers. Reproduced with permission.166 Copyright 2014, John Wiley and Sons. 
Recently, Kim et al. reported the torsional actuation ability of wet-spun nylon-6,6 infiltrated graphene oxide (GO) based fibres.167 These fibres were twisted to form torsional actuators which produced as high as 14.8° per mm rotation when the samples were heated to 200 °C. As illustrated in Fig. 14(a), the actuation was induced by volume expansion of the guest material in the fibre. When the actuator is heated, the volume of the nylon polymer increased, which eventually enhanced the separation between the GO flakes because the nylon polymer occupies the inter-flake spaces. This volume expansion of this hybrid fibre induces the torsional actuation by rotating in the untwisting direction. Fig. 14(b) shows the torsional stroke of the twisted GO/nylon fibres prepared with different amounts on inserted twist when heated to 200 °C. The torsional stroke increased almost linearly with the number of twist and measured 63, 84, 104, and 148.5° per cm for 133, 266, 400, and 533 turns per m, respectively. Although practically viable reversible torsional actuation was obtained, these attractive features should be further supplemented by relatively inexpensive carbon materials such as CNTs. Another approach of integrating GO with conductive polymer containing yarns can potentially be implemented in wearable actuator systems.
 Fig. 14  GO/nylon twisted actuator: (a) schematic illustration and the thermo-responsive work principle, and (b) performance of the maximum torsional actuation when heated to 200 °C and for GO/nylon fibres made of different amounts of the twist. The inset shows a micrograph of GO/nylon fibre with a twist count of 533 turns per m (scale bar: 200 μm). Reproduced with permission.167 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
2.8 Metallic nanowire torsional actuator
CNT yarns have been promising as torsional or tensile actuators; however, they usually exhibit low mechanical strength and electrical or thermal conductivity. Mirvakili et al.171 demonstrated a torsional actuator based on twisted metal nanowires yarns that are strong, pliable, and more conductive than CNT yarns. Niobium nanowire fibres were extracted by etching a copper–niobium nano-composite material made by severe plastic deformation.171,172 When impregnated with paraffin wax, the niobium nanowire yarns produce fast rotational actuation as the wax is heated. Similar to wax impregnated CNT yarns, heated and expanded wax untwists the yarn, which then re-twists upon cooling. Normalised to yarn length, 12° per mm of torsional rotation was achieved along with twist rates in excess of 1800 revolutions per minute when 23 times larger paddle is used for measurement (Fig. 15). The tensile modulus of 19 ± 5 GPa was measured for the niobium nanowire yarns, which is very similar to that of multi-walled CNTs. In thermally induced torsional actuation, the higher conductivity of niobium nanowire yarns allows heating to be attained with lower voltages than are required in CNT yarns, making them of possible importance in portable devices such as implantable drug delivery systems, guided catheters, and miniature valves.171
 Fig. 15  Niobium nanowire yarn torsional actuator: (a) as spun yarn with twist angle α of 13°, (b) torsional actuation configuration, with the right half of the yarn infiltrated with wax and melting induced by current pulses. The central paddle is used to determine rotation, and (c) the angle of rotation versus time upon pulse voltage actuation of the niobium nanowire yarn. Reproduced with permission.171 Copyright 2013, John Wiley and Sons. 
2.9 Polymer fibre/yarn based torsional muscle
Stimuli-responsive fibres and yarns are of great interest in the field of artificial muscles. These fibres can experience a volume and/or shape change when externally stimulated resulting in a tensile expansion/contraction,173–178 bending178–180 or torsional rotation.104,175,178,181 Potential applications for these fibres are many and include microfluidic mixing, micro-scale robots and exoskeletons for movement assistance.
Recently, Haines et al. demonstrated that low-cost, high-strength oriented polymer fibres can be transformed into tensile and torsional muscles by inserting twist in the fibre.175 As reported, commercially produced fibres including polyethylene and nylon fishing line, and polyester sewing thread were used as the precursors. As with CNT yarn muscles,148,154 the twist was inserted into these polymer fibres to make them chiral, which enables them to function as torsional muscles. Tensile stroke was greatly amplified by inserting such a large amount of twist that some twist converted to fibre coiling.182,183 A thermally-induced tensile contraction of the overtwisted coils was found to surpass the maximum in vivo stroke of human skeletal muscles (∼20%)1 [Fig. 16(a)]. A similar kind of actuation was also obtained by introducing heat to the fibres by using different ways such as Joule heating by incorporating electrically conductive filaments174,184 or coatings,175,177 air heating,173,175,185 photo-thermal stimulation175 or electrochemical stimulation.175 Most recently, humidity-induced torsional actuator system has been reported where a twisted spider dragline silk biopolymer fibre exhibited a torsional rotation of 300°/mm when the relative humidity reaches to 70%.186 However, this system is mostly irreversible and limited to low torque generation. Most recently, Mu et al. demonstrated a torsional and tensile muscle that exhibited significant actuation, in which polymer gel was used as a sheath on a twisted or coiled polymer fibre core.187 When activated chemically (ethanol absorption/desorption), this sheath/core muscles exhibited as high as ∼120° per mm torsional rotation. However, compared to thermally activated torsional muscles, the sheath/core muscles are fairly slow and limited to low torque generation.
 Fig. 16  Actuation of oriented polymer fibre: (a) comparison of the tensile actuation of braided polyethylene, nylon 6 monofilament, nylon 6,6 monofilament, and silver-coated nylon 6,6 multifilament fibres before twisting (inset) and after coiling by twist insertion, (b) the optically measured fibre bias angle induced by an applied torque and the torsional stroke and work during thermal actuation (between 20° and 160 °C) as a function of this applied torque for a non-coiled torsional muscle made from 860 mm diameter nylon 6 fishing line (inset photograph was used to optically determine the fibre bias angle by measuring the displacement of a black line from its initial orientation parallel to the fibre axis), and (c) schematic illustration of the mechanism by which torsional fibre actuation drives large-stroke tensile actuation for heterochiral (left) and homochiral (right) coiled fibres. Reproduced with permission.175 Copyright 2014, The American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
There are several advantages of using heat-activated polymer fibre muscles compared to other stimulus. For example, electrochemically charged fibres of conducting polymers can generate large strokes but have low cyclability and need a multi-electrode electrochemical system, which adds to system weight and cost.32,85 Electric field induced dielectric elastomers28,188 are attractive because of their large strokes and high performances but is difficult to use as an artificial muscle because of the required high electric fields. In contrast, thermally-induced twisted polymer fibres or yarns are able to deliver large amounts of mechanical work as torsional actuators with high cyclability and cycle rate. These single component systems do not require any special assembly and are suitable for manufacturing light weight and low cost actuators. Specifically, a constant torque torsional actuation experiment was conducted by using an 0.86 mm diameter, 55 mm long, twisted nylon 6 fibre. Under a temperature fluctuation from 20° to 160 °C, this torsional actuator rotated a 2.8 mm diameter axle by 286° and lifted a 1 kg weight by 7 mm. The mechanical work done by the actuator was calculated to be 2.1 kJ kg−1 [Fig. 16(b)] based on the mass of the nylon fiber and this work output is similar to the 2.48 kJ kg−1 generated during tensile actuation of a coiled nylon 6,6 fibre.
It was found that thermal contraction of coiled polymer fibre muscles principally arises from thermally-induced fibre untwist, which generates a torque that decreases inter-coil separation.35 This thermally-induced fibre untwist (ΔT, measured in turns per initial fibre length) produces the torsional actuation of twisted fibres and amplifies the length change of coiled fibres by changing coil bias angle from αc to αc′, as described by the spring mechanics equation,36 (4)Here, D and D′ are the diameters of coils, taken through the fibre centreline before and after heating, and the coil bias angle αc is the angle between the fibre and the coil's cross-section. For a coil having N turns and length L fabricated from a precursor fibre of length l: sin(αc) = L/l and cos(αc) = πND/l. The expression suggests that when the change in fibre length l is negligible, stretching a coiled fibre which is tethered to prevent end rotation produces a change in the fibre twist of, (5)
This expression predicts that the large contractions and expansions in coil length in twisted and coiled polymer fibres originate from fibre untwist during heating. This twist-driven coil contraction/expansion mechanism is best understood by using mandrel-made coils. Heating of a homochiral coiled fibre (twisted and coiled in the same direction), delivers an untwisting torque that pulls coils together, providing work by linear contraction. On the contrary, the length of a heterochiral muscle (twisted and coiled in the opposite direction) increases due to the fibre untwist during heating that pushes the coils apart [Fig. 16(c)]. However, a comprehensive study on muscle stroke and specific work capacity based on fibre diameter and muscle fabrication parameters is yet to be performed which is critically important for the diverse family of targeted applications including humanoid robotics, powered prosthetic limbs, microfluidic actuators, giant-force-capacity exoskeletons, and smart textiles.174–176,184,189,190
Torsional actuation of helically twisted oriented polymer fibres is associated with the thermal expansion coefficients of the non-twisted fibre to both radial and lengthwise direction. These synthetic polymer fibres exhibit anisotropic thermal expansion behaviour, i.e. their responses are different in different directions.191 A thermal contraction in the fibre axis direction has been reported for several semicrystalline polymers above their glass transition temperature (Tg) and this has been attributed to the rubber-elastic behaviour of the intercrystalline tie-molecules (TM).192 Highly oriented semicrystalline polymers are made up of crystalline lamellae embedded in an amorphous matrix, each lamella consisting of mosaic crystalline blocks connected by occasional ‘tie molecules’. Upon drawing, the chain axes of the crystalline blocks become increasingly aligned along the draw direction. Simultaneously, the crystalline blocks are pulled out of the lamellae, and on further deformation, these blocks will align along the draw direction forming a periodic structure. The intercrystalline material may be thought of as consisting of the three components as shown in Fig. 17.
 Fig. 17  Schematic diagram showing the structure of a highly oriented semicrystalline polymer (A) amorphous region: this includes floating chains, cilia which are attached to a block at one end, and loops which start and end on the same block; (B) intercrystalline bridges: it has been proposed that tie-molecules may coalesce to form bridges of a crystalline nature; (C) chain-folded crystal blocks; (TM) tie-molecules, joining one crystalline block to another: these increases in both number and tautness with increasing amorphous content. Redrawn with permission.192 Copyright 2003, John Wiley and Sons. 
According to Choi et al.,192 the axial thermal contraction of the highly oriented semicrystalline polymer fibres such as polyethylene and nylon originate from both crystalline and non-crystalline regions. Aligned crystal blocks and the crystalline bridges are formed between these regions with the polymer chain direction similar to the fibre drawing direction.193 The main contribution to the negative thermal expansion in the draw direction comes from the rubber-elastic effect of the pre-stretched amorphous tie-molecules in the inter-crystalline regions. These polymer chains remain as highly extended after drawing due to the formation of the crystalline bridges. The inter-crystalline space is significantly sensitive to the moduli of the extended tie-molecules and the crystalline bridges and the volume fraction of each phase. According to the thermodynamics of rubber elasticity, the modulus of the amorphous tie-molecules increases due to the application of heat194 and results in the contraction of crystalline bridges since the modulus of this region remains almost unchanged on heating. These mechanics are operated only at temperatures above the Tg of the polymer. Choi et al. have reported a thermal contraction coefficient up to −40 × 10−5 K−1 in the draw direction of highly oriented polymer fibre192 that is much higher than the change in dimensions of the crystal lattice.
The untwisting phenomenon of oriented twisted polymer fibres can be explained based on these anisotropic thermal properties of highly oriented semicrystalline polymer fibres. Twisting of these fibres results in helically oriented chains. Thermally-induced length contraction of the oriented polymer chains now happens along the helical path presented during twist insertion. The contraction of length in the direction of helically wrapped polymer chains can be accommodated within the twisted fibre by combinations of changes in axial fibre length (l), diameter (d), and number of twist (n). The relationship between twisted fibre length (l), diameter (d), precursor fibre axial chain length (λ) and the helical chain angle to the fibre axis (αf) is modelled by a single helix:175 (6)This equation predicts the untwisting of fibre when helically oriented polymer chain contracts (negative Δλ) and fibre diameter expands (positive Δd); therefore, agreeing the anisotropic thermal behaviour of highly oriented polymer fibres.
Foroughi et al. have reported that the important characteristics related to the deformations of an electrochemically charged twisted CNT yarn can be approached by using this single helix-model.148Fig. 18 illustrates a twisted single fibre having n rotations at a helix bias angle αf to form a cylindrical shape of length l and radius r. The helical path length of fibre is ls and the end rotation of fibre with respect to its starting point at the top is ϕ. The cylindrical radius (r) and volume (V) enclosed by the helically wound fibre can be expressed in terms of fibre length as:148 r2 = (ls2 − l2)/4π2n2(7) V = l(ls2 − l2)/4πn2(8)Rotation due to a change in the cylinder volume is indicated by a change in the number of twists, with a decrease in n indicating untwisting of the helix and an increase in n corresponding to an increase in twist. The ratio of the number of turns after a volume change to the initial number of turns is given by: (9)where V0 and l0 are for the initial state, V and l are for the actuated state, and λ is the length ratio (l/l0). Eqn (9) is for a single helix that can approximate the outer shell of a twisted yarn, and may not quantitative predict the real fibre untwist during heating because of different axial and radial dimensional changes occurring internally in the twisted fibre. At the least, this equation provides a general explanation as to why the twisted polymer fibre untwists when heated and the importance of the anisotropy of thermal expansion on this untwist.
 Fig. 18  Single-helix model for a twist-spun CNT yarn, where helically wound fibre of constant length ls forms a cylindrical volume of radius r0 and length l0 before actuation and r and l after actuation (left and middle illustrations). The fibre makes n0 turns along the cylinder length before actuation and n after actuation, and the rotation of the spring bottom end with respect to spring top is ϕ0 before actuation and ϕ after actuation. Reproduced with permission.148 Copyright 2011, The American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
The helix model approximates the mechanism of torsional actuation obtained from almost all kinds of helically twisted structures such as CNT yarns, metallic nanowire yarns, graphene oxide yarns and polymer fibres. For any stimuli applied to the actuators (i.e. thermal, chemical, moisture, electrochemical, electro-thermal, or photo-thermal) there results an overall volume change, which then drives the torsional actuation. However, Guo et al.160 proposed a possible different actuation mechanism of electromechanical actuation of twisted CNT fibres. By quoting the Ampere's law, it was attributed that these CNTs in a parallel arrangement produce electromagnetic forces as the current flows along the length of the CNTs. Although the electromagnetic force of a single CNT is very small, the combined effect of millions of CNTs in the cross-sectional area of a fibre can generate a force high enough to induce significant electromechanical lengthwise contraction and torsional rotation. By analogy of tensile actuators, the electromagnetic attractions are perpendicular to the CNTs, and the contraction stress attributes to the component force along the axial direction of the CNT fibre. Upon Joule heating, the produced tensile stress of CNT fibres of same cross-sectional CNT density was expected to be increased with the increasing twist bias angle. Unexpectedly, it was found that the stress first increased and then decreased with the increasing bias angle. This unwanted property was explained from the point of three-dimensional hopping conduction mechanism of the CNT fibre.195–197 Haines et al.,174 on the other hand, have elaborately explained the torsional actuation mechanism of twisted fibres (polymers or CNTs) by using their thermal expansion anisotropy and the helical orientation. It was found that the twisted polymer fibres produce similar torsional actuation when either Joule heated or air heated. Since there is no electromagnetic effect present in air heating process, the torsional response was solely seen as a result of the thermal expansion parameters. Twisting fibres of anisotropically expanding materials exposed a new phenomenon i.e. the thermal torsion effect. Any oriented fibre that expands radially more than it expands in length (before twisting) can produce untwist simply by inserting twist into the fibre. Although pure CNT yarns also provide anisotropic thermal expansion, by causing nanotube length contraction and yarn diameter expansion during heating, like for the in-plane and interplane expansions in graphite,198 this dimensional change is small and only able to produce useful actuation when the yarn is heated under very high temperature. By infiltrating a volume expanding guest within the confines of a twisted CNT yarn, a large, initially isotropic guest expansion can be transformed into an anisotropic yarn expansion by the helically aligned, high stiffness CNTs, thereby producing torsional actuation. A number of researchers have supported this mechanism, therefore, validates the acceptability of thermal expansion phenomenon of torsionally actuated fibres/yarns.148,154–157,159,166,175
The present review has shown that the measured length and diameter expansions can be used to predict the torsional actuation. However, there is no accurate prediction of the thermal expansion based on local anisotropy. Comprehensive investigation of the origin of the thermal expansion anisotropy in oriented fibres should be conducted to aid the feasibility of these actuators in real-world systems. Creep has been shown to influence the load-dependency and time-dependency of the torsional actuation.199 Methods for mitigating creep in oriented polymers could be investigated for twisted polymer fibre torsional actuators.
3. Established characterisation methods
3.1 Characterization method of torsional fibre/yarn muscles
Real-world application of torsional artificial muscles necessitates an accurate and continuous characterization method that allows the torsional stroke and torque to be calculated for any externally applied environmental and mechanical condition. Previous work has focused mainly on measuring torsional stroke, for example by securing the sample at one end and measuring the rotation of the free end. Occasionally a return spring mechanism has been used to improve reversibility of torsional actuation. Haines et al. demonstrated a test apparatus for measuring isotonic torsional stroke and the work output from a twisted polymer fibre.175 Torque was applied to a nylon 6 monofilament fibre by attachment to a constant diameter axle (supported by two metal bearings), around which a polymer fibre holding the load ‘c’ (Fig. 19) was wrapped. The constant torque caused by load ‘c’ was first used to increase fibre twist, compared with that for earlier measurements in a sequence, and then to enable thermally-induced actuation measurements under this torque. The same size load (labelled ‘d’ in Fig. 19) was applied to keep the fibre under tension, thereby preventing coil formation.
 Fig. 19  Schematic illustration of an apparatus for measuring torsional stroke and torsional work capacity as a function of applied torque during the torsional actuation of twisted polymer fibre muscles. Components are: polymer muscle (a), controlled temperature furnace (b), load (c) providing torque, tensile load (d) for muscle, pulley (e) to support this load, bearing-supported rod (f) connecting polymer muscle to axle (g) for applying torque, and a wheel-supported attachment (h) for the muscle, which enables horizontal movement of the muscle end. Reproduced with permission.175 Copyright 2014, The American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Building on this early work, a measurement technique and analysis procedure that allows the torsional stroke and torque to be calculated for any imposed external loads has recently been described.200 The characterisation method provides the stroke–torque curve defining the free stroke (zero external torque), blocked torque (zero torsional rotation) and all combinations of non-zero stroke and torque. Aziz et al.200 introduced torsion mechanics to provide the theoretical torsional stroke expected for the cases of free rotation, isotonic torsional actuation and torsional actuation with a return spring [Fig. 20(a) and (b)]. The torsional strokes are expressed as a fraction of the free rotation [ϕ(LA)free] to emphasise the importance of the inherent torsional actuation parameter, θ, in determining the torsional stroke in all cases. A set of equation was presented theoretically calculate the torsional stroke and torque generated from twisted fibres under different mechanical and environmental conditions. ϕ(LA)free = LA·θ(10) τblocked = ϕ(LA)free × SA(11) (12) (13)Here, LA is the length of actuating fibre, SA is the torsional rigidity of the fibre at non-actuated state, SA is torsional rigidity of the actuating fibre at actuated state, τblocked is the blocked torque generated, ϕ(LA)isotonic the is torsional stroke under constant torque, τext, ϕ(LA)returnspring is the torsional stroke at variable (return spring induced) torque and SN is the torsional stiffness of the return spring fibre.
 Fig. 20  Torsional actuation test methods: (a) illustration of different methods where the actuating element is optionally subjected to an external torque (presented as force applied by a hanging weight) and/or a return spring fibre, (b) theoretical estimates of torsional stroke at each point along the length of an actuating fibre and return spring (non-actuating) fibre, if used, and operated in free rotation or isotonic rotation modes, and (c) CAD model of torsional actuation test apparatus; (1) heating zone, (2) ultra-low friction air bearings, (3) lever arm force/distance transducer, (4) movable fibre gripping clamp, (5) support for air bearings, (6) connecting fibre between lever arm force/distance transducer and bearing shaft, (7) actuating muscle fibre, and (8) fibre acting as return spring keeping the actuating muscle straight and well positioned. Reproduced with permission.200 Copyright 2015, Elsevier. 
A proof-of-concept apparatus was also developed for measuring the rotation of a shaft attached to a near frictionless bearing and driven by a thermally induced fibre/yarn torsional actuator, i.e. the twisted fibre [CAD model presented in Fig. 20(c)]. The measurement system can measure both torsional stroke and torque, and the sample can either be operated with or without a return spring fibre.
3.2 Scalability of torsional fibre/yarn muscles
Scalability of torsional actuation is a key issue that has remained mostly unexplored. Important insights are provided by the study of Haines et al.175 in which coils made by twisting nylon 6,6 monofilaments with diameters ranging from 0.15 mm to 2.45 mm strokes and gravimetric work capacities that were essentially scale-independent. Aziz et al.33,201 reported further investigations of the scale dependency of torsional stroke and generated torque in twisted nylon 6 monofilaments. Twisted fibres were prepared from different diameter precursor fibres and with a differently inserted twist having a range of bias angles or the number of twists. The key assumption that torsional stroke depends only on inserted twist was experimentally tested. Further, the single helix approximation of the twisted fibre structure was evaluated in terms of the quantitative prediction of the torsional stroke during fibre heating.
According to the assumption, the volume (v) of the cylinder enclosed by a single helically wound string depends on the string length (ls); the length (l) and diameter (d) of the cylinder; and the number of turns the string makes in forming the helix (n). A change in volume of the cylinder can be accommodated by changes in any of the above parameters so that the ratio of final to initial volume is described by the following expression, in which zero subscripts represent the initial values: (14)Observations made by Haines et al.175 of their twisted nylon 6,6 fibres indicated that the volumetric thermal expansion was mainly in the diameter direction with small axial contraction occurring upon heating. This asymmetry in thermal expansion has been long established in oriented, semi-crystalline polymer fibres.192 Assuming that the cylinder length change is negligible and that the string length is constant, eqn (14) simplifies to: (15)Represented as the change in twist per cylinder length gives: (16)The above expression suggests that the torsional stroke (ΔT) indeed depends on the inserted twist (T0 = n0/l0) and the diameter change from volume expansion, such as during heating. If fibre twist has negligible effect on the asymmetric volume expansion of the fibre, then the torsional stroke depends only on inserted twist and is independent of fibre diameter. Experimentally measured torsional strokes are included for comparison and in all cases there, is a very good agreement between the measured and calculated values [Fig. 21(a)]. The single helix theory correctly predicts the dependence of torsional stroke on the diameter change and the amount of inserted twist.
 Fig. 21  Comparison of experimentally measured and theoretically calculated torsional actuation for 70 mm long twisted nylon 6 fibre prepared with different fabrication parameters. (a) All calculated and measured torsional strokes are compared. (b) All calculated and measured blocked torques comparison. Reproduced with permission.33 Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons. 
A quantitative analysis of torque generation from differently twisted fibres was also conducted. It has been shown previously that the maximum torque generated when the twisted fibres are heated occurs when the fibres ends are securely clamped.200 This “blocked torque” (τblocked) can be calculated using standard torsion mechanics and as verified previously:200 (17)Here, Δn represents the free rotation (in radians) of a fibre of length l that is clamped at one end and whose other end is free to rotate, and G is the fibre shear modulus in the final state. Fig. 21(b) shows the calculated blocked torques obtained from eqn (17) and includes the measured torques for comparison. It was also investigated that the generated blocked torque is simply assumed as a linear function of the temperature applied with torsional stiffness as a coefficient.202 In all cases, there was an excellent agreement between the measured and calculated values, further supporting the analytical approach based on a single helix.
The degree of agreement between the measured torsional actuation parameters and those calculated from the single-helix model was remarkable considering that the model greatly simplifies the complex internal structure of the twisted fibres and yarns to a single helix. In contrast, the real twisted fibre is a solid where the twist angle increases from zero at fibre centre to a maximum at the fibre surface. Treating the twisted fibre as a series of concentric cylinders of increasing diameter and with the same inserted twist provides some insight into why the single helix model is appropriate.
Considering the current utilisation, the further investigation of the single helix model and the suggested concentric cylinder model should be conducted to evaluate the torsional actuation in fibres where appreciable length changes occur during actuation. Helix model studies can be approximated for twist induced hierarchically helical coiled structures. Further work can also extend the modelling to study the untwisting of co-twisted fibres and their effect on linear actuation of hierarchical coiled structures.
4. Summary on torsional artificial muscles
As-discussed, torsional actuators made of different materials and structures have different actuating mechanism and efficiencies. Fig. 22 summarises the different actuation stimulus that are responsible for triggering the actuators in various mechanism. Table 2 summarises the maximum performances obtained from the torsional actuators of different material groups and structures.
 Fig. 22  Different torsional actuators and relevant actuation stimulus that fundamentally control the actuation mechanism. 
Table 2 Summary table of torsional artificial muscles made of different materials and their peak performances




Kind of torsional actuator
Developed structures
Maximum stroke (degree per mm)
Maximum torque (N m kg−1)
Hysteresis
Maximum frequency (Hz)
Operating temperature (°C)




Shape memory alloy
Rod, tube, sheet, strip, wire, or coil
∼4.555
Not reported
Low
∼4
Not reported


Piezoelectric material
Bar, tube, twisted sheet, or fibre
∼0.0464
Not reported
Medium
∼10000
∼80


Multilayer torsional ribbon
Twisted or coiled bimorph strip
∼100075
∼1.5
High
∼100
∼68


Electroactive polymer
Films, or tube
∼0.0199
Not reported
Low
∼0.01
Room temperature


Fluidic torsional actuator
Tubular elastomer with outer helical braided sleeve
∼1.75125
Not reported
Low
Not reported
Room temperature


Carbon nanotube
Twisted or coiled yarn
∼380157
∼0.63
High
∼106
Room temperature


Metallic nanowire
Twisted yarn
∼12171
∼8.42
Low
∼30
∼90


Graphene fibre
Twisted fibre
∼588166
∼0.08
Low
∼86.5
Room temperature


Graphene-polymer fibre
Twisted fibre
∼14.8167
Not reported
High
∼0.13
200


Polymer fibre
Twisted, or coiled fibre
∼300181
∼0.8
Low
∼1166
∼90




A number of functional prototypes have been developed by using torsional artificial muscles (Fig. 23). Tobushi et al.53 have used the thermal recovery of a twisted thin strip of TiNi SMA to develop several prototype devices. A rotation of 90° was achieved through shape recovery in a 40 mm long strip operated in the one-end-tethered mode. This example was a one-way actuation and was used as a door opening mechanism. Another device used a return spring mechanism for two-way actuation to open and close window blinds in sunlight and darkness, respectively.54 Here the twisted strip was connected to a superelastic alloy strip that acted as a return spring in the two-end-tethered configuration [Fig. 23(a)]. Jiao et al.127 introduced new types of vacuum-powered soft pneumatic actuator and their potential to achieve linear, twisting, and radial movements. The feasibility of the actuators has been demonstrated using prototypes based on flexible joint and wrist [Fig. 23(b)]. Foroughi et al.148 demonstrated a fluidic mixer by using a electrochemically actuated CNT yarn torsional artificial muscle to mix two laminar flowing liquids (dyed yellow and blue) that were joined at a T-junction in a fluidic circuit [Fig. 23(c)]. A reversible paddle rotation of up to 180° was attained with a 65 mm long actuating yarn of 15 μm in diameter. The yarn rotated a 100 times wider paddle than the diameter of the yarn, and 80 times its mass, in the flowing liquids at a maximum rotation rate of 360° per second. Cheng et al.166 constructed a humidity switch in which the application of vapour leads to a twisted graphene oxide fibre switching the magnetisation of a small magnet, which sequentially drives a small electric field in copper coils surrounding it [Fig. 23(d)].
 Fig. 23  Functional prototypes made of torsional artificial muscles. (a) Solar-powered active blind model constructed of two-way rotary actuation of a SMA tape. Reproduced with permission.54 Copyright 2013, Elsevier. (b) Vacuum-powered soft pneumatically actuating gripper with various stages of grasping and torsional movements. Reproduced with permission.127 Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons. (c) Fluidic mixer operated by a multi-walled CNT yarn torsional actuator; (1) photograph of the prototype, (2) unmixed fluid and (3) mixed fluid. Reproduced with permission.148 Copyright 2011, The American Association for the Advancement of Science. (d) The scheme of the designed humidity switch based on the humidity-responsive twisted graphene oxide fibres (TGF). Reproduced with permission.166 Copyright 2014, John Wiley and Sons. (e) The bionic bra: two actuator systems made of twisted coiled conductive nylon fibre placed in parallel on the back band of a bra. Reproduced from ref. 203. Copyright 2018, SAGE Publications. (f) A photographic time series of the twisted-coiled actuator driven artificial limb lifting a 1 g load. The heat was applied with a heat gun for 2 s and then followed by 5 s rest epochs. Reproduced with permission.204 Copyright 2019, The American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
In the switch, twisted fibre in response to moisture (e.g., relative humidity = 85%) can rotate a paddle to press on the metal plate, as pointed out by the arrow, so that the electric circle powered by the battery will turn on the LED, as shown in the inset photo. When the humidity changes, twisted fibre can also reversibly rotate the magnet within the surrounding copper coils to generate electricity. Steele et al.203 reported the development of a twisted coiled nylon torsional muscles integrated bionic bra that was able to sense breast motion and actuate to provide some additional breast support [Fig. 23(e)]. Recently, Kanik et al.204 demonstrated a strain-programmable artificial bicep operated by thermally activated high density polyethylene containing bimorph coiled actuator. Similar to the multilayer torsional ribbon,75 this polymer bimorph utilises differential thermal expansion within the structures comprising an elastomer and a thermoplastic polymer amplified by the helix geometry which would allow the linear and torsional actuation at low thermal stimuli [Fig. 23(f)].
5. Conclusions and recommendations
In this review, we highlighted the early development to recent advances of torsional actuators, their actuating mechanism and potential applications, and featured limitations. The construction of torsional actuators has been extended from classical shape memory alloys (SMAs) to state-of-art twisted fibres/yarns in order to achieve giant stroke and torque. In between, torsional actuation has also been achieved by using piezoelectric materials, electroactive polymers (EAPs), thermo-sensitive nanowire yarns and fluidic actuators. A description of the actuating mechanisms, characterization methods as well as scalability of these actuators and some applications were investigated in this review.
Despite the developments highlighted in this review paper, it should also be understood that the gap between the lab bench and real-world application is still substantial. More efforts are required to narrow the gap and the future development of practical applications for torsional actuators needs to address many challenges, including:
• High-speed torsional actuators based on small diameter twisted fibre/yarn still lack acceptable torque generation compared to that of low-speed actuators such as SMAs. Practical methods for increasing the speed of fibre expansion and contraction in twisted polymer fibres need to be developed.
• Attention should also be paid to the biocompatibility of the torsional actuators as such systems could be useful for several biomedical aspects such as microscopic surgery tool, and drug delivery devices.
• Bulk and continuous production of twisted fibre/yarn actuators are needed. Small lengths of twisted fibre are easy to make, but mass production techniques will be needed for commercial application of torsional actuators.
As a final point, exciting progress has been made in recent decade in the field of torsional actuators. Extraordinary performances, novel and integral functionalities and convenient fabrication procedures have been exploited. However, investigations on the protocols for the massive production of controllable torsional actuators are needed to translate these promising systems into designer artificial muscles for human welfare.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Dr Javad Foroughi (University of Wollongong, Australia) and Dr Sina Naficy (The University of Sydney, Australia) for their valuable comments.
References
J. D. W. Madden, N. A. Vandesteeg, P. A. Anquetil, P. G. A. Madden, A. Takshi, R. Z. Pytel, S. R. Lafontaine, P. A. Wieringa and I. W. Hunter, IEEE J. Oceanic Eng., 2004, 29, 706–728 CrossRef .

          M. Shahinpoor and M. Mojarrad, US Pat., US006109852A,  2000 .

          Q. Pei, R. Pelrine, M. A. Rosenthal, S. Stanford, H. Prahlad and R. D. Kornbluh, Smart Structures and Materials: Electroactive Polymer Actuators and Devices (EAPAD), SPIE 5385, USA, 2004.
Y. Bar-Cohen, J. Spacecr. Rockets, 2002, 39, 822–827 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Mirvakili and I. W. Hunter, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704407 CrossRef .

          K. Dai and C. Q. Ning, in Biomechanics and Biomaterials in Orthopedics, ed. D. G. Poitout, Springer London, London,  2004, pp. 179–184 DOI:10.1007/978-1-4471-3774-0_17 .

          Z. Guo, H. Yu and L. B. Wee, IEEE/RSJ Int. Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems,  2013, pp. 4925–4930 Search PubMed .
D. J. Hartl and D. C. Lagoudas, Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng., Part G, 2007, 221, 535–552 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jae-Eul, Q. Ying-Jun, W. Wei, R. Hugo, S. Sung-Hyuk and A. Sung-Hoon, Smart Mater. Struct., 2015, 24, 125033 CrossRef .
K. P. Jamie, H. Elliot and J. W. Robert, Smart Mater. Struct., 2010, 19, 125014 CrossRef .
K. P. Jamie and J. W. Robert, Smart Mater. Struct., 2012, 21, 065013 CrossRef .

          A. P. Jardine, J. N. Kudva, C. A. Martin and K. Appa, Smart Structures and Integrated Systems,  1996, vol. 2717, p. 160 Search PubMed .
J. E. Jeanette and C. Inderjit, Smart Mater. Struct., 2001, 10, 104 CrossRef .

          D. C. Lagoudas, Shape Memory Alloys: Modeling and Engineering Applications, Springer, US,  2008 Search PubMed .

          L. Lecce and A. Concilio, Shape Memory Alloy Engineering: For Aerospace, Structural and Biomedical Applications, Elsevier Science,  2014 Search PubMed .

          M. Elahinia, Shape Memory Alloy Actuators: Design, Fabrication and Experimental Evaluation, Wiley, USA, 1st edn,  2016 Search PubMed .
X. Huang, K. Kumar, M. K. Jawed, A. Mohammadi Nasab, Z. Ye, W. Shan and C. Majidi, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1800540 CrossRef .
S. Chiba, S. Stanford, R. Pelrine, R. Kornbluh and H. Prahlad, J. Robot. Soc. Jpn., 2006, 24, 466–470 CrossRef .
J. W. Paquette and K. J. Kim, IEEE J. Oceanic Eng., 2004, 29, 729–737 CrossRef .

          K. J. Kim and S. Tadokoro, Electroactive Polymers for Robotic Applications: Artificial Muscles and Sensors, Springer, London,  2010 Search PubMed .
C. Federico, K. Roy, S.-L. Peter and A. Gursel, Bioinspiration Biomimetics, 2011, 6, 045006 CrossRef .

          S. G. Wax and R. R. Sands, Smart Structures and Materials: Electroactive Polymer Actuators and Devices (EAPAD), SPIE 3669, USA, 1999.
Y. Bar-Cohen and Q. Zhang, MRS Bull., 2008, 33, 173–181 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fannir, R. Temmer, G. T. M. Nguyen, L. Cadiergues, E. Laurent, J. D. W. Madden, F. Vidal and C. Plesse, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1800519 Search PubMed .

          R. Kornbluh, R. Pelrine, J. Eckerle and J. Joseph, IEEE International Conference
on Robotics and Automation, INSPEC 5966236, Belgium, 1998.

          S. Chiba, M. Waki, R. Kornbluh and R. Pelrine, Electroactive Polymer Actuators and Devices (EAPAD), SPIE 6927, USA, 2008.
K. Kishi, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1987, 26, 31 CrossRef .
R. Pelrine, R. Kornbluh, Q. Pei and J. Joseph, Science, 2000, 287, 836–839 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lemonon, F. Micheron and P. Wang, J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 1983, 73, 722 CrossRef .
H. Zhao, A. M. Hussain, M. Duduta, D. M. Vogt, R. J. Wood and D. R. Clarke, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1804328 CrossRef .
G. K. Klute, J. M. Czerniecki and B. Hannaford, Int. J. Robot. Res., 2002, 21, 295–309 CrossRef .
R. H. Baughman, Synth. Met., 1996, 78, 339–353 CrossRef CAS .
S. Aziz, S. Naficy, J. Foroughi, H. R. Brown and G. M. Spinks, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2016, 54, 1278–1286 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Kim, C. S. Haines, N. Li, K. J. Kim, T. J. Mun, C. Choi, J. Di, Y. J. Oh, J. P. Oviedo, J. Bykova, S. Fang, N. Jiang, Z. Liu, R. Wang, P. Kumar, R. Qiao, S. Priya, K. Cho, M. Kim, M. S. Lucas, L. F. Drummy, B. Maruyama, D. Y. Lee, X. Lepró, E. Gao, D. Albarq, R. Ovalle-Robles, S. J. Kim and R. H. Baughman, Science, 2017, 357, 773–778 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Spinks, J. Mater. Res., 2016, 31, 2917–2927 CrossRef CAS .

          A. E. H. Love, A Treatise on the Mathematical Theory of Elasticity, Dover Publications,  1944 Search PubMed .
R. K. Josephson, Annu. Rev. Physiol., 1993, 55, 527–546 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. W. Madden, N. A. Vandesteeg, P. A. Anquetil, P. G. A. Madden, A. Takshi, R. Z. Pytel, S. R. Lafontaine, P. A. Wieringa and I. W. Hunter, IEEE J. Oceanic Eng., 2004, 29, 706–728 CrossRef .

          M. Kohl, Shape Memory Microactuators, Springer,  2004 Search PubMed .

          M. Elahinia, Shape Memory Alloy Actuators: Design, Fabrication and Experimental Evaluation, Wiley, USA,  2015 Search PubMed .
C. K. Andrew and P. C. Gregory, Smart Mater. Struct., 2000, 9, 665 CrossRef .

          C. Liang, F. M. Davidson, L. M. Schetky and F. K. Straub, Proceedings of 1996 Symposium on Smart Structures and Materials, 1996.
H. Prahlad and I. Chopra, J. Intell. Mater. Syst. Struct., 2007, 18, 29–38 CrossRef .

          K. Gilpin, E. Torres-Jara and D. Rus, in Experimental Robotics: The 12th International Symposium on Experimental Robotics, ed. O. Khatib, V. Kumar and G. Sukhatme, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg,  2014, pp. 149–163 DOI:10.1007/978-3-642-28572-1_11 .
H. Tobushi, T. Sakuragi and Y. Sugimoto, Mater. Trans., 2008, 49, 151–157 CrossRef CAS .
B. H. Shin, T. Jang, B.-J. Ryu and Y. Kim, J. Intell. Mater. Syst. Struct., 2016, 27, 1658–1665 CrossRef CAS .

          J.-S. Koh, S.-R. Kim and K.-J. Cho, 38th Mechanisms and Robotics Conference,  2014, vol. 5B, pp. 1–7 Search PubMed.
Z. Zhakypov, J. L. Huang and J. Paik, IEEE Robot. Autom. Mag., 2016, 23, 65–74 Search PubMed .

          S. M. Mirvakili and I. W. Hunter, A torsional artificial muscle from twisted nitinol microwire, SPIE, 2017.
S. Jun and P. D. Jaydev, Smart Mater. Struct., 2015, 24, 105005 CrossRef .
M. Salerno, S. Tognarelli, C. Quaglia, P. Dario and A. Menciassi, Int. J. Robot. Res., 2013, 32, 360–370 CrossRef .
J.-S. Koh, Materials, 2018, 11, 2324 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Tobushi, T. Sakuragi and Y. Sugimoto, Mater. Trans., 2007, 49, 151–157 CrossRef .
H. Tobushi, E. Pieczyska, K. Miyamoto and K. Mitsui, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 577, S745–S748 CrossRef CAS .
K. J. Gabriel, W. S. N. Trimmer and J. A. Walker, Sens. Actuators, 1988, 15, 95–102 CrossRef CAS .
H. Rodrigue, B. Bhandari, M.-W. Han and S.-H. Ahn, J. Intell. Mater. Syst. Struct., 2015, 26, 1071–1078 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhakypov, J.-L. Huang and J. Paik, IEEE Robot. Autom. Mag., 2016, 23, 65–74 Search PubMed .

          J. G. Drobny, Polymers for Electricity and Electronics: Materials, Properties, and Applications, Wiley, USA,  2012 Search PubMed .
W. H. Duan, Q. Wang and S. T. Quek, Materials, 2010, 3, 5169 CrossRef .
D. Damjanovic and R. E. Newnham, J. Intell. Mater. Syst. Struct., 1992, 3, 190–208 CrossRef .
T. Morita, R. Yoshida, Y. Okamoto, M. K. Kurosawa and T. Higuchi, IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq. Control, 1999, 46, 1439–1445 CAS .
K. Jaehwan and K. Byungwoo, Smart Mater. Struct., 2001, 10, 750 CrossRef .
A. E. Glazounov, Q. M. Zhang and C. Kim, J. Intell. Mater. Syst. Struct., 2000, 11, 456–468 Search PubMed .
C. L. Pan, Z. H. Feng, Y. T. Ma and Y. B. Liu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 012923 CrossRef .
C. L. Pan, Y. T. Ma, Y. B. Liu, Q. Zhang and Z. H. Feng, Sens. Actuators, A, 2008, 148, 250–258 CrossRef CAS .
D. Brei and B. J. Cannon, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2004, 64, 245–261 CrossRef .

          B. M. Finio and R. J. Wood, IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, USA, 2011.

          J. G. Webster, The Measurement, Instrumentation, and Sensors: Handbook, CRC Press,  1999 Search PubMed .

          T. R. Gururaja, Proceedings of the Eighth IEEE International Symposium on Applications of Ferroelectrics, USA, 1992.
D. H. Pearce, A. Hooley and T. W. Button, Sens. Actuators, A, 2002, 100, 281–286 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Tressler, S. Alkoy and R. E. Newnham, J. Electroceram., 1998, 2, 257–272 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Pearce, K. A. Seffen and T. W. Button, J. Mater. Sci., 2002, 37, 3117–3122 CrossRef CAS .
F. Mohammadi, A. L. Kholkin, B. Jadidian and A. Safari, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 75, 2488–2490 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Bell, L. Dong, B. J. Nelson, M. Golling, L. Zhang and D. Grützmacher, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 725–729 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liu, C. Cheng, J. Suh, R. Tang-Kong, D. Fu, S. Lee, J. Zhou, L. O. Chua and J. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1746–1750 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Valtorta, Dynamic Torsion Test for the Mechanical Characterization of Soft Biological Tissues, Cuvillier, ETH Zurich,  2007 Search PubMed .
Y. Sheima, P. Caspari and D. M. Opris, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2019, 40, 1900205 CrossRef .
Z. Lei and P. Wu, Mater. Horiz., 2019, 6, 538–545 RSC .
A. O’Halloran, F. O’Malley and P. McHugh, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 104, 071101 CrossRef .

          J. S. Bashkin, R. Kornbluh, H. Prahlad and A. Wong-Foy, Biomedical Applications of Electroactive Polymer Actuators, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd,  2009, ch. 21, pp. 395–410 DOI:10.1002/9780470744697 .

          J. D. Madden, T. S. Kanigan, S. Lafontaine and I. W. Hunter, US Pat., US6249076B1,  2001 Search PubMed .

          K. Asai and K. Yokoyama, US Pat., US7259495B2,  2007 .

          W. R. Salaneck, Science and Applications of Conducting Polymers, Papers from the Sixth European Industrial Workshop, Taylor & Francis,  1991 Search PubMed .

          T. A. Skotheim, Handbook of Conducting Polymers, Taylor & Francis, 2nd edn,  1997 Search PubMed .
E. Smela, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 481–494 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gürsel, M. Philippe and M. S. Geoffrey, Smart Mater. Struct., 2006, 15, 243 CrossRef .
Y. Fang, X. Tan and G. Alici, IEEE Trans. Control Syst., 2008, 16, 600–612 Search PubMed .
C. Immerstrand, K. Holmgren-Peterson, K. E. Magnusson, E. Jager, M. Krogh, M. Skoglund, A. Selbing and O. Inganäs, MRS Bull., 2002, 27, 461–464 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, D. Zhou, G. M. Spinks, P. C. Innis, W. M. Megill and G. G. Wallace, Smart Mater. Struct., 2005, 14, 1511 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fang and X. Tan, Sens. Actuators, A, 2010, 158, 121–131 CrossRef CAS .
T. James, A. Patrick, F. Timothy, C. Angela, Z. Mike Del and H. Ian, Bioinspiration Biomimetics, 2007, 2, S6 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Scott, A. Gursel, T. Van-Tan and S. Geoffrey, Smart Mater. Struct., 2009, 18, 095009 CrossRef .
I. A. Anderson, T. Hale, T. Gisby, T. Inamura, T. McKay, B. O’Brien, S. Walbran and E. P. Calius, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2009, 98, 75 CrossRef .
I. A. Anderson, E. P. Calius, T. Gisby, T. Hale, T. McKay, B. O'Brien and S. Walbran, Proc. SPIE, 2009, 7287, 72871H CrossRef .

          J. Heim, R. E. Pelrine, R. D. Kornbluh and J. S. Eckerle, US Pat., 6806621,  2004 Search PubMed .
R. Waché, D. N. McCarthy, S. Risse and G. Kofod, IEEE/ASME Trans. Mech., 2015, 20, 975–977 Search PubMed .
L. He, J. Lou, J. Du and H. Wu, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2017, 140, 106–115 CrossRef CAS .

          I. W. Hunter, S. R. Lafontaine and J. D. Madden, US Pat., US6084321A,  2000 Search PubMed .
Y. Fang, T. J. Pence and X. Tan, IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatronics, 2011, 16, 656–664 Search PubMed .
J. G. Martinez, K. Richter, N.-K. Persson and E. W. H. Jager, Smart Mater. Struct., 2018, 27, 074004 CrossRef .

          M. Otake, Electroactive Polymer Gel Robots: Modelling and Control of Artificial Muscles, Springer Berlin Heidelberg,  2010 Search PubMed .
J.-S. Plante and S. Dubowsky, Int. J. Solids Struct., 2006, 43, 7727–7751 CrossRef CAS .
R. Balint, N. J. Cassidy and S. H. Cartmell, Acta Biomater., 2014, 10, 2341–2353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          K. J. Kim and S. Tadokoro, Electroactive Polymers for Robotic Applications: Artificial Muscles and Sensors, Springer, London,  2007 Search PubMed .
B. Tondu, J. Intell. Mater. Syst. Struct., 2012, 23, 225–253 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang and M. Philen, J. Intell. Mater. Syst. Struct., 2012, 23, 255–268 CrossRef CAS .
R. Tiwari, M. A. Meller, K. B. Wajcs, C. Moses, I. Reveles and E. Garcia, J. Intell. Mater. Syst. Struct., 2012, 23, 301–312 CrossRef .
B. Matthew, A. M. Michael and G. Ephrahim, Smart Mater. Struct., 2014, 23, 074009 CrossRef .

          Y. K. Lee and I. Shimoyama, Proceedings 1999 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, 99CH36288C, 1999.

          G. K. Klute, J. M. Czerniecki and B. Hannaford, 1999 IEEE/ASME International Conference on Advanced Intelligent Mechatronics, 99TH8399, 1999.
K. E. Gordon, G. S. Sawicki and D. P. Ferris, J. Biomech., 2006, 39, 1832–1841 CrossRef .
B. Verrelst, R. Van Ham, B. Vanderborght, D. Lefeber, F. Daerden and M. Van Damme, Adv. Robot., 2006, 20, 783–805 CrossRef .
D. Sangian, S. Naficy, G. M. Spinks and B. Tondu, Sens. Actuators, A, 2015, 234, 150–157 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xiang, M. E. Giannaccini, T. Theodoridis, L. Hao, S. Nefti-Meziani and S. Davis, Adv. Robot., 2016, 30, 889–899 CrossRef .
M. Michael, C. Jordan, V. Alexander, B. Matthew and G. Ephrahim, Bioinspiration Biomimetics, 2016, 11, 065004 CrossRef .
B. Tondu and P. Lopez, IEEE Contr. Syst., 2000, 20, 15–38 Search PubMed .
B. Tondu, S. Ippolito, J. Guiochet and A. Daidie, Int. J. Robot. Res., 2005, 24, 257–274 CrossRef .
D. Villegas, M. Van Damme, B. Vanderborght, P. Beyl and D. Lefeber, Adv. Robot., 2012, 26, 1205–1227 CrossRef .
D. G. Caldwell, G. A. Medrano-Cerda and M. Goodwin, IEEE Contr. Syst., 1995, 15, 40–48 Search PubMed .

          G. K. Klute and B. Hannaford, IEEE/RSJ 1998 International Conference on Intelligent Robotic Systems, 1998, vol. 3, pp. 1776–1781.
C. Ching-Ping and B. Hannaford, IEEE Robot. Autom. Mag., 1996, 12, 90–102 CrossRef .

          J. R. Erickson, US Pat., US6067892A,  2000 .
B. Tondu and P. Lopez, Ind. Robot., 1997, 24, 432–439 CrossRef .
S. Sanan, P. S. Lynn and S. T. Griffith, J. Mech. Robot., 2014, 6, 031003 CrossRef .
F. Connolly, P. Polygerinos, C. J. Walsh and K. Bertoldi, Soft
Robot., 2015, 2, 26–32 CrossRef .

          J. Yan, B. Xu, X. Zhang and J. Zhao, Design and Test of a New Spiral Driven Pure Torsional Soft Actuator,  2017 Search PubMed .
Z. Jiao, C. Ji, J. Zou, H. Yang and M. Pan, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1800429 CrossRef .
D. Li, W. F. Paxton, R. H. Baughman, T. J. Huang, J. F. Stoddart and P. S. Weiss, MRS Bull., 2009, 34, 671–681 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Lee, S. H. Kim, M. E. Kozlov, X. Lepró, R. H. Baughman and S. J. Kim, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 17421–17425 RSC .
P. Kim and C. M. Lieber, Science, 1999, 286, 2148–2150 CrossRef CAS .
T. Rueckes, K. Kim, E. Joselevich, G. Y. Tseng, C. L. Cheung and C. M. Lieber, Science, 2000, 289, 94–97 CrossRef CAS .
V. V. Deshpande, H. Y. Chiu, H. W. C. Postma, C. Mikó, L. Forró and M. Bockrath, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1092–1095 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. Baughman, C. Cui, A. A. Zakhidov, Z. Iqbal, J. N. Barisci, G. M. Spinks, G. G. Wallace, A. Mazzoldi, D. De Rossi, A. G. Rinzler, O. Jaschinski, S. Roth and M. Kertesz, Science, 1999, 284, 1340–1344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Vohrer, I. Kolaric, M. H. Haque, S. Roth and U. Detlaff-Weglikowska, Carbon, 2004, 42, 1159–1164 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. W. Madden, J. N. Barisci, P. A. Anquetil, G. M. Spinks, G. G. Wallace, R. H. Baughman and I. W. Hunter, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 870–873 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tissaphern, O. Jiyoung, K. Mikhail, F. Eddie Chi Wah, Z. Mei, F. Shaoli, H. B. Ray and D. W. M. John, Smart Mater. Struct., 2007, 16, S243 CrossRef .
L. Qu, Q. Peng, L. Dai, G. M. Spinks, G. G. Wallace and R. H. Baughman, MRS Bull., 2008, 33, 215–224 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mirfakhrai, J. D. W. Madden and R. H. Baughman, Mater. Today, 2007, 10, 30–38 CrossRef CAS .
V. H. Ebron, Z. Yang, D. J. Seyer, M. E. Kozlov, J. Oh, H. Xie, J. Razal, L. J. Hall, J. P. Ferraris, A. G. Macdiarmid and R. H. Baughman, Science, 2006, 311, 1580–1583 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Madden, Science, 2007, 318, 1094–1097 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. Ahir and E. M. Terentjev, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 491–495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Koerner, G. Price, N. A. Pearce, M. Alexander and R. A. Vaia, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 115–120 CrossRef CAS .
P. Miaudet, A. Derre, M. Maugey, C. Zakri, P. M. Piccione, R. Inoubli and P. Poulin, Science, 2007, 318, 1294–1296 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Spinks, V. Mottaghitalab, M. Bahrami-Samani, P. G. Whitten and G. G. Wallace, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 637–640 CrossRef CAS .
S. Courty, J. Mine, A. R. Tajbakhsh and E. M. Terentjev, Europhys. Lett., 2003, 64, 654–660 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, Y. Liu, H. Cebeci, R. G. de Villoria, J.-H. Lin, B. L. Wardle and Q. M. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3266–3271 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Fennimore, T. D. Yuzvinsky, W.-Q. Han, M. S. Fuhrer, J. Cumings and A. Zettl, Nature, 2003, 424, 408–410 CrossRef CAS .
J. Foroughi, G. M. Spinks, G. G. Wallace, J. Oh, M. E. Kozlov, S. Fang, T. Mirfakhrai, J. D. W. Madden, M. K. Shin, S. J. Kim and R. H. Baughman, Science, 2011, 334, 494–497 CrossRef CAS .
H. Pan, J. Li and Y. Feng, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2010, 5, 654–668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Chen and L. Dai, Mater. Today, 2013, 16, 272–280 CrossRef CAS .
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 845–854 CrossRef CAS .
C. Choi, K. M. Kim, K. J. Kim, X. Lepró, G. M. Spinks, R. H. Baughman and S. J. Kim, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13811 CrossRef CAS .
C. Choi, S. H. Kim, H. J. Sim, J. A. Lee, A. Y. Choi, Y. T. Kim, X. Lepró, G. M. Spinks, R. H. Baughman and S. J. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 9387 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Lima, N. Li, M. Jung de Andrade, S. Fang, J. Oh, G. M. Spinks, M. E. Kozlov, C. S. Haines, D. Suh, J. Foroughi, S. J. Kim, Y. Chen, T. Ware, M. K. Shin, L. D. Machado, A. F. Fonseca, J. D. W. Madden, W. E. Voit, D. S. Galvão and R. H. Baughman, Science, 2012, 338, 928–932 CrossRef CAS .
K.-Y. Chun, S. Hyeong Kim, M. Kyoon Shin, C. Hoon Kwon, J. Park, Y. Tae Kim, G. M. Spinks, M. D. Lima, C. S. Haines, R. H. Baughman and S. Jeong Kim, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3322 CrossRef .
J. A. Lee, Y. T. Kim, G. M. Spinks, D. Suh, X. Lepró, M. D. Lima, R. H. Baughman and S. J. Kim, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2664–2669 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chen, Y. Xu, S. He, X. Sun, S. Pan, J. Deng, D. Chen and H. Peng, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 1077–1083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Suh, T. K. Truong, D. G. Suh and S. C. Lim, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 6647–6652 CrossRef CAS .
J. Di, S. Fang, F. A. Moura, D. S. Galvão, J. Bykova, A. Aliev, M. J. de Andrade, X. Lepró, N. Li, C. Haines, R. Ovalle-Robles, D. Qian and R. H. Baughman, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6598–6605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Guo, C. Liu, F. Zhao, X. Sun, Z. Yang, T. Chen, X. Chen, L. Qiu, X. Hu and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5379–5384 CrossRef CAS .
U. Kosidlo, M. Omastová, M. Micusík, G. Ćirić-Marjanović, H. Randriamahazaka, T. Wallmersperger, A. Aabloo, I. Kolaric and T. Bauernhansl, Smart Mater. Struct., 2013, 22, 104022 CrossRef .
Z. Xu and C. Gao, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 571 CrossRef .
Z. Dong, C. Jiang, H. Cheng, Y. Zhao, G. Shi, L. Jiang and L. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1856–1861 CrossRef CAS .
H.-P. Cong, X.-C. Ren, P. Wang and S.-H. Yu, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 613 CrossRef .
Y. Sun, Y. Wang, C. Hua, Y. Ge, S. Hou, Y. Shang and A. Cao, Carbon, 2018, 132, 394–400 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cheng, Y. Hu, F. Zhao, Z. Dong, Y. Wang, N. Chen, Z. Zhang and L. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2909–2913 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, J. H. Moon, T. J. Mun, T. G. Park, G. M. Spinks, G. G. Wallace and S. J. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 32760–32764 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Meng, Y. Zhao, C. Hu, H. Cheng, Y. Hu, Z. Zhang, G. Shi and L. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2326–2331 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cheng, Z. Dong, C. Hu, Y. Zhao, Y. Hu, L. Qu, N. Chen and L. Dai, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3428–3434 RSC .
A. Taroni, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 223 CrossRef .
S. M. Mirvakili, A. Pazukha, W. Sikkema, C. W. Sinclair, G. M. Spinks, R. H. Baughman and J. D. W. Madden, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 4311–4316 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Mirvakili, M. N. Mirvakili, P. Englezos, J. D. W. Madden and I. W. Hunter, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 13882–13888 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cherubini, G. Moretti, R. Vertechy and M. Fontana, AIP Adv., 2015, 5, 067158 CrossRef .
C. S. Haines, N. Li, G. M. Spinks, A. E. Aliev, J. Di and R. H. Baughman, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 11709–11716 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Haines, M. D. Lima, N. Li, G. M. Spinks, J. Foroughi, J. D. W. Madden, S. H. Kim, S. Fang, M. Jung de Andrade, F. Göktepe, Ö. Göktepe, S. M. Mirvakili, S. Naficy, X. Lepró, J. Oh, M. E. Kozlov, S. J. Kim, X. Xu, B. J. Swedlove, G. G. Wallace and R. H. Baughman, Science, 2014, 343, 868–872 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kianzad, M. Pandit, A. Bahi, A. Rafie Ravandi, F. Ko, G. M. Spinks and J. D. W. Madden, Proc. SPIE, 2015, 9430, 94301X CrossRef .

          S. M. Mirvakili, A. Rafie Ravandi, I. W. Hunter, C. S. Haines, N. Li, J. Foroughi, S. Naficy, G. M. Spinks, R. H. Baughman and J. D. W. Madden, Electroactive Polymer Actuators and Devices,  2014, vol. 9056, p. 90560I Search PubMed .
G. V. Stoychev and L. Ionov, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 24281–24294 CrossRef CAS .

          S. M. Mirvakili and I. W. Hunter, Electroactive Polymer Actuators and Devices,  2016, vol. 9798, p. 97981L Search PubMed .
S. M. Mirvakili and I. W. Hunter, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604734 CrossRef .
S. H. Kim, M. D. Lima, M. E. Kozlov, C. S. Haines, G. M. Spinks, S. Aziz, C. Choi, H. J. Sim, X. Wang, H. Lu, D. Qian, J. D. W. Madden, R. H. Baughman and S. J. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3336–3344 RSC .
F. B. Fuller, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1971, 68, 815–819 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. M. van der Heijden and J. M. T. Thompson, Nonlinear Dyn., 2000, 21, 71–99 CrossRef .
K. H. Cho, M. G. Song, H. Jung, J. Park, H. Moon, J. C. Koo, J.-D. Nam and H. R. Choi, Proc. SPIE, 2016, 9798, 97981J CrossRef .

          N. Li, C. S. Haines, M. D. Lima, D. A. M. Jung, S. Fang, J. Oh, M. E. Kozlov, F. Goktepe, O. Goktepe and D. Suh, US Pat., US9903350B2,  2014 Search PubMed .
D. Liu, A. Tarakanova, C. C. Hsu, M. Yu, S. Zheng, L. Yu, J. Liu, Y. He, D. J. Dunstan and M. J. Buehler, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaau9183 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mu, M. Jung de Andrade, S. Fang, X. Wang, E. Gao, N. Li, S. H. Kim, H. Wang, C. Hou, Q. Zhang, M. Zhu, D. Qian, H. Lu, D. Kongahage, S. Talebian, J. Foroughi, G. Spinks, H. Kim, T. H. Ware, H. J. Sim, D. Y. Lee, Y. Jang, S. J. Kim and R. H. Baughman, Science, 2019, 365, 150–155 CAS .
F. Carpi, S. Bauer and D. De Rossi, Science, 2010, 330, 1759–1761 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hiraoka, K. Nakamura, H. Arase, K. Asai, Y. Kaneko, S. W. John, K. Tagashira and A. Omote, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 36358 CrossRef .

          S. Kianzad, M. Pandit, J. D. Lewis, A. R. Berlingeri, K. J. Haebler and J. D. W. Madden, Electroactive Polymer Actuators and Devices,  2015, vol. 9430, p. 94301Z Search PubMed .

          I. M. Ward and J. Sweeney, An Introduction to the Mechanical Properties of Solid Polymers, Wiley,  2004 Search PubMed .
C. L. Choy, F. C. Chen and K. Young, J. Polym. Sci., Polym. Phys. Ed., 1981, 19, 335–352 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Kerch and L. A. Irgen, Polym. Mech., 1975, 11, 468–470 CrossRef .

          L. R. G. Treloar, The Physics of Rubber Elasticity, OUP, Oxford,  2005 Search PubMed .
Q. W. Li, Y. Li, X. F. Zhang, S. B. Chikkannanavar, Y. H. Zhao, A. M. Dangelewicz, L. X. Zheng, S. K. Doorn, Q. X. Jia, D. E. Peterson, P. N. Arendt and Y. T. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3358–3363 CrossRef CAS .
M. Miao, Carbon, 2011, 49, 3755–3761 CrossRef CAS .
K. Koziol, J. Vilatela, A. Moisala, M. Motta, P. Cunniff, M. Sennett and A. Windle, Science, 2007, 318, 1892–1895 CrossRef CAS .
B. T. Kelly, Carbon, 1991, 29, 721–724 CrossRef CAS .
S. Aziz, S. Naficy, J. Foroughi, H. R. Brown and G. M. Spinks, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2017, 134, 45529 CrossRef .
S. Aziz, S. Naficy, J. Foroughi, H. R. Brown and G. M. Spinks, Polym. Test., 2015, 46, 88–97 CrossRef CAS .
S. Aziz, S. Naficy, J. Foroughi, H. R. Brown and G. M. Spinks, Sens. Actuators, A, 2018, 283, 98–106 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Oiwa, K. Masuya, K. Tahara, T. Irisawa, M. Shioya, T. Yamauchi, E. Tanaka, K. Asaka and K. Takagi, Gray-box modeling and control of torsional fishing-line artificial muscle actuators, SPIE, 2018.
J. R. Steele, S. A. Gho, T. E. Campbell, C. J. Richards, S. Beirne, G. M. Spinks and G. G. Wallace, J. Rehabil. Assist. Technol. Eng., 2018, 5, 2055668318775905 Search PubMed .
M. Kanik, S. Orguc, G. Varnavides, J. Kim, T. Benavides, D. Gonzalez, T. Akintilo, C. C. Tasan, A. P. Chandrakasan, Y. Fink and P. Anikeeva, Science, 2019, 365, 145–150 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Shazed Aziz
	Shazed Aziz is a Postdoctoral Researcher at The University of Queensland, Australia. His current research aims to manufacture nano-particle and nano-fibre reinforced polymer composites for aerospace and automobile applications. His research focus also includes various aspects of fundamental and applied polymer science with a particular emphasis on polymeric actuators (artificial muscles) for soft robotics, energy harvesting, and wearable and implantable bio-devices.

Geoffrey M. Spinks
	Geoffrey M. Spinks is a Senior Professor at Australian Institute for Innovative Materials at the University of Wollongong, Australia. His primary research interest is the development and application of bionic artificial muscles from stimuli-responsive materials that can match or exceed the performance of natural skeletal muscle. He has extensively investigated thermo-responsive polymers, conducting polymers, hydrogels, carbon nanotubes and graphene for artificial muscles and other smart material applications.

 	Fig. 1  Actuation capabilities of differently structured materials: (a) linear actuation, (b) bending motion, (c) torsional rotation and (d) torsion induced linear actuation. Calculations of: (e) fractional change in fibre twist and (f) absolute change in twist for three fibres having different initial twist densities when calculations assume isotropic volume expansion and were based on fibres of 1 mm initial diameter, 100 mm initial length and initial inserted twists of T0 = 180, 264, and 357 turns per m. Reproduced with permission.35 Copyright 2016, Cambridge University Press.	 

 	Fig. 2  Development progression of torsional actuators constructed of different materials.	 
	(1)
ϕ(x) = xΔθ	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 3  Micro-rotary actuator; (a) schematic illustration showing clamping yoke, torsionally strained SMA wire and electronics for differential heating, (b) angular deformation vs. pre-clamped twist (turns per cm) for a 10 mm long, 100 μm diameter piece of SMA wire being heated by a 200 mA current. Reproduced with permission.55 Copyright 1988, Elsevier. Soft twisting actuator; (c) fabrication method of a twisting actuator by clamping the SMA wire with torsional strain, then positioning the SMA wire onto the mold, and finally, close the upper mold and inject siloxane elastomer, (d) twisting angle and twisting moment depending on the elastomer layer thickness. Reproduced with permission.9 Copyright 2015, IOP Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 4  Tubular piezoelectric torsional actuator: (a) piezoceramic based torsion bar (front and top view). Reproduced with permission.62 Copyright 2001, IOP Publishing. (b) Piezoelectric ceramic segments are bonded together to form a tube structured torsional actuator. Redrawn from ref. 63. Copyright 2000, SAGE Publications. (c) Proposed helical electrode actuator model for controlled performance and (d) planar form of the torsional actuator made of tubular fibre showing the electric field direction. Reproduced with permission.65 Copyright 2008, Elsevier. Schematic illustration of multilayer piezoelectric torsional actuator: (e) the fibre directions of the two FRC outer layers (with oriented at angle ±α to the longitudinal axis of the actuator) with embedded piezo layer and (f) a 3-D and end-on view of a twisting actuator with twist angle θtwist.	 

 	Fig. 5  Net shape helically structured bimorph strips: (a) basic process sequence and schematic top view: initial planar bilayer, patterned through conventional microfabrication technique, and (b) digital microscope image with released helical structures and the different orientations of the initial pattern result in helical structures with different pitches. Reproduced with permission.74 Copyright 2006, American Chemical Society. Fabrication of VO2 based bimorph coils: (c) schematic of the microfabrication process of a dual coil, (d) rotation of a single coil removed from as-fabricated dual coil operated at various temperatures in a heating/cooling cycle, and (e) temperature dependence of specific rotation and spring constant in the heating half-cycle. Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2013, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic figure of a helical fibre reinforced tubular dielectric elastomer actuator: (a) the reference and current configurations, and (b) the snap-through instability phenomenon of the tubular DE actuator reinforced by a family of helical fibres. Reproduced with permission.97 Copyright 2017, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  Electropolymerized PPy coated textile yarn actuators: (a) SEM images of used PPy coated yarns: (1) polyamide/carbon, (2) silicon/carbon, (3) silver coated polyamide, (4) cellulose/carbon, (5) polyester/INOX, (6) polyester/Cu/Sn, and (7) gold coated polyester, and (b) electrochemically induced torsional rotation of corresponding PPy coated yarns. Reproduced from ref. 100 Copyright 2018, IOP Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 8  Spiral driven torsional soft actuator: (a) CAD design and a protype, (b) test platform, and (c) validation of theoretically modelled and experimentally evaluated results of the actuator with torsion angle <20° (segment 1) and <20° (segment 2). Reproduced with permission.126 Copyright 2017, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 9  Characteristics and performance of V-SPTAs: (a) actuated state of a V-SPTA, (b) angle change α and height change ΔH with different initial heights H0, and (c) angle change α and height change ΔH with different initial angles β. Reproduced with permission.127 Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 10  Torsional CNT artificial muscle: (a) scanning electron micrograph of a CNT yarn that was symmetrically twist-spun (twist angle, α) from a multi-walled CNT forest, (b) illustration of electrochemical cell configurations used for characterizing torsional actuation or the combination of torsional and tensile actuation, where the Ag/Ag+ reference electrode, actuating yarn electrode, and Pt mesh counter-electrode are shown from left to right, (c) both end tethered yarn configuration with actuating yarn length, LA and non-actuating yarn length, LN, and (d) torsional rotation (black) and axial length actuation (blue) versus time for a yarn (length = 120 mm, diameter = 12 mm, α = 40°). Reproduced with permission.148 Copyright 2011, The American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 11  Actuation performances of helical coiled multi-walled CNT yarn: (a) schematic illustration of the contractive and rotary actuators where a copper paddle with a mass of 75 mg was fixed at the end of the sample, and (b) rotary speeds generated by the coiled sample upon the absorption of ethanol. The coiled sample was made from 20 twisted yarns. Reproduced with permission.157 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 12  Acetone vapour induced torsional CNT artificial muscle: (a) setup for applying ITAP to multi-walled CNT yarns, (b) SEM images of the effects of an applied freely rotating load on a nontethered, non-ITAP coiled yarn, (c) SEM images of the effects of a nontethered, coiled ITAP yarn, showing that the ITAP stabilises the coiled yarn with respect to untwisting, and (d) weight rotation in degrees (normalised to yarn length) versus time for a one-end-tethered, coiled ITAP yarn when driven by acetone vapour absorption/desorption. Reproduced with permission.159 Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons.	 


Multi-walled CNT yarn148	Two-end	Electrochemical double-layer charge injection	∼250	∼590	∼1
Host: multi-walled CNT yarn/guest: paraffin wax154	Two-end	Thermal, or electro-thermal, or photo-thermal	∼180	∼11500	∼3
Host: multi-walled CNT yarn/guest: paraffin wax + SEBS copolymer155	Two-end	Electro-thermal	∼85	∼9800	Not reported
Electrolyte (PVdF-co-HFP + TEABF4 + PC) infiltrated twisted CNT yarn156	One-end	Electrochemical	∼53	Not reported	∼0.7
PCM (icosane) infiltrated CNT yarn158	Two-end	Thermal	∼8	∼0.1	Not reported
Incandescent tension annealed coiled multi-walled CNT yarn159	One-end	Chemical (acetone vapour)	∼26	∼44	0.7
Multi-walled CNT fibre160	Two-end	Electromechanical	Not reported	∼2700	∼2
Hierarchically made multi-walled CNT yarn coil157	One-end	Chemical (ethanol vapour)	∼380	∼6361	∼10
NdFeB magnetic particle bi-scrolled multi-walled CNT yarn129	Two-end	Magnetic	∼71	∼11500	Not reported

 	Fig. 13  Torsional graphene fibre actuator: (a) schematic rotation of a twisted graphene oxide fibre with a paddle at low (left) and high (right) humidity, (b) SEM images of the initially twisted graphene oxide fibre at relative humidity = 20% (1), after exposure to high humidity of 85% (2), and the final state of twisted graphene oxide fibre as the humidity goes back to the initial relative humidity = 20% (3); scale bar: 100 μm, and (c) the durability test of twisted graphene oxide fibre (>5000 turns per meter) undergoing repeated relative humidity changes, showing forward (the environment humidity changed from relative humidity = 20% to 85%) and backward (relative humidity = 85% to 20%) rotation speed versus cycle numbers. Reproduced with permission.166 Copyright 2014, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 14  GO/nylon twisted actuator: (a) schematic illustration and the thermo-responsive work principle, and (b) performance of the maximum torsional actuation when heated to 200 °C and for GO/nylon fibres made of different amounts of the twist. The inset shows a micrograph of GO/nylon fibre with a twist count of 533 turns per m (scale bar: 200 μm). Reproduced with permission.167 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  Niobium nanowire yarn torsional actuator: (a) as spun yarn with twist angle α of 13°, (b) torsional actuation configuration, with the right half of the yarn infiltrated with wax and melting induced by current pulses. The central paddle is used to determine rotation, and (c) the angle of rotation versus time upon pulse voltage actuation of the niobium nanowire yarn. Reproduced with permission.171 Copyright 2013, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 16  Actuation of oriented polymer fibre: (a) comparison of the tensile actuation of braided polyethylene, nylon 6 monofilament, nylon 6,6 monofilament, and silver-coated nylon 6,6 multifilament fibres before twisting (inset) and after coiling by twist insertion, (b) the optically measured fibre bias angle induced by an applied torque and the torsional stroke and work during thermal actuation (between 20° and 160 °C) as a function of this applied torque for a non-coiled torsional muscle made from 860 mm diameter nylon 6 fishing line (inset photograph was used to optically determine the fibre bias angle by measuring the displacement of a black line from its initial orientation parallel to the fibre axis), and (c) schematic illustration of the mechanism by which torsional fibre actuation drives large-stroke tensile actuation for heterochiral (left) and homochiral (right) coiled fibres. Reproduced with permission.175 Copyright 2014, The American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 
	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 17  Schematic diagram showing the structure of a highly oriented semicrystalline polymer (A) amorphous region: this includes floating chains, cilia which are attached to a block at one end, and loops which start and end on the same block; (B) intercrystalline bridges: it has been proposed that tie-molecules may coalesce to form bridges of a crystalline nature; (C) chain-folded crystal blocks; (TM) tie-molecules, joining one crystalline block to another: these increases in both number and tautness with increasing amorphous content. Redrawn with permission.192 Copyright 2003, John Wiley and Sons.	 
	(6)
r2 = (ls2 − l2)/4π2n2	(7)
V = l(ls2 − l2)/4πn2	(8)
	(9)

 	Fig. 18  Single-helix model for a twist-spun CNT yarn, where helically wound fibre of constant length ls forms a cylindrical volume of radius r0 and length l0 before actuation and r and l after actuation (left and middle illustrations). The fibre makes n0 turns along the cylinder length before actuation and n after actuation, and the rotation of the spring bottom end with respect to spring top is ϕ0 before actuation and ϕ after actuation. Reproduced with permission.148 Copyright 2011, The American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 19  Schematic illustration of an apparatus for measuring torsional stroke and torsional work capacity as a function of applied torque during the torsional actuation of twisted polymer fibre muscles. Components are: polymer muscle (a), controlled temperature furnace (b), load (c) providing torque, tensile load (d) for muscle, pulley (e) to support this load, bearing-supported rod (f) connecting polymer muscle to axle (g) for applying torque, and a wheel-supported attachment (h) for the muscle, which enables horizontal movement of the muscle end. Reproduced with permission.175 Copyright 2014, The American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 
ϕ(LA)free = LA·θ	(10)
τblocked = ϕ(LA)free × SA	(11)
	(12)
	(13)

 	Fig. 20  Torsional actuation test methods: (a) illustration of different methods where the actuating element is optionally subjected to an external torque (presented as force applied by a hanging weight) and/or a return spring fibre, (b) theoretical estimates of torsional stroke at each point along the length of an actuating fibre and return spring (non-actuating) fibre, if used, and operated in free rotation or isotonic rotation modes, and (c) CAD model of torsional actuation test apparatus; (1) heating zone, (2) ultra-low friction air bearings, (3) lever arm force/distance transducer, (4) movable fibre gripping clamp, (5) support for air bearings, (6) connecting fibre between lever arm force/distance transducer and bearing shaft, (7) actuating muscle fibre, and (8) fibre acting as return spring keeping the actuating muscle straight and well positioned. Reproduced with permission.200 Copyright 2015, Elsevier.	 
	(14)
	(15)
	(16)

 	Fig. 21  Comparison of experimentally measured and theoretically calculated torsional actuation for 70 mm long twisted nylon 6 fibre prepared with different fabrication parameters. (a) All calculated and measured torsional strokes are compared. (b) All calculated and measured blocked torques comparison. Reproduced with permission.33 Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons.	 
	(17)

 	Fig. 22  Different torsional actuators and relevant actuation stimulus that fundamentally control the actuation mechanism.	 

Shape memory alloy	Rod, tube, sheet, strip, wire, or coil	∼4.555	Not reported	Low	∼4	Not reported
Piezoelectric material	Bar, tube, twisted sheet, or fibre	∼0.0464	Not reported	Medium	∼10000	∼80
Multilayer torsional ribbon	Twisted or coiled bimorph strip	∼100075	∼1.5	High	∼100	∼68
Electroactive polymer	Films, or tube	∼0.0199	Not reported	Low	∼0.01	Room temperature
Fluidic torsional actuator	Tubular elastomer with outer helical braided sleeve	∼1.75125	Not reported	Low	Not reported	Room temperature
Carbon nanotube	Twisted or coiled yarn	∼380157	∼0.63	High	∼106	Room temperature
Metallic nanowire	Twisted yarn	∼12171	∼8.42	Low	∼30	∼90
Graphene fibre	Twisted fibre	∼588166	∼0.08	Low	∼86.5	Room temperature
Graphene-polymer fibre	Twisted fibre	∼14.8167	Not reported	High	∼0.13	200
Polymer fibre	Twisted, or coiled fibre	∼300181	∼0.8	Low	∼1166	∼90

 	Fig. 23  Functional prototypes made of torsional artificial muscles. (a) Solar-powered active blind model constructed of two-way rotary actuation of a SMA tape. Reproduced with permission.54 Copyright 2013, Elsevier. (b) Vacuum-powered soft pneumatically actuating gripper with various stages of grasping and torsional movements. Reproduced with permission.127 Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons. (c) Fluidic mixer operated by a multi-walled CNT yarn torsional actuator; (1) photograph of the prototype, (2) unmixed fluid and (3) mixed fluid. Reproduced with permission.148 Copyright 2011, The American Association for the Advancement of Science. (d) The scheme of the designed humidity switch based on the humidity-responsive twisted graphene oxide fibres (TGF). Reproduced with permission.166 Copyright 2014, John Wiley and Sons. (e) The bionic bra: two actuator systems made of twisted coiled conductive nylon fibre placed in parallel on the back band of a bra. Reproduced from ref. 203. Copyright 2018, SAGE Publications. (f) A photographic time series of the twisted-coiled actuator driven artificial limb lifting a 1 g load. The heat was applied with a heat gun for 2 s and then followed by 5 s rest epochs. Reproduced with permission.204 Copyright 2019, The American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
