Advanced chemical compositions and nanoarchitectures of bismuth based complex oxides for solar photocatalytic application  - RSC Advances (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4RA06419D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4RA06419D
(Review Article)
RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 47136-47152Advanced chemical compositions and nanoarchitectures of bismuth based complex oxides for solar photocatalytic application
Songmei Sun

 and 
Wenzhong Wang

*
State Key Laboratory of High Performance Ceramics and Superfine Microstructure, Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 1295 Dingxi Road, Shanghai 200050, P. R. China. E-mail: wzwang@mail.sic.ac.cn;  Fax: +86-21-5241-3122
Received 
30th June 2014
, Accepted 17th September 2014First published on 17th September 2014AbstractBismuth based complex oxides have attracted considerable interest due to their great potential to harvest solar light to solve the current environmental and energy crisis. Bismuth based complex oxides have excellent photo-oxidation ability for organic contaminant degradation and water oxidation via a photocatalytic process. Many efforts have been made to improve their photocatalytic performance, especially on the BiVO4, Bi2WO6 and Bi2MoO6 materials, which have been mostly studied in the past few years. Significant progress in understanding the fundamentals and improving the photocatalytic performance has been made due to the various new developed concepts and approaches in recent years. In this review, we present a comprehensive overview on the fundamentals and recent advances of BiVO4, Bi2WO6 and Bi2MoO6 photocatalysts. After the analysis of the structure–property relationships, the strategies that have been employed to enhance their photocatalytic performance are discussed in detail, including morphology control, surface modification, doping and construction of composite material. Furthermore, remarks on the challenges and perspectives of research directions are proposed for further development of the highly efficient bismuth based complex oxide photocatalysts.Songmei SunSongmei Sun received her BSc degree in Material Science and Engineering in 2005 at Shandong University of Technology and Ph.D. degree in Material Physics and Chemistry in 2010 from Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. She has published more than 50 papers in the area of bismuth based oxide photocatalyst up to the present. She is currently an associate professor in Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Her current research is focused on the rational synthesis and mechanism exploration of bismuth based complex oxides for solar light driven photocatalysis.Wenzhong WangWenzhong Wang received his Ph.D. degree from University of Science and Technology of China in 1998. He worked as a postdoctoral fellow at Virginia Commonwealth University, Rutgers University and Colorado State University from 1999 to 2003. In 2004, he was supported by “Hundred Talents Program”, CAS. He currently is a full professor in Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research interests include controlled fabrication, novel properties and photocatalytic applications of semiconductor nanostructures, especially with a focus on bismuth based semiconductors for environmental purification and solar light conversion.
1. General background
With the rapid development of industry, environmental pollution and the energy crisis have been serious challenges for human beings. Photocatalysis, which could harvest energy directly from sunlight, offers a desirable approach to solving these two problems. Over the past few decades, photocatalysis has been widely investigated both theoretically and technologically after the Honda–Fujishima effect of water splitting using a TiO2 electrode was reported in the early 1970s.1–7 However, the typical photocatalyst TiO2 is only active in the ultraviolet (UV) light range. Its wide band gap limits its practical applications under solar light. Although modification of TiO2 by doping has been used to increase the visible light absorption,8–11 doped materials often suffer from thermal instability and some dopants may function as recombination centers to decrease the photocatalytic performance.8
With this recognition, many recent studies have been focused on the development of non-TiO2 based semiconductors that can serve as efficient solar light driven photocatalysts. Topics covered the chemical compositions, synthetic strategies, and structure–property relationships etc. Desirable photocatalysts should have a small band gap to increase the solar energy utilization efficiency and appropriate band edge positions to facilitate the light induced redox reactions. In other words, the valence band edge of an ideal photocatalyst is expected positive enough to provide sufficient overpotential for photo-oxidation reaction and the conduction band edge is negative enough for photo-reduction reaction. In the last several years, numerous studies on the visible light driven photocatalyst have proved it is difficult to find a stable semiconductor satisfying both cases. One viable option is the development of narrow band semiconductor with high photo-oxidation activity, for the light induced contaminant degradation and water oxidation mainly depend on the photo-oxidation ability of a photocatalyst. Noticeably, the major challenge for water splitting is the water oxidation process, which is an uphill reaction involved four-electron transfer with slow kinetics. Therefore, metal oxide semiconductors with intrinsic narrow band gap and deep valence bands attracted more and more attention on the development of visible light driven photocatalyst.12–19 Although the deep valence bands endow these oxide photocatalyst high photo-oxidation ability, the photocatalytic efficiency is usually low because the excessive recombination of the photogenerated charge carriers. In the process of searching for efficient visible light driven oxide photocatalyst, bismuth based complex oxides were recognized as potential candidates. It was suggested the lone-pair distortion of Bi 6s orbital in these semiconductors may cause the pronounced overlap of O 2p and Bi 6s orbitals in the valence band, which is benefit to the mobility of photogenerated charge carriers for improving the photocatalytic activity.20–24 Consequently, a great deal of effort was then devoted to the development of bismuth based complex oxide photocatalysts, such as BiVO4,25–31 Bi2WO6,32–36 Bi2MoO6,37–39 Bi4Ti3O12,40–42 BiFeO3,43–48 Bi2Fe4O9,49–52 Bi5FeTi3O15,53 BiOCl,54–56 Bi5O7I (ref. 57 and 58) etc. Compared with their simple oxides without bismuth atoms, these complex oxides exhibited excellent photocatalytic activity by virtue of the improved charge transfer. However, the typical efficiencies of these bismuth based complex oxides were not satisfying because of their low conduction band levels and insufficient visible light absorption. There is still a great deal of effort to do for further improving their photocatalytic performance.
The critical process for semiconductor photocatalysis is the generation of electron–hole pairs, followed by the separation and transfer of the electrons and holes. Therefore, there are mainly two general approaches to improve the photocatalytic performance of bismuth based complex oxides. One way is to enhance the light absorption. Another way is to improve the utilization efficiency of the photo-generated carries, such as by decreasing the recombination rate and increasing the life time of the photo-generated carries. In the previous studies on the bismuth based complex oxide photocatalysts, it was found all of these processes are seriously affected by the composition and structure of the photocatalyst. Various strategies such as morphology control, doping, and construction of composite material, have been developed recently to improve their photocatalytic performance. Some basic principles of photocatalysis in bismuth based complex oxides may be concluded by systematically studying the obtained results up to the present. For this, Zhang et al.59 and Zhu et al.60 independently summarized a short review of Bi2WO6 photocatalyst on the controllable synthesis, microstructures and environmental application, mainly based on their contribution to this area. Choi et al. reviewed the BiVO4 photoanodes for use in photoelectrochemical (PEC) water oxidation,61 but the studies on the suspension-type BiVO4 used as photocatalysts for water oxidation or pollutant degradation were not included. Considering the great potential of bismuth based complex oxides, a systematic study on these materials is necessary to find out the fundamental principles for the construction of high-performance, commercial available solar light photocatalytic material.
Herein, we provide a comprehensive review of bismuth based complex oxides photocatalysts by focusing on the mostly studied BiVO4, Bi2WO6 and Bi2MoO6 materials. It is the first complex work on bismuth based complex oxides covering the primary important factors for photocatalysis. In this review, the bases of bismuth based complex oxides will be first discussed, including the crystal structure, the electronic structure and the structure–performance relationship. Then the major factors affecting photocatalytic performances and strategies to improving the photocatalytic activity will be critically reviewed. For each section, we provide critical commentary based on our knowledge and related research experiences. This review contains the latest ideas and concepts in understanding the basis and improving the performance of bismuth based complex oxide photocatalyst. Representative works were selected from the most recent literature available. The intent of this review is to give the readers a critical discussion of the progress and perspective of bismuth based complex oxide photocatalysts, which could provide guidance for the designed synthesis of high-performance solar light driven photocatalyst.
2. Bases of Bi–M–O complex oxide (M = V, W, Mo) photocatalysts
Photocatalytic activity is closely related to the crystal and electronic structures. In this section, we present an overview on the crystal and electronic structures of Bi–M–O complex oxides and discuss how they affect their photocatalytic performance. This is indispensible for developing effective strategies to obtain highly efficient photocatalysts.
2.1 Crystal structure
BiVO4 is known to exist in three crystalline phases: tetragonal zircon, monoclinic scheelite, and tetragonal scheelite structure.62 The process of phase transformation among them has been studied. When tetragonal zircon BiVO4 is heat-treated above 670–770 K, monoclinic scheelite BiVO4 was obtained. Among scheelite structures, the tetragonal phase is a high temperature phase and the phase transition between monoclinic scheelite BiVO4 and tetragonal scheelite BiVO4 was observed to occur reversibly at 528 K.63 The tetragonal zircon BiVO4 has a band gap of 2.9 eV. Its photocatalytic activity was low under visible light irradiation.20 Therefore, the mostly studied BiVO4 photocatalysts at present is the scheelite BiVO4 with a band gap of 2.4 eV. Fig. 1a shows the schematic crystal structure of scheelite BiVO4. It was found a layered structure of Bi–V–O units stacked parallel to the c axis. In this structure, each V ion is coordinated by four oxygen atoms forming a VO4 tetrahedron. Each VO4 tetrahedron does not make contact with a subsequent VO4 tetrahedron, and each Bi ion is coordinated by eight oxygen atoms from eight different VO4 tetrahedrons.64
 Fig. 1  Schematic crystal structure of BiVO4, Bi2WO6 and Bi2MoO6 in the polyhedron mode: (a) scheelite BiVO4, (b) Aurivillius orthorhombic Bi2WO6, (c) Aurivillius orthorhombic Bi2MoO6. 
There are two types of O atom in this structure. O1 is coordinated to one Bi and V, while O2 is coordinated to two Bi and a single V. The only difference between the tetragonal and monoclinic scheelite structure is that the local environments of V and Bi ions are more significantly distorted in the monoclinic structure, which removes the four-fold symmetry necessary for a tetragonal system. For example, the lengths of the four V–O bond (1.72 Å) were equal in tetragonal scheelite, but two different V–O bond lengths exist in a monoclinic scheelite structure (1.77 Å and 1.69 Å). In the same manner, while only two very similar Bi–O distances exist in the tetragonal scheelite structure (2.453 Å and 2.499 Å), there are four different Bi–O distances (2.354 Å, 2.372 Å, 2.516 Å and 2.628 Å) in the monoclinic scheelite structure.61,64
The band gap of BiVO4 (s-m) (2.41 eV) was similar to that of BiVO4 (s-t) (2.34 eV), suggesting the energy structures were similar to each other.65 However, BiVO4 (s-m) showed high activity. The disparate photocatalytic activity is originated from the variations of the crystal structure, which result in the modification of the electronic structure. Akihiko and co-workers considered that the distortion of a Bi–O polyhedron by a 6s2 lone pair of Bi3+ play an important role in improving the photocatalytic performance of monoclinic BiVO4 under visible light irradiation.65 The further distortion of the Bi-polyhedra in the monoclinic scheelite structure endows its higher activity than tetragonal scheelite structure. These indicate that the photocatalytic performance of BiVO4 largely depends on the crystal structure.
Different from BiVO4, there are only two crystalline phases in Bi2MO6 (M = Mo, W) compounds: orthorhombic and monoclinic structure. Orthorhombic structures of Bi2MO6 (M = Mo, W) existed at low and intermediate temperatures (T < 960 °C) and monoclinic structure is a high temperature phase (T > 960 °C).66,67 The presently studied Bi2MO6 (M = Mo, W) photocatalyst was usually orthorhombic phase. Fig. 1b and c show the schematic crystal structure of the orthorhombic Bi2WO6 and Bi2MoO6, respectively. It is obvious the Bi2MO6 (M = Mo, W) photocatalysts possess a layered structure which is composed of MO6 octahedral layers and Bi–O–Bi layers. In this structure, each Bi atom is coordinated with four O and four M atoms. Each M atom is coordinated with six O atoms to form MO6 octahedron. The MO6 octahedrons are connected to each other by corner-sharing O atom. The (Bi2O2)2+ layers are sandwiched between MO6 octahedral layers. The local environments of M and Bi ions are also distorted in the orthorhombic Bi2MO6 (M = Mo, W). For low temperature orthorhombic Bi2WO6 as an example, there are six different W–O bond lengths (1.85 Å, 1.87 Å, 1.728 Å, 1.720 Å, 2.240 Å and 2.215 Å) exist in the WO6 octahedron67 indicating a distorted octahedral structure. The off-centre octahedral distortions are a general feature of the structural chemistry of d0 metal cations. It also existed in the orthorhombic Bi2MoO6 photocatalyst.
Based on the above analysis, it was found both of the BiVO4 and Bi2MO6 (M = Mo, W) photocatalysts possess a layer structure with local lattice distortions. Besides the reasons mentioned above for the crystal distortion, it is worth noting that the Bi 6s lone pair electrons is another driving force for asymmetric coordination environments in the Bi–M–O photocatalyst. The distortion of local crystal structure probably affects the electronic structure, which is responsible for the high visible light photocatalytic activity.
2.2 Electronic structure
The schematic band structure of the Bi-M-O compounds was shown in Fig. 2. All of the BiVO4 and Bi2MO6 (M = Mo, W) photocatalysts have a direct band gap. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations by many researchers have show that the valence band of the BiVO4 and Bi2MO6 (M = Mo, W) photocatalysts was mainly composed of O 2p and Bi 6s levels, while the conduction band was mainly composed of M nd (V 3d, Mo 4d, W 5d) levels.23,68–71 The band structure indicates that charge transfer upon photoexcitation occurs from the O 2p + Bi 6s hybrid orbitals to the empty M nd orbitals. These authors also emphasized the importance of the sterically active Bi 6s2 lone pair for both reducing the oxide band gaps and increasing the hole conductivity,69 for the Bi 6s orbits are located upon the O 2p orbits and largely dispersed the valence band top. Combining the crystal structure and the electronic structure, M is expected to be a reduction site, whereas the oxidation could occur at either a Bi or an O site in the Bi–M–O complex photocatalysts.72 Then the photocatalytic performance of the Bi–M–O compounds would exhibit significant difference at different lattice planes, along with the varied density of the Bi, M and O atoms at different lattice planes.
 Fig. 2  Schematic band structure and the calculated redox potentials of BiVO4, Bi2WO6 and Bi2MoO6 at the point of zero charge. 
Although the BiVO4 and Bi2MO6 (M = Mo, W) photocatalysts have a similar configuration of the band structures, the band positions were different because of their different chemical composition and crystal structures. Knowledge of the band positions is useful in as much as they indicate the thermodynamic limitations for the photoreactions that can be carried out with the photogenerated charge carriers. Therefore, it is important to clarify the band edge potentials of the photocatalyst. For a MaNb compound, the conduction band edge can be predicted by the following equation:73,74 
(1)where XM and XN are the absolute electronegativity of the atoms M and N respectively, which is defined as the arithmetic mean of the atomic electron affinity and the first ionization energy; Ec is the energy of free electrons on the hydrogen scale (about 4.5 eV); Eg is the band gap of the semiconductor; and pHZPC is the point of zero charge. The estimated ECB at pHZPC by the above equation for BiVO4, Bi2MoO6 and Bi2WO6 is about 0.45 eV, 0.51 eV and 0.52 eV respectively (Fig. 2) using the Pearson absolute electronegativity.75
The low conduction band level of the BiVO4, Bi2MoO6 and Bi2WO6 photocatalyst indicates the insufficient reduction power of the photogenerated electrons with electron acceptors such as O2. For the single-electron reduction of oxygen (O2 + e− → ˙O2− (aq.)), the standard redox potential is about −0.284 V vs. NHE which is much negative than the ECB of BiVO4, Bi2MoO6 and Bi2WO6 photocatalyst. This could increases the recombination rates of electron–hole pairs. Then the most effective approaches to improve the photocatalytic performance of the Bi–M–O photocatalysts are based on decreasing the recombination rate of photogenerated charge carriers. According to the predicted ECB, the EVB of the BiVO4, Bi2MoO6 and Bi2WO6 is estimated at 2.85 eV, 3.1 eV and 3.27 eV respectively. It is clear the valence band position of Bi2WO6 is more positive than BiVO4 and Bi2MoO6, indicating a higher photo-oxidation ability. For this predominance, the Bi2WO6 photocatalyst usually exhibited better performance than the BiVO4 and Bi2MoO6 on the photocatalytic oxidation of various organic contaminants.
Besides the band edge position, the different effective mass of charge carriers is another important factor leading to the different photocatalytic efficiency. It is known that the electronic effective mass is inversely proportional to the curvature of conduction bands.76 Dai's group compared the CB bottoms of Bi2WO6 and Bi2MoO6 by DFT calculations.77 It was found the CB bottom of Bi2WO6 has larger curvature than Bi2MoO6, indicating a smaller electronic effective mass. The smaller effective mass of electrons for Bi2WO6 benefits to the separation and migration of photogenerated carriers and also resulted in better photocatalytic performance than Bi2MoO6.
3. Strategies to enhance photocatalytic properties
As described in Section 1, BiVO4, Bi2WO6 and Bi2MoO6 are highly promising photocatalysts for use in environmental purification and solar water oxidation. The major limiting factor on improving their photocatalytic activity is the excessive electron–hole recombination. Recently, many efforts have been made to address this problem, which include morphology control, surface optimization, doping and construction of composite material. This section will give an overview of each of these strategies and discuss how these strategies affected the photocatalytic performance.
3.1 Structure and morphology control
The photocatalytic activity is closely related to the size, morphology, and crystallinity of the photocatalysts. Controlling the microstructure of the photocatalysts provides an effective way to enhance their photocatalytic properties.
Nanostructured photocatalyst usually exhibited excellent photocatalytic activity, because the photocatalytic behavior is closely related to the particle size. For randomly generated charge carriers, the average diffusion time from the bulk to the surface is given by τ = r2/π2D, where r is the grain radius and D is the diffusion coefficient of the carrier.78 If the grain radius decreases, larger numbers of photogenerated charge carriers will transfer to the surface for photocatalytic reaction. It has been reported the nanoscale BiVO4, Bi2WO6 and Bi2MoO6 exhibited much enhanced photocatalytic activity than that of their bulk samples obtained by solid state reaction.79–82 In a recent study, Colón et al. prepared several BiVO4 samples with different morphologies, such as peanut-like and needle-like architectures. It was found the photocatalytic activity of the prepared BiVO4 is strongly affected by the crystallite size and morphology, and the needle-like BiVO4 with smaller crystallite size exhibited better photocatalytic performance.83
Because of the layered crystal structure, plate-like morphology is a primary nanostructure for the BiVO4, Bi2WO6 and Bi2MoO6 photocatalyst. Yu et al. compared the photocatalytic activity of two dimensional (2D) nanostructures with other morphology.84 In their studies, the 2D (disc-like and plate-like) BiVO4 demonstrates better photocatalytic activity than 3D and bulk BiVO4. Especially, the BiVO4 nanoplate exhibited the highest photocatalytic activity on degradation of RhB. Zhu's group systematically studied the reasons for the excellent photocatalytic activity of Bi2WO6 nanoplates,71,85,86 which is ascribed to the large BET surface area and the thin thickness of the laminar structure.
Though minimizing the particle size could effectively enhance the photocatalytic activities, the decreased particle size makes it harder to be separated and recycled from the treated waste water in industrial use. Nano-/micro-sized hierarchical structures integrate the virtues of nanoscale and micro-scale. Most of the recent studies on the morphological control of the BiVO4, Bi2WO6 and Bi2MoO6 photocatalysts were focused on hierarchical structures. Hierarchical structured BiVO4 has been reported exhibited dendrite,87–89 flower-like90 and olive-like morphology etc. (as shown in Fig. 3).91–93 They exhibited excellent photocatalytic activity because of their unique morphology.89,91,93 Flower-like Bi2WO6 and Bi2MoO6 microspheres are usually obtained when they are hydrothermally synthesized (as shown in Fig. 4).94–107 The diameter of the flower-like microspheres is in the range of micrometers. Studies on the formation mechanism have indicated that these flower-like hierarchical structures are built from oriented aggregation of two-dimensional Bi2WO6 nanoplates with a thickness and average length in nanoscale.95,97 Compared with bulk samples obtained by solid state reaction, these flower-like Bi2WO6 microspheres exhibited much higher photocatalytic activity on the degradation of various organic contaminants, such as RhB,95,97 acetaldehyde,99 and Orange-II.101 Recently, Amano et al. studied the effects of hierarchical architecture on the photocatalytic activity of Bi2WO6.108 It was found the high photocatalytic activity did not depend on the assembling morphology of flakes. For Bi2WO6 samples of similar W/Bi ratio, the photocatalytic activity increased with an increase in their specific surface area. They hypothesize that both a small density of recombination centers and a large specific surface area are essential factors for a high photocatalytic activity.
 Fig. 3  (a) Representative TEM image of dendrite BiVO4 from ref. 87. (b) Representative TEM and SEM image of flower-like BiVO4 from ref. 90. (c) Representative SEM image of olive-like BiVO4 from ref. 91. Reprinted with permission. Copyright 2008, 2007 and 2009, Wiley-VCH, American Chemical Society and Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 4  Typical SEM images of flower-like Bi2WO6 hierarchical structures from ref. 95. Reprinted with permission. Copyright 2007, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Because of the large specific surface area, porous nanostructure has been extensively studied recently. Mesoporous monoclinic BiVO4 (Fig. 5a) prepared by Yu et al. with a high BET surface area of 59 m2 g−1 exhibited a superior visible light-driven photocatalytic activity for the methylene blue degradation and NO oxidation.109 The enhanced activity is due to its physicochemical properties such as crystal size, BET surface area, and porous structure, which not only supplies more active sites for the degradation reaction but also effectively promotes the separation efficiency of the electron–hole pairs.109 The advantages of ordered porous structure for photocatalysis were further proved by studying the photocatalytic performance of ordered macroporous Bi2WO6 (Fig. 5b and c).110,111 It was believed the excellent photocatalytic activities were related to the improved light-harvesting properties, as well as the continuous porous structure.
 Fig. 5  (a) TEM image of ordered mesoporous BiVO4 using KIT-6 as a template from ref. 109. (b) SEM image of ordered macroporous Bi2WO6 film synthesized with 340 nm carbon spheres from ref. 110. (c) TEM image of three-dimensional ordered macroporous Bi2WO6 powder synthesized with 90 nm SiO2 spheres from ref. 111. Reprinted with permission. Copyright 2008, 2009 and 2012, American Chemical Society, Wiley-VCH and Royal Society of Chemistry. 
3.2 Surface optimization and modification
The photocatalytic degradation of a pollutant must proceed at the surface of the photocatalyst, and consequently the surface properties appear as an important parameter. It was reported when the monoclinic BiVO4 photocatalyst (JCPDS file no. 14-0688, space group: I2/a, a = 5.195, b = 11.701, c = 5.092) exposes more facets of {010} (as shown in Fig. 6a and b), it exhibited greatly enhanced photocatalytic activity.112–114 The high photocatalytic activity may be ascribed to the larger atom density of the {010} facets (as shown in Fig. 6c) on the exposed surfaces, which is beneficial to the adsorption and degradation of the pollutants.112,113 Density functional theory calculations by Li et al. studied the surface properties of monoclinic BiVO4.115 The calculated results indicated in all of the most stable terminated planes of BiVO4, the V atoms are fully coordinated, and all of the dangling bonds are derived from the broken Bi–O bonds. A dangling bond plays an important role in the surface adsorption properties. The {010} facets is thermodynamically lowest-energy surface of monoclinic BiVO4. The high density of cleaved Bi–O bonds in {010} facets may improve the adsorption property on the surface, which is advantageous for the photocatalytic reaction. On the other hand, considering that the photocatalytic oxidation of contaminant would occur at either a Bi or an O site in the BiVO4 photocatalysts, the larger atom density of Bi and O in {010} facets could also improve the photocatalytic efficiency.
 Fig. 6  (a) TEM image of {010} oriented BiVO4 nanoplates from ref. 112. (b) TEM image of {010} oriented BiVO4 nanosheets from ref. 113. (c) Schematic illustration of monoclinic BiVO4 crystal structure viewed along different directions (1 × 1 × 1 cell) to show the structural feature of the (101), (100), (001) and (010) facets from ref. 112. Reprinted with permission. Copyright 2009 and 2006, American Chemical Society. 
The photocatalytic activity of preferential oriented BiVO4 was also investigated by Ye's group.116 They found the high photocatalytic activity of (001) plans resulted from their superior hydrophilic ability. The similar viewpoint was proposed by Skrabalak et al. in their studies on the structure-dependent photocatalytic properties of Bi2WO6.117 It was found that the enhanced performance of the Bi2WO6 microspheres is partially ascribed to bismuth-rich hydrophilic surface.
Saison et al. established a relationship between surface acidity and photocatalytic performance on RhB degradation in Bi2O3, BiVO4 and Bi2WO6 materials.118 It was found the best photocatalytic performance for contaminants degradation was obtained with the Bi2WO6 sample that also exhibits the highest surface acidity. The most acid sites may promote a strong interaction with the pollutant, implying a short distance between the pollutant and the photocatalyst. Consequently, the photogenerated electrons, holes, and radicals can reach more easily to the pollutant, leading to an efficient degradation under visible light.
Surface fluorination is an effective method for modifying the surface property of oxide photocatalysts and then improving their photocatalytic performance. Zhu et al. synthesized fluorinated Bi2WO6 photocatalyst by a simple hydrothermal process.119 They found the fluorination of Bi2WO6 affected not only the reaction rate but also the mechanistic pathways of the RhB degradation. The fluorinated Bi2WO6 exhibited enhanced photocatalytic activity for the RhB degradation. More RhB molecules were degraded via the de-ethylation process by the fluorinated Bi2WO6 (as shown in Fig. 7). It was proposed that the F-containing function on the catalyst surface could serve as an electron-trapping site and enhance interfacial electron-transfer rates by tightly holding trapped electrons. As a result, more RhB molecules were degraded via the N-demethylation process.119 Yu et al. studied the surface fluorinated BiVO4 photocatalyst synthesized by NaF-mediated hydrothermal processes.120 It was found the surface fluorination favored the RhB adsorption and hole transfer between RhB molecules and BiVO4 photocatalyst, thus progressively enhancing the initial direct hole transfer mediated de-ethylation process.
 Fig. 7  UV-visible spectral changes of RhB (2 × 10−5 M, 50 mL) over Bi2WO6 and fluorinated Bi2WO6 photocatalyst from ref. 119. Reprinted with permission. Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society. 
In a recent study by Luo et al., surface pretreatment by electrochemical cyclic voltammetry (CV) in the dark was found could remarkably enhance the photocurrent of Mo-doped BiVO4 from the front side illumination.121 Fig. 8 illustrated the possible mechanism for the enhanced photocurrent. Some MoOx segregation precipitated on the surface of the Mo-doped BiVO4 electrode during the preparation of the photoelectrode. MoOx acts as a recombination center and has a negative effect on the photocurrent. After the pretreatment, MoOx on the surface was dissolved into the electrolyte, improving the separation and transfer of the photogenerated charge carriers.
 Fig. 8  Possible sketch of the transfer of photogenerated electrons in Mo-doped BiVO4 electrodes illuminated from the front side and the back side before and after the electrochemical pretreatment (reproduced from ref. 121 with permission from American Chemistry Society). 
3.3 Doping
Previous studies have reported that doping impurities into a semiconductor can improve photocatalytic performance. However, the effect of doping may not always be advantageous. There are two kinds of dopant levels, including deep level and shallow level. A deep level usually acts as a recombination center, severely decrease the photocatalytic activity. Therefore, appropriate dopants and their concentrations are important to increase the performance of the photocatalysts. In this section, a few types of dopants that were reported to enhance the photocatalytic performances of BiVO4, Bi2WO6 and Bi2MoO6 are reviewed and their roles are examined.
Since Ye et al. found the photocatalytic activity of BiVO4 for O2 evolution and methylene blue (MB) degradation under visible light irradiation was evidently improved by 2 atom% Mo doping,122 metal doped BiVO4 has been obtained increasingly attention by many research groups. In the studies by Ye's group, they proposed the improved adsorption affinity towards electrolytes or organic molecules was an important reason for the enhanced activity of Mo doped BiVO4, due to its higher surface acidity than pure BiVO4. The surface acidity of BiVO4 is possibly increased by Mo ion substitution, since Mo6+ ion has a larger electronegativity than that of V5+. Therefore, the role of Mo doping is thought as affecting the adsorption affinity rather than the photo-oxidation ability in determining the photocatalytic activity of the photocatalyst.
Zou's group further studied the Mo doped BiVO4 for photoelectrochemical hydrogen generation from seawater.123 The Mott–Schottky method was used to investigate the donor concentration of the Mo-doped BiVO4, which can be calculated by the slope of the Mott–Schottky curves. It was found the carrier concentration increased about 80 times after doping with Mo (Fig. 9), indicating a high conductivity.
 Fig. 9  Mott–Schottky plots for pure BiVO4 and Mo-doped BiVO4 in 0.5 M Na2SO4, the ac amplitude is 10 mV and the frequency is 1000 Hz (reproduced from ref. 123 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry). 
In order to identify effective dopants for BiVO4 more rapidly, Bard's group performed rapid screening of BiVO4 photocatalysts doped with various metals (W, Fe, B, Cu, Zn, Ti, Nb, Sn, Co, Pb, Rb, Ru, Ag, Ga, Sr, and Ir) using a scanning electrochemical microscopy (SECM) technique.124 Among the elements they have tried, only addition of 5–10% W showed noticeable enhancement of photocurrent. The Bi/V/W oxide with a 4.5:5:0.5 ratio exhibited the highest photocurrent under UV-visible and visible light irradiation. Addition at 10 to 20% levels of elements like Sn, Co, Pd, Rb, Ru, Ag, Ga, Sr, and Ir showed a negative effect and the others basically showed the same behavior as the Bi/V oxide. Mott–Schottky plots revealed that the majority carrier level in the W-doped sample increased approximately 2 times. The increase of the doping level with a decrease in the resistance of the material is probably a contributing factor in the enhanced photocurrent of the Bi/V/W (4.5/5/0.5) oxide. Using the same technique, Park et al. demonstrated that W/Mo co-doped BiVO4 (Bi:V:W:Mo atomic ratio of 4.6:4.6:0.2:0.6) had 10 times higher photocurrent than undoped BiVO4. No changes in band gap of W-doped BiVO4 and W/Mo-doped BiVO4 were observed, while the increase in carrier density was confirmed by the decrease in the slope of the Mott–Schottky plots. Furthermore, deformation of crystal structure of the scheelite BiVO4 occurs with consecutive doping of W and Mo. It was found the crystal symmetry shifted from monoclinic to tetragonal. W and Mo in this study are revealed as excellent shallow dopants, which facilitate the separation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs and effectively increase the charge carrier density of BiVO4 photocatalyst.125
Mullins et al. also studied the Mo-, W- and Mo/W-doped BiVO4 electrodes by ballistic deposition (BD).126 They found the optimal levels for individual incorporation were 2.5% W and 5% Mo, which resulted in photocurrent densities that were 7 and 8 times higher than that of pure BiVO4, respectively. Further improvement was observed for co-incorporation of Mo and W. The optimal level for co-incorporation was also found to be 6% Mo and 2% W, which exhibited a photocurrent density that was 10 times higher than that of pure BiVO4.
Recently, Luo et al. systematically studied the effect of doping on BiVO4 with higher valence metal ions (Mo6+, W6+ and Sn4+) at V5+ and Bi3+ sites by DFT calculation and photoelectrochemical measurements.127 It was found Mo or W could substitute V sites, but Sn did not substitute Bi sites because of a higher formation energy and lower solubility of impurity ions, leading to serious SnO2 segregation on the surface. Therefore, Mo6+ or W6+-doped BiVO4 exhibited a much higher photocurrent while the photocurrent of Sn4+-doped BiVO4 did not change obviously. Moreover, they found the surface segregation of the doping ions had a negative effect on the performance in the doped samples. Therefore, for an n-type semiconductor photoelectrode, doping with a metal ion with higher valence, lower formation energy and less surface segregation can improve the photoelectrochemical performance.
To integrate the advantages of both Bi2WO6 (high photocatalytic activity) and Bi2MoO6 (narrower band gap), many researchers have studied the W6+ doped Bi2MoO6 or Mo6+ doped Bi2WO6. From a structural viewpoint, Bi2WO6 is isostructural with Bi2MoO6. It could be expected that the substitution of W6+ and Mo6+ with each other may produce a stable Bi2MoxW1−xO6 solid solution, because of the structural similarities between the cations, thus leading to improved properties. Actually, phase-pure Bi2MoxW1−xO6 photocatalysts have been successfully synthesized by many research groups and their enhanced visible-light-driven photocatalytic activities were demonstrated.128–131 For instance, Bi2MoxW1−xO6 solid solutions with various compositions (x = 0, 0.25, 0.50, 0.75, and 1.00) have been prepared by Yu's group via hydrothermal treatments.128 For the Bi2MoxW1−xO6 solid solutions with x = 0.25, 0.50, and 0.75, valence band spectra from XPS indicate the valence band is widened and elevated when compared with the pure Bi2WO6 photocatalyst, leading to the narrower band gaps of the Bi2MoxW1−xO6 solid solutions (x = 0.25, 0.50, and 0.75). The Bi2Mo0.25W0.75O6 sample with a relatively high W content exhibited the highest photocatalytic activity on the degradation of MB. Zhu's group reproduced the phase-pure Bi2MoxW1−xO6 solid solutions (x = 0, 0.05, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 0.95, 1) and studied the effects of Mo replacement on the structure and visible-light-induced photocatalytic performances.129 Theoretical calculations based on density functional theory revealed introduction of Mo atom into Bi2WO6 could reduce the conduction band level of Bi2WO6 and the curvature of the conduction band. Under visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm), Bi2WO6 showed relatively higher photocatalytic activity than other samples. However, under visible light λ > 450 nm, Bi2Mo0.25W0.75O6 shows much higher activity than Bi2WO6. They assumed the higher efficiency of Bi2WO6 under visible light λ > 420 nm was attributed to more effective photoelectron transfer in the conduction band with larger curvature, while the higher performance of Bi2Mo0.25W0.75O6 under visible light λ > 450 nm was attributed to its lower band gap compared with Bi2WO6.
Different from the inter-replacement of W6+ and Mo6+, the substitution of M (M = W, Mo) sites with other different ions in Bi2MO6 (M = W, Mo) might induce a slight modification of crystal structure due to the different ion radii, resulting in dramatic influence on the mobility of the charge carrier and then change the photocatalytic and photophysical properties. For instance, we prepared Zr4+ doped Bi2WO6 by substituting the W6+ ions in the crystal lattice.132 Because of the lower valence states of Zr, the substitution of W6+ by Zr4+ lead to an extrinsic oxygen vacancy (Vo) by charge compensation effect. The presence of Vo in the zirconium doped sample was confirmed by XPS analysis. The positively charged oxygen vacancy defects can improve oxygen adsorption and function as electron acceptors to reduce the recombination of charge carriers and then increase the photocatalytic performance. Lai et al. studied the influence of Vo on the electronic band structures of Bi2MO6 (M = W, Mo) with one Vo by means of density functional theory (DFT).77 It was found Vo in Bi2MO6 (M = W, Mo) introduced localized W 5d or Mo 4d states in band gap, which may serve as a trapping center of photogenerated electrons and consequently improve photocatalytic oxidation performance (as shown in Fig. 10a).
Nonmetal elements doped samples were also studied to obtain a high-performance photocatalyst. For instance, F-substituted Bi2WO6 (Bi2WO6−xF2x) photocatalysts were successfully synthesized by Zhu's group.133 It was found that F-substitution could change the original coordination around the W and Bi atoms. Density functional calculations revealed that Bi2WO6−xF2x possesses a wider valence bandwidth and lower valence band position, resulting in an increased mobility of photo-generated charge carriers and a stronger oxidation power. For this reason, the photocatalytic activity of Bi2WO6−xF2x increased about 2 times compared with pure Bi2WO6 on the degradation of MB under visible-light (λ > 420 nm) irradiation. Another example for nonmetal doped Bi2WO6 by the substitution of O atoms is N doped Bi2WO6.134 Our research group studied the effects of nitrogen doping on the crystal structure, optical properties, and photocatalytic performance experimentally. The results showed that the doped samples exhibit 2–3 times higher photocatalytic activities than the undoped one, which was strongly dependent on the N-doping level. The sample with the atomic ration of N to Bi of 0.5 exhibited the best photocatalytic activity. Close investigation revealed that doping Bi2WO6 with N could not only enhance the visible light adsorption, but also improve the charge separation and transfer, which may be the reason for the significantly enhanced photocatalytic activities. Dai's group studied the N doped Bi2WO6 by DFT calculations.77 From the calculated results (as shown in Fig. 10b and 10c), it was found the substitution of N for O induces hybrid states of O 2p and N 2p near the top of valence band, leading to the increases of the VB width and the decreases of band gap. This study theoretically proved the increased mobility of photo-generated charge carriers, the enhanced visible-light absorption property, and the origin of the improved photocatalytic behavior of N doped Bi2WO6.
 Fig. 10  The total and partial DOS of relaxed Bi2WO6: (a) with one O vacancy, (b) with one N atom, (c) with two N atoms. The navy dashed line represents the Fermi level from ref. 77. Reprinted with permission. Copyright 2012, Elsevier. 
3.4 Construction of composite material
Construction of composite photocatalysts provides an interesting way to increase the photocatalytic performance by decreasing the charge recombination and extending the light response of photo-excitation. In this section, a few types of composite materials and the fundamentals for their improved photocatalytic activity will be reviewed.
3.4.1 Composite with semiconductor. Semiconductor-based composite material with a heterojunction structure has been extensively studied for obtaining a high-performance photocatalyst. When heterojunctions constituted by semiconductors with matching band potentials, photogenerated charge carriers can transport from one semiconductor to another driven by the contact electric field, leading to efficient separation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs. For a particulate BiVO4 composite material, it has been reported the photocatalytic performance could be improved by compositing with Co3O4,74,135 V2O5,136,137 CeO2,138 Bi2O3,139,140 Bi2S3,141 CuO (ref. 142) and Cu2O (ref. 143) etc. Long et al. studied the mechanism for the improved photocatalytic activity of the Co3O4/BiVO4 composite material with a p–n heterojunction structure.74,135 The band edge position of the Co3O4 and BiVO4 were estimated from the absolute electronegativity (eqn (1)). According to the band edge position, the excited electrons on the conduction band of the p-type Co3O4 could transfer to that of the n-type BiVO4, and simultaneously holes on the valence band of n-type BiVO4 can be transferred to that of p-type Co3O4 under the potential of the band energy difference. This process decreased the recombination rate of electron–hole pairs. The similar mechanism for the improved photocatalytic performance that the heterojunctions promote the separation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs was further confirmed in the V2O5–BiVO4, Bi2O3–BiVO4, Bi2S3–BiVO4 and Cu2O–BiVO4 composites.137,139–141,143Su et al. employed surface photovoltage spectroscopy (SPS) and transient photovoltage (TPV) techniques to investigate the effect of heterojunction structure on the behavior of photogenerated charges in V2O5–BiVO4 composite material.137 Fig. 11a is the TPV spectra of bare BiVO4, bare V2O5, and the 5.3 wt% V2O5–BiVO4 composite. A positive TPV spectrum of V2O5 implies that positive charges accumulate on the V2O5 surface at the top electrode under irradiation, while the negative sign of BiVO4 is attributed to negative charge accumulation on the surface. Different from bare V2O5 and BiVO4, the V2O5–BiVO4 composite semiconductor shows an initial negative response and next positive response reversed at 7 × 10−6 s in the TPV spectrum. For the V2O5–BiVO4 composites, the intensities and lifetime of the TPV response are much improved compared with those of the bare BiVO4 and V2O5. These TPV features of V2O5–BiVO4 can be ascribed to the improved charge separation in the composite structure, as shown in Fig. 11b.
 Fig. 11  (a) Transient photovoltage (TPV) responses of bare BiVO4, bare V2O5, and 5.3 wt% V2O5–BiVO4, (b) schematic diagram for electron–hole separation at the interface of the V2O5–BiVO4 material from ref. 137. Reprinted with permission. Copyright 2011, American Chemistry Society. 
BiVO4/WO3 composite photoanode films were widely studied for its excellent performance on water splitting.144–146 The heterojunction structure provided enhanced photoconversion efficiency due to the improved charge separation in the composite structure.144–146 The WO3 layer played as barrier for the holes of BiVO4 to reach FTO surface, which decreased the electron–hole recombination and caused the efficient water oxidation.146
Saito and coworkers deposited a SnO2 layer between WO3 and BiVO4 to further improve the photoconversion efficiency of the FTO/WO3/BiVO4 film.147 The effect of a SnO2 layer has been discussed in a FTO/SnO2/BiVO4 photoanode film by van de Krol's group before.148 They found a SnO2 layer could act as a hole mirror that prevents recombination via FTO-related defect states at the FTO/BiVO4 interface (Fig. 12a). This approach promoted the charge collection and greatly improved the external quantum efficiency (IPCE) of the BiVO4 films (as shown in Fig. 12b).
 Fig. 12  (a) The schematic diagram illustrates the recombination at the defect state present at the FTO/BiVO4 interface and the hole mirror effect of the SnO2 layer, (b) comparison of the IPCE spectra of BiVO4 on FTO with and without an ∼10 nm SnO2 interfacial layer (reproduced from ref. 148 with permission from American Chemistry Society). 
Bi2WO6/TiO2 has been widely studied due to its much enhanced photocatalytic performances.149–158 The VB position of TiO2 is higher than that of Bi2WO6. When the TiO2 coupled with Bi2WO6 to form a semiconductor heterojunction, photo-generated holes from the VB of Bi2WO6 would transfer to the VB of TiO2, efficiently suppressing its recombination with photo-generated electrons from the Bi2WO6 photocatalyst. Therefore, Bi2WO6/TiO2 composite material exhibited much enhanced photocatalytic activity on degradation of various contaminants, such as stearic acid,158 acetaldehyde,149 rhodamine B (RhB),149,150,155 methylene blue (MB),154,157 NH4+/NH3,152 and Brilliant Red X3B.153
Besides the Bi2WO6/TiO2 composite, it has been reported the photocatalytic performance of Bi2WO6 could be evidently improved by coupling with Bi2O3,159–162 C3N4,163,164 WO3,165 Co3O4,166 CdS,167 ZnO,168 ZnWO4,169 and Bi2S3 (ref. 170) etc. There is some different from TiO2/Bi2WO6 composite when the Bi2WO6 coupled with Bi2O3, C3N4, WO3, Co3O4, CdS and Bi2S3. These semiconductors could be excited under visible light irradiation. Besides the effective charge separation from their heterostructure, the improved photocatalytic performance in these systems is inevitably associated with the extended energy response of photo-excitation, leading to enhanced charge carriers generation under visible light irradiation.

3.4.2 Composite with carbon material. Carbon materials, such as graphene oxide (GO), C60, carbon quantum dots, carbon nanotube, carbon spheres and carbon nanofibers, have been used to composite with BiVO4 and Bi2MO6 (M = W, Mo) photocatalysts to improve their photocatalytic performance.171–185 Among these carbon materials, GO composite materials obtained the most attention recently, owing to its perfect conjugated sp2-hybridized carbon structure and large BET surface area. The conjugated sp2-hybridized structure provides abundance of delocalized electrons to enhance the transport of photo-generated electrons. The large BET surface area could increase the adsorption of target molecules. Both of these two predominance lead to an increase in the photo-conversion efficiency of GO composited photocatalyst. BiVO4–RGO composite prepared by Ng et al. proved the predominance of RGO for efficient photoelectrochemical water splitting.172 A remarkable 10-fold enhancement in photoelectrochemical water splitting reaction is observed. A recent study for a composite material of RGO and Bi2WO6 quantum dots (QDs) (as shown in Fig. 13a) in our group also proved the advantage of RGO as a base material to improve the photocatalytic performance.174 Electrochemical measurements indicated the electron conductivity is largely improved in the RGO–Bi2WO6 QDs composite. The electron lifetime in the RGO–Bi2WO6 QDs composites was increased 8-fold compared with that of the pure Bi2WO6 QDs. The tightly anchored interface facilitates the electron transfer from Bi2WO6 to RGO, leaving most of the photo-generated holes on the Bi2WO6 surface to take part in photo-oxidation reactions (Fig. 13b). Ma et al. investigated the influence of RGO amount on the photocatalytic activity in the RGO–Bi2WO6 composite material.177 It was found the optimum amount of RGO is 20 mg for 1 mmol Bi2WO6, at which the RGO–Bi2WO6 sample displays the highest reactivity. Zhou et al. prepared RGO–Bi2MoO6 composites with a RGO content from 0.5 to 4.0 wt%.178 Their studies indicate the photocatalytic activities of the RGO–Bi2MoO6 composites were dependent on the amount of graphene and it was found that the optimal hybridized amount of graphene was about 1.0 wt%. Similar with GO, the delocalized conjugated electrons in C60 and carbon nanotubes could also increase the photogenerated electron transfer in their composite material to reduce electron–hole recombination and enhance the photoconversion efficiency, as reported in the C60/Bi2WO6,180 C60/Bi2MoO6 (ref. 184) and carbon nanotube/BiVO4 (ref. 173) composite materials. Besides the crystalline carbon material, amorphous carbon such as carbon spheres, carbon dots and carbon nanofibers composited Bi2MO6 (M = W, Mo) were also reported exhibited improved photocatalytic activity.181–183 These studies revealed the enhanced specific surface area and the effective separation of the photogenerated charge carriers in the composite material is responsible for their improved photocatalytic activity.
 Fig. 13  (a) TEM image of the RGO–Bi2WO6 QDs, (b) the schematic illustration of charge carrier transfer in RGO–Bi2WO6 QDs (reproduced from ref. 174 with permission from American Chemistry Society). 

3.4.3 Metal loaded. Noble metals, such as Ag, Pt, Au and Pd, have been used as electron acceptors to increase the separation of the photo-generated hole–electron pairs and promote interfacial charge-transfer. It has been reported the noble metal loaded BiVO4 and Bi2MO6 (M = W, Mo) photocatalysts exhibited enhanced photocatalytic activities on contaminants degradation and water oxidation.186–192 Cao et al. studied the effect of noble metal on the photocatalytic process in detail in Au–BiVO4 heterogeneous nanostructures.186 Their studies revealed the gold-enhanced photocatalytic efficiencies are attributed to two reasons. First, the surface loaded gold nanoparticles may act as electron acceptors to decrease the recombination rate of the photogenerated electrons and holes. From the energy diagram of the Au–BiVO4 junction (Fig. 14), it can be clearly seen the photo-generated electrons is prone to transfer into the Au nanoparticle because of its lower Fermi level when comparing with the CB potential of BiVO4. Such a charge transfer process enhances the separation of photogenerated electrons and holes and thereby increases their lifetime. This is particularly important for photocatalytic water oxidation because it is a slow multi-electron process with kinetic restraints.193 Second, the SPR effect of gold nanoparticles on BiVO4 surfaces can also contribute to the improved visible light photocatalytic efficiency. To clarify this viewpoint, they compared the photocatalytic activity of Au–BiVO4 with Pt–BiVO4 nanosheets and pure BiVO4 under irradiation of 500 ± 20 nm light. The results indicate the much higher photocatalytic activity of Au–BiVO4 is arrived from the strong SPR at 500 ± 20 nm. It is believed that the gold SPR can enhance the electron–hole separation near the Au–BiVO4 heterojunction, and thus improve the photocatalytic efficiency. Our recent studies indicated Ag-loaded Bi2WO6 photocatalysts exhibited significantly enhanced photocatalytic activity in inactivating E. coli, a Gram-negative bacterium, and S. epidermidis, a Gram-positive bacterium under visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm).187
 Fig. 14  Schematic illustration of the detailed energy alignment in the Au–BiVO4 heterogeneous structure and the proposed mechanism of photocatalytic water oxidation by Au–BiVO4 nanosheets in the presence of sacrificial agent S2O82−. The Fermi level (Ef) of Au shifts to more negative potentials (E*f) because of the transfer of photogenerated electrons from BiVO4 to Au. The SPR excitation of the gold nanoparticle is believed to enhance electron–hole separation near the Au–BiVO4 heterojunction (ref. 186 with permission from American Chemistry Society). 

3.4.4 Co-catalyst loaded. A co-catalyst was usually coupled with a photocatalyst to increase the photo-conversion efficiency and to improve the stability of the photocatalyst, especially in a photocatalytic water splitting process. Oxygen evolution is kinetically the key step in the photocatalytic water splitting. Cocatalysts could lower the activation potential for O2 evolution. Besides, lots of studies have revealed hole accumulation at the photoanode/electrolyte interface often results in photocorrosion,194,195 and a cocatalyst could increase the stability for O2 evolution. For BiVO4 photoanodes as an instance, Sayama et al. found the surface V atoms dissolved from the bare BiVO4 surface during the photoreaction,194 inducing a significantly decreased photocurrent within a few minutes. To solve this problem, they attempt to modify the surface of BiVO4 with Ag+ ions, which involved simply dipping the BiVO4 electrode in an AgNO3 solution. Although the exact form of the responsible species was not identified, the Ag-modified BiVO4 electrode exhibited enhanced O2 evolution and noticeably improved stability. They surmised the Ag+ ion in/on the BiVO4 catalyzed the intrinsic photogeneration of oxygen with the holes. Recently, various cocatalyst have been combined with BiVO4 to enhance the O2 evolution while reducing photocorrosion.Up to the present, the most commonly used cocatalyst to improve water oxidation kinetics of BiVO4 or doped BiVO4 photoanodes was Co–Pi.196–202 Co–Pi have been demonstrated to work effectively as oxygen-evolving electrocatalyst (OEC) at pH 7 buffered with aqueous phosphate in electrolysis.203 When catalyzing water oxidation, Co–Pi undergoes proton-coupled electron transfers along with cyclic valency changes between Co(II/III) and Co(III/IV).204 In photoelectrolysis, it has been demonstrated the primary role of Co–Pi is to inhibit charge recombination by facilitating the hole transfer via the cobalt ion valency cycle.200 For Co–Pi modified W:BiVO4 as an example, Zhong et al. found Co–Pi deposition yields a remarkable ∼440 mV cathodic shift in the onset potential for sustained PEC water oxidation at pH 8.196 The much lower absolute onset potential is promising for solar water splitting in low-cost tandem PEC cells. Moreover, the PEC current of Co–Pi modified W:BiVO4 is about three times higher than that of the parent W:BiVO4 photoanode. Almost completely suppress of surface electron–hole recombination by Co–Pi addition was observed in their studies. They summarized the mechanism of Co–Pi on inhibition of the surface electron–hole recombination, as shown in Fig. 15. For bare W:BiVO4, surface recombination (Jsr) is a major loss pathway which results in poor water oxidation (Jox) and poor PEC photocurrent densities. After Co–Pi modification, almost all of the photogenerated holes that migrate to the W:BiVO4 surfaces can be captured by the Co–Pi electrocatalyst to oxidize water with nearly quantum efficiency. Obviously, Co–Pi deposition provides a facile route by which photogenerated holes can be captured and used in the productive four-electron oxidation of water. Co–Pi modified Mo-doped BiVO4 electrode prepared by Pilli et al. exhibited a similar superior PEC characteristics in terms of onset potential and photocurrent density.197 Furthermore, it was found the Co–Pi/Mo-doped BiVO4 photoelectrode exhibited better stability as compared to bare Mo-doped BiVO4 electrode under photolysis conditions.
 Fig. 15  Energy diagram showing the kinetic processes active in the Co–Pi/W:BiVO4 PEC photoanodes. Electron–hole pairs are generated with a current density associated with photon-absorption (Jabs) and can recombine nonproductively with current densities associated with radiative or nonradiative bulk (Jbr) and surface (Jsr) recombination. Electron collection at the back contact (JPEC) and hole transfer to the oxidizable substrate (Jox) are productive processes contributing to PEC device efficiency (ref. 196 with permission from American Chemistry Society). 
For the same attempt to enhance O2 evolution and reduce photocorrosion, Seabold et al. coupled the BiVO4 photoanode with a different type of cocatalyst, FeOOH which is also a O2 evolution electrocatalyst.195 They found the BiVO4/FeOOH films generated remarkably improved photocurrent for water oxidation, which is comparable to photocurrent generated by bare BiVO4 using sulfite as the hole scavenger, verifying the ability of FeOOH to efficiently collect photogenerated holes from the BiVO4 layer and facilitate water oxidation to O2. The effect of FeOOH on the photostability of BiVO4 was also examined in their study. It was found the photocurrent generated by the bare BiVO4 film decreased significantly within a few minutes because of the anodic photocorrosion. When the FeOOH layer was added to the surface of the BiVO4 electrode, a much enhanced photocurrent density was maintained for 6 h with only 2% of decay. This result demonstrates the exceptional performance of FeOOH for improving photostability as well as photocurrent of BiVO4 in PEC water oxidation. The photocurrent-to-O2 conversion efficiency of the prepared BiVO4/FeOOH photoanode is up to 96%.
Comparing with water splitting, co-catalyst deposition was less focused on contaminant degradation. A typical study was recently reported by Lin et al. on Pt and RuO2 co-loaded BiVO4 (denoted as Pt–RuO2/BiVO4).205 The Pt–RuO2/BiVO4 could oxide thiophene to SO3 in acetonitrile solution under visible light irradiation with molecular oxygen as oxidant. A high photocatalytic activity of thiophene oxidation was achieved by only loading 0.03 wt% of Pt and 0.01 wt% of RuO2 as dual co-catalysts on BiVO4. In Pt–RuO2/BiVO4, Pt acted as a reduction co-catalyst and RuO2 acted as an oxidation co-catalyst. The co-existence of oxidation and reduction co-catalysts is beneficial for the efficient separation and transfer of the photo-excited electrons and holes, resulting in the high photo-catalytic activity of thiophene oxidation. Recently, Cu0 was found as an excellent co-catalyst for Bi2WO6 photocatalyst in our research group.206 The copper reagent not only served as a heterogeneous catalyst to generate hydroxyl radicals by Fenton-like reaction, but also acted as an electron shuttle that facilitated the circulation of the photogenerated carriers to improve the photocatalytic performance.

4. Summary and outlook
Over the past few years, the numerous efforts put on bismuth based complex oxide semiconductors have resulted in a rich database for their synthesis, properties, modifications, and photocatalytic applications. The mostly studied bismuth based complex oxide photocatalysts are BiVO4, Bi2WO6 and Bi2MoO6 up to the present. This review summarized the structures and properties of these bismuth based photocatalysts for use in environmental purification and solar water oxidation, emphasizing the strategies that have been employed to enhance their photocatalytic properties. Although a significant improvement has been made for the development of highly efficient bismuth based complex oxides, there is still considerable problems for further investigated. The poor reduction power of the photogenerated electrons from the low conduction band edge potential resulted in the high recombination rates of photogenerated charge carriers, which is the main defect suppressing the photocatalytic performance of BiVO4, Bi2WO6 and Bi2MoO6. Morphological control has significantly improved its photocatalytic performance by control of the crystallinity, BET surface area, grain size and microstructure et al. It is worth to note decreasing the grain size would significantly decrease the bulk recombination rate of the photogenerated charge carriers. Quantum sized photocatalysts should be paid special attention in the future. However, the current synthesis methods are not sufficient for large-scale production of quantum sized photocatalyst. For this reason, further efforts must be made on the development of robust and reliable strategies for fabricating various quantum sized photocatalysts. Surface control can be used to further improve the photocatalytic performance, considering the photocatalytic reactions proceed at the surface of the photocatalyst and only few of previous investigations were focused on the effect of crystal surface. This provides us with important research opportunities. We believe that the surface defects and configurations of surface atoms, but not limited to, should receive more attention in future studies. Preliminary investigations already show that photo-absorption and charge carrier separation could be improved by doping or construction of composite material. These investigations were mainly studied either experimentally or theoretically. More fundamental studies, combining the experiment, theory and calculation, are needed to help us to understand the photocatalytic principles. These research areas are ripe for growth. We will see an increasing number of new and novel progress of bismuth based complex oxides for application on environmental purification and solar water oxidation.
AcknowledgementsWe acknowledge the financial support from the National Basic Research Program of China (2010CB933503, 2013CB933203), National Natural Science Foundation of China (51102262, 51272269), and the Science Foundation for Youth Scholar of State Key Laboratory of High Performance Ceramics and Superfine Microstructures (Grant no. SKL201204).
ReferencesA. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37 CrossRef CAS .S. U. M. Khan, M. Al-Shahry and W. B. Ingler, Science, 2002, 297, 2243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Zou, J. Ye, K. Sayama and H. Arakawa, Nature, 2001, 414, 625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253 RSC .K. Maeda, K. Teramura, D. Lu, T. Takata, N. Saito, Y. Inoue and K. Domen, Nature, 2006, 440, 295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. J. Bard and M. A. Fox, Acc. Chem. Res., 1995, 28, 141 CrossRef CAS .F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 35 CrossRef CAS .W. Choi, A. Termin and M. R. Hoffmann, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 13669 CrossRef .R. Asahi, T. Morikawa, T. Ohwaki, K. Aoki and Y. Taga, Science, 2001, 293, 269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Sakthivel and H. Kisch, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 4908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. Zhao, W. H. Ma, C. C. Chen, J. C. Zhao and Z. G. Shuai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 4782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. G. Kim, D. W. Hwang and J. S. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 8912 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Sato, N. Saito, H. Nishiyama and Y. Inoue, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 6061 CrossRef CAS .R. Abe, H. Takami, N. Murakami and B. Ohtani, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Hameed, T. Montini, V. Gombac and P. Fornasiero, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Gao, C. Liu, H. E. Jeong and P. Yang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Zhou, H. Yang, C. Wang, X. Mao, Y. Wang, Y. Yang and G. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 17051 CAS .B. Hu, L. H. Wu, S. Liu, H. B. J. Yao, H. Y. Shi, G. P. Li and S. H. Yu, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2277 RSC .Z. G. Zhao, Z. F. Liu and M. Miyauchi, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3321 RSC .A. Kudo, K. Omori and H. Kato, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 11459 CrossRef CAS .M. Wiegel, W. Middel and G. Blasse, J. Mater. Chem., 1995, 5, 981 RSC .W. T. Fu, Phys. C, 1995, 250, 67 CrossRef CAS .M. Oshikiri, M. Boero, J. Ye, Z. Zou and G. Kido, J. Chem. Phys., 2002, 117, 7313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. W. Stoltzfus, P. M. Woodward, R. Seshadri, J. H. Klepeis and B. Bursten, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 3839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Yin, S. Zhu, Z. Chen, W. Zhang, J. Gu and D. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 8367 CAS .J. Yang, D. Wang, X. Zhou and C. Li, Chem.–Eur. J., 2013, 19, 1320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. K. Choi, W. Choi and H. Park, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 6499 RSC .C. Ding, J. Shi, D. Wang, Z. Wang, N. Wang, G. Liu, F. Xiong and C. Li, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 4589 RSC .S. K. Pilli, T. G. Deutsch, T. E. Furtak, L. D. Brown, J. A. Turner and A. M. Herring, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 3273 RSC .H. S. Park, K. C. Leonard and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 12093 CAS .H. W. Jeong, T. H. Jeon, J. S. Jang, W. Choi and H. Park, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 9104 CAS .A. Kudo and S. Hijii, Chem. Lett., 1999, 1103–1104 CrossRef CAS .C. Mao, M. Li, Z. Fang, F. Meng, X. Qu, Y. Liu, M. Wang, J. Zhang, Z. Shi and X. Guo, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 6631 RSC .J. Tian, Y. Sang, G. Yu, H. Jiang, X. Mu and H. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5075–5080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Sun, W. Wang, L. Zhang and J. Xu, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 125, 144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Guo, G. Zhang, J. Liu and Y. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 2963 RSC .J. Bi, J. G. Che, L. Wu and M. H. Liu, Mater. Res. Bull., 2013, 48, 2071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .G. H. Tian, Y. J. Chen, X. Y. Meng, J. Zhou, W. Zhou, K. Pan, C. G. Tian, Z. Y. Ren and H. G. Fu, ChemPlusChem, 2013, 78, 117 CrossRef CAS .Y. S. Xu, Z. J. Zhang and W. D. Zhang, Mater. Res. Bull., 2013, 48, 1420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Hou, W. Luo, Y. Huang, J. C. Yu and X. Hu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 2028 RSC .T. Cao, Y. Li, C. Wang, Z. Zhang, M. Zhang, C. Shao and Y. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6922 RSC .W. Wei, Y. Dai and B. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 5658 CAS .S. Li, J. Zhang, M. G. Kibria, Z. Mi, M. Chaker, D. Ma, R. Nechache and F. Rosei, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 5856 RSC .Z. Li, Y. Shen, C. Yang, Y. Lei, Y. Guan, Y. Lin, D. Liu and C. W. Nan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 823 CAS .Y. Huo, M. Miao, Y. Zhang, J. Zhu and H. Li, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2089 RSC .F. Gao, X. Y. Chen, K. B. Yin, S. Dong, Z. F. Ren, F. Yuan, T. Yu, Z. G. Zou and J. M. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2889 CrossRef CAS .S. Li, Y. H. Lin, B. P. Zhang, Y. Wang and C. W. Nan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 2903 CAS .Y. Zhang, A. M. Schultz, P. A. Salvadora and G. S. Rohrer, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 4168 RSC .Q. Zhang, W. Gong, J. Wang, X. Ning, Z. Wang, X. Zhao, W. Ren and Z. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 25241 CAS .S. Qi, R. Zuo, Y. Wang, H. Wong and L. W. Chan, J. Mater. Sci., 2013, 48, 4143 CrossRef CAS .S. Sun, W. Wang, L. Zhang and M. Shang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 12826 CAS .Q. J. Ruan and W. D. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 4168 CAS .S. Sun, W. Wang, H. Xu, L. Zhou, M. Shang and L. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 17835 CAS .J. Xiong, Z. Jiao, G. Lu, W. Ren, J. Ye and Y. Bi, Chem.–Eur. J., 2013, 19, 9472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Zhang, W. Wang, S. Sun, Y. Sun, E. Gao and J. Xu, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 132–133, 315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Guan, C. Xiao, J. Zhang, S. Fan, R. An, Q. Cheng, J. Xie, M. Zhou, B. Ye and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Sun, W. Wang, L. Zhang, L. Zhou, W. Yin and M. Shang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 2005 CrossRef CAS .L. Zhang, W. Wang, S. Sun, Z. Zhang, J. Xu and J. Ren, Catal. Commun., 2012, 26, 88 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Zhang, H. Wang, Z. Chen, P. K. Wong and J. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 106, 1 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Zhang and Y. Zhu, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 694 CAS .Y. Park, K. J. McDonald and K. S. Choi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2321 RSC .A. R. Lim, S. H. Choh and M. S. Jang, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 1995, 7, 7309 CrossRef CAS .J. D. Bierlein and A. W. Sleight, Solid State Commun., 1975, 16, 69 CrossRef CAS .A. W. Sleight, H.-Y. Chen, A. Ferretti and D. E. Cox, Mater. Res. Bull., 1979, 14, 1571 CrossRef CAS .S. Tokunaga, H. Kato and A. Kudo, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 4624 CrossRef CAS .Y. Yoneda, S. Kohara, H. Takeda and T. Tsurumi, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 51, 09LE06 CrossRef .N. A. McDowell, K. S. Knight and P. Lightfoot, Chem.–Eur. J., 2006, 12, 1493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Zhao, Z. Li and Z. Zou, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 4746 RSC .A. Walsh, Y. Yan, M. N. Huda, M. M. Al-Jassim and S. H. Wei, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 547 CrossRef CAS .K. Lai, W. Wei, Y. Dai, R. Zhang and B. Huang, Rare Met., 2011, 30, 166 CrossRef CAS .H. Fu, C. Pan, W. Yao and Y. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 22432–22439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Oshikiri and M. Boero, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 9188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Xu and M. A. A. Schoonen, Am. Mineral., 2000, 85, 543 CAS .M. Long, W. Cai, J. Cai, B. Zhou, X. Chai and Y. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 20211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .R. G. Pearson, Inorg. Chem., 1988, 27, 734 CrossRef CAS .N. Umezawa, O. Shuxin and J. H. Ye, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 83, 035202 CrossRef .K. Lai, W. Wei, Y. Zhu, M. Guo, Y. Dai and B. Huang, J. Solid State Chem., 2012, 187, 103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Hagfeldt and M. Gratzel, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 49 CrossRef CAS .L. Zhou, W. Wang, S. Liu, L. Zhang, H. Xu and W. Zhu, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2006, 252, 120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Zhang, C. Zhang, Y. Man and Y. Zhu, J. Solid State Chem., 2006, 179, 62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Yu and A. Kudo, Chem. Lett., 2005, 34, 1528 CrossRef CAS .M. Shang, W. Wang, S. Sun, L. Zhou and L. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 10407 CAS .S. Obregón, A. Caballero and G. Colón, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 117–118, 59 CrossRef PubMed .L. Ren, L. Ma, L. Jin, J. B. Wang, M. Qiu and Y. Yu, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 405602 CrossRef PubMed .C. Zhang and Y. Zhu, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 3537 CrossRef CAS .H. Fu, L. Zhang, W. Yao and Y. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2006, 66, 100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Zhao, Y. Xie, X. Zhu, S. Yan and S. Wang, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 1601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Zhou, W. Wang and H. Xu, Cryst. Growth Des., 2008, 8, 728 CAS .W. Yin, W. Wang, M. Shang, L. Zhang and J. Ren, Chem. Lett., 2009, 38, 422 CrossRef CAS .L. Zhou, W. Wang, L. Zhang, H. Xu and W. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 13659 CAS .Y. Sun, C. Wu, R. Long, Y. Cui, S. Zhang and Y. Xie, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4542 RSC .M. Shang, W. Wang, S. Sun, J. Ren, L. Zhou and L. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 20228 CAS .H. Jiang, H. Dai, X. Meng, K. Ji, L. Zhang and J. Deng, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 105, 326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. W. Tang, Z. G. Zou and J. H. Ye, Catal. Lett., 2004, 92, 53 CrossRef CAS .L. Zhang, W. Wang, Z. Chen, L. Zhou, H. Xu and W. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 2526 RSC .Z. Q. Li, X. T. Chen and Z. L. Xue, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 498 RSC .J. Wu, F. Duan, Y. Zheng and Y. Xie, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 12866 CAS .Z. Chen, L. Qian, J. Zhu, Y. Yuan and X. Qian, CrystEngComm, 2010, 12, 2100 RSC .F. Amano, K. Nogami, R. Abe and B. Ohtani, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 9320 CAS .D. Ma, S. Huang, W. Chen, S. Hu, F. Shi and K. Fan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 4369 CAS .D. He, L. Wang, H. Li, T. Yan, D. Wang and T. Xie, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 4053 RSC .L. Xu, X. Yang, Z. Zhai and W. Hou, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 7267 RSC .H. Huang, H. Chen, Y. Xia, X. Tao, Y. Gan, X. Weng and W. Zhang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2012, 370, 132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Liu and J. Yu, J. Solid State Chem., 2008, 181, 1048 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Cui, D. Zeng, T. Tang, J. Liu and C. Xie, J. Hazard. Mater., 2010, 183, 211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .G. Li, D. Zhang, J. C. Yu and M. K. H. Leung, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 44, 4276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .G. Tian, Y. Chen, W. Zhou, K. Pan, Y. Dong, C. Tian and H. Fu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 887 RSC .F. Amano, K. Nogami and B. Ohtani, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 1536 CAS .G. Li, D. Zhang and J. C. Yu, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 3983 CrossRef CAS .L. W. Zhang, Y. J. Wang, H. Y. Cheng, W. Q. Yao and Y. F. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1286 CrossRef CAS .S. Sun, W. Wang and L. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 19244 RSC .S. Sun, W. Wang, L. Zhou and H. Xu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2009, 48, 1735 CrossRef CAS .L. Zhang, D. Chen and X. Jiao, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 2668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Wang, H. Jiang, X. Zong, Q. Xu, Y. Ma, G. Li and C. Li, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 1275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Zhao, Z. Li and Z. Zou, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 874 RSC .G. Xi and J. Ye, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 1893 RSC .A. K. P. Mann, E. M. P. Steinmiller and S. E. Skrabalak, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 7939 RSC .T. Saison, N. Chemin, C. Chanéac, O. Durupthy, V. Ruaux, L. Mariey, F. Maugé, P. Beaunier and J. P. Jolivet, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 5657 CAS .H. Fu, S. Zhang, T. Xu, Y. Zhu and J. Chen, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 2085 CrossRef CAS .S. Liu, K. Yin, W. Ren, B. Cheng and J. Yu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 17759 RSC .W. Luo, Z. Li, T. Yu and Z. Zou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 5076 CAS .W. Yao, H. Iwai and J. Ye, Dalton Trans., 2008, 1426 RSC .W. Luo, Z. Yang, Z. Li, J. Zhang, J. Liu, Z. Zhao, Z. Wang, S. Yan, T. Yu and Z. Zou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4046 CAS .H. Ye, J. Lee, J. S. Jang and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 13322 CAS .H. S. Park, K. E. Kweon, H. Ye, E. Paek, G. S. Hwang and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 17870 CAS .S. P. Berglund, A. J. E. Rettie, S. Hoang and C. B. Mullins, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 7065 RSC .W. Luo, J. Wang, X. Zhao, Z. Zhao, Z. Li and Z. Zou, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 1006 RSC .L. Zhou, M. Yu, J. Yang, Y. Wang and C. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 18812 CAS .L. Zhang, Y. Man and Y. Zhu, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 841 CrossRef CAS .X. C. Song, Y. F. Zheng, R. Ma, Y. Y. Zhang and H. Y. Yin, J. Hazard. Mater., 2011, 192, 186 CAS .H. Yu, Z. Zhu, J. Zhou, J. Wang, J. Li and Y. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 265, 424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Zhang, W. Wang, E. Gao, M. Shang and J. Xu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2011, 196, 255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .R. Shi, G. Huang, J. Lin and Y. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 19633 CAS .M. Shang, W. Z. Wang, L. Zhang and H. L. Xu, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2010, 120, 155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Long, W. Cai and H. Kisch, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 548 CAS .H. Jiang, M. Nagai and K. Kobayashi, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 479, 821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Su, X. X. Zou, G. D. Li, X. Wei, C. Yan, Y. N. Wang, J. Zhao, L. J. Zhou and J. S. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 8064 CAS .N. Wetchakun, S. Chaiwichain, B. Inceesungvorn, K. Pingmuang, S. Phanichphant, A. I. Minett and J. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 3718 CAS .L. Chen, Q. Zhang, R. Huang, S. F. Yin, S. L. Luo and C. T. Au, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 9513 RSC .M. L. Guan, D. K. Ma, S. W. Hu, Y. J. Chen and S. M. Huang, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. K. Ma, M. L. Guan, S. S. Liu, Y. Q. Zhang, C. W. Zhang, Y. X. He and S. M. Huang, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 5581 RSC .W. Zhao, Y. Wang, Y. Yang, J. Tang and Y. Yang, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 115–116, 90 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. Wang, X. Huang, S. Wu, Y. Zhou, L. Wang, H. Shi, Y. Liang and B. Zou, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 134–135, 293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Su, L. Guo, N. Bao and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1928 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. J. Hong, S. Lee, J. S. Jang and J. S. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1781 CAS .P. Chatchai, Y. Murakami, S. Kishioka, A. Y. Nosaka and Y. Nosaka, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 1147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .R. Saito, Y. Miseki and K. Sayama, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 3833 RSC .Y. Liang, T. Tsubota, L. P. A. Mooij and R. van de Krol, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 17594 CAS .M. Shang, W. Wang, L. Zhang, S. Sun, L. Wang and L. Zhou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 14727 CAS .S. Murcia-López, M. C. Hidalgo and J. A. Navío, Appl. Catal., A, 2012, 423–424, 34 CrossRef PubMed .S. M. López, M. C. Hidalgo, J. A. Navío and G. Colón, J. Hazard. Mater., 2011, 185, 1425 CrossRef PubMed .J. Xu, W. Wang, S. Sun and L. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 111–112, 126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Zheng, K. Lv, X. Li, K. Deng, J. Sun, L. Chen, L. Cui and D. Du, Chem. Eng. Technol., 2011, 34, 1630 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhou, F. Krumeich, A. Heel and G. R. Patzke, Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 6043 RSC .G. Colón, S. M. López, M. C. Hidalgo and J. A. Navío, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 4809 RSC .Q. C. Xu, Y. H. Ng, Y. Zhang, J. S. C. Loo, R. Amal and T. T. Y. Tan, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 8641 RSC .Y. Zhang, L. Fei, X. Jiang, C. Pan and Y. Wang, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2011, 94, 4157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Q. C. Xu, D. V. Wellia, Y. H. Ng, R. Amal and T. T. Y. Tan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 7419 CAS .M. S. Gui and W. D. Zhang, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 265601 CrossRef PubMed .M. Ge, Y. Li, L. Liu, Z. Zhou and W. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 5220 CAS .X. Li, R. Huang, Y. Hu, Y. Chen, W. Liu, R. Yuan and Z. Li, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 6245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. S. Gui, W. D. Zhang, Q. X. Su and C. H. Chen, J. Solid State Chem., 2011, 184, 1977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Wang, X. Bai, C. Pan, J. He and Y. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 11568 RSC .L. Ge, C. Han and J. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 108–109, 100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. S. Gui, W. D. Zhang, Y. Q. Chang and Y. X. Yu, Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 197, 283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Q. Xiao, J. Zhang, C. Xiao and X. Tan, Catal. Commun., 2008, 9, 1247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Ge and J. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 105, 289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. L. Min, K. Zhang, Y. C. Chen, Y. G. Zhang and W. Zhao, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2012, 92, 115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. He, L. Wang, D. Xu, J. Zhai, D. Wang and T. Xie, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 3167 CAS .Z. Zhang, W. Wang, L. Wang and S. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 593 CAS .Y. Sun, B. Qu, Q. Liu, S. Gao, Z. Yan, W. Yan, B. Pan, S. Wei and Y. Xie, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 3761 RSC .Y. H. Ng, A. Iwase, A. Kudo and R. Amal, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2607 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhang, J. Yu, H. Wang, M. Sun, Y. Bu, D. Yu and W. Li, J. Nanotechnol., 2011, 2011, 702130 Search PubMed .S. Sun, W. Wang and L. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 9113 CAS .E. Gao, W. Wang, M. Shang and J. Xu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 2887 RSC .Y. L. Min, K. Zhang, Y. C. Chen and Y. G. Zhang, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2012, 86, 98 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Ma, J. Shen, M. Shi, X. Lu, Z. Li, Y. Long, N. Li and M. Ye, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 121–122, 198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .F. Zhou, R. Shi and Y. Zhu, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2011, 340, 77 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. Wang, Y. Ao, C. Wang, J. Hou and J. Qian, Carbon, 2012, 50, 5256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Zhu, T. Xu, H. Fu, J. Zhao and Y. Zhu, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2007, 41, 6234 CrossRef CAS .Y. Li, J. Liu, X. Huang and J. Yu, Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 3420 RSC .Y. Chen, X. Cao, J. Kuang, Z. Chen, J. Chen and B. Lin, Catal. Commun., 2010, 12, 247 CrossRef PubMed .M. Zhang, C. Shao, J. Mu, X. Huang, Z. Zhang, Z. Guo, P. Zhang and Y. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 577 RSC .X. Zhao, H. Liu, Y. Shen and J. Qu, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 106, 63 CAS .D. Tang, H. Zhang, H. Huang, R. Liu, Y. Han, Y. Liu, C. Tong and Z. Kang, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 6285 RSC .S. W. Cao, Z. Yin, J. Barber, F. Y. C. Boey, S. C. J. Loo and C. Xue, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 418 CAS .J. Ren, W. Wang, S. Sun, L. Zhang and J. Chang, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 92, 50 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Wang, G. Xue, Y. Zhen, F. Fu and D. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 4751 RSC .L. Ge, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2008, 282, 62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Ge, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2008, 107, 465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Kohtani, J. Hiro, N. Yamamoto, A. Kudo, K. Tokumura and R. Nakagaki, Catal. Commun., 2005, 6, 185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Kohtani, M. Tomohiro, K. Tokumura and R. Nakagaki, Energy Environ. Sci., 2005, 58, 265 CAS .J. W. Tang, J. R. Durrant and D. R. Klug, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 13885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K. Sayama, A. Nomura, T. Arai, T. Sugita, R. Abe, M. Yanagida, T. Oi, Y. Iwasaki, Y. Abe and H. Sugihara, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 11352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. A. Seabold and K. S. Choi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. K. Zhong, S. Choi and D. R. Gamelin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. K. Pilli, T. E. Furtak, L. D. Brown, T. G. Deutsch, J. A. Turner and A. M. Herring, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 5028 CAS .F. F. Abdi and R. van de Krol, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 9398 CAS .D. Wang, R. Li, J. Zhu, J. Shi, J. Han, X. Zong and C. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 5082 CAS .T. H. Jeon, W. Choi and H. Park, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 21392 RSC .S. K. Pilli, T. G. Deutsch, T. E. Furtak, J. A. Turner, L. D. Brown and A. M. Herring, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 7032 RSC .M. Zhou, J. Bao, W. Bi, Y. Zeng, R. Zhu, M. Tao and Y. Xie, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 1420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. W. Kanan and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2008, 321, 1072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. G. McAlpin, Y. Surendranath, M. Dinca, T. A. Stich, S. A. Stoian, W. H. Casey, D. G. Nocera and R. D. Britt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6882 CrossRef CAS PubMed .F. Lin, D. Wang, Z. Jiang, Y. Ma, J. Li, R. Li and C. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6400 CAS .J. Xu, W. Wang, E. Gao, J. Ren and L. Wang, Catal. Commun., 2011, 12, 834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:
Songmei Sun	Songmei Sun received her BSc degree in Material Science and Engineering in 2005 at Shandong University of Technology and Ph.D. degree in Material Physics and Chemistry in 2010 from Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. She has published more than 50 papers in the area of bismuth based oxide photocatalyst up to the present. She is currently an associate professor in Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Her current research is focused on the rational synthesis and mechanism exploration of bismuth based complex oxides for solar light driven photocatalysis.
Wenzhong Wang	Wenzhong Wang received his Ph.D. degree from University of Science and Technology of China in 1998. He worked as a postdoctoral fellow at Virginia Commonwealth University, Rutgers University and Colorado State University from 1999 to 2003. In 2004, he was supported by “Hundred Talents Program”, CAS. He currently is a full professor in Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research interests include controlled fabrication, novel properties and photocatalytic applications of semiconductor nanostructures, especially with a focus on bismuth based semiconductors for environmental purification and solar light conversion.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic crystal structure of BiVO4, Bi2WO6 and Bi2MoO6 in the polyhedron mode: (a) scheelite BiVO4, (b) Aurivillius orthorhombic Bi2WO6, (c) Aurivillius orthorhombic Bi2MoO6.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic band structure and the calculated redox potentials of BiVO4, Bi2WO6 and Bi2MoO6 at the point of zero charge.	 

	(1)

 	Fig. 3  (a) Representative TEM image of dendrite BiVO4 from ref. 87. (b) Representative TEM and SEM image of flower-like BiVO4 from ref. 90. (c) Representative SEM image of olive-like BiVO4 from ref. 91. Reprinted with permission. Copyright 2008, 2007 and 2009, Wiley-VCH, American Chemical Society and Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  Typical SEM images of flower-like Bi2WO6 hierarchical structures from ref. 95. Reprinted with permission. Copyright 2007, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) TEM image of ordered mesoporous BiVO4 using KIT-6 as a template from ref. 109. (b) SEM image of ordered macroporous Bi2WO6 film synthesized with 340 nm carbon spheres from ref. 110. (c) TEM image of three-dimensional ordered macroporous Bi2WO6 powder synthesized with 90 nm SiO2 spheres from ref. 111. Reprinted with permission. Copyright 2008, 2009 and 2012, American Chemical Society, Wiley-VCH and Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) TEM image of {010} oriented BiVO4 nanoplates from ref. 112. (b) TEM image of {010} oriented BiVO4 nanosheets from ref. 113. (c) Schematic illustration of monoclinic BiVO4 crystal structure viewed along different directions (1 × 1 × 1 cell) to show the structural feature of the (101), (100), (001) and (010) facets from ref. 112. Reprinted with permission. Copyright 2009 and 2006, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  UV-visible spectral changes of RhB (2 × 10−5 M, 50 mL) over Bi2WO6 and fluorinated Bi2WO6 photocatalyst from ref. 119. Reprinted with permission. Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Possible sketch of the transfer of photogenerated electrons in Mo-doped BiVO4 electrodes illuminated from the front side and the back side before and after the electrochemical pretreatment (reproduced from ref. 121 with permission from American Chemistry Society).	 

 	Fig. 9  Mott–Schottky plots for pure BiVO4 and Mo-doped BiVO4 in 0.5 M Na2SO4, the ac amplitude is 10 mV and the frequency is 1000 Hz (reproduced from ref. 123 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 10  The total and partial DOS of relaxed Bi2WO6: (a) with one O vacancy, (b) with one N atom, (c) with two N atoms. The navy dashed line represents the Fermi level from ref. 77. Reprinted with permission. Copyright 2012, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Transient photovoltage (TPV) responses of bare BiVO4, bare V2O5, and 5.3 wt% V2O5–BiVO4, (b) schematic diagram for electron–hole separation at the interface of the V2O5–BiVO4 material from ref. 137. Reprinted with permission. Copyright 2011, American Chemistry Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) The schematic diagram illustrates the recombination at the defect state present at the FTO/BiVO4 interface and the hole mirror effect of the SnO2 layer, (b) comparison of the IPCE spectra of BiVO4 on FTO with and without an ∼10 nm SnO2 interfacial layer (reproduced from ref. 148 with permission from American Chemistry Society).	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) TEM image of the RGO–Bi2WO6 QDs, (b) the schematic illustration of charge carrier transfer in RGO–Bi2WO6 QDs (reproduced from ref. 174 with permission from American Chemistry Society).	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic illustration of the detailed energy alignment in the Au–BiVO4 heterogeneous structure and the proposed mechanism of photocatalytic water oxidation by Au–BiVO4 nanosheets in the presence of sacrificial agent S2O82−. The Fermi level (Ef) of Au shifts to more negative potentials (E*f) because of the transfer of photogenerated electrons from BiVO4 to Au. The SPR excitation of the gold nanoparticle is believed to enhance electron–hole separation near the Au–BiVO4 heterojunction (ref. 186 with permission from American Chemistry Society).	 

 	Fig. 15  Energy diagram showing the kinetic processes active in the Co–Pi/W:BiVO4 PEC photoanodes. Electron–hole pairs are generated with a current density associated with photon-absorption (Jabs) and can recombine nonproductively with current densities associated with radiative or nonradiative bulk (Jbr) and surface (Jsr) recombination. Electron collection at the back contact (JPEC) and hole transfer to the oxidizable substrate (Jox) are productive processes contributing to PEC device efficiency (ref. 196 with permission from American Chemistry Society).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
