Recent advances in the use of carbon nanotubes as smart biomaterials  - Journal of Materials Chemistry B (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TB02419G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TB02419G
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. B, 2019, 7, 1343-1360Recent advances in the use of carbon nanotubes as smart biomaterials

        
          
            Beatriz Rossi Canuto de 
            Menezes
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Karla Faquine 
            Rodrigues
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Beatriz Carvalho da Silva 
            Fonseca
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Renata Guimarães 
            Ribas
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Thaís Larissa do Amaral 
            Montanheiro
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Gilmar Patrocínio 
            Thim
          
        
      
Divisão de Ciências Fundamentais, Instituto Tecnológico de Aeronáutica (ITA), Praça Marechal Eduardo Gomes, 50, Vila das Acácias, São José dos Campos, SP 12228970, Brazil. E-mail: beatriz1menezes@gmail.com
Received 
      12th September 2018
    , Accepted 23rd January 2019First published on 23rd January 2019AbstractCarbon nanotubes (CNTs) have remarkable mechanical, thermal, electronic, and biological properties due to their particular atomic structure made of graphene sheets that are rolled into cylindrical tubes. Due to their outstanding properties, CNTs have been used in several technological fields. Currently, the most prominent research area of CNTs focuses on biomedical applications, using these materials to produce hybrid biosensors, drug delivery systems, and high performance composites for implants. Although a great number of research studies have already shown the advantages of CNT-based biomedical devices, their clinical use for in vivo application has not been consummated. Concerns related to their toxicity, biosafety, and biodegradation still remain. The effect of CNTs on the human body and the ecosystem is not well established, especially due to the lack of standardization of toxicological tests, which generate contradictions in the results. CNTs’ toxicity must be clarified to enable the medical use of these exceptional materials in the near future. In this review, we summarize recent advances in developing biosensors, drug delivery systems, and implants using CNTs as smart biomaterials to identify pathogens, load/deliver drugs and enhance the mechanical and antimicrobial performance of implants.
Introduction
Over the years, humans have been confronting numerous infectious, chronic and genetic diseases, which have been hindering their life expectancy and well-being. Despite the great advance in knowledge in the field of biomedicine since the nineteenth century, there are still many health problems that need to be studied in depth.1 The reckless and stressful lifestyle adopted by many people is one of the main factors responsible for the great number of diseases that appear yearly, like different types of cancer, diabetes, and heart disorder.2 Furthermore, climate changes due to the global greenhouse effect and deforestation expand the incidence of infectious diseases, especially those caused by parasites and mosquito vectors like dengue, chikungunya, Zika, influenza, and ebola, among others.3 Also, every year, there are increased numbers of patients requiring the use of prosthesis due to bone diseases, traffic accidents, birth defects, amputation of limbs, and even teeth loss.4 Thus, the development of new technological smart materials for biomedical applications has become increasingly necessary. The search for innovative materials that can identify pathogens, load/deliver drugs, and enhance the mechanical and antimicrobial performance of implants is crucial for the diagnosis, prevention and treatment of diseases.
Nanotechnology is a promising area for materials science capable of providing high-technology materials to overcome the existing limitations in biomedicine. The use of nanoscale-structured materials along with biotechnology and genetic engineering to diagnose, treat and prevent diseases and traumatic injuries improves human health and relieves pain.5 Of all the nanomaterials known, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have great importance due to their unique biological and physical properties, being well studied over the past few years. These properties make CNTs suitable for application as biological devices, such as drug delivery systems, biosensors, and fillers for implants. The emerging use of CNTs in medical devices has many advantages compared to the traditional methods used today.6 Their small size, large surface area, chemical stability, functionalizability, and polyaromatic structure make CNTs able to interact with different molecules, ensuring their application as drug delivery systems and biosensors. Besides, CNTs’ remarkable mechanical and biological properties make them ideal for use as fillers in dental and orthopaedic implant fabrication.7 Accordingly, we give an overview of the recent advances and current status of CNTs’ application as smart biomaterials in medical components, focusing on their use for drug delivery, implants and as biosensors.
Carbon nanotubes
Structure and properties
CNTs are engineering nanomaterials with increasing production and high importance in nanotechnology fields.8 Their unique electrical, optical, mechanical and biological properties expand their range of applications in different technological areas.9 Although they have been discovered and studied for more than 40 years, CNTs were popularized with the publication of Iijima in 1991.10,11 Since then, significant attention has been paid to CNTs, and the number of research studies with these materials has increased significantly.
CNTs are allotropes of carbon made of graphene sheets that are rolled into cylindrical tubes which can be capped or open-ended. Depending on the number of walls, they can be divided into two groups: single-walled CNTs (SWCNTs) and multi-walled CNTs (MWCNTs) (Fig. 1). SWCNTs are formed by only one graphene cylinder, with a diameter between 0.4 and 2 nm. MWCNTs consist of two or more concentric tubes of graphene, with an outer diameter ranging from 2 to 100 nm. For both SWCNTs and MWCNTs, the length can reach the micrometric scale.12
 Fig. 1  Diagrams of (a) single-walled CNTs (SWCNTs) and (b) multi-walled CNTs (MWCNTs).12 
A CNT network is composed of a hexagonal display of sp2 hybridized carbons.13 There are three varieties of tubule structures depending on the rolling up direction of the graphene sheet: armchair, zigzag, and chiral (Fig. 2). The difference in orientation defines whether the CNTs have electrical properties that are similar to metals (armchair) or semiconductors (zigzag and chiral).12
 Fig. 2  CNT configurations: (a) zigzag, (b) armchair, and (c) chiral.18 
CNTs’ unique structure ensures exceptional mechanical, electrical, thermal and biological properties. Defect-free SWCNTs can have Young's modulus values of approximately 1 TPa and tensile strengths higher than 100 GPa.7 This strength is 10 to 100 times higher than the strongest steel and over 10 times higher than any industrial fiber.14,15 MWCNTs with metallic character (armchair) can carry currents of up to 109 A cm−2 without destroying the nanotube.16 A thermal conductivity of 3500 W m−1 K−1 has been measured for individual SWCNTs at room temperature, exceeding the thermal conductivity of diamond.14,17
Due to their small size and high aspect ratio, CNTs present a large surface area. In addition, CNTs have excellent chemical stability and a rich electronic polyaromatic structure. These properties make them able to adsorb or conjugate with different molecules. Currently, most of the studies are focused mostly on therapeutic molecules, such as drugs, proteins, antibodies, DNA, enzymes, etc.12
Owing to their remarkable properties, CNTs have different engineering applications in structural, electronic and biological fields. Most of the produced CNTs are used in bulk composites as structural reinforcement, due to their superior mechanical properties. Structural composites with CNTs are especially used in automotive and aerospace engineering. Also, CNTs are used to produce coatings for marine current turbines to improve resistance against biofouling, considering the hydrophobic nature of the CNTs.19
Due to their conducting or semiconducting character, CNTs have been extensively used in nanoelectronic devices, electrochemical energy storage, insulators, etc.20 CNTs are already being used as heat sinks for chipboards, LCD screen backlights, electrical protection in Faraday cages, scanning probe microscope, sensing devices and fuel cells.19,21 Most of the works with CNTs in electronic fields are focused on the development of solar cells. CNTs are used to replace ITO (indium tin oxide) in solar cells due to their light weight, durability, resistance, and conductivity.22
Currently, a significant number of researchers are studying the application of CNTs in the biomedical field. Their chemical compatibility with biomolecules and nanometric size allow the use of CNTs as biosensors, for delivery of drugs, as growth substrates, and as composites used as implants and scaffolds.14,23 The literature is replete with works and information about the use of CNTs in biotechnological applications, which will be presented as follows.
Functionalization
Although CNTs have remarkable properties, some characteristics limit their applications. The high surface area of CNTs enhances the van der Waals interactions, resulting in agglomeration. In addition, CNTs are chemically inert, making their processability, solubilization, and degradation difficult. Chemical functionalizations have been shown to improve CNTs’ solubility in different solvents, reduce agglomeration and modify their electronic properties.23
The main approaches for CNTs’ functionalization can be divided into two main groups: (i) covalent attachment of chemical groups, by reactions on the tube ends or sidewalls, and (ii) non-covalent adsorption or wrapping of several functional molecules onto the tubes.24 Appropriate chemical modifications provide CNTs with desirable characteristics that define their posterior applications.25
Covalent reactions at the partial carbon–carbon double bonds of CNTs generate sp3-hybridized carbon sites, changing their geometry from trigonal-planar to tetrahedral. The sites with more propitious chemical reactivity are the caps due to their pronounced curvature that leads to higher pyramidalization of sp2-hybridized carbon atoms.26,27 CNTs’ functionalization requires very reactive agents and can be performed with different chemical groups, such as carboxylic, alkyl, amide, and phenyl.9
Treatment with strong oxidizing agents, such as nitric (HNO3) and sulfuric acid (H2SO4) is the most common covalent functionalization method, which is used to create carboxylic acid groups (COOH). These groups are extremely reactive, allowing further chemical reactions with a wide variety of other functional organic compounds. Long-chain hydrocarbons have been covalently reacted with COOH to improve the solubilization of CNTs in nonpolar solvents.23,28,29
Although covalent functionalization allows the attachment of several active chemical groups, this method has some drawbacks: a large number of defects are created on the CNTs’ sidewalls during the covalent reaction, leading in some extreme cases to the fragmentation of the nanotubes into smaller parts. Non-covalent functionalization is an alternative way to obtain modified CNTs with improved interfacial properties.30 In this method, CNTs are modified via van der Waals forces, π–π stacking or charge transfer interactions, through adsorption and wrapping of biomolecules, polymers, surfactants, and other chemical compounds. This type of functionalization does not destroy the CNTs’ sidewalls, maintaining their structure and properties.24,31
In biological applications, CNTs’ solubility in water is necessary to allow adequate adsorption, distribution, and posterior elimination. Functionalization with appropriate chemical groups can improve their aqueous solubility, and also increase their biocompatibility. Covalent and non-covalent reactions with several biomolecules have been used, depending on the biotechnological applications.32 One example of CNTs’ non-covalent functionalization is the use of polydopamine, a mussel-inspired surface treatment. This type of modification is able to reduce CNTs’ agglomeration, improve their dispersion in water and enhance their biosafety.33–36 For covalent modifications, usually, amine-terminated biomolecules can be attached to CNTs through amidation reactions with COOH. Also, carbodiimide reactions provide covalent linking of CNTs with proteins and DNA.23Fig. 3 shows different procedures used for the covalent functionalization of CNTs with biomolecules.
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of procedures for covalent functionalization of CNTs with biomolecules.23,24,26,30,37 
Biosafety
The use of nanomaterials as CNTs in nanomedicine and nanotechnology is very promising, raising high hopes for more refined and efficient treatments. However, numerous uncertainties about the short and long-term effects of nanomaterials on the human body make it difficult for these products to reach patients and the market.38 The first major concern is the exposure of workers and consumers to CNTs during their production, transportation, handling, and disposal.39 Some toxicological studies have already been performed, showing that inhalation or aspiration of CNTs may cause pulmonary fibrosis. Also, residual metals used as catalysts, such as nickel, can generate occupational asthma and contact dermatitis.8 These effects likely result from CNTs’ intrinsic properties and small size, which allow them to reach regions that larger particles cannot reach.39 Although there is a risk, exposure to airborne contamination is generally much lower when compared to the quantities used for toxicological tests. Therefore, determining safe exposure limits is crucial to ensure the safety of workers and consumers.23
The fibrous shape, contaminants from synthesis and diameter make CNTs more damaging to the cell than other carbon allotropes. CNTs might generate inflammation, granuloma formation, oxidative stress, apoptosis, changes in cell morphology, and mitochondrial dysfunction, among other dysfunctions.40 The biocompatibility or toxicity of CNTs is not yet clearly defined. There are still many contradictions between research studies due to several factors. First, CNTs are a highly heterogeneous type of nanomaterial, differing in size, length, purity, number of walls and surface properties. Also, toxicity tests have not been adapted to nanosized materials, not considering that CNTs often aggregate and sediment.41
Many works have been done on functionalization of CNTs with biomolecules as an alternative to reduce their toxicity and improve their biocompatibility with the human body.42 Organic antioxidant materials like tannic acid can control CNTs’ cytotoxicity by reducing their oxidant stress, one of the principal mechanisms for CNTs’ toxicity.43 Synthetic and natural polymers, including mussel-inspired polymers such as polydopamine, have also been used to reduce CNTs’ toxicity and improve their compatibility with water and physiological environments.36,44,45 Introducing a bio-active polymeric coating in CNTs can reduce their toxicity by preventing the release of toxic ions and inflammatory reactions.46 Also, this type of modification can further react with other biomolecules, producing a multifunctional surface suitable for specific biomedical applications.33,47 Another way to improve the biocompatibility of CNTs is attaching them to templates (e.g. silica). This way, CNTs will behave more like particulate materials without interacting with the cellular cytoskeleton and will not act like nanometric materials.41
Another significant problem regarding the use of CNTs is their disposal after use. Their inert character and chemical stability make them difficult to degrade, bringing risk to living organisms and the ecosystem. Thus, various researchers have been studying microorganisms and enzymes capable of degrading CNTs.48 Chouhan et al. (2016) used some bacteria identified as Trabusiella guamensis to interact with MWCNTs and studied their structural biotransformation. The results showed that the bacteria were able to biodegrade CNTs by oxidation reactions.49 Chandrasekaran, Choi, Lee, Kim, and Shin (2014) compared three ligninolytic enzymes (lignin peroxidase, manganese peroxidase, and laccase) to transform SWCNTs and oxidized (carboxylated) SWCNTs. The authors observed that only manganese peroxidase was capable of degrading SWCNTs, and no other enzymes transformed the oxidized SWCNTs.50
Many other researchers have studied the degradation of CNTs.50–52 Most of them showed that it is possible to degrade CNTs with derivatives of bacteria, fungi, and enzymes from plants, animals, and microorganisms. However, some problems and obstacles that still remain are important to consider. So, further studies should be carried out to understand CNTs’ toxicological effect on the human body and the environment. Therefore, the biotechnological applications of these remarkable materials will be extended.
CNTs as biosensors
Biosensors are used to detect, transmit and record information related to biological or physiological changes. The interaction between a biological component and an electronic transducer results in the conversion of a biochemical signal into an electrical response. The biologically active material will determine the function of the biosensor. Enzymes, antibodies, DNA, microorganisms, animals, and plant tissues have been widely used as biological sensor elements.53
Some factors are essential to have an effective biosensor, such as sensitivity, reliability, portability, real-time analysis and simplicity of operation. Biosensors differ from standard chemical sensors due to the sensor element, which is biological, and their application, since they are applied to monitor biological processes or to recognize biomolecules. Two types of biosensors are generally studied: (I) in vitro, in which a solution with samples, such as blood serum, urine, and food products, is deposited in the device, and the exit signals relate to the analyte; and (II) in vivo, that is often used to measure the concentration of some analytes in living organisms.54
CNTs have some interesting properties that make them attractive for producing biosensors. They present high biological activity, rapid electron transfer to a wide range of electroactive species and can be easily functionalized, increasing their solubility and biocompatibility. Thus, the interaction of CNTs with biomolecules can result in different hybrid systems that can act as nanoscale electrodes, electronic elements, or platforms upon which biomolecules can be attached.54Fig. 4 shows a confection process scheme of a biosensor based on CNTs. Functionalizing agents can be attached to CNTs’ walls, improving the interaction between the nanotubes and detection target, which may be a substance, a virus or a cancer cell. Usually, this detection occurs by electrochemical assays.
 Fig. 4  Confection process of a biosensor based on CNTs: attachment of functional molecules, production of the biosensor, and posterior application. 
CNT-based biosensors for detection of substances in the human body
A wide range of studies have used different types of biosensors for the detection of various substances: drugs (acetaminophen), neurotransmitters (dopamine), hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), glucose, and urea, among others. The modification of material constituents of each biosensor and the functionalization of CNTs have been realized to improve the properties and response of the devices.
Conductive polymers are extensively used in bioanalytical studies, because of their ability to carry charge, biocompatibility, and sensitivity to very small perturbations. The implementation of CNTs in electrodes formed by conductive polymers allows their interaction with aromatic compounds through electronic and hydrophobic π–π interactions. Microorganisms consisting of several enzymes are also used in biosensors made of conductive polymers. Enzymes can be easily manipulated and adapted to be employed in different substrates with specific culture conditions. However, a very close distance between the transducer and microbial cells is necessary to obtain effective biochemical signals. This can be achieved by immobilizing cells on the transducer surface.55
Paracetamol is an analgesic and antipyretic widely used for the treatment of pain. Due to its constant use, it is necessary to understand its mechanism of toxicity. The sensing of paracetamol can be performed by different techniques such as electro-spectrophotometry and liquid chromatography methods. The electrochemical method has characteristics that make it more advantageous than the others, such as low cost, fast response, simple instrumentation, high sensitivity and low power required. For these reasons, electrochemical methods are widely used for the study of electroactive compounds.55 For the sensitive determination of paracetamol, Bayram and Akyilmaz (2016) developed a stable electrochemical microbial biosensor based on Bacillus species. The biosensor consisted of a gold electrode and it was modified by MWCNTs, polyaniline (PANI) and a glutaraldehyde crosslinking agent. The authors used the amperometric technique (0.5 V) to detect paracetamol in drug samples. They demonstrated that the microbial system formed is a quick and simple analytical method used for the determination of paracetamol. The sensitivity of the gold electrode was increased and the Bacillus microorganism presented a considerable economic advantage. In addition, the interactions between MWCNTs and PANI provided good stability and conductivity for biosensor responses.55
Dopamine is an important neurotransmitter responsible for transmitting cognitive, motor and behavioural functions. Neurological diseases, such as Parkinson's, are characterized by the disorder of this neurotransmitter. The detection of dopamine under physiological conditions is a challenge due to its low concentration when compared to the concentrations of ascorbic (AA) and uric acids (AU).56 The modification of conventional electrodes (gold, platinum or glassy carbon) with CNTs is an alternative to improve the selectivity of biosensors. Palomäki et al. (2018) used tetrahedral amorphous carbon (ta-C) films for the detection of dopamine in the presence of AA and AU at physiological concentrations. To compare electroanalytical performance and biocompatibility, MWCNTs were cultured by CVD directly on top of ta-C. According to the authors, the direct growth of MWCNTs on the surface of ta-C helps ensure high repeatability of the manufacturing process and adequate mechanical integrity without serious concerns about the release of CNTs in vivo. In addition, mouse neuronal stem cells were grown on ta-C and ta-C + MWCNT films to assess their biocompatibility for use as in vivo sensors. They concluded that the modification of ta-C films with MWCNTs did not improve detection limits but conferred the necessary selectivity to simultaneously detect dopamine and its main interferents, AA and AU, at physiologically relevant concentrations. The cell culture of mouse neuronal stem cells in ta-C and ta-C + MWCNTs indicated that the materials have good biocompatibility. Based on their electroanalytical performance and good biocompatibility, ta-C and ta-C + MWCNTs are attractive materials for electroanalytical applications with the potential to be used as in vivo sensors.56
Diabetes has been one of the major causes of death and disability in the world, as the abnormality of glucose in the blood causes disorders, such as blindness. Continuous blood glucose testing is crucial for the diagnosis and treatment of diabetic patients. One of the main research areas of biosensors is the development of glucose sensing using glucose oxidase (GOD). Most biosensors of this type, especially those applied in vivo, are based on the oxidation of H2O2 that is formed in the enzyme-catalysed oxidation of glucose by dissolved oxygen.57 The length/diameter ratio of CNTs which provides a high surface/volume ratio and their ability to promote rapid electron transfer to a wide range of electroactive species make them interesting for electrocatalytic and sensory applications. In their previous studies, X. Chen et al. (2018) demonstrated that boron doped with CNTs (BCNTs) is a good candidate for the electrochemical activity of GOD. In another paper, X. Chen et al. employed BCNTs for the production of an amperometric enzymatic sensor. GOD was selected as the enzyme model. A poly(o-aminophenol) film (POAP), as a typical non-conducting film and effective barrier to protect the electrode from fouling in H2O2, glucose, and AU biosensors, was employed in this study to immobilize GOD. Thus, in this study, the performance of the glucose biosensor based on the glassy carbon (GC) electrode was investigated in detail and it presented high sensitivity, low detection limit, short response time and good stability. They concluded that BCNTs have potential application in the construction of enzyme-based amperometric biosensors.57
The selective catalytic activity of enzymes by certain analytes along with their commercial availability makes them attractive for the fabrication of biosensors. The greatest challenge for the manufacture of these devices is to stabilize the enzymes on the surfaces of the transducers since the contamination of the enzymes leads to a poor analytical performance. The production of enzymatic biosensors involves different methods of immobilization.58 H2O2 is widely used for cell signalling, pathogen elimination, disinfection, control of odors and bleaching. The monitoring of H2O2 concentration is used to measure the progress of enzymatic reactions. The development of H2O2 sensors can be performed using biomolecules and complex transition metals such as myoglobin, haemoglobin, and Prussian blue. Hemoglobin (HB) is a stable and economical protein molecule capable of interacting with oxygen, carbon dioxide and H2O2 in the biocatalyst. PANI/polysaccharide composite systems have become promising for various applications, and starch, an abundant natural polysaccharide, has been used for the manufacture of biocompatible materials. In their previous studies, Gautam et al. (2018) studied the morphological, spectroscopic, thermal and electrochemical characteristics of binary and ternary starch-based composite materials. The authors developed composite materials for the production of electrochemical H2O2 sensors and used HB as a biocatalyst. Monitoring H2O2 can be used as a tool for the detection of some analytes, since it is generated during many enzymatic reactions. The work consisted of GOD together with PANI, CNTs, starch and hemoglobin (PCS + HB) as a model system for detecting glucose. The starch maintains the positive charge of the PANI chains and improves compatibility for a biocatalyst. However, it hinders the transfer of intergranular charge. MWCNTs act as a conductive nanowire, improving the transfer of charge between the grains. In addition, the surface area of the composite was increased. In the proposed system, these three different materials – PANI, MWCNTs and starch (PCS) – play a role during the electrochemical sensing of H2O2. HB and PCS were compatible and this combination promoted the reduction of H2O2. PCS facilitated the transfer of charge, which was confirmed by increasing the cathode current during the successive addition of analytes in the assays. The produced biosensor had good operational stability, storage, and H2O2 response. Glucose was successfully detected by the use of GOD with PCS and a carbon paste electrode modified with HB.58
Urea is a non-toxic organic end product that allows the elimination of nitrogen from the human body. Its normal blood level is 3.3–6.7 mM, and above 30 mM can cause the destruction of the gastrointestinal tract. Instead, the decrease in blood urea level can be related to impaired renal function or may be due to alcohol abuse. The evaluation of urea can be performed with different techniques (chromatographic, calorimetric, spectrophotometric, fluorimetry and electrochemical techniques). However, electrochemical techniques, specifically amperometric, have some advantages over the others: low manufacturing cost, short operating time, analyte detection with high selectivity and sensitivity.59 The work proposed by Dervisevic et al. (2018) reported a novel amperometric urea biosensor based on immobilization of urease enzyme onto self-assembled polyamidoamine grafted MWCNTs (MWCNTs-PAMAM) dendrimers (from G1, first generation up to G5) on an Au electrode. The application of urease enzymes coupled to MWCNTs-PAMAM was used for the determination of urea in human blood plasma samples. The analytical performance of the G5 electrode was evaluated in terms of optimized pH, temperature, and operating potential, reuse and storage characteristics. The authors concluded that the G5 of MWCNTs-PAMAM showed a significant improvement in biosensor performance when compared to the other generations of PAMAM, related to greater efficiency of enzyme immobilization. In addition, the produced urea biosensor showed a short response time, high sensitivity, low detection limit, stability and reproducibility. This biosensor could be successfully applied in the quantification of urea in blood samples.59
CNT-based biosensors for detection of virus
Viruses are infectious non-cellular agents existing in nature. These microbes must enter a living host cell in order to replicate. Therefore, all viruses are intracellular parasites. Viruses are one of the main causes of disease in humans and animals. Thus, the search for alternatives that facilitate the detection of viruses more quickly and efficiently is extremely important. In this sense, CNTs have been increasingly used for these purposes, mainly due to their high surface area and excellent electrical properties.60
In the past few years, several studies have focused on viruses’ detection, for example, in dengue detection.61–64 Dengue is a disease caused by a virus that is primarily transmitted by mosquito vectors, Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus, and its major incidence is in tropical and subtropical regions. Wasik et al. (2017) have studied SWCNTs functionalized with heparin in order to create a novel electronic antibody-free chemiresistive biosensor. Heparin is a close structural homolog of heparin sulphate and is a receptor for the four serotypes of dengue virus during infection of cells. The authors functionalized SWCNTs by non-covalent modification with 1-pyrenemethylamine. Posteriorly, the biosensor was prepared with ethyl-3-dimethyl aminopropyl carbodiimide, N-hydroxy succinimide and heparin in a 2-morpholinoethane sulfonic acid buffer. Fabrication of the biosensor was monitored with resistance measurements using linear sweep voltammetry with an electrochemical analyser. The main result obtained was the successful application of a SWCNT-based chemiresistor functionalized with heparin for sensitive detection of dengue virus. The electrical resistance increased during each step of functionalization and upon the binding of dengue virus to the heparin receptor. In this way an interaction between the biosensor and the dengue virus has been demonstrated, proving the efficiency of the proposed study.61
CNTs have also been used for the detection of influenza A. Tran et al. (2017) have proposed the use of a CNT field effect transistor (CNTFET). In this case, CNTs were functionalized with HNO3. Then, the DNA of the influenza virus sequence was immobilized on the CNT network by means of physisorption. The assays were performed by immersing the DNA sensor in a solution of the target DNA dissolved in PBS. The CNTFET-based DNA sensor was modified as a consequence of the change in the concentration of aqueous ions at the interface (CNTFET/DNA), due to the hybridization of the individual DNA strands of the sensor with the target DNA. Some factors were evaluated during the study, such as how DNA–DNA hybridization varies the current of the CNTFETs, the probe concentration, immobilization time, thermal impact, reproducibility, response time, and limit and range of detection. In relation to the analysed factors, the main results achieved were that the DNA sensor showed a fast response time, with high reproducibility. It also had a broad linear detection range from 1 pM to 10 nM.62
In another study, Fu et al. (2017) developed a chemiresistor-type biosensor for highly efficient and fast detection of avian influenza virus (AIV) subtype H5N1 DNA sequences. Two types of CNTs were applied as alternative active sensing elements in the biosensor: SWCNTs (sc-SWCNTs) and nitrogen-doped MWCNTs (N-MWCNTs). The researchers synthesized both CNT types by CVD. MWCNTs were vertically aligned and then they were doped with acetonitrile/ethanol mixtures, which were used as the C/N source. In the other case, SWCNTs with no horizontal alignment were achieved. So, in these samples sc-SWCNTs of 5 to 20 μm length were obtained by CVD-based epitaxial elongation of short fragments of selected sc-SWCNTs on quartz substrates. After the synthesis of CNTs, they formed arrays on the target substrates. Then, the chemiresistor-type sensors were fabricated using a standard microfabrication procedure. After these steps, DNA probe oligonucleotides were non-covalently immobilized on the CNTs’ sidewalls. CNT-based sensing devices were characterized with a probe station under dry conditions by recording the direct current–voltage (I–V) characteristics from −2.0 to +2.0 V. The results obtained showed that the sc-SWCNT-based sensor exhibited higher sensitivity and had the best performance. Generally, CNT-based DNA sensors have good properties, such as small size, flexibility, ease of use, and high sensitivity, making them promising in clinical diagnostics as well as for portable applications.63
CNT-based biosensors for detection of cancer
Cancer is the term designated to a group of pathologies with etiologies, clinical manifestations and patterns of diverse occurrences, in which spatiotemporal changes are unleashed in the genetic and metabolic composition of a cell. Thus, malignant and abnormal cell growth occurs.65 Cancer prevents the action of the host's defense mechanisms, leading to the destruction of the immune system.66 This disease is responsible for countless deaths around the world. In this way, the search for alternatives that soften the impact of this evil has been intense in recent years. In this sense, CNTs have become very important to scientists in the development of biosensors for fast and efficient detection of different types of cancers, as well as for their treatment.67–72
Zanganeh et al. (2016), in their study, proposed an electrical biosensor based on amine-functionalized, vertically aligned CNTs conjugated to folic acid (FA-VACNTs) molecules for detection of cancer cells. The biosensor was produced through the synthesis of CNTs by direct-current plasma enhanced CVD. Then the CNTs were amine functionalized using a double barrier discharge plasma system, forming NH2-VACNTs. After these steps, NH2-VACNTs were suspended in the reaction mixture of FA, 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl) carbodiimide and N-hydroxysuccinimide in a phosphate buffer solution, resulting in FA-VACNTs. For the best evaluation of the proposed biosensor, VACNT samples were also tested. MRC-5 and QUDB cell lines were isolated from the human lung, which are normal and carcinoma tumours, respectively. Then, the cells were detached from the culture flask and flown on the surface of VACNT and FA-VACNT arrays with similar concentrations using a microfluidic pump and the biosensors were tested. The fraction of cancer cells’ entrapment on FA-VACNT arrays was increased in comparison with VACNTs. And, the electrical response of the sensors covered with FA-VACNT electrodes was better. The authors concluded that this device could be used in diagnostic and time monitoring applications in the field of cancer.67
In another study, Zhang et al. (2018) developed a new type of flexible nanohybrid microelectrode based on carbon fiber wrapped with gold nanoparticles and nitrogen-doped CNT arrays. The objective was practical in situ application for electrochemical detection of cancer biomarker H2O2 secreted from live cancer cells. The material proposed was developed from directly synthesized nitrogen-doped CNTs on carbon fiber by a template-based procedure using zinc oxide (ZnO) nanorod arrays (NRAs). ZnO-NRAs were grown on carbon fiber through hydrothermal synthesis and used as a template to construct a hollow structure of nitrogen-doped carbon, with dopamine as the carbon and nitrogen source. The cells used in the study were MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 from breast cancer cell lines. Based on the results presented, the authors concluded that the nanohybrid microelectrode efficiently integrated the structural mechanics and electrochemical properties of different components, and therefore demonstrated good detection performance for H2O2. Also, the biosensor has a wide linear range, high sensitivity and selectivity, exceptional mechanical stability and good biocompatibility. Thus, it can be used for in situ real-time tracking of H2O2 secreted by breast cancer cells, and for evaluating the sensitivity of different cancer cells to chemotherapy or radiotherapy treatments.68
Mansouri Majd and Salimi (2018) developed a novel flexible and ultrasensitive aptasensor based on carboxylated MWCNTs with a reduced graphene oxide-based field effect transistor (FET) for label-free detection of the ovarian cancer antigen (CA125). The experimental procedure was based on the synthesis of reduced graphene oxide nanosheets by Hummers’ method. Then, polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) was used as a substrate for some reduced graphene oxide layers. Simultaneously, carboxylated MWCNTs were first modified with CA125 ssDNA (CA125 aptamer), producing MWCNTs/CA125. Posteriorly MWCNTs/CA125 were stacked on the surface of the graphene through π–π interactions. These steps have helped the authors in developing the ultrasensitive flexible FET-type aptasensor. The reproducibility and stability of the device have been investigated for cancer marker detection in human serum of ovarian cancer patients. The results showed that the aptasensor exhibited high sensitivity, selectivity, stability and reproducibility which provided great promise as a high performance and flexible FET-type aptasensor for detection of CA125 and other cancer biomarkers in clinical samples and biological fluids.70
Biosensors based on CNTs were also used to detect the concentration of substances for helping cancer treatment. In this sense, H. Zhou et al. (2018) developed an analytical device for sensing an anticancer drug in the whole blood, using the detection of methotrexate (MTX) as a model system. MTX is used for the treatment of many cancers; however, excessive use of this medicine can cause severe side effects such as intoxication. In this way, controlling the concentration of MTX in blood is important to create an optimized dosage for patients and reduce the intoxication probability. In this biosensor, tungsten phosphide embedded nitrogen-doped CNTs (WP/N-CNT) were fixed to the electrode surface that supported redox cycling. The results showed that the uniform distribution of tungsten phosphide and the synergistic effect of nitrogen-doped CNTs as an electronic transmission channel ensured that the proposed sensor had excellent sensing performance, with a short response time, wide detection range, satisfactory selectivity, and reproducibility for detection of methotrexate in whole blood.73
CNTs for drug release
The concept of drug release was introduced during the 1950s by Smith Kline & French, with 12 hour delivery of dextroamphetamine.74,75 Later, Folkman and Long (1964) used silicone rubber capsules as an implanted release device in the ventricular myocardium.76 After that, silicone tubes were used to diffuse ether, nitrous oxide, halothane, and cyclopropane and proved that could be used for general anesthesia.77 The science of controlled drug release has been discovered and widely studied.
Drug delivery technologies are nowadays divided into three generations. The 1st generation (1950–1980) includes oral once and twice-a-day systems, transdermal once-a-day and once-a-week delivery systems and drug release mechanisms as the one reported by Folkman. The 2nd generation (1980–2010) of drug delivery systems (DDS), which began in the 1980s reports about smart delivery systems including zero and first-order releases, smart polymers and hydrogels, peptide and protein delivery and nanoparticles. The 3rd generation started around 2010 and is still in progress, referring to modulated delivery systems.74,78 Controlling drug release is one of the most challenging tasks for the 3rd generation of drug delivery since it needs to overcome both physicochemical and biological barriers.78
SWCNTs and MWCNTs have the potential to be used in the field of medicinal chemistry, such as in vaccines, gene transfer, and immunopotentiation; they have also been studied for drug release due to their properties such as high drug carrier capacity and the ability to penetrate through cellular membranes.79,80
Since 2004, CNTs have been cited as drug delivery carriers,81 and from then on, several approaches have been used to enrich the employment of these nanoscale materials as drug carrier systems. The most recently cited strategies for applying CNTs in this field are functionalization, encapsulation, coating with polymers, liposomes, production of structures such as irregular meshes, buckypapers, membranes, and hydrogels, as illustrated in Fig. 5. These modifications are meant to improve CNTs’ water solubility and dispersion in biological fluids and at the same time reduce their cytotoxicity.82 Quantitatively, studies comprising CNTs for drug delivery are more than 60% directed to cancer treatment, as this is the most lethal disease globally.83 According to the Annual Report to the Nation on the Status of Cancer,84 death rates have increased in the past few years for several types of cancers, such as liver, pancreas, and brain, among others. For this reason research in this area attracts much interest from the scientific community.
 Fig. 5  Recent uses of CNTs as drug carriers. 
Since it was suggested by N. Wang, Feng, Zeng, Zhao, and Chen (2015) that functionalized CNTs are less toxic than non-functionalized ones, and that they can be excreted from the human body,85Table 1 shows the most commonly reported functionalizations performed on CNT previously for drug loading and/or other strategies for obtaining DDS intended for cancer treatment. Additional functionalization, encapsulation or another kind of modification may be performed on CNTs after the incorporation of a model drug (Table 1). Efforts have also been made in order to overcome the challenge to trigger drug delivery, using different alternatives, and some of the most recent ones will be presented hereafter. Accordingly, CNTs are potential candidates for release agents to be used for cancer treatment.
Table 1 Most frequently reported functionalizations carried out on CNTs prior to drug loading on cancer treatment DDS




Type of CNT
Functionalization
Model drug
Loading strategy





a Model drugs were adsorbed on pristine CNT, and functionalization and/or modifications were performed afterwards.





MWCNT86
Oxidation
Cisplatin/doxorubicin
Encapsulation/non-covalent


MWCNT87
Nonea
Doxorubicin
Non-covalent


MWCNT88
Nonea
Doxorubicin/rhodamine
Non-covalent


SWCNT89
Carboxylated
SNX-2112
Non-covalent


SWCNT90
Carboxylated
Paclitaxel
Non-covalent


MWCNT91
Oxidation
Doxorubicin
Non-covalent


SWCNT92
Nonea
Doxorubicin
Non-covalent


SWCNT93
Oxidation/chlorination/cyclodextrin covalent attachment
Formononetin
Non-covalent


SWCNT82
Oxidation/PEI + PEG covalent attachment
Doxorubicin
Non-covalent


SWCNT94
Oxidation
Gemcitabine
Covalent


MWCNT80
Oxidation followed by anionic or cationic attachments
—
—




T. Yang et al. (2017) developed a pH-sensitive dual drug delivery system (DDDS) for cancer chemotherapy using large-inner-diameter MWCNTs. Cisplatin (CDDP) and Doxorubicin (Dox) anti-tumor drugs were the non-covalent functionalizing agents. CDDP was encapsulated inside the MWCNTs, and polyethylene glycol (PEG), folic acid (FA) and Dox were used as a three-level blocking strategy to block the CDDP at different levels. Dox was attached to previously PEG and FA loaded MWCNTs’ external surface. FA bonded DDDS presented a biphasic release profile under different pH conditions, and the pH-sensitive release pattern of DOX was observed. For the same FA bonded DDDS, CDDP loading efficiency of 84.56% was obtained. The anticancer activity of DDDS was tested in a human breast cancer cell line (MCF-7), and the antitumor efficiency was higher in pH 6.5 than in pH 7.4, indicating improved drug release in the acidic environment. CDDP and DOX had a synergistic antitumor effect, inhibiting cell growth and giving way to cell death.86
H. Xu et al. (2016) developed a bio-inspired strategy for surface PEGylation of CNTs combining mussel-inspired chemistry and Michael addition reaction. The first one was a new technique inspired by the ability of mussel to adhere to numerous material surfaces. This strong adhesive ability could be attributed to mussel proteins, whose major component is amino acid 3,4-dihydroxyphenyl-L-alanine.47 H. Xu et al. (2016) showed that PEGylated CNTs had biological potential for intracellular delivery of Dox. Results suggested that these PEGylated CNTs improved biocompatibility toward cancer cells and are well dispersed in water and organic solutions. Dox was effectively loaded on PEGylated CNTs and delivered into cancer cells. This strategy could also be utilized for surface modification to incorporate other polymer materials due to the strong and universal adhesion of PDA and designability of polymerization.47
Dong et al. (2017) developed a thermosensitive hydrogel to control drug release based on photothermal effects. A DDS based on a thermosensitive hydrogel combined with chitosan (CH) and MWCNTs was developed. First of all, MWCNTs were loaded with Dox with non-covalent bonds, and afterward CH was added, and the mixture was stirred in order to obtain CH-MWCNTs. Poly(caprolactone) (PCL) and PEG were reacted to form a PCL–PEG–PCL copolymer, and lastly, Dox-loaded CH-MWCNT and PCL–PEG–PCL were physically mixed to obtain the Dox-loaded MWCNTs/hydrogel. The photothermal effects of MWCNTs in the hydrogel made the temperature of the MWCNTs/hydrogel increase 15 times more than that of the pure PCL–PEG–PCL hydrogel. Due to this increasing temperature, the MWCNTs/hydrogel underwent a structural collapse, caused by self-heating upon NIR irradiation, which allowed adjustment of the structure of the hydrogel and triggering of drug release. The anti-tumor cell proliferation effect of free Dox and Dox-loaded CH-MWCNTs showed that Dox-loaded CH-MWCNTs had lower toxicity compared to free Dox at any concentration and that CH-MWCNTs could accurately deliver the Dox to the tumor cells and release the Dox in the cytoplasm. This suggests that it could decrease the toxicity and prolong the therapeutic effects. In vitro drug release shows that the MWCNTs/hydrogel is suitable to be used as a drug carrier for encapsulation of hydrophilic drugs, once it undergoes photothermal conversion when irradiated with an 808 nm laser, accelerating the drug release rate. This approach allows controlling of drug release rate from the hydrogel by merely switching the laser on/off according to a patient's needs. In vivo assays in mice were performed with a subcutaneous injection of Dox-loaded CH-MWCNTs, symmetrically on both sides of the back. The right side was irradiated with NIR, and the left side was used as a control. Dox release was faster when NIR irradiation was used, meaning that it can be used to control the release of Dox from the hydrogel.87
In a subsequent study,88 the use of a similar PCL–PEG–PCL thermosensitive hydrogel with CH-MWCNTs and Dox and rhodamine B (RB) serving as the model drugs generated fluorescent images at the cellular level. The release of Dox and RB was monitored in vivo after the drugs were subcutaneously injected into the back of the mice. Results showed that RB was released faster from the hydrogel than Dox.
CH was used in the study of Zheng et al. (2016) to non-covalently functionalize SWCNTs (SWCNTs-CH) with the aim of improving its biocompatibility and using it to deliver SNX-2112. This is an inhibitor of Hsp90 and a promising candidate for treating diverse types of cancers; however, it is considered insoluble. Wrapping of SWCNTs with CH did not affect drug loading, as unwrapped SWCNTs and SWCNTs-CH showed SNX-2112 loading efficiency above 110%. The release of SNX-2112 was pH-triggered, and as the release kinetics was mainly controlled by the SWCNTs, CH wrapping did not have effects on drug loading. The inhibition effect was evaluated in K562 cells using WST-1 assay, and SWCNTs-CH loaded with SNX-2112 showed the highest inhibition ratios compared with control groups, as well as the most potent effect of destroying cell membrane integrity, observed in the lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) assay. SWCNTs-CH at 80 μg mL−1 in K562 cells showed an increase of about 100% of intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) compared to unwrapped SWCNTs, and Western blotting results were in accordance to ROS. Both indicate that SWCNTs-CH loaded with SNX-2112 actively induced apoptosis, being a great candidate for cancer treatment DDS.89
A distinct functionalization of SWCNTs with CH was performed by Yu et al. (2016) in a study, in which after the non-covalent attachment of CH to SWCNTs’ surface (SWCNT-CH), hyaluronan (HYA) was combined to the outer SWCNTs-CH surface due to its properties such as biocompatibility and low cytotoxicity and to achieve targeting properties. The final material was named SWCNTs-CH-HYA and was loaded with paclitaxel (PTX), developed for the treatment of lung cancer. Concerning drug loading capacity, the modification with CH or HYA did not cause significant changes to the PTX loadings of SWCNTs. PTX release was pH-triggered, and was more easily released at reduced pH. There were no considerable differences in the release pattern of untreated or CH/HYA-treated SWCNTs. Cell viability was evaluated with fibroblasts and A549 cells by WST-1 assay, and the combination of CH and HYA resulted in viabilities >80% for fibroblasts and >70% for A549 cells which were both higher than the values obtained for the same cells incubated with untreated SWCNTs. On the other hand, incubation of A549 cells with combined CH and HYA loaded PTX SWCNTs increased cytotoxicity. The effect of SWCNTs-CH-HYA-loaded-PTX (80 μg mL−1) on intracellular ROS in A549 cells showed that after modification with HYA, ROS values became much higher than the controls, which may have improved mitogen-activated protein kinase activation. LDH levels indicated that SWCNTs-CH-HYA-loaded-PTX had the best therapeutic effect, being the most destructive and also inducing apoptosis on A549 cells.90
Dox was also used as an anticancer drug in the study of Sciortino et al. (2017), in which the efficiency of using MWCNTs as drug carriers related to length and incubation time was evaluated. Short (130 ± 85 nm) and long (500 ± 222 nm) MWCNTs were decorated with biotin and loaded with Dox. Shorter MWCNTs were more effective after 48 h of incubation; nevertheless, after 72 h of testing, the difference was lessened due to the spontaneous release of Dox by the non-internalized long MWCNTs.91
Just like CNTs, Dox is an anti-tumor drug that is being extensively studied, and several alternatives have been developed to overcome its retained cytotoxicity, as seen previously. An alternative to control the retained cytotoxicity of Dox, the magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) contrast effect of gadolinium–diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid Gd–DTPA has been proposed by Yan et al. (2017). SWCNTs were modified with an aspargine–glycine–arginine (NGR) peptide using a simple non-covalent approach; they were loaded with Dox by π–π stacking interactions and Gd–DTPA by n–π interactions. This system could accumulate in and enter tumor cells facilitating chemotherapy and diagnosis of the tumor in a unique system. The developed material was efficient in promoting cellular uptake and increasing drug intracellular accumulation; they had no cytotoxicity against MCF-7 cells, being appropriate vehicles for DDS. The authors also performed in vivo studies using the tumor-bearing mice model after the tumor, generated by subcutaneous injection, reached a volume of 100 mm3. The biodistribution and targeting efficiency of DOX/NGR-SWCNTs/Gd–DTPA was evaluated by treating the tumor-bearing mice using tail vein intravenous injection. Anti-tumor efficacy was also investigated in tumor-bearing mice, and axial and coronal MR images of mice were acquired. Results showed that it had excellent tumor targeting properties. Systemic toxicity showed that the developed system is safe at the treatment dosage for tumor therapy. Concerning in vivo MRI, the group treated with the injection of DOX/NGR-SWCNTs/Gd–DTPA showed increased signal intensity, providing excellent image contrast.92
The delivery of anticancer drug formononetin (FMN) and the reduction of toxicity of SWCNTs by modification with hydroxypropyl-β-cyclodextrin (HP-β-CD) were successfully performed by Liu et al. (2018). SWCNTs were previously carboxylated and covalently functionalized with cyclodextrin (CD-SWCNTs), to posteriorly be loaded with FMN, which could be located on HP-β-CD (CD “side”) of SWCNTs, resulting in relatively high entrapment efficiency. CD-SWCNT formulations achieved burst release in the initial stage followed by sustained release. The release of FMN from CD-SWCNTs was much lower than that from control solutions, because of the van der Waals forces and π–π interactions between FMN and the SWCNT surface, and also because FMN needed time to exit the HP-β-CD cavity. In vitro cytotoxicity was evaluated against MCF-7 cells and HeLa cells using WST-1 assay, and results showed that SWCNTs loaded with FMN could adequately act as an intracellular delivery system of the anticancer drug and that the antitumor activity of CD-SWCNTs-FMN was higher than that of FMN alone.93
Taghavi et al. (2017) covalently functionalized SWCNTs with polyethyleneimine (PEI) and PEG (SWCNTs–PEI–PEG) used as carriers for gene delivery, specifically to deliver shRNA (short hairpin RNA) to breast cancer cells. In this study, the 5TR1 aptamer was used as a targeting ligand, and this platform showed its great potential as a gene delivery system. Just after that, the authors used the same SWCNTs–PEI–PEG, which were attached to the AS141 aptamer for drug delivery into human gastric cancer cells using Bcl-xL-specific shRNA and a small Dox content. AS141 was about 80% covalently bonded to the SWCNTs–PEI–PEG polyplex, and there was no evidence of cytotoxicity to AGS and L929 cell lines, evaluated by MTT assay with or without the aptamer. Transfection efficiency of AGS cells was similar to polyplexes with or without the aptamer, such as for L929 cells; internalization was very low for SWCNTs–PEI–PEG–AS141. The targeted delivery of polyplex–aptamer to cancer cells was confirmed, showing specificity for the tumor cells compared to the polyplex without the aptamer. Western blot analysis after 72 h showed that SWCNTs–PEI–PEG–AS141 could induce apoptosis in tumor cells by suppression of Bcl-xL gene using Bcl-xL shRNA. MTT assay was used to evaluate the synergistic effect between Dox and Bcl-xL shRNA towards AGS cells. Among other results, MTT showed that targeted-cell death was higher for polyplexes with Dox-loaded onto the surface than that of free Dox, meaning that simultaneous use of Dox and Bcl-xL shRNA is a potential alternative for tumor treatment.82
Razzazan et al. (2016) also used SWCNTs as a drug carrier for cancer treatment, as widely cited above; but as an anticancer agent, the authors chose gemcitabine (GEM) to be covalently bonded to the surface of the tubes. The SWCNTs were previously submitted to consecutive carboxylation, acylation, amination and PEGylation reactions, after which GEM was covalently bonded to SWCNTs and SWCNTs-PEG. The drug entrapment efficiency was similar for both SWCNTs–GEM and SWCNTs–PEG–GEM, being enough to ensure intracellular concentration and cytotoxic effects. To release GEM from SWCNTs, the ester bonds were cleaved, and GEM was released faster at lower pH values, giving a pH-responsive release profile. In vitro cytotoxicity was evaluated against A549 and MIA PaCa-2 cells using MTT assay, and showed that PEGylation reduced the cytotoxicity of SWCNTs–PEG–GEM. Cell uptake was also increased by SWCNTs conjugated with PEG and GEM when compared to pure GEM. In vivo studies evaluated the tumor volume in mice and observed that GEM degradation was delayed while attached to SWCNTs, enhancing its antitumor activity. It was observed, after 23 days, that SWCNTs–PEG–GEM reduced tumor growth compared to SWCNTs–GEM. The authors concluded that hydrophilic anticancer drugs could be successfully delivered by this new platform, and tumor efficacy of GEM can be improved by its conjugation with PEGylated SWCNTs. This is the only report found in the last 2 years comprising the covalent attachment of the anti-cancer drug to the surface of the CNTs.94
New delivery platforms of therapeutic agents made of liposomes and modified MWCNTs have been developed by Pippa et al. (2017) to carry different surface functional groups. The authors assert that functionalization of CNTs is an important approach in order to improve their dispersion in biological media, their biocompatibility and minimize their toxicity. Different lipids with different main transition temperatures (Tm) were used: 1,2-dipalmitoyl-sn-glycerol-3-phosphocholine (DPPC) (Tm = 41 °C) and L-α-phosphatidylcholine, hydrogenated Soy (HSPC) (Tm = 53 °C). MWCNTs were previously treated and then the MWCNTs–liposome delivery platforms were prepared with a weight ratio of 10:1 (liposome:MWCNTs). The presence of MWCNTs caused changes of the regular sizes of DPPC and HSPC liposomes. For some MWCNT pre-treatments, the size of HSPC/DPPC mixed nanocarriers was reduced, and for some other cases, the hydrodynamic diameter was increased. In all situations, the nanocarriers showed diameters less than 300 nm, which allows their use as drug delivery vectors, especially for cancer nanotherapy. The toxicity of the nanocarriers was evaluated with human mammary fibroblasts using MTT assay. The low toxicity for most of the samples, even at high concentrations, indicates that the prepared systems are suitable and safe vectors for encapsulation of active pharmaceutical ingredients.80
Besides being extensively used for cancer treatment, recent studies also report the use of CNTs for the delivery of drugs intended to floating DDS, cardiovascular diseases and pain in the form of transdermal patches, as will be presented hereafter.
Levofloxacin (LVF) delivery was studied by L.-P. Zhang, Tan, Huang, and Liu (2018) using MWCNTs coated with a liquid crystalline molecularly imprinted polymer (LC-MIP). Firstly, MWCNTs were functionalized with vinyl groups and posteriorly the polymerization of LC-MIPs was performed on the surface of MWCNTs (MWCNTs@LC-MIP) using LVF as a model template drug. In vitro studies showed a long LVF release duration of 21 h and a release rate of 89.8%. In vivo pharmacokinetic studies were performed in male wistar rats. Desired concentrations of the drug were dispersed in saline solution and administrated intragastrically. Results revealed sustained adsorption for MWCNTs@LC-MIP, higher than control samples and commercial LVF tablets. These findings make MWCNTs coated with LC-MIP potential candidates for gastroretentive DDS because they have both floating and controlled sustained properties.95 Cardiovascular diseases have also been treated with modified SWCNTs in the form of tissue engineered blood vessels (TEBV) by Ding et al. (2018). SWCNTs were used to build an irregular mesh to coat TEBV and reduce the loss of drugs caused by blood flow. Resveratrol (RSV) was used to load previously acid functionalized SWCNTs and they were coated on the surface of an irregular TEBV mesh structure of small diameter, which had enough resistance against blood flow and would maintain a continued drug release. Linking RSV to SWCNTs was a smart alternative to reduce the cytotoxicity of the nanotubes keeping the anti-inflammatory effect of RSV while inhibiting chronic inflammation mediated by M1 macrophages due to RSV released from CNTs-RSV (prepared by electrostatic interaction). Rat carotid artery TEBV transplantation surgery was performed and μCT images suggested that CNTs-RSV TEBV had the best patency rate on day 90 among all groups; so studies concluded that this kind of CNT mesh can be used for small-diameter vascular grafts for transplant surgeries.96
CNTs in the form of buckypapers have been recently studied as electromodulated transdermal DDS by Schwengber, Prado, Bonelli, and Cukierman (2017). Buckypapers were produced on Nylon membranes, using SWCNTs–COOH, and as model drugs, clonidine hydrochloride (CHC), selegiline hydrochloride (SHC), flurbiprofen (FB) and ketorolac tromethamine (KT) were used. The drugs were individually adsorbed into SWCNTs–COOH. A high level of drug loading was achieved (89 ± 4%). For 8 h of release, the lowest value was observed for FB, followed by SHC, KT, and CHC. The buckypapers developed for controlled drug release showed the necessary features for passive drug release, depending on the drug used. The modulation of the profile of drug release in any desired direction was obtained by application of electrical bias of appropriate polarity.97
Transdermal DDS for the delivery of diclofenac sodium was studied by Giri, Bhunia, Pal, Goswami, and Bandyopadhyay (2016). They used different approaches of buckypapers, which consist of a thin sheet of CNTs, and they developed a membrane prepared in situ from the composite of poly(diethylene glycol dimethacrylate) grafted carboxymethyl guargum (CMG-g-PDEGDMA)/carboxy functionalized MWCNTs (f-MWCNTs). Membranes of mean thickness 0.25 mm and f-MWCNT concentration ranging from 0 to 3% (total mass) were obtained. Diclofenac was added into the solutions before forming the membranes, in order to obtain drug-encapsulating membranes. Better matrix–f-MWCNT interactions were achieved for 1% of f-MWCNTs, and this formulation was also the most hydrophobic and with better dispersion. Drug-eluting was smaller in the membrane prepared with 1% of f-MWCNTs, but increasing f-MWCNT concentration made the membranes less hydrophobic, and consequently, drug dilution was faster. All nanocomposites have shown better controlled drug release profiles, compared to neat CMG and CMG-g-PDEGDMA without f-MWCNTs. CMG-g-PDEGDMA with 3, 2, 1 and 0.5% of f-MWCNTs eluted 42, 39, 16.3 and 27.4% of the encapsulated diclofenac within 20 h, respectively. The hydrogel membrane showed excellent results in controlling the release of the proposed drug, having a slow release which would allow prolonged use.98
A molecular insight into the utilization of CNTs in the field of drug delivery was presented by Zhao et al. (2017). It was done to simulate the interactions between benzene (BEN), which was a model for anthracycline drugs, and functionalized CNT with hydrophilic groups (OH, COOH and NH2). The study was performed to compare the binding mechanisms for drugs in systems with functionalized CNTs. The lattice (DNT) of CNTs was substitutionally doped with nitrogen or boron atoms or a combination of both. The authors used quantum chemistry calculations to evaluate the interactions between different CNTs and BEN molecules and observed that if CNTs were functionalized with OH, COOH or NH2 groups and not doped, the interaction with BEN was weak. However, when chemical groups were anchored on the DNT lattice, the interaction with BEN was improved. CNTs with a smaller curvature showed stronger π–π interactions in CNTs–BEN systems.99
To conclude, CNTs are promising agents for DDS, as significant results have been obtained recently; however, in vivo studies are still limited and need to be more exploited to give long-term results and to answer any remaining questions about the use of these nanomaterials as drug carriers.
CNTs as biocomposites
In the past few decades, life expectancy has increased, and elderly people are more likely to suffer from accidents with bone fracture due to degenerative conditions such as osteoporosis and osteoarthritis.100 Also, the number of patients suffering from traffic accidents, bone diseases and injuries due to high-performance sports practice is increasing every year which causes significant economic loss to the health system.4 Thus, the development of biomaterials for bone replacement is considered very important nowadays.
The main inorganic component of bones and teeth is hydroxyapatite (HA, Ca10(PO4)6(OH)2). Synthetic HA has been widely used for implants and bone regeneration due to the similar chemical composition and crystal structure to the mineralized matrix of natural bone in mammals.101,102 Furthermore, HA is bioactive, has high biocompatibility with cells and bone tissue and osteoconductivity.103 Also, it can create a bonding with novel bone cells leading to quick tissue regeneration. Despite all these good aspects, HA has poor mechanical proprieties including low strength, brittleness and low fracture strength that are inherent to its nature. This limits its use for load-bearing and long-term applications.104
On the other hand, CNTs are an excellent option to improve mechanical properties of composites due to their high aspect ratio, exceptional strength and stiffness.105–108 Another attractive factor is that CNTs are also considered to be bioactive in nature.108–110 Therefore, HA is one of the most used components in CNT-reinforced biocomposites for medical and dental applications.111–113 However, CNT-reinforced HA composites created by conventional methods have poor interfacial bonding,114,115 which could result in poor reinforcement efficiency.
Li et al. (2016) developed a new methodology to synthesize CNT-reinforced HA. The authors used a double in situ synthesis process, combining the synthesis of CNTs in HA powders by CVD in situ followed by encapsulation of CNTs using HA by a sol–gel method. This double in situ synthesis approach increased the homogeneous dispersion of CNTs within the HA matrix and enhanced the interfacial bonding between the nanoparticles and the HA, leading to an improvement in the mechanical properties of the composite. The flexural strength of the HA composite was improved significantly, reaching 83 MPa, which is 60% higher than that of pure HA. In vitro biological tests showed that the HA composite accelerated the proliferation of fibroblast (L-929) and osteoblast cells and possessed good biocompatibility.113
In another study, Afroze et al. (2018) prepared an HA-functionalized MWCNT (HA-fMWCNT) nanocomposite. The composite showed an improvement in mechanical properties due to the strong bonding between CNTs and matrixes. Mechanical tests showed that CNTs enhanced the mechanical strength by about 317.5% compared to the pure HA composite.112
Other works incorporated additional components besides HA and CNTs.111,116,117 Ding et al. (2018) produced a new composite for bone replacement using ZnO, due to its antibacterial properties. Different levels of CNT powder were added to the HA/ZnO composite: 0, 0.5, 1.0 and 1.5 wt%. The friction coefficient of the materials decreased significantly with increased level of CNTs. These results evidenced that CNTs improved the wear properties of the new material.100
Silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) are also utilized in nanohybrids as antimicrobial agents due to their bactericidal activity.118 However, direct exposure to AgNPs could be a threat to mammalian cells. C. Nie et al. (2016) introduced a functional biopolymer coating to shield AgNP-loaded oxidized CNTs, using a green mussel-inspired approach. Two dopamine functional biopolymers, heparin and chitosan, were used to reduce the Ag+ ions pre-absorbed onto the oxidized CNT surface. Because of the strong antibacterial properties of AgNPs, nanohybrids have great ability to inhibit bacterial growth and kill both Gram negative and Gram positive bacteria. The chitosan-coated samples were particularly effective due to the synergistic effects of chitosan and AgNPs.119
HA reinforced with CNTs and bovine serum albumin (BSA) was designed by Gholami and Noor (2016) for bone substitution and filler applications. The authors produced scaffolds with 0.5 wt% of different types of functionalized CNTs (COOH or OH) and carried out mechanical and biological tests. The novel composites showed compressive strength in the range of 13 to 29 MPa (which is the range of trabecular bone) and more than 200% cell viability, which demonstrated their favourable cytocompatibility. Therefore, these HA/CNTs/BSA composites can be considered an attractive bone replacement and bone filling material.116
Among the HA/CNT composites for bone substituting and filling applications, some works demonstrated that coatings containing HA and CNTs for metallic implants could enhance some important properties of these traditional materials.117,120,121 Nowadays, 316L Stainless Steel (SS), cobalt alloys (CoNiCrMo), titanium and compounds of titanium (TiN, TiO2, Ti6Al4V) are the most widely used metallic materials for surgery and orthopaedics in hospitals.122 Despite their successful use in surgery, there are some issues related to these types of materials. In some cases, these materials could be corroded in the biological environment like human fluids.123–126 Due to this corrosion process some ions can be released into a patient's body and result in infection and rejection. Another problem is the difference in the mechanical properties between the bone–implant interface, which could cause some premature wear, followed by undesired fracture.127–129
A considerable number of bioimplant surgeries stimulate the development of new bioactive implants made of SS with good antibacterial activity and corrosion resistance. Thom et al. (2017) synthesized HA/carboxyl (COOH) functionalized CNTs on the surface of 316L SS (CrMoNi) by electrodeposition. The study showed that the presence of CNTs in HA coatings reduced the solubility in comparison with pure HA coatings. Furthermore, the adhesion force improved by 40% compared to the pure HA coating.121
Recent research117 reported the bioactivity of HA/CNTs and the hybrid Zn-HA/CNT thin films prepared on medical grade 316L SS substrates by the spray pyrolysis technique. CNTs were used because of their mechanical properties. They deduced that Zn incorporation enhanced not only the corrosion resistance but also the antibacterial activity of the HA/CNT composite. The addition of Zn decreased the crystallinity of the HA/CNT composite, increasing the surface area. This resulted in intense bond formation with some groups of the microorganisms’ membrane such as carboxyl and amino, which caused cell death. Zn modifies cellular permeability and causes dysfunction and eventually the death of bacterial cells.
Other works used CNT-reinforced matrixes to coat metallic implants without incorporating HA. Subramani et al. (2016) performed an in vitro evaluation of osteoblast responses to CNT-coated titanium surfaces to study the effects of surface roughness and –COOH functionalization in CNTs mixed with collagen-coated Ti substrates. The research demonstrated that functionalized CNTs enhanced hydrophilic surface chemistry, which improved proliferation and differentiation of osteoblasts compared with the coating with non-functionalized CNTs. The –COOH group, besides enhancing the osteoblast responses, also enhanced matrix mineralization on Ti surfaces, because carboxylate ions (–COO−) can absorb calcium ions (Ca2+) from the mammal body environment. Thus, this contributes to HA precipitation as a result of exposure to phosphate ions (PO43−).120
Among different types of biocomposites, those using polymers as a matrix play an important role in biomedical and dental applications. They have good processability, light weight and low cost which make them very promising to fabricate implants. Some of them are degradable with low mechanical properties. Incorporating CNTs into polymers could enhance the mechanical properties and biocompatibility of the resulting composites.97,130,131
Liu et al. (2016) prepared a polyether ether ketone (PEEK) hybrid composite reinforced with inorganic nanohydroxyapatite (nHA) and CNTs by a melt-compounding and injection molding process. nHA made the composite more hydrophilic, promoting proliferation and differentiation and mineralization of murine MC3T3-E1 osteoblasts. Conversely, CNTs promoted an improvement in the mechanical properties of the composites. Tensile tests showed that the elastic modulus of the PEEK/nHA/CNT composite increased from 3.87 to 7.13 GPa by adding 15 vol% nHA and 1.88 vol% of CNT fillers. For the same composition, the tensile strength was 64.48 MPa and the elongation at break was 1.74%. Thus, the tensile properties of this composite were superior to those of human cortical bones.132
Although HA is the most common component used in biocomposites due to its similarity to the bone structure, other ceramics and bio-glasses were also studied with CNT reinforcement.133,134 Cao et al. prepared scaffolds for bone repair composed of CNTs, PEEK and bioactive glass (BG).133 They used sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) as a surfactant to better disperse the CNTs into the composites and added 4 wt% of CNTs to improve their tensile strength and bending strength by 29% and 27%, respectively compared to the results of PEEK/BG without CNTs. Thermal gravimetric analysis showed that adding CNTs to the PEEK matrix increased the thermal stability of the composites. This result demonstrated that well-dispersed CNTs could stabilize the PEEK polymer chains, resulting in thermal stability improvement of the PEEK composites. Furthermore, a bone-like apatite layer was formed on the composite surface after immersion in simulated body fluids, which could be an indication of the composite's bioactivity. In vitro cell tests confirmed that the composite scaffold's surface promoted adhesion, proliferation, and differentiation of MC3T3-E1 osteoblast cells.
Liao et al. (2016) investigated the mechanical properties of nHA/Polyamide 66 (PA66) composites reinforced with CNTs. The addition of CNTs improved the crystallinity of PA66, while it had insignificant or no effect either on the composition or on the crystal structure of the composites. No negative effect on the biological tests was observed for these composites. Thus, adding CNT did not affect the cytocompatibility of the original nHA/PA66 composite. Finally, the mechanical tests showed a significant improvement on the tensile and compressive strengths whose maximum values of 90.3 and 126.9 MPa, respectively, were attained with the addition of only 0.1 wt% of CNTs.135
The main challenge of using CNTs to reinforce composites is that they tend to agglomerate in aqueous solutions as well as in organic solvents.136–138 This agglomeration could prejudice the load transference from the matrix to the reinforcement, reducing the efficiency of mechanical properties. Some works use functionalized CNTs to better disperse the nanofiller in the matrix.111,116,130 However, there are alternative methods to improve CNTs’ dispersion.
Mirjalili et al. (2017) used dilute SDS surfactant to improve the dispersion of CNTs. They synthesized β-tricalcium phosphate (β-TCP)/CNT by a solution precipitation method. The β-TCP ceramic has good biocompatibility and osteoconductivity.139 Also, β-TCP, when in contact with body fluids, results in the formation of HA. Thus, β-TCP is a suitable material for bone replacement.134 Nevertheless, its inherent brittleness results in low mechanical strength and limits its load-bearing application.139,140 For this reason, the authors used CNTs to improve its mechanical properties. The surfactant was proved to be efficient in dispersing 1 wt% of CNTs into the composite without agglomeration in the nanocomposite powder. However, higher concentrations of CNT powder resulted in the formation of the second phase of Ca2PO7. The different quantities of surfactant could change the shape, size, and distribution of CNT particles on nanocomposites. The nanocomposite has good ability to form apatite in vitro, which can indicate bioactivity in vivo.
Almost every CNT-reinforced composite in the literature used MWCNTs. Some works compared the influence of adding SWCNTs and MWCNTs in the composites.141,142 Mirza et al. (2017) incorporated CNTs in a PMMA-based denture polymer, comparing the differences between SWCNT and MWCNT nanofillers. In both groups, 0.5 wt% of CNTs was incorporated into the MMA monomer and then heat-cured. Incorporation of CNTs changed the surface morphology and topography of the PMMA specimens. On the other hand, the hardness, elastic modulus and wear resistance were improved in both CNT groups. CNTs played a crucial role in keeping the wear resistance minimal. CNTs in the polymer matrix hindered the movement of molecular chains during the plastic deformation, which reduced the strain recovery during the unloading period. The results of hardness were different for MWCNTs and SWCNTs: 269 and 210 MPa, respectively. Nevertheless, the incorporation of MWCNTs reduced the storage modulus; meanwhile, SWCNTs reinforced the PMMA polymer. This behaviour could be attributed to stronger inter-nanotube interactions, due to clumping and ineffective dispersion of MWCNTs which could lead to an inefficient load transference from the matrix to the filler.142
Flores-Cedillo et al. (2016) also studied the influence of aligning CNTs into a CNT/polycaprolactone (PCL) composite. Using only 0.3 wt% of CNTs, the authors observed that non-aligned CNT incorporation formed materials with better mechanical properties. A higher elastic modulus (608 MPa) and maximum stress (42 MPa) were observed in CNTs/PCL with random CNTs in the matrix. However, cell proliferation after 21 days measured by MTT was higher in MWCNTs aligned with β-glycerol phosphate. It proved that the alignment of CNTs in some composites could lead to different properties; thus this should be studied in future works.143
The last works proved that CNTs are promising nanofillers to improve the mechanical properties of biomaterials for medical and dental applications. Table 2 shows some of these recent works, which incorporated CNTs into composites, presenting positive results in the enhancement of these features.
Table 2 mechanical properties from the literature data obtained from the best concentrations studied




Materials
Application
CNT (% wt)
Functionalization
Mechanical properties




HA + BSA116
Bone substitution (scaffold)
0.5
–COOH
Compressive strength


–OH


HA113
Bioimplants (bulk)
3
—
Flexural strength


HA + ZnO100
Bone substitution (sintered powder)
1.5
—
Microhardness nanohardness elastic modulus


HA112
Implants (scaffold)
0.5
–COOH
Compressive strength


Hardness (Hv)


Fracture toughness


BG + PEEK133
Bone repair (scaffold)
4
(SDS surfactant)
Tensile strength


Bending strength


Ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene131
Artificial joints (bulk)
0.5
—
Coefficient of friction


PMMA142
Denture implant (bulk)
0.5
—
Young's modulus


HA121
Implant (316L SS) coating
0.5
–COOH
Adhesion strength




CNTs have an important role to play in future studies of biocomposites because of their unique characteristics and established potential to improve the mechanical proprieties of these novel materials. Although some biological tests in vitro have been carried out with positive results, in vivo investigations should be performed to evaluate the responses of these composites on the living organisms. There is another research area for the future: some of the new studies144 are including other components to be incorporated in addition to CNTs; thus they can produce new composites with even better properties.
Conclusions
The physicochemical and biological properties of CNTs make them extremely interesting materials for medical applications. Recent results suggest that a growing number of medical devices using CNTs will soon be used for the diagnosis, prevention, and treatment of diseases. The main focus of current research studies is on the application of CNTs as biosensors, drug delivery agents and fillers for composites used in implant fabrication. Their high biological activity and solubility, along with the rapid electron transfer to a wide range of electroactive species, ensures CNTs’ interactions with a large number of biomolecules. These properties allow the production of different hybrid systems that can be used as biosensors for detection of virus, cancer, and some substances in the human body. CNT-based biosensors have been studied for detection of diseases like dengue, influenza A, avian influenza, and cancer; also, for the detection of medicines, neurotransmitters, glucose, and urea, among other substances present in the human body. Other remarkable properties of CNTs, such as their drug carrier capacity and ability to penetrate through cellular membranes, increase their potential to be used as drug delivery systems. More than 60% of the studies about CNTs as drug delivery systems are concentrated on cancer treatment. The use of CNTs in composites for the production of implants has also grown. The high aspect ratio, hollow structure, and exceptional strength and stiffness make CNTs an excellent option to improve the mechanical properties of the composites used to fabricate orthopaedic and dental implants. Most of the works have used CNTs as a filler for HA and polymer composites, and as coatings for SS and titanium alloys.
Although significant advances in the use of CNTs in biomedical applications have been made, several major challenges remain, which make their transition from laboratories to clinics difficult. Clinical uses of CNTs as biosensors and drug delivery systems, and in implants are hampered by different biological barriers, including the toxicity aspects of these materials to the human body. Although many laboratory toxicological tests have already been carried out, the protocols used are not standardized. Besides, most of the toxicological tests address the respiratory routes and apply excessive quantities of CNTs. Therefore, standardizing the toxicological tests and determining the safe exposure limits are crucial to ensure the safe medical application of CNTs. Another option is to study adequate chemical modification treatments to increase the biocompatibility of CNTs. Pharmacokinetics and immunoreactivity also need to be evaluated to have conclusive information about the safety of CNTs. The long-term effect of CNTs on the ecosystem must also be explored. Their inert character and chemical stability make CNTs difficult to degrade, bringing risk to living organisms and the ecosystem. Although there are already some works that use fungi, enzymes, and bacteria in the degradation of nanotubes, this is a topic only a few have explored. So, further investigations are needed to define the toxicity and biodegradability of CNTs, and then disseminate their uses. Besides that, other significant challenges that need to be overcome include the stability of CNTs in biological systems, the metabolism and elimination of CNTs from the human body, and a complete understanding of the cellular uptake and internalization of CNTs. However, by being able to study and understand all the challenges that remain inconclusive, the use of CNT based systems as biomaterials for drug delivery, biosensors, biocomposites, and in vivo imaging, among others, will be translated into reality. So, further investigations are needed to disseminate the use of CNTs as active smart biomaterials.
Abbreviations

CNTsCarbon nanotubes
SWCNTsSingle-walled CNTs
MWCNTsMulti-walled CNTs
CVDChemical vapor deposition
ITOIndium tin oxide
HNO3Nitric acid
H2SO4Sulfuric acid
H2O2Hydrogen peroxide
PANIPolyaniline
AAAscorbic acid
AUUric acid
Ta-CTetrahedral amorphous carbon
GODGlucose oxidase
BCNTsBoron doped with CNTs
POAPPoly o-aminophenol film
GCGlassy carbon
HBHemoglobin
PCSStarch
MWCNTs-PAMAMPolyamidoamine grafted MWCNTs
CNTFETCNT field effect transistor
AIVAvian influenza virus
N-MWCNTsNitrogen-doped MWCNTs
FA-VACNTsVertically aligned CNTs conjugated to folic acid
NH2-VACNTsVertically aligned CNTs functionalized with amine
ZnOZinc oxide
NRAsNanorod arrays
FETField effect transistor
PMMAPolymethyl methacrylate
MTXMethotrexate
WP/N-CNTTungsten phosphide embedded nitrogen-doped CNTs
DDSDrug delivery systems
DDDSDual drug delivery systems
CDDPCisplatin
DoxDoxorubicin
PEGPolyethylene glycol
FAFolic acid
CHChitosan
PCLPoly(caprolactone)
RBRhodamine B
LDHLactate dehydrogenase
ROSReactive oxygen species
HYAHyaluronan
PTXPaclitaxel
MRIMagnetic resonance imaging
Gd–DTPAGadolinium–diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid
NGRAspargine–glycine–arginine
FMNFormononetin
HP-β-CDHydroxypropyl-β-cyclodextrin
CD-SWCNTsSWCNT covalently functionalized with cyclodextrin
PEIPolyethyleneimine
shRNAShort hairpin RNA
GEMGemcitabine

T
m
Main transition temperatures
HSPCHydrogenated soy
DPPC1,2-Dipalmitoyl-sn-glycerol-3-phosphocholine
LVFLevofloxacin
LC-MIPLiquid crystalline molecularly imprinted polymer
TEBVTissue engineered blood vessels
RSVResveratrol
CHCClonidine hydrochloride
SHCSelegiline hydrochloride
FBFlurbiprofen
KTKetorolac tromethamine
CGM-gGrafted carboxymethyl guargum
BENBenzene
DNTLattice
HAHydroxyapatite
HA-fMWCNTsHydroxyapatite-functionalized MWCNTs
BSABovine serum albumin
SSStainless steel
–COO−Carboxylate ions
Ca2+Calcium ions
PO43+Phosphate ions
PEEKPolyether ether ketone
nHANanohydroxyapatite
BGBioactive glass
SDSSodium dodecyl sulfate
β-TCPβ-Tricalcium phosphate
PCLPolycaprolactone

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge financial support from Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo (FAPESP – 2014/17492-6; 2017/02846-5; 2017/24873-4) and Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior (CAPES – 3315/2014 – 23038.005806/2014-76).
Notes and references

          R. C. Hershow and K. E. Nusbaum, Beyond One Health: From Recognition to Results,  2018, pp. 179–195,  DOI:10.1002/9781119194521.ch7 .
L. A. Torre, R. L. Siegel, E. M. Ward and A. Jemal, Cancer Epidemiol., Biomarkers Prev., 2016, 25, 16–27 CrossRef PubMed .
K. D. Lafferty and E. A. Mordecai, F1000Research, 2016, 5, 2040 Search PubMed .
Q. Fu, E. Saiz, M. N. Rahaman and A. P. Tomsia, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5461–5476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gupta, J. Investig. Clin. Dent., 2011, 2, 81–88 CrossRef PubMed .
A. O. Tarakanov, L. B. Goncharova and Y. A. Tarakanov, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol., 2010, 2, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
B. Peng, M. Locascio, P. Zapol, S. Li, S. L. Mielke, G. C. Schatz and H. D. Espinosa, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Duke and J. C. Bonner, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol., 2018, 10, e1498 Search PubMed .

          F. V. Ferreira, L. D. S. Cividanes, F. S. Brito, B. R. C. d. Menezes, W. Franceschi, E. A. N. Simonetti and G. P. Thim, Functionalizing Graphene and Carbon Nanotubes: A Review, Springer,  2016 Search PubMed .
S. Iijima, Nature, 1991, 354, 56 CrossRef CAS .
M. Monthioux and V. L. Kuznetsov, Carbon, 2006, 44, 1621–1623 CrossRef CAS .
H. He, L. A. Pham-Huy, P. Dramou, D. Xiao, P. Zuo and C. Pham-Huy, BioMed Res. Int., 2013, 2013, 578290 Search PubMed .
L. M. Esteves, H. A. Oliveira and F. B. Passos, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2018, 65, 1–12 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. De Volder, S. H. Tawfick, R. H. Baughman and A. J. Hart, Science, 2013, 339, 535–539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. T. Thostenson, Z. Ren and T.-W. Chou, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2001, 61, 1899–1912 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wei, R. Vajtai and P. Ajayan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 1172–1174 CrossRef CAS .
E. Pop, D. Mann, Q. Wang, K. Goodson and H. Dai, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 96–100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-C. Charlier, X. Blase and S. Roche, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2007, 79, 677–732 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Rafiee, Carbon Nanotube-reinforced Polymers: From Nanoscale to Macroscale, Elsevier,  2017 Search PubMed .
M. V. Kharlamova, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2016, 77, 125–211 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, L. Xie, S. Hameed, C. Wang and Y. Ying, Carbon, 2018, 132, 42–58 CrossRef CAS .
E. Arici and S. Karazhanov, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2016, 41, 137–149 CrossRef CAS .
E. Bekyarova, Y. Ni, E. B. Malarkey, V. Montana, J. L. McWilliams, R. C. Haddon and V. Parpura, J. Biomed. Nanotechnol., 2005, 1, 3–17 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Karousis, N. Tagmatarchis and D. Tasis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 5366–5397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Caoduro, R. Kacem, K. Boukari, F. Picaud, C.-H. Brachais, D. Monchaud, C. Borg, H. Boulahdour, T. Gharbi and R. Delage-Mourroux, Carbon, 2016, 96, 742–752 CrossRef CAS .
K. Balasubramanian and M. Burghard, Small, 2005, 1, 180–192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hirsch, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 1853–1859 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. de Menezes, F. Ferreira, B. Silva, E. Simonetti, T. Bastos, L. Cividanes and G. Thim, J. Mater. Sci., 2018, 1–17,  DOI:10.1007/s10853-018-2627-3 .
T. L. Amaral Montanheiro, L. S. Montagna, J. P. B. Machado and A. P. Lemes, Polym. Compos., 2019, 40, 228–295 Search PubMed .
P.-C. Ma, N. A. Siddiqui, G. Marom and J.-K. Kim, Composites, Part A, 2010, 41, 1345–1367 CrossRef .
J. Cha, S. Jin, J. H. Shim, C. S. Park, H. J. Ryu and S. H. Hong, Mater. Des., 2016, 95, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Sajid, U. Jamshaid, T. Jamshaid, N. Zafar, H. Fessi and A. Elaissari, Int. J. Pharm., 2016, 501, 278–299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Q. Huang, M. Liu, J. Tian, G. Zeng, Z. Li, K. Wang, Q. Zang, Q. Wan, F. Deng and Y. Wei, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 343, 19–27 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, J. Ji, X. Zhang, X. Zhang, B. Yang, F. Deng, Z. Li, K. Wang, Y. Yang and Y. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 3476 RSC .
M. Liu, G. Zeng, K. Wang, Q. Wan, L. Tao, X. Zhang and Y. Wei, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 16819 RSC .
X. Sun, H. Shao, K. Xiang, Y. Yan, X. Yu, D. Li, W. Wu, L. Zhou, K.-F. So, Y. Ren, S. Ramakrishna, A. Li and L. He, Carbon, 2017, 113, 176–191 CrossRef CAS .
H. K. F. Cheng, T. Basu, N. G. Sahoo, L. Li and S. H. Chan, Polymers, 2012, 4, 889–912 CrossRef CAS .
B. Halamoda-Kenzaoui, U. Holzwarth, G. Roebben, A. Bogni and S. Bremer-Hoffmann, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol., 2018, e1531,  DOI:10.1002/wnan.1531 .
A. Pietroiusti, H. Stockmann-Juvala, F. Lucaroni and K. Savolainen, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol., 2018, e1513,  DOI:10.1002/wnan.1513 .
S. Naahidi, M. Jafari, F. Edalat, K. Raymond, A. Khademhosseini and P. Chen, J. Controlled Release, 2013, 166, 182–194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. González-Domínguez, N. Iturrioz-Rodríguez, E. Padín-González, J. Villegas, L. García-Hevia, M. Pérez-Lorenzo, W. J. Parak, M. A. Correa-Duarte and M. L. Fanarraga, Int. J. Nanomed., 2017, 12, 6317 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Valentini, E. Mari, A. Zicari, A. Calcaterra, M. Talamo, M. G. Scioli, A. Orlandi and S. Mardente, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2018, 19, 1316 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhang, M. Liu, X. Zhang, F. Deng, C. Zhou, J. Hui, W. Liu and Y. Wei, Toxicol. Res., 2015, 4, 160 RSC .
X. Zhang, L. Meng, Q. Lu, Z. Fei and P. J. Dyson, Biomaterials, 2009, 30, 6041–6047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Alshehri, A. M. Ilyas, A. Hasan, A. Arnaout, F. Ahmed and A. Memic, J. Med. Chem., 2016, 59, 8149–8167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hong, K. Y. Kim, H. J. Wook, S. Y. Park, K. D. Lee, D. Y. Lee and H. Lee, Nanomedicine, 2011, 6, 793–801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xu, M. Liu, M. Lan, H. Yuan, W. Yu, J. Tian, Q. Wan, X. Zhang and Y. Wei, Toxicol. Res., 2016, 5, 1371 RSC .
M. Chen, X. Qin and G. Zeng, Trends Biotechnol., 2017, 35, 836–846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Chouhan, A. Qureshi, B. Yagci, M. A. Gülgün, V. Ozguz and J. H. Niazi, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 298, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chandrasekaran, S.-K. Choi, Y.-C. Lee, G.-J. Kim and H.-J. Shin, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2014, 20, 3367–3374 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, G. Zeng, P. Xu, Y. Zhang, D. Jiang and S. Zhou, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2017, 4, 720–727 RSC .
A. N. Parks, G. T. Chandler, K. T. Ho, R. M. Burgess and P. L. Ferguson, Environ. Toxicol. Chem., 2014, 34, 247–251 CrossRef PubMed .
S. F. D'Souza, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2001, 16, 337–353 CrossRef .

          M. Zhou, Z. Wang and X. Wang, in Industrial Applications of Carbon Nanotubes, ed. H. Peng, Q. Li and T. Chen, Elsevier, Boston,  2017, pp. 129–150,  DOI:10.1016/B978-0-323-41481-4.00005-8 .
E. Bayram and E. Akyilmaz, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 233, 409–418 CrossRef CAS .
T. Palomäki, E. Peltola, S. Sainio, N. Wester, O. Pitkänen, K. Kordas, J. Koskinen and T. Laurila, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2018, 118, 23–30 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Chen, J. Chen, C. Deng, C. Xiao, Y. Yang, Z. Nie and S. Yao, Talanta, 2008, 76, 763–767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Gautam, K. P. Singh and V. L. Yadav, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2018, 111, 1124–1132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Dervisevic, E. Dervisevic and M. Şenel, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 254, 93–101 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yang, X. Chen, T. Ren, P. Zhang and D. Yang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 207, 690–715 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wasik, A. Mulchandani and M. V. Yates, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 91, 811–816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. L. Tran, T. T. Nguyen, T. T. Huyen Tran, V. T. Chu, Q. Thinh Tran and A. Tuan Mai, Phys. E, 2017, 93, 83–86 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fu, V. Romay, Y. Liu, B. Ibarlucea, L. Baraban, V. Khavrus, S. Oswald, A. Bachmatiuk, I. Ibrahim, M. Rümmeli, T. Gemming, V. Bezugly and G. Cuniberti, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 249, 691–699 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. M. S. Dias, S. L. R. Gomes-Filho, M. M. S. Silva and R. F. Dutra, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 44, 216–221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Bhat, J. Kriel, B. S. Priya, Basappa, N. S. Shivananju and B. Loos, Biochem. Pharmacol., 2018, 147, 170–182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Radogna and M. Diederich, Biochem. Pharmacol., 2018, 153, 12–23 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zanganeh, F. Khodadadei, S. R. Tafti and M. Abdolahad, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2016, 32, 617–625 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, J. Xiao, Y. Sun, L. Wang, X. Dong, J. Ren, W. He and F. Xiao, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2018, 100, 453–461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Dabrowska, L. Uram, Z. Zielinski, W. Rode and E. Sikora, Mech. Ageing Dev., 2018, 170, 22–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mansouri Majd and A. Salimi, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2018, 1000, 273–282 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ji, M. Lee and D. Kim, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2018, 102, 345–350 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ding, S. R. Das, B. J. Brownlee, K. Parate, T. M. Davis, L. R. Stromberg, E. K. L. Chan, J. Katz, B. D. Iverson and J. C. Claussen, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2018, 117, 68–74 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhou, G. Ran, J.-F. Masson, C. Wang, Y. Zhao and Q. Song, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2018, 105, 226–235 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Park, J. Controlled Release, 2014, 190, 3–8 CrossRef PubMed .
W. H. Helfand and D. L. Cowen, Pharm. Hist., 1983, 25, 3–18 Search PubMed .
J. Folkman and D. M. Long, J. Surg. Res., 1964, 4, 139–142 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Folkman, D. M. Long and R. Rosenbaum, Science, 1966, 154, 148 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. H. Yun, B. K. Lee and K. Park, J. Controlled Release, 2015, 219, 2–7 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Kostarelos, L. Lacerda, G. Pastorin, W. Wu, S. Wieckowski, J. Luangsivilay, S. Godefroy, D. Pantarotto, J.-P. Briand, S. Muller, M. Prato and A. Bianco, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 108 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Pippa, D. D. Chronopoulos, D. Stellas, R. Fernández-Pacheco, R. Arenal, C. Demetzos and N. Tagmatarchis, Int. J. Pharm., 2017, 528, 429–439 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Liu, J. T. Robinson, S. M. Tabakman, K. Yang and H. Dai, Mater. Today, 2011, 14, 316–323 CrossRef .
S. Taghavi, A. H. Nia, K. Abnous and M. Ramezani, Int. J. Pharm., 2017, 516, 301–312 CrossRef PubMed .
K.-W. Jung, Y.-J. Won, H.-J. Kong, C.-M. Oh, H. Cho, D. H. Lee and K. H. Lee, Cancer Res. Treat., 2015, 47, 127–141 CrossRef PubMed .
K. A. Cronin, A. J. Lake, S. Scott, R. L. Sherman, A. M. Noone, N. Howlader, S. J. Henley, R. N. Anderson, A. U. Firth, J. Ma, B. A. Kohler and A. Jemal, Cancer, 2018, 124, 2785–2800 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Wang, Y. Feng, L. Zeng, Z. Zhao and T. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 14933–14945 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Yang, Z. Wu, P. Wang, T. Mu, H. Qin, Z. Zhu, J. Wang and L. Sui, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Med., 2017, 28, 110 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Dong, C. Wei, J. Liang, T. Liu, D. Kong and F. Lv, Colloids Surf., B, 2017, 154, 253–262 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Wei, X. Dong, Y. Zhang, J. Liang, A. Yang, D. Zhu, T. Liu, D. Kong and F. Lv, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 273, 264–275 CrossRef .
L. Zheng, S. Wu, L. Tan, H. Tan and B. Yu, J. Biomater. Appl., 2016, 31, 379–386 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Yu, L. Tan, R. Zheng, H. Tan and L. Zheng, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2016, 68, 579–584 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sciortino, S. Fedeli, P. Paoli, A. Brandi, P. Chiarugi, M. Severi and S. Cicchi, Int. J. Pharm., 2017, 521, 69–72 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yan, C. Chen, L. Hou, H. Zhang, Y. Che, Y. Qi, X. Zhang, J. Cheng and Z. Zhang, J. Drug Targeting, 2017, 25, 163–171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, D. Xu, C. Liao, Y. Fang and B. Guo, J. Drug Delivery Sci. Technol., 2018, 43, 461–468 CrossRef CAS .
A. Razzazan, F. Atyabi, B. Kazemi and R. Dinarvand, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2016, 62, 614–625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-P. Zhang, X.-X. Tan, Y.-P. Huang and Z.-S. Liu, Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm., 2018, 127, 150–158 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ding, C. Dou, Y. Wang, F. Liu, G. Guan, D. Huo, Y. Li, J. Yang, K. Wei, M. Yang, J. Tan, W. Zeng and C. Zhu, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2018, 7, 1800026 CrossRef .
A. Schwengber, H. J. Prado, P. R. Bonelli and A. L. Cukierman, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2017, 76, 431–438 CrossRef CAS .
A. Giri, T. Bhunia, A. Pal, L. Goswami and A. Bandyopadhyay, Eur. Polym. J., 2016, 74, 13–25 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, X. Liu, Z. Zhu, N. Wang, W. Sun, C. Chen and Z. He, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 416, 757–765 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ding, N. Sahebgharani, F. Musharavati, F. Jaber, E. Zalnezhad and G. H. Yoon, Ceram. Int., 2018, 44, 7746–7753 CrossRef CAS .

          O. Albayrak, O. El-Atwani and S. Altintas, Hydroxyapatite coating on titanium substrate by electrophoretic deposition method: Effects of titanium dioxide inner layer on adhesion strength and hydroxyapatite decomposition,  2008 Search PubMed .
M. F. Morks and A. Kobayashi, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2007, 253, 7136–7142 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wu, Q. Wang, X. Liu and H. Liu, Carbon, 2013, 51, 335–345 CrossRef CAS .
M. Younesi and M. E. Bahrololoom, Mater. Des., 2010, 31, 234–243 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jianli, N. Philip, L. Jiajun, S. Chunsheng and Z. Naiqin, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 235607 CrossRef .
I.-K. Yoon, J.-Y. Hwang, J.-w. Seo, W.-C. Jang, H.-W. Kim and U. S. Shin, Carbon, 2014, 77, 379–389 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mata, F. J. Oliveira, M. A. Neto, M. Belmonte, A. C. Bastos, M. A. Lopes, P. S. Gomes, M. H. Fernandes and R. F. Silva, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 1831–1845 RSC .
D. Mata, F. J. Oliveira, M. Ferro, P. S. Gomes, M. H. Fernandes, M. A. Lopes and R. F. Silval, J. Biomed. Nanotechnol., 2014, 10, 725–743 CrossRef CAS .
M. Krzesińska and J. Majewska, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2015, 116, 202–214 CrossRef .
C. Domínguez-Trujillo, E. Peón, E. Chicardi, H. Pérez, J. A. Rodríguez-Ortiz, J. J. Pavón, J. García-Couce, J. C. Galván, F. García-Moreno and Y. Torres, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2018, 333, 158–162 CrossRef .

          M. Aslani, M. Meskinfam and H. Aghabozorg, In Situ Biomimetic Synthesis of Gelatin-Carbon Nanotube-Hydroxyapatite Biocomposites as Bone Filler,  2017 Search PubMed .
J. D. Afroze, M. J. Abden and M. A. Islam, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2018, 86, 95–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, Q. Zhao, B. Li, J. Kang, Z. Yu, Y. Li, X. Song, C. Liang and H. Wang, Carbon, 2016, 101, 159–167 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, T. H. Zhang, C. H. Gan and G. Yu, Carbon, 2007, 45, 998–1004 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mukherjee, B. Kundu, S. Sen and A. Chanda, Ceram. Int., 2014, 40, 5635–5643 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gholami and A.-F. M. Noor, AIP Conf. Proc., 2016, 1791, 020015 CrossRef .
D. Sivaraj and K. Vijayalakshmi, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2018, 134, 176–182 CrossRef CAS .
C. Nie, C. Cheng, L. Ma, J. Deng and C. Zhao, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 5955–5965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Nie, C. Cheng, Z. Peng, L. Ma, C. He, Y. Xia and C. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 16, 2749–2756 RSC .
K. Subramani, S. N. Pandruvada, D. A. Puleo, J. K. Hartsfield and S. S. Huja, Prog. Orthod., 2016, 17, 23 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. T. Thom, P. T. Nam, N. T. Phuong, C. T. Hong, N. Van Trang, N. T. Xuyen and D. T. M. Thanh, Vietnam J. Sci. Technol., 2017, 55, 706 CrossRef .
D. Gopi, E. Shinyjoy, M. Sekar, M. Surendiran, L. Kavitha and T. S. Sampath Kumar, Corros. Sci., 2013, 73, 321–330 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kasten, R. Luginbühl, M. van Griensven, T. Barkhausen, C. Krettek, M. Bohner and U. Bosch, Biomaterials, 2003, 24, 2593–2603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Khan, F. Rayan, B. S. Dhinsa and D. Marsh, Stem Cells Int., 2012, 2012, 236231 Search PubMed .
J. C. Moreno-Piraján, R. Gómez-Cruz, V. S. García-Cuello and L. Giraldo, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2010, 89, 122–128 CrossRef .
O. Rodriguez, W. Stone, E. H. Schemitsch, P. Zalzal, S. Waldman, M. Papini and M. R. Towler, Heliyon, 2017, 3, e00420 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Kuroda, Y. Sugawara, T. Deguchi, H.-M. Kyung and T. Takano-Yamamoto, Am. J. Orthod. Dentofacial Orthop., 2007, 131, 9–15 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Miyawaki, I. Koyama, M. Inoue, K. Mishima, T. Sugahara and T. Takano-Yamamoto, Am. J. Orthod. Dentofacial Orthop., 2003, 124, 373–378 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Schatzle, R. Mannchen, M. Zwahlen and N. P. Lang, Clin. Oral. Implants Res., 2009, 20, 1351–1359 CrossRef PubMed .
T. M. Valverde, E. G. Castro, M. H. Cardoso, P. A. Martins-Junior, L. M. Souza, P. P. Silva, L. O. Ladeira and G. T. Kitten, Life Sci., 2016, 162, 115–124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Tenison, J. C. Baena, J. Yu and Z. X. Peng, Key Eng. Mater., 2017, 739, 81–86 Search PubMed .
C. Liu, W. K. Chan, J. Shen, Z. C. Liao, W. K. Yeung and C. S. Tjong, Polymers, 2016, 8, 425 CrossRef .
J. Cao, Y. Lu, H. Chen, L. Zhang and C. Xiong, Int. J. Polym. Mater. Polym. Biomater., 2018, 1–9,  DOI:10.1080/00914037.2018.1455679 .
F. Mirjalili, H. Mohammadi, M. Azimi, M. Hafezi and N. A. Abu Osman, Ceram. Int., 2017, 43, 7573–7580 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liao, Y. Zhang, X. Guan, J. Liu, N. Shan, Y. Li, Y. Xie and H. Liu, J. Biomater. Sci., Polym. Ed., 2016, 27, 1674–1684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Prato, K. Kostarelos and A. Bianco, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 60–68 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. P. Saffar, A. R. Arshi, N. JamilPour, A. R. Najafi, G. Rouhi and L. Sudak, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A, 2010, 94, 594–602 Search PubMed .
N. Saito, H. Haniu, Y. Usui, K. Aoki, K. Hara, S. Takanashi, M. Shimizu, N. Narita, M. Okamoto, S. Kobayashi, H. Nomura, H. Kato, N. Nishimura, S. Taruta and M. Endo, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 6040–6079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. N. Oktar, Mater. Lett., 2006, 60, 2207–2210 CrossRef CAS .
R. T. Franceschi and B. S. Iyer, J. Bone Miner. Res., 1992, 7, 235–246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Chiad, W. Sadik and A. H. Jeryo, Int. J. Energy Environ., 2018, 9, 283–294 Search PubMed .
E. H. Mirza, A. A. Khan, M. A. El-Sharawy, A. Al-Khureif, S. Al-Hijji, K. A. Al-Omair and K. A. Khalil, J. Compos. Mater., 2017, 51, 3931–3940 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Flores-Cedillo, K. N. Alvarado-Estrada, A. J. Pozos-Guillen, J. S. Murguia-Ibarra, M. A. Vidal, J. M. Cervantes-Uc, R. Rosales-Ibanez and J. V. Cauich-Rodriguez, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Med., 2016, 27, 35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. K. Gupta, M. Choosri, K. M. Varadarajan and S. Kumar, J. Mater. Sci., 2018, 53, 7939–7952 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Diagrams of (a) single-walled CNTs (SWCNTs) and (b) multi-walled CNTs (MWCNTs).12	 

 	Fig. 2  CNT configurations: (a) zigzag, (b) armchair, and (c) chiral.18	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of procedures for covalent functionalization of CNTs with biomolecules.23,24,26,30,37	 

 	Fig. 4  Confection process of a biosensor based on CNTs: attachment of functional molecules, production of the biosensor, and posterior application.	 

 	Fig. 5  Recent uses of CNTs as drug carriers.	 


MWCNT86	Oxidation	Cisplatin/doxorubicin	Encapsulation/non-covalent
MWCNT87	Nonea	Doxorubicin	Non-covalent
MWCNT88	Nonea	Doxorubicin/rhodamine	Non-covalent
SWCNT89	Carboxylated	SNX-2112	Non-covalent
SWCNT90	Carboxylated	Paclitaxel	Non-covalent
MWCNT91	Oxidation	Doxorubicin	Non-covalent
SWCNT92	Nonea	Doxorubicin	Non-covalent
SWCNT93	Oxidation/chlorination/cyclodextrin covalent attachment	Formononetin	Non-covalent
SWCNT82	Oxidation/PEI + PEG covalent attachment	Doxorubicin	Non-covalent
SWCNT94	Oxidation	Gemcitabine	Covalent
MWCNT80	Oxidation followed by anionic or cationic attachments	—	—

HA + BSA116	Bone substitution (scaffold)	0.5	–COOH	Compressive strength
–OH
HA113	Bioimplants (bulk)	3	—	Flexural strength
HA + ZnO100	Bone substitution (sintered powder)	1.5	—	Microhardness nanohardness elastic modulus
HA112	Implants (scaffold)	0.5	–COOH	Compressive strength
Hardness (Hv)
Fracture toughness
BG + PEEK133	Bone repair (scaffold)	4	(SDS surfactant)	Tensile strength
Bending strength
Ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene131	Artificial joints (bulk)	0.5	—	Coefficient of friction
PMMA142	Denture implant (bulk)	0.5	—	Young's modulus
HA121	Implant (316L SS) coating	0.5	–COOH	Adhesion strength
CNTs	Carbon nanotubes
SWCNTs	Single-walled CNTs
MWCNTs	Multi-walled CNTs
CVD	Chemical vapor deposition
ITO	Indium tin oxide
HNO3	Nitric acid
H2SO4	Sulfuric acid
H2O2	Hydrogen peroxide
PANI	Polyaniline
AA	Ascorbic acid
AU	Uric acid
Ta-C	Tetrahedral amorphous carbon
GOD	Glucose oxidase
BCNTs	Boron doped with CNTs
POAP	Poly o-aminophenol film
GC	Glassy carbon
HB	Hemoglobin
PCS	Starch
MWCNTs-PAMAM	Polyamidoamine grafted MWCNTs
CNTFET	CNT field effect transistor
AIV	Avian influenza virus
N-MWCNTs	Nitrogen-doped MWCNTs
FA-VACNTs	Vertically aligned CNTs conjugated to folic acid
NH2-VACNTs	Vertically aligned CNTs functionalized with amine
ZnO	Zinc oxide
NRAs	Nanorod arrays
FET	Field effect transistor
PMMA	Polymethyl methacrylate
MTX	Methotrexate
WP/N-CNT	Tungsten phosphide embedded nitrogen-doped CNTs
DDS	Drug delivery systems
DDDS	Dual drug delivery systems
CDDP	Cisplatin
Dox	Doxorubicin
PEG	Polyethylene glycol
FA	Folic acid
CH	Chitosan
PCL	Poly(caprolactone)
RB	Rhodamine B
LDH	Lactate dehydrogenase
ROS	Reactive oxygen species
HYA	Hyaluronan
PTX	Paclitaxel
MRI	Magnetic resonance imaging
Gd–DTPA	Gadolinium–diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid
NGR	Aspargine–glycine–arginine
FMN	Formononetin
HP-β-CD	Hydroxypropyl-β-cyclodextrin
CD-SWCNTs	SWCNT covalently functionalized with cyclodextrin
PEI	Polyethyleneimine
shRNA	Short hairpin RNA
GEM	Gemcitabine

T
m
	Main transition temperatures
HSPC	Hydrogenated soy
DPPC	1,2-Dipalmitoyl-sn-glycerol-3-phosphocholine
LVF	Levofloxacin
LC-MIP	Liquid crystalline molecularly imprinted polymer
TEBV	Tissue engineered blood vessels
RSV	Resveratrol
CHC	Clonidine hydrochloride
SHC	Selegiline hydrochloride
FB	Flurbiprofen
KT	Ketorolac tromethamine
CGM-g	Grafted carboxymethyl guargum
BEN	Benzene
DNT	Lattice
HA	Hydroxyapatite
HA-fMWCNTs	Hydroxyapatite-functionalized MWCNTs
BSA	Bovine serum albumin
SS	Stainless steel
–COO−	Carboxylate ions
Ca2+	Calcium ions
PO43+	Phosphate ions
PEEK	Polyether ether ketone
nHA	Nanohydroxyapatite
BG	Bioactive glass
SDS	Sodium dodecyl sulfate
β-TCP	β-Tricalcium phosphate
PCL	Polycaprolactone

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
