Bottom-up approaches for material and device designing using practical aspects of self-assembled molecular architectures  - Molecular Systems Design & Engineering (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8ME00020D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8ME00020D
(Review Article)
Mol. Syst. Des. Eng., 2018, 3, 804-818Bottom-up approaches for material and device designing using practical aspects of self-assembled molecular architectures

        
          
            Toshihiro 
            Ohtake
          
          
        
      *
      Seiko Epson Corporation, 80 Harashinden, Hirooka, Shiojiri-shi, Nagano 399–0785, Japan. E-mail: otake.toshihiro@exc.epson.co.jp
Received 
      24th April 2018
    , Accepted 21st August 2018First published on 23rd August 2018AbstractSelf-assembly is an ordered form of spontaneous molecular organization via specific inter- or intramolecular interactions. Self-assembled molecular architectures are ubiquitous in biological systems and exhibit specific functions. These unique characteristics are of significant interest for technological platforms in material and device design. More recently, this technology has made considerable progress in furthering the fields of biosensors, optoelectronic devices, and actuators. This review focuses on the practical aspects of dynamic properties in self-assembled molecular architectures such as motion, shape change, photonic efficiency, and mass transport, discusses the current challenges in the field, and suggests future scope and direction in bottom-up design of materials and devices by demonstration of specific cases.Toshihiro OhtakeToshihiro Ohtake is currently a researcher in Seiko Epson Corporation, Japan. He received his BS (1995) from Kyoto University and PhD (2000) from the University of Tokyo. He joined Seiko Epson in 2000 and worked on the development of LC displays, soft actuators, and inkjet technologies. His research interests lie in liquid crystals, redox active molecules, functional polymers based on supramolecular chemistry, and controlled polymerization.

Design, System, Application
The design of molecular shape and intramolecular or intermolecular interactions is an important and challenging subject for constructing assembled molecular architectures capable of exhibiting or enhancing a specific function. In particular, for improving dynamic functions, such as ionic conductivity, energy transfer, and self-healing, the flexibility and reversibility of the assembled molecular system must be considered. Thus, ordered and self-assembled molecular architectures should be reviewed from the viewpoint of practical application. Material design based on supramolecular chemistry may provide one promising strategy. Transduction and enhancement of functions in the form of an integrated molecular system will be the most challenging task for supramolecular chemistry applications. Functional materials should be constructed in an integrated molecular system by considering all the molecular components as well as their assembled states and interactions with the surrounding environment. Significant progress in the device fabrication of solar cells, OLEDs, biosensors, and capacitors has been achieved through the precise design and control of self-assembled molecular architectures. This review presents an overview of the technological aspects involved in self-organized molecular architectures and suggests strategies for fabricating smart and precise devices.

1. Introduction
Advances toward the high performance of functional materials typically require careful examination of the properties inherent to their individual molecules. This is significant for the development of materials accompanied by any change in the bulk properties. There is a significant gap of understanding between the changes that occur in individual molecules and the physical properties of those molecules in an assembled state. In other words, the prediction of the macroscopic behavior of molecular assemblies remains a challenging subject. One explanation is that no effective approach to detect and enhance the changes of molecules has yet been established. In particular, for the fabrication of organic functional materials, the physical properties should be correctly assessed based on the assembled molecular architectures in ordered or disordered fields. Understanding the behavior of molecules in the assembled state under any field (isotropic or anisotropic) is therefore crucial to material design.
The visualization of changes in the individual molecule may provide a solution for the challenge described above where monitoring the molecular behavior could be used as the key strategy. For decades, the concept of molecular transformation has been supported in the field of molecular biology1,2 and has been applied to enhance the specific functions and sensitivities of materials. This review is unique in that it highlights and discusses the control and transformation of the dynamic properties (actuation, sensing, and mass transport) of individual molecules in the assembled state.
We should first understand the functions and structures of molecular assembly on the basis of supramolecular chemistry. Supramolecular chemistry is a major driving force in elucidating the unique and dynamic functions of molecular aggregation. Several research topics involving self-assembly and supramolecular chemistry were chosen and categorized into several fields based on their function. A detailed discussion of each field will provide insight into understanding molecular assembly as an integrated and interrelated system with structural order rather than one made up of individual, isolated molecules.
A general strategy for the design of organic materials with dynamic functions will then be our focus. This will be achieved by making reference to several pioneering studies on molecular assemblies and their functional transformations. Finally, the current status of assembled molecular functions will be summarized, and an outlook on the control and transformation of specific molecular functions will be discussed.
2. Improvement of material performances through molecular self-assembly
A major focus of supramolecular chemistry is the formation of molecular assemblies comprising two or more molecular components that form new structural orders and exhibit new functions in the assembled state. The following three principles govern these function-specific self-assembled architectures: (i) molecular shape, (ii) directional order, and (iii) interactions. Appropriate molecular design and the formation of stable, ordered structures may be important factors to achieve effective control of the specific properties of the primary component (molecules or particles). Stupp et al. discussed the correlation between structures and their functions in the assembled state for polymeric systems in a previous review.3 The authors pointed out two more important factors: lifetime of molecular interactions among molecular units and hierarchical structures. The lifetime of the chemical bond between functional molecular units dominates the dynamic behavior of materials such as adaptability and responsiveness. The lifetime can be tuned depending on the self-assembly mechanism in the polymeric supramolecular system. On the other hand, the highly ordered hierarchical structures provide the scaffold, which can enhance the long-range function correlation in low dimension (e.g., electrical connection of cardiac cells, energy transfer in photoconductive devices). Jenekhe et al. have discussed the potential of one-dimensional nanostructures of π-conjugated molecular assembly for the application in device fabrication.4
Formation of supramolecular architectures focusing on the molecular shape has been investigated over two decades. Percec et al. have reported the formation of columnar structures from pie-shaped amphiphilic molecules,5,6 and these structures are able to mimic the shape and mode of the self-assembled tobacco mosaic virus.7,8 This is an example of a stable molecular architecture produced through effective molecular design. More recently, Lee et al. have reported the dynamic function of noncovalent hexameric macrocycles9 consisting of six bent-shaped aromatic moieties10 with hydrophilic oligoether angles of 120° (Fig. 1). The macrocycles form tubular structures in aqueous solution that undergo contraction–expansion interconversion with altering helical chirality on thermal exposure. The primary causes for this are cluster formation between the pyridine core and the water molecules as well as thermally controlled dehydration that induces contraction and expansion. The authors speculate that the chiral inversion seems to result from two independent orientations of the oligoether dendron moieties with respect to the helical axis and the aromatic plane of the macrocycles. Moreover, the reversible encapsulation of C60 molecules on expansion and contraction of the macrocycles was confirmed by fluorescence spectroscopy. In this work, the molecular shape and chirality are experimentally proven to be the predominant characteristics causing the formation of the supramolecular tubular architecture and controlled pulsating motion. More recently, the incorporation of photo-responsive building blocks to such supramolecular tubular systems has enabled light-driven disassembly behaviors in tubular systems upon illumination.11 This indicates that the small action of individual component molecules in supramolecular architectures can be transmitted to a mechanical strain for disassembling tubular structures.
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of reversible switching of the tubules between expanded and contracted states with chirality inversion. Spore, cross-sectional area of a hollow pore in a slice of the macrocycles; Vpore, volume of a hollow pore in a slice of the macrocyles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 9. Copyright 2012 AAAS. 
Ordered assembled structures created through noncovalent molecular interactions have been studied for decades in the field of chemistry as well as in biology.12,13 Biological systems contain abundant and useful ideas for robotics14–16 and medical applications.17–19 For decades, many attempts have been made to integrate the principles of biological systems to artificial systems.20–22 Biological systems operate in a self-assembly paradigm, and in order to understand and exploit their principles, we should highlight a) controlled molecular interactions,23 b) phase segregated structures,24 and c) functions in hierarchical order.25 The bottom-up design and control of the above key factors will drive significant breakthroughs for the fabrication of functional materials and smart devices.
Recently, nanoparticles (or their aggregates) constructed through self-assembly of polymers or polymer/inorganic hybrids have been reported as promising tools for antibacterial coatings,26 microbioreactors27 and antitumor therapy.28 Zheng et al. constructed a stimuli-responsive smart multifunctional hybrid compartment (SMHC) through the self-assembly of magnetic nanoparticles and thermosensitive copolymers.27 The SMHC possessed stimulus-responsive gates that could be opened or closed in response to temperature and near-infrared light (Fig. 2A). This function can enable encapsulated molecules in the compartments to be controllably released. This work demonstrates the future direction for applications to bioreactors, biosensing devices, and drug delivery vehicles.
 Fig. 2  Schematic images of functional nanoparticles and their aggregation through self-assembly. (A) Reversible on/off of stimulus-responsive gate of SMHCs by either temperature or NIR light for programmable reaction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 27. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (B) Molecular structure of a peptide–porphyrin conjugate (TPP-G-FF) and schematic illustration of self-assembly of TPP-G-FF into photothermal peptide–porphyrin nanodots (PPP-NDs) and schematic illustration of their self-assembly. Reprinted with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
Recently, the application potential of the self-assembled photothermal peptide–porphyrin nanodots (PPP-NDs) composed of peptide and porphyrin conjugates has been demonstrated for antitumor therapy.28L-Phenylalanine–phenylalanine and porphyrin were chosen as components of the peptide–porphyrin conjugate (Fig. 2B). The driving forces for nanodot self-assembly are π-stacking and hydrophilic interactions. The PPP-NDs were stable aggregates, approximately 25 nm in size, as confirmed by dynamic light scattering (DLS) measurements. High light-to-heat efficiency and biocompatibilities were achieved, which can facilitate the application to photothermal antitumor therapy. After treatment with both laser and PPP-NDs, the tumours were effectively ablated. The results of this work demonstrate the potential of self-assembled nanodots as new and effective medical tools for antitumor diagnosis and therapy.
More recently, by focusing on phase separation and molecular interaction, supramolecular polymeric systems with controlled antibacterial29 and antibiotic30 activities have been developed. Zhang et al. prepared polypseudorotaxane consisting of ε-poly-L-lysine hydrochlorides and cucurbit[7]uril (CB[7]).29 In this case, cationic and hydrophobic polymers were employed as guest polymers, which bind to the bacterial surface through ionic interaction and hydrophobic interaction to disrupt the osmotic equilibrium of the lipid bilayer of bacterial cells. On the other hand, the host molecules CB[7] are water-soluble macrocycles and can bind hydrophobic guest molecules due to the hydrophobic properties of their cavities. By tuning the ratio of CB[7] to ε-poly-L-lysine hydrochlorides, antibacterial efficiency can be precisely tuned. Wang and co-workers demonstrated switchable antibiotic polymers.30 They prepared the inactive antibiotic phenylalanyl-polyethyleneimine (PhePEI). The supramolecular crosslinking by CB[8] leads to activation of the antibiotic activity of PhePEI. The authors explained the mechanism of deactivation and activation switching based on the zeta potential of Escherichia coli (E. coli). With the increase of the concentration of CB[8], the zeta potential increased, indicating the crosslinking and cationic group network formation. The network structures of positive charge can effectively interact with the negatively charged surface of E. coli.
A number of synthetic molecular components bearing specific molecular interactive sites have therefore been explored in the past. The combination of molecular recognition and interactions can lead to the generation of new molecular orders. For example, Kato et al. reported the development of stable liquid-crystalline order through hydrogen bonding from two independent components.31
Liquid crystals (LCs) are typical and simple examples of ordered molecular architectures.32,33 In recent years, they have been explored as low-dimensional functional materials on the basis of structure–performance studies. LCs can form ordered structures such as the layered (smectic) phase, the column-like (columnar) phase,34 the unidirectional (nematic) phase, and the three-dimensionally interconnected (cubic) phase.35 The self-assembly of LCs is triggered by molecular interactions and phase separation between the rigid and flexible regions (thermotropic LC) or between the hydrophobic and hydrophilic regions (lyotropic LC).
The structural and dynamic properties of LCs can be utilized to improve the specific functions of materials. LCs confer oriented molecular fields and fluidity, characteristics that are ideal for the construction of dynamic and highly ordered soft matter. In this context, LCs have been thoroughly studied for the development of low-dimensional ion transport36,37 and fabrication of electronic devices.38 The strategy is based on the exploitation of the directional difference in physical properties (anisotropy) and the long-range ordered structures of LCs.
Recently, significant progress has been found for hybrid materials based on LCs with other materials. Giese et al. fabricated a series of photonic hybrid materials combining hydrogen-bonded liquid crystals and nematic mesoporous organosilica films leading to tunable properties in absorption (reflection) with temperatures and photo-irradiation demonstrating the potential for the application in thermochromic or photoresponsive optical devices.39 Enhanced photoresponses were achieved for dye-doped nematic LC complexes by optimizing specific molecular interactions between the dopant (dye) and the host LC.40 Halogenated azobenzene derivatives are examined as dopant molecules, which are capable of interacting with the cyano group of 4-cyano-4′-pentylbiphenyl (5CB) (host LC) and increased absorbance was observed in the polarized absorption spectra. Based on the data of polarized absorption and diffraction efficiency, the authors suggested that increase of the order parameter through supramolecular interactions between the dopant and the LC host resulted in high optical performances. Besides the field of photonic or electronic engineering, the motif of LCs has attracted a great deal of attention as a tool for crystal growth41 and 3D printing.42
Moreover, phase segregation on a molecular level will be critical to achieving function improvements. As can be seen in the case of biological systems, nanophase separation between the hydrophobic and hydrophilic regions in amphiphilic molecules is a driving force for the formation of highly ordered and integrated molecular architectures. Phase segregation has an effect of “concentrating” the domain suitable for exhibiting a specific function. Distributing the functional domain in the area cannot provide an environment for enhancement because of the relaxation or suppression of the other domain. The phase segregated structures43 with various dimensions and orders, which were induced through well-designed interactions and molecular shapes, were suggested as an important factor to control and enhance the dynamically functional properties. In this review, we explore the potential of ordered, self-organized structures for the function control or enhancement of favorable physical properties, bearing LCs in mind as the benchmark.
3. Potential functions of self-assembled architectures for applications
3.1. Photonic performances
During the past decade, self-assembled cholesteric LCs have attracted considerable interest for the construction of photonic devices.44,45 Cholesteric LCs could potentially be applied to tunable laser emissions because of their soft nature, continuous rotation of dielectric tensors with respect to one axis, and changeable helical pitches.46,47 Unlike inorganic materials, a major advantage of LC lasers is the ability to modulate the emission wavelength by changing the electric field. There have therefore been numerous attempts to couple light control to molecular self-assembly in the past decades.
Nanostructures play an important role in the efficiency of photonic crystals. Prum et al. characterized the gyroid nanostructures of butterfly wing scales using small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS). These exhibited vivid structural colors, although their mode of organization is still unknown.48 To understand and predict an optical function of such natural color-producing nanostructures, a precise and detailed characterization of such nanostructures is crucial. The authors have successfully assigned the crystallographic space group symmetry for the single gyroid of butterfly wings based on SAXS. Moreover, the biophotonic nanostructures of wing scales have been discussed on the basis of transmission electron microscopy observations and bandgap calculations which suggest that the formation of a pair of lipid-bilayer membranes consisting of cell plasma membranes and a smooth endoplasmic reticulum is a driving force to enable the formation of pentacontinuous structures with a core–shell double-gyroid morphology (Fig. 3). Such a double-gyroid system transforms into a single gyroid, which is an optically more efficient photonic crystal for the development of butterfly scales. The structural transition from a double to a single gyroid is of pivotal interest in current engineering approaches. Recent studies have shown that the butterflies have photonic nanostructures with a perforated lamellar morphology defined as laminar arrays to induce gyroid morphology by a similar mechanism.49 The development of biophotonic crystals in butterfly scales provides an outlook for the design and fabrication of photonic devices.
 Fig. 3  Three-dimensional model of development of photonic butterfly wing scale cell. (I) Unit-cell volume rendering of the core–shell double gyroid model structure of the form ABCB′A′. Color of each component: extracellular space (red); plasma membrane (black); SER membrane (blue); intra-SER space (yellow). (II) Single gyroid composed of cell plasma membrane surrounding extracellular space. (III) As the scale cell dies, the cellular cytoplasm and membranes (BCB′A′ blocks of the core–shell double gyroid) are replaced with air leaving behind a single gyroid core–shell network of chitin (red) in air. Reprinted with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2010 National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 
Significant progress in photoamplification materials has been made by mimicking the function of biomolecules, a typical example of which can be found in DNA-based molecular systems. DNA-based, ordered structures have been explored as templates on which to assemble functional components for integrated functional arrays. Notable work on organic dyes exhibiting efficient energy transfer has been reported over the last few years.50 Medintz et al. systematically investigated the effect of DNA geometry on FRET efficiency based on donor–acceptor spacings and the number of surrounding donor molecules per center acceptor molecule.51 Cyanine dyes were incorporated into DNA by the succinimidyl ester to the terminal or internal amines, and the two-dye single FRET system was referred to as Cy3n → Cy5, consisting of n surrounding donors (Cy3) and a central acceptor (Cy5) with n = 1, 2, 4, and 8 for linear, bifurcated, Holliday junction, and eight-arm star arrangements,52 respectively. Donor–acceptor spacings were varied for each geometry. The results from further investigations on four-dye photonic wire systems suggest that DNA controls dye spacings with high accuracy for efficient energy propagation through multistep FRET transfer. The authors mentioned DNA origami53 rectangles as more complex arrangements, capable of controlling pathways of energy transfer on the single molecular level.54
The DNA origami technique has been extensively studied and was found to effectively organize chromophores by using the base pair accuracy of DNA. This organization of chromophores in DNA results in the enhancement of the antenna effect, where donor molecules surround center acceptor molecules forming a “ring” arrangement.55 As shown in Fig. 4, a significant improvement in the antenna effect was observed by adopting a ring arrangement of donor molecules rather than a simple linear arrangement. This work shows that ordered architectures of DNA origami can control precise geometries and spacings of chromophores, leading to efficient light capture and energy transport, and have the potential to fabricate molecular-level applications such as emitting56,57 and sensing devices.58 DNA origami techniques were applied to precise control of molecular aggregates such as gold nanorod clusters59 and colloidal liquid crystals.60 Furthermore, the size limitation in constructing DNA origami was overcome by fabricating the long circular ssDNA.61 These latest studies demonstrate the future potential of DNA origami techniques as structural and size-controlling tools in various applications.
 Fig. 4  (a) Ring of Cy3 donor dyes (green) surrounds a Cy5 acceptor dye (red) on a flat, square-shaped DNA origami platform. The zoomed-in window shows the precise fluorophore attachment sites using a caDNAno scheme. (b) AEtot as a function of number of adjacent donors N with linear fit (red line). (c) Direct comparison between antenna effect (AEsmtot) obtained from single molecule measurements and the one (AEtot) obtained from ensemble measurements. Reprinted with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
As shown in this section, the efficiency of photonic performances can be determined by the spatial geometries of chromophores, which should allow for favorable energy transfer and have optimum bandgaps to obtain stable, ordered molecular aggregations. To achieve high optical performances by the spontaneous arrangement of molecules, insightful molecular design is required. It should be based on the precise understanding and prediction of favorable arrangements, molecular interactions, and molecular orbitals.
3.2. Mechanical motion
For years, research interest in stimuli-responsive conformational switching was significantly motivated by the fact that multistable molecular systems can have applications in molecular logic, molecular electronics, signal transmission, sensors, and actuators. Irie62 and Minkin63 comprehensively reviewed recent progress in the field of bistable molecular switching. A major challenge that remains is how to transform the structural changes in these small molecules into visible changes in the macroscopic mechanical properties. Recently, Sato et al. reported the thermally induced shape change of a single crystal of a Ni complex. The authors explain that the reorientation of oxalate anions by 90° causes the reconstruction of hydrogen bonding with [NiII(en)3]2+ molecules, leading to pronounced crystal deformations.64 This work suggests that the change in configuration of the central molecules (cations) can be cooperatively induced by a shape or directional change of the partner molecules (anions) through intermolecular interactions. They also experimentally demonstrated the importance of molecular interactions for transforming small changes in individual molecules (conformation or direction) into macroscopic shape changes in their aggregated or bulk states.
Transformations of photochemical isomerization into mechanical work have been extensively studied over the last two decades. Macroscopic orientational changes in liquid-crystalline media caused by the isomerization of embedded dopants are typical examples of propagated function change (structure) leading to self-organized molecular assembly.65–68 Feringa et al. reported on the rotational reorientation induced from cholesteric liquid-crystalline films caused by the light-driven helical twisting power of chiral molecular motors.67,68 The authors explain that the mechanism of rotational reorientation results from the change in direction of the helical axis leading to an unfavorable configuration, and to compensate for this, the local order around the defects has to change to form similar director fields.
Moreover, microparticles with sizes ranging from 10 μm to 60 μm, which exceed the size of molecular motor 1, were successfully rotated on the film (Fig. 5). On irradiation, the rod rotated in a clockwise direction, and when irradiation was stopped, the rod started to rotate in a counterclockwise direction. The rotation behavior of other particles with different shapes and masses has been investigated. It was concluded that not only the shape of the particle but also its mass are crucial for rotation. The conformational change of a photoresponsive dopant into mechanical work is photochemically driven to induce conformational changes in the molecular motors that cause perturbations in the helical pitch and orientation of the cholesteric LCs, thereby modifying the surface tension. Owing to the interaction between particles and the LC film, the particle will move in response to the change in surface tension. This study clearly indicates that liquid-crystalline materials can form self-assembled media suitable for the evaluation of the transformation of topological changes in embedded functional dopants. The small actuation associated with rotational reorientation will lead to macroscopic deformations if ordered fields involving enhanced molecular interactions between media molecules are formed such that the interactions do not relax or suppress the topological changes of the dopant molecules.
 Fig. 5  (A) Chemical structure of molecular motor 1 and (B) optical micrographs of a glass rod rotating on an LC film doped with molecular motor 1, during irradiation with UV light (λ = 365 nm). The rod and the cholesteric texture rotate in a clockwise fashion; the pictures (a) to (p) were taken at 15 s intervals, except for picture (q), which was recorded 11 s after (p). During the depicted process, the rod made approximately 2.5 full turns. The dimensions of the rod are 5.0 × 28.4 μm; scale bar, 50 μm. Glass rod, 28 μm long, 5 μm in diameter. The crossed arrows indicate the directions of the crossed polarizers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society. 
The challenge for such photo-driven supramolecular molecular motors is that the motion stops when they reach a photo-stationary state. Brasselet et al. demonstrated continuous and unidirectional rotation of LC structures.69 The authors prepared cholesteric LCs embedded with chiral molecular motors 2 and a shape-persistent chiral co-dopant 3 (Fig. 6). The two key factors for the achievement are frustration release and use of co-dopant. The frustration release can induce a local defect structure with symmetry breaking accompanied by the rotation of a newly generated asymmetric pattern. The co-dopant functions to drive photo-induced winding structures in helical structures. By adjusting the ratio of 2 and 3, the prepared LCs can exhibit opposite helical handedness at full conversion of chiral dopant. Moreover, several important features of this system were pointed out: (1) elasticity of LCs, (2) different diffusion coefficients between the normal state and the photo-isomerized state of the chiral dopant, (3) non-local feedback loop involving the spatial concentration gradient of chiral motors, and (4) macroscopic orientational order of LCs.70 This work demonstrated the unique approach of amplification of molecular motion using the interplay of the twist of the supramolecular structure of LCs and the diffusion of the chiral dopant in the LCs.
 Fig. 6  Chemical structure of chiral molecular motor 2 and co-dopant 3. 
The photoisomerization of azobenzene derivatives has been extensively investigated because of their drastic structural changes aimed at controlling dynamic surface tension71,72 or noncontact mechanical work.73–75 Ikeda et al. reported the photoisomerization of azobenzene molecular units to transform their shape significantly within a polymeric system.76,77 Shishido et al. investigated in detail the mechanism of the bending motion of aligned azobenzene-functionalized liquid-crystalline polymers. It was proposed that for bending motion, the free volume effect in polymer chains plays an important role in addition to the change in the order parameter associated with trans–cis photoisomerization.78
A typical example of deformation in a highly ordered crystalline system was reported by Irie et al., where the reversible changes in molecular crystals based on the photochromism of diarylethene derivatives were studied.79 On irradiation with UV light, a drastic shape change from square to lozenge shape was observed for a single crystal of 1,2-bis(2-ethyl-5-phenyl-3-thienyl)perfluorocyclopentene. On the other hand, a rectangular single crystal of 1,2-bis(5-methyl-2-phenyl-4-thiazolyl)perfluorocyclopentene shows approximately 5–7% contraction. X-ray crystallographic analysis of the crystal demonstrates the unusual deformation and reversibility caused by photoisomerization in the crystal lattice, which are unlike conventional crystal–crystal transformations. These results suggest that the molecular packing differs substantially between the two stable states (open ring and closed ring) and that the strong association between molecules in highly ordered crystal lattices is an important factor for macroscopic deformation and short response time (on the order of 105 times faster compared with that of polymeric systems).
For other types of mechanical work, redox systems have also been widely studied because of their stable states involving charged species and strong coulombic interactions. However, efficient structural transformation80–84 resulting from redox switching into macroscopic deformation85–87 or volume change88 remains a challenging subject. Stoddart et al. prepared self-assembled monolayers of redox-active bistable [3]rotaxane on gold-coated microcantilevers and demonstrated a clear and reversible bending motion of the microcantilever.86,87 Such redox-active rotaxane combined with the ordered structures of LCs can form superstructures, suggesting the potential of self-assembled rotaxanes for anisotropic mechanical work.89
Strategies of self-assembly can be applied not only to the formation of ordered architectures of organic molecules but also to the manipulation of inorganic nanoparticles.90 Gold, iron oxide, and platinum nanoparticles (NPs) were self-assembled onto the surface of a single crystal of poly(ε-caprolactone), leading to multifunctional nanomotors. On the formation of AuNPs on the polymer single crystal, the structures of AuNPs became clearly visible under an optical microscope, whereas no clear image was observed before the formation of the AuNPs (Fig. 7). Such an enhanced visualization of the nanoparticles is caused by the strong surface plasmon resonance (SPR) properties of AuNPs and could potentially be used as tools for markers. After introducing the PtNPs, autonomous movement of the nanomotors can be observed in 15% H2O2 solution owing to their catalytic function, which decomposes H2O2, generating O2 bubbles. The bubbles are a driving force for directional motion of the nanomotors.91 In this case, the PtNPs can propel the nanomotors with a speed of 30 μm s−1. Remote control with a magnetic field was achieved after incorporating Fe3O4NPs into the nanomotors. Although an individual Fe3O4NP exhibits a weak magnetic field response, ensembles of Fe3O4NPs as a dense layer on the nanomotors lead to enhanced magnetic responses. Other than inorganic nanoparticles, the manipulation of nanomotors such as motor proteins has also been reported.92,93 The authors demonstrate strategies of fabricating density- and size-controllable multifunctional nanomotors exhibiting SPR properties, autonomous movement, and cargo transportation via the self-assembly of Au, Pt, and Fe3O4 nanoparticles.
 Fig. 7  (A) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of a nanoparticle-based nanomotor and (B) series of optical images (photos a–d) taken at 1 s intervals showing the autonomous movement of the nanoparticle-based nanomotor. Scale bar: 20 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
Unlike the photonic amplification described in the previous section, the dynamic factors that induce deformation or motion should also be taken into account. Fig. 8 depicts the image of macroscopic volume change through topological change of functional dopants. On the basis of Feringa's explanation on the photochemical control of small particles in an LC solvent doped with photoresponsive molecular motors, an outlook on the transformation of topological change of small molecules into macroscopic mechanical work is reached by considering the following points:
 Fig. 8  Schematic image for macroscopic dimension change induced by topological change of functional dopants. (A) Functional dopant embedded in surrounding molecules. (B) Topological defect induced by conformational change of functional dopants. (C) Reorientation of surrounding molecules. (D) Volume change of surrounding molecules. 
(a) The conformational change in molecules should induce topological defects in the surrounding environment (Fig. 8A and B).
(b) In response to the topological defects, a reorientation of surrounding molecules will occur in a thermodynamically favorable manner (Fig. 8C).
(c) The modulation of physical properties such as volume (density) or surface tension will be caused by the topological or orientational variation described above (Fig. 8D).
In the case of bulk materials, restriction through molecular interaction and fluidity by the free volume effect or conformational strains may also coexist in an appropriate ratio for structural molecular transformation into macroscopic mechanical work of materials to occur. To achieve this material design, a quantitative understanding of the molecular interactions between functional dopants and surrounding molecules may be required.94 If small changes in molecules can induce changes in the density of surrounding molecules with properly balanced molecular interactions, then this will lead to macroscopic deformations in controlled and oriented molecular fields.
4. Application of supramolecular architectures to fabrication of devices
Recent progress in stimuli-responsive actuating materials can be found in the field of robotics.95–97 Based on liquid-crystal elastomer (LCE) technologies, a photo-driven bio-mimicking artificial flytrap was fabricated by Priimagi et al.98 The gripping device can capture an object in response to changes in light intensity (Fig. 9). The macroscopic deformation is triggered by a light-induced alignment change of the LC moieties, which leads to different strains across the film thickness. When an object enters into the field of view and the light is scattered, actuator deformation occurs to capture the object. Moreover, the gripping device can capture and sustain the object's weight, which is hundreds of times larger than the mass of the actuator itself. The most important feature of this work is that the gripping device was demonstrated to operate spontaneously in response to a change in environment (light intensity) and the operation was reversible. The reversible nature of this action demonstrates significant innovation in the field of robotics. As shown by this work, the volume change and deformation alone were the main focuses over the last two decades; however, the focus has shifted to the fabrication of integrated systems exhibiting a smart function. In the near future, such smart devices will be installed more frequently into products and applications.
 Fig. 9  (A) Schematic drawing of the light-triggered artificial flytrap at its open stage, when no object has entered its field of view. No light is back-reflected to the LCE actuator, which remains in the open stage. (B) The flytrap closes when an object enters its field of view and causes optical feedback to the LCE actuator. Light-induced bending of the LCE leads to closure action, thus capturing the object. The insets of (A) and (B) show the schematic molecular orientation in the LCE actuator at the open and closed stages. Reprinted from ref. 98. Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. 
There are some reports which demonstrate that self-assembly can contribute to the performance improvement of energy devices. The cooperative self-assembly of organic and inorganic molecules results in mesostructured TiO2 shells that exhibit improved lithium storage properties.99 Surfactant hexadecylamine (HDA) was first added to the dispersed solution of nanoparticles, followed by the addition of titanium isopropoxide (TIP), as TiO2 precursors, leading to nanoparticles coated with HDA/TIP composites. HDA forms rod-like micelles in TiO2 domains, and the micelles can become porous after thermal treatment of the composites.
A pronounced improvement in the electrochemical performance was confirmed for cTiO2 hollow spheres. Upon discharge–charge cycles with the current ranging from 1 C to 30 C, the cTiO2 hollow spheres showed stable and high capabilities. Even after over 50 high-rate discharge–charge cycles, the capacity returned to its initial value. The authors speculated that the improved electrochemical properties could be attributed to the well-controlled cavities in mesoporous TiO2 nanoshells, leading to a stable, dispersed state of the nanoparticles and electrical connection with other grains. This effect can cause improved performances compared with those previously reported.100–102 The authors explained the outstanding electrochemical properties of TiO2 nanoshells as follows: (a) short diffusion distance of lithium ions owing to the small sizes of nanocrystals and thin shells; (b) suppression of aggregation through robust shell structures; and (c) high surface area providing active sites suitable for electrochemical reactions.101 In this work, the authors demonstrated the potential of self-assembly for the application of well-controlled inorganic or metal surfaces for high-performance electrodes.
Chemical self-assembly can enable the high-density deposition of carbon nanotubes with high resolution.103 Carbon nanotubes were deposited on narrow trenches (70–200 nm) at a high density of 1 × 109 cm−2 by exploiting the self-assembly of 4-(N-hydroxycarboxamido)-1-methylpyridinium iodide (NMPI) and the ion exchange of corresponding anions. This technique achieved the accurate placement of single-walled carbon nanotubes with high resolution and a low angular deviation of ±30°. The self-assembled monolayer of NMPI was prepared on HfO2 regions, and their counter anions (I−) were exchanged with anionic surfactant-wrapped carbon nanotubes leading to high selectivity and location accuracy. The device yield was higher than 90% for 150 and 200 nm trench widths. When surface cleaning was conducted before the deposition of NMPI, the highest device yield was obtained, indicating that surface cleanliness is crucial for nanotube density and this is of great industrial advantage. Comparable device performances were obtained using chemical self-assembly compared with those previously reported by the deposition of nanotubes from the solution.104 This suggests that chemical self-assembly is a promising strategy to improve the angular and positional order of nanoparticles. By focusing on molecular self-assembly, improvement on ionic conductivities105,106 and photovoltage107 has been intensively attempted over the last two decades for better performance in capacitors, lithium ion batteries, and photovoltaic devices.
Improvement in device performances via self-assembly, based on inorganic materials as well as organic ones, has also been shown. NiCo2O4 platelets self-organized at the hexane/water interface, forming a uniform nanofilm with a specific orientation.108 Sharp diffraction associated with the [111] direction via X-ray diffraction measurements indicated that the platelets were aligned parallel to the substrate surface. Moreover, scanning electron microscopy observations confirmed the densely packed film structure. Under a fixed voltage of 1.0 V, micro-ampere (μA) order photocurrents (1.4 and 3.0 μA illuminated by 550 nm light and white light, respectively) were observed. These differ from those previously reported from similar photovoltaic devices based on V2O5 nanowires,109 In2Ge2O7,110 and ZnSe nanobelt111 exhibiting a photocurrent in the range of pA to nA. The improved photocurrent may be due to the effect of a collection of a large number of NiCo2O4 platelets. Moreover, a favorable response in the millisecond timescale for the construction of the photodetector was observed using this technology. The reasons for the rapid response time are as follows: (1) alternation of the junction barrier between illuminated and dark states; (2) efficient absorption and carrier generation guaranteed by the high crystal quality of NiCo2O4 platelets; and (3) uniform 2D morphology with a large surface-to-volume ratio causing the defects or dangling bonds suppressing the re-combination ratio of carriers. The technique provides a future outlook not only for the fabrication of photosensors but also for the development of high-frequency and high-speed optoelectronic devices.
Solar energy has been considered as a promising source of energy to solve the global problems associated with energy shortages. For two decades, organic energy-generating devices have attracted considerable attention since the first report of dye-sensitized solar cells.112 Recently, research attention in this field has primarily focused on molecular function113 and the cell structures.114 Incorporating self-assembly into molecular design affords a promising strategy for the construction of solar cells.
A theoretical approach to enhancing the photon-to-charge carrier efficiency in light-harvesting devices was demonstrated by Creatore et al.115 The specific arrangement of chromophores caused by dipole–dipole interactions leads to the quantum interference effect, which can amplify photocurrents and power outputs. The stable, delocalized state formed by dipolar coupling may be an important factor of this enhancement. The photovoltaic performance (j–V and power P = j·V, where j and V denote the current density and voltage, respectively) was evaluated based on reaction center inspired quantum heat engine models. Both j and P were proven to be enhanced for the case of coupled donors. An enhancement of up to 25% was observed for a peak current and relative efficiency of power. The potential of self-assembly as a strategy to further make progress on light-absorption devices has been discussed in other studies.116–118
The impact of the polymer's self-assembling properties on the solar cell device's performance was experimentally demonstrated by Beaujuge et al.119 The effect that substituted side-chains in poly(benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]-dithiophene–thieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6-dione) (PBDTTBD) have on self-assembly and solar cell performance was examined (Fig. 10). Longer and linear alkyl chain substituents on either benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]-dithiophene (BDT) or thieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6-dione (TPD) resulted in a decrease of short-circuit current density (JSC) and fill factors. The orientation of the polymer backbone was analyzed by X-ray scattering. The thin film of 2EH/C8 shows a partial arc pattern (Fig. 10d) characteristic of π–π stacking, which indicates a preferential “face on” orientation with respect to the substrate. On the other hand, for C14/C8, no trace of an ordered structure was observed, indicating nearly isotropic order. In this work, a clear correlation between the polymer backbone orientation and the device's performance was drawn. For further improvement, the authors seek to modulate the number of aliphatic carbons in the TPD moieties. The improved JSC and fill factor (FF) could be observed for a branched alkyl chain. The shape of the alkyl chain (linear or branched) affects the device's performance, whereas the length of the chain (number of aliphatic carbons) does not. The correlation between molecular design and solar cell performance120,121 should be discussed, and the approach described will provide us with key guidelines on improving energy-harvesting devices.
 Fig. 10  (a) Synthesis of PBDTTPD(R1/R2) derivatives bearing alkyl side chains with various lengths and branching. (b) Characteristic J–V curves of BHJ solar cells fabricated from PBDTTPD(2EH/C8), PBDTTPD(C14/C8), and PBDTTPD-(C12/C8) under AM1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2). (c) EQE spectra of the BHJ devices. (d) GIXS patterns of (left) PBDTTPD-(2EH/C8) and (right) PBDTTPD(C14/C8) in optimized BHJs with PC71BM. The scattering intensity is plotted on a logarithmic scale and normalized in each GIXS pattern. Reprinted with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
Molecular aggregation induces significant changes in photonic performances that cannot be estimated from the intrinsic isolated molecules. Typical examples can be found in organic light-emitting materials, as demonstrated by Tang et al. for aggregation-induced emission (AIE). AIE may be a promising approach to improve the efficiency of solid-state luminescence by suppressing concentration quenching.122,123 Yasuda et al. experimentally demonstrated the effectiveness and future prospects of AIE by fabricating organic light-emitting diodes.124 In this case, thermally activated, delayed fluorescence by utilizing up-conversion from the nonradiative T1 state to the radiative S1 state was observed. As a consequence of such unique aggregation-induced, delayed fluorescence (AIDF), a high external electroluminescent quantum efficiency of over 10% was achieved for Janus carbonate derivatives. This suggests that controlled conformations and aggregation states as well as molecular design are important considerations to improve AIDF properties in the solid state. Further information regarding the correlation between optoelectrical properties and molecular order in aggregated states may lead to the advancement of this field.
Recently, ordered nanochannels formed through molecular interactions have provided a significant contribution in the field of energy-storage devices. The high performance of lithium batteries has been achieved by utilizing two-dimensional nanostructured electrolytes.125 Liquid-crystalline electrolytes consisting of mesogen-containing carbonate, lithium salt (LiTFSI), and ethylene or propylene carbonate were constructed (Fig. 11). The ionic conductivity of the ternary mixture was 20 to 60 times higher than those of binary mixtures of mesogen-containing carbonate and LiTFSI. Under the current rate of 5 mA g−1, the liquid-crystalline electrolyte showed high discharge capacities of 151 mA h g−1 and 138 mA h g−1 at 60 °C and room temperature, respectively. The high performance at ambient temperature is crucial for practical use. In this case, the noncovalent interactions forming the supramolecular assembly of mobile molecules (ions and electrolytes) and carbonate molecules play a key role for the formation of an efficient environment for ion transportation.
 Fig. 11  Schematic illustration of the strategy to enhance the ion conductivities for Li-ion transport in the nanostructured LC electrolyte for the lithium-ion battery. Reprinted with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
Significant progress in device fabrication has been found in the field of biosensors126 and bioelectronics.127 Pei et al. prepared enzyme-like nanofiber hydrogels through the self-assembly of guanosine and KB(OH)4 with a spontaneous incorporation of hemin. After the electrochemical deposition of polyaniline onto the hydrogel fibres and doping with protons, the hydrogel exhibited high catalytic activities and mechanical properties suitable for flexible bioelectronic devices (Fig. 12). The authors fabricated glucose-sensing devices wherein the oxidation of glucose in the presence of H2O2 can be detected by a color change in the hybrid hydrogel. This work demonstrated that the properties of the self-assembled molecular architectures contributed to the precise fabrication of highly sensitive sensing devices.
 Fig. 12  (a) Image of the glucose sensor based on GOx-loaded H/G4–PANI hydrogel for the detection of glucose. b) The photo of the glucose sensor device. Reprinted with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons. 
It has been demonstrated that molecular self-assembly can have a significant impact on device performance. However, improvement of the performance cannot be achieved by material design alone. For example, in the case of displays, the geometry of electrodes, signal inputs, shapes, and classes of elements are also important factors for device design. Determining suitable ways of self-assembly in integrated devices will be the subject of device development for the next generation.
5. Outlook and concluding remarks
This review has taken a general view of the control and transformation effects of the specific function of molecules in self-assembled molecular architectures. The examples introduced here involve aligned molecular fields triggered by self-assembly. Such ordered fields provide us with a long pass for mass transportation or environment favorable for exhibition of specific properties. From the viewpoint of molecular design, the formation of molecular fields containing “loose packing” to guarantee the dynamic nature of individual molecules and high order causing structural anisotropy should enable the significant transformation of physical properties with high efficiencies. Molecular design and metastable ordered structures have been explicitly detailed for liquid-crystalline molecules. The correlation between the transition temperature (indicative of thermal stability) and the lateral substituent (steric and electronic effect) was demonstrated by investigating the free volume effect, and it may provide us with a promising outlook for the design of self-assembled molecular architectures.8
As discussed in section 2, a phase separated structure is an important factor in forming ordered structures to exhibit specific functions. In addition, the arrangement of many different functional domains on the molecular level will be a challenge in the fabrication of nanoscale devices (e.g., molecular logic circuit). To achieve this, microfabrication as well as interfacial domain analysis with different functions will be required.
This review has primarily focused on functional transformation in the assembled states of individual molecules. It does, however, appear that synchronizing and integrating many favorable specific functions will be the next great obstacle to overcome in the future. The concept described in this review also may be applied to “static amplification” such as biomineralization.128–130 To further facilitate the application of molecular self-assembly into practical use, we should seek to understand the “mutual communication” between molecules.
Conflicts of interest
The author declares no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
The author thanks Dr. Shinobu Yokokawa, Masaya Ishida, Naoyuki Toyoda, and Hiroshi Kiguchi of Seiko Epson for helpful suggestions and encouragement.
References
M. M. Ali, F. Li, Z. Zhang, K. Zhang, D.-K. Kang, J. A. Ankrum, X. C. Le and W. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 3324–3341 RSC .
M. E. Tanenbaum, L. A. Gilbert, L. S. Qi, J. S. Weissman and R. D. Vale, Cell, 2014, 159, 635–646 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Aida, E. W. Meijer and S. I. Stupp, Science, 2012, 335, 813–817 CrossRef PubMed .
F. S. Kim, G. Ren and S. A. Jenekhe, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 682–732 CrossRef .
V. Percec, D. Tomazos, J. Heck, H. Blackwell and G. Ungar, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2, 1994, 31–44 RSC .
B. M. Rosen, M. Peterca, K. Morimitsu, A. E. Dulcey, P. Leowanawat, A. M. Resmerita, M. R. Imam and V. Percec, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 5135–5151 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Klug, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1983, 22, 565–582 CrossRef .
Y. Tian, X. Yan, M. L. Saha, Z. Niu and P. J. Stang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 12033–12036 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Huang, S.-K. Kang, M. Banno, T. Yamaguchi, D. Lee, C. Seok, E. Yashima and M. Lee, Science, 2012, 337, 1521–1526 CrossRef PubMed .
H. J. Kim, J. H. Lee and M. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 5811–5814 Search PubMed .
J. W. Fredy, A. Méndez-Ardoy, S. Kwangmettatam, D. Bochicchio, B. Matt, M. C. A. Stuart, J. Huskens, N. Katsonis, G. M. Pavan and T. Kudernac, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 11850–11855 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Ye, A. J. Shuhendler, L. Cui, L. Tong, S. S. Tee, G. Tikhomirov, D. W. Felsher and J. Rao, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 519–526 CrossRef PubMed .
W. W. Grabow and L. Jaeger, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 1871–1880 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Cully, J. Clune, D. Tarapore and J. B. Mouret, Nature, 2015, 521, 503–507 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Pfeifer, M. Lungarella and F. Iida, Science, 2007, 318, 1088–1093 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Huang, J. Lv, X. Tian, Y. Wang, Y. Yu and J. Liu, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 17414 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Sun, Y. Hong, Y. Xi, Y. Zou, J. Gao and J. Du, Biomacromolecules, 2018, 19, 1701–1720 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Jia, J. Li, J. Chen, P. Hu, L. Jiang, X. Chen, M. Huang, Z. Chen and P. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 15369–15380 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Y. Mi, X. Jing, B. N. Napiwocki, Z. T. Li, L. S. Turng and H. X. Huang, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 331, 652–662 CrossRef .
N. Singh, M. Kumar, J. F. Miravet, R. V. Ulijn and B. Escuder, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 981–993 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Borsley and S. L. Cockroft, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 786–794 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Salehi-Reyhani, O. Ces and Y. Elani, Exp. Biol. Med., 2017, 242, 1309–1317 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Mishra, D. B. Korlepara, M. Kumar, A. Jain, N. Jonnalagadda, K. K. Bejagam, S. Balasubramanian and S. J. George, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1295 CrossRef PubMed .
W. M. Jacobs and D. Frenkel, Biophys. J., 2017, 112, 683–691 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Sant, D. F. Coutinho, A. K. Gaharwar, N. M. Neves, R. L. Reis, M. E. Gomes and A. Khademhosseini, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1606273 CrossRef .
W. Zheng, Y. Jia, W. Chen, G. Wang, X. Guo and X. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 21181–21189 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Cheng, S. J. Hao, Y. Wan, D. Y. Shan, J. Yang and S. Y. Zheng, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 2081–2089 CrossRef .
Q. Zou, M. Abbas, L. Zhao, S. Li, G. Shen and X. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1921–1927 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Huang, H. Zhang, H. Bai, Y. Bai, S. Wang and X. Zhang, ACS Macro Lett., 2016, 5, 1109–1113 CrossRef .
S. Li, N. Jiang, W. Zhao, Y. F. Ding, Y. Zheng, L. H. Wang, J. Zheng and R. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 5870–5873 RSC .
T. Kato and J. Fréchet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1989, 111, 8533–8534 CrossRef .
J. W. Goodby, R. J. Mandle, E. J. Davis, T. Zhong and S. J. Cowling, Liq. Cryst., 2015, 42, 593–622 CrossRef .
D. B. Amabilino, D. K. Smith and J. W. Steed, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 2404–2420 RSC .
R. J. Bushby and K. Kawata, Liq. Cryst., 2011, 38, 1415–1426 CrossRef .
T. Ichikawa, M. Yoshio, A. Hamasaki, S. Taguchi, F. Liu, X. B. Zeng, G. Ungar, H. Ohno and T. Kato, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2634–2643 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Kato, M. Yoshio, T. Ichikawa, B. Soberats, H. Ohno and M. Funahashi, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17001 CrossRef .
S. Sergeyev, W. Pisula and Y. H. Geerts, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 1902–1929 RSC .
M. Kumar, A. Gowda and S. Kumar, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2017, 34, 1700003 CrossRef .
M. Spengler, R. Y. Dong, C. A. Michal, W. Y. Hamad, M. J. MacLachlan and M. Giese, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1800207 CrossRef .
J. Vapaavuori, A. Siiskonen, V. Dichiarante, A. Forni, M. Saccone, T. Pilati, C. Pellerin, A. Shishido, P. Metrangolo and A. Priimagi, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 40237–40242 RSC .
B. Cantaert, D. Kuo, S. Matsumura, T. Nishimura, T. Sakamoto and T. Kato, ChemPlusChem, 2017, 82, 107–120 CrossRef .
A. Kotikian, R. L. Truby, J. W. Boley, T. J. White and J. A. Lewis, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706164 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Kato, Science, 2002, 295, 2414–2418 CrossRef PubMed .
B. A. Parviz, D. Ryan and G. M. Whitesides, IEEE Trans. Adv. Packag., 2003, 26, 233–241 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, Z. Sun and B. Yang, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 14, 103–114 CrossRef .
V. I. Kopp, B. Fan, H. K. Vithana and A. Z. Genack, Opt. Lett., 1998, 23, 1707–1709 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Coles and S. Morris, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 676–685 CrossRef .
V. Saranathan, C. O. Osuji, S. G. J. Mochrie, H. Noh, S. Narayanan, A. Sandy, E. R. Dufresne and R. O. Prum, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 11676–11681 CrossRef PubMed .
I. W. Hamley, V. Castelletto, O. O. Mykhaylyk, Z. Yang, R. P. May, K. S. Lyakhova, G. J. A. Sevink and A. V. Zvelindovsky, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 10785–10790 CrossRef PubMed .
P. K. Dutta, R. Varghese, J. Nangreave, S. Lin, H. Yan and Y. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11985–11993 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Buckhout-White, C. M. Spillmann, W. R. Algar, A. Khachatrian, J. S. Melinger, E. R. Goldman, M. G. Ancona and I. L. Medintz, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5615 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang and N. C. Seeman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 8169–8176 CrossRef PubMed .
P. W. K. Rothemund, Nature, 2006, 440, 297–302 CrossRef PubMed .
I. H. Stein, C. Steinhauer and P. Tinnefeld, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 4193–4195 CrossRef PubMed .
E. A. Hemmig, C. Creatore, B. Wünsch, L. Hecker, P. Mair, M. A. Parker, S. Emmott, P. Tinnefeld, U. F. Keyser and A. W. Chin, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2369–2374 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Özhalici-Ünal and B. A. Armitage, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 425–433 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. N. Teo, J. N. Wilson and E. T. Kool, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3923–3933 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Pei, X. Zuo, D. Pan, J. Shi, Q. Huang and C. Fan, NPG Asia Mater., 2013, 5, e51 CrossRef .
H. Yu, T. Man, W. Ji, L. Shi, C. Wu, H. Pei and C. Zhang, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2018 DOI:10.1016/j.cclet.2018.04.020 .
M. Siavashpouri, C. H. Wachauf, M. J. Zakhary, F. Praetorius, H. Dietz and Z. Dogic, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 849–856 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Chen, Q. Wang, J. Peng, Q. Long, H. Yu and Z. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 24344–24348 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Irie, Chem. Rev., 2000, 100, 1685–1716 CrossRef PubMed .
V. I. Minkin, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 2751–2776 CrossRef PubMed .
Z.-S. Yao, M. Mito, T. Kamachi, Y. Shiota, K. Yoshizawa, N. Azuma, Y. Miyazaki, K. Takahashi, K. Zhang, T. Nakanishi, S. Kang, S. Kanegawa and O. Sato, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 1079–1083 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Kausar, H. Nagano, Y. Kuwahara, T. Ogata and S. Kurihara, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 508–515 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, A. Urbas and Q. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3342–3345 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Eelkema, M. M. Pollard, N. Katsonis, J. Vicario, D. J. Broer and B. L. Feringa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 14397–14407 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Eelkema, M. M. Pollard, J. Vicario, N. Katsonis, B. S. Ramon, C. W. M. Bastiaansen, D. J. Broer and B. L. Feringa, Nature, 2006, 440, 163 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Orlova, F. Lancia, C. Loussert, S. Iamsaard, N. Katsonis and E. Brasselet, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 304–308 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Bléger, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 274–275 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Ichimura, S.-K. Oh and M. Nakagawa, Science, 2000, 288, 1624–1626 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Y. Shin and N. L. Abbott, Langmuir, 1999, 15, 4404–4410 CrossRef .
T. Hugel, N. B. Holland, A. Cattani, L. Moroder, M. Seitz and H. E. Gaub, Science, 2002, 296, 1103–1106 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Finkelmann, E. Nishikawa, G. G. Pereira and M. Warner, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 87, 15501 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Abid, M. Frigoli, R. Pansu, J. Szeftel, J. Zyss, C. Larpent and S. Brasselet, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 7967–7971 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yu, M. Nakano and T. Ikeda, Nature, 2003, 425, 145 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Yamada, M. Kondo, J. Mamiya, Y. Yu, M. Kinoshita, C. J. Barrett and T. Ikeda, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 4986–4988 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Priimagi, A. Shimamura, M. Kondo, T. Hiraoka, S. Kubo, J. Mamiya, M. Kinoshita, T. Ikeda and A. Shishido, ACS Macro Lett., 2012, 1, 96–99 CrossRef .
S. Kobatake, S. Takami, H. Muto, T. Ishikawa and M. Irie, Nature, 2007, 446, 778–781 CrossRef PubMed .
M. J. Marsella and R. J. Reid, Macromolecules, 1999, 32, 5982–5984 CrossRef .
C. Song and T. M. Swager, Org. Lett., 2008, 10, 3575–3578 CrossRef PubMed .
D. A. Scherlis and N. Marzari, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 3207–3212 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Ohta, C. Ueki, Y. Uchiyama and K. Fujimori, Heterocycles, 2006, 69, 365–375 CrossRef .
T. Ohtake, H. Tanaka, T. Matsumoto, M. Kimura and A. Ohta, J. Org. Chem., 2014, 79, 6590–6602 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Nakahata, Y. Takashima, A. Hashidzume and A. Harada, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 5731–5735 CrossRef PubMed .
T. J. Huang, B. Brough, C.-M. Ho, Y. Liu, A. H. Flood, P. A. Bonvallet, H.-R. Tseng, J. F. Stoddart, M. Baller and S. Magonov, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 5391 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, A. H. Flood, P. A. Bonvallet, S. A. Vignon, B. H. Northrop, H. Tseng, J. O. Jeppesen, T. J. Huang, B. Brough, M. Baller, S. Magonov, S. D. Solares, W. A. Goddard, C. Ho and J. F. Stoddart, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 9745–9759 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Ohtake, H. Tanaka, T. Matsumoto, A. Ohta and M. Kimura, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 14680–14685 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Aprahamian, T. Yasuda, T. Ikeda, S. Saha, W. R. Dichtel, K. Isoda, T. Kato and J. F. Stoddart, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 4675–4679 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Dong, T. Zhou, H. Zhang and C. Y. Li, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5192–5198 CrossRef PubMed .
N. I. Kovtyukhova, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 6049–6056 CrossRef .
K. R. S. Kumar, T. Kamei, T. Fukaminato and N. Tamaoki, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4157–4165 CrossRef PubMed .
A. S. Amrutha, K. R. S. Kumar, T. Kikukawa and N. Tamaoki, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 12292–12301 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Yang, C. Adam and S. L. Cockroft, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10084–10087 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Morris, M. Chavez and C. Tan, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2016, 39, 97–104 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Sydney Gladman, E. A. Matsumoto, R. G. Nuzzo, L. Mahadevan and J. A. Lewis, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 413–418 CrossRef PubMed .
O. S. Bushuyev, M. Aizawa, A. Shishido and C. J. Barrett, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2018, 39, 1700253 CrossRef PubMed .
O. M. Wani, H. Zeng and A. Priimagi, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15546 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Y. Guan, L. Yu, J. Li and X. W. Lou, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501554 Search PubMed .
Z. Wang, L. Zhou and X. W. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1903–1911 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Zhang, H. B. Wu, T. Song, U. Paik and X. W. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 12590–12593 Search PubMed .
H. Ren, R. Yu, J. Wang, Q. Jin, M. Yang, D. Mao, D. Kisailus, H. Zhao and D. Wang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6679–6684 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Park, A. Afzali, S.-J. Han, G. S. Tulevski, A. D. Franklin, J. Tersoff, J. B. Hannon and W. Haensch, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 787–791 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Engel, J. P. Small, M. Steiner, M. Freitag, A. A. Green, M. C. Hersam and P. Avouris, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 2445–2452 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Ohtake, M. Ogasawara, K. Ito-Akita, N. Nishina, S. Ujiie, H. Ohno and T. Kato, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 782–789 CrossRef .
T. Ohtake, Y. Takamitsu, K. Ito-Akita, K. Kanie, M. Yoshizawa, T. Mukai, H. Ohno and T. Kato, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 8109–8111 CrossRef .
L. Schmidt-Mende, A. Fechtenkötter, K. Müllen, E. Moons, R. H. Friend and J. D. MacKenzie, Science, 2001, 293, 1119–1122 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Hu, L. Wu, M. Liao and X. Fang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1988–1992 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Zhai, H. Liu, H. Li, X. Fang, M. Liao, L. Li, H. Zhou, Y. Koide, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2547–2552 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Li, P. S. Lee, C. Yan, T. Zhai, X. Fang, M. Liao, Y. Koide, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5145–5149 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Fang, S. Xiong, T. Zhai, Y. Bando, M. Liao, U. K. Gautam, Y. Koide, X. Zhang, Y. Qian and D. Golberg, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 5016–5021 CrossRef PubMed .
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef .
D. Högberg, B. Soberats, R. Yatagai, S. Uchida, M. Yoshio, L. Kloo, H. Segawa and T. Kato, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 6493–6500 CrossRef .
S. Ito, S. M. Zakeeruddin, P. Comte, P. Liska, D. Kuang and M. Grätzel, Nat. Photonics, 2008, 2, 693–698 CrossRef .
C. Creatore, M. A. Parker, S. Emmott and A. W. Chin, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2013, 111, 253601 CrossRef PubMed .
K. D. B. Higgins, S. C. Benjamin, T. M. Stace, G. J. Milburn, B. W. Lovett and E. M. Gauger, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4705 CrossRef PubMed .
J. L. McHale, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 587–597 CrossRef PubMed .
S. K. Saikin, A. Eisfeld, S. Valleau and A. Aspuru-Guzik, Nanophotonics, 2013, 2, 21–38 Search PubMed .
C. Cabanetos, A. El Labban, J. A. Bartelt, J. D. Douglas, W. R. Mateker, J. M. J. Fréchet, M. D. McGehee and P. M. Beaujuge, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 4656–4659 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Piliego, T. W. Holcombe, J. D. Douglas, C. H. Woo, P. M. Beaujuge and J. M. J. Fréchet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7595–7597 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Mei, D. H. Kim, A. L. Ayzner, M. F. Toney and Z. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20130–20133 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Luo, Z. Xie, J. W. Y. Lam, L. Cheng, B. Z. Tang, H. Chen, C. Qiu, H. S. Kwok, X. Zhan, Y. Liu and D. Zhu, Chem. Commun., 2001, 1740–1741 RSC .
S. Pagidi, N. K. Kalluvettukuzhy and P. Thilagar, Organometallics, 2018, 37, 1900–1909 CrossRef .
R. Furue, T. Nishimoto, I. S. Park, J. Lee and T. Yasuda, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 7171–7175 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Onuma, E. Hosono, M. Takenouchi, J. Sakuda, S. Kajiyama, M. Yoshio and T. Kato, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 159–166 CrossRef .
P. Song, D. Ye, X. Zuo, J. Li, J. Wang, H. Liu, M. T. Hwang, J. Chao, S. Su, L. Wang, J. Shi, L. Wang, W. Huang, R. Lal and C. Fan, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 5193–5198 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Zhong, Q. Tang, S. Wang, H. Zhang, F. Zhang, M. Xiao, T. Man, X. Qu, L. Li, W. Zhang and H. Pei, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706887 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Cosmidis and A. S. Templeton, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12812 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Qin, X. Ren, L. Shan, H. Guo, C. Geng, G. Zhang, S. Ji and Y. Liang, J. Membr. Sci., 2016, 498, 180–191 CrossRef .
T. Nishimura, Polym. J., 2015, 47, 235–243 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:
Toshihiro Ohtake	Toshihiro Ohtake is currently a researcher in Seiko Epson Corporation, Japan. He received his BS (1995) from Kyoto University and PhD (2000) from the University of Tokyo. He joined Seiko Epson in 2000 and worked on the development of LC displays, soft actuators, and inkjet technologies. His research interests lie in liquid crystals, redox active molecules, functional polymers based on supramolecular chemistry, and controlled polymerization.

Design, System, Application
The design of molecular shape and intramolecular or intermolecular interactions is an important and challenging subject for constructing assembled molecular architectures capable of exhibiting or enhancing a specific function. In particular, for improving dynamic functions, such as ionic conductivity, energy transfer, and self-healing, the flexibility and reversibility of the assembled molecular system must be considered. Thus, ordered and self-assembled molecular architectures should be reviewed from the viewpoint of practical application. Material design based on supramolecular chemistry may provide one promising strategy. Transduction and enhancement of functions in the form of an integrated molecular system will be the most challenging task for supramolecular chemistry applications. Functional materials should be constructed in an integrated molecular system by considering all the molecular components as well as their assembled states and interactions with the surrounding environment. Significant progress in the device fabrication of solar cells, OLEDs, biosensors, and capacitors has been achieved through the precise design and control of self-assembled molecular architectures. This review presents an overview of the technological aspects involved in self-organized molecular architectures and suggests strategies for fabricating smart and precise devices.


 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of reversible switching of the tubules between expanded and contracted states with chirality inversion. Spore, cross-sectional area of a hollow pore in a slice of the macrocycles; Vpore, volume of a hollow pore in a slice of the macrocyles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 9. Copyright 2012 AAAS.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic images of functional nanoparticles and their aggregation through self-assembly. (A) Reversible on/off of stimulus-responsive gate of SMHCs by either temperature or NIR light for programmable reaction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 27. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (B) Molecular structure of a peptide–porphyrin conjugate (TPP-G-FF) and schematic illustration of self-assembly of TPP-G-FF into photothermal peptide–porphyrin nanodots (PPP-NDs) and schematic illustration of their self-assembly. Reprinted with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  Three-dimensional model of development of photonic butterfly wing scale cell. (I) Unit-cell volume rendering of the core–shell double gyroid model structure of the form ABCB′A′. Color of each component: extracellular space (red); plasma membrane (black); SER membrane (blue); intra-SER space (yellow). (II) Single gyroid composed of cell plasma membrane surrounding extracellular space. (III) As the scale cell dies, the cellular cytoplasm and membranes (BCB′A′ blocks of the core–shell double gyroid) are replaced with air leaving behind a single gyroid core–shell network of chitin (red) in air. Reprinted with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2010 National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Ring of Cy3 donor dyes (green) surrounds a Cy5 acceptor dye (red) on a flat, square-shaped DNA origami platform. The zoomed-in window shows the precise fluorophore attachment sites using a caDNAno scheme. (b) AEtot as a function of number of adjacent donors N with linear fit (red line). (c) Direct comparison between antenna effect (AEsmtot) obtained from single molecule measurements and the one (AEtot) obtained from ensemble measurements. Reprinted with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) Chemical structure of molecular motor 1 and (B) optical micrographs of a glass rod rotating on an LC film doped with molecular motor 1, during irradiation with UV light (λ = 365 nm). The rod and the cholesteric texture rotate in a clockwise fashion; the pictures (a) to (p) were taken at 15 s intervals, except for picture (q), which was recorded 11 s after (p). During the depicted process, the rod made approximately 2.5 full turns. The dimensions of the rod are 5.0 × 28.4 μm; scale bar, 50 μm. Glass rod, 28 μm long, 5 μm in diameter. The crossed arrows indicate the directions of the crossed polarizers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Chemical structure of chiral molecular motor 2 and co-dopant 3.	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of a nanoparticle-based nanomotor and (B) series of optical images (photos a–d) taken at 1 s intervals showing the autonomous movement of the nanoparticle-based nanomotor. Scale bar: 20 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic image for macroscopic dimension change induced by topological change of functional dopants. (A) Functional dopant embedded in surrounding molecules. (B) Topological defect induced by conformational change of functional dopants. (C) Reorientation of surrounding molecules. (D) Volume change of surrounding molecules.	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) Schematic drawing of the light-triggered artificial flytrap at its open stage, when no object has entered its field of view. No light is back-reflected to the LCE actuator, which remains in the open stage. (B) The flytrap closes when an object enters its field of view and causes optical feedback to the LCE actuator. Light-induced bending of the LCE leads to closure action, thus capturing the object. The insets of (A) and (B) show the schematic molecular orientation in the LCE actuator at the open and closed stages. Reprinted from ref. 98. Copyright 2017, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Synthesis of PBDTTPD(R1/R2) derivatives bearing alkyl side chains with various lengths and branching. (b) Characteristic J–V curves of BHJ solar cells fabricated from PBDTTPD(2EH/C8), PBDTTPD(C14/C8), and PBDTTPD-(C12/C8) under AM1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2). (c) EQE spectra of the BHJ devices. (d) GIXS patterns of (left) PBDTTPD-(2EH/C8) and (right) PBDTTPD(C14/C8) in optimized BHJs with PC71BM. The scattering intensity is plotted on a logarithmic scale and normalized in each GIXS pattern. Reprinted with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic illustration of the strategy to enhance the ion conductivities for Li-ion transport in the nanostructured LC electrolyte for the lithium-ion battery. Reprinted with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Image of the glucose sensor based on GOx-loaded H/G4–PANI hydrogel for the detection of glucose. b) The photo of the glucose sensor device. Reprinted with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
