Surface modification of semiconductor photoelectrodes  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5CP01992C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5CP01992C
(Perspective)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 15655-15674Surface modification of semiconductor photoelectrodes

        
          
            Néstor 
            Guijarro
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Mathieu S. 
            Prévot
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Kevin 
            Sivula
          
        
      *
      Laboratory for Molecular Engineering of Optoelectronic Nanomaterials, Institute of Chemical Sciences and Engineering, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Station 6, 1015-Lausanne, Switzerland. E-mail: kevin.sivula@epfl.ch
Received 
      6th April 2015
    , Accepted 26th May 2015First published on 26th May 2015AbstractPhotoelectrochemical (PEC) cells have emerged as promising devices that afford the direct conversion of solar energy into electric power and/or chemical fuels. Apart from the obvious importance of the bulk properties of semiconductor materials employed as photoelectrodes, the semiconductor–liquid interface has proven to strongly govern surface-related processes, i.e. the stability, charge separation/recombination and catalytic activity. Because of this, numerous surface treatments have been reported in an effort to tailor the physicochemical properties of the semiconductor–liquid interface, and in turn, the overall PEC response. In this Perspective article we provide a brief conceptual overview of these surface engineering treatments, connecting the particular effects on the interfacial energetics with the respective consequences on the performance. The beneficial effects that arise from surface treatment are categorized as (i) the protection of the surface against photocorrosion, (ii) the passivation of deleterious surface states, (iii) the modification of the band edge positions or band bending, and (iv) the selective extraction of carriers and improved catalytic activity. State-of-the-art surface treatments such as the adsorption of organic molecules or ions, the deposition of semiconductor overlayers and metal nanoparticles or etching procedures are exemplified and described with respect to the observed beneficial effects. A common emerging theme from recent work is that one single surface treatment can lead to multiple distinct effects. Overall, we suggest that surface engineering holds the key for effectively managing the intrinsic common defects of native semiconductor photoelectrodes regardless of their nature, leading to improved light harvesting efficiency.
1. Introduction
Harnessing the enormous amount of energy delivered by the Sun to the Earth is a long-standing challenge that, if accomplished on the “tens of terawatts” scale, will afford a sustainable and renewable energy framework capable of meeting current and future energy needs. One of the most versatile approaches to harvest solar energy entails the use of semiconductor materials as antennas to efficiently capture incident light, converting it into free charge carriers that can be subsequently separated and exploited. Both photovoltaic (PV) and photoelectrochemical (PEC) cells are built around this concept, although crucial differences between various technologies emerge as a consequence of the nature of the charge-separation interface.1 Classical p–n junction PV devices are based on an inorganic solid–solid junction which demands a high crystallinity and minimum lattice mismatch to reduce charge recombination. Alternatively, in PEC or “liquid junction” cells the solid–solid charge separation interface is replaced by a semiconductor–liquid junction (SCLJ) that allows an intimate contact between the semiconductor and one or more redox couples present in a liquid electrolyte phase.2 The easily achieved conformal electric contact between the semiconductor and electrolyte present in a PEC cell exhibits clear advantages over traditional solid–solid junctions. Primarily, the use of a SCLJ facilitates the implementation of nanostructured or mesoscopic semiconductor electrodes, which hold promise to enhance charge carrier separation by reducing the minority carrier transport distances.3 Moreover, reduced fabrication costs can be envisioned with “liquid junction” cells as mesoscopic semiconductor electrodes tolerate inexpensive solution-based fabrication techniques. Notwithstanding the advantages of liquid-junction cells, these devices—like PV cells—demonstrate an extreme sensitivity to the physicochemical properties of the interface to the extent that they dramatically determine the performance. Indeed, Nobel laureate Herbert Kroemer famously coined the phrase “the interface is the device”, referring to the essential role that an interface or transition region plays in the action of any device.4
Because of the extreme sensitivity of device performance on the quality of the interfaces in PEC cells, much research effort has focused on understanding and controlling this aspect through surface modification. Indeed, distinct mechanisms have been identified by which surface treatments affect the performance, and often a single surface treatment can generate change through more than one mechanism. In this Perspective article we aim to categorize and overview the most relevant state-of-the-art routes to tailor the properties of the SCLJ emphasizing the beneficial effects on the overall performance of the photoelectrode. First, we will briefly describe the fundamental principles and issues of the semiconductor–liquid interface and the operation of a PEC cell. We next analyze the effects of surface treatments on the properties of the electrode–electrolyte interface. Subsequently, we offer specific examples to illustrate how the surface modifications can ameliorate the energy conversion efficiency for a wide variety of semiconductor photoelectrodes.
2. Theoretical framework and motivation
To begin we define the energetics of the SCLJ (Fig. 1). The model traditionally employed to represent a SCLJ follows the principle of a Schottky barrier (i.e. a semiconductor–metal junction) where the Fermi level of the metal is replaced by the redox potential of the solution.5–7Fig. 1a shows an ideal n-type semiconductor and the electrolyte before contact, i.e. before the equilibration process. A complete PEC device can be assembled by Ohmically connecting the other (rear) side of the semiconductor to a counter electrode and immersing both electrodes in the electrolyte (Fig. 1b). Upon bringing the semiconductor in contact with a conductive phase, in this case the redox electrolyte and a metal counter electrode, a net flow of charge occurs through the interfaces until the chemical potential of the electrons is equilibrated in the three phases. For semiconductors, the chemical potential of electrons is given at the Fermi level, whereas for liquid electrolytes it is determined by the redox couples present in the solution. In the case of an n-type semiconductor with a Fermi level higher (i.e. closer to the energy of a free electron in a vacuum) than the electrolyte redox potential, upon contact electrons flow from the semiconductor to the electrolyte. The remaining positive ions in the semiconductor create a positive space-charge layer and a built-in electric field which bends “up” the semiconductor conduction band (CB) and valence band (VB) edges. Likewise, for a p-type semiconductor with a Fermi level lower than the redox potential of the electrolyte (not shown), the charge equilibration causes a negative space-charge layer within the semiconductor that bends “down” the bands. This “band bending”, defined by qΦSC, results in a potential barrier against electron (n-type) or hole (p-type) transfer into the electrolyte. The space-charge layer, also referred to as a depletion layer (Wsc), as it is depleted of majority carriers, can extend distances from few tens of angstroms to several microns into the semiconductor. Note that the band bending can be changed by applying an electrical bias to the semiconductor, and the applied bias that flattens the band edges is the so-called “flat-band” potential, Efb.1 It is important to bear in mind that this parameter denotes the actual position of the Fermi level of the semiconductor with respect to the reference electrode before equilibration. Therefore, Efb (together with the measured charge carrier density) can provide a reliable estimate of the CB or VB edge positions, thus giving insight into the thermodynamic ability of the semiconductor to reduce/oxidize a given species (with a known redox potential) under illumination. Likewise, in the electrolyte/metal interface a net flow of charges occurs to equilibrate the Fermi level of the metal with one of the electrolyte (defined by qE0redox). In this case, given the high concentration of free electrons in the metal, the Wsc would be negligible. Interestingly, the energy difference between the initial CB edge and the redox potential of the electrolyte (Eredox) upon equilibration ideally determines the so-called barrier height (qΦeB). This energetic parameter indicates the maximum energy that can be extracted from the photogenerated electron–hole pairs in the semiconductor. The equilibration process between a semiconductor and a liquid electrolyte also brings a “mirror” charge layer in the electrolyte adjacent to the semiconductor surface, the Helmholtz layer (HL). This layer, with opposite sign to the charge induced within the semiconductor, is composed of ions from the electrolyte that are adsorbed on the semiconductor surface and extends over a few angstroms.6 The presence of this charged layer at the surface has crucial effects on the energy band diagram as will be discussed later. More specifically, as depicted in Fig. 1b, the potential drop across the HL modifies the band bending, which a priori is expected to be equal to the difference between the work function of both phases upon charge-transfer equilibration.5
 Fig. 1  Energy level diagram of a SCLJ and the PEC cell (a) before and (b) after reaching the equilibrium and (c) under illumination. The parameters mentioned in the text are indicated as follows: Fermi level (EF), bottom of the conduction band (ECB) and top of the valence band (EVB), redox potential of the electrolyte (E0redox), local vacuum level (Evac), work function of the semiconductor (ϕSC) and the redox electrolyte (ϕE), band bending (qΦSC), barrier height (qΦeB), depletion layer (WSC), Helmholtz layer (HL), the potential drop through the Helmholtz layer (VH), the quasi-Fermi level for electrons (EF,n*) and holes (EF,p*), the photopotential (Eph), and the overpotentials for the reduction (ηe) and oxidation (ηp) reactions. 
It is worth nothing that another HL is developed at the electrolyte/metal interface, as occurring in the semiconductor side. Note as well that the vacuum level has been drawn flat throughout the electrolyte since no electric field is expected, given the presence of ions in the electrolyte that compensate it.
Upon illumination of the semiconductor, photons with energy greater than the semiconductor band gap can be absorbed generating electron–hole pairs that are separated by the electric field in the depletion layer and be selectively transported to the SCLJ or the Ohmic rear contact and through the external circuit to the counter electrode. Note that the Fermi level rises upon illumination with Eph, the photopotential. Under these conditions it is useful to consider the splitting of the native Fermi level into two quasi-Fermi levels, one related to the concentration of electrons (EF,n*) and the other to the holes (EF,p*). If the free energy of the photoexcited carriers is suitable, reduction (electrons) and oxidation (holes) of the redox species in solution will be driven separately at the different (opposite) electrode/electrolyte interfaces. As depicted in Fig. 1c, these oxidation and reduction reactions commonly require overpotential (ηp, ηe) to effectively drive the processes, which despite being thermodynamically favored are kinetically sluggish. On the basis of this simple operation principle, if only one redox couple is present, the oxidation and reduction on the electrodes can continuously regenerate the redox couple, directly converting solar energy into electric power (regenerative cell) owing to the constant flow of carriers through the external circuit (Fig. 1c). Alternatively, in the presence of two redox couples, two distinct reactions can occur on the electrodes giving a net change in the electrolyte composition. In such a manner, the solar energy is stored directly in the chemical bonds of the new compounds. This type of PEC cell is referred to as a photosynthetic cell and can be used to produce solar fuels. For example, H2, a well-known chemical energy vector, and O2 can be obtained from water cleavage in a PEC cell.1,5,6,8–11
According to the operation mechanism of PEC cells, the ultimate performance is dictated mainly by four parameters, viz. the light absorption, the carrier transport through the semiconductor, the charge transfer across the liquid-junctions and the stability of the material. Essentially, these parameters are defined by the bulk properties of the semiconductor and by the SCLJ. Traditionally, the carrier photogeneration and transport through the film are considered to be a function of the bulk properties. However, surface-related phenomena such as the charge transfer and the stability rely on the physicochemical properties of the semiconductor–liquid junction.12,13
It must be emphasized that the above-described concept of semiconductor band bending applies to systems where the depletion length is smaller than the size of the crystalline domains in the semiconductor. In nanostructured microporous electrodes the small domain size can lead to negligible band bending if the space charge region cannot be borne inside the nanoparticles and the charges are efficiently screened by the ions in solution. In these systems, the charge transport and transfer processes are controlled by diffusion kinetics and relative electron–hole surface reaction rates.14 Changing the applied bias on an electrode of this type will still raise or lower the Fermi level and will thus affect the charge transfer and transport properties. It is important to note as well that in nanostructured electrodes, where the surface-to-volume ratio is dramatically increased, the carrier transport throughout the semiconducting phase is strongly affected by the nature of the interface. Therefore, a rational control over the electrode–electrolyte interfaces is required to finely adjust the semiconductor properties and further extend their applicability.
3. Surface engineering effects
The surface treatment of the semiconductors can be classified in terms of the function pursued, viz. protection, the passivation of surface states, the modification of the band bending and band edges, and the enhancement of charge separation/surface reactivity. These functions are shown schematically in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  (a) Main effects of surface treatments on semiconductor materials. The protection of the semiconductor against (photo)corrosion by encapsulating with a robust material. (b) Reduction of the density surface states (SS) or passivation by reaction with acid or lewis base reagents (X) which creates new bonding (SS–X) and antibonding (SS–X*) states out of the band gap. (c) Energy band diagram without and with a dipole layer composed of molecules with negative dipole moments, or positive dipoles at the interface, where the ΔV corresponds to the potential drop across the dipole layer. (d) Enhancement of the charge separation by depositing an additional semiconducting layer that selectively accept one of the carriers ((a) and (b) represent the electron extraction and recombination processes, respectively, and the thickness of the arrow qualitatively depicts the probability of each process). 
3.1 Protection
The semiconductor's surface can be visualized as the boundary defined by the outermost atomic layer separating the bulk solid from an adjacent phase, and therefore it is the most sensitive to chemical transformations and corrosion processes. For the sake of understanding, the stability of the overall material can be improved by adding a protective layer that acts as a physical barrier between the harsh external conditions and the semiconductor. Ideally, the protection layer would consist of a conformal surface coating by a robust material, which is sufficiently thick to prevent a direct contact of the semiconductor with the electrolyte but also sufficiently transparent and conductive to avoid the limiting of the light harvesting efficiency or the charge transfer (see Fig. 2a). Electronically, two limiting cases can be described (not shown in Fig. 2a). Given a sufficiently thick encapsulation layer, the semiconductor would not electronically equilibrate with the electrolyte, but rather with the overlayer. In this scenario, the energetics of the semiconductor would be dictated by the so-called “buried” junction created at the interface with the overlayer, instead of by the classical SCLJ described above. Alternatively, in the case where the protection layer is sufficiently thin to allow the direct tunneling of electrons (i.e. a few nanometers) the electronic influence of the overlayer is minimized.
3.2 Passivation surface states
An important aspect of the semiconductor–liquid interface is the presence of surface states which are known to play critical roles as trapping sites and recombination centers. The appearance of these deleterious states stems from the truncation of the semiconductor crystal lattice on the surface. More specifically, the atomic orbitals of the surface atoms can no longer interact/overlap efficiently with their neighbors but instead remain as dangling bonds.15 As depicted in Fig. 2b, the surface states appear within the bandgap of the semiconductor, instead of contributing to the conduction and valence bands. One can further distinguish between “deep” states, near the center of the bandgap, and “shallow” states, closer to the VB or the CB.7 By acting over the surface with reagents that strongly bind the “dangling” atoms (e.g. either lewis acid or base species), it is possible to suppress these surface states. Indeed, the resulting bonding and antibonding orbitals would move away from the band gap, alleviating the deleterious effect of these states.16
3.3 Modification of the band bending and band edges
The surface charge density, defined either by ions from the electrolyte adsorbed on the surface or localized electronic charges in surface states, affects the energetics of the semiconductors.17,18 In the presence of surface states the Fermi level of the bulk semiconductor equilibrates with the surface states instead of with the redox couple of the solution, which brings about a lower band bending.19 As mentioned above, the reaction with electron-withdrawing or -donating species passivates these surface states increasing the band bending.20 Note as well that the homogeneous coating of the photoactive semiconductor with a thin semiconductor overlayer can also affect the band bending. In this case, the equilibration of the Fermi levels at the solid–solid interface dictates the band bending and band positions of the host semiconductor.17,21
In general, the alteration of the electrostatic field across the semiconductor surface can alter the actual position of the energy bands, shifting the CB and VB up or down in energy relative to the redox potential depending on the surface treatment.18,22 This accordingly allows fine tuning of the driving force for the charge transfer processes. A classic example for this phenomenon is the shift of the energy bands reported for oxides in aqueous electrolytes as a function of the pH. Commonly, the surface charge of oxides changes with the pH due to the adsorption of H+ or OH−. In general, ions that specifically adsorb at the SCLJ and affect the band positions are called “potential determining ions”. The adsorption of negative ions will shift the bands upwards whereas the positive ions would shift them downwards. Likewise, the adsorption of molecular dipoles on the surface critically affects the band positions.14 As shown in eqn (1), the potential drop, ΔV across the dipole layer18,23 depends on the surface density of the added dipoles (N), the molecular dipole moment (μ), the effective dielectric constant of the dipole layer (ε), the permittivity of free space (ε0) and the tilt of the dipole moment relative to the surface normal (θ). ΔV = Nμcos/εε0(1) As depicted in Fig. 2c, the orientation of the dipole with respect to the surface critically inverts the sign of the band shift. The dipole layer causes a shift, ΔV, in the band edges with respect to the vacuum level. Broadly speaking, the effect of molecular dipoles or charged species on ΔV can be rationalized in electrostatic terms as a consequence of the accumulation/depletion of charge in the Helmholtz layer. While an inward electric field (created by a dipole or negative charges) pushes the bands up in energy, an outward field (due to dipoles or positive charges) lowers the band positions. Likewise, in the particular case of a solid–solid junction, the equilibration of the corresponding Fermi levels is known to bring about a re-alignment of the energy bands,24 which can be beneficial in particular conditions for the overall process of charge separation.
3.4 Enhancement of charge separation and surface reactivity
The SCLJ represents the exit point for the transfer of photo-generated charges into the electrolyte. Surface conditioning treatments can accordingly ameliorate the charge separation and/or the surface reactivity. In the case where a depletion layer does not form in the semiconductor due to the nanostructure, or poor crystallinity, both types of photo-generated carriers (electrons and holes) are present at the same physical point in the semiconductor. This facilitates recombination and therefore reduces the overall energy conversion. A straightforward approach to promote charge extraction involves coating the surface with a thin layer of material possessing energy levels adequately positioned for selectively accepting one of the carriers as depicted in Fig. 2d. The “extracting layer” accepts one of the carriers leaving the other in the semiconductor. In such a way, the probability of recombination is reduced considerably by virtue of spatial separation. Likewise, the charge separation in electrodes with depletion layers can be improved by surface treatments aimed to increase band bending. The larger the band bending the stronger the internal built-in field that pulls the photogenerated carriers away, thus reducing the recombination.
From a general point of view, the charge separation/extraction and surface reaction are key steps for the energy conversion in PEC cells, and are often limited by the slow kinetics of surface reactions.10,25 In terms of the Marcus theory, the rate of electron transfer between the semiconductor and the solution is proportional to the energy difference between the donor and acceptor energy levels—the so-called driving force (defined by ΔG)—apart from other parameters.26 According to this notion, the surface treatments that modify the band edge positions (see above) could potentially improve the kinetics of surface reactions.
Apart from the pure energetic factors, the mechanism by which these surface reactions proceed controls the overall kinetics of the process. The synthesis of chemical products (e.g. solar fuels) can occur via multi-step electron transfer reactions with large overpotential.10 For example the water oxidation reaction requires 4 holes to produce one molecule of O2. This is in contrast to the rapid single-electron transfer reactions that typically occur with the reversible redox couples employed in regenerative cells.1,7 In this regard, there exist some materials that are known to work as efficient catalysts for multi-step reactions.10,25 These materials provide effective attachment/reaction sites for the initial species and also easily release the final products.27 Besides, catalyst overlayers can also act as efficient reservoirs for accumulated charges involved in multi-electron transfer reactions.28 The decoration of a photoactive semiconductor surface with electrocatalytic “islands” or co-catalysts can provide favorable channels for charge transfer and surface reaction.
4. State-of-the-art surface treatments
We now turn to highlight some key demonstrations on semiconductor surface treatments with special emphasis on their beneficial effects in PEC systems. As often a single surface treatment can yield more than one of the surface engineering effects discussed above, the surface modifications have been classified into four categories with respect to the type of material used for the treatment: (1) molecular and ionic interfacial modifiers, (2) semiconductor coating, (3) nanosized metal decoration and (4) etching and photoelectrochemical procedures. The next discussion will extend over oxides, chalcogenides, picnitides and silicon, among others, in an attempt to encompass the most representative families of photoelectrodes and demonstrate the universality of these treatments.
4.1 Molecular and ionic interfacial modifiers
Grafted molecules or adsorbed ions represent a wide variety of semiconductor surface adsorbates that affect the photoelectrochemical response without presenting any photochemical activity on their own. Classically, as previously mentioned, the pH of an aqueous electrolyte dictates the band edge position for oxides (in the absence of interfering adsorbates) due to the adsorption of H+ or OH−. Consequently, it is found that the shift of the VB and CB edges relative to the vacuum level follows a linear Nernstian relationship with a variation close to 0.059 V per pH unit at 298 K, though the density of surface states and morphology might affect this dependence.29–31 With this in mind, it could be possible to carry out reactions that are a priori thermodynamically forbidden because of the energy mismatch between the bands of the oxide and the redox potential just by changing the pH. Unfortunately, this strategy is commonly useless in the case of water splitting since the reduction and oxidation redox potentials of water vary with the pH in the same manner. However, a possibility still exists to leverage the pH dependence of the water redox potentials and band positions of oxides to enhance the photoelectrochemical water splitting yield. Specifically, Nozik conceived a PEC cell comprising a TiO2 photoanode immersed in a basic electrolyte and a Pt cathode in an acid solution.32 The CB of the TiO2 is too low to perform the overall water splitting, but in this design, the photogenerated electrons are transported to another compartment where the redox potential for water reduction is decreased below the CB edge because of the acidic conditions. Therefore, overall water splitting can occur by using a chemical bias induced by the pH gradient in the PEC cell.
The surface modification of oxides with fluoride ions has been explored in the literature. Fluorination of the surface of TiO2 is reported to occur easily by immersing the oxide surface in an acidic solution containing F− ions, which promotes the replacement of Ti–OH2+ by Ti–F species on the surface.33 The surface discharge accounts for an upward shift of the energy bands. Additionally, fluoride adsorption leads to a lower recombination with and enhanced hole transfer toward the electrolyte which could be ascribed to the passivation of surface states.34,35 The effect of surface fluorination has also been studied in Ti-doped Fe2O3 electrodes. Indeed, although the CB of Fe2O3 is around 0.2 V below the H+/H2 redox pair, fluoride adsorption demonstrated an upward shift in the energy bands, which is sufficient to afford the water reduction in the absence of an external bias.36 Likewise, the adsorption of different divalent ions (Mg2+, Cd2+, Ba2+ and Sr2+) has been shown to affect the position of Efb in SnO2 electrodes. In fact, Uchida et al. demonstrated that for a pH above the isoelectric point (also known as point of zero charge) where the surface charge density is dominantly negative, each different cation compensated the surface charge in a unique sense.37 As a result, the authors showed that the surface charge density at a certain pH is determined by the cations in solution, which, in turn, controls the position of Efb. Absorption of cations on oxides can cause markedly distinct effect from merely shifting bands and surface charge. For example, the adsorption of cobalt(II) ions on a hematite surface has been reported to enhance the catalytic activity of the water oxidation reaction, shifting the onset of photocurrent to ∼80 mV.38 Notably, subsequent studies on similar systems have suggested that this effect is rather due to the enhancement of charge separation39 or the suppression of surface recombination40 than due to an increase in the kinetics of the oxidation reaction.
Apart from simple atomic ions, more complex species have been utilized to modify the interfacial properties of oxides. Kim et al. demonstrated that phosphate ions, adsorbed onto hematite films, lead to an enhanced performance not only in basic medium, but also extends the improved response to the neutral pH where the bare films typically display a poor performance. This is shown in Fig. 3 where the photocurrent is proven to increase from 0.4 mA cm−2 to 1.2 mA cm−2 when a bias of 1.23 V vs. the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) is applied under standard illumination conditions.
 Fig. 3  Photocurrent time curves (stability test) for the bare Fe2O3 and phosphate–Fe2O3 (Pi–Fe2O3) photoanodes, performed at pH 7 under an applied bias of 1.23 V vs. RHE. The inset illustrates how the surface phosphate groups could interact with the holes facilitating the extraction toward the surface. Reproduced with permission from Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400476. Copyright 2014 Wiley. 
The authors showed that the isoelectric point of the hematite was dramatically shifted from pH 8.3 to 4.8 by grafting phosphate on the surface, which indicates that a negative surface charge density was built at a lower pH.41 In neutral pH, the negative charge of the deprotonated phosphate is hypothesized to interact with the photogenerated holes in the Fe2O3 promoting their accumulation near the surface and the subsequent reaction with the electrolyte. Similar arguments were previously invoked to support the improved performance of phosphate-modified TiO2 films.42 On the other hand, in basic pH the better performance of phosphate-modified hematite was ascribed to a larger surface negative charge that would increase the band bending with respect to the bare film. It should be noted that, albeit in this work the passivation of surface states was not considered, Cheon et al. ascribed the improved water oxidation photocurrents in TiO2 electrodes modified with phosphoric acid derivatives to surface passivation.43
Mesoporous TiO2 electrodes have been universally employed as electron conducting scaffolds in the so-called sensitized solar cells—a particular design of the regenerative PEC cell was either visible light-absorbing dyes or quantum dots (QDs) are anchored on the TiO2 to extend the spectral response of the (wide band-gap oxide) electrode.44,45 In this case, photogenerated electrons in the sensitizer layer are injected in the oxide instead of carriers being produced in the semiconductor itself. Nevertheless, for these devices the maximum possible open-circuit voltage (Voc) depends on the energy difference between the Fermi level of the TiO2 and the redox potential of the electrolyte, similar to the case without a sensitizer. By shifting the CB of the TiO2 toward the vacuum level (i.e. away from the redox potential) a higher Voc can be obtained, leading therefore to higher conversion efficiency. Rühle et al. reported a comprehensive analysis of the effect of anchoring different molecules (phosphonic, benzoic and dicarboxylic acid derivatives) on the output parameters of dye-sensitized solar cells.22 Interestingly, variations in the Voc and short-circuit current density, Jsc, correlate well with the shift of the TiO2 CB band position induced by the dipole moment of the molecules. Similarly, Kopidakis et al. found that the adsorption of a guanidinium cation causes the band edges to move downwards and slows down the recombination due to the passivation of surface states.46 Interestingly, this result suggests that surface passivation can offset the unfavorable band-edge movement and afford a net gain in the Voc as long as the downward shift of the bands is small. More recently, tert-butylpyridine (TBP) has been extensively incorporated as an additive in solid-state-sensitized cells,47–49 improving the performance. The TBP is known to shift the bands upwards, therefore increasing the Voc, as well as hindering the electron leakage toward the hole conductor.50,51 Apart from the effects on the TiO2, grafting dipoles on the sensitizing QDs themselves have been reported to affect the overall performance of QD-sensitized photoanodes and overall PV devices. Zaban and co-workers firstly demonstrated the potential of thiol-containing dipolar molecules that strongly adsorb on the chalcogenide QD surface to tailor the energy band positions of the sensitizer with respect to the TiO2.52 In such a manner, the driving force across the TiO2/QD interface for electron injection can be enlarged therefore prompting charge separation. Fig. 4 shows this concept for CdS sensitized TiO2. Here the grafted-molecule dipole moment is shown to have a large effect on the IPCE and the Jsc of complete devices. Interestingly, a direct correlation between the increase of the Jsc and the value and sign of the dipole moment was found. Indeed, better IPCE and Jsc correlated well with an upward shift of the CdS CB, as would be expected given the increase in the driving force (ΔG) for electron injection. Subsequent work from Barea et al.53 and Chi et al.54 provided further supporting evidence of the beneficial effect of molecular dipole surface modification on the overall performance of the cells. It should be stressed that thiol-containing molecules, apart from their intrinsic dipole moment, are known to work as efficient hole scavenger agents. This feature can also account for the improved performance of the photoanodes. In this respect, Guijarro et al. demonstrated that surface modification of strongly-confined PbSe QDs with p-mercaptophenol enhances the performance of the corresponding sensitized films.55 In that work, evidence was provided consistent with the claim that this molecule acts as a mediator in the hole extraction, i.e. funneling the holes rapidly from the QD to the acceptor phase which reduces the recombination.
 Fig. 4  Incident photon to current efficiency (IPCE) measurements of CdS QD-sensitized flat TiO2 electrodes modified with a series of benzenethiol derivatives showing a dipole dependent photoresponse (a). Dipole dependent short circuit current density of flat (red) and mesoporous (blue) TiO2 sensitized with CdS QDs measured under AM 1.5G illumination (b). All measurements were carried out in two electrode cells using Pt-coated FTO glass as the counter electrode and aqueous polysulfide (1 M Na2S + 0.1 M S) as electrolyte. Reprinted with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9876–9877. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
Cadmium chalcogenide (CdX, X = S, Se or Te) photoanodes are known to suffer severe photocorrosion under illumination in the absence of chalcogenide ions (X2−) in solution which stabilize the material.56–58 The rapid transfer of photogenerated holes in the semiconductor to the chalcogenide ions in the electrolyte is commonly considered as the factor preventing the photoanodic decomposition. However, certain results indicate that the strong adsorption of X2− on the surface causes a dramatic shift in the dissolution potential, which also plays a role in the stabilization.59 The specific adsorption of the chalcogenide ions, indeed, triggers a negative shift in the flat band potential (i.e. moving Efb upwards in the energy scale), which potentially leads to higher open circuit potentials in cells.60,61 Likewise, Natan et al. demonstrated that thiolate ions (deprotonated cysteamine, carbamates, etc.) that strongly adsorb on CdS and CdSe surfaces not only drastically shifts the Efb toward negative potentials but also enhances their stability.62,63Fig. 5 displays the Mott–Schottky plots for both single-crystalline CdS and CdSe electrodes in electrolytes containing increasing amounts of Na[Et2NCS2]. As observed, in both cases the strong adsorption of the diethyldicarbamate anion shifts Efb more than 600 mV when increasing the concentration in solution. Similarly, transition metal dichalcogenides such as n-MoS2, n-MoSe2, n-WS2 and n-WSe2 have shown to be extremely sensitive to the presence of iodide ions in the electrolyte.64–69 In fact, the shift caused by the adsorption of triiodide in these materials is much larger than that induced in oxides or sulfides by protons or sulfide ions.70 Turner et al. postulated that the larger shift in MoSe2 could be accounted for by the strong interaction between the adsorbed iodide and the filled orbitals from the molybdenum atoms that lie below the selenium layer, thanks to the large polarizability of iodide ions.70 Interestingly, Calabrese et al. clearly exemplified the importance of the iodide demonstrating that the oxidation of SO2, which is unattainable according to the natural band positions of these layered materials, can successfully occur in the presence of iodide ions.67 The authors considered that the surface-adsorbed iodide ions play a double role: first, they shift the bands toward negative potentials, which enhances the photovoltage of the system, and second, they act as a mediator in the charge transfer process improving the catalytic activity. Note that the photoelectrochemical response of p-WSe2 photocathodes was also ameliorated by surface adsorption of halide ions, which was attributed to the efficient passivation of the recombination centers located at the exposed edges of the layers.71
 Fig. 5  Mott–Schottky plot (1/Csc2vs. electrode potential) for CdS and CdSe single-crystalline electrodes showing the shift of the flat band for various concentrations of Na[Et2NCS2]. Reprinted with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1986, 108, 3570–3577. Copyright 1986 American Chemical Society. 
The adsorption of positively charged species has been also reported in the literature with comparable effects to those observed with negative ions. Hilal et al. modified the surface of n-GaAs by covalently grafting positive moieties.72 It was found that higher positive surface charge densities gave larger band-edge shifts toward positive potentials, which in turn shifts the onset of photocurrent. Following a similar strategy, the surface of n-Si was functionalized with ferrocene groups to rapidly shuttle photogenenated holes toward the redox electrolyte, Fe(CN)63−/4−, preventing the photo-oxidation of the silicon surface.73 More recently, our group demonstrated that the surface adsorption of methylviologen (MV2+) can enhance the PEC response of nanoparticulate Cu2ZnSnS4 photocathodes.74 As shown in Fig. 6, when the bare CZTS was coated with CdS, CdSe or ZnSe the photocurrent values were ameliorated significantly as we will discuss in the next section, but, it is indeed the subsequent adsorption of MV2+ which induced a drastic shift in the photocurrent onset toward more positive potentials. In addition, a reduction in the charge transfer resistance was reported. These observations are consistent with the MV2+ both shifting the energy bands downwards and acting as a mediator in the electron injection toward the electrolyte, respectively. In addition to the direct effects of the ions on the surface, indirect effects can also be observed. For example, the addition of cesium ions (Cs+) in liquid-junction cadmium chalcogenide-based PEC cells demonstrated a considerable enhancement in the stability and output parameters by indirectly affecting the semiconductor's surface properties. When cesium polysulfide is used as electrolyte the low tendency of ion pairing favors the chemisorption of polysulfide ions at the SCLJ which results in a larger Efb shift compared to other polysulfide electrolytes.75 The additional shift improved the hole extraction rate and accordingly boosted the overall solar energy conversion from 7.7% to ∼13%. On the other hand, when Fe(CN)64−/3− is employed as electrolyte with CdS photoelectrodes, the addition of Cs+ has been hypothesized to induce an in situ chemical derivatization of the electrode surface, which results in the deposition of a KxCsy[CdFe(CN)6] layer.76 The HOMO level of this species has been suggested to be well-aligned between the VB of the CdS and the Fe(CN)64−/3− redox potential, which can promote a cascade-type hole extraction. Other notable results have employed d5 transition metal cations, Os3+ and Ru3+, as surface modifiers in liquid-junction Se2−/Se22− GaAs-based devices. Parkinson et al. demonstrated that the chemisorption of Ru3+ on the surface of n-GaAs boosts the conversion efficiency from 9% up to 12% with improved stability.77 An in-depth analysis suggested that strongly chemisorbed Ru3+ primarily reduces the surface recombination by passivating the surface states.7 Subsequently, Tufts et al. reached 15% conversion efficiency by replacing the Ru3+ by Os3+.78 In this case, the results suggested that Os3+ acts as an efficient electrocatalyst for Se2− oxidation rather than reducing the surface recombination or shifting the flat-band, which increases the hole-transfer rate and thus improving the photostability and the overall performance.
 Fig. 6  (a) Linear sweep voltammograms under chopped-light illumination of Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS) electrodes before (black line) and after deposition of different buffer layers (CdS, CdSe and ZnSe; blue line) and adsorption of MV2+ (red line), scanned cathodically at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1 and using simulated 1 sun illumination (AM 1.5G). (b) Estimated band-energy positions for the different materials. All measurements were performed in argon-purged aqueous 50 mM Eu(NO3)3 electrolyte. Reprinted with permission from J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3902–3908. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
Very recently, surface treatments have been also implemented in the rapidly emerging field of methylammonium lead trihalide perovskite-based solar cells. Indeed, Snaith and co-workers demonstrated that despite the native low-degree of defects (or surface states) of as-prepared perovskite, the passivation of under-coordinated metal or halide atoms can potentially improve the overall performance of the cells by annihilating carrier trapping/recombination centers.79,80 To do so, the authors treated the as-annealed perovskite with lewis bases such as iodopentafluorobenzene (halogen passivation) or pyridine/thiophene (metal passivation). As a result, a systematic lengthening of the photoluminescence lifetime was achieved, which confirms the efficient surface passivation of defect states and is conducive to improved device power conversion efficiencies.
4.2 Semiconductor coating
In contrast to the coating of a single layer of ions, the deposition of a thin layer of an inorganic (or even organic) semiconducting material onto the photoelectrodes holds greater potential to precisely tune the physicochemical properties of the SCLJ in all the ways mentioned in Section 3. To have a predictable effect on the photoelectrode, an ideal semiconductor overlayer coating should meet the following requirements: (i) excellent stability in the desired electrolyte when in contact with the underlying photoactive film, (ii) an even and conformal coating, (iii) transparency in the region of the solar spectrum absorbed by the photoactive film (to prevent light parasitic light absorption), (iv) be selectively conductive to allow the photogenerated charges generated in the photoactive material to reach the SCLJ, and (v) present a minimum lattice mismatch with the underlying photoactive material to minimize the creation of defects (trapping/recombination centers) at the semiconductor–semiconductor interface. Unfortunately, finding a material that meet all these requirements is challenging especially considering that the effects of any given overlayer are strongly system-dependent. Generally, oxide, chalcogenide, and even organic polymers have been reported as beneficial overlayers taking advantage of a straightforward deposition and good optoelectronic properties.
Thin layers of semiconducting TiO2 have been regularly employed as anti-corrosive, passivating and/or charge separating interfaces for numerous materials, leveraging its robustness, wide band gap and (often) suitable location of the CB and VB. Regarding its ability to protect the underlying semiconductor, recently TiO2 overlayers have received much attention for materials such as ZnO, Cu2O, InP, Si, GaAs, or GaP that are known to suffer from severe photocorrosion when in contact with aqueous solutions under illumination. A pinhole-free and conformal overlayer of TiO2 is most commonly grown by atomic-layer deposition (ALD) or sputter deposition. Zhang et al. reported ZnO nanowire photoanodes where a conformal shell of TiO2 (∼1 nm) prevents the photocorrosion of ZnO and reduces the density of surface trap states, giving rise to enhanced oxidation photocurrents.81 Grätzel and co-workers have demonstrated that Cu2O can obtain stable operation as a photocathode for solar water reduction as long as it is protected by an anti-corrosion layer. Fig. 7a shows the typical protective layer deposited on Cu2O, comprising two oxide layers deposited by an ALD of Al:ZnO (∼20 nm) and TiO2 (∼10 nm).82,83 As shown, the band alignment provides a staggered type-II band offset at the interface that likely promotes the electron extraction. It must be emphasized that given the conformal coating of the protective layers, energetic parameters of the Cu2O such as the band bending or depletion layer are expected to be dictated by the “buried” junction created with the overlayers. Indeed, Domen and co-workers have reported recently an improved onset of photocurrent by judiciously replacing the Al:ZnO layer by Ga2O3 which displays a lower CB band offset with the Cu2O.84 As shown in Fig. 7b and c the ALD-deposited layers not only ameliorate the photocurrent response but also increase the lifetime from a few seconds to hours.82 Similarly, Lee et al. reported the improved stability of p-InP nanopillar photocathodes in acidic media upon coating with a layer (3–5 nm) of TiO2.85 In this case, the authors considered this overlayer to be too thick to allow carrier tunneling, and given the conduction band mismatch at the InP/TiO2 interface, the transfer of electrons to the electrolyte was postulated to occur via pinholes or defect states of the amorphous TiO2 layer. Chorkendorff and co-workers demonstrated that ∼100 nm thick sputtered-layers of TiO2 stabilized and enhanced the performance of Si and GaP photocathodes for the photocatalytic H2 evolution.86,87 The thicker overlayers appear to prolong the stability while preserving an efficient carrier transport. In both cases the staggered alignment of the conduction band of TiO2 with respect to that of Si and GaP allow for an efficient charge transfer towards the electrolyte. As a result, the onset of photocurrent for the p-GaP was shifted from 0.35 V to 0.71 V vs. RHE upon TiO2 coating, exhibiting as well an improved saturation photocurrent.87
 Fig. 7  (a) Energy band positions for the semiconductors in the multilayer photocathode and redox levels of the chemical reactions involved (top) and the schematic representation of the electrode structure (bottom). Linear sweep voltammograms of bare (b) and protected (c) Cu2O under chopped light AM 1.5 light illumination in aqueous 1 M Na2SO4. The insets show the respective stability test at 0 V vs. RHE with N2 purging. Reproduced with permission from Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 456–461. Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group. 
Si photoanodes have also benefited from the extended stability conferred by the TiO2 coating. Two different types of TiO2 overlayers have been lately described in the literature. Chen et al. demonstrated that 2 nm thick TiO2 by ALD-deposited TiO2 efficiently protects a Si photoanode under operating conditions for more than 24 hours.88 However, it was noted that a barrier for the hole extraction through the TiO2 overlayer was present given the valence band mismatch across the Si/TiO2 interface. In this scenario, the protecting overlayer acts as a tunnel barrier, and the authors demonstrated that, as expected, thickening of the TiO2 layer affects adversely the PEC response increasing the resistance for the tunneling-mediated charge transfer. In stark contrast, thicker films, up to 143 nm, of ALD-deposited TiO2 have been claimed to effectively protect while still allowing charge transport despite the VB mismatch. Indeed Lewis and co-workers found their TiO2 to be “electronically leaky” and when deposited onto Si photoanodes, allowing an extension of the stability and enhanced photocurrents. Fig. 8a shows the structure of the Si electrodes modified with a layer of “leaky TiO2” and a layer of Ni metal on the top that acts as a co-catalyst. As shown in Fig. 8b, photocurrents up to 35 mA cm−2 were obtained, exceeding 100 h of stability under operation conditions.89 Likewise, analogous thick “leaky” TiO2 overlayers have been successfully implemented in n-GaP, n-GaAs and n-CdTe by the same group.89,90 The authors speculate that defect states arising from non-stoichiometry, impurities, or structural disorder (amorphous phase) would mediate the hole transfer in a sub-band or via hopping between isolated states through the thick TiO2. Indeed, recent computational studies in this field suggest that amorphous TiO2 is prone to include oxygen vacancies within the structure, which, in turn, could provide efficient channels for hole transport.91,92 Further understanding and optimization of this result will likely lead to a widespread application of “leaky” TiO2 or other oxide93 overlayers for many applications in addition to PEC water oxidation.
 Fig. 8  (a) Elemental contrast of the Si/TiO2/Ni interface observed by scanning TEM. (b) J–E curves of TiO2-coated n-Si as a function of the oxide thickness. All measurements were carried out in an aqueous 1 M KOH electrolyte under 1.25 sun illumination. From Science, 2014, 344, 1005–1009. Reprinted with permission from AAAS. 
TiO2 overlayers have been used for purposes other than to enhance stability. For example, CuFeO2, a promising p-type photocathode material due to its high stability is known to perform poorly in the direct water reduction reaction.94 Recently an ALD TiO2 overlayer has been employed to enhance the charge extraction from this material, setting a new benchmark for solar water reduction with a stable, solution processed p-type oxide.95 Remarkably, TiO2 overlayers have even been used to enhance the performance of TiO2 itself. Pu et al. demonstrated that the deposition of a thin layer of anatase TiO2 (∼2 nm) onto rutile nanowire photoanodes by a wet-chemistry approach improved the photoelectrochemical response for the water oxidation.96 The authors claimed that the enhancement of charge separation primarily came from the efficient passivation of surface states and the reduction of surface recombination. Indeed, despite the energy barrier created at the rutile/anatase interface for the hole extraction, the anatase overlayer was considered thin enough to allow the carrier to tunnel through and reach the electrolyte.
One commonly studied photoanode material, that in contrast to Si, exhibiting intrinsic stability for the water oxidation reaction is Fe2O3 (hematite). While TiO2 over layers are not expected to have an effect of enhancing the stability or charge extraction in this material (due to unfavorable band alignment), other oxide-based overlayers have demonstrated positive effects as overlayers for Fe2O3. Grätzel and co-workers showed that a few-nanometer-thick chemical bath deposited Al2O3, Ga2O3 and In2O3 lead to an improved onset of photocurrents, which was mostly accounted for by the reduced density of surface traps.97 Concretely, the overpotential for water oxidation was reduced by 200 mV after Ga2O3 passivation. Interestingly, the authors pointed out that given the minimum lattice mismatch between the hematite and the Ga2O3 overlayer, the lattice strain of the hematite film could be relaxed, which in turn, would decrease surface traps. Likewise, ultrathin (1–2 nm) ALD-deposited Al2O3 overlayers were also reported to efficiently passivate the surface trapping states.98
Besides oxides, other n-type overlayers have been employed with much success. For example, multinary p-type chalcogenides are known to exhibit a drastic enhancement in the charge collection efficiency upon coating with n-type chalcogenide overlayers (the so-called buffer layers), as historically demonstrated in PV devices.99 Chemical bath deposited n-CdS has been ubiquitously applied on materials such as Cu(InxGa1−x)S(Se)2, Cu2ZnSnS4 or (Ag,Cu)GaSe2 demonstrating an enhanced photoelectrochemical performance,100–106i.e., an increased stability, advanced photocurrent onset and higher saturation photocurrent values, in conjunction with a co-catalyst. As shown in Fig. 9, while the CuGaSe2 shows a poor PEC response for water reduction when modified only with the co-catalyst (Pt), the chemical bath deposition of CdS strikingly enhances the photocurrent values and the onset of photocurrent. Generally, the improvement has been attributed to the enhanced charge separation caused by both (i) the creation of a p–n junction at the interface that selectively extracts the photogenerated electrons (given the conduction band offset) and drives them to the liquid junction, and (ii) the increased thickness of the depletion layer. The seminal work of Domen's group has shown photocurrent values higher than 10 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE for different multinary chalcogenides as well as photocathodes stable under operating conditions over more than 15 days.100–103,107 Apart from CdS, alternative chalcogenide overlayers have been tested to avoid the toxic concerns of the Cd-containing compounds or enhance the charge extraction. Our group has demonstrated that ultrathin layers of CdSe or ZnSe can replace the traditional CdS overlayer giving rise to better onsets of photocurrent.74 In particular, CdSe-treated samples showed the lowest resistance for electron extraction, which could be attributed to the more efficient charge separation given the higher conduction band offset across the Cu2ZnSnS2/CdSe interface. These results are shown in conjunction with the MV2+ results in Fig. 6. Kim et al. demonstrated that ZnS also works as an efficient buffer layer for CuGa3Se5 photocathodes. In this case, given that the conduction band of the ZnS is nominally located well above that of the CuGa3Se5, the ZnS could not be expected to directly extract photogenerated electrons.108 In this case the p–n junction formed with the ZnS is believed to enlarge the depletion layer as well as to passivate the surface defect states, which results in the observed higher photocurrent onset. Interestingly, the ZnS (∼3.7 eV) exhibits a band gap wider than the traditional CdS (∼2.4 eV) which effectively reduces the parasitic light absorption from the buffer layer.109 Indeed it is worth mentioning here that light absorption in the buffer does not enhance photocurrent in these photoelectrodes.109,110 Gunawan et al. reported the improved photoelectrochemical performance of CuInS2 photocathodes after treating with In2S3 (∼2.1 eV) delivering up to 4 mA cm−2 at 0.4 V vs. RHE, though the authors mentioned issues related to the instability of the system.111
 Fig. 9  Linear sweep voltammograms for CuGaSe2/Pt and CuGaSe2/CdS/Pt photocathodes Measurements were carried out in aqueous 0.1 M Na2SO4 (pH 9) with illumination provided by a 300 W Xe lamp. Reprinted with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 3733–3735. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
More recently, multiple semiconductor overlayers have been combined to further enhance the photoelectrochemical response. Although CdS is one of the most extended buffer layers, the lattice mismatch (e.g. at the (Ag,Cu)GaSe2/CdS interface) induces a high density of defect states that causes dramatic losses. In an attempt to address this issue, Zhang et al. deposited a layer of CuGa3Se5 on top of a (Ag,Cu)GaSe2 photocathode followed by the traditional CdS layer and the co-catalyst.107 Since CuGa3Se5 exhibits the same crystal structure as that of (Ag,Cu)GaSe2, a decreased density of defects at the interface was foreseen. Moreover, the (Ag,Cu)GaSe2/CuGa3Se5/CdS interfaces together display a staggered alignment of the conduction band edges that facilitates the electron extraction while blocking the hole transport to the outer CdS layer. In other cases, an additional protective coating of TiO2 has been deposited on top of the thin CdS buffer layer. Rovelli et al. demonstrated that an ALD-deposited TiO2 layer alone does not appear to contribute to the electron extraction from Cu2ZnSnS2 films despite the favorable staggered alignment, but being deposited on top of the CdS it remarkably ameliorates the stability and the photoelectrochemical performance.105 Likewise, Zhao et al. demonstrated that sputtered-TiO2 layers on top of CuInS2/CdS photocathodes contributed not only to the enhancement of the stability but also to the overall photoelectrochemical response.106 The authors postulated that the suitable cascade alignment of the conduction band edges across the CuInS2/CdS/TiO2 interfaces promote the electron tunneling toward the surface whereas the deep valence band edge of the TiO2 avoids the arrival of holes to the surface, therefore suppressing the surface recombination.
The prospects of implementing organic polymers as semiconducting overlayers have been scarcely visited in the literature, although the recent interest in low-cost photoelectrodes would benefit from the solution processability of organic polymers. CdS photoanodes are known to suffer severe photocorrosion under illumination in aqueous medium, but this can be reduced with fast hole removal as previously mentioned. Frank and co-workers managed to remarkably increase the stability of n-CdS photoanodes for O2 evolution by depositing overlayers of conductive polymers, such as polypyrrole, and subsequently decorating with a co-catalyst for water oxidation.112,113 The authors consider that the highly conductive polypyrrole is capable of withdrawing rapidly the photogenerated holes from the CdS and transfer them to the co-catalyst. Following this work, Noufi et al. attempted to ameliorate the stability of polycrystalline n-Si electrodes under acidic conditions under illumination. As shown in Fig. 10, the photocurrent for a bare Si electrode (solid line) fell dramatically after a few seconds. However, coating the electrode with polypyrrole (dashed line) extended the lifetime of the electrode over hundreds of hours.114,115 The authors did not present an in-depth discussion on the underlying mechanism on the stability improvement given the brevity of the reported study. However, taking into account the recent studies on semiconducting overlayers, it would be reasonable to consider that the polypyrrole layer is homogeneously coating the silicon, avoiding its direct contact with the aqueous medium, and likely mediating in the hole transfer to the electrolyte.
 Fig. 10  Photocurrent-time behavior of bare (—) and polypyrrole-covered (⋯) polycrystalline n-type Si electrodes illuminated with tungsten-halogen light at 143 mW cm−2 under short circuit conditions. An aqueous electrolyte containing 0.15 M FeSO4, 0.15 M FeNH4(SO4)2·12H2O and 0.1 M Na2SO4 in water at pH 1 was stirred continuously. Reprinted with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1981, 103, 1849–1850. Copyright 1981 American Chemical Society. 
4.3 Nanosized metal decoration and catalyst overlayers
While the conformal and continuous coating of a photoelectrode with another semiconductor can offer improvement in charge separation and stability, these overlayers do not necessarily offer any improvement in the kinetics of the electrochemical reactions that occur with the redox couple in the electrolyte. Traditionally, this kinetic problem can be solved by coating the surface of the semiconductor with nanosized metal islands that can act as catalytic centers for the electrochemical reaction. When performing such a modification, it is important to understand how it will affect the system thermodynamically, due to Fermi level equilibration with the metal, and kinetically, i.e. the catalytic process itself.
First we consider the influence of the morphology of a metallic overlayer on the open-circuit voltage (Voc) of a photoelectrochemical solar cell. Early studies have shown that bulk semiconductors coated with a continuous metal layer produced only low open-circuit potentials, while the same semiconductor coated with nanosized metal islands was able to produce a Voc similar to the one of the bare semiconductor in the same electrolyte.116–118 For instance an n-type Si single crystal coated with evaporated Pt produced only a Voc of 0.28 V in 8.6 M HBr, while the same electrode produced a Voc of 0.68 V after alkali etching of the metal layer to 5–20 nm metal islands. Based on this observation, Nakato et al. proposed a theory to explain the effect of the metal domain size on the Voc of the device118,119 in three different situations:
(1) If the metal layer is continuous, then a Schottky barrier is created on the whole surface of the electrode: a depletion layer is created inside the semiconductor and the bands are bent after equilibration. The energy barrier at the semiconductor–metal interface qΦmB is constant for a given semiconductor–metal combination, irrespective of whether the junction is illuminated or not, or if the metal is in contact with an electrolyte or not. In other words, the Fermi level of the semiconductor EF(SC) is pinned to that of the metal EF(M) preventing the variation of the band-bending at the surface of the semiconductor by changing the voltage. As a consequence, the Voc of the device is constant in contrast to the corresponding direct SCLJ, where the barrier qΦeB depends on the redox potential of the electrolyte, and can be tuned to increase the Voc by a judicious selection of the redox couple. This discrepancy is shown in Fig. 11a–c.
 Fig. 11  First row – band diagrams after equilibration and in the dark of a semiconductor–metal junction before (a) and after (b) being in contact with the electrolyte, and of the corresponding SCLJ (c). The Schottky barrier qΦmB is lower than the barrier without the metal layer (qΦeB). Second row – band modulation induced by the metal islands when WM ≈ WSC at equilibrium (d) and under cathodic bias (e). The grey areas correspond to the metal islands. Adapted from J. Phys. Chem., 1988, 92, 2316–2324. Copyright 1988 American Chemical Society. 
(2) If the metal is present under the form of nanosized islands, such as the size of these islands is very small compared to the depletion width inside the bare semiconductor in contact with the electrolyte WSC (typically one order of magnitude lower), then the band bending is essentially governed by the SCLJ (Fig. 11c), EF(SC) is no longer pinned to the Fermi level of the metal, and the magnitude of the band bending can be tuned by changing the nature of the electrolyte, in order to maximize the Voc of the device.
(3) When the metal islands have a size similar to WSC an intermediate situation is obtained where the band edges at the surface of the electrode are modulated by the presence of the metal islands (Fig. 11d). In this configuration, the authors observed that it was possible to develop high photovoltages if the Fermi level of the metal-coated areas was raised sufficiently, compared to the one of the bare semi-conductor, for the barrier at the surface to be defined by the conduction band of the uncoated areas (i.e. for the bottom of the conduction band to be located in the naked area, see Fig. 11e).
Since usually it is desired that a photoelectrochemical electrode produces the highest possible voltage, the second case is therefore favored, and the surface of semiconductor electrodes is usually covered with nanosized metal islands. This further has the advantage of limiting the amount of precious metal used in the device. The mechanism of charge transfer to the electrolyte, under illumination, is then rather simple: minority carriers are transferred to the metal islands, affecting the position of their Fermi level EF(M). For a p-type (n-type) semiconductor, electrons (holes) are transferred to the metal and EF(M) is shifted towards lower (higher) potentials until it reaches the reduction (oxidation) potential of the electrolyte. Once the metal equilibrates with the electrolyte, charge transfer across the junction can occur. Finally the band bending remains unaffected by this shift in EF(M) since it is defined by the SCLJ.
For nanoparticle-based photoelectrode systems the situation is slightly different. Indeed, when the semiconductor particle size is much lower than its depletion width, there is no band bending per se, as previously mentioned. Indeed charge transfer is governed by diffusion and therefore the photopotential is mostly determined by the charge recombination rate, rather than by a space-charge layer inducing a drift velocity for the charges. Several studies have detailed how coating semiconductor nanoparticles with nanosized metal particles affects the corresponding PEC device performances. Chandrasekharan and Kamat observed that coating a nanostructured TiO2 film with gold nanoparticles resulted in better charge separation.120 In the presence of the gold, more electrons can be stored in the semiconductor under illumination, without recombining with the holes of the VB, and therefore more holes can be injected into the electrolyte. This resulted in a 150 mV negative shift of the zero current potential (an apparent “flat-band potential” in the J–V curve) and a four-fold increase in photocurrent. The mechanism of this improvement in charge separation was further detailed in subsequent studies:121,122 under illumination, electrons are excited to the CB of the semiconductor and quickly injected into the metal nanoparticle, while holes are scavenged by the electrolyte. As more electrons are photoexcited, an equilibrium is reached between the metal Fermi level and the CB of TiO2 where the excess of electrons is distributed between the two materials. This results in a shift of the Fermi level of TiO2 towards lower potential that was measured to be around 22 mV in the case of Au-coated TiO2 (Fig. 12a). Moreover Kamat and co-workers found that the size of the metal nanoparticle can greatly affect this shift at the Fermi level: while 8 nm gold particles only caused a 20 mV shift, 3 nm gold particles produced a 60 mV shift, improving further the photovoltage and photocurrent of the photoelectrochemical device (Fig. 12b). Another study by Mulvaney and co-workers123 highlights the importance of the nature of the metal on the charge transfer inside the composite electrode. They coated nanostructured n-ZnO films with Au, Ag and Pt and observed different behaviors. Specifically, in the presence of deaerated ethanol, it was possible to store electrons on Au and Ag, and to shift the Fermi level of ZnO towards lower potentials for an extended period of time, as the holes were scavenged by the ethanol molecules. However, in the case of Pt nanoparticles, the electrons are quickly transferred to the electrolyte to reduce the ethanol, as Pt is a catalyst in this reaction. Therefore, in this case, there is no electron accumulation in the electrode, and the Fermi level of the semiconductor remains pinned to the redox couple in solution. These two different situations are illustrated in Fig. 12c, and show that the catalytic properties of the metal used to coat the semiconductor are also important to take into account. More precisely, to perform a PEC process at the surface of the electrode, it is necessary to deposit a catalyst that improves the rate of minority carrier transfer to the electrolyte without improving the rate of majority carrier transfer (essentially a back transfer of minority carriers that results in charge recombination and a drop in photopotential). Stated in other words, the metal needs to promote the accumulation of majority carriers inside the semiconductor without acting as a recombination center.
 Fig. 12  (a) Illustration of the shift in the Fermi level induced by the accumulation of shared photogenerated electrons between the CB of the semiconductor and the metal nanoparticle, in the presence of a hole scavenger (e.g. deaerated ethanol). EF represents the position of the Fermi level before light irradiation and EF* its position after light irradiation. (b) Influence of gold coating of the J–V curve of a TiO2 photoelectrode in 0.05 M NaOH. Curve “a” corresponds to the bare TiO2 electrode, curve “b” to an electrode coated with 8 nm Au particles, and curve “c” to an electrode coated with 5 nm Au particles. Reprinted from J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 4943–4950. Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society. (c) ZnO Fermi level displacement induced by Au, Ag and Cu, but not by Pt, which is catalytic for ethanol reduction (electrons are directly injected to the electrolyte without accumulation). Reproduced from J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 8810–8815. Copyright 2001 American Chemical Society. 
Catalyst nanoparticles are also widely used in the field of photoelectrochemical water splitting. However, there is a clear difference between photosynthetic cells for water splitting and PEC solar cells (or regenerative cells): in the latter the electrolyte is chosen to maximize the output power, while in the former, the electrolyte is imposed (water) and the bottleneck of the process often lies in the slow kinetics of the electrochemical reactions performed at the electrode surface. The water oxidation reaction, in particular, involves the transfer of four electrons from each water molecule to the electrode, involving four successive electron transfers to the same surface site, which translates in very slow kinetics. Therefore, for water splitting applications, metal nanoparticles are almost always used for their catalytic properties towards water reduction (hydrogen evolution) or water oxidation (oxygen evolution). The hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) is mechanistically easier: the adsorption of protons on the metal surface followed by H–H bond formation and desorption of H2 are the required steps. Therefore a good HER catalyst will bind hydrogen strongly enough to allow for the adsorbed protons to react together, but weakly enough to easily release the resulting hydrogen molecule. Concerning metal catalysts, it is well known that there is an optimum in the metal–hydrogen bond strength that provides the fastest kinetics for the HER, and that this optimum is approached the best by Platinum as shown in the volcano plot of Fig. 13a.10,127
 Fig. 13  (a) Volcano-plot of the exchange current density for the HER for several native metals as a function of the metal–hydrogen bond strength (reprinted from, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1972, 39, 163, with permission from Elsevier). (b) Free-energies for the formation of the successive intermediates involved in the OER on a RuO2 surface. An ideal catalyst, for which all the steps are equal to 1.23 eV is shown for comparison. The OER occurs at the potential where all the steps become downhill in energy: 1.23 V vs. RHE for the ideal catalyst, 1.6 V vs. RHE for RuO2. Adapted from J. Electroanal. Chem., 2007, 607, 83–89, with permission from Elsevier. (c) Volcano plot of the overpotential of OER on various oxide surfaces versus the free energy cost of the rate limiting step. Reproduced with permission from ChemCatChem, 2011, 3, 1159–1165. Copyright 2011 Wiley. (d) Illustration of the improvement brought by coating a metal-based catalyst (in this case nickel–iron oxide) on the surface of a hematite photoanode in 1 M NaOH. The graph shows the J–V curve of a hematite electrode before (black trace) and after (grey trace) catalyst deposition. Reproduced with permission from Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 12692–12695. Copyright 2013 Wiley. 
Native metal nanoparticles have the advantage of a good stability under reductive conditions and to be easily processed. However, the most efficient HER metal catalysts are scarce noble metals, which can impact negatively the cost of the final device and can hinder “terawatt-scale” production. Therefore, alternative cheaper catalysts, made of more abundant elements, have been developed in the recent years. In particular, molybdenum sulfide,128–131 cobalt phosphide,132 and nickel phosphide133 have shown promising performances. On the other hand the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) is better catalyzed by metal oxides, which also has the advantage of a good stability at oxidative potentials. Norskov and coworkers have published several reports modeling the steps involved in the OER, using density functional theory.25,124,125 This model is summarized in Fig. 13b, where the solid line represents the cost of free energy associated with each one of the four proton-coupled electron transfer (PCET) steps for water oxidation of RuO2, and under different potentials. Water oxidation is performed at the surface of the catalyst when all four steps are associated with a negative variation in free energy, which is calculated to occur at 1.6 V vs. RHE for RuO2. Moreover, according to this model, an ideal catalyst would equally distribute the free energy requirement for the reaction between the four steps, yielding an energy barrier of 1.23 eV for each step. This ideal case is represented by the dashed line in Fig. 13b, and results in the possibility for the reaction to occur at 1.23 V vs. RHE, i.e. the thermodynamic minimum. Furthermore and similarly to the HER, the catalytic activity of the OER can be linked to the free energy cost of the rate limiting step through a volcano plot (Fig. 13c) and among binary oxides, best performances are obtained, once again, mostly with rare precious elements: RuO2, PtO2 and IrO2, although more abundant elements, such as cobalt or nickel, can also display very good performances.134,135 Recently the quest for alternatives has also produced very efficient multinary oxide catalysts. For instance Shao-Horn and co-workers have highlighted the eg occupancy of the surface 3d metal orbitals to be a good alternative descriptor of perovskite oxide catalytic properties towards the OER, and they used this to create a very efficient BSCF (Ba0.5Sr0.5Co0.8Fe0.2O3−δ) catalyst.136 Earth-abundant oxyhydroxides containing Cobalt Nickel and Iron137–141 have also displayed very good catalytic efficiencies.
These new HER and OER catalysts have indeed been demonstrated to improve the performances of photoelectrodes developed for water splitting, when coated on their surface.126,142–144 Metal-based catalytic nanoparticles are used to decorate the surface of the top layer of optimized electrodes, so photogenerated charge carriers can be injected in them and could readily participate in the catalyzed electrochemical reaction. The faster charge transfer arising from the catalysis obviously translates into higher photocurrents, but also into a lower overpotential which causes an improved photocurrent onset (closer to the flat band of the semiconductor, as illustrated in Fig. 13d). Since metal centers are also known to favor charge recombination, it is important to keep the metal particles small and well dispersed, so charges are injected in the electrolyte faster than they recombine at the metal surface. Indeed, if a thick continuous overlayer of the metal is used, the situation of a buried junction arises as discussed above.
Interestingly, Lin and Boettcher145 pointed out that a buried junction is not always formed when continuous catalyst overlayers are used on photoelectodes. The authors demonstrated a critical difference between ion-permeable and impermeable electrocatalysts. The latter, such as dense IrOx, create a buried junction with the semiconductor, where only the surface of the catalyst is active and more important, the Voc remains constant. Alternatively, ion-permeable catalysts, such as Ni(OH)2 or NiOOH, originate from an “adaptative” Schottky junction where the Voc can be effectively modulated owing to the oxidation of the entire electrocatalyst layer.
4.4 (Photo)electrochemical etching procedures
Single-crystalline, but also (to a lesser extent) polycrystalline electrodes are commonly treated by a process of “surface conditioning” prior to photoelectrochemical operation. These treatments include chemical polishing of the surface and the selective etching of different crystallographic planes by using highly reactive solutions (HF, aqua regia, etc.) to remove both surface impurities from the synthesis and to present preferential surface facets. Here we focus on specific “etching” treatments that afford a finer adjustment of the surface properties.
Copper-based multinary chalcogenide photocathodes such as Cu2ZnSnS4 or Cu(In,Ga)S2 are prone to exhibit some phase segregation coexisting with small particles of CuxS, which are deleterious for the performance acting as recombination centers. Generally, immersion in aqueous KCN for few minutes is enough to remove the deleterious phase and enhance the performance.105
Cadmium chalcogenide/polysulfide and n-WSe2/polyiodide PEC cells have reached their corresponding record conversion efficiencies after submitting to the so-called photoetching treatments. Broadly speaking, this treatment consists of the immersion of the photoelectrode/counterelectrode in an electrolyte where the photoelectrode is unstable under illumination but not under dark conditions. The photoetching process takes place in a few seconds while the photoelectrode is illuminated under an applied bias.146 In addition to the removal of oxide phases that can potentially block charge transfer and also increase the surface area by texturing the surface, the photoetching process removes surface imperfections and defect states reducing the population of recombination centers.147,148 In Fig. 14, the effect of the photoetching on the J–V curve of a classical n-WSe2/polyiodide/Pt PEC cell is shown. In this case the photoetching mainly affects the short-circuit photocurrent, increasing the power conversion efficiency from 5.3% to 14.4%.148 Overall these treatments have led to benchmark efficiencies of 12.7%75 and 17.1%149 for single-crystalline Cd(Se,Te) and WSe2, respectively.
 Fig. 14  The J–V curve of the n-WSe2/I−, I3−/Pt PEC cell, (a) as-grown and (b) photoetched. The conversion efficiency enhances from 5.3% to 14.4%. Reproduced from Prog. Surf. Sci., 1996, 52, 125–192 with permission from Elsevier. 
The alteration of the surface composition by chemical or electrochemical etching treatments can also bring about surprising and unexpected changes in the PEC response of photoelectrodes. In fact, Kronik et al. demonstrated the “type inversion” of CdSe QD films, i.e. from n-type to p-type PEC behavior, after immersion for a few seconds in diluted HCl.150 It is hypothesized that this treatment causes a change in the relative population of electron and hole surface traps that actively mediate carrier transfer to the electrolyte. In this view, before the treatment a large population of surface hole traps promote the n-type behavior (the electrons are preferentially transported through the film whereas the holes are trapped and subsequently transferred to the electrolyte). Upon treatment, the surface becomes rich in electron trapping centers that capture and subsequently inject electrons into the electrolyte giving rise to an apparent p-type behavior. More recently, Gomez and co-workers found that by submitting ZnCuInS2 nanocrystal thin-film electrodes to an oxidative potential for a few seconds in the presence of sulfide ions an inversion in the photoelectrochemical response from n- to p-type occurs.151Fig. 15a (top) shows the photocurrent transients recorded at different applied potentials, before the etching treatment. As observed, the electrode reversibly switched from an n-type (anodic photocurrent) to a p-type (cathodic photocurrent) behavior, which was attributed to the change in the relative position of the EF with respect to the Eredox. Upon the etching treatment (Fig. 15a, bottom), a potential window emerges from −0.65 to −0.80 V where the QDs change from n-type to p-type behavior. In an attempt to unravel the role of the etching treatment, the authors monitored the mass change in the electrode during successive etching treatments (Fig. 15b and c). The results suggested that the treatment was accompanied by a release of surface copper from the nanocrystals. It was postulated that the surface etching, i.e., the change in the surface composition, would affect the surface-state trapping effects, as reported by Kronik et al. for CdSe,150 or would change dramatically the position of the flat band, both of them potentially accounting for the irreversible modification of the photoelectrochemical behavior.
 Fig. 15  (a) Photocurrent transients recorded for ZnCuInS2 QD-based electrodes recorded at different applied potentials referred to the Ag/AgCl electrode, before and after etching treatment, the square highlights the region where the QD response changes from n-type to p-type behavior. All these measurements were carried out in N2-purged aqueous polysulfide (1 M Na2S + 0.1 M S + 1 M NaOH). (b) Current density and (c) change in the mass recorded during the electrochemical treatment, all the transients start and finish at the open circuit potential. This experiment was performed in aqueous 1 M NaOH + 5 mM Na2S electrolyte. All measurements were carried out in a three electrode cell. Reproduced from Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 7681–7683. 
5. Conclusion and outlook
In this Perspective article an overview of the state-of-the-art surface engineering approaches for improving the light harvesting efficiency of semiconductor photoelectrodes was provided. While the bulk properties of the semiconductor control the light absorption and carrier transport, the surface-related processes such as the stability, charge separation and catalytic activity, are primarily governed by the physicochemical properties of the SCLJ. Since these are fundamental operational pillars of the photoelectrodes, tailoring them via surface engineering can drastically ameliorate the overall performance. The most widespread surface modifications involve the adsorption of dipole molecules or ions, the deposition of a semiconducting overlayer or metal nanoparticles and etching treatments. The main effects of these treatments are improved stability by protecting the semiconductor from direct contact with the electrolyte, the suppression of deleterious surface states that act as recombination centers, the enhanced charge separation by using selective extracting layers and the better photocatalytic activity by a coupling co-catalyst. However, in most of the cases it is indeed challenging to uncover the main cause of the improvement given the cumulative effects of each treatment. Indeed, examples where initial explanations were revised by subsequent work are commonly noted in the literature. Speculation often remains even after a detailed characterization as the results are consistent with multiple explanations.
Despite this, the main advantages of the modification of the SCLJ by surface engineering are clear. Not only can the mild and facile conditions be used for a wide variety of treatments, but the potential to extend the applicability and performance of many semiconductor materials is well demonstrated. In fact, most of the reported surface modifications are performed under wet-conditions which opens the doorway for solution-based processes suitable for up-scaling these treatments to roll-to-roll fabrication. On the other hand, some materials can be exploited under conditions that, if not for the surface treatment they could not have been used. For instance, the Cu2O or silicon have shown promising results as photoelectrodes for water splitting, thanks to the anti-corrosive coatings that drastically lengthen their lifetime under aqueous conditions upon illumination. Likewise, the shift of the energy bands induced by the strong adsorption of different ions/molecules has an afforded precise tuning of the photoelectrochemical activity and in some cases afforded transformations are not energetically possible with the bare material (e.g. overall water splitting). Unfortunately, to date and despite the encouraging effects of the surface engineering, there exist some drawbacks for this approach. As a matter of fact, the mildness of the treatments can also cause a limited duration of the beneficial effects. It is well-known that the catalytic activity of many photocathodes for water reduction increases remarkably upon Pt decoration, but, the detachment or poisoning of the Pt particles can occur on the scale of minutes or hours and cause a progressive decrease of the activity. Similarly, the use of a protective coating, such as ALD deposited TiO2, clearly increases the lifetime of the electrodes, but given the amorphous nature of this overlayer (caused by a low deposition temperatures), the film can be permeated by the aqueous solutions or even detached in the timescale of hours/days resulting in the degradation of the electrode. However, more importantly the promising results obtained through surface engineering provide compelling evidence that these treatments address the intrinsic problems of the semiconductor photoelectrodes in order to leverage their maximum potential.
Great progress has been realized in the field of PEC devices during the last decades, clearly showing the great potential and versatility of this concept for solar energy conversion. The above-described methods for semiconductor surface engineering have, in particular, enabled significant enhancement of the light harvesting efficiency. Starting from single crystal electrodes, subsequently polycrystalline configurations, and more lately nanostructured and hybrid organic–inorganic materials, the PEC cell concept has shown to adopt different electrodes and electrolytes. Indeed, the initial liquid electrolytes have been replaced by solution-processable materials were the liquid junction has turned into a soft solid-state junction44,45,152,153 whose border with the classical photovoltaic cell built around an inorganic solid-state junction becomes rather vague. Strikingly, successful surface engineering approaches have been demonstrated on a wide variety of materials, (e.g. oxides, chalcogenides, picnitides and silicon among others), evidencing the universality of surface engineering to address the fundamental and common defects of native semiconductor photoelectrodes (e.g. surface states, poor band bending, mismatch of the band alignment, etc.). In all, we consider that semiconductor surface treatments are and will continue to be useful for enhancing the performance of photoelectrodes and PEC devices. In a more general vein, all the knowledge acquired regarding the effects of these treatments is not only vital and encouraging in the field of photoelectrochemistry, but spans over the domain of photovoltaics, or more generally, over the broad field of optoelectronics where the semiconductor material and the interface play major roles.
Acknowledgements
N.G. gratefully acknowledges the support of the European Commission's Framework Project 7 through a Marie-Curie Intra-European Fellowship (COCHALPEC, Project 326919).
References
M. Gratzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Hodes, I. D. J. Howell and L. M. Peter, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1992, 139, 3136–3140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2294–2320 RSC .
H. Kroemer, ChemPhysChem, 2001, 2, 490–499 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Nozik, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1978, 29, 189–222 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Bard, A. B. Bocarsly, F. R. F. Fan, E. G. Walton and M. S. Wrighton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1980, 102, 3671–3677 CrossRef CAS .
A. Heller, Acc. Chem. Res., 1981, 14, 154–162 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Nozik and R. Memming, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 13061–13078 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem., 1982, 86, 172–177 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Prévot and K. Sivula, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 17879–17893 Search PubMed .
N. S. Lewis, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2001, 508, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .

          M. X. Tan, P. E. Laibinis, S. T. Nguyen, J. M. Kesselman, C. E. Stanton and N. S. Lewis, Prog. Inorg. Chem., John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,  2007, pp. 21–144 Search PubMed .
T. Berger, D. Monllor-Satoca, M. Jankulovska, T. Lana-Villarreal and R. Gómez, ChemPhysChem, 2012, 13, 2824–2875 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Bard, F.-R. F. Fan, A. S. Gioda, G. Nagasubramanian and H. S. White, Faraday Discuss., 1980, 70, 19–31 RSC .
R. Cohen, L. Kronik, A. Shanzer, D. Cahen, A. Liu, Y. Rosenwaks, J. K. Lorenz and A. B. Ellis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 10545–10553 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang and J. T. Yates, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 5520–5551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ashkenasy, D. Cahen, R. Cohen, A. Shanzer and A. Vilan, Acc. Chem. Res., 2002, 35, 121–128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Du, M. Zhang, J.-W. Jang, Y. Liu, G.-Y. Liu and D. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 17054–17059 CAS .
R. Cohen, S. Bastide, D. Cahen, J. Libman, A. Shanzer and Y. Rosenwaks, Adv. Mater., 1997, 9, 746–749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. G. Nair, S. Paul and S. K. Samdarshi, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1901–1907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Rühle, M. Greenshtein, S. G. Chen, A. Merson, H. Pizem, C. S. Sukenik, D. Cahen and A. Zaban, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 18907–18913 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Yang, D. Prendergast and J. B. Neaton, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 383–388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-L. Lee and Y.-S. Lo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 604–609 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Valdes, J. Brillet, M. Gratzel, H. Gudmundsdottir, H. A. Hansen, H. Jonsson, P. Klupfel, G.-J. Kroes, F. Le Formal, I. C. Man, R. S. Martins, J. K. Norskov, J. Rossmeisl, K. Sivula, A. Vojvodic and M. Zach, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 49–70 RSC .
R. A. Marcus, J. Chem. Phys., 1956, 24, 966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Parsons, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1958, 54, 1053–1063 RSC .
A. Yamakata, M. Kawaguchi, N. Nishimura, T. Minegishi, J. Kubota and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 23897–23906 CAS .
Y. Matsumoto, T. Yoshikawa and E. I. Sato, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1989, 136, 1389–1391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Butler and D. S. Ginley, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1978, 125, 228–232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu and M. A. A. Schoonen, Am. Mineral., 2000, 85, 543–556 CAS .
A. J. Nozik, Nature, 1975, 257, 383–386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Park and W. Choi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 4086–4093 CrossRef CAS .
D. Monllor-Satoca and R. Gómez, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 139–147 CAS .
D. Monllor-Satoca, T. Lana-Villarreal and R. Gómez, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 15312–15321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-S. Hu, A. Kleiman-Shwarsctein, G. D. Stucky and E. W. McFarland, Chem. Commun., 2009, 2652–2654 RSC .
I. Uchida, H. Akahoshi and S. Toshima, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1978, 88, 79–84 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kay, I. Cesar and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 15714–15721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Barroso, S. R. Pendlebury, A. J. Cowan and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 2724–2734 RSC .
C. Y. Cummings, F. Marken, L. M. Peter, A. A. Tahir and K. G. U. Wijayantha, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 2027–2029 RSC .
J. Y. Kim, J.-W. Jang, D. H. Youn, G. Magesh and J. S. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400476,  DOI:10.1002/aenm.201400476 .
L. Jing, J. Zhou, J. R. Durrant, J. Tang, D. Liu and H. Fu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6552–6558 CAS .
I. C. Cheon, M. S. Lee, H. K. Shim and Y. Kim, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2003, 24, 1535–1537 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2003, 4, 145–153 CrossRef .
S. Rühle, M. Shalom and A. Zaban, ChemPhysChem, 2010, 11, 2290–2304 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Kopidakis, N. R. Neale and A. J. Frank, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 12485–12489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lee, H. C. Leventis, S.-J. Moon, P. Chen, S. Ito, S. A. Haque, T. Torres, F. Nüesch, T. Geiger, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2735–2742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-S. Kim, C.-R. Lee, J.-H. Im, K.-B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J.-H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Gratzel and N.-G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591 Search PubMed .
J. Krüger, R. Plass, L. Cevey, M. Piccirelli, M. Grätzel and U. Bach, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 2085–2087 CrossRef PubMed .
S. E. Koops, B. C. O'Regan, P. R. F. Barnes and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4808–4818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Katz, M. J. D. Vermeer, O. K. Farha, M. J. Pellin and J. T. Hupp, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 806–814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shalom, S. Rühle, I. Hod, S. Yahav and A. Zaban, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9876–9877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Barea, M. Shalom, S. Giménez, I. Hod, I. Mora-Seró, A. Zaban and J. Bisquert, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6834–6839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-F. Chi, P. Chen, Y.-L. Lee, I. P. Liu, S.-C. Chou, X.-L. Zhang and U. Bach, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17534–17540 RSC .
N. Guijarro, T. Lana-Villarreal, T. Lutz, S. A. Haque and R. Gómez, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 3367–3372 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Ellis, S. W. Kaiser and M. S. Wrighton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1976, 98, 1635–1637 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Ellis, S. W. Kaiser and M. S. Wrighton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1976, 98, 6418–6420 CrossRef CAS .
B. Miller and A. Heller, Nature, 1976, 262, 680–681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Noufi, D. Tench and L. F. Warren, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1980, 127, 2709–2713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. Finlayson, B. L. Wheeler, N. Kakuta, K. H. Park, A. J. Bard, A. Campion, M. A. Fox, S. E. Webber and J. M. White, J. Phys. Chem., 1985, 89, 5676–5681 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lincot and J. Vedel, J. Phys. Chem., 1988, 92, 4103–4110 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Thackeray, M. J. Natan, P. Ng and M. S. Wrighton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1986, 108, 3570–3577 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Natan, J. W. Thackeray and M. S. Wrighton, J. Phys. Chem., 1986, 90, 4089–4098 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Baglio, G. S. Calabrese, D. J. Harrison, E. Kamieniecki, A. J. Ricco, M. S. Wrighton and G. D. Zoski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1983, 105, 2246–2256 CrossRef CAS .
F.-R. F. Fan, H. S. White, B. L. Wheeler and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1980, 102, 5142–5148 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima, Y. Noguchi, K. Honda and B. H. Loo, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1982, 55, 17–22 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Calabrese and M. S. Wrighton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1981, 103, 6273–6280 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, A. J. Forman and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 9713–9722 CAS .
F. R. F. Fan and A. J. Bard, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1981, 128, 945–952 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Turner and B. A. Parkinson, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1983, 150, 611–617 CrossRef CAS .
G. Nagasubramanian and A. J. Bard, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1981, 128, 1055–1060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Hilal and J. A. Turner, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51, 6487–6497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Bolts, A. B. Bocarsly, M. C. Palazzotto, E. G. Walton, N. S. Lewis and M. S. Wrighton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1979, 101, 1378–1385 CrossRef CAS .
N. Guijarro, M. S. Prévot and K. Sivula, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3902–3908 CrossRef CAS .
S. Licht, R. Tenne, G. Dagan, G. Hodes, J. Manassen, D. Cahen, R. Triboulet, J. Rioux and C. Levy-Clement, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1985, 46, 608–610 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-D. Rubin, B. D. Humphrey and A. B. Bocarsly, Nature, 1984, 308, 339–341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Parkinson, A. Heller and B. Miller, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1978, 33, 521–523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Tufts, I. L. Abrahams, P. G. Santangelo, G. N. Ryba, L. G. Casagrande and N. S. Lewis, Nature, 1987, 326, 861–863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Abate, M. Saliba, D. J. Hollman, S. D. Stranks, K. Wojciechowski, R. Avolio, G. Grancini, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3247–3254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. K. Noel, A. Abate, S. D. Stranks, E. S. Parrott, V. M. Burlakov, A. Goriely and H. J. Snaith, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9815–9821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, C.-Y. Nam, C. T. Black, J. Kamcev and L. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 13396–13402 CAS .
A. Paracchino, N. Mathews, T. Hisatomi, M. Stefik, S. D. Tilley and M. Gratzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8673–8681 CAS .
A. Paracchino, V. Laporte, K. Sivula, M. Grätzel and E. Thimsen, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 456–461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, T. Hisatomi, O. Watanabe, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, K. Domen and J.-J. Delaunay, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1493–1500 CAS .
M. H. Lee, K. Takei, J. Zhang, R. Kapadia, M. Zheng, Y.-Z. Chen, J. Nah, T. S. Matthews, Y.-L. Chueh, J. W. Ager and A. Javey, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 10760–10764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Seger, T. Pedersen, A. B. Laursen, P. C. K. Vesborg, O. Hansen and I. Chorkendorff, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1057–1064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Malizia, B. Seger, I. Chorkendorff and P. C. K. Vesborg, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 6847–6853 CAS .
Y. W. Chen, J. D. Prange, S. Dühnen, Y. Park, M. Gunji, C. E. D. Chidsey and P. C. McIntyre, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 539–544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hu, M. R. Shaner, J. A. Beardslee, M. Lichterman, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, Science, 2014, 344, 1005–1009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. Lichterman, A. I. Carim, M. T. McDowell, S. Hu, H. B. Gray, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3334–3337 CAS .
H. H. Pham and L.-W. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 541–550 RSC .
H. H. Pham and L.-W. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 11908–11913 RSC .
K. Sun, F. H. Saadi, M. F. Lichterman, W. G. Hale, H.-P. Wang, X. Zhou, N. T. Plymale, S. T. Omelchenko, J.-H. He, K. M. Papadantonakis, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 3612–3617 CAS .
C. G. Read, Y. Park and K.-S. Choi, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1872–1876 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Prévot, N. Guijarro and K. Sivula, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 1359–1367 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-C. Pu, Y. Ling, K.-D. Chang, C.-M. Liu, J. Z. Zhang, Y.-J. Hsu and Y. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 15086–15094 CAS .
T. Hisatomi, F. Le Formal, M. Cornuz, J. Brillet, N. Tetreault, K. Sivula and M. Gratzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2512–2515 CAS .
F. Le Formal, N. Tetreault, M. Cornuz, T. Moehl, M. Gratzel and K. Sivula, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 737–743 RSC .
B. T. Ahn, L. Larina, K. H. Kim and S. J. Ahn, Pure Appl. Chem., 2008, 80, 2091–2102 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kumagai, T. Minegishi, Y. Moriya, J. Kubota and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16386–16392 CAS .
M. Moriya, T. Minegishi, H. Kumagai, M. Katayama, J. Kubota and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 3733–3735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yokoyama, T. Minegishi, K. Jimbo, T. Hisatomi, G. Ma, M. Katayama, J. Kubota, H. Katagiri and K. Domen, Appl. Phys. Express, 2010, 3, 101202 CrossRef .
D. Yokoyama, T. Minegishi, K. Maeda, M. Katayama, J. Kubota, A. Yamada, M. Konagai and K. Domen, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 851–853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, T. Minegishi, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 6167–6174 RSC .
L. Rovelli, S. D. Tilley and K. Sivula, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 8018–8024 CAS .
J. Zhao, T. Minegishi, L. Zhang, M. Zhong, Gunawan, M. Nakabayashi, G. Ma, T. Hisatomi, M. Katayama, S. Ikeda, N. Shibata, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 11808–11812 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, T. Minegishi, M. Nakabayashi, Y. Suzuki, K. Seki, N. Shibata, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 894–901 RSC .
J. Kim, T. Minegishi, J. Kobota and K. Domen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6368 CAS .
S. Ikeda, T. Nakamura, S. M. Lee, T. Yagi, T. Harada, T. Minegishi and M. Matsumura, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 262–268 CAS .
S. Ikeda, M. Nonogaki, W. Septina, G. Gunawan, T. Harada and M. Matsumura, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2013, 3, 1849 CAS .
Gunawan, W. Septina, S. Ikeda, T. Harada, T. Minegishi, K. Domen and M. Matsumura, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 8941–8943 RSC .
A. J. Frank and K. Honda, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1983, 150, 673–678 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Frank and K. Honda, J. Photochem., 1985, 29, 195–204 CrossRef CAS .
R. Noufi, A. J. Frank and A. J. Nozik, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1981, 103, 1849–1850 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Wrighton, Science, 1986, 231, 32–37 CAS .
Y. Nakato, T. Ohnishi and H. Tsubomura, Chem. Lett., 1975, 883–886 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Nakato and H. Tsubomura, J. Photochem., 1985, 29, 257–266 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Nakato, K. Ueda, H. Yano and H. Tsubomura, J. Phys. Chem., 1988, 92, 2316–2324 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hinogami, Y. Nakamura, S. Yae and Y. Nakato, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 974–980 CrossRef CAS .
N. Chandrasekharan and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 10851–10857 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jakob, H. Levanon and P. V. Kamat, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 353–358 CrossRef CAS .
V. Subramanian, E. E. Wolf and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 4943–4950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Wood, M. Giersig and P. Mulvaney, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 8810–8815 CrossRef CAS .
J. Rossmeisl, Z. W. Qu, H. Zhu, G. J. Kroes and J. K. Nørskov, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2007, 607, 83–89 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. C. Man, H.-Y. Su, F. Calle-Vallejo, H. A. Hansen, J. I. Martínez, N. G. Inoglu, J. Kitchin, T. F. Jaramillo, J. K. Nørskov and J. Rossmeisl, ChemCatChem, 2011, 3, 1159–1165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Du, X. Yang, M. T. Mayer, H. Hoyt, J. Xie, G. McMahon, G. Bischoping and D. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 12692–12695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Trasatti, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1972, 39, 163–184 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Morales-Guio and X. Hu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 2671–2681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Merki, S. Fierro, H. Vrubel and X. Hu, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1262–1267 RSC .
J. Kibsgaard, Z. Chen, B. N. Reinecke and T. F. Jaramillo, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 963–969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kibsgaard, T. F. Jaramillo and F. Besenbacher, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 248–253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. Popczun, C. G. Read, C. W. Roske, N. S. Lewis and R. E. Schaak, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 5427–5430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. Popczun, J. R. McKone, C. G. Read, A. J. Biacchi, A. M. Wiltrout, N. S. Lewis and R. E. Schaak, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 9267–9270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. W. Kanan and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2008, 321, 1072–1075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Dincă, Y. Surendranath and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 10337–10341 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Suntivich, K. J. May, H. A. Gasteiger, J. B. Goodenough and Y. Shao-Horn, Science, 2011, 334, 1383–1385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bajdich, M. García-Mota, A. Vojvodic, J. K. Nørskov and A. T. Bell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 13521–13530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. L. Smith, M. S. Prévot, R. D. Fagan, Z. Zhang, P. A. Sedach, M. K. J. Siu, S. Trudel and C. P. Berlinguette, Science, 2013, 340, 60–63 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. L. Smith, M. S. Prévot, R. D. Fagan, S. Trudel and C. P. Berlinguette, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 11580–11586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. W. Louie and A. T. Bell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 12329–12337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Friebel, M. W. Louie, M. Bajdich, K. E. Sanwald, Y. Cai, A. M. Wise, M.-J. Cheng, D. Sokaras, T.-C. Weng, R. Alonso-Mori, R. C. Davis, J. R. Bargar, J. K. Nørskov, A. Nilsson and A. T. Bell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1305–1313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. G. Morales-Guio, S. D. Tilley, H. Vrubel, M. Gratzel and X. Hu, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3059 Search PubMed .
C. G. Morales-Guio, L. Liardet, M. T. Mayer, S. D. Tilley, M. Grätzel and X. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 664–667 CAS .
D. K. Zhong, M. Cornuz, K. Sivula, M. Gratzel and D. R. Gamelin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1759–1764 CAS .
F. Lin and S. W. Boettcher, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 81–86 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Tenne and G. Hodes, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1980, 37, 428–430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Müller and R. Tenne, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1981, 39, 283–285 CrossRef PubMed .
R. N. Pandey, K. S. C. Babu and O. N. Srivastava, Prog. Surf. Sci., 1996, 52, 125–192 CrossRef CAS .
G. Prasad and O. N. Srivastava, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1988, 21, 1028 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kronik, N. Ashkenasy, M. Leibovitch, E. Fefer, Y. Shapira, S. Gorer and G. Hodes, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1998, 145, 1748–1755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Guijarro, T. Lana-Villarreal and R. Gómez, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 7681–7683 RSC .
H. J. Snaith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 3623–3630 CrossRef CAS .

          I. Barceló, N. Guijarro, T. Lana-Villarreal and R. Gómez, in Quantum Dot Solar Cells, ed. J. Wu and Z. M. Wang, Springer New York,  2014, ch. 1, vol. 15, pp. 1–38 Search PubMed .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2015
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Energy level diagram of a SCLJ and the PEC cell (a) before and (b) after reaching the equilibrium and (c) under illumination. The parameters mentioned in the text are indicated as follows: Fermi level (EF), bottom of the conduction band (ECB) and top of the valence band (EVB), redox potential of the electrolyte (E0redox), local vacuum level (Evac), work function of the semiconductor (ϕSC) and the redox electrolyte (ϕE), band bending (qΦSC), barrier height (qΦeB), depletion layer (WSC), Helmholtz layer (HL), the potential drop through the Helmholtz layer (VH), the quasi-Fermi level for electrons (EF,n*) and holes (EF,p*), the photopotential (Eph), and the overpotentials for the reduction (ηe) and oxidation (ηp) reactions.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Main effects of surface treatments on semiconductor materials. The protection of the semiconductor against (photo)corrosion by encapsulating with a robust material. (b) Reduction of the density surface states (SS) or passivation by reaction with acid or lewis base reagents (X) which creates new bonding (SS–X) and antibonding (SS–X*) states out of the band gap. (c) Energy band diagram without and with a dipole layer composed of molecules with negative dipole moments, or positive dipoles at the interface, where the ΔV corresponds to the potential drop across the dipole layer. (d) Enhancement of the charge separation by depositing an additional semiconducting layer that selectively accept one of the carriers ((a) and (b) represent the electron extraction and recombination processes, respectively, and the thickness of the arrow qualitatively depicts the probability of each process).	 
ΔV = Nμcos/εε0	(1)

 	Fig. 3  Photocurrent time curves (stability test) for the bare Fe2O3 and phosphate–Fe2O3 (Pi–Fe2O3) photoanodes, performed at pH 7 under an applied bias of 1.23 V vs. RHE. The inset illustrates how the surface phosphate groups could interact with the holes facilitating the extraction toward the surface. Reproduced with permission from Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400476. Copyright 2014 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 4  Incident photon to current efficiency (IPCE) measurements of CdS QD-sensitized flat TiO2 electrodes modified with a series of benzenethiol derivatives showing a dipole dependent photoresponse (a). Dipole dependent short circuit current density of flat (red) and mesoporous (blue) TiO2 sensitized with CdS QDs measured under AM 1.5G illumination (b). All measurements were carried out in two electrode cells using Pt-coated FTO glass as the counter electrode and aqueous polysulfide (1 M Na2S + 0.1 M S) as electrolyte. Reprinted with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9876–9877. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Mott–Schottky plot (1/Csc2vs. electrode potential) for CdS and CdSe single-crystalline electrodes showing the shift of the flat band for various concentrations of Na[Et2NCS2]. Reprinted with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1986, 108, 3570–3577. Copyright 1986 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Linear sweep voltammograms under chopped-light illumination of Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS) electrodes before (black line) and after deposition of different buffer layers (CdS, CdSe and ZnSe; blue line) and adsorption of MV2+ (red line), scanned cathodically at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1 and using simulated 1 sun illumination (AM 1.5G). (b) Estimated band-energy positions for the different materials. All measurements were performed in argon-purged aqueous 50 mM Eu(NO3)3 electrolyte. Reprinted with permission from J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3902–3908. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Energy band positions for the semiconductors in the multilayer photocathode and redox levels of the chemical reactions involved (top) and the schematic representation of the electrode structure (bottom). Linear sweep voltammograms of bare (b) and protected (c) Cu2O under chopped light AM 1.5 light illumination in aqueous 1 M Na2SO4. The insets show the respective stability test at 0 V vs. RHE with N2 purging. Reproduced with permission from Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 456–461. Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Elemental contrast of the Si/TiO2/Ni interface observed by scanning TEM. (b) J–E curves of TiO2-coated n-Si as a function of the oxide thickness. All measurements were carried out in an aqueous 1 M KOH electrolyte under 1.25 sun illumination. From Science, 2014, 344, 1005–1009. Reprinted with permission from AAAS.	 

 	Fig. 9  Linear sweep voltammograms for CuGaSe2/Pt and CuGaSe2/CdS/Pt photocathodes Measurements were carried out in aqueous 0.1 M Na2SO4 (pH 9) with illumination provided by a 300 W Xe lamp. Reprinted with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 3733–3735. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  Photocurrent-time behavior of bare (—) and polypyrrole-covered (⋯) polycrystalline n-type Si electrodes illuminated with tungsten-halogen light at 143 mW cm−2 under short circuit conditions. An aqueous electrolyte containing 0.15 M FeSO4, 0.15 M FeNH4(SO4)2·12H2O and 0.1 M Na2SO4 in water at pH 1 was stirred continuously. Reprinted with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1981, 103, 1849–1850. Copyright 1981 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  First row – band diagrams after equilibration and in the dark of a semiconductor–metal junction before (a) and after (b) being in contact with the electrolyte, and of the corresponding SCLJ (c). The Schottky barrier qΦmB is lower than the barrier without the metal layer (qΦeB). Second row – band modulation induced by the metal islands when WM ≈ WSC at equilibrium (d) and under cathodic bias (e). The grey areas correspond to the metal islands. Adapted from J. Phys. Chem., 1988, 92, 2316–2324. Copyright 1988 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Illustration of the shift in the Fermi level induced by the accumulation of shared photogenerated electrons between the CB of the semiconductor and the metal nanoparticle, in the presence of a hole scavenger (e.g. deaerated ethanol). EF represents the position of the Fermi level before light irradiation and EF* its position after light irradiation. (b) Influence of gold coating of the J–V curve of a TiO2 photoelectrode in 0.05 M NaOH. Curve “a” corresponds to the bare TiO2 electrode, curve “b” to an electrode coated with 8 nm Au particles, and curve “c” to an electrode coated with 5 nm Au particles. Reprinted from J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 4943–4950. Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society. (c) ZnO Fermi level displacement induced by Au, Ag and Cu, but not by Pt, which is catalytic for ethanol reduction (electrons are directly injected to the electrolyte without accumulation). Reproduced from J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 8810–8815. Copyright 2001 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Volcano-plot of the exchange current density for the HER for several native metals as a function of the metal–hydrogen bond strength (reprinted from, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1972, 39, 163, with permission from Elsevier). (b) Free-energies for the formation of the successive intermediates involved in the OER on a RuO2 surface. An ideal catalyst, for which all the steps are equal to 1.23 eV is shown for comparison. The OER occurs at the potential where all the steps become downhill in energy: 1.23 V vs. RHE for the ideal catalyst, 1.6 V vs. RHE for RuO2. Adapted from J. Electroanal. Chem., 2007, 607, 83–89, with permission from Elsevier. (c) Volcano plot of the overpotential of OER on various oxide surfaces versus the free energy cost of the rate limiting step. Reproduced with permission from ChemCatChem, 2011, 3, 1159–1165. Copyright 2011 Wiley. (d) Illustration of the improvement brought by coating a metal-based catalyst (in this case nickel–iron oxide) on the surface of a hematite photoanode in 1 M NaOH. The graph shows the J–V curve of a hematite electrode before (black trace) and after (grey trace) catalyst deposition. Reproduced with permission from Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 12692–12695. Copyright 2013 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 14  The J–V curve of the n-WSe2/I−, I3−/Pt PEC cell, (a) as-grown and (b) photoetched. The conversion efficiency enhances from 5.3% to 14.4%. Reproduced from Prog. Surf. Sci., 1996, 52, 125–192 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Photocurrent transients recorded for ZnCuInS2 QD-based electrodes recorded at different applied potentials referred to the Ag/AgCl electrode, before and after etching treatment, the square highlights the region where the QD response changes from n-type to p-type behavior. All these measurements were carried out in N2-purged aqueous polysulfide (1 M Na2S + 0.1 M S + 1 M NaOH). (b) Current density and (c) change in the mass recorded during the electrochemical treatment, all the transients start and finish at the open circuit potential. This experiment was performed in aqueous 1 M NaOH + 5 mM Na2S electrolyte. All measurements were carried out in a three electrode cell. Reproduced from Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 7681–7683.	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2015
