Suppression of surface defects to achieve hysteresis-free inverted perovskite solar cells via quantum dot passivation   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TA12904A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TA12904A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 5263-5274Suppression of surface defects to achieve hysteresis-free inverted perovskite solar cells via quantum dot passivation†

        
          
            Chintam 
            Hanmandlu
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Satyanarayana 
            Swamy
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Anupriya 
            Singh
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Hsin-An Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chi-Ching 
            Liu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chao-Sung 
            Lai
          
        
      *bde, 
      
        
          
            Anisha 
            Mohapatra
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Chun-Wei 
            Pao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Peilin 
            Chen
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Chih-Wei 
            Chu
          
        
      *af
aResearch Center for Applied Science, Academia Sinica, 128 Academia Road, Section 2, Nangang, Taipei 11529, Taiwan, Republic of China. E-mail: gchu@gate.sinica.edu.tw
bDepartment of Electronic Engineering, Chang Gung University, Wenhua 1st Road, Guishan District, Taoyuan City 33302, Taiwan, Republic of China. E-mail: cslai@mail.cgu.edu.tw
cNano-Science and Technology Program, Taiwan International Graduate Program, Academia Sinica, Taipei 115, Taiwan, Republic of China
dDepartment of Nephrology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Linkou, New Taipei City 33305, Taiwan, Republic of China
eDepartment of Materials Engineering, Ming Chi University of Technology, 84 Gungjuan Road, Taishan, New Taipei City, 24301, Taiwan, Republic of China
fCollege of Engineering, Chang Gung University, No. 259, Wenhua 1st Road, Guishan District, Taoyuan City 33302, Taiwan, Republic of China
Received 
      25th November 2019
    , Accepted 29th January 2020First published on 31st January 2020AbstractTechnological implementation of organolead trihalide perovskite (OTP) photovoltaics requires suppression of the surface ionic defects and grain boundaries of OTP films. These surface ionic defects have a detrimental effect on the power conversion efficiency (PCE), are notorious for introducing hysteresis into the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics, and decrease the stability of perovskite solar cells (PSCs). Here, we report the use of core/shell quantum dots (QDs) as passivation layers on the OTP surfaces to decrease the trap density and, simultaneously, stabilize the OTP chemical structure and extend the charge carrier lifetime. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations indicated that the OTP surface defects and grain boundaries were effectively suppressed by the presence of the CdSe/ZnS QDs. We attribute the lower trap density of the OTP to the Se2− anions from the CdSe/ZnS passivation layer, inducing van der Waals interactions between the organic and inorganic components of the framework. For PSCs featuring CdSe/ZnS QD passivation, the PCE reached close to 20% with diminishing hysteresis of the J–V characteristics and fill factor (FF) of 81.44%. Moreover, the PSCs incorporating the CdSe/ZnS QD passivation layer exhibited long-term stability, retaining 75 and 80% of their initial performance after 2400 and 720 h, respectively. This facile interfacial strategy appears highly applicable for preparing high-performance durable OTP-based high optoelectronic devices.
1. Introduction
Organolead trihalide perovskite (OTP) semiconductors are attracting immense attention as ideal candidate materials for photovoltaics because of their intriguing optoelectronic properties, including large absorption coefficients, high charge carrier mobilities, long intrinsic carrier recombination lifetimes, and direct band gaps.1,2 Record-breaking power conversion efficiencies (PCE) in organic and OTP solar cells have arisen because of minimized charge recombination effects inside the absorbing layer and good interfacial contact with the charge extraction layers.3–5 The degree of defects on the OTP surface depends on the perovskite composition and the processing conditions; these defects can enhance nonradiative recombination and decrease charge carrier lifetimes.6,7 These surface defects originate as a result of the low formation energy of OTP materials containing organic materials, which can evaporate readily from the surface during thermal annealing, light soaking, moisture diffusion,8,9 photoinduced reactions,10,11 and phase separation12 such issues all adversely affect the device performance and stability of perovskite solar cells (PSCs).8,11,13
Three different passivation techniques have been developed to minimize the effects of surface defect states on top of OTP thin-film layers. The first approach is to decrease the defect density of the transport layers through surface modification and the addition of dopants.14–17 For example, Yang et al. employed ionic liquid treatment on the mesoporous TiO2 as a way to passivate within the TiO2 lattice, enhancing the PCE from 16.45 to 19.65% with negligible hysteresis in the J–V curves.16 Graetzel et al. prepared PSCs after doping Li into TiO2 to passivate the TiO2 lattice, increasing the open-circuit voltage (Voc) from 1.05 to 1.11 V with negligible hysteresis in the J–V curves.17 The second approach is to add dopants in the OTP layer to lower the defect densities.18,19 Jalebi et al. demonstrated PSCs with excellent device performance of 21.5% and impressive value of Voc of 1.17 V after incorporating K in the OTP layer.19 The third approach is to introduce a passivation layer between the extraction layer and the top or bottom of the OTP layer.6,20 Various materials have been reported for the passivation layer between the OTP and the extraction layers, including fullerenes21 and their derivatives,22 polymers,23 quantum dots (QDs; e.g., graphene QDs, inorganic–organic perovskite QDs, and inorganic perovskite QDs),24–26 quaternary ammonium ions6 and inorganic binary alkaline halides.27 Among these modifiers, inorganic QDs are particularly attractive because of their high absorption coefficients, tunable energy levels, and surface-dependent optoelectronic properties. For example, an ultrathin layer of graphene QDs incorporated between the perovskite and extraction layers has increased the degree of electron extraction to the cathode.26 Very recently, PbS QDs have been used as hole transport materials with an appropriate level alignment with respect to the perovskite materials; they increased the range of the perovskite light absorption into the infrared region.28 Erik et al. coated inorganic perovskite (CsPbI3) QDs on top of the PbS surface in PbS colloidal QD solar cells as a means of passivating the surface to eliminate sub-band gap trap-assisted recombination, thereby improving charge collection and device performance.29 Z. Fan et al. used CdSe/CdS core–shell QDs to convert the high energy UV light into visible light.30 The above technique enhance the device performance and stability of PSCs in ambient atmosphere. Based on the findings above, we wished to develop an effective passivation layer to suppress the surface defects of perovskite materials and, thereby, improve the photovoltaic parameters of PSCs.
Here, we passivated the OTP surface by using CdSe/ZnS and CdS/ZnS QDs to improve the performance and stability of PSCs. Upon positioning a QD passivation layer between the perovskite absorber and C60, we observed an exceptional decrease in the surface trap density, resulting in enhanced carrier lifetimes as well as hysteresis-free and stable inverted PSCs. Through density functional theory (DFT) calculations, we found that the CdSe/ZnS QD passivation layer decreased the surface defect states of the perovskite to a greater extent even than that of [6,6]phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM). As a result, enhancements occurred in the open-circuit voltage (Voc) and short-circuit current density (Jsc) of the PSCs, with the resultant PCE increasing from 17.06 to 19.89%, with an outstanding fill factor (FF) of 81.44%, when compared with the devices passivated using PCBM. The long-term and thermal stabilities of the PSCs also improved significantly.
2. Experimental
Precursor preparations
The perovskite-related precursor solutions were prepared under N2 in a glove box. The PbI2:PbCl2 precursor solution was prepared by dissolving PbI2 (420 mg) and PbCl2 (30 mg) in DMF (1 mL) in a glove box. The MAI precursor solution was prepared by dissolving MAI (55 mg) and DMF (7 μL) in 2-propanol (1 mL).31 These two solutions were kept on hotplate at 70 °C overnight. For the one-step preparation of the perovskite precursor, PbI2 (1.0 M) and MAI (1.0 M) were dissolved in DMF (1 mL). This solution was kept on a hotplate at 70 °C overnight. A solution of [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) was prepared by dissolving PCBM (20 mg) in chlorobenzene (1 mL). Various amounts of QDs (CdSe/ZnS and CdS/ZnS) were dispersed in chloroform.
Device fabrication
Indium tin oxide (ITO) having a sheet resistance of less than 10 Ω sq−1 was cleaned through sonication, one time with detergent and isopropyl alcohol (20 min), and twice in deionized water (20 min), then finally dried with N2 gas. The cleaned substrates were treated with UV ozone for 20 min to remove any organic contamination and also to improve the surface adhesion. PEDOT:PSS was spin-coated (4000 rpm, 60 s) onto the ITO surface and annealed at 140 °C for 15 min. The substrates were transferred to a N2-filled glove box for fabrication of the perovskite layer. The inter-diffusion method was used to ensure better crystallization of the perovskites. The “hotplate” solution of PbI2 in DMF was spin-coated (4000 rpm, 40 s) onto the PEDOT:PSS and annealed at 100 °C for 5 min. The “hotplate” solution of MAI was spin-coated (4500 rpm, 40 s) and then annealed at 100 °C for 10 min. For deposition of the fullerene and QD passivation layers, the precursors were spin-coated (7000 rpm, 40 s) onto the perovskite; the PCBM film was annealed at 100 °C for 40 min, whereas the QD film was dried under a N2 atmosphere. Thereafter, 20 nm C60 and 8 nm bathocuproine (BCP) layers were deposited sequentially through thermal evaporation. Finally, a 120 nm Ag electrode was deposited through a mask (effective area of cells: 10 mm2). Note: all depositions were conducted in a N2-filled glove box.
DFT calculations

Ab initio calculations of the structural minimization, the energy calculation, and the density of states (DOS) calculation of the CdSe/ZnS or CdS/ZnS core/shell nanoparticle/perovskite MAPbI3 heterostructures were performed using the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP),32 which is a plane-wave, pseudopotential package based on the density functional theory (DFT). Generalized gradient approximation (GGA) was used, where the exchange–correlation functional between electrons was modeled using the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) scheme33,34 and the projector augmented wave (PAW) method34,35 was used for pseudopotentials. The kinetic energy cut-off for the plane-wave basis set of wave functions was 400 eV with a tolerance of 10−6 eV per atom for the self-consistent field. In describing the van der Waals (vdW) interaction in the modeling system, DFT-D3 with Becke–Jonson damping35,36 was introduced as a semi-empirical dispersion correction for the energy. The binding energy (Eb) between individual parts is defined by Eb = Esys − (E1 + E2), where Esys stands for the total energy of the whole system and E1, E2 stands for the total energy of the individual part, respectively. To compare Eb between different modeling systems, Eb would be further normalized by the cross-sectional area. The CdSe/ZnS and CdS/ZnS core/shell nanoparticles had radii of approximately 6–7 nm in experiments; they were too large to be evaluated in the ab initio calculations because of limited resources and time. As a compromise, a CdSe/ZnS/CdSe layered heterostructure was introduced to replace the core/shell nanoparticles. The results of the DOS calculations were projected by two parts: perovskite MAPbI3 and CdSe/ZnS/CdSe (CdS/ZnS/CdS or PCBM), showing the defect states contributed in the CdSe/ZnS/CdSe (CdS/ZnS/CdS or PCBM).
3. Results and discussions
The configuration of the planar PSCs in this study was indium tin oxide (ITO)/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrenesulfonate (PEDOT:PSS)/perovskite/PCBM or core/shell QDs/fullerene C60/bathocuproine (BCP)/silver (Ag) (Fig. 1a). The photoactive layer of the perovskite was fabricated using an interdiffusion method;37 the processing conditions are provided in the ESI.† PCBM has been used extensively to passivate the surface trap states and grain boundaries in inverted PSCs.38 In this present study, we replaced PCBM by the core/shell (CdSe/ZnS and CdS/ZnS) QDs whose chemical structures are presented in Fig. 1b. The sizes of the CdSe/ZnS and CdS/ZnS QDs (ca. 6–7 nm) were measured through transmission electron microscopy (TEM) (Fig. S1 in the ESI†). The phase transfer ligand exchange procedure was used to remove the long alkyl chain organic ligands from the QDs,39,40 complete processing conditions are described in experimental section of ESI.† To confirm the lattice coherence of QDs/MAPbI3 we implemented high resolution TEM (HRTEM) measurements of QDs. HRTEM clearly displays the two lattice fringes in each QDs, which corresponds to CdSe/ZnS, CdS/ZnS and MAPbI3 crystal structures (Fig. S2 and S3 in the ESI†). Fig. S4a–d (ESI†) displays the absorption and PL spectrum of CdSe/ZnS and CdS/ZnS QDs with different ligands. The MAPbI3 ligands on CdSe/ZnS and CdS/ZnS QDs clearly shows a redshift of absorption and PL spectrum. Also, the PL spectrum becomes narrower such narrowing could be attributed is less aggregation which may improved the passivation. A cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the full solar cell device is displayed in Fig. 1c, revealing a layer-by-layer structure with sharp interfaces.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic architecture of the inverted planar PSCs. (b) Expanded view of chemical structures of the CdSe/ZnS and CdS/ZnS core/shell QDs and the bonding between the QDs and the perovskite films. (c) Cross-sectional SEM image of MAPbI3 PSCs fabricated on PEDOT:PSS through the inter-diffusion method. Scale bar: 500 nm. 
For CdSe/ZnS and CdS/ZnS QDs to be applied as passivation layers in PSC devices, we examined their film-formation ability, optical absorption, wettability, and surface electronic properties. We used SEM and atomic force microscopy (AFM) to evaluate the film-formation ability of the QDs on perovskite. Fig. 2a–c present top-view SEM images of the perovskite and perovskite-passivated CdSe/ZnS and CdS/ZnS QD films, respectively. The morphology of the pristine perovskite surface features a clear grain boundary (Fig. 2a). The perovskite films prepared with CdSe/ZnS and CdS/ZnS QDs (concentration: 5 mg mL−1) featured similar surface morphologies with a pristine perovskite thin film, but the QDs had uniformly covered the perovskite surfaces and efficiently filled the perovskite along the grain boundaries without changing the perovskite crystallite sizes (Fig. 2b and c). When the QD concentration was greater than 5 mg mL−1, the QDs accumulated on top of the perovskite films, affecting their uniformity and continuity (Fig. S5, ESI†). X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectra of the pristine perovskite and the perovskite films prepared with various amounts of CdSe/ZnS and CdS/ZnS QDs exhibited no systematic variations, indicating no obvious changes in the perovskite phase or crystallite size (Fig. S6, ESI†). The quality of crystallite sizes may not influenced by passivation molecules like organic or inorganic quantum dots. The passivated molecule may not create the new phase of XRD but it can influence the peak shift of perovskite main phases.41,42 The changes in the topographies of the perovskite presenting the CdSe/ZnS and CdS/ZnS QDs passivation layers were observed using AFM (Fig. 2d–f). The root mean square (RMS) roughnesses of the perovskite film passivated by the QDs increased only insignificantly when compared with that of the pristine perovskite. The RMS values of the perovskite film and those presenting the CdS/ZnS and CdSe/ZnS passivation layers were 4.9, 5.8, and 6.1 nm, respectively. A smoother surface favors intimate contact between a perovskite film and the carrier transport layers.43 The optical absorption spectra for the perovskite film and the perovskite films presenting various amounts of CdSe/ZnS and CdS/ZnS QDs (concentration of QDs: 0–7.5 mg mL−1) are presented in Fig. S7 (ESI†). The absorbance intensities of the perovskite thin films presenting the QDs increased slightly, the result of well-passivated grain boundaries and trap states of the perovskite films.
 Fig. 2  (a–c) Top-view SEM images of films of (a) pure perovskite, (b) perovskite/CdSe/ZnS, and (c) perovskite/CdS/ZnS. (d–f) Topographic AFM images of films of (d) perovskite, (e) perovskite with CdSe/ZnS, and (f) perovskite with CdS/ZnS. (g) Model of the interfacial structure between perovskite and QDs. (h and i) XPS spectra of perovskite and perovskite with CdSe/ZnS and CdS/ZnS films: (h) I 3d; (i) Pb 4f. 
Recently, Sargent et al. reported that PbS QDs surfaces can be efficiently passivated through in situ epitaxial growth of perovskite to create a coherent interface.40 We constructed an atomic coherent interface model for a perovskite and the CdSe/ZnS QDs (Fig. 2g). The crystal structures of perovskite, CdSe, CdS, and ZnS are presented in Fig. S8 (ESI†). We also analysed the angles between the perovskite and CdSe/ZnS, CdS/ZnS QDs through HRTEM image (Fig. S9, ESI†). The above results suggest that coated QDs may form good interface with the perovskite surface. The CdSe/ZnS QDs covered the perovskite surface homogeneously such that the neighboring Se2− ions from the CdSe/ZnS QDs enhanced electrostatic interactions with the perovskite surface. At the same time, the Pb2+ cations at the perovskite surface were shared by the perovskite and the CdSe/ZnS QDs (Fig. 2g). We used X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) to confirm the changes in the surface electronic properties of the perovskite film upon passivating with the QDs. The core levels of Pb and I and an overview of the spectra of the perovskite and perovskite/QD films are provided in Fig. 2h, i and S10 (ESI†), respectively. The core levels of the Pb 4f and I 3d spectral peaks shifted to lower binding energies in the perovskites passivated with the QD films (Fig. 2h, i and Table S1, ESI†). The binding energies of the perovskites presenting the QDs shifted to lower values relative to those of the pristine perovskite film, suggesting that the CdSe/ZnS and CdS/ZnS QDs had coordinated to the under-coordinated Pb and I ions in the perovskite. The changes in the binding energies of the Pb and I ions are consistent with increases and decreases in the electronegativities of the Pb and I ions, respectively, in the perovskite lattices that had been passivated with the CdSe/ZnS and CdS/ZnS QDs. The binding energy of Pb, I atoms XPS spectra and consistent interaction between the Se2−, S2− from QDs and Pb of perovskite, display that reduced trap densities of the perovskite. Our XPS results indicates a good interface between the perovskite and QDs, which suggest that the effective way suppress the trap densities of perovskite films.
We employed DFT calculations to investigate the interactions between the perovskite films and the various passivation layers (CdSe/ZnS and CdS/ZnS QDs). The interfaces between the outmost layer of the perovskite and passivation layer surface slabs have a 2 × 2 periodicity in the XZ plane and YZ plane; Fig. 3a–d present representative structural models. The binding energies for CdSe/ZnS and CdS/ZnS QDs interacting with the PbI2 and MAI terminated perovskite surface were calculated to be 0.093, 0.083, and 0.213, 0.194 eV Å−2, respectively. Considering that the surface defects and grain boundaries are mainly caused by iodine vacancies44 we speculated that the interactions between the QDs and the perovskite were van der Waals interactions between the Se2− and S2− ions of the QDs and the organic/inorganic framework. We attribute the stronger binding energy when passivating with CdSe/ZnS QDs to the electronegativity of Se2− (from CdSe/ZnS QDs) being lower than that of S2− (from CdS/ZnS QDs) when interacting with Pb ions of the perovskite. The less electronegative CdSe/ZnS QDs makes the stronger bonding with MAI terminated surface compare with PbI2 terminated surface of perovskite. Fig. 3d–f display the calculated density of states (DOS) of the perovskite films presenting the various passivation layers. The enhanced interaction between the perovskite and the CdSe/ZnS layer surface slabs resulted in an increase in the overlap between the wavefunction of the PbI2 and MAI terminated perovskite surface and the passivation layers surface slabs. The enhanced interaction between the perovskite and the passivation layer surface resulted in new hybrid states. These hybrid states connected the trap states with the band edge states of the perovskite surface slab, thereby decreasing the trapping of charges. This increased interaction between the perovskite and the CdSe/ZnS surface slabs could induce a negligible shift at the band edges. The shifts of the band edges initially resulted from charge transfer between the passivation layers and the perovskite surface. The simulation displays surface defect states are approximately suppressed after CdSe/ZnS QDs passivation, which has a superior surface passivation layer compared with the PCBM.21,38 In contrast, the resultant simulations revealed that the surface trap states were not reduced completely when interactions existed between the PbI2 and MAI terminated perovskite and the CdS/ZnS QDs passivation layer surface slabs.
 Fig. 3  (a and b) DFT-calculated binding energies for the interactions between the PbI2 terminated surface of perovskite and (a) CdSe/ZnS, (b) CdS/ZnS. (c and d) DFT-calculated binding energies for the interactions between the MAI terminated surface of perovskite and (c) CdSe/ZnS and (d) CdS/ZnS. Density of states of PbI2 terminated surface of perovskite passivated with (e) CdSe/ZnS, (f) CdS/ZnS and density of states of MAI terminated surface of perovskite passivated with (g) CdSe/ZnS, (h) CdS/ZnS. (i) Steady state PL and (j) TRPL spectra of perovskite films prepared with and without different passivation layers. 
The optoelectronic properties of the perovskite film and the perovskite films passivated with CdSe/ZnS and CdS/ZnS QDs and PCBM were investigated using steady state photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy (Fig. 3g). The perovskite film exhibited a PL peak at 761 nm; for the perovskite passivated with CdSe/ZnS and CdS/ZnS QDs and PCBM, the PL peaks appeared at 749, 750, and 758 nm, respectively. The blue-shifts of these PL peak indicate that the CdSe/ZnS QDs had the greatest capability to passivate the surface ionic defects and grain boundaries, due to its coordination to the perovskite structure, as confirmed in Fig. 2i and j. A similar study found that the surface defects and grain boundaries of perovskite result in red-shifting of signals in the PL spectrum.38 The time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) decay curves in Fig. 3h were fitted using a bi-exponential model (y = A1exp(−t/τ1) + A2exp(−t/τ2)); the fitted parameters are summarized in Table S2 (ESI†). The TRPL measurements revealed two decay components with slowed decay (τ1) and fast (τ2) decay lifetimes. Previous reports of carrier recombination in perovskite films have revealed that τ1 is related to carrier defect states and τ2 arises mainly from bimolecular radiative recombination of the bulk perovskite.45 For the perovskite films passivated with the CdS/ZnS and CdSe/ZnS QDs, the value of τ1 increased significantly from 59.05 ns for the unmodified perovskite to 146.77 (CdS/ZnS) and 170.38 (CdSe/ZnS) ns, consistent with decreases in the defect densities of the perovskite. Furthermore, the value of τ2 increased from 22.75 ns (perovskite) to 59.13 (CdSe/ZnS QDs) and 53.35 (CdS/ZnS QDs) ns, suggesting that the QDs also increased the carrier lifetime within the bulk perovskite. The average lifetimes improved significantly from 52.15 ns for the unmodified perovskite to 155.01 (CdSe/ZnS) and 115.23 (CdS/ZnS) ns for the films passivated with the CdSe/ZnS and CdS/ZnS QDs, respectively. The passivation with the CdSe/ZnS and CdS/ZnS QDs on the perovskite surface mostly affected the slow decay process, consistent with the proposed mechanism of the QDs passivating the surface traps at the perovskite film surface. The enhanced PL lifetime with the CdSe/ZnS QD passivation layer, compared with the CdS/ZnS passivation layer, was presumably related to the suppression of defect states and the high binding energy of the CdSe/ZnS passivation layer.
Having observed the good surface electronic and morphological properties, we studied the influence of the passivation layer on the device performance. To determine the optimal concentrations of the CdSe/ZnS and CdS/ZnS QDs, we examined the effects of varying their amounts on the photovoltaics parameters of the PSCs. Fig. S11 and S12 (ESI†) present the values of Jsc and Voc and the FFs and PCEs of PSCs prepared using various concentrations of the CdS/ZnS and CdSe/ZnS QDs. A concentration of 5 mg mL−1 provided the best device performance among the different concentrations tested in this study. Fig. 4a presents J–V curves of devices based on perovskite films passivated with PCBM and CdSe/ZnS QDs; the best performance of the PCBM-containing device was characterized by a PCE of 17.06%, with a value of Jsc of 21.33 mA cm−2, a value of Voc of 1.01 V, and a FF of 79.20%; the best performance of the QD-containing device was characterized by a PCE of 19.89%, with a value of Jsc of 23.04 mA cm−2, a value of Voc of 1.06 V, and an outstanding FF of 81.44% (for clarity, hereafter the device containing the PCBM passivation layer is denoted as the control and the best-performing device containing the CdSe/ZnS QD passivation layer is denoted as the target device, unless otherwise stated). To the best of our knowledge, this PCE is the best ever reported for a PSCs featuring QD-passivation. Table S3 (ESI†) provides a comparison of the performance of PSCs with QD passivation and with other passivation layers. Fig. 4b and c present the photostabilities of the target and control devices illuminated continuously under 1.5 G sun. The target device provided an excellent photocurrent response and was more stable than the control device over 500 s. To verify the precision of the evolution of the Jsc measurements in the J–V characteristics of all of the devices, we integrated the relative values of Jsc from the EQE measurements presented in Fig. 4d. The integrated values of Jsc for the target and control devices were 20.71 and 22.31 mA cm−2, respectively, in excellent agreement with the values from the J–V plots. Fig. 4e and Tables S4 and S5 (ESI†) compare the photovoltaic performances of 20 target and control devices. The average values of Jsc, Voc, and FF of the target device were all greater than those of the control device, by 13.77% (from 20.26 ± 0.73 to 23.05 ± 0.42 mA cm−2), 6.31% (from 0.95 ± 0.038 to 1.01 ± 0.030 V), and 6.39% (from 74.86 ± 4.29 to 79.65 ± 1.65%), respectively. The average PCE of the target device was greater than that from the control device by 27.33% (from 14.67 ± 1.35 to 18.68 ± 0.60%). Fig. 4f and S13 (ESI†) present the J–V characteristics and photovoltaic performances of target and control devices having active areas of 0.1, 0.5, and 1 cm2. The inset to Fig. 4f provides a photograph of the PSCs having the various active areas. The best performing target devices having various active areas of 0.1, 0.5, and 1 cm2 exhibited PCEs of 19.89, 17.98, and 17.06%, respectively. Table S6 (ESI†) summarizes the device parameters. This passivation with CdSe/ZnS QDs provides a conformation for the surface coverage of perovskites films and, more importantly, our method is suitable for large-area applications for future commercialization.
 Fig. 4  (a) Photovoltaic parameters of champion devices with PCBM and CdSe/ZnS passivation layers, respectively. (c) Steady state photocurrent output at the maximum power point and (b) corresponding power output of the target and control devices for 500 s. (d) EQE and integrated values of Jsc (mA cm−2) for the control and target devices. (e) Histograms of the photovoltaic parameters Jsc (mA cm−2), Voc (V), FF (%), PCE (%) of 20 control and target PSC devices. (f) J–V curves of target PSCs having active areas of 1, 0.5, and 0.1 cm2; insets: photographs of the devices. (g) Statistical distributions of the HIs of the control and target devices. (h) Photovoltaic parameters of target cells measured in forward (from −1.0 to +1.2 V) and reverse (from +1.2 to −1.0 V) scan directions with different dwelling times, at 10 mV per step. 
Hysteresis is a commonly observed phenomenon in the J–V characteristics of PSCs; it is related to many factors, including the voltage swiping direction, different dwelling times between the voltage points, charge trapping, ionic motion, ferroelectricity, and interfacial contact with extraction layers.46–48 Therefore, in addition to determining the photovoltaic properties in terms of the device PCEs, we also investigated the hysteresis effects in the J–V characteristics. We measured the J–V characteristics of our target and control devices in the forward (Jsc to Voc = −1.0 to 1.2 V) and reverse (Voc to Jsc = 1.2 to −1.0 V) scan directions. The hysteresis index (HI = [Jrs(0.8Voc) − Jrs(0.8Voc)]/Jrs(0.8Voc)) was introduced to evaluate the hysteresis quantitatively.49Fig. 4g displays the HIs of 20 target and control PSC devices. The HIs decreased from 8.51 ± 1.81 for the control device to 1.27 ± 0.53 for the target device. Thus, the hysteresis in the J–V characteristics decreased significantly after incorporating the passivating CdSe/ZnS QDs. Fig. 4h and Table S7 (ESI†) present the hysteresis effects with respect to the various scan directions and the dwelling times between voltages. The HIs between the J–V characteristics increased upon increasing the dwelling times (inset to Fig. 4h). The HIs of the PSCs containing the CdSe/ZnS passivation layer were not completely hysteresis-free, but were extremely similar to those for the device with the record efficiency reported by Huang.6 The hysteresis in the J–V characteristics of PSCs featuring the CdSe/ZnS passivation layer decreased because the CdSe/ZnS QDs passivated the perovskite surface trap states. Therefore, insertion of the CdSe/ZnS QDs passivation layer between the perovskite layer and the ETL appears to be an efficient approach to resolving the problem of hysteresis in PSC devices. Fig. S14 (ESI†) presents the best J–V curve of a device incorporating a CdS/ZnS QD passivation layer. The device exhibited PCEs of 18.65 and 17.44% from its forward and reverse scans, respectively. The relatively poorer performance and hysteresis in the J–V characteristics suggests that the S2− anions from the CdS/ZnS QDs partially impeded charge transport in the active layer, because of the higher electronegativity when compared with Se2−.50
The perovskite films prepared with CdSe/ZnS QDs passivation layer decreased the trap density from 5.6 × 1017 cm−3 (in the absence of the QD) to 2.1 × 1017 cm−3 as determined using the space charge-limited current, as displayed in Fig. 5a and b and ESI Note 1.† Thus, the perovskite film defect density decreased significantly after incorporating the CdSe/ZnS QDs passivation layer, in excellent agreement with the PL and TRPL measurements. To further examine the effect of perovskite passivation on device performance, we determined the charge carrier lifetimes and charge extraction abilities through measurements of the transient photovoltage (TPV) and transient photocurrent (TPC), respectively (Fig. 5c and S16 (ESI†)). When the PSC device was illuminated with laser pulse light under Voc conditions, the photovoltage was generated in the PSC device. When the laser pulsed light illumination was off, however, the voltage decreased, due to the electrons and holes at defect sites. The target device experienced slower charge recombination, and the decay lifetime of the target device (2.69 μs) was longer than that of the control device (0.17 μs), as displayed in Fig. S16 (ESI†). These values can explain why the CdSe/ZnS QDs had positive effects on the perovskite film morphology: the resulting film experienced less non-radiative recombination, owing to a decreased density of surface trap states on the film surface. The transient photocurrent (TPC) measurements provided the charge carrier lifetimes within the devices. Fig. 5c reveals the fast decay lifetime (0.44 μs) in the target device and the slow decay lifetime (1.26 μs) in the control device. These results suggest that the target device experienced charge carrier transport faster than that of the control device. We performed electronic impedance spectroscopy (EIS) at various bias voltages (0.1–1.0 V) for the target and control devices in the dark (Fig. S17, ESI†). The target device possessed higher impedance than that of the control device at each the tested bias voltages. The larger impedance suggested suppressed recombination in the target device, possibly because of improved charge carrier flow between the perovskite and the charge extraction layers. Furthermore, we used intensity modulated photocurrent density spectroscopy to reveal the recombination lifetimes (τr) of the target and control devices (Fig. 5d). For both devices, we used a single RC component to extract the chemical capacitance (Cμ) and recombination resistance (Rct); Fig. S18 (ESI†) lists the fitted parameters. The value of τr(Rct × Cμ) of the target device in the bias region 0.1–0.7 V was seven to eight times higher than that of the control device, indicating that the target devices had lower values of τr. This finding that devices incorporating perovskite layers passivated by the CdSe/ZnS QDs had longer values of τr indicates that excellent charge carrier extraction and transfer occurred within them. This result is consistent with the TPC and TPV measurements, and supports our claim that the CdSe/ZnS QDs passivated the surface defects significantly and, thereby, influenced the carrier transport and extraction dynamics in the perovskite films and PSCs. To further understand the decreases in the density of trap states and charge recombination, we irradiated the control and target devices under various light intensities. Fig. 5e presents plots of logJsc with respect to the light intensity; the slope of the curve for the target device was closer to 1 than that for the control device, indicating suppression of bimolecular recombination at the interface under low light intensity.16Fig. 5f presents plots of Voc with respect to the light intensity. The extracted slopes for the control and target devices were 1.39kBT/q and 1.21kBT/q, respectively (where k, T, and q are the Boltzmann constant, absolute temperature, and elementary charge, respectively). The shallower slope for the target device suggests that the degree of trap-assisted recombination was lower than that in the control device. Thus, the target device had a lower level of Shockley–Read–Hall (SRH) recombination, due to the lower trap density.16,51
 Fig. 5  (a and b) Dark J–V traces of the trap densities of perovskite films prepared with PCBM and CdSe/ZnS QDs. (c) Transient photocurrent of target and control PSCs devices. (d) Recombination lifetimes of PSCs featuring PCBM and CdSe/ZnS passivation layers, extracted from impedance spectra. (e and f) Plots of (e) Jsc and (f) Voc with respect to light intensity. 
The stability of PSCs is one of the most important issues because of their hygroscopic nature. Recent studies have revealed that the degradation of perovskite films begins from the surface defect sites and grain boundaries of the films.8 Because the CdSe/ZnS QDs could interact strongly with the surface ionic defects, we suspected that perovskite films passivated with them would be more stable than those passivated with PCBM. As displayed in Fig. 6a, the control device exhibited poor operation stability, losing 70% of its initial PCE after 2400 h; in contrast, the target device exhibited substantially enhanced stability, losing only 20% of its initial PCE under the same conditions (the non-normalized photovoltaic parameters are provided in Fig. S19, ESI†). Fig. 6b displays the best stable photovoltaic parameters of the target and control devices before and after 2400 h. The decreases in device performance of the control and target devices arose mainly from decreases in the FFs and the values of Voc. Measurements of the humidity stability (40–50%, at room temperature) of the bare films revealed that the films presenting the CdSe/ZnS QD passivation layers possessed very good structural and absorption stabilities (Fig. S20 and S21, ESI†), as measured using XRD and UV-Vis absorption spectroscopy. Much faster degradation of the perovskite (110) plane peak and faster degradation of the UV-Vis PbI2 peak occurred for the PCBM-passivated perovskite films; the perovskite films passivated with the CdSe/ZnS QDs maintained a highly stable perovskite phase without an XRD-detectable PbI2 phase under the same conditions. These findings confirmed that the CdSe/ZnS QDs could indeed improve the moisture-stability of OTP films. Fig. 6c presents the thermal stabilities of the control and target devices, measured at temperatures ranging from 20 to 100 °C for 10 min in a N2-filled glove box. The target device lost only 15% of its initial PCE, even at 80 °C. At 100 °C, however, both the control and target devices exhibited obvious decays in their PCEs, presumably because of evaporation of organic transport materials. Fig. 6d displays images of devices incorporating PCBM and CdSe/ZnS QD passivation layers, after treatment at the various temperatures. When the control and target devices were heated at high temperature, the yellow PbI2 phase appeared faster in the control device than it did in the target device. To further examine the thermal stabilities of the control and target devices, we measured their performance at 50 °C for 720 h (Fig. 6e; the non-normalized photovoltaic parameters are provided in Fig. S22, ESI†). The target device lost only 25% of its initial PCE after heating for 720 h; the control device lost 70% of its initial PCE after 360 h. Fig. 6f presents the best thermal stability photovoltaic parameters of the target and control devices, before and after treatment for 720 h. The decrease in PCE for the control device arose mainly from the lower FF and value of Voc. These findings indicate that the CdSe/ZnS QD passivated devices displayed enhanced long-term and thermal stabilities. We also observed that the CdSe/ZnS QD passivated devices featured highly reflective Ag after maintaining them for 5 hours under an ambient atmosphere; in contrast, the pristine and PCBM-passivated devices featured a purple-brown Ag cathode under the same conditions (Fig. S23a, ESI†). We suspect that halide anions diffused toward the cathode and accumulated at the cathode; for this reason, the performance of the PSCs degraded very rapidly. Using XPS, we confirmed that passivation with the CdSe/ZnS QDs suppressed the diffusion of iodine toward the cathode, because the Se2− anions experienced strong electronic interactions with the MA+ perovskite semiconductors, suppressing free motion of the MA+ cations (Fig. S23b, ESI†).50,52 Thus, our strategy of CdSe/ZnS QD passivation in films effectively suppressed the diffusion of iodine toward the cathode, contributing to the excellent performance and stability of the PSCs devices.
 Fig. 6  Long-term and thermal stabilities of PSC devices incorporating PCBM and CdSe/ZnS passivation layers: (a) PCE evolution of PSC devices for 2400 h; measurements were made every 120 h. (b) Best J–V curves of PSC devices before and after operation for 2400 h in a N2 glove box. (c) PCE plotted with respect to temperature (from 30 to 100 °C) during treatment for 5 h. (d) Photographs of PSC devices heated at various temperatures for 30 min. (e) PCEs of PSCs devices treated under a N2 atmosphere at 50 °C for 720 h. (f) Best J–V curves of PSC devices; thermal stability measured before and after treatment for 720 h. 
4. Conclusions
In summary, we have developed an efficient approach toward hysteresis-free and more-stable PSCs. CdSe/ZnS QDs can effectively passivate the surface charge traps and grain boundaries of perovskite materials, leading to devices with highest efficiencies close to 20%, an outstanding FF of 81.45%, and suppressed hysteresis in the J–V characteristics. The CdSe/ZnS QD passivation layer on the perovskite materials serves as a protecting layer and increases the hydrophobicity. Experimental XPS data coupled with DFT calculations revealed that the CdSe/ZnS QDs effectively suppress the surface trap states and grain boundaries. Based on this passivation strategy, PSCs incorporating CdSe/ZnS QD passivation layers exhibited outstanding device stability (compared with that of devices featuring a PCBM passivation layer), retaining nearly 80 and 75% of the initial PCE in long-term thermal stability studies after 2400 and 720 h, respectively. Our approach appears to be a facile route toward the future realization of large-scale preparation of efficient and stable PSCs.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Dr Chih Wei Chu thanks the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST) of Taiwan (107-2221-E-001-014-MY3) and the Sustainability Science Research Program, Academia Sinica, Taiwan (AS-SS-104-08). Professor Chao-Sung Lai thanks MOST (106-2221-E-182-059-MY3, 106-2632-E-182-001, and 106-2911-I-182-504) and Chang Gung Memorial Hospital (CMRPD2F0022 and CMRPD2G0101) for financial support. We sincerely thank Professor Hao-Wu Lin and Mr Wei-Lun Tsai (Department of Materials Science and Engineering, NTHU) for their help with the TPC and TPV measurements.
References
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 506 CrossRef CAS .
T. C. Sum and N. Mathews, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2518–2534 RSC .
Q. Jiang, Y. Zhao, X. Zhang, X. Yang, Y. Chen, Z. Chu, Q. Ye, X. Li, Z. Yin and J. You, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 460–466 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, H. Yao, J. Hou, J. Zhu, J. Zhang, W. Li, R. Yu, B. Gao, S. Zhang and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800613 CrossRef PubMed .
E. H. Jung, N. J. Jeon, E. Y. Park, C. S. Moon, T. J. Shin, T.-Y. Yang, J. H. Noh and J. Seo, Nature, 2019, 567, 511–515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zheng, B. Chen, J. Dai, Y. Fang, Y. Bai, Y. Lin, H. Wei, X. C. Zeng and J. Huang, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17102 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tan, A. Jain, O. Voznyy, X. Lan, F. P. García de Arquer, J. Z. Fan, R. Quintero-Bermudez, M. Yuan, B. Zhang, Y. Zhao, F. Fan, P. Li, L. N. Quan, Y. Zhao, Z.-H. Lu, Z. Yang, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2017, 355, 722–726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, B. Chen, Y. Liu, Y. Deng, Y. Bai, Q. Dong and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 516–522 RSC .
T. A. Berhe, W.-N. Su, C.-H. Chen, C.-J. Pan, J.-H. Cheng, H.-M. Chen, M.-C. Tsai, L.-Y. Chen, A. A. Dubale and B.-J. Hwang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 323–356 RSC .
T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, S. Pathak, A. Abate, M. M. Lee and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2885 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhao, B. Chen, X. Qiao, L. Luan, K. Lu and B. Hu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500279 CrossRef .
C. G. Bischak, C. L. Hetherington, H. Wu, S. Aloni, D. F. Ogletree, D. T. Limmer and N. S. Ginsberg, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1028–1033 CrossRef CAS .
W. Nie, J.-C. Blancon, A. J. Neukirch, K. Appavoo, H. Tsai, M. Chhowalla, M. A. Alam, M. Y. Sfeir, C. Katan, J. Even, S. Tretiak, J. J. Crochet, G. Gupta and A. D. Mohite, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11574 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Tavakoli, P. Yadav, R. Tavakoli and J. Kong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800794 CrossRef .
J. Jiang, Z. Jin, J. Lei, Q. Wang, X. Zhang, J. Zhang, F. Gao and S. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 9514–9522 RSC .
D. Yang, X. Zhou, R. Yang, Z. Yang, W. Yu, X. Wang, C. Li, S. Liu and R. P. H. Chang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3071–3078 RSC .
F. Giordano, A. Abate, J. P. Correa Baena, M. Saliba, T. Matsui, S. H. Im, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt and M. Graetzel, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, W. Zhang, Y.-C. Wang, W. Zhang, H.-Q. Wang and J. Fang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3806 CrossRef .
M. Abdi-Jalebi, Z. Andaji-Garmaroudi, S. Cacovich, C. Stavrakas, B. Philippe, J. M. Richter, M. Alsari, E. P. Booker, E. M. Hutter, A. J. Pearson, S. Lilliu, T. J. Savenije, H. Rensmo, G. Divitini, C. Ducati, R. H. Friend and S. D. Stranks, Nature, 2018, 555, 497 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Lee, J. Luo, M.-K. Son, P. Gao, K. T. Cho, J. Seo, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3966–3972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shao, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15001 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Y. Zhao, Q. Chen, Y. Yang, Y. Liu, Z. Hong, Z. Liu, Y.-T. Hsieh, L. Meng, Y. Li and Y. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 15540–15547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P.-L. Qin, G. Yang, Z.-w. Ren, S. H. Cheung, S. K. So, L. Chen, J. Hao, J. Hou and G. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706126 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Cha, P. Da, J. Wang, W. Wang, Z. Chen, F. Xiu, G. Zheng and Z.-S. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 8581–8587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zai, C. Zhu, H. Xie, Y. Zhao, C. Shi, Z. Chen, X. Ke, M. Sui, C. Chen, J. Hu, Q. Zhang, Y. Gao, H. Zhou, Y. Li and Q. Chen, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 30–38 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhu, J. Ma, Z. Wang, C. Mu, Z. Fan, L. Du, Y. Bai, L. Fan, H. Yan, D. L. Phillips and S. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 3760–3763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, Y. Zhang, L. Shi, Z. Liu, J. Huang, J. S. Yun, Y. Zeng, A. Pu, K. Sun, Z. Hameiri, J. A. Stride, J. Seidel, M. A. Green and X. Hao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800138 CrossRef .
L. Hu, W. Wang, H. Liu, J. Peng, H. Cao, G. Shao, Z. Xia, W. Ma and J. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 515–518 RSC .
X. Zhang, J. Zhang, D. Phuyal, J. Du, L. Tian, V. A. Öberg, M. B. Johansson, U. B. Cappel, O. Karis, J. Liu, H. Rensmo, G. Boschloo and E. M. J. Johansson, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702049 CrossRef .
M. M. Tavakoli, H. T. Dastjerdi, D. Prochowicz, P. Yadav, R. Tavakoli, M. Saliba and Z. Fan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 14753–14760 RSC .
J. Mo, C. Zhang, J. Chang, H. Yang, H. Xi, D. Chen, Z. Lin, G. Lu, J. Zhang and Y. Hao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 13032–13038 RSC .
G. Kresse and J. Hafner, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1994, 49, 14251–14269 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Perdew and Y. Wang, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1992, 45, 13244–13249 CrossRef PubMed .
P. E. Blöchl, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1994, 50, 17953–17979 CrossRef .
G. Kresse and D. Joubert, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 59, 1758–1775 CrossRef CAS .
S. Grimme, S. Ehrlich and L. Goerigk, J. Comput. Chem., 2011, 32, 1456–1465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xiao, C. Bi, Y. Shao, Q. Dong, Q. Wang, Y. Yuan, C. Wang, Y. Gao and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2619–2623 RSC .
Y. Shao, Z. Xiao, C. Bi, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Aqoma, M. Al Mubarok, W. T. Hadmojo, E.-H. Lee, T.-W. Kim, T. K. Ahn, S.-H. Oh and S.-Y. Jang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605756 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Ning, X. Gong, R. Comin, G. Walters, F. Fan, O. Voznyy, E. Yassitepe, A. Buin, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, Nature, 2015, 523, 324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Peng, Y. Wu, W. Ye, D. A. Jacobs, H. Shen, X. Fu, Y. Wan, T. Duong, N. Wu, C. Barugkin, H. T. Nguyen, D. Zhong, J. Li, T. Lu, Y. Liu, M. N. Lockrey, K. J. Weber, K. R. Catchpole and T. P. White, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1792–1800 RSC .
X. Zheng, J. Troughton, N. Gasparini, Y. Lin, M. Wei, Y. Hou, J. Liu, K. Song, Z. Chen, C. Yang, B. Turedi, A. Y. Alsalloum, J. Pan, J. Chen, A. A. Zhumekenov, T. D. Anthopoulos, Y. Han, D. Baran, O. F. Mohammed, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Joule, 2019, 3, 1963–1976 CrossRef CAS .
P. You, Z. Liu, Q. Tai, S. Liu and F. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3632–3638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Eames, J. M. Frost, P. R. F. Barnes, B. C. O'Regan, A. Walsh and M. S. Islam, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-Y. Son, J.-W. Lee, Y. J. Choi, I.-H. Jang, S. Lee, P. J. Yoo, H. Shin, N. Ahn, M. Choi, D. Kim and N.-G. Park, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16081 CrossRef CAS .
M. Valles-Pelarda, B. C. Hames, I. García-Benito, O. Almora, A. Molina-Ontoria, R. S. Sánchez, G. Garcia-Belmonte, N. Martín and I. Mora-Sero, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 4622–4628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Tress, N. Marinova, T. Moehl, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 995–1004 RSC .
Y. Rong, Y. Hu, S. Ravishankar, H. Liu, X. Hou, Y. Sheng, A. Mei, Q. Wang, D. Li, M. Xu, J. Bisquert and H. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2383–2391 RSC .
C. Hanmandlu, C.-C. Liu, C.-Y. Chen, K. M. Boopathi, S.-H. Wu, M. Singh, A. Mohapatra, H.-W. Lin, Y.-C. Chang, Y.-C. Chang, C.-S. Lai and C.-W. Chu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 17973–17984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gong, M. Yang, D. Rebollar, J. Rucinski, Z. Liveris, K. Zhu and T. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800973 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, Z. Hong, Q. Chen, W. Chang, H. Zhou, T.-B. Song, E. Young, Y. Yang, J. You, G. Li and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 662–668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-J. Tong, W. Geng, O. V. Prezhdo and L.-M. Liu, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1997–2004 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Device fabrication and characterizations, optical constants of each layer in the device, simulated Jsc values with various thicknesses of transport layers, SEM of active layer thickness 330 nm, J–V characteristics of PSCs with ultrathin MoO3 average with 60 devices, full UPS spectrum of various ultrathin MoO3 on Ag, AFM topographic images on various MoO3 thickness on Ag, TRPL of perovskite on glass, AFM topographic images of various electrodes, normalized PCEs of various electrodes, photovoltaics parameters of flexible solar cells, cells with ITO and microcavity electrodes, XRD pattern of perovskite layer with various bending cycles, SEM images of perovskite active layers on flexible substrates with various bending cycles. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta12904aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic architecture of the inverted planar PSCs. (b) Expanded view of chemical structures of the CdSe/ZnS and CdS/ZnS core/shell QDs and the bonding between the QDs and the perovskite films. (c) Cross-sectional SEM image of MAPbI3 PSCs fabricated on PEDOT:PSS through the inter-diffusion method. Scale bar: 500 nm.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a–c) Top-view SEM images of films of (a) pure perovskite, (b) perovskite/CdSe/ZnS, and (c) perovskite/CdS/ZnS. (d–f) Topographic AFM images of films of (d) perovskite, (e) perovskite with CdSe/ZnS, and (f) perovskite with CdS/ZnS. (g) Model of the interfacial structure between perovskite and QDs. (h and i) XPS spectra of perovskite and perovskite with CdSe/ZnS and CdS/ZnS films: (h) I 3d; (i) Pb 4f.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a and b) DFT-calculated binding energies for the interactions between the PbI2 terminated surface of perovskite and (a) CdSe/ZnS, (b) CdS/ZnS. (c and d) DFT-calculated binding energies for the interactions between the MAI terminated surface of perovskite and (c) CdSe/ZnS and (d) CdS/ZnS. Density of states of PbI2 terminated surface of perovskite passivated with (e) CdSe/ZnS, (f) CdS/ZnS and density of states of MAI terminated surface of perovskite passivated with (g) CdSe/ZnS, (h) CdS/ZnS. (i) Steady state PL and (j) TRPL spectra of perovskite films prepared with and without different passivation layers.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Photovoltaic parameters of champion devices with PCBM and CdSe/ZnS passivation layers, respectively. (c) Steady state photocurrent output at the maximum power point and (b) corresponding power output of the target and control devices for 500 s. (d) EQE and integrated values of Jsc (mA cm−2) for the control and target devices. (e) Histograms of the photovoltaic parameters Jsc (mA cm−2), Voc (V), FF (%), PCE (%) of 20 control and target PSC devices. (f) J–V curves of target PSCs having active areas of 1, 0.5, and 0.1 cm2; insets: photographs of the devices. (g) Statistical distributions of the HIs of the control and target devices. (h) Photovoltaic parameters of target cells measured in forward (from −1.0 to +1.2 V) and reverse (from +1.2 to −1.0 V) scan directions with different dwelling times, at 10 mV per step.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a and b) Dark J–V traces of the trap densities of perovskite films prepared with PCBM and CdSe/ZnS QDs. (c) Transient photocurrent of target and control PSCs devices. (d) Recombination lifetimes of PSCs featuring PCBM and CdSe/ZnS passivation layers, extracted from impedance spectra. (e and f) Plots of (e) Jsc and (f) Voc with respect to light intensity.	 

 	Fig. 6  Long-term and thermal stabilities of PSC devices incorporating PCBM and CdSe/ZnS passivation layers: (a) PCE evolution of PSC devices for 2400 h; measurements were made every 120 h. (b) Best J–V curves of PSC devices before and after operation for 2400 h in a N2 glove box. (c) PCE plotted with respect to temperature (from 30 to 100 °C) during treatment for 5 h. (d) Photographs of PSC devices heated at various temperatures for 30 min. (e) PCEs of PSCs devices treated under a N2 atmosphere at 50 °C for 720 h. (f) Best J–V curves of PSC devices; thermal stability measured before and after treatment for 720 h.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Device fabrication and characterizations, optical constants of each layer in the device, simulated Jsc values with various thicknesses of transport layers, SEM of active layer thickness 330 nm, J–V characteristics of PSCs with ultrathin MoO3 average with 60 devices, full UPS spectrum of various ultrathin MoO3 on Ag, AFM topographic images on various MoO3 thickness on Ag, TRPL of perovskite on glass, AFM topographic images of various electrodes, normalized PCEs of various electrodes, photovoltaics parameters of flexible solar cells, cells with ITO and microcavity electrodes, XRD pattern of perovskite layer with various bending cycles, SEM images of perovskite active layers on flexible substrates with various bending cycles. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta12904a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
