State of the art and prospectives of heterogeneous photocatalysts based on metal–organic frameworks (MOFs): design, modification strategies, and their ...  - Catalysis Science & Technology (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3CY00479A View PDF Version  DOI: 10.1039/D3CY00479A
(Minireview)
Catal. Sci. Technol., 2023, Advance Article State of the art and prospectives of heterogeneous photocatalysts based on metal–organic frameworks (MOFs): design, modification strategies, and their applications and mechanisms in photodegradation, water splitting, and CO2 reduction†
Zeren Ma, 
Bin Guan*, 
Jiangfeng Guo, 
Xingze Wu, 
Yujun Chen, 
Jinhe Zhang, 
Xing Jiang, 
Shibo Bao, 
Lei Chen, 
Kaiyou Shu, 
Hongtao Dang, 
Zelong Guo, 
Zekai Li, 
Shunyu Yao and 
Zhen Huang
Key Laboratory for Power Machinery and Engineering of Ministry of Education, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Dongchuan Road No. 800, Min Hang District, Shanghai 200240, China. E-mail: guanbin@sjtu.edu.cn;  Fax: +86 21 34205553;   Tel: +86 21 34206859
Received 
7th April 2023
, Accepted 3rd June 2023First published on 12th June 2023AbstractMetal organic frameworks (MOFs) have sparked a wave of research in the field of photocatalysis due to their ultrahigh specific surface area, porous sparse structure, and tunable topology and composition brought about by numerous metal centers/organic ligands. In this study, we first summarize and refine the basic design strategies of MOFs as photocatalysts and their modification strategies in enhancing photocatalytic performance from the perspective of heterogeneous photocatalysts. Subsequently, we review the recent research progress on the specific applications of MOFs in heterogeneous photocatalysis, i.e., photocatalytic degradation of water pollutants, photocatalytic water separation, and photocatalytic reduction of CO2, including the selection of design strategies and modification strategies for MOF-based photocatalysts, photocatalytic mechanisms, and parameters affecting the photocatalytic performance. In addition, this study highlights the mechanistic studies of MOF-based heterogeneous photocatalysts from different perspectives according to their specific applications and compares and refines the photocatalytic mechanistic studies in different fields through different techniques such as in situ characterization and DFT as well as the commonalities and connections between different mechanistic studies. Finally, the disadvantages and advantages of heterogeneous photocatalysts based on MOFs, possible ending directions for existing problems, and possible key research directions for the future, are discussed.
1 Introduction
1.1 Backgrounds
In the past few decades, a variety of advanced porous materials consisting of inorganic and organic components, such as zeolite,1 porous organic polymer,2 covalent organic frameworks (COFs),3 and metallic organic frameworks (MOFs),4 has gained popularity in scientific and technical domains.5,6 MOFs, a brand-new and rapidly expanding class of ordered porous materials, have been the focus of intense scientific attention since their discovery by the Yaghi group7 in 1995. In MOFs, organic connectives serve as secondary building units (SBUs),8,9 which self-assemble from transition metal ions. These periodically networked crystalline porous inorganic–organic compounds exhibit flexible design,17 excellent surface area,18 obvious high thermal stability, and diversity of topological structures,19 making them attractive for a wide range of applications including gas adsorption10 and separation,11 catalysis,12 sensing,13 drug precursor development,14,15 and energy storage.16
i) Yaghi et al.7 (1995) pioneered the development of isoreticular metal–organic frameworks (IRMOFs), which are octahedral open-bridged coordination polymers consisting of [Zn4O6]+ clusters and organic carboxylic acid ligands. This breakthrough enabled the transition from crystalline microporous materials to crystalline mesoporous materials, a significant advancement in the field of porous materials.
ii) Zeolitic imidazolate frameworks (ZIFs) are composed of imidazoles acting as double-fork bridging ligands and transition metal ions such as Zn or Co, which assemble from N atoms to form pores resembling those of a silica–aluminum molecular sieve.
iii) Materials of Institute Lavoisier (MILs) are a class of porous materials that typically exhibit a very large specific surface area. There are two subgroups of MILs: one is composed of transition metals, dicarboxylic acids, and lanthanides, while the other is synthesized using terephthalic acid or caramel acid and trivalent chromium, iron, aluminum, or vanadium.
iv) Porous coordination networks (PCNs) are primarily synthesized by reacting Cu with ligands such as pyranoic acid, H3TATB (4,4′,4′′-triazine-2,4,6-tribenzoate), or HTB (s-heptane tribenzoate). PCNs have a cage and channel connected by a tiny diameter window and a three-dimensional orthogonal channel structure, resembling a bag (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Four groups of “traditional” MOFs have a wide range of applications. (a) X-ray structures labeled with IRMOF-n (n = 1 to 7, 8, 10, 12, 14, and 16).20 (b) Structures of MIL-100 and MIL-101.25 (c) Isoporous metal organic frameworks (MOFs) PPCN-6825.21 (d) RGO-supported purple nanocatalyst ZIF-9@Phy-rGOs.22 This figure has been reproduced from ref. 20, 22 and 25 with permission from Eddaoudi, M. &Rahmani, M. H., & Kang, J., copyright 2022. 
Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) have garnered considerable attention due to their high porosity, rich redox chemistry, high surface area, and various functional groups on the frames.15 MOFs consist of organic ligand molecules that collaborate with metal ions or clusters to create a unique frame with a porous topology, uniform structure, and high surface area. Metal ions in MOFs include Ni(II),26 Cu(II),27 Fe(II),28 Mn(II),29 Cr(III),30 Zn(II),31 and Co(II).32 By combining different metal ions with organic ligands, an infinite number of MOFs can be created with the requisite structural, magnetic, electrical, optical, electrochemical, and catalytic capabilities. MOFs have been formed in over 20000 species and are classified into 1D,23 2D,24 and 3D25 structures based on organic and inorganic units. MOFs may be employed in various applications by modifying their structural properties and performance (Fig. 2).33
 Fig. 2  (a) Applications of MOFs; (b) number of papers for different applications of MOF reported during 2010–2020. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 34 with permission from Zhao, X., copyright 2021. 
1.2 Energy storage equipment
Rapid global population growth and technological advances have resulted in an increased demand for fossil fuels, leading researchers to explore numerous renewable energy sources,35 such as hydrogen, geothermal, wind, and solar energy, to replace traditional energy sources with environment-friendly options. However, renewable energy efficiency also depends on effective energy storage devices.36 Electrochemical energy storage devices, including lithium-ion batteries and supercapacitors, play a crucial role in modern electronics and flexible wearable devices. Effective energy storage is essential to optimize renewable energy efficiency. Developing a rapid charge–discharge system with high specific volume is crucial. Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) and their derivatives possess high surface area, tunable pores, structure, and composition, as well as the functional characteristics of both an organic ligand guest and a metal ion host. These properties offer significant benefits and prospects for applications in energy storage and conversion. MOFs can be used directly or through composite derivations in certain structural materials.37
1.2.1 Lithium-ion battery. Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) have achieved remarkable commercial success in powering portable electronic devices. During charging and discharging, lithium ions are intercalated and deintercalated between the cathode and anode of lithium-ion batteries, also known as “rocking chair batteries”. The large capacity of lithium-ion batteries is limited by the use of graphite in the positive electrode, which has a theoretical capacity of only 372 mA h g−1.38Graphite-based anode materials usually require fluoridation or oxidation, coating, doping, surface treatment, and mechanical grinding. Although it can meet the energy requirements of some modern devices, developing new electrode materials with high specific energy to enhance the energy density and cycle life is a feasible alternative to replace traditional lithium-ion batteries. Porous carbon or metal compounds with low oxidation–reduction reaction potential, such as lithium cobalt oxide and lithium iron phosphate, are often used as lithium-ion battery cathode materials. These cathode materials are typically composed of lithium-rich oxides with a high oxidation–reduction potential. The electrochemical properties and structure of graphene have been improved through oxidation modification, coating modification, and etching modification to address its shortcomings. However, the use of transition metal compounds in Li-ion batteries is limited by drawbacks such as poor electrical conductivity and a significant volume change of lithium ions during deintercalation.39
MOFs and their derivatives, carbon materials, and metal compounds with distinctive nanostructures created by the template method of MOF materials offer an attractive platform for addressing the current concerns associated with organic cathodes.40 For example, Hai-Jun Peng et al.41 reported a sacrificial precursor of MOF constructed with Mn(II) particles and ligand H2PBA (5-(4-pyridin-3-yl-benzoylamino)-isophthalic acid). The mesoporous Mn3O4/C composites formed after MOF pyrolysis at 500 °C exhibited a remarkable capacity of 1032 mA g−1 after 500 cycles. Alternatively, Yuzhen Han et al.42 used a MOF coating approach (MOF-SC), casting a thin MOF film on the silicon layer's surface and sandwiching it between the active silicon and the diaphragm to increase the area capacity of low-cost silicon from 265 to 1700 μAh cm−2, which remained at 850700 μAh cm−2 after 50 cycles.
In the realm of solid electrolyte (SSE),43 MOFs have wide-ranging applications in lithium-ion electron electrode materials. MOFs have been developed as nanofillers in polymer matrices to construct SSEs. These MOFs serve as lithium-ion conductors by absorbing lithium-containing chemicals and transferring lithium ions through the nanopores. However, they also disrupt the chain-arrangement of polymer molecules and reduce the crystallinity of PEO to achieve high ion conductivity. For instance, Guolong Lu et al.44 fabricated a novel composite solid electrolyte by synthesizing the bifunctional MOF (MOF-2) from two distinct functionalized UiO-66 materials with carboxyl and amine groups (PEO-MOF-2). This electrolyte achieved higher ion conductivity of 5.20 × 10−4 S cm−1 and lower battery loss, exhibiting a capacity retention rate of 98.45% after 100 cycles at 1.0 °C (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  Modification and optimization strategy of MOF materials for the performance of the lithium-ion electrode. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from Shen, M. & Ma, H., copyright 2022. 

1.2.2 Supercapacitors. Supercapacitors have the potential to be widely employed in electronics and hybrid electric cars in the future of energy storage.46 Due to their ability to deliver a significant amount of power instantly as well as their high charge–discharge rate, high power density, safe operation, and ease of maintenance, which have a special significance in the application of hybrid electric vehicles,47 supercapacitors are also able to provide immediate power assistance for rechargeable batteries. On the other hand, supercapacitors cannot attain an energy density that is equal to or greater than the batteries, which drastically restricts the practical uses for them. As a result, the increase in supercapacitor energy density while retaining capacitance and power density has become a new essential condition.48The energy density of supercapacitors is largely dependent on the materials used for the electrodes. They were classified as either fake capacitors49 or electric double layer capacitors (EDLCs) based on the charge storage technique and the material used as the electrode. In the case of EDLCs, a double layer of ions is often formed at the electrode/electrolyte interface, where the charge of a supercapacitor is normally stored.50 The energy density attained by EDLCs is often lower because of the poor physical buildup of charge in the water-based electrolyte. A false capacitor, on the other hand, stores charge through a reversible Faraday reaction. Typical electrode materials are transition metal oxide,51 metal sulfide,52 etc. Supercapacitors achieve higher capacitance and energy density than carbon-based materials.
Supercapacitors hold great promise for use in electronics and hybrid electric vehicles as a future energy storage solution.46 Due to their ability to deliver a large amount of power instantaneously, as well as their high charge–discharge rate, high power density, safe operation, and ease of maintenance, supercapacitors have a special significance in the field of hybrid electric vehicles.47 In addition, supercapacitors can provide immediate power assistance for rechargeable batteries. However, they cannot achieve an energy density that is equal to or greater than batteries, which significantly limits their practical applications. Therefore, increasing the energy density of supercapacitors while maintaining their capacitance and power density has become a new essential condition.48 The electrode materials used in supercapacitors largely determine their energy density. Based on the charge storage technique and the electrode material used, supercapacitors can be classified as either pseudocapacitors49 or electric double layer capacitors (EDLCs). In the case of EDLCs, a double layer of ions is formed at the electrode/electrolyte interface, where the charge of a supercapacitor is typically stored.50 The energy density achieved by EDLCs is often lower due to the poor physical buildup of charge in the water-based electrolyte. On the other hand, pseudocapacitors store charge through a reversible Faraday reaction and commonly use transition metal oxides,51 metal sulfides,52 and other materials as electrode materials. Compared to carbon-based materials, pseudocapacitors can achieve higher capacitance and energy density.
MOFs have received significant attention in the research of supercapacitors due to their unique characteristics, such as adjustable porous structure, rich redox chemistry, and high surface area. To serve as an electrode material, MOFs must possess high conductivity, specific surface area, redox activity, large pore structure, and chemical stability.53 MOFs can be utilized as the active material or as the substance for the active electrode, or indirectly by serving as the template for the sacrifice.54
MOF-derived carbon compounds have a distinct advantage over other carbon materials such as graphene and carbon nanotubes because of their tunable porous structure, high porosity, and high specific surface area. The heat treatment of MOF precursors has been effectively used to produce carbon compounds in various forms. The calcination of MOFs in the air leads to the production of metal oxides with a structure similar to the MOFs template and a higher surface area compared to equivalent metal oxides produced using traditional methods. MOFs also play a role in the creation of a range of mixed metal oxides and metal oxide composites. Carbon materials such as graphene, reduced graphene oxide, and composites of carbon nanotubes can be used as supercapacitor electrodes. Metal oxides derived from MOFs can also be used, such as hexagonal layered nanostructures of NiCo2S4 formed by calcining MOFs on reduced graphene oxide sheets for supercapacitor electrode materials reported by Subalakshmi Kumar et al.49 In the future, supercapacitors may use the exceptional properties of MOF-derived metal oxides in combination with highly conductive carbon materials (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  Diagram depicting the preparation of MOFs and MOF-derived materials for supercapacitors. This figure this figure has been reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from Shinde, P. A., copyright 2022. 

1.3 Physical adsorption and separation of gas
Due to the combination of metal ions and organic ligands, MOFs and their derivatives show promising applications as porous coordination polymer materials for gas adsorption and separation.56 As a low-cost porous crystal, MOFs composites can be sintered to increase the hollow area of the material and the active adsorption sites on the material surface, thus increasing the adsorption capacity of gas molecules.57 They can then be further applied to the separation and absorption of toxic gases.
Researchers can design nanoporous material MOFs to realize the preferential binding of different gas molecules due to the regulability of the target metal ions and organic ligands with different functional groups, making it possible to use MOFs materials to treat air pollutants (ppm level). For example, Susan E. Henkelis58 sintered large amounts of Mg-MOF-74 to separate SOx from water vapor. The SO peak in the FTIR spectra confirmed the MOF selective absorption of the SOx, and as a kind of hydrophilic material, Mg-MOF-74 in the lab before two days to maintain the integrity and the three-dimensional structure of temperature.
Alternatively, we can directly deploy MOFs materials in factories to study the adsorption capacity of energy and chemical applications.
For instance, natural gas treatment concentrates on eliminating both added and naturally existing odor-causing components, such as sulphur compounds. While Lomig Hamon et al.9 focused on evaluating the H2S adsorption capacities of different MOFs, the natural gas industry has developed absorption procedures employing amine treatments to remove the majority of these sulfur compounds. Measurements were conducted to determine the sulfur weight isotherms of MOFs MIL-53(Al, Cr, Fe), MIL-47(V), MIL-100(Cr), and MIL-101(Crhydrogen). To lower the final sulphur level and thus fulfil the environmental criteria, porous substances are also being taken into consideration (Fig. 5).
 Fig. 5  Adsorption isotherm measurement of H2S by different MOFs materials (top left: MIL-47(V) and MIL-53(Al, Cr, Fe); top right: MIL-100(Cr) and MIL-101(Cr)) for natural gas desulfurization. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 9 with permission from Hamon, L., copyright 2009. 
A range of chemicals, including H2S gas, can be treated using the physical features of MOF materials. Using MOF materials, modern industry can also purify methane from light hydrocarbons without distillation. A new 3D microporous MOF [Co2(5,4-PMIA)2(TPOM)0.5] with superior C2Hn/CH4 and CO2/CH4 separation capabilities was developed by Jingui Duan et al.59 In addition, a successful submicron-based microsolid phase extraction (SPE) approach in conjunction with liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry has been developed for the accurate and sensitive detection of trace quantities of monohydroxy polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in complicated human urine. By coupling the ligand 5-(4-pyridinyl)-methoxy-m-benzoic acid (5,4-PMia) with Co(II) ions in the presence of the flexible linker tetris (4-pyridinoxymethyl) methane, the new 3D micropore MOF [Co2(5,4-PMIA)2(TPOM)0.5]-x solvent was effectively realized (TPOM). The mild recognition sites of oxygen atoms and benzene rings from the 5,4-PMIA2-molecule, as well as the flexible TPOM connectomes inside the channel of 1, are designed to offer a pore environment with moderate contact to the guest to enable gas storage and separation with extraction selectivity for OH-PAHs via a synergistic effect.
Taking advantage of this, we can even go a step further and use MOF materials as gas detectors (ppb level) with higher precision requirements by combining them with integrated circuits. For example, Hairui Fang60 designed a CuO/NiO composite material derived from MOFs that has a strong response to H2S gas via hydrothermal sintering of low-temperature precursors. A 106% response rate to 50 ppb H2S was shown by this material-based sensor, which also showed remarkable H2S gas selectivity. The MOFs material may be used to assess the freshness of meat in cold storage settings because hydrogen sulphide (H2S) gas is one of the hallmark gases for determining the freshness of meat and detecting meat spoilage.61
1.4 Effects of catalysis
Catalysts play a crucial role in the production of more than 10000 products, which are worth over $10 trillion per year, accounting for 15% of the world's gross domestic product (GDP).62 It is widely believed that catalysis will play a key role in the development of new energy, chemical manufacturing, and pollution control technologies that will help societies break their reliance on fossil fuels and move toward a more sustainable future. This belief is based largely on the accomplishments of the 20th century and is supported by the strong international science and technology base currently engaged in catalysis research.63 The development of more efficient catalytic materials and processes is a rapidly evolving and exciting field of study, and MOFs offer an excellent opportunity for the rational design of new catalytic solids.
1.4.1 Electrocatalysis based on MOFs. Among the various hydrogen production methods, water electrolysis stands out as an efficient and pollution-free approach. Currently, alkaline electrolytic cells are widely used for industrial electric-driven water reduction hydrogen production. However, the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) has been observed to suffer from significant kinetic retardation due to the high activation barrier of the H–O bond of water molecules. Therefore, the development of high-performance and stable HER electrocatalysts is of utmost importance. Platinum (Pt) catalyst is an excellent electrocatalyst due to its low overpotential, fast reaction kinetics, and excellent molecular adsorption and desorption properties.64 However, the high cost and poor stability of platinum catalysts have led to a search for nonprecious metal electrocatalysts. Metal oxides, metal nitrides, and metal borides have been extensively studied as potential HER electrocatalysts with significant activity.65Metal organic frameworks, which possess dispersed planar metal nodes and distinctive 2D π-conjugated structures, have been identified as promising electrocatalysts for HER.66 MOFs can serve as direct electrocatalysts or as sacrificial precursors and templates to create other electrocatalysts.67 In addition, due to their excellent and stable electrocatalytic activity,68 MOFs can even be used for precise electrochemical signal induction applications (see Fig. 6).
 Fig. 6  I. MOF-derived Au@Co3O4-CP used as an electrocatalytic probe to achieve sensitive electrochemical induction of ATP. II. Noble metals/two-dimensional MOF heterostructures Ni-MOF@Pt for the electrocatalytic hydrolysis of hydrogen production (HER). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 68 and 69 with permission from Zhao, H. & Rui, K., copyright 2022 & 2019. 
For example, Kun Rui et al.69 reported an effective strategy for constructing noble metal/two-dimensional MOF heterostructures using uncoordinated MOF ligand surface oxygen sites. This method regulates the electronic structure of highly dispersed precious metal nanoparticles such as Pt and Pd on the MOF surface, without the use of surfactants. As a proof-of-concept, 2D Ni-MOF@Pt hybrids with good interfaces were applied to promote electrochemical hydrogen evolutionary reactions (HER) and provide good electrocatalytic activity under acidic and alkaline conditions. Subsequent electrochemical characterization showed that at 10 mA cm−2, the overpotential of Ni-MOF@Pt loaded with 20 wt% Pt decreased by 477 and 528 mV, respectively, which verified the improvement of electron transport dynamics in Ni-MOF@Pt, as shown in Fig. 6. In addition, EXAFS research revealed that the catalytic activity of the Pt center was aided by the presence of many Pt–O bonds and abundant available oxygen sites on the defect-rich surface of ultrathin MOF nanosheets.

1.4.2 Thermal catalysis based on MOFs. Since the industrial revolution, the excessive use of fossil fuels has led to various environmental problems, including global warming and acid rain caused by high nitrogen oxide emissions. The traditional NH3 selective catalytic reduction (SCR) method has been widely used in industrial settings to eliminate nitrogen oxides, using classical SCR catalysts such as V2O5, WO3, and MoO3. However, the high operation temperature range of 300–400 °C and the limited availability of SCR catalysts due to their expensive nature, poor sulfur resistance, and low catalytic activity pose significant challenges. MOFs have recently garnered significant interest in the field of SCR thermal catalysis due to their large surface area, considerable porosity, and adjustable chemical activity.70 For instance, Haoxi Jiang et al.71 discovered that Cu-MOF-74 exhibited excellent water resistance and achieved 100% N2 selectivity and 97.8% NO conversion at 230 °C. In another study, Jiang72 employed the hydrothermal approach to produce Mn-MOF-74 with a hollow spherical structure and Co-MOF-74 with a petal-like form. The two MOF catalysts showed 99% and 70% catalytic activity for low-temperature denitrification at 220 °C and 210 °C, respectively, in the presence of NH3. These promising results suggest that MOFs may play a significant role in the development of efficient and cost-effective SCR catalysts for reducing nitrogen oxide emissions in various industrial applications.MOFs materials can be assembled by organic connectors and transition metal ions. The doping of transition metal ions is a reliable method to regulate the low-temperature denitrification performance of MOFs materials. Shangzhi Xie et al.73 used the solubilization approach to create mono and bimetallic MOF-74-M (M = different metals) catalysts for NH3-SCR. The researchers tested the catalysts through various characterization techniques and found that the effectively synthesized MOF-74-M catalyst had a nearly hexagonal shape, high specific surface area, and uniform distribution of metal components. Monometal catalysts using Mn were found to increase activity due to the element's variety of valence states and excellent oxidation reducibility. Water experiments for catalytic activity and sulphur resistance showed that the addition of a proper quantity of SO2 boosted the catalytic activity of MOF-74-M due to an increase in the acidic sites. In situ DRIFTS data revealed that the E–R mechanism dominates the low temperature ranges of MOF-74-MnCo and MOF-74-Mn, while the L–H mechanism dominates the high temperature range (Fig. 7).
 Fig. 7  In situ DRIFTS adsorption–desorption spectra of NH3 on (a) MOF-74-MnCo and (b) MOF-74-Zn. (c) Results of water and sulfur resistance of MOF-74-M catalysts. (d) Schematic diagram of the thermal catalytic mechanism of MOF-74-MnCo. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 73 with permission from Xie, S., copyright 2020. 

1.4.3 Photocatalysis based on MOFs. Since the first industrial revolution, human reliance on fossil fuels (such as coal, oil, and natural gas) has driven the modern industrial era74 and rapid economic and social growth.75 However, the excessive burning of fossil fuels has significantly increased carbon emissions (such as CO2, CO, and CH4) into the atmosphere, causing severe environmental pollution and drawing high attention from governments worldwide.76,77 Unfortunately, only half of the 2.13 billion tons of CO2 emitted into the atmosphere each year are taken up by natural processes, leaving a net increase of 10.65 billion tons of CO2 in the atmosphere annually.78 Atmospheric CO2 concentration has increased steadily, reaching 419.05 ppm in April 2021, the highest level on Earth since the advent of humans, according to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's monitoring data. Thus, one of the most significant challenges facing humanity is climate change, which is caused by greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide absorbing long-wave radiation from the Earth's surface and warming the atmosphere.79 To address this issue, finding a renewable energy source that is clean, cheap, safe, viable, and environment friendly is crucial to meet future energy needs.80Solar energy is an abundant and renewable energy source that has the potential to address the worldwide energy problem and pollution.81 Photocatalysis, as a solar-mediated catalysis, has attracted increasing attention from researchers interested in harnessing solar energy through the interaction of light and matter.82,83 The most commonly used photocatalysts are composed of transition metal complexes modified with organic ligands. However, conventional heterogeneous photocatalysts are generally limited by their active sites,84 which constrain the spectrum of photocatalytic processes. Novel materials that can combine the advantages of homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysis, such as MOFs, are being researched, as are procedures for depositing photocatalysts onto solid substrates. MOFs offer excellent solid-state support due to their ability to be synthesized into materials with controlled porosity, chemical functionalities, and customizable porous structures, making them useful in establishing the structure–activity relationship of photocatalysis.85 Molecules with high light absorption capacity can even be used as assembly materials to design MOFs with photocatalytic activity.86
Metal energy sites, ligands that bring dopants to bind to MOFs either through a preparation process or by post-synthetic modification, and changes to organic linkers are all factors that affect how effective MOF-based catalysts are in real-world applications. Organic linkers have a variety of uses, including as supports for encapsulating or excluding biomolecules, catalytic complex separators, and homogeneous catalysts. As a result, materials based on MOFs are frequently used as oxidation, epoxidation, and photocatalyst catalysts. To produce a wide variety of functional nanomaterials utilizing various processing procedures, MOFs can be employed as supports to load active nanomaterials for diverse catalytic applications or as sacrificial templates.
In practice, the performance of MOF-based catalysts normally depends on
(i) Metal energy sites.
(ii) Ligands that introduce dopants to bind to MOFs either during the preparation process or after the fact.
(iii) Organic linker modification.
Organic linkers can be used as homogeneous catalysts to separate catalytic complexes and as supports for biomolecule capture or exclusion.
Therefore, MOF-based materials are often utilized as catalysts for oxidation, epoxidation, and photocatalysis due to their versatility. MOFs can act as supports for active nanomaterials in various catalytic applications or as sacrificial templates to produce functional nanomaterials using diverse processing methods. MOFs possess exceptional features such as long-range ordering, high porosity with diverse organic structures, and facile degradation to metal oxides through a simple self-assembly mechanism with organic ligands and metal ions, making them well-suited for heterogeneous catalysis. Co-doped MOFs and mixed metal oxides can be synthesized using metal frameworks with diverse compositions, and these heterogeneous frameworks exhibit superior catalytic activity due to the synergistic effects of various metals. Complex materials such as metal/metal oxides, metal/carbon, metal oxides/carbon, and metal/metal oxides/carbon can be developed to achieve high photocatalytic performance. MOFs also have several advantages over other inorganic materials. For example, photoactive organic linkers can provide MOFs with semiconductor properties. Upon exposure to light, organic linkers absorb it by transferring electrons from the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) to the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO).87 The metals in the MOF network then receive the electrons produced by the light via the organic connector-to-cluster charge transfer mechanism (LCCT), allowing them to participate in photoredox reactions such as the reduction of carbon dioxide,88 photocatalytic water splitting, or photodegradation of contaminants in water bodies. By selecting appropriate metal centers and organic linkers and controlling the synthesis process, MOFs can efficiently serve as heterogeneous photocatalysts.
To advance the future development of photoassisted heterocatalysis, this review introduces recent advances in heterogeneous catalysts based on MOFs and summarizes the basic design strategies and modification approaches to enhance the photocatalytic activity of MOFs materials. Subsequently, we discuss the photocatalytic applications of MOFs materials in the degradation of water pollutants, water splitting, and carbon dioxide reduction from various perspectives, including design concepts, synthesis techniques, and essential photocatalytic parameters. The focus of this paper is on understanding the photocatalytic mechanism of MOFs materials in various applications to better comprehend the factors that promote their photocatalytic activity, such as light collection, charge transfer path, and key intermediates. We anticipate that future researchers will conduct more comprehensive studies in this area. We conclude by briefly outlining the challenges facing MOF photocatalysis today and in the future as well as providing recommendations for its advancement (Fig. 8).
 Fig. 8  Degradation of polyoxyethylene ether APEOn (endocrine pollutant alkylphenol) by Cu-based MOFs catalyst under visible light. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 89 with permission from Wang, D., copyright 2021. 
Following that, we discussed the photocatalytic applications of MOF materials in water pollution photodegradation, photocatalytic water splitting, and photocatalytic carbon dioxide reduction from different perspectives such as design concepts, synthesis techniques, and essential photocatalytic parameters. This paper aims to elucidate the photocatalytic mechanisms of MOFs materials in various photocatalytic applications, focusing on the mechanisms that promote the photocatalytic activity of MOFs materials, including light collection, charge transfer path, and important intermediates. It is expected that future scholars will conduct more thorough investigations in this field. Lastly, we highlighted the current challenges facing heterogeneous photocatalysis based on MOFs and provided recommendations for its further advancement.

2 Design strategies and modification methods of MOFs
2.1 Design strategies of MOFs
2.1.1 Transition metal ion center. The kind of metal center, coordinate number, and oxidation state all affect the structural stability of MOFs. Excellent-oxidation metals can establish potent coordination bonds with carboxylate O donors in the ligand,13 imparting high stability on the resultant MOFs. High-priced metal cations often have richer coordination environments than low-priced metal cations. As the core metal ions grow more inert, the chemical stability of the identical MOFs in acids, bases, and water rises. On the other hand, the strength of the metal–oxygen bonds in common oxides controls their thermal stability.Joong Kang et al.,90 for example, purified MOFs of the same kind without coordinating organic connections, including Al-BDC (aluminum benzoate of MIL-53-Al), Cr-BDC (MIL-53-Cr), and V-BDC (MIL-47-V). We compared the thermal and chemical stabilities. The chemical stability for bases, acids, and water decreases in the order Cr-BDC > Al-BDC > V-BDC, suggesting that the stability rises as the core metal ion's inertness increases. On the other hand, the strength of the metal–oxygen bonds in common oxides such as Al2O3, Cr2O3, and V2O5 may explain why thermal stability declines in the order Al-BDC > Cr-BDC > V-BDC.
The exchange of transition metal ion centers in MOFs can also strengthen the bonds between the metal and ligand. For example, Huanhuan Li et al.91 prepared a nickel-doped MOF-5 by the solubilization method, which has significantly larger Langmuir specific surface area, larger pores, and stronger hydrothermal stability compared with untreated MOF-5.

2.1.2 Ligand. Numerous stable MOFs are built using different nitrogen-based ligands or by attaching highly charged metal ions to carboxylate-based ligands. The HSAB (hard/soft acid/base) concept can be used to support this tactic. On the one hand, functionalizing organic ligands that are hydrophobic can make the framework more stable in water. On the other hand, the ligand's basicity will make the metal coordination link stronger. Metals are mostly composed of Lewis acids, which may form stronger bonds with basic ligands.For example, Lv et al.92 produced three series of ligand rotations with comparable connectivity but different degrees of flexibility. Thirteen Zr-based MOFs were produced using Zr6O4(OH4)(–CO2)n units (n = 8 or 12) and associated ligands. It is shown that the stiffness of the framework's ligands has a considerable impact on the stability of the related MOFs. Zhuo also looked into the chemical stability of Zr-MOFs with tetravalent ligands under diverse circumstances, and the results showed that Zr-MOFs built in various ways with the same ligand and connection demonstrated the same chemical stability. The stability of Zr-MOFs generated from the same ligands but with different structures can nevertheless demonstrate comparable stability in this MOF system, suggesting that ligand flexibility is the main determinant of the stability of these Zr-MOFs (Fig. 9).
 Fig. 9  Construction of Zr-MOFs by dicarboxylate ligands. (a) Structures of bidentate ligands, LC1, LC2, and LC3; (b) 12-connected and 8-connected Zr6 clusters; (c) structures of LC2-Zr612-fcu, LC1-Zr612-fcu, and LC3-Zr68-bcu MOFs. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 92 with permission from Lv, X.-L., copyright 2019. 
The exchange of ligands in MOFs has a similar effect to the exchange of metal ion centers in that it can strengthen metal–ligand interactions, which in turn improves the photocatalytic activity. Similar ligands may be fully or partially integrated into the MOF structure during the ligand exchange process, providing the required function through the competition of different ligands in solution.93 For instance, Xueyan Zhao et al.94 used ligand exchange to introduce the functional ligand tetrakis(4-carboxyphenyl)porphyrin (TCPP) into NU-1000, and the resulting mixed ligand MOF displayed improved the photocatalytic activity. The photodynamic impact of TCPP based on porphyrin was confirmed using a laser irradiation experiment at 650 nm.

2.1.3 Band structure adjustment. The entire MOFs structure is composed of central interfaces of organic ligands and transition metal ions. Therefore, the band structure of MOFs is strongly related to the rearrangement of interfacial energy levels at these interfaces. This unique feature allows us to artificially exchange organic ligands and transition metal ion centers to adjust the band structure of MOFs.95 The appropriate VB is a necessary condition for photocatalytic water splitting and the reduction of CO2. The appropriate bandgap displacement of MOFs has a nonnegligible impact on effective charge separation at heterogeneous junctions. Therefore, the bandgap engineering of MOFs has attracted the attention of many researchers. Simply put, the exchange of transition metal ion centers or the binding of functionalized organic ligands are currently the most effective means of energy band adjustment in MOF materials.For example, for the first time, Chi-Kai Lin et al.96 demonstrated that increasing the size of zinc-based metal clusters led to a red shift in the bandgap of MOFs. Further studies showed that the π-conjugation produced by organic ligands in Zn-based MOFs also has a significant effect on its bandgap; reducing the conjugation of carboxylate organic connectors can expand the bandgap of MOFs. Hung Q. Pham et al.97 studied the band structure of a series of halogen-doped IRMOFs by density functional theory. The authors demonstrate that halogens can adjust the bandgap of MOFs, and halogens I are particularly good at increasing the valence band maximum (VBM). Rushie Mae Cedeno et al.98 demonstrated that the construction of mixed organic connectors formed a mid-gap state in zirconium-based MOFs, leading to a reduction of the bandgap. Moreover, in zirconium MOF with π–π packing, the change in the bandgap is more obvious, which is directly related to the interaction energy between organic ligands in MOFs.
In addition, Terence Musho et al.99 confirmed that amino groups may lower the bandgap energy of Zr-UiO-66 using DFT calculations and UV-vis studies. Contrarily, the nitro group somewhat lowers the bandgap energy of Zr-UiO-66, which is a result of the bonds that the functional group nitrogen and aromatic carbon have. To change the valence band maximum (BDC) of MOFs, Christopher H. Hendon et al.100 functionalized organic ligands, such as terephthalates, with NH2. It has been done to reduce the bandgap from 3.76 eV to 2.75 eV. The movement of N 2p electrons in the direction of the aromatic junction unit is what causes this VB redshift. The authors further show that while the electrical tuning of the aromatic pattern is confined, modifying the VB directly alters the optical characteristics.

2.1.4 Photosensitization. Due to its inherent controllability, MOFs have been widely exploited as a new scaffold in photocatalytic applications because their strong heterogeneous matrices can accommodate homogenous photosensitizers and catalysts.According to Sizhuo Yang et al.,12 a molecular Pt-catalyst (Pt(dcbpy)Cl2) and Ru-photosensitizer ([Ru(dcbpy)(bpy)2]2+) were effectively integrated into Zr-MOF, and the resulting catalyst demonstrated good activity and stability in light-driven H2 generation from water. The authors show that charge separation occurs in this mixed MOF by electron transfer (ET) from Ru-photosensitizer to Pt-catalyst using optical instantaneous absorption (OTA) spectroscopy. The Pt L3 XTA spectra may reveal the reduced Pt site in the center, conclusively demonstrating the charge separation state produced by the ET of the Ru-photosensitizer.
According to Xiaoyu Deng et al.,101 the photocatalytic CO2 reduction linker-anchored Re complex MOF-253-Re(CO)3Cl was created by coordinating the open N,N′-chelate site of MOF-253 (Al(OH)(dbpy), where dcbpy = 2,2′-bipyridine-5,5′-dicarboxylic acid) with Re(I). To increase the light absorption of MOF-253-Re(CO)3Cl, Deng developed a linker-anchored Ru sensitizer (Ru-MOF-253-Re). Because the generation of bimolecular Re intermediates, which usually results in the deactivation of homogeneous Re complexes, was greatly reduced in the MOF-supported Re complex, it was able to conduct photocatalysis better than the homogeneous Re complex. As shown in transient absorption experiments, Ru-increased MOF-253-Re's visible light absorption, and an efficient photoinduced charge transfer from the Ru sensitizer to the catalytic center of Re are both responsible for the material's improved photocatalytic CO2 reduction capability.
Because of their low visible light absorption, [Re(N,N′)(CO)3X] complexes are not suitable for photocatalytic CO2 reduction. On the other hand, the highly organized crystal structures of MOFs make them a desirable platform for the assembly of a number of active components into a successful composite photocatalytic system and facilitate charge transfer between photosensitizers and surface-built catalysts. To further enhance the material's light absorption, photosensitive MOF-253-Re(CO)3Cl was synthesized using a Ru(bpy)2Cl2/Re compound with a molar ratio of 1/3. Due to the possibility that MOF-253, which is supported by Ru(bpy)2Cl2, may also react with N,N′-chelate sites that are accessible to the linker to form [Ru(N,N′)(bpy)2]2+ that exhibits visible absorption.
According to the UV-vis results, Ru-MOF-253-Re demonstrated increased absorption in the visible region, with the absorption edge extending to about 600 nm. In its N2 adsorption/desorption isotherm, Ru-MOF-253-Re still displays a sizeable Langmuir surface area of 688 cm2 g−1, proving the persistence of long-lasting pores after Ru inclusion. The fact that the photocatalytic activity of Ru(bpy)2Cl2 (RU-MOF-253) was greater than that of pure Ru(bpy)2Cl2 (HCOO−and CO of about 0.1 and 0.02 tons, respectively) also supports the synthesis of Ru(N,N′)(bpy)2. Ru-MOF-253-Re was discovered to have a substantially greater photocatalytic activity than MOF-253-Re, which was not sensitized. Similar circumstances led to the production of roughly twice as much HCOO− by sensitizing MOF-253-Re(CO)3Cl as opposed to MOF-253-Re(CO)3Cl (Fig. 10).
 Fig. 10  A potential mechanism for the visible light-based photocatalytic reduction of CO2 by MOF-253-Re(CO)3Cl. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 101 with permission from Deng, X., copyright 2018. 

2.1.5 π–π stacking builds MOFs. Coordination interactions between SBU and organic ligands in the MOFs result in the formation of deactivated ions with redox activity. Therefore, a shortage of free charge carriers and low-energy charge transport pathways is the main cause of MOFs' weak conductivity. A clear indicator of a MOF's semiconductor nature is its conductivity. If the electrical conductivity of a MOF is greater than that of an insulator (10−9 S cm−1), it is classified as a semiconductor. As with semiconductors, increasing the electrical conductivity of MOF without reducing its inherent large surface area and porosity may present new prospects for its use in electronic applications. A π-conjugated MOF with a widely scattered valence or conductance band can produce band transfer and significant charge mobility.102For example, Patricia I. Scheurle et al.103 synthesized a series of ANMOF-74 constructed by π–π stacking. An array of divalent metal ions, including Zn2+, Mg2+, Ni2+, Co2+, and Mn2+, were attached to the organic ligand ABHB (4,4′-(anthracene-9,10-diyl)bis(2-hydroxybenzoic acid)) to form the catalyst. A hexagonal metal frame is constructed, and a million times higher conductivity (10−7 to 10−9 S cm−1) is achieved than the general MOF-74. This surprising increase in conductivity is attributed to the authors to a piled charge transport pathway. Thus, a channel with a pore size of 2 nm composed of ABHB units, consisting of ABHB units connected to each other by infinite helices in the c direction, allows efficient charge transfer in rigid MOF to be formed if there is an energy overlap in the orbitals between the conjugated atom and the metal center. Given that the direct optical bandgap of ANMOF-74 materials is approximately 2.9 eV and that the majority of them exhibit photoluminescence in the blue spectral region, where ANMOF-74 (Mg) exhibits a rather high quantum yield of 2.5%, the enhanced conductivity is considerable.
Efficient π–π accumulation paths and redox active ligand/mixed metal nodes facilitate long-distance charge transport, while Jin-Yue Zeng et al.104 proposed a reduction mechanism of CO2 driven by near infrared light over a large π-conjugated metal–organic framework. This composition is defined as three steps in the TNP-MOF photocatalyst.
The first step is the adsorption of near infrared light accompanied by electron transfer, forming a state of charge separation with electron transfer.
The majority of the time, however, the excited electrons in a single organic semiconductor immediately recombines with the holes, preventing charge separation and resulting in subpar catalysis. As a result, there is little charge separation, which results in poor catalysis. Resonant energy transfer will occur in the TNP-MOF as a result of the spectrum overlap between luminescence and high emission and absorption, which can greatly increase the efficiency of photon usage.
Photoinduced electron transfer from the electron-rich, π-conjugated system to the metal clusters of metallic MOFs provides an additional route for electron transport. At conjugated junctions, charge separation is facilitated by this.
In the third stage, the cluster's excited electrons are transferred to CO2 molecules coming into contact with the MOFs.
The research of Zeng indicates that photocatalyzed electrons are produced by excited π-conjugated junctions. It is then transferred to metal SBU and/or the substrate to obtain carbon dioxide (Fig. 11).
 Fig. 11  Proposed mechanism of CO2 reduction driven by near infrared light. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 104 with permission from Zeng, J.-Y., copyright 2022. 

2.1.6 MOFs activation. The most popular technique for activating MOFs includes exchanging them with low-boiling solvents, including acetone, methanol, and methylene chloride, before vacuuming at high temperatures. This is due to the fact that most MOFs are created using solvents, especially those that are very flammable, such as N-dimethylformamide (DMF), N-diethylformamide (DEF), and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). Although solvent exchange and vacuum processing of the created MOFs are also required, this process, called “thermal activation”, has been extensively used for conventional porous materials such as porous carbon and zeolite.Despite the fact that the majority of MOFs have low stability, an increasing number of them have been shown to have good thermal and chemical stability. This makes it possible for them to be instantly activated using typical thermal activation. But most MOF crystallizes in a combination of one or more very flammable solvents, including acids, DMF, DMSO, water, and DEF. If the M–O bonds in these MOFs are weak and their thermal stability is limited, the structures of these MOFs may partially dissolve after heat activation. This is explained by the high surface tension and capillary forces that form as the guest solvent transitions from the liquid to gas phase during the activation process (Fig. 12).
 Fig. 12  Conceptual diagram of MOF activation. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 105 with permission from Zhang, X., copyright 2020. 
Supercritical CO2 drying follows the strategy of activating MOFs by low surface tension solvents under mild conditions and believes that supercritical fluids without surface tension are best used for this purpose. Supercritical carbon dioxide (sc-CO2) is a safe, noncombustible resource that has been widely used in supercritical extraction and in the freeze-drying process of fine structures.
Note that DMF/DEF can only be utilized if the dryer parts are suitable. The original MOF sample synthesis solvents such as methanol and ethanol The following stage is comparable to other traditional solvent exchange methods, with the exception that here the organic solvent in the system is exchanged with liquid carbon dioxide above its critical pressure and below its critical temperature (31 °C, 73 bar). The distinction is that this carbon dioxide exchange process often occurs between 0 and 10 °C, which is a gentler exchange process than the one that typically occurs at ambient temperature. The evaporation of carbon dioxide occurs in its supercritical state after numerous cycles of carbon dioxide exchange (each cycle typically lasts a few hours). By depressurizing the liquid carbon dioxide over its critical temperature, which significantly lowers the surface tension during the carbon dioxide guest's transition from a liquid to a gas, this is accomplished. As a result, the MOF structure's delicate structure and porosity are maintained with much less capillary stress. The sample is then swiftly moved to the adsorption tube and run under dynamic vacuum at a comfortable temperature (about 50 °C), with the intention of eliminating any potential physically deposited carbon dioxide in the process.

2.2 Modification strategies of MOFs
2.2.1 Semiconductor and cocatalyst load. In the specific applications of MOF, the researchers found that the photoexcited charge carrier easily recombines. The modification of surface forces in MOFs with a cocatalyst is an option to solve the problem.106In general, there are two strategies to improve the photocatalytic activity of MOFs using cocatalysts: one is to construct an interface/barrier between the catalyst and MOF to facilitate charge separation and transfer, and the other is to use the loaded cocatalyst as a reaction site to consume the separated charges. These two ideas show us the importance of interface design in the tube catalysis discourse. This is very reasonable because, on the one hand, the bulk of molecular-level redox processes take place on its surface, and on the other, the interface or barrier we build provides a crucial conduit for charge carrier transfer and separation and is crucial in avoiding electron and hole recombination. To actualize the flow of electrons from the MOF to the cocatalyst, the bandgap energy of the cocatalyst should typically be lower than that of MOF. As an illustration, when noble metal ions are loaded, their low Ea enables them to not only create Schottky junctions with MOF to trap electrons but also to offer a useful clean return point. In the photocatalysis of MOFs, conducting semiconductors such as graphene and metal oxides can also have a comparable effect as noble metals.
Taking the surface oxygen sites of uncoordinated MOF ligands into consideration, for instance, Kun Rui et al.69 reported an efficient method for building noble metal/2D MOF heterostructures. Without the use of surfactants, the electronic structure of highly dispersed precious metal nanoparticles such as Pt and Pd is regulated on the surface of MOF. 2D Ni-MOF@Pt hybrids with well-defined interfaces were used as a proof of concept to promote electrochemical hydrogen evolutionary reactions (HER) and provide excellent electrocatalytic activity in acidic and alkaline conditions.
Jinfeng Chen et al.107 reported a TiO2/MIL-101(Cr) photocatalyst. The characterization technique revealed that on the TiO2-MIL-101(T-MCr) photocatalyst, two types of heterojunctions, type II heterojunctions and surface heterojunctions, were formed simultaneously, and their synergistic effects effectively promoted the separation and transfer of photogenerated charges and holes. The photocatalytic activity of MCr in degrading tetracycline under visible light irradiation was significantly increased after loading TiO2 particles on its surface (the degradation efficiency was 94.85% after 45 min of visible light irradiation).
Alternatively, we can more accurately embed active metal ligands with high photocatalytic activity into the MOF backbone or photosensitive transition organics, thus optimizing the catalyst to achieve a more precise tuning of the performance of photocatalysis.
For instance, Deshan Zhang et al.108 successfully embedded the H3TCA ligand (triphenylamine-based photosensitive ligand 4,4′,4′′-nitrotribenzoic acid) into a highly porous and stable MOF, and the obtained MOF photocatalyst(Zr-TCA) showed an excellent photocatalytic activity (Fig. 13).
 Fig. 13  Perspective view of the MOF(Zr-TCA). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 108 with permission from Zhang, D., copyright 2022. 

2.2.2 LSPR (localized surface plasmon resonance). A significant amount of free electrons is present in the noble metal, according to the isoplason effect. These electrons can be thought of as electron gas travelling against a homogeneous backdrop of positive charge. The local mobility of the electrons inside the metal causes the entire electronic system to move collectively as a result of the Coulomb force at work. When exposed to light, isomeric plasmon nanoparticles generate an oscillating conductive electron set or isomeric plasmon. Similar to how light (optical oscillations) is comprised of photons, plasma oscillations are built of plasmons. Plasmons are the quanta of plasma oscillations. The other decays to generate high-energy heat carriers (hot electron–hot hole pairs), which may be efficiently retrieved from the isometric plasmon nanoparticles and drive several unique chemical processes. Some of the light quantum energy is stored in the isometric plasmons and re-emitted as light. The isoionization plasmons have a big impact on things such as increasing sunlight's ability to absorb energy, widening the titration spectrum response range, encouraging photogenerative electrons to separate into holes, boosting the internal energy of photogenerative carriers, and acting as the catalyst for catalytic reactions. The isoplasmon approach is frequently used to apply MOFs materials for photocatalysis, and the load of mono or even polymetallic particles is frequently expressed (Fig. 14).109
 Fig. 14  Schematic diagram of isoplasmon resonance effect on local surface of metal nanoparticles. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 109 with permission from Ahmed, S. A., copyright 2019. 
The interaction of electromagnetic waves with free electrons on the metal surface results in a near-field electromagnetic wave that moves along the metal surface, which is what causes the surface plasmon effect. Electromagnetic waves that hit the metal-dielectric interaction cause the free electrons on the metal surface to collectively oscillate. Resonance will happen if the electron's oscillation frequency matches the incident light wave's frequency. In the resonance state, the free electrons on the metal surface efficiently transfer the electromagnetic field's energy into their entire vibrational energy, creating a novel electromagnetic mode in which the electromagnetic field is amplified and restricted to a limited region around the metal surface.
When free electrons and photons interact at the surface of a metal, surface isopionons, which are electromagnetic oscillations, are produced. Surface ionization displays a number of peculiar properties as a result of the interaction between surface charge oscillation and the electromagnetic field of a light wave.
Metal nanoparticles' plasmon resonance cannot be sustained for a very long time due to the damping effect and will eventually relax. Surface plasmon relaxation can occur in one of two ways.
(1) The radiation relaxation of the released photon increases the strength of the electromagnetic field close to the metal nanoparticles, increasing the signal of molecules adhering to their surfaces.
(2) The nonradiative relaxation of high-energy hot carriers is produced. The energy of the photon is transformed into surface isometric plasmon energy when the metal nanoparticles exhibit the LSPR phenomenon. The surface isometric plasmon attenuates in a nonradiative form as a result of the damping effect. A nonequilibrium electron distribution is created when the hot electron that results gains the energy of a photon and makes an energy level leap. Higher-energy electrons can transmit more energy to lower-energy electrons (hot electrons). Adsorbed molecules will undergo chemical reactions as a result of the metal-molecule charge transfer that takes place when the energy level of the molecules that are adsorbed on the surface of metal nanoparticles matches the high-energy carrier (hot electron/hot hole pair). Warm electrons contribute energy to lattice vibration by electron–phonon scattering and subsequently release energy into the surrounding space via phonon–phonon scattering in the thermal form.
For instance, Kulamani Parida et al.110,111 produced a collection of Zr-based MOFs, UiO-66, UIO-66-NH2, and Au/UIO-66-NH2 and assessed their effectiveness for H2 evolution. The outcomes demonstrated that Au/photocatalytic UiO-66-NH2's efficiency has increased. Au/UIO-66-NH2 > UIO-66-NH2 > UiO-66 is the order in which the reported H2 evolution rates are seen. This is explained by the potent LSPR impact of the priceless metal Au and the linker's improved ability to absorb visible light as a result of the presence of the –NH2 group. The first recombination of electron–hole pairs is prevented by the role of gold nanoparticles as electron collectors from the photoexcited UiO-66-NH2 conduction band (see Fig. S2†). A buildup of photogenerated electrons on the surface of Au can easily encourage the reduction of H2O molecules to produce H2.

2.2.3 Z-type heterojunction modification. Given the wide bandgap and high electron–hole pair recombination rate of MOFs, we often use other semiconductor materials with the same photocatalytic activity together with MOF to construct a composite nanocatalyst possessing a heterojunction structure for promoting photocatalytic activity. The traditional heterojunction structures112–115 were mainly three types of heterojunctions, type I, type II, and type III (Fig. 15(b)–(d)). In type I heterojunctions, the bandgap of one semiconductor (SC-I) is completely covered by the bandgap of the other semiconductor (SC-II), which makes the photogenerated carriers and holes all gather on the same semiconductor (SC-I) after separation, which brings an extremely high electron–hole complexation rate and is not conducive to the utilization of photogenerated carriers. In the type-II heterojunction, the bandgaps of both are staggered and lined up, avoiding too high electron–hole complexation. However, the redox reactions all occur on the lower side of the point (oxidation: SC-I, reduction SC-II), still limiting the further enhancement of the photocatalytic activity. The gap structure of the type III heterojunction even leads to no photogenerated carrier separation with the separation of holes. The researchers fully absorbed the advantages and disadvantages of the three traditional heterojunctions and developed the Z-type heterogeneous photocatalyst with the most excellent photocatalytic performance by optimizing the bandgap structure.
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic diagram of the basic principles of photocatalysis. Three traditional heterojunctions are applied to photocatalysis: (b) type I heterojunction, (c) type II heterojunction, and (d) type III heterojunction. SC-I and SC-II represent semiconductor-I and semiconductor-II, respectively. (e) Evolution of Z-scheme photocatalysis. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 121 with permission from Raizada, P., copyright 2021. 
The Z-type heterojunction system reduces the bandgap of the semiconductor116–119 by bringing more positive VB edges and more negative CB edges compared to the traditional heterojunction system.
The photogenerated electron–hole pair (EHP) separation follows a distinct path in Z-scheme photocatalysis. The photogenerated VB hole of SC-I and the electrons in the CB of SC-II join when exposed to visible light. The outcome is the formation of sufficiently strong oxidizing VB holes in SC-II and reducing electrons in SC-CB. This significantly increases EHP separation while significantly reducing broad electron–hole pair recombination, which is the basis of our photocatalysis. A Z-type heterojunction photocatalyst's excellent separation efficiency of photogenerated carriers with high redox capacity is hence its most notable characteristic. Direct and indirect Z-type heterojunctions are the two forms of Z-type heterojunction. The fundamental difference between the two is whether or not a carrier transfer intermediate is present. A direct Z-type heterojunction's internal electric field drives carrier transfer, but an indirect Z-type heterojunction needs electrical conductors (such as Ag and graphene) to support charge-carrier transfer.120
For example, Ya Li et al.122 developed a Z-scheme Fe2O3@Ag–ZnO@C heterostructure that was employed to photodegrade tetracycline and methylene blue pollutants in wastewater (see Fig. S3(a)†). According to EIS measurements, the Z-scheme structure created from MOFs considerably increases the lifetime of photogenerated electrons, accelerating charge separation in photocatalysis. The interface effect and carbon layer, which effectively separate electron transfer via the heterojunction and electron transfer through the carbon layer, are to blame for the longer lifespan. Because Ag–ZnO has a higher negative Fermi level than Fe2O3, the bands of Ag–ZnO and Fe2O3 are bent into a Z-shaped structure when they join to form a heterojunction. This can significantly enhance charge carrier separation.
At the interface between Fe2O3 and Ag–ZnO, photogenerated electrons from the CB of Fe2O3 may be effectively transported to the VB of ZnO, where they can recombine with holes. The photogenerated electrons on ZnO CB and the holes on VB of Fe2O3 can thus remain stable in redox reactions. Ag is a possible electron acceptor. The photogenerated charge generated on ZnO CB can be transferred to Ag to enhance the separation of the photogenerated charge carrier. It is noteworthy to notice that both the efficiency of charge transfer during the photocatalytic process and the capacity to absorb light are increased by the carbon layer created by the MOF coating on the catalyst.
Liu and Jiang et al.123 also reported a series of novel Z-type photocatalysts, which were prepared by loading Ag nanoparticles on the Ti-MOF/NiFeLDH surface (see Fig. S3(b†)). The obtained Ti-MOF/Ag/NiFeLDH Z-wake composite photocatalysts achieved 95% rhodamine B (RhB) degradation (50 min) and 92% levofloxacin (LVX) degradation (70 min) under visible light.

2.2.4 Functional groups-amine-functionalized. Due to the highly controllable nature of MOFs, it is feasible to generate visible light active catalysts by modifying the type of organic ligands.124 However, the catalytic active sites located on these MOFs produce relatively low activity.125 We also know that adding different functional junctions to a framework will affect its catalytic performance; thus, the inclusion of functional junctions into MOFs is called the trend.126,127 Among them, the achievement of amine group functionalization is the most remarkable.Meicheng Wen et al.,128 for example, reported an amine-group functionalized H2 evolutionary system using Pt NPs as a catalyst, rhodamine B as chlorophyll to collect solar energy, and TEOA as a sacrificial reagent. The catalyst Pt/NH2-MIL-101(Cr) can be reused at least five times without losing its catalytic activity. Furthermore, the concentration of RhB and the position of the main peak in the UV-vis spectrum did not change significantly. At low temperature carbonization (300 °C), Qiong Zhu et al.129 synthesized a carbon frame decorated Cu2O (NH2–C@Cu2O) photocatalyst modified with –NH2 by metal–organic framework (NH2–Cu-MOF). The organic ligand converts to amorphous carbon during the low temperature annealing process, which can promote photogenic electron transfer and inhibit Cu2O photocorrosion. In situ FTIR analysis revealed that changing the amino group could significantly increase the chemical adsorption of CO2 due to the strong acid–base interaction (see Fig. S4†). Furthermore, NH2–C@Cu2O preferentially forms HCOO−-intermediates over others, improving CO2 reduction selectivity to HCOOH. At the same time, because of its electron acceptance properties, amino functionalization can further inhibit carrier recombination. The yield of HCOOH increased threefold when compared to pure Cu2O. Tian Wei Goh et al.130 explored in detail the effect of different functionalized linkers on photocatalysis based on MOFs. Goh prepared a series of Zr-MOFs using NH2-BDC (2-amino-1,4-benzoate ester) as the main connector and X-BDC (X = H, F, Cl, Br) as the auxiliary connector. The Zr-MOF containing NH2-BDC showed a 5-fold photocatalytic activity. Matthew B. Chambers et al.131 evaluated the effect of different numbers of amination junctions. For MIL-125, its photocatalytic performance was significantly enhanced when more and more bdc-NH2 connectors (from 0% to 100%) were added.

2.2.5 Construction of mixed linkers MOFs. Most MOF-based photocatalysts are characterized by sacrificial agent dependence or poor thermal stability in photocatalytic performance evaluation. An effective solution is to introduce multiple linkers with different topologies or functions into the original MOFs to construct a mixed linker MOFs, which exhibit the following advantages over single-linker MOFs.(1) The increase in the number of linkers can bring higher stability to the mixed linker MOFs.
(2) The variety of linkers that can be introduced makes the resulting hybrid linker MOFs more tunable than traditional MOFs, with more ordered pores and multiple functional properties from the linkers.
MOFs, for example, can incorporate a large number of different functions in the manner of mixed connectors on the linking groups, rather than forming separate domains, according to Yaghi et al.127 Yaghi synthesized complex MOFs from 1,4-phthalate esters and their derivatives –NH2, –Br, –(Cl)2, –NO2, –(CH3)2, –C4H4, –(OC3H5)2, and –(OC7H7)2. Eighteen multivariable MOF-5 structures with eight different functions of zinc oxide and methylene units in these structures provide an orderly backbone, but the distribution of functional groups is disorganized. Properties that are not straightforward linear summations of pure components may be produced as a result of the intricate arrangement of numerous functional groups in the pore. For example, MTV-MOF-5-EHI, when compared to its best congener, has a selectivity for carbon dioxide that is 400% greater than that for carbon monoxide.
Yanxin Gao et al.132 successfully prepared hybrid linker Zr metal-centered MOFs PCN-134 for the photocatalytic degradation of DF (diclofenac). The prepared PCN-134, Zr6 clusters, and benzotrizoic acid were interconnected to form a two-dimensional plane, and the introduced linker TCPP (tetra(4-carboxyphenyl)porphyrin) was added to form a three-dimensional layer-column framework. A bridge of electron conversion was built between the TCPP linker and the Zr-based SBU, which promoted the photodegradation of DF by improving the energy transfer efficiency. Since the Zr-based MOFs are able to maintain the integrity of their framework after partial structure loss, Gao can also use this to control the defect density and properties of PCN-134 for a series of defect engineering studies (Fig. 16).
 Fig. 16  (a) The topology and (b) 3D framework of PCN-134. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 132 with permission from Gao, Y., copyright 2019. 

2.2.6 Construction of missing linkers MOFs. In three-dimensional (3D) metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), the presence and properties of structural defects are considered a key factor affecting the physical and chemical behavior of the material. The presence of missing linker defects has been shown to have a significant impact on the gas adsorption capacity,133 catalytic activity,134 and stability135 of MOFs.Hui Wu et al.136 first demonstrated that genuine UiO-66 materials contain a large number of missing linker defects. Through high-resolution neutron power diffraction measurements on a deuterated UiO-66 sample, Hui Wu found that on average, approximately one out of 12 linkers is missing in UiO-66, effectively reducing the network connectivity from 12 to 11, and the UiO-66 structure has better tolerance to missing linkers. The experiment also demonstrated that the presence of missing linker defects significantly improves the porosity of the actual material (from 0.44 to 1.0 cm3 g−1), and the metal center has a preferential adsorption for gases.
Rui Zhang et al.137 assembled UiO-66 crystals with controlled size and missing linker defects into Fabry–Perot thin film sensors. Due to the well-controlled micro and mesostructure features of MOF crystals with missing linker defects, the mesoporous characteristics of the sensing element improved the sensitivity (increased by ∼24.6% for saturated ethanol vapor), response rate (increased by ∼42.9%), and recovery rate (increased by ∼59.7%).
Ziqian Xue et al.138 proved through DFT calculations that the electronic structure of MOFs can be adjusted by introducing missing linkers to improve the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) performance of MOFs. The authors introduced various missing linker molecules into the layered MOF CoBDC (Co2(OH)2(C8H4O4)) and prepared MOFs with missing linkers. This self-supporting MOF nanofilm with ferrocene missing linkers exhibited excellent OER performance, with an ultralow overpotential of 241 mV at 100 mA cm−2 (Fig. 17).
 Fig. 17  Modulating the electronic structure of MOFs by introducing missing linkers for efficient OER. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 138 with permission from Xue, Z., copyright 2019. 

3 Photocatalytic degradation of water pollutants based on MOFs
The water environment all over the world has deteriorated dramatically due to pollution caused by unregulated human factory sewage treatment and the burning of huge amounts of fossil fuels,139 and the project to treat the natural water environment deserves our attention.140 Biomedical development is a culprit. With numerous reports of widespread detection of drug residues in surface and groundwater, they can also have a very negative impact on human health.93,106,130 To remove these pollutants, scientists have used a variety of procedures, including biological, physical adsorption,141 and various electrochemical methods.142 However, the complexity of operation, high cost, and inefficiency limit their further development. Therefore, there is an urgent need to update our pollutant removal methods to protect the environment as well as save the costs.
The degradation of water pollutants by photocatalysis is a very promising method,142 which requires us to develop a photocatalyst with excellent photocatalytic properties. This imposes the following requirements.
(1) A broad spectrum of light absorption; (2) a bandgap that is small enough to allow visible light stimulation; (3) effective charge separation; (4) a high level of stability and redox capacity; (5) recycling; and (6) a reasonable price. For the efficient degradation of different EOC,143 heterogeneous photocatalysts such as TiO2, ZnO, Fe2O3, CdS, GaP, and ZnS have been extensively utilized. However, several of them exhibit common flaws when put in a working environment. Because only about 5% of the solar spectrum is in the ultraviolet region, the largest bandgap of the most common TiO2 photocatalyst prevents it from being used in practical applications.144 There is a practical motivation to create stable and effective photocatalysts that function in the visible range to improve solar energy usage as about 43% of the solar spectrum resides in this area. Finding narrow bandgap-stabilized photocatalysts that can effectively degrade water pollutants by generating OH and O2 in visible light has proven to be difficult though.101
Since the first report on the use of MOF for the catalytic degradation of industrial products (phenol) in water in 2007,146 many researchers have carried out a lot of work in the field of photocatalytic degradation of water pollutants147 by MOFs due to its good photoelectric and photocatalytic performance, high chemical stability, and unique structural characteristics.148
3.1 Design of traditional MOFs
Jianchuan He et al.148 designed a NH2-MIL-88B with Fe as the metal ion center through group functionalization. He studied in detail the degradation of methylene blue (MB) in water at different pH environments. The SEM images showed that the NH2-MIL-88B(Fe) worked as a needle with a length of about 800 nm and a diameter of 300 nm. Characteristic peaks of symmetry and asymmetry due to amine functionalization were observed in FTIR at about 3490 and 3370 cm−1. NH2-MIL-88B(Fe) showed good MB removal and hydrothermal stability in the pH range of 3.0–11.0 in the presence of visible light.
Li Shi et al.149 thoroughly investigated the photocatalytic reduction of Fe-based MOFs NH2-MIL-88B(Fe), NH2-MIL-53(Fe), and NH2-MIL-101(Fe) Cr(VI). Shi also went into great length about its mechanics. When NH2-MIL-88B(Fe) was used to photocatalyze the reduction of Cr(VI) in the presence of visible light; its photocatalytic activity was much higher than that of unfunctionalized MIL-88B(Fe).
The ESR study showed that MIL-88B(Fe) that went through the amine functionalization showed a ESR signal in the dark, with its g value as 1.996, which could be attributed to Fe3+. After visible light irradiation, the ESR signal intensity of Fe3+ decreased. In addition, the ESR signal's intensity returned after the irradiation was halted, showing that when NH2-MIL-88B was exposed to visible light, the electrons were transported from the excited amine group to the Fe3-μ3-oxo cluster. The instantaneous photocurrent reaction-controlled experiment has shown that adding an amine group to Fe(III) MOF may considerably increase the photocurrent. This shows that the photocatalysis caused by the use of visible light is considerably improved in terms of the separation efficiency of the electron–hole pairs and the carrier lifetime following e−/h+ pair separation. This occurs as a result of the electrons in the MOFs being excited by an organic link following amine functionalization and then being transferred to the Fe3-3-oxo cluster (Fig. 18).
 Fig. 18  Process of photocatalytic degradation of water pollutants. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 145 with permission from Rueda-Marquez, copyright 2020. 
Shi then put out the following technique for reducing Cr(VI) via NH2-MIL-88B(Fe) via photocatalysis. The electron–hole pair separation was assisted by the linker and Fe3-μ3-oxo clusters on the amine-functionalized MOFs, which were stimulated by visible light. The electrons on the linker were transported to the Fe3-μ3-oxo clusters and activated before participating in the Cr(VI) reduction process. This supports the importance of amine functionalization in MOF photocatalysis, which provides an electron transport channel to prevent the recombination of electron–hole pairs following separation (Fig. 19).
 Fig. 19  (a) Reduction profiles of photocatalytic reduction of Cr(VI) over MIL-88B(Fe), NH2-MIL-88B(Fe), mixed MIL-88B(Fe), and organic linker BDC-NH2. (b) Proposed mechanism for the photocatalytic reduction of Cr(VI) over NH2-MIL-88B(Fe). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 149 with permission from Shi, L., copyright 2015. 
3.2 Metallic heterogeneous photocatalyst materials based on MOFs
Because of the tunable structure and composition of MOFs, their synergistic catalysis with nanometals and other cocatalysts has also been extensively studied. Mahendra Yadav and Qiang Xu150 synthesized a MIL-101with highly dispersed metal nanoparticles fixed in for the catalytic reduction of Cr(VI) to Cr(III) (see Fig. S5†). We know that because the electrons and holes of Cr(VI) have a high recombination efficiency and a low adsorption activity, its photocatalysis employs a two-solvent method to highly fix dispersed nanometal particles in. The composites formed during the reduction of Cr(VI) to Cr(III) with formic acid were investigated. The results showed that among all the metal nanoparticles, Pt-MOF performed the best.
Composites incorporating single ionic metals alone still suffer from inadequate interactions, clogging of active sites, weak exciton separation, etc. So, to solve this problem, the researchers explored several mixed-metal MOFs.
The sol–gel integration of Cu, Pd nanoparticles on ZIF-8, which was also employed for the photoreduction of Cr(VI) in water, was accomplished by Yifan Zhang et al.151 In addition, it has been carefully examined, utilizing a number of characterization methods. The obtained CuPd@ZIF-8 catalysts significantly outperformed the original ZIF-8 catalyst, according to the performance evaluation results, achieving a photocatalytic reduction of 89% Cr(VI) (20 ppm) in aqueous Cr(VI) for 60 min and maintaining a stability of more than 90% of the photocatalytic activity after four cycles. The key factor for the better performance is that the MOF's high specific surface area and charge transfer rate, together with the monometallic loading, preclude the recombination of produced electrons and holes (see Fig. S6†).
Suraj Prakash Tripathy et al.152 further developed a mixed-valence bimetallic Ce/Zr MOF comprising Ce3+ and Ce4+ ions for photocatalytic hydrogen generation and degradation of ciprofloxacin (CIP) by a one-step pyrolysis technique since the Ce3+ and Ce4+ oxidation states are cheap and readily interchangeable. Due to the exchangeable Ce3+/Ce4+ ion pairs, this bimetallic Ce/Zr MOF exhibits a smaller bandgap, improved exciton separation, and superior ligand–metal charge transfer (LMCT).
The insertion of Ce ions brings about a higher electron density around the Zr4+ ions and a large number of oxygen vacancies (OV), resulting in better photocatalytic activity. The Ce/Zr 1:1 MOF in the photocatalytic performance evaluation exhibited a 4-fold enhancement in hydrogen production efficiency (468.30 μmol h−1 (ACE = 3.51%)) and 90.8% enhancement in degradation efficiency of the CIP. It is worth mentioning that the reaction of photocatalytic degradation of CIP followed pseudo-first-order kinetics (rate constant = 0.0363). TA and NBT tests demonstrated that its intermediate reactants followed the order superoxide radicals (O2−) > hydroxy radicals (OH˙).
According to Prakash Tripathy's analysis of the CIP photodegradation pathway, the Ce ion-inserted MOF experiences a proper band edge reduction and exciton bias, which causes CIP to photodegrade. The decrease in bandgap is especially noticeable in Ce/Zr 1:1 MOFs, indicating that this metal ion's entry and exit result in a stronger LMCT and a better propensity for light harvesting. A further intriguing finding from the PL and EIS analyses is that the prepared bimetallic MOFs have improved exciton anti-conjugation. The decrease in the binding energy of the Zr4+ XPS peak, indicating a strong ability for electron transfer in the clusters, supports the idea that the Ce3+/Ce4+ redox system plays a key role in better LMCT. In addition, O2−-radicals were the main species that were active, whereas OH−-made only a small contribution to the photodegradation of CIP in the presence of light. According to the findings, superoxide radicals are essential to the photocatalytic reaction. These light-generated reactive species combine with the adsorbed CIP molecules to create degradation products in an irreversible manner. Using LC-MS analysis, the CIP photodegradation degradation pathway was identified as well as the formation of reaction intermediates. Furthermore, O2− radicals were the most active species, with OH−-making only a minor contribution to the photodegradation of CIP in the presence of light. According to the findings, superoxide radicals are essential to the photocatalytic activity. These light-generated reactive species combine with the adsorbed CIP molecules to create degradation products in an irreversible manner. The CIP photodegradation degradation route, as well as the formation of reaction intermediates, were identified using LC-MS analysis. The defluorination of the aromatic ring and the cleavage of piperazine often occur first in the photodegradation of CIP, followed by the production of intermediates. The removal of carbonyl groups increases the likelihood that OH radicals are involved in the process (Fig. 20).
 Fig. 20  Schematic diagram of possible CIP photodegradation and H2 evolution mechanism of Ce/Zr 1:1 MOF. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 152 with permission from Tripathy, S. P., copyright 2022. 
The composite with nanometal particles is not the only way to modify MOF materials. The composite with traditional photocatalyst and reporter is also one of the alternative methods. As traditional photocatalysts, TiO2 has been widely researched due to its high surface area and cheap and great photochemical stability. By modifying the traditional sol–gel method, an extremely porous 3D TiO2@Cd-MOF was created by V. Ramasubbu et al.153 and submerged in a solution of Zn(II) porphyrin (ZnPp). In the photocatalytic degradation of methyl orange (MO) dye under visible light irradiation, the generated Zn(II) porphyrin-sensitized nanocomposite aerogel (TiO2@Cd-MOF)@ZnPp displayed remarkable activity (a maximum degradation efficiency of 94.1%) and great photostability. The key variables are the synergistic impact of Z-heterojunction construction, improved light absorption, and efficient electron injection. The HOMO and LUMO values of Zn(II) porphyrin (ZnPp) are also described (see Fig. S7†). The article explains how the bandgap value of the TiO2@Cd-MOF nanocomposite aerogel and the energy gap of ZnPp impact the photocatalytic activity. The heterojunction structure between TiO2 and ZnPp is found to enable effective electron injection and charge separation. The article also explains how electrons and holes in the photocatalyst are stimulated by visible light and interact with O2 and H2O to create reactive species that may oxidize MO molecules. The study found that PTAC samples exhibit better photocatalytic efficiency than TAG and TAC samples due to their heterogeneous structure.
3.3 Nonmetallic heterogeneous photocatalyst materials based on MOFs
Reduced graphene oxide (rGO) is widely used for the photocatalytic degradation of pollutants in water due to its excellent photoinduced excitation ability and environmental friendliness (nonmetallic material).154
Using bioinspired polydopamine nanoparticles (PDA NPs) as starting templates, Nuray Celebi et al.155 developed zirconium-based MOFs (IOO-66, PDA@MOF) in suitable core/shell heterogeneous topologies for the photocatalytic destruction of MB. The nanostructures created can aid in the reduction of oxygen to superoxide anion (O2) and the formation of HO−, which results in visible LED light. The PDA shells used have a regular spherical morphology and a size of 350 nm. The band properties of the PDA@MOF (ECB = −1.10 eV and EVB = 1.85 eV) compared to a normal hydrogen electrode (NHE) also show a high surface area and good bandgap provided to the MOF by Celebi's core/shell architecture, permitting 99% MB degradation in 80 min under visible LED illumination while this was happening (see Fig. S8†).
Feiping Zhao et al.157 developed a MIL-101(Fe)/g-C3N4 heterojunction as a bifunctional photocatalyst to simultaneously reduce Cr(VI) and degrade BPA under visible light. The improved photocatalytic performance of the MIL-101(Fe)/g-C3N4 heterojunction is attributed to the formation of direct Z-type heterojunctions between MIL-101(Fe) and g-C3N4 with appropriate band alignment, which enhances light absorption and effective charge carrier separation. The presence of higher O2 concentrations is crucial for the photocatalytic degradation of BPA on the MIL-101(Fe)/g-C3N4, and electron spin resonance and radical trapping studies have confirmed that light-generated electrons are responsible for oxygen-induced Cr(VI) reduction and BPA degradation. Charge transfer at the interface stage can occur via a straight Z-scheme method or a dual transfer mechanism, with the former being the most effective in explaining the improved photocatalytic reduction of Cr(VI) in MIL-101(Fe)/g-C3N4. The excellent separation of photoinduced e− and h+ couples results in reduced charge recombination of each semiconductor through the direct Z-type process, which accounts for the exceptional photocatalytic performance. Overall, the MIL-101(Fe)/g-C3N4 heterojunction photocatalyst holds great promise for the simultaneous reduction of Cr(VI) and degradation of BPA under visible light.
Zn(NO3)2–6H2O (0.8 g) and H2BDC (0.4 g) were dissolved in DMF and stirred for 30 min to complete dissolution. Qin and Qiang et al.156 created a novel 0D/3D photocatalyst for N-CQD on MOF-5 by controlling the solvothermal process using urea as the N source and coconut shell as the C source. The solvent was then magnetically agitated while N-CQD was added and heated until it turned dark crimson. Then, the solution was heated for 10 h at 150 °C in a 100-cc Teflon-lined autoclave. This ecofriendly N-CQD was additionally endowed with hydrophilic functional groups that may control the crystallization of MOFs and serve as binding sites for MOF nuclei, resulting in a strong interaction between the MOF-5 and N-CQD surfaces. The visible light-induced charge transfer was dramatically increased by the addition of N-CQD, which also improved the N-CQD/visible MOF-5's light-driven photocatalytic activity (Fig. 21).
 Fig. 21  (a) MOF-5,2-N-CQD/MOF-5 photocatalytic activity. (b) Photocatalytic activity of different samples. (c) Photocatalytic activity of MOF-5 and N-CQD/MOF-5 treated by different activation methods. (d) Recycling experiment of 2-N-CQD/MOF-5. (e) Schematic diagram of N-CQD/MOF-5 photocatalytic reduction of Cr(VI). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 156 with permission from Qin, X., copyright 2021. 
3.4 MOF-derived nanocomposite photocatalyst
Metal sulphides,158 such as In2S3, ZnIn2S4, and CdIn2S4, are excellent candidates for photocatalysis159 because of their distinct electronic structure (bandgap and redox potential). Because of photocorrosion, delayed electron/hole separation, and low charge carrier transfer kinetics, single metal sulphide photocatalysts are still far from ideal in terms of photostability, stability, and catalytic performance.160 Therefore, one way to address these issues is employing MOFs as precursors to create functional materials with complicated architectures and tailored components (porous structure, single shell hollow structure, and porous structure).161
Yunhong Pi et al.162 reported a MWCNT@MOF-derived In2S3 hollow tube photocatalyst. In2S3 produced from 0.3% MWCNT@MOF showed 100% degradation efficiency in TC degradation induced by visible light. When compared to pure MOF-derived In2S3 and conventional In2S3 photocatalyst, it had an apparent reaction rate constant that was three to five times greater. Pi uses multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) as electron acceptors to improve the photoreduction capabilities of NH2-MIL-68(In) platforms. The rod-shaped MIL-68(In) can be employed as a precursor for further sulfation in addition to serving as a platform for MWCNT encapsulation. In efforts to isolate the active species, Pi discovered that h+ and O2 were the primary active species in the photodegradation of TC.
According to PL spectroscopy, the electron lifetime in the composite was extended due to a reduction in electron–hole pair recombination. The superoxide radical anion produced in hollow In2S3 was measured using ESR spectroscopy. The results show that the radical O2− was formed more efficiently in MWCNT@MOF-derived In2S3 systems. Pi postulated a mechanism for the accelerated photodegradation of TC on MWCNT@MOF-derived In2S3 heterojunctions based on the aforementioned experimental findings. Photoinduced electron–hole pairs are created when In2S3 is exposed to visible light and electrons are first stimulated from the valence band (VB) to the conduction band (CB). MWCNT works well as an electron acceptor to encourage the transfer of photogenerated electrons and as a photosensitizer to improve light harvesting. The findings demonstrate that the radical O2 is generated more effectively in In2S3 systems obtained from MWCNT@MOF. Based on the aforementioned experimental findings, Pi hypothesized a method for the improved photodegradation of TC on MWCNT@MOF-derived In2S3 heterojunctions. Visible light causes In2S3 electrons to be stimulated from the valence band (VB) to the conduction band (CB), resulting in photoinduced electron–hole pairs. MWCNT is an excellent photosensitizer to increase light harvesting and can also function as an electron acceptor to encourage the transfer of photogenerated electrons (Fig. 22).
Similarly, metal oxides (such as TiO2 (ref. 163 and 164) and ZnO (ref. 165)), as semiconductor materials with wide bandgap, have strong photoexcited hole ability,166 which makes them very suitable for the photocatalytic degradation of water pollutants.167 But the high recombination rate can only absorb UV and photogenerated electrons/holes and greatly limits its application in photocatalysis,168 which makes metal oxide photocatalysts driven by MOFs template also attract much attention.
 Fig. 22  Proposed mechanism for TC photodegradation with MWCNT@MOF-derived In2S3. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 162 with permission from Pi, Y., copyright 2019. 
4 Photocatalytic water splitting based on MOFs for hydrogen production
As one of the most important clean energy fuels,169 hydrogen, which has the highest energy density per mass,170 has the potential to effectively alleviate global energy shortages and widespread environmental pollution. The advantages of photocatalytic hydrogen production include its simplicity, speed, low cost, low pollution, and abundant feedstock. As a result, photocatalytic hydrocracking has received special attention in the research on converting the earth's abundant solar energy into environment-friendly alternative fuels.171 TiO2,172 BiVO4,173 MoS2,174 CdS,175 ZnS,176 and other traditional semiconductor catalysts have been used to promote photocatalytic H2 evolution in recent years. Most inorganic semiconductor photocatalysts are limited in their ability to be developed and used by inherent flaws such as wide bandgaps and high carrier recombination rates.144 Therefore, it is crucial to create photocatalytic materials that are more effective if hydrogen is to be produced by water splitting.
Therefore, MOFs with adjustable components and designable networks have attracted a lot attention in photocatalytic hydrogen production. MOF materials with well-aligned and adjustable pores that can be artificially engineered at the molecular level to manipulate light-harvesting metal nodes and organic linkages can be ideal platforms for photocatalytic hydrogen production applications.
4.1 Metallic heterogeneous photocatalyst materials based on MOFs
Traditional inorganic photocatalysts such as TiO2 and CdS (ref. 177) still outperform MOFs in terms of photocatalytic activity. In comparison to inorganic photocatalysts (93%), MOF photocatalysts have a maximum apparent quantum efficiency (AQE) for water of 8.9%. Therefore, for the modification of MOFs photocatalysts, researchers have widely derived noble metal particles, such as Pt, Au, and Pd, with low activation energy and effective charge separation.62
Chunxiao Lu et al.178 achieved the effective creation of an in-base MOF. Using functionalized tetracarboxylic acid linkers with unsaturated and open ligand nodes, metal-centered In(III) was formed into an In-MOF structure with a single metal node, where In(CO2)4 served as the metal building block of a 4,4-linked PTs anion network. The manufactured In-MOF was verified using several techniques, including single crystal and powder X-ray diffraction, thermogravimetric, and Fourier transform infrared. This In–In III MOF's core is connected to a porous, three-dimensional PTS network that is centered on a single metal node. When it comes to catalyzing the light-driven evolution of H2, In-MOF has shown exceptional photocatalytic hydrogen production capabilities when exposed to UV radiation (see Fig. S10†).
Using solvothermal synthesis, Xiao et al.85 thoroughly examined the photocatalytic H2 activity of a sizable manganese-based MOF (Mn-TBAPy-BK). Two symmetrically related Mn2+ centers make up the SBU cluster in Mn-TBAPy-BK, which Xiao combined with the TBAPy4−-anion to create a layered MOF network. The Mn-TBAPy-BK in 2D nanosheets with long lifetimes of the photogenerated carriers (up to 2 s) were discovered by TA measurements. This guarantees that Mn-TBAPy-NS can participate in redox projections with an efficiency of 56%, which is about 7.9 times higher than that of Mn-based MOFs alone and effectively transfer electrons to the surface of Pt nanoparticles (Fig. 23).
 Fig. 23  Comparison of TA decay kinetics of (a) Mn-TBAPy-BK (probed at 630 nm) and (b) Mn-TBAPy-NS (probed at 605 nm). Schematic of proposed photoinduced excited state relaxation and electron transfer to Pt dynamics in (c) Mn-TBAPy-BK and (d) Mn-TBAPy-NS MOFs. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 85 with permission from Xiao, Y., copyright 2022. 
Chunxiao Lu et al.178 achieved the effective creation of an in-base MOF. Using functionalized tetracarboxylic acid linkers with unsaturated and open ligand nodes, metal-centered In(III) was formed into an In-MOF structure with a single metal node, where In(CO2)4 served as the metal building block of a 4,4-linked PTs anion network. The manufactured In-MOF was verified using several techniques, including single crystal and powder X-ray diffraction, thermogravimetric, and Fourier transform infrared. This In–In III MOF's core is connected to a porous, three-dimensional PTS network that is centered on a single metal node. When it comes to catalyzing the light-driven evolution of H2, In-MOF has shown exceptional photocatalytic hydrogen production capabilities when exposed to UV radiation.
4.2 Semiconductor composite MOFs
Yu-Cheng Luo et al.179 describe a metal–organic cage [Pd6(RuL3)8]28+ (MOC-16) as a photochemical molecular device (PMD) component that simultaneously combines eight Ru2+ light collecting centers and six Pd2+ catalytic centers for effective and reliable H2 production.
It was possible to successfully heterodize a hybrid substance known as MOC-16@CZIF by incorporating a metal–organic framework (MOF) of ZIF-8, which was afterward changed into a carbonate matrix of Znx(MeIm)x(CO3)x(CZIF). With an order of magnitude more triple-excited electrons than the original MOC-16, this MOC@MOF-integrated photocatalyst inherits the its high efficiency and directed electron transfer in the picosecond domain. Water serves as the proton carrier to facilitate proton transfer, while the carbonate CZIF matrix gives MOC-16@CZIF water wettability and functions as a proton transfer station. The penetration of BIH's sacrificial agent into the CZIF matrix to promote conductivity as a result of its potent reducing power to induce free charge carriers, also improves electron transfer during photocatalysis (see Fig. S11†). Due to the high H2 activity produced by these synergies, the heterogeneous MOC-16@CZIF photocatalyst can maintain a turnover frequency of 0.4 H2/s, which is a 50-fold increase over the homogenous PMD.
Interest has been shown in a complex semiconductor, CdxZn1−xS, for its role in hybrid systems.180–184 As a solid solution, the bandgap of CdxZn1−xS can be adjusted more easily than that of CdS and ZnS. In this category, Cd0.2Zn0.8S showed the best photocatalytic activity. For Yun Su et al.,185 therefore, by varying the amount of UiO-66-NH2, a series of Cd0.2Zn0.8S@UiO-66-NH2 composites were created, and a hydrogen evolution rate of 5846.5 μmol g−1 h−1 was attained. The ability to transfer electrons generated on the HOMO of UiO-66-NH2 to the conduction band of Cd0.2Zn0.8S aids in the prevention of photoinduced electron–hole pair recombination (Fig. 24(a)). The results of PL spectra (Fig. 24(b)) and transient photocurrent responses (Fig. 24(c)) further confirm this view.
 Fig. 24  (a) Photogenerated electron and hole transfer diagram in Cd0.2Zn0.8S@UiO-66-NH2, (b) PL spectrum, (c) photocurrent spectrum. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 185 with permission from Su, Y., copyright 2017. 
To create an S-type heterojunction for photocatalytic hydrogen generation by water splitting, Haiming Gong et al.186 modified Ni-based MOFs. First, by surface sulfonation, oxidation, and phosphorylation, Gong produced significant amounts of NiS2, NiO, and Ni2P on the surface of Ni-based MOFs. To increase photocatalytic water splitting activity, these compounds successfully trapped electrons from the Ni-MOF conduction band. In addition, the phosphorylation enabled the P-loaded Ni-MOF to possess better electronegativity, further enhancing its ability to replenish photogenerated electrons. Subsequently, the coupling of 2D CeO2 with Ni-MOF/P successfully constructed an S-type heterojunction. Due to the complete capture and utilization of the photogenerated electrons, the maximum hydrogen production rate of the obtained hybrid catalysts reached 6.337 mmol g−1 h−1, 14.18 times that of the original Ni-MOFs. Calculations using the density flooding theory (DFT) for Ni2P, NiS2, NiO, and CeO2 do show that the introduction of P, S, and O elements caused the bandgap to increase. The densities of the electronic states of Ni2P, NiS2, and NiO close to the Fermi level have gradually decreased, which suggests that the conductivity of the composite MOFs has also gradually decreased. These findings indicate that different surface modifications, such as sulfonation, oxidation, and phosphorylation, can produce various active sites with narrow bandgaps. Similarly, the CB and VB of CeO2 are contributed by Ce and O, respectively.
The pathway of photocatalytic hydrogen generation from Ni-MOF, Ni2P, and CeO2 in composite MOFs is depicted in Fig. 25C. The photoexcitation of the EY molecule produces a single excited state (EY*), which is followed by a bandgap transition into a more stable triple excited state (EY3*). TEOA then acts as an electron donor in the reaction system to reduce EY3* and generate EY. The EY-radical's electrons naturally move to the CB of Ni-MOF and CeO2 because of their great reduction ability. At the same time, visible light stimulates electrons in the VB of Ni-MOF and CeO2 to go into their respective CBs. Ni2P on the surface of Ni-MOF has a significant negative charge and good electrical conductivity, which allows it to absorb electrons.
 Fig. 25  (A) Band structures of EY, Ni-MOF, Ni2P, and CeO2. (B) Schematic diagram of the visible light-induced electron transfer pathway. (C) Diagram of photocatalytic water splitting for hydrogen production by Ni-MOF/Ni2P/CeO2 photocatalyst. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 186 with permission from Gong, H., copyright 2022. 
After that, hydrogen gas is created when it combines with hydrogen ions in water. The Ni-MOF CB's electrons spontaneously migrate to Ni2P under the influence of the potential energy difference. The electrons on the CB of Ni2P react with the H+ in water to produce hydrogen gas. They create a classic S-shaped heterojunction because Ni-MOF and CeO2 have interwoven band structures. Poorly reduced electrons on the CeO2 CB of the material recombine with the collected holes on the Ni-MOF VB under the influence of the internal electric field, band bending, and Coulomb attraction. Through the creation of S-type heterojunctions and the addition of active sites, the formation of hydrogen and the photoinduced generation of electrons are combined in this process. TEOA consumes the pores in CeO2. Because of the potential energy difference, the electrons on the CB of Ni-MOF naturally move to Ni2P. The H+ in water is then reacted with the electrons on the Ni2P CB to produce hydrogen gas. A classic S-shaped heterojunction is formed between Ni-MOF and CeO2 as a result of their interwoven band structures. Due to the interaction of the internal electric field, band bending, and Coulomb attraction, the badly reduced electrons on the CeO2 CB recombine with the accumulating holes on the Ni-MOF VB. Through the development of S-type heterojunctions and the addition of active sites, the photoinduced generation of electrons is completely preserved in this process and interacts with the production of hydrogen. The holes in CeO2 are consumed by TEOA.
4.3 Nonmetallic organic dyes MOFs
The vast majority of metal organic frameworks have a bad photoactivity for the reason that they respond ineffectively to visible light.187 Doping methods, especially nonmetallic doping, therefore deserve special attention due to their efficient role in extending the optical response range.
Since 2009, g-C3N4 has been extensively employed in the hydrogen production industry.188 When compared to conventional inorganic photocatalysts such as CdS, TiO2, and WO3, g-C3N4 performs well in a variety of applications, including the degradation of pollutants and the splitting of water.189 The broad bandgap of g-C3N4 prevents it from being used in many situations, even though it partially reacts to visible light at 460 nm. As a result, g-C3N4 and MOF together are worth testing. By including g-C3N4 during the creation of ZIF-67 and then adding MoS2 nanoparticles to the surface of the g-C3N4/ZIF-67 structure, Zejin Wang et al.190 created an effective ternary photocatalyst. As a narrow-band semiconductor, MoS2 was improved further to effectively capture visible light and hasten charge separation.
When exposed to visible light for 4 h, the MoS2 photocatalyst modified with MOFs (ZIF-67) and g-C3N4 catalyst demonstrated a high hydrogen output of about 321 mol, which was about 30 times greater than that of pure g-C3N4 photocatalyst. Because MoS2 has been modified, the electrochemical characterization demonstrates that the g-C3N4/MOF/MoS2 photocatalyst interface has an obviously higher electron transfer efficiency than g-C3N4/MOF and g-C3N4. Under visible light irradiation, the ternary composite photocatalyst demonstrated high hydrogen generation of about 321 mol in 4 h, which is about 30 times more than that of pure g-C3N4. The electron transfer efficiency of the g-C3N4/MOF/MoS2 photocatalyst interface is greatly increased, according to electrochemical characterization. Because the heterojunction structure created by MoS2 loading makes it easier for the photogenerated electrons to move from EY− to the composite photocatalyst, the photogenerated electron–hole pairs are prevented from recombining. As a result, photocatalytic water splitting is more effective.
The interfacial effects between the catalysts and the construction of chemical bonds are very effective in facilitating photogenerated electron transfer. The S–C bond between CoS and g-C3N4 was successfully created by Zhaobo Fan et al.,191 utilizing a novel form of hollow cubic CoS synthesized from Co-ZIF-9. Photoelectrons may be swiftly transported to the CoS hydrogen evolutionary active site thanks to the S–C bond's role as an electron transport bridge (see Fig. S12†). In addition, data from time-resolved photoluminescence spectroscopy and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy demonstrate that the S–C bond serves as a bridge to quickly transfer photogenerated carriers in the composite, leading to effective hydrogen evolution. The hydrogen production was 9545 μmol g−1 after just 5 h, which was 53 and 12 times more than the yields of g-C3N4 and ZIF-9, respectively. The intrinsic mechanism of photoelectron transport across the S–C bond may be verified by DFT simulations.
When exposed to visible light, the EY molecules linked to the photocatalyst are initially photoexcited into a single excited state, EY1*, and subsequently undergo gap transfer to transform into a triple excited state, EY3*. EY3* will become EY− as a result of TEOA. The electrons carried by EY− will be transported to the CB of S-g-C3N4 and CoS as a result of the reduction of H2O and H2 evolution processes, after which EY will revert to the ground state. In addition, the VB, CB, and bandgap of S-g-C3N4 are determined to be 1.61 eV, −0.95 eV, and 2.56 eV, respectively, using the Mott–Schottky and Kubelka–Munk techniques. Furthermore, when exposed to visible light, S-g-C3N4 is excited, resulting in photogenerated electron–hole pairs. Electrons from the light created will have enough energy to ignite CB. The bridge effect of the S–C bond for the hydrogen evolution process transfers the electrons on the CB of S-g-C3N4 and the electrons transferred from EY to S-g-C3N4 to CoS. The open hollow cube CoS, to which the S-g-C3N4 nanosheet is linked, promotes electron transport in space. Multiple refractions and reflections of light will be caused by the light in the black hollow cube of CoS, allowing for the full use of light.
Peramaiah Karthik et al.192 took advantage of the strong π–π interaction brought by combining rGO and MOF to develop a MOF@rGO material with a highly enhanced photocatalytic activity, which could solve the problem of the very fast photocatalytic electron–hole recombination of MOF materials. Graphene's interaction with organic molecules causes strong interference and changes its electronic properties.
The strong π–π interaction between MOF and rGO, as opposed to the reduction in charge-carrier mobility brought on by the covalent functionalization of organic molecules on graphene, is what effectively separates electron–hole pairs. Through π-mediated charge carrier separation, MOF@rGO achieves a large apparent quantum efficiency of 0.66%, which is 9.1 times better than the original MOF's photocatalytic hydrogen generation activity.
The results of Karthik's study on the electronic interactions between NH2-MIL-125(Ti) and rGO demonstrate the existence of interactions as well as how they enhance the photocatalytic performance. After the synthesis of the composite MOF, the unique peak of the NH2-MIL-125(Ti) MOF at 380 nm was moved to 415 nm in the UV-vis spectra. This shows that there is an electron transfer from the MOF to the rGO. The covalent connection from sp2 to sp3 hybridization via the organic linker's carbon atoms greatly interferes with the extended aromatic nature of rGO, resulting in a decrease in the sp2-CCC-stretching frequency. However, in this scenario, the peak intensity of the sp2 carbon atom rises. These results demonstrate unequivocally that rGO and NH2-MIL-125(Ti) MOF do not interact covalently. Thus, a significant noncovalent contact (−) exists between rGO and NH2-MIL-125(Ti) MOF, promoting electronic conversion between the two. The only potential for electronic conversion between rGO and NH2-MIL-125(Ti) MOF is that NH2-MIL-125 electrons are involved (this explains the change of the absorption peak, i.e., the electronic transition mediated by the strong interaction). This strong π–π interaction enhances fast electron transit and decreases electron–hole pair recombination, boosting the activity of photocatalytic water splitting. To prohibit direct interaction between rGO and NH2-MIL-125(Ti), the authors first constructed a basic structure out of polypyrrole (PPY), and then they synthesized an NH2-MIL-125(Ti)/PPy-rGO MOF to validate their earlier findings. We investigated the efficient surface functionalization of PPY on rGO using FTIR spectroscopy. Along with the normal GO vibrations, PPY-RGO also has new vibrations connected to pyrrole rings at 1556 and 1466 cm−1. It is conceivable that PPy guards against π-π interaction between the rGO's π-orbitals and NH2-Mil-125. Due to PPy's protection of the electron transport mechanism and the absence of π–π interactions, this is primarily the result. This demonstrates the existence of a strong π–π interaction between GO and NH2-MIL-125(Ti) (Fig. 26).
 Fig. 26  (a) Solid-state 13C NMR spectra of rGO, NH2-MIL-125(Ti), and NH2-MIL-125(Ti)/rGO. (b) Enlarged spectra of rGO, NH2-MIL-125(Ti), and NH2-MIL-125(Ti)/rGO (100–160 ppm). (c) FTIR spectra of rGO, NH2-MIL-125(Ti), and NH2-MIL-125(Ti)/rGO. (d) FTIR spectra of NH2-MIL-125(Ti)/rGO. (e) Synthesis of π–π interaction between MOFs and reduced graphene oxide. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 192 with permission from Karthik, P., copyright 2018. 
4.4 MOF-derived photocatalyst for nanocomposites
The MOF-derived nanomaterials may retain the structural characteristics of the MOF matrix thanks to the characteristics of MOFs, such as their ordered 3D structure, vast surface area, high porosity, and uniformly scattered metal junctions, which endow them with exceptional catalytic activity. The MOF-derived method is also very advantageous for creating layered nanomaterials that may hasten molecule and charge transport while simultaneously providing a large surface area and a large number of active sites.193
Wu and Liu194 et al. have considered the synthesis of a series of CoP@ZnIn2S4 layered photocatalysts using an MOF derived strategy. The authors calcined MOF-67 to obtain CoP nanoparticles, and then ZnIn2S4 nanosheets were coated on the MOF-derived CoP surface to obtain the layered CoP@ZnIn2S4. The optimized CoP@ZnIn2S4–10 shows excellent hydrogen production efficiency of 0.103 mmol h−1 and good internal cycle stability. However, the N2 adsorption–desorption isotherm analysis revealed that the MOF-derived CoP was very porous and had a significant BET surface area of 110 m2 g−1. Since CoP@ZnIn2S4 has a surface area of 100 m2 g−1 as opposed to ZnIn2S4's surface area of just 76 m2 g−1, the photocatalyst's surface contains more active sites, which is advantageous for the photocatalytic process (Fig. 27).
 Fig. 27  (a) The process of the CoP@ZnIn2S4 photocatalyst; (b) PXRD patterns of CoP, ZnIn2S4, and CoP@ZnIn2S4 and (c) UV-vis DRS of CoP, ZnIn2S4, and CoP@ZnIn2S4. (d) TEM image of CoP@ZnIn2S4. (e) HAADF-STEM image and element drawing image of CoP@ZnIn2S4. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 194 with permission from Wu, B., copyright 2022. 
Yu-Cheng Luo et al.179 incorporated MOC-16 ([Pd6(RuL3)8]28) into the framework of ZIF-8 to obtain the MOC-16@ZIF-8 precursor. This precursor underwent a chaotic reaction, resulting in the MOF as the precursor-induced Zn(CO3)2–0.66HMeIM (CZIF) carbonate, and the structure of MOC-16 was intact. Metal organic cage MOC-16 with 8 RuL3 photosensitizers and 6 Pd2+ catalytic centers ([Pd6(RuL3)8]28) is very favorable for the photocatalysis. This MOC@MOF-integrated photocatalyst inherits the efficiency and directed transfer of e− of the MOC-16 in the ps domain, with an order of magnitude increase in the number of triple excited electrons compared to the original MOC-16. The carbonate CZIF matrix endows MOC-16@CZIF with water wettability and acts as a proton transfer station, with H2O as a proton carrier to promote proton transfer.
Bing Ma et al.195 synthesized a MoS2@TiO2 nanobridge using a hydrothermal method and MOF precursor. The resulting material displayed exceptional photocatalytic activity in water splitting, with an optimal MoS2 ratio of 14.6 wt%. The uniform dispersion and strong binding of MoS2 and TiO2 created a large number of active sites on the surface, contributing significantly to the increased catalytic performance. The photocatalytic mechanism was further investigated, with fluorescein acting as the photosensitizer. The findings revealed that MoS2 acted as an electron sink, absorbing electrons from TiO2 and stimulating H2 evolution. The close contact and even distribution of MoS2 and TiO2 within the mixed catalyst facilitated efficient electron transport and subsequent hydrogen synthesis. In addition, MoS2 offered active sites to promote hydrogen evolution due to its quantum sealing effect. The EIS measurements indicated that the doped MoS2@TiO2 nanomixture exhibited lower impedance than ordinary TiO2 and MoS2, further demonstrating its potential as a highly effective photocatalyst (see Fig. S13†).
5 Reduction of CO2 for the synthesis of renewable energy by photocatalysts based on MOFs
When fossil fuels are used, greenhouse gases such as CO2 that have harmful impacts on the environment are released in excess into the atmosphere.196 For academics throughout the world, the handling of CO2 has grown to be a top priority. Economically advantageous and ecologically preferable, CO2 may be used as a C1 building block in catalytic conversion to create high-value compounds.197 The standard potential for the conversion of one carbon dioxide atom into another is −1.90 V.198 The many classical reduction products of CO2 are kinetically unfavorable to be generated.199
Metal organic frameworks can provide or be endowed with clear isolation sites to immobilize catalytically active species. In addition, for the synthesis of renewable energy from photocatalytic reduction CO2 synthesis, MOFs can act as a platform to allow energy and electron transfer activities amongst the many species supported in MOFs.
5.1 Design of traditional MOFs
The use of traditional MOFs in photocatalysis is constrained by their poor charge conductivity and low CO2 consumption. However, from the perspective of the customization of MOF materials and the strong CO2 capture ability brought by high porosity, it is completely possible to realize the utilization of visible light by MOFs through the wise selection of metal ions and organic ligands with high light absorption and utilization abilities.200 Hai-Qun Xu et al.201 prepared PCN-222 with tetrakis(4-carboxyphenyl)porphyrin (H2TCPP) as the organic composition, sacrificed in TEOA. The HCOO− selectivity is about 100% in the visible range. With a high specific surface area (1728 m2 g−1), PCN-222 has 23.6 kJ mol−1 CO2 adsorption heat and can be easily regenerated in a low energy manner. The high absorption of CO2 resulted in the enrichment of CO2 molecules near the Zr6 metal center, which also improved the photocatalytic performance. Two electron trapping processes (τ1 is 47% and τ2 is 53%) are observed in the picosecond domain of the transient TA spectrum, reflecting the existence of electron trap states, which are energetically located in the bandgap of PSN-222 and effectively inhibit the harmful and radiative electron–hole recombination.
Yue Xie et al.202 reported a MOFs photocatalyst that enhanced the photoreduction activity of CO2 by modifying MIL-101-Cr with alkyl ammonia to create chemical adsorption points. Due to the differing ratios of absorbed and transformed CO2, MOF photocatalysts are substantially less efficient at using CO2 than other traditional semiconductor photocatalysts.203,204 Through post-modification, Xie effectively included several alkylamines, including ethylenediamine (EN), diethylenetriamine (DETA), and triethylenetetramine (TETA), into MIL-101-Cr. In comparison to the original MOFs MIL-101-Cr, MIL-101-SO3H, DETA, and TETA-modified products, the EN modified material produced the most CO at 47.2 μmol g−1 h−1 with a selectivity of 96.5%.
NY Huang et al.205 synthesized photocatalytically active Ru@Cu-HHTP by combining a copper-based MOF (Cu-HHTP; HHTP = 2, 3, 6, 7, 10, and 11-hexahydroxytriphenylene) with a photosensitizer [Ru(phen)3]2+ (phen = 1,10-phenanthroline). The performance study of Ru@Cu-photocatalytic HHTP resulted in a 69.5 mmol g−1 h−1. CO yield and 91.3% selectivity under ambient light. The photoelectrons generated by the encapsulated photosensitizer [Ru(phen)3]2+ were efficiently transmitted to the surrounding metal sites (CuO4) of Cu-HTP during the photocatalytic process, as evidenced by the significant decrease in Ru@Cu-HHTP caused by PL lifespan. The extraordinarily high photocatalytic activity of Ru@Cu-HHTP is mostly due to the improved charge transfer efficiency attained by the assembly of photosensitizer particles.
The study of NingYu Huang et al.206 also confirmed that integrating photosensitizer molecules into MOFs is an excellent choice to enhance its photocatalytic activity. Huang combined Ru dipyridine, a classical photosensitive unit, with Co imidazo, a unit with high CO2 reduction activity, and 1H-imidazo phenanthroline ligand by the heat solution method to obtain MAF-34-CoRu. In photocatalytic experiments, MAF-34-CoRu achieved CO selectivity of about 100% without the need for additional sacrificial agents and photosensitizers. The PL characterization results verified that the photosensitive unit and the catalytic unit had a good synergistic effect on the MOF.
Mahmoud Elcheikh Mahmoud et al.207 selected the photosensitive double (4′-(4-carboxyphenyl)-tripyridine)ruthenium(II) (Ru(cptpy)2) pillar to be included in Zr-MOF. The resulting MOF (AUBM-4) showed strong HCOOH reducing activity (HCOO−: 366 μmol g−1 h−1) under visible light with TEOA as a sacrificial agent. After the photoexcitation of Ru(cptpy)2, TEOA reduced the Ru center. Carbon dioxide is centrally coordinated with Zr and reduced by a ligand anion.
Zhi-Hao Yan et al.208 constructed an Eu–Ru (phen)3-MOF with an Eu(III)2 cluster as the connection node and photosensitive H3L ligand (Ru(phen)3-derived) as the connection node. In the performance evaluation of photocatalysis, CO2 was selectively reduced to formate (321.9 HCOO−) (μmol h−1 mmol MOF−1). The photoexcitation of metal ligands with photosensitivity and strong light absorption ability initiates the electron injection node, and EPR studies have shown that {Eu(III)}2 clusters become photocatalytic active centers after receiving photoexcited electrons. The results of TA measurements confirm the electron transfer kinetics––the TA spectrum of the H3L ligand shows a negative GSB signal (ground state bleaching) at 440 and 490 nm, overlapping with the excited state absorption (ESA) signal term at 440 to 700 nm––which is consistent with the transfer path of photoexcitation-induced electrons from the H3L ligand to the Eu metal center.
A CO2 molecule can be absorbed by the exposed Eu(III) center across the Eu–O junction. At the active Eu1 ion location, its estimated adsorption energy is −0.55 eV. After the photoinduced electron injection reduces Eu(III) to Eu(II), the electrons can be transferred to CO2 adsorbed at the active site. The CO2 molecules get 0.025 electrons from the successfully activated Eu(II)2, whereas the Eu(II)1 and Eu(II)2 ions lose 0.0073 and 0.004 electrons, respectively, during this process (Fig. 28).
 Fig. 28  DFT calculation of (a) CO2 absorption structure and (b) charge difference density of CO2 adsorption structure of Eu(II)2. (c) Proposed mechanism of photocatalytic CO2 reduction to HCOO−. [EuII–H2O–EuII] active site actually participates in the reduction of CO2 in the two-electron process. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 208 with permission from Yan, Z.-H., copyright 2018. 
Only the arrangement and combination of different metal nodes and ligands in traditional MOFs materials is far from satisfying the researchers. More and more researchers focus on the structural design of traditional MOFs and achieve precise structural regulation by regulating different molecules to replace traditional MOFs components in various ways.
Yu Wang et al.209 looked into the promotion of photocatalytic carbon dioxide reduction by neighboring hydroxide ligands and catalytically active metal centers. Under the same reaction circumstances, Wang examined six cobalt-based MOFs with various coordination environments. They chose three different MOFs with the same coordination geometry: MOF-74-Co, MAF-X27-Cl, and MAF-X27-OH. According to the results of photocatalytic studies, MOFs with an adjacent open Co center and a μ-OH− ligand had the highest CO selectivity (98.2%), and at 0.1 atmosphere, their activity fell by 20% while that of the other MFS decreased by 90%. According to DFT calculations, the carbon dioxide binding strength was 208 kJ mol−1, which was much higher than the binding strength of the control MOF (41 kJ mol−1) without the μ-OH− ligand.
Macrocyclic π-conjugated organic semiconductor-engineered MOFs may produce CO2 reduction catalysts with potent photocatalytic activity propelled by near-infrared light, according to Jin-Yue Zeng et al.104 The researchers developed a series of mesoporous MOFs with progressively larger macrocyclic π-conjugated units to alter the photosorption range and catalytic effectiveness. In single-crystal form, the organic semiconductor units and metal clusters in these MOFs are topologically and accurately organized. Expanding the connection's visible to near-infrared light adsorption range can reduce the energy gap for light-induced electron transfer. Ultrafast spectroscopic experiments also support the development of charge-separated states and the kinetics of photoexcitation. This supports the use of photoinduced electron transport channels inside the MOFs for CO2 reduction driven by near-infrared light, together with X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy and in situ electron paramagnetic resonance studies. With an apparent quantum efficiency (AQE) of more than 2.03% and 1.11% at 760 and 808 nm, respectively, the tetra(4-carboxybiphenyl)naphthalene porphyrin MOF (TNP-MOF) photocatalyst has a particularly high CO2 reduction rate of more than 6630 μmol g−1 h−1 under NIR light (Fig. 29).
 Fig. 29  Crystal structures and characterization of MOFs. The macrocyclic π-electrons of the linker (A) TBCP, (B) TBML, (C) TML, (D) TM, and (E) TNP. Crystal structures of MOFs (F) TBCP-MOF, (G) TBML-MOF, (H) TML-MOF, (I) TM-MOF, and (J) TNP-MOF with the expansion of the π-conjugated system within the MOF. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 104 with permission from Zeng, J.-Y., copyright 2022. 
5.2 Nanometal-loaded MOFs
Particle size adjustment for photocatalytic activity has been recognized to be applicable to precious metals such as Pt. The LSPR effect excited by noble metal nanoparticles under light irradiation can greatly enhance light utilization in photocatalysis. Therefore, many researchers also have great interest in MOFs materials composed of nanometal particles and regulate the photocatalytic activity of CO2 by adjusting the type, size, and compound position of nanometal particles.
By adding Ag nanoparticles with sizes ranging from 80 nm to 800 nm to the MOF skeleton, Fan Guo et al.210 created the MOF MIL-101(Cr)–Ag nanoparticle mixture. When the size of MIL-101(Cr)–Ag was reduced to 80 nm, the highest carbon dioxide photocatalytic reduction activity was attained, and the productivity of CO was 808.2 μmol g−1 h−1, and the productivity of CH4 was 427.5 μmol g−1 h−1. The noble metal nanoparticles significantly improved the photocatalytic utilization of light, leading to the creation of one of the most potent combined catalysts. The high catalytic activity of the catalyst can also be attributed to the high-density cells at the corners and edges of the small-sized mixed catalyst, which are beneficial for electron transport in the photocatalytic carbon dioxide reduction process.
A variety of MOF photocatalysts of various sizes were produced by Ningyu Huang et al.206 by adding Ag nanoparticles to the MOF frameworks. MIL-101(Cr)–Ag is visible between 80 and 800 nm. In the performance evaluation of photocatalysis, 80 nm MIL-101(Cr) demonstrated the greatest activity with a productivity of 808.2 mol g−1 h−1 for CO. 427.5 mol g−1 CH4 was produced. Ag nanoparticles significantly enhanced photocatalyst's use of light, and the resulting hybrid catalysts were very effective. In addition, the high cell density at the catalyst's edges significantly aided in the electron transport during the photocatalytic reduction of CO2.
To improve the photocatalytic effect utilizing the LSPR effect, Kyung Min Choi et al.211 presented a composite photocatalyst coated with metal nanoparticles using the MOF material. The covalent bond between the zirconium MOF, IOI-67 (Ren-MOFs), and the photocatalyst ReI(CO)3(BPYDC)Cl (BPYDC = 2,2′-dipyridine-5,5′-dimethylate) (ReTC), which converts carbon dioxide to carbon dioxide and avoids dimerization and inactivation. Re3-MOF was determined to have the maximum photocatalytic activity by carefully adjusting its density in the frame (n = 0, 1, 2, 3, 5, 11, 16, and 24 complexes per cell).
The ideal amount of Re complexes in each cell should result in the maximum activity, according to a structural study of Ren-MOFs, which demonstrates that proximity between photoactive centers must be carefully balanced to boost the photocatalytic activity. The coating of Re3-MOF on Ag, which spatially limits the photoactive Re center to the near-surface electric field that is enhanced on the surface of the Ag nanocube, increases the CO2–CO conversion rate in visible light by seven times after the optimal structurally-active correlation of Ren-MOFs is determined. The long-term stability is preserved for 48 h.
Ag nanocubes produce an amplified near-surface electric field at the surface plasmon resonance frequency that can be many orders of magnitude greater than the input electromagnetic field, according to the UV-vis spectral analysis. The Re3-MOF coating on Ag nanocubes is therefore expected to be able to spatially concentrate the photoactive Re core in a better electric field, increasing the photocatalytic activity.
Ag–Re3-MOF is created using the Ag nanocube created by the polyol method. Ag nanocubes shows a significant quadrupole local surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) scattering peak in the UV-vis spectrum (max to 480 nm), which coincides with the ReTC absorption range in the visible region (400–550 nm). In addition, the LSPR property of the Ag core is retained in the AgRe3-MOF structure after being coated with Re3-MOF. As a result, the Re3-MOF layer's ReTC absorption for photocatalysis can include the augmented near field that is anticipated to be formed on the Ag nanocube surface (Fig. 30).
 Fig. 30  Structures of Ren-MOF and Ag⊂Ren-MOF for plasmon-enhanced photocatalytic CO2 conversion. (a) Zr6O4(OH)4(–CO2)12 secondary building units are combined with BPDC and ReTC linkers to form Ren-MOF. (b) Ren-MOF coated on Ag nanocubes for the enhanced photocatalytic conversion of CO2. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 211 with permission from Choi, K. M., copyright 2017. 
Noble metal particles may be added to materials to improve light absorption and utilization, and single metal sites can be added to MOFs to provide highly active and selective centers for the binding and catalysis of carbon dioxide.
Sha-Sha Wang and colleagues212 created an indium–porphyrin structure. In(H2TCPP)(1−n)[Fe(TCPP)(H2O)](1−n)[DEA](1−n). The In–FenTCPP-MOF porphyrin ring (H2TCPP = 4-benzoic acid porphyrin; DEA = diethylamine) enables a single point iron for high-performance visible-driven CO2 conversion. The photocatalytic method generated a high CO output of 3469 mol g−1 and a high CO selectivity (about 99.5%) after 24 h of operation. Compared to its cobalt counterparts or the iron-free indium organic framework, it has significantly greater activity (MOF). Systematic experimental and theoretical research has demonstrated that the porphyrin-supported iron centers in the MOF matrix function as real active sites and may take electrons from the photoexcited MOF to help with CO2 reduction.
By altering the concentration of Fe3+, a succession of indium–porphyrin frames was created. The porphyrin rings in these MOFs can not only support the iron core as the catalytic active site but they can also absorb visible light, resulting in high-performance carbon dioxide conversion. The ideal carbon dioxide production may be as high as 3469 mol g−1, while the selectivity for carbon dioxide is roughly 99.5%. By altering the quantity of metal supply, it is possible to adjust the level of TCPP metallization in MOFs. In–FenTCPP-MOF formed in the monoclinic system with a space group of C2/c, according to a single-crystal X-ray diffraction study. The porphyrin molecule has four N donors and one water ligand coupled with each iron core. In addition, each 4-connected Fe-TCPP is coupled with four 4-connected [In(COO−)4] secondary build units (SBU), as shown in Fig. 31(a), to create a two-dimensional (2D) structure that is interpenetrating. ICP-MS can estimate the amount of iron or cobalt present.
 Fig. 31  (a) Synthesis and structure of In–Fe/CoTCPP-MOFs. (b) The PXRD patterns of In–Fe1.91TCPP-MOF, In–Co1.71TCPP-MOF, and In–InTCPP-MOF and simulated patterns of In–FeTCPP-MOF. (c and d) Fe 2p and N 2p XPS spectra of In–Fe1.91TCPP-MOF. (e and f) FT-IR and UV-vis spectra of In–Fe1.91TCPP-MOF, In–Co1.71TCPP-MOF, and In-TCPP-MO, respectively. (g) Steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra of H2TCPP, In–Fe1.91TCPP-MOF, In–Co1.71TCPP-MOF, and In–InTCPP-MOF with excitation wavelength of 515 nm. (h) The electronic configuration of the metal centers for [FeII(Por2−)(COOH−)]− and [CoII(Por2−)(COOH−)]− in the metal–carbon interactions. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 212 with permission from Wang, S.-S., copyright 2022. 
5.3 MOFs modified by semiconductors and cocatalysts
The loading of nanometal particles is not the only way to modify MOFs materials: compositing with a catalytic active semiconductor or combination with a cocatalyst are options. Lu Ye et al.213 developed an ultrathin two-dimensional Zn porphyrin MOF(5,10,15,20-tetrakis(4-carboxyphenyl)porphyrin; TCPP nanosheet) as photosensitizer, [Co2(OH)L](ClO4)3 or ZIF-67 as cocatalyst to participate in the photocatalytic reduction of carbon dioxide. The study found that as the photosensitizer zinc-nano-MOF piece shows better than zinc-MOF body stronger charge transfer ability of the CO2 adsorption capacity (1103.8 cm3 g−1) and longer life electronic light-hole for life. The PL measurement results also confirmed the above results.
Similar to the classical semiconductor TiO2, Zn2GeO4 with wide bandgap has also been widely used in the photocatalytic reduction of CO2.214 In particular, Zn2GeO4 nanorods have a high degree of crystallinity and a more scattered energy structure, which leads to significant photoinduced electron mobility in the conduction band and prevents the majority of photoinduced electron–hole pair recombination.215 According to Hui Zhao et al.,216 Mg-MOF-74 was thoroughly coated by the hydrothermal synthesis of Zn2GeO4 nanorods when the Zn2GeO4/Mg-MOF-74 composite was synthesized. Alkyl ammonium adsorbed on Zn2GeO4 nanorods interacts favorably with H4DOBDC of Mg-MOF-74.
The intimate association between Zn2GeO4 and Mg-MOF-74 seen in infrared spectroscopy and TEM images was ascribed to the adsorption of tetramethylammonium hydroxide (TMAOH) on Zn2GeO4 and the interaction of this compound with the 2,5-dioxy-1,4-benzoate ester (H4DOBDC) of Mg-MOF-74. The binding of Mg-MOF-74 with nanorods increased the adsorption of carbon dioxide, as demonstrated by the carbon dioxide adsorption isotherm. The hydrothermal Zn2GeO4/Mg-MOF-74 catalyst displayed higher performance in converting carbon dioxide to carbon monoxide alone using water as the sacrificial agent as compared to a single Zn2GeO4or Zn2GeO4/Mg-MOF-74 physical combination. This is due to its increased carbon dioxide adsorption capacity and lower recombination of photogenic electron pore pairs. The enhanced charge transfer capabilities of the Zn2GeO4/Mg-MOF-74 catalyst are further shown by PL and EIS characterizations.
The use of Mg-MOF-74 increased the photocatalytic activity of Zn2GeO4 significantly. Zhao proposed numerous explanations for this.
(a) It enhances electron transfer from Zn2GeO4 to itself, hence preventing photoelectron–hole recombination.
(b) At low pressure, it has the maximum CO2 adsorption capacity.
(c) The presence of a significant number of open basic metal sites (Mg2+) facilitates CO2 activation.
(d) It can efficiently broaden the range of visible light that it can absorb. The photocatalytic reduction of CO2 may be accomplished by successfully transferring photoelectrons from Zn2GeO4 to the open basic metal sites (Mg2+) of Mg-MOF-74 under the synergistic action of Zn2GeO4 and Mg-MOF-74. The distinctive Zn2GeO4/Mg-MOF-74 composite has a unique photoconversion efficiency that is more than seven times better than that of pure Zn2GeO4 (Fig. 32).
 Fig. 32  (I) Time–production plot of CO over irradiated Zn2GeO4/Mg-MOF-74. (II) FT-IR spectra of the (a) Zn2GeO4 nanorods, (b) Mg-MOF-74, (c) Zn2GeO4/Mg-MOF-74 physical mixture, and (d) Zn2GeO4/Mg-MOF-74 composites. (III) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of the Zn2GeO4/Mg-MOF-74 composites. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 216 with permission from Zhao, H., copyright 2018. 
Philip M. Stanley et al.217 reported a photosensitizer molecular catalyst assembled in the MOF structure for CO2 photocatalytic reduction, specifically in MIL-101-NH2 type MOF framework through the interaction of host and guest. The FA-ReBR (CO)3(4,4′-dcbpy) photocatalyst (dcbpy = dicarboxy-2,2′-bipyridine) and Ru(bpy)2(5,5′-dcbpy)Cl2 photosensitizer (bpy = 2,2′-bipyridine) were assembled in the channel structure of MIL-101-NH2. Re-based photocatalyst in the host-guest MOF photocatalyst can improve the CO selectivity activity in the photochemical reduction of CO2. The CO selectivity stability time is only 1.5 h when the MOF is not loaded but can be extended to 40 h when the MOF is loaded. In the process of regulating the ratio of photocatalyst and photosensitizer in MOF, it was found that the highest catalytic activity was displayed when the number of photocatalyst and photosensitizer in each cage was 1 and 2, respectively. This demonstrates the ideal effectiveness of having two photosensitizers and one catalyst per cage and also highlights the unique correlation between the size of the molecular complex, size of the MOF pore window, and number of molecules that can be sustained in each cage. Contrary to normal homogeneous systems, photosensitizer deterioration rather than catalyst degradation was found to be the primary performance constraint, opening up possibilities for future work on increasing turnover rates through careful parameter choice.
5.4 MOF-derived nanomaterial composites
MOFs have become a new sacrificial template for the preparation of novel nanocomposite catalysts. Compared to other precursor templates, they have excellent structural tunability in the construction of metal (oxide)/carbon nanocomposites by polymerization and carbonization under mild conditions.
Zhao et al.218 introduced a core–shell structure dual MOF template-oriented technique for fabricating a series of layered heterostructures, carbon-supported In2O3@MO (MO = ZnO, Co3O4, and ZnCo2O4) as a photocatalyst for CO2 reduction from the dual MOF, MIL-68@ZIF. MIL-68@ZnCo-ZIF was created by combining 2 mL Zn(NO3)2·6H2O solution, 2 mL Co(NO3)2·6H2O solution, and 4 mL 2-methylimidazole solution at room temperature. In the meantime, ethanol (5 mL) was used to dissolve 40 mg MIL-68(In) and 40 mg polyethylpyrrolidone (PVP), which was then agitated for 2 h before being collected. The salt solution was also vigorously mixed with MIL-68(In) for 3.5 h at room temperature.
The finished product was centrifugally gathered and baked at 60 °C. The interface between MO and In2O3 may be successfully integrated via a C–In2O3@MO heterojunction. The C–In2O3@MO heterojunction effectively captures solar energy by light scattering and reflection from internal voids thanks to its hollow structure, which also decreases the volume of the surface diffusion route of photoexcited electrons and holes. Most notably, good band matching enhances electron–hole separation in the In2O3@ZnCo2O4 p–n junction. In addition, the distinct layered structure offers a large number of active sites to enhance carbon dioxide adsorption and activation. CO selectivity (66%) and CO2 conversion efficiency (44.1 μmol g−1 h−1) were achieved.
The finished product was centrifugally gathered and baked at 60 °C. The interface between MO and In2O3 may be successfully integrated via a C–In2O3@MO heterojunction. The C–In In2O3@MO heterojunction effectively captures solar energy by light scattering and reflection from internal voids thanks to its hollow structure, which also decreases the volume of the surface diffusion route of photoexcited electrons and holes. Most notably, good band matching enhances electron–hole separation in the In2O3@ZnCo2O4 p–n junction. In addition, the distinct layered structure offers a large number of active sites to enhance carbon dioxide adsorption and activation. CO selectivity (66%) and CO2 conversion efficiency (44.1 μmol g−1 h−1) were achieved (Fig. 33).
 Fig. 33  Chemical diagram for making a hollow C–In2O3@ZnCo2O4 heterojunction. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 218 with permission from Zhao, C., copyright 2021. 
For researchers, compatibility with typical metal oxides is not the sole choice. Graphene, which has showed significant potential, has also piqued the interest of academicians.219 Mengyang Xu et al.220 also produced C-doped In2O3 by pyrolysis, utilizing MIL-68(In) as a sacrifice template and then combined it with g-C3N4 by hydrothermal technique to produce C–In2O3/g-C3N4 type II heterojunctions that showed exceptional photocatalytic activity, producing CO of 153.42 μmol g−1 h−1, and CH4 of 110.31 μmol g−1 h−1. FTIR analysis revealed that COOH* was a critical intermediate in the CO2 reduction process.
Having rather broad light absorption spectra, porous carbon and metal nanoparticles are also interesting options for photothermal catalysis. By integrating induced thermal effects with local surface plasmon resonance, Zhang, H. et al.221 created a nanomaterial called Fe@C composed of an iron core (ca. 9.7 nm) and ultrathin (1–3) carbon layers. The nanomaterial was heated to 700 °C after being heated to 500 °C in argon as a template and precursor, utilizing the Fe-based MIL-101. The UV-vis–near-infrared spectrum exhibits a very broad range of absorption from ultraviolet to infrared light, demonstrating its extremely high solar energy use efficiency.
In addition, the Fe@C catalyst demonstrated a light-induced thermal effect at 481 °C under continuous illumination. Under the same circumstances, the Fe@C catalyst produced 2196.17 μmol of CO, whereas the Fe/SiO2 and Fe/CNT catalysts produced 1963.3 and 1453.2 μmol CO, respectively. High CO selectivity may be achieved using an ultrathin carbon layer that creates a sealing effect that makes it easier for CO to escape from the catalyst surface. The Fe@C catalyst also showed a light-induced heat effect at 481 °C under continuous illumination. Under the same circumstances, the Fe@C catalyst produced 2196.17 μmol of CO, compared to the 1963.3 μmol of CO produced by the Fe/SiO2 catalyst and the 1453.2 μmol of CO produced by the Fe/CNT catalyst. High CO selectivity may be achieved using an ultrathin carbon layer that creates a sealing effect, which makes it easier for CO to escape from the catalyst surface.
Hai-long Jiang et al.222 considered that the carbon-based matrix and metal composition of HP derivatives based on MOF showed better photoreaction than the original MOF. By the calcination of preformed hollow ZIF-8 NPs, we show that a hollow Zn monoatom/N-doped porous carbon (HPC-800) exhibits a wide range of photoreactions in the range of 230–800 nm, resulting in ultrahigh monoatom Zn and uniform N active site loads. The efficient photocatalytic reduction of CO2 at ambient temperature was achieved.
6 Research on photocatalytic mechanism of MOFs
Because of their large specific surface area, regular pore diameters, plentiful catalytic sites, and tunable metal frame architectures, MOFs have tremendous promise for photocatalytic water pollutant degradation, photocatalytic water splitting for hydrogen production, and photocatalytic CO2 reduction.223 Therefore, there are two basic theories of MOFs in the field of photocatalysis: one is MOFs that show good semiconductor properties and follow the semiconductor theory i.e., when MOFs is irradiated, the electrons produced by light leap from VB to CB and produce holes (h+) in VB. In this case, the photogenerated carrier e− (i.e., the photogenerated electron) has strong reducing property, the hole h+ has strong oxidizing property, and the two participate in redox reaction before recombination.
Another theory is the HOMO–LUMO theory. When a MOF is illuminated, its organic ligands absorb light, which excites them to produce electrons. These electrons are then transported from the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) to the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) and finally to the surface of the metal-oxide cluster, which is LMCT. Electrons are stimulated from the ligand donor orbital to the metal acceptor orbital when the metal center is lowered to a lower state, enabling them to absorb photons with reduced energy. In MLCT, the organic ligands of MOFs provide an empty, stable orbital when the metal core is oxidized to a higher valence state. As a result of electrons being excited from the local orbitals of the occupied metal to the local orbitals of the unoccupied ligand, long-wavelength light is absorbed.17
However, unlike TiO2 and other traditional semiconductors,224,225 there have been extensive and mature researches on the photocatalytic mechanism. As the “future star” in the field of photocatalytic application, the relevant researches on MOF materials not only started late but also brought about many design and modification strategies due to the complex quantity and variety of MOFs and the adjustable and controllable structure. It also shows that the further research of MOFs in related fields is disorganized. Therefore, in this chapter, we try to explain the specific mechanisms of MOFs in different fields of photocatalytic degradation of water pollutants, photocatalytic water splitting, and photocatalytic CO2 reduction from a further perspective in a more comprehensive and in-depth way and look forward to more outstanding contributions from the later generations in related fields.
6.1 Mechanisms of photocatalytic degradation of water pollutants based on MOFs
When it comes to the photocatalytic destruction of water pollutants, the hydroxyl radical (OH−) that is created by photogenerated electrons has a larger oxidation potential than H2O molecules and OH−. It may also directly oxidize, degrade, and adsorb tiny organic molecules that are present on the surface. Direct oxidation and degradation of organic contaminants is possible using alpha-hydroxyl radicals. Pollutants can be degraded by superoxide free radicals (–O2), which are formed when O2 traps e−.
For example, Xiaoyu Deng et al.226 reported the microwave-assisted synthesis of MOF-253-Ru(dcbpy)2, which coordinated with Ru(II) by opening the N,N′ chelating site in Ru(dcbpy)2Cl2. It was employed to create a supporting Ru complex with dcbpy (MOF-253-Ru(dcbpy)2), and it was successful in photocatalyzing the simultaneous reduction of CO2 to formic acid and CO as well as the semi-hydrogenation of 1,2,3,4-tetrahydroisoquinoline (THIQ) to produce 3,4-dihydroisoquinoline (DHIQ).
The mechanism of successfully coupling photocatalytic carbon dioxide reduction with THIQ dehydrogenation to produce DHIQ on MOF-253-Ru(dcbpy)2 is shown below. The MOF-253-Ru(dcbpy)2, such as the uniform [Ru(bpy)3]Cl2, may be stimulated to its excited state [MOF-253-RuII(dcbpy)]* (step 1). The excited state is quenched by THIQ, resulting in the creation of [MOF-253-RuI(dbbpy)], which is accompanied by the synthesis of tetrahydroquinoline radical cations (steps 2 and 3). Because THIQ has a low positive potential relative to E ([Ru(bpy)3]2+*/[Ru(bpy)3]+) during photocatalytic dehydrogenation, when DHIQ is formed on uniform [Ru(bpy)3]Cl2, a reductive quenching route has been proposed. The semi-hydrogenated product of tetrahydroquinoline, [DHIQ], is formed when the tetrahydroquinoline cation releases two protons and an additional electron, similar to the situation of [Ru(bpy)3]Cl2 (step 4) (Fig. 34).
 Fig. 34  Proposed mechanism of photocatalytic reduction of CO2 reduction and dehydrogenation by THIQ under visible light. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 226 with permission from Deng, X., copyright 2019. 
p-Aminobenzene sulfonic acid (p-ASA) is a typical benzene arsenic acid chemical that is frequently utilized as an animal feed ingredient. However, water-soluble p-ASA degrades into extremely hazardous inorganic arsenic species (such arsenates) through biological and abiotic processes within 30 days of excretion in feces. As a result, soil and groundwater are significantly contaminated with arsenic.139 Chen Tian et al.227 created an amine-modified UiO-67 (UIO-67-NH2) MOF with a 2-fold better p-ASA adsorption affinity than the original UiO-67. At low concentrations (5 mg L−1), UiO-67-NH2 may remove p-ASA from simulated natural water and wastewater. Results from prolonged EXAFS and XPS demonstrate that As–O–Zr coordination, hydrogen bonding, and π–π packing are all involved in the adsorption process, with As–O–Zr coordination serving as the major driving factor. Amino groups improve the adsorption affinity by enhancing As–O–Zr coordination and π–π stacking as well as by generating additional adsorption sites via hydrogen bonding.
To further explore the potential interaction between UiO-67 and UIO-67-NH2(2) and p-ASA by DFT calculations, Tian also obtained the potential interaction between UiO-67 and UIO-67-NH2 and p-ASA at the molecular level. For UiO-67, the As–O–Zr coordination clearly has the largest interaction energy and is thought to have the best adsorption power. The EXAFS study above is compatible with the ideal Zr node and p-ASA molecule configurations, which show that a binuclear As–O–Zr complex forms after adsorption. In addition, the comparatively high adsorption energy (−40.2 kJ mol−1) of the p-ASA and UiO-67-interaction implies that π–π stacking also exerts a significant influence on adsorption.
The adsorbed UiO-67-NH2 samples treated with amine included the As–O–Zr binary binuclear complex, π–π accumulation, and hydrogen bond. In addition, it is evident that UIO-67-NH2(2) has greater binding energies for the As–O–Zr coordination and interactions than the original UIO-67 while having shorter As–Zr atomic distances and benzene torus center distances (Fig. 35). These findings show that modifying NH2 improves As–O–Zr coordination and π–π stacking. Furthermore, the hydrogen bonding between the –NH2 group and UiO-67-NH2(2) allows for the insertion of another adsorption site for p-ASA. Further enhancing the adsorption affinity is its ideal structure, which is NH–O with a bond energy of −52.4 kJ mol−1. The EXAFS and XPS studies back up these findings. The interaction energy is distributed in the following sequence: DFT calculations show that p-ASA molecules are adsorbed on UiO-67-NH2(2) in a single layer because they go from UiO-67-NH2(2) and p-ASA to water molecules and p-ASA to p-ASA and p-ASA since the p-ASA molecule bound to UiO-67-NH2 prevents further absorption of the free p-ASA molecule. In summary, As–O–Zr coordination, π–π packing, and hydrogen bonding work together to cause p-ASA to form a monolayer adsorption on the surface of UiO-67-NH2(2). It is vital to remember that the amino group on UiO-67-NH2(2) creates a new adsorption site through hydrogen bonding and improves As–O–Zr coordination and π–π stacking, all of which are crucial for increasing the adsorption affinity.
 Fig. 35  Perspective views of (a) UiO-67, (b) UiO-67-NH2(1), and (c) UiO-67-NH2(2); (d) structure of the defective Zr6 node. (e) BPDC linker for UiO-67 and its –NH2 modified forms for UiO-67-NH2(1) and UiO-67-NH2(2). (f) Adsorption mechanism of UiO-67-NH2 toward p-ASA. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 227 with permission from Tian, C., copyright 2018. 
Aiwen Wang et al.163 calcined MOFs to create an N-doped ZnO carbon framework, then grew layered Bi2MoO6 nanosheets on its surface to create S-type heterojunctions with a photodegradation efficiency ten times that of ZIF-8's sulfamethoxazole (SMX).
N–ZnO/C@BiM heterojunction should be a traditional type II heterojunction based on the band position as N–ZnO/C and Bi2MoO6 are both N-type semiconductors. The h+ migrates from the VBM of N–ZnO/C to the VBM of Bi2MoO6, and the e− that was isolated from the Bi2MoO6 CBM migrates to the CNM of N–ZnO/C. Through DFT calculations, Wang demonstrated the heterojunction structure's charge transport channel. The research revealed that in comparison to the Bi2MoO6 (001) surface, which has a work function of 5.98 eV, the N–ZnO/C (001) surface is expected to have a work function of 6.40 eV. This discrepancy suggests that charge transfer occurs at the interface between N–ZnO/C and Bi2MoO6.
The band edges of N–ZnO/C are curved downward owing to electron accumulation,228 whereas the band edges of Bi2MoO6 are bent upward due to electron loss. The surface of Bi2MoO6 is positively charged at the contact, whereas N–ZnO/surface C's is negatively charged. A built-in electric field will be created at the interface as a result of this charge transfer. Wang thus proposed a charge transfer pathway for a MOF-driven N–ZnO/C@BiM photocatalyst that uses light to stimulate N–ZnO/C and e− of Bi2MoO6 from VBM to CBM. The banded edges and internal electric field bending not only cause h+ recombination of e− and Bi2MoO6 stimulated by N–ZnO/C, but they also inhibit e− and h+ recombination in N–ZnO/C and Bi2MoO6. While maintaining the CB of Bi2MoO6 and usable e− and h+ in the VBM of N–ZnO/C; this S-type heterojunction mechanism consumes some ineffective electrons in the CBM of N–ZnO/C and h+ in the VBM of Bi2MoO6. As a result, the extraordinarily high redox capacity of N–ZnO/C@BiM is provided via this charge carrier transfer mechanism.
The HOMO orbitals of SMX are mostly found on one side of the benzene ring, in the areas of the electrically-rich atoms C2, C4, C6, N8, N17, N22, and O21, according to the further DFT simulations of the active sites of SMX organic compounds. The primary species that were active were h+ and OH−. The main method of SMX degradation is electrophilic and free radical attack. A prominent oxidation consequence of SMX is the oxidation byproduct TP1. N8 is the most energetic pro-potential point in SMX, making it simple to generate when attacked by h+ and OH−. Due to the electrophilicity of the C4 and C6 atoms, it is further hydroxylated to produce TP2, and it may also be oxidized to generate TP3 by cleaving the C–N and C–C bonds.
In addition, the coupling process between two SMX molecules creates a self-coupled product (TP17), which can then be further hydroxylated to create TP18. Since the bond order between C5 and N8 is low (1.056), hydroxyl groups can substitute for SMX in electrophilic reactions to generate TP5 and TP7. TP6 may also be produced from TP5 simultaneously because of the electrophilicity of O21 and N22, and the bond order of 1.014. The key places where the hydroxyl group reacts to generate the hydroxylated version of SMX are the C4 and C6 atoms in the aromatic ring of SMX (TP9).
The strong electrophilicity of N17 and the low key position of N17-S1 (1.145) allow for further conversion to TP10, or the N17–S1 bond can be broken to create TP4 instead. The hydrolysis of SMX can result in the formation of TP8, TP19, TP11, and TP12 because of the low bond orders of C18–N17 and S1–C2 (0.901 and 1.099, respectively). Demethylation, however, is likewise a route for SMX to degrade. Since the bonds between C5–N8 and C20–C24 are weak, SMX can be demethylated during the reaction to create TP13 and then demethylated again to create TP14. To create the products TP15 and TP16,229 the S–N link is broken. All the intermediates ultimately undergo further reactions to produce smaller molecules or mineralize as carbon dioxide and water (Fig. 36).
 Fig. 36  Possible transformation pathways of SMX by (a) N–ZnO/C@BiM (b) HOMO (c) and bond order (d) of SMX. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 163 with permission from Wang, A., copyright 2022. 
6.2 Mechanisms of photocatalytic water splitting for hydrogen production based on MOFs
The splitting reaction of water is an energy-intensive process from a thermodynamic perspective. With a 237 kJ mol−1 increase in standard Gibbs free energy, photocatalytic water splitting is a Gibbs free energy-increasing process. In addition, the bandgap of MOFs should be between 1.23 and 3.0 eV, where the top of the valence band is more positive than the redox potential of O2/H2O and that the bottom of the conduction band is more negative than the redox potential of H+/H2 (0 V vs. NHE) (1.23 V).2H+ + 2e− → H2 Hydrogen evolution half reaction (HER)
Since HER requires electrons produced by two photons, it is essential to transport two equivalent excited states or electrons to the same catalytic center within a very short time interval. In the molecular catalytic center of HER half-reaction, [(TCPP)Pt], where TCPP = medium tetrakis(4-carboxyphenyl)porphyrin, showed a very high turnover frequency (TOF),230 which is 35 h−1.
Since HER requires electrons created by two photons, transporting two equivalent excited states or electrons to the same catalytic site in a very short time interval is critical. The turnover frequency (TOF) at the HER half-reaction's molecular catalytic core, [(TCPP)Pt], where TCPP = medium tetracycline(4-carboxyphenyl)porphyrin, was 35 h−1.230 For example, Huihui Hu et al.64 reported a nanophotocatalyst that combined MOF nanosheets with [(TCPP)Pt] with the structure of liposome and analyzed the process and principle of photocatalytic water separation in the liposome-MOF component in detail through various characterization methods.
The hydrogen evolutionary process's transport routes are shown by the findings of fsTA as follows: HER-MOF with [(TCPP)Zn] and [(TCPP)Pt] has a 655 nm SE signal, as opposed to Hf-[(TCPP)Zn]-MOF or Hf-[(TCPP)Pt]-MOF. The lifetime of electrons in HER-MOF is decreased to 1.5 s by mixing (TCPP)Pt with MOF, which may be attributed to the dissociation of exciton states to form [(TCPP)Pt]− and [(TCPP)Zn]+. This demonstrates that the electronic coupling between [(TCPP)Zn] and [(TCPP)Pt] produces a new exciton state, S1mix. The final decay of the [(TCPP)Zn]+ component occurs with a time constant of 0.32 ms, which is equal to the rate of charge recombination. Hu concluded that [(TCPP)Zn] and [(TCPP)Pt] separated due to light, which is how HER happened. The resultant [(TCPP)Pt]− is then protonated to [(TCPP)Pt–H], which receives an additional electron and a subsequent proton to release an H2 molecule.
On the other hand, Hu also designed a WOR-MOF constructed with Zr and Ru bimetallic ion centers to study the water oxidation half reaction of photocatalytic water separation. The findings of the fsTA spectra demonstrated that the addition of Fe3+ (37 mM) to the solution of WOR-MOF resulted in considerable alterations even within the first 660 fs. The generation of [Ru]3+ from [Ru]2+* is consistent with the differential spectra associated with the decay of the initial components ([Ru]3+/[Ru]2+* 0.35 V NHE versus Fe3+/Fe2+ 0.77 V NHE), indicating that WOR is initiated by the photooxidation of Fe3+ to [Ru]2+*, producing [Ru]3+, which is then oxidized to [(BPYDC)Ir] in water.
Hu combined the two MOF materials and successfully built a “Z-scheme” by embedding them in the hydrophobic bilayer (HER-MOF) and hydrophilic interior (WOL-MOF) of the lipid layer, which combined the photocatalytic water separation of the HER half-reaction and the WOR half-reaction to form a complete photocatalytic cycle.
The whole water separation process was started by the photooxidation of [Ru]2+ in WOL-MOF by Fe3+, and then the hole was transferred to the Ir(III) center, producing Ir(IV/V) species, oxidizing the water to O2, and producing a proton. This resulted in a fully functional photocatalytic water separation process. When the Fe2+ produced by this reaction reacts with TCBQ at the lipid/water interface, Fe3+ and reduced TCBQH are formed. Water provides the protons for TCBQH. In the HER-MOF, the other photon excites [(TCPP)Zn] or [(TCPP)Pt] into the exciton tristate, which after charge separation produces [(TCPP)Pt]− and [(TCPP)Zn]+. [(TCPP)Zn]+ oxidizes TCBQH into TCBQ and releases protons to complete the water separation cycle; [(TCPP)Pt]− is protonated into [(TCPP)Pt–H], which absorbs an additional electron and proton and releases H2 (Fig. 37).
 Fig. 37  (a) The fsTA spectra of the Hf-[(TCPP)Zn]-MOF, HER-MOF, and Hf-[(TCPP)Pt]-MOF. (b) Time trace nsTA spectra at 490 nm of Hf-[(TCPP)Zn]-MOF and HER-MOF. (c) Time trace nsTA spectra at 490 nm of the HER-MOF and HER-MOF + 0.015 mM phenol. (d) The fsTA spectra of the WOR-MOF, WOR-MOF + FeCl3, and WOR-MOF + Na2S2O8 at 5ps. (e) Photocatalytic hydrogen evolution cycle and photocatalytic water oxidation cycle. (f) Energy level diagram of overall water splitting. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 64 with permission from Hu, H., copyright 2021. 
Sizhuo Yang et al.231 created a new single-point photocatalyst (Co-Ru-UIO-67(bpy)) on the basis of a metal–organic framework platform that includes molecular photosensitizers and catalysts. In addition to having remarkable activity for light-driven hydrogen synthesis, the catalyst can also be recovered without losing that activity, according to the experimental results. Using a combination of optical transient absorption spectroscopy and in situ X-ray absorption spectroscopy, Yang not only identified the rate-limiting steps in the catalytic cycle but also captured key CoI intermediate species formed after ultrafine charge transfer from the bound photosensitizer, giving insight into the catalytic mechanisms of these unitary metal–organic frame photocatalysts.
Fig. 38(c) illustrates a widely used method for photoinduced proton reduction. It starts with PS absorbing light before going through two charge separation (CS) processes, in which the excited PS's electrons are transferred to the catalyst and the holes are extracted to the electron donor via a reduction or oxidation cycle. As a result, studying the kinetics of light collection and charge separation in Co–Ru-UIO-67(bpy) is critical for understanding how its catalytic activity works mechanistically.
 Fig. 38  (a) Time profile of H2 production by Co–Ru-UIO-67(bpy). (b) Recovery of the Co–Ru-UIO-67(bpy) catalyst after several 5 h experiments. (c) Generally accepted catalytic pathway for the photoinduced generation of H2 with molecular photosensitizers (PS) and catalysts. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 231 with permission from Yang, S., copyright 2018. 
The author investigated the excited states (ES) and CS dynamics of Co–Ru-UIO-67(bpy) MOFs using transient absorption (TA) spectroscopy. To demonstrate the inherent ES dynamics of the Ru complex in the UIO-67(bpy) framework in the absence of Co catalyst species, Ru-UIO-67(bpy) was employed as a control sample. The two primary spectral characteristics in the TA spectra of Ru-UIO-67(bpy) are a large absorption band >560 nm and a negative band with a center wavelength of 513 nm, which are both caused by the ground state bleaching (GSB) and ES absorption of the Ru complex, respectively. The recovery of GSB follows the same kinetics as the decay of ES, and there is an analogous point at 556 nm, showing that the sole recombination mechanism is the decay of ES molecules to their GS. The TA spectrum of Co–Ru-UIO-67(bpy) includes a GSB band as well as a broad ES band. In the spectra of Co–Ru-UIO-67(bpy), however, the middle of the GSB band exhibits a noticeable blue shift when compared to Ru-UIO-67(bpy). Because a minor TA feature is found in the TA spectrum following excitation of Co-UIO-67(bpy) under identical circumstances, this blue shift cannot be the consequence of the direct excitation of the Co complex.
Yang concluded from the in situ EXAFS spectra that the intermediate species is in a Co(I) state with a large Co–L distance. Furthermore, the solvent coordination number increased from 0.38 to 2.37 during catalysis. Given the uncertainty of the coordination number in the fitting process (approximately 0.5 atoms), it is understood to suggest that the majority of Co atoms were unpaired before catalysis, whereas the majority of Co atoms were coordinated by two other atoms during catalysis. A change in the coordination number might be caused by a number of factors, including the coordination of a solvent molecule to a CoI, a TEOA to a CoI, or a by-product to any other remaining CoII other than CoI. Based on in situ measurements, the only plausible intermediate species according to the strategy illustrated in Fig. 38 is CoI.
Lijun Zhang et al.232 used a two-step calcination approach with one of the cobalt-based zeolite imidazole skeletons (ZIF-67) as the precursor material to manufacture a P-doped Co3O4 mixed anionic composite photocatalyst. P@Co3O4 produces 39 times more hydrogen than ZIF-67 and 6.8 times more hydrogen than Co3O4. Density functional theory (DFT) is used to estimate the sample surface's electron delocalization state, which reduces the reaction's energy barrier and promotes the hydrogen evolution process (HER). The unique O(δ−)–CO(δ+)–P(δ−) surface bonding state offers an active location for reaction substrate adsorption and activation as well as making it easier to bridge-isolated electronic states. The improvement of the electron transport channel and the synergistic interaction between catalytic sites at high electron transport rates are the main factors driving the development of photocatalytic hydrogen.
Two models, original Co3O4 and P-doped Co3O4 (P@Co3O4), were constructed for DFT calculation. Fig. 39(b) and (d) illustrate the electrostatic potential (ESP) calculation findings in the middle layer. On the surface of Co3O4, the Co and O atoms form a Lewis acid–base pair. The Co–O bond displayed greater negative ESP once P was largely replaced and strengthened. The aperiodic distribution of the ESP is caused by the peculiar O(δ−)–CO(δ+)–P(δ−) bond state produced on the surface of Co3O4, which facilitates the bridging of the isolated electron state. The phosphorus atom has a lower electronegativity than the oxygen atom, thus having a weak oxidation state. As a result, the integration of P disrupts the symmetry of the initial crystal surface, resulting in a change in ESP on the surface. Furthermore, the Lewis acid–base center created by doping will serve as a site for water molecule adsorption and activation. Fig. 39(e) and (f) show the predicted electronic structure and total state density (DOS) of Co3O4 and P-doped Co3O4. Co3O4 has normal semiconductor characteristics and a bandgap. The bandwidth of P@Co3O4 is greatly decreased, as shown in Fig. 39(f), since certain bands are provided by the P–D hybrid tracks and a hybrid of the Co 3D and P 3P tracks around the Fermi level. The de-domain electrons created by P doping will compensate for voids below the Fermi level in P@Co3O4. Phosphorus addition can hasten photogenerated charge transfer in the photocatalyst. A polar covalent bond is the Co–O bond. As a result, the O atom, as a Lewis base, has difficulty transferring electrons from the Co–O bond to the reaction substrate. P doping promotes electron transport on the P@Co3O4 surface, in addition to making electrons more extraterrestrial around the P site. These modifications expand HER's options on the P@Co3O4 surface.
 Fig. 39  (a) Structural model of Co3O4; (b) electrostatic potential in the middle of the Co3O4 structure; (c) structural model of P-doped P@Co3O4; (d) electrostatic potential in the middle of the P@Co3O4 structure; (e) the electronic energy band structure and density of states (DOS) of Co3O4; and (f) the electronic energy band structure and density of states (DOS) of P@Co3O4. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 232 with permission from Zhang, L., copyright 2021. 
Based on the aforementioned findings, a molecular synergistic mechanism may govern the hydrogen development of an eosin-Y-sensitized P@Co3O4 photocatalyst. When Co3O4 is stimulated, the reducing electrons go to the conduction band, leaving the valence band with strong oxidizing holes. The surface composition and chemical state of Co3O4 were significantly altered by the addition of P. The transport and separation of charge carriers in Co3O4 are significantly enhanced by the P(δ−)–CO(δ+) link. In addition, the creation of proton adsorption sites and the development of H2 are both aided by the P(δ−)–CO(δ+) link. EY functions as an electron transporter during the process by which dye molecules (EY) are activated by visible light and finally fall from the HOMO level to the LUMO level. Under the influence of visible light, EY begins to become EY1* before going through the system to become the more stable EY3*. Then, EY3* removes the electrons from TEOA to produce the highly reactive EY free radical. The photocatalyst's conduction band receives the electrons last. Then, the TEOA donates electrons to EY3*, forming a free radical called EY−. Excellent at reducing substances, EY− ultimately sends electrons to photocatalyst CB to take part in HER. The H2O molecule is then adsorbed onto the transition state created by the lone pair electron in the P 3p orbital adsorbing a proton from the H2O molecule at this stage. The next action is to continue. A protonated transition state is created when electrons from the water molecule's O–H bond are transferred to the oxygen atom. A hydroxyl anion is also produced at the same time. In the end, when exposed to visible light, TEOA injected electrons into Co3O4 to consume photogenic holes, and EY abundantly supplied electrons for the reaction site. The two protons are coupled to produce an H2 molecule at the same time that a homogeneous reaction takes place at the P–H covalent connection. The catalyst can then cycle back and forth through the hydrogen evolutionary process, returning to its starting condition.
6.3 Mechanisms of photocatalytic reduction of CO2 based on MOFs
The multielectron step is generally more advantageous than single-electron reduction in reducing carbon dioxide to fuel precursors, such as CO, because the resulting molecules are more thermodynamically stable.
For example, carbon dioxide reduction often produces carbon monoxide (CO), formic acid (HCO2H), formaldehyde (HCHO), methanol (CH3OH), and CH4 as a result of the reduction of carbon dioxide (Fig. 40). Depending on the circumstances of the experiment, experiments have revealed that up to three of these derivatives can be created concurrently and in varying amounts. It is commonly known that none of the five derivatives, at least not in measurable amounts, are created simultaneously. These findings demonstrate how important experimental circumstances, thermodynamic and kinetic factors, and the overall reaction's outcome are. Protons and electrons are used in the basic process of carbon dioxide reduction, and eight protons and eight electrons are needed to completely convert carbon dioxide to CH4.233
 Fig. 40  Proposed mechanism and sequence of intermediates for the catalytic formation of HCO2H, CO, HCHO, CH3OH, and CH4 from CO2. [M] = a metal center. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 233 with permission from Asselin, P. & Harvey, P. D., copyright 2022. 
A spongy nickel-MOF photocatalyst was designed and synthesized by Kaiyang Niu et al.234 using a photochemical process. The catalyst has a highly concentrated crystalline network structure. With a productivity of roughly 1.6 × 104 μmol g−1 h−1, it is quite active in converting carbon dioxide to carbon monoxide. The process yields approximately 100% selective CO synthesis with no detectable H2 generation.
The majority of the time, stiff ligands, most often aromatic carboxylic acid molecules such as terephthalic acid, are used to coordinate transition metal ions or clusters in MOFs to create their highly ordered crystal structures (TPA). Niu, taking into account that TEG was equivalent to TPA in terms of molecular length, laser-replaced a partly rigid ligand (e.g., TPA) in a traditional MOF with a soft molecule (e.g., TEG). The substitution of TPA linkers with TEG molecules, which lack the carboxyl groups required for a perfect frame structure, may prevent the formation of highly ordered MOF crystals, leading to disordered and deficient metal–organic combinations that are unable to successfully fix carbon dioxide. To do this, Niu used laser-induced solution processes to construct a model of a metal–organic carbon dioxide reduction catalyst that uses the Ni2+ ion as the active metal center, TPA as the stiff linker, TEG as the soft linker, and dimethylformamide (DMF) as the solvent. The synthetic catalyst has a crystal network structure with severe defects and the designation Ni (TPA or TEG). By creating significant defects as a result of mismatches between the soft Ni-TEG units and the hard Ni-TPA units, which are necessary for the spongy Ni (TPA/TEG) network structure, the formation of the Ni-TEG building units by laser light prevented the disordered, spongy Ni (TPA/TEG) from forming.
Given that noble metals have the capacity to decrease carbon dioxide, Niu discovered that when the MOF material was further doped with noble metal nanocrystals, specifically Rh and Ag, formic acid (HCOOH) with a concentration of 29.2 μM and acetic acid (CH3COOH) with a concentration of 72.5 μM were also observed. With the decoration of Rh and Ag nanocrystals, the amount of CO decreased significantly while the amount of liquid products increased significantly. On the Ni (NPA/TEG) catalyst adorned with RH or Ag, formic acid (HCOOH) with a concentration of 313.5 μM and CH3COOH with a concentration of 195.6 μM, respectively, were produced. As a Brønsted base that rapidly interacts with H2O to make CO (CO2− + H2O + e− → CO + 2OH−), Niu suggested creating a basic intermediate in the initial reaction step to facilitate the selective synthesis of CO from CO2. In our proton-deficient photocatalytic reaction medium (pH 8), water (a proton donor) can produce another nonbasic intermediate, H–(H2O + e− → H− + OH−),235 prior to H2 evolution (H2O + e− → H− + OH−). The proton transfer and H2 generation may be limited by the sponge-like Ni (TPA/TEG) catalyst because the Ni-TPA coordination unit does not allow for H binding at the active site. In addition, the adaptable Ni-TEG units, which are structurally well resistant to the water environment, allow for a disordered spongiform network structure in which open and defective structures provide more Ni2+ active sites to capture and stabilize CO2−-derived intermediates, resulting in efficient CO production.
Subsequently, a proton-coupled multielectron reaction procedure can then be used to further reduce the generated CO to liquid fuel. In an electrolyte with a pH of ∼8, HCOOH, CH3COOH, and CH3CH2OH are formed, respectively, by a step of one, four, and eight electrons connected to protons. There are the following reactions to the formation of HCOOH. 
H2O + e− → H˙ + OH−
(1) 
*CO + H˙ → *CHO
(2) 
*CHO + OH− → HCOOH + e−
(3)
On the other hand, *CO is immediately protonated to *CHO and subsequently converted to hydroxyl to form HCOOH. CH3COOH was formed by the continual hydration of *CO into *CHO, *CHOH, *CH2OH, and *CH3OH, which then mixed with adsorbed *CO to produce CH3COOH. The dehydroxylation of the generated CHO may be a crucial rate-limiting step in the production of CH3CH2OH. The generated *C can then be further protonated to , and C–C coupling between *CH3 and the polyprotonated *CO (i.e., CH2OH) can result in the production of CH3CH2OH.
We conducted the CO reduction of Ni (TPA/TEG)–Ag in an electrolyte with a pH of 13 to further tune the suggested reaction. The outcomes demonstrated that the liquid products formed at pH = 8 were considerably different from CH3OH (184.09 μM), CH3CH2OH (149.39 μM), HCOOH (438.98 μM), and CH3COOH (276.99 μM). There are differences between CH3OH (0.0 μM), CH3CH2OH (262.19 μM), HCOOH (263.58 μM), and CH3COOH (1178.04 μM). The production of HCOOH is facilitated by the hydroxylation of *CHO at pH 13, which typically makes hydroxyl ions (OH−) accessible. On the other hand, the kinetics of polyprotonation of *CO and dehydroxylation of *CHO may be inhibited by the increased hydroxylation of *CHO, leading to lower concentrations of CH3COOH and CH3CH2OH at pH 13. A weak C–C interaction between *CH3OH and *CO at pH 13 may be indicated by the existence of CH3OH (leading to CH3COOH at pH 8) (Fig. 41).
 Fig. 41  (A) Proposed design strategy of the disordered spongy Ni (TPA/TEG) composite by introducing soft Ni-TEG building units into a Ni (TPA) framework through laser-chemical reaction. XRD patterns (B), FTIR spectra (C), EDX spectra (D), TGA curves (E), and XPS spectra (F) of the laser-chemical tailored Ni (TPA/TEG) and Ni (TPA) composites. a.u., arbitrary units. (G) Possible conversion pathways leading to the formation of HCOOH, CH3COOH, and CH3CH2OH via proton-coupled one-, four-, and eight-electron steps, respectively. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 234 with permission from Niu, K., copyright 2017. 
To compute and compare the catalytic performance of 2D cobalt–porphyrin organic frameworks, CoO clusters, ZnO clusters, and ZrO clusters as CO2-reduction photocatalysts, Cong Wang et al.236 employed density functional theory (DFT) for CoP, Co-PMOF, Zn-PMOF, and Zr-PMOF, respectively. According to the computed partial state densities (PDOS) of CoP, Co-PMOF, Zn-PMOF, and Zr-PMOF monolayers, only the bandgap of Co-PMOF is significantly reduced by the inclusion of the CoO cluster. In the CB and VB of Co-PMOF monolayers and other states close to Fermi level, the Co 3d state dominates. In contrast, the bands close to the Fermi level are slightly affected by the 3D electrons in the ZnO and ZrO-clusters of n-PMOF and Zr-PMOF monolayers. At the VB and CB, the primary O 2p electrons are similarly dispersed across a large area. Because of this, the energies of CB and VB and the peaks of Zn-PMOF and Zr-PMOF are comparable to those of CoP.
Wang's idea was supported by the Gibbs free energy calculations: the reduction of carbon dioxide starts with the production of *C–Co(I) bonds at the active site and proceeds to hydrogenation to create carboxyl (*COOH) intermediates or formate (*OCHO) intermediates. In the Gibbs free energy diagram, the formation of *COOH on these monolayers has internal heats of 0.24, 0.27, 0.28, and 0.26 eV, respectively, while the formation of *OCHO has internal heats of 0.92, 0.84, 0.94, and 0.91 eV, respectively, and is significantly more challenging than the formation of *COOH. Therefore, it is not necessary to take into account the steps that come after the OCHO intermediate. By interacting with protons and transferring electrons, COOH intermediates can continue to hydrogenate and create CO intermediates. Following this, there are two potential intermediates that can result from the hydrogenation of CO, with the creation of CHO being the more prevalent. Similar to *CHO, *CH2O, or *CHOH intermediates can be created by further reducing *CHO. Due to a lower barrier than the creation of *CHOH, the *CH2O intermediate can be hydrogenated to make *CH2OH or *OCH3 intermediates, which can then be further hydrogenated to produce *CH2 or CH3OH. On these catalysts, the synthesis of CH3OH is unquestionably more advantageous than the creation of CH2. In addition, OCH3 intermediates will undergo more hydrogenation to produce CH3OH. Additional calculations revealed that CH3OH might be further oxidized to produce CH4.
Under the catalysis of CoP, Co-PMOF, Zn-, and Zr-PMOF monolayers, the optimal reduction path from CO2 to CH4 is the same.CO2 → *COOH → *CO → *CHO → *CH2O → *CH2OH → CH3OH → *CH3 → CH4.
The important intermediate species in this process that chooses the rate step is *CHO. In contrast to the other three monolayers, the core cobalt PDOS in the Co-PMOF monolayer has a D-band center that is further from the Fermi level, according to the PDOS for the *CHO intermediates. This shows that d electrons are distributed to *CHO in the Co-PMOF monolayer and exhibit clear bonding properties that favor electron conversion over electron transport. The D-band center of the central cobalt PDOS is extremely near the Fermi level in the other three monolayers, indicating that these d electrons are more likely to be free d electrons (Fig. 42).
 Fig. 42  (I) PDOS of Co-PMOF monolayers. (II) Band edge positions of the CBM and VBM with CO2/CH4 potential. (III) Work functions of Co-PMOF monolayers. (IV) Gibbs free energy diagrams (ΔG's) of CO2 reduction for Co-PMOF monolayers. (V) PDOS of *CHO intermediates adsorbed on Co-PMOF monolayers. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 236 with permission from Wang, C., copyright 2019. 
Wang's conclusion was also confirmed by Jian Li et al.237 in the study of C1 intermediates in the sun-driven reduction of carbon dioxide to CH4. By embedding bimetallic site pairs into an MOF, Li obtained MOF-808-CuNi, achieving a 99.4% product selection rate and a yield of 158.7 μmol g−1 h−1 (TEOA as a sacrificial agent).
According to ESR measurements and DFT calculations, the MOF-808-CuNi system's electron transfer pathway involves electrons moving from the Zr-oxo cluster to the Cu and Ni metal sites before connecting with additional CO2 molecules. Further, DFT calculation results elucidate the intermediate path of CO2 photocatalytic reduction in more detail.
Wang's results are consistent with the COOH* intermediate route being used in the CO2 photoreduction on MOF-808-CuNi. The Cu–C and Ni–O bonds in the MOF-808-CuNi system cause  to be activated. Despite the fact that both of CO2 protonation's stages are internal (+5 and +23 kJ mol−1), the first protonation step leads to the synthesis of COOH*, which is more thermodynamically and kinetically viable than the formation of HCOO* with its activated Gibbs free energy of 54 vs. 115 kJ mol−1. When the generated COOH* is protonated, HCOOH* is created, which has a significant external energy reaction energy (−83 kJ mol−1). The creation of CO*, whose energy-draining Gibbs free reaction energy is −21 kJ mol−1, results from a different reaction pathway of COOH* protonation. The production of CO* is spontaneous, according to DFT calculations; however, the formation of HCOOH* necessitates overcoming a kinetic barrier of 63 kJ mol−1 despite the fact that the formation of HCOOH is thermodynamically more advantageous. The high desorption energies of +94 and +65 kJ mol−1, respectively, make it challenging to remove CO* and HCOOH* from Cu/Ni DMSPs. This is supported by the fact that the experiment's results showed no HCOOH products and only a very low rate of CO generation (2.3 μmol g−1 h−1). Calculating the Gibbs free energy reveals that the MOF-808-CuNi's CO hydrogenation rate is significantly higher than its CO desorption rate, which severely restricts CO desorption.
While the conversion of HCOOH* to HCO*, which would have required a high activated Gibbs free energy of 91 kJ mol−1, was not possible, the generated CO* was further converted to HCO* at a low energy barrier of 39 kJ mol−1. The two succeeding protonation stages that result in the creation of methoxy (H3CO*) are kinetically dependent at HCO* formation and have activated Gibbs free energies of 51 and 69 kJ mol−1, respectively. Then, the production of the CH3OH* intermediate breaks through the 50 kJ mol−1 barrier with an exothermic impact of −18 kJ mol−1. According to the DFT studies, the desorption of CH3OH is challenging due to its high desorption energy of +174 kJ mol−1. A further dehydration process turns the CH3OH* into CH3. The in situ DRIFTS data provide the final assurance that CH4 is produced from  (Fig. 43).
 Fig. 43  (a) Isosurfaces (level 0.005) of charge density differences on MOF-808-EDTA with Cu2+ and Ni2+. (b), Isosurfaces (level 0.005) of charge density differences on MOF-808-CuNi with CO2 molecules. (c) In situ DRIFTS spectra. (d) Gibbs free energy diagram. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 237 with permission from Li, J., copyright 2021. 
Currently, the photocatalytic CO2 reduction reaction's primary products are primarily restricted to C1, such as CO,238 CH4,239 and HCOOH. It is difficult to manufacture useful C2+ products such as ethanol because of the low usage efficiency of multiple electrons and the delayed coupling kinetics of C–C. Among them, how to effectively adsorb the key intermediate *CO and reduce the activation energy of 7 coupling into *COCO is the key. On the basis of CO2 photocatalytic conversion of C1 products, Hainan Shi et al.240 further studied the mechanism of CO2 conversion of C2 products driven by visible light. Shi achieved a yield of 28.5 μmol g−1 h−1 and a high selectivity of 92% by dispersing In and Cu atoms linked to PCN.
The photocatalytic conversion of CO2 to ethanol involves several processes and numerous intermediates. One of them, CO, is recognized as a crucial intermediary in the conversion of CO2 to ethanol. Notably, the dimerization of two *CO will produce C2, whereas the desorption of *CO will result in the creation of CO. Shi employs DRIFTS to evaluate the catalyst's adsorption to the CO intermediate. After an N2 purge for some time, there is no discernible DRIFTS signal for Cu/PCN, showing that the chemisorption of CO on Cu/PCN is weak at ambient temperature and pressure. However, for InCu/PCN and In/PCN (moving from the saturation curve to 2124 and 2165 cm−1, respectively), two residual CO adsorption peaks were consistently seen, demonstrating a significant chemical interaction between InCu/PCN and CO. This confirmed that In species significantly improved the adsorption of key intermediate *CO In In–Cu coupling.
Fig. 44(b) depicts the in situ DRIFTS spectra obtained during the carbon dioxide photoreduction process. The stretches of adsorbed CO32−, HCO3−, and CO2 are measured at maxima of 1339 cm−1, 1472 cm−1, and 1685 cm−1, respectively. Importantly, the formation of C2 products was shown by the observation of a crucial intermediate, COCO, at about 1710 cm−1, where its intensity gradually increased with irradiation duration. The faint peak, measuring 1398 cm−1, is due to *C2H5O, which is involved in the production of ethanol. A crucial intermediary in the conversion of carbon dioxide into CO, CH4, and other compounds such as *COOH, which is indexed for peaks at about 1654 and 1542 cm−1. Similar to this, in situ DRIFTS spectra for CO2 photoreduction on Cu/PCN are obtained. It was evident when comparing the two sets of data that the reaction intermediates found on InCu/PCN and Cu/PCN were extremely similar, indicating that Cu species are the primary active sites for C–C coupling.
 Fig. 44  (a) DRIFTS spectra obtained during CO desorption on InCu/PCN. (b) In situ DRIFTS spectra obtained at different irradiation times during CO2 photoreduction on InCu/PCN. (c) Charge-density difference plot of InCu/PCN. (d) Gibbs free energy diagrams and CO2 to ethanol photoreduction pathways on InCu/PCN, Cu/PCN, and In/PCN. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 240 with permission from Shi, H., copyright 2022. 
Subsequent DFT calculations provided us with the intermediate process of InCu/PCN photoinduction of carbon dioxide into C2. The first active site, copper, activated carbon dioxide to produce the intermediates *COOH and *CO, as well as some *CO desorption to CO. To create a second *CO intermediate, the indium site next to copper adsorbs the *CO that has been removed from the copper site. The Cu–N–In span In InCu/PCN, two *CO species, can couple to create *COCO intermediates at the InCu site, which can then undergo hydrogenation to create *COCOH. *COOH eventually produces a series of cascading water. On copper, *CHOHCH2OH finally dehydrates to *CHCH2OH, which undergoes hydrogenation and is ultimately transformed to ethanol.
7 Conclusion and perspective
7.1 Conclusion
Catalysis plays a significant role in both industrial and laboratory chemical transformations, and the sunlight-driven photocatalysis technology is key to solving energy crises and environmental problems. MOFs materials have piqued the interest of many researchers due to their enormous potential in this sector. MOFs have a well-defined, tunable, and controllable structure with specific pores, which offer an advantage over traditional heterogeneous catalysts, as well as the ability to selectively introduce substrates.
In the design of target MOFs materials, the composition of MOFs, bandgap engineering, application of photosensitized molecules, π–π stacking, and activation of porous structures are given priority. The IRMOFs series, ZIF series, MILs series, and PCNs series are among the traditional MOFs that are the focus of the majority of present research on MOF-based photocatalysts. However, most MOFs lack redox activity, making them almost impossible to drive solar energy. Therefore, several researchers are also focused on MOF modification, including the loading of semiconductors or cocatalysts, the application of LSPR effect, the construction of Z-type heterojunctions, the introduction of amine group functionalization, and the regulation of mixed linked body MOFs.
When using MOFs as heterogeneous photocatalysts, the active sites, such as metal nodes, organic ligands, and guest species, should be given priority as they are directly connected to photocatalytic activity. In the design of MOF materials, functional metal nodes or organic ligands can be chosen as active sites since their photocatalytic ability can be controlled by adjusting the active sites. Alternatively, active sites can be added to MOFs through post-modification techniques for functional and structural design and adjustment.
With the continuous development of heterogeneous photocatalysts based on MOFs, researchers have successfully applied more and more MOFs in photocatalytic degradation, photocatalytic water splitting, and photocatalytic reduction of CO2 based on MOF-based design and modification strategies. However, many MOFs have poor hydrothermal stability, making them highly dependent on electron sacrificial agents for photocatalytic applications and difficult to perform photothermal coupling, unlike many traditional semiconductor materials.
Therefore, utilizing MOFs as starting materials for synthetic catalytic materials may provide a solution to the aforementioned issues. The unique structure of MOFs obtained through thermal decomposition allows the synthesized heterogeneous catalysts to retain the unique controllable porosity and structural morphology of MOFs, while also making the introduction of photothermal coupling possible. However, as the latest research results in this field, the morphological changes of heterogeneous photocatalysts induced by MOFs during the pyrolysis process have been rarely reported and are still highly uncertain.
Despite their potential, MOFs still face numerous challenges in their use for optical catalysis. For instance, MOFs are often perceived as semiconductors, but their inorganic–organic alternating infinite network structure means that they lack obvious semiconductor characteristics. In addition, MOF-based photocatalysts, which contain many organic ligands, produce a significant amount of excitons and a clear exciton energy transfer mechanism. As such, research on the exciton effect in MOFs photocatalysis requires further attention.
Another issue is that the majority of the current mainstream photocatalytic MOFs have a relatively fixed structural composition, with most metal centers being Zr and Ti, and most organic ligands being photosensitive porphyrin macromolecules. When screening novel MOFs photocatalyst materials, it is crucial to explore new metal sites or organic ligands. Furthermore, the metal core of MOFs, loaded nanoparticles, and semiconductors work together to catalyze the reaction in heterogeneous photocatalysis based on MOFs. Research into the modification technique that involves linking functional groups and ligands, combining metal nodes, and creating additional synergies should be continued.
These challenges call for more comprehensive and in-depth discussions on the photocatalytic mechanism of MOFs. Due to the wide variety of MOFs and their adjustable and controllable structure, many researchers are uncertain about the design and modification strategies. Therefore, in this review, we aim to provide a more detailed explanation of the unique mechanisms of MOFs in photocatalytic water pollution degradation, photocatalytic water separation, and photocatalytic CO2 reduction. We also examine the photocatalytic mechanism of MOF-based heterogeneous photocatalysts from various angles. The relationship between different photocatalytic mechanisms proposed by different techniques, such as in situ characterization and density functional calculation, is discussed systematically, and we expect future research to make further outstanding contributions in related fields.
7.2 Perspective
The structure–activity link for MOF-based photocatalysts is challenging to establish due to their complex and diverse structures. Currently, research on MOFs is focused on synthesizing more intricate structures with enhanced functions and improved stability, with performance studies in specific application areas receiving increasing attention. For instance, the synthesis of MOFs for CO2 reduction requires not only high yield, but also higher product types and selectivity. Methane, methanol, and formic acid are generally preferred over carbon monoxide in research, and the pursuit of long carbon chain compounds has imposed new requirements on MOFs. The performance of MOFs with identical crystal structures but differing connecting nodes varies. Despite studying numerous MOF types, achieving consistent pore diameters and organized mesoporous pores in the framework remains challenging. MOF performance research has gained prominence as MOF synthesis and application have become inseparable. MOFs used in the photocatalytic degradation of water contaminants, photocatalytic water splitting, and photocatalytic CO2 reduction have become increasingly specialized and focused on the heterogeneous photocatalysis field.
Despite the significant progress in the design, creation, and use of heterogeneous photocatalysts based on MOFs, there are still several challenges that need to be addressed. These challenges include
(1) Preserving the fundamental structure of MOF-based photocatalysts in semi-industrial production processes while ensuring high yield. Furthermore, there is a need to explore new preparation technologies that do not require the use of excessive energy or chemicals.
(2) Reducing the dependence of MOF-based photocatalysts on electron sacrificial agents as achieving high photocatalytic activity under more general conditions remains a challenge.
(3) Improving the homogeneity and monodispersity of nano-MOF-based photocatalysts to ensure better catalytic activity and expanding the use of monoatomic catalysts on MOFs.
(4) Directly catalyzing CO2 synthesis of C2+ products with heterogeneous photocatalysts based on MOFs to promote sustainable utilization of resources.
(5) Enhancing the hydrothermal stability of MOF-based photocatalysts to facilitate their widespread practical use. This can be achieved through the preparation of nanocomposite catalysts induced by MOFs as a precursor sacrificial agent.
(6) Incorporating defects into heterogeneous photocatalysts based on MOFs and regulating their concentration and chemical characteristics.
(7) Conducting more specific and in-depth quantitative research to determine the specific photocatalytic mechanism of heterogeneous photocatalysts based on MOFs. This includes utilizing in situ characterization techniques such as in situ Raman, in situ XAFS, in situ FT-IR, and density functional theory (DFT) computation.
Abbreviations

1DOne-dimensional
2DTwo-dimensional
3DThree-dimensional
ABHB4,4′-(Anthracene-9,10-diyl)bis(2-hydroxybenzoic acid)
ACPAlkaline phosphatase
AOPAdvanced oxidation process
AQEApparent quantum efficiency
BDCp-Benzenedicarboxylic acid
BETBrunauer–Emmett–Teller
BPABisphenol A
BSABovine serum albumin
bpy2,2′-Bipyridine
CBConduction band
CPCo-polymer
CSCharge separation
CIPCiprofloxacin
CNTsCarbon nanotubes
COFsCovalent organic frameworks
dcbpyDicarboxy-2,2′-bipyridine
DEADiethylamine
DEFn-Diethylformamide
DETADiethylenetriamine
DHIQ3,4-Dihydroisoquinoline
DFDiclofenac
DFTDensity functional theory
DMFn-Dimethylformamide
DMSODimethyl sulfoxide
DOSDensity of states
DRSDiffuse reflection spectra
EaActivation energy
EDSEnergy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy
EDLCsElectric double layer capacitors
EISElectrochemical impedance spectroscopy
EHPPhotogenerated electron–hole pair
ENEthylenediamine
ETElectron transfer
EPRElectron paramagnetic resonance
ESRElectron spin resonance spectroscopy
EXAFSX-ray absorption fine structure
fsTAFemtosecond and nanosecond transient absorption spectroscopies
FTIRFourier-transform infrared spectrometry
GCEGlassy carbon electrode
g-C3N4Graphite carbon nitride
GOGraphene oxide
H2TCPPTetrakis(4-carboxyphenyl)porphyrin
HERHydrogen evolution reaction
HOMOHighest occupied molecular orbital
HSABHard/soft acid/base principle
IRMOFsIsoreticular metal–organic frameworks
LCCTLigand-cluster charge transfer
LIBsLithium-ion batteries
LMCTLigand–metal charge transfer
LSPRLocal surface plasmon resonance
LUMOLowest unoccupied molecular orbital
LVXLevofloxacin
MBMethylene blue
MILsLavoisier Institute Materials
MLCTMetal-to-ligand charge transfer
MOMethyl orange
MOFsMetal organic frameworks
NH3-SCRNH3 selective catalytic reduction
ORROxygen reduction reaction
PCNsPorous coordination networks
PLPhotoluminescence spectroscopy
PMDPhotochemical molecular device
RhBRhodamine B
rGOReduced graphene oxide
SEMScanning electron microscopy
SBUSecondary building units
SMXSulfamethoxazole
TAInstantaneous absorption spectroscopy
TCTetracycline
TCPPTetrakis(4-carboxyphenyl)porphyrin
TEGTriethylene glycol
TEMTransmission electron microscopy
TETATriethylenetetramine
TEOATriethanolamine
THIQ1,2,3,4-Tetrahydroisoquinoline
TNPTetrakis(4-carboxybiphenyl)naphthalene porphyrin
TONTurnover number
TPATerephthalic acid
UIOUniversity of Oslo
VBValence band
VBMValence band maximum
XTAX-ray transient absorption spectra
XPSX-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
ZIFsZeolite-imidazolite framework

Conflicts of interest
The author declare no conflicts of interest.
AcknowledgementsThis work was Sponsored by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (52076134, 51676127, 51436005, and 51176118), the National Key Research and Development Plan (2016YFC0205200, 2016YFC0208000, and 2017YFB0103501), the Oceanic Interdisciplinary Program of Shanghai Jiao Tong University (SL2022MS006), the Open Research Program of State Key Laboratory of Engines (K2023-06), the National Engineering Laboratory for Mobile Source Emission Control Technology (NELMS2017A07), the National Natural Science Foundation of China for Young Scientists (51306115), the Low Speed Marine Engine Project (CDGC01-KT1203), and the Scientific Research Foundation for the Returned Overseas Chinese Scholars of State Education Ministry.
ReferencesY. Shan, G. He, J. Du, Y. Sun, Z. Liu, Y. Fu, F. Liu, X. Shi, Y. Yu and H. He, Strikingly distinctive NH3-SCR behavior over Cu-SSZ-13 in the presence of NO2, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13(1), 4606 CrossRef CAS .X. Liu, C. Zhu, J. Yin, J. Li, Z. Zhang, J. Li, F. Shui, Z. You, Z. Shi, B. Li, X.-H. Bu, A. Nafady and S. Ma, Installation of synergistic binding sites onto porous organic polymers for efficient removal of perfluorooctanoic acid, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13(1), 2132 CrossRef CAS .K. Geng, et al., Covalent Organic Frameworks: Design, Synthesis, and Functions, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 8814–8933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .N. Stock and S. Biswas, Synthesis of Metal-Organic Frameworks (MOFs): Routes to Various MOF Topologies, Morphologies, and Composites, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 933–969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .N. Seal and S. Neogi, Intrinsic-Unsaturation-Enriched Biporous and Chemorobust Cu(II) Framework for Efficient Catalytic CO2 Fixation and Pore-Fitting Actuated Size-Exclusive Hantzsch Condensation with Mechanistic Validation, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 55123–55135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L.-Q. Wei and B.-H. Ye, Cyclometalated Ir–Zr Metal–Organic Frameworks as Recyclable Visible-Light Photocatalysts for Sulfide Oxidation into Sulfoxide in Water, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 41448–41457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .O. M. Yaghi, G. Li and H. Li, Selective binding and removal of guests in a microporous metal–organic framework, Nature, 1995, 378, 703–706 CrossRef CAS .W.-Q. Zhang, et al., Robust Metal–Organic Framework Containing Benzoselenadiazole for Highly Efficient Aerobic Cross-dehydrogenative Coupling Reactions under Visible Light, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 1005–1007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Hamon, et al., Comparative Study of Hydrogen Sulfide Adsorption in the MIL-53(Al, Cr, Fe), MIL-47(V), MIL-100(Cr), and MIL-101(Cr) Metal−Organic Frameworks at Room Temperature, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8775–8777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. M. Ebrahim, B. Levasseur and T. J. Bandosz, Interactions of NO2 with Zr-Based MOF: Effects of the Size of Organic Linkers on NO2 Adsorption at Ambient Conditions, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 168–174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J.-R. Li, J. Sculley and H.-C. Zhou, Metal–Organic Frameworks for Separations, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 869–932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Yang, D. Fan, W. Hu, B. Pattengale, C. Liu, X. Zhang and J. Huang, Elucidating Charge Separation Dynamics in a Hybrid Metal–Organic Framework Photocatalyst for Light-Driven H2 Evolution, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122(6), 3305–3311 CrossRef CAS .B. Wang, et al., Stable Zr(IV)-Based Metal–Organic Frameworks with Predesigned Functionalized Ligands for Highly Selective Detection of Fe(III) Ions in Water, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 10286–10295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .R. V. Jagadeesh, K. Murugesan, A. S. Alshammari, H. Neumann, M. M. Pohl, J. Radnik and M. Beller, MOF-derived cobalt nanoparticles catalyze a general synthesis of amines, Science, 2017, 358(6361), 326–332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. K. Kar, A. Behera and R. Srivastava, Pd-Embedded Ti Metal–Organic Framework Nanostructures for Photocatalytic Reductive N-Formylation of Nitroarenes in Water, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2022, 5, 464–475 CrossRef CAS .W. Xia, A. Mahmood, R. Zou and Q. Xu, Metal–organic frameworks and their derived nanostructures for electrochemical energy storage and conversion, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8(7), 1837–1866 RSC .M. Tahir, W. K. Fan and B. Tahir, MOF-Based Catalysts for Production of Value-Added Fine Chemicals from Carbon Dioxide, in Metal−Organic Frameworks for Carbon Capture and Energy, American Chemical Society,  2021, vol. 1393, pp. 155–171 Search PubMed .M. Kandiah, M. H. Nilsen, S. Usseglio, S. Jakobsen, U. Olsbye, M. Tilset, C. Larabi, E. A. Quadrelli, F. Bonino and K. P. Lillerud, Synthesis and Stability of Tagged UiO-66 Zr-MOFs, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22(24), 6632–6640 CrossRef CAS .X.-N. Zou, et al., Incorporating Photochromic Triphenylamine into a Zirconium–Organic Framework for Highly Effective Photocatalytic Aerobic Oxidation of Sulfides, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 20137–20144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Eddaoudi, et al., Systematic design of pore size and functionality in isoreticular MOFs and their application in methane storage, Science, 2002, 295, 469–472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Yuan, D. Zhao, D. Sun and H.-C. Zhou, An Isoreticular Series of Metal–Organic Frameworks with Dendritic Hexacarboxylate Ligands and Exceptionally High Gas-Uptake Capacity, Angew. Chem., 2010, 122, 5485–5489 CrossRef .M. H. Rahmani, A. Dehghani, G. Bahlakeh and B. Ramezanzadeh, Introducing GO-based 2D-platform modified via phytic acid molecules decorated by zeolite imidazole ZIF-9 MOFs for designing multi-functional polymeric anticorrosive system; DFT-D computations and experimental studies, J. Mol. Liq., 2022, 364, 119945 CrossRef CAS .X. Cai and D. S. Sholl, Point Defects Control Guest Molecule Diffusion in the 1D Pores of Zn(tbip), J. Phys. Chem. C, 2022, 126, 14321–14328 CrossRef CAS .X. Zhao, et al., Growth of Cu2O Nanoparticles on Two-Dimensional Zr–Ferrocene–Metal–Organic Framework Nanosheets for Photothermally Enhanced Chemodynamic Antibacterial Therapy, Inorg. Chem., 2022, 61, 9328–9338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Kang, S.-H. Wei and Y.-H. Kim, Microscopic Theory of Hysteretic Hydrogen Adsorption in Nanoporous Materials, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1510–1511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Díaz-García, Á. Mayoral, I. Díaz and M. Sánchez-Sánchez, Nanoscaled M-MOF-74 Materials Prepared at Room Temperature, Cryst. Growth Des., 2014, 14, 2479–2487 CrossRef .K. Chen, et al., Cu[Ni(2,3-pyrazinedithiolate)2] Metal–Organic Framework for Electrocatalytic Hydrogen Evolution, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 34419–34427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Liu, et al., Iron-Based Theranostic Nanoplatform for Improving Chemodynamic Therapy of Cancer, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2020, 6, 4834–4845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Feng, C. P. Lv, H. Zhao, Z. Q. Li, W. N. Xie, L. N. Sun and Y. Wang, Structural Elucidation and Supercapacitive Performance on a Mn(II)-Based MOF, Cryst. Growth Des., 2020, 20(9), 5682–5687 CrossRef CAS .M. R. DeStefano, T. Islamoglu, S. J. Garibay, J. T. Hupp and O. K. Farha, Room-Temperature Synthesis of UiO-66 and Thermal Modulation of Densities of Defect Sites, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 1357–1361 CrossRef CAS .M. Gutiérrez, A. F. Möslein and J.-C. Tan, Facile and Fast Transformation of Nonluminescent to Highly Luminescent Metal–Organic Frameworks: Acetone Sensing for Diabetes Diagnosis and Lead Capture from Polluted Water, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 7801–7811 CrossRef PubMed .W.-M. Liao, et al., Semiconductive Amine-Functionalized Co(II)-MOF for Visible-Light-Driven Hydrogen Evolution and CO2 Reduction, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 11436–11442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Prakash, P. Muthuraja, K. Balamurugan, J. Anandha Raj and P. Manisankar, Porous cobalt metal-organic framework with ultracapacitor activity, Mater. Lett., 2018, 222, 8–11 CrossRef CAS .X. Zhao, J. Li, X. Li, P. Huo and W. Shi, Design of metal-organic frameworks (MOFs)-based photocatalyst for solar fuel production and photo-degradation of pollutants, Chin. J. Catal., 2021, 42, 872–903 CrossRef CAS .J. W. Ager and A. A. Lapkin, Chemical storage of renewable energy, Science, 2018, 360(6390), 707–708 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Rezaei, S. E. Abdollahi, S. Abdollahi and S. Filizadeh, Energy managment strategies of battery-ultracapacitor hybrid storage systems for electric vehicles: Review, challenges, and future trends, J. Energy Storage, 2022, 53, 105045 CrossRef .W. Xia, A. Mahmood, R. Zou and Q. Xu, Metal–organic frameworks
and their derived nanostructures for electrochemical energy storage and conversion, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1837–1866 RSC .Y. P. Wu, E. Rahm and R. Holze, Carbon anode materials for lithium ion batteries, J. Power Sources, 2003, 114, 228–236 CrossRef CAS .Y. Han, et al., In Situ Growth of MOFs on the Surface of Si Nanoparticles for Highly Efficient Lithium Storage: Si@MOF Nanocomposites as Anode Materials for Lithium-Ion Batteries, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 2178–2182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K. W. Nam, S. S. Park, R. Dos Reis, V. P. Dravid, H. Kim, C. A. Mirkin and J. F. Stoddart, Conductive 2D metal-organic framework for high-performance cathodes in aqueous rechargeable zinc batteries, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10(1), 4948 CrossRef PubMed .H.-J. Peng, et al., Mesoporous Mn3O4/C Microspheres Fabricated from MOF Template as Advanced Lithium-Ion Battery Anode, Cryst. Growth Des., 2017, 17, 5881–5886 CrossRef CAS .Y. Han, et al., Metal–Organic Frameworks (MOFs) as Sandwich Coating Cushion for Silicon Anode in Lithium Ion Batteries, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 26608–26613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Yu, N. S. Grundish, J. B. Goodenough and A. Manthiram, Ionic Liquid (IL) Laden Metal–Organic Framework (IL-MOF) Electrolyte for Quasi-Solid-State Sodium Batteries, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13(21), 24662–24669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .G. Lu, et al., Bifunctional MOF Doped PEO Composite Electrolyte for Long-Life Cycle Solid Lithium Ion Battery, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 45476–45483 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Shen and H. Ma, Metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) and their derivative as electrode materials for lithium-ion batteries, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2022, 470, 214715 CrossRef CAS .D. Feng, et al., Robust and conductive two-dimensional metal−organic frameworks with exceptionally high volumetric and areal capacitance, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 30–36 CrossRef CAS .Y. Yang, F. Liao, X. Wang, Y. Pan, Q. Shao and M. Shao, A variational method guided confining tip discharge for MOF-derived supercapacitors, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 443, 136452 CrossRef CAS .S. Kumar, P. H. Weng and Y. P. Fu, Core-shell-structured CuO@ Ni-MOF: bifunctional electrode toward battery-type supercapacitors and oxygen evolution reaction, Mater. Today Chem., 2022, 26, 101159 CrossRef CAS .S. Kumar, S. Sekar, A. K. Kaliamurthy and S. Lee, Bifunctional rGO-NiCo2S4 MOF hybrid with high electrochemical and catalytic activity for supercapacitor and nitroarene reduction, J. Mater. Res. Technol., 2021, 12, 2489–2501 CrossRef CAS .A. S. Lemine, M. M. Zagho, T. M. Altahtamouni and N. Bensalah, Graphene a promising electrode material for supercapacitors—A review - Lemine, Int. J. Energy Res., 2018, 42(14), 4284–4300 CrossRef CAS .S. Sankar, A. I. Inamdar, H. Im, S. Lee and D. Y. Kim, Template-free rapid sonochemical synthesis of spherical α-MnO2 nanoparticles for high-energy supercapacitor electrode, Ceram. Int., 2018, 44(14), 17514–17521 CrossRef CAS .S. Nandhini and G. Muralidharan, Graphene encapsulated NiS/Ni3S4 mesoporous nanostructure: A superlative high energy supercapacitor device with excellent cycling performance, Electrochim. Acta, 2021, 365, 137367 CrossRef CAS .S. Z. Hussain, M. Ihrar, S. B. Hussain, W. C. Oh and K. Ullah, A review on graphene based transition metal oxide composites and its application towards supercapacitor electrodes, SN Appl. Sci., 2020, 2, 764 CrossRef CAS .X. Hu, et al., Hierarchical CuCo2O4@CoS-Cu/Co-MOF core-shell nanoflower derived from copper/cobalt bimetallic metal–organic frameworks for supercapacitors, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 600, 72–82 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. A. Shinde, M. A. Abdelkareem, E. T. Sayed, K. Elsaid and A.-G. Olabi Metal Organic Frameworks (MOFs) in Supercapacitors. in Encyclopedia of Smart Materials, ed. A.-G. Olabi, Elsevier,  2022, pp. 414–423,  DOI:10.1016/B978-0-12-815732-9.00152-2 .S. Nandi, et al., A single-ligand ultra-microporous MOF for precombustion CO2 capture and hydrogen purification, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, e1500421 CrossRef PubMed .C. Tallon, C. Chuanuwatanakul, D. E. Dunstan and G. V. Franks, Mechanical strength and damage tolerance of highly porous alumina ceramics produced from sintered particle stabilized foams, Ceram. Int., 2016, 42(7), 8478–8487 CrossRef CAS .S. E. Henkelis, P. T. Judge, S. E. Hayes and T. M. Nenoff, Preferential SOx Adsorption in Mg-MOF-74 from a Humid Acid Gas Stream, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 7278–7284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Duan, et al., Highly Selective Gaseous and Liquid-Phase Separation over a Novel Cobalt(II) Metal–Organic Framework, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 23009–23017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Fang, et al., Ppb-level H2S gas sensor based on CuNi-MOFs derivatives for meat freshness detection at low temperature environment, Sens. Actuators, B, 2022, 368, 132225 CrossRef CAS .M. Lee, P. Li, J. A. Koziel, H. Ahn, J. Wi, B. Chen, Z. Meiirkhanuly, C. Banik and W. S. Jenks, Pilot-Scale Testing of UV-A Light Treatment for Mitigation of NH3, H2S, GHGs, VOCs, Odor, and O3 Inside the Poultry Barn, Front. Chem., 2020, 8, 613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Bavykina, et al., Metal–Organic Frameworks in Heterogeneous Catalysis: Recent Progress, New Trends, and Future Perspectives, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 8468–8535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Adams, Applied Catalysis: A Predictive Socioeconomic History, Top. Catal., 2009, 52, 924–934 CrossRef CAS .H. Hu, et al., Metal–organic frameworks embedded in a liposome facilitate overall photocatalytic water splitting, Nat. Chem., 2021, 13, 358–366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. S. Sankar, K. Karthick, K. Sangeetha, A. Karmakar, R. Madhu and S. Kundu, Current perspectives on 3D ZIFs incorporated with 1D carbon matrices as fibers via electrospinning processes towards electrocatalytic water splitting: a review, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9(20), 11961–12002 RSC .W. Cheng, H. Zhang, D. Luan and X. W. Lou, Exposing unsaturated Cu1-O2 sites in nanoscale Cu-MOF for efficient electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution, Sci. Adv., 2021, 7(18), eabg2580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Wang, et al., Site-Specified Two-Dimensional Heterojunction of Pt Nanoparticles/Metal–Organic Frameworks for Enhanced Hydrogen Evolution, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 16512–16518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Zhao, et al., MOF-derived porous Co3O4 coupled with AuNPs and nucleic acids as electrocatalysis signal probe for sensitive electrochemical aptasensing of adenosine triphosphate, Sens. Actuators, B, 2022, 362, 131753 CrossRef CAS .K. Rui, et al., Direct Hybridization of Noble Metal Nanostructures on 2D Metal–Organic Framework Nanosheets To Catalyze Hydrogen Evolution, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 8447–8453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. Hu, et al., Mechanistic assessment of NO oxidative activation on tungsten-promoted ceria catalysts and its consequence for low-temperature NH3-SCR, Appl. Energy, 2023, 330, 120306 CrossRef CAS .H. Jiang, et al., Effect of Cosolvent and Temperature on the Structures and Properties of Cu-MOF-74 in Low-temperature NH3-SCR, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2017, 56, 3542–3550 CrossRef CAS .H. Jiang, Q. Wang, H. Wang, Y. Chen and M. Zhang, MOF-74 as an Efficient Catalyst for the Low-Temperature Selective Catalytic Reduction of NOx with NH3, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 26817–26826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Xie, Q. Qin, H. Liu, L. Jin, X. Wei, J. Liu, X. Liu, Y. Yao, L. Dong and B. Li, MOF-74-M (M = Mn, Co, Ni, Zn, MnCo, MnNi, and MnZn) for Low-Temperature NH3-SCR and In Situ DRIFTS Study Reaction Mechanism, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12(43), 48476–48485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Li, C. Wang and J. Tang, Methane transformation by photocatalysis, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2022, 12(43), 617–632 CrossRef .M. B. Bahari, et al., Insight into the development of silica-based materials as photocatalysts for CO2 photoconversion towards CH3OH: A review and recent progress, Surf. Interfaces, 2022, 31, 102049 CrossRef CAS .L. P. Rosa, S. K. Ribeiro, M. S. Muylaert and C. Pires de Campos, Comments on the Brazilian Proposal and contributions
to global temperature increase with different climate responses—CO2 emissions due to fossil fuels, CO2 emissions due to land use change, Energy Policy, 2004, 32, 1499–1510 CrossRef .J. E. Szulejko, P. Kumar, A. Deep and K.-H. Kim, Global warming projections to 2100 using simple CO2 greenhouse gas modeling and comments on CO2 climate sensitivity factor, Atmos. Pollut. Res., 2017, 8, 136–140 CrossRef .C. V. Reddy, et al., Metal-organic frameworks (MOFs)-based efficient heterogeneous photocatalysts: Synthesis, properties and its applications in photocatalytic hydrogen generation, CO2 reduction and photodegradation of organic dyes, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 7656–7679 CrossRef CAS .H. Fischer, M. Wahlen, J. Smith, D. Mastroianni and B. Deck, Ice core records of atmospheric CO2 around the last three glacial terminations, Science, 1999, 283, 1712–1714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Zou, J. Ye, K. Sayama and H. Arakawa, Direct splitting of water under visible light irradiation with an oxide semiconductor photocatalyst, Nature, 2001, 414, 625–627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .N. Lakshmana Reddy, et al., Nanostructured semiconducting materials for efficient hydrogen generation, Environ. Chem. Lett., 2018, 16, 765–796 CrossRef CAS .C.-M. Fung, C.-C. Er, L.-L. Tan, A. R. Mohamed and S.-P. Chai, Red Phosphorus: An Up-and-Coming Photocatalyst on the Horizon for Sustainable Energy Development and Environmental Remediation, Chem. Rev., 2022, 122, 3879–3965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Chen, T. Takata and K. Domen, Particulate photocatalysts for overall water splitting, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2(10), 1–17 Search PubMed .Y. Zhang, J. Guo, L. Shi, Y. Zhu, K. Hou, Y. Zheng and Z. Tang, Tunable chiral metal organic frameworks toward visible light–driven asymmetric catalysis, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3(8), e1701162 CrossRef PubMed .Y. Xiao, et al., Long-Lived Internal Charge-Separated State in Two-Dimensional Metal–Organic Frameworks Improving Photocatalytic Performance, ACS Energy Lett., 2022, 7, 2323–2330 CrossRef CAS .J.-D. Xiao and H.-L. Jiang, Metal–Organic Frameworks for Photocatalysis and Photothermal Catalysis, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 356–366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J.-L. Wang, C. Wang and W. Lin, Metal–Organic Frameworks for Light Harvesting and Photocatalysis, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 2630–2640 CrossRef CAS .Z.-B. Fang, et al., Boosting Interfacial Charge-Transfer Kinetics for Efficient Overall CO2 Photoreduction via Rational Design of Coordination Spheres on Metal–Organic Frameworks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 12515–12523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Wang, et al., Novel marigold-like CuO@Cu-based MOFs composite photocatalyst for high-performance removal of alkylphenol ethoxylate under visible light, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 106434 CrossRef CAS .I. J. Kang, N. A. Khan, E. Haque and S. H. Jhung, Chemical and Thermal Stability of Isotypic Metal–Organic Frameworks: Effect of Metal Ions, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17(23), 6437–6442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Li, W. Shi, K. Zhao, H. Li, Y. Bing and P. Cheng, Enhanced Hydrostability in Ni-Doped MOF-5, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51(17), 9200–9207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X.-L. Lv, et al., Ligand Rigidification for Enhancing the Stability of Metal–Organic Frameworks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 10283–10293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. M. Cohen, Postsynthetic Methods for the Functionalization of Metal–Organic Frameworks, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112(2), 970–1000 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Zhao, et al., Postsynthetic Ligand Exchange of Metal–Organic Framework for Photodynamic Therapy, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 7884–7892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. A. Syzgantseva, N. F. Stepanov and O. A. Syzgantseva, Band Alignment as the Method for Modifying Electronic Structure of Metal−Organic Frameworks, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 17611–17619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. K. Lin, D. Zhao, W. Y. Gao, Z. Yang, J. Ye, T. Xu, Q. Ge, S. Ma and D. J. Liu, Tunability of Band Gaps in Metal–Organic Frameworks, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51(16), 9039–9044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Q. Pham, et al., Engineering of Band Gap in Metal–Organic Frameworks by Functionalizing Organic Linker: A Systematic Density Functional Theory Investigation, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 4567–4577 CrossRef CAS .R. M. Cedeno, et al., Bandgap Modulation in Zr-Based Metal–Organic Frameworks by Mixed-Linker Approach, Inorg. Chem., 2021, 60, 8908–8916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. Musho, J. Li and N. Wu, Band gap modulation of functionalized metal–organic frameworks, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 23646–23653 RSC .C. H. Hendon, et al., Engineering the Optical Response of the Titanium-MIL-125 Metal–Organic Framework through Ligand Functionalization, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10942–10945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Deng, J. Albero, L. Xu, H. García and Z. Li, Construction of a Stable Ru–Re Hybrid System Based on Multifunctional MOF-253 for Efficient Photocatalytic CO2 Reduction, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 8276–8286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. S. Xie, et al., Tunable Mixed-Valence Doping toward Record Electrical Conductivity in a Three-Dimensional Metal–Organic Framework, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 7411–7414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. I. Scheurle, A. Mähringer, A. C. Jakowetz, P. Hosseini, A. F. Richter, G. Wittstock, D. D. Medina and T. Bein, A highly crystalline anthracene-based MOF-74 series featuring electrical conductivity and luminescence, Nanoscale, 2019, 11(43), 20949–20955 RSC .J.-Y. Zeng, X.-S. Wang, B.-R. Xie, Q.-R. Li and X.-Z. Zhang, Large π-Conjugated Metal–Organic Frameworks for Infrared-Light-Driven CO2 Reduction, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 1218–1231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Zhang, et al., A historical overview of the activation and porosity of metal–organic frameworks, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 7406–7427 RSC .N. Y. Ahn, et al., Patchwork Metal–Organic Frameworks by Radical-Mediated Heterografting of Star Polymers for Surface Modification, Inorg. Chem., 2022, 61, 10365–10372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Chen, et al., Synergistic effects of octahedral TiO2-MIL-101(Cr) with two heterojunctions for enhancing visible-light photocatalytic degradation of liquid tetracycline and gaseous toluene, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 579, 37–49 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Zhang, et al., Highly Effective Photocatalytic Radical Reactions Triggered by a Photoactive Metal–Organic Framework, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 23518–23526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. A. Ahmed, et al., Enhanced Water Stability and Photoresponsivity in Metal-Organic Framework (MOF): A Potential Tool to Combat Drug-resistant Bacteria, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 1–11 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Subudhi and K. Parida, Zr-based MOF: An enhanced photocatalytic application towards H2 evolution by consequence of functional group and LSPR effect, Mater. Today: Proc., 2021, 35, 198–202 CAS .M. L. Brongersma, N. J. Halas and P. Nordlander, Plasmon-induced hot carrier science and technology, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 25–34 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Du, Y.-N. Liu, C.-C. Shen and A.-W. Xu, Nanoheterostructured photocatalysts for improving photocatalytic hydrogen production, Chin. J. Catal., 2017, 38, 1295–1306 CrossRef CAS .P. Thakur, et al., Exploring recent advances in silver halides and graphitic carbon nitride-based photocatalyst for energy and environmental applications, Arabian J. Chem., 2020, 13, 8271–8300 CrossRef CAS .H. Guo, et al., Insight into the energy band alignment of magnetically separable Ag2O/ZnFe2O4 p-n heterostructure with rapid charge transfer assisted visible light photocatalysis, J. Catal., 2019, 370, 289–303 CrossRef CAS .X. Zhang, et al., g-C3N4/UiO-66 nanohybrids with enhanced photocatalytic activities for the oxidation of dye under visible light irradiation, Mater. Res. Bull., 2018, 99, 349–358 CrossRef CAS .R. Ji, J. Liu, T. Zhang, Y. Peng, Y. Li, D. Chen, Q. Xu and J. Lu, Construction of a ternary Z-scheme In2S3@ Au@ P3HT photocatalyst for the degradation of phenolic pollutants under visible light, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2021, 272, 118787 CrossRef CAS .Y. Li, et al., Construction of g-C3N4/PDI@MOF heterojunctions for the highly efficient visible light-driven degradation of pharmaceutical and phenolic micropollutants, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 250, 150–162 CrossRef CAS .S. He, Q. Rong, H. Niu and Y. Cai, Platform for molecular-material dual regulation: A direct Z-scheme MOF/COF heterojunction with enhanced visible-light photocatalytic activity, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 247, 49–56 CrossRef CAS .X. Hao, et al., Architecture of high efficient zinc vacancy mediated Z-scheme photocatalyst from metal-organic frameworks, Nano Energy, 2018, 52, 105–116 CrossRef CAS .M. Madi, M. Tahir and S. Tasleem, Advances in structural modification of perovskite semiconductors for visible light assisted photocatalytic CO2 reduction to renewable solar fuels: A review, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2021, 9(5), 106264 CrossRef CAS .P. Raizada, et al., An overview of converting reductive photocatalyst into all solid-state and direct Z-scheme system for water splitting and CO2 reduction, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2021, 93, 1–27 CrossRef CAS .Y. Li, Y. Xia, K. Liu, K. Ye, Q. Wang, S. Zhang, Y. Huang and H. Liu, Constructing Fe-MOF-derived Z-scheme photocatalysts with enhanced charge transport: nanointerface and carbon sheath synergistic effect, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12(22), 25494–25502 CrossRef PubMed .S. Liu, X. Jiang, G. I. N. Waterhouse, Z.-M. Zhang and L. Yu, Construction of Z-scheme Titanium-MOF/plasmonic silver nanoparticle/NiFe layered double hydroxide photocatalysts with enhanced dye and antibiotic degradation activity under visible light, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2021, 278, 119525 CrossRef .M. A. Nasalevich, M. G. Goesten, T. J. Savenije, F. Kapteijn and J. Gascon, Enhancing optical absorption of metal–organic frameworks for improved visible light photocatalysis, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 10575–10577 RSC .M. A. Nasalevich, M. G. Goesten, T. J. Savenije, F. Kapteijn and J. Gascon, Enhancing optical absorption of metal–organic frameworks for improved visible light photocatalysis, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 4919–4926 RSC .S. Marx, W. Kleist, J. Huang, M. Maciejewski and A. Baiker, Tuning functional sites and thermal stability of mixed-linker MOFs based on MIL-53 (Al), Dalton Trans., 2010, 39(16), 3795–3798 RSC .H. Deng, C. J. Doonan, H. Furukawa, R. B. Ferreira, J. Towne, C. B. Knobler, B. Wang and O. M. Yaghi, Multiple Functional Groups of Varying Ratios in Metal-Organic Frameworks, Science, 2010, 327(5967), 846–850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Wen, K. Mori, T. Kamegawa and H. Yamashita, Amine-functionalized MIL-101(Cr) with imbedded platinum nanoparticles as a durable photocatalyst for hydrogen production from water, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 11645–11648 RSC .Q. Zhu, et al., CO2 reduction to formic acid via NH2-C@Cu2O photocatalyst in situ derived from amino modified Cu-MOF, J. CO2 Util., 2021, 54, 101781 CrossRef CAS .T. W. Goh, C. Xiao, R. V. Maligal-Ganesh, X. Li and W. Huang, Utilizing mixed-linker zirconium based metal-organic frameworks to enhance the visible light photocatalytic oxidation of alcohol, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2015, 124, 45–51 CrossRef CAS .M. B. Chambers, et al., Maximizing the Photocatalytic Activity of Metal–Organic Frameworks with Aminated-Functionalized Linkers: Substoichiometric Effects in MIL-125-NH2, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 8222–8228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Gao, et al., Synthesis of mixed-linker Zr-MOFs for emerging contaminant adsorption and photodegradation under visible light, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 378, 122118 CrossRef CAS .B. Bueken, et al., A zirconium squarate metal–organic framework with modulator-dependent molecular sieving properties, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 10055–10058 RSC .O. V. Gutov, M. G. Hevia, E. C. Escudero-Adán and A. Shafir, Metal–Organic Framework (MOF) Defects under Control: Insights into the Missing Linker Sites and Their Implication in the Reactivity of Zirconium-Based Frameworks, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 8396–8400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .G. C. Shearer, et al., Tuned to Perfection: Ironing Out the Defects in Metal–Organic Framework UiO-66, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 4068–4071 CrossRef CAS .H. Wu, et al., Unusual and Highly Tunable Missing-Linker Defects in Zirconium Metal–Organic Framework UiO-66 and Their Important Effects on Gas Adsorption, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10525–10532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .R. Zhang, et al., Metal–Organic Framework Crystal-Assembled Optical Sensors for Chemical Vapors: Effects of Crystal Sizes and Missing-Linker Defects on Sensing Performances, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 21010–21017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Xue, et al., Missing-linker metal-organic frameworks for oxygen evolution reaction, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5048 CrossRef PubMed .S. Rojas and P. Horcajada, Metal–Organic Frameworks for the Removal of Emerging Organic Contaminants in Water, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120(16), 8378–8415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Jurado, et al., Emerging organic contaminants in groundwater in Spain: A review of sources, recent occurrence and fate in a European context, Sci. Total Environ., 2012, 440, 82–94 CrossRef CAS PubMed .R. Guo, X. Cai, H. Liu, Z. Yang, Y. Meng, F. Chen, Y. Li and B. Wang, In Situ Growth of Metal–Organic Frameworks in Three-Dimensional Aligned Lumen Arrays of Wood for Rapid and Highly Efficient Organic Pollutant Removal, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2019, 53(5), 2705–2712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .V. K. Sharma and M. Feng, Water depollution using metal-organic frameworks-catalyzed advanced oxidation processes: A review, J. Hazard. Mater., 2019, 372, 3–16 CrossRef CAS PubMed .I. Ibrahim, et al., Photocatalysis as an advanced reduction process (ARP): The reduction of 4-nitrophenol using titania nanotubes-ferrite nanocomposites, J. Hazard. Mater., 2019, 372, 37–44 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Ge, et al., A review of one-dimensional TiO2 nanostructured materials for environmental and energy applications, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6772–6801 RSC .J. J. Rueda-Marquez, I. Levchuk, P. Fernández Ibañez and M. Sillanpää, A critical review on application of photocatalysis for toxicity reduction of real wastewaters, J. Cleaner Prod., 2020, 258, 120694 CrossRef CAS .M. Alvaro, E. Carbonell, B. Ferrer, F. X. Llabrés i Xamena and H. Garcia, Semiconductor Behavior of a Metal-Organic Framework (MOF), Chem. – Eur. J., 2007, 13, 5106–5112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Rojas, et al., Ti-based robust MOFs in the combined photocatalytic degradation of emerging organic contaminants, Sci. Rep., 2022, 12, 14513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. He, Y. Zhang, X. Zhang and Y. Huang, Highly efficient Fenton and enzyme-mimetic activities of NH2-MIL-88B(Fe) metal organic framework for methylene blue degradation, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 5159 CrossRef PubMed .L. Shi, T. Wang, H. Zhang, K. Chang, X. Meng, H. Liu and J. Ye, An Amine-Functionalized Iron(III) Metal–Organic Framework as Efficient Visible-Light Photocatalyst for Cr(VI) Reduction, Adv. Sci., 2015, 2(3), 1500006 CrossRef PubMed .M. Yadav and Q. Xu, Catalytic chromium reduction using formic acid and metal nanoparticles immobilized in a metal–organic framework, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 3327–3329 RSC .Y. Zhang and S.-J. Park, Stabilization of dispersed CuPd bimetallic alloy nanoparticles on ZIF-8 for photoreduction of Cr(VI) in aqueous solution, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 369, 353–362 CrossRef CAS .S. P. Tripathy, et al., Mixed-Valence Bimetallic Ce/Zr MOF-Based Nanoarchitecture: A Visible-Light-Active Photocatalyst for Ciprofloxacin Degradation and Hydrogen Evolution, Langmuir, 2022, 38, 1766–1780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .V. Ramasubbu, et al., Zn(II) porphyrin sensitized (TiO2@Cd-MOF) nanocomposite aerogel as novel photocatalyst for the effective degradation of methyl orange (MO) dye, Opt. Mater., 2022, 112558,  DOI:10.1016/j.optmat.2022.112558 .H. Ali and N. R. Jana, Plasmonic photocatalysis: complete degradation of bisphenol A by a gold nanoparticle–reduced graphene oxide composite under visible light, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2018, 17, 628–637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .N. Celebi, M. Y. Aydin, F. Soysal, N. Yıldız and K. Salimi, Core/Shell PDA@UiO-66 Metal–Organic
Framework Nanoparticles for Efficient Visible-Light Photodegradation of Organic Dyes, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 11543–11554 CrossRef CAS .X. Qin, T. Qiang, L. Chen and S. Wang, Construction of 3D N-CQD/MOF-5 photocatalyst to improve the photocatalytic performance of MOF-5 by changing the electron transfer path, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2021, 315, 110889 CrossRef CAS .F. Zhao, Y. Liu, S. B. Hammouda, B. Doshi, N. Guijarro, X. Min, C.-J. Tang, M. Sillanpää, K. Sivula and S. Wang, MIL-101 (Fe)/g-C3N4 for enhanced visible-light-driven photocatalysis toward simultaneous reduction of Cr (VI) and oxidation of bisphenol A in aqueous media, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 272, 119033 CrossRef CAS .X. Jiao, et al., Defect-Mediated Electron–Hole Separation in One-Unit-Cell ZnIn2S4 Layers for Boosted Solar-Driven CO2 Reduction, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 7586–7594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Iwase, S. Yoshino, T. Takayama, Y. H. Ng, R. Amal and A. Kudo, Water Splitting and CO2 Reduction under Visible Light Irradiation Using Z-Scheme Systems Consisting of Metal Sulfides, CoOx-Loaded BiVO4, and a Reduced Graphene Oxide Electron Mediator, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138(32), 10260–10264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Wang, B. Y. Guan, Y. Lu and X. W. D. Lou, Formation of Hierarchical In2S3–CdIn2S4 Heterostructured Nanotubes for Efficient and Stable Visible Light CO2 Reduction, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139(48), 17305–17308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. Zhang, S. Wang, B. Y. Guan and X. W. D. Lou, Fabrication of CdS hierarchical multi-cavity hollow particles for efficient visible light CO2 reduction, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12(1), 164–168 RSC .Y. Pi, et al., Encapsulated MWCNT@MOF-derived In2S3 tubular heterostructures for boosted visible-light-driven degradation of tetracycline, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 256, 117882 CrossRef CAS .A. Wang, et al., MOF-derived N-doped ZnO carbon skeleton@hierarchical Bi2MoO6 S-scheme heterojunction for photodegradation of SMX: Mechanism, pathways and DFT calculation, J. Hazard. Mater., 2022, 426, 128106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Liu, et al., Ternary photocatalysts based on MOF-derived TiO2 co-decorated with ZnIn2S4 nanosheets and CdS nanoparticles for effective visible light degradation of organic pollutants, New J. Chem., 2022, 46, 7195–7201 RSC .A. P. Bhirud, S. D. Sathaye, R. P. Waichal, L. K. Nikam and B. B. Kale, An eco-friendly, highly stable and efficient nanostructured p-type N-doped ZnO photocatalyst for environmentally benign solar hydrogen production, Green Chem., 2012, 14(10), 2790–2798 RSC .S. G. Ullattil, P. Periyat, B. Naufal and M. A. Lazar, Self-Doped ZnO Microrods—High Temperature Stable Oxygen Deficient Platforms for Solar Photocatalysis, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2016, 55(22), 6413–6421 CrossRef CAS .F. H. Abdullah, N. H. H. A. Bakar and M. A. Bakar, Current advancements on the fabrication, modification, and industrial application of zinc oxide as photocatalyst in the removal of organic and inorganic contaminants in aquatic systems, J. Hazard. Mater., 2022, 424, 127416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Wu, Y. Lin and Y. H. Hu, Strategies of tuning catalysts for efficient photodegradation of antibiotics in water environments: a review, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9(5), 2592–2611 RSC .L. Schlapbach and A. Züttel, Hydrogen-storage materials for mobile applications, Nature, 2001, 414(6861), 353–358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Chu and A. Majumdar, Opportunities and challenges for a sustainable energy future, Nature, 2012, 488, 294–303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Q. Xu, L. Zhang, B. Cheng, J. Fan and J. Yu, S-Scheme Heterojunction Photocatalyst, Chem, 2020, 6, 1543–1559 CAS .D. Gao, et al., Simultaneous Realization of Direct Photoinduced Deposition and Improved H2-Evolution Performance of Sn-Nanoparticle-Modified TiO2 Photocatalyst, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 10084–10094 CrossRef CAS .H. Yu, W. Zhong, X. Huang, P. Wang and J. Yu, Suspensible Cubic-Phase CdS Nanocrystal
Photocatalyst: Facile Synthesis and Highly Efficient H2-Evolution Performance in a Sulfur-Rich System, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 5513–5523 CrossRef CAS .D. Lu, et al., Highly Efficient Visible-Light-Induced Photoactivity of Z-Scheme g-C3N4/Ag/MoS2 Ternary Photocatalysts for Organic Pollutant Degradation and Production of Hydrogen, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 1436–1445 CrossRef CAS .D. Xiang, X. Hao and Z. Jin, Cu/CdS/MnOx Nanostructure-Based Photocatalyst for Photocatalytic Hydrogen Evolution, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2021, 4(12), 13848–13860 CrossRef CAS .M.-H. Hsu, C.-J. Chang and H.-T. Weng, Efficient H2 Production Using Ag2S-Coupled ZnO@ZnS Core–Shell Nanorods Decorated Metal Wire Mesh as an Immobilized Hierarchical Photocatalyst, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 1381–1391 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhang, et al., Single-atom Cu anchored catalysts for photocatalytic renewable H2 production with a quantum efficiency of 56%, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 58 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Lu, et al., Indium-Based Metal–Organic Framework for Efficient Photocatalytic Hydrogen Evolution, Inorg. Chem., 2022, 61, 2587–2594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y.-C. Luo, et al., Heterogenization of Photochemical Molecular Devices: Embedding a Metal–Organic Cage into a ZIF-8-Derived Matrix To Promote Proton and Electron Transfer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 13057–13065 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. B. Muradov, L. R. Gahramanli, O. O. Balayeva, I. N. Nasibov, G. M. Eyvazova, I. R. Amiraslanov and Z. A. Aghamaliyev, Formation mechanism of CdxZn1-xS/PVA nanocomposites by SILAR method, Results Phys., 2020, 18, 103280 CrossRef .W. Huang, Z. Yuan, Y. Ren, K. Zhou, Z. Cai and C. Yang, Interface optical phonons and its ternary mixed effects in ZnS/CdxZn1-xS quantum dots, Phys. E, 2019, 108, 60–67 CrossRef CAS .H. He, X. Gao, K. Xu, H. Li, Y. Hu, C. Yang and F. Fu, 1D/0D Z-scheme heterostructure of Bi2S3/CdXZn1− XS with strong interfacial electric field coupling enhanced mass transfer based on gas-liquid-solid micro interface contact for efficient photothermal synergistic catalytic CO2 reduction to syngas, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 450, 138266 CrossRef CAS .Q. Liu, J. Cao, Y. Ji, Y. Liu, C. Liu, G. Che, D. Wang, J. Cao, W. Li and X. Liu, The direct Z-scheme CdxZn1-xS nanorods-Fe2O3 quantum dots heterojunction/reduced graphene oxide nanocomposites for photocatalytic degradation and photocatalytic hydrogen evolution, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 570, 151085 CrossRef CAS .Y. Li, et al., CdxZn1-xS/Sb2Se3 thin film photocathode for efficient solar water splitting, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 286, 119872 CrossRef CAS .Y. Su, Z. Zhang, H. Liu and Y. Wang, Cd0.2Zn0.8S@UiO-66-NH2 nanocomposites as efficient and stable visible-light-driven photocatalyst for H2 evolution and CO2 reduction, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 200, 448–457 CrossRef CAS .H. Gong, Y. Li, H. Li and Z. Jin, 2D CeO2 and a Partially Phosphated 2D Ni-Based Metal–Organic Framework Formed an S-Scheme Heterojunction for Efficient Photocatalytic Hydrogen Evolution, Langmuir, 2022, 38, 2117–2131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Lee, et al., Metal–organic framework materials as catalysts, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1450–1459 RSC .X. Wang, K. Maeda, A. Thomas, K. Takanabe, G. Xin, J. M. Carlsson, K. Domen and M. Antonietti, A metal-free polymeric photocatalyst for hydrogen production from water under visible light, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8(1), 76–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. G. Kumar and K. K. Rao, Comparison of modification strategies towards enhanced charge carrier separation and photocatalytic degradation activity of metal oxide semiconductors (TiO2, WO3 and ZnO), Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 391, 124–148 CrossRef CAS .Z. Wang, Z. Jin, G. Wang and B. Ma, Efficient hydrogen production over MOFs (ZIF-67) and g-C3N4 boosted with MoS2 nanoparticles, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 13039–13050 CrossRef CAS .Z. Fan, X. Guo, Z. Jin, X. Li and Y. Li, Bridging Effect of S–C Bond for Boosting Electron Transfer over Cubic Hollow CoS/g-C3N4 Heterojunction toward Photocatalytic Hydrogen Production, Langmuir, 2022, 38, 3244–3256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. Karthik, et al., π–π Interaction Between Metal–Organic Framework and Reduced Graphene Oxide for Visible-Light Photocatalytic H2 Production, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 1913–1923 CrossRef CAS .X. Han, et al., Engineering an N-doped Cu2O@N–C interface with long-lived photo-generated carriers for efficient photoredox catalysts, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 10220–10226 RSC .B. Wu, N. Liu, L. Lu, R. Zhang, R. Zhang, W. Shi and P. Cheng, A MOF-derived hierarchical CoP@ZnIn2S4 photocatalyst for visible light-driven hydrogen evolution, Chem. Commun., 2022, 58(46), 6622–6625 RSC .B. Ma, P. Y. Guan, Q. Y. Li, M. Zhang and S. Q. Zang, MOF-Derived Flower-like MoS2@TiO2 Nanohybrids with Enhanced Activity for Hydrogen Evolution, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8(40), 26794–26800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Jiang, X. Nie, X. Guo, C. Song and J. G. Chen, Recent Advances in Carbon Dioxide Hydrogenation to Methanol via Heterogeneous Catalysis, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120(15), 7984–8034 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. J. Morris, G. J. Meyer and E. Fujita, Molecular Approaches to the Photocatalytic Reduction of Carbon Dioxide for Solar Fuels, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1983–1994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. H. Wang, Y. Himeda, J. T. Muckerman, G. F. Manbeck and E. Fujita, CO2 Hydrogenation to Formate and Methanol as an Alternative to Photo- and Electrochemical CO2 Reduction, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115(23), 12936–12973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. Yui, A. Kan, C. Saitoh, K. Koike, T. Ibusuki and O. Ishitani, Photochemical Reduction of CO2 Using TiO2: Effects of Organic Adsorbates on TiO2 and Deposition of Pd onto TiO2, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3(7), 2594–2600 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. Tachikawa, J. R. Choi, M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, Photoinduced Charge-Transfer Processes on MOF-5 Nanoparticles: Elucidating Differences between Metal-Organic Frameworks and Semiconductor Metal Oxides, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112(36), 14090–14101 CrossRef CAS .H.-Q. Xu, et al., Visible-Light Photoreduction of CO2 in a Metal–Organic Framework: Boosting Electron–Hole Separation via Electron Trap States, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13440–13443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Xie, Z. Fang, L. Li, H. Yang and T.-F. Liu, Creating Chemisorption Sites for Enhanced CO2 Photoreduction Activity through Alkylamine Modification of MIL-101-Cr, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 27017–27023 CrossRef CAS PubMed .F. N. Al-Rowaili, U. Zahid, S. Onaizi, M. Khaled, A. Jamal and E. M. AL-Mutairi, A review for Metal-Organic Frameworks (MOFs) utilization in capture and conversion of carbon dioxide into valuable products, J. CO2 Util., 2021, 53, 101715 CrossRef CAS .Y. Wang, et al., Visible-Light Driven Overall Conversion of CO2 and H2O to CH4 and O2 on 3D-SiC@2D-MoS2 Heterostructure, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 14595–14598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .N.-Y. Huang, et al., Electrostatic Attraction-Driven Assembly of a Metal–Organic Framework with a Photosensitizer Boosts Photocatalytic CO2 Reduction to CO, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 17424–17430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .N.-Y. Huang, et al., Coupling Ruthenium Bipyridyl and Cobalt Imidazolate Units in a Metal–Organic Framework for an Efficient Photosynthetic Overall Reaction in Diluted CO2, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 8676–8682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Elcheikh Mahmoud, H. Audi, A. Assoud, T. H. Ghaddar and M. Hmadeh, Metal–Organic Framework Photocatalyst Incorporating Bis(4′-(4-carboxyphenyl)-terpyridine)ruthenium(II) for Visible-Light-Driven Carbon Dioxide Reduction, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141(17), 7115–7121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z.-H. Yan, et al., Photo-generated dinuclear {Eu(II)}2 active sites for selective CO2 reduction in a photosensitizing metal-organic framework, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3353 CrossRef PubMed .Y. Wang, et al., Hydroxide Ligands Cooperate with Catalytic Centers in Metal–Organic Frameworks for Efficient Photocatalytic CO2 Reduction, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 38–41 CrossRef CAS PubMed .F. Guo, et al., Size Engineering of Metal–Organic Framework MIL-101(Cr)–Ag Hybrids for Photocatalytic CO2 Reduction, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 8464–8470 CrossRef CAS .K. M. Choi, et al., Plasmon-Enhanced Photocatalytic CO2 Conversion within Metal–Organic Frameworks under Visible Light, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 356–362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S.-S. Wang, et al., Encapsulation of Single Iron Sites in a Metal–Porphyrin Framework for High-Performance Photocatalytic CO2 Reduction, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 6301–6307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Ye, Y. Gao, S. Cao, H. Chen, Y. Yao, J. Hou and L. Sun, Assembly of highly efficient photocatalytic CO2 conversion systems with ultrathin two-dimensional metal–organic framework nanosheets, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 227, 54–60 CrossRef CAS .S. Yan, L. Wan, Z. Li and Z. Zou, Facile temperature-controlled synthesis of hexagonal Zn2GeO4 nanorods with different aspect ratios toward improved photocatalytic activity for overall water splitting and photoreduction of CO2, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47(19), 5632–5634 RSC .J. Zhao, Y. Wang, Y. Li, X. Yue and C. Wang, Phase-dependent enhancement for CO 2 photocatalytic reduction over CeO2/TiO2 catalysts, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 7967–7975 RSC .H. Zhao, et al., Synthesis and characterization of Zn2GeO4/Mg-MOF-74 composites with enhanced photocatalytic activity for CO2 reduction, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 8, 1288–1295 RSC .P. M. Stanley, et al., Entrapped Molecular Photocatalyst and Photosensitizer in Metal–Organic Framework Nanoreactors for Enhanced Solar CO2 Reduction, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 871–882 CrossRef CAS .C. Zhao, et al., Dual MOFs template-directed fabrication of hollow-structured heterojunction photocatalysts for efficient CO2 reduction, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 416, 129155 CrossRef CAS .S.-N. Zhao, X.-Z. Song, S.-Y. Song and H. Zhang, Highly efficient heterogeneous catalytic materials derived from metal-organic framework supports/precursors, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2017, 337, 80–96 CrossRef CAS .M. Xu, X. Zhao, H. Jiang, S. Chen and P. Huo, MOFs-derived C-In2O3/g-C3N4 heterojunction for enhanced photoreduction CO2, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 106469 CrossRef CAS .H. Zhang, et al., Surface-Plasmon-Enhanced Photodriven CO2 Reduction Catalyzed by Metal–Organic-Framework-Derived Iron Nanoparticles Encapsulated by Ultrathin Carbon Layers, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3703–3710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Q. Yang, C.-C. Yang, C.-H. Lin and H.-L. Jiang, Metal–Organic-Framework-Derived Hollow N-Doped Porous Carbon with Ultrahigh Concentrations of Single Zn Atoms for Efficient Carbon Dioxide Conversion, Angew. Chem., 2019, 131, 3549–3553 CrossRef .S. Wang, et al., Energy Level Engineering: Ru Single Atom Anchored on Mo-MOF with a [Mo8O26(im)2]4– Structure Acts as a Biomimetic Photocatalyst, ACS Catal., 2022, 12, 7960–7974 CrossRef CAS .S. Kitano, et al., Bifunctionality of Rh3+ Modifier on TiO2 and Working Mechanism of Rh3+/TiO2 Photocatalyst under Irradiation of Visible Light, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 11008–11016 CrossRef CAS .H. Wang, T. You, W. Shi, J. Li and L. Guo, Au/TiO2/Au as a Plasmonic Coupling Photocatalyst, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 6490–6494 CrossRef CAS .X. Deng, Y. Qin, M. Hao and Z. Li, MOF-253-Supported Ru Complex for Photocatalytic CO2 Reduction by Coupling with Semidehydrogenation of 1,2,3,4-Tetrahydroisoquinoline (THIQ), Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 16574–16580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Tian, et al., Enhanced Adsorption of p-Arsanilic Acid from Water by Amine-Modified UiO-67 as Examined Using Extended X-ray Absorption Fine Structure, X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy, and Density Functional Theory Calculations, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52, 3466–3475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Fu, Q. Xu, J. Low, C. Jiang and J. Yu, Ultrathin 2D/2D WO3/g-C3N4 step-scheme H2-production photocatalyst, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 243, 556–565 CrossRef CAS .T. Li, L. Ge, X. Peng, W. Wang and W. Zhang, Enhanced degradation of sulfamethoxazole by a novel Fenton-like system with significantly reduced consumption of H2O2 activated by g-C3N4/MgO composite, Water Res., 2021, 190, 116777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Wang, J. L. Wang and W. Lin, Elucidating Molecular Iridium Water Oxidation Catalysts Using Metal–Organic Frameworks: A Comprehensive Structural, Catalytic, Spectroscopic, and Kinetic Study, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134(48), 19895–19908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Yang, B. Pattengale, S. Lee and J. Huang, Real-Time Visualization of Active Species in a Single-Site Metal–Organic Framework Photocatalyst, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 532–539 CrossRef CAS .L. Zhang, Z. Jin and N. Tsubaki, Zeolitic Imidazolate Framework-67-Derived P-Doped Hollow Porous Co3O4 as a Photocatalyst for Hydrogen Production from Water, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13(43), 50996–51007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. Asselin and P. D. Harvey, Visible-Light-Driven Production of Solar Fuels Catalyzed by Nanosized Porphyrin-Based Metal–Organic Frameworks and Covalent–Organic Frameworks: A Review, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2022, 5, 6055–6082 CrossRef CAS .K. Niu, Y. Xu, H. Wang, R. Ye, H. L. Xin, F. Lin, C. Tian, Y. Lum, K. C. Bustillo, M. M. Doeff, M. T. M. Koper, J. Ager, R. Xu and H. Zheng, A spongy nickel-organic CO2 reduction photocatalyst for nearly 100% selective CO production, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3(7), e1700921 CrossRef PubMed .A. Wuttig, M. Yaguchi, K. Motobayashi, M. Osawa and Y. Surendranath, Inhibited proton transfer enhances Au-catalyzed CO2-to-fuels selectivity, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, E4585–E4593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Wang, et al., Two-Dimensional Cobaltporphyrin-based Cobalt–Organic Framework as an Efficient Photocatalyst for CO2 Reduction Reaction: A Computational Study, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 14102–14110 CrossRef CAS .J. Li, et al., Self-adaptive dual-metal-site pairs in metal-organic frameworks for selective CO2 photoreduction to CH4, Nat. Catal., 2021, 4, 719–729 CrossRef CAS .H. Li, C. Cheng, Z. Yang and J. Wei, Encapsulated CdSe/CdS nanorods in double-shelled porous nanocomposites for efficient photocatalytic CO2 reduction, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13(1), 6466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. T. Kong, J. Huang, X. G. Jia, W. Z. Wang and Y. Zhou, Synthesis and optimization of Ti/Li/Al ternary layered double hydroxides for efficient photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to CH4, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9(1), 5659 CrossRef PubMed .H. Shi, et al., Atomically Dispersed Indium-Copper Dual-Metal Active Sites Promoting C−C Coupling for CO2 Photoreduction to Ethanol, Angew. Chem., 2022, 134, e202208904 Search PubMed .
Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3cy00479aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Four groups of “traditional” MOFs have a wide range of applications. (a) X-ray structures labeled with IRMOF-n (n = 1 to 7, 8, 10, 12, 14, and 16).20 (b) Structures of MIL-100 and MIL-101.25 (c) Isoporous metal organic frameworks (MOFs) PPCN-6825.21 (d) RGO-supported purple nanocatalyst ZIF-9@Phy-rGOs.22 This figure has been reproduced from ref. 20, 22 and 25 with permission from Eddaoudi, M. &Rahmani, M. H., & Kang, J., copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Applications of MOFs; (b) number of papers for different applications of MOF reported during 2010–2020. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 34 with permission from Zhao, X., copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 3  Modification and optimization strategy of MOF materials for the performance of the lithium-ion electrode. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from Shen, M. & Ma, H., copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 4  Diagram depicting the preparation of MOFs and MOF-derived materials for supercapacitors. This figure this figure has been reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from Shinde, P. A., copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 5  Adsorption isotherm measurement of H2S by different MOFs materials (top left: MIL-47(V) and MIL-53(Al, Cr, Fe); top right: MIL-100(Cr) and MIL-101(Cr)) for natural gas desulfurization. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 9 with permission from Hamon, L., copyright 2009.	 

 	Fig. 6  I. MOF-derived Au@Co3O4-CP used as an electrocatalytic probe to achieve sensitive electrochemical induction of ATP. II. Noble metals/two-dimensional MOF heterostructures Ni-MOF@Pt for the electrocatalytic hydrolysis of hydrogen production (HER). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 68 and 69 with permission from Zhao, H. & Rui, K., copyright 2022 & 2019.	 

 	Fig. 7  In situ DRIFTS adsorption–desorption spectra of NH3 on (a) MOF-74-MnCo and (b) MOF-74-Zn. (c) Results of water and sulfur resistance of MOF-74-M catalysts. (d) Schematic diagram of the thermal catalytic mechanism of MOF-74-MnCo. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 73 with permission from Xie, S., copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 8  Degradation of polyoxyethylene ether APEOn (endocrine pollutant alkylphenol) by Cu-based MOFs catalyst under visible light. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 89 with permission from Wang, D., copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 9  Construction of Zr-MOFs by dicarboxylate ligands. (a) Structures of bidentate ligands, LC1, LC2, and LC3; (b) 12-connected and 8-connected Zr6 clusters; (c) structures of LC2-Zr612-fcu, LC1-Zr612-fcu, and LC3-Zr68-bcu MOFs. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 92 with permission from Lv, X.-L., copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 10  A potential mechanism for the visible light-based photocatalytic reduction of CO2 by MOF-253-Re(CO)3Cl. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 101 with permission from Deng, X., copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 11  Proposed mechanism of CO2 reduction driven by near infrared light. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 104 with permission from Zeng, J.-Y., copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 12  Conceptual diagram of MOF activation. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 105 with permission from Zhang, X., copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 13  Perspective view of the MOF(Zr-TCA). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 108 with permission from Zhang, D., copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic diagram of isoplasmon resonance effect on local surface of metal nanoparticles. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 109 with permission from Ahmed, S. A., copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic diagram of the basic principles of photocatalysis. Three traditional heterojunctions are applied to photocatalysis: (b) type I heterojunction, (c) type II heterojunction, and (d) type III heterojunction. SC-I and SC-II represent semiconductor-I and semiconductor-II, respectively. (e) Evolution of Z-scheme photocatalysis. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 121 with permission from Raizada, P., copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) The topology and (b) 3D framework of PCN-134. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 132 with permission from Gao, Y., copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 17  Modulating the electronic structure of MOFs by introducing missing linkers for efficient OER. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 138 with permission from Xue, Z., copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 18  Process of photocatalytic degradation of water pollutants. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 145 with permission from Rueda-Marquez, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Reduction profiles of photocatalytic reduction of Cr(VI) over MIL-88B(Fe), NH2-MIL-88B(Fe), mixed MIL-88B(Fe), and organic linker BDC-NH2. (b) Proposed mechanism for the photocatalytic reduction of Cr(VI) over NH2-MIL-88B(Fe). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 149 with permission from Shi, L., copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 20  Schematic diagram of possible CIP photodegradation and H2 evolution mechanism of Ce/Zr 1:1 MOF. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 152 with permission from Tripathy, S. P., copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) MOF-5,2-N-CQD/MOF-5 photocatalytic activity. (b) Photocatalytic activity of different samples. (c) Photocatalytic activity of MOF-5 and N-CQD/MOF-5 treated by different activation methods. (d) Recycling experiment of 2-N-CQD/MOF-5. (e) Schematic diagram of N-CQD/MOF-5 photocatalytic reduction of Cr(VI). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 156 with permission from Qin, X., copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 22  Proposed mechanism for TC photodegradation with MWCNT@MOF-derived In2S3. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 162 with permission from Pi, Y., copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 23  Comparison of TA decay kinetics of (a) Mn-TBAPy-BK (probed at 630 nm) and (b) Mn-TBAPy-NS (probed at 605 nm). Schematic of proposed photoinduced excited state relaxation and electron transfer to Pt dynamics in (c) Mn-TBAPy-BK and (d) Mn-TBAPy-NS MOFs. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 85 with permission from Xiao, Y., copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Photogenerated electron and hole transfer diagram in Cd0.2Zn0.8S@UiO-66-NH2, (b) PL spectrum, (c) photocurrent spectrum. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 185 with permission from Su, Y., copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 25  (A) Band structures of EY, Ni-MOF, Ni2P, and CeO2. (B) Schematic diagram of the visible light-induced electron transfer pathway. (C) Diagram of photocatalytic water splitting for hydrogen production by Ni-MOF/Ni2P/CeO2 photocatalyst. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 186 with permission from Gong, H., copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Solid-state 13C NMR spectra of rGO, NH2-MIL-125(Ti), and NH2-MIL-125(Ti)/rGO. (b) Enlarged spectra of rGO, NH2-MIL-125(Ti), and NH2-MIL-125(Ti)/rGO (100–160 ppm). (c) FTIR spectra of rGO, NH2-MIL-125(Ti), and NH2-MIL-125(Ti)/rGO. (d) FTIR spectra of NH2-MIL-125(Ti)/rGO. (e) Synthesis of π–π interaction between MOFs and reduced graphene oxide. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 192 with permission from Karthik, P., copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) The process of the CoP@ZnIn2S4 photocatalyst; (b) PXRD patterns of CoP, ZnIn2S4, and CoP@ZnIn2S4 and (c) UV-vis DRS of CoP, ZnIn2S4, and CoP@ZnIn2S4. (d) TEM image of CoP@ZnIn2S4. (e) HAADF-STEM image and element drawing image of CoP@ZnIn2S4. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 194 with permission from Wu, B., copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 28  DFT calculation of (a) CO2 absorption structure and (b) charge difference density of CO2 adsorption structure of Eu(II)2. (c) Proposed mechanism of photocatalytic CO2 reduction to HCOO−. [EuII–H2O–EuII] active site actually participates in the reduction of CO2 in the two-electron process. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 208 with permission from Yan, Z.-H., copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 29  Crystal structures and characterization of MOFs. The macrocyclic π-electrons of the linker (A) TBCP, (B) TBML, (C) TML, (D) TM, and (E) TNP. Crystal structures of MOFs (F) TBCP-MOF, (G) TBML-MOF, (H) TML-MOF, (I) TM-MOF, and (J) TNP-MOF with the expansion of the π-conjugated system within the MOF. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 104 with permission from Zeng, J.-Y., copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 30  Structures of Ren-MOF and Ag⊂Ren-MOF for plasmon-enhanced photocatalytic CO2 conversion. (a) Zr6O4(OH)4(–CO2)12 secondary building units are combined with BPDC and ReTC linkers to form Ren-MOF. (b) Ren-MOF coated on Ag nanocubes for the enhanced photocatalytic conversion of CO2. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 211 with permission from Choi, K. M., copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) Synthesis and structure of In–Fe/CoTCPP-MOFs. (b) The PXRD patterns of In–Fe1.91TCPP-MOF, In–Co1.71TCPP-MOF, and In–InTCPP-MOF and simulated patterns of In–FeTCPP-MOF. (c and d) Fe 2p and N 2p XPS spectra of In–Fe1.91TCPP-MOF. (e and f) FT-IR and UV-vis spectra of In–Fe1.91TCPP-MOF, In–Co1.71TCPP-MOF, and In-TCPP-MO, respectively. (g) Steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra of H2TCPP, In–Fe1.91TCPP-MOF, In–Co1.71TCPP-MOF, and In–InTCPP-MOF with excitation wavelength of 515 nm. (h) The electronic configuration of the metal centers for [FeII(Por2−)(COOH−)]− and [CoII(Por2−)(COOH−)]− in the metal–carbon interactions. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 212 with permission from Wang, S.-S., copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 32  (I) Time–production plot of CO over irradiated Zn2GeO4/Mg-MOF-74. (II) FT-IR spectra of the (a) Zn2GeO4 nanorods, (b) Mg-MOF-74, (c) Zn2GeO4/Mg-MOF-74 physical mixture, and (d) Zn2GeO4/Mg-MOF-74 composites. (III) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of the Zn2GeO4/Mg-MOF-74 composites. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 216 with permission from Zhao, H., copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 33  Chemical diagram for making a hollow C–In2O3@ZnCo2O4 heterojunction. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 218 with permission from Zhao, C., copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 34  Proposed mechanism of photocatalytic reduction of CO2 reduction and dehydrogenation by THIQ under visible light. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 226 with permission from Deng, X., copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 35  Perspective views of (a) UiO-67, (b) UiO-67-NH2(1), and (c) UiO-67-NH2(2); (d) structure of the defective Zr6 node. (e) BPDC linker for UiO-67 and its –NH2 modified forms for UiO-67-NH2(1) and UiO-67-NH2(2). (f) Adsorption mechanism of UiO-67-NH2 toward p-ASA. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 227 with permission from Tian, C., copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 36  Possible transformation pathways of SMX by (a) N–ZnO/C@BiM (b) HOMO (c) and bond order (d) of SMX. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 163 with permission from Wang, A., copyright 2022.	 
2H+ + 2e− → H2 Hydrogen evolution half reaction (HER)

 	Fig. 37  (a) The fsTA spectra of the Hf-[(TCPP)Zn]-MOF, HER-MOF, and Hf-[(TCPP)Pt]-MOF. (b) Time trace nsTA spectra at 490 nm of Hf-[(TCPP)Zn]-MOF and HER-MOF. (c) Time trace nsTA spectra at 490 nm of the HER-MOF and HER-MOF + 0.015 mM phenol. (d) The fsTA spectra of the WOR-MOF, WOR-MOF + FeCl3, and WOR-MOF + Na2S2O8 at 5ps. (e) Photocatalytic hydrogen evolution cycle and photocatalytic water oxidation cycle. (f) Energy level diagram of overall water splitting. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 64 with permission from Hu, H., copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 38  (a) Time profile of H2 production by Co–Ru-UIO-67(bpy). (b) Recovery of the Co–Ru-UIO-67(bpy) catalyst after several 5 h experiments. (c) Generally accepted catalytic pathway for the photoinduced generation of H2 with molecular photosensitizers (PS) and catalysts. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 231 with permission from Yang, S., copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 39  (a) Structural model of Co3O4; (b) electrostatic potential in the middle of the Co3O4 structure; (c) structural model of P-doped P@Co3O4; (d) electrostatic potential in the middle of the P@Co3O4 structure; (e) the electronic energy band structure and density of states (DOS) of Co3O4; and (f) the electronic energy band structure and density of states (DOS) of P@Co3O4. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 232 with permission from Zhang, L., copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 40  Proposed mechanism and sequence of intermediates for the catalytic formation of HCO2H, CO, HCHO, CH3OH, and CH4 from CO2. [M] = a metal center. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 233 with permission from Asselin, P. & Harvey, P. D., copyright 2022.	 

H2O + e− → H˙ + OH−
	(1)

*CO + H˙ → *CHO
	(2)

*CHO + OH− → HCOOH + e−
	(3)

 	Fig. 41  (A) Proposed design strategy of the disordered spongy Ni (TPA/TEG) composite by introducing soft Ni-TEG building units into a Ni (TPA) framework through laser-chemical reaction. XRD patterns (B), FTIR spectra (C), EDX spectra (D), TGA curves (E), and XPS spectra (F) of the laser-chemical tailored Ni (TPA/TEG) and Ni (TPA) composites. a.u., arbitrary units. (G) Possible conversion pathways leading to the formation of HCOOH, CH3COOH, and CH3CH2OH via proton-coupled one-, four-, and eight-electron steps, respectively. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 234 with permission from Niu, K., copyright 2017.	 
CO2 → *COOH → *CO → *CHO → *CH2O → *CH2OH → CH3OH → *CH3 → CH4.

 	Fig. 42  (I) PDOS of Co-PMOF monolayers. (II) Band edge positions of the CBM and VBM with CO2/CH4 potential. (III) Work functions of Co-PMOF monolayers. (IV) Gibbs free energy diagrams (ΔG's) of CO2 reduction for Co-PMOF monolayers. (V) PDOS of *CHO intermediates adsorbed on Co-PMOF monolayers. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 236 with permission from Wang, C., copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 43  (a) Isosurfaces (level 0.005) of charge density differences on MOF-808-EDTA with Cu2+ and Ni2+. (b), Isosurfaces (level 0.005) of charge density differences on MOF-808-CuNi with CO2 molecules. (c) In situ DRIFTS spectra. (d) Gibbs free energy diagram. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 237 with permission from Li, J., copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 44  (a) DRIFTS spectra obtained during CO desorption on InCu/PCN. (b) In situ DRIFTS spectra obtained at different irradiation times during CO2 photoreduction on InCu/PCN. (c) Charge-density difference plot of InCu/PCN. (d) Gibbs free energy diagrams and CO2 to ethanol photoreduction pathways on InCu/PCN, Cu/PCN, and In/PCN. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 240 with permission from Shi, H., copyright 2022.	 
1D	One-dimensional
2D	Two-dimensional
3D	Three-dimensional
ABHB	4,4′-(Anthracene-9,10-diyl)bis(2-hydroxybenzoic acid)
ACP	Alkaline phosphatase
AOP	Advanced oxidation process
AQE	Apparent quantum efficiency
BDC	p-Benzenedicarboxylic acid
BET	Brunauer–Emmett–Teller
BPA	Bisphenol A
BSA	Bovine serum albumin
bpy	2,2′-Bipyridine
CB	Conduction band
CP	Co-polymer
CS	Charge separation
CIP	Ciprofloxacin
CNTs	Carbon nanotubes
COFs	Covalent organic frameworks
dcbpy	Dicarboxy-2,2′-bipyridine
DEA	Diethylamine
DEF	n-Diethylformamide
DETA	Diethylenetriamine
DHIQ	3,4-Dihydroisoquinoline
DF	Diclofenac
DFT	Density functional theory
DMF	n-Dimethylformamide
DMSO	Dimethyl sulfoxide
DOS	Density of states
DRS	Diffuse reflection spectra
Ea	Activation energy
EDS	Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy
EDLCs	Electric double layer capacitors
EIS	Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy
EHP	Photogenerated electron–hole pair
EN	Ethylenediamine
ET	Electron transfer
EPR	Electron paramagnetic resonance
ESR	Electron spin resonance spectroscopy
EXAFS	X-ray absorption fine structure
fsTA	Femtosecond and nanosecond transient absorption spectroscopies
FTIR	Fourier-transform infrared spectrometry
GCE	Glassy carbon electrode
g-C3N4	Graphite carbon nitride
GO	Graphene oxide
H2TCPP	Tetrakis(4-carboxyphenyl)porphyrin
HER	Hydrogen evolution reaction
HOMO	Highest occupied molecular orbital
HSAB	Hard/soft acid/base principle
IRMOFs	Isoreticular metal–organic frameworks
LCCT	Ligand-cluster charge transfer
LIBs	Lithium-ion batteries
LMCT	Ligand–metal charge transfer
LSPR	Local surface plasmon resonance
LUMO	Lowest unoccupied molecular orbital
LVX	Levofloxacin
MB	Methylene blue
MILs	Lavoisier Institute Materials
MLCT	Metal-to-ligand charge transfer
MO	Methyl orange
MOFs	Metal organic frameworks
NH3-SCR	NH3 selective catalytic reduction
ORR	Oxygen reduction reaction
PCNs	Porous coordination networks
PL	Photoluminescence spectroscopy
PMD	Photochemical molecular device
RhB	Rhodamine B
rGO	Reduced graphene oxide
SEM	Scanning electron microscopy
SBU	Secondary building units
SMX	Sulfamethoxazole
TA	Instantaneous absorption spectroscopy
TC	Tetracycline
TCPP	Tetrakis(4-carboxyphenyl)porphyrin
TEG	Triethylene glycol
TEM	Transmission electron microscopy
TETA	Triethylenetetramine
TEOA	Triethanolamine
THIQ	1,2,3,4-Tetrahydroisoquinoline
TNP	Tetrakis(4-carboxybiphenyl)naphthalene porphyrin
TON	Turnover number
TPA	Terephthalic acid
UIO	University of Oslo
VB	Valence band
VBM	Valence band maximum
XTA	X-ray transient absorption spectra
XPS	X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
ZIFs	Zeolite-imidazolite framework
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3cy00479a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
