Nanoporous black silicon photocathode for H 2 production by photoelectrochemical water splitting   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1EE01124C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1EE01124C
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1690-1694Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsNanoporous black silicon photocathode for H2 production by photoelectrochemical water splitting†

        
          
            Jihun 
            Oh
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Todd G. 
            Deutsch
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Hao-Chih 
            Yuan
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Howard M. 
            Branz
          
        
      
National Renewable Energy Laboratory, 1617 Cole Blvd., Golden, 80401, USA. E-mail: jihun.oh@nrel.gov;  Fax: +1-303-630-2045;   Tel: +1-303-384-7828
Received 
      2nd February 2011
    , Accepted 10th March 2011First published on 5th April 2011AbstractNanostructured Si eliminates several critical problems with Si photocathodes and dramatically improves a photoelectrochemical (PEC) reaction important to water-splitting. Our nanostructured black Si photocathodes improve the H2 production by providing (1) near-ideal anti-reflection that enables the absorption of most incident light and its conversion to photogenerated electrons and (2) extremely high surface area in direct contact with water that reduces the overpotential needed for the PEC hydrogen half-reaction. Application of these advances would significantly improve the solar H2 conversion efficiency of an ideal tandem PEC system. Finally, the nanostructured Si surface facilitates bubble evolution and therefore reduces the need for surfactants in the electrolyte.

Broader context
H2 production by photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting is a potential route to the direct conversion of solar energy into a clean and renewable fuel. Sustainable PEC H2 production imposes strict constraints on the semiconductor electrodes including electronic band positions with respect to the water redox levels, chemical stability in water and abundance of component elements in Earth's crust. Silicon, which already dominates the world photovoltaic industry with more than 10 GW produced annually, is a non-toxic and earth-abundant element with a promising band structure for solar photoconversion. Si-based water-splitting systems could therefore realize low-cost, easily manufactured, and sustainable solar H2fuel production. In this report, we demonstrate that the nanostructured Si surface can significantly improve 3 critical properties of Si for PEC H2 production. Our nanoporous black Si increases the H2-producing photocurrent density by about 20%, reduces the overpotential needed for H2 generation by more than 70 mV and facilitates H2 gas evolution.

Photoelectrochemical (PEC) production of H2 at semiconductor/electrolyte interfaces has drawn much attention as a viable route to direct conversion of solar energy to a storable and clean fuel.1,2Silicon is an earth-abundant semiconductor that dominates the world photovoltaic (PV) industry and is an equally promising material for the photocathode in a PEC system that produces H2. Si has a small band gap (Eg = 1.12 eV) well-matched to the solar spectrum and a conduction band edge position more negative than the hydrogen evolution reaction potential, E0 (H+/H2), for reduction of water to H2.3,4 A complete system for conversion of solar energy to fuel requires addition of either a series-connected n-type photoanode, which completes a tandem photochemical diode and implements the Z-scheme for solar water-splitting,5–9 or an external power source.
One problem with a planar water–silicon interface is that about 25% of incident photons are reflected away from the silicon surface, and these cannot produce electron–hole pairs. To maximize conversion of solar energy to H2fuel, a low reflectance Si surface is required. For anti-reflection (AR) in solid-state Si PV devices, quarter-wavelength-thick films of SiNx, indium tin oxide (ITO) or other materials are applied atop µm scale surface texture; this provides both destructive interference from the film and a geometric optics effect from the large-scale texture. For photoelectrochemical generation of H2, however, it has not been possible to implement the conventional AR coatings used in solid-state PV devices. Coatings can interfere with the junction at the semiconductor/electrolyte interface that, upon illumination, drives photoelectrolysis. If these AR coatings are insulating (e.g., SiNx), they prevent necessary charge transfer from Si to the interface between the AR coating and the electrolyte. Oxide AR coatings (e.g., ITO10 and WO311) suffer from corrosive chemical instability in contact with the aggressive aqueous electrolytes. Furthermore, single-layer AR coatings effectively prevent reflection only in a narrow band of wavelengths (λ) and for a narrow range of incident light angles, while efficient PEC conversion in sunlight requires broadband antireflection that works at all times of day and in diffuse light. Silicon textured with µm scale pyramids significantly enhanced the electrical current from its PEC junction with a non-aqueous electrolyte by a geometric optics effect distinct from the effect of nanostructures studied here.12
A surface with nanoscale periodic or aperiodic features can suppress the reflectance from a semiconductor or other materials by creating an optical density gradient from the top surface to the bulk of the materials.13–16 To avoid back-scattering of light, the nanopores or nanowires that comprise the density-graded surface should have diameters smaller than the wavelength of incident photons, λ, within the material. By metal-assisted etching of nanopores to form sub-50 nm diameter pores with a random distribution of depths ranging from 0 to 250 nm below the top surface, we reduced the reflection of silicon in air to below 5% across the usable solar spectrum with λ < 1.3 µm and over a wide incidence angle.16 Deeper pores reduce the reflection on this ‘black’ Si still further.15,16
In addition to the near-ideal AR it provides, the nanostructured Si dramatically improves the H2 production efficiency and should improve the chemical stability against corrosion by providing an extremely high surface area for the PEC hydrogen half-reaction. The nanostructure reduces the local current density required to produce photoelectrochemical products at a given rate per unit of semiconductor area. This reduces the overpotential needed at the photoelectrode and would improve the solar conversion efficiency of an ideal tandem PEC system. In addition, the reduced current density through the local surface may improve the chemical stability against corrosion in PEC water splitting electrolytes. Finally, when the entire absorber is structured at the micron17 or nanometer scale,18–20 the reduced collection lengths for photogenerated carriers would mean lower-cost semiconductor materials could be used, even if they have poor electronic properties and short minority-carrier diffusion lengths.21 Similarly, nanostructured metal oxides have been used for PEC water splitting but large band gaps and poor electrical properties of the materials limit the efficiency of the water oxidation half-reaction by sunlight.22,23 Thus, demonstration of effective nanostructured Si photoelectrodes provides an important step toward efficient, cost-effective and stable solar fuel production by PEC.
Enhanced photoresponse of nanostructured Si photoelectrodes has been demonstrated previously using various redox couples in photoelectrochemical cells18–20,24 that generate electricity using a semiconductor–electrolyte junction. For example, n-type nano-textured Si (made by PEC etching) showed about 20% improvement in photocurrent density and quantum efficiency due to the reduced reflectance, and improved photocorrosion resistance in concentrated HI due to the increased surface area.24 More recently, n-type Si nanowire arrays (made by metal-assisted etching) showed slightly increased conversion efficiency, compared with planar Si, in a solution containing a Br2/Br−redox couple.18 We believe, however, that ours is the first report on the use of nanostructured Si photoelectrodes to produce PEC fuels such as H2.
In this work, we demonstrate that nanoporous ‘black’ Si (made by metal-assisted etching) with reflectivity <2% over whole solar spectrum is a more effective photocathode for H2 production by the water splitting half-reaction, compared to a polished Si electrode. Photoelectrochemical water splitting tests under simulated 1 sun illumination show that the production rate of H2 is 20% higher due to enhanced photon absorption, compared to a planar control. In addition, the overpotential to create H2 is reduced more than 70 mV, likely due to the large surface area. Finally, we find that the nanoporous Si promotes efficient H2 gas evolution by reducing the bubble adhesion to the electrode surface; this reduces the need for a surfactant.

Fig. 1(a) shows a cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the nanoporous Si we used as a photocathode to produce H2 from water. The nanoporous Si was fabricated by a single-step metal-assisted etching technique (see ESI† for this and other experimental details). We immersed a 300 µm thick Si wafer in a mixed solution of HAuCl4, HF, H2O2, and water;16,25Au nanoparticles are formed in situ by reduction of HAuCl4 by H2O2, and the Au nanoparticles catalyze the local oxidation of Si by H2O2, as they contact the Si surface.16,25,26HF etches the oxidized Si along the [001] directions of a (100) Si wafer to form vertically oriented nanopores of various depths. We then removed the Au nanoparticles with an I2/KI solution. Although Au impurities with a peak concentration of about 1018 cm−3 remain near the etched surface and may cause some carrier recombination, we have fabricated a confirmed 16.8%-efficient black Si PV cell without any AR layer other than the nanoporous black Si.25 As shown in Fig. 1(a), the pores have conical shape with a diameter of about 20 nm at the middle of the pores and depth of up to 590 nm. The pore depth distribution provides a roughly linear density (and index of refraction) gradient across the nanoporous layer.25 From the cross-sectional SEM image, we estimate that the surface area of the nanoporous Si was increased about 10 times above that of the polished Si.
 Fig. 1  
Nanostructure and optical reflectance of Si photocathodes. (a) Cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the nanoporous Si fabricated by the one-step metal-assisted etching process. The conical pore shapes (∼20 nm diameter) and the non-uniform distribution of pore depths combine to create a density-graded layer that suppresses the optical reflectance. (b) The measured total hemispherical optical reflectance of polished and nanoporous Si in air, and the calculated reflectance of polished Si in water. Nanoporous Si shows broadband anti-reflection properties with optical reflectance <2% over whole solar spectrum. The polished Si reflects about 25% of sunlight at the Si–water interface. 

Fig. 1(b) shows the measured total hemispherical reflectance spectra of the nanoporous Si in air, compared to the measured reflectance spectra of polished Si. We also show the reflectance spectra of polished Si in water, as calculated from the known optical constants. Because the index of refraction of water (1.33) is closer than that of air to the index of Si (∼3.5), the reflectance from Si in water is smaller than that of Si in air. From Fig. 1(b), it is clear that the nanoporous Si suppresses reflection over the entire solar spectrum with λ above the Si band gap. The reflectance increase at λ > 1000 nm is caused by reflection of weakly absorbed near-band edge light from the Al contact at the back surface of the wafer, not from reflection at the nanoporous front surface. The average reflectance of our nanoporous Si from 350–1000 nm, weighted by the AM1.5 solar photon flux, is 1.38% in air; this reflection will be even smaller in water. For comparison, 24.8% of incident sunlight is reflected away at the polished Si–water interface. Assuming that all light not reflected at the Si–water interface will produce current (unity photoresponse and an infinite wafer thickness), we calculate that our nanoporous Si could provide 41.7 mA cm−2 for production of H2 from the AM1.5 solar photon flux between 350 and 1100 nm, about 9.4 mA cm−2 more photocurrent density than polished Si. For comparison, Si without any surface reflection could generate 42.95 mA cm−2 under the same illumination.

Fig. 2 compares the photoelectrochemical current density versus the potential of the working nanoporous Si and the polished Si photocathodes during the reduction of water to H2; a Pt counterelectrode is the anode for the water-splitting and the potentials are measured against a Ag/AgCl (3 M KCl) reference electrode. The PEC response is measured under simulated AM1.5 illumination, in 0.5 M sulfuric acid with a surfactant (see ESI† for experimental details). The limiting photocurrent density of the nanoporous Si (associated with the maximum H2 production rate by PEC water electrolysis) increased to about −36 mA cm−2, compared to about −30 mA cm−2 on the polished Si. The dark current density of the nanoporous cathode is −186 µA cm−2 at a cathodic potential of –1.5 V vs.Ag/AgCl, increased from −88 µA cm−2 for the polished Si. The suppression of reflectance from the density-graded layer leads to an enhanced H2 production rate equivalent to 6 mA cm−2 in photocurrent density. Fig. 2 also shows that the current density–voltage, j–V, curve of the nanoporous Si has shifted to a less negative V compared to the polished Si photocathode; a smaller bias is needed to produce H2 at the same rate. The dotted j–V curve of Fig. 2 is the polished Si curve, with j rescaled by a factor of 1.2 to match the limiting photocurrent density of the nanoporous Si. This rescaling makes it clear that the anodic shift of the j–V curve of the nanoporous Si is caused mainly by improved electrochemical performance of the nanostructured Si, not from the increase in photocurrent due to suppressed reflection.
 Fig. 2  Photoelectrochemical (PEC) current–voltage curves of Si photocathodes during the water splitting half-reaction to produce H2 under simulated 1 sun illumination. The j–V curves are scanned from −1.5 V vs.Ag/AgCl to 0.05 V vs. open-circuit potential (OCP) in 0.5 M sulfuric acid, with addition of Zonyl FSN-100 as a surfactant. The black dotted line normalizes the j–V curve of the polished Si to the limiting photocurrent density of the nanoporous Si and indicates that the anodic shift of the nanoporous Si originates from the increased surface area. The inset shows the dark current density of the nanoporous and polished Si electrodes in the same electrolyte. 
Increasing the effective surface area, Aeff, of an electrode above its projected area provides additional sites for the water reduction reaction at the semiconductor–water interface, and reduces the overpotential for PEC H2 production. At the same current density per unit electrode area, a nanoporous electrode surface has a far smaller local current density. This contributes to a positive shift of the j–V curves for the water-splitting half-reaction to generate H2. In Fig. 2, the onset voltage, Vos, which is defined as a voltage where the reduction photocurrent exceeds the dark current, exhibits 70 mV of anodic shift in the nanoporous Si compared with the polished Si. We measure Vos = –0.10 V for the nanoporous Si and Vos = –0.17 V for the polished Si, against the Ag/AgCl reference. At the potentials where the photocurrent density approaches the illumination limit, this anodic shift is about 200 mV. The anodic shift occurs despite the dark current increase shown in the inset of Fig. 2, which would normally decrease (cathodically shift) the overpotential needed for the PEC H2 reaction.17 On the other hand, the area-induced anodic shift may be enhanced by PEC catalytic activity of metal impurities. The measured Au impurity concentration in the porous layer with a peak concentration of ∼1018 cm−3 implies that catalytic activity of surface Au atoms or clusters may contribute to the anodic shift of the j–V curve. In addition, the cathodic pre-treatment of the electrodes could induce electro-deposition of sub-ppm level metal impurities from the electrolyte solution on both the polished and nanoporous Si electrodes,27 possibly leading to higher anodic shift on the nanoporous Si. Still, we attribute most of the anodic shift to the high effective area of the nanostructured photocathode. This combination of increased limiting photocurrent (due to reduced reflection) and the anodic shift of photoreduction current (due mainly to the increase in Aeff) for the nanoporous Si should provide better PEC water splitting performance when incorporated in a complete water splitting system.‡
While the large effective surface area of nanoporous Si increases the number of reaction sites for H2 production to reduce the overpotential, the nanoporous Si also increases the number of surface defect states and/or Au atoms that can cause loss of photo-excited charge carriers by recombination. Fig. 3 compares the incident-photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE), or external quantum efficiency, of the nanoporous Si and polished Si photoelectrodes previously used for the PEC test (Fig. 2). We measure the IPCE at V = –1.0 V vs.Ag/AgCl, where the limiting photocurrent density (maximum H2 production) is achieved on each photocathode. As shown in Fig. 3, reduced reflection from the density-graded layer of the nanoporous Si provides higher IPCE for photons with wavelengths above 470 nm. For example, the IPCE for H2 production by the nanoporous Si is about 90% from photons with λ = 600 nm, while the IPCE of the polished Si at 600 nm is about 76%. The correspondingly higher limiting current seen in the nanoporous Sij–V curve strongly suggests that this increased IPCE extends all the way to the Si absorption edge at about 1100 nm. Correcting for the optical reflection at the Si–water interface, we find that about 9 to10% of λ = 600 nm photons absorbed in nanoporous Si photocathode do not help generate H2, while nearly 100% of absorbed 600 nm photons in the polished Si contribute photoelectrons used for H2 generation. Notably, the IPCE of the nanoporous Si decreases with the shorter wavelength, and even becomes smaller than that of the polished Si at λ < 470 nm. Poor spectral response of the nanoporous black Si at these short wavelengths is likely due to high surface recombination originating from increased surface area and/or recombination at Au impurities.25 This loss of blue response suggests that the maximum H2 production rate might actually decrease if Aeff of the nanostructured electrode was increased further. To optimize H2 production, therefore, it will be critical to control the effective surface area of the anti-reflective nanostructure and find an optimum balance between increased surface recombination and reduced overpotential for the PEC reaction. Addition of catalysts at the surface should also enhance the likelihood that a photoelectron reduces protons to produce H2 instead of recombining with holes in Si. We note that poor blue response of the nanostructured Si electrode would have little impact on overall water splitting performance in a stacked tandem configuration in which the short wavelength photons would first be absorbed in a photoanode with a larger band gap.
 Fig. 3  Incident-photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) of Si photocathodes for the water reduction half-reaction to produce H2. The electrolyte is 0.5 M sulfuric acid with added surfactant (Zonyl FSN-100, Dupont). Both electrodes are biased at −1.0 V vs.Ag/AgCl to achieve the limiting photocurrent. 
To maintain the maximum H2 production rate for prolonged periods of PEC water splitting, hydrogen molecules must be removed at the Si–water interface at a rate equal to the PEC production rate. Since the hydrogen molecules have low solubility in water, they leave the electrode surface by forming H2 bubbles. A surfactant is normally added to the electrolyte to help nucleate and release the H2 bubbles efficiently. Fig. 4 compares the effect of adding surfactant to the electrolyte on the H2 gas evolution kinetics during potentiostatic test in 0.5 M sulfuric acid at V = −1.5 V vs.Ag/AgCl. Both nanoporous and polished Si electrodes exhibit stable limiting photocurrent density with the surfactant added. Remarkably, even without a surfactant, the nanoporous Si provides more than 40% higher stable H2 production rates than a polished Si electrode, a far higher increase than can be achieved by adding surfactant to the electrolyte used with polished Si. Without a surfactant there are also much larger fluctuations of the current density on polished Si than on nanoporous Si. We associate these fluctuations with changes to the effective (wet) surface area which are caused by growth and release of bubbles. Visual observation and photographs confirm that the bubbles are smaller in size and release more frequently on the nanoporous surface than on a polished surface, as shown in Fig. 4(b) and (c). Previously, it was reported that arrays of vertically aligned nanowires and nanopores dramatically promote evolution of bubbles, which enables reduced superheating in a pool boiling heat transfer process; this effect was attributed to increased heterogeneous bubble nucleation density and an increase in the hydrophilicity of the nanostructured surface.28–30 However, the exact mechanism for improved bubble evolution at such nanostructured surfaces is still debated.30 Since bubble evolution at the heated surface during boiling is analogous to production of bubbles at a gas-evolving PEC electrode,31 we believe that our nanoporous surface provides active heterogeneous bubble nucleation sites that facilitate H2 evolution at the black Si photocathode. Nanoporous metallic electrodes might also improve other gas-evolving electrochemical applications such as water electrolysis.
 Fig. 4  Effects of a surfactant on H2 gas evolution from nanoporous and polished Si photocathodes. (a) Potentiostatic current density traces for nanoporous and polished Si for the water reduction reaction to produce H2. Both electrodes were biased at −1.5 V vs.Ag/AgCl in 0.5 M sulfuric acid under 1 sun illumination. Dashed lines are experiments with Zonly FSN-100 surfactant added; solid lines are without surfactant. Photographs taken during the potentiostatic experiments are shown in (b) for polished Si and in (c) for nanoporous Si. Clearly, the nanoporous layer without a surfactant facilitates release of H2 bubbles more efficiently than the polished Si with a surfactant. The black appearance of the nanoporous Si in (c) is due to suppressed optical reflection of visible photons. Scale bars are approximately 5 mm long. 
In summary, we demonstrate that a nanoporous Si photocathode dramatically improves photoelectrochemical H2 production by the water reduction half-reaction, when compared to a polished Si photocathode. The nanoporous black Si fabricated by our one-step metal-assisted etching technique provides broadband anti-reflection in water and a high density of surface reaction sites for the H2-production reaction. The nanoporous Si layer exhibits ∼20% increase in photocurrent density by suppressing reflection, and reduces the overpotential for H2 generation more than 70 mV by increasing the effective surface area of the electrode. Furthermore, the nanoporous Si promotes H2 gas evolution from the electrode surface and reduces the need for added surfactant. Our findings suggest that density-graded nanostructures applied to the semiconductor photoelectrodes used for solar fuel production can enhance optical absorption and maximize the photoelectrochemical reaction rate.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Bobby To for SEM characterization and Robert Reedy for secondary ion mass spectrometry profiling of the Au concentrations. We thank Drs Arthur Nozik, John Turner and Fatima Toor of NREL for helpful discussions. This work was supported under U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) Contract No. DE-AC36-08-GO28308. J. Oh, T. G. Deutsch and H. M. Branz were supported by the SISGR program of the DOE, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Division of Chemical Sciences, Biosciences, and Geosciences. H.-C. Yuan was supported by a DOE American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) Photovoltaic Supply Chain and Crosscutting Technologies grant.
Notes and references
J. A. Turner, Science, 1999, 285, 687–689 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS .
R. N. Dominey, N. S. Lewis, J. A. Bruce, D. C. Bookbinder and M. S. Wrighton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1982, 104, 467–482 CrossRef CAS .
M. Szklarczyk, J. O’M. Bockris, V. Brusic and G. Sparrow, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1984, 9, 707–715 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Nozik, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1977, 30, 567–569 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, T. Deutsch and J. A. Turner, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, F91–F96 CrossRef CAS .

          E. L. Warren, S. W. Boettcher, J. R. McKone and N. S. Lewis, in Solar Hydrogen and Nanotechnology V, ed. H. Idriss and H. Wang, Proceedings of SPIE Vol. 7700, SPIE, Bellingham, WA,  2010, 77001F Search PubMed .
S. W. Boettcher, E. L. Warren, M. C. Putnam, E. A. Santori, D. Turner-Evans, M. D. Kelzenberg, M. G. Walter, J. R. McKone, B. S. Brunschwig, H. A. Atwater and N. S. Lewis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1216–1219 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Gaarenstroom, M. P. Balogh, M. C. Militello, R. A. Waldo, C. A. Wong, N. A. Kelly, T. L. Gibson and M. D. Kundrat, Surf. Interface Anal., 2005, 37, 385–392 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Yoon, D. K. Seo, Y. S. Cho and D. H. Kang, J. Appl. Phys., 1998, 84, 3954–3959 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Gronet, N. S. Lewis, G. Cogan and J. Gibbons, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1983, 80, 1152–1156 CrossRef CAS .
R. B. Stephens and G. D. Cody, Thin Solid Films, 1977, 45, 19–29 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-F. Huang, S. Chattopadhyay, Y.-J. Jen, C.-Y. Peng, T.-A. Liu, Y.-K. Hsu, C.-L. Pan, H.-C. Lo, C.-H. Hsu, Y.-H. Chang, C.-S. Lee, K.-H. Chen and L.-C. Chen, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 770–774 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chattopadhyay, Y. F. Huang, Y. J. Jen, A. Ganguly, K. H. Chen and L. C. Chen, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2010, 69, 1–35 CrossRef .
H. M. Branz, V. E. Yost, S. Ward, K. M. Jones, B. To and P. Stradins, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 231121 CrossRef .
S. W. Boettcher, J. M. Spurgeon, M. C. Putnam, E. L. Warren, D. B. Turner-Evans, M. D. Kelzenberg, J. R. Maiolo, H. A. Atwater and N. S. Lewis, Science, 2010, 327, 185–187 CrossRef CAS .
K. Peng, X. Wang and S.-T. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 163103 CrossRef .
A. P. Goodey, S. M. Eichfeld, K.-K. Lew, J. M. Redwing and T. E. Mallouk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 12344–12345 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yuan, H. Zhao, X. Liu, Z. S. Hasanali, Y. Zou, A. Levine and D. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 9680–9684 CAS .
B. M. Kayes, H. A. Atwater and N. S. Lewis, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97, 114302 CrossRef .
R. van de Krol, Y. Liang and J. Schoonman, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2311–2320 RSC .
A. Kay, I. Cesar and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 15714–15721 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lévy-Clément, A. Lagoubi, M. Neumann-Spallart, M. Rodot and R. Tenne, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1991, 138, L69–L71 CrossRef CAS .
H.-C. Yuan, V. E. Yost, M. R. Page, P. Stradins, D. L. Meier and H. M. Branz, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 123501 CrossRef .

          Y. Yan, H.-C. Yuan, V. E. Yost, K. Jones, M. Al-Jassim and H. M. Branz, Photovoltaic Specialists Conference (PVSC), 35th IEEE,  2010.
A. M. Azzam, J. O’M. Bockris, B. E. Conway and H. Rosenberg, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1950, 46, 918–927 RSC .
C. Li, Z. Wang, P.-I. Wang, Y. Peles, N. Koratkar and G. P. Peterson, Small, 2008, 4, 1084–1088 CrossRef CAS .
R. Chen, M.-C. Lu, V. Srinivasan, Z. Wang, H. H. Cho and A. Majumdar, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 548–553 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Lee, M. M. H. Bhuiya and K. J. Kim, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2010, 53, 4274–4279 CrossRef .
H. Vogt, Ö. Aras and R. J. Balzer, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2004, 47, 787–795 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details including fabrication procedures for nanoporous Si photoelectrodes and photoelectrochemical characterization. See DOI: 10.1039/c1ee01124c‡ If a heterogeneous catalyst (e.g., Pt) was intentionally added, its amount will need to be simultaneously optimized with the surface nanostructuring to minimize the reflectivity and maximize the anodic shift.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

Broader context
H2 production by photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting is a potential route to the direct conversion of solar energy into a clean and renewable fuel. Sustainable PEC H2 production imposes strict constraints on the semiconductor electrodes including electronic band positions with respect to the water redox levels, chemical stability in water and abundance of component elements in Earth's crust. Silicon, which already dominates the world photovoltaic industry with more than 10 GW produced annually, is a non-toxic and earth-abundant element with a promising band structure for solar photoconversion. Si-based water-splitting systems could therefore realize low-cost, easily manufactured, and sustainable solar H2fuel production. In this report, we demonstrate that the nanostructured Si surface can significantly improve 3 critical properties of Si for PEC H2 production. Our nanoporous black Si increases the H2-producing photocurrent density by about 20%, reduces the overpotential needed for H2 generation by more than 70 mV and facilitates H2 gas evolution.


 	Fig. 1  
Nanostructure and optical reflectance of Si photocathodes. (a) Cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the nanoporous Si fabricated by the one-step metal-assisted etching process. The conical pore shapes (∼20 nm diameter) and the non-uniform distribution of pore depths combine to create a density-graded layer that suppresses the optical reflectance. (b) The measured total hemispherical optical reflectance of polished and nanoporous Si in air, and the calculated reflectance of polished Si in water. Nanoporous Si shows broadband anti-reflection properties with optical reflectance <2% over whole solar spectrum. The polished Si reflects about 25% of sunlight at the Si–water interface.	 

 	Fig. 2  Photoelectrochemical (PEC) current–voltage curves of Si photocathodes during the water splitting half-reaction to produce H2 under simulated 1 sun illumination. The j–V curves are scanned from −1.5 V vs.Ag/AgCl to 0.05 V vs. open-circuit potential (OCP) in 0.5 M sulfuric acid, with addition of Zonyl FSN-100 as a surfactant. The black dotted line normalizes the j–V curve of the polished Si to the limiting photocurrent density of the nanoporous Si and indicates that the anodic shift of the nanoporous Si originates from the increased surface area. The inset shows the dark current density of the nanoporous and polished Si electrodes in the same electrolyte.	 

 	Fig. 3  Incident-photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) of Si photocathodes for the water reduction half-reaction to produce H2. The electrolyte is 0.5 M sulfuric acid with added surfactant (Zonyl FSN-100, Dupont). Both electrodes are biased at −1.0 V vs.Ag/AgCl to achieve the limiting photocurrent.	 

 	Fig. 4  Effects of a surfactant on H2 gas evolution from nanoporous and polished Si photocathodes. (a) Potentiostatic current density traces for nanoporous and polished Si for the water reduction reaction to produce H2. Both electrodes were biased at −1.5 V vs.Ag/AgCl in 0.5 M sulfuric acid under 1 sun illumination. Dashed lines are experiments with Zonly FSN-100 surfactant added; solid lines are without surfactant. Photographs taken during the potentiostatic experiments are shown in (b) for polished Si and in (c) for nanoporous Si. Clearly, the nanoporous layer without a surfactant facilitates release of H2 bubbles more efficiently than the polished Si with a surfactant. The black appearance of the nanoporous Si in (c) is due to suppressed optical reflection of visible photons. Scale bars are approximately 5 mm long.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details including fabrication procedures for nanoporous Si photoelectrodes and photoelectrochemical characterization. See DOI: 10.1039/c1ee01124c
‡ If a heterogeneous catalyst (e.g., Pt) was intentionally added, its amount will need to be simultaneously optimized with the surface nanostructuring to minimize the reflectivity and maximize the anodic shift.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
