Artificial light-harvesting antennae: electronic energy transfer by way of molecular funnels  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0CC02687E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0CC02687E
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 611-631Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsArtificial light-harvesting antennae: electronic energy transfer by way of molecular funnels

        
          
            Raymond 
            Ziessel
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Anthony 
            Harriman
          
          
        
      b
aLaboratoire de Chimie Organique et Spectroscopies Avancées (LCOSA), Ecole Européenne de Chimie, Polymères et Matériaux, Université de Strasbourg, 25 rue Becquerel, 67087 Strasbourg Cedex 02, France. E-mail: ziessel@inistra.fr;  Web: http://www-lmspc.u-strasbg.fr/lcosa Fax: 33 3 6885 2761;   Tel: 33 3 6885 222 2689
bMolecular Photonics Laboratory, School of Chemistry, Bedson Building, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK NE1 7RU. E-mail: anthony.harriman@ncl.ac.uk
Received 
      20th July 2010
    , Accepted 17th September 2010First published on 18th October 2010AbstractElectronic energy transfer (EET) plays a critical role in many biological processes and is used by nature to direct energy to a site where chemical reactions need to be initiated. Such EET can occur over large distances and can involve many individual molecules of identical, similar or disparate chemical identity. Advances in spectroscopy and data processing have allowed the rates of EET to be measured on extremely fast timescales such that improved mechanistic insight becomes feasible. At the same time, highly sophisticated synthetic operations have been devised that facilitate the isolation and purification of elaborate multi-component molecular arrays. A key feature of these arrays concerns the logical positioning of individual units in a way that favours directed EET along the molecular axis or along some other preferred pathway. The availability of these novel molecular materials allows close examination of popular theoretical models and paves the way for the development of advanced molecular sensors, artificial light harvesters, fluorescent labels and sensitizers. Of particular interest is the spectacular growth in the application of boron dipyrromethene dyes as basic reagents in such artificial photon collectors and these compounds have dominated the market in recent years because of their synthetic versatility and valuable photophysical properties. In this article, recent developments in the field are highlighted in terms of synthesis and subsequent spectroscopic exploration.
Raymond Ziessel
Doctor Raymond Ziessel gained a PhD in organic Chemistry from the University Louis Pasteur of Strasbourg under the guidance of Professor Jean-Marie Lehn and Doctor Jean-Pierre Sauvage. He is presently the Director of the Laboratoire de Chimie Organique et Spectroscopies Avancées (LCOSA) located at the Engineer School of Chemistry (ECPM) in Strasbourg. Recent research interests have focused on the preparation of novel liquid crystals and organogelators, metallo-polyacetylenes and lanthanide complexes for biomaterial labeling and time-resolved fluorescence imaging. He has published over 440 papers in International Journals and monographs, is co-author of 13 PCT patents, and has given 270 research lectures, in over 15 countries worldwide. He is the recipient of the Silver Medal CNRS award in 2000.
Anthony Harriman
Professor Anthony Harriman spent fourteen years at the Royal Institution, working on the fundamental issues relating to artificial photosynthesis in collaboration with Lord George Porter. This work was recognised by the award of the Corday-Morgan Medal (RSC) in 1984 and Le Prix Grammaticakis-Neumann Prize en Photochimie by the European Photochemistry Society in 1985. He moved to the University of Texas at Austin in 1988 to become Director of the Center for Fast Kinetics Research before moving to the University of Newcastle in October 1999. Research at Newcastle has been concerned with various aspects of light-induced energy and electron transfer in multi-component molecular systems and has involved several long-standing international collaborations. More than 360 publications have appeared in peer-reviewed journals and more than a hundred talks have been given at international conferences.
Introduction
Once again the attention of mankind has turned towards the urgent need to identify and harness supplies of renewable energy and, in particular, the concept of artificial photosynthesis has entered the popular vocabulary.1 In essence, this means that we must develop viable molecular systems able to store sunlight in the form of chemical or electrochemical potential. Such generic ideas are far from new and reappear each 20 years or so. One aspect of artificial photosynthesis which has been around since the early 1970s relates to the principle of trying to mimic some of the more essential features of the natural process, leading to the development of bio-inspired materials.2 Paramount among the multifarious steps associated with natural photosynthesis is the collection of sunlight by light-harvesting complexes (LHCs) and the subsequent transport of the absorbed photons around a large network of well-defined topology.3,4 This excitation energy is shuttled around the network until trapped at a reaction centre complex where it is used to initiate a charge-separation step.5 The resultant electrochemical energy is converted into chemical potential and stored in the form of carbohydrates and other valuable substances. Later, by way of a complex series of dark reactions, the accumulated sugars are oxidized in chemical processes so as to produce localised energy that can be adapted and used by the living organism. The machinery used to operate the reaction centre complex is based on the precise positioning of a series of redox co-factors able to create a gradient of electrochemical energy that spans the membrane and leads to long-range charge separation.6 As the result of protein engineering modified and amended over some billions of years, the primary pigments inherent to the reaction centre complex do not themselves function as large-scale photon collectors but leave this function to the LHCs.7 This arrangement ensures that the dark reactions of photosynthesis are not severely limited by the rate of light absorption at low photon flux.8 Furthermore, the special demands built into photon harvesting and charge separation can be optimised separately and over disparate evolutionary timescales. In this review, we focus on the construction of artificial LHCs using unnatural but bio-inspired reagents.
The largest natural light-absorbing antennae are found in dedicated green bacteria (i.e., chlorobiaceae), which contain from 1000 to 2000 bacteriochlorophyll molecules per reaction centre complex.9 In purple bacteria, the number of absorbing pigment molecules per reaction centre varies from 50 to 250 depending on the organism and environment.10 In higher plants, there are 200 or more chlorophyll-based antennae for each reaction centre.11 A remarkable feature of all such natural LHCs is that very few of the photons absorbed by the chromophores are lost at low photon density and so the reaction centres are supplied with a constant source of photons of appropriate energy.12 At high photon density, the system switches on special processes to deal with the overload and to protect the organism from the consequences of adventitious production of highly-reactive radicals. This type of inherent self-defense mechanism becomes an important feature of artificial arrays if the latter are to survive the harsh conditions associated with aerobic illumination.
A particularly high level of sophistication is reached with cyanobacteria and red algae which contain an assembly of antennae known as phycobilisomes.13 This supramolecular particle is so well constructed that a single photon absorbed anywhere within the structure is transferred to the few terminal acceptors in a unidirectional manner and in five to six kinetically significant steps.5 Remarkably, little energy is lost in the process and the elaboration of the actual design transcends that of the various models of light-harvesting systems proposed over the last few decades.4,14 The general operating principle of these systems involves collecting photonic energy at all wavelengths below a certain threshold value and then transferring that excitation energy over a vast collection of individual pigments. The first step involves a cascade effect in which excitation energy is transferred between dissimilar pigments, each process being driven by a thermodynamic factor that loses excess energy in the longest wavelength absorber. It is not excluded that some of these relay dyes absorb energy to a higher excited state or vibrational level. Subsequently, energy migration takes place whereby the excitation energy moves incoherently around the array until reaching the final acceptor. Each step in the overall reaction is fast, often ultrafast, so that a large distance is covered in a short space of time.15 This type of behaviour is essential for the LHC to compete with the effects of fluorescence and/or non-radiative decay of the excited state. The sheer speed of the process also serves to by-pass triplet formation and thereby helps to protect the system against oxidative stress.
It should be emphasized that in natural LHCs the pigments are arranged in extremely well-designed and precise networks that act in a cooperative fashion. For example, the LHC of the purple bacterium rhodopseudomonas acidophile16 arranges the pigments into rings of discrete size, with individual molecules being held in place by the protein scaffold. This realisation has led to tremendous effort being devoted to the synthesis of wheel-like porphyrin arrays.17 The availability of high-quality crystal structures of natural LHCs has also facilitated comprehensive studies into the mechanisms by which rapid electronic energy transfer (EET) takes place. A great amount is known now about both natural LHCs and the theory of EET so that, in principle, it should be possible to construct effective artificial analogues based on the cascade effect. Such materials could be used as organic solar concentrators, sensitisers for solar cells, unnatural neural networks, opto-electronic components or advanced signalling devices. The critical requisite is the ability to position reagents at the correct location in logically designed networks. Ideally, the main synthetic motif should involve supramolecular construction, but this is beyond our current capability.
There are many reviews dedicated to the design of linear and cyclic porphyrin arrays as artificial models for photosynthetic events.4a,18 Here we focus on the design and synthesis of artificial LHCs based on non-porphyrinic chromophores. In particular, we draw attention to the virtues of boron dipyrromethene (Bodipy) dyes as reagents with which to construct next-generation solar concentrators. Such compounds have been attached to a wide variety of ancillary fluorophores so as to facilitate directed EET processes in which the Bodipy functions as donor, acceptor or relay. Before doing so, we will briefly review selected EET events in related systems.
Multiple EET processes occurring in supramolecular systems
As mentioned above, the light-harvesting machinery of the phycobilisomes present in certain algae and marine bacteria is a near-perfect illustration of multiple EET events leading to the concentration of photonic energy at a preferred site. A key feature of these natural systems relates to the use of a protein matrix to assemble the various components into ordered arrays in such a way that some kind of self diagnosis and repair becomes possible. Recognising the severe difficulties associated with trying to duplicate the sophistication of photosynthetic systems, it has proved possible to mimic certain features at least in a crude manner. One such example makes use of well-defined biological structures to carefully position unnatural reagents,19 this situation being the opposite of the normal approach in which the rate of EET is used to elucidate complex biological structures.20Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) has been used extensively as a scaffold for a variety of chromophores due to its ability to anchor dyes at discrete sites along the backbone and to hybridise multiple dye-labelled oligonucleotides to a complementary strand.21 The main advantage of using DNA as a vehicle by which to assemble donor/acceptor pairs able to drive EET events stems from the ability to predict and control to some extent the mutual orientation of the attached reagents.22 In the case of flexible linkers the orientation is uncertain. A fine example of multi-labelled DNA encoding FAM (i.e., 6-carboxyfluorescein, λem at 525 nm), TAM (i.e., N,N,N′,N′-tetramethyl-6-carboxyrhodamine, λem at 585 nm) and Cy5 (i.e., cyanine-5 monofunctional dye, λem at 670 nm) fluorophores spaced by various lengths of 1′,2′-dideoxyribose phosphate chains has been used in combinatorial fluorescent EET tags for multiplex biological assays (Fig. 1).23 Different fluorescence emission signatures (λem) can be obtained from a single excitation wavelength and by altering the number of sugar phosphates interposed between the three fluorophores. By virtue of changing the spacer, the emission can be tuned so that unique ratiometric signatures are produced. Eight such tags, each bearing a unique fluorescence signal, have been engineered from three different dyes. Furthermore, genotyping assays using three-colour capillary array electrophoresis allow multiplex detection of six nucleotide polymorphisms.23
 Fig. 1  Molecular structure of the CFET tags adapted from ref. 23. The linkage between the fluorophores and the thymidine moieties is a six-methylene chain while DNA can be linked in place of the oligonucleotide sequence. 

Maltose binding protein (MBP) has been used to probe various protein-based multi-EET configurations. The donor portion of the sensing system consists of MBP modified with a long-wavelength absorbing cyanine (e.g., Cy3 or Cy3.5 for cyanine-3-monofunctional or cyanine-3,5-difunctional dyes) as can be seen from Fig. 2a. The acceptor portion of the sensor consists of a β-cyclodextrin (β-CD) modified with either the fluorescent cyanine Cy5 or the dark quencher QSY9. Binding of the modified β-CD to the dye-conjugated MBP results in the self-assembly of the EET complex and leads to an output signal at 669 nm (Fig. 2b).24
 Fig. 2  (a) Molecular structures of Cy3.5 and QSY9. (b) Schematic representation of the EET-based sensing scheme adapted from ref. 22. (c) A double EET-based system uses a quantum dot (QD) as energy input as reported in ref. 25. 
Added maltose displaces the β-CD adduct and thereby disrupts the complex, resulting in the appearance of the characteristic donor fluorescence at 596 nm. When β-CD pre-loaded with a dark quencher is employed, the system displays a remarkable OFF/ON switching process. A different format uses the Cy3-MBP conjugate as a relay between a quantum dot (QD) and the Cy3.5-labeled analogue of maltose linked to the central binding pocket of MBP (Fig. 2c). Although maltose sensing in this QD-MBP displacement sensor is based on changes in the ratio of emission from MBP-Cy3 and Cy3.5, the sensor is driven by the QD since this is the primary chromophore at 530 nm (Fig. 2c).25
Each of these examples of EET in supramolecular systems is made possible by the well-defined features of through-space energy transfer. In covalently attached donor/acceptor pairs, the situation might be more complicated in that through-bond electron-exchange interactions become possible. The two mechanisms, often referred to as Förster (or coulombic) and Dexter processes, exhibit quite different rate vs. distance dependences (see later) and distinguishing between the two mechanisms can be hazardous, especially at intermediate separation distances. Before expanding on this point we illustrate some of the more recent research conducted with Bodipy-based EET events.

EET involving simple Bodipy dyes
It is clear that multiplexing experiments of the type summarised above can be used to extract a considerable amount of information about the local environment simply by registering the emission profile with a suitable database compiled for the same excitation wavelength.21,26,27 This kind of strategy demands that the dyes possess narrow but intense absorption and fluorescence spectral profiles, with minimal overlap, and high emission quantum yields. Amongst the most popular dyes fluorescein, rhodamine, pyrene, perylene, rylene, perylene diimide, flexible cyanines (Alexa), and rigid cyanines such as 4,4-difluoro-4-bora-3a,4a-diaza-s-indacene (F-Bodipy) have been studied extensively.28 The upsurge of interest in the latter Bodipy dyes stems from their pronounced stability, high absorption coefficients, narrow emission profiles and fluorescence quantum yields that approach unity in many cases.29 Furthermore, well-established protocols are available that permit the facile introduction of disparate functionalities at the periphery of the dipyrrin core, including the meso position, and at the boron atom. The robust character of Bodipy dyes also facilitates post-functionalisation and allows the isolation of entire libraries of tailored dyes.30 The range can be further extended using combinatorial techniques based on the so-called “click” chemistry. Such protracted synthetic strategies are fully justified by the enormous variety of applications found for Bodipy derivatives, spanning from sensing materials, fluorescent probes, laser dyes and two-photon absorbers to soft matter (e.g., liquid crystals, organo-gelators, polymers) and electroluminescent devices (e.g., OLEDs and solar cells).31,32
A common problem found for organic fluorophores, or more generally for any singlet emitter, is the small gap between the excitation and emission wavelengths (i.e., the Stokes' shift). A small Stokes' shift leads to severe problems with achieving adequate resolution in fluorescence microscopy and can cause significant loss of emission intensity. To help overcome this difficulty, multi-component dyes have been introduced that operate by way of intramolecular EET.33 Conceptually, such systems are engineered from a donor–spacer–acceptor (D–Sp–A) dyad where the terminal emitters are linked by a non-emissive spacer in such a way that the donor can be illuminated with high selectivity. Provided the energetics are balanced appropriately, EET occurs from donor to acceptor, with the latter fluorescing at much longer wavelength. Such simple molecular systems are often termed EET cassettes.34 The challenge at the onset was to circumvent the inherent limitations of the classical fluorescein–rhodamine systems (e.g., poor optical resolution, limited photochemical stability, pH dependence, gel mobility shifts, etc.) by using functionalised Bodipy dyes. The original systems are sketched in Fig. 3 and start from the alkyne derivatives of the emissive dyes, which are subsequently cross-linked using a palladium catalyst. The first step involves a statistical reaction that provides the target compounds in reasonable yield.32
 Fig. 3  Electronic energy transfer cassettes based on various Bodipy dyes as adapted from ref. 32. 
It should be noted that dyads 2 and 3 possess a functional group for attaching the dye to a substrate but insolubility in aqueous media severely limits the range of potential applications. In each case, the overall efficiency of EET from the donor to the acceptor is about 95%. The pseudo-Stokes' shifts vary between 1450 and 4500 cm−1 while the fluorescence quantum yields recorded for the terminal acceptors range from 12 to 60% (Fig. 3). Steric crowding prevents compounds 1–3 from adopting a fully planar geometry. As a consequence, absorption spectra measured for these cassettes resemble linear combinations of the spectra of the individual moieties. From this viewpoint, these materials can be considered to act like independent modules linked to a preorganized platform. Interestingly, direct attachment of an anthracene module to Bodipyvia a Suzuki coupling reaction also provides a cassette (namely compound 4 in Fig. 4) for which a twisted conformation minimises conjugation between the subunits.35 This holds true also for the Bodipy-anthracenyl dyad, 5, prepared by Sonogashira cross-coupling.
 Fig. 4  Examples of anthracene-linked Bodipy dyes as adapted from ref. 35. 
The situation is somewhat different for compounds 6 and 7 since modest electronic communication between the terminals is evident from cyclic voltammetry studies. These compounds are not cassettes in the strict sense of the definition because the conjugated π-systems are not subjected to internal twisting. This situation is reflected by the fact that the absorption maxima are red-shifted and broader than those observed for compounds 4 and 5. Near complete EET is observed from the donor (anthracene) to the acceptor (Bodipy). Indeed, the quantum yields for Bodipy-type fluorescence are independent of excitation wavelength across the entire spectral window. The virtual Stokes' shifts are quite large, varying from 10300 cm−1 for 4 to about 8000 cm−1 for the other compounds.29

Pyrene building blocks have been used to construct cassettes by direct condensation with pyrenecarbaldehyde (compound 8) or by linkage viaalkyne tethers at the Bodipymeso position (Fig. 5). Compound 9 was prepared by a single cross-coupling reaction promoted by Pd(0), whereas synthesis of dye 10 required a multi-step procedure based on a succession of cross-coupling and deprotection steps.36
 Fig. 5  Synthetic protocol used to prepare some pyrene-linked Bodipy dyes. 
Very efficient intramolecular EET from pyrene to Bodipy takes place via the Förster dipole–dipole mechanism, providing for large “virtual” Stokes' shifts (e.g., 10900 cm−1 for 8, 7400 cm−1 for 9, and 3700 cm−1 for 10). The rate of EET depends on the structure of the dual-dye system and decreases as the centre-to-centre separation distance increases. The EET efficiency, however, exceeds 90% in all cases. Linking two pyrene residues together via an ethynylene spacer leads to a fall in the EET efficiency, with the two polycycles acting as a single chromophore.
A convenient tool by which to connect polyaryl residues to Bodipy dyes is to replace the fluorine atoms with aryl or alkynylaryl modules. An organometallic approach (i.e., organolithium or Grignard reagents) was used as the method of choice for effecting these replacement reactions. Such routes have provided access to a library of stable C-Bodipy and E-Bodipy dyes and opened the way to the preparation of new dyads and cascade-type arrays (Fig. 6).37 This work has been extended to cover cases where the alkynylaryl derivative is not available or lacks sufficient stability. This protocol is based on initial replacement of the fluorine atoms with protected alkynyl functions, followed by deprotection and palladium(0) catalysed cross-coupling. This situation is illustrated for the synthesis of dye 19, which occurs in excellent yield.38 Interestingly, in all cases, excitation into the polyaromatic residue results in strong emission from the Bodipy nucleus with very little residual fluorescence from the donor. Intramolecular EET is quantitative when there is pronounced spectral overlap between fluorescence from the arene and absorption by Bodipy. In many cases, the relevant absorption band corresponds to an upper-lying excited state resident on the Bodipy nucleus, which is typically found in the region 370 to 440 nm.39,40
 Fig. 6  Synthetic protocol used to prepare Bodipy dyes bearing polyaromatic moieties linked to the boron centre. 
Related hybrid dyes can be obtained simply by carrying out the synthesis in the presence of two different Grignard reagents. The resultant mixture is easily separated by column chromatography to give the individual dyes (Fig. 7).41 This is an interesting situation because it allows the isolation of dyes possessing strong absorption bands at predetermined wavelengths, suitable for excitation with laser diodes, or covering an unusually broad spectral envelope. In the latter case, most of the absorption peaks can be assigned to a particular chromophore.
 Fig. 7  Examples of mixed Bodipy dyes bearing polyaryl dyes attached via the boron atom. 
The optical and photophysical properties of C-Bodipy dyes (prototypic examples are 12 and 13) depend on the size of the aryl residues and on the nature of the surrounding solvent. A solvatophobic effect in which the aryl substituent seeks to minimise surface contact with certain types of solvent molecules causes slight buckling of the dipyrrin framework.40 This latter effect is not observed for the classical F-Bodipy dye 11, whose spectroscopic properties are essentially insensitive to changes in solvent polarity. Note that for some 3,5-disubstituted F-Bodipy dyes, the so-called distyryl dyes, red shifts are observed on increasing the polarizability of the solvent.42
Extremely fast intramolecular EET from a polycycle to the Bodipy residue occurs for dyes 22 to 24 while, in contrast to the case considered for the corresponding F-Bodipy dyes, the boron-ethynyl substituents in these E-Bodipy dyes do not affect the photophysical properties of the Bodipy unit. There are no obvious indications for competing intramolecular electron transfer, despite the modest thermodynamic driving forces for certain processes. It is possible that the weak solvent polarity, relatively long through-space distances, and/or poor conductivity of the B atom inhibit electron transfer and thereby favour EET. The ethynyl substituent merely functions as an ancillary light harvester for near-UV photons. In this respect, the asymmetric derivative 24 is the most attractive dye, since it collects photons across most of the accessible spectral range. It also provides for a large “virtual” Stokes' shift of about 11000 cm−1. Intramolecular EET appears to be consistent with the Förster dipole–dipole mechanism, at least for the perylene-based chromophore. It is possible, however, that the rate of EET is augmented by Dexter-type through-bond interactions, given the short separation and conjugated ethynylene linker. The latter is known to be an effective bridge for electron-exchange processes.43 The effectiveness with which an electron can tunnel across the central boron atom has not been explored to any great effect but nonetheless it has not been necessary to invoke the Dexter mechanism in this particular case.
It is interesting to consider the possibility of setting up a cascade effect in the asymmetric derivative 24. Here, photons absorbed by the pyrene unit can be transferred directly to the Bodipy S2 state, or to the perylene unit. The latter is perfectly placed to act as an energy acceptor. The Förster-type overlap integral is high, the centre-to-centre separation distance is modest, and the mean orientation factor is reasonable. Model calculations using reference compounds predict that the rate of Förster-type EET from pyrene to perylene in 24 is on the order of 5 × 1010 s−1. As such, we might expect photons absorbed by the pyrene unit to be channeled to perylene or Bodipy units with (roughly) equal probability.
One area of intense current research activity is the development of dyes that absorb in the 650 to 900 nm window in order to foresee potential applications in biomedical analyses for which the absorption of haemoglobin in blood and autofluorescence by biological residues such as tryptophan are minimal.44 As a first step towards the development of dyes emitting in the far-red or near-IR and displaying large Stokes' shifts, a tandem technology has been developed that leads to the formation of bis-indolomethene dyes (Fig. 8).45 Here the synthesis is straightforward and provides access to blue-green absorbing dyes on relatively large scales. Remarkably, the fluorescence quantum yields remain high, even for dyes emitting above 700 nm. Further development of these dyes has resulted in highly efficient cascade-type EET from attached pyrene residues to the bis-indolomethene fragment, leading to Stokes' shifts as high as 12780, 13760 and 11475 cm−1, respectively, for compounds 25, 26 and 27. Also for these unusual dyes intramolecular EET from pyrene to the second-excited singlet state of the Bodipy subunit appears to be quantitative and consistent with the Förster dipole–dipole mechanism.45
 Fig. 8  Examples of blue–green absorbing Bodipy-based dyes equipped with a pyrene residue as the input energy donor. 

        Bodipy as an energy donor
The all-important antenna effect observed with polyaromatic units as ancillary light harvesters has been extended to include the use of Bodipy as the primary photon collector, rather than using this residue acting as the terminal acceptor. A convenient strategy by which to link together disparate chromophores involves attachment of ethynyliodophenyl derivatives at the boron atom since this approach facilitates post-functionalization (e.g., 28 in Fig. 9). The latter material is a green absorbing dye that can be linked easily to Bodipy subunits that themselves absorb at higher energy. The result is a new type of cascade molecule that emits at relatively long wavelength. For example with triad 29, EET from the krypto-Bodipy (which is prepared from dimethylethylpyrrole) to the central bis-indolodipyrromethene occurs with an efficiency of around 95%. In this particular case, the experimental rate constant is in quite good agreement with that calculated using Förster theory. However, it should be stressed that related dual-chromophore dyes composed of F-Bodipy dyes are known to undergo fast through-bond energy transfer.46 As such the mechanism for EET in these dyads appears to depend on several critical features. A further point of interest with these dyes is that the lowest-energy triplet state does not sensitise formation of singlet molecular oxygen. This situation aids the photo-stability of the dye in solution.47
 Fig. 9  Example of a molecular triad composed of two Krypto-Bodipy residues (λem at 540 nm) and a single green absorber (λabs at 700 nm). 
Absorption spectral profiles recorded for compounds 30 and 31 (Fig. 10) closely resemble linear combinations of those recorded for the individual modules. Rather weak electronic communication between the subunits is imposed on the near orthogonality of each Bodipy unit by the two methyl substituents in the 1,7-positions. Energy transfer from the peripheral dyes to the central distyryl dye reaches about 72% in both these multi-chromophoric materials.48
 Fig. 10  Examples of a molecular triad and tetrad comprising, respectively, two krypto-Bodipy dyes (λem at 540 nm) linked to a distyryl framework and three krypto-Bodipy residues connected to a central distyryl Bodipy fragment (λabs at 650 nm) as adapted from ref. 48. 
Cascade EET in Bodipy-based clusters
V-shaped systems
The optimisation of photon collectors for use in artificial photosynthetic devices aimed at converting sunlight into chemical potential is a topic of significant interest.14,49,50 To be viable, such artificial LHCs have to fulfil several requirements that take due notice of: (i) the energy distribution of the solar spectrum, spanning from the UV to the near-IR region; (ii) the sequence of chromophores must be chosen in such a way that cascade EET is favoured and extremely fast; (iii) the local topology and nature of the connecting units must promote this energy transfer either by the Förster dipole–dipole mechanism (i.e., through space favoured by good spectral overlap) or by the Dexter double electron-exchange mechanism (i.e., through bond promoted by orbital overlap); (iv) both spacer and selected dyes must be chemically and photochemically stable, thereby avoiding photobleaching and destruction of the scaffold; and finally (v) the synthetic chemistry should be versatile, efficient, and sufficiently selective to ensure the absence of interactive impurities. One of the earliest examples of a multi-component cluster was assembled stepwise by linking four disparate chromophores in a controlled manner. This logical arrangement favours efficient photon collection and migration to a terminal Bodipy acceptor (Fig. 11).51
 Fig. 11  Schematic representation of the stepwise assembly of a multi-component BPePyFdye in which each module (namely E-Bodipy (B), 3-perylene (Pe), 1,6-pyrene (Py), 2-fluorene (F)) is linked to its partner via an ethynyl or 1,4-diethynylphenyl spacer. 
The primary energy acceptor for the cluster is a krypto-Bodipy, which emits at 540 nm, and different polyaromatic modules have been substituted in place of the regular fluorine atoms at the boron centre. This approach ensures that minimal spectroscopic perturbations will occur and that each absorber maintains a discrete spectroscopic integrity. The synthetic protocol was inspired by previous post-functionalization strategies carried out on Bodipy subunits.30,31 The crucial step is the statistical attachment of the disubstituted-pyrene module Py, which requires careful optimisation and specific conditions.52 A sequence of cross-coupling reactions using palladium(0) promoted chemistry and subsequent alkyne deprotection allows routine access to the sophisticated dye BPePyF in a minimum of synthetic steps. This particular dye was designed to absorb light across the range from 200 to 550 nm. The perylene unit linked to boronvia a 1,4-diethynylphenyl fragment collects photons in the 320–490 nm, while the pyrene dye joined to the same boron atom absorbs strongly in the 280–420 nm wavelength window. The ethynylfluorene moiety absorbs in the UV below 300 nm.
By using a variety of model compounds allowing selective excitation into each of the individual units it was possible to establish a full picture for the EET cascade in this cluster (Fig. 12). Thus, illumination into any of the polycyclic hydrocarbons results in almost exclusive emission from the Bodipy subunit. The rates of intramolecular EET were determined from time-correlated, single-photon counting studies and compared with the rates for coulombic interactions computed from the Förster expression (Fig. 12). It has been possible to measure rate constants for two of the key steps, although transfer from fluorene to pyrene is too fast to be determined. Indeed, it is difficult to decide if the fluorene and pyrene fragments combine to form a single giant chromophore or retain some degree of individual electronic character. Also, the EET processes doubtless contain some important contribution from the through-bond mechanism. This latter process can be termed “bridge-mediated EET” and might be the dominant route for intramolecular EET in some cases. Part of the problem here, at a mechanistic level, relates to the fact that EET can occur to either the S1 (i.e., with perylene as donor) or S2 (i.e., with pyrene as donor) states associated with the acceptor. There are also serious concerns relating to the general applicability of Förster theory to calculating EET rates at such short separations and consequently the validity of the computed values might be questioned.
 Fig. 12  Schematic representation of sequential EET processes as calculated from Förster theory for the multi-component compound BPePyF. Here, kF refers to a static system assuming only dipole–dipole interactions, while kF* refers to a dynamic system that allows for multipole–multipole interactions. Note kEET refers to the experimentally determined rate constant for EET. 
This early multi-cascade prototype was extended to the construction of expanded Bodipy units that absorb and emit across the far-red region.53 The synthetic strategy used for the preparation of the new array is illustrated by way of Fig. 13. It is notable that the various appendages have minimal effect on the photophysics of the green absorbing dye (S0 → S1; λabs = 730 nm), which emits in the far-red region (λem = 752 nm, ΦF = 0.19, τS = 6.2 ns). On this basis, the radiative rate constant for the green-emitting chromophore is calculated as being 3 × 107 s−1. This value is in reasonable agreement with that determined (kRAD = 4.4 × 107 s−1) from the Strickler–Berg expression,54 but is significantly smaller than that found for conventional Bodipy dyes (kRAD ≈ 1.5 × 108 s−1). In the main, this disparity can be accounted for in terms of the different mean emission wavelengths and molar absorption coefficients.55 The broad S0 → S2 optical transition associated with the green-emitting chromophore is located at about 400 nm. It is reassuring to note that essentially all photons absorbed by the fluorene, pyrene, perylene and diethynyl-phenyl units are channelled to the green emitter. All the individual EET steps are fast (Fig. 14) and, unlike the earlier cluster, the rate of EET from pyrene to the green dye is much faster than that for EET from perylene to the same acceptor. This cluster also provides for a large “virtual” Stokes' shift in excess of 17000 cm−1.
 Fig. 13  Schematic representation of the stepwise synthesis of the multi-component GPePyFdye in which each module (namely, E-Bodipy (GPh), 3-perylene (Pe), 1,6-pyrene (Py) and 2-fluorene (F)) is linked to its partner via an ethynyl or 1,4-diethynylphenyl spacer. 
 Fig. 14  Presentation of the rate constants for intramolecular EET occurring in the multi-component GPePyF compound as derived by experiment. 
There is negligible spectral overlap between fluorescence from the ancillary photon collector and the first-allowed absorption transition localised on the terminal Bodipy acceptor. However, pronounced overlap occurs with the S2 absorption transition of the acceptor and it is clear that EET occurs via the upper-lying excited state. Not much is known about the S2 state of Bodipy dyes but it has been shown that internal conversion from S2 → S1 is extremely fast (i.e., 100–250 fs) in conventional Bodipy-based dyes.56 The expanded (i.e., green) Bodipy residue shows more pronounced S0 → S2 absorption than does the conventional (i.e., yellow) Bodipy chromophore and thereby enhances the rate of EET from a given donor. Although there are several examples of EET from the S2 level of the donor,57,58 direct involvement of the S2 state on the acceptor is scarce.59 Such an effect takes on added significance when designing improved solar concentrators intended to harvest an unusually large fraction of incident sunlight. Indeed, the way is now open to maximise the collection efficiency by adding a further layer of dyes that absorb at lower energy and transfer directly to the S1 state of a green-emitting acceptor (vide infra).

          Dendrimer-like systems
Near-IR absorbing dyes usually comprise highly extended π-conjugated electronic systems that impose planarity and rigidity on the molecular framework. In turn, such structural facets tend to promote spectral broadening and self-aggregation in solution. In addition, highly delocalised π-systems are often susceptible to photochemical damage initiated by attack from singlet molecular oxygen, leading to photobleaching. There is the added problem that it is difficult to concentrate these types of molecules into small volumes, as is needed to construct an effective LHC, without running into difficulties from self-quenching of the excited states and/or solvatophobic interactions. A potential way around the problem is to design dendrimers that incorporate discrete chromophores in the form of layers.60,61 In particular, there now exists a battery of chemical tools that can be used to prepare stable dyes bearing one or more terminal alkyne functions that themselves are suitable for subsequent “click chemistry”. Such approaches permit the synthesis of dendrimers containing several layers of dyes able to undergo EET processes that essentially focus the photonic energy at the innermost chromophore or at the periphery. Examples such as 34–36 have been prepared along these lines (Fig. 15).62
 Fig. 15  Molecular formulae for selected donor–acceptor type dendrimers as adapted from ref. 62: (a) reaction pathway; (b) size of the dendritic units. 
In the specific case of the above-referenced dendrimers, the energy donor is located at the periphery of the core. Selective excitation of this molecule (λabs ≈ 550–650 nm; λem ≈ 620–750 nm) results in highly efficient energy transfer (>90%) to the central aza-Bodipy acceptor (λabs ≈ 600–750 nm). The pronounced spectral overlap between emission from the mono-styryl Bodipy and absorption by the green aza-Bodipy is in favour of a resonance type of energy transfer. It should also be noted that the escalation in molecular size on going from G0 to G3 is matched by a substantial increase in fluorescence quantum yield (ΦF) from 0.21 to 0.66 whereas the unsubstituted green core has a fluorescence quantum yield of only 0.16.62 Many other dendrimer-style architectures are possible and, in some cases, have been realised with related organic and organo-metallic dyes. An interesting feature of such systems is the fact that the redox chemistry of the central unit changes as the number of layers increases due to its general inaccessibility and screening by surrounding chromophores. Such behaviour does not affect the rates of EET but does perturb the rates of light-induced electron transfer. This effect allows tuning of the processes in favour of EET.
Circular systems
Nowadays the chemistry of Bodipy has reached such a high level of sophistication that the absorption and emission spectral properties can be modified at will via, for instance, extending the degree of π-electron delocalization of the indacene core by virtue of importing unsaturated groups to the 3,5-positions.30,31 In this way, blue- and green-absorbing dyes can be prepared routinely on a large scale and in pure form. The range of available dyes is further expanded by attaching strong electron-donating groups, such as dimethylamino, at the 4-phenyl positions of the added styryl fragments. We can illustrate this type of approach by reference to the tripodal truxcene platform. Here, three different dyes have been appended to a single scaffold in order to generate a directional EET cascade.63 The truxcene platform, which is fluorescent under UV illumination, is flat and possesses C3 symmetry. The resultant tri-chromophoric assembly is readily soluble in organic dyes and operates as a reasonably effective artificial LHC (Fig. 16).
 Fig. 16  Star-shaped arrays constructed with Bodipy dyes grafted onto a truxene core. The chemistry exemplified here allows preparation of a variety of mixed compounds (TAB2, TA2C, TB2C, TBC2, TA2B, …) which are useful models by which to better understand the EET pathways. 
In the assembled superstructures, fluorescence from the truxcene scaffold is absent when one or more Bodipy dyes are in place. Excitation spectra support the notion of rapid EET from the scaffold to the Bodipy dye, a process favoured by the strong spectral overlap integral. Now, in the specific case of TABC the fluorescence spectral profile is dominated by emission characteristic of C, which appears at 767 nm, indicating that the excited states of A, B and the truxene core are efficiently quenched by the lower-energy absorbing subunit C. Minor contributions to the overall fluorescence profile appear from A and B and can be recognised at 540 nm and 645 nm, respectively. With the aid of relevant model compounds such as TAB22 and TA22C it becomes possible to estimate the contributions made by individual A → B and A → C EET steps to the total decay of the A-based excited state in the cluster. Rate constants of 5.5 × 1010 s−1 (EET efficiency of 99.6%) for the A → B transfer step and of 2.2 × 109 s−1 (EET efficiency of 90.0%) for the A → C transfer step have been determined. The difference between these A → B and A → C EET rates can be used to infer a “circular” route (i.e., from A to B and finally to C) for the energy-migration pathway.63
Linear systems
Over the past few decades, considerable research activity has been directed towards the construction of so-called molecular-scale photoactive wires.64 The primary purpose of such materials is to replace conventional metallic wires with molecular analogues able to transfer information along the respective molecular axis, often under the influence of photonic or electrical stimulation. In seeking to design improved photonic wires, many rigid oligomers have been prepared, often being constructed around chelating fragments (e.g., bipyridine, phenanthroline, terpyridine, …) suitable for coordination of phosphorescent transition metal (e.g., Ru, Os, Pt, Ir) centres.65 One of the most stable, versatile and adaptable organic fragments identified as a building block for such wires is the 1,4-diethynylphenyl module. Indeed, a variety of elegant and well-characterised π-conjugated architectures have been constructed utilising the power of alkyne chemistry and applied to such functions. At the extreme, conductive polymers have also been prepared along the same lines.66 More recently, these approaches have been used in conjunction with Bodipy-based dyes in an attempt to engineer photonic wires of nanometric dimensions. For example, rigid systems have been prepared using compounds 38–41 and the technology adapted to functionalise organic dyes.67,68 This is nicely illustrated by way of Fig. 17 where a convergent series of oligomers has been synthesized via a cycle of reactions notably including statistical Sonogashira coupling and deprotection steps.
 Fig. 17  Molecular formulae for phenylethynyl-Bodipy oligomers intended as putative photonic wires. 
Linking these dyes in a linear fashion serves to shift the absorption maximum to the red by ca. 90 nm as a consequence of the increased π-electron conjugation running along the 2,6-axis of the Bodipy core.69 Also, of some interest is the increased molar absorption coefficient, which now reaches routinely as high as 250000 M−1 cm−1. A further feature of this extended conjugation is that there are no clear absorption maxima for individual modules but instead the spectrum shows a broad absorption envelope stretching over an inordinately wide range. By illumination on the blue edge of the main absorption band, intense fluorescence can be observed at 620 nm (ΦF = 0.58) for compound 41, where n = 3, and thereby provides for a virtual Stokes' shift of 760 cm−1 which exceeds that for a standard Bodipy (being typically around 350 cm−1).68 The use of similar synthetic protocols allows isolation of the homo-Bodipy dyes 42–44 where the terminals are linked by ethynylphenyl spacers. Quite selective mono-functionalization is possible on the basis of discrete Knoevenagen reactions and allows the synthesis of asymmetric derivatives. The latter compounds are set up to deliver an EET cascade along the molecular axis, as exemplified by molecules 45–47 (Fig. 18).70
 Fig. 18  Molecular formulae for the phenylethynyl-bridged Bodipy dyes and the modified derivatives bearing a terminal azathio crown ether. 
The relative excited-state energy levels localised on these latter molecules favour fluorescence from the styryl-modified derivative while the azathio crown ether is able to accommodate adventitious cations. Now, the concept of an enlarged virtual Stokes' shift can be seen clearly in as much as the sensor can be illuminated at a wavelength corresponding to the conventional Bodipy dye. Rapid intramolecular EET follows from such selective excitation and serves to populate the lowest-energy, singlet-excited state associated with the styryl-substituted Bodipy dye, which is strongly fluorescent in the absence of a bound cation.70 Clearly, the selection of the vinyl-ligand can be readily adapted so as to construct a wide range of ratiometric chemosensors intended to function as probes for various pollutants and toxins. For example, a remarkable perturbation of the EET probability occurs upon binding Hg(II) to the coordination site due to a spectacular absorption spectral shift for the acceptor dye. This shift causes a significant decrease in the spectral overlap integral, thereby curtailing intramolecular EET and disturbing the ratio of the two fluorescence bands. Indeed, a 35-fold increase of the emission characteristic of the acceptor is realised on saturating the pocket with cation, leading to a marked improvement in the detection limits when compared with direct excitation into the acceptor dye.70b
A further advantage of this approach relates to the large choice of coordination pockets that could be appended to the chromophore and the versatility of the synthetic procedure that allows for fine tuning of the system. For example, the distance separating donor from acceptor in 45–47 is easily varied, the number and location of the binding sites can be changed, and several disparate coordination pockets could be attached to the same framework.70b Furthermore, an inverted EET system is made feasible by constructing molecules where the complexation pocket is linked at the donor portion of the molecule and using a passive energy acceptor, as in the case of 49 (Fig. 19). Now, by modulation of the excitation energy input, ratiometric chemosensors with specific signatures can be designed for selected targets.71 The net result is the ability to construct artificial noses capable of the recognition of complex mixtures of reagents, with the express purpose of screening for certain compositions of volatile components. An unexpected bonus obtained from compounds such as 49 is the realisation that the unresolved absorption spectrum, arising because of overlapping transitions, becomes resolved on complexation of mercury salts. This situation arises from the substantial blue shift of the absorption spectrum of the mono-styryl-Bodipy dye carrying the azathiacrown ligand that accompanies cation binding as a result of switching off the internal charge-transfer effect. Excitation at 540 nm, for example, leads to a five-fold increase of fluorescence at 675 nm when the cation binds to its pocket.71
 Fig. 19  Molecular formulae for hybrid Bodipy dyes intended as ratiometric chemosensors. 
Understanding how the rate of EET evolves as a function of molecular length has attracted great attention over recent years and the subject includes examination of both excited-singlet and triplet processes over a wide variety of separation distances. The field is large and outside the scope of the present review.72 Even so it is worth drawing attention to the multifarious synthetic opportunities provided by contemporary Bodipy chemistry as a means by which to engineer sophisticated D–Sp–A arrays in which three and four disparate chromophores are incorporated into a single molecule.73 We illustrate this situation by reference to the preparative pathways sketched in Fig. 20. Reaction proceeds with a step-by-step homologation of a yellow Bodipy dye possessing the necessary functionality for cross-coupling reactions with selected modules able to increase the size of the polyaromatic arm. Such dyes were produced with three, four and five substituted phenylene units built into the central spacer. Linking these modules to a blue expanded Bodipy dye bearing two ethynylphenyl iodo residues at the boron centre gave rise to the target BODN-EXP dyes.73 By using a yellow dye decorated at the boron centre with two ethynylpyrene moieties and with a terminal alkyne at the pseudo-meso-position provided the impetus to isolate the multi-chromophoric dye Py-BOD0-EXP, where pyrene could be selectively excited with near-UV light (Fig. 21).
 Fig. 20  Molecular formulae for a series of molecular triads based on dual yellow/blue Bodipy dyes spaced by oligoethynylphenyl bridges. 
 Fig. 21  Molecular formula of the pyrene-substituted molecular tetrad. 
A notable feature of this series is that each subunit can be selectively excited with monochromatic light. Highly efficacious EET occurs from the first-excited singlet state localized on the (conventional) yellow Bodipy dye to its counterpart resident on the (expanded) blue Bodipy-based nucleus. The experimental rate constant, kEET, follows a non-linear evolution with separation distance (i.e., the boron–boron separation distance varies progressively from 18 to 38 Å along the series). However, kEET rate falls by only a factor of 4-fold on moving from the shortest to the longest spacer. This shallow length dependence is a consequence of the energy gap between donor and spacer units becoming smaller as the molecular length increases. Interestingly, a simple relationship exists between the measured electronic resistance of the spacer unit and the Huang–Rhys factor determined by emission spectroscopy. Both parameters relate to the effective conjugation length.
Direct illumination73 of the spacer unit leads to EET to both terminals, followed by EET from yellow Bodipy to the blue version. In each case, EET to the blue dye involves initial population of the second-singlet excited state whereas transfer from spacer to the conventional Bodipy dye populates the S2 state for shorter lengths but the S1 state for the longer analogues. The rate of EET from spacer to conventional Bodipy dye, as measured for the corresponding molecular dyads, is extremely fast (>1011 s−1) and scales with the spectral overlap integral. The relative partitioning of EET from the spacer to each terminal is somewhat sensitive to the molecular length, with the propensity to populate the conventional Bodipy dye changing from 65% for n = 0 to 45% for n = 2 (Fig. 20). The most likely explanation for this behaviour can be traced to the disparate spectral overlap integrals for the two dyes.
In the molecular tetrad, Py-BOD0-EXP, in which pyrene residues replace the fluorine atoms present on the yellow Bodipy-based dye,73 rapid EET occurs from pyrene to the Bodipy dye and is followed by slower, long-range EET to the opposite terminal. Such materials are seen as highly attractive solar concentrators when dispersed in transparent plastic media and used under conditions where both inter- and intramolecular EET steps operate.
Spiro-linked dyads
More than half a century ago, Förster proposed a theoretical description to explain the mechanism by which EET occurs between widely-spaced reactants where there is little chance of direct orbital contact.74 He was able to relate the rate constant for through-space EET to the spectral overlap integral, the distance between the respective transition dipoles, and the mutual orientation of the two reagents. This theory has been accepted and applied, particularly by the biophysics community, to an inordinately diverse range of applications. Its main strength relates to EET events occurring over separation distances in excess of 50 Å or so but it is doubtful that it can be properly applied to closely-spaced reactants. Indeed, in most of the D–Sp–A systems engineered in the recent past, EET occurs via two classical routes: a through-bond and a through-space mechanism. Often both processes run in parallel and it is difficult to elucidate the dominant effects for weakly coupled systems.74 This is an especially challenging problem, exacerbated by growing doubts about the general acceptability of calculating Förster rates from conventional theory for molecular dyads.74 In turn, this situation opens up new opportunities to test Förster theory over short distances by introducing well-defined molecular assemblies where through-bond interactions are minimised. In fact, appropriate dyads have been built around 2,2′-disubstituted-9,9′-spirobifluorene bridges which are believed to inhibit through-bond EET by incorporating an orthogonal, non-conjugated connection into the spacer unit.75
The synthetic strategy used to prepare these new molecular dyads is outlined in Fig. 22 and capitalises on the use of relevant iodophenyl-substituted Bodipy dyes and a racemic mixture of diethynylspirobifluorene.76 Promoting these cross-coupling reactions with Pd(0) catalysts facilitates the one-pot synthesis of BOD (30%) and BOD-BOD (25%) or EXP (28%) and EXP-EXP (25%) in quite respectable yield. The target conjugate BOD-EXP was conveniently prepared in 72% yield from BOD (or EXP) and the iodophenyl-Bodipy counterpart using similar protocols. The geometry around the bifluorene spacer provides for a perpendicular arrangement77 where the two boron atoms are separated by about 20 Å. Despite the unsaturated and orthogonal bridging unit, EET is highly efficient and reflects the fact that the main mechanism involves through-space interactions. Thus, excitation of BOD-EXP in CH3CN at 480 nm results in selective population of the first-excited singlet state resident on the BOD unit. Weak fluorescence can be detected at 540 nm and assigned to BOD by reference to model compounds; in addition there is strong fluorescence from the EXP moiety. For the BOD component, both ΦF and τS decrease relative to the reference molecules, and it is clear that intramolecular EET occurs under these conditions with a rate constant of 2.6 × 109 s−1 (Fig. 23). The probability of EET, which occurs in competition with radiative and non-radiative decay of the excited singlet state of the donor, is approximately 90%. Now, the coupling element computed from Förster theory (|V| = 0.91 cm−1) compares remarkably well with the experimental value (|V| = 1.21 cm−1).75 In further examination of this agreement it was noted that both the absorption and fluorescence maxima of EXP move steadily towards lower energy with decreasing temperature due to changes in the dielectric constant of the solvent. This has the effect of modifying the spectral overlap integral. The variation in kEET accurately reflects these changes, thereby confirming that only coulombic interactions need be considered and further emphasizing that simple Förster theory works well under these conditions.
 Fig. 22  Molecular formulae of the spiro-bridged Bodipy-based dyes used to critically test Förster theory for EET over short separations. 
 Fig. 23  Schematic representation of the EET processes observed for the spiro-bridged Bodipy-based dyes 54. 
The energy acceptor, EXP, possesses pronounced charge-transfer effects that are switched off on protonation of the amine groups and this effect is accompanied by a substantial blue shift for the respective absorption and fluorescence maxima. Quite unexpectedly, the rate of EET found for BOD-EXP(2H++) is only 20% higher than that determined for the neutral system.75 The experimental coupling element (|V| = 0.70 cm−1) falls to approximately 60% of that derived for the neutral species because protonation leads to disruption of the transition dipole moment on the acceptor. Under these conditions, the calculated |V| term has a value of 0.97 cm−1. Now the agreement between experiment and theory is not so good and the calculation seems to overestimate the coupling by a factor of around two-fold. For the monoprotonated species EXP(H++), formed during the early stages of the titration, the acceptor possesses increased charge-transfer character relative to EXP because of the inductive effect of the ammonium ion.75 The spectral overlap integral lies between those of the neutral and dicationic forms. In this case, agreement between experiment (|V| = 0.46 cm−1) and theory (|V| = 0.20 cm−1) worsens due to the poor definition of the transition dipole moment vector on the acceptor. Incidentally, this system functions as an excellent fluorescence-based thermometer in organic solvents.
The same molecular dyad has been subjected to a detailed examination of how changes in solvent polarity influence the rate of intramolecular EET.78 This study is made possible by the realisation that whereas the BOD terminal is insensitive to changes in solvent the charge-transfer character inherent to EXP renders that terminal particularly sensitive to the nature of the surrounding environment. In all solvents, the probability of EET exceeds 90% but the rate shows a clear increase in non-polar solvents. This effect is traced to small perturbations of the optical absorption spectrum of the acceptor, which affects the overlap integral for Förster-type EET and also disturbs the accompanying transition dipole moment. There is an additional subtle effect whereby the nature of the surrounding solvent affects the transition dipole density, which itself modifies the separation distance.78

Water-soluble cassettes
We have emphasized throughout this review the need to design highly fluorescent dyes that possess a relatively large Stokes' shift. The main application of such materials lies in the field of fluorescence microscopy, including flow cytometry, where the dye is used to image parts of intact biological cells or tissue. Most luminescence microscopes utilise a system of optical filters to isolate excitation and emission beams and, since these filters must be non-emissive, the range of cut-off wavelengths is rather restricted. This makes it extremely difficult to use dyes with a small Stokes' shift, regardless of their fluorescence quantum yield. The use of Bodipy dyes with an enhanced (i.e., virtual!) Stokes' shift overcomes this experimental limitation and the new molecular dyads based on intramolecular EET have important outlets in this area. Even so, there is far more to the development of useful imaging dyes than their having an amplified Stokes' shift.79 In particular, new labels have to be designed in such a way that the fluorescence maxima fall within the far-red window (i.e., 650–800 nm) in order to avoid auto-fluorescence from the biological host and to avoid back-scattering contamination. Since most commercial fluorimeters have limited sensitivity at long wavelengths, the ideal emission wavelength is around 700–750 nm. These dyes must also be resistant to self-aggregation in aqueous media or in the cell membrane, hence attention must be given to their inherent solubility. This leads to a demand to develop water-soluble dyes that readily undergo bio-conjugation or cell internalisation. Although various water-soluble fluorescein–rhodamine dyads80 have been reported as reagents for intracellular imaging in the past,22,33 we recognise the need to produce suitable Bodipy-based analogues that are adequately soluble in water.81
Recently, water-soluble Bodipy-fluorescein cassettes have been described as ratiometric pH reporters by which to image protein-dye conjugates in living cells (Fig. 24).82 These novel materials were prepared using Sonogashira coupling of 5′-alkynylfluorescein diacetate with an appropriate diiodo-Bodipy derivative, followed by removal of the acetate group. Here, the efficiency of EET from the xanthene (i.e., fluorescein) donor to the Bodipy acceptor is governed by the pH; hence the realisation that the dyad can be used as a sensitive pH probe by which to monitor intracellular physiological conditions. It was reported that EET from fluorescein to Bodipy is efficacious in acidic solution giving rise to emission at 600 nm for an input at 495 nm. Conversely, EET was completely suppressed in basic media where the phenolate form of the xanthene dye fluoresces at 520 nm. Further development of this system involved anchoring dyad 55 to bovine serum albumin (BSA, X2 in Fig. 24) to give a stable conjugate that survived several acid–base cycles.82 The BSA-55 conjugate could be imported into specific cellsvia a carrier and the resultant ratiometric signatures used to determine the local pH inside the cell.
 Fig. 24  
Water-soluble cassettes for fluorescence imaging of living cells as adapted from ref. 82. 
Along similar lines, the construction of two additional cassettes using the same energy donor but different acceptors (λem at 599 and 645 nm) were synthesized using “click chemistry” (Fig. 25). The innovation here lies with the use of a water-soluble sulfonic acid derivative as the energy donor in conjunction with a constrained Bodipy-based acceptor, the synthons being connected by a 1,2,3-triazole linker. The fluorescence quantum yields reach 30 and 24%, respectively, for 56 and 57 in water at pH = 7.4 while both compounds exhibit highly efficient EET processes. The pseudo-Stokes' shifts are 3300 and 4500 cm−1, respectively, for 56 and 57. Interestingly, labelling spretavidin with cassette 56 and avidin with cassette 57 leads to an unusual three-component set-up when both conjugate Strep-56 and Avi-57 associate with a single BSA-Atto-425 (λem at 425 nm) labelled protein.83
 Fig. 25  
Water-soluble cassettes for bio-labelling and multi-FRET in the essays described further in ref. 83. 
On mechanistic grounds it is useful to note that there is little spectral overlap between Atto-425 emission at 480 nm and absorption of the fluorescent residues at 600 and 645 nm. However, spectral overlap is very strong between Atto-425 emission and absorption by the tetramethyl-Bodipy fragment. This finding suggests that the latter dye functions as a relay by which to promote a cascade EET process (Fig. 26). Further developments using related conjugates have led to the discovery of dedicated residues able to monitor specific protein–protein interactions both in vitro and inside living cells as probed by fluorescence microscopy.83
 Fig. 26  Symbolized EET from a BSA-Atto425 (BLUE) labelled protein to two different cassette dyes labelled with streptavidin Strep-51 (PINK) and avidine Avi-52 (GREEN) as adapted from ref. 83. 
Hybrid derivatives based on Bodipy dyes

Subphthalocyanine analogues
In recent years there has been a rapid upsurge in non-biological applications of EET, including solar energy conversion,84–86 information processing in molecular devices and machines,87 and the detection of analytes using molecular-based sensors.88 As progress in these areas develops, there comes the need to identify new reagents with predetermined optical properties and discrete chemical signatures. The field is continually evolving and new materials appear at regular intervals. For example, with respect to the design of advanced substrates for broad applications in electroluminescence, non-linear optics and laser technology, it appears that the subphthalocyanine (SubPc) motif holds particular attractions. This constricted form of phthalocyanine possesses a 14π-electron, bowl-shaped conformation having C3v symmetry. Problems from poor solubility, and the usual difficulty caused by a small Stokes' shift, can be overcome by attaching a Bodipy fragment to the SubPc core via a covalent linkage at the boron centre, as was done earlier for Bodipy derivatives. Indeed, the Grignard chemistry developed for Bodipy that allows us to replace the fluorine atoms with alkyne functions was further adapted to modify the SubPc unit and represents a neat entry to novel D–Sp–A dyads (Fig. 27).89 The direction of intramolecular EET between the Bodipy and SubPc fragments can be tuned by changing the nature of the Bodipy or by changing the pH. Typical examples are given in Fig. 28. Thus, while 63 undergoes singlet-to-singlet EET from the tetramethyl-Bodipy to the SubPc90 the direction is reversed for 64.
 Fig. 27  Examples of hybrid subphthalocyanine–Bodipy covalently-linked dyads as adapted from refs. 90 and 91. 
 Fig. 28  Representation of the energy-transfer pathways found for selected hybrid SubPc–Bodipy dyads. 
The absorption spectrum of 62 is a linear combination of the individual spectra without noticeable perturbations, a result in keeping with the absence of orbital overlap between the SubPc core and the axially linked dye. The absorption band at 707 nm (ε = 101000 M−1 cm−1) belongs to the S0–S1 transition of the Bodipy fragment and that at 568 nm (ε = 94000 M−1 cm−1) to the Q band of the SubPc unit. Interestingly, excitation at 670, 555 or 430 nm results in fluorescence centred at 762 nm with a quantum yield of 0.18, which is clearly due to the Bodipy fragment. The fluorescence spectrum shows excellent mirror symmetry with the lowest-energy absorption transition while the emission lifetime is 4.1 ns. Almost no residual emission from the SubPc, expected at 574 nm, can be seen. Such behaviour is indicative of efficient energy transfer from the SubPc to the Bodipy moiety. In this way, the Stokes' shift expands from 250 to 4900 cm−1. Electron transfer from the dimethylamino fragment to the SubPc singlet-excited state was not observed, despite a favourable thermodynamic driving force (ΔG = −0.28 eV). This is consistent with the axial linkage inhibiting through-bond electronic interactions, whilst facilitating through-space energy transfer, and with the large spatial separation between the reactants (Fig. 28).91
Stepwise addition of HCl to compound 62 brings about a pronounced blue-shift for the fluorescence maximum (λem = 634 nm; ΦF = 0.26, τS = 4.7 ns).91 After protonation of both dimethylamino groups, illumination into the SubPc fragment at 532 nm results in virtually complete EET to the emissive state of the dicationic Bodipy species. This behaviour can be well explained in terms of the improved spectral overlap integral for Förster-type energy transfer, arising from the significant hypsochromic shift and increased oscillator strength that accompanies protonation.
Organometallic fragments
One of the main reasons why Bodipy-based dyes are photochemically stable is because intersystem crossing to the triplet manifold is ineffective, even when heavy atoms are substituted into the molecular framework or surrounding environment. With conventional Bodipy dyes, triplet formation accounts for less than 5% of the photon balance. The triplet-excited state can be observed by laser flash photolysis,92 having a lifetime in the absence of oxygen of around 200 μs in fluid solution, and there is a solitary report of phosphorescence from a Bodipy dye in a glassy matrix at 77 K.93 The latter study indicates a large energy gap between singlet and triplet excited states and this situation contributes towards the relative slowness of intersystem crossing. In order to examine properties associated with the Bodipy triplet manifold it becomes necessary to sensitize triplet population and this can be done most conveniently by attaching a transition-metal complex to the dye in such a way as to favour intramolecular electron and/or energy transfer processes.94 This approach, which is fruitful in terms of fundamental knowledge, also leads to important applications in the fields of artificial photosynthesis, energy-conversion devices (e.g., organic light emitting devices and solar cells), and optical microscopy (e.g., cell imaging or two photon absorption). The same strategy has been used in reverse to stabilise the triplet lifetime of the appended metal complex by setting up an equilibrium with the excited-triplet state resident on the organic moiety, usually pyrene. Indeed, this latter rationale has been highly successful in prolonging the triplet lifetime of certain ruthenium(II) and osmium(II) poly(pyridine) complexes.95 Taking advantage of the synthetic know-how gleaned during these earlier trials, several Bodipy dyes have been attached to phosphorescent transition metal complexes. In addition to transforming the photophysical properties by providing indirect access to the triplet state, the metal complex introduces marked changes in solubility since many such residues carry an electronic charge. The synthesis of these dyads is now straightforward and could be realized routinely on large scales (Fig. 29).
 Fig. 29  Examples of hybrid Bodipy dyes decorated with cationic transition-metal complexes. 
For dyad 65, where Bodipy is attached to a ruthenium(II) bis(2,2′:6′,2′′-terpyridine) complex, phosphorescence from the Ru-based subunit and fluorescence from Bodipy are quenched at room temperature due to the formation of an intercomponent charge-separated state. At 77 K, charge separation is inhibited on thermodynamic grounds and the expected Bodipy fluorescence is restored. In addition, long-lived (τ = 50 ms at 77 K) phosphorescence from the Bodipy triplet-excited state is seen at 775 nm.92 The mechanism leading to formation of the Bodipy triplet state most likely involves a combination of enhanced spin–orbit coupling and direct participation of the low-lying, metal-to-ligand charge-transfer (MLCT) triplet-excited state of the metal complex, which lies at higher energy than the Bodipy triplet.
In the case of 66a, fluorescence from the terminal Bodipy dye is extensively quenched due to intramolecular electron transfer.96 Although the triplet-excited state of the Bodipy dye lies at lower energy than the charge-separated state, charge recombination occurs preferentially to reform the ground state. Triplet state formation is relatively unimportant as regards deactivation of the charge-separated state, but there is still an impressive increase in the rate constant for intersystem crossing (kISC) relative to the parent Bodipy dye. This rate is less than ca. 5 × 105 s−1 for 66b, whereas for the Zn complex 66a, kISC increases to around 5 × 108 s−1. The orthogonal geometries inherent to 66a should give rise to a large spin–orbit coupling matrix element and additional spin orbital coupling is favoured via the heavy-atom effect. The fact that triplet formation does not dominate over charge recombination is considered to be a consequence of the poor spin–orbital coupling properties of the parent dye. The rate of singlet–singlet energy transfer from the Zn complex to the Bodipy dye exceeds 5 × 1010 s−1. The most likely mechanism involves Förster-type, dipole–dipole interactions since there is strong spectral overlap between fluorescence from Zn-terpy and absorption by Bodipy and almost optimal orientation of the relevant transition dipoles.
Replacing Zn(II) with Pt(II) promotes EET from the Pt-based MLCT triplet-excited state to the Bodipy triplet (λem at 777 nm; τ = 74 μs at 77 K) at both room temperature and 77 K.97 The rate constant for triplet–triplet energy transfer is about 7 × 108 s−1. In this case, Bodipy fluorescence is not quenched although an oxidative photo-induced electron transfer is thermodynamically feasible (Fig. 30). In the Ir complex, 68, excitation of either the organometallic fragment or the Bodipy dye leads to population of the Bodipy triplet-excited state. This finding was reached on the basis of transient absorption spectroscopy and luminescence measurements at 77 K. In this case, phosphorescence from the Bodipy triplet occurs at 730 nm with a lifetime of 25 μs.98
 Fig. 30  Top: Energy levels (not to scale) and deactivation pathways for complex 67. Bottom: Transient absorption difference spectra of complex 68 in deaerated CH2Cl2 measured for excitation at 355 nm (black) or 510 nm (red). Inset: Single wavelength decay trace at 500 nm (black) along with the corresponding single-exponential fit (red) and residuals (green). 
Molecular dyads containing fullerene units
A tremendously popular research field, which has been in vogue for almost four decades, concerns the design of molecular systems intended to mimic some of the essential features of the natural photosynthetic apparatus.2,4a,17,18 Many of the more recent models to emerge from this work have included fullerenes, most notably C60, as the primary electron acceptor.99 This work has led to the discovery of unusually long-lived, charge-separated lifetimes (i.e., up to 23 μs) in supramolecular triads incorporating a C60 electron reservoir.100 The challenge to us was to devise Bodipy/C60 molecular dyads able to undergo charge separation under illumination and to examine the possibility to generate the Bodipy excited-triplet state during subsequent charge recombination. Triplet formation is often promoted by charge recombination in sterically-constrained systems in which the redox-active subunits are held in an orthogonal geometry.101 Such geometries are (almost) inevitable if the connection is made via the meso position of the Bodipy dye. From a synthetic viewpoint attachment of Bodipy to a C60 residue is made feasible by first preparing two functionalized precursors that can be joined by classical Pd(0) promoted cross-coupling reactions as outlined in Fig. 31.102 The solubility of the target dyad 69 is ensured by replacement of the fluorine atoms with hydrocarbon chains.
 Fig. 31  Synthetic route to the C60/Bodipy molecular dyad. 
An interesting, although far from unique, feature of dyad 69 is that according to spectroscopic and cyclic voltammetry measurements both light-induced electron transfer (PET) and EET are possible. In non-polar solvent, PET is thermodynamically uphill and the singlet–singlet EET from Bodipy to C60 is followed by fast intersystem crossing to populate the T1 state localized on the C60 unit. Since the triplet states localised on the Bodipy and C60 are close in energy, a thermal equilibrium is established and decays with a lifetime of about 140 μs under anaerobic conditions (Fig. 32). In polar solvent, there is a large driving force for PET and the charge transfer state (CTS) energy is set by the solvent polarity.102 The key feature of this system is the realization that the CTS undergoes partial charge recombination to form the triplet state localized on the C60 residue. Despite the comparable triplet energies for Bodipy and C60 there is no experimental evidence for charge recombination forming the Bodipy triplet (Fig. 32). It is notable that direct intersystem crossing is considerably faster in C60 (kISC ≈ 7 × 108 s−1) than in Bodipy (kISC ≈ 2 × 106 s−1). Furthermore, charge recombination to form the C60 triplet involves hole transfer from the HOMO whereas formation of the Bodipy triplet demands electron transfer to the LUMO. The results are consistent with hole transfer having the larger electronic coupling element. Similar reasoning can be used to explain why T1–T1 energy transfer is so slow in 69.
 Fig. 32  Outline of the various processes observed following pulsed excitation of either subunit for 69 in toluene (left-hand side) or in MTHF (right-hand side). Keys: EnT = electronic energy transfer, ISC = intersystem crossing, NR = nonradiative decay, ElT = electron transfer. 
Covalently-linked dimers formed from Bodipy residues
In common with most other organic dyes, Bodipy chromophores self-associate under certain conditions. Often, aggregation is driven by the solvatophobic effect and depends markedly on the structure of the dye. The dimer tends to absorb at relatively long wavelength, typically around 600–650 nm, but does not fluoresce. Different types of dimer, according to the alignment of the transition dipole moments, can co-exist with the composition of the mixture being highly sensitive to the solvent and/or temperature. These aggregates serve no useful purpose. More valuable information becomes available from studying flexible chains bearing Bodipy-based terminals since self-association of the dyes, which leads to perturbation of the photophysical properties, can report on the local environment.103 In extreme cases, where strong overlap exists between the mutual π-systems, exciton coupling can be observed.104 Uncertainties in the molecular topology are overcome by using well-defined dimeric Bodipy derivatives of the type depicted in Fig. 33. Thus, dimers can be prepared from the relevant 2,2′-bis-dipyrrins in the presence of excess boron trifluoride etherate.105 The isolated material, 70, exhibits exciton splitting of ca. 2600 cm−1 in the absorption spectrum, with well-defined maxima at 489 nm (ε = 72000 M−1 cm−1) and 558 nm (ε = 82600 M−1 cm−1). Surprisingly, the dimer is highly fluorescent (ΦF = 0.67, τS = 3.4 ns) with a maximum centred at 638 nm. The corresponding monomeric dye 71 exhibits a single absorption band centred at 526 nm (ε = 72600 M−1 cm−1) with an emission peak located at 538 nm (ΦF = 0.88; τS = 5.0 ns). The Stokes' shift for the dimer is about 4800 cm−1 whereas that for the monomer is only 420 cm−1.
 Fig. 33  Synthetic route used for the preparation of meso-aryl substituted dimeric Bodipy dyes as adapted from ref. 104. 
Co-facial Bodipy dimers have been synthesized recently under conditions where the dihedral angle between the two planes can be varied, as sketched in Fig. 34.106 Standard synthetic procedures were used whereby pyrrole condensation with an carbaldehyde in acidic conditions provided the intermediate dipyrromethane compounds, which were readily oxidized to the conjugated dipyrromethene cyanine in the presence of a Lewis acid under basic conditions. Interestingly, the X-ray molecular structure of dye 74 shows pronounced F⋯F interactions which prohibit perfect face-to-face overlap, a feature that prevents optimum π-stacking between the neighbouring Bodipy subunits. As a consequence, the level of exciton coupling is less pronounced for 74 compared to 70. These dimers were sufficiently soluble to allow recording cyclic voltammograms under both oxidative and reductive conditions. It was observed that modest splitting of the reduction waves was matched by pronounced splitting of the oxidation peaks due to delocalization of the electronic charge over the two Bodipy moieties. Further information on the effects of charge delocalization was sought from spectro-electrochemical experiments which revealed formation of an intervalence charge-transfer (IVCT) band centred at around 800 nm on oxidative scans. This IVCT band is attributed to electron exchange between co-facially arranged neutral and mono-oxidized Bodipy units.105 One of the dimers has been reported to display excimer-like fluorescence in solution.107
 Fig. 34  Preparative route used for the co-facial Bodipy dimers adapted from ref. 105. 
Concluding remarks
In this review we have focused on recent developments in the synthesis of Bodipy derivatives that retain applications in the generic field of EET. The synthetic versatility of Bodipy dyes has been exposed by new methodologies for selective functionalisation at the dipyrrin and boron sites, augmented by the easier attachment of residues at the meso position. The new approaches can be used to produce asymmetric compounds comprising a wide variety of peripheral units that enrich the absorption spectral profile. Selective illumination into these transitions leads to a multitude of EET events, often in competition to electron transfer, involving both singlet and triplet excited states. An impressive collection of peripheral groups has been highlighted, each designed for a particular purpose, but the subject is evolving quickly and new Bodipy-based materials appear at ever-increasing frequency. The main strengths of these dyes are their ready adaptability in terms of solubility, functionality and absorptivity and their high fluorescence quantum yields. They are quite resistant to triplet formation but readily undergo both oxidation and reduction at modest potentials. Since the optical signatures associated with the radical ions are rather weak,105 the best outlets for Bodipy dyes would appear to be based entirely on fluorescence. Indeed, in many respects, these are ideal materials from which to fabricate fluorescent sensors, solar concentrators and sensitisers for solar cells.
Further advances in synthetic methodology might reasonably be expected to see the large-scale manufacture and purification of novel dyes for commercial exploitation. Likewise, combinatorial approaches will be developed for routine screening and optimisation. We can expect major improvements in strategies for establishing soft attachment to surfaces, fragile or dangerous reagents, and explosives. Already, Bodipy-functionalised beads108 and organo-gels109 are available. Chiral Bodipy dyes can be prepared110 while the use of 19F NMR techniques allows discrimination of the two faces of the dipyrrin nucleus.105 The tetragonal geometry around the boron atom provides an easy means for preventing self-association in solution. It remains for us to determine the long-term photo- and thermal stability of these reagents, especially under aggressive conditions, but their resistance to triplet formation is an invaluable aid in this respect.
We can expect to see a plethora of advanced applications for these fluorescent dyes over the coming years. Uses will include personal diagnostic tests for vulnerable people and multi-colour markers for bio-labels, anti-forgery devices and recognition of explosives. Related dyes are being developed as probes for the inside of microcavities and in hazardous liquids. New applications are likely to follow in the field of environmental rheology. There is certain to be a rapid escalation in their use in OLEDs and organic solar cells. Their ability to activate enzymes and function as intelligent labels for biological processes, including protein folding, is under current development.
Acknowledgements
We express our sincere appreciation to the highly talented students, postdocs and permanent researchers whose names are mentioned in the references for their important contributions to the development of this research program. We are also indebted to the University of Newcastle, Université de Strasbourg, Engineering School of Chemistry and Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique for continuous financial support and provision of research facilities. Special thanks are due to Dr. Gilles Ulrich, Director of Research CNRS, for his skillful contribution to the artwork of this account.
Notes and references
A. C. Benniston and A. Harriman, Mater. Today, 2008, 11, 26 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) D. Gust, T. A. Moore and A. L. Moore, Acc. Chem. Res., 2001, 34, 40 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) D. Gust, T. A. Moore and A. L. Moore, Acc. Chem. Res., 1993, 26, 198 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) N. Aratani, D. Kim and A. Osuka, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1922 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) A. Harriman and J.-P. Sauvage, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1996, 25, 41 RSC .

          R. E. Blankenship, in Molecular Mechanism of Photosynthesis, Blackwell Science, Oxford,  2002 Search PubMed .

  (a) Y. Nakamura, N. Aratani and A. Osuka, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 831 RSC ; 
  (b) N. Armaroli and V. Balzani, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 52 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) A. Freer, S. Prince, K. Sauer, M. Papiz, A. Hawthornwaiteless, G. McDermott, R. J. Cogdell and N. W. Isaacs, Structure, 1996, 4, 449 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C. J. Law, A. W. Roszak, J. Southall, A. T. Gardiner, N. W. Isaacs and R. J. Cogdell, Mol. Membr. Biol., 2004, 21, 183 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) J. Janusonis, L. Valkunas, D. Rutkauskas and R. van Grondelle, Biophys. J., 2008, 94, 1348 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Y. Okamura, G. Feher and N. Nelson, in Photosynthesis. Energy Conversion by Plants and Bacteria, ed. Govindjee, Academic Press, New York,  1982, p. 799 Search PubMed .
A. N. Glazer, Annu. Rev. Biochem., 1983, 52, 125 CrossRef CAS .
S. Vassiliev and D. Bruce, Photosynth. Res., 2008, 97, 75 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Olson, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1980, 594, 33 CAS .
G. Drews, Curr. Top. Bioenerg., 1978, 8, 161 Search PubMed .
G. D. Scholes and G. R. Fleming, Adv. Chem. Phys., 2005, 132, 57 .

          K. Sauer, in Bioenergetics of Photosynthesis, ed. Govindjee, Academic Press, San Francisco, CA,  1975, p. 698 Search PubMed .
A. N. Glazer, Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biophys. Chem., 1985, 14, 47 CrossRef CAS .
D. Holten, D. F. Bocian and J. S. Lindsey, Acc. Chem. Res., 2002, 35, 57 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yang, R. Agarwal and G. R. Fleming, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2001, 142, 107 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. Koepke, X. Hu, C. Muenke, K. Schulten and H. Michel, Structure, 1996, 4, 581 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) A. W. Roszak, T. D. Howard, J. Southall, A. T. Gardiner, C. J. Law, N. W. Isaacs and R. J. Cogdell, Science, 2003, 302, 1969 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. R. Wasielewski, J. Org. Chem., 2006, 71, 5051 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. Imahori and Y. Sakata, Adv. Mater., 1997, 9, 537 CAS ; 
  (c) H. Imahori, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2004, 2, 1425 RSC ; 
  (d) W. M. Campbell, A. K. Burrell, D. L. Officer and K. W. Jolley, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1363 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) K. Sugiura, Top. Curr. Chem., 2003, 228, 65 CAS ; 
  (b) A. K. Burrell, D. L. Officer, P. G. Pleiger and D. C. W. Reid, Chem. Rev., 2001, 101, 2751 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) T. Imamura and K. Fukushima, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2000, 198, 133 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) J. Wojaczynski and L. Latos-Grazynski, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2000, 204, 113 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) F. Würthner, C.-C. You and C. R. Saha-Möller, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2004, 33, 133 RSC .

  (a) A. K. Tong, S. Jockusch, Z. M. Li, H. R. Zhu, D. L. Akins, N. J. Turro and J. Y. Ju, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 12923 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) F. D. Lewis, L. Zhang and X. Zuo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 10002 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) Y. Ohya, K. Yabuki, M. Hashimoto, A. Nakajima and T. Ouchi, Bioconjugate Chem., 2003, 14, 1057 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Watrob, C. P. Pan and M. D. Barkley, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 7336 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kawahara, T. Uchimaru and S. Murata, Chem. Commun., 1999, 563 RSC .
F. D. Lewis, L. Zhang and X. Zuo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 10002 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Tong, Z. M. Li, G. S. Jones, J. J. Russo and J. Y. Ju, Nat. Biotechnol., 2001, 19, 756 CrossRef CAS .
I. L. Medintz, E. R. Goldman, M. E. Lassman and J. M. Mauro, Bioconjugate Chem., 2003, 14, 909 CrossRef CAS .
K. E. Sapsford, L. Berti and I. L. Medintz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 4562 CrossRef CAS .
S.-C. Hung, R. M. Mathies and A. N. Glazer, Anal. Biochem., 1997, 252, 78 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) A. I. H. Murche, R. M. Clegg, E. Kitszing, D. R. Dukett and D. M. J. Lilley, Nature, 1989, 341, 763 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) T. Tuschl, C. Gohlke, T. M. Jovin, E. Westhof and F. Eckstein, Science, 1994, 266, 785 CAS ; 
  (c) R. C. Gupta, E. I. Golub, W. S. Marc and R. M. Charles, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1998, 95, 9843 CrossRef CAS .

          J. R. Lakowicz, in Principles of Fluorescence Spectroscopy, Springer, Heidelberg, 3rd edn,  2006 Search PubMed .

          R. P. Haughland, in Handbook of Fluorescent Probes and Research Products, Molecular Probes Inc, Eugene, OR, 9th edn,  2002, p. 36 Search PubMed .
R. Ziessel, C. R. Chim., 2007, 10, 622 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) R. Ziessel, G. Ulrich and A. Harriman, New J. Chem., 2007, 31, 496 RSC ; 
  (b) G. Ulrich, R. Ziessel and A. Harriman, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 1184 CrossRef CAS .
A. Loudet and K. Burgess, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 4891 CrossRef CAS .
L. G. Lee, S. L. Spurgeon, C. R. Heiner, S. C. Benson, B. B. Rosenblum, S. M. Menchen, R. J. Graham, A. Constantinescu, K. G. Upadhya and J. M. Cassel, Nucleic Acids Res., 1997, 25, 2816 CrossRef CAS .
A. Burghart, L. H. Thoresen, J. Chen, K. Burgess, F. Bergström and L. B.-Å. Johansson, Chem. Commun., 2000, 2203 RSC .
C.-W. Wan, A. Burghart, J. Chen, F. Bergström, L. B.-Å. Johansson, M. F. Wolford, T. G. Kim, M. R. Topp, R. M. Hochstrasser and K. Burgess, Chem.–Eur. J., 2003, 9, 4430 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ziessel, C. Goze, G. Ulrich, M. Césario, P. Retailleau, A. Harriman and J. P. Rostron, Chem.–Eur. J., 2005, 11, 7366 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ulrich, C. Goze, S. Goeb, P. Retailleau and R. Ziessel, New J. Chem., 2006, 30, 982 RSC .
C. Goze, G. Ulrich and R. Ziessel, Org. Lett., 2006, 8, 4445 CrossRef CAS .
C. Goze, G. Ulrich and R. Ziessel, J. Org. Chem., 2007, 72, 313 CrossRef CAS .
C. Goze, G. Ulrich, L. J. Mallon, B. D. Allen, A. Harriman and R. Ziessel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 10231 CrossRef CAS .
A. Harriman, G. Izzet and R. Ziessel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 10868 CrossRef CAS .
W. Quin, T. Roland, M. Baruah, A. Stefan, M. Van des Auweraer, W. Dehaen and N. Boens, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 420, 562 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Harriman and R. Ziessel, in Carbon-Rich Compounds, ed. M. M. Haley and R. R. Tykwinski, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2006, p. 26 Search PubMed .
R. Weissleder, Nat. Biotechnol., 2001, 19, 316 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ulrich, S. Goeb, A. De Nicola, P. Retailleau and R. Ziessel, Synlett, 2007, 1517 CrossRef CAS .
T. G. Kim, J. C. Castro, A. Loudet, J. G.-S. Jiao, R. M. Hochstrasser, K. Burgess and M. R. Topp, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110, 20 CrossRef CAS .
A. Harriman, L. J. Mallon, S. Goeb and R. Ziessel, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 5199 RSC .
G. Barin, M. D. Yilmaz and E. U. Akkaya, Tetrahedron Lett., 2009, 50, 1738 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) A. L. Moore, D. Gust and T. A. Moore, Actual. Chim., 2007, 50 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) T. A. Moore, A. L. Moore and D. Gust, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 2002, 357, 9122 .

  (a) M. Borgstrom, S. Ott, R. Lomoth, J. Bergquist, L. Hammarstrom and O. Johansson, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 4820 CrossRef ; 
  (b) S. Fukuzumi, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2006, 79, 177 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) G. Calzaferri, O. Bossarto, D. Bruhwiler, S. Huber, C. Leiggener, M. K. Van Veek and A. Z. Ruiz, C. R. Chim., 2006, 9, 214 CrossRef CAS .
A. Harriman, L. Mallon and R. Ziessel, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 11461 CrossRef CAS .
S. Goeb and R. Ziessel, Tetrahedron Lett., 2008, 49, 2569 CrossRef CAS .
A. Harriman, L. J. Mallon, S. Goeb, G. Ulrich and R. Ziessel, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 4553 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Strickler and R. A. Berg, J. Chem. Phys., 1962, 37, 814 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bixon, J. Jortner and J. W. Verhoeven, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1994, 116, 7349 CrossRef CAS .
P. Toele, H. Zhang, C. Trieflinger, J. Daub and M. Glasbeek, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 368, 66 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) A. N. MacPherson, J. B. Arellano, N. J. Fraser, R. J. Cogdell and T. Gillbro, Biophys. J., 2001, 80, 923 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. Cong, D. M. Niedzwiedzki, G. N. Gibson, A. M. LaFountain, R. M. Kelsh, A. T. Gardiner, R. J. Cogdell and H. A. Frank, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 10689 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) M. P. Debreczeny, M. R. Wasielewski, S. Shinoda and A. Osuka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 6407 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) A. Harriman, M. Hissler, O. Trompette and R. Ziessel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 2516 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) A. C. Benniston, A. Harriman, P. Y. Li and C. A. Sams, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 2553 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) A. C. Benniston, A. Harriman, P. Y. Li, P. V. Patel and C. A. Sams, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 1710 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ulrich, C. Goze, M. Guardigli, A. Roda and R. Ziessel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 3694 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mishra, R. K. Behera, P. K. Behera, B. K. Mishra and G. B. Behera, Chem. Rev., 2000, 100, 1973 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fabian, H. Nakazumi and M. Matsuka, Chem. Rev., 1992, 92, 1197 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yuan, X. Yin, H. Zheng, C. Ouyang, Z. Zuo, H. Liu and Y. Li, Chem.–Asian J., 2009, 4, 707 CrossRef CAS .
S. Diring, F. Puntoriero, F. Nastasi, S. Campagna and R. Ziessel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6108 CrossRef CAS .
A. Harriman and R. Ziessel, Chem. Commun., 1996, 1707 RSC .

  (a) A. Harriman and R. Ziessel, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1998, 171, 331 CrossRef ; 
  (b) R. Ziessel, M. Hissler, A. El-ghayoury and A. Harriman, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1998, 178–180, 1251 CrossRef .
S. W. Thomas III, G. D. Joly and T. M. Swager, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1339 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cakmak and E. U. Akkaya, Org. Lett., 2009, 11, 85 CrossRef CAS .
A. Haefele, G. Ulrich, P. Retailleau and R. Ziessel, Tetrahedron Lett., 2008, 49, 3716 CrossRef CAS .
L. Bonardi, G. Ulrich and R. Ziessel, Org. Lett., 2008, 10, 2183 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) A. Coskun and E. U. Akkaya, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 10464 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) A. Coskun and E. U. Akkaya, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 14474 CrossRef CAS .
R. Guliyev, A. Coskun and E. U. Akkaya, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9007 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Cheng and G. R. Fleming, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2009, 60, 241 CrossRef CAS .
A. Harriman, L. J. Mallon, K. J. Elliot, A. Haefele, G. Ulrich and R. Ziessel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 13375 CrossRef CAS .
T. Förster, Discuss. Faraday Soc., 1959, 27, 7 RSC .
R. Ziessel, M. A. H. Alamiry, K. J. Elliott and A. Harriman, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 2772 CrossRef CAS .
F. Thiemann, T. Piehler, D. Haase, W. Saak and A. Lützen, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2005, 1991 CrossRef CAS .
A. Juris, L. Prodi, A. Harriman, R. Ziessel, M. Hissler, A. El-ghayoury, F. Wu, E. C. Riesgo and R. P. Thummel, Inorg. Chem., 2000, 39, 3590 CrossRef CAS .
A. Harriman and R. Ziessel, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2010, 9, 960 RSC .
R. Weissleder and V. Ntziachristos, Nat. Med., 2003, 9, 123 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bandichhor, A. D. Petrescu, A. Vespa, A. B. Kier, F. Schroeder and K. Burgess, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 10688 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) S. L. Niu, G. Ulrich, R. Ziessel, A. Kiss, P.-Y. Renard and A. Romieu, Org. Lett., 2009, 11, 2049 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S.-L. Niu, G. Ulrich, P. Retailleau, J. Harrowfield and R. Ziessel, Tetrahedron Lett., 2009, 50, 3840 CrossRef CAS .
J. Han, A. Loudet, R. Barhoumi, R. Burghardt and K. Burgess, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1642 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wu, A. Loudet, R. Barhoumi, R. Burghardt and K. Burgess, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9156 CrossRef CAS .
V. Balzani, A. Credi and M. Venturi, ChemSusChem, 2008, 1, 26 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Wasielewski, J. Org. Chem., 2006, 71, 5051 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fukuzumi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 2283 RSC .

  (a) S. Saha and J. F. Stoddart, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 77 RSC ; 
  (b) V. Balzani, A. Credi and M. Venturi, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 26 CrossRef .
K. Kikuchi, H. Takakusa and T. Nagano, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2004, 23, 407 CrossRef CAS .
F. Camerel, G. Ulrich, P. Retailleau and R. Ziessel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 8876 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Liu, H.-S. Yeung, W. Xu, X. Li and D. K. P. Ng, Org. Lett., 2008, 10, 5421 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ziessel, G. Ulrich, K. J. Elliott and A. Harriman, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 4980 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. Galletta, S. Campagna, M. Quesada, G. Ulrich and R. Ziessel, Chem. Commun., 2005, 4222 RSC ; 
  (b) M. Galletta, F. Puntoriero, S. Campagna, C. Chiorboli, M. Quesada, S. Goeb and R. Ziessel, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110, 4348 CrossRef CAS .
A. Harriman, L. J. Mallon, G. Ulrich and R. Ziessel, ChemPhysChem, 2007, 8, 1207 CrossRef CAS .

          V. Balzani, A. Credi and M. Venturi, in Molecular Devices
and Machines, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2003, ch. 2–6, and references therein Search PubMed .

  (a) A. Harriman, M. Hissler, A. Khatyr and R. Ziessel, Chem. Commun., 1999, 735 RSC ; 
  (b) D. S. Tyson, J. Bialecki and F. N. Castellano, Chem. Commun., 2000, 2355 RSC ; 
  (c) M. Hissler, A. Harriman, A. Khatyr and R. Ziessel, Chem.–Eur. J., 1999, 5, 3366 CrossRef CAS .
A. Harriman, J. P. Rostron, M. Cesario, G. Ulrich and R. Ziessel, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110, 7994 CrossRef CAS .
F. Nastasi, F. Puntoriero, S. Campagna, S. Diring and R. Ziessel, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 3982 RSC .
A. A. Rachford, R. Ziessel, T. Bura, P. Retailleau and F. N. Castellano, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 3730 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) F. D'Souza, P. M. Smith, M. E. Zandler, A. L. McCarty, M. Itou, Y. Araki and O. Ito, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 7898 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Wolffs, F. J. M. Hoeben, E. H. A. Beckers, A. P. H. Schenning and E. W. Meijer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 13484 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) F. D'Souza, S. Gadde, D. J. S. Islam, C. A. Wijesinghe, A. L. Schumacher, M. E. Zandler, Y. Araki and O. Ito, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2007, 111, 8552 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) Y. Kuramochi, A. S. D. Sandanayaka, A. Satake, Y. Araki, K. Ogawa, O. Ito and Y. Kobuke, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 2317 CrossRef CAS .
E. Maligaspe, N. V. Tkachenko, N. K. Subbaiyan, R. Chitta, M. E. Zandler, H. Lemmetyinen and F. D'Souza, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 8478 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) A. M. Brun, A. Harriman, Y. Tsuboi, T. Okada and N. Mataga, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1995, 91, 4047 RSC ; 
  (b) W. Rettig, R. Haag and J. Wirz, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1991, 180, 216 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) M. R. Wasielewski, D. R. Minsek, M. P. Niemczyk, W. A. Svec and N. C. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1990, 112, 2823 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) H. J. Van Ramesdonk, B. H. Bakker, M. M. Groeneveld, J. W. Verhoeven, B. D. Allen, J. P. Rostron and A. Harriman, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110, 13145 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) A. C. Benniston, A. Harriman, P. Y. Li, J. P. Rostron, H. J. van Ramesdonk, M. M. Groeneveld, H. Zhang and J. W. Verhoeven, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 16054 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ziessel, B. D. Allen, D. B. Rewinska and A. Harriman, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 7382 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) F. Bergstroem, I. Mikhalyov, P. Haeggloef, R. Wortmann, T. Ny and L. B. Å. Johansson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 196 CrossRef ; 
  (b) I. Mikhalyov, N. Gretskaya, F. Bergstroem and L. B. Å. Johansson, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2002, 4, 5663 RSC ; 
  (c) D. Marushchak, S. Kalinin, I. Mikhalyov, N. Gretskaya and L. B. Å. Johansson, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2006, 65, 113 CrossRef .
M. Kasha, H. R. Rawls and M. A. El-Bayoumi, Pure Appl. Chem., 1965, 11, 371 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. Bröring, R. Krüger, S. Link, C. Kleeberg, S. Köhler, X. Xie, B. Ventura and L. Flamigni, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 2976 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) B. Ventura, G. Marconi, M. Bröring, R. Krüger and L. Flamigni, New J. Chem., 2009, 33, 428 RSC .
A. C. Benniston, G. Copley, A. Harriman, D. Howgego, R. W. Harrington and W. Clegg, J. Org. Chem., 2010, 75, 2018 CrossRef CAS .
N. Saki, T. Dinc and E. U. Akkaya, Tetrahedron, 2006, 62, 2721 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ziessel, G. Ulrich, A. Harriman, M. A. H. Alamiry, B. Stewart and P. Retailleau, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 1359 CrossRef CAS .
F. Camerel, L. Bonardi, M. Schmutz and R. Ziessel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4548 CrossRef CAS .
A. Haefele, C. Zedde, P. Retailleau, G. Ulrich and R. Ziessel, Org. Lett., 2010, 12, 1672 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

Raymond Ziessel
	Doctor Raymond Ziessel gained a PhD in organic Chemistry from the University Louis Pasteur of Strasbourg under the guidance of Professor Jean-Marie Lehn and Doctor Jean-Pierre Sauvage. He is presently the Director of the Laboratoire de Chimie Organique et Spectroscopies Avancées (LCOSA) located at the Engineer School of Chemistry (ECPM) in Strasbourg. Recent research interests have focused on the preparation of novel liquid crystals and organogelators, metallo-polyacetylenes and lanthanide complexes for biomaterial labeling and time-resolved fluorescence imaging. He has published over 440 papers in International Journals and monographs, is co-author of 13 PCT patents, and has given 270 research lectures, in over 15 countries worldwide. He is the recipient of the Silver Medal CNRS award in 2000.

Anthony Harriman
	Professor Anthony Harriman spent fourteen years at the Royal Institution, working on the fundamental issues relating to artificial photosynthesis in collaboration with Lord George Porter. This work was recognised by the award of the Corday-Morgan Medal (RSC) in 1984 and Le Prix Grammaticakis-Neumann Prize en Photochimie by the European Photochemistry Society in 1985. He moved to the University of Texas at Austin in 1988 to become Director of the Center for Fast Kinetics Research before moving to the University of Newcastle in October 1999. Research at Newcastle has been concerned with various aspects of light-induced energy and electron transfer in multi-component molecular systems and has involved several long-standing international collaborations. More than 360 publications have appeared in peer-reviewed journals and more than a hundred talks have been given at international conferences.

 	Fig. 1  Molecular structure of the CFET tags adapted from ref. 23. The linkage between the fluorophores and the thymidine moieties is a six-methylene chain while DNA can be linked in place of the oligonucleotide sequence.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Molecular structures of Cy3.5 and QSY9. (b) Schematic representation of the EET-based sensing scheme adapted from ref. 22. (c) A double EET-based system uses a quantum dot (QD) as energy input as reported in ref. 25.	 

 	Fig. 3  Electronic energy transfer cassettes based on various Bodipy dyes as adapted from ref. 32.	 

 	Fig. 4  Examples of anthracene-linked Bodipy dyes as adapted from ref. 35.	 

 	Fig. 5  Synthetic protocol used to prepare some pyrene-linked Bodipy dyes.	 

 	Fig. 6  Synthetic protocol used to prepare Bodipy dyes bearing polyaromatic moieties linked to the boron centre.	 

 	Fig. 7  Examples of mixed Bodipy dyes bearing polyaryl dyes attached via the boron atom.	 

 	Fig. 8  Examples of blue–green absorbing Bodipy-based dyes equipped with a pyrene residue as the input energy donor.	 

 	Fig. 9  Example of a molecular triad composed of two Krypto-Bodipy residues (λem at 540 nm) and a single green absorber (λabs at 700 nm).	 

 	Fig. 10  Examples of a molecular triad and tetrad comprising, respectively, two krypto-Bodipy dyes (λem at 540 nm) linked to a distyryl framework and three krypto-Bodipy residues connected to a central distyryl Bodipy fragment (λabs at 650 nm) as adapted from ref. 48.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic representation of the stepwise assembly of a multi-component BPePyFdye in which each module (namely E-Bodipy (B), 3-perylene (Pe), 1,6-pyrene (Py), 2-fluorene (F)) is linked to its partner via an ethynyl or 1,4-diethynylphenyl spacer.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic representation of sequential EET processes as calculated from Förster theory for the multi-component compound BPePyF. Here, kF refers to a static system assuming only dipole–dipole interactions, while kF* refers to a dynamic system that allows for multipole–multipole interactions. Note kEET refers to the experimentally determined rate constant for EET.	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic representation of the stepwise synthesis of the multi-component GPePyFdye in which each module (namely, E-Bodipy (GPh), 3-perylene (Pe), 1,6-pyrene (Py) and 2-fluorene (F)) is linked to its partner via an ethynyl or 1,4-diethynylphenyl spacer.	 

 	Fig. 14  Presentation of the rate constants for intramolecular EET occurring in the multi-component GPePyF compound as derived by experiment.	 

 	Fig. 15  Molecular formulae for selected donor–acceptor type dendrimers as adapted from ref. 62: (a) reaction pathway; (b) size of the dendritic units.	 

 	Fig. 16  Star-shaped arrays constructed with Bodipy dyes grafted onto a truxene core. The chemistry exemplified here allows preparation of a variety of mixed compounds (TAB2, TA2C, TB2C, TBC2, TA2B, …) which are useful models by which to better understand the EET pathways.	 

 	Fig. 17  Molecular formulae for phenylethynyl-Bodipy oligomers intended as putative photonic wires.	 

 	Fig. 18  Molecular formulae for the phenylethynyl-bridged Bodipy dyes and the modified derivatives bearing a terminal azathio crown ether.	 

 	Fig. 19  Molecular formulae for hybrid Bodipy dyes intended as ratiometric chemosensors.	 

 	Fig. 20  Molecular formulae for a series of molecular triads based on dual yellow/blue Bodipy dyes spaced by oligoethynylphenyl bridges.	 

 	Fig. 21  Molecular formula of the pyrene-substituted molecular tetrad.	 

 	Fig. 22  Molecular formulae of the spiro-bridged Bodipy-based dyes used to critically test Förster theory for EET over short separations.	 

 	Fig. 23  Schematic representation of the EET processes observed for the spiro-bridged Bodipy-based dyes 54.	 

 	Fig. 24  
Water-soluble cassettes for fluorescence imaging of living cells as adapted from ref. 82.	 

 	Fig. 25  
Water-soluble cassettes for bio-labelling and multi-FRET in the essays described further in ref. 83.	 

 	Fig. 26  Symbolized EET from a BSA-Atto425 (BLUE) labelled protein to two different cassette dyes labelled with streptavidin Strep-51 (PINK) and avidine Avi-52 (GREEN) as adapted from ref. 83.	 

 	Fig. 27  Examples of hybrid subphthalocyanine–Bodipy covalently-linked dyads as adapted from refs. 90 and 91.	 

 	Fig. 28  Representation of the energy-transfer pathways found for selected hybrid SubPc–Bodipy dyads.	 

 	Fig. 29  Examples of hybrid Bodipy dyes decorated with cationic transition-metal complexes.	 

 	Fig. 30  Top: Energy levels (not to scale) and deactivation pathways for complex 67. Bottom: Transient absorption difference spectra of complex 68 in deaerated CH2Cl2 measured for excitation at 355 nm (black) or 510 nm (red). Inset: Single wavelength decay trace at 500 nm (black) along with the corresponding single-exponential fit (red) and residuals (green).	 

 	Fig. 31  Synthetic route to the C60/Bodipy molecular dyad.	 

 	Fig. 32  Outline of the various processes observed following pulsed excitation of either subunit for 69 in toluene (left-hand side) or in MTHF (right-hand side). Keys: EnT = electronic energy transfer, ISC = intersystem crossing, NR = nonradiative decay, ElT = electron transfer.	 

 	Fig. 33  Synthetic route used for the preparation of meso-aryl substituted dimeric Bodipy dyes as adapted from ref. 104.	 

 	Fig. 34  Preparative route used for the co-facial Bodipy dimers adapted from ref. 105.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
