Design strategies of phosphorus-containing catalysts for photocatalytic, photoelectrochemical and electrocatalytic water splitting  - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1GC03768D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1GC03768D
(Perspective)
Green Chem., 2022, 24, 713-747Design strategies of phosphorus-containing catalysts for photocatalytic, photoelectrochemical and electrocatalytic water splitting

        
          
            Lei 
            Chen
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jin-Tao 
            Ren
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Zhong-Yong 
            Yuan
          
          
        
      *ab
aNational Institute for Advanced Materials, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Nankai University, Tianjin 300350, China. E-mail: zyyuan@nankai.edu.cn
bKey Laboratory of Advanced Energy Materials Chemistry (Ministry of Education), Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemical Science and Engineering (Tianjin), Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China
Received 
      12th October 2021
    , Accepted 29th November 2021First published on 29th November 2021AbstractPhotocatalytic, photoelectrochemical and electrocatalytic water splitting provide advanced approaches to produce green hydrogen as a sustainable and renewable energy carrier. The development of highly efficient catalysts is the key to achieving cost-effective and large-scale production of hydrogen. Recently, P-containing catalysts have gained a great deal of attention owing to their diverse chemical valence states, tunable structure and unique physicochemical properties. In this review, an overview of up-to-date progress in water splitting of P-containing photo- and electro-catalysts including elemental P, transition metal phosphides, metal phosphates/phosphonates and metal phosphorus trichalcogenides is provided. A general introduction to the water splitting mechanism and the activity origin of P-containing catalysts is briefly presented to provide rational guidance for the design of highly efficient catalysts. Notably, innovational strategies to design P-containing catalysts with enhanced catalytic activity are summarized with respect to modifying the phase, introducing foreign elements, tailoring morphology and engineering interfaces. In each section, we aim to deeply clarify the theory–structure–property relationship and provide underlying reasons behind enhanced catalytic performance. Finally, some challenges and research orientations of P-containing catalysts toward water splitting are briefly proposed from the perspectives of practical application and mechanism investigation.Lei ChenLei Chen received her BEng degree from Northeast Forestry University in 2017 and obtained her MEng degree from Nankai University in 2020. She is currently a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Zhong-Yong Yuan at Nankai University. Her current research focuses on the fabrication of nanostructured materials for energy-related applications.Jin-Tao RenJin-Tao Ren received his Ph.D. degree from Nankai University in 2020 under the supervision of Prof. Zhong-Yong Yuan. He is currently a postdoctoral fellow at Nankai University. His research interests focus on advanced nanomaterials for applications in electrocatalysis, metal–air batteries, fuel cells, etc.Zhong-Yong YuanZhong-Yong Yuan received his PhD degree from Nankai University in 1999. After his postdoctoral research at the Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, he joined the Laboratory of Inorganic Materials Chemistry at the University of Namur, Belgium in 2001. In 2005, he was appointed Professor in Nankai University. In 2006, he was awarded the “Program for New Century Excellent Talents in University” by the Ministry of Education. In 2016, he was elected as a fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry. He is currently serving as an Associate Editor of RSC Advances, and as editorial board member of several journals. His research interests are mainly focused on the self-assembly of hierarchically nanoporous and nanostructured materials for energy and environmental applications.
1. Introduction
With the aggravation of energy shortages and environmental pollution, the pursuit of renewable energy sources, such as wind, solar and hydraulic power, has aroused great research attention.1 However, the intermittent nature of these renewable energy sources urgently requires “green” technologies to convert and store the excess energy in the form of clean fuels.2 Hydrogen is potentially one of the most sustainable energy materials due to its high combustion efficiency, pollution-free byproduct and high gravimetric energy density of 120 MJ kg−1, which is much higher than that of gasoline (40 MJ kg−1). The abundant and renewable characteristics of water resources offer great advantages for water splitting using solar energy or electrical energy generated by renewable sources.3 Moreover, there is no release of any greenhouse gases during photocatalytic, photoelectrochemical and electrocatalytic water splitting, which have been considered among the most effective methods to produce green hydrogen.4 High-efficiency water splitting processes greatly rely on the assistance of active catalysts. The search for Earth-abundant catalysts with high activity for photocatalytic, photoelectrochemical and electrocatalytic water splitting is of critical importance to ensure sustainable hydrogen production.
The major distinction between photocatalysis and electrocatalysis is the different driving force of the electrons.5 During the photocatalytic water splitting reaction, the photon energy leads to the generation and separation of photoexcited electrons and holes, which transfer to the surface active sites and trigger the redox reaction. However, electricity directly provides electrons for the catalytic sites in electrocatalytic water splitting.6 Photoelectrochemical water splitting is the combination of electrolytic water splitting and photocatalytic water splitting, whose driving energy is provided by sunlight and bias. Generally, photo- and electro-catalysts for water splitting need different standards. Some metallic materials and carbon materials with good electronic conductivity generally exhibit high electrocatalytic performance, while excellent photocatalytic activities are usually achieved by semiconductor materials with the ability for light absorption, charge separation and abundant surface active sites. Due to the abundant types and diverse structures, P-containing materials exhibit extraordinary catalytic performance towards both photocatalytic and electrocatalytic water splitting.7
Phosphorus is widespread in nature and plays a vital role in various life forms and environmental maintenance. In recent years, P-containing materials with remarkable catalytic performance and novel characteristics have triggered intensive research interest. Numerous achievements have been made in the synthesis, characterization and application of P-containing materials.8 Intrinsic electronic and optoelectronic properties such as wide light absorption, excellent conductivity and fast carrier mobility make P-containing materials capable of acting as efficient catalysts for both photocatalysis and electrocatalysis, especially for the water splitting reaction. The relatively stable chemical valences of P are P0, P4+, P5+ and P3−, therefore, P-containing materials with these four valence states are the most widely used.9 P can exist in elemental form, and can combine with metals and non-metals to form a large number of inorganic compounds, such as phosphides,10 metal phosphates (MPi),11 metal phosphorus trichalcogenides (MPT) and so on.12 In addition, P can be found in many organic ligands, which can coordinate with metal ions to form organic–inorganic hybrid metal phosphonates (MPPi).13 P-Containing materials have an interrelated relationship, primarily owing to inherent physical and chemical properties partly derived from the P component. To date, there have been six categories of P-containing materials that exhibit commendable catalytic performance towards photocatalytic and electrocatalytic water splitting, including elemental phosphorus, transition metal phosphides (TMPs), MPi, MPPi, MPT, and P-doped materials.
In 2012, red phosphorus (RP) was first revealed as an Earth abundant metal-free catalyst for photocatalytic water splitting in the visible light region.14 However, its extremely low electronic conductivity hinders the larger-scale development of RP as an electrocatalyst. Another elemental P, black phosphorus (BP) possesses an adjustable layer-dependent direct bandgap, excellent carrier mobility and unique structure, and has undoubtedly become a rising 2D material star in various energy related applications.15 As a kind of well-known P-containing material, TMPs with high electrical conductivity are widely employed as efficient catalysts for electrocatalytic water splitting to produce hydrogen, and commonly act as cocatalysts to prevent the recombination of electrons and holes during photocatalytic water splitting.16 Generally, a high metal content can improve the stability and conductivity of TMPs, and P-rich TMPs have more active sites, thus, the balance of metal and P content in TMPs directly determines the catalytic performance. In addition, some metal-free phosphides such as boron phosphide and silicon diphosphide17 have been revealed to meet the requirements of photocatalytic water splitting, by the density functional theory (DFT). P with positive valence can be found in MPi, which have strong redox ability and good protonic conductivity.11 As early as 2008, cobalt phosphate was reported to electrolyze water for oxygen evolution in a neutral solution.18 Moreover, silver phosphate exhibits effective water splitting availability under visible light, benefiting from excellent light absorption and carrier generation ability.19 By combining organophosphonic ligands with inorganic metal ions, MPPi with an organic–inorganic hybrid framework can be built which have strong stability and flexible controllability.20 For MPPi, the hierarchical pore structure can accelerate mass transfer and organic chromophores can enhance light absorption, which makes them an ideal platform for active photo- and electro-catalysts.21 Lately, some MPPi with advanced features, such as cobalt, nickel and titanium phosphonates, have demonstrated high catalytic performance for photocatalytic and electrocatalytic water splitting.21–23 Additionally, a new type of two-dimensional photo- and electro-catalyst, MPT with adjustable composition and electronic structure, has attracted widespread attention.24 The multiformity of metal, phosphorus and chalcogen atoms in MPT materials provides broad possibilities for the construction of the required physical, chemical, optical and electronic properties.25 Different from the phosphorus containing materials mentioned above, P can also serve as a dopant to be incorporated into some metal and non-metal materials to tailor their morphology and structure, and adjust their electronic structure, band gap and light absorption capacity, such as P-doped TiO2, P-doped graphene and P-doped g-C3N4.26,27
Over the past decade, the vigorous development of P-containing materials has stimulated the emergence of some excellent reviews. Nevertheless, these reviews only emphasized the application of a limited number of P-containing material systems in photocatalysis, where the applications of MPPi and MPT are often overlooked, and even P-doped materials are not discussed.7,9 So far, there has not been a review paper covering photo-/elctro-catalytic water splitting of P-containing materials. This is very useful for laying a solid knowledge foundation for P-containing photocatalysts, and provides a groundbreaking reference for the design of multifunctional P-containing catalysts for light-driven and electricity-driven water splitting processes. Thus, this review delivers a comprehensive and in-depth overview on the up-to-date developments in P-containing materials for photocatalytic and electrocatalytic water splitting. In this review, we first highlight the activity origin of P-containing catalysts including elemental phosphorus, TMPs, MPi, MPPi, MPT, and P-doped materials. More importantly, the design strategies for P-containing materials in photocatalytic and electrocatalytic water splitting are thoroughly discussed, including modifying phase, introducing foreign element, tailoring morphology and engineering interface. In each section, we aim to deeply clarify the theory–structure–property relationship and provide clear reasons behind enhanced catalytic performance. Finally, we present the critical challenges and opportunities for future research to initiate new efforts in the development of P-containing photo- and electro-catalysts.
2. Fundamentals of P-containing catalysts for photocatalytic, photoelectrochemical and electrocatalytic water splitting
2.1 Basic principles of photocatalytic, photoelectrochemical and electrocatalytic water splitting
Through photocatalytic and electrocatalytic technology, intermittent renewable energy can be utilized to split abundant water resources for hydrogen production to realize the recycling of clean energy. A schematic of the sustainable hydrogen fuel cycle based on photocatalytic and electrocatalytic water splitting is depicted in Fig. 1. In this process, hydrogen acts as a medium to convert renewable energy and water into high-efficiency power production systems, such as fuel cells and internal combustion engines. More importantly, hydrogen can react with carbon dioxide captured from factory waste gas or the atmosphere to produce chemicals and fuels (methanol and synthetic gas, etc.), contributing to the mitigation of the global greenhouse effect. The development of photocatalytic and electrocatalytic water splitting technology plays a significant role in the realization of such processes. The mechanism and fundamentals of photocatalytic and electrocatalytic water splitting will be introduced in this section.
 Fig. 1  Schematic of a sustainable hydrogen fuel cycle based on photocatalytic and electrocatalytic water splitting. 

2.1.1 Photocatalytic water splitting. 
Similar to photosynthesis by green plants, photocatalytic water splitting is an uphill reaction accompanied by increased Gibbs free energy (ΔG = 237 kJ mol−1).28 Thus, photocatalytic water splitting is considered to be an artificial photosynthesis and a challenging subject in chemistry. As shown in Fig. 2a, photocatalytic water splitting consists of three sequential processes: light harvesting, charge separation and migration and surface redox reaction. First, a catalyst absorbs photons at certain wavelengths from the irradiated light, and the photons with equivalent or greater energy than the bandgap energy of the catalyst shift electrons from the valence band (VB) to the conduction band (CB), resulting in the generation of excited electrons–hole pairs simultaneously (step 1). Second, electrons and holes are separated and migrated to the surface active sites (step 2). Finally, the redox reaction is induced by these photoexcited carriers and surface catalytic active sites (step 3).29
 Fig. 2  (a) Main steps in photocatalytic water splitting: step 1 is light absorption, step 2 is charge separation and migration, step 3 is surface redox reaction. (b) Mechanism of photocatalytic water splitting. 
In order to ensure efficient photocatalytic water splitting, the photocatalyst needs to fulfill stringent requirements, including band gap, charge transfer/separation efficiency and active sites. Visible light from 400 to 700 nm occupies the most intense solar radiation energy (about 43%), while ultraviolet (UV) light up to 400 nm only has 4% solar energy.28 In addition, H2 is generated via the reduction of protons by the electrons in the CB and the holes in the VB can oxidize water molecules to produce O2, implying that VB maximum should be more positive than O2/H2O oxidation potential (1.23 V vs. NHE) and CB minimum should be more negative than H+/H2 reduction potential (0 V vs. NHE) (Fig. 2b). To maximize the use of solar radiation energy, the band gap of the photocatalyst should be between 1.23 eV and 3.1 eV.5 During charge separation and migration, the photoexcited electrons in the CB will return to the VB and recombine with the holes to reduce the reaction rate, which is regarded as the main challenge of photocatalysis.29 Generally, defects in the photocatalysts act as trapping and recombination centers of electrons and holes.30 A small particle size can shorten the migration distance of electrons and holes to the active site, thereby reducing the possibility of recombination. To avoid the recombination of electrons and holes, the photocatalysts should have high crystalline quality and small particle size.3 Moreover, the catalytic ability and quantity of surface active sites play the critical role in the whole photocatalytic reaction, because insufficient active sites will cause the recombination of photogenerated electrons and holes that have transferred to the catalyst's surface. Some hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER) catalysts with high performance usually serve as the co-catalysts for photocatalytic water splitting, such as Pt, Pd and IrO2, etc.3,28


2.1.2 Electrocatalytic water splitting. 
Electrocatalytic water splitting consists of two half-reactions: HER at the cathode and OER at the anode. In terms of the pH value of electrolytes, the water splitting reaction has different expressions:
In acidic solution2H+ + 2e− → H2 (cathode)H2O → 2H+ + 1/2O2 + 2e− (anode)
In neutral or alkaline solution2H2O + 2e− → H2 + 2OH− (cathode)2OH− → H2O + 1/2O2 + 2e− (anode)
The multistep reaction pathways of HER are summarized and shown in Fig. 3a, where * refers to active sites on the catalyst. Generally, the HER process starts with the Volmer reaction which occurs by the adsorption of H atoms by the catalyst. Subsequently, the adsorbed H* reacts with another proton that diffuses to the catalyst surface to produce hydrogen via electrochemical desorption (Heyrovsky reaction), or adsorbed H* combines with the adjacent H* to generate hydrogen via chemical desorption (Tafel reaction), or both. The Tafel slope can be used to determine the reaction kinetics and mechanism of the HER catalyst. For Pt catalyst, the calculated Tafel slope values are 30, 40 and 120 mV dec−1, corresponding to the rate-determining steps of the HER reaction as Volmer, Heyrovsky and Tafel reaction, respectively.31 The mechanism of OER has not been fully interpreted; however, the most recognized reaction pathways of OER are presented in Fig. 3b, which includes four consecutive proton and electron transfer steps. In addition, oxygen can also be formed by the direct combination of two *O intermediates (the green line in Fig. 3b).32 More complicated than HER, the OER process not only involves the adsorption of OH− or desorption of protons but also generates a variety of intermediates during the OER process, including *OH, *O, *OOH and *O2. The accumulation of potential barriers in each step will cause the sluggish kinetics of OER, which need huge overpotential to overcome.33
 Fig. 3  Mechanism of HER (a) and OER (b) in alkaline (blue way) and acidic (pink way) solutions. 
The adsorption and desorption of intermediates on the surface of catalysts determine the reaction rate of both HER and OER.29 The optimal electrocatalytic reaction can be achieved on the catalyst surface with a moderate bonding energy (or free adsorption energy). Specifically speaking, an excessively strong bond between the catalyst surfaces and intermediates leads to a sluggish reaction because the slow desorption of products limits the available surface sites (poisoning effect), while a too weak bond will also hinder the reaction due to the extremely low adsorption of intermediates.34 A medium adsorption capacity of the catalyst for the intermediates promotes an ideal balance between the combination and removal of the intermediates, which is not only beneficial for the adsorption process, but also ensures the easy detachment of the product (H2 and O2).2 The adsorption properties can be reflected by the Gibbs free adsorption energy (ΔG). For HER, when ΔGH* is equal to or close to 0, the optimal reaction rate can be achieved, and noble metals such as Pt and Pd can meet the above requirements. In OER, the electrocatalytic activity as a function of ΔGO* − ΔGOH* shows the volcano shape, and Ir-/Ru-based compounds at the top of the volcano have excellent OER performance, which is also confirmed by experimental results.1,35 However, the high cost and scarcity of noble metal materials have stimulated the development of cost-effective and Earth-abundant catalysts with high performance toward electrocatalytic water splitting.


2.1.3 Photoelectrochemical water splitting. 
Photoelectrochemical water splitting is the combination of electrolytic water splitting and photocatalytic water splitting, and inherits the advantages of the above two systems, while avoiding their shortcomings. The photoelectrochemical water splitting process can make full use of solar energy and greatly reduce the consumption of electrical energy. The energy required to drive photoelectrochemical water splitting is provided by sunlight and bias.36 The external bias is applied between working electrode and counter electrode (CE) to compensate for the potential gap between the Fermi level of the semiconducting photoelectrode and the work function of CE, which offers a driving force to enhance the transfer rate of photogenerated carriers.37 Three typical photoelectrochemical devices are displayed in Fig. 4. In the n-type semiconducting photoanode, H2O reacts with photoinduced holes accumulated on the surface to generate O2, and the electrons transfer to the CE via an external circuit to produce H2 (Fig. 4a). In contrast, in p-type semiconducting photocathode system, the generation of H2 and O2 occurs at the working electrode and CE, respectively (Fig. 4b). In addition, a photoanode and a photocathode can be used to construct tandem cells instead of using a single photoelectrode and a CE (Fig. 4c).
 Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of traditional photoelectrochemical water splitting cells. 
The selection criteria for photoelectrodes for photoelectrochemical water splitting are almost identical to those of photocatalytic water splitting, which are focused on light absorption, separation and migration of photo-generated carriers, and active sites (for details see section 2.1.1). However, compared with photocatalytic water splitting, photoelectrochemical water splitting is carried out on two photoelectrodes, photocathode and photoanode, which is not only conducive to product separation, but also reduces the requirements for semiconductor band gaps. The band gap requirement is that the VB of the photoanode catalyst should be more positive than the O2 generation potential and the CB edge of photocathode catalyst should be more negative than the H2 evolution potential.

2.2 Activity origin of different P-containing materials
To date, P-containing materials have made remarkable achievements in photocatalytic and electrocatalytic water splitting, and have been regarded as one of the candidates with most potential to replace noble metal catalysts. However, the differences among various P-containing materials (including valence, coordination, composition and structure, etc.) lead to significantly distinct catalytic activity. In this section, we aim to reveal the activity origin of different P-containing materials by briefly analyzing their structure and characteristics.

2.2.1 Elemental phosphorus (P0). 
Elemental phosphorus has three main allotropes, white phosphorus (WP), RP and BP, according to their distinct geometric structures and appearance. These allotropes can be converted into each other under specific reaction conditions. Among them, WP with tetrahedral P4 molecules is poisonous, reactive and volatile, and easily ignites spontaneously in air above 34 °C, leading to limited applications. In contrast, both RP and BP have less toxicity, high chemical stability, suitable band gap and conductivity, and are regarded as the most promising candidates for energy related applications.6
As the most abundant allotrope of elemental phosphorus, RP can be classified into five types, including amorphous phase, fibrous phase, Hittorf phase, hexagonal phase and metastable phase, but the chemical structure of the latter two is still ambiguous.38 Amorphous RP stands out from the rest based on its commercial availability and wide application in daily life. Recently reported theoretical and experimental results indicated that amorphous RP may exist in a zigzag ladder structure (structure 2 in Fig. 5a), but this still needs further validation by other methods due to the non-crystalline nature of amorphous RP.39 Amorphous RP of blood red color can be directly changed into crystalline RP of dark red color (Hittorf and fibrous) after heating, accompanied by the light absorption edge from about 680 nm to 720 nm.40 The crystal structures of Hittorf and fibrous phases were clearly resolved in 1969 and 2005, respectively.9 As illustrated in Fig. 5a, the crystal structures of Hittorf and fibrous RP are very similar and contain a layered structure which allows them to be exfoliated to a few layers, and even to a monolayer. The monolayer Hittorf's phosphorene has significantly improved bandgap, band energy and conductivity compared with those of bulk Hittorf phosphorus, and the CB minimum and VB maximum are predominated by P 2p states.38
 Fig. 5  Ball-stick models of various RP including (a) amorphous phosphorus, Hittorf and fibrous phosphorus, and (b) the side view and the top view of BP. (c) Crystal structures of partial nickel phosphides with different Ni:P ratios. (d) Atomic structure of a MPX3 monolayer. (Reproduced from ref. 49 with permission from American Physical Society, Copyright 2016.) (e) Crystal structures of Ag3PO4. (f) Schematic structure of MPPi with different organophosphonic ligands. 
Compared with WP and RP, BP has the highest structural stability with the assistance of its orthorhombic crystalline structure. As depicted in Fig. 5b, bulk BP is formed by the accumulation of many honeycomb monolayers (called phosphorene) through the interaction of van der Waals forces, and each monolayer presents a double-layer structure in the zigzag direction, and a puckered configuration along the armchair direction.15 The anisotropic structures of BP endow it with unique electronic and optical properties. The layered structure of BP allows thin phosphorene to be exfoliated from the bulk crystals. Decreasing the layer-number of BP from bulk crystals to monolayer would lead to the blue-shift in absorption infrared light to UV, the increase of band gap ranging from 0.3 to 2.0 eV and the reduction of charge mobility, which can be ascribed to the change of charge distribution of each P atom and the decreased intensity of interlayer coupling.15 In addition, the direction of the structure also can affect the light absorption and charge mobility. The armchair direction possesses 10 times larger absorption coefficient, 16 times greater photo diffusion, 14 times higher electron mobility and an order of magnitude smaller effective mass of charge carriers than the zigzag direction, indicating that the armchair direction with excellent ability of light absorption and charge mobility has greater potential in photocatalytic and electrocatalytic reactions.41 More importantly, BP has inherent active sites including the uncoordinated lone pair electrons of P atom and some unavoidable point defects, such as the dangling bonds of P or O, and the diagonal oxygen bridge (P–O–P).6


2.2.2 Transition metal phosphides (P3−). 
TMPs are also promising candidates for photocatalytic and electrocatalytic water splitting owing to polytropic composition and structures, appropriate redox potentials and high electrical conductivity.42 Nearly all of the transition metal elements can be phosphorized to TMPs.43 The variations in constituent elements and stoichiometric ratios give rise to a wide range of possible TMPs. Due to the slightly higher electronegativity of P than that of most transition metal elements, electrons would be transferred from the metal to P, resulting in the formation of negative valence of P in TMPs.44 For most TMPs, the M–P bond has both a covalent and ionic nature, which endows TMPs with high thermal and chemical stability. TMPs with the formula of MxPy can be divided into metal-rich phosphides (x > y) and phosphorus-rich phosphides (x < y) according to the varied stoichiometric ratios.45 In metal-rich phosphides, the presence of the metallic bond (M–M) can give rise to the metallic/superconducting characteristics of TMPs, and part of the ion contribution from the partial electron transfer on the covalent bond (Mδ+–Mδ−) endows TMPs with high thermal and chemical stability.46 For instance, GaP and InP are famous semiconductor materials, while TiP, Fe2P and CoP manifest unique metallic properties, and Mo3P, W3P and Ni3P possess superconducting characteristics.7 With regard to P-rich TMPs, the high atomic percentage of P promotes the formation of the P–P bond, even oligomers and clusters, which can evidently enhance the reactivity, while causing a decrease in stability and conductivity. Nickel phosphides exist in nine phases with different Ni/P stoichiometric ratios, and some typical crystal structures are displayed in Fig. 5c. As previously reported, Ni5P4 has exhibited superior activity towards photocatalytic and electrocatalytic HER, and metal-rich nickel phosphides have been considered as excellent catalysts for the electrocatalytic OER.44 Unexpectedly, Ni2P with appropriate P content and well-defined exposed facets has been proved to be a bifunctional catalyst towards both HER and OER.47 Thus, the appropriate proportion of P in TMPs should be rationally designed to achieve excellent catalytic performance.


2.2.3 Metal phosphorus trichalcogenides (P4+). 
Recently, a flourishing research direction has been the photocatalytic and electrocatalytic water splitting by another important P-containing material, MPT.12 Generally, MPT presents a 2D layered structure and follows the formula of MPX3, where M represents a metal (including transition metal, partial alkaline metal and some other metal ions), and X refers to S and Se. Although MPT was discovered and synthesized as early as a century ago, a plethora of important properties unfolded in the early 2000s, such as the wide bandgaps (1.3 to 3.5 eV), intercalation–reduction (substitution) behavior, ionic conductivity and magnetism, etc.48
In most MPX3, the formal oxidation state of P is +4 instead of +5 in ordinary phosphates, and the metal cations usually exist in the form of divalent state.49 Even if there are some monovalent and trivalent metals, they exist in a mixed-valence to achieve charge neutrality, such as Cr0.5Ag0.5PS3 and Mn0.5Ag1PS3. All MPX3 materials have a defining common structure of (P2S6)4− or (P2Se6)4− anion sublattice, which exists within each layered crystal. As shown in Fig. 5d, the metal ions are arranged in a honeycomb configuration around the (P2X6)4− bipyramids.49 The van der Waals gap distance of the MPX3 crystals refers to the shortest distance between the S layers, while the different atomic radii cations in MPX3 alter the slab size. For the typical M22+[P2X6]4−, the nearly closed packed layers are composed of chalcogen atoms with systematically arranged octahedral coordinated sites, two-thirds of which are filled by metal cations and the rest are occupied by P–P dimers.24 The flat pyramid including X2− ions remains unchanged, and P–P distance can be fine-tuned to accommodate different metal cations, which directly affects the thickness of the layer, and the longer the P–P distance, the greater the thickness of the layer.
The electronic structure of MPX3 is calculated according to the ionic extreme of the Wilson–Yoffe band model, which suggests that MPX3 presents semiconducting characteristics and possesses variable band gaps from 1.3 to 3.5 eV.48 The metal cations in MPX3 determine the value of the bandgap. When the metal cations are consistent, the bandgap of sulfides is larger than that of selenides, resulting from the relative electronegativity of S and Se atoms. The conduction band edges mainly depend on the s and p orbitals of the P atoms, and the chalcogen's atomic orbitals can greatly dominate the top of valence band.48 Compared with the bulk structure, the 2D layered MPX3 materials have more intense light absorption and their range can vary from UV to NIR. Benefiting from merits including 2D morphology, unique electronic structures and strong light absorption, MPT have been perceived as potential candidates for efficient photocatalytic and electrocatalytic water splitting.12


2.2.4 Metal phosphates/phosphonates (P5+). 
Due to their low cost, abundant reserves, tunable multifunctionality and unique physicochemical characteristics, MPi and MPPi can be regarded as one of the most typical representatives of the burgeoning P-based catalysts. As early as 2008, cobalt phosphate was reported to possess excellent OER electrocatalytic performance in neutral solution, and the proton coupling electron transfer (PCET) process was proposed, wherein the dynamic equilibrium between Co2+-HPO42− and Co3+-HPO42− guarantees the high stability of cobalt phosphates in oxidation condition and the proton acceptor HPO42− plays a key role in the whole process.18 Since then, tremendous efforts have been devoted to applying MPi and MPPi in photocatalytic and electrocatalytic water splitting.
P in MPi and MPPi is in the form of chemically stable P5+. Phosphates easily react with metal cations by strong ionic bonding to produce MPi, wherein the diverse oxidation states of metal species enhance their redox ability and the phosphate group can endow them with high protonic conductivity.32 Some noble metal phosphates (Ir and Ag) and transition metal phosphates (TMPi) (Fe, Co, Ni, Cu and Mn) have been proved to possess excellent electrocatalytic OER performance.11,35,50 Taking cobalt phosphates as an example, phosphates not only induce the distorted cobalt geometric structure to promote the adsorption of water molecules but also serve as a proton acceptor to enhance the stability of the whole catalyst system.35 The photocatalytic water splitting system can be catalyzed by MPi with light response ability, e.g. Ti, Zr, Bi, Fe, Cu and Ag phosphates,7,19 and cobalt phosphates can be used as cocatalysts for photocatalytic H2 evolution.51 It is worth noting that silver phosphate can achieve efficient water oxidation regardless of whether it is driven by electricity or light. As displayed in Fig. 5e, the body-centered-cubic Ag3PO4 is composed of several isolated, regular PO4 tetrahedral unit cells, which not only lead to excellent protonic conductivity but can also trap holes and reject electrons to promote the separation of photoinduced holes and electrons.19 Moreover, the band gap energy of Ag3PO4 is about 2.43 eV with a VBM more positive than O2/H2O, indicating it can achieve water oxidation under visible light irradiation.19
As typical organic–inorganic hybrids, MPPi with controllable porosity are formed by the intimate coordination between organophosphonic ligands and metal atoms. Each R–PO3H2 group (R = organic moieties) can combine with up to nine metal atoms, which endow MPPi with versatile structural modes.13,20 Due to the strong R–P–O–metal bonds, MPPi feature remarkable thermal/mechanical/acidic stability, which ensures their application in some harsh conditions.13 The surface functionality and light harvesting ability of MPPi can be easily modified by changing either the metal cations or organophosphonic ligands. More importantly, some functional moieties can be directly grafted onto the organophosphonic ligands and finally homogenously dispersed on the pore walls of MPPi without significantly disturbing the structural periodicity. As displayed in Fig. 5f, the above advantages can extend the application potential of MPPi in environmental and energy uses, such as adsorption, energy storage and catalysis. To date, cobalt and nickel phosphonates have been explored as efficient catalysts for photocatalytic and electrocatalytic water splitting, especially for photocatalytic HER and electrocatalytic OER,22,52 and titanium phosphonates have been considered as potential catalysts towards photocatalytic HER by virtue of the red-shift adsorption edge relative to traditional titania.21


2.2.5 P doped materials. 
P can also be employed as a dopant to modify the chemical and electronic properties of some photo- and electro-catalysts, including metal compounds (oxides and sulfides, etc.) and carbon materials (g-C3N4 and graphene, etc.).53 For the photocatalytic process, the introduction of P can narrow the bandgap and induce charge imbalance, thereby accelerating electron transfer and inhibiting photo-induced charge recombination.2 Generally, P-containing electrocatalysts possess excellent electronic conductivity and hydrophilic acid surface, contributing to the improved electrocatalytic performance.54 More importantly, P is distinguished from non-metallic cations by its ability to stabilize nanostructures, which can maintain extremely high catalytic activity under harsh reaction conditions, such as light illumination and strong acid or alkaline electrolytes.26
There are many kinds of existential states for P dopants in metal oxides. Taking P doped TiO2 as an example, P can substitute Ti as a P5+ cation to form Ti–O–P in an oxygen-rich environment (from TiO2 to P doped TiO2), while it will substitute O as a P3− anion in a Ti-rich environment (from TiP to P doped TiO2), which can be identified by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) characterizations and DFT calculation.9,55 P5+ cation can inhibit the growth of crystal grains and stabilize the anatase TiO2 phase, leading to enlarged specific surface area and improved catalytic performance and stability.56 P3− anion can broaden light absorption to the visible light region by raising the VB.27 Notably, it is easier to form Ti–O–P bonds after P doping, resulting from the higher formation energy of P replacing O than that of P replacing Ti in anatase TiO2.9 In addition, further enhanced P content or calcination temperature can induce the transformation from Ti–O–P to phosphates, which can improve the separation of photo-generated carriers by virtue of the conjugated structure of O–P=O.9 Apart from TiO2, the most common P structure in most P doped metal compounds (Co3O4 and MoS2, etc.) is in the form of P–O (P5+), where the O coordinated with P may be lattice oxygen, surface oxygen and even doped oxygen.57
The P doped carbon materials can usually be synthesized by carbonization of carbon precursor and P-containing compounds, post-modification of the prepared carbon, and deposition of carbon and P from the gas phase.58 For P doped pure carbon materials, P is mainly combined with oxygen, even in carbon prepared using oxygen-free precursors.26 In general, P exists in pentavalent tetra-coordinated form in phosphate, wherein P–C bonds can substitute some P–O bonds. As one of the most famous carbon materials, two-dimensional (2D) g-C3N4 is constructed by tris-s-triazines interconnected through tertiary amines, where P can exist in three doping states including P–N bonds (replacing C atoms), P–C bonds (replacing N atoms) and interstitial dopants.59 According to previous reports, the doping states of P in g-C3N4 can be confirmed by XPS (P–N bonding at 133.5 eV, is ≈1–2 eV higher than that of P–C bonding) and FT-IR (P–N stretching mode at 950 cm−1), and the slight shift in XRD may be evidence of interstitial P dopants.60,61 In addition, further DFT calculations can be used to accurately determine the position of P.7
As mentioned above, P with different states can meet the strict requirements of water splitting whether driven by electricity or light. As shown in Fig. 6, nearly half of transition metals can combine with P to form different metal-based P-containing materials applied in photocatalytic and electrocatalytic water splitting, especially the first row of Fe, Co, Ni and Cu. Accordingly, we focus on the blooming research in P-containing photo- and electro-catalysts and try to summarize the design strategies for improving catalytic performance. For P-doped materials, the modification method mainly focuses on the host catalyst rather than the P dopant, thus the discussion of design strategies below does not include P-doped materials.
 Fig. 6  The most frequently used metal-based P-containing materials in photocatalytic and electrocatalytic water splitting. 

3. Design strategies of P-containing photo- and electro-catalysts
To date, numerous researchers have witnessed the potential of P-containing materials in photocatalytic and electrocatalytic water splitting; however, their practical performance is hardly satisfactory. To solve this issue, an in-depth understanding of heterogeneous photocatalytic and electrocatalytic processes and theory–structure–property relationships is extremely necessary. First of all, light-harvesting ability and electrical conductivity are two important prerequisites for photocatalytic and electrocatalytic reactions, respectively.6 Second, in real catalytic systems, the practical catalytic performance depends on both the inherent ability of active sites and surrounding local environments.46 The active sites dominate the adsorption of reactants, capture of charge and electrons, bond cleavage and formation, stabilization of intermediates and desorption of products, while the surrounding local environments are responsible for the availability of active sites and mass diffusion.33 Thus, the following three points should be taken into consideration in the design of efficient photo-/electro-catalysts: the enhancement of light-harvesting ability and electrical conductivity, the improvement of the inherent ability of active sites and the construction of favorable surrounding local environments. In this section, recent advances in modulated approaches for P-containing materials are summarized in terms of modifying phase, introducing foreign element, tailoring morphology and engineering interface. We aim to clarify the influences of these design strategies and reveal the underlying reasons for the improved catalytic activity. Moreover, the remaining challenges and some prospects are briefly presented.
3.1 Modifying phase
Modifying the phase of P-containing materials can improve the light absorption, charge mobility and intrinsic activity. For P-containing materials, phase modification can be achieved by enhancing crystallinity, creating an amorphous structure or adjusting the metal/phosphorus stoichiometric ratios. High crystallinity can prolong the life of (photogenerated) charge carriers and promote their transfer from the bulk to the surface active sites, and contribute to the investigation of the catalytic mechanism of P-containing materials.62 An amorphous structure possesses more unsaturated active sites and greater flexibility, whereas modulating the metal/phosphorus stoichiometric ratios of TMPs and MPO can balance the electronic conductivity and active sites.63 Accordingly, in this section, we focus on discussing the phase modification of P-containing materials by these approaches and expound the elaborate reasons behind the enhanced performance towards photocatalytic and electrocatalytic water splitting.

3.1.1 High crystallinity. 
Commercial RP with amorphous phase, bulk structure and excess defects possesses limited active sites and lots of carrier trapping sites, resulting in inferior catalytic efficiency. Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) technology can transform amorphous RP to Hittorf's P and fibrous RP with high crystalline and large surface area.64 The earliest evaluation of the feasibility of elemental catalysts for photocatalytic H2 production was carried out on crystalline RP in 2012.14 As the starting material for the transformation of other RP allotropes, the surface of commercial RP can usually be oxidized by air to generate some phosphorus oxides, which are photo-inactive and will transform into toxic P2O5 under high temperature treatment. The hydrothermal method is often adopted as a pre-treatment process to remove the oxide layer on commercially available RP,65 and then the pretreated commercial RP is transformed into high-crystallinity RP through the CVD process. Besides CVD methods, the ball milling method can also achieve the conversion of amorphous RP to crystalline RP by adjusting several factors, such as rotation speed, times and precursors.66 Hittorf's phosphorus with high crystallinity can be obtained by the mechanical ball milling method, wherein the weight ratio of steel balls and RP powder is about 50:1, the rotation speed is 250 rotations per minute and the grinding time is 48 h.67 Analogously, highly crystalline BP can also be prepared by ball-milling commercial RP, and BP prepared by using the mixer mill apparatus has higher crystallinity than that prepared with the planetary ball-mill apparatus.68 This is because mixer mill equipment produces a more effective collision interaction on the RP samples during the reaction compared with planetary ball-mill equipment. The obtained elemental P with high crystallinity generally possesses enhanced light harvesting ability and prolonged charge carriers’ lifetime, thus leading to remarkable photocatalytic performance. Taking crystalline RP as an example, compared with amorphous RP, the adsorption edge of crystalline RP shifts from 700 to 680 nm.14 The photocatalytic HER activity of crystalline RP is evidently better than that of amorphous RP, and can maintain a visible light photocatalytic H2 evolution rate of 0.6 μmol h−1 g−1 over 45 h with the help of a methanol sacrificing agent.14
For metal phosphonate, organophosphonic ligands with a conjugate structure (e.g. benzene ring) can induce the formation of crystallized MPPi.69 Taking isostructural Co and Ni phosphonates (CoPPA and NiPPA) as examples, CoPPA and NiPPA synthesized by using phenylphosphonic acid (PPA) as P sources have the same diffraction peaks corresponding to an orthorhombic space group (Fig. 7a).22 With the assistance of triethanolamine (TEOA) sacrificial agents, CoPPA and NiPPA can achieve the photocatalytic H2 evolution rate of 32.58 and 44.39 μmol g−1 h−1 under UV irradiation, respectively. To get insight into the photocatalytic activity of CoPPA and NiPPA, FeCl3 and K3[Fe(CN)6] were added into pink CoPPA solution and green NiPPA solution, respectively. The obtained two yellow solutions gradually turned blue after UV irradiation, and both the typical EPR signals of Co2+ (g = 2.15) and Ni2+ (g = 2.18) obviously decreased, while the signals of Co+ (g = 1.99) and Ni+ (g = 2.02) greatly increased under UV irradiation, indicating the photo-induced reduction of Ni2+ and Co2+ to Ni+ and Co+, respectively. Subsequently, a photocatalytic mechanism of ligand to metal charge transfer is deduced as follows: the benzene rings of PPA harvest photons to form photo-induced electrons and holes, and then the electrons transfer from PPA to Ni2+ or Co2+ metal centers, leading to the generation of Ni+ and Co+, which serve as the real active sites to reduce the protons in H2O to release H2.
 Fig. 7  (a) XRD patterns of CoPPA and NiPPA. Reproduced from ref. 22 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2018. (b) High-resolution TEM (HRTEM) image and the corresponding FFT pattern (inset b) of ultrathin porous CoP nanosheets. Reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2017. Optical images of CoPS single crystals with the as-grown (111) (c) and cut and polished (100) facets (d), respectively. Reproduced from ref. 73 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2018. (e) HRTEM image of amorphous FePO4 nanosheets, the inset is the corresponding selected area diffraction pattern (SAED). Reproduced from ref. 77 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2017. TEM image (f), HRTEM image (g) and SAED images (h) of amorphous cobalt phosphonates. HRTEM images of amorphous cobalt phosphonates after OER (i) and HER (j) measurements in 1 M alkaline KOH solution, and the insets are the corresponding SAED images. (k) In situ X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) Co K edge spectra exhibit the difference in the oxidation state of Co from fresh amorphous cobalt phosphonates during OER and HER in 1 M alkaline KOH at constant potential (CA) and varying potential (CV). Reproduced from ref. 78 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2020. (l) HRTEM image of the Ni2P–NiP2 polymorphs, (m) top view of the schematic models of the mixed-phase Ni2P–NiP2, and pure NiP2 and Ni2P with H* adsorbed on their surfaces. Reproduced from ref. 89 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2018. 
Due to the preferential growth of crystal orientation, single crystals are usually employed as the model to explore the catalytic reaction mechanism by combining theory and experiment.70 Nevertheless, the synthesis of single crystal P-containing materials is full of challenge. Ni2P (001) facet possesses intrinsic HER activity, which was predicted by theoretical calculation in 2005, and verified by subsequent experimental results.71 Recently, single crystalline CoP nanosheets with preferentially exposed (100) facets (Fig. 7b) prepared by the phosphorization of Co3O4 precursors72 exhibit significantly enhanced HER performance (an overpotential of 56 mV at 10 mA cm−2) in acid electrolyte, compared with polycrystalline CoP. The ΔGH* on CoP (100) surface is close to 0 under high hydrogen coverage, which results in the high utilization efficiency of active sites, thus enhancing electrocatalytic performance. In addition, the influence of the crystallographic facet on HER performance has been explored by preparing CoPS single crystals with different exposed facets.73 As shown in the optical images of CoPS single crystals, the (111) facet shows a very smooth surface (Fig. 7c), while the surface of (100) facet has several small polished scratches (Fig. 7d). These two crystalline facets exhibit completely different HER performance; when the overpotential is lower than 0.35 V, (100) facet-CoPS shows better HER performance than (111) facet-CoPS, but this situation is completely opposite in the high overpotential region (>0.35 V), which can be ascribed to the variation of the rate-determining step. Under low overpotential, the Volmer reaction is the rate-determining step, wherein the (100) facet-CoPS is more favorable for the adsorption of H atom, thus leading to better HER activity than that of (111) facet-CoPS. Further enlarging the overpotential (>0.35 V), the Tafel step occupies the dominated position in HER, and the low free-energy barriers of (111) facet-CoPS contribute to the desorption of H2, which can greatly enhance the catalytic efficiency.


3.1.2 Amorphous structure. 
The great flexibility in structure and composition of amorphous catalysts endows them with great potential in catalytic reactions; especially, the abundant defects in their disordered domains can serve as electrocatalytic active sites.74 Amorphous cobalt phosphate (CoPi) prepared by electrodeposition in phosphate-buffered water containing cobalt(II) ions was used in electrocatalytic OER reactions, only requiring an overpotential of 410 mV to deliver a current density of 10 mA cm−2 in neutral electrolyte, wherein the electrocatalytic active sites were identified as edge-sharing Co–O octahedra.18
Beyond electrodeposition, certain amorphous catalysts can be synthesized by the hydro/solvothermal method. For example, amorphous FePi, CoPi, NiPi and InPi have been prepared by employing water, octadecene and oleylamine (OA) as solvents.75,76 As displayed in Fig. 7e, TEM images could not detect any lattices, whereas SAED also revealed the amorphous nature of the FePi nanosheet. DFT calculations were utilized to investigate the electrocatalytic mechanism of crystal FePi and amorphous FePi. The d band center of amorphous FePi (−1.40 eV) is much lower than that of crystal FePi (−0.64 eV), indicating the decreased binding strength of amorphous FePi for intermediates, which is the origin of the remarkable electrocatalytic activity towards HER, OER and overall water splitting.77 Similarly, amorphous cobalt phosphonate (Fig. 7f) was prepared by a facile hydrothermal method and utilized as a highly efficient pre-catalyst for overall water splitting under alkaline conditions. Due to the application of oxidation potential during the OER process, the original cobalt phosphonate reorganized itself to layered CoOx(OH)y with a lower degree of order to accelerate the OER reaction, and the reduction potential could induce the formation of metallic Co along with Co3O4 spinel and Co(OH)2, which was confirmed by the TEM images and the corresponding electron diffraction patterns after reaction (Fig. 7g–j) and the in situ XANES spectra (Fig. 7k).78
Due to the high concentration of catalytically active sites, amorphous metal phosphates can also be used as efficient co-catalysts for photochemical water splitting. For example, P-doped Fe2O3 photoanode loaded with amorphous cerium phosphate (Ce-Pi) co-catalyst was prepared by a hydrothermal and phosphorization process.79 The addition of Ce-Pi nanoparticles provides abundant active sites for water oxidation by the fast and reversible reaction between Ce3+ and Ce4+. The significantly enhanced photoelectrochemical water oxidation performance was achieved by P-doped Fe2O3 loaded with amorphous Ce-Pi, and the photocurrent density could reach 1.24 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V (versus reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE)) under the illumination of 100 mW cm−2, which was 3.54- and 1.42-fold higher than that of pristine Fe2O3 and P-doped Fe2O3, respectively.
Other P-containing materials with amorphous structure can also be considered as efficient catalysts for the water splitting reaction. For example, amorphous cobalt phosphosulfide electrocatalysts loaded on Ni foams were synthesized by electrodeposition, and the additional dangling bonds exposed on the amorphous structure could favor creating more active sites through the in situ surface self-reconstruction during the electrocatalytic reaction.80 The introduction of P and S can increase the initial sites and modulate the electronic state around Co, thus leading to the abundant active phase and accelerated electron transfer. The cobalt phosphosulfide electrodes present excellent HER and OER electrocatalytic activity requiring 58 and 283 mV to achieve 10 mA cm−2 in 1.0 M KOH, respectively. In addition, amorphous and crystalline CoP were fabricated by hot injection and pyrolysis of a molecular β-diketiminato Co(I) cyclo-P4 complex, respectively.81 Notably, the strong alkaline electrolyte causes the oxidation of CoP, accompanied by the leaching of surface P during the HER process, which promotes the formation of a Co-rich surface encapsulating a CoP conductive core. A similar severe oxidation and P dissolution also occurred in the OER to generate the Co-oxy(hydroxides) active sites. Compared with crystalline CoP, the plentiful arbitrarily oriented bonds and highly flexible structure endow amorphous CoP with fast dissolution rates of P, contributing to the significantly enhanced electrocatalytic activity for both HER and OER.


3.1.3 Metal/phosphorus stoichiometric ratios. 
The stoichiometry ratio of metal to P in MPi and TMPs can be flexibly adjusted. The different stoichiometry of TMPs occupies a very important position in their catalytic activity and stability. The P in TMPs serves as the active site of HER, which can bond protons under low H* coverage and promote desorption of H2 under high H* coverage.31 However, excessive P would reduce the chemical stability and conductivity of TMP. Thus, the content of P atoms in the same TMPs within an appropriate range could effectively improve HER activity.43 For instance, P-rich CoP nanocrystals present higher electrocatalytic HER activity than metal-rich Co2P with the same morphology, as do nickel phosphides, molybdenum phosphides and iron phosphides.82
Very recently, P-rich colloidal cobalt diphosphide nanocrystals (Co2P NCs) were fabricated by a modified hot-injection method.83 The high P content was able not only to promote the physical separation of Co atoms to inhibit the excessive binding of H with multiple Co atoms, but also to stabilize the H adsorbed to a single Co atom. The fabricated Co2P NCs exhibits a Pt-like HER electrocatalytic performance in 0.5 M H2SO4 with a small overpotential of 39 mV to achieve the current density of 10 mA cm−2, which is far ahead of metal-rich CoP and Co2P. By virtue of the favorable HER kinetics, Co2P NCs were introduced into the photoelectrochemical system, which was composed of bottom p-Si light absorber, and atomic layer deposition Al–ZnO passivation layers. This hybrid photocathode displays an outstanding onset potential of 0.48 V (versus RHE) and photocurrent density of −16.7 mA cm−2 under simulated solar illumination (AM-1.5G, 100 mW cm−2) and an output photovoltage of 0.54 V.
Similar phenomena were also observed on nickel phosphides as cocatalysts for photocatalytic hydrogen production, following the photocatalytic performance order of Ni2P–g-C3N4 > Ni2P/Ni12P5–g-C3N4 > Ni/Ni2P–g-C3N4 > Ni12P5–g-C3N4 > Ni–g-C3N4.84
When TMP acts as an OER electrocatalyst, the pre-oxidation process is first triggered to oxidize the surface metal atoms to form the TMP/metal oxides core–shell structure at a high overpotential.85 Then the TMP core acts as a conductive carrier to deliver electrons to the metal oxides shell, which is the real catalytic site of TMPs in OER. The positive charges of metal in TMPs facilitate the adsorption of oxide with unpaired electrons, while the 2p orbitals of P will repel the 2p orbital of O to hinder this pre-oxidation process.34 To meet the requirements of HER and OER simultaneously, some mixed-phase TMPs containing both P-rich and metal-rich phases were synthesized. Many researchers have verified that mixed-phase CoP–Co2P exhibits better catalytic activity towards overall water splitting than pure-phase CoP and Co2P.86,87 In addition, the existence of a heterointerface in mixed-phased TMPs can boost the relocation of electrons and charges to create a favorable interfacial electronic structure for the efficient electrocatalytic reaction.88 For example, the Ni2P–NiP2 polymorph possesses outstanding HER activity, which only needs an overpotential of 59.7 mV to reach 10 mA cm−2.89Fig. 7l exhibits the clear heterointerface between the (220) plane of NiP2 and the (111) plane of Ni2P, whose lattice fringe spacings are 0.193 and 0.221 nm, respectively. The electron transfer from P to Ni at the heterointerface optimizes the ΔGH* value and increases the electronic conductivity (Fig. 7m), since the heterojunctions balance metalloid NiP2 and metallic Ni2P to construct an optimized phosphide polymorph for the efficient HER. A similar phenomenon has also been observed in cobalt phosphates, e.g., the mixed-phase Co3(PO4)2–Co2P2O7 has better OER activity than that of pure Co3(PO4)2 or Co2P2O7.90
The phase and crystallinity of P-containing materials, which are highly related to carrier migration efficiency and the intrinsic active sites, dramatically affect the catalytic performance. As shown in Table 1, an efficient photocatalytic reaction often requires a catalyst with a certain degree of crystallinity to improve light absorption and carrier migration rate.91 A large number of defects in the amorphous structure serve as recombination centers of electrons and holes, greatly reducing the photocatalytic activity. However, those amorphous P-containing materials are promising for electrocatalytic reaction by virtue of the great flexibility and abundant defect active sites (Table 2). In order to explore practical active sites and the in-depth reaction mechanism, the crystallinity needs to be improved, and the single crystalline with simple components is the optimal candidate. Despite the vigorous development of in situ characterization technology, the identification of active sites in amorphous structures is still a very challenging task requiring further in-depth research. In addition, the influence of the stoichiometric ratio of metal and P on catalytic performance is still controversial. Most reports indicate that P-rich materials are more conducive to catalyzing water splitting; however, the heterointerface of the mixed-phase structure can improve the electronic conductivity, and some metals (Fe and Mo) also have excellent hydrogen adsorption capabilities even stronger than P (Table 2). It is anticipated that the ongoing efforts in this area will provide further insights into the ideal stoichiometric ratio for the water splitting reaction.
Table 1 Comparison of photocatalytic water splitting performance for P-containing materials with various modulated strategies (I: modifying phase, II: introducing foreign element, III: tailoring morphology, IV: engineering interface)




Photocatalysts
Strategies
Light source
Sacrificial agents
Activity (μmol h−1 g−1)
AQY (%) λ (nm)
Ref.


HER
OER




Crystalline RP
I
300 W Xe lamp; λ > 400 nm
Methanol
0.6
—
—

14



NiPPA
I/III
Ultraviolet lamp
TEOA
44.39
—
—

22



CoPPA
I/III
Ultraviolet lamp
TEOA
32.58
—
—

22



PCN@Hittorf'sP
I/IV
300 W Xe lamp; λ > 300 nm
—
33.2
—
—

64



PCN@Hittorf'sP
I/IV
300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm
—
17.5
—
—

64



Smashed-Fibrous P
I/III
300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm
Methanol
684
—
—

66



Sn2P2S6
I/III
AM 1.5G
—
202.06
—
2.35 (400)

25



CuInP2S6
I/III
300 W Xe lamp; λ > 300 nm
Na2S/Na2SO3
804
—
—

208



Ni2P–g-C3N4
I/IV
300 W Xe lamp; λ > 300 nm
TEOA
215.1
—
—

84



MnPS3
I/IV
AM 1.5G
—
155
—
—

91



MnPSe3
I/IV
AM 1.5G
—
325
—
—

91



MnPS3
I/IV
AM 1.5G
Na2S/Na2SO3
2175
—
—

91



MnPSe3
I/IV
AM 1.5G
Na2S/Na2SO3
1060
—
—

91



N–CdPS3
II/III
300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm
Methanol
6280
—
—

209



S/Ni12P5/Cd0.5Zn0.5S
II/IV
300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm
Na2S/Na2SO3
105100
—
—

99



7.5 wt%NiCoP/CdS
II/IV
300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm
Lactic acid
238200
—
—

113



FeNiP-D
II/III
300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm
Na2S/Na2SO3
—
42342
—

117



Pt/BP NSs
II/III
300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm
—
447
—
—

155



Mo–Ni2P/g-C3N4
II/IV
300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm
TEOA
67.6
—
3.31 (420)

110



BP NSs/Au/La2Ti2O7
II/IV
320 W Xe lamp; λ > 780 nm
Methanol
300
—
—

210



10% Co2P/ZIS NCGs
III/IV
300 W Xe lamp
Na2S/Na2SO3
7930
—
21.7 (320)

133



ultrathin NiPS3
III
300 W Xe lamp
—
26.4


—

158



ultrathin NiPS3
III
AM 1.5G
—
6.46


—

158



HM-TiPPh
III
Xe arc lamp; λ > 400 nm
TEOA
945
—
—

21



TiPNW
III
Xe arc lamp; λ > 400 nm
TEOA
1260
—
0.77 (420)

23



BP NSs
III
300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm
Na2S/Na2SO3
512
—
—

92



2 wt%Co-BP/RP-QD
III/IV
LED (12 W, λ = 420)
—
3360
—
1.53 (420)

159



FeP/g-C3N4
III/IV
300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm
TEOA
177.9
—
1.57 (420)

163



BPQDs/g-C3N4
III/IV
300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm
Methanol
271
—
—

211



4.0 wt% WP/CdS
IV
300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm
(NH4)2SO3
31040
—
10.5 (420)

164



Fe2P–Co2P/g-C3N4
IV
300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm
TEOA
347
—
—

165



CN/FeNiP/g-C3N4
II/IV
300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm
TEOA
13810
—
48.5 (420)

166



Ni2P/g-C3N4
IV
300 W Xe arc lamp; λ > 420 nm
TEOA
2849.5
—
18.8 (420)

167



CdS/Ni2P/g-C3N4
IV
300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm
—
15.56
7.75
—

168



10 wt%Ni2P/TiO2(B)
IV
300 W Xe lamp
Methanol
3966
—
31 (313)

169



Co-Pi/CdS
IV
300 W Xe arc lamp; λ > 420 nm
Lactic acid
13.3
—
24.3 (420)

51



5 wt% NiCoPi/CdS
II/IV
300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm
Na2S/Na2SO3
13.44
—
23.5 (420)

174



NiCoP@NiCo-Pi/g-C3N4
II/IV
300 W Xe lamp
TEOA
312
—
9.4 (420)

175



BP NS/Pt (3 wt%)/TMC
III/IV
200 mW cm−2
Methanol
950
—
—

177



BP NS/Pt (3 wt%)/TMC
III/IV
200 mW cm−2; λ > 420 nm
Methanol
8700
—
7.1 (420)

177



BP NS/Pt (3 wt%)/TMC
III/IV
200 mW cm−2; λ > 780 nm
Methanol
200
—
1.2 (780)

177



Red P/g-C3N4
IV
300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm
TEOA
2565
—
13.8 (420)

178



FP/CNS
IV
300 W Xe arc lamp; λ > 400 nm
Lactic acid
571
—
1.2 (420)

179



MoP–Cu3P
IV
300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm
Na2S/Na2SO3
855
—
—

183



BP/RP (21–22%)
III/IV
300 W Xe lamp
—
2.0
1.1
—

180



MCN/BP/MS
III/IV
300 W Xe lamp
TEOA
2146.8
—
—

212



BP NSs/MoS2
III/IV
300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm
Na2S/Na2SO3
1286
—
1.2 (420)

213



CoP/P-g-C3N4
IV
300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm
Methanol
724
—
8.5 (420)

214



Ni2P/SNO/CdS-D
IV
300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm
Na2S/Na2SO3
11992
—
35.8 (420)

215



g-C3N4/CoP
IV
350 W Xe lamp
TEOA
936
—
—

216



CoP/CeVO4
IV
5 W white light
TEOA
8892
—
—

217



Co-Pi/ZnO
IV
300 W Xe lamp
AgNO3
—
1558
—

218



CoPi/carbon dots
IV
5 W white light
—
23.68
10.32
—

219



Co-Pi/α-Fe2O3
IV
LED; 400 nm < λ < 700 nm
—
6.3
3.2
—

220



Ag3PO4
IV
300 W Xe lamp; λ > 400 nm
AgNO3
—
1272
—

221





Table 2 Comparison of electrocatalytic water splitting performance for P-containing materials with various modulated strategies (I: modifying phase, II: introducing foreign element, III: tailoring morphology, IV: engineering interface)




Electrocatalysts
Strategies
Electrolyte
Overpotential@10 mA cm−1 (mV)
Tafel slope (mV dec−1)
Voltage for overall@10 mA cm−2 (V)
Ref.



η
HER


η
OER

HER
OER




CoPS (111)
I
0.5 M H2SO4
—
—
86
—
—

73



CoP UPNSs
I/III
0.5 M H2SO4
56
—
44
—
—

72



Cobalt phosphate
I
0.1 M KPi
—
410
—
—
—

18



FePO4/NF
I/IV
1.0 M KOH
123
218
104.5
42.72
1.54

77



CoPn/NF
I/IV
1.0 M KOH
144
240
—
—
1.62

78



Co–P–S
I
1.0 M KOH
58
283
68
61
1.6

80



Amorphous CoP
I
1.0 M KOH
143
284
63
45
1.65

81



Crystalline CoP
I
1.0 M KOH
261
305
80
82
1.79

81



(FexNi1−x)2P
I
1.0 M PBS
90
—
82.7
—
—

70



Mo3P
I
0.5 M H2SO4
69
—
38
—
—

10



MoP
I
0.5 M H2SO4
130
—
44
—
—

10



CoP/Ti
I/IV
0.5 M H2SO4
75
—
50
—
—

82



Co2P/Ti
I/IV
0.5 M H2SO4
95
—
45
—
—

82



CoP/C
I/IV
0.1 M KOH
—
360
—
66
—

85



Ni2P–NiP2
I
1.0 M KOH
59.7
—
58.8
—
—

89



Ni–CoPi
I/II
1.0 M KOH
—
320
—
44.5
—

222



CoP@PC/PG
I/IV
1.0 M KOH
46
—
65
104
—

86



CoP–Co2P@PC/PG
I/IV
1.0 M KOH
39
—
59
66
1.57

86



Co2P@PC/PG
I/IV
1.0 M KOH
138
—
124
100
—

86



Co–P@PC-750
I/IV
0.5 M H2SO4
72
—
49
—
—

87



Co–P@PC-750
I/IV
1.0 M PBS
85
—
58
—
—

87



Co–P@PC-750
I/IV
1.0 M KOH
76
283
52
53
1.6

87



CoP/Co2P@NC
I/IV
0.5 M H2SO4
126
—
—
79
—

88



CoP/Co2P@NC
I/IV
1.0 M KOH
198
—
—
82
—

88



CoP/Co2P@NC
I/IV
1.0 M PBS
459
—
—
—
—

88



FPQDs
II
1.0 M NaOH


430


48



95



S:CoP@NF
II/IV
1.0 M KOH
109
270
79
82
82

96



S:CoP@NF
II/IV
1.0 M KOH
105
280
89
71
—

97



MoP/S
II
1.0 M KOH
86
—
—
—
—

98



N–NiCoP
II
0.5 M H2SO4
97.5
—
40.1
—
—

101



N–NiCoP
II
1.0 M KOH
105.1
—
59.8
—
—

101



Fe–Co–OOH/Ni
II/IV
1.0 M KOH
—
250
—
40.28
—

102



N–Co–Ni–P
II
1.0 M KOH
50
—
55.4
—
—

102



NiCoPIm
II
1.0 M KOH
—
351
—
66.5
—

52



CoPiC-DP/CNTs
II/IV
1.0 M KOH
—
309
—
65
—

103



CoPiC-DP
II
1.0 M KOH
—
410
—
124
—

103



BPed-Pt/GR
II/IV
1.0 M KOH
21
—
46.9
—
—

104



Cu–CoP NAs/CP
II/III/IV
1.0 M PBS
81
411
83.5
101.4
1.72

106



ZnxCo1−xP/TM
II/IV
0.5 M H2SO4
39
—
39
—
—

108



Mn–Co–P/Ti
II/IV
0.5 M H2SO4
49
—
60
—
—

109



Mn–Co–P/Ti
II/IV
1.0 M KOH
76
—
52
—
—

109



Mn–Co–P/Ti
II/IV
1.0 M PBS
86
—
82
—
—

109



FeNiP/NPCS
II/IV
0.5 M H2SO4
126
—
64
—
—

111



FeNiP/NPCS
II/IV
1.0 M KOH
—
318
—
95
—

111



Ni0.1Co0.9P
II
1.0 M PBS
125
—
103
133
1.89

112



NiCoP-8.0
II
1.0 M KOH
34.3
245
49.9
59.2
1.51

113



FeCoNiP
II
1.0 M KOH
—
200
—
70
—

114



FeCoNiP
II
1.0 M KOH
—
265
—
—
—




NiFeSP/NF
II/IV
1.0 M KOH
91
—
82.6
76.3
1.58

121



Ni–Co–S–P
II
1.0 M KOH
78
280
89
69
1.61

122



Cu–Co–P–S
II
1.0 M KOH
120
—
—
—
—

123



NiCoP
II
1.0 M KOH
—
220
—
79.5
—

223



O–Ni(1−x)FexP2
II
1.0 M KOH
—
155
—
55
—

224



Co1−xNix(S1−yPy)2
II
1.0 M KOH
—
285
—
105
—

225



NH2–BP
II
1.0 M KOH
29
—
63
—
—

94



W–NiCoP
II
1.0 M KOH
29.6
—
38
100
—

226



Fe–CoP
II
1.0 M KOH
67
—
66.22
—
1.46

227



Fe–InPO4
II/III/IV
1.0 M KOH
—
230
—
46.47
—

76



Al–CoP/NF
II/III/IV
1.0 M KOH
66
330
94
69
1.63

107



CoNiPi
II
1.0 M KOH
—
238
—
46
—

228



3D MXene-CoP
III/IV
1.0 M KOH
—
298
—
51
—

229



CoPi-HSNPC-800
III/IV
1.0 M KOH
—
155
—
85
—

90



NiCoFe phosphate NSs-C/NF
III/IV
1.0 M KOH
231
240
86
—
1.52

116



Multishelled Ni2P
III
1.0 M KOH
98
270
86.4
40.4
1.57

131



Co0.6Fe0.4P-1.125
II/III
1.0 M KOH
133
298
61
48
1.57

134



Co0.6Fe0.4P-0
II/III
1.0 M KOH
164
308
69
53
—

134



Co0.6Fe0.4P-0.75
II/III
1.0 M KOH
156
301
70
56
—

134



Co0.6Fe0.4P-1.5
II/III
1.0 M KOH
162
304
68
55
—

134



NiCoP–CoP/NF
II/III/IV
1.0 M KOH
73
—
91.3
—
—

136



NiCoP/NF
II/III/IV
1.0 M KOH
80
—
94.7
—
—

136



MoP/Ni2P/NF
III/IV
1.0 M KOH
75
—
100.2
77.6
1.55

138



WP2 NRs
III
0.5 M H2SO4
148
—
52
—
—

140



Mo doped CoP
II/III
1.0 M KOH
78.4
234.2
66.5
62.3
1.49

141



NiPK(Co)-NTs-C
III/IV
1.0 M KOH
—
420
—
74.2
—

142



NiPNa(Co)-NTs-C
III/IV
1.0 M KOH
—
400
—
68.8
—

142



NiPNa(Co3Fe1)-NTs-C
III/IV
1.0 M KOH
—
340
—
55.0
—

142



NiPNa(Co2Fe2)-NTs-C
III/IV
1.0 M KOH
—
300
—
56.3
—

142



Co/exfoliated ZrP
II/III
0.1 M KOH
—
450
—
53.4
—

145



Ni/exfoliated ZrP
II/III
0.1 M KOH
—
—
—
55.1
—

145



FePS3-60
III
0.5 M H2SO4
388
—
136
—
—

147



FePS3-90
III
0.5 M H2SO4
312
—
123
—
—

147



FePS3-120
III
0.5 M H2SO4
241
—
94
—
—

147



FePS3-140
III
0.5 M H2SO4
357
—
148
—
—

147



FePS3-160
III
0.5 M H2SO4
523
—
224
—
—

147



LSTL NiPS
III
1.0 M KOH
158
300
95
88
1.56

151



MoS2/EEBP
III/IV
0.5 M H2SO4
126
—
68
—
—

152



MoS2/EEBP
III/IV
1.0 M KOH
237
—
99
—
—

152



MoS2/EEBP
III/IV
1.0 M PBS
258
—
154
—
—

152



exf-MnPS3
III
0.5 M H2SO4
835
—
—
—
—

154



exf-MnPS3
III
1.0 M KOH
1090
—
—
—
—

154



exf-MnPSe3
III
0.5 M H2SO4
640
—
—
—
—

154



exf-MnPSe3
III
1.0 M KOH
992
—
—
—
—

154



CoP-NF
III/IV
1.0 M KOH
41.1
—
65.3
65.6
1.54

230



CoPO
III
1.0 M KOH
—
280
—
59
—

132



Co5(PO4)2(OH)4
III
1.0 M KOH
—
254
—
57
—

231



P-NM-CF HNRs
III
1.0 M KOH
100
195
54.3
48.4
1.53

137



NiCoP@NF-100
III/IV
1.0 M KOH
98
—
68
—
—

139



Co2P/BP
IV
0.5 M H2SO4
305
—
65
—
—

161



FeP2–NiP2@PC
IV
1.0 M KOH
—
248
—
59
—

194



FeP2–NiP2@PC
IV
0.5 M H2SO4
117
—
59
—
—

194



MoP@NCHSs-T
IV
1.0 M KOH
92
—
62
—
—

195



MoP@NPCS
IV
0.5 M H2SO4
113
—
58
—
—

196



MoP@NPCS
IV
1.0 M KOH
172
—
83
—
—

196



PANI/CoP
IV
0.5 M H2SO4
—
—
34.5
—
—

232



EG-Pt/CoP
II/IV
0.5 M H2SO4
21
—
42.5
—
—

233



Ni5P4@NiCo2O4
IV
1.0 M KOH
27
—
27
—
—

234



Co2P-Ni2P/TiO2
IV
1.0 M KOH
92
—
49
—
—

235



sc-Ni2Pδ−/NiHO
IV
1.0 M KOH
60
—
75
—
—

236



Co(OH)2/Ag/FeP/Ti
IV
1.0 M KOH
118
236
79
56
1.56

237



N-CoO@CoP
II/IV
1.0 M KOH
201
332
37
81.5
1.79

238



CoP/CoCr2O4
IV
1.0 M KOH
212
290
90
52
—

239



EBP@NG
III/IV
1.0 M KOH
125
265
—
—
—

192



MoS2@FePS3
III/IV
1.0 M KOH
175
—
127
—
—

240



NiPS3-G-1:1
IV
1.0 M KOH
—
294
—
42.4
—

241



RP-BP/EG
III/IV
1.0 M KOH
—
328
—
58
—

242



NiMn1.5PO4/NF
IV
1.0 M KOH
72
198
—
—
1.48

203



Co3(PO4)2@GF
IV
0.1 M PBS
—
370
—
133
—

206






3.2 Introducing foreign elements
The incorporation of foreign elements in P-containing materials is a versatile strategy to improve the photoelectronic or electronic properties by modulating the electronic or geometric structure, boosting the intrinsic catalytic activity. In addition, theoretical calculations can be employed to predict the optimal doping level of foreign elements in advance, so that the catalytic activity can be precisely adjusted on the atomic scale.43 To date, both metallic and nonmetallic element doped P-containing materials have been widely reported, which will be discussed case by case in this section.

3.2.1 Nonmetallic element. 
The incorporation of functional groups can significantly improve the photoelectronic or electronic properties of BP. BP nanosheets prepared by the exfoliation strategy have abundant exposed metastable sites, while introducing functional groups to bond with these metastable sites of BP can not only modify the electronic properties but also enhance the stability of the honeycomb crystal structure. For example, by adding LiOH during the ball-milling bulk BP process, the hydroxyl group was introduced to terminate the reactive BP nanosheet edges, which significantly improved the stability of the photocatalytic water splitting reaction.92 The CB and VB position of phosphorene are higher than the redox potential of photocatalytic water splitting, which hinders its application as a bifunctional photocatalyst for both OER and HER. To overcome this challenge, the pseudohalogen (CN and OCN) could be introduced to bond with the edges of phosphorene nanoribbons. As shown in Fig. 8a, the obtained catalysts have the desired VB and CB position by edge electric dipole layer on the basis of retaining the unique photoelectric properties of phosphorene, contributing to the synchronous stimulation of the photocatalytic water redox reactions without additional energy.93
 Fig. 8  (a) Band schematic diagram of pseudohalogen modified armchair phosphorene nanoribbons (ACPNR) heterobilayers. ΔEc and ΔEv refer to the CB and VB offsets, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 93 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017. (b) N 1s XPS fine spectra of N-coordinated cobalt phosphates–carbon hybrids. (c) Molecular structure of different organophosphonic acids. Reproduced from ref. 103 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2021. (d) Electrocatalytic performance of ultrathin NiCoP nanosheets for overall water splitting, the inset is the corresponding overall water splitting cell, (e) photocatalytic H2 evolution rates of NiCoP/CdS containing different amounts of cocatalyst under visible-light. Reproduced from ref. 113 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2020. (f) Fe Mössbauer spectra of amorphous Fe–InPO4. Reproduced from ref. 76 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2020. 
It has been indicated that the introduction of nitrogen-containing groups into BP can greatly enhance the catalytic performance of electrocatalytic water splitting. A NH2-functionalized BP was synthesized by a facile urea-assisted ball-milling method for electrocatalytic HER.94 The urea molecules adsorbed on the surface of BP promote the formation of exfoliated BP nanosheets by weakening the van der Waals forces, and the water soluble urea can be easily removed by water washing. Moreover, the NH2 functional groups at the edge of BP inhibit the recombination of exfoliated BP nanosheets, resulting in the generation of more exposed edges and dangling bonds, which facilitate the charge transfer to enhance the electrocatalytic performance. The NH2-functionalized BP can achieve the current density of −10 mA cm−2 with an overpotential of 290 mV in alkaline electrolyte, accompanied by a Tafel slope of 63 mV dec−1, which is dramatically superior to that of bulk BP. In addition, in situ surface functionalization of phosphorene quantum dots (FPQDs) was performed during a electrochemical exfoliation process in formamide containing 0.1 wt% LiClO4.95 The difference of electronegativity between the P and N atoms promotes the transfer of electron from the P atom to the N atom, which contributes to the adsorption of OH− on the P atom, resulting in improved OER performance. The electrochemical measurements using Fe2+/Fe3+ as redox couple exhibit that FPQDs have faster electron transfer than the pristine PQDs. FPQDs manifest excellent electrocatalytic performance towards OER with an overpotential of 1.66 V@10 mA cm−2, and high stability of more than 10 h and a low Tafel slope of 48 mV dec−1, which drastically surpass those of the pristine PQDs.
The introduction of nonmetallic elements (S, Se, O, B, N, C) into TMPs could modify the local electronic and geometric structure. The electronegativity of S is higher than that of P; incorporating S dopants into TMPs can weaken the metal–ligand bonding and optimize the ΔGOH* value, contributing to improved HER activity while retaining the original structure. For example, S doped Co2P was synthesized by a thiourea-phosphate-assisted strategy; the hybrid electrodes obtained by loading S:Co2P nanoparticles on nickel foam display a remarkable electrocatalytic activity of HER (192 mV@100 mA cm−2) and OER (1.59 V@100 mA cm−2). The reason for this enhanced HER activity was that the introduction of S dopant not only leads to the decrease of electron density at the Fermi level, thereby reducing the metallic nature of Co, but also induces a more positive charge onto Co to balance between hydride and proton acceptors and enhance the number of active sites as well as the intrinsic activity.96–99
Se and O are also efficient dopants by virtue of the similar valence electrons to S.100 Doping oxygen atoms into TMPs not only enhances the inherent conductivity but also activates the active site by extending the M–P bond, which can accelerate the HER and OER progress.100 Besides these chalcogens, the introduction of other nonmetallic elements (N, F, etc.) also has a promotional effect on the catalytic performance of TMPs. However, there exists a conflict on the function of N dopants in TMPs. Zhang et al. suggest that the introduction of N in NiCoP can increase the electron density of Ni and Co, and N dopant tend to substitute O defects rather than P atoms in the NiCoP lattice.101 However, some reports indicated that N dopants with strong electronegativity could replace P in CoP, resulting in the charge transfer from Co to N, which can decrease the d-band center of Co.102 Therefore, the real role of N dopants in TMPs still needs further discussion.
Nonmetallic heteroatom doped MPPi can be achieved by using organophosphonic ligands containing heteroatoms (e.g., N, S, and F), which is favorable for the modulation of electronic and geometric structure, thus engendering significant changes in their physicochemical properties. For example, porous cobalt phosphonates (CoPIm) were synthesized by a facile hydrothermal method using iminodi (methylphosphonic acid); both FT-IR and XPS spectra show an obvious C–N bond in the framework, verifying the doping of the N element.52 The obtained CoPIm can deliver an outstanding OER performance in terms of low overpotential (334 mV) at the current density of 10 mA cm−2 accompanied by high stability up to 25 h in 1 M KOH electrolyte. In addition, introducing N-containing second ligands during the preparation can also induce the generation of N doped MPPi, such as bipyridine and phenanthroline.11 Pyrolyzing these MPPi with heteroatom dopants directly promotes the formation of heteroatom-doping metal phosphate. For instance, N-coordinated cobalt phosphates-carbon hybrids are prepared by the carbonization of cobalt phosphonates with N containing organophosphonic ligands; the N atoms in organophosphonic ligands have been transformed into graphitic N, pyrrolic N, pyridinic N and Co–Nx (Fig. 8b).103 Series of control samples were synthesized by adjusting the types of organophosphonic ligand (Fig. 8c) to control the N content in N-coordinated cobalt phosphate. The electrocatalytic OER performance is directly proportional to the N content, verifying that N-coordinated cobalt sites play vital roles in the impressive electrocatalytic performance.


3.2.2 Metallic element. 
Due to the three-coordinated honeycomb structure, each layer of BP possesses exposed lone pair electrons, which manifests negative adsorption energy to metal atoms, promoting the intense bonding between BP with metal atoms. Generally, incorporating metals with intrinsic HER catalytic activity (Pt, Co and Ni) can facilitate the photo/electrocatalytic HER process. The Pt–P bonds can be spontaneously generated by the unique and negative binding energy between Pt and BP, which endows Pt nanoparticles with strong synergistic ligand effects.104 The existence of Pt–P bonds can induce the down-shift of d-band center of Pt towards the Fermi level, which facilitates the production of optimal energetics for the intermediates, thus leading to improved HER activity (70 mV@82.89 mA cm−2 in 1 M KOH). In addition to these metals with HER activity, noble metals Ag and Au with plasmonic resonance effect can be introduced into BP to increase light absorption and control interfacial hot electron injection, leading to enhanced photocatalytic activity. For example, Ag can be anchored onto BP (Ag/BP) by the covalent bonds between Ag NPs and BP; the obtained catalysts exhibit significantly enhanced photocatalytic activity than BP.105 The Ag/BP plasmonic nanohybrids present enhanced local electric fields at the perimeter of Ag NPs. The interaction between local electric fields and BP shortens the length of the electron–hole pair diffusion to the BP surface and thereby greatly enhances the photocatalytic activity.
The ΔGH* value of single TMPs (Fe2P, CoP, NiP, MoP) is too negative, resulting in excessively strong H chemisorption strength and H2 binding strength.46 Incorporating foreign metal atoms with low electronegativity (V, Mn, Zn, Al and Cu) could readily donate electrons to adjacent P atoms and cause the loss of more electrons of the surrounding metal in TMPs to compensate for the electron deficiency, thus weakening the H chemisorption strength to enhance the electrocatalytic HER activity (Table 2).34,106 For the OER process, the metallic dopants actually modulate the electronic structure of the derived oxyhydroxide on the surface of TMPs, which can decrease the ΔGO* − ΔGOH* value of the active oxyhydroxide to accelerate the potential kinetic limiting step. To date, many metal dopants have been used to improve the HER and OER electrocatalytic performance of TMPs such as Mn doped CoP, Zn doped CoP and Al doped CoP, etc.107–109
Similarly, this metallic element doping method is also applicable for improving the photocatalytic activity of TMP cocatalysts. Recently, Mo-doped Ni2P nanodots supported on g-C3N4 nanosheets were prepared as an efficient photocatalyst, whose H2 evolution rate is 2.4 and 6.0 times higher than that of Ni2P/g-C3N4 and Pt/g-C3N4.110 The superior photocatalytic activity is mainly attributed to the improvement of photogenerated charges’ separation efficiency and more effective electron donating reaction sites, originating from the adjustment of electronic structure by doping Mo element into Ni2P as cocatalyst.
Unlike doping with trace foreign metallic elements, the metal content in bi- and tri-metallic phosphides has a similar order of magnitude. Controlling the atomic ratio of the different metals in bi- and tri-metallic phosphides to the optimal value can achieve a catalytic performance far superior to the single metal counterpart. As shown in Table 2, most of the bi- and tri-metallic phosphides frequently used in water splitting are composed of Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Mo and W, such as NiCoP, NiCuP, NiFeP,111 NiMoP, NiWP and so on.45,46 Among them, NiCoP is the most popular ternary phosphides photo/electrocatalyst, and adjusting the Ni element with an appropriate doping amount can provide a favorable local coordination environment and electronic structure for CoP, thereby improving the catalytic reactivity.112 For example, the ultrathin NiCoP porous nanosheets synthesized by using graphene as a template exhibit excellent electrocatalytic and photocatalytic activity for water splitting.113 The NiCoP porous nanosheets can achieve the current density of 10 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage of 1.51 V in alkaline electrolyte as the bifunctional catalysts (Fig. 8d), and can even realize a superior photocatalytic H2 production rate of 238.2 mmol h−1 g−1 when combined with CdS (Fig. 8e). Compared with bimetallic TMPs, trimetallic TMP shows much better catalytic performance through multiple promotional effects between metal cations. By systematically exploring the OER performance of TMPs containing different metal components (M = Fe, Co, Ni), a notable OER activity trend has been observed, following the order of FeCoNiP > CoNiP > FeNiP > FeCoP > NiP > CoP > FeP.114 This can be attributed to the enhancement of partial electron transfer from transition metal cations to P induced by the introduction of a secondary metal(s) leading to the formation of high-valence-state transition metal species with strong oxidizing ability.
Incorporating foreign metal atoms into the single metal phosphate can activate dopant or host atoms and enhance conductivity to create dramatically increased electrocatalytic performance by the distorted lattice and electron redistribution, resulting from the differences in the atomic radius and electronic confirmations of heteroatoms and host atoms.115 As one of the most frequently used dopants, Fe was introduced into 2D amorphous InPO4 nanosheets for efficient electrochemical OER.76 As shown in Fig. 8f, Mössbauer spectra of Fe doped amorphous InPO4 indicate a doublet (isomer shift δt = 0.38 mm s−1, quadrupole splitting Δt = 0.81 mm s−1), which can be ascribed to amorphous FePO4; another doublet δ of −0.007 mm s−1 and Δ of 0.59 mm s−1 can be related to the “oxidized Fe” species as Fe4+. Fe dopants in the form of high-valent Fe4+ can serve as highly active sites for OER, due to the moderate d-band center and decreased the binding strengths of intermediates. Moreover, the incorporation of Fe can enhance the electronic conductivity and provide high electrochemical surface area. Therefore, the OER performance of InPO4 has been significantly enhanced, and the optimal 2D amorphous Fe–InPO4 nanosheets only require an overpotential of 230 mV to reach the current density of 10 mA cm−1.
Increasing the kinds and amounts of metallic dopants can enable fabrication of bimetallic and even trimetallic phosphates, which can generate abundant active sites and give rise to the synergistic effect. For example, amorphous NiCoFe phosphates synthesized by a facile hydrothermal method have proved to be an excellent bifunctional electrocatalyst towards HER (−231 mV@10 mA cm−2) and OER (240 mV@10 mA cm−2) in 1.0 M KOH electrolyte. And two-electrode electrolyzer employing NiCoFe phosphates as paired electrodes in an alkaline medium can reach the current density of 10 mA cm−2 at 1.52 V with outstanding durability during the water electrolysis reaction.116
Similarly, bimetallic phosphonates have been frequently used in photocatalytic reactions. Taking Fe–Ni phosphonates as an example, employing dimethylformamide (DMF) as the solvent instead of water in the synthesis reduces –OH groups, which can repel the corner/edge-sharing octahedra to disrupt the continuity of the layer, thus leading to the formation of amorphous structure.117 Moreover, the strong solvation effect of DMF on Fe3+ oxidizes part of Ni2+ to Ni3+, and the Ni3+ can be converted into the O–Ni3+–OH moiety during the OER process, which acts as an efficient redox site to enhance the water oxidation rate. Due to the stronger bond between Fe3+ and phosphonates and DMF than that of Ni2+, Fe3+ mainly determines the structure of the final materials and Ni2+ exists in the form of dopants. By adjusting the Fe:Ni ratio in a wide range from 1:0 to 1:5, the optimal catalyst (Fe:Ni = 1:1) was obtained, which can produce 24.7 μmol O2 in 70 min with almost 100% yield under visible light by employing [Ru(bpy)3]2+ as the photosensitizer.
In addition, bimetallic Ni–W mixed phosphonates have also been reported as an efficient photoanode for photoelectrochemical water splitting. In Ni–W mixed phosphonates, Ni(II) and W(VI) octahedrons are alternately connected via phenylphosphonate tetrahedrons, which provides a more favorable band gap and higher concentration of active sites for Ni–W mixed phosphonates as compared with those of single metal phosphonates.118 The Ni–W mixed phosphonates exhibit remarkable photoelectrochemical OER with a low onset-potential (410 mV vs. Ag/AgCl) and high oxygen evolution rate (275 μmol g−1 in 4 h).
In spite of the booming development of foreign element doped Ag3PO4, most of them are used in the photocatalytic degradation of pollutants.19 Generally, the incorporation of dopants can extend the light absorption, modulate the band gap (introducing new levels), affect the kinetic state of photo-generated charge carriers and form some defects (to work as trap centers to decrease the recombination rate of photo-generated electrons and holes). Nevertheless, doping can also disrupt local symmetry and the chemical mismatch between Ag3PO4, the dopant can lead to the generation of deep defect levels and the excess dopants would serve as the recombination centers of electrons and holes.19 Therefore, the choice of appropriate dopants is essential. To date, metallic dopants such as Ni, Bi, Mo, Cu and lanthanides,119 and some nonmetallic dopants such as F and S,120 have been doped into Ag3PO4 lattice leading to significantly improved photocatalytic performance. Due to the suitable band gap of Ag3PO4, it can be reasonably inferred that these efficient photocatalysts may also have remarkable photocatalytic activity for the water oxidation reaction.
Furthermore, metallic and nonmetallic element dual-doping and binary metallic or nonmetallic doping can engender multiple synergetic effects to significantly improve the catalytic performance in water splitting, such as FeCoPO, NiFeSP, NiCoPS and so on.121–123 However, the origins of the high activity and the role of each element in multiple components doping P-containing materials are still inconclusive and need in-depth investigation. Moreover, for these P-containing materials, the cumbersome preparation process and the matching of various element energy levels are also problems that urgently need to be solved before practical application.

3.3 Tailoring morphology
The rational construction of the morphology and structure of catalysts is essential to enhance the density of active sites. For the porous structure, abundant hierarchical porosity and hollow or open carved nanoframes can enhance the exposure of active sites and accelerate mass transfer. One-dimensional (1D) or two-dimensional (2D) morphology with more edge sites can also provide abundant active sites.124 More importantly, 1D arrays can promote the release of generated gas by virtue of the discontinuous three-phase contact area, and turning the bulk materials into a 2D or even quantum dot (QD) structure would modulate the band gap dramatically.125 These unique properties can greatly enhance the photocatalytic and electrocatalytic water splitting performance of P-containing materials. Some synthesis methods used to construct P-containing materials with these favorable structures are summarized in this section.

3.3.1 Porous structure. 
Porous structure can provide exposed activity areas, facilitate diffusion of reactants and produce gas release.126 Some wet-chemical methods such as hydrothermal, solvothermal and self-assembly techniques are widely used in the fabrication of porous advanced functional materials, including P-containing materials, by controlling temperature, precursors, solvents and additives. For example, few-layer phosphorus-based nanosheets (<5 nm) with abundant holes can be fabricated by a wet-chemical solvothermal reaction at 400 °C; the corresponding reaction mechanism is shown in Fig. 9a.127 Since the reaction temperature has reached the sublimation point of RP, the continuous vaporization–condensation process will lead to continuous solid–gas–solid phase transition and subsequent bottom-up assembly growth. The 2D holey nanosheet structure (Fig. 9b) shortens the charge transfer pathway and broadens the application of phosphorus-based materials in electronic and optoelectronic fields.
 Fig. 9  Illustration (a) of the formation process of the holey phosphorus composite nanosheets and the corresponding TEM image (b). Reproduced from ref. 127 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2016. Proposed formation schematics (c) of hierarchically porous titanium phosphonates using dual templates and the corresponding TEM image (d). Reproduced from ref. 21 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2018. (e) Synthetic illustration of the titanium phosphonate nanowires, and the corresponding SEM (f) and TEM images (g), inset of (g) is the high-resolution TEM image. Reproduced from ref. 23 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2020. (h) Sonication exfoliation, (i) electrochemical anodic/cathodic exfoliation, and (j) bipolar electrochemical exfoliation method. 
The strong binding ability of a P-containing precursor with a metal precursor prevents the construction of metal-based P-containing materials with well-defined porosity. The key to solving this problem is to control the self-assembly process by balancing the reactivity of precursors based on their physicochemical properties. For metal precursors, the reactivity (e.g., hydrolysis, condensation) of inorganic metal salts is much stronger than that of metal alkoxides with alkoxy moieties, and the metal alkoxides with bulky moieties possess weaker reactivity, which will become weaker and weaker as the moieties expand. The reactivity of a P-containing precursor would be decreased by adjusting its molecular structure, for example, the partial acidification of organophosphonic ligands by introducing phosphonates esters.20 In addition, adjusting the reaction solvent system can also contribute to the decrease of reaction rate of the precursors by adding organic liquids with chelating ability such as acetic acid and ethylenediamine, as well as by directly using mixed or pure nonaqueous solvents.128 The activity of metal ions in organic solvents is evidently lower than that in water; the balance between the slower precipitation rate caused by organic solvents and the higher product yield provided by water can finely adjust the growth kinetics of metal-based P-containing materials to produce delicate structures.117
Some templates are usually introduced into hydrothermal/solvothermal systems to fabricate mesoporous MPi, including soft templates (cationic, anionic and non-ionic surfactant) and hard templates (SiO2, carbon spheres and MOFs, etc.).129 The choice of soft templates can directly determine the pore size; for example Pluronic block copolymers and oligomeric/ionic surfactants can control the pore size between 2 and 10 nm, and polystyrene-based colloids promote the formation of mesopores from 20 to 50 nm.13,20 Specifically, a cationic surfactant such as cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) can self-assemble with P-containing precursors to construct a directed structure through Coulomb interaction (S+I−).130 Anionic templates (e.g. dodecyl p-benzenesulfonic acid and sodium dodecylsulfate) would react with metal ions by S−M+I− interactions, and a non-ionic surfactant such as polyethylene–polypropylene glycol (F127) can combine with a precursor through hydrogen bonds.11 Recently, hierarchically mesoporous titanium phosphonates have been synthesized by employing polyelectrolyte–surfactant complexes as the template.21 The corresponding formation mechanism is displayed in Fig. 9c. The co-assembly of cationic surfactant CTAB and anionic polymer poly(acrylic) (PAA) via electrostatic interactions engenders the formation of mesomorphous PAA–CTA complex colloids, which further interact with the negatively charged organophosphonic molecules. The subsequently introduced TiCl4 will rapidly polymerize with the organophosphonic ligand to form titanium phosphonates oligomers, which disrupt the electrostatic interaction between PAA and CTA. And then, the ordered mesostructure is formed by the remaining ordered mesomorphous complexes and cross-links around the cationic micelles, and the interstitial pores inside the titanium phosphonates spheres are caused by disassociated PAA from the mesomorphous complexes (Fig. 9d). The well-defined structure including high surface areas and hierarchical mesopores is favorable for the rapid transportation of electrolytes and products, and the homogeneous doping of carbon and phosphorus originated from phosphonate groups enhances the absorption in the visible light region, leading to outstanding photocatalytic HER performance.
Sacrificial template methods are significant in the construction of porous micro–nanostructures, where porous structure are created by selectively removing some components in the precursor. There are numerous templates that can be used to create porous structure in P-containing materials, such as carbon sphere, Prussian Blue Analogues, metal organic frameworks (MOFs) and so on.131 MOFs have been considered as among the most promising templates for the fabrication of porous structure, especially for micropores. A zeolitic imidazolate framework-67 (ZIF-67) nanoplate self-template approach was adopted to construct 2D porous oxygen-incorporated CoP ultrathin nanosheets for electrocatalytic water splitting.132 The synthesis procedure of CoP mainly involves oxidation and subsequent phosphatization of ZIF-67, and the abundant pores are formed in the oxidation step due to the volatilization of carbon component in ZIF-67. In addition, the hollow structure TMPs with large surface-to-volume ratio can also be synthesized by using MOFs as self-template. Hollow Co2P nanocages (Co2P NCGs) were prepared by the derivation of ZIF-67, and then coating of thin-layered ZnIn2S4 on the surface of Co2P NCGs to obtain the Co2P/ZIS NCGs catalysts for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution.133 The distinctive hollow structure allows the rapid diffusion of the photogenerated carriers in the interface of Co2P and ZIS, thereby leading to an efficient H2 evolution rate of 7.93 mmol g−1 h−1, which is better than that of 1% noble metal (Pt, Au, Ag) loaded ZnIn2S4, and even 10 times higher than that of single ZnIn2S4. To further improve the utilization of the active sites on the interior surface of a porous hollow structure, an open carved nanoframes cobalt–iron bimetal phosphide was fabricated by using urea to etch bimetallic MOF–Co–Fe Prussian Blue Analogues as the structural template.134 The obtained Co0.6Fe0.4P nanoframes have less obstructed electrolyte infiltration, larger electrochemical active surface area and faster charge transfer and gas release, making them highly potent bifunctional electrocatalysts for overall water splitting.
In addition, the release of gas during the catalyst synthesis process also contributes to the formation of the porous structure. For example, the mesoporous nanosheet composite of Co3O4 and Co3(PO)4 was synthesized by calcining the precursor consisting of carbon, cobalt hydroxyl carbonate and cobalt phosphate.135 The formation processes of the precursor involve the generation of CO32− and NH4+, which would be converted into CO2 and NH3 gas and released to form the precursor during the calcination process, thus creating abundant pores. The networked mesoporous nanosheet morphology enhanced the exposure of active sites and enlarged electrochemically active surface areas, and the Co3O4–Co3(PO)4 heterojunction provided favorable charge transport kinetics and high intrinsic activity induced by the synergetic effect. By depositing the obtained catalysts on BiVO4, a significantly improved photocurrent density of 3.0 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V (vs. RHE) towards photochemical OER can be achieved.


3.3.2 One-dimensional nanostructures. 
A 1D nanoarray with abundant channels and open space can not only provide high specific surface area but also contribute to the adsorption of water and the release of generated gas by virtue of the discontinuous three-phase contact area. The facile CVD method is usually adopted to prepare crystalline elemental P with 1D morphology. [001]-Oriented Hittorf's phosphorus (HP) nanorod-decorated polymeric carbon nitride (PCN) was synthesized by a CVD strategy for photocatalytic H2 evolution.64 The P atom can replace the C atom in the melon unit in the PCN to form a P–N bond, which serves as a nucleation site for the HP nanorods to grow vertically on the PCN along the [001] direction. Loading [001]-oriented HP nanorods on PCN can broaden light absorption to the visible light region, and the strong coupling P–N bonds between HP and PCN greatly accelerate photogenerated electron–hole separation and transfer. The optimal sample shows the excellent photocatalytic HER rates of 33.2 mmol h−1 and 17.5 mmol h−1 under simulated sunlight (λ > 300 nm) and visible light (λ > 420 nm), respectively.
Hydrothermal and electrodeposition are two very effective strategies for synthesizing 1D nanoarray metal oxide/hydroxide, which act as precursors and can be converted to metal phosphides or MPi with original morphology by the low-temperature phosphorization treatment. To date, the facile hydrothermal followed by phosphorization treatment has been used to prepare TMPs with 1D structure, such as nanowire,136 nanorod,87,137 nanoflower and nanoneedle,138 all of which show superior outstanding photocatalytic and electrocatalytic performance.139 For example, WP2 nanorods possess outstanding catalytic activity and excellent durability towards HER in all pH electrolytes.140 Especially in 0.5 M H2SO4, WP2 nanorods can drive current densities of 10 mA cm−2 in the overpotential of 148 mV, which is more than twice lower than that of bulk WP2. This can be ascribed to the swarming bubbles that quickly and easily agglomerate on the relatively flat surface of bulk materials to hinder the diffusion of electrolytes and cover some active sites, while the nanoarray structure can “cut” and drive off the produced bubbles.141
Beyond that, the synthesis condition in the solvothermal process can also improve the morphology of MPi/MPPi. For instance, the mechanical shear force can create a well-mixed homogeneous reaction condition and guide the directional assembly of titanium phosphonate oligomers along the axial direction, thereby promoting the generation of titanium phosphonate nanowires (Fig. 9e–g).23 The 1D morphology enhances the absorption of light and the exposure of active sites, and improves the mass transfer, thus the photocatalytic H2 evolution performance of titanium phosphonate nanowires is significantly better than that of titanium phosphonate nanoparticles. In addition, the electrostatic interactions from a series of alkali metal ions (Li+, Na+, K+ and Cs+) are utilized to adjust the lengths and diameters of nickel phosphate-based nanotubes.142 The large radius of the used alkali metal ion can strengthen the electrostatic interaction with the early-stage formed blocks, which dominate the formation of the narrow and long nanotubes. The nickel phosphate nanotubes with minimum diameters and maximum lengths possess highly exposed surface atoms and full contact with electrolyte, thus leading to optimal OER performance.


3.3.3 Two-dimensional nanosheet structures. 
Top-down method. 
Exfoliation is an efficient top-down method to exfoliate bulk laminated materials for the preparation of 2D materials. The exfoliation methods in the preparation of layered P-containing materials (including elemental P, MPT and MPi) can be divided into mechanical exfoliation, sonication exfoliation and electrochemical exfoliation based on the driving force. The bulk stacked layers of layered P-containing materials (elemental P and MPT) are held together by weak van der Waals forces, which can be easily isolated by various external driving forces. The phosphorene with a single or a few layers was first fabricated by mechanically exfoliated bulk BP using sticky-tape in 2014.143 After that, it was found that the use of sticky-tape and viscoelastic polydimethylsiloxane can effectively eliminate adhesive residue without additional post treatment.144 However, the produced phosphorene still has uncontrollable size and thickness, which need a layer thickness determination step with other techniques, such as optical microscopy and Raman spectroscopy. The complex and multi-step operation results in a low yield of phosphorene, which meets the requirements of laboratory academic research but not large-scale production.
During the sonication exfoliation process (Fig. 9h), the bulk crystals are completely immerged in the selected liquid, and micro- and nanosized bubbles produced from fluctuations and shear forces encourage the liquid species to embed in the interlayer of the bulk crystal to expand the lattice distance and make it peel off into the liquid.144 Organic liquid exfoliation has been widely utilized to prepare large-quantity layered P-containing materials with controllable size, and typical organic liquids include N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP), N-cyclohexyl-2-pyrrolidone (CHP), isopropyl alcohol (IPA), DMF, dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and so on.144 The anhydrous and oxygen-free properties of these organic liquids prevent the oxidative deactivation of the obtained 2D materials. Upon exfoliation of bulk zirconium phosphate (ZrP) in the presence of tetrabutylammonium hydroxide (TBA+OH−), the layered ZrP nanoparticles have strong absorption ability for Co and Ni cations, resulting in high active metal loadings.145 Meanwhile, the layered structure provides an enlarged specific surface area, which enhances the accessibility of active sites and promotes mass transfer. Thus, the exfoliated ZrP with the modification of Co and Ni cations exhibits excellent OER performance and delivers a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at 41 and 181 mV, respectively. In addition, exfoliated CoPS3 in the mixture of water and IPA (1:1) can achieve a superior photochemical water oxidation activity (photoresponsivity of up to 0.6 mA W−1 under 450 nm excitation wavelength and at +1.23 V versus RHE in 1.0 M KOH), which is 2 times higher than its bulk counterpart.146

N-Propylamine-assisted exfoliation strategy was adopted to prepare FePS3 nanosheets.147 Notably, Fe3+/Fe2+ ratio and matrix crystallinity can be adjusted by changing the reaction temperature; both are directly related to the electrical conductivity. With the increase of the exfoliation reaction temperature, the continuous increase of Fe3+/Fe2+ ratio improves the conductivity of the whole system. However, the crystallinity of FePS3 nanosheets deteriorates with the increase of temperature, excessive sulfur defects created by high temperature lead to poor conductivity. The combined effect of Fe3+/Fe2+ ratio and crystallinity in FePS3-120 (exfoliation temperature is 120 °C) results in optimal conductivity, thus leading to the best HER performance. Nevertheless, the high boiling point of some organic liquids leads to the difficult removal of residues from the surface of the obtained materials, which limits their practical application.
As one of the environmentally friendly solvents, ions liquids (ILs) can not only be used as a solvent to peel off bulk BP without any effects on the conductivity, but also act as passivation layers to prevent the deposition and aggregation of the obtained phosphorene and alleviate the fast oxidation of phosphorene under light irradiation.148 However, the long time sonication requirements of sonication exfoliation need a high-energy supply and lead to enormous defects of phosphorene especially on the edges.
Electrochemical exfoliation is the use of an external electric field to drive the ionic species in liquid electrolyte to the interlayer of bulk crystals to peel them into a few layers, and can be categorized into electrochemical anodic/cationic and bipolar electrochemical exfoliation.149 As illustrated schematically in Fig. 9i, the typical electrochemical anodic/cationic cell consists of working electrodes, reference electrodes and counter electrodes, and bulk crystals are fixed on the working electrodes. The anodic and cathodic exfoliation can be triggered by the insertion of cations and anions into bulk crystals under positive and negative bias, respectively.150 For example, NiPS3 flakes with high crystallinity and pure phase were prepared by fast (in minutes) electrochemical cathodic exfoliation in the presence of tetra-n-butylammonium salt.151 Specifically, applying a constant negative bias (−3 V) to the working electrode can insert tetra-n-butylammonium tetrafluoroborate with a large ionic diameter into the interlayer of the bulk NiPS3 crystal to significantly weaken the van der Waals interaction between the layers. After long-term voltage application, the embedded tetra-n-butylammonium salt is electrochemically decomposed into gaseous substances, resulting in the generation of a driving force for huge and ultra-fast volume expansion of densely layered bulk NiPS3 crystals with edge wrinkling and roughening. Finally, the NiPS3 flakes with large size (typically ≈150 μm2) and thin layer (≈70% monolayer) can be detached from bulk NiPS3 crystals by slight manual shaking. By virtue of the intrinsic fully exposed S and P atoms, the obtained NiPS3 flakes exhibit robust HER (158 mV@10 mA cm−2), OER (300 mV@10 mA cm−2) and overall water splitting (1.56 V@10 mA cm−2) performance in 1.0 M KOH.
Bipolar electrochemical exfoliation (Fig. 9j) is the application of a potential between the two feeding electrodes, then the ions in the electrolyte can be derived to isolate bulk crystals and the obtained nanosheets deposit on the stainless steel electrodes. Recently, sponge-like BP nanosheets (EEBP) with high yield (∼85%) were successfully synthesized by the electrochemical exfoliation method. The 2D layered structure and large specific surface area endow EEBP with great potential to be an excellent support.152 After loading the vertical MoS2, this MoS2/EEBP heterostructure catalyst exhibits remarkable HER catalytic performance with low overpotential of 126 mV, 237 mV and 258 mV at 10 mA cm−2 in 0.5 M H2SO4, 1 M KOH and 1 M PBS, respectively.
Beyond these, there are many other methods to prepare two-dimensional P-containing materials. For example, a selective centrifugation method was employed to control the thickness of BP nanosheets. The active sites exposed on the surface/edge gradually increase as the thickness decreases, which can promote the adsorption of oxygen species to improve OER activity.153 Upon ball-milling BP powder with LiOH additive, few-layer BP nanosheets can be obtained and manifest a H2 evolution of 512 μmol h−1 g−1 under visible light irradiation without any cocatalysts, which is almost 18 times higher than that of bulk BP.92 After exfoliation, the negative shift of CB along with positive shift of VB increases the bandgap of few-layer BP nanosheets, which not only enhances electron reduction ability but also inhibits the recombination of the electron–hole. The 2D structure of BP nanosheets provides a large specific surface area, and these advantages together create dramatically enhanced photocatalytic activity. In addition, two different MnPX3 were prepared by shear force exfoliation, with a lateral dimension of 150–700 nm and an average thickness of 16.7 nm. Compared with bulk MnPX3, all layered MnPX3 have enhanced HER performance in both acidic and alkaline electrolytes.154 In particular, the layered MnPX3 can achieve the density of 10 mA cm−2 with the overpotential of −0.64 V in acidic media, which represents an increase of 350 mV relative to the bulk MnPSe3.
Bottom-up method. 
The few-layer P-containing materials prepared by exfoliation inevitably have issues of poor stability, which can be effectively overcome by the bottom-up method.155 CVD technology has been extensively utilized in the preparation of large-area layered P-containing materials, such as TMPs, MPX3 and BP nanosheets. In 2015, large-area (up to 4 mm) thin BP on a flexible substrate was first prepared by the CVD method using RP as a precursor.156 First, the RP film is deposited on a polyester substrate, and then it is converted to BP in a high-pressure anvil cell at room temperature. The thickness of the obtained BP can be modified by the deposition time at 400 °C; the longer the deposition time, the thicker the film. However, most CVD experimental processes always need expensive anvil cells or vacuum ampoule growth that is difficult to seal and potentially burn. To solve this problem, Smith's group used only tube furnaces and pressure vessels to prepare few-layer BP with variable thickness from 3.4 nm to 600 nm and large area from 0.35 μm2 to 100 μm2.157 The synthesis process involves the heating of amorphous RP thin films and Sn/SnI4 (10 mg) mineralizer at 900 °C and 400 psi (27.2 atm). In addition, a high-density 2D ultrathin NiPS3 crystal was prepared via a simple CVD method using Ni(OH)2 nanosheets, elemental sulfur and phosphorous as precursors.158 The as-prepared NiPS3 nanosheets have high crystallinity and hexagonal morphology with the thickness of 3.5 nm and the lateral size of 15 μm. As expected, the NiPS3 nanosheets achieve efficient photocatalytic performance towards water splitting for H2 generation under both Xenon light and simulated AM 1.5G solar illumination.

In situ growth via solvothermal has been developed as efficient method to synthesize metal phosphate/MPPi with desirable morphology, including 2D structure. Generally, the components of solvents have great impact on the morphology; organic liquids not only decrease the reaction rate of precursors but also inhibit the long-range organization of reactants, thus employing mixed or even pure nonaqueous systems can prevent the formation of bulk structure. For example, a two-phase solvent system has been used to prepare Co3(PO4)2 with 1D or 2D structure by controlling the solvothermal time, wherein the top hydrophobic layer consists of OA and octadecene (ODE) and OA can combine with Co2+ to form OA–Co precursor, and the bottom layer is phosphate solution.75 At the interface of two-phase solvents, OA–Co precursor immediately interacts with phosphate groups to form a small amorphous nucleus wrapped with OA, which is transferred into the hydrophobic layer with the help of OA. With temporal evolution, the product is gradually assembled from nanoplates into nanosheets, and further split into nanowires; the split step cannot be carried out without OA. This method proved to be universal and can be used to synthesize amorphous metal phosphate nanosheets, such as Mn3(PO4)2, Ni3(PO4)2, InPO4 and FePO4 nanosheets.76,77 The unique hierarchical 2D amorphous network not only guarantees the maximum exposure of active sites but also maximizes the electrochemically active surface area, thus leading to dramatically improved OER performance.
Some P-containing materials with quantum structures (quantum dots and quantum sheets) have also been reported in the field of photo/electrocatalysis by virtue of their significantly modified band gap. For example, both CB and VB positions of bulk BP are in the forbidden band of RP, resulting in the formation of a type I heterojunction between BP and RP, where the photogenerated electron and holes can be easily recombined.159 However, the energy band with staggered alignment can be achieved by the construction of BP and RP QDs, contributing to the migration of photogenerated charges by a Z-scheme pathway. The changes from type I to Z-scheme heterostructure not only achieve the efficient separation of photogenerated electrons–holes and complementary light absorption, but also fully demonstrate strong redox ability for water splitting. This results in significantly improved photocatalytic H2 production of BP/RP-quantum dots with respect to that of BP/RP-bulk.
Unique morphology/structure is a pivotal factor that affects catalytic performance by dominating the exposure of active sites, the hydrophilic property and band structure. Despite the achievements that have been made in the preparation of P-containing materials with favorable structure for photo/electrocatalysis, several challenging issues still exist. First, the application of some templates makes the preparation process of the porous structure cumbersome. Second, the growth mechanism of most 1D P-containing materials is ambiguous, so it cannot provide guiding suggestions for future research. Finally, the research on 2D and QDs P-containing materials mainly focuses on BP nanosheets; some RP, MPX3 and MPi with layer structure have great potential to be exfoliated to few layers and even QDs, and need further research combined with the synthesis method of BP.

3.4 Engineering interface
In a hybrid system, the multiple components/phases in close contact can be conducive to optimizing the energy band and electronic configuration by interfacial electron transfer, leading to the formation of a synergistic effect.160 Direct physical contact would induce the strong bonding or interfacial interactions between each component, leading to the reconstruction of active centers in the interface.161 Achieving the interface manipulation could not only integrate the optimal absorption and active sites of adjacent catalysts, but also accelerate the electron transfer to enhance the utilization of input energy in the form of electricity or light emission. Due to the different driving forces of photocatalysis and electrocatalysis, the selection criteria for materials combined with P-containing materials are also completely different; the former pays more attention to light absorption capacity and the matching of band alignment, while the latter focuses on the conductivity and electron injection direction.162 The interface engineering of P-containing materials in photocatalytic and electrocatalytic water splitting is separately discussed in the following section.

3.4.1 Strong interfacial coupling and favorable band alignment for photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical water splitting. 
Serving as cocatalysts. 
By virtue of the excellent conductivity and suitable Fermi level position, TMPs have been considered as one of the best potential candidates to replace noble metal Pt cocatalyst.163 In the photocatalytic system employing TMPs as cocatalyst, TMPs not only facilitate the absorption of H* intermediates and the desorption of produced H2, but also act as an electron acceptor and trap to accelerate the separation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs and prevent their recombination.164 Numbers of semiconductors loaded TMPs have been prepared and exhibited more superior photocatalytic HER performance than that of the original semiconductors or control samples with Pt as cocatalyst, such as Ni2P/CdS, FeP/g-C3N4 and so on (Table 1).165,166
The intense coupling interface plays a key role in charge transfer and separation, and the bond between semiconductors and TMPs acts as a fast electronic transmission channel. For example, the covalent Ni(δ+)–N(δ−) chemical bonding states exist in Ni2P/g-C3N4. Both the binding energy and absorption rising edge of Ni in Ni2P/g-C3N4 shifts to high energy, while N 1s of Ni2P/g-C3N4 displays a decreased binding energy, suggesting that the electron transfer from Ni to N contributes to the formation of Ni(δ+)–N(δ−) (Fig. 10a–c).167 The obvious peak at apparent distances of around 0.188 nm in the extended X-ray absorption fine structure spectra (EXAFS) can be attributed to the Ni–N bond (Fig. 10d). The unique Ni(δ+)–N(δ−) chemical coupling can greatly enhance the efficiency of photo-induced charge separation and transfer between g-C3N4 to Ni2P, leading to the excellent photocatalytic HER rate of 2849.5 μmol g−1 h−1. Moreover, in the ternary photocatalyst system, TMPs can also act as “electron-bridge” to accelerate electron transfer efficiency between two semiconductors.168 For example, Ni2P can replace noble metals (Au, Ag, Pt) mediators in Z-scheme heterojunction photocatalysts to induce efficient electron transfer from the CB of g-C3N4 to that of CdS. This unique structure endows CdS/Ni2P/g-C3N4 with remarkable overall water splitting performance under visible light.
 Fig. 10  XPS fine spectra of Ni2P/g-C3N4 (in situ) and Ni2P/g-C3N4 (self-assembly): (a) Ni 2p, (b) N 1s and Ni XANES spectra (c) and EXAFS (d) of Ni2P/g-C3N4 (in situ), Ni2P/g-C3N4 (self-assembly), Ni2P powder and Ni foil. Reproduced from ref. 167 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2020. (e) Proposed in situ formation illustration of NiICoP and NiCoIIIPi cocatalysts. Reproduced from ref. 175 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020. (f) Illustration of the energy band structure of APO and CFO before and after contact. Reproduced from ref. 189 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2020. (g) High-resolution XPS of FeP2–NiP2@PC after 3000 cycles OER stability test. Reproduced from ref. 194 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020. (h) The HRTEM image of FeNi-LDH/CoP NSs, (i) energy band diagrams of FeNi-LDH and CoP and the proposed mechanism of OER process on the FeNi-LDH/CoP/CC p–n junction. Reproduced from ref. 198 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2019. 
Due to the metallic character of some TMPs (Ni2P, CoP, and MoP, etc.), the Schottky junction can be constructed between TMPs and semiconductors with suitable Fermi level, which can greatly hinder the electrons from reflowing back to semiconductors by Schottky barrier.169 The metal–semiconductor interface and the suitable Fermi level are prerequisites for manufacturing Schottky junctions. Taking CoP/g-C3N4 as an example, the d orbitals of the Co atom are the main source of the state around the Fermi level, verifying the intrinsic metallicity of CoP.170 The work functions (WFs) of CoP and g-C3N4 are 4.91 eV and 4.27 eV, respectively, indicating the electrons would transfer from g-C3N4 to CoP until the Fermi levels are at equilibrium. This result provides sufficient evidence for the formation of a Schottky junction between CoP and g-C3N4, which leads to the evidently enhanced H2 evolution performance of 2%CoP/g-C3N4 compared with that of 2%CoP/g-C3N4.
Owing to the unique OER performance of MPi, a great enhancement of photocatalytic performance can be achieved by combining the MPi (Fe, Ni, Cu and Co) cocatalysts with semiconductors (CdS, g-C3N4 and metal oxides, etc.), especially for photocatalytic water oxidation.171 Photochemical deposition is the most frequently used method to load MPi cocatalysts on the surface of the semiconductor. Taking CoPi as an example, the semiconductors are immersed into the phosphate buffer containing Co2+, and then light irradiation promotes the formation of photogenerated holes, which induce the internal oxidation of Co2+ to Co3+ to form CoPi on the surface of the semiconductors.172 The intense interface between the CoPi and the host catalysts ensures efficient electron–hole separation and decreases the probability of recombination, thus improving the photocatalytic performance. Interestingly, the photocatalytic H2 evolution activity of CdS can also be improved by employing cobalt phosphates as oxidation cocatalysts, because CoPi can act as a holes trap to inhibit the recombination of photoinduced electron–hole pairs.51
Similarly, FePi was electrodeposited on BiVO4 photoanode as a co-catalyst for photochemical water oxidation.173 The introduction of Fe-Pi could decrease the surface kinetics barriers and improve the water oxidation onset potential by modifying hole extraction across the semiconductor–electrolyte interface. Moreover, the phosphate anions in the Fe-Pi nanosheets not only act as efficient linkers between BiVO4 photoanode and Fe active species but also possess a synergistic effect on facilitating multiphoton-coupled electron transfer during the water oxidation process. The hybrid photoanode shows a high photocurrent density (2.28 mA cm−2), a decreased onset potential (cathodic shift ∼500 mV) and a remarkable photostability (more than 2 h without declining).
Very recently, a bimetal phosphate NiCoPi decorated CdS achieved 13.44 mmol g−1 h−1 photocatalytic H2 generation rate, which is 52 times higher than that of pristine CdS. The used 5 wt% NiCoPi/CdS indicates that part of the NiCoPi nanoparticles are reduced to NiICoP and the rest are oxidized to NiCoIIIPi by the photogenerated electrons and holes, respectively.174 Then, the NiICoP accepts the electrons provided by CdS to catalyze the water reduction to H2, while the NiCoIIIPi promotes the reaction of photogenerated holes and sacrificial agent (Fig. 10e). In addition, NiCoP and NiCoPi core–shell heterostructures have been reported as an efficient bifunctional cocatalysts for photocatalytic HER and OER with the assistance of g-C3N4 host catalyst.175 This excellent performance can be attributed to the fact that the NiCoP core and the NiCoPi shell can behave as active sites for the photocatalytic HER and OER, respectively, and the core–shell structure can enlarge the contact area of the interface to enhance the charge separation efficiency and the synergistic effect.
Serving as host catalysts. 
Due to the proper band positions for water splitting, some P-containing materials can also act as host catalysts to combine with various semiconductors to obtain a type II or Z-scheme heterojunction, wherein the typical semiconductors include metal sulfides (CdS, MoS2, CdZnS and WS2etc.), metal oxides (TiO2, SrTiO3 and Co3O4) and carbon materials (g-C3N4 and graphene).176 Constructing elemental P-semiconductors heterojunction photocatalysts not only enhances the optical absorption through the superposition of elemental P and semiconductors, but also promotes the separation and migration of photogenerated carriers by the doping of P atoms into semiconductors. The P dopants in metal oxides often induce the generation of external oxygen defects, which can trap the photo-induced holes to accelerate the separation and migration of carriers.177 Moreover, the doping of some P atoms in the g-C3N4 structure by the replacement of C and N atoms not only strengthens the coupling interaction in the heterojunction interface but also decreases the defects in g-C3N4.178
Elemental P-semiconductors heterojunction catalysts are usually prepared by mixing BP and semiconductors through ball milling or immersion and solvothermal methods.176 For example, a novel 2D/2D van der Waals heterostructure of BP/g-C3N4 was fabricated by facile physical mixing at room temperature.179 A 2D structure of g-C3N4 can provide large-area heterointerface contact and strong interface interaction, which are vital to ensure the efficient interface charge transfer. The high Fermi level of g-C3N4 would cause electrons to migrate from g-C3N4 to BP after contact, which has been confirmed by XPS and XANES characterization, suggesting the strong electronic coupling between g-C3N4 and BP. Therefore, BP/g-C3N4 heterostructure displays an apparently raised photocatalytic H2-production activity of 571 μmol h−1 g−1 under visible light, which is about 13 times that of bare g-C3N4, and even higher than that of Pt loaded g-C3N4 (548 μmol h−1 g−1).
Constructing the hetero-phase junction of BP/RP has been considered as an efficient method to improve photocatalytic performance. Generally, the hetero-phase junction of BP/RP can be fabricated by the facile wet chemistry method using ethylenediamine as the solvent and commercial RP as raw materials.98,180 The in situ formed hetero-phase junction of BP/RP possesses the same chemical composition but different crystal lattices, leading to the formation of an intense coupled interface with atomic precision.181 The feeding ratio of commercial RP and ethylenediamine can determine the BP ratio in the hetero-phase junction of BP/RP. When the feeding ratio of commercial RP and ethylenediamine is 1:20, the proportion of BP in the hetero-phase junction of BP/RP is the highest, about 20%.180 The high content of BP contributes to extending the absorption edge, leading to outstanding photocatalytic performance. By virtue of the effect of the quantum confinement on the bandgap of BP, downsizing the bulk BP/RP to QDs could transform the hetero-phase junction of BP/RP from type I to Z-scheme.159 Furthermore, due to the appropriate band structures, perfect phase junction interface and accelerated separation and transfer of photogenerated carriers, the Z-scheme hetero-phase junction of BP/RP can achieve efficient photocatalytic water splitting without any sacrificial agents, allowing the photocatalytic HER and OER to occur in BP and RP, respectively.181
By virtue of the appropriate bandgap as well as CB and VB positions, Cu3P was used as host photocatalyst for the first time in 2015, achieving an H2 evolution rate as high as 200 μmol h−1 mg−1 when combined with CdS.182 Since then, the easily available and cost-effective Cu3P has been frequently combined with various semiconductor materials to form heterojunction photocatalysts, such as g-C3N4–Cu3P, Cu3P/ZnIn2S4 and so on.183 As reported, the content of Cu3P in a photocatalyst can directly determine its role. In g-C3N4–Cu3P composites, Cu3P functions as cocatalyst to trap photogenerated electrons and activate the H2O molecules at low content, while the high content Cu3P (>10%) can act as p-type semiconductor and transfer electrons to g-C3N4, leading to the construction of p–n g-C3N4–Cu3P.184 The CB level of g-C3N4-10%Cu3P under light illumination has a positive shift compared with g-C3N4 and g-C3N4-10%Cu3P in the dark and displays a negative shift in comparison with that of Cu3P in the dark, which verifies the generation of heterojunction by the effective interface band alignment. Besides Cu3P, some other TMPs have also been reported in photocatalytic water splitting as the host catalysts, such as FeP, CoP,185,186 and Ni2P.187 However, these photocatalytic systems always need the support of dye sensitizers, which deters their further development.
Due to the proper band positions for water splitting, some MPi can also act as host catalysts, such as cobalt phosphates, copper phosphates and silver phosphates, which can combine with various semiconductors to obtain a type II or Z-scheme heterojunction. Ion-exchange deposition has been considered as an effective method to form Ag3PO4/semiconductors heterostructures. Specifically, an adequate amount of semiconductors (g-C3N4, MXenes and graphene) was dispersed in water by ultrasonication treatment, and then AgNO3 and Na2HPO4 were successively put into the above mixed solution; after continuous stirring, Ag3PO4/semiconductors heterojunction catalysts were obtained.188 Since the CB location of Ag3PO4 (+0.45 V vs. NHE) cannot reach the thermodynamic reduction potential of H2O/H2 (0 V vs. NHE), a ternary GO-supported Ag3PO4/CoFe2O4 p–n junction composite (APO/CFO/GO) was prepared for the efficient photocatalytic HER and RhB degradation under visible light.189 As shown in Fig. 10f, the internal electric field between APO and CFO promotes the transfer of photogenerated electrons from the CB of APO to the VB of CFO through the GO mediator, which effectively prevents the photocorrosion of APO and the charge recombination. Therefore, the electrons in the more negative CB of CFO can be used to reduce water and the holes in the more positive of APO can contribute to the oxidation of RhB.


3.4.2 Steering directional electron injection at interface for electrocatalysis. 
Combining with carbon materials. 
Nanocarbons are usually incorporated with P-containing materials to not only enhance the electronic conductivity and enlarge specific surface area, but also downsize the nanoparticles and improve the dispersion by the confinement effect of the carbon matrix, as well as the wrapped carbon layer that can avoid the dissolution of P-containing materials, thus leading to dramatically improved electrocatalytic performance.116,190 Based on morphology differences, carbon-P-containing materials’ heterostructure can be categorized into P-containing materials-exposed and P-containing materials-protected heterostructure.
For the P-containing materials-exposed heterostructure, graphene and g-C3N4 with a 2D structure and large specific surface area has been employed as the ideal support.191 For example, the exfoliated BP coupled N-doped graphene (EBP@NG) heterostructure was prepared via the electrostatic interaction between the ultrathin BP with negative charges and NG with positive charges.192 The electrons are injected into EBP from the NG with higher Fermi level, which not only enhances the electron density around EBP and optimizes the adsorption and desorption of H* for efficient HER, but also endows NG with abundant positively charged carbon sites to facilitate the generation of OOH* to accelerate the OER process. Therefore, the EBP@NG can act as an efficient bifunctional catalyst toward both electrocatalytic HER and OER, and can afford a low cell voltage of only 1.54 V at 10 mA cm−2 when employed as the anode and cathode in the two-electrode electrolyzer. In addition, the P doped graphene supported cobalt phosphides nanocrystals wrapped with P-doped carbon (CoP–Co2P@PC/PG) were synthesized by the assembly and annealing process.86 Compared with the sample without graphene, CoP–Co2P@PC/PG possesses cobalt phosphides nanocrystals with a lower average size and larger surface area and average pore size, indicating that graphene can provide the confinement effect for cobalt phosphides nanocrystals and enhance surface area. Therefore, CoP–Co2P@PC/PG exhibits more excellent electrocatalytic performance towards both HER and OER in alkaline media.
For the P-containing materials-protected heterostructure (carbon layer wrapped P-containing materials), the atomic contact between carbon layer and P-containing materials not only promotes the electron transfer near the interface but also inhibits the corrosion and agglomeration of active components for the enhancement of stability. A transition-metal phosphonates derived strategy is an ideal way to prepare TMPi or TMPs/carbon heterostructures, wherein the high temperature pyrolysis promotes the in situ formation of TMPi or TMPs and carbon hybrids with the intimate coupled interaction. For example, hollow spherical cobalt phosphonate was used as the precursor for the preparation of cobalt phosphate with sufficient N,P-co-doped carbon (CoPi-HSNPC) by high-temperature carbonization under N2 atmosphere.90 The hollow spherical morphology can be retained intact even after high temperature, which can promote the diffuse of electrolyte and the mass transfer. Moreover, the in situ formed N,P doped carbon can not only enhance the electronic conductivity and provide additive protection for cobalt phosphates, but also induce the synergistic effect. Combining the above merits with the intrinsic activity of cobalt phosphates, this catalyst displays outstanding electrocatalytic OER activity (320 mV at 10 mA cm−2) and robust stability (up to 20 h) in alkaline conditions. To date, many other organophosphonic ligands (C6H7O3P and 4-HOOC–C6H4–CH2–NHCH2PO3H2) and metal ions (Fe, Ni and Mn) have been used in transition-metal phosphate or TMPs/carbon heterostructures.11 On this basis, the introduction of carbon materials (graphene and CNTs) into the phosphonate synthesis process can further improve the conductivity and help reduce the size of the metal active components to fully expose the active sites, thereby further enhancing the electrocatalytic activity.103,193
The functionalities of the carbon layer in these composites towards electrochemical water splitting were revealed by means of theoretical calculation and characterization tools. During the long-time OER process, the oxidation effect on carbon of P-doped carbon encapsulated metal diphosphide (FeP2–NiP2@PC) was investigated by Raman and XPS measurements.194 After 3000 cycles of the OER stability test, the obvious K 2p peaks caused by KOH corrosion and the positively shifted CO bonds can be observed in Fig. 10g, the intensity ratio of D and G bands (ID/IG) increased from 1.05 to 1.1. These results suggest that the KOH and high potential can corrode the carbon layer to create defects, which can enhance the exposure of more active sites to decrease the overpotential after the CV acceleration.
For MoP wrapped by Mo, P codoped carbon layer, the existence of Mo–C and P–C bonds at the interface can optimize the electron transfer, accumulation, and subsequent delocalization, facilitating the splitting of water to H* with a faster Volmer process.195 However, for the MoP encapsulated in N-doped carbon, the interaction of MoP with pyridinic N can provide abundant electrons for the N-doped carbon, and has been identified as the real active centers for HER. The pyridinic N–MoP interactive sites have decreased d band center of Mo to weaken the Mo–Hads bonds, which can promote the Volmer and Hryrovsky process. And the low OH* adsorption energy (ΔGOH*) of pyridinic N implies the fast desorption of hydroxyl species, contributing to the readsorption of H2O on the active sites.
Combining with metal compounds. 
Transition metal based electrocatalysts have been considered as good candidates to replace noble metal-based electrocatalysts toward efficient water splitting.196 The construction of heterojunction between P-containing materials and other transition metal based materials not only retains the inherent characteristics of the two components, but also induces the synergistic effect by the heterointerface, resulting in the generation of novel or enhanced performance. Due to the strong interfacial interactions at the heterointerface, coupling the OER-preferred transition metal oxides (TMO), transition metal hydroxides (TMH) and TMPi with TMPs and MPX3 can enhance the bifunctional activity for overall water splitting (Table 2).197 Recently, the semiconductor charge redistribution concept was used to modify the electron density of CoP/FeNi-layered double hydroxides (CoP/FeNi-LDH).198 As shown in Fig. 10h, the intense connection of CoP nanoparticles and amorphous FeNi-LDH suggests the generation of p–n junction at the interface of FeNi-LDH/CoP. Due to the difference of Ef (Fermi energy) between CoP and FeNi-LDH, the close contact makes the electrons in FeNi-LDH diffuse to CoP until the Ef aligns to the same level, thus creating an opposite space-charge region shown in Fig. 10i. The unique space-charge region serves as the driving force to accelerate the transportation of electrons originating from OH− in the basic electrolyte to the VB of FeNi-LDH, which endows FeNi-LDH/CoP with 10-fold and 100-fold OER performance over that of FeNi-LDH and CoP, respectively.
In fact, the surface of most metal based P-containing materials (TMPs, MPX3 and MPi) can be oxidized to metal oxyhydroxides during the OER process, then the metal oxyhydroxides act as the real active sites and the tightly coupled heterointerface formed in situ can accelerate the electron transfer. For example, NiPS3@NiOOH core–shell heterostructures were formed by the hydroxylation step during the OER process. The oxidation of NiII to NiIII results in the formation of amorphous NiOOH on the surface of NiPS3.199 The excellent OER performance is strongly related to the accessible exposed active metallic-edge and unique NiPS3@NiOOH core–shell heterostructure, wherein the existence of P and S can adjust the surface electronic state of Ni to create a super conductive pathway for the electron transport from NiPS3 core to the NiOOH shell.
Additionally, the bifunctional transition metal sulfides (TMS) and TMPs can be utilized to combine with metal phosphate and BP to improve the HER activity, thereby creating a bifunctional catalyst for electrocatalytic overall water splitting.190 The redistribution of electrons at the interface can optimize the Gibbs free energies and facilitate water adsorption and dissociation, thus leading to remarkable electrocatalytic performance. For instance, MoS2–BP heterostructure nanosheets were synthesized by depositing MoS2 on BP nanosheets.200 The electrons transfer from BP nanosheet to MoS2 in MoS2–BP heterostructure catalyst due to the difference of Fermi level between BP and MoS2. MoS2 with high electron density in the heterostructure catalyst has 22-times-higher intrinsic exchange current density than single MoS2, which can greatly enhance the catalytic ability of the MoS2 active sites. The calculation results indicate that the injected electrons from BP also decrease ΔGH* to optimize the H adsorption/desorption, leading to the excellent electrocatalytic HER activity with an overpotential as low as 85 mV at the current density of 10 mA cm−2.
In addition, amorphous NiCoPi loaded on nickel phosphide foam was prepared by the phosphorization and solvothermal method, which can achieve the current density of 10 mA cm−2 in the overpotential of 73 mV for HER and 234 mV for OER, respectively.201 The P atoms in nickel phosphide substrate can tune the electronic structure of NiCoPi to open up a fast electronic transfer channel, and the nanosheet morphology of nickel phosphide enhances the exposure of active sites. Therefore, a water splitting current density of 10 mA cm−2 can be achieved at a cell voltage of 1.56 V only by a two-electrode configuration with NiCoPi/nickel phosphides as a bifunctional electrode.
Phosphides and phosphates heterostructures of the same metal formed by in situ growth have a more tightly coupled interface structure. For example, cobalt phosphide–phosphate (CoPi–CoP) on Ti plate was prepared by the hydrothermal growth of cobalt carbonate hydroxide hydrate precursor and a subsequent post phosphorization treatment.202 CoPi–CoP nanorods exhibit the typical core–shell structure, which can greatly enlarge the contact interface of the inner CoP core and the outer Co-Pi layers, favoring accelerated mass transfer. Benefitting from the structural merits and the synergistic effect of Co-Pi and CoP, a two-electrode configuration employing CoPi–CoP/Ti as both cathode and anode can deliver a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at 1.6 V, and this device can also be drived by a 1.5 V AAA battery.
Combining with self-supporting substrates. 
Some substrates such as Ni foam, Cu foam, Ti plate and carbon paper etc., are used to load P-containing materials in situ to prepare self-supporting electrodes, which can overcome the limited charge transfer caused by polymer binders.203–205 Furthermore, well-designed 3D heterostructures supported by conductive substrates are favorable for the electrocatalytic process owing to multiple advantages, such as fast mass and charge transfer, buffer electrolyte, efficient gas diffusion and abundant active sites.206
Generally, the electroactive components can directly grow on the conductive substrate by hydro/solvothermal synthetic methods, and are subsequently used as working electrode without any extra polymer binders. For example, Ni2P/Ni/NF heterostructure was fabricated via electrodeposition of Ni microsphere followed by phosphorization processes.207 The obtained catalyst delivers a remarkably high HER (98 mV@10 mA cm−2), OER (200 mV@10 mA cm−2) and overall water splitting performance (1.49 V@10 mA cm−2) in 1 M KOH electrolyte. The hierarchically 3D macroporous structure with intense coupling interface not only mitigates the mass transport resistance and the adhesion of as-formed gas (H2 and O2), but also enhances the accessibility of active sites, thus leading to the significantly improved electrocatalytic performance.
Similarly, a cobalt phosphate/graphite felt (Co3(PO4)2@GF) 3D self-supporting electrode was prepared by the hydrothermal method.206 The carbon fiber not only ensures the complete exposure of active sites but also promotes the intense coupling between Co3(PO4)2 and GF, contributing to effective mass and charge transfer. The obtained catalyst exhibits remarkable electrocatalytic OER performance with a low onset overpotential of 370 mV 0.1 M PBS solution at pH 7. In addition, a thermal-vaporization transformation (TVT) method was developed to prepare BP supported on Ti foil (BP-Ti), wherein Ti foil is used as a substrate for collecting evaporated BP species. BP-Ti shows very efficient OER activity with the onset potential of 1.48 V when used directly as a working electrode.
Engineering the interface has been regarded as an effective approach to improve catalytic activity. As mentioned above, a large number of heterogeneous interfaces between P-containing materials and semiconductors, carbon materials, transition metal compounds and self-supporting electrodes have been successfully established for efficient water splitting. Generally, the outstanding catalytic performance was ascribed to the synergistic effect arising from the heterostructure, according to the comprehensive understanding and prediction by theoretical calculation. However, it is difficult to draw conclusions about the real active sites, and the reaction mechanisms of these multicomponent hybrids are very complicated and confusing, especially for some multiple interfaces; this is still an open question and needs much effort to further explore.
The corresponding performances of reported P-containing materials for photocatalytic and electrocatalytic water splitting are listed in Tables 1 and 2, respectively. As can be seen, modifying phase, introducing foreign element, tailoring morphology and engineering interface play critical roles in the achievement of high catalytic activity, while the pristine P-containing materials often show much lower performance. For photocatalysis, it is necessary to overcome the poor light absorption capacity of MPi and TMPs by combining with other semiconductors to improve the catalytic activity.243 However, the excellent photocatalytic performance of element P and MPT can also be obtained by adopting tailoring morphology and introducing foreign element strategies. Compared with element P and MPT, the more efficient electrocatalytic performance of TMPs and MPi makes them more widely used in electrocatalytic water splitting.244 Notably, many P-containing catalysts have adopted multiple design strategies, which can undoubtedly improve the catalytic activity, but raises challenges for the identification of active sites and the study of catalytic mechanisms.

4. Conclusion and outlook
Photocatalytic and electrocatalytic water splitting to produce hydrogen are extremely green and clean technologies for achieving the future hydrogen economy. P-containing materials hold great promise in the photo/eletrocatalytic reaction, due to their diverse chemical valence states, tunable structure and unique physicochemical properties. According to remarkable breakthroughs in this field, we briefly summarized the recent advances of P-containing catalysts in terms of reaction mechanism, the activity origin, design strategies and the corresponding photo/electrocatalytic performance. In particular, the modulated strategies of P-containing photo/electrocatalysts towards water splitting were discussed in detail with the purpose of clarifying the theory–structure–activity relationship, including modifying phase, introducing foreign element, tailoring morphology and engineering interface. Despite the tremendous progress and many achievements that have been made, there is still a long way to go before the industrialization of water splitting to produce hydrogen by P-containing photo-/electro-catalysts. In order to achieve this ambition, we need to overcome a lot of challenges in the future; some points will be listed in the following.
(I) Mechanism investigation
For P-containing photo/electrocatalysts, some mechanistic issues have not yet been resolved. Firstly, elemental P would suffer from corrosion by photo-induced oxidation, and the underlying mechanism has been controversial until now. Secondly, as outlined in this review, the light absorption ability of TMPs is much lower than that of boron phosphides or GaP, so what effect does P have on the band structure of these phosphides? Thirdly, most metal-based P-containing materials such as TMPs, MPi and MPPi undergo reconstruction during the electrocatalytic process. Nevertheless, a similar transformation seems to be rarely explored in elemental P and MPT. Finally, the study of the catalyst mechanism is not only of scientific significance, but can also provide reasonable guidance for the optimization of photo/electrocatalytic activity. However, for most P-containing materials, especially for those foreign atoms-doped and composited catalysts (e.g., heterostructure and composite photoelectrode system), there is still a lack of in-depth mechanism research at the atomic level. Therefore, these may require the integration of DFT calculations and in situ/operando high-resolution characterization methodologies to elucidate these mechanisms. Through the guidance of these profound mechanisms, more novel, efficient and stable next generation P-containing catalysts will be developed for various energy and environmental catalysis requirements.
(II) Benchmark evaluation
The lack of reliable data to evaluate catalysts’ performance in photo/electrocatalytic water splitting makes the comparison between different systems meaningless and becomes a serious obstacle to the development of catalysts. For photocatalytic water splitting, different indicators such as photocatalyst mass, light source, reaction media and temperature can result in significantly different catalytic performance. For example, the high temperature induced by the photothermal effect can overcome the kinetic limitation of light irradiation to enhance the photocatalytic efficiency significantly; however, most reports did not specify the actual reaction temperature. Similarly, the mass loadings of catalysts on the electrode, reaction solutions and scanning rate have great impact on the electrocatalytic performance. The fast scan speed in the linear scan voltammetry test will generate a large background capacitance current, especially for 3D self-supporting electrodes, leading to misjudgment of its activity. In addition, the oxidation peak of TMPs usually overlaps with the OER onset currents during the OER activity estimation by the linear cyclic voltammetry, which may cause its activity to be overestimated. Therefore, it is of great significance and urgency to conduct benchmark research on photo/electrocatalysts by an impartial third party, which would contribute to comparing the catalytic performance between different publications to select the optimal performance catalyst for practical application.
(III) Practical application
In order to commercialize these P-containing photo/electrocatalysts, further improvement of catalytic performance and stability should be taken into first consideration, which directly determine the cost of hydrogen generation. As summarized in Tables 1 and 2, most P-containing materials only have a single function toward HER or OER, and their overall water splitting activity is not efficient, especially for photocatalysis. Therefore, it is an urgent task to prepare bifunctional P-containing catalysts with remarkably enhanced HER and OER activity for both electrocatalytic and photocatalytic reactions. In addition, although Earth-abundant P-containing materials have decreased the cost of catalysts to a certain extent, more facile and efficient synthesis strategies should also be explored to avoid some strict requirements, such as high temperature, high pressure and the process producing toxic PH3 gas. Another issue that needs to be considered in practical applications is the reaction device. The expensive cost of powder-based photocatalytic water splitting devices limits the development of particulate P-containing photocatalysts, thus future research should try to apply P-containing photocatalysts in panel reactors. For photochemical water splitting, attention needs to be paid to some practical issues, such as temperature change of the cell during operation and the systematic effect caused by H2/O2 bubbling or electrolyte circulation. The electrochemical device can be integrated with renewable energy sources, such as photovoltaic modules or wind turbines, and the total cost can be significantly reduced by rationally designing the corresponding configurations.
Finally, recent research has demonstrated the possibility of P-containing materials in highly efficient photocatalytic and electrocatalytic water splitting reactions. It is anticipated that the ongoing research efforts in this field will overcome these issues to achieve the commercial applicability of P-containing catalysts for green hyrdrogen production through water splitting.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21875118, 22111530112, 22179065), the Natural Science Foundation of Tianjin (19JCZDJC37700), Tianjin Research Innovation Project for Postgraduate Student (2020YJSB147), and the Ph.D. Candidate Research Innovation Fund of the NKU School of Materials Science and Engineering.
Notes and references
J. Song, C. Wei, Z. F. Huang, C. Liu, L. Zeng, X. Wang and Z. J. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 2196–2214 RSC .
T. Li, T. Hu, L. Dai and C. M. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 23674–23698 RSC .
S. Chandrasekaran, L. Yao, L. Deng, C. Bowen, Y. Zhang, S. Chen, Z. Lin, F. Peng and P. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 4178–4280 RSC .
S. Li, J. Sun and J. Guan, Chin. J. Catal., 2021, 42, 511–556 CrossRef CAS .
E. Hu, Y. Yao, Y. Cui and G. Qian, Mater. Today Nano, 2021, 15, 100124 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yin, L. Long, X. Tang, M. Qiu, W. Liang, R. Cao, Q. Zhang, D. Wang and H. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 2001431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ren, D. Philo, Y. Li, L. Shi, K. Chang and J. Ye, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2020, 424, 213516 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, X. Zhang, Z. Chen, K. Kempa, X. Wang and L. Shui, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2021, 68, 1–7 CrossRef .
Z. Hu, Z. Shen and J. C. Yu, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 588–613 RSC .
A. Kondori, M. Esmaeilirad, A. Baskin, B. Song, J. Wei, W. Chen, C. U. Segre, R. Shahbazian-Yassar, D. Prendergast and M. Asadi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900516 CrossRef .
H. Zhao and Z. Y. Yuan, ChemCatChem, 2020, 12, 3797–3810 CrossRef CAS .
F. M. Oliveira, J. Pastika, V. Mazanek, M. Melle-Franco, Z. Sofer and R. Gusmao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 23638–23646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. W. Lv, C. C. Weng, Y. P. Zhu and Z. Y. Yuan, Small, 2021, 17, 2005304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, W. K. H. Ng, J. C. Yu, H. Zhu, C. Li, L. Zhang, Z. Liu and Q. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 111–112, 409–414 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, J. S. Ponraj, D. Fan and H. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 3513–3534 RSC .
Y. Yang, C. Zhou, W. Wang, W. Xiong, G. Zeng, D. Huang, C. Zhang, B. Song, W. Xue, X. Li, Z. Wang, D. He, H. Luo and Z. Ouyang, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 405, 126547 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yu, C. Wang, X. Yan, G. Yang and U. Schwingenschlogl, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2021, 12, 2464–2470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. W. Kanan and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2008, 321, 1072–1075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, P. Xu, M. Chen, G. Zeng, D. Wang, F. Chen, W. Tang, C. Chen, C. Zhang and X. Tan, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 366, 339–357 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-P. Zhu, Z.-Y. Yuan and H. N. Alshareef, ACS Mater. Lett., 2020, 2, 582–594 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, Y. Sun, Z. Y. Yuan, Y. P. Zhu and T. Y. Ma, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 3222–3227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, R. Zhang, Y. Liu, Z. Wang, P. Wang, Z. Zheng, X. Qin, X. Zhang, Y. Dai and B. Huang, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 7195–7198 RSC .
Y. P. Zhu, J. Yin, E. Abou-Hamad, X. Liu, W. Chen, T. Yao, O. F. Mohammed and H. N. Alshareef, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Samal, G. Sanyal, B. Chakraborty and C. S. Rout, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 2560–2591 RSC .
M. G. Sendeku, F. Wang, Z. Cheng, P. Yu, N. Gao, X. Zhan, Z. Wang and J. He, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 13392–13399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Puziy, O. I. Poddubnaya, B. Gawdzik and J. M. D. Tascón, Carbon, 2020, 157, 796–846 CrossRef CAS .
R. Huang, S. Zhang, J. Ding, Y. Meng, Q. Zhong, D. Kong and C. Gu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 553, 647–654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang and K. Domen, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 919–985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Daulbayev, F. Sultanov, B. Bakbolat and O. Daulbayev, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 33325–33342 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Gao, L. Chen, J. T. Ren, C. C. Weng, W. W. Tian and Z. Y. Yuan, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 589, 25–33 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Weng, J. T. Ren and Z. Y. Yuan, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 3357–3375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dong and S. Komarneni, Small Methods, 2020, 5, 2000719 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhao and Z. Y. Yuan, ChemSusChem, 2021, 14, 130–149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, R. Li, D. Wang, H. Xu, F. Meng, D. Dong, J. Jiang, J. Zhang, M. An and P. Yang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46, 5131–5149 CrossRef CAS .
P. Rekha, S. Yadav and L. Singh, Ceram. Int., 2021, 47, 16385–16401 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-Y. Wang, Y.-X. Chen, T. Barakat, Y.-J. Zeng, J. Liu, S. Siffert and B.-L. Su, J. Energy Chem., 2022, 66, 529–559 CrossRef .
W. Wang, M. Xu, X. Xu, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 136–152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, J. Ren, X. Zhang and D. Yang, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 13297–13310 RSC .
S. Zhang, H. J. Qian, Z. Liu, H. Ju, Z. Y. Lu, H. Zhang, L. Chi and S. Cui, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 1659–1663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wu, L. Jing, J. Deng, Y. Liu, S. Li, S. Lv, Y. Sun, Q. Zhang and H. Dai, Chemosphere, 2021, 274, 129793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Han, H. M. Stewart, S. A. Shevlin, C. R. Catlow and Z. X. Guo, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4607–4614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. F. Hong, R. T. Guo, Y. Yuan, X. Y. Ji, Z. D. Lin, Z. S. Li and W. G. Pan, ChemSusChem, 2021, 14, 539–557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Z. Dong and L. Jiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 10, 1902104 CrossRef .
Y. Shi, M. Li, Y. Yu and B. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 4564–4582 RSC .
J. Theerthagiri, A. P. Murthy, S. J. Lee, K. Karuppasamy, S. R. Arumugam, Y. Yu, M. M. Hanafiah, H.-S. Kim, V. Mittal and M. Y. Choi, Ceram. Int., 2021, 47, 4404–4425 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Pu, T. Liu, I. S. Amiinu, R. Cheng, P. Wang, C. Zhang, P. Ji, W. Hu, J. Liu and S. Mu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2004009 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ray, S. Sultana, L. Paramanik and K. M. Parida, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 19196–19245 RSC .
R. Gusmao, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 9326–9337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. L. Chittari, Y. Park, D. Lee, M. Han, A. H. MacDonald, E. Hwang and J. Jung, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 94, 184428 CrossRef .
J. Sanchez, M. B. Stevens, A. R. Young, A. Gallo, M. Zhao, Y. Liu, M. V. Ramos-Garcés, M. Ben-Naim, J. L. Colón, R. Sinclair, L. A. King, M. Bajdich and T. F. Jaramillo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2003545 CrossRef CAS .
T. Di, B. Zhu, J. Zhang, B. Cheng and J. Yu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 389, 775–782 CrossRef CAS .
P. Bhanja, Y. Kim, K. Kani, B. Paul, T. Debnath, J. Lin, A. Bhaumik and Y. Yamauchi, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 396, 125245 CrossRef CAS .
L. Feng, Z. Qin, Y. Huang, K. Peng, F. Wang, Y. Yan and Y. Chen, Sci. Total Environ., 2020, 698, 134239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Ren, G. G. Yuan, C. C. Weng, L. Chen and Z. Y. Yuan, ChemCatChem, 2018, 10, 5297–5305 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zheng, H. Wu, J. Guo, J. Dong, S. Jia and Z. Zhu, J. Alloys Compd., 2014, 615, 79–83 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Peng, J. He, Q. Liu, Z. Sun, W. Yan, Z. Pan, Y. Wu, S. Liang, W. Cheng and S. Wei, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 8184–8188 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, X. Liao, X. Pan, M. Yan, L. He, P. Wu, Y. Zhao, W. Luo and L. Mai, Nano Energy, 2021, 83, 105748 CrossRef CAS .
M. Z. Rahman, K. Davey and S.-Z. Qiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 1305–1322 RSC .
H. Ma, Y. Li, S. Li and N. Liu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 357, 131–138 CrossRef CAS .
Y. P. Zhu, T. Z. Ren and Z. Y. Yuan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 16850–16856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, J.-T. Ren and Z.-Y. Yuan, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 387, 124164 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Li, M. Y. Qi, Z. R. Tang and Y. J. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 7539–7586 RSC .
D. Zhang, J. Z. Soo, H. H. Tan, C. Jagadish, K. Catchpole and S. K. Karuturi, Adv. Energy Sustainability Res., 2021, 2, 2000071 CrossRef .
Y. Zhu, C. Lv, Z. Yin, J. Ren, X. Yang, C. L. Dong, H. Liu, R. Cai, Y. C. Huang, W. Theis, S. Shen and D. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 868–873 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, Z. Ren, Y. Liu and R. Fu, Mater. Lett., 2019, 236, 542–546 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Hu, L. Yuan, Z. Liu, Z. Shen and J. C. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 9580–9585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Ansari, M. S. Ansari and M. H. Cho, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 3921–3928 RSC .
M. Nagao, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 6902–6905 CrossRef CAS .
L.-J. Qiu, C.-L. Lin, C.-Y. Chen, X. Wang and T.-H. Yang, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2020, 119, 108123 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, Y. Zou, H. Liu, S. Chen, X. Wang, H. Zhang, X. She and D. Yang, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 813–822 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Popczun, J. R. McKone, C. G. Read, A. J. Biacchi, A. M. Wiltrout, N. S. Lewis and R. E. Schaak, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 9267–9270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, Y. Huang, Y. Yu, J. Zhang, S. Zhuo and B. Zhang, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 2769–2775 RSC .
T. Wu, M. L. Stone, M. J. Shearer, M. J. Stolt, I. A. Guzei, R. J. Hamers, R. Lu, K. Deng, S. Jin and J. R. Schmidt, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 1143–1152 CrossRef CAS .
C. Guo, Y. Shi, S. Lu, Y. Yu and B. Zhang, Chin. J. Catal., 2021, 42, 1287–1296 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xi, B. Dong, Y. Dong, N. Mao, L. Ding, L. Shi, R. Gao, W. Liu, G. Su and L. Cao, Chem.
Mater., 2016, 28, 1355–1362 CrossRef CAS .
J. Han, Q. Wei, J. Zhang, B. Zhang, C. Li, W. Wang, L. Cao and B. Dong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 18232–18243 RSC .
L. Yang, Z. Guo, J. Huang, Y. Xi, R. Gao, G. Su, W. Wang, L. Cao and B. Dong, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1602852 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Indra, P. W. Menezes, I. Zaharieva, H. Dau and M. Driess, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 2637–2643 RSC .
X. Bu, Y. Gao, S. Zhang and Y. Tian, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 355, 910–919 CrossRef CAS .
F. Du, Y. Zhang, H. He, T. Li, G. Wen, Y. Zhou and Z. Zou, J. Power Sources, 2019, 431, 182–188 CrossRef CAS .
R. Beltrán-Suito, P. W. Menezes and M. Driess, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 15749–15756 RSC .
J. F. Callejas, C. G. Read, E. J. Popczun, J. M. McEnaney and R. E. Schaak, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 3769–3774 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, P. Wen, D. S. Itanze, M. W. Kim, S. Adhikari, C. Lu, L. Jiang, Y. Qiu and S. M. Geyer, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900813 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wang, L. Li, M. Liu, T. Miao, X. Ye, S. Meng, S. Chen and X. Fu, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 48, 241–249 CrossRef .
J. Ryu, N. Jung, J. H. Jang, H.-J. Kim and S. J. Yoo, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 4066–4074 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, D. Guo, S. Zhao, Y. Lin, R. Yang, D. Xu, N. Shi, X. Zhang, L. Lu, Y. Q. Lan, J. Bao and M. Han, Small, 2019, 15, 1804546 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wu, D. Wang, S. Wan, H. Liu, C. Wang and X. Wang, Small, 2020, 16, 1900550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lv, J. Ren, Y. Wang, Y. Liu and Z.-Y. Yuan, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 8993–9001 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, A. Li, C. Wang, W. Zhou, S. Liu and L. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803590 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Chen, J.-T. Ren, Y.-S. Wang, W.-W. Tian, L.-J. Gao and Z.-Y. Yuan, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 13559–13568 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Shifa, F. Wang, Z. Cheng, P. He, Y. Liu, C. Jiang, Z. Wang and J. He, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1800548 CrossRef .
X. Zhu, T. Zhang, Z. Sun, H. Chen, J. Guan, X. Chen, H. Ji, P. Du and S. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605776 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Hu, L. Lin, R. Zhang, C. Yang and J. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 15429–15436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Shao, H. Sun, L. Miao, X. Chen, M. Han, J. Sun, S. Liu, L. Li, F. Cheng and J. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 2494–2499 RSC .
R. Prasannachandran, T. V. Vineesh, A. Anil, B. M. Krishna and M. M. Shaijumon, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 11511–11519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. R. Anjum, M. S. Okyay, M. Kim, M. H. Lee, N. Park and J. S. Lee, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 286–295 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. R. Anjum, M. D. Bhatt, M. H. Lee and J. S. Lee, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 8861–8870 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kibsgaard and T. F. Jaramillo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 14433–14437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Guo, X. Guo, H. Lin, J. Cao and S. Chen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 33623–33633 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, G. Wang, Y. Liu, H. Liu, J. Qu and J. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 14686–14693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, Y. Qi, L. Sun, G. Chen, L. Wang, M. Zhang, D. Zeng, Y. Chen, X. Wang, K. Xu and F. Ma, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 512, 145715 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, Z. Xu, Y. Lin, L. Wan and B. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 8949–8957 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, J.-T. Ren and Z.-Y. Yuan, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 1856–1866 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, L. Bai, J. Lu, X. Zhang, D. Liu, H. Yang, J. Wang, P. K. Chu, S. Ramakrishna and X. F. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 19060–19066 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lei, T. Zhang, P. Liu, J. A. Rodriguez, G. Liu and M. Liu, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 8009–8020 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yan, B. Zhang, J. Zhu, Y. Li, P. Tsiakaras and P. Kang Shen, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 265, 118555 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lv, Z. Hu, J. Ren, Y. Liu, Z. Wang and Z.-Y. Yuan, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2019, 6, 74–81 RSC .
T. Liu, D. Liu, F. Qu, D. Wang, L. Zhang, R. Ge, S. Hao, Y. Ma, G. Du, A. M. Asiri, L. Chen and X. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700020 CrossRef .
T. Liu, X. Ma, D. Liu, S. Hao, G. Du, Y. Ma, A. M. Asiri, X. Sun and L. Chen, ACS Catal., 2016, 7, 98–102 CrossRef .
C. Li, H. Wu, S. Hong, Y. Wang, N. Song, Z. Han and H. Dong, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 22556–22566 CrossRef CAS .
J.-T. Ren, Y.-S. Wang, L. Chen, L.-J. Gao, W.-W. Tian and Z.-Y. Yuan, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 389, 124408 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wu, B. Xiao, Q. Gao, Y. R. Zheng, X. S. Zheng, J. F. Zhu, M. R. Gao and S. H. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 15445–15449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lv, X. Li, C. Yang, X. Ding, Y. Zhang, Y. Z. Zheng, S. Li, X. Sun and X. Tao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910830 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, J. Li, D. Xiong, B. Zhang, Y. Liu, K. H. Wu, I. Amorim, W. Li and L. Liu, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 3470–3476 RSC .
W. Zhao, C. Peng, Z. Kuang, Q. Zhang, Y. Xue, Z. Li, X. Zhou and H. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 398, 125537 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sial, H. Lin and X. Wang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 12975–12980 RSC .
W. Xing, S. Yin, W. Tu, G. Liu, S. Wu, H. Wang, M. Kraft, G. Wu and R. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 1171–1175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chakraborty, S. Shyamal and A. Bhaumik, ChemCatChem, 2020, 12, 1504–1511 CrossRef CAS .
Y. P. Xie and G. S. Wang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2014, 430, 1–5 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, S. Shi, G. Huang, Y. Xiong and S. Liu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 455, 1137–1149 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xin, X. Kan, L. Y. Gan and Z. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 10303–10312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tian, Z. Lin, J. Yu, S. Zhao, Q. Liu, J. Liu, R. Chen, Y. Qi, H. Zhang, R. Li, J. Li and J. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 14639–14646 CrossRef CAS .
X. Du, Q. Shao and X. Zhang, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 1322–1331 RSC .
J. Peng, W. Dong, Z. Wang, Y. Meng, W. Liu, P. Song and Z. Liu, Mater. Today Adv., 2020, 8, 100081 CrossRef .
H. Wang, X. Liu, P. Niu, S. Wang, J. Shi and L. Li, Matter, 2020, 2, 1377–1413 CrossRef .
S. Geng, F. Tian, M. Li, X. Guo, Y. Yu, W. Yang and Y. Hou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 8561–8567 RSC .
Y. Zhang, X. Rui, Y. Tang, Y. Liu, J. Wei, S. Chen, W. R. Leow, W. Li, Y. Liu, J. Deng, B. Ma, Q. Yan and X. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502409 CrossRef .
D. Zhang, L.-L. Hu, Y.-G. Sun, J.-Y. Piao, X.-S. Tao, Y.-S. Xu, A.-M. Cao and L.-J. Wan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 8992–8999 RSC .
P. Mei, J. Kim, N. A. Kumar, M. Pramanik, N. Kobayashi, Y. Sugahara and Y. Yamauchi, Joule, 2018, 2, 2289–2306 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, Z.-P. Hu, J.-T. Ren, Z. Wang and Z.-Y. Yuan, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2021, 315, 110921 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun, X. Xu, Z. Yan, X. Chen, F. Cheng, P. S. Weiss and J. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 8539–8547 CrossRef CAS .
G. Anandhababu, Y. Huang, D. D. Babu, M. Wu and Y. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706120 CrossRef .
Q. Zhang, X. Wang, J. Zhang, L. Li, H. Gu and W. L. Dai, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 590, 632–640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lian, H. Sun, X. Wang, P. Qi, Q. Mu, Y. Chen, J. Ye, X. Zhao, Z. Deng and Y. Peng, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 464–474 RSC .
B. Liu, H. Q. Peng, C. N. Ho, H. Xue, S. Wu, T. W. Ng, C. S. Lee and W. Zhang, Small, 2017, 13, 1701875 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Liu, X. Ma, H. Hu, Y. Pan, W. Zhao, J. Liu, X. Zhao, J. Wang, Z. Yang, Q. Zhao, H. Ning and M. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 15528–15536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Li, J. Zang, W. Li, J. Li, Q. Zou, S. Zhou, J. Su and Y. Wang, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 3718–3725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Du, M. Shang, J. Mao and W. Song, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 15940–15949 RSC .
L. Chen, Y. Song, Y. Liu, L. Xu, J. Qin, Y. Lei and Y. Tang, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 50, 395–401 CrossRef .
H. Du, S. Gu, R. Liu and C. M. Li, J. Power Sources, 2015, 278, 540–545 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kim, X. Qin, B. Yan and Y. Piao, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 408, 127331 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, H. Li and X. Wang, Small, 2016, 12, 2969–2974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Castellanos-Gomez, L. Vicarelli, E. Prada, J. O. Island, K. L. Narasimha-Acharya, S. I. Blanter, D. J. Groenendijk, M. Buscema, G. A. Steele, J. V. Alvarez, H. W. Zandbergen, J. J. Palacios and H. S. J. van der Zant, 2D Mater., 2014, 1, 025001 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rabiei Baboukani, I. Khakpour, V. Drozd and C. Wang, Small Struct., 2021, 2, 2000148 CrossRef .
M. V. Ramos-Garcés, J. Sanchez, D. E. Del Toro-Pedrosa, I. B. Alvarez, Y. Wu, E. Valle, D. Villagrán, T. F. Jaramillo and J. L. Colón, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 3561–3567 CrossRef .
F. M. Oliveira, J. Paštika, L. S. Pires, Z. Sofer and R. Gusmão, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 8, 2100294 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yu, J. Peng, Y. Liu, W. Liu, H. Liu and Y. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 13928–13934 RSC .
C.-X. Hu, Q. Xiao, Y.-Y. Ren, M. Zhao, G.-H. Dun, H.-R. Wu, X.-Y. Li, Q.-Q. Yang, B. Sun, Y. Peng, F. Yan, Q. Wang and H.-L. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1805311 CrossRef .
N. Wang, N. Mao, Z. Wang, X. Yang, X. Zhou, H. Liu, S. Qiao, X. Lei, J. Wang, H. Xu, X. Ling, Q. Zhang, Q. Feng and J. Kong, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2005815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pandey, A. N. Nikam, G. Fernandes, S. Kulkarni, B. S. Padya, R. Prassl, S. Das, A. Joseph, P. K. Deshmukh, P. O. Patil and S. Mutalik, Nanomaterials, 2020, 11, 13 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Li, Y. Fang, J. Wang, B. Wei, K. Qi, H. Y. Hoh, Q. Hao, T. Sun, Z. Wang, Z. Yin, Y. Zhang, J. Lu, Q. Bao and C. Su, Small, 2019, 15, 1902427 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Liang, Y. Liu, Y. Cheng, F. Ma and Z. Dai, ChemCatChem, 2020, 12, 2840–2848 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ren, J. Zhou, X. Qi, Y. Liu, Z. Huang, Z. Li, Y. Ge, S. C. Dhanabalan, J. S. Ponraj, S. Wang, J. Zhong and H. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700396 CrossRef .
R. Gusmão, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1805975 CrossRef .
B. Tian, B. Tian, B. Smith, M. C. Scott, Q. Lei, R. Hua, Y. Tian and Y. Liu, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 4345–4350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, B. Deng, X. Wang, S. Chen, M. Vaisman, S.-i. Karato, G. Pan, M. Larry Lee, J. Cha, H. Wang and F. Xia, 2D Mater., 2015, 2, 031002 CrossRef .
J. B. Smith, D. Hagaman and H. F. Ji, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 215602 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Wang, T. A. Shifa, P. He, Z. Cheng, J. Chu, Y. Liu, Z. Wang, F. Wang, Y. Wen, L. Liang and J. He, Nano Energy, 2017, 40, 673–680 CrossRef CAS .
R. Shi, F. Liu, Z. Wang, Y. Weng and Y. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 12531–12534 RSC .
H. Zhang, A. W. Maijenburg, X. Li, S. L. Schweizer and R. B. Wehrspohn, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2003261 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kosmala, L. Bardini, M. Caporali, M. Serrano-Ruiz, F. Sedona, S. Agnoli, M. Peruzzini and G. Granozzi, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2021, 8, 684–692 RSC .
N. Xiao, S. Li, X. Li, L. Ge, Y. Gao and N. Li, Chin. J. Catal., 2020, 41, 642–671 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zeng, T. Zhou, W. J. Ong, M. Wu, X. Duan, W. Xu, Y. Chen, Y. A. Zhu and D. L. Peng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 5651–5660 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, W. Yao, C. Huang, P. Shi and Q. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12513–12519 RSC .
L. Cheng, S. Xie, Y. Zou, D. Ma, D. Sun, Z. Li, Z. Wang and J.-W. Shi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 4133–4142 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, Y. Qi, C. Wang and L. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 241, 178–186 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wen, K. Zhao, H. Li, J. Li, J. Li, Q. Ma, S. M. Geyer, L. Jiang and Y. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 2995–3004 RSC .
H. He, J. Cao, M. Guo, H. Lin, J. Zhang, Y. Chen and S. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 249, 246–256 CrossRef CAS .
X. Luo, R. Li, K. P. Homewood, X. Chen and Y. Gao, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 505, 144099 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Wang, X. Tian, Y. J. Sun, J. Y. Zhu, F. T. Li, H. Y. Mu and J. Zhao, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 12315–12321 RSC .
K. K. Mandari, J. Y. Do, S. V. P. Vattikuti, A. K. R. Police and M. Kang, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 750, 292–303 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Maitani, T. Yamada, H. Mashiko, K. Yoshimatsu, T. Oshima, A. Ohtomo and Y. Wada, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 10349–10354 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-G. Vo, Y. Tai and C.-Y. Chiang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 243, 657–666 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, Y. Zhao, J. Yang, D. Liu, X. Wei, X. Wang and Y. Zheng, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 1566–1575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Qin, Y. Chen, Z. Huang, J. Su and L. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19025–19035 RSC .
F. Liu, C. Huang, C. X. Liu, R. Shi and Y. Chen, Chemistry, 2020, 26, 4449–4460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Elbanna, M. Zhu, M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 3618–3626 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jing, R. Zhu, D. L. Phillips and J. C. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1703484 CrossRef .
J. Ran, W. Guo, H. Wang, B. Zhu, J. Yu and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800128 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhao, H. Fu, L. Jian, Y. Zeng, L. Liu, Q. Liang and X. Xiao, New J. Chem., 2021, 45, 19876–19882 RSC .
F. Liu, R. Shi, Z. Wang, Y. Weng, C. M. Che and Y. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 11791–11795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sun, Q. Yue, J. Li, J. Xu, H. Zheng and P. Du, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10243–10247 RSC .
Y. Song, X. Xin, S. Guo, Y. Zhang, L. Yang, B. Wang and X. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 384, 123337 CrossRef CAS .
R. Shen, J. Xie, X. Lu, X. Chen and X. Li, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 4026–4036 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yan, G. Wang, Y. Zhang, Q. Guo and Z. Jin, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 2578–2592 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, Y. Ding, J. Wu, Z. Zhao, X. Li, Y. Z. Zheng, M. Huang and X. Tao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 22297–22306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yu, Y. Si, Z. Lv, K. Wang, Q. Zhang, X. Liu, G. Wang, G. Xie and L. Jiang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 31832–31840 CrossRef CAS .
N. Raeisi-Kheirabadi and A. Nezamzadeh-Ejhieh, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 33381–33395 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhou, X. Huang, H. Zhang, H. Yang, K. Ma, P. Zhang and G. Zhang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2020, 10, 7661–7670 RSC .
M. Khalid and H. Varela, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3141–3150 RSC .
Y. Tian, H. Wang, H. Li, Z. Guo, B. Tian, Y. Cui, Z. Li, G. Li, H. Zhang and Y. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 4647–4676 RSC .
Z. Yuan, J. Li, M. Yang, Z. Fang, J. Jian, D. Yu, X. Chen and L. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 4972–4979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-T. Ren, G.-G. Yuan, L. Chen, C.-C. Weng and Z.-Y. Yuan, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 9793–9803 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ji, H. Jin, H. Xia, X. Luo, J. Zhu, Z. Pu and S. Mu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 727–733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhao, K. Sun, W. C. Cheong, L. Zheng, C. Zhang, S. Liu, X. Cao, K. Wu, Y. Pan, Z. Zhuang, B. Hu, D. Wang, Q. Peng, C. Chen and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 8982–8990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-T. Ren, L. Chen, D.-D. Yang and Z.-Y. Yuan, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 263, 118352 CrossRef CAS .
P. Bhanja, Y. Kim, B. Paul, Y. V. Kaneti, A. A. Alothman, A. Bhaumik and Y. Yamauchi, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 405, 126803 CrossRef CAS .
K. He, T. Tadesse Tsega, X. Liu, J. Zai, X. H. Li, X. Liu, W. Li, N. Ali and X. Qian, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 11903–11909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Konkena, J. Masa, A. J. R. Botz, I. Sinev, W. Xia, J. Koßmann, R. Drautz, M. Muhler and W. Schuhmann, ACS Catal., 2016, 7, 229–237 CrossRef .
R. He, J. Hua, A. Zhang, C. Wang, J. Peng, W. Chen and J. Zeng, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4311–4316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, X. Mei, F. L.-Y. Lam and X. Hu, Catal. Today, 2020, 358, 215–220 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ai, Z. Niu and J. Jiang, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 242, 355–363 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, H. Ge, L. Zhao, J. Liu, F. Wang, S. Fan and G. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2021, 367, 137567 CrossRef CAS .
J. Rong, F. Qiu, T. Zhang, Y. Fang, J. Xu and Y. Zhu, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 313, 179–188 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Che, X. Xie, Q. Ma, J. Wang, Y. Zhu, R. Shi and P. Yang, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 51, 167–174 CrossRef .
L. Liu, D. Zhang, D. Duan, Y. Li, Q. Yuan, L. Chen and S. Liu, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2020, 862, 114031 CrossRef CAS .
B. You, N. Jiang, M. Sheng, M. W. Bhushan and Y. Sun, ACS Catal., 2015, 6, 714–721 CrossRef .
P. Yu, F. Wang, J. Meng, T. A. Shifa, M. G. Sendeku, J. Fang, S. Li, Z. Cheng, X. Lou and J. He, CrystEngComm, 2021, 23, 591–598 RSC .
H. Li, N. Wells, B. Chong, B. Xu, J. Wei, B. Yang and G. Yang, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2021, 229, 116069 CrossRef CAS .
X. C. Mingshan Zhu, M. Fujitsuka, J. Zhang and T. Majima, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 2064–2068 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Lei, Y. Mi, R. Feng, P. Liu, S. Hu, J. Yu, X. Liu, J. A. Rodriguez, J.-o. Wang, L. Zheng, K. Tang, S. Zhu, G. Liu and M. Liu, Nano Energy, 2018, 50, 552–561 CrossRef CAS .
A. Meng, W. Tian, H. Yang, X. Wang, X. Wang and Z. Li, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 413, 125400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-J. Yuan, P. Wang, Z. Li, Y. Wu, W. Bai, Y. Su, J. Guan, S. Wu, J. Zhong, Z.-T. Yu and Z. Zou, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 242, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Hua, X. Zhou, B. Zhang, M. Wang, J. Liu, Y. Wang and L. Jiang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 2919–2930 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hu, K. Dai, J. Zhang and S. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 269, 118844 CrossRef CAS .
K. Qi, W. Lv, I. Khan and S.-y. Liu, Chin. J. Catal., 2020, 41, 114–121 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, X. Hao, J. Li, Y. Wang and Z. Jin, Chin. J. Catal., 2020, 41, 82–94 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. Wang, R. Jiang and R. Xu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2012, 51, 9945–9951 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhu, M. Han, C. Zhu, L. Hu, H. Huang, Y. Liu and Z. Kang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 530, 256–263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Han, L. Hu, Y. Zhou, S. Zhao, L. Bai, Y. Sun, H. Huang, Y. Liu and Z. Kang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 8, 840–846 RSC .
Z. Yi, J. Ye, N. Kikugawa, T. Kako, S. Ouyang, H. Stuart-Williams, H. Yang, J. Cao, W. Luo, Z. Li, Y. Liu and R. L. Withers, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 559–564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, H. Ren, Q. Liang, K. N. Dinh, R. Dangol and Q. Yan, Small, 2020, 16, 1906766 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. R. Jothi, R. Bose, H. Rajan, C. Jung and S. C. Yi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802615 CrossRef .
K. Liu, F. Wang, P. He, T. A. Shifa, Z. Wang, Z. Cheng, X. Zhan and J. He, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703290 CrossRef .
H. J. Song, H. Yoon, B. Ju, G.-H. Lee and D.-W. Kim, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802319 CrossRef .
S.-S. Lu, L.-M. Zhang, Y.-W. Dong, J.-Q. Zhang, X.-T. Yan, D.-F. Sun, X. Shang, J.-Q. Chi, Y.-M. Chai and B. Dong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 16859–16866 RSC .
Y. Li, F. Li, Y. Zhao, S.-N. Li, J.-H. Zeng, H.-C. Yao and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 20658–20666 RSC .
X. Sun, J. Wang, Y. Yin, H. Wang, S. Li, H. Liu, J. Mao and X. Du, Chemistry, 2020, 26, 2793–2797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xiu, Z. Wang, M. Yu, X. Wu and J. Qiu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 8017–8028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, Y. Gao, X. Tang, K. Zhan, B. Zhao, B. Y. Xia and Y. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 19254–19261 RSC .
X. Bu, C. Chiang, R. Wei, Z. Li, Y. Meng, C. Peng, Y. Lin, Y. Li, Y. Lin, K. S. Chan and J. C. Ho, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 38633–38640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. X. Feng, S. Y. Tong, Y. X. Tong and G. R. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 5118–5126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, H.-X. Liu, W. Gou, M. Zhang, Z. Xia, S. Zhang, C.-R. Chang, Y. Ma and Y. Qu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2298–2304 RSC .
T. Zhang, K. Yang, C. Wang, S. Li, Q. Zhang, X. Chang, J. Li, S. Li, S. Jia, J. Wang and L. Fu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801690 CrossRef .
X. Liu, Q. Hu, B. Zhu, G. Li, L. Fan, X. Chai, Q. Zhang, J. Liu and C. He, Small, 2018, 14, 1802755 CrossRef PubMed .
B. You, Y. Zhang, Y. Jiao, K. Davey and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 11796–11800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ding, Y. Xia, Q. Li, S. Dong, X. Jiao and D. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 7936–7945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lu, L. Li, D. Chen, J. Li, N. I. Klyui and W. Han, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 330, 135210 CrossRef CAS .
A. Saad, H. Shen, Z. Cheng, Q. Ju, H. Guo, M. Munir, A. Turak, J. Wang and M. Yang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 1684–1693 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, J. Song, D. Yu, Y. Hao, Y. Wang and S. Peng, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 525, 146623 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xue, L. Chen, Z. Liu, H. M. Cheng and W. Ren, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 5297–5305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Bai, J.-C. Fan, P.-H. Shi, Y.-L. Min and Q.-J. Xu, J. Power Sources, 2020, 456, 228003 CrossRef CAS .
L.-J. Gao, C.-C. Weng, Y.-S. Wang, X.-W. Lv, J.-T. Ren and Z.-Y. Yuan, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 606, 544–555 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Wang, C. C. Weng, J. T. Ren and Z. Yuan, Front. Chem. Sci. Eng., 2021, 15, 1408–1426 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
Lei Chen	Lei Chen received her BEng degree from Northeast Forestry University in 2017 and obtained her MEng degree from Nankai University in 2020. She is currently a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Zhong-Yong Yuan at Nankai University. Her current research focuses on the fabrication of nanostructured materials for energy-related applications.
Jin-Tao Ren	Jin-Tao Ren received his Ph.D. degree from Nankai University in 2020 under the supervision of Prof. Zhong-Yong Yuan. He is currently a postdoctoral fellow at Nankai University. His research interests focus on advanced nanomaterials for applications in electrocatalysis, metal–air batteries, fuel cells, etc.
Zhong-Yong Yuan	Zhong-Yong Yuan received his PhD degree from Nankai University in 1999. After his postdoctoral research at the Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, he joined the Laboratory of Inorganic Materials Chemistry at the University of Namur, Belgium in 2001. In 2005, he was appointed Professor in Nankai University. In 2006, he was awarded the “Program for New Century Excellent Talents in University” by the Ministry of Education. In 2016, he was elected as a fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry. He is currently serving as an Associate Editor of RSC Advances, and as editorial board member of several journals. His research interests are mainly focused on the self-assembly of hierarchically nanoporous and nanostructured materials for energy and environmental applications.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of a sustainable hydrogen fuel cycle based on photocatalytic and electrocatalytic water splitting.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Main steps in photocatalytic water splitting: step 1 is light absorption, step 2 is charge separation and migration, step 3 is surface redox reaction. (b) Mechanism of photocatalytic water splitting.	 
2H+ + 2e− → H2 (cathode)
H2O → 2H+ + 1/2O2 + 2e− (anode)
2H2O + 2e− → H2 + 2OH− (cathode)
2OH− → H2O + 1/2O2 + 2e− (anode)

 	Fig. 3  Mechanism of HER (a) and OER (b) in alkaline (blue way) and acidic (pink way) solutions.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of traditional photoelectrochemical water splitting cells.	 

 	Fig. 5  Ball-stick models of various RP including (a) amorphous phosphorus, Hittorf and fibrous phosphorus, and (b) the side view and the top view of BP. (c) Crystal structures of partial nickel phosphides with different Ni:P ratios. (d) Atomic structure of a MPX3 monolayer. (Reproduced from ref. 49 with permission from American Physical Society, Copyright 2016.) (e) Crystal structures of Ag3PO4. (f) Schematic structure of MPPi with different organophosphonic ligands.	 

 	Fig. 6  The most frequently used metal-based P-containing materials in photocatalytic and electrocatalytic water splitting.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) XRD patterns of CoPPA and NiPPA. Reproduced from ref. 22 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2018. (b) High-resolution TEM (HRTEM) image and the corresponding FFT pattern (inset b) of ultrathin porous CoP nanosheets. Reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2017. Optical images of CoPS single crystals with the as-grown (111) (c) and cut and polished (100) facets (d), respectively. Reproduced from ref. 73 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2018. (e) HRTEM image of amorphous FePO4 nanosheets, the inset is the corresponding selected area diffraction pattern (SAED). Reproduced from ref. 77 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2017. TEM image (f), HRTEM image (g) and SAED images (h) of amorphous cobalt phosphonates. HRTEM images of amorphous cobalt phosphonates after OER (i) and HER (j) measurements in 1 M alkaline KOH solution, and the insets are the corresponding SAED images. (k) In situ X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) Co K edge spectra exhibit the difference in the oxidation state of Co from fresh amorphous cobalt phosphonates during OER and HER in 1 M alkaline KOH at constant potential (CA) and varying potential (CV). Reproduced from ref. 78 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2020. (l) HRTEM image of the Ni2P–NiP2 polymorphs, (m) top view of the schematic models of the mixed-phase Ni2P–NiP2, and pure NiP2 and Ni2P with H* adsorbed on their surfaces. Reproduced from ref. 89 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2018.	 


Crystalline RP	I	300 W Xe lamp; λ > 400 nm	Methanol	0.6	—	—	
14

NiPPA	I/III	Ultraviolet lamp	TEOA	44.39	—	—	
22

CoPPA	I/III	Ultraviolet lamp	TEOA	32.58	—	—	
22

PCN@Hittorf'sP	I/IV	300 W Xe lamp; λ > 300 nm	—	33.2	—	—	
64

PCN@Hittorf'sP	I/IV	300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm	—	17.5	—	—	
64

Smashed-Fibrous P	I/III	300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm	Methanol	684	—	—	
66

Sn2P2S6	I/III	AM 1.5G	—	202.06	—	2.35 (400)	
25

CuInP2S6	I/III	300 W Xe lamp; λ > 300 nm	Na2S/Na2SO3	804	—	—	
208

Ni2P–g-C3N4	I/IV	300 W Xe lamp; λ > 300 nm	TEOA	215.1	—	—	
84

MnPS3	I/IV	AM 1.5G	—	155	—	—	
91

MnPSe3	I/IV	AM 1.5G	—	325	—	—	
91

MnPS3	I/IV	AM 1.5G	Na2S/Na2SO3	2175	—	—	
91

MnPSe3	I/IV	AM 1.5G	Na2S/Na2SO3	1060	—	—	
91

N–CdPS3	II/III	300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm	Methanol	6280	—	—	
209

S/Ni12P5/Cd0.5Zn0.5S	II/IV	300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm	Na2S/Na2SO3	105100	—	—	
99

7.5 wt%NiCoP/CdS	II/IV	300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm	Lactic acid	238200	—	—	
113

FeNiP-D	II/III	300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm	Na2S/Na2SO3	—	42342	—	
117

Pt/BP NSs	II/III	300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm	—	447	—	—	
155

Mo–Ni2P/g-C3N4	II/IV	300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm	TEOA	67.6	—	3.31 (420)	
110

BP NSs/Au/La2Ti2O7	II/IV	320 W Xe lamp; λ > 780 nm	Methanol	300	—	—	
210

10% Co2P/ZIS NCGs	III/IV	300 W Xe lamp	Na2S/Na2SO3	7930	—	21.7 (320)	
133

ultrathin NiPS3	III	300 W Xe lamp	—	26.4	
	—	
158

ultrathin NiPS3	III	AM 1.5G	—	6.46	
	—	
158

HM-TiPPh	III	Xe arc lamp; λ > 400 nm	TEOA	945	—	—	
21

TiPNW	III	Xe arc lamp; λ > 400 nm	TEOA	1260	—	0.77 (420)	
23

BP NSs	III	300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm	Na2S/Na2SO3	512	—	—	
92

2 wt%Co-BP/RP-QD	III/IV	LED (12 W, λ = 420)	—	3360	—	1.53 (420)	
159

FeP/g-C3N4	III/IV	300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm	TEOA	177.9	—	1.57 (420)	
163

BPQDs/g-C3N4	III/IV	300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm	Methanol	271	—	—	
211

4.0 wt% WP/CdS	IV	300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm	(NH4)2SO3	31040	—	10.5 (420)	
164

Fe2P–Co2P/g-C3N4	IV	300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm	TEOA	347	—	—	
165

CN/FeNiP/g-C3N4	II/IV	300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm	TEOA	13810	—	48.5 (420)	
166

Ni2P/g-C3N4	IV	300 W Xe arc lamp; λ > 420 nm	TEOA	2849.5	—	18.8 (420)	
167

CdS/Ni2P/g-C3N4	IV	300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm	—	15.56	7.75	—	
168

10 wt%Ni2P/TiO2(B)	IV	300 W Xe lamp	Methanol	3966	—	31 (313)	
169

Co-Pi/CdS	IV	300 W Xe arc lamp; λ > 420 nm	Lactic acid	13.3	—	24.3 (420)	
51

5 wt% NiCoPi/CdS	II/IV	300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm	Na2S/Na2SO3	13.44	—	23.5 (420)	
174

NiCoP@NiCo-Pi/g-C3N4	II/IV	300 W Xe lamp	TEOA	312	—	9.4 (420)	
175

BP NS/Pt (3 wt%)/TMC	III/IV	200 mW cm−2	Methanol	950	—	—	
177

BP NS/Pt (3 wt%)/TMC	III/IV	200 mW cm−2; λ > 420 nm	Methanol	8700	—	7.1 (420)	
177

BP NS/Pt (3 wt%)/TMC	III/IV	200 mW cm−2; λ > 780 nm	Methanol	200	—	1.2 (780)	
177

Red P/g-C3N4	IV	300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm	TEOA	2565	—	13.8 (420)	
178

FP/CNS	IV	300 W Xe arc lamp; λ > 400 nm	Lactic acid	571	—	1.2 (420)	
179

MoP–Cu3P	IV	300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm	Na2S/Na2SO3	855	—	—	
183

BP/RP (21–22%)	III/IV	300 W Xe lamp	—	2.0	1.1	—	
180

MCN/BP/MS	III/IV	300 W Xe lamp	TEOA	2146.8	—	—	
212

BP NSs/MoS2	III/IV	300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm	Na2S/Na2SO3	1286	—	1.2 (420)	
213

CoP/P-g-C3N4	IV	300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm	Methanol	724	—	8.5 (420)	
214

Ni2P/SNO/CdS-D	IV	300 W Xe lamp; λ > 420 nm	Na2S/Na2SO3	11992	—	35.8 (420)	
215

g-C3N4/CoP	IV	350 W Xe lamp	TEOA	936	—	—	
216

CoP/CeVO4	IV	5 W white light	TEOA	8892	—	—	
217

Co-Pi/ZnO	IV	300 W Xe lamp	AgNO3	—	1558	—	
218

CoPi/carbon dots	IV	5 W white light	—	23.68	10.32	—	
219

Co-Pi/α-Fe2O3	IV	LED; 400 nm < λ < 700 nm	—	6.3	3.2	—	
220

Ag3PO4	IV	300 W Xe lamp; λ > 400 nm	AgNO3	—	1272	—	
221



CoPS (111)	I	0.5 M H2SO4	—	—	86	—	—	
73

CoP UPNSs	I/III	0.5 M H2SO4	56	—	44	—	—	
72

Cobalt phosphate	I	0.1 M KPi	—	410	—	—	—	
18

FePO4/NF	I/IV	1.0 M KOH	123	218	104.5	42.72	1.54	
77

CoPn/NF	I/IV	1.0 M KOH	144	240	—	—	1.62	
78

Co–P–S	I	1.0 M KOH	58	283	68	61	1.6	
80

Amorphous CoP	I	1.0 M KOH	143	284	63	45	1.65	
81

Crystalline CoP	I	1.0 M KOH	261	305	80	82	1.79	
81

(FexNi1−x)2P	I	1.0 M PBS	90	—	82.7	—	—	
70

Mo3P	I	0.5 M H2SO4	69	—	38	—	—	
10

MoP	I	0.5 M H2SO4	130	—	44	—	—	
10

CoP/Ti	I/IV	0.5 M H2SO4	75	—	50	—	—	
82

Co2P/Ti	I/IV	0.5 M H2SO4	95	—	45	—	—	
82

CoP/C	I/IV	0.1 M KOH	—	360	—	66	—	
85

Ni2P–NiP2	I	1.0 M KOH	59.7	—	58.8	—	—	
89

Ni–CoPi	I/II	1.0 M KOH	—	320	—	44.5	—	
222

CoP@PC/PG	I/IV	1.0 M KOH	46	—	65	104	—	
86

CoP–Co2P@PC/PG	I/IV	1.0 M KOH	39	—	59	66	1.57	
86

Co2P@PC/PG	I/IV	1.0 M KOH	138	—	124	100	—	
86

Co–P@PC-750	I/IV	0.5 M H2SO4	72	—	49	—	—	
87

Co–P@PC-750	I/IV	1.0 M PBS	85	—	58	—	—	
87

Co–P@PC-750	I/IV	1.0 M KOH	76	283	52	53	1.6	
87

CoP/Co2P@NC	I/IV	0.5 M H2SO4	126	—	—	79	—	
88

CoP/Co2P@NC	I/IV	1.0 M KOH	198	—	—	82	—	
88

CoP/Co2P@NC	I/IV	1.0 M PBS	459	—	—	—	—	
88

FPQDs	II	1.0 M NaOH	
	430	
	48	
	
95

S:CoP@NF	II/IV	1.0 M KOH	109	270	79	82	82	
96

S:CoP@NF	II/IV	1.0 M KOH	105	280	89	71	—	
97

MoP/S	II	1.0 M KOH	86	—	—	—	—	
98

N–NiCoP	II	0.5 M H2SO4	97.5	—	40.1	—	—	
101

N–NiCoP	II	1.0 M KOH	105.1	—	59.8	—	—	
101

Fe–Co–OOH/Ni	II/IV	1.0 M KOH	—	250	—	40.28	—	
102

N–Co–Ni–P	II	1.0 M KOH	50	—	55.4	—	—	
102

NiCoPIm	II	1.0 M KOH	—	351	—	66.5	—	
52

CoPiC-DP/CNTs	II/IV	1.0 M KOH	—	309	—	65	—	
103

CoPiC-DP	II	1.0 M KOH	—	410	—	124	—	
103

BPed-Pt/GR	II/IV	1.0 M KOH	21	—	46.9	—	—	
104

Cu–CoP NAs/CP	II/III/IV	1.0 M PBS	81	411	83.5	101.4	1.72	
106

ZnxCo1−xP/TM	II/IV	0.5 M H2SO4	39	—	39	—	—	
108

Mn–Co–P/Ti	II/IV	0.5 M H2SO4	49	—	60	—	—	
109

Mn–Co–P/Ti	II/IV	1.0 M KOH	76	—	52	—	—	
109

Mn–Co–P/Ti	II/IV	1.0 M PBS	86	—	82	—	—	
109

FeNiP/NPCS	II/IV	0.5 M H2SO4	126	—	64	—	—	
111

FeNiP/NPCS	II/IV	1.0 M KOH	—	318	—	95	—	
111

Ni0.1Co0.9P	II	1.0 M PBS	125	—	103	133	1.89	
112

NiCoP-8.0	II	1.0 M KOH	34.3	245	49.9	59.2	1.51	
113

FeCoNiP	II	1.0 M KOH	—	200	—	70	—	
114

FeCoNiP	II	1.0 M KOH	—	265	—	—	—	

NiFeSP/NF	II/IV	1.0 M KOH	91	—	82.6	76.3	1.58	
121

Ni–Co–S–P	II	1.0 M KOH	78	280	89	69	1.61	
122

Cu–Co–P–S	II	1.0 M KOH	120	—	—	—	—	
123

NiCoP	II	1.0 M KOH	—	220	—	79.5	—	
223

O–Ni(1−x)FexP2	II	1.0 M KOH	—	155	—	55	—	
224

Co1−xNix(S1−yPy)2	II	1.0 M KOH	—	285	—	105	—	
225

NH2–BP	II	1.0 M KOH	29	—	63	—	—	
94

W–NiCoP	II	1.0 M KOH	29.6	—	38	100	—	
226

Fe–CoP	II	1.0 M KOH	67	—	66.22	—	1.46	
227

Fe–InPO4	II/III/IV	1.0 M KOH	—	230	—	46.47	—	
76

Al–CoP/NF	II/III/IV	1.0 M KOH	66	330	94	69	1.63	
107

CoNiPi	II	1.0 M KOH	—	238	—	46	—	
228

3D MXene-CoP	III/IV	1.0 M KOH	—	298	—	51	—	
229

CoPi-HSNPC-800	III/IV	1.0 M KOH	—	155	—	85	—	
90

NiCoFe phosphate NSs-C/NF	III/IV	1.0 M KOH	231	240	86	—	1.52	
116

Multishelled Ni2P	III	1.0 M KOH	98	270	86.4	40.4	1.57	
131

Co0.6Fe0.4P-1.125	II/III	1.0 M KOH	133	298	61	48	1.57	
134

Co0.6Fe0.4P-0	II/III	1.0 M KOH	164	308	69	53	—	
134

Co0.6Fe0.4P-0.75	II/III	1.0 M KOH	156	301	70	56	—	
134

Co0.6Fe0.4P-1.5	II/III	1.0 M KOH	162	304	68	55	—	
134

NiCoP–CoP/NF	II/III/IV	1.0 M KOH	73	—	91.3	—	—	
136

NiCoP/NF	II/III/IV	1.0 M KOH	80	—	94.7	—	—	
136

MoP/Ni2P/NF	III/IV	1.0 M KOH	75	—	100.2	77.6	1.55	
138

WP2 NRs	III	0.5 M H2SO4	148	—	52	—	—	
140

Mo doped CoP	II/III	1.0 M KOH	78.4	234.2	66.5	62.3	1.49	
141

NiPK(Co)-NTs-C	III/IV	1.0 M KOH	—	420	—	74.2	—	
142

NiPNa(Co)-NTs-C	III/IV	1.0 M KOH	—	400	—	68.8	—	
142

NiPNa(Co3Fe1)-NTs-C	III/IV	1.0 M KOH	—	340	—	55.0	—	
142

NiPNa(Co2Fe2)-NTs-C	III/IV	1.0 M KOH	—	300	—	56.3	—	
142

Co/exfoliated ZrP	II/III	0.1 M KOH	—	450	—	53.4	—	
145

Ni/exfoliated ZrP	II/III	0.1 M KOH	—	—	—	55.1	—	
145

FePS3-60	III	0.5 M H2SO4	388	—	136	—	—	
147

FePS3-90	III	0.5 M H2SO4	312	—	123	—	—	
147

FePS3-120	III	0.5 M H2SO4	241	—	94	—	—	
147

FePS3-140	III	0.5 M H2SO4	357	—	148	—	—	
147

FePS3-160	III	0.5 M H2SO4	523	—	224	—	—	
147

LSTL NiPS	III	1.0 M KOH	158	300	95	88	1.56	
151

MoS2/EEBP	III/IV	0.5 M H2SO4	126	—	68	—	—	
152

MoS2/EEBP	III/IV	1.0 M KOH	237	—	99	—	—	
152

MoS2/EEBP	III/IV	1.0 M PBS	258	—	154	—	—	
152

exf-MnPS3	III	0.5 M H2SO4	835	—	—	—	—	
154

exf-MnPS3	III	1.0 M KOH	1090	—	—	—	—	
154

exf-MnPSe3	III	0.5 M H2SO4	640	—	—	—	—	
154

exf-MnPSe3	III	1.0 M KOH	992	—	—	—	—	
154

CoP-NF	III/IV	1.0 M KOH	41.1	—	65.3	65.6	1.54	
230

CoPO	III	1.0 M KOH	—	280	—	59	—	
132

Co5(PO4)2(OH)4	III	1.0 M KOH	—	254	—	57	—	
231

P-NM-CF HNRs	III	1.0 M KOH	100	195	54.3	48.4	1.53	
137

NiCoP@NF-100	III/IV	1.0 M KOH	98	—	68	—	—	
139

Co2P/BP	IV	0.5 M H2SO4	305	—	65	—	—	
161

FeP2–NiP2@PC	IV	1.0 M KOH	—	248	—	59	—	
194

FeP2–NiP2@PC	IV	0.5 M H2SO4	117	—	59	—	—	
194

MoP@NCHSs-T	IV	1.0 M KOH	92	—	62	—	—	
195

MoP@NPCS	IV	0.5 M H2SO4	113	—	58	—	—	
196

MoP@NPCS	IV	1.0 M KOH	172	—	83	—	—	
196

PANI/CoP	IV	0.5 M H2SO4	—	—	34.5	—	—	
232

EG-Pt/CoP	II/IV	0.5 M H2SO4	21	—	42.5	—	—	
233

Ni5P4@NiCo2O4	IV	1.0 M KOH	27	—	27	—	—	
234

Co2P-Ni2P/TiO2	IV	1.0 M KOH	92	—	49	—	—	
235

sc-Ni2Pδ−/NiHO	IV	1.0 M KOH	60	—	75	—	—	
236

Co(OH)2/Ag/FeP/Ti	IV	1.0 M KOH	118	236	79	56	1.56	
237

N-CoO@CoP	II/IV	1.0 M KOH	201	332	37	81.5	1.79	
238

CoP/CoCr2O4	IV	1.0 M KOH	212	290	90	52	—	
239

EBP@NG	III/IV	1.0 M KOH	125	265	—	—	—	
192

MoS2@FePS3	III/IV	1.0 M KOH	175	—	127	—	—	
240

NiPS3-G-1:1	IV	1.0 M KOH	—	294	—	42.4	—	
241

RP-BP/EG	III/IV	1.0 M KOH	—	328	—	58	—	
242

NiMn1.5PO4/NF	IV	1.0 M KOH	72	198	—	—	1.48	
203

Co3(PO4)2@GF	IV	0.1 M PBS	—	370	—	133	—	
206


 	Fig. 8  (a) Band schematic diagram of pseudohalogen modified armchair phosphorene nanoribbons (ACPNR) heterobilayers. ΔEc and ΔEv refer to the CB and VB offsets, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 93 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017. (b) N 1s XPS fine spectra of N-coordinated cobalt phosphates–carbon hybrids. (c) Molecular structure of different organophosphonic acids. Reproduced from ref. 103 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2021. (d) Electrocatalytic performance of ultrathin NiCoP nanosheets for overall water splitting, the inset is the corresponding overall water splitting cell, (e) photocatalytic H2 evolution rates of NiCoP/CdS containing different amounts of cocatalyst under visible-light. Reproduced from ref. 113 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2020. (f) Fe Mössbauer spectra of amorphous Fe–InPO4. Reproduced from ref. 76 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 9  Illustration (a) of the formation process of the holey phosphorus composite nanosheets and the corresponding TEM image (b). Reproduced from ref. 127 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2016. Proposed formation schematics (c) of hierarchically porous titanium phosphonates using dual templates and the corresponding TEM image (d). Reproduced from ref. 21 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2018. (e) Synthetic illustration of the titanium phosphonate nanowires, and the corresponding SEM (f) and TEM images (g), inset of (g) is the high-resolution TEM image. Reproduced from ref. 23 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2020. (h) Sonication exfoliation, (i) electrochemical anodic/cathodic exfoliation, and (j) bipolar electrochemical exfoliation method.	 

 	Fig. 10  XPS fine spectra of Ni2P/g-C3N4 (in situ) and Ni2P/g-C3N4 (self-assembly): (a) Ni 2p, (b) N 1s and Ni XANES spectra (c) and EXAFS (d) of Ni2P/g-C3N4 (in situ), Ni2P/g-C3N4 (self-assembly), Ni2P powder and Ni foil. Reproduced from ref. 167 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2020. (e) Proposed in situ formation illustration of NiICoP and NiCoIIIPi cocatalysts. Reproduced from ref. 175 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020. (f) Illustration of the energy band structure of APO and CFO before and after contact. Reproduced from ref. 189 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2020. (g) High-resolution XPS of FeP2–NiP2@PC after 3000 cycles OER stability test. Reproduced from ref. 194 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020. (h) The HRTEM image of FeNi-LDH/CoP NSs, (i) energy band diagrams of FeNi-LDH and CoP and the proposed mechanism of OER process on the FeNi-LDH/CoP/CC p–n junction. Reproduced from ref. 198 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2019.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
