Lanthanide ions as spectral converters for solar cells  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B913877C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B913877C
(Perspective)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 11081-11095Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsLanthanide ions as spectral converters for solar cells

        
          
            Bryan M. 
            van der Ende
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Linda 
            Aarts
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Andries 
            Meijerink
          
          
        
      *a
aCondensed Matter and Interfaces, Debye Institute for NanoMaterials Science, Utrecht University, Princetonplein 1, 3584 CC Utrecht, The Netherlands. E-mail: b.m.vanderende@uu.nl; a.meijerink@uu.nl;  Fax: +31 (0)302532403;   Tel: +31 (0)302532321, +31 (0)302532202
bDepartment of Physics and Astronomy, Trent University, 1600 West Bank Drive, Peterborough, Ontario, Canada K9J 7B8
Received 
      10th July 2009
    , Accepted 19th August 2009First published on 10th September 2009AbstractThe use of lanthanide ions to convert photons to different, more useful, wavelengths is well-known from a wide range of applications (e.g. fluorescent tubes, lasers, white light LEDs). Recently, a new potential application has emerged: the use of lanthanide ions for spectral conversion in solar cells. The main energy loss in the conversion of solar energy to electricity is related to the so-called spectral mismatch: low energy photons are not absorbed by a solar cell while high energy photons are not used efficiently. To reduce the spectral mismatch losses both upconversion and downconversion are viable options. In the case of upconversion two low energy infrared photons that cannot be absorbed by the solar cell, are added up to give one high energy photon that can be absorbed. In the case of downconversion one high energy photon is split into two lower energy photons that can both be absorbed by the solar cell. The rich and unique energy level structure arising from the 4fn inner shell configuration of the trivalent lanthanide ions gives a variety of options for efficient up- and downconversion. In this perspective an overview will be given of recent work on photon management for solar cells. Three topics can be distinguished: (1) modelling of the potential impact of spectral conversion on the efficiency of solar cells; (2) research on up- and downconversion materials based on lanthanides; and (3) proof-of-principle experiments. Finally, an outlook will be given, including issues that need to be resolved before wide scale application of up- and downconversion materials can be anticipated.Bryan M. van der EndeBryan van der Ende attended Simon Fraser University (Burnaby, B.C., Canada) for his BSc degree, and the University of Guelph (Guelph, Ontario, Canada) for his MSc and PhD degrees. He is currently finishing a postdoctoral fellowship at Utrecht University, (Utrecht, The Netherlands) under the supervision of Prof. Andries Meijerink. He will soon begin a new postdoctoral position with Prof. Ralph Shiell at Trent University (Peterborough, Ontario, Canada).Linda AartsLinda Aarts received her BSc degree in chemistry and subsequently completed the Masters programme in Chemistry and Physics at Utrecht University (Utrecht, The Netherlands). Currently she is a PhD student at Utrecht Univeristy and works under the supervision of Prof. Andries Meijerink on downconversion for solar cells.Andries MeijerinkAndries Meijerink received his PhD in 1990 at the Utrecht University under supervision of Prof. George Blasse. Afterwards he joined the group of Prof. John Wright at the University of Wisconsin in Madison as a post-doctoral fellow. In 1996 he was appointed at the chair of Solid State Chemistry in the Debye Institute of the Utrecht University. He leads an active research group that focuses on the optical spectroscopy of lanthanide ions and of semiconductor quantum dots.
I. Introduction
Global energy consumption is on the rise and projected to double in 2050 in comparison with worldwide energy consumption rates in 2001.1 Sustainable energy production based on the direct conversion of energy radiated from the sun into useable forms like heat or electricity is expected to gain importance since it may be the only renewable source capable of generating sufficient energy to meet the long-term worldwide energy demand.1,2 Solar energy utilization requires effective means of capture and conversion of the solar radiation, and storage of the acquired energy.1 The capacity of photovoltaic cells to convert sunlight into electricity makes them prime candidates for effective large-scale capture and conversion of solar energy, but at present the contribution of photovoltaic energy is limited due to its relatively high cost per kilowatt-hour.3 A reduction in price may be achieved by either lowering the production cost or increasing the conversion efficiency.
State-of-the-art commercial single-junction crystalline and polycrystalline Si solar cells dominate the photovoltaic market.4,5 Crystalline Si wafer cells typically have energy efficiencies around 15%.3 In a solar cell a single electron–hole pair is generated upon absorbing a photon above the energy band-gap Eg of the semiconductor material.6Fig. 1 shows a schematic diagram showing the loss mechanisms that limit the efficiency of single-junction solar cells. The most significant loss mechanisms are due to relaxation of ‘hot’ charge carriers that are created upon absorption of a high energy photon (process 1 in Fig. 1) and transmission of photons with energies below the band-gap of the semiconductor material (process 2 in Fig. 1). The excess energy of high energy photons is rapidly dissipated as heat by thermalization of the electron and hole to the edges of the conduction band and valence band. These losses are known as thermalization losses. Especially in solar cells based on semiconductors with a small band-gap, these losses are substantial. The transmission losses contribute more to the losses for wider band-gap solar cells, simply because a large part of the solar spectrum cannot be absorbed.7 Process 3 shows recombination of electron–hole pairs, and this loss process can be minimized through maintaining high minority carrier lifetimes in the semiconductor material. In a detailed balance model developed by Shockley and Queisser,8 the theoretical efficiency limit for a single-junction solar cell with Eg equal to 1.1 eV can be determined to be 30%. The largest part of the 70% energy loss is related to processes 1 and 2, and is known as the spectral mismatch.
 Fig. 1  Loss processes in a single-junction solar cell: (1) lattice thermalization losses; (2) transparency loss; (3) recombination loss; (4) junction loss; (5) contact voltage loss. Adapted from Richards,7 copyright 2006, with permission from Elsevier. 
There are several methods to reduce the spectral mismatch losses. Two basic approaches can be discerned: adapt the solar cell to better use the solar spectrum or adapt the solar spectrum to better match the solar cell. The first approach has been successfully applied in so-called multi-junction tandem solar cells for which efficiencies over 40% under concentrated solar light have been realized.9 This is achieved through combining multiple semiconductor materials, each of which absorb different fractions of the solar spectrum.6,10 Tandem solar cells are costly, however, and are only now becoming cost-competitive for terrestrial concentrated solar applications.10
Other more recently proposed options include multiple exciton generation (MEG), and space-separated quantum cutting (SSQC). In both cases absorption of a high energy photon by the solar cell results in the generation of multiple electron–hole pairs in the cell. MEG has been reported in the recent literature for various types of semiconductor nanocrystals (‘quantum dots’, e.g. CdSe, PbSe, and PbS).11,12 The MEG process uses the excess energy of charge carriers produced by photons of energy greater than Eg to produce additional charge carriers. It has been estimated that MEG could enhance the efficiency of single junction solar cells to as much as 44%.13,14 This high gain in efficiency is however only reached if the MEG efficiency is close to creating an extra electron hole (e–h) pair for every increase by Eg in the photon energy. Even though e–h pair generation efficiencies of 700% for photon energies of 8 Eg have been reported, more recent experiments have revealed that the actual efficiencies are much lower and are in fact very similar to the well-known efficiencies for e–h generation in scintillator materials and cathode ray phosphors where every extra e–h pair requires an additional 2.5 Eg in the photon energy. This will lead to marginal increases in the solar cell efficiency and probably already contribute with similar efficiency in (bulk) semiconductor solar cells for the highest energy (UV) photons.15 Another concept is space separated quantum cutting (SSQC) which has been recently reported to occur in Si nanocrystals.16 SSQC divides an absorbed higher energy photon into two or more e–h pairs through the interaction of two spatially separated neighbouring Si nanocrystals. SSQC could thereby decrease the loss of energy due to thermalization in solar cells, and multiply the number of charge carriers produced per absorbed photon in a solar cell but further research is required to establish the efficiency of charge carrier generation.
An alternative approach to raise the theoretical efficiency beyond the Shockley–Queisser limit is to adapt the solar spectrum through upconversion or downconversion. A comparative review of each of these methods is given by Strümpel et al.17 In the case of upconversion, two low-energy photons are ‘added up’ to give one higher-energy photon,18 thus converting sub-band-gap photons, which are otherwise lost, into supra-band-gap photons, which can be absorbed.19–21 Downconversion, or ‘quantum cutting’, is the opposite process to upconversion, whereby one high energy photon is ‘cut’ into two lower-energy photons. This process can reduce the energy loss due to thermalization of hot charge carriers after the absorption of a high-energy photon. If both lower-energy photons can be absorbed by the solar cell, current doubling is obtained for the high energy region of the solar spectrum, which consists of photons with energies exceeding 2Eg.22,23 The final result is similar to MEG and SSQC; however, rather than multiple excitons being created by one photon absorbed into the solar cell, they are created by photon-doubling prior to absorption into the solar cell.
Downshifting is similar to downconversion, but in the case of downshifting, the external quantum efficiency can not exceed unity. Downshifting may also raise the efficiency of the solar cell by converting a (one) higher energy photon into a (one) lower energy photon that is more efficiently absorbed by the cell,24 but it could never be used to exceed the Shockley–Queisser efficiency limit. Various means can be used to achieve this downshifting, employing quantum dots,25,26 lanthanide ions,27,28 and other types of inorganic29,30 and organic31 materials. This perspective, however, will focus on upconversion and downconversion since these mechanism are capable of raising the efficiency beyond the Shockley–Queisser limit.

Fig. 2 shows the standard terrestrial solar spectrum (air mass coefficient† AM1.5G) and the fraction of the energy that is currently used by single junction c-Si solar cells. The part that is not used is available for upconversion and downconversion. In this spectrum, 32% (149 W m−2) more of the sunlight intensity is accessible through downconversion, and 35% (164 W m−2) of the sunlight intensity is accessible through upconversion. These numbers vary strongly with the air mass coefficient: there is a significant spectral shift from the ultraviolet to the infrared, with increasing air mass coefficient.7 Downconversion is therefore expected to provide the greatest benefits for solar radiation of smaller air mass coefficients, especially for extraterrestrial solar radiation (air mass coefficient AM0), and for diffuse terrestrial solar radiation. Upconversion is expected to provide the greatest benefits for direct solar radiation, and for solar radiation of a higher air mass coefficient.7
 Fig. 2  AM1.5G solar spectrum showing the fraction of terrestrial sunlight that is currently absorbed and effectively utilised by a thick crystalline silicon device, and the additional regions of the spectrum that can contribute to up- or downconversion. Reprinted from Richards,7 Copyright 2006, with permission from Elsevier. 
Richards considers further advantages and disadvantages of upconversion and downconversion.7 For upconversion, a large body of research has already been published, although primarily aimed at the conversion of the output of NIR diode lasers (800–1000 nm) into visible light, rather than converting longer wavelength NIR photons into NIR radiation that can be absorbed by crystalline Si solar cells. An important advantage of upconversion is that an upconversion layer can be applied to the rear of a solar cell without affecting the performance of the device for incident photons with energy E > Eg. Any upconversion of transmitted IR radiation into the useful wavelength range that generates photocurrent serves as real gain. The use of a suitable reflector placed behind the upconversion layer ensures that no usable luminescence can escape out the rear of the solar cell. The major disadvantage of upconversion, however, is that it is a nonlinear process which only becomes efficient at high incident power. For an upconversion process of two steps, the intensity of upconversion light I is related to the incident light intensity lo by I∝lo2. For three step upconversion, the relation is I∝lo.3 Downconversion, however, is a linear process and the efficiency is independent of the incident power. This suggests that it will be easier to gain efficiency with downconversion when using unconcentrated sunlight as the illumination source. In the case of downconversion the conversion layer is applied on top of the solar cell and a fraction of the luminescence escapes out of the front top surface of the downconversion layer. For luminescent species contained in a host material with a refractive index of n = 1.5, this fraction is 12.7%. Richards thus argues that with front-mounted downconversion, an external quantum efficiency (EQE) of 115% for the downconverter is required just to break even. Losses may be reduced by applying an anti-reflective coating which specifically reflects the downconverted emission back into the solar cell.
This perspective focuses on the use of lanthanide ions to achieve upconversion and downconversion for the enhancement of solar cell efficiency. Much of the recent research in upconversion and downconversion was sparked by seminal modelling work published by Trupke et al.21,22 in 2002. We will discuss this and more recent work on modelling of the effect of spectral conversion on the efficiency of solar cells. Further we consider the status of research in upconversion and downconversion systems that could yield significant enhancements in various kinds of solar cells, and we will summarize what efforts have been made so far—and what further can be tried—to achieve significant solar cell efficiency enhancement from spectral conversion of solar radiation.
II. Modelling of upconversion and downconversion in solar cells
We begin by considering the detailed balance models of Trupke et al. for upconversion21 and downconversion.22 The detailed balance models follow that of Shockley and Queisser, except for the addition of spectrally converting layer. In the case of upconversion, the converting layer is mounted beneath a bifacial solar cell, and it is assumed to be electronically isolated from the solar cell; a perfect reflector is also located at the rear surface of the upconverter. The upconverter consists of a material with a band-gap that ideally equals the band-gap energy of the solar cell Eg, and contains intermediate levels with an energy E1 above the valence band edge of the upconverter. The absorption of sub-band-gap photons in the upconverter leads to the generation of electron–hole pairs via two sequential transitions from the valence band into the intermediate level, and from the intermediate level into the conduction band. These electron–hole pairs recombine via radiative band-to-band transitions, accompanied by emission of photons with energies at the band-gap. The maximum efficiency is calculated to be 47.6% for nonconcentrated light, with Eg = 2 eV, E1 = 0.9393 eV. The limit efficiency at Eg = 1.1 eV is about 37%. The numbers given above are critically dependent on the spectrum incident on the solar cell and use a 6000 K incident blackbody spectrum. Using the same model with an unconcentrated terrestrial AM1.5 incident solar spectrum instead, the maximum efficiencies are enhanced further, to 50.69% at Eg = 2 eV, and 40.2% at Eg = 1.1 eV. The enhancement is due to atmospheric absorption of light intensity in the range hν < 1.5 eV, a large fraction of which is otherwise not used in the system.21,32 The biggest gains from upconversion occur for wider band-gap energies Eg, for example the Grätzel or amorphous-Si cells, where a larger fraction of the solar spectrum cannot be absorbed.
In the downconversion model,22 the spectral conversion layer is located on the front surface of a conventional single junction solar cell. The spectral converter is electronically isolated from the solar cell, such that coupling between the converter and the solar cell is purely radiative. For each high energy photon absorbed by the spectral converter, two or more lower energy photons are created, and these are in turn absorbed by the solar cell to create electron–hole (e–h) pairs. Thus more than one e–h pair is generated in the solar cell per high energy photon.
The authors also considered having the downconversion layer at the rear surface of the solar cell. To avoid absorption of high energy photons and subsequent thermalization of e–h pairs inside the solar cell in this case, a bifacial solar cell is needed. Further, the solar cell material must be transparent for high-energy photons in this geometry. This last condition rules out semiconductor materials used for solar cells, unless some suitable low-pass mirrors are used to direct the high-energy part of the solar spectrum to the downconverter.
In either geometry (converting layer at front or rear), a reflector was considered to be at the rear surface of the system. Similar to the modelling for the upconverter, a semiconductor material with band-gap Eg was assumed with an intermediate level in the center of the band-gap of the downconverter, where the intermediate transition threshold is equal to the band-gap Eg of the solar cell. For having the converter in the rear of the cell, the bands of the solar cell are also restricted to avoid absorption by the solar cell photons of energy greater than 2Eg, which is to be absorbed and downconverted in the luminescence converter. Efficiency for the front-mounted configuration is also enhanced if the intermediate layer does not completely absorb all lower-energy photons of energy Eg < hν < 2Eg, a fraction of which would otherwise escape the solar cell through re-emission from the front surface of the conversion layer. The authors calculate the theoretical efficiency limit for each geometry as a function of the solar cell's band-gap. The maximum efficiency for a front-mounted conversion layer is calculated to 38.6% for Eg = 1.1 eV, and for a rear-mounted conversion layer the limit efficiency is found to be 39.63% for Eg = 1.05 eV. The rear-mounted configuration is overall slightly more efficient, since no emitted photons from the conversion layer can in principle escape from the solar cell as they do from the front surface in the front-mounted configuration. However, both maximum efficiencies are well above the 30.9% Shockley–Queisser limit for a conventional solar cell under the same assumption of only radiative recombination being present. The front-mounted configuration is more practical since it can be applied to any existing solar cell. The fact that the maximum efficiency for downconversion occurs around Eg = 1.1 eV makes downconversion a promising option to boost the efficiency for silicon solar cells (Eg = 1.12 eV).
Badescu and co-authors have published a series of papers examining the same model under more refined and realistic conditions.33–35 The first of these papers34 re-examines the downconversion model, and accounts for the changes in radiation flux that occur when passing through interfaces of different refractive indices (through reflections), which had been previously neglected by Trupke et al.22 The model was also expanded to allow for nonradiative recombination losses. In the limit of purely radiative recombination, their results agree with those of Trupke et al.,22 that the conversion efficiency is enhanced when the downconverting layer is mounted in the front or the rear of the solar cell (the rear configuration being slightly more efficient). However, due to reflections at the interfaces, the conversion efficiency is smaller than what Trupke et al.22 estimated previously. For Eg = 1.1 eV, the maximum efficiency is 27% for a rear-mounted configuration, 26% for a front-mounted configuration, and 21% without a downconversion layer. In a subsequent paper,36 the refractive indices of the solar cell and the converting layer were varied independently, and concentration of the incident solar radiation was also considered. For ideal converting layers with only radiative recombination, the efficiency of the solar cell was enhanced by the converting layer in either configuration for some values of the solar cell refractive index, but not for others. When allowing for non-radiative recombination losses in the converting layer, however, the front mounted configuration did not improve solar cell efficiency, while the rear mounted configuration still improved solar cell efficiency for some values of the refractive indices. The rear-mounted configuration also performed consistently better than the front-mounted configuration, whatever the values of the refractive indices and the concentration ratio. Further investigation determined that the inclusion of a front anti-reflection coating and the employment of light trapping can also help enhance the solar cell efficiency.35
Analogous extensions to the upconversion model33 showed that the rear-mounted configuration does enhance solar cell efficiency, but significant enhancement is only obtained for concentrated incident radiation. The maximum achievable efficiency is significantly affected by the reflectance at the interfaces of the system, as well as the indices of refraction of each of the layers of the system. Non-radiative recombination losses were neglected in this model. Modelling of a front-mounted upconversion configuration revealed that no matter how concentrated the incident radiation, there is no enhancement. Clearly, a front mounted configuration is not a logical choice for upconversion.
Another recent detailed balance model by Shpaisman et al.37 considers the combination of a rear-mounted upconversion layer with a front-mounted layer employing either downconversion, or multiple-exciton generation (MEG). The authors argue that MEG can in principle create numerous electronic excitations from a single photon, whereas downconversion can only create two photons per incident photon; so they focus further on MEG. Using what they describe as optimistic, maximum realistic efficiencies for upconversion (25%), and MEG (70%), they estimate the solar cell efficiency limit to be ∼38% (for Eg∼ 1.1 eV) for unconcentrated light. The authors stress the huge materials science challenges involved in realizing such efficiencies.
The detailed balance models described so far provide powerful tools for calculating the thermodynamic limits of cell performance under ideal circumstances. Further insight into the performance of practical converters can be achieved through alternative approaches, such as a recently published Monte Carlo method to model photon spectral conversion for solar cells.38 The approach employs iterative ray tracing for integrating the photon transport equation at optical frequencies, coupled with non-linear, first-order rate equations describing luminescence of the spectral converter. The approach also distinguishes between two sources of light rays: those from the sun, and those from the absorbing luminescence centres of the spectral converter. Scattering and reflection of rays by the photon converter and its interfaces are also taken into account. An advantage of the approach is that solar cell enhancement can be readily estimated as a function of a variety of parameters, such as luminescent centre concentration, the range of convertible wavelengths, photon capture cross section, incident photon flux, and luminescent emission lifetimes. The paper illustrates this through preliminary use of parameters from literature, for Er3+-doped layers, as upconverting or downconverting materials.38 The number of papers on modelling the effects of up- and downconversion preceded work on developing actual spectral conversion materials for solar cells. The use of semiconductor-like materials with band diagrams having an intermediate level at ½Eg is not very realistic to achieve efficient up- or downconversion. Lanthanide ions provide the most efficient options for spectral conversion and recent experimental work on up- and downconversion for solar cells is based on using these ions. This work will be discussed in the next section.
III. Lanthanide ions as spectral converters for solar cells
The lanthanides are a group of elements in the periodic table where the 4f inner shell is filled with electrons. They are mostly stable in the trivalent form and the Ln3+ ions have the electronic configuration 4fn5s25p6 where n varies from 0 to 14. The partly filled 4f inner shell is responsible for the characteristic optical (and also magnetic) properties of the lanthanides. The number of configurations for n electrons divided over the 14 4f orbitals is large (14!/[n!(14-n)!], the number of n-combinations of the set of 14 4f orbitals) and all configurations can have different energies. For the free ion, the energy levels are labelled by so-called term symbols. In Fig. 3 the energy level diagrams for the trivalent lanthanide ions are shown. This diagram, often called the “Dieke diagram” (in recognition of Gerard H. Dieke who originally published the diagram),39,40 exhibits the rich energy level structure of the free ions. This energy level diagram is also representative of the 4f energy level structure of these ions when doped into various kinds of crystalline or glassy materials. This is due to the optically active 4f orbital being well-shielded from the host environment by the outer filled 5s and 5p orbitals.41 As a result, the surrounding crystal field of the dopant host material induces Stark splittings of the energetic levels that are very small, typically on the order of ∼102 cm−1.42 The splitting notably decreases with increasing ionic radius of the dopant site.43 Phonons in the host material mediate non-radiative relaxation between energy levels (multi-phonon relaxation).44
 Fig. 3  Free ion energy levels of the trivalent lanthanide ions from Ce3+ (4f1) to Yb3+ (4f13). Levels are labelled by term symbols or, for some higher levels, capital letters. Reprinted from Dieke and Crosswhite,39 copyright 1963, with permission from the Optical Society of America. 
Up- and downconversion processes can take place within a single type of dopant ion, or they can involve energy transfer between two or more types of ions co-doped within the same host material.18,41,45 The most efficient energy transfer processes involve resonance between the donor and acceptor transition and are observed when there is spectral overlap between the emission band of the donor ion and the absorption band of the acceptor ion.41,46,47 (Donor and acceptor ions are also referred to in the literature as sensitizer and activator ions, respectively. In this article, we use the donor/acceptor nomenclature.) As can be seen from Fig. 3, the relative positioning of the lanthanide energy levels offers excellent opportunities for the design of materials that take advantage of resonant energy transfer. One normally distinguishes between radiative and non-radiative resonant energy transfer, although the two phenomena can also be unified through quantum electrodynamical theory.47 Non-resonant energy transfer between co-doped ions is also possible, via a (multi)phonon-assisted mechanism, or via cooperative or accretive processes in the absence of a resonant intermediate level.48Fig. 4 displays a sketch of cooperative and accretive forms of upconversion, and Fig. 5 shows an analogous sketch for downconversion. The cooperative mechanism in each case involves the mediation of a virtual energy level of the central ion (C in Fig. 4 and 5), whereas the accretive mechanism involves a virtual energy level for one of the ions with the lower energy excited state (A or B). The predominance of either of these mechanisms over the other is dependent on the relative geometry of the three centres.49,50 From a theoretical point of view, the downconversion in Fig. 5 is the time reversal of the upconversion in Fig. 4, which exhibits energy-pooling between two identical donors and an acceptor. This should be distinguished from sensitization, which is a general mechanism involving transfer of energy from a donor ion to an acceptor ion, which may or may not be in an excited state.48 The higher absorption strength of the donor enhances the absorption and thereby sensitizes the desired spectral conversion process. Yb3+, for example, often serves as a sensitizer for upconversion processes in Er3+, Pr3+,51 and Tm3+.52,53 These are examples of sensitized upconversion.
 Fig. 4  Energy level diagrams for three-centre energy-pooling: (a) cooperative mechanism; (b) accretive mechanism. Adapted with permission from Andrews and Jenkins.48 Copyright 2001, American Institute of Physics. 
 Fig. 5  Energy level diagrams for quantum cutting: (a) cooperative mechanism; (b) accretive mechanism. Adapted with permission from Andrews and Jenkins.48 Copyright 2001, American Institute of Physics. 
III.1 Upconversion
The phenomenon of upconversion has been particularly well-studied for lanthanide and transition metal ions doped into solids, since the discovery of upconversion by Auzel in the 1960s. A review of some of the more recent developments in upconversion spectroscopy is given by Suyver et al.54 Excellent reviews of upconversion principles have been published by Auzel.18,55Fig. 6 summarizes the various upconversion mechanisms that are possible. The most efficient process is the mechanism called APTE (addition de photon par transferts d’energie) or ETU (energy transfer upconversion). It can also involve ground state absorption (GSA) followed by an energy transfer step, written as GSA/ETU. The next most efficient mechanism is GSA followed by excited state absorption (ESA), in a two-step absorption process. These mechanisms involve real intermediate energy levels. The other mechanisms shown involve one or more virtual energy levels, and therefore have lower efficiencies.
 Fig. 6  Energy schemes for different 2-photon upconversion processes with quantum efficiency normalized to the incident power (1 W cm−2). Transitions between energy levels are indicated by vertical arrows, and arrows connecting different ions indicate energy transfer. Horizontal lines are real energy levels. Adapted from Auzel,55 copyright 1990, with permission from Elsevier. 
Strümpel et al. summarize some of the key requirements that need to be met for the effective application of upconversion in solar cells.17 Good optical coupling is needed to ensure high transmission of low energy light to the upconverter, and of the upconverted light back into the cell. The spectral absorption range of the upconverter should be longer in wavelength than that corresponding to the band-gap of the solar cell, and the upconverted emission should be shorter in wavelength than the band-gap of the solar cell. The upconversion process should be effective with high efficiency at low excitation intensity, and the upconverting material should exhibit high transmittance of the upconverted light. As has been noted in the literature, upconversion is predicted to enhance the efficiency of solar cells when mounted on the rear of the solar cell.21,33 Depending on the upconverting material used, upconversion could in principle be implemented to enhance the efficiency of solar cells with different values of band-gap energy Eg. For crystalline silicon (c-Si), Eg is 1.12 eV (1110 nm).17 Amorphous forms of silicon have wider band-gap energies, typically up to 1.7 eV.4Eg for other semiconductor materials for solar cells also fall in this range, such as for Cu2S (1.2 eV; 1033 nm), GaAs (1.4 eV; 886 nm), and CdTe (1.5 eV; 826 nm).4,56 Organic solar cells may possess a diverse range of values for Eg and typically have an absorption edge not lower than 1.5 eV. The Grätzel cell is based on the use of TiO2 (Eg = 3.0–3.2 eV; 413–387 nm23); with a strategic choice of dye sensitizer, the photocurrent onset can be reduced in energy to be as low as 1.35 eV (920 nm).57
In this section, we will consider upconversion using lanthanide ions for different wavelength regions which may be beneficial for the various kinds of solar cells. This includes sensitized upconversion, using Yb3+ or transition metal ions. Where applicable, we will review attempts that have been made to measure solar cell efficiency enhancement using upconversion materials. To understand the various up- and downconversion mechanisms involving the different lanthanide ions, the energy level diagram in Fig. 3 will be helpful.


            Er3+ upconversion from ∼1500 nm. 
Excitation of the 4I13/2 level of Er3+ has been shown to result in upconversion luminescence at wavelengths ranging from 410 to 980 nm, in a wide variety of host materials. Strümpel provides a list of bulk host materials for which such upconversion has been reported.17 More recent reports involve Er3+ in nanophosphor materials such as CaF2,58 and Gd2(MoO4)3.59 In each case, the upconverted luminescence originates from the 4I11/2 (∼980 nm), 4I9/2 (∼800 nm), 4F9/2 (∼650 nm), 4S3/2 (∼550 nm) and 4H9/2 (∼410 nm) levels, all situated above the 4I13/2 level of Er3+ around 1500 nm. Upconversion to the 4I11/2 and 4I9/2 levels involves two photons, while upconversion to the 4F9/2, 4S3/2 and 4H9/2 levels requires 3, 4, and 5 photons, respectively. Upconversion to the 4I11/2 and 4I9/2 levels is consequently more efficient, and is well-suited for application to c-Si solar cells. Emission from the 4I9/2 and higher levels may also enhance the efficiency of wider band-gap semiconductor solar cells, as well as NIR dye-sensitized Grätzel solar cells. Excitation of Er3+ at ∼1500 nm is suitable for solar spectrum conversion, since the terrestrial AM1.5 solar spectrum possesses 25 W m−2 of energy in the range of 1480–1580 nm.
Proof-of-principle experiments have been reported for upconversion with excitation of Er3+ at ∼1500 nm in combination with c-Si solar cells, using NaYF4 as a host material for Er3+.19,20 NaYF4 (in the β-phase) is a host material for which the most efficient upconversion has been reported to date, in the case of sensitized upconversion of excitation at 980 nm into Yb3+ co-doped with Er3+.18,54 NaYF4 is a material for which the phonon energies are low (400 cm−1), and the excitation spectrum near 1500 nm is quite broad, stretching from 1480 nm to 1580 nm. In NaYF4 doped with Er3+, upconversion of ∼1500 nm photons into NIR radiation that can be absorbed by c-Si is possible by energy transfer between two Er3+ neighbors excited to the 4I13/2 level, yielding Er3+ in the higher energy 4I9/2 state. To demonstrate the feasibility of this idea, a NaYF4:Er3+ (20 mol%) phosphor was mixed into an acrylic medium and adhered to the rear of a bifacial buried contact silicon solar cell; reflective white paint was used as a reflector at the rear of the solar cell. External quantum efficiencies (EQE) due to upconversion, of up to 2.5% were measured, using laser excitation powers of up to 5 mW at 1523 nm; the corresponding upconversion efficiency has been estimated to be up to 12.1% at 6 mW, 1523 nm excitation.19,20 Excitation with a quartz halogen lamp resulted in EQE due to upconversion of ∼10−3.20 While this efficiency is low, it is many orders of magnitude higher than the intrinsic absorption of silicon in this wavelength range. It is expected that improvement of the EQE can be achieved by optimizing the solar cell geometry or by more efficient upconversion materials.54 The use of chloride materials, for example, could be promising, due to reduced phonon energies to minimize losses in upconversion efficiency due to nonradiative relaxation, while still maintaining a spectrally wide excitation spectrum of the Er3+ ion.19 A strong enhancement of the solar cell efficiency could be attained by sensitizing the Er3+ with a spectrally broad and efficient absorber, to solve the problem of the relatively weak absorption strength and limited spectral range of absorption of the Er3+4I15/2→4I13/2 transition. Research on sensitization in this spectral area is very limited and has not been pursued in relation to spectral upconversion for c-Si solar cells. Interesting candidates for sensitization may be transition metal ions like Ni2+ or Co2+ which can have reasonably strong absorption bands between 1000 and 1500 nm, depending on the host material. To achieve sufficient excitation density for upconversion it seems imperative that the full spectrum between 1000 and 1500 nm is ‘harvested’ and transferred to Er3+. In this regard, it is interesting to mention an early paper on BaCl2 co-doped with Er3+ and Dy3+.60 Excitation in the 6H9/2 level of Dy3+ around 1300 nm was followed by upconversion on Er3+ producing emission near 800 nm (via absorption of 2 photons) and 550 nm and 670 nm (each via absorption of 3 photons).



            Ho3+ upconversion from ∼1170 nm. 
A recent publication from Lahoz61 reports upconversion in Ho3+ in an oxyfluoride glass host material. Upon excitation of the 5I6 level of Ho3+ at 1170 nm, upconversion emission at 650 nm and 910 nm is reported. This is of interest for spectral conversion for solar cells, since the excitation spectrum for the 5I6 level is relatively wide (∼50 nm), and its entire spectral range would absorb a region of the solar spectrum transparent to c-Si solar cells. The upconversion luminescence is due to emission from the 5F5 and the 5I5 levels of Ho3+. The proposed upconversion mechanism is via energy transfer (ETU), wherein two 1170 nm photons are required to access the 5I5 level (giving 910 nm emission), and three photons are required to access the 5F5 level (giving 650 nm emission). A careful study of the Dieke diagram reveals that in these energy transfer processes there is an energy mismatch that needs to be compensated by (multi)phonon emission. The Ho3+ ions segregate into fluoride nanocrystals within the oxyfluoride glass material, during thermal treatment of the precursor glass. The low phonon energy environment of the fluoride nanocrystals enhances radiative luminescence over non-radiative relaxation. Further, the concentration in the nanocrystalline environment reduces distances between the Ho3+ ions, which leads to faster energy transfer between them. As a result, the upconversion efficiency is improved by two orders of magnitude over that of the precursor glass. The oxyfluoride glass is also transparent to photons near 1540 nm. The author therefore proposes making use of Ho3+-doped oxyfluoride material together with Er3+-doped material and a mirror immediately below it, at the rear of a bifacial crystalline silicon solar cell, so as to take advantage of the upconversion potential of both types of spectral conversion materials. Wider band-gap solar cells may also profit from such a strategic implementation.



            Yb3+-Sensitized upconversion. 
To increase the NIR absorption strength of upconverting lanthanide ions, Yb3+ is often co-doped with the ions, as a sensitizer for the upconversion process. The Er3+-Yb3+ upconversion pair is a particularly famous and well-studied couple. Strümpel provides a list of literature reports describing this couple in a number of different host materials.17 More examples can be found in more recent literature.62–70 To date, the Er3+–Yb3+ couple doped in microcrystalline β-NaYF4 is the most efficient upconversion system known.54 Doped nanocrystalline phosphors, however, are also becoming quite efficient.71 Efficient upconversion has also been reported in oxide nanocrystalline materials. Chen et al.,69 report enhanced upconversion for Er3+–Yb3+ co-doped with Li+ ions in nanocrystalline Y2O3, up to half the efficiency of upconversion in bulk Y2O3. The sensitized upconversion in the Er3+–Yb3+ couple starts with absorption of photons of wavelengths around 980 nm due to the 2F5/2→2F7/2 transition of Yb3+. The absorption strength for this transitions is relatively high, much higher than for the 4I15/2→4I11/2 transition of Er3+. The absorbed energy is subsequently transferred to Er3+ which is raised to the 4I11/2 excited state. A second energy transfer step from Yb3+ raises the Er3+ ion to the 4F7/2 level and after relaxation to the 4S3/2 level the characteristic green 4S3/2→4I15/2 emission around 550 nm is observed. This efficiently-generated visible luminescence is particularly well-suited for enhancing the efficiency of wider band-gap semiconductor and organic solar cells. Indeed, the first attempt of integrating spectral conversion for a solar cell was reported by Gibart et al.,72 using the Er3+–Yb3+ couple in combination with a GaAs solar cell. The upconverting couple was incorporated into vitroceramic material which was coated with a reflective gold mirror on one side, and the vitroceramic was mounted at the rear of the substrate-free solar cell. For 1 mW excitation at 1.39 eV (892 nm), an efficiency of 2.5% was reported, corresponding to the efficiency of the APTE process.

            Yb3+ has also been demonstrated to similarly sensitize upconversion in Ho3+,73Tm3+,74–78,17,68Pr3+,79 and Tb3+,80–82 in a number of host materials. Interestingly, Er3+ has been shown to work as a sensitizer for Tm3+ upconversion, upon excitation at 974 nm.83 The choice of upconversion luminescence wavelengths and corresponding efficiencies and host material properties that these various systems offer provides an opportunity to select the right upconversion system(s) for a particular solar cell application. Yb3+ has been further demonstrated to sensitize upconversion in some transition metals, such as Ni2+,84,85Mn2+,86Cr3+, and Re4+.17,54 Since the upconversion emission of the transition metal ions depend strongly on the crystal field, the emission can be tailored for particular solar cell applications via suitable chemical variations of the host lattice in the vicinity of the dopant transition metal ion.87,88


Broad-band sensitization. 
While lanthanide ions (or transition metal ions) can provide efficient upconversion couples, it is of great interest for efficient conversion of the full solar spectrum for solar cells to sensitize upconversion via efficient broad-band NIR absorbers. Yb3+ is quite limited as a sensitizer in this regard, since its f–f absorption band near 1000 nm is relatively narrow. Broad-band and spin-allowed d–d absorption of transition metal ions can be used to more effectively sensitize the upconversion luminescence by efficiently absorbing over a wide spectral range followed by energy transfer to the upconversion couple. To serve as a suitable sensitizer, the transition metal ion should have a sufficiently high absorption cross-section in the NIR region of interest. For efficient energy transfer, it should have emission that is overlapping with an absorption band of the upconverting ion. The sensitizer should also not absorb at energies where the upconversion luminescence is located. These constraints eliminate many possible ions, but the ligand field dependence of the energy position of excited states of the transition metal ion allows one to tune the energy levels of the sensitizer ion to match the required acceptor-ion conditions, through chemical modifications of the host lattice.54,88,89 At present, work on sensitized upconversion for solar cells is very limited. Initial work in our lab aimed at exploiting the NIR emission of Ti3+ has been unsuccessful due to quenching of the Ti3+ emission.
Suyver et al.54 give an insightful review of investigations concerning NIR broad-band sensitizers for upconversion where the transition metal ion is directly involved in the upconversion process. In particular, they have examined the sensitized upconversion of V3+ and Cr5+ in combination with lathanides such as Pr3+ and Er3+, and transition metal ions such as Re4+ and Mo3+. In the case of the transition metals, the upconversion steps involve spin–flip transitions between states on Re4+ or Mo3+, which are characterized by weak electron–phonon coupling, comparable to f–f transitions in lanthanides. The upconversion mechanisms for the various couples are non-trivial and the details are succinctly summarized in the review.54 Notably, extremely efficient sensitized upconversion between Cr5+ and Er3+ has been observed in YVO4 at low temperature (15 K), but unfortunately the emission is strongly quenched at room temperature. Wenger et al.90 have also observed efficient upconversion between Ni2+ and Mn2+ through exchange interactions in Rb2MnCl4, but again only efficient at 15 K.
At the same time that broad-band sensitization of upconversion is being explored, there are also promising avenues of implementing luminescent solar concentrators. Solar concentrators can further enhance the light-gathering ability of solar cells. If the solar cell is also equipped with an upconverting layer, the enhanced incident light intensity would further promote the upconversion process. Some reviews of recent developments for solar concentrators are given by Goldschmidt et al.,91 and van Sark et al.92

III.2 Downconversion
The idea to obtain quantum yields above 100% by creating multiple photons through ‘cutting’ a single photon into two lower energy photons was first proposed by Dexter in 1957.93 The mechanism involved the simultaneous energy transfer from a donor to two acceptors, each accepting half the energy of the excited donor. It was not until 1974 that experimental evidence for quantum yields above 100% was obtained, for YF3:Pr3+. The mechanism was not the one proposed by Dexter, as it involved two sequential emission steps from the high energy 1S0 level of Pr3+ (1S0→1I6 followed by relaxation to the 3P0 level and emission of a second visible photon from 3P0).94,95 Later, quantum cutting via two sequential energy transfer steps in the Gd3+–Eu3+ couple was discovered and, based on the analogy with the two-step energy transfer process leading to upconversion, it was called ‘downconversion’.45 The aim in all this work was to achieve the emission of two visible photons from a single UV photon in order to boost the efficiency of light emitting devices. The potential of downconversion for increasing the efficiency of solar cells was realized soon afterwards.22 The first experimental demonstration of downconversion for solar cells involved the Tb3+–Yb3+ couple where quantum cutting was achieved through cooperative energy transfer from Tb3+ to two Yb3+ ions, the very mechanism suggested almost 50 years earlier by Dexter.96
Richards examined in detail the potential for application of lanthanide-doped inorganic materials for achieving external downconversion quantum efficiencies greater than unity, for enhancement of the conversion efficiency of silicon solar cells.23 He distinguishes between three types of downconversion, or ‘quantum cutting’. One is using the host lattice and is based on the impact ionization process. For material with Eg = 1.1 eV, this requires excitation energies Eexc > 5.5 eV (226 nm) for an external quantum efficiency (EQE) > 100%. Clearly, this short wavelength UV is not useful as it is not available in the global AM1.5 spectrum received on earth. Another is using single lanthanide ions. As discussed above, this has been demonstrated in YF3:Pr3+ where upon absorption of 185 nm photons into the 4f5d excited state of Pr3+ a red photon at 620 nm and a violet photon at 408 nm could be emitted with an overall EQE of 140 ± 15%. It is also possible that two near-infrared photons could be produced in this way from a visible or UV photon (as shown diagrammatically in Fig. 7(a)).
 Fig. 7  Overview of different resonant downconversion mechanisms demonstrated using two ions, I and II, with hypothetical energy level schemes. Transitions between energy levels are indicated by solid vertical arrows. Dashed vertical arrows and solid curved arrows connecting different ions indicate energy transfer. Horizontal lines are real energy levels. In the case of visible quantum cutting, the higher energy transitions are in the ultraviolet, and the lower energy transitions are in the visible. In the case of NIR quantum cutting, these transitions are in the visible and in the NIR, respectively. From Wegh et al.,45 copyright 1999. Adapted with permission from AAAS. 

Fig. 7(b–d) shows the different kinds of downconversion mechanisms that are possible using pairs of lanthanide ions. Fig. 7(b) shows the emission of two photons from ion pairs via cross-relaxation between ions I to II (denoted by (1)) followed by energy transfer from ions I to II (denoted by (2)). Both energy transfer steps are followed by emission from ion II. Fig. 7(c,d) show mechanisms involving a single energy transfer between ions I and II and emission of photons by both ions. The downconversion process of the type in Fig. 7(b) has been demonstrated for the phosphor LiGdF4:Eu3+. Upon VUV excitation in the 6GJ levels of the Gd3+ ion, the energy is transferred to two Eu3+ ions in two energy transfer steps resulting in emission from Eu3+, mainly around 612 nm, with an internal quantum efficiency of about 190%.45,97 Internal quantum efficiency refers to the efficiency for photons which are absorbed by the Gd3+ ions and is based on the experimentally determined efficiency of the two-step energy transfer process. It can be achieved in the absence of non-radiative losses. The external quantum efficiency of the system is much lower. Because of the weak absorption of the 6GJ levels of the Gd3+ ion a significant part of the VUV radiation is not absorbed by Gd3+ but by the LiGdF4host lattice and lost non-radiatively. The external quantum efficiency is therefore much lower and depends strongly on the presence of defect states in the host lattice. Experimental work on LiGdF4:Eu3+ showed external quantum yields of 32%.98 A second example of quantum cutting through downconversion involves LiGdF4:Er3+,Tb3+, with an internal quantum efficiency of 110%.97,99,100 This system involves UV 4f-5d absorption in the Er3+, which transfers via cross-relaxation to Gd3+, and Gd3+ subsequently transfers its energy to Tb3+, resulting in green emission. The high absorption strength for the 4f11→ 4f105d transition on Er3+ may yield a higher external quantum yield, but this has not been measured experimentally. Richards reviews some instances in the literature where downconversion of UV or visible light was converted into near-infrared light using lanthanide ion pairs,101–103 but no external quantum efficiency greater than 100% is reported in those cases.
A more recent review by Strümpel et al.17 points out that UV to VIS quantum cutting examples in the literature are not useful for improving solar cell efficiency, since the (V)UV excitation wavelengths involved are not (or are minimally) present in the terrestrial solar spectrum. However, VIS to near-infrared (NIR) quantum cutting is still of promising benefit to c-Si solar cells, whose band-gap energy is 1.12 eV (1110 nm). It is evident from the Dieke diagram (Fig. 3) that the energy level structure of Yb3+ is ideally suited for use in the downconversion for c-Si solar cells. The Yb3+ ion has a single excited state (denoted by the term symbol 2F5/2) approximately 10000 cm−1 above the 2F7/2 ground state, corresponding to an emission around 1000 nm. The absence of other energy levels allows Yb3+ to exclusively ‘pick up’ energy packages of 10000 cm−1 from other co-doped lanthanide ions and emit photons at ∼1000 nm, which can be absorbed by c-Si. Efficient downconversion using Yb3+via resonant energy transfer requires donor ions with an energy level at about 20000 cm−1 and an intermediate energy level at approximately 10000 cm−1. Examination of Fig. 3 reveals potential ion couples such as Er3+–Yb3+, Nd3+–Yb3+, Ho3+–Yb3+ and Pr3+–Yb3+. In the absence of an intermediate energy level within the donor ion, cooperative or accretive nonresonant energy transfer is also possible, albeit with much lower efficiency. Inspection of the Dieke diagram shows that Tm3+–Yb3+ and Tb3+–Yb3+ are potential couples for cooperative or accretive mechanisms. These approaches for NIR downconversion to enhance the efficiency of c-Si solar cells will form the focus of the rest of this section. Based on observations for the probabilities for resonant two-step upconversion of ∼10−3 and (non-linear) cooperative sensitization of ∼10−6,46,104,105 it is evident that downconversion via an intermediate level will dominate if the donor has a level around 10000 cm−1. Consequently, efficient downconversion at relatively low Yb3+-concentrations can be expected only for the couples Pr3+–Yb3+, Nd3+–Yb3+, Er3+–Yb3+ and Ho3+–Yb3+.

Downconversion ion couples with Yb3+. 
The first published experimental work on using downconversion with Yb3+ was the previously mentioned Tb3+–Yb3+ couple in (Y,Yb)PO4:Tb3+.96 Upon excitation in the 5D4 level of Tb3+ situated around 20000 cm−1, efficient energy transfer is observed to Yb3+. The Dieke diagram clearly shows that resonant one-step energy transfer is not possible as there is no intermediate level around 10000 cm−1. To provide evidence that cooperative energy is the operative mechanism, the results of time-resolved luminescence experiments were carefully compared with Monte Carlo simulations based on theories for phonon-assisted, cooperative, and accretive energy transfer. Analysis of experimental Tb3+ emission decay curves for various Yb concentrations between 0 and 100% were shown to be in excellent agreement with decay curves from simulation models for cooperative energy transfer and demonstrated that energy transfer from Tb3+ to two neighbouring Yb3+ ions occurs via cooperative dipole–dipole interaction. The overall energy transfer efficiency and maximum NIR quantum efficiency were also estimated as a function of Yb3+ concentration via normalized integration of the normalized Tb3+ emission decay curves. A maximum energy transfer efficiency of 88% (and a corresponding maximum NIR quantum efficiency of 188%) was measured. This was only achieved through 100% doping of Yb3+, however. Indeed, at least 50 mol% Yb3+ was needed to achieve over 50% transfer efficiency (>150% NIR quantum efficiency). At such high concentrations, concentration quenching of Yb3+ becomes very significant, so that the actual measured NIR quantum efficiency is strongly reduced.
In the literature, other reports followed on NIR quantum cutting with the Tb3+–Yb3+ couple, in GdAl3(BO3)4,106,107 GdBO3,108 Y2O3,109 CaF2nanocrystals,110 and lanthanum borogermanate glass.111 Reports of efficient quantum cutting in other ion couples simultaneously appeared, for Tm3+–Yb3+,107,112–114 and Pr3+–Yb3+.107,112,115,116 Estimates for the energy transfer efficiency to Yb3+, and the corresponding NIR quantum efficiency from Yb3+ were in nearly every case based on the integration of decay curves, as described by Vergeer et al.96 This method of estimating the quantum efficiency, however, does not account for concentration quenching of the Yb3+ emission. The actual NIR quantum efficiency will always be lower, but it is not trivial to determine absolute or even relative quantum yields for infrared emission.
A method to determine the relative quantum yield for conversion of visible to near-infrared is through careful comparison of integrated areas from emission spectra. This can be done by computing the ratio of the integrated luminescence intensity of the donor ion in the absence of Yb3+ doping, to the integrated Yb3+ luminescence intensity in the case of Yb3+ co-doping. For this method to work quantitatively, it is essential that the emission spectra are measured under identical conditions, and are corrected for instrumental response so that the areas of integrated emission peaks represent the total photon flux. It is also helpful that there is minimal spectral overlap between the emission of the donor ion and the Yb3+ luminescence, in the case of the co-doped sample. An example of this method has recently been published for the Pr3+–Yb3+ couple.116Fig. 8 presents corrected emission spectra for SrF2:Pr3+ (0.1 mol%), Yb3+ (x mol%), each upon excitation at 441 nm. The spectrum for the 0 mol% Yb3+ sample is dominated by 3P0 emission in the visible region, whereas the 5 and 17 mol% samples are dominated by Yb3+ emission, via energy transfer from the 3P0 level of Pr3+. The area under the Yb3+ peak for the 5 mol% sample is 1.4 times larger than the area of all the 3P0 luminescence in the 0 mol% sample, yielding a visible to near-infrared conversion efficiency of 140%. Due to concentration quenching, the conversion efficiency decreases for higher Yb3+ doping.
 Fig. 8  
Emission spectra for SrF2:Pr3+ (0.1 mol%), Yb3+ (x mol%) where x = 0, 5, 17. Emission spectra were recorded under identical conditions for excitation at 441 nm at room temperature, and were corrected for the wavelength-dependent response of the detector system. Φ gives the photon flux per constant wavelength interval. Reprinted from van der Ende et al.,116 copyright 2009, with permission from Wiley-Blackwell. 
It should be stressed that this relative NIR quantum efficiency estimate, which measures the visible to NIR conversion efficiency, is already lowered by quenching mechanisms, such as concentration quenching. The internal quantum cutting efficiency is higher than 140%. This can be demonstrated by comparison of the absorption spectra with excitation spectra, corrected for the instrumental response. Fig. 9 shows the downconversion process for the Pr3+–Yb3+ couple. Because of the presence of the intermediate 1G4 level around 10000 cm−1 it is expected that from the 3P0 level in Pr3+, a two-step energy transfer process is operative, resulting in the emission of two ∼980 nm photons from Yb3+. From the 1D2 level efficient resonant energy transfer to Yb3+ is also possible through a one-step process (Pr3+(1D2→3F3,4)-Yb3+(2F7/2→2F5/2)), resulting in the emission of one ∼980 nm photon from Yb3+. By comparing the relative absorption strengths of the 3H4→3PJ,1I6, and 3H4→1D2 transitions with the corresponding relative photon fluxes in excitation spectra while monitoring the emission of Yb3+ at ∼980 nm, the internal downconversion efficiency can be calculated. Fig. 10 displays the absorption spectrum together with the corrected excitation spectrum, for a sample with 5 mol% Yb3+ and 0.3 mol% Pr3+. At this Yb3+-concentration the energy transfer from both the 3P0 and the 1D2 is almost complete, as hardly any 3P0 or 1D2 emission is observed. From the spectra, it is determined that the ∼980 nm photon flux upon excitation into the 3PJ, 1I6 levels, relative to excitation into the 1D2 level, is approximately twice that of the absorption strength of the 3PJ, 1I6 levels relative to the 1D2 level. In other words, the downconversion from the 3P0 level occurs with an efficiency close to 200%.116
 Fig. 9  Energy levels and quantum cutting mechanism for the Pr3+–Yb3+ couple. A two-step energy transfer occurs upon excitation into the 3PJ (J = 0, 1, 2) and 1I6 levels of Pr3+. A single visible photon absorbed by these levels is thereby converted into two ∼1000 nm photons. Solid, dotted, and curved arrows represent optical transitions, nonradiative energy transfer processes, and nonradiative relaxation, respectively. Reprinted from van der Ende et al.,116 copyright 2009, with permission from Wiley-Blackwell. 
 Fig. 10  Diffuse reflectance (dashed curve) and excitation spectra (solid line) for the same SrF2:Pr3+ (0.3 mol%), Yb3+ (5 mol%) sample, demonstrating quantum cutting. Each spectrum is normalized to the 1D2 peak. The excitation spectrum monitored Yb3+ emission at 980 nm, and was corrected for wavelength-dependent instrument response. Reprinted from van der Ende et al.,116 copyright 2009, with permission from Wiley-Blackwell. 
SrF2 serves as an example of an excellent host material for accomplishing such high quantum cutting efficiency at low dopant concentrations. This is due to its low phonon energy,117 and the fact that trivalent dopant ions in SrF2 tend to form clusters at low doping concentrations. When trivalent Pr3+ and Yb3+ substitute for divalent Sr2+, clusters form due to the need to compensate for the difference in charge.118–121 This is well-known from experimental121 and theoretical120 work indicating that the formation of lanthanide ion clusters (from dimers to hexamers) locally charge-compensated by interstitial F− ions, is energetically favourable and already dominates at low lanthanide concentrations. Fig. 11 displays the structure of trimer and tetramer clusters, as examples. The clustering enhances the probability that each Pr3+ ion is in close proximity to two or more Yb3+ neighbours (required for downconversion) over the probability based on a statistical distribution of ions. This allows for efficient downconversion at sufficiently low Yb3+ concentration where long-range energy transfer is not yet prevalent, thereby minimizing concentration-quenching of the Yb3+ luminescence.
 Fig. 11  (a) The 3|0|1|31 trimer structure in fluorite crystals such as SrF2 (see Bendall et al.120 for explanation of notation), containing three substituted M3+ impurity ions, three charge-compensating anion interstitial ions, and one relaxed lattice ion. (b) The 4|1|2|41 tetramer structure in fluorite crystals such as SrF2 (see Bendall et al.120 for explanation of notation), containing 4 M3+ impurity ions, 4 charge-compensating anion interstitial ions, and two relaxed lattice ions in 〈111〉 directions that will enhance Coulomb interactions with M3+ ions. The cluster is stabilized by the presence of a central anion vacancy. Adapted from Bendall et al.,120 copyright 1984, with permission from Elsevier. 
Notice that Fig. 9 displays the downconversion mechanism as a two-step, first-order resonant energy transfer process. First-order energy transfer is dominant over higher order processes. However, when a first order process is not possible, second-order energy transfer mechanisms can play a significant role. Indeed, in the case of the Tb3+–Yb3+ couple in YPO4, the cooperative second-order mechanism has been determined to be dominant.96 In subsequent studies of NIR downconversion in the Tb3+–Yb3+ couple in other host materials, the downconversion mechanism was often assumed to be cooperative. In each case, no evidence was presented for such a mechanism, but it is reasonable to assume that in analogy with the (Y,Yb)PO4:Tb3+ system, cooperative energy transfer is operative for the Tb3+–Yb3+ couple in other host materials.106–110,112 However, the cooperative mechanism has also been claimed to apply for NIR downconversion for the Tm3+–Yb3+107,112–114 and Pr3+–Yb3+107,112,115,122 couples in various host materials, without evidence based on an analysis of the luminescence decay curves for these dopant pairs in any host material. In the particular case of the Pr3+–Yb3+ couple, resonant first-order energy transfer must certainly be considered as well, since the energy transfer transitions in Pr3+ involving the intermediate 1G4 level (see Fig. 9) have good resonant overlap with the corresponding transition in Yb3+, and first-order energy transfer mechanisms generally have a much higher probability (typically a factor of 103) to occur than do second-order mechanisms.18


Broad-band sensitization and proof-of-principle experiments. 
The promising results on downconversion with lanthanides do not mean that one can expect implementation of downconversion materials in solar cells in the near future. On the contrary, serious challenges need to be addressed before downconversion materials will be applied, and it is by no means clear if the problems will be solved. A major limitation in the use of transitions between 4f levels of trivalent lanthanide ions, is that they are forbidden transitions. The oscillator strengths of 4f–4f transitions are typically on the order of 10−6; dipole-allowed transitions, by comparison, may have an oscillator strength of up to unity.123 Thus, the absorption strength of lanthanide 4f–4f transitions is very weak. In addition, the absorption is limited to narrow lines, thus preventing absorption of the larger part of the solar spectrum. For efficient downconversion it is crucial that the major part of the high energy region of the solar spectrum is converted into two NIR photons. To solve the absorption problem a third ion is required: a sensitizer which absorbs efficiently all light in the UV and visible part of the spectrum up to ∼500 nm and transfers the energy to the downconversion couple, e.g. the 3P0 level of Pr3+. The idea of sensitized lanthanide luminescence is well established and is for example used in fluorescent tubes where the green Tb3+ emission is sensitized through the 4f–5d absorption of Ce3+. Potential sensitizers for the downconversion couples are Eu2+ and Ce3+ which have strongly absorbing f–d transitions in the desired spectral region. Work on sensitization is only just starting.
A second problem that needs to be solved is the issue of concentration quenching. High Yb3+-concentrations are needed to achieve complete energy transfer to the Yb3+ acceptor ions. At these high concentrations quenching of the emission through energy migration over the Yb3+-sublattice (concentration quenching) is a serious issue. A clever choice of host lattice (e.g. inducing clustering by requiring charge compensation) and optimized synthesis conditions (to reduce quenching centers which are reached through energy migration over the Yb3+ sublattice) may reduce concentration quenching to acceptable levels.
Finally, if an efficient downconversion couple is developed, the material needs to be incorporated in a transparaent layer on top of the solar cell. Losses of the emitted downconverted emission also need to be reduced by matching of refractive indices of the downconversion layer, and/or by the use of an anti-reflective coating for the 980 nm Yb3+ emission on top of the downconversion layer. The employment of light-trapping techniques may also minimize the loss of NIR Yb3+ radiation. Clearly, the road towards implementation is long.
While there have already been reported attempts to incorporate upconverting materials into solar cells and measure enhancement of the solar cell efficiency,19–20,72 no such experiments have yet been reported for downconversion. The measurement of enhancement is easier with upconversion materials since enhancement occurs under excitation in a spectral region for which there is no response of the solar cell; the background response in this spectral region is negligible. The enhancement due to downconversion occurs in a spectral region for which there is a significant response of the solar cell. Due to the issues mentioned above (limited 4f–4f absorption and concentration quenching) of the lanthanide ions considered so far for NIR downconversion, a demonstration of solar cell efficiency enhancement due to downconversion is lacking and is not expected until the problems described above are solved.

IV. Conclusions and outlook
This perspective article has presented an overview of the potential that lanthanide ions hold to manage photons radiated by the Sun, so as to adapt the solar spectrum to better match the absorption spectrum of solar cells and thus improve the solar cell efficiency. The focus has been on the use of these ions in upconversion and downconversion schemes, and how these schemes can be utilized to enhance solar cell efficiencies. Modelling shows that the Shockley–Queisser limit for the efficiency of a single junction solar cell can be raised from 30% to 40% (using downconversion) or even 50% (using upconversion).
Upconversion schemes relying on lanthanides have been well-studied for decades, since the 1960s. As such, there is a variety of upconversion couples that can be beneficial for crystalline silicon solar cells and even more so for wider band-gap solar cells. Successful proof-of-principle experiments with Er3+ doped upconverters have been reported for c-Si, while for wider band-gap semiconductor solar cells the efficient Yb3+–Er3+ upconversion couple is promising. The main challenges for applying upconversion are the narrow and weak absorption lines of lanthanides and the quadratic power dependence of the upconversion efficiency. High upconversion efficiency (∼25%) is only reached for high excitation powers and 100% efficiency can never be reached. Solutions can be found by using sensitization schemes involving spin-allowed broad band transitions of 3d or 4d transition metal ions, which may also participate in the upconversion process. The broader absorption range will also increase the incident power, which may be further enhanced by using luminescent solar concentrators.
Quantum cutting through downconversion has only been studied in the last decade. It offers great potential for efficiency enhancement of narrow band-gap solar cells, e.g. crystalline silicon solar cells. Efficient downconversion has been reported for the Pr3+–Yb3+, Tm3+–Yb3+ and Tb3+–Yb3+ couples, and other couples may also serve as potential downconverters (e.g., Ho3+–Yb3+, Er3+–Yb3+ and Nd3+–Yb3+). In these couples Yb3+ serves as an ideal acceptor with a single excited state, just above the band-gap of c-Si. High internal quantum yields (close to 200%) have been demonstrated and are independent of the incident power. Before implementation in solar cell systems can be realized some serious issues need to be addressed: a sensitizer is needed which absorbs strongly in the region 300–500 nm and which transfers efficiently to the donor; losses arising from concentration quenching due to the high Yb3+-concentrations need to be minimized; and the downconverter needs to be incorporated in a transparent layer on top of the solar cell. Finally, even though the Yb3+ emission wavelength of 980 nm is above the band-gap of c-Si, absorption by c-Si at this wavelength is relatively weak; for complete absorption, a thicker c-Si layer is needed. Research on solving the various issues is in progress in many laboratories and one may expect many new results in the coming years. Based on these results it will become clear if spectral conversion of solar radiation using lanthanides will indeed be a viable option to realize more efficient solar cells.
References
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS .
O. Morton, Nature, 2006, 443, 19–22 CrossRef CAS .
B. van der Zwaan and A. Rabl, Sol. Energy, 2003, 74, 19–31 CrossRef .
A. Goetzberger, C. Hebling and H.-W. Schock, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2003, 40, 1–46 CrossRef .
D. M. Bagnall and M. Boreland, Energy Policy, 2008, 36, 4390–4396 CrossRef .
M. A. Green, Phys. E., 2002, 14, 11–17 CrossRef CAS .
B. S. Richards, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 2329–2337 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510–519 CAS .
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa and W. Warta, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2009, 17, 85–94 Search PubMed .
F. Dimroth, Phys. Status Solidi C, 2006, 3, 373–379 Search PubMed .
R. D. Schaller, V. M. Agranovich and V. I. Klimov, Nat. Phys., 2005, 1, 189–194 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Klimov, S. A. Ivanov, J. Nanda, M. Achermann, I. Bezel, J. A. McGuire and A. Piryatinski, Nature, 2007, 447, 441–446 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Hanna and A. J. Nozik, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 074510–074518 CrossRef .
A. J. Nozik, Phys. E., 2002, 14, 115–120 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Trinh, A. J. Houtepen, J. M. Schins, T. Hanrath, J. Piris, W. Knulst, A. P. L. M. Goossens and L. D. A. Siebbeles, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1713–1718 CrossRef .
D. Timmerman, I. Izeddin, P. Stallinga, I. N. Yassievich and T. Gregorkiewicz, Nat. Photonics, 2008, 2, 105–109 Search PubMed .
C. Strümpel, M. McCann, G. Beaucarne, V. Arkhipov, A. Slaoui, V. Svrcek, C. del Cañizo and I. Tobias, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 238–249 CrossRef .
F. Auzel, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 139–174 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shalav, B. S. Richards and M. A. Green, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 829–842 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shalav, B. S. Richards, T. Trupke, K. W. Kramer and H. U. Gudel, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 013505–013503 CrossRef .
T. Trupke, M. A. Green and P. Würfel, J. Appl. Phys., 2002, 92, 4117–4122 CrossRef CAS .
T. Trupke, M. A. Green and P. Würfel, J. Appl. Phys., 2002, 92, 1668–1674 CrossRef CAS .
B. S. Richards, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 1189–1207 CrossRef CAS .
B. S. Richard and A. Shalav, Synth. Met., 2005, 154, 61–64 CrossRef CAS .
W. G. J. H. M. van Sark, A. Meijerink, R. E. I. Schropp, J. A. M. van Roosmalen and E. H. Lysen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2005, 87, 395–409 CrossRef CAS .
W. G. J. H. J. van Sark, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 151117 CrossRef .
S. Ye, B. Zhu, J. Luo, Y. Teng, J. Chen, G. Lakshminarayana, G. Qian and J. Qiu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 181110 CrossRef .
J. Liu, Q. Yao and Y. Li, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 173119–173113 CrossRef .
M. Peng and L. Wondraczek, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 627–630 RSC .
V. Svrcek, A. Slaoui and J. C. Muller, Thin Solid Films, 2004, 451–452, 384–388 CAS .
G. Maggioni, S. Carturan, M. Tonezzer, M. Buffa, A. Quaranta, E. Negro and G. D. Mea, Eur. Polym. J., 2008, 44, 3628–3639 CrossRef CAS .
T. Trupke, A. Shalav, B. S. Richards, P. Würfel and M. A. Green, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 3327–3338 CrossRef CAS .
V. Badescu and A. M. Badescu, Renewable Energy, 2009, 34, 1538–1544 CrossRef CAS .
V. Badescu, A. D. Vos, A. M. Badescu and A. Szymanska, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2007, 40, 341–352 CrossRef CAS .
A. De Vos, A. Szymanska and V. Badescu, Energy Convers. Manage., 2009, 50, 328–336 CrossRef CAS .
V. Badescu and A. De Vos, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 102, 073102–073107 CrossRef .
H. Shpaisman, O. Niitsoo, I. Lubomirsky and D. Cahen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 1541–1546 CrossRef CAS .
C. del Cañizo, I. Tobías, J. Pérez-Bedmar, A. C. Pan and A. Luque, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 6757–6762 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Dieke and H. M. Crosswhite, Appl. Opt., 1963, 2, 675–686 .
R. T. Wegh, A. Meijerink, R.-J. Lamminmäki and H. Jorma, J. Lumin., 2000, 87–89, 1002–1004 CrossRef CAS .

          B. Henderson and G. F. Imbusch, Optical Spectroscopy of Inorganic Solids, Oxford University Press, Oxford,  1989 Search PubMed .

          G. Liu, in Spectroscopic Properties of Rare Earths in Optical Materials, ed. G. Liu and B. Jacquier, Springer Verlag, Berlin,  2005, pp. 1–94 Search PubMed .
J. Ohwaki and Y. Wang, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1994, 33, L334 CrossRef CAS .

          B. Z. Malkin, in Spectroscopic Properties of Rare Earths in Optical Materials, ed. G. Liu and B. Jacquier, Springer-Verlag, Berlin,  2005, pp. 130–190 Search PubMed .
R. T. Wegh, H. Donker, K. D. Oskam and A. Meijerink, Science, 1999, 283, 663–666 CrossRef CAS .

          G. Blasse and B. C. Grabmaier, Luminescent Materials, Springer-Verlag, Berlin,  1994 Search PubMed .
D. L. Andrews, Chem. Phys., 1989, 135, 195–201 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Andrews and R. D. Jenkins, J. Chem. Phys., 2001, 114, 1089–1100 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Jenkins and D. L. Andrews, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2000, 2, 2837–2843 RSC .
R. D. Jenkins and D. L. Andrews, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1998, 102, 10834–10842 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zellmer, P. Riedel and A. Tünnermann, Appl. Phys. B: Lasers Opt., 1999, 69, 417–421 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ozen, J. P. Denis, M. Genotelle and F. Pelle, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 1995, 7, 4325–4336 CrossRef .
X. Wu, J. P. Denis, G. Özen, P. Goldner, M. Genotelle and F. Pellé, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1993, 203, 211–214 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Suyver, A. Aebischer, D. Biner, P. Gerner, J. Grimm, S. Heer, K. W. Krämer, C. Reinhard and H. U. Güdel, Opt. Mater., 2005, 27, 1111–1130 CrossRef CAS .
F. Auzel, J. Lumin., 1990, 45, 341–345 CrossRef CAS .
X. Mathew, J. Mater. Sci. Lett., 2002, 21, 529–531 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2003, 4, 145–153 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ivanova, F. Pellé, A. Tkachuk, M. F. Joubert, Y. Guyot and V. P. Gapontzev, J. Lumin., 2008, 128, 914–917 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liang, X. Huang and Q. Zhang, J. Fluoresc., 2009, 19, 285–289 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ohwaki and Y. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1994, 65, 129–131 CrossRef CAS .
F. Lahoz, Opt. Lett., 2008, 33, 2982–2984 Search PubMed .
M. P. Hehlen, N. J. Cockroft, T. R. Gosnell and A. J. Bruce, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1997, 56, 9302 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Chen, Y. X. Nie, W. M. Du and N. Sawanobori, Opt. Commun., 2000, 184, 289–304 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tsuboi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2000, 62, 4200 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun, S. Xu, S. Dai, J. Zhang, L. Hu and Z. Jiang, Solid State Commun., 2004, 132, 193–196 CrossRef CAS .
N. F. Zhuang, X. L. Hu, S. K. Gao, B. Zhao, J. L. Chen and J. Z. Chen, Appl. Phys. B: Lasers Opt., 2006, 82, 607–613 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jingcun, X. Liyan, L. Xiao, G. Kai, L. Guoqing, Z. Yulin, L. Chao and F. Baohua, J. Rare Earths, 2007, 25, 578–584 CrossRef .
M. Liao, L. Hu, Y. Fang, J. Zhang, H. Sun, S. Xu and L. Zhang, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2007, 68, 531–535 CrossRef .
G. Chen, H. Liu, H. Liang, G. Somesfalean and Z. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 12030–12036 CrossRef CAS .
B. Díaz-Herrera, B. González-Díaz, R. Guerrero-Lemus, C. Hernández-Rodríguez, J. Méndez-Ramos and V. D. Rodríguez, Phys. E., 2009, 41, 525–528 CrossRef CAS .
S. Heer, K. Kömpe, H. U. Güdel and M. Haase, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 2102–2105 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gibart, F. Auzel, J.-C. Guillaume and K. Zahraman, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1996, 35, 4401 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Boyer, F. Vetrone, J. A. Capobianco, A. Speghini and M. Bettinelli, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2004, 390, 403–407 CrossRef CAS .
F. Su and Z. Deng, Opt. Mater., 2007, 29, 1452–1455 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, Y. Wang, Y. Yu, F. Liu and P. Huang, Opt. Lett., 2007, 32, 3068–3070 Search PubMed .
F. Su, J. Mod. Opt., 2007, 54, 2819–2826 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liao, S. Li, H. Sun, Y. Fang, L. Hu and J. Zhang, Mater. Lett., 2006, 60, 1783–1785 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liao, L. Wen, H. Zhao, Y. Fang, H. Sun and L. Hu, Mater. Lett., 2007, 61, 470–472 CrossRef CAS .
V. Lupei, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 1998, 54, 1615–1632 CrossRef .
G. M. Salley, R. Valiente and H. U. Güdel, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2002, 14, 5461–5475 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Salley, R. Valiente and H. U. Güdel, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 67, 134111 CrossRef .
G. M. Salley, R. Valiente and H. U. Güdel, J. Lumin., 2001, 94–95, 305–309 CrossRef .
K. Zhang, F. Song, J. Su, L. Han, J. Liang, X. Zhang, L. Yan, J. Tian and J. Xu, Opt. Express, 2006, 14, 12584–12589 CrossRef .
S. Garcia-Revilla, P. Gerner, H. U. Güdel and R. Valiente, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 125111 CrossRef .
S. García-Revilla, P. Gerner, O. S. Wenger, H. U. Güdel and R. Valiente, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2005, 401, 492–496 CrossRef CAS .
C. Reinhard, P. Gerner, F. Rodríguez, S. García-Revilla, R. Valiente and H. U. Güdel, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2004, 386, 132–136 CrossRef CAS .
O. S. Wenger, M. Wermuth and H. U. Güdel, J. Alloys Compd., 2002, 341, 342–348 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Gamelin and H. U. Gudel, Acc. Chem. Res., 2000, 33, 235–242 CrossRef CAS .
O. S. Wenger and H. U. Gudel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 10011–10019 CrossRef CAS .
O. S. Wenger, R. Valiente and H. U. Güdel, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 64, 235116 CrossRef .
J. C. Goldschmidt, M. Peters, A. Bösch, H. Helmers, F. Dimroth, S. W. Glunz and G. Willeke, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 176–182 CrossRef CAS .
W. G. Van Sark, K. W. Barnham, L. H. Slooff, A. J. Chatten, A. Büchtemann, A. Meyer, S. J. Mc.Cormack, R. Koole, D. J. Farrell, R. Bose, E. E. Bende, A. R. Burgers, T. Budel, J. Quilitz, M. Kennedy, T. Meyer, S. H. Wadman, G. P. van Klink, G. van Koten, A. Meijerink and D. Vanmaekelbergh, Opt. Express, 2008, 16, 21773–21792 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Dexter, Phys. Rev., 1957, 108, 630 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Sommerdijk, A. Bril and A. W. de Jager, J. Lumin., 1974, 8, 341–343 CrossRef .
W. W. Piper, J. A. DeLuca and F. S. Ham, J. Lumin., 1974, 8, 344–348 CrossRef CAS .
P. Vergeer, T. J. H. Vlugt, M. H. F. Kox, M. I. den Hertog, J. P. J. M. van der Eerden and A. Meijerink, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71, 014119 CrossRef .
R. T. Wegh, H. Donker, E. V. D. van Loef, K. D. Oskam and A. Meijerink, J. Lumin., 2000, 87–89, 1017–1019 CrossRef CAS .
C. Feldmann, T. Jüstel, C. R. Ronda and D. U. Wiechert, J. Lumin., 2001, 92, 245–254 CrossRef CAS .
K. D. Oskam, R. T. Wegh, H. Donker, E. V. D. van Loef and A. Meijerink, J. Alloys Compd., 2000, 300–301, 421–425 CrossRef CAS .
R. T. Wegh, E. V. D. van Loef and A. Meijerink, J. Lumin., 2000, 90, 111–122 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Tanner, C. S. K. Mak, W. M. Kwok, D. L. Phillips and M.-F. Joubert, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 3606–3611 CrossRef CAS .
W. Strek, A. Bednarkiewicz and P. J. Deren, J. Lumin., 2001, 92, 229–235 CrossRef CAS .
W. Strek, P. Deren and A. Bednarkiewicz, J. Lumin., 2000, 87–89, 999–1001 CrossRef CAS .

          F. Auzel, in Rare Earth Spectroscopy, ed. B. Jezowska-Trzebiatowska, J. Lengendziewicz and W. Strek, World Scientific, Singapore,  1985, p. 502 Search PubMed .
F. Auzel, Proc. IEEE, 1973, 61, 758 CAS .
Q. Y. Zhang, C. H. Yang and Y. X. Pan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 021107 CrossRef .
Q. Y. Zhang, G. F. Yang and Z. H. Jiang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 051903 CrossRef .
Q. Y. Zhang, C. H. Yang, Z. H. Jiang and X. H. Ji, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 061914 CrossRef .
J.-L. Yuan, X.-Y. Zeng, J.-T. Zhao, Z.-J. Zhang, H.-H. Chen and X.-X. Yang, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2008, 41, 105406 CrossRef .
S. Ye, B. Zhu, J. Chen, J. Luo and J. R. Qiu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 141112 CrossRef .
X. Liu, S. Ye, Y. Qiao, G. Dong, B. Zhu, D. Chen, G. Lakshminarayana and J. Qiu, Appl. Phys. B: Lasers Opt., 2009, 96, 51–55 CrossRef CAS .
G. Lakshminarayana and J. Qiu, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 481, 582 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ye, B. Zhu, J. Luo, J. Chen, G. Lakshminarayana and J. Qiu, Opt. Express, 2008, 16, 8989–8994 CrossRef CAS .
G. Lakshminarayana, H. Yang, S. Ye, Y. Liu and J. Qiu, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2008, 41, 175111 CrossRef .
D. Chen, Y. Wang, Y. Yu, P. Huang and F. Weng, Opt. Lett., 2008, 33, 1884–1886 Search PubMed .
B. M. van der Ende, L. Aarts and A. Meijerink, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3073 CrossRef CAS .
P. Denham, G. R. Field, P. L. R. Morse and G. R. Wilkinson, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1970, 317, 55–77 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Falin, K. I. Gerasimov, V. A. Latypov and A. M. Leushin, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2003, 15, 2833–2847 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Reeves, G. D. Jones and R. W. G. Syme, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1992, 46, 5939 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Bendall, C. R. A. Catlow, J. Corish and P. W. M. Jacobs, J. Solid State Chem., 1984, 51, 159–169 CAS .
D. R. Tallant, D. S. Moore and J. C. Wright, J. Chem. Phys., 1977, 67, 2897–2907 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, Y. Qiao, G. Dong, S. Ye, B. Zhu, G. Lakshminarayana, D. Chen and J. Qiu, Opt. Lett., 2008, 33, 2858–2860 Search PubMed .
O. L. Malta and L. D. Carlos, Quim. Nova, 2003, 26, 889–895 CAS .

Footnote† The air mass coefficient describes the solar spectrum after the solar radiation has passed through the earth’s atmosphere; it is the ratio of the solar radiation path length l to the atmosphere thickness lo, for solar radiation incident at an angle θ relative to the normal of the earth’s surface: llo−1 = 1/cos θ.7This journal is © the Owner Societies 2009
Table Content:
Bryan M. van der Ende	Bryan van der Ende attended Simon Fraser University (Burnaby, B.C., Canada) for his BSc degree, and the University of Guelph (Guelph, Ontario, Canada) for his MSc and PhD degrees. He is currently finishing a postdoctoral fellowship at Utrecht University, (Utrecht, The Netherlands) under the supervision of Prof. Andries Meijerink. He will soon begin a new postdoctoral position with Prof. Ralph Shiell at Trent University (Peterborough, Ontario, Canada).
Linda Aarts	Linda Aarts received her BSc degree in chemistry and subsequently completed the Masters programme in Chemistry and Physics at Utrecht University (Utrecht, The Netherlands). Currently she is a PhD student at Utrecht Univeristy and works under the supervision of Prof. Andries Meijerink on downconversion for solar cells.
Andries Meijerink	Andries Meijerink received his PhD in 1990 at the Utrecht University under supervision of Prof. George Blasse. Afterwards he joined the group of Prof. John Wright at the University of Wisconsin in Madison as a post-doctoral fellow. In 1996 he was appointed at the chair of Solid State Chemistry in the Debye Institute of the Utrecht University. He leads an active research group that focuses on the optical spectroscopy of lanthanide ions and of semiconductor quantum dots.

 	Fig. 1  Loss processes in a single-junction solar cell: (1) lattice thermalization losses; (2) transparency loss; (3) recombination loss; (4) junction loss; (5) contact voltage loss. Adapted from Richards,7 copyright 2006, with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 2  AM1.5G solar spectrum showing the fraction of terrestrial sunlight that is currently absorbed and effectively utilised by a thick crystalline silicon device, and the additional regions of the spectrum that can contribute to up- or downconversion. Reprinted from Richards,7 Copyright 2006, with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 3  Free ion energy levels of the trivalent lanthanide ions from Ce3+ (4f1) to Yb3+ (4f13). Levels are labelled by term symbols or, for some higher levels, capital letters. Reprinted from Dieke and Crosswhite,39 copyright 1963, with permission from the Optical Society of America.	 

 	Fig. 4  Energy level diagrams for three-centre energy-pooling: (a) cooperative mechanism; (b) accretive mechanism. Adapted with permission from Andrews and Jenkins.48 Copyright 2001, American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 5  Energy level diagrams for quantum cutting: (a) cooperative mechanism; (b) accretive mechanism. Adapted with permission from Andrews and Jenkins.48 Copyright 2001, American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 6  Energy schemes for different 2-photon upconversion processes with quantum efficiency normalized to the incident power (1 W cm−2). Transitions between energy levels are indicated by vertical arrows, and arrows connecting different ions indicate energy transfer. Horizontal lines are real energy levels. Adapted from Auzel,55 copyright 1990, with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  Overview of different resonant downconversion mechanisms demonstrated using two ions, I and II, with hypothetical energy level schemes. Transitions between energy levels are indicated by solid vertical arrows. Dashed vertical arrows and solid curved arrows connecting different ions indicate energy transfer. Horizontal lines are real energy levels. In the case of visible quantum cutting, the higher energy transitions are in the ultraviolet, and the lower energy transitions are in the visible. In the case of NIR quantum cutting, these transitions are in the visible and in the NIR, respectively. From Wegh et al.,45 copyright 1999. Adapted with permission from AAAS.	 

 	Fig. 8  
Emission spectra for SrF2:Pr3+ (0.1 mol%), Yb3+ (x mol%) where x = 0, 5, 17. Emission spectra were recorded under identical conditions for excitation at 441 nm at room temperature, and were corrected for the wavelength-dependent response of the detector system. Φ gives the photon flux per constant wavelength interval. Reprinted from van der Ende et al.,116 copyright 2009, with permission from Wiley-Blackwell.	 

 	Fig. 9  Energy levels and quantum cutting mechanism for the Pr3+–Yb3+ couple. A two-step energy transfer occurs upon excitation into the 3PJ (J = 0, 1, 2) and 1I6 levels of Pr3+. A single visible photon absorbed by these levels is thereby converted into two ∼1000 nm photons. Solid, dotted, and curved arrows represent optical transitions, nonradiative energy transfer processes, and nonradiative relaxation, respectively. Reprinted from van der Ende et al.,116 copyright 2009, with permission from Wiley-Blackwell.	 

 	Fig. 10  Diffuse reflectance (dashed curve) and excitation spectra (solid line) for the same SrF2:Pr3+ (0.3 mol%), Yb3+ (5 mol%) sample, demonstrating quantum cutting. Each spectrum is normalized to the 1D2 peak. The excitation spectrum monitored Yb3+ emission at 980 nm, and was corrected for wavelength-dependent instrument response. Reprinted from van der Ende et al.,116 copyright 2009, with permission from Wiley-Blackwell.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) The 3|0|1|31 trimer structure in fluorite crystals such as SrF2 (see Bendall et al.120 for explanation of notation), containing three substituted M3+ impurity ions, three charge-compensating anion interstitial ions, and one relaxed lattice ion. (b) The 4|1|2|41 tetramer structure in fluorite crystals such as SrF2 (see Bendall et al.120 for explanation of notation), containing 4 M3+ impurity ions, 4 charge-compensating anion interstitial ions, and two relaxed lattice ions in 〈111〉 directions that will enhance Coulomb interactions with M3+ ions. The cluster is stabilized by the presence of a central anion vacancy. Adapted from Bendall et al.,120 copyright 1984, with permission from Elsevier.	 
Footnote
† The air mass coefficient describes the solar spectrum after the solar radiation has passed through the earth’s atmosphere; it is the ratio of the solar radiation path length l to the atmosphere thickness lo, for solar radiation incident at an angle θ relative to the normal of the earth’s surface: llo−1 = 1/cos θ.7

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2009
