Redox-active benzoquinones as challenging “ non-innocent ” linkers to construct 2D frameworks and nanostructures with tunable physical properties  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TC05335C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TC05335C
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 1548-1572Redox-active benzoquinones as challenging “non-innocent” linkers to construct 2D frameworks and nanostructures with tunable physical properties

        
          
            Noemi 
            Monni
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Marco Sanna 
            Angotzi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mariangela 
            Oggianu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Suchithra Ashoka 
            Sahadevan
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Maria Laura 
            Mercuri
          
        
      *a
aDipartimento di Scienze Chimiche e Geologiche, Università degli Studi di Cagliari, S.S. 554—Bivio per Sestu, I09042 Monserrato, CA, Italy
bApplied Physical Chemistry, Centre of Molecular Devices, Department of Chemistry, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, SE-10044 Stockholm, Sweden. E-mail: mercuri@unica.it
Received 
      4th November 2021
    , Accepted 19th December 2021First published on 20th December 2021AbstractExploiting redox activity in supramolecular frameworks such as coordination polymers, metal–organic frameworks and related nanostructures is of paramount importance both at the molecular level and for their technological applications, since the modulation of their redox states is an emerging strategy to enhance their physical properties. In the plethora of organic linkers, quinone derivatives are excellent redox-active ligands, widely used for various applications such as electrode materials, flow batteries, pseudocapacitors, etc. Benzoquinones undergo a one-electron reversible reduction to form a semiquinone radical species that can be further reduced to form hydroquinone. Remarkably, the quinoid ring can be functionalized with various functional groups making these systems excellent linkers to construct supramolecular frameworks as well as challenging platforms to tune the redox potential and therefore the stability of radical anions and electrochemical performances of the obtained materials. The recent advances on benzoquinone-based 2D CPs/MOFs and related nanostructures are reported, highlighting the extreme versatility of this class of redox-active linkers in tailoring the physical properties of the obtained materials. The current/future potential of these materials in electrochemical and technologically relevant applications will also be envisioned.
1. Introduction
Redox-active supramolecular frameworks including coordination polymers (CPs) and Metal–Organic Frameworks (MOFs) have aroused ever-growing interest in recent years as they represent promising materials for applications as electrode materials in batteries,1–3 magnetic4 and conductive materials,5etc.6–8 CPs are infinite coordination frameworks built by the self-assembly of metal ions and organic linkers to form various architectures in different dimensions.9–13 MOFs are a subclass of CPs, possessing potential voids that can lead to permanent porosity as a unique feature, which are an important class of materials due to their potential practical applications in various fields such as sensing,14 adsorption,15 wastewater treatment,16 photocatalysis,17 biomedicine,18etc.19,20
Different ways are known to promote redox activity in CPs and MOFs, mainly, by the use of redox-active metal ions or/and ligands, mixed valence metal ions, post-synthetic modifications by ligand/counterion exchange, or by the intercalation of redox-active guest ions, etc.21–24 The possibility of tremendous synthetic versatility by different combinations of redox-active metal ions and organic linkers allows modulating the physical and chemical properties of these materials, in particular, magnetic and/or conducting properties.
There are several redox-active metals that are used in CPs and MOFs, ranging from transition metal ions25–30 to lanthanides,31 leading to several promising applications ranging from photochromic materials to lithium-ion batteries,32 flow batteries,33 and photocatalysis.34 One of the most extensively used redox-active metal ions in 2D networks is the FeII/FeIII couple,25 since the report of mixed-valence Prussian blue, [FeIII4{FeII(CN)6}3]·xH2O,35 which has been commonly used as a dye. The commonly used redox-active linkers in CPs and MOFs are the derivatives of tetrathiafulvalene,36 viologen,37 quinone,38 triphenylamine,39 porphyrin,40 ferrocene,41 pyrazine,42 hexaaminobenzene43 and tetrazine44,45 (Chart 1). Among these ligands, quinone and its derivatives have been widely studied for their impressive redox properties.46,47 Quinones are naturally occurring organic molecules forming conjugated six-membered cyclic diketones in ortho or para positions, namely, o-quinones and p-quinones, respectively. Quinones (Q) undergo reversible electron transfer reactions to form fully reduced hydroquinone QH2via an intermediate semiquinone radical species (Q˙−) (Scheme 1).48
 Chart 1  Some of the redox-active organic linkers used in the construction of CPs and MOFs. 
 Scheme 1  Reversible redox reactions: (a) p-quinone/hydroquinone (b) o-quinone/catecholate couple. 
Quinones have been of special interest to chemists, since a long time, mainly as catalysts for industrial applications, although their derivatives have been widely used in coordination and material chemistry.49,50 In particular, chelation of o-quinone ligands with metal ions shows that they can behave as “non-innocent” ligands, exhibiting different oxidation states depending upon the metal ion nature, due to the quite similar energy levels of quinone and metal ion orbitals.51,52 The redox activity of o-quinone ligands could also induce an intramolecular electron-transfer between two redox-active centers with the formation of two electronic isomers (valence tautomers), as response to external stimuli such as change of pH, temperature, pressure, or light.53
Remarkably, in 2016, Harris et al.,54 reported on the simultaneous solid-state redox-switching of optical, magnetic, and conducting properties through a o-benzoquinoid ligand in a 1D chain compound, Mn(N,OL)(DMSO) (N,OLH4-4,5-bis(pyridine-2-carboxamido)-1,2-catechol). Upon soaking the compound in a solution of Cp2Co reductant, MnII(N,OL2−) undergoes a reversible one-electron reduction to form [MnII(N,OL˙3−)]− showing electrochromic response from dark green to dark purple solid. This ligand-centered reduction shows a significant enhancement of both magnetic exchange coupling strength and conductivity values, compared to neutral compound, with J = −0.38(1) to −15.6(2) cm−1 and σ = 2.33(1)× 10−12 to 8.61(1) × 10−8 S cm−1, respectively (σ ∼ 10−6–10−23 S cm−1 range for insulators).54 Remarkably, the oxidized 1D chain can be easily regenerated, highlighting the capability of benzoquinoid ligands to mediate reversible solid-state redox reactions in non-porous extended networks.
Derivatives of p-benzoquinone, particularly 2,5-dihydroxy-1,4-benzoquinone (dhbq) and 3,6-disubstituted-2,5-dihydroxy-1,4-benzoquinone, commonly known as anilic acids H2X2An, X = Cl, F, Br, NO2, CN, etc.), have received significant attention as they are largely used as excellent organic linkers in combination with numerous 3d and 4f metal ions to build CPs and MOFs with different dimensions and unique physical properties (Fig. 1).55–62 The first example of a semiquinoid-bridged 1D single-chain magnet, containing the chloranilate linker, Cl2An, formulated as (NMe4)2[(Cl2An)FeCl2], is generated via temperature-induced metal-to-ligand electron transfer (valence tautomerism) from high spin FeII units (L2−) to low spin FeIII (L˙3−) upon decreasing temperature, with a transition temperature of T1/2 = 213 K and conductivity value of σ = 5.7 × 10−8 S cm−1.63
 Fig. 1  Extended networks based on a 3,6-disubstituted-2,5-dihydroxy-1,4-benzoquinone. 
Since the discovery of graphene, the search for other 2D ultrathin layered materials is steadily progressing for their peculiar properties originating from their ultrathin thickness64 and for their wide potential applications ranging from sensors,65 biomedicine,66 to electronic devices67 and energy storage devices.68 Along with other 2D inorganic nanomaterials, the novel members of the nanosheets family, the ultrathin 2D MOF nanosheets, are considered a challenge up to now in both fundamental studies and applications.69 Very recently, Han et al. reported on a unique nanostructured electrode, fabricated by anchoring bimetallic Mn/Ni MOF, formed by terephthalic acid-based (benzene-1,4-dicarboxylic acid, H2BDC) linkers, on multi-walled carbon nanotubes (Mn/Ni-MOF@MWCNTs), via bottom-up approach (vide infra). This electrode shows an excellent specific capacitance of 793.6 F g−1, high energy density (33.2 W h kg−1) and capacity retention of 78.3% over 2000 cycles. The increased surface area of the reported nanostructure provides several active sites for facilitating enhanced electron-transfer during the charging/discharging cycles. This approach paves the way for the development of promising future generation energy storage devices.70
Several reviews are reported on CPs and MOFs formed by redox-active linkers and nodes,26,71–76 evidencing the crucial role of redox-activity on their physical properties and applications. The present review covers up new insights on benzoquinones (BQ)-based 2D CPs/MOFs and nanostructures over the last decade, highlighting the extreme versatility of this class of redox-active linkers in tailoring the physical properties of 2D frameworks and the related applications. Firstly, redox active properties of quinones are summarized in next section, while the following three sections are focused on redox activity of (i) benzoquinone-based 2D CPs/MOFs, (ii) benzoquinone-based 2D nanostructures and (iii) other benzoquinone-related nanostructures. Additionally, a summary of the synthetic protocols of redox 2D-benzonquinone based frameworks and nanostructures discussed in the text is reported. Furthermore, the current/future opportunities of these materials in the development of electrochemical and related technological applications will be envisioned.
2. Redox activity of quinones
The chemistry of quinones and their derivatives has been studied for over 80 years and, recently, these molecules have received renewed interest in material chemistry due to their “non-innocent” behavior (vide supra) and inherent redox activity.54,63,77–80 In fact, benzoquinones can undergo a one-electron reversible reduction which leads to the formation of a semiquinone species that can be further reduced to hydroquinone. These reversible reactions make this class of molecules ideal candidates as building blocks for constructing switchable materials, where magnetic and/or conducting properties can be tuned by switching quinone–semiquinone species. Fine control of the reduction process can be achieved by modulating different factors, including solvents polarity and supporting electrolytes, formation of inter/intramolecular hydrogen bonding, stabilization of the semiquinone/quinone couple etc.81–85 In addition, pH plays a crucial role on the reduction process: when pH is acidic, the reduction occurs as a single two-electron two-proton process (Scheme 2a), while when the pH is basic, no protons are involved in the reduction process, which consists in a two-electron reduction (Scheme 2b). At neutral pH, the reduction can take place through the former or the latter mechanism, depending on the pKa value of the –OH group of the generated hydroquinone.86–89 The same mechanism exists when a quinone derivative is incorporated in a MOF, showing a Proton-Coupled Electron Transport, which can be modulated as a function of the pH.46 Furthermore, if the reduction occurs in a neutral aprotic media, the quinones are reduced via two successive one-electron reduction steps to form a semiquinone (Q˙−) species, in a completely reversible way and a quinone dianion (Q2−) species in a quasi-reversible way.82,90–95
 Scheme 2  (a) Two-electron two-proton reduction mechanism of quinone (aqueous media, acidic pH). (b) Two-electron reduction mechanism of quinone (aqueous media, alkaline pH). 
The reduction process is also influenced by the nature of various substituents in the benzoquinone rings, which represent a key factor in tuning the reduction potentials of the molecules. By a proper choice of substituents at the 3,6 positions of the six-membered ring, i.e. halogens, nitro, amino, alkoxy, carboxylic and benzoic groups, etc., delocalization of spin density can be tuned, allowing for the stabilization of radical anion.96 Furthermore, the nature of substituents affects the one-electron reduction potential. In fact, the presence of electron-donating substituents, i.e., the amino group, makes the species more difficult to reduce with a more negative potential. On the contrary, when an electron-withdrawing substituent, as chlorine, is present, an opposite trend with more positive potentials is observed.84
Spectroelectrochemical techniques such as Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR)97–99 and pulse radiolytic measurements85 are used to identify semiquinone radicals. Absorption spectra of semiquinones can be used to study their formation rate, acid–base equilibria, and redox potential; for example, absorption spectra can distinguish ortho, para, and meta semiquinones, which absorb at different wavelengths: 300 nm, 430 nm, and 450 nm, respectively.100,101
Vibrational spectroscopy techniques such as Infrared (FT-IR) and Raman are also used as a probe to identify the presence of semiquinones in a complex or an extended network. In fact, C–O and C–C stretching modes and C–C–C bending modes show a frequency dependence on the oxidation state.102 Semiquinones generally give a higher νC–O stretching frequency (1400 cm−1) in FT-IR spectroscopy than their corresponding benzoquinones in the dianionic form (1540–1480 cm−1).30 As for Raman spectroscopy, the typically observed peak for benzoquinones is at 1600 cm−1, while for the corresponding semiquinones, it is downshifted to 1400 cm−1.103,104 The spectroscopic data along with single crystal structural data elucidate the presence of radical species in the 2D frameworks and, hence, provide relevant structure/properties relationships.
3. Benzoquinone-based 2D frameworks
Benzoquinone/semiquinone-based 2D frameworks are revised, discussing the synthetic methodologies (Fig. 2), followed by the properties and potential applications of the most relevant systems.
 Fig. 2  Schematic representation for the synthetic routes for benzoquinone-based 2D frameworks. 
3.1 Synthetic routes
There are numerous ways to prepare 2D CPs and MOFs ranging from conventional one-pot synthesis, hydro/solvothermal methods, microwave, sonochemistry, to less-known dry-gel conversion methods, etc.105 However, despite the enormous potential of such synthetic ways, scaling up of these 2D materials in an economical way, for commercialisation and industrial applications, is still limited and the search for alternative synthetic protocols for practical applications is still in progress. One of the conventional methods for preparing such materials is the one-pot synthesis. The redox-active metal ions and organic linkers are dissolved in suitable solvents under stirring and/or heating, and the powder/crystals are formed in situ by self-assembly. Another well-known methodology is the solvothermal method, where the redox-active metal precursors and organic linkers dissolved in a solvent are usually placed in closed vessels such as a Teflon vial inside an autoclave or a bomb, generating autogenous pressure (Fig. 2). The commonly used solvents are N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), N,N-diethylformamide (DEF), acetonitrile, etc.106 If water is used as the solvent, the method is called hydrothermal. The temperature and crystallization time varies from room temperature to elevated temperature, above the boiling point of the solvent, followed by cooling from several hours to days.
However, post-synthetic reduction has also been used to promote redox-activity through counter ion/ligand exchange or by using a reducing agent such as cobaltocene, naphthalenide, etc.104,107 For example, in the (Me2NH2)2[Fe2(Cl2An)3]·2H2O·6DMF compound, obtained by using the solvothermal method, the H2Cl2An linker were fully reduced to its semiquinoid form by using cobaltocene (Cp2Co), affording a compound, formulated as (Cp2Co)1.43(Me2NH2)1.57[Fe2L3]·4.9DMF, showing different physical properties (vide infra).104 Moreover, in the case of porous polymers, incorporation of guest molecules or insertion of ions in the pores of the network also promotes redox activity.61
There are many factors affecting the formation of coordination frameworks, such as, molar ratios of precursors, pH, solvent, reaction time, and temperature, etc.108,109 Hence, it is a very challenging and cumbersome process to optimise the conditions. High-throughput (HT) methods are used to systematically investigate several synthetic conditions in parallel.110 HT methods involving solvothermal reaction consists of HT reactor block, which contains several Teflon vials with varying volume ranging from a few microliters to a few millilitres (Fig. 2). Hence, several parameters can be tested in parallel and in a short time, allowing for systematic optimisation of reaction conditions. The microporous benzoquinone-based AlIII-MOFs, of formula (CH3)2NH2)3[Al4(L1)3(L1˙)3]·3DMF and ((CH3)2NH2)3[Al4(L2)3 (L2˙)3]·9DMF (L1 = p-dhbq2−; L2 = Cl2An2−, chloranilic acid) were obtained via a HT synthetic method, containing 24 Teflon vials of 2 mL volume, at 120 °C, in DMF. Their structure is formed by a 2D porous framework with a well-known honeycomb arrangement, where hexagonal anionic layers are stacked on the cationic layers, forming pores. The ligands in the anionic layers are present in both their dianionic (L2−) and semiquinonic forms (L3−).111
In the layering technique metal precursors, ligands and counterions are dissolved in different solvents, by varying density and often, with another solvent in the middle. The different solutions are layered on top in a thin test tube and the crystals are usually formed at the interface through the slow diffusion over several days to weeks (Fig. 2). The Fe-benzoquinone-based 2D frameworks, formulated as (NPr4)2[Fe2(Cl2An)3]·2 (acetone)·H2O, where Cl2Ann− = 2,5-dichloro-3,6-dihydroxy-1,4-benzoquinonate and NPr4+ = tetrapropyl-ammonium cation, were obtained by using slow diffusion of a solution of H2Cl2An ligand in acetone (top layer), into an aqueous solution containing FeIICl2 and NPr4Br (bottom layer) yielding black, hexagonal crystals, showing thermally induced valence tautomeric transition (vide infra).112
3.2 Tuning/switching of magnetism and conductivity
The first solid-state electrochemical study on a 2D CP of formula (PMePh3)2[Cd2(dhbq)3] (1), containing 2,5-dihydroxy-p-benzoquinone (p-dhbq), was reported by Abrahams et al.113 Dhbq was selected as redox-active connecting linker while CdII metal node was chosen for assigning redox-activity unambiguously to the ligand. Its structure consists of 2D [Cd2(dhbq)3]2− anionic layers showing hexagonal voids of (6,3) topology, where CdII nodes are surrounded by 6 oxygen atoms provided by three dhbq2− ligands, in a distorted octahedral coordination. Two PMePh3+ cations are associated with each hexagonal hole, forming cationic/anionic ABAB… stacks. Remarkably 1 was reduced from p-dhbq2− (deprotonated 2,5-p-dihydroxybenzoquinone), to thb4− (tetrahydroxybenzene) and re-oxidized, through solid-state cyclic voltammetry, performing more than 30 redox cycles, by changing electrolytes. A reduction peak at −680 mV and the return oxidation peak at −505 mV was observed at the different conditions used. Noteworthy the reduction and oxidation processes (maybe one-electron) occurred maintaining unaltered the (PMePh3)2[Cd2(dhbq)3] framework while receiving/losing electrons. This pioneered study provides significant insights on the potential of benzoquinones as challenging building blocks for constructing extended frameworks114 whose physical properties can be fine-tuned through redox activity, while keeping unchanged the supramolecular architecture (vide infra).
As mentioned earlier, semiquinone in an extended framework is obtained either in situ or by soaking the material in a reducing solution, through a post-synthetic approach. An example of a permanently porous 2D framework incorporating the linker in its semiquinone form, was reported by Harris et al. in 2015.103,104 The porous semiquinoid magnet is formulated as (Me2NH2)2[Fe2(Cl2An)3]·2H2O·6DMF (2), with a BET surface area of 885(105) m2 g−1. It was synthesized through a solvothermal method in DMF, by combining FeII ions with H2Cl2An which lead to a spontaneous electron transfer from FeII to Cl2An2−, leading to the simultaneous formation of both FeII/FeIII and benzoquinone/semiquinone couples.1032 is a porous antiferromagnet, showing a spontaneous magnetization below 80 K, while the magnetic ordering temperature (Tc = temperature above a material behaves as paramagnet) decrease to 26 K when the solvent molecules are removed from the channels. Due to its delocalized nature, 2 shows also conductivity values of σ = 1.4(7) × 10−2 S cm−1 (Ea = 0.26(1) eV) and 1.0(3) × 10−3 S cm−1 (Ea = 0.19(1) eV), for both solvated and desolvated forms respectively, showing the typical values of a semiconductor (σ ∼ 10−1–10−4 S cm−1) and being a porous multi-functional framework with the coexistence of magnetism and conductivity.103 Furthermore, when 2 is soaked in a cobaltocene (Cp2Co) solution for 48 hours, a new compound formulated as (Cp2Co)1.43(Me2NH2)1.57[Fe2L3]·4.9DMF (3) is formed. Here, through a post-synthetic approach, it was possible to fully reduce Cl2An2− in its semiquinoid form, changing the physical properties of the framework. In fact, the presence of Cl2An˙3− leads to stronger magnetic exchange interactions between metal ions, and so the magnetic ordering temperature increases up to 105 K, which is a remarkable value for a metal–organic solid and one of the highest values for a semiquinone-based framework (Fig. 3).104 In addition, the pressed-pellet conductivity measurement of 3 shows σ = 5.1(3) × 10−4 S cm−1 (Ea = 0.34(1) eV). This decrease of one order of magnitude compared to 2, could be attributable to the fully reduced ligand in its semiquinoid form, which removes the mixed-valence character in the framework.
 Fig. 3  Plots of magnetisation vs. T under an applied dc field of 10 Oe for 2 (blue) and its desolvated form (red). Perspective view of crystal structure of 2 along the c axis, shown in the middle. The grey, red, green and orange spheres represent the C, O, Cl and Fe atoms, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 103. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Several studies on redox-activity and metal–ligand interactions have been performed30,115 in such 2D frameworks, due to their potential profit in electrochemical applications. On this way, very recently Long et al. have fabricated a lithium-ion device prototype by using as a cathode the iron-semiquinoid framework 2, prepared by a different synthetic approach,116 which shows extraordinary capacities due to the redox processes involving both ligand and metal ions. Remarkably, the spectroscopical and electrochemical studies pointed out that the combination of iron and chloranilate, which have close reduction potentials, give rise to a porous and conductive material with a charge capacity retention over 50 cycles at charging rates up to 150 mA h g−1. Long et al. also reported a new phase, formulated as (Me2NH2)4Fe3(Cl2An)3(SO4)2(DMF)1.4(THF)1.0 (4), obtained with a similar synthetic strategy.1164 shows a 2D structure characterized by a double-walled honeycomb packing with hexagonal channels, similar to previously reported channels. Despite 4 presents both metal and ligand mixed-valency, obtained by an incomplete metal-to-ligand electron transfer, it shows a pressed-pellet conductivity value of 8.4 × 10−5 S cm−1, two to three orders of magnitude lower than that of the similar frameworks 2, and no magnetic ordering. In fact, both the conductivity and the magnetic ordering are not promoted as in 2, because this framework does not present an infinite connectivity between iron ions and ClAn2−.
ClAn2−-bridged 2D layered frameworks can also undergo thermally driven electron transfer (TDET), as reported for the first time by Miyasaka et al.112 which present a 2D novel framework of formula (NPr4)2[Fe2(Cl2An)3]·2(acetone)·H2O (5) (NPr4+ = tetrapropyl ammonium cation), obtained via layering technique (vide supra). 5 shows the typical honeycomb packing and it exhibits a thermally induced valence tautomeric transition at T1/2 = 236 K (cooling)/237 K (heating) between Fem+ (m = 2 or 3) and ClAnn− (n = 2 or 3), giving two tautomers of formula [Fe2+HSFe3+HS− (Cl2An2)2(Cl2An˙3−)]2− at T > T1/2 and [Fe3+HSFe3+HS−(Cl2An2−)(Cl2An˙3−)]2− at T < T1/2, respectively. Despite the well-known structure, 5 shows uncommon electronic and magnetic properties, exhibiting slow relaxation of magnetization at low temperature and a quasi-one-dimensional ferrimagnetic spin due to the structure. In fact, this 2D framework can be considered as a chain-knit network composed of Δ and Λ-stranded [–FeIII–(Cl2An˙3−)] magnetic chains with the diamagnetic Cl2An2− acting as a bridge between chains, resulting in a Single Chain Magnets behaviour. Interestingly, when 5 is desolvated, a new phase is formed at low-temperature (LT), formulated as [(Fe3+)2(Cl2An2) (Cl2An˙3−)]2− followed by, the [(Fe2.5+)2(Cl2An2−)(Cl2An2.5−)2]2− intermediate phase and the final phase [(Fe2+)2(Cl2An2−)3]2− at high-temperature (HT). Hence, the three observed different charge-ordered states demonstrate how the guest interactions (in this case solvent molecules) may lead to a new multiple switching system.117
Interestingly, the use of redox-active linkers belonging to the anilate family allows for the rational design and development of suitable 2D frameworks with applications as energy storage materials. In particular, frameworks obtained by combining iron(II) ions with X2An2− (X = H, F, Cl) exhibit remarkable physical properties, due to the good matching of frontier orbitals between the components. As an example, by combining FeII with H2F2An, a new mixed-valence 2D framework, formulated as (NEt4)2[Fe2(F2An)3] (1.5-(acetone)) (6), has been reported, showing honeycomb packing with typical (6,3)-topology.118 The mixed-valence character arises from both metals and ligands FeII/FeIII and F2An2−/F2An˙3− respectively, with a consequent ferromagnetic coupling between FeII and FeIII and slow magnetic relaxation. Furthermore, the material shows high conductivity values of 1.8 × 10−2 S cm−1 (300 K) and 1.3 × 10−2 S cm−1 (261 K), and it was investigated as a potential anode for Lithium Ion Batteries (LIBs), revealing a high reversible capacity of 676.6 mA h g−1, low working voltage and high capacity retention, 90% over 200 cycles.118
The cations used to build CP/MOFs can play a crucial role in forming the porous frameworks since they can act as templating agent.38,119 The incorporated cation itself, in fact, can be redox-active and it can interact with the anionic network, as recently reported by Abrahams et al., who obtained a new 2D mixed-valence FeII-chloranilate framework with the insertion of the viologen dication PhenQ2+ (5,6-dihydropyrazino[1,2,3,4-lmn][1,10]-phenanthrolindiium), formulated as (PhenQ)[Fe2(Cl2An)3]·solvent (7).61 Remarkably, the redox-activity of viologen cation in the framework is maintained, affording additional redox states to the framework without destroying the desirable magnetic and conducting properties. 7 has a spontaneous magnetization below 31 K and behaves as a semiconductor, with a conductivity of σ295K = 4.9 × 10−4 S cm−1 (Ea = 0.249(2) eV). Noteworthy, the incorporation of redox-active cations in a porous framework can be considered as a peculiar strategy for modifying its electronic structure and physical properties via non-covalent interactions.
Intriguingly, radical spins based on semiquinones, when electrochemically generated, can tune/switch magnetic properties in cationic/anionic layered 2D frameworks. Miyasaka et al.120 reported on the magnetic phase stability switching of (NBu4)[MnCr(Cl2An)3], the well-known layered 2D porous ferrimagnet (8),121 by using an electrochemical method based on a LIBs, which allows for the simultaneous insertion/extraction of ions and electrons into/from a target material, producing a reversible redox reaction (Cl2An2− + e− ⇌ Cl2An˙3−) and a switchable control of the radical spin (Scheme 3). To balance the negative charge, Li+ ions migrate in framework pores. The reversible Cl2An2− + e− ⇌ Cl2An˙3− redox reaction is crucial as the generated semiquinone promotes a stronger antiferromagnetic exchange interaction between MnII and CrIII metal ions than the pristine material (8), showing a significant increase of the Tc value from 10 K to 36 K for the reduced semiquinone-based (discharge) form. 8 could withstand over 10 cycles of reduction/oxidation process, maintaining almost the same discharge and charge capacities values, giving the first example of reversible magnetism control based on a semiquinone species.120
 Scheme 3  Schematic representation of magnetic phase stability tuning by electron-filling control of benzoquinoid linkers via LIB system. Arrows indicate the reversible insertion/extraction of Li+ ions in the framework, affording the switchable control of the radical spin. The black, red, green and pink spheres represent the C, O, Cl and Mn/Cr atoms, respectively. Disordered NBu4+ groups located between the honeycomb layers are portrayed in pale gray. Reprinted with permission from ref. 119. Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society. 
The reversible phase switching between paramagnetic and ferrimagnetic states occurred in the 10 K (Tc charged)–36 K (discharged) range. When a similar honey-comb 2D layered framework, formulated as (H3O)2(phz)3[Fe2(Cl2An)3] (9), is tested in the same LIB system, an enormous magnetic change in the framework is observed. In fact, the insertion of Li+ ions leads to the formation of a new compound formulated as (Li)3(H3O)2(phz)3[(Fe)2(Cl2An)3] (9_red). Here, due to the ligand reduction, the radical anion Cl2An˙3− is generated, and the strong antiferromagnetic superexchange interactions with FeII ions give a magnetic ordering temperature of 128 K, one of the highest values reported so far.38 On this way, Harris et al.107 reported on the post-synthetic chemical redox switching of a same type of framework, of formula (Me4N)2[Mn2(Cl2An)3]·3.2Et2O (10). By soaking 10 in a THF reducing solution of sodium naphthalenide and 1,2-dihydroacenaphthylene for several days, the semiquinoid-based compound Na3(Me4N)2[Mn2(Cl2An)3]3.9THF (11) was obtained, through a single-crystal-to-single-crystal (SC–SC) reduction process, which involved only the Cl2An2− ligand, while keeping constant MnII oxidation state. This post-synthetic reduction induces a simultaneous change in both conductivity and magnetism of the framework. In fact 10 is paramagnetic above 1.8 K and shows a room temperature (RT) conductivity value of σ = 1.14(3) × 10−13 S cm−1 (Ea = 0.74(3) eV), while 11, exhibits antiferromagnetic interactions between MnII ions below 41 K and a conductivity value of σ = 2.27(1) × 10−8 S cm−1 (Ea = 0.489 (8) eV. In addition, the complete reversibility of the process was observed when 11 was soaked in an oxidative solution of Ferrocene (Cp2Fe+), forming Na(Me4N)[Mn2(Cl2An)3] 5.5THF 0.8CH3CN (12) (Fig. 4), exhibiting similar physical properties as 10.107
 Fig. 4  Schematic representation of SC–SC conversions in compounds 10–12 (top). Magnetization vs. T plot under an applied dc field of 10 Oe and conductivity values for 10–12 compounds (down). The MnII coordination polyhedra are represented in purple, while the linkers are in orange (benzoquinone form) and green (benzoquinone/semiquinone form). Adapted from ref. 107 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
3.3 Tuning of organic electrodes performances
Organic electrode materials which possess high electron conduction, good structure stability and multiple redox centers are excellent candidate for ions storage. Very recently, Wang et al. reported on a Ni-coordinated tetramino-benzoquinone (NiII-TABQ) (13) Metal–Organic Polymer (MOP), prepared via d–π hybridization, which shows a robust and stable 2D layered structure formed by polymer chains linked through hydrogen bonds. In this material, both the ligand and the 2D structure play a key role in electron conduction and Na+ diffusion along the polymer chains and hydrogen bonds. The ligand acts as a redox center through the conjugated benzoid carbonyls and imines, allowing for insertion and extraction of Na+ ions. The 2D structure is so robust that it can stand 100 cycles with almost 100% coulombic efficiencies at large capacities (469.5 mA h g−1 at 0.1 A g−1 and 345 mA h g−1 at 8 A g−1).122 This material, due to its versatile features (vide supra), is an highly desirable material and a potential candidate for sodium-ion storage. Interestingly, when both redox-active metals (CuI/CuII) and benzoquinone derivatives, namely, anthraquinone (AQ) linker, were used simultaneously, a novel 2D MOF was obtained which has been successfully demonstrated, for the first time, to be an excellent cathode material in LIBs.123 This material, formulated as {Cu(2,7-AQDC)(DMF)}n·xDMF (2,7-H2AQDC = 2,7-anthraquinonedicarboxylic acid) (14), was synthesized through a solvothermal reaction in DMF and it shows a Kagomé lattice architecture. Each triangular unit of the lattice is formed by a paddlewheel cluster of two CuII ions surrounded by four carboxylates which are linked to the other clusters through AQ groups. Remarkably, 14 shows an independent redox activity from AQ, which exhibits two reversible redox steps and the reduction from CuII to CuI, making it suitable as an excellent cathode active material for LIBs. The batteries that include 14 have been tested showing excellent robustness in the 4.0–2.0 V voltage range and no capacity loss within 50 cycles. Remarkably, the theoretical capacity (162 mA h g−1) of 14 is similar to the required capacity for commercial inorganic materials, i.e. LiCoO2, 148 mA h g−1. However, the practical value is strongly reduced due to the limited exposed surface area and low charge-transfer rate of MOFs. To overcome this issue, it would be desirable the use of MOFs for industrial batteries in the form of thin films and nanocrystals.123 In 2020, a novel conductive and redox-active copper benzoquinoid MOF, CuTHQ (THQ = tetrahydrobenzoquinone) (15),124 has been obtained via a simplified hydrothermal method, by combining the tetrahydroxy-1,4-quinone (THQ) linker with copper ions, leading to a higher density of redox active centers and to nanosized pores. A 2D honeycomb layered framework was formed with a porous hexagonal structure (BET surface area of ∼137 m2 g−1 and pore volume of d 0.43 cm3 g−1) which endows an excellent electrochemical response, due to the intrinsic redox behavior of both THQ and CuII. 15 exhibits a typical semiconducting behavior with a temperature-dependent electrical conductivity of 2.15 × 10−3–0.16 μS cm−1 from 30 to 110 °C respectively. Exceptionally, 15 shows a very high value of capacity, >350 mA h g−1 and capacity retention of 85% after 100 cycles, going beyond most MOF-based cathode materials used in rechargeable energy storage devices.124 Most importantly, a comprehensive spectroscopic multi-technique approach, including hard X-ray absorption spectroscopy (hXAS), EPR, FT-IR, and cyclic voltammetry (CV), was successfully used to unveil the redox mechanism, demonstrating that the coordination unit/copper ions involve a three-electron/one-electron redox processes respectively, unlike previously discussed frameworks (vide supra). The electrochemical Li+ insertion/extraction mechanism in Cu-THQ MOF is shown in Scheme 4. Steps I–III show the charging process, where fully lithiated Cu-THQ MOF reversibly extracts two Li+ in step I and II, further, in step III, CuI is oxidized to CuII, with the insertion of PF6−, for maintaining charge balance. Steps IV–VI show the discharge process, where CuII is further reduced to CuI in IV, and eventually, in step V and VI, the coordination unit accepts two Li+ completing charge/discharge processes.
 Scheme 4  Electrochemical Li+ insertion/extraction mechanism in Cu-THQ MOF (15). Steps I-III show charging and IV–VI shows discharging processes. The binding sites between Li and O, and variation of oxidation states of copper are indicated by blue and grey circles. The grey, red and orange spheres represent the C, O and Cu atoms, respectively Copyright (2020) Wiley used with permission from ref. 124. 
4. Benzoquinone-based ultrathin layered nanostructures
The latest advances on benzoquinone-based 2D Nanostructures are revised, discussing both synthetic methodologies (Fig. 5) and the properties and potential applications of each system.
 Fig. 5  Schematic representation of the synthetic routes for redox-active ultrathin layered nanostructures. 
4.1 Synthetic routes
The methodologies reported so far for the fabrication of 2D nanostructures can be itemized in two main approaches: top down and bottom up. Benzoquinone derivatives, particularly anilates, are able to construct 2D layered structures, due to their 1,2-bidentate coordination mode, which can be exfoliated through different top-down approaches, such as micromechanical scotch-tape methods, solvent-assisted methods, etc.125–128
One of the widely used top-down approaches consists in the ultrasonication-assisted liquid-phase exfoliation (ULPE) (Fig. 5).129 The 2D layered frameworks are formed by strong coordination bonds within the layers, whereas between the neighbouring layers experience weak van der Waals forces. Sonication can overcome this issue leading to the exfoliation of the layered frameworks into mono (quite rare) and/or thin multi-layered nanosheets which are then stabilized in a dispersion by solvent interactions. The choice of solvent is an important factor and it must be chosen in such a way to facilitate the exfoliation and stabilize the dispersions. The dispersion is later centrifuged to obtain a homogeneous colloidal suspension.
The commonly used solvents for a successful exfoliation of 2D quinone-based networks are methanol,126 ethanol125,130 and isopropanol.56 Nanosheets of benzoquinone derivatives, in particular, anilate-based 2D layered CPs are receiving great attention nowadays due to the easy fabrication, robustness with crystallinity retainment up to the nanoscale and thickness below 10 nm.56,125,126,130
In the case of ULPE method, in order to induce redox activity into a nanostructure, the crystals of the pristine 2D framework should be treated with a suitable oxidizing solution in a suitable solvent.131 The selection of the oxidizing solution and the ultrasonication conditions are crucial, as mild oxidising agents can often lead to the oxidation of only surface layers, as the inner layers become inaccessible due to the close stacking of 2D layers. In contrast, strong oxidising agents may lead to the decomposition of the material. For example, the pristine Zn-BTA MOF, obtained by self-assembly of 2,3,5,6-tetrakis(pcarboxyphenyl)hydroquinone, H4BTA, linker and Zn(NO3)2via a solvothermal method, was exfoliated to redox-active 2D Metal–Organic Nanosheets (MON) by using an oxidising agent during the exfoliation process via ULPE method. Initially, Zn-BTA MOF was soaked in a mild hypervalent iodine-based oxidising agent, phenyliodine(III) diacetate (PIDA) in methanol solution. The solution remains colourless even after 24 hours, suggesting no noticeable oxidation of hydroquinone to quinone, whereas IR studies revealed only partial oxidation, even though occurring presumably at the surface. Furthermore, oxidation with a stronger oxidizing agent, as PIFA [iodobenzene-I,I-bis(trifluoroacetate)], leads to the decomposition of the MOF. However, by treating Zn-BTA methanolic solution with PIDA, in ultrasonication for 1 hour, a colour change from initial colourless dispersion to a yellow suspension was observed, suggesting a successful oxidation of the hydroquinone core to benzoquinone (vide infra).131
Other top-down methods include the mechanical exfoliation based on the scotch-tape method. Although top-down approaches are simple and low cost, the latter is not commonly used for the fabrication of redox-2D benzoquinone-based nanosheets, probably due to the lack of control on the yield of nanosheets and on their morphology, particularly thickness and lateral size. The most commonly used synthetic routes to fabricate redox-active benzoquinone-based 2D nanostructures are summarized in Fig. 5.
In this regard, bottom-up approaches such as Chemical Vapour Deposition (CVD), Atomic Layer Deposition (ALD), etc.135–137 are powerful methods to grow 2D materials with high reproducibility in a controllable way. In these methods, gas precursors react with the surface of the substrate and are deposited on the substrate forming 2D nanostructures. ALD is another vapour-phase thin-film technique producing controllable and uniform films, where substrate is placed in a chamber and gas precursors are introduced sequentially, affording single layers. The unreacted precursors are purged out with the carrier gas between the steps. The layer deposition steps can be repeated as many times as possible, depending on the required thickness (Fig. 5). Recently, the in situ deposition of lithiated hydroquinone-based nanosheets as cathode was demonstrated by using the Atomic/Molecular Layer Deposition (ALD/MLD) (vide infra).138 A relatively new bottom-up method, quite challenging, is the crystal-controlled polymerization,132,133 where nanosheets of organic polymers are grown on the crystal surface of suitable inorganic and organic oxidants, via the diffusion of the monomer vapour, at low temperature, under ambient pressure. Remarkably an improved control of nanosheets thickness and lateral size is obtained. Here, the experimental setup consists of a large chamber where two separate vessels are present, one containing the oxidant crystal and the other containing a liquid monomer, heated at a suitable temperature under ambient pressure. The diffusion of the liquid monomer occurs on the crystal surface of the organic oxidant. Therefore, subsequent growth of multilayers of the polymer occurs by oxidative polymerization (Fig. 5). The commonly used heteroaromatic monomer liquids for conductive polymers are 3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene (EDOT), pyrrole (Py), etc. The main advantage of this method is that the morphology control of the nanosheet, mainly thickness and lateral size, can be achieved by controlling the reaction time and the crystal size, respectively.134
Recently, crystal-controlled polymerization approach was used for the synthesis of redox-active organic polymer nanosheets based on polypyrrole (PPy) and poly-(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) on the crystal surface of quinone derivatives. Redox-active quinone crystals act as oxidizing agent and template for polymerization and morphogenesis. A rapid polymerization occurs on the surface of the oxidant crystal when it was reached by the monomer vapour through diffusion. The obtained nanosheets showed enhanced conductive and electrochemical properties (vide infra).133
4.2 Tuning/switching of conductive and/or electrochemical properties
Very recently, Maka et al.131 reported on the first example of 2D metal–organic nanosheets (16), that exhibit chemically induced redox switching behaviour. The self-assembly of the molecular building blocks, i.e. Zn(NO3)3 and H4BTA linkers (vide supra), leads to a close stacking of 2D layers, affording a 3D network which prevents the oxidation of the hydroquinone-based ligand due to the non-accessible active sites. Impressively, when the bulk MOF is exfoliated to 2D MONs, by using the ULPE method in the presence of PIDA oxidizing solution, the hydroquinone core was oxidized to benzoquinone due to more accessible active sites and the colorimetric change induced by the redox reaction is visible at naked eye (colorless → yellow) and further supported by UV-Vis measurements (Fig. 6). Remarkably, if compared to the pristine bulk MOF, the few-layer 2D MONs, obtained by ultrasonication in MOF methanol suspension, having the hydroquinone core on their surface, can be reduced reversibly to quinones by treatment with ascorbic acid, a well-known reducing agent, turning back to the yellow color.131 Noteworthy, the aforementioned chemically induced redox switching behaviour of the quinone-hydroquinone core, showing a fast and reversible colour change and thickness up to the nanoscale, may be exploited in practical applications, mainly in the development of electrochromic devices such as smart windows.135–138
 Fig. 6  Exfoliation of 3D MOF to 2D MON (16) demonstrating the redox switchability (top). UV/Vis absorption spectra showing the reversible redox switchability on the suspension (down). Copyright (2019) Wiley used with permission from ref. 131. 
Although research and development of new technologies based on benzoquinone-frameworks are still at a very early stage, the use of benzoquinone/hydroquinone core in nanosheets/thin films for electrochemical applications has been raising great interest in recent years. Nanosheets of lithium-based salts of 2,5-dihydroxyterepthalic acid (DHTPA), 17, have been recently studied as potential active materials for positive or negative electrodes of rechargeable LIBs.139 The tetralithium salt can undergo a reversible redox reaction in the ranges of redox potentials, 1.8–3.2 V and 0.4–2.0 V, corresponding to the reactions of Li4DHTPA/Li2DHTPA and Li4DHTPA/Li6DHTPA, respectively, as shown in Fig. 7.
 Fig. 7  Electrochemical redox reactions between Li4DHTPA and Li2DHTPA/Li6DHTPA with redox potential associated. Reprinted with permission from ref. 139. Copyright © 2013, American Chemical Society. 
Among the different morphologies as bulk, nanosheets and nanoparticles (NPs), based on the same organic salt as the active material, nanosheets showed the best electrochemical performances, due to the presence of more accessible active groups and a high-specific surface area. They exhibit high first discharge capacity of 223 mA h g−1 at 0.1C (93% of the theoretical capacity 241 mA h g−1), discharge capacity of 145 mA h g−1 at 5C and a capacity retention of 95% at 0.1C, after 50 cycles.139 The cycleability and relevant electrode capacity of the reversible redox reactions make the Li4C8H2O6 nanosheets promising initial active materials of both positive and negative electrodes for the fabrication of fully organic rechargeable LIBs.
A new strategy to construct 2D conductive and redox-active organic nanostructures consists in the use of benzoquinone derivatives as a substrate for growing nanosheets of an organic polymer that could be oxidized, taking advantage of the redox activity of benzoquinones. In fact, it is possible to grow in high yield nanosheets of conventional conductive polymers, like polypyrrole (PPy) and poly-(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT), on the benzoquinone crystal surface by using crystal-controlled polymerization approach, through the diffusion of monomer vapors, at low temperature and ambient pressure conditions (Fig. 5, vide supra). The benzoquinones crystals used as substrate play multiple roles in the growth of redox-active nanosheets, acting at the same time as the oxidizing agent and the template for polymerization and morphogenesis. The oxidative process is governed by the reduction potential of the benzoquinone derivatives that increase with the presence of electron-withdrawing groups in the ring, while their use as templates afford 2D morphologies that show enhanced conductive properties raising from the 2D nature, controlling the lateral size through the benzoquinones pristine substrate.140 Remarkably, this approach allows for an appropriate tuning of the lateral size and thickness of nanosheets and the morphology control may play a key role in enhancing properties of conventional materials or in constructing new composite materials acting as size-controlled building blocks through a layer-by-layer self-assembling process.
Remarkably, benzoquinones showing great electrochemical performances due to (i) their relatively high redox potential (2.8 V vs. Li/Li+), (ii) theoretical maximum capacity of 496 mA h g−1 and, particularly, high solubility in liquid electrolytes, are excellent candidates for building up all-solid-state organic thin-film batteries, fully operative without conductive additives (Fig. 8). Nisula et al.141 have demonstrated the in situ deposition of lithiated dianionic (discharged) hydroquinone-based thin films (18) acting as suitable active cathode materials. Dilithium-1,4-benzenediolate (Li2Q) high-quality thin films were obtained due to a layer-by-layer process limited by surface saturation, thus leading to the thickness control up to the nanometer-scale. Mostly impressive, by using ALS/MLD techniques: (i) high precision ultra-thin films are obtained by directly depositing the species in the lithiated form, avoiding post-deposition treatments and (ii) the nanostructured organic cathode allows for a high redox reaction rate of the quinones, thus improving the device performances.141
 Fig. 8  ALD/MLD mechanism of lithiated quinone, dilithium-1,4-benzenediolate (Li2Q) thin film (18). Reprinted with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2018 from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Interestingly, Luo et al. reported on a 2D microporous covalent-organic framework based on poly(imide-benzoquinone), obtained by solvothermal reaction in the presence or absence of graphene additive, namely, PIBN-G (19_G) and PIBN (19), which can be used as purely organic cathode in LIBs.142 In fact, the presence of micropores of 1.5 nm size favors an easy access of both electrons and Li+ ions to the plenty of redox-active carbonyl groups present in the structure, promoting reversible redox reactions, as shown in Fig. 9. PIBN-G shows an excellent performance as active cathode material with high reversible specific capacities of 271.0 mA h g−1 at 0.1C, which is close to the theoretical value of 280.0 mA h g−1, whereas PIBN shows a lower specific capacity of 244.8 mA h g−1. The high electron transport and Li+ diffusion in PIBN-G may be due to the strong interaction and charge-transfer between PIBN and graphene.
 Fig. 9  Gradual lithiation and delithiation of carbonyl groups of PIBN in discharge/charge cycles, involving 8 Li+ in the imide carbonyl groups (first step) and another 2 Li+ in the benzoquinone carbonyl groups (second step). Copyright (2018) Wiley used with permission from ref. 142. 
A unique electrode architecture, DMQ@rGO (20), was reported by Gogotsi et al., which consists of a redox-active xerogel obtained, via hydrothermal method (Fig. 10), by combining 2,5-dimethoxy-1,4-benzoquinone (DMQ) with nanosheets of reduced 2D graphene oxide (rGO). DMQ@rGO shows high capacitance, 650 F g−1 at 5 mV s−1vs. graphene (<200 F g−1), excellent capacitance retention of 99% after 25000 cycles at 50 mV s−1 and noticeably cycling performance. In this composite material, DMQ serves multiple purposes: (i) it provides stable redox-active centres, due to the presence of electron donors methoxy groups at 2,5-positions of the quinone moiety, which stabilize the radical anion (vide supra); (ii) its inherent redox-activity allows for the occurrence of high capacitance and energy density due to reversible redox reactions and (iii) it acts as an efficient spacer to avoid the aggregation of neighbouring 2D nanosheets giving rise to a 3D hierarchical electrode.143
 Fig. 10  Synthesis of redox-active xerogel. Reprinted with permission from ref. 143. Copyright 2016 from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The intriguing results clearly highlight the capability of benzoquinone derivatives to fabricate 2D nanostructures that could be exploited for improving the performance of energy storage systems.
5. Quinone-related nanostructures and applications
Different classes of quinone-related nanostructures, particularly, polymer nanoparticles (NPs), quinone-capped inorganic nanostructures, and 3D CPs or organometallic compounds, are revised, discussing firstly their synthetic methodologies, summarized in Fig. 11, followed by the properties and application of each system, highlighting the role of the o-quinone-catechol or p-quinone/hydroquinone redox core.
 Fig. 11  Schematic representation of the synthetic routes for preparation and/or coating of nanostructures. 
5.1 Polymeric nanostructures
Regarding the first class of nanostructures, the synthesis is generally conducted with a monomer containing the redox active group through spontaneous polymerization or with a cross-linker, either in water144,145 or in organic146 media. Protected monomers145 are sometimes used to enable radical polymerization and to avoid uncontrolled cross-linking since unprotected catechols are known to be radical inhibitors.
Bae et al.146 synthesized quinone-propionic acid (QPA)-based polymeric NPs combining N-(1,3-dihydroxypropan-2-yl)23-methyl-3-(2,4,5-trimethyl-3,6-dioxo-cyclohexa-1,4-dien-1-yl) with glutaric acid or adipic acid (21). When loaded with Paclitaxel (PTX), the well-known anticancer drug, the NPs revealed redox-triggered drug release. Indeed, using a chemical reducing agent, sodium dithionite (E = −0.66 V at pH 7 at 0.35 M), the p-quinone part of the polymer undergoes intramolecular cyclization via two-electron reduction favouring the release of PTX. Kong and co-workers144 fabricated polydopamine (PDA) NPs through the reaction of dopamine with MnO, generating the orthoquinone derivative, which undergoes polymerization to form fluorescent PDA NPs (22). PDA NPs are used as sensors for reduced glutathione (GSH) in human blood since GSH can reduce MnO2 into Mn2+ ions and inhibits the formation of fluorescent NPs. Pirnat et al.145 exploited the redox potential of catechols to prepare polymer NPs ranging from 40 to 360 nm to be used in organic batteries (25). Their redox reaction in batteries consists in the reversible reduction of quinone to hydroquinone dilithium salt by using two electrons and two Li+ cations. It was found that small particles (40 nm) with low (1%) cross-linker content showed highest electroactivity. A reversible redox process was observed at 0.45 and 0.40 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) for the reduction of poly(4-vinyl catechol) and poly(3-vinyl catechol), respectively. Changing the acidic aqueous electrolyte to neutral, a shift in the redox potential of 440–475 mV to lower values was observed.
5.2 Benzoquinone-capped inorganic nanostructures
Benzoquinones are extensively used as capping agents or linkers with inorganic nanostructures, such as carbon black, carbon nanotubes (CNTs), noble metals and metal oxides. The capping of carbon-based nanostructures with benzoquinone derivatives is afforded through electrodeposition in the case of carbon black NPs or simple mixing of the precursors when CNTs are employed. To allow the generation of oxygen-containing functional groups of the surface of CNTs, a reflux treatment with concentrated acid (e.g., HNO3 67% w/w) can be emoployed.147 Finally, the as-obtained composite is left to dry. Benzoquinone-coated metal NPs can be synthesized either with one-pot or two-pot approaches.148–152 The first one provides for the nucleation and growth of metal NPs in a solution where the hydroquinone units are already present. In this case, the metal precursors (AgNO3, HAuCl4, or CuSO4) are reduced with the concomitant oxidation of the hydroquinone to its quinone form. The syntheses are generally performed in water, in one case with the help of ultrasonication to favour the silver nucleation at the interface between the organic and the water phase. In the two-pot approach, the previously-synthesized metal NPs are then covered by simply mixing the NPs with the benzoquinone derivative. Concerning metal oxide coated NPs, also in this case there are examples of one-pot153,154 and two-pot155–159 approaches. The one-step technique is carried out through the precipitation of the metal oxide precursor in the presence of the benzoquinone, at room temperature or in hydrothermal condition.153 In the two-step approach, as for metal NPs, the coating of metal oxide is obtained by simply mixing the NPs with the organic molecule for several hour, followed by centrifugation and washing with water to remove the un-reacted species.
The reversible redox properties related to the catechol-quinone moieties in catechin covered-carbon black NPs were exploited for the GSH detection in blood samples (26).160 During the reaction with GSH, the catechol initially generates an o-quinone through a two-electron, two-proton redox process, then, with an additional two-electron, two-proton process, the o-quinone undergoes a nucleophilic attack by the thiol of the GSH, resulting in a four-electron, four-proton process. Wang et al. prepared CNTs covered with PDA (cathode) and woven with zinc wire (anode) to make wearable power textiles (23).147 Two cathodic peaks were found in the cyclic voltammetry, corresponding to the simultaneous ZnII binding and the concerted reduction of o-quinone to phenol. The prepared power fibers showed a high specific capacity of 372.3 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1 and excellent cycling stability. CNTs were also functionalized with pyrroloquinoline quinone (PQQ)-dependent alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) enzyme or a nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADp) for bio-electrooxidation of ethanol (27).161 The direct and mediated electron transfer mechanisms were studied for the CNTs and CNTs-decorated with gold NPs, revealing a catalytic current density of 781 and 925 μA cm−2, respectively. Gold NPs alone were coated with several benzoquinone-based capping agents, such as hydroquinone (28, 29),148,162 5-hydroxy-3-hexanedithiol-1,4-naphthoquinone (30),163 theaflavine (31),151 calix[7]hydroquinone (32),149 or Ac-(3,4-dihydroxyphe-nylalanine)4− methoxy-poly(ethylene glycol) amine (33).150 The hydroquinone units are commonly employed as reducing agents to promote the growth of NPs or as an electrochemical sensor for microRNA detection, while the orthoquinones are employed as anti-cancer. The mechanism involves one and two-electron reduction of quinones to semiquinone radicals and dihydroquinone, respectively. Remarkably these reactions are reversible and both species can be re-oxidized back, transforming molecular oxygen to reactive oxygen species (ROS) in a redox cycle that can cause DNA damage, leading to apoptosis. Other noble metal NPs, namely silver and copper, have been functionalized with benzoquinone derivatives (e.g., PDA) for their antibacterial and antibiofilm activity, due to their redox activity which involves a ROS mechanism.152 Concerning the coating of metal oxide, spinel iron oxide (magnetite or maghemite),153,155,156,158,164 manganese oxide,154 α-alumina and zincite157 are commonly employed. Indeed, Fe3O4 NPs surfaces were modified with catechol or hydroquinone-based molecules, including PDA (24), polyhydroquinone, or green tea polyphenol extracts (34, 35), to exploit their reducing abilities. For example, PDA-coated Fe3O4 NPs can be used as biodetectors for N-terminal pro- B-type natriuretic peptide, a biomarker for cardiac disease prognosis, based on electrochemiluminescence (ECL) method. The reaction between Ru(bpy)32+ and peroxydisulfate generates the excited Ru(bpy)32+*, which relaxes to the ground state inducing emission. The PDA@Fe3O4 NPs were found to enhance the ECL sensitivity, through a quenching strategy. The Ru(bpy)32+* can be indeed annihilated by the quinone units of PDA via energy transfer, generating hydroquinone and Ru(bpy)33+. These typed of NPs can also be used to degrade dyes such as Rhodamine B (RhB) in the presence of persulfate, methyl orange or methyl red in the presence of NaBH4. The hydroquinone units transfer electrons to the Fe3+ species to generate Fe2+ that can reduce and degrade the dyes. Azo dyes were also decolorized with α-Al2O3, ZnO, or Al(OH)3 functionalized with anthraquinone-2,6-disulfonate (AQDS), through reductive biotransformation (36).157 Finally, Kumaran and its group154 prepared MnO2 nanorods modified with p-quinone as a supercapacitor for energy storage (37). The exhibited specific capacitance was about 320 F g−1 with more than 83% of capacitance retention after 2000 cycles. The increase capacitance retention if compared to the pristine MnO2 was attributed to the synergistic effect between MnO2 and the quinone part that interconnect creating a framework structure, which facilitates the fast ion and electron transport.
5.3 Organometallic nanocatalysts
Another class of nanostructures concerns organometallic nanocatalysis (ON), where the metal ions such as manganese or rhodium are π-bonded to the quinone ring through 4-fold, 5-fold, or 6-fold hapticity. The organometallic compound (e.g., [(η6-1,4-hydroquinone)Rh(COD)]+, 38) is treated with a metal alkoxide (e.g., Al(Oi-Pr)3) in THF to generate an insoluble solid and 2-propanol (Fig. 12).165 The synthesis is activated by deprotonation of the hydroxyl groups by Al(Oi-Pr)3, with concomitant coordination of the quinone oxygen atoms to the aluminum and a η6 → η4 hapticity modification in the bonding of the quinoid ring to the rhodium. The deprotonation of the hydroquinone groups is accompanied by electron transfer to the transition metal, acting as an internal oxidizing agent or an electron sink. The Rhodium complexes play a crucial role in multifunctional C–C coupling catalysis as they were used, for examples, for the polymerization of phenylacetylene. The same authors166 reported the preparation of core–shell nanocatalysts for carbene transfer reactions made up of a core of [(η6-1,4-hydroquinone)Mn(CO)3]+ (39) linked to Ti(OiPr)4 and a shell of [(η6-1,4-hydroquinone)Rh(COD)]+ also linked to Ti(OiPr)4. Another example of ONs is reported by Kim and co-workers (40),167 who reported the incorporation of magnetite NPs into [(η5-semiquinone)Mn(CO)3] through ligand exchange for the formation of a crystalline coordination polymer. The as-prepared catalyst can therefore exploit the magnetic behavior of magnetite NPs allowing a facile separation of the particles.
 Fig. 12  Synthesis of self-supported organometallic nanocatalyst. Reprinted with permission from ref. 165. Copyright © 2006, American Chemical Society. 
5.4 Nanostructured coordination polymers
A further class of nanostructures regard valence-tautomeric metal–organic NPs, such as polymers of {Co(3,5-dbsq)(3,5-dbcat)} units,168 where dbsq and dbcat stand for are respectively the semiquinone radical and catecholate forms of 3,5-di-tert-butyl-1,2-benzoquinone (dbq, 41), respectively. In a typical experiment, Co(CH3COO)2·4H2O is added with stirring to an ethanolic solution of the organic molecules at room temperature. Once a blue color is formed, the NPs can be sedimented by the fast addition of water to the mixture. The NPs are therefore centrifuged, washed with water and redispersed in water.
These types of complexes can interconvert between two valence-tautomers low spin ls-[CoIII(3,5-dbsq)(3,5-dbcat)] and high-spin hs-[CoII(3,5- dbsq)2] through intramolecular transfer between the metal ion and the ligand in response to thermal variation (Fig. 13a).
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic representation of the VT equilibrium between ls-CoIII and hs-CoII isomers. (Copyright (2015) Wiley used with permission from ref. 137 (b) coordination polymerization used to obtain valence-tautomericn NPs. (c) χT values as a function of temperature for the amorphous metal–organic nanospheres (full squares) and crystalline coordination polymer (empty circles). (d) SEM image of NPs created by infinite coordination polymerization of {CoIII(3,5-dbsq)(3,5-dbcat)} units through bix ligands. (e) High-resolution TEM image of one spherical NP. (Copyright (2008) Wiley used with permission from ref. 168). 
The main feature of valence-tautomeric systems is the change of the magnetic moment during the high-spin to low-spin interconversion. For instance, at low temperatures, the observed χMT value is 0.4 emu K mol−1, which is consistent with the one unpaired electron of the LS-[CoIII (3,5-dbsq)(3,5-dbcat)]. At 340 K, an abrupt increase was observed, with a maximum value of χMT = 2.6 emu K mol−1 in agreement with conversion to the hs-[CoII-(3,5-dbsq)2] bearing one S = 3/2(catechol) and two S = 1/2 (semiquinone) independent units (Fig. 13c). The observed change of magnetic moment and optical properties under external stimuli, make these complexes ideal candidates for the use in molecular electronic devices and switches. Another example concerns [Co(bix)(3,5-dbsq)(3,5-dbcat)] NPs (42), where bix is a flexible bisimidazole bridging ligand, prepared by Amorìn-Ferrè et al.169 for drug release. The same coordination polymer was employed by Zhang and co-workers for the incorporation of Rhodamine B and its application for colorimetric and fluorescence sensing of hypochlorite. Indeed, ClO− oxidizes the ligands in 3,5-dbq, causing the destruction of the network and the release of RhB into the solution with a consequent change in colorimetric and fluorescent properties.170 You et al. exploited the good electronic conductivity of the redox-active [Co(bix)(3,5-dbsq)(3,5-dbcat)] NPs for the in situ formation, by electrochemical polarization, of CoOx NPs supported on indium tin oxide (ITO), employed as catalyst.171
The stoichiometric formula and functional properties of benzoquinone-based 2D frameworks, MONs and 2D nanostructures, discussed in the text, are summarized in Table 1.
Table 1 Stoichiometric formula and functional properties of benzoquinone derivatives-based 2D frameworks and nanostructures




Ligand
Stoichiometric formula
Functional properties
Ref.




2D CPs/MOFs





(PMePh3)2[Cd2(dhbq)3] (1)
Reversible redox activity

113






(Me2NH2)2[Fe2(Cl2An)3]·2H2O·6DMF (2)
Porosity with surface area: 885 m2 g−1

103,104



Antiferromagnet, Tc = 80 K





σ = 1.4(7) × 10−2 S cm−1, Ea = 0.26(1) eV




(Me2NH2)2[Fe2(Cl2An)3] (2 in its desolvated form)
Antiferromagnet, Tc = 26 K

103,104




σ =1.0(3) × 10−3 S cm−1, Ea = 0.19(1) eV




(Cp2Co)1.43(Me2NH2)1.57[Fe2(Cl2An)3]·4.9DMF (3)

T
c = 105 K

104




σ = 5.1(3) × 10−4 S cm−1, Ea = 0.34(1) eV




Capacity retention over 50 cycles (charging rates up to 150 mA h g−1)




(Me2NH2)4Fe3(Cl2An)3(SO4)2(DMF)1.4(THF)1.0 (4)
No magnetic ordering

116




σ = 8.4 × 10−5 S cm−−1




(NPr4)2[Fe2(Cl2An)3]·2(acetone)·H2O (5)
Thermally induced valence tautomeric transition at T1/2 = 236 K (cooling)/237 K (heating)

112



Single chain magnet behaviour




(PhenQ)[Fe2(Cl2An)3]·solvent (7)
Spontaneous magnetization below 31 K

61




σ = 4.9 × 10−4 S cm−1 (295 K)





E
a = 0.249(2) eV




(NBu4)[MnCr(Cl2An)3] (8)
Magnetic switching from paramagnetic to antiferromagnetic

120




T
c reversibly modified by LIB charge/discharge cycles from 10 K to 36 K




(H3O)2(phz)3[Fe2(Cl2An)3] (9)
Paramagnetic




(Li)3(H3O)2(phz)3[(Fe)2(Cl2An)3] (9_red)
Antiferromagnetic ordering at Tc = 128 K

38



(Me4N)2[Mn2(Cl2An)3]·3.2Et2O (10)
Antiferromagnetic ordering at Tc = 1.8 K

107




σ = 1.14(3) × 10−13 S cm−1





E
a = 0.74(3) eV




Na3(Me4N)2[Mn2(Cl2An)3]3·9THF (11)
Antiferromagnetic ordering at Tc = 41 K

107




σ = 2.27(1) × 10−8 S cm−1, Ea = 0.489(8) eV




Na(Me4N)[Mn2(Cl2An)3]5·5THF0.8CH3CN (12)
Antiferromagnetic ordering at Tc = 1.8 K

107




σ = 1.45(2) × 10−13 S cm−1







(NEt4)2[Fe2(F2An)3] (1·5-(acetone)) (6)

σ = 1.8 × 10−2 S cm−1 (300 K)

118




σ = 1.3 × 10−2 S cm−1 (261 K)





E
a = 64 meV




Capacity = 676.6 mA h g−1, capacity retention of 90% over 200 cycles







(Ni-TABQ) (13)
Electron conduction (σ = 0.68 S m−1) and Na+ diffusion

122



Capacitance = 469.5 mA h g−1 at 0.1 A g−1 and 345 mA h g−1 at 8 A g−1




Capacity retention of 100% over 100 cycles







{Cu(2,7-AQDC)(DMF)}n·xDMF (14)
Theoretical capacitance = 162 mA h g−1

123



No capacity loss after 50 cycles





CuTHQ (15)
Capacitance > 350 mA h g−1

124



Capacity retention of 85% after 100 cycles



σ = 2.15 nS cm−1 (303 K)



σ = 0.16 μS cm−1 (373 K)


2D MONs/nanostructures





ZnBTA MON (16)
First example of optical properties due to redox switchability

131






Lithiated 2,5-dihydroxyterephtalic acid (Li4C8H2O6) (17)
Active materials for rechargeable lithium-ion batteries.

139



Discharge capacity of 223 mA h g−1 at 0.1C




Discharge capacity of 145 mA h g−1 at 5C




Capacity retention of 95% at 0.1C, after 50 cycles







Lithiated quinone (Li2C6H4O2) thin films (18)
Cathode material for Li-ion batteries (LiBs)

141






Polypyrrole (PPy) and poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) nanosheets on quinone derivatives

σ = 287 S cm−1, capacitance = 523 F g−1 at the current density of 18 A g−1

140






Poly(imide-benzoquinone) COF in the presence and absence of graphene additive PIBN-G (19_G) and PIBN (19)
Cathode materials for LIBs, with specific capacities of 271.0 and 244.8 mA h g−1 at 0.1C, for 19_G and 19, respectively.

142






Xerogel of DMQ on 2D reduced graphene oxide, DMQ@rGO (20)
Capacitance = 650 F g−1 at 5 mV s−1 and capacitance retention of 99% after 25000 cycles at 50 mV s−1

143



Benzoquinone-related nanostructures





QPAMN-based redox-sensitive polyester (21)
Redox-triggered drug release with the reduction of the paraquinone part of the polymer

146






Polydopamine (PDA) NPs (22)
Reduced glutathione (GSH) sensing in human blood

144



PDA covered CNTs woven with zinc wire (23)
Wearable power textiles with specific capacity of 372.3 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g

147



PDA covered Fe3O4 NPs (24)
Bio detector for N-terminal pro- B-type natriuretic peptide

164





Catalytic reduction of dyes

155






Poly-vinyl catechol NPs (25)
Cathodes in organic batteries

145






Catechin covered carbon black NPs (26)
GSH detection in blood samples

160






PQQ-dependent alcohol and aldheide dehydrogenase (PQQ-ADH and PQQ-AldDH) covered multi-walled CNTs (MWCNTs) and MWCNTs-decorated Au NPs (27)
Bio-electrooxidation of ethanol via direct and mediated electron transfer

161






H2Q coated Au NPs (28)
Reducing agent for the growth of Au NPs

148






H2Q-SH coated Au NPs (29)
Nucleation and growth of Ag NPs

162






JUG-SH coated Au NPs (30)
miRNA detection

163






TfQ coated Au NPs (31)
Anticancer potential against ovarian cellsx

151






Calix[7]hydroquinone coated of Ag NPs (32)
Nanoreactor, container, and template for the synthesis of Ag NPs

149






Ac-DOPA4-mPEG Coated Ag or Au NPs (33)
Reducing agent for the growth of Au NPs

150






EC coated Fe3O4 NPs (34)
Magnetic resonance imaging

153






EGCG coated Fe3O4 NPs (35)









AQDS cated α-Al2O3, ZnO, or Al(OH)3 NPs (36)
Decoloration agent for azo dyes

157






MnO2 nanorods modified with paraquinone (37)
Capacitance = 320 F g−1

154






Organometallic nanocatalyst (38)
Polymerization agent for phenylacetene

165






Organometallic nanocatalyst (39)
Carbene transfer reaction

166






Organometallic nanocatalyst (40)
Incorporation with magnetite NPs for facile magnetic separation

167






Valence-tautomer [CoIII(3,5-dbsq)(3,5-dbcat)] NPs (41)
Variation of the magnetic moment during the high-spin to low-spin interconversion

168



[CoIII(3,5-dbsq)(3,5-dbcat)(bix)] NPs (42)



169–171





Summary and outlook
The materials herein discussed evidence the challenging role of the benzoquinone/semiquinone core in tuning the physical properties of 2D frameworks and nanostructures, which, indeed, may lead to new technologically relevant applications. Quinone derivatives, in fact, are promising redox-active linkers for constructing extended frameworks of different dimensions and nanostructures due to their: (i) inherent redox activity, i.e. two-electron reversible reduction to form aromatic hydroquinones via semiquinone radical formation; (ii) non-innocent behaviour, due to different accessible oxidation states of the ligand depending on the chelation to metal; (iii) ability to tune redox potential, solubility and electrochemical response, through functionalization of the quinoid ring system with various substituents, via conventional methods of organic chemistry.
A summary of the different synthetic routes to fabricate these materials is reported. Noteworthy it comes out that the incorporation of a semiquinone in a 2D framework is an appealing synthetic strategy to properly tune its physical properties, particularly, magnetism and/or conductivity. It could be achieved through in situ or post-synthetic reduction of the benzoquinone derivatives, by soaking the material in a suitable reducing solution. Most often, extended frameworks with magnetic metal centres and non-redox-active diamagnetic linkers give rise to paramagnetic insulators or with low electrical conductivity, but, with redox-active linkers, strong metal–radical coupling occurs which may provoke an enhancement of magnetic and transport properties.107 Remarkably the layered cationic/anionic 2D frameworks which undergo reversible redox processes and simultaneous switching of magnetism are particularly attractive for their potential use in next-generation technologies, more energy efficient and faster such as magnetic transistors, terahertz information processing and multi-functional chips.138 Furthermore when porosity coexists with magnetism, and/or conductivity as observed in these layered cationic/anionic 2D frameworks, the porous channels allow for facile insertion/extraction of ions and electrolytes. Most importantly, these layered frameworks show improved capacity and discharge potential, which can compete with inorganic cathode materials, making them promising candidates as organic cathode materials in next-generation battery technologies and in the development of practical and efficient energy storage devices such as fuel-cell batteries, solar cell components, etc.120,124
Improved capacity and discharge potential were also observed in 2D nanostructured materials containing the benzoquinone/hydroquinone core, particularly nanosheets/thin films. The different synthetic top-down approaches to fabricate nanosheets, as micromechanical scotch-tape and solvent-assisted exfoliation (ULPE) methods were explored. ULPE method in particular, show the advantage to exfoliate MOFs which possess, in their pristine bulk form, non-accessible redox-active active sites, leading to the formation of 2D Metal–Organic Nanosheets (MONs). Due to their high surface area and consequent accessibility to the redox-active sites, MONs are enabled to show a reversible redox switching behaviour associated with a fast colorimetric change, crucial for the development of new electro-active materials for next-generation molecular devices such as smart windows.
Atomic/molecular layer deposition (ALD/MLD) instead is a bottom-up approach which allows for a high reproducible growth of nanosheets/thin films under a controllable way. Thus, through bottom-up methods it is possible to fully exploit the capability of benzoquinone/hydroquinone core to act as potential active materials for positive or negative electrodes of rechargeable LIBs. In fact, the benzoquinone/hydroquinone derivatives can be used: (i) to form nanosheets and/or be deposited in situ via ALD/MLD as thin films,139,141 (ii) as building blocks of redox active purely organic or hybrid frameworks,142,143 (iii) as oxidant substrates and templates to grow conductive organic nanostructures.140 Nowadays, the current research on redox active benzoquinone/hydroquinone 2D nanostructures is at a very early stage and one can foresee the potential applications in near future. Nonetheless, due to their versatility and their great electrochemical performances, such 2D nanostructures may be excellent candidates as platforms for future energy storage systems.
Nanostructures based on quinone derivatives are further discussed. Besides the formation of polymeric NPs, employed mainly for redox-triggered drug release and organic batteries, benzoquinones are also used as a capping agent of CNTs, metal, and metal oxide NPs. In this context, they display peculiar properties for both the material design, acting as reducing agent to promote the growth of noble metals NPs and their redox-related applications in the environment, biomedicine and catalysis. Benzoquinone derivatives can also form organometallic nanocatalysts, where the metal is π-bonded to the hydroquinone ring, whose deprotonation is accompanied by electron transfer to the transition metal, acting as an internal oxidizing agent or an electron sink. Finally, valence-tautomeric metal–organic coordination polymers, prepared in nanosized form, can be exploited as molecular electronic devices and switches, due to the observed change of magnetic moment and optical properties during the low-spin to high-spin interconversion.
The use of redox-active benzoquinones as “non-innocent” linkers to construct 2D frameworks and nanostructures with tunable physical properties represents a challenge towards practical applications, even though their general performance is still modest compared to 2D inorganic materials. However, there is plenty of room for improving their performance, mainly due to their inherent capability to fine tune their redox potential and electrochemical response, by playing with the substituents at the benzoquinone moiety. By a wise choice of substituents, such as electron-donor substituents, it would be possible to stabilize the semiquinone form (vide supra), provoking a further enhancement of the magnetic ordering temperature and transport properties. The post-synthetic reduction is a further strategy which allows for a simultaneous modulation of these physical properties. 2D room temperature ferromagnetic semiconductors are the desired targets for fabrication of commercial spintronic devices172–174 or shrinking conventional data storage which requires layers up to the nanoscale. Noteworthy, miniaturization at the nanoscale is also possible for these 2D frameworks, via exfoliation to nanosheets with a nanometric thickness or as thin films, or nanoparticles when benzoquinones work as capping agents or linkers with inorganic nanostructures, such as carbon black, carbon nanotubes (CNTs), noble metals and metal oxides nanoparticles. Particularly, nanosheets where the chemically induced redox switching behaviour of the quinone–hydroquinone core occurs simultaneously along with a rapid and reversible colour change, may be exploited in the development of electrochromic devices such as smart windows. Remarkably the combination of benzoquinones bearing electron-donor substituents with nanosheets of reduced 2D graphene oxide, is a promising route to obtain heterostructures of potential interest in next-generation battery technologies, as redox-active xerogels, which exhibit high capacitance, excellent capacitance retention after several cycles and relevant cycling performance. The benzoquinone/semiquinone couple represents an important resource that should provide new insights for the design and development of materials and related nanostructures with the desired physical properties and applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
CESA (Centro d’Eccellenza per la Sostenibilità Ambientale, accordo di programma RAS-UNICA-IGEA-AUSI, project number E58C16000080003) is acknowledged for the PhD grant and post-doctoral fellowship of MO and MSA. Fondazione di Sardegna – Convenzione triennale tra la Fondazione di Sardegna e gli Atenei Sardi, Regione Sardegna – L.R. 7/2007 Annualità 2018 – DGR 28/21 del 17.05.2015, through Projects F74I19000940007 and F74I19000920007, are acknowledged for the post-doctoral fellowship of MO. MIUR (Ministry of Education, University, Research) UNICA-UNISS Consortium PhD Course on Chemical Sciences and Technologies is also acknowledged for financing the PhD grant of NM.
Maria Laura Mercuri wishes to dedicate the present work to the memory of her beloved father, Cavalier Giuseppe Mercuri.
Notes and references
G. Nagaraju, S. C. Sekhar, B. Ramulu, S. K. Hussain, D. Narsimulu and J. S. Yu, Nano-Micro Lett., 2021, 13, 1–18 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. S. Renani, S. M. Khoshfetrat, J. Arjomandi, H. Shi and S. Khazalpour, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 12853–12869 RSC .

          X. Gao, Y. Dong, S. Li, J. Zhou, L. Wang and B. Wang, MOFs and COFs for Batteries and Supercapacitors, Springer, Singapore,  2020, vol 3 Search PubMed .
Y. R. Qiu, L. Cui, J. Y. Ge, M. Kurmoo, G. Ma and J. Su, Front. Chem, 2021, 9, 2–9 RSC .
L. S. Xie, G. Skorupskii and M. Dincă, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 8536–8580 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Cruz-Navarro, F. Hernandez-Garcia and G. A. Alvarez Romero, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2020, 412, 213263 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, X. Y. Daphne Ma, Z. Wang, L. Xu, T. Xu, C. He, F. Wang and X. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 7442–7450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. B. Choudhary, S. Ansari and M. Majumder, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2021, 145, 110854 CrossRef CAS .
I. K. V. Gonçalves, W. X. C. Oliveira, F. B. de Almeida, M. V. Marinho, W. D. do Pim and P. P. Silva-Caldeira, Polyhedron, 2021, 198, 115068 CrossRef .
C. L. Hobday and G. Kieslich, Dalton Trans., 2021, 50, 3759–3768 RSC .
M. L. Hu, M. Abbasi-Azad, B. Habibi, F. Rouhani, H. Moghanni-Bavil-Olyaei, K. G. Liu and A. Morsali, ChemPlusChem, 2020, 85, 2397–2418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. P. Tang, S. Yang, D. Liu, C. Wang, Y. Ge, L. M. Tang, R. L. Zhou and H. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 14356–14383 RSC .
Z. Chen, H. Jiang, M. Li, M. O’Keeffe and M. Eddaoudi, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 8039–8065 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Olorunyomi, S. T. Geh, R. A. Caruso and C. M. Doherty, Mater. Horizons, 2021, 8, 2387–2419 RSC .
M. Fakhraei Ghazvini, M. Vahedi, S. Najafi Nobar and F. Sabouri, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 104790 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Uddin, R. E. Ampiaw and W. Lee, Chemosphere, 2021, 284, 131314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wen, M. Feng, P. Zhang, H.-C. Zhou, V. K. Sharma and X. Ma, ACS ES&T Eng., 2021, 1, 804–826 Search PubMed .
M. Oggianu, N. Monni, V. Mameli, C. Cannas, S. A. Sahadevan and M. L. Mercuri, Magnetochemistry, 2020, 6, 1–14 CrossRef .
C. H. Hendon, A. J. Rieth, M. D. Korzyński and M. Dincă, ACS Cent. Sci., 2017, 3, 554–563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li, H. M. Wen, Y. Cui, W. Zhou, G. Qian and B. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8819–8860 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, L. Cui, J. Xie, C. F. Leong, D. M. D. Alessandro and J. Zuo, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2017, 345, 342–361 CrossRef CAS .
G. Férey, F. Millange, M. Morcrette, C. Serre, M. L. Doublet, J. M. Grenèche and J. M. Tarascon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 3259–3263 CrossRef PubMed .
H. G. Jin, M. Wang, J. X. Wen, S. H. Han, X. J. Hong, Y. P. Cai, G. Li, J. Fan and Z. S. Chao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 3899–3910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Halls, D. Jiang, A. D. Burrows, M. A. Kulandainathan and F. Marken, Electrochemistry, 2013, 12, 187–210 Search PubMed .
L. Sun, C. H. Hendon, S. S. Park, Y. Tulchinsky, R. Wan, F. Wang, A. Walsh and M. Dinca, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 4450–4457 RSC .
J. Calbo, M. J. Golomb and A. Walsh, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 16571–16597 RSC .
D. M. D’Alessandro, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 8957–8971 RSC .
C. K. Brozek and M. Dincă, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 12886–12891 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lu, H. G. W. Godfrey, I. Da Silva, Y. Cheng, M. Savage, F. Tuna, E. J. L. McInnes, S. J. Teat, K. J. Gagnon, M. D. Frogley, P. Manuel, S. Rudić, A. J. Ramirez-Cuesta, T. L. Easun, S. Yang and M. Schröder, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1–10 CrossRef .
M. E. Ziebel, L. E. Darago and J. R. Long, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 3040–3051 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lammert, M. T. Wharmby, S. Smolders, B. Bueken, A. Lieb, K. A. Lomachenko, D. De Vos and N. Stock, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 12578–12581 RSC .
Q. Li, D. Zhou, L. Zhang, D. Ning, Z. Chen, Z. Xu, R. Gao, X. Liu, D. Xie, G. Schumacher and X. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1970064 CrossRef .
D. P. Tabor, R. Gómez-Bombarelli, L. Tong, R. G. Gordon, M. J. Aziz and A. Aspuru-Guzik, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 12833–12841 RSC .
X. P. Wu, L. Gagliardi and D. G. Truhlar, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 7904–7912 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ludi, J. Chem. Educ., 1981, 58, 1013 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jiang, Y. G. Weng, Z. Y. Zhou, C. Y. Ge, Q. Y. Zhu and J. Dai, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 10727–10735 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Abdul-Hassan, D. Roux, C. Bucher, S. Cobo, F. Molton, E. Saint-Aman and G. Royal, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 12961–12969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, K. Taniguchi, Y. Sekine and H. Miyasaka, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2020, 494, 165818 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Peng, X. Yi, Z. Liu, J. Shang and D. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 14578–14585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. M. Campbell, K. W. Jolley, P. Wagner, K. Wagner, P. J. Walsh, K. C. Gordon, L. Schmidt-Mende, M. K. Nazeeruddin, Q. Wang, M. Grätzel and D. L. Officer, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 11760–11762 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Z. Deng, H. Yu and L. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 410, 128360 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Pedersen, P. Perlepe, M. L. Aubrey, D. N. Woodruff, S. E. Reyes-Lillo, A. Reinholdt, L. Voigt, Z. Li, K. Borup, M. Rouzieres, D. Samohvalov, F. Wilhelm, A. Rogalev, J. B. Neaton, J. R. Long and R. Clérac, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 1056–1061 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, L. Shi, L. Zhang, P. Chen, J. Zhu, X. Wang and Y. Fu, J. Mater. Chem., 2020, 8, 369–379 RSC .
N. Li, Z. Chang, M. Zhong, Z. X. Fu, J. Luo, Y. F. Zhao, G. B. Li and X. H. Bu, CCS Chem., 2021, 3, 1297–1305 CrossRef CAS .
O. Stetsiuk, A. Abhervé and N. Avarvari, Dalton Trans., 2020, 49, 5759–5777 RSC .
P. J. Celis-Salazar, C. C. Epley, S. R. Ahrenholtz, W. A. Maza, P. M. Usov and A. J. Morris, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 13741–13747 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, H. Sheng, W. Li, J. B. Gerken, S. Jin and S. S. Stahl, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 1533–1539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Han, H. Li, R. Shi, T. Zhang, J. Tong, J. Li and B. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 23378–23415 RSC .
J. Moussa, K. Boubekeur and H. Amouri, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2005, 3808–3810 CrossRef CAS .
M. Oh, G. B. Carpenter and D. A. Sweigart, Organometallics, 2003, 22, 2364–2366 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bhattacharya, S. R. Boone, G. A. Fox and C. G. Pierpont, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1990, 112, 1088–1096 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Fox and C. G. Pierpont, Inorg. Chem., 1992, 31, 3718–3723 CrossRef .
A. Dei, D. Gatteschi, C. Sangregorio and L. Sorace, Acc. Chem. Res., 2004, 37, 827–835 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. R. Jeon, L. Sun, B. Negru, R. P. Van Duyne, M. Dinca and T. D. Harris, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 6583–6590 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Sahadevan, N. Monni, A. Abhervé, G. Cosquer, M. Oggianu, G. Ennas, M. Yamashita, N. Avarvari and M. L. Mercuri, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 13988–13998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ashoka Sahadevan, N. Monni, M. Oggianu, A. Abhervé, D. Marongiu, M. Saba, A. Mura, G. Bongiovanni, V. Mameli, C. Cannas, N. Avarvari, F. Quochi and M. L. Mercuri, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 94–104 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Sahadevan, A. Abhervé, N. Monni, C. Sáenz de Pipaón, J. R. Galán-Mascarós, J. C. Waerenborgh, B. J. C. Vieira, P. Auban-Senzier, S. Pillet, E.-E. Bendeif, P. Alemany, E. Canadell, M. L. Mercuri and N. Avarvari, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 12611–12621 CrossRef CAS .
S. Benmansour, C. Vallés-García, P. Gómez-Claramunt, G. Mínguez Espallargas and C. J. Gómez-García, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 5410–5418 CrossRef CAS .
S. Benmansour, A. Hernández-Paredes, A. Mondal, G. López Martínez, J. Canet-Ferrer, S. Konar and C. J. Gómez-García, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 9862–9865 RSC .
C. J. Kingsbury, B. F. Abrahams, J. E. Auckett, H. Chevreau, A. D. Dharma, S. Duyker, Q. He, C. Hua, T. A. Hudson, K. S. Murray, W. Phonsri, V. K. Peterson and R. Robson, Chem. – Eur. J., 2019, 25, 5222–5234 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Van Koeverden, B. F. Abrahams, D. M. D’Alessandro, P. W. Doheny, C. Hua, T. A. Hudson, G. N. L. Jameson, K. S. Murray, W. Phonsri, R. Robson and A. L. Sutton, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 7551–7563 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Mercuri, F. Congiu, G. Concas and S. Ashoka Sahadevan, Magnetochemistry, 2017, 3, 17 CrossRef .
J. A. Degayner, K. Wang and T. D. Harris, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 6550–6553 CrossRef CAS .
S. Guo and S. Dong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 2644–2672 RSC .
A. Dhakshinamoorthy, A. M. Asiri and H. Garcia, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900617–19600657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, Y. Sunami and H. Hashimoto, Nanomaterials, 2017, 7, 1–7 Search PubMed .
K. Choi, Y. T. Lee and S. Im, Nano Today, 2016, 11, 626–643 CrossRef CAS .
P. Tao, S. Yao, F. Liu, B. Wang, F. Huang and M. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 23512–23536 RSC .
A. Bétard and R. A. Fischer, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 1055–1083 CrossRef .
Y. Han, J. Zhou, L. Wang, L. Xing, Z. Xue, Y. Jiao and Y. Pang, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2021, 882, 114993 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, J. H. Kim and K. Ariga, Joule, 2017, 1, 739–768 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, S. N. Riduan and J. Wang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 16419–16431 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Howarth, A. W. Peters, N. A. Vermeulen, T. C. Wang, J. T. Hupp and O. K. Farha, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 26–39 CrossRef CAS .
T. B. Schon, B. T. Mcallister, P. Li and D. S. Seferos, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 6345–6404 RSC .
B. Ding, M. B. Solomon, C. F. Leong and D. M. D’Alessandro, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2021, 439, 213891 CrossRef CAS .
N. Monni, M. Oggianu, S. A. Sahadevan and M. L. Mercuri, Magnetochemistry, 2021, 7, 1–12 CrossRef .
O. Müller and J. P. Baumberger, Trans. Electrochem. Soc., 1937, 71, 181–194 CrossRef .
Q. Yu, Z. Yao, J. Shi, W. Tang, C. Wang, D. Li and C. Fan, Org. Electron., 2021, 89, 106057 CrossRef .
Y. Misaki, S. Noda, M. Kato, T. Yamauchi, T. Oshima, A. Yoshimura, T. Shirahata and M. Yao, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 2312–2320 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, P. Liu, J. Liu, X. Yang and X. Zhang, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2019, 14, 4264–4270 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Wightman, J. R. Cockrell, R. W. Murray, J. N. Burnett and S. B. Jones, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1976, 98, 2562–2570 CrossRef CAS .
N. Gupta and H. Linschitz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 6384–6391 CrossRef CAS .
J. Garza, R. Vargas, M. Gómez, I. González and F. J. González, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2003, 107, 11161–11168 CrossRef CAS .
X. Q. Zhu and C. H. Wang, J. Org. Chem., 2010, 75, 5037–5047 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Guin, S. Das and P. C. Mandal, Int. J. Electrochem., 2011, 2011, 1–22 CrossRef .
P. S. Guin, S. Das and P. C. Mandal, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2008, 3, 1016–1028 CAS .
R. Gill and H. I. Stonehill, J. Chem. Soc., 1952, 1845–1857 RSC .
N. Howell Furman and K. G. Stone, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1948, 70, 3055–3061 CrossRef .
P. S. Guin, S. Das and P. C. Mandal, J. Phys. Org. Chem., 2010, 23, 477–482 CrossRef CAS .
A. Capon and R. Parsons, Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1973, 46, 215–222 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Rieke, T. Saji and N. Kujundzic, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1979, 102, 397–405 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Stallings, M. M. Morrison and D. T. Sawyer, Inorg. Chem., 1981, 20, 2655–2660 CrossRef CAS .
M. Oyama, T. Hoshino and S. Okazaki, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1996, 401, 243–246 CrossRef .
M. Aguilar-Martinez, G. Cuevas, M. Jimenez-Estrada, I. Gonzalez, B. Lotina- Hennsen and N. Macias-Ruvalcaba, J. Org. Chem., 1999, 64, 3684–3694 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shamsipur, A. Siroueinejad, B. Hemmateenejad, A. Abbaspour, H. Sharghi, K. Alizadeh and S. Arshadi, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2007, 600, 345–358 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tang, J. Zhao, J. F. Xu and X. Zhang, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 1192–1204 RSC .
D. Meisel and G. Czapski, J. Phys. Chem., 1975, 79, 1503–1509 CrossRef CAS .
D. Meisel and R. W. Fessenden, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1976, 98, 7505–7510 CrossRef CAS .
D. Meisel and P. Neta, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1975, 97, 5198–5203 CrossRef CAS .
B. Y. G. E. Adams and M. V. Hospital, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1967, 2, 1171–1180 RSC .
S. Steenken and P. Neta, J. Phys. Chem., 1982, 86, 3661–3667 CrossRef CAS .

          P. Neha, Radiation Chemistry of quinoid compounds, in The Chemistry of Quinonoids Compounds, ed. S. Patai and Z. Rappoport,  1988, ch. 14, vol. 2, Part 2, pp. 879–898 Search PubMed .
I. R. Jeon, B. Negru, R. P. Van Duyne and T. D. Harris, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 15699–15702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. DeGayner, I. R. Jeon, L. Sun, M. Dincă and T. D. Harris, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 4175–4184 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Stock and S. Biswas, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 933–969 CrossRef CAS .
A. U. Czaja, N. Trukhan and U. Müller, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1284–1293 RSC .
L. Liu, J. A. Degayner, L. Sun, D. Z. Zee and T. D. Harris, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 4652–4661 RSC .
D. Sud and G. Kaur, Polyhedron, 2021, 193, 114897 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xia, H. Wang, B. Huang, X. Yuan, J. Zhang, J. Zhang, L. Jiang, T. Xiong and G. Zeng, Small, 2019, 15, 1–25 CrossRef .
R. Banerjee, A. Phan, B. Wang, C. Knobler, H. Furukawa, M. O’Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2008, 319, 939–943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Halis, A. K. Inge, N. Dehning, T. Weyrich, H. Reinsch and N. Stock, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 7425–7431 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, Y. Sekine, Y. Komatsumaru, S. Hayami and H. Miyasaka, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 12043–12047 CrossRef CAS .
B. F. Abrahams, A. M. Bond, T. H. Le, L. J. McCormick, A. Nafady, R. Robson and N. Vo, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 11422–11424 RSC .
A. D. Kharitonov, O. Y. Trofimova, I. N. Meshcheryakova, G. K. Fukin, M. N. Khrizanforov, Y. H. Budnikova, A. S. Bogomyakov, R. R. Aysin, K. A. Kovalenko and A. V. Piskunov, CrystEngComm, 2020, 22, 4675–4679 RSC .
C. Tang, C. Zhang, Z. Jiang, K. Ostrikov and A. Du, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 5792–5796 RSC .
M. E. Ziebel, C. A. Gaggioli, A. B. Turkiewicz, W. Ryu, L. Gagliardi and J. R. Long, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 2653–2664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, Y. Sekine, A. Okazawa, H. Sato, W. Kosaka and H. Miyasaka, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 3610–3618 RSC .
R. Murase, C. J. Commons, T. A. Hudson, G. N. L. Jameson, C. D. Ling, K. S. Murray, W. Phonsri, R. Robson, Q. Xia, B. F. Abrahams and D. M. D’Alessandro, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 3619–3630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Kingsbury, B. F. Abrahams, D. M. D’Alessandro, T. A. Hudson, R. Murase, R. Robson and K. F. White, Cryst. Growth Des., 2017, 17, 1465–1470 CrossRef CAS .
K. Taniguchi, J. Chen, Y. Sekine and H. Miyasaka, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 10053–10059 CrossRef CAS .
M. Atzori, S. Benmansour, G. Mínguez Espallargas, M. Clemente-León, A. Abhervé, P. Gómez-Claramunt, E. Coronado, F. Artizzu, E. Sessini, P. Deplano, A. Serpe, M. L. Mercuri and C. J. Gómez García, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 10031–10040 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, Y. Ni, X. Hou, L. Chen, F. Li and J. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 22126–22131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, H. Yoshikawa and K. Awaga, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 16112–16115 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Jiang, P. Xiong, J. Liu, Z. Xie, Q. Wang, X. Q. Yang, E. Hu, Y. Cao, J. Sun, Y. Xu and L. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 5273–5277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Abhervé, S. Mañas-Valero, M. Clemente-León and E. Coronado, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 4665–4673 RSC .
S. Benmansour, A. Abhervé, P. Gómez-Claramunt, C. Vallés-García and C. J. Gómez-García, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 26210–26218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Ashworth and J. A. Foster, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 16292–16307 RSC .
M. Zhao, Y. Huang, Y. Peng, Z. Huang, Q. Ma and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6267–6295 RSC .
V. Nicolosi, M. Chhowalla, M. G. Kanatzidis, M. S. Strano and J. N. Coleman, Science, 2013, 340, 72–75 CrossRef .
S. Ashoka Sahadevan, N. Monni, A. Abhervé, D. Marongiu, V. Sarritzu, N. Sestu, M. Saba, A. Mura, G. Bongiovanni, C. Cannas, F. Quochi, N. Avarvari and M. L. Mercuri, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 6575–6586 CrossRef CAS .
V. K. Maka, A. Mukhopadhyay, S. Jindal and J. N. Moorthy, Chem. – Eur. J., 2019, 25, 3835–3842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Oaki, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2017, 90, 776–788 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Oaki and K. Sato, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 23197–23219 RSC .
K. Kuwabara, Y. Oaki, R. Muramatsu and H. Imai, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 9698–9701 RSC .
H. N. Kim and S. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1902597 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yang, Y. M. Zhang, Y. Cai, B. Yang, C. Gu and S. X. A. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 8687–8720 RSC .
P. González-Monje, F. Novio and D. Ruiz-Molina, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 10094–10099 CrossRef .
F. Pulizzi, Nat. Phys., 2008, 4, S20–S20 Search PubMed .
S. Wang, L. Wang, K. Zhang, Z. Zhu, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4404–4409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sato, H. Imai and Y. Oaki, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 4218–4226 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nisula and M. Karppinen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 7027–7033 RSC .
Z. Luo, L. Liu, J. Ning, K. Lei, Y. Lu, F. Li and J. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 9443–9446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Boota, C. Chen, M. Be, L. Miao and Y. Gogotsi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2586–2594 RSC .
X. J. Kong, S. Wu, T. T. Chen, R. Q. Yu and X. Chu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 15604–15610 RSC .
K. Pirnat, N. Casado, L. Porcarelli, N. Ballard and D. Mecerreyes, Macromolecules, 2019, 52, 8155–8166 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bae, M. A. Nael, L. Jiang, P. T. Hwang, F. Mahdi, H. W. Jun, W. M. Elshamy, Y. D. Zhou, S. N. Murthy, R. J. Doerksen and S. Jo, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2014, 131, 1–10 CrossRef .
C. Wang, T. He, J. Cheng, Q. Guan and B. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1–9 Search PubMed .
S. Yagi, N. Oeda and C. Kojima, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, H668–H673 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhou, S. Teo and M. P. Srinivasan, Thin Solid Films, 2014, 550, 210–219 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. L. Black, Z. Liu and P. B. Messersmith, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 1130–1135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Maity, M. Chatterjee, A. Banerjee, A. Das, R. Mishra, S. Mazumder and N. Chanda, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2019, 104, 109909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yeroslavsky, R. Lavi, A. Alishaev and S. Rahimipour, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 5201–5212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xiao, M. Mertens, L. Wortmann, S. Kremer, M. Valldor, T. Lammers, F. Kiessling and S. Mathur, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 6530–6540 CrossRef CAS .
K. T. Kumaran, G. V. M. Kiruthika, I. Arulraj and P. Ragupathy, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, A1743–A1752 CrossRef CAS .
S. Du, Y. Luo, F. Zuo, X. Li and D. Liu, NANO, 2017, 12, 1–9 CrossRef .
C. Wang, N. Zhang, D. Wei, R. Feng, D. Fan, L. Hu, Q. Wei and H. Ju, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2019, 142, 111521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. H. Alvarez, M. A. Perez-Cruz, J. R. Rangel-Mendez and F. J. Cervantes, J. Hazard. Mater., 2010, 184, 268–272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kuznowicz, A. Jędrzak, A. Leda, T. Rębiś and T. Jesionowski, Meas. J. Int. Meas. Confed., 2021, 184, 1–10 Search PubMed .
X. Wu and Z. Nan, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2019, 227, 302–312 CrossRef CAS .
F. Della
Pelle, L. Blandón-Naranjo, M. Alzate, M. Del Carlo and D. Compagnone, Talanta, 2020, 207, 120349 CrossRef .
S. Aquino Neto, D. P. Hickey, R. D. Milton, A. R. De Andrade and S. D. Minteer, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 72, 247–254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Xie, C. Jing, M. Li, W. Ma, Z. Ding and Y. T. Long, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 23104–23110 CrossRef CAS .
H. V. Tran, N. D. Nguyen, B. Piro and L. T. Tran, Anal. Methods, 2017, 9, 2696–2702 RSC .
L. Shi, X. Li, W. Zhu, Y. Wang, B. Du, W. Cao, Q. Wei and X. Pang, ACS Sens., 2017, 2, 1774–1778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. H. Park, K. Jang, S. U. Son and D. A. Sweigart, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 8740–8741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. H. Park, K. Jang, Y. Cho, J. Chun, H. J. Kim, D. A. Sweigart and S. U. Son, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2547–2551 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Kim, C. Cai, S. Sun and D. A. Sweigart, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 2907–2910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Imaz, D. Maspoch, C. Rodríguez-Blanco, J. M. Pérez-Falcón, J. Campo and D. Ruiz-Molina, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 1857–1860 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Amorín-Ferré, F. Busqué, J. L. Bourdelande, D. Ruiz-Molina, J. Hernando and F. Novio, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 17508–17516 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhang, J. Deng, G. Shi and T. Zhou, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 107964–107969 RSC .
X. You, C. Huang, W. Huang, G. Shi, J. Deng and T. Zhou, Environ. Sci. Nano, 2020, 7, 554–570 RSC .
E. Coronado, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 5, 87–104 CrossRef .
K. F. Mak, J. Shan and D. C. Ralph, Nat. Rev. Phys., 2019, 1, 646–661 CrossRef .
M. Gibertini, M. Koperski, A. F. Morpurgo and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2019, 14, 408–419 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Chart 1  Some of the redox-active organic linkers used in the construction of CPs and MOFs.	 

 	Scheme 1  Reversible redox reactions: (a) p-quinone/hydroquinone (b) o-quinone/catecholate couple.	 

 	Fig. 1  Extended networks based on a 3,6-disubstituted-2,5-dihydroxy-1,4-benzoquinone.	 

 	Scheme 2  (a) Two-electron two-proton reduction mechanism of quinone (aqueous media, acidic pH). (b) Two-electron reduction mechanism of quinone (aqueous media, alkaline pH).	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic representation for the synthetic routes for benzoquinone-based 2D frameworks.	 

 	Fig. 3  Plots of magnetisation vs. T under an applied dc field of 10 Oe for 2 (blue) and its desolvated form (red). Perspective view of crystal structure of 2 along the c axis, shown in the middle. The grey, red, green and orange spheres represent the C, O, Cl and Fe atoms, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 103. Copyright © 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 3  Schematic representation of magnetic phase stability tuning by electron-filling control of benzoquinoid linkers via LIB system. Arrows indicate the reversible insertion/extraction of Li+ ions in the framework, affording the switchable control of the radical spin. The black, red, green and pink spheres represent the C, O, Cl and Mn/Cr atoms, respectively. Disordered NBu4+ groups located between the honeycomb layers are portrayed in pale gray. Reprinted with permission from ref. 119. Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic representation of SC–SC conversions in compounds 10–12 (top). Magnetization vs. T plot under an applied dc field of 10 Oe and conductivity values for 10–12 compounds (down). The MnII coordination polyhedra are represented in purple, while the linkers are in orange (benzoquinone form) and green (benzoquinone/semiquinone form). Adapted from ref. 107 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Scheme 4  Electrochemical Li+ insertion/extraction mechanism in Cu-THQ MOF (15). Steps I-III show charging and IV–VI shows discharging processes. The binding sites between Li and O, and variation of oxidation states of copper are indicated by blue and grey circles. The grey, red and orange spheres represent the C, O and Cu atoms, respectively Copyright (2020) Wiley used with permission from ref. 124.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic representation of the synthetic routes for redox-active ultrathin layered nanostructures.	 

 	Fig. 6  Exfoliation of 3D MOF to 2D MON (16) demonstrating the redox switchability (top). UV/Vis absorption spectra showing the reversible redox switchability on the suspension (down). Copyright (2019) Wiley used with permission from ref. 131.	 

 	Fig. 7  Electrochemical redox reactions between Li4DHTPA and Li2DHTPA/Li6DHTPA with redox potential associated. Reprinted with permission from ref. 139. Copyright © 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  ALD/MLD mechanism of lithiated quinone, dilithium-1,4-benzenediolate (Li2Q) thin film (18). Reprinted with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2018 from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  Gradual lithiation and delithiation of carbonyl groups of PIBN in discharge/charge cycles, involving 8 Li+ in the imide carbonyl groups (first step) and another 2 Li+ in the benzoquinone carbonyl groups (second step). Copyright (2018) Wiley used with permission from ref. 142.	 

 	Fig. 10  Synthesis of redox-active xerogel. Reprinted with permission from ref. 143. Copyright 2016 from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic representation of the synthetic routes for preparation and/or coating of nanostructures.	 

 	Fig. 12  Synthesis of self-supported organometallic nanocatalyst. Reprinted with permission from ref. 165. Copyright © 2006, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic representation of the VT equilibrium between ls-CoIII and hs-CoII isomers. (Copyright (2015) Wiley used with permission from ref. 137 (b) coordination polymerization used to obtain valence-tautomericn NPs. (c) χT values as a function of temperature for the amorphous metal–organic nanospheres (full squares) and crystalline coordination polymer (empty circles). (d) SEM image of NPs created by infinite coordination polymerization of {CoIII(3,5-dbsq)(3,5-dbcat)} units through bix ligands. (e) High-resolution TEM image of one spherical NP. (Copyright (2008) Wiley used with permission from ref. 168).	 

2D CPs/MOFs


	(PMePh3)2[Cd2(dhbq)3] (1)	Reversible redox activity	
113



	(Me2NH2)2[Fe2(Cl2An)3]·2H2O·6DMF (2)	Porosity with surface area: 885 m2 g−1	
103,104

Antiferromagnet, Tc = 80 K	


σ = 1.4(7) × 10−2 S cm−1, Ea = 0.26(1) eV	

(Me2NH2)2[Fe2(Cl2An)3] (2 in its desolvated form)	Antiferromagnet, Tc = 26 K	
103,104


σ =1.0(3) × 10−3 S cm−1, Ea = 0.19(1) eV	

(Cp2Co)1.43(Me2NH2)1.57[Fe2(Cl2An)3]·4.9DMF (3)	
T
c = 105 K	
104


σ = 5.1(3) × 10−4 S cm−1, Ea = 0.34(1) eV	

Capacity retention over 50 cycles (charging rates up to 150 mA h g−1)	

(Me2NH2)4Fe3(Cl2An)3(SO4)2(DMF)1.4(THF)1.0 (4)	No magnetic ordering	
116


σ = 8.4 × 10−5 S cm−−1	

(NPr4)2[Fe2(Cl2An)3]·2(acetone)·H2O (5)	Thermally induced valence tautomeric transition at T1/2 = 236 K (cooling)/237 K (heating)	
112

Single chain magnet behaviour	

(PhenQ)[Fe2(Cl2An)3]·solvent (7)	Spontaneous magnetization below 31 K	
61


σ = 4.9 × 10−4 S cm−1 (295 K)	


E
a = 0.249(2) eV	

(NBu4)[MnCr(Cl2An)3] (8)	Magnetic switching from paramagnetic to antiferromagnetic	
120


T
c reversibly modified by LIB charge/discharge cycles from 10 K to 36 K	

(H3O)2(phz)3[Fe2(Cl2An)3] (9)	Paramagnetic	

(Li)3(H3O)2(phz)3[(Fe)2(Cl2An)3] (9_red)	Antiferromagnetic ordering at Tc = 128 K	
38

(Me4N)2[Mn2(Cl2An)3]·3.2Et2O (10)	Antiferromagnetic ordering at Tc = 1.8 K	
107


σ = 1.14(3) × 10−13 S cm−1	


E
a = 0.74(3) eV	

Na3(Me4N)2[Mn2(Cl2An)3]3·9THF (11)	Antiferromagnetic ordering at Tc = 41 K	
107


σ = 2.27(1) × 10−8 S cm−1, Ea = 0.489(8) eV	

Na(Me4N)[Mn2(Cl2An)3]5·5THF0.8CH3CN (12)	Antiferromagnetic ordering at Tc = 1.8 K	
107


σ = 1.45(2) × 10−13 S cm−1	



	(NEt4)2[Fe2(F2An)3] (1·5-(acetone)) (6)	
σ = 1.8 × 10−2 S cm−1 (300 K)	
118


σ = 1.3 × 10−2 S cm−1 (261 K)	


E
a = 64 meV	

Capacity = 676.6 mA h g−1, capacity retention of 90% over 200 cycles	



	(Ni-TABQ) (13)	Electron conduction (σ = 0.68 S m−1) and Na+ diffusion	
122

Capacitance = 469.5 mA h g−1 at 0.1 A g−1 and 345 mA h g−1 at 8 A g−1	

Capacity retention of 100% over 100 cycles	



	{Cu(2,7-AQDC)(DMF)}n·xDMF (14)	Theoretical capacitance = 162 mA h g−1	
123

No capacity loss after 50 cycles


	CuTHQ (15)	Capacitance > 350 mA h g−1	
124

Capacity retention of 85% after 100 cycles

σ = 2.15 nS cm−1 (303 K)

σ = 0.16 μS cm−1 (373 K)
2D MONs/nanostructures


	ZnBTA MON (16)	First example of optical properties due to redox switchability	
131



	Lithiated 2,5-dihydroxyterephtalic acid (Li4C8H2O6) (17)	Active materials for rechargeable lithium-ion batteries.	
139

Discharge capacity of 223 mA h g−1 at 0.1C	

Discharge capacity of 145 mA h g−1 at 5C	

Capacity retention of 95% at 0.1C, after 50 cycles	



	Lithiated quinone (Li2C6H4O2) thin films (18)	Cathode material for Li-ion batteries (LiBs)	
141



	Polypyrrole (PPy) and poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) nanosheets on quinone derivatives	
σ = 287 S cm−1, capacitance = 523 F g−1 at the current density of 18 A g−1	
140



	Poly(imide-benzoquinone) COF in the presence and absence of graphene additive PIBN-G (19_G) and PIBN (19)	Cathode materials for LIBs, with specific capacities of 271.0 and 244.8 mA h g−1 at 0.1C, for 19_G and 19, respectively.	
142



	Xerogel of DMQ on 2D reduced graphene oxide, DMQ@rGO (20)	Capacitance = 650 F g−1 at 5 mV s−1 and capacitance retention of 99% after 25000 cycles at 50 mV s−1	
143

Benzoquinone-related nanostructures


	QPAMN-based redox-sensitive polyester (21)	Redox-triggered drug release with the reduction of the paraquinone part of the polymer	
146



	Polydopamine (PDA) NPs (22)	Reduced glutathione (GSH) sensing in human blood	
144

PDA covered CNTs woven with zinc wire (23)	Wearable power textiles with specific capacity of 372.3 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g	
147

PDA covered Fe3O4 NPs (24)	Bio detector for N-terminal pro- B-type natriuretic peptide	
164


	Catalytic reduction of dyes	
155



	Poly-vinyl catechol NPs (25)	Cathodes in organic batteries	
145



	Catechin covered carbon black NPs (26)	GSH detection in blood samples	
160



	PQQ-dependent alcohol and aldheide dehydrogenase (PQQ-ADH and PQQ-AldDH) covered multi-walled CNTs (MWCNTs) and MWCNTs-decorated Au NPs (27)	Bio-electrooxidation of ethanol via direct and mediated electron transfer	
161



	H2Q coated Au NPs (28)	Reducing agent for the growth of Au NPs	
148



	H2Q-SH coated Au NPs (29)	Nucleation and growth of Ag NPs	
162



	JUG-SH coated Au NPs (30)	miRNA detection	
163



	TfQ coated Au NPs (31)	Anticancer potential against ovarian cellsx	
151



	Calix[7]hydroquinone coated of Ag NPs (32)	Nanoreactor, container, and template for the synthesis of Ag NPs	
149



	Ac-DOPA4-mPEG Coated Ag or Au NPs (33)	Reducing agent for the growth of Au NPs	
150



	EC coated Fe3O4 NPs (34)	Magnetic resonance imaging	
153



	EGCG coated Fe3O4 NPs (35)	
	



	AQDS cated α-Al2O3, ZnO, or Al(OH)3 NPs (36)	Decoloration agent for azo dyes	
157



	MnO2 nanorods modified with paraquinone (37)	Capacitance = 320 F g−1	
154



	Organometallic nanocatalyst (38)	Polymerization agent for phenylacetene	
165



	Organometallic nanocatalyst (39)	Carbene transfer reaction	
166



	Organometallic nanocatalyst (40)	Incorporation with magnetite NPs for facile magnetic separation	
167



	Valence-tautomer [CoIII(3,5-dbsq)(3,5-dbcat)] NPs (41)	Variation of the magnetic moment during the high-spin to low-spin interconversion	
168

[CoIII(3,5-dbsq)(3,5-dbcat)(bix)] NPs (42)	
	
169–171


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
