Design principles of photosynthetic light-harvesting  - Faraday Discussions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1FD00078K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1FD00078K
(Paper)
Faraday Discuss., 2012, 155, 27-41Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsDesign principles of photosynthetic light-harvesting

        
          
            Graham R. 
            Fleming
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Gabriela S. 
            Schlau-Cohen†‡
ab, 
      
        
          
            Kapil 
            Amarnath†
ab and 

        
          
            Julia 
            Zaks†
bc
aDepartment of Chemistry, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720. E-mail: grfleming@lbl.gov
bPhysical Biosciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720
cGraduate Program in Applied Science and Technology, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720
Received 
      22nd April 2011
    , Accepted 15th June 2011First published on 6th July 2011AbstractPhotosynthetic organisms are capable of harvesting solar energy with near unity quantum efficiency. Even more impressively, this efficiency can be regulated in response to the demands of photosynthetic reactions and the fluctuating light-levels of natural environments. We discuss the distinctive design principles through which photosynthetic light-harvesting functions. These emergent properties of photosynthesis appear both within individual pigment–protein complexes and in how these complexes integrate to produce a functional, regulated apparatus that drives downstream photochemistry. One important property is how the strong interactions and resultant quantum coherence, produced by the dense packing of photosynthetic pigments, provide a tool to optimize for ultrafast, directed energy transfer. We also describe how excess energy is quenched to prevent photodamage under high-light conditions, which we investigate through theory and experiment. We conclude with comments on the potential of using these features to improve solar energy devices.
1 Introduction
Two characteristics of sunlight at the earth's surface provide the key drivers for the design of effective photosynthetic devices: (1) the sun is a dilute energy source, providing at best ∼1 kW m−2 and (2) during the day, a photosynthetic device is subject to large variations in solar intensity arising from clouds, the diurnal cycle, and, for many plants, the motions of the canopy.1 In addition, ideally these devices would be composed from earth abundant materials. Photosynthetic organisms, such as plants and algae, have evolved to harvest light in natural light conditions using only materials ubiquitous in the seas and in soil and, in these three ways, are model photosynthetic devices.
In light-harvesting organisms, these conditions lead to a general architecture of pigment–protein complexes where large, dense arrays of chromophores serve as antennae, or the sites of initial absorption events.2,3 The excitation then migrates quickly, without losses from relaxation to the ground state, to a location, the reaction center, where a photochemical reaction traps the excitation and initiates an electron transfer chain that converts the light energy to usable chemical energy. Once the excitation reaches the reaction center, it must be converted irreversibly into chemical energy. Charge separation must be ultrafast with little or no back flow of charge, while metal-based catalysts must be made from earth-abundant materials to allow plants to flourish across the planet. A model of the Photosystem II (PSII) supercomplex, and a sample trajectory, is shown in Fig. 1.4
 Fig. 1  The general architecture of the PSII supercomplex where antenna complexes surround two reaction centers, exhibiting a symmetric architecture. Excitation energy migrates from the antenna to the reaction center. A potential trajectory is shown above. 
The complexity of the chemistry initiated in the photosynthetic reaction centers suggests that they are metabolically expensive to make and should be dilute with respect to the number of light absorbers. This leads to the concept of an efficient antenna system that matches the rate of light absorption and transfer to the reaction center to the maximum possible rate of downstream electron and proton transfer and subsequent chemical steps of carbon fixation and ATP production.5 At low light levels, most photosynthetic systems operate with near unity quantum efficiency. At high light levels, the rate of solar absorption can significantly exceed the turnover frequency of the PSII reaction center. This creates the possibility of system damage via reactive oxygen species such as singlet oxygen. To minimize damage, plants and algae have evolved feedback mechanisms to control the efficiency of light harvesting in response to external factors such as light intensity and the solar spectrum.6 However, damage to PSII, the site of the water splitting reaction, does occur. In the event of damage, plants have a remarkable and, as yet, imperfectly understood repair mechanism for PSII reaction centers.7
In this article, we discuss how certain aspects of photosynthesis have been optimized for effective natural light-harvesting and may have utility for the design of artificial systems. We focus on two major features of photosynthetic light-harvesting, as these characteristics are critical to creating devices that are both efficient at light-harvesting and robust under natural conditions. Photosynthetic organisms exhibit efficient, directional energy transfer, and we examine how the molecular structures are designed to give rise to ultrafast energy flow. We also discuss the ability of algae and higher plants to regulate light-harvesting by safely dissipating excess energy. We finish with more comments on what we think is necessary to know in order to design an efficient photosynthetic device.
2 Antenna design
Antenna structural motifs show a great deal of variety in natural photosynthetic systems. Fig. 2 gives examples of three very different-looking antenna systems from plants and two types of photosynthetic bacteria.8–10 Despite their different architectures, all the antenna systems share both high quantum efficiency and two structural characteristics: first, they have very densely packed chromophores (e.g., the antenna of Photosystem I has a chlorophyll concentration of about 0.9 M.11) This dense packing, required for the effective absorption of sunlight, produces strong interactions between the component molecules, modifying their electronic and dynamic properties and introducing new functions significantly different from their components. In other words, they exhibit emergent properties. Second, most, if not all, antenna systems contain carotenoid molecules, which serve as both secondary light harvesters and photoprotective agents.
 Fig. 2  Structural models of three photosynthetic antenna complexes: a) LHCII from higher plants; b) the chlorosome from green sulfur bacteria; c) LH2 from purple bacteria. 
These two features can be examined from an engineering design standpoint. From this perspective, what are the control parameters available within the molecular machinery of photosynthetic light harvesting systems? The most obvious is the choice of pigments. We will confine our comments to systems with chlorophyll (Chl), bacteriochlorophyll (BChl), and carotenoid (Car) optical components; although other light harvesting molecules are found, nature is remarkably parsimonious in its use of different chemical species in photosynthesis.
Instead of constructing many different chromophores, nature has preferred to manipulate the properties of specific components by means of: (1) variations in their individual protein environments, which introduce differences in transition energies12,13 and in the strength and timescales of coupling of the excited states to the nuclear motion of the protein; and (2) electronic coupling to neighboring chromophores.14 These interactions are able to introduce changes to the functional behavior of the pigments because of the dense packing found in photosynthetic complexes, as mentioned above. Electrodynamic interaction with the protein environment changes the excited state energies and induces a variety of fluctuations in the transition energies, which drive energy transfer processes.15 When combined with variations in coupling due to specific separations and orientations of the chromophores within the protein complex, these control parameters lead to substantially altered energetic and electronic landscapes compared to the simple sum of individual absorption bands and transition moments.3 The electronic coupling terms mean that the excited states are linear combinations of those of the individual pigments, i.e. are delocalized excited states. These delocalized excited states are called excitons and are the states which interact with the light. The excitons have different transition energies than in the case of isolated chromophores, which differ based on the mixing angles between the pigments. Fig. 3 illustrates the resultant delocalized excited states for a coupled trimer of Chl-a molecules in LHCII, the major light harvesting complex of plants.16Fig. 3a shows the estimated site energies for Chls 610, 611, 612 and their individual transition moment directions and magnitudes when the coupling between the Chls is turned off. When the coulombic coupling between these three Chls is turned on three delocalized stated (excitons) with new transition moment magnitudes and directions are formed with new excited state energies (Fig. 3b).
 Fig. 3  Photosynthesis can be studied in terms of three separate landscapes, the spatial, energetic and electronic landscapes. a) Site basis, or spatial, transition dipole moments of a trimer of Chl within LHCII are shown with their uncoupled transition energies. b) The transition dipole moments of the delocalized excited states (J ≠ 0) and with the energies of these delocalized excited states. 
3 Dynamics of light harvesting
Speed is essential to efficient light harvesting. As noted above, at low light levels, energy transfer processes in photosynthetic organisms can show a >90% quantum efficiency, which is defined as the percentage of absorbed photons that undergo charge separation at the reaction center.2Fig. 1 presents a sample trajectory of excitation energy through a model of the photosynthetic apparatus. This translocation of the excitation must be achieved before the energy is lost through fluorescence or nonradiative relaxation. If excitation movement is modelled via a classical random walk, in an antenna of 250 Chls each energy transfer step must take ~100 fs for >90% of excitations to reach the reaction center, given a Chl fluorescence lifetime of ~2 ns.17 The ultrashort energy transfer timescale raises the question of whether mechanisms beyond that envisaged in standard Förster theory18 are utilized in photosynthesis. The short answer is yes.15,19 Nature uses a variety of sophisticated methods to achieve the necessary speed and directionality of energy flow. One such method that has gathered much recent attention is the use of intrinsically quantum mechanical phenomena to optimize energy flow.20–22 Given the current interest in this area, a large body of literature and multiple conferences devoted to this topic have appeared over the past few years, so we simply refer the reader to some current literature.23–25 Rather than repeat the material in this earlier literature, in the next section we discuss potential roles of coherence in photosynthetic light harvesting. To the best of our knowledge, the full range of applications has not been described elsewhere.
4 Role of coherence
Coherence most likely arose as a byproduct of the packing density required to optimally absorb sunlight. As mentioned earlier, in Photosystem I this corresponds to a concentration approaching 1 M. It is interesting to note that concentration quenching in solutions of Chl makes fluorescence undetectable for concentrations above ∼10−3 M.26 The fact that this quenching does not make photosynthesis impossible at three orders of magnitude higher concentrations is truly remarkable. This difference speaks to the role of the protein in the selection of highly specific position and relative orientation of the chromophores. As noted earlier, the close proximity of other Chl molecules produces strong electronic coupling between chromophores which in turn produces delocalized states (excitons) and quantum coherent phenomena. The presence of quantum electronic coherence has been clearly demonstrated by two-dimensional electronic spectroscopy in a variety of light harvesting complexes,20,27,28 including the major light harvesting complex of green plants, LHCII.29
A balance between coherent and incoherent transfer is required to achieve the optimal rate of energy transfer. The formally exact quantum dynamic calculations of Ishizaki and Fleming show that the rate of energy transfer in a dimer system has a maximum when calculated as a function of the reorganization energy.19 Too little decoherence and the system simply oscillates; too much, as a result of environmental relaxation on the initial site, and the excitation is trapped there. These calculations also show the importance of properly incorporating the bath relaxation timescale in any realistic theory. A potentially interesting example of this effect is in the reaction center of purple bacteria, where ultrafast energy transfer is observed from bacteriopheophytin (H) to ‘accessory’ bacteriochlorophyll (B) to the special pair (P). Experiments show coherent energy transfer between H and B.27 The strong coupling between the two BChls of P produces two well separated dimer states labeled P+ and P− for the higher and lower energy states of P, respectively. The special pair has much stronger electron–phonon coupling as a result of charge transfer in the dimer wavefunction. As a consequence, once an excitation reaches the upper exciton component of P (P+) rapid loss of coherence occurs during the relaxation to P−, trapping the excitation there.30,31
Coherence provides a tool to optimize performance for a particular function. One potential use arises from the fact that, depending on pigment placement, the lowest exciton state in a complex may be localized on an individual chromophore or delocalized on several. Which outcome is the most desirable will depend on function. For example, the FMO complex functions as an energetic wire connecting the baseplate protein to the reaction center. Here, because of specific docking of the FMO complex to the reaction center, a localized target (i.e., lowest exciton) state is desirable. However, LHCII functions in a large array and reasonably isotropic behavior, in terms of orientational sensitivity of onward energy transfer and polarization dependence of absorption, is desirable.13,16 In LHCII, there is a trimer of chlorophylls on the external side of the complex, proximal to neighboring pigment–protein complexes. According to the working model, the two lowest levels of the trimer of Chls are the lowest of the 14 excitons in the LHCII monomer.16 The fact that these states are delocalized reduces the orientational sensitivity of onward energy transfer to other complexes in the PSII super complex. The coupling inherent to creating delocalized excited states also smears out the electronic transitions, thus broadening the range of the solar spectrum absorbed.16
A perhaps non-intuitive application of coherence is the generation of energy transfer rectifiers or, as has been recently suggested, energy transfer ratchets.32 Quantum coherence can provide a tool for overcoming uphill energy transfer steps and large energetic gaps. In the FMO complex, excitation energy can be conducted from the baseplate to the reaction center along two parallel pathways.33 Both of the two major energy transfer pathways in the FMO complex utilize this principle. We consider the simpler of the two pathways, which involves initial excitation arriving at BChl 1 from the baseplate protein. The energy transfer dynamics for this pathway are illustrated in Fig. 4, where relaxation through the site basis transition energies are shown in (a) and the corresponding spatial energy flow is shown in (b). The excitation energy originates on BChl 1 and transfers uphill to BChl 2. The excitation then transfers downhill to the lowest energy state, localized on BChl 3. If we project this energy transfer pathway onto the energy eigenstates of the electronic Hamiltonian, then the exciton basis initial population of site 1 excites both excitons 2 and 3, which then transfer to exciton 1. The strong coupling between BChl 1 and 2 generates quantum coherence between these two chromophores, enabling the excitation to oscillate between these two sites. The resultant population on BChl 2 can relax to BChl 3. Because of the energetic barrier between BChls 1 and 3, transfer back to the starting point, BChl 1, becomes very difficult. Theoretical calculations have shown that the quantum coherence of BChls 1 and 2 enhances the overall rate of energy transfer from BChl 1 to BChl 3.32
 Fig. 4  One of the energy transfer pathways in the FMO complex illustrated in terms of a) the site basis transition energies and b) the translocation through the molecular structure. 
In summary, coherence provides a tool to optimize performance for a particular function. Pigment placement enables the creation of localized or delocalized target states as required. Manipulation of site energies, along with pigment placement to create delocalized excitons, spreads out the energy levels to produce more even coverage of the solar spectrum, and more isotropic dependence on the polarization of the incoming light.13 Manipulation of site energies and electronic coupling between pigments enables the construction of energy transfer rectifiers. Why coherence persists for such “long” periods relative to the timescale of many energy transfer steps in photosynthetic complexes is still not fully understood. Lee, et al. suggested that correlated fluctuations in the bacterial reaction center preserved the coherence.27 However, recent attempts to find such correlations via molecular dynamics combined with electronic structure calculations in the FMO complex have not found any evidence for a strong role of cross correlation.34,35 At present, we seem to be some distance from being able to design environments to protect electronic coherence, though weak electron–phonon coupling is obviously a key element.
5 Photoprotection
Photosystem II (PSII) turns over on the millisecond timescale. In bright sunlight, PSII with an antenna of 250–300 Chls per reaction center absorbs well over 1 photon per ms, and the reaction center is unable to use any subsequent photons absorbed while it is completing its electron transfer reactions.2 The excess excitation energy from these ‘surplus’ photon absorptions can relax to the Chl triplet state. These triplets can react with ground state oxygen to generate singlet oxygen that can cause photo-oxidative damage to the reaction center proteins.36 In light harvesting complexes, Chl triplets can be quenched by neighboring carotenoids, whose triplet state energy is too low to generate singlet oxygen. For this reason, damage is localized to the D1 protein of the reaction center, as the primary electron donor (P680) cannot be protected by carotenoid quenching of Chl triplets. If a carotenoid were present, it would block water oxidation because the driving force for electron transfer from a carotenoid typically found in photosynthesis2 to P680+ (∼0.5 V37) is more favorable than that of electron transfer from water to P680+ (∼0.2 V38). This process would ‘short circuit’ the electron transfer chain connecting P680 to the oxygen evolving complex. To prevent damage and avoid repair, PSII contains feedback mechanisms, collectively called nonphotochemical quenching (NPQ), that trigger the redirection of energy transfer to quenching sites where the excitations can be harmlessly dissipated as heat. An experimental observation of NPQ via time-resolved fluorescence detection is shown in Fig. 5. The red curve is the fluorescence lifetime of PSII chlorophylls without NPQ or charge separation, and the blue curve shows that the PSII lifetime is much shorter with NPQ turned on, thus indicating the presence of energy transfer pathways that serve to reduce PSII damage. The primary, rapidly reversible component of NPQ is called energy-dependent quenching, or qE.6 Our group has been investigating how the photosynthetic membrane conspires to achieve qE using two approaches. First, we have been modeling all the dynamic processes required to generate qE to better understand how photosynthesis functions as a feedback control system. Second, in collaboration with K. K. Niyogi at the UC Berkeley and R. Bassi at the University of Verona, we have studied how energy is redirected and quenched using a combination of modeling, genetics, and ultrafast spectroscopy.
 Fig. 5  Time-resolved fluorescence measurement of live cells of the green alga C. reinhardtii grown in high light and minimal (high salt) media. The red trace was taken with the addition of DCMU, a specific inhibitor of the QB binding site in PSII, which does not allow the reaction center to turn over and generate a pH gradient. Both traces were taken under light conditions that closed the reaction center, so the PSII chlorophylls represented in the red trace can only decay by intrinsic pathways, while those in the blue trace can also decay via NPQ. 
The response of PSII to variations in the intensity of sunlight can be viewed as a feedback control system involving a negative feedback controller that stabilizes the photosystem by quenching singlet excitation of excess light, as illustrated in Fig. 6. Above a threshold light intensity, the output of photosynthesis is constant, which means that the efficiency of photosynthesis is a decreasing function of light intensity above this threshold.39 To achieve this constant-output behavior, a system must reject the effects of a disturbance completely, regardless of the precise value of the disturbance. It can be shown that in a system that completely rejects the effect of a constantly present external disturbance (i.e., a step), an integrator in the feedback loop is necessary.40,41 Furthermore, if a disturbance is constantly increasing (i.e., a ramp) then the feedback element must contain a double integrator, as illustrated in Fig. 6.42 Is an integrator involved in triggering qE? The light reactions cause protons to be pumped across the thylakoid membrane from the outer compartment, the stroma, to the inner compartment, the lumen. This creates a proton motive force that powers ATP synthesis, during which protons are returned to the stroma. During steady-state operation, the rates of protons entering and exiting the lumen are equal. If light intensity increases, the rate of protons entering the lumen increases, lowering the lumen pH. Low lumen pH is the trigger for qE quenching, which reduces the quantum efficiency of light harvesting, thereby reducing the number of protons entering the lumen until a new steady state is reached. The lumen pH can be thought of as an approximate time-integrator of the disturbance, excess light, because it is proportional to the mismatch in rates of protons entering and exiting the lumen. Mutagenesis studies have revealed that two pH-sensitive proteins are necessary for full expression of qE. One is PsbS, which is incorporated into PSII and senses lumen pH via two lumen-exposed glutamate residues.43 The other is the enzyme violaxanthin deepoxidase, which converts violaxanthin to zeaxanthin via the xanthophyll cycle.44 Zeaxanthin is required for qE.45 The concentration of zeaxanthin in PSII is roughly proportional to the double integral of the disturbance because the rate of its formation is proportional to an integrator. Because both zeaxanthin and PsbS must be present for quenching to occur in plants, the fraction of PSIIs that are in a quenching configuration can be modeled as the product of the fractions of zeaxanthin and PsbS, assuming populations of zeaxanthin and PsbS are uncorrelated which matches experimental results to date. For our model of quenching, this means that the photosystem “remembers” the buildup due to the double-integrator control element (zeaxanthin) even when the single-integral of the error (due to PsbS) drops to zero.
 Fig. 6  Photosynthesis as a feedback control system. 
With the aim of developing an understanding of the functional role of quenching in the photosynthetic apparatus as a whole, we have developed a systems model of PSII that enables us to simulate experiments that quantify NPQ in live plants. Our model consists of 14 differential equations which can be simulated in MATLAB© using a stiff differential equation solver such as ode15s. The equations incorporate light harvesting and electron transfer in PSII, docking and undocking of plastoquinone in the QB binding site,46 plastoquinol oxidation at cytochrome b6f, protons entering the lumen from water oxidation and plastoquinol oxidation, parsing proton motive force into a pH gradient and a transmembrane electric field,47 the resultant motion of ions in response to this field,47 and pH-activated NPQ of excited chlorophylls. A simulation of lumen pH, fraction of PSIIs with zeaxanthin and protonated PsbS, and the effect of these quenchers on the concentration of excited chlorophylls in PSII, is shown in Fig. 7.
 Fig. 7  a) Simulation of lumen pH with (green) and without (red) quenching. Within the framework of our model, the pH gradient is reduced in the presence of quenching. This means that the proton motive force, which powers the synthesis of ATP, is reduced due to qE. b) Fraction of PSII complexes containing protonated PsbS (blue), zeaxanthin (green) and quenchers (red). c) Relative concentration of excited chlorophyll units in PSII with quenching (green) and without quenching (red). The difference between the graphs with quenching and the graph without quenching is proportional to the amount of damage that is averted by quenching excited states. In this simulation, following Cruz et al.,47 the lumenal buffering capacity was taken to be 0.03 mol protons/pH. The black bar in each panel indicates the duration of the saturating light. 
A comparison of the experimental data for Arabidopsis thaliana and the theoretical model is shown in Fig. 8. In our simulation, both protonation of PsbS and deepoxidation of violaxanthin are required to turn on quenching but only PsbS needs to be de-protonated to turn quenching off. Because converting zeaxanthin back to violaxanthin is slow,44 PsbS can act as the effective switch once a sufficient amount of zeaxanthin is in place in the photosystem. We are currently testing if this hypothesized quenching mechanism can adequately match our simulations of qE with experimental measurements in mutants that have modified quantities of PsbS and carotenoid pigments zeaxanthin, violaxanthin, and lutein. Because the model provides reasonable agreement with experimental data, it can serve as a starting point for systems analysis of various models of feedback mechanisms of qE to quantify features such as robustness and parameter sensitivity, and may serve as a tool for identifying changes to the photosynthetic system that would enhance photosynthetic yield.48 Details of our model and a systems analysis will be described elsewhere.
 Fig. 8  Comparison of nonphotochemical quenching measurements (left) with simulations (right). The y-axis quantifies the amount of PSII that is in a quenching configuration. The measurement was done using pulse amplitude modulation (PAM) fluorometry,49 which measures the plant's fluorescence yield under different light intensities. 
Our systems model provides an indication of how quenching is triggered, but we are also trying to understand how PSII redirects and traps excitation energy before it reaches a vulnerable reaction center. Because qE involves a redirection of energy flow, we need to have a picture of how energy transfer occurs in PSII. The energy landscape of the chlorophyll in PSII is thought to be fairly flat throughout the antenna proteins, with the reaction center pigments at a slightly higher energy.50 In addition, recent electron micrographs of PSII supercomplexes at 12 Å resolution51 show that the antenna proteins have specific orientations with respect to one another, meaning that only energy transfer pathways that go through the necessary exit and entrance sites of adjacent antenna can successfully reach the reaction center. These two points result in an energy transfer picture where excitations move in a random walk from one group of strongly coupled Chls (Fig. 3) to the next, with transitions occurring only with other groups within a certain distance (1–5 nm). With this picture, there are two problems the organism faces in regards to quenching excess light. First, the quenching must occur well before the intrinsic decay times of 1.5–2 ns of Chl-a in PSII. If an average transfer step takes 0.5–1 ps and intrinsic decay processes such as intersystem crossing, internal conversion, and fluorescence occur in 1.5 ns,17 then the probability of intrinsic decay occurring scales as (1–0.999)n, where n is the number of energy transfer steps that have occurred. After 100 steps, the probability of an intrinsic process occurring in one of those steps is 0.1. Thus, the number of transfer steps to the quenching site must be limited to reduce losses. Second, when the qE quenching sites are on, they should limit the probability of excitations migrating to the reaction center core. Long lived excited states near the core are particularly prone to causing damage at the core because of the lack of triplet quenching by carotenoids. With this in mind, where might the quenching sites occur and by what mechanism? Energy transfer pathways from LHCII, the main light harvester, to the reaction center are required to go through the minor light harvesting complexes, such as CP29 (Fig. 1). Thus, quenching might occur in these proteins, by some mechanism that is tunable by changes in protein conformation. Our group has investigated this possibility by measuring the dynamics of the quenching mechanism in plant thylakoids and proteins and by measuring the energy transfer pathways of quenching in live cells of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii.
The requirement of zeaxanthin for quenching has led us to investigate the possibility that it participates in quenching. In collaboration with M. Head-Gordon and A. Dreuw, we modeled the interactions of the xanthophylls with chlorophyll using TDDFT to determine what kinds of mechanisms might quench a chlorophyll excitation.52 The analysis suggested that two reasonable mechanisms of quenching with Zea were 1) a charge-transfer from Zea to Chl, followed by recombination and relaxation to the ground state and 2) excitation energy transfer to Zea. To test the former mechanism, our group performed pump–probe experiments on thylakoids from A. thaliana where the Chl Qy band was excited at 664 nm and the Zea cation radical was probed at 1000 nm. We observed cation radical formation correlated with qE that had a rise time of 11 ps and a decay of 150 ps.53 We performed the same experiment on isolated LHCs and saw the cation radical signal only in minor complexes containing zeaxanthin.54 In CP29, by mutating the binding sites for each of the eight chlorophylls, we found the chlorophyll A5 and B5 dimer to be the quenching site.55 Because the dimeric Chla anion radical is more stable than a monomeric one, the distance and orientation between these two pigments can be tuned to turn the quenching site on or off, perhaps by binding or unbinding of the pH sensor PsbS. Experiments are underway to see whether this mechanism might be conserved in other organisms such as C. reinhardtii.
We have investigated the trajectory by which excitations reach quenching sites in live C. reinhardtii cells. We have measured the average time for an excitation to be fully quenched by qE, τqE, to be between 200 and 250 ps. We obtained this value by performing time-resolved fluorescence measurements on light adapted cells of C. reinhardtii. Because this is an intact system, our measurement is physiologically accurate, as isolating the thylakoids can result in a decreased antenna size and qE is related to many variables in the chloroplast. Determination of τqE requires a direct comparison of decay pathways between light adapted cells with and without qE. This is accomplished by measuring the time-resolved fluorescence of light-adapted cells with closed reaction centers with qE turned on and off. Quenching can be deactivated by adding nigericin, a small-molecule transporter of H+ across the membrane, to prevent the build up of a pH gradient. The changes in the amplitudes of the fastest components of the two decays (<300 ps) were determined and then renormalized to calculate τqE. These are the components relevant for qE because they appear on a timescale much shorter than that of intrinsic decay pathways. We have also applied this technique to qE mutants of C. reinhardtii. Our experimental results suggest that the quenching site in this organism is located in a pigment-binding protein that had previously been found to be essential for qE in this organism, lhcsr3.56 Surprisingly, τqE is similar to the timescale of quenching by the reaction center in low light, although lhcsr3 is present in substoichiometric amounts relative to the reaction center.57 Furthermore, coarse-grained modeling58 suggests that lhcsr3 is bound between the reaction center and the major light harvesting complexes. A more sophisticated energy transfer model than the random walk approach is currently under development to describe these results more quantitatively.
6 Control systems for artificial devices
The prevalence of feedback control systems in natural photosynthetic systems naturally raises the question of whether such systems can improve the performance of artificial systems. There are both similarities and differences in the need for regulation in natural photosynthesis and in artificial devices.59 Both types of devices must avoid damage due to fluctuations in light intensity and temperature. In both devices, there are multiple steps involved in converting excitation energy into a stable form of stored energy, and components involved in any one of these steps can break. For this reason, limiting excited state lifetimes of light harvesters to prevent buildup of long-lived excited states is desirable for both systems. However, the photosynthetic apparatus has a repair mechanism; artificial devices currently do not. This means that it may be more important in artificial devices than in photosynthetic ones to contain a damaged portion of the device to prevent the damage from propagating through the entire device. In natural photosynthesis, the availability of resources, such as water, carbon dioxide, and phosphate, can fluctuate. In artificial devices, the availability of reactants, such as water for devices designed to produce H2 and O2, can be controlled. With natural photosynthesis, evolutionary pressure selects for those plants which compete for resources most effectively and produce the largest number of viable offspring. In artificial devices, the objective is to maximize the total amount of energy that can be extracted from the device over a finite period of time—a long-lasting, stable device that has low power output may be less useful than a device with a shorter lifetime but higher power output. These differences suggest that photoprotective regulation in artificial devices may need to be prioritized due to the lack of repair mechanisms.
Depending on the system to be protected, different kinds of error signals for photoprotective regulation may be appropriate. For example, to minimize accumulation of damage to electrodes in fuel cells, preliminary application of the systems model described in Sec. 5 indicates that pH can be a useful error signal in a variety of contexts, especially those that involve water splitting. However, if a fuel cell requires saturation of light-induced electron transfer above a certain light intensity, as is the case in photosynthesis, quenching by pH-activated switching of a quenching moiety (see below) may not be a sufficient controller. Another possible error signal to trigger a controlled quenching process is the increase in the polarity of the environment of light harvesters, which may happen when charged carriers build up in a solar cells due to their limited mobility. Recombination of charge carriers in solar cells is one natural, unregulated example of quenching due to a buildup of an electric field in a device, but this is typically undesirable because it reduces efficiency and may involve decay through high-energy, harmful intermediates. On the contrary, a control mechanism that limits damage without harming device performance must ensure that any form of dissipation of high-energy states occurs through nondestructive pathways and only when it is necessary.
In collaboration with Gust, Moore, Moore and coworkers, we have explored the use of pH as an error signal in a synthetic porphyrin hexad antenna system covalently linked to a control dye (Fig. 9).60 The control dye switches to a quenching form at low pH, quenching the excited singlet states of all five porphyrins, converting the excitation energy to heat. The likely quenching mechanism is energy transfer and occurs with rates in agreement with those calculated from the Förster equation. We are currently working to produce and characterize an antenna-reaction center complex in which pH regulates photo-induced electron transfer.
 Fig. 9  a) Schematic of synthesized hexad molecule that can reversibly transition from a state with a long lifetime (2 ns) to a state with a short lifetime (<200 ps) by changing the pH of the solvent. The transition is accomplished by the quenching dye (circled in orange) which is colorless in neutral solution and blue in acidic solution. b) Time-resolved fluorescence of the porphyrin moiety in neutral (blue) and acidic (green) solution. 
7 What do we need to know to design a light-harvesting device?
In this manuscript, we have discussed several distinctive characteristics of photosynthetic light-harvesting. We conclude by commenting on how these design principles may be useful in the construction of devices.
Just as the design of modern electronics relies heavily on sophisticated modeling and simulation tools,61 the design of artificial light harvesting devices would be greatly aided by simulation tools that allow rapid exploration of the influence of specific design parameters on predicted total energy output, device lifetime, and other desired properties. While extensive theoretical effort has gone into simulating the microscopic photophysics of light harvesting complexes,15,62 there remains a need for larger scale methods to consider the entire photosynthetic unit. To the best of our knowledge, there have been only a few efforts to make these larger-scale models.58,63–65
Currently, many different approaches to reproduce photosynthetic functionality are under development, including genetic manipulation of biological systems to optimize light-harvesting,66,67 incorporation of biological components into synthetic devices,68,69 synthetic devices that mimic photosynthetic dynamics,70,71 and mixed biological/inorganic systems.72,73 In designing these devices, the help of an analytical model could, for example, indicate the optimal packing density of absorbing molecules. The concentration could be tuned to overcome the paucity of solar photons and introduce strong interactions between pigments, which would then drive unidirectional, ultrafast energy transfer via both coherent and incoherent dynamics. In order to prolong device lifetime in natural environments, an analytical model could determine an appropriate concentration of controllable quenchers that could be added to the device. Synthetic quenchers, such as the porphyrin hexad system, could be incorporated to allow for the economical construction of charge separation sites based on average, as opposed to maximal, light intensities. More generally, the evolution of natural photosynthetic light harvesting complexes points to the fact that damage control provides robust light harvesting functionality.
Beyond these two features of photosynthetic light-harvesting, photosynthesis exhibits additional desirable characteristics which might improve light harvesting devices. Photosynthetic systems have the ability to self-repair, or replace components after oxidative damage. Recently, researchers have successfully copied this functionality by introducing repair mechanisms into photosynthetic reaction centers attached to nanotube substrates.74,75 Finally, following the photosynthetic model would mean the construction of all the molecular machinery out of readily available, earth abundant materials. As we learn more about photosynthetic function, these lessons will aid in efforts to adapt what bacteria, algae and plants accomplish—conversion of sunlight into usable energy in a robust, renewable manner—to meet our long-term energy needs.76
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Professor Krishna K. Niyogi, Thuy B. Truong, and Matthew Brooks for helpful discussions, use of their lab, and their gift of mutants. We would also like to thank Professor Roberto Bassi and Dr Matteo Ballottari for providing isolated light harvesting complexes. This work was funded by the Division of Chemical Sciences, Office of Basic Energy Sciences of the Department of Energy through Grant DE-AC03-76SF000098 and by the Helios Solar Energy Research Center, which is supported by the Director, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH1123. G.S.S.-C. acknowledges a AAUW American fellowship, J.Z. a Chancellor's Fellowship from UC Berkeley, and K.A. an NSF Graduate Research Fellowship.
References
C. Kulheim, J. Agren and S. Jansson, Science, 2002, 297, 91–93 CrossRef .

          R. E. Blankenship, Molecular Mechanisms of Photosynthesis, Blackwell Publishing,  2002 Search PubMed .

          H. van Amerongen, L. Valkunas and R. van Grondelle, Photosynthetic Excitons, World Scientific, Singapore,  2000 Search PubMed .
J. P. Dekker and E. J. Boekema, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg., 2005, 1706, 12 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kramer, T. Avenson and G. Edwards, Trends Plant Sci., 2004, 9, 349–357 CrossRef CAS .
P. Müller, X. P. Li and K. K. Niyogi, Plant Physiol., 2001, 125, 1558–66 CrossRef .
N. Adir, H. Zer, S. Shochat and I. Ohad, Photosynth. Res., 2003, 76, 343–370 CrossRef CAS .
Z. F. Liu, H. C. Yan, K. B. Wang, T. Y. Kuang, J. P. Zhang, L. L. Gui, X. M. An and W. R. Chang, Nature, 2004, 428, 287 CrossRef CAS .
G. McDermott, S. Prince, A. Freer, A. Hawthornthwaite-Lawless, M. Papiz, R. Cogdell and N. Isaacs, Nature, 1995, 374, 517–521 CrossRef CAS .
J. Psencik, T. Ikonen, P. Laurinmäki, M. Merckel, S. Butcher, R. Serimaa and R. Tuma, Biophys. J., 2004, 87, 1165–1172 CrossRef CAS .
P. Jordan, P. Fromme, H. T. Witt, O. Klukas, W. Saenger and N. Krausz, Nature, 2001, 411, 909–917 CrossRef CAS .
J. Adolphs and T. Renger, Biophys. J., 2006, 91, 2778 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Schlau-Cohen, T. R. Calhoun, N. S. Ginsberg, M. Ballottari, R. Bassi and G. R. Fleming, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 13276 CrossRef CAS .
D. Andrews, C. Curutchet and G. Scholes, Laser Photonics Rev., 2010, 5, 114 CrossRef .
A. Ishizaki, T. R. Calhoun, G. S. Schlau-Cohen and G. R. Fleming, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 7319 RSC .
G. S. Schlau-Cohen, T. R. Calhoun, N. S. Ginsberg, E. L. Read, M. Ballottari, R. Bassi, R. van Grondelle and G. R. Fleming, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 15352 CrossRef CAS .
B. van Oort, M. Alberts, S. de Bianchi, L. Dall'Osto, R. Bassi, G. Trinkunas, R. Croce and H. van Amerongen, Biophys. J., 2010, 98, 922–931 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Scholes, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2003, 54, 57 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ishizaki and G. R. Fleming, J. Chem. Phys., 2009, 130, 234111 CrossRef .
G. S. Engel, T. R. Calhoun, E. L. Read, T.-K. Ahn, T. Mančal, Y.-C. Cheng, R. E. Blankenship and G. R. Fleming, Nature, 2007, 446, 782 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Plenio and S. F. Huelga, New J. Phys., 2008, 10, 113019 CrossRef .
M. Mohseni, P. Rebentrost, S. Lloyd and A. Aspuru-Guzik, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 129, 174106 CrossRef .
Y.-C. Cheng and G. R. Fleming, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2009, 60, 241 CrossRef CAS .
P. Rebentrost, M. Mohseni and A. Aspuru-Guzik, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 9942 CrossRef CAS .
F. Caruso, A. W. Chin, A. Datta, S. F. Huelga and M. B. Plenio, J. Chem. Phys., 2009, 131, 105106 CrossRef .
G. Beddard and G. Porter, Nature, 1976, 260, 366–367 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lee, Y.-C. Cheng and G. R. Fleming, Science, 2007, 316, 1462 CrossRef CAS .
E. Collini, C. Y. Wong, K. E. Wilk, P. M. G. Curmi, P. Brumer and G. D. Scholes, Nature, 2010, 463, 644 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Calhoun, N. S. Ginsberg, G. S. Schlau-Cohen, Y.-C. Cheng, M. Ballottari, R. Bassi and G. R. Fleming, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 16291 CrossRef CAS .
A. Warshel and W. Parson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1987, 109, 6143–6152 CrossRef CAS .
W. Parson and A. Warshel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1987, 109, 6152–6163 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ishizaki and G. R. Fleming, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 17255 CrossRef .
T. Brixner, J. Stenger, H. Vaswani, M. Cho, R. Blankenship and G. Fleming, Nature, 2005, 434, 625–628 CrossRef CAS .
C. Olbrich, J. Strmpfer, K. Schulten and U. Kleinekathfer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 759–764 Search PubMed .

          S. Shim, P. Rebentrost, S. Valleau and A. Aspuru-Guzik,  2011, Arxiv preprint arXiv:1104.2943, .
H. K. Ledford and K. K. Niyogi, Plant, Cell Environ., 2005, 28, 1037–1045 CrossRef CAS .
F. Fungo, L. Otero, E. Durantini, W. Thompson, J. Silber, T. Moore, A. Moore, D. Gust and L. Sereno, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2003, 5, 469–475 RSC .
C. Tommos and G. Babcock, Acc. Chem. Res., 1998, 31, 18–25 CrossRef CAS .
S. Long, S. Humphries and P. Falkowski, Annu. Rev. Plant Physiol. Plant Mol. Biol., 1994, 45, 633–662 CrossRef CAS .
H. El-Samad, J. P. Goff and M. Khammash, J. Theor. Biol., 2002, 214, 17–29 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yi, Y. Huang, M. Simon and J. Doyle, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2000, 97, 4649–4653 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Doyle, B. Francis and A. Tannenbaum, Feedback Control Theory, MacMillan Publishing Co.,  1990, pp. 1–219 Search PubMed .
X. Li, P. Muller-Moule, A. Gilmore and K. Niyogi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2002, 99, 15222–15227 CrossRef CAS .
P. Jahns, D. Latowski and K. Strzalka, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg., 2009, 1787, 3–14 CrossRef CAS .
K. K. Niyogi, A. R. Grossman and O. Björkman, Plant Cell, 1998, 10, 1121–34 CAS .
N. E. Belyaeva, F.-J. Schmitt, R. Steffen, V. Z. Paschenko, G. Y. Riznichenko, Y. K. Chemeris, G. Renger and A. B. Rubin, Photosynth. Res., 2008, 98, 105–119 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Cruz, C. A. Sacksteder, A. Kanazawa and D. M. Kramer, Biochemistry, 2001, 40, 1226–37 CrossRef CAS .
X.-G. Zhu, J. Biotechnol., 2010, 149, 201–208 CrossRef CAS .
N. Baker, Annu. Rev. Plant Biol., 2008, 59, 89–113 CrossRef CAS .
T. Renger and E. Schlodder, ChemPhysChem, 2010, 11, 1141–1153 CrossRef CAS .
S. Caffarri, R. Kouril, S. Kereiche, E. J. Boekema and R. Croce, EMBO J., 2009, 28, 3052–3063 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dreuw, G. R. Fleming and M. Head-Gordon, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2003, 5, 3247 RSC .
N. E. Holt, D. Zigmantas, L. Valkunas, X.-P. Li, K. K. Niyogi and G. R. Fleming, Science, 2005, 307, 433–6 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Avenson, T. K. Ahn, D. Zigmantas, K. K. Niyogi, Z. Li, M. Ballottari, R. Bassi and G. R. Fleming, J. Biol. Chem., 2008, 283, 3550–8 CrossRef CAS .
T. K. Ahn, T. J. Avenson, M. Ballottari, Y.-C. Cheng, K. K. Niyogi, R. Bassi and G. R. Fleming, Science, 2008, 320, 794–7 CrossRef CAS .
G. Peers, T. B. Truong, E. Ostendorf, A. Busch, D. Elrad, A. R. Grossman, M. Hippler and K. K. Niyogi, Nature, 2009, 462, 518–U215 CrossRef CAS .
G. Bonente, M. Ballottari, T. B. Truong, T. Morosinotto, T. K. Ahn, G. R. Fleming, K. K. Niyogi and R. Bassi, PLoS Biol., 2011, 9, e1000577 CAS .
K. Broess, G. Trinkunas and C. van der Weij-de Wit, 
            et al.
          , Biophys. J., 2006, 91, 3776–3786 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kanan and D. Nocera, Science, 2008, 321, 1072 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Terazono, G. Kodis, K. Bhushan, J. Zaks, C. Madden, A. Moore, T. Moore, G. Fleming and D. Gust, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2916–22 CrossRef CAS .

          L. W. Nagel and D. Pederson, SPICE (Simulation Program with Integrated Circuit Emphasis), EECS Department, University of California, Berkeley Technical Report UCB/ERL M382,  1973 Search PubMed .
R. van Grondelle and V. I. Novoderezhkin, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2006, 8, 793 RSC .
M. Yang and G. R. Fleming, J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 119, 5614–5622 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhu, S. Long and D. Ort, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2008, 19, 153–159 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhu, A. Portis Jr and S. Long, Plant, Cell Environ., 2004, 27, 155–165 CrossRef CAS .
A. Melis, Plant Sci., 2009, 177, 272–280 CrossRef CAS .
D. Noy, C. Moser and P. Dutton, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg., 2006, 1757, 90–105 CrossRef CAS .
G. Steinberg-Yfrach, P. Liddell, S. Hung, A. Moore, D. Gust and T. Moore, Nature, 1997, 385, 239–241 CrossRef CAS .
G. Steinberg-Yfrach, J. Rigaud, E. Durantini, A. Moore, D. Gust and T. Moore, Nature, 1998, 392, 479–482 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Terazono, G. Kodis, P. Liddell, V. Garg, T. Moore, A. Moore and D. Gust, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 7147–7155 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hardin, E. Hoke, P. Armstrong, J. Yum, P. Comte, T. Torres, J. Fréchet, M. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and M. McGehee, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 406–411 CrossRef CAS .
R. Das, P. Kiley, M. Segal, J. Norville, A. Yu, L. Wang, S. Trammell, L. Reddick, R. Kumar and F. Stellacci, 
            et al.
          , Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1079–1083 CrossRef CAS .
C. Faulkner, S. Lees, P. Ciesielski, D. Cliffel and G. Jennings, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 8409–8412 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ham, J. Choi, A. Boghossian, E. Jeng, R. Graff, D. Heller, A. Chang, A. Mattis, T. Bayburt and Y. Grinkova, 
            et al.
          , Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 929–936 CrossRef CAS .
A. Boghossian, J. Choi, M. Ham and M. Strano, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 1599–1609 CrossRef CAS .
N. Lewis and D. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† These authors contributed equally to this work.‡ Current Address: Department of Chemistry, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305 USAThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  The general architecture of the PSII supercomplex where antenna complexes surround two reaction centers, exhibiting a symmetric architecture. Excitation energy migrates from the antenna to the reaction center. A potential trajectory is shown above.	 

 	Fig. 2  Structural models of three photosynthetic antenna complexes: a) LHCII from higher plants; b) the chlorosome from green sulfur bacteria; c) LH2 from purple bacteria.	 

 	Fig. 3  Photosynthesis can be studied in terms of three separate landscapes, the spatial, energetic and electronic landscapes. a) Site basis, or spatial, transition dipole moments of a trimer of Chl within LHCII are shown with their uncoupled transition energies. b) The transition dipole moments of the delocalized excited states (J ≠ 0) and with the energies of these delocalized excited states.	 

 	Fig. 4  One of the energy transfer pathways in the FMO complex illustrated in terms of a) the site basis transition energies and b) the translocation through the molecular structure.	 

 	Fig. 5  Time-resolved fluorescence measurement of live cells of the green alga C. reinhardtii grown in high light and minimal (high salt) media. The red trace was taken with the addition of DCMU, a specific inhibitor of the QB binding site in PSII, which does not allow the reaction center to turn over and generate a pH gradient. Both traces were taken under light conditions that closed the reaction center, so the PSII chlorophylls represented in the red trace can only decay by intrinsic pathways, while those in the blue trace can also decay via NPQ.	 

 	Fig. 6  Photosynthesis as a feedback control system.	 

 	Fig. 7  a) Simulation of lumen pH with (green) and without (red) quenching. Within the framework of our model, the pH gradient is reduced in the presence of quenching. This means that the proton motive force, which powers the synthesis of ATP, is reduced due to qE. b) Fraction of PSII complexes containing protonated PsbS (blue), zeaxanthin (green) and quenchers (red). c) Relative concentration of excited chlorophyll units in PSII with quenching (green) and without quenching (red). The difference between the graphs with quenching and the graph without quenching is proportional to the amount of damage that is averted by quenching excited states. In this simulation, following Cruz et al.,47 the lumenal buffering capacity was taken to be 0.03 mol protons/pH. The black bar in each panel indicates the duration of the saturating light.	 

 	Fig. 8  Comparison of nonphotochemical quenching measurements (left) with simulations (right). The y-axis quantifies the amount of PSII that is in a quenching configuration. The measurement was done using pulse amplitude modulation (PAM) fluorometry,49 which measures the plant's fluorescence yield under different light intensities.	 

 	Fig. 9  a) Schematic of synthesized hexad molecule that can reversibly transition from a state with a long lifetime (2 ns) to a state with a short lifetime (<200 ps) by changing the pH of the solvent. The transition is accomplished by the quenching dye (circled in orange) which is colorless in neutral solution and blue in acidic solution. b) Time-resolved fluorescence of the porphyrin moiety in neutral (blue) and acidic (green) solution.	 
Footnotes
† These authors contributed equally to this work.
‡ Current Address: Department of Chemistry, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305 USA

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
