A review of graphene and graphene oxide sponge: material synthesis and applications to energy and the environment  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3EE43385D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3EE43385D
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1564-1596A review of graphene and graphene oxide sponge: material synthesis and applications to energy and the environment

        
          
            Victor 
            Chabot
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Drew 
            Higgins
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Aiping 
            Yu
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Xingcheng 
            Xiao
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Zhongwei 
            Chen
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Jiujun 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *c
aDepartment of Chemical Engineering, University of Waterloo, Ontario N2L3G1, Canada. E-mail: aipingyu@uwaterloo.ca
bChemical Sciences and Materials Systems, General Motors Global Research and Development Center, Warren, 48090, USA
cNational Research Council Canada, 4250 Wesbrook Mall, Vancouver, B.C., Canada V6T 1W5. E-mail: jiujun.zhang@nrc.gc.ca
Received 
      11th October 2013
    , Accepted 11th February 2014First published on 11th February 2014AbstractThis paper gives a comprehensive review about the most recent progress in synthesis, characterization, fundamental understanding, and the performance of graphene and graphene oxide sponges. Practical applications are considered including use in composite materials, as the electrode materials for electrochemical sensors, as absorbers for both gases and liquids, and as electrode materials for devices involved in electrochemical energy storage and conversion. Several advantages of both graphene and graphene oxide sponges such as three dimensional graphene networks, high surface area, high electro/thermo conductivities, high chemical/electrochemical stability, high flexibility and elasticity, and extremely high surface hydrophobicity are emphasized. To facilitate further research and development, the technical challenges are discussed, and several future research directions are also suggested in this paper.Victor ChabotVictor Chabot received his MASc. in Nanoengineering from the University of Waterloo and currently is pursuing his doctoral degree in Chemical Engineering. His research focuses on nanomaterials developments for energy storage and conversion: supercapacitor and battery.Drew HigginsDrew Higgins is a Ph.D. student in Chemical Engineering at the University of Waterloo with an expected graduation date of May, 2015. His research focuses on the development of advanced nanostructured materials for fuel cell and battery applications. He also holds as BASc. (’09) and MASc. (’11), both in Chemical Engineering.Aiping YuAiping Yu is an assistant professor at the University of Waterloo in Canada. She obtained her Ph.D. from the University of California-Riverside. Her research interests are in material development for energy storage and conversion, photocatalysts, and nanocomposites. Dr Yu has published over 40 papers in peer-reviewed journals such as Science, holds multiple patents for graphene nanomaterials and is the author of 2 book chapters and a book on supercapacitors.Xingcheng XiaoXingcheng Xiao studied Materials Science and Engineering at the Chinese Academy of Sciences (Ph.D. 2000), and joined the General Motors Global Research and Development Center in 2006. He is currently a staff scientist with focus on surface chemistry and energy storage materials for lithium ion batteries with more than 100 papers publsihed in the peer reviewed journals.Zhongwei ChenZhongwei Chen is an Associate Professor in the Department of Chemical Engineering at University of Waterloo. His current research interests are in the development of advanced electrode materials for metal-air batteries, lithium-ion batteries and fuel cells. He received his Ph.D. in Chemical and Environmental Engineering from the University of California-Riverside. Prior to joining the faculty at Waterloo in 2008, he was focusing on the advanced catalysts research in the Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL) at New Mexico, USA. He has published 4 book chapters and more than 80 peer reviewed journal articles. These publications have earned him to date more than 3000 citations with H-index 28. He is also listed as inventor on 3 US patents and 8 provisional US patents, with two licensed to startup companies in USA.Jiujun ZhangJiujun Zhang is a Principle Research Officer and Technical Leader at the National Research Council of Canada's Energy, Mining & Environment Portfolio (NRC-EME). Dr. Zhang is also the Adjunct Professor for 13 universities and research organizations including University of British Columbia, University of Waterloo, and Peking University. Up to now, Dr. Zhang has co-authored 350 publications including 220 refereed journal papers with approximately 10,000 citations, 12 edited /co-authored books, 11 conference proceeding papers, 24 book chapters, as well as 90 conference and invited oral presentations. He also holds over 10 US/EU/WO/JP/CA patents, 9 US patent publications, and produced in excess of eighty industrial technical reports.

Broader context
Advanced graphene materials residing at the frontier of scientific research offer immense potential for overcoming the challenges related to the performance, functionality and durability of key functional materials' in the fields of life science, energy, and the environment. Future demand necessitates advanced processing methods be developed that can mass produce high quality, two-dimensional graphene sheets while overcoming the issues of poor dispersion and restacking with large size-scale deployment of two-dimensional graphene sheets. These issues, along with graphene sheet defects and multilayer thicknesses prevent the full realization of graphene's high potential, including electronic properties and high surface area. Three-dimensional arrangements have been recently able to address these limitations, by creating sponge-like low density materials with a long list of beneficial properties including: macroscale size, high accessible surface area, less restacking, highly-interconnected microstructure, high strength and flexibility, fast ion transport and electron conductivity. This review is intended to address the continued developments and challenges with a wide scope of interest, highlighting fundamental understanding of the synthesis and characterization procedures, future outlook, as well as an in-depth discussion of application areas reporting high performance in recent publications. The outstanding potential of these materials has enabled significant enhancements for numerous important applications such as electrochemical energy storage and conversion, absorption, sensing, catalysis, transistors and polymer composites.

1 Introduction
In today's world, frontier scientific and technological research into the fields of life science, energy, as well as the environment is facing challenges with the performance, functionality and durability of key materials. It has been widely recognized that advanced materials including carbon-based nano-materials such as active carbon (carbon black), carbon nanotubes, carbon nanofibers, graphene and so on will continue to play a more and more important role in the effort to overcome the major challenges and make breakthroughs in both technology and in practical application. These advanced carbon nano-materials have been and will continue to be widely employed in various important applications such as electrochemical energy storage and conversion, sensing, catalysis, transistors and polymer composites.1–10
Graphene, as one of these advanced carbon nano-materials, is a 2-dimensional single sheet of carbon atoms arranged in a hexagonal network. It was discovered in 2004 through a process of scotch tape peeling.11 The ideal graphene sheets that can be achieved by this mechanical exfoliation technique have proven to be: highly ordered, exhibit outstanding surface areas (2630 m2 g−1), high Young's modulus (1 TPa), high thermal conductivity (5000 W mK−1), strong chemical durability and high electron mobility (2.5 × 105 cm2 V−1 s−1).12 However, although production of pristine graphene by mechanical exfoliation has led to the rapid development and characterization of graphene's potential, this method is not applicable to most applications which require larger material quantities of graphene. Therefore, some alternative processes are required for large-scale graphene production and its widespread distribution. In recent years, several alternative technologies have been developed graphene production. For example, the patterned growth of graphene by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) on metallic catalysts has proven to have potential in applications requiring the deposition of very thin and highly conductive graphene materials with several layers.13–16 Direct exfoliation of graphite to graphene can produce low defect ratio materials,17–25 although limited by large size and thickness distributions, which are useful in bulk applications where graphene is a component within a mixture. In addition, graphene can also be prepared at a larger scale by liquid phase exfoliation to form a graphene oxide (GO) intermediate,26,27 followed by reduction to restore the graphene structure (rGO).28–33 However, it has been found that the combination of sheet defects, poor dispersion, restacking and multilayer thickness can prevent the full realization of graphenes' electronic and high surface area properties.12 In addition, the advanced properties of rGO make it an interesting candidate for many applications.
To overcome the challenges of poor dispersion and restacking, some innovative synthesis methods are definitely necessary in order to achieve long range order and conductivity between the individual graphene sheets.34 This will be important for maintaining graphene's properties in bulk and to enhance graphene utilization for practical applications. One of the approaches for synthesis of high performing graphene nano-materials is to utilize 2-dimensional graphene sheets to compose solid three-dimensional networks of graphene sponges, which could also be referred to as hierarchal three dimensional structures, foams, templates, and aerogels. These graphene nano-materials, referred to as graphene sponges throughout this review, exhibits high surface area and accessible pore volume as well as high strength and conductivity at extremely low density.
As a result, graphene and carbon nanotube (CNT) based three-dimensional structures are rapidly evolving with many new techniques and applications. They have become the focus of extensive study illustrated by several targeted reviews.35–39 For those interested in the field, the significant development, wide application scope and numerous variations in preparation methodology continue to make understanding the benefits, future opportunities and drawbacks for these different materials a challenge. This review is intended to address the continued developments and challenges with a wide scope of interest, highlighting fundamental understanding of the synthesis and characterization procedures, future outlook, as well as an in-depth discussion of application areas reporting high performance in recent publications.
2 Synthesis of graphene and graphene-oxide sponges
Generally speaking, ordered three-dimensional graphene networks can be obtained through different procedures, including the direct gelling of high aspect ratio materials and the self-assembly interactions of GO during reduction. Actually, these techniques share a common drying process for the formation of sponge structure. In the literature, there are several methods including direct drying solution, self assembly and expansion of compact GO films. However, in each method, different reducing species, temperatures and additives can be used according to the targeted products. Bottom-up growth of graphene on metal catalyst supports could offer a fundamentally different procedure for achieving a templated three dimensional architecture on the macroscale, with strictly defined porous sponge structures. Although the procedures in the synthesis methods are slightly different, they share a similar growth philosophy at high temperature, followed by post-treatment to remove the sacrificial support or to grow any composite materials. Table 1 gives a brief summary of the performance metrics associated to the main methods in use to produce free standing graphene architectures. The following subsections will give some deeper discussion on these methods and the research directions of the materials produced.
Table 1 Summary of graphene/graphene oxide sponge structures and their variants




Synthesis
Characteristics
Application
References





Template growth




Nickel sponge





- Superhydrophobicity (160°, rebounds water)
Polymer composite

118 and 134



- Flexibility (1 mm bend radius)


- Low percolation conductivity (<1 wt%, 5 S cm−1)


 




- Up to 130 g g−1 organic solvent and oil capacity
Absorber

175



 




- High conductivity, 10 S cm−1
Sensing

115, 120, 147, 149 and 157



- High S/N ratios and sensitivity (2–50× vs. glassy carbon)


- Direct detection limits below 25 nM


 




- High rate/capacity retention composite anode materials, up to 200 °C
Energy storage

121, 122, 227, 230, 231 and 256



- Free standing electrodes (no binder or metal)


- High pseudocapacitance composites, 300–1100 F g−1


 



Other

- Adjustable macro porosity below 1 μm



124–126 and 128



- Ultralow density reaching 0.2 mg cm−3


- High conductivity, 650 S cm−1


 



Free standing




Direct dry





- High strength and rigidity, supports 10000 g g−1
Polymer composite

54–56, 84 and 130



- Conductivity, up to 2 S cm−1


- Superhydrophobic, 160°


- Scalable size, >1000 cm3


- Ultralow density graphene network, 0.16–4 mg cm−3


 




- Heavy metal ion extraction, 20 mg g−1 copper ion
Absorber

57, 81 and 106



- Up to 700 g g−1 organic solvent/oil capacity


 




- 7% DSSC, 2× compared to graphene powder
Energy

53 and 226



- High initial capacity, reversible capacity of 400 mA h g−1


 



Self assembly





- Self healing, scratch resistance
Polymer composite

43, 44, 46, 83 and 87–89



- Composite with up to 3000% elongation


- Conductivity, up to 1 S cm−1


 




- High absorption, 600 g g−1for organic solvents and 180 mg g−1 for dyes
Absorber

60, 83, 91, 92, 96 and 174



- Reversible absorption, can burn off collected contaminants


- Rapid compression recovery, up to 90%


 




- Strong DEFC fuel cell performance and ORR activity better than Pt/C
Energy

45, 60, 90, 93, 94, 96, 187, 189, 228, 229, 235, 242, 254 and 255



- High rate Li-air battery, 2000 mA h g−1 at 2.8 A g−1


- High capacity composite anode materials, >700 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1


- High capacity/rate composite cathode materials, 400 mA h g−1 at 190 °C


- High double layer capacitance, 200–480 F g−1




2.1 Free-standing graphene and graphene oxide sponges
Free-standing graphene and graphene oxide sponges can be produced by a special drying process in which the strong interactions of graphene oxide in water play an important role. In this technique, the interactions are strong enough that solutions could be directly frozen to produce the sponges cost-effectively. Furthermore, the change in hydrophilic character during GO reduction can allow for increased strength and control of pore size, maintaining high area at increased density. However, there are some challenges and the process variability also requires more development for achieving optimal and consistent results.

2.1.1 Direct drying techniques for aerogel preparation. 
The starting material for generation of graphene and graphene oxide sponges is normally a hydrogel, which can provide a route for the formation of three dimensional graphene structures with extraordinary surface area and properties.40 The gel commonly consists of a solid network which interacts through physical or chemical bonds to trap many times their weight in water, where hydrophilic groups can create strong surface tension. The surface tension within the gel can prevent the liquid from flowing and disrupting the bonds. To obtain graphene sponge materials by this method, drying the hydrogels is an integral first step for the formation of free standing sponges. However, during drying, the capillary action caused by the evaporation of water can collapse the pore structure. To avoid this, there are two techniques that can be used; one is freeze drying, and the other is critical point drying. Both techniques can be used to limit stress on the pore structure by replacing the liquid with gas for sponge formation. By these techniques, self-assembled structures composed of hydrogel or strong interactions in solution between the 2D sheets can be preserved, resulting in high surface area macroscale sponge. Normally, the freeze drying technique would limit the capillary stress by going around water's triple point boundary, lowering the temperature of water and then going directly from solid to the gas phase via low pressure. However, the stress caused by crossing the solid–gas boundary can disrupt more fragile monolayer/bi-layer structures.41,42 Further, water crystallization on freezing must be controlled to prevent sample damage.43,44 With respect to this, the critical point drying technique has the distinct advantage of avoiding any phase boundary by forming a supercritical fluid at elevated temperature and pressure. However, the critical point of water is at 374 °C, high enough to damage many sponge structures.40 Instead, acetone is often exchanged for water and then acetone is washed away with liquid CO2 in a high pressure chamber.44–46 CO2 is recognized as an excellent supercritical fluid which exhibits its critical point at only 1000 psi and 31 °C.40 The pressure in the chamber is slowly released as gas after the temperature is raised above the critical point, leaving the dry sample with minimal distortion of the gelled structure.


2.1.2 Graphene sponges from the direct drying of graphene oxide hydrogels. 
Graphene oxide (GO) is currently the most common precursor for the preparation of graphene materials. GO can be prepared by the intercalation and oxidation of graphite powder, usually by the modified Hummer's method, where the key components are sulfuric acid and potassium permanganate.26,27,31 These two key reactants are mixed to form a strongly oxidizing species known as dimanganeseheptoxide (Mn2O7).47 When heated to around 55 °C and or placed in contact with organic compounds such as graphite, a series of micro detonations occur to functionalize the carbon surface.47 Therefore, the extent of acid penetration before addition of KMnO4 can greatly affect the exfoliation efficiency. The functionalities consist of primarily epoxide and hydroxyl groups which are highly hydrophilic and form strong hydrogen bonds with water.48 The intercalation with water can cause lattice expansion, increasing the distance between the graphite planes from 0.335 nm to 0.6–1.2 nm.49 Then, after strong mixing or weak sonication, the van der Waal's binding forces are easily overcome to form thin mono or few layer graphene oxide materials.50
The high solubility and hydrophilic edges of the formed graphene oxide allow it to be well dispersed at high concentrations. However, the basal plane would retain some of its hydrophobicity, rendering GO amphiphilic.51,52 Then the un-gelated solution between 1 and 15 mg mL−1, which exhibits strong enough bonding interactions, can be directly freeze dried to form GO sponges.53–55Fig. 1a illustrates the grains created from ice crystal formation during rapid solution freezing, which causes internal expansion and macroscale cracking of the freeze dried solution.56Fig. 1b shows images of the well-ordered porous network created by these GO sponges, taken by a scanning electron microscope (SEM).57 It should be noted that improving the quality and strength of GO networks will be important in the production of repeatable, scalable sponges.
 Fig. 1  (a) Image of GO sponge produced by direct freeze drying of GO solution, and (b) SEM of its lateral cross section. (c) Photographs of 5 mg mL−1 GO solutions mixed with different cross-linkers: (1) 0.5 mg mL−1 PVP, (2) 1 mg mL−1 hydroxypropylcellulose (HPC), (3) 1 mg mL−1 PEO, (4) 0.1 mg mL−1 polydimethyldiallylammonium chloride (PDDA), (5) 0.2 mg mL−1 polyethylenimine (PEI), (6) 0.3 mg mL−1 cetyltrimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB), (7) 1.9 mg mL−1 tetramethylammonium chloride (TMAC), (8) 0.3 mg mL−1 melamine, (9) 20 mM Li+, (10) 20 mM K+, (11) 20 mM Ag+, (12) 15 mM Mg2+, (13) 9 mM Ca2+, (14) 3 mM Cu2+, (15) 3 mM Pb2+, (16) 3 mM Cr3+, (17) 3 mM Fe3+. All the concentrations labeled above are the critical gelation concentration measured for the corresponding cross-linkers, except for 9, 10, and 11 which did not gel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 57 (a and b) and ref. 65 (c). Copyright: 2012 Elsevier (a and b) and 2011 American Chemical Society (c). 
To increase the applicability and harness the desired graphene properties, this GO sponge must be reduced to a rGO sponge. Unfortunately, reintroducing GO sponges to high humidity or water moisture can cause the rapid collapse of the sponge due to the redispersion of GO. This means that the chemical reduction in solution with a reducing agent such as sodium borohydride, hydrazine, ascorbic acid and HI seems unfeasible.28,30–32,48,58,59 Instead, the GO sponge can be reduced with high temperature (∼600–1000 °C) in a dry argon environment or at lower temperatures with a strongly reducing vapor to form rGO sponge.60,61 Note that in this process, the temperature ramp rate should not be too high, otherwise, the sponge would suffer thermal shock, rapidly releasing gas and disrupting the integrity of the sponge structure.55 For example, Xue et al.53,62 utilized a porous GO sponge to produce uniformly nitrogen-doped three-dimensional graphene sponge,53,62 the approach is different from that of the predominantly surface doping seen with reduction of air dried GO powders.63
2.1.2.1 Effects of GO sheet size and gelling agents on graphene sponge formation. 
To produce stronger and more robust graphene sponges from direct drying of GO solutions, understanding the characteristics of GO gelation seems very important. Normally, higher aspect ratio materials are capable of inhibiting rotational motion within a gel and increasing the number of contact points between sheets. Therefore, larger lateral dimensions of the GO sheets should give increased solution viscosity and hydrophobic character. Further, a recent fundamental investigation by Thomas et al.64 determined that up to 33% of the GO produced by oxidation, regardless of the protocol used, is comprised of small over-oxidized carbonaceous debris adhered to the surface of the monolayer GO sheets. A simple wash in base was all that was necessary to effectively remove this debris from the GO surface, revealing its true monolayer nature. Incorporation of a similar step to clean the GO surface during processing could significantly improve the quality of sheet interaction, reduce sheet size distribution and translate to improved performance for the graphene sponges discussed throughout this review.
The investigation by Bai et al.65 into the effect of sheet size and solution acidification revealed that GO hydrogels could also be rapidly formed at room temperature, with a low critical gelation concentration of only 3 mg mL−1. It was observed that the acidification of GO could protonate the carboxyl groups on the basal plane, weakening the repulsive force between sheets and water, making the GO become less stable solution.65,66 Furthermore, small GO flakes produced through exfoliation of microcrystalline graphite powder or large mesh natural graphite did not form a solid gel, predictably favored the rapid precipitation of flocculated powders after acidification, even at high concentrations. It was also observed that when flake size was greater than 1 μm, instead of precipitating, the restricted rotational motion of the larger sheets and the increased bond strength could trigger a nearly 40× increase in viscosity, forming hydrogels within a few seconds of adding the acid. It should be noted that the initial sheet size is not the only factor, sonication has also be shown to induce scission of the GO basal plane, as observed in Fig. 2.67–72
 Fig. 2  (a) SEM image of graphene oxide sheets that underwent 6 hours of mechanical shaking. (b) Histogram of sheet sizes observed in (a). (c) SEM image of graphene oxide sheets that underwent 6 hours of mechanical shaking and 0.5 hour of sonication. (d) Histogram of sheet sizes observed in (c). All the scale bars are 50 μm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
There are also several measures that can be used to strengthen the inter-sheet binding, crosslinking and sharply increase viscosity of the GO solution forming hydrogels which could also translate to the enhanced the properties of the dried aerogels, including: divalent and trivalent coordination with the oxygen functionality on GO,65,73 long polymer chains which form hydrogen bonds with GO including polyvinyl acetate (PVA), polyethylene oxide (PEO) and polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP), cationic molecules containing quaternary ammonium groups and protonated amino groups to enhance long range electrostatic interactions (Fig. 1c).74,75 In addition to these gelating agents, hydrogels have also been prepared by amino acids, nucleosides and peptide chains.76,77 Depending on the type of stabilizing interactions, some hydrogels will remain intact after washing to form freestanding hydrogels, which can also then be freeze dried to form graphene sponge materials. Chen et al.78 recently demonstrated that this is true for chitosan, a crosslinking polysachharide which can form multiple hydrogen bonds with GO, as well as, amine groups that can strongly attract the negatively charged GO sheets. Hydrogels formed by the addition of polyethylenimine (PEI), crosslinkers at room temperature also exhibit a high density of accessible amine groups, which have been dried to form freestanding graphene sponges with high surface area.79,80 In contrast to this, the coordination of multivalent ions (La3+, Co3+, Ni2+) to carboxyl groups on the GO sheets offers a selectively reversible sol–gel transition, as observed by Huang et al.80 In this case, the hydrogels could be broken down before drying by the addition of ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), which coordinates with the metal ions in place of the carboxyl groups. With continued investigation into gelling agents, it is expected that the qualities of the GO sponges produced should continue to improve.
With continuing improvements to graphene sponge networks, it is believed that it may be possible to produce the solid material with comparable to or even lower density than air, <1 mg cm−3. For example, the sacrificial template and high temperature CVD approaches discussed later in Section 2.2.3 reveals aerographite could have a density as low as 0.18 mg cm−3. This kind of material benefited from the hierarchical structure, allowing them to reach density much below that of other CNT or graphene sponges reported (>2 mg cm−3). 60 However, the scalability of such materials to large volume using these templating and high temperature processes is limited. Sun et al.81,82 integrated the beneficial effects of giant GO sheets with a 4–50 μm size range. The obtained materials were ultraporous graphene sponges with a density as low as 0.16 mg cm−3. More importantly, the sponges could be achieved with a simple direct solution freeze drying process, followed by a 90 °C hydrazine vapor reduction60 which harnessed the leavening effects discussed by Niu et al.61 (Section 2.1.4). However, the formed graphene sponges exhibited a limited mechanical strength and also a limited elasticity due to the flexibility of the large GO sheets. To address this, up to 50 wt% CNTs was added to the GO solution, resulting in a highly synergistic effect through the strong van der Waal forces between the giant rGO and CNTs, which caused the CNTs to lay flat on the graphene sheets (Fig. 3a and b).60,81 As a result the flexible rGO network favored a load transfer to the strong CNT ribs, creating compressible sponges (0.75–1.5 mg cm−3), which could recover from 50% strain after more than 1000 cycles (88% stress retention). As demonstrated by Fig. 3c, a large 1000 cm3 brick can be easily made with the rGO-CNT hybrid sponge process.81 This recent work clearly demonstrates the potential for employing the increased sheet interactions of large graphene sheets to tailor the sponges produced.
 Fig. 3  (a) SEM image and schematic of the CNT/reduced GO sponges (ρ = 1 mg cm−33,fCNT = 0.5), and (b) CNT distribution on individual graphene sheets at higher magnification. (c) Demonstration of ∼1000 cm3 sponge cylinder (21 cm in diameter and 3 cm in thickness). (d) Crosslinking (top) and self-healing (bottom) processes of dsDNA/rGO sponge: the as-prepared free-standing sponge was cut with a razor into three small blocks and the blocks could adhere to each other by pushing the freshly formed surfaces to contact together followed by heating at 90 °C in air for 3 minutes. SEM images of freeze dried (e) BIS only sponge and (f) the high elasticity BIS/GO cross-linked sponge. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81 (a–c), ref. 83 (d) and ref. 88 (e and f). Copyright: 2013 Wiley (a–c), 2010 American Chemical Society (d), and 2012 Elsevier (e and f). 
2.1.2.2 Direct drying methods with in situ assembled polymer networks. 
In general, the addition of large chain networks cross linking between the functional groups of multiple GO sheets can help create composites, partially reduced sponges with enhanced strength and elasticity. The improved mechanical properties could also allow the sponges to survive drying more easily. An example was illustrated by Xu et al.83 who considered DNA to be a novel non-covalent crosslinker in the formation of GO sponges. In their work, GO solution was mixed well with double stranded DNA and then heated to 90 °C for 5 minutes, causing the DNA to unwind into its single stranded form. The nucleo-bases and the backbone could form strong pi–pi interactions with the functionalized GO surface, leading GO to rapidly gelate. Upon cooling, the unbound single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) could be converted back to double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) trapped within the final sponge. When cut, the pieces could be touched back together and heated to 90 °C, the unbound dsDNA in the sponge would again unwind and link the partially reduced GO surfaces, giving the sponge a unique self-healing property illustrated by Fig. 3d.
Porous GO sponges have also been reported with the use of polymers to increase their strength and elasticity, as well as prevent dissolution of GO gels. For example, Ye et al.84 reported the usage of low GO concentrations (3–9%) to rapidly crosslink with epoxy monomers, forming porous sponges with high strength and elasticity. After stirring for 1 minute, the mixture was freeze dried to form relatively dense sponges (90 mg cm−3) composed of uncured epoxy monomers and GO. After drying, the sponge was cured at 100 °C for 3 hours. The successful cross linking of the GO sheets was confirmed by the eliminated diffraction peak indicative of both GO and rGO materials. The formed composite epoxy sponge materials could support up to 231 kPa stress at 70% strain. At high stress, the sponges collapsed, similar to other composite sponges.85–87 Without epoxy, the sponges could still form, but they were weak under deformation and broke under stress, making mechanical tests difficult. Regarding the elasticity, at only 50% strain, the compression showed nearly 100% stress retention after multiple cycles, illustrating a high degree of elasticity due to the presence of crosslinking groups.
Inversely, the crosslinking of GO at low concentration within a polymer matrix can also induce the formation of macroporous polymer sponges with enhanced properties. For example, Shen et al.88 used a free radical polymerization process at 60 °C to generate the GO hydrogels in composite with N,N-methylenebisacrylamide (BIS) crosslinked polyacrylamide (PAM). In their experiments, no sponge was seen when the BIS crosslinker was eliminated, which was probably due to the lower crosslinking efficiency of GO at 60 °C. However, the introduction of GO to the PAM/BIS gels could increase the number of crosslinked junctions in the polymer microstructure, leading to reduced swelling, enhanced thermal stability and more even distribution of stress throughout the polymer matrix (Fig. 3e and f) (2 mg mL−1 GO). The high elasticity of the hydrogel polymers allowed them to recover quickly from compressive stress and reached up to 500% tensile strain before stress failure. Liu et al.89 also reported rubbery composite sponges synthesized using GO to crosslink PAM without BIS initiator. In their synthesis, a longer, low temperature (3 °C) process was used to prevent rapid polymerization and allow more effective GO cross linking (0.6 mg mL−1 GO). The resulting hydrogel GO sponges exhibited a long-term stability over 48 hours in water at temperatures up to 80 °C. They also found that PAM hydrogels cross-linked with BIS only were too brittle, breaking easily under compression or stretching, while GO cross-linked hydrogels exhibited up to 4000% elongation before breaking, due to the even force distribution in the pore network and GO's efficient hydrogen bonding with the water network in the sponge.


2.1.3 Self-assembled graphene sponges by GO reduction. 
Three dimensional graphene sponges have also been generated by utilizing the unique properties of graphene oxide to produce high concentration solutions and gels. During the initial stages of thermal reduction, the basal plane of graphene oxide is shifted from a hydrophilic state to a more hydrophobic regime. Hydrogen bonding with water becomes weakened and the van der Waal's attraction between the planes is increased, creating some sticky graphene sheets.54 If undisturbed, the sheets in solution can began to self-assemble, as illustrated by Qui et al.43 in Fig. 4a. Conversely, Fig. 4c reveals that when the concentration is insufficient, porous precipitates form and settle out of solution.90 However, if the concentration is high enough, the attractive forces between sheets and the mutual restriction of mobility could result in the slightly reduced graphene materials assembling into a porous hydrogel, taking on the shape of the containment vessel.91 Reduced further, the C/O ratio of the network was increased, the van der Waal's forces became stronger and the self-assembled rGO hydrogel became more rigid and dense. After, assembly, the structure was dried to prepare sponges. Actually, various approaches for graphene sponges formed by the reduction self-assembly process can be found in the literature in which both high pressure and high temperature in autoclaves, electrochemical reduction or low temperature are used. The reduction can also be performed with the addition of crosslinking agents or more environmentally friendly reducing agents, and the reduction process can be further supplemented with high temperature annealing.
 Fig. 4  (a) Photos of GO dispersions after being subjected to ascorbic acid reduction at 100 °C for different periods of time. (b) SEM image of a typical self-assembled 2 mg mL−1 rGO sponge formed with 180 °C in autoclave. (c) Image depicts that the GO concentration must be above a critical point before self-assembly will occur and that (d) after a network is formed it will continue to tighten and become denser with reduction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 43 (a) and ref. 90 (b–d). Copyright: 2012 Nature Publishing Group (a) and 2010 American Chemical Society (b–d). 
2.1.3.1 Reduction self-assembly by high temperature and pressure. 
The production of graphene sponge has been widely reported, utilizing an autoclave at moderately high temperatures (∼90–200 °C) and elevated solution pressures to reduce GO and induce self-assembly.43,44,46,90,92,93 Shi et al.90 published several reports on graphene sponges produced from the reduction self-assembly process. In one report, aqueous 2 mg mL−1 GO solutions were reduced from the temperature and pressure within an autoclave for 1–12 hours. The process could give some dense hydrogels bound together by many pi–pi interactions and van der Waal's forces.90 Increasing the reduction time, the C/O ratio was increased from 3.4 (1 hour) to 5.3 (12 hour), and also the conductivity of the unpressed sponges reached to 0.005 S cm−1. Further, as illustrated by Fig. 4d, the sponges become progressively denser as time is increased. The strong rGO sponges were measured to have an elastic regime at low stress and a storage modulus reaching to 470 kPa and stable at measured temperatures up to 100 °C. Fig. 4b shows the thin pore walls of the rGO structure consisting of a few partially overlapping sheets and pore diameter on the order of a few micrometers.
2.1.3.2 Crosslinking enhanced methods for reduction self-assembly. 
Crosslinkers have also been employed to improve the sheet interactions and or to functionalize the graphene surfaces prepared with high temperature and pressure in an autoclave. For example, Zhao et al.94 produced a 463 m2 g−1 rGO composite by autoclaving a 2 mg mL−1 of GO solution in the presence of 5 vol% pyrrole (Py) at 180 °C. In their approach, the nitrogen rich monomer was able to interact with the GO sheets through hydrogen and pi–pi bonding to reduce self-stacking of the GO during reduction, while still promoting binding between rGO. As a result, the sponge volume was 500% greater than that with GO only. Furthermore, the additional sheet interaction allowed the group to achieve three-dimensional sponges with a low critical self-assembly concentration of only 0.5 mg mL−1 GO when Py was present. After reduction, the monomer dispersed throughout the hydrogel could be polymerized to strengthen the final freeze dried sponge, lowering the surface area to 166 m2 g−1 but creating a reversible compression. Furthermore, the polypyrrole (PPy) rGO sponge exhibited a high conductivity of 30 S cm−1.94 Wu et al.93 used various boron and nitrogen to co-dope the graphene planes for the enhancement of electrochemical performance. In this process, a 1.5 mg mL−1 GO solution with the co-doping compounds was autoclaved for 12 hours at 180 °C. The resultant sponges exhibited a similar morphology to that previously shown with entangled 1–5 μm pores and thin GO walls of 1–2 nm thickness. Zhao et al.91 harnessed thiourea as a crosslinker additive during autoclaving to produce similar three-dimensional sponges with a maximum compressive stress of 140 kPa. During autoclaving, the thiourea was decomposed to form ammonia and hydrogen sulfide gases which could leaven the hydrogel, creating larger pores. At higher thiourea concentrations, the gas formation could result in looser sponges with poor structural stability. However, at lower thiourea concentrations the gases could dope the basal plane with –NH2 and –SO3H groups as it was reduced.91 These groups acted to promote stronger inter-sheet crosslinking, while still increasing the plane spacing compared to rGO. As discussed previously, GO sheet sizes played an important role in forming sponge morphology, having a significant effect on the pore size of the thiourea derived sponges.91
It should be noted that the carbon to oxygen (C/O) ratio of the self-assembled rGO sponges reduced through temperature and pressure alone was significantly less than that of graphene powders reduced through hydrazine (C/O ∼ 10.3)28 and NaBH4 (C/O ∼ 8.6).32 But, the rapid gas release during aggressive reduction in these aqueous mediums could limit the self-assembly behaviour during the reduction of GO solutions prepared by these methods. In the case of self-assembled rGO sponges, the hydrothermally reduced three-dimensional architectures had extensive pore structure that allowed for more efficient gas release than in compact GO films. Therefore, if parameters could be well controlled, most deflagration of the material during reduction at high annealing temperatures could be avoided. Worsley et al.44,46 synthesized partially reduced rGO sponges at only 85 °C from base catalyzed GO solution. Then, the freeze dried sponges were fully reduced by controlled pyrolysis at 1050 °C to produce sponges with low density (6 mg cm−3) and high conductivity reaching to 0.25 S cm−1, comparable to that of the autoclaved rGO sponges. In this approach, before synthesis the GO solutions were sonicated for several hours to ensure uniform mixing. The well-sonicated GO solutions contained smaller GO sheets and the rGO sponges had much smaller pore size compared to those presented in Fig. 3a and 4b. In literature, differences in the GO precursors were likely to create variation in the results achieved between one report and another. However, the low processing temperatures and the steric inter-sheet repulsion created from the unprotonated GO sheets could result in less aggressive restacking/assembly, which after critical point drying produced rGO sponges with 1200 m2 g−1 surface area.46 The lower temperature could eliminate most of the pressure increase, enabling the reduction process to occur in sealed glass vials. Worsley et al.44 also experimented with the addition of up to 4 wt% loading of resorcinol-formaldehyde (RF) resin to crosslink rGO during resin curing.44 As a result, conductivity was improved to 0.87 S cm−1 but the RF solids could create a stronger restacking of the GO, leading to surface area of only 500 m2 g−1.
In addition to the controlled high temperature reduction, covalent cross linkers have also been used to demonstrate improved rGO sponge strength and conductivity due to the increased binding strength, flexibility, and control of inter-sheet spacing than with physical interactions alone. Hu et al.92 presented a low density, compression tolerant sponge using ethylenediamine (EDA), a short carbon chain capped with amine groups, to covalently crosslink GO's structure. During 95 °C of reduction, the FTIR band corresponding to epoxy groups on the GO surface weakened, replaced by –CH2 and –NH groups, suggesting that a ring opening reaction occurred on the epoxide groups, leaving EDA covalently bound to the GO surface (Fig. 5a).92,95 In addition to the mild thermal reduction at 95 °C, EDA was capable of acting as a mild reducing agent, removing hydroxyl functionalities from the GO surface. The EDA could promote covalent linkages between multiple GO sheets, while hydrogen bonds between amine functionalities could further promote inter-sheet binding and the functionalities minimized restacking, thereby eliminating the diffraction peak normally seen for GO and rGO materials (Fig. 5c). The achieved sponge was only mildly reduced (C/O ∼ 2.3) and the self-assembly led to very little volume reduction (Fig. 5b). After freeze drying, the functionalized graphene sponges (FGA) were fully reduced by microwave irradiation, which could remove the remaining oxygen and create ultralight sponges (3 mg cm−3) with excellent compressibility at up to 90% strain (Fig. 5d). Luan et al.96 also reported rGO hydrogels which used EDA as a covalent crosslinker, preventing restacking at high concentrations up to 15 mg mL−1.96 XPS results indicated that nearly all the nitrogen existed in the C–NH–C form, suggesting that EDA was covalently bound to graphene. After EDA linkages were formed at 90 °C, then the hydrogels were transferred into a hydrazine solution for reduction and finally freeze dried to form a sponge with high surface area of 745 m2 g−1.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of mechanism of EDA-mediated functionalization and reduction of GO, the restored sp2 regions are marked with red line. (b) Illustration of different steps in the fabrication process of the ultralight graphene sponge (ULGA). (c) XRD patterns and of GO, FGA and ULGA. (d) The digital images showing compressibility of ULGA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 92. Copyright 2013 Wiley. 
2.1.3.3 Low temperature methods for reduction self-assembly. 
For the synthesis of graphene sponges without high temperature annealing, effective reducing agents are necessary to achieve high conductivity rGO sponges. However, the strong reducing power of the most common agents used, such as hydrazine and NaBH4, could generate large quantities of gas capable of breaking apart the forming hydrogels during their critical state of reduction. Further, the pressure generated during reaction requires the use of high pressure equipment. In addition, hydrazine has high toxicity and NaBH4 has strong reactivity with water. Fortunately, ascorbic acid (AA), also known as “Vitamin C”, seems to be an edible, non-toxic mild reducing agent as shown by Fernanadez-Merino et al.30 who demonstrated that AA could be an effective substitute for hydrazine in reducing graphene oxide (C/O ∼ 12.5). The proposed reaction mechanism involved a gradual hydride transfer from the AA molecule to the epoxide or hydroxyl groups on GO, releasing primarily water upon heating, as opposed to gases produced by other reduction methods. In addition to ascorbic acid, the mineral salt sodium ascorbate has also been shown as an effective reducing agent for graphene sponge production.97 Zhang et al.45 illustrated the efficacy of AA by producing comparable rGO aerogels with area of 512 m2 g−1 and conductivity of 0.63 S cm−1, using extended time at only 40 °C in glass vials.45 In their work, the slow restoration of the pi–pi interaction could result in a strong network and high conductivity, despite the low temperatures used. Qiu et al.43 also reported self-assembled rGO sponges produced by boiling a 5 mg mL−1 GO solution containing AA. In addition, they also reported that the gradual reduction allowed for the tuning of the C/O ratio, enabling the production of long range cork-like morphology during freezing. After freezing, the hydrogels were boiled for extended time and freeze dried to form rGO sponges with reversible compressibility. These steps towards more environmentally friendly, low temperature processing with controlled porosity suggest a wide range of application and utility.
Several other low temperature and pressure alternatives have also been successfully demonstrated for graphene sponge formation. As previously discussed above, some crosslinking agents such as EDA and thiourea can also mildly reduce GO and induce reduction self-assembly at moderate solution temperatures around 95 °C, producing robust graphene sponges. In addition to AA, several other reducing agents including NaHSO3, Na2S, HI, and hydroquinone have been demonstrated to effectively reduce GO and induce sponge self-assembly, using 95 °C and atmospheric pressure.98 In one embodiment, Chen et al.99 used NaHSO3 to reduce GO and simultaneously trap Fe3O4 nanoparticles within the graphene sponge material. By this method they created a superparamagnetic composite with much higher surface area and lower density than for the Fe3O4 nanoparticles alone. Another new method demonstrated by Wu et al.100 used copper nanoparticles to simultaneously initiate the reduction self-assembly of GO and generate Cu2O particles uniformly anchored to the high surface area of the forming graphene sponge. The composite sponges offered excellent photocatalytic degradation of methyl orange and the absorption of several dyes and oils from water. Further, this approach suggests a potentially facile method for formation of high surface area sponges functionalized with metal oxides for a wide range of applications.
An interesting alternative for room temperature processing is the use of electrochemical reduction to prepare rGO sponge coatings with controllable micron size pore structure and low resistance. In this regard, Shi et al.101,102 illustrate low resistance, ultrahigh rate capacitor, electrodes made from interpenetrating networks of electrochemically reduced rGO on gold current collectors. These electrodes displayed relaxation time constants as low as 0.24 ms and strongly capacitive behaviour up to 350 V s−1, faster than even CNT electrodes (time constant, 1.5 ms).


2.1.4 Other techniques for the generation of free-standing graphene sponges. 
Tightly stacked layers in GO films have also been used to create free-standing graphene sponges. In general, efficient reduction of these GO films seems critical, and can result in varied thickness, due to the shrinking lattice space and the expansion caused by rapid gas formation. For example, in the case of highly efficient reduction by hydrohalic acids, the GO films shrunk in thickness by 50%, while both hydrazine and NaBH4 reduced films broke up or dissolved during the reduction.48 Another way using thermal shock on GO films could lead to mixed results, achieving well expanded GO films but with loss of film flexibility and embrittlement. To address this, by controlling gas release during the reduction, El-Kady et al.103 exfoliated GO films using a low power laser to slowly leaven and efficiently reduce graphite oxide over multiple cycles. The optimal conditions could produce flexible rGO films (2× thicker than graphite oxide film) with hundred nanometer pores, conductivity reaching to 17 S cm−1, and high surface area of 1500 m2 g−1. In a different approach, Niu et al.61 investigated the controlled leavening of tightly packed free-standing graphite oxide films using small quantities of hydrazine to produce flexible three-dimensional rGO papers with surprising mechanical integrity (Fig. 6a). The mass loss through gas generation could result in a significant volume expansion up to 20×, as depicted by Fig. 6b–d.
 Fig. 6  (a) Freestanding paper-like rGO sponge after leavening a compact GO film in 90 °C hydrazine vapor. SEM images of (b) the rGO formed without any vapor and (c) when 40 μL of hydrazine were added to the autoclave during reduction. (d) A graph depicting the volume expansion with increasing hydrazine vapor content. Reproduced with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2012 Wiley. 
In addition, when successfully dispersed, high aspect ratio materials such as carbon nanotubes104,105 and 2D graphene sheets could also develop hydrogels, forming hybrid graphene sponges. As shown in literature,106 when concentration was increased, the rotational motion of each wire or sheet was inhibited by that of the surrounding molecules, forming a three-dimensional network held together by van der Waal's forces at the contact points. But, there were some challenges in producing this kind of graphene sponges. For example, the reduced graphene oxide and pristine graphene materials might have insufficient functionality due to the structure being dominated by the hydrophobic sp2 hybridized carbon ring structure; 12,107 and the hydrophobic character could result in poor graphene dispersion, even after continued sonication. Van der Waal's forces between graphene sheets could cause aggregation at low concentration, leading to the material precipitating instead of forming a gel.
Normally, structural preservation of the material upon drying requires the use of solvents compatible with the various drying techniques, often with poor dispersion properties toward graphene or GO. With the addition of surfactant, the quality of graphene dispersion can be greatly improved,17,23,24,108,109 although this is still not a common technique at this moment. For example, Jung et al.106,109 managed to prepare well dispersed graphene hydrogels by slow volume reduction at 40 °C, which was gelled in a mold and dialysed at 80 °C for a week to remove the surfactant, followed by solvent exchange and critical point drying to collect the sponge. With further development of high concentration dispersion and high temperature treatment to improve the intersheet contacts and remove residual surfactant, graphene sponges with high quality and good properties could be produced from highly dispersed graphene precursor solutions.

2.2 Template guided growth methods
The template growth method, which is a well-defined procedure to grow and effectively separate graphene, can provide a convenient way to control the pattern growth of graphene. Using this method, the resultant graphene materials can have excellent conductivity and reliable long range order. During the synthesis, the sacrificial template, normally a nickel sponge is used as the catalyst layer for graphene growth. This nickel sponge template can provide a robust free-standing application platform or support for material growth. Furthermore, this nickel coating layer can be placed on some predefined substrate shapes to grow graphene/graphene oxide with desired morphologies.

2.2.1 Introduction to growing graphene by chemical vapor deposition (CVD). 
The chemical vapor deposition (CVD) technique can be used to produce monolayer or few layers of graphene with very high conductivities that are comparable to that of pristine mechanically exfoliated graphene on a small scale.29 Using this CVD technique, depositing a large area of graphene layers is possible. However, across a large area the graphene layers develop grain boundaries, defects, and multi-layer regions, which may impact the quality of the material. Actually, the production of large area graphene thin films nearly a meter in width using CVD has been demonstrated by a continuous roll-to-roll procedure.14 In this growth process, three main components are required: a metal catalyst, a carbon precursor and high temperatures around 1000 °C within a controlled atmosphere.
The metal catalyst film is composed of either Ni110 or Cu111,112 and is deposited in a thin layer by electron beam evaporation. It is found that the thickness of Ni13 and Cu112 layers could affect the surface coverage. For example, using a thinner layer, predominantly mono- and bi-layer graphene could be formed at high temperatures. In some cases, even without any precursor carbon the carbon impurities contained within the deposited Ni films were found to be sufficient for the creation of graphene islands.113 During the CVD synthesis, carbon can diffuse through the grain boundaries of nickel and migrate toward the interfacial boundaries, when heated at high temperature (900–1000 °C) under argon. The surface segregation can create a thin carbon layer which can then form graphene islands on the metal surface. Similar results can be seen when poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) is used as the carbon source by spin coating, followed by deposition of the metal catalyst thin film.114 This pathway results in self-limited thickness of graphene films based on metal deposition thickness.112
To achieve optimal surface coverage, the predominant method for growing graphene by CVD utilizes the continuous supply of carbon as either vaporized organic liquids such as ethanol115 and hexane,116 or small molecule carbon gases such as methane13,112 and ethane.117 By this method the carbon solubility in Ni metal is saturated, and upon cooling the carbon solubility decreases and it precipitates on the metal surface, where the carbon atoms organize into a stable graphitic structure. Rapid cooling under argon at 10–100 °C min−1 is necessary to limit the formation of multiple layers on the nickel surface.112,113 Using the CVD technique, the resulting graphene (CVD-G) materials often have a thickness distribution between 1 and 10 layers and their variation is strongly dependent on the synthesis quality.


2.2.2 Growth of graphene sponge from nickel templates. 
In general, catalysts such as nickel templates (nickel foils) play an important role in deriving large quantities of graphene material. The limited surface area of nickel foils traditionally prevented the extension of CVD-G to a large scale or to a three dimensional structure. To address this, the production of millimeter thick nickel sponges with extremely high porosity (∼90–95% void space) and low density (300–600 g m−2) has been made widely available by material suppliers, which has opened new possibilities for CVD-G technology. The rapid development in this area seems to be represented by the work of Cheng et al. in 2011.118 In this work, a Ni sponge was prepared for graphene growth, and the possible surface oxide layer on the Ni sponge was removed by annealing for a short time period at 1000 °C under a 700 standard cubic centimeters per minute (sccm) gas flow composed of 2.5:1 Ar:H2. During synthesis, under a high temperature, a methane carbon source was introduced at a constant rate varying between 2 and 10 sccm. After 5 minutes of carbon gas exposure, a rapid convective cooling step of 100 °C min−1 was applied. Fig. 7a shows the resulting graphene coating on the Ni surface with between 2 and 10 layers. The quality of graphene formed was verified using Raman spectroscopy where there was no defect (D-Band) peak for the CVD-G materials. The shape and position of the Raman 2D peak, 119 also suggested a narrow thickness distribution around only a few layers. To obtain the graphene material, following growth of the graphene coating, Ni could be etched away via a hot 3 M HCl solution. To avoid collapse of the graphene network a sacrificial PMMA layer could be added before the etching. In doing so, the Ni/G sponge was placed in a 4 wt% solution of PMMA (average molecular weight, 1 million), then a thin layer was formed by baking at 180 °C. After etching away the Ni, the PMMA was gradually removed by placing the CVD-G sponge in hot acetone, which was then evaporated to result in a high surface area graphene monolith (850 m2 g−1, ∼10 S cm−1, as shown in Fig. 7b) with large size dimensions (Fig. 7c). Besides using Ni as the catalyst, monolayer graphene coatings can also be produced using copper sponge, which has a lower carbon saturation level and also exhibits catalytic activity for growth of the graphene materials. The growth produces a similar result, however the growth mechanism for copper differs from that of Ni, and the collapse of the CVD-G sponges could not be prevented when using Cu supports. In addition, Similar high quality CVD-G sponges have been achieved by others using ethanol as the carbon source or with minor variations in flow and temperature.120–123
 Fig. 7  SEM images of (a) as-grown graphene on Ni sponge surface, (b) CVD-G sponge protected by PMMA after etching the Ni support, (c) the large 374 cm2 sheets that could be produced by the CVD template method, (d) Ni plated patterned photoresist templates, (e) CVD-G sponge after template removal, and (f) SEM of the graphitic growth during the etching process of the ZnO crystal template. Reproduced with permission from ref. 118 (a–c), ref. 124 (d and e) and ref. 125 (f). Copyright: 2011 Nature Publishing Group (a–c), 2012 American Chemical Society (d and e) and 2012 Wiley (f). 


2.2.3 Growth of graphene sponge from other sacrificial templates. 
Xiao et al.124 reported graphene sponges produced using interference lithography to generate three dimensional patterns of amorphous carbon from a thick layer of NR7 photoresist. The well-defined amorphous carbon structure is covered by a thin layer of sputtered Ni and annealed in N2/H2 (Fig. 7d). The sp3 hybridized amorphous carbon core could diffuse through the nickel layer, forming sp2 hybridized few layer graphene films. After using acid to etch away the Nickel layer, the templated hollow graphene sponges were produced with defined pores a few hundred nanometers in diameter (Fig. 7e). This process is very similar to that of Ni sponge based graphene sponges but exhibits smaller pore sizes and has the advantage of patterning graphene sponges through existing lithographic processes.
Mecklenburg et al.125 reported ultra-light sponges weighing only 0.2 mg cm−3 produced using tunable morphology ZnO networks as a template for CVD growth. The macroscopic ZnO networks were formed by hot pressing loose powders of ZnO with tetrapod morphology to form connective junctions. The ZnO templates were then inserted into a furnace at 760 °C under Ar/H2 gas flow, and toluene was injected into the furnace slowly. The intake of hydrogen gas could reduce the ZnO forming metallic Zn which could be precipitated out to the exhaust system, but not before the deposition and crystallization of a thin carbon coating. Fig. 7f shows that a thin 15 nm hollow graphitic coating that remains as ZnO is being removed. However, the conductivity of the graphitic sponge was about 0.008–0.37 S cm−1 with densities between 0.2 and 100 mg cm−3.
In addition to template growth of graphene, thin films with three-dimensional morphology have also been produced by controlling the drying procedure of the precursor materials creating a self-controlled template. The initial particles deposited on the surface could act as a guide for the growth of a thick film with porous morphology. These materials vary from the 2D compact reduced graphene oxide (rGO) and graphene oxide (GO) films formed by vacuum controlled restacking, instead they are more similar to the hierarchal structure of the rGO sponges discussed in Section 2.1. The materials exhibit a porous thin film structure that is tunable and the pore walls are composed of few layer graphene. Lee et al.126 fabricated these films of rGO using “breath-figure” templating, which is a well-known technique for synthesizing porous polymer films.127 In this synthesis, 2.5–5 mL of styrene monomer was mixed with a 3–10 mg mL−1 solution of GO sheets. This step could give some polymer-grafted GO sheets (ps-GO) through polymerization, which were uniformly dispersed in benzene. After that, evaporation of the organic solvent under a stream of humid air could induce the self-assembly of the ordered three-dimensional GO film (∼1 μm) on a SiO2 wafer. Thermal treatment was applied at 400 °C in air to remove the polystyrene, followed by 1000 °C under hydrogen to reduce and form the final rGO structure (Fig. 8a).126 Upon transferring the rGO structure to a polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrate the thin film proved to be flexible and super hydrophobic, exhibiting a water contact angle of 152°. To improve the material's conductivity, an additional nitrogen doping step was included during pyrolysis to generate a high conductivity of 649 S cm−1. Using a simple low temperature process, Ahn et al.128,129 used a technique known as “nucleate boiling” to induce the self-assembly of solutions containing chemically reduced 2D rGO sheets into ∼10 μm thick three-dimensional rGO films (Fig. 8b). Nucleate boiling occurred when a heated substrate was elevated above water saturation point (100 °C). With sufficient heat flux (800–1200 kW m−2), bubbles were formed over the entire heater/substrate plate, grown to a critical size, and then merged into larger bubbles which could compress the rGO flakes between the bubbles. In the final stage of nucleate boiling, the bubbles departed, leaving behind the three-dimensional rGO films with higher conductivity (6.7 S cm−1), comparable to that of CVD-G sponge. Fig. 8c–e shows that the three-dimensional rGO films can deposited on various substrates.
 Fig. 8  (a) SEM image of porous film formed from a solution of PS (5 mg mL−1)-GO (1.8 mg mL−1), after the removal of the polystyrene content. Pore size and number of layers in the pore wall controlled by PS and GO concentrations. (b) SEM of nucleate boiled structures, inset depicts water contact angle of the film. Depiction of the nucleate boiled coating on the surfaces of (c) FTO glass, (d) Cu foil and (e) PDMS. Reproduced with permission from ref. 126 (a), and ref. 128 (b–e). Copyright: 2010 Wiley (a), and 2013 Nature Publishing Group (b–e). 

3 Applications
In the most recent years, graphene-based materials have been developed for many applications, including functional composite materials, electrochemical sensors, absorption agents, and devices for energy storage and conversion.
3.1 Composite materials with tailored functionality
Due to the unique properties of graphene-based materials they can be used as an additive component, forming composite materials with some desired properties and performance. With respect to this, introducing graphene material' properties such as elasticity, porosity, strength and conductivity into the targeted materials are important for many applications. Some graphene sponges are strong under compressive stress, but break under higher loads.44,46,91,94 As discussed, under certain lower concentration or crosslinked conditions, the formed graphene sponges can exhibit strong reversible compression loads,43,92 but they still remain fragile during handling. However, the large surface area and high strength of the sponge networks in some optimal mass ratios has made them attractive in providing reinforcement of polymer matrices with increased strength and other tailored properties. Therefore, well-defined graphene sponge matrices can provide high strength, superhydrophobicity and high conductivity, as well as, flexibility or reversible elongation to several compositing applications.

3.1.1 Flexible and conductive polymers. 
In some applications it is important to promote elasticity and flexibility of the polymer network while preserving high strength and adding conductivity. For example, Chen et al.130 demonstrated this with rigid composite sponges by freeze-drying GO/Functionalized Multi-Wall Carbon Nanotubes (MWCNT) solution which was then pyrolyzed at 1000 °C.130 The formed low density (40 mg cm−3) sponges could support up to 10000 times their own weight without collapse, but exhibited an irreversible structural failure at higher loads. In this work, the scaffold was vacuum-infiltrated with polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) and cured under vacuum at 90 °C, resulting in a flexible composite film, free of aggregation in the reinforcement matrix with a conductivity as high as 2.8 S cm−1 using only 1.3 wt% sponge mass. This conductivity was much higher than the 5 × 10−4 S cm−1 film created from solution blending PDMS monomer with rGO and the acid-treated MWCNT materials. Further, the robust sponge network within the composited polymer matrix allowed the film to be both bent and stretched (20% tensile strain) many times with negligible drop in conductivity. The strength of graphene sponge scaffolds could also presumably be used to promote strength within stiffer polymer matrices.
The large area sheets of CVD-G sponge with a density of 5 mg cm−3 were also produced by Chen et al.118 and used as excellent scaffolds for infiltration of PDMS. Without PDMS the CVD-G sponge suffered from both poor elasticity and flexibility, limiting its use in flexible electronics. However, the PDMS infiltrated sponge composite in Fig. 9a was able to provide 10 S cm−1 conductivity with only 0.5 wt% graphene loading. Secondly, testing showed that the scaffold could increase the tensile modulus of PDMS by 30%, reaching to 95% strain before breaking (Fig. 9b). Further, the conductive networks showed minimal degradation after repeated stretching (50% tensile strain, Fig. 9c) and bending. The strain gauge behaviour after 50% strain showed only a 30% resistance increase compared to the initial state, indicating the adaptability of the reinforced matrix. After 10000 bending cycles with a small 0.8 mm bend radius, only a 7% increase in resistance was seen.
 Fig. 9  (a) Photograph of a bent CVD-G sponge/PDMS composite, showing its flexibility. (b) Typical stress–strain curves of PDMS and CVD-G sponge/PDMS composites with ∼0.5 wt% of graphene loading and (c) photographs of the stretching process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 118. Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group. 
Unfortunately, infiltration methodologies could sacrifice the inner surface area of the sponge and limit elasticity which is important to some other applications. To address this, an alternative approach is to crosslink polymers with low GO concentration, which can result in porous, polymer reinforced sponges with highly elastomeric behaviour. For example, The composite PAM-GO hydrogels produced by Liu et al.,89 discussed previously, exhibited a 450% increase in tensile strength compared to BIS crosslinked PAM hydrogels, and enabled over 3000% elongation. This was achieved even when the GO content in the hydrogel was only 0.008 wt%. In addition, using only 3 wt% GO, Ye et al.84 produced GO reinforced epoxy sponges with high strength and reversible compression below 70% strain. These sponges still exhibited low density of 90 mg cm−3, similar to that of the soft and brittle GO sponge networks discussed previously.


3.1.2 Superhydrophobic. 
In general, materials with super hydrophobic surfaces can exhibit self-cleaning, anti-corrosive and anti-fouling behaviours that are desirable properties in the development of many applications. Graphene sheets have a non-polar surface layer, which makes them inherently hydrophobic. Graphene sponges offer a novel approach to creating superhydrophobic surfaces based on a combination of inherent hydrophobicity, tunable Laplace pressure due to controlled pore size, and high elasticity capable of rebounding incoming water droplets. Shin et al.131 illustrate hydrophobicity by epitaxial graphene growth on SiC, which showed a contact angle of 92°, a 30° increase when compared to bare SiC.131 Like most synthetically prepared hydrophobic surfaces, the hydrophobicity of graphene materials could be enhanced through controlled surface nano/microscale roughness and chemical processes.132 Due to that the fact that graphene macrostructures have high inherent porosity and surface roughness, near superhydrophobic surfaces (>∼150°) could be possible without any coatings. The microscale roughness can result in increased Laplace pressure and if the surface energy was low enough, superhydrophobicity would be reached.133
Some superhydrophobic rGO sponges by Lin et al.55 were produced by directly freeze-drying GO, followed by a thermal reduction at 1050 °C (1–5 °C min−1 ramp) to form highly hydrophobic surfaces with a 120–130° contact angle. XPS in Fig. 10b reveals that after reduction the CO and COOH are reduced leaving primarily residual hydroxyl groups (C–O). In this work, superhydrophobicity was reached by utilizing the residual functionality, silanizing the sponges in 30 mL hexane containing 0.1 mL 1H,1H,2H,2H perfluorodecyl-trichlorosilane (FDTS) to create a thin conformal coating. The SiCl bonds in FDTS could react with the remaining hydroxyl groups and the remaining fluorine functionality of FDTS could reduce the surface energy of the silanized rGO sponges. The resulting sponges were able to reach a superhydrophobic state, with receding contact angles as high as 160° (Fig. 10c).
 Fig. 10  (a) Snapshots of a water droplet impacting the surface of the Teflon coated graphene sponge. The impact velocity just prior to the droplet striking the surface was ∼76 cm s−1. The sequence of snapshots shows the deformation time history of the droplet upon impact. (b) XPS spectra of graphene oxide sponge (GOA) and graphene sponge (GA). (c) Water contact angles of silanized and untreated GA surface with various concentrations. Reproduced with permission from ref. 134 (a) and ref. 55 (b and c). Copyright: 2013 Wiley (a) and 2011 American Chemical Society (b and c). 
Singh et al.134 demonstrated the potential of using low density graphene sponge (CVD-G sponge) to achieve superhydrophobicity, because this material had some well-controlled microscale porosity and roughness with long range order.134 To make the sponges superhydrophobic, a Teflon solution was drop cast and cured at 165 °C for 24 hours (slightly above the glass transition) to form a smooth conformal coating that was approximately 200 nm thick. Dynamic contact angle measurements on the superhydrophobic Teflon coated sponge showed a significant hysteresis between the receding (144°) and advancing contact angles (163°) as the water droplet shrunk and grew on the surface. The hysteresis was predicted to be from the large 200 μm pore size on the sponges, which caused a pinning of the liquid front during recession, and preventing droplet roll off below 35°. However, the highly ordered pore structure of template CVD-G sponge could help reduce droplets from becoming pinned on impact, a practical issue for superhydrophobic surfaces.135 On impact, a droplet could be transformed from the predominantly Cassie state, where the droplet rested on trapped air pockets and rolled off the surface, to the Wenzel state where the droplet penetrated into the interstices of the roughened surface, becoming pinned on the surface. Using a high speed camera, Singh et al.134 studied the drop impact effect, with large 1.25 mL drops travelling 0.76 m s−1 upon impact to see if a Cassie–Wenzel transition could be avoided with the highly ordered CVD-G sponge. When untreated CVD-G sponge was tested, the droplet became completely pinned, and the kinetic energy was quickly dissipated by viscosity during the vibration. When a rigid sacrificial Ni sponge, which had the same pore structure as CVD-G sponge, was coated in Teflon, the transition was avoided as expected, with the drop coming to rest on the superhydrophobic surface after dissipating the vibration energy. Based on the pore size of the Ni lattice, the critical pressure for Cassie to Wenzel state transition was predicted to be 340.2 Pa, well above the 294.3 Pa calculated for the drops impact at 0.76 m s−1. However, Fig. 10a reveals that for the Teflon coated CVD-G sponge, the droplet was able to rebound from the surface at 30% of its impact velocity.134 The elastic deformation of the graphene sheets within the superhydrophobic G sponge, acted like a spring upon impact, releasing the stored energy back to the droplet and ejecting the unbroken droplet entirely.

3.2 Materials for electrochemical sensors
Graphene sponges that possess excellent conductivity coupled with high surface area have been shown to make an excellent platform for electrochemical sensors to detect trace targets. The large pore systems allow for the rapid analyte transport, resulting in improvement to mediated detection systems which detect a whole range of binding targets such as proteins and enzymes. In direct sensing systems, the graphene itself can detect certain important biological moieties at very low concentrations.

3.2.1 Introduction to using graphene for electrochemical detection. 
Electrochemical sensors have an advantage over other biosensor transducer methods because they can sense materials without damaging the surrounding system.136 However, the electro-active groups of the binding proteins and enzymes are generally trapped deep within the protein structure which results in insufficient electron transfer to support sensing.137,138 For efficient sensing, the distance between the redox centers and electrode surface must be minimized, often by the addition of metal nanoparticles, CNT's or nanowires/fibers. Graphene exhibits excellent electron transfer properties and excellent catalytic activity for detection of several bio-molecule analytes.137,139 The high conductivity, large surface area and electrochemical activity of graphene have attracted a great amount of interest as a support for high sensitivity enzyme based electrochemical sensing. Further, initial studies also revealed a potential biocompatibility and no obvious toxicity, making rGO based sensors a viable option for in vivo biomedical applications.140–142 Rapid development in this area has led to a long list of direct electron transfer sensors based on functionalized graphene. Review of these sensors showed they all exhibited long-term stability and high sensitivity detection of important biological moieties including: glucose, Cytochrome-C, NADH coenzyme, Hemoglobin, cholesterol, dopamine and H2O2.137,138 High performance was also seen for non-enzymatic graphene composite sensors which could detect H2O2 (ref. 143 and 144) and selectively differentiate dopamine from two common interfering agents such as uric acid and ascorbic acid.145,146
Conventionally electrochemical electrodes are limited by the two dimensional nature of electrode surface such as metal and glassy carbon electrodes, which exhibit low active surface area and therefore relatively limited current sensitivity. Graphene sponges with sufficient conductivity and large surface area could be readily applied to similar sensing applications. However, for electrochemical sensing, the abundant defects and functional groups on rGO sponge would limit conductivity and therefore performance, as indicated by Dong et al.147 To improve this, they utilized a highly conductive CVD-G sponge with minimal functional groups, defects and intersheet junctions to demonstrate a variety of three-dimensional graphene sensors with high sensitivity, low noise and low detection limit. Therefore, the monolithic pore network and the high surface area of graphene sponge could be an excellent platform for electrochemical sensing.


3.2.2 Mediated detection. 
In general, the mediated detection methodology relies on analyte to alter the redox behaviour of a mediator compound in solution to give a stronger electrochemical response of the electrode with improved sensitivity. For example, a phosphate buffered solution containing potassium ferrocyanide (K3[Fe(CN)6]3−), a commonly employed mediator,148 was used to compare the performance of CVD-G sponge electrodes with that of conventional glassy carbon. Fig. 11a shows that the peak redox current is over 2× stronger in magnitude for the CVD-G sponge and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy in Fig. 11b reveals the charge transfer resistance and series resistance are significantly smaller for the graphene sponge.120 Further improvements to mediated CVD-G sponge sensitivity were reported when surface area was increased with the growth of highly conductive CNTs (4× peak increase over GC) or highly electroactive zinc oxide nanorods (25× increase).115,149 High conductivity of the electrode enabled efficient charge transfer between the highly electroactive ZnO nanorods grown on the graphene surface by precipitation of ZnCl2 at 120 °C.115 As a result, the ZnO coated CVD-G sponge showed an extrapolated lower detection limit for [Fe(CN)6]3− of 10 nM (signal/noise, S/N = 3), sensitivity of 70 μA M−1 cm−2 and a linear detection range up to 800 μM.
 Fig. 11  (a) Cyclic voltammograms and (b) electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) of glassy carbon (GC) electrode and CVD-G sponge electrode at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1 in PBS solution containing 5.0 mM K3[Fe(CN)6]3−. The charge transfer resistance is fitted on the Nyquist plot as a semicircle; the series resistance is at the x-intercept. (c) The average dopamine dose–response curve from CVD-G sponge and the inset shows the amperometric response to 25 nM dopamine. (d) Linear sweep voltammogram (LSV) plots of the graphene sponge electrode in PBS solution containing constant 10 μM DA with different concentrations of UA: 0, 10, 20, 40, 60, 80, 100 μM. Scan rate = 50 mV s−1. (e) High resolution SEM image shows CVD-G sponge coated with Co3O4 nanowires for glucose detection and (f) the average glucose dose–response curve when operated in 0.1 M NaOH solution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 120 (a–d) and ref. 147 (e and f). Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 


3.2.3 Direct electron transfer (DET). 
CVD-G sponge was also investigated for electrochemical sensors based on direct electron transfer (DET) between the analytes and the electrodes. Traditionally DET sensors utilize a fixed enzyme as the sensing region. However, performance is limited by the position and availability of the active sites with the enzymatic proteins, the storage life of enzymes in commercial products, as well as the resistive pathway to the planar electrode surface. In general, three-dimensional electrodes can help enhance the conduction and shorten the distance between active sites. Further the inherent catalytic effects demonstrated by graphene to the redox behaviors of the biological moieties also suggest an improved enzymeless detection schemes if using graphene sponge. For example, DET performance of the effective platform with the assistance of surface bound enzymes was tested using horseradish peroxidise (HRP) for detection of H2O2.149 In this detection, Nafion® was used to fix the HRP and ensure enzymatic activity on the CVD-G platform. The lowest measured detection limit of 1 μM H2O2 showed equivalence to the best reported 2D graphene HRP sensors (LOD ∼ 1 μM, S/N = 3),138 but with a much higher S/N ratio of 17.4.137 The superior performance was likely due to the high 138 mA M−1 cm−2 sensitivity provided by the high surface area three-dimensional sponge.137 Dopamine detection was used to prove the performance of the three-dimensional platform for enzymeless detection.115,120,149Fig. 11c reveals the effect of dopamine concentration on redox current response at 0.16 V measured from cyclic voltammetry of CVD-G sponge in a phosphate buffered solution. It was seen that excellent sensitivity of 620 mA M−1 cm−2 with linear response up to 25 μM can be achieved. Detection at only 25 nM is easily observed with a S/N of 5.6.120 Poorer response can be seen for the ZnO coated G electrodes. Furthermore, the addition of CNTs allows a further improved 20 nM detection with a higher S/N ratio of 9.115,149 It is also seen that the dopamine oxidation response is often heavily confounded by the presence of uric acid (UA) and ascorbic acid (AA) which can be oxidized at nearly the same potential.138Fig. 11d illustrates that dopamine's linear response on CVD-G sponge is resolved from the UA peak for measured concentrations as low as 10–20 μM, allowing simultaneous dopamine and UA detection well below the 170 μM simultaneous detection limits seen by Shang et al.146 using 2D graphene sheets.
Dong et al.147 also proved that CVD-G sponge has potential for the enzymeless detection of glucose by additionally growing Co3O4 nanowires (Fig. 11e). In their experiments, the wires were grown on a graphene electrode through a 120 °C autoclaved precipitation reaction with CoCl2 and urea, followed by crystallization at 450 °C in a furnace. Two reversible redox transitions occurred between Co3O4 ↔ CoOOH(I/II) and CoOOH ↔ CoO2(III/IV). Charging in the presence of glucose could cause the second transition, at +0.58 V, to exhibit an extraordinary degree of sensitivity (3.39 A M−1 cm−2) with a wide range of linear response shown in Fig. 11f (up to 80 μM). The high sensitivity was due to the 850 m2 g−1 surface area and the rapid electrochemical response afforded by the morphology of the cobalt oxide nanostructure and the conductive CVD-G sponge. It was claimed that the response was due to the conversion of glucose to gluconolactone, catalyzed by the conversion of CoO2 back to CoOOH, which allowed for more electrons to be transferred at the detection sites.147,150 Remarkably, the limit of detection (LOD) of 25 nM still had an excellent signal to noise ratio of ∼8.5 and detection time of only a few seconds.147 This was far superior to the electrospun Co3O4 nanofibers deposited on conventional glassy carbon reported by Ding et al.150 (970 nM, S/N = 3), and others for glucose oxidase enzyme fixed to graphene sheets (various reports, LOD ∼ 1–1000 μM).138

3.3 Absorbers
Three dimensional graphene and graphene oxide structures exhibit huge surface area and can be made free-standing, which should provide a large number of active sites for absorption events. Graphene sponges have shown greatly improved uptake of organic liquids compared to existing materials, with the added advantage of reusability. Further, graphene sheets have been shown to absorb certain gases on a molecular level, making for resistive detection of low gas concentrations, and the functional groups on graphene oxide sheets have potential to reduce upon gas exposure to trap and convert undesirable gases in industrial processing.

3.3.1 Gas absorption and detection. 
The extensive functionality on GO sponges can act as an efficient site for reduction events, leading to physical and resistive detection of gases.151–153 An example of this phenomena involved the utilization of GO sponges to catalyze the oxidation of SO2 gas to SO3 adsorbed on the gas reduced GO sponge at room temperature.54 After gas exposure, the brown sponges turned black and the trapped SO3 could be converted to sulphuric acid upon exposure to water, allowing for easy filtration of the rGO impurities. This allowed for visual detection and more importantly the storage of an undesirable industrial gas. Alternatively, high quality graphene sheets exhibit several key properties which make them applicable to ultra-sensitive gas sensing, down to single molecule adsorption events for NO2.154 The trace sensitivity of NH3, HCN, CO, Cl2 and H2O has also been shown or modelled by first principle calculations.155–160 The band structures of single layer sheets can form a zero gap semiconductor with huge surface area. Further, the electronic properties show strong dependence to surface absorbents including gas molecules, and the unique two dimensional crystal lattice can result in low electrical noise and high sensitivity. The change in local carrier density upon gas adsorption leads to changes in resistance.154 The restored lattice of rGO graphene sheets was reported to have high gas sensing capability, and when fixed CVD-G sheets were coated with Pd nanoparticles,160–162 the catalysis of hydrogen gas formed temporary dipole interactions (PdHx) on the graphene surface, leading to a similar resistance increase upon exposure to less than 100 ppm.163 In practice, the potential of graphene sheets for sensing is hindered by the susceptibility of individual graphene sheet elements to extraneous environmental and chemical factors, which affect the repeatability and device reliability.
Normally, the use of macroscopic, high surface area graphene sponges with efficient gas transport can enhance the durability and lower the cost targets, while still maintaining high sensitivity for the nanoscale gas interactions. These conductive graphene sponges can exhibit resistive changes upon gas absorption, leading to reversible and highly sensitive detection. For example, Yavari et al.157 reported the use of robust CVD-G sponges to detect toxic NO2 and NH3 gases. In their detection, sponge sheets were cut in 0.5 cm2 strips and fixed to a four probe chip with copper interconnects for creating low contact resistance and reducing electrical noise. The simple and robust sensor design was able to reliably detect resistance change upon exposure to 20 ppm NH3 and 20 ppm NO2 gases at room temperature, with steady-state response times around 5–10 minutes. Desorption of the gas was incomplete under pure air, but with joule heating a completely reversible sensor could be achieved. Sensitivity is an order of magnitude higher than that of conducting polymer which was also operated at room temperature and similar time response.164,165 Thus, the graphene sponge sensors are also more practical for gas detection than semiconducting metal oxide sensors that operate at high temperature (>200 °C).


3.3.2 Organic liquids and dyes absorption. 
Natural microporous absorbers such as wool, sawdust, expanded perlite and zeolites have been used for spill cleanup. But, these conventional materials have low oil loading and also absorb large quantities of water, making extraction and recycling of the oil absorbents unfeasible.166–168 Hydrophobic, microporous polymers are mouldable, capable of absorbing 5–25 times their own weight in both oils and organic solvents and up to 80% can be extracted by squeezing.168–170 As a strong alternative for low-cost oil removal, expanded graphite has shown high loading up to 83 times its weight, and up to 70% of the collected oil can be removed by vacuum filtration. But, the particulates do not exhibit high absorption of organic solvents, the powder form makes for difficult use and the material can only be recycled a few times (only 17% capacity after 5 cycles).171–173 The development of new materials able to effectively and reversibly remove both organic solvents and oil spill contaminates is critical to the future of oil spill cleanup and water remediation required for environmental protection.
With respect to this, graphene sponges with high surface area, uniform structure, chemical stability in organic solvents, ability to withstand high temperatures, and highly hydrophobic and oleophilic surfaces have been demonstrated to be feasible for absorbers. For example, several graphene and graphene/CNT hybrid sponges have been demonstrated as absorbers for a wide variety of oils, alkanes, water soluble alcohols and organic solvents, with exceptional performance as demonstrated in Table 2.81,91,175,176 Bi et al.174 used 180 °C autoclaved reduction to induce self-assembly and create an rGO sponge with 430 m2 g−1 surface area,174 which showed that this rGO sponge was able to absorb many times its own weight, 20–85 g g−1. Fig. 12a demonstrates a complete absorption of dodecane stained with organic dye from the surface of artificial sea water at an average rate of 0.57 g g−1 s−1. Zhao et al.91 reported a 400 m2 g−1 rGO sponge prepared by a similar thermal reduction process but with the addition of thiourea to functionalize and crosslinking the material, and showed that this rGO sponge could even reach even higher adsorption capacities between 75 and 154 g g−1.91 Moreover dye absorption in water was also test showing high adsorption for common dyes used to color products in industry, such as Rhodamine B (72.5 mg g−1) and Methylene Blue (184 mg g−1). Dong et al.175 utilized CVD-G sponge to achieve 48.5–71 g g−1. It was found that when the macroporous sponges were coated with a dense forest of CNTs, they became superhydrophobic (152°) due to the increased surface roughness, boosting adsorption capacity to 80–130 g g−1. Even higher dye absorption was observed for the recent graphene/Cu2O sponges produced by Wu et al. reduced using copper nanoparticles.100 The composite sponges were tested for several dyes including Rhodamine B (150 mg g−1), Methyl Orange (250 mg g−1) and Methylene Blue (650 mg g−1). In addition, a unique property of the metal oxide coated sponge was that it also showed strong photocatalytic degradation properties for Methyl Orange.
Table 2 Absorption capacity of various non-aqueous liquids by graphene sponges




Absorbing species
Adsorption capacity (g g−1) (Mafter–Mbefore)/Mbefore
References





Oils



Gasoline
270

60



Crude oil
289

81



Pump oil
68, 85

174 and 175



Kerosene/paraffin oil
45

174



Castor oil
75

174



Soybean oil
55

174



Diesel oil
124

91



Motor oil
345

81



Olive oil
460

60



Vegetable oil
95, 103, 418

81, 91 and 175



 



Alkanes



Hexane
43, 215

81 and 174



Heptane
21, 75

91 and 174



Octane
45

174



Decane
35

174



Dioxane
489

81



Cyclohexane
320

60



Dodecane
50

174



 



Aromatic compounds



Ethylbenzene
33

174



1,2-Dichlorobenzene
45, 127, 450

60, 174 and 175



Toluene
55, 125, 200, 350

60, 81, 174 and 175



Nitrobenzene
63, 370

60 and 174



 



Organic solvents



Acetic ester/ethyl acetate
92

88



DMSO
62, 430

60 and 145



THF
55, 250

60 and 145



Acetone
51, 350

60 and 145



Chloroform
86, 108, 154, 500, 568

60, 81, 91, 145 and 175



DMF
105

175



Phenoxin
600, 743

60 and 81



Ethylene glycol
133

91



 



Alcohols and aldehydes



Methanol
49, 290

60 and 174



Ethanol
51, 80, 300, 350

60, 81, 91 and 174



 



Ionic liquid



1-Butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate
527

81





 Fig. 12  (a) Photographs illustrating the oil absorption and characterization of a 0.26 g SG block absorbing 11.8 g of dodecane (stained with Sudan red 5B) at intervals of 20 s. (b) Absorption process of toluene (stained with Sudan Black B) on water by the ultra flyweight sponge (ρ = 1.4 mg cm−3, fCNT = 0.5) within 5 seconds. Reproduced with permission from ref. 174 (a) and ref. 81 (b). Copyright: 2012 Wiley (a) and 2013 Wiley (b). 
Sun et al.81 demonstrated a significantly higher performance and utility of their rGO-CNT sponge prepared by the direct freeze drying of solutions containing giant GO sheets and CNTs.81 In their experiments, after hydrazine vapour reduction, the GO sheets in the sponge could create a high level of elasticity. Further, the sponge was highly hydrophobic (contact angle, 133°) and had an ultralow density (concentration controlled between 0.16 and 22.4 mg cm−3). More importantly, the method allowed for the scalable preparation of large sponge blocks, an integral feature for the development of materials needed for low-cost, large-scale spill cleanup. The combination of these features allowed the tested ultra-light sponge (1000 cm3, 1.4 mg cm−3) to reach an absorption capacity of 215–743 g g−1, dependant on liquid density.81Fig. 12b shows that the absorption of 1.1 g toluene took only 5 seconds, a rate of 68 g g−1 s−1.174
Regarding the recyclability of the graphene-based absorbers, due to the thermal stability exhibited by graphene sponges, heat treatment was easily applied to vaporize solvents, allowing the user to reuse the sponge materials (up to 99% capacity remaining after 10 cycles) and restore the absorbed solvent condensate (99.9% restored for future use).81,174 In the case of compressible sponges, mechanical extrusion could also be used to remove most of the absorbed solvent.81 The results showed that graphene sponges of various kinds had strong potential to become efficient and safe absorbers for remediation of organic media in environmental protection and industrial processes.

3.4 Energy storage and conversion
Graphene sponges doped or treated with metal oxides, showing limited sheet restacking and high electro-active surface area, have been demonstrated to be excellent materials for devices of energy storage and conversion. Continuing interest for the use of graphene sponges in energy storage is further related to the high conductivity of the interconnected networks, the three-dimensional porous microstructure, high electrochemical stability and the promise of high elasticity and mechanical stability. These devices include the polymer electrolyte membrane (PEM) fuel cells, batteries, solar cells, batteries and supercapacitors. For PEM fuel cells, the graphene materials are normally used the catalysts and catalyst supports; for batteries such as lithium batteries, they are used as both cathode and anode materials; for supercapacitors, they are used as the electrode materials for both double-layer capacitors and pseudocapacitors; and for solar cells, they are used as the dye-sensitizers.

3.4.1 Fuel cells. 
The most extensively explored fuel cell applications of graphene-based materials are in the area of non-precious metal oxide and nitrogen coordinated metal catalysts, which have been pursued as alternative catalysts to replace expensive platinum catalysts.176–179 In general, for these kinds of catalysts, both the inferior catalytic activity and stability are insufficient for practical applications when compared to those Pt-based catalysts.180 Although traditional nanostructured carbon support materials such as active carbons (carbon black) which have high surface area could greatly improve the catalyst's performance, insufficient chemical/electrochemical stability of these supports are still the limitation. Since graphene-based materials emerged, they have been identified as strong candidates for catalyst applications because of its promising conductivity, high surface area, chemical/electrochemical stability, as well as its strong adhesion to catalyst particles.176,177,181–184 Furthermore, the abundant functional groups on graphene oxide can provide more chances for the nucleation and anchoring of catalyst nanoparticles, as well as effective molecular and electron transport.185
The strong properties of graphene sponge as a catalyst support for platinum was recently described by Wang et al.186 The freestanding CVD G sponges supporting for platinum nanoparticles created improved catalytic performance and durability compared to carbon fiber supports. Recently, Wu et al.187 demonstrated the uniform deposition of iron oxide (Fe3O4) nanoparticles onto a graphene sponge framework (Fig. 13a). The sponge was prepared by autoclaving a GO solution containing polypyrrole (PPy) and iron acetate with various concentrations at 180 °C, followed by freeze-drying. The procedure allowed simultaneous self-assembly for Fe3O4 particle growth on graphene and incorporation of a nitrogen source into the graphene network. N-doped rGO (3.5 wt% N) sponges containing crystalline Fe3O4 nanoparticles were formed by 600 °C thermal treatment under nitrogen gas for 3 hours. Compared to nanoparticles grown on N-doped graphene sheets and carbon black, the N-doped rGO had more positive onset potential (−0.19 V vs. Ag/AgCl) for oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) and higher ORR current density (−2.56 mA cm−2 @ 400 rpm) in alkaline solutions (Fig. 13b). Further, the electron transfer numbers displayed in Fig. 13c shows that the catalyzed ORR process is dominated by a direct four-electron oxygen reduction mechanism. This is more favorable than that of a two electron transfer process catalyzed by other carbon supports tested.188 In addition to benefits of increased electrocatalytic ORR activity in alkaline electrolyte, the sponge also revealed better durability than commercial Pt/C (Fig. 13d). Continuing this work, they also reported a similar enhanced performance for ORR in acidic media when Fe nanoparticles were incorporated into the N-doped rGO sponges.187 Therefore, N-doped graphene sponges should be feasible catalyst support materials for the future non-precious catalysts for PEM fuel cell applications.
 Fig. 13  (a) Typical SEM image of Fe3O4/N-GAs revealing the three-dimensional macroporous structure and uniform distribution of Fe3O4 nanoparticles in the GAs. (b) RRDE test of the ORR on Fe3O4/N-GAs, Fe3O4/N-GSs, Fe3O4/N-CB in an O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH electrolyte at a rotation rate of 1600 rpm, (c) electron transfer number of Fe3O4/N-GAs, Fe3O4/N-GSs, and Fe3O4/N-CB as functions of the electrode potential, and (d) the Current-time chronoamperometric response of Fe3O4/N-GAs and Pt/C catalysts at −0.4 V. Reproduced with permission from ref. 187. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
The use of rGO sponges has also been recently illustrated by Ren et al.189 by developing rGO supported Ni catalysts for direct ethanol fuel cells (DEFC).189 High valence nickel oxyhydroxide (NiOOH) as a substitute to platinum has attracted interest because of its high catalytic activity toward ethanol and resistance to poisoning, but its low conductivity and agglomeration require immobilization on a conductive support.190–196 The composite Ni/rGO sponge was formed by the simultaneous reduction of nickel sulfate and GO at 180 °C in an autoclave. The sponge was mixed with diluted Teflon solution to form a slurry and prepared as coating on an ITO glass electrode. Upon electrochemical cycling of this Ni/rGO coated electrode in alkaline media, the nickel nanoparticles underwent a surface oxidation; creating a fast, reversible Ni(OH)2/NiOOH redox transition. When ethanol was added, the redox centers showed a high catalytic activity toward the ethanol oxidation with peak current at a potential of 0.66 V vs. Saturated Calomel Electrode (SCE). This DEFC electrode also exhibited a stable catalytic performance, much better than other reported Ni catalysts for DEFC.190–192 This work demonstrated that graphene sponges could also play a key role in nonprecious catalysis for DEFCs.
Furthermore, graphene-based materials can not only be used as the catalyst supports for both Pt and non-precious metal catalyst, but have also been explored as metal-free catalysts in fuel cell applications, which suggests that graphene sponge materials could also be used in this application. For example, nitrogen-doped graphene materials themselves showed some significant catalytic ORR activity and stability when they are used as the fuel cell catalysts.197


3.4.2 Dye sensitized solar cell (DSSC). 
A typical dye sensitized solar cell (DSSC) has three main components including a dye adsorbed TiO2 photoanode, a counter electrode and iodide electrolyte.198,199 In operation, under the light beam on the TiO2 photoanode, the iodide can be oxidized into triiodide, releasing an electron into TiO2. This electron will travel through the external circuit to the counter electrode, where it meets triiodide, then reduces triiodide back to iodide. In order to make the trioxide reduction reaction fast enough, a catalyst such as Pt-based catalyst is usually needed.53 Similar to fuel cells discussed above, a lot of effort has been put on replacing the expensive Pt-based electrodes using non-precious catalysts, specifically with heteroatom doped carbons such as graphene materials although their conductivity and catalytic activities still underperform those of platinum-based catalysts.200–205 As discussed, graphene sponges could provide a larger surface area for catalytic conversion and well-defined porosity for enhanced electrolyte diffusion. To demonstrate this application, Xue et al.41 used a N-doped rGO sponge (430 m2 g−1) coated on top of doped tin oxide (FTO) glass as the counter electrode to achieve power conversion efficiency as high as 7.07%, which was comparable to the 7.44% efficiency achieved with a platinum counter electrode and much better than that using undoped rGO sponge (4.84%) or a spin coated nitrogen doped rGO film (4.2%). It was observed that the nitrogen doped rGO sponge could exhibit lower resistance and higher current density than platinum, but a lower fill factor. It was believed that with further optimization, doped graphene sponges could be used as an effective replacement for platinum in DSSCs. Furthermore, some simply prepared nucleate boiled three-dimensional graphene films on FTO glass from Ahn et al.128 were also explored for the counter electrode in quantum dye sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs), and the obtained performance was competitive with the efficiency of more expensive platinum and gold catalysts. The photovoltaic properties of the QDSSCs composed of CdSe/CdS-cosensitized ZnO nanowire anodes and a solid ionomer film electrolyte were tested against various counter electrodes to evaluate the performance of the three-dimensional rGO film structure. The rGO sponge achieved a greater quantum efficiency of 3.6%, compared to only 1.4% for a solution cast two dimensional rGO electrode, 2% for Pt and even 3.4% for Au.


3.4.3 Lithium-ion battery. 
Graphitic carbon is one of the most commonly used anode materials in commercial lithium-ion batteries. However, to further improve the performance, a new generation of anode materials is necessary to overcome the intercalation capacity limitations of the graphite compounds.206
Regarding graphite carbon as the anode material, due to its high crystallinity and packing of the graphene layers, the maximum intercalation state corresponds to LiC6, where Li transfers its 2s electrons to the carbon host which are stored between two sheets, yielding a limited specific energy capacity of 372 mA h g−1.207 Second, the long range crystal order of graphite can create large diffusion distances and limit capacity retention at higher rates of charge-discharge. To improve the specific energy capacity, some effort has been made in recent years. For example, Sato et al.208 proposed that disordered carbons could go beyond the ion storage limitation by forming an additional Li2 covalent site, with each lithium atom trapped on either side of a benzene ring, reaching a maximum theoretical capacity of 1116 mA h g−1 in disordered carbon. Alternatively, active defects such as edges and vacancies could be contributing to additional storage of lithium,209 which was supported by various reports of disordered carbons with some enhancement in capacity (400–700 mA h g−1).210–212 It seems that the balance among the low conductivity, reduced capacity retention at higher rates and poor cycle life is still the challenge for graphite anode materials.
In this regard, reduced graphene can offer a balance of high conductivity, defects and increased interlayer spacing compared to graphite. The advantages of the two dimensional structure have led to enhanced capacities of 460–800 mA h g−1, varying based on the reduction conditions.207,213 Unfortunately, although the graphene material could outperform graphite, the rate capability is still low, has poor first cycle efficiency, and even its reversible capacity is still only comparable to the high capacity of nanostructured materials such as tin214 and metal oxides,215,216 and much lower than recent advances in silicon based anodes which could achieve a reversible capacity above 3100 mA h g−1.217 However, these non-carbon materials still suffer from rapid capacity fade during cycling due to pulverization of the electrode, weakening the electrical contact with the current collector. Further, silicon composites with stiff carbon coatings cannot release the large strains created by volume expansion.218
As discussed, graphene sheets have a large aspect ratio, are flexible and are highly conductive, suggesting potential as a confining structure to prevent pulverization and improve cycle stability and increase capacity retention at useful discharge rates. It was reported that the performance gains could be realized when agglomeration was prevented by sufficient mixing or anchoring the nanoparticles to the graphene during growth.219 Zhou et al.218 demonstrated an anode assembly with G/Fe3O4, which gave 700 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 700 mA g−1, two times higher than the reversible capacity of commercial Fe3O4 after 30 cycles at only 35 mA g−1. Xiang et al.220 prepared a layer by layer Si/G composite which retained 800 mA h g−1 at 300 mA g−1 after 30 cycles, compared to only 400 mA h g−1 for silicon particles alone.220 Evanoff et al.221 used CVD to deposit a uniform coating of Si nanoparticles on graphene powder, enabling a performance of 1400 mA h g−1 at a high discharge rate of 1400 A g−1, with negligible performance loss after 150 cycles.221 The benefits of forming graphene composites were also shown to enhance cathode performance by Hu et al.222 who were able to enhance capacity of commercial LiFePO4 material between 23 and 26% and substantially improve the cycle life by coating the materials with a simple dropwise addition of graphene solution.
Sulfur has a high theoretical capacity of 1672 mA h g−1 when it is used as the anode material for batteries, which is many times higher than traditional cathode materials, but similar to many high capacity anode materials, it suffers from low electrical conductivity, dissolution and volume expansion issues which result in poor cycle life. Wang et al.223 showed the use of reduced graphene oxide sheets to wrap the sulfur particles resulting in high specific capacity of 600 mA h g−1 at 830 mA g−1, with only 13% decay after 150 cycles. Without the graphene coating, the capacity decreased to less than 330 mA h g−1 after only 20 cycles. These results illustrate that two dimensional graphene has a significant potential for the enhancement of both anode and even cathode materials in lithium-ion batteries. The performance results also indicate a future for these materials, reflected by the announcement in early 2013 of two commercial graphene products, XGnP™ and LITX G700™. XGnP™ from XG Sciences is a graphene nanoplatelet material which is being used in a new composite anode to stabilize silicon particles, yielding reversible capacity four times that of current graphite anodes.224 LITX G700™ from Cabot Corporation have also released a graphene based additive, LITX G700™, which offers enhanced electrical and ionic conductivity in cathode materials at low loading levels that could not be achieved with other carbon additives.225
As recognized, increasing porosity of the electrode materials in Li-ion batteries can significantly decrease the diffusion time of lithium ions into the disordered graphene layers, increasing the effective capacity and cycling performance. As a composite, graphene sponges could increase the number of anchoring sites yielding high porosity, resulting in improved capacity. Unfortunately, porosity can reduce the volumetric capacity of the materials and can lead to a large amount of electrolyte intercalation, resulting in increased irreversible capacity like in graphite materials.206 For example, Zhou et al.226 reported an rGO sponge prepared by thermally annealing a freeze-dried GO sponge. The initial cycle capacity of this material was as high as 1059 mA h g−1 (low rate, 50 mA g−1). However, the large surface area of this material resulted in an increased irreversible capacity, indicated by retaining capacity of only 400 mA h g−1 (50 mA g−1) after a few cycles and the capacity dropping to 230 mA h g−1 (1000 mA g−1) at higher discharge rates. To address this, Xiao et al.227 developed a different procedure (a simple 600 °C CVD process) to grow multilayered graphene sheets vertically aligned on the current collector. As shown in Fig. 14a, the aligned configuration can facilitate both electron and lithium ion transport and increase the active material rate capability, eliminating the need for any conductive additives used in the conventional electrodes. The optimized electrode structure and the reduced diffusion distance, rather than an enhanced diffusion coefficient due to the graphene structure, were believed to be responsible for the fast charge-discharge kinetics seen in Fig. 14b. Therefore, highly ordered porosity must be designed carefully; otherwise it is not a guarantee for the improved battery performance. For these reasons, the benefits of graphene sponge may be more directly applicable to enhancing composite metal oxide and silicon materials.
 Fig. 14  (a) SEM image of graphene layers grown on Ni substrate. HRTEM (inset) shows graphene layers grown vertically on Ni substrate. (b) Capacity retention of graphene coated Ni-electrode capacity as a function of cycle number. (c) SEM image of Fe2O3/graphene sponge (GA) revealing the three-dimensional macroporous structure and uniform distribution of Fe2O3 particles. (d) Rate and cycling capacity of Fe2O3/GAs tested between 0.01 and 3.0 V. Reproduced with permission from ref. 227 (a and b) and ref. 228 (c and d). Copyright: 2011 Elsevier (a and b) and 2013 American Chemical Society (c and d). 
In the effort to further improve capacity of the electrode materials in Li-ion batteries, Xiao et al.228 studied the performance enhancement of in situ Fe2O3 growth on GO during autoclaved reduction, resulting in a well anchored composite sponge with a surface area of 77 m2 g−1, as shown in Fig. 14c. The specific capacity for the sponge was found to be 1000 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1, and >90% stable for over 50 cycles. This was much higher than the 50th cycle 263 mA h g−1 capacity of physically mixed graphene powder and Fe2O3 particles. EIS showed that the charge transfer resistance due to ion diffusion was reduced, confirming that the sponge structure could enhance the activity of the Fe2O3. Furthermore, the large surface area of the sponge could effectively shorten the diffusion distance, and the anchoring sites formed during rGO reduction could suppress the aggregation and accommodate volume expansion during the cycling. Therefore, over 750 mA h g−1 reversible capacity was retained at 1 A g−1 (Fig. 14d). Chen et al.229 prepared a similar Fe3O4/rGO sponge composite which gave 730 mA h g−1of capacity after 50 cycles at a high rate of 1600 mA g−1 (∼900 mA h g−1 at 800 mA g−1), higher than the two dimensional Fe3O4 composites previously reported.208 For validating the materials, the sponges were dispersed in slurries to create the battery electrodes. By breaking up and mixing the sponges, electrodes with a lightweight, conductive, free-standing structure were fabricated for ultralight batteries. An immediate performance advantage could be recognized due to the absence of inactive electrode weight attributed to metal current collectors, conducting additives and binding agents. However, sufficient conductivity is required to support the deposited materials. Ji et al.230 created a CVD-G sponge which showed the sponges ability as an adequate support, by comparing it against both Al and Ni sponge collectors.230 In all cases, slurries containing carbon black and PVdF were drop cast on the collectors with a loading of 12 mg cm−3. They found that CVD-G sponge actually enhanced columbic efficiency and capacity retention at higher rates, and when considering the mass of the entire electrode not just the active material, the specific capacity of graphene sponge electrodes could outperform aluminum by 23% and Ni sponge by 170%, respectively.
Li et al.231 showed that a conductive CVD-G sponge (10 S cm−1) could be directly used to grow the active anode and cathode materials without inactive mass normally in the slurry, further boosting specific performance of the entire electrode. In this work, the anode was prepared by hydrothermal growth of Li4Ti5O12 (LTO) on the CVD-G sponge support, as shown in Fig. 15a and b. As tested, the LTO/G anode (Fig. 15c) exhibited a flat potential curve, even at extremely high rates of 200 C (18 second discharge), and the obtained capacity was nearly constant with a power output of 135 mA h g−1. Fig. 15d shows that even after 500 cycles there is only a 4% capacity loss. The LTO/G sponge rate performance was determined to be much better than any previously reported LTO composites, with maximum rates of 10–100 C and much lower capacity retention as well.232–234 Similar enhancement was also seen for a LiFePO4/G (LFP/G) cathode produced by in situ growth of LFP, anchoring it to the CVD-G support. The resulting cathode performance was a reversible capacity of 120 mA h g−1 at 10 °C with negligible loss of capacity after 500 cycles.
 Fig. 15  SEM images of (a) the low resolution G/LTO network and (b) high resolution of the LTO growth on G. (c) Discharging voltage curves of the LTO/CVD-G sponge with different charge/discharge rates. (d) Capacities of the LTO/CVD-G sponge charged/discharged at constant 30 C and 100 C rates for 500 cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 231. Copyright 2012 National Academy of Sciences. 
In general, the lithium diffusion time also plays a significant role in Li-ion battery performance, which can be enhanced with the advent of nanoarchitectures (t ∼ L2/D). For example, Yang et al.235 recently reported the one-pot synthesis of a free-standing sponge composed of interconnecting vanadium oxide (VO2) nanoribbons and rGO sheets, where a mixture of GO and V2O5 were reduced inside an autoclave at 180 °C. The composite sponge was dried (SEM in Fig. 16a), pressed and tested as a free standing electrode (specific surface area ∼150 m2 g−1). The tightly interpenetrating VO2 ribbons were only 10 nm thick, which resulted in a very short diffusion time (∼0.01 s). Fig. 16b shows a high reversible specific capacity of 415 mA h g−1 at 1 °C and 204 mA h g−1 at an extremely high rate of 190 °C (37.2 A g−1, 19 second discharge). Furthermore, the tight network could prevent agglomeration of the VO2 during cycling which led to stable performance for over 1000 cycles (<10% capacity loss, Fig. 16c). This was significantly improved from bulk VO2 nanomaterials that showed rapid capacity decay, material distortion and longer diffusion lengths, as well as having limited performance of 130–200 mA h g−1 at up to 1 A g−1 discharge and a capacity retention of only 20–50% after 50 cycles.236–239 Therefore, the rGO/VO2 composite electrode can utilize graphene sponge to greatly enhance the cathode rate capability.
 Fig. 16  (a) VO2–graphene sample hydrothermally treated for 1.5 and 12 h, demonstrating the formation of numerous ribbons with the width of 200–600 nm and length of several tens of micrometers. Electrochemical performance of VO2–graphene architectures under room temperature. (b) Representative discharge–charge curves of VO2–graphene (78%) architecture at various C-rates over the potential range of 1.5–3.5 V vs. Li+/Li. (c) Capacity retentions of VO2–graphene architectures when performing full discharge–charge at the highest rate of 190 C (37.2 A g−1) for 1000 cycles. 1′ and 2′ are denoted as VO2–graphene architectures with the VO2 contents of 78% and 68%, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 235. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
Therefore, it can be seen that the graphene sponges can be used as the both the anode and cathode materials for Li-ion batteries with high discharge rates and the improved performance by significantly reducing inactive electrode mass. Further, combining the CVD-G sponge with higher energy density materials such as metal oxides and silicon can result in much higher volume energy density.


3.4.4 Lithium air battery. 
Lithium air batteries (Li–O2) have the potential to store an order of magnitude more energy than current generation lithium-ion batteries. Prototypes consist of a lithium anode, organic electrolyte and a porous carbon cathode exposed to oxygen during operation. However, the largest challenge in Li-air batteries is seen at the cathode side. Upon discharge, the lithium reduces oxygen to form lithium peroxide and/or lithium oxide, which blocks electrolyte and oxygen pathways in the electrode and limit rate capability. This limits the cycle life of the batteries. Further, the tight aggregation of carbon and binder particles results in low O2 diffusion rates and affects rate performance.240 Therefore, there is an urgent need for highly effective carbon cathodes with hierarchal porous structure to give higher performance.241 With respect to this, a high surface area, free standing, open pore system like that of graphene sponges with strong conduction could enhance utilization of porous carbon and allow for efficient transport of electrolyte and oxygen in the cathode. Recently, Wang et al.242 produced a resorcinol-formaldehyde (RF) crosslinked rGO sponge inside the Ni sponge to create a loosely packed, highly conductive cathode composite (specific surface area ∼378 m2 g−1). The micron sized pore structure was able to better support O2 transport to the electrode interior, enabling 2020 mA h g−1 capacity at a high current density of 2 mA cm−2 (2800 mA g−1). Therefore, freestanding graphene supports also have potential to enhance the rate and capacity of next generation Li–O2 batteries.


3.4.5 Supercapacitor. 
The chemical stability, large surface area and high conductivity make graphene a natural competitor for the future of electrochemical double-layer capacitors. There are many reports of various graphene and heteroatom doped graphene materials with capacitance between 100 and 200 F g−1,243–250 better than many high surface area activated carbons used in industry.251 However, restacking of the materials prevents utilization of graphene's full 2600 m2 g−1 surface area, which corresponds to a measured intrinsic capacitance of 550 F g−1, indicating that there is still room for improvement.248,252 It is believed that assembly of graphene into porous three dimensional supercapacitor electrode layers has the potential to enhance electrode active surface area, boost network conductivity, and create large macropore channels to better facilitate ionic transport in electrolyte. With respect to this, freestanding networks of graphene materials can also reduce inactive electrode mass originating from polymer binders, conductive additives and current collectors.
With optimized processing, the rate performance and capacitance of graphene aerogels can also outperform that of two dimensional graphene. Recently, Mitlin et al.253 illustrated the possibilities for ultrahigh power density graphene-CNT sponge materials in ionic liquids, where ionic liquids traditionally offer very poor rate performance. The electrodes produced with the sponge material exhibited 90–98% capacity retention after 10000 cycles and stable performance measured up to 100 A g−1 or 2 V s−1 (∼78% of 0.1 A g−1 capacitance). The novel single step microwave synthesis was able to generate highly doped and crosslinked sponge-like microscale powders with mesoporous structure. In contrast, the free-standing sponges produced by Shi et al.90 using 180 °C autoclaved reduction of GO without any reducing agents or crosslinkers were able to yield 175 F g−1 at 10 mV s−1, 50% better than the standalone graphene particles produced by the same process. However, the freestanding rGO sponge conductivity (0.005 S cm−1) was still not high enough to demonstrate significant performance retention at high rates >50 mV s−1 even in aqueous mediums with high ionic conductivity. With continued development, the freestanding rGO sponges underwent secondary processing in 90 °C solution containing a strong reducing agent (HI acid, Hydrazine), the performance was increased considerably due to the enhanced conductivity (0.032 S cm−1).254 Furthermore, the performance reached to 222 F g−1 at low cycle rates and 70% of the capacitance could be maintained at a high rate of 100 A g−1 in aqueous electrolyte. Alternatively, freestanding electrodes produced by Wu et al.93 through heteroatom doping during autoclaving gave moderate capacitance at high 100 mV s−1 rates, producing between 50 F g−1 for the baseline rGO sponge to 132 F g−1 for its nitrogen doped counterpart.93
In most cases, the high performance demonstrated for graphene sponges is associated to low sponge density due to the relatively low active mass per unit area. In order to produce sponges with smaller pore structure, higher concentrations can be used. However, this may lead to stronger restacking of the rGO, unless some crosslinking functionality is present to prevent restacking. For example, Luan et al.96 used EDA pre-treatment to crosslink the rGO sponge before subjecting it to a strong reducing agent, allowing the retention of high surface area >500 m2 g−1 using starting GO concentrations as high as 15 mg mL−1. The tight, porous network could create high conductivity up to 13.5 S cm−1 and a performance of 232 F g−1 at 1 A g−1.96,255 Normally, graphene sponges produced by chemical vapor deposition are tightly stacked and uniform due to the low functionality of the as grown structure. As previously discussed, this can lead to much higher conductivity (∼10 S cm−1) than most rGO sponges, but also give a low wettability for aqueous electrolytes commonly used in lab scale testing. After mild 80 °C activation in KOH electrolyte to enhance hydrophyllicity, Wang et al.256 demonstrated that the strong supercapacitive performance could also be achieved. CNT-coated CVD-G sponge initially produced only 50 F g−1 at 50 mV s−1, similar to the low performance of bare CVD-G sponge, but after treatment the contact angle of the sponge dropped to 19° and the performance was increased to 233 F g−1.115,147,256 Stability testing on the treated CVD-G/CNT sponge electrode revealed 99% capacitance retention after 80000 cycles.
Another approach is the in situ growth of rGO sponge within nickel foam by a reduction self-assembly process that forms a composite electrode. This methodology provides highly interconnected rGO sheets within the porous sponge with limited restacking and high surface area. Further, the three dimensional nickel foam support creates a short pathway to the highly conductive metal collector and increases the overall strength and durability compared to using free-standing rGO sponge alone. Chen et al.255 illustrated this method by impregnating nickel foam with a 2–6 mg mL−1 GO solution, followed by reduction self-assembly at 60–100 °C in ascorbic acid solution. Surface area of the electrode reached 1260 m2 g−1 and the high ion diffusion and electron conduction within the composite electrode enabled outstanding capacitance retention, with capacitance decreasing only 8% for current densities between 1.3 A g−1 up to 133.3 A g−1. Shibing et al.257 report a similar binder-free composite electrode composed of in situ grown rGO sponge and nickel foam. After annealing the composite electrode, high specific capacitance of 366 F g−1 was achieved at 2 A g−1.
Nitrogen doped graphene sponge was also used by Zhao et al.60,94 to report one of the highest capacitive performances of any carbon materials to date. Pyrrole monomer, a carbon ring containing a secondary amine group, was added to an autoclaved GO reduction to form pi–pi and hydrogen bonding with graphene oxide during reduction and freeze-drying. The pyrrole could effectively prevent restacking during reduction and introduce a nitrogen source into the initial sponge structure. The sponges were then annealed at 1050 °C, burning away the pyrrole, leaving a highly conductive (1.2 S cm−1), nitrogen doped graphene sponge (Fig. 17a and b). In this way, nitrogen is believed to be able to modify the electronic structure of pristine graphene, leading to an increased quantum capacitance.258 As a result, the performance of the high surface area sponge pressed onto a collector plate could reach to 484 F g−1 at 1 A g−1. More importantly, the conductive heteroatom doped structure could retain 400 F g−1 at a high discharge rate of 100 A g−1 for over 1000 cycles with negligible loss in performance (Fig. 17c).60 This was even higher than the 350 F g−1 (1.5 A g−1) of pseudocapacitive carbon composites created by electro-polymerizing the pyrrole in the rGO sponge in a compression tolerant pseudocapacitive device.94
 Fig. 17  High resolution XPS spectrum for the N1s peak of the (a) freeze-dried N-containing sponge by hydrothermal treatment of a GO dispersion mixed with 5 vol% Py and (b) the shift to pyrridinic N in the 1050 °C annealed sponge. (c) 1000 cycle stability of the N-doped sponge at a high rate of 100 A g−1. High resolution SEM of well anchored pseudocapacitive CVD-G sponge electrodes coated with (d) MnO2, (e) NiO and (f) ZnO. Reproduced with permission from ref. 60 (a–c), ref. 121 (d), ref. 122 (e) and ref. 115 (f). Copyright: 2012 Wiley (a–c), 2012 Elsevier (d), 2011 Wiley (e) and 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry (f). 
For supercapacitors, using aqueous electrolytes holds several advantages such as high ion mobility, lower toxicity, easy handling, as well as safety compared to organic electrolytes used in commercial electrochemical double layer capacitors (EDLC). However, the low voltage of the aqueous cells limits the energy density. This could be partially overcome by implementing nanostructured metal oxides with fast redox reactions and specific capacitance much higher than double-layer charge storage on carbon.259–266 Furthermore, metal oxides are more dense, leading to a higher volumetric performance. But, the conductivity of these materials is low, which limits the utilization at the discharge rates required for practical supercapacitive applications. With respect to this, CVD-G sponges could provide some key benefits to enhancing pseudocapacitance. First, the high surface area provides ample area to effectively anchor the growth of nanostructured materials, resulting in short electron transport distances with low transport resistance. In combination, the high conductivity of the graphene network allows for effective utilization of the pseudocapacitive material even at high rates, increasing high power retention and making the cycle life more competitive with EDLC devices. Table 3 lists the composite performance of several nanostructured metal oxides grown on CVD-G sponge materials. Various morphologies of the deposited metal oxides can be seen in Fig. 17d–f and by referring to Fig. 11e. Similar rate enhancement could also be expected for other metal oxides such as RuO2/2D-G composite powders which have displayed high 570 F g−1 capacitance at low 0.1 A g−1 rates.267
Table 3 Performance characteristics for composites of various metal oxides on CVD-graphene sponge




Metal oxide
Demonstrated morphology
Voltage range (V)
Discharge rate
Capacitance (F g−1)
Stability (1000 cycles)
References




ZnO
Nanorods
0.4 V
5–50 mV s−1, 6.7–33 A g−1
210–400
6.7A g−1, negligible losses

115



MnO2
Nanoflower
1 V
0.2–1.2 A g−1
250–550
0.2 A g−1, 21% loss

121



Nanoporous particle
1 V
0–100 mV s−1
100–475
∼2 A g−1, 8% loss

266



Co3O4
Nanowire
0.5 V
10–100 mV s−1, 10–30 A g−1
456–1100
10 A g−1, negligible losses

147



NiO
Nanoporous particle
0.5 V
5–40 mV s−1, 1–20 A g−1
573–816
80 mV s−1, negligible losses

122






4 Conclusions and outlook for graphene sponge development
4.1 Conclusions
Due to several advantages of both graphene and graphene oxide sponges such as three dimensional graphene networks, high surface area, high electro/thermo conductivities, high chemical/electrochemical stability, high flexibility and elasticity, extremely high surface hydrophobicity, and so on, they have been used to demonstrate a feasibility way for bridging the nano-scale properties of graphene-based materials to practical macro-scale applications. To facilitate the further improvement and development of these advanced materials, this paper gives a comprehensive review about the most recent progress in synthesis, characterization, fundamental understanding and the performance of graphene and graphene oxide sponges, and their practical applications, including: compositing materials, use as the electrode materials for electrochemical sensors, use as the absorbers for both gases and liquids, and use as electrode materials for devices involved in electrochemical energy storage and conversion. Furthermore, with successful implementation these three dimensional structures offer a larger range of applicability and often greater performance than those achieved with two dimensional graphene.
Regarding the synthesis, several methods have been successfully developed, demonstrating the feasibility in preparing high quality and high performance graphene and graphene oxide sponges. These methods include the templated growth of graphene on nickel sponges, direct sponging of GO solutions, self-assembly and several others. Among these methods, the CVD growth technique can produce well-defined, large pore size structures with high conductivity, and the material's quality can be primarily controlled by process variables during the CVD growth. However, the high temperatures, sacrificial template and multistep processing limit the scalability. The self-assembly technique using the reduction of graphene oxide is compatible with simultaneous growth of composite materials. The properties and performance of the formed graphene/graphene oxide sponges are shown to be strongly dependant on the quality and size of the graphene oxide precursor, the type of the reducing agents, cross linkers, doping agents and the pH of synthetic solution. Although the direct freeze drying self-assembly is simple, it is heavily dependent on size and concentration, in which controlling ice crystal formation and cracking on a larger size scale is a challenge. Therefore, all of the methods reviewed in this paper require further development to promote robust, scalable sponges at low cost and with less restacking. In order to do this, a better understanding of the surface growth and graphene assembly mechanisms is necessary.
Regarding the practical applications, the properties of both graphene and graphene oxide sponges have attracted a great interest, and their feasibilities have also been demonstrated in many practical areas. When they are used to composite the targeting materials such as polymers, the materials' flexibility, elasticity, conductivity, or surface hydrophobicity can be greatly improved; when they are used as the electrode materials for electrochemical sensors, the sensitivity can be significantly increased in trace analysis; when they are used as the absorbers for both gas and liquids extremely high uptake can be achieved; and when they are used as the electrode materials for electrochemical energy storage and conversion devices such as fuel cells, solar cells, lithium batteries, and supercapacitors, significantly improved performance of these devices can be achieved when compared to those using conventional carbon as electrode materials.
4.2 Challenges and future outlook
However, although there are advantages of these graphene-based sponges, to reach large-scale production for commercialization, there are still several common challenges. Most of the sponges discussed throughout this review are on a small lab scale and despite reported flexibility and elasticity, most graphene sponges remain fragile and easily broken or torn without careful handling. This issue must continue to be addressed by future work focused on developing techniques which promote improved inter-sheet binding and composites which effectively incorporate further flexibility and tear resistance. Depending on the application, this might be achieved by the incorporation of highly elastic polymers, surface modification with load bearing fibers or optimization of crosslinking agents that can control structure by selectively targeting either crosslinking of the edge-planes or the basal-plane. With regards to scale, template growth techniques are limited by the furnace size and expense of the sacrificial template, as well as the sheet defects and temperature gradients that exist over larger areas. Future attempts to overcome these challenges might focus on engineering a furnace design capable of accommodating many layers, larger sheets with minimal furnace dead space and promoting uniform graphene growth. Considering the scalability of graphene sponges produced by direct dry and self-assembly methodologies, the freeze-drying process is already available at an industrial scale, but there are many variables which can prevent adhesion of the sponge structure and make it more difficult to reproduce the work reported by others. Additional characterization of the GO precursors, in future work, to determine size and functionality distributions should help mitigate this challenge and could make it easier to predict changes to the binding forces during simultaneous compositing and sponge formation. In addition, the large scale production of GO by current methods is limited by the concentrated acids required and the variability in sheet size, as well as surface functionality. A future direction for graphene sponging technology, might consider controlled surface modification of graphene sheets produced by the solvent or surfactant exfoliation of graphite. In addition to limitations of scale, further development of template supports, direct dry and self-assembly sponges with controlled pore size might be important to commercialization; specifically to enhance volumetric performance for applications such as energy storage and conversion devices, or to optimize the density as an absorber.
Moving forward it is important to recognize simultaneous developments in three-dimensional carbon nanotube sponges that are very similar in function and performance too, but are often prepared by different methods from, graphene sponge. Compared to the often cellular pore structure of graphene sponge, CNT based sponges more strongly favor aligned growth via CVD growth or random entanglement via functionalized CNTs dried from organo- or hydrogels.36 However, under specific growth conditions,268 it is also possible to produce free-standing non-aligned CVD grown sponges with low density, ultrahigh flexibility and high mechanical durability. Reduced GO sponges have the advantages of higher reported surface area, simultaneous reduction and aqueous sponge formation. But, the high degree of CNT entanglement and high conductivity along their 1D axis may provide more consistency with respect to increased sponge conductivity and mechanical durability during flexibility testing. Looking to the future, the combination of CNT and graphene sponge, may provide enhanced overall performance and mechanical durability.
The key challenges for graphene sponge will require continued innovative research and development. However, in only a short time the extension of graphene from a two-dimensional nano-material into the macro-scale three-dimensional sponges with exceptional performance has been widely demonstrated. Moving forward, utilization of three-dimensional graphene and graphene oxide networks could be integral, harnessing the high-surface area and exceptional properties of graphene materials in order to help achieve the next-generation of performance for several application areas.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the support of the General Motors Global Research and Development Center. Financial support from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), and the University of Waterloo are also gratefully acknowledged.
References
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, W. Cai, X. Li, J. W. Suk, J. R. Potts and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3906–3924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Brownson and C. Banks, Analyst, 2010, 135, 2768–2778 RSC .
B. Thompson and J. M. J. Fréchet, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 58–77 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Hammel, X. Tang, M. Trampert, T. Schmitt, K. Mauthner, A. Eder and P. Pötschke, Carbon, 2004, 42, 1153–1158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jong and J. Geus, Catal. Rev., 2000, 42, 481–510 Search PubMed .
B. S. Sherigara, W. Kutner and F. D'Souza, Electroanalysis, 2003, 15, 753–772 CrossRef CAS .
E. T. Thostenson, Z. Ren and T.-W. Chou, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2001, 61, 1899–1912 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. Baughman, A. a. Zakhidov and W. de Heer, Science, 2002, 297, 787–792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, J. Liang and Y. Chen, Small, 2012, 8, 1805–1834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gooding, Electrochim. Acta, 2005, 50, 3049–3060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, V. I. Fal'ko, L. Colombo, P. R. Gellert, M. G. Schwab and K. Kim, Nature, 2012, 490, 192–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Kim, Y. Zhao, H. Jang, S. Y. Lee, J. M. Kim, K. S. Kim, J.-H. Ahn, P. Kim, J.-Y. Choi and B. H. Hong, Nature, 2009, 457, 706–710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bae, H. Kim, Y. Lee, X. Xu, J.-S. Park, Y. Zheng, J. Balakrishnan, T. Lei, H. R. Kim, Y. I. Song, Y.-J. Kim, K. S. Kim, B. Ozyilmaz, J.-H. Ahn, B. H. Hong and S. Iijima, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 574–578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Reina, X. Jia, J. Ho, D. Nezich, H. Son, V. Bulovic, M. S. Dresselhaus and J. Kong, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 30–35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Eda, G. Fanchini and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 270–274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Bourlinos, V. Georgakilas, R. Zboril, T. Steriotis and A. K. Stubos, Small, 2009, 5, 1841–1845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E.-K. Choi, I.-Y. Jeon, S.-Y. Bae, H.-J. Lee, H. S. Shin, L. Dai and J.-B. Baek, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6320–6322 RSC .
A. Green and M. C. Hersam, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4031–4036 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. E. Hamilton, J. R. Lomeda, Z. Sun, J. M. Tour and A. R. Barron, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3460–3462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hernandez, V. Nicolosi, M. Lotya, F. M. Blighe, Z. Sun, S. De, I. T. McGovern, B. Holland, M. Byrne, Y. K. Gun'Ko, J. J. Boland, P. Niraj, G. Duesberg, S. Krishnamurthy, R. Goodhue, J. Hutchison, V. Scardaci, A. C. Ferrari and J. N. Coleman, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 563–568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Khan, A. O'Neill, M. Lotya, S. De and J. N. Coleman, Small, 2010, 6, 864–871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Khan, H. Porwal, A. O'Neill, K. Nawaz, P. May and J. N. Coleman, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 9077–9082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lotya, Y. Hernandez, P. J. King, R. J. Smith, V. Nicolosi, L. S. Karlsson, F. M. Blighe, S. De, Z. Wang, I. T. McGovern, G. S. Duesberg and J. N. Coleman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3611–3620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Chabot, B. Kim, B. Sloper, C. Tzoganakis and A. Yu, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1378 Search PubMed .
W. Hummers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1958, 80, 1339 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Marcano, D. V. Kosynkin, J. M. Berlin, A. Sinitskii, Z. Sun, A. Slesarev, L. B. Alemany, W. Lu and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4806–4814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Stankovich, D. Dikin, R. D. Piner, K. Kohlhaas, A. Kleinhammes, Y. Jia, Y. Wu, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Carbon, 2007, 45, 1558–1565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-B. Zhang, J.-W. Wang, Q. Yan, W.-G. Zheng, C. Chen and Z.-Z. Yu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 5392–5397 RSC .
M. Fernandez-Merino, L. Guardia, J. I. Paredes, P. Villar-Rodil, P. Solis-Fernandez, A. Martinez-Alonso and J. M. D. Tascon, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 6426–6432 CAS .
S. Park and R. S. Ruoff, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 217–224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-J. Shin, K. K. Kim, A. Benayad, S.-M. Yoon, H. K. Park, I.-S. Jung, M. H. Jin, H.-K. Jeong, J. M. Kim, J.-Y. Choi and Y. H. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1987–1992 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qiu, X. Zhang and S. Yang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 12554–12558 RSC .
Y. Sun, Q. Wu and G. Shi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1113–1132 CAS .
C. Li and G. Shi, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5549–5563 RSC .
S. Nardecchia, D. Carriazo, M. L. Ferrer, M. C. Gutierrez and F. del Monte, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 794–830 RSC .
C. Huang, C. Li and G. Shi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8848–8868 CAS .
W. Yeng and G. Shi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 10078–10091 Search PubMed .
X. Gui, J. Wei, K. Wang, A. Cao, H. Zhu, Y. Jia, Q. Shu and D. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 617–621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Pierre and G. M. Pajonk, Chem. Rev., 2002, 102, 4243–4265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Pikal and S. Shah, Int. J. Pharm., 1990, 62, 165–186 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. King and J. Bellows, Cryobiology, 1972, 561, 559–561 Search PubMed .
L. Qiu, J. Z. Liu, S. L. Y. Chang, Y. Wu and D. Li, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1241 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Worsley, P. J. Pauzauskie, T. Y. Olson, J. Biener, J. H. Satcher and T. F. Baumann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14067–14069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Z. Sui, B. Xu, S. Yue, Y. Luo, W. Zhan and B. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6494–6497 RSC .
M. Worsley, T. Olson and J. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 921–925 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Koch, J. Chem. Educ., 1982, 59, 973–974 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pei, J. Zhao, J. Du, W. Ren and H.-M. Cheng, Carbon, 2010, 48, 4466–4474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. Dreyer, S. Park, C. W. Bielawski and R. S. Ruoff, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 228–240 RSC .
H. He, J. Klinowski, M. Forster and A. Lerf, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1998, 287, 53–56 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, L. J. Cote, F. Kim, W. Yuan, K. R. Shull and J. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8180–8186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Guo, H. Song and X. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 4867–4874 RSC .
Y. Xue, J. Liu, H. Chen, R. Wang, D. Li, J. Qu and L. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 12124–12127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Long, C. Zhang, X. Wang, J. Gao, W. Wang and Y. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 13934–13941 RSC .
Y. Lin, G. J. Ehlert, C. Bukowsky and H. A. Sodano, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 2200–2203 CAS .
X. Zhou and Z. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2611–2613 RSC .
X. Mi, G. Huang, W. Xie, W. Wang, Y. Liu and J. Gao, Carbon, 2012, 50, 4856–4864 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Yoo, K. Balakrishnan, J. Huang, V. Meunier, B. G. Sumpter, A. Srivastava, M. Conway, A. L. M. Reddy, J. Yu, R. Vajtai and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1423–1427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Stoller, S. Park, Y. Zhu, J. An and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3498–3502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, C. Hu, Y. Hu, H. Cheng, G. Shi and L. Qu, Angew. Chem.,
Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11371–11375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Niu, J. Chen, H. H. Hng, J. Ma and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4144–4150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, T. Maiyalagan and X. Wang, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 781–794 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qu, Y. Liu, J.-B. Baek and L. Dai, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1321–1326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Thomas, S. Day, W. Woodruff, C. Vallés, R. Young, I. Kinloch, G. Morley, J. Hanna, N. Wilson and J. Rourke, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 3580–3588 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bai, C. Li, X. Wang and G. Shi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 5545–5551 CAS .
H. Bai, C. Li, X. Wang and G. Shi, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2376–2378 RSC .
S. Pan and I. A. Aksay, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4073–4083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. McAllister, J. Li, D. Adamson, H. Schniepp, A. Abdala, J. Liu, M. Herrera-Alonso, D. Milius, R. Car and R. Prud'homme, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4396–4404 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, S. Pei, W. Ren, L. Gao and H. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5245–5252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, J. Liang, Y. Huang, Y. Ma, Y. Wang and Y. Chen, Carbon, 2009, 47, 3365–3368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Botas, A. Pérez-Mas, P. Álvarez, R. Santamaría, M. Granda, C. Blanco and R. Menéndez, Carbon, 2013, 63, 576–578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Qi, J. Cao, R. Bao, Z. Liu, W. Yang, B. Xie and M. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3163–3170 CAS .
S. Park, K. Lee, G. Bozoklu and W. Cai, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 572–578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-P. Cong, P. Wang and S.-H. Yu, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 3357–3362 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sashu, W. Choi and G. Tae, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 5820–5822 RSC .
B. Adhikari and A. Banerjee, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 9259–9266 RSC .
B. Adhikari, A. Biswas and A. Banerjee, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 1460–1469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, L. Chen, H. Bai and L. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1992–2001 CAS .
Z. Sui, Y. Cui, J. Zhu and B. Han, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 9172 CAS .
H. Huang, S. Lu, X. Zhang and Z. Shao, Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 4609–4615 RSC .
H. Sun, Z. Xu and C. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2554–2560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xu, H. Sun, X. Zhao and C. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 188–193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, Q. Wu, Y. Sun, H. Bai and G. Shi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 7358–7362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ye, J. Feng and P. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3495–3502 CAS .
H. Sehaqui, M. Salajková, Q. Zhou and L. A. Berglund, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 1824–1832 RSC .
E. M. Arndt, M. D. Gawryla and D. A. Schiraldi, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 3525–3529 RSC .
X. Xiao, T. Xie and Y.-T. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 3508–3514 RSC .
J. Shen, B. Yan, T. Li, Y. Long, N. Li and M. Ye, Composites, Part A, 2012, 43, 1476–1481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Liu, S. Liang, X.-Z. Tang, D. Yan, X. Li and Z.-Z. Yu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 14160–14167 RSC .
Y. Xu, K. Sheng, C. Li and G. Shi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4324–4330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, W. Ren and H.-M. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 20197–20202 RSC .
H. Hu, Z. Zhao, W. Wan, Y. Gogotsi and J. Qiu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1–5 CrossRef .
Z.-S. Wu, A. Winter, L. Chen, Y. Sun, A. Turchanin, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5130–5135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, J. Liu, Y. Hu, H. Cheng, C. Hu, C. Jiang, L. Jiang, A. Cao and L. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 591–595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Che, L. Shen and Y. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1722–1727 RSC .
V. H. Luan, H. N. Tien, L. T. Hoa, N. T. M. Hien, E.-S. Oh, J. Chung, E. J. Kim, W. M. Choi, B.-S. Kong and S. H. Hur, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 208–211 CAS .
K. Sheng, Y. Xu, C. Li and G. Shi, New Carbon Mater., 2011, 26, 9–15 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen and L. Yan, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3132–3137 RSC .
W. Chen, S. Li, C. Chen and L. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5679–5683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wu, M. Chen, L. Zhang, X. Xu, Y. Liu, J. Yan, W. Wang and J. Gao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 7612–7621 CAS .
K. Sheng, Y. Sun, C. Li, W. Yuan and G. Shi, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 247 Search PubMed .
Y. Li, K. Sheng, W. Yuan and G. Shi, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 291–293 RSC .
M. F. El-Kady, V. Strong, S. Dubin and R. B. Kaner, Science, 2012, 335, 1326–1330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bryning, D. Milkie and M. Islam, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 661–664 CrossRef CAS .
T. Bordjiba, M. Mohamedi and L. H. Dao, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 815–819 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Jung, H. Y. Jung, M. S. Dresselhaus, Y. J. Jung and J. Kong, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 849 Search PubMed .
L. Tang, Y. Wang, Y. Li, H. Feng, J. Lu and J. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2782–2789 CrossRef CAS .
L. Guardia, M. J. Fernández-Merino, J. I. Paredes, P. Solís-Fernández, S. Villar-Rodil, A. Martínez-Alonso and J. M. D. Tascón, Carbon, 2011, 49, 1653–1662 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lotya, P. J. King, U. Khan, S. De and J. N. Coleman, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3155–3162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Peng, Z. Yan, Z. Sun and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8241–8247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Deheer, C. Berger, X. Wu, P. First, E. Conrad, X. Li, T. Li, M. Sprinkle, J. Hass and M. Sadowski, Solid State Commun., 2007, 143, 92–100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, W. Cai, J. An, S. Kim, J. Nah, D. Yang, R. Piner, A. Velamakanni, I. Jung, E. Tutuc, S. K. Banerjee, L. Colombo and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2009, 324, 1312–1314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, L. Fu, N. Liu, M. Liu, Y. Wang and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1020–1024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Allen, V. C. Tung and R. B. Kaner, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 132–145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Dong, Y. Cao, J. Wang, M. B. Chan-Park, L. Wang, W. Huang and P. Chen, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 4364–4369 RSC .
A. Leela, M. Reddy, A. Srivastava, S. R. Gowda, H. Gullapalli, M. Dubey and P. M. Ajayan, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6337–6342 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Luo, S. Lim, Z. Tian, J. Shang, L. Lai, B. MacDonald, C. Fu, Z. Shen, T. Yu and J. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 8038–8044 RSC .
Z. Chen, W. Ren, L. Gao, B. Liu, S. Pei and H. Cheng, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 424–428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Ferrari, J. C. Meyer, V. Scardaci, C. Casiraghi, M. Lazzeri, F. Mauri, S. Piscanec, D. Jiang, K. S. Novoselov, S. Roth and A. K. Geim, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 187401 CrossRef CAS .
X. Dong, X. Wang, L. Wang, H. Song, H. Zhang, W. Huang and P. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 3129–3133 CAS .
X. Dong, X. Wang, J. Wang, H. Song, X. Li, L. Wang, M. B. Chan-Park, C. M. Li and P. Chen, Carbon, 2012, 50, 4865–4870 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cao, Y. Shi, W. Shi, G. Lu, X. Huang, Q. Yan, Q. Zhang and H. Zhang, Small, 2011, 7, 3163–3168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Bi, F. Huang, J. Liang, Y. Tang, X. Lü, X. Xie and M. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17366–17370 RSC .
X. Xiao, T. E. Beechem, M. T. Brumbach, T. N. Lambert, D. J. Davis, J. R. Michael, C. M. Washburn, J. Wang, S. M. Brozik, D. R. Wheeler, D. B. Burckel and R. Polsky, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3573–3579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mecklenburg, A. Schuchardt, Y. K. Mishra, S. Kaps, R. Adelung, A. Lotnyk, L. Kienle and K. Schulte, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3486–3490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Lee, H. W. Kim, J. O. Hwang, W. J. Lee, J. Kwon, C. W. Bielawski, R. S. Ruoff and S. O. Kim, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 10084–10088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hernandez-Guerrero and M. H. Stenzel, Polym. Chem., 2012, 3, 563–577 RSC .
H. S. Ahn, J.-W. Jang, M. Seol, J. M. Kim, D.-J. Yun, C. Park, H. Kim, D. H. Youn, J. Y. Kim, G. Park, S. C. Park, J. M. Kim, D. I. Yu, K. Yong, M. H. Kim and J. S. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1396 CAS .
H. S. Ahn, H. Kim, J. M. Kim, S. C. Park, J. M. Kim, J. Kim and M. H. Kim, Carbon, 2013, 64, 27–34 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chen, T. Tao, L. Zhang, W. Gao and C. Li, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 1612–1614 RSC .
Y. J. Shin, Y. Wang, H. Huang, G. Kalon, A. T. S. Wee, Z. Shen, C. S. Bhatia and H. Yang, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 3798–3802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-M. Li, D. Reinhoudt and M. Crego-Calama, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 1350–1368 RSC .
L. Gao and T. J. McCarthy, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 2966–2967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Singh, Z. Chen, F. Houshmand, W. Ren, Y. Peles, H.-M. Cheng and N. Koratkar, Small, 2013, 9, 75–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, C. Lopez, A. Hirsa and N. Koratkar, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 023105 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Chaubey and B. D. Malhotra, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2002, 17, 441–456 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shao, J. Wang, H. Wu, J. Liu, I. A. Aksay and Y. Lin, Electroanalysis, 2010, 22, 1027–1036 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kuila, S. Bose, P. Khanra, A. K. Mishra, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2011, 26, 4637–4648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhou, Y. Zhai and S. Dong, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 5603–5613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, M. B. Müller, K. J. Gilmore, G. G. Wallace and D. Li, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3557–3561 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park, N. Mohanty, J. W. Suk, A. Nagaraja, J. An, R. D. Piner, W. Cai, D. R. Dreyer, V. Berry and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1736–1740 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yang, Ќ. J. Wan, Ќ. S. Zhang, Y. Zhang, S. Lee and Z. Liu, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 516–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, Z. Du, S. Liu, Q. Hao, Y. Wang, Q. Li and T. Wang, Talanta, 2010, 82, 1637–1641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, J. Lei, R. Pan, Y. Xue and H. Ju, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2010, 26, 371–376 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhang, J. Yin, C. Peng, W. Hu, Z. Zhu, W. Li, C. Fan and Q. Huang, Carbon, 2011, 49, 986–995 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. G. Shang, P. Papakonstantinou, M. McMullan, M. Chu, A. Stamboulis, A. Potenza, S. S. Dhesi and H. Marchetto, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 3506–3514 CrossRef CAS .
X.-C. Dong, H. Xu, X.-W. Wang, Y.-X. Huang, M. B. Chan-Park, H. Zhang, L.-H. Wang, W. Huang and P. Chen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3206–3213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, L. Wang, D. Pan, S. Song and C. Fan, Chem. Commun., 2007, 1154–1156 RSC .
X. Dong, Y. Ma, G. Zhu, Y. Huang, J. Wang, M. B. Chan-Park, L. Wang, W. Huang and P. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 17044–17048 RSC .
Y. Ding, Y. Wang, L. Su, M. Bellagamba, H. Zhang and Y. Lei, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2010, 26, 542–548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Pasricha, S. Gupta and A. K. Srivastava, Small, 2009, 5, 2253–2259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. Dreyer, H.-P. Jia and C. W. Bielawski, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6813–6816 CAS .
G. Scheuermann and L. Rumi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8262–8270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Schedin, A. K. Geim, S. V Morozov, E. W. Hill, P. Blake, M. I. Katsnelson and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 652–655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yavari, C. Kritzinger, C. Gaire, L. Song, H. Gulapalli, T. Borca-Tasciuc, P. M. Ajayan and N. Koratkar, Small, 2010, 6, 2535–2538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dan, Y. Lu, N. J. Kybert, Z. Luo and T. C. Johnson, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1472–1475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yavari, Z. Chen, A. V Thomas, W. Ren, H.-M. Cheng and N. Koratkar, Sci. Rep., 2011, 1, 166 Search PubMed .
O. Leenaerts, B. Partoens and F. Peeters, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 125416 CrossRef .
J. D. Fowler, M. J. Allen, V. C. Tung, Y. Yang, R. B. Kaner and B. H. Weiller, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 301–306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Robinson, F. K. Perkins, E. S. Snow, Z. Wei and P. E. Sheehan, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3137–3140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Lu, S. Park, K. Yu, R. S. Ruoff, L. E. Ocola, D. Rosenmann, J. Chen and L. Al, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 1154–1164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Lu, L. E. Ocola and J. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 083111 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Wu, Z. Liu, L. a. Jauregui, Q. Yu, R. Pillai, H. Cao, J. Bao, Y. P. Chen and S.-S. Pei, Sens. Actuators, B, 2010, 150, 296–300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. N. Bartlett and S. K. Ling-Chung, Sens. Actuators, B, 1989, 20, 287–292 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Miasik, A. Hooper and B. C. Tofield, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 2, 1986, 82, 1117–1126 CAS .
T. R. Annunciado, T. H. D. Sydenstricker and S. C. Amico, Mar. Pollut. Bull., 2005, 50, 1340–1346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Radetić, D. M. Jocić, P. M. Iovantić, Z. L. J. Petrović and H. F. Thomas, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2003, 37, 1008–1012 CrossRef .
D. Bastani, A. a. Safekordi, A. Alihosseini and V. Taghikhani, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2006, 52, 295–300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. U. Kulawardana and D. C. Neckers, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2010, 48, 55–62 CrossRef CAS .
A. Li, H.-X. Sun, D.-Z. Tan, W.-J. Fan, S.-H. Wen, X.-J. Qing, G.-X. Li, S.-Y. Li and W.-Q. Deng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2062–2065 CAS .
S. Li, S. Tian, C. Du, C. He, C. Cen and Y. Xiong, Biochem. Eng. J., 2010, 162, 546–551 CAS .
M. Toyoda and M. Inagaki, Carbon, 2000, 38, 199–210 CrossRef CAS .
M. Inagaki, H. Konno, M. Toyoda, K. Moriya and T. Kihara, Desalination, 2000, 128, 213–218 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bi, X. Xie, K. Yin, Y. Zhou, S. Wan, L. He, F. Xu, F. Banhart, L. Sun and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 4421–4425 CrossRef CAS .
X. Dong, J. Chen, Y. Ma, J. Wang, M. B. Chan-Park, X. Liu, L. Wang, W. Huang and P. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 10660–10662 RSC .
Y. Liang, Y. Li, H. Wang, J. Zhou, J. Wang, T. Regier and H. Dai, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 780–786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhou, L. Ge, Z.-G. Chen, F. Liang, H.-Y. Xu, J. Motuzas, A. Julbe and Z. Zhu, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 4193–4198 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Chang, Z.-H. Loh, C. Shi, F. C. Anson and D. G. Nocera, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 10013–10020 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Liu, C. Von Malotki and L. Arnold, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10372–10375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-J. Wang, D. P. Wilkinson and J. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 7625–7651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, D. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. Wan and B. Hou, J. Power Sources, 2012, 198, 122–126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Y. Liang, Y. Li and H. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 10969–10972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Guo and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2492–2495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liang, H. Wang, J. Zhou, Y. Li, J. Wang, T. Regier and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3517–3523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Bai, C. Li and G. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1089–1115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Maiyalagan, X. Dong, P. Chen and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 5286–5290 RSC .
Z.-S. Wu, S. Yang, Y. Sun, K. Parvez, X. Feng and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9082–9085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Gong, F. Du, Z. Xia, M. Durstock and L. Dai, Science, 2009, 323, 760–764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ren, K. S. Hui and K. N. Hui, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5689–5694 CAS .
G.-P. Jin, R. Baron, L. Xiao and R. G. Compton, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2009, 9, 2719–2725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. M. Suleimanov, S. M. Khantimerov, E. F. Kukovitsky and V. L. Matukhin, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2008, 12, 1021–1023 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xu, Y. Hu, J. Rong, S. P. Jiang and Y. Liu, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 2009–2012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Danaee, M. Jafarian, F. Forouzandeh, F. Gobal and M. Mahjani, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 4367–4376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, J. Tan, F. Yang, X. Li, X. Liu and D. Ma, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 23, 13–16 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-P. Jin, Y.-F. Ding and P.-P. Zheng, J. Power Sources, 2007, 166, 80–86 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, Z. Li, F. Wang, J. Liu, J. Ji, J. Wang, W. Wang, S. Qin and L. Zhang, Mater. Lett., 2011, 65, 3396–3398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Parvez, S. Yang, Y. Hernandez, A. Winter, A. Turchanin and X. Feng, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 9541–9550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Grätzel, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2003, 4, 145–153 CrossRef .
S. Zhang, X. Yang, Y. Numata and L. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1443–1464 CAS .
D. Yu, E. Nagelli, F. Du and L. Dai, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2165–2173 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Zhang, X. D. Li, H. B. Li, S. Chen, Z. Sun, X. J. Yin and S. M. Huang, Carbon, 2011, 49, 5382–5388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Choi, H. Kim, S. Hwang, Y. Han and M. Jeon, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 7548–7551 RSC .
J. D. Roy-Mayhew, D. J. Bozym, C. Punckt and I. A. Aksay, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6203–6211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Hong, Y. Xu, G. Lu, C. Li and G. Shi, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 1555–1558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, X. Feng, X. Wang and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 123, 5451–5455 CrossRef .
M. Liang and L. Zhi, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5871–5878 RSC .
G. Wang, X. Shen, J. Yao and J. Park, Carbon, 2009, 47, 2049–2053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sato, M. Noguchi, A. Demachi, N. Oki and M. Endo, Science, 1994, 264, 556–558 CAS .
C. Menachem, E. Peled, L. Burstein and Y. Rosenberg, J. Power Sources, 1997, 68, 277–282 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gong, H. Wu and Q. Yang, Carbon, 1999, 37, 1409–1416 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wan Park, S.-H. Yoon, S. I. Lee and S. M. Oh, Carbon, 2000, 38, 995–1001 CrossRef .
Y. Wu, S. Fang and Y. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem., 1998, 8, 2223–2227 RSC .
E. Yoo, J. Kim, E. Hosono, H. Zhou, T. Kudo and I. Honma, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2277–2282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Derrien, J. Hassoun, S. Panero and B. Scrosati, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2336–2340 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, B. Tan and Y. Wu, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 265–270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-M. Zhang, X.-L. Wu, J.-S. Hu, Y.-G. Guo and L.-J. Wan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 3941–3946 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Chan, H. Peng, G. Liu, K. McIlwrath, X. F. Zhang, R. Huggins and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 31–35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhou, D.-W. Wang, F. Li, L. Zhang, N. Li, Z.-S. Wu, L. Wen, G. Q. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5306–5313 CrossRef CAS .
J.-G. Ren, Q.-H. Wu, G. Hong, W.-J. Zhang, H. Wu, K. Amine, J. Yang and S.-T. Lee, Energy Technol., 2013, 1, 77–84 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xiang, K. Zhang, G. Ji, J. Y. Lee, C. Zou, X. Chen and J. Wu, Carbon, 2011, 49, 1787–1796 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Evanoff, A. Magasinski, J. Yang and G. Yushin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 495–498 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lung-Hao Hu, F.-Y. Wu, C.-T. Lin, A. N. Khlobystov and L.-J. Li, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1687 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Liang, J. T. Robinson, Y. Li, A. Jackson, Y. Cui and H. Dai, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2644–2647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

New battery anode with four times the capacity of conventional materials, can be found under http://xgsciences.com/releases/new-battery-anode/,  2013 Search PubMed.

Cabot Launches First Graphene-Based Additive to Improve Energy Density of Lithium-Ion Batteries, can be found under http://investor.cabot-corp.com/phoenix.zhtml?c=94559%26p=irol-newsArticle%26ID=1788701%26highlight=,  2013 Search PubMed.
X. Zhou and Z. Liu, IOP Conf. Ser.: Mater. Sci. Eng., 2011, 18, 062006 CrossRef .
X. Xiao, P. Liu, J. S. Wang, M. W. Verbrugge and M. P. Balogh, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 209–212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xiao, D. Wu, S. Han, Y. Huang, S. Li, M. He, F. Zhang and X. Feng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 3764–3769 CAS .
W. Chen, S. Li, C. Chen and L. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5679–5683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ji, L. Zhang, M. Pettes, H. Li and S. Chen, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2446–2451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, Z. Chen, W. Ren, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 17360–17365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Prakash, P. Manikandan, K. Ramesha, M. Sathiya, J.-M. Tarascon and A. K. Shukla, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 2857–2863 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, L. Wen, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 8610–8617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-G. Jung, M. W. Jang, J. Hassoun, Y.-K. Sun and B. Scrosati, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 516 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Yang, Y. Gong, Z. Liu, L. Zhan, D. P. Hashim, L. Ma, R. Vajtai and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1596–1601 CAS .
Q. Zhao, L. Jiao, W. Peng, H. Gao, J. Yang, Q. Wang, H. Du, L. Li, Z. Qi, Y. Si, Y. Wang and H. Yuan, J. Power Sources, 2012, 199, 350–354 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. V. Subba Reddy, E. H. Walker Jr, S. A. Wicker Sr, Q. L. Williams and R. R. Kalluru, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2009, 9, 1195–1198 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Chen, S. Gao, L. Jiang, M. Wei and K. Wei, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2010, 121, 254–258 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, Y. Liu and C. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 2662–2666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ren, S. S. Zhang, D. T. Tran and J. Read, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 10118–10125 RSC .
J. Xiao, D. Mei, X. Li, W. Xu, D. Wang, G. L. Graff, W. D. Bennett, Z. Nie, L. V Saraf, I. A. Aksay, J. Liu and J.-G. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5071–5078 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-L. Wang, D. Xu, J.-J. Xu, L.-L. Zhang and X.-B. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3699–3705 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Z. Shi, Y. Huang, Y. Ma, C. Wang, M. Chen and Y. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 13103–13107 CAS .
C. Liu, Z. Yu, D. Neff, A. Zhamu and B. Z. Jang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4863–4868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, M. D. Stoller, K. J. Ganesh, W. Cai, P. J. Ferreira, A. Pirkle, R. M. Wallace, K. Cychosz, M. Thommes, D. Su, E. Stach and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2011, 332, 1537–1541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mathkar, D. Tozier, P. Cox, P. Ong, C. Galande, K. Balakrishnan, A. Leela, M. Reddy and P. M. Ajayan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 986–991 CrossRef CAS .
C. N. R. Rao, a. K. Sood, K. S. Subrahmanyam and A. Govindaraj, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 7752–7777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Wu, Y. Huang, F. Zhang, X. Yang, Y. Ma and Y. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 23192–23197 CAS .
H. M. Jeong, J. W. Lee, W. H. Shin, Y. J. Choi, H. J. Shin, J. K. Kang and J. W. Choi, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2472–2477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. Yu, V. Chabot and J. J. Zhang, Electrochemical Supercapacitors for Energy Storage and Delivery, CRC Press, New York,  2013 Search PubMed .
L. L. Zhang and X. S. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2520–2531 RSC .
J. Xia, F. Chen, J. Li and N. Tao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 505–509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xu, Z. Li, C. Holt, X. Tan, H. Wang, B. Amirkhiz, T. Stephenson and D. Mitlin, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 2928–2933 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang and G. Shi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 17206–17212 CAS .
J. Chen, K. Sheng, P. Luo, C. Li and G. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4569–4573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, S. Guo, M. Penchev, I. Ruiz, K. N. Bozhilov, D. Yan, M. Ozkan and C. S. Ozkan, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 294–303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ye, J. Feng and P. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 7122–7129 CAS .
L. L. Zhang, X. Zhao, H. Ji, M. D. Stoller, L. Lai, S. Murali, S. Mcdonnell, B. Cleveger, R. M. Wallace and R. S. Ruoff, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9618–9625 CAS .
X. Sun, G. Wang, J.-Y. Hwang and J. Lian, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 16581–16588 RSC .
Y. Wang, A. Yuan and X. Wang, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2007, 12, 1101–1107 CrossRef PubMed .
B. E. Conway, V. Birss and J. Wojtowicz, J. Power Sources, 1997, 66, 1–14 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xia, J. Tu, Y. Mai, R. Chen, X. Wang, C. Gu and X. Zhao, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 10898–10905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Biswas and L. T. Drzal, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5667–5671 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Hu and W.-C. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 49, 3469–3477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yu, L. Hu, M. Vosgueritchian, H. Wang, X. Xie, J. R. Mcdonough, X. Cui, Y. Cui and Z. Bao, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2905–2911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. He, W. Chen, X. Li, Z. Zhang, J. Fu, C. Zhao and E. Xie, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 174–182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-S. Wu, D.-W. Wang, W. Ren, J. Zhao, G. Zhou, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3595–3602 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gui, A. Cao, J. Wei, H. Li, Z. Li, L. Fan, K. Wang, H. Zhu and D. Wu, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2320–2326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:
Victor Chabot	Victor Chabot received his MASc. in Nanoengineering from the University of Waterloo and currently is pursuing his doctoral degree in Chemical Engineering. His research focuses on nanomaterials developments for energy storage and conversion: supercapacitor and battery.
Drew Higgins	Drew Higgins is a Ph.D. student in Chemical Engineering at the University of Waterloo with an expected graduation date of May, 2015. His research focuses on the development of advanced nanostructured materials for fuel cell and battery applications. He also holds as BASc. (’09) and MASc. (’11), both in Chemical Engineering.
Aiping Yu	Aiping Yu is an assistant professor at the University of Waterloo in Canada. She obtained her Ph.D. from the University of California-Riverside. Her research interests are in material development for energy storage and conversion, photocatalysts, and nanocomposites. Dr Yu has published over 40 papers in peer-reviewed journals such as Science, holds multiple patents for graphene nanomaterials and is the author of 2 book chapters and a book on supercapacitors.
Xingcheng Xiao	Xingcheng Xiao studied Materials Science and Engineering at the Chinese Academy of Sciences (Ph.D. 2000), and joined the General Motors Global Research and Development Center in 2006. He is currently a staff scientist with focus on surface chemistry and energy storage materials for lithium ion batteries with more than 100 papers publsihed in the peer reviewed journals.
Zhongwei Chen	Zhongwei Chen is an Associate Professor in the Department of Chemical Engineering at University of Waterloo. His current research interests are in the development of advanced electrode materials for metal-air batteries, lithium-ion batteries and fuel cells. He received his Ph.D. in Chemical and Environmental Engineering from the University of California-Riverside. Prior to joining the faculty at Waterloo in 2008, he was focusing on the advanced catalysts research in the Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL) at New Mexico, USA. He has published 4 book chapters and more than 80 peer reviewed journal articles. These publications have earned him to date more than 3000 citations with H-index 28. He is also listed as inventor on 3 US patents and 8 provisional US patents, with two licensed to startup companies in USA.
Jiujun Zhang	Jiujun Zhang is a Principle Research Officer and Technical Leader at the National Research Council of Canada's Energy, Mining & Environment Portfolio (NRC-EME). Dr. Zhang is also the Adjunct Professor for 13 universities and research organizations including University of British Columbia, University of Waterloo, and Peking University. Up to now, Dr. Zhang has co-authored 350 publications including 220 refereed journal papers with approximately 10,000 citations, 12 edited /co-authored books, 11 conference proceeding papers, 24 book chapters, as well as 90 conference and invited oral presentations. He also holds over 10 US/EU/WO/JP/CA patents, 9 US patent publications, and produced in excess of eighty industrial technical reports.

Broader context
Advanced graphene materials residing at the frontier of scientific research offer immense potential for overcoming the challenges related to the performance, functionality and durability of key functional materials' in the fields of life science, energy, and the environment. Future demand necessitates advanced processing methods be developed that can mass produce high quality, two-dimensional graphene sheets while overcoming the issues of poor dispersion and restacking with large size-scale deployment of two-dimensional graphene sheets. These issues, along with graphene sheet defects and multilayer thicknesses prevent the full realization of graphene's high potential, including electronic properties and high surface area. Three-dimensional arrangements have been recently able to address these limitations, by creating sponge-like low density materials with a long list of beneficial properties including: macroscale size, high accessible surface area, less restacking, highly-interconnected microstructure, high strength and flexibility, fast ion transport and electron conductivity. This review is intended to address the continued developments and challenges with a wide scope of interest, highlighting fundamental understanding of the synthesis and characterization procedures, future outlook, as well as an in-depth discussion of application areas reporting high performance in recent publications. The outstanding potential of these materials has enabled significant enhancements for numerous important applications such as electrochemical energy storage and conversion, absorption, sensing, catalysis, transistors and polymer composites.



Template growth


Nickel sponge


	- Superhydrophobicity (160°, rebounds water)	Polymer composite	
118 and 134

- Flexibility (1 mm bend radius)
- Low percolation conductivity (<1 wt%, 5 S cm−1)
 

	- Up to 130 g g−1 organic solvent and oil capacity	Absorber	
175

 

	- High conductivity, 10 S cm−1	Sensing	
115, 120, 147, 149 and 157

- High S/N ratios and sensitivity (2–50× vs. glassy carbon)
- Direct detection limits below 25 nM
 

	- High rate/capacity retention composite anode materials, up to 200 °C	Energy storage	
121, 122, 227, 230, 231 and 256

- Free standing electrodes (no binder or metal)
- High pseudocapacitance composites, 300–1100 F g−1
 

Other
	- Adjustable macro porosity below 1 μm	
	
124–126 and 128

- Ultralow density reaching 0.2 mg cm−3
- High conductivity, 650 S cm−1
 

Free standing


Direct dry


	- High strength and rigidity, supports 10000 g g−1	Polymer composite	
54–56, 84 and 130

- Conductivity, up to 2 S cm−1
- Superhydrophobic, 160°
- Scalable size, >1000 cm3
- Ultralow density graphene network, 0.16–4 mg cm−3
 

	- Heavy metal ion extraction, 20 mg g−1 copper ion	Absorber	
57, 81 and 106

- Up to 700 g g−1 organic solvent/oil capacity
 

	- 7% DSSC, 2× compared to graphene powder	Energy	
53 and 226

- High initial capacity, reversible capacity of 400 mA h g−1
 

Self assembly


	- Self healing, scratch resistance	Polymer composite	
43, 44, 46, 83 and 87–89

- Composite with up to 3000% elongation
- Conductivity, up to 1 S cm−1
 

	- High absorption, 600 g g−1for organic solvents and 180 mg g−1 for dyes	Absorber	
60, 83, 91, 92, 96 and 174

- Reversible absorption, can burn off collected contaminants
- Rapid compression recovery, up to 90%
 

	- Strong DEFC fuel cell performance and ORR activity better than Pt/C	Energy	
45, 60, 90, 93, 94, 96, 187, 189, 228, 229, 235, 242, 254 and 255

- High rate Li-air battery, 2000 mA h g−1 at 2.8 A g−1
- High capacity composite anode materials, >700 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1
- High capacity/rate composite cathode materials, 400 mA h g−1 at 190 °C
- High double layer capacitance, 200–480 F g−1

 	Fig. 1  (a) Image of GO sponge produced by direct freeze drying of GO solution, and (b) SEM of its lateral cross section. (c) Photographs of 5 mg mL−1 GO solutions mixed with different cross-linkers: (1) 0.5 mg mL−1 PVP, (2) 1 mg mL−1 hydroxypropylcellulose (HPC), (3) 1 mg mL−1 PEO, (4) 0.1 mg mL−1 polydimethyldiallylammonium chloride (PDDA), (5) 0.2 mg mL−1 polyethylenimine (PEI), (6) 0.3 mg mL−1 cetyltrimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB), (7) 1.9 mg mL−1 tetramethylammonium chloride (TMAC), (8) 0.3 mg mL−1 melamine, (9) 20 mM Li+, (10) 20 mM K+, (11) 20 mM Ag+, (12) 15 mM Mg2+, (13) 9 mM Ca2+, (14) 3 mM Cu2+, (15) 3 mM Pb2+, (16) 3 mM Cr3+, (17) 3 mM Fe3+. All the concentrations labeled above are the critical gelation concentration measured for the corresponding cross-linkers, except for 9, 10, and 11 which did not gel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 57 (a and b) and ref. 65 (c). Copyright: 2012 Elsevier (a and b) and 2011 American Chemical Society (c).	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) SEM image of graphene oxide sheets that underwent 6 hours of mechanical shaking. (b) Histogram of sheet sizes observed in (a). (c) SEM image of graphene oxide sheets that underwent 6 hours of mechanical shaking and 0.5 hour of sonication. (d) Histogram of sheet sizes observed in (c). All the scale bars are 50 μm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) SEM image and schematic of the CNT/reduced GO sponges (ρ = 1 mg cm−33,fCNT = 0.5), and (b) CNT distribution on individual graphene sheets at higher magnification. (c) Demonstration of ∼1000 cm3 sponge cylinder (21 cm in diameter and 3 cm in thickness). (d) Crosslinking (top) and self-healing (bottom) processes of dsDNA/rGO sponge: the as-prepared free-standing sponge was cut with a razor into three small blocks and the blocks could adhere to each other by pushing the freshly formed surfaces to contact together followed by heating at 90 °C in air for 3 minutes. SEM images of freeze dried (e) BIS only sponge and (f) the high elasticity BIS/GO cross-linked sponge. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81 (a–c), ref. 83 (d) and ref. 88 (e and f). Copyright: 2013 Wiley (a–c), 2010 American Chemical Society (d), and 2012 Elsevier (e and f).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Photos of GO dispersions after being subjected to ascorbic acid reduction at 100 °C for different periods of time. (b) SEM image of a typical self-assembled 2 mg mL−1 rGO sponge formed with 180 °C in autoclave. (c) Image depicts that the GO concentration must be above a critical point before self-assembly will occur and that (d) after a network is formed it will continue to tighten and become denser with reduction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 43 (a) and ref. 90 (b–d). Copyright: 2012 Nature Publishing Group (a) and 2010 American Chemical Society (b–d).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of mechanism of EDA-mediated functionalization and reduction of GO, the restored sp2 regions are marked with red line. (b) Illustration of different steps in the fabrication process of the ultralight graphene sponge (ULGA). (c) XRD patterns and of GO, FGA and ULGA. (d) The digital images showing compressibility of ULGA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 92. Copyright 2013 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Freestanding paper-like rGO sponge after leavening a compact GO film in 90 °C hydrazine vapor. SEM images of (b) the rGO formed without any vapor and (c) when 40 μL of hydrazine were added to the autoclave during reduction. (d) A graph depicting the volume expansion with increasing hydrazine vapor content. Reproduced with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2012 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 7  SEM images of (a) as-grown graphene on Ni sponge surface, (b) CVD-G sponge protected by PMMA after etching the Ni support, (c) the large 374 cm2 sheets that could be produced by the CVD template method, (d) Ni plated patterned photoresist templates, (e) CVD-G sponge after template removal, and (f) SEM of the graphitic growth during the etching process of the ZnO crystal template. Reproduced with permission from ref. 118 (a–c), ref. 124 (d and e) and ref. 125 (f). Copyright: 2011 Nature Publishing Group (a–c), 2012 American Chemical Society (d and e) and 2012 Wiley (f).	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) SEM image of porous film formed from a solution of PS (5 mg mL−1)-GO (1.8 mg mL−1), after the removal of the polystyrene content. Pore size and number of layers in the pore wall controlled by PS and GO concentrations. (b) SEM of nucleate boiled structures, inset depicts water contact angle of the film. Depiction of the nucleate boiled coating on the surfaces of (c) FTO glass, (d) Cu foil and (e) PDMS. Reproduced with permission from ref. 126 (a), and ref. 128 (b–e). Copyright: 2010 Wiley (a), and 2013 Nature Publishing Group (b–e).	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Photograph of a bent CVD-G sponge/PDMS composite, showing its flexibility. (b) Typical stress–strain curves of PDMS and CVD-G sponge/PDMS composites with ∼0.5 wt% of graphene loading and (c) photographs of the stretching process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 118. Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Snapshots of a water droplet impacting the surface of the Teflon coated graphene sponge. The impact velocity just prior to the droplet striking the surface was ∼76 cm s−1. The sequence of snapshots shows the deformation time history of the droplet upon impact. (b) XPS spectra of graphene oxide sponge (GOA) and graphene sponge (GA). (c) Water contact angles of silanized and untreated GA surface with various concentrations. Reproduced with permission from ref. 134 (a) and ref. 55 (b and c). Copyright: 2013 Wiley (a) and 2011 American Chemical Society (b and c).	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Cyclic voltammograms and (b) electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) of glassy carbon (GC) electrode and CVD-G sponge electrode at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1 in PBS solution containing 5.0 mM K3[Fe(CN)6]3−. The charge transfer resistance is fitted on the Nyquist plot as a semicircle; the series resistance is at the x-intercept. (c) The average dopamine dose–response curve from CVD-G sponge and the inset shows the amperometric response to 25 nM dopamine. (d) Linear sweep voltammogram (LSV) plots of the graphene sponge electrode in PBS solution containing constant 10 μM DA with different concentrations of UA: 0, 10, 20, 40, 60, 80, 100 μM. Scan rate = 50 mV s−1. (e) High resolution SEM image shows CVD-G sponge coated with Co3O4 nanowires for glucose detection and (f) the average glucose dose–response curve when operated in 0.1 M NaOH solution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 120 (a–d) and ref. 147 (e and f). Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 


Oils

Gasoline	270	
60

Crude oil	289	
81

Pump oil	68, 85	
174 and 175

Kerosene/paraffin oil	45	
174

Castor oil	75	
174

Soybean oil	55	
174

Diesel oil	124	
91

Motor oil	345	
81

Olive oil	460	
60

Vegetable oil	95, 103, 418	
81, 91 and 175

 

Alkanes

Hexane	43, 215	
81 and 174

Heptane	21, 75	
91 and 174

Octane	45	
174

Decane	35	
174

Dioxane	489	
81

Cyclohexane	320	
60

Dodecane	50	
174

 

Aromatic compounds

Ethylbenzene	33	
174

1,2-Dichlorobenzene	45, 127, 450	
60, 174 and 175

Toluene	55, 125, 200, 350	
60, 81, 174 and 175

Nitrobenzene	63, 370	
60 and 174

 

Organic solvents

Acetic ester/ethyl acetate	92	
88

DMSO	62, 430	
60 and 145

THF	55, 250	
60 and 145

Acetone	51, 350	
60 and 145

Chloroform	86, 108, 154, 500, 568	
60, 81, 91, 145 and 175

DMF	105	
175

Phenoxin	600, 743	
60 and 81

Ethylene glycol	133	
91

 

Alcohols and aldehydes

Methanol	49, 290	
60 and 174

Ethanol	51, 80, 300, 350	
60, 81, 91 and 174

 

Ionic liquid

1-Butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate	527	
81


 	Fig. 12  (a) Photographs illustrating the oil absorption and characterization of a 0.26 g SG block absorbing 11.8 g of dodecane (stained with Sudan red 5B) at intervals of 20 s. (b) Absorption process of toluene (stained with Sudan Black B) on water by the ultra flyweight sponge (ρ = 1.4 mg cm−3, fCNT = 0.5) within 5 seconds. Reproduced with permission from ref. 174 (a) and ref. 81 (b). Copyright: 2012 Wiley (a) and 2013 Wiley (b).	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Typical SEM image of Fe3O4/N-GAs revealing the three-dimensional macroporous structure and uniform distribution of Fe3O4 nanoparticles in the GAs. (b) RRDE test of the ORR on Fe3O4/N-GAs, Fe3O4/N-GSs, Fe3O4/N-CB in an O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH electrolyte at a rotation rate of 1600 rpm, (c) electron transfer number of Fe3O4/N-GAs, Fe3O4/N-GSs, and Fe3O4/N-CB as functions of the electrode potential, and (d) the Current-time chronoamperometric response of Fe3O4/N-GAs and Pt/C catalysts at −0.4 V. Reproduced with permission from ref. 187. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) SEM image of graphene layers grown on Ni substrate. HRTEM (inset) shows graphene layers grown vertically on Ni substrate. (b) Capacity retention of graphene coated Ni-electrode capacity as a function of cycle number. (c) SEM image of Fe2O3/graphene sponge (GA) revealing the three-dimensional macroporous structure and uniform distribution of Fe2O3 particles. (d) Rate and cycling capacity of Fe2O3/GAs tested between 0.01 and 3.0 V. Reproduced with permission from ref. 227 (a and b) and ref. 228 (c and d). Copyright: 2011 Elsevier (a and b) and 2013 American Chemical Society (c and d).	 

 	Fig. 15  SEM images of (a) the low resolution G/LTO network and (b) high resolution of the LTO growth on G. (c) Discharging voltage curves of the LTO/CVD-G sponge with different charge/discharge rates. (d) Capacities of the LTO/CVD-G sponge charged/discharged at constant 30 C and 100 C rates for 500 cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 231. Copyright 2012 National Academy of Sciences.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) VO2–graphene sample hydrothermally treated for 1.5 and 12 h, demonstrating the formation of numerous ribbons with the width of 200–600 nm and length of several tens of micrometers. Electrochemical performance of VO2–graphene architectures under room temperature. (b) Representative discharge–charge curves of VO2–graphene (78%) architecture at various C-rates over the potential range of 1.5–3.5 V vs. Li+/Li. (c) Capacity retentions of VO2–graphene architectures when performing full discharge–charge at the highest rate of 190 C (37.2 A g−1) for 1000 cycles. 1′ and 2′ are denoted as VO2–graphene architectures with the VO2 contents of 78% and 68%, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 235. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  High resolution XPS spectrum for the N1s peak of the (a) freeze-dried N-containing sponge by hydrothermal treatment of a GO dispersion mixed with 5 vol% Py and (b) the shift to pyrridinic N in the 1050 °C annealed sponge. (c) 1000 cycle stability of the N-doped sponge at a high rate of 100 A g−1. High resolution SEM of well anchored pseudocapacitive CVD-G sponge electrodes coated with (d) MnO2, (e) NiO and (f) ZnO. Reproduced with permission from ref. 60 (a–c), ref. 121 (d), ref. 122 (e) and ref. 115 (f). Copyright: 2012 Wiley (a–c), 2012 Elsevier (d), 2011 Wiley (e) and 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry (f).	 

ZnO	Nanorods	0.4 V	5–50 mV s−1, 6.7–33 A g−1	210–400	6.7A g−1, negligible losses	
115

MnO2	Nanoflower	1 V	0.2–1.2 A g−1	250–550	0.2 A g−1, 21% loss	
121

Nanoporous particle	1 V	0–100 mV s−1	100–475	∼2 A g−1, 8% loss	
266

Co3O4	Nanowire	0.5 V	10–100 mV s−1, 10–30 A g−1	456–1100	10 A g−1, negligible losses	
147

NiO	Nanoporous particle	0.5 V	5–40 mV s−1, 1–20 A g−1	573–816	80 mV s−1, negligible losses	
122


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
