Multi-film roll transferring (MRT) process using highly conductive and solution-processed silver solution for fully solution-processed polymer solar c ...  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4EE01073F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4EE01073F
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2764-2770Multi-film roll transferring (MRT) process using highly conductive and solution-processed silver solution for fully solution-processed polymer solar cells†

        
          
            Hongseok 
            Youn
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Taehwa 
            Lee
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            L. Jay 
            Guo
          
        
      *ab
aElectrical Engineering & Computer Science, The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA
bMechanical Engineering, The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. E-mail: guo@umich.edu
Received 
      4th April 2014
    , Accepted 20th May 2014First published on 20th May 2014AbstractTo produce practical large area polymer solar cells (PSCs), it is highly desirable that the Ag (silver) top electrodes be made by a printing process rather than by vacuum evaporation. However, directly printing electrodes using highly conductive metal inks, such as organometallic and nanoparticle inks, has risks which can cause the infiltration and contamination of the underlying polymer layers during the printing and annealing processes. Moreover, the metal inks usually require high sintering temperatures to achieve high-conductivity electrodes. To overcome these limitations, we introduce a multi-layer roll transferring (MRT) approach, in which a high performance solution processed Ag electrode is prepared separately from the rest of the organic layers, and the device is completed by a final transferring process. By optimizing the processing conditions of the reductive organometallic Ag solution, the resulting metal electrode has an excellent resistivity (3.4 μΩ cm−1) and a morphology comparable to that of a thermally evaporated silver film. The performances of the devices fabricated by the MRT process were comparable to those of metal evaporated devices. Furthermore we achieved fully solution processed devices fabricated by integrating the roll-to-roll coating of the polymer cathode, polymer semiconductor and charge extraction layer and the MRT process.

Broader context
In the past few years, there has been much effort devoted to the production of low-cost polymer solar cells (PSCs) via printing technologies such as roll-to-roll, screen and inkjet printing. The PSCs require highly conductive and reflective metal electrodes for high efficiency. However, it is hard to directly apply the highly conductive metal inks as the electrode in PSCs due to penetration and contamination issues. Here we demonstrate a multi-layer roll transferring (MRT) method as an alternative to the direct printing of metal inks. This method allows a high sintering temperature for the high conductivity of the metal film without the penetration issues. We achieved the integration of the MRT method with the roll-to-roll process. Similar processes can also be considered for the production of polymer LEDs.

I. Introduction
Polymer solar cells (PSCs) are considered as a next generation power source due to their light weight, flexibility, low-cost and environmentally friendly manufacturing processes.1–6 These offer fascinating opportunities e.g. for mobile applications as a supplementary power source or for scalable building integrated photovoltaics (BIPV). Moreover, because the functional layers in PSCs can be dissolved in common solvents, they can be manufactured by eco-friendly and scalable printing or coating technologies such as roll-to-roll printing, inkjet printing, screen printing and slot-die coating.7–10
Since the introduction of the bulk heterojunction (BHJ) and with the development of new low band gap polymer materials, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of polymer BHJ solar cells have now increased to 10%.11–14
This work makes use of the commonly used poly(3-hexylthiophene):[6,6]-phenyl C61 butyric acid methyl ester (P3HT:PCBM) materials, which have a reported PCE of 3–5%.15–17
To realize the use of PSCs as a next generation power source, the manufacturing process needs to be environmentally friendly, e.g. employing printing processes to minimize solvent waste, and using non-halogenated solvent to replace toxic organic solvents.18 In particular, a suitable coating or printing process could reduce the materials cost in large-sized devices, because the cost of materials can be up to 50% (excluding ITO and encapsulation) of the cost of the PSCs.19
The inverted PSC structure of the form ITO/ZnO/P3HT:PCBM/PEDOT:PSS/Ag is appropriate for the printing process because the top electrode can be replaced with Ag paste and printed by a screen printing or inkjet printing method. The PCE of an all-solution processed device produced via roll-to-roll printing including a printed top (back) electrode was reported to be around 1.9% for the inverted structure.20 However, because PEDOT:PSS is an aqueous polymer solution, it is difficult to form a good coating on top of a hydrophobic polymer BHJ layer such as P3HT:PCBM. Thus, the PEDOT:PSS solution should be blended with appropriate surfactants and solvents to improve the wetting behavior on the polymer layer. Moreover, the annealing temperature of the metal inks should be low enough so as not to degrade the organic semiconductors, but low annealing temperatures can significantly impact the conductivity of the metal film. Even though highly conductive metal inks (organometallic or nanoparticles) have been achieved, the residues of reducing agents and organic capping materials or surfactants in the nanoparticle based or organometallic inks are harmful to the underlying polymer layers because they act as impurity contaminants penetrating into the organic semiconductor layer. Therefore, to print the Ag pastes or nanoparticle inks successfully without causing electrical short circuit problems or contamination, the underlying PEDOT:PSS layer has to be thick (800 nm to 2 μm) and robust enough to prevent the potential penetration problems during the printing and annealing processes.21
As an approach to address this problem, the solution processed top metal electrode and the PEDOT:PSS hole transport layer can be fabricated separately from the rest of the layer structures. Such an approach is also advantageous as parallel manufacturing can reduce the processing time. As an example, lamination techniques were reported in which two parts that were prepared separately on flexible substrates could be contacted and bonded on each side with high pressure to ensure conformal contact between the two parts using a hotplate.22–25 However, the two laminated parts on the two substrates are only sustained by the weak adhesion between the interfaces of the internal films such as PEDOT:PSS and P3HT:PCBM. Thus, the laminated device requires additional adhesion layers to protect against potential delamination risks.24,25 In addition, it is hard to achieve highly conductive and reflective electrodes due to the poor adhesion and aggregation of the soluble metal inks on the polymer substrate, and a high processing temperature must be allowed. Therefore, metal electrodes are commonly vacuum deposited to achieve high reflection or conductivity for better device performance.22–25 Consequently, a new fabrication method is required to achieve not only a fully solution-based process but also highly conductive metal electrodes using soluble metal inks.
This paper reports polymer solar cells that are fabricated entirely by solution-processing steps and proposes a multi-layer roll transferring method as a promising manufacturing process. In this process, the solution processed Ag anode and PEDOT:PSS layers were fabricated separately from the rest of the structure, where a polymer electrode, a ZnO nanoparticle (NP) based electron transport layer and a P3HT:PCBM active layer were roll-to-roll coated or spin-coated. Importantly, by optimizing the annealing conditions, the conductivity of the solution processed Ag film is comparable to a Ag film prepared by thermal evaporation. The performances of the device fabricated by the multi-film roll transfer technique were comparable to the performances of those made by traditional spin-coating and vacuum metal deposition processes.
II. Results and discussion
A. Solution processed highly conductive Ag electrode
Among various soluble metal inks, Ag nanoparticle inks and reductive organometallic inks have been widely used due to their high conductivity.26–29 For example, the resistivity of Ag metal films produced using Ag inks has been reported to be around 6–10 μΩ cm−1 in the literature.30–33
However, it is hard to directly apply the soluble metal inks as the electrode in PSCs without a protection layer because the solution based inks can penetrate and contaminate the underlying layers. Therefore, to avoid these issues, the less conductive and reflective Ag pastes have been commonly used in PSCs with a thick PEDOT:PSS layer as the protection layer. However the Ag nanoparticle inks used in the PSCs typically had a resistivity of around 40–100 μΩ cm−1,34 and the morphology of the metal film was not smooth due to aggregation of the ink.35 These issues lead to the higher series resistance and relatively rough surface in the devices as compared with the devices made by using evaporated metal electrodes, and therefore a lower cell efficiency.
Here we show that the multi-layer roll transferring method (MRT) can provide an efficient strategy to make devices using soluble metal solutions because the MRT process allows a high processing temperature.
First we introduce a solution processed Ag film as the electrode in PSCs, which has an excellent conductivity similar to that of the evaporated metal. Specifically, we exploit a reductive organometallic Ag precursor solution (silver 2-ethylhexylcarbamate complex). The purity of the metal and the morphology of the reduced metal film are decisive factors for the conductivity of the final film. To facilitate the decomposition of the organic moieties within the organometallic complex, we increased the reduction time of the Ag precursor to provide sufficient time to remove the residual organic components. Moreover, a thinner film is used as it can facilitate the evaporation of the decomposed organic molecules from inside the solid film, as opposed to the case of a thicker film. As a result, improved conductivity was achieved. Here the film thickness was controlled by adjusting the concentration of the precursor solution and the spin-coating speed. In addition, this precursor solution was diluted and homogenized to maintain the film morphology and uniformity. The detailed procedure of the Ag solution preparation is described in the Experimental section.
The resistivity of the optimized Ag film fabricated by the spin-casting was only 3.4 μΩ cm−1, which compares favorably with that of the thermally evaporated Ag film of 2.8 μΩ cm−1, as shown in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  The conductivity and resistivity of the silver film fabricated from the reductive organometallic Ag solution. The film was cast by spin-coating and then soft-baked (90 °C) and then sintered at different temperatures (130–220 °C). The thicknesses of the Ag film were measured using a surface profilometer (Dektak) after the sintering process. The resistivity and conductivity were calculated using the parameters of the film thicknesses and sheet resistances (acquired by the 4 point prove measurement tool). The resistivity of the ideal bulk silver is 1.6 μΩ cm−1. 
We investigated the reasons that such high conductivity was achieved in the solution-processed Ag ink film. First, the organic residues or additives in the organometallic complex are decomposed more effectively with increasing annealing temperature, and the Ag organometallic complexes are reduced to very tiny metallic particles (1–2 nm). During the sintering process, at lower temperature (under 100 °C), the film consists of disconnected nanoparticles (<5 nm) and is therefore non-conductive. At 100 °C the Ag nanoparticles (10 nm) start to merge into larger conductive grains as shown in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  SEM images of the silver film cast from Ag solution. The Ag nanoparticles were merged and grown into larger grains with depending on the annealing temperature. (a) 10 nm sized nanoparticles were created at under 100 °C, (b) merged into 25 nm sized nanoparticles networks starting to have conductivity at under 130 °C, (c) 80 nm sized grains merged from the nanoparticles at under 170 °C, (d) larger sized 140 nm grains were grown at under 200 °C, (e) 160 nm sized grains were grown at under 220 °C, (f) the surface image of the thermally evaporated film for evaluation of the grain size. 
We found that higher temperature (>170 °C) is required for better conductivity and removal of the residual organic components in the grains. The largest grain size is around 150 nm, achieved at 220 °C and the corresponding conductivity is the lowest. The morphology of the film using Ag ink is similar to that of the thermally evaporated Ag film. The average roughness of the Ag film from the Ag solution was 1.68 nm and the thermally evaporated Ag film displayed a 1.23 nm average roughness. This means that the film cast from the Ag solution is dense enough to have a continuous grain network, and its surface quality is high enough as a reflective metal electrode.
B. Transfer process to complete the devices
As mentioned earlier, if the Ag ink is applied directly onto the organic semiconductor layer, the nanoparticles and organic residues are likely to penetrate the polymer layer in the polymer solar cells during the coating and annealing process. To eliminate these contamination issues and allow a sufficiently high annealing temperature, we developed a transfer process. We coated the Ag solution onto glass first. After a high-quality conductive film is formed by annealing, it is then transferred to a flexible PDMS layer. As illustrated in Fig. 3(b), the PDMS covers the Ag film, which is then gently separated from the substrate without cracking and deformation of the Ag film. To reduce the adhesion between the Ag film and the glass surface for easier transfer, the glass surface was treated with a self-assembled monolayer (SAM). To do this, OTS (n-octadecyltrichlorosilane) solution was diluted to a 1 mM concentration with toluene and applied onto the O2 plasma treated glass. The Ag solution coated on the OTS treated-glass was soft-baked at 135 °C and annealed at 180 °C to produce a highly conductive Ag film.
 Fig. 3  An illustration of the overall fabrication procedure using the multi-film roll transferring (MRT) method: (a) the highly conductive silver film cast from Ag solution and the PEDOT:PSS double layer on the flexible PDMS substrate were transferred onto the photo-active layer of P3HT:PCBM by adding mild pressure using a soft roller. (b) The silver film was coated and annealed on an OTS treated glass substrate at 170 °C then the silver was covered with PDMS. The silver film was transferred to the PDMS and the PEDOT:PSS was coated on the back side of the silver film. (c) The overall device structure consisting of all-solution processed layers including ZnO nanoparticles (electron transport layer), P3HT:PCBM (photo-active layer) and PEDOT:PSS/Ag multi-layer produced by the MRT process. 
The Ag film was perfectly transferred to the tacky PDMS substrate, and exhibited a good film quality, which is critical to the device performance.
The hole transport layer, a 50 nm thick PEDOT:PSS layer, was then coated on top of the Ag layer. This stack was then applied to the polymer active layer during the transferring process.
Parallel to this, a cathode part consisting of a stack of films (ITO/ZnO/P3HT:PC61BM) was fabricated separately by spin-coating. A ZnO nanoparticles layer (30 nm) for electron transport, and a P3HT:PC61BM active layer (250 nm) was sequentially coated onto ITO glass. Lastly, the two separate parts (Ag/PEDOT:PSS and ITO/ZnO/P3HT:PC61BM) were attached using a hot plate at 130 °C with a soft roller under mild pressure [Fig. 3(a)]. After removing the PDMS, the Ag/PEDOT:PSS stack was nicely transferred onto the P3HT:PCBM surface as shown in Fig. 3(c), completing the device fabrication.
The performance of the device fabricated by the multi-layer roll transferring method (MRT) is comparable to the control devices made by conventional spin-coating of polymer layers and vacuum deposition of the metal anode, although the MRT process was performed in the air. For instance, the J–V curves are shown in Fig. 4 for the MRT devices and the control devices with evaporated MoO3/Ag anodes.
 Fig. 4  The J–V device performance of P3HT:PCBM BHJ PSCs fabricated by the multi-film roll transferring method (MRT) or simple spin-coating. The blue line represents the spin-coated device and the red line represents the device fabricated by the MRT method. The inner figure in the graph shows the actual device fabricated by the MRT method, in which the Ag solution and PEDOT:PSS were used as the reflective anode and hole transport layer respectively. 
The power conversion efficiency of the MRT device was 3.89%, slightly lower than that of the evaporated device, with a decreased Voc. The key performance parameters including short circuit current (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc), series resistance (Rs) and shunt resistance (Rp) are summarized in Table 1.
Table 1 The J–V device performance of the P3HT:PCBM BHJ PSCs fabricated by the multi-film roll transferring method (MRT), spin-coating and the roll-to-roll process







J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)

R
s (Ω cm2)

R
p (Ω cm2)





a Roll-to-roll processed device (PEDOT:PSS cathode, PEIE and P3HT:PCBM layers were roll-to-roll coated in air).





ITO glass + MoO3/Ag evaporated
12.01
0.59
58.90
4.17
6.64
444


ITO glass + MRT process
12.21
0.58
54.84
3.89
7.21
401


ITO-PET + MoO3/Ag evaporated
11.32
0.57
51.98
3.39
23.43
349


Roll-to-rolla + MRT process
9.52
0.55
57.96
3.04
24.21
443




To check the relative mechanical adhesion between the transferred layers of PEDOT:PSS/Ag and P3HT:PCBM, we attached an adhesive tape and peeled it off from the device as shown in Fig. S1.† We could not observe any film delaminated from the devices when the tape was peeled off as shown in Fig. S1(b).†
C. Roll-to-roll process and ITO-free polymer cathode
As described above, since the spin-coated device exhibited promising performance, the device should be applicable for the roll-to-roll process. Finally we evaluated using the roll coating process to replace spin-coating to show the scalability of the fabrication process. Moreover, the ITO was replaced by a roll-to-roll compatible polymer cathode.
We first tested coat-ability of the functional layers by the roll-to-roll coating method and the MRT process.
In the case of the roll-to-roll process, all of the layers are coated using 8′′ wide roll-to-roll coating systems developed in house, which were controlled by the 400 W AC servo-motor and driver shown in Fig. 5(c).
 Fig. 5  The image of the device structure and the designed 8′′ based roll-to-roll coating system driven by an AC servo-motor: (a) illustration of the device structure and the roll-to-roll coating process via the slit nozzle. (b) The PEDOT:PSS (PH1000 + 5% DMSO) cathode (roll-to-roll coated on a 6′′ PET substrate). (c) An image of the roll-to-roll coating process. The various solutions can be contained within the slit and the PEDOT:PSS solution is flowing out and creating a wet film when the motor moves. 
The coating thickness was mainly controlled by the coating speed. We employed a slit nozzle made of a glass plate and a doctor blade,36 which contains the coating solutions such as PEDOT:PSS or P3HT:PC61BM solution. The solution contained in the slit flows out and creates a meniscus in front of the glass plate, followed by a homogeneous laminar flow at the back of the blade [Fig. 5(a)]. This fine laminar flow is the key to uniformity and film quality.37 The device structure fabricated by the roll-to-roll coating system is described in Fig. 5(a).
All of the layers in the PSCs coated by the roll-to-roll system were processed under ambient conditions in air. First, the PEDOT:PSS (PH1000 + 5 wt% DMSO) was coated on the PET substrate. We want to highlight that PEDOT:PSS was coated, which functions not only as hole transporting layer, but also as a polymer cathode. Two different thicknesses of PEDOT:PSS were tested. The thicker PEDOT:PSS film used as a polymer electrode was 250 nm thick and had a 45 ohm sq.−1 sheet resistance. The thick polymer film (250 nm) could be achieved by a one-step coating via the blade-slit coating system. The thinner film had 100 nm thickness and 110 ohm sq.−1 resistance, achieved using a smaller solution flow rate. The transmittance of the thicker and thinner polymer electrodes were 75.0% and 92.5% respectively. By comparison, the transmittance of the ITO is 90.0% at a wavelength of 550 nm, as compared in Fig. 6. Even though the thinner PEDOT:PSS electrode has good transmittance, the sheet resistance is too high, which seriously affects the fill factor of the PV device due to the high series resistance in the device. Therefore, the thicker film was chosen for the efficient device fabricated by roll-to-roll coating.
 Fig. 6  The transmittances of the transparent electrodes: commercial grade ITO-PET (red), roll-to-roll coated thin polymer electrode (blue) and thick polymer electrode (green). The thicknesses of the polymer transparent electrodes are 100 nm and 250 nm respectively. The transmittance data was acquired and calibrated using a bare PET substrate as a reference substrate. 
Next, the interfacial layer and the photo-active layers were sequentially coated onto the anode by the same roll-to-roll coating process. Polyethylenimine (PEI), a work function tuning material that functions by forming an interfacial dipole layer, was used to lower the work function of the PEDOT:PSS electrode.38
For the active layer coating (P3HT:PC61BM), the solvent in the wet coating film was slowly evaporated to create better crystallinity in the ambient air conditions, as is well known in the literature.39
The roll-to-roll coating process has the advantage of minimizing the solution waste compared with the conventional spin-coating process, and is therefore more suitable for sustainable and environmentally friendly manufacturing.
For the complete structure, the MRT process was again followed. The performance of the device consisting of fully solution processed layers (roll-to-roll processed PEDOT:PSS cathode, PEIE and P3HT:PCBM + anode by solution processed MRT), exhibits a promising power conversion efficiency of 3.04%. A comparison between devices made from ITO coated on a flexible substrate (PET) and from the evaporated Ag anode is shown in Fig. 7.
 Fig. 7  The J–V device performance of P3HT:PCBM BHJ fabricated by roll-to-roll processing and the MRT method. The blue curve represents the device fabricated by using evaporated MoO3 and metal anode, and the red curve represents the device fabricated by MRT with solution processed anode. 
Though the PEDOT:PSS layers were used as the cathode and the hole transport layer, Voc was slightly lower than that of the ITO-PET devices with the evaporated MoO3/Ag. The current density of the device using the polymer electrode was 85% of the ITO-PET because the polymer electrode has low transmittance in whole visual wavelength range as shown in Fig. 6. (The transmittance of the thick polymer electrode at the 550 nm wavelength was 83% of the ITO-PET.)
Nevertheless, the maximum power conversion efficiencies of the two devices were not notably different due to the higher fill factor compared to the ITO-PET. This is because the surface morphology of the polymer electrodes was very smooth.36 The smooth surface improves the shunt resistance and thereby increases the fill factor.
III. Conclusion
In conclusion, to achieve fully solution processed polymer solar cells we have demonstrated the multi-film roll transferring (MRT) process as an effective means to address the difficulty of achieving high conductivity metal electrodes using Ag inks. The solution processed silver (Ag) film showed excellent conductivity comparable to that of evaporated Ag. Since the Ag film is prepared on a glass substrate modified using SAMs, this helps to reduce the surface energy, and the transferred Ag film exhibits good film quality without cracks and deformations throughout the MRT process. Compared with direct coating of Ag films on top of the organic layers, the transfer coating of the Ag film is advantageous for preventing the potential issues of contamination or attack by solvent during the printing process.
The solution processed polymer electrode (PEDOT:PSS), interfacial layer and semiconductor polymer blend were coated using a 8′′ roll-to-roll coating system developed in-house, which allows for full solution processing without the waste of the solutions.
We anticipate that the integration of the MRT method with the roll-to-roll process can be developed as a practical approach for large scale manufacturing of organic photovoltaics.
IV. Experimental
A. Fabrication of polymer PV cells on the ITO-glass substrate
The control devices for the PSCs have the following structure: ITO-glass/ZnO nanoparticle layer/P3HT:PCBM/MoO3/Ag. ITO-glass was cleaned with acetone and isopropyl alcohol sequentially in an ultrasonic bath. ZnO nanoparticles were synthesized and dispersed in butanol as described elsewhere.40 The ZnO nanoparticle solution was spin-coated onto the pre-cleaned ITO-glass substrate at 3000 rpm. After baking on a hotplate, the thickness of the film was 30 nm. P3HT:PCBM solution blended at a 1:0.8 ratio in dichlorobenzene was spin-coated onto the ZnO nanoparticle layer at a 1000 rpm spin-rate. The P3HT:PCBM layer was kept and dried for 20 min to create the crystalline 200–250 nm BHJ film. MoO3 (10 nm) and Ag (100 nm) layers were thermally evaporated in the vacuum chamber at 10−6 mbar. All fabrication steps were carried out in a nitrogen filled glove-box environment.
The MRT processed devices were fabricated the same way as the control device except for the solution processed PEDOT:PSS/Ag film. All the film thicknesses were acquired and analyzed using a Dektak Surface Profilometer or SEM. The device performances were measured using a Keithley 2400 source-meter system whilst illuminating the polymer solar cells using an Oriel solar simulator (xenon lamp and AM 1.5 G filter) at an irradiation intensity of 100 mW cm−2, calibrated by a NREL-certified Si reference cell. All measurements of the PSCs were performed under ambient air conditions.
B. Roll-to-roll coating process on the flexible substrate
The roll-to-roll processed and MRT processed devices ware produced by the following process. The flexible substrate, 6′′ and 120 μm PET, was surface-treated by O2 plasma at 100 W for 30 s. The PEDOT:PSS (PH1000 + 5 wt% DMSO) solution was injected into the blade-slit space and then coated onto the PET substrate. The film thicknesses of the PEDOT:PSS electrodes with different conductivities were controlled by adjusting the coating speed from 10 to 20 mm s−1. The blade-gap from the substrate was controlled at 50–100 μm according to the layers. Other layers, such as PEIE (0.4 wt% in 2-methoxyethanol) and P3HT:PCBM were roll-to-roll coated. The blade gap between the blade and the substrate was fixed at 50 μm. The solution processed and patterned 1 cm2 (active area) Ag and PEDOT:PSS layer was transferred onto the roll-to-roll processed P3HT:PCBM layer.
C. Ag solution process and MRT process
The 10 wt% reductive type Ag solution (silver 2-ethylhexylcarbamate complex, provided by Inktec Inc.) was diluted with isopropanol to 20–50 vol% precursor concentrations. Typically the film from 50 vol% has 150 nm thickness. The diluted and mixed Ag solution was homogenized in an ultrasonic bath. The Ag solution was coated on the n-octadecyltrichlorosilane (OTS) deposited glass substrate. The glass was treated with O2 plasma at 200 W for 60 s and then subjected to the OTS solution (1 mM at toluene) for 30 min. Finally, the substrate was washed with toluene and water sequentially in the ultrasonic bath.
For the MRT process, a 2 mm thick PDMS (Sylgard 184, Dow Corning Corp.) substrate was wrapped on the surface of the Ag film. After the Ag film was transferred onto the PDMS, the surface was UV ozone ramp treated and coated with the PEDOT:PSS (Clevios PV P AI4083) as a hole transport layer. During the MRT process, a soft rubber roller was used for adding mild pressure and annealing at 130 °C.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the support by the ONR through a sub-contract from Soluxra and the University of Michigan.
References
N. Espinosa, M. Hösel, D. Angmo and F. C. Krebs, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5117 CAS .
C. R. McNeill, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5653 CAS .
W. Chen, M. P. Nikiforov and S. B. Darling, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8045 CAS .
H. Ma, H.-L. Yip, F. Huang and A. K.-Y. Jen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1371 CrossRef CAS .
B. P. Lyons, N. Clarke and C. Groves, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7657 CAS .
J. D. Servaites, M. A. Ratner and T. J. Marks, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4410 CAS .
F. C Krebs, S. A. Gevorgyan and J. Alstrup, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5442 RSC .
H. J. Park, M.-G. Kang, S. H. Ahn and L. J. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. C. Krebs, T. Tromholt and M. Jørgensen, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 873 RSC .
Y. Galagan, J.-E. J. M. Rubingh, R. Andriessen, C.-C. Fan, P. W. M. Blom, S. C. Veenstra and J. M. Kroon, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. He, C. Zhong, X. Huang, W.-Y. Wong, H. Wu, L. Chen, S. Su and Y. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-Y. Chen, J. Hou, S. Zhang, Y. Liang, G. Yang, Y. Yang, L. Yu, Y. Wu and G. Li, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 649 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Small, S. Chen, J. Subbiah, C. M. Amb, S.-W. Tsang, T.-H. Lai, J. R. Reynolds and F. So, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 115 CrossRef CAS .
Z. He, C. Zhong, S. Su, M. Xu, H. Wu and Y. Cao, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 591 Search PubMed .
H. J. Park, H. Kim, J. Y. Lee, T. Lee and L. J. Guo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2203 CAS .
M. T. Dang, L. Hirsch and G. Wantz, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3597 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Hau, H.-L. Yip, O. Acton, N. S. Baek, H. Ma and A. K.-Y. Jen, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 5113 RSC .
C.-C. Chueh, K. Yao, H.-L. Yip, C.-Y. Chang, Y.-X. Xu, K.-S. Chen, C.-Z. Li, P. Liu, F. Huang, Y. Chen, W.-C. Chenb and A. K.-Y. Jen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3241 CAS .
S. Beaupre and M. Leclerc, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 11097 CAS .
J.-S. Yu, I. Kim, J.-S. Kim, J. Jo, T. T. Larsen-Olsen, R. R. Søndergaard, M. Hösel, D. Angmo, M. Jørgensen and F. C. Krebs, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 6032 RSC .
D. Angmo, J. Sweelssen, R. Andriessen, Y. Galagan and F. C. Krebs, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1230 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nakamur, C. Yang, E. Zhou, K. Tajima and K. Hashimoto, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 12, 2703 Search PubMed .
D. Gupta, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 782 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, C. Alexander, Z. Xiao, Y. Yuan, R. Zhang and J. Huang, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 344007 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Kaduwal, B. Zimmermann and U. Würfel, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 120, 449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ankireddy, S. Vunnam, J. Kellara and W. Cross, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 572 RSC .
Y. Li, Y. Wu and B. S. Ong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 3266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-L. Tai and Z.-G. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 5938 RSC .
J. Perelaer, C. E. Hendriks, A. W. M. Laat and U. S. Schubert, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 165303 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Y. Ahn, D. J. Loranga and J. A. Lewis, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 2700 RSC .
Y.-L. Tai and Z.-G. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 5938 RSC .
Y. Tao, Y. Tao, B. Wang, L. Wang and Y. Tai, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2013, 8, 296 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wu, Y. Li and B. S. Ong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 1862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Girotto, B. P. Randa, S. Steudel, J. Genoea and P. Heremans, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Haua, H.-L. Yip, K. Leong and A. K.-Y. Jen, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 719 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Shin, M. Yang, L. J. Guo and H. Youn, Small, 2007, 9, 4036 CrossRef PubMed .

          H. S. Youn, H. S. Kim and L. Jay Guo, Low-Cost Fabrication of Organic Photovoltaics and Polymer LEDs, in Low-cost Nanomaterials: Toward Greener and More Efficient Energy Applications, ed. Z. Lin and J. Wang, Springer , 2014 Search PubMed.
Y. Zhou, C. F. Hernandez, J. Shim, J. Meyer, A. J. Giordano, H. Li, P. Winget, T. Papadopoulos, H. Cheun, J. Kim, M. Fenoll, A. Dindar, W. Haske, E. Najafabadi, T. M. Khan, H. Sojoudi, S. Barlow, S. Graham, J.-L. Brédas, S. R. Marder, A. Kahn and B. Kippelen, Science, 2012, 336, 327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, V. Shrotriya, J. Huang, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 864 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. E. Beek, M. M. Wienk, M. Kemerink, X. Yang and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 9505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ee01073fThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

Broader context
In the past few years, there has been much effort devoted to the production of low-cost polymer solar cells (PSCs) via printing technologies such as roll-to-roll, screen and inkjet printing. The PSCs require highly conductive and reflective metal electrodes for high efficiency. However, it is hard to directly apply the highly conductive metal inks as the electrode in PSCs due to penetration and contamination issues. Here we demonstrate a multi-layer roll transferring (MRT) method as an alternative to the direct printing of metal inks. This method allows a high sintering temperature for the high conductivity of the metal film without the penetration issues. We achieved the integration of the MRT method with the roll-to-roll process. Similar processes can also be considered for the production of polymer LEDs.


 	Fig. 1  The conductivity and resistivity of the silver film fabricated from the reductive organometallic Ag solution. The film was cast by spin-coating and then soft-baked (90 °C) and then sintered at different temperatures (130–220 °C). The thicknesses of the Ag film were measured using a surface profilometer (Dektak) after the sintering process. The resistivity and conductivity were calculated using the parameters of the film thicknesses and sheet resistances (acquired by the 4 point prove measurement tool). The resistivity of the ideal bulk silver is 1.6 μΩ cm−1.	 

 	Fig. 2  SEM images of the silver film cast from Ag solution. The Ag nanoparticles were merged and grown into larger grains with depending on the annealing temperature. (a) 10 nm sized nanoparticles were created at under 100 °C, (b) merged into 25 nm sized nanoparticles networks starting to have conductivity at under 130 °C, (c) 80 nm sized grains merged from the nanoparticles at under 170 °C, (d) larger sized 140 nm grains were grown at under 200 °C, (e) 160 nm sized grains were grown at under 220 °C, (f) the surface image of the thermally evaporated film for evaluation of the grain size.	 

 	Fig. 3  An illustration of the overall fabrication procedure using the multi-film roll transferring (MRT) method: (a) the highly conductive silver film cast from Ag solution and the PEDOT:PSS double layer on the flexible PDMS substrate were transferred onto the photo-active layer of P3HT:PCBM by adding mild pressure using a soft roller. (b) The silver film was coated and annealed on an OTS treated glass substrate at 170 °C then the silver was covered with PDMS. The silver film was transferred to the PDMS and the PEDOT:PSS was coated on the back side of the silver film. (c) The overall device structure consisting of all-solution processed layers including ZnO nanoparticles (electron transport layer), P3HT:PCBM (photo-active layer) and PEDOT:PSS/Ag multi-layer produced by the MRT process.	 

 	Fig. 4  The J–V device performance of P3HT:PCBM BHJ PSCs fabricated by the multi-film roll transferring method (MRT) or simple spin-coating. The blue line represents the spin-coated device and the red line represents the device fabricated by the MRT method. The inner figure in the graph shows the actual device fabricated by the MRT method, in which the Ag solution and PEDOT:PSS were used as the reflective anode and hole transport layer respectively.	 


ITO glass + MoO3/Ag evaporated	12.01	0.59	58.90	4.17	6.64	444
ITO glass + MRT process	12.21	0.58	54.84	3.89	7.21	401
ITO-PET + MoO3/Ag evaporated	11.32	0.57	51.98	3.39	23.43	349
Roll-to-rolla + MRT process	9.52	0.55	57.96	3.04	24.21	443

 	Fig. 5  The image of the device structure and the designed 8′′ based roll-to-roll coating system driven by an AC servo-motor: (a) illustration of the device structure and the roll-to-roll coating process via the slit nozzle. (b) The PEDOT:PSS (PH1000 + 5% DMSO) cathode (roll-to-roll coated on a 6′′ PET substrate). (c) An image of the roll-to-roll coating process. The various solutions can be contained within the slit and the PEDOT:PSS solution is flowing out and creating a wet film when the motor moves.	 

 	Fig. 6  The transmittances of the transparent electrodes: commercial grade ITO-PET (red), roll-to-roll coated thin polymer electrode (blue) and thick polymer electrode (green). The thicknesses of the polymer transparent electrodes are 100 nm and 250 nm respectively. The transmittance data was acquired and calibrated using a bare PET substrate as a reference substrate.	 

 	Fig. 7  The J–V device performance of P3HT:PCBM BHJ fabricated by roll-to-roll processing and the MRT method. The blue curve represents the device fabricated by using evaporated MoO3 and metal anode, and the red curve represents the device fabricated by MRT with solution processed anode.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ee01073f

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
