Recent progress in the electron paramagnetic resonance study of polymers  - Polymer Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8PY00689J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8PY00689J
(Review Article)
Polym. Chem., 2018, 9, 3306-3335Recent progress in the electron paramagnetic resonance study of polymers

        
          
            Kaleem-ur-Rahman 
            Naveed
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Li 
            Wang
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Haojie 
            Yu
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Raja Summe 
            Ullah
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Muhammad 
            Haroon
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Shah 
            Fahad
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jiyang 
            Li
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Tarig 
            Elshaarani
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Rizwan Ullah 
            Khan
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Ahsan 
            Nazir
          
        
      
College of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. E-mail: opl_wl@dial.zju.edu.cn; hjyu@zju.edu.cn;  Fax: +86-571-8795-1612;   Tel: +86-571-8795-3200
Received 
      5th May 2018
    , Accepted 13th May 2018First published on 15th May 2018AbstractThis review article provides an overview of the contemporary research based on a tailor-made technique to understand the paramagnetic behavior of different polymer classes. The ubiquity of free radicals, including biradicals, triplet states, and point defects in polymer systems, has made EPR spectroscopy an indispensable tool in polymer science among other mainstream analytical techniques. The scope of EPR spectroscopy has broadened particularly due to the growing impulse to produce polymers with enhanced stability, to follow the charge transfer process in conducting polymers, to decipher the complex nanoscale dynamics of polymers, to fathom out the reaction mechanisms and kinetics of complex polymer reactions in a more facile way, and to carry out comprehensive structural and conformational analyses. Recent studies have hinted at the effectiveness of EPR spectroscopy in collecting data with sub-nanometer spatial resolution to decipher intrinsic intricacies, while keeping the pristine geometry unperturbed, a task yet not achievable with other conventional techniques. EPR spectroscopy is being applied in polymer science in multifarious ways, including, but not limited to, exploring the structure, conformation, and dynamics of polymer chain segments, degradation or defect studies, charge transfer properties, kinetics and reaction mechanisms especially of free radical polymerization reactions, and EPR imaging of the polymer matrix. A recent surge in its applications indicates that EPR spectroscopy is going to make a profound impact in the field of polymer science in upcoming years.
1. Introduction
It is essential to understand the structure and molecular dynamics of polymers in order to modulate their macroscopic properties. The recent era of polymer research is marked with not only unraveling the complex internal dynamics of polymer chains, but also exploiting these underlying mechanisms to tune their bulk properties.1 Electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) or electron spin resonance (ESR) spectroscopy, analogous to nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, has emerged as a technique to decipher the intrinsic intricacies of polymer systems, which are sometimes inaccessible to other contemporary analytical techniques, while keeping the structures unperturbed.2 Despite the fact that NMR spectroscopy has achieved remarkable success in the field of polymer chemistry, it is quite intriguing that EPR spectroscopy is lagging far behind NMR in practice, in spite of the remarkably common features of the two (the main difference lies in the magnetic moments of electrons and protons).3 Fortunately, the recent era is marked with a clear surge in the number of publications related to the EPR study of polymers, markedly changing the previous dynamics, especially due to the availability of high field instruments, new developments in pulse EPR instruments, and advanced simulation procedures.4
EPR is a non-invasive and non-destructive analytical technique for the detection of paramagnetic species (free radicals, biradicals, triplet-state systems, transition metal ions, and point defects).5 It has encompassed numerous biological, environmental, chemical, medical, geological, and other scientific and technological fields particularly in the recent decade.6–11 Recent studies have established the suitability of EPR in complex analyses, especially of the functional group interactions, weak electrostatic forces in self-assembly, spatial distribution of polymer chains in nanostructures, indirect probes for bond scission patterns, etc.2,12,13 This review is aimed to provide an overview of general EPR methods employed in polymer science with representative examples to illustrate the areas which can be explored with this promising still obscure field of magnetic spectroscopy.
2. A succinct overview of EPR spectroscopy
As stated earlier, EPR spectroscopy affords information of the unpaired electrons including quantity, nature and most importantly their local environment. Certain magnetic interactions split the principal energy level of unpaired electrons with a spin orbital momentum (electrons residing on a molecule) and can be described by the spin Hamiltonian (H0).15 The terms in the spin Hamiltonian describe a complete set of all the magnetic interactions of unpaired electrons with their immediate environment. The most important of these magnetic interactions is the electron Zeeman interaction which is essentially the interaction of the electron spin moment with the externally applied magnetic field which eliminates the degeneracy of the electron spin states. Microwave radiation is directed towards these degenerate electron states to induce magnetic dipole transitions.14 The resonance condition can be described by the following (1).15 ΔE = hν = geβeB0(1)where ge = 2.0023 is the g-factor or Landé-factor of a free electron and βe = 9.274 × 10−24 JT−1 is the Bohr magneton. In the case where the electron is residing on a molecule, its g-value will deviate from that of the free electron (ge) which depends on the extent of spin–orbit coupling (spin–orbit coupling results from the interaction of the electron spin with its angular orbital momentum). This spin–orbit interaction based deviation of the g-value provides an opportunity to identify a particular paramagnetic species.15
For a system with a number of unpaired electrons and nuclei, the spin Hamiltonian can be given by eqn (2).16 H0 = HEZI + HNZI + HHFI + HNNI + HEEI + HZFS + HNQI(2)where the energy terms describe the electron Zeeman, nuclear Zeeman, hyperfine, nuclear–nuclear, electron–electron, zero-field splitting, and quadrupole interactions. The nuclear–nuclear interaction is too weak to be observed in EPR spectra and therefore will not be discussed further, whereas the electron–electron interaction is only present in a system with multi-unpaired electrons. Thus, for a single electron or strongly coupled electrons in a system, the spin Hamiltonian can sufficiently be described by the following eqn (3).16 (3)
Not all of these energy terms are required for every system and conversely not all of the paramagnetic systems can sufficiently be described by these terms alone and additional terms are required for interacting paramagnetic centers (weakly coupled electrons).16 Thus, in the absence of any other interactions, the electron Zeeman interaction would give a single line EPR spectrum with a characteristic g-value. Though the g-value is the intrinsic property of each paramagnetic center, magnetic interactions with adjacent electron spins (spin–spin couplings) and with nearby nuclear magnetic moments (hyperfine couplings) further split the energy levels of unpaired electrons. Hyperfine coupling (hfc) occurs due to the interaction of the nuclear spin (e.g.1H and 14N etc.) with the spin of the paramagnetic center and is one of the most information-oriented EPR parameters.4
Another less important interaction is the nuclear quadrupole interaction (NQI) where nuclei with asymmetric charge distribution (I > 1/2) interact with the electric field gradient generated by electrons inside the paramagnetic center which cause an extensive peak broadening in EPR spectra.46 This field gradient is due to the uneven distribution of electric charges around the nuclei (quadrupolar nuclei, nuclei with a quadrupole moment) but due to broadening its effect is sometimes apparent only in pulsed EPR. Essential information of even hfc is sometimes lost due to manifestation of NQI in EPR spectra. Nuclear quadrupole resonance (NQR) has been used alone to characterize polymers in the past but in pure polymers it has proven to be limited and is not a very common characterization method due to broadening of linewidths. Very few weak NQRs have been seen in polymer systems despite commonly occurring nuclei with good NQR responses.17
In a system of multiple electrons, the magnetic interactions among these electrons can be treated based on the coupling strength. For the strongly coupled electrons, zero-field splitting (ZFS) is an important parameter. This dipolar interaction, as the name implies, is present even in the absence of a magnetic field and is quite common in the case of transition metal ions and has been discussed in the relevant section.4
Due to the very large magnetic moment of electrons compared to nuclei, distant electrons can also interact with each other. In a multiple electron system with weakly coupled electrons, spin–spin interactions i.e. dipole–dipole and exchange interactions may be present. Dipole–dipole interactions can affect from longer distances than exchange interactions due to their working through space but they are weaker than exchange interactions.18 The strength of dipole–dipole interactions depends on the distance between the paramagnetic centers and has been extensively employed in spin label EPR analysis (dipolar spectroscopy) where two radicals are covalently attached at specific locations on a macromolecule and the distance between these spin-labels, or distance distributions in the case of multiple unpaired electrons, is measured along with information of molecular orientation. The key technique employed these days is termed double-electron electron resonance (DEER) or PELDOR (pulsed electron double resonance).19 It is particularly instrumental in the structural analysis of biopolymers by spin labeling at specific positions which is termed site directed spin labeling (SDSL).20 Though SDSL has been successfully applied in several studies to bio-macromolecules, the technique has not found widespread applications in the field of synthetic polymers. However, in a few studies, DEER analysis has been applied to determine the conformational dynamics of polymers by tethering spin labels (SLs) at chain ends to determine the end-to-end distance inside nanoparticles or with a spin probe as in the case of polyelectrolytes,12 conformations of molecular wires,21 swelling behavior of copolymer based micelles, etc.22 Counterpart fluorescence techniques are considered to be disadvantageous due to the interference of the fluorescent probe during analysis compared to commonly used radicals (nitroxides) as small SLs in DEER spectroscopy.23
Exchange coupling interactions between two electrons each with spin S = 1/2 can generate a spin triplet (S = 1) and singlet (S = 0) due to ferromagnetic or antiferromagnetic coupling depending on the energy levels of coupled spins. A case study of antiferromagnetic coupling has been discussed in 3.3 (related to the EPR study of coordination polymers). The extent of exchange interactions depends on the value of the exchange coupling constant, J, whereas its sign determines the nature of exchange coupling between paramagnetic centers (whether ferromagnetic or antiferromagnetic). Additional splitting in the lines of the EPR spectrum can be observed when |a| ≪ |J| (where a is the hyperfine coupling constant and occurs when paramagnetic centers are sufficiently closer to each other).23
In a crystalline sample (powder form or frozen solution), the EPR spectrum depends on the orientation of the magnetic tensors with respect to the applied magnetic field which results in an anisotropic spectrum due to superimpositions of random orientations of magnetic tensors. Thus, the g-tensor of a paramagnetic species depends on the relative orientation of its principle axes and has three components i.e. gx, gy, and gz. Based on this, g can be isotropic gx = gy = gz (e.g. a regular tetrahedral geometry of an metal ion), axial gx = gy ≠ gz (elongated octahedral geometry) or rhombic gx ≠ gy ≠ gz (the latter two being anisotropic).24
In fluid solutions, manifestation in the EPR spectrum of magnetic interactions is usually isotropic (e.g. in a sufficiently dilute solution of nitroxide radicals, three equidistant lines of equal intensity are observed in the derivative form of the EPR spectrum regardless of the anisotropic nature of the hyperfine interaction between unpaired electrons (S = 1/2) and nearby N-atoms (I = 1)) as molecular tumbling of radicals averages anisotropy i.e. in the case of the g-tensor, giso = (gx + gy + gz)/3.24 In viscous solutions and for radicals with large anisotropy, partial averaging of magnetic tensors is observed. In such media, due to the Brownian thermal rotational mobility which is characterized by rotational correlation times, τR, orientations of the radicals change with respect to the applied magnetic field and anisotropic hyperfine interactions are modulated which affect the shape of the EPR spectrum. The variation in the shape of spectra, thus, is dependent on τR which is a characteristic value providing information of the local environment of radicals affecting the rotational reorientation or tumbling motion.25 It implies that factors affecting molecular tumbling e.g. viscosity, temperature, polarity, and steric hindrance will have a profound effect on the EPR spectra in solution. Thus, the variation in the molecular tumbling of radicals in solution affecting the line-shape of the EPR spectrum provides a plethora of information of the microenvironment and dynamics of polymer chains with an intrinsic paramagnetic center or attached through covalent (spin label) or non-covalent (spin probe) bonding. For a comprehensive discussion of various factors affecting the τR values of radicals in solution, the reader can refer to a treatise on the experimental techniques of EPR by Charles P. Poole.25 In this way, different magnetic interactions govern the intensity, shape, and splitting patterns of the EPR spectrum providing invaluable information of the microenvironment of unpaired electrons.15
Though continuous wave (CW-EPR) spectroscopy had been in vogue, the recent era is marked with a trend towards high field instruments and pulse spectrometers to obtain information previously unknown in the CW-EPR technique. Pulsed EPR is employed to single out and study a particular magnetic interaction (e.g. weak quadrupole interaction) in detail. Because of the much shorter electron spin relaxation times with respect to the relaxation times of the magnetic nucleus, much shorter pulse lengths along with cryogenic temperatures are required in pulsed EPR spectroscopy.16 Advanced EPR techniques, including electron nuclear double resonance (ENDOR), electron spin echo envelope modulation (ESEEM), hyperfine sublevel correlation spectroscopy (HYSCORE), and relaxation filtered hyperfine spectroscopy (REFINE), coupled with computer aided simulations have made the determination of structural features and internal dynamics a less challenging task.16 The emergence and ever increasing applications of pulsed EPR spectroscopy have opened new vistas in the analysis of spin systems previously unresolved by CW-EPR spectroscopy. The weak hfc which is difficult to resolve using conventional CW-EPR spectroscopy can be conveniently resolved with ENDOR and in turn ESEEM variants of EPR.3
In a typical ENDOR experiment, a radio frequency wave is employed to monitor the variations in the polarizations of actual EPR transitions. The technique is typically instrumental for the resolution of multi nuclei hyperfine splitting in the conventional EPR spectrum. It is a double resonance excitation approach where high resolution of NMR and high detection sensitivity of EPR are combined by employing two different frequencies, i.e. microwave and radiofrequency.16 In pulsed ENDOR, the intensity of electron spin echo, produced by microwave irradiation, is recorded as a function of rf frequency and two pulses are applied sequentially. ESEEM, a pulse EPR, is applied to resolve weak hyperfine splitting that cannot be resolved by ENDOR owing to longer distances. In ESEEM, the modulation of the electron spin-echo amplitude by nearby spins is monitored around typical ENDOR frequencies.3 Timed pulses are applied and Fourier transformed to obtain a frequency dependent spectrum. Two-dimensional four-pulse electron spin echo envelope modulation, hyperfine sub-level correlation (HYSCORE), is employed to disentangle the complicated ESEEM spectrum. It is employed to resolve very weak hfc especially when more than one hfc is present.16 A detailed description of these methods is out of scope of this review and the reader is referred to a few excellent monographs here.4,26,27
The EPR signal is only observed when the overall radical concentration from radical formation and decay is not lower than the detection limit of the spectrometer. Additionally, steady-state EPR (SS-EPR) methods might not work well in the case of some transient EPR-active species (radicals or radical pairs) and short-lived excited states (excited triplet) where lifetimes are too short (sub-microsecond) to be detected. Thus, SS methods that are perfectly suited for the study of stable radicals cannot be well-applied for short lived radical species in reaction media as well as for short-lived excited triplet states, etc.28 Thus, a method called time-resolved EPR (TR-EPR) is employed, as opposed to SS and pulsed EPR, which is particularly well-suited for polymer systems with short-lived paramagnetic species, e.g. in the field of photochemistry, and has been extensively applied to polymer based organic photovoltaic materials for the resolution of short-lived excited triplet states in the nanosecond time scale where ordinary continuous-wave EPR is quite unsuitable.28 The observation of the spin polarization transfer phenomenon (mixing of spin wave functions) in TR-EPR spectra is particularly advantageous to deduce the mechanism of radical generation and other characteristics and is a key strength of this methodology. The spin polarization (more specifically so-called chemically induced dynamic electron polarization, CIDEP) phenomenon is one where enhanced absorption or emission signals are observed due to polarized spins (e.g. due to the generation of radical pairs) beyond the usual Boltzmann distribution.28 One of the CIDEP mechanisms (spin correlated radical pair, SCRP) is discussed in 3.4 as due to the restricted mobility of radical pairs generated in polymer systems. SCRP is the most important consideration among other CIDEP mechanisms. For a complete discussion on CIDEP mechanisms, the reader is referred to an excellent study on TR-EPR spectroscopy here (ref. 28).
Polymers encompass a vast array of chemical compounds differing distinctly in their composition and properties. This implies that a particular EPR variant can be more suitable for a certain composition with a specific range of relaxation times of paramagnetic centers. Moreover, in contrast to pulse NMR, much shorter relaxation times of electron spins limit wider applications of the pulse sequence.3 Thus, in the case of polymers, the significance of any of the EPR variants including the CW and pulse cannot be undermined and the ultimate choice depends on the sample properties. Generally, most of the EPR methods are suitable for a particular segment of the time scale and due to large heterogeneity in polymer samples, their properties have to be kept in mind before making a choice of a suitable method. The study of kinetics of polymerization reactions would require comparatively large samples due to the low concentration of short lived radical species so resonant cavity limitations at higher frequencies must be kept in mind.4 At high field, sensitivity is enhanced due to a larger difference in Boltzmann populations and small g-anisotropy can be resolved. But, large g-anisotropy in disordered materials can also lead to field-dependent broadening. On the other hand, in coordination polymers where high concentrations of paramagnetic metal ions limit the resolution of spectral parameters due to super-exchange interactions, pulse EPR becomes instrumental to resolve distant hyperfine interactions.16 Similarly, a large number of hyperfine interactions in biopolymers require pulse spectrometers to take into account the precise effects of small interactions in the spin Hamiltonian.20 Motional dynamics of polymers in solution, through spin labeling or probing, can be conveniently probed by X-band (∼9.5 GHz) EPR because the sensitivity of the technique, in most cases, correlates with the time window of rotational motion of radicals attached to or embedded in the polymer matrix.29–33Fig. 1 shows different polymer classes and their characteristic studies by EPR spectroscopy which is not intended to be exhaustive but to provide the reader an idea of a variety of polymer systems investigable by this method.
 Fig. 1  Major areas of polymer research under the purview of EPR spectroscopy. 
It is desirable to mention that the recent attempts are directed to measure the resonance of individual paramagnetic centers in an ensemble to account for the subtle structural inhomogeneities (paramagnetic metal ions are extremely sensitive to the variations in the positions and charges of the neighboring ions) experienced by paramagnetic centers which causes inhomogeneous broadening in the EPR spectrum due to the distribution of resonance frequencies. Inhomogeneous broadening is caused by effects which act differently on paramagnetic centers as opposed to homogeneous broadening which occurs due to factors affecting all the paramagnetic centers equally.34 Baumann et al. have illustrated this phenomenon by combining EPR with scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), to investigate the spin resonance of individual atoms to enhance the spatial resolution of the EPR signal, while driving inelastic excitation in Fe atoms along with measuring the tunneling current by varying the strength of the magnetic field as described in Fig. 2.34 Inhomogeneous broadening was investigated in the subtly varied magnetic moment or easy spin axis of few iron atoms (Fig. 3). The Fe atoms resonate at different frequencies from each other, but the change is proportional to the applied magnetic field. The work showed the significance of measuring the spin resonance of a single atom at a time.34 Recent studies have also been conducted to not only observe but also manipulate single electron spin without employing optical and electrical techniques.35 Methods have also been proposed to improve the sensitivity of EPR instruments, reaching even to quantum limits, by employing a microwave amplifier with superconducting micro-resonators to improve the spectral resolution.36 These striking developments in the field of EPR spectroscopy indicate better prospects of this field of magnetic spectroscopy in polymer science.
 Fig. 2  (A) A representation of spin-polarized scanning tunneling microscopy for obtaining EPR spectra of a single Fe atom adsorbed on the MgO film. A spin polarized STM tip was positioned over an iron atom and an electric field established between the tip and iron atom. Tunneling current was measured which depended on the relative population of states. (B) Iron and cobalt atoms located on the one atom thick film of MgO captured through STM. (C) Position of the Fe atom on the MgO layer above the oxygen atom. (D) Visualization of the first five energy levels of the Fe atom. Reproduced with permission from ref. 34. Copyright (2015) American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
 Fig. 3  Graph representing the variations in the EPR signals of five Fe atoms. Resonating Fe atoms at a slightly different magnetic field due to the subtly varied local environment (which leads to different magnetic moments or tilting of the axis w.r.t. magnetic field) indicates the manifestation in the form of inhomogeneous broadening in ensemble measurements. Straight lines show the linear relationship between the resonance position and strength of the magnetic field for all five Fe atoms. Reproduced with permission from ref. 34. Copyright (2015) American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
3. Current trends in the EPR research of polymers
Substantial but rather sporadic research work has been reported in the past related to the EPR study of polymers. But, during the last three decades due to diversification in the instrumentation of EPR spectrometers, an avalanche of research work in polymer science has emerged which is directly related to EPR spectroscopy. Diverse fields of polymer science have been explored utilizing this single or more precisely the group of related techniques.4 Polymer related fields as diverse as structural and geometrical analysis, dynamics and conformational studies, from defects to mechanistic, kinetic, reactivity, and degradation studies have fallen under the purview of EPR spectroscopy among many others.20 An in-depth description of such a wider applicability of EPR in polymer science is practically not possible in this review and only an overview of historical outlook and current trends with representative studies will be discussed in the subsequent sections.
3.1. Spin labeling and probing study of polymers in solution
Not every polymer system inherently possesses a paramagnetic center, so in order to make them investigable a paramagnetic probe needs to be inserted. In spin labeling and probing, a stable radical is either attached to the polymer chain covalently or embedded in the polymer matrix, respectively.37 Though spin labeling restricts the spin density locally, it has the tendency to alter the structure and functions of the probed molecule making the characterization futile. Spin probes, on the other hand, do not perturb the structure but can be locality biased towards the sites offering the most favorable attraction.13 Consequently, the nature of the spin probe i.e. size, polarity, substituents, etc. plays a key role in determining its suitability for particular polymer systems. Sometimes, a group of spin probes has to be employed to uncover various micro-heterogeneities, e.g. in colloidal polymer dispersions.38
As stated earlier, due to the Brownian thermal rotational mobility in solutions characterized by τR, orientations of the radicals change with respect to the applied magnetic field and anisotropic hyperfine interactions are modulated which affect the shape of the EPR spectrum. The variations in the shape of spectra, thus, are dependent on τR values which is characteristic of the local environment of radicals affecting the rotational reorientation or tumbling motion.25 Very fast tumbling motion of SLs is affected by their insertion on polymer chains with a change in τR which is sensitive to steric hindrance. The spectral parameter, outer extrema separation (2Azz), is commonly employed to describe the motional regime of SLs as well as its dependence on temperature, pH, etc. and has an inverse relationship with rotational diffusion to a certain limit.39 Traditionally, a correlation is obtained between the glass transition temperature Tg of a polymer and an EPR parameter T50 G (or T5 mT). T50 G is essentially the temperature at which 2Azz approaches 50 G and is sometimes termed the ESR glass transition temperature.40 Thus, simple and advanced EPR methods are gaining popularity to determine the glass transition temperature of polymers among other methods for inhomogeneous polymeric materials especially by observing spin–lattice relaxation times, T1 of admixed spin probes. It has been shown that the spin–lattice relaxation time undergoes abrupt changes around the glass transition due to a substantial phase change. In the past, the temperature dependence of the spin–lattice relaxation time of polymers containing spin probes has been studied. Recently, Miwa et al. proposed another efficient method to determine the glass transition temperature of polymers by EPR spin labeling and probe techniques with a microwave power saturation method. The power saturation phenomenon has been utilized in the past to estimate the relaxation times of paramagnetic species at multiple power levels because the saturation behavior of the sample by increasing the microwave power provides the information of the relaxation times.41 A correlation between relaxation times and saturation factor S, a term which can be deduced from the EPR spectra, is given by the following equation.42 (4)where B1 corresponds to the microwave magnetic field, γ is the electron magnetogyric ratio, and T1 and T2 are the longitudinal and transverse relaxation times, respectively. The microwave magnetic field corresponds to , where Q is the quality factor of the microwave frequency employed and C relates to the resonator's conversion factor.42 In the absence of saturation, the EPR signal intensity increases linearly with B1. A power saturation curve can be employed to investigate the effect of increasing microwave power on the signal intensity of EPR spectra by plotting a graph between the signal amplitude, V, and the square root of microwave power, P. This plot shows a linear relationship until the microwave power is strong enough to saturate the sample where deviation from a straight line is observed.
The value of S can be determined from the saturation curve using,43 (5)where VR,US and VR,US represent relative intensities by normalizing the same measured at P = 0.02 mW and at a number of other frequencies. V is calculated by the double integration of a derivative EPR spectrum. The authors showed that the inflection of the curve obtained by plotting S at a particular P value against temperature correlated with the Tg value found by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and was defined as Tg,ESR as shown in Fig. 4. It is interesting to note here that the inflection actually represents the change of temperature dependences of T1 and T2 as S, at a fixed microwave power, is a function of T1 and T2 collectively.43 However, the increased concentration of the nitroxide radicals affected the temperature dependencies of S slightly which indicated that it is not the T2, but the inflection is due to the difference in the temperature dependence of T1 around Tg as the nitroxide concentration should affect T2 with an overall change of S.43 The method has been employed to study the concentration dependencies of various spin probes in polymer systems.44
 Fig. 4  A representative saturation curve for the low-density polyethylene (LDPE) spin labeled with 10-doxylnonadecane. The straight line indicates a direct relationship between V and S without any microwave power saturation. Deviations from the straight line indicate saturation at higher microwave power values. Note the effect of temperature on the extent of saturation at a given P value. Reprinted with permission from ref. 45. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society. 
The motion of spin labeled macromolecules is considered to be rather complex. Models that describe the reorientational dynamics of SLs are based on local (nitroxide radical), internal (polymer chain segment), and global (polymer with respect to the matrix) reorientational motions.46 Thus, different motional models i.e. molecular dynamics (MD) and Stochastic dynamics (SD) are employed to understand molecular tumbling depending on different levels of reorientation in the case of a slow motion regime, which occurs in spin labeled polymers.15 Frequently, CW-EPR spectra are simulated by employing a particular rotational model and important among them is the microscopic order macroscopic disorder (MOMD) model. The MOMD model assumes that spin probes or spin labels undergo molecular ordering, but these ordered regions are not ordered with respect to each other. It means that the cumulative alignment of local directors in polymer samples is not directed towards the macroscopic direction.20 The model was developed primarily for the analysis of biomolecules through SDSL.20 In certain cases where global rotation of the macromolecule can be neglected, the local polymer chain segmental and SL motion about its tether can be approximated by a single rotational diffusion tensor described by Pilar et al. These rotational diffusion coefficients, Rs and RI, describe the rotational diffusion of the segment of the spin labeled polymer and the internal rotation of SL about the tether, whereas Rprp and Rpll relate to perpendicular and parallel rotational diffusion tensors due to axially symmetric diffusion (when the axis of internal rotation of nitroxide radicals is parallel to the bond axis through which rotation occurs).47
Spin labeling of the distinct architectures of synthetic polymers to understand their dynamics in solution with EPR spectroscopy is becoming increasingly popular. The strength of EPR spectroscopy to deliver direct information of the immediate microenvironment of spin labeled polymers in solution has been utilized in several recent studies to investigate the dynamics of polymer chains under the effect of a change in various internal (electrostatic interactions, chain length, shielding, steric effects, etc.) and external factors (pH, solvent viscosity, polarity, charged species, etc.).24 A few of these studies are discussed here.
One of the characteristics of polymers is phase behavior which has been investigated in the past with EPR as in the case of thermo-reversible phase separation of poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) in water.20 In a study to investigate the phase behavior of spin labeled poly(acrylic acid), the polymer was grafted with different 4-amino-2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl (4-amino-TEMPO, a nitroxide radical) concentrations. The grafted polymers, poly(acrylic acid-g-TEMPO), (PAA-T), showed phase behavior around pH 2–4 as shown in Fig. 5.48 The boundaries show the phase transition of polymers, with a varying degree of TEMPO grafting, from a true solution to precipitation through the colloidal phase formation. It is evident that the pH range of the transition region increases with increasing TEMPO grafting on the polymer chain. At low pH, PAA-T exhibited disproportionation of TEMPO radicals which was evident from the decrease in the EPR signal intensity of spin labeled PAA from pH 6 to 1.3. Based on EPR spectra, the study concluded that the phase separation occurs due to electrostatic interactions between the cationic TEMPO species and anionic ionized carboxyl groups owing to the disproportionation of TEMPO at lower pH along with a couple of related phenomena.48
 Fig. 5  Phase separation of PAA-T as a function of concentration, pH, and degree of substitution in 5 mM KCl at rt. Dynamic light scattering was employed to obtain the average particle diameter in nm and is represented by black squares and numbers. Samples devoid of the colloidal phase are labeled as P. DS stands for the degree of substitution. Reprinted with permission from ref. 48. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. 
Polyelectrolytes provide an excellent opportunity to study segmental dynamics due to variable electrostatic interactions in between constituent molecules, which depend on a number of factors, significantly altering the internal dynamics and consequently the bulk properties. Polyelectrolytes have been studied previously by Jeschke et al. in detail by spin probing analysis38 but Lappan et al. have taken this field to the next level by spin labeling the polyanion and preparing polyelectrolyte complex coacervates (PEC).39 Previous studies have already established the effectiveness of spin probe EPR to investigate the conformations and dynamics of chains of polyions by DEER analysis, interactions of spin probes with polyelectrolytes through τR values or their spatial distribution and nature of binding of counterions to polymer chains by investigating rotational diffusion tensors.38 The pH responsive behavior of PECs of PAA is a well-known phenomenon. Previous studies have tried to explain the factors behind the slow chain dynamics of PAA in PEC at lower pH values. Accordingly, the behavior has been attributed to uncharged hydrophobic chain loops formed due to the reduction in dissociation of polyacids at lower pH values. Still other studies have concluded that the interactions between PEC components are stronger at lower pH probably due to the formation of hydrogen bonds. Additionally, dissociated PAA units at higher pH values are accompanied by strong hydration which weakens the electrostatic interaction between PEC components.39 EPR spectra of PEC were recorded by varying pH and temperature values which revealed that the line shape shows no variations from pH 10.0 to 5.0, but at lower pH values the outer extrema separation (A′zz) increases by decreasing pH as shown in Fig. 6.39 At lower pH, the peak due to free nitroxide radicals is also visible in the EPR spectra. This expansion implies lower mobility of the backbone by decreasing the pH below 5.39 The present study related to the EPR analysis of PEC of PAA assumed that hydrophobic chain loops, if formed, should restrict water accessibility to the SL which in turn should affect the N-hyperfine coupling constant, αN. The parameter, αN, is the measure of the polarity of the microenvironment of nitroxide radicals as its value, in the absence of other factors, is greater in hydrophilic and polar environments than in a non-polar environment due to an increased electron density on the N-atom in a polar environment. According to spectral results, the change in pH did not affect the αN value which suggested that the slow chain dynamics might not be due to the formation of hydrophobic chain loops but due to stronger hydrogen bonding between acrylic acid units on PAA and quaternary nitrogen atoms of PDADMAC (polycation) along with the effect of hydration at higher pH. Furthermore, the internal rotation coefficient, RI, in this study was found to be higher than the coefficient of the rotational diffusion, Rs, calculated from the simulated data of parallel and perpendicular rotational diffusion coefficients.39
 Fig. 6  EPR spectra along with simulations of the PEC of PDADMAC and SL-PAA by varying pH at (a) T = 273, and (b) T = 333. The line-shape of EPR spectra (both at 273 K & 333 K) clearly shows the change in the mobility of nitroxide radicals attached to the polymer chain as A′zz is increasing from pH 5 to 4 due to the restricted mobility of nitroxide radicals. This decrease in mobility was attributed to the attractive forces between PAA and PDADMAC units as well as hydrogen bonds between PAA chains. Additionally, the pH range 5–4 is also related to the abrupt change in the dissociation of PAA chains. The EPR line-shape is not showing any considerable deviation from pH 10 to 5. Reprinted with permission from ref. 39. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. 
The rotational diffusion coefficient decreased with decreasing temperature. The tilt angle, βD, did not show any variations at all pH values. The variations of the orienting potential coefficients c20, c22, and c40 hinted at the interactions of SL with some side groups on the macromolecule. Defined by Freed and coworkers, orienting potential is the constraint in the polymer segmental motion sensed by the spin labeled nitroxide radical and is characterized by orienting potential coefficients. It relates to the ordering of the SL and describes the propensity of the SL to order itself relative to its environment (preferred orientation of the axis of internal rotation of the SL with respect to the polymer main chain).47 This ordering or alignment of the SL in a particular direction provides additional information of structural and conformational features. A detailed description can be found in an excellent compilation of ESR methods edited by Schlick.24 The study coupled with another on SL-P(E-alt-MA) with the same strong polycation poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) (PDADMAC) confirmed that the dynamics of spin-labeled weak polyacids is influenced by the degree of dissociation of the weak polyacid along with some secondary interactions such as hydrogen bonds, ion dipole interactions, and hydration of chains.39 In a more recent study, the authors employed different polycations to investigate the effect of interactions on the dynamics of PEC. It was evident from the EPR spectra that the mobility of the polyanion chain segment was apparently inversely proportional to the strength of intermolecular ion pairing. The stronger the intermolecular attraction, the more hindered the microenvironment and the lower the mobility of the SL.49
Dendrimers have been one of the most fascinating classes of polymers studied by EPR spectroscopy. These are desirable templates to bear functional molecular components since the chemical behavior of dendrimers largely depends on the accessibility of their functional components to the external environment. Moreover, an infinite number of different dendrimers’ structures can be obtained with diverging functionality and reactivity to the external environment.19 That's the reason dendrimers have been studied extensively in the past and still it is an active area of scientific research. In the past, Ottaviani and Turro et al. have extensively utilized EPR to study the dendrimers, poly(amidoamine) (PAMAM), along with their adsorption and interactions with different species including the surfactants, paramagnetic ions, and biological molecules. Moreover, polynitroxide functionalized poly(propyleneimine) dendrimers and their relaxivity studies for water and trapping of nitric oxide by nitroxide functionalized dendrimers have also been conducted along with orientation of dendrimers’ branches in solid and solution forms.50–52 Junk et al. have applied EPR spectroscopy to investigate the nanoscopic structure of thermoresponsive dendronized polymers,53 nanoscopic heterogeneities during the thermal collapse of dendronized polymers,54 and inhomogenieties in the structure and reactivity of thermoresponsive hydrogels.55 Very recently, Ottaviani et al. have studied the biocatalytic activities of Cu2+ PAMAM dendrimers functionalized with pyridine molecules.56 Studies on the functional group distributions of PAMAM dendrimers have also been conducted by other groups, as Sebby et al. have determined the end group distributions of different generations of spin-labeled PAMAM dendrimers by EPR spectroscopy.57
A classic example of exchange interactions in closely packed nitroxide radicals was presented by Badetti et al. employing five generations of phosphorus containing dendrimers having a cyclotriphosphazene core.19 Five generations, from zeroth to fourth (from top to bottom), of the phosphorus based dendrimers containing nitroxide radicals at the periphery were synthesized with each generation having successively closed packing of radicals. The EPR spectra showed a seven-line signal instead of the characteristic three-line hyperfine spectrum of 14N. The splitting into seven lines was related to the exchange interactions between the nitroxide radicals localized on the dendrimers’ branches. If interactions are rapid enough (|aN| ≪ |J|), an averaging of local magnetic fields results in narrowing of resonance lines.46 Variations in the line intensity and line width from around room temperature to cryogenic temperature suggested that the exchange interactions are being modulated by temperature and that the lower temperature reduced these interactions due to the reduced frequency of the collision of SL-loaded functional groups and spectra were close to the individual nitroxide radicals. The slight difference was due to the dipole–dipole interactions among the neighboring SLs localized on the dendrimers because dipole–dipole interactions are significant in frozen solution.19
Johnson et al. have conducted a number of studies to deduce and compare polymer properties by inserting nitroxide radicals at different locations on polymer chains.30–33 They not only studied the microenvironment of nitroxide radicals by analyzing EPR spectra in terms of τR values, spin–spin exchange frequency (ωex), line width, and intensity, but also determined the properties of nitroxide functionalized polymers, including polylactide brush polymers, poly(ethylene glycol) PEG-branch-nitroxide bivalent brush polymers, traditional PEG bottle brush polymers, PEG-based branched-bottle brush, and brush-arm star polymers, as magnetic resonance imaging contrast agents.21,32 Ring opening metathesis polymerization (ROMP) using Grubbs’ catalyst was employed in these studies to synthesize well defined nitroxide bearing polymers applying different synthetic approaches.30,31 In one of these studies, EPR was employed to study the dynamics of brush polymers, synthesized from norbornene-terminated polylactide macromonomers (MMs), in different organic solvents including dichloromethane (DCM), dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO), and DMF, by copolymerization of a small-molecule, norbornene-nitroxide, at the end of the side chains (P-TEMPO-brush), and at the end (E-TEMPO-brush) and the middle (M-TEMPO-brush) of the backbone of the polymer. The τR values calculated for different solvents increased in the order τDCM < τDMF < τDMSO for each of the spin-labeled brush polymers at the same concentration which correlated with the increase in the solvent viscosity.
The same trend of τR values was observed for each type of spin-labeled brush polymer in all the three solvents. The peripherally labeled brush polymer (P-TEMPO-brush) showed the smallest τR, while larger τR values were observed when the labels were tethered to the backbone, either at the end (E-TEMPO-brush) or in the middle (M-TEMPO-brush) in correlation with steric hindrance experienced by nitroxide radicals. The broadening of the EPR signal was suggested due to the interaction of adjacent nitroxides and the effect was higher in E-TEMPO-brush owing to the higher probability of interactions between nitroxides. M-TEMPO-brush and E-TEMPO-brush also exhibited anisotropy due to the steric hindrance in rotation, compared to P-TEMPO-brush. The reaction dynamics of these brush polymers were observed by employing a small molecule and a macromolecule as quenching agents. Nitroxide radicals are reduced to hydroxylamine by treating with a reductant (quencher).30 On reacting the SLs with hydrazine-functionalized polystyrene (PS-NHNH2), a macromolecule-based reductant of nitroxide radicals, locality based nitroxide reduction was observed. The quenching rate was monitored by the intensity of the low-field peak of the EPR spectra as a function of time. Nitroxides at the end and at the middle of the backbone showed less reactivity towards hydrazine-functionalized polystyrene compared to phenyl hydrazine molecules (small reductant) but the reactivity was higher in peripherally labeled nitroxides as shown in Fig. 7.30 These results showed that the dense side chains of brush polymers hinder the approach of macromolecules to the backbone region but allow free diffusion of small molecules.30
 Fig. 7  Suppression of EPR signals of spin-labeled brush polymers with (A) PhNHNH2; (B) PS-NHNH2 in DMF at rt. A higher degree of quenching is evident in the case of phenyl hydrazine (A) due to the ease in diffusion of smaller molecules in the polymer matrix. Greater shielding by side groups would hinder the accessibility of external reagents to functional groups. The access is least in M-TEMPO-brush in the case of the bulky quencher (B) where steric crowding is higher and accessibility to nitroxide radicals is reduced. Reprinted with permission from ref. 30. Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society. 
In another study related to brush polymers, Burts et al. conducted a detailed comparative EPR analysis of the branched-brush polymer and random and block bottle-brush copolymers. Fig. 8 shows the monomers employed for the synthesis of polymers with nitroxide radicals at different locations. Polymerization of 2 was carried out to synthesize a homopolymer bearing nitroxides at homogeneously distributed locations. The unlabeled PEG-macromonomer (PEG-MM) was employed to react with other monomers resulting in defined distributions of nitroxide radicals as shown in Fig. 9.31 It is evident from the EPR simulation data that the EPR spectra of pristine monomers, 2 and 5, are only comprised of fast motion components, somewhat similar to the free TEMPO radical. It is further evident by the comparison of peripherally, end and backbone labeled polymers that nitroxides at the peripherally labeled bottle brush polymer (BBP) are less sterically hindered than the latter two, while the mid labeled polymers showed a very slow motion component in their EPR spectra indicating a much-hindered microenvironment for the nitroxides. Among the mid labeled polymers produced by bridging 2 and 3 monomers between non-labeled MM, the structure 3 bearing polymers showed a greater percentage of the slow motion component because of a shorter tether used to link the monomer with the polymer backbone compared to structure 2. Spin–spin exchange interactions were more pronounced in the case of the end-labeled and mid-labeled polymers as is evident from the broadening of EPR spectra in these cases.31 Wang et al. have also recently synthesized spin labeled bottle-brush copolymers PHEMA-g-[(PAA-g-TEMPO)-b-PMA] and PHEMA-g-(PAA-g-TEMPO), where PHEMA = poly(2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate) and PMA = poly(methyl acrylate). They showed that an outer polymer segment, PMA, present in one of the bottle-brush polymers effectively shielded TEMPO radicals on it.58
 Fig. 8  Monomers employed to synthesize bottle brush polymers with nitroxides at defined locations. Reprinted with permission from ref. 31. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 9  EPR spectra for different samples synthesized by the combinations of monomers along with simulation data. Comparison of macromonomers (A) shows that the shape of EPR spectra is not influenced substantially by variations in the structure of nitroxide radicals. τR values are higher than for free nitroxide radicals in solution (0.005 ns). Due to the facile interaction of the peripherally labeled polymer with the solvent (increase in micropolarity of SLs), the value of αN is higher in the peripherally labeled polymer (17.1) than the backbone labeled polymer (16.9 G), whereas a similar intensity of the EPR signal for all three samples shows that the solubility is comparable. The proportion of the slow motion component is tilted towards samples with more sterically hindered nitroxides (e.g. mid-labeled polymer). Broadening in the case of a shorter tether of MM 3 compared to MM 2 is clearly evident (C & D). Reprinted with permission from ref. 31. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society. 
Zhang et al. have recently conducted a similar EPR study of the copolymers with different topological structures and TEMPO radical distributions by ring opening polymerization with a nitroxide monomer, 4-glycidoloxy-2,2,6,6,-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl (GTEMPO) to produce linear and hyperbranched polymers containing ethylene oxide (EO) and glycidol (Gly) monomers, poly(EO-co-GTEMPO) and poly(Gly-co-GTEMPO), as well as with a multifunctional macroinitiator of hyperbranched polyglycerol (HPG) to synthesize HPG-g-poly(Glycidol-co-GTEMPO) and HPG-g-PGTEMPO.59
In the latter two polymers, HPG-g-poly(Glycidol-co-GTEMPO) and HPG-g-PGTEMPO, radicals were located at the periphery of the branches with higher regional density of SL due to solubility differences, which in turn resulted in more pronounced spin exchange and dipole interactions in these polymers compared to the former two, linear poly(EO-co-GTEMPO) and hyperbranched poly(GO-co-GTEMPO) as shown in Fig. 10.59 The spectra in Fig. 10 show broadening of lines from top to bottom in the case of individual polymers based on the increased regional density of GTEMPO units on the polymer chains, whereas the peak intensity enhanced by increasing the concentration of each polymer sample. The effect of temperature on the EPR spectral lines was also studied which showed the evolution of weak peaks at 190 K to intense broad peaks at 300 K due to increased exchange interactions, whereas the peaks of HPG-g-PGTEMPO emerged into a broad single line at higher temperature due to densely introduced GTEMPO radicals.59
 Fig. 10  Concentration dependent EPR spectra of copolymers with four different topological structures and TEMPO distributions. Red dots show the location of nitroxide radicals on polymer chains. The negligible effect of the increase in the concentration of samples on the line-shape of EPR spectra shows that spectral features are modulated by intramolecular exchange and dipole interactions rather than any intermolecular interactions. The densely and uniformly grafted GTEMPO radicals in HPG-g-PGTEMPO broadened the EPR spectra to the point of unresolved hyperfine splitting. Reprinted with permission from ref. 59. Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society. 
Polymers with dual phases or states provide an excellent opportunity to employ a spin probing tool as in the case of semi-crystalline polymers with crystalline and disordered regions, porous coordination polymers with interconvertible narrow and large pore states due to guest molecules, or in polymers with small solvent molecule penetration.60 The technique has also been employed to figure out the intricate nanoscale dehydration process of thermo-responsive biopolymers and di-block elastin-like polypeptides (ELPs) during the lower critical solution temperature based (LCST) inverse phase transition, to determine the distribution of spin probes in rigid and mobile amorphous fractions of semi-crystalline polymers, etc.60,61 Wasserman et al. described in detail the spin probes for micellar and polymer self-associating systems including surfactant micelles, gels of hydrophobically modified polymers, polymer micelles, etc.62 They have recently conducted a few studies by employing spin probes to determine the molecular mobility in gels, interfacial layers of elastomers, etc.63,64
High field EPR spectra in Fig. 11 represent the dynamics of nitroxide radicals as spin probes in poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS), a semi-crystalline polymer.60 The semi-crystalline polymers show heterogeneous dynamics with disordered and crystalline regions which can be attributed to crystallites, a rigid amorphous fraction (RAF, interfacial region) and a mobile amorphous fraction (MAF, completely amorphous region). The spectra indicate a significant change in dynamics above the glass transition temperature, Tg. As the disordered phase of the PDMS undergoes a change in dynamics above Tg, the spectra suggested the presence of a spin probe in the disordered fraction of the polymer i.e. RAF and MAF. At around 210 K, a visible narrowing of peaks and three-line spectra above this temperature, and just below the melt temperature, suggested a marked change in dynamics around this temperature. Further analysis of slow and fast motion components of the spin probe enabled deducing the percentage of RAF and MAF fractions present in the semi-crystalline polymer around the melt temperature. The spectra indicated that the three-line pattern appears at a bit higher temperature with 285 GHz frequency than with 190 GHz frequency, where the triplet pattern started appearing at 210 K.60
 Fig. 11  EPR spectra at different temperatures of PDMS with two high-field EPR frequencies, 285 GHz (left), 190 GHz (right). Spectra are better resolved at a higher magnetic field value (285 GHz). Reprinted with permission from ref. 60. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. 
Micellar systems provide a promising domain for spin probe tools. Ruthstein utilized DEER analysis to characterize micelles with a hydrophobic spin probe, 4-hydroxy-tempo-benzoate (4HTB), that was found to be located in the hydrophopic core of the micelles rather than its hydrophilic part and radii of the spin probe was determined. The study also determined the localized quantity of spin probes, which in turn provides information about the volume of the micelles along with their aggregation number.65 The previous studies of EPR spectroscopy on micelles were directed towards the conventional analysis of the line shape of the SLs and probes to determine the local polarity and its variation with the temperature, hydration degree of polymer chains, order profile, nature of aggregates, etc.66–68 Recently, Pan et al. studied the swelling and deswelling behavior of micelles by spin labeling and presented a method to reveal the disassembly of spin labeled polymeric micelles by the addition of an organic solvent in the line-shape of EPR spectra. Sequential addition of the organic solvent worked to swell the micelles and to induce disassembly and EPR spectra recorded after fractional additions correlated with the increased rotational dynamics of the spin label initially embedded in the interfacial region and core of micelles.69
3.2. Radical detection in polymer degradation
Efforts are being made to produce polymers with enhanced stability and reduced degradation propensities; nevertheless it requires comprehensive understanding of the mechanism of the degradation process. Fortunately, the degradation of polymers is accompanied by the generation of free radicals, which can conveniently be studied by EPR spectroscopy to deduce the nature of intermediate radical species and subsequently to figure out the mechanism of degradation.70 Radicals can be generated by the chemical rearrangements, bond cleavage, and oxidation reactions due to atmospheric oxygen, chain scission reactions, and cross-linking reactions in the gamma-irradiated materials.78 Free radicals used to be an ideal candidate for EPR application and unsurprisingly polymer degradation and radical polymerization reactions to uncover mechanisms and determine rate constants were the pioneering studies conducted by EPR spectroscopy in the field of polymer chemistry.72 Generally, these studies were limited by low steady state concentrations of radical species when in solution and the poor resolution of spectra due to anisotropic interactions in the solid form. In early years, degradation in diverse polymer classes e.g. acrylates and methacrylates, aromatic polymers, halogenated polymers, polyolefins, polysaccharides, etc. has been studied by EPR spectroscopy.72 Spin traps are also being employed in radical-mediated processes, for radicals produced during photo- or radiolysis of polymers and in radical polymerization reactions.71 Spin traps (nitrones or nitroso compounds) convert the radicals, which are inaccessible to the EPR spectrometer due to a shorter half-life (nanoseconds), to stable ones for indirect radical characterization.73 The spin trapping tool is befitting for polymer systems with a narrow range of radical species; otherwise, interpretation of the EPR spectrum becomes a challenging task in the case of superimposition of signals from various radical species. Though initial studies were directed largely towards investigating the mechanism of degradation of synthetic polymers, studies on natural polymers have increased substantially. The current trends relate to the degradation studies of plant-based biopolymers and polymers designed for electronic devices, as their degradation is a major scientific concern.61,74 Here, a few representative studies are included.
Łabanowska et al. conducted a number of studies related to the formation of radicals by thermally treated pristine and modified starches and their quantitative and qualitative determination by EPR spectroscopy.75 In these studies, the values of g and A tensors (hyperfine tensor) can be related to a particular radical, whereas integration of EPR spectra and comparing it with a known quantity of spins, usually the 2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) radical (radical commonly employed for free radical scavenging studies), can provide quantitative information. In one study, the radical generation and bond cleavage in the thermally activated potato starch, amylose, and amylopectin were investigated. The comparison of experimental EPR spectra at particular intervals of time for these three samples suggested that the radical generation started earlier in amylose than in the case of the other two by increasing the temperature.75 The EPR work on cereal starches (wheat and corn) revealed that the amylose portion in these starches has an impact on the character of radicals formed through thermal treatment, whereas it did not affect their amount in contrast to potato starch.76 In another study, EPR spectroscopy was applied to study the radicals formed by starch oxidation and phosphorylation after thermal treatment.65
Generation of radicals in lignin has been studied by high field EPR spectroscopy because a conventional X-band spectrometer could not resolve the anisotropic g tensor.77 Bährle et al. employed high field EPR (HF-EPR) spectroscopy to resolve the gxx, gyy, and gzz components in acid and base treated lignin. In the case of lignin-based radicals (semiquinone type radicals) gzz is not influenced strongly by spin–orbit coupling due to its orientation of the principle axis perpendicular to the aromatic system, in contrast to gxx and gyy which shows a high shift due to spin–orbit coupling mainly from oxygen atoms. The broadening of lines in EPR spectra in the case of these radicals results mainly from the different orientations of the hydrogen bonds and unresolved proton hyperfine couplings. The pH value during the lignin extraction process influenced g values. Fig. 12 presents different types and classes of radicals generated in the lignin based on their characteristic g-values.77
 Fig. 12  Plot of radical concentration vs. their g-values from the EPR spectra of several lignin preparations. Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society. 
A commonly employed spin trap, 5,5-dimethyl-1-pyrroline-N-oxide (DMPO), was employed to study the degradation of phenolic resin by a spin trapping technique.70 The pH dependent production of hydroxyl radicals was evidenced from the EPR spectrum, which were produced by the degradation of recalcitrant phenolic resin present in the wastewater of tanneries, which renders the wastewater treatment problematic. DMPO exhibits a characteristic EPR spectrum for each of the free radicals. It means that the spectrum of the DMPO spin-adduct can be utilized as a fingerprint to detect a particular free radical. The characteristic spectrum of the DMPO-OH˙ adduct exhibits four lines and their intensity varies by varying pH from acidic to alkaline indicating the variations in the production of hydroxyl radicals at different pH values.70
Degradation profiling of other synthetic (conjugated) polymers by EPR spectroscopy has been discussed in section 3.4.
3.3. EPR in coordination polymers
Paramagnetic resonance is quite a common phenomenon in coordination polymers that render these materials tailor-made for EPR application.79 Metal ions are an integral part of coordination polymers and many of them are paramagnetic which makes them EPR-active entities. Either transition metal ions are utilized as paramagnetic probes or a dopant, organic, or inorganic radical is introduced into the EPR-silent polymer to render it investigable by EPR spectroscopy.80,81 Main transition metal ions that mostly occur in coordination polymers as paramagnetic species include Cu+2, Co+2, Cr+3, Ti+3, V+4, Fe+3, and Mn+2.82 Organic radicals can be created or introduced in the coordination polymers i.e. already present organic linkers can be modified to create radicals or organic radicals (nitroxide) can be incorporated as SLs or spin probes. Inorganic radicals can also be adsorbed on the surface of coordination polymers, especially in the gaseous phase, to study their interaction with the host molecules e.g., the NO radical has been employed to investigate the local adsorption sites of coordination polymers having porous and non-porous sites.82 Due to the fast relaxation times of transition metal ions in coordination polymers on the EPR timescale, the EPR spectrum is obtained in frozen solution or in powder form. In this situation, the g-tensor depends on the orientation of the paramagnetic center with respect to applied magnetic field. This directional behavior is the measure of symmetry of electronic distribution inside a paramagnetic center.83
EPR spectroscopy is being applied to understand various inherent characteristic phenomena including, but not limited to, the structural defects and degradation,82,84,85 charge transfer and redox activity,86,87 paraelectric-ferroelectric transitions,88 catalytic activity,89–92 adsorption and desorption behavior,93,94 breathing phenomenon or host–guest interactions,13,95–97 magnetic exchange pathways,79 post-synthetic modifications or functionalization,98etc. One of the primary applications is probably the determination of the catalytic activity of coordination polymers where the oxidation states of metal ions before and after the catalytic activity can be determined (e.g. Cu2+ is EPR active, whereas Cu1+ is not) and the intensity of the EPR signal showing the relative quantity of metal ions with or without a change in oxidation states after several reactions.90
In one of the studies to investigate the breathing phenomenon or phase transitions between narrow pore (NP) and large pore (LP) states of metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), the spin probing method was applied to MIL-53(Al) (MIL: Materials of Institute Lavoisier). The spin probe was entrapped in the pores of the MOF, while phase transitions were induced by varying the temperature as shown in Fig. 13.13 NP → LP conversion takes place at higher temperatures and from 325 to 375 K, whereas the reverse phase transition occurs at lower temperature between 125 and 150 K. The MOF in the NP state restricts the free mobility of the spin probe, while in the LP state it shows unrestricted motion. Fig. 14 clearly shows the spectra related to the immobilized TEMPO radicals at a temperature of 80 K, when it is cooled from room temperature, suggesting a conversion of a large pore to narrow pore state. But, when the temperature was reversed back to 293 K, a reversible change in the line shape of the TEMPO radicals did not appear, suggesting that the MOF is still in the narrow pore state due to large thermal hysteresis, though the spectra transformed to its initial state at 375 K. In another aspect of the same study, a reversibly reduced number of spins upon LP → NP conversion were detected with the second integral over the EPR spectrum, which was suggested to be due to the interaction of TEMPO radicals with μ2-hydroxo groups of the MIL-53(Al) in the NP state.13 In another related study, TEMPO derivatives were employed to determine the variable spin probe dynamics in the pores of the same MOF depending on the size and functional groups of spin probes.96
 Fig. 13  The structures showing the (a) MIL-53(Al) and spin probe, TEMPO. (b) Demonstration of the motion of the spin probe in large pores of MIL-53(Al). (c) Orientation of TEMPO in the NP state of the MIL-53(Al) with preferred orientation in which the μ2-hydroxo group has a shorter distance from the NO group of MIL-53(Al) developing interactions and immobilizing the TEMPO radical. Reprinted with permission from ref. 13. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 14  EPR spectra along with simulations taken by cooling and warming the MIL-53(Al) with spin probe showing the variations in the mobility of spin probe in LP and NP states. At lower temperature, LP to NP conversion occurs, which restricts the mobility of TEMPO leading to increased correlation times with broadening of EPR spectral lines and vice versa. Reprinted with permission from ref. 13. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. 
The interpretation of EPR spectra in the case of multiple unpaired electrons is a challenging task which is quite a common phenomenon in transition metal ions. Despite a surge in the number of publications in recent years related to the EPR study of coordination polymers, this field is still in its nascent phase. Nevertheless, recent studies have highlighted the greater potential of EPR spectroscopy in the characterization of coordination polymers, over other contemporary techniques, in practice. Most of the EPR studies on coordination polymers are based on the well-defined spin Hamiltonian parameters of transition metal complexes which are sufficient to probe high symmetry coordination polymers, whereas low symmetry metal ions require the introduction of other parameters as perturbations.4 In other words, distortions in octahedral and tetrahedral symmetries in coordination polymers further split the energy levels of metals’ d-orbitals that are in t2g and eg splitting levels. Another prominent parameter in the case of transition metal ions is the ZFS which manifests itself in the case of multiple unpaired electrons (S > 1/2). It should be kept in mind that ZFS of the individual metal ions with S = 1/2, when combined through exchange interactions, can yield a total spin (S > 1/2) with a higher value of ZFS.4
The classic case for ZFS is the spin triplet, i.e., the S = 1 spin system and has been well-studied in coordination polymers bearing Cu+2 ions in well-known paddle wheel units where two copper ions antiferromagnetically couple (a negative value of J (J < 0) corresponds to the antiferromagnetic coupling) and give rise to an EPR inactive state with S = 0, whereas an EPR active triplet state (S = 1) is populated at higher temperatures (above 80 K). A high local concentration of Cu+2 ions in the coordination polymer results only in a single exchange narrowed resonance line in the EPR spectrum with unresolved hyperfine splitting and anisotropy of the g-tensor, etc.99 Thus, Cu+2 ions in their pristine form in paddle wheel units cannot be effectively probed by EPR spectroscopy for structural characterization. This kind of super-exchange coupling between the two electronic spins (1/2) of Cu+2 ions was first recognized long ago by B. Bleaney and K. D. Bowers.100 It is important to mention here that activated coordination polymers show a higher degree of exchange interactions due to a close inter-spin distance between paramagnetic centers. The phenomenon has been shown in a few studies where the spectra obtained for the activated (potentially removed water) and as-synthesized polymer clearly showed that the triplet exchange interaction due to populated S = 1 is higher in the activated polymer suggesting that the removal of water caused the inter-spin distance to decrease. Doping in coordination polymers in the context of EPR spectroscopy is applied for two main purposes i.e., making diamagnetic polymers paramagnetic ones with an EPR-active transition metal or suppressing the exchange interactions in the pristine polymers. Doping allows the characterization of the coordination environment of metal ions as well as their interactions with adsorbates. Jee et al. introduced a small amount of Zn+2 ions as a dopant to replace some of the Cu+2 ions in the paddle wheel units to make the system investigable by EPR spectroscopy at low temperatures.99 Though Cu+2 ions in most of the paddle wheel units would still be EPR-inactive at low temperatures (below 80 K), some of the Cu+2 ions in the paddle wheel units with replaced Zn+2 ions will behave as individual Cu+2 ions with S = 1/2. Both the CW and pulsed EPR resolved the anisotropy of the g-tensor according to the powder pattern of Cu+2 as well as the hyperfine splitting. As has already been stated, pulsed EPR techniques are commonly employed to resolve the hfc which cannot be resolved in the linewidth of the CW EPR spectrum. Due to higher concentration of paramagnetic centers and large ZFS values in coordination polymers, pulsed EPR methods are cardinal to resolve the EPR spectrum in terms of hyperfine interactions.99
In a powder spectrum with g-anisotropy that is common to transition metal ions in a coordination environment, orientation-selective spectroscopy offers the opportunity to determine not only the principle values but the orientation of the principle axis system with respect to the molecular frame.99 The essence of orientation-selective spectroscopy arises from the fact that mW pulses are too much shorter than the bandwidth of the EPR spectrum to be resolved and thus, the pulses affect a fraction of spins with selected orientations. Thus, a particular magnetic field determines the subset of spins and specific molecular orientations that will contribute to the spectrum.99 Therefore, pulse sequences are carried out at different magnetic field settings within the EPR spectrum. In the case of Cu+2 where g-anisotropy is well resolved, orientation-selective ENDOR can provide the orientation of the hfc tensor of nuclei with respect to the g-principle axis system of the interacting paramagnetic center.101 Thus, in orientation-selective ENDOR, a fraction of paramagnetic centers with selected orientations with respect to an observer in an applied external magnetic field contributes to the spectrum. The spectra obtained provided evidence of at least three protons (H1, I = 1/2) in the X-band 1H Davies ENDOR spectra (splitting pattern in Fig. 15) of Cu(II) species in this coordination polymer in the dehydrated form. It is important to mention here that an intense doublet of protons while irradiating close to gzz and gxx,yy spectral positions is tantamount to almost similar orientation of the proton hfc tensor to that of the g-tensor. The spectrum also indicated hyperfine splitting due to more distant coupled nuclei with very small hfc constants.99
 Fig. 15  Orientation-selective X-band 1H Davies ENDOR spectra showing hfc of protons in the dehydrated sample at 6 K at (a) 278.0 mT, (b) 292.2 mT, (c) 342.1 mT, and (d) 346.1 mT. Dotted lines represent the simulated spectra. Reprinted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society. 
As has been stated earlier, coupling interactions in the coordination polymers can potentially be complicated by the intramolecular super-exchange or through intermolecular pathways. Jee et al. also employed di-tert-butyl nitroxide (DTBN) radicals to get adsorbed to suppress the antiferromagnetic coupling after thermal treatment and the spectrum of the distinct paramagnetic Cu(II) centers was observed at temperatures below 70 K.102 Fleker et al. have recently shown to resolve the usual broad EPR signal of the adjacent copper ions in the HKUST-1 (HKUST-Hong Kong University of Science and Technology) through preparation of its composite with an activated carbon material and the spin dilution effect of the activated carbon matrix. The suppression of the spin–spin coupling interaction also decreased the giso value owing to the decreased magnetic field around the separated copper ions.103 Mahata et al. have also shown anti-ferromagnetic, canted-antiferromagnetic, and ferromagnet-like behaviors in the porous coordination polymers with varying ligand–metal connectivity as M–O–C–O–M (M = Mn), M–O–M (M = Mn) as dimer and tetramer units, and –M–OH–M– (M = Ni) one dimensional chains, respectively.104 Metal–anion radical based antiferromagnetic couplings have also been reported in some coordination polymers.105 Ni+2 ions in coordination polymers, with a 3d8 configuration, can also have a low spin singlet state or a high spin triplet state. The magnetic coupling of the two Ni+2 ions in the paddle wheel units can attain spin values of 0, 1, or 2, though studies have shown that a low spin ground state (S = 0) of the Ni+2 pairs is favored in paddle wheel units. It is important to mention that the absence of the EPR signal for such coordination polymers does not necessarily imply a low spin ground state (S = 0) as spin states with values 1 and 2 may also show no EPR signal at some particular field value if its ZFS is large.106
The Peisach–Blumberg plot is being employed to deduce the coordination environment of metal ions with the help of the parameters extracted from the EPR spectra as shown in Fig. 16. The Peisach–Blumberg correlation diagram is a schematic presentation of the relationship between the A‖ and g‖ (A‖ and g‖ correspond to Azz and gzz, respectively) for the dx2−y2 or dxy Cu(II) ground state to recognize the various types of Cu(II) complexes including the information about the coordination geometry, distortions, and type of donor ligand just by locating the position of a given Cu-complex.81
 Fig. 16  Peisach–Blumberg plot, A‖ vs. g‖. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81. Copyright (2014) Elsevier B.V. 
Coronado et al. studied the transformation of the flexible coordination polymers of Co(II) and Zn(II) ({[M(btix)2(OH2)2]·2NO3·2H2O}n where btix = 1,4-bis(triazol-1-ylmethyl)benzene) from a 1-dimensional to 2-dimensional structure. The framework transforms its structure from 1D to 2D based on the conformational change of ligands around the metal center. The ligands can have two conformations i.e., syn and anti as shown in Fig. 17.80 The anti conformation leads to two-dimensional neutral grids, whereas the syn conformation produces cationic chains with 1D geometry. The 1D polymer can irreversibly be converted to 2D by extruding the water molecules involving the breaking and making of covalent bonds with a rearrangement of the metal coordination sphere. The EPR spectra of the compounds at different temperatures are shown in Fig. 18 which presents a characteristic distorted axial spectrum of high-spin Co(II) having g-values of 6.49, 3.28, and 2.31. The low field component of the spectrum shows hyperfine splitting with a value of 65 G for the I = 7/2 59Co nucleus, which changed significantly after the solid-state transformation from 65 G to 100 G showing the sensitivity of EPR in determining the minor variations in the coordination structure of the metal ion.80 A conversion analysis through EPR by taking the EPR spectrum of the compound with 1D chains at various temperatures revealed that the conversion of the compound with a 1D structure to 2D takes place by changing the coordinated water at the metal center with the nitrate ligands in the coordination sphere.80
 Fig. 17  
syn and anti conformations of the flexible ligand btix. Reprinted with permission from ref. 80. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 18  (a) Temperature variation of the X-band EPR spectra showing the conformational transformation from 1D to 2D. (b) Coordination environments of cobalt(II) centers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 80. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society. 
In another study, two of the paramagnetic species i.e., Cu(II) and Mn(II) were introduced into a porous coordination polymer (PCP) containing Zn(II) ions ({[(Zn(dpe)(μ-OOCCH3)2](H2O)n} and {[Zn3(dpe)4(μ-OOCC2H5)4](dpe)(ClO4)2}n where dpe = 1,2-bis(4-pyridyl)ethene) to find out the coordination sites occupied by these metal ions by replacing Zn(II) ions.107 The spectra of these two doping agents showed that in the trinuclear PCP, not all of the Zn ions were replaced by the metal ions and only site 1, as shown in Fig. 19, was occupied by the Cu+2 ions as it showed a spectrum of a distorted octahedral geometry and site 2 was occupied by the Mn+2 ions with a regular octahedral geometry indicated by EPR spectra. The spectra showed no exchange interactions for each of the copper and manganese doping suggesting that only one of the two coordination sites was occupied by each of these ions with Mn+2 preferably binding to site II (Fig. 19).107
 Fig. 19  EPR spectra of the doped compound with Cu+2 and Mn+2 metal ions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 107. Copyright (2013) Elsevier B.V. 
The study of redox-active coordination polymers by EPR spectroscopy is an emerging area of scientific research. The usual broad signal in charge transfer coordination polymers is correlated with the coupling of two resonance lines of the charge transfer and the unpaired electrons on the metal ions. In such charge transfer complexes, the peak intensity can reasonably be related to the electron transfer, which in turn is inversely proportional to the charge transfer gap. Some ligands in the coordination polymers contain a photochromic moiety such as 1,4,5,8-naphthalenediimide (NDI), which can act as an electron transfer agent and then converted to NDI radicals. NDI radicals show a characteristic EPR signal in the g = 2.002–2.004 region.108 Leong et al. for the first time applied a unique technique of EPR spectroelectrochemistry (SEC) to investigate the mechanism and modulation of the charge transfer in a novel donor–acceptor and redox active coordination polymer, [(Zn(DMF))2-(TTFTC)(DPNI)] where TTFTC stands for tetrathiafulvalenetetracarboxylate and DPNI stands for N,N′-di-(4-pyridyl)-1,4,5,8-naphthalenetetracarboxydiimide. EPR SEC proved to be an instrumental technique to study the response of the PCPs in terms of charge transfer by applying an electrochemical bias. At a certain bias, and due to electrochemical reduction, the decrease in the intensity of the g-value for one ligand species (TTFTC radical cations with a g-value of 2.0059) with a subsequent increase in the intensity of the g-value for the other ligand species (DPNI radical anions with a g-value of 2.0034) indicates charge transfer from one ligand (TTFTC) to the other ligand (DPNI) or in other words inter-ligand charge transfer.109
EPR spectroscopy is becoming an indispensable tool for the study of coordination polymers. Whereas CW-EPR spectroscopy provides valuable information of the electronic structure as well as the symmetry of central metal ions in the coordination polymers, pulsed EPR spectroscopy provides an in depth analysis of the interactions of ligands with metals in the form of hf couplings.110 The main advantage of spin probing EPR analysis in the case of coordination polymers is due to the fact that a very minute quantity e.g. 1/1000 per pore or unit cell of PCP of the guest molecules is sufficient to probe the internal dynamics which also ensures an unperturbed structure and unaltered internal patterns.96
Though theoretically EPR spectroscopy is a tailor-made technique for the characterization of coordination polymers, in practice it is associated with certain limitations. Two main problems include the absence of EPR-active paramagnetic metal ions and their presence in high concentrations.111 First, the absence of paramagnetic centers in diamagnetic coordination polymers restricts the EPR applicability because all coordination polymers do not inherently possess EPR active sites. In this case, polymers have to be doped with a minute quantity of paramagnetic metal ions e.g., Cu2+, Cr3+, Mn2+ ions, etc. or organic radicals introduced at the ligands to render them EPR active. Secondly, the exchange interactions due to highly concentrated paramagnetic metal ions in these polymers limit the appropriate resolution of EPR spectroscopic parameters.111
Another class of coordination polymers gaining more attention is heterospin polymers having both EPR active metal ions and organic radicals in close vicinity to each other exhibiting exchange interactions.112 Understanding of exchange pathways between the metal center and organic radical (mostly nitroxide radical) is a promising domain of EPR spectroscopy as it can lead to manipulation of spin density with many potential applications, e.g. in data storage devices.113 Certain heterospin polymers exhibit a unique property of structural transitions and a subsequent change in their magnetic behavior due to spin transitions. A large number of structurally varying nitroxide radicals have been linked to polymers to modulate their magnetic properties.114–116 Artem'ev et al. demonstrated the exchange interactions in the heterospin polymers synthesized from a TEMPO derivative and a copper containing complex, Cu(hfac)2, where hfac = hexafluoro-acetylacetonate. The results of EPR analysis showed that small variations in the side groups of the TEMPO radicals govern the existence or non-existence of exchange interactions with nearby metal ions (changing from 4-[E-(3-methoxy-3-oxoprop-1-en-1-yl)oxy]-TEMPO to 4-[E-(3-ethoxy-3-oxoprop-1-en-1-yl)oxy]-TEMPO) with the first not exhibiting a significant exchange interaction as opposed to the latter.117
3.4. EPR study of conjugated polymers
Among conducting substances, conjugated polymers have become increasingly popular with potential applications in electronic devices as photovoltaic materials.118 The photovoltaic process is essentially absorption, charge separation and transfer processes in which a polymer–inorganic (fullerene) junction (a heterojunction) is employed in the energy conversion process.119 In this process, a neutral exciton (bound electron–hole pair) is produced with the absorption of photons which can dissociate at the donor–acceptor (polymer–fullerene) interface producing free carriers (positive and negative polarons).118 Diffusion of charge carriers or electron–hole pairs through the interfacial region of this donor–acceptor heterojunction can also lead to recombination processes with an impact on the device performance. Light-induced EPR (LEPR), as the name implies, is employed for the study of spins that are generated by light induced excitation. Thus, an illuminated sample would provide EPR signal intensity directly correlated with the generation of charge carriers escaping recombination, whereas trap states are present which restrict the recombination of charge carriers. EPR studies to determine the density of trap states in conducting polymers have been discussed later, whereas a basic description of charge separation, recombination and trap states in hybrid donor–acceptor systems is given by Krause and Borchert.120
EPR spectroscopy has emerged as a powerful technique for the study of the flow of charge carriers, polarons produced in conjugated polymers, polaron pairs, bipolarons, trap states, charge separation, charge transfer, recombination and degradation in conjugated polymers which are designed for electronic devices.121 Identification of polarons and resolution of g-anisotropy and charge separation, i.e. positive polarons on the polymer and radical anions on the fullerene have been studied thoroughly.122 EPR spectroscopy has also been applied to study the effect of different substituents on the spin density of conducting polymers. Thomsen et al. studied the effect of the nitro group of poly(p-phenylene vinylene)s (PPVs) on photo-induced charge separation. PPVs with nitro groups and without them as the control were employed and their EPR spectra were compared. It was found that the PPV without nitro groups showed a markedly reduced intensity, which means that the nitro group on the polymer alters the spin density of polarons.123 The study of the effects of residual catalytic impurities on the hole mobility of the fullerene–polymer heterojunction has also been conducted by LEPR. The study suggested a substantial effect of impurities on the charge carrier properties of polymers with a linear relationship with charge trapping.124 The recombination kinetics of charge carriers in the polymer composites with different alkyl chains have also been investigated by EPR spectroscopy.125
Apart from the effect of substituents, dynamics of polarons and bipolarons have been investigated after the introduction of a dopant.127 Jang et al. studied the spin dynamics (formation of polarons and bipolarons) with the varying amounts of iodine as a doping agent in the polymers and conductance properties. It was shown that lightly doped polymers show a narrow line peak in the EPR spectrum due to isolated polarons with no correlation, whereas heavily doped polymers were associated with high polaron correlation presumably due to the presence of polaron pairs with higher spin concentration leading to higher conductivity than in the case where EPR-inactive spinless bipolarons were produced.127 The doping process in the semiconductors is directly related to the variations in electron spin density which in turn is investigable by EPR spectroscopy, particularly for the determination of the extent of doping. The existence of polarons and bipolarons in semiconductors at various doping levels was determined directly by variations in the EPR signal at various doping levels with the formation and experimental evidence of bipolarons in the organic semiconductor poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HT) as shown in Fig. 20.126
 Fig. 20  Figure showing the doping induced production of polarons in the organic semiconductor P3HT. (a) The potential applied until 600 mV continuously produces polarons with increased concentration of spins and increased EPR signal intensity. (b) The cut in the EPR signal intensity from 600 mV to 1300 mV suggests the production of bipolarons from the combination of polarons decreasing the overall spin density. Reproduced with permission from ref. 126. Copyright (2016) John Wiley and Sons, Inc. 
It has been shown that the polarons in conducting polymers can be more efficiently studied with 2 mm waveband (140 GHz) saturation transfer electron paramagnetic resonance (ST-EPR) spectroscopy. The EPR spectrum, at this waveband, becomes more information-oriented and explicable, and resolves the super slow motions of charge carriers in the conducting polymers (CPs) as the sensitivity of ST-EPR is proportional to the resonant frequency ωe, favorably modulated in CPs for ST-EPR.118 It has been utilized to understand electronic processes in many CPs, including polytetrathiafulvalene, polyaniline, polythiophenes, etc.128 Albeit, ST EPR provides a better opportunity for more detailed analysis of polymer chain dynamics but the method is not in vogue for the study of conducting polymers. Fraind et al. have recently employed HF-ST-EPR to show that the technique provides a more detailed description of the structure, relaxation times, and molecular dynamics.129 Theoretically, HF-ST-EPR combines the virtues of enhanced resolution of g-anisotropy with high field and saturation transfer enabling the realization of very slow correlation times of the order of microseconds or longer. The resolution of g-anisotropy at this field, though, is advantageous but at high field the anisotropy of superfine interactions also gets pronounced leading to complex spectral interpretation and simulation procedures.118 But, it can also provide an opportunity to study independently the relaxation change of all orientations of EPR-active species. Actually in saturation transfer, a portion of spins, due to irradiation with microwave power and due to their rotational diffusion, saturates the other portion before spin–lattice relaxation occurs. The method has been applied extensively to the very slow rotational diffusion of a wide range of membrane proteins and other condensed systems.26
A comprehensive description and study of charge carriers, charge separation, charge transfer, and recombination processes in conjugated polymers and their nanocomposites by EPR spectroscopy have recently been carried out by Krinichnyi in detail,118 so here a few studies related to the EPR study of defects and degradation of conjugated polymers are presented. Photo-degradation of polymeric films in electronic devices, e.g. solar cells, is a major commercialization barrier. EPR spectroscopy is quite instrumental in investigating the mechanism of photo-degradation of conjugated polymers.130 Though EPR active species have to be introduced in materials devoid of paramagnetic entities, this additional step can be avoided in the case of conjugated polymers as these materials are inherently EPR active. Conjugated polymers are prone to degradation by oxygen, moisture, light, and elevated temperature. A barrier layer outside of such materials can prevent or reduce the accessibility of oxygen and moisture, but the degradation caused by light and temperature cannot be avoided. It has been suggested in earlier studies that under illumination radical species are generated which trap mobile charge carriers reducing the conducting ability of polymers.74

Fig. 21 shows the EPR spectra of illuminated poly[[4,8-bis[(2-ethylhexyl)oxy] benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′] dithiophene-2,6-diyl] [3-fluoro-2-[(2-ethylhexyl) carbonyl] thieno[3,4-b] thiophenediyl]], commonly called PTB7, representing the accumulation of radical species with time. The enhanced EPR signal intensity directly correlates with the increased accumulation of radical species with respect to aging time. Fig. 22 shows a comparative plot of different polymers for solar cells and the accumulation of radical species with aging time extracted from the EPR spectra of individual polymers. The plot is important to determine the relative stability of different polymers and this stability can be linked to their structural features.130 It is evident from Fig. 22 that for the polymers with higher rates of radical accumulation, a subsequent decrease in radical concentration occurs after a certain time. This decrease has been associated with a higher rate of radical quenching after their accumulation than the rate of radical generation. Generally, a lower rate of initial radicals’ formation in a polymer, Rin, and a lower rate of average radical formation during a prolonged period of time indicate an increased stability of the polymer. A thermal degradation study of these polymers suggested a minor effect of heat on polymer degradation compared to the photo-degradation in some polymers, whereas no effect of heat at all in the case of others was observed.74 Such degradation profiles can give direct evidence of the presence of specific stabilizing groups or atoms in the polymer chains. The method was employed to investigate the electronic quality of various other conjugated polymers designed as photovoltaic materials.130
 Fig. 21  Evolution of the EPR spectra of PTB7 in the course of polymer degradation. The spectra show the correlation between the peak intensity and accumulation of radical species over time and their increased recombination dynamics after a certain period. The radical quenching rate is higher after about 4340 h than the rate of radical generation indicating a decrease in signal intensity after this period. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright (2014) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 22  Degradation profiles of polymers under different photo-thermal aging conditions obtained using EPR spectroscopy. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright (2014) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
A typical steady state LEPR spectrum of the polymer blend, showing charge separation, consists of a broad low field (due to polymer polarons) and a narrow high field EPR spectral line (due to anions).131 Bonoldi et al. studied the effects of aging and annealing on trap states in the polymer, poly(3-dodecylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (rrP3DDT), as a charge donor and PCBM as an acceptor by LEPR. Charge carriers might get trapped inside the deep localized states affecting the recombination process. These trap states inside the polymers can practically be detected by EPR spectroscopy as the signal intensity of the LEPR spectrum (the spectrum is acquired by subtracting the CW-EPR spectrum obtained before and after light irradiation) is proportional to the density of these trap states. The LESR spectrum was obtained by subtracting the CW-EPR spectrum obtained before and after light irradiation.132 Trapped charges are present even before the light irradiation due to room-temperature or defects and changes in the signal intensity of the EPR spectrum after irradiation (light-on spectrum) provide evidence of the changes in trapped carriers. Recombination kinetics was obtained from the light-off spectrum obtained after irradiation and was due to carriers’ recombination. The LESR method ensures that the signal intensity is only proportional to trapped carriers as excess carriers have recombination times much shorter and cannot be resolved with an EPR spectrometer.

Fig. 23 shows the dark and LESR spectra (obtained by subtracting the “dark” spectra from those recorded under illumination) of fresh, aged, and annealed photovoltaic materials. It shows that annealing markedly reduced the signal intensity in both dark and LESR spectra, whereas aging only showed a decrement in the signal intensity of PCBM− and a negligible effect on polymer polarons, P+. The effect was attributed to oxygen, which acts as a contaminant, rather than a decrease in trap states. The negligible effect in the case of polymer polarons is due to the formation of a charge transfer complex (CTC) by combining with oxygen that behaves spectroscopically similar to polymer polarons.132 The EPR spectra revealed a significant decrease in trap states after annealing due to structural modifications.
 Fig. 23  EPR spectra obtained at T = 120 K; (as) “dark” spectra, recorded before irradiation; (b) LEPR spectra. The aged sample shows a decrease in dark signal intensity (blue line) at the position of the PCBM− anion but the intensity of the signal due to polarons is comparable to that of the fresh sample due to the formation of CTC by oxygen with the polymer increasing the signal intensity at the position of P+. The annealed sample showed a substantial decrease in dark as well as LESR signal intensity for both the PCBM− anion and P+ due to reduced carrier generation efficiency in the annealed sample. Reprinted with permission from ref. 133. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. 
In the LESR spectra, the signal intensity of the annealed sample reduced substantially. The effect of annealing to reduce the signal intensity was attributed to a decreased donor–acceptor interphase surface after annealing which caused a reduction in carrier generation efficiency due to less probability of exciton splitting. Thermal treatment reduces the interphase region between the polymer and fullerene as their segregation is thermodynamically favored.132Fig. 24 shows recombination kinetics for the three states at 120 K. The signal intensity was higher in the case of the aged material with the highest signal persistence suggesting the lowest recombination processes and highest carrier retention times. This higher retention time in the aged material was attributed to the effect of aging on expanding the trap states into deeper levels which caused more restricted recombination of charge carriers. Recombination kinetics in the case of annealed samples was higher than the pristine material according to the LEPR signal intensity as the annealing acted to remove the oxygen and segregated interphase regions. The study further examined the density of trap states from the recombination kinetics data.133 Recently, outdoor studies of intrinsic photochemical stabilities of a series of conjugated polymers by EPR spectroscopy have also been conducted.134
 Fig. 24  Graphs showing recombination kinetics from LEPR spectra at T = 120 K in the aged, fresh, and annealed samples for PCBM− (left) and P+ (right). The slow relative decrease in the LESR signal intensity of the aged sample with respect to time is attributed to the effect of aging to evolve deeper trap states with high retention of charge carriers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 133. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. 
An instance where a combination of general CW and TR-EPR experiments allowed a complete description of a radical system (Fig. 25) of a photodegraded polymer is presented here. Sheveleva et al. studied the photoinduced radicals’ generation in fluoroacrylic porous polymer films in the solid form. Due to the reduced mobility of radicals generated in the solid form, dynamics of radicals in the solid matrix are markedly different from that of liquid.135 Radicals generated in the solid polymer film are supposed to show a slow motion regime because of the restricted mobility. However, the CW-EPR spectra obtained indicated an otherwise pattern. The spectra were more closely related to mobile radicals in typical liquid solutions. These radicals were attributed to the pores in the polymer film having a free volume for unrestricted mobility of radicals. To further probe into the radicals embedded in the polymer matrix and outside of the pores, TR-EPR was employed because no indication of such radicals was evident in the CW-EPR spectra probably due to the shorter lifetimes.135
 Fig. 25  A representation of a degraded porous polymer with the radicals generated in the pores as well as the bulk of the polymer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 135. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. 
TR-EPR spectroscopy has been applied in the past to investigate polymer systems and CIDEP (very common in such systems) mechanisms including the radical pair (RP, spin polarization in a radical pair) spin-correlated radical pair (SCRP, spin polarization in RPs in confined spaces) and radical-triplet pair mechanism (RTPM, spin polarization in an excited triplet state and a free radical) have been described.28 The TR-EPR spectra showed a single broad line which is not indicative of individual radicals with restricted motion because such a type of radical would show discernible effects from anisotropic hyperfine interactions as has been shown in a number of previous studies.28 This broad signal was reasonably attributed to the formation of SCRP. The SCRP mechanism is related to the radicals which are formed inside a region of restricted mobility and show emission/absorption (E/A) or absorption/emission (A/E) patterns. Such patterns exist due to exchange, dipole or hyperfine interactions. However, such patterns were not visible in the TR-EPR spectra and the reason was assigned mainly to the close proximity of radical species along with their variable relative mobility in the polymer matrix which led to net emissive TR-EPR spectra masking spectral features.135
Although conjugated polymers are currently cynosure with respect to current research on conducting electro-active materials, non-conjugated polymers, bearing radical groups along the chain length, are an emerging class of materials for potential use in electronic devices due to the impressive redox properties of pendant radical groups (usually TEMPO radicals) and robust charge transport kinetics.136 But, due to a very high concentration of radicals, their EPR spectra are not very informative and always consist of a single line. It is highly desirable to devise EPR methods to decipher the charge transport properties of conducting non-conjugated (nitroxide-bearing) polymers. Various synthetic strategies have been developed to incorporate radicals on polymer chains as conventional radical polymerization cannot be carried out in the case of radical monomers because they interfere with the polymerization process. For detailed description of synthetic methods being employed to synthesize radical-based polymers along with their potential applications, the reader is referred to a couple of excellent reviews here.137,138
3.5. Site-directed spin labeling in biopolymers
Insertion of a paramagnetic probe in the form of a free radical on the specific locations of diamagnetic biopolymers to render them EPR active is known as site directed spin labeling (SDSL) and was developed by Hubbell and co-workers around a quarter of a century ago.20 The value of dipolar interactions between the two spin labels attached at specific locations is proportional to the inverse of the cube of the distance between them and is a key to measure the distance between spin-labeled groups on biomolecules.139 EPR spectroscopy eliminates size restrictions that are associated with other characterization techniques including NMR and X-ray crystallography. Additionally, it can provide dynamic information that is unknown in X-ray crystallography and can specifically be applied more conveniently to membrane proteins due to their crystallization problems owing to their hydrophobic nature.140 Due to a number of excellent reviews and monographs on SDSL of biopolymers,139–141 the area will not be discussed here.
However, a study is presented here in which the excellent power of EPR to resolve internal dynamics at the sub-nanometer length scale has been utilized to study the internal dynamics of a self-assembled peptide amphiphile (PA), which can be extended to characterize complex biopolymers. Though the study is related to supramolecular self-assembly, its potential to be applied to biopolymers is tremendous. Ortony et al. recently employed the spin labeling technique in a unique way to study the internal dynamics of nanofibers of PA.2 Different locations of the PA were spin-labeled with nitroxide radicals as shown in Fig. 26.
 Fig. 26  (a) Structure of the peptide amphiphile with SLs at different locations of the supramolecule (1a–1e). Structures 1 and 2 vary slightly with the methyl group at amide nitrogen in 2 in place of hydrogen in 1. (b) Visualization of nitroxide radicals inside the PA nanofiber, and (c) TEM micrograph of nanofibers of PA 1 showing their diameter. Reproduced with permission from ref. 2. Copyright (2014) Springer Nature. 
The structure of the PA is unique in that it shows three diverse kinds of interactions. The hydrocarbon tail is associated with van der Waals’ forces, the structural sequence shows hydrogen bonding with a tendency to form β-sheets, whereas the head-groups exhibit repulsion. The nitroxide radicals are supposed to show slow motion in a region where a high propensity of interactions is present between different groups of the PA in the form of hydrogen bonding, whereas a fast motion regime is expected for the reduced interactions inside the nanofiber. PA 1 was modified to reduce the hydrogen bonding formation by introducing a co-assembly of PA 1 with PA 2 (PA 1/2), in which the latter was synthesized by incorporating a methyl group in place of hydrogen to slightly vary the interactions between the chains of PA (Fig. 26).2
The EPR spectra recorded for the PA 1 and PA 1/2 are shown in Fig. 27. The obvious results of the EPR spectra suggest the broadened signals of the PA 1 nanofiber where hydrogen bonding is the strongest and varies according to the position of the SL in the nanofiber. Narrow lines are evident in the EPR spectra where the propensity is to form weaker β-sheets and the rotation of nitroxide is rather facile. This particular study has proved the effectiveness of EPR spectroscopy to investigate the internal dynamics, at the sub-nanometer length scale, of complex supramolecular structures where other conventional techniques show certain limitations.2
 Fig. 27  EPR spectra of (a) nanofibers having a higher percentage of PA 1 (99.6% PA1 and 0.4% of each 1a–1e) with a strong β-sheet formation tendency and line-broadening effect due to the restricted motion of nitroxides, (b) nanofibers with an approximately equal proportion of PA 1 and PA 1/2 with spin-labeled nanofibers showing less tendency to form weaker β-sheets. Spectra of 1a and 1e clearly show narrower peaks due to the location of nitroxides away from the β-sheet formation region (peptide sequence with persistent hydrogen bonding). Reproduced with permission from ref. 2. Copyright (2014) Springer Nature. 
3.6. EPR study of kinetics of radical polymerization
EPR spectroscopy has made it less complicated to understand the chemistry of initiating, intermediate, and terminating free radicals, which in turn provides direct evidence of the route of polymerization along with providing assistance to determine the reactivity and kinetics of polymerization reactions.142–145 EPR analysis of propagating rate coefficients has been conducted by direct detection methods, but attempts were not quite successful due to variable chain lengths of propagating radicals, initiator concentration, etc.24 Apart from this, a low concentration of propagating radicals also causes technical problems. Short lived radical species in radical polymerization reactions require large samples and thus are unsuitable to be characterized at higher frequencies due to the limitation in the size of resonant cavities.4 But with the emergence of controlled radical polymerizations, it became somewhat easier to apply EPR spectroscopy for the study of reaction kinetics, though transfer reactions in polymerization still pose a serious challenge due to complex dynamics, and though EPR based methods, such as SP-PLP-EPR as described later, have been developed to accurately measure the rate coefficients of transfer reactions as well.24
Weber and Turro have shown how pulsed EPR spectroscopy can be used to determine the rate constants of addition reactions between initiator radicals and monomers. Firstly, they determined the phase memory time, Tm, of the reacting radical by the electron spin-echo detection method. Then, rate constants were deduced from the linear relationship between the phase memory time and monomer concentration.146 The rate constants they obtained were in agreement with the values obtained by time resolved continuous wave electron spin resonance (TR-CW-EPR). TR-EPR spectroscopy is being applied to conduct the kinetic studies of polymerization reactions involving radical initiators. In TR-EPR, the loss of sensitivity of transient EPR active species in the reaction mixture can be avoided by obtaining spectra in sequential light flashes. Due to a range of intermediate species, a multifrequency approach is more suitable for TR-EPR analysis of polymerization reactions. Takahashi et al. have concluded the advantage of applying EPR spectroscopy for the study of intermediate radicals in polymerization reactions compared to absorption methods as prevention of dissociation of target radicals with light, especially in the case of phosphorus-centered radicals, and the presence of weak absorption bands in the case of carbon-centered radicals. Additionally, absorption methods do not provide structural information. In both of these cases, EPR has proven to be advantageous for the extraction of additional structural information.142
Chemically induced dynamic nuclear/electron polarization (CIDNP/CIDEP) effects, as previously described, have been employed for the radicals in chemical reactions which are based on a very useful phenomenon of dynamic polarization in NMR spectroscopy. Chemically induced dynamic polarization makes the system deviate from Boltzmann distribution and low concentration radical species with very short lifetimes can then be detected with CIDEP enhanced EPR signals.3 The method has been applied to calculate rate constants and characterize transient radicals and reaction mechanisms.147 The methodology, though, is disadvantageous with regard to the absence of any structural characterization of radical species. Still, the overlapping of the CIDEP mechanisms in the experiment, obscuring the spectral features, makes the analysis complicated.146 But, TR-CW-EPR has its own limitations when applied to the kinetic studies of reaction intermediates as polarization and relaxation parameters have to be determined independently. Takahashi et al. have applied TR-EPR to study the nature of intermediate radicals formed during the photo-polymerization reactions of monomers with carbon and phosphorus-centered radicals and determined the rate constants of these reactions by pulsed EPR spectroscopy.142 In another study, they characterized and determined the rate constants of photo-generated radicals reacting with geometrical isomers.143
Buback et al. have conducted a number of studies to investigate the kinetics of radical polymerization reactions through single pulse–pulsed laser polymerization (SP-PLP) in combination with time-resolved EPR spectroscopy, a tailor-made EPR analysis for the study of kinetics and for calculating the rate coefficients of polymerization reactions. In polymerization reactions, transfer reactions produce an array of secondary and tertiary radicals within the polymerization reaction mixture which complicate the kinetics. SP-PLP-EPR has shown to be instrumental in deducing the reaction parameters by accurately measuring the rate coefficients of transfer reactions.138,139 Apart from this, chain length dependent termination of polymerization has been efficiently studied by SP-PLP-EPR even with more than one type of radicals involved. The applied laser pulse makes the chain length increase in proportion to time. Radical concentration versus time traces obtained through the EPR experiment provides a basis to calculate the rate coefficients of chain length dependent termination.130 The rate coefficients of reversible deactivation polymerizations can be correlated with the termination due to similar radical size distributions and can be deduced in the same way. In SP-PLP-EPR, a single pulse laser experiment can provide information to deduce propagation (kp) and termination (kt) rate coefficients as well as transfer kinetics and has been particularly befitting for polymerizations with slowly terminating radicals.148
3.7. EPR for the reaction mechanism
Redox processes taking place in the polymerization reactions are the direct target of spectroscopic data acquisition and, in some cases, the reaction mechanisms have been deduced solely based on EPR spectral data or, in others, in conjunction with other contemporary characterization techniques.149 In most of the cases, the use of EPR spectroscopy in mechanistic pathway studies is limited to refining the hypotheses or the data collected by other techniques. It goes by determining the nature of reaction intermediates with unpaired electrons to propose a hypothetical reaction mechanism.150 Though the applicability of EPR spectroscopy to polymer systems has enhanced considerably in recent years, it is not so much in vogue in determining the reaction behavior or reaction mechanisms of polymerization reactions compared to the other spectroscopic techniques. For instance, the mechanism of self-healing of vulcanized natural rubber was elucidated by EPR spectroscopy as shown in Fig. 28.150 Previous studies related to sulfur-based self-healing polymers established that the metathesis of disulfide bridges is responsible for the self-healing properties. EPR spectra in this study corroborated the previous results as the calculated g-tensor from the spectrum gave evidence of the disulfide exchange reaction in the chemical structure of natural rubber in correlation with the metathesis of disulfide bridges for healing in sulfur-based self-healing polymers.150 Polysulphanyl radicals, R–Sn˙ with n ≥ 2, exhibit EPR signals in the range of 2.03–2.04, whereas the disulphide exchange reaction was evidenced by an observed g-value of 2.0481 at 70 °C.150 Reference values of g and hfc constants provide a direct opportunity to detect these radicals in reaction media, provided that reactions are accompanied by a very narrow range of intermediate radicals.151
 Fig. 28  Elucidation of the healing principle of the self-healing polymer with temperature induced free radical formation of sulfur atoms. (a) Disulfide bridge exchanging mechanism, (b) and (c) EPR spectra of the conventional sulfur cured natural rubber compound at room temperature and at 70 °C, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 150. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. 
Mechanoresponsive materials respond to stimuli by changing their properties. Thus, it is highly desirable to understand the mechanism to modulate the characteristics of materials involved in mechanoresponsive behavior. But in some cases, e.g. in spiropyran (colorless compound) estimation of mechanical force by its conversion to merocyanine (colored compound) upon applied mechanical stress can be troublesome by the possibility of reversion of merocyanine to spiropyran which could happen on exposure to visible light. Therefore, the control on this kind of equilibrium in mechanophores to improve mechanoresponsive properties is of significance.152 Otsuka et al. have conducted a few studies to figure out the mechanism of mechanoresponsiveness of the polymer and its composites along with certain factors which influence mechanochromic behavior. The polymers having a mechanochromic moiety (structural feature in a material that deforms on mechanical force producing a characteristic color) produce radicals due to homolytic cleavage.152
A dynamic covalent mechanophore, diarylbibenzofuranone (DABBF), was used in these studies because of it forming stable radicals upon mechanical stress, which could be quantitatively studied via EPR spectroscopy. The DABBF moiety was incorporated into segmented polyurethane elastomers because the ease of its scission and recombination upon mechanical stress would tell the stability of polymer structures, which in turn could be used to deduce the mechanism of failure and fatigue in polymeric materials. Fig. 29 shows the generation of stable radicals under stress and a subsequent increase in the intensity of EPR spectra by increasing the stress in dumb-bell shaped segmented polyurethane elastomers.152
 Fig. 29  (a) Illustration of the mechanochromic transition on applying the stress. The DABBF moiety and its cleavage upon stress with a visible change in color from yellow to blue. (b) The intensity of EPR spectra obtained at increasing stress values which indicates increased generation of radical species by escalating the stress from 0 to 300%. Reprinted with permission from ref. 152. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society. 
In another similar study by the same group, paramagnetic resonance was employed to investigate the activation and recombination process of the DABBF moiety in polymer-inorganic composites.153 By the incorporation of DABBF inside the rigid networks of alkoxysilanes, the molecular motion of radicals generated by the DABBF after stress was suppressed. Fig. 30 shows the increased stability of radicals generated by the DABBF moiety by increasing the cross-linking of DABBF-diol with a rigid silica network, as can be seen conspicuously by the intensity of color and EPR signals. DABBF-tetrakis(trimethoxysilane) based polymer (2) shows the maximum cross-linking of the silica network with the DABBF moiety exhibiting the most pronounced color and highest EPR signal intensity of the three, while the pristine DABBF diol shows the least color and EPR signal intensity indicating the least stability of radicals in it. The recombination behavior of DABBF-bis(trimethoxysilane) based polymer (1) was intermediate with respect to the above two. Furthermore, the DABBF alkoxysilane derivatives were introduced into the elastomers such that the latter acted as soft domains and the former as hard domains along with the formation of an interface region. The activation and recombination rates of radicals generated in these domains were compared under variable stress and heating conditions. The intensity of EPR spectra provided evidence of the presence of radicals inside a particular domain i.e. a soft or hard domain.153
 Fig. 30  Grinding behavior of (a) DABBF-bis(trimethoxysilane) based polymer, (b) DABBF-diol, (c) DABBF-tetrakis(trimethoxysilane) based polymer at rt, showing the more vivid color in the case of DABBF-containing rigid silica networks in comparison with DABBF-diol due to not only the restriction in the recombination of ABF radicals but also due to very high dissociation of Si-DABBF compared with DABBF-diol owing to the enhanced impact of mechanical force applied on the DABBF moiety through the rigid silica structure. (d) EPR spectra of the DABBF-tetrakis(trimethoxysilane) based polymer, DABBF-bis(trimethoxysilane) based polymers and DABBF-diol after grinding, showing higher persistent radical accumulation in rigid networks and (e) recombination behavior of radicals generated by the DABBF moiety in the above three. Reprinted with permission from ref. 153. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. 
In yet another recent study, the group introduced the same DABBF mechanophore in different polymer architectures and determined the relationship between the polymer architecture and mechanoresponsiveness by EPR spectroscopy.154 Network reorganization of dynamic covalent polymer gels and poly(vinylpyrrolidone) (PVP) based hydrogels has also been studied.155,156 In a study on poly(n-butyl acrylate) networks for the introduction of self-healing properties, EPR spectroscopy was employed to study the efficiency of the cleavage, pendant nitroxide generation, and mobility at alkoxyamine junctions.157 These studies signify that for the understanding of stimuli responsive and self-healing mechanisms, EPR experiments can provide direct and meaningful information avoiding complex simulation procedures and high field and pulse spectrometers.
3.8. EPR imaging and polymer science
Electron paramagnetic resonance imaging (EPRI) involves the discrimination of the resonant frequencies of paramagnetic spins by applying magnetic field gradients. As EPR spectroscopy provides a cumulative signal of all the paramagnetic centers in the sample, it cannot provide spatial information. Employing strong magnetic field gradients in conventional EPR instruments can provide spatial information of paramagnetic centers in the sample.24 Though decades ago, EPRI has been utilized to study the inhomogeneous distribution of paramagnetic centers in a sample,11 the commercial applications of this technique to polymer science are limited. The initial applications of EPRI come from the analyses of solid materials and biological systems around 1980.158,159
The bond between EPRI and polymer systems is now stronger than before. Polymer systems are being characterized by both magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and EPRI techniques, whereas suitable organic radical based materials are being developed as contrast agents or redox sensitive probes for in vivo MRI and EPRI analysis. Minuscule research work has been conducted yet for the 1-D (spatial) and 2-D (spectral-spatial and spatial-spatial) EPRI imaging of the polymeric systems. A few instances where EPRI has been initially applied in the polymer field include the study of the UV irradiated polypropylene and the distribution of nitroxide radicals in it with 1D EPRI,12,21 quantification of the radicals formed after heat treatment of polyimide resins, diffusion coefficient studies of polymeric systems, and degradation monitoring of copolymers.160 Leveque et al. have recently applied spectral spatial EPRI for photoactive dimethacrylate-based dental resins to study the evolution of radicals.161 In the past, EPRI has been applied in a number of studies to polymer systems by Schlick et al. including the stabilization and degradation studies of heterophasic polymers and polymer membranes, transport processes in polymer solutions, ion containing polymers, and cross linked polymers, etc.24
In contrast, a few recent studies concluded that the polymers containing nitroxide radicals are promising candidates for magnetic resonance imaging because of the inherent in vivo toxicity of metal-based polymers. However, polymer based metal containing molecular imaging agents are numerous which utilize the paramagnetic resonance properties of metals for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).162,163 A nitroxide radical is introduced into a polymer chain to produce a macro-radical with paramagnetic properties to be used as MRI contrast agent. These polymer-based macro-radicals have shown to be more effective imaging agents than the pristine nitroxide radicals such as TEMPO and PROXYL as the pristine nitroxide radicals are prone to in vivo redox activity. Radical functionalized amphiphilic poly(ethylene glycol)-b-polycarbonate-based diblock copolymers have been synthesized for imaging agents with reduced toxicity having an additional property of drug delivery as shown in Fig. 31.164
 Fig. 31  (a) Nitroxide radical functionalized copolymer, (b) interaction of the organic radical with water molecules. (c) Self-micellization of the copolymer and cargo loading. Reprinted with permission from ref. 164. Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society. 
Johnson et al. have synthesized nitroxide bearing polymers with different topological structures and organic radical loadings. They showed the altered imaging contrast properties based on these organic radical functionalized polymer architectures, e.g. radicals bearing a branched bottle-brush polymer architecture.32,33Fig. 32 presents the EPR spectra of spirocyclohexyl nitroxide (chex-MM) and spirocyclohexyl nitroxide functionalized bottle-brush polymers (P1) showing a broader line width in the case of P1 due to the increased concentration and packing of nitroxides on the polymer. Fig. 32 further shows the comparison of the reduction-resistant property of different polymer architectures along with spirocyclohexyl nitroxide radicals. Reduction resistant efficiency was studied for chex-MM, P1, fourth generation spirocyclohexyl nitroxide-functionalized poly(propyleneimine) dendrimers, and TEMPO-functionalized branched-bottlebrush polymers. The combination of spirocyclohexyl with a bottle-brush polymer was found to show the highest reduction-resistant property.32 The group further studied the contrasting abilities of the chex-MM functionalized brush-arm star polymer and still found its transverse relaxivities superior to the previously synthesized chex-dendrimers and chex-bottle brush polymers.33 Previously, few studies have also hinted at the enhanced effectiveness of particular nitroxide functionalized dendrimers compared to gadolinium based MRI contrast agents.165–167
 Fig. 32  (a) Comparison of EPR spectra of chex-MM and P1. (b) MRI phantoms and relative contrast enhancements of phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), chex-MM, and P1. PBS was used for comparison. (c) Reduction of nitroxide radicals in chex-MM, P1, dendrimers, and TEMPO polymer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 32. Copyright (2014) Nature Publishing Group. 
The EPRI technique when compared to nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (NMRI) is associated with certain drawbacks which include the demand for higher gradients in EPRI, intricate EPRI spectra due to complex hyperfine splitting, and the absence of paramagnetic species in numerous systems, which also limit the application of EPRI in polymer science.21
4. Conclusion
This review has highlighted the diverse array of polymer research fields where EPR spectroscopy is currently being employed. It is indeed a challenging task to characterize polymers by EPR spectroscopy as it requires an understanding of diverse fields of science including quantum physics, magnetic resonance, spectroscopy, handling of the simulation procedures, etc. Furthermore, it is always desirable to couple EPR spectroscopy with other contemporary analytical techniques to remove its limitations.
Free radical EPR spectroscopy is now a well-established field, but in the case of transition metal ion containing polymers, i.e. coordination polymers, EPR spectroscopy has still to go a long way to accurately interpret the spectral features. The same is the case with in vivo imaging of biopolymers through EPR with respect to decreased sensitivity. Nevertheless, with the current developments in the biocompatible spin probes, in vivo EPR imaging is going to become a cardinal technique for the analysis of biological systems, especially in explaining the intricate biopolymer structures. Distance distribution studies by DEER are quite scarce in the case of synthetic polymers and models for biological systems that have already been developed should be applied to synthetic polymers.
Because of radical species being central to polymer research fields and their ubiquitous existence in polymer systems and the emergence of new classes of polymers, the scope and applications of EPR spectroscopy are bound to increase in upcoming years. Furthermore, the recent developments in instrumentation with enhanced sensitivity, the improved spectral simulation packages, the integration of other analytical techniques, an increased range of applicable systems which fall within its ambit, and the broad spectrum of conditions in which it can now be applied have ensured promising future prospects of EPR spectroscopy in the field of polymer science.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
References

          J. L. Halary, F. Laupretre and L. Monnerie, Polymer Materials: Macroscopic Properties and Molecular Interpretations, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,  2011 Search PubMed .
J. H. Ortony, C. J. Newcomb, J. B. Matson, L. C. Palmer, P. E. Doan, B. M. Hoffman and S. I. Stupp, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 812–816 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Möbius, W. Lubitz and A. Savitsky, Prog. Nucl. Magn. Reson. Spectrosc., 2013, 75, 1–49 CrossRef PubMed .

          P. H. Rieger, Electron Spin Resonance Analysis and Interpretation, The Royal Society of Chemistry,  2007 Search PubMed .

          A. Agarwal, R. Sharma, S. Gupta, A. Harlev, G. Ahmad, S. S. d. Plessis, S. C. Esteves, S. M. Wang and D. Durairajanayagam, Oxidative Stress in Human Reproduction, Springer International Publishing,  2017 Search PubMed .
S. Kempe, H. Metz and K. Mäder, Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm., 2010, 74, 55–66 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Mangion, Y. Liu, M. Reibarkh, R. T. Williamson and C. J. Welch, J. Org. Chem., 2016, 81, 6937–6944 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. P. Virmani and E. J. Zeller, Anal. Chem., 1974, 46, 324–325 CrossRef .

          T. Risse, D. Hollmann and A. Bruckner, Catalysis, The Royal Society of Chemistry,  2015 Search PubMed .
Y. Pan and M. J. Nilges, Rev. Mineral. Geochem., 2014, 78, 655–690 CrossRef .
N. P. Crook, S. R. Hoon, K. G. Taylor and C. T. Perry, Geophys. J. Int., 2002, 149, 328–337 CrossRef .
C. Hintze, F. Schutze, M. Drescher and S. Mecking, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 32289–32296 RSC .
A. M. Sheveleva, D. I. Kolokolov, A. A. Gabrienko, A. G. Stepanov, S. A. Gromilov, I. K. Shundrina, R. Z. Sagdeev, M. V. Fedin and E. G. Bagryanskaya, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 20–24 CrossRef PubMed .

          N. M. Atherton, Electron spin resonance: theory and applications, Ellis Horwood; Wiley : Halsted Press, Chichester; New York,  1973 Search PubMed .

          S. Schlick and G. Jeschke, in Characterization and Analysis of Polymers, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,  2008 Search PubMed .
M. M. Roessler and E. Salvadori, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 2534–2553 RSC .
R. R. Hewitt and B. Mazelsky, J. Appl. Phys., 1972, 43, 3386–3392 CrossRef .

          W. R. Hagen, Biomolecular EPR Spectroscopy, CRC Press,  2008 Search PubMed .
E. Badetti, V. Lloveras, J. L. Muñoz-Gómez, R. M. a. Sebastián, A. M. Caminade, J. P. Majoral, J. Veciana and J. Vidal-Gancedo, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 7717–7724 CrossRef .

          M. Drescher and G. Jeschke, EPR Spectroscopy Applications in Chemistry and Biology, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg,  2012 Search PubMed .
J. E. Lovett, M. Hoffmann, A. Cnossen, A. T. J. Shutter, H. J. Hogben, J. E. Warren, S. I. Pascu, C. W. M. Kay, C. R. Timmel and H. L. Anderson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 13852–13859 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Pan, S. Neupane, J. Farmakes, B. Liu, W. Sun and Z. Yang, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2017, 55, 1770–1782 CrossRef .

          P. Z. Qin and K. Warncke, Methods in Enzymology, Academic Press,  2015 Search PubMed .

          S. Schlick, Advanced ESR Methods in Polymer Research, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,  2006 Search PubMed .

          C. P. Poole, Electron spin resonance: a comprehensive treatise on experimental techniques, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2nd edn,  1983 Search PubMed .

          J. A. Weil and J. R. Bolton, Electron Paramagnetic Resonance, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,  2006 Search PubMed .

          A. Schweiger and G. Jeschke, Principles of Pulse Electron Paramagnetic Resonance, Oxford University Press,  2001 Search PubMed .

          M. D. E. Forbes, L. E. Jarocha, S. Sim and V. F. Tarasov, in Adv. Phys. Org. Chem, ed. I. H. Williams and N. H. Williams, Academic Press,  2013, vol. 47, pp. 1–83 Search PubMed .
U. Lappan, B. Wiesner and U. Scheler, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 3577–3581 CrossRef .
Y. Xia, Y. Li, A. O. Burts, M. F. Ottaviani, D. A. Tirrell, J. A. Johnson, N. J. Turro and R. H. Grubbs, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19953–19959 CrossRef PubMed .
A. O. Burts, Y. Li, A. V. Zhukhovitskiy, P. R. Patel, R. H. Grubbs, M. F. Ottaviani, N. J. Turro and J. A. Johnson, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 8310–8318 CrossRef .
M. A. Sowers, J. R. McCombs, Y. Wang, J. T. Paletta, S. W. Morton, E. C. Dreaden, M. D. Boska, M. F. Ottaviani, P. T. Hammond, A. Rajca and J. A. Johnson, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5460 CrossRef PubMed .
H. V. T. Nguyen, Q. Chen, J. T. Paletta, P. Harvey, Y. Jiang, H. Zhang, M. D. Boska, M. F. Ottaviani, A. Jasanoff, A. Rajca and J. A. Johnson, ACS Cent. Sci., 2017, 3, 800–811 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Baumann, W. Paul, T. Choi, C. P. Lutz, A. Ardavan and A. J. Heinrich, Science, 2015, 350, 417–420 CrossRef PubMed .
J. J. Pla, K. Y. Tan, J. P. Dehollain, W. H. Lim, J. J. L. Morton, D. N. Jamieson, A. S. Dzurak and A. Morello, Nature, 2012, 489, 541 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Bienfait, J. J. Pla, Y. Kubo, M. Stern, X. Zhou, C. C. Lo, C. D. Weis, T. Schenkel, M. L. W. Thewalt, D. Vion, D. Esteve, B. Julsgaard, K. Mølmer, J. J. L. Morton and P. Bertet, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 11, 253 CrossRef PubMed .
R. R. Amirov, E. A. Burilova, Z. T. McMillan, L. R. Amirova, A. B. Ziyatdinova, J. R. Shayimova, M. S. Bukharov, A. M. Dimiev and A. V. Zakharov, J. Mol. Liq., 2017, 238, 184–192 CrossRef .

          G. Jeschke, in Advanced ESR Methods in Polymer Research, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,  2006 Search PubMed .
U. Lappan, B. Wiesner and U. Scheler, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 8616–8621 CrossRef .
P. Törmälä and G. Weber, Polymer, 1978, 19, 1026–1030 CrossRef .

          R. Lopez, in Computational and Instrumental Methods in EPR, Springer US, Boston, MA,  2007, pp. 31–82 Search PubMed .

          S. S. Eaton and G. R. Eaton, in Biomedical EPR, Part B: Methodology, Instrumentation, and Dynamics, ed. S. R. Eaton, G. R. Eaton and L. J. Berliner, Springer US, Boston, MA,  2005, pp. 3–18 Search PubMed .
Y. Miwa, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 6141–6146 CrossRef .
Y. Miwa and K. Yamamoto, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2012, 116, 9277–9284 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Miwa, T. Kondo and S. Kutsumizu, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 5232–5237 CrossRef .

          S. Stoll, in Encyclopedia of Biophysics, ed. G. C. K. Roberts, Springer Berlin, Heidelberg,  2013 Search PubMed .
D. Xu, D. E. Budil, C. K. Ober and J. H. Freed, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 15867–15872 CrossRef .
Q. Fu, Z. R. Gray, A. V. Est and R. H. Pelton, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 4935–4939 CrossRef .
U. Lappan and U. Scheler, Macromolecules, 2017, 50, 8631–8636 CrossRef .
A. J. Maliakal, N. J. Turro, A. W. Bosman, J. Cornel and E. W. Meijer, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2003, 107, 8467–8475 CrossRef .
G. M. Rosen, S. Porasuphatana, P. Tsai, N. P. Ambulos, V. E. Galtsev, K. Ichikawa and H. J. Halpern, Macromolecules, 2003, 36, 1021–1027 CrossRef .
E. Badetti, V. Lloveras, K. Wurst, R. M. Sebastián, A. M. Caminade, J. P. Majoral, J. Veciana and J. Vidal-Gancedo, Org. Lett., 2013, 15, 3490–3493 CrossRef PubMed .
M. J. N. Junk, W. Li, A. D. Schlüter, G. Wegner, H. W. Spiess, A. Zhang and D. Hinderberger, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2011, 212, 1229–1235 CrossRef .
M. J. N. Junk, W. Li, A. D. Schlüter, G. Wegner, H. W. Spiess, A. Zhang and D. Hinderberger, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 5683–5687 CrossRef PubMed .
M. J. N. Junk, U. Jonas and D. Hinderberger, Small, 2008, 4, 1485–1493 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-H. Tang, M. Cangiotti, C.-L. Kao and M. F. Ottaviani, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2017, 121, 10498–10507 CrossRef PubMed .
K. B. Sebby, E. D. Walter, R. J. Usselman, M. J. Cloninger and D. J. Singel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2011, 115, 4613–4620 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wang, Z. Wu, H. Shen and G. Wang, Polym. Chem., 2017, 8, 7044–7053 RSC .
J. Zhang, H. Shen, W. Song and G. Wang, Macromolecules, 2017, 50, 2683–2695 CrossRef .
C. A. Massa, S. Pizzanelli, V. Bercu, L. Pardi and D. Leporini, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 6748–6756 CrossRef .
K. Widder, S. R. MacEwan, E. Garanger, V. Nunez, S. Lecommandoux, A. Chilkoti and D. Hinderberger, Soft Matter, 2017, 13, 1816–1822 RSC .
A. M. Wasserman, M. V. Motyakin, I. I. Barashkova, L. A. Wasserman and L. L. Yasina, Russ. Chem. Bull., 2015, 64, 2284–2293 CrossRef .
L. A. Wasserman, I. I. Barashkova, V. G. Vasil'ev, V. S. Papkov, S. N. Salazkin and A. M. Wasserman, Appl. Magn. Reson., 2015, 46, 1409–1420 CrossRef .
I.
I. Barashkova, M. V. Motyakin, N. N. Komova, L. L. Yasina, E. E. Potapov and A. M. Wasserman, Appl. Magn. Reson., 2015, 46, 1421–1427 CrossRef .
S. Ruthstein, A. Potapov, A. M. Raitsimring and D. Goldfarb, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 22843–22851 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhou and S. Schlick, Polymer, 2000, 41, 4679–4689 CrossRef .
K. Malka and S. Schlick, Macromolecules, 1997, 30, 456–465 CrossRef .
M. Vasilescu, A. Caragheorgheopol, H. Caldararu, R. Bandula, H. Lemmetyinen and H. Joela, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 7740–7751 CrossRef .
Y. Pan, S. Neupane, J. Farmakes, B. Liu, W. Sun and Z. Yang, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2017, 55, 1770–1782 CrossRef .
S. Sundarapandiyan, T. S. Renitha, J. Sridevi, P. Saravanan, B. Chandrasekaran and G. B. Raju, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 313, 1112–1121 CrossRef .
E. Chernikova, V. Golubev, A. Filippov, C. Y. Lin and M. L. Coote, Polym. Chem., 2010, 1, 1437–1440 RSC .

          P. B. Ayscough, Specialist Periodical Reports-Electron Spin Resonance, The Royal Society of Chemistry,  1982 Search PubMed .
M. J. Scott, T. R. Billiar and D. A. Stoyanovsky, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 38773 CrossRef PubMed .
L. A. Frolova, N. P. Piven, D. K. Susarova, A. V. Akkuratov, S. D. Babenko and P. A. Troshin, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 2242–2244 RSC .
M. Łabanowska, A. Wesełucha-Birczyńska, M. Kurdziel and K. Sepioło, Carbohydr. Polym., 2013, 91, 339–347 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Łabanowska, A. Wesełucha-Birczyńska, M. Kurdziel and P. Puch, Carbohydr. Polym., 2013, 92, 842–848 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Bährle, T. U. Nick, M. Bennati, G. Jeschke and F. Vogel, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2015, 119, 6475–6482 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Fel, L. Khrouz, V. Massardier and L. Bonneviot, Polymer, 2015, 77, 278–288 CrossRef .
R. F. D. Luis, E. S. Larrea, J. Orive, L. Lezama and M. I. Arriortua, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 11662–11675 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Coronado, M. Gimenez-Marques and G. M. Espallargas, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 4403–4410 CrossRef PubMed .
S. K. Hoffmann, J. Goslar, S. Lijewski, K. Tadyszak, A. Zalewska, A. Jankowska, P. Florczak and S. Kowalak, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2014, 186, 57–64 CrossRef .
M. Mendt, F. Gutt, N. Kavoosi, V. Bon, I. Senkovska, S. Kaskel and A. Poeppl, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 14246–14259 Search PubMed .

          B. Goodman and J. B. Raynor, Electron Spin Resonance of Transition Metal Complexes,  1970 Search PubMed .
M. Todaro, G. Buscarino, L. Sciortino, A. Alessi, F. Messina, M. Taddei, M. Ranocchiari, M. Cannas and F. M. Gelardi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 12879–12889 Search PubMed .
E. Borfecchia, S. Maurelli, D. Gianolio, E. Groppo, M. Chiesa, F. Bonino and C. Lamberti, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 19839–19850 Search PubMed .
Y. Liu, D. Chen, X. Li, Z. Yu, Q. Xia, D. Liang and H. Xing, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 1475–1481 RSC .
T. C. Narayan, T. Miyakai, S. Seki and M. Dinca, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 12932–12935 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Abhyankar, S. Bertaina and N. S. Dalal, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 28143–28147 Search PubMed .
K. Leus, G. Vanhaelewyn, T. Bogaerts, Y. Y. Liu, D. Esquivel, F. Callens, G. B. Marin, V. V. Speybroeck, H. Vrielinck and P. V. D. Voort, Catal. Today, 2013, 208, 97–105 CrossRef .
N. Anbu and A. Dhakshinamoorthy, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 490, 430–435 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Dhakshinamoorthy, M. Alvaro and H. Garcia, J. Catal., 2009, 267, 1–4 CrossRef .
P. Valvekens, E. D. Bloch, J. R. Long, R. Ameloot and D. E. De Vos, Catal. Today, 2015, 246, 55–59 CrossRef .
B. Jee, M. Hartmann and A. Pöppl, Mol. Phys., 2013, 111, 2950–2966 CrossRef .
B. Tan, C. Chen, L. X. Cai, Y. J. Zhang, X. Y. Huang and J. Zhang, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 3456–3461 CrossRef PubMed .
T. K. A. Hoang, M. I. Webb, H. V. Mai, A. Hamaed, C. J. Walsby, M. Trudeau and D. M. Antonelli, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11792–11798 CrossRef PubMed .
A. S. Poryvaev, A. M. Sheveleva, D. I. Kolokolov, A. G. Stepanov, E. G. Bagryanskaya and M. V. Fedin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 10698–10704 Search PubMed .
I. Nevjestic, H. Depauw, K. Leus, V. Kalendra, I. Caretti, G. Jeschke, S. V. Doorslaer, F. Callens, P. V. D. Voort and H. Vrielinck, ChemPhysChem, 2015, 16, 3118 CrossRef .
M. Meilikhov, K. Yusenko, A. Torrisi, B. Jee, C. Mellot-Draznieks, A. Poeppl and R. A. Fischer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6212–6215 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Jee, K. Eisinger, F. Gul-E-Noor, M. Bertmer, M. Hartmann, D. Himsl and A. Pöppl, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 16630–16639 Search PubMed .
B. Bleaney and K. D. Bowers, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A Math. Phys. Sci., 1952, 214, 451–465 CrossRef .
I. Kaminker, M. Florent, B. Epel and D. Goldfarb, J. Magn. Reson., 2011, 208, 95–102 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Jee, K. Koch, L. Moschkowitz, D. Himsl, M. Hartman and A. Poppl, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 357–361 CrossRef .
O. Fleker, A. Borenstein, R. Lavi, L. Benisvy, S. Ruthstein and D. Aurbach, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 4935–4944 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Mahata, D. Sarma and S. Natarajan, J. Chem. Sci., 2010, 122, 19–35 CrossRef .
G.-P. Yong, Y.-Z. Li, Y.-M. Zhang and W.-L. She, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 1439–1448 RSC .
A. Kubica, J. Kowalewski, D. Kruk and M. Odelius, J. Chem. Phys., 2013, 138, 064304 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Phuengphai, S. Youngme, N. Chaichit and J. Reedijk, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2013, 403, 35–42 CrossRef .
B. Garai, A. Mallick and R. Banerjee, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 2195–2200 RSC .
C. F. Leong, B. Chan, T. B. Faust and D. M. D'Alessandro, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 4724–4728 RSC .
M. Savonnet, J. Canivet, S. Gambarelli, L. Dubois, D. Bazer-Bachi, V. Lecocq, N. Bats and D. Farrusseng, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 4105–4108 RSC .

          S. Kaskel, The Chemistry of Metal-Organic Frameworks: Synthesis, Characterization, and Applications, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,  2016 Search PubMed .
M. V. Fedin, S. L. Veber, K. Y. Maryunina, G. V. Romanenko, E. A. Suturina, N. P. Gritsan, R. Z. Sagdeev, V. I. Ovcharenko and E. G. Bagryanskaya, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13886–13891 CrossRef PubMed .
F. A. Villamena, M. H. Dickman and D. R. Crist, Inorg. Chem., 1998, 37, 1454–1457 CrossRef .
R. A. Allao, A. K. Jordao, J. A. L. C. Resende, A. C. Cunha, V. F. Ferreira, M. A. Novak, C. Sangregorio, L. Sorace and M. G. F. Vaz, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 10843–10850 RSC .
M. Baskett, P. M. Lahti and F. Palacio, Polyhedron, 2003, 22, 2363–2374 CrossRef .
L. B. L. Escobar, G. P. Guedes, S. Soriano, N. L. Speziali, A. K. Jordão, A. C. Cunha, V. F. Ferreira, C. Maxim, M. A. Novak, M. Andruh and M. G. F. Vaz, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 7508–7517 CrossRef PubMed .
A. V. Artem'ev, O. V. Vysotskaya, L. A. Oparina, A. S. Bogomyakov, S. S. Khutsishvili, I. V. Sterkhova, V. I. Ovcharenko and B. A. Trofimov, Polyhedron, 2016, 119, 293–299 CrossRef .

          V. I. Krinichnyi, Multi Frequency EPR Spectroscopy of Conjugated Polymers and Their Nanocomposites, CRC Press,  2016 Search PubMed .
M. T. Nguyen, R. A. Jones and B. J. Holliday, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 13112–13115 RSC .
C. Krause and H. Borchert, Synth. Methods, 2016, 222, 84–92 CrossRef .
J. Niklas, K. L. Mardis, B. P. Banks, G. M. Grooms, A. Sperlich, V. Dyakonov, S. Beaupré, M. Leclerc, T. Xu, L. Yu and O. G. Poluektov, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 9562–9574 RSC .
J. D. Ceuster, E. Goovaerts, A. Bouwen, J. C. Hummelen and V. Dyakonov, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 64, 195206 CrossRef .
E. A. Thomsen, D. J. Keeble, B. Lochab, P. L. Burn, H. El-Mkami and I. D. W. Samuel, Org. Electron., 2008, 9, 809–815 CrossRef .
N. Camaioni, F. Tinti, L. Franco, M. Fabris, A. Toffoletti, M. Ruzzi, L. Montanari, L. Bonoldi, A. Pellegrino, A. Calabrese and R. Po, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 550–559 CrossRef .
T. Hisaaki, H. Naoki, S. Tomotaka, M. Kazuhiro and K. Shin-ichi, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 46, 5187 CrossRef .
C. Enengl, S. Enengl, S. Pluczyk, M. Havlicek, M. Lapkowski, H. Neugebauer and E. Ehrenfreund, ChemPhysChem, 2016, 17, 3836–3844 CrossRef PubMed .
J. W. Jang, K. W. Lee, E. M. Lee and C. E. Lee, Solid State Commun., 2008, 147, 293–295 CrossRef .
V. I. Krinichnyi, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 129, 134510 CrossRef PubMed .
A. M. Fraind, L. R. Ryzhkov and J. D. Tovar, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2016, 120, 1033–1039 CrossRef PubMed .
D. K. Susarova, N. P. Piven, A. V. Akkuratov, L. A. Frolova, M. S. Polinskaya, S. A. Ponomarenko, S. D. Babenko and P. A. Troshin, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 2239–2241 RSC .
L. Franco, A. Toffoletti, M. Ruzzi, L. Montanari, C. Carati, L. Bonoldi and R. Po’, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 1554–1560 Search PubMed .
M. S. A. Abdou, F. P. Orfino, Y. Son and S. Holdcroft, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 4518–4524 CrossRef .
L. Bonoldi, C. Carati, L. Montanari and R. Po’, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 7751–7758 Search PubMed .
A. I. Shames, L. N. Inasaridze, A. V. Akkuratov, A. E. Goryachev, E. A. Katz and P. A. Troshin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 13166–13170 Search PubMed .
A. M. Sheveleva, M. Y. Ivanov, I. K. Shundrina, A. D. Bukhtoyarova, E. G. Bagryanskaya and M. V. Fedin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 14767–14773 Search PubMed .
J. Winsberg, T. Hagemann, T. Janoschka, M. D. Hager and U. S. Schubert, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 686–711 CrossRef PubMed .
K.-A. Hansen and J. P. Blinco, Polym. Chem., 2018, 9, 1479–1516 RSC .
K. Zhang, M. J. Monteiro and Z. Jia, Polym. Chem., 2016, 7, 5589–5614 RSC .
P. Roser, M. J. Schmidt, M. Drescher and D. Summerer, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2016, 14, 5468–5476 Search PubMed .
I. D. Sahu, R. M. McCarrick and G. A. Lorigan, Biochemistry, 2013, 52, 5967–5984 CrossRef PubMed .

          E. Bordignon, EPR Spectroscopy: Site-Directed Spin Labeling of Membrane Proteins, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg,  2011 Search PubMed .
H. Takahashi, Y. Marushima, K. Tsuji, K. Shibuya and A. Kawai, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2015, 119, 8261–8268 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Takahashi, K. Hagiwara and A. Kawai, Mol. Phys., 2016, 114, 3093–3103 CrossRef .
J. Barth and M. Buback, Macromol. React. Eng., 2010, 4, 288–301 CrossRef .
H. Kattner and M. Buback, Macromol. Symp., 2013, 333, 11–23 CrossRef .
M. Weber and N. J. Turro, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2003, 107, 3326–3334 CrossRef .
O. B. Morozova, S. E. Korchak, R. Z. Sagdeev and A. V. Yurkovskaya, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2005, 109, 10459–10466 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Kattner and M. Buback, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 3716–3722 CrossRef .
F. Cicogna, S. Coiai, P. Rizzarelli, S. Carroccio, C. Gambarotti, I. Domenichelli, C. Yang, N. T. Dintcheva, G. Filippone, C. Pinzino and E. Passaglia, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 5656–5667 RSC .
M. Hernandez, A. M. Grande, W. Dierkes, J. Bijleveld, S. V. Zwaag and S. J. Garcia, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 5776–5784 CrossRef .
P. Garra, F. Morlet-Savary, C. Dietlin, J. P. Fouassier and J. Lalevée, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 9371–9381 CrossRef .
K. Imato, T. Kanehara, T. Ohishi, M. Nishihara, H. Yajima, M. Ito, A. Takahara and H. Otsuka, ACS Macro Lett., 2015, 4, 1307–1311 CrossRef .
T. Kosuge, K. Imato, R. Goseki and H. Otsuka, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 5903–5911 CrossRef .
H. Oka, K. Imato, T. Sato, T. Ohishi, R. Goseki and H. Otsuka, ACS Macro Lett., 2016, 5, 1124–1127 CrossRef .
K. Imato, T. Ohishi, M. Nishihara, A. Takahara and H. Otsuka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 11839–11845 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Pal, J. P. Pandey and G. Sen, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2017, 194, 261–273 CrossRef .
S. Telitel, Y. Amamoto, J. Poly, F. Morlet-Savary, O. Soppera, J. Lalevee and K. Matyjaszewski, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 921–930 RSC .
T. Swift, L. Swanson, M. Geoghegan and S. Rimmer, Soft Matter, 2016, 12, 2542–2549 RSC .
G. Das, T. Prakasam, S. Nuryyeva, D. S. Han, A. Abdel-Wahab, J. C. Olsen, K. Polychronopoulou, C. Platas-Iglesias, F. Ravaux, M. Jouiad and A. Trabolsi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 15361–15369 Search PubMed .
G. Jeschke, M. Sajid, M. Schulte, N. Ramezanian, A. Volkov, H. Zimmermann and A. Godt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 10107–10117 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Leveque, J. G. Leprince, S. Bebelman, J. Devaux, G. Leloup and B. Gallez, J. Magn. Reson., 2012, 220, 45–53 CrossRef PubMed .
N. R. B. Boase, I. Blakey and K. J. Thurecht, Polym. Chem., 2012, 3, 1384–1389 RSC .
A. J. L. Villaraza, A. Bumb and M. W. Brechbiel, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 2921–2959 CrossRef PubMed .
J. M. W. Chan, R. J. Wojtecki, H. Sardon, A. L. Z. Lee, C. E. Smith, A. Shkumatov, S. Gao, H. Kong, Y. Y. Yang and J. L. Hedrick, ACS Macro Lett., 2017, 6, 176–180 CrossRef .
C. S. Winalski, S. Shortkroff, E. Schneider, H. Yoshioka, R. V. Mulkern and G. M. Rosen, Osteoarthr. Cartilage, 2008, 16, 815–822 CrossRef PubMed .
C. S. Winalski, S. Shortkroff, R. V. Mulkern, E. Schneider and G. M. Rosen, Magn. Reson. Med., 2002, 48, 965–972 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Francese, F. A. Dunand, C. Loosli, A. E. Merbach and S. Decurtins, Magn. Reson. Chem., 2003, 41, 81–83 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:
ΔE = hν = geβeB0	(1)
H0 = HEZI + HNZI + HHFI + HNNI + HEEI + HZFS + HNQI	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 1  Major areas of polymer research under the purview of EPR spectroscopy.	 

 	Fig. 2  (A) A representation of spin-polarized scanning tunneling microscopy for obtaining EPR spectra of a single Fe atom adsorbed on the MgO film. A spin polarized STM tip was positioned over an iron atom and an electric field established between the tip and iron atom. Tunneling current was measured which depended on the relative population of states. (B) Iron and cobalt atoms located on the one atom thick film of MgO captured through STM. (C) Position of the Fe atom on the MgO layer above the oxygen atom. (D) Visualization of the first five energy levels of the Fe atom. Reproduced with permission from ref. 34. Copyright (2015) American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 3  Graph representing the variations in the EPR signals of five Fe atoms. Resonating Fe atoms at a slightly different magnetic field due to the subtly varied local environment (which leads to different magnetic moments or tilting of the axis w.r.t. magnetic field) indicates the manifestation in the form of inhomogeneous broadening in ensemble measurements. Straight lines show the linear relationship between the resonance position and strength of the magnetic field for all five Fe atoms. Reproduced with permission from ref. 34. Copyright (2015) American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 
	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 4  A representative saturation curve for the low-density polyethylene (LDPE) spin labeled with 10-doxylnonadecane. The straight line indicates a direct relationship between V and S without any microwave power saturation. Deviations from the straight line indicate saturation at higher microwave power values. Note the effect of temperature on the extent of saturation at a given P value. Reprinted with permission from ref. 45. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Phase separation of PAA-T as a function of concentration, pH, and degree of substitution in 5 mM KCl at rt. Dynamic light scattering was employed to obtain the average particle diameter in nm and is represented by black squares and numbers. Samples devoid of the colloidal phase are labeled as P. DS stands for the degree of substitution. Reprinted with permission from ref. 48. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  EPR spectra along with simulations of the PEC of PDADMAC and SL-PAA by varying pH at (a) T = 273, and (b) T = 333. The line-shape of EPR spectra (both at 273 K & 333 K) clearly shows the change in the mobility of nitroxide radicals attached to the polymer chain as A′zz is increasing from pH 5 to 4 due to the restricted mobility of nitroxide radicals. This decrease in mobility was attributed to the attractive forces between PAA and PDADMAC units as well as hydrogen bonds between PAA chains. Additionally, the pH range 5–4 is also related to the abrupt change in the dissociation of PAA chains. The EPR line-shape is not showing any considerable deviation from pH 10 to 5. Reprinted with permission from ref. 39. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Suppression of EPR signals of spin-labeled brush polymers with (A) PhNHNH2; (B) PS-NHNH2 in DMF at rt. A higher degree of quenching is evident in the case of phenyl hydrazine (A) due to the ease in diffusion of smaller molecules in the polymer matrix. Greater shielding by side groups would hinder the accessibility of external reagents to functional groups. The access is least in M-TEMPO-brush in the case of the bulky quencher (B) where steric crowding is higher and accessibility to nitroxide radicals is reduced. Reprinted with permission from ref. 30. Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Monomers employed to synthesize bottle brush polymers with nitroxides at defined locations. Reprinted with permission from ref. 31. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  EPR spectra for different samples synthesized by the combinations of monomers along with simulation data. Comparison of macromonomers (A) shows that the shape of EPR spectra is not influenced substantially by variations in the structure of nitroxide radicals. τR values are higher than for free nitroxide radicals in solution (0.005 ns). Due to the facile interaction of the peripherally labeled polymer with the solvent (increase in micropolarity of SLs), the value of αN is higher in the peripherally labeled polymer (17.1) than the backbone labeled polymer (16.9 G), whereas a similar intensity of the EPR signal for all three samples shows that the solubility is comparable. The proportion of the slow motion component is tilted towards samples with more sterically hindered nitroxides (e.g. mid-labeled polymer). Broadening in the case of a shorter tether of MM 3 compared to MM 2 is clearly evident (C & D). Reprinted with permission from ref. 31. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  Concentration dependent EPR spectra of copolymers with four different topological structures and TEMPO distributions. Red dots show the location of nitroxide radicals on polymer chains. The negligible effect of the increase in the concentration of samples on the line-shape of EPR spectra shows that spectral features are modulated by intramolecular exchange and dipole interactions rather than any intermolecular interactions. The densely and uniformly grafted GTEMPO radicals in HPG-g-PGTEMPO broadened the EPR spectra to the point of unresolved hyperfine splitting. Reprinted with permission from ref. 59. Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  EPR spectra at different temperatures of PDMS with two high-field EPR frequencies, 285 GHz (left), 190 GHz (right). Spectra are better resolved at a higher magnetic field value (285 GHz). Reprinted with permission from ref. 60. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  Plot of radical concentration vs. their g-values from the EPR spectra of several lignin preparations. Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  The structures showing the (a) MIL-53(Al) and spin probe, TEMPO. (b) Demonstration of the motion of the spin probe in large pores of MIL-53(Al). (c) Orientation of TEMPO in the NP state of the MIL-53(Al) with preferred orientation in which the μ2-hydroxo group has a shorter distance from the NO group of MIL-53(Al) developing interactions and immobilizing the TEMPO radical. Reprinted with permission from ref. 13. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  EPR spectra along with simulations taken by cooling and warming the MIL-53(Al) with spin probe showing the variations in the mobility of spin probe in LP and NP states. At lower temperature, LP to NP conversion occurs, which restricts the mobility of TEMPO leading to increased correlation times with broadening of EPR spectral lines and vice versa. Reprinted with permission from ref. 13. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  Orientation-selective X-band 1H Davies ENDOR spectra showing hfc of protons in the dehydrated sample at 6 K at (a) 278.0 mT, (b) 292.2 mT, (c) 342.1 mT, and (d) 346.1 mT. Dotted lines represent the simulated spectra. Reprinted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  Peisach–Blumberg plot, A‖ vs. g‖. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81. Copyright (2014) Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 17  
syn and anti conformations of the flexible ligand btix. Reprinted with permission from ref. 80. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Temperature variation of the X-band EPR spectra showing the conformational transformation from 1D to 2D. (b) Coordination environments of cobalt(II) centers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 80. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  EPR spectra of the doped compound with Cu+2 and Mn+2 metal ions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 107. Copyright (2013) Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 20  Figure showing the doping induced production of polarons in the organic semiconductor P3HT. (a) The potential applied until 600 mV continuously produces polarons with increased concentration of spins and increased EPR signal intensity. (b) The cut in the EPR signal intensity from 600 mV to 1300 mV suggests the production of bipolarons from the combination of polarons decreasing the overall spin density. Reproduced with permission from ref. 126. Copyright (2016) John Wiley and Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 21  Evolution of the EPR spectra of PTB7 in the course of polymer degradation. The spectra show the correlation between the peak intensity and accumulation of radical species over time and their increased recombination dynamics after a certain period. The radical quenching rate is higher after about 4340 h than the rate of radical generation indicating a decrease in signal intensity after this period. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright (2014) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 22  Degradation profiles of polymers under different photo-thermal aging conditions obtained using EPR spectroscopy. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright (2014) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 23  EPR spectra obtained at T = 120 K; (as) “dark” spectra, recorded before irradiation; (b) LEPR spectra. The aged sample shows a decrease in dark signal intensity (blue line) at the position of the PCBM− anion but the intensity of the signal due to polarons is comparable to that of the fresh sample due to the formation of CTC by oxygen with the polymer increasing the signal intensity at the position of P+. The annealed sample showed a substantial decrease in dark as well as LESR signal intensity for both the PCBM− anion and P+ due to reduced carrier generation efficiency in the annealed sample. Reprinted with permission from ref. 133. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  Graphs showing recombination kinetics from LEPR spectra at T = 120 K in the aged, fresh, and annealed samples for PCBM− (left) and P+ (right). The slow relative decrease in the LESR signal intensity of the aged sample with respect to time is attributed to the effect of aging to evolve deeper trap states with high retention of charge carriers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 133. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 25  A representation of a degraded porous polymer with the radicals generated in the pores as well as the bulk of the polymer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 135. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Structure of the peptide amphiphile with SLs at different locations of the supramolecule (1a–1e). Structures 1 and 2 vary slightly with the methyl group at amide nitrogen in 2 in place of hydrogen in 1. (b) Visualization of nitroxide radicals inside the PA nanofiber, and (c) TEM micrograph of nanofibers of PA 1 showing their diameter. Reproduced with permission from ref. 2. Copyright (2014) Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 27  EPR spectra of (a) nanofibers having a higher percentage of PA 1 (99.6% PA1 and 0.4% of each 1a–1e) with a strong β-sheet formation tendency and line-broadening effect due to the restricted motion of nitroxides, (b) nanofibers with an approximately equal proportion of PA 1 and PA 1/2 with spin-labeled nanofibers showing less tendency to form weaker β-sheets. Spectra of 1a and 1e clearly show narrower peaks due to the location of nitroxides away from the β-sheet formation region (peptide sequence with persistent hydrogen bonding). Reproduced with permission from ref. 2. Copyright (2014) Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 28  Elucidation of the healing principle of the self-healing polymer with temperature induced free radical formation of sulfur atoms. (a) Disulfide bridge exchanging mechanism, (b) and (c) EPR spectra of the conventional sulfur cured natural rubber compound at room temperature and at 70 °C, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 150. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) Illustration of the mechanochromic transition on applying the stress. The DABBF moiety and its cleavage upon stress with a visible change in color from yellow to blue. (b) The intensity of EPR spectra obtained at increasing stress values which indicates increased generation of radical species by escalating the stress from 0 to 300%. Reprinted with permission from ref. 152. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 30  Grinding behavior of (a) DABBF-bis(trimethoxysilane) based polymer, (b) DABBF-diol, (c) DABBF-tetrakis(trimethoxysilane) based polymer at rt, showing the more vivid color in the case of DABBF-containing rigid silica networks in comparison with DABBF-diol due to not only the restriction in the recombination of ABF radicals but also due to very high dissociation of Si-DABBF compared with DABBF-diol owing to the enhanced impact of mechanical force applied on the DABBF moiety through the rigid silica structure. (d) EPR spectra of the DABBF-tetrakis(trimethoxysilane) based polymer, DABBF-bis(trimethoxysilane) based polymers and DABBF-diol after grinding, showing higher persistent radical accumulation in rigid networks and (e) recombination behavior of radicals generated by the DABBF moiety in the above three. Reprinted with permission from ref. 153. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) Nitroxide radical functionalized copolymer, (b) interaction of the organic radical with water molecules. (c) Self-micellization of the copolymer and cargo loading. Reprinted with permission from ref. 164. Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 32  (a) Comparison of EPR spectra of chex-MM and P1. (b) MRI phantoms and relative contrast enhancements of phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), chex-MM, and P1. PBS was used for comparison. (c) Reduction of nitroxide radicals in chex-MM, P1, dendrimers, and TEMPO polymer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 32. Copyright (2014) Nature Publishing Group.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
