Proton  reduction to hydrogen in biological and chemical systems  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CP42413D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CP42413D
(Perspective)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 13772-13784Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsProton reduction to hydrogen in biological and chemical systems

        
          
            Phong D. 
            Tran
          
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            James 
            Barber
          
          
        
      *bc
aEnergy Research Institute @ Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Research TechnoPlaza, 5th Storey, 50 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637553
bSolar Fuel Laboratory, School of Materials Science and Engineering, NTU, 50 Nanyang Avenue, Singapore 639798. E-mail: j.barber@imperial.ac.uk
cDivision of Molecular Biosciences, Imperial College London, London, SW7 2AZ, UK
Received 
      16th July 2012
    , Accepted 16th August 2012First published on 10th September 2012AbstractIn the drive to devise catalytic systems to convert solar energy into the energy of chemical bonds, chemists and electrochemists are seeking inspiration from our understanding of enzymes involved in bioenergetics. This is particularly true for generating molecular hydrogen from high energy electrons derived from solar driven water splitting. In this case the natural enzymes are the [NiFe]- and [FeFe]-hydrogenases. In this article we review our present understanding of the structure and mechanistic functioning of these enzymes and how they are providing a blue print to the design and understanding of the mechanism of a variety of synthesized catalysts for proton reduction chemistry.
Phong D. Tran
Phong D. Tran obtained his PhD degree at the University of Paris 11 at Orsay-France in 2007. From 2009 to 2010 he worked as a postdoctoral research associate in the research group of Prof. Fontecave and Dr. Artero at the CEA, Grenoble-France where he studied bioinspired molecular catalysts and nanostructured catalytic materials for hydrogen (photo)generation. Since 2011, he is a research fellow at the Solar Fuel Laboratory in NTU, Singapore, lead by Prof. James Barber. His interests are in development of solid state inorganic electrocatalysts and hybrid photocatalysts for water oxidation and solar fuel production.
James Barber
James Barber is Ernst Chain Professor of Biochemistry at the Imperial College London and Nanyang visiting Professor at the Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore where he has established the Solar Fuels Laboratory. He has worked extensively on the water splitting system for photosynthesis and is using this experience to contribute to research into artificial photosynthesis for solar fuel production. He is a fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry, of Royal Society of London, Member of the European Academy (Academia Europaea) and a Foreign Member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences. He has been awarded several medals, prizes and honorary doctorates.
1. Introduction
Hydrogen is considered as an attractive clean fuel, which produces only water as the by-product when oxidized either by combustion in pure oxygen or via an electrochemical fuel cell. In practical terms water is an unlimited source of hydrogen but its release requires input of energy. In principle, solar driven hydrogen generation can be achieved by employing a solar cell coupled with an electrolyser which removes electrons from water via the water oxidation reaction (WOR, eqn (1)) at an anode and uses the electrons to drive the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER, eqn (2)) at a cathode. Alternatively a more direct approach is to use an appropriate photocatalyst or a tandem system consisting of two interacting photocatalysts to harvest solar energy and drive the WOR and HER reactions.1 In both cases, efficient electrocatalysts are required to accelerate these multiple electron chemical reactions. Platinum is known as an extremely efficient electrocatalyst for HER and is used in (photo)electrolysis systems. However, its low abundance in the Earth's crust makes it expensive and not suitable for large scale hydrogen production.2 Research for viable alternatives to platinum is, therefore, one great challenge for developing large scale technology to convert solar energy into chemical fuel. To this end, learning from biology could give valuable lessons. Indeed, in Nature, many microorganisms have the ability to either extract electrons from hydrogen molecules to power their metabolism or remove excess low-potential electrons in the environment by reducing protons and releasing hydrogen. In these microorganisms, the inter-conversion between hydrogen consumption and release is efficiently mediated by enzymes, known as hydrogenases. Armstrong and colleagues have concluded, based on electrochemical studies, that hydrogenases are as efficient as platinum nanoparticles for hydrogen evolution and uptake.3
Importantly, the crystal structures of various hydrogenases, determined by X-ray diffraction analyses, have revealed that the catalytic centers of these enzymes are composed of earth abundant transition metals, Ni and Fe, along with simple inorganic and organic ligands.4–6 Therefore, considerable efforts have been focused on mimicking natural hydrogenases to engineer alternative HER catalysts to platinum. 2H2O → O2 + 4H+ + 4e(1) 2H+ + 2e ⇌ H2(2) Pt + H+ + e → Pt/Hθ(3) 2Pt/Hθ → 2Pt + H2(4)
At the atomic level, the mechanism of proton reduction on platinum (heterogeneous catalysis) is different from that of natural hydrogenases or synthetic molecular catalysts (homogeneous catalysis). On the platinum surface, hydrogen generation involves a one-electron reduction process of protons into atomic hydrogen (eqn (3)). The recombination of adsorbed atomic hydrogen generates a hydrogen molecule and re-generates the active surface of platinum (eqn (4)).7 The free energy of H atoms bound to the Pt catalyst was found to be negative and close to zero (ΔG0H* ≅ 0 eV) which means absorption–dissociation of H2 molecules into H atoms is reversible on the Pt surface (Fig. 1). This explains why platinum is an extremely efficient electrocatalyst for both hydrogen generation and uptake. In contrast, the free energy ΔG0H* of first-row transition metals, e.g. Ni, Co, Mo, is sufficiently negative to generate relatively strong chemical bonding between these metals and hydrogen and metal hydrides (M–H) form. Therefore, the generation of hydrogen on the surface of these metals is no longer via the homolysis mechanism as found for platinum but involves the protonation of the metal hydride resulting in a heterolysis mechanism.
 Fig. 1  The Sabatier plot for the HER of different electrocatalysts. The catalytic activities (given in terms of the exchange current density j0) are plotted versus the hydrogen adsorption free energy (ΔG0H*).8,9 
The formation of a metal hydride has also been identified as the key intermediate species in the proton reduction catalysis mediated by hydrogenases and by a number of molecular catalysts. In the case of hydrogenases, the coordinating ligands, as well as the protein environment, are believed to tune and optimize the reactivity of the metal hydride, so much so that their activities can match that of platinum as stated above.
The scheme in Fig. 2 presents possible pathways for hydrogen generation in the hydrogenases or synthetic catalysts. Briefly, the catalytic cycle can be initiated by a protonation process followed by reduction processes or it is initiated by reduction events prior to protonation. The precise sequence of these electro- and chemical-steps depends on the nature of the catalyst as well as experimental conditions such as the concentration of the catalyst, the electrochemical potential of the protons etc. Key elements of these catalytic cycles are metal-hydride intermediates which are usually highly active and therefore difficult to fully characterize. In most examples, the occurrence and important role of these hydrides are predicted by DFT calculations. However, only a few hydrides have been identified by spectroscopic analysis and in these cases they were kinetically stabilized by employing appropriate ligand and experimental conditions (e.g. low temperature).
 Fig. 2  Possible catalytic pathways for proton reduction reaction generating hydrogen in the natural hydrogenases or synthetic catalysts. 
In this paper, we use the catalytic scheme depicted in Fig. 2 as a framework to analyze catalytic behavior of hydrogenases as well as synthetic chemical electrocatalysts. We start with hydrogenases with the objective to formulate a mechanistic understanding of these enzymes in relation to their specific structural and functional features. We then employ this understanding as a guide to address the mechanisms of HER synthetic catalysts, both organometallic molecular catalysts and inorganic solid state materials. The most important advances will be reviewed and remaining challenges for engineering synthetic catalysts with activities equivalent to hydrogenases will be discussed.
2. Brief overview on structure and function of natural hydrogenases
The first determination of the crystal structure at the atomic level was for a [NiFe]-hydrogenase.4 The crystal structure of [FeFe]-hydrogenases was determined later by Peters et al.5 and Nicolet et al.6 The catalytic centers of these hydrogenases are composed of first-row transition metals: Ni and Fe in the case of [NiFe]-hydrogenases and only Fe in the case of [FeFe]-hydrogenases. The coordination of these transition metal ions is provided by residual cysteine, dithiolate ligand and surprisingly CO and CN− which are unusual biological ligands (Fig. 3, top). These catalytic centers are buried within the specific protein environment which means transfer pathways for electron, proton and hydrogen are required. The transfer of substrate protons and hydrogen products is facilitated by a specific proton transfer pathway and by gas channels while the [Fe–S] clusters ([4Fe–4S] in the case of the [FeFe]-hydrogenases and two [4Fe–4S] plus one [3Fe–4S] in the [NiFe]-hydrogenases) ensure the transfer of electrons from ferredoxin, the redox mediator bound to the protein surface, to the H2-generation catalytic centers (Fig. 3, bottom).10
 Fig. 3  (Top): Catalytic centers of [FeFe]- and [NiFe]-hydrogenases; (bottom): schematized structure and function of [FeFe]-hydrogenase for HER. Schematized electron, proton, and hydrogen transfer pathways are included. 
A simplified scheme for the proton reduction reaction in [FeFe]-hydrogenases is given in Fig. 4. The catalytic center of these hydrogenases is commonly referred to as the H-cluster. The first step of the catalysis is thought to be the protonation of the azapropanedithiolate ligand which lowers the redox potential of the H-cluster. Reduction of this protonated system results in formation of a highly active terminal hydride which rapidly generates hydrogen gas via a heterolysis mechanism once in contact with a proton. Since the H-cluster is embedded within the protein environment, hydrogen generation via a homolysis pathway involving two hydride species as found in the case of cobaloxime catalysts (see Section 3.3 following) is not possible. Moreover, the specific protein environment is believed to place constraints on the H-cluster to adopt the CO-bridged conformation and avoid the tautomerization of the terminal hydride into the more thermodynamically stable bridged hydride isomer.11 This could well be a main reason for the impressive catalytic activities of [FeFe]-hydrogenases for hydrogen evolution with TOF up to 9000 s−1.12
 Fig. 4  Proposed for activation of [FeFe]-hydrogenase and catalytic cycle for hydrogen evolution reaction.15–17 Note that H(ox) is the aerobic inactive state of the active site of [FeFe]-hydrogenase. One-electron reduction of this H(ox) gives the transient paramagnetic state H(trans). From this H(trans) state, the catalytic active H(ox) state is obtained by a redox-dependent activation process. 
In the [NiFe]-hydrogenases case, the protonation site could be sulfur atoms of a cysteine ligand, either bridged or terminal, and the redox platform was proposed to be centered on the NiII center rather than on FeII. Details of the proposed mechanistic cycle for proton reduction in this enzyme can be found in recent reviews.10,13,14
From our understanding of hydrogenases, key structural and functional features provide a valuable blue print for engineering synthetic molecular catalysts or catalytic material for HER. First, a redox platform composed of transition metal ion M is required. The ligands coordinated to this metal ion M need to be engineered in such a way to adjust the reduction potential of the catalyst to be close to the thermodynamic reduction potential of the 2H+/H2 couple. This adjustment is important in determining how much overpotential is required to allow the catalytic system to express its HER activity. However, a balance between the redox potential of the M platform and pKa of the M–H hydride has to be struck. In principle, the more positive the reduction potential of Mn+/M is, the smaller the pKa of the M–H hydride will be (see Section 3.2 following for NiP4 catalysts). As a consequence, stronger acid is required and hydrogen is produced at lower rates. A proton relay site needs to be introduced into the second coordination sphere and the overall design of the biomimic must favor the formation of a kinetically active M–H hydride and limit its tautomerization into a thermodynamically more stable isomer. Lastly, electron transfer to the catalytic site needs to be optimized as in the case of hydrogenases where [Fe–S] clusters play this role.
During the past ten years there has been considerable progress in engineering synthetic catalysts that mimic catalytic sites of hydrogenases. In following sections, we will review the most recent advances and discuss how the key structural and functional features of hydrogenases have inspired the design of synthetic catalysts. We will focus on three families of bio-inspired catalysts: [FeFe]-, nickel bisdiphosphine, and cobaloxime catalysts on which important advances have been achieved both in terms of mechanistic understanding and basic design principles.
3. Biomimetic molecular catalysts
3.1 Diiron catalysts ([FeFe] catalysts)
The chemistry of dinuclear [FeFe] complexes was well known long before the determination of the crystal structural of [FeFe]-hydrogenases in 1998.18 Since then, more than two hundred [FeFe] complexes have been synthesized and many of them were found to have catalytic activity for hydrogen generation.19 The simplest [FeFe] catalyst, the hexacarbonyl propanedithiolate complex [Fe(CO)3(dpt)FeCO3], has some HER activity but is overall a poor catalyst (Fig. 5, top). It could not be protonated even by strong acids such as HBF4 or trifluoromethanesulfonic acid.20 Hence, in this case, the catalytic cycle is initiated by a one-electron reduction process, which could lead to Fe–S bond cleavage, followed by protonation. Introducing electron donor ligands (CN−, PR3etc.) increased the pKa of the [FeFe] core which shifted the first reduction event to a more negative potential. Nevertheless, increasing the pKa of the system resulted in an easier protonation step. Despite this apparent improvement these [FeFe] catalysts with electron-donor ligands displayed comparable catalytic activities to those of the hexacarbonyl equivalent. Significant improvements in the catalytic activities of these [FeFe] catalysts were achieved when a proton relay site was introduced. One approach involved the introduction of a nitrogen base either within an aza-propanethiolate ligand or in an aza-diphosphine ligand.21,22 By employing a strong acid, catalysis is initiated by protonation of the nitrogen base (Fig. 5, bottom). This protonation shifts the redox level of the [FeFe]-catalyst to a more positive potential that translates to catalysis occurring at a smaller over potential. The migration of protons from a nitrogen atom to the distal iron center of the reduced Fe(I)Fe(I)-core resulted in formation of a terminal hydride that has been detected by spectroscopic analysis.21,23,24 This proton transfer was proposed to occur with a low energetic barrier.16 However, the terminal hydride intermediate is only observable at low temperature conditions. At room temperature, it rapidly tautomerized into the bridged hydride isomer which is more thermodynamically stable and therefore less kinetically active for protonation. This is probably the reason why all synthetic [FeFe] catalysts are inferior to the natural [FeFe]-hydrogenases both in terms of over potential requirements and catalytic rates.
 Fig. 5  (Top): Proton reduction catalysis with some selected catalysts containing different ligand sets; (bottom): possible proton reduction pathway in a functional [FeFe] catalyst containing proton relay site on the second coordination sphere (adapted from ref. 21, 24 and 27). 
Indeed, in the natural [FeFe]-hydrogenases, the rotation of –Fe(CO)2CN− is blocked due to the proximity and strong interaction between the CN− coordinated ligand and protonated Lysine237. As a consequence, the H-cluster is constrained adopting CO-bridged conformation that exposes the vacant coordination position for terminal hydride production during the catalysis.11 Such a phenomenon is difficult to replicate in solvated synthetic molecular [FeFe] catalysts. In order to achieve such a favorable conformation and thus enhance the activities of bio-inspired diiron catalysts, efforts are required to engineer appropriate ligand systems. Encapsulating synthetic catalysts within an appropriate protein or an artificial protein host could be a solution. Examples of this have been reported involving the encapsulation of the [FeFe] catalyst core within the cyclodextrin host.25,26 However, these hybrid catalysts showed low catalytic activities probably because the properties of the host were not compatible with the requirement for efficient electron transport to the active center. Employing an appropriate conducting host could help solve the problem.
Despite the fact that many of synthetic [FeFe] catalysts seem to replicate the structural and functional features of the H-cluster of [FeFe] hydrogenases, the activities are still very far from those of the natural enzymes. To date, extremely high overpotentials of ca. 500 mV and a strong acid are still required for synthetic [FeFe] catalysts to catalyse hydrogen evolution. Moreover, most of these catalysts function only in organic solvents and therefore not applicable for coupling to water splitting technology. Only a few examples of aqueous soluble catalysts have been reported.28,29 Another critical issue is that decomposition of [FeFe] catalysts containing carbonyl ligands occurs due to oligomerization coupling with CO ligand removal, particularly under photo-reduction conditions. Hence, the possibility of integrating synthetic [FeFe] catalysts into systems for large scale hydrogen (photo)production from water seems questionable. Moreover, better progress has been achieved for other families of molecular HER catalysts: nickel bisdiphosphine and cobaloxime catalysts.
3.2 Nickel bisdiphosphine (NiP4) catalysts
By blending the key functional features of [NiFe]- and [FeFe]-hydrogenases, DuBois and colleagues30,31 have pioneered a class of excellent molecular HER catalysts. Nickel bisdiphosphine catalysts (denoted as NiP4) contain a NiII redox platform as found in the [NiFe]-hydrogenases and a proton relay cyclic (di)aza-diphosphine ligand as identified for the aza-propanedithiolate ligand in the [FeFe]-hydrogenases (Fig. 6). As shown in Fig. 6 the catalytic cycle is initiated by protonation of two basic nitrogens followed by two subsequent one-electron reduction events. Proton transfer from the nitrogen atom to reduced-Ni species results in the formation of Ni–H hydride intermediate which is subsequently protonated, generating a hydrogen molecule and re-generating the starting NiII catalyst. Interestingly, the catalytic rate and overpotential requirement for the hydrogen generating reaction are tunable by tailoring substitutions on the phosphorus or nitrogen positions of the diphosphine ligands. Indeed, catalytic hydrogen generation was usually observed at potentials close to the redox potential of the NiII/NiI couple.30,32 That is by shifting this redox couple to a more positive potential, catalytic hydrogen generation can be achieved with a small over potential requirement. When a large residue, such as cyclohexyl, was introduced onto the phosphorous atoms the structure of the catalyst underwent a tetrahedral distortion which decreased the energy of the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital.31,33,34 This resulted in an anodic shift of the reduction potential (Table 1). A similar effect was achieved by using electron withdrawing substitutions at the nitrogen position.32 However, the catalytic rate was found to be dependent on basicity of the proton relay. With a strong base (e.g. [Ni(P2PhN2PhMe)2]2+) the removal of H2 was difficult while with a weak base (e.g.) the protonation step was not favored so that in both cases hydrogen generation was impeded. As a consequence, the highest activity was found for the [Ni(P2PhN2PhBr)2]2+ catalyst. Controlling the formation of the endo–endo isomer by destabilizing un-favorable kinetic endo–exo or exo–exo isomers was reported to be another valuable strategy to enhance the catalytic rate for hydrogen production with NiP4 catalysts (Fig. 6). Indeed, an impressive catalytic rate of 106000 s−1 representing ten times faster than that achieved for [FeFe]-hydrogenases12 was measured for NiP4 in which P2 is a 1,3,6-triphenyl-1-aza-3,6-diphosphacycloheptane ligand (see inset of Fig. 6). This ligand is believed to facilitate the formation of the endo–endo isomer.35 The NiP4 catalysts were found to have the capability to catalyze both hydrogen evolution and uptake.30,36 However, unlike hydrogenases, almost all the NiP4 catalysts required large overpotentials. The  system was the first and still remains an unique example of reversibly bifunctional molecular electrocatalysts for the interconversion between two protons and a hydrogen molecule (eqn (2)).36 Moreover, the rich chemistry of the diphosphine ligand provides a possibility of introducing functional groups into the catalyst which can be used to immobilize it on electrode materials.37–39 We will discuss this in more detail in Section 5 dealing with materials engineering.
 Fig. 6  Structure and catalytic function of NiP4 catalysts. The endo–endo isomer is kinetically favorable for hydrogen generation while the endo–exo and exo–exo isomers are less catalytically active. Inset shows the structure of the highly active  catalyst. 
Table 1 Redox and catalytic activities of  (x = 1 or 2) catalysts in acetonitrile solution and with [DMFH]+ as a proton source. Catalytic activities were enhanced with adding water to acetonitrile solution




R
R′

E(NiII/NiI)

E(NiI/Ni0)
TOF (s−1)
Ref.


MeCN
MeCN/H2O




Ph
Ph (x = 2)
−0.83
−1.02
590
720

33



Cy
Ph (x = 2)
−0.62
−1.09
NA
NA

33




n-Butyl
Ph (x = 2)
−0.93
−1.23
46
1820

33



2,4,4-Trimethylpentyl
Ph (x = 2)
−0.89
−1.17
<1
69

33



Ph
PhCF3 (x = 2)
−0.74
−0.89
95
120

32



Ph
PhBr (x = 2)
−0.79
−0.97
740
1040

32



Ph
PhMe (x = 2)
−0.84
−1.05
590
770

32



Ph
Ph (x = 1)
—
−1.13
33000
106000

35



Ph
CH2CH2OMe (x = 2)
−0.94
−1.25
NA
NA

36



Cy


t
Bu (x = 2)
−0.81
−1.45
NA
NA

34





NiP4 catalysts are robust under both electrocatalysis or photocatalysis conditions which makes them attractive for further study for possible application.40 Moreover, NiP4 catalysts are not only water tolerant catalysts but their catalytic rates were even enhanced when water was added to the acetonitrile solution.32 However, no water soluble NiP4 system has yet been reported and NiP4 catalysts still required strong acidic solution to function.
3.3 Cobaloxime catalyst
Cobaloxime was an early identified powerful catalyst for hydrogen evolution from acidic solutions and in the presence of reducing agents.41 In the last decade, important progress has been made with this class of promising HER catalysts, not only in ligand engineering to enhance their catalytic activities but also in gaining mechanistic insights of the proton reduction reaction. The activation of the catalyst involves the reduction of the Co3+ in the cobaloxime by two one-electron processes resulting in the generation of a highly active CoI species. Protonation of this CoI species results in formation of an active CoIIIH hydride. Indeed, kinetically stabilized CoI species were observed by spectroscopy.42–44 The catalytic reaction rate shows a first order dependence both for catalysis and proton concentration, emphasizing the importance of the CoIIIH production step in the overall catalytic cycle. From this intermediate, hydrogen generation can occur by following the homolysis pathway (a) or heterolysis pathway (b) shown in Fig. 7, top. Which one of these two pathways is dominant is still a matter of debate.45 It seems that both are involved with one being favored depending on experimental conditions (strength of acid as well as acid concentration used, catalyst concentration etc.). Another possibility is further reduction of the CoIIIH intermediate to a CoIIH intermediate from which hydrogen generation occurs.46–48 When the heterolysis mechanism is preferred, the role of a proton relay is critical. This is particularly true for the cobalt diimine-dioxime catalysts which are analogous to cobaloxime catalysts. Here better catalytic activities were obtained for hydroxyl bridged catalysts compared to the difluoro borane (BF2) equivalent (Fig. 7, bottom).42
 Fig. 7  (Top): Possible catalytic pathways of hydrogen evolution reaction catalyzed by cobaloxime catalysts; (bottom): possible catalytic pathway involving proton transfer from proton relay site to the CoI center. 
The catalytic activity of cobaloxime can be tuned by tailoring the ligands. It was found that hydrogen generation was usually observed at potentials close to the reduction potential of the CoII/CoI redox couple. CoII/CoI reduction potential can be shifted to more positive potential by introducing electron withdrawing substitutions into the glyoxime ligands.49,50 However, an anodic shifting of the CoII/CoI couple results in formation of a less basic CoIII–H hydride which requires stronger acid for protonation and generation of hydrogen. Hence, the ligands need to be optimized to achieve a good compromise between the overpotential requirement and rate of catalytic hydrogen generation as well as facilitating proton delivery to the active site.
Clearly, for solar driven water splitting and hydrogen generation it is critical that the electrocatalyst for HER is stable in water. One possibility is to replace bidentate glyoxime ligands with tetradentate diimine-dioxime ligands.42 However, only a few cobaloxime catalysts are water soluble and function in aqueous solution. Grafting these catalysts onto electrode surfaces could be a good solution to engineer systems that function in an aqueous environment.51
It is worth noting that, a new class of molecular cobalt catalyst, the cobalt pentapyridine complexes, has been recently discovered.52,53 These catalysts were reported to be active in aqueous solution at neutral pH. However, a large over potential of ca. 600–700 mV is required which makes these catalysts less attractive for energy conversion application.
3.4 General remark and perspectives
It can be concluded that the electron transfer, proton transfer and proton reduction processes which underpin hydrogen generation have been well managed within synthetic molecular catalysts thanks to mechanistic understanding of the hydrogen evolving process in catalytic sites of hydrogenases. Significant advances have been made for the [FeFe] and cobaloxime systems. But the most remarkable progress was reported by DuBois and colleagues for the nickel bisdiphosphine complexes with a recently synthesized catalyst which is even more active than hydrogenases in terms of catalytic rate. The challenge now is to make these catalysts function in aqueous solution, preferably at neutral or near to neutral pH, and with low overpotential requirements. To this end, learning how electrons are efficiently transferred from the protein surface to the catalytic centers in hydrogenases is important. This aspect of bio-mimicking could possibly be achieved by grafting the molecular catalyst onto electrical conducting materials such as CNTs, graphene etc. We will return to this possibility in Section 5.
4. Inorganic solid state materials
It is generally agreed that organometallic-based HER molecular catalysts are not suitable for long-term practical application due to their instability under working conditions. For example, organic ligands of a ruthenium water oxidation catalyst were reported to be oxidized when functioning, resulting in the rapid deactivation of the catalyst.54 Also cobaloxime HER catalysts are not stable due to hydrolysis.55 Therefore, when searching for robust catalysts for industrial scale application, the employment of inorganic catalysts which do not contain any fragile organic ligand makes sense. Sulfides of first-row transition metals are such promising candidates. Cobalt sulfides and nickel sulfides were identified some years ago as effective catalysts for hydrogen generation in alkaline solution.56,57 However, more interesting catalytic activities were obtained with molybdenum and tungsten sulfides which were also reported to be remarkably robust. Details of these HER catalysts will be discussed in following sections.
4.1 Molybdenum sulfide and tungsten sulfide
Molybdenum sulfide (MoS2) and tungsten sulfide (WS2) are isostructural materials. They have layered morphology consisting of S–M–S (M = Mo or W) hexagonal packed layers which are held together by van de Waals interaction with characteristic layer-to-layer distance of about 0.7 nm. These materials were well known as the active center of heterogeneous catalysts for hydrodesulfurization.58 Recently, they were also reported to be promising materials for other applications, e.g. counter electrode material in dye-sensitized solar cells59 or anode material for Li batteries.60–62 For HER, MS2 was recently identified as a very attractive alternative to platinum having outstanding stability and high electrocatalytic activities. It was reported that the edge where the Mo atoms are located is electrocatalytically active while an S edge is inert for HER.8,9,63,64 The reason is that hydrogen bonding to the S edge surface is an uphill reaction: the free energy for binding of hydrogen was calculated to be +0.18 eV which is much more positive compared with that calculated for binding of hydrogen to the Mo edge surface, +0.08 eV. In the Sabatier plot for HER (Fig. 1), the MoS2 catalyst was positioned close to the top of the volcano curve which illustrates its high electrocatalytic activity. DFT calculations predicted that the WS2 analogue is slightly less active than MoS2. This prediction was confirmed by experiment.64 Enhancing the catalytic activity of MoS2 can be achieved by increasing the amount of Mo edge sites per mole of MoS2 catalyst by tailoring the synthesis process. As such, amorphous MoS2 electrodeposited by the dynamic potential method65 and MoS2/graphene composite66 catalyzed HER with 50–100 mV less overpotential requirement and with a significantly lower Tafel plot of ca. 40 mV decade−1 compared with HER catalysis by MoS2 nanoparticles. Moreover, Hu and colleagues reported that amorphous electrodeposited MoS2 is an active catalyst for HER over a wide range of pH (pH0 to pH13) in aqueous solution. These properties make MoS2 a good co-catalyst for interfacing with a semiconductor to construct a hybrid photocatalyst for hydrogen production.67–70
Perhaps, the main drawback of MoS2 and WS2 catalysts is the extremely low electrical conductivity between two adjacent S–M–S sheets. Therefore, in principle, it requires a perfect orientation of S–M–S layers on the electrode surface to optimize electron transfer from the electrode to catalytic active sites. It was proposed that growing S–M–S sheets perpendicularly onto a conducting electrode surface can result in an optimum electron transfer.71 However, such a highly ordered nanostructured material has yet to be reported.
It is worth noting that although electrocatalytic activities of MoS2 and WS2 catalysts have been well investigated, the mechanism of proton reduction on these catalysts at the atomic level is still unclear. DFT calculations have assumed a mechanism similar to that occurring on the surface of platinum.8,63 That is, the calculations were based on the hypothesis that hydrogen generation was driven via homolysis radical–radical mechanism involving adsorbed hydrogen atoms.
Recently, Chang and colleagues reported on the synthesis of a molybdenum molecular HER catalyst in which the coordination of Mo4+ was provided by a pentapyridine (N5) and disulfide (S–S) ligands.72 This complex containing a N5MoIV(S–S) system was believed to structurally resemble the catalytic active site on the MoS2 surface. However, this HER catalyst functions with ca. 600 mV overpotential which is extremely high compared with that of the MoS2 catalyst (ca. 100–200 mV). In this case also, the mechanism of hydrogen evolution is still unclear. The role of the S–S ligand in proton reduction may not be a key issue since the oxo equivalent N5MoIVO is also catalytically active.73,74 Whatever the precise mechanism is, the studies by Chang and colleagues suggest that the MoS2 catalyst could mechanistically function closer to that of hydrogenases than to that of platinum. If this is so then hydrogen generation by MoS2 probably involves production of a Mo–H hydride intermediate via a Mo–Mo dinuclear catalytic center.
4.2 Ni/Co-promoted MS2 catalysts
Cobalt or nickel were reported as good promoters to enhance catalytic activities of MS2 catalysts (M = Mo or W) for both the hydrogen desulfurization reaction75,76 and HER.64,77 The morphology changes when adding promoters to MoS2 material have been investigated.76 However, the real structure of these promoted materials is still not clear most likely due to their amorphous properties. From DFT calculations, it was proposed that promoters located on the inactive S-edge of MS2 materials activate this surface for hydrogen adsorption by lowering the free energy for hydrogen binding. Indeed, in the case of molybdenum, adding a cobalt promoter creates a new Co–S edge which is as active as the Mo edge.64 Experimental studies showed that this enhancement in activity was reflected in the increase in catalytic current without any change in the over potential requirement. In the case of WS2 catalyst, the newly created Co–S edge was even more catalytically active than the W edge in the untreated WS2 catalyst. As a result, the HER for the Co-promoted WS2 catalyst had a 50 mV–100 mV lower overpotential requirement compared with pristine WS2.64 Here again, DFT calculations were performed assuming that the promoted MS2 material catalyzes proton reduction similarly to the platinum catalyst.
It could be interesting in our opinion to examine how a bimetallic sulfur cluster, [MoS2Mo] in the case of MoS2 and [CoS2Mo] in the case of Co-promoted MoS2, acts as a catalytic center for HER given the fact that catalytic centers in the natural enzymes, e.g. hydrogenase, nitrogenase, molybdenum CO-dehydrogenase, are all bimetallic systems.
4.3 Cu2MS4 (M = Mo, W) catalysts
Most recently, we were successful in extending the concept of metal sulfide electrocatalysts for HER to heterobimetallic ternary sulfides.78 By a simple precipitation process between CuI(MeCN)BF4 and MVIS42− (M = Mo, W) precursors in DMF/acetonitrile solvent, we obtained crystalline Cu2MS4 ternary sulfides in which each Mo/W atom is bonded with four (4) sulfur atoms and each two sulfurs are bonded with a copper atom (Fig. 8).78,79 Interestingly, the [Cu4S4M] building block of these materials possesses several structural similarities to the active sites of molybdenum CO-dehydrogenase80 and of hydrogenases4–6 suggesting that they could be considered as solid state bio-inspired equivalents of these natural enzymes. It is worth noting that molybdenum CO-dehydrogenase is not only an efficient electrocatalyst for interconversion between CO and CO2 but also has some hydrogenase activities when its environment is highly reducing.81 Interestingly, we have found that Cu2MS4 shows good catalytic activities for hydrogen generation in aqueous solution (phosphate buffer) at neutral pH 7.78 Cu2MoS4 showed better HER catalytic activity than its Cu2WS4 equivalent. In phosphate buffer (pH7), Cu2MoS4 catalyzed hydrogen generation with a relatively low overpotential of ca. 135 mV and with an apparent exchange current density of 0.04 mA cm−2. The current-to-hydrogen efficiency was determined to be unity. This very good performance of the Cu2MoS4 system is better than the amorphous electrodeposited MoS2 catalyst.65 Moreover, the two Cu2MS4 catalysts are robust and stable and remain intact under hydrogen generating conditions. We concluded that Cu2MS4 catalysts, especially Cu2MoS4, represent an attractive alternative to platinum and biomimetic hydrogenase molecular catalysts.78
 Fig. 8  Crystalline structure of Cu2MoS4 (A); drawn [Cu4S4Mo] building block (B); catalytic centers of molybdenum CO-dehydrogenase (C) and [NiFe]-hydrogenase (D).78 
The similarity of the Cu2MS4 catalysts with hydrogenases has been emphasized by DFT calculation on Cu2MoS4 which strongly suggests a possible catalytic cycle which resembles very much that of the natural enzyme (Fig. 9).78 It is proposed that the catalytic cycle is initiated by a protonation of state (1) in Fig. 9, followed by a one-electron reduction process on (2) which results in formation of a reduced intermediate (3). The injection of second electron into (3) rapidly results in generation of a hydrogen molecule and re-generation of the catalyst (1). Indeed, we were unable to isolate a two-electron reduced species due to its energetic instability. On the other hand, the formation of a Mo–H hydride intermediate (4a) was detected thus giving evidence for the involvement of Mo6+ in proton reduction catalysis. This indicated that the Cu2MoS4 catalyst acts as a molecular catalyst. In other words, the catalytic mechanism of Cu2MoS4 resembles more that of natural hydrogenases than that of platinum.
 Fig. 9  Proposed catalytic mechanism for HER catalyzed by the Cu2MoS4 catalyst. 
Given the nucleophilic properties of a sulfide ligand, rapid protonation of the Cu2MoS4 catalyst in interfacing with an electrolyte is expected. We proposed that the first one-electron reduction step of the protonated-catalyst is rate limiting for hydrogen evolution reaction. The potential of this reduction event was calculated to be −0.63 vs. NHE which is close to the value that we found experimentally, −0.48 V vs. NHE. Moreover, in both pH0 and pH7 solutions, Tafel plots were found to be 95 mV decade−1 which means the rate limiting step is a discharge process. Hence, our hypothesis on the limiting step is reasonable. However, further theoretical calculation and spectroscopic investigations are required to elucidate the proposed mechanism, identify whether one or two [Cu4S4Mo] building blocks are involved in generating one hydrogen molecule and clarify the role of CuI in the catalytic cycle.
5. Material engineering to go beyond molecular catalysis
Considerable advances have been achieved in mimicking enzymes to synthesize chemical catalysts for HER. However, management of the transfer of electron and proton to the catalytic centers also has to be optimized to produce catalysts as efficient as the natural systems. As stated earlier, in the hydrogenases, the electron transfer from the protein surface to the catalytic center is facilitated by a chain of [Fe–S] clusters. Introducing a [Fe–S] cluster into a [FeFe] molecular catalyst was reported for the first time by Pickett and colleagues.82 However, this artificial hydrogenase showed significantly lower catalytic activities compared with the natural hydrogenases in part due to the fact that the synthetic [Fe–S] cluster did not play an effective role as a redox mediator. Most recently, Rauchfuss and colleagues were successful in coupling a ferrocenium redox mediator with a [FeFe] catalyst which resulted in an efficient system for hydrogen oxidation reaction.83 Proton reduction activities were not however reported for this catalyst.
An important approach has been reported by Artero and colleagues who grafted NiP4 catalysts onto the surface of MWCNTs, a matrix which offers outstanding electrical conductivity, a high specific surface area and is robust (Fig. 10a).39,84 An activated ester or a pyrene functional group was introduced within a diphosphine ligand. These functional groups served as linkers to covalently or non-covalently immobilize NiP4 catalysts onto the CNT surface. In this way CNT supports allow a rapid electron transfer to the immobilized catalytic sites. As a consequence, NiP4 catalysts mediate both hydrogen evolution and hydrogen uptake with near to zero overpotential and they operate at exceptionally high rates when bound to MWCNTs. It was shown that the NiP4 catalysts remained intact after grafted onto the CNT surface.39 However, given that a CNT support is a mesoporous matrix, it is possible that the enhanced catalytic activity is associated with conformational changes of the catalyst which are kinetically favorable for catalysis as found in the hydrogenases and in solvated NiP4 molecular catalysts.35 By employing the same grafting strategy, Artero's group has recently demonstrated the possibility of constructing a composite catalytic material based on cobalt diimine-dioxime catalysts. Importantly, this novel composite system functions in aqueous solution.51 In acetate buffer at pH4.5, it generates hydrogen with ca. 350 mV overpotential requirement. However, Artero's molecular catalyst–CNTs composites are still inactive at neutral pH7.
 Fig. 10  Carbon-based composite catalysts. NiP4 grafted onto MWCNTs (A); MoS2 selectively grown on graphene sheet (B). 
Just like CNTs, graphene is an outstanding electrical conducting support which has high thermal, chemical and electrochemical stability. Growing the MoS2 catalyst on a graphene support resulted in formation of a highly active material for HER (Fig. 10b).66 Indeed, in pH0 H2SO4 solution, the MoS2/graphene composite catalyzed HER with only ca. 100 mV overpotential and with an impressive Tafel plot value of 41 mV decade−1 which is close to that determined for Pt catalysts (30 mV decade−1). This indicates that HER is no longer limited by the proton discharge process (Volmer reaction) as in the case of native MoS2 nanoparticles but is limited by the electrochemical desorption step (Heyrovsky reaction) or by the recombination of adsorbed hydrogen atoms (Tafel reaction). This is because the electron transfer from the graphene support to MoS2 catalytically active sites is highly efficient.
The electrical conducting properties of layered Cu2MS4 (M = Mo, W) catalysts seem to be low, suggested by the charging phenomenon of these materials in XPS analysis.78 Incorporating these catalysts within graphene or CNT supports improves their conducting properties. As a result, Cu2MS4/graphene composite catalysts function with a similar over potential requirement to that of the native Cu2MS4 catalyst but with smaller Tafel plot values. This means, at a given potential, higher catalytic current was achieved for the Cu2MS4/graphene composite.
These examples suggested that managing an efficient electron transfer to the catalytic center could be of considerable benefit to further enhance catalytic activities of synthetic catalysts, either molecular catalyst or inorganic solid state material. To this end, mesoporous carbon based supports (CNTs, graphene, C60etc.) are good candidates. For the molecular catalyst this grafting strategy may bring about beneficial conformation changes since when planar carbon electrodes were used there was no such impressive improvement.37,85 However, evidence for such a structural modification still needs to be reported.
6. Conclusion
Having an understanding of the structure and mechanisms of enzymes at the atomic and molecular levels is providing a blue print for scientists striving for viable solutions for solar fuels production in general and for hydrogen generation, more specifically. A direct use of hydrogenase enzymes in technological devices such as electrolyzers or fuel cells is not practical due to their sensitivity to oxygen, the vulnerability of their protein structures to degradation and the requirement for their large scale production. Advances in mimicking the active centers of the natural hydrogenases to produce chemical catalytic systems for hydrogen generation have been very active in recent years. Key functional features of hydrogenase enzymes were successfully introduced into synthetic molecular catalysts. A NiP4 catalyst performs even faster than natural hydrogenases in reducing protons into hydrogen. Reversible bifunctional catalysts for both hydrogen evolution and uptake have also been reported. Nevertheless, further efforts are needed to address the low stability and limited catalytic activities of these molecular catalysts in aqueous solution, specifically at neutral or near to neutral pH. To this end, mimicking the efficient electron transfer via specific [Fe–S] clusters and the protection effect of the protein environment surrounding the catalytic center in hydrogenase could be options to explore. Nanostructured carbon supports have been demonstrated as good candidates for this purpose. Another possible solution to address the stability issue is employing all-inorganic catalysts. MS2, promoted MS2, and Cu2MS4 (where M is Mo or W) have been recently identified as good electrocatalysts for HER in neutral pH aqueous solution which are efficient and robust. Further efforts are required to investigate how these catalysts function for proton reduction in atomic terms. With this insight more efficient catalysts could be designed. Lastly, for solar-driven hydrogen generation it will be necessary to assemble these electrocatalysts onto appropriate semiconductors to construct efficient photocathodes. Primary proof-of-concept examples were reported for natural hydrogenases,86 cobaloxime molecular catalysts,87 and MS2 catalysts67–70,88 but more efforts are certainly required. In this context the recent work of Reece et al.89 is relevant who used a MoNiZn alloy as an effective proton reducing catalyst to generate hydrogen using electrons derived from water energizes by light absorbed by a triple junction amorphous Si semiconducting water.
Notes and references
P. D. Tran, L. H. Wong, J. Barber and J. S. C. Loo, Recent advances in hybrid photocatalysts for solar fuel production, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5(3), 5902–5918 CAS .
R. B. Gordon, M. Bertram and T. E. Graedel, Metal stocks and sustainability, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103(5), 1209–1214 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Jones, E. Sillery, S. P. J. Albracht and F. A. Armstrong, Direct comparison of the electrocatalytic oxidation of hydrogen by an enzyme and a platinum catalyst, Chem. Commun., 2002,(8), 866–867 RSC .
A. Volbeda, M.-H. Charon, C. Piras, E. C. Hatchikian, M. Frey and J. C. Fontecilla-Camps, Crystal structure of the nickel–iron hydrogenase from Desulfovibrio gigas, Nature, 1995, 373(6515), 580–587 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Peters, W. N. Lanzilotta, B. J. Lemon and L. C. Seefeldt, X-ray Crystal Structure of the Fe-Only Hydrogenase (CpI) from Clostridium pasteurianum to 1.8 Angstrom Resolution, Science, 1998, 282(5395), 1853–1858 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Nicolet, C. Piras, P. Legrand, C. E. Hatchikian and J. C. Fontecilla-Camps, Desulfovibrio desulfuricans iron hydrogenase: the structure shows unusual coordination to an active site Fe binuclear center, Structure, 1999, 7(1), 13–23 CrossRef CAS .
B. E. Conway and B. V. Tilak, Interfacial processes involving electrocatalytic evolution and oxidation of H2, and the role of chemisorbed H, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 47(22–23), 3571–3594 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hinnemann, P. G. Moses, J. Bonde, K. P. Jørgensen, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, Biomimetic Hydrogen Evolution: MoS2 Nanoparticles as Catalyst for Hydrogen Evolution, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127(15), 5308–5309 CrossRef CAS .
T. F. Jaramillo, K. P. Jørgensen, J. Bonde, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch and I. Chorkendorff, Identification of Active Edge Sites for Electrochemical H2 Evolution from MoS2 Nanocatalysts, Science, 2007, 317(5834), 100–102 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Fontecilla-Camps, A. Volbeda, C. Cavazza and Y. Nicolet, Structure/Function Relationships of [NiFe]- and [FeFe]-Hydrogenases, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107(10), 4273–4303 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bruschi, C. Greco, M. Kaukonen, P. Fantucci, U. Ryde and L. De Gioia, Influence of the [2Fe]H Subcluster Environment on the Properties of Key Intermediates in the Catalytic Cycle of [FeFe] Hydrogenases: Hints for the Rational Design of Synthetic Catalysts, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48(19), 3503–3506 CrossRef CAS .
M. Frey, Hydrogenases: Hydrogen-Activating Enzymes, ChemBioChem, 2002, 3(2–3), 153–160 CrossRef CAS .
A. Volbeda and J. C. Fontecilla-Camps, The active site and catalytic mechanism of NiFe hydrogenases, Dalton Trans., 2003,(21), 4030–4038 RSC .
A. L. De Lacey, V. M. Fernández, M. Rousset and R. Cammack, Activation and Inactivation of Hydrogenase Function and the Catalytic Cycle: Spectroelectrochemical Studies, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107(10), 4304–4330 CrossRef CAS .
C. Greco, M. Bruschi, L. De Gioia and U. Ryde, A QM/MM Investigation of the Activation and Catalytic Mechanism of Fe-Only Hydrogenases, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46(15), 5911–5921 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-P. Liu and P. Hu, A Density Functional Theory Study on the Active Center of Fe-Only Hydrogenase: Characterization and Electronic Structure of the Redox States, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124(18), 5175–5182 CrossRef CAS .
H.-J. Fan and M. B. Hall, A Capable Bridging Ligand for Fe-Only Hydrogenase: Density Functional Calculations of a Low-Energy Route for Heterolytic Cleavage and Formation of Dihydrogen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123(16), 3828–3829 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Gerlach, S. L. McMullin and P. C. Ellgen, Mechanisms of substitution
of ligand-bridged diiron hexacarbonyl complexes. Bis(.mu.-diphenylphosphide)-bis(tricarbonyliron). Promotion of an SN1 mechanism by a bulky bridging ligand, Inorg. Chem., 1976, 15(5), 1232–1233 CrossRef CAS .
C. d. Tard and C. J. Pickett, Structural and Functional Analogues of the Active Sites of the [Fe]-[NiFe]-, and [FeFe]-Hydrogenases†, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109(6), 2245–2274 CrossRef CAS .
J.-F. Capon, F. Gloaguen, F. Y. Pétillon, P. Schollhammer and J. Talarmin, On the electrochemistry of diiron dithiolate complexes related to the active site of the [FeFe]H2ase, C. R. Chim., 2008, 11(8), 842–851 CrossRef CAS .
B. E. Barton, M. T. Olsen and T. B. Rauchfuss, Aza- and Oxadithiolates Are Probable Proton Relays in Functional Models for the [FeFe]-Hydrogenases, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130(50), 16834–16835 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ezzaher, J. F. Capon, F. Gloaguen, F. Petillon, P. Schollhammer, J. Talarmin and N. Kervarec, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 2 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ezzaher, J.-F. Capon, F. Gloaguen, F. Y. Pétillon, P. Schollhammer, J. Talarmin, R. Pichon and N. Kervarec, Evidence for the Formation of Terminal Hydrides by Protonation of an Asymmetric Iron Hydrogenase Active Site Mimic, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46(9), 3426–3428 CrossRef CAS .
B. E. Barton and T. B. Rauchfuss, Terminal hydride in FeFe-hydrogenase model has lower potential for H-2 production than the isomeric bridging hydride, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47(7), 2261–2263 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Singleton, J. H. Reibenspies and M. Y. Darensbourg, A Cyclodextrin Host–Guest Approach to a Hydrogenase Active Site Biomimetic Cavity, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132(26), 8870–8871 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, M. Wang, D. Zheng, K. Han, J. Dong and L. Sun, Photocatalytic H2 production in aqueous solution with host–guest inclusions formed by insertion of an FeFe-hydrogenase mimic and organic dye into cyclodextrins respectively, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8220–8224 CAS .
J.-F. Capon, S. Ezzaher, F. Gloaguen, F. Y. Pétillon, P. Schollhammer and J. Talarmin, Electrochemical Insights into the Mechanisms of Proton Reduction by [Fe2(CO)6{μ-SCH2N(R)CH2S}] Complexes Related to the [2Fe]H Subsite of [FeFe]Hydrogenase, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14(6), 1954–1964 CrossRef CAS .
W.-N. Cao, F. Wang, H.-Y. Wang, B. Chen, K. Feng, C.-H. Tung and L.-Z. Wu, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 8081–8083 RSC .
M. L. Singleton, D. J. Crouthers, R. P. Duttweiler, J. H. Reibenspies and M. Y. Darensbourg, Sulfonated Diiron Complexes as Water-Soluble Models of the [Fe–Fe]-Hydrogenase Enzyme Active Site, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50(11), 5015–5026 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Wilson, R. H. Newell, M. J. McNevin, J. T. Muckerman, M. Rakowski DuBois and D. L. DuBois, Hydrogen Oxidation and Production Using Nickel-Based Molecular Catalysts with Positioned Proton Relays, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 128(1), 358–366 CrossRef .
M. Rakowski DuBois and D. L. DuBois, The roles of the first and second coordination spheres in the design of molecular catalysts for H2 production and oxidation, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38(1), 62–72 RSC .
U. J. Kilgore, J. A. S. Roberts, D. H. Pool, A. M. Appel, M. P. Stewart, M. R. DuBois, W. G. Dougherty, W. S. Kassel, R. M. Bullock and D. L. DuBois, [Ni(PPh2NC6H4X2)2]2 + Complexes as Electrocatalysts for H2 Production: Effect of Substituents, Acids, and Water on Catalytic Rates, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133(15), 5861–5872 CrossRef CAS .
U. J. Kilgore, M. P. Stewart, M. L. Helm, W. G. Dougherty, W. S. Kassel, M. R. DuBois, D. L. DuBois and R. M. Bullock, Studies of a Series of [Ni(PR2NPh2)2(CH3CN)]2 + Complexes as Electrocatalysts for H2 Production: Substituent Variation at the Phosphorus Atom of the P2N2 Ligand, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50(21), 10908–10918 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Yang, S. Chen, W. G. Dougherty, W. S. Kassel, R. M. Bullock, D. L. DuBois, S. Raugei, R. Rousseau, M. Dupuis and M. R. DuBois, Hydrogen oxidation catalysis by a nickel diphosphine complex with pendant tert-butyl amines, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46(45), 8618–8620 RSC .
M. L. Helm, M. P. Stewart, R. M. Bullock, M. R. DuBois and D. L. DuBois, A Synthetic Nickel Electrocatalyst with a Turnover Frequency Above 100000 s−1 for H2 Production, Science, 2011, 333(6044), 863–866 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Smith, J. Y. Yang, D. L. DuBois and R. M. Bullock, Reversible Electrocatalytic Production and Oxidation of Hydrogen at Low Overpotentials by a Functional Hydrogenase Mimic, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51(13), 3152–3155 CrossRef CAS .
A. Le Goff, V. Artero, R. Metayé, F. Moggia, B. Jousselme, M. Razavet, P. D. Tran, S. Palacin and M. Fontecave, Immobilization of FeFe hydrogenase mimics onto carbon and gold electrodes by controlled aryldiazonium salt reduction: an electrochemical, XPS and ATR-IR study, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35(19), 10790–10796 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. Tran, V. Artero and M. Fontecave, Water electrolysis and photoelectrolysis on electrodes engineered using biological and bio-inspired molecular systems, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3(6), 727–747 CAS .
P. D. Tran, A. Le Goff, J. Heidkamp, B. Jousselme, N. Guillet, S. Palacin, H. Dau, M. Fontecave and V. Artero, Noncovalent Modification of Carbon Nanotubes with Pyrene-Functionalized Nickel Complexes: Carbon Monoxide Tolerant Catalysts for Hydrogen Evolution and Uptake, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50(6), 1371–1374 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. McLaughlin, T. M. McCormick, R. Eisenberg and P. L. Holland, A stable molecular nickel catalyst for the homogeneous photogeneration of hydrogen in aqueous solution, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47(28), 7989–7991 RSC .
P. Connolly and J. H. Espenson, Cobalt-catalyzed evolution of molecular hydrogen, Inorg. Chem., 1986, 25(16), 2684–2688 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Jacques, V. Artero, J. Pecaut and M. Fontecave, Cobalt and nickel diimine–dioxime complexes as molecular electrocatalysts for hydrogen evolution with low overvoltages, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106(49), 20627–20632 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bhattacharjee, M. Chavarot-Kerlidou, E. S. Andreiadis, M. Fontecave, M. J. Field and V. Artero, Combined Experimental–Theoretical Characterization of the Hydrido-Cobaloxime [HCo(dmgH)2(PnBu3)], Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51(13), 7087–7093 CrossRef CAS .
G. N. Schrauzer and R. J. Holland, Hydridocobaloximes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1971, 93(6), 1505–1506 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Dempsey, B. S. Brunschwig, J. R. Winkler and H. B. Gray, Hydrogen Evolution Catalyzed by Cobaloximes, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42(12), 1995–2004 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. McCormick, B. D. Calitree, A. Orchard, N. D. Kraut, F. V. Bright, M. R. Detty and R. Eisenberg, Reductive Side of Water Splitting in Artificial Photosynthesis: New Homogeneous Photosystems of Great Activity and Mechanistic Insight, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132(44), 15480–15483 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Muckerman and E. Fujita, Theoretical studies of the mechanism of catalytic hydrogen production by a cobaloxime, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47(46), 12456–12458 RSC .
J. L. Dempsey, J. R. Winkler and H. B. Gray, Mechanism of H2 Evolution from a Photogenerated Hydridocobaloxime, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132(47), 16774–16776 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, B. M. Cossairt, B. S. Brunschwig, N. S. Lewis and J. C. Peters, Electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution by cobalt difluoroboryl–diglyoximate complexes, Chem. Commun., 2005, 4723–4725 RSC .
C. Baffert, V. Artero and M. Fontecave, Cobaloximes as functional models for hydrogenases. 2. Proton electroreduction catalyzed by difluoroborylbis(dimethylglyoximato)cobalt(II) complexes in organic media, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46(5), 1817–1824 CrossRef CAS .
E. S. Andreiadis, P.-A. Jacques, Phong D. Tran, Adeline Leyris, Murielle Chavarot-Kerlidou, Bruno Jousselme, Muriel Matheron, Jacques Pécaut, Serge Palacin, Marc Fontecave and Vincent Artero, Molecular Engineering of a Cobalt-based Electrocatalytic Nano-Material for H2 Evolution under Pure Aqueous Conditions, Nat. Chem., 2012 Search PubMed  , submitted.
Y. Sun, J. P. Bigi, N. A. Piro, M. L. Tang, J. R. Long and C. J. Chang, Molecular Cobalt Pentapyridine Catalysts for Generating Hydrogen from Water, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133(24), 9212–9215 CrossRef CAS .
W. M. Singh, T. Baine, S. Kudo, S. Tian, X. A. N. Ma, H. Zhou, N. J. DeYonker, T. C. Pham, J. C. Bollinger, D. L. Baker, B. Yan, C. E. Webster and X. Zhao, Electrocatalytic and Photocatalytic Hydrogen Production in Aqueous Solution by a Molecular Cobalt Complex, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51(24), 5941–5944 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Duan, Y. H. Xu, P. Zhang, M. Wang and L. C. Sun, Visible Light-Driven Water Oxidation by a Molecular Ruthenium Catalyst in Homogeneous System, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49(1), 209–215 CrossRef CAS .
V. Artero, M. Chavarot-Kerlidou and M. Fontecave, Splitting Water with Cobalt, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50(32), 7238–7266 CrossRef CAS .
F. G. Banica, N. Spataru and T. Spataru, Catalytic hydrogen evolution in the presence of sulfide and cobalt ions. A study by cathodic-stripping voltammetry on the hanging mercury drop electrode, Electroanalysis, 1997, 9(17), 1341–1347 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sabela and I. Paseka, Properties of Ni–Six/i, electrodes for hydrogen evolution from alkaline medium, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1990, 20(3), 500–505 CrossRef CAS .

          H. B. S. L. Topsoe and F. E. Massoth, Hydrotreating Catalysis–Science and Technology, ed. J. R. Anderson and M. Boudart, Springer Verlag, New York,  1996, vol. 11 Search PubMed .
M. Wu, Y. Wang, X. Lin, N. Yu, L. Wang, L. Wang, A. Hagfeldt and T. Ma, Economical and effective sulfide catalysts for dye-sensitized solar cells as counter electrodes, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13(43), 19298–19301 RSC .
K. Chang and W. Chen, Single-layer MoS2/graphene dispersed in amorphous carbon: towards high electrochemical performances in rechargeable lithium ion batteries, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21(43), 17175–17184 RSC .
J. Xiao, D. Choi, L. Cosimbescu, P. Koech, J. Liu and J. P. Lemmon, Exfoliated MoS2 Nanocomposite as an Anode Material for Lithium Ion Batteries, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22(16), 4522–4524 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chang and W. Chen, 
            L-Cysteine-Assisted Synthesis of Layered MoS2/Graphene Composites with Excellent Electrochemical Performances for Lithium Ion Batteries, ACS Nano, 2011, 5(6), 4720–4728 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hinnemann, J. K. Nørskov and H. Topsøe, A Density Functional Study of the Chemical Differences between Type I and Type II MoS2-Based Structures in Hydrotreating Catalysts†, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 109(6), 2245–2253 CrossRef .
J. Bonde, P. G. Moses, T. F. Jaramillo, J. K. Norskov and I. Chorkendorff, Hydrogen
evolution on nano-particulate transition metal sulfides, Faraday Discuss., 2009, 140, 219–231 RSC .
D. Merki, S. Fierro, H. Vrubel and X. Hu, Amorphous molybdenum sulfide films as catalysts for electrochemical hydrogen production in water, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2(7), 1262–1267 RSC .
Y. Li, H. Wang, L. Xie, Y. Liang, G. Hong and H. Dai, MoS2 Nanoparticles Grown on Graphene: An Advanced Catalyst for the Hydrogen Evolution Reaction, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133(19), 7296–7299 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zong, H. Yan, G. Wu, G. Ma, F. Wen, L. Wang and C. Li, Enhancement of Photocatalytic H2 Evolution on CdS by Loading MoS2 as Cocatalyst under Visible Light Irradiation, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130(23), 7176–7177 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zong, G. Wu, H. Yan, G. Ma, J. Shi, F. Wen, L. Wang and C. Li, Photocatalytic H2 Evolution on MoS2/CdS Catalysts under Visible Light Irradiation, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114(4), 1963–1968 CAS .
M. L. Tang, D. C. Grauer, B. Lassalle-Kaiser, V. K. Yachandra, L. Amirav, J. R. Long, J. Yano and A. P. Alivisatos, Structural and Electronic Study of an Amorphous MoS3 Hydrogen-Generation Catalyst on a Quantum-Controlled Photosensitizer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50(43), 10203–10207 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. Tran, S. S. Pramana, V. S. Kale, M. Nguyen, S. Y. Chiam, S. K. Batabyal, L. H. Wong, J. Barber and J. Loo, Novel assembly of MoS2 electrocatalyst onto silicon nanowire array electrode to construct photocathode composed of Earth-abundant elements for Hydrogen generation, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012 DOI:10.1002/chem.201202214 .
A. B. Laursen, S. Kegnaes, S. Dahl and I. Chorkendorff, Molybdenum sulfides-efficient and viable materials for electro – and photoelectrocatalytic hydrogen evolution, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5577–5591 CAS .
H. I. Karunadasa, E. Montalvo, Y. Sun, M. Majda, J. R. Long and C. J. Chang, A Molecular MoS2 Edge Site Mimic for Catalytic Hydrogen Generation, Science, 2012, 335(6069), 698–702 CrossRef CAS .
H. I. Karunadasa, C. J. Chang and J. R. Long, A molecular molybdenum-oxo catalyst for generating hydrogen from water, Nature, 2010, 464(7293), 1329–1333 CrossRef CAS .
V. S. Thoi, H. I. Karunadasa, Y. Surendranath, J. R. Long and C. J. Chang, Electrochemical generation of hydrogen from acetic acid using a molecular molybdenum-oxo catalyst, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7762–7770 CAS .
R. R. Chianelli, T. A. Pecoraro, T. R. Halbert, W. H. Pan and E. I. Stiefel, Transition metal sulfide catalysis: Relation of the synergic systems to the periodic trends in hydrodesulfurization, J. Catal., 1984, 86(1), 226–230 CrossRef CAS .
M. Brorson, A. Carlsson and H. Topsøe, The morphology of MoS2, WS2, Co–Mo–S, Ni–Mo–S and Ni–W–S nanoclusters in hydrodesulfurization catalysts revealed by HAADF-STEM, Catal. Today, 2007, 123(1–4), 31–36 CrossRef CAS .
D. Merki, H. Vrubel, L. Rovelli, S. Fierro and X. Hu, Fe, Co, and Ni ions promote the catalytic activity of amorphous molybdenum sulfide films for hydrogen evolution, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 2515–2525 RSC .
P. D. Tran, M. Nguyen, S. S. Pramana, A. Bhattacharjee, S. Y. Chiam, J. Fize, M. J. Field, V. Artero, L. H. Wong, J. Loo and J. Barber, Copper Molybdenum Sulfide: A New Efficient Electrocatalyst for Hydrogen Production from Water, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012 10.1039/C2EE22611A .
E. A. Pruss, B. S. Snyder and A. M. Stacy, A New Layered Ternary Sulfide: Formation of Cu2WS4 by Reaction of WS42– and Cu + Ions, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1993, 32(2), 256–257 CrossRef .
H. Dobbek, L. Gremer, R. Kiefersauer, R. Huber and O. Meyer, Catalysis at a dinuclear [CuSMo(O)OH] cluster in a CO dehydrogenase resolved at 1.1-Å resolution, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2002, 99(25), 15971–15976 CrossRef CAS .
B. S. a. O. Meyer, Characterization of hydrogenase activities associated with the molybdenum CO dehydrogenase from Oligotropha carboxidovorans, FEMS Microbiol. Lett., 1996, 136, 157–162 CrossRef .
C. Tard, X. Liu, S. K. Ibrahim, M. Bruschi, L. D. Gioia, S. C. Davies, X. Yang, L.-S. Wang, G. Sawers and C. J. Pickett, Synthesis of the H-cluster framework of iron-only hydrogenase, Nature, 2005, 433(7026), 610–613 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Camara and T. B. Rauchfuss, Combining acid–base, redox and substrate binding functionalities to give a complete model for the [FeFe]-hydrogenase, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 26–30 CrossRef CAS .
A. Le Goff, V. Artero, B. Jousselme, P. D. Tran, N. Guillet, R. Metaye, A. Fihri, S. Palacin and M. Fontecave, From Hydrogenases to Noble Metal-Free Catalytic Nanomaterials for H-2 Production and Uptake, Science, 2009, 326(5958), 1384–1387 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Berben and J. C. Peters, Hydrogen evolution by cobalt tetraimine catalysts adsorbed on electrode surfaces, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46(3), 398–400 RSC .
E. Reisner, D. J. Powell, C. Cavazza, J. C. Fontecilla-Camps and F. A. Armstrong, Visible Light-Driven H2 Production by Hydrogenases Attached to Dye-Sensitized TiO2 Nanoparticles, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131(51), 18457–18466 CrossRef CAS .
F. Lakadamyali and E. Reisner, Photocatalytic H2 evolution from neutral water with a molecular cobalt catalyst on a dye-sensitised TiO2 nanoparticle, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47(6), 1695–1697 RSC .
X. Zong, J. Han, G. Ma, H. Yan, G. Wu and C. Li, Photocatalytic H2 Evolution on CdS Loaded with WS2 as Cocatalyst under Visible Light Irradiation, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115(24), 12202–12208 CAS .
S. Y. Reece, J. A. Hamel, K. Sung, T. D. Jarvi, A. J. Esswein, J. J. H. Pijpers and D. G. Nocera, Wireless Solar Water Splitting Using Silicon-Based Semiconductors and Earth Abundant Catalysts, Science, 2011, 334, 645–648 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2012
Table Content:

Phong D. Tran
	Phong D. Tran obtained his PhD degree at the University of Paris 11 at Orsay-France in 2007. From 2009 to 2010 he worked as a postdoctoral research associate in the research group of Prof. Fontecave and Dr. Artero at the CEA, Grenoble-France where he studied bioinspired molecular catalysts and nanostructured catalytic materials for hydrogen (photo)generation. Since 2011, he is a research fellow at the Solar Fuel Laboratory in NTU, Singapore, lead by Prof. James Barber. His interests are in development of solid state inorganic electrocatalysts and hybrid photocatalysts for water oxidation and solar fuel production.

James Barber
	James Barber is Ernst Chain Professor of Biochemistry at the Imperial College London and Nanyang visiting Professor at the Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore where he has established the Solar Fuels Laboratory. He has worked extensively on the water splitting system for photosynthesis and is using this experience to contribute to research into artificial photosynthesis for solar fuel production. He is a fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry, of Royal Society of London, Member of the European Academy (Academia Europaea) and a Foreign Member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences. He has been awarded several medals, prizes and honorary doctorates.
2H2O → O2 + 4H+ + 4e	(1)
2H+ + 2e ⇌ H2	(2)
Pt + H+ + e → Pt/Hθ	(3)
2Pt/Hθ → 2Pt + H2	(4)

 	Fig. 1  The Sabatier plot for the HER of different electrocatalysts. The catalytic activities (given in terms of the exchange current density j0) are plotted versus the hydrogen adsorption free energy (ΔG0H*).8,9	 

 	Fig. 2  Possible catalytic pathways for proton reduction reaction generating hydrogen in the natural hydrogenases or synthetic catalysts.	 

 	Fig. 3  (Top): Catalytic centers of [FeFe]- and [NiFe]-hydrogenases; (bottom): schematized structure and function of [FeFe]-hydrogenase for HER. Schematized electron, proton, and hydrogen transfer pathways are included.	 

 	Fig. 4  Proposed for activation of [FeFe]-hydrogenase and catalytic cycle for hydrogen evolution reaction.15–17 Note that H(ox) is the aerobic inactive state of the active site of [FeFe]-hydrogenase. One-electron reduction of this H(ox) gives the transient paramagnetic state H(trans). From this H(trans) state, the catalytic active H(ox) state is obtained by a redox-dependent activation process.	 

 	Fig. 5  (Top): Proton reduction catalysis with some selected catalysts containing different ligand sets; (bottom): possible proton reduction pathway in a functional [FeFe] catalyst containing proton relay site on the second coordination sphere (adapted from ref. 21, 24 and 27).	 

 	Fig. 6  Structure and catalytic function of NiP4 catalysts. The endo–endo isomer is kinetically favorable for hydrogen generation while the endo–exo and exo–exo isomers are less catalytically active. Inset shows the structure of the highly active  catalyst.	 


Ph	Ph (x = 2)	−0.83	−1.02	590	720	
33

Cy	Ph (x = 2)	−0.62	−1.09	NA	NA	
33


n-Butyl	Ph (x = 2)	−0.93	−1.23	46	1820	
33

2,4,4-Trimethylpentyl	Ph (x = 2)	−0.89	−1.17	<1	69	
33

Ph	PhCF3 (x = 2)	−0.74	−0.89	95	120	
32

Ph	PhBr (x = 2)	−0.79	−0.97	740	1040	
32

Ph	PhMe (x = 2)	−0.84	−1.05	590	770	
32

Ph	Ph (x = 1)	—	−1.13	33000	106000	
35

Ph	CH2CH2OMe (x = 2)	−0.94	−1.25	NA	NA	
36

Cy	

t
Bu (x = 2)	−0.81	−1.45	NA	NA	
34


 	Fig. 7  (Top): Possible catalytic pathways of hydrogen evolution reaction catalyzed by cobaloxime catalysts; (bottom): possible catalytic pathway involving proton transfer from proton relay site to the CoI center.	 

 	Fig. 8  Crystalline structure of Cu2MoS4 (A); drawn [Cu4S4Mo] building block (B); catalytic centers of molybdenum CO-dehydrogenase (C) and [NiFe]-hydrogenase (D).78	 

 	Fig. 9  Proposed catalytic mechanism for HER catalyzed by the Cu2MoS4 catalyst.	 

 	Fig. 10  Carbon-based composite catalysts. NiP4 grafted onto MWCNTs (A); MoS2 selectively grown on graphene sheet (B).	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2012
