Porous polymeric membranes: fabrication techniques and biomedical applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry B (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TB01727B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TB01727B
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. B, 2021, 9, 2129-2154Porous polymeric membranes: fabrication techniques and biomedical applications

        
          
            Amane 
            Shiohara
          
          
        
      abc, 
      
        
          
            Beatriz 
            Prieto-Simon
          
          
        
      ade and 

        
          
            Nicolas H 
            Voelcker
          
          
        
      *abc
aDrug Delivery, Deposition, and Dynamics, Monash Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Monash University, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia. E-mail: nicolas.voelcker@monash.edu
bCommonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO), Clayton, Victoria 3168, Australia
cMelbourne Centre of Nanofabrication, Victorian Node of the Australian National Fabrication Facility, Clayton, Victoria 3168, Australia
dDepartment of Electronic Engineering, Universitat Rovira i Virgili, 43007 Tarragona, Spain
eICREA, Pg. Lluís Companys 23, 08010 Barcelona, Spain
Received 
      13th July 2020
    , Accepted 19th November 2020First published on 19th November 2020AbstractPorous polymeric membranes have shown great potential in biological and biomedical applications such as tissue engineering, bioseparation, and biosensing, due to their structural flexibility, versatile surface chemistry, and biocompatibility. This review outlines the advantages and limitations of the fabrication techniques commonly used to produce porous polymeric membranes, with especial focus on those featuring nano/submicron scale pores, which include track etching, nanoimprinting, block-copolymer self-assembly, and electrospinning. Recent advances in membrane technology have been key to facilitate precise control of pore size, shape, density and surface properties. The review provides a critical overview of the main biological and biomedical applications of these porous polymeric membranes, especially focusing on drug delivery, tissue engineering, biosensing, and bioseparation. The effect of the membrane material and pore morphology on the role of the membranes for each specific application as well as the specific fabrication challenges, and future prospects of these membranes are thoroughly discussed.
Amane Shiohara
Dr Amane Shiohara received her MSc from Tokyo Institute of Technology in Japan and her PhD in materials science from Victoria University of Wellington in New Zealand. Her PhD project focused on the synthesis and surface modification of silicon quantum dots for biomedical applications. After completing her PhD, she worked as a postdoctoral fellow at CIC Biomagune in San Sebastian, Spain. Her postdoctoral research focused on the fabrication of biosensing devices using plasmonic nanoparticles. Since 2018, Amane has been a research fellow at Monash University under Prof. Nicolas Voelcker, working on the nanochannel-based electrochemical biosensors for virus detection. Currently she is working on the point-of-care detection of SARS CoV-2 virus.
Beatriz Prieto-Simon
Beatriz Prieto-Simón is an ICREA Research Professor at the University Rovira i Virgili. Her research has contributed to the fields of biosensors, nanotechnology, materials science, bioengineering and electrochemistry, and the crossing over into areas such as medical diagnosis, environmental control and food safety. Her research interest focuses on unveiling fundamental advances on synergies at the interface of nanostructured materials and biological processes that lay the foundation to build smart sensing platforms based on principles found in nature.
Nicolas H Voelcker
Professor Nicolas Voelcker. After completing his BSc at the University of Saarland (1993) and his MSc at the RWTH Aachen (1995) in Germany, Nico completed a PhD thesis (1999) in polymer surface chemistry at the DWI Leibniz Institute for Interactive Materials under Professor Hartwig Höcker. He received postdoctoral fellowships to work in the area of bioorganic chemistry under Professor Reza Ghadiri at the Scripps Research Institute in La Jolla, California. In 2001, he became a Lecturer at Flinders University in Australia, an Associate Professor in 2006 and a full Professor in 2008. From 2008–2011, he was the Associate Head of the Faculty of Science and Engineering at Flinders University. Since 2012, he is a Professor in Chemistry and Materials Science at the Mawson Institute of the University of South Australia. From 2013–2015, he was Deputy Director of the Mawson Institute at the University of South Australia and Program Leader of the Cooperate Research Centre for Cell Therapy Manufacturing. From 2014–2017, he was Node Leader in the Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence in Convergent Bio-Nano Science & Technology. Since February 2017, he is the Scientific Director of the Melbourne Centre for Nanofabrication, Professor at the Monash Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences at Monash University and Science Leader at the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO). The core research activity in his laboratory is the study of silicon-based nanostructures and their surface chemistry. Following from this more fundamental research, his focus is on the application of silicon-based nanostructured materials in biosensors, biochips, drug delivery and regenerative medicine. He has authored over 420 peer-reviewed journal articles with over 14000 citations, h-index 58, and has filed over 30 patents. He has received fellowships from the German Research Foundation (DFG), the CSIRO, the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation, is a recipient of the Tall Poppy Science Award, a finalist for the South Australian Scientist of the Year 2015 and the Australian Innovation Challenge. And he has served on the College of Experts of the Australian Research Council and is a member of the Australian Academy of Technology and Engineering.
Introduction
Due to their unique characteristics such as tuneable pore size and shape, and densities, and large surface-to-volume ratio that enables incorporating large number of functional groups within the pores, porous materials, including organic polymers, mesoporous silica, and alumina, have been investigated intensively for a wide range of applications. Those applications include separation such as in water filtration and hemodialysis, supporting scaffold such as in tissue engineering, and diagnostic tools such as sensing platforms.1 While there are numerous studies available, comparing the characteristics and fabrication techniques of these porous materials as well as their potential use especially in biological and biomedical applications,2–4 most of them focused on a particular technique and applications using that technique. In this review, we cover the range of fabrication techniques for porous membranes made from polymers.
The pores featured by porous materials or materials with pores of 100 nm or smaller are classified into three categories by their size according to the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) notation:5 pores smaller than 2 nm are micropores, pores within the range from 2–50 nm are mesopores, and larger than 50 nm pores are macropores. However, in this review we will mainly use the term nanoporous which has been widely acknowledged in the literature to identify porous materials with pore size less than 100 nm. The key criterion to successfully transfer fabricated membranes to real-world products is to provide the ability to scale-up membrane fabrication with precisely controlled pore diameter and narrow pore size distribution. Although the fabrication technology of polymer-based membranes has improved dramatically over the last two decades, addressing such requirement still remains challenging especially for membranes in the nanoscale pore size range. The first half of this review provides a brief summary of the main fabrication techniques of porous polymeric membranes, discussing the advantages and limitations of each technique. These techniques include top-down approaches such as track etching and nanoimprinting, and bottom-up approaches such as block-copolymer self-assembly and electrospinning. The diversity of synthetic routes and types of polymer materials to fabricate porous polymers provide them with high versatility in their design and with the possibility to feature multiple chemical functionalities, key advantages compared to other types of porous materials such as silica, alumina and zeolite.6 Porous polymeric structures have dramatically improved our quality of life and have been widely applied in various areas, including water treatment, liquid–gas separation, dialysis, and electrochemical energy storage.1 Apart from these commercial applications, research in porous polymers opens up a promising future for their use in many other fields including catalysis or photoenergy conversion in solar cells.1 However, arguably the most promising commercial potential for porous polymeric membranes lies in the field of biomedicine including drug delivery, tissue engineering, bioseparation and hemodialysis.7 The biodegradability and easy dissolution of many polymers in certain solvents are extra positive features of these materials for their biomedical exploitation. In tissue engineering, for example, controlled biodegradability of the membranes is a critical factor when used as biological scaffolds in in vivo environments. The selective solubility of polymers has facilitated the recent development of various fabrication techniques such as electrospinning or block copolymer self-assembly, and broadened the diverse designs of porous polymeric membranes that can be achieved. The second half of this review covers biomedical applications of porous polymeric membranes, discussing the membranes’ features and properties such as pore diameter ranges, porosities, and mechanical strength that are required for drug delivery, tissue engineering, biosensing and bioseparation, and summarises the suitable techniques to produce such membranes for each application.
1. Fabrication techniques for porous polymeric membranes
This section describes the most common techniques used to fabricate porous polymeric membranes which include track-etching, nanoimprint lithography, block-copolymer self-assembly, electrospinning, and 3D printing. Each subsection details the basic theory of the technique, followed by the discussion of its advantages and limitations, and some examples of application.
1.1. Track etching
Track etching-based micro- and nanofabrication technique enables researchers to produce membranes featuring precisely controlled and uniform pore size, shape, location, and density. The greatest advantage of this technique is that it can produce a wide range of pore densities and sizes from the nano- to the microscale, which can be controlled independently.
Track-etching technology, firstly reported in 1960's,8–10 is based on irradiating polymers with either energetic heavy ions, electrons, X-ray irradiation, or UV light, resulting in the formation of linear damaged tracks through the exposed polymeric film. Poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF), polyethylene terephthalate (PET) and polycarbonate (PC) are the common polymers used for this approach.11–17 The damaged tracks are transferred into pores using either properly selected wet chemical etching conditions or an applied electric field.18 The use of heavy ion accelerators enables variation of the linear energy transfer of track-forming particles, angle distribution of pore channels and pore length.19 As shown in Fig. 1G, a typical single irradiation setup includes: an electrostatic deflector, a magnetic defocusing instrument, a detector, a trigger and a sample stack. First, the ion beam is magnetically defocused and adjusted so that a single beam passes through the aperture at a certain frequency. Afterward the ion beam irradiates the stack of foils. The solid-state particle detector set behind the sample detects the ions and once the detection of a single ion occurs, the entire ion beam is deflected by an electrostatic chopper system.20–22 An example of track-etched pore can be seen in Fig. 1A–E. Generally, polymeric membranes with uniform pore sizes can be produced by continuous and homogeneous damage along the ion trajectory.
 Fig. 1  (A–E) Scanning electron microscopy image of the tips at different stages of etching of a PET foil and (F) the scheme of asymmetrically etched pore in the initial stage after breakthrough. The etching time increases from left to right. (A) Corresponds to the breakthrough moment and (E) the etching continued for ∼150 min after breakthrough. (F) VB shows the constant rate the conical part of the pore widens [ref. 26]. (G) The image of a single irradiation track etching setup [ref. 20]. 
Pore generation by irradiation followed by wet chemical etching depends on the chemical etching conditions after irradiation, and thus etching solvents and time are the critical parameters to control pore shape and diameter, while irradiation time determines pore density. According to that, cylindrical pores can be generated by using a single etching solution via symmetric etching.23,24 As an example of symmetric etching, Pevarnik et al. produced track-etched PET membranes with cylindrical pores by first irradiating the 12 μm thick PET foil with single energetic heavy ions followed by chemical etching with 0.5 M sodium hydroxide solution at 70 °C for a certain time period. They studied the fluctuation of diameters along the pore length using resistive pulse sensing of polystyrene particles passing through the pores.25 The polystyrene particles were analysed as they passed through the pores separating two reservoirs of electrolyte solution to measure the resistance of the pores when applying a certain voltage between these reservoirs. The average pore diameters increased linearly with etching time, and pores of approximately 100 nm in diameter were obtained after 30 min etching. Conical shape pores can also be generated by asymmetric etching through immersion of the membrane in two different solvents. The mechanism of osmotic phenomena taking place in pore morphology formation via iron track etching was studied by Apel and co-workers.26 Conical shape nanopores were formed by asymmetric chemical etching where the foil was etched from one side with a strong etchant solution while the other side of the foil faced relatively diluted stopping solution (Fig. 1A–F).22,27 The chemical stopping by neutralisation of the etchant at the moment of pore breakthrough was electrically supported. A positive potential was applied to an electrode inserted into the etchant solution to remove OH− ions from the newborn pore, which stopped further growth of the pores.
As an alternative to the creation of pores by chemical etching, an electric field can be applied to the membrane immersed in an electrolyte solution without any etchant to generate the pores. In this case, the UV irradiation time before the application of an electric field to create conductive ionic channels is longer compared to the conventional track-etching process based on chemical etching. By replacing chemical etching with longer UV irradiation time, the pore diameter can be lowered down to less than 1 nm, which is one of the main advantages of this technique.28 Due to the capability of producing small nanoscale pores and unique pore characteristics, track-etched polymeric membranes possess interesting transporting properties. As such, they are widely studied for applications in filtration and separation,29 energy conversion,30–32 and molecular sensing.33,34 Liu et al. have made extensive effort to summarise the properties of track-etched porous polymeric membranes outlining their ion and molecule transport mechanism.35
Despite these salient advantages over other fabrication methods, the complexity of the process is still a significant limitation to its wide use. Additional drawbacks include the fact that track-etched membranes are often of microscale thickness what can cause the loss of ions and molecules passing through the pores and interacting with the long pore walls due to the high surface area. It is also worth mentioning the difficulty to integrate these membranes into microfluidic devices since it is hard to attach the membrane materials often used, such as PC or PET, to common microfluidic materials, such as polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS).36
1.2. Nanoimprint lithography
Nanoimprint lithography is one of the most common soft lithography-based techniques applied to produce porous polymeric membranes. The nanoimprint lithography technique became popular due to its great potential to scale up at low cost, and the simplicity and time-effectiveness of the process. It is a mechanical lithography technique that involves pressing a stamp or a template against a deformable resist layer deposited on a substrate such as a silicon (Si) wafer or a metallic surface.37 Fabrication of the master mould is one of the most critical factors as the accuracy and definition of its structure are key to define the pattern on the imprinted polymers. Thermal nanoimprinting and photo nanoimprinting are two of the widely applied nanoimprint lithography techniques of which basic principles are shown in Fig. 2A and B38–45 and discussed below. Templates or master moulds are often fabricated using photolithography or, at the nanoscale, electron beam lithography (EBL) to create controlled nano- and microstructural patterns. However, due to high operational cost and technical complications of EBL, porous anodic aluminium oxide (pAAO) membranes are also used as template to produce nanoscale masters as it is relatively easy to fabricate pAAO membranes with uniform straight nanochannels.46 Master moulds are made of Si, thermoset plastics and nickel (Ni), the latter being the most widely used material due to its elasticity and strength.47–50 When producing a small nanoscale master for soft lithography, the combination of hard polydimethylsiloxane (hPDMS) and PDMS mould is often used as hPDMS possesses much higher resolution compared to PDMS.40,41,51 A unique polymeric dual-scale nanoimprinting mould was fabricated by Choi et al., using a thin flexible SU-8 stencil membrane.39 The microscale-through holes membrane was fabricated via photolithography or thermal nanoimprint lithography. On the one hand, photolithography involved spin-coating of a sacrificial lift-off resist (LOR) layer on a Si substrate, followed by the deposition of a SU-8 layer. After UV exposure, the membrane was released by dissolving the LOR layer with a developer. On the other hand, thermal nanoimprinting consisted in creating microscale holes on the same combination of LOR and SU-8 layer, using a Si mould. To create the second layer, a polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) substrate with nanoscale cavities was fabricated by thermal nanoimprinting. Finally, the SU-8 membrane was placed onto the PMMA substrate for double layer of micro- and nanostructures. After the deposition of a very thin PDMS layer followed by silanisation of the hybrid mould to facilitate the release of the final master mould, a UV curable resin, PUA511RM, was dispensed against the assembled substrate and peeled off after UV exposure, using a flexible PC film as a supporting backplane. Lee and co-workers reported the use of soft lithography to tune the density of the pattern by heating or stretching the thermoplastic substrate.52 The authors selected a polyurethane primary master moulded with nanoscale arrays of hexagonally distributed posts, and PDMS was then cast against it. The tuning of the pattern was achieved by two methods. The first one relayed on solvent-assisted nanoscale embossing (SANE), where the PDMS mould was first wet with solvent and then placed into contact with a photoresist-coated substrate. The second one consisted in transferring the patterns from the original master onto a flexible thermoplastic, polystyrene, the properties of which can be manipulated by external means. With these two approaches, the authors managed to thermally shrink the array spacing by 50% as well as increase it by 100% by means of mechanical stretching.
 Fig. 2  (A) Basic process of thermal nanoimprinting and (B) photo nanoimprinting [ref. 45]. (C) SEM images of the Ni nanopillars mould top view, (D) cross section, and (E) porous polymer fabricated with the Ni mould top view, and (F) cross section [ref. 63]. 

1.2.1. Thermal nanoimprint lithography. 
In a typical thermal nanoimprinting process, a thin layer of thermoplastic polymer is deposited on a solid substrate, usually by spin coating and heated up to 20–40 °C above its glass transition temperature (Tg) to soften the layer and allow embossing of a patterned master mould with optimal pressure and time.45 The elevation of temperature is necessary as the thermoplastic polymer's resistance to elastic deformation and the stress value where the deformation of thermoplastic polymer occurs decrease considerably at temperatures below the Tg. However, overheating can damage the film.53 The imprint temperature is then lowered down below Tg to solidify the thermoplastic layer before lifting off the master to create the pattern on the film. One notable advantage of thermal nanoimprinting over photo nanoimprinting is that there is a wide variety of thermoplastics available for the former. The ease of controlling thickness and uniformity that can be achieved by spin-coating these thermal resists on a substrate is also important.41 Typically, a rigid Ni structure is used as master mould in thermal nanoimprinting, especially for nanopore production, as elastomeric moulds such as those made of PDMS suffer to provide good resolution. Jung and co-workers reported a nanoengineered polystyrene surface that consists of a nanoscale pore array-patterned substrate which mimics the nanoscale topographical features of the extracellular matrix.42 A polystyrene Petri dish, containing these nanopore arrays was fabricated by a nanoinjection moulding process using a Ni nanopillars master with 200 nm diameter, 500 nm depth and 500 nm pitch distance.42 Since the standard photolithography (365 nm) has a resolution limit just below 1 μm, a nanoporous pAAO membrane was used to create the nanoscale Ni pillars in order to achieve smaller nanoscale pores.54 Although rigid master moulds such as those made of Ni or Si can provide high resolution, they are often sensitive to surface contaminants, which can cause defects.55 Elastomeric moulds, often using PDMS, can overcome this drawback as they are much less sensitive to surface contaminants. Additionally, elastomeric materials have lower surface energy compared to rigid materials, which makes detachment of the mould from the imprinted polymer film easier.56,57 Soft thermal nanoimprinting enables imprinting on non-planar surfaces thanks to its mechanical flexibility.58,59 To maximise the advantages of PDMS moulds and overcome the limited resolution of this technique, a variety of studies have been conducted. Pandey et al. successfully demonstrated the thermal nanoimprinting fabrication of a porous polymeric membrane with 10 nm feature size, using double replicate of the master mould with hydrogen silsesquioxane (HSQ) and PDMS.41 First the desired pattern with 10 nm feature size was created on an HSQ layer spin-coated on a Si wafer by EBL. Afterward the pattern was imprinted on a thermal resist, poly(benzyl methacrylate) (PBMA), by thermal imprint process followed by casting a hPDMS/PDMS double layer into the PBMA mould. The final hPDMS/PDMS mould was used as a master for thermal nanoimprinting. The authors demonstrated that soft lithography can overcome the limitations of using a rigid mould for thermal nanoimprinting which are the high susceptibility to defects and the ability to pattern only flat surfaces.


1.2.2. Photo nanoimprint lithography. 
Opposite to the thermal nanoimprinting process, the photo nanoimprinting technique involves embossing the desired patterns on a layer of liquid photoresist and curing it by UV exposure, which results in solidifying the resist by inducing polymer cross-linking.60 The photo nanoimprinting technique has several prominent advantages over the thermal equivalent. Firstly, it can be conducted at room temperature, which removes the issues resulting from thermal expansion variations between the mould, substrate, and resist.61 Additionally, the photoresist is normally a less viscous liquid compared to other types of polymers such as PDMS, which allows the process to be conducted at a lower imprint pressure.38,61,62 Lower viscosity resist enables the liquid to fill the mould cavity quicker without needing vacuum. A polymeric membrane with nanoscale pores was fabricated by Zhou et al. by UV nanoimprinting, using high-density hPDMS nanopillars as a master.40 The hPDMS nanopillars were produced from a nanoporous pAAO membrane by casting hPDMS. UV nanoimprinting was conducted by spin coating of a UV curable resin, AMONIL-MMS4, on the hPDMS master. Yanagishita and co-workers also reported a highly uniform sub-100 nm pore arrays polymeric structure made by means of photo nanoimprinting, using a Ni nanopillars mould fabricated from a pAAO membrane (Fig. 2C–F). The Ni mould filled with the photopolymer monomer, PAK-01, was then placed on a glass substrate prior to UV exposure to induce polymerisation. The Ni mould, the surface of which was pre-treated with a release agent, was mechanically removed to obtain the porous polymeric membrane.63 Despite the aforementioned advantages of nanoimprinting, the fabrication of free-standing permeable membranes is still challenging as often a very thin layer remains at the bottom of the pores and detachment of the membrane from the substrate can damage the membrane. To overcome these issues, a sacrificial layer can be introduced between the polymer layer and the substrate. Choi and co-workers reported the fabrication of an initial free-standing polymeric membrane with 10–13 nm pores by UV nanoimprinting technique.64 A SU-8 membrane was fabricated using a 100 nm thick sacrificial LOR layer spin-coated below the resist, and the desired pattern was imprinted using Si microneedles fabricated by photolithography. Conical pores were created which penetrated through the membrane layer (SU-8) into the sacrificial LOR layer. Afterward a polymer reflow process reduced the pore diameter down to sub 10 nm.


1.2.3. Other soft lithography techniques. 
Besides the two fundamental nanoimprinting processes, there are several other variations of imprinting techniques. Le-The et al. introduced a unique strategy to fabricate a free-standing porous PDMS membrane, using double sacrificial layers of photoresist (Fig. 3). In this study, the first sacrificial layer, OiR907-17i, spun on a Si wafer was separated from the second layer by placing a very thin Ti layer in between, to later on release a free-standing membrane.65 The desired patterns of nanopillars were created on the second photoresist layer via standard photolithography. Then a PDMS solution in hexane was spin-coated on the surface of the nanopillar arrays. After treating the top surface of cured PDMS with O2 reactive ion etching (RIE) to reduce the membrane thickness and create the open-through holes, the supported membrane was immersed in acetone to release the free-standing membrane by dissolving the double sacrificial layers. Although PDMS has probably been the most common material used for soft lithography due to its low cost, biocompatibility, chemical inertness, and versatile surface chemistry,65,66 there are studies using other types of polymers. For example, Yanagishita and co-workers immersed a Ni nanopillar array fabricated from a pAAO membrane in a methylmethacrylate (MMA) monomer and 2 wt% benzoyl peroxide solution, and polymerised it using heat treatment at 50 °C for 12 hours to produce a nanoporous PMMA membrane.67 The Ni mould was then dissolved in acid to produce a free-standing membrane. The produced membrane had a pore diameter of 320 nm, a pitch distance of 500 nm and a thickness of 4.5 μm, which were almost the same features of the pAAO master mould membrane used, which had a pore diameter of 300 nm, a pitch distance of 500 nm, and a thickness of 4.5 μm. The slight difference in the pore diameter of pAAO and PMMA membranes was thought to originate from the shrinkage of the volume of PMMA during polymerisation. One benefit of this approach is the possibility to produce nanoscale pores with very high aspect ratios, which is difficult to achieve with pressure-based nanoimprinting. Additionally, this casting approach can avoid creating the thin layer at the bottom of the pores. Bernards and Desai used the casting approach to fabricate a biodegradable nanoporous membrane with poly(ε-caprolactone) (PCL).68 Vertically oriented ZnO nanorods, used as a template, were synthesised on a ZnO layer and the solution of PCL was casted. The nanoporous membrane was fabricated by selectively etching the ZnO nanorods template with sulfuric acid. The length of the ZnO nanorods was approximately 500 nm with an average diameter of 23 ± 7 nm. The fabricated PCL membrane had a pore size and a density of 21 ± 7 nm and 5 × 109 pore cm−2, respectively. This technique provides membranes with a wide range of pore sizes and density, which have been considered for various applications including tumour cell separation,69,70 micro/nanoparticle arrays fabrication,71 and biosensing.72
 Fig. 3  (A) Fabrication process of a free-standing PDMS through-hole membrane using a sacrificial layer and (B) top-view of optical (top row) and SEM (bottom row) images of the free standing PDMS membrane [ref. 65]. 

1.3. Polymer self-assembly
Polymer self-assembly produces porous polymeric membranes through the spontaneous organisation of polymeric precursors driven by specific non-covalent interactions among them.73 Often self-assembly can be induced by a phase inversion process. The well-known phase inversion process includes non-solvent induced phase separation (NIPS),74 thermally induced phase separation (TIPS),75 and vapor induced phase separation (VIPS).76 Among those, NIPS using block copolymer self-assembly, called self-assembled NIPS (SNIPS),77 appears to be particularly promising for the preparation of polymer structures with small nanopores. Furthermore, SNIPS is suitable for industrialisation. Therefore, the next section will focus on porous polymeric membrane fabrication based on block copolymer self-assembly.

1.3.1. Block copolymer self-assembly. 
Although nanoimprinting techniques can offer advantages over other methods including precise control over pore size, shape, and density as well as covering a wide range of pore sizes from the micro- to the nanoscale, often they require photolithography or EBL to fabricate master moulds, which can be costly. They also lack the flexibility of patterning. For example, if the design of the pattern changes in pore diameter or density, a new master mould needs to be fabricated.78 Due to the requirements of the process, imprinting on round objects is challenging and thus the geometry of the membrane is limited to flat-plane. Block copolymer self-assembly can provide high-density uniform nanoscale pores in a typical range of 3–50 nm without the need of sophisticated costly facilities (Fig. 4E).79–81 Block copolymers suitable for self-assembly can be regarded as hybrid macromolecules consisting of two or more chemical homopolymers that are linked together with covalent bonding. Due to the thermodynamic incompatibility of these polymers, phase separation occurs when self-assembled to minimise the contact energy between the segments of the copolymer.6 In a typical process, self-assembly occurs either in a pure block copolymer or in a composite of block copolymer and additional materials. To produce porous membranes block copolymers can be harnessed either: (1) as the template for pore formation, or (2) as the porous membrane framework.82
 Fig. 4  (A–D) Fabrication procedures of polymeric membrane by block copolymer, NBCB-b-NBPLA, self-assembly and (E) SEM image of the surface of a porous polymeric membrane [ref. 80 and 81]. 
Block copolymer as the pore template. 
In this procedure, block copolymers serve as the pore template to self-assembly with added prepolymers or polymer precursors of homopolymers that are not part of block copolymers through various non-covalent interactions followed by removal of the block copolymer. Although this approach is very useful to produce porous inorganic materials such as silica and carbons,83,84 it involves some limitations. First, generally the block copolymers need to be amphiphilic with one segment that can interact non-covalently with the prepolymer. Second, the prepolymer needs to be able to further cross-link to form a stable framework without affecting the self-assembled block copolymers. Also, easy removal of the block copolymers is required without affecting the framework structure.6 In many cases, the precursors of the polymeric framework are treated at high temperature to form stable porous structures and simultaneously remove the block copolymer template.85–87 Phenolic resins are one of the main prepolymers to construct the porous frame.85,87–90 Schuster et al. reported the fabrication of a 2D hexagonal mesoporous polymer film. They conducted self-assembly of preformed oligomeric resol precursor induced by evaporation, using the triblock copolymer (Pluronic P123) template.90 Thermal polymerisation of the precursor was followed by template removal. An ethanolic mixture of precursor and block copolymer was spin-coated on a Si wafer. The fabricated polymeric membrane possessed elliptically shaped pores of Del = 6.8 nm and del = 3 nm (Del and del for the largest and shortest diameters, respectively). A similar approach was also reported by Liang and co-workers, using polystyrene-block-poly(4-vinylpyridine) (PS–P4VP) self-assembly. Resorcinol monomers were preorganised in the nanostructured film by PS–P4VP self-assembly and solvent-induced structural annealing. Afterward in situ polymerisation of the resorcinol monomers was conducted in the presence of formaldehyde vapour to form a stable framework.88 The uniqueness of this approach lies in the incorporation of resorcinol monomers into the PS–P4VP block copolymer as a resorcinol-block copolymer complex to form a base porous structure before resorcinol polymerisation and carbonisation. This facilitates framework formation by the block copolymer–resorcinol complex and thus the formation of highly cross-linked resorcinol–formaldehyde resin which is often difficult to dissolve. The pore diameter can be controlled by the volume fraction of the PS domain in the block copolymer and the thickness of pitch area was controllable by the volume fraction of the resin.
Block copolymer as porous membrane framework. 
Unlike the approach using block copolymers as the pore template, where the block copolymers get completely removed for pore formation, this approach uses part of the block copolymers to build the porous membrane framework by removing only one of the blocks and, in some cases, additional components. One of the challenges to form well-ordered porous polymeric films is controlling the perpendicular orientation of the pores to the substrate throughout the film. This can be achieved by fine control of experimental conditions such as proper casting solvent,91,92 fast evaporation to the film,91,92 solvent annealing,93–97 zone-casting,98,99 thermal annealing,81,100–104 or electric field application.105,106 Tuning the pore size is also possible with careful consideration of the dynamics of film formation and phase separation for a given block copolymer, which are the key factors to define the final morphology of the membrane.
Usually block copolymers with high Flory–Huggins parameters such as PS-b-P4VP,107–110 polystyrene-b-poly(hydroxyethylmethacrylate) (PS-b-PHEMA), or polystyrene-b-poly(acrylic acid) (PS-b-PAA), are used to fabricate uniform porous membranes.111,112 An asymmetric membrane was fabricated by a fast one-step procedure, using PS-b-P4VP.107 The membrane consisted of two integrated layers featuring a non-ordered sponge-like bottom layer underneath a top layer with well-ordered perpendicularly aligned pores. The highly ordered cylindrical pores at the top layer showed a diameter of approximately 40 nm. In this approach, self-assembly and pore formation occurred during the evaporation of the solvent, tetrahydrofuran (THF), shortly after the block copolymer was casted on a glass surface.
In a unique approach, Wang et al. studied the control of pore orientation and morphology by selecting the solvent and temperature required for solvent vapour annealing to induce the specific swelling of minority blocks of PS-b-PVP block copolymers. The authors reported perpendicularly oriented isopores throughout the whole membrane and demonstrated reversible pore closure by exposure to a selected solvent.113 The pore diameter was tuned in the range of 12–46 nm. In general, the diameter of perpendicular pores of diblock copolymers is smaller than 50 nm due to practical limitations of the high molecular weight linear block copolymer self-assembly. To challenge this limitation, Bolton and co-workers reported the use of an asymmetric bottlebrush polystyrene–polylactide (PS-b-PLA) block copolymer to fabricate a polymeric structure with an average pore diameter of 55 nm.114 The authors previously reported the control of pore diameter within the range from 15 to 45 nm by changing the molecular weight of the same block copolymer, PS-b-PLA. In both studies, after self-assembly, PLA was removed by hydrolytic degradation, using sodium hydroxide solution.115 While in a traditional linear block copolymer only the block length can affect the polymer composition, in a bottlebrush architecture the length of both the backbone and the brush side chains has an effect on the composition. The final morphology of a porous polymeric membrane can be finely tuned by controlling the length of backbone and brush side chains (Fig. 5A–D). The authors demonstrated that an asymmetric polystyrene–polylactic acid (PS–PLA) bottlebrush copolymer with long PS branches and short PLA branches can attain a cylindrical morphology with melt self-assembly. They also showed that by selectively etching PLA domains, large pore size nanostructures can be obtained. Although fine tuning of pore size and orientation using diblock copolymers and triblock terpolymers has extensively been studied, good permeability and mechanical integrity are still a challenge. Phillip and co-workers tried to overcome this challenge and reported the fabrication of a mesoporous hybrid membrane with synthesised triblock terpolymer, poly(isoprene-b-styrene-b-vinylpyridine). Tuning the diameter of pores within the range of 16–30 nm was achieved through hybridisation via homopolymer blending. The membrane structure featured a unique morphology with enhanced mechanical integrity, hard to achieve with diblock copolymer systems.116 The mesoporous structure with gradient pore sizes was formed using a combination of controlled solvent evaporation and NIPS. Solvent evaporation drives the terpolymer self-assembly to form the mesoporous layer, and the subsequent NIPS process creates the microporous structure underneath. The fabricated membrane also showed stimuli-responsive permeability depending on pH due to P4VP pKa value.117,118 At pH 5 or higher, as pH increases, a small increase in permeability was observed; on the other hand, below pH 5, the permeability rapidly decreased. The authors explained this effect with the solubility of P4VP. At a pH value below the pKa, the degree of protonation of the P4VP is higher, which makes it more soluble in aqueous solutions. The hydrated P4VP expands toward the centre of the pores, narrowing them and thus slowing the flow of the aqueous solution. In contrary, deprotonated P4VP is not very soluble in aqueous solutions and collapses against the pore walls, widening the pores and thus improving the flow of the solution.
 Fig. 5  (A) Interfacial curvature of linear copolymer self-assembly and (B) bottle brush copolymer. TEM images of (C) the PS–PLA bottle brush copolymer and (D) the nanoporous membrane prepared using the bottle brush copolymer [ref. 114]. (E) Schematic diagram of SNIPS process enhanced by an electric field and (F) SEM images of the surface morphology of PS80P2VP20 membranes fabricated at applied voltages of 0, 20, and 40 kV and evaporation times of 5, 10, and 15 s [ref. 119]. 
As an example of a unique approach Dreyer et al. demonstrated the orientation of polymer self-assembly can be controlled by applying an electric field to the block copolymer solutions during the solvent evaporation step (Fig. 5E and F). Polystyrene-block-poly(2-vinylpyridine) (PS-b-P2VP) and PS-b-P4VP diblock copolymers were used to study the impact of an external electric field on membrane fabrication.119 These block copolymers were chosen because of their well-studied SNIPS morphology and permittivity difference between the two chemically distinct blocks. Results indicated that the application of an electric field enhances self-assembly and facilitates vertical cylindrical alignment of the block copolymer, compensating for non-optimal experimental parameters. Once the desired self-assembly was achieved, the block copolymers were immersed in a water bath to kinetically trap the cylindrical domains. The non-volatile solvent in the PVP domains was exchanged by the precipitant. Pores were then opened in the solid PS matrix in alignment with the precipitated PVP blocks. Magnetic fields have also been used to control the perpendicular orientation of the pores using block copolymer. This unique strategy is based on the use of magnetic fields to direct the alignment of block copolymer domains (Fig. 4A–D). Gopinadhan et al. reported a scalable approach that can develop large areas of polymer films with stimuli-responsive vertically aligned nanopores, using a liquid crystalline brush-like diblock copolymer, NBCB-b-NBPLA.80 Asymmetric materials with a 3:1 ratio by volume of NBPLA and NBCB were targeted to produce cylindrical domains of PLA by microphase separation. The diamagnetic anisotropy of the smectic mesophase formed by the cyanobiphenyl units affords the ability with which the self-assembled block copolymer structure can be aligned by the magnetic field. After the perpendicular alignment of PLA domain with the magnetic field, the use of polynorbornene backbones allows the system to be cross-linked with UV light exposure. Finally, the PLA domain was selectively removed, using a mild alkaline etching solution. Feng et al. also applied a magnetic field to create vertically aligned 1 nm pores in a membrane produced by cross-linking a liquid crystalline mesophase consisting of wedge-shaped amphiphilic species as building blocks.120
While block copolymer self-assembly offers advantages such as versatile surface chemistry, precise control of pore size in the low-nanoscale range solely by adjusting chemical composition and length of each block, achieving pores over 100 nm in diameter is still a challenge. It is also difficult to generate cylindrical pores throughout the membrane. This technique furthermore suffers from scaling up due to the cumbersome and long preparation procedures.121 The feasibility of the produced membranes to introduce biomimetic functionalities supports their main applications in virus filtration,122,123 water purification,92,124 and biomolecule separation.125,126

1.4. 3D printing
Additive manufacturing which can also be called 3D printing or rapid prototyping is a relatively modern technique that has enormous potential for the fabrication of biomedical membranes The greatest advantage of this technique is the ability to create complex shapes or features in 3D with a wide range of materials including conventional thermoplastic, ceramics, metals and graphene-based materials across different scales.127 This approach can be divided into four types: (1) photopolymerisation in which photoreactive polymers are cured with a laser or UV-light,128,129 (2) powder-based printing, in which the powder of the desired material is spread on a substrate followed by spurting a chemical binder to form a 3D object and selectively sinter it,130 (3) material extrusion which works by heating the thermoplastic higher than its Tg to melt and extrude a filament of the polymeric material to form a desired structure,131,132 and (4) lamination which works by laminating the stacked thin layers of materials which are cut into a desired shape to form a prototype.133 Among those techniques, photopolymerisation, especially laser-lithography-based technique known as stereolithography (SLA) is currently the most widely used approach to produce polymeric membranes. In this technique, a UV laser traces the desired structure and cures the photo-reactive polymer either on the top or bottom of the moving stage. Once the desired pattern is created at the surface of the photo-reactive polymer solution on the stage, the stage moves vertically down into or up from the resin surface and the resin on the surface is cured by the UV-laser to form a continuous 3D object (Fig. 6A and B).134 Although 3D printing has a great potential in various fields including medicine, art, manufacturing and engineering, it is still in its infancy, having some important limitations such as printing resolution.127,134,135 As such, it is still a challenge to produce membranes with nanoscale pores. Although the majority of the approaches in 3D printing have a microscale resolution limit, recent advancement in the use of the two-photon polymerisation (TPP) technique for 3D printing has demonstrated the possibility to increase the resolution limit to a 100 nm scale.136–139 This technique enabled such high resolution by irradiating a femtosecond laser beam tightly focused on a photo-reactive resin using a high-numerical aperture objective.137 Since most photo-reactive resins absorb in the UV range, a near infrared laser can be used to induce TPP, which allows confinement of polymerisation to a small area around the focal spot of the laser beam.136,137,140 While this technology has shown rapid improvement in the last decade, the several limitations it needs to overcome are: (1) material types, (2) low mechanical strength without additional post-treatment process, and (3) high production cost.141 To the best of our knowledge, there are no reports on 3D printing used to generate porous polymeric membranes with pores in the nanoscale. However, recent advances focused on improving the resolution limit of specific 3D printing approaches pave the way towards the promising fabrication of porous membranes in the near future.
 Fig. 6  Schematic procedure of layer by layer 3D printing using stereolithography in (A) normal and (B) inverted configurations [ref. 134]. 
1.5. Electrospinning
The electrospinning process involves electrostatically driven spinning of polymeric fibres to produce porous polymeric structures. Porous polymeric membranes fabricated with this method can have pore diameters ranging from the micro- to the nanoscale. Advantages of these membranes include high gravimetric porosity, excellent pore interconnectivity, microscale interstitial space, low-density, controllable thickness and a large surface area-to-volume ratio with reasonable mechanical strength.142–145 A typical electrospinning process is shown in Fig. 7A.142 In this process, the prepared polymer solution is firstly placed either by melting or dissolution in solvent into a capillary tube. After that, a strong electrical field is applied between the capillary tip and the ground collector. The charge induced by the electric field opposes the surface tension of the polymer liquid which is hold at the tip of the capillary. By increasing the electric power, the hemispherical shape of the polymer fluid at the tip changes to a conical shape called Taylor cone. Once the applied electrical field reaches a critical value that exceeds the surface tension of the polymer liquid, the solution is ejected from the tip of the Taylor cone. The path followed by the charged jet of the polymer solution can be electrically controlled, thus continuous polymeric fibres can be collected to produce porous membranes.18,146 In general, this process can be classified into two categories: (1) solution electrospinning and (2) melt electrospinning.
 Fig. 7  (A) Schematic procedure of electrospinning technique [ref. 142] and (B) the SEM images of electrospun silk fibres at electric field of 4 kV cm−1 at concentrations of 5, 8, 10, 12, 15, and 19.5% with a spinning distance of 7 cm [ref. 150]. 

1.5.1. Solution electrospinning. 
Solution electrospinning is a widely applied and well-studied technique, easily processed at room temperature. The three key parameters that govern the electrospinning process are: solution, process, and ambient conditions.
Solution parameters. 
The solution parameters that dictate the electrospinning process are concentration, viscosity, polymer molecular weight, conductivity, and surface tension. For nanofibres formation, there is a minimum polymer concentration required. Various research groups have investigated the effect of polymer concentration on the morphology of nanofibres and reported that by increasing the polymer concentration, more uniform nanofibres are obtained, while at low concentration, often a mixture of beads and fibres is observed (Fig. 7B).147–150 Molecular weight of polymers also affects the surface tension, viscosity and conductivity. Haghi and Akbari reported that a too low molecular weight solution tends to favour a bead morphology, while a high molecular weight solution produces fibres with large average diameters.149 Low viscosity also produces a bead like morphology and discontinuous fibres, while too high viscosity hinders polymer solution ejection.150 Surface tension is strongly related to the selection of solvents. Unlike melt electrospinning, in this approach the polymer is dissolved in a suitable solvent, and as such, solvents should fulfil certain requirements including good volatility, vapour pressure, boiling point, and integrity of the polymer solution over time. The thinner the jet becomes the faster solvent evaporation and phase separation occur. As a result, solvent vapour pressure and volatility play an important role in determining the evaporation rate, the drying rate and the phase separation process. If high boiling point and low vapour pressure solvent are used, the polymer jet is collected prior to complete solvent evaporation, causing ribbon-like flat shape and interconnected web-like morphology of the nanofibres.151 Several research groups showed that the solvent properties and polymer concentration affect the morphology, structure, and mechanical and thermal properties of nanofibre fabrication of polyethylene oxide (PEO) and PET.152,153 Wannatong et al. studied the solvent effect on PS nanofibres using six solvents: acetic acid, acetonitrile, m-cresol, toluene, THF, and dimethylformamide (DMF). In this study, a significant decrease of fibre diameters was found with increase of density and boiling point of the solvents. The thinnest fibre diameter of 200 nm was achieved with m-cresol, while the largest fibre diameter of 1.6–4.5 μm was produced with THF.
Process parameters. 
The process parameters to control electrospinning include the applied electric field, the distance between the tip and the controller, and flow rate. There is a threshold voltage for the formation of fibres to occur and various studies suggest that higher voltage facilitates greater stretching of the polymer solution leading to reduced fibre diameters and rapid solvent evaporation.154,155 The flow rate is also an important parameter that influences the jet velocity and material transfer rate. Generally lower feed rate is desirable to give enough time for solvent evaporation.156,157
Ambient parameters. 
Temperature and humidity are ambient factors that affect the electrospinning process. Mit-uppatham et al. studied the effect of the temperature, reporting that high temperatures facilitate the production of thin fibres.158 Ray et al. studied the effect of humidity showing that high humidity prevents the elongation or stretching of the polymeric solution and thus results in increased nanofibre diameters.159 However, low relative humidity can also produce large nanofibre diameters as it facilitates rapid solvent evaporation.160
As the electrospinning technique uses thin nanofibres to create a membrane, the ability to produce highly uniform pores, especially in the submicron and subnanometre range, is limited. However, some research groups managed to produce controlled pore formation at nanoscale by applying combined approaches. For example, Kang et al. fabricated a polymeric membrane with well-controlled nanosize pores by combining electrospinning and photofluidisation.161 In this study, photoresponsive azopolymer fibres from polydisperse orange 3 (PDO 3) were electrospun onto an optically inactive PCL fibrous supporting layer. After light irradiation, the electrospun PDO 3 fibrous layer partially melted, the photofluidisation causing pore size shrinking. The pore size was controlled by the light irradiation time in a range from 6.8 μm to nanoscale. Jao and co-workers combined electrospinning and Stamp-thru-mould (ESTM) to fabricate porous membranes. The authors reduced the pore size by stacking multiple layers of nanofibre sheets where the fibres are deposited to create rectangular pores. The pore size can range from nanometre scale to a few hundred microns by adjusting the number of layers and their deposition time.162 Zhou et al. combined electrospinning and block copolymer self-assembly to produce membranes featuring uniform nanoscale pore size. The authors first fabricated a polyvinylalcohol (PVA)/SiO2 fibrous membrane by electrospinning, which featured macropores and was expected to confer mechanical strength to the final composite. Afterwards, a PS-b-P2VP solution was added to the membrane dropwise to form a nanoporous composite. The pore size was adjusted by regulating the swelling time and temperature using ethanol.163 The authors demonstrated two types of membrane fabrication, symmetric and asymmetric, leading to pore diameters ranging from 38 nm to slightly less than 100 nm.


1.5.2. Melt electrospinning. 
Melt electrospinning has several advantages over solution electrospinning which include no requirement of solvent selection and easy cleaning process to remove solvent after fabrication. It specially suits to polymers which do not have an appropriate solvent to dissolve at room temperature. Do et al. fabricated polyethylene glycol (PEG)/PVDF core/shell nanofibres with melted coaxial electrospinning.164 They used a double spinneret to coaxially electrospin PEG as core and PVDF as shell layers. The average diameter of the PVDF fibres in this study was 408 nm and it gradually went up to 911 nm by increasing the core feed rate and the molecular weight of PEG.
This technique has the ability to tune the geometry of the membrane, such as tube shape, and to select the precursor from a wide range of polymers including biocompatible synthetic and natural polymers.165 As such, the membranes fabricated with this technique have potential in diverse areas of application including water purification,166 tissue engineering,167,168 drug delivery,169,170 and lithium ion battery technology.171 The high surface roughness often shown by these membranes favours surface fouling, which renders them less suitable for certain applications such as biosensing.172 The key to improve the membrane quality fabricated with electrospinning for the aforementioned applications is to introduce antifouling properties on the surface with suitable surface modification processes or hybrid materials as well as to expand this technique to industrial scale with precise control of membrane uniformity, pore size at the nanoscale and thickness.166

Table 1 summarises each fabrication technique discussed above including advantages and limitations, the membrane materials used, and the pore size ranges achieved. Due to the lack of reports using 3D printing to fabricate porous polymeric membranes at the nanoscale, 3D printing is listed in Table 1 as a potential technique.
Table 1 Overview of porous polymeric membrane fabrication techniques including main advantages and limitations




Fabrication technique
Pore size range
Membrane materials
Approach
Primary applications
Advantages
Limitations
Ref.




Track etching
0.6–870 nm
PET
Thermal/chemical etching
Bioseparation/ionic transport/biosensor
Regular pore structure and narrow pore size distribution
Difficult to scale up/limited geometry

11, 12, 23–28 and 33



30 nm–3 μm
PC

16 and 17



20–80 nm
PVDF

13–15







Electrospinning
Several micrometers
Gelatin
N/A
Water treatment/tissue and bone regeneration/drug delivery/li ion battery
Low fabrication cost/easy to control porosity/complex geometry fabricaiton
Hard to control pore size uniformity/high surface roughness/low reproducibility

147



Sub-micrometers
PA-6

158



576.4–648.6 nm
PVDF

172



∼50 nm–6.2 μm
PDO

161



50–150 μm
PU

167



N/A
Chitosan

168



PSF

142 and 156



PVP–PCL core shell

169



PAN/PMMA

171



PET-co-PEI

148



PLAGA

154



PS

153



Silk

150



[P(LA-co-CL)]

155



PEG–PVDF core shell

164



Silica–PVA

163



PLA

151, 157 and 165







3D printing
N/A
Organometallic polymers
Two-photon polymerisation (TPP)
Microfluidic device/artificial organs and bones
Complex geometry fabrication
Limited resolution/limited materials/high cost

136, 138 and 139



SCR500


IP-Dip


PC
Material extrusion 3D printing (ME3DP)

131 and 132



CYCOLAC™ ABS grade MG37GR resin






Fabrication technique
Pore size range
Base
Mould
Approach
Primary applications
Advantages
Limitations
Ref.




Nanoimprint
35–300 nm
AMO-NIL MMS10
PDMS, PC, PET
UV imprint
Bioseparation/cell manipulation/DNA translocation
Low cost/fast fabrication time/narrow pore size distribution/can cover a wide range of pore size and density
Limited selection of materials and geometry

38



PUA511RM
PUA511RM

39



∼10 nm
PAK-01
Nickel

63



10 nm–10 μm
SU-8
Si
UV/thermal imprint

64



PBMA
h-PDMS/PDMS
Thermal imprint

41



PMMA
Si/SiO2









44



PE
Nickel

69



PBMA
HSQ/PDMS

55



21–320 nm
PMMA
Nickel
Casting

67



PS

42



PCL
ZnO

68







Fabrication technique
Pore size range
Polymer
Sacrificial material
Approach
Primary applications
Advantages
Limitations
Ref.




Block copolymer self bassembly
6.8 nm
Resin
Pluronic F127
Block copolymer as a template
Bioseparation


Narrow pore size and porousity coverage/Long fabrication time

87



3–6.8 nm
Pluronic P123

90



33.7 nm
PS-b-P4VP

88



7.7–10.1 nm
NBCB-b-NBPLA
PLA
Block copolymer as part of the membrane frame

80



13 nm
PSTPA-b-PLA









81



15–55 nm
PS-b-PLA

92, 94, 100, 114 and 115



PDMSB-b-PS-b-PLA (DSL)

97



15–55 nm
PFS-b-PLA

105



10–15 nm
PS-b-PMMA-b-PEO
PMMA

93



10–40 nm
PS-b-PMMA

122, 123 and 126



∼5 nm
PS-b-PFEMS
PS

96



20–70 nm
PS-b-P4VP
N/A

107–110, 119 and 125



16–30 nm
PI-b-PS-b-P4VP

116






2. Biomedical applications of porous polymeric membranes
Porous polymeric membranes have been investigated for numerous potential applications including catalytic reaction,173 water filtration174 and energy storage.175 They have also demonstrated great potential for biomedical applications, contributing significantly to advance in biomedical research. This review provides an overview of the state-of-the-art and future prospects of the biomedical applications of polymeric membranes which are shown in Fig. 8. For these applications, biocompatibility and biodegradability of the membranes are crucial factors. Prevention of membrane biofouling, and suppression of induced immune response and any other biological responses are also key requirements. Surface properties determine the degree of biocompatibility and thus the membrane surface has to be often modified either to enhance the interaction with the biological sample or to suppress the immune response.7 Indeed, the polymeric membrane surface is modified either physically, such as via plasma or UV treatment, or chemically, such as by forming covalent bonds.7 Biocompatible polymers can be classified into three categories depending on the host response they induce: (1) inert biomaterials which do not induce any host response, (2) interactive biomaterials that trigger some specific responses such as cell growth or adhesion, and (3) viable materials which incorporate or attract living cells and are actively resorbed by the system.176 Biocompatibility including hemocompatibility and antifouling behaviour, are very important for biomedical applications such as tissue engineering, drug delivery and bioseparation. Biofouling is a significant issue as the non-specific adsorption of undesired molecules, proteins and substances on the membrane surface, can affect membrane functionalities.177 Past studies suggest that the membranes should have low surface charge and a balanced distribution of hydrophobic and hydrophilic domains.178–180 For implantation or tissue regeneration as well as drug delivery, biodegradability is also a critical aspect. Research has mainly focused on biodegradable polymers for biomedical applications,181–185 although some non-degradable polymers have also been studied as, for example, polyester imide (PI) which is stable in physiological environment and can be functionalised easily.186–188
 Fig. 8  Overview of biomedical/biological applications of porous polymeric membranes. 
2.1. Drug delivery systems

2.1.1. Osmotic and diffusion-controlled membranes. 
Drug delivery systems (DDS) have been investigated extensively as there is a large demand for controlled delivery of drugs to a targeted spot to reduce severe side effects. Currently the main methods to administer drugs to a patient are intravenous injection and oral pathway. However, these methods have important drawbacks including poor drug solubility and biodistribution, rapid drug decomposition, tissue damage extravasation, and so on.189 DDS aim to reduce these drawbacks by maximising the therapeutic efficacy, drug releasing time, the stability of drugs in the body, increasing the bioavailability of the drugs, and reducing adverse effects. Reducing the drug dosage frequency also can improve patient compliance. Porous polymeric membranes are used in DDS to control the diffusion of the drug molecules by adjusting their permeation and drug release. There are two types of systems: (1) osmotic membrane systems, and (2) diffusion-controlled membrane systems.7 Usually an osmotic system consists of a polymeric membrane reservoir permeable to water but not to the drug. As shown in Fig. 9A, water permeates the membrane due to osmotic pressure, and the drug is released through an orifice.7,190,191 In this approach, the membranes contain pore-forming agents to create pores in situ. On the other hand, diffusion-controlled membrane systems transport the drugs across the membranes in a controlled manner via drug diffusion, polymer swelling, and polymer dissolution or degradation (Fig. 9B). The critical factors to consider when using porous polymeric membranes for drug delivery are the chemical and mechanical stability of the drug cargo till its delivery at the target point, the uniform pore size to control drug permeability, and the feasibility to easily control the pore size depending on the size of drugs.189 Due to the possibility of precise control of pore size in the nanometre range and the low fabrication cost offered by the block copolymer self-assembly technique, it has been widely studied for drug delivery applications.192–196 For example, cylindrical nanochannels prepared by self-assembly of PS-b-PMMA block copolymers were used to demonstrate the controlled release of the biotherapeutics, human growth hormone (hGH), both in vitro and in vivo.126 As shown in Fig. 10, after creating the porous membrane with 80 nm thickness, a microfiltration polysulfone membrane was used as a support layer and Au was deposited to reduce the pore size. The pore size was precisely controlled from 15 to 6 nm by tuning the Au deposition time to ensure that only the target molecules diffuse through the membrane. Similar approaches to control the pore size have been reported with block copolymer self-assembly using various porous membranes as a support layer.197,198 Huang and co-workers reported the controlled release of triclosan, as a model drug, using pH-responsive PS-b-P4VP block copolymer.195 In their study, cyclodextrins immobilised in the macroporous sublayer were used to capture drug molecules, and slow drug release was achieved through the vertically aligned nanopores in the top layer. The authors claimed a high loading capacity, 305.5 μg cm−2, and a long-time extended drug release without an initial burst effect. Apart from block copolymer self-assembly, solution casting has also been used to fabricate porous membranes for drug delivery. Bernards and Desai reported the fabrication by solution casting of a PCL membrane using ZnO nanorods as a template.68 The authors studied cellular compatibility of the membrane with MTT cell viability assay, followed by the demonstration of controlled release of a model protein, fluorescein isothiocyanate-labelled bovine serum albumin (FITC–BSA). Controlled release was attributed to the interaction between the membrane material and the model protein as well as to the geometry of the membrane such as its pore size.
 Fig. 9  (A) Illustration of an osmotic drug delivery system and (B) diffusion control membrane system, and transdermal delivery system with (C) membrane and (D) polymer matrix [ref. 7]. 
 Fig. 10  (A) Fabrication procedure of vertical nanochannel block copolymer membrane. (B–D) SEM images of the top view of the membrane after different Au deposition thicknesses: (B) 0 nm (average pore diameter: 15 nm), (C) 7 nm (average pore diameter: 10 nm), and (D) 11 nm (average pore diameter: 6 nm) [ref. 126]. 


2.1.2. Transdermal drug delivery. 
In general, transdermal drug delivery provides several advantages over intravenous or oral DDS. As the membranes do not need to be internalised in the body, this removes a large number of barriers such as the difficulty of controlled release of drugs or the pain caused by needles that need to be considered for the intravenous and oral DDS. In this strategy, the drugs can penetrate the skin either via the intact stratum corneum (SC) and/or via hair follicles and sweat ducts.7 The membranes used for transdermal drug delivery usually consist of several layers, with a drug impermeable layer on top of the other layers to prevent the drugs from leaking out, followed by a drug reservoir and a porous membrane or a porous polymer matrix to control the drug release, and an adhesive layer to attach on the skin when the polymer matrix is not adhesive (Fig. 9C and D).7 Various types of polymers have been used to produce membranes for transdermal drug delivery including natural polymers such as gelatin,199,200 semi-synthetic polymers such as hydroxypropyl cellulose,201 nitrocellulose202,203 or cellulose,204–206 and synthetic polymers including polysiloxane,207,208 polyisoprene,209 polyester,210 polyurethane,211,212 polyethylene vinyl acetate,213 polyacrylamide,214,215 PVA,216 polysulfone,217 and PMMA.218 Iontophoresis is a popular technique that has been widely studied for this system, which is based on applying a low current that does not cause physiological damage and helps charged drug molecules permeate into the body. The basic components of almost all iontophoresis patches contain artificial membranes which are made of biocompatible materials.219–221 The benefits of this active transport are: (i) the superficial distribution of the drugs can be controlled without drug release in the blood stream, and (ii) a significant improvement of drug rate penetration compared to passive transport mechanisms.222

2.2. Tissue engineering
Porous polymeric membranes have been widely studied as scaffolds for tissue regeneration to support their structures. For this application, biocompatibility, space maintenance ability, cell occlusiveness, integration by the host tissue, and clinical manageability, have a key role. Normally, the membranes used for tissue regeneration are made of biopolymers which are naturally sourced, such as collagen and chitosan, or synthetically produced, such as expanded polytetrafluoroethylene (e-PTFE), PLA, and PCL.223,224

2.2.1. Use of porous biopolymer membranes. 
Biopolymer membranes have several advantages over synthetic membranes regarding their use for tissue engineering. They have good biocompatibility, biodegradability, inherent bioactivity, the ability to attract cells, and the susceptibility to be degraded by cell-triggered proteolysis and to be naturally remodelled.225 Collagen and chitosan are the most popular natural biopolymers being studied for tissue regeneration. Collagen membranes are highly biocompatible and have good tissue integration, osteoblastic adhesion, and fast vascularisation without foreign body reaction. They also induce chemotaxis for fibroblasts and hemostasis to promote wound healing, and a lower immune response compared to many other synthetic polymers such as polystyrene and polyethylene (Fig. 11A).226–230 Usually, enzymes such as collagenase/proteases, macrophage/polymorphonuclear leukocyte-derived enzymes, and bacterial proteases degrade collagen membranes and can lead to resorption of the membranes.224,231,232 However, despite all these benefits, collagen membranes still have some drawbacks. They tend to lose the ability as a space maintainer in humid conditions.224,233 They also carry the risks of disease transmission to humans when collagen from animals is used.234 The mechanical strength of collagen membranes is weak and membrane biodegradation is too fast.235 As such, to reinforce the mechanical strength and rapid biodegradability, researchers have applied a cross-linking technique to modify collagen.230,236–241 Glutaraldehyde is, so far, the most common agent used to cross-link collagen, though, its cytotoxicity has been reported.242 As a consequence, other cross-linking materials have been studied, such as genipin and oligomeric proanthocyanidins (OPCs). Li et al. assessed the physical properties, including degradation and mechanical strength, and the cytotoxicity of OPCs cross-linked collagen membranes according to the percentage of OPCs content in the membrane, ranging from 0 to 20%. Their results showed that the enzymatic degradation of membranes with 10% OPCs was delayed, with around 60% of the membrane weight remaining intact after 50 days of degradation. The membrane did not show cytotoxicity, and facilitated the proliferation of L929 cells in the in vivo study.243 Although there is still significant scope for improvement for the cross-linking approaches including prolonged membrane integrity with surrounding tissue and blood vessels244 and delayed angiogenesis,240,245 these techniques are expected to push this field to the next step. Chitosan-based membranes have also been well studied due to their low cost, superior biocompatibility, non-antigenicity, appropriate degradation rate, flexibility in hydrated environments, hemostatic activity, and antimicrobial and wound healing potential.246–249 Chemical cross-linking using genipin is a widely used method to improve chitosan membranes mechanical strength and degradation speed.168,250,251 Bavariya et al. reported genipin-cross-linked chitosan membranes with a long life-time of 20 weeks compared to a non-cross-linked chitosan membrane and a collagen membrane which both disappeared in 12–16 weeks (Fig. 11B–E).250 The mechanical strength of an electrospun genipin-cross-linked chitosan mat also showed a 165% strength increase compared to a non-cross-linked membrane.168
 Fig. 11  (A) Mechanism of the two possible pathways of acute inflammation. In acute inflammation neutrophils, monocytes, and macrophages are observed. The left scheme corresponds to a wound healing process and the right scheme corresponds to a foreign body response. In wound healing, tissue remodelling occurs at the end of the process. In foreign body response, acute inflammation remains for a long period. (B) Non-cross-linked chitosan membrane at 16 weeks showing fibrous tissue infiltration and degradation, (C) collagen membrane showed complete resorption at 16 weeks, (D) chitosan cross-linked with 5 mM genipin membrane at 20 weeks showing fibrous tissue infiltration, and (E) chitosan cross-linked with 10 mm genipin membrane showed resorption and splitting from side of the membrane at 20 weeks [ref. 250]. 


2.2.2. Synthetic porous polymer membranes. 
Compared to natural polymers, synthetic polymers such as PLA, PCL, PEG and poly(glycolic acid) (PGA) are prone to induce inflammatory foreign body reactions which may limit their use for tissue regeneration.252 However, they are worth to consider due to their controllable biodegradability, low rigidity, clinical manageability, processability, and drug-encapsulating ability.252–254 PLA is a Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved polymer and is one of the most common synthetic polymers used in tissue regeneration studies due to its good mechanical properties and biocompatibility. In order to control the degradation rate and hydrophilicity of PLA, copolymers such as polylactic acid/polyglycolic acid (PLGA) have been used.223 Studies comparing PLGA and collagen membranes performance showed similar wound healing ability255 and periodontal regeneration enhancement.223 Currently known drawbacks of PLA and PLGA membranes are the stiffness and the risk of inflammation due to the release of oligomers and acid by-products during their degradation.256,257 However, some studies have shown that stiffness and inflammation can be overcome by adding N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) as a softener, and hydroxyapatite, respectively.223,256,258,259 While NMP dissolves a wide range of polymers, it is known to cause skin irritation and rapid permeation through intact skin, therefore, adequate caution should be taken when handling it. PCL is another FDA approved biodegradable synthetic polymer which has been studied for tissue regeneration, harnessing its high mechanical strength and good biocompatibility.260 Unlike PLA or PLGA membranes, PCL membranes do not produce acidic species during their long degradation process, that can be of 2–3 years. As a result, it is known that PCL membranes serve as a structural guide until tissue regeneration is completed.261 However, their high hydrophobicity reduces cell adhesion and proliferation.262 Although PEG-based hydrogels are not FDA approved, their high biocompatibility and tissue integration have been harnessed for tissue regeneration.263–265 Moreover, their degradation kinetics can be tuned by adjusting the PEG composition.266

2.3. Biosensing
Polymeric membrane-based biosensors have been studied intensively as they can be fabricated relatively easily and cost-effectively, and many of the polymers used are biocompatible. Generally, biosensors are comprised of two elements: (1) a bioreceptor which interacts with a specific biomolecule (target analyte), and (2) a transducer which outputs a measurable signal proportional to the target analyte in the sample.267 Biosensors possess exceptional potential for high-performance bioanalysis, which includes simplicity, high specificity and sensitivity, short analysis time, low cost, portability, user-friendly operation, and point-of-care ability. Polymeric membranes have been incorporated into the structure of biosensors to improve their reliability, selectivity, and sensitivity. Moreover, polymers are ideal materials for disposable biosensors which is beneficial to biomedical applications. Porous polymeric membranes can be used in biosensor strategies to restrict the diffusion of interfering high molecular weight biologicals such as large proteins, while still allowing facile diffusion of low molecular weight solutes such as metabolites towards the transducer surface to be detected.268 They can also be used to selectively capture target analytes by interacting with the bioreceptors immobilised on the surface of the nanopores/nanochannels.269,270 Recent advances in polymeric membrane-based biosensors, mainly with optical and electrochemical transduction, have used PET, PI, PC, and conductive polymer-based porous membranes.271 In biosensors, prevention of biofouling is key to improve sensitivity and selectivity. Several approaches have been investigated to minimise biofouling including surface modification of the sensing platform with; (i) antifouling polymers such as PHEMA and PEG, (ii) phospholipid materials mimicking the cell membrane, and (iii) surfactant molecules.177 Track etching is the main fabrication method to produce porous polymeric membranes for biosensing as it allows the formation of uniform pore sizes and controlled pore densities. This technique also provides the ability to produce symmetric and asymmetric pore shapes.19 However, this is a time-consuming fabrication process that is inherently difficult to scale up and, as a result, nanoimprint lithography is becoming a popular fabrication alternative.64

2.3.1. Electrochemical biosensors. 
Electrochemical biosensors convert the biochemical information of target analyte into an electrochemical signal, for example, current or voltage. There are four types of electrochemical measurements: amperometric, potentiometric, impedimetric and conductimetric, which measure generated current, potential, impedance over a frequency range, and the conductive properties of a medium, respectively. Since signal transduction occurs on the working electrode surface, the performance of the sensor greatly depends on the electrode material, its surface modification, and its dimensions.272 Porous polymeric membranes can be used to modify the surface of working electrodes to improve the sensitivity, for example by introducing nanoscale pores which not only increase the surface area, but also can be used as nanowells where the biorecognition event can be confined, maximising the binding effect when compared to using conventional non-nanostructured electrodes. These pores can also act as filters to minimise interferences. Fig. 12A and B depicts one example of a sensing platform that exploits the nanopore blockage caused upon analyte binding as sensing mechanism, and the expected electrochemical response. Bioreceptors are immobilised on the nanoporous structure ready to bind to the target analyte, causing a change in the electrochemical signal measured as a result of partial nanopore blockage.273,274 A unique approach reported to produce nanoscale pores on solid substrates is the use of self-assembled polymer nanoparticles (Fig. 12C).275,276 The spaces between the hexagonally packed polymer beads can be considered as pores and the diameter of the pores can be tuned by adjusting the size of the polymer beads. Mackiewics et al. modified a gold plate with a thermosensitive N-isopropylacrylamide microgel beads monolayer and demonstrated the changes in electrochemical signals induced by the changes in pore diameter at various temperatures.275 As these microgel beads shrink at high temperature, the pore diameter increases by applying heat which, in turn increases the peak current. Apart from nanochannel array-based porous polymeric membranes, there are other types of porous polymeric membranes used for biosensors. For example, molecular imprinting is widely applied to produce porous polymeric membranes. Li et al. fabricated a 3D nanoporous structure as electrochemical sensing platform using molecular imprinting of metronidazole (MNZ). The authors produced a nanoporous Ni structure and decorated it with molecularly imprinted polymers by electropolymerisation using o-phenylenediamine as a functional monomer and demonstrated high selectivity and sensitivity toward MNZ.277 Some of these porous polymeric membranes present low conductivity and electrocatalytic activity, affecting the electrochemical performance of the biosensors where they have been introduced. To overcome those limitations, conducting polymers including poly(acetylene), poly(3,4-ethylene-dioxythiophene) (PEDOT), poly(thiophene), poly(p-phenylene vinylene) (PPV), poly(pyrrole), and polyaniline are often electropolymerised on the surface of electrochemical biosensors.278–280 Das and Sarkar reported an enzymatic electrochemical biosensor for urea, modifying the working electrode with a conductive polymer hydrogel. The enzyme urease was immobilised on the composite made of conductive electropolymerised aniline and non-conductive hydrogel of polyacrylamide and PVA.281 In another study by Cui et al., a biocompatible polymer composite using PEDOT and a PEG derivative was electrodeposited onto a glassy carbon electrode. Afterward the polymer composite was modified with citrate-stabilised gold nanoparticles. The gold nanoparticles were modified to display anti-alpha fetoprotein (AFP) antibody with affinity towards AFP, a tumour biomarker of liver cancer. The biosensor showed high sensitivity with a limit of detection (LOD) of 0.0003 fg mL−1 for AFP. Its selectivity was also tested with various other proteins including BSA, human serum albumin (HAS), and hemoglobin (HGB), as well as with single stranded DNA. Negligible responses to all those analytes at the concentration of 1 nM were observed, demonstrating high selectivity to AFP.282 A similar approach using PEDOT to increase the antifouling properties was reported by Wang et al. The porous nanocomposites were created by electropolymerisation of polypeptide doped PEDOT.283
 Fig. 12  (A) Mechanism of nanochannel blockage electrochemical sensing. (B) The differential pulse voltammograms (DPVs) of a: only bioreceptor is attached on the channel walls and b: after target analytes are captured by the bioreceptor and block the pores [ref. 274 and 273]. (C) Mechanism of nanochannel blockage using polymer beads monolayer and corresponding DPVs. 


2.3.2. Optical biosensors. 
Optical biosensors are built upon the measurement of photons. In other words, they measure absorbance, reflectance, or fluorescence emission that occur in the UV, visible, and near infrared regions. The changes in optical properties of the transducer such as intensity, polarisation or phase, triggered by biomolecular interaction on the sensor surface are measured to detect the target biomolecules. Most optical sensors make use of the evanescent wave working principle. Various evanescent wave integrated sensors have been developed including interferometers, ring resonators, grating couplers, photonic crystals and Si wire-based sensors.284 A variety of polymers can be synthesised to render specific properties including low optical loss, special surface functionalities and biocompatibility.285 Molecular imprinting is widely used to produce porous polymeric membranes for optical biosensors. Chen and co-workers demonstrated the quantitative detection of Escherichia coli based on a polydopamine (PDA) surface imprinted polymer with graphene quantum dots.286 First, PMMA–PS polymer waveguides and ring resonators were fabricated using thermal nanoimprinting technique by hot embossing with a Si master. Then, nanopores were introduced to the embossed optical structures by selectively developing out PMMA from the PMMA–PS composite devices using dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO).287

2.4. Bioseparation
Bioseparation is the isolation of biological substances such as cells, cell components, microorganisms or other types of biological molecules. In general, the mechanism of nanoporous membrane-based separation relies on physical size, charge or affinity, or combination of size and affinity. To achieve efficient bioseparation, the membranes need to have uniform controlled pore sizes at nano to microscale, high chemical and physical stability, small membrane thickness to enhance the analyte flux, and well-controlled surface charge.288 Sadeghi et al. reported a unique approach to separate similar size organic molecules based on their electrostatic charge by creating nanoporous membranes with a packed array of polymer micelles in alcohol.289 The micelles were formed by self-assembly of random amphiphilic copolymer, poly(trifluoroethyl methacrylate-random-methacrylic acid) P(TFEMA-r-MAA), generating carboxylate-functionalised nanochannels with an estimated pore size of 3–4 nm in the membrane layers, which separated negatively charged solutes from neutral and positively charged solutes. Block copolymer self-assembly is known to produce uniform pore sizes at small nanometre range suitable for separation of target biocomponents such as viruses, proteins and amino acids. For example, Yang et al. demonstrated the separation of rhinovirus type 14 (HRV14), using a mixture of PS-b-PMMA block copolymer (Fig. 13).122,123 For bioseparation, an antifouling polymer is often used to coat the membrane to prevent non-specific adsorption of biomolecules. For this, membrane wettability is a critical factor to control biofouling effect. Kim et al. used atom transfer radical polymerisation to produce hydrophilic polymer brushes, poly(ethylene glycol) methacrylate (PEGMA), to provide track-etched polyester nanoporous membranes with antifouling properties. The authors demonstrated the viral filtration efficiencies of these membranes with dengue virus.290 The fabricated membrane showed 93% of flux recovery while unmodified membrane showed only 63%. Another approach to minimise biofouling is to select membrane materials that have antifouling properties. Parylene-C, known to minimise biofouling, was used to prepare a micron size porous membrane for circulating tumour cell filtration.69,291 Parylene-C membranes with a diameter of 10 μm and pore centre to centre distance of 20 μm were fabricated by photolithography and used to separate metastatic human prostatic adenocarcinoma cells.291 Tang et al. used a polyethylene membrane fabricated by means of thermal nanoimprinting from a Ni master mould to demonstrate the ability of the membrane to capture human lung cancer cells, PC-9 cells, spiked in human blood samples.69 The authors claimed that this membrane showed similar capture efficiency to parylene membranes.
 Fig. 13  (A) Schematic process of the fabrication of asymmetric nanopores membrane using PS-b-PMMA block copolymer and PMMA homopolymer [ref. 122]. SEM image of the fabricated porous membrane (B) top view, (C) bottom view, and (D) cross-section, and (E) AFM image of the same membrane after filtration of HRV 14 virus [ref. 123]. 
When target biological components have compatible sizes and different charges, electrostatic interactions can be used to separate the components.292 Gold-coated track-etched poly(carbonate) membranes were surface modified with weak acidic alkane thiol, and the effect of pH and ionic strength for separation of BSA and bovine hemoglobin (BHb) from their mixture was studied.292 To be able to provide efficient bioseparation, stability in various solvents and resistance to high pH environment, as well as low surface energy, are desirable. Recently Schuster et al. fabricated an ultra-thin polymeric membrane based on a thermoset resin. The porous structure was formed via self-assembly of poly(o-cresyl glycidyl ether)-co-formaldehyde (PCGF), PEI, and PLGA mixture, followed by cross-linking of the epoxy matrix (PCGF/PEI) and selectively dissolving the PLGA domain.293 The fabricated membranes showed high robustness in organic solvents, low surface energies, and high efficiencies in separating proteins including myoglobin, cytochrome c, and BSA. Membranes produced by electrospinning have been widely studied for bioseparation.294–297 These membranes are based on nanofibres and many of the polymers used with this technique are biocompatible, though some difficulties still remain such as the selection of a suitable solvent. The separation mechanism of these membranes is mainly due to chemical and electrostatic interactions. As such, surface functionalisation of the nanofibre with specific ligands is often required to increase the selectivity. Ma et al. successfully separated 13 mg g−1 of BSA and 4 mg g−1 of bilirubin, using a cibacron blue F3GA-functionalised regenerated cellulose membrane.294 The same group also reported the separation of IgG from its mixture with BSA, using the same cellulose membrane but functionalised with proteins A and G instead of cibacron blue F3GA.295 The regenerated cellulose membrane was also used for ion exchange-based separation of proteins. In some studies, the regenerated cellulose membrane was functionalised with diethylaminoethyl (DEAE) anion exchange ligands and the separation of proteins such as BSA and cytochrome c was demonstrated.296,297
Conclusion
In spite of the recent progress of nanofabrication techniques for porous polymeric membranes, there are some challenges not solved yet. Moreover, each technique has its specific advantages and limitations that have to be considered for each specific application. Electrospinning, for example, can cover a large fabrication area and produce membranes with high mechanical strength. However, this technique often struggles with achieving uniform pore sizes and orientation. Additionally, process, solution and ambient parameters need to be optimised for each application. While block copolymer self-assembly can provide low cost, well-controlled pore size membranes, it is still a challenge to produce large pore sizes in the microscale and to generate large membrane areas. On the other hand, track etching and lithography-based techniques can cover a wide range of pore sizes and finely control porosity, as well as pore shape. The main issues of these techniques are the difficulties to scale-up and the limited geometries that can be achieved. Nanoimprinting is a promising approach to overcome the issues of scaling up and shortening the fabrication time required. It can also cover a wide range of pore size, shape and density and produce highly uniform pores. However, it does not have patterning flexibility and thus a small change in the design requires high-cost techniques for master mould fabrication or an alternative approach to master fabrication such as using pAAO as template. 3D printing is also a promising technique as it can be used to fabricate complex geometries with high reproducibility, and it has the ability to cover a wide range of pore, shape and density, though its resolution still needs to be improved to achieve nanoscale features. It also suffers from reasonably high fabrication cost. As such, it is critical to understand the pros and cons of each technique and select the right technique depending on the application purposes. For example, for tissue regeneration, mechanical strength is one of the critical factors, and as such, electrospinning is the most common method used for this purpose. On the other hand, bioseparation requires control of the pore size and density which favours block copolymer self-assembly and lithography-based techniques. To improve nanofabrication of porous polymeric membranes in the future, integration with other techniques, doping other materials, or exploration of new polymeric materials providing specific properties, such as high conductivity and high electrocatalytic activity may also help overcome the drawbacks of each technique and various disadvantages of porous polymeric membranes including, low stability at high temperature or in organic solvents, poor conductivity and low electrocatalytic activities. After all, in most cases of biomedical applications, especially for in vivo use, antifouling properties are the key issue that all of the above techniques need to overcome as well as mechanical and chemical drawbacks that each technique possesses. To resolve biofouling issues, surface modification of the membranes’ inner pore surface as well as outer parts such as pitch area could be an important aspect to consider in future membrane fabrication approaches. The type of polymer also plays an important role to overcome antifouling properties and the suitable polymers need to be compatible with the techniques that can produce the desired formation. As such, interdisciplinary efforts from scientists, clinicians and researchers from different backgrounds including physics, chemistry, material sciences, biology, and medical sciences will be required to improve the translation of porous polymeric membrane research to the real world.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge funding from the Probing Biosystems Future Science Platform. This work was performed in part at the Melbourne Centre for Nanofabrication (MCN) in the Victorian Node of the Australian National Fabrication Facility (ANFF).
References
J. Wu, F. Xu, S. Li, P. Ma, X. Zhang, Q. Liu, R. Fu and D. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1802922 CrossRef .
P. Stroeve and N. Ileri, Trends Biotechnol., 2011, 29, 259–266 CrossRef CAS .
P. Guo, J. Huang, Y. Zhao, C. R. Martin, R. N. Zare and M. A. Moses, Small, 2018, 14, 1703493 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, Y. Tian and L. Jiang, Nano Today, 2016, 11, 61–81 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. W. Sing, D. H. Everett, R. A. W. Haul, L. Moscou, R. A. Pierotti, J. Rouquerol and T. Siemieniewska, Pure Appl. Chem., 1985, 57, 603–619 CAS .
D. Wu, F. Xu, B. Sun, R. Fu, H. He and K. Matyjaszewski, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 3959–4015 CrossRef CAS .
D. F. Stamatialis, B. J. Papenburg, M. Gironés, S. Saiful, S. N. M. Bettahalli, S. Schmitmeier and M. Wessling, J. Membr. Sci., 2008, 308, 1–34 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Meng and J. Zhai, Curr. Org. Chem., 2018, 22, 737–749 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Fleischer, P. B. Price and R. M. Walker, Science, 1965, 149, 383–393 CrossRef CAS .
P. B. Price and R. M. Walker, J. Appl. Phys., 1962, 33, 3400–3406 CrossRef CAS .
I. V. Korolkov, Y. G. Gorin, A. B. Yeszhanov, A. L. Kozlovskiy and M. V. Zdorovets, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2018, 205, 55–63 CrossRef CAS .
I. V. Korolkov, A. A. Mashentseva, O. Güven, Y. G. Gorin and M. V. Zdorovets, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 2018, 151, 141–148 CrossRef CAS .
O. Cuscito, M. C. Clochard, S. Esnouf, N. Betz and D. Lairez, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2007, 265, 309–313 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grasselli and N. Betz, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2005, 236, 501–507 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. Zhao, P. Vater and R. Brandt, Nucl. Tracks Radiat. Meas., 1991, 19, 829–832 CrossRef CAS .
A. Delavari, D. Breite, A. Schulze and R. E. Baltus, J. Membr. Sci., 2019, 584, 110–119 CrossRef CAS .
P. Martinez-Perez and J. Garcia-Ruperez, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2019, 10, 677–683 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tan and D. Rodrigue, Polymers, 2019, 11, 1160 CrossRef .
P. Apel, Radiat. Meas., 2001, 34, 559–566 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Toimil-Molares, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2012, 3, 860–883 CrossRef .
B. S. Lalia, V. Kochkodan, R. Hashaikeh and N. Hilal, Desalination, 2013, 326, 77–95 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Siwy, P. Apel, D. Dobrev, R. Neumann, R. Spohr, C. Trautmann and K. Voss, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2003, 208, 143–148 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yameen, M. Ali, R. Neumann, W. Ensinger, W. Knoll and O. Azzaroni, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2788–2793 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lin, Y. Liu, J. Yan, X. Wang and J. Li, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 334–340 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pevarnik, K. Healy, M. E. Toimil-Molares, A. Morrison, S. E. Létant and Z. S. Siwy, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7295–7302 CrossRef CAS .
P. Y. Apel, I. V. Blonskaya, N. E. Lizunov, K. Olejniczak, O. L. Orelovitch, M. E. Toimil-Molares and C. Trautmann, Small, 2018, 14, e1703327 CrossRef .
P. Y. Apel, Y. E. Korchev, Z. Siwy, R. Spohr and M. Yoshida, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2001, 184, 337–346 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wen, D. Yan, F. Liu, M. Wang, Y. Ling, P. Wang, P. Kluth, D. Schauries, C. Trautmann, P. Apel, W. Guo, G. Xiao, J. Liu, J. Xue and Y. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 5796–5803 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Werber, C. O. Osuji and M. Elimelech, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16018 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Feng, W. Zhu, W. Guo and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702773 CrossRef .
L. Cao, W. Guo, W. Ma, L. Wang, F. Xia, S. Wang, Y. Wang, L. Jiang and D. Zhu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2259–2266 RSC .
W. Guo, L. Cao, J. Xia, F.-Q. Nie, W. Ma, J. Xue, Y. Song, D. Zhu, Y. Wang and L. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1339–1344 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mara, Z. Siwy, C. Trautmann, J. Wan and F. Kamme, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 497–501 CrossRef CAS .
A. de la Escosura-Muñiz and A. Merkoçi, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7556–7583 CrossRef .
F. Liu, M. Wang, X. Wang, P. Wang, W. Shen, S. Ding and Y. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2018, 30, 052001 CrossRef .

          G. Emilsson and A. B. Dahlin, in Miniature Fluidic Devices for Rapid Biological Detection, ed. S.-H. Oh, C. Escobedo and A. G. Brolo, Springer International Publishing, Cham,  2018, pp. 1–23 DOI:10.1007/978-3-319-64747-0_1 .
M. Kwiat, S. Cohen, A. Pevzner and F. Patolsky, Nano Today, 2013, 8, 677–694 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, S. Park, K. Choi and G. Kim, Microelectron. Eng., 2008, 85, 861–865 CrossRef CAS .
J. Choi, Z. Jia and S. Park, Microelectron. Eng., 2018, 199, 101–105 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhou, X. Niu, G. Min, Z. Song, J. Zhang, Y. Liu, X. Li, J. Zhang and S. Feng, Microelectron. Eng., 2009, 86, 2375–2380 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pandey, S. Tzadka, D. Yehuda and M. Schvartzman, Soft Matter, 2019, 15, 2897–2904 RSC .
A. R. Jung, R. Y. Kim, H. W. Kim, K. R. Shrestha, S. H. Jeon, K. J. Cha, Y. H. Park, D. S. Kim and J. Y. Lee, Tissue Eng., Part A, 2015, 21, 2115–2124 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Alkaisi and K. Mohamed, Lithography, IntechOpen, 2010, 571–596 Search PubMed .
S. Y. Chou, P. R. Krauss and P. J. Renstrom, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1995, 67, 3114–3116 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kooy, K. Mohamed, L. T. Pin and O. S. Guan, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2014, 9, 13 CrossRef .
W. Lee, R. Ji, U. Gösele and K. Nielsch, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 741–747 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Dumond, K. A. Mahabadi, Y. S. Yee, C. Tan, J. Y. Fuh, H. P. Lee and H. Y. Low, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 485310 CrossRef .
T. Mäkelä, M. Kainlauri, P. Willberg-Keyriläinen, T. Tammelin and U. Forsström, Microelectron. Eng., 2016, 163, 1–6 CrossRef .
S. H. Ahn and L. J. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2044–2049 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ge, W. Wu, Z. Li, G.-Y. Jung, D. Olynick, Y. Chen, J. A. Liddle, S.-Y. Wang and R. S. Williams, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 179–182 CrossRef CAS .
D. Huh, H. J. Kim, J. P. Fraser, D. E. Shea, M. Khan, A. Bahinski, G. A. Hamilton and D. E. Ingber, Nat. Protoc., 2013, 8, 2135 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Lee, M. D. Huntington, W. Zhou, J. C. Yang and T. W. Odom, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 311–315 CrossRef CAS .
K.-J. Sohn, J. H. Park, D.-E. Lee, H.-I. Jang and W. I. Lee, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2013, 23, 035024 CrossRef .
A. Maalouf, M. Gadonna and D. Bosc, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2009, 42, 015106 CrossRef .
V. Bhingardive, L. Menahem and M. Schvartzman, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 2705–2714 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Legrand and G. L. Gaines, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1969, 31, 162–167 CrossRef CAS .
G.-Y. Jung, Z. Li, W. Wu, Y. Chen, D. L. Olynick, S.-Y. Wang, W. M. Tong and R. S. Williams, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 1158–1161 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fan, H. Razavi, J.-w. Do, A. Moriwaki, O. Ergen, Y.-L. Chueh, P. W. Leu, J. C. Ho, T. Takahashi, L. A. Reichertz, S. Neale, K. Yu, M. Wu, J. W. Ager and A. Javey, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 648–653 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, C. Gu, H. Lin and S.-C. Chen, Opt. Express, 2015, 23, 20977–20985 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. Vladimirsky, M. Colburn, S. C. Johnson, M. D. Stewart, S. Damle, T. C. Bailey, B. Choi, M. Wedlake, T. B. Michaelson, S. V. Sreenivasan, J. G. Ekerdt and C. G. Willson, presented in part at the Emerging Lithographic Technologies III, 1999.
M. Vogler, S. Wiedenberg, M. Mühlberger, I. Bergmair, T. Glinsner, H. Schmidt, E.-B. Kley and G. Grützner, Microelectron. Eng., 2007, 84, 984–988 CrossRef CAS .
U. Plachetka, Microelectron. Eng., 2004, 73-74, 167–171 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yanagishita, K. Nishio and H. Masuda, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 45, L804–L806 CrossRef CAS .
J. Choi, C. C. Lee and S. Park, Microsyst. Nanoeng., 2019, 5, 12 CrossRef .
H. Le-The, M. Tibbe, J. Loessberg-Zahl, M. Palma do Carmo, M. van der Helm, J. Bomer, A. van den Berg, A. Leferink, L. Segerink and J. Eijkel, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 7711–7718 RSC .
H. Kavand, H. van Lintel, S. Bakhshi Sichani, S. Bonakdar, H. Kavand, J. Koohsorkhi and P. Renaud, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 10559–10566 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yanagishita, K. Nishio and H. Masuda, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 45, L1133–L1135 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Bernards and T. A. Desai, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2358–2362 CrossRef CAS .
F. Tang, Z. Shao, M. Ni, Y. Cui, C. Yuan and H. Ge, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2019, 125, 55 CrossRef .
J. A. Hernández-Castro, K. Li, A. Meunier, D. Juncker and T. Veres, Lab Chip, 2017, 17, 1960–1969 RSC .
J. J. Kim, K. W. Bong, E. Reátegui, D. Irimia and P. S. Doyle, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 139–146 CrossRef CAS .
H. Im, J. N. Sutherland, J. A. Maynard and S.-H. Oh, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 1941 CrossRef CAS .

          P. R. Sundararajan, Physical Aspects of Polymer Self-Assembly, John Wiley & Sons,  2016 Search PubMed .
X. Sun, T. Fujimoto and H. Uyama, Polym. J., 2013, 45, 1101–1106 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Mino, T. Ishigami, Y. Kagawa and H. Matsuyama, J. Membr. Sci., 2015, 483, 104–111 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, Z. Li, X. Liu, D. Zeng, Y. Zhang, Y. Sun, H. Ke and H. Cheng, J. Membr. Sci., 2017, 544, 47–57 CrossRef CAS .
G.-D. Zhu, C.-Y. Yang, Y.-R. Yin, Z. Yi, X.-H. Chen, L.-F. Liu and C.-J. Gao, J. Membr. Sci., 2019, 589, 117255 CrossRef .
D. Wu, N. S. Rajput and X. Luo, Curr. Nanosci., 2016, 12, 712–724 CrossRef CAS .
S.-J. Jeong, J. Y. Kim, B. H. Kim, H.-S. Moon and S. O. Kim, Mater. Today, 2013, 16, 468–476 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gopinadhan, P. Deshmukh, Y. Choo, P. W. Majewski, O. Bakajin, M. Elimelech, R. M. Kasi and C. O. Osuji, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5148–5154 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. W. Crossland, P. Cunha, S. Scroggins, S. Moratti, O. Yurchenko, U. Steiner, M. A. Hillmyer and S. Ludwigs, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 962–966 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Nunes, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 2905–2916 CrossRef CAS .
A. Stein and R. C. Schroden, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2001, 5, 553–564 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Peyratout and L. Dahne, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 3762–3783 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Meng, D. Gu, F. Zhang, Y. Shi, L. Cheng, D. Feng, Z. Wu, Z. Chen, Y. Wan, A. Stein and D. Zhao, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 4447–4464 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, T. M. Wang and Q. H. Wang, J. Polym. Res., 2019, 26, 5 CrossRef .
Y. Meng, D. Gu, F. Zhang, Y. Shi, H. Yang, Z. Li, C. Yu, B. Tu and D. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 7053–7059 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liang, K. Hong, G. A. Guiochon, J. W. Mays and S. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 5785–5789 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, Y. Meng, D. Gu, Y. Yan, C. Yu, B. Tu and D. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 13508–13509 CrossRef CAS .
J. r. Schuster, R. Köhn, A. Keilbach, M. Döblinger, H. Amenitsch and T. Bein, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 5754–5762 CrossRef CAS .
W. A. Phillip, M. A. Hillmyer and E. L. Cussler, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 7763–7770 CrossRef CAS .
W. A. Phillip, B. O'Neill, M. Rodwogin, M. A. Hillmyer and E. L. Cussler, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 847–853 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bang, S. H. Kim, E. Drockenmuller, M. J. Misner, T. P. Russell and C. J. Hawker, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7622–7629 CrossRef CAS .
M. Vayer, M. A. Hillmyer, M. Dirany, G. Thevenin, R. Erre and C. Sinturel, Thin Solid Films, 2010, 518, 3710–3715 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, L. Yang, S. Yurt, M. J. Misner, J. T. Chen, E. B. Coughlin, D. Venkataraman and T. P. Russell, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1571–1576 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Rider, K. A. Cavicchi, L. Vanderark, T. P. Russell and I. Manners, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 3790–3796 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lee, L.-C. Cheng, K. G. Yager, M. Mumtaz, K. Aissou and C. A. Ross, Macromolecules, 2019, 52, 1853–1863 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tang, A. Tracz, M. Kruk, R. Zhang, D.-M. Smilgies, K. Matyjaszewski and T. Kowalewski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 6918–6919 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tang, W. Wu, D. M. Smilgies, K. Matyjaszewski and T. Kowalewski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11802–11809 CrossRef CAS .
R. Olayo-Valles, S. Guo, M. S. Lund, C. Leighton and M. A. Hillmyer, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 10101–10108 CrossRef CAS .
D. Grande, J. Penelle, P. Davidson, I. Beurroies and R. Denoyel, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2011, 140, 34–39 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Wang, K. H. Kim and J. Bang, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2019, 40, e1800728 CrossRef .
Y. Pang, L. Wan, G. Huang, X. Zhang, X. Jin, P. Xu, Y. Liu, M. Han, G.-P. Wu and S. Ji, Macromolecules, 2017, 50, 6733–6741 CrossRef CAS .
H. Turgut, D. Varadharajan, N. Dingenouts and G. Delaittre, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2018, 39, e1800231 CrossRef .
E. J. W. Crossland, S. Ludwigs, M. A. Hillmyer and U. Steiner, Soft Matter, 2007, 3, 94–98 RSC .
E. J. W. Crossland, M. Nedelcu, C. Ducati, S. Ludwigs, M. A. Hillmyer, U. Steiner and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2813–2819 CrossRef CAS .
K.-V. Peinemann, V. Abetz and P. F. W. Simon, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 992–996 CrossRef CAS .
M. Radjabian and V. Abetz, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 352–355 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rangou, K. Buhr, V. Filiz, J. I. Clodt, B. Lademann, J. Hahn, A. Jung and V. Abetz, J. Membr. Sci., 2014, 451, 266–275 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Nunes, A. R. Behzad and K.-V. Peinemann, J. Mater. Res., 2013, 28, 2661–2665 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Cheng, R. A. Lawson, W.-M. Yeh, N. D. Jarnagin, L. M. Tolbert and C. L. Henderson, PS-b-PHEMA: synthesis, characterization, and processing of a high X polymer for directed self-assembly lithography, SPIE,  2013 Search PubMed .

          J. Cheng, R. A. Lawson, W.-M. Yeh, N. D. Jarnagin, A. Peters, L. M. Tolbert and C. L. Henderson, Directed self-assembly of poly(styrene)-block-poly(acrylic acid) copolymers for sub-20 nm pitch patterning, SPIE,  2012 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 1401–1408 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bolton, T. S. Bailey and J. Rzayev, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 998–1001 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Zalusky, R. Olayo-Valles, J. H. Wolf and M. A. Hillmyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 12761–12773 CrossRef CAS .
W. A. Phillip, R. M. Dorin, J. Werner, E. M. Hoek, U. Wiesner and M. Elimelech, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2892–2900 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Mika, R. F. Childs and J. M. Dickson, J. Membr. Sci., 1999, 153, 45–56 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tagliazucchi, O. Azzaroni and I. Szleifer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 12404–12411 CrossRef CAS .
O. Dreyer, M. L. Wu, M. Radjabian, C. Abetz and V. Abetz, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1900646 CrossRef .
X. Feng, M. E. Tousley, M. G. Cowan, B. R. Wiesenauer, S. Nejati, Y. Choo, R. D. Noble, M. Elimelech, D. L. Gin and C. O. Osuji, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11977–11986 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ren, L. Ocola, R. Divan, D. Czaplewski, T. Segal-Peretz, S. Xiong, R. J. Kline, C. Arges and P. F. Nealey, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 435303 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Yang, I. Ryu, H. Y. Kim, J. K. Kim, S. K. Jang and T. P. Russell, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 709–712 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Yang, J. Park, J. Yoon, M. Ree, S. K. Jang and J. K. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 1371–1377 CrossRef CAS .
J. Diep, A. Tek, L. Thompson, J. Frommer, R. Wang, V. Piunova, J. Sly and Y.-H. La, Polymer, 2016, 103, 468–477 CrossRef CAS .
X. Qiu, H. Yu, M. Karunakaran, N. Pradeep, S. P. Nunes and K.-V. Peinemann, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 768–776 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Yang, J.-A. Yang, E.-S. Kim, G. Jeon, E. J. Oh, K. Y. Choi, S. K. Hahn and J. K. Kim, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3817–3822 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-X. Low, Y. T. Chua, B. M. Ray, D. Mattia, I. S. Metcalfe and D. A. Patterson, J. Membr. Sci., 2017, 523, 596–613 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Chartrain, C. B. Williams and A. R. Whittington, Acta Biomater., 2018, 74, 90–111 CrossRef CAS .
J.-C. Wang and H. Dommati, Int. J. Adv. Des. Manuf. Technol., 2018, 98, 1537–1546 CrossRef .
J. A. Lewis and G. M. Gratson, Mater. Today, 2004, 7, 32–39 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Torrado, C. M. Shemelya, J. D. English, Y. Lin, R. B. Wicker and D. A. Roberson, Addit. Manuf., 2015, 6, 16–29 CAS .
M. N. Jahangir, K. M. M. Billah, Y. Lin, D. A. Roberson, R. B. Wicker and D. Espalin, Addit. Manuf., 2019, 28, 354–364 CAS .
D. X. Luong, A. K. Subramanian, G. A. L. Silva, J. Yoon, S. Cofer, K. Yang, P. S. Owuor, T. Wang, Z. Wang, J. Lou, P. M. Ajayan and J. M. Tour, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707416 CrossRef .
R. D. Farahani, M. Dube and D. Therriault, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5794–5821 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tan and D. Rodrigue, Polymers, 2019, 11, 1310 CrossRef .
S. Kawata, H.-B. Sun, T. Tanaka and K. Takada, Nature, 2001, 412, 697–698 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, Y. Hou and J. Lin, AIP Adv., 2015, 5, 030701 CrossRef .
Q. Geng, D. Wang, P. Chen and S.-C. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2179 CrossRef .
E. Balčiūnas, S. J. Baldock, N. Dreižė, M. Grubliauskaitė, S. Coultas, D. L. Rochester, M. Valius, J. G. Hardy and D. Baltriukienė, Polym. Int., 2019, 68, 1928–1940 CrossRef .
Z.-P. Liu, Y. Li, Y.-F. Xiao, B.-B. Li, X.-F. Jiang, Y. Qin, X.-B. Feng, H. Yang and Q. Gong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 211105 CrossRef .
X. Wang, M. Jiang, Z. Zhou, J. Gou and D. Hui, Composites, Part B, 2017, 110, 442–458 CrossRef CAS .
P. Arribas, M. Khayet, M. C. García-Payo and L. Gil, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2014, 138, 118–129 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Kim, J. H. Kim, Y. M. Lee and E. Drioli, AIChE J., 2016, 62, 461–490 CrossRef CAS .
N. Bhardwaj and S. C. Kundu, Biotechnol. Adv., 2010, 28, 325–347 CrossRef CAS .
P. Raghavan, D.-H. Lim, J.-H. Ahn, C. Nah, D. C. Sherrington, H.-S. Ryu and H.-J. Ahn, React. Funct. Polym., 2012, 72, 915–930 CrossRef CAS .
S. Remanan, M. Sharma, S. Bose and N. C. Das, ChemistrySelect, 2018, 3, 609–633 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Ki, D. H. Baek, K. D. Gang, K. H. Lee, I. C. Um and Y. H. Park, Polymer, 2005, 46, 5094–5102 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. McKee, G. L. Wilkes, R. H. Colby and T. E. Long, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 1760–1767 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Haghi and M. Akbari, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2007, 204, 1830–1834 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sukigara, M. Gandhi, J. Ayutsede, M. Micklus and F. Ko, Polymer, 2003, 44, 5721–5727 CrossRef CAS .
H. Maleki, A. A. Gharehaghaji, L. Moroni and P. J. Dijkstra, Biofabrication, 2013, 5, 035014 CrossRef CAS .
B. Veleirinho, M. F. Rei and J. A. Lopes-Da-Silva, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2008, 46, 460–471 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wannatong, A. Sirivat and P. Supaphol, Polym. Int., 2004, 53, 1851–1859 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Katti, K. W. Robinson, F. K. Ko and C. T. Laurencin, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part B, 2004, 70, 286–296 CrossRef .
X. M. Mo, C. Y. Xu, M. Kotaki and S. Ramakrishna, Biomaterials, 2004, 25, 1883–1890 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yuan, Y. Zhang, C. Dong and J. Sheng, Polym. Int., 2004, 53, 1704–1710 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Selatile, S. S. Ray, V. Ojijo and R. Sadiku, Fibers Polym., 2019, 20, 100–112 CrossRef CAS .
C. Mit-uppatham, M. Nithitanakul and P. Supaphol, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2004, 205, 2327–2338 CrossRef CAS .

          S. S. Ray, S.-S. Chen, N. C. Nguyen and H. T. Nguyen, Nanoscale Materials in Water Purification,  2019, pp. 247–273 DOI:10.1016/b978-0-12-813926-4.00014-8 .
J. Pelipenko, J. Kristl, B. Jankovic, S. Baumgartner and P. Kocbek, Int. J. Pharm., 2013, 456, 125–134 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Kang, H. Cho, W. Panatdasirisuk and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 18762–18769 RSC .

          P. Jao, M. Machado, X. Cheng, D. E. Senior, G. J. Kim, D. Ding, W. Sun and Y. Yoon, IEEE 24th International Conference on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems,  2011, pp. 257–260.
M. Zhou, Y.-n. Wu, P. Luo, J. Lyu, D. Mu, A. Li, F. Li and G. Li, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 49568–49575 RSC .
C. Van, Do, T. T. T. Nguyen and J. S. Park, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 104, 131–139 CrossRef .
T. A. M. Valente, D. M. Silva, P. S. Gomes, M. H. Fernandes, J. D. Santos and V. Sencadas, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 3241–3249 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Ray, S.-S. Chen, C.-W. Li, N. C. Nguyen and H. T. Nguyen, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 85495–85514 RSC .
L. P. Gabriel, A. A. Rodrigues, M. Macedo, A. L. Jardini and R. Maciel Filho, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2017, 72, 113–117 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Norowski, Jr., T. Fujiwara, W. C. Clem, P. C. Adatrow, E. C. Eckstein, W. O. Haggard and J. D. Bumgardner, J. Tissue Eng. Regen. Med., 2015, 9, 577–583 CrossRef .
J.-J. Li, Y.-Y. Yang, D.-G. Yu, Q. Du and X.-L. Yang, Eur. J. Pharm. Sci., 2018, 122, 195–204 CrossRef CAS .
S. Thakkar and M. Misra, Eur. J. Pharm. Sci., 2017, 107, 148–167 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rao, X. Geng, Y. Liao, S. Hu and W. Li, J. Membr. Sci., 2012, 399-400, 37–42 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bae, I. Baek and H. Choi, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 307, 670–678 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Ozdemir, M. G. Buonomenna and E. Drioli, Appl. Catal., A, 2006, 307, 167–183 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Warsinger, S. Chakraborty, E. W. Tow, M. H. Plumlee, C. Bellona, S. Loutatidou, L. Karimi, A. M. Mikelonis, A. Achilli, A. Ghassemi, L. P. Padhye, S. A. Snyder, S. Curcio, C. D. Vecitis, H. A. Arafat and J. H. Lienhard, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2018, 81, 209–237 CrossRef CAS .
L. Nyholm, G. Nyström, A. Mihranyan and M. Strømme, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3751–3769 CAS .

          J. Black, Biological performance of materials: fundamentals of biocompatibility, CRC Press,  2005 Search PubMed .
S. P. Adiga, C. Jin, L. A. Curtiss, N. A. Monteiro-Riviere and R. J. Narayan, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol., 2009, 1, 568–581 CAS .
M. Diamantoglou, H. D. Lemke and J. Vienken, Int. J. Artif. Organs, 1994, 17, 385–391 CrossRef CAS .
M. Diamantoglou, J. Platz and J. Vienken, Artif. Organs, 1999, 23, 15–22 CrossRef CAS .
J. Vienken, M. Diamantoglou, C. Hahn, H. Kamusewitz and D. Paul, Artif. Organs, 1995, 19, 398–406 CrossRef CAS .

          L. Hench and J. Jones, Biomaterials, artificial organs and tissue engineering, Elsevier,  2005 Search PubMed .
G. Wang, L. Wang, L. H. Mark, V. Shaayegan, G. Wang, H. Li, G. Zhao and C. B. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 1195–1203 CrossRef CAS .
R. Geesala, N. Bar, N. R. Dhoke, P. Basak and A. Das, Biomaterials, 2016, 77, 1–13 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Johnson, C. Langford, M. Didsbury, B. Lipp, S. Przyborski and N. Cameron, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 7256–7263 RSC .
R. Suntornnond, J. An, W. Y. Yeong and C. K. Chua, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2015, 300, 858–877 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, J. Kuang, L. Shao, X. Che, F. Wang and Y. Wang, J. Bioact. Compat. Polym., 2018, 33, 178–194 CrossRef CAS .
W. Albrecht, B. Seifert, T. Weigel, M. Schossig, A. Holländer, T. Groth and R. Hilke, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2003, 204, 510–521 CrossRef CAS .
F. Santoso, W. Albrecht, M. Schroeter, T. Weigel, D. Paul and R. Schomäcker, J. Membr. Sci., 2003, 223, 171–185 CrossRef CAS .
G. Jeon, S. Y. Yang and J. K. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 14814–14834 RSC .
R. A. Keraliya, C. Patel, P. Patel, V. Keraliya, T. G. Soni, R. C. Patel and M. M. Patel, ISRN Pharm., 2012, 2012, 528079 Search PubMed .
T. Ghosh and A. Ghosh, J. Appl. Pharm. Sci., 2011, 2, 38–49 Search PubMed .
M. Mabrouk, R. Rajendran, I. E. Soliman, M. M. Ashour, H. H. Beherei, K. M. Tohamy, S. Thomas, N. Kalarikkal, G. Arthanareeswaran and D. B. Das, Pharmaceutics, 2019, 11, 294 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yu, X. Qiu, S. P. Nunes and K. V. Peinemann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 10072–10076 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yu, X. Qiu, S. P. Nunes and K. V. Peinemann, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4110 CrossRef CAS .
T. Huang, P. Manchanda, L. Zhang, O. Shekhah, N. M. Khashab, M. Eddaoudi and K.-V. Peinemann, J. Membr. Sci., 2019, 584, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, P. Cheng, J. Cheng, N. Li, Y. Wang, J. Yang, X. Qiu, H. Tan and H. Yu, J. Membr. Sci., 2019, 570-571, 427–435 CrossRef CAS .
E. S. Kim, D. S. Jang, S. Y. Yang, M. N. Lee, K. S. Jin, H. J. Cha, J. K. Kim, Y. C. Sung and K. Y. Choi, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4262–4269 RSC .
G. Jeon, S. Y. Yang, J. Byun and J. K. Kim, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1284–1288 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nagarajan, D. Abessolo Ondo, S. Gassara, M. Bechelany, S. Balme, P. Miele, N. Kalkura and C. Pochat-Bohatier, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 1542–1549 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, R. Zheng, L. Cheng, X. Zhao, R. Jin, L. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang and W. Cui, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 9360–9369 RSC .
A. Hanafia, C. Faur, A. Deratani, P. Guenoun, H. Garate, D. Quemener, C. Pochat-Bohatier and D. Bouyer, J. Membr. Sci., 2017, 526, 212–220 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sun, S. Feng, C. Ji, M. Shi, X. He, F. Xu and T. J. Lu, J. Membr. Sci., 2020, 595, 117502 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Ahmad, R. M. Milhem, N. G. Panicker, T. A. Rizvi and F. Mustafa, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 29089 CrossRef .
Z. Dabaghian, A. Rahimpour and M. Jahanshahi, Desalination, 2016, 381, 117–125 CrossRef CAS .
S. I. Voicu, R. M. Condruz, V. Mitran, A. Cimpean, F. Miculescu, C. Andronescu, M. Miculescu and V. K. Thakur, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 1765–1774 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Cao, Z. Shen, X. Luo, H. Zhang, Y. Liu, N. Cai, Y. Xue and F. Yu, Carbohydr. Polym., 2017, 166, 320–328 CrossRef CAS .
V. Ahilan, C. C. de Barros, G. D. Bhowmick, M. M. Ghangrekar, M. M. Murshed, M. Wilhelm and K. Rezwan, Bioelectrochemistry, 2019, 129, 259–269 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yu, Z. Jiang, H. Ding, F. Pan, B. Wang, J. Yang and X. Cao, J. Membr. Sci., 2015, 481, 73–81 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Bohrer, L. J. Fetters, N. Grizzuti, D. S. Pearson and M. V. Tirrell, Macromolecules, 1987, 20, 1827–1833 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gangopadhyay, B. J. Nablo, M. V. Rao and D. R. Reyes, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2017, 19, 1600592 CrossRef .
A. V. Menon, G. Madras and S. Bose, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 352, 590–600 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Giannitelli, F. Basoli, P. Mozetic, P. Piva, F. N. Bartuli, F. Luciani, C. Arcuri, M. Trombetta, A. Rainer and S. Licoccia, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2015, 51, 329–335 CrossRef CAS .
S.-C. Shin and H.-J. Lee, Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm., 2002, 54, 201–206 CrossRef CAS .
S. Asadi, H. Tabani and S. Nojavan, J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal., 2018, 151, 178–185 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, B. Lin, K. Zhao, J. Wei, J. Guo, W. Cui, S. Jiang, D. Liu and J. Li, Desalination, 2015, 365, 234–241 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, F. Yan, H. Pei, J. Li, Z. Cui and B. He, Carbohydr. Polym., 2018, 198, 241–248 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhao, M. Li, M. Liu, Y. Zhang, C. Wu and Y. Zhang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2016, 301, 233–241 CrossRef CAS .
L.-F. Ren, F. Xia, J. Shao, X. Zhang and J. Li, Desalination, 2017, 404, 155–166 CrossRef CAS .
D. Stamatialis, H. H. Rolevink, M. Girones, D. Nymeijer and G. Koops, Curr. Drug Delivery, 2004, 1, 313–319 CrossRef CAS .
D. F. Stamatialis, H. H. M. Rolevink and G. H. Koops, J. Pharm. Sci., 2003, 92, 1037–1039 CrossRef CAS .
D. Stamatialis, H. Rolevink, J. Balster and G. Koops, J. Controlled Release, 2005, 101, 287–408 CrossRef .

          L. Mazzeo, M. Bianchi, M. Cocchi and V. Piemonte, in Current Trends and Future Developments on (Bio-) Membranes, ed. A. Basile and C. Charcosset, Elsevier,  2019, pp. 291–309 DOI:10.1016/B978-0-12-813606-5.00010-5 .
J. Wang, L. Wang, Z. Zhou, H. Lai, P. Xu, L. Liao and J. Wei, Polymers, 2016, 8, 115 CrossRef .
P. F. Gielkens, J. Schortinghuis, J. R. de Jong, G. M. Raghoebar, B. Stegenga and R. R. Bos, Clin. Oral Implants Res., 2008, 19, 516–521 CrossRef .
L. S. Nair and C. T. Laurencin, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2007, 32, 762–798 CrossRef CAS .
G. I. Benic and C. H. F. Hämmerle, Periodontology 2000, 2014, 66, 13–40 CrossRef .
G. I. Benic and C. H. Hämmerle, Periodontology 2000, 2014, 66, 13–40 CrossRef .
D. Rothamel, F. Schwarz, M. Sager, M. Herten, A. Sculean and J. Becker, Clin. Oral Implants Res., 2005, 16, 369–378 CrossRef .
A. Klinger, R. Asad, L. Shapira and Y. Zubery, Clin. Oral Implants Res., 2010, 21, 873–876 Search PubMed .
L. M. Delgado, Y. Bayon, A. Pandit and D. I. Zeugolis, Tissue Eng., Part B, 2015, 21, 298–313 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Sela, E. Babitski, D. Steinberg, D. Kohavi and G. Rosen, Clin. Oral Implants Res., 2009, 20, 496–502 CrossRef .
M. N. Sela, D. Kohavi, E. Krausz, D. Steinberg and G. Rosen, Clin. Oral Implants Res., 2003, 14, 263–268 CrossRef .
E. J. Hoogeveen, P. F. Gielkens, J. Schortinghuis, J. L. Ruben, M. C. Huysmans and B. Stegenga, Int. J. Oral Surg., 2009, 38, 870–875 CrossRef CAS .
F. Dori, T. Huszar, D. Nikolidakis, N. B. Arweiler, I. Gera and A. Sculean, J. Clin. Periodontol., 2007, 34, 254–261 CrossRef .
A. M. Ferreira, P. Gentile, V. Chiono and G. Ciardelli, Acta Biomater., 2012, 8, 3191–3200 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zubery, A. Goldlust, A. Alves and E. Nir, J. Periodontol., 2007, 78, 112–121 CrossRef .
Y. Zubery, E. Nir and A. Goldlust, J. Periodontol., 2008, 79, 1101–1107 CrossRef .
J. W. Drexler and H. M. Powell, Tissue Eng., Part C, 2011, 17, 9–17 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Lee, J. S. Lee, W. S. Baek, H. C. Lim, J. K. Cha, S. H. Choi and U. W. Jung, J. Periodontal Implant Sci., 2015, 45, 229–237 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Cha, M. J. Joo, S. Yoon, J. S. Lee, S. H. Choi and U. W. Jung, Clin. Oral Implants Res., 2017, 28, 76–85 CrossRef .
J. Jiménez Garcia, S. Berghezan, J. M. M. Caramês, M. M. Dard and D. N. S. Marques, J. Periodontal
Res., 2017, 52, 955–964 CrossRef .
J. E. Gough, C. A. Scotchford and S. Downes, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., 2002, 61, 121–130 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, W.-C. Liu, Y.-H. Chang, X. Liu, C.-L. Chang, C. Lin and R.-J. Chung, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2019, 101, 640–649 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Verissimo, R. F. Leitao, R. A. Ribeiro, S. D. Figueiro, A. S. Sombra, J. C. Goes and G. A. Brito, Acta Biomater., 2010, 6, 4011–4018 CrossRef CAS .
F. Schwarz, D. Rothamel, M. Herten, M. Sager and J. Becker, Clin. Oral Implants Res., 2006, 17, 403–409 CrossRef .
C. Xu, C. Lei, L. Meng, C. Wang and Y. Song, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part B, 2012, 100, 1435–1443 CrossRef .
J. Mota, N. Yu, S. G. Caridade, G. M. Luz, M. E. Gomes, R. L. Reis, J. A. Jansen, X. F. Walboomers and J. F. Mano, Acta Biomater., 2012, 8, 4173–4180 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dash, F. Chiellini, R. M. Ottenbrite and E. Chiellini, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2011, 36, 981–1014 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Qasim, R. M. Delaine-Smith, T. Fey, A. Rawlinson and I. U. Rehman, Acta Biomater., 2015, 23, 317–328 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Bavariya, P. Andrew Norowski, Jr., K. Mark Anderson, P. C. Adatrow, F. Garcia-Godoy, S. H. Stein and J. D. Bumgardner, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part B, 2014, 102, 1084–1092 CrossRef .
F. L. Mi, Y. C. Tan, H. C. Liang, R. N. Huang and H. W. Sung, J. Biomater. Sci., Polym. Ed., 2001, 12, 835–850 CrossRef CAS .
T. von Arx, D. L. Cochran, R. K. Schenk and D. Buser, Int. J. Oral Surg., 2002, 31, 190–199 CrossRef CAS .
Z. S. Haidar, Polymers, 2010, 2, 323–352 CrossRef CAS .
N. Donos, L. Kostopoulos and T. Karring, Clin. Oral Implants Res., 2002, 13, 203–213 CrossRef .
N. Hua, V. L. Ti and Y. Xu, Cell Biochem. Biophys., 2014, 70, 1051–1055 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Jung, V. Kokovic, M. Jurisic, D. Yaman, K. Subramani and F. E. Weber, Clin. Oral Implants Res., 2011, 22, 802–807 CrossRef .
H. Zhou, J. G. Lawrence and S. B. Bhaduri, Acta Biomater., 2012, 8, 1999–2016 CrossRef CAS .
B. S. Miguel, C. Ghayor, M. Ehrbar, R. E. Jung, R. A. Zwahlen, P. Hortschansky, H. G. Schmoekel and F. E. Weber, Tissue Eng., Part A, 2009, 15, 2955–2963 CrossRef .
L. S. Karfeld-Sulzer, C. Ghayor, B. Siegenthaler, B. Gjoksi, T. H. Pohjonen and F. E. Weber, J. Tissue Eng. Regen. Med., 2017, 11, 425–433 CrossRef CAS .
M. Domingos, F. Intranuovo, T. Russo, R. De Santis, A. Gloria, L. Ambrosio, J. Ciurana and P. Bartolo, Biofabrication, 2013, 5, 045004 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Park, D. S. Park, J. W. Shin, Y. G. Kang, H. K. Kim, T. R. Yoon and J.-W. Shin, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Med., 2012, 23, 2671–2678 CrossRef CAS .
T. Patrício, M. Domingos, A. Gloria and P. Bártolo, Procedia CIRP, 2013, 5, 110–114 CrossRef .
M. Herten, R. E. Jung, D. Ferrari, D. Rothamel, V. Golubovic, A. Molenberg, C. H. Hammerle, J. Becker and F. Schwarz, Clin. Oral Implants Res., 2009, 20, 116–125 CrossRef .
R. E. Jung, G. A. Halg, D. S. Thoma and C. H. Hammerle, Clin. Oral Implants Res., 2009, 20, 162–168 CrossRef .
I. Mihatovic, J. Becker, V. Golubovic, A. Hegewald and F. Schwarz, Clin. Oral Implants Res., 2012, 23, 308–315 CrossRef .
M. Herten, R. E. Jung, D. Ferrari, D. Rothamel, V. Golubovic, A. Molenberg, C. H. F. Hämmerle, J. Becker and F. Schwarz, Clin. Oral Implants Res., 2009, 20, 116–125 CrossRef .
K. Rathee, V. Dhull, R. Dhull and S. Singh, Biochem. Biophys. Rep., 2016, 5, 35–54 Search PubMed .

          S. M. Reddy, in Materials for Chemical Sensing, ed. T. R. L. Cesar Paixão and S. M. Reddy, Springer International Publishing, Cham,  2017, pp. 75–103 DOI:10.1007/978-3-319-47835-7_4 .
Q. Wang, H. Wang, X. Fan and J. Zhai, Sci. Adv. Mater., 2015, 7, 2147–2167 CrossRef CAS .
L. Movileanu, Protein Pept. Lett., 2014, 21, 235–246 CrossRef CAS .
S. Howorka and Z. Siwy, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2360–2384 RSC .
D. Grieshaber, R. MacKenzie, J. Vörös and E. Reimhult, Sensors, 2008, 8, 1400–1458 CrossRef CAS .
A. de la Escosura-Muñiz and A. Merkoçi, Small, 2011, 7, 675–682 CrossRef .
A. de la Escosura-Muñiz and A. Mekoçi, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 9007–9009 RSC .
M. Mackiewicz, K. Marcisz, M. Strawski, J. Romanski, Z. Stojek and M. Karbarz, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 268, 531–538 CrossRef CAS .
A. d. l. Escosura-Muñiz, M. Espinoza-Castañeda, M. Hasegawa, L. Philippe and A. Merkoçi, Nano Res., 2014, 8, 1180–1188 CrossRef .
Y. Li, Y. Liu, Y. Yang, F. Yu, J. Liu, H. Song, J. Liu, H. Tang, B. C. Ye and Z. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 15474–15480 CrossRef CAS .
N. Aydemir, J. Malmstrom and J. Travas-Sejdic, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 8264–8277 RSC .
V. Sethuraman, P. Muthuraja, J. Anandha Raj and P. Manisankar, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 84, 112–119 CrossRef CAS .
L. Pan, G. Yu, D. Zhai, H. R. Lee, W. Zhao, N. Liu, H. Wang, B. C. Tee, Y. Shi, Y. Cui and Z. Bao, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 9287–9292 CrossRef CAS .
J. Das and P. Sarkar, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 92520–92533 RSC .
M. Cui, Z. Song, Y. Wu, B. Guo, X. Fan and X. Luo, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 79, 736–741 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, D. Wang and N. Hui, Bioelectrochemistry, 2020, 136, 107595 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Ramirez, L. M. Lechuga, L. H. Gabrielli and H. E. Hernandez-Figueroa, Opt. Express, 2015, 23, 11985–11994 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tu, S. Chen, C. Song, T. Huang and L. J. Guo, IEEE Photonics J., 2019, 11, 1–10 Search PubMed .
S. Chen, X. Chen, L. Zhang, J. Gao and Q. Ma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 5430–5436 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mancuso, J. M. Goddard and D. Erickson, Opt. Express, 2012, 20, 245–255 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Fahmy, M. Alawak, J. Brussler, U. Bakowsky and M. M. H. El Sayed, BioMed Res. Int., 2019, 2019, 4983291 Search PubMed .
I. Sadeghi, J. Kronenberg and A. Asatekin, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 95–108 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, D. Dehlinger, J. Peña, H. Seol, M. Shusteff, N. M. Collette, M. Elsheikh, M. Davenport, P. Naraghi-Arani and E. Wheeler, Microfluid. Nanofluid., 2019, 23, 9 CrossRef .
S. Zheng, H. Lin, J. Q. Liu, M. Balic, R. Datar, R. J. Cote and Y. C. Tai, J. Chromatogr. A, 2007, 1162, 154–161 CrossRef CAS .
J.-R. Ku and P. Stroeve, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 2030–2032 CrossRef CAS .
C. Schuster, A. Rodler, R. Tscheliessnig and A. Jungbauer, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 4410 CrossRef .
Z. Ma, M. Kotaki and S. Ramakrishna, J. Membr. Sci., 2005, 265, 115–123 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ma and S. Ramakrishna, J. Membr. Sci., 2008, 319, 23–28 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, T. Menkhaus and H. Fong, J. Membr. Sci., 2008, 319, 176–184 CrossRef CAS .
O. Hardick, S. Dods, B. Stevens and D. G. Bracewell, J. Biotechnol., 2015, 213, 74–82 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Amane Shiohara
	Dr Amane Shiohara received her MSc from Tokyo Institute of Technology in Japan and her PhD in materials science from Victoria University of Wellington in New Zealand. Her PhD project focused on the synthesis and surface modification of silicon quantum dots for biomedical applications. After completing her PhD, she worked as a postdoctoral fellow at CIC Biomagune in San Sebastian, Spain. Her postdoctoral research focused on the fabrication of biosensing devices using plasmonic nanoparticles. Since 2018, Amane has been a research fellow at Monash University under Prof. Nicolas Voelcker, working on the nanochannel-based electrochemical biosensors for virus detection. Currently she is working on the point-of-care detection of SARS CoV-2 virus.

Beatriz Prieto-Simon
	Beatriz Prieto-Simón is an ICREA Research Professor at the University Rovira i Virgili. Her research has contributed to the fields of biosensors, nanotechnology, materials science, bioengineering and electrochemistry, and the crossing over into areas such as medical diagnosis, environmental control and food safety. Her research interest focuses on unveiling fundamental advances on synergies at the interface of nanostructured materials and biological processes that lay the foundation to build smart sensing platforms based on principles found in nature.

Nicolas H Voelcker
	Professor Nicolas Voelcker. After completing his BSc at the University of Saarland (1993) and his MSc at the RWTH Aachen (1995) in Germany, Nico completed a PhD thesis (1999) in polymer surface chemistry at the DWI Leibniz Institute for Interactive Materials under Professor Hartwig Höcker. He received postdoctoral fellowships to work in the area of bioorganic chemistry under Professor Reza Ghadiri at the Scripps Research Institute in La Jolla, California. In 2001, he became a Lecturer at Flinders University in Australia, an Associate Professor in 2006 and a full Professor in 2008. From 2008–2011, he was the Associate Head of the Faculty of Science and Engineering at Flinders University. Since 2012, he is a Professor in Chemistry and Materials Science at the Mawson Institute of the University of South Australia. From 2013–2015, he was Deputy Director of the Mawson Institute at the University of South Australia and Program Leader of the Cooperate Research Centre for Cell Therapy Manufacturing. From 2014–2017, he was Node Leader in the Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence in Convergent Bio-Nano Science & Technology. Since February 2017, he is the Scientific Director of the Melbourne Centre for Nanofabrication, Professor at the Monash Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences at Monash University and Science Leader at the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO). The core research activity in his laboratory is the study of silicon-based nanostructures and their surface chemistry. Following from this more fundamental research, his focus is on the application of silicon-based nanostructured materials in biosensors, biochips, drug delivery and regenerative medicine. He has authored over 420 peer-reviewed journal articles with over 14000 citations, h-index 58, and has filed over 30 patents. He has received fellowships from the German Research Foundation (DFG), the CSIRO, the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation, is a recipient of the Tall Poppy Science Award, a finalist for the South Australian Scientist of the Year 2015 and the Australian Innovation Challenge. And he has served on the College of Experts of the Australian Research Council and is a member of the Australian Academy of Technology and Engineering.

 	Fig. 1  (A–E) Scanning electron microscopy image of the tips at different stages of etching of a PET foil and (F) the scheme of asymmetrically etched pore in the initial stage after breakthrough. The etching time increases from left to right. (A) Corresponds to the breakthrough moment and (E) the etching continued for ∼150 min after breakthrough. (F) VB shows the constant rate the conical part of the pore widens [ref. 26]. (G) The image of a single irradiation track etching setup [ref. 20].	 

 	Fig. 2  (A) Basic process of thermal nanoimprinting and (B) photo nanoimprinting [ref. 45]. (C) SEM images of the Ni nanopillars mould top view, (D) cross section, and (E) porous polymer fabricated with the Ni mould top view, and (F) cross section [ref. 63].	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) Fabrication process of a free-standing PDMS through-hole membrane using a sacrificial layer and (B) top-view of optical (top row) and SEM (bottom row) images of the free standing PDMS membrane [ref. 65].	 

 	Fig. 4  (A–D) Fabrication procedures of polymeric membrane by block copolymer, NBCB-b-NBPLA, self-assembly and (E) SEM image of the surface of a porous polymeric membrane [ref. 80 and 81].	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) Interfacial curvature of linear copolymer self-assembly and (B) bottle brush copolymer. TEM images of (C) the PS–PLA bottle brush copolymer and (D) the nanoporous membrane prepared using the bottle brush copolymer [ref. 114]. (E) Schematic diagram of SNIPS process enhanced by an electric field and (F) SEM images of the surface morphology of PS80P2VP20 membranes fabricated at applied voltages of 0, 20, and 40 kV and evaporation times of 5, 10, and 15 s [ref. 119].	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic procedure of layer by layer 3D printing using stereolithography in (A) normal and (B) inverted configurations [ref. 134].	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) Schematic procedure of electrospinning technique [ref. 142] and (B) the SEM images of electrospun silk fibres at electric field of 4 kV cm−1 at concentrations of 5, 8, 10, 12, 15, and 19.5% with a spinning distance of 7 cm [ref. 150].	 

Track etching	0.6–870 nm	PET	Thermal/chemical etching	Bioseparation/ionic transport/biosensor	Regular pore structure and narrow pore size distribution	Difficult to scale up/limited geometry	
11, 12, 23–28 and 33

30 nm–3 μm	PC	
16 and 17

20–80 nm	PVDF	
13–15



Electrospinning	Several micrometers	Gelatin	N/A	Water treatment/tissue and bone regeneration/drug delivery/li ion battery	Low fabrication cost/easy to control porosity/complex geometry fabricaiton	Hard to control pore size uniformity/high surface roughness/low reproducibility	
147

Sub-micrometers	PA-6	
158

576.4–648.6 nm	PVDF	
172

∼50 nm–6.2 μm	PDO	
161

50–150 μm	PU	
167

N/A	Chitosan	
168

PSF	
142 and 156

PVP–PCL core shell	
169

PAN/PMMA	
171

PET-co-PEI	
148

PLAGA	
154

PS	
153

Silk	
150

[P(LA-co-CL)]	
155

PEG–PVDF core shell	
164

Silica–PVA	
163

PLA	
151, 157 and 165



3D printing	N/A	Organometallic polymers	Two-photon polymerisation (TPP)	Microfluidic device/artificial organs and bones	Complex geometry fabrication	Limited resolution/limited materials/high cost	
136, 138 and 139

SCR500
IP-Dip
PC	Material extrusion 3D printing (ME3DP)	
131 and 132

CYCOLAC™ ABS grade MG37GR resin

Nanoimprint	35–300 nm	AMO-NIL MMS10	PDMS, PC, PET	UV imprint	Bioseparation/cell manipulation/DNA translocation	Low cost/fast fabrication time/narrow pore size distribution/can cover a wide range of pore size and density	Limited selection of materials and geometry	
38

PUA511RM	PUA511RM	
39

∼10 nm	PAK-01	Nickel	
63

10 nm–10 μm	SU-8	Si	UV/thermal imprint	
64

PBMA	h-PDMS/PDMS	Thermal imprint	
41

PMMA	Si/SiO2	
	
	
	
	
44

PE	Nickel	
69

PBMA	HSQ/PDMS	
55

21–320 nm	PMMA	Nickel	Casting	
67

PS	
42

PCL	ZnO	
68


Block copolymer self bassembly	6.8 nm	Resin	Pluronic F127	Block copolymer as a template	Bioseparation	
	Narrow pore size and porousity coverage/Long fabrication time	
87

3–6.8 nm	Pluronic P123	
90

33.7 nm	PS-b-P4VP	
88

7.7–10.1 nm	NBCB-b-NBPLA	PLA	Block copolymer as part of the membrane frame	
80

13 nm	PSTPA-b-PLA	
	
	
	
	
81

15–55 nm	PS-b-PLA	
92, 94, 100, 114 and 115

PDMSB-b-PS-b-PLA (DSL)	
97

15–55 nm	PFS-b-PLA	
105

10–15 nm	PS-b-PMMA-b-PEO	PMMA	
93

10–40 nm	PS-b-PMMA	
122, 123 and 126

∼5 nm	PS-b-PFEMS	PS	
96

20–70 nm	PS-b-P4VP	N/A	
107–110, 119 and 125

16–30 nm	PI-b-PS-b-P4VP	
116


 	Fig. 8  Overview of biomedical/biological applications of porous polymeric membranes.	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) Illustration of an osmotic drug delivery system and (B) diffusion control membrane system, and transdermal delivery system with (C) membrane and (D) polymer matrix [ref. 7].	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) Fabrication procedure of vertical nanochannel block copolymer membrane. (B–D) SEM images of the top view of the membrane after different Au deposition thicknesses: (B) 0 nm (average pore diameter: 15 nm), (C) 7 nm (average pore diameter: 10 nm), and (D) 11 nm (average pore diameter: 6 nm) [ref. 126].	 

 	Fig. 11  (A) Mechanism of the two possible pathways of acute inflammation. In acute inflammation neutrophils, monocytes, and macrophages are observed. The left scheme corresponds to a wound healing process and the right scheme corresponds to a foreign body response. In wound healing, tissue remodelling occurs at the end of the process. In foreign body response, acute inflammation remains for a long period. (B) Non-cross-linked chitosan membrane at 16 weeks showing fibrous tissue infiltration and degradation, (C) collagen membrane showed complete resorption at 16 weeks, (D) chitosan cross-linked with 5 mM genipin membrane at 20 weeks showing fibrous tissue infiltration, and (E) chitosan cross-linked with 10 mm genipin membrane showed resorption and splitting from side of the membrane at 20 weeks [ref. 250].	 

 	Fig. 12  (A) Mechanism of nanochannel blockage electrochemical sensing. (B) The differential pulse voltammograms (DPVs) of a: only bioreceptor is attached on the channel walls and b: after target analytes are captured by the bioreceptor and block the pores [ref. 274 and 273]. (C) Mechanism of nanochannel blockage using polymer beads monolayer and corresponding DPVs.	 

 	Fig. 13  (A) Schematic process of the fabrication of asymmetric nanopores membrane using PS-b-PMMA block copolymer and PMMA homopolymer [ref. 122]. SEM image of the fabricated porous membrane (B) top view, (C) bottom view, and (D) cross-section, and (E) AFM image of the same membrane after filtration of HRV 14 virus [ref. 123].	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
