Artificial photosynthesis for solar fuels  - Faraday Discussions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1FD00113B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1FD00113B
(Paper)
Faraday Discuss., 2012, 155, 357-376Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsArtificial photosynthesis for solar fuels

        
          
            Stenbjörn 
            Styring
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, Ångström Laboratory, Uppsala University, Box 523, SE-751 20, Uppsala, Sweden. E-mail: Stenbjorn.Styring@fotomol.uu.se;   Tel: +46-18 471 6580
Received 
      15th November 2011
    , Accepted 16th November 2011First published on 21st December 2011AbstractThis contribution was presented as the closing lecture at the Faraday Discussion 155 on artificial photosynthesis, held in Edinburgh Scotland, September 5–7 2011. The world needs new, environmentally friendly and renewable fuels to exchange for fossil fuels. The fuel must be made from cheap and “endless” resources that are available everywhere. The new research area of solar fuels aims to meet this demand. This paper discusses why we need a solar fuel and why electricity is not enough; it proposes solar energy as the major renewable energy source to feed from. The scientific field concerning artificial photosynthesis expands rapidly and most of the different scientific visions for solar fuels are briefly overviewed. Research strategies and the development of artificial photosynthesis research to produce solar fuels are overviewed. Some conceptual aspects of research for artificial photosynthesis are discussed in closer detail.
Introduction
Today the global energy supply is dominated by fossil energy that accounts for ca. 80% of the used energy (Fig. 1).1 However, with increasing energy use all over the world the fossil resources are dwindling. The supply can easily be jeopardized in countries that depend on imported fossil energy. On an even larger scale both oil and natural gas will run out in the foreseeable future making a fossil energy based society impossible in a longer time perspective. The situation is worsened because today's dominating energy carriers also are connected to environmental and social factors that clearly affect the quality of life. In particular this concerns fossil fuels with fast growing CO2 emissions which have been identified as the dominating factor behind global warming. In addition fossil fuels are unevenly spread over the planet leading to political tension and problems with availability (energy security) in many countries and regions. Pollution due to unrestrained traffic and increasing industry is another too well known environmental problem connected to fossil fuels. Nuclear energy is an important energy source that does not release CO2 into the atmosphere. However, many people worry about large, future nuclear-power programs. There are many reasons for this, involving fear for major accidents and for the spreading of nuclear technology, concerns about nuclear waste and security etc.
 Fig. 1  The lower bar diagram shows the total amount of energy used in the world, recalculated to electric power. In 2009 this amounted to ca. 16 TW (corresponding to ca. 140000 TW h). 80% of this energy was provided from fossil resources (mainly coal, oil and natural gas) while the other main contributors were biomass used in a huge variety of ways and electric power from nuclear and hydroelectric plants. Other energy sources like wind power, solar power and others contribute to a very small fraction of today's energy use.1 The top diagram shows that the total solar irradiation on the planet per hour amount to almost the same amount of energy as the entire world uses today. The middle bar diagrams shows the expected energy use in 2050 and the division between electricity use and use of energy for other purposes. Ca. 17% of the worlds energy use was used in the form of electricity.1 
It has also become clear that new energy carriers should also be free or neutral with respect to release of CO2 into the atmosphere. With this background it is not surprising that there are strong calls for development of renewable energy systems. There is no lack of renewable energy on the planet, not even with respect to the huge global energy consumption. The most abundant renewable resource is solar energy which is available in vast quantities. Solar energy today is used in only small amounts. Therefore many call for heavy development and investment in solar energy research. This is reflected in the 30–40 years old, varied research field on solar cell technologies for electricity production. This field has reached a mature stage and different solar cell technologies exist at all levels, from an industrial scale (silicon solar cells) to early research stages (for example organic solar cells and tandem solar cells). However, together with renewable electricity generation, the development of CO2 free, non-polluting renewable fuels is a vital interest. Here, the perspective of solar fuels as important future energy carriers and a way to store solar energy makes this a theme that quickly moves up the global research agenda (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  Development of the scientific field for solar fuels research. A: Number of publications listed in Web of Science in August 2011 under the headings “Artificial photosynthesis” (red) and “Solar fuel” (yellow). B: The number of research networks and larger centres active in solar fuels research in the US (blue) and Europe (green) and total for the two continents (US + Europe; yellow). The networks statistics were collected by the author.2 It is clearly not complete but the trends are clear. The large increase of renewable energy research centers in the US in 2009 is included in the diagram. From 2010 Europe is probably catching up the US numbers of networks/centres and there are several new centers/networks in France, Holland, Germany, Sweden, the UK (and other countries) and on a continental scale that were not present in 2009. 
Solar fuels—artificial photosynthesis
The term “solar fuel” is recent and has become established since the beginning of the new millennium (Fig. 2). This research is often named “artificial photosynthesis for fuel production”; “solar-hydrogen research”, “the artificial leaf” or something analogous. The recent increase in this research is evident from the rapid growth in research networks in the field and in the number of publications per year. A survey of the larger networks in the field in Europe and the US revealed a burst in the field after ca. 2006 (Fig. 2B).2 In the US this was a result of political decisions made by the Obama regime and the installation of many large centers active (partially or predominantly) in solar fuels research in 2008/09, and was a clear change in the research infrastructure in the field globally as well as in the US. In Europe the increase in networks has evolved more slowly over time and has been overtaken by the US in the last years. The survey was made in spring 2009 and it is not unlikely that Europe is now catching up to the US in terms of numbers.2 The reason is that the installation of networks in the US probably peaked in 2009 while the European efforts are spread over many nations leading to a less “burst”-like situation. There are, for example, several recent important networks in the field both on a continental scale (a so called EuroCore program in the ESF) in the UK, the Netherlands, Sweden and the Nordic Countries that were not active when the survey was done.
A literature survey (Fig. 2A) is also informative. Here the Web of Science was searched for all publications under the keywords “Artificial photosynthesis” and “Solar Fuels”. In both cases there were a few publications per year during a ca. ten-year period around 1980. Thereafter the number of publications was almost constant between 1990 and 1998. From then on, the number of publications under respective key words has increased fast and steadily and will likely continue to do so for at least some time. This, because the influence of the research initiatives in the many new networks and research centers now being devoted to solar fuels, will not appear for the next few years.
The introduction of solar fuels on a very large scale is motivated by concerns about global warming, energy security for everyone and decreased availability of oil and gas. It is also driven by recent advances in a range of scientific fields that make scientists convinced that it is possible to produce solar fuels in an efficient and cheap way in the not too distant future. An important driving force is, most scientists agree, that the only way to build an energy dependent society on the vast, but not always flowing, solar energy is to learn how to store this energy. To manage this, it is vital that the energy can be stored for long times to be used for what and when we want. This is the vision and major driving force behind solar fuels! A solar fuel is always made using solar energy as the only energy source. The idea is to harvest the energy that comes when the sun shines, convert it and store it as a fuel, and then use this when and for whatever we want.†
Huge amounts of solar energy are available everywhere and are often abundant where the population is dense. Even in Northern countries there is enough solar energy to contribute substantially to the energy system. This holds in particular in the summer when the days are long. However, it is lacking in winter when energy demand is high. If this abundant solar energy could be converted into a storable energy carrier (fuel), solar energy could become an important energy source also in Northern countries. The same issues are also relevant on a much shorter time scale. Often the energy consumption is highest in the morning and in the afternoon and early evenings while the sun shines brightest in the middle of the day. It does not shine at all at night even though much energy is also used then. Thus storage of the energy from the sun would be critical to balance this situation. A convenient way would be in the form of a fuel.
There could be additional advantages with the development of the large scale use of solar fuels. Many scientists and others engaged in research also see development of solar fuels as the real chance for the non-legacy world to catch up with the energy consumption and the thereby connected advantages of the legacy world. Given the limited and unevenly spread fossil reserves there is little chance for billions of people to increase their living standards since this is too closely connected to the use of energy. It is costly and there is not enough of fossil energy available. Maybe the only way to change this is to fully explore the potential of solar energy which is a resource available everywhere. This demands not only solar electricity from solar cells but also solar fuels for storage, transport and many other purposes.
The raw material for the (storage) fuel is the second, equally important key aspect. The desirable raw material must be essentially inexhaustible, cheap and widely available. Most scientists target water as the raw material and this is the only really sound option. Processes in which water is split (oxidized) into its constituents by solar energy can become large contributors to the shift away from fossil fuels on a global scale. Thus, solar fuels research gathers science with the aim to provide a fuel based on solar energy and water. Both resources are essentially endless and fairly evenly spread over the entire planet. An additional advantage is that such a fuel would be CO2 lean—a huge advantage over fossil fuels.
The target fuel is the third important issue. Many scientists target hydrogen as the solar fuel. When water is used as a starting material this is natural from scientific reasons. However, the transition to a hydrogen based economy is not easy and the hydrogen technologies have their own technological hurdles to overcome and scientific issues to tackle before hydrogen can become a world wide fuel. An alternative is to use CO2 itself as a second raw material (together with water) to create a carbon based solar fuel. This might have lower technological problems in the shorter term but will not remove CO2 from the energy cycle. In addition the science involved is most likely more difficult than for hydrogen production.
Research on solar fuels constitutes a novel, diverse field that aims to answer these demands and challenges. The field is evolving (Fig. 2)! The development of technologies for direct solar to fuel conversion requires revolutionary scientific breakthroughs in several areas of fundamental science.
Energy use; global versus local aspects
In 2009 the total energy consumption in the world corresponded to a power consumption of ca. 16 TW.1 It is not easy to predict where the energy use of the future will go. It is often stated that the global energy need will at least double by 2050 (Fig. 1) and maybe triple by 2100. There are many driving forces behind this huge increase. The three most pertinent relate to the present and increasing world population and to potential energy savings. It is clear that increased welfare is connected to an increased GDP (gross domestic product) in a nation. It is also clear that energy consumption directly scales with the GDP. This means in other words that a poor nation or region has very low energy consumption per capita while very rich nations consume 10–20 fold more energy per capita. There are also many nations in between. It is very important for the analysis of future energy consumption that very large populations in mainly Asia, Africa and South America are small energy users today. It is understandable and can be little criticised that their personal and national incentives are connected to making their lives better for themselves and for their children. This costs energy, vast amounts of energy and these people can not do this by saving energy—they have nothing to save from! It is clear that a large part of the foreseen increased energy use comes from the people that use little energy today. These have been estimated to represent nearly half of the population of the world, ca. 3000 million people.
The second, equally large, increase of world energy use comes from people that are not born today but who will grow up in the years leading to 2050. The world population passed 7 billion in October 2011 and is projected to increase to 9–10 billion in 2050. Of course these ca. 3000 million new world citizens will also demand huge quantities of energy (and all other resources)—and of course they can not be expected to save energy, they are not even born yet! Thus there are in total at least 6000 million new people whose energy needs must be met by 2050. This energy hunger of the world's population will be difficult to meet under all circumstances. The emerging lack of fossil fuels and global warming do not make this task easier!
Energy savings is the third important factor and is a solution that is often brought forward in the energy discussion. Energy saving is a powerful way for populations and countries that already have high standard of living connected to high per capita energy use. The EU has tried to address this idea in the so called “20-20-20” targets to be met by 2020.4 These are:
• A reduction in EU greenhouse gas emissions of at least 20% below 1990 levels
• 20% of EU energy consumption should come from renewable resources
• A 20% reduction in primary energy use compared with projected levels, to be achieved by improving energy efficiency.
Thus, the entire EU (with 27 nations and ca. 500 million people) wish to achieve an overall 20% decrease in energy use by 2020 and 20% of this energy should come from renewable resources. Maybe this exact target can not be met by 2020 but the 20% energy savings target gives a hint of a realistic political target over one or two decades in the legacy world.

Fuels and electricity
The power the world uses was ca. 16 TW in 2009. How is all this energy used? Again this varies from country to country, between cities and the countryside, between industrial and agricultural societies etc. An important dividing factor is how much of this energy is used as electricity and how much is used as a fuel (or in this context maybe better—as a stored form of energy). This is shown in Fig. 1. On a global scale ca. 17% of the supplied energy is used as electricity. Of the rest, an amazing 83% is used in some other way.1 It is used as fuel or being fossil fuels used as raw materials to produce plastics, and reduce N2 to fertilizeretc.
The use of electricity also shows up in the degree of electrification. Far from all countries in the world are fully electrified—one can even claim with some right that a continuous supply of electricity is a luxury commodity for huge populations. This of course does not hold in the legacy world where the energy is distributed through intricate, tightly integrated centralized systems. In those countries, the electricity is mainly generated in huge fossil or nuclear powered plants and distributed in massive grid systems. One can certainly ask if the build up of similar grid systems is the only way forward given a future where large power plants furnished from fossil fuels is a distant memory. It is likely that the investments for the near 6000 million new energy users need development of a less centralized, highly distributed energy system.
The fraction of energy used as electricity grows and the IEA estimates the growth to be 2.5% per year on average over time. In 2030 this would result in ca. 22% of total energy production being used as electricity.1 In total numbers this reflects a large increase but at the same time the total energy use also increases. Thus, it can be concluded that electricity is not everything! All visions for future energy system changes must take this into account. Not only must electricity be produced, at least 4 times greater amounts of fuel need to be found. In a sustainable and CO2 neutral energy economy this must come from other sources than fossil energy. Instead, these energy sources must be renewable and environmentally friendly everywhere!
Renewable energy, solar energy
There is no lack of renewable energy on planet Earth! There is also a large variety of resources to exploit. Some of them, like solar energy, are available everywhere while others, like wave energy, are restricted in spread. The largest, by far, is solar energy and there falls similar amounts of solar energy on the planet in one hour as the yearly human energy consumption (Fig. 1). Solar energy is everywhere but obviously there is more sunshine in some places than in others. Clearly, solar irradiation is substantial in many places where human population is dense, for example around the Mediterranean sea, in India and South East Asia etc. Not all of this huge influx can be used for energy conversion. To a large part this reflects geography—it is difficult to see how the vast middle of the oceans or the mountain ranges shall be connected to cheap energy systems. Attempts have been made to calculate how much of the solar influx can be “useful” in future energy systems. The numbers that came out suggest that there is more solar energy to use than mankind can ever find a use for, certainly much more than is discussed for use in 2050 or 2100.
Solar energy has, together with its broad availability and large volume, the advantage that it can be collected and used in many different ways. The challenge is to learn how to use and convert solar energy in cheap and efficient manners. In part this can already be achieved and several solar energy technologies are well developed. In part this involves development of future technologies that demand extensive research in visionary scientific projects before they can become a real contributor to the energy system.
The use of solar energy in today's energy system is very small, also in locations where the solar influx is high. This reflects in part the short comings in the available technologies but depends to a large extent also on the very low price of fossil fuels. At today's price picture they are simply difficult to beat. This will however change in the near future due to raising demand and simultaneous lower availability of oil and natural gas. It is also likely that the concerns for CO2 release from fossil fuels will drive up the prices. It is difficult to predict when the costs of fossil fuels will meet the costs of solar based systems. However, it will happen soon enough; it is therefore necessary to develop today the solar technologies of tomorrow.
Options with solar energy
There are 100s of methods to collect and use solar energy. However, for the discussion here they can be divided in 4 main categories (Fig. 3). Combustion of already converted solar energy in the form of biomass, fossil fuels, waste etc. is known technology (Fig. 3, upper left corner). There is technological research needed to burn and use the commodities better and more cleanly. There is also the need for the production of biomass in higher yield. However, most of these technologies are well known and there are no improvements here that will lead to conceptual changes of our energy system, take our society out from the fossil fuel dependence or solve the problem of global warming due to release of CO2.
 Fig. 3  Options with solar energy, a general overview. Fields where the research content is very high are indicated by a question mark (?) while fields where mainly technological improvements of existing technologies are expected are indicated with an exclamation mark (!). 
Heating to very high temperature is very useful both for electricity and fuel production and advanced heating concepts like concentrated solar power (CSP) or thermal cycles for solar fuels (see below) using heliostats are promising research and engineering demanding new technologies. However, high temperature heating is mainly restricted to very sunny places and will be less important at more northern latitudes. Heating to lower temperatures (of water or some other carrier of heat) is useful for many industrial processes and the heating and cooling of houses.
Solar electricity from different kinds of solar panels (Fig. 3, lower right) clearly has the option to solve the need for electricity also in countries and areas where the sun does not shine enough to allow the concentrated heating concepts. Solar cells have reached considerable maturity and the world presently rolls out solar cells of the first generation at a very high and accelerating tempo. However, new generations of solar cells are very promising both with respect to price and efficiency and here much research and development is needed to bring those early technologies to major scale industries (see ref. 5 for a recent very promising development).
The fourth alternative is to make a solar fuel directly from solar energy and water (Fig. 3, upper right). This is the newest of these branches and clearly the most research demanding. There are no available technologies outside a few laboratories (see however ref. 6) and basic research is needed in every corner of this science and technology. Although the science is young, the production of solar fuels is probably the most promising path towards a conceptual change of our present fossil fuel driven society. All other solar technologies either aim to produce electricity, which is very useful but presently only can cover ca. 17% of today's energy use, or heat which is also very useful but of more local interest and not really transportable in the scale needed. Combustion of already converted solar energy in the form of biomass or waste is limited in scale while combustion of fossil fuels must be reduced for many reasons.
Methods to produce a solar fuel
Development of a global energy system based on renewable energy, in particular solar energy, must exploit chemistry, physics and biology to produce fuels from solar energy and “endless” raw materials. This idea is far from new but the fossil fuels have been too easy to find and too cheap to use to motivate a change. In addition much of the science necessary to develop solar fuels has been lacking. This has changed! Our scientific potential is higher than ever and also spreads over the world in an accelerated manner. This has resulted in a broad pallet of research strategies and the development of solar fuels follows several scientific and technological pathways. These contain similar elements (solar energy, energy conversion, cheap raw materials) but also critical differences. One useful distinction is to distinguish direct and indirect processes for solar fuel production. A second useful distinction is between processes in molecular or non-molecular systems. Fig. 4–6 depict a range of research strategies that are currently the focus of the research efforts and separate these strategies after these principles.
 Fig. 4  Two functional and well known indirect process for solar fuels and their general drawbacks. 
 Fig. 5  Three direct processes for solar fuels and their general advantages. Artificial photosynthesis can be made in both molecular systems and non-molecular systems. The former uses both catalysts and photoactive components that are made from molecules. The latter is carried out in photoelectrochemical systems built on semiconducting materials or other types of nano-materials like carbon nanofibers. A third option is to split water at a metal oxide surface at very high temperatures in a system where thermo-chemical cycles are utilized. In cases where the high temperature originates from solar energy in a heliostat, the fuel (normally hydrogen is the target fuel) is a solar fuel. In cases where the high temperature originates from a nuclear process, it is not. 
 Fig. 6  Solar fuels like hydrogen, fatty acids or alcohols can be formed and excreted from photosynthetic microorganisms, in particular cyanobacteria and green algae. In most of these processes, storage compounds like carbohydrates are converted to the desired product. This is best described as a semi-direct process in that the intact cell is used as a catalyst for production of the fuels that to a large extent is derived from a stored intermediate in the cell. 
Indirect processes for solar fuel production
Indirect processes for solar fuels production are exactly that: although the energy in the fuel produced originates in solar energy, the connection between the energy source and the fuel is not direct. Instead, the solar energy is first converted and stored as an intermediate that is already an energy carrier. The intermediate can in itself be valuable but it is not directly useful as a versatile fuel. It can therefore not be exchanged for fossil fuels, instead the intermediate is further transformed to the desired fuel. Fig. 4 shows two very important indirect pathways to achieve a solar fuel.

Solar fuel from photovoltaics. 
The use of photovoltaics is an important option. Here electricity is first produced in a solar cell. Instead of being used directly, the electricity is used in a machine called an electrolyser to make hydrogen from water. In the electrolyser the electricity is used as the energy source and water is split into H2 and oxygen. The electrolyser contains the necessary catalysts, a membrane to separate the two products (H2 and O2 must be separated from each other) etc. These systems work, there is no doubt of this, and they can be easily designed and built. Since electricity is only an intermediate, the process is not dependent on solar energy; all types of electricity can drive utilities like this. Research is mainly needed on the electrolyser to make them better and more environmentally friendly. The very promising system described by D. Nocera and coworkers6 is an example of a technology that falls in this category. In this system the solar cell is used, not to drive a normal electrolyser, but instead to drive two catalytic systems able to oxidize water and reduce protons to hydrogen.
However, the general draw back is the detour around electricity that will always result in the loss of already converted and gained energy (in this case in the form of electricity) when the fuel is made. Many commercial electrolysers work with efficiencies of ca. 60% of the input energy appearing in the form of hydrogen. It is clear that improvements can be made (better electrolysers already exist) but it is inevitable that there will be a significant loss in the extra step (in addition to the extra cost of the electrolyser itself, see below). It is also difficult to see this solar cell driven process producing fuel on a very large scale. Why not use the electricity instead? The world is in need also of plenty of renewable electricity, everywhere and for very long times. In contrast, this technology will almost certainly have a place in places like islands, remote areas, ships and similar where both utilities, fuel and electricity, are wanted and the scale is more easy to handle.


Biomass. 
Another indirect process to achieve a solar fuel is to grow a tree, plant or photosynthetic microorganism, which is rich in wood, a fibre, an oil or something else that can serve as a fuel or as raw material to make a fuel (Fig. 4). The entire organism is harvested to produce the fuel. Typical examples of this is to cut down a tree to produce wood, wood chips, char coal or something else to burn; to ferment the carbohydrates in sugarcane, grapes or corn to produce alcohol or to make a motor fuel from ripe seed. These systems work and are industrial processes. However, in all the systems based on harvesting biomass, the limitation (what concerns energy efficiency) is the detour around the life of the organism. Sustaining life is, from a pure energy efficiency standpoint, a very demanding process. Only a very small fraction of the solar energy that actually has fallen on an organism (or a field with crop) is converted into biomass. Typical yields for the conversion of solar energy into biomass falls in the range of 0.1–2% of the solar energy that falls on the field where the organism is grown. Much of the “lost” energy is used to sustain life while other large losses originate from inefficient solar energy absorption (plants are green, not black) etc. In cases where a second process like alcohol fermentation and distillation is involved the overall yield is even lower.
Thus all processes to solar fuel involving biomass are indirect and inefficient with respect to solar energy conversion into the fuel. They work, the quantity is very large and there is room for improvement, but the efficiencies will never be high enough to allow for a conceptual change from the fossil fuel based economy on a global scale.


Extra systems costs. 
An additional problem with indirect processes is that the extra steps inevitably will bring extra costs to the system. This is not analyzed in depth for most systems but the combined installation of both solar cells and electrolysers, or both biomass production units and biomass converting plants seems unnecessary if an alternative can be developed where only one apparatus or unit can make the entire process. Ideas along these lines are the direct processes for solar fuel production. These are described below.

Direct processes for solar fuel production
Common for direct processes is that they have the option to become more efficient as compared to indirect processes. They can also be cheaper since the costs for the entire solar fuel apparatus is likely to be lower than for an indirect system. This is because they, the direct processes, do not make use of unnecessary steps or machines and that they are not dependent on already valuable intermediate products like electricity or a photosynthetically produced biomaterial. Instead the sole role of the process is to harvest the solar energy and convert this into a fuel that can be stored and transported. An important factor when comparing the indirect processes described above with the direct processes described below is that some of the former actually work on a large scale while there is no direct process that works on any technological scale.
The larger potential in the direct processes make them nevertheless attractive future technologies. There are several different strategies to develop direct processes for solar fuels production. They fall in three categories described in Fig. 5. To develop them, to create many alternative solutions and to drive the best options to technological devices are formidable challenges. The research content is large and many disciplines are needed. Generous attitudes are valuable when comparing them since neither technology has been proven feasible outside any laboratory.

Artificial photosynthesis. 
In one category of the direct processes we find attempts to develop what is often called artificial photosynthesis. The vision here is to design and make light driven catalysts that can oxidize (split) water directly without involving intermediate electricity generation. The produced fuel will utilize the highly reducing electrons achieved by the oxidation of water. Artificial photosynthesis therefore also involves attempts to develop catalysts that can catalyze the reaction of those electrons with a suitable substrate. The principles and some general features behind development of artificial photosynthesis are described below.
The fuel can be hydrogen which is the target in most attempts since the electrons need only to be reacted with protons, a reasonably simple process. It can also be a carbon based fuel, for example an alcohol, that might be easier to use today but is probably more difficult to make since catalysts that photo-reduce CO2 are scarce and difficult to develop.


Molecular and non-molecular processes. 
The light driven catalyst can be either molecular or non-molecular (Fig. 5). The physical limitations and scientific problems encountered are of equal magnitude. This reflects that light-driven oxidation of water and development of catalysts that can assist this reaction is the main research problem. The capture of solar energy and the formation of hydrogen (or another fuel) are both better known processes and much easier to achieve. A general statement is that systems of this kind have the highest potential, with respect to solar energy to fuel conversion, of all systems envisioned today.
A special case is when the catalysts, and maybe the entire system, for artificial photosynthesis are entirely molecular in nature. This is difficult to achieve but has several clear advantages which make many scientists follow this difficult route in their science (see ref. 7 and 8; see also articles in ref. 9–11, which all are special issues that are to a large extent devoted to the molecular processes). The essential element is that the catalysts are molecules. They can then be varied through small, deliberate synthetic modifications to improve or fine tune their properties. They are also amenable to studies with for example high level molecular or kinetic spectroscopy of many kinds including FTIR, optical, EPRetc. The catalytic process can therefore be followed and understood to a very detailed level.7,8 Intermediates and partial steps on the way to the desired reaction (water oxidation or hydrogen formation) can be identified and followed. This is a clear advantage in the research and development of these methods!
Non-molecular systems are based on light driven catalysts that are not molecules. The catalysis instead occur on metal surfaces, semiconductors or nano-structured carbon based materials while the catalysts involved for water splitting often have cores of metal oxide, sometimes doped with other metals. The science is often based on knowledge from solar cell research (see ref. 12–14; see also articles in ref. 9 and 10). One clear disadvantage is that many presently envisioned systems are based on catalysts made from scarce and expensive metals. They might become useful technologically but the expensive catalysts are a severe limitation. Another disadvantage when compared to the molecular systems is that it is much more difficult to study the mechanism for the reactions involved. It is more difficult to follow short lived intermediates or to analyze them in materials than in molecules. An important advantage is however that, while most molecular systems studied to date are unstable and easily brake during illumination, many non-molecular systems are quite stable and seemingly more sturdy against degradation and inactivation. It is however not clear that this situation will always prevail when more functional systems have been studied and better understood.
An interesting development that seemingly is introduced rapidly involves ideas where molecular and non-molecular systems are mixed. Here the solar energy capture system is semi-conductor based or made from some other nano-technology while the catalytic chemistry is carried out by linked molecular catalysts. These catalysts are then made from abundant materials like cobalt, iron, manganese or nickel similar to the “purely” molecular systems described above. It is not unlikely that these mixed systems will become dominant in research and maybe technology since they combine advantages from both fields.


Thermochemical cycles. 
A totally different technology which is very promising is the employment of thermal processes for solar fuel production.15,16 These are processes involving the generation of very high temperatures in closed environments to split water into its constituents directly. This results in a solar fuel when the high temperature is achieved by concentration of solar energy in a heliostat illuminating a solar tower. However, the high temperature can also be achieved by other processes, like, for example, from nuclear energy. In this case the result is not a solar fuel. Therefore these thermal processes should be distinguished from the solar fuels processes described above. The science and technology represents interesting engineering and physical science and are very demanding technically involving very high temperatures and huge systems like heliostats.


Semi-direct photobiological processes. 
Photobiological solar fuel production is another approach, which is perhaps best defined as semi-direct (Fig. 6). Here a photosynthetic microorganism harvests the solar energy and uses this to produce a fuel in high yield, as a dominating product (see ref. 17, and references in ref. 18 and 19). This is then secreted from the organism. Thereby, the fuel can be formed continuously in a vessel called a photo-bioreactor. The fuel production does not demand the harvest of the entire organism. Therefore this is a process where maintaining life and growing the organism only uses a small part of the supplied solar energy. The efficiency of such a photo-biological process can be much higher than of a system where the biomass is harvested. It is however also lower than what can be theoretically achieved by artificial photosynthesis. This is because a significant fraction of the absorbed solar energy is used by the organism to maintain it's life-processes. In addition it is unlikely that a photosynthetic organism can use as much of the solar spectrum as a synthetic system which essentially can be made black.
Different types of fuels can be anticipated from photo-biological processes in photosynthetic microorganisms. Some cyanobacteria and green algae are the only organisms that combine efficient water oxidizing photosynthesis with the capacity to use some of this energy to produce hydrogen (Fig. 6). Thus, hydrogen is a natural product in both cyanobacteria and green algae. To make use of this versatility, hydrogen is a commonly targeted product in this area of research. The science involves reasonable foreseeable efforts in molecular biology, biochemistry and metabolic engineering and might be quite close to brake troughs. Demonstration of photobiological hydrogen production for quite long times has been achieved in both cyanobacteria and algae.
Other targets fuels have been introduced instead of hydrogen. These involve oils, alcohols and other naturally existing substances that are suitable for fuel and that can be secreted from the organism (Fig. 6). In these approaches scientists will use a photosynthetic organism to drive new metabolic pathways to produce the fuel directly. The organism of choice is normally one of the unicellular cyanobacteria where molecular biology and genetics are strong but it can also be a green algae. The genome must be sequenced. The metabolic pathway will be inserted into an existing organism by synthetic biology. This branch of solar fuels research develops rapidly. Synthetic biology is equally useful for the development of hydrogen producing, photosynthetic microorganisms.
Two types of photosynthetic organisms dominate photobiological solar fuels research at present. One is green algae, Chlamydomonas sp and others, which can be forced to produce hydrogen or valuable oil products under certain circumstances. The other are different cyanobacteria that already in nature posses the metabolic machinery to produce hydrogen. Both systems have limitations and advantages and demand similar developments using molecular biology, metabolic engineering and synthetic biology approaches. At present it is impossible to judge which system will have the largest potential.
It is a matter of choice if these methods for hydrogen (or another fuel) formation in photosynthetic microorganisms should be called a direct pathway for solar fuel production. It is clearly not an entirely indirect pathway since the energy rich intermediates never leave the organism and the desired fuel is collected without destroying the cell. However, it is not an entirely direct process either. The reason is that the metabolic pathways to the solar fuel in the cell also involve an energy rich intermediate in the organism. This intermediate is normally starch or some other storage carbohydrate, which is broken down in the process leading to the fuel. This would make this an intermediate in the pathway which thus is not entirely direct. Probably the best definition is that the use of the entire cell machinery in a photosynthetic cell as the catalyst makes this process something in between. It can therefore be called a semi-direct process.
An interesting recent development in this context is to try to divert the electrons that come from photosynthesis (water splitting in Photosystem II) from “unnecessary” pathways that lead to storage compounds to the desired pathways that lead to the fuel. There are few examples of this research as yet, but promising results have been presented in the unicellular cyanobacteriumSynechocystis sp. Here enzymes in the nitrate reduction metabolism have been removed by molecular biology resulting in increased hydrogen formation, most probably indicating that electrons have been redirected to the formation of the desired product (hydrogen) from the removal pathway (reduction of nitrate).20



            Enzyme-based and hybrid systems. 
Mind provoking and intricate science aims for another direct approach that is a hybrid between a biological and a man-made system. There are several variations on this theme, most of them using molecular science.21,22,23 The basic idea is to purify critical enzymes like photosynthetic reaction centers and hydrogenases and to use them together with another enzyme or a molecular, man-made, catalyst to produce the solar-fuel directly. A typical approach is to purify Photosystem II to harvest the solar energy and drive the generation of reducing electrons by splitting water. The photosynthetic enzyme is linked to a hydrogen producing enzyme (a hydrogenase) or catalyst (for example platinum). The idea is to react the electrons with protons to form hydrogen. These systems represent elegant science rather than real fuel producing systems of high potential impact to allow exchange for fossil fuels. The main reason is that they all depend on biological processes to produce components of the systems. Their scale is therefore limited.

Principle reactions in artificial photosynthesis
Regardless if the intended artificial photosynthesis system is molecular or non-molecular in nature there are some common principles that should be accomplished to achieve the desired solar fuel. These are shown in Fig. 7.
 Fig. 7  A: Principle reactions in artificial photosynthesis to make a solar fuel when the entire process is driven by the absorption of one photon. P is the photosensitizer that absorbs the energy in the photon. D is the water oxidizing catalyst. A is the proton reducing catalyst. B: Principle reactions in artificial photosynthesis to make a solar fuel when the entire system is driven in two modules, by two photons. Po is the photosensitizer in the oxidizing module. The oxidized form of Po reaches redox potentials high enough to oxidize water. D is the water oxidizing catalyst. Pr is the photosensitizer in the reducing module. The excited state of Pr is reducing enough to reduce protons to hydrogen. A is the proton reducing catalyst. The use of the protons formed during the oxidation of water in the reaction where hydrogen is formed is indicated. 
The first concerns the substrates (raw materials) in the reaction. If solar fuels shall have the option to become important on a global scale, and for a long time, the raw material(s) used to produce the fuel must be essentially “endless”. In addition they must be available almost everywhere, cheap and easy to transport. All these factors hold for water and development of processes where water is oxidized (split) into its constituents is the key factor in development of large scale solar fuels. This makes water the prime target for the first substrate in Fig. 7, and also the only real option. Water is also used in natural photosynthesis where light-driven oxidation of water in Photosystem II provides the biosphere with an endless source of electrons.24 These electrons, which are extracted from water using a light driven active site composed of a CaMn4 complex, are made reducing using the energy in sunlight. They are then used by the organism to reduce CO2 and other substrates into a multitude of energy rich compounds. The structure of Photosystem II and the intricate details of the very important oxygen evolving complex has eluded scientists for a long time. Since the millennium it has been determined to, with time, better and better resolution. In 2011 the structure was finally determined to 1.9 Å resolution revealing the molecular structure of the CaMn4 complex to an unprecedented level of detail.25 Most likely this breakthrough will trigger a multitude of research efforts to create chemical mimics to this remarkable catalytic site.
The idea in solar fuels production is the same, use the energy in sunlight to extract the electrons from water (to oxidize water) and make them reducing enough to be used to form the fuel product. The reaction is shown on the left side in Fig. 7 and is written as:  
Two options exist to handle these reducing electrons (in bioenergetics they are often referred to as “reducing equivalents”). They can be stored in the form of a reduced intermediate substance; this is the case in natural photosynthesis where the electrons are stored intermittently in a quinone electron acceptor.24 However, in an artificial system it is more interesting to use the electrons directly. In this case they are reacted with a second substrate to form the fuel. One tempting option, which is in focus for much research, is to use the protons formed in the water splitting reaction. This reaction is shown on the right side of Fig. 7. In this case, the highly reducing electrons and protons are brought together (shown as a connecting arrow in Fig. 7A) on a catalyst to form hydrogen according to the reaction:  
This reaction is chemically feasible and the product is hydrogen, an energy-rich and useful fuel. This reaction might be feasible using a single photon per electron transferred from water to hydrogen (Fig. 7A) but this is at the verge of what can be achieved energetically with visible light.
Recent developments have also led to other ideas. CO2 in the atmosphere is a major concern. It would be advantageous, and scientifically challenging, if this CO2 could be used to produce a solar fuel. The idea here is to use CO2 instead of protons as the 2nd raw material in Fig. 7. The reducing equivalents (electrons) that originate from the oxidation of water are then reacted with CO2 on a catalyst. It is probably more difficult to drive this multi-electron chemistry with light than to accomplish the reduction of protons from hydrogen. However, reduction of CO2 can result in well known fuels like methanol (CH3OH) or methane (CH4), both in common use and easy to use in machines and motors. The use of CO2 is however linked to a large practical problem. How and where can cheap CO2 be found in large enough quantities to allow exchange with fossil fuels? In addition the CO2 cycle is maintained and if any CO2 leaks out from the cycle it will end up in the atmosphere, adding to the CO2 released from fossil fuels.

Fig. 7 shows the three principal steps that need to be accomplished. The first reaction is the absorption of a photon. This is accomplished by a photoactive material of a photosensitizer P (red in Fig. 7) that is excited in the reaction. This excited state triggers the fundamental charge separation reaction. In this reaction, a highly energetic radical pair, where the electron is separated from the electron hole on the photosensitizer or photoactive material, is formed transiently. This radical pair is normally unstable since the electron and the electron hole are close to each other and deactivates quickly via a process known as recombination. However, in a system for artificial photosynthesis like the one drawn in Fig. 7 the photosensitizer is coupled to two catalytic systems, A and D. The coupling will be via defined chemical links able to transfer electrons in a molecular system or via integration of (for example) a metal containing catalytic particle on a metal oxide system in a non-molecular system. In either case, the electron in the radical pair is transported to an electron acceptor system (A, blue in Fig. 7) while the corresponding electron hole is transferred to an electron donating system (D, green in Fig. 7).
It is during the charge separation reaction that the photon energy is converted to chemically useful energy. The subsequent electron and hole transfer steps to respective catalytic center, function to stabilize the separated charges against wasteful recombination long enough to permit the catalytic chemistry to occur. There are many suitable photosensitizers available, both molecular and non-molecular. They have different spectral properties and the radical pair formed in the charge separation reaction will have different properties dependent on the species involved. A feature that is necessary to accomplish to manage successful solar fuel production from water is that the electron hole formed and the oxidized donating system, D, should be oxidizing enough to extract electrons from water. At the same time, the electron acceptor system, A, must be reducing enough to put electrons on, for example, protons (Fig. 7).
The two other set of reactions that need to be achieved are the catalytic reactions to oxidize water and to reduce protons to hydrogen. Both demand efficient catalytic systems. These are denoted D and A in Fig. 7. The most difficult reaction to accomplish is the controlled oxidation of water at ambient temperature and preferentially fairly neutral pH's. This reaction has several complicating factors. The oxidation of two water molecules to one O2 molecule, 4 protons and 4 reducing electrons is complex and needs control of both multi-electron and multi-proton chemistry. Since photons come one by one, while the two water molecules must be oxidized in one step, the catalyst D must in some way or another be able to store four oxidizing electron holes close together. This is energetically and chemically difficult and there are not so many options to manage this. In Nature this is carried out by the oxygen evolving center in Photosystem II that contains a CaMn4 cluster.24,25 The 4 Mn ions all have high valence (Mn(III) and Mn(IV)). During catalysis in the much studied S-cycle, they toggle between these states to store the necessary four electron holes and to accomplish the difficult formation of the oxygen–oxygen bond in the O2 molecule.24
The second critical reaction is carried out by the electron accepting system, A. This system (which can be either a molecular catalyst or a non-molecular system composed even of metallic Pt) should be able to store at least two electrons originating from two separate charge separation reactions and also be able to react these electrons with two protons to form hydrogen (Fig. 7, right side). This chemistry is much easier than water oxidation and there are many both molecular and non-molecular systems that are able to carry out this chemistry. In Nature the corresponding reaction is carried out by the hydrogenase enzymes that in most cases have bi-metallic active sites composed of either Ni–Fe or Fe–Fe systems.26,27 Hydrogenases are not driven by light reactions. Instead the electrons are derived from metabolic reactions in the cell and transferred to the active site one by one via an electron transfer chain. In principle a molecular catalyst driven by light can function analogously and the biomimetic (or sometimes also called bio-inspired) chemistry in this field is quite successful.8
Thus a system for artificial photosynthesis should contain three different components that shall function together to accomplish the necessary difficult chemistry. The photoactive material or photosensitizer P shall absorb the light energy and trigger the reaction. A fairly reducing electron shall be transferred to the reducing end of the system that is composed of a catalytically active component, A. After reduction by two electrons the catalyst A shall be able to reduce protons to hydrogen. A very oxidizing electron hole shall move to the oxidizing end of the system that also is composed of a catalytically active component, D. After accumulation of four electron holes, following the absorption of four photons by P, the catalyst D should be able to oxidize water to molecular oxygen.
Much of the research in artificial photosynthesis is focussed on the development of catalysts that can be driven by the energy in visible light. This is not easy. Both the oxidizing and the reducing catalyst will presumably be built using transition metals that have several oxidation states available. There are many catalysts that can work with the more energetic UV light or can be driven by electrochemical reactions using very oxidizing or very reducing conditions. However, to accomplish the reactions with the relatively low energy available in a visible light photon and to maintain most of the energy in the products is much more difficult. This is presently the limiting step in development of promising systems. A second complicating factor is that many of the available efficient catalysts are made from expensive and rare elements. For water oxidation, catalysts made from for example Ru and Ir work quite well. Hydrogen formation is accomplished by for example Pt and Pd. Several of these catalysts could in principle work in solar fuel production. However, there is not enough of these elements to allow development of industrial processes in a scale that allows exchange of fossil fuels to solar fuels. Therefore, the catalysts have to be built from abundant elements. This might turn out not too difficult for the acceptor side where common elements like Co, Ni and Fe constitute the active parts in several well functioning catalysts that also can be driven by visible light (see ref. 8 and 28; see also ref. 9, 10, 11 and 14 and references therein). It is however much more difficult to accomplish light driven water oxidation and there are few systems available that have been shown to work. Here oxides of Fe (Grätzel et al.DOI: 10.1039/c1fd00103e), Mn29 and Co12,30,31 are the most promising and the development is quite fast and promising. There are many recent volumes9,10,11 covering different aspects of this exciting chemistry and details in the catalyst design and function will not be dealt with here.
A second important factor is whether the entire reaction from water oxidation to hydrogen formation can be achieved by one photon only or if two photons are necessary (Fig. 7A and B respectively). With one photon the reaction looks deceptively simple; the high energy electron achieved in the charge separation reaction reacts directly with the proton to form the energy rich product, the solar fuel while the electron hole is directly transferred to the water oxidizing catalyst D. However, it will be very difficult to manage this entire reaction with one photon only. The energy in most visible photons is barely enough to allow both oxidation of water and reduction of protons. In addition, it will be very difficult to manage the chemistry and to control unwanted back electron flow. It is much more reasonable to involve two photons in the reactions (Fig. 7B). In this case, two different light reactions must be developed. In Fig. 7B this is drawn as two modules (their connection is drawn very loose to indicate that many solutions exist here). This is also how most researchers attempt to accomplish the chemistry since the design and synthesis of the respective modules is easier than of a combined system. In one module, or half cell, one photosensitizer (Po in Fig. 7B) is coupled to the water oxidizing catalyst, D. In the light, water is oxidized and the electrons are taken care of. In the second module, the reducing half cell, another photon is absorbed (by Pr in Fig. 7B) and used to drive efficient hydrogen production by the catalytic system A. The electron needed shall in a final system be provided from the oxidizing module.
Although it looks complicated it is not necessarily more difficult scientifically to build the two photon system since both steps essentially are similar as the one photon reaction. The problem lies in combining the two steps in a functional device for solar fuels (Fig. 8). The two halves must work in a concerted manner such that no energy rich intermediates are lost or left behind. If they are lost, the energy already captured is also lost. If they are left behind their high energy content can make them reactive in side reactions that lead to destruction of the catalyst or other components in the system. Hydrogen and oxygen, the two products, must be kept well separated and protons must be allowed to pass from the water oxidizing side to the hydrogen forming side. However, the use of two photons also gives new possibilities and it is tempting to imagine a system where the two photons used have different wave lengths. This would allow use of a wider range of the solar spectrum, thus more of the solar energy that hits the solar fuel apparatus is used. This would be a major advantage.
 Fig. 8  Tentative design of an artificial photosynthesis cell where two modular functions are combined. Here the oxidative module (Po–D), which accomplishes light driven oxidation of water, is linked (bound) to a surface which assists the delivery of electrons from the oxidizing module to the reducing side of the cell. The reductive module (Pr–A) is linked to a second surface which also provides a means for electron transfer between the two modules. The colour coding for Po and Pr indicates that the two photosensitizers involved are unlikely to be the same. The two compartments with the different modules are connected by a membrane that allows diffusion of protons to allow that the protons formed by the oxidation of water can be used as the substrate in the formation of hydrogen. 
Nature has developed photosynthetic systems of both the one photon and the two photon types. One photon systems are found in photosynthetic bacteria, which are unable to oxidize water. Two-photon photosynthesis is the most advanced type and is found in cyanobacteria, algae and plants.24 Here water is oxidized by light in Photosystem II. This would correspond to the left hand module in Fig. 7B and 8. From Photosystem II, the electrons are transferred to and stored in a pool of quinones in the thylakoid membrane. When needed the electrons are transferred to the second “module” where they are once again excited by light, this time by Photosystem I (this would correspond to the right hand module in Fig. 7B and 8). The electrons that originate from water are now very reducing and used to produce the cell's intermediate reducing agent NADPH and from there all other reduced components in the cell. Thus, there is much to learn from natural photosynthesis in the development of artificial solar fuel production. Hence the nomenclature artificial photosynthesis, the artificial leaf or similar.
Acknowledgements
Financial support for the author's own research in the Swedish Consortium for Artificial Photosynthesis is provided by the Knut and Alice Wallenbergs Foundation, the Swedish Energy Agency, the Swedish Research Council and SOLAR-H2 (FP7 EU contract 212508). Valuable discussions with Dr. M. Anderlund, P. Huang, L Hammarström, P. Lindblad, A. Magnuson, S. Ott and A. Thapper are gratefully acknowledged.
References
IEA World Energy Outlook 2008, 2009, and 2010.
The network and research center list was assembled by S. Styring and P. Lindblad, Uppsala University, Sweden in the spring 2009.
A. Kraytsberg and Y. Ein-Eli, Review on Li-air batteries – opportunities, limitations and perspective, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 886–893 CrossRef CAS .
The EU directive behind the so called 20/20/20 targets is found at: http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do%3Furi%3DCELEX%3A32009L0028%3AEN%3A%20NOT.
A. Yella, H.-W. Lee, H.-N. Tsao, C. Yi, A. Kumar, M. K. Nazeeruddin, E. W. Diau, C.-Y. Yeh, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Porphyrin-Sensitized Solar Cells with Cobalt (II/III)-Based Redox Electrolyte Exceed 12 Percent Efficiency, Science, 2011, 334, 629–634 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Reece, J. A. Hamel, K. Sung, T. D. Jarvi, A. J. Esswein, J. J. Pijpers and D. G. Nocera, Wireless Solar Water Splitting Using Silicon-Based Semiconductors and Earth-Abundant Catalysts, Science, 2011, 334, 645–649 CrossRef CAS .
A. Magnuson, M. Anderlund, O. Johansson, P. Lindblad, R. Lomoth, T. Polivka, S. Ott, K. Stensjö, S. Styring, V. Sundström and L. Hammarström, Biomimetic and Microbial Approaches to Solar Fuel Generation, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1899–1909 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Ott, S. Styring, L. Hammarström, O. Johansson, Towards Solar Fuels using a biomimetic Approach. Progress in the Swedish Consortium for Artificial Photosynthesis, in “Energy production and storage”; Inorganic Chemical Strategies for a Warming World, ed. R. Crabtree, Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd,  2010, pp 199–227 Search PubMed .

          Artificial Photosynthesis and Solar Fuels, Guest editors: L. Hammarström and S. Hammes-Schiffer, special issue in: Acc. Chem. Res.,  2009, 42(12), pp. 1859–2029.

          Inorganic Chemistry Forum: Making Oxygen, Guest editors: R. Eisenberg and H. B. Gray, special Issue in Inorg. Chem.,  2008, 47, pp. 1697–1861.
Special issue of Chem. Soc. Rev.,  2009, 38, pp. 1–300.
T. R. Cook, D. K. Dogutan, S. Y. Reece, Y. Surendranath, T. S. Teets and D. G. Nocera, Solar Energy Supply and Storage for the Legacy and Nonlegacy Worlds, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6474–6502 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Solar Water Splitting Cells, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, S. Shen, L. Guo and S. S. Mao, Semiconductor-based Photocatalytic Hydrogen Generation, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6503–6570 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pagliaro, A. G. Konstandopoulos, R. Ciriminna and G. Palmisano, Solar hydrogen: fuel of the near future, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 279–287 CAS .
W. C. Chueh, C. Falter, M. Abbott, D. Scipio, P. Furler, S. M. Haile and A. Steinfeld, High-Flux Solar-Driven Thermochemical Dissociation of CO2 and H2O Using Nonstoichiometric Ceria, Science, 2010, 330, 1797–1801 CrossRef CAS .
Anja Hemschemeier and Thomas Happe, Alternative photosynthetic electron transport pathways during anaerobiosis in the green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg., 2011, 1807, 919–926 CrossRef CAS .

          Solar Energy Conversion, Guest editor: V. Sundström, special issue in Dalton Trans.,  2009, 45, pp. 9937–10124.

          Energy Biotechnology, Guest editors: P. Lindblad and T. Jeffries, special issue in Curr. Opin. Biotechnol.,  2009, 20, pp. 318–380.
W. Baebprasert, S. Jantaro, W. Khetkorn, P. Lindblad and A. Incharoensakdi, Increased H2 production in the cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. Strain PCC 6803 by redirecting the electron supply via genetic engineering of
the nitrate assimilation pathway, Metab. Eng., 2011, 13, 610–616 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Lubner, R. Grimme, D. A. Bryant and J. H. Golbeck, Wiring Photosystem I for Direct Solar Hydrogen Production, Biochemistry, 2010, 49, 404–414 CrossRef CAS .

          N. Waschewski, G. Bernat and M. Rögner, Engineering Photosynthesis for H2 production from H2O: Cyanobacteria as design organisms, in Biomass to Biofuels: Strategies for Global Industries, ed. A. Vertes, N. Querashi, H. Blaschek and H. Yukawa, Wiley and Sons, Ltd.,  2010, pp 387–401 Search PubMed .
H. Krassen, A. Schwarze, B. Friedrich, K. Ataka, O. Lenz and J. Heberle, Photosynthetic Hydrogen Production by a Hybrid Complex of Photosystem I and [NiFe]-Hydrogenase, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 4055–4061 CrossRef CAS .
N. Nelson and C. F. Yocum, Structure and function of photosystems I and II, Annu. Rev. Plant Biol., 2006, 57, 521–565 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Umena, K. Kawakami, J. R. Shen and N. Kamiya, Crystal structure of oxygen-evolving photosystem II at a resolution of 1.9 angstrom, Nature, 2011, 473, 55–60 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Fontecilla-Camps, A. Volbeda, C. Cavazza and Y. Nicolet, Structure/Function Relationships of [NiFe]- and [FeFe]-Hydrogenases, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107(10), 4273–4303 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Vincent, A. Parkin and F. A. Armstrong, Investigating and Exploiting the electrocatalytic properties of hydrogenases, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 4366–4413 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Goff, V. Artero, B. Jousselme, P. D. Tran, N. Guillet, R. Métayé, A. Fihri, S. Palacin and M. Fontecave, From Hydrogenases to Noble Metal Free Catalytic Nanomaterials for H2 Production and Uptake, Science, 2009, 326, 1384–1387 CrossRef .
M. Wiechen, H.-M. Berends and P. Kurz, Water oxidation catalysed by manganese compounds: from complexes to “biomimetic rocks”, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 21 RSC .
Q. Yin, J.-M. Tan, C. Besson, Y. V. Geletti, D. G. Musaev, A. E. Kuznetsov, Z. Luo, K. I. Hardcastle and C. L. Hill, A Fast Soluble Carbon-Free Molecular Water Oxidation Catalyst Based on Abundant Metals, Science, 2010, 328, 342–345 CrossRef CAS .
D. Shevchenko, M. F. Anderlund, A. Thapper and S. Styring, Photodriven water oxidation with visible light using a cobalt containing catalyst, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1284–1287 CAS .

Footnote† The alternative to conversion and storage of solar energy as a fuel is to produce solar electricity with solar cells and store the electricity in batteries. However, in Li–air batteries which are at the forefront of battery research, the energy content per kilogram is something like wet wood and a factor of ca. 15 lower than in H2 or 4 lower than in isobutanol, two of the intended solar fuels.3This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  The lower bar diagram shows the total amount of energy used in the world, recalculated to electric power. In 2009 this amounted to ca. 16 TW (corresponding to ca. 140000 TW h). 80% of this energy was provided from fossil resources (mainly coal, oil and natural gas) while the other main contributors were biomass used in a huge variety of ways and electric power from nuclear and hydroelectric plants. Other energy sources like wind power, solar power and others contribute to a very small fraction of today's energy use.1 The top diagram shows that the total solar irradiation on the planet per hour amount to almost the same amount of energy as the entire world uses today. The middle bar diagrams shows the expected energy use in 2050 and the division between electricity use and use of energy for other purposes. Ca. 17% of the worlds energy use was used in the form of electricity.1	 

 	Fig. 2  Development of the scientific field for solar fuels research. A: Number of publications listed in Web of Science in August 2011 under the headings “Artificial photosynthesis” (red) and “Solar fuel” (yellow). B: The number of research networks and larger centres active in solar fuels research in the US (blue) and Europe (green) and total for the two continents (US + Europe; yellow). The networks statistics were collected by the author.2 It is clearly not complete but the trends are clear. The large increase of renewable energy research centers in the US in 2009 is included in the diagram. From 2010 Europe is probably catching up the US numbers of networks/centres and there are several new centers/networks in France, Holland, Germany, Sweden, the UK (and other countries) and on a continental scale that were not present in 2009.	 

 	Fig. 3  Options with solar energy, a general overview. Fields where the research content is very high are indicated by a question mark (?) while fields where mainly technological improvements of existing technologies are expected are indicated with an exclamation mark (!).	 

 	Fig. 4  Two functional and well known indirect process for solar fuels and their general drawbacks.	 

 	Fig. 5  Three direct processes for solar fuels and their general advantages. Artificial photosynthesis can be made in both molecular systems and non-molecular systems. The former uses both catalysts and photoactive components that are made from molecules. The latter is carried out in photoelectrochemical systems built on semiconducting materials or other types of nano-materials like carbon nanofibers. A third option is to split water at a metal oxide surface at very high temperatures in a system where thermo-chemical cycles are utilized. In cases where the high temperature originates from solar energy in a heliostat, the fuel (normally hydrogen is the target fuel) is a solar fuel. In cases where the high temperature originates from a nuclear process, it is not.	 

 	Fig. 6  Solar fuels like hydrogen, fatty acids or alcohols can be formed and excreted from photosynthetic microorganisms, in particular cyanobacteria and green algae. In most of these processes, storage compounds like carbohydrates are converted to the desired product. This is best described as a semi-direct process in that the intact cell is used as a catalyst for production of the fuels that to a large extent is derived from a stored intermediate in the cell.	 

 	Fig. 7  A: Principle reactions in artificial photosynthesis to make a solar fuel when the entire process is driven by the absorption of one photon. P is the photosensitizer that absorbs the energy in the photon. D is the water oxidizing catalyst. A is the proton reducing catalyst. B: Principle reactions in artificial photosynthesis to make a solar fuel when the entire system is driven in two modules, by two photons. Po is the photosensitizer in the oxidizing module. The oxidized form of Po reaches redox potentials high enough to oxidize water. D is the water oxidizing catalyst. Pr is the photosensitizer in the reducing module. The excited state of Pr is reducing enough to reduce protons to hydrogen. A is the proton reducing catalyst. The use of the protons formed during the oxidation of water in the reaction where hydrogen is formed is indicated.	 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 8  Tentative design of an artificial photosynthesis cell where two modular functions are combined. Here the oxidative module (Po–D), which accomplishes light driven oxidation of water, is linked (bound) to a surface which assists the delivery of electrons from the oxidizing module to the reducing side of the cell. The reductive module (Pr–A) is linked to a second surface which also provides a means for electron transfer between the two modules. The colour coding for Po and Pr indicates that the two photosensitizers involved are unlikely to be the same. The two compartments with the different modules are connected by a membrane that allows diffusion of protons to allow that the protons formed by the oxidation of water can be used as the substrate in the formation of hydrogen.	 
Footnote
† The alternative to conversion and storage of solar energy as a fuel is to produce solar electricity with solar cells and store the electricity in batteries. However, in Li–air batteries which are at the forefront of battery research, the energy content per kilogram is something like wet wood and a factor of ca. 15 lower than in H2 or 4 lower than in isobutanol, two of the intended solar fuels.3

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
