Iron triad (Fe, Co, Ni) nanomaterials: structural design, functionalization and their applications   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5CS00033E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5CS00033E
(Tutorial Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 6697-6707Iron triad (Fe, Co, Ni) nanomaterials: structural design, functionalization and their applications†

        
          
            Wei 
            Zhou
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Lin 
            Guo
          
          
        
      *
      Key Laboratory of Bio-Inspired Smart Interfacial Science and Technology of Ministry of Education, School of Chemistry and Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, 100191, China. E-mail: guolin@buaa.edu.cn
Received 
      13th January 2015
    First published on 9th July 2015AbstractThe structure and the composition are two key factors that influence the physical, chemical, and other properties of materials. Correspondingly, structural design and functionalization with inorganic or organic materials provide efficient routes to enhancing some properties. Herein, iron triad nanomaterials, with a wide range of applications in energy, environment and other fields, were chosen as the target materials. This paper reviews various approaches for designing three typical structures (hollow and porous, ultrathin two-dimensional, and complex three-dimensional structures) of iron triad nanomaterials with high specific surface areas as well as their feasible functionalization for special purposes. Furthermore, some amazing work in recent years is introduced and discussed, especially in the energy field including energy transfer, conversion and storage, and in the environment field, including the adsorption and removal of harmful inorganic ions and organic pollutants. This review aims at developing potential applications of the nanomaterials using structural adjustment and functionalization to overcome their intrinsic shortcomings and enhance their performance.
Wei Zhou
Dr Wei Zhou received her PhD degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Beihang University under the supervision of Prof. Lin Guo in 2009. She worked as a visiting scholar in Prof. Hong Yang's group in University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC) from 2012–2013. Currently she is an Associate Professor at the School of Chemistry and Environment in Beihang University. Her research interests focus on iron triads (Fe, Co, Ni) and their compound nanomaterials for applications in energy, adsorption and catalysis.
Lin Guo
Dr Lin Guo received his PhD in Materials Science and Engineering from Beijing Institute of Technology (BIT) in 1997. He worked as a visiting scholar in Prof. Shihe Yang's lab in Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST) in 1999. He worked in Dresden University of Technology with a Humboldt Fellowship for 2 years. Currently he is a Professor and the Vice Dean of the School of Chemistry and Environment in Beihang University. His research interests include the synthesis and characterization of sophisticated nanomaterials, high-strength nanomaterials with light weights, and functional nanomaterials for energy storage.

Key learning points
(1) Structural design of three typical structures with high specific surface areas.
(2) Feasible functionalization to enhance structural stability, conductivity and adsorption.
(3) Recent intriguing work about structural design and functionalization.

1. Introduction
Nanomaterials have been studied for decades, and a remarkable development for them might be the controllable chemical synthesis of adjustable nanostructures. At the very beginning, only simple irregular nanoparticles (NPs, for all abbreviations see ESI†) could be prepared in chemical solutions. Then, through the understanding of the mechanisms of nanocrystal (NC) growth and getting more advanced scientific equipment and instruments, researchers gradually developed different synthetic strategies, through which various nanostructures such as regular polyhedrons, hollow particles, one-dimensional (1D) structures, and even complex three-dimensional (3D) spatial structures have been fabricated. These studies continue to thrive as many efforts have been made to develop advanced nanomaterials using structural design and functionalization in pursuit of more wide applications.
Iron triads (Fe, Co, Ni) are a class of materials covering metals(0), oxides, sulfides, hydroxides and their composites, these are potentially advantageous for lithium-ion batteries (LIBs), electrochemical capacitors (ECs), adsorbents, and nanocatalysts in the fields of energy and environment. For example, oxides of iron, nickel and cobalt, and mixed oxides thereof, are studied as choices for electrode materials in lithium ion batteries (LIBs), while hydroxides of nickel and cobalt usually possess high specific capacitances, being favourable for high energy density storage in ECs.1 In addition, magnetic nanomaterials among the iron triad series can be used as adsorbents for heavy metal ions, which can be easily re-collected via magnetic separation after adsorption.2 Sometimes, they can also serve as catalysts for pollutant degradation.3 That is, the iron triad nanomaterials are chosen as they can provide vivid examples for nano-structural design and functionalization with hot applications in the fields of energy and environment, not to mention their low cost, low toxicity, and flexible syntheses.
Iron triad materials in conventional forms such as bulk or aggregated NPs have no competitive advantage in their electrochemical, adsorption or catalytic performances, as their low specific surface areas (SSAs) would lead to poor contact between the active materials and the electrolyte/pollutants. Thus, the fundamental prerequisite for structural design is to ensure a high SSA. Additionally, functionalization is also an efficient route to enhance their properties. However, different performances need different functionalization. For instance, high-quality active materials for electrodes prefer to have their conductivity and structural stability improved, while adsorbents and nanocatalysts prefer more adsorption sites.
Here, we choose three kinds of typical nanostructures of iron triads with high SSA, i.e., hollow and porous structures, ultrathin two-dimensional (2D) structures, and complex 3D structures. We will summarize the intriguing synthetic methods based on recent progress, provide the dominant strategies for the functionalization of nanostructures, and give classical applied examples of iron triad nanomaterials used in electrode materials, adsorbents, and catalysts. The large enhancement of their properties via the structural fabrication and the functionalization of iron triads could also drive the development of other alternative nanomaterials.
2. Nano-structural design for high SSA
A simple way to increase the SSA of materials is to decrease their size. But small NPs tend to aggregate to lower their surface energy, which will definitely lower the SSA and even influence the related properties. Instead, three typical nanostructures with high SSA attract much attention, covering hollow and porous structures, ultrathin 2D structures, and complex 3D structures. All of these structural design strategies refer to reported interesting work in recent years.
2.1 Hollow and porous structures
It is highly desirable to develop generalized and efficient methods to synthesize hollow or porous structures as they possess improved physical and chemical properties with larger SSAs and void spaces in comparison with their solid nanoscale counterparts. Four typical methods will be introduced in detail.
The first one is the galvanic replacement reaction for hollow metal oxides, reported by Oh et al. in Science in 2013.4 The method is usually used to fabricate hollow nanostructures of noble metals with controllable compositions (for a detailed mechanism see the ESI†). When manganese oxide (Mn3O4) NCs reacted with iron(II) perchlorate, hollow box-shaped NCs of Mn3O4/γ-Fe2O3 were produced. These nanoboxes ultimately transformed into hollow cage-like γ-Fe2O3via the localized dissolution of Mn3O4 and the surface precipitation of γ-Fe2O3, as Fig. 1a shows. The generality of this approach was demonstrated with other metal pairs, including Co3O4–SnO2 and Mn3O4–SnO2.4 Furthermore, by adding extra chemical agents for further reaction, a series of hollow metal hydroxides could be obtained.5
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of the galvanic replacement reaction of Mn3O4 and Fe2O3, showing the localized dissolution of Mn3O4 and the surface precipitation of γ-Fe2O3 (ref. 4, copyright 2013 American Association for the Advancement of Science), (b) Ni3S2 nanobowls wrapped by rGO sheets, synthesized via the Kirkendall effect (ref. 6, copyright 2014 Elsevier), (c) schematic illustration of the formation procedure of bowl-like SnO2@C hollow particles (ref. 7, copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH), (d) schematic illustration for the preparation process of porous hollow ZnO/ZnFe2O4/C octahedra (ref. 8, copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH). 
The second one is the nanoscale Kirkendall effect, a well-known method, firstly reported by Alivisatos' group in Science in 2004 (for details see the ESI†). It is mainly used to prepare hollow or core–shell nanostructures of metal oxides and sulfides. By introducing the soft substrate of graphene, peculiar bowl-like structure could be fabricated through the Kirkendall effect.6 As shown in Fig. 1b, the existence of polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP)-stabilized graphene oxide (GO) sheets made nickel clusters aggregate and form semispheres instead of spheres. Thus, the Ni solid semisphere templates turned into nickel sulfide nanobowls after sulfidation via the Kirkendall effect.6
Obviously, the final hollow samples based on galvanic replacement or the Kirkendall effect are limited in their structures (as determined by the original template) and components. As a good alternative, the template-sacrificial method is proposed, where the target structure depends on the nanostructure of the template but its component is not limited. That is, we can synthesize different hollow structures by choosing different templates. For example, Liang et al. used bowl-like polystyrene (PS) spheres (made from PS hollow spheres after drying naturally in air) as substrates and synthesized bowl-like SnO2@C particles with a SSA of ∼103.8 m2 g−1 (the process is illustrated in Fig. 1c).7 Recently, inspired by their diverse configurations, metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) have also been used as sacrificial templates to fabricate porous structures. Zou et al. prepared porous ZnO/ZnFe2O4/C octahedra with hollow interiors (with a SSA of ∼140 m2 g−1) using MOFs as both the precursor and the self-sacrificing template, as shown in Fig. 1d.8 The templates can be removed by annealing or using suitable chemical agents that won't react with the target materials.
Additionally, heat decomposition provides an efficient and simple route to fabricate a porous structure. Usually, unstable nanostructured precursors such as Co(CO3)0.5(OH)·0.11H2O nanobelt arrays are heated, decomposed, and turned into metal oxides with mesoporous structures.9
2.2 Ultrathin 2D nanostructures
As for 2D nanostructures, Ni(OH)2, Co(OH)2 and their composite layered double hydroxides (LDHs) are familiar materials. LDHs are a class of ionic lamellar compounds composed of positively charged brucite-like layers with metal cations occupying the centers of edge-sharing octahedra and hydroxide ions connecting at the vertices. Thus, the nature of the layered structure of hydroxides provides a feasible route to make ultrathin iron triad nanosheets.
We could directly produce ultrathin sheets by controlling the growth of the metal hydroxide and preventing the thin layers from stacking. For example, Zhu et al. synthesized α-Ni(OH)2 sheets (∼2 nm in thickness) via a microwave-assisted liquid-phase growth under low-temperature atmospheric conditions. After heat treatment, the corresponding NiO ultrathin nanosheets were obtained.10 The process is simply illustrated in Fig. 2a. It was believed that the rapid microwave heating could facilitate a super saturation of the reactant species, leading to the instantaneous formation of ultrafine nanocrystals, which would then self-assemble spontaneously via an intrinsic driving force, creating a lamellar structure with 2D anisotropic growth. More thin sheets of only five-atom thickness could be obtained under a very slow liquid-phase growth rate.1 The detail about the seed attachment and growth is shown in Fig. 2b.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic diagram of the formation of Ni(OH)2 and NiO nanosheets of ∼2 nm in thickness (ref. 10, copyright 2014 American Association for the Advancement of Science), (b) schematic diagram of the 2D oriented attachment for the formation of a five-atom-thickness Co(OH)2 ultrathin layer (ref. 1, copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH), (c) schematic diagram of exfoliated LDH monolayers dispersed in a colloidal solution by inter-layer anions and water molecules (ref. 11, copyright 2014 Nature Publishing group), (d) illustration of the synthesis of rGO–Fe(0)–Fe3O4 and rGO–Fe(0) sheets (reproduced from ref. 2 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Considering the layered structure of the hydroxides, the liquid-exfoliation method can peel 2D sheets into ultrathin 2D sheets. As shown in Fig. 2c, metal hydroxides and oxyhydroxides are composed of edge-sharing octahedral MO6 layers. The anions and solvation molecules within the interlayer, which could enlarge the inter-layer distance (from d1 to d2), can be used for exfoliation. A typical exfoliation process includes adding Br−, exchanging Br− with NO3−, redispersing in degassed formamide, and obtaining monolayers.11
As is known, graphene, constructed from sp2 carbon atoms arranged in hexagonal rings, can be used as a template to produce ultrathin 2D composite sheets. As represented in Fig. 2d, Fe3O4 NPs were intercalated in reduced graphene oxide (rGO) layers and subsequently converted to Fe(0) by thermal annealing at different temperatures in a H2/Ar atmosphere, forming the rGO–Fe(0)–Fe3O4 and the rGO–Fe(0) sheets.2
2.3 Complex 3D nanostructures
Complex 3D nanostructures have emerged as transformative constructions due to their high SSA, special spatial stability, and more reaction cavities, and can be fabricated by many routes. Some hierarchical 3D structures can be obtained through one-pot solution methods. As shown in Fig. 3a, the hollow structure was formed using glycerol/water (oil/water) particles as soft templates in a quasi-micro-emulsion system. The urchin-like hollow structure was then prepared through further epitaxial growth of 1D FeOOH from the initial shell and the removal of inner glycerol.12 Besides this, we can roll the 2D sheets into 3D tubes or cones. For example, Co(OH)2 thin nanosheets can be turned into 3D nanocones by rolling, while their interlayer spacing can be adjusted by intercalating different anions (dodecylsulfate, benzoate, or nitrate).13
 Fig. 3  (a) Morphological evolution process and a TEM image of the urchin-like hierarchical α-FeOOH sphere (ref. 12, copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH), (b) illustrative scheme for the synthesis of a peptide–Co3O4 hybrid nanowire array (ref. 14, copyright 2010 American Chemical Society), (c) schematic diagram of the growth of CNTs on graphene sheets that were functionalized using amines (ref. 15, copyright 2013 American Chemical Society), (d) schematic diagram of the fabrication of 3D CNT–NC nanocomposites through an aerosol spray drying process followed by thermal annealing (ref. 16, copyright 2014 American Chemical Society). 
At present, researchers like to build 3D structures with the aid of hard templates such as carbon cloth, nickel foam, fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) glass, metal, and even organic substrates. One example for the formation of a peptide–Co3O4 hybrid nanowire (NW) array is illustrated in Fig. 3b. Peptide NWs were prepared by treating an amorphous diphenylalanine film with aniline vapor at an elevated temperature. They were used as templates and hybridized with Co3O4 NCs through the reduction of cobalt ions in a NaBH4 aqueous solution.14 Undoubtedly, one amazing idea for constructing 3D structures is to combine 2D sheets with 1D structures, such as combining graphene and carbon nanotubes (CNTs). Vadahanambi et al. synthesized 3D structures with CNTs standing vertically on graphene sheets and iron oxide NPs decorated on both the graphene and the CNTs (Fig. 3c).15 The key point was to add ferrocene (one kind of catalyst for the formation of CNTs) into the fresh amino-functionalized graphene under microwave irradiation to produce the iron oxide and CNTs.15
The simplest method to fabricate a 3D structure is to mix existing 0D, 1D, or 2D structures together. As shown in Fig. 3d, aerosol droplets composed of Fe3O4 NCs and 1D CNTs were condensed into a solidified 3D nanocomposite after annealing.16
3. Hybridization and surface functionalization
The structure and the composition are two key factors that influence the physical or chemical properties of the nanomaterials. The above structural design provides an important route for improving the properties. Functionalization of nanomaterials is also an effective way to make up for the intrinsic defects of materials by introducing extra organic or inorganic components. For instance, we can coat metal oxide nanomaterials with an amorphous carbon layer to improve their conductivity and structural stability. We can also introduce Ag to form a Ni@Ag core–shell structure to replace nickel NPs for better conductivity. Sometimes, we need to cap the inorganic NPs with DNA or other organic molecules for use as biomaterials, adsorbents or other applications. Herein, we roughly group these newly formed inorganic hybrid nanomaterials as one kind of functionalization, and surface functionalization with organic molecules as another kind.
3.1 Inorganic hybrid nanomaterials
Carbon coating is a simple, low-cost, and high-efficiency modification approach to improve conductivity, keep the nanostructure stable, and prevent some components from oxidation. The selectable carbon sources include glucose, dopamine, aniline, and other small organic molecules. Usually, a thin carbon-rich polymer layer forms on the surface of the nanomaterials by polymerization of the carbon source, which will generate a carbon layer later in a protective atmosphere after annealing.17 As carbon materials can be doped with boron, nitrogen and other heteroatoms, we can achieve a N-, or B-doped carbon coating by choosing a boron source (B2H6, NaBC24H20, etc.) or a nitrogen source (NH3, pyridine, urea, etc.). Because the doping could break the electroneutrality and create many active sites, it can enhance the electrical properties of carbon-based materials.18
To keep some voids between the inorganic nanomaterial and the surface carbon layer, a temporary interlayer such as a silica layer can be introduced. As shown in Fig. 4a, the Fe2O3 NPs were first coated with a silica layer through the hydrolysis of tetraethoxysilane (TEOS). Then the α-Fe2O3@SiO2 NPs were coated with polymerized dopamine and were converted to FeOx@SiO2@C after annealing at 700 °C for 5 h under Ar. Finally, the FeOx@C yolk–shell NPs were obtained after washing with NaOH for 12 h to remove the silica layer. By adjusting the thickness of the silica layer, the void space can be optimized for improved electrochemical performance.19
 Fig. 4  (a) Illustration of the synthesis of FeOx@C yolk–shell structures (ref. 19, copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH), (b) schematic illustration of the formation of iron nanocomposites with fish scale-like iron nanosheets supported on graphene (ref. 20, copyright 2013 American Chemical Society), (c) schematic illustration of the fabrication of a ZnO@LDH core–shell nanowire array and a TEM image of the sample (ref. 22, copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH), (d) schematic illustration of the in situ growth of Au NPs in preformed hexaniobate nanoscrolls that are partially filled with Fe3O4 NPs (ref. 25, copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH). 
Besides carbon coating, carbon-based hybrid materials can also be prepared using a carbon material (graphene, CNTs, carbon cloth, etc.) as a substrate. A facile strategy was reported to prepare fish scale-like Fe sheets supported on graphene with a high SSA of ∼218 m2 g−1 (Fig. 4b). Firstly, the 2D fish scale-like polyaniline (PANI) on graphene oxide (GO) was prepared via in situ polymerization. After the carbonization, the scale-like pyrolytic carbon nanosheets formed on the GO sheets. Meanwhile, Fe3+ cations were adsorbed onto the PANI–GO composite via electrostatic interactions with the nitrogen and oxygen-containing functional groups on PANI and GO. The adsorbed Fe3+ ions and GO were then reduced to metallic iron and graphene by the pyrolytic carbon from the PANI. Obviously, PANI served both as the reducing agent and the template.20
Other heterogeneous materials (noble metals, semiconductors, etc.) have also been used to form hybrid nanocomposites.21 Using prepared nanostructures as cores, they can be coated uniformly by further electrochemical deposition or hydrothermal (solvothermal) growth. As shown in Fig. 4c, the ZnO@CoNi-LDH nanoarray was synthesized by using ZnO NWs grown on a FTO substrate as a template and coating with LDH nanoflakes through an electro-synthetic route.22 One-pot mixing could also be useful to synthesize hybrid nanomaterials. Unlike multiple steps for core–shell structures, the various metal ions should be mixed in the solvent prior to the chemical reaction to make sure that the composition is uniform.23
Both the galvanic replacement and the nanoscale Kirkendall effect described above for hollow structures can also be applied for hybrid inorganic nanocomposites by controlling the reaction process. For example, hollow chains of nickel sulfide were prepared by total sulfidation, while the Ni@Ni3S2 peapod-like structure was achieved by partial sulfidation.24 As is known, 2D sheets can roll into 1D hollow tubes. If some heterogeneous NPs are embedded in the tubes, some fantastic peapod-like hybrid nanocomposites would be produced. For example, Adireddy et al. synthesized partially filled hexaniobate nanoscrolls with Fe3O4 and Au NPs, forming bifunctional peapod-like structures as illustrated in Fig. 4d.25
3.2 Surface functionalization with organic molecules
In recent years, we have become familiar with iron oxide NPs modified by polymers for their biological applications. Although the polymer coating is very sensitive to temperature and easily loses its stability at high temperature, studies on polymer coatings with small organic molecules play a great role in the fields of energy and environment protection. For energy materials, coating or mixing with a conducting polymer such as polypyrrole (PPy) is an efficient way to enhance the conductivity and flexibility of nanomaterials, and a feasible way to produce carbon layers by annealing. For nano-adsorbents of metal ions or organic pollutants, the organic coating will make the adsorbents disperse more stably in solution as it creates a steric repulsion to balance the attractive forces, such as magnetic or van der Waals forces. Furthermore, the linked long-chain molecules also provide more active sites for adsorption.
Referring to chemical functionalization, self-polymerization is a commonly used method.26 In Fig. 5a, the Fe3O4@polydopamine (PDA) core–shell nanocomposite was achieved through the in situ self-polymerization of dopamine.26 The thickness of the polymer layers can be adjusted by varying the solution conditions, such as pH. The self-polymerization method can also be used to fabricate outer layers for 3D structures. As illustrated in Fig. 5b, a CoO nanowire array grown on nickel foam was coated with PPy through the self-polymerization of pyrrole monomers. PPy was immobilized onto the nanowire array based on a simple chemical polymerization by using ammonium persulfate (APS) as the oxidant and p-toluenesulfonic acid (p-TSA) as the doping agent.27
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of Fe3O4@PDA nanocrystals (ref. 26, copyright 2014 American Chemical Society), (b) representative synthesis of a well-aligned CoO nanowire array grown on 3D nickel foam with PPy firmly anchored to each nanowire surface (ref. 27, copyright 2013 American Chemical Society), (c) schematic diagram of the production of polymer-stabilized nanoclusters via the chemisorption of poly(acrylic acid-co-propargyl acrylate) to Fe3O4 NPs and functionalization with an azide-modified indocyanine green derivative (azICG), attached using a copper(I)-catalyzed azide alkyne cycloaddition (CuAAC) reaction (ref. 28, copyright 2013 American Chemical Society), (d) functional polymers are grafted onto an inorganic core of iron oxide through an anchoring group; groups that can be used to anchor polymers on iron oxide particle surfaces (ref. 29, copyright 2010 Nature Publishing Group). 
Most nanomaterials synthesized using solution methods have residual chemicals on their surfaces such as hydroxyl, carboxyl, or other functional groups, which can link other organic molecules to make chemisorption feasible. As shown in Fig. 5c, Fe3O4 NPs were stabilized by poly(acrylic acid-co-propargyl acrylate) by mixing them together and stirring for a time. Further grafting was carried out via organic reactions to form fluorescent nanoclusters.28 As for chemisorption, hydroxyl groups on the surface of iron oxide NPs play an important role in chemical functionalization; they serve as binders to immobilize organic molecules such as dopamine, amine, cysteine, phosphonic acid, carboxylic acid, and trimethoxy silane as shown in Fig. 5d.29 The ligands obtained using these organic molecules could be further used to anchor polymers.
Most inorganic nanomaterials are synthesized by adding some surfactants or organic reagents and the residual organic molecules adhering on the surface are hard to wash away. Although inorganic NPs that are stabilized by surface functionalization with organic molecules are better dispersed in solutions, sometimes the molecules cause poor electronic conductivity. Ligand exchange is an easy way to remove these unpopular molecules and can be used to replace long alkyl-chains with short ones to eliminate the disadvantages. For example, the capping oleylamine molecules can be removed by stirring the NPs in n-butylamine for several days.30
4. Applications in energy and the environment
Recent intriguing work about iron triad nanomaterials in the fields of energy and environment, reminds us of the above summarized approaches for structural design and functionalization, and explains clearly the relationship between the structures and their properties.
4.1 Electrode materials in energy
This part introduces iron triad nanomaterials with applications focusing on electrode materials in lithium-ion batteries and supercapacitors. It will emphasize the importance of the structural design and functionalization in improving the electrochemical properties. The enhanced electrochemical performances require the iron triad electrode materials to have better electrical conductivity, higher SSA, and improved structural stability, which would be the criteria when designing optimal structures and functionalization.

4.1.1 Lithium-ion batteries. 
The transitional metal oxides and sulfides can deliver reversible capacities between 500 and 1000 mA h g−1 as their reaction mechanism includes both lithium ion insertion/extraction and a cyclic redox process. Take the low-cost and non-toxic hematite (Fe2O3), for example. It yields a total theoretical capacity of 1007 mA h g−1 from the formation of Fe0 from Fe3+, much higher than the traditional anode material of graphite (∼372 mA h g−1).
All metal oxides (Fe2O3, Fe3O4, Co3O4, CoO, etc.) and sulfides (NiS, CoS, FeS2, etc.) can be used as anode active materials. Allowing for increasing charge/discharge rates in LIBs, nanostructures with a high SSA will benefit the transfer of Li-ion flux through the liquid electrolyte/nanosized electrode material interface. Additionally, some nanostructures with shorter path lengths for electron and ion transport would also improve the charge/discharge rate by eliminating the disadvantages of oxides and sulfides of poor conductivity. That's why the porous, hollow, ordered mesoporous and other hierarchical nanostructures are used in LIBs.31 Besides this, the electrode materials suffer badly from an irreversible volume expansion and easily pulverized structures during the lithiation and delithiation processes. Experiments have confirmed that the unstable structural arrangement after the first lithiation is unfavorable for electronic transport.32 That is, better electrode materials prefer more stable nanostructures.
To meet the requirements for a high SSA, a short electronic-transfer path, and a stable structure, 1D nanostructures with small diameters have their advantage, because they can't aggregate or curl easily like 0D NPs or 2D sheets.33 Hollow, porous, hierarchical and other 3D structures are also good choices. Meanwhile, some carbon materials such as CNTs or graphene can be mixed in to improve the electrical conductivity of the nanomaterials. For example, we designed bowl-like Ni3S2 NPs wrapped by rGO sheets (Fig. 6a), that showed an enhanced cycle stability with a specific capacity of 443 mA h g−1 after 500 cycles, while Ni3S2 hollow chains faded dramatically to 147 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles.6 The graphene wrapper improves the conductivity and also acts as a mechanical buffer for the volume expansion of Ni3S2 during cycling. More importantly, a bowl-like hollow structure excludes the unnecessary void space in conventional hollow particles, thus allowing the packing of more active materials per volume. The tap density of LIBs can be increased.7 There is another example using carbon materials to form a hybrid nanocomposite. Fe3O4 NPs of ∼5–7 nm in size were decorated on CNTs to form a sheath layer, which gave a reversible capacity of over 800 mA h g−1.34 As shown in Fig. 6b, a little volume expansion without any structural destruction could be observed by comparing the TEM images before and after cycles. Obviously, the poor intrinsic electrical conductivity of metal sulfides or oxides and their structural stability both can be improved by introducing CNTs or graphene.
 Fig. 6  (a) Ni3S2 bowl-like structures wrapped by rGO sheets with a TEM image of one particle inserted (ref. 6, copyright 2014 Elsevier), (b) TEM images of Fe3O4 sheath/CNTs at high and low magnification before (above) and post cycling in LIBs (below) (ref. 34, copyright 2013 American Chemical Society), (c) TEM image showing interweaved networks of CNT–Fe3O4 nanocomposites, and a schematic illustration of the volume expansion and SEI formation during cycling (ref. 16, copyright 2014 American Chemical Society), (d) illustration of the nanoengineering principles of the PPy-coated Fe2O3@C multifunctional composites and a scheme of the formation of the stable SEI film (ref. 35, copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH). 
Among various hybrid nanomaterials, 3D architectures assembled from 0D and 1D structures (Fig. 6c), are becoming popular as this kind of structure can shorten the ion and electron transfer routes, bear volume changes, and decrease compositional segregation.16 The PPy-functionalized Fe2O3@C nanocomposite as illustrated in Fig. 6d shows a stable cycle performance because the PPy coating bridges the Fe2O3 NPs and the tubular mesoporous carbon together into a larger unit, which prevents the aggregation of NPs and maintains the structural integrity of the active materials, in addition to effectively enhancing the electronic conductivity and keeping the stability of the as-formed solid–electrolyte interface (SEI) films.35


4.1.2 Supercapacitors. 
As one kind of supercapacitor, pseudocapacitors provide a high specific capacitance using a fast reversible multi-electron redox reaction on the surface of the electrode material (Ni(OH)2, Co(OH)2, NiO, Co3O4, CoO, etc.). As the charge storage only occurs on the surface or near the surface, ultrathin 2D freestanding nanosheets have aroused great attention as electrode materials in supercapacitors (Fig. 7a).10 When the sheets are too thin, they tend to curl and form other structures such as tubes or cones (Fig. 7b).36 Sometimes, the newly formed 3D structure also showed considerable SSA. But sometimes, the curl or aggregation will have adverse effect on their properties. To prevent further curling or aggregation and to keep their contact with the electrolyte, surface stabilizers or assisted substrates can be introduced.23,36,37 Carbon cloth and nickel foam are two kinds of typical substrates, as they have rough surfaces, a high stability, structural flexibility, and good conductivity.23,37 Considering smooth electrolyte flow and faster reaction kinetics, porous structures are beneficial to electrochemical performance (Fig. 7c).37
 Fig. 7  (a) α-Ni(OH)2 ultrathin nanosheets (ref. 10, copyright 2014 Nature Publishing), (b) Co(OH)2 nanocones, formed by curling sheets (ref. 36, copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH), (c) Co3O4 nanowires with a brush-like morphology, grown on carbon fiber paper. A TEM image of porous nanowires is inserted (ref. 37, copyright 2012 American Chemical Society). (d) Network-like 3D structure of nickel and cobalt compound arrays with a structural illustration inserted (ref. 17, copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH). 
With the poor conductivity of the oxides and hydroxides, these electrode materials show limited electrochemical stability at a high current density. To increase the electron transfer, other components (CNTs, graphene, conductive polymers or metal compounds) can be introduced to form hybrid nanocomposites.27 Nickel–cobalt LDH nanosheets and nickel–cobalt–aluminum layered hydroxides (LHs) have been prepared as efficient electrode materials. In addition, using 2D ultrathin sheets can also improve poor electrical conductivity. For example, an all-solid-state asymmetric supercapacitor made from β-Co(OH)2 single-layer sheets (only five atoms in layer thickness) achieved a high cell voltage of 1.8 V and an exceptional energy density of 98.9 W h kg−1 at an ultrahigh power density of 17981 W h kg−1. Also, this integrated nanodevice exhibited excellent cyclability with 93.2% capacitance retention after 10000 cycles.1
Some scientists have mixed two or three of the strategies of structural design and functionalization mentioned above to improve the electrochemical properties. They formed multi-component electrode materials with complex 3D structures, such as nanohybrids of NiAl LDHs–MWNTs–Ni foam or carbon-coated CoNi3O4 nanoarrays with a network-like structure on a stainless steel substrate (Fig. 7d).17,38


4.1.3 Other applications in energy. 
The oxides (NiO, Fe2O3, etc.) of the iron triad have been studied as photoelectrode materials in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), one kind of photovoltaic device. More interestingly, the sulfides (NiS, CoS, etc.) have been verified as prospective Pt-free counter electrodes (CEs), as they have high catalytic activities towards the redox couple of I3−/I− in DSSCs.39 Yu et al. grew 3D nickel sulfide and cobalt sulfide hierarchical nanospheres on F-doped SnO2 substrates as CEs for DSSCs, showing power conversion efficiencies of 6.81% and 6.59%, respectively, approaching an efficiency of 6.85% based on the sputtering Pt CE.39
In addition, iron pyrite (FeS2) is an ideal abundant photovoltaic material that can be substituted for silicon, which may accelerate the development of flexible cells and wearable devices. As FeS2 is thermodynamically unstable, its functionalization becomes important. Researchers used trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO) in their reaction system to modify the product and synthesized a pyrite film that was stable in air for over one-year. This indicated that the TOPO passivated both the iron and the sulfur atoms on the surface of the FeS2 nanocrystals.40
The iron triad materials can also be used as electrocatalysts in fuel cells and metal–air batteries. Metal oxide NPs (Co3O4, Fe2O3, NiO, etc.) supported on carbon materials could replace traditional expensive Pt catalysts for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) in alkaline media. The components and sizes of the NPs are the key factors for battery properties. Sun et al. synthesized a series of sub-10 nm NPs loaded on commercial carbon, among which MnxFe3−xO4 NPs showed an efficiency comparable to a commercial Pt catalyst.41
Obviously, the prepared oxide or sulfide nanopowder would be spin-coated on substrates in the form of 2D films to assemble devices. To eliminate the influence of particle dispersity, organic binders, and some operating techniques, we can grow the nanomaterials directly onto suitable substrates for better conductivity. We can even design optimal structures providing a high SSA and special exposed crystal planes. For example, Zhao et al. developed flexible mesoporous iron oxide nanopyramid arrays with a high SSA of ∼175 m2 g−1 on flexible Ti foil. The integration of plasmonic gold with 3D nanopyramids remarkably improves the performance of the photoelectrochemical conversion.42

4.2. Adsorbents and nanocatalysts in the environment
Iron triad adsorbents and nanocatalysts in the environment concentrate on structures with high SSA and the adsorption sites, which can be enhanced by surface functionalization. The detailed examples further demonstrate the importance of structural fabrication and functionalization.

4.2.1 Adsorption and degradation of harmful inorganic ions. 
Researchers have used iron based nanomaterials (Fe2O3, Fe3O4, FeOOH, etc.) to remove toxic ions from wastewater, in view of their environmental benignity, natural abundance, and low cost. Adsorption is one application considering their remarkable properties such as high SSA, rich adsorbing active species, and ideal components affording extra lone pairs of electrons to meet the unoccupied electronic levels of some metal ions. The components have a direct impact on the removal efficiency. For example, Zhang et al. reported the fast Cr(VI) removal from wastewater by iron oxide submicron wires and confirmed that most of the Cr(VI) was reduced by Fe(0) in the Fe2O3 wires to Cr(III) rather than adsorbed onto the wires.43
Many pollutants, such as heavy metal ions, radioactive waste, toxic gases, and organic dye molecules, can be adsorbed and removed by choosing suitable nanostructures.12,15 Mesoporous, hierarchical, or hollow structures, are usually used for their high SSA. Nowadays, continuous efforts have being made to prepare complex adsorbents with 3D nanostructures assembled using low-dimensional building blocks, which could give adsorption cavities, avoid aggregation of NPs, and have a long service life. The 3D structures can be prepared directly. For instance, urchin-like α-FeOOH hollow spheres were synthesized in a quasi-micro-emulsion system with a high surface area of 96.9 m2 g−1 as shown in Fig. 8a, showing excellent water treatment performance towards organic dyes and heavy metal ions.12 We can also combine extra materials (low-toxicity, stable and with a high-SSA, such as CNTs or graphene) to fabricate 3D structures. Oh and his coworkers prepared 3D structures using CNTs standing on graphene sheets with iron oxide NPs decorated on both carbon materials (Fig. 8b), which showed excellent absorption of As(III) for removal from contaminated water due to its high surface-to-volume ratio and the open pore network of the 3D nanostructures.15
 Fig. 8  (a) SEM and TEM (the inset) images of urchin-like α-FeOOH hollow spheres (ref. 12, copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH), (b) 3D nanostructures with CNTs vertically grown on graphene and decorated with iron oxide NPs. The corresponding structure model was inserted (ref. 15, copyright 2013 American Chemical Society). 
Furthermore, to improve the adsorbing capabilities, organic functional groups, polymers, or biomolecules rich in elements with lots of lone pairs such as N, C, O, S or X (X = Cl, Br, I), could be modified onto the surfaces of the adsorbents. Sometimes, iron oxide NPs were coated by silica for further covalent grafting. Harwood et al. synthesized neocuproine-functionalized SiO2-coated maghemite NPs with a Cu(II) extraction efficiency of up to ∼99% from a 12 ppm aqueous solution at pH = 2.44 Thanks to the fast development of CNTs and graphene, the surface modification of carbon materials can be simply achieved via covalent linkage or non-covalent interactions (π-stacking).45 Iron oxide NPs can also be immobilized on CNTs or graphene to prevent them from aggregating during adsorption.2
When using or mixing magnetic nanomaterials as adsorbents for removal of heavy metal ions or organic pollutants, a big reward is that we can apply magnetic separation instead of filtration or centrifugation for the collection of the adsorbents.2,15


4.2.2 Adsorbents and catalysts for organic pollutants. 
Fe(0) nanomaterials have been used in removing chlorinated hydrocarbons (4-chlorophenol, pentachlorophenol, phenol, etc.) for many years, not only as reducing agents but also as active agents to produce molecular oxygen in air via anaerobic removal. In order to prevent Fe(0) NPs from oxidization, Fe@Fe2O3 NPs have been used instead.46 Ni(0) nanomaterials are also popular for removing organic molecules (nitrophenol, nitrobenzene, etc.) via hydrogenation. Besides this, iron oxide and cobalt oxide are common adsorbents and photocatalysts for the degradation of dyes and other organic molecules (rhodamine B, methylene blue, isopropanol, etc.).47
Similarly to adsorbents, better catalysts should provide considerable contact interfaces with pollutants. Accordingly, nanostructures with high SSAs are more suitable for nanocatalysts, and that is why so many tiny NPs, and hollow, mesoporous or hierarchical nanomaterials have been used as catalysts. Compared with preparing complex hierarchical structures, a simple way is to mix (grow) nanocatalysts with (on) some kind of material with a high SSA (graphene is always the best choice).
Sometimes, other materials can be used to form multi-component heterostructures to improve the catalytic properties. For example, Fe2O3/SnO2 hollow particles fabricated via the Kirkendall effect showed an enhanced photocatalytic activity compared to pure Fe2O3 or commercial SnO2, owing to the effective electron hole separation at the interfaces of Fe2O3 and SnO2.48 Noble metals (Pt, Ag, Pd, etc.) are also used to form alloy NPs or even polyhedrons to improve the catalysis of the iron triad. For example, Pt–Ni nanodendrites showed a high hydrogenation activity while multiply twinned AgNi NPs showed excellent catalytic activity in the reduction of 4-nitrophenol and 4-nitroaniline to amines.49,50 In addition, the ferromagnetic components (Fe, Co, Ni, Fe3O4 and γ-Fe2O3) play an important role in collecting pollutants via their magnetic separation.3

5. Conclusions and outlook
Iron triad nanomaterials show great potential for future industrialization due to their low cost, nature abundance, flexible synthesis, and versatile applications. In this review, we introduce typical approaches for fabricating three kinds of nanostructures with a high specific surface area (hollow and porous structures, ultrathin 2D sheets, and complex 3D structures) based on iron triad nanomaterials (for a summary of the SSA values for the three typical nanostructures, see the ESI†), such as the galvanic replacement method and the nanoscale Kirkendall effect. Moreover, hybridization and surface functionalization, such as forming 3D complex structures and heterostructure hybrid nanomaterials, are summarized to further improve their properties and overcome their intrinsic disadvantages to give better conductivity, enhanced structural stability, shortened electron-transfer paths, or more adsorption sites for applications in the fields of energy and environment protection. Combined with recent intriguing work, these strategies are discussed and analyzed in detail. Energy and environment protection are two hot issues nowadays. Studies on structures and functionalization will promote the further application of nanomaterials.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the financial support of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (11079002, 51102005, 51472014 & 51438011), the Foundation for the Author of National Excellent Doctoral Dissertation of China (201331), the Program for New Century Excellent Talents in University (NCET-13-0032), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities.
Notes and references
S. Gao, Y. Sun, F. Lei, L. Liang, J. Liu, W. Bi, B. Pan and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 12789–27939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Bhunia, G. Kim, O. Noonan and H. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 9888–9890 RSC .
H.-Y. Kang and H. P. Wang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2013, 47, 7380–7387 CAS .
M. H. Oh, T. Yu, S.-H. Yu, B. Lim, K.-T. Ko, M.-G. Willinger, D.-H. Seo, B. H. Kim, M. G. Cho, J.-H. Park, K. Kang, Y.-E. Sung, N. Pinna and T. Hyeon, Science, 2013, 340, 964–968 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Nai, Y. Tian, X. Guan and L. Guo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16082–16091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhou, J. Zheng, Y. Yue and L. Guo, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 428–435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liang, X.-Y. Yu, H. Zhou, H. B. Wu, S. Ding and X. W. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 126, 13017–13021 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Zou, X. Hu, Z. Li, L. Qie, C. Hu, R. Zeng, Y. Jiang and Y. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6622–6628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, H. Xia, L. Lu and J. Lin, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1425–1432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, C. Cao, S. Tao, W. Chu, Z. Wu and Y. Li, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Song and X. Hu, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4477 CAS .
B. Wang, H. Wu, L. Yu, R. Xu, T.-T. Lim and X. W. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1111–1116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, Z. H. Dong, Z. G. Wang, F. X. Zhang and J. Jin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2758–2764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ryu, S.-W. Kim, K. Kang and C. B. Park, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 159–164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Vadahanambi, S.-H. Lee, W.-J. Kim and I.-K. Oh, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2013, 47, 10510–10517 CAS .
X. Jia, Y. Cheng, Y. Lu and F. Wei, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9265–9273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, J. Jiang, Z. Sun, J. Luo, Z. Fan, X. Huang, H. Zhang and T. Yu, Small, 2014, 10, 2937–2945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, Z. Guo, W. Shen, Q. Xu, H. Liu and Y. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 5511–5521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, L. Zhou, O. Noonan, D. J. Martin, A. K. Whittaker and C. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 4337–4342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Long, T. Wei, J. Yan, L. Jiang and Z. Fan, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 11325–11332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-K. Sun, M.-J. Lee, C. S. Yoon, J. Hassoun, K. Amine and B. Scrosati, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1192–1196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shao, F. Ning, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 580–586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, L. Hu, Y. Yan, R. Che, M. Chen and L. Wu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1636–1646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhou, W. Chen, J. Nai, P. G. Yin, C. Chen and L. Guo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3678–3683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Adireddy, C. E. Carbo, T. Rostamzadeh, J. M. Vargas, L. Spinu and J. B. Wiley, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 4614–4617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-S. Lin, Z.-X. Cong, J.-B. Cao, K.-M. Ke, Q.-L. Peng, J. Gao, H.-H. Yang, G. Liu and X. Chen, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3876–3883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhou, Y. Zhang, Y. Li and J. Liu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2078–2085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Daniele, M. L. Shaughnessy, R. Roeder, A. Childress, Y. P. Bandera and S. Foulger, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 203–213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Boyer, M. R. Whittaker, V. Bulmus, J. Liu and T. P. Davis, NPG Asia Mater., 2010, 2, 23–30 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wu, S. C. Yang and H. Yang, ECS Trans., 2014, 61, 25–34 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Vu, Y. Qiang and A. Stein, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 1056–1085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kim, J.-H. Lee, S. Cho, Y. Kwon, I. In, J. Lee, N.-H. You, E. Reichmanis, H. Ko, K.-T. Lee, H.-K. Kwon, D.-H. Ko, H. Yang and B. Park, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6701–6712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tang, Y. Zhang, J. Deng, J. Wei, H. L. Tam, B. K. Chandran, Z. Dong, Z. Chen and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6111–6118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, Y. Wei, J. Wang, K. Jiang and S. Fan, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 818–823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Han, D. Li, W.-C. Li, C. Lei, Q. Sun and A.-H. Lu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1692–1700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, R. Ma, Y. Bando and T. Sasaki, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 4292–4302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. B. Rakhi, W. Chen, D. Cha and H. N. Alshareef, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2559–2567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, G. R. Williams, Z. Chang, M. Jiang, J. Liu, X. Lei and X. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 16304–16311 CAS .
J. Yang, C. Bao, K. Zhu, T. Yu, F. Li, J. Liu, Z. Liad and Z. Zou, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 4824–4826 RSC .
Y. Bi, Y. Yuan, C. L. Exstrom, S. A. Darveau and J. Huang, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4953–4957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, S. Zhang, Y.-X. Huang, L. Wu and S. Sun, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2947–2951 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Kong, J. Tang, C. Selomulya, W. Li, J. Wei, Y. Fang, Y. Wang, G. Zheng and D. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6822–6825 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, L. Chen, L. Zhang, S. Poyraz, Z. Guo, X. Zhang and J. Zhu, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 8036–8039 RSC .
A. Afsar, L. M. Harwood, M. J. Hudson, M. E. Hodsonb and E. J. Shaw, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 7477–7480 RSC .
V. Georgakilas, M. Otyepka, A. B. Bourlinos, V. Chandra, N. Kim, K. C. Kemp, P. Hobza, R. Zboril and K. S. Kim, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 6156–6214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ai, Z. Gao, L. Zhang, W. He and J. J. Yin, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2013, 47, 5344–5352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, M. Wen, Q. Wu and H. Fang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 6307–6313 CAS .
W. Wu, S. Zhang, F. Ren, X. Xiao, J. Zhou and C. Jiang, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4676–4684 RSC .
W. Wang, D. Wang, X. Liu, Q. Peng and Y. Li, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 2903–2905 RSC .
M. Kumar and S. Deka, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 16071–16081 CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: A list of abbreviations, details about the galvanic replacement reaction and the nanoscale Kirkendall effect, and a summary of the specific surface area (SSA) values for three typical nanostructures. See DOI: 10.1039/c5cs00033eThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

Wei Zhou
	Dr Wei Zhou received her PhD degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Beihang University under the supervision of Prof. Lin Guo in 2009. She worked as a visiting scholar in Prof. Hong Yang's group in University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC) from 2012–2013. Currently she is an Associate Professor at the School of Chemistry and Environment in Beihang University. Her research interests focus on iron triads (Fe, Co, Ni) and their compound nanomaterials for applications in energy, adsorption and catalysis.

Lin Guo
	Dr Lin Guo received his PhD in Materials Science and Engineering from Beijing Institute of Technology (BIT) in 1997. He worked as a visiting scholar in Prof. Shihe Yang's lab in Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST) in 1999. He worked in Dresden University of Technology with a Humboldt Fellowship for 2 years. Currently he is a Professor and the Vice Dean of the School of Chemistry and Environment in Beihang University. His research interests include the synthesis and characterization of sophisticated nanomaterials, high-strength nanomaterials with light weights, and functional nanomaterials for energy storage.

Key learning points
(1) Structural design of three typical structures with high specific surface areas.
(2) Feasible functionalization to enhance structural stability, conductivity and adsorption.
(3) Recent intriguing work about structural design and functionalization.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of the galvanic replacement reaction of Mn3O4 and Fe2O3, showing the localized dissolution of Mn3O4 and the surface precipitation of γ-Fe2O3 (ref. 4, copyright 2013 American Association for the Advancement of Science), (b) Ni3S2 nanobowls wrapped by rGO sheets, synthesized via the Kirkendall effect (ref. 6, copyright 2014 Elsevier), (c) schematic illustration of the formation procedure of bowl-like SnO2@C hollow particles (ref. 7, copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH), (d) schematic illustration for the preparation process of porous hollow ZnO/ZnFe2O4/C octahedra (ref. 8, copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic diagram of the formation of Ni(OH)2 and NiO nanosheets of ∼2 nm in thickness (ref. 10, copyright 2014 American Association for the Advancement of Science), (b) schematic diagram of the 2D oriented attachment for the formation of a five-atom-thickness Co(OH)2 ultrathin layer (ref. 1, copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH), (c) schematic diagram of exfoliated LDH monolayers dispersed in a colloidal solution by inter-layer anions and water molecules (ref. 11, copyright 2014 Nature Publishing group), (d) illustration of the synthesis of rGO–Fe(0)–Fe3O4 and rGO–Fe(0) sheets (reproduced from ref. 2 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Morphological evolution process and a TEM image of the urchin-like hierarchical α-FeOOH sphere (ref. 12, copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH), (b) illustrative scheme for the synthesis of a peptide–Co3O4 hybrid nanowire array (ref. 14, copyright 2010 American Chemical Society), (c) schematic diagram of the growth of CNTs on graphene sheets that were functionalized using amines (ref. 15, copyright 2013 American Chemical Society), (d) schematic diagram of the fabrication of 3D CNT–NC nanocomposites through an aerosol spray drying process followed by thermal annealing (ref. 16, copyright 2014 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Illustration of the synthesis of FeOx@C yolk–shell structures (ref. 19, copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH), (b) schematic illustration of the formation of iron nanocomposites with fish scale-like iron nanosheets supported on graphene (ref. 20, copyright 2013 American Chemical Society), (c) schematic illustration of the fabrication of a ZnO@LDH core–shell nanowire array and a TEM image of the sample (ref. 22, copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH), (d) schematic illustration of the in situ growth of Au NPs in preformed hexaniobate nanoscrolls that are partially filled with Fe3O4 NPs (ref. 25, copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of Fe3O4@PDA nanocrystals (ref. 26, copyright 2014 American Chemical Society), (b) representative synthesis of a well-aligned CoO nanowire array grown on 3D nickel foam with PPy firmly anchored to each nanowire surface (ref. 27, copyright 2013 American Chemical Society), (c) schematic diagram of the production of polymer-stabilized nanoclusters via the chemisorption of poly(acrylic acid-co-propargyl acrylate) to Fe3O4 NPs and functionalization with an azide-modified indocyanine green derivative (azICG), attached using a copper(I)-catalyzed azide alkyne cycloaddition (CuAAC) reaction (ref. 28, copyright 2013 American Chemical Society), (d) functional polymers are grafted onto an inorganic core of iron oxide through an anchoring group; groups that can be used to anchor polymers on iron oxide particle surfaces (ref. 29, copyright 2010 Nature Publishing Group).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Ni3S2 bowl-like structures wrapped by rGO sheets with a TEM image of one particle inserted (ref. 6, copyright 2014 Elsevier), (b) TEM images of Fe3O4 sheath/CNTs at high and low magnification before (above) and post cycling in LIBs (below) (ref. 34, copyright 2013 American Chemical Society), (c) TEM image showing interweaved networks of CNT–Fe3O4 nanocomposites, and a schematic illustration of the volume expansion and SEI formation during cycling (ref. 16, copyright 2014 American Chemical Society), (d) illustration of the nanoengineering principles of the PPy-coated Fe2O3@C multifunctional composites and a scheme of the formation of the stable SEI film (ref. 35, copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) α-Ni(OH)2 ultrathin nanosheets (ref. 10, copyright 2014 Nature Publishing), (b) Co(OH)2 nanocones, formed by curling sheets (ref. 36, copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH), (c) Co3O4 nanowires with a brush-like morphology, grown on carbon fiber paper. A TEM image of porous nanowires is inserted (ref. 37, copyright 2012 American Chemical Society). (d) Network-like 3D structure of nickel and cobalt compound arrays with a structural illustration inserted (ref. 17, copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) SEM and TEM (the inset) images of urchin-like α-FeOOH hollow spheres (ref. 12, copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH), (b) 3D nanostructures with CNTs vertically grown on graphene and decorated with iron oxide NPs. The corresponding structure model was inserted (ref. 15, copyright 2013 American Chemical Society).	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: A list of abbreviations, details about the galvanic replacement reaction and the nanoscale Kirkendall effect, and a summary of the specific surface area (SSA) values for three typical nanostructures. See DOI: 10.1039/c5cs00033e

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
