Bacterial cellulose: an encouraging eco-friendly nano-candidate for energy storage and energy conversion  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TA12536A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TA12536A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 5812-5842Bacterial cellulose: an encouraging eco-friendly nano-candidate for energy storage and energy conversion

        
          
            Lina 
            Ma
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Zhijie 
            Bi
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yun 
            Xue
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wei 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Qiying 
            Huang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lixue 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Yudong 
            Huang
          
          
        
      *c
aCollege of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Qingdao University, Qingdao 266071, P. R. China. E-mail: malina@qdu.edu.cn; zhanglx@qdu.edu.cn
bCollege of Physics, Qingdao University, Qingdao 266071, P. R. China
cMIIT Key Laboratory of Critical Materials Technology for New Energy Conversion and Storage, State Key Laboratory of Urban Water Resource and Environment, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 150001, P. R. China. E-mail: ydhuang.hit1@aliyun.com
Received 
      14th November 2019
    , Accepted 5th March 2020First published on 5th March 2020AbstractBacterial cellulose (BC), an eco-friendly nano-biomaterial, has attracted widespread attention due to its unique interconnected network structure and robust physical properties, such as high water holding capacity, large specific surface area, good chemical stability, environmental friendliness and remarkable mechanical strength. These fascinating features make BC an ideal candidate for fabricating highly versatile three-dimensional carbon nanomaterials and serving as a tunable flexible scaffold material. This review presents a comprehensive and systematic summary of the current developments of BC in electrochemical energy storage and conversion. We first briefly introduce the source, natural properties and microstructural features of BC and give the reason why it is suitable as a candidate material for energy storage and conversion. Then, we summarize the production processes of various BC-derived carbon nanofibers and their hybrids, including porous carbon nanofibers, doped carbon nanofibers, and carbon nanofiber-derived hybrid materials with carbon materials, metal oxides/hydroxides and conducting polymers. Moreover, we highlight several significant kinds of research studies for the applications of BC in energy storage (supercapacitors, lithium ion batteries, lithium–sulfur batteries, and sodium-ion batteries) and energy conversion (oxygen reduction reaction and hydrogen evolution reaction). Finally, we give some prospects on future directions, challenges and opportunities in this fascinating area of designing functional nanomaterials and flexible electrodes from BC for various energy systems.Lina MaLina Ma received her PhD from the Harbin Institute of Technology in 2018. She started as an associate professor at College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at Qingdao University in 2018. Her research interests focus on the design and controlled synthesis of conducting polymers and their carbon nanocomposites, and their applications in electrochemistry-related areas such as electrochromism, energy storage and conversion.Zhijie BiZhijie Bi received his PhD from the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2018. He started as a lecturer at College of Physics in Qingdao University in 2018. His research interests focus on solid electrolytes and solid-state batteries.Lixue ZhangLixue Zhang is a Professor of the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at Qingdao University. He received his PhD in Chemistry from the Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2009. His postdoc research in Germany was supported by the Alexander von Humboldt Research Fellowship for Postdoctoral Researchers. He worked at Qingdao Institute of Bioenergy and Bioprocess Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences as an associate professor in 2011. He joined Qingdao University in 2015 and was promoted to a full professor in 2017. His research interests are nanomaterial-based electrocatalysis and electroanalysis, and electrochemical energy storage and conversion (especially metal-air batteries).Yudong HuangYudong Huang received his PhD in 1993 from the Harbin Institute of Technology. He became full professor in 1997 and now he is the dean of school of chemistry and chemical engineering at Harbin Institute of Technology. He has published more than 760 papers on peer-reviewed journals and his work has been cited more than 8700 times. His research topics include the surface and interface modification of polymer composites, biopolymer materials, and sustainable and highly efficient energy-storage devices.
1. Introduction
With the rapid growth of global population, consumption of fossil fuels and severe environmental impacts,1–3 it is urgent to develop some sustainable and eco-friendly energy sources such as wind power, water power and solar energy.4–7 As the supply of these new energy forms is discontinuous and intermittent, and strongly depends on the natural environment and regional distribution, many researchers have dedicated to developing efficient energy storage and energy conversion to meet this challenge.5–10 As is well known, for realizing practical application, besides the high-level safety and high performance, it is significant to utilize abundant and green raw materials and design eco-friendly and simple processes, thus achieving low-cost, up-scalable and multi-functional energy devices.11–17 Among the various candidates, cellulose-based materials have attracted considerable attention and been demonstrated as constituents of numerous electrochemical energy storage and conversion devices.17
Cellulose, a water-insoluble polysaccharide consisting of (1 → 4) β-glycosidic linked glucose units, is the most abundant renewable biopolymer in nature.18,19 Statistically, the world production of cellulose is estimated to be about 100 billion metric tons every year,20 and it is widely used as paper, clothing, food and many other forms, changing every aspect of our daily lives. Bacterial cellulose (BC) represents an interesting type of cellulose that can be produced by fermentation of various microorganisms (Acetobacter xylinum, Pseudomonas, Rhizobium, E. coli, etc.) on a large scale at the low-cost level.21,22 BC was first reported by Adrian Brown in 1886,19 during his routine experiment; he found a solid mass to unexpectedly appear at the surface of the fermentation medium; the solid mass was later identified as cellulose and named as BC for the bacterial synthesis process; it is usually called the “mother” or “vinegar plant” and is widely utilized in home-made vinegar production. In fact, BC has long been used as the raw material of a popular dessert nata-de-coco. Similar to plant cellulose, BC is a polysaccharide with a β-1,4-glycosidic linkage and the molecular formula is (C6H10O5)n (Fig. 1b), while it displays several distinct advantages and gradually becomes the focus, which is reflected in the increasing number of publication papers in the past 20 years (Fig. 1c).
 Fig. 1  (a) Photograph of a BC slice. (b) Structure of BC. (c) The number of publications of BC from 2000 to 2019 (last update on August 28, 2019). (d) Schematic model of the plant cellulose fibrils (left) and the BC microfibers (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 27. (e) SEM and (f) TEM of the BC. Reproduced with permission from ref. 25. 
Currently, BC-derived materials are under a fast-developing stage and extensively used in biomedical applications, including artificial blood vessels, tissue-engineering scaffolds, wound dressings, food, cosmetics, paper-making (high quality paper), acoustics, optoelectronic devices, thermo-responsive applications (biosensors), multifunctional food ingredients (thickeners, stabilizers and texture modifiers) and energy devices.18,23,24
In contrast to conventional cellulose fibers, BC exhibits a more attractive microstructure and distinctive properties. Firstly, BC has an ultrafine nanosized three-dimensional (3D) fibrous network structure with diameters in the range of 10–100 nanometers (Fig. 1e and f),25 which are smaller by approximately 2 orders of magnitude than plant-based cellulosic fibers (∼10 μm), thus resulting in a higher specific surface area and higher porous structure.
Secondly, BC is highly pure, closing to 100% cellulose content, which is higher than that of 60–70% for plant tissues and fibers.26 In comparison to the plant cellulose with a schematic model (Fig. 1d), ultrafine network structured BC is an unbranched polymer with nanofibrils; nascent chains are first aggregated into crystallized subfibrils with a width of ∼1.5 nm, then cellulose molecular chains accumulate to form microfibrils, subsequently, long bundles are aligned parallel forming a ribbon structure in BC microfibers, and finally, the ultrafine BC ribbons (with a length of 1–9 μm) produce a dense reticulated structure, while the cell wall of plant cellulose is in the form of a more complex structure, including hemicellulose, lignin, and other impurities.27,28 Thirdly, it has a high-water holding capability (Fig. 1a, water content is about 5000 wt% of the fibers in BC) due to the hydroxyl groups on the surface.29 Fourthly, BC has excellent mechanical properties, and the tensile strength and Young's modulus can reach 20.8 GPa and 357.3 MPa, respectively.29 Additionally, BC also exhibits good thermal stability, excellent biodegradability, and biocompatibility.30 Last but not least, BC can be easily obtained on a large scale by a low-cost microbial fermentation process, and several tons of BC can be produced in china every day.22 Based on these unique features, BC has been utilized as a raw material to play diverse roles in energy devices, such as flexible substrates, porous carbon nanofibers (CNFs), doped CNFs, hybrid CNFs and separators/electrolytes, as shown in Scheme 1.
 Scheme 1  Schematic diagram of the BC structure and functional design for applications in energy storage and conversion. 
BC and its composites are widely believed to have enormous potential for application in energy devices. Although most of the previous reviews have summarized the fabrication and various applications of BC and its derived materials, comprehensive topics on the research of the structure–function relationship and systematic understanding of the advantages of the use of BC for the energy storage and conversion yet have not been fully described. This review mainly analyzes the relationship among the structure, characteristics, performance and application, as shown in Fig. 2, also summarizes very recent significant research studies of the current developments of BC in electrochemical energy storage and conversion, and builds a comprehensive overview (Scheme 1). We first briefly introduce the source, natural properties and microstructural features of BC and give the reason why it is suitable as a candidate material for the electrode and separator/electrolyte. Then, we summarize the production process of various CNF hybrids based on BC. Thirdly, we highlight several significant kinds of research studies for applications in energy storage and energy conversion, including supercapacitors, lithium ion batteries (LIB), lithium–sulfur batteries (Li–S), sodium-ion batteries (SIB), oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) and hydrogen evolution reaction (HER). Finally, existing problems and future directions for the development of BC based energy storage are further reviewed.
 Fig. 2  Summary of the structure–function relationship of BC for energy storage and conversion applications. 
2. Design and fabrication of diverse functional materials based on BC
BC, ribbon-shaped fibrils with around 100 nm in width and 100 μm in length, is secreted by several species of aforementioned bacteria, which are cultivated in aqueous nutrient media.31 The microstructure of BC can be regulated by changing the bacterial species and strains, the additives, the cultivation conditions and the post-processing methods. In terms of constituents, BC is almost pure cellulose without lignin and any other branched nanofibrils, thus resulting in a high degree of polymerization of 8000 and distinct crystallinity of 90%, respectively.27
From the view of microstructure, BC possesses an ultrafine nanosized 3D fibrous and entangled network-like structure, which provides a higher specific surface area and higher porous structure. Additionally, BC also exhibits excellent mechanical properties, good thermal stability, excellent biodegradability, and biocompatibility.30 Due to these unique features, BC can be utilized as a raw material via integrating it with electroactive materials or converting it into carbon materials to play diverse roles in energy devices, such as BC-based hybrid materials, BC-derived carbon materials or separators/electrolytes.
2.1 BC-derived hybrid materials
To meet the demand for wearable and portable electronics32,33 such as roll-up displays, bendable smart phones, flexible wireless sensors, integrated circuits and artificial skin, great interest has been shown in flexible energy devices.34–43 Flexible energy storage and conversion equipment represents promising multifunctional electronics. The main difference between the flexible and conventional devices is that the electrodes must possess certain foldability and stability.34–38 Therefore, the key challenge for fabricating well performing flexible electronics is to design bendable electrodes with the aim of guaranteeing both electrochemical characteristics and mechanical stability.38–43
Because of the high porosity and high aspect ratio, BC can be utilized as a template or supporting substrate and directly integrated with active materials (conductive carbon materials, metal oxides/hydroxides and conducting polymers) to construct flexible electrodes. It possesses several fascinating advantages over the traditional substrate, namely, (1) the design and fabrication strategies are general, like extrusion,44 vacuum filtration and freeze-drying,45 and could be applied to build 1D fibers, 2D papers/films, and 3D foams/aerogels, realizing various structures such as coating, embedding, and core@shell carbon-based composites. (2) The excellent mechanical properties of BC ensure flexible electrodes with high mechanical integrity upon bending and stretching. (3) The sufficient porosity and high hydrophilicity of BC increase the contact between electroactive materials and aqueous electrolytes, and provide diffusion channels for electrolyte ions. (4) The procedure is facile, environmentally friendly, low-cost and suitable for an industrial scale-up.

2.1.1 Hybrids with carbon materials. 
Currently, carbon materials are considered to be the most prospective electrode materials for industrialization.46 1D CNTs, CNFs and 2D RGO represent the most promisingly exploited carbon materials for flexible devices.47–49 1D structured CNTs have been developed to form flexible electrodes due to their fascinating advantages of high electrical conductivity, good chemical stability, high mechanical strength, and controllable regular pore structure.50 1D nanofibers can be produced from a BC/CNT mixture solution via wet spinning, and the entangled formation not only ensures long continuous conductive paths along the lengths of the CNF but also enables high flexibility.
RGO, a 2D carbon layer, has gained interest in developing flexible supercapacitors due to its good electrochemical stability, high theoretical specific area (2630 m2 g−1), high electrical conductivity (104 S cm−1) and remarkable mechanical properties. Low-cost and green 2D papers/films can be prepared by mixing BC with either RGO or CNT solution followed by filtration and drying or electrodeposition of nanocarbon on BC papers/films.33,51 As shown in Fig. 3, all these hybrids show high conductivity and enhanced mechanical properties.
 Fig. 3  The hybrids of BC with carbon materials. (a) One-step preparation of the covalently bonded BC/GO composite. (b) Electrical conductivity. (c and d) Stress–strain curves of (c) GO and (d) the BC/GO composite. The inset image shows the specimens before and after the stress–strain test. Reproduced with permission from ref. 51. (e–j) Fabrication process of BC papers coated with CNTs. (e) BC pellicle produced by culturing Gluconacetobacter xylinus. (f) Bleached pellicles. (g) Semi-transparent BC paper. (h) Vacuum filtering apparatus loaded with a BC paper. (i) Deposition of a CNT layer by the filtering process. (j) Flexible CNT-coated BC paper. Reproduced with permission from ref. 52. 
Furthermore, 3D aerogels/foams, as a promising class of nanostructured porous materials with low density, high specific surface area, low thermal conductivity, and high electrical conductivity, can be fabricated from a BC/carbon material mixture through freeze-drying and supercritical drying methods and they have been demonstrated to be good candidates for flexible devices. Hierarchically structured carbon aerogels obtained from BC/PI composites53 demonstrate excellent adsorption capacity, excellent recycling performance and superior compressive properties, and can be directly utilized as electrode active materials. These advantages are mainly attributed to the pores for fast ion diffusion, active sites for efficient charge adsorption, and crosslinked CNFs for rapid electron transport.


2.1.2 Hybrids with conducting polymers. 
Polypyrrole (PPy), polyaniline (PANI), polythiophene (PTH) and its derivative material poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) are the most promising conductive polymers because of the lightweight, cost-effectiveness, ease of synthesis, controllable electrical conductivity and environmental stability.54,55 Morphology well-controlled conducting polymer-cellulose composites with well-defined structures have been successfully designed and developed via in situ chemical or electrochemical polymerization,30,55,56 generating growing interest because of their new properties and enhanced performance, and they exhibit promising applications in corrosion protection, antistatic coating, and energy storage and electrical devices.30,57,58 Highly conductive core–sheath structured nanocomposites were prepared by wrapping a homogeneous layer of PPY,35,59 PANI,22 and PEDOT60 around BC nanofibers via in situ polymerization. The morphology can be controlled by adjusting the mass ratio, concentrations of the oxidant and dopant, reaction conditions, and solvents. These composites show high specific capacitance, which is attributed to the more porous structure and better doping of the nanocomposites. However, conducting polymers/BC composites also suffer from the drawbacks of the aggregation effect and volume change in the charge/discharge process.61
To further improve the conductivity and cycling stability, various strategies have been carried out. BC/nanocarbon based composites have received widespread attention attributed to the synergistic effect of the individual components. As shown in Fig. 4, various conducting polymers with BC/RGO nanocomposites are fabricated by an in situ culture method,40–42,45 BC fibres attached onto both the edge and surface of GO not only act as spacers to increase the electrolyte-accessible interface but also construct 3D interpenetrating networks to reinforce the composites. The incorporation of RGO effectively resolves the aggregation problem and poor conductivity of conducting polymers/BC to ensure high electron and ion transfer. The combination of the three compounds not only constructs a 3D electrical conduction path but also eliminates the negatives of the individual parts, including the restacking of GO layers and aggregation of the conducting polymer and BC nanofibers. The constructed composites feature a multilayer stacking structure without any obvious aggregation and exhibit the highest electrical conductivity.
 Fig. 4  The hybrids of BC with conducting polymers. (a) Schematic of the synthesis procedure of BC-PEDOT paper electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 60. (b) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process and structure of PPy@TOBC/rGO macrofibers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. (c–g) BC/GE/PANI hybrid. (c) The schematic illustration of the preparation process of BC/GE/PANI; (d) SEM image of BC/GE, (e) TEM image of BC/GE, (f) SEM image of BC/PANI, and (g) the SEM image of BC/GE/PANI (inset showing a photograph of a bent BC/GE/PANI sample). Reproduced with permission from ref. 63. 


2.1.3 Hybrids with metal-based composites. 
Transition metal oxides/hydroxides, as another kind of electrode material, can use fast and reversible faradaic reactions to contribute more storage charges, higher power density and energy density. However, they are always limited by low conductivity and poor rate performance. Therefore, it is vital to combine transition metal oxides with conducting polymer/carbon-based materials to form the composites, which is beneficial for the construction of electrode materials with high specific capacitance, excellent rate performance, and good cycling stability. Meanwhile, hybridizing BC with various kinds of metal oxides/hydroxides can also create a multi-functional and synergistic effect.
Our group has fabricated a free-standing Ni(OH)2/RGO/BC electrode via a rational combination of hydrothermal and filtration technology. The conductive RGO wrapped flowery Ni(OH)2 (Fig. 5a) is well integrated within the robust mechanically flexible BC substrate.64 RGO not only functions as a growth platform for the flowery architecture (Fig. 5b), but also serves as a buffering layer to repress and absorb the volumetric/structural alternation during the charge/discharge process. More importantly, the Ni(OH)2/RGO active material can immerse into the interior of BC uniformly and continuously, and retains the ordered porous structure (Fig. 5c), which provides a large mass loading, maintains good conductivity and facilitates fast electron transfer and ion diffusion. Zhang et al.65 prepared ultrathin K-birnessite typed MnO2 nanosheets coated onto the surface of BC by using a rapid and eco-friendly hydrothermal method (Fig. 5d), in which the BC serves as not only a bridging ligand to assemble the nanosized building units but also a reductant. Wu et al.66 fabricated nickel–cobalt layered double hydroxide/PANI/BC (NiCo-LDH/PANI/BC) hybrids, as shown in Fig. 5e–g, where the PANI acts as a “nanoglue” to immobilize NiCo-LDH onto the surface of PANI/BC nanofibers. The composites show excellent electrochemical performance and robust mechanical properties (Fig. 5h–l) because of the high hierarchical structure, numerous electroactive sites, unobstructed channels, 3D conductive network and induced synergistic effect.
 Fig. 5  The hybrids of BC with metal compounds. (a–c) Ni(OH)2/RGO/BC hybrid. (a) Schematic representation of the fabrication process of the Ni(OH)2/RGO/BC electrode. (b) High-resolution SEM images of Ni(OH)2/RGO/BC. (c) Cross-sectional SEM micrographs of Ni(OH)2/RGO/BC. Reproduced with permission from ref. 64. (d) Schematic illustration of the preparation process of ultrathin K-birnessite type MnO2 nanosheets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 65. (e–l) NiCo-LDH/PANI/BC hybrid. (e–g) Schematic illustration of the synthetic procedure of NiCo-LDH/PANI/BC and (e1–g1) the corresponding digital photographs; (h–l) digital photographs show the flexibility, foldability and toughness of NiCo-LDH/PANI/BC. Reproduced with permission from ref. 66. 
In these systems, each composition of the composites plays a crucial role in the excellent performance of the 3D architecture, chemically bonded hybrid composite electrodes. The BC is not only used as a substrate to ensure large mass loading and maintain high mechanical properties, but also provides efficient pore volume and rapid pathways for ion and electron transport, thus achieving high-performance bendable electrodes.25,67 Therefore, these positive results of BC-based hybrid composite electrode materials can inspire further work on exploiting these low-cost, eco-friendly biomaterials for high-performance supercapacitors.

2.2 BC-derived carbon materials
3D carbon nanomaterials including carbon aerogel, RGO foam and CNT sponge are considered to be the most attractive and promising materials attributed to their large specific surface area, hierarchical pore structure, good electrical conductivity and chemical stability.68,69 Currently, the most effective technologies for the fabrication of 3D carbon nanomaterials always have these major obstacles of complex equipment, prohibitive costs, environmentally unfriendly precursors or low production ability. Hence, it is urgent to develop a more facile and intensive approach for fabricating large-scale 3D carbon nanomaterials. Given the electrochemical properties and fabrication cost, the synthesis of 3D carbon materials derived from biomass precursors is attracting much interest due to their ease of fabrication, low cost, and environmental compatibility.70,71 BC and its derivatives can be converted into conductive 3D carbon aerogels via high temperature pyrolysis, and the conductivity and surface properties could be easily adjusted through varying the pyrolysis temperature and atmosphere. The obtained 3D carbon aerogels can be used as active materials directly. Moreover, multi-functional carbon-based nanomaterials with high-performance can be prepared by the activation process, heteroatomic doping or hybridization with other active materials.

2.2.1 Porous CNF materials. 
BC and its derivative materials could be easily converted into 3D carbon aerogels, which present high electrical conductivity, ultra-low density, and extraordinary compressibility. However, the size of BC will shrink to half in three dimensions during the pyrolysis process, and the porous 3D network structure is well inherited. As a result, the 3D carbon aerogels suffer from a relatively low specific surface area of 286.4 m2 g−1,22 which will affect the electrochemical properties. Activation treatment with inert gas/mixed gas and potassium compounds is the most efficient strategy to increase the specific surface area. The BC pellicles were firstly frozen-dried to preserve the structure of the network, and then carbonized under a flowing N2 atmosphere to directly form the 3D CNF aerogel.72 The resultant aerogel exhibited a high Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area of 506 m2 g−1, which is much higher than that of the carbon aerogels without activation. Jiang et al. provided a comprehensive investigation into CNF-bridged porous carbon nanosheets (PCNs) by pyrolyzing the mixture of BC and potassium citrate using an activation-free one-step method,73 as shown in Fig. 6a. During the fabrication, the potassium citrate not only acts as the carbon precursor for the formation of PCNs but also serves as the chemical activating agent during the heat-treatment, thus forming a 3D integrated porous carbon (Fig. 6b and c) and resulting in a high specific surface area of 1037 m2 g−1.
 Fig. 6  Porous CNF materials. (a–c) PCN/CNF composite. (a) Scheme illustration of the synthesis of the PCN/CNF composite. (b) SEM and (c) TEM images of the as-prepared PCN/CNF composite. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73 (d–g) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of CN-BC and digital photographs: (d) Gel-like origin BC membrane. (e) The dry BC@SiO2 membrane. (f) The obtained carbon films. (g) Specific capacitances of BC and CN-BC electrodes in the three-electrode system using 6 M KOH as the electrolyte at various current densities. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. 
An interconnected 3D meso-microporous CNF network was developed using a simple silica-assisted strategy (Fig. 6d–f), and the as-prepared material showed a large surface area of 624 m2 g−1, high graphitization degree and mesopore-dominated hierarchical porosity.74 Furthermore, the electrode without any binder displayed high specific capacitance, high-rate capability and good cyclicity, as shown in Fig. 6g.


2.2.2 Doped CNF materials. 
It is well recognized that the engineering of incorporation of heteroatoms into the 3D porous carbon network under simple conditions is an effective way, which can affect the electrical conductivity, electro-active surface area, surface polarity and wettability, and is beneficial to achieve a superior electrochemical performance.75 Currently, four strategies have been adopted to achieve heteroatom doped CNF materials:
(a) annealing with heteroatom-rich compounds. Heteroatom-rich compounds can be easily filled in the pores and 3D network of carbon aerogels because of their hydrophilic properties and high porosity. Zhang et al. proposed a method via using BC and TEMPO as a precursor and dopant (Fig. 7b).76 Numerous stable O species and defects can not only increase the electrolyte diffusion, but also provide high pseudo-capacitance. A P-CNF aerogel was prepared via freeze-drying and thermal treatment.77 The doped material exhibited an interconnected, well-organized, porous 3D network, which can enhance the specific surface area, facilitate charge transfer, and improve the specific capacitance. Chen et al. fabricated N,P-CNFs by impregnating NH4H2PO4 into the BC pellicle, followed by pyrolyzation in an inert atmosphere. To increase and adjust the heteroatom contents and conductivity, we adopted two kinds of dopants NH4H2PO4 and CO(NH2)2.75 Furthermore, Chen et al. also proved that the heteroatom-doping tactic not only allows the fabrication of high-performance active materials, but also could serve as an environmental strategy for turning toxic waste into a valuable material. They manufactured various doped CNF aerogels with this method by pyrolysis of BC pellicles which were dyed with sorts of toxic organic dyes (Fig. 7a), and the resultant doped CNF aerogels can be well applied as electrocatalysts and electrode materials for ORR and supercapacitors, respectively.41 Hence, the methodology is verified to be a rational, effective, and scalable strategy and can be further extended to exploit other doped electrode materials (Table 1).
 Fig. 7  The fabrication process of doped CNF aerogels. (a) (1) BC hydrogels were soaked in various organic dye solutions (imitating waste-water) until saturation sorption; (2) after freeze-drying of the as-obtained BC/dye hybrid hydrogels, various BC/dye hybrid aerogels were obtained; (3) further pyrolysis of BC/dye hybrid aerogels under flowing N2 produced doped CNF aerogels. Reproduced with permission from ref. 78. (b) Schematic illustration of the preparation of p-BC and p-MBC samples. Reproduced with permission from ref. 76. (c) Schematic diagram of the preparation of CNFA800 and N-CNFA. (d) TEM image of N-CNFA800; Elemental mapping images of NCNFA800, (e) the C element, (f) the O element and (g) the N element, the inset is the magnified SEM image of N-CNFA800. Reproduced with permission from ref. 79. 
Table 1 Performance of BC-based flexible supercapacitors




Function of BC
Voltage range (V)
Capacitance (mF cm−2/F g−1)
Rate capability:
Stability (cycle numbers)

E
max (W h kg−1)

P
max (kW kg−1)
Ref.




N-CNF/RGO/BC//N-CNF/RGO/BC
0–1
810/— (2 mV s−1)
755 (50 mV s−1)
99.6% (10000)
0.11 mW h cm−2
27 mW cm−2

80



N,P-CNF/RGO/BC//N,P-CNF/RGO/BC
0–1
690/— (2 mV s−1)
620 (40 mV s−1)
99.6% (10000)
0.096 mW h cm−2
19.98 mW cm−2

75



BC/CNT/ion gel supercapacitors
0–3
18.8/46.9 (100 mV s−1)
42.0 (500 mV s−1)
99.5% (50000)
15.5 W h kg−1
1.5 kW kg−1

52



A-CNF//BC gel//a-CNF supercapacitors
0–1
289/— (0.1 mA cm−2)
70% (10 mA cm−2)
66.7% (100)
—
—

91



BC/PPY/CNT//BC/PPY/CNT
0–0.8
590/— (1 mA cm−2)
—
94.5% (5000)
—
—

55



PPY/BC/RGO//PPY/BC/RGO
0–1
1670/— (0.5 mA cm−2)
670 (50 mA cm−2)
65.4% (8000)
0.23 mW h cm−2
23.5 mW cm−2

56



PANI/BC/RGO//PANI/BC/RGO
0–0.8
1930/— (0.25 mA cm−2)
53.6% (10 mA cm−2)
—
0.17 mW h cm−2
3.72 mW cm−2

114



PPY/RGO/BC//PPY/RGO/BC
0–1
790/— (1 mA cm−2)
360 (30 mA cm−2)
75.8% (3000)
0.11 mW h cm−2
15 mW cm−2

25



PANI/RGO/BC//PANI/RGO/BC
0–0.8
1320/— (0.25 mA cm−2)
—
90% (2000)
0.12 mW h cm−2
4.45 mW cm−2

67





(b) Annealing with heteroatom-containing polymers. As mentioned, morphology well-controlled conducting polymer-cellulose composites with well-defined structures have been successfully designed and developed via an in situ chemical or electrochemical polymerization method. After the heat treatment, heteroatom-doped carbon aerogels can be easily fabricated. PANI sheets were uniformly coated onto the surface of BC nanofibers, after pyrolysis and KOH activation, the constructed porous N-doped energy storage carbon sheets are interconnected with CNFs.70 The surface area of the resultant N-doped carbon nanomaterials with many microspores is greatly improved to as high as 1326 m2 g−1, which largely enhances the double layer charge and pseudocapacitive storage. Similarly, an N-CNFs/RGO/BC paper was also prepared using a novel and efficient strategy.80 Firstly, PPY was coated onto the surface of BC/GO via an in situ polymerization approach, and then pyrolyzed under inert conditions. The one-step pyrolysis treatment not only provides nitrogen-doped 3D nanostructured carbon composite materials but also forms RGO sheets. Benefiting from its unique microstructure and numerous functional groups, the flexible electrode achieves high capacitive performance with excellent reversibility and capacitive properties, and ultrahigh areal capacitance.
(c) Hydrothermal treatment of CNF aerogels with heteroatom-containing molecules in solution. Yu et al. fabricated a flexible all-solid-state supercapacitor device with N-CNFs as the electrode material via an eco-friendly and low-temperature hydrothermal synthesis using BC-derived carbon aerogels and urea. The fabricated device can reversibly deliver a considerable power density of 390.53 kW kg−1 and exhibit a stable cycling performance with 95.9% capacitance retention after 5000 cycles.81
(d) Annealing CNF aerogels in a heteroatom-donor atmosphere. A highly active N-CNF aerogel metal-free ORR electrocatalyst was developed via successive stages including direct pyrolysis and NH3 activation (Fig. 7c).79 The resulting N-CNF aerogel maintains the 3D porous network and displays a high BET surface area of 916 m2 g−1. Furthermore, the energy-filtered TEM (EFTEM) elemental mapping (Fig. 7d–g) reveals that the N element is uniformly and homogeneously dispersed within the whole nanofibrous network structure, and the density of N-containing active sites is as high as 5.8 at%.


2.2.3 Hybrid materials. 
Decorating 3D CNF aerogels with various kinds of active materials, such as nanocarbon materials, metal oxides/hydroxides and sulfides, can create multi-functional and synergistical performances. Chang et al.82 embedded RGO into CNFs derived from BC to engineer self-supporting 3D CNF networks, followed by N-doping to improve the electrochemical performance (Fig. 8a). The hybrid presents a highly conductive 1D/2D hybrid framework, which facilitates the exertion of active N species. The refined-structure N-CNF, derived from one-step pyrolyzation of PANI coated BC nanocomposites, serves as an ideal supercapacitor electrode with excellent capacitive properties as well as providing a 3D scaffold for further deposition of ultrathin Ni-Co LDH nanosheets;83 the photographs and morphology of the samples are shown in Fig. 8b–h. Benefiting from the unique structure, the as-prepared N-CNF@LDH hybrid electrode exhibits enhanced electrochemical performance. Yuan and his co-workers synthesized Ni3S2/CNF in a similar process,72 and the constructed asymmetric supercapacitor Ni3S2/CNF//CNF achieved a broad operating potential up to 1.7 V.
 Fig. 8  Hybrid materials. (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of PBC-RGON. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. (b–h) CBC-N@LDH composites. (b) Schematic of the preparation of CBC-N@LDH composites; (c) Photographs of the pristine bacterial cellulose pellicle and freeze-dried bacterial cellulose membrane (inset) with a size of 30 × 40 cm2 and 4 × 5 cm2, respectively; (d) FESEM image and photograph (inset) of the CBC membrane; FESEM image of pure (e) PANI powder, (f) CBC-N1, (g) CBC-N2, and (h) CBC-N3 nanofibers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 83. 
Aerogels, a promising class of 3D nanostructured porous materials with adequate corrosion resistance, low density, low thermal conductivity, high specific surface area, and high electrical conductivity, have been used in an extensive range of important applications such as catalyst supports, oil/water separation, hydrogen storage, sensors, and so forth.84,85 Xu and his co-workers synthesized a catalyst-free, flexible, mesoporous, and highly graphitized carbon-aerogel. The carbon aerogel consisted of core (graphitized BC nanofibers)–shell (LRF nanoaggregates) structured CNFs, a unique blackberry-like structure and large mesoporous concentration which facilitated ion transportation and adsorption.86

2.3 BC-derived separators/electrolytes
Besides the electrode, the separator and electrolyte are indispensable components for the fabrication of electrochemical storage and conversion electrodes. A non-electrically conductive separator is inserted to prevent the electrical contact between the two electrodes. The electrolyte resides inside the separator as well as within the active material layers, ensuring conductive/ionic connection between the electrodes.87 The fundamental requirements for an electrolyte include high electrochemical stability, a wide voltage window, low resistivity, high ionic concentration, a low solvated ionic radius, low viscosity, low toxicity, low volatility, low cost and availability at high purity.88 The typical electrolytes include aqueous electrolytes, organic electrolytes and solid-state electrolytes. The aqueous solution can be prepared easily and provides higher ionic concentrations and lower resistances, thus resulting in a higher capacitance and higher power density, while the narrow voltage window (generally lower than 1.2 V) may limit the improvement of high energy density. The organic ones possess a higher voltage window (∼3.5 V), but they must be prepared and utilized with stringently controlling the preparation processes and conditions and can easily generate environmental and toxic problems. With respect to safety issues, the most widely used solid-state electrolytes in supercapacitors are gel polymers and quasi-solid electrolytes, which can avoid leakage problems and reduce the packaging cost.87
BC has unique interconnected network structure, high water holding capacity, large specific surface area, good chemical stability, environmental friendless and remarkable mechanical strength. Recently, several studies have been conducted to investigate BC-based separators and electrolytes. Jiang et al.89 fabricated a BC nanofibrous membrane with a highly porous 3D network (Fig. 9a and b), and the thickness and porosity can be controlled through changing the compression ratio. The appropriate porosity and good wettability can ensure fast ion transformation (Fig. 9c and d). Xu et al.90 fabricated BC/Al2O3 composites via a simple in situ thermal decomposition method. The composite membrane shows good thermal stability up to 200 °C, as shown in Fig. 9e–g, which is better than that of the commercial PP-PE-PP membrane.
 Fig. 9  BC-derived separators. (a–d) BC membrane. SEM images of the BC membrane: (a) top view and (b) cross-sectional view. Contact angle (θ) of the electrolyte droplet on (c) the Celgard® separator and (d) the BC separator. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. (e–g) Photographs of the PP-PE-PP (e), BC and BC-Al2O3 separators before and after thermal treatment at 150 °C (f) and 180 °C (g) for 30 min, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 90. (h) Digital pictures of BC, BC-H3PO4 and APBC. (i) Digital pictures of the electrode, the gel electrolyte, and the all-biomaterial supercapacitor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 91. (j) SEM image of the cross-section of the assembled SC. Reproduced with permission from ref. 92. 
Zhi and his co-workers91 reported a novel dielectric semi-transparent BC-based gel electrolyte, and the gel electrolyte was directly used as a separator, as shown in Fig. 9h and i. The obtained all-biomaterial supercapacitor displays a higher ion mobility with a solution resistance of 7.4 Ω. Fei et al.92 prepared a BC/PAAS-Na2SO4 gel electrolyte to construct a highly flexible asymmetric supercapacitor. This neutral gel electrolyte not only is good for the environment, but also presents high viscosity to combine two electrodes (Fig. 9j). Furthermore, the gel electrolyte will form a separator at a high temperature to prevent short circuiting of the two electrodes.
3. Electrochemical energy storage devices
3.1 Supercapacitors
Supercapacitors, also called ultracapacitors or electrochemical capacitors, are considered as a class of state-of-the-art energy storage devices because of the combination of the advantages of rechargeable batteries and the conventional capacitor, exhibiting fast power delivery, rapid charge discharge rate and long operating lifetimes.1,88,93 Thus, they are attractive and versatile for applications in back-up power systems, electric vehicles, load-levelling and other successive power applications.94 Meanwhile, owing to the emergence of different demands and various functionalities (flexibility, stretchability, and implantability) for more and more modern wearable and portable electronic equipment, the fabrication of lightweight, operation safety, environmentally friendly, highly efficient and bendable supercapacitors has aroused tremendous interest among researchers.95,96
According to the mechanisms of charge storage, supercapacitors can be categorized into electrical double layer capacitors (EDLCs) and pseudocapacitors.97,98 EDLCs store electrical charges electrostatically by accumulating ions at the interface between the electrode and electrolyte.99 The effective surface area and pore structure have the main influence on the capacitive performance of EDLCs. In this regard, carbon materials are the most widely employed electrode materials in EDLCs including CNTs, active carbon (AC), CFs and RGO due to their large specific surface area, porous structures, high electrical conductivity and fast charging/discharging kinetics.99 Alternatively, pseudocapacitors, with transition metal oxides and conducting polymers as electrode materials, realize their energy storage abilities via fast and reversible faradaic reactions, contributing to more storage charges, higher power density and higher energy density in comparison to EDLCs; however, they are always limited by poor cycle life and low rate performance.100 In the ensuing sections, we discuss recent progress reported on the development of nano-structured BC and its derived materials for supercapacitor applications.

3.1.1 Flexible supercapacitors based on BC-derived hybrid materials. 
The crucial parameters of flexible electrodes include mass loading, areal/volumetric/gravimetric specific capacitance and high mechanical integrity upon bending, folding and stretching. Recently, paper-based materials have been considered as potential substrates for flexible electrodes, since they not only are flexible, lightweight, low-cost, and environmentally friendly, but also can be strongly integrated with conductive materials such as carbon-based materials, conducting polymers and their composites. There are some studies using BC paper as the flexible substrate because of its 3D network architecture, high mechanical strength, good chemical stability, and water-holding capability, achieving higher electrochemical and mechanical performance than other paper-based electrodes (Table 1). Our group has also developed several kinds of electrode materials using BC papers as substrates for this general strategy toward flexible supercapacitor electrodes, we found that the integration of active materials with flexible, porous and mechanically tough BC substrates is an attractive approach for the construction of high-performance electrodes. This section summarizes the states of BC/carbon material, BC/metal oxide and BC/conducting polymer foldable electrodes.
3.1.1.1 Flexible EDLC electrodes. 
At the current stage of technology, carbon materials are believed to be the most promising electroactive materials,46 1D CNTs, CNFs and 2D RGO represent the most prospective carbon materials for flexible supercapacitors.47 CNTs, RGO and their composites possess many fascinating advantages such as high electrical conductivity, good chemical stability, high mechanical strength, and controllable regular pore structure.50 Hence, CNT and RGO based materials can be covered onto highly flexible nonconductive substrates and act as freestanding electrodes directly. The flexible supercapacitor prepared with the RGO electrode shows a moderate areal capacitance of 71.0 mF cm−2 at 1 mA cm−2, remarkable rate performance with 79.0% capacitance retention at 100 mA cm−2, and long cycle life with 98.3% capacitance retention after 5000 cycles. Xiong et al. fabricated a porous RGO film using a GO hydrogel instead of the GO dispersion.101 Astonishingly, there is an almost negligible capacity loss when the flexible supercapacitor was bent to arbitrary angles (even 180°). However, the freestanding RGO papers in several recent reports showed limited mechanical properties, hampering their widespread commercialization.
A BC/CNT film electrode for flexible supercapacitors was developed using a simple approach,52 which has been described in the former part. The 1D structured CNTs not only ensure long continuous conductive paths along the lengths of the CFs, but also tends to entangle with the nanofibers of the BC, thus enable the high flexibility of the hybrid film. The resulting BC/CNT film shows good mechanical stability over hundreds of repeated bending cycles without being separated into individual layers. The symmetric triangular profile of GCD curves indicates good capacitive characteristics with high coulombic efficiency for BC/CNT flexible supercapacitors. Especially, this device exhibits a specific capacitance, energy density, and power density of 50.5 F g−1, 15.5 mW h g−1, and 1.5 W g−1 at 1 A g−1, respectively, and can tolerate a large number of bending cycles without significant degradation of capacitive performance. Additionally, it was demonstrated that a LED can be lit by the flexible supercapacitors, showing the potential of the device for energy storage.
A 3D honeycomb structural holey graphene oxide/bacterial cellulose (HRGO/BC) is successfully fabricated, as shown in Fig. 10e.102 The HRGO/BC composite films show good mechanical properties with a high tensile strength of 204 MPa with an elongation of 13.8% and can be twisted, bent, knotted and even folded. The solid-symmetric supercapacitors demonstrated a specific capacity of 65.9 F g−1, and an energy density of 9.2 W h kg−1. These merits mainly benefit from the continuous 3D honeycomb structure, good wettability, holey architecture and excellent mechanical flexibility (Fig. 10f). The unique strategy provides a novel pathway for the fabrication of 3D honeycomb structure gels/films in electrical fields.
 Fig. 10  BC-derived hybrid materials for flexible supercapacitors. (a–c) RGO/PEDOT:PSS/BNC supercapacitors. (a) Photographs showing the flexibility of the components (electrode and separator) of the device and a schematic showing the structure of the solid-state supercapacitor device based on RGO/PEDOT:PSS/BNC electrodes. (b) Optical image showing the flexibility of the assembled supercapacitor. (c) LED indicator lit by the assembled device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 112. (d) Co3O4/GN/BC//r-Bi2O3/GN/BC asymmetric supercapacitor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 113. (e and f) HRGO/BC composites. (e) Schematic diagrams of the solid-state supercapacitor based on HRGO/BC composites. (f) The mechanism scheme of ions going through HRGO sheets (the ion transport pathways are highlighted by red arrows). Reproduced with permission from ref. 102. 
The above results demonstrate that BC is a perfect substrate for CNTs and RGO. Thereby, it is hoped that BC can be applied for realizing other carbon-based flexible electrodes. Given the obvious advantages of low cost, ease of fabrication and environmental friendliness, carbon materials derived from renewable biomass precursors such as AC and CFs are the most extensively used materials for supercapacitors. However, the utilization of hierarchically porous structure carbon materials for flexible electrodes is still limited due to the mechanical instability of the films and the increasing complexity of the fabrication process.
Recently, our group has focused on BC flexible substrates for supporting CNFs, achieving high-performance bendable electrodes.75,80 In comparison to gravimetric performance, the areal energy and/or volumetric performance are believed to be the more reasonable parameter to evaluate the performance of flexible supercapacitors that store enough energy in a limited space; therefore, the development of foldable electrodes with high mass and high gravimetric capacitance active materials is a critical technological breakthrough.32 As mentioned, BC is exploited as both the precursor for N,P-CNFs and N-CNFs by pyrolysis and the flexible substrate for the active materials. Benefiting from the unique microstructure and numerous functional groups, these electrodes permit a large area mass of 8 mg cm−2 and achieve a prominent areal capacitance, impressive tensile strength and excellent cycling ability. These studies show that BC based carbon materials are ideal and promising candidates for constructing flexible and freestanding supercapacitor electrodes using a facile and low-cost strategy (Table 1).
3.1.1.2 Flexible pseudocapacitor electrodes. 
To push forward flexible supercapacitors, the development of bendable electrodes with higher specific capacitance is required to catch up with the rapid growth of the demand for wearable and portable electronics. In addition, for practical applications, a simple, scalable, low-cost, and general strategy for fabricating high electrochemical performance and mechanically strong pseudocapacitance flexible electrodes is highly desired. By introducing the high specific capacitance of pseudocapacitive composites and highly mechanically tough BC substrates, the design puts forward a promising approach for exploiting high-performance flexible supercapacitors.
Conducting polymers have generated a great interest because of their lightweight, cost-effectiveness, and conductive properties. However, the direct use of conducting polymers as flexible electrode materials can be hardly scaled up due to their low mechanical strength. PANI, as a promising conducting polymer for supercapacitors, exhibits high theoretical capacitance, low cost, ease of synthesis, controllable electrical conductivity and environmental stability.88,103 Recently, some researchers have explored PANI-based flexible electrodes to mostly combine PANI with bendable conductive paper by the electrochemical polymerization technology. Shen et al. fabricated a freestanding PANI/CNT/BC paper based flexible supercapacitor, which can be prepared by filtering CNTs onto BC papers with subsequent electrochemical polymerization of PANI.18 The composite paper has excellent flexibility, an impressive specific capacitance of 656 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 and excellent cyclic stability with 99.5% capacitance retention after 1000 cycles. Therefore, it shows enormous potential for flexible paper-based supercapacitors for energy storage. PPY is another promising pseudocapacitive conducting polymer-based electrode material for flexible supercapacitors. Competitive advantages of PPY include high electrical conductivity, simple synthesis, good environmental stability and high redox pseudocapacitive charge storage.104,105 Besides, by introducing permanent doping anions into PPY, the operating voltage can be extended, and the specific capacitance can also be further enhanced.106
Conductive PPY/BC membranes were synthesized through in situ oxidative polymerization of Py using iron(III) chloride as an oxidant and the BC membrane as a template, respectively. The PPY/BC membrane electrode can offer a high electrical conductivity of 3.9 S cm−1, and a moderate specific capacitance of 459.5 F g−1. However, the cycling stability (70.3% after 50 cycles) needs to be improved for practical applications. Likewise, the PPY/BC composites also suffer from the drawbacks of the aggregation effect and volume change in the charge/discharge process.61 Future investigations will be aimed at solving the problem of degradation during the charge/discharge. Following a similar strategy, PPY/CuS/BC and PPY/CoS/BC membranes were also prepared.107,108 The specific capacitance of supercapacitors based on PPY/CuS/BC and PPY/CoS/BC electrodes can reach about 580 F g−1 and 614 F g−1 at a current density of 0.8 mA cm−2 and can retain about 73% and 62.4% of their initial value after 300 cycles, while the PPY/BC-based device could retain only 21.7% after 300 cycles. The introduction of CuS and CoS remarkably improves the pseudocapacitance and electrochemical stability in comparison with the previous study. Another flexible PPY/NiS/BC nanofibrous composite membrane electrode was successfully synthesized via a facile “soak and reaction” method.109 The obtained PPY/NiS/BC electrode shows an enhanced electrochemical performance with a high electrical conductivity of 5.1 S cm−1 and a specific capacitance as high as 713 F g−1 with a power density of 39.5 W kg−1 and an energy density of 239.0 W h kg−1 at a current density of 0.8 mA cm−2. Oh and his co-workers coated PPY nanoparticles onto the surface of TEMPO-oxidized BC nanofibers (TOBC) through an in situ chemical polymerization approach to endow films with a high porosity of 101 m2 g−1 and a high electrical conductivity of 6.63 S cm−1.110 Owing to the high mechanical performance and good interfacial quality, the as-assembled bendable supercapacitor exhibits good bending stability and a high power density of 6.59 kW kg−1, and the life time is estimated to last for more than 19 days.
Despite all of this, all these novel composite electrodes show limited stability, and future strategies and investigations need to be adopted to improve the cycling stability and other electrochemical properties. In view of this, some nanostructured carbon materials have been incorporated to enhance the conductivity, promote the rate and address the poor cycling or any other related issues. Shen et al. fabricated highly conductive BC/PPY paper electrodes in combination with CNTs by a simple and environmentally friendly vacuum-filtering method.55 The hybrid electrode without any binders, current collectors and any other additives shows excellent capacitance with the highest capacitance being 2.43 F cm−2 at a mass loading of 11.23 mg cm−2, which is superior to that of PPY-coated paper (1.5 F cm−2) and comparable to that of PPY-coated aligned CNTs (2.55 F cm−2).111 The assembled symmetric supercapacitor provides an excellent cycling stability with 94.5% capacitance retention after 5000 cycles, benefiting from the high conductivity and hierarchical porous structure of the electrode.
We proposed a freestanding conductive PPY/BC/RGO film by an efficient “polymerization and vacuum filtration” method.56 The porous and flexible BC nanofiber is used as the substrate and the template at the same time, which is responsible for such a large areal mass of 13.5 mg cm−2. The assembled symmetric supercapacitor can offer a high energy density of 0.23 mW h cm−2 and a maximum power density of 23.5 mW cm−2. Based on these experimental results, the efficient strategy described above can also be employed to prepare other types of conducting polymer-based flexible electrodes. Afterward, a series of PANI/BC/RGO hybrids114 were also prepared for constructing a stable flexible and freestanding electrode by incorporating nanostructured RGO. Here, the combination of high pseudocapacitive conducting polymers, excellent conductive RGO and the flexible BC substrate not only facilitates electron transport and ion dispersion throughout the inter-connective network readily, but also overcomes the aggregation of RGO and conducting polymer/BC within the 3D conductive paper.
The flexible PANI/BC/RGO paper114 was proved to be a suitable and promising electrode material, achieving a high areal capacitance of 6.15 F cm−2. As mentioned, benefitting from the hierarchical structure, unobstructed channels, numerous electroactive sites and induced synergistic effect, the NiCo-LDH/PANI/BC electrode66 shows a high specific capacitance of 1690 F g−1 (761C g−1) at 1 A g−1, excellent foldability, high tensile strength (90.8 ± 4.9 MPa), high breaking elongation (7.2 ± 0.7%) and outstanding electrochemical stability during bending and stretching. This work provides a new path for high-performance flexible energy storage devices and offers a new vision for uniformly and robustly assembling nanohybrids. Jiang et al.112 introduced GO, PEDOT and PSS into the BC matrix to achieve a flexible RGO/PEDOT:PSS/BC composite (Fig. 10a); this electrode exhibits an excellent electrochemical performance with high reversibility, good rate capability, a high specific capacitance of 373 F g−1 and stability (retaining 85% after 1000 cycles). Using BC as the separator, the assembled solid-state supercapacitors present remarkable mechanical flexibility and stability with 88% capacitance retention after 4500 cycles (Fig. 10b). To demonstrate the potential application, three RGO/PEDOT:PSS/BNC flexible all solid-state supercapacitors were connected in tandem to power a red LED, and the state was maintained for a total of 3 minutes (Fig. 10c).
Furthermore, another methodology to obtain flexible electrodes is utilizing BC only as a substrate, and the fabricated films are single-side conductive electrodes. As mentioned, we have mainly employed the BC paper in the fabrication of active materials as the precursor during the pyrolysis,80 and as a template or scaffold for other active materials.56 Herein, BC is only used as a substrate to ensure large mass loading, maintain high mechanical properties and also provide efficient pore volume and rapid pathways for ion and electron transport, thus achieving high-performance bendable electrodes.
The novel free-standing Ni(OH)2/RGO/BC electrode64 with robust mechanical flexibility and ordered porous structure endows the bendable electrode with a superior excellent rate and pseudocapacitive characteristics with a large mass of 11.9 mg cm−2, a remarkable areal capacitance of 10.44 F cm−2, excellent cycling stability with 93.6% capacitance retention after 15000 cycles and superior flexibility. We also constructed Co-based oxides and hydroxides to highlight the universality and versatility of this method.115
Moreover, they display remarkable cycling stability, high bending performance (even 180°), and excellent tensile strength, suggesting their promising application as flexible electrodes in flexible energy-storage devices. Additionally, this simple, highly scalable, low-cost, and general method could be easily applied for realizing other kinds of flexible electrodes and open up new opportunities for fabricating high-performance flexible supercapacitors and other energy storage devices. Based on these positive results, we then developed a flexible asymmetric supercapacitor with r-Bi2O3/GN/BC and Co3O4/GN/BC films as negative and positive electrodes, respectively, in which the negative electrode was fabricated through a facile solvothermal approach followed by a solution reduction method (Fig. 10d).113 In this system, the oxygen vacancies have significant effect on the electrochemical performance of Bi2O3, delivering greatly improved capacitive values compared to that of the untreated Bi2O3 flexible electrode, and achieved 83% (1137 F g−1) of the theoretical value (1370 F g−1). The assembled devices have a wide operation voltage of 1.6 V, revealing a high maximum areal energy density of 0.449 mW h cm−2 and an areal power density of 40 mW cm−2.


3.1.2 BC-derived carbon materials for supercapacitors. 
Recently, 3D carbon nanomaterials and their applications in supercapacitors have gained increasing interest and represent a very significant topic in energy storage. BC can act as a biomass precursor for producing 3D carbon nanomaterials, playing a vital role in high-performance supercapacitor electrode materials. Consequently, there is a widespread interest in the development of BC and its composites for energy storage (Table 2). The BC pellicles were firstly frozen-dried to preserve the structure of the network, and then carbonized under a flowing N2 atmosphere to directly form 3D CNFs. The specific capacitance of the CNF is found to be 108 F g−1 at 2 A g−1, which is much higher than that of commercially available CNFs (0.17 F g−1).72 Even so, for the emerging applications, further capacitance improvement for the 3D CNF is a significant requirement for supercapacitors.
Table 2 Performance of BC-based carbon materials and hybrids for supercapacitors




Materials
Voltage range (V)
Capacitance (F g−1)
Rate capability:
Stability (cycle numbers)

E
max (W h kg−1)

P
max (kW kg−1)
Ref.




CNF aerogels
−1∼0 (vs. Ag/AgCl)
194.7 (0.5 A g−1)
108.7 (10 A g−1)
94% (5000)
—
—

53



N-CNFs
−1∼0 (vs. Ag/AgCl)
120 (1 A g−1)
—
98.2% (5000)
—
—

69



KOH activated N-CNFs
0.9–0.1 (vs. She)
296 (2 mV s−1)
75% (500 mV s−1)
99% (10000)
—
—

70



CO2 activated CNFs
−0.2–0.2 (vs. Ag/AgCl)
42 (659 mF cm−2) (1 mV s−1)
70% (10 mV s−1)
—
—
—

71



N-S-CNF-700
0–1 (vs. Ag/AgCl)
171.2 (0.5 A g−1)
105.2 (10 A g−1)
>90% (1000)
—
—

78



N-CNF/RGO/BC
−0.8–0.2 (vs. Hg/HgO)
2106/263 (1 mV s−1)
76% (50 mV s−1)
100% (20000)
—
—

80



N,P-CNF/RGO/BC
−0.8–0.2 (vs. Hg/HgO)
1900/244.8 (2 mV s−1)
1554 (50 mV s−1)
100% (20000)
—
—

75



Ni(OH)2/RGO/BC
0.1–0.6 (vs. Hg/HgO)
10440/877.1 (5 mA cm−2)
6230 (50 mA cm−2)
93.6% (15000)
—
—

64



Co3O4/GN/BC
0–0.6 (vs. Hg/HgO)
12250/1274.2 (3 mA cm−2)
10400 (50 mA cm−2)
96.4% (20000)
—
—

115



PANI/CNT/BC
0–0.8 (vs. Ag/AgCl)
—/656 (1 A g−1)
440 (1 A g−1)
99.5% (1000)
—
—

18



PPY/BC
0–1.5
—/495.5 (0.16 A g−1)
—
70.3% (50)
39.7 (W h kg−1)
—

107



PPy/CoS/BC
0–0.8
—/614 (0.8 A cm−2)
73.2% (1.6 A cm−2)
62.4% (300)
54.5 (W h kg−1)
0.663 (kW kg−1)

120



PPY/BC
−0.5–0.5
—/153 (0.2 A g−1)
82.4% (1.2 A cm−2)
∼93% (100)
21.22 (W h kg−1)
6.59 (kW kg−1)

110



BC/PPY/CNTs
−0.2–0.6 (vs. Ag/AgCl)
2430/— (2 mA cm−2)
51% (20 mV s−1)
—
—
—

55



PCN/CNFs//PCN/CNFs
0–1.8
—
—
94.8% (10000)
20.4
17.8

73





Jiang et al. provided a comprehensive investigation into CNF-bridged porous carbon nanosheets (PCNs) by pyrolyzing the mixture of BC and potassium citrate in an activation-free one-step method.73 The potassium citrate acts as not only a carbon precursor for the formation of PCNs but also a chemical activating agent during heat-treatment, thus forming a 3D integrated porous carbon and resulting in a high specific surface area of 1037 m2 g−1. The unique structure and high conductivity endow the PCN/CNF composite electrode with a high specific capacitance of 261 F g−1, outstanding cycling stability with 97.6% capacitance retention after 10000 cycles and excellent rate capability (Fig. 11a–c). More importantly, the assembled symmetric supercapacitor PCN/CNF//PCN/CNF delivers an ultrahigh energy density of 20.4 W h kg−1 and stable cycling life with 94.8% capacitance retention after 10000 cycles (Fig. 11d), which are superior/comparable to those of previously reported carbon materials.
 Fig. 11  BC-derived CNF materials for supercapacitors. (a–d) PCNs/CNF composites. (a) CV curves of the PCNs/CNF based symmetric supercapacitor at different operation voltages at the scan rate of 50 mV s−1. (b) Cycling performance of the symmetric supercapacitors measured at 200 mV s−1 (c) CV curves of the symmetric supercapacitor at different scan rates in the voltage window of 0–1.8 V. (d) Ragone plot of the PCNs/CNF based symmetric supercapacitor compared with other previously reported carbon materials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73. (e and f) BC-derived CNF materials for supercapacitors. (e) CV scan at 100 V s−1 in different potential windows up to 3.5 V. (f) The cell stability tests up to 100 K cycles with the inset as a section of the C–D curve. Reproduced with permission from ref. 116. 
Another type of hierarchically structured carbon aerogels consisting of 1D CNFs derived from BC and the 3D carbon skeleton stemming from polyimide were successfully synthesized through the sequential imidization and carbonization of BC/poly(amic acid) aerogels. Benefitting from the multiporous structure, excellent mechanical properties and capillary effect of CNFs, the as-obtained carbon aerogel electrode shows a high specific capacitance of 194.7 F g−1, extraordinary recycling performance and superior adsorption capacity, and can be directly used as versatile adsorbents.53 Islam demonstrated a crosslinked CNF aerogel via a rapid and low-cost plasma pyrolysis process, and the composite can be used as an electrode directly.116 The voltage operation window can be extended to 3 V (Fig. 11e–g) in an organic electrolyte, which is mainly attributed to the porous and well-crosslinked structure, providing high ionic/electron transmission channels and resulting in a high areal capacitance and high frequency response. Additionally, Yu et al. fabricated a flexible all-solid-state supercapacitor device with N-CNFs as the electrode material via an eco-friendly and low-temperature hydrothermal synthesis. The fabricated device can reversibly deliver a considerable power density of 390.53 kW kg−1 and exhibit a stable cycling performance with 95.9% capacity retention after 5000 cycles.81
It is well recognized that the engineering of incorporation of heteroatoms into carbon networks is an effective way, which can affect the electrical conductivity, electro-active surface area, surface polarity and wettability of carbon materials.75 In the N,P-CNF system,117 the heteroatoms are effectively incorporated and highly uniformly distributed throughout the 3D carbon nanomaterials and endow the symmetric supercapacitor with good reversibility and rate properties, long-term cyclability without any degradation after 4000 cycles, a high energy density of 7.76 W h kg−1, and a maximum power density of 186.03 kW kg−1, which are mainly due to the co-dopants of N/P and the interconnected 3D porous nanofiber network, thus improving the specific capacitance, speeding the electron transportation and shortening the ion diffusion paths for the electrode. Notably, multi-heteroatom-doped CNF networks can also be realized with the general, eco-friendly, scalable and effective way. N,P-doped, B,P-doped or any other doped CNFs can be successfully fabricated by the pyrolysis of BC immersed in H3PO4, NH4H2PO4, and H3BO3/H3PO4 or any other related aqueous solutions, respectively. Moreover, the as-prepared N,P-CNF exhibits good supercapacitive performance. The constructed N,P-CNF electrode reached a high-performance level with a maximum specific capacitance of 204.9 F g−1 and power density of 186.03 kW kg−1, significantly higher than that of the pure CNF.117 Similarly, Yuan and his co-workers reported N,P-carbon nanowires prepared by impregnating NH4H2PO4 into the BC pellicles and then carbonization in the NH3 atmosphere at 800 °C. The as-prepared materials show excellent electrochemical properties with the specific capacitance of 258 F g−1 and a capacitance retention of 98% over 30000 cycles.118
Given the above results, this approach has many merits in comparison to other methods, such as low-cost, abundant raw materials, the low requirement of equipment, and the facile and versatile fabrication process. More importantly, it is suitable for scale-up in the practical application, and hence effective for constructing high-performance electrode materials with high power density and excellent cycling stability (Table 2).


3.1.3 Hybrid CNF materials for supercapacitors. 
Pseudocapacitors have been widely investigated in the past few decades, and conducting polymers and transition metal oxides/hydroxides are extensively studied as pseudocapacitance materials through fast reversible faradaic reactions in delivering higher specific capacitance than EDLCs. However, conducting polymers used as electrode materials often suffer from low cycle life because of the mechanical instability caused by swelling and shrinking during the charge/discharge processes, while most transition metal oxides show poor rate performance due to the low conductivity. Therefore, it is vital to combine conducting polymers or transition metal oxides with carbon-based materials to form composites, which is beneficial for the construction of electrode materials with high specific capacitance, excellent rate performance, and good cycling stability.
The refined-structure N-CNF, derived from one-step pyrolyzation of PANI coated BC nanocomposites, serves as an ideal supercapacitor electrode with excellent capacitive properties as well as providing a 3D scaffold for further deposition of ultrathin Ni-Co LDH nanosheets.83 The as-prepared N-CNF@LDH hybrid electrode exhibits enhanced electrochemical performance with a high specific capacitance of 1949.5 F g−1, and the developed asymmetric supercapacitor N-CNF@LDH//N-CNF exhibits a high energy density of 36.3 W h kg−1 at the power density of 800.2 W kg−1. Yuan and his co-workers synthesized another composite Ni3S2/CNF in a sequential procedure of pyrolyzation and hydrothermal methods, growing Ni3S2 nanoparticles on the surface of CNFs. The hybrid electrode displays an improved specific capacitance of 883 F g−1. The constructed asymmetric supercapacitor Ni3S2/CNF//CNF achieves a broad operating potential of up to 1.7 V, thus providing a high energy density of 25.8 W h kg−1. Meanwhile, the asymmetric supercapacitor demonstrates good cyclic stability with only 3% drop after 2500 cycles.72
MnO2 has attracted intensive attention because of its low cost, high theoretical pseudo-capacitance, and environmental compatibility, and has been extensively applied as an electrode material. Fan and his co-workers constructed an asymmetric supercapacitor with a 3D N-CNF achieved by the carbonization of PANI coated BC as the negative electrode material and the obtained N-CNF-network coated crystalline MnO2 (CNF/MnO2) as the positive electrode material (Fig. 12a). GCD curves of CNF/MnO2 are highly linear and symmetrical, implying excellent electrochemical reversibility. Additionally, the CNF/MnO2 electrode shows a high specific capacitance of 273 F g−1 at 2 mV s−1 and good capacitance retention of 75% from 2 to 100 mV s−1, superior to those of the pure MnO2. These enhanced performances are mainly attributed to the rapid and reversible intercalation/deintercalation of electrolyte ions and fast charge transfer from MnO2 to the carbon substrate along conductive carbon networks, endowing the asymmetric supercapacitor with a high specific capacitance of 113 F g−1, high energy density of 63 W h kg−1, and excellent cycling performance (only 8% capacitance loss after 5000 cycles) (Fig. 12b).70
 Fig. 12  Hybrid CNF materials for supercapacitors. (a–c) The fabrication of c-BP/MnO2//a-CBP hybrid supercapacitors. (a) Schematic diagram illustrating BC as a template and precursor for the synthesis of electrode materials for an asymmetric supercapacitor device. (b) Cycle performance of the c-BP/MnO2//a-CBP asymmetric supercapacitor with a voltage of 2.0 V at 200 mV s−1 in 1.0 M Na2SO4 aqueous solution (the inset shows the CV curves of the 1st and the 5000th cycle at 200 mV s−1). Reproduced with permission from ref. 70. (c–e) The fabrication of p-BC@MnO2-2h//p-BC/N-5M hybrid supercapacitors. (c) Scheme of our asymmetric supercapacitor device and (d) Ragone plots of the supercapacitors. (e) Digital image of a red-LED lit by the p-BC@MnO2-2h//p-BC/N-5M device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 119. 
Another similar asymmetric supercapacitor CNF@MnO2//N-CNF was fabricated using urea as the dopant (Fig. 12c).119 The optimized device achieves a considerably long cycling stability, high energy density of 32.91 W h kg−1 and maximum power density of 284.63 kW kg−1 (Fig. 12d and e). Furthermore, the supercapacitor exhibits good cycling durability with 95.4% specific capacitance retained after 2000 cycles. More importantly, these electrode materials have unique characteristics for low cost and easy fabrication.


3.1.4 BC-derived separators for supercapacitors. 
BC can be used as a separator because of its high porosity, refined nanostructure, hydrophilic properties and robust mechanical performance. Zhi and his co-workers reported a novel strategy to construct an all-biomaterial supercapacitor, with CNFs activated by pyrolyzing BC as the electrode material, and the dielectric semi-transparent BC-based gel electrolyte as the separator. The resultant all-biomaterial supercapacitor demonstrates a higher ion mobility with a solution resistance of 7.4 Ω, an excellent specific capacitance of 289 mF cm−2, and an acceptable cycling stability with 66.7% capacitance retention after 100 cycles.91 The concept of eco-friendly all-biomaterial supercapacitors has paved a new avenue for the efficient utility of eco-friendly biomaterials and the development of novel nanomaterials for various energy storage applications. Fei et al. prepared a highly flexible MnO2/RGO//RGO asymmetric supercapacitor, in which BC/PAAS-Na2SO4 was used as the gel electrolyte, as shown in Fig. 13a. This neutral gel electrolyte is not only eco-friendly, but also presents high viscosity and is sticky to combine two electrodes. The constructed device with a thin thickness of only 120 μm shows a high flexibility, and there are no obvious changes of the electrochemical performance even bending or rolling (Fig. 13b–d). What's more, the device displays a high performance with a large voltage of 1.8 V, a high energy density of 11.7 W h kg−1 and a good cycling stability (85.5% over 5000 cycles).92
 Fig. 13  BC-derived separators for supercapacitors. (a–d) The fabrication of MnO2/RGO and its property test. (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation process. (1) Vacuum filtration of MnO2/RGO, RGO colloidal suspension and graphite flake suspension; (2) compression to obtain MnO2/RGO and RGO hydrogel films with an attached graphite current collector; (3) compression to assemble the flexible supercapacitor (SC) with the obtained hydrogel films and the BC/PAAS-Na2SO4 gel electrolyte; (4) schematic structure of the assembled flexible asymmetric SC, demonstrating the role of the separation of BC. Flexibility of an asymmetric MnO2/RGO//RGO device. (b) CV curves at 10 mV s−1 at three different bending states: (c) flat, bent, and rolled; (d) capacitance retention after cycles of repeating flattening/bending and flattening/rolling and the photograph displays a green LED lit by two asymmetric devices in series, and demonstrates no obvious performance change of the LED from the flat state to the rolled state. Reproduced with permission from ref. 92. 
Based on the various advantages of low cost, mechanically robust 3D nanostructure, porous network and the high conduction properties of their pyrolytic products, BC-based materials have been verified not only to fabricate supercapacitors but also to implement in other kinds of energy storage devices, especially in rechargeable batteries(Table 3), such as LIBs,121,122 Li–S batteries,123,124 metal-air batteries79,125,126 and fuel cells.127,128 Herein, we mainly introduce several typical and significant research studies for applications in LIBs, Li–S batteries, and sodium ion batteries.
Table 3 Performance of BC-based rechargeable batteries




Application
Materials
Voltage range (V)
Coulombic efficiency
Electrochemical performance (mA h g−1) (low rate)
Electrochemical performance (mA h g−1) (high rate)
Cycle life
Ref.




LIBs
Fe2O3/CNFs
0.2–3.0 (Li/Li+)
100% (after 200 cycles)
1390 (0.2 A g−1)
870 (2 A g−1)
75% (400 cycles)

134



MoS2/CNFs
0–3.0 (Li/Li+)
66%
935 (0.1 A g−1)
267 (4 A g−1)
95.9% (1000 cycles)

133



A-pBC
0.01–3.0 (Li/Li+)
56%
1067.78 (0.1 A g−1)
261.3 (8 A g−1)
85.6% (100 cycles)

132



P-PBC
0.01–2.5 (Li/Li+)
70.03%
1039.7 mA h g−1
418.2 mA h g−1 at 2C
82.84% (1000 cycles)

136



PBC-SnO2
0.02–2.0 (Li/Li+)
98.5%
600 (0.1 A g−1)
380 (1 A g−1)



135



PBC-Ge
0.02–2.0 (Li/Li+)


500 (0.1 A g−1)
230 (0.7 A g−1)



135



Li–S
CNFA
1.6–2.8 (Li/Li+)
99%
1283 at 0.2C
689 at 2C
76% (200 cycles)

141



CBC/TiO2
1.8–2.8 (Li/Li+)
99.24%
1314 at 0.2C
537.1 at 2C
79.8% (50 cycles)

142



S@CBC-In
1.8–2.7 (Li/Li+)
98%
1134 (0.2 A g−1)
475 (3.2 A g−1)
400 mA g−1 (400 cycles)

140



SIBs
CNF/NPC
0–3.0 (Na/Na+)
29.4%
258 (0.05 A g−1)
146.5 (1 A g−1)
148.8 mA h g−1 (400 cycles)

143



BN-CNFs
0–2.8 V (Na/Na+)
36.6%
644 (0.2 A g−1)
314 (10 A g−1)
277 mA h g−1 (1000 cycles)

144



NOC
0.001–2.8 V (Na/Na+)
∼100%
650 (0.1 A g−1)
161 (5 A g−1)
249 mA h g−1 (2000 cycles)

145






3.2 Lithium–ion batteries

3.2.1 BC-derived carbon materials for LIBs. 
LIBs are one of the most promising energy storage devices because of their high capacity, large output voltage and appreciable lifespan, and have been extensively used in consumer electronics, electric vehicles and other electrical devices.129,130 As a result, several electrode, separator and electrolyte materials have been explored and designed to fulfil the various demands. To construct a high-performance flexible anode electrode for higher specific capacity and better cycle performance, the 3D multi-porous architecture CNF is applied to provide higher lithium storage, shorten the transport pathway of the ions/electrons and increase the active materials/electrolyte contact areas.
The first CNF-based LIB anode was proposed and developed by the Yu group,131 and then to further enhance the electrochemical performance, Cao et al. fabricated versatile 3D conductive CNF networks via KOH activation of CNFs.132 Notably, the as-prepared anode electrode can deliver a high specific capacity of 857.6 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 100 mA g−1 and maintain a super rate capacity even at 10 A g−1 (Table 3). The superior performance with good reversibility, high specific capacity (857.6 mA h g−1) and excellent stability could be attributed to its hierarchically porous architecture and unique cross-linked 3D webs, which not only supply a large surface area (as high as 1235.58 m2 g−1), but also serve as reservoirs for the storage of lithium ions. More importantly, the nanocarbon frameworks also retained a good structure, and no obvious destruction and fracture occurred after 100 discharge–charge cycles. Meanwhile, the 3D porous CNF hydrogels and aerogels have also demonstrated immense potential as scaffolds for the fabrication of 3D composites. By following this approach, MoS2 nanoleaves/CBC composites were also investigated (Fig. 14a). This composite shows high conductivity, high structural stability, and good flexibility, which can be directly used as an anode without any other binder and collector.133
 Fig. 14  BC-derived carbon materials for LIBs. (a and b) Schematic of the fabrication of the MoS2/CNF composite by (a) directly growing MoS2 on CNFs, with MoS2 randomly distributed on CNFs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 133. (c) Long-term cycle performance of A-Fe2O3@CBC at a current density of 1000 mA g−1. TEM images of (d) CBC, (o) A-Fe2O3@CBC, and the corresponding SAED pattern (inset in e) of A-Fe2O3@CBC; STEM image of (f) the AFe2O3@CBC composite, and the corresponding elemental mapping of C (red), O (green), and Fe (blue), respectively. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.) Reproduced with permission from ref. 134. 
Similarly, a 3D Fe2O3@CBC composite aerogel was prepared,134 as shown in Fig. 14d–f, the amorphous Fe2O3 nanoshells are tightly coated and stabilized onto the CBC nanofibril surface by an in situ thermal treatment. The composite anode exhibits high rate capability and stable cycling performance (Fig. 14c). Zhi and his co-workers135 utilized the conductive porous CNF as the scaffold to support SnO2 and Ge nanoparticle anode materials. The BC-derived carbon-SnO2 hybrid aerogel electrodes exhibit a reversible capacity of approximately 600 mA h g−1 under 100 mA g−1 after 100 cycles and good rate capability (380 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1). These unique features strongly imply that the CNF plays a vital role in promoting the formation of a homogeneous distribution of active nanoparticles, creating efficient electron transport pathways, facilitating the diffusion of lithium ions and resulting in an improved electrochemical performance.
Yang prepared a free-standing film from amorphous red phosphorus and pyrolyzed bacterial cellulose (P-PBC) through thermal carbonization, followed by the vaporization–condensation process. This flexible film presents a high reversible capacity of 1039.7 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 0.1C and good cycling stability (82.84% after 1000 cycles at 2C).136

3.2.2 BC-derived separators for LIBs
Separator is an indispensable component of LIBs, which is required not only to separate the anode and cathode electrodes, but also to supply enough transfer channels for Li-ions. The structure and properties of the separator have a significant influence on the performance of LIBs, such as safety, cycle stability, power density and energy density. A porous BC based film with unique fibrous structure is hydrophilic and shows good thermal/mechanical properties, which can be used as a separator for LIBs. Jiang successfully prepared a BC-based nanofibrous separator for LIBs through a facile hot-pressing fabrication method. The BC film demonstrates superior rate capability, electrolyte affinity, cycling stability, and excellent dimensional stability even at 180 °C, which are better than those of Celgard® polyolefin separators.89 However, the porosity and specific surface areas need to be increased to enhance the ionic conductivity. Xu et al. using hydrophilic inorganic Al2O3 to modify the BC via in situ thermal decomposition, the BC/Al2O3 composite film exhibits large porosity, excellent thermal performance, high tensile strength and ionic conductivity, consequently giving rise to good cycling stability and high discharge capacity. These phenomena suggest that BC based materials can be utilized as lithium metal battery separators.90
Electrolyte is another necessary part for LIBs, which is divided into three categories: liquid electrolyte, solid electrolyte and gel electrolyte. The liquid electrolyte shows higher ionic concentrations and lower resistances. However, there exist potential safety hazards. The solid electrolyte could efficiently prevent leakage and internal shorting, while the large interfacial resistance and low ionic conductivity hamper the potential application. Gel electrolytes can not only avoid leakage problems and reduce the packaging cost, but also show high ionic conductivity. Dong exploited a BC-based gel electrolyte to satisfy the requirement for high-voltage LiCoO2 LIBs, as shown in Fig. 15. BC was used to support poly(methyl vinyl ether-alt-maleic anhydride) (P(MVE-MA)) as the multifunctional polymer electrolyte for the first time, which shows excellent overall performance for a wide electrochemical window of 4.45 V, high ionic conductivity and a high lithium ion transference number. The constructed lithium metal battery delivered a superior capacity retention of 85% after 700 cycles at 60 °C. The extraordinary characteristics have paved a new avenue for the efficient utility of eco-friendly biomaterials and the design of novel polymer electrolytes for various high-voltage lithium metal cells.137
 Fig. 15  BC-derived electrolytes for LIBs. (a) A schematic representation of the PMM-CPE fabrication process. (b) Side-view SEM image of the P(MVE-MA) membrane. (c) Stress–strain curves of the PP separator in the transverse direction, the P(MVE-MA) membrane without bacterial cellulose and the P(MVE-MA) membrane with bacterial cellulose. (d) Schematic illustration of the mechanism of action of PMM-CPE in the 4.5 V-class LiCoO2/Li cell. (e) Schematic illustration of the flexible LiCoO2/Li metal cell and digital photographs of an LED lit up by the flexible LiCoO2/Li battery in a bent state. Reproduced with permission from ref. 137. 
3.3 Lithium–sulfur batteries
To obtain a high-performance rechargeable lithium battery to fulfil the requirements of further potential applications, it is necessary to develop high energy density cathode materials with long cycle life and excellent rate capability.
The S element is abundant, cheap and environmentally friendly. Li–S batteries have received considerable attention because of their low cost, high capacity (1675 mA h g−1), theoretical gravimetric (2500 W h kg−1) and volumetric energy density (2800 W h L−1),138 and gradually become the most promising candidates for next-generation rechargeable batteries. However, there are several challenges to be confronted: (1) during the electrochemical cycles, the volume changes of sulfur particles will lead to structural changes of the active materials, consequently, leading to low rate properties and low capacity. (2) Both S and Li2S are insulating, which will cause the sluggishness of electrochemical kinetics. (3) “Shuttle effect” of the polysulfides may increase the electric resistance and hinder the diffusivity of lithium ions.123,139
To settle these problems, various tactics have been taken to design and fabricate efficient electrodes, separators, and electrolytes. Recently, several investigations on BC based materials have been reported to construct high performance Li–S batteries. Sun et al.140 designed and fabricated a flexible cathode using S-doped CNF advanced Li–S batteries with an ultralight CNF interlayer inserted (CNF-In) between the S cathode and separator. The as-prepared S@CNF conductive film exhibits a high S content of 81 wt%, good electrical conductivity, and superior mechanical stability, and the inserted CNF film can provide an extra conductive framework, adsorb migrating polysulfides and improve the active material utilization (Fig. 16a). Benefiting from these merits, the S@CNF-In achieves good cycling stability, rate performance and coulombic efficiency with a high capacity of 1134 mA h g−1 at 200 mA g−1.
 Fig. 16  BC-derived carbon materials for Li–S batteries. (a–e) Schematic of the working mechanisms of S@CBC-In and S@CBC batteries, respectively. SEM and EDS characterization of the CBC interlayer and S/CBC cathodes after 300 cycles at 800 mA g−1: (b) SEM image of the cycled CBC interlayer, (c) the corresponding S mapping for the region shown in image (a), and the cycled S/CBC cathodes extracted from (d) S@CBC-In and (e) S@CBC batteries, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 140. (f) SEM images of the carbonized micro-fiber membrane. Cells without (g)/with (h) an interlayer. (d) Rate performances from 0.2C to 2C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141. 
The CNF interlayer plays a vital role in the process. The CNF interlayer still retains a good 3D porous microstructure after 300 cycles, and an amount of S species has been intercepted by the CNF interlayer and displayed good distribution in comparison with that of S/CNF composites (Fig. 16b–e). This is because a substantial amount of insoluble S species was deposited onto the surface, thus blocking the macropores, increasing electric resistance and hindering the diffusivity of lithium ions, while for the S@CNF-In, the inserted CNF can act as an additional collector to relieve the over-aggregation of insulating S on the cathode surface and be reutilized in the next cycle easily. During electrochemical cycles. The detailed illustration can be seen in Fig. 16a.
Similarly, a kind of crosslinked CNF aerogel (Fig. 16f) with extremely low density was obtained from BC, and this obtained aerogel was used as a S cathode matrix, which has strong absorption for the catholyte and confinement for polysulfides, resulting in a high S content and S loading.141 The fabricated battery displays outstanding performance with a high initial capacity of 1360 mA h g−1 at 0.2C, and excellent cycling stability with 76% capacity retention after 200 cycles, which is better than that without the interlayer (Fig. 16g and h).
As mentioned, heteroatom-doping is the most extensive and efficient method to improve the electrochemical performance, including increase of the active sites, promotion of electroconductivity, and increase of the interaction with active materials. To further enhance the performance of Li–S batteries, a N,O-codoped CNF aerogel was employed as the gel-based S cathode, which achieved a high S loading and content of 6.4 mg cm−2 with 90% capacity retention. The fabricated cell exhibited a high capacity of 943 mA h g−1 with an areal capacity of 5.9 mA h cm−2.146
Additionally, mixing BC-derived carbon materials with TiO2 can also be used as a separator modification strategy to promote the cycle stability and capacity retention of Li–S batteries. The nano-TiO2 shows strong chemical adsorption of polysulfides, while the carbon materials not only provide considerable physical adsorption for polysulfides but also act as the upper collector for the S. Thus, the modified separator can efficiently restrain the shuttle effect and improve the utilization of the active materials, and consequently, the Li–S batteries are constructed. The cell demonstrated a high capacity of 1314 mA h g−1 at 0.2C and rate capability of 537.1 mA h g−1 at 2C.142
3.4 Sodium-ion batteries
As mentioned above, LIBs play significant roles as one of the most promising energy storage devices and have attracted extensive interest for various applications. However, the low abundance, widespread uses, uneven distribution and high price have become the main restrictions and bottlenecks for the sustainable and large-scale application of LIBs.147 Currently, sodium-ion batteries (SIBs) have been regarded as a promising alternative to LIBs because of the abundant, eco-friendly and low-cost raw materials of Na.147,148 However, SIBs suffer from three critical issues as follows: (1) the radius of Na+ is 55% larger than that of Li+, which makes Na+ more difficult to insert/extract from host materials during the sodiation/desodiation process, resulting in poor cyclability and rate capability. (2) The kinetics of the Na storage process is much more sluggish than that of LIBs, which also limits its rate capability. (3) The structure may change during the insertion or extraction. Thus, great improvements are urgently required in developing some appropriate electrode materials. Among the various candidates, biomass-derived carbonaceous materials have been proved to be promising anode materials due to their good chemical and thermal stabilities and Na-storage capacity. BC, an eco-friendly nano-biomaterial, has attracted widespread attention due to its unique interconnected networks structure, robust physical properties, large specific surface area, good chemical stability and environmental friendliness.
Recently, heteroatom doping (N, B, S, P, I) has been demonstrated as an effective way to tune the electrical performance and has attracted more and more attention in the energy storage area. Among them, N could create extrinsic defects to improve the reactivity and electronic conductivity. B doping can change the active sites and enhance the conductivity of carbon materials.149 Zhang et al. fabricated a core–sheath CNF@N-doped porous carbon (CNF@NPC) composite by pyrolysis of PPy coated BC,143 as shown in Fig. 17f, in which BC is not only used as a template but also as the part of precursor for the active material. Because of the unique core–sheath structure and the synergetic effect, the CNF@NPC exhibits a high electronic conductivity, porous 3D network, and high surface area. Hence, the constructed anode shows a high reversible specific capacity (240 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 over 100 cycles), an excellent rate performance (146.5 mA h g−1 at 1000 mA g−1), and a superior cycling stability (148.8 mA h g−1 at 500 mA g−1 over 400 cycles) (Fig. 17g). The application of environmentally friendly electrode materials may open a new situation for SIBs. Compared to single-atom doping, dual-atom doping in carbon could exploit synergistic effects of the beneficial influence of the two heteroatoms. So, it is a promising option to co-dope carbon with two different heteroatoms, which takes advantage of the additionally created defect sites and electronic conductivity for sodium storage. To further increase the energy density and power density of the battery, the metal current collector and binder are not suggested to use, because these materials could not participate in sodium/lithium storage.
 Fig. 17  BC-derived carbon materials for SIBs. (a–e) BN-CNF electrode. Fabrication process of the BN-CNF electrode. (d) Elemental mapping images of the BN-CNF electrode. (e) The optimized models of pure graphene. (b–e) The optimized models of Na ions adsorbed on the models of pure graphene, B-graphene, N-graphene, BN-graphene, and B5N-graphene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 144. (f and g) CNF@NPC electrode. (f) Schematic illustration of the sodium storage mechanism in CNF@NPC. (A colour version of this figure can be viewed online.) (g) Long cycle performance at 500 mA g−1 of the CNF and CNF@NPC electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 143. 
It is proved to be a promising option to co-dope carbon with two or more heteroatoms, which results in synergistic effects of the benefits of different heteroatoms and creates more defect sites for increasing the electronic conductivity. Recently, Yu et al. synthesized B,N-Dual doped carbon networks by infiltrating NH4HB4O7·H2O into BC by subsequent carbonization (Fig. 17a–e).144 The synergistic effects enlarge the layer spacing for Na+ insertion/exertion, improving the electrochemical activity and electronic conductivity. The obtained carbon materials deliver a high electrochemical performance with a high specific charge capacity of 581 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 after 120 cycles, and good cycling stability (277 mA h g−1 at 10 A g−1 after 1000 cycles). Simultaneously, they developed N,O-dual doped carbon networks by using PANI and KOH as the doping agent and activation agent, respectively.145 The obtained carbon networks exhibited a high specific capacity (798 mA h g−1), long cycle life (545 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 after 100 cycles), and high rate capability (240 mA h g−1 at 2 A g−1 after 2000 cycles). The carbon materials have 3D well-defined porosity and N,O-dual dopant induced active sites, contributing to the enhanced sodium storage.
Given that several researchers have pioneered the research on BC-based electrodes with low cost, eco-friendliness and outstanding conductivity and structural properties, BC and its derivatives are verified to be promising materials for future practical applications of high-performance recharge batteries (Table 3).
4 Electrochemical energy conversion devices
Besides energy storage, energy conversion devices have also received considerable attention for the climate change caused by CO2 emissions and gradual depletion of fossil resources.150 In addition, energy conversion systems can output a reliable power supply whenever available. However, like energy storage systems, not only fuel cells but also water splitting cells suffer from low efficiency or high cost.151–153 To settle these issues, porous carbon materials have drawn more attention due to their outstanding performances, including high electrical conductivity, good stability, tunable morphology, and multi-functionality.154 Recently, numerous investigations have consistently demonstrated that BC-based materials with unique porous networks and high specific surface area are promising and potential electrocatalysts or catalyst supports for ORR and HER. In this part, we mainly discuss the various latest applications of BC-derived materials as electrocatalysts in ORR and HER, which are the fundamental process of fuel cells and electrochemical water splitting cells.
4.1 Oxygen reduction reaction (ORR)
Electrochemical reduction of oxygen is an indispensable step and displays a significant role in the performance of various energy conversion systems, such as metal-air batteries, microbial fuel, and hydrogen and alcohol fuel cells. Given the sluggish kinetics, Pt/Pt-based alloys are the most useful and efficient catalysts.155,156 However, not only the prohibitive costs and rare reserves of Pt, but also the poor durability during the charge/discharge process hampers its potential applications. Hence, it is essential to explore other alternative catalysts with low cost, abundant and green raw materials, high activity, and long-term stability.157,158 BC presents a high crystallinity, good purity, a high degree of polymerization and excellent mechanical properties. As mentioned, carbonization at high temperature and doping with heteroatoms (N, P, B O, etc.) can improve the surface properties, the electronic conductivity and the valence orbital energy levels of the adjacent carbon, thus inducing high electrocatalytic activity.
As mentioned above, a highly active N-CNF aerogel metal-free ORR electrocatalyst was developed via successive stages including direct pyrolysis and NH3 activation.79 The resulting N-CNF aerogel maintains the 3D porous network and displays a high BET surface area of 916 m2 g−1. Furthermore, the EFTEM elemental mapping reveals that the N element is uniformly and homogeneously dispersed within the whole nanofibrous network structure, and the density of N-containing active sites is as high as 5.8 at%. Such a N-CNF aerogel exhibits superior ORR activity with an ORR half-wave potential of 0.80 ± 0.01 V, good durability (the half-wave potential decreased to 20 mV after 10000 cycles) and high voltages, which are comparable with those of the state-of-the-art Pt/C catalyst. These results suggest that this kind of N-CNF aerogel is a promising replacement for Pt-based ORR catalysts for practical applications in fuel cells and metal-air batteries and other related devices.
Ye et al.159 developed a novel “vein-leaf”-type 3D composite through a simple and effective method, in which BC-derived carbon nanofibers and N-doped graphene from urea acted as the “vein” skeleton and “leaf” (CNF@NG), respectively. Urea not only serves as a precursor to obtain layered graphitic carbon nitride, but is also utilized as a sacrificial template to form graphene nanosheets. The unique CNF@NG catalyst presents high activity, superior stability and good tolerance to methanol, which are ascribed to the tough 3D network, facilitating ion/electron transfer in ORR and adsorption of more oxygen molecules. To solve the low yield and low density of BC-derived CNFs, Yu et al.160 fabricated a 3D N-doped hierarchically porous graphite carbon (HPGC) (Fig. 18a and b), in which the BC pellicles were employed as the substrate and sacrificial microreactor, and ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) was used as the carbon source and provided the N element, while the cobalt served as the recyclable pore-creating template. The resultant HPGC displays a large specific surface area of 868 m2 g−1, high porosity of 2.13 cm3 g−1, good methanol tolerance and a large number of structural defects, thus leading to a high ORR activity and stability.
 Fig. 18  BC-derived CNFs for ORR. (a and b) The comparison of the production processes for (a) HPGC and (b) CNFs. (a) The synthesis procedure of HPGC. (b) The conventional synthesis process for BC-derived CNFs (one route is via carbonization of pure BC at high temperature into CNFs and another is via pyrolysis of metal ion-loaded BC into CNF-M compounds). Reproduced with permission from ref. 160. (c) Schematic illustration of the preparation of the CFO/CNF nanocomposite. Reproduced with permission from ref. 162. 
To further improve the performance of carbon materials, Liu et al.161 prepared N,S-doped CNFs by in situ chemical polymerization and carbonization processes. Moreover, the activity can be regulated via varying the precursor; compared with small molecules, the polymer as the N/S source shows good catalytic activity with a half-wave potential of about 0.80 V in alkaline media, long-term stability and methanol tolerance compared to those of commercial 20 wt% Pt/C. The synthesis route, the catalyst structure, and the proposed mechanism open a novel avenue and insights to develop next-generation metal-free ORR catalysts.
By decorating with metal oxide nanoparticles, 3D carbon nanomaterials can be converted to highly active hybrid catalysts. BC is a cheap, abundant and green biomass with numerous-OH functional groups, which can be used as nucleation sites for metal oxide nanoparticles. Liu et al.162 explored CoFe2O4/CNF composites (CFO/CNF) in hydrothermal and pyrolytic treatment, the Co2+ and Fe3+ ions were first absorbed onto the surface of BC nanofibers and then reduced under hydrothermal treatment in the presence of NH4OH, and subsequently, the prepared materials were carbonized at 500 °C which resulted in the CoFe2O4 crystal and the CNF derived from BC (Fig. 18c). The synergistic effects endow the hybrid with high activity in both ORR and OER, fast charge transfer and high stability, which are much higher than those of benchmark RuO2/C (20 wt%) and Pt/C (20 wt%), respectively.
In another strategy, Ag nanoparticles were used to deposit onto a BC membrane through a facile in situ growth method directly without any carbonization.163 The obtained AgNP/BC membrane presented a high activity and good tolerance to glucose, which indicated its potential application in the related fuel cells. However, further improvement should be conducted to overcome the weak stability of 12% drop after 500 cycles.
4.2 Hydrogen evolution reaction (HER)
Hydrogen (H2) is considered as a perfect and promising next-generation energy resource to replace fossil fuels because of its high energy density (140 MJ kg−1) and clean emission.168,169 Normally, steam-methane reformation and water electrolysis are hailed as the state-of-the-art and typical technologies, while the former one suffers from high energy input, low hydrogen evolution rate and undesirable byproducts (CO2/CO).
The water splitting reaction consists of ORR and OER, and the H2 is the product of the half-reaction of HER.165 However, the catalysis is the requisite part during the water splitting process to overcome the intrinsically slow HER kinetics and achieve high catalytic efficiency. Hence, it is significant to develop efficient catalysis with high activity, low cost and high abundance. Pt/Pt-based compounds show outstanding performance and are regarded as the most efficient catalysts for HER.167 However, the scarcity and high cost hamper its potential applications. The porosity and high surface of the catalyst is a critical factor for HER, which can improve the interfacial catalytic reaction and enhance the catalytic activity and efficiency during the subsequent gas detachment process. Apart from ORR, BC-derived materials can also be well employed as catalysts in HER. For this reason, Huang et al.164 constructed a N-doped mesoporous graphene (N-MPG) via the combination of micelle-template synthesis and pyrolysis treatment, as shown in Fig. 19a. The SEM and TEM image suggested that MPG has a highly open porous architecture, containing enormous —sphere-like pores with a uniform size of 25 nm. The MPG prepared using a soft-template approach shows a high surface area of 927 m2 g−1, large pore volume of 3.29 cm3 g−1 and controllable pore sizes. The N-MPG displays a high electrocatalytic efficiency for H2 with an overpotential of 239 mV at 10 mA cm−2. Lai et al. prepared hierarchical nitrogen-doped carbon nanofiber/molybdenum disulfide (pBC-N/MoS2) nanocomposites, firstly, the PAIN is uniformly polymerized onto the surface of BC, the obtained products are treated by a high-temperature carbonization process to achieve the N doped material and then the pBC-N was used as the template for the growth of MoS2 nanosheets in a hydrothermal reaction, as shown in Fig. 19b. The pBC-N/MoS2 nanocomposites display superior electrocatalytic activity for HER with a small overpotential of 108 mV, low Tafel slope of 61 mV s−1, high current density of 8.7 mA cm−2 at η = 200 mV, and even excellent conductivity and stability. These outstanding performances are mainly attributed to the high conductivity of N-CNFs, high exposure of active edge sites, the 3D network and the intimate connection between N-CNF and MoS2 nanosheets. Similarly, Wei et al.166 developed CNFs/CoSe2 from the BC-derived CNF, Se and cobalt salt via hydrothermal treatment (Fig. 19c). The fabricated composites show a 3D porous network and a large surface area which facilitate charge transportation and show good performance with a small onset overpotential of 85 mV, smaller Tafel slope of 54 mV−1 and good cycling stability.
 Fig. 19  BC-derived CNFs for HER. (a) Schematic illustration of preparing mesoporous graphene. Self-assembly of partially reduced GO and F127 micelles, followed by calcination to obtain MPG. Morphology and structure of MPG. Reproduced with permission from ref. 164. (b) Schematic of the preparation of pBC-N/MoS2 nanocomposites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 165. (c) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of CNFs/CoSe2 hybrids. Reproduced with permission from ref. 166. 
These results indicate that BC-based 3D catalysts show excellent performance in the HER and provide a new strategy and concept for applying earth-abundant and cost-effective biological materials in energy conversion and storage areas (Table 4).
Table 4 Performance of BC-based electrocatalysts in energy conversion






Materials
Electrolyte
Half-wave potential
Limited current density
Stability
Ref.




ORR
N-CNFs
0.1 M KOH
0.80 V vs. RHE


∼97.5% after 10000 cycles

79



N,S-CNFs
0.1 M KOH
0.80 V vs. RHE


94% after 6000 s

161



HPGC
0.1 M KOH
0.84 V vs. RHE
5.32 mA cm−2
94% after 50000 s

160



BC/PAD/Ag
0.1 M KOH




66% after 1000 cycles

163



CoFe2O4/CNFs
0.1 M KOH


5.41 mA cm−2
96.3% after 35000 s

162



CNF@NG
0.1 M KOH
0.80 V vs. RHE
5.0 mA cm−2
90.1% after 36000 s

159









Materials
Electrolyte
Overpotential
Tafel slope
Stability
Ref.




HER
MPG
0.5 M H2SO4
239 mV at 10 mA cm−2
109 mV dec−1
∼100% after 1000 cycles

164



pBC-N/MoS2
0.5 M H2SO4
200 mV at 8.7 mA cm−2
61 mV dec−1
∼95% after 3000 s

165



CNFs/CoSe2
0.5 M H2SO4
119 mV at 10 mA cm−2
54 mV dec−1
∼100% after 2000 cycles

166



Pt@HN-BC
0.5 M H2SO4
−47 mV at 10 mA cm−2
−35 mV dec−1
∼93.5% after 5000 cycles

167





5. Conclusion and perspective
BC has received substantial interest owing to its unique ultrafine network features, and excellent mechanical properties including durable chemical stability, mechanical strength and high-water retention. The issues discussed above indicate that BC is indeed a very important and promising renewable biomaterial for energy storage and conversion.
The rational design and development of BC and its composites is the first step to realize the structure-function relationship, we first briefly introduce the source, natural properties and microstructural features of BC and analyze the relationship among the structure, characteristics, performance, and give the reason why it is suitable as a candidate material for the electrode and separator/electrolyte. Then, we build a comprehensive overview of the production process of various BC-derived hybrids, porous CNFs, doped CNFs and CNF hybrids based on BC. Furthermore, the rapid progress of BC and its composites have shown their immense potential applications, and we have also summarized the recent significant work in energy storage and energy conversion, including supercapacitors, LIBs, Li–S, SIBs, ORR and HER. Despite the above-mentioned impressive achievements, it should be noticed that the application of BC for energy storage and conversion is now in its early research stage. There remain challenges before the widespread implementation of BC in various practical areas can be realized.
(i) Large-scale production. BC can be produced by fermentation of various microorganisms, such as Acetobacter xylinum, Pseudomonas, Rhizobium, E. coli, etc., and several tons of BC can be produced in china every day from several research institutions and companies. However, the microstructure, surface properties, nanofibrillation degree and mechanical properties are quite different from those of laboratory products. Meanwhile, the bacterial species and strains, the additives, the cultivation conditions and the post-processing methods are all the influencing factors. Hence, it is still a significantly difficult task to achieve large-scale production of BC with uniformity, high aspect ratio and high quality. Thus, we should pay more emphasis on designing and optimizing fundamental equipment such as bacterial culture monitors, large capacity homogenizers, high-intensity ultrasonicators, supercritical dryers, vacuum filters, and tube furnaces to simplify the mechanistic study and achieve mass production with high quality to provide sustainable supply in energy and other related fields. Besides, in the fabrication of CNFs, the low carbonization yield is still another concern.
(ii) Diversity. As is known, the constituents and microstructure critically affect the performance, namely the “structure–function relationship”. In order to realize the widespread application of BC with various properties, more new and efficient synthesis strategies should be developed. Thus, we should regulate BC-based materials by changing the elemental composition (heteroatom-doping and modification) and controlling the microstructure such as porous structure and fibre-like layers to improve the activities for energy storage and conversion. Using different synthetic methods such as doping with heteroatoms and decorating with metal oxide nanoparticles, 3D carbon nanomaterials can be converted into multifunctional hybrid electrode materials with advantages such as high capacity and high catalytic activity. BC can also directly act as a template or scaffold to synthesize BC/conducting polymers via in situ polymerization. Additionally, the insulating BC is a promising green source of separator materials and electrolytes.
(iii) Interface engineering. While interface problems still exist within the whole electrode, including the active material within the electrode, the electrode/electrolyte, and the separator/electrolyte. We should further tune micro- and nano-scale structures, achieve a hierarchical micropore–mesopore structure to enhance the contact area of the electrode/electrolyte and separator/electrolyte, provide more ion transportation channels, and shorten the diffusion length, while for the separator, porous BC films should be applied to achieve electrical isolation but facilitate ion transport.
(iv) Multi-functional properties. Recent advances in flexible electronics have been motivated by a desire to discover and fabricate wearable and portable electronics for real applications. According to the related publications, whether BC is used as a substrate for carbon nanomaterials, metal oxides or conducting polymers in conjunction with suitable modifications for ensuring the conductivity of the whole flexible electrode, remarkable capacitance, good rate capability and good cycling stability have been achieved, clearly demonstrating that sustainable and low-cost BC can act as a tunable flexible platform for supporting other multifunctional materials. Hence, BC based CNFs are undoubtedly emerging as promising functional materials, which show enormous application potential in energy devices and related areas.
(v) New fabrication, new materials and new applications. Continued effort in the design and development of BC could make it one of the most promising materials for energy storage and conversion or some related areas, which will affect every aspect of our modern society. Therefore, it is urgent to adopt a new strategy to precisely tailor the pore structure and interface problems. The synthesis methods presented in this review, including BC based CNFs as the template and BC paper as the substrate for active materials, can be applied to support other functional materials for broad application.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Chang Jiang Scholars Program (No. 51073047), National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 91016015 and 21775078) and Youth Innovation Team Project of Shandong Provincial Education Department (No. 2019KJC023).
References
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 845–854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. G. Chang, X. C. Ma, Y. X. Zhang, L. Y. Wang, G. Tian, J. W. Liu, J. Wu, Z. Y. Hu, X. Y. Yang and B. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2019, 1904969, 1–9 Search PubMed .
H. Wang and H. Dai, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3088–3113 RSC .
J. P. Holdren, WIT Trans. Ecol. Environ., 2009, 121, 9–10 Search PubMed .
L. Huang, S. Lin, Z. Xu, H. Zhou, J. Duan, B. Hu and J. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2019, 1902034, 1–20 Search PubMed .
D. Chen, K. Jiang, T. Huang and G. Shen, Adv. Mater., 2019, 1901806, 1–19 Search PubMed .
Y. Fang, X. Li, J. Li, C. Yao, H. Y. Hoh, X. Hai, J. Lu and C. Su, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 25691–25711 RSC .
Y. Zhou, X. Wang, L. Acauan, E. Kalfon-Cohen, X. Ni, Y. Stein, K. K. Gleason and B. L. Wardle, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1–8 Search PubMed .
W. Guo, C. Yu, S. Li, X. Song, H. Huang, X. Han, Z. Wang, Z. Liu, J. Yu, X. Tan and J. Qiu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1–10 Search PubMed .
J. Shi, S. Liu, L. Zhang, B. Yang, L. Shu, Y. Yang, M. Ren, Y. Wang, J. Chen, W. Chen, Y. Chai and X. Tao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 1901958, 1–37 Search PubMed .
Z. Yang, J. Zhang, M. C. W. Kintner-Meyer, X. Lu, D. Choi, J. P. Lemmon and J. Liu, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3577–3613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, Z. Liu, G. Cui and L. Chen, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2015, 43, 136–164 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, W. Lu, G. Zhou and Q. Li, Adv. Mater., 2019, 1902028, 1–21 Search PubMed .
R. You, Y. Q. Liu, Y. L. Hao, D. D. Han, Y. L. Zhang and Z. You, Adv. Mater., 2019, 1901981, 1–22 Search PubMed .
J. Diao, Y. Qiu, S. Liu, W. Wang, K. Chen, H. Li, W. Yuan, Y. Qu and X. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2019, 1905679, 1–11 Search PubMed .
Y. H. Zhu, X. Y. Yang, T. Liu and X. B. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 1901961, 1–19 Search PubMed .
A. Mulyadi, Z. Zhang, M. Dutzer, W. Liu and Y. Deng, Nano Energy, 2017, 32, 336–346 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, D. Huang, B. Zhang, X. Xu, M. Wang, G. Yang and Y. Shen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1–7 Search PubMed .
S. P. Lin, I. Loira Calvar, J. M. Catchmark, J. R. Liu, A. Demirci and K. C. Cheng, Cellulose, 2013, 20, 2191–2219 CrossRef CAS .
M. Balat and G. Ayar, Energy Sources, 2005, 27, 931–940 CrossRef .
Z. Y. Wu, C. Li, H. W. Liang, J. F. Chen and S. H. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 2925–2929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Wu, H. W. Liang, L. F. Chen, B. C. Hu and S. H. Yu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 96–105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Shi, Y. Zhang, G. O. Phillips and G. Yang, Food Hydrocolloids, 2014, 35, 539–545 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, Y. Zheng, X. Wen, Q. Lin, X. Chen and Z. Wu, Biomed. Mater., 2014, 9, 035005 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Ma, R. Liu, H. Niu, M. Zhao and Y. Huang, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2016, 137, 87–93 CrossRef CAS .
K. Qiu and A. N. Netravali, Polym. Rev., 2014, 54, 598–626 CrossRef CAS .
M. Iguchi, S. Yamanaka and A. Budhiono, J. Mater. Sci., 2000, 35, 261–270 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chen, S. Y. Cho and H. J. Jin, Macromol. Res., 2010, 18, 309–320 CrossRef CAS .
W. Hu, S. Chen, Z. Yang, L. Liu and H. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2011, 115, 8453–8457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, E. Zhu, J. Yang, P. Zhou, D. Sun and W. Tang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 13013–13019 CrossRef CAS .
H. Luo, J. Xie, L. Xiong, Y. Zhu, Z. Yang and Y. Wan, Composites, Part B, 2019, 162, 484–490 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu, M. Yu, G. Wang, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2160–2181 RSC .
Y. Zheng, Y. Yang, S. Chen and Q. Yuan, CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 4218–4235 RSC .
S. Zhang, Y. Chen, H. Liu, Z. Wang, H. Ling, C. Wang, J. Ni, B. C. Saltik, X. Wang, X. Meng, H. J. Kim, A. Baidya, S. Ahadian, N. Ashammakhi, M. R. Dokmeci, J. Travas-Sejdic and A. Khademhosseini, Adv. Mater., 2019, 1904752, 1–7 Search PubMed .
B. Fang, D. Chang, Z. Xu and C. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 1902664, 1–29 Search PubMed .
Y. Jang, S. M. Kim, G. M. Spinks and S. J. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2019, 1902670, 1–14 Search PubMed .
W. Yang, J. Yang, J. J. Byun, F. P. Moissinac, J. Xu, S. J. Haigh, M. Domingos, M. A. Bissett, R. A. W. Dryfe and S. Barg, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1–8 Search PubMed .
V. L. Deringer, M. A. Caro and G. Csányi, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1–16 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhou, C. H. Wang, W. Lu and L. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2019, 1902779, 1–24 Search PubMed .
W. Tian, A. VahidMohammadi, M. S. Reid, Z. Wang, L. Ouyang, J. Erlandsson, T. Pettersson, L. Wågberg, M. Beidaghi and M. M. Hamedi, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Karnaushenko, T. Kang, V. K. Bandari, F. Zhu and O. G. Schmidt, Adv. Mater., 2019, 1902994, 1–30 Search PubMed .
W. Sun, X. Tang, Q. Yang, Y. Xu, F. Wu, S. Guo, Y. Zhang, M. Wu and Y. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1–8 Search PubMed .
X. Y. Du, Q. Li, G. Wu and S. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2019, 1903733, 1–38 Search PubMed .
Q. Niu, K. Gao and Z. Shao, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 4083–4088 RSC .
Q. Zheng, Z. Cai, Z. Ma and S. Gong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 3263–3271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yu, Z. Wang, Y. Han, Y. Tong, X. Lu and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 4634–4658 RSC .
T. Chen and L. Dai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 10756–10775 RSC .
H. Gwon, H. S. Kim, K. U. Lee, D. H. Seo, Y. C. Park, Y. S. Lee, B. T. Ahn and K. Kang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1277–1283 RSC .
U. N. Maiti, J. Lim, K. E. Lee, W. J. Lee and S. O. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 615–619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Huang, F. Li, F. Dong, Y. X. Zhang and L. L. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 21380–21423 RSC .
L. Jin, Z. Zeng, S. Kuddannaya, D. Wu, Y. Zhang and Z. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 1011–1018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Kang, S. J. Chun, S. S. Lee, B. Y. Kim, J. H. Kim, H. Chung, S. Y. Lee and W. Kim, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 6400–6406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Lai, Y. E. Miao, L. Zuo, Y. Zhang and T. Liu, ChemNanoMat, 2016, 2, 212–219 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, L. Bian, P. Zhou, J. Tang and W. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 578–584 RSC .
S. Li, D. Huang, J. Yang, B. Zhang, X. Zhang, G. Yang, M. Wang and Y. Shen, Nano Energy, 2014, 9, 309–317 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ma, R. Liu, H. Niu, F. Wang, L. Liu and Y. Huang, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 222, 429–437 CrossRef CAS .
S. Virji, R. B. Kaner and B. H. Weiller, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 22266–22270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, S. Yun, S. K. Mahadeva, K. Yun, S. Y. Yang and M. Maniruzzaman, Sensors, 2010, 10, 1473–1485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Müller, C. R. Rambo, D. O. S. Recouvreux, L. M. Porto and G. M. O. Barra, Synth. Met., 2011, 161, 106–111 CrossRef .
Y. Bu, M. Cao, Y. Jiang, L. Gao, Z. Shi, X. Xiao, M. Wang, G. Yang, Y. Zhou and Y. Shen, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 271, 624–631 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Lee, T. J. Chung, H. J. Kwon, H. J. Kim and W. T. Y. Tze, Cellulose, 2012, 19, 1251–1258 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sheng, S. Chen, J. Yao, F. Guan, M. Zhang, B. Wang, Z. Wu, P. Ji and H. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 368, 1022–1032 CrossRef CAS .
H. Luo, J. Dong, Y. Zhang, G. Li, R. Guo, G. Zuo, M. Ye, Z. Wang, Z. Yang and Y. Wan, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 334, 1148–1158 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ma, R. Liu, L. Liu, F. Wang, H. Niu and Y. Huang, J. Power Sources, 2016, 335, 76–83 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, M. He, P. He, C. Li, H. Liu, X. Zhang and Y. Ma, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 433, 419–427 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu, Y. Zhang, W. Yuan, Y. Zhao, S. Luo, X. Yuan, L. Zheng and L. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 16617–16626 RSC .
R. Liu, L. Ma, S. Huang, J. Mei, J. Xu and G. Yuan, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 857–864 RSC .
L. L. Zhang and X. S. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2520–2531 RSC .
W. Lei, L. Han, C. Xuan, R. Lin, H. Liu, H. L. Xin and D. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 210, 130–137 CrossRef CAS .
C. Long, D. Qi, T. Wei, J. Yan, L. Jiang and Z. Fan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 3953–3961 CrossRef CAS .
K. Y. Lee, H. Qian, F. H. Tay, J. J. Blaker, S. G. Kazarian and A. Bismarck, J. Mater. Sci., 2013, 48, 367–376 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yu, W. Lin, X. Shao, Z. Hu, R. Li and D. Yuan, J. Power Sources, 2014, 272, 137–143 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang, J. Yan, X. Wu, D. Shan, Q. Zhou, L. Jiang, D. Yang and Z. Fan, J. Power Sources, 2016, 307, 190–198 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hao, J. Wang, B. Ding, Y. Wang, Z. Chang, H. Dou and X. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2017, 352, 34–41 CrossRef CAS .
R. Liu, L. Ma, J. Mei, S. Huang, S. Yang, E. Li and G. Yuan, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 2610–2618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhang, J. Lang, L. Liu, L. Liu, H. Li, Y. Gu, X. Yan and X. Ding, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2017, 28, 2212–2218 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Y. Liu, M. Wang, X. Xu, T. Lu, C. Q. Sun and L. Pan, Carbon, 2018, 130, 377–383 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Wu, H. W. Liang, C. Li, B. C. Hu, X. X. Xu, Q. Wang, J. F. Chen and S. H. Yu, Nano Res., 2014, 7, 1861–1872 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Liang, Z. Y. Wu, L. F. Chen, C. Li and S. H. Yu, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 366–376 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ma, R. Liu, H. Niu, L. Xing, L. Liu and Y. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 33608–33618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. F. Chen, Z. H. Huang, H. W. Liang, W. T. Yao, Z. Y. Yu and S. H. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3331–3338 RSC .
Y. Chang, L. Zhou, Z. Xiao, J. Liang, D. Kong, Z. Li, X. Zhang, X. Li and L. Zhi, ChemElectroChem, 2017, 4, 2448–2452 CrossRef CAS .
F. Lai, Y. E. Miao, L. Zuo, H. Lu, Y. Huang and T. Liu, Small, 2016, 12, 3235–3244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. C. Dong, H. Xu, X. W. Wang, Y. X. Huang, M. B. Chan-Park, H. Zhang, L. H. Wang, W. Huang and P. Chen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3206–3213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wu, S. Yang, Y. Sun, K. Parvez, X. Feng and K. Mullen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9082–9085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xu, J. Zhou, D. H. Nagaraju, L. Jiang, V. R. Marinov, G. Lubineau, H. N. Alshareef and M. Oh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 3193–3202 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, Y. Liu, S. Liu, L. Li, C. Zhang and T. Liu, Mater. Chem. Front., 2017, 1, 251–268 RSC .
G. Wang, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 797–828 RSC .
F. Jiang, L. Yin, Q. Yu, C. Zhong and J. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 279, 21–27 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xu, C. Wei, L. Fan, S. Peng, W. Xu and J. Xu, Cellulose, 2017, 24, 1889–1899 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, D. Kong, Y. Zhang, B. Wang, X. Li, T. Qiu, Q. Song, J. Ning, Y. Song and L. Zhi, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 9146–9150 RSC .
H. Fei, N. Saha, N. Kazantseva, R. Moucka, Q. Cheng and P. Saha, Materials, 2017, 10, 1251 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Gogotsi and P. Simon, Science, 2011, 334, 917–918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Z. Zhang, Y. Wang, T. Cheng, W. Y. Lai, H. Pang and W. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5181–5199 RSC .
Q. C. Liu, J. J. Xu, D. Xu and X. B. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 1–8 Search PubMed .
O. Inganäs and S. Admassie, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 830–848 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhai, Y. Dou, D. Zhao, P. F. Fulvio, R. T. Mayes and S. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4828–4850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cao, Z. Yin and H. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1850–1865 RSC .
X. Peng, L. Peng, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 3303–3323 RSC .
C. Wu, X. Lu, L. Peng, K. Xu, X. Peng, J. Huang, G. Yu and Y. Xie, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1–7 Search PubMed .
Z. Xiong, C. Liao, W. Han and X. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4469–4475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Guan, S. Chen, N. Sheng, Y. Chen, J. Yao, Q. Pei and H. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 360, 829–837 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xia, W. Chen, X. Wang, M. N. Hedhili, N. Wei and H. N. Alshareef, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401805 CrossRef .
C. Yang, J. Shen, C. Wang, H. Fei, H. Bao and G. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 1458–1464 RSC .
Y. Zhao, J. Liu, Y. Hu, H. Cheng, C. Hu, C. Jiang, L. Jiang, A. Cao and L. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 591–595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Song, J. L. Xu and X. X. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2014, 249, 48–58 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, L. Zhu, Z. Bai, G. Liang, L. Liu, D. Fang and W. Xu, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 3331–3338 CrossRef CAS .
S. Peng, L. Fan, C. Wei, X. Liu, H. Zhang, W. Xu and J. Xu, Carbohydr. Polym., 2017, 157, 344–352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Peng, L. Fan, C. Wei, H. Bao, H. Zhang, W. Xu and J. Xu, Cellulose, 2016, 23, 2639–2651 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, H. J. Kim, S. Park, C. D. Kee, S. J. Kim and I. K. Oh, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2016, 128, 33–40 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yuan, B. Yao, B. Hu, K. Huo, W. Chen and J. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 470–476 RSC .
Q. Jiang, C. Kacica, T. Soundappan, K. K. Liu, S. Tadepalli, P. Biswas and S. Singamaneni, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 13976–13982 RSC .
R. Liu, L. Ma, G. Niu, X. Li, E. Li, Y. Bai and G. Yuan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1–9 Search PubMed .
R. Liu, L. Ma, S. Huang, J. Mei, J. Xu and G. Yuan, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 107426–107432 RSC .
R. Liu, L. Ma, S. Huang, J. Mei, E. Li and G. Yuan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 28480–28488 CrossRef CAS .
N. Islam, S. Li, G. Ren, Y. Zu, J. Warzywoda, S. Wang and Z. Fan, Nano Energy, 2017, 40, 107–114 CrossRef CAS .
L. F. Chen, Z. H. Huang, H. W. Liang, H. L. Gao and S. H. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 5104–5111 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Hu, S. Li, P. Cheng, W. Yu, R. Li, X. Shao, W. Lin and D. Yuan, J. Mater. Sci., 2016, 51, 2627–2633 CrossRef CAS .
L. F. Chen, Z. H. Huang, H. W. Liang, Q. F. Guan and S. H. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4746–4752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Peng, Q. Xu, L. Fan, C. Wei, H. Bao, W. Xu and J. Xu, Synth. Met., 2016, 222, 285–292 CrossRef CAS .
H. Take, S. Yamanaka, M. Ishihara and K. Yoshino, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., Part 1, 2002, 41, 3137–3139 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shim, Y. Jin, S. Seo, S. Lee and D. Kim, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 443–449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Seh, Y. Sun, Q. Zhang and Y. Cui, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 5605–5634 RSC .
W. Chen, H. Yu, S. Y. Lee, T. Wei, J. Li and Z. Fan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 2837–2872 RSC .
F. Sharifi, S. Ghobadian, F. R. Cavalcanti and N. Hashemi, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 52, 1453–1472 CrossRef .
L. Hu and Y. Cui, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6423–6435 RSC .
T. Bayer, B. V. Cunning, R. Selyanchyn, M. Nishihara, S. Fujikawa, K. Sasaki and S. M. Lyth, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 4805–4814 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, A. A. Armentrout, J. Li, H. L. Tekinalp, J. Nanda and S. Ozcan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 13350–13356 RSC .
W. Li, B. Song and A. Manthiram, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3006–3059 RSC .
P. Li, X. Dong, C. Li, J. Liu, Y. Liu, W. Feng, C. Wang, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 2093–2097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. W. Liang, Q. F. Guan, Z. Z. Zhu, L. T. Song, H. Bin Yao, X. Lei and S. H. Yu, NPG Asia Mater., 2012, 4, 19 CrossRef .
W. Wang, Y. Sun, B. Liu, S. Wang and M. Cao, Carbon, 2015, 91, 56–65 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, Y. Tang, Y. Yang, X. Zhang and C. S. Lee, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 211, 404–410 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, Z. Lin, M. Zheng, T. Wang, J. Yang, F. Yuan, X. Lu, L. Liu and D. Sun, J. Power Sources, 2016, 307, 649–656 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, X. Li, B. Luo, J. Yang, X. Wang, Q. Song, S. Chen and L. Zhi, Small, 2013, 9, 2399–2404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yang, Y. Li, P. Long, J. Han, C. Cao, F. Yao and W. Feng, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 17325–17333 RSC .
T. Dong, J. Zhang, G. Xu, J. Chai, H. Du, L. Wang, H. Wen, X. Zang, A. Du, Q. Jia, X. Zhou and G. Cui, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1197–1203 RSC .
Y. Zheng, S. Zheng, H. Xue and H. Pang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 3469–3491 RSC .
W. Li, J. Qian, T. Zhao, Y. Ye, Y. Xing, Y. Huang, L. Wei, N. Zhang, N. Chen, L. Li, F. Wu and R. Chen, Adv. Sci., 2019, 1802362, 1802362 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Huang, M. Zheng, Z. Lin, B. Zhao, S. Zhang, J. Yang, C. Zhu, H. Zhang, D. Sun and Y. Shi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10910–10918 RSC .
S. Li, J. Warzywoda, S. Wang, G. Ren and Z. Fan, Carbon, 2017, 124, 212–218 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, G. Wang, P. Wang, J. Yang, K. Zhang, Y. Liu and Y. Lai, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2017, 788, 150–155 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, J. Zhang, X. Zhao and F. Yang, Carbon, 2015, 95, 552–559 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, Y. Yang, Z. Yang, L. Gu, Q. Chen and Y. Yu, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600468 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Wang, Z. Yang, W. Li, L. Gu and Y. Yu, Small, 2016, 12, 2559–2566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, T. Mou, G. Ren, J. Warzywoda, Z. Wei, B. Wang and Z. Fan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1650–1657 RSC .
Y. Zhao, L. P. Wang, M. T. Sougrati, Z. Feng, Y. Leconte, A. Fisher, M. Srinivasan and Z. Xu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601424 CrossRef .
B. Scrosati, Electrochim. Acta, 2000, 45, 2461–2466 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wei, H. E. Karahan, S. Zhai, Y. Yuan, Q. Qian, K. Goh, A. K. Ng and Y. Chen, J. Energy Chem., 2016, 25, 191–198 CrossRef .
T. D. O. Gadim, A. G. P. R. Figueiredo, N. C. Rosero-Navarro, C. Vilela, J. A. F. Gamelas, A. Barros-Timmons, C. P. Neto, A. J. D. Silvestre, C. S. R. Freire and F. M. L. Figueiredo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 7864–7875 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, W. Xu, X. Chen, Y. Peng, Y. Song, C. Lv, H. Liu, J. Sun, D. Yuan, X. Li, X. Guo, D. Yang and L. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1–11 CAS .
Z. Wang, H. Liu, R. Ge, X. Ren, J. Ren, D. Yang, L. Zhang and X. Sun, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 2236–2241 CrossRef CAS .
G. Song, Z. Wang, J. Sun, J. Sun, D. Yuan and L. Zhang, Electrochem. Commun., 2019, 105, 106487 CrossRef CAS .
M. Borghei, J. Lehtonen, L. Liu and O. J. Rojas, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1–27 Search PubMed .
C. Sealy, Mater. Today, 2008, 11, 65–68 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Debe, Nature, 2012, 486, 43–51 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wu, K. L. More, C. M. Johnston and P. Zelenay, Science, 2011, 332, 443–447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, Z. Y. Wu, H. L. Jiang and S. H. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 14385–14388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. N. Ye, L. B. Lv, X. H. Li, M. Xu and J. S. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 6905–6909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yu, J. Sunarso, W. Zhuang, G. Yang, Y. Zhong, W. Zhou, Z. Zhu and Z. Shao, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2017, 1, 1700045 CrossRef .
J. Liu, Y. G. Ji, B. Qiao, F. Zhao, H. Gao, P. Chen, Z. An, X. Chen and Y. Chen, Catalysts, 2018, 8, 269 CrossRef .
S. Liu, W. Yan, X. Cao, Z. Zhou and R. Yang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 5351–5360 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, K. Qiao, Y. Zheng, S. Liu, Y. Xie, M. Zhang, L. Yue and C. Wang, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2017, 799, 377–385 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, Y. Zhao, Z. Ao and G. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 1–6 Search PubMed .
F. Lai, Y. E. Miao, Y. Huang, Y. Zhang and T. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 3558–3566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wei, J. Luo, L. Jiang, L. Qiu, J. Zhang, D. Zhang, P. Xu and D. Yuan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 20704–20711 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, J. Tan, F. Wen, Z. Zhou, M. Zhu, S. Yin and H. Wang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 6167–6176 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, Z. Jiang, H. Zhang, L. Liu, L. Fang, X. Gu and Y. Wang, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1099–1104 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao, S. Wang, C. Feng, H. Wu, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 40491–40499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
Lina Ma	Lina Ma received her PhD from the Harbin Institute of Technology in 2018. She started as an associate professor at College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at Qingdao University in 2018. Her research interests focus on the design and controlled synthesis of conducting polymers and their carbon nanocomposites, and their applications in electrochemistry-related areas such as electrochromism, energy storage and conversion.
Zhijie Bi	Zhijie Bi received his PhD from the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2018. He started as a lecturer at College of Physics in Qingdao University in 2018. His research interests focus on solid electrolytes and solid-state batteries.
Lixue Zhang	Lixue Zhang is a Professor of the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at Qingdao University. He received his PhD in Chemistry from the Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2009. His postdoc research in Germany was supported by the Alexander von Humboldt Research Fellowship for Postdoctoral Researchers. He worked at Qingdao Institute of Bioenergy and Bioprocess Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences as an associate professor in 2011. He joined Qingdao University in 2015 and was promoted to a full professor in 2017. His research interests are nanomaterial-based electrocatalysis and electroanalysis, and electrochemical energy storage and conversion (especially metal-air batteries).
Yudong Huang	Yudong Huang received his PhD in 1993 from the Harbin Institute of Technology. He became full professor in 1997 and now he is the dean of school of chemistry and chemical engineering at Harbin Institute of Technology. He has published more than 760 papers on peer-reviewed journals and his work has been cited more than 8700 times. His research topics include the surface and interface modification of polymer composites, biopolymer materials, and sustainable and highly efficient energy-storage devices.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Photograph of a BC slice. (b) Structure of BC. (c) The number of publications of BC from 2000 to 2019 (last update on August 28, 2019). (d) Schematic model of the plant cellulose fibrils (left) and the BC microfibers (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 27. (e) SEM and (f) TEM of the BC. Reproduced with permission from ref. 25.	 

 	Scheme 1  Schematic diagram of the BC structure and functional design for applications in energy storage and conversion.	 

 	Fig. 2  Summary of the structure–function relationship of BC for energy storage and conversion applications.	 

 	Fig. 3  The hybrids of BC with carbon materials. (a) One-step preparation of the covalently bonded BC/GO composite. (b) Electrical conductivity. (c and d) Stress–strain curves of (c) GO and (d) the BC/GO composite. The inset image shows the specimens before and after the stress–strain test. Reproduced with permission from ref. 51. (e–j) Fabrication process of BC papers coated with CNTs. (e) BC pellicle produced by culturing Gluconacetobacter xylinus. (f) Bleached pellicles. (g) Semi-transparent BC paper. (h) Vacuum filtering apparatus loaded with a BC paper. (i) Deposition of a CNT layer by the filtering process. (j) Flexible CNT-coated BC paper. Reproduced with permission from ref. 52.	 

 	Fig. 4  The hybrids of BC with conducting polymers. (a) Schematic of the synthesis procedure of BC-PEDOT paper electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 60. (b) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process and structure of PPy@TOBC/rGO macrofibers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. (c–g) BC/GE/PANI hybrid. (c) The schematic illustration of the preparation process of BC/GE/PANI; (d) SEM image of BC/GE, (e) TEM image of BC/GE, (f) SEM image of BC/PANI, and (g) the SEM image of BC/GE/PANI (inset showing a photograph of a bent BC/GE/PANI sample). Reproduced with permission from ref. 63.	 

 	Fig. 5  The hybrids of BC with metal compounds. (a–c) Ni(OH)2/RGO/BC hybrid. (a) Schematic representation of the fabrication process of the Ni(OH)2/RGO/BC electrode. (b) High-resolution SEM images of Ni(OH)2/RGO/BC. (c) Cross-sectional SEM micrographs of Ni(OH)2/RGO/BC. Reproduced with permission from ref. 64. (d) Schematic illustration of the preparation process of ultrathin K-birnessite type MnO2 nanosheets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 65. (e–l) NiCo-LDH/PANI/BC hybrid. (e–g) Schematic illustration of the synthetic procedure of NiCo-LDH/PANI/BC and (e1–g1) the corresponding digital photographs; (h–l) digital photographs show the flexibility, foldability and toughness of NiCo-LDH/PANI/BC. Reproduced with permission from ref. 66.	 

 	Fig. 6  Porous CNF materials. (a–c) PCN/CNF composite. (a) Scheme illustration of the synthesis of the PCN/CNF composite. (b) SEM and (c) TEM images of the as-prepared PCN/CNF composite. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73 (d–g) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of CN-BC and digital photographs: (d) Gel-like origin BC membrane. (e) The dry BC@SiO2 membrane. (f) The obtained carbon films. (g) Specific capacitances of BC and CN-BC electrodes in the three-electrode system using 6 M KOH as the electrolyte at various current densities. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74.	 

 	Fig. 7  The fabrication process of doped CNF aerogels. (a) (1) BC hydrogels were soaked in various organic dye solutions (imitating waste-water) until saturation sorption; (2) after freeze-drying of the as-obtained BC/dye hybrid hydrogels, various BC/dye hybrid aerogels were obtained; (3) further pyrolysis of BC/dye hybrid aerogels under flowing N2 produced doped CNF aerogels. Reproduced with permission from ref. 78. (b) Schematic illustration of the preparation of p-BC and p-MBC samples. Reproduced with permission from ref. 76. (c) Schematic diagram of the preparation of CNFA800 and N-CNFA. (d) TEM image of N-CNFA800; Elemental mapping images of NCNFA800, (e) the C element, (f) the O element and (g) the N element, the inset is the magnified SEM image of N-CNFA800. Reproduced with permission from ref. 79.	 

N-CNF/RGO/BC//N-CNF/RGO/BC	0–1	810/— (2 mV s−1)	755 (50 mV s−1)	99.6% (10000)	0.11 mW h cm−2	27 mW cm−2	
80

N,P-CNF/RGO/BC//N,P-CNF/RGO/BC	0–1	690/— (2 mV s−1)	620 (40 mV s−1)	99.6% (10000)	0.096 mW h cm−2	19.98 mW cm−2	
75

BC/CNT/ion gel supercapacitors	0–3	18.8/46.9 (100 mV s−1)	42.0 (500 mV s−1)	99.5% (50000)	15.5 W h kg−1	1.5 kW kg−1	
52

A-CNF//BC gel//a-CNF supercapacitors	0–1	289/— (0.1 mA cm−2)	70% (10 mA cm−2)	66.7% (100)	—	—	
91

BC/PPY/CNT//BC/PPY/CNT	0–0.8	590/— (1 mA cm−2)	—	94.5% (5000)	—	—	
55

PPY/BC/RGO//PPY/BC/RGO	0–1	1670/— (0.5 mA cm−2)	670 (50 mA cm−2)	65.4% (8000)	0.23 mW h cm−2	23.5 mW cm−2	
56

PANI/BC/RGO//PANI/BC/RGO	0–0.8	1930/— (0.25 mA cm−2)	53.6% (10 mA cm−2)	—	0.17 mW h cm−2	3.72 mW cm−2	
114

PPY/RGO/BC//PPY/RGO/BC	0–1	790/— (1 mA cm−2)	360 (30 mA cm−2)	75.8% (3000)	0.11 mW h cm−2	15 mW cm−2	
25

PANI/RGO/BC//PANI/RGO/BC	0–0.8	1320/— (0.25 mA cm−2)	—	90% (2000)	0.12 mW h cm−2	4.45 mW cm−2	
67


 	Fig. 8  Hybrid materials. (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of PBC-RGON. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. (b–h) CBC-N@LDH composites. (b) Schematic of the preparation of CBC-N@LDH composites; (c) Photographs of the pristine bacterial cellulose pellicle and freeze-dried bacterial cellulose membrane (inset) with a size of 30 × 40 cm2 and 4 × 5 cm2, respectively; (d) FESEM image and photograph (inset) of the CBC membrane; FESEM image of pure (e) PANI powder, (f) CBC-N1, (g) CBC-N2, and (h) CBC-N3 nanofibers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 83.	 

 	Fig. 9  BC-derived separators. (a–d) BC membrane. SEM images of the BC membrane: (a) top view and (b) cross-sectional view. Contact angle (θ) of the electrolyte droplet on (c) the Celgard® separator and (d) the BC separator. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. (e–g) Photographs of the PP-PE-PP (e), BC and BC-Al2O3 separators before and after thermal treatment at 150 °C (f) and 180 °C (g) for 30 min, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 90. (h) Digital pictures of BC, BC-H3PO4 and APBC. (i) Digital pictures of the electrode, the gel electrolyte, and the all-biomaterial supercapacitor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 91. (j) SEM image of the cross-section of the assembled SC. Reproduced with permission from ref. 92.	 

 	Fig. 10  BC-derived hybrid materials for flexible supercapacitors. (a–c) RGO/PEDOT:PSS/BNC supercapacitors. (a) Photographs showing the flexibility of the components (electrode and separator) of the device and a schematic showing the structure of the solid-state supercapacitor device based on RGO/PEDOT:PSS/BNC electrodes. (b) Optical image showing the flexibility of the assembled supercapacitor. (c) LED indicator lit by the assembled device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 112. (d) Co3O4/GN/BC//r-Bi2O3/GN/BC asymmetric supercapacitor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 113. (e and f) HRGO/BC composites. (e) Schematic diagrams of the solid-state supercapacitor based on HRGO/BC composites. (f) The mechanism scheme of ions going through HRGO sheets (the ion transport pathways are highlighted by red arrows). Reproduced with permission from ref. 102.	 

CNF aerogels	−1∼0 (vs. Ag/AgCl)	194.7 (0.5 A g−1)	108.7 (10 A g−1)	94% (5000)	—	—	
53

N-CNFs	−1∼0 (vs. Ag/AgCl)	120 (1 A g−1)	—	98.2% (5000)	—	—	
69

KOH activated N-CNFs	0.9–0.1 (vs. She)	296 (2 mV s−1)	75% (500 mV s−1)	99% (10000)	—	—	
70

CO2 activated CNFs	−0.2–0.2 (vs. Ag/AgCl)	42 (659 mF cm−2) (1 mV s−1)	70% (10 mV s−1)	—	—	—	
71

N-S-CNF-700	0–1 (vs. Ag/AgCl)	171.2 (0.5 A g−1)	105.2 (10 A g−1)	>90% (1000)	—	—	
78

N-CNF/RGO/BC	−0.8–0.2 (vs. Hg/HgO)	2106/263 (1 mV s−1)	76% (50 mV s−1)	100% (20000)	—	—	
80

N,P-CNF/RGO/BC	−0.8–0.2 (vs. Hg/HgO)	1900/244.8 (2 mV s−1)	1554 (50 mV s−1)	100% (20000)	—	—	
75

Ni(OH)2/RGO/BC	0.1–0.6 (vs. Hg/HgO)	10440/877.1 (5 mA cm−2)	6230 (50 mA cm−2)	93.6% (15000)	—	—	
64

Co3O4/GN/BC	0–0.6 (vs. Hg/HgO)	12250/1274.2 (3 mA cm−2)	10400 (50 mA cm−2)	96.4% (20000)	—	—	
115

PANI/CNT/BC	0–0.8 (vs. Ag/AgCl)	—/656 (1 A g−1)	440 (1 A g−1)	99.5% (1000)	—	—	
18

PPY/BC	0–1.5	—/495.5 (0.16 A g−1)	—	70.3% (50)	39.7 (W h kg−1)	—	
107

PPy/CoS/BC	0–0.8	—/614 (0.8 A cm−2)	73.2% (1.6 A cm−2)	62.4% (300)	54.5 (W h kg−1)	0.663 (kW kg−1)	
120

PPY/BC	−0.5–0.5	—/153 (0.2 A g−1)	82.4% (1.2 A cm−2)	∼93% (100)	21.22 (W h kg−1)	6.59 (kW kg−1)	
110

BC/PPY/CNTs	−0.2–0.6 (vs. Ag/AgCl)	2430/— (2 mA cm−2)	51% (20 mV s−1)	—	—	—	
55

PCN/CNFs//PCN/CNFs	0–1.8	—	—	94.8% (10000)	20.4	17.8	
73


 	Fig. 11  BC-derived CNF materials for supercapacitors. (a–d) PCNs/CNF composites. (a) CV curves of the PCNs/CNF based symmetric supercapacitor at different operation voltages at the scan rate of 50 mV s−1. (b) Cycling performance of the symmetric supercapacitors measured at 200 mV s−1 (c) CV curves of the symmetric supercapacitor at different scan rates in the voltage window of 0–1.8 V. (d) Ragone plot of the PCNs/CNF based symmetric supercapacitor compared with other previously reported carbon materials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73. (e and f) BC-derived CNF materials for supercapacitors. (e) CV scan at 100 V s−1 in different potential windows up to 3.5 V. (f) The cell stability tests up to 100 K cycles with the inset as a section of the C–D curve. Reproduced with permission from ref. 116.	 

 	Fig. 12  Hybrid CNF materials for supercapacitors. (a–c) The fabrication of c-BP/MnO2//a-CBP hybrid supercapacitors. (a) Schematic diagram illustrating BC as a template and precursor for the synthesis of electrode materials for an asymmetric supercapacitor device. (b) Cycle performance of the c-BP/MnO2//a-CBP asymmetric supercapacitor with a voltage of 2.0 V at 200 mV s−1 in 1.0 M Na2SO4 aqueous solution (the inset shows the CV curves of the 1st and the 5000th cycle at 200 mV s−1). Reproduced with permission from ref. 70. (c–e) The fabrication of p-BC@MnO2-2h//p-BC/N-5M hybrid supercapacitors. (c) Scheme of our asymmetric supercapacitor device and (d) Ragone plots of the supercapacitors. (e) Digital image of a red-LED lit by the p-BC@MnO2-2h//p-BC/N-5M device. Reproduced with permission from ref. 119.	 

 	Fig. 13  BC-derived separators for supercapacitors. (a–d) The fabrication of MnO2/RGO and its property test. (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation process. (1) Vacuum filtration of MnO2/RGO, RGO colloidal suspension and graphite flake suspension; (2) compression to obtain MnO2/RGO and RGO hydrogel films with an attached graphite current collector; (3) compression to assemble the flexible supercapacitor (SC) with the obtained hydrogel films and the BC/PAAS-Na2SO4 gel electrolyte; (4) schematic structure of the assembled flexible asymmetric SC, demonstrating the role of the separation of BC. Flexibility of an asymmetric MnO2/RGO//RGO device. (b) CV curves at 10 mV s−1 at three different bending states: (c) flat, bent, and rolled; (d) capacitance retention after cycles of repeating flattening/bending and flattening/rolling and the photograph displays a green LED lit by two asymmetric devices in series, and demonstrates no obvious performance change of the LED from the flat state to the rolled state. Reproduced with permission from ref. 92.	 

LIBs	Fe2O3/CNFs	0.2–3.0 (Li/Li+)	100% (after 200 cycles)	1390 (0.2 A g−1)	870 (2 A g−1)	75% (400 cycles)	
134

MoS2/CNFs	0–3.0 (Li/Li+)	66%	935 (0.1 A g−1)	267 (4 A g−1)	95.9% (1000 cycles)	
133

A-pBC	0.01–3.0 (Li/Li+)	56%	1067.78 (0.1 A g−1)	261.3 (8 A g−1)	85.6% (100 cycles)	
132

P-PBC	0.01–2.5 (Li/Li+)	70.03%	1039.7 mA h g−1	418.2 mA h g−1 at 2C	82.84% (1000 cycles)	
136

PBC-SnO2	0.02–2.0 (Li/Li+)	98.5%	600 (0.1 A g−1)	380 (1 A g−1)	
	
135

PBC-Ge	0.02–2.0 (Li/Li+)	
	500 (0.1 A g−1)	230 (0.7 A g−1)	
	
135

Li–S	CNFA	1.6–2.8 (Li/Li+)	99%	1283 at 0.2C	689 at 2C	76% (200 cycles)	
141

CBC/TiO2	1.8–2.8 (Li/Li+)	99.24%	1314 at 0.2C	537.1 at 2C	79.8% (50 cycles)	
142

S@CBC-In	1.8–2.7 (Li/Li+)	98%	1134 (0.2 A g−1)	475 (3.2 A g−1)	400 mA g−1 (400 cycles)	
140

SIBs	CNF/NPC	0–3.0 (Na/Na+)	29.4%	258 (0.05 A g−1)	146.5 (1 A g−1)	148.8 mA h g−1 (400 cycles)	
143

BN-CNFs	0–2.8 V (Na/Na+)	36.6%	644 (0.2 A g−1)	314 (10 A g−1)	277 mA h g−1 (1000 cycles)	
144

NOC	0.001–2.8 V (Na/Na+)	∼100%	650 (0.1 A g−1)	161 (5 A g−1)	249 mA h g−1 (2000 cycles)	
145


 	Fig. 14  BC-derived carbon materials for LIBs. (a and b) Schematic of the fabrication of the MoS2/CNF composite by (a) directly growing MoS2 on CNFs, with MoS2 randomly distributed on CNFs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 133. (c) Long-term cycle performance of A-Fe2O3@CBC at a current density of 1000 mA g−1. TEM images of (d) CBC, (o) A-Fe2O3@CBC, and the corresponding SAED pattern (inset in e) of A-Fe2O3@CBC; STEM image of (f) the AFe2O3@CBC composite, and the corresponding elemental mapping of C (red), O (green), and Fe (blue), respectively. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.) Reproduced with permission from ref. 134.	 

 	Fig. 15  BC-derived electrolytes for LIBs. (a) A schematic representation of the PMM-CPE fabrication process. (b) Side-view SEM image of the P(MVE-MA) membrane. (c) Stress–strain curves of the PP separator in the transverse direction, the P(MVE-MA) membrane without bacterial cellulose and the P(MVE-MA) membrane with bacterial cellulose. (d) Schematic illustration of the mechanism of action of PMM-CPE in the 4.5 V-class LiCoO2/Li cell. (e) Schematic illustration of the flexible LiCoO2/Li metal cell and digital photographs of an LED lit up by the flexible LiCoO2/Li battery in a bent state. Reproduced with permission from ref. 137.	 

 	Fig. 16  BC-derived carbon materials for Li–S batteries. (a–e) Schematic of the working mechanisms of S@CBC-In and S@CBC batteries, respectively. SEM and EDS characterization of the CBC interlayer and S/CBC cathodes after 300 cycles at 800 mA g−1: (b) SEM image of the cycled CBC interlayer, (c) the corresponding S mapping for the region shown in image (a), and the cycled S/CBC cathodes extracted from (d) S@CBC-In and (e) S@CBC batteries, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 140. (f) SEM images of the carbonized micro-fiber membrane. Cells without (g)/with (h) an interlayer. (d) Rate performances from 0.2C to 2C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141.	 

 	Fig. 17  BC-derived carbon materials for SIBs. (a–e) BN-CNF electrode. Fabrication process of the BN-CNF electrode. (d) Elemental mapping images of the BN-CNF electrode. (e) The optimized models of pure graphene. (b–e) The optimized models of Na ions adsorbed on the models of pure graphene, B-graphene, N-graphene, BN-graphene, and B5N-graphene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 144. (f and g) CNF@NPC electrode. (f) Schematic illustration of the sodium storage mechanism in CNF@NPC. (A colour version of this figure can be viewed online.) (g) Long cycle performance at 500 mA g−1 of the CNF and CNF@NPC electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 143.	 

 	Fig. 18  BC-derived CNFs for ORR. (a and b) The comparison of the production processes for (a) HPGC and (b) CNFs. (a) The synthesis procedure of HPGC. (b) The conventional synthesis process for BC-derived CNFs (one route is via carbonization of pure BC at high temperature into CNFs and another is via pyrolysis of metal ion-loaded BC into CNF-M compounds). Reproduced with permission from ref. 160. (c) Schematic illustration of the preparation of the CFO/CNF nanocomposite. Reproduced with permission from ref. 162.	 

 	Fig. 19  BC-derived CNFs for HER. (a) Schematic illustration of preparing mesoporous graphene. Self-assembly of partially reduced GO and F127 micelles, followed by calcination to obtain MPG. Morphology and structure of MPG. Reproduced with permission from ref. 164. (b) Schematic of the preparation of pBC-N/MoS2 nanocomposites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 165. (c) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of CNFs/CoSe2 hybrids. Reproduced with permission from ref. 166.	 

ORR	N-CNFs	0.1 M KOH	0.80 V vs. RHE	
	∼97.5% after 10000 cycles	
79

N,S-CNFs	0.1 M KOH	0.80 V vs. RHE	
	94% after 6000 s	
161

HPGC	0.1 M KOH	0.84 V vs. RHE	5.32 mA cm−2	94% after 50000 s	
160

BC/PAD/Ag	0.1 M KOH	
	
	66% after 1000 cycles	
163

CoFe2O4/CNFs	0.1 M KOH	
	5.41 mA cm−2	96.3% after 35000 s	
162

CNF@NG	0.1 M KOH	0.80 V vs. RHE	5.0 mA cm−2	90.1% after 36000 s	
159


HER	MPG	0.5 M H2SO4	239 mV at 10 mA cm−2	109 mV dec−1	∼100% after 1000 cycles	
164

pBC-N/MoS2	0.5 M H2SO4	200 mV at 8.7 mA cm−2	61 mV dec−1	∼95% after 3000 s	
165

CNFs/CoSe2	0.5 M H2SO4	119 mV at 10 mA cm−2	54 mV dec−1	∼100% after 2000 cycles	
166

Pt@HN-BC	0.5 M H2SO4	−47 mV at 10 mA cm−2	−35 mV dec−1	∼93.5% after 5000 cycles	
167


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
