Singlet oxygen : there is indeed something new under the sun  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B926014P View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B926014P
(Critical Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3181-3209Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsSinglet oxygen: there is indeed something new under the sun

        
          
            Peter R. 
            Ogilby
          
          
        
      
Center for Oxygen Microscopy and Imaging, Department of Chemistry, Aarhus University, DK-8000, Århus, Denmark. E-mail: progilby@chem.au.dk
Received 
      4th February 2010
    , Accepted 23rd March 2010First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      22nd June 2010
    AbstractSinglet oxygen, O2(a1Δg), the lowest excited electronic state of molecular oxygen, has been known to the scientific community for ∼80 years. It has a characteristic chemistry that sets it apart from the triplet ground state of molecular oxygen, O2(X3Σ−g), and is important in fields that range from atmospheric chemistry and materials science to biology and medicine. For such a “mature citizen”, singlet oxygen nevertheless remains at the cutting-edge of modern science. In this critical review, recent work on singlet oxygen is summarized, focusing primarily on systems that involve light. It is clear that there is indeed still something new under the sun (243 references).
Peter R. Ogilby
Peter R. Ogilby is a Professor of Chemistry at Aarhus University. He started working with singlet oxygen in 1977 as a PhD student under the guidance of C. S. Foote at the University of California-Los Angeles. Although Ogilby's independent research over the years has taken him from solution-phase photophysics and studies in glassy polymers to the development of microscopes to examine events at the level of a single live cell, these efforts have always involved singlet oxygen in one way or another.
1 Introduction
Molecular oxygen, O2, is integral to many processes that occur on earth.1 It plays a key role in the maintenance of life, and in mechanisms by which life is extinguished and materials destroyed.
The properties and behavior of oxygen reflect its unique electronic structure. Unlike many molecules, oxygen's electronic ground state, O2(X3Σ−g), is a spin triplet.2,3 As such, it often exhibits radical-like behavior in chemical reactions. Oxygen's two lowest-energy excited electronic states, O2(a1Δg) and O2(b1Σ+g), are spin singlets (Fig. 1). Although the higher-energy b1Σ+g state is not known to react with other molecules,4,5 at least in solution-phase systems, the a1Δg state has a rich chemistry that differs significantly from that of the X3Σ−g state.6,7 The a1Δg state is commonly called “singlet oxygen”, and is the focus of this review.
 Fig. 1  Diagram illustrating the one- and two-photon-initiated, triplet-state photosensitized production of singlet oxygen, O2(a1Δg). The letter S denotes discrete states of the sensitizer with singlet spin multiplicity, and T denotes states with triplet spin multiplicity. IC and ISC denote internal conversion and intersystem crossing, respectively. Depending on the sensitizer, the simultaneous absorption of two photons may or may not populate the same state as that created upon the absorption of a single higher-energy photon. 
As an isolated molecule, oxygen provides a wonderful model to illustrate a number of fundamental chemical and physical phenomena. For example, differences in the O2(X3Σ−g), O2(a1Δg) and O2(b1Σ+g) states reflect the ways that two electrons can be placed in two degenerate orbitals and, as such, provide an ideal system to examine phenomena that give rise to Hund's rules for orbital occupancy.3 In particular, the O2(a1Δg) excitation energy of 94 kJ mol−1 quantifies the effect of pairing electrons in the same orbital but with opposite spin. Moreover, transitions between the O2(X3Σ−g), O2(a1Δg) and O2(b1Σ+g) states are not very probable, providing excellent examples of selection rules based on changes in spin and orbital angular momentum, symmetry, and parity.8
In general, for “real” applications of oxygen, certainly those in solution-phase systems, it is necessary to distinguish the isolated molecule from a molecule that is perturbed by intermolecular collisions. Thus, in a solvent such as water or benzene, one would speak of an ephemeral complex formed between oxygen and the perturbing solvent molecule, M.3,9 In itself, this defines a whole new perspective; for example, one can now consider the effect that a given molecule M has on the transitions between the O2(X3Σ−g), O2(a1Δg) and O2(b1Σ+g) states. Alternatively, the molecule M could be another solute in the system, and we would think of M and O2 as mutually perturbing each other. A discussion of transitions between different electronic states of the M–O2 complex is particularly pertinent when considering mechanisms for M-dependent O2(a1Δg) production and deactivation.3,10–14
But singlet oxygen is not just an important model for fundamental chemical/physical phenomena. Many will argue, justifiably so, that singlet oxygen stays at the forefront of research because of its unique reactivity as a synthetic reagent,7,15 as an intermediate in oxygenation reactions of polymers16–19 and, perhaps most significantly, as a so-called “reactive oxygen species”, ROS, in a range of biologically pertinent systems.20–22
The “classic” and most commonly cited reactions of singlet oxygen with an organic molecule invariably produce a peroxide as an initial product. Although many of these peroxides can be isolated and characterized at low temperature,23,24 they are often fleeting precursors to other products in systems of functional importance (e.g., a live cell). Specifically, the peroxide O–O bond generally has a low dissociation energy and, as such, readily cleaves to yield oxygen-based radicals (e.g., ˙OH from a hydroperoxide). These radicals can then propagate to generate a wide range of other reactive intermediates and, ultimately, a wide range of reaction products.25
Although the chemical reactivity of singlet oxygen may define its importance, and hence ultimately justify work in this field, it does not stand alone. The chemical reactions of singlet oxygen are always in kinetic competition with the physical deactivation of O2(a1Δg) to O2(X3Σ−g) by (1) the molecule with which it can also react, (2) a collision with another solute molecule in the system, and (3) collision with surrounding solvent molecules. Indeed, with the judicious incorporation of a “quencher” molecule into a given system, one can control and influence the production of molecules that derive from a chemical reaction with singlet oxygen.
Thus, research in the “singlet oxygen field” is necessarily broad, particularly as the systems that can be addressed become increasing complicated (e.g., a mammalian cell, a multi-component solar energy collector). The disciplines involved are as extensive as science itself. Nevertheless, although a traditional physical-organic study26 may appear in a totally different context than an intracellular viscosity study,27 or the study of diffusion and free volume in a glassy polymer28 may seem remote from that in a protein,29 the connection is still there.
The photosensitized production of singlet oxygen
Although singlet oxygen can be produced in a variety of ways,30 a convenient method involves electronic energy transfer from an excited state of a given molecule, a so-called sensitizer, to O2(X3Σ−g), Fig. 1. Because excited electronic states are readily produced upon UV–vis light absorption, and because we live in a world of light, oxygen, and molecules that are efficient sensitizers, this method of singlet oxygen production is also extremely pertinent. Indeed, sensitized systems driven by sunlight alone provide sufficient justification for research in this field. However, the use of more “controlled” light sources (i.e., lasers, lamps) not only facilitates mechanistic studies, but makes specific applications more tenable (e.g., medical treatments mediated by singlet oxygen). Although this review is limited to discussing singlet oxygen produced in photosensitized systems, many of the conclusions are still pertinent with respect to the behavior of singlet oxygen in light-free systems.
It is pertinent at this juncture to mention that, for a given sensitizer, energy transfer to O2(X3Σ−g) can also result in the production of the “other” singlet oxygen; O2(b1Σ+g).11,31 However, in solution-phase systems, O2(b1Σ+g) rapidly decays to produce O2(a1Δg) with unit efficiency.11 As such, we can proceed, unencumbered, with our focus on the a1Δg state.
Light is not only a useful tool by which singlet oxygen can be produced, it is also a convenient tool to monitor events that result in the sensitized formation of singlet oxygen. For example, although this is not shown in Fig. 1, singlet oxygen can be produced upon oxygen quenching of the fluorescent S1 state of a sensitizer.11 This has generally been associated with the process of oxygen-induced S1 → T1 intersystem crossing (with the corollary that the S1–T1 energy gap exceeds the excitation energy of singlet oxygen). However, it has recently been shown that oxygen can also induce S1 → S0 internal conversion, and that this process can result in the production of singlet oxygen.32 In any event, one can monitor sensitizer fluorescence in pulsed-laser, time-resolved experiments to help elucidate mechanisms of O2(X3Σ−g)-dependent excited state deactivation. Sensitizer fluorescence, recorded in a microscope-based imaging experiment, can also be useful in ascertaining the location of singlet oxygen production in a given inhomogeneous system (e.g., a biological cell).
Although singlet oxygen can be produced upon O2(X3Σ−g) quenching of the S1 state, the lowest energy triplet state, T1, is generally the most efficient singlet oxygen precursor for molecules used as sensitizers. This principally reflects the fact that the T1 state is much longer-lived than the S1 state and, as such, the required bimolecular collision with O2(X3Σ−g) will be more probable. Sensitizer triplet states can be probed in phosphorescence and/or triplet absorption experiments (Fig. 1). As we will encounter at several points throughout this review, these latter experiments are often critical in interpreting singlet oxygen data.
Light is also a useful analytical probe for singlet oxygen itself. Indeed, the development and application of methods to monitor the weak O2(a1Δg) → O2(X3Σ−g) phosphorescence at ∼1275 nm from condensed phase systems has arguably been the most significant contribution to the field over the last 30 years.11,33–37 We will elaborate on selected recent aspects of this general approach, illustrating how kinetic information can be obtained from time-resolved experiments and how spatially-resolved information can be obtained from microscope-based imaging experiments.
It has also been demonstrated that singlet oxygen in solution-phase systems can be monitored in time-resolved absorption experiments using the O2(a1Δg) → O2(b1Σ+g) transition at ∼1920 nm (i.e., ∼5200 cm−1) (Fig. 1).38,39 Although this approach complements the O2(a1Δg) → O2(X3Σ−g) phosphorescence method nicely, and can provide unique mechanistic information,40–42 it suffers from the general rule that absorption techniques are not as sensitive as luminescence techniques. Thus, even though a singlet oxygen absorption microscope has been developed,43 for example, I will focus in this review on techniques for direct singlet oxygen detection that are based on the O2(a1Δg) → O2(X3Σ−g) phosphorescent transition.
This review
One way to assimilate the material presented in this review is illustrated in Fig. 2. Specifically, one can consider singlet oxygen from three perspectives: (1) It is a molecule that is directly responsible for unique phenomena. Examples include specific reactions that lead to the death of a biological cell. (2) Singlet oxygen serves as nice model and/or probe to investigate other general phenomena. Examples here include issues related to oxygen diffusion or collision-dependent phenomena that enhance a forbidden optical transition. (3) A study of singlet oxygen provides the basis for the development of new tools, techniques and materials. Examples include the construction of IR imaging systems and the implementation of appropriate high-level computational methods. Most importantly, it should be apparent that the examples of pertinent topics listed in Fig. 2 reflect issues that are currently competitive and at the cutting-edge of science.
 Fig. 2  Diagram illustrating three general perspectives that can guide a research program on singlet oxygen. For each perspective, selected examples of pertinent issues are provided. It should be apparent from the discussion throughout this review that these three perspectives are not mutually exclusive. 
Presented below in a series of numbered sections is material that amplifies what is in Fig. 2. The material included reflects a subjective decision on my part; these are topics that I think best illustrate how work on singlet oxygen addresses issues at the forefront of science. Of course, one person's definition of a “forefront” invariably differs from that of another and, in the end, my choices may only reflect science that is currently “popular”. My choices are certainly very egocentric; they stem from my own research program. Throughout my discussion, I also comment on what might be important and interesting topics for future research. Again, this is clearly a subjective perspective, and may be somewhat provocative. Of course, the probability that these comments are misplaced is high, certainly given what history tells us about scientific predictions.
Given the breadth of the “singlet oxygen field” and the length limitation of this review, there is no doubt I neglect a great deal of pertinent material and overlook significant contributions of many people. Nevertheless, I hope that, for a certain topic, the interested reader will eventually be able to obtain a more comprehensive discussion through the few papers to which I refer.
2 Singlet oxygen in biology: mechanisms of cell death and signaling
Singlet oxygen plays a number of different and important roles in biological systems. It can be a protective agent, oxidizing molecules and destroying organisms that would otherwise be considered harmful. One appropriate example here is the role that singlet oxygen can play as an antibacterial or antimicrobial agent, both in plants as well as animals.44–48 Of course, the fact that singlet oxygen can perturb and/or lead to the destruction of a molecule, cell, or organism can also have adverse effects on a healthy and well-functioning system. For example, photosynthetic units would cease to work if the singlet oxygen that is inherently produced could, without hindrance, oxygenate the multitude of readily accessible functional groups, including those on the light-collecting chromophore.49,50 However, Mother Nature's judicious placement of certain molecules (e.g., β-carotene, α-tocopherol) in the photosynthetic unit contribute to the quenching and removal of singlet oxygen and, thus, minimizes this threat.51,52
With respect to cell death and its ramifications, the currently most cited application of photosensitized singlet oxygen production is, without doubt, photodynamic therapy (PDT), the medical procedure whereby undesired tissue (e.g., cancers) can be removed.53 In this review, I will not address issues pertinent to the clinical application of PDT. Rather, I will focus on selected developments pertinent to elucidating the mechanism(s) of singlet oxygen mediated cell death. Of course, with a better understanding of mechanism, one can presumably design more efficient sensitizers (i.e., the PDT “drug”) to be used for treatment.
Once produced in or near a cell, singlet oxygen will react/interact with a wide range of molecules. Significant efforts continue to be expended to characterize reactions that occur with proteins22,54 and nucleic acids,55 for example. The exact identity of the intracellular molecules with which singlet oxygen will interact will depend, in part, on the site of singlet oxygen production. In turn, this will influence the response of the cell. It is known, for example, that singlet oxygen produced in or near mitochondria elicits a different response from singlet oxygen produced in the cell nucleus.21,56–61 Given the complexity of a cell, the possible responses are, as expected, diverse. Indeed, this is what makes the problem interesting.
Even death is not a simple thing at the level of a single cell. On one hand, death mediated by singlet oxygen can occur by necrosis. From a chemist's perspective, this process is perhaps the easiest to understand. It generally involves a rather drastic perturbation with immediate cell destruction, typically as a consequence of high local concentrations of singlet oxygen. A good example is an oxygenation-dependent disruption of the cell membrane. On the other hand, singlet oxygen can also initiate apoptotic cell death.57,62 Apoptosis is more complicated and subtle. In this process, a comparatively small amount of singlet oxygen could trigger a cascade of events that would result in a systematic shut-down of cell function. Singlet oxygen could play different, spatially-dependent roles, either directly influencing protein function or acting as a mobile signaling agent.21,63 A better understanding of the mechanisms by which singlet oxygen can initiate and influence apoptotic cell death can have many significant ramifications. Although this topic has been addressed for many years, recent developments in cell and molecular biology, particularly those involving genetic engineering and protein alteration, coupled with developments in microscope-based spectroscopic tools continue to make this an exciting and fertile research area.
Type I vs. Type II reactions
In any study of photoinitiated cell death, it is essential to be able to distinguish a process that does not involve singlet oxygen from one that does involve singlet oxygen. These processes are commonly denoted as Type I and Type II reactions, respectively. However, one must be careful with these definitions.64 A Type I process is generally considered to involve reactive radicals that can disrupt function. By definition, these radicals derive from photoinitiated electron transfer or H-atom abstraction reactions between the chromophore and another organic molecule in the system (e.g., the substrate that is ultimately oxidized). The production of oxygenated products in a Type I process is easily seen as a consequence of secondary reactions between O2(X3Σ−g) and the radicals and/or radical ions initially formed.
Potential confusion with the Type I/Type II definitions can arise when it is recognized that, upon oxygen quenching of the excited state sensitizer, energy transfer to produce singlet oxygen (Type II process) sometimes competes with electron transfer to oxygen (i.e., reduction of O2(X3Σ−g) to yield the superoxide anion, O2−.). It has been suggested we also call the latter a Type II process even though singlet oxygen is not involved.64 In short, the definitions should reflect whether the excited state sensitizer is quenched by oxygen, Type II, or an organic molecule, Type I. In this way, our nomenclature reflects a phenomenon which is easily determined experimentally, not the more convoluted process that first involves resolving a reaction mechanism.
As we have already mentioned, a process that initially involves singlet oxygen can also readily evolve into a process wherein cell death results as a consequence of radicals and other reactive species that are subsequently formed.25,65,66 In this context, it is essential that one has access to probes that directly test for the presence and involvement of singlet oxygen. It has been demonstrated that many of the classic tests for singlet oxygen can now also be applied at the level of a single living cell. Short descriptions of four such tests are outlined below:

(a) The H2O/D2O solvent isotope effect to perturb the singlet oxygen lifetime. 
This test is based on the fact that the lifetime of singlet oxygen in D2O (∼67 μs) is substantially longer than that in H2O (∼3.5 μs).67 This solvent isotope effect is a manifestation of the importance of the high-frequency O–H vibrational modes in the process by which these solvent molecules deactivate singlet oxygen (i.e., non-radiative electronic-to-vibrational energy transfer).11 A change in the efficiency with which the solvent affects non-radiative deactivation can be manifested in the efficiencies of processes that kinetically compete with solvent-induced deactivation (e.g., singlet oxygen dependent chemistry, singlet oxygen phosphorescence). Thus, the H2O/D2O test can be used with a number of different assays and probes and, as such, is an extremely versatile and powerful tool.
Some might find it surprising that we even consider replacement of intracellular H2O with D2O given that exposure of a cell to D2O can have a number of potentially detrimental effects.68–70 Nevertheless, using a variety of different assays for cell viability, we have ascertained that replacement of both intra- and extracellular H2O by D2O does not have apparent adverse effects on the cell, at least over a time period of several hours.71 The latter is sufficient to allow a great deal of flexibility in the kinds of singlet oxygen experiments that can be performed. Thus far, the only exception to our observation of cell “tolerance” to the H2O/D2O exchange has been obtained in electrophysiological recordings on neurons.72 In this case, we find subtle and immediate changes in the membrane action potential when H2O is replaced with D2O. The inference here is that selected proteins that control membrane ion channels rapidly respond to the H2O/D2O change.


(b) Detecting the O2(a1Δg) → O2(X3Σ−g) phosphorescence in a time-resolved experiment. 
This is arguably the most definitive test for the presence of singlet oxygen. The spectral profile of singlet oxygen phosphorescence is unique, with a distinct and narrow band (FWHM ∼110 cm−1) centered at ∼7850 cm−1 (i.e., ∼1275 nm). Although this spectrum is solvent-dependent, the changes are subtle and do not interfere with the assignment to singlet oxygen.73,74 Moreover, luminescence from other species in a multicomponent system generally occurs at wavelengths shorter than ∼1000 nm, thus the complications of interfering signals are minimal. In time-resolved experiments, the kinetics of singlet oxygen formation and decay obtained from this phosphorescent signal are invaluable in characterizing a given system.11 Although this phosphorescence is very weak, it has nevertheless been observed in a number of biologically-relevant systems, including (1) model solutions of cell constituents,75,76 (2) ensembles of cells,77–81 (3) a single cell,27,71,82–88 as well as (4) tissue.77,79,89


(c) Use of luminescent probes specific for singlet oxygen. 
Given the choice, it is always best to look at a given species of interest directly. In this way, monitoring the time-resolved O2(a1Δg) → O2(X3Σ−g) phosphorescence signal provides the most information. However, because the intensity of this signal is so weak, particularly in many biologically-relevant systems, it can sometimes be a very difficult, if not impossible, endeavor. As such, it can be helpful to use a probe molecule whose optical properties change as a consequence of interaction with singlet oxygen. To this end, a number of molecules have been developed whose intensity of fluorescence changes upon reaction with singlet oxygen. With this general approach, if the probe fluorescence occurs with high quantum efficiency in the visible region of the spectrum, where optical detectors have a high responsivity, then one can, in principle, detect minute quantities of singlet oxygen. One potential limitation of this approach, at least with respect to work with cells, is that the probe must be readily incorporated into the cell, localize in a given and desired intracellular spatial domain, and be non-toxic, among other things. We will return to a more expansive discussion of this important topic in a subsequent section.


(d) Adding molecules known to specifically quench singlet oxygen. 
This approach is a variation of the H2O/D2O solvent isotope effect; H2O is a better quencher of singlet oxygen than D2O, and the addition of increasing amounts of H2O to a D2O solution is reflected in the singlet oxygen lifetime. Similarly, there are a number of molecules that are sufficiently good quenchers of singlet oxygen that they can be added in small amounts as a solute to a given system which, in turn, result in a shortening of the singlet oxygen lifetime. The effects of the latter can then be monitored using an independent probe (e.g., cell death). Of course, for a given system, one must be judicious and perform appropriate control experiments because the added molecule may also influence other reaction intermediates, not just singlet oxygen. Moreover, for probing intracellular singlet oxygen, one must be assured that the added quencher (1) is not itself toxic, and (2) can indeed readily penetrate the cell membrane. A useful extension of this latter point is that one can identify singlet oxygen quenchers that do not penetrate into the cell and, as such, only quench singlet oxygen that diffuses from the cell interior into the extracellular environment. We likewise discuss these issues further in a subsequent section.
Despite the fact that relatively sophisticated tests such as those outlined above can be used at the single cell level, distinguishing between radical-based and singlet-oxygen-based behavior can nevertheless be complicated because these processes are not mutually exclusive. In many cases, they may be operating at the same time, each influencing cell function in a different way. Nevertheless, a great deal of useful mechanistic information about photoinitiated death can still be obtained by selectively perturbing and testing for singlet oxygen while, at the same time, using selected assays to monitor cell response.

Singlet oxygen's intracellular sphere of activity
When produced in or near a cell, singlet oxygen's “sphere of activity” will be defined by the molecules that comprise its immediate environment. Once formed where a given sensitizer happens to be localized, the singlet oxygen molecules thus produced will diffuse through the surrounding medium. The distance traveled by singlet oxygen, d, will depend on the magnitude of the diffusion coefficient, D, and on the singlet oxygen lifetime, τΔ. If we assume radial diffusion over some time period, t, then the distance traveled can be expressed as shown in eqn (1).90 (1) Of course, the time period, t, must reflect τΔ. Recall that the kinetic lifetime defines the period in which a given population is reduced by a factor of 1/e (i.e., by a factor of ∼0.368). Thus, even after 3 or 4 lifetimes, there will still be an appreciable population of singlet oxygen remaining. As such, it is reasonable to consider t = 5 τΔ.
Strictly speaking, a cell is microscopically inhomogeneous, and use of eqn (1) is really not appropriate simply because there will be local domains characterized by different values of both D and τΔ. Local viscosity gradients, for example, will certainly influence D. It is well-known that τΔ depends significantly on the chemical/molecular constituency of the local environment,11 a point upon which we will further elaborate. Moreover, these effects of spatial inhomogeneity will be accompanied by those from a temporal inhomogeneity; values of D and τΔ will evolve in time simply because the cell is a dynamic entity, particularly in the presence of singlet oxygen.27 Nevertheless, if we assume an “apparent” D and an “apparent” τΔ for a given domain, the resultant value of d can still be useful. This exercise then reduces to providing meaningful estimates for D and τΔ for a given spatial domain, as outlined in the following sections.
The lifetime of intracellular singlet oxygen
Quantifying τΔ for a given system is sufficiently important that, when looking at the history of work in the field, a great deal of effort has been expended on this one parameter.11 Without doubt, one of the biggest breakthroughs in this regard has been the development of tools to directly monitor singlet oxygen by its 1275 nm phosphorescence in time-resolved, solution-phase experiments. The direct result of this technological advance is a vast catalog of data showing that rate constants for singlet oxygen deactivation and removal are indeed very sensitive to the kind of molecule with which it interacts.67
The parameter τΔ reflects all processes that remove singlet oxygen from a given system. It is the reciprocal of the first-order rate constant for singlet oxygen removal, kΔ, that, in turn, is expressed as the sum of all chemical and physical channels for removal (eqn (2)). τ−1Δ = kΔ = knr[S1] +⋯+ kr[S1] +⋯+ kq1[Q1] +⋯+ krxn1[R1] +⋯(2)In eqn (2), the product knr[S1] is the pseudo first-order rate constant for non-radiative singlet oxygen removal by a solvent S1. This could be H2O present at ∼55 M, for example. The product kr[S1] is the pseudo first-order rate constant for singlet oxygen radiative deactivation in solvent S1 (i.e., O2(a1Δg) → O2(X3Σ−g) phosphorescence). Unfortunately, the ratio kr[S1]/knr[S1] is ∼10−6 in H2O, and is even smaller in aqueous systems that contain singlet oxygen quenchers (vide infra);11,35,91 this underscores the difficulty of a singlet oxygen phosphorescence measurement. It is here one can see the advantage of using D2O as a solvent instead of H2O. Because (1) kr[D2O] ∼ kr[H2O], and (2) knr[H2O] ∼ 20 knr[D2O],11,35,91 it should be clear that, in the absence of other non-radiative deactivation channels (vide infra), one will see a more intense phosphorescence signal in D2O as opposed to H2O.
In the inhomogeneous environment of the cell, singlet oxygen encounters different solvent domains through its diffusion-dependent translation, and one must then consider the properly weighted contribution from a second solvent S2. Although not explicitly shown in eqn (2), this amounts to a treatment such as xknr[S1] + (1 − x) knr[S2], reflecting the time x spent in each solvent domain.11,92,93 An analogous treatment must be applied to account for the effect of solvent on the radiative deactivation channel.
In kinetic competition with these solvent-dependent deactivation channels are processes whereby (1) quencher molecules Q1, Q2, etc., induce the physical deactivation of singlet oxygen, and (2) reactant molecules R1, R2, etc., chemically remove singlet oxygen. Although this competition generally involves a plethora of molecules, certainly in the cell, it can also involve a single molecule that, in one package, provides both physical and chemical removal pathways. To further complicate matters, the rate constants for chemical and physical removal, along with the concentration of the corresponding molecule, will depend on the local solvent environment.67 Thus, one must likewise consider properly weighted sums of the respective terms in eqn (2).
Although the process of factoring out all of these contributions to eqn (2) is complicated, the good news is that, in itself, the value of τΔ is a useful and informative parameter. In many cases, it is sufficient simply to keep eqn (2) in mind when interpreting a given value of τΔ and/or changes in τΔ.
Prior to the direct, time-resolved detection of singlet oxygen phosphorescence from cells, estimates of the magnitude of τΔ in an intracellular environment were obtained, for example, from indirect photobleaching experiments94 or by extrapolating data from model solutions.75 The perspective thus obtained was that τΔ in a cell was very short (ca. 10–300 ns), supporting a notion that, until recently, has pervaded the community for over 30 years: in a cell, there is a high concentration of good singlet oxygen quenchers that provide a variety of facile deactivation channels.
One of the early substantive indications that the lifetime of singlet oxygen in a cell had to be significantly longer than ca. 10–300 ns came with the observation from microscope-based single cell experiments that the steady-state intensity of the 1275 nm phosphorescence signal was much greater from a cell that had been incubated with D2O as opposed to H2O.82 These data clearly showed that the solvent-dependent deactivation channels could kinetically compete with the quencher-dependent (e.g., protein) deactivation channels.
Subsequent time-resolved O2(a1Δg) → O2(X3Σ−g) phosphorescence experiments were performed on single cells with sub-cellular spatial resolution as a function of (1) the intracellular D2O/H2O ratio, (2) added quenchers, (3) the intracellular domain irradiated, (4) sensitizers that localize in different intracellular domains, and (5) the concentration of ambient oxygen to which the cells had been exposed.85,86,88 One key aspect of these experiments was to unequivocally decouple the kinetics of photosensitized singlet oxygen production from the kinetics of singlet oxygen removal in the observed time-resolved 1275 nm phosphorescence signal.
As shown in Fig. 3, in a pulsed-laser experiment, the evolution of the 1275 nm phosphorescence signal in time is described as a difference of two exponential functions (i.e., the signal will first rise and then fall). In cases where the rate constant for singlet oxygen removal, kΔ, is much smaller than the rate constant for the decay of the singlet oxygen precursor (e.g., kT for a T1-sensitized process), then the lifetime of singlet oxygen, 1/kΔ, is readily obtained from the falling portion of the time resolved phosphorescence signal. These conditions are met, for example, in an oxygen-saturated, D2O-incubated cell (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  (Top) Kinetic scheme for the T1-sensitized production of singlet oxygen followed by a representation of all processes that remove singlet oxygen from the system. (Middle) Equation based on this kinetic scheme that shows how the concentration of singlet oxygen will evolve in time, t, upon the rapid production of T1 in a pulsed laser experiment.85 The first-order rate constant kT represents all channels by which T1 is removed, including processes that do not result in singlet oxygen formation, and [T1]0 represents the T1 concentration at time = 0. (Bottom) Singlet oxygen phosphorescence signals observed from D2O-incubated single cells; ■ = oxygen saturated; □ = air saturated.86 To quantify the rate constant of singlet oxygen removal (i.e., kΔ) from data such as these, one must independently quantify the rate constant kT. The latter can be done in a time-resolved T1 phosphorescence or absorption experiment. 
However, in an air-saturated H2O-incubated cell, for example, where (1) kΔ is much larger, and (2) the rate constant for oxygen-dependent sensitizer decay is much smaller, it becomes increasingly difficult to accurately extract the desired value of kΔ (i.e., when kT < kΔ, the pertinent information about the singlet oxygen lifetime appears on the short rising portion of the phosphorescence signal).
The initial time-resolved 1275 nm phosphorescence data from single cells were obtained from D2O-incubated cells. Although experiments have since been performed with increasing amounts of added H2O, it is still necessary to exploit the D2O/H2O solvent isotope effect to see appreciable singlet oxygen phosphorescence signals from single cells. As the accuracy of these experiments evolved, singlet oxygen lifetimes in the range ∼15–30 μs were obtained from D2O-incubated cells; the exact lifetime obtained depended on the intracellular location of singlet oxygen, among other things. Recognizing that the lifetime of singlet oxygen in neat D2O is ∼67 μs,95 and if it is assumed that the magnitudes of the respective cell-dependent quenching terms kq[Q] are the same in D2O and H2O, then these data point to singlet oxygen lifetimes in H2O-incubated cells (∼3.0 μs) that are not appreciably different from that in neat H2O (∼3.5 μs).
As the microscope-based single cell experiments were being developed and performed, a number of independent groups were recording corresponding 1275 nm phosphorescence data from ensembles of cells (i.e., cells suspended in a cuvette).77–81 Of course, there are many significant differences in the way the ensemble and single-cell experiments are performed; each has their advantages and limitations which, in turn, influence the data obtained. One obvious difference is the spatial domain probed. The single cell experiments are performed upon irradiation of a small intracellular volume (although the cross-sectional diameter of the focused laser beam used is about 1 μm, see Fig. 4, the effects of light scattering by cellular components in a one-photon excitation experiment will increase the size of the irradiated domain. This issue is discussed further below). Thus, the logistics of irradiation facilitate some level of intracellular spatial discrimination that can complement any effects that arise from sensitizer localization. Experiments performed on an ensemble of cells distribute the incident photon flux over a large volume in a cell suspension and, as such, integrate signal from many cells and all domains where singlet oxygen is produced (of course, we are assuming a suspension of cells in which the sensitizer is unequivocally located inside the cell, and that the singlet oxygen signal does not come from an extracellular sensitized process).
 Fig. 4  Image of a HeLa cancer cell based on the fluorescence of a singlet oxygen sensitizer with which the cell had been incubated. Under the conditions these data were recorded, the sensitizer has preferentially localized in the cell nucleus. The white dot superimposed on the cell approximates the cross-sectional area of irradiation using a diffraction-limited focused laser. 
A key and characteristic feature of the ensemble approach is that the 1275 nm phosphorescence signals are more readily observed from H2O-incubated cells. In one of the earlier reports,77 the complications of extracting an intracellular singlet oxygen lifetime from such a signal were highlighted. This included trying to interpret multi-exponential kinetics and phosphorescence that clearly came from extracellular singlet oxygen. Nevertheless, an intracellular lifetime of 0.6 ± 0.4 μs for an H2O-incubated cell was reported. A subsequent ensemble study that also included independent experiments to decouple the kinetics of singlet oxygen production yielded intracellular lifetimes of ∼1.6 ± 1.0 μs80 that are clearly much closer to that seen in neat H2O (∼3.5 μs). [Recent reports of intracellular lifetimes from ensemble studies of H2O-incubated cells that fall in the range 5–10 μs likely reflect a misinterpretation of the data obtained;78,79i.e., data from the falling portion of the time-resolved phosphorescence signal appear to be incorrectly assigned to kΔ rather than kT (see discussion relative to Fig. 3). If these lifetimes were correct, the data would point to an appreciable intracellular singlet oxygen population that, despite the effects of diffusion, can remain localized in a non-aqueous domain.]
Without doubt, these H2O-based ensemble systems make for difficult experiments. In the least, one is trying to quantify a comparatively fast event (singlet oxygen decay) from a multi-exponential signal that contains slower components (singlet oxygen formation); all from data that still have a poor signal-to-noise ratio. As such, the lifetimes reported are not inconsistent with the value of ∼3 μs extrapolated from the D2O-based single cell experiments. Indeed, it is important to note that arguably more accurate data recorded from ensembles of D2O-incubated cells yield singlet oxygen lifetimes (∼15–25 μs)80 that are consistent with those from the single cell experiments.
In any event, both the single cell and ensemble data collected thus far confirm that the lifetime of singlet oxygen in a cell is much longer than had been believed for many years. These results imply that, although deactivation of singlet oxygen indeed occurs within the cell (it must, otherwise singlet oxygen would not lead to cell death), (1) the available intracellular quenchers are not as effective as originally thought, and /or (2) the quenchers do not present themselves to singlet oxygen in as high a concentration as originally thought. With this new perspective in mind, independent data published over the years actually begin to fit into the puzzle. For example, it had been shown that, when denatured, a given protein can be an effective singlet oxygen quencher; whereas, the native protein can be a comparatively poor singlet oxygen quencher.96 These observations are reasonable considering that, in the denatured protein, certain functional groups known to be effective at deactivating/removing singlet oxygen (e.g., amines, thiols) are exposed and accessible to collision with singlet oxygen. Likewise, it had been shown that cell death mediated by singlet oxygen depended on the D2O/H2O ratio in the surrounding medium.65,97–99 These latter data are consistent with solvent-dependent singlet oxygen deactivation channels that indeed kinetically compete with processes that result in cell death.
We can conclude from these τΔ experiments that, in a cell, singlet oxygen behaves not as a “reactive” intermediate but, rather, as a “selective” intermediate. This assessment is entirely consistent with the model of singlet oxygen reactivity obtained over the years from bulk solution phase studies: rate constants for singlet oxygen removal generally fall in the range of ∼105–108 s−1 M−1, and only a few molecules remove singlet oxygen with rate constants that approach those characteristic of the diffusion-controlled limit (i.e., 109–1010 s−1 M−1).11,67
Changes in the intracellular singlet oxygen lifetime
It has recently been established in both single-cell and ensemble experiments that, when singlet oxygen is produced in the cell, the kinetics of the 1275 nm phosphorescence signal change as a function of the elapsed photolysis time.27,81 Specifically, upon successively longer elapsed periods of sensitizer irradiation, there is a distinct decrease in the rates at which the time-resolved phosphorescence signal appears and, independently, disappears (Fig. 5). Thus, under the general conditions employed to record singlet oxygen phosphorescence signals from cells, the kinetics of singlet oxygen formation and removal evolve over the period of time in which data are acquired and averaged. When considered in the context that singlet oxygen must be perturbing the cell, these results are entirely reasonable, and indeed are expected. In short, time-resolved singlet oxygen phosphorescence experiments performed in cells are sensitive enough to reflect photoinduced changes in the local environment.
 Fig. 5  Time-resolved singlet oxygen phosphorescence signals recorded from a single D2O-incubated cell as a function of the elapsed irradiation time of the sensitizer.27 
The pertinent data thus recorded from D2O-incubated single cells yield τΔ values that evolve from ∼16 to 28 μs and, independently, ∼24 to 30 μs, depending on the intracellular location probed.27 Ensemble experiments performed using H2O-incubated cells yield τΔ values that evolve from 0.5 to 1.0 μs.81 For these latter experiments, it should be noted that the reported values of τΔ do not derive from a distinct kinetic trace (i.e., one must still face the difficult task of resolving rate constants from the fast rising portion of a signal that evolves over a period of ∼10 μs; see discussion for Fig. 3).
With these observations in mind, it is reasonable to suggest that all of the intracellular τΔ values recently reported from pulsed-laser experiments will be longer than the “inherent” lifetime. Moreover, for an H2O-based experiment, where kΔ∼kT (Fig. 3), extracting the “correct” value of τΔ becomes even more tenuous simply because one must account for the “correct” value of kT that also evolves with the elapsed photolysis time. Although it is arguably easier to extract a pertinent value of τΔ from D2O-incubated cells (Fig. 5), one must now ascertain whether the extrapolation of these data to obtain a τΔ value for an H2O-incubated cell is accurate; over the elapsed photolysis time, will the pertinent cell-dependent quenching terms kq[Q] respond in the same way as the D2O/H2O ratio is changed?
On the basis of experiments such as those shown in Fig. 5, it certainly becomes difficult to point to a “correct” intracellular singlet oxygen lifetime. We have clearly established that singlet oxygen kinetic signals recorded from cells can reflect irradiation-induced perturbations of the cell. Thus, the averaging that leads to an “apparent” lifetime includes the effect of the temporal evolution of the local environment. Moreover, from a spatial perspective, even the single cell experiments performed using a focused laser for excitation yield an “apparent” lifetime that reflects the effects of an inhomogeneous environment (i.e., the area of irradiation, as illustrated in Fig. 4, is still too large to isolate a homogeneous intracellular domain).
In conclusion, recent singlet oxygen kinetic data obtained from cells reflect the effects of temporal and spatial averaging. This is manifested in rates of photosensitized singlet oxygen formation as well as singlet oxygen decay. As outlined below, changes in these rates can be correlated to changes in the diffusional motion of oxygen. In light of this latter comment, we now consider the diffusion coefficient of oxygen in a cell.
Oxygen's intracellular diffusion coefficient
To continue with the exercise of quantifying singlet oxygen's intracellular sphere of activity, it is necessary to consider the effective or “apparent” diffusion coefficient, D, for singlet oxygen. In our analysis, we are treating singlet oxygen simply as a small diatomic molecule whose diffusion coefficient will be identical to that of ground state oxygen; we are decoupling the effects that the reactions of singlet oxygen with the surrounding medium might have in establishing the magnitude of the “real” diffusion coefficient. It is only when we define a sphere of activity as the product of τΔ and D (i.e., eqn (1)) that we begin to account for events that would characterize the real diffusion coefficient of singlet oxygen.
Through the Stokes–Einstein equation, D is inversely related to the “apparent” viscosity of the environment through which oxygen moves. Given the inherent inhomogeneity of a cell, there will be a plethora of local intracellular domains characterized by a different viscosity. As such, depending on the method by which intracellular viscosity is quantified and where the viscosity probe is located, one can obtain data that covers a wide range. For the data to be most pertinent, one must ascertain that the spatial domain whose viscosity is probed corresponds to the same domain in which oxygen is located. One way in which this latter condition can be met is to design experiments in which a direct probe for singlet oxygen (i.e., the 1275 nm phosphorescence) can also be used as a probe for the local viscosity.
For the photosensitized production of singlet oxygen (Fig. 1), the amount of singlet oxygen produced, and hence the intensity of the singlet oxygen phosphorescence signal, will depend on the concentration of ground-state oxygen in the local environment of the sensitizer as well as the local viscosity. This reflects that fact that the production of singlet oxygen occurs as a result of a bimolecular collision between the sensitizer excited state and O2(X3Σ−g). As the local oxygen concentration is increased, the fraction of sensitizer excited states quenched by O2(X3Σ−g) correspondingly increases, up to the limit where all sensitizer excited states are quenched by O2(X3Σ−g) and no further increase in the amount of singlet oxygen produced can be realized (Fig. 6).86,100 The rate which this asymptotic limit is reached will depend on the viscosity of the medium. In a more viscous medium, where both oxygen and sensitizer diffusion is inhibited, the probability of a collision between O2(X3Σ−g) and the excited state sensitizer decreases and this, in turn, adversely influences the amount of singlet oxygen produced.
 Fig. 6  Normalized integrated intensity of the time-resolved singlet oxygen phosphorescence signal obtained in photosensitized experiments plotted against the percent of oxygen in the ambient atmosphere with which the sample was in equilibrium. Data are shown for aqueous solutions containing 0 (△), 0.59 (○), and 1.46 M (□) sucrose. Also shown are data recorded from single cells (●).86 Experiments were performed using the same sensitizer thus obviating the effects of a change in the inherent lifetime of the singlet oxygen precursor. 
A solvent system in which these effects of viscosity and O2(X3Σ−g) concentration can be illustrated is sucrose dissolved in water (Fig. 6).86 As the concentration of sucrose in water is increased, one obtains solutions in which (1) the viscosity increases, and (2) the oxygen solubility decreases. Because the magnitudes of these changes have been independently quantified, one can obtain a homogeneous reference system against which singlet oxygen data from a cell can be compared.
The results of one such experiment are shown in Fig. 6 and, without going into potentially complicating details, the data point to an average intracellular viscosity that is significantly greater than that of neat H2O. On the basis of data such as these,86 one can readily conclude that a pertinent “apparent” diffusion coefficient for oxygen in a cell (D ∼ 2–4 × 10−6 cm2 s−1) will certainly be less than that for oxygen in neat H2O (D ∼ 2 × 10−5 cm2 s−1).101 This conclusion, derived from experiments specific for singlet oxygen, is consistent with data that have been recorded from a variety of other systems.102–104
Although different attempts to quantify intracellular viscosity have been made over the years,105,106 it is pertinent to cite here the use of selected fluorescent probes simply because they have a direct relation to recent studies of singlet oxygen behavior in cells. Using fluorophores that have a specific intramolecular rotational degree of freedom, it has been shown that the viscosity of the surrounding environment will influence the dynamical behavior of these so-called “molecular rotors”.107 This can be manifested as a viscosity dependent fluorescence lifetime108 or spectral profile,27 both of which can be calibrated using aqueous sugar solutions (vide supra) or methanol/glycerol mixtures, for example.
In experiments using a lifetime-sensitive molecular rotor and, independently, a spectrum-sensitive molecular rotor, it has been established that the viscosity of the intracellular domains where these rotors tend to localize is indeed significantly greater than that of water.27,108 These data are thus consistent with those shown in Fig. 6.
Singlet oxygen dependent changes in intracellular viscosity
It has recently been shown using a molecular-rotor viscosity probe that, with an increase in the elapsed photolysis time of an intracellular singlet oxygen sensitizer, the local intracellular viscosity correspondingly increases.27 Thus, there is a direct and clear explanation for the singlet oxygen kinetic data shown in Fig. 5: upon prolonged photolysis, singlet oxygen mediated morphological changes in the cell lead to an increase in the viscosity of selected intracellular domains and this, in turn, results in a decrease of the oxygen diffusion coefficient. There are a number of possible morphological changes that could result in these intracellular viscosity changes, including the creation of comparatively dense domains as a consequence of protein crosslinking reactions.87
The relationship between local viscosity and the rate constant for a bimolecular process involving oxygen can be manifested in many ways. We have indicated that an increase in viscosity can result in a change in τΔ. This reflects a viscosity-dependent change in the frequency with which singlet oxygen encounters quenchers in the medium. The overall effect of such a viscosity change on the bimolecular rate constant for singlet oxygen removal actually depends on whether the quencher is “efficient” (i.e., large rate constant at or near the so-called diffusion-controlled limit) or whether the quencher is not efficient (i.e., smaller rate constant characteristic of the so-called pre-equilibrium limit). These latter points have been elaborated for singlet oxygen both in a range of polymeric systems17,109 as well as in a cell.88
We have likewise indicated that an increase in local viscosity can influence the rate constant for singlet oxygen formation in a photosensitized process. Singlet oxygen is most commonly formed upon O2(X3Σ−g) quenching of the photosensitizer triplet state and, for most molecules in a typical organic solvent, this generally occurs with a rate constant in the range ∼109–1010 s−1 M−1.11 For selected molecules under certain circumstances, O2(X3Σ−g) quenching of the shorter-lived sensitizer singlet state (i.e., the fluorescent state) can also result in singlet oxygen production. The rate constant for this process is generally larger, ∼ 1–3 × 1010 s−1 M−1, and is often cited as a characteristic example of a diffusion-controlled process.100,110 In the context of our discussion to quantify τΔ using time-resolved singlet oxygen phosphorescence signals (e.g., Fig. 3), it is important to recognize that the rate constant for O2(X3Σ−g) quenching of the sensitizer S1 and T1 states will be influenced by the local viscosity.
Monitoring the intracellular oxygen concentration
The inhomogeneity of a cell will also be manifested as local domains of different oxygen concentration. In the least, we must recognize that the solubility of oxygen in an aqueous domain is significantly less than that in a hydrocarbon domain,111 and that small aqueous/hydrocarbon microdomains define intracellular heterogeneity.
Much can be gained from a method by which intracellular oxygen concentrations can be accurately quantified and imaged. One promising and, to date, successful approach has been to use luminescent probes as a measure of local oxygen concentrations.112–115 Data can be recorded, for example, by monitoring phosphorescent lifetimes and/or intensities, and Stern–Volmer quenching experiments can also be performed as a function of the ambient oxygen partial pressure to which the cells are exposed. It follows from our discussion thus far, however, that the most one can gain from such experiments is the product of the oxygen concentration and the bimolecular rate constant for the quenching of the luminescent state of the probe molecule, kq[O2(X3Σ−g)]. To make a meaningful statement about [O2(X3Σ−g)], one must infer something about the magnitude of kq, and vice versa. We have established that, with intracellular domains of different viscosity and corresponding differences in D, kq will vary with intracellular location. A great deal of useful information can nevertheless be obtained from such luminescence experiments as long as one is aware of this limitation and, as with many of the singlet oxygen optical experiments described herein, one refers to “apparent” parameters that reflect these heterogeneity-derived uncertainties.
The intracellular diffusion distance of singlet oxygen
Keeping the preceding discussion in mind, a reasonable estimate for an “apparent” value of τΔ in an H2O-incubated cell is 2 μs. Recalling that the singlet oxygen lifetime in neat H2O is ∼3.5 μs, this corresponds to a situation where ∼43% of the singlet oxygen produced is removed by interactions with cellular material (e.g., proteins) through a combination of chemical reaction and physical quenching channels. Likewise, let us use 4 × 10−6 cm2 s−1 as an “apparent” value of D.86
In applying eqn (1) to estimate the radial diffusion distance of singlet oxygen, d, we consider a time period of t = 5τΔ = 10 μs. Over this period of time, the population of singlet oxygen initially produced by a pulsed light source, for example, will be reduced by a factor of ∼150. Under these conditions, the distance d is 155 nm, which effectively defines the radius of singlet oxygen's sphere of activity from its point of production at the sensitizer in an H2O-incubated cell. If we apply the same treatment for a D2O-incubated cell where τΔ ∼ 25 μs,27,80,85 then we obtain a diffusion distance d of 550 nm.
These diffusion distances allow us to draw some significant conclusions about the intracellular behavior of singlet oxygen:
(a) Typical eukaryotic cells have a diameter in the range ∼10–30 μm. Although the values of d upon which we have converged are larger than those long assumed by the community,94 our values are still small compared to the size of the cells in which we are generally interested. Thus, for singlet oxygen produced in a given intracellular location, either by a localized sensitizer or by focused irradiation, its initial effects will be spatially confined. This is consistent with many independent studies which show that cell death can indeed depend on the intracellular location of the singlet oxygen sensitizer.21,56,57,61
(b) Our values of d are sufficiently large that, from its point of origin, singlet oxygen will clearly sample a variety of local environments. Indeed, if produced near the cell membrane, it will also be able to cross over into the extracellular environment. The latter has been shown to occur through the judicious use of singlet oxygen quenchers that remain outside the cell simply because they are too large to penetrate the membrane (i.e., bovine serum albumen).83–85
(c) One can infer from such large values of d that a given singlet oxygen molecule will undergo multiple collisions with surrounding molecules before it ultimately is either physically quenched or chemically reacts. This model of intracellular reactivity is entirely consistent with what we have learned from bulk solution-phase studies: singlet oxygen is a selective not a reactive intermediate.
Controlling photosensitized singlet oxygen production in both space and time
With its localized sphere of activity, studies of the intracellular behavior of singlet oxygen, albeit complicated, nevertheless become more interesting. The clear inference is that singlet oxygen produced in one part of a cell can, and will, have a different effect than singlet oxygen produced in a different part of the cell. Indeed, we have already mentioned that the efficiency with which singlet oxygen initiates cell death depends on the intracellular location of the sensitizer used, and these results have been used over the years in arguments to support the long-held notion that singlet oxygen does not diffuse more than ca. 10–20 nm from its point of production. Although our recent results, as outlined above, demonstrate that singlet oxygen has a much larger intracellular sphere of activity than previously thought, the general model of localized intracellular behavior nevertheless remains intact. In the least, we have only reinforced the need of establishing better methods by which this sphere of activity can be controlled and exploited. For example, through such control, one could (1) provide more compelling mechanistic information regarding the ways that singlet oxygen can influence cell behavior and, in turn, (2) potentially develop more effective PDT sensitizers for clinical use.
As we have already established, when discussing the sphere of activity of a transient intermediate such as singlet oxygen, time and distance are linked parameters. In short, in devising and implementing methods to control the behavior of intracellular singlet oxygen, we must consider both the spatial localization of singlet oxygen production as well as the time period over which singlet oxygen is present. These issues are illustrated in Fig. 7, which provides a framework from which our discussion on control can continue.
 Fig. 7  Diagram illustrating approaches by which control and selectivity can be achieved in the photosensitized production of singlet oxygen and in singlet oxygen's sphere of activity. 
In Fig. 7, we identify four approaches by which one can exert control over intracellular singlet oxygen, each of which are briefly discussed below. A similar but more expansive discussion, although now somewhat dated, was published in 2007.116

(a) Sensitizer excitation: Physical control of the irradiated volume. 
Because light is readily manipulated and positioned, taking command of the excitation source is one way to exert spatial and temporal control over the photosensitized production of singlet oxygen. To limited extents, one can achieve spatial control through focused excitation and temporal control through the use of pulsed lasers.
With respect to spatial control, we must first consider that the diffraction of light places a limit on the resolution that can be easily obtained. Although a number of techniques are available by which one can obtain an excitation volume smaller than that defined by the diffraction limit,117–120 only one of these techniques has, to my knowledge, thus far been exploited in a distinct experiment related to singlet oxygen. In this case, evanescent wave irradiation achieved in a total internal reflection experiment was used to illuminate the bottom of a cell on a microscope cover slip (i.e., region in and near the plasma membrane).121 For other techniques, where sub-diffraction limit experiments can be performed to increase both the lateral and axial spatial resolution that is accessible, the necessary laser-based technology is becoming commonplace.118–120 As such, in this regard alone, there is a bright future for single-cell singlet oxygen experiments.
For a diffraction-limited experiment, one way to reduce the excitation volume in a given sample is to exploit the fact that many molecules will efficiently absorb photons in a nonlinear two-photon process (see Fig. 1). In this case, light absorption only occurs where the photon flux is sufficiently high (i.e., there must a sufficiently high probability that two photons will “simultaneously” interact with the same molecule). The spatial consequences of this intensity threshold, as illustrated in Fig. 8, have been extensively discussed, both in general122–124 and with particular reference to singlet oxygen experiments.125
 Fig. 8  Diagram illustrating excitation volumes (colored green) obtained when using a focused laser beam in one- and two-photon experiments. The z-axis represents the direction of light propagation through the sample. 
On the scale of the diffraction limit of light, a single cell positioned on a microscope stage covers a relatively large area but is comparatively thin (the analogy of a fried egg on a flat surface is appropriate). As such, when focusing light into the cell, one mainly needs to consider the cross sectional area at the waist of the focused beam; attempts to reduce the dimension of excitation along the axis of light propagation will generally not have a great effect for these single cell experiments. In Fig. 4, the white dot superimposed on the fluorescence image of a cell represents the approximate lateral spatial resolution that is readily achieved upon diffraction-limited irradiation in the visible region of the spectrum (i.e., spot diameter of ∼1 μm).
Although the reduced excitation volume available through two-photon irradiation of the sensitizer can be of some benefit in a single cell experiment, the dimensions involved are still large compared to many subcellular structures. On the other hand, there is a less obvious, but significantly more important benefit of using two- as opposed to one-photon excitation. For an inhomogeneous medium in which incident light is efficiently scattered (i.e., a cell), the excitation volume illustrated in Fig. 8 for a one-photon process is overly simplified, and arguably incorrect. Light from the incident beam will be scattered throughout the sample and, because one-photon absorption does not have an intensity threshold, molecules throughout the cell can, and will, absorb light. Upon two-photon excitation, however, light scattered throughout the cell will invariably not exceed the required intensity threshold for absorption. Moreover, two-photon experiments are performed using light of a longer wavelength that, in the ideal case, cannot be absorbed in a one-photon process by other chromophores in the system. Thus, as a consequence of light scattering in a single cell experiment, the benefit of two-photon excitation is realized as a true and meaningful localized volume of excitation.


(b) Chemical control of sensitizer location. 
This approach to control is based, in part, on the notion that, upon appropriate chemical functionalization of the sensitizer, one can influence intracellular location as a consequence of solubility and/or complex formation with a site-specific molecule or macromolecule (e.g., a protein). Over the years, a large fraction of the cell-based experiments have relied on this approach, and many useful results have been obtained. For example, we have already alluded to experiments which indicate that the intracellular lifetime of singlet oxygen responds to the inhomogeneity of the cell.88 In this case, a key component of the experiment involved the use of a hydrophobic and, independently, a hydrophilic sensitizer to produce singlet oxygen in different intracellular domains. Likewise, a plethora of experiments has been performed to show that the efficiency of photoinduced cell death indeed correlates with the intracellular location of the sensitizer.21,56–61
Although this approach to location control based on solubility and non-specific binding has many advantages and has indeed led to many informative conclusions, it also has many disadvantages that are now evolving into limitations as the field becomes increasingly sophisticated. For example, non-specific binding may ensure that 90% of the sensitizer present in the cell is localized in a given domain; however, the remaining 10% localized elsewhere in the cell may, in fact, have the greatest cytotoxic effect. Indeed, it has been shown that a small amount of singlet oxygen produced in or near the mitochondria can be significantly more lethal than a large amount of singlet oxygen produced in the cell nucleus.61 Thus, it is to our benefit to further explore and exploit methods for sensitizer localization that rely on specific and/or covalent interactions. In this way, one can potentially increase the fraction of sensitizer molecules localized in a given intracellular domain, and help ensure that sensitizers localized elsewhere in the cell will be present in such a low concentration that they will not have an appreciable effect on whatever process is being monitored.
At this juncture, it is pertinent to first mention one useful and justifiably popular approach to generate a localized population of an intracellular sensitizer; the endogenous production of Protoporphyrin IX (PpIX) from 5-aminolevulinic acid (ALA).126–129 The final stages of this process occur in the mitochondria and, as a consequence, results in a highly localized concentration of an efficient singlet oxygen sensitizer (Fig. 9).
 Fig. 9  Fluorescence images recorded of HeLa cells containing the singlet oxygen sensitizer Protoporphyrin IX (PpIX), generated endogenously after incubating the cells with 5-aminolevulinic acid.87 (a) Image based on PpIX fluorescence. The data show that only the cell on the left produced an appreciable amount of PpIX. (b) Image based on the fluorescence of rhodamine 123, Rh123, a mitochondria-specific stain with which these cells had been incubated. The coincidence of the PpIX and Rh123 images indicate that PpIX principally localizes in the mitochondria. 
Although the data in Fig. 9 indeed point to a high degree of PpIX localization, one must nevertheless still exercise caution in the interpretation of these images. First, when examining such images, one often tends to focus on the “bright” part of the picture, neglecting the background. Indeed, when processing data recorded for such images, the natural temptation is to adjust the contrast ratio to highlight the domain where the dye preferentially localizes (i.e., the mitochondria in this case). For this particular system, however, despite being produced in the mitochondria, PpIX is not covalently bound and can diffuse out into the cytoplasm.127,130 Thus, one is still hampered by the limitations defined by sensitizer solubility and local concentration gradients.
The recent past has seen a substantial growth in the development and use of methods to attach chromophores to a given intracellular protein.131,132 This work includes techniques by which an independently synthesized, “non-natural” chromophore can be introduced133–135 as well as methods that exploit the use of an endogenous chromophore embedded in a protein (e.g., green fluorescent protein, GFP).136 Admittedly, the field has almost exclusively focused on attaching fluorophores to be used as probes or in imaging experiments. Nevertheless, upon irradiation, some of these fluorophores also produce a sufficient amount of reactive oxygen species, including singlet oxygen, that one can selectively perturb the system being investigated. These latter systems provide the basis for the techniques known as Chromophore Assisted Light Inactivation, CALI (this acronym was originally coined using the word “laser” instead of “light”) and Fluorophore Assisted Light Inactivation, FALI.99,137–139
Intracellular studies of singlet oxygen can benefit greatly by a concerted effort to exploit these existing methods to “tag” specific proteins with chromophores, particularly when one uses a molecule known to be an efficient singlet oxygen sensitizer. In light of the recent results regarding the intracellular lifetime and diffusion distance of singlet oxygen (vide supra), it will also be important to revisit previous interpretations of FALI data regarding singlet oxygen's sphere of activity.138
Although extremely promising, these protein tagging experiments will be complicated and must still be interpreted with caution; they will not be an immediate panacea for mechanistic studies of intracellular singlet oxygen. For example, with some approaches (e.g., SNAP-Tag),134,135 it is necessary to incubate the cell with a sensitizer functionalized such that it can be linked to a given protein. In this case, one must thus consider the kinetics of sensitizer uptake by the cell, protein tagging, and the removal of untagged sensitizer. With respect to the latter, residual amounts of the untagged sensitizer may remain either in or on the cell as a consequence of non-specific binding interactions. Moreover, as we have already mentioned with our discussion of Fig. 9, a fluorescence imaging experiment must be carefully performed if it is to be used to assess the amount of sensitizer that remains elsewhere in the cell. One approach to address the complications associated with untagged, residual sensitizer is to incorporate an “off-on” switching mechanism that is activated only when the sensitizer is specifically bound to a given protein. We discuss selected aspects of such switches in the next section.
Inherent, genetically-encoded protein-based chromophores provide another approach to increase the specificity of intracellular singlet oxygen studies. For example, it has recently been shown that a variant of GFP, the so-called “KillerRed” chromophore, can be localized in mitochondria and, upon irradiation, produce sufficient amounts of reactive oxygen species to cause cell death.140 Although it was first suggested that singlet oxygen is indeed involved in this process,140 subsequent experiments now implicate the intermediacy of other reactive oxygen species derived from electron transfer reactions.141,142 Indeed, the latter is in keeping with a general report that GFPs can act as light-induced electron donors.143 Similarly, we have shown that irradiation of a yellow fluorescent protein (YFP) incorporated into the tubulin cytoskeletal network can cause the collapse of these structures and lead to other morphological signs of cell death (Fig. 10).144
 Fig. 10  (Top) Image of two HeLa cells based on emission from a yellow fluorescent protein (YFP) in the tubulin cytoskeletal network. The YFP was genetically encoded via transient transfection.87 (Bottom) YFP-based image that shows the collapse of the cytoskeletal network upon focused 420 nm irradiation of YFP in the cell on the right hand side (3 min irradiation at 1.7 nJ/pulse with the output of a fs laser operated at 1 kHz). Irradiation was performed with spatial localization under one-photon conditions, and the red dot in the image approximates the cross sectional diameter of the focused laser at the beam waist. The scale bars denote a distance of 20 μm. 
With respect to this latter study, it interesting to note that the experiment was performed upon one-photon irradiation using a focused laser whose cross sectional diameter was small compared to the area of the cell (Fig. 10). The cytoskeletal response to this irradiation, however, encompassed the whole cell. Although scattered light could contribute to this observation, it is important to note that the neighboring cell that could equally have been affected by scattered light does not show the same response. As such, it appears rather that localized irradiation may have initiated a cascade of intracellular events resulting in the global skeletal response confined to one cell. Independently, we have shown that irradiation of a known singlet oxygen sensitizer (i.e., an exogenous porphyrin) incorporated into the cell will also lead to the collapse of the tubulin cytoskeletal network.87
Clearly, more work needs to be done to better elucidate the details of the cell's response upon irradiation of a genetically-encoded protein-based chromophore. This includes ascertaining whether or not singlet oxygen is indeed involved and, if so, what are the pertinent yields and kinetics. Although members of the GFP family can act as electron donors,143 there is independent evidence to indicate that they can also sensitize the production of singlet oxygen.145 Admittedly, data obtained from GFP itself currently point to a very low quantum yield of singlet oxygen production from this chromophore.146 The results obtained suggest that the chromophore is effectively shielded by the surrounding protein, and that oxygen diffusion to and from the chromophore is constrained.


(c) Quenching of sensitizer excited states. 
The quenching of either the S1 or T1 state of the sensitizer as a means to control singlet oxygen production has likewise been the subject of much recent work. In general, the deactivation of an organic molecule excited state by another molecule Q added to the system is a phenomenon that has been studied for many years.147,148 Such quenching can occur through a variety of mechanisms (e.g., Q-induced radiationless deactivation, resonant energy transfer to Q, electron transfer to or from Q), each of which provide a quencher-dependent channel for sensitizer excited state deactivation that can kinetically compete with the production of singlet oxygen.
The key phrase in this context is “to kinetically compete with processes that result in the production of singlet oxygen”. If we consider, for example, the sensitizer T1 state, the pertinent processes are (1) T1 quenching by the added quencher with a rate constant kQ[Q], where kQ is the bimolecular rate constant for T1 deactivation by Q, and (2) T1 quenching by ground state oxygen with a rate constant defined by the product fkO2[O2(X3Σ−g)], where kO2 is the bimolecular rate constant for T1 deactivation by O2(X3Σ−g) and f is the fraction of these quenching events that result in singlet oxygen production. Analogous expressions can be written to quantify the processes that serve to deactivate the S1 state (i.e., Q-induced deactivation vs. intersystem crossing to produce T1 and, thereafter, singlet oxygen).
Continuing with our example, if it is assumed that the respective rate constants for Q-dependent and O2-dependent deactivation of the sensitizer excited state are equally large (and this is reasonable and realistic), then it should be apparent that some level of control can be obtained by adjusting the relative concentrations of the quencher and ground state oxygen, [Q] and [O2(X3Σ−g)], respectively. However, if the desired level of control is a Q-dependent on-off switch for singlet oxygen production, then additional modifications must be made to the system. Specifically, to minimize singlet oxygen production for the “off” case, it is desirable to judiciously place Q right next to the sensitizer chromophore. In this way, one obviates the requirement for diffusion-dependent encounter; static quenching of the excited state sensitizer occurs immediately and rapidly, well before the diffusion-dependent bimolecular process with oxygen can occur. To activate the sensitizer, and turn singlet oxygen production “on”, something must be done to either (1) remove Q from the vicinity of the sensitizer, or (2) alter Q such that it is no longer a viable quencher. Under these latter conditions, random collisions with O2(X3Σ−g) can then dominate the deactivation of the sensitizer excited state.
In recent years, these guidelines have been used to develop a number of on-off switching systems for singlet oxygen production, each with unique and characteristic features. In Fig. 11, we illustrate an approach that exploits features of DNA hybridization.149 First, the sensitizer is covalently linked to a DNA oligomer with a specific sequence of nucleotides. Although functionalized, this sensitizer is now in the “on” state, and singlet oxygen can be readily produced. Upon exposure of this functionalized sensitizer to a similarly functionalized quencher, but in which the nucleotide sequence complements that on the sensitizer, hybridization of the respective DNA strands will bring the sensitizer and Q into close proximity and, thereby, turn the sensitizer “off”. Note that specificity for this process is determined by the nucleotide sequence; if the respective bases do not complement each other, on-off switching will not occur. Finally, singlet oxygen production can be switched back on by the addition of yet another DNA oligomer that will preferentially hybridize with the strand attached to Q and, as a consequence, re-liberate the sensitizer.
 Fig. 11  Illustration of the DNA nucleotide sequence-controlled off-and-on switching of a singlet oxygen sensitizer (Sens) using a quencher (Q)-DNA conjugate and an independent target oligonucleotide, respectively.116,149 
This concept of DNA-controlled switching has recently been extended through the use of a single-stranded hairpin structure to keep the sensitizer and Q in close proximity (“off” state).150 The hairpin was constructed such as to complement a mRNA sequence expressed in a specific cancer cell. Upon incorporation of the Sens-Q construct into these cancer cells, the hairpin was opened, singlet oxygen production was activated, and cell death ensued.
Analogous approaches have used a short peptide tether to hold the sensitizer and quencher together to define the “off” position.151 The unique feature of this system that defines specificity is that the amino acid sequence in this peptide can be chosen such that it is a substrate for a specific enzyme that would then cleave the tether and liberate the sensitizer (e.g., a protease expressed in cancer cells). It has likewise been shown that this approach can be used to selectively target and kill cancer cells.152,153 Unlike the DNA system shown in Fig. 11, however, this latter switch is irreversible; once the sensitizer is activated, it can no longer be deactivated.
As mentioned, instead of physically changing the distance between Q and the sensitizer, another switching approach is to maintain the close physical contact between Q and the sensitizer but then to alter Q such that its effectiveness as a quencher changes. This approach has been used, for example, to develop a singlet oxygen sensitizer that responds to the pH of the surrounding medium.154 Under alkaline conditions, amine moieties in the quencher part of a two-component Sens-Q conjugate readily deactivate the adjacent excited state sensitizer via electron transfer and, as such, define the off position. Upon protonation of these amine lone pair electrons in an acidic medium, however, electron transfer quenching is precluded, and the sensitized production of singlet oxygen can ensue. Such coupled two component systems have the advantage of flexibility; one can tune the photophysical properties of the sensitizer independently of any changes made to alter the sensitivity of quencher moiety.
With respect to a pH-sensitive system, the same principle of proton-dependent control can be applied to sensitizers in which the Brønsted base is an integral part of the sensitizer chromophore. In this latter case, protonation-dependent on-off switching can be a result of spectral, kinetic and morphological phenomena, all of which can be manifested in the quantum yield of singlet oxygen production.155–159


(d) Selective quenching of singlet oxygen. 
Throughout the history of work in this field, the addition to a given system of molecules that can selectively remove singlet oxygen, either by chemical reaction or physical deactivation, has been a useful mechanistic tool. In the context of controlling singlet oxygen behavior, the addition of such quenchers complements methods used to influence singlet oxygen production. Specifically, upon production of singlet oxygen in a given spatial domain, the amount of added quencher defines the yield with which singlet oxygen can react with other molecules in the system. In short, this is another example in which we exploit kinetic competition as a means for control.
With respect to intracellular studies of singlet oxygen, the judicious use of added quenchers has already had an impact. We have mentioned the benefits of using H2O as a quencher in a system initially equilibrated with D2O. Bovine Serum Albumin is an effective quencher that does not penetrate into the cell and, as such, helps discriminate between intra- and extracellular responses to singlet oxygen.83,85 Sodium azide, NaN3, is a well-established quencher of singlet oxygen,67 and recent studies have shown the benefit of its use to characterize the effects of intracellular inhomogeneity on the reactivity of singlet oxygen.88 However, care should be exercised with the use of NaN3 in cells simply because it can be toxic in itself.88 With this in mind, imidazole, for example, has likewise been used as an intracellular quencher selective for singlet oxygen.99
In the same way that sensitizers can be selectively tagged to intracellular proteins, one could also spatially localize a singlet oxygen quencher or, perhaps even better, a fluorescent molecule that irreversibly traps singlet oxygen (vide infra). Indeed, it is anticipated that dual tagging experiments,160 in which a switchable sensitizer is located in one intracellular domain and a quencher/trap located in another, will be an extremely useful, albeit complicated, mechanistic tool to examine intracellular singlet oxygen behavior and the specific responses of a cell to singlet oxygen.

Other probes for singlet oxygen
The most specific, useful, and revealing probe of singlet oxygen is, without doubt, the 1275 nm O2(a1Δg) → O2(X3Σ−g) phosphorescence, particularly when it is monitored in a time-resolved experiment. Nevertheless, this probe also has its limitations, the most significant of which is that this emission is very weak. As a consequence, at least for current single cell experiments, one must typically collect time-resolved O2(a1Δg) phosphorescence data from D2O-incubated cells over periods of time that can range from ∼10 to 100 s using laser excitation energies of ca. 3–10 nJ/pulse (fs laser operated at a repetition rate of 1 kHz).27,88 These latter conditions are not ideal for a system that can respond adversely to the presence of singlet oxygen.
Although such direct time-resolved data have been useful, and should continue to be quite informative, it is nevertheless desirable to also have a more benign and complementary probe for intracellular singlet oxygen. To this end, the use of highly fluorescent chemical traps for singlet oxygen appears quite promising, particularly for imaging experiments at the level of a single cell.
The development and use of luminescent probes to monitor reactions and reactive species in cells continues to be an active area of research.161 It is also a vigorous industry in which several companies compete to market a wide range of products. Probes for reactive oxygen species certainly get their share of attention.162–164 Nevertheless, despite notable progress in the field, an acceptable and easily-handled probe for intracellular singlet oxygen has unfortunately yet to be identified.
Chemical traps have long been employed to study singlet oxygen mediated processes. Of these traps, 1,3-diphenylisobenzofuran (DPBF) has arguably been the most widely used. Singlet oxygen rapidly and irreversibly reacts with DPBF in a π2 + π4 cycloaddition reaction to yield an endoperoxide and, through this process, generates products that do not fluoresce and whose absorption spectra differ significantly from that of DPBF.165 The development of DPBF-dependent time-resolved experiments has played a key role in revealing kinetic information about singlet oxygen.166–170
Other, more sophisticated fluorescent probes for singlet oxygen have recently been developed. Perhaps the most notable in this regard is a coupled, two-component system comprised of a trap and a fluorophore (Fig. 12).171 This system works in a way that is analogous to that described above in our discussion of a switchable pH-sensitive sensitizer. Prior to the reaction with singlet oxygen, emission from the fluorophore is quenched by electron transfer from an adjacent donor moiety. The latter is designed such that (1) it will readily react with singlet oxygen in a π2 + π4 cycloaddition reaction to yield an endoperoxide, and (2) the resultant endoperoxide will not quench the adjacent fluorophore by electron transfer. As a result, in the presence of singlet oxygen, fluorescence is observed.
 Fig. 12  Illustration of a two-component system wherein intramolecular electron transfer (ET) inhibits fluorescence from the fluorescein-based chromophore. Upon reaction with singlet oxygen, intramolecular electron transfer is precluded, and fluorescence is observed.171 
The basic principle and structure of the system shown in Fig. 12 have been exploited for the development of a commercially available product, the so-called “singlet oxygen sensor green®” (SOSG).172 Although SOSG provides a step in the correct direction, it has a number of limitations that must be overcome before it can be generally used in intracellular experiments. First, more work needs to be done to develop methods by which SOSG itself, or suitable derivatives, can be better incorporated into a cell and targeted to a specific intracellular location. Second, steps must be taken to account for the fact that SOSG can sensitize its own singlet oxygen mediated oxygenation.173
Despite these limitations, SOSG has nevertheless been successfully used in imaging experiments to monitor singlet oxygen production in plant leaves.174 Related plant imaging experiments have likewise been performed using fluorescent pyrrole-based singlet oxygen traps.175
The system in Fig. 12 has also been modified to include a chelated europium ion as the lumophore.176 As with other lanthanide-based systems, this latter probe for singlet oxygen has the advantages that (1) the lifetime of the luminescent state is quite long, and (2) emission occurs with a discrete spectrum characterized by a series of comparatively narrow bands that extend out to ∼700 nm. As such, both temporal and spectral discrimination can be readily used to isolate the desired emission, thus minimizing uncertainties that may arise as a consequence of detecting luminescence from other sources and/or scattered excitation light. Although intracellular data from this lanthanide-based probe have been recorded,176 selected problems regarding its incorporation into a cell likewise still need to be resolved before it can become a general tool. Nevertheless, the system appears quite promising.
In conclusion, the further development and refinement of luminescent probes for intracellular singlet oxygen will contribute a great deal to the field. I particularly envision great benefits from a dual-tagging experiment in which a viable probe is attached to one intracellular protein whereas a singlet oxygen sensitizer is positioned in a different location. Data from this admittedly complicated system could then, in principle, also be analyzed against independent probes that monitor cell viability.
Monitoring the cell's response to singlet oxygen
Arguably, the most important aspect of studying singlet oxygen in a cell is the experiment performed to assess the cell's response to singlet oxygen. The options available for this are many; indeed, the appropriate citation here is to the body of modern cell and molecular biology. However, given the kinds of singlet oxygen experiments we have discussed thus far (e.g., single cell), viability assays that depend on an optical or electrophysiological technique are likely to be more convenient. These latter techniques are also more amenable to rapidly monitoring the cell's response as a function of the elapsed time from singlet oxygen production in a given location. Although we have discussed a few assays already, the literature is nevertheless replete with examples specific to the intracellular production of singlet oxygen. These range from monitoring changes in the mitochondrial transmembrane potential and the concentration of intracellular Ca2+ to gross morphological changes such as the collapse of cytoskeletal structures (Fig. 10). Such assays become even more informative when coupled with the use of cells genetically engineered to either express or knockout a given feature.
At this juncture, it is useful to mention two points that must be considered with respect to future photosensitized singlet oxygen experiments performed at the single cell level. First, we have already illustrated how fluorescence images of the sensitizer can be very useful in pointing to the intracellular location of singlet oxygen production (e.g., Figs. 4 and 9).71,87 However, one must recognize that, in the process of creating such an image, one produces a certain amount of singlet oxygen. Thus, one must carefully ascertain if simply “looking” at the sensitizer is enough to perturb the cell. Second, accumulating the proper statistics can be problematic for experiments performed at the single cell level. Indeed, because there are so many variables that influence cell viability, it will be essential to carry out the singlet oxygen experiments to which I have referred using techniques in which the response of many cells can be readily analyzed.
Singlet oxygen in a cell: What does the future hold?
A cursory look at singlet oxygen papers published over the last ∼40 years reveals that one of the more common justifications for a given project is that the work would presumably be of benefit in understanding the behavior of singlet oxygen where it “really matters”: in a cell. Without belittling the valuable contributions of those who, in the past, have worked either with model systems or with singlet oxygen in a “real” biological system, I believe the community has now reached a critical juncture where the development of tools and methods makes it easier to draw substantive conclusions about the behavior of singlet oxygen in a cell. We now have a formidable arsenal that can be used, ranging from the tools of genetic engineering to sophisticated laser-based imaging techniques. Of course, this assessment applies to a variety of cellular processes and the associated reactive intermediates, not just singlet oxygen. In any event, the scientific community of the immediate future will be able to directly address, with unprecedented clarity, many of the issues that have challenged our predecessors. New problems and new issues will occur, of course, but that is the way of science. Nevertheless, the future is rich with opportunity as we begin, in earnest, to unravel the behavior of singlet oxygen where it “really matters”; from experiments performed in the inhomogeneous and dynamically-evolving world of a viable cell.
3 Nonlinear, two-photon sensitized production of singlet oxygen
In starting this section, I refer back to Fig. 1 and the process of light absorption that results in the creation of the singlet oxygen precursor: the excited-state sensitizer. Over the years, it has been implicit that sensitizer excitation invariably occurs as a result of light absorption in a linear one-photon process. This is pertinent for light sources such as the sun or most lamps. Indeed, many sensitizers commonly used are naturally occurring compounds that have evolved to exploit the solar spectrum. Porphyrins, for example, have a characteristic and intense absorption band around 420 nm (the so-called Soret band) and a series of less intense bands at longer wavelengths that extend out to about 700 nm, depending on the molecule (the Q band).177
For light sources capable of delivering a much higher flux, in particular a laser, excitation of a given molecule can also occur upon the simultaneous absorption of two photons.178–180 This process is often described as proceeding through a so-called virtual state (Fig. 1). The production of the virtual state is perhaps best envisioned as a non-resonant condition when the molecule in question interacts with the incident electromagnetic radiation; “non-resonant” in that the molecule does not have a discrete state corresponding to the energy of one of the incident photons. However, if a second photon arrives during this interaction, the energy available to the molecule from the radiation field is effectively pooled, and a resonant condition can be achieved to populate a discrete excited state. The likelihood that two photons will be available at the same point in time and space increases as a quadratic function of the incident laser power (hence the word “nonlinear”) and, as outlined in Fig. 8, can impart a unique spatial characteristic to two-photon excitation. For a given molecule, the probability for such two-photon absorption, at a given wavelength, is commonly expressed in the so-called two-photon absorption cross section, δ(λ).
Many fundamental aspects of two-photon absorption were elucidated in studies performed throughout the 1970s and 1980s.181–183 In the 1990s the field was rejuvenated, in part, by demonstrations on how characteristic features of two-photon excitation could be used for three-dimensional microscopy184 and for initiating chemical reactions with spatial resolution.185 Moreover, evidence began to accumulate demonstrating that one could design and prepare molecules with comparatively large two-photon absorption cross sections,186 and experimental techniques were refined such that these cross sections could be accurately quantified.187 The latter included, in particular, the development and implementation of femtosecond pulsed lasers that obviated many problems associated with the use of nanosecond lasers.
With respect to the photosensitized production of singlet oxygen, the benefits of two-photon excitation are clear. As we have already outlined, through the use of a focused laser, one can define a comparatively small and localized excitation volume in which singlet oxygen is produced (Fig. 8).125 Moreover, because the longer wavelengths used in two-photon experiments are invariably not resonant with an allowed one-photon transition (Fig. 1), (1) one can potentially achieve greater selectivity in the excitation of a given chromophore in complex mixtures of chromophores, and (2) light absorption can occur deeper within a given sample. The latter is often cited in the context of PDT and the increased flexibility of being able to irradiate tumors below the skin surface in a spectral domain in which tissue is most transparent (i.e., ca. 700–900 nm).188 Of course, the irradiation of a highly inhomogeneous medium that efficiently scatters light, such as tissue, can make it more difficult to achieve the focused intensity threshold necessary for two-photon excitation. For mechanistic experiments performed at the level of a single cell, however, this threshold is easily obtained and, as already mentioned, allows one to realize a true and meaningful localized volume of excitation.
Thus far, much of the systematic work on the two-photon sensitized production of singlet oxygen has dealt with three issues: (1) use of the 1275 nm singlet oxygen phosphorescence signal as an independent method to quantify the two-photon absorption cross section of the sensitizer, (2) elucidating the features of a given molecule that give rise to both a large two-photon absorption cross section and a high yield of sensitized singlet oxygen production, and (3) use of singlet oxygen sensitizers to further elucidate fundamental aspects of two-photon absorption that depend on molecular symmetry, or lack thereof. Other studies have established initial footholds for further systematic work in a number of promising areas. These include exploring the effect of solvent on two-photon absorption and exploiting the spatial features of two-photon excitation as a biomedical tool. Each of these issues is addressed in the sections that follow.
Singlet oxygen phosphorescence as a tool to quantify absorption cross sections
Over the last ten years, there has been a widespread effort to produce molecules with increasingly larger two-photon absorption cross sections, δ.178–180 Although this work has been remarkably successful, it has often been limited by the accuracy of the methods used to quantify the purported increase in δ.
Two methods have been, and continue to be, commonly used to quantify δ. The first, the so-called z-scan technique, is based on the amount of light transmitted through a sample as the latter is translated along the propagation axis of a focused laser beam.189 The second involves monitoring the intensity of fluorescence from the molecule being studied. These emission experiments can be performed in two ways: (1) establish an internal standard using the intensity of fluorescence obtained upon one-photon excitation of the given molecule, where the absorption coefficient is known, against which the intensity of fluorescence from two-photon excitation is compared, and thereby determine the unknown absorption coefficient,122,190 or (2) compare the intensity of fluorescence upon two-photon excitation of a molecule to the fluorescence obtained upon two-photon excitation of a separate molecule established as a standard with an accepted two-photon absorption cross section.186,187
Each of these approaches has its advantages and disadvantages.178,179 Moreover, the accuracy of the data obtained depends significantly on the spatial and temporal profile of the laser used in the experiment.122,182,191 In short, quantifying δ is a non-trivial exercise. This has perhaps been best exemplified in recent years by the rather wide range of δ values reported for any one given molecule.
Despite these rather pessimistic statements, the community has nevertheless progressed appreciably as it begins to understand the limitations inherent to these measurements. Moreover, enough data have now been recorded from a number of independent laboratories using a number of different techniques such that several two-photon-absorbing molecules have been sufficiently characterized for use as standards that cover a wide range of excitation wavelengths.187,191–193 It is here that measurements based on singlet oxygen phosphorescence have played a role, providing a complementary but independent approach to quantify two-photon absorption.191,193,194
Like everything else, the use of singlet oxygen phosphorescence to quantify δ for a given molecule has it advantages and disadvantages. Of course, the principle requirement is that the molecule being studied must sensitize the production of enough singlet oxygen that the latter can be detected in a time-resolved phosphorescence experiment. At one extreme, this requirement points to the most obvious way that a singlet oxygen phosphorescence experiment can complement experiments based on the fluorescence of the two-photon chromophore; many molecules simply do not fluoresce, but rather, efficiently intersystem cross to produce the T1 state and, subsequently, singlet oxygen (Fig. 1). For molecules that do not appreciably fluoresce, it has been shown that solution-phase optoacoustic measurements can likewise be used to quantify δ.191
Another advantage of using singlet oxygen phosphorescence as a probe for two-photon absorption is that the emission signal monitored is always a constant and independent of the molecule being studied. Specifically, singlet oxygen phosphorescence occurs over a narrow spectral bandwidth centered at ∼1275 nm.73,74 Thus, one readily and efficiently collects all of the light emitted. Moreover, irrespective of the solvent used in a given experiment, the singlet oxygen lifetime (>3 μs) is invariably much longer than that of a fluorophore (<20 ns) and, as such, one can temporally discriminate against undesired light that might interfere with a given measurement (e.g., scattered laser light). As with the fluorescence experiments from the two-photon chromophore itself, the two-photon sensitized singlet oxygen phosphorescence experiments can be performed (1) using the one-photon sensitized singlet oxygen signal as an internal standard, or (2) against a second sensitizer for which the two-photon absorption cross section has been independently quantified.191,193–195
The great compromise: an efficient two-photon singlet oxygen sensitizer
Much of the recent work to develop molecules with a large two-photon absorption cross section, δ, has been based on guidelines that state the importance of maximizing the extent to which intramolecular charge transfer can yield a large dipolar or quadrupolar transition moment.178–180 Thus, molecules have been produced in which electron donor and acceptor moieties are judiciously placed onto increasingly larger conjugated π networks that facilitate charge separation. Unfortunately, this molecular construct is usually not conducive to the efficient production of singlet oxygen.
Intramolecular charge transfer generally facilitates mechanisms for non-radiative deactivation of an excited state that efficiently compete against, and thus preclude, energy transfer to O2(X3Σ−g) to produce singlet oxygen.196 Moreover, molecules M with a propensity for intramolecular charge transfer generally also have a corresponding propensity for intermolecular charge transfer in the bimolecular complex with O2(X3Σ−g) that necessarily precedes singlet oxygen production. The resultant M–O2 charge-transfer state, M+˙O2−˙, likewise facilitates mechanisms for non-radiative excited state deactivation that efficiently compete with the process of energy transfer to produce singlet oxygen.10,11,100,197 These effects on the singlet oxygen yield can also be enhanced when using a solvent that stabilizes the M–O2 charge-transfer state (e.g., water).10,100,198,199 Thus, the conundrum with which we are faced is that molecules optimized to be good two-photon absorbers are generally not efficient singlet oxygen sensitizers, and vice versa.200–202
Of course, exceptions to this general rule exist, and examples can be provided of molecules that have a comparatively large value of δ coupled with a large quantum yield for singlet oxygen production, ΦΔ. Although the absolute magnitude of these respective parameters is indeed important, the appropriate figure of merit for a two-photon singlet oxygen sensitizer is arguably the product of these parameters, δΦΔ. In any event, it has been shown, for example, that the product δΦΔ for selected porphycenes can be appreciably larger than that for the isomeric porphyrin.195 Similarly, it has been shown that porphyrin macrocycles linked by a conjugated π system can be very efficient two-photon sensitizers.203,204 Unfortunately, such exceptions are currently few and far between. Thus, the field can benefit from continued research along several complementary lines: (1) Experiments designed to better elucidate the features of a given molecule that give rise to these apparent exceptional systems that have large values of both δ and ΦΔ, and (2) experiments to find systems in which a suitable compromise between the relative magnitudes of δ and ΦΔ allow for the further development of a functional tool (e.g., a sensitizer for use in spatially-resolved singlet oxygen imaging experiments125 or a sensitizer for two-photon PDT205).
A different approach to this problem is to develop a two-component system consisting of an efficient two-photon light-absorbing chromophore coupled to a separate singlet oxygen generating system. The intent is to design the system such that, upon irradiation, energy transfer from the light-absorbing chromophore to the sensitizer ensues, thus generating singlet oxygen in high yield. The pertinent proof-of-principle experiments have been completed,206,207 demonstrating that this approach is indeed viable. As with the other two-component systems already discussed in this review (i.e., fluorescent singlet oxygen traps, pH-sensitive sensitizer), however, an increase in functional flexibility may be offset by difficulties associated with (1) synthesizing such a “complex” molecule, and (2) incorporating and localizing this molecule in a cell, for example.
Selected symmetry-dependent aspects of two-photon absorption
In the early, seminal work on two-photon absorption, selection rules based on molecular symmetry were established that, in turn, allowed one to differentiate a one-photon transition from a two-photon transition.181 In particular, if a given molecule contained a center of inversion, then an allowed one-photon transition would necessarily be forbidden as a two-photon process, and vice versa. Thus, in a centrosymmetric molecule, the lowest energy one- and two-photon transitions would populate different states. However, if the molecule is not centrosymmetric, then a given excited state could be populated by both one- and two-photon transitions. These points are illustrated in Fig. 13.
 Fig. 13  Example of how a symmetry-derived selection rule influences one- and two-photon transitions. The singlet oxygen sensitizer on the left does not have a center of inversion and, hence, one- and two-photon light absorption can populate the same state. The sensitizer on the right is centrosymmetric and, hence, the selection rules dictate that the lowest energy one- and two-photon transitions must populate different states. The data obtained from these respective molecules are consistent with this picture.193 
For a given molecule, these selection rules can have a significant impact on the wavelengths of light used to create an excited state. Thus, from an applied perspective alone, a study of this phenomenon as it appears in singlet oxygen sensitizers can have useful ramifications. Such studies using singlet oxygen sensitizers have also yielded important fundamental information about the effects of molecular structure on one- and two-photon spectroscopic transitions.193,195,202
One aspect of these one- and two-photon spectroscopic studies is illustrated in Fig. 14 using data recorded from distyryl benzenes.202 On the basis of the chemical structure shown for compound 2, which indicates an apparent center of inversion, one would expect to record one- and two-photon absorption spectra that correspond to the population of different excited states. This was indeed the case (Fig. 14). On the basis of the chemical structure shown for compound 1, which likewise indicates an apparent center of inversion, one would also expect to record a two-photon spectrum that differs noticeably from the one-photon spectrum. However, the data shown in Fig. 14 indicate that this is clearly not the case.
 Fig. 14  Example illustrating how conformational flexibility in a molecule can be manifested in one- and two-photon absorption spectra.202 Data are shown for two distyryl benzenes. For each molecule, the one-photon absorption spectrum is shown in black. Also shown in black are the fluorescence spectra. The two-photon absorption spectra are shown in red. Note that, because of the scaling factor that differentiates the one- and two-photon wavelength axes (black vs. red, respectively), the two-photon spectra appear to be less broad than the one-photon spectra. The data for 1 clearly show that one- and two-photon excitation populate the same state, whereas the data for 2 show that different states are populated. 
The explanation for these results lies in the fact that 1 can more readily access non-centrosymmetric conformers. Thus, the “static” chemical structure shown for 1 is misleading; one must also consider the available dynamic degrees of freedom and that light absorption will always sample the resultant distribution of molecules in the system. Analogous results have also been obtained from a study on porphycenes and porphyrins.195 It is important to note that, for the example shown in Fig. 13, where the observed data indeed conform to the expectations based on symmetry-derived selection rules, the molecules are “rigid” planar aromatic hydrocarbons.
Effect of solvent on two-photon absorption
A key tenet of chemistry is that, for a given molecule, the surrounding medium can have a profound effect on both the properties and reactivity of that molecule.208 The study of solvent effects on one-photon spectroscopic transitions, both absorption and emission, arguably represents one of the oldest fields of research in the scientific community.209 Despite this, the field nevertheless remains extremely active with cutting-edge experimental and theoretical programs.
Systematic experimental studies of the effect of solvent on two-photon absorption have only just begun.210–212 As presented in our discussion on quantifying δ, solvent effect studies have likewise been compromised and limited by the difficulties of recording accurate and reproducible data. Nevertheless, as reliable experimental techniques have evolved, so have meaningful data. Like the study of symmetry-dependent transitions (vide supra), this is a research area of widespread fundamental interest where a study of singlet oxygen sensitizers provides a wonderful model and where the use of singlet oxygen phosphorescence provides a useful experimental probe.211 Of course, there is a direct and immediate relevance to singlet oxygen systems as well, best exemplified by the desire to incorporate two-photon sensitizers and chromophores into selected locations in a cell where the surrounding environment can range from an aqueous gel to the more rigid hydrophobic interior of a protein, for example.
In studying the effect of solvent on electronic transitions, it is convenient and, in fact, meaningful to decouple the effect of solvent on the spectrum (i.e., transition energy) from the effect of solvent on the transition probability. Indeed, studies of the effect of solvent on the O2(a1Δg) → O2(X3Σ−g) phosphorescent, the O2(a1Δg) → O2(b1Σ+g) absorption, and O2(b1Σ+g) → O2(a1Δg) fluorescent transitions provide a beautiful example of how these two parameters respond differently and independently to perturbation by the solvent.3,11,35,38,42,213
In the extensive literature on one-photon transitions of organic chromophores, the effect of solvent on spectra has, without doubt, been the most extensively and fruitfully examined.209 Pronounced solvent-dependent spectral shifts have been interpreted using a variety of models and, in most cases, meaningful correlations can be made with macroscopic properties of the bulk solvent. The latter invariably include both the static and optical dielectric constants, and functions thereof. Unfortunately, compilations of solvent effects on two-photon spectra are, at present, insufficient to begin any substantive analysis; to my knowledge, there is currently only one study in which the molecules examined have a distinct absorption band from which solvent-dependent changes in the band maximum and band width can be considered.211
In contrast to the work on spectra, understanding the effect of solvent on the probability of a one-photon electronic transition is less developed. Despite a wealth of experimental results, there is an apparent lack of general models that can (1) account for the data, and (2) predict the behavior of a chromophore given selected properties of the solvent. In fact, the currently accepted model presented for the mechanism in which solvent perturbs the probability of the O2(a1Δg) → O2(X3Σ−g) radiative transition is, arguably, one of the few examples of success in this area.3,11,12 The situation with respect to two-photon transitions is likewise unresolved. However, in contrast to the two-photon spectral studies discussed above, there is at least more experimental data currently available on the way in which solvent influences δ.
The data on δ obtained thus far as a function of the solvent point to an extremely interesting, albeit potentially complicated, problem. For example, in one study,211 three very similar molecules were examined (Fig. 15); the only difference between these molecules was a supposedly subtle substituent change on the chromophore. Nevertheless, δ values obtained for these molecules at the band maxima of the respective two-photon spectra did not follow a systematic and similar trend with a change in the solvent. For example, for the CN-substituted molecule, the change in solvent from toluene to cyclohexane resulted in an appreciable increase in δ. For the Br-substituted molecule, however, this same change in solvent resulted in an appreciable decrease in δ. In short, the magnitude and direction of the solvent effect depend on the solute being investigated.
 Fig. 15  Structure of the distyryl benzene chromophore used for a study of solvent effects on two-photon absorption.211 Despite presumed subtle changes in the chromophore (i.e., R = CN, Br, and OCH3), significantly different responses to the solvent were observed. 
Although perhaps surprising at first glance, this effect of solvent on δ is arguably consistent with the currently accepted model for two-photon absorption. As already discussed, we envision two-photon absorption as proceeding through the intermediacy of a virtual state. The best way to describe this virtual state, certainly within the context of modern theoretical and computational concepts, is to express it as a linear combination of all the real states of the molecule, ψi, including the ground state (eqn (3)). (3) Even subtle substituent changes on the chromophore can have an appreciable effect on the relative energies and symmetries of these respective states ψi which, in turn, will be reflected in the virtual state. Given that the wave function for the latter effectively appears twice in the overall description for δ (eqn (4)),211,214 it is expected that subtle changes in this wave function will thus have profound effects. In eqn (4), Ô represents an operator (e.g., electric dipole interaction) that couples the ground state, g, with the final state, f, in the two-photon transition. (4) On this basis, we reinforce the need for more sophisticated models that can simulate the perturbing effects of a solvent. It is expected that models which rely on the macroscopic dielectric properties of the solvent will not be sufficient. Rather, one will need to consider specific solvent–solute interactions. To this end, hybrid quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics (QM/MM) methods provide one promising approach.215 With this methodology, it is expected that the best results will occur when both the solute and the first solvation sphere are treated quantum mechanically. Furthermore, given the importance of the virtual state, as described in eqn (3), it is expected that traditional sum-over-states models will likewise not be sufficient. Rather, methods such as response theory will be more desirable because they accurately represent all states of the system in a computationally tractable manner.216,217 The combination of the QM/MM and response methodologies has already been applied to the problem of calculating nonlinear optical properties of solvated molecules,218,219 although more clearly needs to be done with respect to large molecules in a range of solvents. In these computations, it will also be essential to consider the vibronic profiles of the solvated solute, and preliminary work on this issue has likewise shown promise.220
In conclusion, experimental and computational investigations of solvent effects on two-photon optical transitions are seen to provide a new dimension for the study of fundamental interactions between light and matter. Using singlet oxygen phosphorescence as a probe to quantify the solvent-dependent nonlinear optical parameters of a given sensitizer will continue to be a useful and accurate tool in this regard. The results of such studies will directly influence projects ranging from the two-photon-based creation of images to two-photon-initiated chemical reactions, both of which are especially pertinent for current efforts to study the behavior of singlet oxygen at the level of a single cell.
Exploiting the unique spatial features of two-photon singlet oxygen production
Although the small and localized excitation volume unique to a two-photon experiment has been extensively exploited for fluorescence imaging184 and the production of three-dimensional materials,185 for example, the community is only beginning to exploit this phenomenon as it applies to a localized production of singlet oxygen.
Admittedly, the idea of capitalizing on these advantages of spatial-localization, particularly the issue of depth penetration in a sample, has long been on the minds of many in the PDT community.188 Nevertheless, the number of actual spatially-resolved experiments that are pertinent in this regard is still small. Examples include (1) the demonstration using fluorescent probes that intracellular reactive oxygen species can be produced upon two-photon excitation,221 and (2) two-photon irradiation of a singlet oxygen sensitizer in a given spatial domain of a tissue sample can close a blood vessel.204
To my knowledge, use of the O2(a1Δg) → O2(X3Σ−g) 1275 nm phosphorescence, produced in a two-photon sensitized experiment, has yet to be exploited for the creation of a singlet oxygen based image of a cell. At present, this experiment is limited by the fact that the signal to be detected is still too small.125 Solutions to this problem include (1) the use of more efficient two-photon sensitizers, and (2) the development and use of more efficient near-IR optical detectors.
4 Metal-enhanced singlet oxygen phosphorescence
It has now been sufficiently documented that the 1275 nm O2(a1Δg) → O2(X3Σ−g) phosphorescence of singlet oxygen is an indispensible tool. However, as we have mentioned, this tool has its limitations; the principal ones of which are (1) the quantum efficiency of phosphorescence is extremely small, and (2) this phosphorescence occurs in the near IR where optical detectors are not very efficient. To calibrate this latter statement for the uninitiated, fluorescence from organic molecules typically occurs with a quantum efficiency that is over a million times larger in the visible region of the spectrum where photomultiplier tubes, for example, have excellent response.
With the goal of simply detecting the presence of singlet oxygen, one way to address the limitation of a weak O2(a1Δg) → O2(X3Σ−g) phosphorescence signal is, for example, to employ chemical traps for singlet oxygen that efficiently fluoresce in the visible region of the spectrum (vide supra). Of course, this approach also has its limitations, two of which are (1) it is currently an irreversible technique that will stop working when trap molecules are no longer available for reaction, and (2) other reactive oxygen species may trigger a fluorescence signal giving a false response. The latter point reflects that fact that such a chemical trap is an indirect, secondary probe of singlet oxygen; it does not have the specificity of the 1275 nm phosphorescent signal.
Alternatively, one can try to directly overcome the limitation of the weak O2(a1Δg) → O2(X3Σ−g) phosphorescence signal. This could be accomplished, for example, through the development of an optical detector with a larger quantum efficiency at 1275 nm. On the other hand, one could try to boost the intensity of the O2(a1Δg) → O2(X3Σ−g) phosphorescence signal thereby making singlet oxygen easier to detect. It is this latter approach that we now address.
It is well-established that unique electric fields associated with certain metal surfaces can enhance a spectroscopic transition in a nearby molecule. The now classic example of this phenomenon is surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS), which has evolved into a powerful analytical tool and probe.222 Although currently less developed, it has nevertheless also been established that metal surfaces can likewise alter the probability of an electronic transition in a molecule suitably positioned near the metal.223–225 Work in this field has become quite promising with the advent of metal nanoparticles (e.g., gold nanorods) that have discrete localized surface plasmon resonances which depend on the size and shape of the metal particle.226 By exploiting any number of recently-established techniques to prepare nanoparticles,227 one can thus create a specific metal-dependent electric field that reflects the localized, confined motion of the surface electrons. In short, one can produce a spatially localized electric field, tuned to be energetically resonant with an electronic transition in a given molecule, and thereby enhance that transition.
We have recently shown that a gold metal nanoparticle can indeed enhance the 1275 nm phosphorescence of singlet oxygen.228 Moreover, in this proof-of-principle experiment, the data point to an extent of enhancement that is at least a factor of several hundred. In itself, this result warrants further work. However, before a generally-applicable, phosphorescence-enhancing tool can be achieved, several issues must be addressed. Indeed, by exploring the inherent limitations of this technique as applied to singlet oxygen, complemented by experiments to elucidate the mechanism of metal-enhanced phosphorescence, we once again get to use singlet oxygen to investigate aspects of a general phenomenon of current interest to a wide selection of the research community (Fig. 2). In short, singlet oxygen remains at the cutting-edge of science.
The first criterion that must be met for the O2(a1Δg) → O2(X3Σ−g) experiment is that the metal nanoparticle used must have a localized surface plasmon resonance with significant intensity at ∼ 1275 nm. This is most simply assessed by recording the extinction spectrum of an ensemble of the nanoparticles (e.g., particles dispersed in a solvent or attached to a glass substrate). The preparation of a nanoparticle, or rather, a homogeneous ensemble of nanoparticles, whose size and structure yield a plasmon resonance at 1275 nm can be a non-trivial exercise. For the O2(a1Δg) → O2(X3Σ−g) enhancement experiment, gold nanodiscs were used (20 nm thick, 280 nm diameter), and these were prepared on a glass substrate by a lithographic technique (Fig. 16).228
 Fig. 16  (Top) SEM image of the 280 nm-diameter surface-immobilized gold nanodiscs used for the metal-enhanced O2(a1Δg) → O2(X3Σ−g) phosphorescence experiment.228 (Middle) Illustration of the surface-immobilized gold nanodiscs. The discs were encased in a thin layer of glassy polystyrene that also contained the singlet oxygen sensitizer. (Bottom) Extinction spectra recorded from two separate samples of gold nanodiscs, each having a different diameter. For each sample, the discrete plasmon bands reflect a very homogeneous size distribution of gold discs. The spectrum shown in green was obtained from discs whose diameter-to-height aspect ratio was 7.5, whereas the black spectrum was obtained from discs with an aspect ratio of 14. The latter is clearly coincident with the emission spectrum of singlet oxygen which is approximated by the small red band. As expected based on these respective spectra, the discs with d/h = 14 enhanced singlet oxygen phosphorescence the most.228 
One could, in principle, also use gold nanorods for the singlet oxygen experiment. However, the length-to-width aspect ratio required to obtain a resonance at 1275 nm makes preparation and handling of these particles difficult. On the other hand, we have recently shown that by taking an easily-handled gold nanorod with a plasmon resonance in the visible region of the spectrum and by coating it first with a silica shell and then a gold overcoat, one can readily obtain a nanoparticle with the required near IR plasmon resonance (Fig. 17).229
 Fig. 17  (Top) TEM images of nanoparticles that illustrate stages in the production of a multilaminate structure in which a gold nanorod is first coated with silica, followed by the application of a gold overcoat.229 (Bottom) Normalized extinction spectra of a dilute aqueous dispersion of multilaminate silica-coated gold nanorods with a gold overcoat (solid line). These data were obtained from 20 × 60 nm nanorods with a 60 nm thick silica shell and a 15 nm thick gold overcoat. Also shown are the extinction spectra recorded from (a) identical gold-coated silica particles that lack the core gold nanorod (green line) and (b) identical silica-coated gold nanorods that lack the gold overcoat (blue line). The red band represents the spectral profile of O2(a1Δg) → O2(X3Σ−g) phosphorescence. 
The next most significant feature of this nanoparticle-dependent phenomenon as it applies to singlet oxygen is the spatial domain in which phosphorescence enhancement will occur. The pertinent particle-dependent electric field extends approximately 10–30 nm out from the surface of the metal, and only those oxygen molecules in this domain will be influenced. Unlike a large organic molecule that can either be covalently attached to the metal surface or whose mobility can be restricted through the use of a glassy matrix, oxygen will readily diffuse in and out of this small volume surrounding the nanoparticle. As such, if one wants to exploit this unique metal-dependent effect to enhance singlet oxygen phosphorescence, the experiment must be designed such as to ensure that a sufficient number of the singlet oxygen molecules produced can indeed be influenced by the localized electric field. One way to meet this requirement, for example, is to covalently link the singlet oxygen sensitizer to the metal particle with a tether that is (1) long enough to preclude quenching of the sensitizer excited state by the metal surface, but (2) short enough to ensure a sufficiently high concentration of singlet oxygen in the domain where the plasmon field can perturb the radiative process.
Upon considering the potential applications for this phenomenon of metal-enhanced singlet oxygen phosphorescence, the future appears quite bright. For example, it is not unreasonable to consider a metal particle suitably functionalized with a sensitizer and a bio-compatible coating such that it (1) is not toxic to a cell in the absence of light, (2) will localize in a specific intracellular domain, and (3) will produce a local population of singlet oxygen that can then be optically detected in a time-resolved experiment.
5 Singlet oxygen in polymeric materials
The study of singlet oxygen's behavior in polymers, particularly synthetic organic polymers, has long been an active and important field. Much of this work has revolved around the role played by singlet oxygen in the degradation of polymers.16
The feature common to many polymeric systems that has the greatest impact on singlet oxygen behavior, particularly singlet oxygen produced in a photosensitized process, is that these systems are inherently more viscous than a low molecular weight liquid solvent at 20 °C. As such, the translational motion of a solute in the polymer matrix or polymer solution will be impeded, and this is reflected in smaller diffusion coefficients. Clearly, the solutes pertinent to our discussion are oxygen, the sensitizer, and any quenchers and/or substrates with which singlet oxygen will interact. With respect to the latter, an obvious corollary is that reduced conformational flexibility in the macromolecule itself may also influence a given reaction of the polymer with singlet oxygen.
It is important to recognize that a decrease in the magnitude of diffusion coefficients will not only influence efficient bimolecular reactions that occur at the so-called diffusion-controlled limit (i.e., reaction rate constants will decrease with the decrease in the diffusion coefficients); inefficient bimolecular reactions that occur at the so-called pre-equilibrium limit will also be influenced.17,109,230 In the latter case, rate constants can actually increase with a decrease in diffusion coefficients as a consequence of longer-lived solvent-caged pairs of the reacting molecules.17,109
This phenomenon has been illustrated using singlet oxygen reactions (1) that range from being very efficient (e.g., quenching of singlet oxygen by β-carotene) to being very inefficient (e.g., cycloaddition reaction between singlet oxygen and 9,10-diphenylanthracene), (2) in “solvents” that range from liquid toluene (i.e., large solute diffusion coefficients) to glassy polystyrene (i.e., small diffusion coefficients).17,109 Although such data, in themselves, are extremely useful in studies of polymer degradation mediated by singlet oxygen, they also serve as a wonderful model for a fundamental kinetic phenomenon with widespread applications. Indeed, aspects of this phenomenon have already been shown to be pertinent for the study of intracellular singlet oxygen (vide supra).88
Quantifying oxygen's diffusion coefficient
On the basis of our discussion thus far, it should be apparent that quantifying the diffusion coefficient of oxygen in a range of media is an important exercise. The necessary measurements are arguably simplest to perform using homogeneous polymer glasses and rubbers that can be produced in a variety of discrete shapes (e.g., thin films) that complement a range of experimental tools. From a practical standpoint, such measurements have long been important to the polymer community given (1) the role that oxygen plays in mechanisms of polymer degradation,231 and (2) the need to develop oxygen impermeable barrier materials for packaging applications.232 From a more fundamental perspective, the results obtained from these polymer studies have been invaluable in elucidating molecular events that either inhibit or facilitate the translational motion of a small molecule through a given medium. Clearly, the perspective obtained here can also be useful for studies of oxygen diffusion in biological systems.
Although diffusion coefficients for oxygen in a wide range of polymers have been appearing in the literature for many years, recent experiments based on photophysical phenomena shown in Fig. 1 have made particularly substantive contributions to the field.233–236 Use of the singlet oxygen phosphorescence intensity or the phosphorescence intensity from the singlet oxygen sensitizer as a probe for the amount of oxygen incorporated into a given polymer sample as a function of time has many advantages that facilitate the acquisition of accurate and reproducible data (Fig. 18). For example, because the experiments can be performed on comparatively thin polymer films (∼10 μm thick), high quality samples are readily prepared which, in turn, helps minimize the large effect that sample history and morphology can have on a given measurement. In addition, experiments are more readily performed as a function of temperature which yields information on apparent activation barriers for diffusion.28,234,235
 Fig. 18  (Top) Schematic representation of an experiment in which the 1275 nm phosphorescence of singlet oxygen is used to quantify oxygen sorption into a polymer film. A de-gassed polymer film containing a sensitizer is rapidly exposed to an ambient atmosphere of oxygen. Oxygen sorption into the film is then monitored using the phosphorescence of singlet oxygen. (Bottom) Singlet oxygen phosphorescence data recorded from such an experiment. The solid black line superimposed onto the red sorption curve represents the solution to a fitting equation that directly yields the oxygen diffusion coefficient in that material.28,234,235 
Oxygen sorption experiments such as those shown in Fig. 18 have also been performed on multi-layer films.237 On one hand, the data obtained provide insight of practical importance; multi-layer films are commonly used as membranes with unique barrier properties. On the other hand, the study of oxygen diffusion through even a simple bi-layer film provides a model for some rather complicated experimental and computational challenges.237 It is anticipated that by initially working with more accessible and readily-controlled synthetic polymers, many problems pertinent for the study of more complicated biological systems will be easier to solve. This latter statement is likewise relevant for recent work in which singlet oxygen phosphorescence experiments were used to quantify oxygen diffusion coefficients in solvent-swollen gels.238 Data thus recorded indicated that, as the extent of crosslinking in these polymers was increased, these materials became more heterogeneous and were characterized by a combination of dense domains and less-dense open “channels” through which oxygen could more readily move. Data such as these certainly appear relevant with respect to light-initiated reactions that alter intracellular morphology (e.g., the collapse of cytoskeletal proteins, Fig. 10) and that, in turn, undoubtedly alter the local diffusion of intracellular oxygen and other small molecules.
In a related study, O2(a1Δg) → O2(X3Σ−g) phosphorescence has also been used in a microscope-based imaging experiment to characterize the behavior of singlet oxygen at the boundary of two immiscible solvents (Fig. 19).239 From a technical point of view, these data provide a nice example of how the use of an array detector can provide spatially-resolved information that complements results obtained from independent kinetic measurements (e.g., effect of solvent on the O2(a1Δg) → O2(X3Σ−g) radiative rate constant170,240). Furthermore, and again from a technical point of view, such singlet oxygen imaging experiments have provided the impetus to refine techniques by which a higher spatial resolution can be obtained using array detectors.36,241
 Fig. 19  (Top) Schematic representation of a singlet oxygen phosphorescence imaging experiment using a near-IR array detector to monitor the steady-state concentration gradient of singlet oxygen across the boundary between two immiscible solvents. Using a water-soluble sensitizer, singlet oxygen is produced only in the aqueous domain, but it diffuses across the solvent boundary into the CS2 domain.239 (Bottom) The phosphorescence data recorded are consistent with (1) an oxygen solubility in CS2 that is greater than that in D2O, (2) a quantum efficiency of singlet oxygen phosphorescence in CS2 that is greater than that in D2O, (3) curvature of the solvent boundary due to surface tension, and (4) a limited but distinct diffusion distance from the D2O domain into the CS2 domain. 
Singlet oxygen phosphorescence experiments have also been used to quantify the extent to which the presence of another gas (e.g., nitrogen, argon) perturbs oxygen diffusion in a glassy polymer film.234,235,242 It was shown that, under certain conditions, added nitrogen gas, for example, can cause an increase in the diffusion coefficient for oxygen. The data were interpreted using a model in which oxygen and nitrogen molecules compete for sorption sites in the polymer matrix. If the presence of nitrogen helps to more rapidly fill the “stickier” sites, one effectively removes an impediment to oxygen transport. In turn, this results in a larger oxygen diffusion coefficient. These results could be of significance in the design and construction of polymer-based gas separation membranes, for example.243
6 Singlet oxygen: challenges for the theoretical and computational community
The oxygen–organic molecule photosystem, as represented in Fig. 1 and denoted M–O2, has long provided challenges to the theoretical and computational community. Indeed, one of the first triumphs of molecular orbital theory directly involved oxygen; in 1928, Robert Mulliken argued that there should be two metastable states of singlet spin multiplicity slightly higher in energy than the ground electronic state which should have triplet spin.2 In the ∼80 years since this first report, problems involving oxygen and the M–O2 photosystem have always remained at the cutting-edge of theoretical and computational research.
The application of theoretical/computational methods to the M–O2 photosystem has recently been discussed in a rather extensive review.3 The latter also contains an explicit description of why the M–O2 photosystem provides such unique challenges. Thus, for the present discussion, I choose not to be redundant. However, the reader should not construe that a brief discussion here means that this topic is any less important than those discussed in previous sections.
In the preceding sections, I alluded to a number of issues that represent a unique theoretical and computational challenge. These range from the modeling of solvent effects on oxygen's radiative transitions to modeling nonlinear transitions in large organic molecules. Key and characteristic aspects of these problems which put them at the cutting-edge of computational chemistry include the following: (1) One is invariably dealing with open-shell systems in which valence orbitals are not completely filled. The open-shell “problem” is at the forefront of research in quantum chemistry; some of the most successful theoretical models and computational methods are simply not viable for such systems. (2) Transitions between pertinent states of the M–O2 system invariably involve a change in spin angular momentum and, as such, one must properly consider the effects of spin–orbit coupling, for example. (3) It is imperative that one consider the effects of state mixing in any treatment of rigor. This could mean including a description of the M–O2 charge-transfer state when quantifying transitions between lower-lying valence states, or it could mean including a description of all real states in a system when defining the virtual state that is important in a two-photon process.
Although the three points just outlined are problematic in themselves, consider now that in modeling a pertinent singlet oxygen system one must also accurately consider the effects of both equilibrium and non-equilibrium solvation on comparatively large molecules. In making such statements, my intent is not to strike a pessimistic tone. Rather, this is an attempt to portray an exciting and challenging problem, aspects of which are being addressed on a daily basis by a large fraction of the computational community. Although a given investigator may not be working on an actual M–O2 or singlet oxygen system, the results obtained are nevertheless pertinent; the singlet oxygen “problem” remains a beautiful and relevant model around which we can converge.
7 Conclusions
The study of singlet oxygen, particularly in photosensitized systems, provides a coalescence point for many topics currently at the cutting-edge of science. Indeed, with singlet oxygen in mind, seemingly disparate issues such as nanoparticle-dependent surface plasmon resonances and genetically-engineered protein tagging experiments can be mentioned, with significance, in the same sentence.
Studies of singlet oxygen will remain at the forefront of science simply because singlet oxygen is an important species that plays a role in so many processes. I hope to have demonstrated through this review that, as science evolves, so does the study of singlet oxygen. There will always be something new under the sun.
Acknowledgements
This review is based principally on work performed over the years by members of the Center for Oxygen Microscopy and Imaging (COMI) at Aarhus University, and visitors who have come to COMI from other universities and research centers. I tried to mention all people involved, either by citing work that has already appeared in print or by associating their name with work that has yet to be published. I am extremely fortunate in that I have been, and continue to be, associated with wonderful colleagues and students.
References

          N. Lane, Oxygen: The molecule that made the world, Oxford University Press, Oxford,  2002 Search PubMed .
R. S. Mulliken, Nature, 1928, 122, 505 CAS .
M. J. Paterson, O. Christiansen, F. Jensen and P. R. Ogilby, Photochem. Photobiol., 2006, 82, 1136–1160 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Scurlock, B. Wang and P. R. Ogilby, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 388–392 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bodesheim and R. Schmidt, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1997, 101, 5672–5677 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Foote, Acc. Chem. Res., 1968, 1, 104–110 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Clennan and A. Pace, Tetrahedron, 2005, 61, 6665–6691 CrossRef CAS .

          G. Herzberg, Molecular Spectra and Molecular Structure. I. Spectra of Diatomic Molecules, 2nd edn, Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York,  1950 Search PubMed .
H. Tsubomura and R. S. Mulliken, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1960, 82, 5966–5974 CrossRef CAS .
P.-G. Jensen, J. Arnbjerg, L. P. Tolbod, R. Toftegaard and P. R. Ogilby, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 9965–9973 CrossRef CAS .
C. Schweitzer and R. Schmidt, Chem. Rev., 2003, 103, 1685–1757 CrossRef CAS .
B. F. Minaev, S. Lunell and G. I. Kobzev, THEOCHEM, 1993, 284, 1–9 CrossRef .
B. F. Minaev and H. Ågren, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1997, 93, 2231–2239 RSC .
R. D. Scurlock and P. R. Ogilby, J. Phys. Chem., 1989, 93, 5493–5500 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Matsumoto, in Singlet Oxygen. Volume II. Reaction Modes and Products, ed. A. A. Frimer, CRC Press, Boca Raton,  1985, pp. 205–272 Search PubMed .

          J. F. Rabek, in Singlet Oxygen. Volume 4. Polymers and Biomolecules, ed. A. A. Frimer, CRC Press, Boca Raton,  1985, pp. 1–90 Search PubMed .
R. D. Scurlock, M. Kristiansen, P. R. Ogilby, V. L. Taylor and R. L. Clough, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 1998, 60, 145–159 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Scurlock, B. Wang, P. R. Ogilby, J. R. Sheats and R. L. Clough, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 10194–10202 CrossRef CAS .
E. S. Gonçalves and P. R. Ogilby, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 9056–9065 CrossRef CAS .

          R. C. Straight and J. D. Spikes, in Singlet Oxygen, ed. A. A. Frimer, CRC Press, Boca Raton,  1985, vol. 4, pp. 91–143 Search PubMed .
R. W. Redmond and I. E. Kochevar, Photochem. Photobiol., 2006, 82, 1178–1186 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Davies, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., 2003, 305, 761–770 CrossRef CAS .
M. Orfanopoulos, I. Smonou and C. S. Foote, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1990, 112, 3607–3614 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kang and C. S. Foote, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 4865–4873 CrossRef CAS .

          B. Halliwell and J. M. C. Gutteridge, Free Radicals in Biology and Medicine, 3rd edn, Oxford University Press, Oxford,  1999 Search PubMed .
M. R. Solomon, J. Sivaguru, S. Jockusch, W. Adam and N. J. Turro, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2009, 8, 912–915 RSC .
M. K. Kuimova, S. W. Botchway, A. W. Parker, M. Balaz, H. A. Collins, H. L. Anderson, K. Suhling and P. R. Ogilby, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 69–73 Search PubMed .
L. Poulsen, I. Zebger, M. Klinger, M. Eldrup, P. Sommer-Larsen and P. R. Ogilby, Macromolecules, 2003, 36, 7189–7198 CrossRef CAS .
G. B. Strambini and P. Cioni, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 8337–8344 CrossRef CAS .

          I. Rosenthal, in Singlet Oxygen, ed. A. A. Frimer, CRC Press, Boca Raton,  1985, vol. I, pp. 13–38 Search PubMed .
D. Weldon, T. D. Poulsen, K. V. Mikkelsen and P. R. Ogilby, Photochem. Photobiol., 1999, 70, 369–379 CrossRef CAS .
F. M. Cabrerizo, J. Arnbjerg, M. P. Denofrio, R. Erra-Balsells and P. R. Ogilby, ChemPhysChem, 2010, 11, 796–798 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Krasnovsky, Photochem. Photobiol., 1979, 29, 29–36 CrossRef .
A. U. Khan and M. Kasha, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1979, 76, 6047–6049 CAS .
P. R. Ogilby, Acc. Chem. Res., 1999, 32, 512–519 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Snyder, I. Zebger, Z. Gao, L. Poulsen, P. K. Frederiksen, E. Skovsen, S. P. McIlroy, M. Klinger, L. K. Andersen and P. R. Ogilby, Acc. Chem. Res., 2004, 37, 894–901 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jiménez-Banzo, X. Ragas, P. Kapusta and S. Nonell, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2008, 7, 1003–1010 RSC .
T. Keszthelyi, D. Weldon, T. N. Andersen, T. D. Poulsen, K. V. Mikkelsen and P. R. Ogilby, Photochem. Photobiol., 1999, 70, 531–539 CrossRef CAS .
D. Weldon and P. R. Ogilby, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 12978–12979 CrossRef CAS .
T. Keszthelyi, T. D. Poulsen, P. R. Ogilby and K. V. Mikkelsen, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2000, 104, 10550–10555 CrossRef CAS .
N. Dam, T. Keszthelyi, L. K. Andersen, K. V. Mikkelsen and P. R. Ogilby, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2002, 106, 5263–5270 CrossRef CAS .
L. K. Andersen and P. R. Ogilby, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2002, 106, 11064–11069 CrossRef CAS .
L. K. Andersen and P. R. Ogilby, Photochem. Photobiol., 2001, 73, 489–492 CrossRef CAS .
C. Flors and S. Nonell, Acc. Chem. Res., 2006, 39, 293–300 CrossRef CAS .
E. Reddi, M. Ceccon, G. Valduga, G. Jori, J. C. Bommer, F. Elisei, L. Latterini and U. Mazzucato, Photochem. Photobiol., 2002, 75, 462–470 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mosinger, O. Jirsak, P. Kubat, K. Lang and B. Mosinger, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 164–166 RSC .
M. R. Hamblin and T. Hasan, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2004, 3, 436–450 RSC .
T. Maisch, J. Baier, B. Franz, M. Maier, M. Landthaler, R.-M. Szeimies and W. Bäumler, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 7223–7228 CrossRef CAS .
H. K. Ledford and K. K. Niyogi, Plant, Cell Environ., 2005, 28, 1037–1045 CrossRef CAS .
A. Krieger-Liszkay, J. Exp. Bot., 2004, 56, 337–346 CrossRef .
R. Edge, D. J. McGarvey and T. G. Truscott, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 1997, 41, 189–200 CrossRef CAS .
A. Krieger-Liszkay and A. Trebst, J. Exp. Bot., 2006, 57, 1677–1684 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Bonnett, Chemical Aspects of Photodynamic Therapy, Gordon and Breach Science Publishers, Amsterdam,  2000 Search PubMed .
M. J. Davies, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2004, 3, 17–25 RSC .
J. Cadet, J.-L. Ravanat, G. R. Martinez, M. H. G. Medeiros and P. Di Mascio, Photochem. Photobiol., 2006, 82, 1219–1225 CrossRef CAS .
K. Plaetzer, T. Kiesslich, T. Verwanger and B. Krammer, Med. Laser Appl., 2003, 18, 7–19 CrossRef .
N. L. Oleinick, R. L. Morris and I. Belichenko, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2002, 1, 1–21 RSC .
D. Kessel, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2004, 8, 1009–1014 CrossRef CAS .
I. J. MacDonald, J. Morgan, D. A. Bellnier, G. M. Paszkiewicz, J. E. Whitaker, D. J. Litchfield and T. J. Dougherty, Photochem. Photobiol., 1999, 70, 789–797 CrossRef CAS .
J. Usuda, S.-M. Chiu, E. S. Murphy, M. Lam, A.-L. Nieminen and N. L. Oleinick, J. Biol. Chem., 2003, 278, 2021–2029 CrossRef CAS .
N. Rubio, S. P. Fleury and R. W. Redmond, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2009, 8, 457–464 RSC .
I. E. Kochevar, M. C. Lynch, S. Zhuang and C. R. Lambert, Photochem. Photobiol., 2000, 72, 548–553 CAS .
L.-O. Klotz, K.-D. Kröncke and H. Sies, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2003, 2, 88–94 RSC .
C. S. Foote, Photochem. Photobiol., 1991, 54, 659 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wright, C. L. Hawkins and M. J. Davies, Free Radical Biol. Med., 2003, 34, 637–647 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Ouédraogo and R. W. Redmond, Photochem. Photobiol., 2003, 77, 192–203 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wilkinson, W. P. Helman and A. B. Ross, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 1995, 24, 663–1021 CAS .
G. I. Makhatadze, G. M. Clore and A. M. Gronenborn, Nat. Struct. Biol., 1995, 2, 852–855 CAS .
D. J. Kushner, A. Baker and T. G. Dunstall, Can. J. Physiol. Pharmacol., 1999, 77, 79–88 CrossRef CAS .
P. Cioni and G. B. Strambini, Biophys. J., 2002, 82, 3246–3253 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hatz, J. D. C. Lambert and P. R. Ogilby, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2007, 6, 1106–1116 RSC .

          I. B. Andersen, T. Breitenbach, J. D. C. Lambert and P. R. Ogilby, unpublished work .
A. N. Macpherson, T. G. Truscott and P. H. Turner, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1994, 90, 1065–1072 RSC .
J. M. Wessels and M. A. J. Rodgers, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 17586–17592 CrossRef CAS .
A. Baker and J. R. Kanofsky, Photochem. Photobiol., 1992, 55, 523–528 CrossRef CAS .
S. Oelckers, T. Ziegler, I. Michler and B. Röder, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 1999, 53, 121–127 CrossRef CAS .
M. Niedre, M. S. Patterson and B. C. Wilson, Photochem. Photobiol., 2002, 75, 382–391 CAS .
J. Baier, M. Maier, R. Engl, M. Landthaler and W. Bäumler, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 3041–3046 CrossRef .
J. Baier, T. Maisch, M. Maier, M. Landthaler and W. Bäumler, J. Invest. Dermatol., 2007, 127, 1498–1506 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jiménez-Banzo, M. L. Sagrista, M. Mora and S. Nonell, Free Radical Biol. Med., 2008, 44, 1926–1934 CrossRef CAS .
J. Schlothauer, S. Hackbarth and B. Röder, Laser Phys. Lett., 2009, 6, 216–221 Search PubMed .
I. Zebger, J. W. Snyder, L. K. Andersen, L. Poulsen, Z. Gao, J. D. C. Lambert, U. Kristiansen and P. R. Ogilby, Photochem. Photobiol., 2004, 79, 319–322 CrossRef CAS .
E. Skovsen, J. W. Snyder, J. D. C. Lambert and P. R. Ogilby, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 8570–8573 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Snyder, E. Skovsen, J. D. C. Lambert and P. R. Ogilby, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 14558–14559 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Snyder, E. Skovsen, J. D. C. Lambert, L. Poulsen and P. R. Ogilby, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2006, 8, 4280–4293 RSC .
S. Hatz, L. Poulsen and P. R. Ogilby, Photochem. Photobiol., 2008, 84, 1284–1290 CrossRef CAS .
T. Breitenbach, M. K. Kuimova, P. Gbur, S. Hatz, N. B. Schack, B. W. Pedersen, J. D. C. Lambert, L. Poulsen and P. R. Ogilby, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2009, 8, 442–452 RSC .
M. K. Kuimova, G. Yahioglu and P. R. Ogilby, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 332–340 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Jarvi, M. J. Niedre, M. S. Patterson and B. C. Wilson, Photochem. Photobiol., 2006, 82, 1198–1210 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Crank, The Mathematics of Diffusion, 2nd edn, Oxford University Press, Oxford,  1975 Search PubMed .
T. D. Poulsen, P. R. Ogilby and K. V. Mikkelsen, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1998, 102, 9829–9832 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. Lee and M. A. J. Rodgers, J. Phys. Chem., 1984, 88, 4385–4389 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Lissi, M. V. Encinas, E. Lemp and M. A. Rubio, Chem. Rev., 1993, 93, 699–723 CrossRef CAS .
J. Moan and K. Berg, Photochem. Photobiol., 1991, 53, 549–553 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Ogilby and C. S. Foote, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1983, 105, 3423–3430 CrossRef CAS .
A. Michaeli and J. Feitelson, Photochem. Photobiol., 1997, 65, 309–315 CrossRef CAS .
W. Bäumler, C. Abels, S. Karrer, T. Weiss, H. Messmann, M. Landthaler and R.-M. Szeimies, Br. J. Cancer, 1999, 80, 360–363 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Matroule, C. M. Carthy, D. J. Granville, O. Jolois, D. W. C. Hunt and J. Piette, Oncogene, 2001, 20, 4070–4084 CrossRef CAS .
O. Tour, R. M. Meijer, D. A. Zacharias, S. R. Adams and R. Y. Tsien, Nat. Biotechnol., 2003, 21, 1505–1508 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kristiansen, R. D. Scurlock, K.-K. Iu and P. R. Ogilby, J. Phys. Chem., 1991, 95, 5190–5197 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tsushima, K. Tokuda and T. Ohsaka, Anal. Chem., 1994, 66, 4551–4556 CrossRef CAS .
K. Uchida, K. Matsuyama, K. Tanaka and K. Doi, Respir. Physiol., 1992, 90, 351–362 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dutta and A. S. Popel, J. Theor. Biol., 1995, 176, 433–445 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. Sidell, J. Exp. Biol., 1998, 201, 1118–1127 Search PubMed .
K. Fushimi and A. S. Verkman, J. Cell Biol., 1991, 112, 719–725 CrossRef CAS .
K. Luby-Phelps, S. Mujumdar, R. B. Mujumdar, L. A. Ernst, W. Galbraith and A. S. Waggoner, Biophys. J., 1993, 65, 236–242 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Haidekker and E. A. Theodorakis, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2007, 5, 1669–1678 RSC .
M. K. Kuimova, G. Yahioglu, J. A. Levitt and K. Suhling, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 6672–6673 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Ogilby, M. P. Dillon, M. Kristiansen and R. L. Clough, Macromolecules, 1992, 25, 3399–3405 CrossRef CAS .
W. R. Ware, J. Phys. Chem., 1962, 66, 455–458 CrossRef CAS .

IUPAC Solubility Data Series. Volume 7: Oxygen and Ozone, ed. R. Battino, Pergamon Press, Oxford,  1981 Search PubMed .
J. M. Vanderkooi, G. Maniara, T. J. Green and D. F. Wilson, J. Biol. Chem., 1987, 262, 5476–5482 CAS .
S. A. Vinogradov, L.-W. Lo, W. T. Jenkins, S. M. Evans, C. Koch and D. F. Wilson, Biophys. J., 1996, 70, 1609–1617 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sinaasappel and C. Ince, J. Appl. Physiol., 1996, 81, 2297–2303 CAS .
Y. L. Koo, Y. Cao, R. Kopelman, S. M. Koo, M. Brasuel and M. A. Philbert, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76, 2498–2505 CrossRef CAS .
E. Cló, J. W. Snyder, P. R. Ogilby and K. V. Gothelf, ChemBioChem, 2007, 8, 475–481 CrossRef CAS .
E. Betzig and J. K. Trautman, Science, 1992, 257, 189–195 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dyba and S. W. Hell, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2002, 88, 163901 CrossRef .

          G. Cox, Optical Imaging Techniques in Cell Biology, CRC, Taylor and Francis, Boca Raton,  2007 Search PubMed .
S. W. Hell, Science, 2007, 316, 1153–1158 CrossRef CAS .
C. P. Lin, M. C. Lynch and I. E. Kochevar, Exp. Cell Res., 2000, 259, 351–359 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Xu and W. W. Webb, in Topics in Fluorescence Spectroscopy, ed. J. Lakowicz, Plenum Press, New York,  1997, vol. 5: Nonlinear and Two-Photon-Induced Fluorescence, pp. 471–540 Search PubMed .
J. Squier and M. Müller, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2001, 72, 2855–2867 CrossRef CAS .
H.-B. Sun, T. Tanaka and S. Kawata, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 3673–3675 CrossRef CAS .
E. Skovsen, J. W. Snyder and P. R. Ogilby, Photochem. Photobiol., 2006, 82, 1187–1197 CrossRef CAS .

          E. F. Gudgin Dickson, J. C. Kennedy and R. H. Pottier, in Photodynamic Therapy, ed. T. Patrice, Royal Society of Chemistry, Cambridge,  2003, pp. 81–103 Search PubMed .
B. C. Wilson, M. Olivo and G. Singh, Photochem. Photobiol., 1997, 65, 166–176 CAS .
K. Tabata, S.-I. Ogura and I. Okura, Photochem. Photobiol., 1997, 66, 842–846 CrossRef CAS .
E. G. Mik, J. Stap, M. Sinaasappel, J. F. Beek, J. A. Aten, T. G. van Leeuwen and C. Ince, Nat. Methods, 2006, 3, 939–945 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ji, G. Yang, V. Vasovic, B. Cunderlikova, Z. Suo, J. M. Nesland and Q. Peng, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2006, 84, 213–220 CrossRef CAS .
B. N. G. Giepmans, S. R. Adams, M. H. Ellisman and R. Y. Tsien, Science, 2006, 312, 217–224 CrossRef CAS .
M. Z. Lin and L. Wang, Physiology, 2008, 23, 131–141 CrossRef CAS .
D. Summerer, S. Chen, N. Wu, A. Deiters, J. W. Chin and P. G. Schultz, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 9785–9789 CrossRef CAS .
A. Keppler, H. Pick, C. Arrivoli, H. Vogel and K. Johnsson, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2004, 101, 9955–9959 CrossRef CAS .
A. Keppler and J. Ellenberg, ACS Chem. Biol., 2009, 4, 127–138 CrossRef CAS .
R. N. Day and M. W. Davidson, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2887–2921 RSC .
F.-S. Wang and D. G. Jay, Trends Cell Biol., 1996, 6, 442–445 CrossRef CAS .
S. Beck, T. Sakurai, B. K. Eustace, G. Beste, R. Schier, F. Rudert and D. G. Jay, Proteomics, 2002, 2, 247–255 CrossRef CAS .
E. Horstkotte, T. Schröder, J. Niewöhner, E. Thiel, D. G. Jay and S. W. Henning, Photochem. Photobiol., 2005, 81, 358–366 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Bulina, D. M. Chudakov, O. V. Britanova, Y. G. Yanushevich, D. B. Staroverov, T. V. Chepurnykh, E. M. Merzlyak, M. A. Shkrob, S. Lukyanov and K. A. Lukyanov, Nat. Biotechnol., 2006, 24, 95–99 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pletnev, N. G. Gurskaya, N. V. Pletneva, K. A. Lukyanov, D. M. Chudakov, V. I. Martynov, V. O. Popov, M. V. Kovalchuk, A. Wlodawer, Z. Dauter and V. Pletnev, J. Biol. Chem., 2009, 284, 32028–32039 CrossRef CAS .
E. O. Serebrovskaya, E. F. Edelweiss, O. A. Stremovskiy, K. A. Lukyanov, D. M. Chudakov and S. M. Deyev, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 9221–9225 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Bogdanov, A. S. Mishin, I. V. Yampolsky, V. V. Belousov, D. M. Chudakov, F. V. Subach, V. V. Verkhusha, S. Lukyanov and K. A. Lukyanov, Nat. Chem. Biol., 2009, 5, 459–461 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Hatz and P. R. Ogilby, unpublished work .
L. Greenbaum, C. Rothmann, R. Lavie and Z. Malik, Biol. Chem., 2000, 381, 1251–1258 CAS .
A. Jiménez-Banzo, S. Nonell, J. Hofkens and C. Flors, Biophys. J., 2008, 94, 168–172 CAS .

          N. J. Turro, V. Ramamurthy and J. C. Scaiano, Principles of Molecular Photochemistry, University Science Books, Sausalito,  2009 Search PubMed .

          J. R. Lakowicz, Principles of Fluorescence Spectroscopy, 3rd edn, Springer, New York,  2006 Search PubMed .
E. Cló, J. W. Snyder, N. V. Voigt, P. R. Ogilby and K. V. Gothelf, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4200–4201 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, J. F. Lovell, P.-C. Lo, K. Stefflova, M. Niedre, B. C. Wilson and G. Zheng, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2008, 7, 775–781 RSC .
J. Chen, K. Stefflova, M. J. Niedre, B. C. Wilson, B. Chance, J. D. Glickson and G. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 11450–11451 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zheng, J. Chen, K. Stefflova, M. Jarvi, H. Li and B. C. Wilson, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 8989–8994 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, M. Jarvi, P.-C. Lo, K. Stefflova, B. C. Wilson and G. Zheng, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2007, 6, 1311–1317 RSC .
S. O. McDonnell, M. J. Hall, L. T. Allen, A. Byrne, W. M. Gallagher and D. F. O'Shea, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 16360–16361 CrossRef .
R. Bonneau, R. Pottier, O. Bagno and J. Joussot-Dubien, Photochem. Photobiol., 1975, 21, 159–163 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ehrenberg, J. L. Anderson and C. S. Foote, Photochem. Photobiol., 1998, 68, 135–140 CrossRef CAS .
R. B. Ostler, A. D. Scully, A. G. Taylor, I. R. Gould, T. A. Smith, A. Waite and D. Phillips, Photochem. Photobiol., 2000, 71, 397–404 CAS .
A. Beeby, S. FitzGerald and C. F. Stanley, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2, 2001, 1978–1982 RSC .
J. Arnbjerg, M. Johnsen, C. B. Nielsen, M. Jørgensen and P. R. Ogilby, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2007, 111, 4573–4583 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gautier, A. Juillerat, C. Heinis, I. R. Correa, M. Kindermann, F. Beaufils and K. Johnsson, Chem. Biol., 2008, 15, 128–136 CrossRef CAS .

Handbook of Biological Confocal Microscopy, ed. J. B. Pawley, 3rd edn, Springer, New York,  2006 Search PubMed .
T. Nagano, J. Clin. Biochem. Nutr., 2009, 45, 111–124 Search PubMed .
N. Soh, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2006, 386, 532–543 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kálai, E. Hideg, I. Vass and K. Hideg, Free Radical Biol. Med., 1998, 24, 649–652 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Howard and G. D. Mendenhall, Can. J. Chem., 1975, 53, 2199–2201 CAS .
D. R. Adams and F. Wilkinson, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 2, 1972, 68, 586–593 RSC .
P. B. Merkel and D. R. Kearns, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1972, 94, 7244–7253 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. Young, D. Brewer and R. A. Keller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1973, 95, 375–379 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Gorman, G. Lovering and M. A. J. Rodgers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1978, 100, 4527–4532 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Scurlock and P. R. Ogilby, J. Phys. Chem., 1987, 91, 4599–4602 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tanaka, T. Miura, N. Umezawa, Y. Urano, K. Kikuchi, T. Higuchi and T. Nagano, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 2530–2536 CrossRef CAS .
Invitrogen (http://www.probes.com).
X. Ragàs, A. Jiménez-Banzo, D. Sánchez-García, X. Batllori and S. Nonell, Chem. Commun., 2009, 2920–2922 RSC .
C. Flors, M. J. Fryer, J. Waring, B. Reeder, U. Bechtold, P. M. Mullineaux, S. Nonell, M. T. Wilson and N. R. Baker, J. Exp. Bot., 2006, 57, 1725–1734 CrossRef CAS .
E. Hideg, K. Ogawa, T. Kálai and K. Hideg, Physiol. Plant., 2001, 112, 10–14 CrossRef CAS .
B. Song, G. Wang, M. Tan and J. Yuan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 13442–13450 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Gouterman, in The Porphyrins, ed. D. Dolphin, Academic Press, New York,  1978, vol. 3, pp. 1–165 Search PubMed .
F. Terenziani, C. Katan, E. Badaeva, S. Tretiak and M. Blanchard-Desce, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4641–4678 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pawlicki, H. A. Collins, R. G. Denning and H. L. Anderson, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 3244–3266 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. He, L.-S. Tan, Q. Zheng and P. N. Prasad, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 1245–1330 CrossRef CAS .
W. M. McClain, Acc. Chem. Res., 1974, 7, 129–135 CrossRef CAS .

          R. R. Birge, in Ultrasensitive Laser Spectroscopy, ed. D. S. Kliger, Academic Press, Inc., New York,  1983, pp. 109–174 Search PubMed .
R. R. Birge, Acc. Chem. Res., 1986, 19, 138–146 CrossRef CAS .
W. Denk, J. H. Strickler and W. W. Webb, Science, 1990, 248, 73–76 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kawata, H.-B. Sun, T. Tanaka and K. Takada, Nature, 2001, 412, 697–698 CrossRef CAS .
M. Albota, D. Beljonne, J.-L. Brédas, J. E. Ehrlich, J.-Y. Fu, A. A. Heikal, S. E. Hess, T. Kogej, M. D. Levin, S. R. Marder, D. McCord-Maughon, J. W. Perry, H. Röckel, M. Rumi, G. Subramaniam, W. W. Webb, X.-L. Wu and C. Xu, Science, 1998, 281, 1653–1656 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xu and W. W. Webb, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 1996, 13, 481–491 Search PubMed .
W. G. Fisher, W. P. Partridge, C. Dees and E. A. Wachter, Photochem. Photobiol., 1997, 66, 141–155 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sheik-Bahae, A. A. Said, T.-H. Wei, D. J. Hagan and E. W. VanStryland, IEEE J. Quantum Electron., 1990, 26, 760–769 CrossRef .
A. Karotki, M. Drobizhev, M. Kruk, C. Spangler, E. Nickel, N. Mamardashvili and A. Rebane, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 2003, 20, 321–332 Search PubMed .
J. Arnbjerg, M. Johnsen, P. K. Frederiksen, S. E. Braslavsky and P. R. Ogilby, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110, 7375–7385 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Makarov, M. Drobizhev and A. Rebane, Opt. Express, 2008, 16, 4029–4047 CrossRef CAS .
J. Arnbjerg, M. J. Paterson, C. B. Nielsen, M. Jørgensen, O. Christiansen and P. R. Ogilby, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2007, 111, 5756–5767 CrossRef CAS .
M. Johnsen, M. J. Paterson, J. Arnbjerg, O. Christiansen, C. B. Nielsen, M. Jørgensen and P. R. Ogilby, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 1177–1191 RSC .
J. Arnbjerg, A. Jiménez-Banzo, M. J. Paterson, S. Nonell, J. I. Borrell, O. Christiansen and P. R. Ogilby, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 5188–5199 CrossRef CAS .
C. Flors, P. R. Ogilby, J. G. Luis, T. A. Grillo, L. R. Izquierdo, P.-L. Gentili, L. Bussotti and S. Nonell, Photochem. Photobiol., 2006, 82, 95–103 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. McGarvey, F. Wilkinson, D. R. Worrall, J. Hobley and W. Shaikh, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1993, 202, 528–534 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Abdel-Shafi and F. Wilkinson, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2002, 4, 248–254 RSC .
F. Wilkinson, D. J. McGarvey and A. F. Olea, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 3762–3769 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Nielsen, M. Johnsen, J. Arnbjerg, M. Pittelkow, S. P. McIlroy, P. R. Ogilby and M. Jørgensen, J. Org. Chem., 2005, 70, 7065–7079 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Frederiksen, S. P. McIlroy, C. B. Nielsen, L. Nikolajsen, E. Skovsen, M. Jørgensen, K. V. Mikkelsen and P. R. Ogilby, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 255–269 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Nielsen, J. Arnbjerg, M. Johnsen, M. Jørgensen and P. R. Ogilby, J. Org. Chem., 2009, 74, 9094–9104 CrossRef CAS .
M. Drobizhev, Y. Stepanenko, Y. Dzenis, A. Karotki, A. Rebane, P. N. Taylor and H. L. Anderson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 7223–7236 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Collins, M. Khurana, E. H. Moriyama, A. Mariampillai, E. Dahlstedt, M. Balaz, M. K. Kuimova, M. Drobizhev, V. X. D. Yang, D. Phillips, A. Rebane, B. C. Wilson and H. L. Anderson, Nat. Photonics, 2008, 2, 420–424 Search PubMed .
A. Karotki, M. Khurana, J. R. Lepock and B. C. Wilson, Photochem. Photobiol., 2006, 82, 443–452 CrossRef CAS .
W. R. Dichtel, J. M. Serin, C. Edder, J. M. J. Fréchet, M. Matuszewski, L.-S. Tan, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy and P. N. Prasad, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 5380–5381 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Oar, J. M. Serin, W. R. Dichtel, J. M. J. Fréchet, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy and P. N. Prasad, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 2267–2275 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Reichardt, Solvents and Solvent Effects in Organic Chemistry, 2nd edn, VCH, Weinheim,  1988 Search PubMed .

          P. Suppan and N. Ghoneim, Solvatochromism, The Royal Society of Chemistry, Cambridge,  1997 Search PubMed .
H.-Y. Woo, B. Liu, B. Kohler, D. Korystov, A. Mikhailovsky and G. C. Bazan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 14721–14729 CrossRef CAS .
M. Johnsen and P. R. Ogilby, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 7831–7839 CrossRef CAS .
C. Toro, L. De Boni, S. Yao, K. D. Belfield and F. E. Hernandez, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 12185–12190 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hild and R. Schmidt, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1999, 103, 6091–6096 CrossRef CAS .
W. K. Bischel, P. J. Kelly and C. K. Rhodes, Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys., 1976, 13, 1817–1828 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gao, Acc. Chem. Res., 1996, 29, 298–305 CrossRef CAS .
J. Olsen and P. Jørgensen, J. Chem. Phys., 1985, 82, 3235–3264 CrossRef CAS .
T. D. Poulsen, P. K. Frederiksen, M. Jørgensen, K. V. Mikkelsen and P. R. Ogilby, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2001, 105, 11488–11495 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Paterson, J. Kongsted, O. Christiansen, K. V. Mikkelsen and C. B. Nielsen, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 125, 184501 CrossRef .
T. D. Poulsen, P. R. Ogilby and K. V. Mikkelsen, J. Chem. Phys., 2001, 115, 7843–7851 CrossRef CAS .
P. Macak, Y. Luo and H. Ågren, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2000, 330, 447–456 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. King and D. H. Oh, Photochem. Photobiol., 2004, 80, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Camden, J. A. Dieringer, J. Zhao and R. P. Van Duyne, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1653–1661 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Lakowicz, K. Ray, M. Chowdhury, H. Szmacinski, Y. Fu, J. Zhang and K. Nowaczyk, Analyst, 2008, 133, 1308–1346 RSC .
J. C. Ostrowski, A. Mikhailovsky, D. A. Bussian, M. A. Summers, S. K. Buratto and G. C. Bazan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1221–1227 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kinkhabwala, Z. Yu, S. Fan, Y. Avlasevich, K. Müllen and W. E. Moerner, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 654–657 Search PubMed .
M. A. El-Sayed, Acc. Chem. Res., 2001, 34, 257–264 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Murphy, T. K. Sau, A. M. Gole, C. J. Orendorff, J. Gao, L. Gou, S. E. Hunyadi and T. Li, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 13857–13870 CrossRef CAS .
R. Toftegaard, J. Arnbjerg, K. Daasbjerg, P. R. Ogilby, A. Dmitriev, D. S. Sutherland and L. Poulsen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 6025–6027 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cong, R. Toftegaard, J. Arnbjerg and P. R. Ogilby, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 4188–4195 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Turro, M.-F. Chow and M. A. Blaustein, J. Phys. Chem., 1981, 85, 3014–3018 CrossRef CAS .

          W. Schnabel, Polymer Degradation, Macmillan/Hanser, New York,  1981 Search PubMed .

Barrier Polymers and Structures, ACS Symp. Ser., ed. W. J. Koros, American Chemical Society, Washington, DC,  1990 Search PubMed .
Y. Rharbi, A. Yekta and M. A. Winnik, Anal. Chem., 1999, 71, 5045–5053 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, A. M. Baca, B. Wang and P. R. Ogilby, Macromolecules, 1994, 27, 7041–7048 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang and P. R. Ogilby, Can. J. Chem., 1995, 73, 1831–1840 CrossRef CAS .

          X. Lu and M. A. Winnik, in Organic, Physical, and Materials Photochemistry, ed. V. Ramamurthy and K. S. Schanze, Marcel Dekker, New York,  2000 Search PubMed .
L. Poulsen, I. Zebger, P. Tofte, M. Klinger, O. Hassager and P. R. Ogilby, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 13885–13891 CrossRef CAS .
N. B. Schack, C. L. P. Oliveira, N. W. G. Young, J. S. Pedersen and P. R. Ogilby, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 1148–1153 CrossRef .
I. Zebger, L. Poulsen, Z. Gao, L. K. Andersen and P. R. Ogilby, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 8927–8933 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Scurlock, S. Nonell, S. E. Braslavsky and P. R. Ogilby, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 3521–3526 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Snyder, Z. Gao and P. R. Ogilby, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2005, 76, 013701 CrossRef .
L. Poulsen and P. R. Ogilby, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2000, 104, 2573–2580 CrossRef CAS .

Polymeric Gas Separation Membranes, ed. D. R. Paul and Y. P. Yampol'skii, CRC Press, Boca Raton,  1994 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Table Content:

Peter R. Ogilby
	Peter R. Ogilby is a Professor of Chemistry at Aarhus University. He started working with singlet oxygen in 1977 as a PhD student under the guidance of C. S. Foote at the University of California-Los Angeles. Although Ogilby's independent research over the years has taken him from solution-phase photophysics and studies in glassy polymers to the development of microscopes to examine events at the level of a single live cell, these efforts have always involved singlet oxygen in one way or another.

 	Fig. 1  Diagram illustrating the one- and two-photon-initiated, triplet-state photosensitized production of singlet oxygen, O2(a1Δg). The letter S denotes discrete states of the sensitizer with singlet spin multiplicity, and T denotes states with triplet spin multiplicity. IC and ISC denote internal conversion and intersystem crossing, respectively. Depending on the sensitizer, the simultaneous absorption of two photons may or may not populate the same state as that created upon the absorption of a single higher-energy photon.	 

 	Fig. 2  Diagram illustrating three general perspectives that can guide a research program on singlet oxygen. For each perspective, selected examples of pertinent issues are provided. It should be apparent from the discussion throughout this review that these three perspectives are not mutually exclusive.	 
	(1)
τ−1Δ = kΔ = knr[S1] +⋯+ kr[S1] +⋯+ kq1[Q1] +⋯+ krxn1[R1] +⋯	(2)

 	Fig. 3  (Top) Kinetic scheme for the T1-sensitized production of singlet oxygen followed by a representation of all processes that remove singlet oxygen from the system. (Middle) Equation based on this kinetic scheme that shows how the concentration of singlet oxygen will evolve in time, t, upon the rapid production of T1 in a pulsed laser experiment.85 The first-order rate constant kT represents all channels by which T1 is removed, including processes that do not result in singlet oxygen formation, and [T1]0 represents the T1 concentration at time = 0. (Bottom) Singlet oxygen phosphorescence signals observed from D2O-incubated single cells; ■ = oxygen saturated; □ = air saturated.86 To quantify the rate constant of singlet oxygen removal (i.e., kΔ) from data such as these, one must independently quantify the rate constant kT. The latter can be done in a time-resolved T1 phosphorescence or absorption experiment.	 

 	Fig. 4  Image of a HeLa cancer cell based on the fluorescence of a singlet oxygen sensitizer with which the cell had been incubated. Under the conditions these data were recorded, the sensitizer has preferentially localized in the cell nucleus. The white dot superimposed on the cell approximates the cross-sectional area of irradiation using a diffraction-limited focused laser.	 

 	Fig. 5  Time-resolved singlet oxygen phosphorescence signals recorded from a single D2O-incubated cell as a function of the elapsed irradiation time of the sensitizer.27	 

 	Fig. 6  Normalized integrated intensity of the time-resolved singlet oxygen phosphorescence signal obtained in photosensitized experiments plotted against the percent of oxygen in the ambient atmosphere with which the sample was in equilibrium. Data are shown for aqueous solutions containing 0 (△), 0.59 (○), and 1.46 M (□) sucrose. Also shown are data recorded from single cells (●).86 Experiments were performed using the same sensitizer thus obviating the effects of a change in the inherent lifetime of the singlet oxygen precursor.	 

 	Fig. 7  Diagram illustrating approaches by which control and selectivity can be achieved in the photosensitized production of singlet oxygen and in singlet oxygen's sphere of activity.	 

 	Fig. 8  Diagram illustrating excitation volumes (colored green) obtained when using a focused laser beam in one- and two-photon experiments. The z-axis represents the direction of light propagation through the sample.	 

 	Fig. 9  Fluorescence images recorded of HeLa cells containing the singlet oxygen sensitizer Protoporphyrin IX (PpIX), generated endogenously after incubating the cells with 5-aminolevulinic acid.87 (a) Image based on PpIX fluorescence. The data show that only the cell on the left produced an appreciable amount of PpIX. (b) Image based on the fluorescence of rhodamine 123, Rh123, a mitochondria-specific stain with which these cells had been incubated. The coincidence of the PpIX and Rh123 images indicate that PpIX principally localizes in the mitochondria.	 

 	Fig. 10  (Top) Image of two HeLa cells based on emission from a yellow fluorescent protein (YFP) in the tubulin cytoskeletal network. The YFP was genetically encoded via transient transfection.87 (Bottom) YFP-based image that shows the collapse of the cytoskeletal network upon focused 420 nm irradiation of YFP in the cell on the right hand side (3 min irradiation at 1.7 nJ/pulse with the output of a fs laser operated at 1 kHz). Irradiation was performed with spatial localization under one-photon conditions, and the red dot in the image approximates the cross sectional diameter of the focused laser at the beam waist. The scale bars denote a distance of 20 μm.	 

 	Fig. 11  Illustration of the DNA nucleotide sequence-controlled off-and-on switching of a singlet oxygen sensitizer (Sens) using a quencher (Q)-DNA conjugate and an independent target oligonucleotide, respectively.116,149	 

 	Fig. 12  Illustration of a two-component system wherein intramolecular electron transfer (ET) inhibits fluorescence from the fluorescein-based chromophore. Upon reaction with singlet oxygen, intramolecular electron transfer is precluded, and fluorescence is observed.171	 

 	Fig. 13  Example of how a symmetry-derived selection rule influences one- and two-photon transitions. The singlet oxygen sensitizer on the left does not have a center of inversion and, hence, one- and two-photon light absorption can populate the same state. The sensitizer on the right is centrosymmetric and, hence, the selection rules dictate that the lowest energy one- and two-photon transitions must populate different states. The data obtained from these respective molecules are consistent with this picture.193	 

 	Fig. 14  Example illustrating how conformational flexibility in a molecule can be manifested in one- and two-photon absorption spectra.202 Data are shown for two distyryl benzenes. For each molecule, the one-photon absorption spectrum is shown in black. Also shown in black are the fluorescence spectra. The two-photon absorption spectra are shown in red. Note that, because of the scaling factor that differentiates the one- and two-photon wavelength axes (black vs. red, respectively), the two-photon spectra appear to be less broad than the one-photon spectra. The data for 1 clearly show that one- and two-photon excitation populate the same state, whereas the data for 2 show that different states are populated.	 

 	Fig. 15  Structure of the distyryl benzene chromophore used for a study of solvent effects on two-photon absorption.211 Despite presumed subtle changes in the chromophore (i.e., R = CN, Br, and OCH3), significantly different responses to the solvent were observed.	 
	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 16  (Top) SEM image of the 280 nm-diameter surface-immobilized gold nanodiscs used for the metal-enhanced O2(a1Δg) → O2(X3Σ−g) phosphorescence experiment.228 (Middle) Illustration of the surface-immobilized gold nanodiscs. The discs were encased in a thin layer of glassy polystyrene that also contained the singlet oxygen sensitizer. (Bottom) Extinction spectra recorded from two separate samples of gold nanodiscs, each having a different diameter. For each sample, the discrete plasmon bands reflect a very homogeneous size distribution of gold discs. The spectrum shown in green was obtained from discs whose diameter-to-height aspect ratio was 7.5, whereas the black spectrum was obtained from discs with an aspect ratio of 14. The latter is clearly coincident with the emission spectrum of singlet oxygen which is approximated by the small red band. As expected based on these respective spectra, the discs with d/h = 14 enhanced singlet oxygen phosphorescence the most.228	 

 	Fig. 17  (Top) TEM images of nanoparticles that illustrate stages in the production of a multilaminate structure in which a gold nanorod is first coated with silica, followed by the application of a gold overcoat.229 (Bottom) Normalized extinction spectra of a dilute aqueous dispersion of multilaminate silica-coated gold nanorods with a gold overcoat (solid line). These data were obtained from 20 × 60 nm nanorods with a 60 nm thick silica shell and a 15 nm thick gold overcoat. Also shown are the extinction spectra recorded from (a) identical gold-coated silica particles that lack the core gold nanorod (green line) and (b) identical silica-coated gold nanorods that lack the gold overcoat (blue line). The red band represents the spectral profile of O2(a1Δg) → O2(X3Σ−g) phosphorescence.	 

 	Fig. 18  (Top) Schematic representation of an experiment in which the 1275 nm phosphorescence of singlet oxygen is used to quantify oxygen sorption into a polymer film. A de-gassed polymer film containing a sensitizer is rapidly exposed to an ambient atmosphere of oxygen. Oxygen sorption into the film is then monitored using the phosphorescence of singlet oxygen. (Bottom) Singlet oxygen phosphorescence data recorded from such an experiment. The solid black line superimposed onto the red sorption curve represents the solution to a fitting equation that directly yields the oxygen diffusion coefficient in that material.28,234,235	 

 	Fig. 19  (Top) Schematic representation of a singlet oxygen phosphorescence imaging experiment using a near-IR array detector to monitor the steady-state concentration gradient of singlet oxygen across the boundary between two immiscible solvents. Using a water-soluble sensitizer, singlet oxygen is produced only in the aqueous domain, but it diffuses across the solvent boundary into the CS2 domain.239 (Bottom) The phosphorescence data recorded are consistent with (1) an oxygen solubility in CS2 that is greater than that in D2O, (2) a quantum efficiency of singlet oxygen phosphorescence in CS2 that is greater than that in D2O, (3) curvature of the solvent boundary due to surface tension, and (4) a limited but distinct diffusion distance from the D2O domain into the CS2 domain.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
