Progress in flexible energy storage and conversion systems, with a focus on cable-type lithium-ion batteries  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3EE24260A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3EE24260A
(Minireview)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2414-2423Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsProgress in flexible energy storage and conversion systems, with a focus on cable-type lithium-ion batteries

        
          
            Sang-Young 
            Lee
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Keun-Ho 
            Choi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Woo-Sung 
            Choi
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yo Han 
            Kwon
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Hye-Ran 
            Jung
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Heon-Cheol 
            Shin
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Je Young 
            Kim
          
          
        
      *c
aInterdisciplinary School of Green Energy, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), Ulsan, 689-798, Korea
bSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Pusan National University, Busan, 609-735, Korea. E-mail: hcshin@pusan.ac.kr
cBatteries R&D, LG Chem, Yusong-gu, Daejeon, 305-380, Korea. E-mail: jeykim@lgchem.com
Received 
      4th December 2012
    , Accepted 4th April 2013First published on 5th April 2013AbstractThe unending demand for portable, flexible, and even wearable electronic devices that have an aesthetic appeal and unique functionality stimulates the development of advanced power sources that have excellent electrochemical performance and, more importantly, shape versatility. The challenges in the fabrication of next-generation flexible power sources mainly arise from their limited form factors, which prevent their facile integration into differently shaped electronic devices, and from the lack of reliable electrochemical materials that exhibit optimized attributes and suitable processability. This review describes the technological innovations and challenges associated with flexible energy storage and conversion systems such as lithium-ion batteries and supercapacitors, along with an overview of the progress in flexible proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs) and solar cells. In particular, recently highlighted cable-type flexible batteries with extreme omni-directional flexibility are comprehensively discussed.Sang-Young LeeSang-Young Lee is an associate professor in the Interdisciplinary School of Green Energy at Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST). Before joining the faculty, he worked at Batteries R&D, LG Chem. as a research scientist. He received the PhD in Chemical Engineering from KAIST in 1997. He joined Prof. Gerhard Wegner's group as a postdoctoral fellow at the Max-Planck Institute for Polymer Research in 2001. His research interests include functional materials for flexible lithium-ion batteries, nanostructured separator membranes, and surface engineering of electrode materials.Heon-Cheol ShinHeon-Cheol Shin is the associate professor of materials science and engineering at Pusan National University (PNU), Korea. He received his PhD at Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology on the lithium transport mechanism in rechargeable lithium batteries. After his post-doc at Georgia Tech and serving as a senior researcher at Samsung SDI, he joined PNU in 2006. His primary concern lies in the fundamental understanding of the interfacial and transport phenomena, leading to next-generation functional electrochemical devices. He also has a special interest in the electrochemical preparation of porous structures based on the electroplating and anodizing process.Je Young KimJe Young Kim is a principal research scientist and project leader of the anode material development team for LG Chem. in Korea. He has 13 years of experience with LG in a variety of positions addressing lithium ion polymer batteries, anode materials and flexible batteries. He obtained his PhD in Chemical Engineering in 1999 from KAIST, where he specialized in the science of polymer physics.

Broader context
The advent of a new era of smart and ubiquitous energy will be expedited by innovations in flexible power sources that afford aesthetic versatility and universality in integration with electronics. More importantly, overcoming the design limitation of power sources, along with the fabrication of reliable electrochemical materials with optimized attributes and functionality, will facilitate the development of electronic devices based on new concepts, such as smart mobile gadgets, roll-up displays, wearable devices, multidimensional electromechanical systems, and biomedical sensors. This mini review covers the recent progress in flexible energy storage and conversion systems, with a focus on cable-type lithium-ion batteries.

1 Introduction
Flexible power sources featuring aesthetic versatility and facile integration with electronic devices of various sizes and shapes have garnered considerable attention, as an era of smart and ubiquitous energy is rapidly coming toward us. In the development of these innovative full-fledged power sources, freeing from design limitation is considered to be the most important technical prerequisite, in addition to the synthesis of reliable electrochemical materials with well-tuned attributes. Herein, we present a mini review of the recent progress made and challenges faced in the development of next-generation flexible energy storage and conversion systems, with a special focus on cable-type lithium-ion batteries.
In the first half of this review, an overview of various electrochemical devices, including lithium-ion batteries, supercapacitors, proton exchange membrane fuel cells, and solar cells, is described. The current status and future development direction for each energy system are discussed in terms of research activities on nanostructured electroactive materials, shape-conformable solid electrolytes, and soft current collectors. Notably, special attention is devoted to covering technological innovations of flexible lithium-ion batteries and supercapacitors, which have attracted considerable commercial interest and vigorously expanded their application scope. The second half of this review reports the structural and functional characteristics of a cable-type flexible battery with unusual omni-directional flexibility, which is a new design concept that represents a considerable advancement in conventional battery design. Along with a brief introduction to prototype cable batteries, recent progress in cable batteries is also demonstrated, with special attention on the cycling stability, rate performance, and robustness under mechanical bending stress.
2 Introduction to flexible energy storage and conversion systems
2.1 Flexible lithium-ion batteries
Research on flexible lithium-ion batteries has mainly focused on the development of nano-engineered electroactive materials, shape-conformable electrolytes, and soft current collectors. From among the various functional electrode materials explored for flexible batteries, free-standing paper-like carbon-based materials based on carbon nanotubes (CNTs), graphene, and their composites have gathered increasing attention.1–4 Cui et al.1 demonstrated a new structure of a thin, flexible lithium-ion battery using plain paper as a separator and free-standing CNT thin films as current collectors. The current collectors and battery materials were integrated onto a single sheet of paper through a lamination process. The thin lithium-ion paper battery was very thin (∼300 μm thickness), and had robust mechanical flexibility (could be bent up to a radius of <6 mm) and high energy-density (∼108 mA h g−1). Despite this excellent performance, direct coating of electrode slurry onto plain paper led to the occasional internal-shorting of the device due to the leakage of the electrode material through a large-sized hole in the paper. Therefore, an additional lamination process was required to apply a thin layer of PVdF onto the paper. The structure of the paper lithium-ion battery and a photograph demonstrating its mechanical flexibility are shown in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  A schematic illustration of the paper lithium-ion battery and a photograph showing its mechanical flexibility. Reprinted with permission from ref. 1. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
Another notable CNT-based approach makes use of flexible and binder-free electrodes (∼30 μm thickness) comprising interpenetrative nanocomposites of ultra-long CNTs and vanadium oxide (V2O5) nanowires.2 The robust network architecture enables effective charge transport and electrode integrity, thereby providing the electrodes with excellent electrochemical performance (for example, discharge capacity = 169 mA h g−1 at a charge/discharge rate of 10 C/10 C). A remaining challenge to its commercialization is the use of lithium metal as a counter-electrode.
In addition to CNT-incorporated electrodes, graphene paper-based electrodes have also attracted much attention as a new means to achieve flexible electrodes. Kang et al.3 developed a flexible electrode using graphene paper (∼2 μm thickness and ∼8000 S m−1 conductivity), which acts not only as a current collector but also as a conducting agent. The integration of graphene into the V2O5 electrode allows the fabrication of thin, lightweight, and flexible batteries and also gives superior electrochemical performance (1st discharge capacity = 806.62 mA h g−1 at a voltage range of 0.02 and 3.5 V) over the conventional, non-flexible electrode architecture (=669.16 mA h g−1).
The potential application of a folded graphene sheet as a new type of flexible electrode was explored.4 This unique graphene paper (diameter = 10 cm and thickness = 10 μm) was prepared by mechanically pressing a graphene aerogel. A distinctive characteristic of the resulting graphene paper was that it allowed graphene sheet folding, which could effectively enhance the accessibility of lithium ions and the electrolyte. This consequently contributed to the excellent cell performance (after 100 cycles, reversible capacity = 568 mA h g−1 at a current density of 100 mA g−1 for a voltage range of 0.01–3.5 V).
Recently, a bendable inorganic thin-film battery was developed using the universal transfer approach, which enables the formation of high-temperature annealed electrodes on polymer substrates.5 The lithium-ion battery incorporating the new electrode was integrated with a flexible light-emitting diode (LED), which demonstrated the feasibility of manufacturing an all-in-one flexible electronic system (Fig. 2). The battery had a maximum charging voltage of 4.2 V and an energy density of 2.2 × 103 μW h cm−3 at a rate of 46.5 μA cm−2. A concern associated with this system is that the flexibility of the battery may mainly arise from the PDMS sheet wrapping and not from the cell components.
 Fig. 2  (a) A photograph of a bendable inorganic thin film lithium-ion battery turning on a blue LED under bending condition. (b) A photograph of an all-in-one flexible LED system integrated with a bendable lithium-ion battery. Reprinted with permission from ref. 5. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
Meanwhile, a hierarchical three-dimensional (3D) ZnCo2O4 nanowire array/carbon cloth was synthesized as a new class of binder-free anode for flexible lithium-ion batteries.6 The flexible battery showed outstanding electrochemical performance in terms of capacity (1300–1400 mA h g−1 at a voltage range of 0.01–3.0 V) and cycle life (retention capacity = 1200 mA h g−1 after 160 cycles) under a full mechanical bending state. The structure of the hierarchical 3D ZnCo2O4 nanowire array/carbon cloth-incorporated flexible cell is schematically illustrated in Fig. 3.
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the fabrication of the hierarchical 3D ZnCo2O4 nanowire array/carbon cloth/liquid electrolyte/LiCoO2 flexible lithium-ion battery. Reprinted with permission from ref. 6. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
Among the core components (i.e. anodes, cathodes, electrolytes, and separators) of batteries, the use of liquid electrolytes presents the greatest obstacle to variation in the cell design and size. Hence, extensive efforts have been made in recent decades to replace liquid electrolytes with shape-conformable solid electrolytes. A-site deficient perovskite, lanthanum lithium tantalate (La1/3−xLi3xTaO3), having a room-temperature conductivity of 1.5 × 10−5 S cm−1 (15 times higher than that of the most commonly used solid electrolyte, lithium phosphorous oxy-nitride, LIPON) was integrated with a cheap, flexible, lithium metal-stable substrate, copper foil.7
Another noteworthy advance in flexible electrolytes was the introduction of plastic crystal electrolyte (PCE)-based polymer electrolytes, which are completely different from conventional carbonate-based electrolyte systems. A PCE (=1 M LiTFSI in succinonitrile) featuring unique electrolyte properties such as high ionic conductivity (>10−3 S cm−1 at room temperature) and nonflammability was integrated with an ultraviolet (UV)-curable semi-interpenetrating polymer network (semi-IPN). The resulting highly bendable plastic crystal composite electrolytes8 maintained dimensional stability even after 100 bending cycles.
Recently, Lee et al. reported a novel concept in the fabrication of imprintable, bendable, and shape-conformable composite polymer electrolytes for flexible lithium-ion batteries.9 The composite polymer electrolytes are composed of a UV-cured ethoxylated trimethylolpropane triacrylate polymer matrix, a high-boiling-point liquid electrolyte, and alumina (Al2O3) nanoparticles. Due to structural uniqueness and well-tuned rheological characteristics, this polymer electrolyte is also directly writable or printable onto substrates of interest (including 3D micropatterned architectures of Si anodes). Fig. 4 shows the printability feature of a UV-curable electrolyte mixture before UV-crosslinking, and a scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the composite polymer electrolyte with a maze-pattern, along with the mechanical flexibility of the electrolyte, i.e. the electrolyte is bendable and twistable.
 Fig. 4  (a) Non-dripping behavior of a UV-curable electrolyte mixture. (b) A SEM photograph of the composite polymer electrolyte with a maze-pattern (the inset is a cross-sectional image). (c) Photographs showing bendable and twistable features of the composite polymer electrolyte. Reprinted with permission from ref. 9. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH, GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
In addition to this rapid development of soft functional materials for flexible lithium-ion batteries, LG Chem. Ltd demonstrated a novel concept for battery architecture: a cable-type lithium-ion battery significantly superior to conventional batteries.10 The cable-type lithium-ion battery is characterized by a hollow spiral, spring-like anode (comprising nickel/tin-coated copper wires) and a modified polyethylene terephthalate (PET) nonwoven separator membrane. The linear shape and omni-directional flexibility of the cable battery free the cell designer from rigid constraints. Moreover, in comparison to conventional batteries generally mounted inside electronic devices, the cable battery can be adapted to fit nearly anywhere, thereby facilitating the realization of practical wearable electronics. The cable battery shows good charge/discharge behaviours and stable capacity retention, similar to its designed cell capacity (per unit length of the cable battery) of 1 mA h cm−1 under a voltage range of 2.5–4.2 V. Additional work is required to further improve the capacity retention with cycling. A schematic illustration of the cable battery with a hollow-helix anode and a photograph of its excellent mechanical flexibility are provided in Fig. 5.
 Fig. 5  (a) A schematic illustration of the cable battery with a hollow-helix anode. (b) A photograph showing its excellent mechanical flexibility. Reprinted with permission from ref. 10. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH, GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
2.2 Flexible supercapacitors
Along with lithium-ion batteries, supercapacitors (or electrochemical capacitors) are at the forefront of present-day energy storage technologies. Compared with lithium-ion batteries, supercapacitors have a superior charge/discharge rate, ultrahigh power delivery, exceptional cycle life and efficiency, a wide range of operating temperatures, and improved safety. These performance benefits make supercapacitors a promising candidate for powering full-fledged flexible electronics.
Carbon-based materials such as CNTs and graphene have attracted considerable interest in the development of flexible supercapacitors. Pushparaj et al.11 demonstrated nanoporous cellulose papers embedded with aligned CNT electrodes and ionic liquid electrolytes as a building block for thin, flexible supercapacitors. The free-standing nanocomposite paper devices offer complete mechanical flexibility during operation of supercapacitors. Another intriguing approach is the conformal coating of single-walled CNTs (SWNTs) on commercially available plain paper, which enabled the fabrication of highly conductive paper.12 The conductive paper was used as the electrode and current collector for flexible supercapacitors. When only CNT mass is considered, a specific capacitance of 200 F g−1, a specific energy density of 30–47 W h kg−1, a specific power density of 200000 W kg−1, and a cycling performance of more than 40000 cycles are demonstrated. Cui and Hu reviewed a wide variety of applications for SWNT-treated papers and textiles, which can serve as novel conductors to replace conventional electrodes.13
Apart from paper-based approaches, sponges comprising many small cellulose or polyester fibres with a hierarchical macroporous nature were employed as a new substrate for flexible supercapacitor electrodes.14 Nanostructured MnO2/CNT/sponge hybrid electrodes were prepared via a simple ‘dipping and drying’ method. The macroporous nature of the sponge, along with the porous nature of the electrodeposited MnO2 nanoparticles, provided a double-porous electrode structure with good conductivity and full accessibility of the electrolyte to MnO2, notably improving the performance of MnO2/CNT/sponge supercapacitors. Their specific power and energy densities were reported to be 63 kW kg−1 and 31 W h kg−1, respectively.
Kaner et al.15 reported direct laser reduction of graphite oxide films to graphene in a novel attempt to substantially improve energy density while maintaining high power density and cycle stability. Laser-scribed graphene films are mechanically robust and exhibit a high electrical conductivity (1738 S m−1) and specific surface area (1520 m2 g−1). Notably, they can be employed directly as electrochemical capacitor electrodes without the need for binders or current collectors.
Flexible and durable textile electrodes for supercapacitors, which can be used as a possible energy source in smart garments (Fig. 6), were developed using nontoxic electrolytes, common textiles used in the apparel industry, and inexpensive yet highly capacitive activated carbons.16 Herein, the use of screen-printing in combination with carbon materials allows infiltration of the porous structures of both cotton lawn and polyester microfibers, and achieves higher mass loading and areal capacitance than the previous results obtained from polymer webs or CNT textiles and paper. Electrodes coated with activated carbon show a high gravimetric and areal capacitance of ∼85 F g−1 (corresponding to ∼0.43 F cm−2) on cotton lawn and polyester microfibers.
 Fig. 6  Design concept of a porous textile supercapacitor integrated into a smart garment. Reprinted with permission from ref. 16. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Apart from the above-mentioned CNT and graphene-based electrode materials, nano-fibrous felts of carbide-derived carbon (CDC), which were fabricated from the precursor of electrospun titanium carbide nanofelts (TiC), were reported as a new electrode material for supercapacitors.17 TiC–CDC nanofelts are mechanically flexible and resilient, and hence, they can be used as an electrode material without the addition of any binders. A high gravimetric capacitance of 110 F g−1 in aqueous electrolyte (1 M H2SO4) and 65 F g−1 in organic electrolyte (1.5 M TEA-BF4 in acetonitrile) was obtained.
Highly flexible, all-solid-state paper-like polymer supercapacitors were demonstrated, wherein the H2SO4/polyvinyl alcohol gel electrolyte was combined with polyaniline-based electrodes.18 Polymer supercapacitors have a thickness comparable to that of a piece of commercial A4 paper and show outstanding electrochemical performance under a highly deformed state, in which they have a specific capacitance of 350 F g−1 for electrode materials, good cycling performance after 1000 cycles, and a leakage current of 17.2 μA. A critical limitation of this system is that the use of an aqueous electrolyte solution presently limits the operating voltage to around 1.0 V.
Functionalized reduced graphene oxide thin films (acting as an electrode) were combined with a solvent-cast Nafion electrolyte membrane for realizing all-solid-state flexible supercapacitors.19 These supercapacitors exhibited a high specific capacitance (118.5 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1) and rate capability (90% retention at 30 A g−1) owing to their rapid ion-transport and charge transport at the interface; and their good mechanical integrity resulted in no substantial deterioration in performance over long operational periods under the bending condition.
Another notable recent advance in flexible supercapacitors is the development of flexible fibre supercapacitors, which comprise two fibre electrodes, a helical spacer wire, and an electrolyte.20 The use of a spacer wire enables efficient separation of the two fibre electrodes and scalable preparation. Commercial pen ink was employed as an active material for the first time, and this led to good electrochemical capacitance performance (areal capacitance = 9.5 mF cm−2 at a scan rate of 1.0 V s−1 and stable cycling performance over 15000 cycles). A schematic diagram of fibre supercapacitors and a photograph of a flexible fibre supercapacitor packaged using a plastic tube are shown in Fig. 7.
 Fig. 7  (a) A schematic diagram of the fiber supercapacitors. (b) A photograph of a flexible fiber supercapacitor packaged using a plastic tube. Reprinted with permission from ref. 20. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH, GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
2.3 Flexible renewable energy generators: proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs) and solar cells
Bendable fuel cells have been reported as a new concept that can be used for next-generation fuel cells. Bendable on-chip fuel cells are fabricated on cyclo-olefin polymer films (Fig. 8), instead of on conventional brittle silicon films.21 This approach effectively resolves the brittleness and cost problems of traditional on-chip fuel cells.
 Fig. 8  (a) A schematic illustration of the on-chip fuel cells. (b) Photographs of the bendable on-chip fuel cell fabricated on a cyclo-olefin polymer film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 21. Copyright 2009 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have attracted substantial attention owing to their ease of fabrication and wide applicability. One disadvantage of DSSCs is that they use a precious and scarce metal, platinum (Pt). As a potential substitute for Pt, free-standing flexible single-walled CNT films called bucky papers (BPs) have been developed for use as counter-electrodes in DSSCs.22 A notable achievement with regard to organic solar cells is the fabrication of conformable solar devices.23 A stretchable organic solar cell is reversibly bonded, conformably, to a hemispherical watch glass (Fig. 9). In addition, Bao et al. have reported a reversibly stretchable solar cell that can accommodate up to 18.5% strain.24 Rigorous optimization of cell components and design is expected to further improve the performance of such stretchable devices.
 Fig. 9  (a) A stretchable organic solar cell bonded to a hemispherical watch glass. (b) Photographs of an organic solar cell stretched between two chips. Reprinted with permission from ref. 23. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
3 Flexible cable-type batteries
Realizing a cable-type battery might be an ideal and ultimate goal of flexible battery technology, owing to its extreme omni-directional flexibility. Herein, the prototype cable battery previously reported10 is briefly reviewed in terms of cell and component design. Our recent progress in cable batteries is then explained, with special focuses on the cycling stability, rate performance, and robustness under mechanical bending stress.
3.1 First prototype cell design

Inner electrode (anode). 

Fig. 10(a) shows one of the simplest cable-type battery designs, consisting of an inner electrode, surrounding a separator wetted with electrolyte, and an outer electrode. Because it has a relatively high specific capacity, the anode is relevant to the inner electrode and the selection of the Cu wire as a substrate and current collector is expected. However, in this design, the anode capacity and mechanical flexibility are mutually exclusive: since anode capacity is essentially proportional to the volume of the electrode materials with a hollow cylindrical shape, the increased anode capacity necessarily implies a greater Cu wire radius (t1 in the figure) and/or electrode thickness (t2 in the figure). Using a rule of thumb calculation, by assuming that the active materials, e.g. graphite particles (specific capacity = 372 mA h g−1; density = 2.16 g cm−3), occupy half of the volume of the composite electrode, the electrode volume per unit length of the Cu wire for a linear anode capacity of 1 mA h cm−1 is estimated to be 2.49 × 10−3 cm3 cm−1. Here, 1 mA h cm−1 is the linear capacity of the 25 cm prototype cable-type battery that was reported to supply continuous power to a typical MP3 player for approximately 10 h.10 When the graphite-based anode electrode is coated on the Cu wire at a thickness of 100 μm, the required diameter of the Cu wire for a capacity of 1 mA h cm−1 reaches 692 μm. Conceptual bending of an anode, as depicted in Fig. 10(b), which shows results for the case in which the user folds the cable battery, results in tensile strains of 0.069 and 0.089 on the Cu wire and electrode surfaces, respectively, according to the equation εsuf = (t1 + t2)R−1.25 Since the surface strain on the Cu wire considerably exceeds its elastic limit, repetitive bending leads to reduced flexibility as a result of strain hardening, and to subsequent fatigue fractures.26 Reducing the radius of the Cu wire alleviates such undesirable mechanical side effects, but the electrode thickness then needs to be increased accordingly to achieve the same capacity, which in turn increases the reaction polarization owing to the long transport paths of electrons and lithium-ions. One solution might be to coat a thinner electrode of active materials onto multiple Cu wires having a smaller radius that forms an anode bundle which gives the desired linear capacity, as shown in Fig. 10(c). For instance, the selection of the Cu wires with a diameter of 127 μm reduces the bending-induced surface strain of the Cu wire to 0.013, which significantly reduces strain hardening and delays fatigue failure. A simple close-packed bundle, however, inhibits electrolyte penetration deep inside the structure, and a large proportion of the surface area of the active materials remains unwetted by the electrolyte. In such a situation, the initial capacity is drastically lower than it should be. Moreover, a close-packed bundle may cause unstable capacity retention during battery use, because the cycling-induced volume change in the electrode and mechanical bending can cause an increase in the volume available for the electrolyte inside the bundle, which would result in electrolyte shortage. One promising design to achieve uniform electrolyte wetting is to make the anode bundle a hollow tube structure in which the inner space becomes the electrolyte reservoir (Fig. 10(d)). This structure can significantly improve electrolyte wetting of the anode surface, and would be expected to give stable cycling performance together with a reversible capacity similar to that of the initial design.10
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of a cable battery with a single Cu wire. (b) Hypothetical mechanical bending of the anode. (c) Close-packed anode bundle. (d) Hollow anode bundle. 


Electrolyte and separator. 
Despite safety issues, liquid electrolyte remains an attractive choice for cable batteries because it is virtually insensitive to mechanical bending strain. The problem with using liquid electrolytes is that it becomes difficult to apply the separator to the wire-type electrode. The present prototype cell uses a polyethylene terephthalate (PET) nonwoven-based composite separator;27 it is wound around the anode, from one end to the other, as shown in Fig. 11(a); the separator is wound at an angle such that it overlaps slightly at each turn, thereby avoiding internal shorting. The present separator design appears to work well in short-term battery tests. However, the effects of the overlapped region of the separator (A in the figure) and the irregular gap, between the anode surface and the separator throughout the length (B in the figure), on long-term battery performance need to be further clarified before practical implementation.
 Fig. 11  Schematic illustration of the winding processes of the (a) separator and (b) Al wire. The hollow-twisted anode in (a) means the hollow anode with a multi-helix structure previously reported.10 (c) The following introduction of the cathode and packing tube. 


Outer electrode (cathode). 
There are different methods to (partially) achieve a flexible cathode and a current collector. In the prototype battery, a single Al wire is wound as a cathode current collector around the separator (Fig. 11(b)). The spring-shaped Al wire can adapt effectively to mechanical bending stress. Its low cross-sectional area, however, causes large polarization and Joule heat during high current drain. A larger number of Al wires or the use of an Al mesh are the design options for high-power applications. Because of the extremely large bending-induced strain on the cathode surface, it is difficult to identify materials or electrode designs that withstand bending, for both conventional powder-based composite cathodes including binder and conducting materials, and binder-free thin film cathodes. Moreover, the outer electrode (cathode) essentially remains unpressed after the coating and drying processes because the uniform pressing of the electrode in the radial direction is impracticable and, more importantly, the pressing of the electrode critically damages internal components such as the hollow-spiral anode, separator, and Al wire. The unpressed electrode is expected to be highly vulnerable to bending-induced breakdown, primarily because of poor contact between the binder and other electrode components (e.g. active materials and conducting materials). In this regard, it is interesting that the prototype cable battery with the LiCoO2 powder-based outer cathode is operationally stable even in the case of severe bending. The outermost heat-shrinkable tube used as the packaging insulator might well protect the cathode from mechanical breakdown during bending by being tightly adhered to it (Fig. 11(c)).

3.2 Recent progress in the cable battery and its performance
It is well known that Sn-based materials show poor cycling stability due to their extreme volume change during the Li alloying/dealloying process.28–30 In the prototype cable battery adopting a Ni/Sn film anode with low Ni content, a relatively large capacity-fade is observed. Half-cell tests of the Ni/Sn alloy (not included in this mini review) show a similar capacity fade to that of the cable battery. This strongly indicates that the degradation of the anode is responsible for the capacity fade of the cable battery. Here, we report our recent attempts to enhance the cyclability of a cable-type battery using conventional powder-type anode materials. Fig. 12(a) shows typical voltage profiles of 12 mA h class cable-type battery with 12 cm length. The battery was discharged to 3.0 V at the rate of 0.3 C. It was then charged to 4.2 V at the same rate and maintained at a constant voltage of 4.2 V until the current corresponded to 0.05 C. Graphite was used as the anode and relatively large amounts of the PVdF binder were included in the anode composite (graphite:carbon black:PVdF = 75:5:20 by weight). It was noted that cycling stability was considerably improved in comparison to the cable battery with Ni/Sn-based alloys, showing a capacity retention of about 90% at the 45th cycle (Fig. 12(b)). From the assumption of a linear capacity fade (dotted line in the figure), it is expected that about 80% of the initial capacity would be maintained after 100 cycles.
 Fig. 12  (a) Typical voltage profiles of the 12 mA h class cable type battery at the rate of 0.3 C and (b) its cycling stability. 
A hollow anode design is beneficial for the fast supply/release of lithium ions to/from the anode|electrolyte interface, but the wire substrates of Cu and Al considerably limit electron transport, owing to their long length and small cross-sectional area. It would be interesting to investigate the rate performance of the cable battery design under these conditions. Fig. 13 shows the voltage profiles of the aforementioned cable battery with a graphite anode at different discharging rates. Before each discharging step, the battery was charged at the rate of 0.1 C. The capacity retention at a rate of 0.5 C was about 89% of that observed at a rate of 0.1 C. However, the capacity retention decreased abruptly at higher C rates, to 64% and 23% at discharge rates of 1 C and 2 C, respectively. The factors governing such a rapid drop in discharging capacity are yet to be determined. In order to achieve lower cell polarization and a certain level of rate capability, in-depth analysis of the internal elementary resistances of the cable battery is needed, such as by using a three-electrode electrochemical cell configuration.
 Fig. 13  Voltage profiles of the cable type battery at different discharging rates. 
The ability of the cable battery to withstand mechanical stress was investigated as follows: the cable battery was discharged from 4.2 V at a rate of 0.1 C. Mechanical bending of the cable battery began when the voltage reached 3.9 V and real-time voltage data were recorded. The cable battery was bent until the distance between two grips was 1 cm, and then returned to its original ‘straight’ condition at a constant grip speed of 50 cm min−1, as shown in Fig. 14(a). It is noted that the voltage profile recorded with bending for 3 h (Fig. 14(b)) was quite stable and did not abruptly change, despite severe repetitive bending at three points of the cable battery (arrows in Fig. 14(a)). The results are encouraging, but definitive conclusions on the effect of bending on capacity fade cannot be drawn at present because there is no established testing protocol for the bending of cable batteries.
 Fig. 14  (a) Snapshots of the bending test. The cable battery was bent until the distance between two grips was 1 cm, and then returned to its original ‘straight’ condition at a constant grip speed of 50 cm min−1. (b) Real-time voltage profile recorded with bending for 3 hours. 
3.3 Future applications and remaining challenges for cable-type batteries
The distinctive features of cable-type batteries are omni-directional flexibility and installation freedom for electronic devices. Moreover, cable-type batteries can be interconnected/woven in parallel or series with exceptional mechanical flexibility. Owing to these unprecedented advantages, cable-type batteries can be directly mounted on a user's wrist, neck, or waist; or otherwise integrated into clothing and plugged into electronics. Potential applications of cable-type batteries include mobile devices such as digital MP3 players, smartphones, and tablet-computers. In addition, flexible/rollable displays and implantable biomedical sensors are also considered as significant potential applications.
Although recent developments in cable-type batteries appear extremely promising, there remain many challenges to their practical applications, which are closely associated with the further enhancement of their electrochemical performance and safety. Several promising resolutions to these problems focus on how to achieve the following: (1) improved mechanical stability with a highly elastic electrode; (2) adaptability to nanoscale active materials with high power characteristics and solid/gel-type electrolyte systems to ensure safety; (3) stabilized packaging materials with exceptional barrier properties. In fact, these are the common interests with regard to the flexible energy conversion devices.31 Although the above-mentioned obstacles remain, substantial progress in cable-type batteries is highly anticipated in the near future.
4 Conclusions and outlook
We have briefly reviewed the recent progress and challenges in next-generation flexible energy storage and conversion systems. A large part of this mini review was devoted to covering technological innovations associated with lithium-ion batteries and supercapacitors, in addition to a brief overview of flexible PEMFCs and DSSCs. In the power sources currently used in typical electronic devices, the lack of variety in their shape and architecture imposes severe limitations on flexibility. Hence, overcoming the design limitations of power sources would boost the development of portable and even wearable electronics that have aesthetic appeal and unique functionalities. Research on flexible power sources has mainly focused on the development of nanostructured electroactive materials, shape-conformable solid electrolytes, and soft current collectors. Meanwhile, a noteworthy technological advance that has recently received considerable attention is cable-type batteries with extreme omni-directional flexibility, which frees the cell designer from rigid constraints. Moreover, cable-type batteries could be combined with apparel technology, leading to the emergence of a new concept: energy-storing garments. We believe that flexible power sources, combined with design innovation, will emerge as a disruptive technology that could expedite the advent of a new era of smart and ubiquitous energy sources.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the Converging Research Center Program through the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (2012K001252).
References
L. Hu, H. Wu, F. L. Mantia, Y. Yang and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5843–5848 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jia, Z. Chen, A. Suwarnasarn, L. Rice, X. Wang, H. Sohn, Q. Zhang, B. M. Wu, F. Wei and Y. Lu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6845–6849 CAS .
H. Gwon, H. S. Kim, K. U. Lee, D. H. Seo, Y. C. Park, Y. S. Lee, B. T. Ahn and K. Kang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1277–1283 CAS .
F. Liu, S. Song, D. Xue and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1089–1094 CrossRef CAS .
M. Koo, K. I. Park, S. H. Lee, M. Suh, D. Y. Jeon, J. W. Choi, K. Kang and K. J. Lee, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4810–4816 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, J. Zhang, X. Wang, G. Chen, D. Chen, C. Zhou and G. Shen, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3005–3011 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Ihlefeld, P. G. Clem, B. L. Doyle, P. G. Kotula, K. R. Fenton and C. A. Apblett, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5663–5667 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Ha, E. H. Kil, Y. H. Kwon, J. Y. Kim, C. K. Lee and S. Y. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6491–6499 CAS .
E. H. Kil, K. H. Choi, H. J. Ha, S. Xu, J. A. Rogers, M. R. Kim, Y. G. Lee, K. M. Kim, K. Y. Cho and S. Y. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1395–1400 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Kwon, S. W. Woo, H. R. Jung, H. K. Yu, K. Kim, B. H. Oh, S. Ahn, S. Y. Lee, S. W. Song, J. Cho, H. C. Shin and J. Y. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5192–5197 CrossRef CAS .
V. L. Pushparaj, M. M. Shaijumon, A. Kumar, S. Murugesan, L. Ci, R. Vajtai, R. J. Linhardt, O. Nalamasu and P. M. Ajayan, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 13574–13577 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hu, J. W. Choi, Y. Yang, S. Jeong, F. L. Mantia, L. F. Cui and Y. Cui, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 21490–21494 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hu and Y. Cui, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6423–6435 Search PubMed .
W. Chen, R. B. Rakhi, L. Hu, X. Xie, Y. Cui and H. N. Alshareef, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5165–5172 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. El-Kady, V. Strong, S. Dubin and R. B. Kaner, Science, 2012, 335, 1326–1330 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jost, C. R. Perez, J. K. McDonough, V. Presser, M. Heon, G. Dion and Y. Gogotsi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 5060–5067 CAS .
V. Presser, L. Zhang, J. J. Niu, J. McDonough, C. Perez, H. Fong and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 423–430 CrossRef CAS .
C. Meng, C. Liu, L. Chen, C. Hu and S. Fan, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4025–4031 CrossRef CAS .
B. G. Choi, J. Hong, W. H. Hong, P. T. Hammond and H. S. Park, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7205–7213 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fu, X. Cai, H. Wu, Z. Lv, S. Hou, M. Peng, X. Yu and D. Zou, Adv. Mater., 2012, 42, 5713–5718 CrossRef .
S. Tominaka, H. Nishizeko, J. Mizuno and T. Osaka, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 1074–1077 CAS .
S. Roy, R. Bajpai, A. K. Jena, P. Kumar, N. kulshrestha and D. S. Misra, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7001–7006 CAS .
D. J. Lipomi and Z. Bao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3314–3328 CAS .
D. J. Lipomi, B. C. K. Tee, M. Vosgueritchian and Z. N. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1771–1775 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Jen, J. A. Bertrand and S. M. George, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 109, 084305 CrossRef .

          D. R. Askeland and P. P. Phule, The Science and Engineering of Materials, Thomson Brooks/Cole, 4th edn,  2003 Search PubMed .
H. S. Jeong, J. H. Kim and S. Y. Lee, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 9180–9186 RSC .
S. D. Beattie and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A894–A898 CrossRef CAS .
W. Choi, J. Y. Lee and H. S. Lim, Electrochem. Commun., 2004, 6, 816–820 CrossRef CAS .
N. Tamura, A. Fujimoto, M. Kamino and S. Fujitani, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 49, 1949–1956 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bae, M. K. Song, Y. J. Park, J. M. Kim, M. Liu and Z. L. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 1683–1687 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
Sang-Young Lee	Sang-Young Lee is an associate professor in the Interdisciplinary School of Green Energy at Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST). Before joining the faculty, he worked at Batteries R&D, LG Chem. as a research scientist. He received the PhD in Chemical Engineering from KAIST in 1997. He joined Prof. Gerhard Wegner's group as a postdoctoral fellow at the Max-Planck Institute for Polymer Research in 2001. His research interests include functional materials for flexible lithium-ion batteries, nanostructured separator membranes, and surface engineering of electrode materials.
Heon-Cheol Shin	Heon-Cheol Shin is the associate professor of materials science and engineering at Pusan National University (PNU), Korea. He received his PhD at Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology on the lithium transport mechanism in rechargeable lithium batteries. After his post-doc at Georgia Tech and serving as a senior researcher at Samsung SDI, he joined PNU in 2006. His primary concern lies in the fundamental understanding of the interfacial and transport phenomena, leading to next-generation functional electrochemical devices. He also has a special interest in the electrochemical preparation of porous structures based on the electroplating and anodizing process.
Je Young Kim	Je Young Kim is a principal research scientist and project leader of the anode material development team for LG Chem. in Korea. He has 13 years of experience with LG in a variety of positions addressing lithium ion polymer batteries, anode materials and flexible batteries. He obtained his PhD in Chemical Engineering in 1999 from KAIST, where he specialized in the science of polymer physics.

Broader context
The advent of a new era of smart and ubiquitous energy will be expedited by innovations in flexible power sources that afford aesthetic versatility and universality in integration with electronics. More importantly, overcoming the design limitation of power sources, along with the fabrication of reliable electrochemical materials with optimized attributes and functionality, will facilitate the development of electronic devices based on new concepts, such as smart mobile gadgets, roll-up displays, wearable devices, multidimensional electromechanical systems, and biomedical sensors. This mini review covers the recent progress in flexible energy storage and conversion systems, with a focus on cable-type lithium-ion batteries.


 	Fig. 1  A schematic illustration of the paper lithium-ion battery and a photograph showing its mechanical flexibility. Reprinted with permission from ref. 1. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) A photograph of a bendable inorganic thin film lithium-ion battery turning on a blue LED under bending condition. (b) A photograph of an all-in-one flexible LED system integrated with a bendable lithium-ion battery. Reprinted with permission from ref. 5. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the fabrication of the hierarchical 3D ZnCo2O4 nanowire array/carbon cloth/liquid electrolyte/LiCoO2 flexible lithium-ion battery. Reprinted with permission from ref. 6. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Non-dripping behavior of a UV-curable electrolyte mixture. (b) A SEM photograph of the composite polymer electrolyte with a maze-pattern (the inset is a cross-sectional image). (c) Photographs showing bendable and twistable features of the composite polymer electrolyte. Reprinted with permission from ref. 9. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH, GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) A schematic illustration of the cable battery with a hollow-helix anode. (b) A photograph showing its excellent mechanical flexibility. Reprinted with permission from ref. 10. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH, GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 6  Design concept of a porous textile supercapacitor integrated into a smart garment. Reprinted with permission from ref. 16. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) A schematic diagram of the fiber supercapacitors. (b) A photograph of a flexible fiber supercapacitor packaged using a plastic tube. Reprinted with permission from ref. 20. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH, GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) A schematic illustration of the on-chip fuel cells. (b) Photographs of the bendable on-chip fuel cell fabricated on a cyclo-olefin polymer film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 21. Copyright 2009 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) A stretchable organic solar cell bonded to a hemispherical watch glass. (b) Photographs of an organic solar cell stretched between two chips. Reprinted with permission from ref. 23. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of a cable battery with a single Cu wire. (b) Hypothetical mechanical bending of the anode. (c) Close-packed anode bundle. (d) Hollow anode bundle.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic illustration of the winding processes of the (a) separator and (b) Al wire. The hollow-twisted anode in (a) means the hollow anode with a multi-helix structure previously reported.10 (c) The following introduction of the cathode and packing tube.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Typical voltage profiles of the 12 mA h class cable type battery at the rate of 0.3 C and (b) its cycling stability.	 

 	Fig. 13  Voltage profiles of the cable type battery at different discharging rates.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Snapshots of the bending test. The cable battery was bent until the distance between two grips was 1 cm, and then returned to its original ‘straight’ condition at a constant grip speed of 50 cm min−1. (b) Real-time voltage profile recorded with bending for 3 hours.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
