Lead selenide quantum dots and carbon dots amplify solar conversion capability of a TiO 2 /CdS photoanode   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5TA04393J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5TA04393J
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 20715-20726Lead selenide quantum dots and carbon dots amplify solar conversion capability of a TiO2/CdS photoanode†

        
          
            Ramesh K. 
            Kokal
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            P. 
            Naresh Kumar
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Melepurath 
            Deepa
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Avanish Kumar 
            Srivastava
          
        
      b
aDepartment of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad, Kandi, Sangareddy-502285, Telangana, India. E-mail: mdeepa@iith.ac.in
bCSIR-National Physical Laboratory, Dr K. S. Krishnan road, New Delhi-110012, India
Received 
      16th June 2015
    , Accepted 1st September 2015First published on 1st September 2015AbstractAn integrated approach involving the use of visible light absorbing CdS quantum dots (QDs) and near infrared light harvesting PbSe QDs, along with highly conducting carbon dots (C-dots), resulting in impressive power conversion efficiency (PCE) is presented. A photoanode assembly composed of TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots was prepared for the first time. The charge transfer processes in photoanodes of different compositions are explained using absorption studies, emission quenching and lifetime analysis. Upon illumination, photo-excited electrons are injected from the conduction bands of C-dots, CdS and PbSe QDs into TiO2; C-dots serve as excellent electron conduits, and promote electron transport from the photoactive assembly to the current collector and they also function as photosensitizers. Quantum dot solar cells (QDSCs) were fabricated with PbSe, CdS and C-dots based photoanodes, a S2− ion conducting hole transport layer, and multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) as the counter electrode. The cell with the TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots photoanode delivered a remarkably high PCE of 4.97% for the champion cell, which was 35.8 and 48.1% greater than the PCEs produced by the cells with TiO2/PbSe/CdS and TiO2/CdS photoanodes. The increased efficiency, especially in comparison to the cell based on sole CdS, highlights the ability of (a) PbSe QDs, with a band gap of 0.98 eV to harvest red photons and convert them into electricity, and (b) C-dots to channelize the photogenerated electrons to the current collector, by virtue of their high electrical conductivity. This was clearly confirmed by the altered profiles of external and internal quantum efficiencies in the NIR region, for their magnitudes increased from zero to finite in the wavelength range of 550 to 1000 nm, only in the presence of PbSe QDs. Intensity modulated photocurrent/photovoltage data analysis showed fast electron transport and slow recombination for the TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots photoanode. These studies furnish the rationalization for integrating NIR absorbing PbSe QDs and conductive C-dots with other visible light harvesting dyes or QDs to achieve increased photoconversion efficiencies.
1. Introduction
Quantum dots of cadmium and lead chalcogenides have been at the forefront of photovoltaic research for the last few years, due to their ability to exhibit multiple exciton generation (the exciting prospect of producing more than one electron per impinging photon), adjustable band gap through size control and inexpensive solution phase synthesis.1,2 While cadmium chalcogenides (sulfides and selenides) show a strong absorption cross-section in the visible region, lead-sulfide and selenide absorb strongly in the near infrared (NIR) region. By combining CdX and PbX (X = S or Se), both visible and NIR regions of the solar spectrum can be harvested, which can translate into higher power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) compared to pristine PbX or CdX based quantum dot solar cells (QDSCs). To this end, in the past, colloidal PbSe QDs were assembled into an infrared single junction stable solar cell wherein, by the choice of an appropriate linker (benzenedithiol), an external quantum efficiency of 46% was achieved in the infrared region.3 The authors attributed this excellent performance to benzenedithiol, which served as a linker, a molecular conductor that cross-linked the PbSe nanocrystals, and thus increased the diffusion lengths and mobilities of the charge carriers and also imparted longevity to the cell.3 While there is a surge of reports on high efficiency PbS based solar cells, with efficiencies ranging between 6 and 8%,4–7 there are few focused reports on PbSe based cells. Similarly, some exciting results have been achieved for cadmium chalcogenide cells. CdS/Cu2S core–shell nanowires were solution processed, and the solar cell based on the same showed a very high PCE of 5.4%.8 In another study, a QDSC with alloyed CdSexTe1−x QDs delivered a very high PCE of 6.36%, due to a favorable conduction band edge position, good chemical stability and wide absorption range of the QDs.9 A QDSC with CuInS2/Mn doped CdS based core/shell structures showed a PCE of 5.38%.10 By a rational design, the authors manipulated the energy levels of the core and the shell, and were able to achieve such a high efficiency.10 A double layer of ZnS/SiO2 was applied to a TiO2 sensitized CdSexTe1−x electrode, which prevented interfacial recombination to a significant extent. The resulting cell showed an exceptionally high certified PCE of 8.21%, and the corresponding champion cell showed a PCE of 8.55%.11 A Mn doped CdS/CdSe based solar cell with Cu2S/reduced graphene oxide as a counter electrode showed a PCE of 5.42%.12 The mid-gap states introduced by Mn in this cell aid in electron accumulation and also shift the Fermi level to more negative potentials, thus increasing the photovoltaic performance.12
In a PbSe/metal oxide system, due to a fewer number of intra-gap states, interfacial recombination does not limit the photocurrents or voltages.13 In a recent study, for a heterojunction solar cell operated in air, based on PbSe QDs anchored to titania, with MoO3 as the hole transport layer, an efficiency of 2.56% was demonstrated.14 Crystalline PbSe QDs were prepared by a successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) method and hole transport properties were significantly improved by modifying the surface of a PbSe/TiO2 electrode with p-mercaptophenol, which manifested in increased photocurrents, in comparison to an unmodified electrode.15 A recent study expounded the fabrication of a p–n junction device with PbSe QDs, prepared by a direct cation exchange by injection of CdSe QDs into a hot mixture of PbCl2/oleylamine, to yield PbSe QDs. The authors obtained a spectacular PCE of 6.2%. This very high efficiency was ascribed to the minimization of recombination losses, attained by chloride and Cd passivation and by the use of small sized QDs.16 In another study, ultrasmall PbSe crystals and an extremely thin absorber layer over a current collector were prepared, and the potential of the film for a heterojunction solar cell was shown.17 In another study of note, a heterojunction cell with a combination of PbSe QDs and PbSe nanorods delivered a PCE of ∼3.5%.18 While PbSe QDs have been employed in heterojunction solar cells, there are hardly any reports on the use of PbSe QDs in solution based solar cells.
Carbon dots (C-dots) in the past have also been used in solar cells as photosensitizers and electron acceptors. For a C-dots/TiO2 cell with S2− as the electrolyte, an incident photon to current conversion efficiency (IPCE) of 1.2–3.4% was achieved.19 In another study, TiO2 sensitized with graphene QDs showed a VOC of 0.48 V and a JSC of 200 μA cm−2 in an I−/I2 electrolyte.20 In another study, solution phase carbon QDs/TiO2 based solar cells were prepared and they showed a PCE of 0.13%.21 Previously, our group also used C-dots in solar cells as electron conduits and the ensuing ZnS/CdS/ZnS/C-dot/CuPc/Na2S/MWCNT solid-state cell showed a PCE of 0.34%.22
In view of the above-described developments, it is apparent that a photoanode architecture employing CdS QDs (as the visible light harvesters), PbSe QDs (as NIR light absorbers), and C-dots (as electron conduits), with TiO2 as the wide band gap semiconductor, which has not been attempted before, is expected to deliver a high PCE. In the present report, a TiO2/CdS/PbSe/C-dots electrode was prepared. The photoanodes and their components were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD), Raman spectroscopy, and electron microscopy. The electron transfer mechanisms in the electrodes were deduced from fluorescence quenching and lifetime studies. QDSCs were assembled with different combinations of QDs and C-dots-based electrodes as photoanodes, a sulfide ion conducting electrolyte as the hole transport medium, and a multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) based film as the counter electrode. Compared to Pt, which is a popular choice for the counter electrode in dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs),23,24 here a carbonaceous electrode was chosen, as Pt is readily corroded by the S2− solution and thus has a deleterious effect on the QDSC performance. MWCNTs have a work function of 4.5 eV, can be easily applied over conducting substrates in the form of uniform thin layers, are electrically conducting, and are therefore an ideal substitute for Pt.25–27 The ability of PbSe QDs and C-dots to bring about marked improvements in the overall PCE and in the internal and external quantum efficiencies (IQEs and EQEs) of a TiO2/CdS photoanode was studied. The role of PbSe QDs, in particular, in raising the EQE from zero to finite values in the NIR region of a TiO2/CdS electrode was analyzed. The synergy between the QDs (as visible and NIR light absorbers) and the electron transporting ability of C-dots was also affirmed by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). This study opens up new avenues for developing photoanode architectures, which can maximize (i) broader solar spectrum utilization and (ii) current collection, which can lead to high performance QDSCs.
2. Experimental
2.1 Chemicals
Fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) glass with sheet resistance 25 Ω cm−2 was purchased from Pilkington and cleaned in a soap solution, 30% HCl solution, twice distilled water and acetone, in that sequence, prior to use. Titanium(IV) dioxide (TiO2) P25 powder was a free gift from Evonik. Cadmium acetate dihydrate (Cd(CH3COO)2·2H2O), sodium sulfide (Na2S), Triton X-100, titanium tetrachloride (TiCl4), selenium dioxide (SeO2), lead acetate hydrate (Pb(CH3COO)2·H2O), ethanol, L-ascorbic acid, copper(II)acetate hydrate (Cu(CH3COO)2·H2O), and methanol (MeOH) were purchased from Merck. Deionized water with a resistivity of ∼18.2 Ω cm was obtained from a Millipore Direct-Q3 UV system. Acetylacetone, sodium borohydride (NaBH4), and multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) were purchased from Aldrich.
2.2 Preparation of electrodes and cells
Washed FTO substrates were dipped in an aqueous solution of 0.4 M TiCl4 at 70 °C for 20 min, and the coated substrate was rinsed in ultrapure water to remove unabsorbed excess TiO2 and annealed at 500 °C (temperature increase at the rate of 5 °C min−1). For the active layer of TiO2, a paste of TiO2 was made by dispersing TiO2 powder in a solution of 1.5 mL of acetyl acetone, 8.5 mL of ultrapure water and 20 mg of Triton X-100 and this homogeneous paste was applied over a FTO plate by the doctor blading method. The deposited TiO2 film was annealed at 80 °C for 30 min followed by annealing at 500 °C for 30 min. One more layer of TiO2 was prepared using the same procedure by applying TiO2 paste and sequential annealing at 80 and 500 °C for 30 min each and this TiO2 coating was used directly for anchoring the photosensitizers. Carbon (C)-dots were prepared from L-ascorbic acid by a one-pot green synthesis method previously reported by Wang et al.28 0.1761 g of AA was dissolved in 19 mL of ultrapure water taken in a round bottomed flask followed by the addition of an aqueous solution of 0.1 M Cu(CH3COO)2 and the mixture was stirred at room temperature for 10 min. The solution was then stirred at 90 °C for 5 h, under reflux conditions. It was cooled to room temperature, the contents were centrifuged at 10000 rpm and the supernatant was discarded. The precipitate was redispersed in ultrapure water, purified by the column chromatography technique, and the resulting brown colored C-dots solid was collected after evaporation of the solvent.
Cadmium sulfide (CdS) QDs were prepared over the TiO2 electrode by using the successive ionic layer absorption and reaction (SILAR) process. In this method, in two separate beakers, solutions of 0.1 M Cd(CH3COO)2 and 0.1 M Na2S in methanol were taken as cadmium and sulfide precursors respectively. The TiO2 electrode was immersed in Cd(CH3COO)2/MeOH solution at 25 °C for 2 min, rinsed in methanol to remove the unabsorbed salt and dried at 60 °C in a hot air oven for 2 min. The electrode was then dipped in the Na2S/MeOH solution at 25 °C for 2 min, rinsed in methanol to remove the superfluous salt and dried at 60 °C in an oven for 2 min after which a CdS layer was obtained. This two-step immersion/heating process is defined as a one complete cycle of SILAR. In a similar manner, the same electrode was subjected to 6 more SILAR cycles to yield a yellowish-orange colored electrode of TiO2/CdS. For preparation of pristine CdS, an uncoated FTO or glass substrate was directly subjected to 7 cycles of SILAR with Cd2+ and S2− precursors. Like CdS QDs, PbSe QDs were also synthesized by using a SILAR process. For the preparation of the selenium precursor a procedure used in a previous report was followed.29 0.09986 g of selenium dioxide was taken in 30 mL of ethanol in a three-necked round bottomed flask in an inert N2 atmosphere, stirred for 2 min to dissolve the contents, and then 0.068 g of NaBH4 was added with rapid stirring. The reaction was allowed to continue for 1 h at 25 °C. The color of the solution changed from deep red to transparent indicating the reduction of selenium from Se4− to Se2−. This selenide solution was carefully extracted into a beaker. The TiO2 electrode was dipped in a solution of 0.1 M Pb(CH3COO)2·H2O in ethanol at 25 °C for 30 s, rinsed in ethanol and dried at 50 °C for 2 min. The resulting electrode was dipped in the selenide solution at 25 °C for 30 s, rinsed in ethanol and dried at 50 °C for 2 min and a PbSe layer was obtained. The dipping of the electrode in two different (Pb and Se) solutions constitutes one SILAR cycle. The same electrode was subjected to one more SILAR cycle and a dark brown colored TiO2/PbSe electrode was obtained. For preparation of pristine PbSe, an uncoated FTO or glass substrate was directly subjected to 2 cycles of SILAR with Pb2+ and Se2− precursors. For incorporation of C-dots in the QD sensitized electrodes, an aqueous solution of C-dots (9 mg mL−1) was used in a two electrode cell, with a FTO plate or a TiO2 plate or TiO2/QDs as the working electrode and a blank FTO plate as the counter electrode. A constant dc bias of 30 V was applied to the cell using a Tarsons 7090 electrophoresis power supply, and the C-dots were transferred from the solution onto the working electrode, as a brownish colored deposit was observed. The electrode was washed in water and dried in air. Photoanodes of different compositions were prepared: TiO2/CdS, TiO2/PbSe, TiO2/PbSe/CdS; in the latter, a TiO2 plate was first coated with PbSe (2 SILAR cycles) and then the TiO2/PbSe plate was coated with CdS (7 SILAR cycles). C-dots were electrophoretically deposited onto the TiO2/PbSe/CdS electrode to yield the TiO2/C-dots/PbSe/CdS electrode. A cartoon illustrating the formation of this quaternary component photoanode is provided in Scheme 1.
 Scheme 1  Cartoon illustrating the preparation of the TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots photoanode. 
MWCNTs were dispersed in a mixture of concentrated HNO3 and H2SO4 mixed in a 1:3 v/v ratio. The resultant solution was sonicated for 30 min and then refluxed at 80 °C for 6 h. A black precipitate formed; the formulation was further diluted with ultrapure water and then cooled to room temperature. The precipitate was filtered using ashless fast filter paper (Ø 150 mm), and then washed repeatedly with large quantities of ultrapure water, till it acquired a neutral pH. The black-brown solid was collected and dried in an oven at 60 °C for 48 h. These were the functionalized MWCNTs. 1 mg of this solid was taken in 3 mL of ultrapure water, and then sonicated for 2 h and a homogeneous dispersion was obtained. A fixed dc bias of 30 V was applied for 3 min in a two electrode cell (two FTO plates) with a MWCNTs dispersion. A coating of transparent black colored layer of MWCNTs was obtained on the FTO glass plate by electrophoresis. It was dried in an oven by heating at 60 °C for 24 h and stored in air.
QDSCs were constructed by affixing a parafilm spacer of 120 μm thickness along the periphery of the active photoanode area, such that a cavity was created with the exposed photoanode. A clear 0.1 M solution of Na2S, prepared in a solution of water:methanol mixed in a 3:7 volume ratio, was injected into the cavity and the counter electrode with MWCNTs facing inwards was placed on top of the FTO/photoanode/electrolyte assembly. The whole assembly was held together with binder clips, and the edges were sealed with an epoxy resin. The cells were then ready to use.
2.3 Characterization techniques
HRTEM (high resolution transmission electron microscopy) images of C-dots and electrode samples were obtained on a HRTEM FEI Tecnai G2 F30 STWIN with a FEG source operating at 300 kV. For TEM, a thin layer of the sample was carefully extracted either from a substrate or directly into isopropanol, dispersed well and then applied to a carbon coated copper grid of 3.05 mm diameter. The solvent was then evaporated. XRD patterns of the samples were recorded on a PANalytical X'PertPRO instrument with Cu-Kα (λ = 1.5406 Å) radiation. Surface morphology analysis of electrodes was performed using a field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM, Carl Zeiss AG Supra 40). Raman spectra of C-dots were recorded on a Bruker Senterra Dispersive Raman Microscope spectrometer; the laser excitation wavelength was fixed at 532 nm. The optical absorption spectra of the films were measured in the diffuse reflectance mode and converted to absorbance using the Kubelka–Munk function and for a solution of C-dots the spectrum was measured in absorbance mode in a quartz cuvette, on a UV-Vis-NIR spectrophotometer (Shimadzu UV-3600).
Photoluminescence (PL) spectra of electrodes were recorded by fixing the sample/substrate configuration in a solid sample holder, whereas the spectra of C-dot solutions of varying concentrations were recorded in a quartz cuvette. All measurements were performed on a Horiba Flouromax-4 fluorescence spectrometer; a suitable filter was utilized during the measurement and background correction was also applied. The time-correlated single photon counting (TCSPC) method was used for deducing emission lifetimes with a Horiba Jobin Yvon data station HUB functioning in the TCSPC mode. A nano-LED diode emitting pulses at 370 nm with a 1 MHz repetition rate and a pulse duration of 1.3 ns was employed as an excitation source. Light-scattering Ludox solution (colloidal silica) was used to acquire the instrument response function (prompt). A long pass 500 nm filter was placed in front of the emission monochromator for all measurements. Horiba Jobin Yvon DAS6 fluorescence decay analysis software was used to fit the model function to the experimental data, with appropriate correction for the instrument response. Current versus potential (I–V) data of QDSCs were measured using a Newport Oriel 3A solar simulator with a Keithley model 2420 digital source meter. A 450 W xenon arc lamp was the light source which provided a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2 of Air Mass (AM) 1.5G illumination; the spatial uniformity of irradiance was confirmed by calibrating with a 2 cm × 2 cm Si reference cell traceable to NREL and re-affirmed with a Newport power meter. Before collection of I–V data, each electrode was allowed to reach equilibrium at open-circuit. IQE and EQE were recorded using a Quantum Efficiency Measurement System, Oriel IQE-200™ capable of measurements compliant to ASTM E1021-06. The instrument gave the EQE (also known as IPCE) and IQE directly as a function of wavelength. The light source was a 250 W quartz tungsten halogen lamp, the monochromator path length was 1/8 m and the spot size was 1 mm × 2.5 mm rectangular at focus. Cyclic voltammograms of pristine-TiO2, CdS, PbSe and C-dots deposited over FTO substrates were recorded in a three electrode cell, with the aforementioned as working electrodes, a Pt sheet as the counter electrode and Ag/AgCl/KCl as the reference electrode in an aqueous 0.1 M KOH electrolyte solution on an Autolab PGSTAT 302N equipped with a NOVA 1.9 software. The linear sweep voltammogram (LSV) of pristine C-dots was recorded by compressing a C-dots sample between two stainless steel electrodes, separated by an adhesive spacer, at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. Intensity modulated photocurrent/photovoltage (IMPS/IMVS) for cells was measured on an Autolab PGSTAT under a white LED (60 W) and the intensity of the light was varied by changing the distance between the source and the sample. Light intensities were measured with a LOT-Oriel radiometer-photometer (ILT: 1400). The frequency range was set from 1 MHz to 0.01 Hz for IMPS and IMVS measurements.
3. Results and discussion
3.1 Structural features
The TEM image of pristine C-dots is shown in Fig. 1a. The image shows discrete oblong shaped nanoparticles of carbon with the particle size in the range of 10 to 30 nm. The corresponding lattice scale image of C-dots is displayed in Fig. 1b. C-dots are highly crystalline, for each particle shows lattice fringes and the inter-fringe separation is 0.34 nm (Fig. 1b), which matches with a d value of 3.39 Å of graphite (JCPDS card # 75-1621). The bright field image of pristine PbSe QDs is shown in Fig. 1c. The image shows aggregated nanoparticles of PbSe, with indistinct grain boundaries. The nanocrystallites of PbSe were identified in the corresponding high resolution image, which is shown in Fig. 1d. They are encircled with dotted ellipses in Fig. 1d. The dimensions of PbSe QDs vary from 4 to 8 nm. Nanocrystallites of PbSe oriented in different directions were observed. Inter-fringe distances of 0.35, 0.30, 0.22 and 0.18 nm were observed, and these match well with d values of 3.53, 3.06, 2.16 and 1.84 Å corresponding to (111), (200), (220) and (311) planes of PbSe with a face centered cubic (fcc) lattice, as per JCPDS card # 06-0354. Thus, HRTEM results clearly confirm the formation of PbSe QDs by SILAR. The high magnification image of pristine CdS QDs grown by SILAR is displayed in Fig. 1e. The nanocrystallites of CdS have dimensions in the range of 3–6 nm. The lattice fringes obtained from CdS are separated by a constant distance of ∼0.29 nm, which matches with an inter-layer spacing of 2.92 Å of the (200) plane of CdS with a fcc lattice (JCPDS card # 65-2887). The TEM image of the TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots electrode (after scraping off from the FTO) is shown in Fig. 1f. It shows mingling particles, which are interlinked and are overlapping with one another. The corresponding lattice scale image of TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots is shown in Fig. 1g. The image shows nanocrystallites of TiO2, CdS, PbSe and C-dots, as lattice fringes from these photoanode components were identified clearly. In Fig. 1g, the solid yellow colored ellipses are from CdS QDs, the dotted black colored ellipses are from PbSe QDs, the dashed-dotted ellipses are from TiO2 and the dashed ellipses are from C-dots. Inter-fringe spacings of 0.31, 0.33, 0.34 and 0.36 nm are assigned to the (200), (111), (002) and (101) planes of PbSe, CdS, C-dots and TiO2 respectively in Fig. 1g, illustrating the co-existence of all the four components in the electrode. The selected area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns of pristine-C-dots (Fig. 1h), PbSe (Fig. 1i) and CdS (Fig. 1j) are also shown, which reaffirm the crystal structures. In Fig. 1h, for C-dots, a pattern of concentric diffuse rings with bright spots superimposed over the rings is observed. These were indexed to the (110) and (111) planes of C-dots. For pristine CdS QDs (in Fig. 1j) and pristine PbSe QDs (in Fig. 1i), only bright spots were observed and these were indexed to the (111) and (200) planes of their fcc lattices respectively.
 Fig. 1  TEM image of pristine C-dots (a) and the corresponding HRTEM image (b), TEM image of pristine PbSe QDs (c) and the corresponding HRTEM image (d), HRTEM image of CdS QDs (e), TEM image of the TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots assembly (f), and the corresponding HRTEM image (g), SAED patterns of pristine-C-dots (h), CdS QDs (i) and PbSe QDs (j). The ellipses/circles enclose crystallites of: C-dots (shown in pale green; dotted ellipses in (b) and dashed ellipses in (g)), PbSe (shown in black; dotted ellipses in (d) and (g)), CdS (shown in yellow; dotted ellipses in (e) and solid ellipses in (g)) and TiO2 (in white; dashed-dotted ellipses in (g)). 
The FE-SEM images of pristine C-dots, TiO2, TiO2/PbSe/CdS and TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dot electrodes are shown in Fig. S1 (ESI†). The SEM image of pristine C-dots shows aggregated particles (Fig. S1a and b†), wherein agglomerates of C-dots with sizes in the range of a few hundred nanometers are observed. Pristine TiO2 (Fig. S1c†) shows a granular morphology. The electrode is composed of interconnected irregular shaped particles which are separated by uniformly distributed pores and show a wide variation in size from 20 to 100 nm, with an average size of about 30 nm. The pore sizes are adequate for the incorporation of QDs across the bulk or cross-section of the TiO2 electrode by the SILAR process. After the deposition of PbSe and CdS QDS, the TiO2/PbSe/CdS electrode is obtained. The SEM images of this ternary component electrode (Fig. S1d and e†) also show interlinked particles of no particular shape, and the morphology continues to be highly and uniformly porous, as pores with an average size of approximately 50 nm are seen to be interspersed with the particles. The pore size is large enough to allow the permeation of C-dots through the cross-section of the TiO2/PbSe/CdS electrode, via electrophoresis. The micrographs of the TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots electrode (Fig. S1f and g†) also show a particulate morphology, with no distinctive feature. The film continues to retain some porosity, but at this stage the porosity is not very high. This is also evident from the cross-sectional FE-SEM image of the TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots electrode, which is shown in Fig. S1h.† As can be seen from the image, the packing of particles is compact, and there are no large gaps across the thickness of the film. The thickness of the TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots film is approximately 2 μm. X-ray diffractograms of pristine-TiO2, CdS, PbSe and C-dots, Raman spectral data- and I–V characteristics of C-dots are shown in Fig. S2 and S3† respectively. The electrical conductivity of C-dots was found to be ∼0.12 S cm−1, which can facilitate electron transport when used in a photoanode.
3.2 Optical studies
The absorption spectra of different photosensitizers and the TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots photoanode are shown in Fig. 2. The UV-Vis spectrum of a C-dots colloid (Fig. 2a) shows a broad absorption band in the wavelength range of 230 to 380 nm. The absorption tapers off to negligible values above 510 nm. C-dots do not show any absorption in the NIR region. The absorption spectrum of the TiO2 electrode showed a broad absorption below 400 nm (Fig. 2a) and from the absorption edge, the band gap of TiO2 was deduced to be 3.16 eV. Fig. 2b shows the absorbance spectra of films. PbSe QDs show a broad and shallow absorption band in the 480 to 660 nm wavelength range in the visible region, and an additional intense sharp excitonic peak with a λmax at 1212 nm is observed in the near infrared (NIR) region. Previously, Pratama et al. also obtained two peaks in the visible and NIR regimes for CdSe QDs prepared by an organo-metallic synthesis method.30 Here, for PbSe QDs band gaps deduced from the two excitonic peaks in the visible and NIR regions were 1.62 and 0.98 eV respectively. In the past, Guijarro et al. observed a band gap of ∼1.8 eV for PbSe QDs synthesized by a SILAR method.15 In the past, for PbSe QDs prepared by a cation exchange method, varying sized PbSe QDs were obtained and for large sized PbSe QDs, band gaps of about 0.8 eV were obtained.31 Here, the peak in the NIR region could be due to the intra-gap states introduced by the defects in PbSe QDs. PbS/PbSe QDs are known to have shallow and deep trap states which have been in the past shown to be responsible for prohibiting charge transport and in assisting recombination.8 For CdS QDs herein, a broad absorption extending from 300 to 510 nm is observed, and thereafter it tapers off. The band gap was calculated to be 2.25 eV, which is close to a reported value of 2.2 eV reported for CdS QDs prepared by a SILAR method using CdCl2 and Na2S baths in an earlier study.32 The TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots photoanode absorbs in the visible and in the NIR region, as the spectrum of this assembly shows a broad band in the visible region and a peak at 1212 nm (Fig. 2b). The combined effect of CdS and PbSe is clearly reflected in the absorbance attributes of this photoanode. It is due to the PbSe QDs, which are NIR absorbing, that the absorption of TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots is finite in the NIR region.
 Fig. 2  Absorption spectra of (a) a TiO2 electrode () and a C-dots colloid () and (b) a pristine CdS electrode (), a PbSe electrode (), and a TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots electrode (). The spectra of electrodes were recorded in diffuse reflectance mode and converted to absorbance by using a Kubelka–Munk function. 
Fluorescence spectra of an aqueous C-dots dispersion at different concentrations of C-dots: 1, 2, 4, 7, 9 and 10 mg mL−1 and acquired at an excitation wavelength of 370 nm are shown in Fig. 3a. At 1 mg mL−1 the C-dots show an emission peak with a λmax at 450 nm. The emission intensity increases progressively as a function of increasing C-dots concentration till a concentration of 9 mg mL−1 is reached. Generally, it is well-known that the intensity of fluorescence is directly proportional to the concentration of the fluorophore over a reasonable concentration range.33 In the case of C-dots, this direct dependence of fluorescence intensity on the concentration of the fluorophore (C-dots) is clearly observed, when the concentration is increased from 1 mg mL−1 to 9 mg mL−1. The net jump in the fluorescence intensity occurs by a staggering 183%, when the C-dots concentration is raised from 1 to 9 mg mL−1. However, above this concentration (i.e., at 10 mg mL−1), the emission intensity drops by ∼34% (with respect to the intensity observed at 9 mg mL−1). At a very high concentration of the fluorophore (C-dots), which here is 10 mg mL−1, the proportionality condition (fluorescence intensity ∝ concentration) is no longer satisfied, since due to collisions between the fluorophores some proportion of the fluorophores present in the excited state transfer their excitation (energy) to the neighbouring fluorophores and then decay back to the ground state non-radiatively,33 thus causing a fluorescence intensity loss. In the case of C-dots, this phenomenon is dominant at a concentration above 9 mg mL−1, thus causing the sharp decline in fluorescence intensity. It is also well-established in the literature that this self-quenching is typically dominant only at very high concentrations of the fluorophore, for energy transfer can occur only when the fluorophores are very close to each other (when the separation between them is less than 10 nm).33
 Fig. 3  (a) Fluorescence spectra of a C-dots colloid at different concentrations of C-dots in water: at 1 (), 2 (), 4 (), 7 (), 9 () and 10 () mg mL−1 (λex = 375 nm). The inset of (a) is a blown-up view of the C-dots concentration for optimum/maximum emission. (b) Fluorescence spectra of electrodes of TiO2/C-dots (), CdS/C-dots (), CdS/glass (), TiO2/CdS (), TiO2/CdS/C-dots (), and TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots () (λex = 370 nm). (c) Time resolved fluorescence decay traces of electrodes of pristine CdS (), TiO2/CdS (), CdS/C-dots (), TiO2/CdS/C-dots () and TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots (), recorded at λex = 370 nm and λem = 530 nm and pristine C-dots (), TiO2/C-dots (), CdS/C-dots (),TiO2/CdS/C-dots () and TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots (), recorded at λex = 370 nm and λem = 450 nm. Corresponding magnified views of the decay traces of electrodes recorded at λem of (d) 530 and (e) 450 nm respectively. 
The emission in C-dots stems from the surface defects, the oxygen containing groups which are anchored to the carbon atoms. The π-bonded carbon atoms form the valence band, and the π*-orbitals of oxygens form the conduction band in C-dots.34 The concentration of C-dots at 9 mg mL−1 was fixed as the optimum concentration for maximum charge separation. Pristine CdS QDs deposited on glass, upon excitation at 370 nm, show a strong emission above 470 nm, with a λmax at ∼530 nm; this is attributed to the band edge emission in CdS QDs (Fig. 3b). A pristine C-dots film, deposited from an aqueous C-dots dispersion (having a concentration of 9 mg mL−1), showed an undulating emission response, and the λmax is slightly blue-shifted by ∼10 nm compared to the C-dots dispersion. For the C-dots film, the λmax is observed at ∼440 nm. For a CdS/C-dots film, the emission of CdS is enhanced by ∼17% (compared to the pristine CdS film), whereas the emission of C-dots is quenched by 51.8% (compared to the pristine C-dots film). The conduction band (CB) of CdS is poised at 3.9 eV and this value was determined by a cyclic voltammetry experiment (plot and details are provided in the ESI, Fig. S4†). The CB of C-dots is fixed at 3.78 eV (again determined from a CV plot, Fig. S4†). Since the energy level offsets of CdS and C-dots are conducive for direct excited electron injection from the CB of C-dots to the CB of CdS, the de-population of a greater number of electrons from the CB of CdS (inherent and injected electrons) results in an enhanced emission intensity compared to pristine CdS (wherein only the intrinsically excited electrons deactivate and there are no injected electrons). For a TiO2/CdS film, the emission of CdS is quenched by ∼69% (compared to pristine CdS) in the presence of TiO2. The CB of TiO2 is positioned at 4.17 eV (determined from a CV measurement, Fig. S4†). Electron injection from the CB of CdS (3.9 eV) to the CB of TiO2 is responsible for this loss of emission intensity. The emission plot of a TiO2/CdS/C-dots film shows a significantly quenched emission for both C-dots and CdS, compared to sole CdS and sole C-dots. In comparison to CdS/C-dots, for the TiO2/CdS/C-dots film, the emission peak intensity at 440 nm is quenched by 83% and the peak intensity for the peak at 530 nm is quenched by 94%. It is evident that C-dots owing to their high electrical conductivity provide an additional driving force by serving as electron conduits and promote excited charge injection into TiO2, which is responsible for this huge emission drop. Upon further including PbSe QDs in the photoanode assembly (TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots), the emission intensities at 440 and 530 nm are further quenched by 46 and 51% respectively, compared to the same assembly (TiO2/CdS/C-dots) devoid of PbSe QDs. For pristine PbSe QDs, the position of the CB is deduced to be 3.86 eV (from a CV plot, Fig. S4†). Intrinsic excited electrons or excited electrons injected into PbSe from C-dots are transferred to TiO2. It was also observed that pristine PbSe QDs did not exhibit any luminescence in the visible region. The quenched luminescence for the assembly with both QDs, TiO2 and the C-dots, is indicative of a maximum charge transfer attained therein and therefore this photoanode is expected to deliver high photocurrents upon illumination.
The time resolved emission decay plots for different photoactive electrode films recorded at the same excitation wavelength of 370 nm, but at two different emission wavelengths of 530 (for samples containing CdS) and 450 nm (for samples containing C-dots) are shown in Fig. 3c and the corresponding enlarged views of the initial time spans are shown in Fig. 3d and e. The emission decay profiles for pristine CdS and C-dots were fitted into a single exponential decay, corresponding to excitonic band edge electron–hole recombination, whereas a bi-exponential function (eqn (1)) was used for fitting the data obtained for multicomponent photoactive assemblies. I = B1exp(−t/τ1) + B2exp(−t/τ2)(1)
In eqn (1), I is the normalized fluorescence intensity, B1 and B2 are the pre-exponential factors, t is the time after excitation, and τ1 and τ2 are the two lifetimes. The average time the electron spends in the excited state before recombination or transfer is determined using eqn (2). 〈τ〉 = ΣBiτi2/ΣBiτi(2)
The fitted data are provided in Table S1.† The excited electron lifetime for pristine CdS QDs/glass was 11.5 ns, and for pristine C-dots, it was 5.1 ns. For CdS/C-dots, the average excited electron lifetime is 13.8 ns, when monitored at λem = 530 nm. The fast decay component of 4.6 ps could be due to electron transfer from C-dots to CdS, for the pristine C-dots film shows an emission intensity of about 57% of the emission intensity of CdS, at 530 nm, which is the λmax of CdS and not of C-dots. The slow decay component of 14 ns (further lowered in comparison to pristine CdS) is due to additional electron (supplied by C-dots) deactivation by recombination. When the same film (CdS/C-dots) was probed at λem = 450 nm (λem of C-dots), the average electron lifetime reduced to 2.1 ns (compared to 5.1 ns for pristine C-dots). Here, the slow and fast decay components of 2.14 and 0.18 ns are attributed to e−–h+ recombination and electron transfer to CdS. The average electron lifetimes for TiO2/CdS and TiO2/C-dots are 1.4 and 2.7 ns, lowered relative to the pristine photo-sensitizers, and this is due to fast electron injection from the CBs of CdS or C-dots into the CB of TiO2. The average electron lifetime for the TiO2/CdS/C-dots film when probed at λem = 530 nm, is 0.37 ns; the short lived component of 6.25 ps is assigned to electron transfer from C-dots to CdS or TiO2, and the long lived component of 0.54 ns is assigned to electron transfer from CdS to TiO2. When probed at λem = 450 nm, the excited electron lifetime is 1 ns, wherein the fast and slow decay components of 6.2 ps and 1.3 ns are assigned to electron injection into CdS and band edge recombination respectively. Upon inclusion of PbSe in the film, for the resulting TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots film, the average lifetime at a probe emission wavelength of 530 nm is 0.14 ns, and at 450 nm the lifetime is 0.23 ns. These two average lifetimes are the least among all photoactive films. It is suggestive of a more efficient charge transfer and transport, facilitated by PbSe QDs and C-dots. C-dots provide channels for unhindered electron transport due to their high electrical conductivity, and PbSe QDs provide an additional energy level for accepting electrons from C-dots (as opposed to recombination), which are then shuttled to the current collector, thus increasing the rate of electron injection. The electron injection rate for C-dots to CdS and the improvement in the electron transfer rate induced by PbSe were calculated using the following equations: ket = 1/τ2(CdS/C-dots) − 1/〈τ〉(C-dots)(3) ket = 1/〈τ〉(TiO2/C-dots/PbSe/CdS) − 1/〈τ〉(TiO2/C-dots/CdS)(4)
The electron transfer rate constant is 5.3 × 109 s−1 for electron injection from C-dots to CdS, and the rate constants are 4.4 × 109 and 3.3 × 109 s−1 at emission probe wavelengths of 530 and 450 nm respectively. The latter two values are a measure of how quickly electrons are transferred to the current collector in the presence of PbSe QDs.
3.3 Charge transfer processes
Cyclic voltammograms of pristine-TiO2, CdS and PbSe films are shown in the ESI (Fig. S4†), and the positions of the CB and valence band (VB) were calculated from the oxidation and reduction potentials. The details of the calculations are also provided in the ESI.† These values were used in visualizing the energetics of the photoanode. The topography and surface potential maps of a pristine C-dots electrode and a TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots electrode are displayed in Fig. 4(a, a′) and (b, b′). In KPFM, an alternating current (ac) voltage with a modifiable direct current (dc) offset potential is applied between a conducting AFM tip and the sample surface and the resulting electrostatic force is detected by a lock-in amplifier. The feedback mechanism controls the dc tip potential until the contact potential difference (VCPD) is nullified. This VCPD or surface potential is plotted as a function of the lateral position coordinate. For pristine C-dots, the topography image showed the presence of small discrete graphitic particles with a very narrow distribution of size, from 10 to 20 nm, and the corresponding surface potential image showed uniformly distributed bright spots. The bright spots arise from C-dots. The conducting Co/Cr tip was first calibrated with a reference sample of highly ordered pyrolytic graphite (HOPG) of a known work function of 4.6 eV. The VCPD was 90 mV for HOPG, and using the following equation the work functions of unknown samples were calculated. These work functions are approximated to the equilibrated Fermi levels of the samples. The average values of surface potentials for C-dots and the TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots electrode were 230 and 115 mV. ϕ(sample) = 4.6 + VCPD(HOPG) − VCPD(sample)(5)
 Fig. 4  Topography and surface potential maps of (a, a′) pristine C-dots and (b, b′) TiO2/C-dots/PbSe/CdS and (c) the energy band diagram of the TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots electrode showing all possible electron transfer modes upon illumination. 
From eqn (5), the magnitudes of EF for C-dots and the TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots are 4.46 and 4.57 eV respectively. For carbon nanostructures such as MWCNTs and graphene, the reported values of EF are about 4.5 eV.35–37 The position of CB is 3.78 eV (from CV studies). The energy band diagram for a TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots assembly is shown in Fig. 4c. The positions of VBs and CBs of the different components used in the diagram were determined from CV and absorption studies. Upon illumination, the energy level offsets allow excited electrons to be injected from the CB of C-dots to the CB of CdS or PbSe or TiO2. From CdS and PbSe, the intrinsically produced and injected charge carriers are transferred from their CBs to the CB of TiO2. From TiO2, these electrons are transferred to the current collector (FTO).
3.4 Solar cell characterization
QDSCs were constructed with the following photoanodes: TiO2/CdS, TiO2/PbSe, TiO2/C-dots, TiO2/PbSe/CdS and TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots electrodes. A functionalized MWCNTs coated FTO substrate was used as the counter electrode and a solution of 0.1 M Na2S in a 3:7 v/v mixture of water:methanol as the electrolyte. J–V characteristics were recorded for the cells under an irradiance of 100 mW cm−2 (AM 1.5G spectrum). These plots are shown in Fig. 5a and the solar cell parameters are summarized in Tables 1 and S2.† For a cell based on TiO2/CdS, the PCE of the champion cell was 2.58%, and the open circuit voltage (VOC ∼ 719 mV) was also the highest for this cell, in comparison to other cells studied in this report. The TiO2/PbSe film based cell showed a PCE = 1.45%; the photocurrent density (JSC = 4.65 mA cm−2) obtained for this cell was lower compared to other cells, and therefore the efficiency was lower. The efficiency of the cell based on both the QDs: CdS and PbSe was higher than that of the cell based on individual QDs. PbSe QDs are capable of solar radiation of wavelengths above 600 nm (NIR region) and CdS QDs are capable of harvesting light radiation of wavelengths in the 400 to 500 nm wavelength range. This ability of harvesting different regions of the solar spectrum is clearly reflected in a higher PCE of 3.66% for the cell based on the TiO2/PbSe/CdS film. Upon further including C-dots in the assembly, along with QDs, the ensuing cell based on the TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots electrode as the photoanode showed a spectacularly high PCE of 4.97%, greater by 26.35% compared to the cell without C-dots. The JSC for this cell is very high, 17.26 mA cm−2, which can be attributed to the ability of C-dots to conduct electrons and to serve as photosensitizers as well, for C-dots showed a visible light luminescence and a band gap of about 0.7 eV. The J–V plot of the TiO2/C-dots film based cell is shown in Fig. S5 (ESI†). Surprisingly, the PCE of this cell was low (0.062%), and this is because of a very low magnitude of photocurrent produced by the cell. The JSC was only 0.20 mA cm−2, and we ascribe this low photocurrent to the fast electron–hole recombination in C-dots upon illumination. While this cell based on pristine C-dots did not yield a commendable performance, inclusion of C-dots in the QDs based cell resulted in a dramatic improvement in the overall PCE value. In a QDSC, the role of C-dots as electron conduits, and their assistance in charge transport to the current collector come to the fore, compared to their intrinsic capability to produce excitons upon illumination. If this were not so, then the cell based on C-dots should have yielded a PCE comparable to the pristine PbSe or CdS based cells. In the TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots photoanode, the layers are deposited sequentially, nonetheless, because these layers are deposited from solutions they tend to be porous and this leads to a good mixing of the components. Due to this factor, C-dots are likely to be in contact with the QDs and TiO2 and therefore C-dots can aid in transporting the photogenerated electrons to FTO, which could be the reason for the high JSC and PCE values. This was further augmented by the resistances at VOC and JSC, which are proportional to series and shunt resistances (Rs and Rsh) of the cell. For the cell based on the TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots photoanode, the Rs (594 Ω) was the lowest and the Rsh (11856 Ω) was the highest among the four cells under consideration. A high value of Rsh indicates that current losses in the cell are at a minimum, and a low value of Rs is an indicator of a relatively unhindered passage of electrons through the circuit.
 Fig. 5  (a) J–V characteristics, (b) external quantum efficiency (EQE) and (c) internal quantum efficiency (IQE) spectra of photoelectrochemical solar cells encompassing the following photoanodes: TiO2/PbSe (), TiO2/CdS (), TiO2/PbSe/CdS () and TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots () in a 0.1 M Na2S solution in 3:7 (v/v) water:MeOH as the electrolyte. (d) J–V characteristics of a cell with a TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots photoanode: as such (), after intermittent 1 sun exposure for 3 h () and after storing the exposed cell in the dark for 30 days (). All measurements in (a) and (d) were performed under 1 sun (100 mW cm−2) illumination (AM 1.5G). In (a–d), a MWCNT/FTO assembly was used as the counter electrode. 
Table 1 Solar cell parameters of cells with 0.1 M Na2S electrolyte, exposed cell area 0.12 to 0.15 cm2, under 1 sun illumination (100 mW cm−2) with the listed photoanodes; all cells with MWCNTs/FTO as the counter electrode




Photoanode configuration

V
OC (mV)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF

η
best (%)

η
avg (%)

R at VOC (Ω)

R at JSC (Ω)




TiO2/CdS
719.7
8.08
44.32
2.58
2.44 ± 0.14
647.2
2523.1


TiO2/PbSe
682.5
4.65
45.63
1.45
1.39 ± 0.0575
1192.93
8529.8


TiO2/C-dots
496.8
0.20
61.68
0.06
0.05 ± 0.01
4553.8
215627.8


TiO2/PbSe/CdS
692.3
11.93
44.27
3.66
3.52 ± 0.14
841.9
2493.6


TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots
694
17.26
41.52
4.97
4.84 ± 0.13
594.4
11856.4




The EQE and IQE responses of the QDSCs with the photoanodes TiO2/CdS, TiO2/PbSe, TiO2/PbSe/CdS and TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots are shown in Fig. 5b and c. EQE is a ratio of the number of photogenerated electrons of a given wavelength to the number of impinging incident photons and IQE is the ratio of the number of charge carriers of a given wavelength produced to the number of photons absorbed. It follows that IQE is generally greater than or equal to EQE. For the TiO2/CdS cell the maximum EQE is about 26% and it has significant values in the 400 to 500 nm wavelength range, which coincides with the light absorption regime of CdS. The IQE is higher than EQE for this cell, with a highest value of about 31%, in the same wavelength range. The highest EQE is about 16% in the visible region for the TiO2/PbSe cell and it varies between 7 and 12% in the NIR region, tapering off above 1000 nm, thus indicating the ability of PbSe QDs to convert both visible and NIR photons into current. The IQE response for the same cell was also similar, wherein the light harvesting capability of the photoanode extended from visible to NIR wavelengths. For the cell made up of the two types of QDs (TiO2/PbSe/CdS), the maximum EQE was about 42% in the 400–500 nm wavelength range, and in the 600–950 nm wavelength range it lies between 5 and 10%. IQE values were comparable for this cell, almost in the entire wavelength range. The cell with a TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots photoanode showed an EQE maximum of 60% at 465 nm and it was found to decrease from 13 to 5% ongoing from 600 to 950 nm. The highest IQE for this cell was 64% at 460 nm, and at longer wavelengths the EQE and IQE values are comparable. It is evident from the EQE and IQE data that PbSe QDs enable the harvesting of NIR energy photons and C-dots increase the overall current collection capability of the photoanode, for upon including C-dots in the assembly the EQE and IQE values increased over the entire spectral range under consideration. The integrated area under the EQE curve is a measure of JSC and we find that the EQE values are underestimated compared to the JSC values obtained from J–V studies. The reason for this discrepancy is explained in the ESI (Fig. S6†).
The stability of the best performing cell was evaluated by subjecting it to two rigorous experiments (Fig. 5d and Table S3†). In the first one, the cell was exposed to 1 sun illumination in a non-continuous manner for 3 h. At the end of this extended illumination, the PCE reduced from 4.97% to 3.84%. The PCE decreased by 22.7%; detachment of QDs from the current collector and their photo-decomposition were the reasons for this huge decline. This cell was then stored in the dark for thirty days under ambient conditions. The PCE of the cell at the end of this long storage was 2.47%. The air-stability and stability to light require improvement; this can be addressed by using passivating ZnS layers or by use of solid state electrolytes.
3.5 Impedance studies on cells
The EIS curves for the cells with the following photoanodes: TiO2/CdS, TiO2/C-dots, TiO2/PbSe, TiO2/PbSe/CdS and TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots are shown in Fig. 6. The Nyquist plots were generated over a frequency range of 1 MHz to 0.1 Hz, by superimposing an ac potential of 10 mV over the open circuit potential. The plots were acquired under white light irradiance of 20 mW cm−2. For TiO2/C-dots and TiO2/PbSe, a semi-circle is obtained. For the remaining electrodes, an arc followed by a straight line profile is observed. The semi-circle arises from a parallel combination of a resistor and a capacitor, and the low frequency response corresponds to diffusional (Warburg) impedance, i.e., the resistance offered by the electrolyte to the movement of oxidized or reduced species in the electrolyte. The data were fitted into circuits with and without the Warburg component; the fitted parameters are listed in Table S4.† The overall magnitudes of impedances are substantially lower for the cell based on TiO2/C-dots, which ratifies the ability of C-dots to transport electrons efficiently. The point of commencement of the arc-like response on the abscissa is attributed to the bulk resistance and the resistance offered at the counter electrode/S2− interface to the reduction of the oxidized electrolyte species (Sn2−). This magnitude is least for the cell with sole C-dots (∼4.2 Ω) and for the remaining four cells it lies in the range of 21 to 100 Ω. The resistance to charge transfer (Rct) at the photoanode/S2− solution interface is 103 Ω for the sole C-dots based cell and for the cell with TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots, it is 134 Ω. The Rct values are higher for the remaining cells, indicating that charge transfer is more facile for the cell based on the TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots electrode due to the presence of C-dots. Yo is a component of the Warburg impedance, and it is directly proportional to the measure of the ease of diffusion of oxidized or reduced species in the cell. The Yo value was high for the cells based on electrodes with C-dots, which suggests that the diffusion of the oxidized or reduced species is also to some extent controlled by C-dots.
 Fig. 6  EIS spectra of TiO2/CdS (), TiO2/C-dots (), TiO2/PbSe, (), TiO2/CdS/C-dots () and TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots () recorded under a white light irradiance of 20 mW cm−2. Magnified views of the plots are shown in the inset of (a), and in (b) and (c). (d) Equivalent circuits used for fitting all data except those of TiO2/PbSe and TiO2/C-dots, for which circuit (e) was used. (f) Electron transit time, τd, and (g) electron lifetime, τn, versus light density for TiO2/CdS () and TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dot () electrodes obtained from IMPS and IMVS measurements respectively. 
Intensity modulated photocurrent/photovoltage spectroscopy (IMPS/IMVS) experiments on TiO2/CdS and TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots based cells help in comparing the electron transport and recombination times in the cells. The impedance curves were recorded under different white light illumination densities at short-circuit and open-circuit conditions respectively (Fig. S7†). The electron transit time (τd) and electron lifetime (τn) in the cells were determined by the two equations τd = 1/2πfIMPS and τn = 1/2πfIMVS, where fIMPS/fIMVS is the frequency of the minimum imaginary component in the IMPS/IMVS impedance curves.38,39 Our values are comparable to literature values. The τd and τnversus light density plots are shown in Fig. 6f and g respectively. Both τd and τn decrease as a function of increasing light intensity, for both cells. The IMPS outcomes at different light intensities (Fig. 6f) reveal that the τd values for the TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots electrode based cells (∼6–14 ms) are shorter than those obtained for the reference TiO2/CdS cell (∼6–190 ms). Electron transport through the quaternary electrode is faster than that in the TiO2/CdS electrode. The aligned CBs of C-dots, CdS, PbSe and TiO2 provide the driving force for injecting excited electrons into FTO, and the electrical conductivity of C-dots also allows fast electron propagation. The IMVS data show that electron lifetimes are longer for the TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots electrode based cells compared to the TiO2/CdS based cells at all light densities. This implies that recombination is less favored in the former. Due to the presence of multiple overlayers, each having unique energetics, applied over TiO2 in the TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots electrode, the accessibility of the sulfide electrolyte to TiO2 is poor in comparison to the TiO2/CdS electrode, where only the CdS QDs cover the TiO2 layer. Due to this, recombination of the excited electrons from the CB of TiO2 with the oxidized sulfide species or any available acceptor mid-gap states in QDs is easier in the TiO2/CdS based cell. Consequently, the shorter electron transit times and the longer electron recombination times obtained for the TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots based cell favor solar cell performance.
4. Conclusions
A photoanode assembly of TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots was synthesized for the first time, wherein CdS and PbSe QDs with band gaps of 2.25 and 0.98 eV absorb blue-green and red photons respectively, and C-dots being electrically conductive facilitate electron propagation through the matrix. CdS and PbSe QDs are less than 10 nm in dimensions, and C-dots have sizes in the range of 10 to 20 nm. The energy level offsets of this configuration favor photo-generated electron transfer from the conduction bands of C-dots, CdS and PbSe to the conduction band of TiO2, and then to the current collector, accompanied by simultaneous hole transfer to the sulfide redox couple. The equilibrated Fermi level of this photoanode was deduced to be poised at 4.41 eV, by Kelvin probe force microscopy, which is also conducive for electron injection into FTO. QDSCs based on the TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots photoanode delivered a PCE of 4.97%, which is significantly higher than that of the cell with the photoanode devoid of C-dots (η = 3.66% for TiO2/PbSe/CdS), ratifying the ability of low cost, environmentally friendly C-dots to serve as electrically conductive interconnects between the QDs and TiO2 and promote fast charge transport to the current collecting contact. IMPS and IMVS studies also aided in gaining some insights into electron transport dynamics in the quaternary electrode. The light harvesting capability of PbSe QDs comes to the fore, particularly in the NIR region, wherein the cells with PbSe in the photoanode show significant external and internal quantum efficiencies compared to zero IQEs and EQEs obtained for the TiO2/CdS based cell. Harnessing of red photons by PbSe QDs and the active role played by dual function C-dots (as electron conductors and photosensitizers) validate their use with a variety of other visible light harvesting assemblies, so that substantial enhancements in solar power conversion efficiencies can be realized.
Acknowledgements
Financial support from the Solar Energy Research Initiative-Department of Science & Technology (DST/TM/SERI/2K12-11(G)) is gratefully acknowledged.
Notes and references
P. V. Kamat, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 1906–1915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. N. Kumar, S. Mandal, M. Deepa, A. K. Srivastava and A. G. Joshi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 18924–18937 CAS .
G. I. Koleilat, L. Levina, H. Shukla, S. H. Myrskog, S. Hinds, A. G. P. Abraham and E. H. Sargent, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 833–840 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tang, K. W. Kemp, S. Hoogland, K. S. Jeong, H. Liu, L. Levina, M. Furukawa, X. Wang, R. Debnath, D. Cha, K. W. Chou, A. Fischer, A. Amassian, J. B. Asbury and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 765–771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Lee, D. Y. Son, T. K. Ahn, H. W. Shin, I. Y. Kim, S. J. Hwang, M. J. Ko, S. Sul, H. Han and N. G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1050 Search PubMed .
M. J. Speirs, D. M. Balazs, H. H. Fang, L. H. Lai, L. Protesescu, M. V. Kovalenko and M. A. Loi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1450–1457 CAS .
S. K. Saha, A. Bera and A. J. Pal, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 7578–7580 CrossRef .
J. Tang, Z. Huo, S. Brittman, H. Gao and P. Yang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 568–572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Pan, K. Zhao, J. Wang, H. Zhang, Y. Feng and X. Zhong, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5215–5222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Luo, H. Wei, Q. Huang, X. Hu, H. Zhao, R. Yu, D. Li, Y. Luo and Q. Meng, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 3881–3883 RSC .
K. Zhao, Z. Pan, I. Mora-Sero, E. Canovas, H. Wang, Y. Song, X. Gong, J. Wang, M. Bonn, J. Bisquert and X. Zhong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5602–5609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. K. Santra and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2508–2511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Ehrler, K. P. Musselman, M. L. Bohm, F. S. F. Morgenstern, Y. Vaynzof, B. J. Walker, J. L. MacManus-Driscoll and N. C. Greenham, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4210–4220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, J. Gao, E. M. Miller, J. M. Luther and M. C. Beard, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 614–622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Guijarro, T. Lana-Villarreal, T. Lutz, S. A. Haque and R. Gomez, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 3367–3372 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, J. Gao, C. P. Church, E. M. Miller, J. M. Luther, V. I. Klimov and M. C. Beard, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6010–6015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Akhtar, M. Banski, M. A. Malik, N. Revaprasadu, A. Podhorodecki and J. Misiewicz, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 16424–16430 RSC .
L. Han, J. Liu, N. Yu, Z. Liu, J. Gu, J. Lu and W. Ma, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 2461–2470 RSC .
J. Bian, C. Huang, L. Wang, T. Hung, W. A. Daoud and R. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 4883–4890 CAS .
X. Yan, X. Cui, B. Li and L. Li, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1869–1873 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Mirtchev, E. J. Henderson, N. Soheilnia, C. M. Yip and G. A. Ozin, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 1265–1269 RSC .
R. Narayanan, M. Deepa and A. K. Srivastava, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3907–3918 CAS .
F. Gao, Y. Wang, D. Shi, J. Zhang, M. Wang, X. Jing, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Gratzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 10720–10728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, M. Wang, J. Li, N. Pootrakulchote, L. Alibabaei, C. Ngoc-le, J. Decoppet, J. Tsai, C. Gratzel, C. Wu, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Gratzel, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3103–3109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zeng, D. Xiong, W. Zhang, L. Ming, Z. Xu, Z. Huang, M. Wang, W. Chen and Y. Cheng, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 6992–16998 RSC .
G. Li, F. Wang, Q. Jiang, X. Gao and P. Shen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 3653–3656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. N. Kumar, R. Narayanan, M. Deepa and A. K. Srivastava, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9771–9783 CAS .
X. Jia, J. Li and E. Wang, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5572–5575 RSC .
H. Lee, M. i. Wang, P. Chen, D. R. Gamelin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Gratzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4221–4227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. W. P. Adhyaksa, G. I. Lee, S. Baek, J. Lee and J. K. Kang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2711 Search PubMed .
G. Zaiats, D. Yanover, R. Vaxenburg, J. Tilchin, A. Sashchiuk and E. Lifshitz, Materials, 2014, 7, 7243–7275 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Xie, G. Ali, S. H. Yoo and S. O. Cho, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 2910–2914 CAS .

          J. R. Lakowicz, Principles of Fluorescence Spectroscopy, Third edn, Springer,  2010 Search PubMed .
K. Suzuki, L. Malfatti, D. Carboni, D. Loche, M. Casula, A. Moretto, M. Maggini, M. Takahashi and P. Innocenzi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 2837–2843 CAS .
S. C. Lim, J. H. Jang, D. J. Bae, G. H. Han, S. Lee, I. Yeo and Y. H. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 264103 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Liu, Q. Sun, F. Zhu, K. Liu, K. Jiang, L. Liu, Q. Li and S. Fan, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 647–651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shiraishi and M. Ata, Carbon, 2001, 39, 1913–1917 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Pan, I. Mora-Sero, Q. Shen, H. Zhang, Y. Li, K. Zhao, J. Wang, X. Zhong and J. Bisquert, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 9203–9210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yu, J. Liao, K. Qiu, D. Kuang and C. Su, ACS Nano, 2011, 12, 9494–9500 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: FE-SEM images and XRD patterns of photoactive materials, Raman studies and I–V studies on C-dots, CV plots of photoactive materials, fitted fluorescence decay parameters of films/solutions, calculations of VBs and CBs of photoactive materials, solar cell parameters, J–V plot of the C-dots based cell, light density versus wavelength for the EQE measurement system and discussion, tabulated EIS fitted parameters, and IMPS/IMVS-impedance plots for cells. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta04393jThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Cartoon illustrating the preparation of the TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots photoanode.	 

 	Fig. 1  TEM image of pristine C-dots (a) and the corresponding HRTEM image (b), TEM image of pristine PbSe QDs (c) and the corresponding HRTEM image (d), HRTEM image of CdS QDs (e), TEM image of the TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots assembly (f), and the corresponding HRTEM image (g), SAED patterns of pristine-C-dots (h), CdS QDs (i) and PbSe QDs (j). The ellipses/circles enclose crystallites of: C-dots (shown in pale green; dotted ellipses in (b) and dashed ellipses in (g)), PbSe (shown in black; dotted ellipses in (d) and (g)), CdS (shown in yellow; dotted ellipses in (e) and solid ellipses in (g)) and TiO2 (in white; dashed-dotted ellipses in (g)).	 

 	Fig. 2  Absorption spectra of (a) a TiO2 electrode () and a C-dots colloid () and (b) a pristine CdS electrode (), a PbSe electrode (), and a TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots electrode (). The spectra of electrodes were recorded in diffuse reflectance mode and converted to absorbance by using a Kubelka–Munk function.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Fluorescence spectra of a C-dots colloid at different concentrations of C-dots in water: at 1 (), 2 (), 4 (), 7 (), 9 () and 10 () mg mL−1 (λex = 375 nm). The inset of (a) is a blown-up view of the C-dots concentration for optimum/maximum emission. (b) Fluorescence spectra of electrodes of TiO2/C-dots (), CdS/C-dots (), CdS/glass (), TiO2/CdS (), TiO2/CdS/C-dots (), and TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots () (λex = 370 nm). (c) Time resolved fluorescence decay traces of electrodes of pristine CdS (), TiO2/CdS (), CdS/C-dots (), TiO2/CdS/C-dots () and TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots (), recorded at λex = 370 nm and λem = 530 nm and pristine C-dots (), TiO2/C-dots (), CdS/C-dots (),TiO2/CdS/C-dots () and TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots (), recorded at λex = 370 nm and λem = 450 nm. Corresponding magnified views of the decay traces of electrodes recorded at λem of (d) 530 and (e) 450 nm respectively.	 
I = B1exp(−t/τ1) + B2exp(−t/τ2)	(1)
〈τ〉 = ΣBiτi2/ΣBiτi	(2)
ket = 1/τ2(CdS/C-dots) − 1/〈τ〉(C-dots)	(3)
ket = 1/〈τ〉(TiO2/C-dots/PbSe/CdS) − 1/〈τ〉(TiO2/C-dots/CdS)	(4)
ϕ(sample) = 4.6 + VCPD(HOPG) − VCPD(sample)	(5)

 	Fig. 4  Topography and surface potential maps of (a, a′) pristine C-dots and (b, b′) TiO2/C-dots/PbSe/CdS and (c) the energy band diagram of the TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots electrode showing all possible electron transfer modes upon illumination.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) J–V characteristics, (b) external quantum efficiency (EQE) and (c) internal quantum efficiency (IQE) spectra of photoelectrochemical solar cells encompassing the following photoanodes: TiO2/PbSe (), TiO2/CdS (), TiO2/PbSe/CdS () and TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots () in a 0.1 M Na2S solution in 3:7 (v/v) water:MeOH as the electrolyte. (d) J–V characteristics of a cell with a TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots photoanode: as such (), after intermittent 1 sun exposure for 3 h () and after storing the exposed cell in the dark for 30 days (). All measurements in (a) and (d) were performed under 1 sun (100 mW cm−2) illumination (AM 1.5G). In (a–d), a MWCNT/FTO assembly was used as the counter electrode.	 

TiO2/CdS	719.7	8.08	44.32	2.58	2.44 ± 0.14	647.2	2523.1
TiO2/PbSe	682.5	4.65	45.63	1.45	1.39 ± 0.0575	1192.93	8529.8
TiO2/C-dots	496.8	0.20	61.68	0.06	0.05 ± 0.01	4553.8	215627.8
TiO2/PbSe/CdS	692.3	11.93	44.27	3.66	3.52 ± 0.14	841.9	2493.6
TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots	694	17.26	41.52	4.97	4.84 ± 0.13	594.4	11856.4

 	Fig. 6  EIS spectra of TiO2/CdS (), TiO2/C-dots (), TiO2/PbSe, (), TiO2/CdS/C-dots () and TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dots () recorded under a white light irradiance of 20 mW cm−2. Magnified views of the plots are shown in the inset of (a), and in (b) and (c). (d) Equivalent circuits used for fitting all data except those of TiO2/PbSe and TiO2/C-dots, for which circuit (e) was used. (f) Electron transit time, τd, and (g) electron lifetime, τn, versus light density for TiO2/CdS () and TiO2/PbSe/CdS/C-dot () electrodes obtained from IMPS and IMVS measurements respectively.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: FE-SEM images and XRD patterns of photoactive materials, Raman studies and I–V studies on C-dots, CV plots of photoactive materials, fitted fluorescence decay parameters of films/solutions, calculations of VBs and CBs of photoactive materials, solar cell parameters, J–V plot of the C-dots based cell, light density versus wavelength for the EQE measurement system and discussion, tabulated EIS fitted parameters, and IMPS/IMVS-impedance plots for cells. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta04393j

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
