Recent advances and perspectives of 3D printed micro-supercapacitors: from design to smart integrated devices  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CC05544E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CC05544E
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2022, 58, 2075-2095Recent advances and perspectives of 3D printed micro-supercapacitors: from design to smart integrated devices

        
          
            Wei 
            Zong
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yue 
            Ouyang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yue-E. 
            Miao
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Tianxi 
            Liu
          
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Feili 
            Lai
          
          
        
      *c
aState Key Laboratory for Modification of Chemical Fibers and Polymer Materials, College of Materials Science and Engineering, Donghua University, Shanghai 201620, P. R. China
bThe Key Laboratory of Synthetic and Biological Colloids, Ministry of Education, School of Chemical and Material Engineering, Jiangnan University, Wuxi 214122, P. R. China
cDepartment of Chemistry, KU Leuven, Celestijnenlaan 200F, Leuven 3001, Belgium. E-mail: feili.lai@kuleuven.be
Received 
      30th September 2021
    , Accepted 5th January 2022First published on 5th January 2022Abstract3D-printed micro-supercapacitors (MSCs) have emerged as the ideal candidates for energy storage devices owing to their unique characteristics of miniaturization, structural diversity, and integration. Exploring the 3D printing technology for various materials and architectures of MSCs is key to realizing customization and optimizing the performance of 3D-printed MSCs. In this review, we summarize the latest progress in 3D-printed MSCs with regards to general printing approaches, printable materials, and rational design considerations. Specifically, several general types of 3D printing techniques (their working principles, available materials, resolutions, advantages, and disadvantages) and their applications to fabricate electrodes with different energy storage mechanisms, and various electrolytes, are summarized. We further discuss research directions in terms of integrated systems with other electronics. Finally, future perspectives on the research and development directions in this important field are further discussed.
Wei Zong
Wei Zong received his BS degree from Ludong University (2017). He is now a PhD candidate at the College of Materials Science and Engineering, Donghua University. His current research interests include the design and synthesis of advanced nanostructured materials for 3D-printed energy storage devices.
Yue Ouyang
Yue Ouyang received her BS degree from Donghua University (2017). She is now a PhD candidate at the College of Materials Science and Engineering, Donghua University. Her research focuses on the design and preparation of high-performance carbon nanofiber composites in Li–S and Li–metal batteries.
Yue-E. Miao
Yue-E Miao received her BS degree from Southeast University in 2010 and PhD degree from Fudan University in 2015. She is now an associate professor at the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Donghua University. Her research interests mainly focus on high-performance organic fiber electrodes/separators, carbon nanofiber composites, and their applications in electrochemical energy storage devices (such as Li/Na–ion batteries, and Li–S batteries).
Tianxi Liu
Prof. Tianxi Liu obtained his BS degree from Henan University (1992) and his PhD degree from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (1998). He is currently a full professor at Jiangnan University. His main research interests include polymer nanocomposites, organic/inorganic hybrid materials, nanofibers and their composites, advanced energy materials and energy conversion and storage.
Feili Lai
Feili Lai received his B.S. degree from Donghua University (2014), his Master's degree from Fudan University (2017), and his PhD degree from the Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces/Universität Potsdam (2019). He is now a research fellow at the Department of Chemistry, KU Leuven. His current interests include the design and synthesis of low-dimensional solids for energy storage and conversion applications, smart poly-gels, and theoretical calculations.
1. Introduction
Electrochemical energy storage (EES) devices designed for storing and providing electrical power have been used not only as power supplies for portable electric devices and vehicles, but also as key parts of renewable energy applications and power grids.1–5 With the progress in modern technologies, various sorts of updated miniaturized portable electronics have gradually been developed, such as remote microsensors, implantable medical devices, wireless sensor networks, and the Internet of Things.6 Miniaturized power supplies are expected to play pivotal roles in the future exploration of these newly emerging technologies and spur blooms in micro-electrochemical energy storage (MEES) devices, such as micro-batteries (MBs) and micro-supercapacitors (MSCs).7–9 In the initial stage, MBs are the main option as self-powered units owing to their favorable energy density and stable power supply. However, further applications of MBs are constrained by their poor power density and lifespan due to sluggish mass diffusion kinetics and the volumetric expansion effect. Although the energy densities of MSCs are inferior to those of MBs, MSCs still exhibit the inherent advantages of extraordinary power densities and stable operating lifetimes, allowing them to meet practical requirements for maintenance-free wireless sensor networks, miniature wearable systems, and flexible electronics.10,11 Because of their extremely long operating periods with very little capacitance decay, MSCs can even be applied to power implantable sensors/biochips in humans/animals and reduce the possible pain caused by multiple surgical operations.
In general, the footprint area of MSCs ranges from the square millimeter to the centimeter scale.12 Compared with the common commercial supercapacitors, which are still restricted to fixed forms with 2D stacked sandwiched configurations, MSCs feature microscale dimensions and configurational diversities, allowing better compatibilities for a more comprehensive range of applications. To date, typical MSCs constructions include 1D fibrous structures (e.g., parallel, twisted, and coaxial structures), 2D plane structures, and 3D stacked configurations (normally interdigital or other arbitrary shapes), which are beneficial to regulating the migration paths of electrolyte ions, reducing the mass transfer resistance, and boosting the rate capability and power density of the MSCs. In particular, the specific capacity and energy density of MSCs based on 3D stacked structures can be easily enhanced by optimizing the electrochemical active area and loading mass of the active materials. However, complicated preparation processes (e.g., electrode slurry preparation, tape casting on current collectors, supercapacitor component assembly, electrolyte addition, and packaging) are always needed to fabricate traditional MSCs, which makes it difficult to satisfy the requirements of customization, miniaturization, and low cost simultaneously. 3D printing has emerged as a promising technology for the fabrication of MSCs due to its high degree of design freedom, simplified and fast fabrication and integration processes, low cost, and environmental friendliness.13,14 Moreover, the 3D printing process is more intelligent and customizable compared to the conventional method, which not only significantly enhances the design freedom at the micron scale, but also allows almost any desired architecture or pore structure. Fortunately, the unique architectural designs using 3D printing technology can effectively address several of the specific technological and scientific issues in available MSCs systems.
Overall, there is a growing tendency to progress toward the next generation of MEES devices using 3D printing technologies. Before this, the process development of 3D-printed MSCs has moved from 1D to 3D configurations, from stacking to interdigital shapes, and from MSCs to hybrid micro-supercapacitors (HMSCs). In addition, it is envisioned that future 3D-printed MSCs will possess fully printed, customized, flexible, miniature, and integrated characteristics.15–19 While previous articles have discussed various 3D printing techniques generally, this article comprehensively summarizes the printing techniques, applications based on the energy-storage mechanism, electrolytes, and subsequent integrated devices for 3D-printed MSCs construction. Specifically, Section 2 discusses four types of 3D printing techniques, including their working mechanisms, material screenings, operation procedures, advantages, and deficiencies. Moreover, applications of the various printing techniques in the manufacture of 3D-printed MSCs (based on the energy-storage mechanism) and other printable electrolytes are summarized in Sections 3 and 4. Section 5 introduces representative integrated devices involving 3D printing technology. Finally, the status quo, remaining challenges, and outlook for 3D-printed MSCs are outlined (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Schematic summary: printing techniques, applications, electrolytes, and integration for the construction of 3D-printed MSCs.14,94,119,120 
2. 3D printing techniques and functional inks
2.1. 3D printing techniques
According to the International Committee of the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM), 3D printing technologies include the following seven major types based on their manufacturing processes: (i) material jetting (e.g., aerosol jet printing [AJP] and inkjet printing [IJP]); (ii) material extrusion (e.g., fused deposition modeling [FDM] and direct ink writing [DIW]); (iii) vat photopolymerization (e.g., stereolithography [SLA], two-photon lithography [TPL], and digital light processing [DLP]); (iv) powder bed fusion (e.g., selective laser sintering [SLS]); (v) sheet lamination (e.g., laminated object manufacturing [LOM]); (vi) binder jetting; (vii) directed energy deposition (DED).20 In this section, we focus on discussing and summarizing the four representative 3D-printed techniques that have been used to fabricate micro-supercapacitor modules to date, which include DIW, IJP, SLA, and FDM. The printing method should be selected rationally depending on the processability and feature size of the product to achieve the customized architecture and performance requirements for the supercapacitor modules. Therefore, it is highly crucial to understand the technological processes and characteristics of the various printing methods for material design and technology improvement.

2.1.1. Direct ink writing printing. 
DIW printing is a typical extrusion-type deposition process. The printability of the ink is critical, and mainly depends on the harsh mechanical requirements of the MSCs and the rheological properties of the printed inks. During the DIW process, the customized 3D structure is generated by extruding a filament through a nozzle under adjustable pressure and stacking the filament on the substrate continuously. The printing resolution is usually determined by the nozzle diameter, the applied extrusion pressure, and the characteristics of the ink. Based on the working principle of DIW printing, the printable inks should have high viscosities (106–108 cP) and elastic behaviors (determined by the storage modulus [G′] and loss modulus [G′′]). The inks exhibit shear-thinning behavior, i.e., the viscosity decreases with increasing shear rate.21–23 To date, the widespread use of DIW printing in the preparation of MSCs has benefitted from its four remarkable advantages:24–26 (1) DIW printing enables the manufacture of complex 3D multi-scale architectures, providing wide design versatility;15 (2) DIW printing is capable of achieving a high-resolution printing process using microcapillary nozzles with a minimum diameter of 1 μm;27 (3) DIW printing ensures multi-material printing capability with high componential and spatial accuracy by using multiple ink compositions and diverse print heads (e.g., coaxial, core–shell, and switching);28 (4) DIW printing is suitable for most printable materials, from metals to plastics, ceramics, hydrogels, and emerging nanomaterials (e.g., graphene, MXene, and perovskite), which offers numerous possibilities to print active materials for MSCs.19 However, one of the key challenges of the DIW technique is the preparation of appropriate inks that meet a series of technical conditions, including yield stress behavior, viscoelasticity, and the requirement for an unhindered extruding process under pressure.


2.1.2. Inkjet printing. 
IJP printing is a typical deposition process that consists of positioning, droplet formation, contact with the substrate (paper or plastic), and further solidification treatment.29 The IJP technique works similarly to DIW printing. After the printable ink is prepared, the print head with nozzles moves across the platform to produce the required patterns. The resolutions of the patterns are determined by the characteristics of the inks, as well as the mechanisms and physical operations in the manufacturing process. Moreover, the resolution of the IJP technique depends to some degree on the diameter of the nozzle, but a thinner diameter increases the printing cost and is more likely to cause nozzle clogging. There are two mainstream IJP printing techniques based on different principles of droplet generation: drop-on-demand inkjet printing (DOD) and continuous inkjet printing (CIJ). DOD technology has the advantages of high resolution, low cost, and environmental friendliness. The high droplet resolution is around 20 μm due to pressure pulses generated by thermal or piezoelectric print heads. In the CIJ printing process, a continuous stream of droplets is produced under pressure and spread out on the platform. Unlike in DOD, the droplet diameter in CIJ is slightly larger than that of the nozzle, resulting in a lower resolution. The printing process of IJP also imposes specific requirements on the dynamic viscosity and surface tension of the prepared inks, with the inks presenting much lower viscosities (40–100 cP) than those used in DIW printing.30,31 An adequate understanding of the ink behaviors is required for effective control during the printing process, including the droplet generation and spread processes, the interaction between the droplet and the substrate, and the droplet solidification process after deposition. Although abundant active materials can be directly used in IJP for printing MSCs, the as-obtained MSCs are usually presented as thin membranes due to the low viscosity and size capability, which limit the design of 3D electrode severely.32,33


2.1.3. Stereolithography. 
SLA is a typical printing process based on photopolymerization; it involves a visible or ultraviolet (UV) laser source and a reservoir for storing photosensitive resin (usually acrylic or epoxy-based resin) in the layer.34–36 The photosensitive precursor materials usually include two components: a prepolymer material and a photoinitiator. The specific workflow is as follows: UV light initiates the photopolymerization of the resin, which then solidifies to form a 2D single layer cross-section. The build platform moves downwards or upwards to form a surface covered with a new layer of liquid resin following the direction of UV or visible light, and the move distance of the build platform is predetermined by the height of the layers. A blade then scrapes the surface of the resin with high viscosity, and the light source is scanned again to solidify it. Eventually, the 3D object is completed layer-by-layer according to the predesigned model. The photopolymerization reactions comprise an appropriate photo-induced reaction and rapid crosslinking process. The prepolymer materials rapidly solidify into a highly cross-linked network after being stimulated by visible or UV light. In accordance with the working principle of SLA, the printable resins are composed of prepolymer materials, photoinitiators, and active materials. In addition, the SLA technique can print objects with high resolution, with a minimum feature size of 0.5 mm. Therefore, SLA is widely used in various applications ranging from automobiles and electronic devices to living tissues. The applications of SLA printing in MSCs have mainly been studied in two areas: (1) preparing substrates and collectors for depositing conductive layers or filling electrode materials;37–39 (2) mixing light-curable polymers with active materials.40–42 Unlike the DIW and IJP techniques, SLA is a nozzle-free technique, avoiding the problem of nozzle clogging. Although the SLA technique has the advantages of easy operation and high resolution, its commercial applications are still severely restricted due to the sticky and messy process of handling the photopolymers.


2.1.4. Fused deposition modeling printing. 
FDM printing is another standard extrusion-type printing process via layer-by-layer deposition of thermoplastic filaments on the substrate to construct 3D structures.43 Thermoplastic filaments are heated to a semi-molten state and maintained in this state before extrusion from the nozzle. FDM printing is an excellent 3D printing process owing to its simple operation, high printing speed, and low cost, and the fact that it does not require chemical post-treatment. In comparison with DIW, FDM has a narrower selection of printable materials and commonly requires thermoplastic filaments, such as polycarbonate (PC), polylactic acid (PLA), thermoplastic urethane (TPU), polyamide (PA), or acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS).44 However, these commercially available thermoplastics usually exhibit inferior electrical conductivity, which limits their applicability for fabricating electrodes for MSCs. Therefore, in practice, it is necessary to prepare usable filaments for FDM in advance when this technique is used in the manufacture of MSCs devices. The thermoplastic polymer matrixes can be modified by mixing them with active conductive materials. Additionally, the electrochemical performance of the extruded thermoplastic materials can be improved by deposition with functional materials [e.g., polypyrrole (PPy) and MXene] or electrically conductive metals (e.g., Au and Ag).45–51 In addition, the FDM technique exhibits a low printing resolution of 50–200 μm, and less flexibility in terms of multi-material capability when compared with the DIW technique.52
In short, the efficacy of 3D printing can be evaluated by the available materials, printing resolution, advantages and disadvantages. Table 1 summarizes and compares the four 3D printing technologies.
Table 1 Comparison of different 3D printing technologies for MSCs




3D printing method
Available materials
Printing resolution
Advantage
Disadvantage




DIW
Plastics, metals, ceramics, and composites
1–250 μm
Affordable cost, easy operation, wide material diversity, and no mask requirement
High ink requirements


IJP
Sol–gels, metals, conductive polymers, proteins, and carbon-based materials
20 μm
Low cost, multi-material printing capability, and ability to print large areas
Low printing speed, bad for high-volume printing, and poor durability of the print head


FDM
Thermoplastic filaments
50–200 μm
User-friendliness, low cost, high speed, large size capability, and lack of chemical post-processing requirement
Limited resolution, weak mechanical properties, high viscosity of the molten materials, and low surface quality


SLA
Photopolymers
0.25–100 μm
High resolution, high surface finish, and high efficiency
Severe limitation in multi-material deposition





2.2. 3D printing of functional inks
Functional inks should meet the following requirements to ensure the realization of 3D-printed MSCs with good printability and appropriate components. The prepared inks should be capable of being extruded continuously under a constant force and maintaining their shapes during the printing of multiple layers. The printing speed and viscosity of the inks should also meet the requirements of the corresponding printing technique. Therefore, the choice of printing technique is significant for formulating representative inks to fabricate 3D-printed MSCs. In addition to the parameters of the 3D printing technique, the compatibility between the different components, such as the active materials, solvents, binders, and additives, should also be taken into consideration in preparing functional inks.53 As the printing materials are relatively fixed for both the stereolithography and fused deposition modeling technologies, the composition design of functional inks is mainly focused on direct ink writing printing and inkjet printing. In these functional inks, the solvent should provide excellent solubility for the active materials and binders to produce uniform and printable inks. The solvent content can be adjusted to an appropriate ratio to change the viscosity and drying speed. The binder is beneficial to stabilizing the various components and facilitating the formation of uniform inks. Additives can be used as humectants/surfactants to improve the surface tension and optimize the rheological properties of the inks for printability. Additionally, they can also serve as conductive agents to improve the electrical conductivity of the inks.54 As the key ingredients of the inks, active materials provide the printable inks with the required performance for specific applications. Depending on the application of the MSCs, the active materials can be carbon-based materials, metals or metal oxides, conductive polymers, organics, or other emerging nanomaterials. For example, among the carbon-based materials, graphene has received wide attention due to its numerous attractive properties (e.g., appropriate amphipathicity and viscosity), which allow it to be directly printed without extra additives.55 In addition, carbon nanotubes and active carbon are also good candidates for electrode materials. However, they are often difficult to disperse well in water-based inks owing to their hydrophobicity. The inks generally must be prepared in an organic solvent system with added polymeric binders or dispersion agents.56 Although inks including metals or metal oxides can provide high electrochemical storage capacity, extra additives are also needed to ensure suitable rheological properties for printability and electrical conductivity for energy storage. In this respect, conductive polymer-based composites are one of the most promising candidates for direct printing owing to their tunable viscosity over a wide range.57 Overall, the ink requirements of 3D printing are important factors that influence the behavior of 3D-printed MSCs. At present, several technical problems still remain, such as blockage of the printing nozzles, aggregation of the printing inks, and surface roughness of the printed electrodes. It is expected that appropriate ink compositions for various printing materials and processes will be explored to address these issues.
3. Applications of 3D printing for micro-supercapacitors
In principle, the design of the printed electrodes is the most pivotal step in the manufacture of MSCs. The active materials, printing techniques, spatial morphologies, and microscopic architectures jointly determine the performance of the electrodes for MSCs. Additionally, the categorization of the charge-storage mode in MSCs is crucial to the choice of printing technology. This section discusses and summarizes the research progress into 3D-printed MSCs in recent years based on the energy storage mechanism, material type, and printing technology. At the end of this Section, Table 2 lists representative reports on 3D-printed MSCs based on various energy storage mechanisms, namely, electrochemical double-layer capacitor-based MSCs (EDLC-MSCs), pseudocapacitor-based MSCs (PC-MSCs), and metal–ion hybrid MSCs (MH-MSCs).
Table 2 Summary and comparison of representative 3D-printed MSCs using various techniques and materials




Device system
Printing method
Anode/cathode
Electrolyte
Voltage range
Specific capacitance
Stability performance
Energy density power density
Ref.




EDLC-MSCs
DIW
GO/PAA
H2SO4
0–0.8 V
230.7 mF cm−2 (1.2 mA cm−2)
81% over 20000 cycles
20.5 mW h cm−2; 0.9 mW cm−2

63





DIW
rGO
H2SO4/PVA gel
0–0.8 V
111.1 mF cm−2 (10 mV s−1)
94.5% over 10000 cycles
—

59





DIW
CNF/SWCNT
H2SO4/PVA gel
0–0.8 V
11.8 F cm−2
95.9% over 10000 cycles
0.66 mW h cm−2; 1039.8 mW cm−2

61





DIW
MWNT
LiCl–PVA gel
0–1 V
15.34 F cm−3 (1.32 A cm−3)
96.5% over 5000 cycles
1.18 mW h cm−3; 11.8 W cm−3

56



PC-MSCs
IJP
RuO2/MWNT
H3PO4–PVA
0–1 V
138 F g−1 (8 A g−1)
—
18.8 W h kg−1; 96 kW kg−1

72





DIW
GA/MnO2
3 M LiCl
0–1 V
18.74 F cm−2 (1 mA cm−2)
92.9% over 20000 cycles
1.56 mW h cm−2

74





IJP
MoO3/rGO
H2SO4–PVA gel
0–0.8 V
22.5 F cm−3 (1 A cm−2)
82% over 10000 cycles
2 mW h cm−3; 0.018 W cm−3

79





DIW
V2O5/SWCNT//VN/SWCNTs
KOH–PVA
0–1.6 V
116.19 mF cm−2 (0.6 mA cm−2)
94.7% over 4000 cycles
41.28 μW h cm−2; 480 μW cm−2

75





DIW
Graphene–VNQDs/rGO//V2O5/rGO
LiCl–PVA
0–1.6 V
207.9 mF cm−2 (0.63 mA cm−2)
65% over 8000 cycles
73.9 W h cm−2; 3.77 mW cm−2

76





DIW
N-STC/Fe2O3/AC/CNT/GO
EMIMBF4/(PVdF–HFP) gel
0–4 V
1.79 F cm−2
93.2% over 10000 cycles
114 W h kg−1

80





DIW
PANI/rGO
H2SO4–PVA gel
0–0.8 V
1329 mF cm−2 (4.2 mA cm−2)
75% over 1000 cycles
—

82





DIW
GO/PANI/PEDOT: PSS
H3PO4–PVA gel
0–1.2 V
37.8 F cm−3 (5 mV s−1)
75% over 5000 cycles
3.36 mW h cm−3; 9.4 W cm−3

84





IJP
PEDOT: PSS/CNT/Ag
H3PO4–PVA
0–0.8 V
23.6 F cm−3
92% over 10000 cycles
42.1 mW h cm−3; 89.1 mW cm−3

85





DIW
MXene
PVA/H2SO4 Gel
0–0.6 V
1.98 F cm−2 (at 5 mV s−1)
90.1% over 10000 cycles
0.1 mW h cm−2; 19.7 mW cm−2

88





DIW
MXene–AgNW MnONW–C60
PVA–KOH gel
0–0.8 V
216.2 mF cm−2 (at 10 mV s−1)
85% over 10000 cycles
19.2 μW h cm−2; 58.3 mW cm−2

17





DIW
E-BP/ZIF-67/CNT
EMIMBF4/(PVdF–HFP) gel
0–2.5 V
506 F cm−3 (0.5 A cm−3)
—
109.8 mW h cm−3; 0.675 W cm−3

90





SLS
LIC-(MOF199-@ZIF-67)
H2SO4
0–1 V
5.02 mF cm−2 (0.2 mA cm−2)
—
—

89



Li-ion MSCs
LOM
Laser induced graphene
1 M LiPF6 in 1:1 EC/DEC


354 mAh g−1 (anode)
—
64 W h kg−1; 970 W kg−1

101



Na-ion MSCs
DIW
N-Ti3C2//AC
1 M NaClO4 in EC/PC with VC (1:1:0.02)
0.01–4 V
325 mAh g−1 at 0.5 C (anode)
75% over 3500 cycles
101.6 W h kg−1/3269 W k−1; 1.18 mW h cm−2/40.15 m W cm−2.

102



K-ion MSCs
DIW
MoP@NC//AC
0.8 M KPF6 in (EC)/(DEC) (v:v, 1:1)
0.01–4 V
256.1 mAh g−1 at 0.1 A g−1 (anode)
61.2% over 2000 cycles
69.7 W h kg−1/2041.6 W kg−1; 0.34 mW h cm−2/9.97 mW cm−2

103



Zn-ion MSCs
DIW
CNT/Zn//MXene
2 M ZnSO4
0.1–1.2 V
714.6 mF cm−2 (10 A g−1)
86.5% over 6000 cycles
0.10 mW h cm−2; 5.90 mW cm−2

110



Mg-ion MSCs
IJP
1T c-MoS2//rGO
MgSO4
0–1.75 V
9.04 mF cm−2 (20 mV s−1)
96% over 20000 cycles
3.85 μW h cm−2; 12.6 mW cm−2

109





3.1. Electrochemical double-layer capacitor-based micro-supercapacitors
Micro-supercapacitors based on the EDLC mechanism store energy physically via electrostatic charge adsorption at the two-phase interface (between the electrode and electrolyte) in a spontaneously formed double layer.58,59 One of the distinct characteristics of EDLCs is that no charge transfer occurs at the interface of the electrode and electrolyte, and there is no faradaic reaction. The electric double layer can respond immediately to potential change, leading to a fast charge/discharge process. In this respect, considering their combined advantages of desirable chemical stability, high specific surface area, and controllable porosity to electrolyte ions, carbon-based materials, including graphene, carbon aerogels (CAs),60 activated carbons (ACs), carbon nanotubes (CNTs),56,61 and carbon nanofibers,62 have shown prominent potential and have been studied extensively as electrode materials for EDLC-MSCs. Based on their significant characteristics (e.g., outstanding electronic conductivity and specific surface area), CAs are widely used as active materials for electrodes in 3D-printed EDLC-MSCs. For example, Liu et al.63 designed 3D-printed carbon aerogel micro-lattices with changeable electrode thickness to achieve high areal capacitances. Polyamic acid (PAA) has been innovatively chosen as an ink additive and crosslinking agent to synthesize graphene oxide (GO)/PAA gels, which can be used as printable inks for DIW printing (Fig. 2a). Benefitting from the abundant hydrogen bond networks in GO/PAA gels, the PAA/GO system formed a cross-linking network, which achieved a relatively high storage modulus even at a low GO concentration of 25 mg mL−1 (Fig. 2b). The 3D-printed PAA/GO hydrogel micro-lattices are presented in the digital photographs in Fig. 2c, which demonstrate that the PAA/GO inks can retain the printed 3D structure. Based on its rheological behavior and electrical conductivity, PAA/GO ink with a GO:PAA ratio of 4:1 was selected for follow-up work. After imidization and carbonization, 3D-printed CA-4 with various macro-architectures can be manufactured by designing programs to meet the demands of customizable configuration and improved areal capacitances of the 3D-printed electrodes. Hence, this is a feasible method to fabricate various graphene-based electrodes with the desired micro- and macro-structures via DIW printing. As shown in Fig. 2d, a CA-4 micro-lattice with a size of 1.125 cm3 can rest on bristlegrass, manifesting its ultra-lightweight nature. The periodic grid structure of the CA-4 micro-lattice can provide sufficient ion transport paths and maximize the exposure of the active materials; these characteristics are beneficial to achieving excellent areal and volumetric capacitance (870.3 mF cm−2 and 1.7 F cm−3) with a high mass loading (15.3 mg cm−2) and large thickness (4.9 mm) (Fig. 2e). The CA micro-lattice electrode realized an impressive areal capacitance, which was superior to those of previous reported functionalized carbon-based electrodes (Fig. 2f).
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the GO/PAA micro-lattice. (b) Mechanism of reversible hydrogen bonding between GO and PAA. (c) Optical images showing the ability of GO and GO/PAA-x inks to maintain the extruded shape on a flat or inclined polytetrafluoroethylene substrate. (d) CA-4 with a cubic lattice structure. (e) Areal capacitance of the CA-4 micro-lattice electrodes with different layer numbers. (f) Comparison of the areal capacitances of the CA-4 micro-lattice electrode. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The ability to create complicated porous carbon structures through additive manufacturing technology with specific ink components can decrease ion diffusion resistance and distance and open new possibilities for the low-temperature performance of MSCs. Li et al.64 prepared a 3D-printed multiscale porous carbon aerogel (3D-MCA) by effectively combining a chemical process and the DIW technique (Fig. 3a). Complex shapes were obtained directly via 3D printing and were maintained well in air (Fig. 3b). Moreover, the lyophilized printed micro-lattice had hierarchical pore structures during carbonization (Fig. 3c). The electrochemical capacitive performance of 3D-MCA can be improved effectively by regulating its porous structure. For instance, increasing the porosity and decreasing the diameter of the 3D-printed ligament can simultaneously shorten the ion diffusion distance and reduce the resistance (Fig. 3d and e). The as-prepared 3D-MCA exhibited a high surface area (1750 m2 g−1) with an open porous structure. Therefore, even at −70 °C, the symmetric MSCs realized a high specific capacitance of 148.6 F g−1 (5 mV s−1), which is 6.5 times that of the non-3D-printed MCA (Fig. 3f). Hence, the multiscale porous carbon aerogel manufactured via the 3D printing method exhibited a well-developed porous structure and enhanced electrochemical performance as compared to its non-3D-printed counterpart.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of 3D-printed multiscale porous carbon aerogels. (b) Digital images of the 3D-printed CNCs/SiO2 aerogels with a “UCSC” shape and (c) the 3D-printed multiscale porous carbon aerogels with different thicknesses. (d) Z′ plotted against the reciprocal of the square root of frequency in the intermediate frequency range for the 3D-MCA and MCA. (e) Nyquist plots of the 3D-MCA and MCA. (f) The capacitance ratio (3D-MCA/MCA) at −70 °C and 20 °C plotted as a function of scan rate. Reproduced with permissions. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
3.2. Pseudocapacitor-based micro-supercapacitors
Unlike EDLCs, pseudocapacitive materials store charges via faradaic reactions, in which rapid and reversible oxidation/reduction reactions occur near or at the interface of the electrode and electrolyte.65–69 Owing to the additional charge transfer for a given voltage, pseudocapacitive materials generally exhibit higher capacitance values but worse stabilities than EDLC-based materials.70,71 Common pseudocapacitive materials include metal oxides, noble metals, and conductive polymers. In recent years, there has been rapid development in emerging pseudocapacitive materials, such as transition-metal dichalcogenides, perovskite oxides, MXenes, metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), and black phosphorus (BP), which exhibit pseudocapacitive behavior in MSCs. Furthermore, several recent advances in 3D-printed MSCs based on newly emerging pseudocapacitor-based materials are summarized in this section.
Metals or metal oxides can offer reasonably high pseudocapacitance for MSCs, but their poor electrical conductivity impedes electrochemical stability and reduces energy density. These deficiencies can be relieved by mixing them with carbonous or other conductive materials, which is also beneficial for forming inks with good rheological properties for printing MSCs. Recently, several related works have also reported metal oxides, such as RnO2,72 MnO2,73,74 V2O5,75,76 NiO,77 Fe2O3,78 and MoO379 to be effective pseudocapacitor-based materials. Liu et al.80 developed a series of nitrogen-doped, cross-coupled micro-mesoporous carbon–metal networks (N-STC/MxOy) as effective ink additives for fabricating 3D-printed MSCs. Using the extrusion-based DIW printing method, 3D-printed MSCs with the desired architectures and quasi-solid-state performance were prepared. Among them, the as-prepared N-STC/Fe2O3 composite showed a good gravimetric capacitance (267 F g−1 at 2 mV s−1) and a record-high energy density (114 W h kg−1) for an asymmetric supercapacitor in a liquid electrolyte system. The 3D-printed quasi-solid-state MSCs showed good flexibility with their shape integrity being maintained after restoring the bending angles from 90° and 180° to 0°. Additionally, the 3D-printed ionogel-based quasi-solid-state MSCs achieved a gravimetric capacitance of 377 F g−1. Benefiting from the temperature resistance of EMIMBF4-based ionogel, the quasi-solid-state MSCs also exhibited excellent temperature resistance, allowing them to operate under a wide temperature range from −10 to 60 °C. These results proved that 3D-printed quasi-solid-state MSCs are a potential candidate for wide-temperature MEES devices.
Conductive polymers, such as PPy,81 polyaniline (PANI),82,83 and poly(3,4-dioxythiophene):poly(phenylene ethylene sulfonate) (PEDOT/PSS)84,85 normally have high electrical conductivity, excellent mechanical flexibility, and good printing suitability. Moreover, conductive polymers or the corresponding carbon-based composites can be printed directly as electrodes in 3D-printed MSCs. For instance, Chen et al.86 reported a assembly–dispersion method for the large-scale preparation of air-stable conductive polymer ink to prepare wearable MSCs. Aniline and citric acid (CA) spontaneously assemble into a PANI/CA hydrogel, and the weak interactions of the PANI and CA nanosheets can be broken to produce conducting polymer (CP) ink (Fig. 4a). The CP inks were then used for fabricating printed MSCs as shown in the schematic illustration in Fig. 4b. Ink printing shows great potential as a practical approach for the scalable fabrication of MSC electrodes. As shown in Fig. 4c, the wearable MSC array was highly flexible and lightweight. Due to the good specific structure of the CP electrodes (Fig. 4d), wearable MSCs with an energy density of 2.4 mW h cm−3 at a power density of 238.3 mW cm−3 can be achieved (Fig. 4e). Moreover, the as-obtained MSCs can supply energy for some electronics, such as a liquid crystal display (LCD) timer (Fig. 4f). Huang et al.87 prepared free-standing stretchable printed electrodes with a negative Poisson's ratio (NPR) and multi-dimensional tunability. The high-concentration and viscoelastic conductive polymers of the PEDOT:PSS ink can be prepared without additives and printed using the DIW technique. Owing to the unique superiority of the DIW technique in the rational structural design of materials and devices with accuracy and efficiency at even the micro- and macroscales, a deformable shape design and arc-shaped microstructure were introduced into the traditional NPR structure, which can overcome the shortcoming of unregulated mechanical properties and broaden the strain range of conventional supercapacitors (Fig. 4g). The diverse microstructures endowed the printed electrode with a broader range of effective stress and strain relief, with the 3D-printed stretchable electrode exhibiting excellent flexibility and stretchability with a maximum elongation of 150% (Fig. 4h). Finite element analysis was utilized to prove the effectiveness of the arc-shaped microstructure, which can offer a homogeneous stress area and lower the peak strain value of the electrodes (Fig. 4i). In addition to flexibility, the all-polymer electrodes also provided a good areal capacitance of 990 mF cm−2.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation of CP ink. (b) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of printed MSCs using a mask-assisted spray-coating method. (c) Flexible MSC array derived from air-stable conductive polymer ink; the scale bar is 2 cm. (d) Solid-state MSCs can be easily assembled using a gel electrolyte and PANI/CA nanosheets electrode. (e) Ragone plots of conductive-polymer-ink-based MSCs and other state-of-the-art materials. (f) An LCD timer being driven by three wearable MSCs in tandem; the scale bar is 2 cm. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (g) Images of as-printed electrodes with different structures. Scale bars: 5 mm. (h) S-hinged and re-entrant structure electrodes in the maximum stretch state. Scale bars: 6 mm. (i) Von Mises stress distribution in the electrodes with S-hinged and re-entrant structures at 30% stretch based on FEA characterization. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In 2021, Wu et al.88 presented a strategy for preparing MXene hydrogel supercapacitor electrodes using multi-scale structural engineering. Unidirectional freezing treatment enabled MXene sheets to form a hierarchical structure with vertically oriented paths (Fig. 5a). Furthermore, when this method was extended to manufacture 3D-printed MXene MSCs via DIW printing, the electrodes also exhibited honeycomb-like compartments, as shown in Fig. 5b. The 3D-printed MXene MSCs delivered an areal capacitance of 2.0 F cm−2 at 1.2 mA cm−2 and maintained a capacitance of 1.2 F cm−2 at 60 mA cm−2 with a record-high energy density of 0.1 mW h cm−2 at 0.38 mW cm−2 (Fig. 5c). Due to the vertically oriented architecture in the 3D-printed electrodes and enhanced interlayer spacing derived from the intercalation of protons, the MXene-based MSCs show not only accelerated diffusion of electrolyte ions, but also increased surface area, resulting in high ionic conductivity and low resistance. Fig. 5d presents the Ragone plots of 3D-printed MXene MSCs prepared via the freezing method, which achieve a maximum energy density of 0.1 mW h cm−2 (0.38 mW cm−2). Similar to the work of Wu's group, Liang et al.17 used DIW printing technology and the unidirectional freezing method to fabricate stretchable MSCs. Benefitting from the sliding of adjacent MXene nanosheets as well as the as-obtained honeycomb-like porous structure, 3D-printed MSCs can retain stable electrochemical performance under a strain of up to 50% (Fig. 5e–h). Moreover, the 3D-printed MSC devices showed excellent electrochemical performance, such as a high energy density and power density of 19.2 μW h cm−2 and 58.3 mW cm−2.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the multi-scale structural engineering strategy combining unidirectional freezing and thawing in H2SO4 to fabricate MXene hydrogel supercapacitor electrodes. (b) The fabrication process of 3D-printed all-MXene MSCs. (c) Galvanostatic charge–discharge (GCD) profiles of 3D-printed MXene MSCs at different current densities. (d) Ragone plot of the 3D-printed MXene MSCs. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. Electrochemical performance of MXene-AgNW–MnONW–C60 MSCs measured under stretching and bending. (e) Optical images under stretching ratios from 0% to 50%, and (f) capacitance retention at different stretching ratios (inset: CV curves recorded at 100 mV s−1 under stretching ratios from 0% to 50%). (g) Optical images at different bending degrees and (h) capacitance retention at different bending degrees (inset: CV curves recorded at 100 mV s−1 under bending from 0° to 180°). Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. 
Using the laser-scribing technique, Zhou et al.89 synthesized MOF-derived carbons from six typical MOFs with different metal ions (Fig. 6a–c). Due to the high-precision control of the laser-scribing printing technique, a core–shell structured composite (MOF-199@ZIF-67) was synthesized and printed with an interdigitated architecture for MSCs; this approach can easily be scaled up for the fabrication of micro-devices (Fig. 6d). The as-prepared MSCs exhibited a highly hierarchical and porous structure, which resulted in an enhanced specific capacitance. The 3D-printed LIC-(MOF-199@ZIF-67)-based MSCs achieved a specific areal capacitance of 5.02 mF cm−2 and a volumetric capacitance of 3.72 F cm−3 at a current density of 0.2 mA cm−2, which exhibited 32% retention at 25 mA cm−2. Additionally, the 3D-printed LIC-(MOF-199@ZIF-67)-based MSCs showed excellent stability with 94% capacitance retention over 10000 cycles. Recently, Chen et al.90 combined DIW printing technology and a microfluidic method to prepare ordered anisotropic structures and further assemble all-integrated solid-state MSCs. BP/metal–organic heterostructure hybrids connected via covalent bond bridges (P–O–Co) were prepared using confinement and droplet microfluidics methods, and exhibited a well-developed porous structure and good electroactivity for energy storage performance. The as-fabricated 3D-printed all-integrated solid-state MSCs were assembled using BP/metal–organic and poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene) (PVDF/HFP) as durable components for the inks (Fig. 6e). The 3D-printed MSCs showed good electrode–electrolyte interfacial contact, fast charge conduction, and rapid ion diffusion owing to the interconnected porous structure. As a result, the 3D-printed all-integrated solid-state MSCs exhibited a large specific capacitance of 506 F cm−3, an ultrahigh volumetric energy density of 109.8 mW h cm−3, and good deformable power-supply abilities (Fig. 6f and g). The MSCs can offer a stable power supply for intelligent devices and operate under harsh conditions, including low temperatures and long periods of motion (Fig. 6h).
 Fig. 6  (a) Illustration of the fabrication process of LIC-MOF-based MSCs. (b) Schematic representation of the over-focused laser beam on the surface of MOFs. (c) Crystal structures and TEM images of the employed MOFs. (d) Photograph and optical microscopy images of LIC-MOF-based MSCs. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (e) Illustration of the 3D printing of all-integrated solid-state MSCs. (f) Temperature-dependent capacitance of E-BP/ZIF-67 MSCs. Inset: GCD curves at 2 A cm−3. (g) CV curves of E-BP/ZIF-67 MSCs under consecutive motions at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. (h) Photographs of MSCs woven into cloth to power a health care device. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. 
3.3. Metal-ion hybrid micro-supercapacitors
Despite the high power density of EDLC-based and pseudocapacitor-based MSCs, their intrinsically low energy densities (amount of energy stored per unit weight) have held them back from surpassing batteries for widespread commercial application. Considering these aspects, MH-MSCs composed of a supercapacitor-type electrode and a battery-type electrode can combine the merits of supercapacitors and batteries, which are well recognized as a practical species of EES devices to achieve high energy density without loss of power density and cycle life.91–96 The energy storage principle of hybrid supercapacitors combines electrostatic attraction and faradaic redox reaction. Therefore, MH-MSCs can be mainly divided into the following types: (1) those with EDLC-type and pseudocapacitor-type electrodes, (2) those with two pseudocapacitor-type electrodes with different redox-active sites, and (3) those with a combination of supercapacitor-type and battery-type electrodes. The first two types of HMSCs are summarized in Section 3.1 and Section 3.2. Section 3.3 will elaborate on the third type of HMSCs, especially metal–ion hybrid micro-supercapacitors. MH-MSCs consist of a battery-type electrode to increase the energy density and a supercapacitor-type electrode to achieve a high power density. The design of MH-MSCs can effectively widen the potential window and significantly boost the electrochemical performance of HMSCs.
Among the various types of MH-MSC devices, lithium-ion and sodium-ion hybrid micro-supercapacitors have already been extensively studied, and significant progress has been obtained.97–100 Tour et al.101 prepared laser-induced graphene (LIG) via laser-milling treatment of commercial polyimide (PI) film in the ambient atmosphere. The LIG foams were used as both the anode and cathode in the assembly of lithium-ion hybrid MSCs (LH-MSCs). The full LH-MSCs revealed good-shaped GCD curves in the voltage range of 0.01 to 4.2 V and linear relationships at various current densities, demonstrating outstanding rate performance. Recently, Sun et al.102 reported 3D-printed sodium-ion hybrid micro-supercapacitors (SH-MSCs) via the DIW printing technique by using AC and nitrogen-doped porous Ti3C2Tx (N-Ti3C2Tx) as the cathode and anode (Fig. 7a), respectively. The 3D-printed N-Ti3C2Tx electrodes revealed well-developed hierarchical pores, which can provide plentiful channels for ion/electrolyte transfer and accommodate volume changes during cycling. For the fabrication of SH-MSCs, printable inks can be obtained by mixing the active components (cathode: AC; anode: N-Ti3C2Tx) with additives (CNTs and GO) in particular mass proportions. The multi-inks can be printed into any as-designed pattern (e.g., “SIEMIS” and “MXENE”) on polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrates, indicating their flexible and versatile nature (Fig. 7b). The suitable potential window was extended to 4.0 V without any side reactions or decomposition of the electrolyte. As a result, the optimized SH-MSCs exhibited areal energy and power densities of 1.18 mW h cm−2 and 40.15 mW cm−2, respectively, which outperformed those of many reported HMSCs (Fig. 7c). Huang et al.103 explored ultrafine MoP nanoparticles with nitrogen-doped carbon nanosheets (MoP@NC), which were used as the anode material for potassium-ion hybrid micro-supercapacitors (PH-MSCs). The ultrafine MoP nanoparticles were confined effectively in porous NC owing to the strong chemical bonds in the molecular skeleton of the polyacrylamide (PAM) hydrogel, leading to reduced volume expansion and increased ion/electron pathways (Fig. 7d). The prepared MoP@NC-1/CNT/GO and AC/CNT/GO inks contained an active component (MoP@NC-1 or AC) and additives (GO and CNT). Furthermore, the 3D-printed PH-MSCs were fabricated via the DIW printing technique by employing the 3D-printed MoP@NC-1 electrode and 3D-printed AC electrode as the anode and the cathode, respectively. Due to the robust architectures and interconnected pore networks, the 3D-printed electrodes exhibited abundant charge transport channels and achieved good electrochemical performance even at a high mass loading. The 3D-printed PH-MSCs displayed an extended working potential range of 0.01–4 V with high gravimetric energy and power densities of 69.7 W h kg−1 and 2041.6 W kg−1 (Fig. 7e–g).
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic diagram of the preparation process of 3D-printed electrodes with porous N-Ti3C2Tx. (b) Photographs of N-Ti3C2Tx ink printed into different shapes. (c) Ragone plots of the 3D-printed N-Ti3C2Tx//AC sodium-ion supercapacitors. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration of the synthetic procedure for MoP@NC and the 3D-printed electrode (inset at top-right corner: photograph of 3D-printed electrode). (e) GCD curves of the MoP@NC-1//AC 3D-printed PH-MSCs. (f and g) Ragone plots of the MoP@NC-1//AC 3D-printed PH-MSCs. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. 
Considering their superiority in terms of security, stability, nonflammability and low cost, multivalent metal (e.g., Mg, Zn, and Al) ion-based hybrid supercapacitors have gradually attracted attention. Moreover, multivalent metal ions deliver a multi-electron transfer process, unlike monovalent metal ions, resulting in improved ion diffusion kinetics and energy density.96,104–112 For instance, Kaner et al.109 prepared magnesium-ion hybrid micro-supercapacitors by combining reduced graphene oxide and 3D crumpled MoS2 (c-MoS2) as the anode and cathode, respectively (Fig. 8a). In this work, the author printed 96 Mg-ion MSCs on a rigid 4-inch Si/SiO2 wafer or on flexible EPSON photopaper, indicating the high resolution and large-scale capability of the IJP technique (Fig. 8b). A single printed Mg-ion MSC can achieve an areal energy density of 3.85 μW h cm−2 and power density of 12.6 mW cm−2 (Fig. 8c). Due to the anti-aggregation properties of 3D 1T c-MoS2, its open space endows it with good electrolyte penetration and rapid ion transfer. The author further demonstrated that an MgSO4-based electrolyte exhibited an expanded potential window and higher specific capacitance compared to other electrolytes (e.g., Li2SO4, Na2SO4, K2SO4) (Fig. 8d). Furthermore, flexible solar-charging integrated systems were manufactured, which effectively inspired the design of microelectronic devices with good mechanical properties, high energy density, and long cycle life. Fan et al.110 then reported printed zinc-ion hybrid micro-capacitors (ZH-MSCs) using DIW printing (Fig. 8e and f), in which a 3D-printed CNT/Zn electrode, 3D-printed MXene electrode, and 2 M aqueous ZnSO4 were used as the anode, cathode, and electrolyte, respectively. Fig. 8g presents the CV curves with distinct redox humps at different scan rates from 2 to 100 mV s−1, indicating the pseudocapacitive characteristic of the thus-constructed ZH-MSCs. Due to their unobstructed ion diffusion and excellent conductive framework, 3D-printed MXene ZH-MSCs have an areal energy/power density of 0.10 mW h cm−2/5.90 mW cm−2 (Fig. 8h).
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic depiction of inkjet-printed asymmetric micro-supercapacitors (AMSCs) containing 3D 1T c-MoS2 (left) and rGO (right). (b) 96 inkjet-printed interdigital 3D 1T c-MoS2 MSCs on a 4 inch Si wafer and 96 inkjet-printed 3D 1T c-MoS2/rGO-based AMSCs on flexible photopaper. (c) CV curves of the printed AMSCs in 1.0 M MgSO4 aqueous electrolyte. (d) Comparison of the CV curves of three connected AMSCs in series with that of a single AMSC. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic diagram showing the preparation process of the 3D-printed CNT/Zn anode. (f) Schematic diagram showing the discharging process of the 3D-printed ZH-MSCs. (g) CV profiles of the 3D-printed ZH-MSCs at scan rates from 2 to 100 mV s−1. (h) Ragone plots of 3D-printed ZH-MSCs compared with those of other reported printable energy storage devices. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. 
4. 3D printing applications for electrolytes
As a necessary component in 3D-printed micro-supercapacitors, the selection of electrolyte shows a significant effect on their electrochemical properties, such as potential window, rate performance, energy/power density, and cycling life. In this section, we review some research advances in printable electrolytes. Electrolytes are generally coated or printed on the surface of printed electrodes for 3D-printed micro-supercapacitors. These electrolytes are typically divided into three categories: liquid electrolytes, quasi-solid-state electrolytes (gel-type electrolytes), and solid-state electrolytes. Obviously, gel and solid-state electrolytes can be printed directly owing to their suitable rheological properties, and avoid the leakage and flammability problems of organic-based liquid electrolytes. Additionally, these two types of electrolytes can also act as the separator, which simplifies the manufacturing process of 3D-printed MSCs to meet the requirements of fully integrated printing equipment. However, the exploration of printable electrolytes has received less attention and is still in its infancy.
Gel-type electrolytes are generally composed of a conductive ionic composition and a host polymer matrix, such as polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA), PVDF–HFP, and PVA, in a solvent. Aqueous gel polymer electrolytes have been investigated widely to date. The electrolytic compounds can be divided into three categories, namely, strong bases (e.g., KOH and NaOH), strong acids (e.g., H2SO4 and H3PO4), and neutral salts (e.g., LiCl and Na2SO4) in hydro-solvents. Among them, PVA–hydrogel-based electrolytes are the most common gel-type electrolytes at present, and can be employed under ambient conditions with excellent conductivities.
Studies have shown that the viscosities (∼10 Pa s at 0.1 s−1) of both neutral and acidic PVA-based electrolytes are in a suitable range for 3D printing. For example, the 3D printing technique was first used to fabricate high-performance quasi-solid-state MSCs by Yang.76 As shown in Fig. 9a, the anode ink (graphene–vanadium nitride quantum dots), cathode ink (V2O5/GO), and electrolyte ink (LiCl–PVA) were prepared and printed on the glass matrix directly. The as-prepared MSCs demonstrated remarkable architecture integrity and a high working voltage of 1.6 V. Subsequently, Bhattacharya et al.113 reported a manufacturing method to obtain flexible planar MSCs (Fig. 9b), in which the electrodes (AC–Bi2O3 and AC–MnO2), electrolyte (KOH/PVA gel electrolyte) and the conducting layer (rGO) were printed via continuous inkjet printing. The as-prepared PAμSC showed an areal capacitance of 536.6 mF cm−2 with a high energy density and power density (15 mW h cm−3 and 0.141 W cm−3). However, the voltage window of the aqueous-based electrolytes was severely restricted due to the electrolysis of water. The ionic-liquid-based gel electrolytes can provide a wider working voltage (up to 4 V) and high ionic conductivity to enhance the energy density of MSC devices. Additionally, their prominent temperature resistance can also improve stability and safety under different circumstances. In this respect, Honma et al.114 developed photocurable multi-inks for the 3D printing process that were prepared from mixtures of ionic liquids, such as 1-ethylimidazolium trifluoromethanesulfonate ([EIm][TfO]), inorganic silica nanoparticles, and photocurable resins (Fig. 9c). This was the first demonstration of the assembly of all-solid-state MSCs using a 3D-printed proton-conducting film. The author found that the viscosity of the inks could be regulated by changing the mixing ratio of the precursors, and an appropriate ratio of inks could be prepared for direct 3D printing. Moreover, the inks showed high flexibility in curing methods (e.g., thermal or UV-irradiation treatment) compared to other 3D printing methods (e.g., DLP or SLA) because this approach allowed inks or slurries to be used with a broad range of viscosities. Sang-Young Lee et al.115 first achieved electrohydrodynamic jet (EHD) printing in manufacturing active carbon (AC)-based electrodes for solid-state 3D-printed MSCs with fine feature sizes (Fig. 9d). Owing to the high resolution EHD printing, a miniature-size electrode (electrode width = 10 μm) was printed on a Ti/Au collector. The solid-state gel electrolyte was used to ensure the electrochemical isolation of a single MSC and achieve intensive integration with in-series or in-parallel cells connected on a chip. The solid-state gel electrolyte was then further introduced on as-obtained interdigitated MSCs via drying-free EHD jet printing with UV curing. The electrolyte ink solidified to produce a self-supporting gel electrolyte membrane after UV irradiation. The preparation scheme of the solid-state gel electrolyte was as follows: a thiol–ene monomer mixture was reacted with trimethylolpropane tris(3-mercaptopropionate) (TMPTMP, thiol monomer) and trimethylolpropane triacrylate (TMPTA, ene monomer) through a UV-induced click reaction in the presence of an ionic liquid (1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolum bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl) imide, [EMIM][TFSI]).
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of 3D printing of AMSCs with interdigitated electrodes. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (b) Schematic illustration of the stepwise fabrication of the all-printed PAμSC on a bond paper substrate with different electrode and electrolyte materials. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (c) Main components of a functionalized ink consisting of silica particles with different morphologies and diameters, ionic liquid, and photocurable resin, and the main stages of fabrication, which consist of the printing of the functionalized ink on a carbon sheet and UV curing before obtaining the completed membrane. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (d) Fabrication of on-chip ultrahigh areal number density solid-state MSCs via EHD jet printing. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
5. Applications in integrated systems
Microelectrochemical energy storage devices with high integration have aroused great attention due to the urgent demand for miniaturized, flexible, and portable electronic equipment. 3D printing technologies show unique potential to simplify the manufacturing process and realize continuity and compatibility during subsequent integrated assembly processes. Depending on the functional differences in the integrated electronic systems, the 3D-printed MSCs can act as either an energy storage unit or a power unit. Therefore, MSCs enable energy storage from environmental energy collectors, such as wind-driven generators or solar cells. By integrating these energy storage devices with functional electronic components, so-called self-powered systems are obtained.116 Given this, we review recent progress in integrated systems based on 3D-printed MSCs. However, these are primarily produced on a laboratory scale, and their practical applications in integrated systems are still in their infancy.
Fan et al.117 applied IJP printing to achieve an integrated system for a wearable self-powered sensor system for the first time; this system can be used for gas detection in the ambient environment. The fully integrated device was composed of an embedded solar cell, MnO2/rGO/PEDOT:PSS supercapacitors, and a printed gas sensor. Based on the stated system operating principle, the embedded solar cells acted as a power supply to harvest solar energy, which can not only drive the printed gas sensors to detect ethanol and acetone directly, but also provide electricity for light-emitting diodes (LEDs) to transmit a warning signal. The electricity can also be stored in the printed supercapacitors in standby mode to compensate for the intermittency of illumination (Fig. 10a and b). Impressively, the printed MSCs exhibited an areal capacitance of 12.9 mF cm−2 and a high specific energy/power density of 4.5 m W h cm−3/7.2 W cm−3. The serial mode can also provide extended operating voltage for supporting sensor modules. Similarly, Fan et al.118 also fabricated self-powered clothing made from printed MSCs on IJP-based Ag substrates that acted as energy supply modules. The MSCs were integrated with solar cells as energy collectors and energy-consuming LEDs. In this self-powered system, the MSCs and LEDs were powered by solar cells under light exposure (Fig. 10c). The MSCs could be charged up to 3.2 V and supply the LEDs with sufficient power to work appropriately under dark conditions (Fig. 10d). Wu et al.119 reported aqueous MXene/PH1000 (MP) multi-inks for planar MSCs with excellent volumetric capacitance, customizable shape, modularization ability, and an integrated system (Fig. 10e). The improved electrochemical performance was attributed to the role of PH1000 in enhancing interlayer contact with the MXene, leading to the promotion of electron and ion transfer. Furthermore, the printed MP-MSCs can connect with a flexible solar device to power a self-powered temperature sensor. The self-powered integrated device can monitor the external temperature with a response of 2% and shows excellent mechanical properties during different bending measurements without any bias voltage input (Fig. 10f).
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic images of printable fabrication procedure and system operation mechanism (inset) of the flexible and wearable monolithically integrated self-powered smart sensor system on a plastic substrate. (b) Demonstration of a monolithically integrated self-powered sensor system: photograph of a wearable wristband. Inset: LEDs as the gas detection indicator. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. A wearable self-powered system on a T-shirt, composed of solar cell panels, designed supercapacitors with arbitrary shapes, and an LED array, with the solar cell panels under (c) illuminated and (d) dark situations at left and the corresponding circuit diagrams shown at right. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. Schematic illustration of the fabrication of inkjet-printed MP-MSCs and the self-powered integrated system. (e) Schematic of the aqueous MP hybrid ink for inkjet printing MP-MSCs. (f) Construction of the self-powered temperature sensor system obtained by printing MP-MSCs and a temperature sensor and connecting a Si film solar cell via wires. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. 
The group of Chen120 designed 3D-printed all-in-one fiber-shaped asymmetric supercapacitors (FASCs) with a coaxial fibrous shape, which was obtained using a coherent 3D direct multi-ink writing printing technology (Fig. 11a). The 3D-printed FASCs were assembled with VN/multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) as negative electrodes and V2O5/MWCNTs as positive electrodes (Fig. 11b). As a result of the compact coaxial configuration, the 3D-printed FASCs showed shortened ion diffusion paths, high areal energy density, and high power density even at a high mass loading. As a conceptual demonstration of integrated systems, Fig. 11c shows that the integrated systems (solar cells, printed FASCs and electric motors) achieved a self-powered system that can collect solar energy and realize outstanding durability for future use in self-powered electric vehicles (Fig. 11d–i). Moreover, the 3D-printed coaxial device can act as the power supply to enable self-powered mechanical and monitoring systems with stable power output and pressure sensitivity.
 Fig. 11  (a) The development of a 3D-printed coaxial FASC device via direct coherent multi-ink writing (DCMW) technology. (b) 3D printing extrusion process and subsequent solidification process of the printable coaxial FASC device. (c) Schematic diagram of the self-powered system of energy storage and conversion. (d) Photographs of the water pumping prototype with a solar cell. (e) Photographs of the water pumping prototype in the self-powered configuration. (f) Relationship between the volume of the pumping solution and time for the solar cell and self-powered system. (g) Photographs of the operation of a sightseeing cable car using a solar cell only. (h) Photographs of the operation of a sightseeing cable car using the self-powered configuration. (i) Relationship between distance and time for the sightseeing cable car in the self-powered and solar-cell-only systems. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
6. Conclusion and perspective
As an innovative manufacturing technique to produce advanced MSCs, 3D printing can subversively revolutionize the traditional architectures and designs of materials, methods, and devices at all levels. In this review, we have examined the recent advances in 3D-printed MSCs based on various techniques and different types of printable capacitive materials and electrolytes, with the aim of providing readers with a comprehensive understanding of 3D-printed MSCs and their considerable potential in practical applications. A series of technological advancements have been achieved based on the significant progress and developments over the past few years, including the optimization of suitable printing techniques for 3D-printed MSC products, the exploration of printable materials for both electrode and electrolyte MSC modules, and the design of architectures at the full MSC level. There is no doubt that considerable progress has been made in manufacturing 3D-printed MSCs. However, several challenges still must be overcome before 3D-printed MSCs can be widely distributed from lab research to industry.
Firstly, the development of electrode materials is a crucial prerequisite for the realization of high-performance MSCs. To date, traditional active materials for supercapacitors have been widely studied and applied. Emerging 2D active materials (e.g., MXene, MOFs, covalent organic frameworks, and BP) are considered to be promising candidates for supercapacitors due to their open structures with abundant ion diffusion channels and high active surface areas. In addition, organic materials and metal-oxide materials (e.g., perovskite oxides) are also potential electrode materials because of their high diversity of active sites and high specific capacitances. Hence, the development of high-performance electrode materials for MSCs is still a constant theme. In this regard, the conventional trial-and-error method is inefficient, as it requires extensive laboratory testing to achieve the desired/target properties. The emerging machine learning and data-driven prediction methods can be utilized in the research process to predict the optimum material compositions and structures to improve the energy storage performance. At the same time, we cannot pursue the electrochemical properties of electrode materials single-mindedly without taking the printability of the active materials and their compatibility with printing additives into consideration.
Secondly, it should also be pointed out that increasing the overall energy density of MSCs has always been a critical goal. For this purpose, in aqueous systems, mixing EDLC-based materials with pseudocapacitor-based materials to construct asymmetric MSCs can effectively increase the voltage window (less than 2 V) and the energy density of MSC devices, but it is still limited. Metal-ion hybrid MSCs can usually operate over a wider voltage range (0–4.5 V) with enhanced energy density. The current research is still in its infancy due to the following shortcomings. First, the water and oxygen present in the air have a significant impact on the performance of the active electrodes and non-aqueous electrolytes. Hence, the chemical reactions triggered by contact with air will significantly reduce the electrochemical performance, service life, and safety of MSCs. Secondly, in order to obtain high-efficiency metal-ion hybrid MSCs, the preparation and assembly procedures must be carried out in an argon glove box with oxygen and water vapor contents of <0.1 ppm, which results in high cost and complicated processing. It is critical to develop high-quality packaging for 3D-printed MSCs to protect them from oxygen/water molecules and other chemicals. Therefore, novel technologies and new materials for printing and packaging should be worth developing in the future.
Notably, the flexibility and endurance of 3D-printed MSCs are two further significant parameters that must be taken into account to satisfy the requirements of complicated operating environments, but have not been studied extensively. Although a number of studies have achieved flexibility by printing arbitrary shapes on flexible substrates (e.g., PET, polyimide, or paper), the construction of thick electrodes without sacrificing flexibility remains a challenge. This is because thick 3D-printed electrodes are usually fabricated layer-by-layer, which means that the interface bond between two layers is relatively weak and may collapse during subsequent assembly or application. At the same time, it is a greater challenge to achieve fully flexible devices with electrodes and other components to meet the requirements of specific applications, such as flexible and wearable integrated electronics. In this case, it is necessary to develop novel photocurable and thermoplastic materials with appropriate electrochemical conductivity and strong bonding. In addition, the emerging additive manufacturing technology of 4D printing has been receiving increasing attention; this technique would endow 3D-printed devices with variable characteristics or reconfigurable architectures over the time dimension in response to different environmental stimuli, including magnetism, light, temperature, force, etc. That is to say, in response to the trigger conditions and the passage of time, the 4D-printed devices will spontaneously adjust their physicochemical properties based on changes in external environmental factors. The overall process will not rely on manual operation, so the durability of the printed MSC devices could be further enhanced, their performance could be further improved, and smart electrochemical energy storage configurations could be constructed.
Finally, 3D printing technology is expected to provide great opportunity for effective integration between 3D-printed micro-capacitors and other electronic devices due to its shape and size adjustability. However, most functional integrated electronic systems are still in the initial stage of experimental research, with several unsolved but urgent problems. The first issue is the improvement of the energy conversion efficiency through the construction of systems with high matching between the printed MSCs and energy harvesting devices. In addition, another issue is the integration of a variety of electronic devices by enhancing the sensitivity of the sensor and the compatibility between the sensor and the printed MSCs in an assembly system. In terms of auxiliary medical equipment in the future, the materials employed for MSCs should be non-toxic, biocompatible, and easily absorbed or decomposed; further exploration in this area is required. Therefore, the integration of multiple components into a single device is highly demanded for flexible electronics, which will require the collaboration of multiple disciplines for device design, such as electrical engineering, industrial engineering, etc.
In summary, it is envisioned that the future generation of 3D-printed micro-supercapacitors should have the characteristics of customizability, miniaturization, wearability, flexibility, and intelligence. The development of 3D printing technology will revolutionize the way in which we think about the design and application of energy storage devices, leading to a rapid rise in the exploration of 3D-printed MSCs and, eventually, a promising market.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful for the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (22075042), the Natural Science Foundation of Shanghai (20ZR1401400, 18ZR1401600), the Innovation Program of Shanghai Municipal Education Commission (2021-01-07-00-03-E00108), and the Shanghai Scientific and Technological Innovation Project (18JC1410600).
References
P. Huang, C. Lethien, S. Pinaud, K. Brousse, R. Laloo, V. Turq, M. Respaud, A. Demortiere, B. Daffos, P. L. Taberna, B. Chaudret, Y. Gogotsi and P. Simon, Science, 2016, 351, 691–695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhang, F. Wang, M. Yu, X. Zhuang and X. Feng, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 7426–7451 RSC .
Z. Zhao, S. L. Liu, J. X. Zhu, J. S. Xu, L. Li, Z. Q. Huang, C. Zhang and T. X. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 19871–19880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Beidaghi and Y. Gogotsi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 867–884 RSC .
K.-H. Choi, D. B. Ahn and S.-Y. Lee, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 220–236 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ouyang, W. Zong, J. Wang, Z. Xu, L. Mo, F. L. Lai, Z.-L. Xu, Y.-E. Miao and T. X. Liu, Energy Storage Mater., 2021, 42, 68–77 CrossRef .
S. Zheng, X. Shi, P. Das, Z. S. Wu and X. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, X. Li, S. Fan, S. Huang, D. Yan, L. Liu, P. Alvarado and H. Yang, Mater. Today Energy, 2020, 16, 100407 CrossRef .
D. Qi, Y. Liu, Z. Liu, L. Zhang and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1602802 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Gao, N. Singh, L. Song, Z. Liu, A. L. M. Reddy, L. Ci, R. Vajtai, Q. Zhang, B. Wei and P. M. Ajayan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 496–500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Su, C. Yang, B. Xie, Z. Lin, Z. Zhang, J. Liu, B. Li, F. Kang and C. P. Wong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2652–2659 RSC .
Y. Gogotsi, Nature, 2014, 509, 568–570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, W. Fan, S. Yuan, J. Tian, G. Chao and T. X. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 23968–23976 RSC .
B. Elder, R. Neupane, E. Tokita, U. Ghosh, S. Hales and Y. L. Kong, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li and J. J. Liang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1805864 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Lv, M. Liu, D. Zhu, L. Gan and T. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705489 CrossRef PubMed .
X. R. Li, H. P. Li, X. Q. Fan, X. L. Shi and J. J. Liang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903794 CrossRef CAS .
K. Fu, Y. Yao, J. Dai and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603486 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Pomerantseva, F. Bonaccorso, X. Feng, Y. Cui and Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2019, 366, eaan8285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Moylan, J. Slotwinski, A. Cooke, K. Jurrens and M. A. Donmez, J. Res. Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol., 2014, 119, 429–459 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Ambrosi and M. Pumera, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2740–2755 RSC .
P. Yang and H. Fan, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2020, 5, 2000217 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tian, J. Jin, S. Yuan, C. K. Chua, S. B. Tor and K. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700127 CrossRef .
V. G. Rocha, E. Garcia-Tunon, C. Botas, F. Markoulidis, E. Feilden, E. D'Elia, N. Ni, M. Shaffer and E. Saiz, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 37136–37145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Tang, H. Zhou, Z. Cai, D. Cheng, P. He, P. Xie, D. Zhang and T. Fan, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 3502–3511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wei, F. Zhang, W. Wang, P. Alexandridis, C. Zhou and G. Wu, J. Power Sources, 2017, 354, 134–147 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Gratson, F. Garcia-Santamaria, V. Lousse, M. J. Xu, S. H. Fan, J. A. Lewis and P. V. Braun, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 461–465 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Skylar-Scott, J. Mueller, C. W. Visser and J. A. Lewis, Nature, 2019, 575, 330–335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Cummins and M. P. Y. Desmulliez, Circuit World, 2012, 38, 193–213 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pang, Y. Cao, Y. Chu, M. Liu, K. Snyder, D. MacKenzie and C. Cao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1906244 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Lyu, G. J. H. Lim, J. J. Koh, Y. Li, Y. W. Ma, J. Ding, J. L. Wang, Z. Hu, J. Wang, W. Chen and Y. Chen, Joule, 2021, 5, 89–114 CrossRef CAS .
M. Singh, H. M. Haverinen, P. Dhagat and G. E. Jabbour, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 673–685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, F. Ye, S. Vaziri, M. Muhammed, M. C. Lemme and M. Ostling, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3985–3992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. P. W. Melchels, J. Feijen and D. W. Grijpma, Biomaterials, 2010, 31, 6121–6130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Z. Manapat, Q. Chen, P. Ye and R. C. Advincula, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2017, 302, 1600553 CrossRef .
G. Salmoria, C. Ahrens, V. Beal, A. Pires and V. Soldi, Soldi Mater. Des., 2009, 30, 758–763 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lin, S. Jin, F. Zhang, C. Wang, Y. Wang, C. Zhou and G. J. Cheng, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 434003 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. C. Eckel, C. Zhou, J. H. Martin, A. J. Jacobsen, W. B. Carter and T. A. Schaedler, Science, 2016, 351, 58–62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Colo, F. Bella, J. R. Nair and C. Gerbaldi, J. Power Sources, 2017, 365, 293–302 CrossRef CAS .
X. Su, X. Li, C. Y. A. Ong, T. S. Herng, Y. Wang, E. Peng and J. Ding, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1801670 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Cohen, S. Menkin, M. Lifshits, Y. Kamir, A. Gladkich, G. Kosa and D. Golodnitsky, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 265, 690–701 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Chen, R. Xu, Z. He, K. Zhao and L. Pan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, A1852 CrossRef CAS .
D. Popescu, A. Zapciu, C. Amza, F. Baciu and R. Marinescu, Polym. Test., 2018, 69, 157–166 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, W. Fan and T. X. Liu, Compos. Commun., 2020, 21, 100413 CrossRef .
A. Abdalla, H. H. Hamzah, O. Keattch, D. Covill and B. A. Patel, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 354, 136618 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kim, J. H. Jeong, J. Y. Lee, A. Capasso, F. Bonaccorso, S. H. Kang, Y. Lee and G. H. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 11841–11848 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Foster, G. Q. Zou, Y. Jiang, M. P. Down, C. M. Liauw, A. Garcia-Miranda Ferrari, X. Ji, G. C. Smith, P. J. Kelly and C. E. Banks, Batteries Supercaps, 2019, 2, 448–453 CrossRef CAS .
C. Reyes, R. Somogyi, S. Niu, M. A. Cruz, F. Yang, M. J. Catenacci, C. P. Rhodes and B. J. Wiley, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 5268–5279 CrossRef CAS .
A. Maurel, M. Courty, B. Fleutot, H. Tortajada, K. Prashantha, M. Armand, S. Grugeon, S. Panier and L. Dupont, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 7484–7493 CrossRef CAS .
M. Areir, Y. Xu, R. Zhang, D. Harrison, J. Fyson and E. Pei, J. Manuf. Process., 2017, 25, 351–356 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, J. Wang and T. X. Liu, Compos. Commun., 2021, 23, 100600 CrossRef .
B. N. Turner, R. Strong and S. A. Gold, Rapid Prototyping J., 2014, 20, 192–204 CrossRef .
J. Kim, R. Kumar, A. J. Bandodkar and J. Wang, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1600260 CrossRef .
L. Liu, Y. Feng and W. Wu, J. Power Sources, 2019, 410-411, 69–77 CrossRef CAS .
S. Naficy, R. Jalili, S. H. Aboutalebi, R. A. Gorkin, III, K. Konstantinov, P. C. Innis, G. M. Spinks, P. Poulin and G. G. Wallace, Mater. Horiz., 2014, 1, 326–331 RSC .
B. Chen, Y. Jiang, X. Tang, Y. Pan and S. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 28433–28440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Guo and J. A. Lewis, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1999, 82, 2345–2358 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, J. Xu, J. Zhu, Y. Chang, H. Wang, Z. Liu, Y. Xu, C. Zhang and T. X. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19997–20004 RSC .
X. W. Yun, B. C. Lu, Z. Y. Xiong, B. Jia, B. Tang, H. N. Mao, T. Zhang and X. G. Wang, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 29384–29395 RSC .
Y. Zhang, W. Fan, H. Lu and T. X. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 283, 1763–1772 CrossRef CAS .
W. B. Kang, L. Zeng, S. W. Ling and C. H. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2100020 CrossRef CAS .
F. L. Lai, Y. E. Miao, L. Z. Zuo, H. Y. Lu, Y. P. Huang and T. X. Liu, Small, 2016, 12, 3235–3244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Yuan, W. Fan, D. Wang, L. S. Zhang, Y. E. Miao, F. L. Lai and T. X. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 423–432 RSC .
B. Yao, H. Peng, H. Zhang, J. Kang, C. Zhu, G. Delgado, D. Byrne, S. Faulkner, M. Freyman, X. Lu, M. A. Worsley, J. Q. Lu and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 3731–3737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, M. Wang, P. Wang, W. Zhou, Z. Chen, Q. Gao, M. Shen and J. Zhu, Compos. Commun., 2021, 27, 100885 CrossRef .
V. Augustyn, P. Simon and B. Dunn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1597–1614 RSC .
F. L. Lai, Y. E. Miao, Y. Huang, Y. Zhang and T. X. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 3558–3566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. E. Conway, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1991, 138, 1539 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Fan, Joule, 2019, 3, 317–319 CrossRef .
Y. Gogotsi and R. M. Penner, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 2081–2083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zong, F. L. Lai, G. J. He, J. R. Feng, W. Wang, R. Q. Lian, Y. E. Miao, G. C. Wang, I. P. Parkin and T. X. Liu, Small, 2018, 14, 1801562 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Chen, H. Chen, J. Qiu and C. Zhou, Nano Res., 2010, 3, 594–603 CrossRef CAS .
F. L. Lai, J. R. Feng, R. Y. Yan, G. C. Wang, M. Antonietti and M. Oschatz, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801298 CrossRef .
B. Yao, S. Chandrasekaran, J. Zhang, W. Xiao, F. Qian, C. Zhu, E. B. Duoss, C. M. Spadaccini, M. A. Worsley and Y. Li, Joule, 2019, 3, 459–470 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, Y. Zhang, Y. Huang, J. Xie, X. Zhao, C. Li, J. Qu, Q. Zhang, J. Sun, B. He, Q. Li, C. Lu, X. Xu, W. Lu, L. Li and Y. Yao, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1801114 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Shen, J. W. Ding and S. B. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800408 CrossRef .
T. Wang, L. Li, X. Tian, H. Jin, K. Tang, S. Hou, H. Zhou and X. Yu, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 319, 245–252 CrossRef CAS .
F. L. Lai, J. R. Feng, T. Hei, G. C. Wang, P. Adler, M. Antonietti and M. Oschatz, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 20, 188–195 CrossRef .
B. Li, N. Hu, Y. Su, Z. Yang, F. Shao, G. Li, C. Zhang and Y. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 46044–46053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. L. Lai, C. Yang, R. Q. Lian, K. B. Chu, J. J. Qin, W. Zong, D. W. Rao, J. Hofkens, X. H. Lu and T. X. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2002474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, L. Li, J. X. Zhu, J. S. Xu, S. L. Liu, Y. F. Wang, C. Zhang and T. X. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 13428–213437 RSC .
Z. Wang, Q. e. Zhang, S. Long, Y. Luo, P. Yu, Z. Tan, J. Bai, B. Qu, Y. Yang, J. Shi, H. Zhou, Z.-Y. Xiao, W. Hong and H. Bai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 10437–10444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhou, X. An, C. Zhou, Y. Wu, Y. Miao and T. X. Liu, Compos. Commun., 2020, 22, 100519 CrossRef .
Y. Q. Liu, B. B. Zhang, Q. Xu, Y. Y. Hou, S. Seyedin, S. Qin, G. G. Wallace, S. Beirne, J. M. Razal and J. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706592 CrossRef .
W. Liu, C. Lu, H. Li, R. Y. Tay, L. Sun, X. Wang, W. L. Chow, X. Wang, B. K. Tay, Z. Chen, J. Yan, K. Feng, G. Lui, R. Tjandra, L. Rasenthiram, G. Chiu and A. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3754–3764 RSC .
X. Chu, G. Chen, X. Xiao, Z. Wang, T. Yang, Z. Xu, H. Huang, Y. Wang, C. Yan, N. Chen, H. Zhang, W. Yang and J. Chen, Small, 2021, 17, 2100956 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, Q. Cao, X. Tang, J. Du, T. Yu, X. Xu, D. Cai, C. Guan and W. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 19649–19658 RSC .
X. Huang, J. Huang, D. Yang and P. Wu, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2101664 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhang, R. Li, H. Zheng, J. S. Bao, Y. J. Tang and K. Zhou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2009057 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wu, Z. Ma, Y. He, X. Wu, B. Tang, Z. Yu, G. Wu, S. Chen and N. Bao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 10366–10374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, X. Liu, S. Wang, H.-K. Liu and L. Li, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 28, 122–145 CrossRef .
W. Zong, C. Yang, L. L. Mo, Y. Ouyang, H. L. Guo, L. F. Ge, Y. E. Miao, D. W. Rao, J. W. Zhang, F. L. Lai and T. X. Liu, Nano Energy, 2020, 77, 105189 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Dubal, O. Ayyad, V. Ruiz and P. Gomez-Romero, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 1777–1790 RSC .
J. Ding, W. Hu, E. Paek and D. Mitlin, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 6457–6498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhou, L. Mo, C. Zhou, Y. Lv, Y. E. Miao and T. X. Liu, Compos. Commun., 2020, 22, 100490 CrossRef .
H. Wang, W. Ye, Y. Yang, Y. Zhong and Y. Hu, Nano Energy, 2021, 85, 105942 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, C. Zhu, D. Chao, Q. Yan and H. J. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702093 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Jia, G. Shen and D. Chen, Sci. China Mater., 2020, 63, 185–206 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li and Z. Zhou, Small, 2018, 14, 1702961 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhu, P. Yang, D. Chao, W. Mai and H. J. Fan, ChemNanoMat, 2015, 1, 458–476 CrossRef CAS .
D. X. Luong, A. K. Subramanian, G. A. L. Silva, J. Yoon, S. Cofer, K. Yang, P. S. Owuor, T. Wang, Z. Wang, J. Lou, P. M. Ajayan and J. M. Tour, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707416 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Fan, C. Wei, L. Yu, Z. Xia, J. Cai, Z. Tian, G. Zou, S. X. Dou and J. Sun, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 867–876 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zong, N. B. Chui, Z. H. Tian, Y. Li, C. Yang, D. W. Rao, W. Wang, J. J. Huang, J. Wang, F. L. Lai and T. X. Liu, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2004142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhang, Y. Li, G. Wang, F. Wang, S. Yang, F. Zhu, X. Zhuang, O. G. Schmidt and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806005 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhang, Q. Liu, Y. Fang, C. Teng, X. Liu, P. Fang, Y. Tong and X. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1904948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, L. Ma, C. Han, Z. Wang, Z. Liu, Z. Tang and C. Zhi, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 550–587 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, Z. Li, Z. Bai, H. Mi, C. Ji, H. Pang, C. Yu and J. Qiu, Nano Energy, 2019, 66, 104132 CrossRef CAS .
P. Liu, Z. Zhang, R. Hao, Y. Huang, W. Liu, Y. Tan, P. Li, J. Yan and K. Liu, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 403, 126425 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shao, J. H. Fu, Z. Cao, K. Song, R. Sun, Y. Wan, A. Shamim, L. Cavallo, Y. Han, R. B. Kaner and V. C. Tung, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 7308–7318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Fan, J. Jin, C. Li, J. Cai, C. Wei, Y. Shao, G. Zou and J. Sun, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 3098–3107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. D. Juan Zeng, Lulu Sun, Wen Wang, Yinhua Zhou, Lu Wei and X. Guo, Nano-Micro Lett., 2021, 13, 1–14 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Wang, T. Gao, Y. Li, S. Li and G. Zhou, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2017, 21, 705–714 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sundriyal and S. Bhattacharya, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 1876–1890 CrossRef CAS .
K. Iwase, S. Stauss, Y. Gambe, R. Miyazaki and I. Honma, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 3651–3659 CrossRef CAS .
K.-H. Lee, S.-S. Lee, D. B. Ahn, J. Lee, D. Byun and S.-Y. Lee, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaaz1692 CrossRef PubMed .
T.-T. Huang and W. Wu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 7, 2000015 CrossRef .
Y. Lin, J. Chen, M. M. Tavakoli, Y. Gao, Y. Zhu, D. Zhang, M. Kam, Z. He and Z. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804285 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lin, Y. Gao and Z. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701736 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Ma, S. Zheng, Y. Cao, Y. Zhu, P. Das, H. Wang, Y. Liu, J. Wang, L. Chi, S. Liu and Z.-S. Wu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2100746 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, H. Lu, Y. Zhang, S. Yu, O. I. Malyi, X. Zhao, L. Wang, H. Wang, J. Peng, X. Li, Y. Zhang, S. Chen, H. Pan, G. Xing, C. Lu, Y. Tang and X. Chen, Sci. Adv., 2021, 7, eabd6978 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Wei Zong
	Wei Zong received his BS degree from Ludong University (2017). He is now a PhD candidate at the College of Materials Science and Engineering, Donghua University. His current research interests include the design and synthesis of advanced nanostructured materials for 3D-printed energy storage devices.

Yue Ouyang
	Yue Ouyang received her BS degree from Donghua University (2017). She is now a PhD candidate at the College of Materials Science and Engineering, Donghua University. Her research focuses on the design and preparation of high-performance carbon nanofiber composites in Li–S and Li–metal batteries.

Yue-E. Miao
	Yue-E Miao received her BS degree from Southeast University in 2010 and PhD degree from Fudan University in 2015. She is now an associate professor at the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Donghua University. Her research interests mainly focus on high-performance organic fiber electrodes/separators, carbon nanofiber composites, and their applications in electrochemical energy storage devices (such as Li/Na–ion batteries, and Li–S batteries).

Tianxi Liu
	Prof. Tianxi Liu obtained his BS degree from Henan University (1992) and his PhD degree from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (1998). He is currently a full professor at Jiangnan University. His main research interests include polymer nanocomposites, organic/inorganic hybrid materials, nanofibers and their composites, advanced energy materials and energy conversion and storage.

Feili Lai
	Feili Lai received his B.S. degree from Donghua University (2014), his Master's degree from Fudan University (2017), and his PhD degree from the Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces/Universität Potsdam (2019). He is now a research fellow at the Department of Chemistry, KU Leuven. His current interests include the design and synthesis of low-dimensional solids for energy storage and conversion applications, smart poly-gels, and theoretical calculations.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic summary: printing techniques, applications, electrolytes, and integration for the construction of 3D-printed MSCs.14,94,119,120	 

DIW	Plastics, metals, ceramics, and composites	1–250 μm	Affordable cost, easy operation, wide material diversity, and no mask requirement	High ink requirements
IJP	Sol–gels, metals, conductive polymers, proteins, and carbon-based materials	20 μm	Low cost, multi-material printing capability, and ability to print large areas	Low printing speed, bad for high-volume printing, and poor durability of the print head
FDM	Thermoplastic filaments	50–200 μm	User-friendliness, low cost, high speed, large size capability, and lack of chemical post-processing requirement	Limited resolution, weak mechanical properties, high viscosity of the molten materials, and low surface quality
SLA	Photopolymers	0.25–100 μm	High resolution, high surface finish, and high efficiency	Severe limitation in multi-material deposition

EDLC-MSCs	DIW	GO/PAA	H2SO4	0–0.8 V	230.7 mF cm−2 (1.2 mA cm−2)	81% over 20000 cycles	20.5 mW h cm−2; 0.9 mW cm−2	
63


	DIW	rGO	H2SO4/PVA gel	0–0.8 V	111.1 mF cm−2 (10 mV s−1)	94.5% over 10000 cycles	—	
59


	DIW	CNF/SWCNT	H2SO4/PVA gel	0–0.8 V	11.8 F cm−2	95.9% over 10000 cycles	0.66 mW h cm−2; 1039.8 mW cm−2	
61


	DIW	MWNT	LiCl–PVA gel	0–1 V	15.34 F cm−3 (1.32 A cm−3)	96.5% over 5000 cycles	1.18 mW h cm−3; 11.8 W cm−3	
56

PC-MSCs	IJP	RuO2/MWNT	H3PO4–PVA	0–1 V	138 F g−1 (8 A g−1)	—	18.8 W h kg−1; 96 kW kg−1	
72


	DIW	GA/MnO2	3 M LiCl	0–1 V	18.74 F cm−2 (1 mA cm−2)	92.9% over 20000 cycles	1.56 mW h cm−2	
74


	IJP	MoO3/rGO	H2SO4–PVA gel	0–0.8 V	22.5 F cm−3 (1 A cm−2)	82% over 10000 cycles	2 mW h cm−3; 0.018 W cm−3	
79


	DIW	V2O5/SWCNT//VN/SWCNTs	KOH–PVA	0–1.6 V	116.19 mF cm−2 (0.6 mA cm−2)	94.7% over 4000 cycles	41.28 μW h cm−2; 480 μW cm−2	
75


	DIW	Graphene–VNQDs/rGO//V2O5/rGO	LiCl–PVA	0–1.6 V	207.9 mF cm−2 (0.63 mA cm−2)	65% over 8000 cycles	73.9 W h cm−2; 3.77 mW cm−2	
76


	DIW	N-STC/Fe2O3/AC/CNT/GO	EMIMBF4/(PVdF–HFP) gel	0–4 V	1.79 F cm−2	93.2% over 10000 cycles	114 W h kg−1	
80


	DIW	PANI/rGO	H2SO4–PVA gel	0–0.8 V	1329 mF cm−2 (4.2 mA cm−2)	75% over 1000 cycles	—	
82


	DIW	GO/PANI/PEDOT: PSS	H3PO4–PVA gel	0–1.2 V	37.8 F cm−3 (5 mV s−1)	75% over 5000 cycles	3.36 mW h cm−3; 9.4 W cm−3	
84


	IJP	PEDOT: PSS/CNT/Ag	H3PO4–PVA	0–0.8 V	23.6 F cm−3	92% over 10000 cycles	42.1 mW h cm−3; 89.1 mW cm−3	
85


	DIW	MXene	PVA/H2SO4 Gel	0–0.6 V	1.98 F cm−2 (at 5 mV s−1)	90.1% over 10000 cycles	0.1 mW h cm−2; 19.7 mW cm−2	
88


	DIW	MXene–AgNW MnONW–C60	PVA–KOH gel	0–0.8 V	216.2 mF cm−2 (at 10 mV s−1)	85% over 10000 cycles	19.2 μW h cm−2; 58.3 mW cm−2	
17


	DIW	E-BP/ZIF-67/CNT	EMIMBF4/(PVdF–HFP) gel	0–2.5 V	506 F cm−3 (0.5 A cm−3)	—	109.8 mW h cm−3; 0.675 W cm−3	
90


	SLS	LIC-(MOF199-@ZIF-67)	H2SO4	0–1 V	5.02 mF cm−2 (0.2 mA cm−2)	—	—	
89

Li-ion MSCs	LOM	Laser induced graphene	1 M LiPF6 in 1:1 EC/DEC	
	354 mAh g−1 (anode)	—	64 W h kg−1; 970 W kg−1	
101

Na-ion MSCs	DIW	N-Ti3C2//AC	1 M NaClO4 in EC/PC with VC (1:1:0.02)	0.01–4 V	325 mAh g−1 at 0.5 C (anode)	75% over 3500 cycles	101.6 W h kg−1/3269 W k−1; 1.18 mW h cm−2/40.15 m W cm−2.	
102

K-ion MSCs	DIW	MoP@NC//AC	0.8 M KPF6 in (EC)/(DEC) (v:v, 1:1)	0.01–4 V	256.1 mAh g−1 at 0.1 A g−1 (anode)	61.2% over 2000 cycles	69.7 W h kg−1/2041.6 W kg−1; 0.34 mW h cm−2/9.97 mW cm−2	
103

Zn-ion MSCs	DIW	CNT/Zn//MXene	2 M ZnSO4	0.1–1.2 V	714.6 mF cm−2 (10 A g−1)	86.5% over 6000 cycles	0.10 mW h cm−2; 5.90 mW cm−2	
110

Mg-ion MSCs	IJP	1T c-MoS2//rGO	MgSO4	0–1.75 V	9.04 mF cm−2 (20 mV s−1)	96% over 20000 cycles	3.85 μW h cm−2; 12.6 mW cm−2	
109


 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the GO/PAA micro-lattice. (b) Mechanism of reversible hydrogen bonding between GO and PAA. (c) Optical images showing the ability of GO and GO/PAA-x inks to maintain the extruded shape on a flat or inclined polytetrafluoroethylene substrate. (d) CA-4 with a cubic lattice structure. (e) Areal capacitance of the CA-4 micro-lattice electrodes with different layer numbers. (f) Comparison of the areal capacitances of the CA-4 micro-lattice electrode. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of 3D-printed multiscale porous carbon aerogels. (b) Digital images of the 3D-printed CNCs/SiO2 aerogels with a “UCSC” shape and (c) the 3D-printed multiscale porous carbon aerogels with different thicknesses. (d) Z′ plotted against the reciprocal of the square root of frequency in the intermediate frequency range for the 3D-MCA and MCA. (e) Nyquist plots of the 3D-MCA and MCA. (f) The capacitance ratio (3D-MCA/MCA) at −70 °C and 20 °C plotted as a function of scan rate. Reproduced with permissions. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation of CP ink. (b) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of printed MSCs using a mask-assisted spray-coating method. (c) Flexible MSC array derived from air-stable conductive polymer ink; the scale bar is 2 cm. (d) Solid-state MSCs can be easily assembled using a gel electrolyte and PANI/CA nanosheets electrode. (e) Ragone plots of conductive-polymer-ink-based MSCs and other state-of-the-art materials. (f) An LCD timer being driven by three wearable MSCs in tandem; the scale bar is 2 cm. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (g) Images of as-printed electrodes with different structures. Scale bars: 5 mm. (h) S-hinged and re-entrant structure electrodes in the maximum stretch state. Scale bars: 6 mm. (i) Von Mises stress distribution in the electrodes with S-hinged and re-entrant structures at 30% stretch based on FEA characterization. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the multi-scale structural engineering strategy combining unidirectional freezing and thawing in H2SO4 to fabricate MXene hydrogel supercapacitor electrodes. (b) The fabrication process of 3D-printed all-MXene MSCs. (c) Galvanostatic charge–discharge (GCD) profiles of 3D-printed MXene MSCs at different current densities. (d) Ragone plot of the 3D-printed MXene MSCs. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. Electrochemical performance of MXene-AgNW–MnONW–C60 MSCs measured under stretching and bending. (e) Optical images under stretching ratios from 0% to 50%, and (f) capacitance retention at different stretching ratios (inset: CV curves recorded at 100 mV s−1 under stretching ratios from 0% to 50%). (g) Optical images at different bending degrees and (h) capacitance retention at different bending degrees (inset: CV curves recorded at 100 mV s−1 under bending from 0° to 180°). Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Illustration of the fabrication process of LIC-MOF-based MSCs. (b) Schematic representation of the over-focused laser beam on the surface of MOFs. (c) Crystal structures and TEM images of the employed MOFs. (d) Photograph and optical microscopy images of LIC-MOF-based MSCs. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (e) Illustration of the 3D printing of all-integrated solid-state MSCs. (f) Temperature-dependent capacitance of E-BP/ZIF-67 MSCs. Inset: GCD curves at 2 A cm−3. (g) CV curves of E-BP/ZIF-67 MSCs under consecutive motions at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. (h) Photographs of MSCs woven into cloth to power a health care device. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic diagram of the preparation process of 3D-printed electrodes with porous N-Ti3C2Tx. (b) Photographs of N-Ti3C2Tx ink printed into different shapes. (c) Ragone plots of the 3D-printed N-Ti3C2Tx//AC sodium-ion supercapacitors. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration of the synthetic procedure for MoP@NC and the 3D-printed electrode (inset at top-right corner: photograph of 3D-printed electrode). (e) GCD curves of the MoP@NC-1//AC 3D-printed PH-MSCs. (f and g) Ragone plots of the MoP@NC-1//AC 3D-printed PH-MSCs. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic depiction of inkjet-printed asymmetric micro-supercapacitors (AMSCs) containing 3D 1T c-MoS2 (left) and rGO (right). (b) 96 inkjet-printed interdigital 3D 1T c-MoS2 MSCs on a 4 inch Si wafer and 96 inkjet-printed 3D 1T c-MoS2/rGO-based AMSCs on flexible photopaper. (c) CV curves of the printed AMSCs in 1.0 M MgSO4 aqueous electrolyte. (d) Comparison of the CV curves of three connected AMSCs in series with that of a single AMSC. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic diagram showing the preparation process of the 3D-printed CNT/Zn anode. (f) Schematic diagram showing the discharging process of the 3D-printed ZH-MSCs. (g) CV profiles of the 3D-printed ZH-MSCs at scan rates from 2 to 100 mV s−1. (h) Ragone plots of 3D-printed ZH-MSCs compared with those of other reported printable energy storage devices. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of 3D printing of AMSCs with interdigitated electrodes. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (b) Schematic illustration of the stepwise fabrication of the all-printed PAμSC on a bond paper substrate with different electrode and electrolyte materials. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (c) Main components of a functionalized ink consisting of silica particles with different morphologies and diameters, ionic liquid, and photocurable resin, and the main stages of fabrication, which consist of the printing of the functionalized ink on a carbon sheet and UV curing before obtaining the completed membrane. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (d) Fabrication of on-chip ultrahigh areal number density solid-state MSCs via EHD jet printing. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic images of printable fabrication procedure and system operation mechanism (inset) of the flexible and wearable monolithically integrated self-powered smart sensor system on a plastic substrate. (b) Demonstration of a monolithically integrated self-powered sensor system: photograph of a wearable wristband. Inset: LEDs as the gas detection indicator. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. A wearable self-powered system on a T-shirt, composed of solar cell panels, designed supercapacitors with arbitrary shapes, and an LED array, with the solar cell panels under (c) illuminated and (d) dark situations at left and the corresponding circuit diagrams shown at right. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. Schematic illustration of the fabrication of inkjet-printed MP-MSCs and the self-powered integrated system. (e) Schematic of the aqueous MP hybrid ink for inkjet printing MP-MSCs. (f) Construction of the self-powered temperature sensor system obtained by printing MP-MSCs and a temperature sensor and connecting a Si film solar cell via wires. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) The development of a 3D-printed coaxial FASC device via direct coherent multi-ink writing (DCMW) technology. (b) 3D printing extrusion process and subsequent solidification process of the printable coaxial FASC device. (c) Schematic diagram of the self-powered system of energy storage and conversion. (d) Photographs of the water pumping prototype with a solar cell. (e) Photographs of the water pumping prototype in the self-powered configuration. (f) Relationship between the volume of the pumping solution and time for the solar cell and self-powered system. (g) Photographs of the operation of a sightseeing cable car using a solar cell only. (h) Photographs of the operation of a sightseeing cable car using the self-powered configuration. (i) Relationship between distance and time for the sightseeing cable car in the self-powered and solar-cell-only systems. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2021, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
