Elemental two-dimensional nanosheets beyond graphene  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6CS00937A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6CS00937A
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 2127-2157Elemental two-dimensional nanosheets beyond graphene

        
          
            Xiangkai 
            Kong
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Qiangchun 
            Liu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Changlin 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Zhenmeng 
            Peng
          
          
        
      *d and 

        
          
            Qianwang 
            Chen
          
          
        
      *be
aSchool of Physics and Electronic Information, Huaibei Normal University, Huaibei, Anhui 235000, P. R. China. E-mail: kxk@chnu.edu.cn
bHigh Magnetic Field Laboratory, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hefei, Anhui 230031, P. R. China
cJoint Center for Artificial Photosynthesis, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
dDepartment of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of Akron, Akron, OH 44325, USA. E-mail: zpeng@uakron.edu
eHefei National Laboratory for Physical Science at Microscale and Department of Materials Science & Technology, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui 230026, P. R. China. E-mail: cqw@ustc.edu.cn
Received 
      26th December 2016
    First published on 22nd March 2017AbstractThe great success of graphene has encouraged the fast development of other two-dimensional (2D) nanosheets, which have attracted extensive attention in different scientific fields encompassing field effect transistors, lithium-ion batteries, and catalysis. With atomic-scale thickness, almost all of the atoms are exposed on the surface, providing an extremely high specific surface area, in conjunction with special physical, chemical, and electronic properties, owing to the quantum confinement effects, which enable their surface phase to be as important as the bulk counterparts. In this review, we have summarized and discussed the recent advancements of 2D nanomaterials beyond graphene, with an emphasis on their basic fundamentals, preparation strategies, and applications. We believe that this review supplies critical insights for exploring and understanding 2D nanomaterials and puts forward the challenges and opportunities for further developments, such as more precise morphology control, foreign atom doping and surface modification technologies, atomic-scale characterization, and finding wide applications in many different fields.
Xiangkai Kong
Xiangkai Kong is currently an Associate Professor at the School of Physics and Electronics Information at Huaibei Normal University. Xiangkai obtained his PhD degree from the University of Science and Technology of China under the supervision of Prof. Qianwang Chen in 2014. He did postdoctoral studies at Case Western Reserve University and the University of Akron. His notable awards include the Special Prize of the President Scholarship of the Chinese Academy of Sciences for Postgraduate students. His research interests include catalysis, air-batteries and theoretical simulations.
Qiangchun Liu
Qiangchun Liu is currently a Professor in the School of Physics and Electronics Information at the Huaibei Normal University. He graduated from Huaibei Normal University in 1999, and received his MS and PhD degrees from the University of Science and Technology of China. His research interests include the synthesis and application of wave absorbing materials.
Changlin Zhang
Dr Changlin Zhang is a Postdoc Research Fellow working at the Joint Center for Artificial Photosynthesis (JCAP), and Advanced Light Source (ALS) in Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. He received his PhD in Chemical Engineering and MS in Statistics from University of Akron in 2016. His research interests include materials synthesis and in situ/ex situ (TEM/STEM/FTIR/XRD/XAS and XPS) characterization on applications such as energy conversion and storage (oxygen reduction reaction, water splitting and so on). Currently, he is interested in using ambient pressure XPS, other synchrotron X-ray based techniques and in-situ gas/liquid TEM to study the CO2 reduction reaction (CO2RR). He has co-authored 14 peer-reviewed papers in journals such as JACS, Nano Letters, ACS Catalysis and Nano Energy.
Zhenmeng Peng
Dr Zhenmeng Peng is an Assistant Professor of Chemical Engineering at the University of Akron. He received his BS and MS degrees at the University of Science and Technology of China in 2002 and 2005, respectively, his PhD degree at the University of Rochester in 2010, and his postdoc training at the University of California at Berkeley in 2010–2012. Dr Peng's research interests focus on materials chemistry, fundamental understanding of catalysis, and catalyst development for chemical conversion and energy-related reactions. He has co-authored over 50 publications in the research field.
Qianwang Chen
Professor Qianwang Chen received his PhD from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC) in 1995 and was appointed to the faculty of USTC. He worked as a postdoc in the Institute of Hydrothermal Chemistry, Kochi, Japan, Alexander von Humboldt Research Fellow in the Solar Energy Institute of Hannover, Germany and as visiting researcher in the Hong Kong Polytechnic University. He was appointed as a professor in 2000 at the USTC and was awarded the Cheung Kong Professorship in 2002 by the Ministry of Education of China. His research interests include the synthesis and application of nanoscale materials.
1. Introduction
Apart from the management of the compositions and arrangements of atoms in functional materials, dimensionality engineering also plays a pivotal role in determining their fundamental properties, and has exhibited much success and great progress in chemistry, physics, and material science.1 Two-dimensional (2D) nanomaterials are quite fascinating to the scientific community and have become the focus of intensive research in recent years. To date, 2D nanomaterials with sheet-like structure have been studied in more than 30000 published academic articles every year, suggesting that they are among the hottest topics in academic research and have great impacts on industry and our lives.2 After being exfoliated into ultrathin nanosheets, almost all of the atoms are exposed on the surface, making their surface phase extremely important. In addition, the dramatically increased surface areas originating from exfoliation not only enhance their physical and chemical reactivities, but also influence a 2D wave function from quantum confinement effects.3 Therefore, their unique 2D nanostructure with the dimensional confinement feature can offer abnormal electronic, photonic, magnetic, and catalytic properties compared to that of the bulk counterparts, endowing them with impressive behaviors in field-effect transistors, sensors, catalysis, supercapacitors, batteries, ferroelectricity, and thermoelectricity.4
The special layered feature is highly determined by the inherent crystalline structure. The most common crystal structures can be exfoliated through the top-down process, featuring neutral, single-atom-thick or polyhedral-thick layers of atoms that are covalently or ionically connected to their neighbors, in which the van der Waals force interaction along the third axis between these nanosheets can be weakened or even broken via the mechanical and chemical exfoliation process, to form the desired ultrathin 2D morphologies constructed by single- or few-layered nanosheets. Layered ionic crystals with charged 2D polyhedral layers (that are typically held together with strongly electropositive cations or strongly electronegative anions) can also be exploited and deposited as single to few layers via bulky organic cation/anion exchange, such as tetrabutylammonium/dodecyl sulfate.5 Beyond that, the confined growth method with precise control based on the bottom-up synthetic process can also facilitate the growth and assembly of 2D nanomaterials. In general, surface growth,6 solution-phase growth7 and vapor deposition8 strategies have been successfully employed. For instance, monolayers of silicon composed of a puckered hexagonal lattice with sp2 bonding configuration have been obtained by deposition on Ag(111) substrate.9 Transition metal sulfide nanosheets can be easily prepared through hydrothermal or solvothermal reactions with sulfur-containing precursors.10 Also, graphene and 2D MoS2 have been successfully synthesized via the chemical vapor deposition process with precisely controlled reaction conditions.11,12
Currently, a broad range of 2D nanomaterials have been prepared and evaluated in different applications, including graphene, metal dichalcogenides, metal carbides, metal nitrides, layered oxides and hydroxides, layered metal–organic frameworks, and their derivatives. Among them, the typical example is graphene, which is the first planar nanosheet revealed in nature and shows 3–5 orders of magnitude higher electrical and thermal conductivities along the basal plane than graphite, its three-dimensional counterpart. The discovery of graphene has ignited intensive interest in a wide range of 2D nanomaterials. Accompanied by fast development, 2D metal-free C3N413 and BN14 nanosheets and a series of metal compounds have been prepared and reported in succession, which exhibit enhanced performance, relative to their bulk counterparts, in energy conversion and storage, illustrating the great potential of the 2D nanomaterials family. Meanwhile, elemental 2D nanomaterials are attracting dramatically increasing interest, especially after the achievement of phosphorene15,16 and borophene17 nanosheets in experiment, which exhibit versatile physical, optical and electronic properties, and unexpected performance in a variety of applications. Some groups have reviewed the physical characters and chemistry of graphene, 2D transition metal dichalcogenides, metal hydroxides and their applications; however, the authors only place emphasis on graphene or its compounds.18–21 Herein, we provide a comprehensive review of the latest advances in elemental 2D nanomaterials beyond graphene and discuss their basic fundamentals and applications, with the hope of increasing the awareness of this novel promising structure and stimulating further exploration of new 2D nanomaterials, as well as their usage in more fields. The reports are organized based on elements, with the progress of both experimental and theoretical investigations being discussed. Finally, to conclude this review, a brief conclusion and perspectives on the future development of 2D elemental nanosheets will be addressed.
2. Group IV A
2.1 Silicon & silicene
As an analogue of carbon, silicon is expected to have certain similar structures and properties. It is the most commonly used material in the semiconductor industry and favors the equal sharing of four electrons, leading to a sp3-hybridized tetrahedral configuration and forming the bulk silicon structure. Lower electronegativity, larger atomic radius, smaller energy difference between the s and p orbitals, and the lower-lying d orbitals are the characteristics of silicon, compared to carbon.22 Recently, the rapid advances in graphene have increased the interest in speculating whether silicon can have low-dimensional allotropes; in particular, the fascinating option of creating a 2D hexagonal lattice of silicon, which is named silicene, is extremely appealing.23,24
Silicene has single atom thickness, similar to graphene, with the same honeycomb structure.25 As early as 1994, Takeda and Shiraishi put forward the question of what kind of 2D structures of silicon might be possible.26 Through quantum mechanical ab initio calculations, the authors have found that structures with minimum energies could be obtained if the two atoms in a unit cell were not in the same plane, resulting in a sheet that had dimples rather than both atoms being in the same plane as for graphene.27 To date, silicene has attracted extensive attention on the basis of both experiment and theory among scientists, owing to its fascinating properties and wide range of potential applications.28–35
Unlike carbon, which can effortlessly form sp2 hybrid orbitals, the sp3 hybridization configuration is more stable and energetically favorable for the common Si–Si bond, because of the poor π type overlap between neighbouring p orbitals at the distance imposed by normal s bonding, which causes its very unlikely independent existence and puts forward the great challenge to its free-standing preparation.36 Nevertheless, the wet chemical method, exploited through the top-down process, has accelerated the synthetic technology development and driven the access to 2D silicon nanosheets. In 2006, Nakano and his co-workers selected Zintl phase calcium disilicide, CaSi2, as a fundamental unit, which had a hexagonal layered structure consisting of alternating Ca layers and corrugated Si(111) planes with interconnected Si6 rings (seen in Fig. 1A).37,38 By treating the Zintl compound with ice-old concentrated aqueous HCl, the CaSi2 transformed into a green-yellow solid and hydrogen gas was released, leading to the Weiss siloxane Si6H3(OH)3 solid product, as shown in Fig. 1B.
 Fig. 1  Structural model of (A) CaSi2 and (B) Weiss siloxene Si6H3(OH)3. (C) TEM image of siloxene nanosheets. Reproduced from ref. 37 with permission from Royal Chemical Society of Chemistry, copyright 2005. (D) Schematic of the top view and side view of a magnesium-doped silicon sheet capped with oxygen, with yellow, red and green balls representing oxygen, silicon and magnesium, respectively. (E) TEM and (F) AFM images of the prepared magnesium-doped silicon sheet. Reproduced from ref. 38 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2006. 
Compared to CaSi2, the introduced OH and H groups in the interlayer of the silicon polymer sheet could significantly weaken the combination between layers, facilitating the cleavage in many layers throughout the Si6H3(OH)3 product and forming 2D silicon based nanostructures, as displayed in the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image in Fig. 1C.37 Another pathway is to introduce magnesium. Because the electrostatic interaction between the Ca2+ and Si− layers in the ionic Zintl phase was too strong, magnesium doping could effectively decrease the charge on the negatively charged silicon layers, contributing to the preparation of tremendous silicon monolayer sheets through the chemical exfoliation of CaSi1.85Mg0.15. Fig. 1D demonstrates the hexagonal crystal structure of the magnesium-doped silicon sheet, with its typical TEM and atomic force microscopy (AFM) images shown in Fig. 1E and F, respectively, to confirm its ultrathin nature with the average sheet thickness of 0.37 nm.38
Although Nakano's contributions opened up the experimental 2D silicon research, the issue was that foreign elements were inevitably in existence and functionalized on the monolayer surface. Since then, tremendous progress has been made, and the breakthrough in experimental silicene research was achieved, with the fabrication of silicene nanoribbons on a silver substrate being recognized as a promising 2D material beyond graphene.39 The substrate interaction could effectively change the silicon atomic bonding configuration, to compete with the intrinsic sp3 hybridization, which would be taken as another influencing factor to control the structure during its growth process. Various substrates have been reported for rich phases and different morphologies of silicon preparation, including Ag(111),40–42 Ag(110),43–45 Au(110),46 Ir(111),47 MoS2,48 and ZrB2.9 Among them, Ag(111) surfaces with sixfold top-layer symmetry were utilized as the most accepted support for the formation of honeycomb silicon adlayers, and have attracted tremendous attention from experimental investigations as well as theoretical calculations.49,50
A home-built low-temperature scanning tunneling microscope (STM) with a base pressure of 5 × 10−11 Torr has been created by Wu et al. to deposit 2D silicene on a clean single-crystal Ag(111) substrate.51 They observed and reported the evolution of a several monolayer superstructure of silicon on the Ag(111) surface, which was dependent on the coverage and temperature. These structures were found to share the common building blocks of silicon rings, transforming from a fragment of silicene to the complete monolayer and multilayer 2D silicon nanosheets. When the deposition temperature was below 400 K, only clusters and disordered structures were observed. As the substrate temperature increased to 420 K, the less ordered phase with close-packed protrusions (marked as T) and the highly ordered phase consisting of honeycomb structures (labeled as H) were acquired, as illustrated in Fig. 2A and B, respectively. Fig. 2C proposes a model of phase H, which was constructed based on the high-resolution STM observation of the characteristic corner hole structure. Accordingly, the authors have built the model of phase T via removing half of the silicon rings in phase H, as depicted in Fig. 2D, leaving one hexagonal silicon ring per 3 × 3 unit cell. Their coexistence under the same conditions suggest that these two phases had similar formation energies and stabilities. Furthermore, after the substrate temperature reached 480 K, long-range ordered 2D silicon with moire pattern was obtained, covering the whole surface as shown in Fig. 2E, with its high-resolution STM image demonstrated in Fig. 2F. When the depositing temperature reached 500 K, the 3D STM image in Fig. 2G elucidated a one-atom-thick silicene sheet across the Ag(111) surface without losing the continuity of the atomic lattice, with the obvious honeycomb structure illustrated in the high-resolution image (Fig. 2H). These results present the detailed process of silicene growing on the Ag(111) substrate and provide insights for high-quality and large-scale 2D silicene preparation.
 Fig. 2  STM image of (A) 0.5 monolayer silicon atoms deposited on a Ag(111) surface at substrate temperature of 420 K, and (B) 0.9 monolayer silicon atoms deposited at the Ag(111) substrate temperature of 440 K. (C and D) High-resolution STM images superposed with calculated models of phases H and T, respectively, with the red and gray balls representing buckled and unbuckled silicon atoms, respectively. (E) A derivative STM image of 0.9 monolayer silicon atoms deposited at the temperature of 480 K. (F) High-resolution STM image showing the atomic structure of moire patterns. (G) 3D STM image of a single layer of a silicene island across a step edge of Ag(111). (H) High-resolution STM image of one monolayer silicene terrace showing the honeycomb superstructure. Reproduced from ref. 51 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2012. 
Diffusion is also an interesting and critical factor that drives the 2D silicene growth in the CVD preparation procedure. In 2015, Choi's group introduced argon into the flow of hydrogen gas to make a more dilute environment and control the gas flow conditions for silicene nanosheet deposition.52Fig. 3A and B are the scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of samples synthesized under a high flow rate of hydrogen gas and diluted concentration media, respectively. It is obvious that the growth of 2D silicon could be controlled by introducing argon gas into the hydrogen flow, with its morphology changing from spherically congregated silicon nanosheets, to the bundle shape caused by the addition of argon. Control experiments were carried out and the results are summarized in Fig. 3C to show the influence caused by the diffusion-limited aggregation. Moreover, the cross-sectional views have addressed the relationship between 2D silicon and the crystal planes of silver substrates. Fig. 3D–F present the angles with the substrates, depending on the orientation of the substrate, involving (100), (110) and (111); their schematic images in the side projection view of the epitaxial silicon nanosheets are depicted in Fig. 3G–I, respectively.
 Fig. 3  Silicon nanosheets grown by controlling the flow rate of hydrogen. (A) SEM image of spherically congregated silicon nanosheets and (B) top view SEM image of controlled epitaxial silicon nanosheets on the (111) substrate. (C) Conditions for the formation of arrays and bundles of silicon nanosheets. (D–F) SEM images of epitaxial silicon nanosheets in the cross-sectional view, presenting the angles with the substrates, depending on the orientation of the substrates. (G–I) The schematic images of the side projection view of the epitaxial silicon nanosheets, corresponding to (D–F), respectively. Reproduced from ref. 52 with permission from Springer, copyright 2015. 
Okamoto et al. have shown that oxygen-free silicon nanosheets covered with organic groups can be obtained by the exfoliation of layered polysilane, as a result of reaction with n-decylamine and dissolution in organic solvent.53 Nakano and co-workers have prepared soluble 2D silicon nanosheets with surfaces modified by benzene-, naphthalene- and carbazole-containing amino substituents, which were obtained via dehydrogenative coupling of layered polysilane Si6H6 with the corresponding amines.54 In 2016, Rieger's group reported the functionalization of free-standing silicon nanosheets by radical-induced hydrosilylation reactions, and an efficient hydrosilylation of Si–H terminated 2D silicon nanostructure has been achieved through thermal initiation or the addition of diazonium salts with a variety of alkene or alkyne derivatives.55 Simultaneously, an efficient and economical route for the synthesis of porous 2D nanoplates of silicon was developed by Hwang et al. via the magnesiothermically induced phase transition of exfoliated clay 2D nanosheets, and the magnesiothermic reaction of precursor clay nanosheets prepared by the exfoliation and restacking with Mg2+ cations could yield 2D porous nanoplates that are composed of elemental silicon.56
Silicene can be described as a surface material that is truncated from the bulk silicon. When the truncation takes place, it is a serious problem to stabilize silicene because of the presence of dangling bonds on the surface.57,58 In addition to the above experimental preparations, Berdiyorov, Neek-Amal and their coworkers have proposed a novel route by using the graphene bilayer as a scaffold via molecular dynamics simulations. The buckled hexagonal silicene was observed, only weakly coupled to the graphene layers by van der Waals interactions, with a graphite-like interlayer distance of ∼3.4 Å. Based on the thermal stability investigation, the authors demonstrated that the silicene intercalated within bilayer graphene is stable well above room temperature, thus providing a favorable route to realizing silicene.59,60
A series of investigations on the physical properties of 2D silicene were made using the first-principles method, including structural and electronic properties,61–63 quantum spin Hall effect,64–66 ferromagnetism,67,68 thermal conductivity,69 and half-metallic properties.68,70 Due to the buckled structure, silicene has properties that are not found in graphene. Theoretical studies have indicated that the electronic structure and spin states in silicene are strongly influenced by applying an electric field in the perpendicular direction and an exchange field, making the properties well tuned under different potentials.71,72 It was found that the combined fields could bring a spin and valley texture to the particle-hole excitation spectrum and allow the formation of spin- and valley-polarized plasmons, whose lifetime and oscillator strength depend on the number of spin and valley type electrons that form the electron–hole pairs,73 and the properties of silicene are sensitive to lattice imperfections and adatoms. Creating in-plane defects opened the possibility for tailoring the electronic structures of silicene. Stone–Wales type defects could be formed within silicene with an energy barrier of ∼2.5 eV for the formation, which is significantly lower than that in graphene (∼9.2 eV). Silicene with Stone–Wales defects is semiconducting with a direct band gap of 0.02 eV, and this value depends on the concentration of defects, realizing band gap engineering.74 Pristine silicene was found to be stable up to 1500 K, and Peeters found that vacancy defects resulted in local structural changes in the system and reduced its thermal stability; depending on the size of the vacancy defect, the critical temperature decreased by more than 30%.75 In addition, adsorption of foreign atoms has also been regarded as an effective route for electronic property control.76 Sahin and Peeters reported that the adsorption of Be, Mg, and Ca turned silicene into a narrow gap semiconductor, and upon the adsorption of transition metals, depending on the adatom type and atomic radius, the system could exhibit metal, half-metal, and semiconducting behavior.77 Zhou and Zhong carried out density functional theory (DFT) calculations on the molecular adsorption of N2 and CO on silicene, seen in Fig. 4, as well as the atomic adsorption of nitrogen, carbon and oxygen.78 The obtained results demonstrated 0.085 and 0.255 eV adsorption energies for N2 and CO, respectively, exhibiting the higher reactivity of 2D silicon nanosheets towards CO chemisorption, compared to N2 physisorption.
 Fig. 4  Schematic of (A) N2 and (B) CO molecules adsorbed onto silicene. The yellow, blue, red and gray balls are silicon, nitrogen, oxygen and carbon atoms, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 78 with permission from World Scientific Publishing Company, copyright 2016. 
It is widely accepted that silicon is the most promising anode material for the next generation of high-performance lithium ion batteries, and for this reason, 2D silicon based materials have been explored and have shown significantly improved lithium storage performance in experiment.79,80 Hong et al. synthesized free-standing silicon nanosheets from natural sand through the magnesiothermic reduction process, as illustrated in Fig. 5A, with their structures characterized by SEM (Fig. 5B) and TEM (Fig. 5C), exhibiting a leaf-like sheet morphology ranging from tens to several hundred nanometers.81 Moreover, the reduced graphene oxide could also be used to encapsulate 2D silicon, and both of them presented enhanced lithium capacity performance, compared to commercial nano-silicon, as measured in Fig. 5D. Meng et al. have employed first-principles calculations to investigate the interaction of lithium with silicon in the model electrode of free-standing silicene.82 The strong binding site for lithium adsorption and the energy barriers for lithium diffusion were identified, as displayed in Fig. 5E and F. Moreover, the authors have compared the obtained results with bulk silicon and nanowires, to assess the suitability of 2D silicon in the form of silicene layers for lithium ion storage.
 Fig. 5  (A) Schematic of the synthesis of reduced graphene oxide-encapsulated silicon nanosheets. (B) SEM and (C) high-magnification TEM images of as-synthesized silicon nanosheets. (D) Cyclability of commercial silicon nanopowder, silicon nanosheets and reduced graphene oxide-encapsulated silicon nanosheets. Reproduced from ref. 81 with permission from the Chemical Society of Chemistry, copyright 2014. (E) Atomic structure of lithiated single-layer silicene of Li0.5Si0.5. (F) Pathways for the diffusion of atomic lithium on single-layer silicene. Reproduced from ref. 82 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2013. 
Because silicon is a congener of carbon, silicene has also attracted tremendous interest in the science and technology field. Owing to the advances in physical and chemical properties, silicon nanosheets were developed as the building blocks for electronic devices in field effect transistors.83,84 Although the applications are still in infancy, 2D silicene has exhibited great potential and is expected to be explored in photo devices, sensors and other functional fields in the near future.
2.2 Germanium & germanene
Like carbon and silicon, the outer shell electrons of germanium are also made up of the s2p2 configuration, and thus it is expected to emerge as a strong contender in the realm of 2D materials. Each germanium atom is covalently bonded to three other germanium atoms, resulting in a simple hexagonal unit cell. Despite having a similar electronic configuration to carbon, germanium is more stable in the sp3-hybridized tetrahedral configuration than in sp2 hybridization. The Ge–Ge bond length is much larger than the C–C bond length, making the pz overlap and the π bond formation more difficult in germanium.85 Hence, converting the sp3 configuration into sp2via controllable physical and chemical modifications to form a 2D nanostructure has been raised and fueled by the fast development of graphene.
Germanene is designated as the germanium analogue of silicene.36 Its first prediction also originates from Takeda and Shiraish's first-principles total-energy calculations, which suggest that the germanium atoms prefer to form the corrugated aromatic stage and to construct the corrugated 2D layer-structure.26 Because of its special location relative to silicon in the periodic table of elements, germanene has also become the prologue of recent research based on nanosheets and has been regarded as the “brother” of silicene, further igniting the spark in the 2D materials family.86–91
The synthesis of 2D germanene and germanene-based materials was initiated by the study of Bianco et al. on the preparation and generation of stable, single-layered germanene, which is a single layer of hydrogen-terminated germanium.92,93 In their investigations, millimeter-scale crystals of a layered hydrogenated germanium have been firstly obtained from the topochemical deintercalation of CaGe2, as shown in the schematic illustration in Fig. 6A, which has alternating planes of covalently bonded germanium atom layers separated by ionically bonded interstitial calcium. The chemical conversion proceeded by placing a large prepared CaGe2 crystal into aqueous HCl at −40 °C for several days, and the designed hydrogenated germanium was purified through washing with Milli-Q water followed by methanol, and then dried at room temperature on a Schlenk line. The optical image in Fig. 6B demonstrated that the obtained crystallites of hydrogenated germanium were 2–3 mm in diameter and less than 100 μm in thickness. The 2D few layered nanosheets could be acquired by simple exfoliation of the layered van der Waals solid, which exhibited good stability in ambient environment and was only slowly oxidized in air over the span of several months. Fig. 6C shows the corresponding TEM image, which confirms its layered morphology. Furthermore, AFM analysis indicated its ultrathin nature, as shown in Fig. 6F and G, where few-layer and even 2D single-layer-thick germanium-based samples were observed. Meanwhile, its silver-black appearance suggests a broad absorption over visible wavelengths, with a linear approximation of the absorption edge indicating a band gap of around 1.59 eV (see in Fig. 6D). Simultaneously, the HSE-06 theory calculations predicted a 1.56 eV direct band gap for an isolated single layer of hydrogenated germanium, which matched well the experimental observations, demonstrating the great potential for a wide range of optoelectronic and sensing applications (Fig. 6E).
 Fig. 6  (A) Schematic of the topotactic deintercalation of CaGe2 to GeH. (B) Optical image of GeH crystals on graph paper with a 1 mm grid. (C) TEM image of GeH platelets. (D) Diffuse reflectance absorption spectrum of GeH, with the calculated 1.59 eV band gap. (E) The calculated electronic band structure of an isolated single layer of GeH. AFM images and height profiles of (F) few-layered GeH and (G) single-layer thick GeH sheets; inset: optical image. Reproduced from ref. 92 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2013. 
As with preceding discussions on the electronic structure of germanium, it was difficult to obtain stable free-standing germanene due to its local lattice distortions. Similar to silicene, pure germanene could only be synthesized by virtue of the interaction with substrates, and to date, only a few substrates have been reported to successfully deposit 2D germanene nanostructures.94,95 In 2014, Gao et al. fabricated germanene on a clean Pt(111) substrate using an ultra-high vacuum (UHV) system, and a (√19 × √19) superstructure related to the substrate lattice was observed using low energy electron diffraction and STM, as shown in Fig. 7A.96 Pirri and co-workers selected Al(111) as the substrate and they prepared the 2D germanene layer, uniformly covering the substrate with a large coherence over the Al(111) surface atomic plane, seen in Fig. 7B.97 Besides, Davila's group have grown an atom-thin, ordered, 2D multi-phase film in situ through germanium molecular beam epitaxy using a Au(111) surface as the substrate (Fig. 7C).98 Similar to silicene, the growth of germanene Ag(111) has also been attempted by evaporating germanium in UHV, by Dimoulas et al., and about 1/3 monolayer coverage with a stable (√3 × √3)R30° superstructure was observed by reflection high-energy electron diffraction, as displayed in Fig. 7D.99
 Fig. 7  (A) STM image of the germanium adlayer grown on the Pt(111) surface, showing a √19 × √19 superstructure. Reproduced from ref. 96 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2014. (B) Large scale STM image of germanene on the Al(111) surface, with its fast Fourier transform image inset. Reproduced from ref. 97 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. (C) 16.2 nm × 16.2 nm STM image of the modulated honeycomb √19 × √19 superstructure with a close-up in the bottom left corner. Adapted from ref. 98 with permission from Institute of Physics, copyright 2014. (D) Reflection high-energy electron diffraction patterns of germanium/Ag(111) at 1/3 monolayer coverage obtained along different azimuths of Ag(111). Blue and orange arrows indicate the diffraction streaks of Ag(111) and germanium/Ag(111) superstructure, respectively. The schematic illustrates a simulated LEED image, with open blue and filled orange circles corresponding to Ag(111) and (√3 × √3)R30° diffraction spots, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 99 with permission from the American Physical Society, copyright 2013. 

Ab initio calculations were effective for the study and prediction of the potential physical properties as well as electronic structures of free-standing 2D germanene, especially when its experimental development was fairly limited.100–108 The structural stability,109 metallic behavior,110 strong excitonic resonances,111,112 carrier mobility,113 Dirac features,114,115 photon properties,116,117 negative thermal expansion,118 spin polarized electronic transport,119 magnetic properties,120 many body effect,121 infrared adsorption,122,123 vibrational properties124 and thermoelectricity125 have been discussed and predicted theoretically in recent research. Moreover, it was found that modification by haloid elements or hydrogen could lead to the quantum spin Hall effect,126,127 highly anisotropic optical responses,128 half-metallic ferromagnetism,129 and topological insulators.130 Besides, foreign element doping could lead to superconductivity131 and magnetism132 on 2D germanene, as well as change its electronic and magnetic properties.133 It has also been predicted that applying an electric field was able to tune the band gap,84 control the topological phase transition,134 and induce half-metallicity135 in buckled germanene. For example, it is known that germanene is zero-gap semi-metallic, and its charge carriers are massless fermions due to the linear contact of its π and π* bands at the Fermi level. The atoms in the lattice will become inequivalent under the influence of a vertical electric field, leading to a direct band gap opening at the K point (Eg = 0.06 and 0.12 eV under the vertical electric field of 0.51 and 1.03 V Å−1, respectively), which provides the opportunity to fabricate field effect transistors at room temperature.84
In addition, based on the experimental achievements, 2D germanene supported by different substrates have also been studied by first-principles calculations. For instance, Liu et al. have investigated the structural, electronic, and hydrogenation-induced properties of Al(111) supported germanene, and found that despite having a different lattice from the free-standing germanene, the supported counterpart on Al(111) still possessed Dirac points at high-symmetry K and K′ points. More remarkably, they discovered that the one-sided semi-hydrogenated germanene turned out to be a 2D half-semimetal, representing a novel state of matter that was simultaneously a half-metal and a semimetal.136 Recently, Pirri and co-workers calculated the electronic structure at the germanene/Al(111) interface, and disclosed a charge transfer from the Al surface atoms to the germanene, and the existence of three non-equivalent germanium sites with three different atomic Bader charges, which were in agreement with the photoemission measurements.137 Simultaneously, Meng's group carried out a comprehensive first-principles study to investigate the geometric structures, electrical properties, and optical properties of the 2D Ge/BeO heterostructure. The energy gap of around 49 meV was obtained, which could be further adjusted in the range of 14–382 meV by the interlayer distance, external strain, as well as the external electric field.138
Theoretical investigation of the adsorption of atoms and organic molecules on 2D germanene, which had an ability that graphene did not, was also an interesting topic. Ciraci et al. showed that a germanium adatom adsorbed on germanene could push down the host germanium atom and form a dumbbell structure, as illustrated in Fig. 8A, and the exothermic process could occur spontaneously, causing new phase formation.139 3d transition metal atom adsorption could provide a route to modifying the electronic and magnetic properties of 2D germanene for the applications in nanoelectronics.140,141 Kaloni addressed the structural, electronic, and magnetic properties of 3d transition metal atom adsorbed germanene, and found that these metal atoms preferred to occupy the hollow site for all the cases.142Fig. 8B shows the calculated charge density difference isosurface for two Mn atoms at a distance of 15.47 Å, with ferromagnetic coupling on the 2D germanene surface. He concluded that transition metals and the nearest-neighbor germanium atoms were ferromagnetically ordered in the case of V, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, and Zn, whereas an antiferromagnetic ordering was achieved for Sc, Ti, and Cr-adsorbed germanene. Besides, Zhang et al. studied the germanene adsorption with several small organic molecules, which led to a large enhancement of the band gap on germanene, with sizeable values of 3.9 (acetonitrile)–81.9 (ammonia) meV, due to the sublattice symmetry breaking (summarized in the table in Fig. 8C).143 In addition, Yang et al. investigated the common gas molecules adsorption, and reported that N2, CO, CO2 and H2O were physisorbed on germanene via van der Waals interaction, while NH3, NO, NO2 and O2 were chemisorbed on germanene via strong covalent bonds, providing a feasible way to exploit chemically modified 2D germanene.144
 Fig. 8  (A) Snapshots of conjugate gradient steps in the course of the formation of a dumbbell structure. Reproduced from ref. 139 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. (B) Charge density difference isosurface for the Mn-adsorbed supercell of germanene for the ferromagnetic coupling between two Mn atoms, with the isosurface corresponding to a value of 2 × 10−3 electrons per Å3. Reproduced from ref. 142 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. (C) The calculated adsorption energies and band gap of different molecules on germanene. Reproduced from ref. 143 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2016. 
2.3 Stannum (tin) & stanene (tinene)
The stannum element is located in a deeper position in group IV A in the periodic table, and also has unusual and potentially useful electronic properties. It is emerging as a competitor for the miracle material, and its progress makes things even more interesting.145 The 2D allotrope of stannum is named stanene, which is composed of a bi-atomic layer of Sn(111), in which two triangular sublattices stack together, forming a buckled honeycomb lattice. It has potential for being a topological insulator, owing to its special electronic structures and outstanding properties, and is regarded as a new cousin of graphene.146 According to the predictions made by Zhang et al. in 2013, 2D stanene was found to be a quantum spin insulator with extraordinarily large bulk gaps of 0.3 eV, which is sufficient for practical applications at room temperature, spurring great interest among both physicists and chemists.147
Unlike the successful realization of silicene and germanene in experiment, the synthesis of 2D stanene has proved to be a tremendous challenge for a long time. In 2015, Jia et al. overcame this difficulty and fabricated 2D stanene by molecular beam epitaxy, and its atomic and electronic features were characterized and confirmed using STM and angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES).148 Bi2Te3(111) substrate was selected for stanene deposition. Compared to the topography of the substrate, the overall surface morphology was unperturbed on the large scale after stanene growth, as shown in Fig. 9A and B, in which the sharp Bi2Te3 steps with 1 nm height could be always observed. Moreover, the dispersion of the inner hole band was measured via the polarization-dependent experiments and the corresponding ARPES spectra near the Γ point were presented. It was obvious that there were two hole bands under p-polarization crossing the Fermi level (dotted lines), with the conduction bands and valence bands of Bi2Te3 also being observed (arrows), shown in Fig. 9C. In contrast, the Bi2Te3 bands were strongly suppressed under s-polarization, seen in Fig. 9D, where the two hole bands originating from stanene remained and the inner hole band was enhanced. After that, Shukla et al. reported the synthesis and investigation of the optical properties of 2D stanene up to a few layers. The typical high resolution TEM demonstrated its hexagonal arrangement of tin atoms, with the inter-planar d spacing calculated using the selected area electron diffraction pattern to be around 0.25 and 0.16 nm for d1 and d2, respectively (Fig. 9E). Fig. 9F represents the edge of a large stanene flake, with the height profile indicating the presence of 4 layers and confirming its 2D morphology.149
 Fig. 9  (A) and (B) are the large-scale STM topography and atomically resolved STM image of stanene film, respectively. (C) and (D) are the ARPES spectra taken under p- and s-polarization, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 148 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2015. (E) High-resolution TEM image of the hexagonal stanene lattice, with the energy dispersive X-ray analysis, large area TEM image and electron diffraction pattern shown in the inset. (F) AFM image showing the edge of ∼4 layered stanene sheet, with the 3D view and measured height profile inset. Reproduced from ref. 149 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2016. 
Compared to the finite development of experiments on 2D stanene, the theoretical investigations have shown greater progress and also suggest its potential in nanoelectronics and chemistry. These days, the mechanical properties,150 thermal conductivity and transport,151–155 electronic properties,156,157 phase transition,158 giant magnetoresistance,159 superconductivity,160 and quantum spin Hall effect161,162 of 2D stanene have been studied in succession. More interestingly, the influence on stanene sheets caused by special conditions has been discussed. According to the reports, it was found that buckled bilayer stanene under external pressure could be automatically converted into a new dynamically stable phase with flat honeycomb meshes, from normal metal to topological insulator.163 Ezawa addressed photo-irradiation could induce the Haldane term into the 2D stanene system, by introducing s-wave superconductivity by proximity coupling, facilitating the system transforming into a topological superconductor.164 Applying an external electric field165 and strain166,167 would also modify the electronic properties in stanene, such as enlarging its band gap based on the first principles calculations.
Adsorption of atoms and molecules on 2D stanene is also an important matter, which has attracted much attention from some groups.168 Gas molecules such as nitrogen, sulfur and carbon oxides were used for the study of the adsorption of stanene sheets, showing the good reactivities of stanene against these air pollutants, which could offer low temperature trapping and dissociation of air pollutants.169 In addition, Chen et al. reported that NH3 and H2S molecules could serve as charge donors (see in Fig. 10A and B) when adsorbed on stanene surface, and indicated that the sensing performance of stanene was superior to other 2D materials, such as silicene and germanene.170 Meanwhile, Mortazavi's group and Akturk's group investigated lithium and sodium adsorption on stanene, with the charge density difference plotted in Fig. 10C and D, to reveal its potential application in lithium and sodium ion batteries.171,172
 Fig. 10  Charge density difference of the (A) NH3/stanene and (B) H2S/stanene configurations, with the charge transfer value denoted. The isosurface is taken as 2 × 10−3 e Å−3. Reproduced from ref. 170 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. Calculated charge density difference plots for (C) lithium and (D) sodium ions on stanene. The green and red areas represent electron loss and gain, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 171 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2016. 
Additionally, the derivatives of stanene functionalized by hydrogen, halogens and organic clusters have also aroused great awareness and showed a promising platform for further realistic applications. The results indicated that the half-hydrogenation broke the π-bonds of stanene, leaving π electrons in unsaturated tin atoms localized and unpaired.173 The semi-hydrogenated stanene nanosheets possessed the ferromagnetic ground states with magnetic moments of 1 μB and high Curie temperatures under different strains.174 Besides, Chuang et al. predicted that hydrogenated ultra-thin films of stannum harbored a new class of 2D topological insulators.175 Stanene sheets functionalized by halogens, especially by fluorine, could efficiently tune the electronic structure and drive the quantum spin Hall effect.176,177 Noticeably, ethynyl-derivative functionalized stanene, especially with chlorine, bromine and iodine, have been found to be quantum spin Hall insulators with a bulk gap around 0.22 eV, shedding new light on the future design and fabrication of new quantum devices with topological phenomena, which could operate at room temperature in spintronics.178,179
2.4 Lead
As researchers continued downward in the study of group IV A of the periodic table, lead, at the bottom in the carbon group, was also considered, whose outer shell electrons were made also up of the s2p2 structure. As far as we know, there was no experimental report on the successful preparation of 2D ultrathin lead nanosheets, and even its theoretical investigation was still in infancy. Recently, Barraza-Lopez and co-workers indicated that lead could stabilize an optimal 2D high-buckled phase – a hexagonal close packed bilayer structure with nine-fold atomic coordination, which was demonstrated by energetics, phonon dispersion curves, and the structural optimization of finite-sized samples. Through the analysis of structural stability and the discussion of its electronic properties, it was shown that lead was not a viable route towards stabilizing topological fullerenes.180 In addition, Zhang et al. predicted a novel class of 2D quantum spin Hall insulators in X-decorated 2D Pb monolayers (PbX; X = H, F, Cl, Br, I) with extraordinarily giant-sized bulk gaps from 1.03 eV to a record value of 1.34 eV. The topological characteristics of 2D PbX generally originated from s–px,y band inversion related to the lattice symmetry, while the effect of spin–orbital coupling was only to open up a giant gap.181
3. Group V A
3.1 Phosphorus & phosphorene
In general, phosphorus has several allotropes including white, red and black phosphorus, which are taken as common materials with industrialized production and have been extensively used in matchsticks, fireworks, chemical fertilizers, and the napalm bomb.182 Among them, black phosphorus (BP) has attracted significant attention in recent years as an emerging material due to its 2D morphology exploration.183 The first fabrication of BP could be traced back to 1914, when Bridgman applied high hydrostatic pressure at a suitable temperature to transform white phosphorus into black phosphorus, with a high density of 2.69 g cm−3.184,185 On seeing the success from graphene, phosphorene, a single layer of BP, was prepared from the bulk counterpart using scotch-tape-based microcleavage in early 2014, and was regarded as the second elementary single-layer material after graphene that can be exfoliated from bulk crystals.15,16,186 Its electronic bandgap has been found to increase from 0.3 to 1.3 eV when exfoliated from the bulk to the monolayer limit, conferring on it the typical characteristics of semiconductors and suggesting significant potential for used in electronic and photonic devices.187 Phosphorene has a layered structure consisting of puckered hexagonal rings in an orthorhombic crystal structure and shares the same in-plane translation symmetry with bulk BP. There are five valence electrons in the 3p orbitals in the phosphorus atom and each atom is saturated by making a covalent bond, giving rise to sp3 hybridization with the phosphorene structure.188 For the few layered case, each individual layer consists of two atomic layers, with the shorter in-plane P–P bond of 0.2224 nm connecting the nearest phosphorus atoms and the longer out-plane P–P bond of 0.2244 nm combining the phosphorus atoms at the interface between the top and bottom of a single layer.189 It is well known that phosphorene is unstable in the presence of the moisture and oxygen in air, and a few-layer sample without protection can degrade within hours. As a result, oxidized aluminum, poly(methyl methacrylate) and other protections have been proposed as a passivation layer, which can effectively reduce the degradation of phosphorene.190,191
According to the report from Ye et al., 2D few-layer crystals of phosphorene have been prepared and introduced by the scotch-tape-based microcleavage of the layered bulk black phosphorus, which have an inherent, direct and appreciable band gap and are regarded as an unexplored p-type semiconducting material. Fig. 11A addresses the AFM image of an exfoliated single-layer phosphorene crystal, with a step height of around 0.85 nm, confirming its single-layer structure. Based on the photoluminescence measurements as shown in Fig. 11B, an obvious response was observed in the visible wavelengths on the exfoliated phosphorene, while no photoluminescence signal was obtained for 10 nm thick BP flakes. Subsequently, the authors have employed the 2D exfoliated phosphorene in the field effect transistor to demonstrate its p-type characteristics and reveal its good performance in devices (seen in Fig. 11C and D).15 Chen and Zhang have also fabricated field effect transistors based on few-layer black phosphorus crystals with thicknesses down to a few nanometers. The carrier sign inversion and electrical conduction were detected on their device as displayed in Fig. 11E and F, to demonstrate that 2D phosphorene is a candidate for future nanoelectronic and optoelectronic applications.16,192–195
 Fig. 11  (A) AFM image of a single-layer phosphorene crystal with measured thickness of about 0.85 nm. (B) Photoluminescence spectra of single-layer phosphorene and bulk BP. (C) Output and (D) transfer curves of a typical few-layer phosphorene transistor with a film thickness of 5 nm. The arrow directions are also back gate bias sweeping directions. Reproduced from ref. 15 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. (E) Schematic of the device structure of a few-layer phosphorene field effect transistor, with the cross-section height profile of the device along the white dashed line. (F) Hall coefficient (blue curve) and conductance (red curve) as a function of gate voltage. Inset: Optical image of a typical multi-terminal few-layer phosphorene device. Reproduced from ref. 16 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2014. 
In addition, Jin et al. introduced a successful experimental approach to preparing monolayer phosphorene by mechanical cleavage and the subsequent plasma thinning process.196 As can be seen in Fig. 12A and B, the optical contrast of the regions after Ar+ plasma treatment significantly decrease and 2D phosphorene composed of 1–5 layers with uniform surfaces can be obtained in succession, in a controlled manner, which was also confirmed by the contrast spectra (shown in Fig. 12C).
 Fig. 12  (A) Optical image of multilayered pristine phosphorene. (B) Same as in (A) after plasma thinning. (C) The contrast spectra of phosphorene with different layers. Reproduced from ref. 196 with permission from Springer, copyright 2014. 
Liquid exfoliation is also a very promising typical method for 2D material fabrication, which normally provides high yield with rather low cost.197 The first report on phosphorene preparation via liquid exfoliation was according to Brent et al.'s work,198 in which, BP crystal was immersed into the organic solvent, N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone, with strong bath ultrasonication to produce three to five-layer phosphorene nanosheets with significant lateral dimensions. After that, exfoliation in different conventional solvents such as dimethylformamide, dimethyl sulfoxide and N-cyclohexyl-2-pyrrolidone were carried out for 2D phosphorene fabrication with high yield, confirming the tremendous potential for liquid exfoliation in 2D materials synthesis.199–201
The properties of phosphorene highly depend on its layered structures. Photoluminescence and Raman spectra have proved to be effective at providing useful information for the interlayer coupling in phosphorene, whose peak position correlated substantially with the layer number, type and size of strain and other factors.202–205 This characteristic confirmed its semiconductor nature and conferred 2D phosphorene with controlled response to light irradiation, making it a good candidate for use in photoelectronics, involving photo-detectors,206 solar cells207 and photosensitizers for singlet oxygen generation.208
Based on the combination of experiment and theoretical simulations, a series of properties and the performance of 2D phosphorene have been systematically studied, including electronic structure,209–212 magnetic behavior,213 magneto-optical transport properties,214 band structure influenced by layers215 as well as by strain and orientation,216 mechanical flexibility,217 blue phase,218,219 thermal properties,220 thermoelectric efficiency,221 anisotropic excitons,222 anisotropic electrical conductance,223 anisotropic thermal conductivity224,225 and the conversion from a normal insulator into a topological insulator via electric field.226 The influence of strain has been discussed by Peeters et al., where applying a compressive biaxial in-plane strain and perpendicular tensile strain can lead to a topological phase transition.227 Moreover, they have reported that applying tensile strain can significantly improve electron transport along the zigzag direction of phosphorene and biaxial strain is able to tune its optical band gap from 0.38 eV (at −8% strain) to 2.07 eV (at 5.5%), which appears as a promising technique to design novel photovoltaic devices.228
Furthermore, the development of 2D phosphorene has been applied in gas sensing. For instance, a field effect transistor sensor device has been fabricated based on phosphorene nanosheets by Cui et al., which exhibited an ultrahigh sensitivity to NO2 with a sensitivity up to 190% at 20 parts per billion at room temperature.229 On the other hand, Kou et al. studied the adsorption of CO, CO2, NH3, NO and NO2 gas molecules on a monolayer phosphorene via first principles calculations.230 Their results predicted its superior sensing performance compared to graphene and MoS2, which was driven by the higher charge transfer and stronger interaction between the molecules and 2D phosphorene surface.
Considering the extremely high surface areas of phosphorene nanosheets and the successful application of its cousin graphene in batteries, it was also anticipated to explore phosphorene as a new anode material in lithium and sodium ion batteries. To the best of our knowledge, the experimental development of using isolated phosphorene in this field was limited, while much progress has been made by density functional theory calculations.231–233 Zhang and co-workers have indicated the ultrahigh diffusivity of lithium on monolayer phosphorene along the zigzag direction with the shallow energy barrier of 0.08 eV, in Fig. 13A and B.234 The lithium atoms were loaded on the phosphorene surface then diffused along the armchair or zigzag direction. Obviously, the diffusion of lithium on phosphorene was highly anisotropic with the zigzag direction being highly energetically favorable, while along the armchair direction was almost prohibited. Moreover, Wu et al. have found the high theoretical sodium storage capacity and low diffusion energy barrier of single layer phosphorene.235Fig. 13C addresses a high sodium intercalated structure, corresponding to NaP2, in which all of the sodium atoms remained isolated and kept their positions above the centers of the hexagons, suggesting that large sodium concentration might be expected in phosphorene, owing to a rather small Na–Na repulsion with a large Na–Na distance of 3 Å. It was shown that sodium diffusion on phosphorene was fast and anisotropic with an energy barrier of only 0.04 eV (seen in Fig. 13D). Therefore, 2D phosphorene was regarded as a very promising material due to its interesting features and good performance in various domains.
 Fig. 13  (A) Schematic of lithium surface loading, diffusion along armchair and zigzag directions on phosphorene surface. (B) (a) Energy profiles of lithium diffusion along armchair and zigzag directions, (b) top and (c) side views of the lithium diffusion pathway along the armchair direction, (d) top and (e) side view of lithium diffusion pathway along the zigzag direction. Reproduced from ref. 234 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. (C) Structure of the sodium-adsorbed phosphorene at a high sodium coverage for single-side adsorption. (D) Sodium diffusion on monolayer phosphorene, (a) top and (b) side view of sodium diffusion pathways, (c) corresponding energy barriers for sodium diffusion on phosphorene. Reproduced from ref. 235 with permission from Royal Chemical Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015. 
3.2 Arsenic & arsenene
Arsenic also has several allotropes, in which the gray bulk arsenic constructed by buckled honeycomb layers is denoted as the most stable phase. There are five electrons in its atomic outer-shell which are composed of s2p3 structure, making arsenic crystals tend to form a 2D layered structure with single-layer thickness of about 1.35 Å.236 Meanwhile, arsenene has been put forward to describe a single-atomic layer of gray arsenic with a rhombohedral structure, which inspires tremendous research interest in the field of 2D materials. In the early part of this year, Tsai and Liang successfully prepared multilayer arsenene (thickness is about 14 nm) on an InAs substrate using the plasma assisted process, in which the thickness could be controlled by the plasma exposure time and the bandgap of multilayer arsenene was estimated to be around 2.3 eV.237
Based on a comprehensive theoretical investigation on the electronic structure, 2D arsenene seemed to be an ideal direct bandgap semiconductor,238,239 and its electronic properties could be further effectively modulated by staking, patterning and applying strain.240 Allaei and his co-workers studied the lattice thermal conductivity of the 2D honeycomb structure of arsenene using ab initio calculations and predicted a highly anisotropic thermal conductivity of 30.4 and 7.8 W m−1 K−1 along the zigzag and armchair directions, respectively.241 Chen et al. reported that the suitable strain modulation could result in a unique 2D topological insulator with a sizable bulk gap that could be characterized and utilized at room temperature.242 Yang and Liu have investigated the dielectric functions of atomically thin arsenene as a function of temperature, and concluded that with large energy gap, interband transitions dominate the optical absorption of arsenene sheets, but are reduced with the lattice vibration becoming stronger, including a redshift and decreased absorption peaks.243
Introducing defects into 2D materials, including doping and adsorption, is of fundamental importance because this process could enable a wide range of nanoelectronic devices by modulating their electronic properties. Foreign atom doping was investigated by means of first principles methods, indicating the obvious influences of impurity atoms on the structural, electronic and magnetic properties in 2D arsenene.244–247 For instance, Fig. 14A displays the band structures of B-, C- N-, O-, and F-doped models with the substituted formats, where B-, N-, and F-doped systems exhibit semiconducting characteristics, while C- and O-doped cases manifest metallic behaviors with their Fermi levels crossing the electronic states.248 Besides, the adsorption of metal atoms,249 hydrogen,250,251 halogen,252 and other molecules253,254 on arsenene nanosheet surfaces showed promise as candidates for practical room temperature applications in electronics and photonics. Taking Ma's work for example, the optical properties of the F decorated arsenene monolayer were calculated as illustrated in Fig. 14B and C, which suggested its pronounced visible light absorption and potential usage in photovoltaics, and also provided an instructive platform for the design of new controlled bandgap 2D elemental materials.255
 Fig. 14  (A) Band structures of B-, C-, N-, O- and F-doped arsenene, with the bands due to dopants indicated by red dotted lines. Reproduced from ref. 248 with permission from Institute of Physics, copyright 2015. (B) Atomic structures of F functionalized monolayer arsenene. (C) The calculated optical properties of the F functionalized monolayer arsenene, with the absorbance coefficient in the visible and near-infrared light region shown inset. Reproduced from ref. 255 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016. 
3.3 Antimony & antimonene
Antimony is in a much lower position in group V A and is also composed of s2p3 electronic structure with the five electrons in its outer-shell orbitals. The largest applications for metallic antimony are as an alloy with lead and tin, and the lead antimony plates in lead–acid batteries. Similar to arsenic, the gray antimony constructed by bulk honeycomb antimony layers is the most stable phase among all its allotropes. When exfoliated down into a monolayer structure, it is denoted as antimonene, exhibiting semiconductor behavior with a theoretical bandgap up to 2.28 eV.256 The fast development of its experimental fabrication as well as theoretical calculations point toward a hopeful electronic structure with a bandgap suitable for optoelectronics applications, which has attracted significant interest.
Zamora et al. have demonstrated that single layers of antimonene could be readily produced using mechanical exfoliation combined with a controlled double step transfer procedure.257Fig. 15A depicts the sample transferring process, and the AFM and TEM images in Fig. 15B and C have addressed the 2D sheet-like morphology composed of well-resolved terraces with a thickness in the nanometer range. Meanwhile, the same group has reported a fast and simple liquid exfoliation method to produce few-layer antimonene nanosheets without any surfactant.258 The Faraday–Tyndall effect was obvious for the suspension with the corresponding AFM image in Fig. 15D, indicating its high yield and efficient exfoliation. The observed Raman spectra reflected the high thickness dependence (Fig. 15E), which was rationalized by the theoretical calculations as displayed in Fig. 15F. Apart from these, 2D antimonene with few layered structures have been grown on different substrates, involving InSb,259 Bi2Te2Se,260 Bi2Te3 and Sb2Te3,261 which exhibited some special electronic properties and paved a material foundation for further study and commercial applications.
 Fig. 15  (A) Antimonene flakes on SiO2 substrates, top: millimeter-sized crystals of antimony; middle: adhesive tape with sub-millimeter crystals of antimony; bottom: polymer on glass slide with micrometer antimony flakes. (B) AFM topographic image showing two flakes of antimonene. (C) High-resolution TEM image of a few-layer antimonene flake. The inset is a digital magnification of the area inside the blue rectangle. Reproduced from ref. 257 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2016. (D) Topographic AFM image of few-layer antimonene showing flakes with micrometer lateral dimensions. (E) Single point Raman spectra measured at different thicknesses according to the topographic AFM image (inset). (F) Calculated Raman spectra for bulk antimony and single-layer antimonene. Reproduced from ref. 258 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2016. 
A string of theoretical calculations have been carried out to investigate the electronic properties,262,263 spin–orbit coupling effect,264 thermal conductivity265 and light absorption266 behaviors of 2D antimonene. Ciraci et al. have studied the chemisorption of selected adatoms and physisorption of molecules on antimonene sheet surfaces.267 Molecules such as H2, O2 and H2O were found to be physisorbed with a weak binding energy without affecting the properties of antimonene, while atoms including H, Li, B, C, N, O, Al, In, Si, P, Cl, Ti, As, and Sb were revealed to be chemisorbed with significant binding energy, leading to the locally modified atomic and electronic structures.
In addition, the application of strain to 2D atomic layers was also one possible approach to tailoring their electronic properties.268,269 Recently, three groups have reported that the indirect bandgap semiconducting character of the antimonene monolayer could be transformed into a direct bandgap material with the application of relatively small strain, opening up the possibility for its use in optoelectronics.270–272 Doping decorations have also attracted significant attention. Mi and co-workers have observed that a spin-polarized semiconducting state could appear in Cr-doped antimonene, while half-metallic states appear by doping Ti, V and Mn.273 Besides, n- and p-type antimonene were realized by introducing tetrathiafulvalene and tetracyanoquinodimethane as electron and hole dopants, respectively, according to the report by Zeng et al., which might widen the application of 2D antimonene semiconductors in electronics.274
3.4 Bismuth & bismuthene
Bismuth is a pentavalent post-transition metal. It is located at the bottom of group V A in the periodic table, and chemically resembles its lighter homologues, arsenic and antimony. Similar to the above discussions, bismuthene is used to describe the single layer bismuth, which is also composed of the 2D hexagonal lattice with washboard structure.
In 2005, Nagao et al. reported the unusual high-quality film growing of bismuth to form a 2D structure on a silicon surface with atomic level surface smoothness, which put forward the concept of 2D growth of bismuthene.275 After that, Kumar et al. developed a novel and convenient, template-free synthesis approach based on a low-temperature reduction route for the fabrication of high-yield ultrathin bismuthene nanosheets through bottom-up self-assembly.276Fig. 16A and B are the representative TEM characterizations of the obtained sample, which demonstrate its nanosheet-like morphology and ultrathin nature. The phase was confirmed by X-ray diffraction patterns, XPS and Raman spectra, and the achieved productive yield could be as high as 80%. According to the report from one group at Princeton University, Drozdov et al. carried out STM experiments that showed that a subset of the predicted bismuthene bilayer edge states were decoupled from states of bismuth substrate and provided direct spectroscopic evidence of their one-dimensional (1D) nature. Based on further detailed analysis, they claimed there are 1D topological edge states at bismuthene bilayers.277
 Fig. 16  (A and B) TEM images of the as-prepared ultrathin 2D bismuth nanosheets. Reproduced from ref. 276 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2013. 
With respect to theoretical simulations, some groups have studied the stability, mechanical, electronic and thermoelectric properties of monolayer and bilayer bismuthene.278,279 Chen and co-workers calculated the electronic band structure and topological edge states of single bilayer bismuthene as a function of strain and perpendicular electric field, to acquire the effects induced by lattice mismatch and interfacial charge transfer when it was epitaxially grown on a substrate.280 Moreover, functionalized bismuth film was also of fundamental scientific interest. Ma et al. demonstrated the 2D topological insulator characteristic in methyl-decorated bismuthene, and further showed that its topological properties were robust against mechanical deformation.281
4. Boron and other metallene
4.1 Boron & borophene
Boron has a rich chemistry and striking features, which can constitute the lightest 2D material. Boustani previously studied its structure based on theoretical predictions, reporting that small boron clusters tend to exhibit quasi-planar structures; this indicated the possibility and they put forward the principle to construct 2D boron in experiment.282,283 In 2015, Guisinger et al. successfully grew atomically thin, crystalline 2D boron sheets (i.e., borophene) on the clean Ag(111) substrate using an electron beam evaporator under ultrahigh-vacuum conditions, as illustrated in Fig. 17A.17In situ Auger electron spectroscopy and in situ scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) confirmed the boron deposition and revealed the emergence of planar boron nanosheets. A solid boron atomic source (99.9999% in purity) was employed to avoid the toxic precursors and the silver substrate was maintained between 450 and 700 °C under boron flux between about 0.01 to 0.1 monolayer per minute. With a deposition temperature of 550 °C, two distinct boron phases were observed as marked by arrows in Fig. 17B: a homogeneous phase and a more corrugated “striped” phase. When the deposition rate increased, more homogenous islands could be obtained (Fig. 17C). Meanwhile, it was found that the homogeneous phase was metastable relative to the striped phase, as a higher growth temperature favored the striped phase. Furthermore, Fig. 17D reveals that the silver surface was completely covered by boron sheets and sparse clusters when the deposition coverage approached one monolayer. The discovery of 2D boron sheets has encouraged efforts into realizing larger free-standing 2D networks of boron atoms and stable molecular models.284
 Fig. 17  (A) Schematics of the growth setup with atomic structure model and STM topography rendering. (B–D) Series of large-scale STM topography of borophene sheets with low, medium and high coverages, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 17 with permission from National Academy of Sciences, copyright 2015. (E) STM image of 2D boron sheets on Ag(111) with a substrate temperature of about 570 K, labelled as the S1 phase. (F) High-resolution STM image of S1 phases. (G) STM image of boron sheets after annealing the S1 phase to 650 K, with the new S2 phase appearing as marked. (H) High-resolution STM image of the S2 phase. Reproduced from ref. 285 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2016. 
A parallel experimental work illustrating that 2D boron sheets could be grown epitaxially on a Ag(111) substrate was carried out by Wu and co-authors.285 In their work, a pure boron source was directly evaporated for deposition on the silver surface, and two types of boron nanosheets (β12 and χ3) were obtained, both of which exhibited the same triangular lattice, but with different arrangements of periodic holes. When the substrate temperature increased to 300 °C, ordered monolayer boron islands were obtained with their STM images shown in Fig. 17E and F demonstrated the corresponding high-resolution STM configurations, with parallel and ordered rows of protrusions along the [−112] direction of the substrate. In contrast, when the annealing temperature approaches 380 °C, it would transfer into another ordered phase as shown in Fig. 17G and H, where the protrusions along the rows were obviously divided into sections with alternate brighter and darker parts.
At the same time, Tai's group also prepared the thin boron films by using their home-made two-zone chemical vapor deposition furnace.286 As shown in Fig. 18A, the source zone T1 was set to 1100 °C to get the diboron dioxide vapor via annealing a mixture of B and B2O3 powders. Simultaneously, a 25 μm thick piece of Cu foil was placed at the substrate zone T2, with the annealing temperature of 1000 °C for the boron film growth. Finally, the atomically thin 2D γ-boron nanosheets were achieved, which featured orthorhombic γ-B28 cells with a unit cell of 28 atoms (a = 5.054 Å, b = 5.620 Å, c = 6.987 Å) and the space group of Pnnm. Fig. 18B and C are the typical AFM and TEM images, which demonstrate its ultrathin nature of 0.80 nm in thickness and the whole covering feature on copper substrates. In addition, the UV/Vis absorption spectroscopy characterization was conducted, as shown in Fig. 18D; the optical band gap with a direct excitonic transition was estimated to be around 2.25 eV. Moreover, the authors have also presented the fist-principles calculations, and the obtained band structure suggested a 2.07 eV band gap (seen in Fig. 18E), which is in conformity with the experimental observation.
 Fig. 18  (A) Schematic of the home-made two-zone furnace used to obtain atomically thin 2D boron films by CVD. (B) AFM topographical image of a monolayer boron on the substrate, with the 0.8 nm thickness marked. (C) Low-resolution TEM image of the transferred boron film. Inset: Typical TEM image of the film with a folded edge. (D) UV/vis absorption spectrum of monolayer boron film, with the band gap determination inserted. (E) The calculated electronic band structure of monolayer boron, with the Fermi level indicated by the pink dashed line. Reproduced from ref. 286 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2015. 
In order to understand the nature of 2D boron nanostructures and the experimental results, a string of theoretical simulations have also been carried out to study the structures and features of the free-standing boron nanosheets.287–289 The mechanical,290,291 thermomechanical,292 work function,293 magnetic294 properties and hydrogen storage capacity295 have been analyzed and discussed, respectively, indicating good performance in wide applications. Specifically, the conventional superconductivity has been predicted on the 2D boron polymorphs with the estimated critical temperature in the range of Tc about 10–20 K.296 This property arose from multiple phonon modes, owing to the electronic states of the Fermi surface originating from both σ and π electrons.297 Furthermore, due to the superconductivity achieved on lithium-decorated graphene, Li et al. established the lithium-incorporated boron monolayer nanostructure and evaluated its structural diversity, as well as the energetic stability.298 Compared with the pure boron sheet, some 2D lithium–boron monolayers could exhibit photon-mediated superconducting properties above the liquid helium temperature. These results suggest the attractive potential applications of 2D boron based nanomaterials in power generation, electricity transmittance and energy storage.
The interaction between 2D boron and its substrate was also a critical issue; as discussed above, its preparation was commonly achieved through CVD method on a metal substrate that catalyzed the reactions and supported the sample. By employing the cluster-expansion method combined with first-principles calculations, Yakobson and co-authors have systematically investigated the preferred 2D boron on different metal surfaces, which were usually taken as deposition substrates in the CVD process.299 They showed that a layer composed of icosahedral boron was unfavorable on copper and nickel, but unexpectedly occurred on gold and silver, which opened a possibility to guide 2D boron formation through controlled boron–metal interactions. Recently, Shu et al. also studied the atomic structure and electronic properties of borophene on the Ag(111) surface, revealing that the energetically favorable 2D monolayer boron structures on silver substrate occurred with slight surface buckling (around 0.15 Å) and relatively higher hexagonal vacancy density.300
Besides, the electrochemical hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER) have been envisaged on a 2D boron sheet, which are the two branches of the water splitting reaction, and are able to produce promising, clean and affordable hydrogen energy in a green and sustainable way. Similar to the doped graphene for catalysis,301 Jha et. al. functionalized the monolayer boron sheet with different elemental dopants like carbon, nitrogen, phosphorous, sulfur, and lithium, and calculated their electronic strictures, as well as determined the adsorption energy for each case based on a density functional theory framework.302 The free energy calculations demonstrated that the carbon dopant was the best candidate for good HER and OER activities.
4.2 2D iron
Iron is the fourth most common element in the Earth's crust and pure iron metal is relatively soft. Body-centered cubic and face-centered cubic are the two common crystal structures of iron, and these non-lamellar features make it difficult to prepare ultrathin 2D iron configuration. Fortunately, Wu et al. developed a general strategy to fabricate free-standing 2D iron and other metallic nanosheets at room temperature.303Fig. 19A demonstrates the schematic of the process to advance from thin metals toward their 2D nanolayer structures. Iron and aluminum metal sheets were stacked first, followed by repeated folding and calendaring for 20 times with a rolling machine. After that, the iron and aluminum layers were stacked alternately, without any alloy phase detected. Aluminum layers were selectively etched from the as prepared binary metal system using alkaline media, to obtain the final free-standing 2D iron nanosheets, with their SEM and TEM images shown in Fig. 19B and C, respectively. This strategy was universal, and in this report the authors have claimed the successful fabrication of other 2D metallic nanosheets including nickel, copper, silver and gold within this method at room temperature.
 Fig. 19  (A) Schematic of the fabrication of metal nanosheets. (B) SEM and (C) TEM images of the prepared 2D iron nanosheets. Reproduced from ref. 303 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2016. 
4.3 2D cobalt
Cobalt is an important and typical transition metal element that has been widely studied. The crystal structure is hexagonal close-packed, and it usually displays a hard, lustrous and silver-gray appearance. Recently, Xie et al. have synthesized 2D inorganic ultrathin cobalt nanosheets, which were four atomic layers in thickness and exhibited metallic properties.304 The fabrication process was depicted in Fig. 20A, with n-butylamine for controlling the growth and assembly direction of cobalt, and dimethylformamide for gradually reducing cobalt ions. After a series of characterizations including XRD, elemental mapping and Raman spectroscopy were carried out on the obtained nanosheets to determine the phase and composition. Furthermore, the obtained cobalt nanosheets could be partially oxidized for 3 h, during which the 2D ultrathin morphology was still retained. HRTEM and AFM images shown in Fig. 20B and C have confirmed the [001]-oriented hexagonal cobalt nature with average sheet thickness of 0.84 nm. Furthermore, the fabricated 2D cobalt nanomaterials with and without oxidization were loaded onto a glassy carbon electrode and tested in CO2-saturated 0.1 M Na2SO4 electrolyte, respectively. Fig. 20D addresses the catalytic performance data, in which both samples display CO2 reduction response. The partially oxidized 2D cobalt could generate an enhanced current density of 10.59 mA cm−2 at −0.85 V versus a saturated calomel electrode, roughly 10, 40 and 260 times larger than the current densities obtained with the pure cobalt nanosheets, partially oxidized bulk cobalt and bulk cobalt, respectively, illustrating the great advantages of using 2D cobalt based nanosheets for electrocatalysis.
 Fig. 20  (A) Schematic formation process for the partially oxidized and pure Co 4-atomic-layer. (B) Lateral HAADF-STEM and (C) AFM images of the Co 4-atomic-layer. (D) LSV curves in a CO2-saturated and N2-saturated 0.1 M Na2SO4 aqueous solution (from bottom to top are successively partially oxidized Co 4-atom-thick layers, Co 4-atom-thick layers, partially oxidized bulk Co and bulk Co). Reproduced from ref. 304 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2016. 
In 2007, Li et al. employed a facile hydrothermal/solvothermal method to control the shape of cobalt nanostructures, obtaining 2D cobalt hexagonal nanocrystals with well-defined planes.305 The underlying formation mechanism was proposed as follows: the cobalt hydroxide colloid precipitate was first produced when sodium hydroxide was added into the cobalt chloride solution. Then, the cobalt hydroxide was reacted with H2PO2− to form metallic cobalt in the presence of sodium dodecylsulfate under hydrothermal conditions, while the product inherited the 2D morphology during the reducing process. This strategy has been applied in fabricating other 2D metal with anisotropic structures, and according to their reports, 2D nickel and copper have also been achieved. The temperature-dependent magnetization and hysteresis loop curves of nickel nanoplatelets suggested typical ferromagnetic behavior at room temperature, with the blocking temperature exceeding 300 K, which was different from the superparamagnetism reported on nickel nanoparticles at room temperature. UV-Vis absorption spectra measured on copper nanoplatelets displayed two adsorption peaks at 540 and 610 nm, a little different from previous reports, which was probably because of the high aspect ratio on the prepared copper nanoplatelets.
4.4 2D nickel
Nickel is also a typical and widely studied transition metal, belonging to the face-centred cubic crystal structure, and often has a silver-white lustrous appearance. Although the non-layered crystal structure makes it a great challenge to prepare 2D nickel nanosheets, Sun's group recently designed a simple in situ reducing method to simultaneously synthesize the atomically thick 2D nickel nanocrystal.306 The ultrathin nickel nanosheets were prepared via reducing a Ni(OH)2 nanosheet array on a metal substrate under mild reducing conditions, as depicted in Fig. 21A. The phase transition from Ni(OH)2 to Ni was evidenced by XRD measurements. It was found that the kinetics behavior was critical for the conversion and morphology control process, and the reaction temperature should be kept around 160 °C. In Fig. 21B and C, the SEM and TEM images show the thin array morphology and ultrathin structure. Fig. 21D displays a vertically laid nickel nanosheet, with the inset HRTEM image exhibiting the thickness of the nanowall in the range of 5–6 nm (i.e. 10–12 nickel layers). The obtained 2D nickel nanosheet array has been tested in the hydrazine oxidation reaction, in which it displayed a dramatic enhancement on both activity and stability relative to platinum. This work has provided a new method for the fabrication of 2D metal nanostructures.
 Fig. 21  (A) In situ topotactic reduction method for the fabrication of the atomically layered nickel nanosheet arrays. (B) SEM image of the nickel nanosheet arrays. (C) High-resolution TEM image of nickel nanosheets, with crystal lattices inserted. (D) High-resolution TEM image of a vertically laid nickel nanosheet, with its thickness marked in the inset image. Reproduced from ref. 306 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2016. 
4.5 2D copper
Copper has a reddish-orange color and face-centred cubic crystal structure. It is a soft, malleable and ductile metal with high thermal and electrical conductivity. Recently, Shaik and Chakraborty reported the synthesis of stable, large 2D copper nanostructures using fast reduction at room temperature.307 The copper nanosheets were obtained through reducing Cu(OH)42− with hydrazine hydrate in the presence of cetyltrimethylammonium bromide at room temperature. Fig. 22A–C illustrate their typical TEM images in different solvents, demonstrating their 2D thin morphologies. In addition, the authors found the size of the nanosheet was highly dependent on the concentration of alkaline media and reducing agent, providing reference for other 2D material preparation.
 Fig. 22  TEM images of the as-prepared 2D copper nanosheets in (A) water, (B) dimethylsulfoxide, and (C) chloroform. Reproduced from ref. 307 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016. 
4.6 2D ruthenium
Ruthenium is a rare transition metal with the hexagonal close-packed crystal structure, and belongs to the platinum group in the periodic table. It is inert to most other chemicals and has been broadly used as a catalyst in many reactions. According to Yan et al.'s report, ultrathin 2D ruthenium nanocrystals could be obtained through a fast growth process, with a high concentration of ruthenium chloride and poly(vinylpyrrolidone) as the precursors. The obtained ruthenium nanosheets were less than 2 nm in thickness, containing less than five layers of ruthenium unit cells.308
Recently, our group reported the synthesis of free-standing 2D Ru nanosheets using a facile solvothermal method, in which Ru(III) was reduced via self-decomposition of the Ru(acac)3 precursor and grew into ultrathin nanosheets with the aid of isopropanol and urea.309Fig. 23A demonstrates its 2D growing mechanism, with the corresponding attachment growth process confirmed in Fig. 23B. Fig. 23C and D show that the product was constructed primarily of very thin, sheet-like nanostructures of a few hundred nanometers in size. The hydrogen evolution activity via electrochemical water splitting is recorded in Fig. 23E. The 2D ruthenium exhibited excellent HER activity compared with its powder counterpart, demonstrating its great potential in chemical catalysis.
 Fig. 23  (A) Schematic of the growth process of ruthenium nanosheets. (B) High-resolution TEM images of the intermediate products at 1 h, 3 h and 10 h, with the attachment areas marked, and all the bars represent 5 nm. (C and D) TEM images of the as-synthesized 2D ruthenium nanosheets. (E) HER performance electrochemical measurement of the ruthenium nanosheets. Reproduced from ref. 309 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. 
4.7 2D rhodium
Rhodium is a member of the platinum group elements and belongs to face-centred cubic crystal structure. It is one of the rarest and most valuable precious metals, and usually appears with silver-white, hard, and chemically inert features. In 2014, Li et al. reported the fabrication of poly(vinylpyrrolidone)-supported single-layered rhodium nanosheets based on a facile solvothermal method.310Fig. 24A is an image of 2D rhodium nanocrystals supported on silica wafer, showing that the thickness of the rhodium nanosheet is less than 4 Å. The TEM characterization shown in Fig. 24B demonstrates its sheet-like features, which are consistent with the above TEM image. The obtained single-layer 2D rhodium could expose full atoms with unsaturated coordination, significantly improving its atomic efficiency and overcoming the limited reserve issue. When tested in both hydrogenation and hydroformylation reactions, in which rhodium is commonly used as catalyst, ultrathin 2D rhodium nanosheets exhibited much enhanced activity, compared to rhodium nanoparticles and commercial rhodium/carbon catalysts, suggesting its great advances in chemical and material science.
 Fig. 24  (A) AFM image and the corresponding height profiles of a bare rhodium nanosheet, with the scale bar of 200 nm. (B) High-magnification TEM image of the prepared poly(vinylpyrrolidone)-capped rhodium nanosheets, with the scale bar of 100 nm. Reproduced from ref. 291 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2014. (C) TEM image of rhodium nanosheets obtained under the CO pressure of 1.0 atm. Reproduced from ref. 311 with permission from the authors, copyright 2015. 
Zheng's group was very efficient at shape control during the crystal growing process, especially for designed noble metal synthesis. They demonstrated the CO-confined growth strategy to effectively prepare single-crystalline rhodium nanosheets with atomic thickness and controllable size.311 The TEM image in Fig. 24C has illustrated the typical 2D ultrathin structure. They also revealed that the formation process involved the formation of small rhodium carbonyl clusters at the early stage, followed by their aggregation assembly into 2D nanosheets to minimize their surface energy. Moreover, Kuang et al. synthesized an ultrathin 2D rhodium nanostructure with a thickness of approximately 1 nm.312 During the preparation process, formaldehyde was regarded as the shape controller, which could produce CO and H2via its decomposition, playing key roles in the formation of 2D ultrathin nanostructures. The obtained sample had a clean surface as well as plentiful exposed atoms, providing excellent activity toward the catalytic oxidation of CO.
4.8 2D palladium
Palladium is a rare and lustrous silvery-white metal, belonging to the face-centered cubic crystal structure. It has excellent catalytic behavior and has been widely used in many reactions, converting a large number of harmful chemicals into less noxious substances, which is very important for industrial production.
Zheng's group has made a lot of contributions to the shape control of palladium nanocrystals. In 2011, they reported a general CO-confined growth method to facilely synthesize free-standing hexagonal palladium nanosheets that were less than 10 atomic layers thick.313 CO was taken as a surface confining agent, and the obtained 2D nanocrystals were blue in color, as displayed in Fig. 25A. Upon near infrared irradiation, the palladium samples created a significant photothermal effect and could effectively kill cancer cells; see Fig. 25B and C. Moreover, the 2D nanosheets exhibited enhanced activity for the oxidation of formic acid that was 2.5 times higher than commercial palladium catalyst, displayed in Fig. 25D, suggesting the great potential of 2D palladium nanostructure.
 Fig. 25  (A) TEM image of palladium nanosheets. Inset: Photograph of an ethanol dispersion of the as-prepared palladium nanosheets in a cuvette. (B and C) Micrographs corresponding to 2 and 4 min irradiation, respectively, for the cell viability measurements. Dead cells were stained with trypan blue. (D) CV curves recorded for comparison of the electrocatalytic properties of 2D palladium nanosheets and palladium black. Reproduced from ref. 313 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2011. (E) TEM image of the prepared palladium 1D palladium superlattice nanowires. Reproduced from ref. 315 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. (F) Multilayered palladium nanosheets with 8° rotational mismatches. Reproduced from ref. 316 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. 
In 2013, they demonstrated a facile synthetic method to prepare surface-clean uniform palladium nanosheets.314 The [Pd2(μ-CO)2Cl4]2− complex was firstly prepared by stirring a solution of PdCl42− in anhydrous N,N-dimethylformamide solution under CO atmosphere. CO was removed and a small amount of water was added to the reaction mixture, with the solution color turning from light yellow to dark blue. The obtained 2D palladium nanocrystals had a thickness of approximately 1.8 nm, and the mechanism study indicated that the CO ligands in the complex served as both reductant and capping agent for the 2D structure formation. Based on the above work, the authors further investigated the self-assembly behavior.315 It was found that introducing trace amounts of countercations could facilitate the above surfactant palladium nanosheets assembled into one dimensional (1D) superlattice nanowires as shown in the TEM image in Fig. 25E. The countercations would shield the negative charges on 2D palladium nanosheets, and thus electrostatic repulsion was greatly reduced, leading to their 1D assembly. These newly obtained palladium superlattices that were composed of 2D nanostructures could exhibit unique surface plasmon resonance properties, as well as excellent performance in hydrogen sensing.
Yang's group have also contributed a lot to the 2D palladium field. In 2014, they reported the ensemble structures of multilayered 2D palladium nanosheets that had shared growth centers.316 As shown in the TEM images in Fig. 25F, the nanosheets were hexagonal with the diagonal distance of ∼2 μm and rotationally mismatched in their in-plane orientations. The competitive adsorption of the Pd4(CO)4(OAc)4 complex and CO on palladium surfaces was proposed as the critical factor determining the anisotropic growth of palladium nanosheets. Moreover, the authors have prepared flexible palladium nanosheets by using short chain thiolated carboxylic acids and amines.317 The as-prepared positively charged cysteamine and negatively charged 3-mercaptopropionic acid functionalized 2D palladium nanocrystals exhibited around 80% and 30% cell death at 100 ppm, suggesting the potential for using ultrathin metal nanosheets as carriers for drug delivery and targeted release.
4.9 2D silver
Silver is a rather unreactive metal and belongs to the face-centred cubic crystal structure. It is soft, white, as well as lustrous, and has long been valued as a precious metal. Fang et al. reported the synthesis of 2D silver nanostructures through a facile self-seeding strategy.318 Based on a series of control experiments, poly(vinylpyrrolidone) and sodium dodecyl sulphate were found to regulate the size and morphology of the silver nanosheets, which could built the microreactor together and serve as a synthesis template. The reduced silver atoms were driven to grow into anisotropic 2D silver nanosheets under the influence of poly(vinylpyrrolidone) through selective adsorption onto different crystal facets to control their growing rates. Besides, Song and co-workers reported the large-scale synthesis of micrometer-sized silver nanosheets (several tens of nanometers in thickness) via a facile, template- and surfactant-free electrochemical deposition in an ultra-dilute electrolyte of low electrical conductivity (less than 50 μS cm−1).319 The 2D structure growth involved three stages: polygonal island formation, faceted nanowire growth, and planar growth of the nanosheet with the faceted nanowire, which was also expected to contribute to the development of other functional 2D nanomaterials.
4.10 2D platinum
Platinum is one of the least reactive metals and widely employed in catalysis, jewelry, electrodes and other laboratory equipment. The crystal structure of platinum is face-centered cubic, resulting in the significant challenge of preparing it with 2D sheet-like morphology. In 2015, Gautam et al. induced the mechanochemical transformation of tellurium template nanorods to synthesize 2D free-standing platinum nanostructures under the influence of external deforming forces exerted by magnetic stirring.320 The obtained nanosheets had a thickness of about 27 nm and uneven surfaces, as shown in their SEM (Fig. 26A) and TEM (Fig. 26B) images, which could provide high catalytic active surface area and exhibit efficiency toward the electrocatalytic oxidation of small fuel molecules. In addition, Matsumoto et al. reported the preparation of monolayer platinum nanosheets by exfoliating layered platinum oxide and adjusting the reducing conditions, with the AFM measurement displayed in Fig. 26C.321 They also demonstrated that the platinum had high oxygen reduction reaction activity, compared to commercial platinum/carbon catalysts. Moreover, by using a molten salt (KOH–NaOH) and through an in situ chemical vapor reaction, Yang et al. have presented the synthesis of platinum nanosheets via bubble breakage.322 There were no toxic gases and organic solvents involved in the developed synthetic method and the as-prepared 2D platinum nanocrystals had good activity toward oxygen reduction, implying its potential application in fuel cell electrodes.
 Fig. 26  (A) SEM and (B) TEM images of the prepared platinum nanosheets. Adapted from ref. 320 with permission from Wiley. (C) AFM image of the monolayer platinum nanosheet after electrochemical reduction. Reproduced from ref. 321 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2014. 
4.11 2D gold
Gold is a bright, slightly reddish yellow and ductile metal, and normally belongs to the face-centered cubic crystal structure. As is well known, it has been used for jewelry and coinage throughout recorded history. Zhang's group has done a lot in the preparation of 2D gold nanostructures.323 As early as 2011, they presented the first in situ synthesis of dispersible hexagonal close-packed gold square sheets on graphene oxide sheets by slowly reducing chloroauric acid with oleylamine under mild conditions (as seen in Fig. 27A).324 Furthermore, the authors have claimed that these gold square sheets could transform from the hexagonal close-packed to the face-centered cubic phase via exposure to an electron beam during TEM characterization, while remaining in their original 2D configuration (as shown in Fig. 27B).325
 Fig. 27  (A) TEM image of ∼2.4 nm thick gold nanosheets on a graphene oxide surface, with scale bar of 500 nm. Reproduced from ref. 324 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2011. (B) The face-centred cubic gold 2D nanosheets obtained via exposing (A) to an electron beam. Reproduced from ref. 325 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2011. (C) Schematic of the synthetic procedure for 2D gold nanosheets, with layered double hydroxide as the template. Green slices, gold squares and red balls represent layered double hydroxide, 2D gold nanosheets and An−/AuCl4− anions, respectively. (D) Scanning TEM image of the gold nanosheets in the layered double hydroxide, with the scale bar of 50 nm. Reproduced from ref. 326 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2015. (E) SEM image of the as-prepared gold nanosheets. Reproduced from ref. 327 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2013. 
In addition, Wang et al. have introduced a wet chemistry method to prepare 2D gold nanosheets by using layered double hydroxide as the template.326 As depicted in Fig. 27C, gold precursors were intercalated into the interlayer space of layered double hydroxides through the anion-exchange process, and were subsequently reduced to form an ultrathin 2D gold nanostructure with few atomic layers. Fig. 27D shows the TEM image and indicated the large lateral dimensions of the obtained gold nanosheets, which exhibited excellent catalytic activity and stability towards the selective and solvent-free oxidation of C–H bonds using molecular oxygen as the oxidant. Jeong et al. have presented the synthesis of large, thin gold nanosheets with L-arginine as a capping ligand and mild reductant in aqueous solution; the SEM image is shown in Fig. 27E. The nanosheets can be further processed into electrode film, and demonstrate high electrical stability at 100% strain during the repeated stretching cycles.327 Moreover, it was reported that by microwave heating of chloroauric acid in the ionic liquid, 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate, without any additional template agent, large-sized single crystal 2D gold could also be successfully prepared on a large scale.328 This synthetic procedure was fast and simple, and might be a versatile approach to the fabrication of some other 2D metal nanosheets.
5. Conclusion and perspectives
In summary, this review article has supplied an overview of the recent development in elemental 2D nanosheets beyond graphene, involving their physical, chemical and structural properties, as well as the reported applications, which are based on both experimental and theoretical investigations. Dimensionality engineering has achieved excellent success with graphene, which gives people great hints and drives us to look for and design more new elemental 2D nanocrystals. Because of their location in the same group as carbon and having the same s2p2 electronic structure, other group IV A elements have also attracted great concern, including silicon, germanium, stannum and lead. The first three have experimental reports on their 2D nanosheets preparation, while as we know, there is still no report on the 2D lead fabrication, and only a few theoretical simulations. Group V A elements, including phosphorus, arsenic, antimony and bismuth are gaining attention especially after the successful synthesis of 2D phosphorene nanosheets and the report of their applications in field effect transistors. To date, all four elements have been confirmed to have their own 2D allotropies via experiment. Combining with theoretical investigation, it has been shown that these new 2D nanostructures have good semiconductor features, implying their potential applications in electronic and photonic devices. Moreover, boron and other metals as listed in the review have also exhibited promising properties and excellent behaviors in their 2D morphologies, such as in catalysis and biomedical science, which not only enrich the elemental 2D nanosheets family, but also provide valuable reference for exploring more functional 2D nanomaterials. All of the related experimental reports are summarized in Table 1 and readers can refer to them for more detailed information.
Table 1 Summary of the experimental elemental 2D nanosheets beyond graphene




Name
Method
Thickness
Applications
Performance
Ref.




Si nanosheets
Vacuum deposition
Single layer
—
—

9



Liquid exfoliation
∼0.7 nm
—
—

37



Liquid exfoliation
∼0.37 nm
—
—

38



Vacuum deposition
Single layer
—
—

42



Vacuum deposition
∼0.72 nm
—
—

47



Vacuum deposition
∼0.3 nm
—
—

48



Vacuum deposition
Single layer
—
—

51



CVD
5–20 nm
—
—

52



Liquid exfoliation
∼7.5 nm
—
—

53



Liquid exfoliation
∼1.6 nm
—
—

54



Liquid exfoliation
∼2 nm
—
—

55



Magnesiothermic reduction
—
Li ion battery
Capacity of about 800 mA h g−1, and reaching 1500 mA h g−1 encapsulated in reduced graphene oxides

81



Vacuum deposition
∼0.4 nm
Field effect transistor
Mobility of about 100 cm2 V−1 s−1

83







Ge nanosheets
Liquid exfoliation
∼0.6 nm
—
—

92



Vacuum deposition
∼0.6 nm
—
—

96



Vacuum deposition
∼0.27 nm
—
—

97



Vacuum deposition
Atom-thin
—
—

98



Vacuum deposition
—
—
—

99







Sn nanosheets
Vacuum deposition
∼0.35 nm
—
—

148



Ultra-fast laser-material interactions
Four layers
—
—

149







P nanosheets
Mechanical exfoliation
∼0.85 nm
Field effect transistor
On-current of 194 mA mm−1, hole field-effect mobility of 286 cm2 V−1 s−1, on/off ratio of 104

15



Mechanical exfoliation
∼2 nm
Filed effect transistor
Charge-carrier mobility of 1000 cm2 V−1 s−1

16



Mechanical cleavage and Ar+ plasma thinning
Single layer
—
—

196



Liquid exfoliation
3.5–5 nm
—
—

198



Liquid exfoliation
∼10 nm
Field effect transistor
Mobility of about 50 cm2 V−1 s−1, on/off ratio of 104

199



Liquid exfoliation
∼6 nm
—
—

200



Liquid exfoliation
<10 layers
—
—

201



Mechanical exfoliation
2–5 layers
—
—

202



Mechanical exfoliation
1.2–10.4 nm
—
—

203



Mechanical exfoliation
Two layers
—
—

205



Mechanical exfoliation
∼120 nm
Hyperspectral imaging
Submicron resolution

206



Liquid exfoliation
7 layers
Photovoltaics
The power conversion efficiencies can be improved to 8.18% with the relative enhancement of 11%

207



Liquid exfoliation
∼2.02 nm
Photodynamic therapy
Generation of singlet oxygen with a high quantum yield of about 0.91

208



CVD
—
Biosensing
The oxidation peak starts at 35 mV and reaches a maximum at 500 mV for ascorbic acid, and stars at +10 mV and reaches a maximum at 400 mV for dopamine

213



Mechanical exfoliation
Single layer
—
—

222



Mechanical exfoliation
∼4.8 nm
Gas sensor
Sensitivity up to 190% at 20 p.p.b. at room temperature

229







As nanosheets
Plasma assisted annealing
∼14 nm
—
—

237







Sb nanosheets
Mechanical exfoliation
Single layer
—
—

257



Liquid exfoliation
∼4 nm
—
—

258



Plasma assisted annealing
∼5 nm
—
—

259



Vacuum deposition
3–5 layers
—
—

260







Bi nanosheets
Vacuum deposition
∼10 layers
—
—

275



Wet-chemical synthesis
—
—
—

276







B nanosheets
Vacuum deposition
Single layer
—
—

17



Vacuum deposition
Single layer
—
—

285



CVD
∼0.8 nm
—
—

286







Fe nanosheets
Repeated folding and calendaring
∼5 nm
—
—

303







Co nanosheets
Wet-chemical synthesis
∼0.82 nm
Electrochemical CO2 reduction
The activity is 26 times higher than bulk Co

304



Hydrothermal/solvothermal method
∼8 nm
—
—

305







Ni nanosheets
Hydrothermal/solvothermal method
∼2.2 nm
Electrochemical hydrazine oxidation
The activity is 1.97 times higher than Pt/C

306







Cu nanosheets
Wet-chemical synthesis
∼25 nm
—
—

307







Ru nanosheets
Hydrothermal/solvothermal method
<4 nm
CO-selective methanation
Higher than other Ru morphologies

308



Hydrothermal/solvothermal method
∼1.2 nm
Electrochemical hydrogen evolution
The activity is 2.6 times higher than Ru powder

309







Rh nanosheets
Hydrothermal/solvothermal method
∼0.4 nm
Hydrogenation of phenol and hydroformylation of 1-octene
The activities are much higher than Rh nanoparticles and Ru/C

310



Wet-chemical synthesis
∼0.9 nm
Hydrogenation of anthracene
The activity is higher than the PVP-capped Rh, with 6 hours realizing complete conversion

311



Hydrothermal/solvothermal method
∼1 nm
CO conversion
The activity is higher than Rh nanoparticles, with the full conversion at 110 °C

312







Pd nanosheets
Wet-chemical synthesis
∼1.8 nm
Photothermal therapy and electrochemical formic acid oxidation
The photothermal cell-killing efficacy is comparable or higher than gold nanostructures and the electrocatalytic activity is 2.5 times higher than Pd black

313



Wet-chemical synthesis
∼1.8 nm
Conversion of styrene to ethylbenzene
The activity is higher than PVP-capped Pd nanosheets

314



Wet-chemical synthesis
∼1.8 nm
H2 sensing
The change resistance decreases from 7% to 2% as H2 concentration changes from 4% to 0.25%

315



Wet-chemical synthesis
<1 nm
—
—

316



Wet-chemical synthesis
Tens of nanometers
HepG2 cytotoxicity
More than 80% cell depth at 100 ppm

317







Ag nanosheets
Wet-chemical synthesis
—
—
—

318



Electrochemical deposition
∼28 nm
—
—

319







Pt nanosheets
Mechanochemical synthesis
∼27 nm
Electrochemical methanol and formic acid oxidation
The activities are higher than commercial Pt/C

320



Liquid exfoliation
∼1 nm
Electrochemical oxygen reduction
The activity is 125 times higher than Pt/C

321




In situ chemical vapor reaction
∼10 nm
Electrochemical oxygen reduction
The activity is higher than commercial Pt/C

322







Au nanosheets
Wet-chemical synthesis
∼2.4 nm
—
—

324



We-chemical synthesis
Single to a few atomic layers
Catalytic oxidation of ethylbenzene
Conversion of ∼38% and selectivity of acetophenone of ∼90%

326



Wet-chemical synthesis
∼20 nm
For electrode
No difference with ε = 40%

327



Microwave heating
∼50 nm
—
—

328





Although some progress has been achieved in this field, some challenges still remain. One of the greatest difficulties for the synthesis of 2D elemental nanomaterials is to achieve the large-scale yield with high purity. CVD and high vacuum deposition are the universal methods for 2D nanostructure preparation, but the cost is too high and the yield is far from practical use. Although liquid exfoliation has been successful in the fabrication of some nanosheets, foreign atoms or byproducts are usually introduced on the 2D sheets, which will inevitably reduce their quality. In addition, developed characterization techniques should be explored, to help us get more precise images of the details on these novel elemental 2D materials, which are crucial for us to understand their formation mechanisms, as well as to further strengthen their performance improvement.
Rational design and synthesis of elemental nanosheets with desired structural features are anticipated for specific applications. Thickness, size, crystal phase, defects and other factors of a material play an essential role in determining its physical, chemical, and electronic properties. It is expected that materials with different structures should exhibit different properties, which are applicable to their utilization in all fields. From an application point of view, field effect transistors and other electronic devices require elemental 2D nanomaterials have larger lateral size and suitable bandgap, while catalysts, especially electrocatalysts, should possess large exposed active sites and good conductivity. Hence, the highly controllable synthesis of elemental 2D functional nanosheets with desired structures is worth developing further.
As mentioned above, electronic modification via doping foreign elements has recently been receiving considerable attention. The introduced atoms with stronger electronegativity will snatch electrons from the elemental sheet base, while introducing less electronegative atoms will donate electrons to the 2D nanomaterials, forming p- and n-doping formats, respectively. Controllable doping is an effective measure for regulating band structures, serving as electronic and photonic devices, and simultaneously, this strategy can induce interesting local high spin/electronic states on the elemental nanosheets' surface, to create special active sites for catalytic application. For example, high solar light absorption can be realized by precise bandstructure tailoring via doping and defect engineering on 2D nanomaterials, and at the same time, efficient catalysts may also be created, owing to the induced local high spin/electronic states on the surface, which will form a photocatalytic system to convert sunlight into useful chemicals, contributing to the energy storage and energy conversion, such as in the research of solar-water splitting. Therefore, the doped species, concentrations and distributions are our focus, and even realizing the controlled doping down to a single atom is one of our further research directions. Furthermore, in situ characterization is also appealing. For example, it is expected to identify the specific active sites and understand the catalytic mechanisms by virtue of scanning probe microscopy technology in liquid media.
Alloying is also an important direction for future research. With matching crystal structures, different elements can be alloyed in the same lattice to form new 2D alloyed nanomaterials. For instance, it is possible to form a novel nanosheet composed of iron and nickel, since they both have face-centred cubic crystal structures and are very close in atomic size. Because iron and nickel are active for different catalytic reactions, this newly prepared alloyed nanosheet can have bifunctional or multifunctional catalytic activities and the synergistic effect induced between these two elements may enhance their original catalytic behavior. One example is the oxygen evolution reaction, in which iron doping is well accepted as an effective step to improve the oxygen evolution activity on nickel based catalysts.
To fully resolve these problems, systematic theoretical simulations are also needed to establish a clear relationship between their structures and properties in the near future. As for the layer number dependence, much more research should be carried out to understand the property change caused by reducing or increasing the layers of these 2D nanosheets. All in all, there are numerous exciting opportunities in developing the elemental 2D family, and bearing these in mind, we believe the elemental 2D nanomaterials will be further extended and contribute to our daily life.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51602116), Anhui Natural Science Foundation (1708085QB40) and China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2016M600492) (to X. K.).
Notes and references
C. Tan and H. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7873 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yin and Z. Tang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 4873–4891 RSC .
Y. Guo, K. Xu, C. Wu, J. Zhao and Y. Xie, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 637–646 RSC .
H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9451–9469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Z. Butler, S. M. Hollen, L. Cao, Y. Cui, J. A. Gupta, H. R. Gutierrez, T. F. Heinz, S. S. Hong, J. Huang, A. F. Ismach, E. Johnston-Halperin, M. Kuno, V. V. Plashnitsa, R. D. Robinson, R. S. Ruoff, S. Salahuddin, J. Shan, L. Shi, M. G. Spencer, M. Terrones, W. Windl and J. E. Goldberger, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2898–2926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. F. Hirjibehedin, C.-Y. Lin, A. F. Otte, M. Ternes, C. P. Lutz, B. A. Jones and A. J. Heinrich, Science, 2007, 317, 1199–1203 Search PubMed .
C. Schliehe, B. H. Juarez, M. Pelletier, S. Jander, D. Greshnykh, M. Nagel, A. Meyer, S. Foerster, A. Kornowski, C. Klinke and H. Weller, Science, 2010, 329, 550–553 Search PubMed .
C. Li, L. Huang, G. P. Snigdha, Y. Yu and L. Cao, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8868–8877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fleurence, R. Friedlein, T. Ozaki, H. Kawai, Y. Wang and Y. Yamada-Takamura, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 245501 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Jeong, D. Yoo, J.-T. Jang, M. Kim and J. Cheon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 18233–18236 Search PubMed .
X. Li, W. Cai, J. An, S. Kim, J. Nah, D. Yang, R. Piner, A. Velamakanni, I. Jung, E. Tutuc, S. K. Banerjee, L. Colombo and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2009, 324, 1312–1314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shi, W. Zhou, A.-Y. Lu, W. Fang, Y.-H. Lee, A. L. Hsu, S. M. Kim, K. K. Kim, H. Y. Yang, L.-J. Li, J.-C. Idrobo and J. Kong, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2784–2791 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, K. Maeda, A. Thomas, K. Takanabe, G. Xin, J. M. Carlsson, K. Domen and M. Antonietti, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 76–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Corso, W. Auwarter, M. Muntwiler, A. Tamai, T. Greber and J. Osterwalder, Science, 2004, 303, 217–220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, A. T. Neal, Z. Zhu, Z. Luo, X. Xu, D. Tománek and P. D. Ye, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4033–4041 Search PubMed .
L. Li, Y. Yu, G. J. Ye, Q. Ge, X. Ou, H. Wu, D. Feng, X. H. Chen and Y. Zhang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 372–377 Search PubMed .
A. J. Mannix, X.-F. Zhou, B. Kiraly, J. D. Wood, D. Alducin, B. D. Myers, X. Liu, B. L. Fisher, U. Santiago, J. R. Guest, M. J. Yacaman, A. Ponce, A. R. Oganov, M. C. Hersam and N. P. Guisinger, Science, 2015, 350, 1513–1516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chhowalla, H. S. Shin, G. Eda, L.-J. Li, K. P. Loh and H. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 263–275 Search PubMed .
A. Kuc and T. Heine, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2603–2614 Search PubMed .
X. Duan, C. Wang, A. Pan, R. Yu and X. Duan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8859–8876 RSC .
M. Xu, T. Liang, M. Shi and H. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 3766–3798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Okamoto, Y. Sugiyama and H. Nakano, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 9864–9887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Carlo, C. Eugenio and M. Alessandro, 2D Mater., 2016, 3, 012001 CrossRef .
T. Morishita, K. Nishio and M. Mikami, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 081401 CrossRef .
J. Zhuang, X. Xu, H. Feng, Z. Li, X. Wang and Y. Du, Sci. Bull., 2015, 60, 1551–1562 Search PubMed .
K. Takeda and K. Shiraishi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1994, 50, 14916–14922 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. L. Yan Voon and G. G. Guzmán-Verri, MRS Bull., 2014, 39, 366–373 CrossRef .
Z. Ji, R. Zhou, L. C. Lew Yan Voon and Y. Zhuang, J. Electron. Mater., 2016, 45, 5040–5047 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-L. Song, Y. Zhang, J.-M. Zhang and D.-B. Lu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2010, 256, 6313–6317 CrossRef CAS .
G. Le Lay, B. Aufray, C. Léandri, H. Oughaddou, J. P. Biberian, P. De Padova, M. E. Dávila, B. Ealet and A. Kara, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2009, 256, 524–529 Search PubMed .
S. Lebègue and O. Eriksson, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 115409 CrossRef .
M. Houssa, G. Pourtois, V. V. Afanas'ev and A. Stesmans, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 112106 CrossRef .
Y.-T. Yukiko and F. Rainer, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2014, 15, 064404 CrossRef PubMed .
H. S. Liu, N. N. Han and J. J. Zhao, Chin. Phys. B, 2015, 24, 87303 CrossRef .
T. P. Kaloni, G. Schreckenbach, M. S. Freund and U. Schwingenschlögl, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2016, 10, 133–142 CrossRef CAS .
P. Miro, M. Audiffred and T. Heine, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 6537–6554 RSC .
H. Nakano, M. Ishii and H. Nakamura, Chem. Commun., 2005, 2945–2947 RSC .
H. Nakano, T. Mitsuoka, M. Harada, K. Horibuchi, H. Nozaki, N. Takahashi, T. Nonaka, Y. Seno and H. Nakamura, Angew. Chem., 2006, 118, 6451–6454 CrossRef .
A. Kara, C. Léandri, M. E. Dávila, P. De Padova, B. Ealet, H. Oughaddou, B. Aufray and G. Le Lay, J. Supercond. Novel Magn., 2009, 22, 259–263 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lalmi, H. Oughaddou, H. Enriquez, A. Kara, S. Vizzini, B. Ealet and B. Aufray, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 223109 CrossRef .
L. Chun-Liang, A. Ryuichi, K. Kazuaki, T. Noriyuki, M. Emi, K. Yousoo, T. Noriaki and K. Maki, Appl. Phys. Express, 2012, 5, 045802 CrossRef .
P. Vogt, P. De Padova, C. Quaresima, J. Avila, E. Frantzeskakis, M. C. Asensio, A. Resta, B. Ealet and G. Le Lay, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 155501 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Aufray, A. Kara, S. Vizzini, H. Oughaddou, C. Léandri, B. Ealet and G. Le Lay, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 183102 CrossRef .
C. Lian and J. Ni, Phys. B, 2012, 407, 4695–4699 CrossRef CAS .
P. De Padova, C. Quaresima, C. Ottaviani, P. M. Sheverdyaeva, P. Moras, C. Carbone, D. Topwal, B. Olivieri, A. Kara, H. Oughaddou, B. Aufray and G. Le Lay, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 261905 CrossRef .
M. Rachid Tchalala, H. Enriquez, A. J. Mayne, A. Kara, S. Roth, M. G. Silly, A. Bendounan, F. Sirotti, T. Greber, B. Aufray, G. Dujardin, M. Ait Ali and H. Oughaddou, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 083107 CrossRef .
L. Meng, Y. Wang, L. Zhang, S. Du, R. Wu, L. Li, Y. Zhang, G. Li, H. Zhou, W. A. Hofer and H.-J. Gao, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 685–690 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chiappe, E. Scalise, E. Cinquanta, C. Grazianetti, B. van den Broek, M. Fanciulli, M. Houssa and A. Molle, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2096–2101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Feng, S. R. Wagner and P. Zhang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 10310 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Abdelkader, V. Sébastien, L. Cristel, E. Benedicte, O. Hamid, A. Bernard and L. Guy, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2010, 22, 045004 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Feng, Z. Ding, S. Meng, Y. Yao, X. He, P. Cheng, L. Chen and K. Wu, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3507–3511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, S. W. Kim, I. Kim, D. Seo and H.-J. Choi, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2015, 10, 429 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Okamoto, Y. Kumai, Y. Sugiyama, T. Mitsuoka, K. Nakanishi, T. Ohta, H. Nozaki, S. Yamaguchi, S. Shirai and H. Nakano, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2710–2718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ohshita, K. Yamamoto, D. Tanaka, M. Nakashima, Y. Kunugi, M. Ohashi and H. Nakano, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 10991–10996 CAS .
T. Helbich, A. Lyuleeva, I. M. D. Höhlein, P. Marx, L. M. Scherf, J. Kehrle, T. F. Fässler, P. Lugli and B. Rieger, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 6194–6198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Adpakpang, S. B. Patil, S. M. Oh, J.-H. Kang, M. Lacroix and S.-J. Hwang, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 204, 60–68 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yagmurcukardes, F. M. Peeters, R. T. Senger and H. Sahin, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2016, 3, 041302 Search PubMed .

          S. Cahangirov, H. Sahin, G. L. Lay and A. Rubio, Introduction to the physics of silicene and other 2D materials, Lecture Notes in Physics 930, Springer International Publishing AG 2017.
G. R. Berdiyorov, M. Neek-Amal, F. M. Peeters and A. C. T. van Duin, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 024107 CrossRef .
M. Neek-Amal, A. Sadeghi, G. R. Berdiyorov and F. M. Peeters, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 261904 CrossRef .
T. Morishita, S. P. Russo, I. K. Snook, M. J. S. Spencer, K. Nishio and M. Mikami, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 045419 CrossRef .
M. J. S. Spencer, T. Morishita and I. K. Snook, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2906–2913 RSC .
H. Li, H.-X. Fu and S. Meng, Chin. Phys. B, 2015, 24, 086102 CrossRef .
C.-C. Liu, W. Feng and Y. Yao, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 107, 076802 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-T. Sun, Z. Wang, S. Meng, S. Du, F. Liu and H. J. Gao, 2D Mater., 2016, 3, 035026 CrossRef .
K. Shakouri, P. Vasilopoulos, V. Vargiamidis and F. M. Peeters, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 90, 235423 CrossRef .
C.-w. Zhang and S.-s. Yan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 4163–4166 CAS .
F.-b. Zheng and C.-w. Zhang, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2012, 7, 1–5 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Guo, S. Zhou, Y. Bai and J. Zhao, J. Supercond. Novel Magn., 2016, 29, 717–720 CrossRef CAS .
R.-w. Zhang, C.-w. Zhang, S.-s. Li, W.-x. Ji, P.-j. Wang, F. Li, P. Li, M.-j. Ren and M. Yuan, Solid State Commun., 2014, 191, 49–53 CrossRef CAS .
N. Missault, P. Vasilopoulos, V. Vargiamidis, F. M. Peeters and B. Van Duppen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 92, 195423 CrossRef .
K. Shakouri, H. Simchi, M. Esmaeilzadeh, H. Mazidabadi and F. M. Peeters, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 92, 035413 CrossRef .
B. Van Duppen, P. Vasilopoulos and F. M. Peeters, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 90, 035142 CrossRef .
H. Sahin, J. Sivek, S. Li, B. Partoens and F. M. Peeters, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 88, 045434 CrossRef .
G. R. Berdiyorov and F. M. Peeters, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 1133–1137 RSC .
J. Sivek, H. Sahin, B. Partoens and F. M. Peeters, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 085444 CrossRef .
H. Sahin and F. M. Peeters, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 085423 CrossRef .
S. Zhong, F. Ning, F. Rao, X. Lei, M. Wu and L. Zhou, Int. J. Mod. Phys. B, 2016, 30, 1650176 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu, L. Ben, H. Li and X. Huang, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 2654–2662 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xie, X. Yang, S. Zhou and D. Wang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9225–9231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-S. Kim, Y. Hwa, J.-H. Shin, M. Yang, H.-J. Sohn and S.-H. Hong, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 4297–4302 RSC .
G. A. Tritsaris, E. Kaxiras, S. Meng and E. Wang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2258–2263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tao, E. Cinquanta, D. Chiappe, C. Grazianetti, M. Fanciulli, M. Dubey, A. Molle and D. Akinwande, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 227–231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ni, Q. Liu, K. Tang, J. Zheng, J. Zhou, R. Qin, Z. Gao, D. Yu and J. Lu, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 113–118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Gupta, T. Sakthivel and S. Seal, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2015, 73, 44–126 CrossRef CAS .
H. Şahin, S. Cahangirov, M. Topsakal, E. Bekaroglu, E. Akturk, R. T. Senger and S. Ciraci, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 155453 CrossRef .
F. Gándara, M. E. Medina, N. Snejko, B. Gómez-Lor, M. Iglesias, E. Gutiérrez-Puebla and M. A. Monge, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 6791–6795 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Fan, J. Liu, S. Chen, H. Chang, C. Guan and L. Yuan, Microelectron. Eng., 2012, 96, 11–17 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Shaleev, A. V. Novikov, D. V. Yurasov, J. M. Hartmann, O. A. Kuznetsov, D. N. Lobanov and Z. F. Krasilnik, Semiconductors, 2013, 47, 427–432 CrossRef CAS .
M. Q. Arguilla, S. Jiang, B. Chitara and J. E. Goldberger, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 6941–6946 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fujiwara, T. Hirao, M. Kawada, H. Shibai, S. Matsuura, H. Kaneda, M. Patrashin and T. Nakagawa, Appl. Opt., 2003, 42, 2166–2173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Bianco, S. Butler, S. Jiang, O. D. Restrepo, W. Windl and J. E. Goldberger, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4414–4421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Koski and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3739–3743 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Acun, L. Zhang, P. Bampoulis, M. Farmanbar, A. v. Houselt, A. N. Rudenko, M. Lingenfelder, G. Brocks, B. Poelsema, M. I. Katsnelson and H. J. W. Zandvliet, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2015, 27, 443002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dimoulas, Microelectron. Eng., 2015, 131, 68–78 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, S.-z. Lu, J. Pan, Z. Qin, Y.-q. Wang, Y. Wang, G.-y. Cao, S. Du and H.-J. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4820–4824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Derivaz, D. Dentel, R. Stephan, M.-C. Hanf, A. Mehdaoui, P. Sonnet and C. Pirri, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2510–2516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. Dávila, L. Xian, S. Cahangirov, A. Rubio and G. L. Lay, New J. Phys., 2014, 16, 095002 CrossRef .
E. Golias, E. Xenogiannopoulou, D. Tsoutsou, P. Tsipas, S. A. Giamini and A. Dimoulas, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 88, 075403 CrossRef .
S. Cahangirov, M. Topsakal, E. Aktürk, H. Şahin and S. Ciraci, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 102, 236804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. Oscar, E. K. Kevin, G. Joshua and W. Wolfgang, New J. Phys., 2014, 16, 105009 CrossRef .
J. E. Padilha and R. B. Pontes, Solid State Commun., 2016, 225, 38–43 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 11929–11938 RSC .
L. C. Lew Yan Voon, E. Sandberg, R. S. Aga and A. A. Farajian, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 163114 CrossRef .
N. J. Roome and J. D. Carey, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 7743–7750 CAS .
M. Houssa, E. Scalise, K. Sankaran, G. Pourtois, V. V. Afanas'ev and A. Stesmans, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 223107 CrossRef .

          H. Hakan Gürel, M. Topsakal and S. Ciraci, in Low-Dimensional and Nanostructured Materials and Devices: Properties, Synthesis, Characterization, Modelling and Applications, ed. H. Ünlü, N. J. M. Horing and J. Dabowski, Springer International Publishing, Cham,  2016, pp. 261–290 Search PubMed .
A. Nijamudheen, R. Bhattacharjee, S. Choudhury and A. Datta, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 3802–3809 CAS .
A. O'Hare, F. V. Kusmartsev and K. I. Kugel, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1045–1052 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Houssa, G. Pourtois, V. V. Afanas'ev and A. Stesmans, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 082111 CrossRef .
O. Pulci, P. Gori, M. Marsili, V. Garbuio, R. Del Sole and F. Bechstedt, EPL, 2012, 98, 37004 CrossRef .
O. Pulci, M. Marsili, V. Garbuio, P. Gori, I. Kupchak and F. Bechstedt, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2015, 252, 72–77 CrossRef CAS .
X.-S. Ye, Z.-G. Shao, H. Zhao, L. Yang and C.-L. Wang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 21216–21220 RSC .
L. Zhang, P. Bampoulis, A. van Houselt and H. J. W. Zandvliet, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 111605 CrossRef .
M. E. Dávila and G. Le Lay, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 20714 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Han, J. Dong, G. Qin and M. Hu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 69956–69965 RSC .
J.-A. Yan, R. Stein, D. M. Schaefer, X.-Q. Wang and M. Y. Chou, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 88, 121403 CrossRef .
L.-F. Huang, P.-L. Gong and Z. Zeng, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 91, 205433 CrossRef .
B. Bishnoi and B. Ghosh, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 26153–26159 RSC .
R.-w. Zhang, W.-x. Ji, C.-w. Zhang, S.-s. Li, P. Li, P.-j. Wang, F. Li and M.-j. Ren, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 12169–12174 RSC .
W. Wei, Y. Dai, B. Huang and T. Jacob, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 8789–8794 RSC .
L. Matthes, P. Gori, O. Pulci and F. Bechstedt, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 035438 CrossRef .
F. Bechstedt, L. Matthes, P. Gori and O. Pulci, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 261906 CrossRef .
E. Scalise, M. Houssa, G. Pourtois, B. van den Broek, V. Afanas'ev and A. Stesmans, Nano Res., 2013, 6, 19–28 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yang, S. Cahangirov, A. Cantarero, A. Rubio and R. D'Agosta, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 125403 CrossRef .
Y. Ma, Y. Dai, C. Niu and B. Huang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 12587–12591 RSC .
R.-w. Zhang, W.-x. Ji, C.-w. Zhang, S.-s. Li, P. Li and P.-j. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 2088–2094 RSC .
H. Shu, Y. Li, S. Wang and J. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 4542–4550 RSC .
X.-Q. Wang, H.-D. Li and J.-T. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 3031–3036 RSC .
C. Si, J. Liu, Y. Xu, J. Wu, B.-L. Gu and W. Duan, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 115429 CrossRef .
T. Herrmannsdörfer, V. Heera, O. Ignatchik, M. Uhlarz, A. Mücklich, M. Posselt, H. Reuther, B. Schmidt, K. H. Heinig, W. Skorupa, M. Voelskow, C. Wündisch, R. Skrotzki, M. Helm and J. Wosnitza, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 102, 217003 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Sun, Q. Ren, S. Wang, Y. Zhang, Y. Du, J. Yu and W. Tang, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2016, 118, 112–116 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Pang, Y. Zhang, J.-M. Zhang, V. Ji and K.-W. Xu, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4330–4338 RSC .
J. Qi, X. Li and X. Qian, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 253107 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, J. Zheng, Z. Ni, R. Fei, Q. Liu, R. Quhe, C. Xu, J. Zhou, Z. Gao and J. Lu, Nano, 2012, 07, 1250037 CrossRef .
G. Liu, S. B. Liu, B. Xu, C. Y. Ouyang, H. Y. Song, S. Guan and S. A. Yang, J. Phys. Lett., 2015, 6, 4936–4942 CAS .
R. Stephan, M. C. Hanf, M. Derivaz, D. Dentel, M. C. Asensio, J. Avila, A. Mehdaoui, P. Sonnet and C. Pirri, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 1580–1585 CAS .
X. Chen, X. Sun, J. Jiang, Q. Liang, Q. Yang and R. Meng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 20350–20356 CAS .
V. O. Özçelik, E. Durgun and S. Ciraci, J. Phys. Lett., 2014, 5, 2694–2699 Search PubMed .
S.-s. Li, C.-w. Zhang, W.-x. Ji, F. Li, P.-j. Wang, S.-j. Hu, S.-s. Yan and Y.-s. Liu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 15968–15978 RSC .
Q. Pang, L. Li, C.-L. Zhang, X.-M. Wei and Y.-L. Song, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2015, 160, 96–104 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. Kaloni, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 25200–25208 CAS .
Y.-p. Wang, W.-x. Ji, C.-w. Zhang, S.-s. Li, F. Li, P. Li, M.-j. Ren, X.-l. Chen, M. Yuan and P.-j. Wang, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2016, 173, 379–384 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xia, W. Hu, Z. Li and J. Yang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 22495–22498 RSC .
M. Gross, Chem. Ind., 2014, 78, 24–27 Search PubMed .
S. Balendhran, S. Walia, H. Nili, S. Sriram and M. Bhaskaran, Small, 2015, 11, 640–652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, B. Yan, H.-J. Zhang, J. Wang, G. Xu, P. Tang, W. Duan and S.-C. Zhang, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2013, 111, 136804 CrossRef PubMed .
F.-f. Zhu, W.-j. Chen, Y. Xu, C.-l. Gao, D.-d. Guan, C.-h. Liu, D. Qian, S.-C. Zhang and J.-f. Jia, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1020–1025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Saxena, R. P. Chaudhary and S. Shukla, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 31073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tao, C. Yang, L. Wu, L. Han, Y. Song, S. Wang and P. Lu, Mod. Phys. Lett. B, 2016, 30, 1650146 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Cherukara, B. Narayanan, A. Kinaci, K. Sasikumar, S. K. Gray, M. K. Y. Chan and S. K. R. S. Sankaranarayanan, J. Phys. Lett., 2016, 7, 3752–3759 CAS .
B. Peng, H. Zhang, H. Shao, Y. Xu, X. Zhang and H. Zhu, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 20225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. D. Kuang, L. Lindsay, S. Q. Shi and G. P. Zheng, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 3760–3767 RSC .
H. Zhou, Y. Cai, G. Zhang and Y.-W. Zhang, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2016, 94, 045423 CrossRef .
A. S. Nissimagoudar, A. Manjanath and A. K. Singh, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 14257–14263 RSC .
B. v. d. Broek, M. Houssa, E. Scalise, G. Pourtois, V. V. Afanas'ev and A. Stesmans, 2D Mater., 2014, 1, 021004 CrossRef .
G. Ying, P. Feng, Y. Meng, W. Yangyang, P. Yuanyuan, Z. Xiuying, L. Jingzhen, Z. Han and L. Jing, 2D Mater., 2016, 3, 035020 CrossRef .
M. Houssa, B. van den Broek, K. Iordanidou, A. K. A. Lu, G. Pourtois, J.-P. Locquet, V. Afanas'ev and A. Stesmans, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 774–778 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rachel and M. Ezawa, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 195303 CrossRef .
Y. Shaidu and O. Akin-Ojo, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2016, 118, 11–15 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, J. Zhang, B. Zhao, T. Zhou and Z. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 082104 CrossRef .
Y. Xu, P. Tang and S.-C. Zhang, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 92, 081112 CrossRef .
C. Huang, J. Zhou, H. Wu, K. Deng, P. Jena and E. Kan, J. Phys. Lett., 2016, 7, 1919–1924 CAS .
M. Ezawa, J. Supercond. Novel Magn., 2015, 28, 1249–1253 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fadaie, N. Shahtahmassebi and M. R. Roknabad, Opt. Quantum Electron., 2016, 48, 440 CrossRef .
M. Modarresi, A. Kakoee, Y. Mogulkoc and M. R. Roknabadi, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2015, 101, 164–167 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ceng-Ceng, J. Wei-Xiao, Z. Chang-Wen, L. Ping and W. Pei-Ji, Mater. Res. Express, 2016, 3, 105008 CrossRef .
V. O. Özçelik, D. Kecik, E. Durgun and S. Ciraci, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 845–853 Search PubMed .
L. Takahashi and K. Takahashi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 21394–21396 RSC .
X. Chen, C. Tan, Q. Yang, R. Meng, Q. Liang, M. Cai, S. Zhang and J. Jiang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 13987–13994 CAS .
B. Mortazavi, A. Dianat, G. Cuniberti and T. Rabczuk, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 213, 865–870 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kadioglu, F. Ersan, G. Gökoğlu, O. Ü. Aktürk and E. Aktürk, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2016, 180, 326–331 CrossRef CAS .
S.-s. Li and C.-w. Zhang, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2016, 173, 246–254 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xiong, C. Xia, T. Wang, Y. Peng and Y. Jia, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 10622–10628 CAS .
C. Bo-Hung, H. Zhi-Quan, H. Chia-Hsiu, C. Feng-Chuan, L. Yu-Tzu, L. Hsin and B. Arun, New J. Phys., 2014, 16, 115008 CrossRef .
R.-w. Zhang, W.-x. Ji, C.-w. Zhang, P. Li and P.-j. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 28134–28139 RSC .
Y. Ma, Y. Dai, M. Guo, C. Niu and B. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 12977–12981 CAS .
R.-w. Zhang, C.-w. Zhang, W.-x. Ji, S.-s. Li, S.-s. Yan, S.-j. Hu, P. Li, P.-j. Wang and F. Li, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 18879 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Run-Wu, Z. Chang-Wen, J. Wei-Xiao, L. Sheng-Shi, H. Shu-Jun, Y. Shi-Shen, L. Ping, W. Pei-Ji and L. Feng, New J. Phys., 2015, 17, 083036 CrossRef .
P. Rivero, J.-A. Yan, V. M. García-Suárez, J. Ferrer and S. Barraza-Lopez, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 90, 241408 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhao, C.-w. Zhang, W.-x. Ji, R.-w. Zhang, S.-s. Li, S.-s. Yan, B.-m. Zhang, P. Li and P.-j. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 20152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Kou, C. Chen and S. C. Smith, J. Phys. Lett., 2015, 6, 2794–2805 CAS .
H. Liu, Y. Du, Y. Deng and P. D. Ye, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2732–2743 RSC .
P. W. Bridgman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1914, 36, 1344–1363 CrossRef CAS .
P. W. Bridgman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1916, 38, 609–612 CrossRef CAS .
V. Eswaraiah, Q. Zeng, Y. Long and Z. Liu, Small, 2016, 12, 3480–3502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. R. Bhimanapati, Z. Lin, V. Meunier, Y. Jung, J. Cha, S. Das, D. Xiao, Y. Son, M. S. Strano, V. R. Cooper, L. Liang, S. G. Louie, E. Ringe, W. Zhou, S. S. Kim, R. R. Naik, B. G. Sumpter, H. Terrones, F. Xia, Y. Wang, J. Zhu, D. Akinwande, N. Alem, J. A. Schuller, R. E. Schaak, M. Terrones and J. A. Robinson, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11509–11539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Batmunkh, M. Bat-Erdene and J. G. Shapter, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8586–8617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Z. Rahman, C. W. Kwong, K. Davey and S. Z. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 709–728 CAS .
X. Ling, H. Wang, S. Huang, F. Xia and M. S. Dresselhaus, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 4523–4530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Ryder, J. D. Wood, S. A. Wells and M. C. Hersam, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3900–3917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Na, Y. T. Lee, J. A. Lim, D. K. Hwang, G.-T. Kim, W. K. Choi and Y.-W. Song, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11753–11762 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Buscema, D. J. Groenendijk, S. I. Blanter, G. A. Steele, H. S. J. van der Zant and A. Castellanos-Gomez, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3347–3352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liang, J. Wang, W. Lin, B. G. Sumpter, V. Meunier and M. Pan, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6400–6406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xia, H. Wang and Y. Jia, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4458 CAS .
W. Lu, H. Nan, J. Hong, Y. Chen, C. Zhu, Z. Liang, X. Ma, Z. Ni, C. Jin and Z. Zhang, Nano Res., 2014, 7, 853–859 CrossRef CAS .
C. Huo, Z. Yan, X. Song and H. Zeng, Sci. Bull., 2015, 60, 1994–2008 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Brent, N. Savjani, E. A. Lewis, S. J. Haigh, D. J. Lewis and P. O'Brien, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 13338–13341 RSC .
J. Kang, J. D. Wood, S. A. Wells, J.-H. Lee, X. Liu, K.-S. Chen and M. C. Hersam, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 3596–3604 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yasaei, B. Kumar, T. Foroozan, C. Wang, M. Asadi, D. Tuschel, J. E. Indacochea, R. F. Klie and A. Salehi-Khojin, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1887–1892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Hanlon, C. Backes, E. Doherty, C. S. Cucinotta, N. C. Berner, C. Boland, K. Lee, A. Harvey, P. Lynch, Z. Gholamvand, S. Zhang, K. Wang, G. Moynihan, A. Pokle, Q. M. Ramasse, N. McEvoy, W. J. Blau, J. Wang, G. Abellan, F. Hauke, A. Hirsch, S. Sanvito, D. D. O'Regan, G. S. Duesberg, V. Nicolosi and J. N. Coleman, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, J. Yang, R. Xu, F. Wang, W. Li, M. Ghufran, Y.-W. Zhang, Z. Yu, G. Zhang, Q. Qin and Y. Lu, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9590–9596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Dong, A. Zhang, K. Liu, J. Ji, Y. G. Ye, X. G. Luo, X. H. Chen, X. Ma, Y. Jie, C. Chen, X. Wang and Q. Zhang, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2016, 116, 087401 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Fei and L. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 083120 CrossRef .
C.-G. Andres, V. Leonardo, P. Elsa, O. I. Joshua, K. L. Narasimha-Acharya, I. B. Sofya, J. G. Dirk, B. Michele, A. S. Gary, J. V. Alvarez, W. Z. Henny, J. J. Palacios and S. J. v. d. Z. Herre, 2D Mater., 2014, 1, 025001 CrossRef .
M. Engel, M. Steiner and P. Avouris, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6414–6417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lin, S. Liu, Z. Yang, Y. Li, T. W. Ng, Z. Xu, Q. Bao, J. Hao, C.-S. Lee, C. Surya, F. Yan and S. P. Lau, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 864–871 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, X. Yang, W. Shao, S. Chen, J. Xie, X. Zhang, J. Wang and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 11376–11382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Dai and X. C. Zeng, J. Phys. Lett., 2014, 5, 1289–1293 CAS .
S. Appalakondaiah, G. Vaitheeswaran, S. Lebègue, N. E. Christensen and A. Svane, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 035105 CrossRef .
X. Peng, Q. Wei and A. Copple, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 90, 085402 CrossRef .
D. Cakir, C. Sevik and F. M. Peeters, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 92, 165406 CrossRef .
Z. Sofer, D. Sedmidubský, Š. Huber, J. Luxa, D. Bouša, C. Boothroyd and M. Pumera, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128, 3443–3447 CrossRef .
M. Tahir, P. Vasilopoulos and F. M. Peeters, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 92, 045420 CrossRef .
V. Tran, R. Soklaski, Y. Liang and L. Yang, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 235319 CrossRef .
X. Han, H. Morgan Stewart, S. A. Shevlin, C. R. A. Catlow and Z. X. Guo, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4607–4614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wei and X. Peng, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 251915 CrossRef .
Z. Zhu and D. Tománek, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 112, 176802 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Guan, Z. Zhu and D. Tománek, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 113, 046804 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Aierken, D. Cakir, C. Sevik and F. M. Peeters, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 92, 081408 CrossRef .
R. Fei, A. Faghaninia, R. Soklaski, J.-A. Yan, C. Lo and L. Yang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6393–6399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, A. M. Jones, K. L. Seyler, V. Tran, Y. Jia, H. Zhao, H. Wang, L. Yang, X. Xu and F. Xia, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 517–521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Fei and L. Yang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2884–2889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Luo, J. Maassen, Y. Deng, Y. Du, R. P. Garrelts, M. S. Lundstrom, P. D. Ye and X. Xu, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jin-Wu, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 055701 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Liu, X. Zhang, L. B. Abdalla, A. Fazzio and A. Zunger, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1222–1228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. T. Sisakht, F. Fazileh, M. H. Zare, M. Zarenia and F. M. Peeters, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2016, 94, 085417 CrossRef .
D. Cakir, H. Sahin and F. M. Peeters, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 90, 205421 CrossRef .
S. Cui, H. Pu, S. A. Wells, Z. Wen, S. Mao, J. Chang, M. C. Hersam and J. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Kou, T. Frauenheim and C. Chen, J. Phys. Lett., 2014, 5, 2675–2681 CAS .
S. Zhao, W. Kang and J. Xue, J. Mater.
Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19046–19052 CAS .
D. Wang, G.-C. Guo, X.-L. Wei, L.-M. Liu and S.-J. Zhao, J. Power Sources, 2016, 302, 215–222 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yao, C. Huang, Y. Yuan, Y. Liu, S. Liu, K. Deng and E. Kan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 6923–6928 CAS .
W. Li, Y. Yang, G. Zhang and Y.-W. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1691–1697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. V. Kulish, O. I. Malyi, C. Persson and P. Wu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 13921–13928 RSC .
S. Qilong, D. Ying, M. Yandong, Y. Na, W. Wei, Y. Lin and H. Baibiao, 2D Mater., 2016, 3, 035017 CrossRef .
H.-S. Tsai, S.-W. Wang, C.-H. Hsiao, C.-W. Chen, H. Ouyang, Y.-L. Chueh, H.-C. Kuo and J.-H. Liang, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 425–429 CrossRef CAS .
A. Chaves, M. Z. Mayers, F. M. Peeters and D. R. Reichman, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2016, 93, 115314 CrossRef .
Z. Zhiya, X. Jiafeng, Y. Dezheng, W. Yuhua, S. Mingsu and X. Desheng, Appl. Phys. Express, 2015, 8, 055201 CrossRef .
S. Ma, P. Zhou, L. Z. Sun and K. W. Zhang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 8723–8729 RSC .
M. Zeraati, S. M. Vaez Allaei, I. Abdolhosseini Sarsari, M. Pourfath and D. Donadio, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2016, 93, 085424 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, Y. Ma and Z. Chen, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 19152–19159 RSC .
J. Y. Yang and L. H. Liu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 091902 CrossRef .
M. Sun, S. Wang, Y. Du, J. Yu and W. Tang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 389, 594–600 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, W. Xu, Y. Yu, H. Du, K. Zhen, J. Wang, L. Luo, H. Qiu and X. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 362–370 RSC .
J. Du, C. Xia, T. Wang, X. Zhao, X. Tan and S. Wei, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 378, 350–356 CrossRef CAS .
J. Du, C. Xia, Y. An, T. Wang and Y. Jia, J. Mater. Sci., 2016, 51, 9504–9513 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ya-ping, Z. Chang-wen, J. Wei-xiao and W. Pei-ji, Appl. Phys. Express, 2015, 8, 065202 CrossRef .
G. Li, Y. Zhao, S. Zeng and J. Ni, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 390, 60–67 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-p. Wang, W.-x. Ji, C.-w. Zhang, P. Li, F. Li, M.-j. Ren, X.-L. Chen, M. Yuan and P.-j. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 20342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, Y. Hu, Z. Hu, B. Cai and H. Zeng, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 022102 CrossRef .
D. Wang, L. Chen, C. Shi, X. Wang, G. Cui, P. Zhang and Y. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 28487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Ersan, E. Aktürk and S. Ciraci, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 14345–14355 CAS .
M. S. Khan, A. Srivastava and R. Pandey, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 72634–72642 RSC .
J. Zhao, Y. Li and J. Ma, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 9657–9666 RSC .
S. Zhang, M. Xie, F. Li, Z. Yan, Y. Li, E. Kan, W. Liu, Z. Chen and H. Zeng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 1666–1669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Ares, F. Aguilar-Galindo, D. Rodriguez-San-Miguel, D. A. Aldave, S. Diaz-Tendero, M. Alcami, F. Martin, J. Gomez-Herrero and F. Zamora, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6332–6336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gibaja, D. Rodriguez-San-Miguel, P. Ares, J. Gómez-Herrero, M. Varela, R. Gillen, J. Maultzsch, F. Hauke, A. Hirsch, G. Abellán and F. Zamora, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 14345–14349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-S. Tsai, C.-W. Chen, C.-H. Hsiao, H. Ouyang and J.-H. Liang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 8409–8412 RSC .
S. H. Kim, K.-H. Jin, J. Park, J. S. Kim, S.-H. Jhi and H. W. Yeom, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 33193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Lei, C. Liu, J.-L. Zhao, J.-M. Li, Y.-P. Li, J.-O. Wang, R. Wu, H.-J. Qian, H.-Q. Wang and K. Ibrahim, J. Appl. Phys., 2016, 119, 015302 CrossRef .
Y. Hu, Y. Wu and S. Zhang, Phys. B, 2016, 503, 126–129 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Cheung, H.-R. Fuh, M.-C. Hsu, Y.-C. Lin and C.-R. Chang, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2016, 11, 459 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Yang, Y. Song, W. Mi and X. Wang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 66140–66146 RSC .
S. K. Gupta, Y. Sonvane, G. Wang and R. Pandey, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2015, 641, 169–172 CrossRef CAS .
D. Singh, S. K. Gupta, Y. Sonvane and I. Lukacevic, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 6386–6390 RSC .
O. Üzengi Aktürk, E. Aktürk and S. Ciraci, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2016, 93, 035450 CrossRef .
O. Ü. Aktürk, V. O. Özçelik and S. Ciraci, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 91, 235446 CrossRef .
M. Zhao, X. Zhang and L. Li, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 16108 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Wang, R. Pandey and S. P. Karna, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 11490–11496 Search PubMed .
S. B. Pillai, S. Narayan, S. D. Dabhi and P. K. Jha, AIP Conf. Proc., 2016, 1731, 090024 CrossRef .
S. Zhang, Z. Yan, Y. Li, Z. Chen and H. Zeng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 3112–3115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. F. Yang, Y. Song, W. B. Mi and X. C. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 022103 CrossRef .
M. Xie, S. Zhang, B. Cai, Y. Zou and H. Zeng, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 14620–14625 RSC .
T. Nagao, S. Yaginuma, M. Saito, T. Kogure, J. T. Sadowski, T. Ohno, S. Hasegawa and T. Sakurai, Surf. Sci., 2005, 590, 247–252 CrossRef .
P. Kumar, J. Singh and A. C. Pandey, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 2313–2317 RSC .
I. K. Drozdov, A. Alexandradinata, S. Jeon, S. Nadj-Perge, H. Ji, R. J. Cava, B. Andrei Bernevig and A. Yazdani, Nat. Phys., 2014, 10, 664–669 CrossRef CAS .
E. Aktürk, O. Ü. Aktürk and S. Ciraci, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2016, 94, 014115 CrossRef .
L. Cheng, H. Liu, X. Tan, J. Zhang, J. Wei, H. Lv, J. Shi and X. Tang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 904–910 CAS .
L. Chen, Z. F. Wang and F. Liu, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 235420 CrossRef .
Y. Ma, Y. Dai, L. Kou, T. Frauenheim and T. Heine, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1083–1089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Boustani, Surf. Sci., 1997, 370, 355–363 CrossRef CAS .

          I. Boustani, Chemical Modelling: Applications and Theory, The Royal Society of Chemistry,  2011, vol. 8, pp. 1–44 Search PubMed .
R. D. Dewhurst, R. Claessen and H. Braunschweig, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 4866–4868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Feng, J. Zhang, Q. Zhong, W. Li, S. Li, H. Li, P. Cheng, S. Meng, L. Chen and K. Wu, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 563–568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Tai, T. Hu, Y. Zhou, X. Wang, J. Kong, T. Zeng, Y. You and Q. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 15473–15477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, Z. Yang, N. Wei and L. Kou, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 23233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Ma, Y. Jiao, G. Gao, Y. Gu, A. Bilic, Z. Chen and A. Du, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3022–3028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wu, J. Dai, Y. Zhao, Z. Zhuo, J. Yang and X. C. Zeng, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7443–7453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiao, F. Ma, J. Bell, A. Bilic and A. Du, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128, 10448–10451 CrossRef .
Q. Peng, L. Han, X. Wen, S. Liu, Z. Chen, J. Lian and S. De, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 2160–2168 RSC .
T. Tsafack and B. I. Yakobson, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2016, 93, 165434 CrossRef .
B. Zheng, H.-t. Yu, Y.-f. Lian and Y. Xie, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2016, 648, 81–86 CrossRef CAS .
X.-F. Zhou, A. R. Oganov, Z. Wang, I. A. Popov, A. I. Boldyrev and H.-T. Wang, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2016, 93, 085406 CrossRef .
J. Li, H. Zhang and G. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 19681–19688 CAS .
E. S. Penev, A. Kutana and B. I. Yakobson, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2522–2526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, S. Zeng and J. Ni, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2016, 93, 014502 CrossRef .
C. Wu, H. Wang, J. Zhang, G. Gou, B. Pan and J. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 2526–2532 CAS .
Z. Zhang, Y. Yang, G. Gao and B. I. Yakobson, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 13022–13026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shu, F. Li, P. Liang and X. Chen, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 16284–16291 RSC .
X.-K. Kong, C.-L. Chen and Q.-W. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 2841–2857 RSC .
S. H. Mir, S. Chakraborty, P. C. Jha, J. Wärnå, H. Soni, P. K. Jha and R. Ahuja, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 053903 CrossRef .
H. Liu, H. Tang, M. Fang, W. Si, Q. Zhang, Z. Huang, L. Gu, W. Pan, J. Yao, C. Nan and H. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8170–8176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gao, Y. Lin, X. Jiao, Y. Sun, Q. Luo, W. Zhang, D. Li, J. Yang and Y. Xie, Nature, 2016, 529, 68–71 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Xu, T. Xie, Y. Zhao and Y. Li, Cryst. Growth Des., 2007, 7, 1904–1911 CAS .
Y. Kuang, G. Feng, P. Li, Y. Bi, Y. Li and X. Sun, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128, 703–707 CrossRef .
A. H. Shaik and J. Chakraborty, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 14952–14957 RSC .
A.-X. Yin, W.-C. Liu, J. Ke, W. Zhu, J. Gu, Y.-W. Zhang and C.-H. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 20479–20489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Kong, K. Xu, C. Zhang, J. Dai, S. N. Oliaee, L. Li, X. Zeng, C. Wu and Z. Peng, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 1487–1492 CrossRef CAS .
H. Duan, N. Yan, R. Yu, C.-R. Chang, G. Zhou, H.-S. Hu, H. Rong, Z. Niu, J. Mao, H. Asakura, T. Tanaka, P. J. Dyson, J. Li and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3093 Search PubMed .
L. Zhao, C. Xu, H. Su, J. Liang, S. Lin, L. Gu, X. Wang, M. Chen and N. Zheng, Adv. Sci., 2015, 2, 1500100 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Hou, J. Zhu, C. Liu, X. Wang, Q. Kuang and L. Zheng, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 6127–6130 RSC .
X. Huang, S. Tang, X. Mu, Y. Dai, G. Chen, Z. Zhou, F. Ruan, Z. Yang and N. Zheng, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 28–32 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, G. Chen, H. Yang, X. Wang, J. Liang, P. Liu, M. Chen and N. Zheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 8368–8372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Hu, K. Lin, X. Wang, S. Liu, J. Yi, Y. Tian, B. Wu, G. Chen, H. Yang, Y. Dai, H. Li and N. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 12856–12859 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yin, X. Liu, Y.-T. Pan, K. A. Walsh and H. Yang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 7188–7194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-T. Pan, C. E. Smith, K. S. Kwok, J. Chen, H. Kong and H. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 14171–14174 RSC .
Y. Fan, Y. Ren, Y. Fang and M. Wu, Micro Nano Lett., 2014, 9, 726–730 Search PubMed .
S. H. Park, J. G. Son, T. G. Lee, H. M. Park and J. Y. Song, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2013, 8, 248 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Chhetri, M. Rana, B. Loukya, P. K. Patil, R. Datta and U. K. Gautam, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4430–4437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Funatsu, H. Tateishi, K. Hatakeyama, Y. Fukunaga, T. Taniguchi, M. Koinuma, H. Matsuura and Y. Matsumoto, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 8503–8506 RSC .
H. Zhao, J. Wu, H. You, S. Yang, B. Ding, Z. Yang, X. Song and H. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 12046–12052 RSC .
X. Hong, C. Tan, J. Chen, Z. Xu and H. Zhang, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 40–55 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, S. Li, Y. Huang, S. Wu, X. Zhou, S. Li, C. L. Gan, F. Boey, C. A. Mirkin and H. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 292 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Huang, H. Li, S. Li, S. Wu, F. Boey, J. Ma and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 12245–12248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, Y. Zhu, J.-Q. Wang, F. Liu, J. Huang, X. Meng, J.-M. Basset, Y. Han and F.-S. Xiao, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. D. Moon, G.-H. Lim, J. H. Song, M. Shin, T. Yu, B. Lim and U. Jeong, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2707–2712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, Z. Liu, J. Zhang, B. Han, J. Du, Y. Gao and T. Jiang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 14445–14448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Xiangkai Kong
	Xiangkai Kong is currently an Associate Professor at the School of Physics and Electronics Information at Huaibei Normal University. Xiangkai obtained his PhD degree from the University of Science and Technology of China under the supervision of Prof. Qianwang Chen in 2014. He did postdoctoral studies at Case Western Reserve University and the University of Akron. His notable awards include the Special Prize of the President Scholarship of the Chinese Academy of Sciences for Postgraduate students. His research interests include catalysis, air-batteries and theoretical simulations.

Qiangchun Liu
	Qiangchun Liu is currently a Professor in the School of Physics and Electronics Information at the Huaibei Normal University. He graduated from Huaibei Normal University in 1999, and received his MS and PhD degrees from the University of Science and Technology of China. His research interests include the synthesis and application of wave absorbing materials.

Changlin Zhang
	Dr Changlin Zhang is a Postdoc Research Fellow working at the Joint Center for Artificial Photosynthesis (JCAP), and Advanced Light Source (ALS) in Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. He received his PhD in Chemical Engineering and MS in Statistics from University of Akron in 2016. His research interests include materials synthesis and in situ/ex situ (TEM/STEM/FTIR/XRD/XAS and XPS) characterization on applications such as energy conversion and storage (oxygen reduction reaction, water splitting and so on). Currently, he is interested in using ambient pressure XPS, other synchrotron X-ray based techniques and in-situ gas/liquid TEM to study the CO2 reduction reaction (CO2RR). He has co-authored 14 peer-reviewed papers in journals such as JACS, Nano Letters, ACS Catalysis and Nano Energy.

Zhenmeng Peng
	Dr Zhenmeng Peng is an Assistant Professor of Chemical Engineering at the University of Akron. He received his BS and MS degrees at the University of Science and Technology of China in 2002 and 2005, respectively, his PhD degree at the University of Rochester in 2010, and his postdoc training at the University of California at Berkeley in 2010–2012. Dr Peng's research interests focus on materials chemistry, fundamental understanding of catalysis, and catalyst development for chemical conversion and energy-related reactions. He has co-authored over 50 publications in the research field.

Qianwang Chen
	Professor Qianwang Chen received his PhD from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC) in 1995 and was appointed to the faculty of USTC. He worked as a postdoc in the Institute of Hydrothermal Chemistry, Kochi, Japan, Alexander von Humboldt Research Fellow in the Solar Energy Institute of Hannover, Germany and as visiting researcher in the Hong Kong Polytechnic University. He was appointed as a professor in 2000 at the USTC and was awarded the Cheung Kong Professorship in 2002 by the Ministry of Education of China. His research interests include the synthesis and application of nanoscale materials.

 	Fig. 1  Structural model of (A) CaSi2 and (B) Weiss siloxene Si6H3(OH)3. (C) TEM image of siloxene nanosheets. Reproduced from ref. 37 with permission from Royal Chemical Society of Chemistry, copyright 2005. (D) Schematic of the top view and side view of a magnesium-doped silicon sheet capped with oxygen, with yellow, red and green balls representing oxygen, silicon and magnesium, respectively. (E) TEM and (F) AFM images of the prepared magnesium-doped silicon sheet. Reproduced from ref. 38 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2006.	 

 	Fig. 2  STM image of (A) 0.5 monolayer silicon atoms deposited on a Ag(111) surface at substrate temperature of 420 K, and (B) 0.9 monolayer silicon atoms deposited at the Ag(111) substrate temperature of 440 K. (C and D) High-resolution STM images superposed with calculated models of phases H and T, respectively, with the red and gray balls representing buckled and unbuckled silicon atoms, respectively. (E) A derivative STM image of 0.9 monolayer silicon atoms deposited at the temperature of 480 K. (F) High-resolution STM image showing the atomic structure of moire patterns. (G) 3D STM image of a single layer of a silicene island across a step edge of Ag(111). (H) High-resolution STM image of one monolayer silicene terrace showing the honeycomb superstructure. Reproduced from ref. 51 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2012.	 

 	Fig. 3  Silicon nanosheets grown by controlling the flow rate of hydrogen. (A) SEM image of spherically congregated silicon nanosheets and (B) top view SEM image of controlled epitaxial silicon nanosheets on the (111) substrate. (C) Conditions for the formation of arrays and bundles of silicon nanosheets. (D–F) SEM images of epitaxial silicon nanosheets in the cross-sectional view, presenting the angles with the substrates, depending on the orientation of the substrates. (G–I) The schematic images of the side projection view of the epitaxial silicon nanosheets, corresponding to (D–F), respectively. Reproduced from ref. 52 with permission from Springer, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic of (A) N2 and (B) CO molecules adsorbed onto silicene. The yellow, blue, red and gray balls are silicon, nitrogen, oxygen and carbon atoms, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 78 with permission from World Scientific Publishing Company, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) Schematic of the synthesis of reduced graphene oxide-encapsulated silicon nanosheets. (B) SEM and (C) high-magnification TEM images of as-synthesized silicon nanosheets. (D) Cyclability of commercial silicon nanopowder, silicon nanosheets and reduced graphene oxide-encapsulated silicon nanosheets. Reproduced from ref. 81 with permission from the Chemical Society of Chemistry, copyright 2014. (E) Atomic structure of lithiated single-layer silicene of Li0.5Si0.5. (F) Pathways for the diffusion of atomic lithium on single-layer silicene. Reproduced from ref. 82 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) Schematic of the topotactic deintercalation of CaGe2 to GeH. (B) Optical image of GeH crystals on graph paper with a 1 mm grid. (C) TEM image of GeH platelets. (D) Diffuse reflectance absorption spectrum of GeH, with the calculated 1.59 eV band gap. (E) The calculated electronic band structure of an isolated single layer of GeH. AFM images and height profiles of (F) few-layered GeH and (G) single-layer thick GeH sheets; inset: optical image. Reproduced from ref. 92 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) STM image of the germanium adlayer grown on the Pt(111) surface, showing a √19 × √19 superstructure. Reproduced from ref. 96 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2014. (B) Large scale STM image of germanene on the Al(111) surface, with its fast Fourier transform image inset. Reproduced from ref. 97 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. (C) 16.2 nm × 16.2 nm STM image of the modulated honeycomb √19 × √19 superstructure with a close-up in the bottom left corner. Adapted from ref. 98 with permission from Institute of Physics, copyright 2014. (D) Reflection high-energy electron diffraction patterns of germanium/Ag(111) at 1/3 monolayer coverage obtained along different azimuths of Ag(111). Blue and orange arrows indicate the diffraction streaks of Ag(111) and germanium/Ag(111) superstructure, respectively. The schematic illustrates a simulated LEED image, with open blue and filled orange circles corresponding to Ag(111) and (√3 × √3)R30° diffraction spots, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 99 with permission from the American Physical Society, copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) Snapshots of conjugate gradient steps in the course of the formation of a dumbbell structure. Reproduced from ref. 139 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. (B) Charge density difference isosurface for the Mn-adsorbed supercell of germanene for the ferromagnetic coupling between two Mn atoms, with the isosurface corresponding to a value of 2 × 10−3 electrons per Å3. Reproduced from ref. 142 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. (C) The calculated adsorption energies and band gap of different molecules on germanene. Reproduced from ref. 143 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) and (B) are the large-scale STM topography and atomically resolved STM image of stanene film, respectively. (C) and (D) are the ARPES spectra taken under p- and s-polarization, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 148 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2015. (E) High-resolution TEM image of the hexagonal stanene lattice, with the energy dispersive X-ray analysis, large area TEM image and electron diffraction pattern shown in the inset. (F) AFM image showing the edge of ∼4 layered stanene sheet, with the 3D view and measured height profile inset. Reproduced from ref. 149 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 10  Charge density difference of the (A) NH3/stanene and (B) H2S/stanene configurations, with the charge transfer value denoted. The isosurface is taken as 2 × 10−3 e Å−3. Reproduced from ref. 170 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. Calculated charge density difference plots for (C) lithium and (D) sodium ions on stanene. The green and red areas represent electron loss and gain, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 171 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 11  (A) AFM image of a single-layer phosphorene crystal with measured thickness of about 0.85 nm. (B) Photoluminescence spectra of single-layer phosphorene and bulk BP. (C) Output and (D) transfer curves of a typical few-layer phosphorene transistor with a film thickness of 5 nm. The arrow directions are also back gate bias sweeping directions. Reproduced from ref. 15 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. (E) Schematic of the device structure of a few-layer phosphorene field effect transistor, with the cross-section height profile of the device along the white dashed line. (F) Hall coefficient (blue curve) and conductance (red curve) as a function of gate voltage. Inset: Optical image of a typical multi-terminal few-layer phosphorene device. Reproduced from ref. 16 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 12  (A) Optical image of multilayered pristine phosphorene. (B) Same as in (A) after plasma thinning. (C) The contrast spectra of phosphorene with different layers. Reproduced from ref. 196 with permission from Springer, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 13  (A) Schematic of lithium surface loading, diffusion along armchair and zigzag directions on phosphorene surface. (B) (a) Energy profiles of lithium diffusion along armchair and zigzag directions, (b) top and (c) side views of the lithium diffusion pathway along the armchair direction, (d) top and (e) side view of lithium diffusion pathway along the zigzag direction. Reproduced from ref. 234 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. (C) Structure of the sodium-adsorbed phosphorene at a high sodium coverage for single-side adsorption. (D) Sodium diffusion on monolayer phosphorene, (a) top and (b) side view of sodium diffusion pathways, (c) corresponding energy barriers for sodium diffusion on phosphorene. Reproduced from ref. 235 with permission from Royal Chemical Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 14  (A) Band structures of B-, C-, N-, O- and F-doped arsenene, with the bands due to dopants indicated by red dotted lines. Reproduced from ref. 248 with permission from Institute of Physics, copyright 2015. (B) Atomic structures of F functionalized monolayer arsenene. (C) The calculated optical properties of the F functionalized monolayer arsenene, with the absorbance coefficient in the visible and near-infrared light region shown inset. Reproduced from ref. 255 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 15  (A) Antimonene flakes on SiO2 substrates, top: millimeter-sized crystals of antimony; middle: adhesive tape with sub-millimeter crystals of antimony; bottom: polymer on glass slide with micrometer antimony flakes. (B) AFM topographic image showing two flakes of antimonene. (C) High-resolution TEM image of a few-layer antimonene flake. The inset is a digital magnification of the area inside the blue rectangle. Reproduced from ref. 257 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2016. (D) Topographic AFM image of few-layer antimonene showing flakes with micrometer lateral dimensions. (E) Single point Raman spectra measured at different thicknesses according to the topographic AFM image (inset). (F) Calculated Raman spectra for bulk antimony and single-layer antimonene. Reproduced from ref. 258 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 16  (A and B) TEM images of the as-prepared ultrathin 2D bismuth nanosheets. Reproduced from ref. 276 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 17  (A) Schematics of the growth setup with atomic structure model and STM topography rendering. (B–D) Series of large-scale STM topography of borophene sheets with low, medium and high coverages, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 17 with permission from National Academy of Sciences, copyright 2015. (E) STM image of 2D boron sheets on Ag(111) with a substrate temperature of about 570 K, labelled as the S1 phase. (F) High-resolution STM image of S1 phases. (G) STM image of boron sheets after annealing the S1 phase to 650 K, with the new S2 phase appearing as marked. (H) High-resolution STM image of the S2 phase. Reproduced from ref. 285 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 18  (A) Schematic of the home-made two-zone furnace used to obtain atomically thin 2D boron films by CVD. (B) AFM topographical image of a monolayer boron on the substrate, with the 0.8 nm thickness marked. (C) Low-resolution TEM image of the transferred boron film. Inset: Typical TEM image of the film with a folded edge. (D) UV/vis absorption spectrum of monolayer boron film, with the band gap determination inserted. (E) The calculated electronic band structure of monolayer boron, with the Fermi level indicated by the pink dashed line. Reproduced from ref. 286 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 19  (A) Schematic of the fabrication of metal nanosheets. (B) SEM and (C) TEM images of the prepared 2D iron nanosheets. Reproduced from ref. 303 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 20  (A) Schematic formation process for the partially oxidized and pure Co 4-atomic-layer. (B) Lateral HAADF-STEM and (C) AFM images of the Co 4-atomic-layer. (D) LSV curves in a CO2-saturated and N2-saturated 0.1 M Na2SO4 aqueous solution (from bottom to top are successively partially oxidized Co 4-atom-thick layers, Co 4-atom-thick layers, partially oxidized bulk Co and bulk Co). Reproduced from ref. 304 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 21  (A) In situ topotactic reduction method for the fabrication of the atomically layered nickel nanosheet arrays. (B) SEM image of the nickel nanosheet arrays. (C) High-resolution TEM image of nickel nanosheets, with crystal lattices inserted. (D) High-resolution TEM image of a vertically laid nickel nanosheet, with its thickness marked in the inset image. Reproduced from ref. 306 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 22  TEM images of the as-prepared 2D copper nanosheets in (A) water, (B) dimethylsulfoxide, and (C) chloroform. Reproduced from ref. 307 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 23  (A) Schematic of the growth process of ruthenium nanosheets. (B) High-resolution TEM images of the intermediate products at 1 h, 3 h and 10 h, with the attachment areas marked, and all the bars represent 5 nm. (C and D) TEM images of the as-synthesized 2D ruthenium nanosheets. (E) HER performance electrochemical measurement of the ruthenium nanosheets. Reproduced from ref. 309 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 24  (A) AFM image and the corresponding height profiles of a bare rhodium nanosheet, with the scale bar of 200 nm. (B) High-magnification TEM image of the prepared poly(vinylpyrrolidone)-capped rhodium nanosheets, with the scale bar of 100 nm. Reproduced from ref. 291 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2014. (C) TEM image of rhodium nanosheets obtained under the CO pressure of 1.0 atm. Reproduced from ref. 311 with permission from the authors, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 25  (A) TEM image of palladium nanosheets. Inset: Photograph of an ethanol dispersion of the as-prepared palladium nanosheets in a cuvette. (B and C) Micrographs corresponding to 2 and 4 min irradiation, respectively, for the cell viability measurements. Dead cells were stained with trypan blue. (D) CV curves recorded for comparison of the electrocatalytic properties of 2D palladium nanosheets and palladium black. Reproduced from ref. 313 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2011. (E) TEM image of the prepared palladium 1D palladium superlattice nanowires. Reproduced from ref. 315 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. (F) Multilayered palladium nanosheets with 8° rotational mismatches. Reproduced from ref. 316 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 26  (A) SEM and (B) TEM images of the prepared platinum nanosheets. Adapted from ref. 320 with permission from Wiley. (C) AFM image of the monolayer platinum nanosheet after electrochemical reduction. Reproduced from ref. 321 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 27  (A) TEM image of ∼2.4 nm thick gold nanosheets on a graphene oxide surface, with scale bar of 500 nm. Reproduced from ref. 324 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2011. (B) The face-centred cubic gold 2D nanosheets obtained via exposing (A) to an electron beam. Reproduced from ref. 325 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2011. (C) Schematic of the synthetic procedure for 2D gold nanosheets, with layered double hydroxide as the template. Green slices, gold squares and red balls represent layered double hydroxide, 2D gold nanosheets and An−/AuCl4− anions, respectively. (D) Scanning TEM image of the gold nanosheets in the layered double hydroxide, with the scale bar of 50 nm. Reproduced from ref. 326 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2015. (E) SEM image of the as-prepared gold nanosheets. Reproduced from ref. 327 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2013.	 

Si nanosheets	Vacuum deposition	Single layer	—	—	
9

Liquid exfoliation	∼0.7 nm	—	—	
37

Liquid exfoliation	∼0.37 nm	—	—	
38

Vacuum deposition	Single layer	—	—	
42

Vacuum deposition	∼0.72 nm	—	—	
47

Vacuum deposition	∼0.3 nm	—	—	
48

Vacuum deposition	Single layer	—	—	
51

CVD	5–20 nm	—	—	
52

Liquid exfoliation	∼7.5 nm	—	—	
53

Liquid exfoliation	∼1.6 nm	—	—	
54

Liquid exfoliation	∼2 nm	—	—	
55

Magnesiothermic reduction	—	Li ion battery	Capacity of about 800 mA h g−1, and reaching 1500 mA h g−1 encapsulated in reduced graphene oxides	
81

Vacuum deposition	∼0.4 nm	Field effect transistor	Mobility of about 100 cm2 V−1 s−1	
83



Ge nanosheets	Liquid exfoliation	∼0.6 nm	—	—	
92

Vacuum deposition	∼0.6 nm	—	—	
96

Vacuum deposition	∼0.27 nm	—	—	
97

Vacuum deposition	Atom-thin	—	—	
98

Vacuum deposition	—	—	—	
99



Sn nanosheets	Vacuum deposition	∼0.35 nm	—	—	
148

Ultra-fast laser-material interactions	Four layers	—	—	
149



P nanosheets	Mechanical exfoliation	∼0.85 nm	Field effect transistor	On-current of 194 mA mm−1, hole field-effect mobility of 286 cm2 V−1 s−1, on/off ratio of 104	
15

Mechanical exfoliation	∼2 nm	Filed effect transistor	Charge-carrier mobility of 1000 cm2 V−1 s−1	
16

Mechanical cleavage and Ar+ plasma thinning	Single layer	—	—	
196

Liquid exfoliation	3.5–5 nm	—	—	
198

Liquid exfoliation	∼10 nm	Field effect transistor	Mobility of about 50 cm2 V−1 s−1, on/off ratio of 104	
199

Liquid exfoliation	∼6 nm	—	—	
200

Liquid exfoliation	<10 layers	—	—	
201

Mechanical exfoliation	2–5 layers	—	—	
202

Mechanical exfoliation	1.2–10.4 nm	—	—	
203

Mechanical exfoliation	Two layers	—	—	
205

Mechanical exfoliation	∼120 nm	Hyperspectral imaging	Submicron resolution	
206

Liquid exfoliation	7 layers	Photovoltaics	The power conversion efficiencies can be improved to 8.18% with the relative enhancement of 11%	
207

Liquid exfoliation	∼2.02 nm	Photodynamic therapy	Generation of singlet oxygen with a high quantum yield of about 0.91	
208

CVD	—	Biosensing	The oxidation peak starts at 35 mV and reaches a maximum at 500 mV for ascorbic acid, and stars at +10 mV and reaches a maximum at 400 mV for dopamine	
213

Mechanical exfoliation	Single layer	—	—	
222

Mechanical exfoliation	∼4.8 nm	Gas sensor	Sensitivity up to 190% at 20 p.p.b. at room temperature	
229



As nanosheets	Plasma assisted annealing	∼14 nm	—	—	
237



Sb nanosheets	Mechanical exfoliation	Single layer	—	—	
257

Liquid exfoliation	∼4 nm	—	—	
258

Plasma assisted annealing	∼5 nm	—	—	
259

Vacuum deposition	3–5 layers	—	—	
260



Bi nanosheets	Vacuum deposition	∼10 layers	—	—	
275

Wet-chemical synthesis	—	—	—	
276



B nanosheets	Vacuum deposition	Single layer	—	—	
17

Vacuum deposition	Single layer	—	—	
285

CVD	∼0.8 nm	—	—	
286



Fe nanosheets	Repeated folding and calendaring	∼5 nm	—	—	
303



Co nanosheets	Wet-chemical synthesis	∼0.82 nm	Electrochemical CO2 reduction	The activity is 26 times higher than bulk Co	
304

Hydrothermal/solvothermal method	∼8 nm	—	—	
305



Ni nanosheets	Hydrothermal/solvothermal method	∼2.2 nm	Electrochemical hydrazine oxidation	The activity is 1.97 times higher than Pt/C	
306



Cu nanosheets	Wet-chemical synthesis	∼25 nm	—	—	
307



Ru nanosheets	Hydrothermal/solvothermal method	<4 nm	CO-selective methanation	Higher than other Ru morphologies	
308

Hydrothermal/solvothermal method	∼1.2 nm	Electrochemical hydrogen evolution	The activity is 2.6 times higher than Ru powder	
309



Rh nanosheets	Hydrothermal/solvothermal method	∼0.4 nm	Hydrogenation of phenol and hydroformylation of 1-octene	The activities are much higher than Rh nanoparticles and Ru/C	
310

Wet-chemical synthesis	∼0.9 nm	Hydrogenation of anthracene	The activity is higher than the PVP-capped Rh, with 6 hours realizing complete conversion	
311

Hydrothermal/solvothermal method	∼1 nm	CO conversion	The activity is higher than Rh nanoparticles, with the full conversion at 110 °C	
312



Pd nanosheets	Wet-chemical synthesis	∼1.8 nm	Photothermal therapy and electrochemical formic acid oxidation	The photothermal cell-killing efficacy is comparable or higher than gold nanostructures and the electrocatalytic activity is 2.5 times higher than Pd black	
313

Wet-chemical synthesis	∼1.8 nm	Conversion of styrene to ethylbenzene	The activity is higher than PVP-capped Pd nanosheets	
314

Wet-chemical synthesis	∼1.8 nm	H2 sensing	The change resistance decreases from 7% to 2% as H2 concentration changes from 4% to 0.25%	
315

Wet-chemical synthesis	<1 nm	—	—	
316

Wet-chemical synthesis	Tens of nanometers	HepG2 cytotoxicity	More than 80% cell depth at 100 ppm	
317



Ag nanosheets	Wet-chemical synthesis	—	—	—	
318

Electrochemical deposition	∼28 nm	—	—	
319



Pt nanosheets	Mechanochemical synthesis	∼27 nm	Electrochemical methanol and formic acid oxidation	The activities are higher than commercial Pt/C	
320

Liquid exfoliation	∼1 nm	Electrochemical oxygen reduction	The activity is 125 times higher than Pt/C	
321


In situ chemical vapor reaction	∼10 nm	Electrochemical oxygen reduction	The activity is higher than commercial Pt/C	
322



Au nanosheets	Wet-chemical synthesis	∼2.4 nm	—	—	
324

We-chemical synthesis	Single to a few atomic layers	Catalytic oxidation of ethylbenzene	Conversion of ∼38% and selectivity of acetophenone of ∼90%	
326

Wet-chemical synthesis	∼20 nm	For electrode	No difference with ε = 40%	
327

Microwave heating	∼50 nm	—	—	
328


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
