A voyage into the synthesis and photophysics of homo- and heterobinuclear ensembles of phthalocyanines and porphyrins   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3CS60140D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3CS60140D
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 8049-8105Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsA voyage into the synthesis and photophysics of homo- and heterobinuclear ensembles of phthalocyanines and porphyrins†
Gema de la Torre

a, 
Giovanni Bottari

ab, 
Michael Sekita

c, 
Anita Hausmann

c, 
Dirk M. Guldi

*c and 
Tomás Torres

*ab
aDepartamento de Química Orgánica, Universidad Autonoma de Madrid, 28049, Madrid, Spain. E-mail: tomas.torres@uam.es
bIMDEA-Nanociencia, c/Faraday 9, Campus de Cantoblanco, 28049 Madrid, Spain
cFriedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Department of Chemistry and Pharmacy & Interdisciplinary Center for Molecular Materials (ICMM), Egerlandstrasse 3, 91058 Erlangen, Germany. E-mail: dirk.guldi@chemie.uni-erlangen.de
Received 
19th April 2013
First published on 8th July 2013AbstractThe remarkable properties of both phthalocyanines and porphyrins as individual building blocks have motivated the synthesis and study of homo- and heterobinuclear conjugates as light-harvesting systems. These planar chromophores share important electronic features such as high molar absorption coefficients, rich redox chemistry and interesting photoinduced energy and/or electron transfer abilities. In addition, some of these properties can be tuned by the introduction of different peripheral substituents and metal centres. In this review, we present relevant synthetic strategies for the preparation of covalent and supramolecular, homo- and heterobinuclear systems based on phthalocyanine and porphyrin chromophores, leading to a variety of architectures. In such systems, the degree of electronic interaction between the components is highly dependent on the electronic features of the two macrocycles, their linkage, and the molecular topology of the ensemble. In addition, incorporation of electroactive units into these binuclear systems has been pursued, affording multicomponent, donor–acceptor conjugates. In-depth photophysical characterization of the ground- and excited-state features of many of these homo- and heterobinuclear phthalocyanine and/or porphyrin ensembles has also been presented. Particular attention has been paid to understand the fundamental dynamics of the energy transfer and charge separation processes of these systems. This review intends to offer a general overview of the preparation of this class of compounds and the study of their photophysical properties which clearly show their potentiality as model compounds of light-harvesting complexes.Gema de la TorreGema de la Torre graduated in Chemistry (1992) and obtained her PhD (1998) from Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (UAM). Currently she is Associate Professor in the Organic Chemistry Department at UAM. Her current research interests are the synthesis of new phthalocyanines for their application in organic solar cells, double-decker phthalocyanines with single-molecule magnetic properties and new phthalocyanine-based multicomponent systems, including phthalocyanine–nanotube and phthalocyanine–graphene ensembles.Giovanni BottariGiovanni Bottari graduated in Chemistry (1999) from the Universitá degli Studi di Messina (Italy) and received his PhD (2003) at the University of Edinburgh (United Kingdom). Currently, he is Assistant Professor at the Universidad Autónoma de Madrid and Associate Scientist at IMDEA Nanociencia (Spain). His current research interests include the preparation and study of multicomponent, phthalocyanine-based donor–acceptor molecular materials both in solution and on surfaces.Michael SekitaMichael Sekita was born in Inowroclaw (Poland) in 1987. He studied Molecular Science at the Friedrich-Alexander University in Erlangen, where he obtained his Master's degree in 2011. Currently he is a graduate student in the research group of Prof. D. M. Guldi working on his PhD in the field of charge transfer processes involving carbon nanostructures. This is within the context of characterization and testing novel electron donor acceptor conjugates/hybrids as integrative materials for robust and photoactive films for an efficient solar energy conversion.Anita HausmannAnita Hausmann started her studies in chemistry in 2000 and received her diploma from the Friedrich-Alexander University in Erlangen (Germany) in 2007. She obtained her PhD in December 2011 at the University of Erlangen under the supervision of Prof. Dr Dirk M. Guldi for her research on energy- and electron-transfer processes of supramolecular donor–acceptor systems. During her PhD studies, she joined Prof. Dr Erik Vauthey's group at the University of Geneva for two months. In 2012, she had a postdoc position in Prof. Dr Dirk M. Guldi's working group at the University of Erlangen (Germany).Dirk M. GuldiDirk M. Guldi graduated in Chemistry (1988) and received his PhD (1990) at the University of Köln. Currently, he is Chair of Physical Chemistry at the University of Erlangen-Nuremberg. He is one of the world-leading scientists in the field of charge-separation in donor–acceptor nanocarbon-based materials and construction of solar energy conversion devices. Homepage: http://www.chemie.uni-erlangen.de/dcp/assets/pdf/DCP-Profile2010.pdfTomás TorresTomás Torres is Full Professor of Organic Chemistry at the Autonoma University of Madrid (UAM) and Associated Senior Researcher at the IMDEA-Nanoscience. In addition to various aspects of synthetic and supramolecular chemistry his current research interests include the preparation and study of the optical properties of organic functional materials. His group, that presently consists of twenty five researchers, is currently exploring several areas of basic research and applications of phthalocyanines, porphyrins and carbon nanostructures (fullerenes, carbon nanotubes, graphene), including organic and hybrid solar cells, with a focus on nanotechnology.
1. Introduction
Porphyrinoids, due to their preeminent role in nature, are the usual chromophores of choice to be employed as components of photovoltaic and artificial photosynthetic devices.1–9 Porphyrins (Pors) and their analogues, phthalocyanines (Pcs), hold some advantages with respect to other types of electro- and photoactive compounds which arise from their 18 π-electron aromatic structure, namely, high molar absorption coefficients and fast energy and/or electron transfer donor abilities to electron acceptor counterparts. Thus, porphyrinoids are widely used as molecular components in artificial photosynthetic systems, both for energy-transfer and electron-transfer processes. On the other hand, the possibility of tailoring their redox potentials through peripheral functionalization represents an appealing feature for their use in the above-mentioned energy-related areas. In this connection, both Pors and Pcs have remarkable absorption in the visible region. However, whereas regular Pors do not display significant absorption at energies lower than 550 nm, Pcs show excellent light harvesting capabilities over a wide range of the solar light spectrum with a maximum at around 700 nm, where the maximum of the solar photon flux occurs.10 Therefore, the development of new porphyrinoid-based systems able to absorb a higher portion of the solar emissions is of paramount importance, the functions of these new derivatives ranging from light harvesting through most of the visible part of the solar spectrum to electron transport.
Modifications of the porphyrinoid structure for light harvesting purposes can be achieved, for example, by extending the conjugation of the π-system that causes a bathochromic shift in the absorption spectrum. This is one of the reasons why the chemistry of conjugated Por oligomers has recently grown up, and synthetic strategies are continuously being developed, targeted to the preparation of multiPor arrays. Por dimers, trimers, and oligomers have a wide range of potential applications in areas such as photodynamic therapy (PDT), nonlinear optics (NLO), single molecular magnets, molecular photovoltaics and organic light-emitting diodes, among others.11–14 In this context, in the last few years, much effort has been devoted to the preparation and studies of binuclear Por systems which are formed by fusing, directly linking, or linking through different types of conjugated or non-conjugated bridges, the two chromophores.
Despite the great scientific and technological interest in the related Pc systems, the effort devoted to the preparation of binuclear Pcs or multiPc arrays is not comparable to that of Pors, but still interesting approaches have been reported in the search for excitonic and/or electronic interactions between macrocyclic subunits.15–19 Some examples in which the Pc subunits are connected through π-conjugated pathways have been described.20 For instance, Pcs endowed with acetylene functions have been used as precursors of Pc–Pc dimers.21 The utility of the alkynyl group arises from its physical and chemical features, namely its linear geometry, structural rigidity, extended π-electron delocalization and ability to be used in a variety of transition-metal catalyzed chemical reactions that allow the assembly of multicomponent systems. On the other hand, a variety of fused- and non-conjugated Pc–Pc dimers has also been described.15–19
Pc–Por heteroarrays22–24 are also targets of choice in the search for multicomponent systems with improved optoelectronic properties, in the sense that the two macrocycles present intense and complementary optical absorption, which cover a large portion of the UV-vis-near infrared component of the solar spectrum. Both macrocycles can be linked in different ways, as will be detailed in this revision.
Many studies have also appeared regarding the photophysical properties of porphyrinoid–porphyrinoid ensembles. Model systems of Por dimers are very attractive for spectroscopic and kinetic studies, in order to understand the photophysics of the special pair. In particular, mixed metal dimers offer the possibility of isolating the factors affecting the rates of energy and electron transfer between the two Por moieties.25,26 On the other hand, Pcs also produce efficient electron-transfer processes that can be modulated by choosing the appropriate central metal and the nature of the peripheral substitution. Typically, rapid charge-separation (CS) and slow charge recombination (CR) rates are facilitated by the small reorganization energies of electron transfer that these chromophores exhibit.27 However, studies on excited-state interactions of Pc binuclear systems are scarce. In contrast, Pc–Por heterodimers have been targets of choice, aimed at rationalizing the effect of the structural and electronic features of each of the two components on the photoinduced electron/energy transfer dynamics of the ensemble.23 It is well known that the long-wavelength absorption of Pcs overlaps quite well with the short-wavelength fluorescence of Pors, which results, upon photoexcitation, in an efficient transduction of singlet excited state energy from the Por to the Pc.28,29 On the other hand, the incorporation of a Por unit, as a secondary donor, into Pc–C60 conjugates has been exploited in the search for long-lived charge-separated states.23 Several electron-donating Pc–Pc, Por–Por, and Pc–Por dyads have been attached, either covalently or non-covalently, to electron-acceptor components such as C60 or perilendiimides (PDIs).9,23,26,30
This review will revise the synthetic methods developed for the preparation of outstanding Pc–Pc and Pc–Por derivatives and their multicomponent arrays in which a dimer is connected to one or more electro- or photoactive units. Some Pc–subphthalocyanine (SubPc) and Por–SubPc dyads will also be described in the first sections. Next, relevant examples of Por dimers presenting different connectivities will be given, as well as their self-organization in supramolecular ensembles. Particular attention will be paid to the synthesis and properties of multicomponent electroactive systems containing Por–Por units. The review will be closed with selected and representative examples of the photophysical properties of the assemblies comprising Pc–Pc, Pc–Por and Por–Por as electron-donor units. Sandwich-type, rare earth Pc- and/or Por-based complexes are out of the scope of this review.31
2. Phthalocyanine–phthalocyanine binuclear systems
The preparation of covalently linked, binuclear Pc systems has been pursued by many different researchers in the search for excitonic or electronic interactions between macrocycles which can modify the electrical and optical behaviour of the binuclear systems with regard to the mononuclear parent compounds.15–19 These interactions can arise from:
(a) A cofacial arrangement of the Pc subunits, which can be achieved either when a (semi-) flexible and large enough bridge is connecting both macrocycles, or through axial–axial bonding.
(b) An extension of the π-conjugated system, which is achieved by either using rigid alkenyl–alkynyl bridging groups between the macrocyclic units or by the edge-to-edge fusion of two Pcs, resulting in binuclear systems sharing a common benzene (or naphthalene) ring.
(c) Supramolecular (e.g. donor–acceptor (D–A), metal–ligand, etc.) interactions between appropriately substituted Pcs.
2.1 Cofacially arranged, binuclear phthalocyanines
Binuclear Pcs covalently linked through their benzo rings with different flexible bridges were widely studied by Leznoff and coworkers in the late 1980's and early 1990's.32 In these systems, cofacial conformations allow π-overlap bringing about spectroscopic and electrochemical properties which differ significantly from the parent mononuclear compounds. More recently, some novel examples of cofacially arranged, binuclear Pcs have been published, most of them focused on the use of these systems as sensors. In particular, cofacial assembly of two Pcs by means of a calixarene scaffold was reported.33 Binuclear Pc 1 is the first example of a “Pacman”-type Pc, and it was conceived as a potential sensor of soft heavy metal ions such as Ag+ and Hg+. The calixarene scaffold in 1 imparts conformational flexibility, a property which is desirable in chemoreceptor applications. The bisPc architecture was built by reaction of the bis(phthalonitrile)-containing calixarene precursor 2 with an eightfold excess of phthalonitrile in Li/penthanol at 110 °C (Scheme 1). The UV-vis spectrum of 1 indicated that the dimer existed as a conformational mixture of cofacial (‘clamshell’) and open forms. The cation complexing ability of 1 towards Ag+ was evaluated, the studies indicating that the binding occurs through interaction of the Pc rings with the silver cation, since the bis(phthalonitrile)-containing calixarene precursor 1 did not possess any silver ion selectivity. Moreover, the fluorescence of 1 decreased upon the addition of silver cations demonstrating that the two Pc rings are ‘sandwiching’ the silver ion in the final complex.
 Scheme 1  Synthesis of “Pacman”-type Pc 1. Reagents and conditions: (i) phthalonitrile, lithium/penthanol, 110 °C, 24 h. 
Similarly, 1,1′-bi-2-naphthol (BINOL) has been used as a rigid linker to prepare cofacially coupled Pc dimers 3.34 The originality of this contribution relies on the fact that enantiomerically pure BINOL was inserted, thus affording two different bisPc enantiomers 3a and 3b. Chiral cavity-containing dimers can be interesting as flexible-size tweezers for molecular recognition of chiral substrates and exceptional platforms for enantioselective catalytic systems. Both (R)-(3a) and (S)-(3b) enantiomers (Fig. 1) were prepared by cross-condensation of enantiomerically pure bis(phthalonitrile)-containing BINOL precursors with 18-fold excess of commercially available 4-tert-butyl-phthalonitrile. Exciton-coupling in these “clamshell” binuclear derivatives was corroborated by electronic absorption, magnetic circular dichroism and cyclovoltammetry (CV) measurements.
 Fig. 1  Cofacially coupled bisPcs 3a,b and 4. 
A more convergent approach to prepare “clamshell” bisPcs is the reaction of a preformed Pc holding a reactive moiety with an appropriately, doubly-functionalized molecule which will perform as a bridge in the target binuclear compound. An example of this approach is the nucleophilic “coupling” of hydroxyPcs with 1,2-, 1,3- and 1,4-bis(bromomethyl)benzenes to give binuclear Pcs with different arrangements in excellent yields.35 “Double-click” chemistry was used as a tool to achieve “clamshell”-binuclear Pc 4 from a functionalized mononuclear Pc (Fig. 1).36 The “double-click” reaction between an ethynyl-containing Pc and 1,4-bis(azidomethyl)benzene, using CuI and DMSO as solvent, gave 4 in 80% yield. UV-vis and fluorescence spectra of this compound revealed that its preferred conformation is the closed “clamshell” arrangement, which was also confirmed by CV measurements. This cofacial conformation could be easily opened by the addition of pyridine. On the other hand, the same authors also described a related trifluoroethoxy-coated binuclear Pc, which is the first example of a never-closing “clamshell” Pc, the fluorophobic repulsion among lateral chains being responsible for this behaviour.37
Ball-type Pcs are a new class of complexes which were firstly reported by Tomilova's group in 2003.38 These compounds have four cross linked substituents, each of them attached to both of the two face-to-face Pc molecules through their peripheral position (for example, see compound 5 in Scheme 2). Other authors have reported the synthesis and various properties of these types of Pcs with various metal centres and cross-linkages, such as calix[4]arene,39–41 4,4′-isopropylidendioxydiphenyl ligands,42 pentaerythritol bridges,43,44 and others.45–48 The preparation of these types of compounds is usually performed by ipso substitution of 4-nitrophthalonitrile with the corresponding bridging ligand having a diol functionality (see for example Scheme 2) followed by a typical cyclotetramerization reaction procedure. It has been demonstrated that the extent of the interactions is a result of the distance between the two MPc units and, therefore, the physicochemical properties are strongly affected by the nature of the bridging ligands.
 Scheme 2  Synthesis of ball-type Pc 5. Reagents and conditions: (i) K2CO3, DMF, 50 °C; (ii) Co(CH3COO)2·4H2O, sealed tube, 300 °C; (iii) H2 (1 atm), Pd/C (10%), DMSO, rt; (iv) NaH, heptadecafluoro-10-iododecane, DMF, 120 °C. 
Ball-type Co(II)Pc dimers are a subject of interest in electrocatalysis for the oxygen reduction reaction at the fuel cell cathode. Recently, the synthesis and the electrochemical, electrocatalytic, electrical and gas sensing properties of a ball-type, Co(II)Pc dimer 5 with eight perfluorinated chains was reported (Scheme 2).49,50 This complex displays high catalytic activity for oxygen reduction reaction which is attributed to the involvement of two redox-active metal centres in a rigid cofacial structure. Also, novel ball-type, binuclear MPcs (M = Co(II), Zn(II), Cu(II)) bridged by four rigid cyclopentyldisilanoxy-polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxanes have been prepared.51 The Co(II) Pc2 derivative shows higher oxygen reduction performance in acidic medium than monomeric Co(II)Pc, which should be related to the presence of two redox-active, face-to-face metal centres, which promotes the interaction with O2 molecules, probably the O–O bond breakage and thus, reduction to water. This evaluation is strongly supported by the improved electrocatalytic performance of the ball-type Pc derivative with Co(II) redox-active centres than the analogs with redox-inactive Zn(II) and Cu(II) metal centres.
Axially-bridged Pcs are an outstanding class of compounds. This type of linkage provokes relevant changes in the electronic structure of the molecule by altering the π-electronic distribution due to the dipole moment of the central metal–axial ligand bond. The most widespread axially-bridged dimeric structures are based on Fe(III) Pcs linked together through oxygen (μ-oxo Fe(III)Pc dimers)52,53 or nitrogen (μ-nitrido Fe(III)Pc dimers).54,55 These compounds show superior catalytic properties in selective oxidation processes, and have widely been covered in previous revisions.56
More recently, the chemical reactivity of other trivalent metallic Pcs, in particular Ga(III) and In(III) complexes, has been exploited to prepare heavy-metal containing, axially bridged bisPcs, in the pursuit of systems with improved non-linear absorption properties for optical limiting applications. Axially bridged bisPcs 6–8 (Scheme 3) were prepared upon dimerization of tetra-tert-butyl-In(III)ClPc (9) and tetra-tert-butyl-In(III)(p-trifluoromethylphenyl)Pc (10) through reactions with the bidentate ligands 1,4-diisocyanobenzene and 2,3,5,6-tetrafluorophenylene, respectively.57 When compared with the parent monomers 9 and 10, the dimers 6–8 display linear UV-vis spectra characterized by a blue-shift of the Pc Q-band in the order of 5–10 nm. On the other hand, a Ga(III)Pc-based dimer with a direct gallium–gallium bond and two coordinated dioxane molecules was also prepared.58 This compound may exist in two different conformations: one in which the two Pcs are poorly interacting, and another in which they are very close and strongly interacting. In the latter conformer, the emission lifetime is much shorter than that of the monomer model compounds. As far as no significant difference between the absorption spectra of the monomer and dimer was observed, intramolecular interactions should exist only in the excited state.
 Scheme 3  Synthesis of axially-bridged, In(III)Pcs binuclear systems 6–8. 
2.2 Conjugated binuclear phthalocyanines
As mentioned above, increasing the extension of the conjugated π-electronic system of Pcs brings about changes in the electronic structure and, therefore, in the optical behaviour features of the resulting systems, namely red-shift and splitting of the Q-band. Conjugated, binuclear Pc systems stand out as functional materials in molecular optoelectronics and NLO.59,60 Enlargement of the π-conjugation can be attained either by fusing two Pc rings in such a way that a benzene (or a naphthalene) ring is shared by the two macrocycles, or by bridging the two Pc units with short, conjugated spacers. Following are detailed several examples of these two families of outstanding derivatives.
Various alkyl- and alkoxy substituted, planar binuclear Pcs sharing either benzene61,62 or naphthalene rings63,64 are reported in the literature, as well as binuclear naphthalocyanines (Ncs).65 For homobinuclear Pc systems, the synthesis is usually carried out by statistical condensation of alkyl/alkoxy-substituted phthalonitriles and either 1,2,4,5-tetracyanobenzene or 2,3,6,7-tetracyanonaphthalene that will be incorporated into the fused position of the final molecule. However, to synthesize fused heterobinuclear or heterodimetallic Pc systems, a multistep procedure involving the former preparation of an unsymmetrically substituted mononuclear Pc holding two cyano moieties in an ortho substitution pattern was formerly developed by the group of Torres (see Scheme 4).66,67 A more recent example of the latter approach is shown in Scheme 4.64 The prepared dicyano-substituted intermediate 11 reacts with a selected phthalonitrile to yield binuclear compound 12. In general, all fused, binuclear Pc compounds reported in the literature exhibit an intense Q-band shifted to the near IR with regard to the parent mononuclear Pcs, reaching ca. 1000 nm in the case of planar binuclear Ncs.65
 Scheme 4  Synthesis of fused, binuclear Pcs 12. 
Apart from the pursuit of systems with a delocalized π-structure, the preparation of fused, binuclear Pc-based systems is, indeed, encouraged by the search for intramolecular interactions between components either in the ground- or excited states. An evaluation of the intramolecular interactions in the excited state of both metal-free, planar Pc–Pc and Pc–pyrazinoporphyrazine dimers has been performed by means of time-resolved electron paramagnetic resonance techniques. Both types of compounds display delocalization of the excitation over the two units and a contribution of a CT configuration.68 Steady-state and time-resolved absorption and fluorescence experiments as well as quantum mechanical density functional theory (DFT) calculations have also been performed on binuclear metal-free and Zn(II)Pcs sharing a common benzene ring.69 The larger fluorescence anisotropies shown by the binuclear derivatives compared to those of the monomers are consistent with the loss of symmetry and therefore the extension of the π-electron system.
Some work has been devoted to the preparation of systems having Pc-to-Pc conjugated linkers. For instance, ethyne bridges are proved to be ideal linkages for enabling electronic interactions between chromophores. The first synthetic approach to prepare conjugated, binuclear Pcs covalently linked by alkyne and alkene bridges was reported by Leznoff and coworkers in 1991.20 Since then many other alkynyl- and alkenyl-bridged conjugated binuclear compounds have been reported. In particular, Torres' group has been involved for some years on the synthesis, spectroscopic and electrochemical characterization of π-extended, binuclear Pc systems linked through one or more ethynyl and butadiynyl bridges. Palladium-catalyzed reactions are the key for preparing this type of alkynyl-linked bisPcs. In particular, the Sonogashira cross-coupling reaction between Pcs bearing a terminal alkyne and monoiodoPcs has provided many different conjugated, binuclear systems. The work on this area has been compiled in some revisions.16–18,21 An example of the further use of these alkynyl-bridged bisPcs for the construction of more complex systems is the preparation of a benzene-centered Pc hexamer through dicobaltoctacarbonyl-catalyzed trimerization of an ethynyl-linked bisPc.70
Cross-coupling methodology is still followed by other authors to prepare alkynyl-bridged, homodinuclear Pc derivatives, as shown in Scheme 5.71 Butadiynyl-bridged compound 13 was synthesized by a Pd(II)-catalyzed, Sonogashira cross-coupling reaction of iodoPc 14 and a monoprotected ethyne (to give 15), followed by deprotection (to give 16) and Glaser coupling. As a consequence of the peripheral substitution with trifluoroethoxy moieties, which causes fluorophobic repulsion, the molecule does not aggregate in solution. Even though aggregation had been minimized in previous works by the introduction of bulky substituents at the peripheral Pc positions, this example is one of the few reporting a fully nonaggregating binuclear Pc system, this feature conferring high fluorescence on the molecule.
 Scheme 5  Preparation of Pc 13. Reagents and conditions: (i) trimethylsilylacetylene, Pd(PPh3)2Cl2, CuI, Et3N, THF, 40 °C, 24 h, 97%; (ii) K2CO3, MeOH, RT, 4 h, 99%; (iii) CuCl, pyridine, RT, 3 days, 74%. 
It is worth mentioning that, in a recent work, Pt(II) has been inserted into the central bond of the butadiynyl bridge, this modification causing a significant decoupling of the Pc groups since the Pt(II) ion reduces or even disrupts conjugation.72
In addition to alkynyl bridges, other conjugated moieties that make possible the electronic communication between Pc macrocycles have been exploited. An outstanding example incorporates a [2,2′]paracyclophane ring as a bridge (17, Fig. 2).73 [2,2′]Paracyclophane contains two arene subunits with strong through-space, π–π coupling owing to the close proximity of the aromatic moieties. The two differently substituted Pc fragments in 17, namely, a Pc substituted with six electron-donor alkoxy substituents and a Pc substituted with six electron-withdrawing alkylsulfonyl substituents, were connected to a pseudo-para-divinyl[2.2]paracyclophane derivative by two successive Heck reactions. This molecular building block, containing a π-electron-rich component and a complementary π-electron-poor counterpart, undergoes hetero-association both in solution and in the solid state by means of D–A interactions.
 Fig. 2  Molecular structure of [2,2′]paracyclophane-bridged, binuclear Pc 17. 
2.3 Supramolecular phthalocyanine dimers
Metal–ligand interactions are widely-used molecular recognition tools for the construction of well-defined supramolecular architectures.74 Thus, it is not surprising that, over the years, some effort has been devoted to the construction of supramolecular arrays of Pcs by means of the metal coordination approach. Most of the noncovalent superstructures based on Pcs involve the coordination of Zn(II)Pcs and Ru(II)Pcs.75
A former example of homodimer Pc–Pc formation through metal–ligand interactions reported the self-coordination of Zn(II) hexaoctylpyridino[3,4]tribenzoporphyrazine derivative 19a, which is a Pc derivative where one of the isoindolic moieties has been replaced by a pyridine unit. This molecule showed to form alternative edge-to-face complexes through axial coordination of the pyridine moiety of one Pc to the zinc atom of another.76 Other authors went one step further in the study of a similar Zn(II) tri-tert-butylpyridino[3,4]tribenzoporphyrazine 19b. This Pc also showed a natural tendency to form homodimers such as 18 in noncoordinating solvents (Scheme 6).77,78 In the presence of pyridine, the dimer dissociated, giving rise to 19b, which, in the presence of silver salts such as AgPF6, formed a Ag(I)-coordinated homodimer 20. On the basis of its electronic absorption and magnetic circular dichroism properties, it has been suggested that this latter dimer adopts a planar, trans-conformation. Addition of NH4Cl, which can remove the silver ions as AgCl, regenerates the monomeric species 19c. Diethylamino-substituted tetrapyrazinoPcs were also shown to self-assemble into J-dimers in noncoordinating solvents by the coordination of the free electron pair of one diethylamino group with the central metal of the adjacent molecule.79
 Scheme 6  Zn(II) pyridino[3,4]tribenzoporphyrazine 19a,b, and two modes of self-assembly of 19b leading to 18 and 20. 
An outstanding example of a supramolecular Pc–Pc ensemble formed through self-coordination is shown in Fig. 3. Homodimer 21 was assembled by means of double, axial Zn(II) coordination with the imidazolyl (Im) moiety peripherally linked to the Pc macrocycle.80 This self-coordination process was found to be extremely efficient in solution of noncoordinating solvents such as toluene, with binding constants (Kass) of about 1–10 × 1011 M−1, depending on the nature of the peripheral substituents. The resulting homodimers are so stable that they can break into the monomers only in the presence of a large excess of the competing ligand N-methylimidazole.
 Fig. 3  Self-coordinated dimers 21 formed by axial-coordination of Im-functionalized Zn(II)Pcs. 
2.4 Binuclear phthalocyanines connected to electroactive moieties
The enormous interest in Pcs as molecular building blocks for the construction of artificial photosynthetic systems has fostered the study of a wide range of covalent and noncovalent Pc-based, D–A systems incorporating electroactive acceptor units of a diverse nature such as fullerene, PDI and anthraquinone (AQ) units, among others. Some examples of covalent and supramolecular arrays of such a nature are illustrated below.
Among the acceptor units employed for the preparation of D–A, bisPc-based systems, C60 and PDI enjoy a privileged position. Covalent Pc–Pc–PDI or Pc–Pc-fullerene assemblies have proved to be efficient providing intramolecular charge separated states after photoexcitation of the chromophores. The photophysical aspects of these types of ensembles will be detailed in Section 5.
A binuclear, Pc–Pc–PDI (22, Fig. 4) was prepared by condensation reaction between an amino-functionalized Pc precursor and perylene dianhydride.81 The preparation of such structures can also be performed by first implementation of the phthalonitrile into the perylene structure followed by the formation of both Pc macrocycles through mixed cyclotetramerization with tert-butylphthalonitrile.
 Fig. 4  Molecular structures of Pc2–PDI triads 22 and 23. 
Pd(II)-catalyzed, cross-coupling methodology was pursued to prepare conjugated Pc–PDI–Pc derivative 23 (Fig. 4).82 The synthesis of this triad was thereby accomplished through two different routes. The first one involves the initial bromination of the PDI at positions 1 and 7 and subsequent Sonogashira coupling with an ethynyl-functionalized Pc. The second methodology consists of endowing the same bay positions of the PDI scaffold with two terminal triple bonds followed by the conjugation with an iodoPc derivative. A significant redistribution of charge density in the ground state, that is, from the electron-donating Zn(II)Pc to the electron-accepting PDI is deduced from the absorption spectrum of the triad.
Ethynyl-bridges are also employed to assemble Pc–Pc conjugates to C60. The synthetic strategy used for the preparation of conjugate 24 consisted of an initial preparation of the diformyl-containing Pc precursor 25, through Pd(II)-catalyzed, cross-coupling reaction of diiodo Pc 26 and 4-ethynylbenzaldehyde. Binuclear conjugate 25 was then reacted with N-methyl glycine and C60 to afford Pc2–(C60)2 tetrad 24 (Scheme 7).83
 Scheme 7  Synthesis of Pc2–(C60)2 fullerene tetrad 24. (i) 4-Ethynylbenzaldehyde, Pd(PPh3)2Cl2, CuI, NEt3, THF, RT. (ii) C60 fullerene, N-methylglycine, toluene, reflux. 
Regarding the incorporation of alkenyl linkers for the fabrication of binuclear Pc–Pc-based multicomponent systems, Heck-type coupling proved successful to form triads 27–29 (Fig. 5), consisting of one AQ unit covalently linked to two Zn(II)Pcs.84 The reaction of monofunctionalized tri-tert-butylvinyl Zn(II)Pc with 1,5-, 1,8-, and 2,6-substituted diiodoAQ yielded isomeric triads 27, 28, and 29, respectively, leading to either highly interacting, packed (28) or extended (27 and 29) topologies. In triad 28, the Zn(II)Pc units are forced to π-stack cofacially and out of the plane of the AQ ring. Consequently, this molecule shows strong inter-Pc interactions that give rise to intramolecular excitonic coupling but a relatively small electronic communication with the AQ acceptor through the vinyl spacers. In contrast, the 1,5- or 2,6-connections of triads 27 and 29 allow for an efficient conjugation between the active units that extends over the entire planar system.
 Fig. 5  Molecular structures of Zn(II)Pc2–AQ triads 27–29. 
Supramolecular interactions have also been employed as a tool for the construction of Pc–Pc-based D–A systems. In particular, metal–ligand interactions are widely-used molecular recognition tools for the construction of such systems.
As mentioned above, axial Zn(II) coordination of Zn(II)Pcs with Im-containing units gives rise to rather stable supramolecular conjugates. Following this approach, a supramolecular architecture based on the assembly of two Zn(II)Pc units and a bis(Im)-substituted PDI has been recently described.85 Supramolecular complexation studies by 1H-NMR spectroscopy and ESI-MS, as well as UV-vis and fluorescence titration experiments, demonstrate a high coordinative Kass between the two components (ca. 105 M−1).
Ru(II)Pcs form strong complexes with basic sp2 nitrogen atoms (pyridine and imidazole), either on one side or on both sides of the macrocycle depending on the mononuclear Ru(II)Pc precursor used, that is, either monocoordinated with CO or dicoordinated with benzonitrile. Cook and colleagues were the first to predict the utility of Ru(II)Pcs in the preparation of pyridyl ligated derivatives,86 which show remarkable stability in solution due to the robustness of the ruthenium–pyridyl linkage.
Some examples in which two Ru(II)Pcs are linked together by means of other photoactive units through ruthenium–pyridyl bonds have recently been reported. For instance, treatment of PDI, bearing two 4-pyridyl substituents at the imido positions, with Ru(II)Pc monocoordinated with CO affords triad 30 in good yields (Fig. 6).87 Another related example describes the self-assembly of two Ru(II)(CO)Pcs with one appropriate squaraine molecule bearing two 4-ethenylpyridyl moieties to yield triad 31 (Fig. 6).88 This ensemble was shown to absorb a large portion of the visible spectrum.
 Fig. 6  Molecular structures of supramolecular triads Ru(II)Pc2–PDI 30, Ru(II)Pc2-squaraine 31, and Ru(II)Pc2–C60 32. 
On the other hand, triad 32 (Fig. 6) bearing an orthogonal geometry was prepared by treatment of Ru(II)(CO)Pc with a hexakis-substituted C60–pyridyl ligand.89 This array exhibits electronic coupling between the two electroactive components (the two Ru(II)Pc units and the fullerene moiety) in the ground state.
Other supramolecular interactions have also been used as a recognition motif for the preparation of binuclear Pc ensembles, such as D–A contacts between appropriately substituted Pcs bearing electron-donating or electron-withdrawing groups. This supramolecular tool has been exploited in Torres' group for the construction of the photoactive supramolecular Pc–C60 triad 33 depicted in Fig. 7.90 Hetero-association between the complementary electron-deficient Pc 34 and electron-rich Pc 35, bearing also a covalently linked C60 unit, was confirmed by different techniques, which provided evidence for the formation of a 1:1 D–A complex with a stability constant of about 105 M−1 in chloroform.
 Fig. 7  Structures of heterosupramolecular triad 33 formed by D–A interactions between Pd(II)Pc 34 and Zn(II)Pc–C60 dyad 35, and crown-ether Pc2–(C60)2 ensemble 36. 
The self-assembly of Pcs functionalized at the periphery with crown-ether moieties was intensively studied in the late 1980's by different groups.91,92 In particular, tetra-15-crown-5-substituted Pcs were found to form cofacial dimeric supramolecular complexes in the presence of alkali cations with diameters exceeding those of the crown ether rings such as K+. In these complexes, four potassium ions were sandwiched between two crown-ether Pc units. This approach was recently used, together with metal–ligand interactions, to ensemble two Pcs and two C60 moieties.93 Thus, supramolecular system 36 (Fig. 7) consists of a cofacial Pc dimer held together by crown-ether–K+ interactions, which is bound through both Zn(II) metal centers to the pyridyl-functionalized C60 component. Further stabilization by alkylammonium cations–crown-ether interactions takes place in the ensemble.
Hydrogen-bonding interactions have also been used to create ensembles of two Pcs with other electroactive subunits. In particular, a melamine/PDI recognition motif has been employed as a new strategy to assemble Pcs in well-defined, hydrogen-bonding supramolecular architectures such as 37 (Fig. 8).94 Thus, two Pc derivatives 38 that were functionalized with a ditopic melamine moiety strongly bind to each of the complementary diimide subunits in PDI 39 forming a stable supramolecular assembly. More recently, a related Pc unsymmetrically substituted with six strong donor thioalkyl chains and one melamine unit was assembled to a complementary PDI through three strong and highly directional hydrogen bonds.95
 Fig. 8  Molecular structure of heterosupramolecular triad 37. 
2.5 Phthalocyanine–subphthalocyanine systems
A number of macrocyclic chromophores can be considered as Pc derivatives, for instance those with extended conjugation (e.g. Ncs, phenanthrenocyanines), those formed by replacement of one isoindole unit by another heteroaromatic moiety (e.g. triazolePcs, pyrydinoporphyrazines) and those with a reduced (SubPcs) or increased (superPcs) number of isoindole units. Among all the Pc derivatives, SubPcs hold a privileged position. These lower Pc homologues are 14 π-electron aromatic compounds which comprise three N-fused, diiminoisoindole units in a cone-shaped geometry, and a central boron atom axially substituted with a halogen atom or other type of ligands. SubPcs are very promising candidates as photo- or electroactive systems.96–100 In particular, SubPc–Pc conjugates are perfectly suited for the study of intramolecular energy/electron-transfer processes for several reasons. First, the absorption of each chromophore perfectly complements that of the other; second, the energy level of their excited states and, therefore, of their optical transitions are very well suited for the efficient absorption and directional funneling, via energy-transfer processes, of photoexcitation energy; and finally, the redox gradient can be easily tuned by the introduction of different peripheral substituents on both macrocycles, and thus, control can be gained over the competition between photoinduced energy- and electron-transfer mechanisms.
As for other Pc-based, binuclear ensembles, different strategies can be applied for linking both chromophores. For instance, dyads 40a–c (Scheme 8), in which both units are covalently linked through their peripheral positions by a conjugated ethynyl spacer, have been synthesized.101 Pd(II)-mediated, cross-coupling reaction between different monoiodo-SubPcs (41a–c) and Pc 42 bearing a single ethynyl group afforded the target compounds. A remarkable dependence of the reaction rate on the SubPc peripheral substitution was noticed; electron-poor aromatic rings react much faster (40c > 40a > 40b).
 Scheme 8  Synthesis of Pc–SubPc dyads 40a–c. 
Peripheral functionalization of SubPcs is sometimes difficult since the harsh reaction conditions for SubPc formation preclude the incorporation of a number of important functional groups. On the other hand, substitution of axial ligands of SubPcs is a feasible, modular approach towards the functionalization of these rings. Therefore, covalent bonding of SubPc and Pc cores can take place through the axial position of the participating rings.102 Cofacial Pc–SubPc dyad 43 having an oxygen atom linking the metal ions at the centres of the macrocycles was prepared by condensation reaction of ClSubPc 44 and Si(IV)(OH)2Pc 45 (Scheme 9). The principal absorption bands arising from the SubPc and Si(IV)Pc components are evident in the UV-vis absorption spectra of dyad 43, but a small hypsochromic shift of the SubPc Q-band and a small bathochromic shift of the Si(IV)Pc Q-band are observed with regard to the monomeric reference compounds 44 and 45, respectively. These effects can be ascribed to differences in the axial environment more than to significant interactions of the π-electron orbitals of the component chromophores. The lack of interactions could be due to the cone-shaped structure of the SubPc unit, which avoids excitonic coupling even at such a short distance between the macrocycles. In accordance with this, the fluorescence spectrum of dyad 43 showed two bands at ca. 605 nm and ca. 780 nm, attributable to independent emissions from the SubPc and Si(IV)Pc components, respectively.
 Scheme 9  Synthesis of μ-oxo Pc–SubPc dyad 43. 
Very recently, a related alkynyl-linked SubPc–Pc system 46 (Fig. 9) was prepared through Pd(II)-catalyzed, Sonogashira coupling between a peripheral ethynyl moiety at the Pc and the p-iodo-functionalized position of an axial phenoxy ligand at the SubPc moiety.103 A remarkable feature of this dyad is that both SubPc and Pc units are fully coated with trifluoroethoxy groups.
 Fig. 9  Molecular structures of Pc–SubPc dyads 46 and 47. 
Following a supramolecular approach, SubPc–Pc dyads 47a,b (Fig. 9) were constructed through metal–ligand interactions between pyridiloxy moieties linked at the axial position of the SubPc and the metal center of tetraisopropyloxy-substituted Zn(II)Pc (47b) and Ru(II)(CO)Pc (47a).104 The complexation process was studied by 1H NMR and fluorescence spectroscopic methods, which confirmed the 1:1 binding stoichiometry between the chromophoric units. The Kass, as determined by fluorescence titration, were generally higher for 47a [(2.5–4.7) × 104 M−1] than for 47b [(0.3–1.8) × 104 M−1] (in 47b). UV-vis spectroscopy experiments revealed negligible ground-state interactions between the two chromophores.
3. Phthalocyanine–porphyrin systems
The unique physicochemical properties that both Pcs and Pors present as individual chromophores have prompted, in recent years, to the preparation of several Pc-Por ensembles and their study.
As in the case of Pc–Pc assemblies, covalent and supramolecular Pc–Por systems have been prepared using, in some cases, synthetic strategies similar to the ones employed for the preparation of Pc–Pc systems (e.g., metal-catalyzed coupling reactions or metal–ligand interactions between appropriately substituted Pc and Por macrocycles leading to covalent or supramolecular assemblies, respectively).
In this part of the review, we will present some of the most recent examples of covalent and supramolecular Pc–Por ensembles.
3.1 Covalent phthalocyanine–porphyrin systems
Since the first report, dated 1986, on the preparation of covalently linked, Pc–Por heterodimers,105 a large number of covalent, Pc–Por ensembles have been prepared and studied.
In 2007, the groups of Torres, Cavaleiro and Guldi reported a series of N-bridged, Pc–Por heterodimers in which a Pc macrocycle was connected either at the β-pyrrolic (48a–c) (Scheme 10) or meso (49) (Fig. 10) positions of a Por unit.29 Dyad 48a was prepared following two different synthetic procedures. One synthetic route involved a statistical condensation reaction between 4-tert-butylphthalonitrile and 4-porphyrinylaminophthalonitrile 50, which was obtained by a Buchwald–Hartwig amination reaction of Ni(II)Por 51 with 4-iodophthalonitrile, leading to Pc–Por dimer 48a in 33% yield (Scheme 10). Alternatively, dyad 48a could also be obtained by a Buchwald–Hartwig reaction between aminoPor 51 and a tri-tert-butyl-iodo-substituted Zn(II)Pc in 70% yield. Zn(II)Pc–Ni(II)Por derivative 48a served as a precursor for the preparation of Pc–Por dyads 48b and 48c which were obtained by acid-promoted demetallation of the Por unit (48b) followed by treatment with Zn(OAc)2 (48c). Immobilization of H2–Zn(II)Por–Zn(II)Pc conjugates 48b or 48c onto single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) has also been demonstrated, giving rise to the formation of stable, D–A Pc–Por–SWCNT hybrids.106
 Scheme 10  Synthesis of N-linked, Pc–Por dyad 48. 
 Fig. 10  Molecular structure of N-linked, Pc–Por dyad 49. 
In the case of the preparation of meso-linked Pc–Por 49 (Fig. 10), similarly to the case of Pc–Por heterodimer 48a, two synthetic strategies were used. In the first synthetic route, a Por-substituted phthalonitrile was prepared by Pd(II)-catalyzed coupling reaction between 4-iodophthalonitrile and a Zn(II)Por bearing an amino moiety at the para position of one of the four meso-phenyl rings, followed by statistical cross condensation of the resulting product with an excess of 4-tert-butylphthalonitrile, affording Pc–Por dyad 49 in 17% yield. Dimer 49 could also be prepared in 41% yield by direct, metal-catalyzed coupling of the same amino-substituted Zn(II)Por used above with a tri-tert-butyl-iodo-substituted Zn(II)Pc.
Ground state absorption spectra of Pc–Por dyads 48b and 49 show the characteristic absorption features of the individual macrocycles, namely strong absorptions assigned to the Por and Pc Soret- and Q-bands. A red-shift (ca. 23 nm in the case of 48b) of the Zn(II)Pc-based absorption was observed with respect to a Zn(II)Pc reference compound, as well as a hypsochromic shift of the Zn(II)Por bands, thus suggesting some degree of ground-state electronic communication between the two macrocycles. Photophysical studies with 48b and 49 revealed efficient Por-to-Pc energy transfer phenomena (vide infra).107
Some examples of Pc–Por dimers presenting a direct linkage between the two macrocycles have also been reported. Zn(II)Pc–Zn(II)Por dyads 52a–54a having the Pc moiety directly bound to one of the Por β-pyrrolic positions have been synthesized (Scheme 11).108 The synthesis of these dyads involves the use of a common Por-substituted phthalonitrile 55, which was prepared in 75% yield by Diels–Alder reaction of diene 56 with fumaronitrile, followed by the oxidation of the resulting adduct 57 with DDQ. Target Zn(II)Pc–Zn(II)Por dyads 52a–54a were obtained by statistical condensation of compound 55 with an excess of unsubstituted phthalonitrile (in the case of 52a), 4,5-dibutoxyphthalonitrile (in the case of 53a), or 4-tert-butylphthalonitrile (in the case of 54a) in the presence of ZnCl2. For all these Pc–Por heterodimers, their electronic absorption spectra resulted to be almost identical to those of equimolar mixtures of the corresponding Pc and Por subunits. Moreover, the direct linkage between Pc and Por in dyads 52a–54a results in a hindered rotation between the two chromophores.
 Scheme 11  Synthesis of Pc–Por dyads 52–54. Reagents and conditions: (i) fumaronitrile, toluene, reflux, overnight; (ii) DDQ, toluene, reflux; (iii) DMAE–o-DCB, 145 °C, Ar, 24 h (for 52a, 53a and 54a). 
A metal-catalyzed, Suzuki cross-coupling reaction has been employed for the preparation of Pc–Por dyads 58a, 59a–c and 54a. This latter compound was prepared using a different synthetic strategy from the one mentioned above.109 In such Pc–Por dyads, the Pc macrocycle was directly connected to a Zn(II)Por β (54a) or meso (58a, 59a–c) position, through the coupling of a common Zn(II)Pc-boronate derivative 60 with Por 61a (in the case of 58a), 62a–c (in the case of 59a–c) or a Zn(II)TTP macrocycle bearing a bromine atom at a β-position (in the case of 54a) with yields ranging from 30% to 65% (Scheme 12). Similar to the case of dyads 48b and 49, the absorption spectral features of dyads 54a, 58a and 59a–c resulted similar to those of the individual Zn(II)Pc and Zn(II)Por subcomponents, thus suggesting the absence of significant ground-state electronic communication between the two macrocycles.
 Scheme 12  Synthesis of Pc–Por dyads 58a and 59a–c. Reagents and conditions: Pd2(dba)3, S-Phos, K3PO4, toluene, 90 °C. 
Another example of directly-linked Pc–Por heterodimers is represented by H2Pc–Zn(II)Por 63 and Zn(II)Pc–Zn(II)Por 64 (Fig. 11).110 These systems are constituted by a Por macrocycle directly connected at one of its meso positions to a Pc macrocycle, and substituted at the opposite meso position with an Im group. In such systems, intermolecular π–π stacking between the Por and Pc macrocycles is precluded due to the orthogonal geometry adopted by the two closely-spaced chromophores. The pendant Im substituent in these Pc–Por dyads promotes, in noncoordinating solvents, the formation of stable, slipped cofacial supramolecular tetramers, that is [H2Pc–Zn(II)Por]2 (63)22-s and [Zn(II)Pc–Zn(II)Por]2 (64)22-s, through the coordination of the imidazole moiety of dyad 63 or 64 to the Zn(II)Por macrocycle of another dimer, with extremely large Kass (1011–1012 M−1) (Fig. 11). The formation of self-assembled dimers (63)22-s and (64)22-s could be inferred by UV-vis analysis which revealed a broadening of both the split Zn(II)Por Soret bands and the Pc Q-band, broadening that is accompanied, in this latter case, by a 7–10 nm red-shift of the λmax. The formation of supramolecular tetramers (63)22-s and (64)22-s was also confirmed by 1H NMR spectroscopy.
 Fig. 11  Formation of slipped, cofacial tetramers (63)22-s and (64)22-s resulting from the assembly of Pc–Por dyads 63 and 64, respectively. 
The use of metal–ligand coordination has also been involved in order to obtain cofacial stacks of Pc–Por dyads ((65)22c-(70)22c) as a result of the antiparallel stacking of Pc–Por dyads (65–70) (Fig. 12).28,111
 Fig. 12  Formation of cofacial, Pc–Por tetramers (65)22-c-(70)22-c resulting from the self-assembly of Pc–Por dyads 65–70. 
These dyads are constituted by one Im-substituted Por and one Pc connected, in this case, through an ethynylene spacer that allows free rotation of the two chromophores around the triple bond, which is not possible in dyads 63 and 64. M(II)Pc–H2Por dimers 69 and 70 were synthesized by using Pd(II)-catalyzed coupling reaction between an ethynyl-substituted Zn(II) or Mg(II)Pc and an iodo-substituted H2Por bearing an Im moiety. Compounds 69 and 70 were subsequently converted to M(II)Pc–Zn(II)Por dimers 67 and 68 by treatment with zinc acetate. On the other hand, a complementary synthetic strategy was employed for the preparation of Zn(II)Pc–H2Por dimers 65 and 66 which were prepared by copper-free, Sonogashira coupling reaction between adequately substituted Zn(II)Pcs having an iodo group and an ethynyl-substituted H2Por bearing an Im group. For these series of Pc–Por dimers, complementary coordination of the Im group of a Pc–Por dyad to the Pc Zn(II) or Mg(II) metal center of a second dimer results in the formation of head-to-tail supramolecular tetramers as demonstrated by different techniques. For example, in the case of dyad 69, GPC analysis using a noncoordinating solvent such as CHCl3 showed a single peak corresponding to supramolecular tetrad (69)22-c; neither monomer nor polymer was observed. The formation of such a supramolecular complex was also supported by MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry experiments, which showed a clear peak assignable to this supramolecular tetrad in addition to the dissociated dyad species. Further insight into the association ability of this dyad came from 1H NMR spectroscopy in noncoordinating solvents which showed an upfield shift for the Im protons with respect to a reference, uncomplexed Im–Por system, suggesting a ligand-to-metal coordination between the Im group and the Zn(II)Pc moiety. Finally, the stability of such tetrads was investigated by UV-vis titration experiments, which showed important spectral changes upon addition of 1-methylimidazole to the solution of the self-assembled tetrads. From these titrations experiments, a Kass of 1014 M−1 was calculated.
Interestingly, UV-vis titration studies of CHCl3 solutions containing self-assembled, cofacial dimer (68)22-c showed, upon addition of variable amounts of DMSO, the selective formation of a new stacked species (68)22-s (Scheme 13). This is a consequence of the preferred complexation of DMSO, a hard base, to the magnesium ion, a hard acid, with respect to the zinc ion, an intermediate acid. As expected, addition of 1-methylimidazole to a solution of (68)22-s resulted in the complete disassembly of the stacked complex and the formation of a Pc–Por having one 1-methylimidazole ligand on both zinc and magnesium centers.
 Scheme 13  Formation of slipped, Pc–Por stacks (68)22-s from cofacial Pc–Por stacks (68)22-c upon addition of DMSO. 
Strong NLO properties involving two-photon absorption (2PA) and three-photon absorption (3PA) have also been reported for stacked complexes (68)22-c and (70)22-c.112
Very recently, a wide-band capturing solar energy harvesting material constituted by a Pc–Por conjugate (71) having the two macrocycles connected by a semiflexible amide linker has been reported by the groups of Tkachenko and D'Souza (Fig. 13).113 Compound 71 was prepared by reacting an amino-functionalized tri-tert-butyl-Zn(II)Pc with a monocarboxyphenyl meso-substituted Zn(II)Por prior to conversion of the latter compound to its highly-reactive, acid chloride analog by treatment with thionyl chloride. Interestingly, Pc–Por dyad 71 has been employed for the preparation of a photoelectrochemical cell by modifying the semiconducting TiO2 surface with a ligand (4-carboxyphenylimidazole) capable of axially binding to the Zn(II)Por macrocycle. Although the overall performance of such a cell was relatively low compared to some of the well-engineered photocells, this method represents a new approach for the preparation of novel photovoltaic devices which function by a combination of multichromophoric systems and supramolecular interactions.
 Fig. 13  Molecular structures of Pc–Por dyads 71 and 72. 
A Pc–Por dimer (72) in which the two chromophores are separated by a long and rigid, conjugated spacer has also been prepared (Fig. 13).114 In 72, the presence of a π-conjugated, oligomeric phenylethynyl bridge reduces the symmetry of the Sn(IV)Cl2Por and Zn(II)Pc chromophores, resulting in red-shifted and broadened absorption bands as compared to some Pc and Por reference compounds, as well as in a splitting of the Zn(II)Pc-centered Q-band.
3.2 Supramolecular phthalocyanine–porphyrin systems
Supramolecular interactions have widely been used as an efficient and versatile method for the preparation of Pc·Por heterodimers.22,115
In this context, one of the most successful “supramolecular” approaches that has been used to prepare such dimers is represented by the metal–ligand axial coordination, relying on the ability of some ligands, such as pyridyl or Im moieties, to axially coordinate to the metal center of Pc or Por macrocycles. Following this strategy, a series of Pc·Por and Nc·Por supramolecular ensembles have recently been prepared by the complexation of Im-substituted H2Pors 73 to Pcs 74 or Ncs 75 (Fig. 14).116,117
 Fig. 14  Molecular structures of Im-substituted, H2Pors 73-oo, -mm, -pp, Pcs 74-Zn(IIii) and 75-Mg(IIii) and Ncs 74-Zn(IIii) and 75-Mg(IIii). 
In such systems, the substitution pattern of the Im unit at the H2Por meso phenyl ring has been changed from ortho (73-oo), meta (73-mm) and para (73-pp) with the aim of obtaining a family of Pc·Por and Nc·Por dyads. The different relative orientations of the Por and the Pc or Nc macrocycles in such supramolecular ensembles are expected to influence the communication between the two chromophores. On the other hand, the employed Pcs/Ncs were decorated with four tert-butyl substituents at their periphery in order to improve solubility and reduce self-aggregation. UV-vis studies on Pors 73 in a noncoordinating solvent such as o-DCB show the characteristic Por Soret band at around 432 nm, whereas in the case of Pc 74-Zn(IIii) and Nc 75-Zn(IIii) their absorption maxima were located in the visible (681 nm) or infrared (IR) (777 nm) region of the solar spectrum, respectively. The spectral features of Pc 74-Mg(IIii) and Nc 75-Mg(IIii) were quite similar to their zinc analogs, showing bands at 351, 618, and 681 nm while the spectrum of Nc was stretched into the near-IR region with peaks at 332, 690, 734 and 770 nm. Importantly, the Por band at 518 nm had little or no overlap with the absorption bands of either Pc or Nc providing a possibility for selective excitation of the donor H2Por.
Addition of H2Por 73-pp to a solution of Pc 74-Zn(IIii) or Pc 74-Mg(IIii) resulted, beside the normal increase of the H2Por absorption peaks, in a diminishing of the intensity of the Pc Q-band and the raising of new bands with several isosbestic points indicating existence of only one equilibrium process in solution. A similar trend was observed when titrating Nc 75-Zn(IIii) or Nc 75-Mg(IIii) with H2Por 73-pp. Job's plot experiments suggested the existence of a 1:1 complex formation between the H2Por donor 73-pp and the acceptor macrocycles 74-Zn(IIii) or 75-Zn(IIii), with Kass of 8.23 × 104 M−1 and 1.53 × 105 M−1, respectively. The magnitudes of the Kass for the Mg(II)Pc or Mg(II)Nc with Por 73-pp were generally smaller than those of the corresponding zinc analogs. The formation of a 1:1 supramolecular complex was also observed when titrating Pc 74-Zn(IIii) or Nc 75-Zn(IIii) with H2Por 73-oo or H2Por 73-mm, obtaining Kass around 104–105 M−1. The Kass values resulted higher in the case of the complexes formed between Pc 74-Zn(IIii) or Nc 75-Zn(IIii) and H2Por 73-pp with respect to the same complexes formed employing H2Por 73-oo or H2Por 73-mm, probably due to the lower steric constraints present on the para-substituted H2Por. Moreover, the binding constants of the Im-substituted Pors with Nc 75-Zn(IIii) were found to be 2–3 times larger than those obtained for Pc 74-Zn(IIii), probably due to the higher electronic-richness of the Zn(II)Nc with respect to the Zn(II)Pc macrocycle.
More recently, a series of supramolecular Pc·Por dyads (76) have been prepared by the groups of Tkachenko and D'Souza featuring the axial coordination of (ortho-, meta- or para-) Im-substituted H2Pors to a carbonyl Ru(II)(CO)Pc (Fig. 15).118 The replacement of a Zn(II)Pc for a Ru(II)Pc(CO) was aimed at increasing the stability constant of the resulting assemblies due to the stronger coordination between the ruthenium metallic center and the nitrogen Im ligand. Such Pc·Por dyads were obtained by reacting Ru(II)Pc(CO) with a stoichiometric amount of the appropriate Im-functionalized H2Por followed by chromatographic purification. Importantly, the presence of the carbonyl group on the Ru(II)Pc macrocycle provides stronger ligation for the coordinated nitrogen ligand due to the π-acceptor ability of the carbonyl ligand at one of the two axial Ru(II) coordination sites. UV-vis studies on these supramolecular complexes suggested small electronic communication between the two chromophores.
 Fig. 15  Molecular structures of Pc·Por dyads 76 resulting from the complexation of ortho-, meta- or para-Im-substituted, H2Pors to a Ru(II)(CO)Pc. 
Electrostatic interactions have also been exploited in order to drive the formation of Pc·Por supramolecular dimers and oligomers. In this context, a family of Pc·Por complexes consisting of negatively charged tetrasulfonatophenyl Pors (77a–c) or a tetracarboxyphenyl Por (77d) ion pairing with crown ether substituted Pcs (78) bearing potassium ions into its four crown ether cavities have been prepared119 and studied (Fig. 16a).120 The complexation of potassium ions by the crown ether residues imparts a tetracationic nature to the Pc supramolecular complex, thereby providing the potential for the K+-doped Pcs to interact via electrostatic interactions with tetraanionic Pors. CV and spectroelectrochemistry experiments indicate a degree of partial charge transfer character for the ground state.
 Fig. 16  (a) Molecular structures of K+-complexing, crown ether-substituted Pcs 78 and tetraanionic Pors 77. (b) Evolution of the absorption spectrum of Ni(II)Pc 78b upon addition of Ni(II)Por 77b in DMSO. Reprinted from ref. 120. Copyright 2002 ACS. 
For example, the titration of Ni(II)Pc 78b with Ni(II)Por 77b in DMSO resulted in a small blue shift of the Por Soret band, complete disappearance of the crown ether-substituted Pc Q-band and the appearance of a new band in the red spectral region (Fig. 16b). In contrast to the metal-containing Pc and Por systems described above, titration of the H2Por 77a with free-base (78a), Co(II) (78d) or Zn(II) (78e) Pcs, showed different behavior.
Weak electrostatic interactions in solution between non-charged macrocycles such as an Al(III)ClPc and an Al(III)OHPor have also been studied.121 UV-vis and fluorescence studies on mixed solutions of the two macrocycles indicate the formation of a 1:1 Pc·Por heterodimer with a Kass of 5.7 × 104 M−1, a value higher than that of the respective Pc·Pc or Por·Por homodimers, but considerably lower than the one obtained for strongly interacting Pcs and Pors bearing oppositely charged substituents (∼107 M−1).
More recently, the groups of Ermilov and Ng have used host–guest interactions between a tetrasulfonated Zn(II)TTP (79) and several Si(IV)Pcs axially-substituted with two permethylated β-cyclodextrin (CD) units (80) for the construction of Pc·Por supramolecular complexes (Fig. 17).122 UV-vis absorption and fluorescence measurements indicate that the two chromophores bind in a 1:1 manner in water with Kass in the range of 1.1 × 107 to 3.5 × 108 M−1, as a result of the interaction between the negatively-charged sulfonated groups and the internal cavity of the β-CD.
 Fig. 17  Molecular structures of β-CD-substituted SubPc 89, tetrasulfonated Zn(II)Por 79, and β-CD-substituted Si(IV)Pc 80. 
3.3 Phthalocyanine–porphyrin systems connected to other electroactive moieties
Pc–Por ensembles connected, covalently or through supramolecular interactions, to one or more electroactive units have also been reported.
A triad system (81) constituted of a Zn(II)Por “input” unit, a H2Pc “output” unit, and Fc as the redox-switching unit has been prepared (Fig. 18).123 The synthesis of 81 involves a one-pot, Pd-coupling reaction between a Zn(II)TTP derivative bearing two iodo atoms, an ethynyl-substituted Fc compound, and an ethynyl-functionalized H2Pc. The reaction gave a mixture of trimeric, dimeric, and monomeric species which were purified by using chromatography procedures to obtain the desired triad 81.
 Fig. 18  Molecular structure of Pc–Por–Fc triad 81 and Pc–C60–Por triads 82. 
Electrochemical studies on triad 81 showed electrochemical potentials close to those of the individual molecular components (Pc, Por and Fc), thus suggesting a relatively weak, ground-state coupling between these subunits in the array.
Very recently, some Pc–C60–Por triads (82) presenting the three photoactive moieties covalently connected have been described.124 Zn(II)Pc–C60–Ni(II)Por triad 82a was prepared in a 37% yield in a one-step synthesis via 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition of an azomethine ylide, generated in situ by a condensation reaction between a formyl Zn(II)Pc and glycine N-substituted with a Ni(II)Por macrocycle, to C60 (Fig. 18). Next, Zn(II)Pc–C60–H2Por 82b was obtained in a 95% yield by demetallation of the Por macrocycle in 82a using a H2SO4 solution in dichloromethane. Finally, metallation of compound 82b with Zn(AcO)2 afforded Zn(II)Pc–C60–Zn(II)Por triad 82c in 91% yield. A modification of the synthetic route leading to triad 82a replacing the formyl Zn(II)Pc for a diformyl Zn(II)Pc has allowed the authors to prepare Pc2–(C60)2–Por pentads.
Recently, the groups of Torres, Cavaleiro and Guldi reported a series of supramolecular triads constituted by pyridyl-substituted C60 ligands (83 and 84, Fig. 19) axially-coordinated to the Pc zinc center of tri-tert-butyl Zn(II)Pc-M(II)Por (M = Zn(II) (54a), Pd (II) (54b) and 2H (54c)) dyads, and their analog dyads having tert-butyloxy or no substituents (53a–c and 52a–c, respectively) on the Pc macrocycle (Scheme 11).125 Compounds 52a, 53a and 54a were obtained by statistical, cross-condensation of a H2Por-substituted phthalonitrile with an excess of phthalonitrile, 4-tert-butylphthalonitrile, and 4,5-dibutoxyphthalonitrile, respectively, in a refluxing mixture of o-DCB and DMAE, in the presence of zinc chloride. Compounds 52c, 53c and 54c were obtained in excellent yields (about 95%) through the demetallation of the Pors of compounds 52a, 53a and 54a with trifluoroacetic acid in CH2Cl2. The absorption spectra of these compounds showed an additional band at 516 nm, which is assigned to one of the H2Por Q-bands. Similarly to compounds 52a, 57a and 54a, dyads 52b, 53b and 54b were obtained by statistical condensation of Pd(II)Por-substituted phthalonitrile with adequate phthalonitriles in moderate yields (13–45%). Coordination of dyads 52–54 by fullerene derivatives 83 and 84 led to the formation of D–A, supramolecular hybrids through coordination of the pyridyl moiety of the fullerene species to the zinc metal center of the dyads' Pc macrocycle, as corroborated by titration fluorescence studies and transient absorption measurements (vide infra).
 Fig. 19  Molecular structures of pyridyl-substituted C60 derivatives 83 and 84. 
The same groups also investigated the supramolecular interaction between fullerene derivative 83 and fused Pc–Por conjugates 85a,b (Fig. 20).126 The UV-vis spectrum of 85a in toluene shows the characteristic absorption bands of the two chromophores, although a remarkable bathochromic shift of 20 nm is observed in the Por Soret band. The broadening, splitting, and red-shift of the Pc Q-band (from 677 nm to 685 and 709 nm) is also a consequence of the ‘‘desymmetrization’’ of the Pc, the enlargement of the π-conjugated system, and the intramolecular electronic coupling between the two macrocycles. The UV-vis spectrum of dimer 85b shows an additional minor Q-band at 538 nm due to the H2Por subunit. It is interesting to note that, while reported fused diPors and fused diPcs show a planar geometry, 85a and 85b present a marked distortion as evidenced by molecular mechanic calculations (MM+). This fact contributes to the strong ‘‘desymmetrization’’ of the Pc observed in the UV-vis spectra of 85a and 85b, although it does not preclude the extension of the π-conjugated Pc system with the Por.
 Fig. 20  Molecular structure of fused Pc–Por conjugates 85. 
3.4 Porphyrin–subphthalocyanine systems
Few examples of SubPc–Por dimers have been reported to date. One of the first examples of such ensembles is represented by dyad 86. This compound has been synthesized by reacting a triphenylamine (TPA)-substituted Zn(II)Por carrying a phenol group with a dodecafluoroSubPc axially substituted with a chloro atom (Fig. 21).127 Computational studies on this dimer revealed that the HOMO is shared between the TPA moieties and the Por macrocycle, while the LUMO is localized on the F12SubPc chromophore.
 Fig. 21  Molecular structure of TPA-substituted Zn(II)Por–SubPc ensemble 86. 
More recently, a SubPc–TPA–Zn(II)Por triad (87) has been prepared and its complexation by an Im-substituted C60 88 investigated by using different techniques (Scheme 14).128
 Scheme 14  Complexation of SubPc–TPA–Zn(II)Por triad 87 by Im-substituted C60·88 leading to supramolecular tetrad 87·88. 
The absorption spectrum of 87 presents common features of both the electron-donor Zn(II)Por–TPA and the electron-acceptor SubPc subunits, suggesting negligible electronic interactions between these chromophores in the ground state. Upon addition of Im-substituted C60 ligand 88 to a solution of 87, a diminishing in the Por Soret band intensity, a 4 nm red-shift, and the appearance of an isosbestic point at 430 nm was observed suggesting the formation of a pentacoordinated Zn(II) complex in which the Im-substituted C60 derivative is coordinating the Zn(II)Por metal center, forming self-assembled complex 87·88. Analysis of the absorbance data upon titration allowed the authors to determine the Kass of complex 87·88 which was 1.1 × 104 M−1.
A supramolecular complex formed by tetraanionic Por 79 and SubPc 89 (Fig. 17) has also been reported.129 The β-CD-substituted SubPc 89, which represents the first covalently-linked SubPc–CD conjugate, was synthesized in very low yields (about 5%) by treating the peripherally-unsubstituted Cl–SubPc with mono-6-hydroxy permethylated β-CD in the presence of triethylamine in refluxing p-xylene. The presence of the permethylated β-CD moiety greatly increased the solubility of 89 in common organic solvents and allowed it to be purified readily by chromatography. The absorption spectrum of 89 in ethanol showed no signs of aggregation. Next, the complexation of SubPc 89 with tetrasulfonated Zn(II)TTP 79 in water was investigated by UV-vis analysis. These studies show that, upon increasing the mole fraction of SubPc 89, the Por B band at 413 nm gradually decreases and shifts to 416 nm, while two isosbestic points at 325 and 460 nm are observed, indicating the formation of a supramolecular complex. Job's plot analysis suggests the formation of a 2:1 supramolecular complex (89)2·79. A Kass of 1.2 × 1012 M−2 in water was determined for complex (89)2·79 which indicates strong binding between the two components. More recently, as an extension of the above-mentioned work, a report has appeared in which compounds 79 and 89 have been investigated in the presence of a third chromophore, namely β-CD disubstituted Si(IV)Pc 80 (Fig. 17).130 The UV-vis spectrum of a 1:1:1 mixture of 79, 80 and 89 in water showed a number of intense absorptions covering a broad range from 300 to 700 nm, and was basically a superposition of the spectra of the three individual components except for the Por Soret band and the Pc Q-band which were shifted to the red by 3 nm and 8 nm, respectively. The intensity of the latter was also slightly reduced in the mixture. In this case photophysical (steady-state and time-resolved fluorescence and transient absorption) experiments were used in order to shed light onto the possible interactions between the three macrocycles in solution.
4. Porphyrin–porphyrin binuclear systems
4.1 meso- and β-linked binuclear porphyrins
Binuclear Por-based systems in which the constituent Pors are directly linked through their meso–meso positions are an attractive target in the search for electronic interactions between the component units. Different synthetic approaches have been applied for the construction of such systems, for instance, coupling reactions of monomeric Pors with AgPF6, Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling reactions of boronic ester with halogen-containing macrocycles, and acid-catalyzed condensations of meso-formyl substituted Pors with meso-aryldipyrromethanes, among others.13
meso–meso diPors such as 90 (Fig. 22) present split Soret bands in their UV-vis spectra as a consequence of the exciton coupling between Por subunits, but the conjugative electronic interaction between the chromophores is weak because of the nearly perpendicular conformation.131 However, the electronic interactions between directly linked Por units can be modulated as a function of the dihedral angle; therefore a decrease in the dihedral angle of meso–meso diPors, from an average of 90° to an oblique geometry, leads, indeed, to an enhancement in the electronic coupling between the subunits. This enhancement has been observed in permanently distorted, meso–meso-linked diPors 91 (Fig. 22), which are bridged by a strap of variable length.132 Shortening of the strap length causes a gradual decrease in the dihedral angle between the Pors and concomitant increasing distortion of the constituent rings, which is proved by red-shifting of the exciton split Soret band together with the growth of a new high-energy band, as well as changes in the resonant Raman spectra. INDO/SSCI calculations predict that these facts are due to charge transfer states located close to the excitonic Soret transitions, which are intensified upon a decrease in the dihedral angle.
 Fig. 22  Distorted meso–meso linked diPors 90 and 91. 
Encouraged by this observation, the same authors undertook the task of modulating the dihedral angle in meso–meso-linked Zn(II) diPors 90 through coordination with α,ω-diaminoalkanes (H2N(CH2)nNH2).131 In particular, they observed that, upon the addition of 1,7-diaminoheptane (7DA), a 1:1 complex was formed, which showed absorption (and also fluorescence) spectral features similar to those of permanently distorted meso–meso-linked diPor 91. It was then assumed that the association of 7DA with 90 took place through two amino groups coordinated to the two Zn(II) centers, hence forcing a tilt of the two Pors from a dihedral angle of about 90° to a decreased one. Furthermore, these torsional changes can be effected in a reversible manner, since the addition of acetic acid to a solution of complex 7DA·90 restores the original absorption and fluorescence spectra of 90.
Another illustration of how axial ligand coordination of meso–meso linked diPors can be used to modulate the electronic properties of the conjugate is exemplified with the coordination of butadiynyl-linked diPor 92 with bidentate ligands (Scheme 15). The very low rotational barrier imposed by the butadiyne link in the dimer allows a broad distribution of conformations, and all the Por–Por dihedral angles are populated at room temperature. It has been shown that when a bidentate dipyridylpyrrole ligand is added to 92, a stable 1:1 complex is formed in which the Por macrocycles of the dimer are essentially coplanar.133 Encouraged by this result, the same authors have undertaken the complexation of pyridine-appended dithienylethene (DTE), which is a well-known photochromic molecule, with the meso–meso-linked Por dimer 92 (Scheme 15) in the search for photoresponsive molecular memories.134 DTE is reversibly switched between its closed and open isomeric forms by irradiation with 302 nm UV- and 450 nm visible light, respectively. The open isomer possesses much more conformational flexibility than the closed form and, therefore, DTE-open is able to adopt a conformation that is well-suited for a chelated 1:1 complex with 92, whereas DTE-closed cannot easily coordinate to both Zn(II) centers of the same dimer molecule because of geometrical incompatibilities. In fact, the absorption spectrum of 1:1 92·DTE-open complex strongly suggests a structure where the Por macrocycles adopt a mutually planar conformation. The spectrum recorded after irradiation of this complex at 302 nm indicates the formation of the monodentate, non-planar 92·DTE-closed ensemble. Subsequent exposure to broadband visible light restores the original absorption spectrum, thus showing that the process is fully reversible.
 Scheme 15  Isomeric forms of 92·DTE complex. 
An intriguing case described by Aida and coworkers is the manipulation of the conformations of diPor systems comprising a Fc unit as a rotary module.135 Photoresponsive Por dimers 93 were prepared in which the Por units are linked through their meso positions to the Fc unit (Scheme 16). Additionally, each cyclopentadienyl ring of the Fc moiety is covalently linked to an aminodiphenyl arm. The conformation of this diPor is externally locked by the coordination of the cis form of the bidentate 1,2-bispyridylethylene 94 to each of the Zn(II) atoms complexed in the Por cavity (one-to-one complex 93·94ciscis). Upon UV-irradiation, the bidentate ligand isomerizes to the trans and is released from the host, thus causing an internal rotation through the Fc axis to afford the internally locked state 93, as each aniline unit coordinates to the Zn(II) metal of one Por. The backward photochemical isomerization of 93 in the presence of 94transtrans results in switching of 93 to its externally locked state 93·94ciscis. In a related example, the Fc spacer was doubly-linked to an azobenzene unit through the same positions linked to the aminodiphenyl arms in the previous example.136 By means of UV-vis irradiation cycles, the azobenzene unit changes its conformation from trans to cis, respectively, thus causing the molecule to rotate around the Fc moiety in a reversible, pedal-like fashion.
 Scheme 16  Photochemically controlled conformational switching of 93. 
The large conjugated character of meso–meso-butadiyne-linked Zn(II)Por dimers and, thus, their red-shifted absorption at around 700–750 nm and their 2PA137 cross sections render them potential sensitisers for one- and two-photon PDT. However, for such an application, water solubility is compulsory for reproducible delivery into cells, this requirement representing a difficult challenge considering the large hydrophobic core of meso–meso-butadiyne-linked diPors. For conferring water-solubility to these molecules, four polar triethyleneglycol substituents have been appended along the sides of each dimer, together with charged cationic (methylpyridinium and trimethylammonium) (compounds 95–97 in Fig. 23) and anionic (sulfonate and carboxylate) (compounds 98–100 in Fig. 23) substituents at the meso-positions.138 The photophysical properties and intracellular uptake of this series of hydrophilic conjugated Por dimers have been investigated.139 Using fluorescence microscopy, the accumulation of the photosensitisers in adenocarcinoma cells was monitored. Por dimers with positively charged substituents partition into cells more efficiently than the negatively charged dimers. In addition, one-photon and two-photon excited PDT results show that these Por dimers are very efficient one-photon PDT sensitisers, with efficiencies approaching those of drugs used clinically for PDT, especially in the case of dimer 96 functionalized with two terminal N-methylpyridinium moieties.140 The latter molecule, in particular, has shown an unprecedented wavelength-dependent effect in the production of singlet oxygen.141 It also behaves as a fluorescent molecular rotor being sensitive to the viscosity of the media; thus, intracellular viscosity changes in single cells can be quantified by means of fluorescence measurements. Using this tool, the authors have shown that there is a dramatic increase in the viscosity of the immediate environment of the rotor on photoinduced cell death. They provide insight into the dynamics of diffusion in cells, which is pertinent to drug delivery, cell signaling and intracellular mass transport.142
 Fig. 23  Structures of hydrophilic conjugated Zn(II)Por dimers 95–100. 
In an attempt to obtain Por dimers with an enhanced electronic delocalization, resonance-stabilized carbocationic systems such as 101a–c have been prepared,143 which emulate common dyes, such as cyanines and rhodamines. These systems have been called “porpho-cyanines”, and were found to have effective delocalization,144 over approximately 18 conjugated bonds, significantly longer than traditional cyanine dyes. Porpho-cyanines 101 were synthesized as shown in Scheme 17, through deprotonation of the terminal acetylene 102 and reaction with 0.5 equivalents of methyl benzoate derivatives, followed by addition of trifluoroacetic acid to generate the carbocation. These compounds show intense NIR absorption maxima located in the 1100–1340 nm range. Interestingly, extending the length of the acetylenic link between Pors brings about even more red-shifting of the maximum absorption wavelength, up to ca. 1620 nm.145 The mid-IR absorption exhibited by these carbocationic systems, together with their large ultrafast third-order nonlinearities, makes them promising materials for all-optical switching.
 Scheme 17  Synthesis of cations 101a–c. (i) XC6H4CO2Me (0.5 equiv.); LiN(SiMe3)2 (4 equiv.), THF; (ii) trifluoroacetic acid (2% by vol.), CHCl3. 
Additional changes over the conjugated structure of butadiynyl-linked diPors include the insertion of Pt(II) between the sp C atoms via σ coordination of two Por–acetylide ligands to the metal centre.146 Pt(II)–acetylide π-conjugated oligomers and polymers have received much attention because of their potential applications in electronic and optoelectronic devices. For this reason the effects of the Pt(II) bridge on the π-conjugation between Por units has been addressed. Electrochemical and UV-vis absorption measurements on these Pt(II)–diacetylide bridged Por dimers show that conjugation is reduced with regard to parent butadiyne-bridged diPors.
Recently, other types of conjugated Por dimers, such as meso–meso-(E)-ethene-1,2-diyl-linked diPors, have also been prepared by Suzuki coupling of porphyrinylboronates and iodovinylPors.147 Electronic absorption and steady state emission studies, together with theoretical geometry and spectral calculations, led the authors to conclude that the ethenediyl-linked dyads exist in solution in a family of conformations that differ in the extent of conjugation across the bridge, due to differing dihedral angles between the Por and alkene planes. (E)-Azoporphyrins, namely, Por dimers linked through azo-bridges by their meso positions, are also an interesting class of π-extended diPors since they combine the porphyrinoid conjugation with the potential photoreactivity of the azo linkage. Stronger interactions between the Por rings across the azo bridge than across ethene and ethyne linkers have been found.148 Carbazole-149 and pyrrole-150 linked Por dimers, as well as 1,2-,151 1,3- and 1,4-152 phenylene-linked diPors have also been prepared by means of metal-catalyzed, cross-coupling methodologies. In many cases, the structural features of the aromatic spacer impart a cofacial nature to the diPor system. Cofacial diPors holding spacers such as tris-anthracenic units,153 or structurally simpler biphenylene, anthracene, dibenzofuran, dibenzothiophene or dimethylxanthene bridges have been prepared following classical synthetic protocols based on acid-catalyzed condensations.154 Cofacial, “Pacman”-type, Por dimers, in which two Por rings are held in a face-to-face arrangement by a calixarene platform, have also been described.155
On the other hand, much effort has been devoted to the synthesis of chiral diPors because of their many important applications. Chiral Pors have been used as catalysts in asymmetric synthesis, as sensors for chiral recognition, and as mimics for enzymatic processes.156,157 Several approaches can be applied for chiral diPor synthesis. The most straightforward method is to attach chiral building blocks to preformed Por synthons, the chiral unit also performing as a bridge between the two macrocyclic units. For instance, commercial (−)-2,3,-o-isopropylidene-D-threitol has been coupled to a meso-substituted bromoPor,158 and two chiral BINOL spacers have been employed to link two Por rings in an offset face-to-face geometry with an interplanar distance of 5.8–7.2 Å, thus creating a chiral cavity which is suitable for hosting aromatic molecules (103 in Fig. 24).159 Apart from that, chirality can be achieved in meso–meso linked diPors by intramolecular chiral induction. Stereoselective synthesis of the chiral meso–meso-linked Por dimer 104 (Fig. 24) was achieved by using a chiral BINOL moiety as a remote chiral auxiliary, which controls the chirality of the diPor bond formed after oxidative coupling of the two subunits.160 For instance, a 2.2:1 ratio of SS/SR diastereoisomers of 104 was obtained with (S)-BINOL as remote auxiliary when the intramolecular oxidative coupling was performed at low temperatures. The two diastereoisomers of 104 were separated by achiral column chromatography. This elegant example is the first one reported in which the two atropisomers of a directly, meso–meso linked chiral diPor were isolated without utilizing chiral chromatography.
 Fig. 24  Chiral diPors 103 and 104. 
In the last few years, Pors have proved to be realistic candidates for replacing the costly and environmentally unfriendly ruthenium-based sensitizers in dye sensitised solar cells (DSSCs).161 Incorporating multichromophore light harvesting arrays with increased absorption cross sections would have the advantage that efficient DSSCs with thinner dye-sensitised films can be prepared. In this regard, directly meso–meso linked Por dimers are interesting candidate dyes to improve light-harvesting capability in DSSCs as the Soret band becomes broader by splitting into two bands due to strong exciton coupling between Por moieties. In the meantime, the extinction coefficients of the Q-bands also increase due to the reduced symmetry of Por dimers. In this regard, some directly meso–meso linked Por dimers tethered at two or four pyrrolic positions162 or at one free meso-position163,164 with carboxylic acid moieties to anchor onto the TiO2 surface have been prepared and studied. Efficiencies of up to 5.2% have been achieved with some of these systems.164
As in the case of meso–meso linked multiporphyrinic molecules, β–β directly linked diPors are receiving much attention since the interactions among coupled moieties are the basis of fundamental biological processes. The research on these types of compounds was triggered by the finding that the conditions of direct borylation of aromatic compounds via C–H bond iridium-catalyzed activation can be successfully applied to Por chemistry. Osuka and co-workers found that treatment of 5,15-bis-(3,5-di-tert-butylphenyl)Por (105) with bis(pinacolato)diborane (B(pin)) in the presence of catalytic amounts of an iridium complex provided Por 106 in moderate yields (Scheme 18).165 The borylation took place exclusively at the β-position adjacent to the unsubstituted meso-position of the Por core, namely, the sterically less hindered β-position. Exhaustive tetraborylation could also be carried out on 5,15-diarylPor 105. β-Borylation provides useful building blocks for the synthesis of Por-containing ensembles. In fact, as a proof of concept, the same authors reported the Pd(II)-catalyzed oxidative dimerization of 106 to give the β–β-linked diPor 107 in good yield (Scheme 18). In addition, Suzuki–Miyaura coupling between 105 and meso-bromoPor 108 afforded the meso-β-linked diPor 109.
 Scheme 18  Synthesis of β–β linked diPors 107 and 109. Reagents and conditions: (i) bis(pinacolato)diborane, [Ir(cod)OMe]2 (cat), 4,4′-di-tert-butyl-2,2-bipyridyl, 1,4-dioxane; (ii) O2, Pd(OAc)2, 1,3-bis(diphenylphosphino)propane, DMSO–toluene; (iii) Pd2dba3, PPh3, Cs2CO3, DMSO–toluene. 
Whilst the chirality of other diPor systems relies on unsymmetric substitution patterns (their basic bisPor framework has a plane of symmetry and is therefore achiral), directly β,β-coupled bisPor exhibits axial chirality per se, independently of their substitution. The first example of isolation of enantiopure β,β-linked Por dimers was reported in 2006.166 The dimers were prepared by Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling of a tetraphenyl (or tetratosyl) Por borylated at the β-position with the corresponding β-monobrominated Por derivative. The resulting bisPor Zn(II) complexes could be separated by HPLC on a chiral stationary phase into their atropoenantiomers, (i.e., (p)- and (m)) which, indeed, showed mirror-imaged circular dichroism curves. Following the same protocol, other metallated (Cu(II), Ni(II), Pd(II), etc.) β,β-coupled bisPor were prepared.167 It was shown that the configurational stability of the Por–Por axis strongly depends on the nature of the central metals.
As shown in previous sections, covalently linked π-conjugated Por dimers show interesting electronic features, which depend on the extent of overall π-conjugation, which is a function of molecular co-planarity. In this regard, doubly β-to-β butadiyne-bridged diPors 110a–c are very interesting compounds since they possess a robust, enforced, overall planar conformation.168 These compounds were prepared from bis(β-borylated)-H2Por 111a, which was first treated with Oxone, and then with PhNTf2 and Cs2CO3 to yield trifluoromethanesulfonyl derivatives 112b–c after metallation (Scheme 19). Installation of ethynyl groups was conducted through standard Sonogashira coupling with trimethylsilylacetylene followed by desilylation; then a Cu(II)-mediated oxidative coupling reaction furnished the corresponding butadiyne-bridged Por dimers 110a–c. Interestingly, TPA cross-section values of these double-bridged dimers almost double those of related monobutadiynyl-bridged diPors. π-Conjugation through thienylene linkages in Por dimers has been also studied. DiPors 113a–c were prepared from β,β-diborylPor 111a and 2,5-dibromothiophene under Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling conditions (Scheme 19).169
 Scheme 19  Synthesis of β–β linked diPors 110a–c and 113a–c. Reagents and conditions: (i) (1) oxone, THF–acetone–H2O, RT, 1.5 h; (2) PhNTf2, Cs2CO3, DMF, RT, 12 h; (3) Zn(OAc)2 or Ni(acac)2, CHCl3, MeOH, RT, 2 h; (ii) (1) Me3SiCCH, Pd(PPh3)4, CuI, Et3N, DMF, toluene, 70 °C, 3 h; (2) K2CO3, THF, MeOH, RT, 2 h; (3) Cu(OAc)2, THF, pyridine, RT, 24 h; (iii) 2,5-dibromothiophene, Pd2(dba)3, PPh3, Cs2CO3, CsF, toluene–DMF–H2O, reflux, 48 h. 
Metal–ligand coordinative interactions are a useful tool to construct β–β linked diPors. For instance, β-η1-palladio- and Pt(II)Por (114a,b in Fig. 25) were formed by regioselective metallation at the β carbon of meso-phosphanylporphyrins.170 The coplanar Por dimers linked by peripherally fused phosphametallacycles through their β and meso positions were found to exhibit characteristic optical and electrochemical properties derived from the pπ–dπ orbital interaction.171 Oppositely, Pt(II)- (and also Pt(IV)-) bridged cofacial diPors such as 115 in Fig. 25 have been constructed by metallation at the meso position of a β-pyridyl Por.172 The Pt center forces the two Por macrocycles to be in close proximity by the stable two Pt–C σ-bonds supported by the pyridyl groups. These Pt-bridged cofacial diPors such as 115 have inherent helical chirality, and the authors succeeded in separating the enantiomers by chiral HPLC. In addition, β,β′-doubly-2,6-pyridylene-bridged Por dimer 116 was prepared by Suzuki–Miyaura coupling reactions and, in a second step, it was readily metallated via meso-C–H bond activation with the assistance of the pyridyl nitrogen atoms to produce the corresponding Pd(II) complexes.173 Interestingly, diPor 116 exhibits remarkably bent conformations due to constraints arising from double β,β′-2,6-pyridylene bridges. On the other hand, the functionalization of two neighboring β-pyrrolic positions of a Por by a fused N-heterocyclic carbene ligand and subsequent metallation of this external coordination site by Pd(II) affords another type of metal-bridged diPors.174
 Fig. 25  Structures of (a) β-η1-Pd(II)- and Pt(II)diPors 114a,b; (b) Pt(IV)-bridged cofacial diPor 115; and (c) Pd(II)-bridged diPor belt 116. 
Similarly to the above-mentioned examples of metal-bridged diPors, in which both meso- and pyrrolic positions are involved, the dimerization of meso-bromoPors using Pd-catalyzed homocoupling conditions in the presence of a Lewis acid provides directly linked meso-β diPors such as 117 (Fig. 26).175 In this unprecedented example, the coupling formally involves the C–H bond cleavage at the β-position that is remote from the initially brominated meso-position, where the coupling reaction is probably initiated. Importantly, the dimerization was perfectly regioselective. The structural and electronic features of 117 are similar to other previously reported meso-β-linked diPors, which were prepared by condensation reaction of a tetraphenylporphyrin derivative featuring a formyl group at the β-position and different meso-substituted dipyrromethanes.176 In all the examples, the UV-vis absorption spectra showed split Soret bands, as a consequence of the exciton coupling in line with the directly linked dimeric structure. Worth mentioning is the isolation of a meso-β directly linked Ni(II)diPor after treatment of a [36]octaphyrin with Ni(acac)2.177 This conversion was serendipitously found during the study on the nickel(II) metallation of the expanded Por.
 Fig. 26  meso-to-β linked diPors 117 and 118a,b and meso–meso, β–β diPor 119. 
Other interesting examples of Por dimers with meso-to-β linkages involve the previous formation of either a triazole178 or a pyrrolidine179 ring fused to one of the pyrrolic components of a Por core, followed by N-arylation or N-alkylation reaction with other appropriately functionalized Por monomers. Following this approach, interesting bisPors such as 118a,b (Fig. 26) have been obtained.178 Also, a diPor system 119 (Fig. 26) with a meso-to-meso-β-to-β linkage has also been reported. The preparation of such a compound involves SmI2-mediated pinacol coupling of a β-acetyl-Por followed by treatment with concentrated sulfuric acid and trifluoroacetic acid.180 In the final diPor system, the two Pors are held close in a conformationally restricted manner. Photophysical experiments and quantum mechanical calculations indicate that the π-conjugation extends to the whole molecule, being an interesting example of homoconjugation via two alkyl linkages.181
4.2 Fused, binuclear porphyrins
Fusion reactions allow for the connection of two π-electronic systems by two or more bonds in a single step. This strategy is highly useful for constructing rigid and planar structures, which would be effective for π-conjugation and suppression of energetic decay in the photoirradiated excited state. Fusion of two Por units through aromatic rings such as benzene,182 pyrazine,183 or AQ184 leads to large π-systems, which show split Soret bands and substantially bathochromically shifted Q-bands. Por dimers fused with shared benzene or AQ units are prepared by retro-Diels–Alder reaction of bicyclo-connected Por–Por precursors. In the case of the pyrazine-fused systems, their synthesis proceeds by oxidative dimerization of β-aminoPors.
In addition to those highly conjugated dimeric structures, particular attention has been paid to meso–meso, β–β, β–β triply linked Por dimers 120 (Fig. 27), since they hold great potential as molecular wires in nanoscale electronic devices. In such a type of array, conjugation is fully extended over the whole covalent ensemble, which results in extremely low-energy electronic absorption bands that reach into the IR region.185
 Fig. 27  “Por tapes” 120a–d and 121. 
These compounds were first reported in 2000 by Osuka and co-workers (120a in Fig. 27),186 and their synthesis was carried out by oxidation of meso–meso linked diPors with, for instance, Sc(OTf)3 and DDQ.187 Since then, different structural variations of the so-called “Por tapes” have been pursued, as well as other oxidative methods to prepare these triply fused diPors such as the phenyliodine bis(trifluoroacetate)-mediated oxidation of mononuclear Zn(II) Pors with one free meso-position.188 For instance, bulky aryl substituents installed at the meso positions of the Por monomer in the former reported example (5,15-bis(3,5-di-tert-butylphenyl)) have been replaced by alkyl substituents in order to enhance the self-assembling nature of the tapes by π–π stacking (120b).189 Hybrid Por tapes (120c) consisting of a donor core of 3,5-di-tert-butylphenyl-substituted Zn(II)Por and an acceptor pentafluorophenyl-substituted Zn(II)Por were prepared by a synthetic route involving the cross-condensation reaction of a Ni(II)-porphyrinyldipyrromethane and pentafluorobenzaldehyde, followed by appropriate demetallation, remetallation with a Zn(II) salt, and oxidative ring-closure.190 Interestingly, these hybrid Por tapes show slightly larger TPA values than the parent homoleptic ones composed exclusively of donor Por components.191 Electron deficient Por tapes, such as hexakis(pentafluorophenyl)-substituted meso–meso, β–β, β–β triply linked Zn(II)–diPor192 120d, and others containing CN groups attached to peripheral meso-aryl substituents193 were also prepared and their electronic properties investigated. Additionally, meso-β doubly linked ensembles 121 were synthesized by oxidation of meso-β singly linked Por dimers having a free meso-position, with DDQ-Sc(OTf)3.194 It is worth mentioning that the crystal structures of some of these compounds reveal that the component Por cores are almost coplanar. The electronic communication between the two Por macrocycles is quite strong in these triply (and also doubly) fused arrays, and all of them present extremely low HOMO–LUMO gaps, with the lowest energy absorption bands reaching the infrared region (ca. 1050 nm). Another remarkable feature of these Por tapes is that, after installing peripheral alkoxy chains at the periphery, the molecules organize into liquid crystalline phases which show intrinsic electron transport properties.195 In contrast, liquid crystalline phases formed by fused metalloPor dimers functionalized with semifluoroalkyl side chains behave as p-type semiconductors.196
Further enlargement of the π-electronic network of meso–meso, β–β, β–β triply linked diPors has also been undertaken by different means. Certainly, Por tapes composed of three or more Pors have a large π-electronic network and give absorbances, which extend into the mid-NIR region (ca. 1.5 μm). However, these derivatives are difficult to synthesize, have low solubility, and are indeed far from the scope of this review, which is focused on Por dimers. Nevertheless, the conjugation of Por dimers can be additionally extended through several modes of substitution involving the meso, (β,β), (β,meso) and (β,meso,β) positions. For diPors substituted with two alkyne groups at the terminal meso positions, the Q-band is red-shifted by 130 nm (λ = 1181 nm) relative to the parent dimer.197 Extending the conjugation in Por dimers by benzannulating β,β-pyrrolic positions such as 122 in Scheme 20 red-shifts the Q-band up to 1169 nm.198 This compound is prepared by the initial retro Diels–Alder reaction of bicyclo[2.2.2]octadiene-fused meso–meso-linked diPor 123 that affords the dibenzo-fused porphyrin dimer 124, which is further oxidized with DDQ-Sc(OTf)3 to the target diPor 122. Notably, this compound shows larger TPA cross sections than normal diPor tapes.
 Scheme 20  Synthesis of 122. Reagents and conditions: (i) 210 °C, 0.1 mmHg for 30 min; (ii) DDQ-Sc(OTf)3. 
Recently, it has been shown that anthracene rings can be fused to Por dimers through the (β,meso,β) mode by oxidative ring closure of a mononuclear Por 125a with an anthracene moiety linked to its meso-position, using Sc(OTf)3/DDQ (Scheme 21).199 In order to circumvent problems of insolubility and aggregation, the anthracene moiety was designed to bear bulky 2,4,6-trimethylaryl ether substituents. The spectrum of anthracene end-capped fused dimer 126 extends well into the near-IR with a λmax at 1495 nm. The effect of aromatic ring fusion to Por tapes in a (β,meso) mode has also been explored. For instance, pyrene-(β,meso)-fused diPor 127 holds the advantage of displaying out-of-plane-distortion, which is known to improve solubility and processability in conjugated aromatics. Starting from the Por derivative 125b, having one pyrene ring linked to one meso position and one unsubstituted meso-carbon, pyrene-fused Por dimer 127 was successfully obtained (Scheme 21).200 The increase in conjugation of the Por dimer by adding two fused pyrene rings results in a large bathochromic shift of the Q-band up to 1323 nm.
 Scheme 21  Synthesis of 126 and 127. Reagents and conditions: (i) DDQ-Sc(OTf)3, CH2Cl2; (ii) FeCl3, CH2Cl2, then aq HCl (M = 2H); Zn(OAc)2, MeOH, CH2Cl2, (M = Zn(II)); Pb(OAc)2, pyridine, CH2Cl2, (M = Pb(II)). 
4.3 Supramolecular ensembles of covalent and noncovalent porphyrin dimers
In this section we will review some recent works on the self-aggregation of appropriately functionalized, covalent Por dimers and Por monomers leading to the formation of supramolecular multiPor and Por·Por ensembles, respectively.
Among the supramolecular interactions that have been used for such a scope, coordinative, metal–ligand interactions are probably the most used and versatile ones, especially considering the large variety of metal atoms that metalloPors can incorporate in their central cavity.201
In this context, a considerable number of metalloPor systems bearing peripheral coordinating ligands, mainly nitrogenated bases such as pyridyl, Im, aminopyrimidyl, and amino groups, have been reported and their self-aggregation ability studied. For such systems, by carefully modulating some parameters such as the directional angle and basicity of the ligand(s) nitrogen(s) lone pair as well as steric factors around the metalloPor macrocycle, a large variety of supramolecular structures have been obtained such as cofacial, linear, branched, cyclic, dendritic, and polymeric metalloPor assemblies.
For example, supramolecular Por dimers ((128)22,(129)22)202 and tetramers ((130)22,(131)22)203 have been obtained from the spontaneous self-assembly in a noncoordinating solvent such as CHCl3 of meso-triazolyl-appended Zn(II) Por monomers (128,129) and dimers (130,131), respectively, these latter compounds are prepared by Cu(I)-catalyzed, 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition of benzyl azide to meso-ethynylated Zn(II)Pors (Fig. 28). GPC and 1H NMR and UV-vis spectroscopies clearly demonstrate the formation of metal–ligand coordination complexes, with Kass as high as 1011 M−1 in the case of dimer (129)22.
 Fig. 28  Molecular structures of (a) cofacial Por dimers (128)22 and (129)22 resulting from the self-assembly of meso-triazolyl-appended Zn(II) Por monomers 128 and 129 and (b) Por dimers 130 and 131 able to self-assemble giving rise to tetrads (130)22 and (131)22. 
A similar assembly strategy has been used for the preparation of supramolecular Por dimers (132)22 and (133)22 from bis Im-substituted, meso–meso linked H2Por–Zn(II)Por 132 and butadiyne-linked H2Por–Zn(II)Por 133, respectively (Fig. 29).204 The 2PA and higher-order nonlinear absorption properties of (132)22 and (133)22 were investigated over femtosecond time scales using an open-aperture Z-scan method, revealing, in the case of the self-assembled butadiyne-linked Por dimer (133)22 a 2PA cross section almost 20 times larger than that of the meso–meso-linked Por dimer (132)22. These results suggest that the butadiyne connection, which brings about a significant expansion of the Por–Por π-system, is probably the predominant factor in the observed 2PA cross section enhancement. Supramolecular polymers with a mean molecular weight of Mn = 1.5 × 105 Da could also be obtained by zinc metallation of the free-base Por macrocycle in dimer 133, leading to a further increase of the 2PA cross section. Finally, 3PA was observed in the case of supramolecular Por tetrad (133)22, an observation which is the first of this kind in Por chemistry.
 Fig. 29  Molecular structures of Por tetramers (132)22 and (133)22 resulting from the self-assembly of bis Im-substituted, meso–meso linked H2Por–Zn(II)Por 132 and butadiyne-linked H2Por–Zn(II)Por 133, respectively. 
In 2007, Satake, Kobuke and coworkers reported an interesting self-aggregating, monoIm-substituted Por dimer 134, whose fluorescence could be switched between two states (a fluorescent and a less-fluorescent state) as a response to changes in Por dimer binding ability (Scheme 22).205
 Scheme 22  Molecular structures of the stacked (134)22-s and extended (134)22-e conformation resulting from the self-aggregation of Por dimer 134. 
In fact, whereas in noncoordinating solvents Por dimer 134 mainly adopts a stacked conformation (134)22-s which is poorly fluorescent, addition of pyridine to this stacked assembly induces its almost quantitative transformation to the extended species (134)22-e. This process, which can be reverted by addition of acetic acid and subsequent heating, is accompanied by an increase in the fluorescence intensity by a factor of 7. In both supramolecular complexes, which structural features have unequivocally been elucidated by 1H NMR spectroscopy, the interconversion rate can be regulated by controlling the dimer-to-external ligand ratio and/or the temperature. A covalent version of (134)22-e in which the two central, stacked Por macrocycles have covalently been linked by metathesis reaction between the terminal alkenes on R1 using Grubbs' catalyst has also been reported.206
A combination of Zn(II)–Im interactions and metathesis reaction has also been used by the group of Kobuke in order to prepare Por tetramer 135a (Fig. 30) which was obtained from a supramolecular precursor constituted by a covalent, bis-Im-substituted, butadiyne-bridged Zn(II)Por dimer axially coordinated to two, mono-Im-functionalized Zn(II)Por monomers.207 Por tetramers 135b and 135c could be easily obtained from compound 135a. Interestingly, water-soluble compound 135c showed good 2PA cross-section values and it was found to generate, upon two-photon excitation, singlet oxygen, cytotoxic for tumor cells in PDT.
 Fig. 30  Molecular structures of multiPor systems 135 and 136. 
High 2PA cross-section values were also obtained for a multiPor conjugate (136) presenting two covalently connected Por dimers in its central part, which is obtained by a stepwise elongation process employing the same Por components used for the synthesis of 135 (Fig. 30).208
Formation of Im–Zn(II) interactions have also been used to obtain cyclic, supramolecular Por assemblies by the slipped-cofacial, self-aggregation of a Zn(II)Por dimer (137) bearing two terminal Im units (Fig. 31a).
 Fig. 31  Molecular structures of (a) Zn(II)Por dimers 137 and 138 bearing two terminal Im units and (b) cyclic, supramolecular ensemble resulting for the self-assembly of six Zn(II)Por dimers 137. Reprinted from ref. 210. Copyright 2003 ACS. 
GPC showed that Zn(II)Por dimer 137 forms, in noncoordinating solvents, a polymeric mixture with broad molecular weight distributions. Although the distribution of 137 was broad, the curve showed a distinctly longer elution time, indicating the formation of oligomeric species of small molecular weight, due to intramolecular cyclization species. This is in stark contrast to what is observed in the case of linear, meso–meso-coupled Zn(II)Por dimer complexes, which formed giant linear arrays.209 Further studies demonstrated that the cyclic coordination complex, formed in nonpolar solvent, could be broken in polar solvents by competitive coordination, in a reversible process, but in this case under high-dilution conditions. AFM and STM studies of these oligomeric species deposited on solid substrates confirmed the circular structure of the assembly, whereas small-angle X-ray scattering measurements in solution allowed the authors to determine the exact aggregation number, which in this case resulted to be six (Fig. 31b).210 In this case, crucial for the formation of such cyclic structure is the presence of a 1,3-phenylene spacer connecting the two Im-substituted Zn(II)Por macrocycles, which maintains the two macrocycles with a 120° spatial orientation. Pentameric supramolecular nanorings based on the self-assembly of gable Por dimer 137 could also be obtained by a sequence of dissociation–reassociation processes.211 Interestingly, in these self-assembled, supramolecular nanorings, the distances and orientations between the metal Por units as well as the overall cyclic structure strongly resemble those of the natural light-harvesting complexes.
The 2PA properties of supramolecular Por nanorings have also been investigated similar to the case of the linear, supramolecular Por assemblies. Por dimer 138, which contains a bridging fluorene unit and pendant terminal alkene units in the Por meso positions (Fig. 31a), formed, when dissolved in a nonpolar solvent, long and linear polymers which, by gentle heating, gradually converted to smaller, cyclic supramolecular arrays. Ring closing metathesis reaction was then carried out on these cyclic, supramolecular structures giving rise to covalent species which were separated by GPC in distinct fractions containing from 11 to 19 Por dimers. High 2PA values have been observed for these large, multiPor arrays as a result of their covalent, cyclic structure reinforced by metal–ligand cooperative intramolecular interactions between the Por units.212
Gable-type Zn(II)Por dimer 139 in which the two macrocycles have been connected by a phenanthroline linker has also been prepared and used as a bifunctional receptor for free-base, meso-5,10-bis(4-pyridyl)-15,20-diphenyl H2Por 140 (Fig. 32).213
 Fig. 32  Molecular structure of the supramolecular assembly 139·140 resulting from the complexation of meso-5,10-bis(4-pyridyl)-15,20-diphenyl H2Por 140 to Zn(II)Por dimer 139. 
1H NMR spectroscopy studies evidenced the quantitative formation of the trisPor ensembles 139·140, in which the two fragments are held together by two axial pyridyl–Zn interactions. The remarkable stability of this complex, with a Kass of about 6 × 108 M−1 as determined by UV-vis absorption and emission titration experiments in toluene, is due to the almost perfect geometrical match between the two interacting units, as revealed by the X-ray crystal structure of the complex.
Three-dimensional, supramolecular Por boxes formed via enantiomeric, self-sorting assembly of (3 or 4)-pyridyl-appended, meso–meso linked Zn(II)Por dimers have also been synthetized.214 Crucial for the formation of such box-shaped assemblies is the dihedral angle formed between the two Por macrocycles. In 2004, the groups of Kim and Osuka reported the spontaneous self-assembly, in noncoordinating solvents such as CHCl3, of a series of 4-pyridyl-appended, meso–meso linked Zn(II)Por dimers (141), giving rise to supramolecular Por boxes (Fig. 33a).215 Interestingly, the formation of such boxes from achiral Por dimers proceeds via a homochiral, self-sorting process of Por atropisomers 141 giving rise to two enantiomerically pure supramolecular boxes (Fig. 33b). These boxes display strong Cotton effects in their circular dichroism spectra and Kass as high as 1021 M−3 as a result of eight-point, simultaneous coordinative interactions.
 Fig. 33  Molecular structures of (a) meso–meso linked Zn(II)Por dimers 141–145 bearing two, meso-substituted pyridyl fragments and (b) (R) and (S) enantiomeric boxes resulting from the homochiral self-sorting of Por dimer 141a. 
Supramolecular boxes have also been obtained employing meso–meso Zn(II)Por dimers presenting, at a meso position of each of the two Por macrocycles, a 3-pyridyl (142),216 a (5-azaindol-2-yl) (143),217 or a cinchomeronimide (144)218 unit. Interestingly, the self-sorting process of Por dimer 144 led to the formation of supramolecular cages of different sizes such as trimers, tetramers and pentamers. This structural variety arises from the different relative arrangements that the two 3-pyridyl fragments in 144 can adopt, which ultimately control the size of the resulting aggregates.
More recently, Tsuda, Kim and coworkers documented the self-aggregation ability of meso–meso linked Zn(II)Por dimers 145 presenting a mono- or a di-butadyine linker as a bridging unit between the two Por macrocycles.219 Different from meso–meso linked Zn(Por) dimers 141–144, Por dimers 145 present free rotation around the linear linkers thus giving rise to two possible self-assembled Por boxes resulting from the assembly of orthogonal, similar to Por boxes in Fig. 33b, or planar Por–Por conformers. In such supramolecular constructs, the different lengths of the linkers and the dihedral angle between the Por moieties (90° in the case of orthogonal conformers and 0° in the case of planar conformers) significantly influence the π-conjugation between Por units and strongly affect the photophysical properties of these ensembles – vide infra.
Beside Por-based supramolecular boxes, supramolecular prism-shaped assemblies have also been obtained via coordinative self-assembly of two 1,3,5 triethynylpyridyl-substituted benzene (L) molecules and three Zn(II)Por (D) dimers.220 These supramolecular complexes have been structurally characterized by different techniques suggesting a L2:D3 stoichiometry of the assembly.
Although Zn(II)Pors and nitrogenated ligands are by far the more frequently used building blocks for the preparation of self-assembled Por dimers by metal–ligand interactions, metalloPors different from zinc and/or no-nitrogenated ligands have also been explored for this scope.
In 2007, Matano and coworkers reported the synthesis and self-aggregation properties of meso-phosphoryl-substituted Zn(II)Pors 146 and 147.221 Pors 146 and 147, which have been prepared by copper-catalyzed, carbon–phosphorus cross-coupling reactions, have been found to undergo self-organization through oxo-zinc coordination leading to cofacial Por dimers (146)22 and (147)22 (or oligomers) (Fig. 34a). In both types of aggregates, the σ4-phosphorus center with a polarized Por–oxo bond defines the orientation and distances of the Por chromophores. Structural proofs of the formation of cofacial, partially overlapped Zn(II)Por dimers was obtained by variable-temperature NMR studies (1H and 31P) and single crystal X-ray determination, whereas absorption and fluorescence studies allowed us to determine the Kass of supramolecular dimers (146)22 and (147)22 that was found to be 1.4 × 104 M−1 and 5.9 × 106 M−1 in toluene, respectively. These findings demonstrate the potential utility of phosphoryl groups as peripheral coordinating ligands for the formation of Por-based supramolecules.
 Fig. 34  Formation of cofacial Por dimers (a) (146)22 and (147)22 and (b) (148)22 resulting from the self-assembly of meso-phosphoryl-substituted Zn(II)Por dyads 146 and 147, and meso-Im-substituted Co(II)Por 148, respectively. 
Co(II)Por dimer (148)22 with a ‘picket fence’ structure has been prepared from a mono(Im)-substituted Co(II)Por 148 via nitrogen–cobalt, metal–ligand interactions (Fig. 34b).222 UV-vis, resonance Raman and ESR spectral measurements showed that the supramolecular dimer (148)22 is able to bind to two dioxygen molecules reversibly, with an affinity that resulted to be lower than that of the corresponding monomer, probably due to steric hindrance and the orientational effect of the axial ligand.
4.4 Binuclear porphyrins connected to other electroactive moieties
Conjugates based on Por dimers acting as electron donors and an acceptor moiety, are an interesting class of D–A systems. In such ensembles, the presence of the two chromophores doubles the light-harvesting capability. This is especially important for photonic applications, since upon photoexcitation, both electron-donor moieties can donate to the fullerene moiety, thus helping to ensure a high quantum yield of CS even though the driving force for electron transfer is relatively small (vide infra).
In 2007, the groups of Diederich, Echegoyen and Armaroli reported a D–A conjugate (149) constituted by two C60 units covalently attached and spatially close to a triply-fused Por dimer (Fig. 35).223,224 The synthesis of 149 involved the preparation of a meso–meso linked Zn(II)Por dimer, which was then converted into its fused analog by oxidative ring closure using DDQ and Sc(OTf)3. The latter triply-fused Por dimer was then functionalized with two malonate units and the resulting product subjected to a Bingel–Hirsch, cyclopropanation reaction with C60 furnishing the target conjugate 149. Interestingly, a detailed electrochemical study of 149 showed that this D–A ensemble is capable of undergoing nine reversible redox processes involving a total of fifteen electrons. Moreover, photophysical investigations demonstrate that 149 does not exhibit any classical behavior documented for numerous Por–fullerene dyads (vide infra).
 Fig. 35  Molecular structure of conjugate 149 constituted by two C60 units covalently attached to a triply-fused Zn(II)Por dimer. 
The 1,3 dipolar cycloaddition reaction between azomethine ylides and fullerenes, also known as the Prato reaction and one of the most widely used synthetic methods of fullerene functionalization,225 has also been used to prepare covalently-linked, Por2–C60 trimers such as 150 (ref. 226) or 151 (ref. 227) (Fig. 36). Whereas compound 150 was prepared by a single Prato reaction between a C60 molecule and a Por dimer bearing an aldehyde moiety on the Por–Por bridging unit, in the case of trimer 151 a double 1,3 dipolar cycloaddition reaction between C60 and a gable-type Por dimer having two aldehyde units was carried out, resulting in a product with C2 symmetry and a trans-2 substitution pattern at the fullerene sphere.
 Fig. 36  Molecular structures of covalent, Por2–C60 trimers 150 and 151. 
Moreover, both systems present a conformationally-constrained geometry, strongly pronounced in the case of trimer 151, in which the Pors and fullerene are joined in a cyclic arrangement, that in principle, further constrains the relative motion of these two moieties by limiting rotations around bonds.
Very recently, a covalently-linked, multifullerene Ni(II)Por dimer (152) has been prepared in a so-called “molecular LEGO” approach using a synthetic route involving a short sequence of [4+2]-cycloaddition and cheletropic SO2-extrusion reactions (Fig. 37).228 This hexafullereno-diPor conjugate, which represents the first example of a transition metal complex of a regularly structured multi-modular molecular assembly of two Pors and six fullerenes, can be considered as a reversibly chargeable reservoir of a large number of electrons.
 Fig. 37  Molecular structures of covalently-linked, hexafullereno–diPor conjugate 152. 
Covalent Por dimer conjugates connected to two distinct electroactive units have also been prepared such as covalent, D–A system 153a reported in 2007 by the groups of Anderson and Albinsson (Fig. 38).229 Compound 153a, constituted by a butadiyne-linked, Zn(II)Por dimer which is covalently connected at its ends to Fc and C60 moieties, has been used to test the influence of conformational heterogeneity on the electron transfer dynamics. It was found that when dimer 153a was forced to adopt a planar conformation (N.B. in the uncomplexed form, 153a can adopt both a planar and a perpendicular conformation) by means of axial coordination of bidentate dipyridyl ligand 154, important changes in the CR rate were observed with respect to the unconstrained system 153a (vide infra). This study clearly evidenced the possibility of modulating some of the physical properties of a D–A system by controlling its conformational freedom, in this case by using reversible, supramolecular interactions.
 Fig. 38  Molecular structures of the supramolecular complex resulting from the coordination of bidentate ligand 154 to Zn(II)Por2–C60 derivatives 153a,b. 
In 2006, Kobuke and coworkers reported some supramolecular (155–157) and covalent, D–A Por dimers functionalized with Fc and/or C60 electroactive units (Fig. 39). Similarly to several Por dimer complexes mentioned above, zinc–nitrogen interactions between mono-Im-substituted Zn(II)Pors have been used for the preparation of supramolecular Por dimers 155–157 in which the two Pors adopt a slipped-cofacial arrangement.230
 Fig. 39  Molecular structures of slipped-cofacial Zn(II)Por dimers bearing two Fc (155), two C60 (156), and one Fc and one C60 (157) moieties. 
Whereas homodimers 155 and 156 could be easily obtained by self-assembly of Zn(II)Por dimers bearing an Fc or a C60 moiety, respectively, heterodimer 157 was prepared by using a reorganization procedure. This consisted of dissolving equivalent amounts of homodimers 155 and 156 in pyridine in order to dissociate them into the respective monomeric species. The pyridine solvent was then evaporated obtaining, along with compounds 155 and 156, heterodimer 157, containing Fc as an electron donor and C60 as an electron acceptor. Supramolecular dimers 155–157 were then covalently fixed by using ring-closing metathesis reaction between the allyloxycarbonylethyl substituents appended at two of the Por meso positions, and the covalently linked, homo- and heterodimers separated by GPC. Whereas UV-vis investigation of the covalently-linked analog of heterodimer 157 in benzonitrile indicated no significant electronic interaction among the three chromophores (Por dimer, C60 and Fc) in the ground state, efficient and electronic communication was suggested in the excited state – vide infra.
In the same year, a series of supramolecular, Fc- and nonamethyl Fc-functionalized Por homodimers were prepared using the same Im-to-zinc complementary coordination strategy used for the preparation of compounds 155 and 156.231 Structural variations in the bridging units connecting the peripheral Fc derivatives to the Por macrocycles (single bond, phenylene–ethenylene or phenylene–ethylene spacers) were also realized. In such systems, the interaction between the two ferrocenyl units across the coordination dimer proved to be weak and a single oxidation wave was observed in CV and differential pulse voltammetry.
Recently, a cyanine-like, squaraine moiety has also been used by Webster and coworkers both as an electroactive moiety and a bridging unit between two Por macrocycles.232 The linear and NLO properties of this highly π-conjugated, Zn(II)Por dimer have been investigated showing increased 2PA cross section values across an unprecedented long wavelength range covering most of the near-infrared and considerably higher than its separate Por and squaraine constituents.
Besides C60, Fc and squaraine, SWCNTs233 or carbon nanohorns (CNHs)234 have also been used as molecular platforms for the covalent grafting of free-base Por dimers. In the case of the SWCNT-based hybrid material, its synthesis involved the preparation of an amino Por dimer, which was then transformed in situ into the reactive diazonium species and finally reacted with octadecylamine-modified SWCNTs. On the other hand, a condensation reaction between a monocarboxylic acid-substituted H2Por dimer and amino-functionalized CNHs has been used in order to prepare the CNH-based material. Both hybrid materials, which were found to be soluble or dispersible in several organic solvents, were fully characterized by using diverse techniques such as UV-vis and Raman spectroscopies, thermogravimetric analysis, and TEM.
The photovoltaic properties of D–A conjugates constituted by Por dimers covalently connected to C60 or Fc derivatives have also been investigated.
In this context, in 2013 the groups of Matsuo and Nakamura reported a Mg(II)Por2–C60 covalent triad which was axially coordinated to an Im-substituted carboxylic acid (ICA), and in turn layered on an ITO surface.235 A study of the photovoltaic properties of the resulting Mg(II)Por2–C60/ICA/ITO ensemble showed a quantum yield of the photocurrent conversion of 7.8%, ten times higher than the one of a device fabricated using an analogous Zn(II)Por2–C60 triad. In general, Mg(II)Pors have an important disadvantage, that is, a considerable instability due to their high-lying HOMO levels, which render them easily oxidized by singlet oxygen. However, in this case, the possibility of a rapid quenching of the photoexcited Mg(II)Por via electron transfer to the covalently-linked C60 moiety, followed by fast electron injection from the fullerene onto the ITO semiconductor, considerably increase the stability of such a Mg(II)Por-based material, thus leading to efficient photon-to-electron conversion.
Supramolecular interactions have also been widely used in order to prepare D–A complexes based on covalent Por dimers and fullerenes, mainly C60. In this context, two main strategies have been used in order to prepare such assemblies, that is, the covalent functionalization of the fullerene sphere with one or more ligands able to axially coordinate to one or both Por metal centers, or the use of dispersion forces such as π–π and van der Waals between unsubstituted fullerenes and Por dimers presenting well-defined geometrical features.
In 2009, the groups of Ana and Thomas Moore and Devens Gust employed a “two-point binding” strategy based on the zinc–nitrogen axial coordination in order to complex a dipyridyl-substituted C60 derivative to a hexaphenylbenzene unit substituted with two bis(phenylethynyl)anthracene moieties absorbing light in the 400–500 nm range, two boron-dipyrromethene (BODIPY) entities, which absorb in the 450–550 and 330–430 nm range, and two Zn(II)Por macrocycles. The resulting multichromic, D–A system was able to harvest light from the ultraviolet throughout the visible region up to 650 nm.236
Using the same ‘two-point’ coordinate bonding between a dipyridyl-substituted C60 and a Zn(II)Por dimer, a simpler Por2 C60 supramolecular system has been prepared and its photophysical properties investigated.237
Structurally interesting, multicomponent supramolecular ensembles resulting from the complexation of two fullerene derivatives functionalized with both a pyridine and a terminal ammonium moiety to two crown ether-containing Zn(II)Pors (158)238 or Mg(II)Pors (159)239 have also been reported by the groups of D'Souza and Ito (Fig. 40). Supramolecular complexes 158 and 159 are held together by a combination of metal–ligand interactions between the pyridine group on the fullerene derivative and the Por metal central atom and cation–crown ether interactions between the four crown ether substituents on the two Por rings and four potassium ions, leading to the formation of a cofacial Por–Por dimer. A further contribution to the stability of the complex is obtained via the interaction of the terminal alkylammonium moieties present on the fullerene derivatives to one of the crown ether macrocycles. Importantly, this latter complexation occurs without destroying the 4 K+/Por–Por stacked dimer. Both supramolecular ensembles 158 and 159 exhibited enhanced electron transfer properties with an important stabilization of the charge-separated state as a consequence of the cofacial, stacked arrangement adopted by the two Por macrocycles, as observed in Pc–Pc analog 36 (Fig. 7) (vide infra).93 Within this strategy, perhaps the most popular design has been the covalent linkage of two Por macrocycles by rigid or semi-rigid spacers to form what are often termed as molecular “tweezers”.240 Such tweezer-like receptors possess an open structure, which is sufficiently flexible to adapt to the fullerene guest.
 Fig. 40  Molecular structures of supramolecular ensembles Zn(II)Por2·(C60)2 158 and Mg(II)Por2·(C60)2 159. 
In 2000, the first report by Boyd and Reed et al. on the use of jaw-like, fullerene receptors based on Por dimers appeared.241
Few years later, Aida and coworkers reported the first example of “supramolecular peapods” composed of linear, Zn(II)Por supramolecular nanotubes encapsulating fullerenes such as C60 and C70.242 The formation of such nanotubes, whose structural features were determined by using several spectroscopic (UV-vis, 1H NMR and IR) and microscopic (TEM) techniques, results from the self-aggregation of compound 160 composed of an acyclic Zn(II)Por dimer having six carboxylic acid functionalities and two large [4th generation]-poly-(benzyl ether) dendritic wedges, which are intended to increase the solubility of the carboxylic acid-appended metalloPor (Fig. 41a). A combination of intermolecular, hydrogen bonding interactions between the carboxylic acid groups of adjacent molecules, as well as π–π stacking interactions between fullerene and the two Por units of each tweezers, is responsible for the formation of these discrete, supramolecular architectures presenting a high aspect ratio and good thermal stability.
 Fig. 41  Molecular structures of acyclic Zn(II)Por dimer tweezers (a) 160 and (b) 161 and 162. For these latter compounds, only the (S) enantiomers have been represented. 
Zn(II)Por dimers 161 (ref. 243) and 162 (ref. 244) constitute two recent examples of molecular tweezers based on Por dimers able to bind C60 and C70 in solution (Fig. 41b). These two systems, which present either a cyclopentenyl (161) or a bisthiophenyl (162) bridging unit, possess different bite angles, which result in different fullerene binding abilities. As a consequence, receptor 161 is able to discriminate among C60 and C70 in solution (Kass C70/Kass C60 = 6.53), while 162 is unable to produce even a moderate value of selectivity (Kass C70/Kass C60 = 2.0).
Hydrogen bonding interactions have also been used by the group of Li in order to introduce a higher degree of preorganization into the tweezer-like design of Por dimers 163 and 164 (Fig. 42).245 In 163 and 164, intramolecular hydrogen bonding interactions result in a syn conformation of both Por units, thus enhancing the ability of this receptor to associate fullerenes. UV-vis titrations allowed determining the Kass of 163 and 164 towards C60, which resulted to be, in toluene at room temperature, 1.0 × 105 and 2.7 × 104 M−1, respectively. A one order of magnitude increase in the Kass was observed when titrating 163 and 164 with C70. The stronger fullerene binding ability of receptor 163 with respect to 164 clearly evidences that even small structural changes in the receptor binding pocket, such as the modification in connectivity of the amide groups between 163 and 164, can result in important changes in the receptor binding constants.
 Fig. 42  Molecular structures of tweezers-like Por dimer receptors 163 and 164. 
Calix[4]arenes have also been used by the groups of Reed, Boyd and Armaroli as spacer units in Por dimer-based fullerene receptors. These tweezers have shown efficient binding for C60 and C70 with Kass, for the most effective receptor, of 2.5 × 105 (for C60) and 2.5 × 106 M−1 (for C70) in toluene at room temperature.246
In 2008, the group of Morin described an interesting example of Por dimer tweezers (165), in which the two Por macrocycles were not covalently but mechanically linked, making use of a [3]rotaxane architecture (Fig. 43).247 In 165, the extremely high conformational flexibility provided by the mechanical bond as compared to the “classical” covalent bond where rigid and covalent spacers are employed, resulted in a significant decrease in the C60 Kass (5 × 103 M−1 in toluene at room temperature). However, this example illustrates that “unconventional” spacers can also be used for the preparation of molecular tweezers.
 Fig. 43  Molecular structure of Zn(II)Por dimer receptor 165 based on a [3]rotaxane architecture. 
Although Por-based tweezers have shown to effectively complex fullerenes in solution, to date, some of the most efficient Por dimer-based hosts for fullerenes feature macrocyclic architectures. The extraordinary binding ability of such cyclic receptors, which are often more demanding from the synthetic point of view than their acyclic counterparts, is the result of a high degree of preorganization coupled to a good complementarity in size and shape between the host cavity and the fullerene guest, thus maximizing the host–guest interactions.
In 1999, Aida, Saigo and coworkers synthesized a cyclic Zn(II)Por dimer, which resulted to be the best C60 receptor described at that time, with a Kass of 6.3 × 105 M−1 in benzene at room temperature. Since that report, a large variety of cyclic metalloPor receptors have been prepared and studied, most of them reviewed in a comprehensive account published in 2007.248 In light of this, in the following part we will mainly focus on some of the most recent examples.
In 2007, Tashiro, Aida and coworkers reported a cyclic MeIr(III)Por dimer (166) able to effectively complex C60 with a Kass of 1.3 × 108 M−1 in o-DCB at room temperature, which still constitutes the highest stability constant value for a C60–guest complex, and which exceeds by more than 3 orders of magnitudes the one obtained for a MeRh(III)Por analog of 166 (Fig. 44a).249 Single crystal X-ray diffraction studies showed that MeIr(III)Por dimer 166 binds in a η2 fashion to a 6:6 C–C bond of C60, a process that has also been observed in solution by 13C NMR studies at low temperatures. Such a combination of host–guest size complementarity and dynamic, chemical entrapment of the fullerene by the reactive cage are probably responsible for the high Kass.
 Fig. 44  Molecular structures of cyclic Por dimer receptors 166–169. In the case of Por dimer 168 only one enantiomer has been represented. 
The preparation of optimal Por dimer-based macrocycles for fullerene recognition has also been tackled by Sanders and coworkers using a different synthetic perspective, that is, using dynamic combinatorial chemistry.250 In this context, the authors prepared a mononuclear Zn(II)Por dithiol derivative that could be efficiently dimerized in the presence of a bipyridine or a 1,4-diazabicyclo[2.2.2]octane template to afford the cyclic Zn(II)Por dimer 167 (Fig. 44a).251 Receptor 167 was able to effectively complex C60, both in solution and in the solid state as demonstrated by 1H NMR and X-ray crystal determination (Fig. 45). However, this spherical guest could not be used to template the formation of 167, since reactive R–S˙ thiyl radical species are generated during the receptor synthesis, which are incompatible with the presence of radical scavengers such as fullerenes.
 Fig. 45  X-ray crystal structure of the inclusion complex between Por dimer receptor 167 and C60 (hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity). Reprinted from ref. 251. Copyright 2005 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
More recently, a fullerene templating approach has successfully been employed for the preparation of Por-based cyclic receptors.252 In this case, the fullerene guest preorganizes the Por monomers before the metathesis cyclization reaction and, thus, displaces the equilibrium toward the best fullerene host, which in this case resulted to be the Por trimer species.
Enantioselective recognition of chiral fullerenes has also been exploited by using cyclic and chiral Por dimer receptors. In this context, a chiral receptor (168, Fig. 44b) has been prepared by Tashiro, Aida and co-workers, which features a C1-symmetric N-methylPor unit as an asymmetrically distorted π-electronic component. Host 168 was able not only to strongly bind to the smallest chiral fullerene, C76 (Kass = 1.5 × 107 M−1), but also to discriminate between the two fullerene enantiomers of a racemic mixture as demonstrated by 1H NMR studies.253 Although strongly interacting with C76, chiral compound 168 did not show any enantioselectivity, making it a good receptor for quantifying the enantiomeric excess in chiral fullerene mixtures, where the binding constants of the host for both enantiomers are identical.
More recently, the same group reported a second generation of chiral Por dimer hosts structurally similar to 168, in which the alkylated Por macrocycle has strongly been distorted with the aim of increasing the discrimination ability of the resulting chiral guest for an enantiomeric mixture of C76.254 This hypothesis was confirmed in the single enantioselective extraction of a racemic mixture of C76 by one of these distorted Por dimers obtaining a 7% enantiomeric excess.
Very recently, endohedral fullerenes have also been used as guest molecules for cyclic Por dimer hosts. In 2011, Aida, Kato and coworkers have reported the complexation of an endohedral metallofullerene by a cyclic Cu(II)Por dimer (169).255 The host 169 complexes the paramagnetic La@C82 in its cavity to form an inclusion complex which is the first ferromagnetically-coupled inclusion complex featuring paramagnetic La@C82. This latter complex is transformed into a caged complex by ring-closing olefin metathesis of its side-chain olefinic termini, thus mechanically trapping the endohedral metallofullerene. Interestingly, this closure is accompanied by a change in the nature of the cage to ferromagnetic, thus opening the interesting possibility of modifying the mode of coupling between metal spins by changes in the cluster geometry.
In a more recent report, the groups of Tani and Fukuzumi investigated the electrochemical and photophysical properties of the supramolecular complexes resulting from the complexation of cyclic, free-base (170) and Ni(II)Por (171) dimers to another endohedral fullerene, that is, a lithium ion encapsulated C60 molecule (Li+@C60) with a Kass of the order of 105 M−1 in benzonitrile (Fig. 46a).256
 Fig. 46  (a) Molecular structures of cyclic Por dimers 170 and 171. (b) Schematic representation of the strategy for the formation of a tubular assembly with cyclic Por dimers 170 and 171. Reprinted from ref. 257. Copyright 2007 Wiley-VCH. 
A few years earlier, the group of Tani, independently, published an interesting work describing, besides the expected C60 inclusion property of Por dimers 170 and 171, the ability of these systems to self-aggregate giving rise to the formation of supramolecular nanotubes.257 The presence of two pyridyl moieties on each Por macrocycle was crucial for the formation of these 1-D nanostructures through a combination of hydrogen bonding interactions between the pyrrole β-hydrogens and the pyridyl nitrogens and π–π interactions between adjacent pyridyl rings (Fig. 46b). In the case of Por dimer 171, this arrangement is also maintained when C60 is cocrystallized with the host, as clearly demonstrated by single crystal X-ray studies. Conductivity studies carried out on such supramolecular “peapods” revealed high and anisotropic conductivity (σ = 0.72 cm2 V−1 s−1) along the nanotube axis as a result of the 1-D fullerene supramolecular organization.258
Surprisingly, a very different organization resulted from the cocrystallization of C60 and Por dimer 170.259 In this case, the formation of supramolecular nanotubes was no longer observed in the solid state, replaced by a zig-zag organization of the fullerenes. This structural modification was accompanied by a decrease in conductivity (σ = 0.13–0.16 cm2 V−1 s−1) and a lower anisotropy. In the same work, the photovoltaic properties of both C60·170 and C60·171 were evaluated by constructing photoelectrochemical cells, which showed an IPCE value of 17% and a power conversion efficiency (η) of 0.33%. More recently, the formation of inclusion complexes between [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester and cyclic Por dimers 170 and 171 was also achieved as revealed by solution and X-ray crystal investigation.260
Similar to fullerenes, SWCNTs have also been complexed via supramolecular interactions by using covalently linked, Por dimers as demonstrated by Komatsu and coworkers in a series of seminal papers. These authors prepared a family of chiral, gable-type, Por dimer nanotweezers, having m-phenylene (172a),261 2,6-pyridylene (172b),262,263 3,6-phenanthrene (173),264 and 3,6-carbazolylene (174)265 as bridging units, which were able to discriminate diameter and/or (n,m)266 of SWCNTs according to the size and shape of the cleft made by two Pors and a spacer in between (Fig. 47). The use of chiral units on the Por macrocycles also resulted in different binding affinities of the nanotweezers to the left- and right-handed helical SWCNT isomers thus forming complexes with different stabilities that could be readily separated. Finally, optically enriched SWCNTs were obtained by uncomplexing the “gable-type” Por dimers. For such systems, it was rationalized that the nanotweezers with smaller bite angles accepted smaller diameter SWCNTs (<1.0 nm) deeper in the cleft, enabling precise differentiation of the nanotube diameter. However, an important limitation in selectivity was found by using such nanotweezers when trying to sort SWCNTs with larger diameters. In fact, a larger dihedral angle, or shallow cavity, needed to complex SWCNTs with large diameters, is accompanied by a decrease in the selectivity toward the SWCNT diameter. These studies suggested that nanotweezers with a longer spacer and narrower angle exhibited better (n,m) selectivity than those with the shorter spacer and wider angle.267 Based on this theory and with the aim of complexing SWCNTs with diameters larger than 1.0 nm, Komatsu and co-workers, very recently, designed an “evoluted” version of the Por dimer nanotweezers, called “nanocaliper” (175) (Fig. 47), which was able to recognize the diameter, handedness, and metallicity of SWCNTs simultaneously.268 The main features of the newly designed host receptor are a long spacer with more than 1.4 nm consisting of three aromatic moieties, with a nearly parallel orientation of the two Por units; restricted conformation by biaryl linkages of the Por–carbazole and carbazole–anthracene; strong interaction of two Pors and anthracene with the surface of a SWCNT through π–π stacking interactions; and, similar to the previous systems, stereogenic centers at the periphery of the Por units discriminating the helicity of SWCNTs. Nanocliper 175 allowed us to obtain optically-active SWCNTs with >1.0 nm in diameter and, unexpectedly, to enrich metallic SWCNTs. The optically active metallic SWCNTs are identified for the first time, in addition to the optically active semiconducting SWCNTs with such large diameters.
 Fig. 47  Molecular structures of Zn(II)Por dimer nanotweezers 172–174 and nanocaliper 175. For these compounds, only the (S) enantiomers have been represented. 
5. Photophysics of homo- and heterobinuclear ensembles of phthalocyanines and porphyrins
The development of electron D–A models, which are able to mimic photosynthetic processes such as light harvesting, unidirectional energy transfer, charge transfer, and charge shift, is of great interest. In this context, the preparation of homo- and heterobinuclear systems based on Pcs and Pors is very appealing due to the excellent light-harvesting features of these ensembles. Implementation of electroactive units to these conjugates leads to D–A systems with improved energy/charge transfer abilities. A photophysical analysis of some representative examples compiled in this review will be presented with the aim of rationalizing which effect the structural and electronic features of these D–A systems have on the photoinduced electron/energy transfer dynamics.
5.1 Binuclear phthalocyanines connected to other electroactive moieties
Photoinduced electron transfer processes in Zn(II)Pc2–PDI 22 in Fig. 4 were investigated.81 A long lived charge separated state was achieved by addition of Mg2+ to benzonitrile solutions of (Zn(II)Pc)2–PDI, in which PDI forms a complex with magnesium (Zn(II)Pc2˙+–PDI˙−/Mg2+). As the low-lying triplet excited state of PDI precludes the formation of a long-lived charge-separated state, addition of Mg2+ stabilizes the charge separated state by lowering its energy and increasing the reorganization energy of electron transfer. In doing so, time resolved absorption spectra confirm the presence of long lived charge separated states (270 μs; [(ZnPc)2+–PDI−/Mg2+]). On similar grounds, the tightly coupled Zn(II)Pc2–PDI array 23 in Fig. 4 yielded a 517 ps lived radical ion pair state in toluene–pyridine after excitation of the Zn(II)Pc unit.82 While in conjugate 22 linkages at the imido positions are realized, in the latter compound, it is the linkage through ethynyl bridges at the bay position that affords CR via recovery of the singlet ground state.
Ethynyl-bridges are also employed to assemble Pc–Pc conjugates to C60. The photophysical properties of multicomponent Zn(II)Pc2–(C60)2 nanoconjugates 24 (Scheme 7) have also been investigated.83 Steady state fluorescence assays, in which different solvent polarities were probed, reveal that quenching of the Pc fluorescence takes place, which is due to intramolecular electron transfer. This process is accelerated in polar media, although the quantum yield of CS is reduced. Additionally, femtosecond laser flash photolysis revealed relatively short lifetimes of the charge-separated state (10−10–10−9 s). Such a short lifetime is explained on grounds of close proximity between the electro- and photoactive Zn(II)Pc and C60 units in 24, thus facilitating through space charge transfer.
In a series of Zn(II)Pc2–AQ triads linked by ethenyl spacers (27–29 in Fig. 5), electronic communication was ensured by changing the aggregation status.84 In these series, only the connecting positions of the Zn(II)Pcs to the central AQ differ. As such, these triads show a dependence of their redox and photoinduced CS properties on the molecular topology and solvent environment. 1-,5- and 2-,6-connections, that is, 27 and 29, respectively, evoke efficient π-conjugation between the Zn(II)Pcs and the AQ unit, and lead to J-type aggregate formation in solution, while a 1-,8-connection (28) forces cofacially π-stacking of Zn(II)Pcs out of the AQ plane. Time resolved absorption measurements confirm that photoexcitation of the Zn(II)Pc component in all the isomeric forms results in the formation of the Zn(II)Pc˙+–AQ˙− charge separated state. Interestingly, the kinetics of these electron transfer reactions are greatly dependent on the aggregation status of the triads. In particular, in the case of 27 and 29, monomeric species are present in THF, but aggregates are formed in benzonitrile, leading to a stabilization of the lifetime of the charge separated state by more than 3 orders of magnitude.
Supramolecular complexes based on Zn(II)Pc and diIm-substituted PDI (Im2PDI) have recently been described.85 1H NMR spectroscopy, absorption, and fluorescence titrations reveal the formation of 1:1 Zn(II)Pc–Im2PDI and 2:1 Zn(II)Pc–Im2PDI–Zn(II)Pc complexes with binding constants in the order of 105 M−1. Time resolved measurements provided insights into efficient photoinduced electron transfer events taking place in these supramolecular systems, which show longer lifetimes of the charge separated states, namely 3 ± 1 ns for the Zn(II)Pc–Im2PDI–Zn(II)Pc complex, than in related covalently linked conjugates.
Supramolecular interaction between a PDI unit bearing two 4-pyridyl substituents at the imido positions (Py2PDI) and Ru(II)Pc monocoordinated with a CO ligand affords triad 30 in Fig. 6 in good yields.87 Transient absorption measurements attest the rapid formation of a [Ru(II)(CO)Pc˙+–Py2PDI˙−–Ru(II)(CO)Pc] charge separated state that lives for 115 ± 5 ns upon photoexcitation of either chromophore. As a matter of fact, the unique orthogonal geometry strongly favors exothermic CR dynamics that are placed into the inverted region of the Marcus parabola. Orthogonal geometry has also been achieved in Ru(II)Pc2–C60 triad 32 in Fig. 6, in which the components are assembled through metal coordination of a bispyridyl-fullerene, with a linear arrangement of the pyridyl ligands, to two Ru(II)(CO)Pcs.89 As evidenced by absorption and electrochemical assays, the electroactive components show electronic coupling in the ground state. With respect to the excited state, triad 32 reveals shorter lifetimes than related monopyridyl-C60-based dyads due to the fact that the Ru(II)Pc triplet excited state is energetically low enough to offer a rapid deactivation pathway for the charge separated state.
Panchromatic optical absorption behavior has been achieved in the supramolecular Zn(II)Pc2-squaraine ensemble 31 in Fig. 6, which absorbs light in a wide range of the solar spectrum, namely from 250 to 850 nm.88 Fluorescence spectroscopy experiments demonstrate quenching of the squaraine fluorescence, with quantum yields as low as 0.003. Responsible for this trend is an efficient and ultrafast electron transfer from the Zn(II)Pc components to the squaraine unit, leading to a charge separated state that lives for 24 ± 2 μs.
In addition to metal–ligand interactions, other supramolecular motifs, such as D–A contacts between appropriately substituted Pcs featuring electron-donating or electron-withdrawing groups, have been utilized to construct binuclear Pc systems linked to other electroactive units. Heteroassociation of a Zn(II)Pc–C60 conjugate 35 with an electron-deficient Pd(II)Pc 34 has been used to construct supramolecular hybrid 33 in Fig. 7,90 which features a stability constant of about 105 M−1 in CHCl3. Compared with covalently linked Zn(II)Pc–C60 dyads, femtosecond flash photolysis evidenced that this heteroassociation leads to substantial stabilization of the charge separated state up to 475 ns. The latter is formed by an exothermic electron transfer from Zn(II)Pc to C60 upon photoexcitation. The results document the benefits from the supramolecular electronic coupling between the donor and the acceptor Pcs, which assists in the delocalization of the radical cation over the two Pc moieties.
Supramolecular photosynthetic reaction center 36 in Fig. 7 resulting from the coordination of pyridyl-functionalized C60 as an electron acceptor with a cofacially self-assembled Zn(II)Pc dimer as an electron donor has been prepared.93 Model system 36 exhibits superior electron transfer properties, that is, the formation of a longer lived charge separated state (6.7 μs) than that formed by a related mononuclear Zn(II)Pc–C60 hybrid (4.8 μs). This observation is rationalized as a slower CR process in 36 as a consequence of the smaller reorganization energy of the cofacial arrangement.
Hydrogen-bonding interactions have also been used to create ensembles of two Pcs with other electroactive subunits. To this end, a supramolecular D–A hybrid 37 in Fig. 8 has been constructed by means of triple hydrogen bonding between two Zn(II)Pc units featuring a melamine moiety and PDI.94 By means of absorption and fluorescence titrations, Kass of 2 × 105 M−1 and 7 × 104 M−1 have been determined in THF and benzonitrile, respectively. As predicted from the Kass, quenching of the Zn(II)Pc fluorescence is rather efficient. Transient absorption measurements further corroborated that the photoexcitation of PDI results in the transduction of singlet excited state energy to the energetically lower-lying Zn(II)Pc. CS, on the other hand, could not be confirmed. More recently, a related H2Pc substituted with six strongly donor thioalkyl chains and one melamine unit was assembled to a complementary PDI through triple hydrogen bonding.95 Optical experiments lack evidence for any appreciable ground state electronic interactions, which is explained by the weak electronic coupling through the hydrogen bonds. However, selective photoexcitation of PDI leads to an intramolecular electron transfer, affording a several nanosecond-lived PDI˙−/(H2Pc)2˙+ charge separated state, while photoexcitation of H2Pc is only followed by an intersystem crossing to the triplet excited state of H2Pc.
5.2 Phthalocyanine–subphthalocyanine systems
As mentioned above, SubPc–Pc systems are perfectly suited for the study of intramolecular energy/electron-transfer processes. Therefore, in a series of covalently linked SubPc–Pc conjugates 40a–c in Scheme 8, electronic coupling between the two photoactive units is ensured by a rigid and π-conjugated alkynyl spacer.101 In addition, the electronic characteristics of the SubPc moiety were modulated by the introduction of different peripheral substituents. When the charge transfer state lies high in energy, which is the case for 40b, a quantitative singlet–singlet energy transfer mechanism (3.0 × 1010 s−1) from the excited SubPc to the Pc takes place. In contrast, stabilization of the radical ion pair state by lowering the redox gap between electron donor and acceptor results in a highly efficient photoinduced electron transfer process (5.0 × 1010 s−1) with quantum yields as high as 0.9 (as in the case of 40c).
On the other hand, photoinduced electron transfer in supramolecular ensembles from the electron-donating tetra-tert-butyl-Zn(II)Pc to the electron-accepting dodecafluoroSubPc in benzonitrile solutions of both components has been investigated by nanosecond laser photolysis.269 Owing to the particular electronic properties of both entities, such combination seems to be perfectly suited for the study of intermolecular electron-transfer processes in polar solvents via the triplet-excited state of SubPcF12. Upon excitation of SubPcF12 with 570 nm laser light, the electron transfer from Zn(II)Pc to the triplet-excited state of SubPcF12 was confirmed by observing the transient absorption bands of the Zn(II)Pc radical cation and SubPcF12 radical anion in both the visible and near-IR regions.
5.3 Phthalocyanine–porphyrin systems
Pc–Por systems are very interesting from the photophysical point of view for several reasons. The transduction of singlet excited state energy occurs very efficiently from the Por to the Pc owing to the fact that the Q-band absorption of the Pc almost overlaps with the fluorescence of Pors. Importantly, the close separation between the donor Pors and the acceptor Pcs leads in several cases to strong electronic coupling or a partial electronic orbital overlap.
Another interesting objective is the possibility of driving intramolecular energy transfer from higher lying excited states such as the second singlet excited state. Usually, such excited states are too short lived to be involved in energy or electron transfer reactions although such an energy transfer has already been demonstrated in photosynthesis by ultrafast laser spectroscopy. In the context of the latter, the length of the conjugation in carotenoids determines the extent of spectral and electronic overlap with the acceptor bacteriochlorophyll.270,271
Pc–Por conjugates 52–54 in Scheme 11 presenting a direct linkage through the β-pyrrolic position of the Por unit, and having different substituents on the Pc core (H2, tert-butyl or butoxy) and different metal centers in the Por (H2, Zn(II), and Pd(II)) were studied photophysically by steady-state absorption and emission spectroscopy as well as time-resolved fluorescence, fluorescence up-conversion, and transient absorption measurements.108 The close location of the two chromophores is the inception to strong excitonic coupling between them due to hindered free rotation through the direct linking bond. Fluorescence spectroscopy shows quenching of the Por emission with quantum yields as low as 0.0005 – when compared to Por references – with the simultaneous appearance of Pc emission upon exclusive excitation of the Por at 420 nm. Responsible for that is an efficient and ultrafast intramolecular energy transfer (∼1012 s−1) from the photoexcited Por to the covalently linked Pc, which is not expected to change notably with solvent polarity. Proof for this comes from complementary excitation spectra and transient absorption measurements. From fluorescence up-conversion experiments, an intramolecular energy transfer is observed from the second singlet excited state S2 as well as from the first singlet excited state S1 of the Por. Hereafter, the long-lived triplet excited state of the Pc (70 μs) is populated via intersystem crossing (3.2 × 108 s−1). In contrast, the Por triplet excited state is not formed due to its unfavorable energetic positioning in the Pc–Por arrays.108,125
Later, N-bridged, Pc–Por heterodimers directly connected through an amino group, located either at the β-pyrrolic position (48a,b in Scheme 10) or at the p-position of the meso phenyl moiety (49 in Fig. 10) of the Por, thus allowing a close proximity of the two units, were studied.29 The nitrogen atom located between the two macrocycles could play the role of an “active” spacer, since it typically behaves as a pH- and redox-sensitive group. The characteristic absorptions of the individual components are noticed in the absorption spectra, but the Pc Q-band is red-shifted by about 20 nm with regard to the mononuclear Pc references, thus suggesting a reduction of its HOMO–LUMO gap as a consequence of the electron donor character of the Por–NH-substituent. This red-shift is also observed in the fluorescence maxima, with much lower quantum yields than the corresponding references. Upon exclusive excitation of the Por unit at 425 nm, detecting the Pc fluorescence implies a transduction of singlet excited state energy from the Por to the Pc (∼1011 s−1). Overall, higher energy transfer efficiencies were noted for the β-pyrrolic conjugates 48a,b in Scheme 10. Fluorescence up-conversion experiments corroborate that an intramolecular energy transfer occurs from the second singlet excited state S2 as well as from the first singlet excited state S1 of the Por. The S2 deactivation efficiencies (∼1.1 × 1012 s−1) were determined to be around 25% for both dyads, while for the S1 deactivation, values of around 90% were derived. This work underlines the transduction efficiency in β-pyrrolic linked conjugates, while an impact exerted by the NH-connection cannot be ruled out.107
Alkynyl-bridged Pc–Por systems are intriguing examples for the design of systems with strong electronic coupling. A conjugate consisting of a Zn(II)Pc and a Sn(IV)Por (72 in Fig. 13) has also been prepared and photophysically studied.114 The presence of a phenyl–ethynyl bridge reduces the symmetry of the two moieties and leads to a conjugated π-system involving the bridge, which results in red-shifted and broadened absorption bands and a split of the Pc Q-bands. From the fluorescence spectrum, strong quenching of the fluorescence is deduced. Transient absorption measurements indicate a rapid formation of the radical ion pair state upon photoexcitation, which includes the signatures of the one-electron oxidized form of Zn(II)Pc and the one-electron reduced form of Sn(IV)Por. Excitation at 680 nm results in an electron transfer from the singlet excited state of the Zn(II)Pc (13 ps), which proceeds through the direct super-exchange mechanism, as the bridge is too difficult to be reduced for electron hopping to occur. Starting from the singlet excited state of the Sn(IV)Por upon 440 nm excitation, a hole-hopping mechanism via a transiently oxidized bridge is energetically feasible (4 ps). The photolytically observed spectrum is ascribed to the radical ion pair state and agrees well with that derived from spectroelectrochemical measurements. CR via a long-range, super-exchange mechanism takes place within 85 ps. Energy transfer from the Sn(IV)Por to the Zn(II)Pc is energetically possible, but is excluded. In this regard, the subsequent CS from the excited Zn(II)Pc would be slower than the observed decay of the photoexcited Sn(IV)Por.
On the other hand, fused Pc–Por conjugates 85a,b in Fig. 20 show, as mentioned above, a remarkable bathochromic-shift (∼20 nm) in the Por Soret-band and a broadening, splitting, and red-shift of the Pc Q-band as a consequence of the desymmetrization of the Pc, the enlargement of the π-conjugated system, and the intramolecular electronic coupling between the individual components.126 The fluorescence maxima also show the underlying red-shift matching the red-shifted absorption maxima, with, however, much lower quantum yields than in the corresponding references. This infers appreciable electronic interactions. Despite the nearly exclusive excitation of the Por at 434 nm, Pc fluorescence was seen to develop, while no significant fluorescence is observed for the Por. Here, an efficient intramolecular transduction of singlet excited state energy from the Por to the fused Pc is implicit (∼30 ps). Support for this notion was lent from excitation spectra as well as transient absorption measurements. Hereafter, the long-lived triplet excited state of the Pc is populated via intersystem crossing (1.5 ns).
Very similar to the aforementioned, singlet–singlet energy transfer prevails in self-assembled H2Por/Zn(II)Pc and H2Por/Zn(II)Nc in o-DCB and toluene. The time constants of ultrafast singlet–singlet energy transfer are on the order of 2–25 ps.116
Besides the already well-known energy transfer reactions, photoinduced electron transfer reactions were investigated in slipped-cofacial supramolecular dimer systems (64)22-s (Fig. 11) of a directly linked Zn(II)Por–Zn(II)Pc heterodyad 64 by means of picosecond and femtosecond transient absorption spectroscopies.272 In this dimer, two heterodyads 64 are connected through metal–ligand interactions between two Im-substituted Zn(II)Por, which is advantageous for the effective production of the radical ion pair states due to a decrease in the reorganization energy. The absorption spectrum is composed of the characteristic bands of the individual components, namely Zn(II)Por and Zn(II)Pc. However, a remarkable broadening and splitting of the Por Soret-band indicates the self-assembled dimerization, and it is explained by the exciton splitting theory proposed by Kasha et al.273 The fluorescence properties suggest a rapid energy transfer (<1 ps) from the photoexcited Por to the Pc. Despite the nearly exclusive excitation of the Por, Pc fluorescence is seen, while no significant response is observed in the range of the Por fluorescence. In addition, the Pc fluorescence quantum yields decrease with an increasing solvent dielectric constant, which suggests an electron transfer reaction. Thus, the rapid energy transfer reaction from the Por to the Pc is followed by photoinduced electron transfer (47 ps) with a 93% efficiency to create a radical ion pair state. The radical ion pair state reveals features that include the signatures of the one-electron oxidized form of Zn(II)Pc and the one-electron reduced form of Zn(II)Por. In this particular case, CR takes place in 510 ps. Electrochemical measurements revealed that the radical cation is delocalized over the whole π-system of the dimer.
Using the metal–ligand binding approach, stable molecular dyads 76 in Fig. 15 and pentad featuring Im-substituted H2Pors and Ru(II)(CO)Pc were synthesized and spectrally characterized.118 The molecular structure and electronic states are deduced from computational, spectral, and electrochemical studies. Using steady-state and time-resolved transient absorption techniques, photochemical events taking place in these molecular polyads upon excitation of the H2Por are systematically investigated. To this end, steady-state emission predicted excitation transfer, in which the linkage on the H2Por entity and the number of Pcs influence the efficiency of excitation transfer. The kinetics of energy transfer (3.71 × 1010 s−1), monitored by performing transient absorption measurements using both up-conversion and pump probe techniques and modeled using the Förster-type energy transfer mechanism give rise to a good match between the theoretically estimated and the experimentally measured kinetic results. Interestingly, in the dyads subsequent charge transfer (1010 s−1) evolves in polar benzonitrile. Such charge transfer interactions are absent in the case of the pentad in benzonitrile, which could be due to different orientation factors promoting the competing photochemical process.
Stable host–guest complexes were formed in aqueous media between tetrasulfonated Zn(II)TPP 79 in Fig. 17 and several Si(IV)Pcs axially-substituted with two permethylated β-CD units (such as 80 in Fig. 17).122 As shown by steady-state measurements, 1:1 complexes are formed with large binding constants in the range from 1.1 × 107 to 3.5 × 108 M−1. In dependence of the length of the spacers between the β-CD units and the silicon center of the Pc, transient absorption measurements reveal two major photoinduced processes, namely fluorescence resonance energy transfer and charge transfer. This behavior is explained by the control of the length and flexibility of the linker on the overall efficiency of the processes. Being in close proximity, lifetimes of the resulting charge separated states are in the picosecond range.
5.4 Phthalocyanine–porphyrin systems connected to other electroactive moieties
Tri-tert-butyl Zn(II)Pc–M(II)Por (M = Zn(II) (54a), Pd (II) (54b) and H2 (54c)) dyads, and their analogs having tert-butyloxy (53a–c) or no (52a–c) substituents on the Pc macrocycle (Scheme 11) were studied in the presence of variable concentrations of two pyridyl-substituted C60 (83 and 84 in Fig. 19), which axially-coordinated to the Pc Zn(II) center.125 Fluorescence titration experiments show significant quenching of the Pc fluorescence. In fact, the quantum yields of the Pc fluorescence converge towards the end of the titration, which correlates with the successful formation of Por–Pc–fullerene supramolecular hybrids through coordination of the pyridyl moiety of the fullerene species to the zinc metal center of the Pc macrocycle in the dyad. This trend is rationalized on the basis of the larger cavity of Pcs. The calculated Kass for Zn(II)Pc and C60 are very high, with values of around 105 to 106 M−1. Transient absorption measurements confirm that, after an intramolecular energy transfer from the Por to the Pc component (∼15 ps), an intramolecular charge transfer occurs (∼14 ps). Radical ion pair state features, which include the signatures of the one-electron oxidized form of the Zn(II)Pc and the one-electron reduced form of C60, appeared. CR takes place (∼1.4 ns) without giving rise to any charge shift reaction to yield the one-electron oxidized form of the Por.125
Interestingly, a different coordination behaviour is observed in the case of Pc–Por conjugates 85a,b (Fig. 20) and C60 derivative 83.126 Fluorescence titration experiments show significant quenching of the Pc fluorescence, with values less than 10% of the initial intensity when fullerenes were absent. Overall, the calculated Kass of around 106 M−1 are very high. In contrast to the H2Por-containing dyad 85b, a red-shift of 7 nm in the absorption spectra of conjugate 85a·83 was observed. This result testifies that 83 coordinates to the Zn(II)Por, leading to an isosbestic point at 433 nm and a Kass of around 105 M−1. Transient absorption measurements corroborated that, after an intramolecular energy transfer from the Por to the Pc (∼20 ps) occurs, an intramolecular charge transfer takes place in the supramolecular ensemble (∼40 ps). This radical ion pair reveals features that include the signatures of the one-electron oxidized form of Zn(II)Pc and the one-electron reduced form of C60. Interestingly, CR takes place (∼1.2 ns) without giving rise to any charge shift reaction to yield the one-electron oxidized form of the Por. The latter would be, however, endergonic and would require a significant activation barrier.
Electron acceptors can also be covalently linked to a Pc–Por system. In fact, some Pc–C60–Por triads (82a–c in Fig. 18) presenting the three photoactive moieties covalently connected by means of a pyrrolidine spacer have been described and photophysically studied by steady-state absorption and emission spectroscopy as well as time-resolved fluorescence and transient absorption measurements.124 Zn(II)Por–C60–Zn(II)Pc 82c, give rise upon excitation of the Por to a sequence of energy and charge transfer reactions with fundamentally different outcomes. Relative to the component spectra of the single moieties, all individual features are present except those from C60, which are overshadowed by notable blue-shifted and broadened transitions of Zn(II)Por and Zn(II)Pc with lower extinction coefficients. Exclusive photoexcitation of the Por at either 428 or 425 nm leads to a fluorescence pattern that is reminiscent of that of the Pc, while a significant quenching of the Por centered fluorescence is seen. Such an observation lends support for an efficient transduction of singlet excited state energy from the Por to the Pc. The quantum yields of the Pc fluorescence are much lower than in the corresponding reference system. As such, it was concluded that intramolecular interactions play decisive roles in deactivating the photoexcited systems. Support for this notion was lent from excitation spectra as well as transient absorption measurements. In Zn(II)Por–C60–Zn(II)Pc 82c, an initial energy transfer (8.3 × 1011 s−1) is followed by a charge transfer (1.5 × 1011 s−1) to power the formation of Zn(II)Por–(C60˙−)–Zn(II)Pc˙+. No appreciable evidence could be gathered that would prompt to the involvement of the one-electron oxidized Zn(II)Por radical cation, due to the strong coupling between Zn(II)Por and Zn(II)Pc. It is likely that the short methylene linker weakens the interactions between Zn(II)Por and C60. The lifetime of the radical ion pair state is much longer in non-polar solvents like toluene (>3000 ps) than in polar solvents like THF (168 ps).
The combination of Pc–Por ensembles, with electron-accepting SWCNTs is a powerful approach to construct panchromatic electron D–A systems, with reactive cross sections in the visible, infrared, and near-infrared. Such a system was studied photophysically by using highly concentrated SWCNT suspensions, in a mixture of 25% THF and 75% DMF, which were titrated with variable concentrations of H2–Zn(II)Por–Zn(II)Pc conjugates 48b and 48c in Scheme 10.106 On one hand, absorption titrations show small red-shifts of ∼9 nm of the Por Soret bands and stronger red-shifts of ∼34 nm of the Zn(II)Pc bands, which indicate strong interactions between the components. On the other hand, fluorescence titration experiments show significant quenching of the Zn(II)Pc fluorescence. Transient absorption measurements confirm that, after an intramolecular energy transfer from the Por to the Pc (∼2.0 × 1012 s−1) takes place, an intramolecular charge transfer occurs. Radical ion pair state features, including the signatures of the one-electron oxidized form of the Zn(II)Pc and the one-electron reduced form of SWCNT, evolved. Here, CR occurs within ca. 109 s−1.106
5.5 Porphyrin–subphthalocyanine systems
A newly synthesized multimodular system (86 in Fig. 21) composed of three TPA entities covalently substituted at the meso positions of a Zn(II)Por ring, which is linked to a dodecafluoroSubPc by its axial position, reveals appreciable electronic interactions between the subcomponents.127 The occurrence of fast and efficient CS processes (1012 s−1) via the singlet excited state of Zn(II)Por was confirmed by femtosecond transient absorption spectral measurements in polar and nonpolar solvents. On one hand, the lifetimes of the singlet radical ion pair state (20–170 ps) decrease substantially in more polar media, whereas the rate of CS is much less solvent-dependent. On the other hand, the delocalization of the one-electron oxidized π-cation radical over the TPA–Por donor, the lower energy of the radical ion pair state, the particular characteristics of the axial B–O bond, and the triplet radical ion pair character rationalize the charge stabilization of the one-electron oxidized form of the Zn(II)Por and the one-electron reduced form of the SubPc with an extremely long lifetime (370 μs) compared to the reported Pc-based compounds. Coordination of an Im-containing fullerene 88 coordinating ligand to the Zn(II)Por component of a related Por–SubPc dyad 87 in Scheme 14 affords a moderately stable ensemble (Kass = 104 M−1).128 Redox measurements indicate that the energy level of the radical-ion pair in toluene is located lower than that of the singlet and triplet states of the Zn(II)Por and fullerene. Femtosecond transient absorption measurements revealed fast CS from the singlet Zn(II)Por to the coordinated fullerene is the inception to a long-lived radical ion pair state in toluene (1.6 × 105 s−1).
A supramolecular complex composed of β-CD-conjugated SubPc and a tetrasulfonated Por has been formed as a stable 2:1 host–guest complex with a Kass of (1.2 ± 0.5) × 1012 M−2.122 In the resulting hybrid, no significant electronic interactions are evidenced in the ground state, as the absorption spectra are a simple superposition of the absorption spectra of the individual components. Calculations by the Rehm–Weller equation and CV measurements indicate that efficient energy transfer takes place from the excited SubPc to H2Por. In a competitive way, electron transfer is also favorable as a deactivation pathway of the SubPc singlet excited state.
5.6 Porphyrin–porphyrin binuclear systems
Particular attention has been focused on the construction of artificial light-harvesting complexes to investigate the fundamental mechanism of the excitation energy hopping processes as mimicries of the natural photosynthetic antenna LH1 and LH2. Thus, investigations have been directed towards the construction of various multidimensional Por arrays for the fabrication of artificial, light-harvesting complexes.
In non-coordinating solvents, Osuka et al. demonstrated the spontaneous assembly of meso–meso linked diPors (130)22,(131)22 in Fig. 28b to form tetrameric arrays.203 By using both steady-state and time resolved spectroscopic methods, excitation-energy migration processes in such assemblies are clearly shown. Assuming that the number of energy-hopping sites is 2 in the tetrameric assembly, respectively, excitation-energy hopping rates of 1.5 ps−1 are derived, which are in good agreement with the calculated Förster-type energy transfer rates. The results are explained on the grounds of the competition between H- and J-type coupling of the transition dipole moments along the meso–meso-linkages in the tetrameric array and the parallel arrangement of transition dipole moments. The latter decreases energy transfer rates.
Self assembled Por boxes constructed by conjugated Por dimers were investigated by Kim et al.219 Here, meso-pyridyl appended, alkynylene-bridged Zn(II)Por dimers 145 in Fig. 33 assemble spontaneously into tetrameric Por boxes in noncoordinating solvents. Interestingly, owing to the free rotation of the di- and tetraalkynylene Por dimers, two kinds of self assembled Por boxes with planar and orthogonal conformers are noted, respectively. The excitation energy migration process within the Por boxes, where the exciton–exciton annihilation time has been described in terms of the Förster-type incoherent energy hopping model, is directly associated with the pump-power dependency on the femtosecond transient absorption decay profiles. In doing so, the excitation energy hopping rates in Por boxes constructed by planar and orthogonal conformers are established as <1.2 ps−1 and <1 ps−1, respectively. Moreover, the Por boxes constructed by orthogonal conformers give rise to slow excitation energy hopping rates of <12 ps−1. Thus, the dihedral angle between the Pors is an important factor to control the energy transfer efficiency using conjugated Por dimer systems.
The next work has also been an example of structural control over photophysical processes. Butadiyne-linked Por dimers were forced by metal coordinating ligands to self assemble into prismatic structures, in which the dimers comprise the faces of the prisms.274 Significant spectral enhancements are shown for the dimers. For example, after photoexcitation of the prismatic assemblies an efficient, through-space energy transfer is observed between the macrocyclic dimers. Interestingly Por and chlorophyll dimer prisms with the same size trigonal ligand show similar exciton migration lifetimes. The independence of the chromophores indicates that energy transfer occurs from the low energy transition situated along the long axis of the dimers and that these transitions for both chlorophylls and Por have similar energies.
Photoexcited state dynamics of triply-fused, Zn(II) and Pd(II)Por dimers 120e in Fig. 27 were investigated by Schmidt et al.275 Both compounds show short excited-state lifetimes. For the Zn(II)Por dimer, for instance, an average singlet excited state lifetime of 14 ps is noted, proposing a crossing of the singlet excited state and singlet ground state potential energy surfaces as a reason for the fast non-radiative deactivation to the ground state. However, the Pd(II)Por dimer displays longer average singlet excited state lifetimes of 18 ps before intersystem crossing at 1.7 ns sets in. Compared to other diPors that also show intramolecular heavy atom effects, the short triplet lifetime of the palladium diPors is rationalized on the basis of the position of the heavy atom within the diPor framework and the resulting strength of the spin–orbit coupling.
5.7 Binuclear porphyrin systems connected to electroactive moieties
The charge transfer behavior and the CR features of different covalently- and noncovalently linked Por conjugates connected to electroactive moieties were analyzed, to study the influence of both the nature of the bridges between the electron donors and the electron acceptors and the number of Pors and acceptors in multicomponent ensembles.
Photoinduced CS and CR processes in Por2–C60 systems were first examined by Imahori, Fukuzumi and coworkers.276 More recently, Por2–C60 system 153b in Fig. 38, in which the Por units are linked by a butadiyne spacer, have been studied to demonstrate how the driving force for electron transfer can be tuned by selective excitation of the different conformations.229 The butadiyne spacer allows a broad distribution of conformations and, thus, at room temperature, all Por–Por dihedral angles in 153b are populated. It has been shown that the planar and perpendicular conformations of such Por dimers are spectroscopically distinct and that it is possible to selectively excite either conformer. The fundamental 0–0 transitions of the two conformers are spaced in energy by approximately 0.2 eV and, in turn, two different initial states are formed that feature different driving forces for electron transfer from the Por dimer to the fullerene. The electron transfer rate is significantly faster in the conformationally distorted singlet excited donor (2.5 × 1011 s−1) than in the planar conformer (5.8 × 1010 s−1). The larger driving force and the larger electronic coupling of the perpendicular conformer to the appended fullerene rationalize the significantly different rates. It was suggested that in the excited state of the perpendicular conformation of the dimer it is likely that the excitation is localized on one of the Pors, the one that is closest to the C60 acceptor. The latter renders the average electron D–A distance shorter. Coordination of 154 to dimer 153b fixes its conformation giving rise to a larger inter-Por conjugation. Interestingly, the CR rate increases by an order of magnitude when comparing the planar conformer (1.4 × 109 s−1) with the unconstrained conformer (1.4 × 108 s−1). The faster recombination in the planar conformer was explained by the higher degree of conjugation. Thus, charges are mediated more efficiently through the delocalized system as evidenced by larger electronic couplings obtained for the planar system when the CR process is treated within the simple Marcus approach. In this context, electronic coupling for the planar system is estimated to be 2.5–3.9 cm−1, which is significantly higher than the coupling of 0.92 cm−1 in the conformationally heterogeneous system.
Related covalent Por dimer conjugates connected to two distinct electroactive units have also been prepared such as covalent D–A system 153a in Fig. 38, in which the two Pors are bridging a Fc and a fullerene. By extending the system with a secondary Fc-donor, a long-range charge-separated state can be formed.229
While the aforementioned system was covalently linked in a linear fashion (Por2–C60), in triad 150 in Fig. 36 the two Pors are linked to the fullerene component in a symmetrical manner (Zn(II)Por–C60–Zn(II)Por)226 and are held in a conformationally constrained geometry. Transient absorption measurements revealed that in the case of 150, formation of the singlet excited state of Zn(II)Por is followed by photoinduced electron transfer to the fullerene with a time constant of 20 ps. The resulting radical ion pair state is formed with a quantum yield of 98% and has a lifetime of 820 ps. The first excited singlet state of a H2Por analog of 150 leads to the radical ion pair state with a time constant of 200 ps and a quantum yield of 98%. The radical ion pair state decays with a lifetime of 2.8 ns. Despite the fact that the rate constant for photoinduced electron transfer is slower in the metal-free D–A derivative (4.9 × 109 s−1 vs. 4.9 × 1010 s−1), the longer lifetime for its singlet excited state allows a high quantum yield for electron transfer. CR was also shown to be faster for the zinc derivative (1.2 × 109 s−1) than for the free-base one (3.6 × 108 s−1). The results are in qualitative accord with the Marcus relationship: the driving force for CR of the Zn(II)Por-based conjugate is lower than for the free-base analog. Reactions, having driving forces for electron transfer that are much larger than those for photoinduced electron transfer, evidently occur in the inverted region of the Marcus relationship, where a decrease in driving force leads to an increase in rate constant.
Diederich et al.223 showed that changing the linkage between the Pors to a triply-fused, diPor linked to C60 (149 in Fig. 35) results in a weaker electronic interchromophoric interaction than in conjugates, where a face-to-face alignment of Pors and fullerene prevails. Despite the fact that triply-fused Por dimers show much better electron donor properties than simple Pors, their low-lying and very short-lived (4.5 ps) singlet level leads to a competitive deactivation pathway as the radical ion pair state energy was determined to be nearly isoenergetic. In conclusion, in both publications clear differences in the photoinduced process between the triply-fused, Por dimers connected to C60 (149) and the biaryl-type, Por dimers connected to the C60 conjugate 153a discussed above were evidenced.
Besides Por2–C60 conjugates, Por-functionalized SWCNTs have attracted extensive attention as excellent candidates for nanoscale photovoltaic devices. For example, meso–meso-linked diPors have successfully been covalently linked to functionalized SWCNTs.233 Steady state fluorescence assays as a function of solvent polarity reveal that fluorescence quenching is mainly dominated by excited state electron transfer. Transient absorption measurements confirmed the existence of electron transfer with a charge separated lifetime of 145 ns and CR kinetics of 6.9 × 106 s−1. Compared to the monoPor-modified SWCNTs showing a CS of 57 ns and 1.8 × 107 s−1, the meso–meso-linked diPor system prolonged the CS state lifetime by a factor of 2.5.
Another interesting electron D–A system was shown by Tagmatarchis et al., in which a Por dimer is linked to CNH through a rigid ester bond.234 The CNH hybrid material gives rise to efficient quenching of the dimeric Por fluorescence, suggesting photoinduced CS evolving from the singlet excited state. Additionally, transient absorption measurements indicate the fingerprints of the one-electron oxidized form of the Por dimer and the one-electron reduced form of CNH with absorption maxima at around 600–650 and 1400 nm, respectively. CS rate constants and quantum yields are 2.1 × 109 s−1 and 0.95, respectively. The rate constant for the CR process is 1.4 × 107 s−1, which corresponds to a lifetime of the radical ion pair of 72 ns in CH2Cl2. In addition, photoactive electrodes were constructed based on nanostructured SnO2 electrodes, which reveal photocurrent and photovoltage responses with an incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency value as large as 9.6%, without the application of any bias voltage. The mechanism for the photocurrent generation includes electron transfer, followed by electron mediation from the reduced nanohorns to the conduction band of the SnO2 electrode. Interestingly, CNHs covalently functionalized with mononuclear Pors show an IPCE value of only 2.7%.277
meso–meso-linked Por dimers and larger oligomers have also been immobilized onto ITO electrodes to enhance light-harvesting and generate higher photocurrents as compared to the corresponding monomer system.278 The work showed that because of the exciton coupling of the Pors, visible light is absorbed more widely than in a linear combination of the corresponding Por monomers. By increasing the number of Pors, the photocurrent conversion efficiency per mol cm−2 and the quantum yield of photocurrent generation – Φ420 (ITO/H2Por/TEA/Pt) = 1.7% and Φ420 (ITO/(H2Por)4/TEA/Pt) = 3.2% (TEA = triethanolamine) – improve. Another approach to achieve improved efficient anodic photocurrent generation by a photoexcited Por on ITO electrodes involves the use of a special-pair mimic Por assembly.279 Accordingly, slipped-cofacial Por dimers related to 128 in Fig. 28, organized through Im-to-zinc complementary coordination of Im-substituted Zn(II)Por units, were covalently fixed by ring closing olefin metathesis of allyl side chains and immobilized on ITO through different linkers. Comparing the results with a Por monomer, the special pair-mimic dimer formation increases the anodic photocurrent by means of improving Φ410 values from 8.2 to 10%. The enhanced photocurrent generation documents the advantage of the slipped-cofacial Por dimer in providing photoinduced CS (IPCE410 = 0.55%). Furthermore, higher quantum yields for the anodic photocurrent from the second singlet excited state S2 compared with that from the first singlet excited state S1 (Φ550 = 4.3%) suggests that a sufficiently fast charge injection occurs due to higher driving forces prior to any internal conversion. Further fine-tuning of a photoelectrochemical cell was established one year later with an Fc/slipped cofacial Por dimer/ITO redox assembly.280
The photocurrent properties of a series of covalently linked, slipped-cofacial Zn(II)Por dimers presenting a Fc or nonamethyl Fc moiety attached to one Por macrocycle via single bond, phenylene–ethenylene or phenylene–ethylene spacers and a phosphonate group to the other were also investigated.280 In such covalent ensembles, prepared by ring closing metathesis reaction of supramolecular Zn(II)Por heterodimers, the presence of the phosphonate group allows the grafting of the Fc-functionalized Por dimers to the ITO surface forming a monolayer.
Photoactive supramolecular systems, in which the donor Por dimer and the acceptor moieties are noncovalently linked, are also discussed in the following part. One example is a supramolecular Por2 C60 featured by a ‘two-point’ coordinate bonding between a dipyridyl-substituted C60 and a Zn(II)Por dimer.237 The rather large Kass of 1.8 × 105 M−2 for the coordination of a bidentate C60 ligand to the Zn(II)Por dimer is explained by the “two-point” coordinate binding strategy. As predicted from the Kass, quenching of the Por dimer fluorescence is quite efficient. Transient absorption measurements confirm the formation of a radical ion pair state, by means of the 1020 and 480 nm spectral features of the one-electron oxidized form of the dimeric Por and the one-electron reduced form of the fullerene. The rate of CS is 3.3 × 109 s−1 and the CS quantum yield is 0.86. Moreover, the rate of CR is 2 × 108 and 1.8 × 108 s−1 at room temperature and −10 °C, respectively, indicating fairly rapid CR.
Self-assembled Im–Zn(II)Por dimers have been functionalized with Fc and C60 electroactive units and then chemically fixed by a metathesis reaction to give a covalently linked version of 157 (Fig. 39).230 While no significant electronic interactions are evidenced in the ground state, steady-state as well as time resolved measurements provided data on the formation of a long lived radical ion pair state with a lifetime longer than 100 μs. The mechanism involves CS between photoexcited Zn(II)Por dimers and the fullerene followed by oxidative charge shift to the Fc unit.
To mimic the photosynthetic reaction center a “special pair”, that is, a supramolecular ensemble resulting from the complexation of two fullerene derivatives functionalized with both a pyridine and a terminal ammonium moiety to two self-assembled, crown ether-containing Zn(II)Pors (158 in Fig. 40) was prepared.238 Steady state and time-resolved fluorescence assays speak for a CS with rate constants and quantum yields of 5.3 × 109 s−1 and 0.91, respectively. Decisive for the formation of the radical ion pair state upon photoexcitation of the Zn(II)Por dimer are nanosecond transient absorption measurements. Here, the CR takes place with 1.0 × 107 s−1. Additionally, the importance of the cofacial Por dimer as a donor vs. a Zn(II)Por monomer is demonstrated by a slower CS with 2.9 × 109 s−1 and a lower quantum yield of 0.85. As a complement to the aforementioned, enhanced electron transfer properties of cofacial Por dimers compared with the reference monomer were studied in another publication.281 By using laser flash photolysis, the dynamics of photoinduced electron transfer from the triplet excited states covalently-fixed cofacial Por dimers to a series of electron acceptors (e.g. nitrobenzene derivatives and a series of benzoquinone compounds) were followed and compared with Por monomers. In doing so, the results show that photoinduced electron transfer from cofacial Por dimers to electron acceptors is accelerated, whereas CR is decelerated relative to that observed for the corresponding Por monomer. Due to π–π interactions among Por components, the Por dimer radical cation is stabilized more efficiently and results in larger driving forces for the CS as indicated by the π–π* transition in the near-infrared region and also by the negative shifts of the first oxidation potential with decreasing distances between the Por rings.
Another interesting supramolecular approach is the inclusion of fullerenes in a self assembled Por nanotube.257,258 Cyclic Ni(II)Por dimer 171 in Fig. 46 linked by butadiyne moieties, and bearing 4-pyridyl groups at two opposite meso positions of the Pors is able to form supramolecular nanotubes, which host fullerenes inside their cavity in solution to form a 1:1 inclusion complex (2.0 × 105 M−1). By steady-state absorption measurements and electrochemistry, a charge transfer band from the Por to the fullerene was confirmed. In additional experiments, an anisotropic electron mobility of 0.72 cm2 V−1 s−1 along the linearly arranged fullerenes is established. However, femtosecond transient absorption measurements leading in the solid state to the population of the Por second singlet excited state provides the only proof for the formation of a triplet exciplex, which decays with a lifetime of 34 ps to the ground state. Using H2Por dimer 170 (Fig. 46), the desired CS is favored.259 Electrochemical studies corroborate the lower oxidation potential of the Por dimer, which results in lower energy levels of the radical ion pair state. Anisotropic charge mobility of the Por nanotube–C60 complex shows a value of 0.16 cm2 V−1 s−1, likely due to the zig-zag arrangement of the fullerenes. Finally, CS with a lifetime of 470 ps comes from transient absorption measurements in the solid state.
Steady-state measurements on supramolecular complexes with Por dimer tweezers 161 (Fig. 41) and different fullerenes (C60 and C70) demonstrate ground state interactions and fluorescence quenching of the cyclopentene linked Zn(II)Por dimeric tweezers by the fullerenes.243 Moreover, the value of the Kass implies that the Por tweezers may be used as selective hosts for different fullerenes in benzonitrile. In addition, transient absorption measurements attest the sequence of energy transfer from the singlet excited state of the Por to the fullerene and electron transfer to the fullerenes in benzonitrile with a rate constant of 109 s−1. One year later, a newly designed dithiophene-containing Por dimer 162 (Fig. 41) was investigated in an analogous way and the electron transfer properties in combination with fullerenes were probed.244
6. Conclusions and outlook
During the last decade, a large number of reports have appeared on the preparation and study of covalent and supramolecular, homo- and heterobinuclear systems based on Por and Pc chromophores. The most relevant synthetic strategies, molecular topologies and ground- and excited-state features of these systems have been collected in this review.
Covalently and noncovalently linked Por- and Pc-based binuclear systems may find numerous applications, ranging from molecular electronic and NLO devices to sensors and medical applications such as photodynamic therapy, to mention a few. Moreover, porphyrinoid-based binuclear systems hold particular relevance as artificial photosynthetic models in molecular photovoltaics, due to their improved light-harvesting capabilities and the occurrence of photoinduced energy and/or electron transfer events, particularly in the case of heterobinuclear systems.
Electronic coupling between these chromophores is an important parameter that determines the electronic properties of Pc and/or Por dimers. In this regard, the covalent strategy is suitable for fine-tuning this electronic coupling, since it allows to “bridge” the two macrocycles by a variety of spacers of different sizes, shapes and electronic nature.
While non-conjugated dimeric systems are usually weakly coupled via through-space and through-bond interactions, strong electronic coupling occurs in binuclear systems linked either directly or through conjugated spacers. The preparation of most of these systems is usually carried out by means of transition metal-catalysed, cross-coupling reactions.
An effective enlargement of π-conjugation can be attained by fusing two Pc and/or Por rings. This strategy is highly useful for constructing rigid and planar structures in which conjugation is fully extended over the whole covalent ensemble, leading to absorptions that reach into the near-mid-IR region. These systems are attractive because of their large nonlinear absorption properties, and can find applications in two-photon fluorescence microscopy and optical power limiting.
Inspired by the noncovalent nature of natural photosynthetic systems, the self-assembly approach has been increasingly pursued in the search for light-harvesting and charge-separation systems. In this context, metal–ligand interactions are widely-used molecular recognition tools for the construction of well-defined supramolecular architectures. Thus, it is not surprising to find, over the last few years, an increasing number of reports devoted to the construction of supramolecular Pc and/or Por dimers by means of the metal coordination approach. In this regard, coordination of pyridyl or imidazolyl ligands, appended to the periphery of Ru(II) or Zn(II) macrocycles is, by far, the most frequently used method to create such supramolecular ensembles. Other types of motifs such as D–A, host–guest, and electrostatic interactions have also been used for the construction of such supramolecular homo- and heterobinuclear systems. The self-assembly of covalent Por and/or Pc homo- and heterodimers into multiporphyrinoid arrays, such as cofacial tetrameric stacks, cyclic ensembles, and boxes deserves special mention.
The enormous interest in porphyrinoid-based binuclear conjugates for the construction of artificial photosynthetic systems has fostered the implementation of these conjugates into a wide range of D–A systems through their connection with different electroactive acceptor units, such as fullerene, PDI and AQ. This approach has proved efficient for the generation of photoinduced intramolecular charge separated states in covalent ensembles. On the other hand, there are many reported examples in which appropriately functionalized electroactive units interact through supramolecular interactions with covalent or supramolecular Pc and/or Por binuclear systems. As mentioned above, coordination between Zn(II) or Ru(II) metal centers and nitrogenated ligands is the most frequently used supramolecular motif to create such ensembles. Nevertheless, remarkable examples have also been reported in which other supramolecular interactions such as highly-directional, hydrogen bonding and host–guest interactions have been employed as tools to construct biomimetic ensembles. Particularly relevant is the use of Por binuclear systems as receptors for fullerene derivatives. In this case, the formation of supramolecular complexes relies on π–π stacking and charge transfer interactions between fullerene derivatives and the largely aromatic, electron-donor Por dimers. “Tweezers-like” architectures or cyclic Por dimers have also been described, which are able to host C60, or even larger fullerene derivatives. Moving one step further, some of these cyclic dimers were found to be able to self-aggregate, giving rise to the formation of supramolecular nanotubes in which several C60 molecules can be hosted in a one-dimensional, “peapod” arrangement. Similar to fullerenes, SWCNTs have also been complexed via supramolecular interactions using Por dimer nanotweezers.
In-depth photophysical characterization of many of the above-mentioned ensembles has also been performed. Regarding porphyrinoid-based binuclear systems, particular attention has been focused on the understanding of the fundamental dynamics of the excitation energy transduction and CS of these systems as model compounds towards the preparation of artificial, light-harvesting complexes.
In this context, some investigations have been focused on the determination of energy transfer rates in supramolecular ensembles of Por dimers. On the other hand, covalently linked, fused, and supramolecular Pc–Por heterodimers have been the target of choice to study photoinduced electron/energy transfer processes. It is well known that the long-wavelength absorption of Pcs overlaps quite well with the short-wavelength fluorescence of Pors, which results, upon photoexcitation, in an efficient transduction of singlet excited state energy from the Por to the Pc. Besides energy transfer, photoinduced electron transfer has also been found in some metal–ligand bound Pc–Por dimers. Additionally, the incorporation of one or more electroactive units into Pc and/or Por binuclear systems has also been exploited as a tool to obtain long-lived, charge-separated states. The charge transfer behaviour and the CR features of such D–A, covalent and noncovalent ensembles have been rationalized in terms of the topology of the arrangements and the electronic nature of the subunits.
To conclude, Pcs and Pors have clearly demonstrated to be more than simple dyes, they are highly versatile building blocks for the construction of multifunctional complex architectures. In this regard, organic synthesis holds a prominent role providing the tools to create sophisticated ensembles with improved ground- and excited-state features.
Although important advances have been made in this sense, a lot of understanding is still needed in order to accurately predict and modulate the physicochemical properties of such conjugates. Moreover, a further step includes the implementation of these Pc- and Por-based ensembles into architectures showing long-range order which would provide efficient, solid-state devices.
AcknowledgementsFinancial support from the MICINN and MEC, Spain (CTQ-2011-24187/BQU, PIB2010US-00652, CONSOLIDER-INGENIO 2010 CDS 2007-00010, Nanociencia Molecular), CAM (MADRISOLAR-2, S2009/PPQ/1533), the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (SFB 583 and FCI), “Solar Technologies Go Hybrid” initative by the state of Bavaria, and Cluster of Excellence “Engineering of Advanced Materials (EAM)” is acknowledged.
ReferencesD. M. Guldi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2002, 31, 22–36 RSC .H. Imahori, Y. Mori and Y. Matano, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2003, 4, 51–83 CrossRef CAS .M. E. El-Khouly, O. Ito, P. M. Smith and F. D'Souza, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2004, 5, 79–104 CrossRef CAS .G. de la Torre, C. G. Claessens and T. Torres, Chem. Commun., 2007, 2000–2015 RSC .S. Fukuzumi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 2283–2297 RSC .M. R. Wasielewski, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1910–1921 CrossRef CAS .Special issue on “Renewable Energy”,   D. Nocera and D. M. Guldi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1–293 RSC .D. Gust, T. A. Moore and A. L. Moore, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1890–1898 CrossRef CAS .G. Bottari, G. de la Torre, D. M. Guldi and T. Torres, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6768–6816 CrossRef CAS .Y. Rio, M. S. Rodríguez-Morgade and T. Torres, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2008, 6, 1877–1894 CAS  , and references therein.The Porphyrin Handbook – Multiporphyrins, Multiphthalocyanines and Arrays, ed. K. M. Kadish, K. M. Smith and R. Guilard, Academic Press, San Diego,  2000, vol. 18 Search PubMed .Multiporphyrin Arrays Fundamentals and Applications, ed. D. Kim, Pan Stanford Publishing,  2012 Search PubMed .N. Aratani and A. Osuka, in Handbook of Porphyrin Science, ed. K. M. Kadish, K. M. Smith and R. Guilard, World Scientific,  2010, vol. 1, pp. 1–129 Search PubMed .A. Ryan, A. Gehrold, R. Perusitti, M. Pintea, M. Fazekas, O. B. Locos, F. Blaikie and M. O. Senge, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2011, 5817–5844 CrossRef CAS  , and references cited therein.G. de la Torre, M. Nicolau and T. Torres, Phthalocyanines Synthesis, Supramolecular Organization and Physical Properties, in Supramolecular Photosensitive and Electroactive Materials, ed. H. S. Nalwa, Academic Press,  2001, pp. 1–111 Search PubMed .M. S. Rodríguez-Morgade, G. de la Torre and T. Torres, in The Porphyrin Handbook, ed. K. M. Kadish, K. M. Smith and R. Guilard, Elsevier Science,  2003, vol. 15, pp. 125–159 Search PubMed .A. Yu Tolbin, L. G. Tomilova and N. S. Zefirov, Russ. Chem. Rev., 2008, 77, 435–449 CrossRef .A. M. V. M. Pereira, A. R. M. Soares, M. J. F. Calvete and G. de la Torre, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2009, 13, 419–428 CrossRef CAS  , and references therein.G. de la Torre, G. Bottari, U. Hahn and T. Torres, Struct. Bonding, 2010, 135, 1–44 CrossRef CAS .For seminal work in this area, see:   S. Vigh, H. Lam, P. Janda, A. B. P. Lever, C. C. Leznoff and R. L. Cerny, Can. J. Chem., 1991, 69, 1457–1461 CrossRef CAS .G. Bottari, D. D. Díaz and T. Torres, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2006, 10, 1083–1100 CrossRef CAS  , and references therein.P.-C. Lo, X. Leng and D. K. P. Ng, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2007, 251, 2334–2353 CrossRef CAS .J.-Y. Liu, P.-C. Lo and D. K. P. Ng, Struct. Bonding, 2010, 135, 169–210 CrossRef CAS .G. Bottari, G. de la Torre, D. M. Guldi and T. Torres, in Multiporphyrin Arrays: Fundamentals and Applications, ed. D. Kim, Pan Stanford Publishing,  2012, pp. 149–216 Search PubMed .H. Imahori, D. M. Guldi, K. Tamaki, Y. Yoshida, C. Luo, Y. Sakata and S. Fukuzumi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 6617–6628 CrossRef CAS .B. Grimm, A. Hausmann, A. Kahnt, W. Seitz, F. Spänig and D. M. Guldi, in Handbook of Porphyrin Science, ed. K. M. Kadish, K. M. Smith and R. Guilard, World Scientific,  2010, vol. 1, pp. 133–219 Search PubMed .J. E. Norton and J.-L. Bredas, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 128, 034701 CrossRef .M. Morisue and Y. Kobuke, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 4993–5000 CrossRef CAS .R. M. Soares, M. V. Martínez-Díaz, A. Bruckner, A. M. V. M. Pereira, J. P. C. Tomé, M. C. A. Alonso, M. A. F. Faustino, M. G. P. M. S. Neves, A. C. Tomé, A. M. S. Silva, J. A. S. Cavaleiro, T. Torres and D. M. Guldi, Org. Lett., 2007, 9, 1557–1560 CrossRef .G. Bottari, O. Trukhina, M. Ince and T. Torres, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2012, 256, 2453–2477 CrossRef CAS .J. Jiang, M. Bao, L. Rintoul and D. P. Arnold, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2006, 250, 424–448 CrossRef CAS .H. Isago, D. Terekhov and C. C. Leznoff, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 1997, 1, 135–140 CrossRef CAS .S. O'Malley, B. Schazmann, D. Diamond and K. Nolan, Tetrahedron Lett., 2007, 48, 9003–9007 CrossRef CAS .V. N. Nemykin, A. Y. Koposov, R. I. Subbotin and S. Sharm, Tetrahedron Lett., 2007, 48, 5425–5428 CrossRef CAS .A. Y. Tolbin, V. E. Pushkareva, E. V. Shulishov and L. G. Tomilova, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2012, 16, 341–350 CrossRef CAS .H. Yoshiyama, N. Shibata, T. Sato, S. Nakamura and T. Toru, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2008, 6, 4498–4501 CAS .H. Yoshiyama, N. Shibata, T. Sato, S. Nakamura and T. Toru, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2009, 7, 2265–2269 CAS .A. Y. Tolbin, A. V. Ivanov, L. G. Tomilova and N. S. Zefirov, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2003, 7, 162–166 CrossRef CAS .T. Ceyhan, A. Altindal, A. R. Özkaya, M. K. Erbil, B. Salihd and Ö. Bekaroglu, Chem. Commun., 2006, 320–322 RSC .T. Ceyhan, A. Altindal, A. R. Özkaya, B. Salih, M. K. Erbil and Ö. Bekaroglu, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2007, 11, 625–634 CrossRef CAS .T. Ceyhan, A. Altindal, A. R. Özkaya, Ö. Çelikbic, B. Salih, M. Kemal Erbil and Ö. Bekaroglu, Polyhedron, 2007, 26, 4239–4249 CrossRef CAS .M. Canlica, A. Altindal, A. R. Özkaya, B. Salih and Ö. Bekaroglu, Polyhedron, 2008, 27, 1883–1890 CrossRef CAS .M. Özer, A. Altindal, A. R. Özkaya, B. Salih, M. Bulut and Ö. Bekaroglu, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2007, 3519–3526 CrossRef .M. Özer, A. Altindal, B. Salih, M. Bulut and Ö. Bekaroglu, Tetrahedron
Lett., 2008, 49, 896–900 CrossRef .Z. Odabas, A. Altindal, A. R. Özkaya, M. Bulut, B. Salih and Ö. Bekaroglu, Polyhedron, 2007, 26, 3505–3512 CrossRef CAS .S. Altun, A. Altindal, A. R. Özkaya, M. Bulut and Ö. Bekaroglu, Tetrahedron Lett., 2008, 49, 4483–4486 CrossRef CAS .Z. Odabas, F. Dumludag, A. R. Özkaya, S. Yamauchi, N. Kobayashi and Ö. Bekaroglu, Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 8143–8152 RSC .T. Ceyhan, A. Altindal, A. R. Özkaya, B. Salih and Ö. Bekaroglu, Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 9801–9814 RSC .M. Özer, A. Altindal, A. R. Özkaya and Ö. Bekaroglu, Dalton Trans., 2009, 3175–3181 RSC .I. Koç, M. Özer, A. R. Özkaya and Ö. Bekaroglu, Dalton Trans., 2009, 6368–6376 RSC .T. Ceyhan, A. Altindal, A. R. Özkaya, B. Salih and Ö. Bekaroglu, Dalton Trans., 2009, 10318–10329 RSC .S. M. Gorun, J. W. Rathke and M. J. Chen, Dalton Trans., 2009, 1095–1097 RSC .H. M. Neu, V. V. Zhdankin and V. N. Nemykin, Tetrahedron Lett., 2010, 51, 6545–6548 CrossRef CAS .A. B. Sorokin, E. V. Kudrik and D. Bouchub, Chem. Commun., 2008, 2562–2564 RSC .E. V. Kudrik and A. B. Sorokin, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 7123–7126 CAS .B. Floris, M. P. Donzello and C. Ercolani, in Porphyrin Handbook, ed. K. M. Kadish, K. M. Smith and R. Guilard, Elsevier Science, San Diego,  2003, vol. 18, pp. 1–2 Search PubMed .Y. Chen, D. Dini, M. Hanack, M. Fujitsuka and O. Ito, Chem. Commun., 2004, 340–341 RSC .Y. Chen, Y. Araki, M. Hanack, M. Fujitsuka and O. Ito, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2005, 4655–4658 CrossRef CAS .G. de la Torre, P. Vázquez, F. Agulló-López and T. Torres, J. Mater. Chem., 1998, 8, 1671–1683 RSC .G. de la Torre, P. Vázquez, F. Agulló-López and T. Torres, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 3723–3750 CrossRef CAS .M. J. F. Calvete, D. Dini, S. R. Flom, M. Hanack, R. G. S. Pong and J. S. Shirk, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2005, 3499–3509 CrossRef CAS .S. Makarov, C. Litwinski, E. A. Ermilov, O. Suvorova, B. Röder and D. Wöhrle, Chem.–Eur. J., 2006, 12, 1468–1474 CrossRef CAS .T. V. Dubinina, A. V. Ivanov, N. E. Borisova, S. A. Trashin, S. I. Gurskiy, L. G. Tomilova and N. S. Zefirov, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2010, 363, 1869–1878 CrossRef CAS .M. Calvete and M. Hanack, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2003, 2080–2083 CrossRef CAS .T. V. Dubinina, S. A. Trashin, N. E. Borisova, I. A. Boginskaya, L. G. Tomilova and N. S. Zefirov, Dyes Pigm., 2012, 93, 1471–1480 CrossRef CAS .G. de la Torre, M. V. Martinez-Diaz, P. R. Ashton and T. Torres, J. Org. Chem., 1998, 63, 8888–8893 CrossRef CAS .G. de la Torre, M. V. Martinez-Diaz and T. Torres, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 1999, 3, 560–568 CrossRef CAS .K. Ishii, N. Kobayashi, Y. Higashi, T. Osa, D. Lelièvre, J. Simon and S. Yamauchi, Chem. Commun., 1999, 969–970 RSC .D. Fix, S. Makarov, O. Suvorova, L. González, D. Wöhrle and B. Röder, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 8466–8476 CrossRef .G. Bottari and T. Torres, Chem. Commun., 2004, 2668–2669 RSC .H. Yoshiyama, N. Shibata, T. Sato, S. Nakamura and T. Toru, Chem. Commun., 2008, 1977–1979 RSC .A. J. Jiménez, M. L. Marcos, A. Hausmann, M. S. Rodríguez-Morgade, D. M. Guldi and T. Torres, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 14139–14146 CrossRef .A. de la Escosura, M. V. Martínez-Díaz, P. Thordarson, A. E. Rowan, R. J. M. Nolte and T. Torres, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 12300–12308 CrossRef CAS .B. H. Northrop, Y.-R. Zheng, K.-W. Chi and P. J. Stang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1554–1563 CrossRef CAS .C. G. Claessens, M. V. Martínez-Díaz and T. Torres, in Supramolecular Chemistry From Molecules to Nanomaterials, ed. P. A. Gale and J. W. Steed, John Wiley & Sons,  2012, pp. 1075–1100 Search PubMed .M. J. Cook and A. Jafari-Fini, J. Mater. Chem., 1997, 7, 2327–2329 RSC .K. Ishii, S. Abiko, M. Fujitsuka, O. Ito and N. Kobayashi, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 2002, 1735–1739 RSC .K. Ishii, M. Iwasaki and N. Kobayashi, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2007, 436, 94–98 CrossRef CAS .V. Novakova, P. Zimcik, K. Kopecky, M. Miletin, J. Kuneš and K. Lang, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2008, 3260–3263 CrossRef CAS .K. Kameyama, M. Morisue, A. Satake and Y. Kobuke, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 4763–4766 CrossRef CAS .S. Fukuzumi, K. Ohkubo, J. Ortiz, A. M. Gutierrez, F. Fernandez-Lazaro and A. Sastre-Santos, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 10744–10752 CrossRef CAS .A. J. Jimenez, F. Spänig, M. S. Rodriguez-Morgade, K. Ohkubo, S. Fukuzumi, D. M. Guldi and T. Torres, Org. Lett., 2007, 9, 2481–2484 CrossRef CAS .A. Kahnt, M. Quintiliani, P. Vázquez, D. M. Guldi and T. Torres, ChemSusChem, 2008, 1, 97–102 CrossRef CAS .A. Gouloumis, D. Gonzalez-Rodríguez, P. Vázquez, T. Torres, S. Liu, L. Echegoyen, J. Ramey, G. L. Hug and D. M. Guldi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 12674–12684 CrossRef CAS .F. J. Céspedes-Guirao, K. Ohkubo, S. Fukuzumi, F. Fernández-Lázaro and A. Sastre-Santos, Chem.–Asian J., 2011, 6, 3110–3121 CrossRef .A. N. Cammidge, G. Berger, I. Chambrier, P. W. Hough and M. Cook, Tetrahedron, 2005, 61, 4067–4074 CrossRef CAS .M. S. Rodríguez-Morgade, T. Torres, C. Atienza-Castellanos and D. M. Guldi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 15145–15154 CrossRef .F. Silvestri, I. López-Duarte, W. Seitz, L. Beverina, M. V. Martínez-Díaz, T. J. Marks, D. M. Guldi, G. A. Pagani and T. Torres, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4500–4502 RSC .M. S. Rodríguez-Morgade, M. E. Plonska-Brzezinska, A. J. Athans, E. Carbonell, G. de Miguel, D. M. Guldi, L. Echegoyen and T. Torres, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 10484–10496 CrossRef .A. de la Escosura, M. V. Martínez-Díaz, D. M. Guldi and T. Torres, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4112–4118 CrossRef CAS .N. Kobayashi and A. B. P. Lever, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1987, 109, 7433–7441 CrossRef CAS .O. E. Sielcken, M. M. Van Tilborg, M. F. M. Roks, R. Hendriks, W. Drenth and R. J. M. Nolte, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1987, 109, 4261–4265 CrossRef CAS .F. D'Souza, E. Maligaspe, K. Ohkubo, M. E. Zandler, N. K. Subbaiyan and S. Fukuzumi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8787–8797 CrossRef CAS .W. Seitz, A. J. Jiménez, E. Carbonell, B. Grimm, M. S. Rodríguez-Morgade, D. M. Guldi and T. Torres, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 127–129 RSC .A. J. Jiménez, R. M. K. Calderón, M. S. Rodríguez-Morgade, D. M. Guldi and T. Torres, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 1064–1074 RSC .C. G. Claessens, D. Gonzalez-Rodriguez and T. Torres, Chem. Rev., 2002, 102, 835–853 CrossRef CAS .R. S. Iglesias, C. G. Claessens, T. Torres, G. M. A. Rahman and D. M. Guldi, Chem. Commun., 2005, 2113–2115 RSC .D. González-Rodríguez, T. Torres, M. A. Herranz, L. Echegoyen, E. Carbonell and D. M. Guldi, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 7670–7679 CrossRef .D. González-Rodríguez, T. Torres, D. M. Guldi, J. Rivera, M. A. Herranz and L. Echegoyen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 6301–6313 CrossRef .D. González-Rodríguez, E. Carbonell, D. M. Guldi and T. Torres, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 8032–8036 CrossRef .D. Gonzalez-Rodriguez, C. G. Claessens, T. Torres, S. G. Liu, L. Echegoyen, N. Vila and S. Nonell, Chem.–Eur. J., 2005, 11, 3881–3893 CrossRef CAS .Z. Zhao, A. N. Cammidge and M. J. Cook, Chem. Commun., 2009, 7530–7532 RSC .N. Shibata, B. Das, E. Tokunaga, M. Shiro and N. Kobayashi, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 7554–7562 CrossRef CAS .H. Xu and D. K. P. Ng, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 7921–7927 CrossRef CAS .S. Gaspard, C. Giannotti, P. Maillard, C. Schaeffer and T.-H. Tran-Thi, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1986, 1239–1241 RSC .J. Bartelmess, A. R. M. Soares, M. V. Martinez-Diaz, M. G. P. M. S. Neves, A. C. Tome, J. A. S. Cavaleiro, T. Torres and D. M. Guldi, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 3490–3492 RSC .A. Hausmann, A. R. M. Soares, M. V. Martinez-Diaz, M. G. P. M. S. Neves, A. C. Tomé, J. A. S. Cavaleiro, T. Torres and D. M. Guldi, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2010, 9, 1027–1032 CAS .J. P. C. Tomé, A. M. V. M. Pereira, C. M. A. Alonso, M. G. P. M. S. Neves, A. C. Tomé, A. M. S. Silva, J. A. S. Cavaleiro, M. V. Martinez-Diaz, T. Torres, G. M. A. Rahman, J. Ramey and D. M. Guldi, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2006, 257–267 CrossRef .H. Ali and J. E. van Lier, Tetrahedron Lett., 2009, 50, 1113–1116 CrossRef CAS .K. Kameyama, A. Satake and Y. Kobuke, Tetrahedron Lett., 2004, 45, 7617–7620 CrossRef CAS .A. Satake, T. Sugimura and Y. Kobuke, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2009, 13, 326–335 CrossRef CAS .M. Morisue, K. Ogawa, K. Kamada, K. Ohta and Y. Kobuke, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2121–2123 RSC .C. B. Kc, K. Stranius, P. D'Souza, N. K. Subbaiyan, H. Lemmetyinen, N. V. Tkachenko and F. D'Souza, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 763–773 Search PubMed .J. Fortage, E. Göransson, E. Blart, H.-C. Becker, L. Hammarström and F. Odobel, Chem. Commun., 2007, 4629–4631 RSC .T. H. Tran-Thi, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1997, 160, 53–91 CrossRef CAS .E. Maligaspe, T. Kumpulainen, H. Lemmetyinen, N. V. Tkachenko, N. K. Subbaiyan, M. E. Zandler and F. D'Souza, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2010, 114, 268–277 CrossRef CAS .K. Stranius, R. Jacobs, E. Maligaspe, H. Lemmetyinen, N. V. Tkachenko, M. E. Zandler and F. D'Souza, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2010, 14, 948–961 CrossRef CAS .R. Jacobs, K. Stranius, E. Maligaspe, H. Lemmetyinen, N. V. Tkachenko, M. E. Zandler and F. D'Souza, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 3656–3665 CrossRef CAS .A. V. Gusev, E. O. Danilov and M. A. J. Rodgers, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2002, 106, 1993–2001 CrossRef CAS .A. V. Gusev and M. A. J. Rodgers, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2002, 106, 1985–1992 CrossRef CAS .M. R. Pereira, J. A. Ferreira and G. Hungerford, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2005, 406, 360–365 CrossRef CAS .E. A. Ermilov, R. Menting, J. T. F. Lau, X. Leng, B. Roder and D. K. P. Ng, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 17633–17641 RSC .A. Ambroise, R. W. Wagner, P. D. Rao, J. A. Riggs, P. Hascoat, J. R. Diers, J. Seth, R. K. Lammi, D. F. Bocian, D. Holten and J. S. Lindsey, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 1023–1034 CrossRef CAS .R. F. Enes, J.-J. Cid, A. Hausmann, O. Trukhina, A. Gouloumis, P. Vázquez, J. A. S. Cavaleiro, A. C. Tomé, D. M. Guldi and T. Torres, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 1727–1736 CrossRef CAS .A. M. V. M. Pereira, A. Hausmann, J. P. C. Tomé, O. Trukhina, M. Urbani, M. G. P. M. S. Neves, J. A. S. Cavaleiro, D. M. Guldi and T. Torres, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 3210–3219 CrossRef CAS .A. M. V. M. Pereira, A. R. M. Soares, A. Hausmann, M. G. P. M. S. Neves, A. C. Tomé, A. M. S. Silva, J. A. S. Cavaleiro, D. M. Guldi and T. Torres, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 11858–11863 RSC .M. E. El-Khouly, J. B. Ryu, K.-Y. Kay, O. Ito and S. Fukuzumi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 15444–15453 CAS .M. E. El-Khouly, D. K. Ju, K.-Y. Kay, F. D'Souza and S. Fukuzumi, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 6193–6202 CrossRef CAS .H. Xu, E. A. Ermilov, B. Roder and D. K. P. Ng, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 7366–7370 RSC .R. Menting, J. T. F. Lau, H. Xu, D. K. P. Ng, B. Roder and E. A. Ermilov, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 4597–4599 RSC .H. Shinmori, T. K. Ahn, H. S. Cho, D. Kim, N. Yoshida and A. Osuka, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 2754–2758 CrossRef CAS .N. Yoshida, T. Ishizuka, A. Osuka, D. H. Jeong, H. S. Cho, D. Kim, Y. Matsuzaki, A. Nogami and K. Tanaka, Chem.–Eur. J., 2003, 9, 58–75 CrossRef CAS .M. U. Winters, J. Kärnbratt, M. Eng, C. J. Wilson, H. L. Anderson and B. Albinsson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 7192–7199 CAS .J. Kärnbratt, M. Hammarson, S. Li, H. L. Anderson, B. Albinsson and J. Andréasson, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 1854–1857 CrossRef .T. Muraoka, K. Kinbara and T. Aida, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 11600–11605 CrossRef CAS .T. Muraoka, K. Kinbara and T. Aida, Nature, 2006, 440, 512–515 CrossRef CAS .M. Drobizhev, Y. Stepanenko, Y. Dzenis, A. Karotki, A. Rebane, P. N. Taylor and H. L. Anderson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 15352–15353 CrossRef CAS .M. Balaz, H. A. Collins, E. Dahlstedt and H. L. Anderson, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2009, 7, 874–888 CAS .M. K. Kuimova, H. A. Collins, M. Balaz, E. Dahlstedt, J. A. Levitt, N. Sergent, K. Suhling, M. Drobizhev, N. S. Makarov, A. Rebane, H. L. Anderson and D. Phillips, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2009, 7, 889–896 CAS .E. Dahlstedt, H. A. Collins, M. Balaz, M. K. Kuimova, M. Khurana, B. C. Wilson, D. Phillips and H. L. Anderson, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2009, 7, 897–904 CAS .M. K. Kuimova, M. Balaz, H. L. Anderson and P. R. Ogilby, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 7948–7949 CrossRef CAS .M. K. Kuimova, S. W. Botchway, A. W. Parker, M. Balaz, H. A. Collins, H. L. Anderson, K. Suhling and P. R. Ogilby, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 69–73 CrossRef CAS .K. J. Thorley, J. M. Hales, H. L. Anderson and J. W. Perry, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7095–7098 CrossRef CAS .S. Ohira, J. M. Hales, K. J. Thorley, H. L. Anderson, J. W. Perry and J.-L. Bredas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6099–6101 CrossRef CAS .K. J. Thorley and H. L. Anderson, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2010, 8, 3472–3479 CAS .Y.-J. Chen, S.-S. Chen, S.-S. Lo, T.-H. Huang, C.-C. Wu, G.-H. Lee, S.-M. Peng and C.-Y. Yeh, Chem. Commun., 2006, 1015–1017 RSC .O. Locos, B. Bašić, J. C. McMurtrie, P. Jensen and D. P. Arnold, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 5574–5588 CrossRef CAS .L. J. Esdaile, P. Jensen, J. C. McMurtrie and D. P. Arnold, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 2090–2093 CrossRef CAS .A. Ryan, B. Tuffy, S. Horn, W. J. Blau and M. O. Senge, Tetrahedron, 2011, 67, 8248–8254 CrossRef CAS .C. Maeda, H. Shinokubo and A. Osuka, Org. Lett., 2010, 12, 1820–1823 CrossRef CAS .K. Osawa, N. Aratani and A. Osuka, Tetrahedron Lett., 2009, 50, 3333–3337 CrossRef CAS .N. N. Sergeeva, A. Scala, M. A. Bakar, G. O'Riordan, J. O'Brien, G. Grassi and M. O. Senge, J. Org. Chem., 2009, 74, 7140–7147 CrossRef CAS .R. Rein, M. Gross and N. Solladié, Chem. Commun., 1994, 1992–1993 Search PubMed .S. Faure, C. Stern, R. Guilard and P. D. Harvey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 1253–1261 CrossRef CAS .G. Pognon, C. Boudon, K. J. Schenk, M. Bonin, B. Bach and J. Weiss, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 3488–3489 CrossRef CAS .F. Tani, M. Matsu-ura, S. Nakayama and Y. Naruta, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2002, 226, 219–226 CrossRef CAS .G. Simonneaux and P. Le Maux, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2002, 228, 43–60 CrossRef CAS .G.-Y. Gao, J. V. Ruppel, K. B. Fields, X. Xu, Y. Chen and X. P. Zhang, J. Org. Chem., 2008, 73, 4855–4858 CrossRef CAS .T. Ema, N. Ura, K. Eguchi, Y. Ise and T. Sakai, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6090–6092 RSC .Q. Ouyang, Y.-Z. Zhu, Y.-C. Li, H.-B. Wei and J.-Y. Zheng, J. Org. Chem., 2009, 74, 3164–3167 CrossRef CAS .M. V. Martinez-Diaz, G. de la Torre and T. Torres, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7090–7108 RSC .J. K. Park, J. Chen, H. R. Lee, S. W. Park, H. Shinokubo, A. Osuka and D. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 21956–21963 CAS .A. J. Mozer, M. J. Griffith, G. Tsekouras, P. Wagner, G. G. Wallace, S. Mori, K. Sunahara, M. Miyashita, J. C. Earles, K. C. Gordon, L. Du, R. Katoh, A. Furube and D. L. Officer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15621–15623 CrossRef CAS .C.-L. Mai, W.-K. Huang, H.-P. Lu, C.-W. Lee, C.-L. Chiu, Y.-R. Liang, E. W.-G. Diau and C.-Y. Yeh, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 809–811 RSC .H. Hata, H. Shinokubo and A. Osuka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 8264–8265 CrossRef CAS .G. Bringmann, S. Rüdenauer, D. C. G. Götz, T. A. M. Gulder and M. Reichert, Org. Lett., 2006, 8, 4743–4746 CrossRef CAS .G. Bringmann, D. C. G. Götz, T. A. M. Gulder, T. H. Gehrke, T. Bruhn, T. Kupfer, K. Radacki, H. Braunschweig, A. Heckmann and C. Lambert, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 17812–17825 CrossRef CAS .I. Hisaki, S. Hiroto, K. S. Kim, S. B. Noh, D. Kim, H. Shinokubo and A. Osuka, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 5125–5128 CrossRef .J. Song, S. Y. Jang, S. Yamaguchi, J. Sankar, S. Hiroto, N. Aratani, J.-Y. Shin, S. Easwaramoorthi, K. S. Kim, D. Kim, H. Shinokubo and A. Osuka, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 6004–6007 CrossRef CAS .Y. Matano, K. Matsumoto, Y. Nakao, H. Uno, S. Sakaki and H. Imahori, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 4588–4589 CrossRef CAS .Y. Matano, K. Matsumoto, H. Hayashi, Y. Nakao, T. Kumpulainen, V. Chukharev, N. V. Tkachenko, H. Lemmetyinen, S. Shimizu, N. Kobayashi, D. Sakamaki, A. Ito, K. Tanaka and H. Imahori, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 1825–1839 CrossRef CAS .S. Yamaguchi, T. Katoh, H. Shinokubo and A. Osuka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 14440–14441 CrossRef CAS .J. Song, N. Aratani, J. H. Heo, D. Kim, H. Shinokubo and A. Osuka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11868–11869 CrossRef CAS .S. Richeter, A. Hadj-Aïssa, C. Taffin, A. van der Lee and D. Leclercq, Chem. Commun., 2007, 2148–2150 RSC .S. Tokuji, T. Yurino, N. Aratani, H. Shinokubo and A. Osuka, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 12208–12211 CrossRef CAS .M. O. Senge, B. Rößler, J. von Gersdorff, A. Schäferb and H. Kurreck, Tetrahedron Lett., 2004, 45, 3363–3367 CrossRef CAS .Y. Tanaka, H. Mori, T. Koide, H. Yorimitsu, N. Aratani and A. Osuka, Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 11460–11464 CrossRef CAS .P. S. S. Lacerda, A. M. G. Silva, A. C. Tomé, M. G. P. M. S. Neves, A. M. S. Silva, J. A. S. Cavaleiro and A. L. Llamas-Saiz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 5487–5491 CrossRef CAS .A. M. G. Silva, P. S. S. Lacerda, A. C. Tomé, M. G. P. M. S. Neves, A. M. S. Silva, J. A. S. Cavaleiro, E. A. Makarova and E. A. Lukyanets, J. Org. Chem., 2006, 71, 8352–8356 CrossRef CAS .S. Tokuji, C. Maeda, H. Yorimitsu and A. Osuka, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 7154–7157 CrossRef CAS .M.-C. Yoon, S. Lee, S. Tokuji, H. Yorimitsu, A. Osuka and D. Kim, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 1756–1764 RSC .H. Uno, K. Nakamoto, K. Kuroki, A. Fujimoto and N. Ono, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 5773–5784 CrossRef CAS .M. Akita, S. Hiroto and H. Shinokubo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 2894–2897 CrossRef CAS .H. Uno, A. Masumoto and N. Ono, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 12082–12083 CrossRef CAS .H. Mori, T. Tanaka and A. Osuka, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 2500–2519 RSC .A. Tsuda, H. Furuta and A. Osuka, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 2549–2552 CrossRef CAS .A. Tsuda, H. Furuta and A. Osuka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 10304–10321 CrossRef CAS .Q. Ouyang, Y.-Z. Zhu, C.-H. Zhang, K.-Q. Yan, Y.-C. Li and J.-Y. Zheng, Org. Lett., 2009, 11, 5266–5269 CrossRef CAS .S. Hiroto and A. Osuka, J. Org. Chem., 2005, 70, 4054–4058 CrossRef CAS .T. Tanaka, B. Sun Lee, N. Aratani, M.-C. Yoon, D. Kim and A. Osuka, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 14400–14412 CrossRef CAS .D. Y. Kim, T. K. Ahn, J. H. Kwon, D. Kim, T. Ikeue, N. Aratani, A. Osuka, M. Shigeiwa and S. Maeda, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2005, 109, 2996–2999 CrossRef CAS .H. Mori, T. Tanaka, N. Aratani, B. S. Lee, P. Kim, D. Kim and A. Osuka, Chem.–Asian J., 2012, 7, 1811–1816 CrossRef CAS .L.-A. Fendt, H. Fang, M. E. Plonska-Brzezinska, S. Zhang, F. Cheng, C. Braun, L. Echegoyen and F. Diederich, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2007, 4659–4673 CrossRef CAS .T. Ikeda, N. Aratani, S. Easwaramoorthi, D. Kim and A. Osuka, Org. Lett., 2009, 11, 3080–3083 CrossRef CAS .T. Sakurai, K. Shi, H. Sato, K. Tashiro, A. Osuka, A. Saeki, S. Seki, S. Tagawa, S. Sasaki, H. Masunaga, K. Osaka, M. Takata and T. Aida, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 13812–13813 CrossRef CAS .T. Sakurai, K. Tashiro, Y. Honsho, A. Saeki, S. Seki, A. Osuka, A. Muranaka, M. Uchiyama, J. Kim, S. Ha, X. K. Kato, M. Takata and T. Aida, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 6537–6540 CrossRef CAS .K. J. McEwan, P. A. Fleitz, J. E. Rogers, J. E. Slagle, D. G. McLean, H. Akdas, M. Katterle, I. M. Blake and H. L. Anderson, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1933–1935 CrossRef CAS .Y. Inokuma, N. Ono, H. Uno, D. Y. Kim, S. B. Noh, D. Kim and A. Osuka, Chem. Commun., 2005, 3782–3784 RSC .N. K. S. Davis, A. L. Thompson and H. L. Anderson, Org. Lett., 2010, 12, 2124–2127 CrossRef CAS .V. V. Diev, K. Hanson, J. D. Zimmerman, S. R. Forrest and M. E. Thompson, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 5523–5526 CrossRef CAS .T. S. Balaban, Acc. Chem. Res., 2005, 38, 612–623 CrossRef CAS   and references therein.C. Maeda, S. Yamaguchi, C. Ikeda, H. Shinokubo and A. Osuka, Org. Lett., 2008, 10, 549–552 CrossRef CAS .C. Maeda, P. Kim, S. Cho, J. K. Park, J. M. Lim, D. Kim, J. Vura-Weis, M. R. Wasielewski, H. Shinokubo and A. Osuka, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 5052–5061 CrossRef CAS .K. Ogawa, A. Ohashi, Y. Kobuke, K. Kamada and K. Ohta, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 22003–22012 CrossRef CAS .A. Satake, J. Tanihara and Y. Kobuke, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 9700–9707 CrossRef CAS .J. Tanihara, K. Ogawa and Y. Kobuke, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2006, 178, 140–149 CrossRef CAS .J. T. Dy, K. Ogawa, A. Satake, A. Ishizumi and Y. Kobuke, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 3491–3500 CrossRef CAS .J. Dy, K. Ogawa, K. Kamada, K. Ohta and Y. Kobuke, Chem. Commun., 2008, 3411–3413 RSC .K. Ogawa and Y. Kobuke, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 4070–4073 CrossRef CAS .R. Takahashi and Y. Kobuke, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 2372–2373 CrossRef CAS .R. Takahashi and Y. Kobuke, J. Org. Chem., 2005, 70, 2745–2753 CrossRef CAS .J. E. Raymond, A. Bhaskar, T. Goodson, N. Makiuchi, K. Ogawa and Y. Kobuke, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 17212–17213 CrossRef CAS .E. Iengo, E. Zangrando, E. Alessio, J.-C. Chambron, V. Heitz, L. Flamigni and J.-P. Sauvage, Chem.–Eur. J., 2003, 9, 5879–5887 CrossRef CAS .C. Maeda, T. Kamada, N. Aratani and A. Osuka, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2007, 251, 2743–2752 CrossRef CAS .I.-W. Hwang, T. Kamada, T. K. Ahn, D. M. Ko, T. Nakamura, A. Tsuda, A. Osuka and D. Kim, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 16187–16198 CrossRef CAS .C. Maeda, T. Kamada, N. Aratani, T. Sasamori, N. Tokitoh and A. Osuka, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 9681–9684 CrossRef CAS .C. Maeda, H. Shinokubo and A. Osuka, Org. Lett., 2009, 11, 5322–5325 CrossRef CAS .T. Kamada, N. Aratani, T. Ikeda, N. Shibata, Y. Higuchi, A. Wakamiya, S. Yamaguchi, K. S. Kim, Z. S. Yoon, D. Kim and A. Osuka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7670–7678 CrossRef CAS .P. Kim, J. M. Lim, M.-C. Yoon, J. Aimi, T. Aida, A. Tsuda and D. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 9157–9164 CrossRef CAS .S. J. Lee, K. L. Mulfort, J. L. O'Donnell, X. Zuo, A. J. Goshe, P. J. Wesson, S. T. Nguyen, J. T. Hupp and D. M. Tiede, Chem. Commun., 2006, 4581–4583 RSC .Y. Matano, K. Matsumoto, Y. Terasaka, H. Hotta, Y. Araki, O. Ito, M. Shiro, T. Sasamori, N. Tokitoh and H. Imahori, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 891–901 CrossRef CAS .Y. Inaba and Y. Kobuke, Tetrahedron, 2004, 60, 3097–3107 CrossRef CAS .D. Bonifazi, M. Scholl, F. Song, L. Echegoyen, G. Accorsi, N. Armaroli and F. Diederich, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 4966–4970 CrossRef CAS .D. Bonifazi, G. Accorsi, N. Armaroli, F. Song, A. Palkar, L. Echegoyen, M. Scholl, P. Seiler, B. Jaun and F. Diederich, Helv. Chim. Acta, 2005, 88, 1839–1884 CrossRef CAS .M. Prato and M. Maggini, Acc. Chem. Res., 1998, 31, 519–526 CrossRef CAS .P. A. Liddell, G. Kodis, D. Kuciauskas, J. Andreasson, A. L. Moore, T. A. Moore and D. Gust, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2004, 6, 5509–5515 RSC .V. Garg, G. Kodis, M. Chachisvilis, M. Hambourger, A. L. Moore, T. A. Moore and D. Gust, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2944–2954 CrossRef CAS .S. Banala, R. G. Huber, T. Muller, M. Fechtel, K. R. Liedl and B. Krautler, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 4359–4361 RSC .M. U. Winters, J. Kärnbratt, H. E. Blades, C. J. Wilson, M. J. Frampton, H. L. Anderson and B. Albinsson, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 7385–7394 CrossRef CAS .H. Nakagawa, K. Ogawa, A. Satake and Y. Kobuke, Chem. Commun., 2006, 1560–1562 RSC .D. Kalita, M. Morisue and Y. Kobuke, New J. Chem., 2006, 30, 77–92 RSC .S. Webster, S. A. Odom, L. A. Padilha, O. V. Przhonska, D. Peceli, H. Hu, G. Nootz, A. D. Kachkovski, J. Matichak, S. Barlow, H. L. Anderson, S. R. Marder, D. J. Hagan and E. W. Van Stryland, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 14854–14867 CrossRef CAS .L. He, Y.-Z. Zhu, J.-Y. Zheng, Y.-F. Ma and Y.-S. Chen, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2010, 216, 15–23 CrossRef CAS .G. Pagona, G. E. Zervaki, A. S. D. Sandanayaka, O. Ito, G. Charalambidis, T. Hasobe, A. G. Coutsolelos and N. Tagmatarchis, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2012, 116, 9439–9449 CrossRef CAS .T. Ichiki, Y. Matsuo and E. Nakamura, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 279–281 RSC .Y. Terazono, G. Kodis, P. A. Liddell, V. Garg, T. A. Moore, A. L. Moore and D. Gust, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 7147–7155 CrossRef CAS .F. D'Souza, S. Gadde, M. E. Zandler, M. Itou, Y. Araki and O. Ito, Chem. Commun., 2004, 2276–2277 RSC .F. D'Souza, R. Chitta, S. Gadde, L. M. Rogers, P. A. Karr, M. E. Zandler, A. S. D. Sandanayaka, Y. Araki and O. Ito, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 916–922 CrossRef CAS .A. S. D. Sandanayaka, N. K. Subbaiyan, R. Chitta, Y. Araki, O. Ito and F. D'Souza, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2008, 12, 857–865 CrossRef CAS .D. Canevet, E. M. Pérez and N. Martín, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 9248–9259 CrossRef CAS .D. Sun, F. S. Tham, C. A. Reed, L. Chaker, M. Burgess and P. D. W. Boyd, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 10704–10705 CrossRef CAS .T. Yamaguchi, N. Ishii, K. Tashiro and T. Aida, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 13934–13935 CrossRef CAS .S. Mukherjee, A. K. Bauri and S. Bhattacharya, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2010, 500, 128–139 CrossRef CAS .S. Mukherjee, S. Banerjee, A. K. Bauri and S. Bhattacharya, J. Mol. Struct., 2011, 1004, 13–25 CrossRef CAS .Z.-Q. Wu, X.-B. Shao, C. Li, J.-L. Hou, K. Wang, X.-K. Jiang and Z.-T. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 17460–17468 CrossRef CAS .A. Hosseini, S. Taylor, G. Accorsi, N. Armaroli, C. A. Reed and P. D. W. Boyd, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 15903–15913 CrossRef CAS .J.-S. Marois, K. Cantin, A. Desmarais and J.-F. Morin, Org. Lett., 2007, 10, 33–36 CrossRef .K. Tashiro and T. Aida, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 189–197 RSC .M. Yanagisawa, K. Tashiro, M. Yamasaki and T. Aida, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 11912–11913 CrossRef CAS .P. T. Corbett, J. Leclaire, L. Vial, K. R. West, J. L. Wietor, J. K. M. Sanders and S. Otto, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 3652–3711 CrossRef CAS .A. L. Kieran, S. I. Pascu, T. Jarrosson and J. K. M. Sanders, Chem. Commun., 2005, 1276–1278 RSC .A. R. Mulholland, C. P. Woodward and S. J. Langford, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 1494–1496 RSC .Y. Shoji, K. Tashiro and T. Aida, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 10690–10691 CrossRef CAS .Y. Shoji, K. Tashiro and T. Aida, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 5928–5929 CrossRef CAS .F. Hajjaj, K. Tashiro, H. Nikawa, N. Mizorogi, T. Akasaka, S. Nagase, K. Furukawa, T. Kato and T. Aida, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9290–9292 CrossRef CAS .T. Kamimura, K. Ohkubo, Y. Kawashima, H. Nobukuni, Y. Naruta, F. Tani and S. Fukuzumi, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 1451–1461 RSC .H. Nobukuni, Y. Shimazaki, F. Tani and Y. Naruta, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 8975–8978 CrossRef CAS .H. Nobukuni, F. Tani, Y. Shimazaki, Y. Naruta, K. Ohkubo, T. Nakanishi, T. Kojima, S. Fukuzumi and S. Seki, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 19694–19699 CAS .H. Nobukuni, Y. Shimazaki, H. Uno, Y. Naruta, K. Ohkubo, T. Kojima, S. Fukuzumi, S. Seki, H. Sakai, T. Hasobe and F. Tani, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 11611–11623 CrossRef CAS .H. Nobukuni, T. Kamimura, H. Uno, Y. Shimazaki, Y. Naruta and F. Tani, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2012, 85, 862–868 CrossRef CAS .X. Peng, N. Komatsu, S. Bhattacharya, T. Shimawaki, S. Aonuma, T. Kimura and A. Osuka, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 361–365 CrossRef CAS .X. Peng, N. Komatsu, T. Kimura and A. Osuka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 15947–15953 CrossRef CAS .G. Liu, T. Yasumitsu, L. Zhao, X. Peng, F. Wang, A. K. Bauri, S. Aonuma, T. Kimura and N. Komatsu, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2012, 10, 5830–5836 CAS .F. Wang, K. Matsuda, A. F. M. M. Rahman, X. Peng, T. Kimura and N. Komatsu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 10876–10881 CrossRef CAS .X. Peng, N. Komatsu, T. Kimura and A. Osuka, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 2045–2050 CrossRef CAS .(nm) index in SWCNTs is designated as roll-up vector according to the Strano's proposal.   M. S. Strano, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 340–341 CrossRef CAS .X. Peng, F. Wang, A. K. Bauri, A. F. M. M. Rahman and N. Komatsu, Chem. Lett., 2010, 1022–1027 CrossRef .G. Liu, F. Wang, S. Chaunchaiyakul, Y. Saito, A. K. Bauri, T. Kimura, Y. Kuwahara and N. Komatsu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 4805–4814 CrossRef CAS .M. E. El-Khouly and S. Fukuzumi, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2011, 15, 111–117 CrossRef CAS .J. Petersson, M. Eklund, J. Davidsson and L. Hammarstrom, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 7940–7941 CrossRef CAS .A. C. Benniston, A. Harriman and P.-Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 26–27 CrossRef CAS .F. Ito, Y. Ishibashi, S. R. Khan, H. Miyasaka, K. Kameyama, M. Morisue, A. Satake and Y. Kobuke, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110, 12734–12742 CrossRef CAS .M. Kasha, H. R. Rawls and M. A. El-Bayoumi, Pure Appl. Chem., 1965, 11, 371–392 CrossRef CAS .R. F. Kelley, S. J. Lee, T. M. Wilson, Y. Nakamura, D. M. Tiede, A. Osuka, J. T. Hupp and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 4277–4284 CrossRef CAS .D. A. Roberts, B. Fückel, R. G. C. R. Clady, Y. Y. Cheng, M. J. Crossley and T. W. Schmidt, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2012, 116, 7898–7905 CrossRef CAS .H. Imahori, K. Tamaki, D. M. Guldi, C. Luo, M. Fujitsuka, O. Ito, Y. Sakata and S. Fukuzumi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 2607–2617 CrossRef CAS .G. Pagona, A. S. D. Sandanayaka, T. Hasobe, G. Charalambidis, A. G. Coutsolelos, M. Yudasaka, S. Iijima and N. Tagmatarchis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 15735–15741 CAS .T. Hasobe, H. Imahori, H. Yamada, T. Sato, K. Ohkubo and S. Fukuzumi, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 409–412 CrossRef CAS .M. Morisue, N. Haruta, D. Kalita and Y. Kobuke, Chem.–Eur. J., 2006, 12, 8123–8135 CrossRef CAS .M. Morisue, D. Kalita, N. Haruta and Y. Kobuke, Chem. Commun., 2007, 2348–2350 RSC .A. Takai, C. P. Gros, J.-M. Barbe, R. Guilard and S. Fukuzumi, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 3110–3122 CrossRef CAS .
Footnote† Dedicated to Prof. Maurizio Prato on the occasion of his 60th birthday.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
Gema de la Torre	Gema de la Torre graduated in Chemistry (1992) and obtained her PhD (1998) from Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (UAM). Currently she is Associate Professor in the Organic Chemistry Department at UAM. Her current research interests are the synthesis of new phthalocyanines for their application in organic solar cells, double-decker phthalocyanines with single-molecule magnetic properties and new phthalocyanine-based multicomponent systems, including phthalocyanine–nanotube and phthalocyanine–graphene ensembles.
Giovanni Bottari	Giovanni Bottari graduated in Chemistry (1999) from the Universitá degli Studi di Messina (Italy) and received his PhD (2003) at the University of Edinburgh (United Kingdom). Currently, he is Assistant Professor at the Universidad Autónoma de Madrid and Associate Scientist at IMDEA Nanociencia (Spain). His current research interests include the preparation and study of multicomponent, phthalocyanine-based donor–acceptor molecular materials both in solution and on surfaces.
Michael Sekita	Michael Sekita was born in Inowroclaw (Poland) in 1987. He studied Molecular Science at the Friedrich-Alexander University in Erlangen, where he obtained his Master's degree in 2011. Currently he is a graduate student in the research group of Prof. D. M. Guldi working on his PhD in the field of charge transfer processes involving carbon nanostructures. This is within the context of characterization and testing novel electron donor acceptor conjugates/hybrids as integrative materials for robust and photoactive films for an efficient solar energy conversion.
Anita Hausmann	Anita Hausmann started her studies in chemistry in 2000 and received her diploma from the Friedrich-Alexander University in Erlangen (Germany) in 2007. She obtained her PhD in December 2011 at the University of Erlangen under the supervision of Prof. Dr Dirk M. Guldi for her research on energy- and electron-transfer processes of supramolecular donor–acceptor systems. During her PhD studies, she joined Prof. Dr Erik Vauthey's group at the University of Geneva for two months. In 2012, she had a postdoc position in Prof. Dr Dirk M. Guldi's working group at the University of Erlangen (Germany).
Dirk M. Guldi	Dirk M. Guldi graduated in Chemistry (1988) and received his PhD (1990) at the University of Köln. Currently, he is Chair of Physical Chemistry at the University of Erlangen-Nuremberg. He is one of the world-leading scientists in the field of charge-separation in donor–acceptor nanocarbon-based materials and construction of solar energy conversion devices. Homepage: http://www.chemie.uni-erlangen.de/dcp/assets/pdf/DCP-Profile2010.pdf
Tomás Torres	Tomás Torres is Full Professor of Organic Chemistry at the Autonoma University of Madrid (UAM) and Associated Senior Researcher at the IMDEA-Nanoscience. In addition to various aspects of synthetic and supramolecular chemistry his current research interests include the preparation and study of the optical properties of organic functional materials. His group, that presently consists of twenty five researchers, is currently exploring several areas of basic research and applications of phthalocyanines, porphyrins and carbon nanostructures (fullerenes, carbon nanotubes, graphene), including organic and hybrid solar cells, with a focus on nanotechnology.

 	Scheme 1  Synthesis of “Pacman”-type Pc 1. Reagents and conditions: (i) phthalonitrile, lithium/penthanol, 110 °C, 24 h.	 

 	Fig. 1  Cofacially coupled bisPcs 3a,b and 4.	 

 	Scheme 2  Synthesis of ball-type Pc 5. Reagents and conditions: (i) K2CO3, DMF, 50 °C; (ii) Co(CH3COO)2·4H2O, sealed tube, 300 °C; (iii) H2 (1 atm), Pd/C (10%), DMSO, rt; (iv) NaH, heptadecafluoro-10-iododecane, DMF, 120 °C.	 

 	Scheme 3  Synthesis of axially-bridged, In(III)Pcs binuclear systems 6–8.	 

 	Scheme 4  Synthesis of fused, binuclear Pcs 12.	 

 	Scheme 5  Preparation of Pc 13. Reagents and conditions: (i) trimethylsilylacetylene, Pd(PPh3)2Cl2, CuI, Et3N, THF, 40 °C, 24 h, 97%; (ii) K2CO3, MeOH, RT, 4 h, 99%; (iii) CuCl, pyridine, RT, 3 days, 74%.	 

 	Fig. 2  Molecular structure of [2,2′]paracyclophane-bridged, binuclear Pc 17.	 

 	Scheme 6  Zn(II) pyridino[3,4]tribenzoporphyrazine 19a,b, and two modes of self-assembly of 19b leading to 18 and 20.	 

 	Fig. 3  Self-coordinated dimers 21 formed by axial-coordination of Im-functionalized Zn(II)Pcs.	 

 	Fig. 4  Molecular structures of Pc2–PDI triads 22 and 23.	 

 	Scheme 7  Synthesis of Pc2–(C60)2 fullerene tetrad 24. (i) 4-Ethynylbenzaldehyde, Pd(PPh3)2Cl2, CuI, NEt3, THF, RT. (ii) C60 fullerene, N-methylglycine, toluene, reflux.	 

 	Fig. 5  Molecular structures of Zn(II)Pc2–AQ triads 27–29.	 

 	Fig. 6  Molecular structures of supramolecular triads Ru(II)Pc2–PDI 30, Ru(II)Pc2-squaraine 31, and Ru(II)Pc2–C60 32.	 

 	Fig. 7  Structures of heterosupramolecular triad 33 formed by D–A interactions between Pd(II)Pc 34 and Zn(II)Pc–C60 dyad 35, and crown-ether Pc2–(C60)2 ensemble 36.	 

 	Fig. 8  Molecular structure of heterosupramolecular triad 37.	 

 	Scheme 8  Synthesis of Pc–SubPc dyads 40a–c.	 

 	Scheme 9  Synthesis of μ-oxo Pc–SubPc dyad 43.	 

 	Fig. 9  Molecular structures of Pc–SubPc dyads 46 and 47.	 

 	Scheme 10  Synthesis of N-linked, Pc–Por dyad 48.	 

 	Fig. 10  Molecular structure of N-linked, Pc–Por dyad 49.	 

 	Scheme 11  Synthesis of Pc–Por dyads 52–54. Reagents and conditions: (i) fumaronitrile, toluene, reflux, overnight; (ii) DDQ, toluene, reflux; (iii) DMAE–o-DCB, 145 °C, Ar, 24 h (for 52a, 53a and 54a).	 

 	Scheme 12  Synthesis of Pc–Por dyads 58a and 59a–c. Reagents and conditions: Pd2(dba)3, S-Phos, K3PO4, toluene, 90 °C.	 

 	Fig. 11  Formation of slipped, cofacial tetramers (63)22-s and (64)22-s resulting from the assembly of Pc–Por dyads 63 and 64, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 12  Formation of cofacial, Pc–Por tetramers (65)22-c-(70)22-c resulting from the self-assembly of Pc–Por dyads 65–70.	 

 	Scheme 13  Formation of slipped, Pc–Por stacks (68)22-s from cofacial Pc–Por stacks (68)22-c upon addition of DMSO.	 

 	Fig. 13  Molecular structures of Pc–Por dyads 71 and 72.	 

 	Fig. 14  Molecular structures of Im-substituted, H2Pors 73-oo, -mm, -pp, Pcs 74-Zn(IIii) and 75-Mg(IIii) and Ncs 74-Zn(IIii) and 75-Mg(IIii).	 

 	Fig. 15  Molecular structures of Pc·Por dyads 76 resulting from the complexation of ortho-, meta- or para-Im-substituted, H2Pors to a Ru(II)(CO)Pc.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Molecular structures of K+-complexing, crown ether-substituted Pcs 78 and tetraanionic Pors 77. (b) Evolution of the absorption spectrum of Ni(II)Pc 78b upon addition of Ni(II)Por 77b in DMSO. Reprinted from ref. 120. Copyright 2002 ACS.	 

 	Fig. 17  Molecular structures of β-CD-substituted SubPc 89, tetrasulfonated Zn(II)Por 79, and β-CD-substituted Si(IV)Pc 80.	 

 	Fig. 18  Molecular structure of Pc–Por–Fc triad 81 and Pc–C60–Por triads 82.	 

 	Fig. 19  Molecular structures of pyridyl-substituted C60 derivatives 83 and 84.	 

 	Fig. 20  Molecular structure of fused Pc–Por conjugates 85.	 

 	Fig. 21  Molecular structure of TPA-substituted Zn(II)Por–SubPc ensemble 86.	 

 	Scheme 14  Complexation of SubPc–TPA–Zn(II)Por triad 87 by Im-substituted C60·88 leading to supramolecular tetrad 87·88.	 

 	Fig. 22  Distorted meso–meso linked diPors 90 and 91.	 

 	Scheme 15  Isomeric forms of 92·DTE complex.	 

 	Scheme 16  Photochemically controlled conformational switching of 93.	 

 	Fig. 23  Structures of hydrophilic conjugated Zn(II)Por dimers 95–100.	 

 	Scheme 17  Synthesis of cations 101a–c. (i) XC6H4CO2Me (0.5 equiv.); LiN(SiMe3)2 (4 equiv.), THF; (ii) trifluoroacetic acid (2% by vol.), CHCl3.	 

 	Fig. 24  Chiral diPors 103 and 104.	 

 	Scheme 18  Synthesis of β–β linked diPors 107 and 109. Reagents and conditions: (i) bis(pinacolato)diborane, [Ir(cod)OMe]2 (cat), 4,4′-di-tert-butyl-2,2-bipyridyl, 1,4-dioxane; (ii) O2, Pd(OAc)2, 1,3-bis(diphenylphosphino)propane, DMSO–toluene; (iii) Pd2dba3, PPh3, Cs2CO3, DMSO–toluene.	 

 	Scheme 19  Synthesis of β–β linked diPors 110a–c and 113a–c. Reagents and conditions: (i) (1) oxone, THF–acetone–H2O, RT, 1.5 h; (2) PhNTf2, Cs2CO3, DMF, RT, 12 h; (3) Zn(OAc)2 or Ni(acac)2, CHCl3, MeOH, RT, 2 h; (ii) (1) Me3SiCCH, Pd(PPh3)4, CuI, Et3N, DMF, toluene, 70 °C, 3 h; (2) K2CO3, THF, MeOH, RT, 2 h; (3) Cu(OAc)2, THF, pyridine, RT, 24 h; (iii) 2,5-dibromothiophene, Pd2(dba)3, PPh3, Cs2CO3, CsF, toluene–DMF–H2O, reflux, 48 h.	 

 	Fig. 25  Structures of (a) β-η1-Pd(II)- and Pt(II)diPors 114a,b; (b) Pt(IV)-bridged cofacial diPor 115; and (c) Pd(II)-bridged diPor belt 116.	 

 	Fig. 26  meso-to-β linked diPors 117 and 118a,b and meso–meso, β–β diPor 119.	 

 	Fig. 27  “Por tapes” 120a–d and 121.	 

 	Scheme 20  Synthesis of 122. Reagents and conditions: (i) 210 °C, 0.1 mmHg for 30 min; (ii) DDQ-Sc(OTf)3.	 

 	Scheme 21  Synthesis of 126 and 127. Reagents and conditions: (i) DDQ-Sc(OTf)3, CH2Cl2; (ii) FeCl3, CH2Cl2, then aq HCl (M = 2H); Zn(OAc)2, MeOH, CH2Cl2, (M = Zn(II)); Pb(OAc)2, pyridine, CH2Cl2, (M = Pb(II)).	 

 	Fig. 28  Molecular structures of (a) cofacial Por dimers (128)22 and (129)22 resulting from the self-assembly of meso-triazolyl-appended Zn(II) Por monomers 128 and 129 and (b) Por dimers 130 and 131 able to self-assemble giving rise to tetrads (130)22 and (131)22.	 

 	Fig. 29  Molecular structures of Por tetramers (132)22 and (133)22 resulting from the self-assembly of bis Im-substituted, meso–meso linked H2Por–Zn(II)Por 132 and butadiyne-linked H2Por–Zn(II)Por 133, respectively.	 

 	Scheme 22  Molecular structures of the stacked (134)22-s and extended (134)22-e conformation resulting from the self-aggregation of Por dimer 134.	 

 	Fig. 30  Molecular structures of multiPor systems 135 and 136.	 

 	Fig. 31  Molecular structures of (a) Zn(II)Por dimers 137 and 138 bearing two terminal Im units and (b) cyclic, supramolecular ensemble resulting for the self-assembly of six Zn(II)Por dimers 137. Reprinted from ref. 210. Copyright 2003 ACS.	 

 	Fig. 32  Molecular structure of the supramolecular assembly 139·140 resulting from the complexation of meso-5,10-bis(4-pyridyl)-15,20-diphenyl H2Por 140 to Zn(II)Por dimer 139.	 

 	Fig. 33  Molecular structures of (a) meso–meso linked Zn(II)Por dimers 141–145 bearing two, meso-substituted pyridyl fragments and (b) (R) and (S) enantiomeric boxes resulting from the homochiral self-sorting of Por dimer 141a.	 

 	Fig. 34  Formation of cofacial Por dimers (a) (146)22 and (147)22 and (b) (148)22 resulting from the self-assembly of meso-phosphoryl-substituted Zn(II)Por dyads 146 and 147, and meso-Im-substituted Co(II)Por 148, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 35  Molecular structure of conjugate 149 constituted by two C60 units covalently attached to a triply-fused Zn(II)Por dimer.	 

 	Fig. 36  Molecular structures of covalent, Por2–C60 trimers 150 and 151.	 

 	Fig. 37  Molecular structures of covalently-linked, hexafullereno–diPor conjugate 152.	 

 	Fig. 38  Molecular structures of the supramolecular complex resulting from the coordination of bidentate ligand 154 to Zn(II)Por2–C60 derivatives 153a,b.	 

 	Fig. 39  Molecular structures of slipped-cofacial Zn(II)Por dimers bearing two Fc (155), two C60 (156), and one Fc and one C60 (157) moieties.	 

 	Fig. 40  Molecular structures of supramolecular ensembles Zn(II)Por2·(C60)2 158 and Mg(II)Por2·(C60)2 159.	 

 	Fig. 41  Molecular structures of acyclic Zn(II)Por dimer tweezers (a) 160 and (b) 161 and 162. For these latter compounds, only the (S) enantiomers have been represented.	 

 	Fig. 42  Molecular structures of tweezers-like Por dimer receptors 163 and 164.	 

 	Fig. 43  Molecular structure of Zn(II)Por dimer receptor 165 based on a [3]rotaxane architecture.	 

 	Fig. 44  Molecular structures of cyclic Por dimer receptors 166–169. In the case of Por dimer 168 only one enantiomer has been represented.	 

 	Fig. 45  X-ray crystal structure of the inclusion complex between Por dimer receptor 167 and C60 (hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity). Reprinted from ref. 251. Copyright 2005 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 46  (a) Molecular structures of cyclic Por dimers 170 and 171. (b) Schematic representation of the strategy for the formation of a tubular assembly with cyclic Por dimers 170 and 171. Reprinted from ref. 257. Copyright 2007 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 47  Molecular structures of Zn(II)Por dimer nanotweezers 172–174 and nanocaliper 175. For these compounds, only the (S) enantiomers have been represented.	 
Footnote
† Dedicated to Prof. Maurizio Prato on the occasion of his 60th birthday.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
