Transition metal dichalcogenide-decorated MXenes: promising hybrid electrodes for energy storage and conversion applications  - Materials Chemistry Frontiers (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1QM00035G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1QM00035G
(Review Article)
Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 3298-3321Transition metal dichalcogenide-decorated MXenes: promising hybrid electrodes for energy storage and conversion applications

        
          
            N. R. 
            Hemanth†
a, 
      
        
          
            Taekyung 
            Kim†
b, 
      
        
          
            Byeongyoon 
            Kim†
b, 
      
        
          
            Arvind H. 
            Jadhav
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Kwangyeol 
            Lee
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Nitin K. 
            Chaudhari
          
          
        
      *d
aDepartment of Metallurgical and Materials Engineering, National Institute of Technology Karnataka (NITK), Surathkal, Karnataka 575025, India
bDepartment of Chemistry and Research Institute for Natural Sciences, Korea University, Seoul, 02841, Republic of Korea. E-mail: kylee1@korea.ac.kr
cCentre for Nano and Material Science (CNMS), Jain University, Jain Global Campus, Bangalore 562112, Karnataka, India
dDepartment of Chemistry, School of Technology, Pandit Deendayal Petroleum University, Gandhinagar 382007, Gujarat, India. E-mail: nitin.chaudhari@sot.pdpu.ac.in
Received 
      8th January 2021
    , Accepted 16th February 2021First published on 18th February 2021AbstractVarious two-dimensional (2D) materials have demonstrated unique structure-dependent characteristics that are conducive to energy-harvesting applications. Among them, the family of layered MXenes has found a wide range of applications in batteries, supercapacitors, photo- and electrocatalysis, water purification, biosensors, electromagnetic interference shielding, structural composites, etc., owing to their well-defined structure, large surface area, large interlayer distance, and excellent thermal and electrical conductivity. However, layer restacking due to hydrogen bonding or van der Waals forces between the layers considerably impedes the utility of MXenes. To tackle the restacking issues, transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) such as MoS2, WS2, and MoSe2 nanosheets have been uniformly dispersed on the surface of MXenes, which not only mitigates the restacking of the MXenes but also improves the electrochemical performance due to the synergistic interaction between MXenes and TMDs. This review describes recent advances in the synthesis of MXene/TMD heterostructures and the nature of the synergistic interactions between TMDs and MXenes in energy-related applications. We further highlight future research directions for MXene/TMD-based materials for energy storage applications.
N. R. Hemanth
N. R. Hemanth is a final year undergraduate student pursuing a bachelor's degree in metallurgical and materials engineering, at National Institute of Technology Karnataka, Surathkal, India. His research interests include 2D-based nanomaterials, functional polymeric materials and composites for specialized industrial applications. His other research interests include nanomaterials for energy harvesting applications.
Taekyung Kim
Dr Taekyung Kim earned his PhD degree (2020) in inorganic chemistry from Korea University after working at Kolon Industries, Inc., (Republic of Korea) as an engineer for several years. Currently, his research interests are mainly focused on the development of synthetic methods for phase and structure-controlled nanocatalysts and their potential applications in electrocatalytic water splitting.
Byeongyoon Kim
Dr Byeongyoon Kim received his PhD Degree (2018) in inorganic chemistry from Korea University, Republic of Korea. Currently, he is working as a postdoctoral fellow with Prof. Kwangyeol Lee at Nano Chemistry Laboratory, Korea University. His research interests include the design and synthetic methodology for transition metal-based functional nanomaterials and the applications of electrocatalysis.
Arvind H. Jadhav
Dr Arvind H. Jadhav is currently working as an Assistant Professor at the Centre for Nano and Material Sciences (CNMS), JAIN University, India. He received his PhD from Myongji University, Republic of Korea. Dr Jadhav has several research publications to his credit in reputed peer reviewed international journals. He is also a recipient of many awards for his academic excellence with a gold medal for his PhD research and a good number of best paper and best poster presentation awards. His research areas focus on heterogeneous catalysis for CO2 conversion and utilisation, synthesis of ILs for organic transformations, and sustainable energy applications.
Kwangyeol Lee
Professor Kwangyeol Lee obtained his PhD degree (1997) in chemistry from the University of Illinois at Urbana- Champaign. After fulfilling his military obligation, he joined Korea University in 2003 as a chemistry faculty member, before being appointed as a professor. He is the recipient of the 2009 Wiley-KCS Young Scholar Award. His current interests include the development of synthetic methodologies for nanoscale materials, the application of nanomaterials in biomedical fields, and the development of nanotechnologies to support the environment by creating sustainable energy sources.
Nitin K. Chaudhari
Dr Nitin Chaudhari is an Associate Professor at Pandit Deendayal Petroleum University, Gandhinagar, India. He received his PhD degree in materials science from Korea University, South Korea in 2013. He subsequently worked as a research professor at Myongji University and Korea University, South Korea from 2013 to 2019. Later, he joined Nexcoms Ltd. Co., South Korea as Deputy Director before moving to India. His research interest includes the design and development of active electrode materials such as porous carbons, nanocomposites, oxides, sulphides, hydroxides, 2D MXenes, and nanomaterials for energy storage and conversion devices.
1. Introduction
Energy and environmental issues have reached crisis levels over the last decade due to the rapid depletion of fossil fuels and the associated climate changes.1 To address these challenges, it is imperative to develop sustainable energy production technologies by tapping into renewable energy sources such as solar, geothermal, and wind energy. The development of electrochemical storage devices such as batteries, supercapacitors, and water electrolyzers for converting hydrogen to electrical energy, as well as fuel cells for efficient conversion of chemical energy in hydrogen to electricity, is critical.2
In recent years, atomically thin two-dimensional (2D) materials have attracted considerable interest owing to their unmatched portfolio of optical, electrical, and mechanical properties.3 Among the plethora of 2D materials, transition metal carbides/nitrides (MXenes), the newest additions to the family of 2D materials, have been prepared by the selective extraction of element ‘A’ from layered hexagonal MAX precursors using hydrogen fluoride as an etching agent, or from layered ceramics.4 The large surface area, tunable interlayer distance, and narrow diffusion barrier, combined with the superior metallic conductivity of MXenes, make them optimal electrode materials.5 However, MXene layers undergo restacking, which limits their potential utility in electrochemical applications.6 Therefore, for further enhancement of the electrochemical performance, spacers have been introduced between the layers of MXenes to develop a porous structure. The introduction of nano-carbon, conductive polymers, heteroatoms, metal oxides, and TMDs considerably increased the interlayer distance to yield better electrochemical performance.7 On the other hand, transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) have been extensively explored as electrode materials in the past decade due to their large specific area, excellent electrical properties, atomically thin layered arrangement, and stability.8 However, TMDs suffer from poor cycling stability, low electrical conductivity, and, most critically, a limited number of active sites located on the edges, which seriously limits the catalytic performance of TMDs.9 Recent studies show that combining the 2D structures of MXenes and TMDs can preserve the best features of both the MXenes and TMDs. When MXenes are combined with TMDs, restacking of the layers is hindered, thereby increasing the contact area between the electrolyte and electrode.7a,10 Moreover, the 2D heterointerface between MXenes and TMDs consists of van der Waals interactions that can prevent Fermi level pinning; this effect operates synergistically with the work function adjustability of metallic MXenes to afford Schottky barrier-free contact and reduce the contact resistance.11 The MXene–TMD composites demonstrated excellent reversible specific capacitance, superior coulombic efficiency, and improved cyclability and rate performance in electrochemical applications (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  A graphical abstract of the 2D TMD/MXene hybrid structure toward energy storage and conversion. 
An extensive literature survey reveals the existence of several review papers on the respective topics concerning MXenes and TMDs.4c,8,12 However, no critical review article on MXene/TMD composites is available, although this unique heterostructure family has great potential as electrochemical materials; thus, a timely account of this topic would be greatly helpful to researchers in related fields. The present review highlights the recent developments in the fabrication and electrochemical applications of MXene/TMD composites. Furthermore, the electronic structure and ion transfer mechanism are explained using density functional theory (DFT). Finally, we summarize the present research on MXene composites to provide overall prospects for this material family and trigger rapid development in this exciting material class for future energy applications.
2. MXenes and TMDs
2.1 Transition metal carbides/nitrides (MXenes)

2.1.1 Synthesis. 
Two-dimensional transition metal carbides or nitrides, referred to as MXenes, are an emerging family of metallic or semiconducting materials possessing electrical conductivity and a hydrophilic surface.13 They are usually represented by the formula Mn+1XnTx (n = 1, 2 or 3), where M refers to an early transition metal (M = Sc, Ti, V, Cr, Zr, Nb, Mo, Hf, and Ta), X denotes carbon or nitrogen, and T stands for surface terminal groups (T = OH−, F−, and O2−).14 MXenes are synthesized by the selective removal of the A-group (mostly elements of IIIA and IVA groups of the periodic table) from layered hexagonal ternary carbides known as MAX phases (Fig. 2).15 MAX powders are immersed in a controlled quantity of hydrofluoric acid (HF) solution at room temperature or higher temperature, resulting in the formation of surface terminals on MXenes, which are mainly oxygen and/or hydroxyl moieties.16 Since the direct handling of HF is dangerous due to its toxic nature, a safer in situ formation of HF has been accomplished through the reaction of HCl and fluoride salts or via ammonium bifluoride. These HF precursors aid in the simultaneous intercalation of cations like Li+, Na+, K+, NH4+, Ca+, and Al3+ between the interlayers.15,17 The intercalation of the cation and water during this process results in delamination without any additional steps, which is another advantage of in situ HF over the pure HF etching method. The etching conditions for the complete transition of MAX to MXene depend on different variables; the M–Al bond strength in Al-based MAX phases determines the etching environment, and the increasing number n in Mn+1CnTx type requires stronger and/or longer etching conditions. On the other hand, nitride-based MXenes have been prepared using molten fluoride salts for etching the A-elements from MAX precursors at a relatively higher temperature (at 550 °C) under argon atmosphere.4c,18 Synthesis of MXenes by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) is also possible, where high-quality ultra-thin orthorhombic α-Mo2C crystals with a lateral size of ∼100 μm were produced from the decomposition of methane on a bilayer substrate comprising copper foil placed over molybdenum foil. This method was further applied to the fabrication of WC and TaC crystals.19 Until now, various bottom-up synthesis methods such as CVD, template methods, plasma-enhanced pulsed laser deposition, etc., have been reported to produce higher quality crystals compared to selective etching processes.20 While ultra-thin MXenes have been obtained by bottom-up synthesis, single-layered MXenes have not yet been demonstrated by these processes. MXenes can also be prepared from non-MAX phase precursors by etching the Al–C units from MnAl3C2 and MnAl4Cn+3.21 Furthermore, it has been reported that etching of Al–C units together is energetically more favorable than etching of single Al units. Delamination of MXenes is a crucial step to the understanding of their fundamental properties, and is also necessary for the fabrication of MXene-based electrodes with high storage capacity.21a Before delamination, the structure of multilayered MXenes is similar to that of graphene-like stacks of sheets, and delamination of multilayered MXenes into few-layered or mono-layered nanosheets using an organic base drastically improves the accessibility to the surface.22 Due to strong interlayer forces, delamination of multilayered MXenes by mechanical exfoliation is more difficult than those of graphite and MoS2, and results in poor yield of mono-layers of MXenes.23 Therefore, delaminating by intercalation of various organic, inorganic, and ionic species followed by sonication has been widely practiced, because of large-scale production of single MXene layers.16,22a,22b
 Fig. 2  Typical synthesis of MXene from MAX phase via the selective etching method and its delaminated structure; the bottom SEM images represent MAX, MXene and delaminated-MXene structures, respectively. Reproduced with permission.113 Copyright 2020, Wiley. 


2.1.2 Structure and properties. 
The MXene crystal structure is similar to that of the parent MAX phases; the mono-layer of MXene comprises a hexagonal lattice with six-fold symmetry, wherein the transition metal ions are six-coordinate.24 The remarkable properties of MXenes include excellent thermal and electrical conductivity, a high Young's modulus, and a tunable bandgap.25 The surface termination is an important factor in determining the mechanical properties of MXenes. For example, a recent study has revealed that the O-terminated MXenes display better mechanical strength, mainly due to the stronger bonding between M–O than M–F and M–OH.26 Thin MXene films are transparent and conduct electricity, and this unique combination of properties makes them novel materials for transparent conductive electrodes as well.27 However, the synthesis process and composition can affect the electronic conductivity of MXene; larger flakes with minimum defects have displayed higher conductivity. Furthermore, high-quality single flakes and O/OH-terminated MXenes are more stable towards oxidation. Pristine MXenes display metallic character, but their metallic nature decreases as the number of layers increases. In addition, a few MXene materials become semiconducting after surface modification.28 MXenes are unique among two-dimensional materials, including graphene, because of their notable hydrophilic surface and exceptional metallic conductivity.29 Density functional theory predicts that the pristine MXene would exhibit magnetic behavior due to the presence of Ti atoms on the surface. With the surface termination step, the MXene loses its magnetic property.30
The appealing properties of MXenes lead to a wide range of applications, including chemical adsorption, electromagnetic interference (EMI) shielding, biomedical applications, wastewater treatment, and environmental remediation.13,31 MXenes have shown great potential as electro/photocatalysts for hydrogen evolution reactions, and CO2 reduction reactions, and as electrode materials for supercapacitors and batteries.32 However, the low capacitance of the resulting anodes, complex surface functionalities, and oxidation of MXenes limit their applications.4b,7a,33

2.2 Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs)

2.2.1 Synthesis. 
Two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides are intriguing semiconducting layered materials with the typical formula MX2, where M denotes a transition metal atom of group VI of the periodic table (e.g., Mo or W), whereas X is a chalcogen atom (S, Se, or Te).8b Mechanical exfoliation, in which a layer is peeled off from the bulk crystals using adhesive Scotch tape, is a clean and rapid method for producing high-quality crystalline and atomically thin mono-layers of TMDs. However, this method produces a non-uniform flake size, the deposited material is non-uniform, and it is difficult to separate the layers.34 To overcome these problems, nanolayers of bulk TMD crystals are produced by liquid-phase exfoliation by ultrasonication in organic solvents, in which the nanolayers remain chemically unaltered, and their electronic properties are maintained.35 Recently, aqueous ammonia has been used as an alternative and eco-friendly solvent for scalable liquid-phase exfoliation of MoS2 and WS2.36 Furthermore, this solvent offers high concentration yields with good stoichiometry, structural and semiconductor qualities, and does not require additional surfactants and stabilizers. High-quality ultra-thin TMDs can also be prepared from a molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) method in an ultrahigh vacuum chamber with high purity source materials (Fig. 3a).37 The low growth temperature, low deposition rate, and in situ characterization during the MBE process provide good synthetic control with minimal impurities in the final TMD films. Bottom-up synthesis routes are the most practical approaches to 2D TMDs because they afford a high yield, precise control over the lateral size, and a homogeneous composition and structure of the nanolayers.8b Chemical vapor deposition is widely considered as a scalable method of developing thin 2D TMDs and their heterostructures (Fig. 3b), due to the great control over the morphology and low cost. As a result, several MX2 type TMDs with excellent semiconducting properties have been synthesized. The earliest and primary method reported employs the vapor-phase reaction of the parent metal oxide (WO3, or MoO3) and chalcogen element at high temperature by co-evaporation, leading to the growth of thin stable TMDs on the substrate.38 In addition to various growth parameters of CVD such as temperature, growth time, and atomic gas flux, growth substrate and system design are also important for controlled and optimized growth of 2D TMDs.39 Furthermore, by increasing the density of edge sites during the mid-growth process and by creating vacancies to activate the basal plane in the post-growth process, the catalytic activity of CVD-grown TMDs can be enhanced.40 Another CVD growth occurs via a two-step process, where the pre-deposited metal precursor on the substrate reacts with a gaseous vapor of sulfur, selenium, or tellurium in an inert atmosphere.41 Synthesis of large-area, thin, crystalline TMDs on various insulating substrates has been accomplished by the thermolysis process, in which the crystallinity increases sharply upon the addition of sulfur during high-temperature annealing of thermally decomposed salts.42 Better control might be achieved by metal–organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD), in which metal–organic or organosulfur precursors are used to develop wafer-scale films with high crystallinity (Fig. 3c). Precise control over the gas-phase precursors helps in tuning the domain size, shape, and nucleation density. However, the noxious precursors and slow deposition are the main drawbacks of this process.43 Recently a novel growth-etch MOCVD process has been presented to eliminate the carbon contamination and small domain size resulting from the conventional MOCVD process, wherein introducing water vapor during the process has improved the final crystal quality.44 Atomic layer deposition by a gas-phase reaction of the parent elements has recently been used to prepare conformal, thin, binary transition metal sulfides on various substrates, including 3D templates.45 The uniform, area selective growth of 2D thin TMD films has been achieved by controlling the incubation period on various substrates or by using the ABC-type plasma-enhanced ALD process.46
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of a molecular beam epitaxy process with atomic force microscopy image of GaSe mono-layer grown on MoS2. (b) Schematic illustration of chemical vapour deposition with an optical image of MoS2 domains grown on SiO2. (c) Schematic illustration of metal–organic chemical vapour deposition with a false-colour dark field transmission electron microscopy image of the MoS2 mono-layer having different grain orientation. (a), (b) and (c) Reproduced with permission.8b Copyright 2017, Macmillan Publishers Limited. 


2.2.2 Structure and properties. 
The crystal structure of single-layer TMDs (MX2) comprises a transition metal layer (M) sandwiched between two atomic layers of chalcogen (X).47 A triangular prismatic phase (2H) and an octahedral phase (1T) are the two commonly observed phases. The thermodynamically stable 2H-MoS2 exhibits six-siemens atoms prismatically surrounding each of the Mo atoms, and the metastable 1T-MoS2 comprises six-siemens atoms surrounding each of the Mo atoms in the form of a distorted octahedron.48 Each of these phases exhibits distinctively different electronic properties, as 2H-MoS2 is semiconducting, whereas 1T-MoS2 is a metallic and more active hydrogen evolution catalyst.
The Young's modulus of defect-free single-layer MoS2 is comparable to that of stainless steel, and therefore mono-layer MoS2 can be used as a reinforcing component in composite materials.49 The unique functionalities of 2D TMDs allow them to transform the indirect bandgap in multilayered TMDs to a direct bandgap in single-layered TMDs with good carrier mobility.50 The unique properties of TMDs have led to many phenomenal applications. The tunable bandwidth of mono-layer TMDs has been extensively utilized in the field of high-performance flexible electronics and optoelectronics.51 The inactive basal plane in MoS2 (typical TMD) impedes the trapping of Li+ on the surface, and thus the coulombic efficiency of MoS2 anodes is far superior to that of graphene oxide and its derivatives.9a The desirable characteristics of high capacitance and stability have also been observed in other TMDs, which has led to widespread interest and advances in the domain of energy storage and conversion.52 The morphologies of 2D TMDs, thermal stability, conductivity, mechanical features, tunable bandgap, and their direct influence on the optical properties of materials have inspired a broad range of applications in sensors,53 catalysis for hydrogen evolution,54 flexible electronics and optoelectronics,51,55 and energy storage.56 However, developing routes for the synthesis of structures with more active sites in the basal plane remains a significant challenge. Furthermore, the electrochemical stability and electrical conductivity are far from satisfactory.
On the other hand, coupling TMDs with MXenes reportedly allows the full exploitation of the extraordinary features of each component. The TMD/MXene heterostructure demonstrated outstanding specific capacitance, durable performance, enhanced coulombic efficiency, satisfactory reverse capacitance at high current rates, and enhanced ion transport and structural stability during redox reactions.57

3. Synergy between MXene and TMDs
When combining two different materials to obtain a heterostructure, synergetic interaction between the different material phases is generally expected. Although the effort to combine TMDs and MXenes is in the very early stage, synergistic interaction between these materials has been demonstrated in a number of examples.58 When a junction is formed by a metal and semiconductor contact, it creates a potential barrier for charge carriers to cross the junction, the so-called Schottky barrier (SB), which ideally follows the predictions of the Schottky–Mott model: (1)where ΦB,n and ΦB,p are the n-type and p-type SB height (SBH), and χs and Is are the electron affinity and ionization energy of the semiconductor, respectively.59 The SBH should be as low as possible to reduce the contact resistance of the metal–semiconductor junction (MSJ), and ultimately be zero or negative to achieve SB-free contact. Because most electrode metals do not meet the above criteria, investigations of electrode materials with tunable work functions have recently been emphasized for 2D TMD semiconductor devices. The work function of MXenes varies over a wide range with the surface functional groups, composition, and thickness. Based on first-principles calculations, Liu et al. reported that the work function of MXenes with OH- and O-terminations on their surface is smaller than that of Sc (3.5 eV) and larger than that of Pt (5.6 eV), respectively, (Fig. 4).60 Mixing of O and OH or adding F terminations brings the work function to a moderate level, allowing the use of the material as a work function regulator.
 Fig. 4  Work function plots of MXenes with OH-, F- and O- terminations. Reproduced with permission.60 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Although the work function of electrode metals seems to be a suitable descriptor of the SBH in MSJ, studies have revealed that the measured SBH is not directly proportional to the metal work function, which deviates from the Schottky–Mott rule.61 This discrepancy is attributed to Fermi level pinning (FLP), driven by various gap states, including surface states, metal-induced gap states (MIGS), defect-related states, and disorder-induced gap states (DIGS).62 Although these states are classified according to their different structural origins, they are fundamentally caused by chemical interactions on the contact. Considering an additional interface dipole (eΔdip), which is attributed to charge relaxation at the MSJ, the SBH is modified from the Schottky–Mott model to: (2) (3)where z, Δρ, and S are the coordinates normal to the surface, change in the charge density, and surface area, respectively.60 The schematic MSJ band diagram, which is modified with various gap states and the interface dipole, is shown in Fig. 5a. Unfortunately, the interface dipole cannot be clearly determined due to the ambiguity of the contributors and bulk states.62,63 The linearly fitted slope of the ΦB-versus-ϕM plot is deduced as a measure of the FLP strength, so-called interface behavior parameter, or S parameter of the semiconductor (SΦ).62,64 (4)SΦ = 1 indicates no pinning. From the experiments, SΦ was determined to be 0.1 for the MoS2-3D metal electrode (Sc, Ti, Ni, and Pt) junction, approximately 0.25 for GaSe, and 0.05 for n-Ge (Fig. 5b).65 These small SΦ values indicate a weak dependence of SBH on the work function; therefore, in a strong pinning situation, it becomes challenging to achieve SB-free MSJ even if the work function has been largely adjusted.
 Fig. 5  (a) The fixed separation model for SBH formation. Electronic states, with a charge neutrality level (CNL) and density of states, were assumed to reside on the semiconductor surface, which is held at a fixed distance from the metal. Reproduced with permission.62 Copyright 2014 AIP Publishing LLC. (b) SBH versus the contact 3D metal work functions for p-type GaS, GaSe, and GaTe, and n-type n-Ge, and MoS2.65 The solid and dotted lines represent a linear fit to the experimental points and the ideal Schottky–Mott limits with S = 1, respectively. 
To avoid lattice mismatch-induced gap states (or DIGS) and MIGS, it is necessary to form TMD and MXene 2D contacts by secondary bonding. The atomically flat and defect-free MSJ, which is difficult to achieve in 3D materials, can be easily achieved with 2D metals and 2D semiconductors via their chemically saturated surfaces, consequently suppressing defect-related states. More than 70 MXenes are theoretically expected to afford optimized coupling between MXenes and TMDs. Some recent studies have demonstrated the feasibility of constructing SB-free contacts with black phosphorus, MoS2, and GaN.11b–d Liu et al. investigated the electronic state of T-MoS2-H-MoS2 as an example of a 2D-metal–2D-semiconductor via DFT calculations and found that the MSJ states originate from the metal rather than the semiconductor, leading to negligible MIGS in the junction (Fig. 6a).64b This is in contrast to the significant MIGS determined in the case of a 3D-metal–2D-semiconductor. The bond distance of T-MoS2–H-MoS2 was calculated to be within 3–4 Å, indicating typical vdW interactions, where the vdW interactions were not strong enough to induce MIGS. The suppression of MIGS in the semiconductor can therefore lead to a weak FLP, which was supported by the calculated  for H-MoS2–2D metals (Fig. 6b).
 Fig. 6  (a) Electronic band structure and density of states (DOS) of a typical vdW MSJ of metallic T-MoS2 and semiconductor (SC) H-MoS2. FL is set to zero. The VBM and CBM of the SC are marked by blue and red dots, respectively. Isosurfaces show the spatial distributions of the states. (b) SBH versus the contact 2D metal work functions. The diagonal line shows the ideal Schottky–Mott limit. Reproduced with permission.64b Copyright 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
You et al. verified the HER activity of MoS2 with seven representative O-terminated MXenes (V2CO2, Cr2CO2, Mo2CO2, Ti3C2O2, V4C3O2, Cr2NO2, and V2NO2), which were used in p-type SB-free contacts with near-zero SBH from −0.185 to +0.245 eV.11a The report suggests that the metallic properties of 2H-MoS2, induced by the SB-free contact at the interface of MoS2/MXenes, enhance the hydrogen adsorption ability on the basal plane of 2H-MoS2, based on an analysis of the hydrogen adsorption energy (ΔEH) of the heterostructure of MoS2 with O-terminated MXenes. In more detail, when MXenes with near-zero SBH were contacted with semiconducting 2H-MoS2, the Fermi level of the MXenes was located at or below the valence band maximum of 2H-MoS2, which could result in metallic properties of 2H-MoS2. Therefore, these SB-free p-type 2H-MoS2/MXenes exhibited enhanced charge transfer kinetics for the HER. As shown in Fig. 7a, the ΔEH of the 2H-MoS2/MXenes was considerably lower than that of pristine 2H-MoS2, reaching values comparable to that of 1T-MoS2. This could result in dramatically improved H adsorption on the basal plane of 2H-MoS2 in 2H-MoS2/MXene hybrids. Furthermore, the adsorption of H on the S vacant sites seemed to be strengthened; ΔEH for a single S vacancy on the basal plane of 2H-MoS2/Cr2CO2 was −3.08 eV, while that of the pristine MoS2 was −2.06 eV.
 Fig. 7  (a) The plot of hydrogen adsorption energies (ΔEH) of 2H-MoS2, 1T-MoS2, and 2H-MoS2/MXene heterostructures. Reproduced with permission.11a Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (b) Electron localization functions for the cross section of the (110) plane of VS2/Mo2CO2, VS2/Nb2CO2, VS2/Ti2CO2, and VS2/V2CO2, respectively, with five layers of Na+ ions. Reproduced with permission.66 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
Another important characteristic of the TMD/MXene hybrids relates to the ion diffusion rate and capacity for energy storage applications. The flexibility of the vdW interaction of 2D TMD/MXenes allows the reversible intercalation of guest ions without significant destruction of the layers. Tang et al. recently predicted that proper combinations of MoS2 and VS2 with Mo-, Nb-, Ti-, and V-based-MXenes could be effective for application in Na-ion batteries, based on DFT calculations.66 First, the study revealed that the interaction between TMDs and bare MXenes was stronger compared to that with O-terminated MXenes, suggesting more potent cohesive energies for the former. All these cohesive energies were negative, which suggests that the construction of stacked TMDs with MXenes is an exothermic reaction. Second, O-terminated MXenes showed a better capacity for intercalating five layers of Na+ ions (Fig. 7b) without severe structural distortion due to their large interlayer space (2.59–2.81 Å), compared to those of bare MXenes and TMDs (1.62–2.40 Å). Furthermore, the minimal barriers for layer-to-layer Na+ diffusion (0.091–0.371 eV for MoS2 and 0.097–0.221 eV for VS2) were sufficient to facilitate fast charge/discharge processes. Considering the optimal adsorption sites of the TMD/MXene structure for Na+ ions, five layers of Na+ ions could be formed around the TMD/MXenes. The MoS2/O-terminated MXenes behaved differently from VS2/O-terminated MXenes; some of the Na+ ions escaped from the S-terminated surfaces of MoS2, whereas no such phenomenon was observed for the latter. On the basis of the above results and by visualizing the electron localization functions (ELFs) along the (110) plane of VS2 with O-terminated MXenes, they concluded that VS2 with an O-terminated Ti2CO2 structure could accommodate five layers of Na+ ions without severe structural distortion upon intercalation of the Na+ ions, with rapid charge/discharge processes.
4. Synthesis of TMD decorated MXenes
In recent years, several MXene-TMD composite structures have been reported for various electrochemical applications. The combination of MXene–TMDs forms an open structure in which the stacking issue affecting the individual materials can be resolved, thus maintaining the interlayer space and resulting in fast ion transfer between the sheets, which makes these composites promising and desirable electrode materials. The recent development of various TMD/MXene composite nanostructures is presented in the following subsections (Fig. 8).
 Fig. 8  Various approaches for the synthesis of TMD-MXene hybrid structures. (a) Synthesis of a SnS2–MXene composite by sonication and vacuum-assisted filtration through a polypropylene membrane. Reproduced with permission.6 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (b) Synthesis of the MoS2-in-Ti3C2 (MoS2-out-Ti3C2) hybrids by electrostatic attraction in the presence (absence) of cetyltrimethyl ammonium bromide. Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2018, Wiley. (c) Synthesis of MoS2/Ti3C2 hybrid material prepared via freeze-drying followed by thermal decomposition. Reproduced with permission.71b Copyright 2020, Wiley. (d) Step-by-step synthesis of MoSe2/MXene hybrid nanoflowers by a simple hydrothermal method; inset picture shows the SEM image of MoSe2/MXene hybrid nanoflowers. Reproduced with permission.82 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (e) Schematic illustration of introduction of 1T-WS2 between the delaminated matrixes of Ti3C2 through a simple sonication process to produce a 2D Ti3C2/1T-WS2 hybrid structure. Reproduced with permission.10 Copyright 2019, Wiley. 
4.1. MoS2–MXene
Among the transition metal dichalcogenides, MoS2 (bulk and delaminated forms) has been established as a versatile and prominent material for dry lubrication, catalysis, biological, electrochemical, and electronics applications.67 Thin 2D MoS2 affords great electrochemical performance because of its catalytically active edges, layered dynamic morphology, hydrophilicity, and tunable bandwidth.56a,68 Thus, MoS2 has gained immense interest for electrochemical applications, and its performance is comparable to that of graphene and carbon nanotube electrodes.56d,69 However, the significant constraints of MoS2 include its low intrinsic conductivity, inadequate active sites, oxidation of the edges, limited voltage window, structural disintegration, and poor cycling stability.68,70 To address these issues, MoS2-based composites such as MoS2–graphene/CNT/Fe3O4 hybrid structures have been synthesized, but moderate conductivity and volume expansion still remain major challenges.71 Two-dimensional MXenes have been proven to be efficient electrode materials owing to their superior metallic conductivity and hydrophilicity combined with cyclability. Therefore, MXene-based MoS2 hybrid composites have been extensively explored to overcome the above limitations.71b Ti3C2 is typically used as a representative MXene material for the synthesis of TMD/MXene-based nanocomposites. A simple sintering method was first introduced by Shen et al., where MoS2@Ti3C2 nanocomposite powder was obtained via a solid-phase sintering method using Ti3C2 as a starting material.72 The hydrothermal method was also applied by Li et al. to form a TMD/MXene hybrid, where in situ uniform growth of MoS2 nanolayers was achieved on the surface of Ti3C2.57b However, the synthesis of vertically aligned MoS2 on a Ti3C2 support by a hydrothermal process, in the absence of carbon nano-plating, would readily oxidize Ti3C2 to TiO2 and lead to structural degradation.73 Consequently, Attanayake et al. reported that the exposure of a colloidal solution of exfoliated Ti3C2 and (NH4)2MoS4 to microwaves at a specific temperature generated sufficient heat for the nucleation and perpendicular growth of MoS2 on the Ti3C2 surface. The resulting MoS2 nanosheets were vertically oriented on the Ti3C2 support.74 Ma et al. and Chen et al., respectively, reported other techniques, including electrostatic interaction and laser engraving-assisted fabrication for the formation of MoS2–Ti3C2 nanocomposites.58e,75 Other MXenes such as Mo2CTx (T = O-, OH-, or F-terminated groups), V4C3, and Mo2TiC2Tx have also been successfully coupled to MoS2 (Fig. 9a–d).76
 Fig. 9  (a) and (b) SEM images of MoS2/Mo2TiC2Tx heterostructures at 500 °C and 700 °C, respectively. (c) and (d) Cross-sectional TEM images of MoS2/Mo2TiC2Tx heterostructures at 500 °C and 700 °C, respectively, indicate 2D layers with MoS2 on Mo2TiC2Tx. Reproduced with permission.76c Copyright 2018, Wiley. (e) and (f) FESEM images of MoSe2/Ti3C2 heterostructures at various magnification. Reproduced with permission.57a Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
4.2. WS2–MXene
WS2 is also a naturally occurring layered TMD, and exfoliated WS2 shows impressive optical and electrochemical/catalytic properties,77 making it amenable to diverse applications.78 The space present between the sheets of WS2 allows for intercalation of atoms, forming high-efficiency materials for energy storage applications.79 To overcome the intrinsically low electrical conductivity, poor rate capability, low cycling stability, and massive volume expansion of WS2, significant efforts have been devoted to fabricating hybrid WS2-based nanostructures.80 The WS2–Ti3C2 nanohybrid structure has been easily synthesized due to the abundant nucleation sites provided by Ti3C2 for the growth of WS2; Su et al. introduced the vapor phase deposition of WS2 flakes over Ti3C2Tx.81 The report suggests that the desired layers of WS2 flakes can be achieved simply by controlling the growth parameters. Vyskočil et al. reported the synthesis of 2D nanohybrids by sonication of delaminated Ti3C2 (Ti3C2-D), prepared using tetrabutylammonium hydroxide, with different ratios of 1T-phase WS2 nanolayers.10 The multilayer stacking arrangement of Ti3C2-D and 1T-phase WS2 was confirmed through transmission electron microscopy (TEM) imaging. The ideal ratio of delaminated Ti3C2 to 1T-phase WS2 was noted to be 90:10 by comparing the capacitance for different ratios of 1T-phase WS2.
4.3. Other TMD/MXenes
In addition to MoS2 and WS2, other TMD/MXene-based composites with MoSe2, SnS2, and WSe2 have been reported. For example, a MoSe2–MXene composite (Fig. 9e and f) was developed by employing a hydrothermal approach followed by annealing.57a,82 The MoO42− and Se4+ ions formed were adsorbed on the surface of ultrasonicated Ti3C2, resulting in the formation of a 3D MoSe2–Ti3C2 hybrid nanoflower-like structure. On the other hand, Li et al. prepared 1T/2H-MoSe2/MXene catalysts via a simple hydrothermal method, where Na2MoO4, Se powder, and NaBH4 were dispersed in DI water with as-prepared Ti3C2 MXene nanosheets.83 This solution was heated in a steel autoclave at 220 °C for 20 h to produce 1T/2H-MoSe2/MXene. They revealed the existence of 1T- and 2H-MoSe2 from the lattice fringes using HRTEM, visualizing the characteristic atomic arrangement of 1T- and 2H-MoSe2 on the (002) plane, where trigonal and honeycomb atomic arrangements were observed for the 1T and 2H phases, respectively. Raman analysis further showed that the 1T and 2H phases of MoSe2 coexisted in 1T/2H-MoSe2/MXene; the two typical Raman peaks of 2H-MoSe2/MXene were observed at 241 (A1g) and 285 cm−1 (E2g1), while the profile of 1T/2H-MoSe2/MXene exhibited not only negatively shifted Raman peaks (5–6 cm−1) for the A1g and E2g1 states, but also two additional peaks at 195 and 350 cm−1, which were not observed in the Raman spectra of 2H-MoSe2/MXene and MXene. However, the exact ratio between the 1T and 2H phases was not reported.
The synthesis of SnS2–MXene composites was reported by Wu et al., where the composite was synthesized by mixing a colloidal solution of Ti3C2Tx with SnS2 solution at different mass ratios.6 The heterostructure of SnS2–Ti3C2Tx was obtained after vacuum-assisted filtration of the aqueous mixture through a polypropylene membrane. Furthermore, Xu et al. (first report on TMD/MXene composites) reported the stacking of mechanically exfoliated Ti2C(OH)xFy flakes on the targeted WSe2 flakes by a mechanical transfer method to fabricate WSe2–Ti2C(OH)xFy heterostructures.84
5. Applications towards energy storage and conversion devices
As mentioned earlier, MXenes have high electrical conductivity, and their work function can be modulated by adjusting the layer thickness or surface termination. The ability to create a vdW heterointerface with TMDs, avoiding FLP, opens a door for applying hybrids of TMDs and MXenes in various fields such as energy conversion, energy storage, photo- and electrocatalysis, and optics.
5.1 Batteries and supercapacitors
Rechargeable batteries are considered a primary tool for energy storage. Thus, various nanomaterials have been explored and developed for fabricating high-performance energy storage materials.85 Lithium-ion batteries are of great interest because of their compact, efficient storage mechanism and robust nature, which allow the shuttling of Li+ ions between the anode (mostly graphite) and cathode (mostly lithium metal oxide).86 Over the past decade, graphene-like layered 2D materials have been vastly investigated as electrode materials because of their large surface area, which can provide high capacity, combined with structural permanence.87 As electrode materials in Li-ion batteries, graphene and transition metal oxide materials demonstrated superior and comparable capacity (744 and 700 mA h g−1, respectively), with good cyclic stability.88 Layered 2D TMDs display low volume change and possess numerous active sites due to their large surface area, making them different from the bulk counterparts; thus, these materials have attracted tremendous interest as electrode materials.52
Several studies have investigated 2D MoS2 as an anode material for Li-ion batteries. The results revealed that exfoliated MoS2 affords increased specific capacity (approximately 1131 mA h g−1) and higher coulombic efficiency than the pristine MoS2 electrode because the slack exfoliated MoS2 layers can accommodate the volume variation.89 Owing to the lack of structural integrity of the anode during the lithiation process and capacity reduction after several cycles, the construction of MoS2-based composite electrodes has been highlighted. MoS2@TiO2 hybrid nanostructures prepared by Xu and co-workers afforded substantially improved specific capacity and rate capability.90 Chang et al. effectively fabricated MoS2/graphene nanosheet layered composites, which exhibited exceptionally high specific capacity and current density (1300 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 and 1040 mA h g−1 at 1000 mA g−1).56c Similarly, as electrode materials, a composite of MoS2 with SnO2 and a CNT-supported MoS2 nanohybrid afforded improved structural integrity with a long cycle life and high rate capability in Li-ion batteries.91 In MoS2–carbon-based electrodes, the presence of carbon sites led to numerous side reactions, which reduced the overall efficiency.71b
2D MXene (Ti3C2)-based electrodes exhibit an attractive reversible volumetric capacitance (1375 mA h cm−3), which is twice that of the graphite electrode (550 mA h cm−3), because of the excellent electrochemical properties of the former.92 By exploiting the properties of layered MXenes, Hu et al. and Du et al. reported the synthesis of a MoS2/Ti3C2Tx hybrid composite as an anode material for Li-ion batteries.71b,93 The resulting MoS2/Ti3C2Tx composite delivered a stable reversible capacitance (614.4 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1) with low electrochemical impedance and better rate performance (Fig. 10a and b). This performance was mainly attributed to the unique structure and synergistic effect, which hindered the agglomeration and volume expansion of the MoS2 nanosheets due to the large conductive surface of the Ti3C2Tx substrate (Fig. 10c), which promoted rapid electron/Li+ transfer kinetics. Similarly, Wu et al. assembled MoS2/Ti3C2–MXene@C nanohybrids as anodes and evaluated their utility in lithium batteries using CR2016 coin cells, which had an ideal mass loading of electrodes of approximately 0.8–1.0 mg cm−2. The test demonstrated high capacity and prolonged cycle life (3000 cycles) at a high current density.73 This significant improvement was due to the reduced number of pathways for mass and charge diffusion from the MoS2 nanostructures, along with the carbon nanoplating, which improved the electronic coupling between the MoS2 nanostructures with Ti3C2 and also provided structural stability.
 Fig. 10  (a) Rate performance of the MoS2/Ti3C2Tx composite for different discharge capacities with coulombic efficiency almost 100%. (b) Cycling stability of the MoS2/Ti3C2Tx composite compared to MoS2 and Ti3C2Tx. (c) Schematic representation of MoS2 layers uniformly distributed over Ti3C2Tx, along with the ion diffusion and electron conduction paths. Reproduced with permission.93 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Specific capacitance of a micro supercapacitor (MXene-MoS2) at different scan rates. (e) Capacitive retentivity and coulombic efficiency of a micro supercapacitor. Reproduced with permission.58e Copyright 2019, Wiley. 
On the other hand, V4C3 exhibited better structural durability and specific capacity as an anode material than Ti3C2.76a Considering this, Bai and co-workers produced a V4C3/MoS2/C nanohybrid for a high-rate Li-ion battery, which displayed a high specific capacitance at high current rates (622.6 and 500 mA h g−1 at 1 and 10 A g−1, respectively), and enhanced cycling efficiency in the potential range of 0.01–3.0 V (vs. Li/Li+), with an optimal mass loading of 1–2 mg cm−2. The improved electrochemical performance resulted from the increased electrical conductivity and structural stability due to V4C3 and the thin carbon coating, while the MoS2 nanosheets led to higher specific capacitance and enhanced charge mobility. Because sodium-ion batteries are regarded as a cheaper alternative to Li-ion batteries, extensive studies have been dedicated to identifying an optimum anode material for these batteries.94 With respect to this, Wu et al. reported MoS2/Ti3C2Tx composites synthesized by the hydrothermal method as an anode material for Na-ion batteries.11g The evaluation of the electrochemical properties of the MoS2/Ti3C2Tx composite using a CR2032 coin-type cell with Na–metal as the counter-electrode, within the voltage window of 0.01–3.0 V (vs. Na/Na+), demonstrated the excellent reversible capacity (250.9 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1), high cycling stability, and rate capability, attributed to the nested architecture of the composite. While the MoS2 nanosheets increased the capacity of the composite, the presence of Ti3C2Tx favored the open structure, and the decreased concentration of fluorine on the surface afforded improved electrochemical performance of the composite. The weak van der Waals forces of MoS2 and the large interlayer spaces of MXene, capable of accommodating various cations (such as Na+, K+, NH4+, Mg2+, and Al3+), have attracted great interest for the use of these materials in non-lithium batteries.56a,95 Inspired by this, the possibility of using MoS2–MXene composite electrodes in magnesium, potassium, and lithium–sulfur batteries has been explored.57b,96 Electrochemical measurements displayed superior reversible capacity, remarkable rate performance, and cycling durability. However, research on MoS2–MXene composites for non-lithium batteries is still at an early stage, calling for further study.
Seo et al. and Sun et al. reported SnS2 as an electrode material for Li-ion and Na-ion batteries, respectively, and achieved exceptional specific capacity, rate performance, and cyclability.97 To overcome the inherent constraints of SnS2, such as tremendous volume change and large capacity fading in Na-ion batteries, Wu and co-workers subjected the Ti3C2Tx/SnS2 heterostructure (mass ratio MXene/SnS2 = 1:5) to charge/discharge tests within the potential range of 0.01–2.5 V (vs. Na/Na+) using LAND 2001A. They demonstrated that the specific capacity was maintained, even at high temperatures, when used as an anode material.6 Li et al. prepared a Ti3C2Tx-decorated SnS2/Sn3S4 hybrid via a solvothermal process and examined the resultant composite as an anode for Li-ion batteries, within the voltage range of 0.005–3.0 V, at room temperature.11e Interestingly, the composite displayed steady cycling performance, with notable rate capability, attributed to expeditious electron transfer with little volume variation. Furthermore, the increased surface interaction between the electrode and electrolyte due to the large specific area of SnS2/Sn3S4 led to partial pseudocapacitance at high current densities, thereby increasing the Li+ ion diffusion. Li and co-workers recently studied a MoSe2/MXene heterojunction for Na-ion batteries, with an average electrode loading mass of approximately 1.1 mg cm−2. The battery could maintain reversible capacity at a high current density and exhibited promising electrochemical qualities.57a The mechanism of rapid Na+ ion shuttling and the better electronic structure of MoSe2/MXene were confirmed theoretically (density-functional theory calculations) and experimentally (galvanostatic intermittent titration and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy).
Supercapacitors belong to a class of electrochemical energy storage devices and can deliver higher power densities quickly with protracted charge/discharge cycles compared to batteries.98 Graphene is considered one of the best-suited materials for supercapacitors owing to its high surface area, excellent conductivity, intrinsic stability, and high volumetric capacitance (376 F cm−3).99 However, during charging and discharging, these materials undesirably undergo layer restacking, which decreases the charge storage due to the restricted availability of the surface area. The use of hydrous ruthenium oxide in pseudocapacitors afforded impressive supercapacitance (∼900 F g−1) and cycling efficiency. However, when the water content was reduced, the capacitance also decreased (to 29 F g−1).100 On the other hand, MXenes combine large surface areas with superior hydrophilicity and conductivity and provide significantly high capacitance, exceeding that of the best-known carbon supercapacitor.14b Ghidiu et al. first introduced a new, safe, and easy protocol for the synthesis of additive-free clay-like MXenes and provided a faster approach for obtaining delaminated flakes.15 When these clay-like MXenes were rolled into thin sheets for supercapacitor electrodes, they displayed remarkable volumetric capacitance of up to 900 F cm−3 and better rate-handling ability. However, the aggregation of the layers inhibited the complete utilization of MXene, which hindered ion transport and strongly reduced the capacity. Acerce and co-workers showed that metallic 1T-phase MoS2 nanosheets can be chemically exfoliated to facilitate the intercalation of various cations (H+, Li+, Na+, and K+), leading to high capacitance (∼400–700 F cm−3) with excellent cycling stability (about 5000 cycles) in both aqueous and organic electrolytes.56a The ability of the exfoliated layers to expand, along with the high hydrophilicity and electrical conductivity (nearly 107 times higher than those of the semiconducting 2H phase) of the 1T MoS2 phase, resulted in excellent electrochemical properties. By introducing MoS2 between the MXene sheets, the intrinsic drawbacks of both materials can be eliminated, thereby enhancing the electrochemical performance. Only recently, the 1T-phase WS2/Ti3C2 nanohybrid was studied, where a high capacitance (157 F g−1) was observed for 90% Ti3C2/10% 1T-phase WS2, and no improvement was observed upon further addition of 1T-phase WS2.10 The study discussed the increase in the capacitance for each step of exfoliation of Ti3C2, where a substantial increase (nearly 59%) was observed upon inserting WS2 due to the larger exposed surface area. The enhanced capacitance of the nanohybrid was comparable to that of other hybrid materials. Designing an efficient microsupercapacitor is crucial for portable and wearable electronics. Recently, Chen et al. synthesized a Ti3C2Tx–MoS2 film by direct laser etching and evaluated the results for a microsupercapacitor.58e The composite afforded a significantly high specific capacitance (173.6 F cm−3, which is 60% more than that of pristine MXene), good coulombic efficiency (around 98%), and longer cycling rates (approximately 6000) (Fig. 10d and e). The study also demonstrated the great flexibility of the hybrid electrode, wherein 89% of the capacitance was retained when the electrode was bent at an angle of 150°.
Although the majority of the research has focused on developing MXene–TMD heterostructures for lithium batteries, MXene–TMD heterostructures have also displayed promising results as functional materials for non-lithium batteries. Among the large families of MXene and TMD materials, Ti3C2Tx and MoS2 have been the forerunners. However, the successful reversible transformation of MoS2 from LiS2 during discharging and charge storage needs to be studied in detail. Significant focus needs to be placed on research for developing TMD-MXene composites for supercapacitor materials to further advance energy storage devices.
5.2 Electrochemical energy conversion
Among TMDs, molybdenum-and tungsten-based disulfides and diselenides are the most widely utilized electrocatalysts due to their excellent and efficient electrochemical catalytic performance in energy conversion applications, such as the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), oxygen evolution reaction (OER), and oxygen reduction reaction (ORR).9b,101 However, as mentioned in Section 3.1, one of the critical weaknesses of TMDs is the low conductivity of the 2H phase.83 Therefore, the construction of a hybrid structure with highly conductive MXene is an ingenious solution that has been adopted to overcome the low electrical conductance of the 2H phase in electrochemical applications. According to a report by Attanyake et al., MoS2 nanosheets vertically grown on Ti3C2 nanosheets (MoS2⊥Ti3C2@240) were prepared at reaction temperatures of 200–260 °C.74 The edge density of MoS2 was controlled by the reaction temperature, and the highest density of MoS2 edges was obtained at 240 °C due to the complete reduction of the (NH4)2MoS4 precursor (Fig. 11a). Evaluation of the electrocatalytic HER performance of the composite showed that the HER activity of the MoS2⊥Ti3C2 catalysts was proportional to the edge density of MoS2, as shown in Fig. 11b, and the optimal overpotential to drive the current density of 10 mA cm−2 was 110 mV for MoS2⊥Ti3C2@240, with a Tafel slope of ∼40 mV dec−1. Moreover, MXenes are known to be metastable due to their poor oxygen resistance under oxygen-rich conditions (even under ambient conditions).102 As a result of the undesirable spontaneous oxidation, transformation to metal oxides has been reported for several MXenes, leading to a decrease in the catalyst stability and activity.103 Wu et al. reported carbon nano-plating as an effective strategy for constructing a MoS2/Ti3C2 hybrid with improved HER stability and catalytic activity.73 The surface of Ti3C2 MXene was protected by the carbonization of glucose by a facile hydrothermal method and subsequent annealing. The HER performance of MoS2/Ti3C2–MXene@C in 0.5 M H2SO4 was compared to that of a hybrid of MoS2 and oxidized Ti3C2 MXene (MoS2@oxidized MXene) without carbon nano-plating. The overpotential at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 (η10) for MoS2/Ti3C2–MXene@C was found to be 135 mV, whereas that of MoS2@oxidized MXene was ∼350 mV. The improved catalyst activity was attributed to the prevention of the direct exposure of MXene to the environment, where the charge transfer resistance (Rct) of MoS2/Ti3C2–MXene@C (39 Ω) was significantly lowered due to the carbon nano-plating, whereas the charge transfer resistance of MoS2@oxidized MXene was 57 Ω. Additionally, MoS2/Ti3C2–MXene@C showed better long-term stability of up to 2000 cycles, as demonstrated by chronoamperometric study at −130 mV for 20 h. Recently, Ren et al. reported a Mo-based MXene hybrid HER catalyst with MoS2 nanoflowers (MoS2@Mo2CTx) instead of Ti-based MXene. In 1.0 M KOH solution, the η10 of MoS2@Mo2CTx was 176 mV, whereas the η10 of Mo2CTx and MoS2 was 533 and 394 mV, respectively.76b This highly synergetic HER performance of MoS2@Mo2CTx could be achieved by the fast electron transport induced by the intrinsic conductivity of Mo2CTx and the numerous exposed active sites for hydrogen adsorption on the MoS2 nanoflowers. The electrochemical impedance of MoS2@Mo2CTx was only 26 Ω, compared to that of MoS2 (660 Ω) and Mo2CTx (155 Ω). The double-layer capacitance (Cdl), which is related to the electrochemically active surface area (ECSA) of Mo2CTx (106 mF cm−2) was the highest in MoS2@Mo2CTx (the Cdl of MoS2 and Mo2CTx was 21.7 and 22.6 mF cm−2, respectively). In contrast to the above examples, Lim et al. oxidized MXenes to prepare nanohybrids of 2H-MoS2 on Mo2CTx MXene for the HER via in situ sulfidation of an adventitious oxide layer on Mo2CTx.104 Mo2CTx/2H-MoS2 required an overpotential of only 119 mV to reach a current density of 10 mA cm−2 in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution. They claimed that this exceptionally high HER activity originated from the epitaxially grown lattice interface between Mo2CTx and 2H-MoS2, where the oxidation layers were removed by sulfidation.
 Fig. 11  (a) Edge density plots and (b) HER polarization plots in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution of IE-MoS2/Ti3C2 sheets prepared at 200, 220, 240, and 240 °C. Reproduced with permission.74 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectra of (c) Mo 3d and (d) Co 2p of different materials. Reproduced with permission.105b Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Furthermore, the optimized weight ratio of TMD to MXene and doping on the TMDs was suggested as a strategy for improving the electrochemical water splitting performance.105 Huang et al. synthesized a series of weight ratio-controlled hierarchical 2H-MoS2 nanosheets grown vertically on Ti3C2 MXenes (MoS2/Ti3C2 heterostructures).105a The HER activity of the MoS2/Ti3C2 heterostructures was demonstrated in 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolytes, and the overpotentials required to reach a current density of 10 mA cm−2 were optimized for MoS2/Ti3C2-5% (∼280 mV), with a Tafel slope of 68 mV dec−1. Although the exact values of the overpotentials of the other materials (MoS2/Ti3C2-1%, -10%, and -20%) were not mentioned, the difference in the activity of the various catalysts could be distinguished from the polarization plots. The enhanced HER activity of the MoS2/Ti3C2-5% catalyst was associated with the strong interfacial coupling between MoS2 and Ti3C2 at that component ratio, which resulted in enhanced charge transfer. Indeed, among the catalysts, the Tafel slope was the smallest for MoS2/Ti3C2-5%; the Tafel slopes of MoS3/Ti3C2-1%, -10%, and -20% were reported to be 109, 74, and 90 mV dec−1, respectively. In addition, the increased number of active sites of MoS2/Ti3C2-5% could afford an enhanced activity, as suggested by the larger Cdl value (61.3 mF cm−2) compared to that of the MoS3/Ti3C2-1, -10, and -20% catalysts (41.3, 57.1, and 47.0 mF cm−2, respectively). According to a recent report by Liang et al., the Co-doped MoS2 hybrid structure with Mo2CTx MXene afforded enhanced alkaline HER performance.105b The study revealed that Co doping could modulate the electronic structure of MoS2 to reduce the kinetic barrier during the water dissociation step, promoting OH− desorption, as reported in earlier work.106 The Mo2CTx MXene synergistically serves as a superior conductive support to promote charge transfer by strong coupling with Co-doped MoS2.105b The Mo 3d XPS profile showed a negative shift in the binding energy peak of Co–MoS2/Mo2CTx (−0.5 eV) and MoS2/Mo2CTx (−0.2 eV) compared to that of pristine MoS2 (the Mo 3d5/2 and 3d3/2 peaks were observed at 229.2 and 232.3 eV, respectively), indicating strong coupling between MoS2 and Mo2CTx, and consequently efficient electron transfer from Mo2CTx to MoS2 (Fig. 11c). The −1.1 eV shift of the Co 2p peak of Co–MoS2/Mo2CTx relative to that of Co–MoS2 suggests strong coupling between Co–MoS2 and Mo2CTx (Fig. 11d). The η10 of Co–MoS2/Mo2CTx for the HER in 1.0 M KOH solution was 112 mV, while those of MoS2, Mo2CTx, Co–MoS2, Co–Mo2CTx, and MoS2/Mo2CTx were 345, 280, 215, 365, and 204 mV, respectively. Furthermore, the smallest Tafel slope of 82 mV dec−1 and Rct of 50 Ω were obtained for Co–MoS2/Mo2CTx, suggesting that Co doping of MoS2 on Mo2CTx MXene effectively enhanced the HER activity of the TMD/MXene hybrid by modulating the electronic structure and further improving the conductivity.
Despite the great achievements in the use of TMDs in electrochemical applications, relatively few examples of hybrid TMDs and MXenes have been reported for the OER, ORR, and CO2RR. However, some strategies for improving the electrocatalytic OER and ORR performance have recently emerged.83,107 Li et al. combined multiphasic 1T/2H-MoSe2 nanosheets with Ti3C2 MXene nanosheets to construct active and stable bifunctional electrocatalysts for water splitting in alkaline solution.83 The formation of such composites can be attributed to the intrinsic properties of MoSe2; the 1T phase is metallic and metastable, while the 2H phase is semiconducting and thermodynamically stable. Thus, the mixed phase comprising 1T- and 2H-MoSe2 may simultaneously afford enhanced HER activity and stability, and the introduction of MXene with high conductivity may enhance the catalytic activity, providing rapid charge transfer in the catalyst. The bifunctional 1T/2H-MoSe2/MXene catalyst showed good electrocatalytic performance towards water splitting in 1.0 M KOH solution. The overpotentials of 1T/2H-MoSe2/MXene to drive the current density of 10 mA cm−2 were 95 mV (HER) and 340 mV (OER), respectively, while comparatively larger values were observed for 2H MoSe2/MXene (123 mV (HER) and 380 mV (OER)). The Tafel slopes of 1T/2H-MoSe2/MXene for the HER (91 mV dec−1) and OER (90 mV dec−1) were smaller than those of 2H-MoSe2/MXene (111 mV dec−1). Furthermore, the evaluation of the long-term stability for overall water splitting, determined by chronopotentiometry, demonstrated better stability, where the current density of ∼10 mA cm−2 was maintained at 1.64 V for 50 h. The study reveals that mixing the 1T/2H phases effectively enhanced the electrocatalytic activity and stability for electrochemical water splitting. Pang et al. provided an interesting approach for fabricating TMD/MXene hybrids for the OER.107b Instead of constructing the hybrid structure by merging the existing TMD and MXene, the TMD/MXene-like structure was synthesized via a bottom-up approach (Fig. 12a). The obtained M2Q2C compounds (M, Q, and X correspond to transition metals, chalcogenides, and carbon or nitrogen, respectively) presented good conductivity and enriched active sites. Using this approach, the authors generated Nb2Se2C compounds via solid-state synthesis. Confirmation of the crystal structure by Rietveld refinement of the XRD pattern revealed that Nb2Se2C was iso-structural with Ta2S2C and belonged to the hexagonal crystal system (Pm1 space group). In addition, the electronic band structures calculated using density functional theory (DFT) indicated that there was an apparent overlap between the conduction and valence bands, suggesting that Nb2Se2C is a semi-metallic material. The electrocatalytic OER performance of Nb2Se2C was tested in 1.0 M KOH electrolyte, and a current density of 10 mA cm−2 was achieved at an overpotential of 321 mV, with a Tafel slope of 238 mV dec−1, whereas NbSe2 required an overpotential of 415 mV, with a Tafel slope of 329 mV dec−1 (Fig. 12b). EIS analysis demonstrated that Nb2Se2C (60.89 Ω) had smaller charge transfer resistance than NbSe2 (184.3 Ω), RuO2 (60.89 Ω), and IrO2 (84.59 Ω). In addition, chronoamperometry indicated that Nb2Se2C showed good long-term stability, where the current density of 10 mA cm−2 was maintained (>98.0%) at 350 mV for 24 h. Recently, Yang et al. reported a TMD/MXene hybrid quantum dot (QD) structure with carbon nanotubes (CNTs) as an electrocatalyst for the ORR under alkaline conditions (Fig. 12c).107a The higher surface area of QD MoS2 with exposed edge atoms relative to that of the nanosheets is believed to provide extra active sites. Hybrid multiwalled CNTs decorated with MoS2 and Ti3C2Tx QDs (MoS2QDs@Ti3C2TxQDs@MWCNTs), which interact with each other through van der Waals forces, were prepared by simple stoichiometric mixing in solution. The hybrid structure exhibited outstanding ORR activity; the half-wave potential was 0.75 V (vs. RHE) with a Tafel slope of ∼90 mV dec−1, while that of commercial Pt/C was 0.80 V with a Tafel slope of 89 mV dec−1 (Fig. 12d). However, the mass activity of the MoS2QDs@Ti3C2TxQDs@MWCNTs (∼27 A g−1) at 0.35 V was somewhat smaller than that of Pt/C (∼36 A g−1), requiring further optimization of the hybrid structure.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the concept for a “TMD-MXene”-like compound. (b) OER polarization curves in 0.1 M KOH solution (left) with the comparison of the overpotentials at 10 mA cm−2 (inset) and Tafel plots (right) of RuO2, IrO2, Nb2Se2C, NbSe2, and Nb2C. Reproduced with permission.107b Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic diagram of the preparation of MoS2QDs@Ti3C2TxQDs@MWCNTs. (d) ORR polarization curves in O2-saturated 1.0 M KOH solution (left) and Tafel plots (right) of (i) MoS2QDs@Ti3C2TxQDs@MWCNTs-1, (ii) MoS2QDs@Ti3C2TxQDs@MWCNTs-2, (iii) MoS2QDs@Ti3C2TxQDs@MWCNTs-3, (iv) Ti3C2Tx QDs, (v) MWCNTs, (vi) MoS2 QDs, and (vii) Pt/C at 0.5 V. Reproduced with permission.107a Copyright 2019, Elsevier B.V. 
So far, studies on the TMD/MXene hybrid system have mainly focused on their inherent high catalytic activity. The strategy for enhancing electron transfer by the SB-free 2D contact with highly conductive MXene would stimulate new ideas for the next designs of catalysts. Despite the existing promising reports, the catalytic stability of the TMD/MXene hybrids is still far from being satisfactory due to the poor oxygen resistance of MXene. Therefore, the efforts to enhance the oxidation stability of MXene or to explore less oxidative catalysis should be exerted in the future works.
6. Summary and outlook
The development of 2D materials has received substantial attention because of the outstanding physical and electrical properties of these materials. Atomic flat sheets without defects could be laminated by secondary bonding, providing flexibility and wide inter-sheet space, allowing facile ion intercalation and extraction without destroying the structures. Properties such as the electrical carrier mobility, work function, hydrophilicity, and transparency can be adjusted by controlling the layer thickness or by surface treatment, and importantly, SB-free MSJs with dramatically lower contact resistance can be achieved. In this review, we systematically discussed the recent advances in 2D TMD-decorated MXene hybrid composites for electrochemical electrode-based applications such as batteries, supercapacitors, water splitting, and fuel cells. Among the 2D materials, MXenes and TMDs have advantages such as large specific area, good electrical properties, and an atomically thin layered structure, making them prominent candidates for various applications. In particular, the synergy from the construction of 2D heterojunctions between semiconducting TMDs and metallic MXenes could favorably influence electrochemical applications by modulating the work function or binding strength of the MSJ. Here, we present a comprehensive overview in Table 1, summarizing the synthesis approaches, material compositions, and applications of TMD-decorated MXenes as electrode materials for energy conversion and storage, which have been presented in recent years. In addition, recent developments have suggested the advantages of TMD-decorated MXene materials in diverse research applications.84,108
Table 1 Summary of synthesis, applications, and their performance of TMD/MXenes




Parent materials
Synthesis
Initial reversible capacity (mA h g−1/A g−1)
Cycling performance (residual capacity/cycles@A−1)
Ref.


TMD
MXene




Li-ion batteries


MoS2
Ti3C2
Hydrothermal
451.3/1
79%/1300@1

7a



MoS2
V4C3
Hydrothermal
933.7/1
67%/450@1

76a



MoS2
Ti3C2Tx

In situ sulfidation
554/0.1
92%/100@1

76c



MoS2
Ti3C2Tx
Hydrothermal
339/0.1
98%/70@0.1

93



MoS2
Ti3C2
Solid state sintering
246.1/0.05
100%/200@0.1

72



MoS2
Ti3C2
Freeze-drying and thermal treatment
645.4/0.5
130%/1390@5

71b



MoS2
Ti3C2@C
Hydrothermal
1750/0.2
95%/3000@20

73



SnS2/SnS4
Ti3C2Tx
Solvothermal and calcination
462.3/0.1
47%/500@5

11e



MoS2
Ti3C2
Electrostatic attraction and (CTAB)-directed growth
914/0.1
100%/1000@0.5

75



Na-ion batteries


MoS2
Ti3C2
Electrostatic attraction and (CTAB)-directed growth
310/1
—

75



MoSe2
Ti3C2Tx
Hydrothermal
559/0.5
91%/400@2

57a



SnS2
Ti3C2Tx
Hydrothermal
377/0.1
85%/200 @ 0.1

6



MoS2
Ti3C2Tx
Hydrothermal
285.4/0.1
88%/100 @ 0.1

11g



MoS2
Ti3C2Tx
Hydrothermal
356.2/0.1
93%/70 @ 0.1

93



Other batteries


MoS2
Ti3C2Tx
Hydrothermal
K-ion
233.1/0.1
75.9%/100@0.05

57b



MoS2
Ti3C2Tx
Hydrothermal
Mg-ion
165/0.5
65%/50@0.05

96a



1T-2H MoS2
Ti3C2
Hydrothermal
Li–S
1014.1/0.5 C
79%/300@0.5 C

96b







TMD
MXene
synthesis
Specific capacitance
Ref.




Supercapacitor


MoS2
Ti3C2Tx
Laser etching
173.6 F cm−3

58e



1TWS2
Ti3C2
Sonication
157 F g−1

10







TMD
MXene
Synthesis
Overpotential at 10 mA cm−2 (mV)
Tafel slope (mV dec−1)
Loading (mg cm−2)
Electrolyte
Ref.




HER


MoS2
Mo2CTx
Hydrothermal
176
98
0.71
1 M KOH

76b



MoS2
Ti3C2
Microwave heating
110
∼40
0.071
0.5 M H2SO4

74



MoS2
Ti3C2@C
Hydrothermal
135
45
0.4
0.5 M H2SO4

73



MoS2
Ti3C2
Hydrothermal
∼280
68
—
0.5 M H2SO4

105a



Co–MoS2
Mo2CTx
Annealing
112
82
0.354
1 M KOH

105b



MoSe2
Ti3C2
Hydrothermal
180
91
0.28
0.5 M H2SO4

82



1T/2H MoSe2
Ti3C2
Hydrothermal
95
90
2∼3
1 M KOH

83







OER


NbSe2
Nb2C
Solid state sintering
321
238
∼2.65
1 M KOH

107b



1T/2H MoSe2
Ti3C2
Hydrothermal
340
91
2∼3
1 M KOH

83







TMD
MXene
Synthesis

E
1/2

Mass activity
Tafel slope (mV dec−1)
Electrolyte
Ref.




ORR


MoS2
Ti3C2Tx
Hydrothermal
0.75 V
∼27 A g−1
90
1 M KOH

107a





Because the electrocatalytic reaction takes place on the surface of the materials, research on MXenes with different termini on the basal plane, such as O, OH, or F, would be critical for such applications.109 Therefore, careful surface modification of MXenes by controlling the amount and type of terminal elements will play a significant role in enhancing the performance of energy conversion applications using TMD–MXene hybrids. Furthermore, as described earlier, the surface termination of MXenes is affected by the type of etchant used for the extraction of the ‘A’ site atoms in MAX powders. Thus, MXenes with F-termini are often generated due to the frequent use of F-containing etchants such as HF. MXenes with different functional groups, such as F- and OH-terminated MXenes, may provide remarkable interactions with not only TMDs, but also reactants. Further diversification of the surface treatment is required to optimize or enhance the catalytic performance. For example, the metal-free sulfur nanoparticles could be treated on the surface of MXene by melt diffusion.110 The strong interaction between Ti and S atoms can replace the hydroxyl groups on the MXene. To utilize the electronic interaction or hydrogen bonding formation, grafting charged or O-containing polymers, such as polyvinyl alcohol (PVA), poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride (PDDA), poly(2-(dimethylamino)ethyl methacrylate (PDMAEMA), and sodium alginate (SA), onto MXene might be another great tool for surface engineering to modulate the electrical and mechanical properties.13,22c,111 However, surface engineering should address the persistent concern about restacking between the 2D materials due to van der Waals or hydrogen bonding interactions. Despite the efforts of many research groups, the facile oxidation of MXenes has not been fully resolved, leading to a deleterious impact on the catalytic performance of TMD/MXene composites. Thus, oxidative or oxygen-involved catalytic applications such as the OER or ORR would be negatively impacted by degradation problems. Catalyst architectures beyond the 2D–2D heterostructure should be considered, as specified in this review. The development of QD MoS2 and MXenes on CNTs proved the possibility of other heterojunction types for electrochemical applications (ORR and MOR), although these species were deposited on the CNTs.107a Thus, improving and developing the interfacial and spatial design of TMD/MXene composites is inevitable for achieving advanced electrochemical applications.
Research on energy storage and conversion applications with TMD/MXene hybrids is in the infancy stage, and much has to be done to identify the ideal structural features, and synthesis routes. Thus far, complementary computational studies have been performed with various hypothetical TMD/MXene hybrid models, and many TMD/MXene hybrid candidates have been proposed as electrode materials for energy-related applications. However, theoretical considerations are generally based on oversimplified and idealized models because of the limited computing resources, leading to an overly optimistic vision for these materials.112 Therefore, it is necessary to develop methodologies for synthesizing structurally well-defined TMD/MXene hybrids, which are forecasted to afford excellent performance, and to test their performance. In doing so, the surface chemistry of TMD/MXene hybrids and their electrochemical reaction mechanisms should be probed carefully by both theoretical and experimental studies based on advanced in situ techniques, such as X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS), IR, Raman, and Mössbauer spectroscopy. Such studies would lead to the development of improved theoretical models that can fill the gap between experimentation and computation. Additionally, the emerging machine-learning technique would be beneficial for screening the possible composition, surface, and crystal structure of these materials for electrochemical applications, including the HER, OER, CO2RR, and ORR. Finally, we hope that this review will accelerate investigations of the myriad combinations of TMD/MXene hybrids to realize the advent of next-generation energy-related technologies.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This study was financially supported by the Department of Science and Technology (DST) under the joint India-Korea project (INT/Korea/P-52). This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF-2020R1A2B5B03002475, NRF-2019R1A6A1A11044070, NRF-2019M3E6A1064709, NRF-2020R1A6A3A01096557, and NRF-2020K1A3A1A19088726), the Korea Basic Science Institute under the R&D program (Project No. C38530), Korea University Future Research Grant (KU-FRG), and Korea University Grant to T. K.
References

  (a) B.-M. Jun, S. Kim, J. Heo, C. M. Park, N. Her, M. Jang, Y. Huang, J. Han and Y. Yoon, Review of MXenes as new nanomaterials for energy storage/delivery and selected environmental applications, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 471–487 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) F. Wang, X. Wu, X. Yuan, Z. Liu, Y. Zhang, L. Fu, Y. Zhu, Q. Zhou, Y. Wu and W. Huang, Latest advances in supercapacitors: from new electrode materials to novel device designs, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 6816–6854 RSC ; 
  (c) R. Yadav, A. Subhash, N. Chemmenchery and B. Kandasubramanian, Graphene and graphene oxide for fuel cell technology, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2018, 57, 9333–9350 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. Armand and J.-M. Tarascon, Building better batteries, Nature, 2008, 451, 652–657 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Materials for electrochemical capacitors, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 845–854 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) M. R. Lukatskaya, B. Dunn and Y. Gogotsi, Multidimensional materials and device architectures for future hybrid energy storage, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12647 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (d) Q. Pang, X. Liang, C. Y. Kwok and L. F. Nazar, Advances in lithium–sulfur batteries based on multifunctional cathodes and electrolytes, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16132 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) Y. Zheng and S.-Z. Qiao, N-doping goes sp-hybridized, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 900–902 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (f) Y. Zhao, N. Yang, H. Yao, D. Liu, L. Song, J. Zhu, S. Li, L. Gu, K. Lin and D. Wang, Stereodefined Codoping of sp-N and S Atoms in Few-Layer Graphdiyne for Oxygen Evolution Reaction, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 7240–7244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tan, X. Cao, X.-J. Wu, Q. He, J. Yang, X. Zhang, J. Chen, W. Zhao, S. Han, G.-H. Nam, M. Sindoro and H. Zhang, Recent advances in ultrathin two-dimensional nanomaterials, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 6225–6331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) Y. Sun, D. Chen and Z. Liang, Two-dimensional MXenes for energy storage and conversion applications, Mater. Today, Energy, 2017, 5, 22–36 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) M.-Q. Zhao, M. Torelli, C. E. Ren, M. Ghidiu, Z. Ling, B. Anasori, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, 2D titanium carbide and transition metal oxides hybrid electrodes for Li-ion storage, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 603–613 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) B. Anasori, M. R. Lukatskaya and Y. Gogotsi, 2D metal carbides and nitrides (MXenes) for energy storage, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 16098 CrossRef CAS .
D. Xiong, X. Li, Z. Bai and S. Lu, Recent advances in layered Ti3C2Tx MXene for electrochemical energy storage, Small, 2018, 14, 1703419 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wu, P. Nie, L. Wu, H. Dou and X. Zhang, 2D MXene/SnS2 composites as high-performance anodes for sodium ion batteries, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 334, 932–938 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) S. Luan, M. Han, Y. Xi, K. Wei, Y. Wang, J. Zhou, L. Hou and F. Gao, MoS2-decorated 2D Ti3C2 (MXene): a high-performance anode material for lithium-ion batteries, Ionics, 2020, 26, 51–59 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Q. Zhao, X. Xie, C. E. Ren, T. Makaryan, B. Anasori, G. Wang and Y. Gogotsi, Hollow MXene spheres and 3D macroporous MXene frameworks for Na-ion storage, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702410 CrossRef PubMed .

  (a) W. Choi, N. Choudhary, G. H. Han, J. Park, D. Akinwande and Y. H. Lee, Recent development of two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides and their applications, Mater. Today, 2017, 20, 116–130 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. Manzeli, D. Ovchinnikov, D. Pasquier, O. V. Yazyev and A. Kis, 2D transition metal dichalcogenides, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17033 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. Chhowalla, H. S. Shin, G. Eda, L.-J. Li, K. P. Loh and H. Zhang, The chemistry of two-dimensional layered transition metal dichalcogenide nanosheets, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 263–275 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) L. Lin, P. Sherrell, Y. Liu, W. Lei, S. Zhang, H. Zhang, G. G. Wallace and J. Chen, Engineered 2D Transition Metal Dichalcogenides—A Vision of Viable Hydrogen Evolution Reaction Catalysis, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903870 CrossRef CAS .
J. Vyskočil, C. C. Mayorga-Martinez, K. Szőkölová, A. Dash, J. Gonzalez-Julian, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, 2D Stacks of MXene Ti3C2 and 1T-Phase WS2 with Enhanced Capacitive Behavior, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 3982–3986 CrossRef .

  (a) J. You, C. Si, J. Zhou and Z. Sun, Contacting MoS2 to MXene: Vanishing p-Type Schottky Barrier and Enhanced Hydrogen Evolution Catalysis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 3719–3726 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y. Shao, Q. Wang, H. Pan and X. Shi, van der Waals Contact to 2D Semiconductors with a Switchable Electric Dipole: Achieving Both n- and p-Type Ohmic Contacts to Metals with a Wide Range of Work Functions, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2020, 6, 1900981 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) J. Wang, X. Zhou, M. Yang, D. Cao, X. Chen and H. Shu, Interface and polarization effects induced Schottky-barrier-free contacts in two-dimensional MXene/GaN heterojunctions, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 7350–7357 RSC ; 
  (d) Q. Wang, K. Dou and X. Shi, Band alignment in multilayered semiconductor homojunctions supported on metals, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 959–967 RSC ; 
  (e) J. Li, L. Han, Y. Li, J. Li, G. Zhu, X. Zhang, T. Lu and L. Pan, MXene-decorated SnS2/Sn3S4 hybrid as anode material for high-rate lithium-ion batteries, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 380, 122590 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) M. Chen, Z. Zheng, Q. Wang, Y. Zhang, X. Ma, C. Shen, D. Xu, J. Liu, Y. Liu, P. Gionet, I. O’Connor, L. Pinnell, J. Wang, E. Gratz, R. Arsenault and Y. Wang, Closed Loop Recycling of Electric Vehicle Batteries to Enable Ultra-high Quality Cathode Powder, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 1654 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (g) Y. Wu, P. Nie, J. Jiang, B. Ding, H. Dou and X. Zhang, MoS2-Nanosheet-Decorated 2D Titanium Carbide (MXene) as High-Performance Anodes for Sodium-Ion Batteries, ChemElectroChem, 2017, 4, 1560–1565 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) V. M. H. Ng, H. Huang, K. Zhou, P. S. Lee, W. Que, J. Z. Xu and L. B. Kong, Recent progress in layered transition metal carbides and/or nitrides (MXenes) and their composites: synthesis and applications, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3039–3068 RSC ; 
  (b) X. Chia, A. Y. S. Eng, A. Ambrosi, S. M. Tan and M. Pumera, Electrochemistry
of nanostructured layered transition-metal dichalcogenides, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 11941–11966 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) N. Hemanth and B. Kandasubramanian, Recent advances in 2D MXenes for enhanced cation intercalation in energy harvesting applications: a review, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 392, 123678 CrossRef CAS .
F. Shahzad, M. Alhabeb, C. B. Hatter, B. Anasori, S. M. Hong, C. M. Koo and Y. Gogotsi, Electromagnetic interference shielding with 2D transition metal carbides (MXenes), Science, 2016, 353, 1137–1140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) C. Eames and M. S. Islam, Ion intercalation into two-dimensional transition-metal carbides: global screening for new high-capacity battery materials, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 16270–16276 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) M. R. Lukatskaya, S. Kota, Z. Lin, M.-Q. Zhao, N. Shpigel, M. D. Levi, J. Halim, P.-L. Taberna, M. W. Barsoum, P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Ultra-high-rate pseudocapacitive energy storage in two-dimensional transition metal carbides, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17105 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ghidiu, M. R. Lukatskaya, M.-Q. Zhao, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Conductive two-dimensional titanium carbide ‘clay’with high volumetric capacitance, Nature, 2014, 516, 78–81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Lukatskaya, O. Mashtalir, C. E. Ren, Y. Dall’Agnese, P. Rozier, P. L. Taberna, M. Naguib, P. Simon, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Cation intercalation and high volumetric capacitance of two-dimensional titanium carbide, Science, 2013, 341, 1502–1505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, C. Garnero, G. Rochard, D. Magne, S. Morisset, S. Hurand, P. Chartier, J. Rousseau, T. Cabioc'h, C. Coutanceau, V. Mauchamp and S. Célérier, A new etching environment (FeF3/HCl) for the synthesis of two-dimensional titanium carbide MXenes: a route towards selective reactivity vs. water, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 22012–22023 RSC .
P. Urbankowski, B. Anasori, T. Makaryan, D. Er, S. Kota, P. L. Walsh, M. Zhao, V. B. Shenoy, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Synthesis of two-dimensional titanium nitride Ti4N3 (MXene), Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 11385–11391 RSC .
C. Xu, L. Wang, Z. Liu, L. Chen, J. Guo, N. Kang, X.-L. Ma, H.-M. Cheng and W. Ren, Large-area high-quality 2D ultrathin Mo2C superconducting crystals, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1135–1141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Verger, C. Xu, V. Natu, H.-M. Cheng, W. Ren and M. W. Barsoum, Overview of the synthesis of MXenes and other ultrathin 2D transition metal carbides and nitrides, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2019, 23, 149–163 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. Halim, S. Kota, M. R. Lukatskaya, M. Naguib, M. Q. Zhao, E. J. Moon, J. Pitock, J. Nanda, S. J. May, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Synthesis and characterization of 2D molybdenum carbide (MXene), Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3118–3127 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. Zhou, X. Zha, F. Y. Chen, Q. Ye, P. Eklund, S. Du and Q. Huang, A two-dimensional zirconium carbide by selective etching of Al3C3 from nanolaminated Zr3Al3C5, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 5008–5013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) O. Mashtalir, M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, Y. Dall’Agnese, M. Heon, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Intercalation and delamination of layered carbides and carbonitrides, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1716 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) M. Naguib, R. R. Unocic, B. L. Armstrong and J. Nanda, Large-scale delamination of multi-layers transition metal carbides and carbonitrides “MXenes”, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 9353–9358 RSC ; 
  (c) Z. Ling, C. E. Ren, M.-Q. Zhao, J. Yang, J. M. Giammarco, J. Qiu, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Flexible and conductive MXene films and nanocomposites with high capacitance, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 16676–16681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hu, M. Hu, Z. Li, H. Zhang, C. Zhang, J. Wang and X. Wang, Interlayer coupling in two-dimensional titanium carbide MXenes, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 20256–20260 RSC .

  (a) J. Pang, R. G. Mendes, A. Bachmatiuk, L. Zhao, H. Q. Ta, T. Gemming, H. Liu, Z. Liu and M. H. Rummeli, Applications of 2D MXenes in energy conversion and storage systems, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 72–133 RSC ; 
  (b) A. L. Ivanovskii and A. N. Enyashin, Graphene-like transition-metal nanocarbides and nanonitrides, Russ. Chem. Rev., 2013, 82, 735–746 CrossRef .

  (a) H. Kim, Z. Wang and H. N. Alshareef, MXetronics: Electronic and photonic applications of MXenes, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 179–197 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) L. Chen, X. Shi, N. Yu, X. Zhang, X. Du and J. Lin, Measurement and analysis of thermal conductivity of Ti3C2Tx MXene films, Materials, 2018, 11, 1701 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (c) Z. Fu, N. Wang, D. Legut, C. Si, Q. Zhang, S. Du, T. C. Germann, J. S. Francisco and R. Zhang, Rational design of flexible two-dimensional MXenes with multiple functionalities, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 11980–12031 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) X.-H. Zha, Q. Huang, J. He, H. He, J. Zhai, J. S. Francisco and S. Du, The thermal and electrical properties of the promising semiconductor MXene Hf2 CO2, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 27971 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Hu, J. Yang, W. Li, X. Wang and C. M. Li, Quantifying the rigidity of 2D carbides (MXenes), Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 2115–2121 RSC .
L. Verger, V. Natu, M. Carey and M. W. Barsoum, MXenes: an introduction of their synthesis, select properties, and applications, Trends Chem., 2019, 1, 656–669 CrossRef CAS .
M. Khazaei, A. Ranjbar, M. Arai, T. Sasaki and S. Yunoki, Electronic properties and applications of MXenes: a theoretical review, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 2488–2503 RSC .
R. M. Ronchi, J. T. Arantes and S. F. Santos, Synthesis, structure, properties and applications of MXenes: Current status and perspectives, Ceram. Int., 2019, 45, 18167–18188 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xie and P. R. C. Kent, Hybrid density functional study of structural and electronic properties of functionalized Tin+1Xn (X = C, N) monolayers, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 235441 CrossRef .

  (a) K. Rasool, R. P. Pandey, P. A. Rasheed, S. Buczek, Y. Gogotsi and K. A. Mahmoud, Water treatment and environmental remediation applications of two-dimensional metal carbides (MXenes), Mater. Today, 2019, 30, 80–102 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. Zhu, E. Ha, G. Zhao, Y. Zhou, D. Huang, G. Yue, L. Hu, N. Sun, Y. Wang, L. Y. S. Lee, C. Xu, K.-Y. Wong, D. Astruc and P. Zhao, Recent advance in MXenes: A promising 2D material for catalysis, sensor and chemical adsorption, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2017, 352, 306–327 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) K. Huang, Z. Li, J. Lin, G. Han and P. Huang, Two-dimensional transition metal carbides and nitrides (MXenes) for biomedical applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 5109–5124 RSC .

  (a) M. Greaves, S. Barg and M. A. Bissett, MXene-Based Anodes for Metal-Ion Batteries, Batteries Supercaps, 2020, 3, 214–235 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) V. Bayram, M. Ghidiu, J. J. Byun, S. D. Rawson, P. Yang, S. A. McDonald, M. Lindley, S. Fairclough, S. J. Haigh, P. J. Withers, M. W. Barsoum, I. A. Kinloch and S. Barg, MXene Tunable Lamellae Architectures for Supercapacitor Electrodes, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 411–422 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) G. Gao, A. P. O’Mullane and A. Du, 2D MXenes: a new family of promising catalysts for the hydrogen evolution reaction, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 494–500 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) T. P. Nguyen, D. M. T. Nguyen, H. K. Le, D.-V. N. Vo, S. S. Lam, R. S. Varma, M. Shokouhimehr, C. C. Nguyen and Q. Van, Le, MXenes: Applications in electrocatalytic, photocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction and CO2 reduction, Mol. Catal., 2020, 486, 110850 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) R. Zang, P. Li and G. Wang, Bimetallic Sulfide/Sulfur Doped T3C2Tx MXene Nanocomposites as High-performance Anode Materials for Sodium-ion Batteries, Chem. Res. Chin. Univ., 2020, 36, 431–438 CrossRef CAS .
J. Nan, X. Guo, J. Xiao, X. Li, W. Chen, W. Wu, H. Liu, Y. Wang, M. Wu and G. Wang, Nanoengineering of 2D MXene-based materials for energy storage applications, Small, 2019, 1902085 Search PubMed .
H. Li, J. Wu, Z. Yin and H. Zhang, Preparation and applications of mechanically exfoliated single-layer and multilayer MoS2 and WSe2 nanosheets, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 1067–1075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) M. Ahmadi, O. Zabihi, S. Jeon, M. Yoonessi, A. Dasari, S. Ramakrishna and M. Naebe, 2D transition metal dichalcogenide nanomaterials: advances, opportunities, and challenges in multi-functional polymer nanocomposites, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 845–883 RSC ; 
  (b) G. Eda, H. Yamaguchi, D. Voiry, T. Fujita, M. Chen and M. Chhowalla, Photoluminescence from chemically exfoliated MoS2, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5111–5116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Adilbekova, Y. Lin, E. Yengel, H. Faber, G. Harrison, Y. Firdaus, A. El-Labban, D. H. Anjum, V. Tung and T. D. Anthopoulos, Liquid phase exfoliation of MoS2 and WS2 in aqueous ammonia and their application in highly efficient organic solar cells, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 5259–5264 RSC .

  (a) B. A. Joyce, Molecular beam epitaxy, Rep. Prog. Phys., 1985, 48, 1637–1697 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) W. Pacuski, M. Grzeszczyk, K. Nogajewski, A. Bogucki, K. Oreszczuk, J. Kucharek, K. E. Połczyńska, B. Seredyński, A. Rodek, R. Bożek, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, S. Kret, J. Sadowski, T. Kazimierczuk, M. Potemski and P. Kossacki, Narrow Excitonic Lines and Large-Scale Homogeneity of Transition-Metal Dichalcogenide Monolayers
Grown by Molecular Beam Epitaxy on Hexagonal Boron Nitride, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 3058–3066 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) C. Cong, J. Shang, X. Wu, B. Cao, N. Peimyoo, C. Qiu, L. Sun and T. Yu, Synthesis and Optical Properties of Large-Area Single-Crystalline 2D Semiconductor WS2 Monolayer from Chemical Vapor Deposition, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2014, 2, 131–136 CrossRef ; 
  (b) Y. H. Lee, X. Q. Zhang, W. Zhang, M. T. Chang, C. T. Lin, K. D. Chang, Y. C. Yu, J. T. W. Wang, C. S. Chang, L. J. Li and T.-W. Lin, Synthesis of large-area MoS2 atomic layers with chemical vapor deposition, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2320–2325 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) S. Najmaei, Z. Liu, W. Zhou, X. Zou, G. Shi, S. Lei, B. I. Yakobson, J.-C. Idrobo, P. M. Ajayan and J. Lou, Vapour phase growth and grain boundary structure of molybdenum disulphide atomic layers, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 754–759 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) T. A. Empante, Y. Zhou, V. Klee, A. E. Nguyen, I. H. Lu, M. D. Valentin, S. A. Naghibi Alvillar, E. Preciado, A. J. Berges, C. S. Merida, M. Gomez, S. Bobek, M. Isarraraz, E. J. Reed and L. Bartels, Chemical Vapor Deposition Growth of Few-Layer MoTe2 in the 2H, 1T′, and 1T Phases: Tunable Properties of MoTe2 Films, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 900–905 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) X. Wang, Y. Gong, G. Shi, W. L. Chow, K. Keyshar, G. Ye, R. Vajtai, J. Lou, Z. Liu, E. Ringe, B. K. Tay and P. M. Ajayan, Chemical Vapor Deposition Growth of Crystalline Monolayer MoSe2, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5125–5131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) Y.-F. Lim, K. Priyadarshi, F. Bussolotti, P. K. Gogoi, X. Cui, M. Yang, J. Pan, S. W. Tong, S. Wang, S. J. Pennycook, K. E. J. Goh, A. T. S. Wee, S. L. Wong and D. Chi, Modification of Vapor Phase Concentrations in MoS2 Growth Using a NiO Foam Barrier, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 1339–1349 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) D. Li, Z. Xiao, S. Mu, F. Wang, Y. Liu, J. Song, X. Huang, L. Jiang, J. Xiao, L. Liu, S. Ducharme, B. Cui, X. Hong, L. Jiang, J.-F. Silvain and Y. Lu, A Facile Space-Confined Solid-Phase Sulfurization Strategy for Growth of High-Quality Ultrathin Molybdenum Disulfide Single Crystals, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 2021–2032 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) Y. Zhang, Q. Ji, G.-F. Han, J. Ju, J. Shi, D. Ma, J. Sun, Y. Zhang, M. Li, X.-Y. Lang, Y. Zhang and Z. Liu, Dendritic, Transferable, Strictly Monolayer MoS2 Flakes Synthesized on SrTiO3 Single Crystals for Efficient Electrocatalytic Applications, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8617–8624 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) D. Wu, T. Min, J. Zhou, C. Li, G. Ma, G. Lu, M. Xia and Z. Gu, Effect of Substrate symmetry on the dendrite morphology of MoS2 Film synthesized by CVD, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 15166 CrossRef PubMed .
G. W. Shim, W. Hong, S. Y. Yang and S.-Y. Choi, Tuning the catalytic functionality of transition metal dichalcogenides grown by chemical vapour deposition, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 14950–14968 RSC .

  (a) Y. Zhan, Z. Liu, S. Najmaei, P. M. Ajayan and J. Lou, Large-Area Vapor-Phase Growth and Characterization of MoS2 Atomic Layers on a SiO2 Substrate, Small, 2012, 8, 966–971 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) J. Park, N. Choudhary, J. Smith, G. Lee, M. Kim and W. Choi, Thickness modulated MoS2 grown by chemical vapor deposition for transparent and flexible electronic devices, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 012104 CrossRef .

  (a) K.-K. Liu, W. Zhang, Y.-H. Lee, Y.-C. Lin, M.-T. Chang, C.-Y. Su, C.-S. Chang, H. Li, Y. Shi, H. Zhang, C.-S. Lai and L.-J. Li, Growth of large-area and highly crystalline MoS2 thin layers on insulating substrates, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1538–1544 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) A. Hasani, Q. V. Le, M. Tekalgne, M.-J. Choi, S. Choi, T. H. Lee, H. Kim, S. H. Ahn, H. W. Jang and S. Y. Kim, Fabrication of a WS2/p-Si Heterostructure Photocathode Using Direct Hybrid Thermolysis, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 29910–29916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) K. Kang, S. Xie, L. Huang, Y. Han, P. Y. Huang, K. F. Mak, C.-J. Kim, D. Muller and J. Park, High-mobility three-atom-thick semiconducting films with wafer-scale homogeneity, Nature, 2015, 520, 656–660 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) S. M. Eichfeld, L. Hossain, Y.-C. Lin, A. F. Piasecki, B. Kupp, A. G. Birdwell, R. A. Burke, N. Lu, X. Peng, J. Li, A. Azcatl, S. McDonnell, R. M. Wallace, M. J. Kim, T. S. Mayer, J. M. Redwing and J. A. Robinson, Highly scalable, atomically thin WSe2 grown via metal–organic chemical vapor deposition, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 2080–2087 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) B. Kalanyan, W. A. Kimes, R. Beams, S. J. Stranick, E. Garratt, I. Kalish, A. V. Davydov, R. K. Kanjolia and J. E. Maslar, Rapid wafer-scale growth of polycrystalline 2H-MoS2 by pulsed metal–organic chemical vapor deposition, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 6279–6288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Cohen, A. Patsha, P. K. Mohapatra, M. Kazes, K. Ranganathan, L. Houben, D. Oron and A. Ismach, Growth-Etch Metal–Organic Chemical Vapor Deposition Approach of WS2 Atomic Layers, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 526–538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) L. K. Tan, B. Liu, J. H. Teng, S. Guo, H. Y. Low and K. P. Loh, Atomic layer deposition of a MoS2 film, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 10584–10588 RSC ; 
  (b) J.-G. Song, J. Park, W. Lee, T. Choi, H. Jung, C. W. Lee, S.-H. Hwang, J. M. Myoung, J.-H. Jung, S.-H. Kim, C. Lansalot-Matras and H. Kim, Layer-controlled, wafer-scale, and conformal synthesis of tungsten disulfide nanosheets using atomic layer deposition, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 11333–11340 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) G.-H. Park, K. Nielsch and A. Thomas, 2D Transition Metal Dichalcogenide Thin Films Obtained by Chemical Gas Phase Deposition Techniques, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1800688 CrossRef .

  (a) S. Balasubramanyam, M. J. M. Merkx, M. A. Verheijen, W. M. M. Kessels, A. J. M. Mackus and A. A. Bol, Area-Selective Atomic Layer Deposition of Two-Dimensional WS2 Nanolayers, ACS Mater. Lett., 2020, 2, 511–518 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) C. Yue, Y. Wang, H. Liu, L. Chen, H. Zhu and Q. Sun, Controlled growth of MoS2 by atomic layer deposition on patterned gold pads, J. Cryst. Growth, 2020, 541, 125683 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Wilson and A. Yoffe, The transition metal dichalcogenides discussion and interpretation of the observed optical, electrical and structural properties, Adv. Phys., 1969, 18, 193–335 CrossRef CAS .
R. Lv, J. A. Robinson, R. E. Schaak, D. Sun, Y. Sun, T. E. Mallouk and M. Terrones, Transition metal dichalcogenides and beyond: synthesis, properties, and applications of single-and few-layer nanosheets, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 56–64 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bertolazzi, J. Brivio and A. Kis, Stretching and breaking of ultrathin MoS2, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9703–9709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. F. Mak, C. Lee, J. Hone, J. Shan and T. F. Heinz, Atomically thin MoS2: a new direct-gap semiconductor, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 136805 CrossRef PubMed .

  (a) B. Radisavljevic, A. Radenovic, J. Brivio, V. Giacometti and A. Kis, Single-layer MoS2 transistors, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 147–150 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman and M. S. Strano, Electronics and optoelectronics of two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 699–712 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pumera, Z. Sofer and A. Ambrosi, Layered transition metal dichalcogenides for electrochemical energy generation and storage, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 8981–8987 RSC .

  (a) H. Li, Z. Yin, Q. He, H. Li, X. Huang, G. Lu, D. W. H. Fam, A. I. Y. Tok, Q. Zhang and H. Zhang, Fabrication of Single- and Multilayer MoS2 Film-Based Field-Effect Transistors for Sensing NO at Room Temperature, Small, 2012, 8, 63–67 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) J. Ping, Z. Fan, M. Sindoro, Y. Ying and H. Zhang, Recent advances in sensing applications of two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenide nanosheets and their composites, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1605817 CrossRef .

  (a) U. Gupta and C. N. R. Rao, Hydrogen generation by water splitting using MoS2 and other transition metal dichalcogenides, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 49–65 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) D. Voiry, H. Yamaguchi, J. Li, R. Silva, D. C. Alves, T. Fujita, M. Chen, T. Asefa, V. B. Shenoy, G. Eda and M. Chhowalla, Enhanced catalytic activity in strained chemically exfoliated WS2 nanosheets for hydrogen evolution, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 850–855 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) M. A. Lukowski, A. S. Daniel, F. Meng, A. Forticaux, L. Li and S. Jin, Enhanced hydrogen evolution catalysis from chemically exfoliated metallic MoS2 nanosheets, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10274–10277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) K. F. Mak and J. Shan, Photonics and optoelectronics of 2D semiconductor transition metal dichalcogenides, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 216–226 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. Wang, L. Yu, Y.-H. Lee, Y. Shi, A. Hsu, M. L. Chin, L.-J. Li, M. Dubey, J. Kong and T. Palacios, Integrated Circuits Based on Bilayer MoS2 Transistors, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4674–4680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) M. Acerce, D. Voiry and M. Chhowalla, Metallic 1T phase MoS2 nanosheets as supercapacitor electrode materials, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 313–318 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) X. Xie, Z. Ao, D. Su, J. Zhang and G. Wang, MoS2/Graphene Composite Anodes with Enhanced Performance for Sodium-Ion Batteries: The Role of the Two-Dimensional Heterointerface, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 1393–1403 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) K. Chang and W. Chen, In situ synthesis of MoS2/graphene nanosheet composites with extraordinarily high electrochemical performance for lithium ion batteries, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4252–4254 RSC ; 
  (d) N. Choudhary, M. Patel, Y.-H. Ho, N. B. Dahotre, W. Lee, J. Y. Hwang and W. Choi, Directly deposited MoS2 thin film electrodes for high performance supercapacitors, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 24049–24054 RSC .

  (a) E. Xu, Y. Zhang, H. Wang, Z. Zhu, J. Quan, Y. Chang, P. Li, D. Yu and Y. Jiang, Ultrafast kinetics net electrode assembled via MoSe2/MXene heterojunction for high-performance sodium-ion batteries, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 385, 123839 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. Li, B. Rui, W. Wei, P. Nie, L. Chang, Z. Le, M. Liu, H. Wang, L. Wang and X. Zhang, Nanosheets assembled layered MoS2/MXene as high performance anode materials for potassium ion batteries, J. Power Sources, 2020, 449, 227481 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. Liu, Y. Liu, D. Xu, Y. Zhu, W. Peng, Y. Li, F. Zhang and X. Fan, Hierarchical “nanoroll” like MoS2/Ti3C2Tx hybrid with high electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution activity, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 241, 89–94 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y. Li, S. Yang, Z. Liang, Y. Xue, H. Cui and J. Tian, 1T-MoS2 nanopatch/Ti3C2 MXene/TiO2 nanosheet hybrids for efficient photocatalytic hydrogen evolution, Mater. Chem. Front., 2019, 3, 2673–2680 RSC ; 
  (c) W. Jiang, X. Zou, H. Du, L. Gan, C. Xu, F. Kang, W. Duan and J. Li, Universal descriptor for large-scale screening of high-performance mxene-based materials for energy storage and conversion, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 2687–2693 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) Y. Li, L. Ding, Z. Liang, Y. Xue, H. Cui and J. Tian, Synergetic effect of defects rich MoS2 and Ti3C2 MXene as cocatalysts for enhanced photocatalytic H2 production activity of TiO2, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 383, 123178 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) X. Chen, S. Wang, J. Shi, X. Du, Q. Cheng, R. Xue, Q. Wang, M. Wang, L. Ruan and W. Zeng, Direct Laser Etching Free-Standing MXene-MoS2 Film for Highly Flexible Micro-Supercapacitor, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1901160 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) N. F. Mott, The theory of crystal rectifiers, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1939, 171, 27–38 CrossRef ; 
  (b) W. Schottky, Zur halbleitertheorie der sperrschicht-und spitzengleichrichter, Z. Phys., 1939, 113, 367–414 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, H. Xiao and W. A. Goddard, Schottky–Barrier-Free Contacts with Two-Dimensional Semiconductors by Surface-Engineered MXenes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 15853–15856 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) 
            S. M. Sze and K. K. Ng, Physics of semiconductor devices, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, NJ, USA,  2006 CrossRef ; 
  (b) P. Schmid, Silicide-silicon Schottky barriers, Helv. Phys. Acta, 1985, 58, 371–382 CAS ; 
  (c) W. Mönch, On metal-semiconductor surface barriers, Surf. Sci., 1970, 21, 443–446 CrossRef ; 
  (d) J. R. Waldrop, Schottky-barrier height of ideal metal contacts to GaAs, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1984, 44, 1002–1004 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) A. Cowley and S. Sze, Surface states and barrier height of metal-semiconductor systems, J. Appl. Phys., 1965, 36, 3212–3220 CrossRef CAS .
R. T. Tung, The physics and chemistry of the Schottky barrier height, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2014, 1, 011304 Search PubMed .
A. Franciosi and C. G. Van de Walle, Heterojunction band offset engineering, Surf. Sci. Rep., 1996, 25, 1–140 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Y. Liu, J. Guo, E. Zhu, L. Liao, S.-J. Lee, M. Ding, I. Shakir, V. Gambin, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Approaching the Schottky–Mott limit in van der Waals metal–semiconductor junctions, Nature, 2018, 557, 696–700 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Y. Liu, P. Stradins and S.-H. Wei, van der Waals metal-semiconductor junction: Weak Fermi level pinning enables effective tuning of Schottky barrier, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1600069 CrossRef .

  (a) S. Das, H.-Y. Chen, A. V. Penumatcha and J. Appenzeller, High performance multilayer MoS2 transistors with scandium contacts, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 100–105 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. Kurtin and C. Mead, Surface barriers on layer semiconductors: GaS, GaSe, GaTe, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1969, 30, 2007–2009 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) A. Dimoulas, P. Tsipas, A. Sotiropoulos and E. Evangelou, Fermi-level pinning and charge neutrality level in germanium, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 252110 CrossRef .
C. Tang, Y. Min, C. Chen, W. Xu and L. Xu, Potential Applications of Heterostructures of TMDs with MXenes in Sodium-Ion and Na–O2 Batteries, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 5577–5586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) D. Voiry, M. Salehi, R. Silva, T. Fujita, M. Chen, T. Asefa, V. B. Shenoy, G. Eda and M. Chhowalla, Conducting MoS2 nanosheets as catalysts for hydrogen evolution reaction, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 6222–6227 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) J. Lee, P. Dak, Y. Lee, H. Park, W. Choi, M. A. Alam and S. Kim, Two-dimensional Layered MoS2 Biosensors Enable Highly Sensitive Detection of Biomolecules, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 7352 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) J. Martin, C. Donnet, T. Le Mogne and T. Epicier, Superlubricity of molybdenum disulphide, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1993, 48, 10583 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) T. Wang, S. Chen, H. Pang, H. Xue and Y. Yu, MoS2-based nanocomposites for electrochemical energy storage, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600289 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (e) L. Wang, L. Chen, S. L. Wong, X. Huang, W. Liao, C. Zhu, Y.-F. Lim, D. Li, X. Liu, D. Chi and K.-W. Ang, Electronic Devices and Circuits Based on Wafer-Scale Polycrystalline Monolayer MoS2 by Chemical Vapor Deposition, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2019, 5, 1900393 CrossRef .

  (a) Z. He and W. Que, Molybdenum disulfide nanomaterials: Structures, properties, synthesis and recent progress on hydrogen evolution reaction, Appl. Mater. Today, 2016, 3, 23–56 CrossRef ; 
  (b) T. Stephenson, Z. Li, B. Olsen and D. Mitlin, Lithium ion battery applications of molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) nanocomposites, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 209–231 RSC .
J. M. Soon and K. P. Loh, Electrochemical double-layer capacitance of MoS2 nanowall films, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2007, 10, A250–A254 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, J. Zhang, S. Yang, F. Wang, X. Zhuang, K. Müllen and X. Feng, Vertically Aligned MoS2 Nanosheets Patterned on Electrochemically Exfoliated Graphene for High-Performance Lithium and Sodium Storage, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702254 CrossRef .

  (a) J.-Z. Wang, L. Lu, M. Lotya, J. N. Coleman, S.-L. Chou, H.-K. Liu, A. I. Minett and J. Chen, Development of MoS2–CNT Composite Thin Film from Layered MoS2 for Lithium Batteries, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 798–805 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Z. Hu, X. Kuai, J. Chen, P. Sun, Q. Zhang, H.-H. Wu and L. Zhang, Strongly Coupled MoS2 Nanocrystal/Ti3C2 Nanosheet Hybrids Enable High-Capacity Lithium-Ion Storage, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 1485–1490 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) Y. Chen, B. Song, X. Tang, L. Lu and J. Xue, Ultrasmall Fe3O4 nanoparticle/MoS2 nanosheet composites with superior performances for lithium ion batteries, Small, 2014, 10, 1536–1543 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) L. David, R. Bhandavat and G. Singh, MoS2/graphene composite paper for sodium-ion battery electrodes, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1759–1770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Shen, L. Wang, A. Zhou, H. Zhang, Z. Chen, Q. Hu and G. Qin, MoS2-Decorated Ti3C2 MXene nanosheet as anode material in lithium-ion batteries, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, A2654–A2659 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, Z. Wang, M. Yu, L. Xiu and J. Qiu, Stabilizing the MXenes by carbon nanoplating for developing hierarchical nanohybrids with efficient lithium storage and hydrogen evolution capability, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1607017 CrossRef PubMed .
N. H. Attanayake, S. C. Abeyweera, A. C. Thenuwara, B. Anasori, Y. Gogotsi, Y. Sun and D. R. Strongin, Vertically aligned MoS2 on Ti3C2 (MXene) as an improved HER catalyst, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 16882–16889 RSC .
K. Ma, H. Jiang, Y. Hu and C. Li, 2D Nanospace Confined Synthesis of Pseudocapacitance-Dominated MoS2-in-Ti3C2 Superstructure for Ultrafast and Stable Li/Na-Ion Batteries, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1804306 CrossRef .

  (a) J. Bai, B. Zhao, S. Lin, K. Li, J. Zhou, J. Dai, X. Zhu and Y. Sun, Construction of hierarchical V4C3-MXene/MoS2/C nanohybrids for high rate lithium-ion batteries, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 1144–1154 RSC ; 
  (b) J. Ren, H. Zong, Y. Sun, S. Gong, Y. Feng, Z. Wang, L. Hu, K. Yu and Z. Zhu, 2D organ-like molybdenum carbide (MXene) coupled with MoS2 nanoflowers enhances the catalytic activity in the hydrogen evolution reaction, CrystEngComm, 2020, 22, 1395–1403 RSC ; 
  (c) C. Chen, X. Xie, B. Anasori, A. Sarycheva, T. Makaryan, M. Zhao, P. Urbankowski, L. Miao, J. Jiang and Y. Gogotsi, MoS2-on-MXene heterostructures as highly reversible anode materials for lithium-ion batteries, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 1846–1850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) J. Zhang, Q. Wang, L. Wang, X. A. Li and W. Huang, Layer-controllable WS2-reduced graphene oxide hybrid nanosheets with high electrocatalytic activity for hydrogen evolution, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 10391–10397 RSC ; 
  (b) H. Liu, D. Su, G. Wang and S. Z. Qiao, An ordered mesoporous WS2 anode material with superior electrochemical performance for lithium ion batteries, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 17437–17440 RSC ; 
  (c) C. Cong, J. Shang, Y. Wang and T. Yu, Optical Properties of 2D Semiconductor WS2, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1700767 CrossRef .

  (a) L. Rapoport, Y. Bilik, Y. Feldman, M. Homyonfer, S. Cohen and R. Tenne, Hollow nanoparticles of WS2 as potential solid-state lubricants, Nature, 1997, 387, 791–793 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) R. Bhandavat, L. David and G. Singh, Synthesis of surface-functionalized WS2 nanosheets and performance as Li-ion battery anodes, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1523–1530 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) O. A. Abbas, I. Zeimpekis, H. Wang, A. H. Lewis, N. P. Sessions, M. Ebert, N. Aspiotis, C.-C. Huang, D. Hewak, S. Mailis and P. Sazio, Solution-Based Synthesis of Few-Layer WS2 Large Area Continuous Films for Electronic Applications, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 1696 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) N. Perea-López, A. L. Elías, A. Berkdemir, A. Castro-Beltran, H. R. Gutiérrez, S. Feng, R. Lv, T. Hayashi, F. López-Urías, S. Ghosh, B. Muchharla, S. Talapatra, H. Terrones and M. Terrones, Photosensor device based on few-layered WS2 films, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5511–5517 CrossRef ; 
  (e) J. Yang, L. Gao, C. Peng and W. Zhang, Construction of self-signal DNA electrochemical biosensor employing WS2 nanosheets combined with PIn6COOH, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 9613–9619 RSC ; 
  (f) S. Ratha and C. S. Rout, Supercapacitor Electrodes Based on Layered Tungsten Disulfide-Reduced Graphene Oxide Hybrids Synthesized by a Facile Hydrothermal Method, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 11427–11433 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (g) J. Lin, Z. Peng, G. Wang, D. Zakhidov, E. Larios, M. J. Yacaman and J. M. Tour, Enhanced Electrocatalysis for Hydrogen Evolution Reactions from WS2 Nanoribbons, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301875 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, N. Zhang, H. Kang, M. Shang, L. Jiao and J. Chen, WS2 Nanowires as a high-performance anode for sodium–ion batteries, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 11878–11884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) Y. Liu, H. Wei, C. Wang, F. Wang, H. Wang, W. Zhang, X. Wang, C. Yan, B. H. Kim and F. Ren, Nitrogen-doped carbon coated WS2 nanosheets as anode for high-performance sodium-ion batteries, Front. Chem., 2018, 6, 236 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) Y. Huang, Y. Jiang, Z. Ma, Y. Zhang, X. Zheng, X. Yan, X. Deng, W. Xiao and H. Tang, Seaweed-liked WS2/rGO enabling ultralong cycling life and enhanced rate capability for lithium-ion batteries, Nanomaterials, 2019, 9, 469 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) S. Bellani, F. Wang, G. Longoni, L. Najafi, R. Oropesa-Nunez, A. E. Del Rio Castillo, M. Prato, X. Zhuang, V. Pellegrini, X. Feng and F. Bonaccorso, WS2–graphite dual-ion batteries, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 7155–7164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Su, S. Wang, L. Fu, F. Chen, K. Song, X. Huang and L. Yang, Growth of WS2 flakes on Ti3C2Tx Mxene Using Vapor Transportation Routine, Coatings, 2018, 8, 281 CrossRef .
J.-J. Huang, X.-Q. Liu, F.-F. Meng, L.-Q. He, J.-X. Wang, J.-C. Wu, X.-H. Lu, Y.-X. Tong and P.-P. Fang, A facile method to produce MoSe2/MXene hybrid nanoflowers with enhanced electrocatalytic activity for hydrogen evolution, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2020, 856, 113727 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, Y. Zhang, M. Jia, X. Lv, X. Li, R. Li, X. Ding, Y.-Z. Zheng and X. Tao, 1T/2H MoSe2-on-MXene heterostructure as bifunctional electrocatalyst for efficient overall water splitting, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 326, 134976 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, J. Shim, J. H. Park and S. Lee, MXene electrode for the integration of WSe2 and MoS2 field effect transistors, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 5328–5334 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Bruce, B. Scrosati and J. M. Tarascon, Nanomaterials for rechargeable lithium batteries, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2930–2946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Scrosati and J. Garche, Lithium batteries: Status, prospects and future, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 2419–2430 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) L. Shi and T. Zhao, Recent advances in inorganic 2D materials and their applications in lithium and sodium batteries, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3735–3758 RSC ; 
  (b) Y. Zhao, N. Yang, R. Yu, Y. Zhang, J. Zhang, Y. Li and D. Wang, Unique structural advances of graphdiyne for energy applications, Energy Chem., 2020, 2, 100041 CrossRef .

  (a) R. Raccichini, A. Varzi, S. Passerini and B. Scrosati, The role of graphene for electrochemical energy storage, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 271–279 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) P. Poizot, S. Laruelle, S. Grugeon, L. Dupont and J. Tarascon, Nano-sized transition-metal oxides as negative-electrode materials for lithium-ion batteries, Nature, 2000, 407, 496–499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xiao, D. Choi, L. Cosimbescu, P. Koech, J. Liu and J. P. Lemmon, Exfoliated MoS2 nanocomposite as an anode material for lithium ion batteries, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 4522–4524 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, Z. Fan, S. Ding, D. Yu and Y. Du, Fabrication of MoS2 nanosheet@ TiO2 nanotube hybrid nanostructures for lithium storage, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 5245–5250 RSC .

  (a) J. Li, Y. Hou, X. Gao, D. Guan, Y. Xie, J. Chen and C. Yuan, A three-dimensionally interconnected carbon nanotube/layered MoS2 nanohybrid network for lithium ion battery anode with superior rate capacity and long-cycle-life, Nano Energy, 2015, 16, 10–18 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. Song, Y. Li, Z. Liu, C. Zhu, M. Imtiaz, X. Ling, D. Zhang, J. Mao, Z. Guo, S. Chu, P. Liu and S. Zhu, Enhanced lithium storage for MoS2-based composites via a vacancy-assisted method, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 515, 146103 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, X. Tao, J. Zhang, Y. Xia, H. Huang, L. Zhang, Y. Gan, C. Liang and W. Zhang, Sn4+ ion decorated highly conductive Ti3C2 MXene: promising lithium-ion anodes with enhanced volumetric capacity and cyclic performance, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2491–2499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Du, M. Tao, W. Gao, Y. Zhang, R. Zhan, S. Bao and M. Xu, Preparation of MoS2/Ti3C2Tx composite as anode material with enhanced sodium/lithium storage performance, Inorg. Chen. Front., 2019, 6, 117–125 RSC .
Y. Wu and Y. Yu, 2D material as anode for sodium ion batteries: Recent progress and perspectives, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 16, 323–343 CrossRef .
N. K. Chaudhari, H. Jin, B. Kim, D. San Baek, S. H. Joo and K. Lee, MXene: an emerging two-dimensional material for future energy conversion and storage applications, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 24564–24579 RSC .

  (a) M. Xu, N. Bai, H.-X. Li, C. Hu, J. Qi and X.-B. Yan, Synthesis of MXene-supported layered MoS2 with enhanced electrochemical performance for Mg batteries, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2018, 29, 1313–1316 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y. Zhang, Z. Mu, C. Yang, Z. Xu, S. Zhang, X. Zhang, Y. Li, J. Lai, Z. Sun, Y. Yang, Y. Chao, C. Li, X. Ge, W. Yang and S. Guo, Rational Design of MXene/1T-2H MoS2–C Nanohybrids for High-Performance Lithium–Sulfur Batteries, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1707578 CrossRef .

  (a) J.-w. Seo, J.-t. Jang, S.-w. Park, C. Kim, B. Park and J. Cheon, Two-Dimensional SnS2 Nanoplates with Extraordinary High Discharge Capacity for Lithium Ion Batteries, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4269–4273 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) W. Sun, X. Rui, D. Yang, Z. Sun, B. Li, W. Zhang, Y. Zong, S. Madhavi, S. Dou and Q. Yan, Two-Dimensional Tin Disulfide Nanosheets for Enhanced Sodium Storage, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11371–11381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Miller and P. Simon, Electrochemical capacitors for energy management, Science, 2008, 321, 651–652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) S. Bose, T. Kuila, A. K. Mishra, R. Rajasekar, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, Carbon-based nanostructured materials and their composites as supercapacitor electrodes, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 767–784 RSC ; 
  (b) Y. Tao, X. Xie, W. Lv, D.-M. Tang, D. Kong, Z. Huang, H. Nishihara, T. Ishii, B. Li, D. Golberg, F. Kang, T. Kyotani and Q.-H. Yang, Towards ultrahigh volumetric capacitance: graphene derived highly dense but porous carbons for supercapacitors, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2975 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Subramanian, S. C. Hall, P. H. Smith and B. Rambabu, Mesoporous anhydrous RuO2 as a supercapacitor electrode material, Solid State Ionics, 2004, 175, 511–515 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) A. Ostadhossein, J. Guo, F. Simeski and M. Ihme, Functionalization of 2D materials for enhancing OER/ORR catalytic activity in Li–oxygen batteries, Commun. Chem., 2019, 2, 95 CrossRef ; 
  (b) Z. W. Seh, K. D. Fredrickson, B. Anasori, J. Kibsgaard, A. L. Strickler, M. R. Lukatskaya, Y. Gogotsi, T. F. Jaramillo and A. Vojvodic, Two-Dimensional Molybdenum Carbide (MXene) as an Efficient Electrocatalyst for Hydrogen Evolution, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 589–594 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) D. R. Cummins, U. Martinez, A. Sherehiy, R. Kappera, A. Martinez-Garcia, R. K. Schulze, J. Jasinski, J. Zhang, R. K. Gupta, J. Lou, M. Chhowalla, G. Sumanasekera, A. D. Mohite, M. K. Sunkara and G. Gupta, Efficient hydrogen evolution in transition metal dichalcogenides via a simple one-step hydrazine reaction, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11857 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) F. Wang, T. A. Shifa, X. Zhan, Y. Huang, K. Liu, Z. Cheng, C. Jiang and J. He, Recent advances in transition-metal dichalcogenide based nanomaterials for water splitting, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 19764–19788 RSC ; 
  (e) X. Xu, B. Sun, Z. Liang, H. Cui and J. Tian, High-Performance Electrocatalytic Conversion of N2 to NH3 Using 1T-MoS2 Anchored on Ti3C2 MXene under Ambient Conditions, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 26060–26067 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. B. Rakhi, B. Ahmed, M. N. Hedhili, D. H. Anjum and H. N. Alshareef, Effect of Postetch Annealing Gas Composition on the Structural and Electrochemical Properties of Ti2CTx MXene Electrodes for Supercapacitor Applications, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 5314–5323 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lee, S. J. Kim, Y.-J. Kim, Y. Lim, Y. Chae, B.-J. Lee, Y.-T. Kim, H. Han, Y. Gogotsi and C. W. Ahn, Oxidation-resistant titanium carbide MXene films, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 573–581 RSC .
K. R. G. Lim, A. D. Handoko, L. R. Johnson, X. Meng, M. Lin, G. S. Subramanian, B. Anasori, Y. Gogotsi, A. Vojvodic and Z. W. Seh, 2H-MoS2 on Mo2CTx MXene Nanohybrid for Efficient and Durable Electrocatalytic Hydrogen Evolution, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 16140–16155 CrossRef PubMed .

  (a) L. Huang, L. Ai, M. Wang, J. Jiang and S. Wang, Hierarchical MoS2 nanosheets integrated Ti3C2 MXenes for electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 965–976 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. Liang, C. Ding, J. Liu, T. Chen, W. Peng, Y. Li, F. Zhang and X. Fan, Heterostructure engineering of Co-doped MoS2 coupled with Mo2CTx MXene for enhanced hydrogen evolution in alkaline media, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 10992–11000 RSC .
J. Zhang, T. Wang, P. Liu, S. Liu, R. Dong, X. Zhuang, M. Chen and X. Feng, Engineering water dissociation sites in MoS2 nanosheets for accelerated electrocatalytic hydrogen production, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2789–2793 RSC .

  (a) X. Yang, Q. Jia, F. Duan, B. Hu, M. Wang, L. He, Y. Song and Z. Zhang, Multiwall carbon nanotubes loaded with MoS2 quantum dots and MXene quantum dots: Non–Pt bifunctional catalyst for the methanol oxidation and oxygen reduction reactions in alkaline solution, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 464, 78–87 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) X. Pang, T. Wu, Y. Gu, D. Wang, X. Che, D. Sun and F. Huang, Nb2Se2C: a new compound as a combination of transition metal dichalcogenide and MXene for oxygen evolution reaction, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 9036–9039 RSC .

  (a) W. Y. Chen, X. Jiang, S.-N. Lai, D. Peroulis and L. Stanciu, Nanohybrids of a MXene and transition metal dichalcogenide for selective detection of volatile organic compounds, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1302 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) F. Alimohammadi, M. S. Gh, N. H. Attanayake, A. C. Thenuwara, Y. Gogotsi, B. Anasori and D. R. Strongin, Antimicrobial Properties of 2D MnO2 and MoS2 Nanomaterials Vertically Aligned on Graphene Materials and Ti3C2 MXene, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 7192–7200 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) P. Zhao, H. Jin, X. Lv, B. Huang, Y. Ma and Y. Dai, Modified MXene: promising electrode materials for constructing Ohmic contacts with MoS2 for electronic device applications, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 16551–16557 RSC ; 
  (d) A. Shahzad, J. Jang, S.-R. Lim and D. S. Lee, Unique selectivity and rapid uptake of molybdenum-disulfide-functionalized MXene nanocomposite for mercury adsorption, Environ. Res., 2020, 182, 109005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) A. D. Handoko, K. D. Fredrickson, B. Anasori, K. W. Convey, L. R. Johnson, Y. Gogotsi, A. Vojvodic and Z. W. Seh, Tuning the Basal Plane Functionalization of Two-Dimensional Metal Carbides (MXenes) To Control Hydrogen Evolution Activity, ACS Appl.
Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 173–180 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) P. Li, J. Zhu, A. D. Handoko, R. Zhang, H. Wang, D. Legut, X. Wen, Z. Fu, Z. W. Seh and Q. Zhang, High-throughput theoretical optimization of the hydrogen evolution reaction on MXenes by transition metal modification, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 4271–4278 RSC .
X. Liang, A. Garsuch and L. F. Nazar, Sulfur Cathodes Based on Conductive MXene Nanosheets for High-Performance Lithium–Sulfur Batteries, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 3907–3911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, K. Chen, D. Tong, Y. Huang, J. Zhang, J. Xue, Q. Huang and T. Chen, CO2 and temperature dual responsive “Smart” MXene phases, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 314–317 RSC .
N. Abidi, K. R. G. Lim, Z. W. Seh and S. N. Steinmann, Atomistic modeling of electrocatalysis: Are we there yet?, WIREs Comput. Mol. Sci., 2020, e1499,  DOI:10.1002/wcms.1499 .
Y.-Z. Zhang, Y. Wang, Q. Jiang, J. K. El-Demellawi, H. Kim and H. N. Alshareef, MXene Printing and Patterned Coating for Device Applications, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1908486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
Table Content:

N. R. Hemanth
	N. R. Hemanth is a final year undergraduate student pursuing a bachelor's degree in metallurgical and materials engineering, at National Institute of Technology Karnataka, Surathkal, India. His research interests include 2D-based nanomaterials, functional polymeric materials and composites for specialized industrial applications. His other research interests include nanomaterials for energy harvesting applications.

Taekyung Kim
	Dr Taekyung Kim earned his PhD degree (2020) in inorganic chemistry from Korea University after working at Kolon Industries, Inc., (Republic of Korea) as an engineer for several years. Currently, his research interests are mainly focused on the development of synthetic methods for phase and structure-controlled nanocatalysts and their potential applications in electrocatalytic water splitting.

Byeongyoon Kim
	Dr Byeongyoon Kim received his PhD Degree (2018) in inorganic chemistry from Korea University, Republic of Korea. Currently, he is working as a postdoctoral fellow with Prof. Kwangyeol Lee at Nano Chemistry Laboratory, Korea University. His research interests include the design and synthetic methodology for transition metal-based functional nanomaterials and the applications of electrocatalysis.

Arvind H. Jadhav
	Dr Arvind H. Jadhav is currently working as an Assistant Professor at the Centre for Nano and Material Sciences (CNMS), JAIN University, India. He received his PhD from Myongji University, Republic of Korea. Dr Jadhav has several research publications to his credit in reputed peer reviewed international journals. He is also a recipient of many awards for his academic excellence with a gold medal for his PhD research and a good number of best paper and best poster presentation awards. His research areas focus on heterogeneous catalysis for CO2 conversion and utilisation, synthesis of ILs for organic transformations, and sustainable energy applications.

Kwangyeol Lee
	Professor Kwangyeol Lee obtained his PhD degree (1997) in chemistry from the University of Illinois at Urbana- Champaign. After fulfilling his military obligation, he joined Korea University in 2003 as a chemistry faculty member, before being appointed as a professor. He is the recipient of the 2009 Wiley-KCS Young Scholar Award. His current interests include the development of synthetic methodologies for nanoscale materials, the application of nanomaterials in biomedical fields, and the development of nanotechnologies to support the environment by creating sustainable energy sources.

Nitin K. Chaudhari
	Dr Nitin Chaudhari is an Associate Professor at Pandit Deendayal Petroleum University, Gandhinagar, India. He received his PhD degree in materials science from Korea University, South Korea in 2013. He subsequently worked as a research professor at Myongji University and Korea University, South Korea from 2013 to 2019. Later, he joined Nexcoms Ltd. Co., South Korea as Deputy Director before moving to India. His research interest includes the design and development of active electrode materials such as porous carbons, nanocomposites, oxides, sulphides, hydroxides, 2D MXenes, and nanomaterials for energy storage and conversion devices.

 	Fig. 1  A graphical abstract of the 2D TMD/MXene hybrid structure toward energy storage and conversion.	 

 	Fig. 2  Typical synthesis of MXene from MAX phase via the selective etching method and its delaminated structure; the bottom SEM images represent MAX, MXene and delaminated-MXene structures, respectively. Reproduced with permission.113 Copyright 2020, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of a molecular beam epitaxy process with atomic force microscopy image of GaSe mono-layer grown on MoS2. (b) Schematic illustration of chemical vapour deposition with an optical image of MoS2 domains grown on SiO2. (c) Schematic illustration of metal–organic chemical vapour deposition with a false-colour dark field transmission electron microscopy image of the MoS2 mono-layer having different grain orientation. (a), (b) and (c) Reproduced with permission.8b Copyright 2017, Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 4  Work function plots of MXenes with OH-, F- and O- terminations. Reproduced with permission.60 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 5  (a) The fixed separation model for SBH formation. Electronic states, with a charge neutrality level (CNL) and density of states, were assumed to reside on the semiconductor surface, which is held at a fixed distance from the metal. Reproduced with permission.62 Copyright 2014 AIP Publishing LLC. (b) SBH versus the contact 3D metal work functions for p-type GaS, GaSe, and GaTe, and n-type n-Ge, and MoS2.65 The solid and dotted lines represent a linear fit to the experimental points and the ideal Schottky–Mott limits with S = 1, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Electronic band structure and density of states (DOS) of a typical vdW MSJ of metallic T-MoS2 and semiconductor (SC) H-MoS2. FL is set to zero. The VBM and CBM of the SC are marked by blue and red dots, respectively. Isosurfaces show the spatial distributions of the states. (b) SBH versus the contact 2D metal work functions. The diagonal line shows the ideal Schottky–Mott limit. Reproduced with permission.64b Copyright 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) The plot of hydrogen adsorption energies (ΔEH) of 2H-MoS2, 1T-MoS2, and 2H-MoS2/MXene heterostructures. Reproduced with permission.11a Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (b) Electron localization functions for the cross section of the (110) plane of VS2/Mo2CO2, VS2/Nb2CO2, VS2/Ti2CO2, and VS2/V2CO2, respectively, with five layers of Na+ ions. Reproduced with permission.66 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Various approaches for the synthesis of TMD-MXene hybrid structures. (a) Synthesis of a SnS2–MXene composite by sonication and vacuum-assisted filtration through a polypropylene membrane. Reproduced with permission.6 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (b) Synthesis of the MoS2-in-Ti3C2 (MoS2-out-Ti3C2) hybrids by electrostatic attraction in the presence (absence) of cetyltrimethyl ammonium bromide. Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2018, Wiley. (c) Synthesis of MoS2/Ti3C2 hybrid material prepared via freeze-drying followed by thermal decomposition. Reproduced with permission.71b Copyright 2020, Wiley. (d) Step-by-step synthesis of MoSe2/MXene hybrid nanoflowers by a simple hydrothermal method; inset picture shows the SEM image of MoSe2/MXene hybrid nanoflowers. Reproduced with permission.82 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (e) Schematic illustration of introduction of 1T-WS2 between the delaminated matrixes of Ti3C2 through a simple sonication process to produce a 2D Ti3C2/1T-WS2 hybrid structure. Reproduced with permission.10 Copyright 2019, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) and (b) SEM images of MoS2/Mo2TiC2Tx heterostructures at 500 °C and 700 °C, respectively. (c) and (d) Cross-sectional TEM images of MoS2/Mo2TiC2Tx heterostructures at 500 °C and 700 °C, respectively, indicate 2D layers with MoS2 on Mo2TiC2Tx. Reproduced with permission.76c Copyright 2018, Wiley. (e) and (f) FESEM images of MoSe2/Ti3C2 heterostructures at various magnification. Reproduced with permission.57a Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Rate performance of the MoS2/Ti3C2Tx composite for different discharge capacities with coulombic efficiency almost 100%. (b) Cycling stability of the MoS2/Ti3C2Tx composite compared to MoS2 and Ti3C2Tx. (c) Schematic representation of MoS2 layers uniformly distributed over Ti3C2Tx, along with the ion diffusion and electron conduction paths. Reproduced with permission.93 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Specific capacitance of a micro supercapacitor (MXene-MoS2) at different scan rates. (e) Capacitive retentivity and coulombic efficiency of a micro supercapacitor. Reproduced with permission.58e Copyright 2019, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Edge density plots and (b) HER polarization plots in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution of IE-MoS2/Ti3C2 sheets prepared at 200, 220, 240, and 240 °C. Reproduced with permission.74 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectra of (c) Mo 3d and (d) Co 2p of different materials. Reproduced with permission.105b Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the concept for a “TMD-MXene”-like compound. (b) OER polarization curves in 0.1 M KOH solution (left) with the comparison of the overpotentials at 10 mA cm−2 (inset) and Tafel plots (right) of RuO2, IrO2, Nb2Se2C, NbSe2, and Nb2C. Reproduced with permission.107b Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic diagram of the preparation of MoS2QDs@Ti3C2TxQDs@MWCNTs. (d) ORR polarization curves in O2-saturated 1.0 M KOH solution (left) and Tafel plots (right) of (i) MoS2QDs@Ti3C2TxQDs@MWCNTs-1, (ii) MoS2QDs@Ti3C2TxQDs@MWCNTs-2, (iii) MoS2QDs@Ti3C2TxQDs@MWCNTs-3, (iv) Ti3C2Tx QDs, (v) MWCNTs, (vi) MoS2 QDs, and (vii) Pt/C at 0.5 V. Reproduced with permission.107a Copyright 2019, Elsevier B.V.	 


Li-ion batteries
MoS2	Ti3C2	Hydrothermal	451.3/1	79%/1300@1	
7a

MoS2	V4C3	Hydrothermal	933.7/1	67%/450@1	
76a

MoS2	Ti3C2Tx	
In situ sulfidation	554/0.1	92%/100@1	
76c

MoS2	Ti3C2Tx	Hydrothermal	339/0.1	98%/70@0.1	
93

MoS2	Ti3C2	Solid state sintering	246.1/0.05	100%/200@0.1	
72

MoS2	Ti3C2	Freeze-drying and thermal treatment	645.4/0.5	130%/1390@5	
71b

MoS2	Ti3C2@C	Hydrothermal	1750/0.2	95%/3000@20	
73

SnS2/SnS4	Ti3C2Tx	Solvothermal and calcination	462.3/0.1	47%/500@5	
11e

MoS2	Ti3C2	Electrostatic attraction and (CTAB)-directed growth	914/0.1	100%/1000@0.5	
75

Na-ion batteries
MoS2	Ti3C2	Electrostatic attraction and (CTAB)-directed growth	310/1	—	
75

MoSe2	Ti3C2Tx	Hydrothermal	559/0.5	91%/400@2	
57a

SnS2	Ti3C2Tx	Hydrothermal	377/0.1	85%/200 @ 0.1	
6

MoS2	Ti3C2Tx	Hydrothermal	285.4/0.1	88%/100 @ 0.1	
11g

MoS2	Ti3C2Tx	Hydrothermal	356.2/0.1	93%/70 @ 0.1	
93

Other batteries
MoS2	Ti3C2Tx	Hydrothermal	K-ion	233.1/0.1	75.9%/100@0.05	
57b

MoS2	Ti3C2Tx	Hydrothermal	Mg-ion	165/0.5	65%/50@0.05	
96a

1T-2H MoS2	Ti3C2	Hydrothermal	Li–S	1014.1/0.5 C	79%/300@0.5 C	
96b


Supercapacitor
MoS2	Ti3C2Tx	Laser etching	173.6 F cm−3	
58e

1TWS2	Ti3C2	Sonication	157 F g−1	
10


HER
MoS2	Mo2CTx	Hydrothermal	176	98	0.71	1 M KOH	
76b

MoS2	Ti3C2	Microwave heating	110	∼40	0.071	0.5 M H2SO4	
74

MoS2	Ti3C2@C	Hydrothermal	135	45	0.4	0.5 M H2SO4	
73

MoS2	Ti3C2	Hydrothermal	∼280	68	—	0.5 M H2SO4	
105a

Co–MoS2	Mo2CTx	Annealing	112	82	0.354	1 M KOH	
105b

MoSe2	Ti3C2	Hydrothermal	180	91	0.28	0.5 M H2SO4	
82

1T/2H MoSe2	Ti3C2	Hydrothermal	95	90	2∼3	1 M KOH	
83



OER
NbSe2	Nb2C	Solid state sintering	321	238	∼2.65	1 M KOH	
107b

1T/2H MoSe2	Ti3C2	Hydrothermal	340	91	2∼3	1 M KOH	
83


ORR
MoS2	Ti3C2Tx	Hydrothermal	0.75 V	∼27 A g−1	90	1 M KOH	
107a

Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
