Highly efficient photoelectrochemical response by sea-urchin shaped ZnO/TiO 2 nano/micro hybrid heterostructures co-sensitized with CdS/CdSe   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3TA15439D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3TA15439D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 6474-6479Highly efficient photoelectrochemical response by sea-urchin shaped ZnO/TiO2 nano/micro hybrid heterostructures co-sensitized with CdS/CdSe†

        
          
            Zahid 
            Ali
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Imran 
            Shakir
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Dae Joon 
            Kang
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Physics, Institute of Basic Sciences, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 440-746, Republic of Korea. E-mail: djkang@skku.edu
bNational Institute of Lasers and Optronics, Islamabad, Pakistan
Received 
      30th December 2013
    , Accepted 17th February 2014First published on 17th February 2014AbstractPhotoelectrochemical cells have existed for decades. However, the poor efficiency of such devices is still problematic because of trade-offs between different materials properties used for photoelectrochemical reactions. Here we report a novel photoanode architecture consisting of CdS/CdSe co-sensitized sea urchin-shaped ZnO/TiO2-based nano/micro hybrid heterostructures that simultaneously offer better light scattering over the entire visible frequency domain, better separation of photo-generated charge carriers, significantly improved light absorption that extends over a broad visible spectrum, and better transport of electrons through a highly connected network of conducting ZnO nanowires than existing architectures. Use of the synthesized structures as photoanodes in a photoelectrochemical cell yielded a photocurrent density as high as 11.8 mA cm−2 with a remarkable photo-conversion efficiency of 6.4%.
Introduction
Photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting1–4 is considered the holy grail of sustainable energy. Semiconductor materials with a band gap energy of 1.23 eV (ref. 5) are ideal for splitting water, but kinetic and thermodynamic non-idealities in water redox reactions at the semiconductor–water interface demand significantly higher energy than 1.23 eV in practice, hence only wide band gap semiconductors have been effective thus far. Unfortunately, these large band gap semiconductors can absorb only 5% of the solar spectrum, which is the major obstacle in achieving good water splitting efficiencies.6–8 Over the past few decades, considerable efforts have been devoted to improve the light absorption range of these photocatalysts. Among the various strategies suggested, sensitization of large band gap semiconductors (i.e. TiO2, ZnO, and WO3) with narrow band gap semiconductors (i.e. CdS, CdSe, and CdTe) appears to be a promising approach as it offers (a) extended absorption of the solar spectrum in the visible frequency domain by using a narrow band gap semiconductor, (b) the ability to tune the band level to a position suitable for water redox reactions via heterostructure formation and (c) better separation of photo-generated charge carriers at heterojunction interfaces.9–11
To exploit the synergistic effects that can be obtained by coupling large band gap and narrow band gap semiconductors, a purpose-designed architecture is essential to provide a large surface area, to improve electron transport, and to reduce minority carrier diffusion length and charge carrier recombination losses. Furthermore, increased optical path length is also highly desirable to maximize the absorption of visible photons in ultra-thin layers of narrow band gap semiconductors.12 However, designing a material architecture with these properties is challenging because of trade-offs between different material properties; sensitization of large band gap semiconductors with narrow band gap semiconductors has to date only resulted in a marginal improvement in PEC response.13,14
Herein, we report an innovative photoanode architecture that we developed using sea urchin-shaped ZnO/TiO2-based nano/micro hybrid heterostructures co-sensitized with CdS and CdSe to simultaneously achieve (a) efficient absorption of sunlight in the visible frequency domain, (b) efficient scattering of sunlight in the visible frequency domain, and (c) efficient electron–hole separation and transport. We investigated the microstructure and morphology of the synthesized structures by scanning electron microscopy, X-ray diffraction, and transmission electron microscopy. The synthesized structures showed a remarkable PEC response when used as photoanodes in a PEC cell.
Experimental
Synthesis
TiO2 microspheres were synthesized by using the sol–gel method.15 Four grams of hexadecylamine (90%, Sigma Aldrich, Korea) was dissolved in 400 mL of ethanol (99.99%, Sigma Aldrich, Korea) and 1.9 mL of 0.1 M KCl (AR, BDH) solution, followed by the addition of 9 mL of titanium isopropoxide (TTIP, 97%, Sigma Aldrich, Korea) under vigorous stirring. After keeping the solution static for 24 hours, the obtained spheres were subsequently washed three times, and dried at 50 °C before calcination at 500 °C. Annealed microspheres were then coated with ZnO by dispersing them in seed layer solution16 under mild stirring conditions for 8 hours. The methanol was evaporated at room temperature and the dried samples were heated at 150 °C for 10 minutes to obtain ZnO nanocrystals on the surface of the microspheres. The process was repeated 2–3 times to ensure full coverage of the microspheres with the ZnO seed layer. In the third step, coated spheres were dispersed in 20 mL of aqueous solution comprising 25 mM zinc nitrate hexahydrate, 25 mM hexamethylenetetramine (HMTA), and 5 mM polyethylene amine (PEI). The solution was kept in a sealed glass vessel and heated at 95 °C in an oil bath under mild stirring conditions. The obtained core–shell structures were then centrifuged and washed three times before drying.
CdS/CdSe sensitization and photoanode preparation
To synthesize CdS/CdSe co-sensitized ZnO/TiO2 sea urchin structures, slurry was first prepared using the ZnO/TiO2 hybrid heterostructures, ethyl cellulose, and ethanol. This slurry was then coated on FTO substrate glass (2.2 mm thick with 15 ohm per square sheet resistance, Solaronix, Switzerland) using a doctor-blade technique. Films were scratched into an area of 1 cm × 1 cm and then heat-treated at 300 °C for 30 minutes. After heat treatment, films were sensitized with CdS and CdSe according to the procedure outlined in ref. 17. Briefly, heat-treated films were immersed in 0.1 M Na2S (99.99%, Sigma Aldrich, Korea) aqueous solution prepared for 10 minutes at room temperature, which resulted in the formation of a thin ZnS layer on top of the ZnO nanowires grown on the TiO2 microspheres that served as a leading layer for the formation of a CdS shell. After rinsing with DI water, films with ZnS as an outer layer were immersed in an aqueous solution of 0.025 M cadmium acetate (99.99%, Sigma Aldrich, Korea), 0.1 M thiourea (99%, Sigma Aldrich, Korea), and 0.1 M ethylenediamine (99.99%, Sigma Aldrich, Korea) for 1 hour at room temperature. After this process, films were again rinsed with DI water and finally immersed in a solution prepared by dissolving 15 mg of Se powder (99.99%, Sigma Aldrich, Korea) and 50 mg of NaBH4 (98%, Sigma Aldrich, Korea) in 30 mL of DI water and kept at 90 °C for 3 hours. After this process, films were washed and heat-treated at 300 °C for 30 minutes.
Physical characterization
Structural analysis of the samples was performed using X-ray diffractometry (XRD, Rigaku Rotaflex D/Max) with Cu Kα radiation (wavelength (λ) = 1.5418 Å) and field emission high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (FE-TEM, JEOL JEM-2100F, Japan). The morphology of the ZnO/TiO2 heterostructures was determined by field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM, JEOL JSM – 7401F, Japan). Diffuse transmittance and total transmittance spectra were recorded on a Cary 5000 UV-Vis-NIR spectrophotometer with an integrating sphere (Internal DRA-2500) accessory.
Photoelectrochemical measurements
Photocurrent–potential responses (I–V curves) were recorded with a 150 W xenon lamp-based solar simulator (PECCELL, Yokohama, Japan, PECL01: 100 mW cm−2). Light intensity was calibrated using a silicon reference cell (Fraunhofer ISE, Certificate no. CISE269). The electrolyte comprised of an aqueous solution of 0.25 M Na2S and 0.35 M Na2SO3 bubbled with a nitrogen stream. Incident photon to current efficiency (IPCE) was measured using a 300 W xenon light source and a monochromator (Polaronix K3100 IPCE Measurement System, McScience, Korea) in conjunction with the equation18  where I is the photocurrent density, λ is the incident light wavelength, and Jlight is the measured irradiance.
Results and discussions
The as-synthesized TiO2 microspheres had a very smooth surface and a diameter of around 1 μm, as shown in Fig. 1a. These spheres were calcined at 500 °C, which resulted in a 33% reduction in the size of the microspheres as well as transformation from an amorphous to an anatase phase (see the XRD pattern in the ESI, Fig. S1†). The inset in Fig. 1b shows a SEM image of spheres coated with a ZnO seed layer; ZnO nanocrystals can clearly be observed and the growth of ZnO nanowires from these nanocrystals after 1 hour of hydrothermal reaction is shown in Fig. 1b. A SEM image of the final sea urchin-shaped ZnO/TiO2 heterostructures obtained after 4 hours of hydrothermal reaction under mild stirring conditions is shown in Fig. 1c. The diameter of the ZnO nanowires grown on the TiO2 microspheres was around ∼35 nm as indicated in Fig. 1d.
 Fig. 1  (a) SEM images of as-synthesized TiO2 microspheres, (b) TiO2 microspheres coated with a ZnO seed layer, (c) ZnO/TiO2 hybrid structures, and (d) ZnO nanowires grown on TiO2 microspheres. 
Finally, the ZnO/TiO2-based sea urchin structures were sensitized with CdS and CdSe using the successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) method, and the structural properties of the synthesized structures were investigated by transmission electron microscopy. A high resolution transmission electron microscope HRTEM image and the selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern of single ZnO nanowires grown on TiO2 microspheres are shown in Fig. 2a and the inset in Fig. 2a, respectively, indicating the single crystalline nature of the ZnO nanowires. A lattice spacing of 5.2 Å between adjacent lattice planes was observed from Fig. 2a, which corresponds to the distance between two (0002) crystal planes of ZnO, confirming that the growth of the ZnO nanowires is along the [0001] direction. A HRTEM image of a single ZnO nanowire after CdS sensitization is shown in Fig. 2b; the measured lattice spacing of the core (0.52 nm) and the shell layer (0.32 nm) are consistent with the d-spacing values of ZnO and CdS, respectively, confirming that the ZnO nanowires were uniformly covered with CdS nanocrystals with an average diameter of 3–10 nm. A TEM image of a CdS/ZnO core shell nanowire after CdSe sensitization is shown in Fig. 2c. It can be observed from this figure that the CdSe sensitization process resulted in the formation of nanocrystals on the surface of the CdS/ZnO core shell nanowire. The lattice spacing value for these nanocrystals was calculated to be 0.36 nm from the HRTEM image shown in Fig. 2d; this value is in agreement with the d-spacing value for the (111) plane of CdSe.
 Fig. 2  (a) HRTEM image of a ZnO nanowire (the inset is the SAED pattern of the ZnO nanowire); (b) HRTEM image of a CdS/ZnO core shell nanowire; (c) TEM image of a CdS/ZnO core shell nanowire after CdSe sensitization; and (d) HRTEM image of a part of the nanowire shown in (c). 
To further verify the presence of CdS and CdSe on the ZnO nanowires, we performed energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) elemental mapping of individual CdS/CdSe-sensitized ZnO nanowires grown on TiO2 microspheres and the results are shown in Fig. 3a. The corresponding elemental maps of Zn, O, Cd, S, and Se are shown in Fig. 3b–f, respectively, and demonstrate the uniform distribution of CdS and CdSe on the surface of the ZnO nanowires. EDX elemental mapping confirmed an approximate atomic ratio of 65:35 for S and Se in the CdS/CdSe co-sensitized ZnO nanowires.
 Fig. 3  (a) TEM image of a CdSe/CdS/ZnO core shell nanowire; (b) TEM elemental map for Zn; (c) TEM elemental map for O; (d) TEM elemental map for Cd; (e) TEM elemental map for S; and (f) TEM elemental map for Se. 
ZnO/TiO2-based sea urchin structures were purposely designed to have superior optical properties. The size of TiO2 microspheres suitable for scattering light over the entire visible range was calculated using Mie scattering theory, which predicts the effective electric and/or magnetic polarizability densities of scattering objects.19,20 Light scattering by a spherical particle much smaller than the incident light wavelength can be accurately determined by the Mie solution. The scattered field of a single dielectric sphere with radius r0 and relative refractive index n can be decomposed into a multipole series. The 2m-pole term of the scattered electric field is proportional to  while the 2m-pole term of the scattered magnetic field is proportional to  where k is the wave vector, a is the sphere radius, n is the refractive index of the material, ψm is an mth order Bessel function of the first kind, and ξm is an mth order Hankel function of the first kind. The prime indicates the derivative with respect to the argument. Only the a1 and b1 coefficients, which are the strengths of the electric and magnetic dipole responses, are used to calculate scattering efficiency.21 We used the equation shown below to calculate the scattering efficiency of TiO2 spherical particles:  where Qs represents the light scattering efficiency.
Our theoretical calculation revealed that TiO2 particles with a diameter of ∼0.8 μm are required for light scattering in the visible frequency domain. However, keeping in mind that micron-sized particles offer less surface area than nano-sized particles, we grew vertical ZnO nanowires on the surfaces of TiO2 microspheres to increase the surface area. These vertical ZnO nanowires also provided a conducting channel for electron transport and improved the adhesion of the CdS layer by the formation of ZnS as a gluing layer during the CdS/CdSe sensitization process.
Light scattering response of ZnO/TiO2 based sea urchin structures was experimentally calculated as a percentage of haze value (see Fig. 4a) from the diffused transmittance and total transmittance spectra (Fig. S2, ESI†) according to the following equation22–24  
 Fig. 4  (a) Percentage haze value for TiO2 microspheres, ZnO nanowires and ZnO/TiO2 sea urchin structures and (b) absorption spectra of ZnO/TiO2 sea urchin CdS and CdS/CdSe sensitized ZnO/TiO2 sea urchin structures. 
The spectral dependence of the haze value was compared to that of ZnO nanowires and TiO2 microspheres. A significant improvement in response was observed in the entire visible wavelength range, as shown in Fig. 4a. Once we had synthesized the structure which can scatter light in the entire visible range, it was then sensitized with CdS and CdSe to efficiently absorb visible photons. After sensitization with CdS and CdSe, we performed UV-Vis spectroscopy and the results are shown in Fig. 4b. It can be observed from Fig. 4b that the absorption edge for ZnO/TiO2 sea urchin structures is in the UV region at wavelengths around 400 nm while after sensitization with CdS or CdSe, the absorption range was significantly extended in the visible frequency domain. The degree of red shift after CdS/CdSe co-sensitization was larger than that of CdS sensitized ZnO/TiO2 sea urchin structures which can be attributed to the smaller band gap of CdSe as compared to CdS.
Another advantage of the synthesized cascade structure was the stepwise position of band edges due the redistribution of electrons between CdS and CdSe in order to align Fermi levels.25 This stepwise structure of the band edges as shown Fig. 5a is not only suitable for the efficient injection of photo-excited electrons but also advantageous for hole-recovery in both CdS and CdSe layers and hence could improve the PEC response when exploited as a photoanode for PEC cells. To evaluate the potential of the CdS/CdSe sensitized ZnO/TiO2 heterostructure as a photoanode, we performed photoelectrochemical measurements under dark and simulated sunlight irradiation (AM 1.5, 100 mW cm−2). Fig. 5b shows a set of linear sweep voltammograms recorded for the ZnO/TiO2, CdS sensitized ZnO/TiO2 and CdS/CdSe sensitized ZnO/TiO2 based photoanodes. Dark current density for all the samples was in the range of 10−1 to 10−3 mA cm−2 from −1.3 to 0.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl. It can be observed from Fig. 5b that after sensitization with CdS and CdS/CdSe the photoanodes showed substantially enhanced photo response as compared to bare ZnO/TiO2 based photoanodes. It is worth noting that CdS/CdSe co-sensitized ZnO/TiO2 structures have shown a photocurrent density of ∼11.8 mA cm−2 at 0.4 V, which is about two times larger than that of the CdS sensitized ZnO/TiO2 based photoanodes. In order to evaluate the role of ZnO/TiO2 heterostructures we compared photoelectrochemical response of CdS/CdSe sensitized ZnO/TiO2 based photoanodes to that of CdS/CdSe sensitized ZnO nanowires and CdS/CdSe sensitized TiO2 microsphere based photoanodes as shown in Fig. 6a. It can be observed from Fig. 6a that CdS/CdSe sensitized TiO2 microsphere based photoanodes have delivered only 3 mA cm−2, whereas CdS/CdSe sensitized ZnO nanowires and CdS/CdSe sensitized ZnO/TiO2 based photoanodes have shown a photocurrent density of 8 mA cm−2 and 11 mA cm−2 respectively at an applied bias potential of 0.4 V. The higher photoelectrochemical response of ZnO nanowires can be attributed to better adhesion of CdS on ZnO as in the case of ZnO nanowire formation of a ZnS layer that functioned as glue for the CdS layer, the high electronic conductivity of ZnO nanowires, and their high surface area. Further improvements in the photoresponse of the CdS/CdSe-sensitized ZnO/TiO2 sea urchin structures is solely due to the better higher light scattering offered by the ZnO/TiO2 sea urchin structures; these structures significantly improved the optical path length by multiscattering, allowing efficient absorption of a broader spectrum of sunlight by the thin CdS/CdSe shells around the ZnO nanowires.
 Fig. 5  (a) Proposed band diagram for the CdS/CdSe co-sensitized ZnO/TiO2 sea urchin structures; (b) linear sweep voltammograms for the ZnO/TiO2 sea urchin structures, CdS-sensitized ZnO/TiO2 sea urchin structures, and CdS/CdSe co-sensitized ZnO/TiO2 sea urchin structures. 
 Fig. 6  (a) Amperometric I–t curves for CdS/CdSe co-sensitized ZnO/TiO2 sea urchin structures, CdS/CdSe co-sensitized ZnO nanowires, and CdS/CdSe co-sensitized TiO2 microspheres; (b) PEC efficiency of ZnO/TiO2 sea urchin structures, CdS-sensitized ZnO/TiO2 sea urchin structures, and CdS/CdSe co-sensitized ZnO/TiO2 sea urchin structures. 
The efficiency (η) of water splitting of photoelectrochemical cells equipped with ZnO/TiO2 sea urchin structures, CdS-sensitized ZnO/TiO2 sea urchin structures, and CdS/CdSe co-sensitized ZnO/TiO2 sea urchin structures under an applied voltage was calculated according to the following equation26  where Vapp is the applied voltage versus RHE, I is the externally measured current density, and Plight is the power density of illumination. The PEC efficiencies of ZnO/TiO2, CdS-sensitized ZnO/TiO2, and CdS/CdSe co-sensitized ZnO/TiO2 are compared in Fig. 6b. The photo-conversion efficiency of the CdS/CdSe-sensitized ZnO/TiO2-based photoanode was significantly higher than that of the CdS-sensitized ZnO/TiO2 photoanode. Our PEC results clearly demonstrate the unique benefits of CdS/CdSe co-sensitized ZnO/TiO2-based photoanodes; these can efficiently harvest sunlight in the visible frequency domain due to the smaller band gap of CdS and CdSe than ZnO and yield better separation of photo-generated charge carriers due to the stepwise structure of band edges in CdSe/CdS/ZnO.
Conclusions
We successfully designed novel photoanodes for PEC cells based on CdS/CdSe co-sensitized ZnO/TiO2 sea urchin structures synthesized via combined sol–gel and hydrothermal processes. The sea urchin structures had a dramatically enhanced optical path length due to multi-scattering allowing efficient absorption of a broader spectrum of sunlight, and showed good separation of photo-generated charge carriers due to the stepwise structure of the band edge positions and improved electronic transport through the conducting ZnO nanowires. A promising photocurrent density of 11.8 mA cm−2 was achieved at an applied bias voltage of 0.4 V under simulated sunlight irradiation, corresponding to an overall photo conversion efficiency of 6.4%.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Center for BioNano Health-Guard funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning (MSIP) of Korea as the Global Frontier Project (H-GUARD_2013M3A6B2078944) and the Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education (S-2011-0292-000).
Notes and references
S. U. M. Khan, M. Al-Shahry and W. B. Ingler, Science, 2002, 297, 2243–2245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, F. Wang, H. Huang, H. Li, X. Han, Y. Liu and Z. Kang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 2274–2278 RSC .
P. A. DeSario, J. J. Pietron, D. E. DeVantier, T. H. Brintlinger, R. M. Stroud and D. R. Rolison, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8073–8083 RSC .
S. Hoang, S. Guo and C. B. Mullins, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 23283–23290 CAS .
B. Jeremie, Y. Jun-Ho, C. Maurin, H. Takashi, S. Renata, A. Jan, G. Michael and S. Kevin, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 824–828 CrossRef .
M. Ni, M. K. H. Leung, D. Y. C. Leung and K. Sumathy, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2007, 11, 401–425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Su, T. Wang, R. Lv, J. Zhang, P. Zhang, J. Lu and J. Gong, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 9001–9009 RSC .
K. Maeda and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2655–2661 CrossRef CAS .
H. Park, W. Choi and M. R. Hoffmann, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2379–2385 RSC .
H. M. Chen, C. K. Chen, R.-S. Liu, L. Zhang, J. Zhang and D. P. Wilkinson, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 5654–5671 RSC .
H. Kim, M. Seol, J. Lee and K. Yong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 25429–25436 CAS .
G. Wang, X. Yang, F. Qian, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1088–1092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-J. Lin, Y.-T. Lu, C.-H. Hsieh and S.-H. Chien, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 113102–113103 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Horiuchi, T. Toyao, M. Takeuchi, M. Matsuoka and M. Anpo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 13243–13253 RSC .
D. Chen, L. Cao, F. Huang, P. Imperia, Y.-B. Cheng and R. A. Caruso, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 4438–4444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Pacholski, A. Kornowski and H. Weller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 1188–1191 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lu, J. Xu, X. Xie, H. Wang, C. Wang, S.-Y. Kwok, T. Wong, H. L. Kwong, I. Bello, C.-S. Lee, S.-T. Lee and W. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 116, 2656–2661 Search PubMed .
A. B. Murphy, P. R. F. Barnes, L. K. Randeniya, I. C. Plumb, I. E. Grey, M. D. Horne and J. A. Glasscock, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2006, 31, 1999–2017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. Taylor, Optical Binding Phenomena: Observations and Mechanisms, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg,  2011, p. 11 Search PubMed .
Z. Zhang and S. Satpathy, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1990, 65, 2650–2653 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Schuller, R. Zia, T. Taubner and M. L. Brongersma, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 99, 107401 CrossRef .
T. Nonami, H. Taoda, N. T. Hue, E. Watanabe, K. Iseda, M. Tazawa and M. Fukaya, Mater. Res. Bull., 1998, 33, 125–131 CrossRef CAS .
H. Stiebig, N. Senoussaoui, C. Zahren, C. Haase and J. Müller, Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and Applications, 2006, 14, 13–24 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Intawiwat, E. Myhre, H. Øysæd, S. H. Jamtvedt and M. K. Pettersen, Polym. Eng. Sci., 2012, 52, 2015–2024 CAS .
Y.-L. Lee and Y.-S. Lo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 604–609 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lei, G. Zhao, M. Liu, Z. Zhang, X. Tong and T. Cao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 19067–19076 CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: XRD spectra of TiO2 microspheres and ZnO/TiO2 nano/micro hybrid heterostructures and diffuse and total transmittance spectra of TiO2 microspheres, ZnO nanowires, and ZnO/TiO2 sea urchin structures. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ta15439dThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

 		 

 	Fig. 1  (a) SEM images of as-synthesized TiO2 microspheres, (b) TiO2 microspheres coated with a ZnO seed layer, (c) ZnO/TiO2 hybrid structures, and (d) ZnO nanowires grown on TiO2 microspheres.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) HRTEM image of a ZnO nanowire (the inset is the SAED pattern of the ZnO nanowire); (b) HRTEM image of a CdS/ZnO core shell nanowire; (c) TEM image of a CdS/ZnO core shell nanowire after CdSe sensitization; and (d) HRTEM image of a part of the nanowire shown in (c).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) TEM image of a CdSe/CdS/ZnO core shell nanowire; (b) TEM elemental map for Zn; (c) TEM elemental map for O; (d) TEM elemental map for Cd; (e) TEM elemental map for S; and (f) TEM elemental map for Se.	 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Percentage haze value for TiO2 microspheres, ZnO nanowires and ZnO/TiO2 sea urchin structures and (b) absorption spectra of ZnO/TiO2 sea urchin CdS and CdS/CdSe sensitized ZnO/TiO2 sea urchin structures.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Proposed band diagram for the CdS/CdSe co-sensitized ZnO/TiO2 sea urchin structures; (b) linear sweep voltammograms for the ZnO/TiO2 sea urchin structures, CdS-sensitized ZnO/TiO2 sea urchin structures, and CdS/CdSe co-sensitized ZnO/TiO2 sea urchin structures.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Amperometric I–t curves for CdS/CdSe co-sensitized ZnO/TiO2 sea urchin structures, CdS/CdSe co-sensitized ZnO nanowires, and CdS/CdSe co-sensitized TiO2 microspheres; (b) PEC efficiency of ZnO/TiO2 sea urchin structures, CdS-sensitized ZnO/TiO2 sea urchin structures, and CdS/CdSe co-sensitized ZnO/TiO2 sea urchin structures.	 

 		 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: XRD spectra of TiO2 microspheres and ZnO/TiO2 nano/micro hybrid heterostructures and diffuse and total transmittance spectra of TiO2 microspheres, ZnO nanowires, and ZnO/TiO2 sea urchin structures. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ta15439d

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
