Membrane-intercalating conjugated oligoelectrolytes  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2CS00014H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2CS00014H
(Tutorial Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 9917-9932Membrane-intercalating conjugated oligoelectrolytes

        
          
            Cheng 
            Zhou
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Geraldine W. N. 
            Chia
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Ken-Tye 
            Yong
          
          
        
      *c
aInstitute of Polymer Optoelectronic Materials and Devices, State Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials and Devices, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, 510640, P. R. China. E-mail: czhou@scut.edu.cn
bDepartment of Chemistry, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117543, Singapore
cSchool of Biomedical Engineering, The University of Sydney, Sydney 2006, New South Wales, Australia. E-mail: ken.yong@sydney.edu.au
Received 
      19th August 2022
    First published on 30th November 2022AbstractBy acting as effective biomimetics of the lipid bilayers, membrane-intercalating conjugated oligoelectrolytes (MICOEs) can spontaneously insert themselves into both synthetic lipid bilayers and biological membranes. The modular and intentional molecular design of MICOEs enable a range of applications, such as bioproduction, biocatalysis, biosensing, and therapeutics. This tutorial review provides a structural evolution of MICOEs, which originated from the broader class of conjugated molecules, and analyses the drivers behind this evolutionary process. Various representative applications of MICOEs, accompanied by insights into their molecular design principles, will be reviewed separately. Perspectives on the current challenges and opportunities in research on MICOEs will be discussed at the end of the review to highlight their potential as unconventional and value-added materials for biological systems.
Cheng Zhou
Cheng Zhou is a tenure track associate professor at the South China University of Technology (SCUT). He was a post-doc at the National University of Singapore and Nanyang Technological University. He obtained his PhD in 2016 at the SCUT and received his BSc degree in 2011 from Jilin University. His current work is focused on the design and synthesis of membrane-intercalating conjugated oligoelectrolytes for diverse applications.
Geraldine W. N. Chia
Geraldine W. N. Chia received the NUS-NRF Postdoctoral Fellowship at the National University of Singapore, where she worked on the biological applications of membrane-intercalating conjugated oligoelectrolytes. Prior to that, she obtained her PhD in 2022 and received her BSc degree in 2017 at the Nanyang Technological University. Her research interest is in membrane intercalating molecules and their applications in biological systems.
Ken-Tye Yong
Ken-Tye Yong is a Professor at the School of Biomedical Engineering at the University of Sydney. Before that, he was the Provost's Chair and Associate Professor at the School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering at the Nanyang Technological University. Dr Yong earned his BS, MEng, and PhD from the State University of New York at Buffalo, USA. He is the Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry, Fellow of the Royal Society of Biology, Overseas Fellow of the Royal Society of Medicine, and Fellow of the Institute of Physics.

Key learning points
(1) The functional design of conjugated oligoelectrolytes for them to confer an intended modification of lipid membranes, both in synthetic and living systems.
(2) The utility of the conjugated framework as both an optical reporter and an efficient mediator for transmembrane electron transfer.
(3) The structural evolution of membrane-intercalating conjugated oligoelectrolytes (MICOEs) and the underlying drivers of the evolution.
(4) Representative applications of MICOEs.
(5) Opportunities to construct MICOEs with greater value-added functions.

1 Introduction
Conjugated oligoelectrolytes (COEs) are composed of hydrophobic conjugated backbones that are decorated with polar ionic pendants. Within this relatively broad class of synthetic molecules, certain COEs adopt a linear molecular framework with a one-dimension conjugated backbone, such as the oligo(phenylene vinylene) class of molecules.1–5 A further subclass of these COEs are the membrane-intercalating conjugated oligoelectrolytes (MICOEs). Their molecular framework allows for efficient and spontaneous membrane intercalation, which is driven by the electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions between COEs and phospholipids that make up the membrane (Fig. 1).6 The molecular length of MICOEs generally has an influence over their effect on lipid bilayers; MICOEs that are shorter than the lipid bilayer thickness typically lead to membrane disruption, which is postulated to stem from the hydrophobic mismatch between the COEs and lipid bilayers.7,8 However, for MICOEs which have a molecular length similar to the lipid bilayer thickness, they were found to alter the cell membrane permeability and accelerate the passage of electrons and other substances across the membrane.9,10 On the other extreme, when the molecular length of MICOEs slightly exceeds the thickness of the lipid bilayer (≈4 nm), the MICOEs span the lipid bilayer and act to stabilize it, perhaps mimicking natural compounds like the noncanonical tetraether lipids.11,12
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of the effects of three different length MICOEs on lipid bilayers. 
The lipid bilayer is an essential component of all biological membranes that delineates the intracellular space from the extracellular environment.13 By acting as the biomimetics of lipid bilayers and taking advantage of its versatile chemistry, MICOEs are a powerful molecular platform to realize multiple functions in the biological context (Fig. 1). For example, by simply regulating their molecular lengths, MICOEs can be tuned to serve a range of functions from being antimicrobial agents (through bacterial membrane disruption),6 to biocatalysts (through promoting electron transport across membranes),14 to chemical fortifiers (through stabilising membranes against environmental stresses).11 The conjugated backbone of MICOEs also allows them to be utilized as membrane-specific fluorescent probes for cellular or vesicle detection (i.e. diagnostic tools).15,16 Through intentional chemical design, MICOEs can also be manipulated in their conversion pathway of captured photon energy, and be repurposed as photodynamic or photothermal agents for therapy.17,18
In this tutorial review, we will introduce MICOEs from their initial discovery to their emergence as a novel class of molecular tools; a journey fundamentally grounded in materials chemistry. The evolution of their molecular design and the driver of the evolutionary process will be discussed in depth. The chemical design principles of MICOEs will consider the effects of molecular topology, molecular length, hydrophobic–hydrophilic balance, and functional group decoration on the intended function of the molecule. The interplay among different modules (including the conjugated backbone, linker, side chain, and terminal polar groups), the subsequent impact of MICOEs on the lipid membrane, and the applications of MICOEs in the biological systems will also be discussed. This review will conclude with the challenges and outlook of MICOE research.
2 The evolution of MICOEs in materials chemistry
2.1 Conjugated polymers and oligomers
Conjugated polymer research has a history of about 200 years beginning with the first report of polyanilines.19 Alongside polyaniline, other conjugated polymers based on other π-systems, such as polypyrrole, polyphenylene, polyacetylene and poly(phenylene vinylene) have also been reported to be synthesized successfully.19 After that, in the 1970s, polyacetylene was found to have a significantly increased conductivity after oxidation with halogen vapor.4 The oxidation or reduction of conjugated polymers is a common pathway to achieve conducting polymers, of which they belong to a unique class of organic materials with similar electrical and optical properties to those of inorganic semiconductors and metals.20 Notably, the Noble Prize in Chemistry 2000 was awarded to Alan Heeger, Alan MacDiarmid and Hideki Shirakawa for their discovery and development of conductive polymers. The field of conjugated polymers developed rapidly in the 1980s, with the synthesis of new π-conjugated systems, such as polythiophene and other narrow-bandgap conjugated polymers that aimed to achieve a broad absorption spectrum.21 Their unique and outstanding electrical, optical, and mechanical properties have made conjugated polymers popular as a novel material in areas such as photovoltaic cells, light-emitting devices, organic field-effect transistors, electrochromic devices, energy storage, photocatalysis, anti-corrosion coating, biomedical and light sensing applications.22 However, polymers are polydisperse (i.e. they contain different chain lengths because the repeating unit, n, is variable), which means it is difficult to predict and precisely control their optoelectronic properties.19 In contrast, monodisperse conjugated oligomers (where n is constant) have a well-defined chemical structure while retaining a similar electronic structure as their polymer analogues, and only have minimal batch-to-batch variation.23 In the beginning, the monodisperse conjugated oligomers were utilized as model systems in fundamental research to understand the relationship between the structural and optoelectronic properties of high molecular weight polymers.24 Subsequently, they were found to be an independent category of materials with unique properties that are distinct from both conjugated small molecules and polymers.23
2.2 Conjugated polyelectrolytes and oligoelectrolytes
When conjugated polymer research first gained traction, the poor solubility of the macromolecules posed a major problem to semiconductor device fabrication via solution-based processes.25 One widely used method to circumvent this problem is to incorporate alkyl groups, which will make the conjugated polymers highly soluble in common organic solvents.26 At that time, Wudl and co-workers designed and synthesized two conjugated polymers (P3-ETSNa and P3-BTSNa), based on the polythiophene backbone with sulfonate groups, which was intended to make these polymers soluble in the environmental friendly solvent, water.27 These two polymers were later realized to be the first conjugated polyelectrolytes (CPEs).
To enable applications in biological contexts, conjugated materials are required to have enough aqueous solubility.28 One direct method is to form water-soluble nanoparticles using miniemulsion and nanoprecipitation techniques, e.g., encapsulation using hydrophilic polymer coatings.29 Another practical method is to decorate these conjugated materials with charged side-chains, i.e., CPEs or COEs (conjugated oligoelectrolytes).1 These CPEs and COEs are widely used in organic electronic devices as the interface layer for facilitating electron injection/extraction.30,31
Owing to the unique photophysical and electronic properties and the capabilities of such versatile structural modifications, a variety of interdisciplinary biological applications were realized by these water-soluble conjugated electrolyte materials.32 Early research on water-soluble CPEs focused on developing them as biological and chemical sensors, where the readout was dependent on the change in the CPEs’ fluorescence intensity after binding with their molecular targets.33 However, polymers are polydisperse with a mixture of different chain lengths, which complicated the elucidation of their structure–property relationships.34
In this regard, the first COE molecule (COE-1, Fig. 2a) based on the oligo(phenylene vinylene) backbone was designed and synthesized by Gaylord and co-workers in 2001, to investigate the effect of chain length on molecular aggregation and photoluminescence-quenching efficiencies.35 The fluorescence of COE-1, due to extensive aggregation in water, was found to be more effectively quenched than that of its parent CPE. New monodisperse COEs have been continually developed and employed in basic photophysical study,36 biosensors for DNA or protein,37,38 and even electron injection/transport layers in polymer light emitting diodes,39,40 respectively. Notably, all these COEs mentioned above adopted a similar structure topology to linear CPEs, where the charged side chains are perpendicular to the conjugated backbone.37 As these molecules were previously viewed only as the “fragments” of CPEs, research into the biological applications of the early cationic COEs was very limited. This was likely due to concerns that there will be strong electrostatic interactions between cationic COEs and negatively charged biomolecules (such as DNA or protein) that exist in the complex environment of biological samples, which may impede the success of using cationic COEs in a biological context.38 Few research studies have thus worked on the systematic expansion of new COEs and taken the approach of designing COEs for a more specific and stable binding with a defined target in the cell or other biological samples.2,41,42
 Fig. 2  (a) Timeline of the discovery of MICOEs from conjugated polymers. (b) Chemical structure of representative phospholipids and one MICOE molecule (left), and the schematic diagram of membrane intercalation (right). 
2.3 Membrane-intercalating conjugated oligoelectrolytes
To address the gap, one of the breakthroughs in COE molecular design is the discovery and synthesis of membrane-intercalating COEs (MICOEs).1 MICOEs also have a linear backbone, but their polar pendants are uniquely placed at both terminals of the backbone.2 This allows MICOEs to spontaneously intercalate and partition into lipid bilayers.11 One of the first MICOEs reported in the literature was “DSBN+”,3 where the abbreviation “DSB” refers to the “distyrylbenzene” backbone and “N+” refers to the positively charged quaternary ammonium. It is worth noting that the abbreviation of COEs has typically been left to the researchers to define and there is currently no guideline to standardise the naming convention.

DSBN+ was originally designed and synthesized to study the solvent effects on two-photo absorption cross-sections of organic fluorophores.3 Interestingly, five years later, DSBN+ and its homologous analogue DSSN+, which has one more phenylethylene repeat unit in its backbone, were found to spontaneously intercalate into lipid bilayers, as indicated by confocal microscopy measurements.2 One noticeable difference for DSBN+ and DSSN+, compared to previous COEs (such as COE-1), is that their terminal ionic pendants are located at both terminals of the linear backbone.16 The overall structural topology of these MICOEs is similar to that of lipid bilayers, where the hydrophobic moiety is located in the centre and the two hydrophilic moieties are positioned at two opposite ends (Fig. 2b). The hydrophilic moieties on MICOEs are traditionally ionic groups (e.g. quaternary ammonium), which likely facilitates the electrostatic attraction between MICOEs and the charged phospholipids in the lipid bilayer.43 The highly hydrophobic backbone of MICOEs has also been postulated to provide a strong driving force for the insertion of MICOEs into the hydrophobic core of the lipid bilayers, where the phospholipid acyl tails reside.11 These interactions enable MICOEs to orientate themselves perpendicular to the surface of the lipid bilayer, which is starkly different from the insertion of other membrane-anchoring molecules such as carbocyanine dyes.44,45 Such perpendicular orientations have been supported by in silico modelling6 and biophysical experiments such as polarized fluorescence microscopy.2 Moreover, investigations using DSBN+ and DSSN+ as representative MICOEs, have showed that MICOEs typically exhibit a significant increase in photoluminescence quantum yield and a blue-shifted emission spectrum after inserting into the membrane, demonstrating that the MICOEs had transited from a hydrophilic aqueous environment into the hydrophobic lipid environment.2
Given their unique structural topology, MICOEs can be viewed as biomimics of the lipid bilayer, which is a feature that underlies the predictability of MICOE's molecular target and the effects they may exert on their target compared to non-MICOE conjugated polymers.46 Together with the versatility in modulating the chemical features of MICOEs, these are the key factors that shape MICOEs into an emerging platform for the creation of new molecular tools to serve different applications and needs across multidisciplinary fields.1
3 Molecular design principles of MICOEs
3.1 Modular design and synthesis for specific applications
The structure of a typical MICOE can be split into four components: conjugated backbone, linker, side chain, and end group. The components are usually designed and synthesised independently according to the intended function(s) of the MICOEs. And through synthetic chemistry, these individual entities (or building blocks) are assembled into a single MICOE molecule (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  Modular design of MICOE for different specific applications. 
The conjugated backbone is the core structure of a MICOE. It not only confers the photoelectronic functions through its electronically delocalized structure, but also provides a rigid framework that determines the location and orientation of the terminal charged pendants on the MICOE.16 As a general rule of thumb, a linear and rigid backbone is typically used for MICOEs, especially for the elongated ones (such as ∼3 nm in length), to minimise any adverse disruption to lipid bilayers after membrane intercalation.7 Bulky functional moieties or side chains are typically not incorporated in the middle of the conjugated backbone for MICOEs, to retain the sanctity of a linear and rigid backbone.41 This will inevitably narrow the choice of building blocks and make synthesis more challenging compared to common conjugated materials. The most widely used backbone is oligo(phenylenevinylene) with different numbers of repeat units, although a range of other chemical units have also been used to construct the backbone that is intended to step cross the “oligomer” limitation. For example, the strong electron-deficient unit benzobisthiadiazole narrows the optical gap of the MICOE, thereby allowing it to be used for deep-depth in vivo imaging due to its near-infrared emission.16 Meanwhile, azobenzene is known for its ability to quench photoluminescence and it also confers photo-switchable properties for MICOEs, in which its structural morphology can be controlled by light.47 Ferrocene has also been introduced into the backbone of MICOEs to enhance the reversibility of redox and catalyse microbial transmembrane electron transfer in bioelectrochemical devices.48
In addition to the hydrophobic core, the side chains of MICOEs also contribute to the overall hydrophobicity and they offer much more flexibility compared to the rigid backbone.7 Currently, the most wildly used side chain is the hexyl chain.2 The length of the side chain can be modulated, e.g. changing from –C4H8– to –C8H16–, to change the total molecular length and/or the hydrophobicity ratio.7 Double bonds can also be introduced into the alkyl chains to introduce additional chain flexibility given that polyunsaturated alkyl chains have greater conformational plasticity.49 Biodegradable or water-soluble groups can also be added to optimize metabolism or biodistribution, while branched alkyl chains can be introduced to alter the molecular configuration and to further increase solubility. In short, the side chain is an important component that can be used to increase the diversity of MICOE chemical structures.7
A linker group is typically used to covalently bond the flexible side chains to a rigid backbone in MICOEs. Currently, the common linker units used are based on tertiary amine (N) or oxyl (O)8 in the examples of aminobenzene- and different hydroxybenzene-based MICOEs. In these cases, the nitrogen and oxygen atoms in the linker can also partly influence the electron delocalization of the conjugation through their lone pairs or through inductive effects. Meanwhile, the type and position of linkers also determine the number and orientation of the side chains in the MICOEs, thus influencing the overall molecular topology of MICOES.41 Further research in MICOEs can explore other types of linkers such as ester, amide, and other functionalized or biodegradable groups (like carbamate and urea).50
Contrary to the hydrophobic parts of MICOEs, the end groups are typically hydrophilic and can be selected from either positively/negatively charged or polar amphiphilic groups. They help to confer aqueous solubility to the MICOEs, thereby allowing them to have useful applications in a biological context. The most widely reported end group used is quaternary ammonium. Other nitrogen based polar groups, including tertiary/secondary/primary amine, and pyridinium, can also serve as the polar end groups.51 One can further decorate the end group with extended alkyl chains to increase the hydrophobicity or decorate with another charged group to increase the hydrophilicity and overall charge density of MICOEs. Positively charged groups have been postulated to facilitate cellular uptake of MICOEs, which is likely facilitated by the enhanced attraction of the positively charged MICOEs to the negatively charged surface of most bacteria and mammalian cells.52 Conversely, negatively charged functional groups (like sulfonate and acetate) can be used to reduce the electrostatic interactions instead.53 The end groups can also be functionalised with neutral amphiphilic groups, although their influence on MICOE interactions with the cell membrane has not been studied extensively.54
Following the rational molecular design of each component, MICOEs can be synthesized in a modular strategy via different types of reactions. Generally, the conjugated backbone can be fabricated using McMurry,7 Horner–Wadsworth–Emmons (HWE),3 or metal-catalysed coupling reactions (Stille, Suzuki or Heck reactions).8,17,18 Alkylation and quaternarization reactions were frequently employed to link the side chains and end groups to the MICOE backbone. From a chemical synthesis point of view, the amino or hydroxyl groups provide relatively high reactivity compared with direct carbon–carbon coupling in the alkylation step.11 Notably, the polar end groups are usually functionalised in the last step. Prior to this step, low-polarity intermediates can be simply purified using current accessible techniques, like silica gel chromatography.
The applications of MICOEs vary with different chemical designs (Fig. 3). For example, the short molecular length of COE-D8 allows it to act as a broad-spectrum antimicrobial agent.7 MICOEs can also be designed with a redox-active unit to accelerate microbial transmembrane electron transport e.g., DFSO+.48 On the other hand, MICOEs with an extended conjugated backbone can be employed to stabilize the microbial membrane,11 as well as to selectively label Gram-positive bacteria such as COE-S6.15 These examples will be discussed in detail in the Applications section of this tutorial review.
3.2 Four key molecular design principles of MICOEs
To ensure that MICOEs can insert themselves into lipid bilayers appropriately, the first molecular design principle is to select the appropriate molecular topology.41 MICOEs are distinct from other COEs because of the characteristic placement of polar side chains at the terminals of the conjugated backbone. To illustrate, ZCOE is not a typical MICOE because it has six side chains positioned at the side of its backbone (Fig. 4a).41 Study has shown that ZCOE cannot stably insert and embed itself in the membranes of bacteria, fungi and mammalian cells, whereas the typical MICOE, DSSN+ persisted in the membranes of all types of cells. The molecular design of DSSN+ allows it to be a biomimic of the lipid bilayer, which has likely facilitated the efficient membrane intercalation of the MICOE. As evidenced using fluorescence microscopy, the fluorescence from MICOEs clearly outlined the cell periphery, suggesting that MICOEs successfully intercalated into the cell membranes.15,18 This phenomenon was also observed with some other MICOEs. For example, COE-S6 was found to stably label E. coli membranes as observed from the fluorescence signals from COE-S6 in the majority of the cells, even after they were incubated with COE-S6 overnight. This also implied that these intercalated MICOEs can be passed on to daughter cells during cell division, with no evident toxicity toward the bacterial cells.11 These studies generally point to the importance of MICOE's molecular topology as a key enabler to its efficient and stable membrane intercalation.
 Fig. 4  Four key principles for MICOE design. 
Furthermore, the molecular length of MICOE regulates its effect on lipid bilayers, which can range from membrane disruption, permeation, to stabilization. Using the examples of COE2-3C, DSSN+ and COE1-5C, with molecular lengths estimated to be about 3.1, 3.8 and 4.7 nm respectively (GaussView, Fig. 4b), their antimicrobial activity was studied by measuring the minimum inhibition concentration (MIC) against bacteria cells. The MIC was found to be 8 μM for the short COE2-3C, while DSSN+ and COE1-5C exhibited no significant antimicrobial activity given their MIC values of 256 and 512 μM, respectively.8 In fact, DSSN+ was found to facilitate transmembrane electron and ion transport,2,10 while the elongated COE1-5C was observed to stabilise bacterial membranes that were fluidised by butanol (a solvent) and was used as a chemical additive to increase microbial butanol tolerance.12 In this regard, the molecular length should be carefully considered in the design of MICOEs from the perspective of its intended functions. For example, antimicrobial MICOEs will typically require a shorter molecular length relative to the lipid bilayer,8 while MICOEs that are employed as fluorescent probes should adopt a long molecular length to prevent membrane disruption as a result of MICOE membrane intercalation.16
The balance between hydrophilic and hydrophobic moieties is another important criterion to consider – a concept that is similar to the partition coefficient (or logP) criterion used in pre-clinical drug discovery.55 Using the examples illustrated in Fig. 4c, the short COE2-2C, decorated with four polar side chains, showed a poor antimicrobial activity against E. coli K12 with a MIC of 169 μg mL−1, due to its high aqueous solubility which subsequently resulted in a low extent of cell membrane association (below the detection limit).8 Ideally, the high degree of hydrophobic mismatch between COE2-2C and the membrane should result in extensive membrane disruption. However, the poor cellular uptake of COE2-2C had severely limited its antimicrobial activity. Through modifying the chemical structure and reducing the number of polar side chains to two to achieve a new MICOE, COE-D6, the cellular uptake ratio increased to 16% with an MIC of 16 μg mL−1.7 The hydrophobicity of MICOEs can be further increased by extending the alky chain length. For example, by adding two methylene units in each side chain of COE-D6, the homogenous analogue COE-D8 was achieved, which exhibited a higher uptake ratio of 72% and a lower MIC value of 4 μg mL−1.7 These improved parameters were likely the result of the optimum hydrophobicity and molecular length of COE-D8. Notably, a highly hydrophobic molecule will have a compromised aqueous solubility. For example, the solubilities for COE-D6 and COE-D8 are already as low as 240 and 65 μg mL−1 in phosphate buffered saline (PBS), respectively. The extremely poor water solubility will limit the use of MICOE in aqueous biological systems, in addition to increasing the challenge of chemical synthesis and purification of the MICOE. These examples highlight that the rational hydrophilicity and hydrophobicity ratio is critical for a MICOE as this is likely to affect drug absorption, transport, biodistribution and the final efficacy.55
The last key principle is to design MICOE with specific functional groups that enable it to achieve its intended function. For example, the oligophenylethylene backbone of COE2-4C is a well-known fluorescent chromophore that is widely used in organic light emitting diodes and biological sensors (Fig. 4d).8,56 Thus, COE2-4C can be utilized as a fluorescent probe. To confer the fluorescence quenching ability to the MICOE, the stilbene unit was replaced by an azobenzene motif to give a new MICOE, DSAzB, which can undergo photoinduced trans–cis isomerization to change its morphology thereby quenching its own fluorescence.47 The photophysical properties of MICOEs can also be easily modified by other approaches, such as introducing donor–acceptor fragments to enhance the intermolecular charge transfer (ICT) and shift the photo-response into the near-infrared region,16 or adopting a twisted or cross-conjugated backbone to reduce the ICT and result in a blue-shift of the absorption and emission spectra. Functional groups can also be installed at other modules of MICOEs, such as the side chain or end group. For example, antibody fragments can be conjugated to MICOEs via an oligo(ethylene glycol) or other flexible chain, which confers MICOEs the ability to bind more precisely to its targets through specific antibody-antigen reactions.
3.3 Common characterization methods
Generally, characterization of a novel MICOE includes structural elucidation, chemical and physical property characterization, biophysical measurements, and in vitro and in vivo biological experiments. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), mass spectroscopy (MS) and high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) are common techniques to identify the structure and determine the purity of MICOEs.16 When the conjugated backbone of the designed MICOEs is too planar and large, elevated temperature (e.g., 55 to 100 °C) is recommended to obtain more defined and sharp NMR peaks.57 Due to the multi-charged structure of MICOEs, several peaks that can be attributed to fragments with a different number of counter ions may appear during the MS run. Meanwhile, the counter ions of MICOEs may be replaced by other ions in the eluent during HPLC runs because the displacing ions have a stronger binding force with MICOE e.g., trifluoroacetate will replace the halogen ions. Ion chromatography can also be employed to confirm the identity and quantity of counter ions of MICOEs.
Characterization of the chemical and physical properties of MICOEs is usually intended to understand the structure–property relationships. For example, the aqueous solubility reflects the hydrophilicity and hydrophobicity ratio of MICOEs.7 Basic photophysical measurements, including absorption and emission spectrum, are usually carried out to investigate the electronic structures.3 Sometimes, photophysical techniques are used as a method to quantify MICOE concentrations.8 For example, the cellular uptake of MICOEs can be determined by measuring the absorption of the filter liquor after MICOE treatment in cells, relative to the control (i.e. MICOE solution without cells).7 Specific characterization may be applied for differently functionalized MICOEs, such as photoluminescence quantum yield and photostability measurements for fluorescent probes,16 electrochemical tests for biocatalysts,48 and reactive oxygen species (ROS) characterization for photodynamic agents.18
Lipid bilayers are the specific target of MICOEs.2 Model lipid systems including small unilamellar vesicles, large multilamellar vesicles and giant unilamellar vesicles, are generally employed during biophysical experiments to investigate the effects of MICOEs on the membrane.11,15 The phospholipid compositions of these vesicles are usually varied depending on the purpose of the biophysical studies.2,7 For example, 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-glycero-3-phosphocholine (POPC) is often used to mimic the mammalian phospholipid composition while 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine (POPE) mimics the bacterial membrane.16 The negatively charged 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phospho-(1′-rac-glycerol) (POPG) is also usually used to increase the overall negatively charges of the lipid bilayer. One can typically use a range of techniques, such as photoluminescence spectroscopy and fluorescent microscopy to study fluorescence, MICOE distribution and the effect of MICOE on liposome morphology;16 dynamic light scattering is used to study the effect of MICO on the surface charge and zeta potential58 and differential scanning calorimetry to study the thermodynamic properties of the lipid bilayers after MICOE insertion.7
Having understood the chemical and physical properties, biological experiments are then typically carried out to investigate the impact of MICOEs on biological cells and to explore or validate their potential uses. Half-maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) and MIC measurements based on mammalian and microbial cells respectively, are commonly employed to evaluate the in vitro toxicities of MICOEs.59 By utilizing the inherent photoluminescence of MICOEs, the biodistribution and mechanism of action (MoA) can be analyzed at the cellular level using fluorescence-based techniques, including microscopy and flow cytometry.60 These experiments are usually tailored according to the targeted applications and MICOE molecular structures. Specific application examples in different categories will be introduced in the next section.
4 Applications of MICOEs
4.1 Tuning transmembrane electron transfer
Bioelectrochemical devices generally fall into two categories: microbial fuel cell (MFC) or bioelectrosynthesis cell.61 In a MFC, organic substrates are oxidized to carbon dioxide by microbial colonies on the anode surface, and the electrons are collected at the anode to allow for the generation of electricity. Meanwhile, in the bioelectrosynthesis cell, water is oxidized at the anode, coupled with metabolic stimulation of microorganisms to facilitate bioelectrosynthesis via injection of electrons from the cathode.
Early studies were mostly focused on using MICOEs to regulate microbial electron transport across the cell membrane in bioelectrochemical systems after they were first known for their membrane intercalating properties in 2010.2 Early work in this area found that the addition of DSSN+ (190 nM) to a U-tube type and yeast based MFC gave rise to an approximately 5-fold increase of voltage production, compared to the conventional diffusion-based electron shuttle methylene blue (13 μM). Notably, the concentration of DSSN+ was two orders of magnitude lower than that of the conventional methylene blue. Switching the system to a bioelectrochemical device from the Escherichia coli based MFC, it was further found that the current collection could be enhanced by more than 300% after the addition of 25 μM DSSN+. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images showed the growth of E. coli cells on surfaces of the carbon felt fibres, indicating that the MICOE supplement may have tailored the biotic–abiotic interfaces to maximize the utility of bioelectronic devices.62 In the work reported by Garner et al., DSSN+ was also found to improve the performance of wastewater MFCs with respect to current generation and organic contaminant removal,63 as a result of membrane modifications in electrochemically active model microorganisms, such as Shewanella oneidensis MR-1.64
Though there are reported successful applications of MICOEs in this field, a mechanistic study on the impact of MICOE on microbial extracellular electron transport (EET) is still under progress due to the complexity of living systems.65–67 There are two key EET mechanisms for electroactive microorganisms, including (1) direct electro transfer (DET) via outer membrane proteins or conductive biological “nanowires”, and (2) mediated electron transfer (MET) with electron shuttles. Inspired by previous research on conductive polymers, MICOEs based on oligo(phenylenevinylene) were designed for molecular wire functionality.2,68 As the conjugated backbone extended from 3 to 4 phenylenevinylene repeat units, MICOEs showed an obvious increase in power generation in E. coli based MFCs. However, the power generation reduced when the backbone of MICOEs was further extended to 5 phenylenevinylene units.69 One explanation for the enhanced rate of biocatalysis by the 3- or 4-ringed MICOE is that these relatively shorter MICOEs may be simulataneoulsy permeabilising the cell membranes to facilitate transport across the membrane, which would not be possible in the case of the longer MICOE counterparts as the latter tends to increase membrane rigidity instead.14 Nonetheless, the much shorter molecular length MICOEs may compromise membrane integrity and cell functions, thus the MICOE concentrations need to be optimised when being utilised in these systems.8 As supporting evidence, DSSN+ was also observed to improve cross-membrane ion conductivity in bioelectrochemical systems.10 Other experiments revealed that DSSN+ promoted both cytochrome-based DET and flavin-based MET, as well as increased the cell density attached on electrodes.70 In other words, there may be more than one mechanism in which MICOEs facilitate the EET process.
The above-mentioned bioelectrochemical studies focused on oligophenylethylene-based MICOEs. To explore other π-systems, a ferrocene-based MICOE, DSFO+ was designed and synthesized by Kirchhofer et al.48 This redox-active molecule was employed in a single-chamber microbial three-electrode electrochemical cell (M3C), which allows precise control of the potential of the anode. The study showed that the addition of 1 μM DSFO+ resulted in three S. oneidensis MR-1 strains exhibiting an immediate and sustained amplification in respiratory biocurrent when the working electrodes were poised at E = 0.27 V versus Ag/AgCl. Another two ferrocene-based MICOEs with and without fluorination were studied by McCuskey et al. in a M3C containing S. oneidensis MR-1.71 The fluorination was found to induce a higher oxidation potential and a smaller increment of steady-state biocurrent than the non-fluorinated MICOE, but both have a higher electron extraction efficiency than the controls. These results thereby suggest that ferrocene-based MICOEs potentially provide a new means of incorporating redox-active units throughout the cell membrane and accelerate EET by mimicking the function of electron transport proteins.
MICOEs were also used in the bioelectrosynthesis cell.72 As a proof-of-concept, a H-shape bioelectrosynthesis cell inoculated with S. oneidensis was operated under an applied bias of −300 mV versus the standard hydrogen electrode. After DSSN+ addition, the reduced metabolic product, succinate, was produced via fumarate reduction. It was postulated that this bioproduction was enabled due to the spontaneous membrane intercalation of DSSN+ which facilitated the direct transmembrane electron transport from the electrode to the charge acceptor sites of S. oneidensis.72 Furthermore, MICOEs were directly incorporated into thylakoid bioanodes to observe their photobioelectrochemical properties.73 In both three-electrode electrochemical cells and bio-solar cell devices, a significant enhancement in anodic performance was observed when anodes were modified with certain MICOEs, demonstrating the potential of MICOEs to promote the photosynthesis. Wang et al. used MICOEs as a biocatalyst for L-malic acid production from fumaric acid by yeast cells.14 The use of DSSN+ and DSBN+ led to obvious increases in product yield compared to untreated yeast, attributing to an increase in membrane permeability. These biocatalysis studies highlight the future potential of MICOEs in areas such as bioremediation, biofuel fermentation, and microbial CO2 reduction.
4.2 Regulation of membrane stability
Membrane insertion of MICOEs is often accompanied by changes in fluidity and permeability, which in turn influences the overall stability of the membrane. Hinks et al. reported that the short DSBN+ can perturbate the E. coli membrane with a MIC of 2 μg mL−1, demonstrating the potential of using MICOEs as antimicrobial agents.6 The landmark study by Yan et al. clearly showed the antimicrobial activity of MICOE is fundamentally dependent on the molecular length of its hydrophobic core, in which the shorter three-ringed MICOEs exhibited better antimicrobial activity than the longer MICOE counterparts (e.g., four- or five-ringed).8In silico simulations revealed that antimicrobial MICOEs disrupt the lipid bilayers after insertion, due to the hydrophobic mismatch of the short MICOEs (∼3 nm) in the bacterial lipid bilayers (typically ∼4 nm).6 The most direct evidence is the changes in membrane morphology after being treated with antimicrobial MICOEs, as characterized by SEM and TEM (transmission electron microscopy).7,60 In the biophysical experiments, antimicrobial MICOEs were also shown to permeabilize liposome membranes which subsequently caused the release of encapsulated calcein.74 Meanwhile, transcriptomic analysis also supported that membrane disruption is a key MoA because genes related to the membrane stress response were differentially expressed in cells that were exposed to MICOE over a long period of time.75
Antimicrobial MICOEs usually carry a positive charge, intended to improve the cell affinity toward the negatively charged bacterial membrane. As a counter example, an anionic MICOE based on sulfonate groups showed significantly less antimicrobial activity than its cationic analogues.76,77 Notably, these MICOEs are generally more effective against the Gram-positive pathogens compared to the Gram-negative ones.60 Similar to most antibiotics, the higher efficacy of MICOEs is likely due to the lack of an outer membrane in Gram-positive bacteria, which often acts as a barrier of entry. To overcome this problem and achieve a higher affinity to bacterial membranes, Zhou et al. increased the hydrophobicity ratio for MICOEs and obtained higher antimicrobial efficacy against both Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria.7 The hydrophobic interactions with the bacteria membrane are likely to play a more prominent role in the MoA of antimicrobial MICOEs. This notion was further echoed by Limwongyut and co-workers whose work showed that the hydrophobicity of the end groups were key for cell association of antimicrobial MICOEs.59
Recent works by Limwongyut et al. also started to consider cytotoxicity and/or haemolytic activities of the MICOEs – both parameters being important in the development of novel drug candidates.59,74 One MICOE COE2-3C-C4butyl was shown to have a selectivity index with an IC50/MIC greater than 256.59 One explanation is that the mammalian surface is less negatively charged than that of bacteria.78 However, it may also be because MICOEs could behave differently when inserted into mammalian membranes compared to bacterial membranes. For example, Du et al. showed that the five-ringed MICOE (COE1-5C) destroyed the mammalian cells more readily than the shorter four-ringed MICOE (DSSN+) in the patch clamp experiments, which is opposite in trend to their antimicrobial activities.10 Interestingly, serial passage experiments based on E. faecalis have also suggested the inability of the bacteria to develop significant resistance against the antimicrobial MICOEs,79 which is likely due to the similar behavior of MICOEs to cationic antimicrobial peptides (CAMPs). Although these results demonstrate MICOEs to be an emerging class of novel membrane-targeting antimicrobials,80 it is also noteworthy that the highly positively charged MICOEs are potentially potent and can induce systemic toxicity e.g. hepatotoxicity or over-stimulation of the proinflammatory response.81 Future MICOE therapeutics research may look toward installing pH-sensitive moieties that can still confer the molecule with positive charges for maintaining aqueous solubility during drug administration, and be neutralised when it enters a different pH environment intracellularly later on.
Currently, the design of new antimicrobial MICOEs relies on a typical material chemistry-based approach by studying one homologous series of molecules.7,59,74 Inevitably, the structure-activity-relationship (SAR) analysis has become increasingly complex because trends in molecular features became less informative. Hence, a systematic study that integrates both material chemistry and machine learning may help to quickly derive some useful insights to guide the molecular design. For example, a proof-of-validation study using machine learning described that the 3D shape of MICOEs is an integral predictor of its antimicrobial activity using an in-house built model.82 It is important to note that current antimicrobial MICOE research has relied heavily on in vitro experiments and testing only a narrow spectrum of pathogens.7 Moving forward, a shift towards in vivo experiments and priority pathogens identified by the World Health Organization (e.g., Neisseria gonorrhoeae) or nontuberculous Mycobacteria (NTM) spp. would be highly recommended to demonstrate stronger therapeutic interests of antimicrobial MICOEs for clinical use.83
Alongside studies on short antimicrobial MICOEs, it was also discovered that MICOEs with molecular lengths similar or longer than that of the lipid bilayers, tended to confer a protective effect on bacterial membranes. The first indication was from the observation that E. coli became resistant toward osmotic stress and dehydration upon treatment with the four-ringed MICOE DSSN+.6 Some microorganisms such as Clostridium acetobutylicum can produce solvents as renewable sources of biofuel e.g., butanol. However, these solvents are toxic to the cells because they can easily partition into the bacterial membranes, and increase fluidity to the extent that membrane stability is compromised. In this respect, Hinks et al. saw an opportunity for the longer MICOEs to act as riveting tools to increase membrane tolerance against the solvents in bacteria.12 Indeed, the longer MICOE COE1-5C was shown to reduce the fluidity of the E. coli lipids in a supported lipid bilayer. In silico simulations also revealed that COE1-5C mitigated bilayer disruption by butanol. Consequentially, the five-ringed COE1-5C treated E. coli demonstrated higher tolerance against butanol compared to the untreated cells.12 The class of membrane stabilizing MICOEs was further expanded with the addition of six-ringed COE-S6, which was designed to have a further elongated conjugated backbone and higher charge density. These changes enabled COE-S6 to outperform COE1-5C in the ability to stabilize and rigidify bacterial membranes under butanol stress.11 More generally, it is possible that these membrane stabilizing MICOEs can be utilized as chemical additives in bacteria to engineer membrane tolerance against other harsh environmental factors such as extreme pH, temperature or chemicals.
While it may seem that the short and long MICOEs are mutually exclusive given their opposite effects on membrane stability, Bazan et al. made an interesting discovery when studying mixtures of the short COE-D8 and long COE-S6 – the combined use of these two MICOEs synergistically inhibited bacterial growth.46 The results suggest that membrane destabilization by the shorter MICOE far outweighed the stabilizing effects of the elongated MICOE. It may be possible that COE-S6 sensitized the cells and promoted uptake of the antimicrobial COE-D8. Cell membrane sensitization has previously been demonstrated for molecules with a length between the short membrane-disrupting and elongated membrane-stabilizing MICOEs. For example, the four-ringed MICOE DSSN+ caused the release of periplasmic proteins by permeabilizing the outer membrane in the E. coli, although the permeabilization had no effect on cell viability.9,84 Importantly, DSSN+ did not permeabilize the inner membrane as indicated by the absence of cytoplasmic protein released into the extracellular milieu.9 As a result of its membrane permeabilization effect, DSSN+ had been widely utilized to accelerate biocatalysis as listed in Section 4.1. Increased toxicity is a common issue when using short MICOEs to perturbate the membrane. In this regard, a three-dimensional MICOE, COE2-3-pCp, bearing a [2.2]paracyclophane unit was designed and synthesized (Fig. 5a), which exhibits a similar level of membrane permeabilization but less toxicity toward E. coli K12 and yeast, when compared to its linear and three-ringed analogue COE2-3C.85 These examples highlight that MICOEs are powerful modified tools used to tune the physicochemical properties of the cell membrane.
 Fig. 5  (a) Chemical structures of the rest COEs discussed in this review. (b) Schematic diagram of versatile MICOEs and their impacts on lipid bilayers. 
4.3 Use as optical reporters
With the development of fluorescence-based techniques such as flow cytometry and fluorescence microscopy, the use of fluorescent probes has dramatically increased in the life sciences to distinguish targeted components within biological samples and to understand their biological processes in both research and clinical settings. The conjugated backbones of MICOEs like oligophenylethylene, are typical fluorophores. For example, DSSN+ and DSBN+ were used to stain Baker's yeast during confocal microscopy, as well as to study the membrane intercalation into model lipid bilayers using polarized confocal microscopy.2DSSN+ has also been used to label the cell membrane of E. coli in MoA investigations.60 In a study by Gwozdzinska and co-workers, three MICOEs with different oligophenylethylene lengths (DSBN+,DSSN+, and COE1-5C) were studied for their properties to assess their suitability for use as mammalian cell membrane probes.42 The cell viability reduced to 40, 33 and 66% for HeLa, K562 and HEK293T cell lines after incubating with 20 μM DSBN+ for 48 hours. Meanwhile, low cell cytotoxicity was observed for DSSN+ and COE1-5C. Both DSBN+ and DSSN+ also showed large blueshifts when embedded in the bilayer membrane from aqueous media, with 2- to 12-fold increases in quantum efficiency observed respectively. These results suggest that elongated MICOEs are more suited as fluorescent probes rather than the short MICOEs.
Gram typing is still one of the most widely used techniques to guide clinical decisions for antibiotic treatment, in which optical probes are key. The previously reported MICOE, COE-S6 that was originally studied for its membrane stabilizing properties, was later found to be a useful optical probe for selective bacterial labeling.15 This Gram-selectivity is attributed to the lipopolysaccharides present on the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria, which hinders COE-S6 penetration into the membrane i.e., COE-S6 kinetically prefers intercalation into Gram-positive bacteria. The strong photoluminescence of COE-S6 also enabled naked-eye detection of Gram-positive bacteria with a hand-held UV lamp.15 Recently, Zhou et al. reported a water-soluble MICOE COE-BBT, containing a thiophene–benzobisthiadiazole–thiophene unit in its conjugated core, that can be used as an optical reporter in the second near-infrared window (NIR-II, 1000–1700 nm) for deep-depth in vivo imaging.86COE-BBT retained the fluorogenic nature of its predecessors and was also highly photostable when incorporated into the lipid bilayer. This was further demonstrated through in vivo experiments which showed that COE-BBT fluorescence could still be observed even after 26 days, from the time it was introduced into a mouse subcutaneous tumor model for tumor tracking.16 Notably, an increase in fluorescent intensity during the 26 days was observed as the tumor grew, attributed to a progressive attenuation of the self-quenching effect within the cells.16 These studies suggested the MICOEs can be designed to have unique functions as a fluorescent reporter, rather than a simple membrane dye.
The utility of DSSN+ was also demonstrated by Czernek et al. for the labelling of cancer-derived and nanometer-sized extracellular vesicles (EVs).43 When compared with carboxyfluorescein succinimidyl ester (CFSE) labelling in bead-based flow cytometry and fluorescence microscopy, DSSN+ was shown to label EVs efficiently, for tracking in cells. Milczarek et al. further expanded the investigation into the earlier versions of MICOEs and included the negatively charged COE1-4C– to investigate the influence of charge on a variety of cancerous and normal cell lines.87 Among them, DSSN+ was found to have the highest per cell fluorescent intensity, while its negatively charged analogue COE1-4C– had the lowest. This difference may be attributed to the slight negative charge of mammalian cell membranes, allowing for greater uptake of positively charged MICOEs. In 2020, Suwara and co-workers synthesized derivatives of DSSN+, in which the styrylnaphthalene was introduced into the conjugated core.54 The study focused on seven new MICOEs, DSNN-X, where X indicated various end groups, including trimethylammonium, phosphonate, morpholine, dihydroxyethylamine, phosphonate potassium, amino, and pyridinium. The dihydroxyethylamine derivative (DSNN-DEA) was found to have a significantly higher fluorescence intensity, measured by flow cytometry, compared to the other six derivatives. The perlyene-based MICOE, PC4, in the work of Niu et al. also demonstrated an interesting evolution in the molecular and functional space of MICOE.88 The study combined two separate functions of MICOEs (optical probe MICOEs and antimicrobial MICOEs) into a single molecule, allowing the new species of MICOE to behave as both a live/dead optical reporter and light-activated antimicrobial agent simultaneously.
In sum, the elongated MICOEs with their modular molecular platform, fluorogenic properties, excellent solubility, low cytotoxicity, specificity, and biomimicry to lipid bilayers make them ideal candidates for the development of new fluorescent reporters.
4.4 Conversion of photon energy
Besides using the MICOEs as fluorescent probes, the photon energy absorbed by the conjugated backbone through other pathways, can allow MICOEs to achieve photo-based applications. A donor–acceptor MICOE PTTP was designed and synthesized, which exhibited red-shifted absorption spectra relative to the oligophenylethylene-based analogues, and it was found to efficiently generate singlet oxygen in situ (ΦΔ ≈ 20%).18 The sensitizing ability of PTTP allowed it to be a highly efficient antibacterial agent, under a low light dose of activation (0.6 J cm−2), towards the Gram-negative bacteria, E. coli. The work showed the ability of MICOEs to be designed as efficient optically mediated antimicrobial agents. The photodynamic antibacterial activities can be further improved by complexing the PTTP with a biomimetic polyisocyanopetide hydrogel, as a result of higher ROS production efficiency and increased association of MICOEs toward bacteria.89 Another MICOE WMG1, composed of a benzobisthiadiazole unit in its backbone, was reported by Wang et al., which exhibited an absorption maxima at around 800 nm, and a remarkably photothermal conversion efficiency of circa 60%, with good photothermal killing efficiency toward both Gram-positive B. subtilis and Gram-negative E. coli bacteria.17 Different from photodynamic and photothermal therapy applications, MICOE was also developed into a photo-respond regulator of membrane morphology. By introducing the photoswitchable azobenzene into the MICOE backbone, the photoinduced isomerization transformed the linear trans DSAzB into a bend or C-shape form. Thus, it can disrupt the membrane integrity or control membrane permeability through light irradiation.47 This work demonstrated the potential of MICOEs for accurate photon-based therapies, such as for cancer treatments.
2.5 Other applications
The versatility of MICOEs is exemplified by the array of applications that they have been studied in – some of which were not discussed above. For example, DSBN+ was added to the microbial electrolysis cells inoculated with Geobacter sulfurreducens to improve hydrogen recovery. It was found that the addition of the MICOEs led to a 10.5 times increase in terms of energy yield and 11.8 times enhancement in hydrogen yield, likely due to interaction of DSBN+ with the hydrogenases of exoelectrogens and hydrogenotrophic methanogens.90 Detailed studies suggested that MICOE can be an effective H2 uptake inhibitor, thus it may have enabled an improved and sustained H2 gas recovery in these bioelectrochemical systems.91DSSN+ was also introduced into a hybrid system, constituted by the water-splitting photoelectrochemical cell and the E. coli based MFC, to enhance hydrogen evolution. By utilizing the Förster resonance energy transfer from phospholipid-assembled DSSN+ to Nile red, anodic photocurrent was enhanced in the aqueous-based artificial photosynthetic systems.92 The MICOEs can also be used to tune the microbial surface charge, like the zeta potential.58DSSN+ was also found to form stable multilamellar peripheral vesicular structures when incorporated into nanohydrogel-supported lipid bilayers. These new nanoparticle-supported lipid assemblies are potentially used in the biomedical field for delivery of cosmetic or drug agents.93 Some elongated MICOEs, such as COE-S6, were also found to be an effective drug delivery carrier for small interfering RNA (siRNA). The COE-S6/siRNA nanocomplexes enabled efficient silencing of the K-ras gene in pancreatic cancer cells and significant inhibition of cancer cell growth with negligible in vitro toxicities.94
5 Challenges and outlook
5.1 Challenges in chemistry
Currently, most of the building blocks in MICOEs reported in the literature are influenced by materials that were traditionally used in the organic semiconductor field, such as phenylethylene, thiophene and straight alkyl chains.31 Moreover, almost all reported MICOEs employ a symmetrical topology with multiple quaternary ammonium-based ending groups due to easy synthesis.8 Notably, positively charged groups MICOEs are potentially hazardous in the context of medical use, as they may have unspecific binding with serum proteins or cells via electrostatic interactions,95 compromising oral bioavailability and metabolic stability.83
MICOE research is considerably in its infancy stage and more can be done to expand the structural diversity of MICOEs. For example, in the context of employing MICOEs in biological systems, the future design of MICOEs should consider downstream factors, such as the absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion (ADME) properties of MICOEs so that more “drug-like” MICOE molecular structures can be expected. Advancements in MICOE research can benefit from having scientists from diverse backgrounds, such as medical chemists, to contribute their field expertise and bring in fresh perspective to the chemical design, synthesis and exploration of novel applications for MICOEs. Future research can also look into designing MICOEs with biodegradable and biocompatible units.
5.2 Challenges in mechanism studies
Fundamentally, a detailed mechanistic understanding of the membrane intercalation of MICOEs is still lacking. To date, most studies rely only on indirect evidence to demonstrate that MICOEs have intercalated the membrane and are inferred to adopt the molecular orientation that spans the lipid bilayers. Current examples of indirect evidence include the enhanced and blue-shifted emission spectrum,15 temperature-dependent cellular uptake ratio,7 microscopic observations of MICOE fluorescence originating from the cellular periphery,60 membrane stability enhancement,11 non-linear zeta potential change.16 By far, polarized confocal microscopy measurement for DSBN+ -stained vesicle samples is the only direct proof that reveals both location and orientation of MICOEs within the membrane.2 However, a contention remains in the field that MICOEs can also possibly accumulate on membrane surfaces by electrostatic interactions; a concept which has yet to be disproved. Given that the thickness of lipid bilayers is very thin (∼4 nm), and below the resolution limit of many characterization techniques, it remains extremely challenging to directly observe an individual MICOE molecule and its interactions with lipid bilayers. Nonetheless, such fundamental and comprehensive studies to provide convincing evidence on the membrane intercalation of MICOEs and the mechanisms still deserve attention as the information serving to guide the design of new MICOEs and to better understand their biological activities in depth.
The detailed working mechanism of MICOEs in complex biological systems is also unclear. Notably, MICOEs are not considered nanoparticle-based materials given that they exist as individual molecules with a well-defined structure. This is likely to be a comparative advantage when considering MICOEs in the biomedical space, because it can simplify the pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics and other MoA studies that can be complicated by uncertainties in the identities of the macromolecular drugs.
To date, there is a paucity of studies that focus on the structure-activity relationship (SAR) and MoA.75 This may be a limitation from the chemical synthesis perspective, given that the methods to quantify MICOEs are still not well established in the field today. Because MICOEs generally have several charged groups, which can lead to multiple peaks during MS measurements, hence a more specific and reliable MS detection or other methods for MICOEs should be looked into so that accurate MICOE detection can be employed for quantification in the SAR and MoA related studies.
5.3 Challenges in application
There is also much room for exploration and development of new applications of MICOEs. Future MICOE research can focus efforts on areas in which existing materials cannot address the research gaps or needs of the field sufficiently well, and may consider research directions with the value of commercialization in mind. For example, elongated MICOEs that are decorated with sufficiently charged side chains will have excellent solubility in aqueous solutions and hence, are not likely to form nanoaggregates.16 Hence, MICOEs have the potential to be developed as lipophilic, water soluble probes for the detection of extracellular vesicles or other biological nanoparticles using flow cytometry, because current lipophilic dyes such as PKH-26 are poorly water soluble and have been known to cause severe “false-positive” signals due to dye micelle formation in aqueous solution.96
Moreover, given that MICOEs mimic the lipid bilayers and act as a membrane stabilizer, MICOEs have the potential to be used in the construction of artificial lipid systems, such as liposomes and lipid nanoparticles. MICOEs may confer value-added functions to these systems, such as intrinsic fluorescence and membrane stabilisation, in areas such as drug delivery.94
A guided structural innovation of MICOEs to realize these new applications is highly desirable. Applications of MICOEs seem to be converging to more valuable fields, like diagnosis and therapeutics. However, the multiple cationic end groups of current MICOEs could rapidly interact with negatively charged serum proteins (such as albumin) and adhere to the cell surfaces without specificity when administered into the circulatory system, potentially leading to in vivo toxicity.95 To optimize the biocompatibility and metabolic stability, appropriate formulation with additives such as negatively charged cyclodextrins can be considered for current MICOEs to neutralise the positive charges. Alternatively, one can design neutral MICOE molecules by switching the charged end groups to polar amphiphilic ones. To further mimic the natural lipid bilayers, the head groups of neutral phospholipids, such as phosphatidylcholine (PC), phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) and phosphatidylserine (PS) can also be introduced into new MICOEs, to increase their biocompatibility. With MICOE as a versatile platform given its modular design, this new class of molecules has the potential to trigger new trends in chemistry innovation.
6 Summary
MICOEs are emerging as a novel class of biologically compatible materials, where their lipid bilayer-mimicking structure allows for spontaneous membrane intercalation. By modularly changing their chemical structures, MICOEs can be specifically designed and tuned to result in the intended impacts or functions on the cell membrane. Various applications across diverse fields have been achieved, such as the facilitation of transmembrane electron transport, regulation of membrane integrity/stability, use in phototherapy and as optical reporters, and regulation of photon energy conversion (Fig. 5b). It is noteworthy that some of these applications even require modifications of the membrane, that are of opposite effect from each other, which can be realised by MICOEs. For instance, antimicrobial MICOEs result in membrane disruption whereas membrane rigidifying MICOEs act as chemical additives to fortify membranes against fluidization by solvents. Altogether, MICOEs are a versatile and powerful molecular platform for membrane modifications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors are thankful for the help from Prof. Guillermo C. Bazan and Dr Sarah J. Cox-Vázquez. C.Z. acknowledges the South China University of Technology for their financial support. C.Z. and G.W.N.C. thank the National University of Singapore start up grant A-0004525-00-00. K.-T.Y. acknowledges the faculty of engineering at the University of Sydney for their financial support.
References
H. Yan, C. Catania and G. C. Bazan, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2958–2973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. E. Garner, J. Park, S. M. Dyar, A. Chworos, J. J. Sumner and G. C. Bazan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 10042–10052 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Woo, B. Liu, B. Kohler, D. Korystov, A. Mikhailovsky and G. C. Bazan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 14721–14729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shirakawa, E. J. Louis, A. G. MacDiarmid, C. K. Chiang and A. J. Heeger, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1977, 578–580,  10.1039/C39770000578 .
F. Garnier, G. Horowitz and D. Fichou, Synth. Met., 1989, 28, 705–714 CrossRef .
J. Hinks, Y. Wang, W. H. Poh, B. C. Donose, A. W. Thomas, S. Wuertz, S. C. J. Loo, G. C. Bazan, S. Kjelleberg, Y. Mu and T. Seviour, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 2429–2440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhou, G. W. N. Chia, J. C. S. Ho, T. Seviour, T. Sailov, B. Liedberg, S. Kjelleberg, J. Hinks and G. C. Bazan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 8069–8072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yan, Z. D. Rengert, A. W. Thomas, C. Rehermann, J. Hinks and G. C. Bazan, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 5714–5722 RSC .
C. Catania, C. M. Ajo-Franklin and G. C. Bazan, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 100300 RSC .
J. Du, A. W. Thomas, X. Chen, L. E. Garner, C. A. Vandenberg and G. C. Bazan, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 9624–9626 RSC .
C. Zhou, G. W. N. Chia, J. C. S. Ho, A. S. Moreland, T. Seviour, B. Liedberg, A. N. Parikh, S. Kjelleberg, J. Hinks and G. C. Bazan, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1808021 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Hinks, Y. Wang, A. Matysik, R. Kraut, S. Kjelleberg, Y. Mu, G. C. Bazan, S. Wuertz and T. Seviour, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 3718–3726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Nagle and S. Tristram-Nagle, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Rev. Biomembr., 2000, 1469, 159–195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, S. L. Fronk, Z. D. Rengert, J. Limwongyut and G. C. Bazan, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 5836–5840 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhou, J. C. S. Ho, G. W. N. Chia, A. S. Moreland, L. Ruan, B. Liedberg, S. Kjelleberg, J. Hinks and G. C. Bazan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2004068 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhou, Z. Li, Z. Zhu, G. W. N. Chia, A. Mikhailovsky, R. J. Vázquez, S. J. W. Chan, K. Li, B. Liu and G. C. Bazan, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2201989 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, G. Feng, M. Seifrid, M. Wang, B. Liu and G. C. Bazan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 16063–16066 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, M. Wang, A. Mikhailovsky, S. Wang and G. C. Bazan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 5031–5034 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Rasmussen, ChemPlusChem, 2020, 85, 1412–1429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Nezakati, A. Seifalian, A. Tan and A. M. Seifalian, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 6766–6843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhou, G. Zhang, C. Zhong, X. Jia, P. Luo, R. Xu, K. Gao, X. Jiang, F. Liu, T. P. Russell, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601081 CrossRef .
K. Namsheer and C. S. Rout, RSC Adv., 2021, 11, 5659–5697 RSC .
R. E. Martin and F. Diederich, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1999, 38, 1350–1377 CrossRef .
C. Zhou, Y. Liang, F. Liu, C. Sun, X. Huang, Z. Xie, F. Huang, J. Roncali, T. P. Russell and Y. Cao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 7538–7547 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kumar and R. C. Sharma, Eur. Polym. J., 1998, 34, 1053–1060 CrossRef CAS .
K.-Y. Jen, G. G. Miller and R. L. Elsenbaumer, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1986, 1346–1347,  10.1039/C39860001346 .
A. O. Patil, Y. Ikenoue, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1987, 109, 1858–1859 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhu, L. Liu, Q. Yang, F. Lv and S. Wang, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 4687–4735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wu and D. T. Chiu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3086–3109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Huang, H. Wu, D. Wang, W. Yang and Y. Cao, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 708–716 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lee, J. H. Seo and H. Y. Woo, Polymer, 2013, 54, 5104–5121 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, F. Lv, L. Liu and S. Wang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 3211–3222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, D. W. McBranch, H.-L. Wang, R. Helgeson, F. Wudl and D. G. Whitten, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1999, 96, 12287–12292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jiang, P. Taranekar, J. R. Reynolds and K. S. Schanze, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 4300–4316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. S. Gaylord, S. Wang, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 6417–6418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Stork, B. S. Gaylord, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 361–366 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, B. Liu, B. S. Gaylord and G. C. Bazan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 463–467 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li and G. C. Bazan, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 964–967 CrossRef CAS .
R. Yang, Y. Xu, X.-D. Dang, T.-Q. Nguyen, Y. Cao and G. C. Bazan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3282–3283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, R. Yang, J. Peng, A. A. Mikhailovsky, Y. Cao, T.-Q. Nguyen and G. C. Bazan, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 584–588 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. W. Thomas, Z. B. Henson, J. Du, C. A. Vandenberg and G. C. Bazan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 3736–3739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Gwozdzinska, R. Pawlowska, J. Milczarek, L. E. Garner, A. W. Thomas, G. C. Bazan and A. Chworos, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 14859–14861 RSC .
L. Czernek, A. Chworos and M. Duechler, Scand. J. Immunol., 2015, 82, 506–514 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Collot, P. Ashokkumar, H. Anton, E. Boutant, O. Faklaris, T. Galli, Y. Mély, L. Danglot and A. S. Klymchenko, Cell Chem. Biol., 2019, 26, 600–614 CrossRef CAS PubMed  .e607.
M. Wu, X. Liu, H. Chen, Y. Duan, J. Liu, Y. Pan and B. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 9093–9098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. L. Bazan, L. Ruan and C. Zhou, PLoS One, 2019, 14, e0224816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Leifert, A. S. Moreland, J. Limwongyut, A. A. Mikhailovsky and G. C. Bazan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 20333–20337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. D. Kirchhofer, Z. D. Rengert, F. W. Dahlquist, T.-Q. Nguyen and G. C. Bazan, Chem, 2017, 2, 240–257 CAS .
B. Antonny, S. Vanni, H. Shindou and T. Ferreira, Trends Cell Biol., 2015, 25, 427–436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Becker and F. R. Wurm, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 7739–7782 RSC .
K. Binnemans, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 4148–4204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Salatin, S. Maleki Dizaj and A. Yari Khosroushahi, Cell Chem. Biol., 2015, 39, 881–890 CAS .
A. W. Thomas, C. Catania, L. E. Garner and G. C. Bazan, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 9294–9297 RSC .
J. Suwara, B. Lukasik, R. Zurawinski, R. Pawlowska and A. Chworos, Materials, 2020, 13, 951 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Waring, Expert Opin. Drug Discovery, 2010, 5, 235–248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. K. Praveen, C. Ranjith, E. Bandini, A. Ajayaghosh and N. Armaroli, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 4222–4242 RSC .
Z. Cao, G. Ma, M. Leng, S. Zhang, J. Chen, C. Do, K. Hong, L. Fang and X. Gu, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2022, 4, 3023–3033 CrossRef CAS .
C. Catania, A. W. Thomas and G. C. Bazan, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 2023–2029 RSC .
J. Limwongyut, C. Nie, A. S. Moreland and G. C. Bazan, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 8138–8144 RSC .
J. Hinks, W. H. Poh, J. J. H. Chu, J. S. C. Loo, G. C. Bazan, L. E. Hancock and S. Wuertz, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2015, 81, 1949–1958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Du, C. Catania and G. C. Bazan, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 686–697 CrossRef CAS .
V. B. Wang, J. Du, X. F. Chen, A. W. Thomas, N. D. Kirchhofer, L. E. Garner, M. T. Maw, W. H. Poh, J. Hinks, S. Wuertz, S. Kjelleberg, Q. C. Zhang, J. S. C. Loo and G. C. Bazan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 5867–5872 RSC .
L. E. Garner, A. W. Thomas, J. J. Sumner, S. P. Harvey and G. C. Bazan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9449–9452 RSC .
V. B. Wang, N. D. Kirchhofer, X. Chen, M. Y. L. Tan, K. Sivakumar, B. Cao, Q. Zhang, S. Kjelleberg, G. C. Bazan, S. C. J. Loo and E. Marsili, Electrochem. Commun., 2014, 41, 55–58 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Ajo-Franklin and A. Noy, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5797–5804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. B. Wang, N. Yantara, T. M. Koh, S. Kjelleberg, Q. Zhang, G. C. Bazan, S. C. J. Loo and N. Mathews, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 8223–8226 RSC .
J. P. Jahnke, G. C. Bazan and J. J. Sumner, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 11613–11620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. O. Saboe, E. Conte, S. Chan, H. Feroz, B. Ferlez, M. Farell, M. F. Poyton, I. T. Sines, H. Yan, G. C. Bazan, J. Golbeck and M. Kumar, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 15457–15463 RSC .
H. Huijie, C. Xiaofen, A. W. Thomas, C. Chelsea, N. D. Kirchhofer, L. E. Garner, A. Han and G. C. Bazan, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1593–1597 CrossRef PubMed .
N. D. Kirchhofer, X. Chen, E. Marsili, J. J. Sumner, F. W. Dahlquist and G. C. Bazan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 20436–20443 RSC .
S. R. McCuskey, Z. D. Rengert, M. Zhang, M. E. Helgeson, T.-Q. Nguyen and G. C. Bazan, Adv. Biosyst., 2019, 3, 1800303 CrossRef PubMed .
A. W. Thomas, L. E. Garner, K. P. Nevin, T. L. Woodard, A. E. Franks, D. R. Lovley, J. J. Sumner, C. J. Sund and G. C. Bazan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1761–1765 RSC .
N. D. Kirchhofer, M. A. Rasmussen, F. W. Dahlquist, S. D. Minteer and G. C. Bazan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2698–2706 RSC .
J. Limwongyut, A. S. Moreland, C. Nie, J. Read de Alaniz and G. C. Bazan, ChemistryOpen, 2022, 11, e202100260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. S. Chilambi, J. Hinks, A. Matysik, X. Zhu, P. Y. Choo, X. Liu, M. B. Chan-Park, G. C. Bazan, K. A. Kline and S. A. Rice, Front. Microbiol., 2020, 11, 155 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhou, T. S. Corbitt, A. Parthasarathy, Y. Tang, L. K. Ista, K. S. Schanze and D. G. Whitten, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 3207–3212 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, E. Y. Chi, K. S. Schanze and D. G. Whitten, Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 8547–8558 RSC .
W. Shen, P. He, C. Xiao and X. Chen, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2018, 7, 1800354 CrossRef PubMed .
G. S. Chilambi, I. H. Gao, B. K. Yoon, S. Park, L. M. Kawakami, V. Ravikumar, M. B. Chan-Park, N.-J. Cho, G. C. Bazan, K. A. Kline, S. A. Rice and J. Hinks, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 10284–10293 RSC .
U. Hofer, Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 2019, 17, 3 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kedmi, N. Ben-Arie and D. Peer, Biomaterials, 2010, 31, 6867–6875 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Tiihonen, S. J. Cox-Vazquez, Q. Liang, M. Ragab, Z. Ren, N. T. P. Hartono, Z. Liu, S. Sun, C. Zhou, N. C. Incandela, J. Limwongyut, A. S. Moreland, S. Jayavelu, G. C. Bazan and T. Buonassisi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 18917–18931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Milite, Expert Opin. Ther. Pat., 2020, 30, 911–915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sivakumar, V. B. Wang, X. Chen, G. C. Bazan, S. Kjelleberg, S. C. J. Loo and B. Cao, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2014, 98, 9021–9031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Limwongyut, Y. Liu, G. S. Chilambi, T. Seviour, J. Hinks, Y. Mu and G. C. Bazan, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 39849–39853 RSC .
S. Zhu, R. Tian, A. L. Antaris, X. Chen and H. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900321 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Milczarek, R. Pawlowska, R. Zurawinski, B. Lukasik, L. E. Garner and A. Chworos, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2017, 170, 40–48 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Niu, H. Zhou, N. Liu, H. Jiang, Z. Hu and C. Yu, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 4395–4398 RSC .
C. Du, D. Gao, M. Gao, H. Yuan, X. Liu, B. Wang and C. Xing, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 27955–27962 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hou, X. Chen, J. Liu, X. Zhu, G. C. Bazan and B. E. Logan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 19407–19415 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, H. Hou, X. Chen, G. C. Bazan, H. Kashima and B. E. Logan, Bioelectrochemistry, 2015, 106, 379–382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lee, I. Yang, J. E. Lee, S. Hwang, J. W. Lee, S.-S. Um, T. L. Nguyen, P. J. Yoo, H. Y. Woo, J. Park and S. K. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 3298–3307 CrossRef CAS .
I. Kang, J. Yoon, Y. Lee, J. Choi, J. Yang, S. T. Chang, J. Lee, J. Lee, P. J. Yoo and J. Park, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 263, 38–44 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, H. Huang, N. M. Singh, C. Zhou, G. Yang, Z. Xu, H. Lin, G. Xu, K.-T. Yong and G. C. Bazan, Biomacromolecules, 2022, 23, 1259–1268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lv, S. Zhang, B. Wang, S. Cui and J. Yan, J. Controlled Release, 2006, 114, 100–109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Pužar Dominkuš, M. Stenovec, S. Sitar, E. Lasič, R. Zorec, A. Plemenitaš, E. Žagar, M. Kreft and M. Lenassi, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Biomembr., 2018, 1860, 1350–1361 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Cheng Zhou
	Cheng Zhou is a tenure track associate professor at the South China University of Technology (SCUT). He was a post-doc at the National University of Singapore and Nanyang Technological University. He obtained his PhD in 2016 at the SCUT and received his BSc degree in 2011 from Jilin University. His current work is focused on the design and synthesis of membrane-intercalating conjugated oligoelectrolytes for diverse applications.

Geraldine W. N. Chia
	Geraldine W. N. Chia received the NUS-NRF Postdoctoral Fellowship at the National University of Singapore, where she worked on the biological applications of membrane-intercalating conjugated oligoelectrolytes. Prior to that, she obtained her PhD in 2022 and received her BSc degree in 2017 at the Nanyang Technological University. Her research interest is in membrane intercalating molecules and their applications in biological systems.

Ken-Tye Yong
	Ken-Tye Yong is a Professor at the School of Biomedical Engineering at the University of Sydney. Before that, he was the Provost's Chair and Associate Professor at the School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering at the Nanyang Technological University. Dr Yong earned his BS, MEng, and PhD from the State University of New York at Buffalo, USA. He is the Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry, Fellow of the Royal Society of Biology, Overseas Fellow of the Royal Society of Medicine, and Fellow of the Institute of Physics.

Key learning points
(1) The functional design of conjugated oligoelectrolytes for them to confer an intended modification of lipid membranes, both in synthetic and living systems.
(2) The utility of the conjugated framework as both an optical reporter and an efficient mediator for transmembrane electron transfer.
(3) The structural evolution of membrane-intercalating conjugated oligoelectrolytes (MICOEs) and the underlying drivers of the evolution.
(4) Representative applications of MICOEs.
(5) Opportunities to construct MICOEs with greater value-added functions.


 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of the effects of three different length MICOEs on lipid bilayers.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Timeline of the discovery of MICOEs from conjugated polymers. (b) Chemical structure of representative phospholipids and one MICOE molecule (left), and the schematic diagram of membrane intercalation (right).	 

 	Fig. 3  Modular design of MICOE for different specific applications.	 

 	Fig. 4  Four key principles for MICOE design.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Chemical structures of the rest COEs discussed in this review. (b) Schematic diagram of versatile MICOEs and their impacts on lipid bilayers.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
