Recent advances in piezocatalytic polymer nanocomposites for wastewater remediation  - Dalton Transactions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1DT02653D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1DT02653D
(Frontier)
Dalton Trans., 2022, 51, 451-462Recent advances in piezocatalytic polymer nanocomposites for wastewater remediation

        
          
            Dhananjoy 
            Mondal
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shubham 
            Roy
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Souravi 
            Bardhan
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jhilik 
            Roy
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ishita 
            Kanungo
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Ruma 
            Basu
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Sukhen 
            Das
          
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Physics, Jadavpur University, Kolkata-700032, India. E-mail: sdasphysics@gmail.com;   Tel: +91 9433091337
bDepartment of Physics, Jogamaya Devi College, Kolkata-700026, India
Received 
      10th August 2021
    , Accepted 16th November 2021First published on 16th November 2021AbstractAmong several forms of water pollutants, common pesticides, herbicides, organic dyes and heavy metals present serious and persistent threats to human health due to their severe toxicity. Recently, piezocatalysis based removal of pollutants has become a promising field of research to combat such pollutions by virtue of the piezoelectric effect. In reality, piezoelectric materials can produce electron–hole separation upon external vibration, which greatly enhances the production of various reactive oxygen species (ROS) and further increases the pollutant degradation rate. Piezocatalysis does not alter the quality or composition of water, like several other conventional techniques (adsorption and photocatalysis), which makes this technique non-invasive. The simplicity and tremendously high efficacy of piezocatalysis have attracted researchers worldwide and thus various functional materials are employed for piezocatalytic wastewater remediation. In this frontier, we highlight and demonstrate recent developments on polymer based piezocatalytic nanocomposites to treat industrial wastewater in a facile manner that holds strong potential to be translated into a clean and green technology.Dhananjoy MondalDhananjoy Mondal is currently pursuing his Ph.D. degree in the Department of Physics, Jadavpur University, Kolkata, India. He has received graduation and post-graduation degrees in physics from the same department. His research interest includes biocompatible material-based sensors and actuators along with piezo-responsive catalysts. He is presently working as a junior research fellow under a DST-SERB funded project at Jadavpur University, Kolkata.Shubham RoyShubham Roy obtained his bachelor degree in physics from the University of Calcutta in 2013 and acquired his Master degree in the same discipline from Madurai Kamaraj University in the year 2015. He is presently pursuing his doctoral degree under the supervision of Prof. Sukhen Das from the Department of Physics, Jadavpur University, India. His research area includes the synthesis and characterization of nanomaterials for fabricating low cost fluorometric sensors to combat wastewater mediated heavy metal pollution. Mr. Roy has published numerous papers on multifunctional fluorometric sensors and their contamination removal efficacies.Souravi BardhanMs. Souravi Bardhan is currently pursuing her Ph.D. in the Department of Physics, Jadavpur University, India. She pursued her graduation and post-graduation in environmental science from the University of Calcutta, India. Prior to joining the PhD program she worked on a project on biogeochemistry of core regions of Indian Sundarbans with the School of Environmental Science, Jawaharlal Nehru University, India. Her present research-work involves the enhancement of the optical, electrical and biological properties of natural minerals in their nano-regime in order to design natural-multifunctional sensors for wastewater treatment.Jhilik RoyJhilik Roy is presently doing her research in materials science in the Department of Physics, Jadavpur University, Kolkata, India. She has obtained both B.Sc and M.Sc degrees in physics from the University of Calcutta and Techno India University, respectively. Ms. Roy has an excellent command of theoretical molecular docking analysis and other in-silico studies. She has published several research papers recently on fluorometric sensors and their interaction with living systems.Ishita KanungoIshita Kanungo is currently pursuing her doctoral degree in the Department of Physics, Jadavpur University, India. She obtained her B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees from the University of Calcutta and Central University of Haryana, respectively. She is currently also a faculty member of the Department of Physics, Jogamaya Devi College, Kolkata, India. Her research interest includes the development of novel nano-sensors from waste materials and studying their fluorometric and colorimetric behaviors.Ruma BasuDr Ruma Basu is an Associate professor at the Department of Physics, Jogamaya Devi College. She has guided several doctoral fellows and has more than 100 research publications in reputed journals. She obtained her B.Sc. degree from Presidency College, Calcutta University, in the year 1980, M. Sc. from Calcutta University, in 1983 and Ph. D. from Jadavpur University in 1989. Dr Basu's research area includes membrane biophysics, biophysical chemistry, fluorescence and absorption spectroscopy, photobiology, etc.Sukhen DasProf. Sukhen Das is currently the Head of Department of Physics, Jadavpur University, India. He has guided several doctoral and post-doctoral fellows and has more than 200 research publications in reputed journals. Other than Jadavpur University, Prof. Sukhen Das has also been appointed as a visiting professor at the University of Virginia, USA; North Virginia Community college, USA; and New York University, USA. Prof. Das's research area includes the development of ceramics, polymeric materials, antimicrobial bio-ceramics and nanomaterials for the development of piezoelectric probes and sensors. Recently, he and his group have done extensive research on fluorometric sensors to combat wastewater pollution.
1. Introduction
Nowadays, numerous research studies are ongoing worldwide and various techniques have been developed to combat wastewater mediated pollutions. Traditionally, adsorption-based removal techniques showed great potential against such issues. Various nanostructures, due to their high aspect ratios, showed remarkable efficacy in removing organic and inorganic contaminants from wastewater.1–4 However, adsorption may simply transfer the specific pollutants from one phase to another and result in the formation of chemically active species, which can initiate secondary pollution.5–10 Bioremediation methods have also been adopted widely for wastewater treatment. These methods involve processes like hyperaccumulation, phytoremediation, mycoremediation, rhizoremediation, etc.11a Although these techniques are cost effective and ecofriendly, they still suffer from various drawbacks such as high reaction time, seasonal alteration in microbial activities and reversibility if improperly handled.10 Therefore, photocatalysis has emerged to resolve the drawbacks of conventional removal processes.11b Although numerous methods have been proposed to enhance the photocatalytic efficacy by band gap maneuvering, the formation of composite semiconductors, metal ion implantation, etc., it is still challenging to achieve an effective charge separation process in these systems.12 In fact, photocatalysts may corrode under low pH conditions and could restrict the degradation efficacy tremendously.10
This is where piezoelectric materials have become a favorable alternative to acquiring better catalytic activity. Normally, piezoelectric materials have been widely used in various applications, such as energy generation, charge storage, sensor devices, etc. These functional materials enable new advances in catalytic processes using clean energies, like mechanical vibration, ultrasonic waves and pressure.13 Piezocatalysis exploits such piezo-stimulations for accelerating chemical reactions. In reality, piezoelectric materials possess better charge center separation under mechanical stress. Such separation leads to the formation of reactive radicals (oxygen species) that are responsible for initiating the catalysis process. Besides several other inorganic nano-systems, MoS2, BaTiO3, and BiFeO3 show promising piezocatalytic activity in aqueous media.14 In some cases, the catalytic efficacy is found to be around 100%. In fact, bacterial sterilization has also been achieved through piezocatalysis. However, most of these powdered inorganic piezocatalytic materials have a tendency to diffuse in water. Thus, it is extremely necessary to separate them from the aqueous media and minimize secondary pollution. Such disadvantages of inorganic piezo-materials can be curtailed by encapsulating them into different polymeric systems.15–18 Though polymeric piezocatalysts are showing promising catalytic activity, these systems are still in their infancy. Henceforth, this frontier article highlights the recent advances of polymeric piezocatalytic systems for combating wastewater pollution. These hybrid and versatile polymer-nanocomposites would eventually contribute to the control of the excessive use of hazardous pollutants, minimizing their effects on the environment and definitely would reveal the importance of polymeric encapsulation of piezocatalysts.19,20
2. Piezocatalysis: mechanism and discussion
2.1 Discovery and recent progress
Among various crystal point groups, researchers are focusing on mainly three types of piezo-crystals such as ZnO based composites, perovskites and 2D ultrathin materials. Initially, ZnO emerged as a promising piezocatalyst. Hong et al. in their 2010 paper showed the successful conversion of mechanical energy to chemical energy using piezo-electric ZnO microfibers.10 They named the conversion process the piezoelectrochemical effect (PZEC). The release of H2 and O2 gases in a 2:1 stoichiometry has also been demonstrated from pure water. Furthermore, the problem of dispersion of catalysts in solution was solved by the ZnO embedded carbon nanotube flexible network. Also carbon nanotubes with outstanding electrical conductivity could act as high-speed channels for charge transfer and boost the piezocatalytic activity.21,22
Nanoscale perovskites can also be used in piezocatalytic applications. Lead based perovskites Pb(Mg1/3 Nb2/3)O3·32PbTiO3 and Pb(Zr0.52Ti0.48)O3 showed great potential in generating H2 gas and dye de-coloration.23 Similarly, CH3NH3PbI3 nanoparticles prepared by the co-precipitation method have stronger polarization resulting from a larger displacement of the Pb atom, demonstrating excellent piezocatalytic activity.24 In fact, lead-free BaTiO3 microdendrites, BaTiO3 nanofibers and (Ba,Sr)TiO3 nanowires, obtained by hydrothermal and sol gel methods, depicted pronounced piezocatalytic activity besides azo dye degradation.25–27
Besides several nanostructures, 2-D MoS2 has been used as a potential piezocatalyst in recent years. It is observed that single layer MoS2 exhibits strong polarization and charge separation between the bases of Mo2–S layers. Piezo-electrochemical experiments suggest promising charge mobility through these layers. Such a piezoelectric effect would definitely initiate piezocatalytic activity in a MoS2 system.28 In reality, a double layer MoS2 system suffers from a reduction in piezoelectric activity due to the opposite polarization direction between two consecutive layers. Therefore, researchers have determined the fact that the piezoelectricity in MoS2 is highly structure-dependent and periodically follows the odd-even order.29,30 Moreover, Li et al. performed a comparative analysis between the piezocatalytic activity of numerous 2-D materials including MoS2, WS2, and WSe2, which revealed that the piezocatalytic activity was directly correlated with piezoelectric coefficients obtained by calculations and PFM measurements.31
2.2 Mechanism of action
Piezoelectric crystals are normally electrically neutral, and the atoms inside them may not always be symmetrically arranged. Despite having a non-centrosymmetric structure, a positive charge cancels out a negative charge near it, nullifying the electric dipole which makes the crystal neutral. Whenever the crystal is squeezed i.e., mechanical stress is applied across it, the structure is deformed, which in turn disrupts not only the balance of positive and negative charges, but also alters their band structures (Fig. 1). The electrons and holes thus move to opposite sides of the crystal, building up an electric field on its surface. Additionally, the piezo-potential modifies the electronic energy levels of the HOMO and LUMO within the materials.32 It lowers the conduction band (CB) to a degree below the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the material. So the electrons will transfer from the HOMOs to the CB. On the opposite side, electrons will leave the valence band (VB) and transfer to the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO).32a,b
 Fig. 1  The mechanical energy mediated generation of electrical energy in the external circuit showing the mechanism of piezoelectric energy generation. 
Piezocatalysis is an approach towards augmenting electrochemical processes using such a strain state of a piezoelectric material. Piezocatalysis is the product of an interaction between the native electronic state of the piezoelectric material, the composition of the surrounding medium and a strain induced piezoelectric potential. The action of mechanically deforming a piezoelectric material induces a steep electric field which builds up the energetics of both free and bound charges throughout the material. The thermodynamic feasibility and kinetics of electrochemical processes occurring at the surface of the piezoelectric material sensitively depend upon the electrochemical potential difference between the charges on its surface and in the surrounding medium. Additionally, the electron–hole pairs that originated from the strained catalysts migrate (in the opposite direction) and accumulate at the surface of the catalysts.32 External piezoelectric stimulation accumulates enough electron–hole pairs at the surface to initiate redox reactions (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  The mechanism of the piezocatalytic degradation of hazardous dye molecules depicting the generation of piezo-response mediated ROS. 
At the anode, the piezo-induced electrons on the surface of the catalyst entrap the H2 from water to produce hydrogen radicals (H*), thereby forming H2 gas and OH*. Whereas at the cathode, these hydroxyl radicals (OH*) are released through the holes and trap electrons on the hydroxyl groups. The degradation of pollutants is primarily caused by such OH* radicals in aqueous media.10Piezocatalyst + mechanical energy → Piezocatalyst (e− + h+)
Anodic reactions:4e− + 4H2O → 4OH− + 4H*4H* → 2H2
Cathodic reactions:4OH− → 4e− + 4OH*2(OH* + OH*) → 2H2O + 2O*2O* → O2
Pollutant degradation:OH* + pollutant → degradation product of the pollutante− + pollutant → degradation product of the pollutanth+ + pollutant → degradation product of the pollutant
2.3 Design and fabrication
It is observed that in a wide range of piezoelectric materials the particle size and morphology are key parameters enhancing the piezoelectric efficiency. It is found that 1-D fiber/wire like materials exhibit a better piezocatalytic response compared to spherical particles. On the other hand, thin sheet-like 2-D structures also exhibit better piezoelectricity. In reality, a theoretical piezoelectric output is directly proportional to the size of the catalyst as stated below,33Vp = dijσjωi/ε0εr, iwhere Vp is the piezoelectric open circuit potential, σj is the applied stress in the j direction, dij is the piezoelectric charge coefficient, ωi is the length of the piezocatalyst in the i direction of polarization and εr,i is the relative permittivity in the i direction and ε0 is the permittivity in the open space. Piezoelectricity of any material can be defined by a series of piezoelectric coefficients such as piezoelectric charge constants dij (e.g., d11, d33) or dielectric constants (e.g., ε11T, or ε22T), which are among the best indicators of the potential performance of any given piezoelectric material. Hence, piezoelectric polymer nanocomposites with high dij values are quite effective in generating a high piezo-response in order to eliminate contaminants from wastewater. The catalysis generally occurs in both the electrodes upon external piezo-stimulation.33
However, piezocatalytic composite powders are difficult to recycle in practical applications. Sometimes they cause secondary pollution and therefore it is necessary to prepare piezoelectric composite films with great recyclability.32
On the other hand, external piezo-stimulation is an important parameter for achieving better catalytic activity. Generally, ultrasound of 20–40 kHz has been widely used to ‘excite’ piezocatalysts in bath or probe sonication systems. The acoustic pressure in these systems does not exceed 2 bar, which might not be sufficient to exert adequate stress on piezocatalysts. Additionally, continuous sonication for a prolonged duration causes internal heat generation. This could be addressed by replacing the water in the bath or adding ice cubes/water during the experiment. However, such addition or alteration could greatly influence the piezocatalytic efficacy. These drawbacks have been minimized by collapsing the cavitation bubbles with pressures up to 108 Pa and simultaneously using modern temperature controlled ultrasonic bath systems.33
3. Recent advances in polymer based piezocatalysts
Although various nanoparticles have emerged as fast and efficient piezocatalysts, most of them suffer from practical feasibility due to their direct decomposition in water, creating several problems in terms of stability, efficacy, accumulation, toxicity, separation and recyclability. Nowadays, researchers are focusing on polymer based piezocatalysts to overcome such drawbacks for practical applicability. Polymers offer robust, reliable, flexible, and cost-effective substrates that can be extensively used and do not agglomerate or degrade due to ambient environmental conditions.
3.1 Synthetic polymers
After the discovery of piezocatalysis by Hong et al. in 2010, various groups have started exploring synthetic polymers for this purpose. Piezoelectric poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF) has become a favorable candidate in the field of piezocatalytic degradation of contaminants. This semicrystalline polymer has five crystalline polymorphs, namely, α, β, γ, δ and ε. Among them, the most common piezo-responsive stable polymorph of PVDF is the polar β-phase.34 Generally, the β-phase is present in a very low amount in pristine PVDF but it can be enhanced by incorporating various nanostructures by means of their surface charges. Under mechanical vibration, the piezocatalyst (β-PVDF) produces polarization, which can be harnessed as electrical energy. This further drives electrons through an external circuit. After the release of the external stress, the electrons flow in the opposite direction, which results in the generation of a negative potential. Such charge center separation drives the electron–hole pairs to either direction for effective piezocatalysis.13
The first work on PVDF based piezocatalysis was reported by Dong et al. in 2017. The authors fabricated an e-skin using PVDF/TiO2 nanofibers for methylene blue degradation.35 These electrospun TiO2 nanowires were enforced inside the PVDF polymer for this purpose. The process involves a hybrid piezo-photocatalyst, where the TiO2 performs the photodegradation while the PVDF moiety contributes to the piezo-response. The TiO2 nanostructure herein promotes the electrons from the valence band to the conduction band using the piezo-response leaving the holes in the valence state. These electron–hole pairs initiate the catalytic activity tremendously. According to this report the hybrid PVDF based e-skin completely degraded the dye solution within 40 minutes of external mechanical vibration. Besides, ZnSnO3 (ZTO) was also recognized as an efficient piezocatalyst that modulates the band structure of the system to manipulate the dye degradation efficacy.36 In this case, the external ultrasonic stimulation bends the band edges for better electron–hole separation. The dye degradation efficacy was found to be 1.5 × 10−2 min−1 under the ultrasonic stress, which is approximately four times higher than that in the absence of the ultrasonic vibration. The ZTO nanowire also exhibits a synergistic piezophotocatalytic effect that was further enhanced by encapsulating ZTO into PVDF and polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) matrices.36 It is observed that an irregular alignment of ZTO nanowires on the ITO surface experiences uneven polarization when the mechanical stress is applied. Surprisingly, the polymer coated ZTO shows better polarization due to the flexibility of the polymer, which causes better reception of the external stress, resulting in a better piezoelectric effect. Furthermore, the efficacy of the PVDF-ZnSnO3 nanocomposite has been drastically improved by incorporating hydrothermally grown Co3O4 nanoparticles.37 The piezo-degradation efficiency reached 100% within 20 minutes for both methylene blue (rate constant∼43 × 10−3 min−1) and rhodamine-B (rate constant∼45 × 10−3 min−1) dyes. This catalytic enhancement is attributed to the fact that the hydroxyl radical (˙OH) and superoxide radical (˙O2−) generated during ultrasonic stress play a pivotal role in degrading the dyes. In reality, ZnSnO3 induces the polarizability of PVDF, whereas Co3O4 improves the charge transport mechanism for efficient redox reactions, which causes the generation of the superoxide radicals under ultrasonic vibrations.
Piezoelectric wurtzite ZnO nanocrystals have also emerged as promising piezocatalysts in recent times. Wu et al. (2020)38 have introduced the novel concept that the utilization of mechanical stress generated from natural water flow accelerates the piezo-response for water pollutant degradation. Wu and group fabricated two different nanocomposites, namely, ZnO@PVDF and ZnO@PDMS, for rhodamine-B degradation. The ZnO@PVDF film exhibited 10 times better performance than ZnO@PDMS which might be due to the piezoelectric effect in the case of PVDF. It promotes the migration of photogenerated carriers under the stress generated from water flow. Moreover, the ZnO@PVDF film having more extensive (1 0 0) polar plane exposure shows an enhancement in active catalytic sites and causes better piezocatalytic degradation. Thus, this work paved a new path for the synergistic utilization of solar energy and natural water flow for better degradation of contaminants using the piezophotocatalytic effect. Besides dye degradation, certain research studies also dealt with the degradation of other contaminants such as pharmaceutical pollutants or microbial contaminants.39 A recent work by Singh et al. 202140 focusses on the piezocatalytic removal of pharmaceutical and bacterial pollutants using a flexible PVDF membrane intercalated by the well-known antibacterial silver nanoparticles embedded in the LiNbO3 nanostructure. This is probably the first time when pharmaceutical pollutants like tetracycline (69%) and ciprofloxacin (53%) have been decomposed within 2 h using a piezoresponse (Fig. 3). Additionally, this work reports the facile degradation of numerous pathogenic bacteria like Escherichia coli (99.999%) and Staphylococcus aureus (96.65%) within 180 minutes under vigorous ultrasound treatment (Fig. 4).40 The Ag–LiNbO3 nanocomposite enhances the β-phase PVDF, which in turn increases the piezoelectric nature. Under mechanical stress (from sonication) it generates free charge carriers which move opposite of the polarization field. Some of the free charge carriers ultimately interact with the O2 and OH− ions, resulting in the production of ROS (˙OH and ˙O2−) which performs the dual application of the degradation of pharmaceuticals and the generation of oxidative stress and lipid peroxidation that ultimately damages the nucleic acids and enzyme activity of bacteria, resulting in their death. Moreover, the occurrence of band bending due to the piezoelectric effect accelerates the migration of free charge carriers facilitating this process. This activity of ROS for contaminant degradation was explored by Bagchi et al. (2020), who illustrated a free-standing film made of PVDF wrapped MoS2 nanoflowers for the degradation of rhodamine-B.13 The composite film was synthesized using a simple solution casting method. This novel material gains multifunctionality when a remarkable power density (47.14 mW cm−3) is achieved along with a promising piezocatalytic efficiency (>90% within 20 minutes). The primary resource of such a piezoresponse is attributed to the polarization of the PVDF upon MoS2 incorporation. The polar β-phase of PVDF was found to be around 80% in this case. The increment of the β-phase radically increases the charge separation process and electron–hole pair formation, thereby producing various reactive oxygen species (ROS). These ROS degrade the rhodamine-B dye in water, making the material suitable for industrial effluent management.
 Fig. 3  UV–visible spectra illustrating the piezocatalytic degradation of the MB dye solution recorded at different vibration times using LN-PVDF (a) and Ag/LN-PVDF composite films (b); variation in (c) dye concentration in terms of C/Co and (d) dye degradation rate with vibration time; (e) effect of scavengers on percent dye degradation through piezocatalysis; (f) piezocatalytic dye degradation percentage in various dyes using Ag/LN-PVDF composite films. Adapted with permission from ref. 40 copyright (2021) American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 4  (a) Time-dependent log reduction of CFUs mL−1 of E. coli in various films; (b) illustration of CFUs of E. coli on agar plates (1/10 dilution) at various times demonstrating piezocatalytic bacterial disinfection; (c) log reduction of S. aureus for various films; (d) CFUs of S. aureus on agar plates (1/1000 dilution) before and after 3 h sonication demonstrating piezocatalytic bacterial disinfection. Adapted with permission from ref. 40 copyright (2021) American Chemical Society. 
Besides PVDF, MoS2 nanoflowers, when encapsulated into a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) matrix, show excellent piezocatalytic properties as mentioned by Lin et al. (2017).41 Upon applying external mechanical force this polymer nanocomposite degrades the rhodamine-B dye with an efficacy of 67% under dark conditions. The degradation efficacy remains unaltered even after four test cycles. Thus, it can be believed that the catalytic efficiency of this composite is entirely dependent on the external piezo-response. This novel piezocatalyst also acts as a piezoelectric nanogenerator with an output of 23 V, 13 mA m−2 when placed under a continuous water flow (20 mL s−1). Hydrothermally grown chalcogenide (WS2) has also been incorporated inside the PDMS polymer for the piezocatalytic degradation of rhodamine-B and pathogenic E. coli bacteria (Masimukku et al., 2018).42 The degradation efficacies of rhodamine-B and E. coli are found to be ∼99% and 99.99% (in 90 minutes), respectively, under ultrasonic vibration. The recyclability of this reported polymer-nanocomposite is quite high (ten cycles) as compared to those of other reported samples. Initially, the piezo-response of the sample was confirmed by tunneling atomic force microscopy and piezo-response force microscopy. Electron paramagnetic microscopy unveils the production of reactive oxygen species (O2− and OH*), which are primarily responsible for such rapid degradation of the contaminants in water. Another highly stable PDMS based nanocomposite (BaTiO3/PDMS) has been reported to be capable of reducing rhodamine-B contamination using the piezocatalytic method.43 The degradation efficiency of this composite foam is around 94% after twelve complete cycles. Perovskite-based barium strontium titanate (BST) foam in a PDMS polymer was reported, which successfully enhances the rhodamine-B degradation efficacy radically (275%) when compared to individual photocatalysis.44 This piezocatalytic composite has a degradation efficacy of 97.8% even after ten cycles of repeated catalytic reactions. This hybrid piezo-photocatalyst offers a higher degree of charge center separation, which renders promising catalytic degradation performance.
Polytetrafluroethylene (PTFE) is known to be a useful polymer with high flexural strength and high electrical resistance. Generally, PTFE is extremely inert even under harsh ambient conditions below 300 °C. Very recently (2021) Wang et al. reported a PTFE based ROS generation method in aqueous medium via ultrasonic vibration.45 This method involves a simple sonication technique to activate the PTFE electret from the polymer. This permanent piezo-responsive polarization is fairly high (∼600 pC/N) and even higher than those of conventional piezoelectric polymers (∼16 times). In this work the authors have reported the successful decomposition of methyl orange (∼89.7%), acid orange-7 and methylene blue (>90%) within 60 minutes of ultrasonic exposure. The activated PTFE coating on the inner walls of a water pipeline has been proposed here for drinking water disinfection. To support this, PTFE membrane mediated degradation of E. coli has been studied. The results show a promising bactericidal effect on E. coli within 15 min of ultrasonication (99.7%).
Conductive polymers have been widely used over the past two decades in electrical, thermal and thermoelectric applications.46 In fact, various implantable medical devices have also been made using conductive polymers. Intercalation of numerous metallic and semiconducting nanomaterials enhances the physicochemical properties of such polymers. Polyaniline is a conductive polymer that exhibits efficient piezoelectric and thermoelectric activities under various circumstances. Das et al. (2017) successfully synthesized an Fe0/PANI (polyaniline) nanocomposite by the reductive decomposition method, which successfully degrades Congo red dye under ultrasonic conditions.47 This efficient piezocatalyst decomposes ∼98% of the initial dye concentration within 30 minutes of mechanical exposure. During ultrasonic irradiation, the excited electrons of the Fe0/PANI composite are transferred to the conduction band and generate electron–hole pairs. As a result, the dissolved oxygen and water molecules in the dye solution can react with the electron–hole pairs to produce reactive oxygen species and super-oxides. These reactive species are responsible for the degradation of the dye molecules. Such an excellent piezocatalyst could be a promising agent for wastewater treatment plants.
Though the use of conductive polymers in piezocatalytic dye degradation seems to be a newer concept, the efficacy of these conductive polymers would definitely unlock new avenues in the near future.48,49
3.3 Biopolymers
Biopolymers such as chitin, collagen, cellulose, starch, keratin, and fibrin have the ability to convert mechanical energy and electrical energy.50 Hence, the synthesis of efficient, green piezo-electric materials has captured widespread attention.51
The piezo-electric nature is observed in biopolymers, especially in peptide-based biopolymers, containing L- and D-amino acid isomers but is absent in the DL-forms. This can be attributed to the CO⋯CH3 interactions in the isomers that result in the piezo-response.52 Various reports showed that the piezoelectric properties of biopolymers vary greatly with their shape, phase, growth orientation and water content. In fact, collagen fibrils predominantly in the axial direction exhibit a much stronger piezo-electric response than those in the radial direction probably due to polarization.53 Among the various forms of chitosan, the α-chitin form found in crab shells and butterfly wings can exhibit a piezo-response due to their non-centrosymmetric crystal structure having intrinsic molecular polarization.50 Although various works have been reported on biopolymer based piezo-electric material synthesis and application in nano-generators and sensor fields, piezo-catalyst based wastewater treatment is yet not much invaded. A recent report by Karaca et al. shows the generation of a piezo-catalytic response in a montmorillonite loaded natural chitosan biopolymer using ultrasound that can efficiently degrade various dyes like Acid Orange (AO7), Basic Red (BR4), and Basic Yellow (BY2 and BY28) in aqueous solutions.54 According to the report, the chitosan structure has –NH3+ groups which are attracted towards the negatively charged clay moiety. Such alteration in the microstructure enhances the polarizability of the composite system and contributes to a higher piezoelectric potential (Fig. 5). When this polarized system is stimulated through ultrasonic vibration, an electric field originates which further promotes the generation of free reactive OH* radicals, causing the degradation of the dye. This method can even efficiently remove as much as 82.74% of the dye within an hour. This study paved the path for more such industrially feasible piezo-catalytic biopolymers that can be significant for pollutant removal.
 Fig. 5  Clay nanoparticle intercalation mechanism inside the bio-polymeric matrix of a chitosan biopolymer showing the contribution of the surface charge of the clay moiety. 
4. Conclusion and outlook
Environmental degradation by toxic effluents from various industrial discharges is utmost essential to combat. Thus, numerous strategies have been implemented to restrict the use of such toxic chemicals and dyes in industries. But global industrialization and the need for technological advancement enhance the use of carcinogenic precursors exponentially. These toxic effluents discharged from the industries cause enormous harm to the environment. Currently, numerous adsorbents and other chemical catalysts are being used in industries for removing such toxic dyes and pigments. But their limited efficacy and huge cost are unbearable for small scale industries (Table 1). In fact, these conventional catalysts and adsorbents are causing secondary pollution in some cases, which also needs rigorous attention. Piezocatalysis is one of the most promising and efficient ways to combat such a crisis. Polymer-based piezocatalysts have been gaining importance very recently due to their ease of use. These flexible membranes are capable of degrading toxic dyes and heavy metals completely within a few minutes. In fact, polymeric piezocatalysts have been recently used in minimizing bacterial contamination, making them more sustainable and multifunctional. Such multifunctional and effective materials are needed in real life wastewater treatment systems. In some studies, water flow mediated catalytic removal has been achieved successfully. This implies the rise of purely green piezocatalytic systems in near future. Besides various organic and synthetic polymers, biopolymers are gaining importance due to their low-cost and biocompatibility. To date, biopolymers have not been explored in a rigorous way in piezocatalytic systems, as polymer based piezocatalysis is itself a very new approach to degrade dyes and pigments. Although piezocatalysts are showing enormous potential for future applications, there are several challenges that needs to be faced before deploying such systems in real life. It is quite challenging to perform piezocatalysis on a large scale and in stable waterbodies like ponds and reservoirs due to the size of the catalyst. The piezo-response generation in these cases are difficult and will certainly need external mechanical stimuli to drive the system that may reduce the efficacy of the piezocatalytic system by increasing the cost. Therefore, further research on employing piezocatalysts in real life is much needed for better catalytic activity. Moreover, the catalyst takes a long time to decompose the dyes. Thus, a wide area of research is open in this field to fabricate more versatile and multifunctional piezocatalysts that can degrade the effluents rapidly. Another major aspect of piezocatalysis is hydrogen gas generation. During the experiment, H2 gas releases in a moderate amount and could be used for fuel cell and other energy generation applications, if suitably improvised.
Table 1 Comparison between various piezocatalysts and their catalytic efficacies




Type
Polymer
Targeted effluent
Efficiency (%)
Degradation time (minutes)
Reference




Synthetic
MoS2 nano flower/PVDF
Rhodamine-B
>90
20
Bagchi et al.13


Synthetic
TiO2/PVDF
Methylene blue
100
40
Dong et al.35


Synthetic
PVDF/PMMA-ZnSnO3
Methylene blue
71
120
Lin et al.36


Synthetic
Ag loaded LiNbO3/PVDF
Tetracycline, ciprofloxacin, E. coli and S. aureus
69(TC) 53(CF) 99.999(EC) 96.65(SA)
120(TC, CF) and 180(EC, SA)
Sing et al.40


Synthetic
PVDF/ZnSnO3-Co3O4
Methylene blue, rhodamine-B
100
20
Raju et al.37


Synthetic
ZnO/PVDF, ZnO/PDMS
Rhodamine-B
∼35(PDMS) ∼90(PVDF)
100
Wu et al.38


Synthetic
Barium strontium titanate/PDMS
Rhodamine-B
97.8
90
Xu et al.44


Synthetic
PDMS/WS2 nanoflower
Rhodamine-B, E. coli
99 (RB) 99.99(EC)
90
Masimukku et al.42


Synthetic
PDMS/MoS2
Rhodamine-B
67
200
Lin et al.41


Synthetic
BaTiO3/PDMS
Rhodamine-B
94
120
Qian et al.43


Synthetic
PTFE
Methyl orange, acid orange-7, methylene blue, E. coli
89.7 (MO) >90 (MB, AO7) 99.7 (EC)
60 (MO, MB, AO7) 15 (EC)
Wang et al.45


Synthetic
Fe0/PANI
Congo red
98
30
Das et al.47


Biopolymer
Chitosan modified montmorillonite
Acid orange-7, basic red, basic yellow
82.74
60
Karaca et al.54




Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to the Department of Physics, Jadavpur University, for extending the experimental facilities. D. M. and S. D. would like to acknowledge the DST-SERB (Grant No. EEQ/2018/000747) for funding. S. R. would like to acknowledge the Dept. of Higher Education, Govt. of West Bengal, for providing the SVMCM (Non-NET) fellowship.
References
S. Roy, S. Bardhan, D. K. Chanda, J. Roy, D. Mondal and S. Das, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 43833–43843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Roy, S. Bardhan, D. K. Chanda, S. Ghosh, D. Mondal, J. Roy and S. Das, Dalton Trans., 2020, 49, 6607–6615 RSC .
S. Bardhan, S. Roy, D. K. Chanda, D. Mondal, S. Das and S. Das, Microchim. Acta, 2021, 188(4), 1–12 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Roy, K. Pal, S. Bardhan, S. Maity, D. K. Chanda, S. Ghosh, P. Karmakar and S. Das, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 8369–8378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, N. R. Stuckert and R. T. Yang, AIChE J., 2011, 57, 2902–2908 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sheikhi, S. Shahab, R. Alnajjar and M. Ahmadianarog, J. Cluster Sci., 2018, 30, 83–96 CrossRef .
J. Björk, F. Hanke, C.-A. Palma, P. Samori, M. Cecchini and M. Persson, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 3407–3412 CrossRef .
F. Lin, D. Liu, S. M. Das, N. Prempeh, Y. Hua and J. Lu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 1866–1877 CrossRef CAS .
D. T. Sun, L. Peng, W. S. Reeder, S. M. Moosavi, D. Tiana, D. K. Britt, E. Oveisi and W. L. Queen, ACS Cent. Sci., 2018, 4, 349–356 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Hong, H. Xu, H. Konishi and X. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 13045–13051 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) D. Mani and C. Kumar, Int. J. Environ. Sci. Technol., 2014, 11, 843–872 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Z. Liang, C. F. Yan, S. Rtimi and J. Bandara, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 241, 256–269 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, H. Yu, Y. Xiao, L. Zhang, L. Guo, L. Zhang and X. Dong, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 394, 125014 CrossRef CAS .
B. Bagchi, N. A. Hoque, N. Janowicz, S. Das and M. K. Tiwari, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Bößl, T. P. Comyn, P. I. Cowin, F. R. García-García and I. Tudela, Chem. Eng. J. Adv., 2021, 7, 100133 CrossRef .
H. Kaczmarek, B. Królikowski, E. Klimiec, M. Chylińska and D. Bajer, Russ. Chem. Rev., 2019, 88, 749–774 CrossRef CAS .
E. Lin, N. Qin, J. Wu, B. Yuan, Z. Kang and D. Bao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 14005–14015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Liu, C. Jin, F. Shan, J. He and F. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 17443–17451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. Ghosh, S. Remita and F. Goubard, et al., Conjugated Polymer Nanostructures for Energy Conversion and Storage, Wiley-VCH Verlag Gmbh & Co. KGaA, Germany, ISBN:978-3-572-34557-1,  2021, p. 59553 Search PubMed .
Y. Chen, L. Wang, W. Wang and M. Cao, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 209, 110–117 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, H. Lv, F. Tang, Y. Sun, W. Ji, W. Zhou, X. Shen and C. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 419, 12945 Search PubMed .
Y. Gao, S. Li, B. Zhao, Q. Zhai, A. Lita, N. S. Dalal, H. W. Kroto and S. F. A. Acquah, Carbon, 2014, 77, 705 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, M. Zhang, Y. Gao, B. Bao and S. Wang, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 1329 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lin, Z. Wu, Y. Jia, W. Li, R. K. Zheng and H. Luo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 162907 CrossRef .
M. Wang, Y. Zuo, J. Wang, Y. Wang, X. Shen, B. Qiu, L. Cai, F. Zhou, S. P. Lau and Y. Chai, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901801 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yuan, J. Wu, N. Qin, E. Lin and D. Bao, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 5119 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Hong, H. Xu, H. Konishi and X. Li, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 997 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Hong, H. Xu, H. Konishi and X. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 13045 CrossRef CAS .
D. Tan, M. Willatzen and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 512 CrossRef .
K. H. Michel and B. Verberck, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 83, 115328 CrossRef .
K. A. N. Duerloo, M. T. Ong and E. J. Reed, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 2871 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, Z. Zhao, D. Yu, J. Z. Zhao, Y. Su, Y. Liu, Y. Lin, W. Liu, H. Xu and Z. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2019, 66, 104083 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) S. Tu, Y. Guo, Y. Zhang, C. Hu, T. Zhang, T. Ma and H. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2005158 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. M. Ji, H. Zhou, Y. K. Eom, C. H. Kim and H. K. Kim, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000124 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bößl and I. Tudela, Curr. Opin. Green Sustain. Chem., 2021, 32, 100537 CrossRef .
P. Thakur, A. Kool, B. Bagchi, N. A. Hoque, S. Das and P. Nandy, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 62819–62827 RSC .
C. Dong, Y. Fu, W. Zang, H. He, L. Xing and X. Xue, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 416, 424–431 CrossRef .
H. M. Lin and K. S. Chang, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 30513–30520 RSC .
T. D. Raju, S. Veeralingam and S. Badhulika, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 4777–4787 CrossRef .
W. Wu, X. Yin, B. Dai, J. Kou, Y. Ni and C. Lu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 517, 146119 CrossRef .
W. Ma, B. Yao, W. Zhang, Y. He, Y. Yu, J. Niu and C. Wang, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2018, 5, 2876–2887 RSC .
G. Singh, M. Sharma and R. Vaish, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 22914–22925 CrossRef .
J. H. Lin, Y. H. Tsao, M. H. Wu, T. M. Chou, Z. H. Lin and J. M. Wu, Nano Energy, 2017, 31, 575–581 CrossRef .
S. Masimukku, Y. C. Hu, Z. H. Lin, S. W. Chan, T. M. Chou and J. M. Wu, Nano Energy, 2018, 46, 338–346 CrossRef .
W. Qian, K. Zhao, D. Zhang, C. R. Bowen, Y. Wang and Y. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 27862–27869 CrossRef .
S. Xu, W. Qian, D. Zhang, X. Zhao, X. Zhang, C. Li, C. R. Bowen and Y. Yang, Nano Energy, 2020, 77, 105305 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, Y. Xu, S. Dong, P. Wang, W. Chen, Z. Lu, D. Ye, B. Pan, D. Wu, C. D. Vecitis and G. Gao, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12(1), 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Maity, N. Sepay, C. Kulsi, A. Kool, S. Das, D. Banerjee and K. Chatterjee, ChemistrySelect, 2018, 3, 8992–8997 CrossRef .
R. Das, M. Bhaumik, S. Giri and A. Maity, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2017, 37, 600–613 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Xu, L. Jin, X. He, X. Huang, M. Xie, C. Wang, C. Zhang, W. Yang, F. Meng and J. Lu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 1810–1823 RSC .
S. Ghosh, T. Maiyalagan and R. N. Basu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 6921 RSC .
N. A. Hoque, P. Thakur, P. Biswas, Md. M. Saikh, S. Roy, B. Bagchi, S. Das and P. P. Ray, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 13848–13858 RSC .
A. Hänninen, E. Sarlin, I. Lyyra, T. Salpavaara, M. Kellomäki and S. Tuukkanen, Carbohydr. Polym., 2018, 202, 418–424 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Li, Y. Long, F. Yang and X. Wang, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2020, 24, 100806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Baniasadi and M. Minary-Jolandan, Materials, 2015, 8, 799–814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Karaca, E. Ç. Önal, Ö. Açışlı and A. Khataee, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2021, 260, 124125 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
Dhananjoy Mondal	Dhananjoy Mondal is currently pursuing his Ph.D. degree in the Department of Physics, Jadavpur University, Kolkata, India. He has received graduation and post-graduation degrees in physics from the same department. His research interest includes biocompatible material-based sensors and actuators along with piezo-responsive catalysts. He is presently working as a junior research fellow under a DST-SERB funded project at Jadavpur University, Kolkata.
Shubham Roy	Shubham Roy obtained his bachelor degree in physics from the University of Calcutta in 2013 and acquired his Master degree in the same discipline from Madurai Kamaraj University in the year 2015. He is presently pursuing his doctoral degree under the supervision of Prof. Sukhen Das from the Department of Physics, Jadavpur University, India. His research area includes the synthesis and characterization of nanomaterials for fabricating low cost fluorometric sensors to combat wastewater mediated heavy metal pollution. Mr. Roy has published numerous papers on multifunctional fluorometric sensors and their contamination removal efficacies.
Souravi Bardhan	Ms. Souravi Bardhan is currently pursuing her Ph.D. in the Department of Physics, Jadavpur University, India. She pursued her graduation and post-graduation in environmental science from the University of Calcutta, India. Prior to joining the PhD program she worked on a project on biogeochemistry of core regions of Indian Sundarbans with the School of Environmental Science, Jawaharlal Nehru University, India. Her present research-work involves the enhancement of the optical, electrical and biological properties of natural minerals in their nano-regime in order to design natural-multifunctional sensors for wastewater treatment.
Jhilik Roy	Jhilik Roy is presently doing her research in materials science in the Department of Physics, Jadavpur University, Kolkata, India. She has obtained both B.Sc and M.Sc degrees in physics from the University of Calcutta and Techno India University, respectively. Ms. Roy has an excellent command of theoretical molecular docking analysis and other in-silico studies. She has published several research papers recently on fluorometric sensors and their interaction with living systems.
Ishita Kanungo	Ishita Kanungo is currently pursuing her doctoral degree in the Department of Physics, Jadavpur University, India. She obtained her B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees from the University of Calcutta and Central University of Haryana, respectively. She is currently also a faculty member of the Department of Physics, Jogamaya Devi College, Kolkata, India. Her research interest includes the development of novel nano-sensors from waste materials and studying their fluorometric and colorimetric behaviors.
Ruma Basu	Dr Ruma Basu is an Associate professor at the Department of Physics, Jogamaya Devi College. She has guided several doctoral fellows and has more than 100 research publications in reputed journals. She obtained her B.Sc. degree from Presidency College, Calcutta University, in the year 1980, M. Sc. from Calcutta University, in 1983 and Ph. D. from Jadavpur University in 1989. Dr Basu's research area includes membrane biophysics, biophysical chemistry, fluorescence and absorption spectroscopy, photobiology, etc.
Sukhen Das	Prof. Sukhen Das is currently the Head of Department of Physics, Jadavpur University, India. He has guided several doctoral and post-doctoral fellows and has more than 200 research publications in reputed journals. Other than Jadavpur University, Prof. Sukhen Das has also been appointed as a visiting professor at the University of Virginia, USA; North Virginia Community college, USA; and New York University, USA. Prof. Das's research area includes the development of ceramics, polymeric materials, antimicrobial bio-ceramics and nanomaterials for the development of piezoelectric probes and sensors. Recently, he and his group have done extensive research on fluorometric sensors to combat wastewater pollution.

 	Fig. 1  The mechanical energy mediated generation of electrical energy in the external circuit showing the mechanism of piezoelectric energy generation.	 

 	Fig. 2  The mechanism of the piezocatalytic degradation of hazardous dye molecules depicting the generation of piezo-response mediated ROS.	 
Piezocatalyst + mechanical energy → Piezocatalyst (e− + h+)
4e− + 4H2O → 4OH− + 4H*
4H* → 2H2
4OH− → 4e− + 4OH*
2(OH* + OH*) → 2H2O + 2O*
2O* → O2
OH* + pollutant → degradation product of the pollutant
e− + pollutant → degradation product of the pollutant
h+ + pollutant → degradation product of the pollutant
Vp = dijσjωi/ε0εr, i

 	Fig. 3  UV–visible spectra illustrating the piezocatalytic degradation of the MB dye solution recorded at different vibration times using LN-PVDF (a) and Ag/LN-PVDF composite films (b); variation in (c) dye concentration in terms of C/Co and (d) dye degradation rate with vibration time; (e) effect of scavengers on percent dye degradation through piezocatalysis; (f) piezocatalytic dye degradation percentage in various dyes using Ag/LN-PVDF composite films. Adapted with permission from ref. 40 copyright (2021) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Time-dependent log reduction of CFUs mL−1 of E. coli in various films; (b) illustration of CFUs of E. coli on agar plates (1/10 dilution) at various times demonstrating piezocatalytic bacterial disinfection; (c) log reduction of S. aureus for various films; (d) CFUs of S. aureus on agar plates (1/1000 dilution) before and after 3 h sonication demonstrating piezocatalytic bacterial disinfection. Adapted with permission from ref. 40 copyright (2021) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Clay nanoparticle intercalation mechanism inside the bio-polymeric matrix of a chitosan biopolymer showing the contribution of the surface charge of the clay moiety.	 

Synthetic	MoS2 nano flower/PVDF	Rhodamine-B	>90	20	Bagchi et al.13
Synthetic	TiO2/PVDF	Methylene blue	100	40	Dong et al.35
Synthetic	PVDF/PMMA-ZnSnO3	Methylene blue	71	120	Lin et al.36
Synthetic	Ag loaded LiNbO3/PVDF	Tetracycline, ciprofloxacin, E. coli and S. aureus	69(TC) 53(CF) 99.999(EC) 96.65(SA)	120(TC, CF) and 180(EC, SA)	Sing et al.40
Synthetic	PVDF/ZnSnO3-Co3O4	Methylene blue, rhodamine-B	100	20	Raju et al.37
Synthetic	ZnO/PVDF, ZnO/PDMS	Rhodamine-B	∼35(PDMS) ∼90(PVDF)	100	Wu et al.38
Synthetic	Barium strontium titanate/PDMS	Rhodamine-B	97.8	90	Xu et al.44
Synthetic	PDMS/WS2 nanoflower	Rhodamine-B, E. coli	99 (RB) 99.99(EC)	90	Masimukku et al.42
Synthetic	PDMS/MoS2	Rhodamine-B	67	200	Lin et al.41
Synthetic	BaTiO3/PDMS	Rhodamine-B	94	120	Qian et al.43
Synthetic	PTFE	Methyl orange, acid orange-7, methylene blue, E. coli	89.7 (MO) >90 (MB, AO7) 99.7 (EC)	60 (MO, MB, AO7) 15 (EC)	Wang et al.45
Synthetic	Fe0/PANI	Congo red	98	30	Das et al.47
Biopolymer	Chitosan modified montmorillonite	Acid orange-7, basic red, basic yellow	82.74	60	Karaca et al.54

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
