Ionic thermoelectric supercapacitors   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6EE00121A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6EE00121A
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1450-1457Ionic thermoelectric supercapacitors†

        
          
            D. 
            Zhao‡
a, 
      
        
          
            H. 
            Wang‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Z. U. 
            Khan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            J. C. 
            Chen
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            R. 
            Gabrielsson
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            M. P. 
            Jonsson
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            M. 
            Berggren
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            X. 
            Crispin
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Science and Technology, Campus Norrköping, Linköping University, S-60174 Norrköping, Sweden. E-mail: Xavier.crispin@liu.se
bDepartment of Physics, Xiamen University, People's Republic of China
Received 
      13th January 2016
    , Accepted 8th February 2016First published on 8th February 2016AbstractTemperature gradients are generated by the sun and a vast array of technologies and can induce molecular concentration gradients in solutions via thermodiffusion (Soret effect). For ions, this leads to a thermovoltage that is determined by the thermal gradient ΔT across the electrolyte, together with the ionic Seebeck coefficient αi. So far, redox-free electrolytes have been poorly explored in thermoelectric applications due to a lack of strategies to harvest the energy from the Soret effect. Here, we report the conversion of heat into stored charge via a remarkably strong ionic Soret effect in a polymeric electrolyte (Seebeck coefficients as high as αi = 10 mV K−1). The ionic thermoelectric supercapacitor (ITESC) is charged under a temperature gradient. After the temperature gradient is removed, the stored electrical energy can be delivered to an external circuit. This new means to harvest energy is particularly suitable for intermittent heat sources like the sun. We show that the stored electrical energy of the ITESC is proportional to (ΔTαi)2. The resulting ITESC can convert and store several thousand times more energy compared with a traditional thermoelectric generator connected in series with a supercapacitor.

Broader context
Today, only 1% of the energy we use comes from solar radiation. However, the sun is the largest green energy source and could cover many thousand times the energy need of today's society. Solar radiation can generate electricity with solar cells, but the efficiency of low-cost solar cells is expected to reach only about 20%. Hence, 80% of the solar radiation is unused and part of this could be transformed into thermal energy. Here, we propose to harvest this thermal energy by letting a heat flow charge a supercapacitor, or eventually a battery, with the so-called ionic thermoelectric effect. The resulting device, called the ionic thermoelectric supercapacitor (ITESC), combines the functions of a thermoelectric generator and a supercapacitor. The ITESC could store electrical charge due to heating by the sun during the daytime and the energy could then be used by discharging the device during the night. The ITESC is truly scalable since the materials we use are composed of abundant atomic elements. In addition, it is compatible with solution processing without the need of high temperature annealing. Hence, large area ITESCs could be combined with large area solar cells to boost the total efficiency of light to electricity conversion.

Introduction
Various thermoelectric concepts are currently under investigation for conversion of thermal energy into electrical energy, with the goal to provide efficient thermoelectric systems. First, electronic charge carriers in a conductor thermodiffuse when subjected to a temperature gradient, which leads to a thermovoltage known as the Seebeck voltage. Thermoelectric generators (TEGs) that utilize the Seebeck effect are typically composed of semi-metals1,2 and inorganic semiconductors,3–6 and electronically conducting polymers have also recently been explored.7 Secondly, thermovoltages can originate from the thermogalvanic effect, which results from temperature-dependent entropy changes during electron transfer between a redox molecule and an electrode.8 Hence, thermogalvanic cells are based on electrolytes with redox couples, such as ferricyanide/ferrocyanide. The Soret effect9 of a redox free electrolyte, i.e. from ionic charge carriers, constitutes yet a third thermoelectric concept that, to the best of our knowledge, has not previously been considered for energy harvesting. Analogous to the electronic Seebeck effect, the Soret effect is a result of thermo-diffusion of ions in an ionic solid10,11 or electrolyte.12 This produces an ionic concentration gradient and a corresponding thermo-voltage that is governed by the temperature difference across the material and the ionic Seebeck coefficient αi.
For a traditional thermoelectric leg, composed of a semiconductor and two metal contacts, a constant electrical power can be provided to an external load by imposing a temperature gradient along the metal–semiconductor–metal stack. The same harvesting principle is, however, not directly applicable if the semiconductor is replaced by an electrolyte solution with ions as charge carriers. The reason is that the thermo-diffused ions are blocked at the surface of the metal electrode and cannot pass through the external circuit. Instead, the ions will be accumulated in excess at the metal surface where they form an electric double layer capacitor (EDLC).13 Our approach utilizes this EDLC principle and harvests energy from the ionic thermoelectric effect by charging carbon nanotube super-capacitor electrodes under a temperature gradient ΔT. The energy can be stored without the temperature gradient (ΔT = 0) and then delivered (discharging) to an external circuit. The resulting device operates in cycle with an intermittent heat source and it is here referred to as an ionic thermoelectric supercapacitor (ITESC). In addition, the polymeric electrolyte based on polyethyleneoxide treated by NaOH provides an exceptionally high ionic Seebeck coefficient up to 11.1 mV K−1. This leads to a stored energy that is 2500 times higher than the state of the art circuit composed of a traditional electronic thermoelectric generator (TEG) coupled to a supercapacitor (SC).
Results
Thermoelectric characterization of PEO–NaOH
We choose a low molecular weight PEO ended with alcohol groups (Mw = 400 g mol−1) as the electrolyte, because it is non-volatile and can withstand relatively high temperatures (<120 °C). The facilitated thermoelectric effect is stable since there is no solvent evaporation and degradation for large ΔT over a long period of time. We added NaOH to the liquid PEO (C(NaOH) = 0.75 mM) to transform the terminating alcohol groups (–C–OH) into anionic alkoxide end-groups (–C–O–Na+).14 Nuclear magnetic resonance (1H-NMR) and Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) confirm that the reaction has taken place (Fig. S1 and S2 in ESI 1†). The resulting electrolyte is composed of polymeric anions that are very weakly mobile and mobile Na+ cations. The ionic conductivity measured by impedance spectroscopy is 8.13 × 10−5 S cm−1 at room temperature and the activation energy for the ionic transport is 476 meV (see ESI 2†). We investigate the thermoelectric properties of the PEO–NaOH solution. The thermoelectric liquid is injected into a small cylindrical chamber (1 mm thick, diameter of 10 mm). Planar Au electrodes are evaporated on both sides of the chamber and are in direct contact with the polymer electrolyte (Fig. 1a). In order to monitor the temperature difference between the two electrodes, we fabricated thermistors under the electrodes (details are provided in ESI 3†). At any given ΔT, the corresponding Soret-induced open voltage can be obtained. This is exemplified in Fig. 1b during heating one side of the device while cooling of the other side. The thermovoltage induced by different ΔT values was investigated in the temperature range between 25 °C and 35 °C. For each ΔT, the voltage was measured 5 min after stabilization. The results are presented in Fig. 1c and demonstrate that Vthermo varies linearly with ΔT. The slope of the linear fit gives an ionic Seebeck coefficient of +11.1 mV K−1 for the PEO–NaOH electrolyte. The thermovoltage originates from non-compensated thermodiffusion of cations and anions, with an overall sodium cation accumulation at the cold electrode, as expected since alkoxylate and carboxylate anions are mostly immobile. The magnitude of the ionic Seebeck coefficient is remarkably high. Indeed for Na+ in a diluted aqueous solution, the heat of transport Q* is about 3 kJ mol−1,15 giving an expected Seebeck coefficient of αNa+ = Q*/Na|e|T = 0.1 mV K−1, where Na is the Avogadro number and |e| is the charge of an electron. This is 100 times smaller than what is found for the PEO–NaOH electrolyte. The Born model16 allows a first estimate of the heat of transport17 and the thermopower.18 In this model, the square of the dielectric constant of the medium is inversely proportional to the Seebeck coefficient. Although the static dielectric constant of PEO (ε0 = 36.1 at 20 °C) is lower than that of water (ε0 = 80.6 at 20 °C), its temperature variation (dε/dT = 0.02) is negligible compared to water (dε/dT = 0.49). As a result of those compensating effects, we conclude that the large difference in the thermovoltage of Na+ in water and in PEO cannot be attributed to the difference in the dielectric constant (see ESI 4†). Thermodiffusion is a complex process that also involves the interaction and the entropy change between the solvent and the ions.19 The complexity is not reduced with the presence of polymer chains. For instance, ions in the polyelectrolyte and salt solution are expected to have a Soret coefficient 100 times larger than a salt solution without the polyelectrolyte.20 This could be one origin for the large ionic Seebeck coefficient measured for PEO–NaOH. Other reports also indicate large thermoelectric coefficients for polymer electrolyte membranes, from a few mV K−1 to around 500 mV K−1.21 Aside from the major ionic Seebeck voltage, there may be another minor contribution due to a thermogalvanic voltage associated with the Faradic process involved in the leakage current.22 Regardless of the reason, it is clear that ionic polymer solutions can provide remarkably high Seebeck coefficients, and a relatively low thermal conductivity of 0.216 W m−1 k−1, as measured by the 3-omega method (see ESI 5†), which may be found to be useful in various applications.
 Fig. 1  Thermoelectric properties of PEO–NaOH solution. (a) Sketch of the ionic thermoelectric supercapacitor device (left) with two different electrodes (right, Au and CNT), and the reaction that takes place in the solution. (b) Measured Vthermo and ΔT during heating using the Au electrode. (c) The measured Vthermo during heating using either Au or CNT electrodes. (d) Vthermo at different ΔT values using Au electrodes (red open squares) and CNT electrodes (black solid squares). For each point, ΔT is fixed until Vthermo was stable for at least 5 minutes. The slope of the linear fit to the data for the Au electrodes gives a Seebeck coefficient of 11.1 mV K−1. 
The Au electrodes of the device can be functionalized with self-assembled multi-wall carbon nanotubes to form a supercapacitor (Fig. 1a) (CNT, detailed preparation protocols are provided in ESI 6†). CNTs self-assembled onto the Au-contact provide intercalation of electrolyte components, thus providing a relatively high capacitance value over a projected area unit. Both Au and CNT electrodes are electrochemically stable over a potential window much wider than what is measured from the induced thermovoltage, which means that no Faradic processes related to electrode deterioration are involved in the ITESC measurements. Similar saturation of Vthermovs. time (Fig. 1c) and evolution of Vthermovs. ΔT (Fig. 1d) are obtained using both Au and CNT electrodes, which indicates that the nature of the electrodes does not play a role and that the thermovoltage is an intrinsic property of the polymer electrolyte.
Capacitance property characterization
Carbon nanotube films have previously shown to be suitable as electrodes in supercapacitors,23 primarily due to their large surface area.24 The application of a voltage over the PEO–NaOH capacitor induces migration of the cations towards the negatively charged CNT electrode, at which an electric double layer (EDL) is formed (illustrated in Fig. 2a). We compare the electrical characteristics of three devices that are based on the same polymer electrolyte PEO–NaOH, but with different electrodes: two different amounts of CNT assembled onto Au electrodes (we define them as thick and thin CNT electrodes) and the bare gold electrode. Before exploring the effect of a thermal gradient, we characterize the capacitors electrically (at 22 °C) by impedance spectroscopy and cyclic-voltammetry.
 Fig. 2  Capacitance properties of NaOH–PEO with the CNT electrode. (a) Illustration of the electric double layer (EDL) formed in CNT electrodes. (b) Nyquist plot for devices with Au, thin CNT and thick CNT electrodes in the frequency range of 100 kHz to 1 mHz. The inset shows the simulated equivalent circuit: Rp: resistance connected parallel to the capacitance that is associated with the leakage current; Rs: resistance connected series which represents the internal resistance of the device; C: the capacitance. (c) CV curves of devices with the three different types of electrodes, measured at 10 mV s−1. (d) Potential static electric charging and discharging of a device with thick CNT electrodes (Rload = 50 kΩ). All measurements are conducted at room temperature. 
Using impedance spectroscopy, an alternating voltage Vac(f) = 5 mV is applied across the electrolyte-based supercapacitors, the polarization characteristics of the electrolyte strongly depend on the frequency (f)25,26 and the total complex impedance ZTot(f) is measured. Fig. 2b shows Nyquist plots, i.e. the real ZRe(f) vs. the imaginary ZIm(f) part of the impedance of the device with Au, thin and thick CNT electrodes, in the frequency ranging from 0.001 Hz to 100 kHz (without any DC bias). As shown, all the Nyquist plots consist of two distinct parts including a distorted semicircle in the high frequency region and a sloped line in the low frequency region. The x-intercept in the Nyquist plots represents the equivalent series resistance (Rs), which corresponds to the electrolyte solution resistance. Rs is almost identical for the different devices and is about 1.5 kΩ. Also, the presence of a semicircle indicates that an additional resistive element (Rp) acts in parallel and it is associated with a low-frequency leakage resistance (see the equivalent circuit in the inset of Fig. 2b). The equivalent circuit parameters (Table 1) have been obtained by fitting the experimental Nyquist spectra. For the Au electrodes, the capacitance is around 5 μF cm−2, which is typical of EDLCs.27 Because of the extremely high effective surface area of the CNT electrode networks (≈120–430 m2 g−1),28 the specific capacitance is typically larger than that for a planar metal electrode21 and reaches in our case 1.03 mF cm−2 for the thick CNT electrodes and 0.48 mF cm−2 for the thin electrodes.
Table 1 The parameters in the equivalent circuit




 
Au
Thin CNT
Thick CNT




Capacitance (μF cm−2)
5.1
484
1031



R
s (series resistance Ω)
1622
1545
1605



R
p (parallel resistance Ω)
2.95 × 105
4.88 × 105
5.04 × 105




Typical cyclic voltammetry (CV) characteristics of the different devices are presented in Fig. 2c for the same scan rate (dV/dt = 10 mV s−1). The devices exhibited a near-ideal rectangular shape, indicating purely capacitive behaviour. The amplitude of the current is proportional to the capacitance of the electrodes (I = −CdV/dt): small for Au and large for CNT electrodes. The capacitance of the thick CNT electrode is estimated to be about 0.95 mF cm−2; while for the thin CNT electrodes it is about 0.48 mF cm−2. This is consistent with the result from the impedance measurements.
The charge and discharge characteristics of the SCs are studied by electric potential static charge–discharge measurements (Fig. 2d). For the charging procedure, a power supply, Rload and SCs are connected in series, and the voltage across Rload is recorded. Around 5 min after the recorded voltage stabilizes, the power supply is replaced by a short at those two electrodes, and the discharging current is obtained by recording the voltage drop over Rload. The device is charged with a constant potential of 50 mV. Two measurements with different charging times are shown in the graph, indicating that the discharging curve does not change for a prolonged charging time. This means that the stable leakage current, which is most likely a Faradic current between the electrode and the electrolyte, does not contribute to the accumulated charge on the CNT electrodes. In other words, the amount of charge transferred to and stored in the capacitor will always be less than the calculated charge using Q = CVload, since a part of the charging voltage is lost across Rload even upon full charging. We infer that this leakage current is related to the parallel resistance (Rp) in the equivalent circuit. After charging, the stored charge may gradually vanish due to self-discharging. We investigate this by measuring the decay of the open voltage (without connecting Rload) in Fig. S7 (see ESI 7†). The device with thick CNT electrodes provides significantly better charge retention than the device with thin CNT electrodes. For this reason, we choose to focus the rest of the investigation on the PEO–NaOH based supercapacitor with thick CNT electrodes.
Demonstration of the ionic thermoelectric supercapacitor
We now demonstrate the first ITESC, by combining the promising thermoelectric properties of the PEO–NaOH solution and the high capacitive performance of the device when sandwiched by CNT–Au electrodes. The ionic thermoelectric effect will act as an internal electric generator that can charge the EDLC of the supercapacitor. In brief, the ITESC concept is based on the following expected mechanisms. (i) First, ΔT is applied over the electrode–electrolyte–electrode stack to induce a thermovoltage Vthermo = αiΔT. (ii) By connecting an external load resistance (Rload), the ionic thermovoltage is used to charge the supercapacitor. (iii) After charging, Rload is disconnected (open circuit) and the heater is switched off. In this step, the thermovoltage should decay to zero, such that the open circuit potential is governed only by the voltage drop (of opposite sign) induced by the stored charge. (iv) Finally, the device can be discharged by connecting the ITESC stack to an external circuit including Rload.
We demonstrate the ITESC concept in Fig. 3a. (i) First, a ΔT of 16 K is established across our device while Vthermo is recorded. As expected, Vthermo increases during heating until it reaches a stable thermovoltage of around 180 mV. (ii) Next, Rload (100 kΩ) is connected and the voltage across it (Vload) is recorded. Vload decreases rapidly and reaches a stable value of around 50 mV. This is the charging curve of the device. The decrease of Vload during charging is attributed to charge being transferred to the capacitor, which induces a potential of opposite sign that compensates the thermovoltage. The residual voltage is related to the electronic leakage current, which results in a non-zero voltage drop over Rload also after full charging. Hence, the effective charging voltage (Veffective) is reduced from 180 mV by 50 mV to around 130 mV. The predicted Veffective can also be estimated from Vthermo(1 − Rload/(Rload + Rp + Rs)), which with the values in Table 1 for the thick CNT electrodes gives Veffective = 150 mV, which is close to the measured value.
 Fig. 3  Charging and discharging of the ITESC. (a) Measured voltage curve (black) and mechanism sketch of a full charge and discharge cycle: (i) establishing the temperature gradient (ΔT = 16 K) leads to an ionic thermovoltage, (ii) thermoelectric charging of the supercapacitor (the superimposed curve in blue corresponds to the electric charging of the same device upon applying an electric potential equals to the thermo-voltage value), (iii) equilibration to ΔT = 0, and (iv) discharging (both with Rload = 100 kΩ). (b) Charging and discharging using a periodic heating source. (c) The amount of charge transferred to or from the capacitor during charging (black squares) and discharging (red circles) at different ΔT values (Rload = 100 kΩ). The teq value between charging and discharging was 400–1200 s. The inset shows the equivalent circuit of charging and discharging processes of the ITESC. 
We compare the charging behaviour of the ITESC exposed to a varied temperature gradient with charging achieved by applying an external voltage source (blue curve in Fig. 3a). The two charging curves, obtained by varying the voltage versus changing the ΔT, overlays perfectly with each other. The good agreement between the two curves indicates that the two charging methods have almost the same charging behaviour.
This means that the thermoelectric effect for ΔT (Taverage) is equivalent to an internal electric generator (V = αiΔT). Additional results comparing electrical and thermoelectric charging are provided in ESI 8† (Fig. S8a). (iii) After complete charging, heating is turned off and the circuit is kept open. As the thermovoltage decays, the recorded Vthermo decreases to negative values, which infers that charges have indeed been transferred to the CNT electrodes by the ITESC. (iv) The final part of the curve in Fig. 3a demonstrates that the supercapacitor is able to discharge and provide useful energy to a load, as evaluated in more detail below. As expected, repeating the ITESC experiment for a device with Au electrodes instead of CNT electrodes does not provide any measurable charging or discharging (Fig. S8b, ESI†). Repeating the ITESC process over multiple cycles produces highly reproducible charge–discharge current evolutions (Fig. 3b). This demonstrates not only the stability of the device but also its true potential for harvesting electricity from intermittent heat sources.
Evaluation of charge transfer during charging and discharging
During the charging step, the thermoelectric charging of the ITESC shows very similar output current through Rload to that for electric charging of the supercapacitor at a voltage equal to the thermovoltage, and both charging principles also lead to the same level of leakage current. We therefore propose that the ITESC can effectively be described by an equivalent circuit that is similar to electrical charging (inset of Fig. 3c), where the voltage source is equivalent to the thermovoltage, and the rest is composed of a load resistance and a sub-circuit corresponding to the supercapacitor (as derived in Section 2). During charging, the generator provides a thermovoltage αiΔT, while the capacitor will be shorted before discharging takes place. We stress that this equivalent circuit does not describe the complete ITESC circuit, for which the voltage drop over the capacitor in fact starts at αiΔT and decreases during charging, but it is implemented to describe the effective voltage that goes into charging of the supercapacitor. The time constant for charging in this equivalent circuit is τ = C(Rs + Rload), and we use 5τ as the charging time when calculating the stored charge in the capacitor (more details can be found in ESI 9†).
The amount of charge transferred to the capacitor is calculated by integrating the current flowing through the capacitor (Icapacitor) during charging or discharging. In turn, this current is obtained by measuring the voltage over the Rload and by subtracting the time-dependent leakage current (Ileakage), which does not contribute to the charging process. We estimate the leakage current from the voltage drop over the capacitor (Vcapacitor = ΔTαi − Vload − Vs) divided by Rp and Vs is the voltage drop over the internal series resistance. In first approximation, Rs is negligible compared to Rload, such that the transferred charge is: (1)Fig. 3c shows the calculated charge stored for different ΔT values during charging. Because Qcharging= CVeffective upon full charging, and Veffective = ΔTαi (1 − Rload/(Rload + Rp + Rs)), the charge is expected to be linearly proportional to the temperature gradient according to: (2)Fig. 3c shows that the amount of charge increases approximately linearly with ΔT with a slope of 8.3 × 10−6 C K−1. This is close to 8.8 × 10−6 C K−1, as predicted by eqn (2). Similarly, the charge transferred during discharging also increases with ΔT, although the trend is less clear and there is a larger spread in the values. Notably, there is an apparent loss for the charge transferred during discharging compared to charging. This can be attributed to self-discharge during the time teq of temperature equilibration (step iii in Fig. 3a, see ESI 7†). The loss in stored charge during teq can fully explain why Qdischarge is lower than Qcharge in the ITESC measurements (Fig. 3a and b). Based on multiple measurements with similar equilibration times (teq = 550–650 s), the ratio β = Qdischarge/Qcharge upon TE charging at 50 mV (ΔT = 4.5 °C) was measured to be around 27% (Table 2). Almost the same value of β (approximately 28%) is measured when the same supercapacitor is instead electrically charged (ΔT = 0) at Taverage and when the discharge is triggered 600 s after charging. If the discharging is triggered directly after electrical charging (within 1 s), the self-discharge has a minor effect and β reaches values as high as 94%. We note that because the ITESC principle requires a waiting step between charging and discharging, future devices with lower self-discharge should provide better ratios.
Table 2 The amount of charge transferred to or from the capacitor during charging or discharging, for electric (electric-SC) and thermoelectric (ITESC) charging for thick CNT capacitors (Vcharging = 50 mV)




 
Electric-SC: thick CNT discharge immediately
Electric-SC: thick CNT discharge after 600 s
ITESC: thick CNT equilibration time: 550—650 s





Q
charging (C)
2.42 × 10−5 (±5.31 × 10−7)
2.42 × 10−5 (±5.31 × 10−07)
2.50 × 10−5 (±1.06 × 10−6)



Q
discharging (C)
2.28 × 10−5 (±6.43 × 10−7)
6.85 × 10−6 (±2.24 × 10−7)
6.85 × 10−6 (±9.25 × 10−7)



Q
discharging/Qcharging
94.2%
28.3%
27.4%




Stored charge and energy

Fig. 4a shows Qcharging (black squares) and the energy (red dots) transferred to the capacitor during charging (the current curves plotted versus time are provided in Fig. S9 in ESI 10†). Qcharging is relatively insensitive to Rload for values up to around 20 kΩ, after which it decreases as Rload becomes comparable to Rp. Note that for Rload values close to Rs, the accurate expression of Veffective = ΔTαi(1 − (Rload + Rs)/(Rload + Rp + Rs)). The experimental results can be accurately expressed by Qcharging = CVeffective (dashed black line), where C is the surface capacitance (1.03 mF cm−2). The measured energy stored per area in the capacitor is 1.35 μJ cm−2 for ΔT = 4.5 K and Rload < 20 kΩ, but decreases for large Rload (red dot). This evolution is also in agreement with the theoretical prediction (dashed red line) (Ec = 1/2Qcharging2/C).
 Fig. 4  Energy stored in the ITESC. (a) The amount of charge stored and electrical energy stored in the capacitor during charging for different Rload values (ΔT = 4.5 K), and the two dashed lines represent the calculated value of the charge (black) and energy (red), respectively. (b) Energy density versus ΔT for the ITESC (red open circles), electric charging (blue open squares) and the theoretical prediction from Vthermo (dashed red line), Velectric (dashed blue line), and Veffective (dashed and dotted black lines). (c) Energy density versus ΔT for the ITESC, both experimental data (red open dot) and theoretical results (red dashed line), and theoretical prediction for the same SC charged by one leg of Bi2Te3 TEG (black dashed-dotted line). 
The energy per area is found to increase quadratically with the applied temperature gradient, approximately as E = 1/2C(ΔTαi)2. In an ITESC, the stored electrical energy can be expressed as a function of the Seebeck coefficient of the electrolyte. This expression can be further revised for a realistic device with a leakage current as E = 1/2C(ΔTαi − Vs − Vload)2. The latter overlaps the experimental data perfectly (Fig. 4b). Also, the experimental values for the ITESC are close to the experimental data (blue open triangle in Fig. 4b) obtained for a circuit made of the SC (ΔT = 0) and a power supply providing a voltage equal to the thermovoltage (so called electrical charging). The latter fits the theoretical expression E = 1/2CV2. The extrapolated energy density for ΔT = 10 K is 33.8 kJ kg−1 (9.4 W h kg−1). Importantly, the energy density for large temperature gradients can be high, because the ionic thermovoltage of the polymer electrolyte system is exceptionally large. For the sake of comparison, Li-polymer batteries have an energy density of about 200 W h kg−1.26 Hence, in principle, the ionic thermoelectric effect of polymer electrolytes can be used to charge partially any type of supercapacitor or battery.
In order to pinpoint the unique feature of the ITESC, we now compare its electrical characteristics with that predicted for a single leg thermoelectric generator (TEG) based on Bi2Te3 connected in series to the supercapacitor (SC). Since the Seebeck coefficient of Bi2Te3 (190 μV K−1)1 is more than 50 times lower than PEO–NaOH (11.1 mV K−1), the resulting energy stored would be 2500 times lower (Fig. 4c). Hence, the ITESC is a very attractive solution compared to existing state-of-the-art technology when it comes to harvesting and storing electricity from an intermittent heat source.
We evaluate the efficiency η of the ITESC in converting heat to electricity, which is defined as η = Eout/Qin, i.e. the ratio between the electrical energy that is generated and stored in the ITESC from the charging (Eout) and the total heat absorbed over one full ITESC cycle (Qin). The dominant term is the thermal energy passing through the device during the time needed for the ions to slowly thermodiffuse and establish a stable Vopen (tst) (interval (i) in Fig. 3a). The efficiency for a full cycle reaches 6 × 10−6% at low Rload and ΔT = 4.5 K. Note that, if we consider only the heat to electricity conversion during the charging interval (integrating over the interval (ii) in Fig. 3a, i.e. not over the full cycle), the “peak” efficiency of the measured devices reaches about 5 × 10−4% for ΔT = 4.5 K. In ESI 11,† we show that the total efficiency η can reach about 0.1% through the optimization of the device's architecture and the use of a large temperature gradient ΔT = 100 K. We stress that the efficiency is 2500 times higher than that of a circuit composed of a SC connected in series with a conventional TEG.
Experimental
Materials
Polyethylene oxide (PEO, Mw: 400 g mol−1) is purchased from Fluka and used as received. Sodium hydroxide (NaOH), sodium hydride (NaH) and multi-walled carbon nanotubes (m-CNTs, diameter: 5–9 nm, length: 5 μm) are purchased from Sigma-Aldrich.
Characterization
The effective capacitance and the phase angle of PEO–NaOH are measured using an impedance spectrometer (an Alpha high-resolution dielectric analyzer, Novocontrol Technologies GmbH, Hundsangen, Germany). The ac voltage 5 mV is applied while sweeping the frequency from 1 × 105 Hz to 1 × 10−2 Hz. The effective capacitance per area is calculated using the capacitive reactance (Xc = −ZIm) via Ceff(f) = [2πfXc(f)A]−1, where A is the surface area of the electrodes with disregard to their porosity, while the frequency-dependent phase angle (φ(f)) was obtained from the real and the imaginary parts of the impedance via φ(f) = tan−1(ZIm/ZRe).
The cyclic voltammetry was carried out using a μAutolab potentiostat (Eco Chemie, Utrecht, Netherlands) in the potential range of 0–0.2 V at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1.
Thermopower measurements are carried out by sandwiching the samples by a pair of Peltier element. The voltage difference (ΔV) between two electrodes is recorded using a nanovoltmeter (Keithley Instruments, Inc., model 1282A). ΔV is averaged by reversing the polarity of each Seebeck measurement to eliminate the unipolar and off-set voltages. The temperature difference (ΔT) between two electrodes is measured using two thermistors beneath the Au electrodes used to measure the thermo-voltage. The two thermistors are made of narrow and thin Au lines vacuum deposited on the glass substrate. The thermistors are deposited with a 1 μm thick Si3N4 layer before the evaporation of the top Au electrode, and calibrated in a climate chamber. The Seebeck coefficient is defined as α = ΔV/ΔT − αAu. The Seebeck coefficient and conductivity are measured at 21 °C.
The thermal conductivity of PEO–NaOH solution is measured using the differential 3ω-method, explained in more detail in the ESI.† A sinusoidal input current of tunable frequency ω, generated from an arbitrary waveform generator (AFG3000 from Tektronix), is applied to an insulated narrow metal heater with the liquid in the cavity on top. The third harmonic component 3ω of the voltage at the terminals of the heater is measured using a lock-in amplifier (Stanford Research SR850). The reference measurement is performed inside the cryogenic probe station from Janis under vacuum and the measurements with the cavity filled with a liquid are performed in an ambient environment at a temperature of 22 °C.
Device fabrication
A glass substrate is patterned using two Au thermistors (10 μm width) by thermal evaporation and photolithography. Then 1 μm thick Si3N4 is deposited using CVD as an insulation layer. And two round Au electrodes are patterned by thermal evaporation (10 mm diameter).
Both the prepared glass substrate and PDMS (1 mm thickness) are exposed to UV plasma for 3 min, then brought into contact and baked at 70 °C in an oven for 10 min, and then a cavity of 0.0785 cm3 is obtained.
PEO–NaOH solution with a concentration of 3 wt% is prepared and stirred before use. The solution is then injected into the chamber.
For devices with CNT electrodes, two electrodes (Au thermal evaporated) are UV plasma treated for 3 min, and then drop-casting a certain amount of CNT aqueous solution (0.1%). After the solution is dry, rinse the electrode with acetone and water, and dry them using a nitrogen gun.
Conclusions
We have demonstrated for the first time that the Soret effect in a polymer electrolyte leads to a significant ionic thermoelectric effect that could be used to charge a supercapacitor. The device remains charged after the thermal gradient has been removed and can thus be discharged by delivering current to an external circuit. The presented ITESC device requires a fluctuation in the applied temperature gradient to function, which makes the concept suitable for intermittent heat sources, such as the sun. We discuss potential improvements of the ITESC concept, and predict the heat-to-electricity charging conversion efficiency to be able to improve if good thermoelectric electrolytes are designed with low specific heat capacitance, low thermal conductivity, large Seebeck coefficient and high ionic conductivity. Importantly, all materials constituting the ITESC (polymer and inorganic salts) are fully compatible with industry processing.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the European Research Council (ERC-starting-grant 307596), the Swedish foundation for strategic research (SSF), the Knut and Alice Wallenberg foundation (KAW), The Swedish Energy Agency, The Wenner-Gren Foundations and the Advanced Functional Materials Centre at Linköping University.
References
B. Poudel, Q. Hao, Y. Ma, Y. Lan, A. Minnich, B. Yu, X. Yan, D. Wang, A. Muto, D. Vashaee, X. Chen, J. Liu, M. S. Dresselhaus, G. Chen and Z. Ren, Science, 2008, 320, 634–638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. J. Snyder and E. S. Toberer, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 105–114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Laiho, L. Herlogsson, R. Forchheimer, X. Crispin and M. Berggren, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 15069–15073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. I. Hochbaum, R. K. Chen, R. D. Delgado, W. J. Liang, E. C. Garnett, M. Najarian, A. Majumdar and P. D. Yang, Nature, 2008, 451, 163–165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. D. Zhao, S. H. Lo, Y. Zhang, H. Sun, G. Tan, C. Uher, C. Wolverton, V. P. Dravid and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nature, 2014, 508, 373–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-D. Zhao, G. Tan, S. Hao, J. He, Y. Pei, H. Chi, H. Wang, S. Gong, H. Xu and V. P. Dravid, Science, 2016, 351, 141–144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, P. Sheng, C. Di, F. Jiao, W. Xu, D. Qiu and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 932–937 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Hu, B. A. Cola, N. Haram, J. N. Barisci, S. Lee, S. Stoughton, G. Wallace, C. Too, M. Thomas, A. Gestos, M. E. d. Cruz, J. P. Ferraris, A. A. Zakhidov and R. H. Baughman, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 838–846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. D. Eastman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1928, 50, 283–291 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. L. Howard and A. B. Lidiard, Discuss. Faraday Soc., 1957, 23, 113–121 RSC .
S. M. Girvin, J. Solid State Chem., 1978, 25, 65–76 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. V. Tyrrell, D. A. Taylor and C. M. Williams, Nature, 1956, 177, 2 CrossRef .
M. Bonetti, S. Nakamae, B. T. Huang, T. J. Salez, C. Wiertel-Gasquet and M. Roger, J. Chem. Phys., 2015, 142, 244708 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Xiao, J. Jiang and H. Huang, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Snowdon and J. Turner, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1960, 56, 1812–1819 RSC .
M. Born, Z. Phys., 1920, 1, 45–48 CrossRef CAS .
J. Agar, C. Mou and J. L. Lin, J. Phys. Chem., 1989, 93, 2079–2082 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Petit, K. E. Renner and J. L. Lin, J. Phys. Chem., 1984, 88, 2 CrossRef .
Y. Marcus, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 25 CrossRef PubMed .
D. G. Leaist and L. Hao, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1994, 90, 1909–1911 RSC .
M. Tasaka, Pure Appl. Chem., 1986, 58, 1637–1646 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bonetti, S. Nakamae, M. Roger and P. Guenoun, J. Chem. Phys., 2011, 134, 114513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Niu, E. K. Sichel, R. Hoch, D. Moy and H. Tennent, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1997, 70, 1480–1482 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Zhang and X. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2520–2531 RSC .

          P. Colomban, Proton Conductors: Solids, membranes and gels-materials and devices, Cambridge University Press,  1992 Search PubMed .
O. Larsson, E. Said, M. Berggren and X. Crispin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3334–3341 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Bard and L. Faulkner, Electochem. Methods, Fundam. Appl., Wiley, New York,  2001 Search PubMed .
E. Frackowiak and F. Béguin, Carbon, 2001, 39, 937–950 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ee00121a‡ These two authors contributed the same.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

Broader context
Today, only 1% of the energy we use comes from solar radiation. However, the sun is the largest green energy source and could cover many thousand times the energy need of today's society. Solar radiation can generate electricity with solar cells, but the efficiency of low-cost solar cells is expected to reach only about 20%. Hence, 80% of the solar radiation is unused and part of this could be transformed into thermal energy. Here, we propose to harvest this thermal energy by letting a heat flow charge a supercapacitor, or eventually a battery, with the so-called ionic thermoelectric effect. The resulting device, called the ionic thermoelectric supercapacitor (ITESC), combines the functions of a thermoelectric generator and a supercapacitor. The ITESC could store electrical charge due to heating by the sun during the daytime and the energy could then be used by discharging the device during the night. The ITESC is truly scalable since the materials we use are composed of abundant atomic elements. In addition, it is compatible with solution processing without the need of high temperature annealing. Hence, large area ITESCs could be combined with large area solar cells to boost the total efficiency of light to electricity conversion.


 	Fig. 1  Thermoelectric properties of PEO–NaOH solution. (a) Sketch of the ionic thermoelectric supercapacitor device (left) with two different electrodes (right, Au and CNT), and the reaction that takes place in the solution. (b) Measured Vthermo and ΔT during heating using the Au electrode. (c) The measured Vthermo during heating using either Au or CNT electrodes. (d) Vthermo at different ΔT values using Au electrodes (red open squares) and CNT electrodes (black solid squares). For each point, ΔT is fixed until Vthermo was stable for at least 5 minutes. The slope of the linear fit to the data for the Au electrodes gives a Seebeck coefficient of 11.1 mV K−1.	 

 	Fig. 2  Capacitance properties of NaOH–PEO with the CNT electrode. (a) Illustration of the electric double layer (EDL) formed in CNT electrodes. (b) Nyquist plot for devices with Au, thin CNT and thick CNT electrodes in the frequency range of 100 kHz to 1 mHz. The inset shows the simulated equivalent circuit: Rp: resistance connected parallel to the capacitance that is associated with the leakage current; Rs: resistance connected series which represents the internal resistance of the device; C: the capacitance. (c) CV curves of devices with the three different types of electrodes, measured at 10 mV s−1. (d) Potential static electric charging and discharging of a device with thick CNT electrodes (Rload = 50 kΩ). All measurements are conducted at room temperature.	 

Capacitance (μF cm−2)	5.1	484	1031

R
s (series resistance Ω)	1622	1545	1605

R
p (parallel resistance Ω)	2.95 × 105	4.88 × 105	5.04 × 105

 	Fig. 3  Charging and discharging of the ITESC. (a) Measured voltage curve (black) and mechanism sketch of a full charge and discharge cycle: (i) establishing the temperature gradient (ΔT = 16 K) leads to an ionic thermovoltage, (ii) thermoelectric charging of the supercapacitor (the superimposed curve in blue corresponds to the electric charging of the same device upon applying an electric potential equals to the thermo-voltage value), (iii) equilibration to ΔT = 0, and (iv) discharging (both with Rload = 100 kΩ). (b) Charging and discharging using a periodic heating source. (c) The amount of charge transferred to or from the capacitor during charging (black squares) and discharging (red circles) at different ΔT values (Rload = 100 kΩ). The teq value between charging and discharging was 400–1200 s. The inset shows the equivalent circuit of charging and discharging processes of the ITESC.	 
	(1)
	(2)


Q
charging (C)	2.42 × 10−5 (±5.31 × 10−7)	2.42 × 10−5 (±5.31 × 10−07)	2.50 × 10−5 (±1.06 × 10−6)

Q
discharging (C)	2.28 × 10−5 (±6.43 × 10−7)	6.85 × 10−6 (±2.24 × 10−7)	6.85 × 10−6 (±9.25 × 10−7)

Q
discharging/Qcharging	94.2%	28.3%	27.4%

 	Fig. 4  Energy stored in the ITESC. (a) The amount of charge stored and electrical energy stored in the capacitor during charging for different Rload values (ΔT = 4.5 K), and the two dashed lines represent the calculated value of the charge (black) and energy (red), respectively. (b) Energy density versus ΔT for the ITESC (red open circles), electric charging (blue open squares) and the theoretical prediction from Vthermo (dashed red line), Velectric (dashed blue line), and Veffective (dashed and dotted black lines). (c) Energy density versus ΔT for the ITESC, both experimental data (red open dot) and theoretical results (red dashed line), and theoretical prediction for the same SC charged by one leg of Bi2Te3 TEG (black dashed-dotted line).	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ee00121a
‡ These two authors contributed the same.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
