General discussion  - Faraday Discussions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1FD90056K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1FD90056K
(Discussion)
Faraday Discuss., 2012, 155, 297-308General discussionFirst published on 12th December 2011

Professor Uner opened the discussion of the paper by Michael Graetzel: In the descriptive current versus voltage diagram you showed during the lecture you stated that we need catalysis to move towards the left horizontally, while we need nanotechnology to move vertically. Can you elaborate on that please?

Professor Graetzel responded: Indeed, we need nanotechnology to improve the photo-current generated with our Fe2O3 films. In particular the feature size of the iron oxide should be in the 5–10 nm range to make it commensurate with the hole diffusion length. In such as case, a large fraction of the valence band will escape recombination and reach the surface, where it can react with water to produce oxygen. Our present films are made by applying chemical vapor deposition methods to produce a cauliflower-type morphology. Visible light photons can penetrate deeply in the structure before being absorbed. However, the majority of the charge carriers generated in this fashion will recombine before they reach the oxide solution interface. As a result, they can not contribute to the generation of photo-current. Hence the need to develop films that have a smaller feature size to increase the photo-current. The photo-current onset is moved left horizontally by any agent that blocks recombination of charge carriers or accelerates the valence band hole reaction with water resulting in oxygen formation. At this stage an inverse bias voltage of 0.5–0.8 V is necessary on bare hematite films to drive the water oxidation photo-current up near the plateau value of 3–4 mA cm−2. This is reduced by several hundred mV using a water oxidation catalyst or a passivating layer of gallium oxide, as shown in the paper we submitted to this Discussion.

Professor Dr Sacilotti asked a number of questions: Do you know the relative band-gap position of the α-Ga2O3/Fe2O3? Do you know of a mechanism to increase the catalytic efficiency of the α-Ga2O3/Fe2O3 system? When you excite the α-Ga2O3/Fe2O3 system, do you observe a low energy peak emission (and at what wavelength)?

Professor Graetzel answered: The specific question raised by Professor Sacilotti concerned the position of the band gap relative position at the Ga2O3/Fe2O3 junction. The levels of the valence and conduction band edge position of Ga2O3 are at ca. 7.5 and 3 eV below vacuum, respectively, while those of Fe2O3 are at 6.8 and 4.7 eV. Hence there is a 1.7 eV offset in the conduction band positions of the two oxides, while the hole barrier is only 0.7 eV.

Professor Peter asked: Slow hole transfer in the oxygen evolution reaction at Fe2O3 means that a very high concentration of holes builds up at the surface under illumination. What is remarkable is that the recombination rate is also very low, so that hole transfer is able to compete. This might seem surprising since recombination is a one-electron process and is normally much faster at semiconductor/electrolyte interfaces. In the Fe2O3 system, the electron capture cross sections of surface states must be orders of magnitude smaller than is normally the case.

Professor Graetzel responded: The recombination of electrons with trapped holes must indeed be orders of magnitude slower than with the free valence band holes. A reduction of the electron–hole recombination rate upon surface trapping of the holes by several orders of magnitude is not uncommon. For example, in colloidal anatase particles a similar effect has been previously observed [e.g. Rothenberger et al., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1985, 107(26), 8054–8059. The strapped surface hole state in hematite films is likely to be a Fe(IV) species, which is coordinated by oxygen ions from the hematite lattice and by water or hydroxide on the solution side. The reduction of Fe(VI) to Fe(III) by conduction band electrons is requires therefore a large reoganization energy which would reduce the rate of electron capture. Another factor which contributes to the slow rate is the fact that the mesoscopic hematite films employed in our studies are strongly n-doped which produces a space charge layer even though the feature size of these films is only 10–50 nm. The electric field generated by the space charge pulls the electrons away from the surface of the hematite resulting in a further retardation of the electron–hole recombination rate.

Professor Styring opened the discussion of the paper by Leif Hammarström: Your 2-electron transfer in a molecular system is very elegant. Can you elude on the positive factors of using molecular systems. Why is this good in artificial photosynthesis, considering the difficulties in managing such systems?

Professor Hammarström replied: Particularly for the catalyst, molecular systems offer much greater tunability of structure and electronic properties than for solid materials. We can design a 2nd coordination sphere for substrate binding and proton management, etc. It is also more feasible to investigate the mechanisms in molecular systems. It is a challenge to take advantage of these greater possibilities, but the potential is high.

Professor Perutz commented: Would you mind going over the relationship of these elegant double-pulse experiments to the accumulation of charge in photosynthetic reactions involving transfer of more than one electron?

Professor Hammarström responded: The molecular system we have studied undergoes two rounds of photoinduced charge separation by absorption of two sequential photon absorptions by the same regenerative photosensitizer. This is without sacrificial agents, so the result is an energy-storing, doubly charge separated state in a ca. 100% yield, similar in principle to the accumulative charge separation in photosystem II. Subsequent recombination is slow, so a significant fraction survives longer than 100 μs, which is similar to the turnover time of e.g. the fastest hydrogenase enzymes. This is a proof-of-principle experiment, but shows that we can get double charge separation in a molecular system by accumulative electron transfer, which survives on a time scale relevant for catalysis. It would obviously be interesting to replace the present accumulative unit with a catalyst to show photoinduced turnover without sacrificial agents.

Professor Graetzel commented: Electron storage plays an key role in solar fuel generation which always involves multielectron redox reactions. Storing electrons in a semiconductor nanoparticle such as TiO2 or ZnO is one method to accomplish this.

Professor Gust said: In the very nice system you have described for accumulating charge, it seems to me that one of the major reasons for success is that the photoinduced electron transfer processes involve electron injection into a titanium dioxide nanoparticle. Not only does this particle accumulate electrons, but electron injection into the particle is extremely rapid, so that the competing reactions available to the second excited state generated do not interfere with the process.

Professor Hammarström responded: It is indeed one of the design principles that injection into TiO2 is normally ultra-fast. With a purely molecular acceptor we may have to exert even greater care to out-compete the competing quenching reactions. Interestingly, even with TiO2, it seems that in one of the reference complexes (no. 2) injection did not occur upon the second excitation. We propose that this is because of the closer proximity of the donor “hole” to the sensitizer, so that reverse electron transfer, or energy transfer, out-competed injection.

Dr Benniston remarked: Photoinduced multiple electron storage in molecular systems was tried back in the 1980s. How successful was the approach and can we solve the problems?

Professor Harriman answered: Many attempts were made to bring about multiple-electron storage without resorting to sacrificial redox agents but no real success was achieved. The main problem is that the excited state reacts rapidly with the “stored” electron rather than supplying a second electron. Relatively simple molecular systems were used and it might be worthwhile returning to the problem with more sophisticated molecules. Colloidal metal dispersions do the job very well in the presence of sacrificial agents but not in their absence. This is one reason why people fool themselves when using sacrificial reagents. Other catalysts, such as hydrogenases or polyoxometallates might be better suited for charge accumulation but a lot of work is needed in this area. It is the biggest factor preventing the establishment of molecular artificial photosynthetic models.

Professor Burrows spoke: Another class of systems which are potentially good candidates for storing multiple charges are conjugated oligomers or polymers. For example, Janssen and coworkers have shown by chemical oxidation that it is possible to have two separate positive charges on a dodecathiophene chain.1 We have also shown by pulse radiolysis that multiple positive charges can be stored on chains of fluorene based conjugated polymers.2
1. J. A. E. H. van Haare, E. E. Havinga, J. L. J. van Dongen, R. A. J. Janssen, J. Cornhill and J.-L. Brédas, Chem.–Eur. J., 1998, 4, 1509.
2. S. Fratiloiu, S. M. Fonseca, F. C. Grozema, H. D. Burrows, M. L. Costa, A. Charas, J. Morgado and L. D. A. Siebbeles, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 5812.

Professor Hammarström replied: It is indeed useful to consider different classes of molecules capable of storing multiple redox equivalents. However, the equivalents also need to be utilized in a concerted manner if fuel should be produced. Spreading them out over weakly coupled monomers in a dendrimer, polymer etc., or over a large conjugated polymer, will not lead in the right direction. The conjugated oligomers you propose may be useful, if coupled to a catalyst.

Professor Graetzel noted: Japanese colleagues use the iodide–iodate redox system to couple two photosystems based on semiconductor particles: the first generating hydrogen; and the second oxygen from water.

Professor Ghiggino opened the discussion of the paper by Dirk Guldi: You have used polystyrene sulfonate as a layer on your carbon nanotube systems. To improve coverage of the nanotube surface and optimise electronic coupling of attached donors, have you considered using other polyelectrolytes as surface layers? Is this factor the major limitation to improving the present systems?

Professor Guldi answered: Yes, of course. But the fact that the even the coating with the initial PPDA shell resulted already in rather weak electronic communication led us to stop at this point.

Professor Cogdell added: Any scalable system designed to harvest solar energy will take large areas of land. It is important to consider this now and to try to get public opinion on our side in time. Otherwise we might produce a suitable solution but it will be wasted if that solution is not publically acceptable. We should remember the problems we got into over GM-foods and not make the same mistake with solar energy.

Professor Guldi continued: I like to draw your attention to the chemical conversion/storage of dihydrogen with carbazole – a project that is currently investigated by the German car manufacturer BMW.

Professor Graetzel added: The late chair of the Swatch Corporation, Nicolas Hayek, launched a project in Switzerland to equip private homes with solar water electrolysis units generating hydrogen which is converted to fuels by a Fischer–Tropsch type reaction.

Professor Uner addressed the meeting: Hydroelectric dams are also solar. Solar energy evaporates water, which precipitates to rivers, we make dams and they produce electricity. In Turkey, there are a large number of dams being constructed, but three major dams constructed over the River Euphrates probably have covered a land area larger than (perhaps) Switzerland. The social and ecological perspectives of hydroelectric dams are little-researched but exist, especially in countries like Turkey, India, China and South America. These can be studied and the lessons can be extrapolated to the issues of solar collectors. I believe that the importance of solar energy is not in large-scale but in the small-scale empowerment!

Professor Styring asked: Richard Cogdell worries about that many will object to the use of land for installations for solar fuels. Of course this is only a rhetorical question and I question that this is a relevant issue for us. We should do what we do best: research and deliver systems able to make solar fuels in high quantities. There are many other aspects that will solve themselves in the time-frame we work in or that have to handled by politicians and policy-makers on the way. It is imperative that we stay focused and not get blinded or sidetracked by side-path questions or political-day slender questions which are long gone when our solar fuels are needed.

Professor Cogdell answered: Stenbjorn is right that these considerations should not stop our work. However, we must not pretend that this is not an issue that must be addressed. What use are solutions if public opinion then prevents their implementation?

Professor Harriman continued: We have not yet reached the point where we have to worry too much about public opinion of our products, simply because we are short of product. Photovoltaic research has produced a visible output, easily recognised by the public, that seems to have been accepted thus far. There are concerns, of course, about building solar farms on arable land, but energy is running out and opinions will change as the cost of oil increases. We have still not produced a device based on bio-inspired artificial photosynthesis and, until we do so, we cannot fully engage the public. The term “artificial” was perfectly acceptable back in the 1970s but is questionable now. Personally, I don't like the phrase “solar fuel”, and “artificial leaf” has been around for almost 50 years – I heard the term first from Melvin Calvin. I accept that public opinion is very important – as with genetically modified food – but I would like to see more progress on a research basis before wasting time and money on finding a suitable brand name.

Professor Inoue replied: I have very similar opinion to Professor Harriman. The term is very crucial especially for general public. In the sense, the phrase “fuel” and “artificial” in the “Solar fuel” or “Artificial leaf.” may not sound well for general public.

Professor Dr Faunce addressed Leif Hammarström: How would you respond to arguments from the PV industry and its researchers that photovoltaics are much further developed and worthy of funding support as other forms of renewable energy supply – in particular that they are close to achieving parity between installation cost and the cost of grid electricity, or that pumped hydroelectricity may provide low cost continuous energy from PV.

Professor Hammarström responded: Today only 17% of our global energy consumption is carried via electricity; the dominating energy carriers are fuels. Electricity will probably carry a larger fraction of our energy in the future; here solar electricity from PVs and concentrators are promising technologies. However, it is very difficult to store electricity on a large scale in e.g. batteries. Fuels on the other hand have orders of magnitude larger energy densities. Pumped water has an even lower energy density than batteries. If we want to store as little as a few percent of our current power consumption in water dams it would be equivalent to running all our world's hydroelectric plants backwards at the same flux as they now run forward, i.e. we would have to turn our big rivers. The large scale of our energy storage need is the problem.

Professor Uner spoke: The energy issues should also be analyzed from the point of view of our insatiable appetite. We are using 1000-kg metal blocks we call cars to move around 50–100 kg objects, i.e. ourselves. The excess work needed to move these weights is wasted, as well as the thermodynamic necessity for the wasted energy of the ca. 20% efficient engines. Thus, our fuel efficiency of personal vehicles is not that good, but also our understanding of architecture and use of daylight is not that good either. While developing the next generation of technologies and devices, as responsible scientists we should also develop/use more efficient modes of transportation and architecture.

Professor Gust replied: There is no doubt that energy conservation in all forms is very important. Even if we had a practical prototype for a solar energy based fuel production system sitting in a laboratory right now, it would take many years until the system was developed and implemented to the extent that it contributed significantly to global energy use by humans. Although conservation by itself is not sustainable, reducing energy usage as much as possible would help give us the time necessary to invent and implement solar energy conversion systems on a large scale.

Professor Mallouk added a follow up to Tom Faunce's comment on the issue of grid parity and photovoltaics. The projection of grid parity by 2020 is based on CdTe and CIGS thin film devices, the implementation of which is limited to about 1 TW because of the use of rare elements. By the mid-century we will need tens of terawatts of primary power beyond current capacity, and as Stenbjorn Styring will point out in his closing remarks, much of this will need to be in the form of fuel. Gary Rumbles showed the development curves for thin film photovoltaics, as well as those for emerging photovoltaic technologies (dye cells, organic photovoltaics, quantum dot solar cells) that in principle are not limited by the supply of rare elements. It suggests that if we wish to think beyond CdTe and CIGS, these are the kinds of things we should be researching, along with solar fuels and plasmonics/photonics/concentrator optics for thin film silicon solar cells. There is also a huge technological issue of grid power storage as the photovoltaic industry marches towards grid parity.

Dr Reisner addressed Michael Graetzel: Could you please give your opinion on solarthermal versus photovoltaic energy and their prospects for the future?

Professor Graetzel replied: One well known and wide-spread current application of solar thermal conversion is in conventional solar collectors to heat water for residential use. The total amount of energy provided currently by all these collectors is several times higher than that of PV which covers only about 0.04 percent of the current energy consumption of the world. However from a thermodynamic point of view, low temperature heat is of less value than electricity. The other application uses concentrated solar power (CSP) to first heat a fluid by a parabolic mirror to several hundred degrees. The heat is stored in the fluid and is subsequently employed to generate electricity by a normal turbine. The DESERTEC Foundation is developing plans to build a string of large CSP plants across North Africa and in the Middle East linked by a grid which would provide power for the region, and – with links running round the Mediterranean – for much of Europe. In about 40 years from now the amount of electric power generated by PV and CSP is projected to be as much a one third of today’s world energy consumption.

Professor Guldi noted: As a general aspect photon management has not been addressed at all.

Professor Styring commented: Talking with politicians and energy funding bodies is talking to a moving target. It changes all the time and what type of question that is relevant changes over time. Solar fuels, for example, has been discussed via great efforts at many meetings in the EU and other places where solar fuels/artificial photosynthesis/photobiological hydrogen production have been used over and over again. There is not much resistance from the political bodies, but clearly from other scientists and stakeholders in renewable energy.
Our task, as scientists in this field, is to talk about solar fuels. In general, our field and its importance is not known; it is too new for this and is easily mixed up with solar cells, which does not help us. In the general arena and for general assemblies of people I argue for a broad inclusive attitude in describing the field and those of us who have the option should talk for the field as a whole, not single out a winner immediately. That we can do when we argue for our science in scientific bodies or in our groups/families etc.

Professor Gust added: Using sunlight to produce electricity cheaply is certainly an important goal, but electricity alone will not solve humanity's energy problems. We also need storage of energy in a fuel. We need energy continually, and of course sunlight falls on any given part of the earth only part of the time. We also need fuels for transportation. Solar energy is so diffuse that powering land vehicles or airplanes using sunlight directly is not practical. Too much surface area is required. Hydrocarbon fuels are among the most dense forms of energy storage known, and this helps explain the great interest in producing carbon-based fuels using carbon dioxide.

Dr Szalai addressed Professor Graetzel and Professor Peter: In natural photosynthesis, much emphasis and effort has been directed at understanding the mechanism of water oxidation in every S-state. On the other hand, it seems that mechanistic information for each step in water oxidation often is not presented for metal oxide materials. Is there a reason for the dearth of mechanistic information on metal oxide water oxidation catalysts?

Professor Peter responded: This is a very good point. In the electrochemical literature there are suggested mechanisms for oxygen evolution on metal electrodes covered by oxide layers. These are mostly derived from an analysis of current voltage plots (Tafel plots). In the case of transition metal oxides, higher valent species are usually proposed. We are addressing this problem in the case of iron oxide photoanaodes by using in situ spectroscopic methods. In addition it would be useful to have more computational modelling of the oxide electrolyte interface with the ultimate objective of defining intermediates and transition states in multi-electron transfer processes.

Professor Graetzel replied: It is true that the light induced oxidation of water by valence band holes on metal oxides is often treated rather summarily. However quite a lot is known about the details of the sequential 4 electron transfer steps leading to the evolution of oxygen. In oxides such as TiO2 the first step is electron abstraction from a surface-bound hydroxide group by a valence band hole leading to hydroxyl radical formation. The latter radicals dimerize to produce a surface bound peroxide which undergoes two further oxidations before oxygen is released. The accumulation of 4 holes in one TiO2 nanoparticle before occurrence of oxygen release during water oxidation has been beautifully unravelled in the laser photolysis studies carried out by the group of Professor James Durrant at Imperial College. [J. Tang, J. R. Durrant and D. R. Klug, Mechanism of photocatalytic water splitting in TiO2. Reaction of water with photoholes, importance of charge carrier dynamics, and evidence for four-hole chemistry, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 13885–13891].

Professor Durrant added: I think there are several reasons for this. A key strategy to study the S-states of PS II has been the use of multiple pulse sequences to generate well defined oxidation states. This has been made possible as a single saturating optical pulse only advances the S-state by one oxidation state. However for metal oxide systems, the lack of discrete photosystems typically results in multiple oxidations of a single catalytic site by a single laser pulse, making it much more difficult to observe specific oxidation states. Another challenge has been that metal oxides currently showing promising water photoxidation performance typically generate highly oxidising holes capable of driving water oxidation by several different reaction pathways.

Professor Mallouk opened the discussion of the paper by Licheng Sun: It is really remarkable that you get such fast turnover rates from a mononuclear water oxidation catalysts. There is, however, a problem with the turnover frequency of iridium oxide in the comparison table you showed. We measured the rate as ca. 79 per second per surface atom in 2004, using a driving force of 300 mV near pH 6. For covalently bound [Ru(bpy)3]3+ and IrO2, the rate is even faster. It is important also to correct for the overpotential when comparing catalysts. When you make measurements using Ce(IV) as an oxidant in a pH 1 sulfate solution, the driving force for oxygen evolution is about 530 mV.

Professor Sun responded: For the TOF of 0.0014 s−1 for IrO2 using Ce(IV) as oxidant at pH 1, please see these two references: (1) M. Yagi and M. Kaneko, Chem. Rev., 2000, 101, 21; (2) K. Nagoshi, S. Yamashita, M. Yagi and M. J. Kaneko, J. Mol. Catal. A, 1999, 144, 71. We would like to point out that pH conditions could dramatically affect the catalytic activities of WOCs. For example, Hill's Co4-POM catalyst does not work at pH 1 conditions [Science, 2010, 328, 342–345) and the same for Berlinguette's Co-Py5 complex [Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4249–4251], although both catalysts catalyze water oxidation at neutral conditions.

Professor Mallouk commented: It's useful to compare catalysts at the same overpotential, or to correct for the overpotential in comparing turnover rates. Heinz Frei has made such a comparison for cobalt and manganese oxide catalysts in a recent review [Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1018–1027].

Professor Sun replied: We do agree with this point. That was also the reason why we compared the TOFs of different molecular catalysts all under Ce(IV) pH 1 conditions.

Professor Hammarström asked: There are few Ru-complexes where the mechanism for water oxidation is established, but there are several strong proposals. For the mononuclear ones, can you generalize the observations and suggest an explanation why your seven-coordinate intermediate react via radical coupling while your six-coordinate complex (as all or most suggestions in the literature) react via nucleophilic attack?

Professor Sun replied: This is a very good question. In our work, we found that the nature of ligand decides the O–O bond formation pathway, in case of bipyridine as backbone tetradentate ligand the O–O bond formation goes via bimolecular radical coupling reaction; when we change the backbone ligand to phenanthroline, the O–O bond formation goes via mononuclear water nucleophilic attack. In both cases, seven coordinate species are involved. In case of tridentate ligands with six co-ordination, all Ru catalysts go via mononuclear water nucleophilic attack.

Dr Fielden asked: (a) What conditions did you use to get the very high turnover numbers for your catalyst? I am curious because the Hill group catalysts you compare to are typically more limited by the stability of the [Ru(bpy)3]2+ photosensitizers at pH 7 than the stability of the catalysts themselves. (b) This is more of an observation, but I am not sure it is very sensible to compare IrO2 to molecular catalysts when the TOF etc. is likely to vary with particle size. (c) In response to you answer to my question (a): are your catalysts active at higher pH, e.g. 6 or 7?

Professor Sun responded: (a) In this paper, the turnover numbers are based on Ce(IV)-driven water oxidation. Our Ru-pdc complexes could promote the oxidation of water at higher pH conditions (see L. Duan, Y. Xu, M. Gorlov, L. Tong, S. Andersson and L. Sun, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 4659–4668). (b) We do agree that the TOF of IrO2 is sensitive to the particle size. In addition, it also depends on the pH conditions very much.

Dr Fujita asked: Your Ru complexes are very impressive, showing very fast TOF (initial) such as 2.9 s−1 with Ce(IV) oxidation. I assume that water needs to coordinate to the Ru center. Do you know at which oxidation state of the Ru center water coordinates? Does the Ru center lose a pyridine or substituted pyridine molecule when water coordinates?

Professor Sun replied: By a combination of electrochemistry (changing the Ru oxidation states) and 1H-NMR (monitoring the free picoline ligand released from the catalysts), we found that at the Ru(III) state one picoline ligand (from the equatorial position to the tridentate backbone ligand) is exchanged by a water molecule, forming the real water oxidation catalyst.

Dr Fujita asked: Can you isolate water-coordinated complexes by aquation or oxidation followed by aquation? It would be very interesting to determine the Pourbaix diagrams of these species. Some of the complexes investigated by Professor Thummel (and your complexes if all substituted pyridine molecules are coordinated during water oxidation) are very crowded. Would you comment on the possible involvement of seven-coordinated intermediate species?

Professor Sun responded: We have not been able to isolate any pure Ru-aqua complex related to the precatalyst, although we have tried. Now we are working on the derivatives of the Ru-pdc catalysts (H2pdc = 2,6-pyridine dicarboxylic acid). One Ru-Cl complex has been isolated and its aqua complex is under preparation. For Thummel’s Ru-catalysts, such as trans-[Ru(pbn)(Me-py)2(OH2)]2+ (pbn = 2,2′-(4-(tert-butyl)pyridine-2,6-diyl)bis(1,8-naphthyridine)), they are crowded, mainly due to the naphthyridine rings. It is difficult to say if the seven-coordinate Ru intermediate is involved or not. If yes, the energy barrier could be very high. For the equatorial position of our Ru-pdc complexes, there is no other block except the two oxygen atoms, which is different from Thummel’s catalysts.

Professor Campagna enquired: Your paper deals with electrochemically-driven water oxidation catalysis. Your catalysts are Ru(II) complexes containing pyridines as ligands. Ru(II) complexes with pyridine ligands suffer by photodecomposition, as the Ru-pyridine bond can be photolysed. This could cause problems in connecting your systems with light. Are your catalysts photostable?

Professor Sun responded: I do agree with you that the catalysts with this type of ligands have a not-so-high photostability, although they show better performance than other similar Ru catalysts reported in the literature. We found that even the Ru(bpy)3 has low photostability. Hopefully, the photostability of both the catalysts and the photosensitizer will increase when we move the photochemical reactions from homogeneous solutions (where the sacrificial electron acceptor is used) to molecular devices.

Dr Farras asked: For photochemical water oxidation in homogeneous systems, the use of persulfate as a sacrificial electron acceptor should be avoided as itself with Ru(bpy)3 produces a considerable amount of oxygen. Moreover, using this system you could not measure the activity of the catalyst using light, because sulfate radicals can produce undesirable side reactions.

Professor Sun responded: Indeed the persulfate is not best sacrificial electron acceptor due to the involvement of sulfate radical, the reason why it has been widely used in photochemical water oxidation is simply that there is no better candidate. We are fully aware of the problem, and normally we make control experiments by comparing the amounts of oxygen evolved with catalysts and without catalysts.

Professor Harriman asked: There is some older literature, I think from the 1960s and 1970s, that mentions oxygen evolution via peroxycarbonates of certain metal ions. Could such species play a role in water oxidation as alternatives to transition metals? What about the role of calcium in photosynthetic oxygen evolution? Are we missing something here?

Professor Sun responded: From recent crystal structure (1.9 Å) of PSII it is found that there are two water molecules bound to the Ca ion, this might facilitate the water nucleophilic attack to the Mn(V) leading to O–O bond formation. However, in artificial water oxidation systems, the role of Ca may be replaced by smart design of the second coordination sphere of the catalyst ligand.

Professor Campagna opened the discussion of the paper by Dongho Kim: One of the system you presented is a “ring” of Zn-porphyrins. It looks like here is some room at the center of the ring for a guest. Do you believe it could be possible to insert a perpendicular guest within this space, for example by taking advantage of the Zn centers of the porphyrins, and possibly to anchor donor and acceptor groups at the periphery, to simulate the reaction center?

Professor Dr Kim replied: It would be possible if we utilize guest molecules with appropriate size. A couple of years ago, Kobuke and coworkers have tried to realize the idea you suggested. They employed self-assembled porphyrin wheels and fullerene-tripyridyl ligand as donor–acceptor system to simulate the reaction center. Please refer to the two following papers: Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 2827–2841 and Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 2317–2327.

Ms Bai asked: Could you please comment on the application of the fluorescence spectroscopy technique? Is it possible that your approach might be suitable to monitor conformational dynamics at the single molecule level resolution? If so, could it be used in intra-operative cellular imaging and immunoassays based on fluorescence?

Professor Dr Kim answered: In comparison with the direct probing of single molecules on surfaces by scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) or atomic force microscopy (AFM), fluorescence spectroscopy enables one to observe single molecules from a certain distance without perturbation as well as to monitor a variety of dynamic processes. Much of the fascination of fluorescence spectroscopy relies on the fact that it completely removes ensemble averaging by constructing a molecular distribution of physical quantities, from which we can obtain detailed information hidden in ensemble measurements, and also new effects in unexplored regimes.
The study of the glass transition in polymer physics, stochastic gene expression in biology and high resolution microscopy such as PALM are just a few of the many examples for which single-molecule fluorescence spectroscopy has been instrumental. Here I would like to recommend you a book entitled Single-Molecule Techniques: A Laboratory Manual (by Paul R. Selvin and Taekjip Ha). You can learn more about detailed techniques and experimental conditions for the implementation of single-molecule fluorescence spectroscopy on the field you are interested in.

Professor Hammarström asked: We discussed before whether electronic coherence is needed for efficient energy transfer in light-harvesting antennas. Do you have information on the rate of energy transfer (presumably incoherent) from end-to-end in your large multi-porphyrin arrays? Would it indicate that also incoherent energy transfer in antennas of about 100 chromophores is sufficiently efficient for practical artificial photosynthesis?

Professor Dr Kim responded: In the case of a directly meso–meso linked porphyrin dimer, the rate of energy transfer between the neighboring porphyrins was revealed to be ~100 fs−1. Thus, it may take a few picoseconds for the excitation energy to be conveyed from one end to another in large arrays.
Previously, we prepared long porphyrin arrays, up to 128-mer, and characterized their excitation energy transport phenomena by using time-resolved fluorescence and absorption spectroscopy. The conformational heterogeneities in longer porphyrin arrays influence significantly the nature of the observed excited state dynamics such as unusual couplings between solvent related relaxation process and conformational relaxation process. The overall efficiencies of the EET processes are diminished significantly, especially when the energy donor array becomes longer to increase their absorptivity by increasing the number of porphyrin pigments in the porphyrin array. To minimize the conformational heterogeneity and improve the EET efficiency in longer molecular arrays, the construction of an LH1 type assembly, that is, circular array donor and central acceptor complex, could be a better way. If the light-harvesting antenna is composed of the linear array, the pigments being farther than the coherence length should experience difficulties in the EET process to the reaction center, resulting in low energy transfer efficiency.

Miss He asked: Does the single molecular measurement mean the energy transfer is intramolecular? Whether the packing of the molecules Z2B (besides the packing of polymers and solvent around molecules) in the solid state will affect the lifetime? Is there any possibility of intermolecular energy transfer?

Professor Dr Kim responded: Since the sample films for the single-molecule measurements are prepared by spin coating very dilute solution (10−9 M) onto cover slips at about 2000 rpm, I believe that the results I presented represent intramolecular processes. As you inquired, we also carried out fluorescence lifetime measurements on the concentrated films of Z2B but we did not observe a noticeable change in the lifetime compared with that measured in condensed phase.

Professor Ghiggino asked: You have observed reversible intensity jumps in single molecule fluorescence intensity/time trajectories of molecule Z2B embedded in a PMMA matrix which you have attributed to electron ejection leading to radical cation formation. What is the mechanism you suggest for the charge separation process and do you propose this occurs by multiphoton absorption or through the triplet state of the molecules? Excitation intensity dependence of the blinking might prove informative in this regard – have such studies been performed?

Professor Dr Kim answered: The excitation intensity that we employed (200 W cm−2 at the sample) was low enough not to induce multiphoton process by single laser pulse. In addition, as you commented, we performed the experiments with higher excitation intensity (800 W cm−2), but no noticeable difference was found between the two different conditions. If we consider that Z2B behaves as a single quantum system, as evidenced by one-step photobleaching, the multiphoton process in this molecule is rather unlikely.
Another mechanism you proposed is the process through triplet states. If we take a look at the value of excess polarizability volumes of the triplet states [J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 97–104], which is a measure of the change in polarizability of the molecule upon photoexcitation, Z2B exhibits an order of magnitude lower value (30 ± 5 Å) than that of the singlet state (400 ± 5 Å). Thus, we think that the charge separation through the triplet state also seems to be unlikely. We, of course, are aware of that our interpretation basically assumes that a key factor determining the charge separation is the strength of Coulombic interactions between photogenerated electrons and holes within the molecule.
There might be a process involving the triplet states leading to the charge separation, but at this moment we think that thermal energy imparted by repetitive excitation in the single-molecule experiment promotes the dissociation of the singlet exciton (weakly-bound electron and hole) in single Z2B molecule, which leads to fluorescence intermittency as a result of the charge separation.

Dr Reisner opened the discussion of the paper by Yutaka Amao: Could you please provide more details about FDH? What do you know about its active site composition, O2-tolerance and activity? How does the enzyme attach to the Au surface? Does it remain active on Au or does it denature quickly? How does the activity of your system compare the analogous homogeneous system?

Professor Amao answered: In our system, formate dehydrogenase obtained from Candida boidinii is used. The amino acid sequences are determined and the active site is also clarified. The active site composition of FDH is mainly a molybdenum cluster structure. As the formic acid synthesis with FDH proceeds in the presence of oxygen, so oxygen tolerance of this FDH is strong. In our system, FDH is immobilised to the substrate by the interaction between the SH group of FDH and Au. There is almost no difference in activity between FDH on this substrate and a homogeneous system. The activity of this system is equivalent to a homogeneous system consisting of an electron donor, a water-soluble zinc porphyrin, methylviologen and FDH.

Professor Harriman asked: How close are you to full optimisation of your system? Do you expect to make a big improvement in the near future or are you already close to the limit?

Professor Amao replied: This system has not been optimized yet. It is the first stage that is developed the artificial leaf device consisting of a photosensitizer, an electron carrier and FDH for solar fuel production based on the carbon dioxide reduction. The photosensitiser, electron carrier molecule for the suitable artificial substrate of FDH and substrate material, will be optimised in detail in the near future. Moreover, the ultimate goal of our system is developing an artificial leaf device for carbon dioxide-to-methanol conversion. Currently we are trying to develop formate, aldehyde and alcohol dehydrogenases immobilised on the device.

Professor Harriman said: What is the typical size of your artificial leaf? Could this be scaled up? What stops you from making a large area plate, for example? How easy would it be to generate large sheets coated in your material?

Professor Amao responded: The typical size of our artificial leaf is about 4.0 cm2. In order to scale up this system, it is more suitable to assemble orders of the devices at the present size rather than preparing a large device-coated sheet.

Dr Benniston said: Formic acid or formate is a good way to store hydrogen but releases carbon dioxide upon decomposition. Would it be viable to find a bi-catalyst that both traps the carbon dioxide on release (e.g., cyclic carbonate formation) and decomposes the formate at room temperature?

Professor Amao responded: In the present system, we show a device for carbon dioxide-to-formic acid conversion with visible light irradiation. As you point out, this releases carbon dioxide upon decomposition. It is possible to find a bi-catalyst that both traps the carbon dioxide on release and decomposes the formate. However, the ultimate goal of our system is developing an artificial leaf device for carbon dioxide-to-methanol conversion instead of storage of hydrogen.

Professor Dr Fukuzumi added: The decomposition of formic acid without catalyst results in formation of CO and water. With appropriate catalysts, formic acid decomposes to hydrogen and carbon dioxide. We have been developing catalysts for reduction of carbon dioxide by hydrogen to produce formic acid as well as for the selective decomposition of formic acid to hydrogen and carbon dioxide. This is a carbon neutral system, which should be developed further for cutting carbon dioxide emission.

Dr Fujita answered: We are also investigating such catalysts that not only can produce formic acid from CO2 and H2 at ambient temperature and pressure, but also can decompose formic acid selectively to produce H2 at high pressure. If we can find such a catalyst that has high TOF and TON for both directions, I believe the process will be very valuable. We also need to produce the H2 for such a process by splitting water using sunlight.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
