Atomic spectrometry update. X-Ray fluorescence spectrometry  - Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B511542F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B511542F
(Atomic Spectrometry Update)
J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20, 1124-1154Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsAtomic spectrometry update. X-Ray fluorescence spectrometry

        
          
            Philip J. 
            Potts
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Andrew T. 
            Ellis
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Peter 
            Kregsamer
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Christina 
            Streli
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Christine 
            Vanhoof
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Margaret 
            West
          
        
      e and 

        
          
            Peter 
            Wobrauschek
          
        
      c
aFaculty of Science, The Open University, Walton Hall, Milton Keynes, UK MK7 6AA
bOxford Instruments Analytical Ltd., Halifax Road, High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire, UK HP12 3SE
cTU Wien, Atominstitut der Österreichischen Universitäten, Stadionallee 2, A-1020 Vienna, Austria
dVITO, Environmental Measurements, Boeretang 200, B-2400 Mol, Belgium
eWest X-ray Solutions, 405 Whirlowdale Road, Sheffield, UK S11 9NF
Received 
      12th August 2005
    First published on 14th September 2005Contents1 Introduction and reviews2 Instrumentation2.1 General instrumentation and excitation sources2.2 Detectors3 Spectrum analysis, matrix correction and calibration procedures3.1 Spectrum analysis3.2 Matrix correction and calibration procedures4 X-Ray optics and microfluorescence5 Synchrotron radiation6 TXRF6.1 Instrumentation and sample preparation6.2 Synchrotron radiation induced TXRF (SR-TXRF)6.3 Surface analysis6.4 Applications6.5 Related techniques7 Portable and mobile XRF8 On-line XRF9 Applications9.1 Sample preparation and preconcentration techniques9.2 Geological and industrial minerals9.3 Environmental9.4 Archaeological, cultural heritage and forensic9.5 Industrial9.6 Clinical and biological9.7 Thin films and coatings9.8 Chemical state, speciation and crystal characterisationReferencesAbstract
This annual review of X-ray fluorescence covers developments over the period 2004–2005 in instrumentation and detectors, matrix correction and spectrum analysis procedures, X-ray optics and microfluorescence, synchrotron XRF, TXRF, portable XRF and on-line applications, as assessed from the published literature. The review also covers a survey of applications, including sample preparation, geological, environmental, archaeological, forensic, biological, clinical, thin films, chemical state and speciation studies. As was remarked on in last year’s review, substantial numbers of papers continue to be offered in the areas of environmental, industrial and biological/clinical applications, indicating the continued importance of XRF in these fields. Furthermore, several papers have risen to the challenge presented by EU directives in the recycling of waste (not the least plastic and related materials), landfill issues with the literature in general reflecting the growing contribution that XRF can make to these studies. There has, furthermore, been a continued growth in the application of portable XRF techniques, including, remarkably, both portable synchrotron and portable TXRF instrumentation. Interest continues in the development of silicon wafer based devices, including the silicon drift detectors, CCDs and other nanostructural arrays. These developments demonstrate the current prominence and potential for further growth of XRF in the modern analytical sciences.

1 Introduction and reviews
A number of papers were published during the current review period that covered general aspects of XRF, including some that evaluated the comparative performance of XRF. One such study was that of Zerrouki et al.,1 who considered that X-ray reflection and X-ray fluorescence were complementary techniques for surface characterisation. In a French language contribution, Rahmani et al.2 undertook a comparative study of EDXRF, WDXRF and ICP-AES. Norman et al.3 were concerned with the question of bringing atomic and nuclear physics laboratory data into the classroom by developing three web sites that illustrated various aspects, including X-ray spectra, half-lives, XRF and NAA. Peter Bode4,5 of the Interfaculty Reactor Centre, Delft, questioned the future for nuclear analytical techniques (NAA, XRF, TXRF and PIXE) and proposed a problem-oriented approach to research in finding ways for participation in nano-technology, cancer research or genomics. Hubbell et al.6 published a review, bibliography and tabulation of K, L and higher atomic shell X-ray fluorescence yields, that is likely to become influential. The group at the IAEA Agency Laboratories, Seibersdorf, Vienna, reviewed7 the application of a wide range of XRF techniques (including TXRF and micro-XRF) in the determination of hazardous and essential trace elements in environmental and biological materials. Finally for this section, Yoshihara8 re-evaluated the pioneering work of Masataka Ogawa, and his son Eijiro Ogawa, commencing in the early years of the 20th century, with the discovery of what was then claimed to be a new element, ‘nipponium’. Examination of their X-ray spectrum derived from a sample of thorianite and preserved on a photographic plate indicated the absence of element 43 and the presence of element 73 (rhenium), resulting in a re-evaluation of the historical significance of this work.
2 Instrumentation
2.1 General instrumentation and excitation sources
The capabilities and limitations of a new concept in spectrometer design were discussed by Greaves and Manz,9 who are working towards XRF and XRD on-chip analysis. The use of X-rays in a micro-fluid chip was explored by exploiting the absorption properties of chip building materials for different radiation sources. That is the principle: perhaps readers may find applications for this fascinating concept. Sakurai and Mizusawa10 developed an XRF projection-type microscope which provided information on atomic scale structures as an alternative to the conventional XAFS configuration. The system was designed to satisfy demands from materials researchers for better resolution when investigating inhomogeneous structures. During the 2004 Denver X-ray Conference, Nicolosi et al.11 described a system for small spot EDXRF. Using the established digital pulse processing techniques and reflective optics in physical modelling programmes, the authors were able to convert elemental intensities into quantitative results. Net peak intensities were processed using “pure” fundamental parameters to obtain results from a series of known alloy and oxide samples that were generally better than 1% absolute. Lima et al.12 described a multi-channel analyser based on a fast analogue-to-digital converter plus digital circuitry programmed on a complex programmable logic device. This approach reduced the circuit dead time to 200 μs. Schwenke et al.13 incorporated a novel X-ray source into a WDXRF spectrometer, allowing X-rays to be generated by means of light pulses from a powerful femtosecond laser. The laser plasma source used a 10–20 μm silicon foil target situated parallel to and a few mm above the sample surface. This new concept in grazing emission XRF was designed for the analysis of trace amounts of aluminium on wafer surfaces. X-ray lasers have certainly evolved since first being demonstrated in 1985. Their development trends were discussed by Janulewicz et al.14 with an eye towards their suitability for possible applications. Developments in miniature X-ray tubes using the carbon nano-tube based cold cathode configuration were described by Reyes-Mena et al.15 Superior lifetime, a stable focus spot and the capability of pulsed operation were offered as new features for those eager to exploit this device as an alternative to thermionic or hot cathode tubes. Brownridge and Shafroth16 used high energy Bremsstrahlung and K X-rays to produce almost background-free spectra of high atomic number elements. Excitation was achieved by an electron accelerator, consisting of heated and cooled cylindrical LiTaO3 and LiNbO3 crystals at mTorr pressures. With a W/Bi target, the radiation was used to fluoresce Ta and Pb K X-ray spectra. Pavlinsky et al.17 concentrated on the needs of those analysts interested in low Z fluorescence with designs for tubes with either a 300 μm window and grounded anode or a 75 μm window with grounded cathode.
2.2 Detectors
The review year has seen a welcome recovery in the number of publications on ultra-high energy resolution cryogenic detectors. Huber and colleagues18 described a new superconducting tunnel junction (STJ) comprising two aluminium electrodes and a novel isolated lead (Pb) absorber, which improved absorption efficiency at 6 keV from <1% to around 50% and significantly reduced detector artefacts. A thin (1.3 μm) layer of silicon monoxide was used to protect the lead absorber from oxidation, and although this additional layer slightly degraded the energy resolution, it eliminated serious performance degradation previously observed with lead alone. Despite the degradation, energy resolutions of 9.7 eV at 1.7 keV and 20 eV at 5.9 keV were achieved. A detailed study was made by Huber et al.19 of this detector using monochromatised SR at the PTB beamline on BESSY-II in Berlin. The same beamline, which produces very pure monochromatised SR, was used by a team based at PTB to investigate spatial effects in Nb/Al/AlOx/Al/Nb STJ detectors,20 who concentrated their work on beam energies below 1500 eV and a collimated incident beam size of less than 18 μm. The results showed how energy resolution varied with sizes of the irradiated spot and the sensor pixel and also the effect of irradiating the leads and edges of the sensor. The development of an STJ with a titanium sub-layer was described by Kozin et al.,21 although the reported electronic noise was 50 eV, which resulted in a disappointing best energy resolution of only 78 eV.
Turning now to transition edge sensor (TES) microcalorimeters, which are the second type of cryogenic detector, Jach and co-workers22 presented improvements to the NIST microcalorimeter. The improvement work focused on peak position stability and their use of novel electrothermal feedback circuitry resulted in an impressive stability of <1 eV per hour. This stability is critically important due to the pitiful count rate of this spectrometer (500 counts in 2000 seconds from a pure copper foil) and the consequent longer (2000 to 10000 seconds) counting times required. The authors reported an energy resolution better than 12 eV at 1 keV for their improved configuration. A continuing driver for TES and particularly for TES arrays is the demand for a large area, high energy resolution X-ray detector for space science studies. Responding to this need, Porter and co-workers23 described an impressive 32-element TES array operating at 16 mK and delivering an energy resolution of 6 eV at 6 keV with an energy range of 0.1–12 keV. The design, fabrication details and characterisation of a 5 × 5 array of TES detectors were reported by Bruiju et al.,24 who obtained an energy resolution of 6–7 eV at 5.9 keV. The design details and fabrication of a novel, fully lithographically patterned magnetic microcalorimeter with an integrated readout SQUID were described by Zinc et al.25 The process was claimed by the authors to be readily applicable to the fabrication of sensor arrays although the energy resolution of the proof of concept prototype detectors was reported to be poor. A fabrication process for very large (1000 pixel) TES arrays was described by a NASA team26 and we await results from such impressive designs. Meanwhile, back on Earth, d’Acapito and Maurizio27 reviewed the application of cryogenic detectors in many types of SR spectroscopy experiment and Maurizio et al.28 reported their testing at an ESRF SR beamline of a TES detector in which they achieved an uninspiring (for cryogenic detectors) energy resolution of 70 eV in the energy range 6–9 keV.
The most active area for publications on detectors during the review period was that of silicon drift detectors (SDD). This type of detector has seen increasing and widespread use in the past few years and improvements in performance continue to be sought after for both EDXRF and ED microanalysis applications. The EXRS conferences of 2002 (Berlin) and 2004 (Alghero) provided excellent updates on the improvements in SDD, and in 2004 Kemmer29 and Soltau30,31 presented reviews of the development of SDD and the latest advances in SDD based upon designs using discrete and integrated FETs, respectively. The full paper by Lechner, Pahlke and Soltau32 on the improvements in performance of SDD with an integrated FET described how the chip layout was changed to reduce the size and capacitance of the anode and how it and its integrated FET could be moved to the periphery of the device active area to shield it from direct X-rays. The almost halving of the capacitance in this so-called “teardrop” or SD3 configuration improved the energy resolution of a 5 mm2 SDD to 128 eV at 5.9 keV and 1000 cps and the ability in the new geometry to shield the anode and integrated FET from direct incident X-rays resulted in a valuable improvement of P/B ratio from 2000 to 6000. The authors also proposed a large area device with very high geometric efficiency in which four 15 mm2 SDD were arranged in a cloverleaf arrangement with a central hole for an exciting beam. The spectrum peak shift with count rate observed with SDD using an integrated FET is well-known and was studied in detail by Hansen and Reckleben33 using an ASIC-based readout system connected directly to the readout elements of the SDD chip. The authors used monochromatised SR and a multielement sample to investigate peak shift when more than one photon energy struck the SDD and found that the peak shift was a zero offset and not a gain change. The zero shift was shown to be directly proportional to the slew rate, which was itself shown by means of careful real-time electronic measurements to have a linear relationship with count rate and peak centroid energy. As a result of this careful study, the authors were able to suggest methods to correct some of the peak shift. Eggert and colleagues34 described the sources of noise in SDDs and how the performance of SDDs degrades with increasing active area as a result of increased leakage and of charge cloud diffusion during its drift. The constraints for simple scaling of a single device were described in detail and geometric configurations for larger area multichannel SDDs were proposed, including a 12-channel SDD, although the inevitable complexity, cost and limitations of needing 12 readout channels did not go without comment. The authors closed by proposing a single channel monolithic SDD of 100 mm2, which was then reported at the 2004 Denver Conference35 by the same team. Their SDD was a hexagonal device with a discrete FET and the reported energy resolution was 183 eV at 5.9 keV, with a shaping time of 0.5 μs and an operating temperature of −30 °C. The new device is attractive for EDXRF in applications where a large solid angle is required and the higher energy resolution is acceptable. However, there may still be some problems to resolve with ballistic deficit in these large area devices in which the charge cloud has a relatively long distance to travel and diffuse over. The application of this 100 mm2 SDD with a discrete FET to nuclear medical imaging was described by Metzger et al.36 The energy resolution at 5.9 keV was reported to be 195 eV with a 4 μs shaping time at −24 °C, but this improved to 170 eV when the leakage current was reduced by operating the sensor at −50 °C and with a longer (8 μs) shaping time. The authors used a movable collimator to investigate signal rise times across this large device and found times to be in the range 100–750 ns. In order to use this device for high energy X-rays in medical imaging, the SDD was coupled to a caesium iodide scintillator, which resulted in an energy resolution of 7 percent at 122 keV and −10 °C. Using a similar approach, Marisaldi and co-workers37 coupled a CsI(Tl) scintillator crystal to an SDD with an integrated FET and made use of two parallel processing channels, each with a different shaping time to allow pulse shape discrimination to be applied for successful gamma ray spectroscopy over the impressively wide energy range of 1 keV to 1 MeV, irrespective of whether the charge in the SDD was generated directly or by indirect secondary detection from the scintillator. A high efficiency SDD was developed by Tull and colleagues,38 who reported the successful fabrication of devices 1 and 1.5 mm thick compared with the usual 0.3–0.5 mm thick SDDs. The SDD structure included multiple guard rings to prevent breakdown and leakage resulting from the higher bias voltages needed to fully deplete these thick devices. Energy resolution at 5.9 keV was reported to be 172 and 158 eV for peaking times of 4 and 12 μs, respectively, for detectors 1 mm thick and operated at −55 °C. Turning now to low energy X-ray measurements, Streli and colleagues39 compared a conventional LN-cooled 30 mm2 Si(Li) with a Peltier cooled 10 mm2 SDD, both equipped with thin polymer entrance windows, for TXRF spectrometry in the 0–5 keV range. Although the SDD had a smaller active area and used the same electron trap as the 30 mm2 Si(Li), the closer geometry of the SDD offset much of any expected count rate loss. Detection limits (1000 s) for F were 2 and 5 ng and for O were 4 and 36 ng for the Si(Li) and SDD, respectively. The SDD was unable to detect the peaks below O K and showed peak shape distortion and significant peak tailing and shelving, whereas the Si(Li) had no problem, which indicated limitations in the SDD sensor itself or its front end electronics. Based on their results, the authors suggested use of the SDD for low energy TXRF spectrometry although for elements of lower Z than Na the SDD performance was poor compared with a conventional Si(Li). Finally, Goulon et al.40 reviewed X-ray detector advances at ESRF, Grenoble, over the past 15 years with special emphasis on the use of a SDD array, most recently used successfully for XAFS measurements. Energy resolution was claimed to have been improved to an impressive 126 eV at 6.4 keV by means of mathematical peak deconvolution.

Peltier cooled silicon PIN diode detectors are widely used where their advantages of size and convenience are more important than headline performance in terns of energy resolution and P/B ratio. The present performance and historical advances of commercially available silicon PIN detectors was described by Pantazis41 and Huber et al.42 A detailed comparison was made by Kump et al.43 of a silicon PIN detector and a conventional Si(Li) detector, both operated in the same annular source configuration using both 55Fe and 109Cd radioisotope source excitation. The energy resolution at 5.9 keV of the 7 mm2 active area, 0.3 mm-thick silicon PIN detector was 195 eV at 5.9 keV and that of the 30 mm2 active area 3-mm thick Si(Li) detector was 175 eV, which was significantly worse than the <140 eV available with state of the art 30 mm2 Si(Li) detectors. The silicon PIN detector was found by the authors to be depleted only to 0.2 mm, which further reduced the performance for the X-ray lines >10 keV. Analytical performance was compared using a pressed pellet of NIST SRM 2710 Montana Soil and shown to be similar for both detection systems. However, the claimed performance and comparable detection limits for the PIN diode spectrometer were only obtained when the measurement time was at least six times longer (typically 50000 s) than for the Si(Li) which was typically 7–10000 s. The significant challenge of producing a viable Peltier cooled Si(Li) detector was taken up by Sokolov and colleagues44 who used a five-stage Peltier cooler with a ΔT of 132 °C in conjunction with a conventional external recirculating water chiller to reduce leakage current below 1 pA for a 20 mm2 detector. The authors reported energy resolutions at 5.9 keV of 164, 188 and 240 eV for circular detectors of 20, 30 and 100 mm2 active area, respectively. Rectangular detectors with an active area of 15 × 4 mm2 were developed for use in XRD systems and a best energy resolution of 270 eV at 5.9 keV was reported. Although these energy resolutions are satisfactory for many applications and are encouraging for Peltier cooled Si(Li) detectors, conventional LN-cooled or those with alternate LN-free cooling systems are commercially available and offer energy resolution <140 eV for 30 mm2 detectors and higher P/B ratios than were cited in this paper. Finally, a room temperature solid-state silicon avalanche photodiode was reported at the 2004 Denver Conference by Omote et al.45 for use in very high rate X-ray reflectivity studies. Count rates >108 cps were achieved with a signal pulse duration of 2–5 ns and a dead time of only 3 ns, although energy resolution was only around 2 keV at 8 keV. This is a simple and impressive X-ray detector for applications such as XRD, XRF and where direct measurement of an X-ray beam is required.
Turning now to other detector materials, there were again few publications in the field of XRF spectrometry during the review period. A technologically impressive large area HPGe detector with eight separate 100 mm2 detectors and nucleonics chains was characterised46 for use on a beam line at the Lund nuclear microprobe facility but this was a very specialised use of HPGe detectors. An interesting study47 of silicon germanium crystal material confirmed the expected improvement in stopping power over conventional silicon material but there needs to be further optimisation of this material before it becomes suitable for detectors with attractive energy resolution and spectrum quality. Detectors fabricated from CdTe or CdZnTe are already used in X-ray and gamma spectrometers. One such device was used by Saito et al.48 for astronomical X-ray measurements on a balloon flight but the rather small detector of only 2 mm3 active volume had a limited energy resolution of 3 keV at 60 keV. The study of CdZnTe detectors for direct conversion X-ray medical imaging continues, as evidenced by a report49 on the interestingly-named Swank factor that reflects degradation in the P/B ratio due to conversion gain fluctuations in electron-hole pair formation.
The team at the University of Coimbra, Portugal, continued to develop gas proportional counter technology during the review period. In the first paper from the group50 a gas proportional scintillation counter (GPSC) was optimised for the energy range 0.1–3 keV. The detector was filled with xenon gas, which was constantly purified by a non-evaporable getter and the entrance window was a commercially available polymer type. The energy resolution obtained with this detector for C, O, F, Na and Mn K lines was 98, 130, 152, 207 and 495 eV, respectively, which the authors claimed was comparable to a HPGe detector at 1 keV and below. The performance was impressive for a detector of this active area (around 100 mm2), and although it was unable to resolve the Al and Si K lines there was clear and complete baseline separation of the C and O K lines. In a second paper51 from the group, a curved grid was used successfully to radially increase scintillation yield and compensate energy effects in the very large area (25 mm active diameter) GPSC. An interesting very large area GPC was described by Giles et al.52 for field measurement of 238Pu in soils. The GPC was 16.5 by 70.5 by 5.9 cm3, fitted with a 25 μm beryllium window and was filled with a 90 ∶ 10 xenon–argon gas mix. The effective detector area was an impressive 850 cm2 and a fully working measurement system was developed for mobile field survey work at 238Pu concentrations of 1.9 Bq g−1 of soil. A novel GPC detector for use in single photon WD X-ray spectrometry using high energy, high-speed pulsed X-ray sources was reported by Beaven and co-workers.53 The novel multi-chamber device worked on a principle similar to that of an SDD and was capable of loss-free detection of up to 300 low-energy (1.5 keV) photons per pulse or burst. An impressively instrumented multi-wire GPC system was described in detail by Prikhosko et al.54 for high speed position sensitive X-ray experiments.
Although there were a few publications during the review period on the topic of pixellated and CCD-based X-ray detectors, these tended not to be used specifically for XRF spectrometry but are of interest for their future potential in some applications. Fant and co-workers55 at RAL, UK, reported a large area pixellated silicon-based detector of 500 μm thick pixels each of 150 × 150 μm2. The overall detector had 448 × 64 pixels that were bump bonded to 7 readout ASICs and fed into a novel energy adjustment circuit with control that allowed the previously observed pixel signal output non-uniformity to be successfully corrected. The impressive large area, high-speed system was used for high-speed protein crystallography studies at high power SR sources. Other studies with CCDs included studies of: charge collection and absorption limited X-ray sensitivity;56 large area detectors used either directly or in conjunction with an image intensifier for time-resolved X-ray diffraction experiments;57 direct measurement with a high speed CCD for time resolved X-ray scattering and imaging;58 high spatial hard X-ray imaging with a CCD coupled to a scintillator59 and a CCD for direct measurements in exotic atom experiments.60
3 Spectrum analysis, matrix correction and calibration procedures
3.1 Spectrum analysis
The importance of fitting and modelling of spectra acquired from semiconductor detectors was again in evidence during the review period. Continuing the extensive work on this topic at Guelph, O’Meara and Campbell61 described their recent improvement to the conventional model for detector efficiency. The improvement took account of multiple interactions such as single or multiple Compton scatter followed by photoelectric absorption. The authors showed these effects contributed significantly to the full energy peak intensity, particularly at energies >20 keV, which are frequently of importance in XRF spectrometry. The effects on multiple interactions of crystal geometry and collimation were included in the improved model and the new correction factor was established by means of Monte Carlo simulation to be up to 8% of the full energy peak intensity. Full details of the model and calculations were provided and the method gave a useful estimate of the true Si(Li) crystal thickness and of the effectiveness of the internal detector collimator. In a publication studying the effect of spectrometer settings on the accuracy and precision of spectrum peak fitting, Greaves et al.62 established an optimum number of channels for the peak. Based upon data from a planar HPGe detector the authors showed that for a Gaussian peak fitting of an isolated peak, the minimum uncertainty for peak position and width was obtained when the peak FWHM was 2.5–3 channels. Papp et al.63 reported a new approach to the determination of the Fano factor, in which the shape of the escape peaks from an HPGe detector was used to advantage. The Fano factor was shown to have an energy dependence, which the authors predicted from transport theory, and the values established by the authors varied between 0.059 and 0.083 for the HPGe detector. The escape method was not suitable for a Si(Li) detector so a different approach was adopted and a value was established for the Fano factor of 0.063 at 5.9 keV.
The contribution of incomplete charge collection (ICC) to the spectrum background is an important part of any detector response model. At the 2004 Denver Conference, Eggert64 reported a model for SDDs that concentrated on the ICC for peaks <1 keV. The model was established for the specific p–n junction structure of the front contact/entrance window of the SDD and ignored effects due to irradiation of the central integrated FET and the outer ring structure, both of which could be shielded mechanically. The model was verified using experimental data produced from an SDD irradiated with highly monochromatic X-rays in the energy range 0.2–1.9 keV, produced at a BESSY-II SR beamline. Good agreement between the model and measured data was reported. The ICC, especially peak tailing, of a HPGe detector was studied by Shariff et al.65 and fitted using the GUPIX code whose response model is based upon the Hypermet function. Very strong tailing was observed and fitted at the lower energies (down to 1.3 keV) but this tailing reduced rapidly with increasing peak energy. The authors concluded that this behaviour was similar to that of a typical Si(Li) detector and they augmented the GUPIX parameter library to include the HPGe detector data. The obvious importance was recognised by Portnoi and co-workers66 of including the detector ICC background for radioisotope excited XRF spectrometry in the energy range 2–15 keV using an Americium-241 source and a Si(Li) detector. Experimental data were reported to agree well with the modelled spectrum data once the improved detector response model was applied.

Artefact peaks are often a cause of significant confusion and of error in qualitative and quantitative EDXRF spectrometry. The escape peaks are a particular challenge when using a HPGe detector and a detailed study of these was made by Yilmaz and Can.67 The authors studied characteristic Compton and photoelectron escape events for peaks in the energy range 8–52 keV, using a variable energy source providing X-rays in increasing K line energy from Cu, Rb, Mo, Ag, Ba and Tb. All three escape mechanisms were observed for Ba and Tb X-rays while only characteristic and photoelectron escape was observed for the other lines. The magnitude and complexity of the Ge K escape peaks and the impact on spectrum background over a wide energy range of the photoelectron escape was depicted visually and effectively in the spectra included in the paper. The escape probabilities for the most intense Ge Kα escape was measured to be 13.0, 9.2, 6.2, 2.6 and 1.1 for the K alpha full energy peaks of Rb, Mo, Ag, Ba and Tb, respectively. The authors showed their data to be in reasonable agreement with the published data. Significant improvements to an existing model for pulse pileup correction of spectra was proposed by Gardner and co-workers.68 Such corrections are essential for operating at high countrates and are particularly important for the rates achievable with modern SDD spectrometry systems although it is important to ensure that the electronics chain itself produces high-fidelity data that need no additional compensation for system deficiencies. Finally, it is encouraging to report the work by Verkhodov69 on correcting diffraction peaks and the associated increased background experienced in XRF spectrometry of polycrystalline materials. The proposed model included background intensity formed by diffraction processes of both characteristic and Bremsstrahlung radiation and showed good agreement with published experimental data.
3.2 Matrix correction and calibration procedures
Interest in influence coefficient algorithms remained undiminished during the review period and an excellent comparison was made by Willis and Lachance70 of most of the common algorithms that are implemented in commercial XRF systems. The algorithms were grouped into those using Fundamental Parameter (FP) models and those using influence coefficients, and then further sub-divided into those using empirical intensity or concentration coefficients and finally into those using concentration coefficients that were either fixed or variable with concentration. The form of the algorithms was presented in a manner that allowed easy comparison and the authors drew illuminating and very practical conclusions that will be very useful to XRF practitioners and should reduce some of the partisan claims of supremacy for individual approaches. In a second paper71 these authors introduced a new approach for correction of absorption and enhancement effects in which multiplicative factors were used to simplify stepwise estimation of theoretical intensities. The benefits of the proposed approach were to simplify the understanding of the effects themselves and also to allow the coefficients to be derived directly from mass attenuation coefficients, which the authors claimed were particularly suitable in teaching situations. A useful reminder of the limitation of simple binary versus multielement influence coefficients was provided by Vrebos and Willis,72 who showed that the loss of accuracy could be minimised if the binary influence coefficients were calculated for the actual sample composition. The authors showed how this could be achieved by means of a factor for the sum of the concentration of the matrix concentrations and use of cross-product coefficients. The application of alpha coefficients that varied with concentration73 was shown to significantly extend the calibration range for analysis of complex alloys such as stainless steels, in which interelement effects are often severe and accurate analysis is highly desirable. Two new empirical coefficients models for XRF analysis of samples of intermediate thickness were proposed by Sitko.74 In the first model it was necessary to know the mass thickness of the sample, which is inconvenient, while the second model made valuable use of the Compton and Rayleigh scattered radiation to estimate the sample mass thickness. The paper included a timely review of prior art in analysing samples of intermediate thickness and of estimating sample thickness and so-called dark matrix from the scattered radiation. Full derivations were included of the equations used in the new models, which were calibrated and then tested using pressed pellet samples of synthetic mixtures and a number if international geological CRMs. The corrections improved accuracy by up to an order of magnitude in some cases and results for the CRMs were in good agreement with the certified values. The author warned that, as with most empirical methods, the choice of calibration samples needs to be such that the element ranges and thicknesses cover those of the unknowns and that because the influence coefficients were constants, the variation in matrix composition should be minimised for best accuracy and predictability. Although the new models were less flexible than the FP approach they have benefits in terms of simplicity of implementation and computation.
In their continuing studies of the basic theoretical understanding of XRF processes, Fernandez et al.75 analysed the effects of geometry on the XRF radiation field in the frame of the transport theory. The authors developed a new and theoretically rigorous computer code for the description of the radiation field and used it to establish the significant angular variation in XRF emission intensity for a pure iron sample. This code could be useful for the design of specific XRF experimental and instrument set-ups to optimise XRF peak to background ratios and the code will be extended to include polarisation effects. In a deeply theoretical paper, Mukoyama and Taniguchi76 used Dirac–Fock wavefunctions to calculate rates of K and L-shell X-ray emission. The authors established the active region of X-ray emission to be 10 times the mean K shell radius and 7.5 times that of the L shell radius. One interesting application of this work is to enable calculation of the effects of chemical bonding on X-ray emission rates.
The review year had a conspicuous lack of publications related to the application of conventional chemometric techniques to XRF analysis. There was, however, the emergence of the statistical approach of censoring, which is more usually applied in life sciences and medicine. In the first paper,77 random left-censoring was applied to XRF measurements of trace elements in biological samples, where the mean of a series of measurements can be affected significantly by the number of measurements that are at or below the detection limit. The authors used MC simulations to support their approach and showed that the mean and median could be calculated reliably and precisely using random left-censoring. The estimate for the median was significantly more precise than that of the mean and the authors recommended their censoring method be adopted as standard practice in trace element XRF analysis. In the second paper78 the same technique was extended to TXRF analysis of biomedical samples. Using either of two estimators for the left-censoring method, the mean and median, respectively, for 100 samples of Mn in full term placenta were reduced by a factor of 2 from the raw experimental values of 1.54 μg g−1 and 0.541 μg g−1 to 0.736 μg g−1 and 0.229 μg g−1. This was an impressive removal of bias from a study in which 55% of the measurements were at or below the detection limit of 10 ng g−1 and is strong support for the authors’ call for the technique to be adopted generally for trace XRF analysis. Similar data and recommendations were also made in a third paper79 from the same group. While on the topic of detection limits, Tiwari et al.80 concluded that the detection limit in XRF could best be estimated from samples with concentrations of the elements of interest that lie around 10 times that of the detection limit.
Turning now to Fundamental Parameter (FP) methods, Rousseau81 discussed the practical challenges posed in solving the Sherman equation and reminded readers how his fundamental algorithm still held advantages in this regard, especially because of its efficient calibration procedure. The paper did not propose any new approach but did outline the key characteristics that any solution must have and identified some potential avenues down which future solutions might lie. Although measured values of the all-important fundamental parameters themselves are normally excluded from this Update, calculations and tabulations are reported from time to time. To this end, Brunetti et al.82 reported the creation of a software library function for the generation of many X-ray data such as cross-sections and form factors that will doubtless be of value to those seeking a comprehensive and convenient source of such data.
The importance to accurate FP analysis of an accurate X-ray tube spectrum model is well known and Zarkadas and Karydas83 reported on how the use of secondary target excitation does not reduce the need for an accurate model of the emitted spectrum distribution. The authors only reported data for a molybdenum target tube, which is perhaps the least efficient tube for a general secondary target system, and found, unsurprisingly, that monochromaticity increased with increasing overpotential. Low efficiency was also reported for high Z secondary targets such as those containing Ba and Sb or the REE, where the overpotential is low and the molybdenum target, with Z
					= 42, is inefficient in its emission of high energy Bremsstrahlung radiation. The FP program used by the authors showed best accuracy with highly monochromatic excitation and lower accuracy as monochromaticity decreased, leading them to conclude that the tube model was inadequate for many secondary target set-ups. A similar conclusion was reached by Mandal et al.84 that their Bremsstrahlung model in direct EDXRF analysis was inadequate. These authors adopted the approach of directly measuring the tube output spectrum by means of a Si(Li) detector and then producing a model of that spectrum. Results from their FP program in which this new experimentally determined model was included were found to agree with known values. Reflecting the increase in use during the past decade of polarisation XRF, Kitov85 derived an equation to describe the spectrum obtained from a boron carbide scatterer used in conjunction with a molybdenum target tube. The model was described completely and although there were no confirmatory measurements, the model is valuable for instrument designers, particularly those wishing to optimise the use of Barkla polarisers. An empirical approach to the choice of target material and thickness to reduce scattering was proposed by Kumar et al.,86 although use of one of the above models would offer much more flexibility and convenience.
The speed of calculation in FP analysis was the subject of a paper by Kocsonya et al.,87 who reduced the overhead in the enhancement calculation by means of stored pre-calculated parameters. They developed the algorithm in a commercially available mathematical modelling program and showed substantial savings in time. A program was reported by Gardner and Guo88 that used MC simulation and library least squares techniques to predict the complete EDXRF spectrum. The magnitude of this complex mathematical task was reflected in the reported run times of 3–4 h that were required for the MC simulations alone.
Finally, a number of other publications will be of interest, such as the presentation by Roessiger,89 who reminded us of the pitfalls in thin film analysis of using a sample for correcting FP bias that was significantly different from the unknown to which the correction would be applied. The VERBA-XRF software package was further developed90 by summing the concentration of all elements with Z < 10 and using this in an improved correction algorithm. The method required only one calibration standard for each analyte and was applied to 120 pressed powder samples of a wide variety of geological materials. Accuracy for the major elements was claimed by the author to be 1–2%. A process was described for the calibration of a WDXRF spectrometer for standardless analysis.91 Four interesting correction procedures were reported92 for correcting homogeneity effects in the analysis of brass of which one involved a combination of theoretical and empirical influence coefficients and another involved splitting the calibration line into two regions depending upon the appearance of the lead phase.
4 X-Ray optics and microfluorescence
Strong interest continues in the development of X-ray waveguides and focusing devices for use in X-ray micro-analysis, including a new ‘planar waveguide-resonator’, described by Egorov and Egorov.93 This device was based on observations on the mechanism of X-ray beam propagation for a narrow extended slit formed by two plane dielectric plates. When compared with slit widths in the range ≥3 μm, where propagation by multiple consecutive total reflection dominates, it was found that for ‘super narrow’ slit widths (≤0.1 μm) a different propagation mode occurred, namely ‘waveguide resonance’. This phenomenon forms the basis of the new optical device proposed here. Interest in the ‘alligator lens’, comprising two inclined arrays of saw-teeth or prisms, continued with a publication by Jark94 who investigated the use of these devices in combination with a suitable slit as an in-line monochromator. The author derived a simple universal function for the dependence of transmission on photon energy and found that a laboratory-made Plexiglas lens gave 50% of the transmission of a ‘perfect’ lens, a discrepancy caused by macroscopic defects at the saw teeth tips. The Leicester Space Research Group95 continued their interest in micro-channel plate optics, describing a prototype imaging X-ray fluorescence spectrometer with a spatial resolution of 0.7 mm that was capable of instantaneous imaging over a field of view of 24 mm2 without the need for scanning. The quantitative calibration and application of this device to geological samples was described. Hosokawa et al.96 described an instrument based on a 100 μm diameter X-ray waveguide coupled to a micro-focus X-ray tube, x–y scanning stage and silicon drift detector. Industrial quality control applications of the instrument were demonstrated by the analysis of ceramic capacitances and aluminium can tops.

Capillary devices also continue to be of interest, with Ohzawa et al.97 comparing the performance of a high intensity monocapillary guide tube with a commercially available polycapillary device. The monocapillary device was considered to be more versatile as it was capable of achieving a spatial resolution of 10 μm at a working distance that was ten times less than that of the polycapillary device. A polycapillary micro-XRF instrument was developed by Emoto et al.,98 which was also capable of undertaking grazing exit micro-XRF measurements. Application of this instrument was demonstrated by the two-dimensional elemental mapping of growth features in the plant ‘Quinoa’ and the analysis of a small region of thin film. Yan and Ding99 were interested in developing a method for calculating the transmission efficiency of a monolithic polycapillary X-ray lens using a source of any shape. Predictions from the model were compared with experimental results for a Cu 0.3 × 3 mm2 line source. A modular system for XRF and XRD applications consisting of a micro-focus X-ray source and different capillary optics was described by Bjeoumikhov et al.,100 the idea being that by choice of the appropriate capillary, either parallel (for XRD) or focused (for XRF) beams of high intensity could be obtained. Padilla et al.101 were interested in the development of a semi-empirical approach for standardless calibration in micro-XRF spectrometry using capillary lenses, one issue being the shape of the excitation spectrum resulting from the use of capillary optics. The energy spectral distribution of the excitation source was estimated by measuring radiation scattered from a sample in combination with MC simulation of radiation transport and was combined with a fundamental parameter approach. Accuracy and repeatability of this software package were verified for glass and ore CRMs.
Turning now to consider some applications of micro-XRF, Havrilla and Miller102 reviewed the use of the technique for materials characterisation, summarising a wide range of innovative applications from the single point analysis of nanolitre volumes of liquid to the use of the technique as an element-specific detector in capillary electrophoresis. Lankosz et al.103 studied the feasibility of quantitative elemental microanalysis of biological materials and glass samples by micro-XRF. A spectrometer using capillary optics was used to analyse optically polished glass slabs in which metal thin films were used for calibration; SR microbeam analysis (mono- and polychromatic) was used for brain tissue. Weizhi104 employed a combination of techniques (INAA, EDXRF, μ-PIXE) to identify and characterise CRMs suitable for quality control in microanalysis. Malzer et al.105 developed a model in which a fingerprint ‘value’ was estimated as a way of distinguishing between different types of ink associated with different types of inhomogeneous ink–paper layer systems. This figure-of-merit value was based on trace elements determinations made by micro-analysis techniques and was applied to Mozart’s manuscript of the Magic Flute. Micro-XRF was used by Hahn et al.106 with visible spectrophotometry to investigate qualitatively the pigments used in coloured prints of the 16th century to characterise the artist’s palette (see section 9.4 for similar applications). Bartoll and colleagues107 used micro-EDXRF to analyse art objects to detect the presence of wood preservatives based on the chlorine content. The advantages that micro-XRF offered in this application were high spatial resolution and the ability to analyse larger areas in a relatively short time scale as demonstrated by the analysis of wooden scenery parts of the ‘Theatrum Sacrum’ in the church of Nettzelle, Brandenburg, Germany. By way of contrast, Scheidegger et al.108 used the technique to examine metal speciation in heterogeneous waste depository materials. Speciation in a fast growing ferromanganese marine nodule was the topic of interest to Marcus et al.,109 using μ-XRD and μ-absorption spectroscopy, as well as μ-XRF. The nodule displayed alternating Fe-rich and Mn-rich layers, reflecting variations in redox conditions. Redox analysis of single bacterial cells by X-ray microbeam analysis was undertaken by Kemner et al.110 By contrast, Doering and co-workers111 evaluated micro-XRF imaging to detect coating voids and to quantify coating materials diffused into the chromium disilicide layer that was coated onto the niobium alloy used in the thrusters of the Space Shuttle Orbiter. Their work demonstrated the viability of this technique as compared with alternative methods in this important application. Finally in this section, micro-XRF in conjunction with micro-XRD and high temperature laser microscopy were used by Takamuru et al.112 to observe in situ and clarify the reaction and high temperature behaviour of ash during the gasification of coke.
5 Synchrotron radiation
The very elegant concept of confocal X-ray μ-fluorescence imaging was used by the Antwerp group113,114 for three-dimensional XRF analysis. The authors claimed that this technique provided a suitable alternative to XRF tomography. Two optical elements (polycapillary half lenses) were inserted into the beam path, one between the excitation source (beam line ID 18F at ESRF, Grenoble) and the sample and the other between the sample and the detector, where the focus of the latter coincided with the focus of the incoming beam. The sample volume defined in this arrangement was in the range of 100–350 μm3 and a drastic reduction in background was observed due to the decrease in the scatter events. Janssens et al.115 used the same technique at the microfocus beam line at HASYLAB (Hamburg) and claimed detection limits at the sub-femtogram level using excitation with a so-called pink-beam (that is a monochromatic beam diffracted from a multilayer device that has a larger band width than that observed from a crystal monochromator).
Potential users should be aware that two new beamlines at BESSY (Berlin) have been brought into operation. One was a microfocus beam line which was designed by Erko et al.116 to provide facilities for EXAFS, XRF, XRD and X-ray small-angle scattering with micrometre and sub-micrometre spatial resolution in the energy range of 1.9–30 keV. The other, ‘BAMline’, was described by Riesemeier et al.117 and offered a double multilayer and a double-crystal monochromator (with the option for separate or in-line use) with photon energies up to 60 keV provided by a superconducting 7 T wavelength shifter. This beamline will be dedicated to XRF, CT, detector calibration and reflectometry. Hirai et al.118 reported a new undulator beamline at SPring-8 (Harima, Japan) for energies between 4.5 and 40 keV and with spot sizes of 1 μm and less. This versatile beamline was also designed to undertake measurements of surface contamination on silicon wafers in TXRF geometry using either ED or WD detectors. At the Swiss Light source, the materials science beamline provides 5–40 keV radiation. The advantage of this beamline claimed by the authors119 was its versatile use for powder and surface diffraction and for tomography. A feasibility study for a wavelength dispersive microprobe was presented by von Bohlen et al.,120 offering a spectrum resolution of 3 eV.
Yasa et al.121 described a combined multilayer and Bragg–Fresnel optical device that combined diffraction and geometric focusing on a single device, which used a Bragg–Fresnel structure (for vertical focusing) deposited on a bent graded multilayer substrate (for horizontal focusing). This device was capable of providing a focused beam of 1.6 × 12 μm2. Kirkpatrick–Baez optics were used in a new beamline facility designed for XRF and XRD measurements up to 17 keV at ALS (Chicago).122
A number of publications described geological applications of SRXRF. Manceau et al.123 used an SR μ-beam to make XRF, EXAFS in fluorescence mode and XRD measurements to characterise low concentrations of Zn in clayey, acidic soil. Zn was found to be predominantly associated with phyllosilicates. Single fluid inclusions, of both natural and synthetic origin, were of interest to Cauzid et al.124 These samples represented ancient fluids trapped in crustal rocks and the authors were particularly concerned with uncertainties in quantification associated with inclusion depth and the fluid sample volume that would affect the interpretation of results in terms of understanding palaeo-fluid rock interactions and hydrothermal transport processes.
Several groups used SRXRF to study human teeth. Marques et al.125 reported elemental profiles in teeth collected from patients with renal disorders, in particular patients with and without dialysis treatment. They reported higher Pb levels in the pulp region of teeth from deceased patients. Martin et al.126 studied the differences in the trace element concentration between dentine and cementum rings of human teeth and concluded that Zn is concentrated in the cementum rings. Perez et al.127 presented results of the μ-SRXRF analysis of human dental calculus and found a spatial correlation between Cu and Zn with an accumulation preferentially in the sub-gingival part of the calculus. Both modern and prehistoric teeth were analyzed for their Cu, Hg, Pb and Zn content by Shirasawa et al.,128 and reported differences caused by changes in the environment through civilization, unsurprisingly finding higher Pb levels in modern teeth.
Slices of human bone were examined for their Pb and Zn content with μ-SRXRF by Zöger et al.129 Surprisingly, Pb was mostly located at the outer border of the cortical bones (rather than being homogeneously distributed) and a remarkable positive correlation was observed between these two elements. Martin et al.130 developed a mathematical model for the distribution of Pb measured in a hair sample collected from a lead smelter worker. They concluded that direct deposition from the environment was the more important source of hair Pb as compared with ingestion.

Other medically related studies included the work of Flinn et al.,131 who challenged the generally accepted statement that Zn deficiency impairs cognitive functioning. These workers found that enhanced zinc consumption increased brain levels of Zn and caused, furthermore, memory deficiencies in rats. In another study132 of brain tissue, patients suffering from diffuse neurofibrillary tangles with calcification (DNTC) disease, a so-called atypical form of dementia, were investigated for the distribution of trace elements. They particularly observed Pb concentrations in calcified blood vessels in brain tissue from DNTC patients. Brain sections of rats were also investigated by Liu et al.133 at the Beijing synchrotron. Titanium released from oral implants was studied by Wennerburg et al.,134 both in vitro and in vivo, as a function of surface roughness and distance from the implant surface. They could not find a correlation between implant surface roughness and ion release and also found that Ti concentrations rapidly decreased with distance from the implant. Different metal containing proteins were separated by gel electrophoresis by Weseloh et al.135 and Kuehbacher et al.136 The thrust of this work was to show that SRXRF was a suitable method for the determination of trace element distribution patterns in proteins separated by this procedure.
An interesting environmental study was undertaken as a result of a major mining accident that occurred in 2000 in the Romanian part of the Tiza catchment area. A tailings dam failed, releasing huge amounts of heavy metals into the river. Osan et al.137 sampled riverbed sediments anticipated to be contaminated from the downstream Hungarian sction of the river. After preselection of contaminated particles by EPMA, heavy metals such as Cd were determined with white beam μ-SRXRF, and the speciation of Cu and Zn (also in individual sediment particles) was performed by μ-XANES. These results showed that heavy metals in most of the particles remained as sulfides, resulting in limited mobility. Jernström et al.138 investigated weakly radioactive particles found in Irish Sea sediments, associated with authorized discharges of radioactive waste from the Sellafield nuclear reprocessing plant (UK). Three uranium-rich particles with diameters of tens of μm were isolated by solid-state nuclear track detection and further analyzed for their elemental composition and uranium oxidation states by μ-SRXRF and μ-XANES. The results indicated that two of the particles were nuclear fuel debris, and one was of natural origin. Toyoda et al.139 developed methods for the characterisation of single aerosol particles using a combination of SRXRF and SEM built into a single experimental instrument. The authors emphasized the advantages of the two methods in measuring the shape of individual particles in real time by SEM and the composition by SRXRF. Camerani et al.140 studied the Cd distribution within single municipal waste and biomass fly ash particles with a 2 × 5 μm2 beam combining SRXRF and microtomography. Cadmium was found to be higher in the core of particles and associated with calcium-containing matrices.
Individual aerosol particles collected from an industrial area of Shanghai were used for source identification using μ-SRXRF spectra to ‘fingerprint’ the source to specific industrial and anthropogenic sources.141 The residues retained in individual droplets found in clouds are important in understanding rain-out mechanisms and the aerosol modification of droplets. Ma et al.142,143 classified individual residual particles into several categories as a function of raindrop size. The sampling was carried out on the summit of Mt. Taiko, Japan, and micro-XANES was used to identify different oxidation states of Fe and Zn, which was correlated with dust from desert sands originating in China. The possibility exists that life originated from high-pressure high-temperature environments fuelled by the reduction of metal ions. Equipped with μ-XRF and μ-XANES, Oger et al.144 studied the kinetics of selenite reduction by prokaryotes under controlled pressure and temperature conditions in a dedicated diamond anvil cell. Certain plants show the ability not only to survive the exposure to relatively high levels of heavy elements but also to accumulate them. Shi et al.145 investigated Elsholtzia splenda, a copper tolerant plant, and suggested that Ca, P and S played an important role in Cu accumulation. Blute et al.146 established spatial distribution maps of As oxidation states for the arsenic sequestration by Typha latifolia
				(cattail) roots. Results suggested that this plant has a beneficial effect on the removal of As(III) and As(V) from ground water. Sarret et al.147 studied the speciation of Zn originating from smelters and found that, despite its marked lability, Zn appears to be retained in the topsoil due to the presence of organic matter.
Synchrotron radiation excited μ-XRF and micro-XAS were utilized by Grolimund et al.148 in a cultural heritage application to characterise iron artifacts from the Iron Age to early Medieval Times. Their studies demonstrated the potential of oxidation state and mineral phase mapping in gaining new insights concerning the nature and origin of used raw materials. Smit et al.149 used a confocal μ-SRXRF to analyse historic and modern paint layers and provided some insights into quantification procedures. Fredrickx et al.150 presented a μ-structure characterization of a set of Roman glass fragments using EPMA, μ-SRXRF and TEM analysis, results being used to help explain the appearance of the material.
6 TXRF
During the review period the proceedings of the 10th Conference on TXRF and Related Techniques held in Japan were published as a special issue of Spectrochimica Acta, Part B,151 leading to a higher number of publications dealing with TXRF in comparison with review periods without published proceedings.
6.1 Instrumentation and sample preparation
In contrast to the previous Update there were some developments in instrumentation reported during this review period.
A new TXRF spectrometer with a vacuum sample chamber was developed by Streli et al.152 A multilayer was used to monochromatise either Mo-Kα or Cr-Kα radiation, a compact SDD was used to measure the fluorescence radiation, and a software controlled 12 position sample changer allowed automated routine measurement. The vacuum chamber nullified the interfering argon peak, reduced the scattering in air and eliminated the absorption by air of Cr-Kα radiation that was used for efficient excitation of low Z elements. Detection limits of 700 fg were achieved for Rb and 52 pg for Al using Mo-Kα and Cr-Kα excitation, respectively. Tiwari et al153 reported a simple and precise TXRF spectrometer, also using a Peltier cooled detector. The flexible arrangement of the components allowed the use of various beam modification optics and the performance of ultra-trace analysis, as well as surface characterization of thin films and wafers. An additional reflector in the beam path of a TXRF spectrometer led to higher flux on the sample, as developed by Tsuji and Delalieux,154 who maximized the X-ray intensities emerging from this configuration with an SDD by angular adjustment. The high count rate capability of the SDD made it valuable as a direct beam intensity monitor. A helpful tool to set up new spectrometers was developed by Sanchez and Valentinuzzi,155 who simulated photon transport inside beam guides by a mathematical model based on experimental parameters and studied the intensity as function of several experimental parameters.
A new sample preparation method based on membrane complexations for heavy metals like Pb and Hg was developed by Koulouridakis et al.,156 who achieved detection limits in the few ng ml−1 range for Pb and 0.8 ng ml−1 for Hg. Gomes et al.157 developed a preconcentration and separation system based on continuous flow hydride generation, leading to enrichment factors of 55 for As and 82 for Se. When using a 20 ml sample, detection limits of 0.3 μg l−1 were obtained for both As and Se.
6.2 Synchrotron radiation induced TXRF (SR-TXRF)
The performance of a wavelength dispersive TXRF spectrometer installed at the high flux beamline 40XU at SPring-8 was reported by Awaji et al.158 The origin of the main background source was found, unsurprisingly, to be photoelectron Bremsstrahlung, which in fact is consistent with earlier investigations by others. Detection limits for Ni of 5 × 108 atoms cm−2 have been obtained, which are similar to those of an ED detector, even though the WD spectrometer offered an energy resolution of 50 eV, which was considerably better by a factor of 3 than a typical ED spectrometer. By applying the surface concentration technique for an 8 inch wafer detection limits of 3.7 × 106 atoms cm−2 are reported, which was claimed to be lower than that obtained by ICP-MS. In a second paper Awaji159 reported results of multilayer thin films measured with the setup. Kurunczi and Sakurai160 described a special method for preparation of water samples for WD-SRTXRF that used HF etching to obtain a hydrophobic silicon surface and produced an impressively small microdroplet of 80 μm.
Török et al.161 performed SRTXRF-NEXAFS on nitrogen compounds in aerosol samples collected on silicon wafer surfaces. The plane grating monochromator beamline for undulator radiation of the Physikalisch-Technische Bundesanstalt (PTB) at BESSY2 was used as the excitation source. The authors obtained detection limits for N in the low pg range, which allowed analysis of samples collected in only 10 min.
SR-TXRF at the Taiwan National Synchrotron radiation centre was applied by Chang et al.162 to studying SiO2/Ta2O5 multilayer films on glass substrates.
Several topics were investigated at the Brazilian National Synchrotron Light Source in Campinas. Trace elements in different pharmaceutical forms of diclofenac sodium were determined by Zucchi et al.163 and differences in trace element content could be verified. Costa et al.164 analysed sea-water after preconcentration with ammonium pyrrolidinedithiocarbamate. Moreira et al.165 studied the metal absorption in cultured corn irrigated with domestic sewage and found higher metal concentrations in the plants irrigated with sewage compared with plants irrigated with natural water. Salvador et al.166 determined trace elements in various plants to provide data for environmental pollution control. Perspex™, Kimfoil™ and Mylar™ were compared as substrates for the analysis of liquid samples by Poli et al.167 The authors established that thin polymer foils produced less spectrum background, although unfortunately they did not compare their substrates with the commonly used quartz or silicon reflectors which one would have expected to have been even better.
6.3 Surface analysis
As TXRF is nowadays a standard analytical tool for determining wafer surface contamination several comparisons with other analytical tools were made during the review period.
Rostam-Khani et al.168 compared TXRF with TOF-SIMS and ICP-MS for analysis of wafer surfaces treated with vapor phase decomposition (VPD). The collection efficiency was determined and good agreement found between the analytical techniques. Caputo et al.169 determined Fe concentrations on a silicon wafer surface after wet cleaning treatment. The techniques compared were SR-TXRF, TOF-SIMS, lifetime and deep level transient spectroscopy using SR-TXRF as reference. Good correlations were found.
In contrast to normal practice in TXRF nonlinear calibration effects in micro-droplet residue samples on Si wafers were reported by Hellin et al.170 Upper limits of the linear calibration range and the origin of the effects were discussed and modelled and the authors found it necessary to introduce a mass absorption model for thin films. The same group171 validated their correction method using VPD droplet collection and, surprisingly, reported nonlinear effects at contamination levels of only 3 × 1013 atoms, which corresponds to 1 × 1011 atoms cm−2 for a 200 mm wafer.

Improvements to Si wafer surface investigations were reported by Miller et al.,172 who used a nanolitre dried spot method that enhanced the VPD process. Droplets of 10–50 nl were deposited on native silicon oxide wafer surfaces and the authors showed a linear relation between Fe intensity and the number of deposited drops of a single element iron solution. Measurement at different incident angles showed the film-like character of the sample. Sweeping TXRF was described by Mori et al.,173 in which the location of unknown contaminations on Si wafer surfaces were determined by moving the wafer under the detector during measurement. In this publication scanning was not continuous, but step-by-step mapping with a short measuring time of 4–8 s provided rough mapping information. The authors claim highly impressive detection limits of 1010 atoms cm−2 for each spot.
The copper diffusion behaviour in SiO2/Si structures during 400° annealing was studied by Hozawa and Yugami,174 who reported a dependence on the thickness of the front SiO2 surface layer and drew the conclusion that the effect of back surface copper contamination was very small during a back-end process. Tokuda et al.175 reported investigations of leakage current distribution and dielectric breakdown of copper contaminated thin SiO2. The ability of TXRF to measure both surface and in-layer Cu allowed the authors to establish that a high copper concentration induced dielectric breakdown and low concentration induced high leakage current.
Sparks et al.176characterised high-k gate dielectric and metal gate electrode semiconductor samples and demonstrated the versatility of TXRF in the analysis of semiconductor samples. They monitored the high-k film growth on silicon wafers and obtained information about the interface between deposited high-k layer and the silicon substrate. Their results were compared with other techniques. The deposition kinetics of high-k material were studied by Carpanese et al.,177 who obtained information about initial growing cycles of deposition and on carbon and chlorine inclusions.
Pepponi et al.178 applied TXRF to determine non-destructively the dose and depth profile of arsenic ultrashallow junctions and found good agreement with SIMS. The advantage of TXRF was noted for probing the near surface layers compared with SIMS probing the deeper implants better. The authors used no external standard, but the Si signal was used as internal reference. The ion implantation dose was measured using TXRF and SIMS by Frost et al.,179 who described the advantages and disadvantages of both techniques for this application.
6.4 Applications
Following the trend of the last year’s Update the number of environmental application reports in the review period was higher in comparison with other applications. Several reports dealt with environmental monitoring. Zaray et al.180 used biofilms grown on polycarbonate substrates in Hungarian and Turkish lakes. Although the algae species between these two lakes were different, the enrichment factors were about the same; they found highest enrichment factors for Mn and Fe and lowest for K. The same authors181 analysed freshwater and biofilm samples from inlets of mining activities on the upper river Tisza with a portable TXRF spectrometer and compared them with samples of the river Szamos: surprisingly they only found elevated trace element concentrations in the river Szamos, which had no mining activity. The authors showed that a portable TXRF spectrometer allowed rapid screening. Hazel pollen was used as a biomonitor by Pepponi et al.,182 to indicate atmospheric pollution using samples collected from areas in the province of Trento with different anthropogenic impacts. The authors also compared microwave digestion with the suspension technique and reported comparable results in peak to background ratio, but better repeatability for the digested samples. Detection limits in the sub-ppm range had been achieved for metals like Fe. Golob et al.183 analysed trace and minor elements in Slovenian honey and found statistically relevant differences between various types of honey, but they did not observe any influence of the year of honey production. Vietnamese freshwater mussels were used as biomonitors by Wagner et al.:184 specimens were taken at two rural sites with one located close to a power plant. Heavy metal concentrations were found to be below the levels regarded as harmful. Sures et al.185 used an intestinal fish parasite as a sensitive accumulation indicator for Pt, Pd and Rh. The authors analyzed only Pd with TXRF and found all metals at significantly higher concentrations in the parasite than in the fish.
Urban air pollution was characterized by Schmeling.186 Samples were taken in Chicago and in Phoenix with a temporal resolution of only 1–1.5 h. Measurements have been performed after digesting the filter matrix. Due to the low sample mass needed for TXRF analysis, requiring a short sampling time, the author found diurnal patterns in both cities and observed the influence of local meteorological patterns. Hallquist and Boman187 analysed organic substances and trace elements in aerosol samples. The authors found a linear relationship between the inorganic content and specific orangic functional groups analyzed with FTIR spectroscopy, although a transfer from the quartz plates to zinc selenite plates was necessary.
Holynska et al.188 reported on a study of the deterioration of sandstone due to acid rain. Sandstone samples were immersed for several weeks in SO2 solutions at different pH values and concentrations of Ca, Fe and Mg leached from the sandstone were determined by TXRF. In addition, autoradiograms have been obtained after exposure to radioactive S35 gas, indicating that S penetrated to the interior part of the sandstone. Seven sugar cane spirits commercialized in Brazil were analyzed by Silva et al.:189 the authors found Cu, Fe and Zn above the detection limits but two samples showed Cu concentration above the permitted values in Brazil.
The second main topic of applications in this review period dealt with biological samples. Marco et al.190 reported strategies to overcome difficulties associated with the analysis of organic samples, particularly of solid ones. Five modes for direct analysis and evaluation are shown and discussed. The determination of trace elements including Pb in whole blood were described by Martinez et al.,191 although no sample preparation method was described. Kubala-Kukus et al.192 discussed the nature of concentration distributions of trace elements in biomedical samples and their statistical treatment. The authors evaluated logstable, random-left censoring and the Kaplan–Meier approach and the logrank test to compare the censored concentrations measured for two groups. In a second paper the same authors193 suggested also to include concentrations below the detection limits and claim that the Kaplan–Meier approach allowed them to estimate the mean concentration which was substantially below the mean level of detection limits. Carvalho194 reported on trace element distribution in trabecular and cortical human bones from middle age and discussed the influence of elemental uptake during burial from surrounding soil.
Some other interesting applications were found: Vazquez195 applied TXRF to the polymeric analytical field and reported on various sample preparation procedures of the dispersions. Boykens and Vazquez195 used the inelastic scatter peak to obtain matrix information from polymers and used principal component analysis combined with cluster analysis for preliminary classification. Esaka et al.196 applied TXRF to safeguard swipe samples to determine the isotope ratio of 235U/238U and developed a sensitive screening method in combination with SIMS.
6.5 Related techniques
Intuitively one would expect that liquids are homogenous. Due to the fact that there can be an ion segregation on the solution surface, total reflection absorption fine structure analysis (TR-XAFS) will be a surface sensitive tool to examine the solvation structure of the ions at the air–water interface.197 In order to improve the lateral resolution for EPMA, Tsuji et al. used, instead of the conventional geometry, a take-off angle of less than 1°. The authors198 tried to solve the problem of the reproducibility of the exit angle by means of a laser beam and four light detectors. With the same technique Awane et al.199 could reduce the spectral background of sub-micrometre precipitates, which consisted of Si and Ni in copper based alloy. Imazono et al.200 studied inter-diffused layers near the surface of Fe/Si multilayers by soft X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy in total reflection geometry and concluded the usefulness to study the chemical state of elements to a depth of a few nm from the surface.
7 Portable and mobile XRF
Recent advances in PXRF were reviewed by Hou et al.,201 covering the principles and instrumentation and a wide range of applications. The authors concluded that the technique was particularly suitable for the rapid screening of samples where the specific analytes of interest were unknown, but that the technique does not have the accuracy and detection limits of a range of laboratory atomic spectrometry techniques, an assertion that could provoke an interesting discussion if the wider aspects of uncertainty in the context of sampling and analysis are taken into account (see 9.3 for a similar application). Melquades and Appoloni202 reviewed the application of PXRF to environmental analysis, their particular interest being in the determination of heavy metal pollution in water.
A few laboratories have reported a comparison of the performance of PXRF with other techniques. Specifically, Papadopoulou et al.203 were interested in the analysis of 7th and 5th century BC ceramic sherds and compared portable micro-XRF with ICP-AES. In this study, non-destructive in situ micro-XRF measurements on surfaces that were untreated, apart from cleaning, were compared with micro-XRF measurements on pressed pellet disks and with ICP-AES after closed, high pressure decomposition to evaluate the relative performance characteristics. Zwicky and Lienemann204 undertook a comparison of laboratory-based WDXRF and portable EDXRF in the analysis of nickel-based alloys. They concluded that portable EDXRF measurements did not meet the quality requirements of laboratory analyses, but were good enough for field investigations.
Although possibly stretching the definition of ‘portable’, two PXRF-related developments that fall into the category of ‘astonishing’ are available for review this year. The first was a paper by Yamada and colleagues,205 who reported the analysis of heavy elements (such as Ag, Pb, Pt, Sn and W from the respective K-lines), using a portable synchrotron excitation source (named MIRRORCLE-20). The portable synchrotron comprised a single piece of normal conducting magnet of 1.2 m outside diameter and 0.15 m orbit radius. In addition to the characteristic high atomic K-lines, several peaks with short lifetimes were observed. Another technique that is normally regarded as a fixed laboratory instrument was evaluated in portable mode by Mages et al.206 These workers investigated the use of a newly developed portable TXRF spectrometer for the determination of trace elements in freshwater micro-crustaceans (Daphnia), comparisons being made with a laboratory instrument. Field measurements were found to be very fast and sufficiently sensitive for the elemental analysis of minute biological samples. Good correlation between field and laboratory measurements was found for As, Cu, K, Mn, Ni and Sr, but significant differences were observed in data for Ca, Fe, Pb and Zn. Ardid et al.207 also undertook a comparison, but in this case between ‘static’ TXRF instrumentation and portable EDXRF, in the field of art and archaeometry. Not surprisingly, perhaps, portable EDXRF was recognised as having advantages in making in situ and on-line measurements in a multidisciplinary environment. However, ‘static’ EDXRF showed advantages in the analysis of paper and metal pieces and TXRF for the sensitive analysis of trace elements in micro-samples, such as cottons used by restorers of works of art. Other TXRF developments can be found in Section 6.
A development in portable XRF instrumentation was described by Romano et al.,208 specifically, an instrument that incorporated beam stability control. This control was achieved by X-ray fluorescence induced in a double Ag/Ba thin target when crossed by the X-ray beam during a measurement. The performance and application of this instrument in the field of cultural heritage was discussed. At the EXRS 2004 conference, Longoni et al.209 described the first elemental mapping applications of a new XRF spectrometer based on a ring-shaped monolithic array of silicon drift detectors. The specific application described was the analysis of the 7th Century Lombard jewels, found in Northern Italy. Ida and Kawai developed a new design of PXRF instrument210–212 that was applied to an astonishing range of applications, given the time scale of this review. The instrument incorporated a pyroelectric crystal (LiTaO3) X-ray generator coupled to a Si(PIN) detector that was powered by a 9 V dry battery. This instrument was configured and evaluated in several possible geometries and applications included elements that had been preconcentrated onto a sodium diethyldithiocarbamate ion exchange resin,210 toxic elements in air (in a Japanese language publication),212 Cr in steel using secondary target excitation,213 Co, Cr, Ni and V in steel by direct excitation,214 the screening of glass and ceramics,215 and the identification of paint and leather (in another Japanese language publication).216

Workplace monitoring is an application of PXRF that has not yet been fully developed. However, two papers originating from the UK Health and Safety Executive Laboratory, formerly in Sheffield, described applications to dermal exposure. In one of these contributions, Roff et al.217 used a PXRF spectrometer to scan the surface of whole body oversuits that had been worn by workers who were potentially exposed to electroplating fluids (chromic acid, nickel sulfate, copper sulfate, copper cyanide or zinc hydroxide). The geometric mean surface loading was calculated to estimate the potential exposure. In a second contribution,218 the dermal exposure to dry paint spray powders was estimated using PXRF in a similar manner. In this case, the geometric mean loading of whole body suits was estimated from PXRF determinations of Ba and Ti (fillers in the paint) to evaluate exposure levels. It was claimed that dusts could be measured in situ by PXRF in a manner that would otherwise be difficult by other techniques which depend on the extraction of analytes from the material. Nygren and Aspman219 evaluated PXRF as an on-site screening method for the assessment of deposited aerosols in the workplace. Aerosols were collected by wipe sampling followed by XRF analysis, and applications centred on the distribution of welding fumes in a workshop and a cytotoxic drug in a drug preparation room. The technique was capable of identifying target spots for the more extensive assessment of worker exposure. Regulatory compliance of toxic metals in polymer plastics was the subject of a conference report by Piorek.220 The report demonstrated that is was possible to achieve detection limits for Cd and Pb way below regulatory limits using a commercial PXRF instrument.
In the assessment of contaminated soil there is a complex relationship in determining fitness-for-purpose when the financial consequences of decision errors (e.g., incorrectly identifying the area requiring remediation) are balanced against the cost of increasing the number of measurements (and therefore sampling population). These relationships were examined by Taylor et al.,221 who evaluated the measurement uncertainty associated with Pb contamination in topsoil using two approaches: in situ measurements by PXRF and ex situ laboratory measurements by AAS. The PXRF approach was shown to be three times more cost effective than laboratory AAS in characterising the site in question, largely because measurement uncertainty was dominated by sampling uncertainty, not instrumental uncertainty. A study by Ge et al.222 illustrated another aspect of the PXRF analysis of soils, sediments and rocks, namely the influence of and correction for the presence of moisture. This is an important issue when in situ PXRF measurements are compared with laboratory measurements, when determinations are almost always undertaken on samples that are first dried, and indeed, the presence of moisture would affect the PXRF matrix correction procedure. The correction method was based on the observation that the intensity of scattered radiation is directly proportional to the water content of wet samples. The method was applied to a copper prospecting area in Yunnan, China, and results demonstrated that measurement for Cu, Sr and Zn were in satisfactory agreement before and after rain, with the procedure being applicable to wet samples containing up to 20% moisture. In a conference report, Potts et al.223 used PXRF to assess the effect of weathering on rock outcrops. The intention was to show how estimates of the fresh composition of the rock outcrop could be made from measurements on a weathered surface where depletions (or enhancements) in elemental composition can occur. It is appropriate to link this to a paper by Kamh,224 who used a range of techniques (including conventional XRF) to study the effects of weathering on carboniferous Old Red Sandstone, exemplified by the building stone of Jedburgh Abbey Church, Scotland. Relevant effects were a reduction in the rock’s CaO content and enhanced levels of Cl and S caused by air pollution. Chemical changes were associated with salt hydration and the chemical alteration of the rock’s carbonate content to sulfate and chloride. Training students is always an important aspect of any scientific endeavour and Bachofer225 described a PXRF field sampling experiment designed to provide students with such experience and the modifications required to accommodate rainy weather conditions. The objective was to characterise the Pb content of soil along a traverse perpendicular to a highway (2000 mg kg−1 at 15 feet, 20 mg kg−1 background at 300 ft).

Space applications of PXRF are limited this year, first to a report by Omand et al.226 in developing a simulation code combining analytical and MC methods to predict the X-ray yields from minerals exposed to the alpha particle X-ray spectrometer that was used during the 2004 NASA expedition to Mars for the analysis of rock and soil samples. Schaefer and Fegley227 speculated that XRF (and laser breakdown spectroscopy) could be used to verify the identity of the heavy metal frosts on Venus. In a conference presentation, Potts et al.228 described the analytical performance of the PXRF that flew on the unfulfilled Beagle 2 mission to Mars.
One of the classic applications of PXRF is in the analysis, characterisation and provenancing of archaeological artefacts and objects of cultural heritage. Zarkadas and Karydas229 developed a ‘semi-micro’ PXRF spectrometer for archaeometrical studies. The instrument was based on a novel, end-window, battery operated, low-power X-ray tube (Au anode) and a Peltier-cooled Si(PIN) detector in which a 240 μm pinhole collimator was used to form a semi-micro beam. Preliminary results were compared with published data for other micro-XRF instruments. PXRF analyses of Islamic glass, excavated at a site in the Sinai Peninsula of Egypt, were reported by Sawada et al.230 and classified into natron glasses and plant ash glasses on the basis of a SrO versus K/Ca plot. The instrument used by this group was described by Nakai et al.231 and comprised two monochromatic X-ray sources coupled to a silicon drift detector. Pd Kα and Pd Lα excitation were obtained using two doubly bent toroidal monochromators of graphite (0002) and PET (200), respectively. This instrument was used to analyse a range of glass and metallic objects, pottery sherds and some pigments and was operated in ‘mobile laboratory’ mode. Cesareo et al.232 used portable XRF equipment to analyse golden haloes on paintings by Giotto in the Chapel of Scrovegni, Padua, Italy. Of particular interest was the identification of the pigments used in the fresco, the presence of sulfur (atmospheric pollution) on its surface and the composition of the gold haloes themselves. Felicia et al.233 studied the paintings of Andrea Pozzo on the walls and vault of the refectory in the Convent of Trinita dei Monti in Rome. Painting techniques were examined and compared with the painters own recommendations. A jewellery collection (7th–1st C BC) at Benaki Museum, Athens, was undertaken by an in-house PXRF instrument by Karydas et al.234 Results showed that the gold could be categorised into native and high purity gold. PIXE and PXRF systems were used by Pappalardo et al.235 to characterise the Della Robbia sculptures at the Bargello Museum in Florence. Analysis of the blue pigments present on these sculptures showed that As was only present as a trace element after 1520. Limoges painted enamels (16th to 19th centuries) were analysed by Röhrs and Stege236 using a PXRF instrument fitted with polycapillary X-ray optics and a silicon drift chamber detector, which included a helium purge to permit elemental determinations down to Na. Particular consideration was given to measurements on layered surfaces and the influence on XRF analyses, taking into account theoretical calculations. The results for over 160 enamels were used to secure a more reliable attribution of individual items with doubted authenticity. Plaster and pigments on tomb walls in Egypt were of interest to Uda237 using a portable EDXRD and EDXRF spectrometer. This instrument, whose operation mode is completely different from that of a commercial XRD, was used to characterise the crystalline structure and chemical composition of ancient plaster and pigments in the tomb of Amenhotep III (1364 BC). Micro-Raman and in situ XRF were used by Rosi et al.238 to identify 19th century blue and green pigments in a mural paintings by the Italian miniaturist, Napoleone Verga and so identify not only the painter’s palette and painting technique, but also undocumented retouches. The palette of the painter Perugino was investigated by the same group in another Raman/in situ XRF study.239 Szokefalvi-Nagy et al.240 illustrated the use of radioisotope PXRF in the analysis of paintings, showing that detection of Ti in white spots on the painting could be used as evidence that it was a fake. By contrast, Echard241 used in situ EDXRF to analyse the varnishes of historical Italian violins from a collection at the Musée de la Musique, Paris, and showed that inorganic elements such as Fe, Hg and Pb were related to siccatives or pigments.
8 On-line XRF
Although the publication productivity of on-line applications continues to be low, a number of interesting papers have appeared during the current review period, including an overview242 of systems (and vendors) for automatic production and quality control in a cement factory that included XRF. Solo-Gabriele et al.243 were interested in the contamination of wood waste with chromated copper arsenate (CCA) and the consequent limitation of recycling opportunities. They investigated the use of XRF and laser induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS) for sorting out CCA contaminated wood and concluded that both technologies offered significant promise. An on-line corrosion monitor for use in evaluating the secondary side of pressurised water reactors was described by Yamada et al.,244 the elements of interest being mainly Cu and Fe. This system was considered to be more effective than conventional sampling and laboratory analysis, not the least because of the consequent saving in plant water chemistry personnel. Sokolov et al.245 described, in a conference abstract, an on-line application for the analysis of chrome–iron ores that were being transported on a conveyor belt. Their particular interest was in the development of FP correction software designed to accommodate differences in sample–analyser distance, lump size and other factors.
9 Applications
9.1 Sample preparation and preconcentration techniques

Preconcentration techniques continue to feature in the literature, offering methods that provide a valuable tool for speciation or enrichment of analytes of interest from an aqueous phase to the active sites in an adjacent phase. Rao and Preetha246 reviewed the speciation procedures developed so far for inorganics where naphthols find use as chelating agents. Foulkes et al.247 presented a paper on trace metal speciation at the 12th Biennial National Atomic Spectroscopy Symposium. Potential advantages for the preparation of bespoke calibrations using light sample support matrices were described to guide delegates through a technique that often appears over-complicated. The authors’ understanding of the physical and chemical characteristics of absorbers such as ion exchange and chelating resins demonstrated the sensitivity of EDXRF for the speciation of trace metals. Zougagh et al.248 reviewed chelating sorbents anchored to silica gel and compared them with new media available for the determination of trace metal ions. Ferreira et al.249 described the sorption behaviour of indium iodide onto polyether-based polyurethane foam (PUF). In a second publication this Brazilian group250 offered a method for the determination of mercury from copper concentrates by WDXRF after extraction and collection of ground PUF on a filter paper by vacuum filtration. The main parameters for the preparation procedure were shown to be iodide concentration, pH, shaking time and sample dilution. Zawisza and Sitko251 described a method for the determination of trace levels of Ag, Co, Cr, Cu and Fe in ZnS–Ag+ and ZnS–Cu+ type luminophore materials. Based on the dissolution of the zinc matrix in a solution of more than 12% m/v NaOH on a MnO2
					+ Mg(OH)2 carrier, the precipitate was collected on a membrane filter. An internal standard was then used to confirm the homogeneity of the mass per unit area. The method was found to be in good agreement with values obtained using ICP-AES and AAS.
The preparation of fused beads from chromite rich materials with low silica content posed a number of problems for workers at the University of Pretoria, South Africa.252 Cr3+ is renowned for its low solubility in borate melts and several options are available to the analyst wishing to prepare homogeneous beads: reduction of grain size to create a larger surface area to speed dissolution, increase flux/sample ratio within the limits of trace analyte sensitivity, increase fusion temperature, extend fusion time or use a more aggressive agitation regime. The authors found that by increasing the time and flux/sample ratio, the dissolution of the residual opaque chromite particles was improved. Another group from the same institution in Pretoria253 investigated the volatilisation of some commercially available Li2B4O7 and LiBO2 fluxes. TGA and DSC techniques were used to assess the thermal behaviour of the fluxes heated in a platinum crucible at 10 °C min−1 over the range 20–1280 °C. The work showed that above 1050 °C, the lithium borate fluxes volatilised. However, the experienced analyst knows that the thermal behaviour of a flux is modified by the addition of the sample. Sieber et al.254 addressed a problem familiar to many analysts working to satisfy the demand for compliance with quality systems that need to demonstrate traceability of results to the International System of Units (SI) or the values of a CRM, namely the need to demonstrate uncertainty in reported results. Calibrations based on fused beads prepared from spectrometric standard solutions or high purity compounds achieved this goal. The team at NIST used this method for the analysis of low alloy steel and an Al–Ti–Nb–W aerospace alloy during their work with candidate SRMs.

Other preparation techniques included a report by Dolgopolova et al.255 on a reliable and robust procedure using closed-vessel microwave digestion of lichens and leaves for the determination of trace levels of Cu, Pb and Zn. A mixture of 3 ml HNO3, 3 ml H2O2, 2 ml H2O and 0.8 ml HF ensured complete sample dissolution with 100 ± 5% recovery for analytes of interest at a maximum temperature of 210 °C and 350 psi pressure. Significant parameters were found to be the amount of HF and microwave pressure in the digestion vessel. Worley and Colletti256 reported improvements to a dried residual method used for the analysis of gallium in plutonium metal. Preparing dried specimens from liquids avoids problems associated with the introduction of caustic or otherwise hazardous liquids into a spectrometer. Ion exchange chromatography was used to remove the plutonium prior to casting the dried residues, improving the relative error from 5% to below 1%. Miller et al.257 used a new nanolitre dried spot method that overcame problems such as lack of repeatability and long preparation times that are familiar to many readers.
9.2 Geological and industrial minerals
X-Ray fluorescence spectroscopy continues to contribute to a substantial extent to the complete elemental characterisation of geological materials in order to elucidate its geological origin or to study the evolution of mineral deposition with time. Furthermore, XRF is frequently used for the verification of the quality and the physical characteristics of industrial mineral processes.
Soil and sediment characterisation by X-ray fluorescence spectrometry was applied by several researchers to evaluate climate variability and to give insights into changing palaeo-environments. Holmes et al.258 analysed upper Palaeocene cyclic sediments comprising alternate white carbonate-rich and green carbonate-poor beds. Measurements of iron in different beds, measured by scanning cores with XRF combined with estimates of the kaolinite content and nanofossil assemblage of the two beds, resulted in a correlation between the cyclic nature of the beds and climatic conditions. Westerhold et al.259 also used Fe intensity data obtained by scanning cores using XRF in combination with oxygen isotope compositions to discuss variations in the middle to late Miocene climatic record in the eastern South Atlantic in relation to changes in sea-level and deep-water temperature. Driese et al.260 used the XRF analysis of soil to evaluate the late Pleistocene to Holocene climatic record of a flood plain-terrace system in West Virginia, USA. The glacial to interglacial climatic shift was thought to be related to changes in both soil texture and C, Fe, Ti and Zr concentrations. Additional palaeoclimatic work was presented by Bahr et al.261 and Duntze et al.262
XRF, in combination with complementary techniques, continues to assist in the geochemical identification of rocks, minerals and soils. Karakaya et al.263 determined the mineralogical and chemical composition of sepiolite samples in Karapinar, Turkey, using SEM-EDS, XRD and XRF. The abundance of the major element oxides was measured by XRF, showing that the sepiolite was formed either by conversion of dolomite or by direct precipitation from solution under alkaline and saline conditions. Marques et al.264 analysed Brazilian Cerrado soils using WDXRF in order to provide insights as to the possible origin of the soil parent materials on the South American erosion surface and on the Serra Geral Basalts. Total major and trace elemental contents were quantified by WDXRF. Signatures of trace elements indicated that basalt-derived soils were formed from distinctly different magmas that may have been deposited during different basalt flow events. Solov’eva et al.265 described the application of AAS, ICP-MS and XRF to the determination of a range of REE in xenoliths from the kimberlite pipes in various Siberian Platforms. The data presented showed that the crustal evolution was different in the northeastern and central geoblocks of the platform, and these geoblocks should have belonged to different terrains. The geochemistry of kimberlite clan rocks in the Dharwar Craton, India, was also determined by XRF and described in a publication of Hagarty and Birkett.266 Wang et al.267 developed a method to determine the major, minor and trace elements, including C and the four halogens, in seamount phosphorite using XRF. Ultrafine (<40 μm) powder samples were directly pressed into pellets. For low atomic number elements, the interelement absorption-enhancement effects were corrected using an influence coefficient method; the other elements were corrected using the Rh Compton internal standard method. The accuracy of the method was evaluated by determinations on three certified reference materials. Enzweiler and Vendemiatto268 studied the performance of a commercially available WDXRF measurement method based on fundamental parameters for the analysis of soils and sediments. The calibrations were refined until the XRF results of certified reference materials were within the confidence interval of the corresponding certified value. The main advantage of the tested method was that it enabled the analysis of samples with high concentrations of trace elements and the determination of less common elements such as Bi, F, Sb and W. XRD and XRF techniques were applied to the analysis of geological minerals of volcanic origin by Pedersen et al.,269 who used these complementary techniques to characterise the composition of a clay-like diatomite. Bellezza et al.270 found cuspidine and gotzenite as accessories in the facies of venanzite from a Pleistocene lava flow and tuff outcrops formed between single basaltic lava flows were analysed by Buchl and Gier271 to study the different alteration stages.
For the certification of reference materials X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy remains a valuable technique to assess the homogeneity of the samples. The certification of three Co-rich seamount crust reference materials was described by Wang et al.272 Homogeneity tests using WDXRF for all the selected elements on 40 subsamples resulted in a relative standard deviation of less than 0.4%. Forty-six elements were certified in each sample based on interlaboratory results of 16 international laboratories. Petrov et al.273 presented the certification of two new reference samples of black shale SCHS-1 and SLg-1, collected in Siberia (Russia). These materials were certified for 51 and 43 elements, respectively, using interlaboratory data from more than 50 laboratories.
The importance of X-ray fluorescence spectrometry in the quantification and characterization of industrial minerals featured in publications during the review period. For bauxite exploration in Nigeria a procedure was developed for rapid, accurate and precise measurements based on a radioisotope EDXRF spectrometer.274 The oxides and elements determined in the bauxite ore were Al2O3, Co, Cu, Fe2O3, Ga, K2O, Mn, Nb, Pb, Rb, SiO2, Sr, TiO2, Y, Zn and Zr. Analysis of the obtained results showed a negative correlation between Al2O3 with Fe2O3, SiO2 and TiO2. This effect could be related to the processes of formation of bauxite where Al was enriched while the Si and Fe–Ti was removed. Perez et al.275 performed more than 500 multi-elemental XRF determinations to evaluate the geochemical quality of high-purity quartz in deposits from Argentina. The critical impurities of high quality samples, selected on the basis of the available XRF results, were subsequently determined by AAS. The combined analytical results allowed the classification of the quality of quartz according to its environment and geological genesis. Castendyk et al.276 presented a mineral quantification method for wall rocks at open pit mines to evaluate the pit lake water quality. INAA, XRD and XRF resulted in the identification of the most abundant minerals and their elemental concentration. Distribution maps of these minerals defined 8 relatively homogeneous areas of wall rocks. Additional work on the topic was presented by Sei et al.,277 describing the characterisation of kaolinitic clays from the Ivory Coast; and, by Funtua II,278 describing the analysis of pyrochlore ore samples from an albite-riebeckite granite for the simultaneous determination of the elements of economic interest, i.e., Nb, Sn, Ta, Th and U. Two papers in the French language were published dealing with the characterisation of phosphate layers by XRF.279,280
The evaluation of the chemical and structural properties of modified minerals using XRF in combination with other spectroscopic techniques was reported. Examples included: the evaluation of diatomaceous clay supported with metal oxides to explore their interaction with aqueous phenol solutions;281 the study of clinoptilolite modified with titanium phosphate to assess its sorption capacity to heavy metals;282 and an investigation of the effect of heat treatment and acid activation on the surface area, pore volume and microporosity of glauconitic clay.283
For the determination of the platinum group metals and gold in ores and rocks the published literature confirms the advantageous use of X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy. Robertson and Feather284 developed an EDXRF method for the determination of Au, Pt and U in ores, by utilizing the high-energy spectral regions of the K X-ray lines of these elements. The elemental concentration was related to peak intensity corrected for background, matrix variations, density and line overlaps. Provided that the samples were finely pulverized, the EDXRF method proved to be a viable alternative to fire assay, capable of measuring Au concentrations down to 1 mg kg−1. Yoon et al.285 presented the performance of different analytical techniques (AAS, ICP-AES, ICP-MS and XRF) in the quantitative determination of Pt-group metals (PGM) in ore samples and industrial materials. The XRF technique was used to examine the total amount of PGM.
In the synthesis and characterization process of new industrial materials XRD and XRF analysis in combination with other analytical techniques continues to be of major importance. Deshpande et al.286 prepared microwave-hydrothermally derived Ba1−xSrxTiO3
					(BST) powders and characterized them by SEM, XRD and XRF. Their results indicated that under well-controlled preparation conditions stoichiometric cubic BST powders were formed. The production of a p-type semiconductor, Zn1−xFexS, by a co-precipitation method with various Fe concentrations (x
					= 0.18 and 0.4) was presented by Deulkar et al.287 The material was characterized by XRF and other analytical techniques to define the semiconductor properties related to the Fe content. Mergen288 performed research on the production of high alumina refractories from bauxite ore. XRD and XRF measurements of acid leached bauxite revealed that the Fe level in the bauxite was decreased below 2% and that no significant amounts of SiO2 and TiO2 were dissolved. Leached bauxite material sintered at 1400–1700 °C was characterized with XRD and SEM revealing corundum and mullite minerals in the form of large aggregates. Another paper dealing with the analysis and chemical composition of larnite-rich ultra-refractory material was presented by Martinez-Frias et al.289
9.3 Environmental

9.3.1 Atmospheric particulate matter. 
The importance of sampling strategy has been a recurring theme throughout this review period for investigations into elemental characterisation and the mobility of airborne particulates. Deutsch et al.290 used filtration and impaction methods to collect samples representing all four seasons of the year. They found that element concentrations were affected by both the location of the sampling site and meteorological conditions, as only heavy rains were able to provide sufficient removal of the aerosols from the atmosphere. Braziewicz et al.291 collected aerosol samples during tropospheric and stratospheric aircraft flights over the mainly agricultural land and forest in the north-eastern region of Poland. Air volumes were filtered using Petrianov filters at altitudes of 1, 3, 6, 9, 12 and 15 km using customised equipment attached to a jet plane. The long sampling distances served as a good representation of mean aerosol composition and distribution for comparison with the elements found from collections using stationary equipment near the ground level on the outskirts of Warsaw. Bruno et al.292 used both a high volume sampler equipped with glass fibre filters and a dichotomous sampler with nucleopore filters for estimations of source apportionment using a chemical mass balance receptor model software (CMB8).
The dichotomous impactor has become the sampling device of choice in several studies to characterise aerosol element compositions of the PM10 and PM2.5 size fractions. Air pollution is not only known to be correlated with human health, but is also recognised as a factor in the radiation balance of the Earth, as small aerosol particles scatter and absorb solar radiation. Viksna et al.293 measured mass, element composition and black carbon on Teflon filters of airborne particulates in Riga, Latvia, using both TXRF and EDXRF. The mobile, fine particle elements in the aerosol were determined by subtraction of X-ray spectra measured before and after sequential leaching of the filters. Street dust particles were found to be dominant in the coarse particles, whereas particles generated by human activities were dominant in the <0.5 μm size fraction. Marcazzan et al.294 sampled PM10 and PM2.5 in parallel three times per week in Milan, Italy, for the whole of 2001. More than 250 PM samples, analysed by EDXRF, demonstrated strong seasonal modulation. Principal factor analysis was used for source apportionment. Gatari et al.295 collected samples at four different sites during July and August, 1999, in the town of Nanyuki, which is situated on the Equator on the north-western slope of Mount Kenya, some 1930 m above sea level. All four sites recorded high concentrations of Cl and S with the coarse Cl considered to be due to sea salt, thereby demonstrating the significant influence of aerosols transported over long distances. Bromine and Zn were found in the PM2.5 fraction, whilst soil derived elements such as Ca, Fe, K and Si were dominant in the coarse size range. The comparatively high concentrations of Br and Pb were attributed to vehicle repairs, which is a major activity close to one of the collection sites. Concentrations of 14 elements in samples collected in Khartoum, Sudan, by El-Tahir and colleagues296 during April and May 2001 were compared with other African locations. The EDXRF results showed that dust aerosol transport and re-suspension were the main sources that affected the quality of ambient air in the Khartoum area. Anthropogenic sources were found to be generally low. Levels of black carbon were also determined in both size fractions. Bennet et al.297,298 also used a dichotomous impactor to collect samples at an urban and a rural location during two months with different meteorological conditions in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. A sharp cyclone was used to sample the finer, PM1, particles. An EDXRF spectrometer based on the three-axial geometry was used to measure concentrations of elements heavier than phosphorus. Black carbon was also measured with a reflectometer. The coarse particles were found to originate from soil with black carbon in both the PM2.5 and PM1 fractions whilst Br, K, Pb and Zn were present only in the smallest particles. Single elements or ratios between elements were used as a fingerprint for the emitting sources: sea spray, soil, city road dust, biomass burning, industry and traffic. Koleleni299 compared PM10 data collected in Dar es Salaam with aerosol data available for the cities of Kinshasa in the Republic of Congo and Butare, Ruwanda. Elements found included Br, Ca, Cl, Cr, Cu, Fe, Ga, K, Mn, Ni, P, Pb, Rb, S, Se, Si, Sr, Ti, V, Zn and Zr. Rain, wind speed and its directions were reported to be the main seasonal variations to correlate with the minimum and maximum values of the analyte concentrations reported for the months between September 1996 and May 1997.
A sampler with an Andersen PM10 inlet was used by Carvacho et al.300 to study air pollution at one site in the agricultural city of Chillan, Chile. Filters were weighed before and after sampling to obtain mass concentration and PIXE and XRF used to identify the 22 elements found. Re-suspended soil dust was found to be responsible for 55% of the PM10 aerosol. The presence of Br, Pb and V were attributed to traffic emissions. Industrial activities were thought to be associated with the following trace metals: As, Cu, Ga, Mn, Sr and Zn. Ambient particulate matter and gas in Tokyo were studied using XRF, gravimetric methods and ion chromatography by Yamada et al.301 Samples were collected on PTFE membrane filters using an Andersen air sampler for the PM fraction and a four stage filter pack method for the determination of SO2, HNO3, HCl and NH3. Levels of the analytes and gases measured were found to be dependent on seasonal variations and evidence of transport of matter from China to Japan was noted.
An eight stage Andersen impactor was also used by Zereini et al.302 to monitor airborne particulates associated with motor vehicles. Samples were collected from August 2001 to July 2002 at three locations with different traffic density in Frankfurt am Main and non- urban areas in Germany. Sampling at the three sites was performed simultaneously for the subsequent determination of the platinum group metals (PGE) Pd, Pt and Rh. Palladium was measured by TXRF after Hg co-precipitation and Pt and Rh were analysed by adsorptive stripping voltammetry after high pressure ashing digestion. Levels of PGE correlated with traffic density and, reassuringly, the lowest levels found in the non-urban area. However, the presence of PGE in the area relatively free of traffic was thought to hint at transfer of emitted PGE from the city to this sampling station by the wind. The main fraction of PGE was found in the respirable particle sizes between 1.1 and 4.7 μm. This is likely to be of interest to those concerned with risk assessment related to human inhalation. Lesniewska et al.303 were also concerned with health issues after their study of PGE in road dust, tunnel dust, common grass and pine needles collected from residential areas of Bialystok in north-eastern Poland. High resolution (HR) and quadrupole ICP-MS were used to measure Pt and Ph. Palladium was determined by TXRF and HR-ICP-MS after matrix separation by reductive co-precipitation with Hg. The highest PGE concentration was found in the road dust with Pt values ranging from 34.2 to 110.9 ng g−1, Rh from 6.0 to 19.7 ng g−1 and Pd reported at 32.8 ng g−1 by TXRF and 42.2 ng g−1 by HR-ICP-MS. Lough et al.304 collected PM2.5 and PM10 at the entrance and exits of two tunnels in Milwaukee, USA. MOUDI cascade impactors were used to collect metal emissions to monitor the effect of fleet composition and seasonal changes. The authors noted a relationship between noble metals and the age of vehicles, elements related to brake wear and the presence of Ca, Cu, Fe and Pb in the sub-micrometre fraction. A three day strike that freed the streets of buses in Sao Paulo, Brazil, provided an opportunity for workers from the university in the city305 to assess any change in pollution. Particles were sampled on glass fibre filters on strike and normal working days using a high volume sampler. The results indicated that a programme aiming to reduce emissions from the bus fleet was proving successful.
Single particle characterisation of Asian dust samples using a low Z EPMA were reported by Ro et al.306 The quantitative determination of elements such as C, N and O were included as well as higher Z elements that were analysed by conventional EPMA. Aerosol particles were collected in three Korean cities with four different urban characteristics during four Asian dust storms in the Spring of 2000 and of 2001. From the analyses, the authors were able to report that three samples had experienced chemical modification during their long range transport from China to Korea. However, characteristics of the chemical modification were very different from each other. Shi et al.307 collected samples during two of these storms in Beijing, China. Analysis of individual particles by field emission gun SEM and environmental-SEM with EDXRF showed some 20% of particles were mineral aggregates and at least 25% contained sulfur. Ma et al.308,309 collected samples during a storm in March 2002 on the west coast of Japan to show that 79% of the total particle population was found to be modified by sea salt and sulfur. Evidence of the hygroscopic nature of mineral dust particles from Asian sources was confirmed by Perry et al.,310 who used eight stage rotating drum impactors at Trinidad Head, California, during the Spring of 2002. One sampler operated at ambient relative humidity whilst the other operated at 55% relative humidity. SR provided continuous measurements of the size-related aerosol element composition with a three hour time resolution. The PM10 and PM2.5 element mass ratios were consistent with the long range transport of mineral dust from Asian sources and showed a strong correlation between S and Si mass concentrations. The ratio of Ca to S was thought to point towards the accumulation of sulfate coatings near the source region or during transport across the Pacific Ocean. Kuang and co-workers311 considered the plight of the 10000000 people living in Beijing during the intense Spring time storms. PCA was used to report that in addition to the particulates emitted through chimneys from a steel factory and by wind from coal heaps used as a primary energy source, traffic, domestic heating, other small industrial operations and construction materials such as concrete and mortar also formed part of the dust storm.
A two-step procedure that combined an air dispersion model with a receptor model was used by Gomez et al.312 to identify sources from industrial activity in San Nicolas, Argentina. PM10 concentrations were measured from four sites by WDXRF and potential sources, a thermal power plant, a steel mill, motor vehicle exhaust fumes and dust from both paved and unpaved roads, were identified using PCA. Ortner et al.313 characterised individual aerosol particles from a nickel refinery using EPMA to discover a complex onion-like surface structure in the particles emitted during high temperature processing. Increased awareness of problems associated with CO2 emissions has led to a number of environmental conservation campaigns to reduce all emissions towards zero. Many steel companies now recycle their dust and therefore require analyses to fully understand its composition. Kashiwaya et al.314 studied dust sampled from the filtering system of an electric arc furnace using XRF and XRD. The main constituents were found to be ZnFe2O4 and Fe2O3 plus chlorides (PbCl2 and ZnCl2), fluorides (FeF3, PbF2 and ZnF2) and oxides (MnO2 and ZnO). This information highlighted the potential for the recovery of zinc from what had previously been considered a pollutant. Personal and area air samples taken at a scrap lead smelter were analysed by Harper et al.315 The PVC filters used in three different samplers were initially analysed for their Pb content using a portable XRF system, then digested with dilute HNO3 to provide solutions for analysis by ICP-OES. As a result of this pilot project all three samplers were considered suitable for use in further field research studies. An inter-laboratory exercise for the XRF analysis of harmful metals collected onto filters as thin layers from workplace air was presented at the 2004 Denver X-ray Conference by Foster.316 This work again showed that direct analysis of particulates on filters by XRF has advantages over the traditional, lengthy route of acid digestion and subsequent analysis by AAS or ICP-AES. Furthermore, the exercise showed that sets of calibration filter reference standards can be mass-produced and that it was possible to “transport” the calibration from a “parent” spectrometer to other instruments, be they ED- or WDXRF configurations.

Other publications included an investigation by Spolnik et al.317 using EPMA and EDXRF to determine the chemical composition, size and probable origin of aerosol particles responsible for blackening works of art displayed within the cathedral at Weert in the Netherlands. Koistinen et al.318 assessed the PM2.5 in personal exposure samples from residential indoor, outdoor and workplace indoor micro-environments from some non-smoking adults in Helsinki, Finland. Personal exposure and static samples (48 h) were analysed by EDXRF for 76 participants not exposed to environmental tobacco smoke and 102 residences where smoking did not occur. Using PCA, the authors concluded that fixed site outdoor monitoring for sources such as traffic and long range transport of dusts were overestimated and that the contribution from indoor sources to personal exposure levels had not been given sufficient credibility. Szilagyi and Hartyani319 published a simple, rapid method for the XRF analysis of aerosol samples. Three supports (Whatman and Teflon® filters and Prolene® foil) were considered. The calibration procedure was carried out by dripping 500 μl of a gradually diluted multi-element standard solution (CertiPUR 11355®) onto supports which were then dried at room temperature. The filters were covered with Re or Ta plates to ensure infinite thickness for the primary X-ray beam. These plates also served as secondary targets. Accuracy, precision and detection limits (0.01–0.18 mg kg−1) were calculated to show that the Teflon filters and Prolene foil were better than the Whatman quartz fibre filters.


9.3.2 Other environmental. 
An exercise to find an alternative approach to the traditional procedure for determining heavy metals in contaminated soils was described by Vanhoof et al..320 To satisfy the demands by government and consultants for a cost effective procedure that was fit-for-purpose when immediate feedback of results is helpful during remediation projects, four EDXRF configurations were assessed. The systems ranged from portable to high-performance laboratory-based spectrometers and were considered using criteria such as limit of detection, accuracy, measurement uncertainty and sample pre-treatment. The study proved that the field portable system and the benchtop instrument placed in a mobile van gave semi-quantitative data. Limits of detection were found to be a factor of 10–20 higher for the portable analyser. Accuracy and measurement uncertainty improved using the benchtop system. Jorgensen et al.321 reported the multi-element mapping of polluted soil on former horticultural land. The Pb ∶ As mass ratio confirmed that PbHAsO3 had been used for pest control in the former greenhouses and Bordeaux mixture (CuSO4) applied to limit leaf damage. The enrichment of As, Cu, Pb and Zn was greatest in the top 20 cm of the soil with no anthropogenic enrichment of the analytes below a depth of 50 cm. The benefits of a polarised EDXRF configuration were demonstrated by Hettipathirana,322 with measurements in contaminated soils for trace levels of As, Cd, Cr and Pb in addition to major levels of Al, Ca, Fe, K, Mg, Mn, Na, P, Si and Ti. The calibration was based on synthetic fused beads prepared with Al2O3 for the trace elements and SiO2 matrices for the majors. Matrix correction was based on the well established loss-eliminated alpha coefficient method. Rapid industrialisation and intensive agriculture in India was shown by Krishna and Govil323 to have caused heavy metal contamination of soils in the Pali region of Rajasthan. Levels of Cr, Cu, Pb, Sr, V and Zn were proved to be responsible for the development of toxicity in agricultural produce which, in turn, affected the population. Bakac324 studied samples from 33 different sites in western Turkey to show that not only industry but also the geology and agriculture contributed to the pollution of the soil. Pfeifer et al.325 reported elevated arsenic concentrations in waters and soils in southern Switzerland. Using a host of analytical tools, XRD, XRF, XAS-XANES, EXAFS, EPMA, ICP and AAS with hydride generation and ion chromatography, they proposed seven different mechanisms that were thought to contribute to the behaviour of arsenic in the natural environment under temperate climatic conditions. The geochemical baselines of Cr and Ni were studied by Salminen et al.326 in data collected by XRF, ICP-MS and ICP-AES from the Barents region of northwest Russia and Finland. The Cerrado region on the central plateau of Brazil is known to contain weathered soils that have, until recently, escaped the consequences of agriculture and industrialisation. Marques et al.327 prepared an inventory of the native elements present in the pristine soils to assist in the understanding of the weathering processes. Following the conflict in the Kosovo region, Török et al.328 measured depleted uranium in individual soil particles using EPMA and SIMS. The ultra-fine uranium particles were often found to be attached to larger soil particles and Al and Ti, typical elements in the components of the weaponry, were also present.

Lead in paint and soil is now a concern in developing countries. A pilot study329 in a mining and smelting region in northern Armenia reported that lead levels exceeded 400 mg kg−1, the standard accepted in the USA for soils in children’s play areas. Similarly, floor dust in the houses exceeded the US EPA limit of 40 μg ft−2. Clark et al.330 found that 53% of children under the age of 12 in 7 cities in Karnataka and Gujarat, India, had blood levels equal to or greater than 10 μg dl−1, the level currently considered elevated by the US Centres for Disease Control and Prevention. Field portable XRF analysers were then used to determine the lead levels in paint, dust, air, soil and other bulk materials near industrial sites and in the homes of the children found to be at risk.
Givelet et al.331 suggested a comprehensive protocol for the collection, handling and preparation of peat cores for physical, chemical, mineralogical and isotopic analyses. Collected cores were kept frozen at −18 °C until they could be prepared for analysis. The non-destructive benefits of XRF analysis were exploited in this multi-disciplinary approach to the profiling of this valuable archive of atmospheric deposition. Ukonmaanaho et al.332 measured As, Cu, Ni, Pb and Zn by XRF in four ombrotrophic peat bogs in Finland to produce different elemental profiles for each bog.
The EU Council Directive 98/83/EC on the quality of drinking water specifies that the lead content in our water has to decrease during the coming years. Vilarinho et al.333 used XRF and AAS to measure the leaching of Pb from leaded brasses used in pipe work and fittings that come into contact with drinking water. Gopal et al.334 used FTIR, XRD and XRF to characterise suitable adsorbents for the removal of contaminants in water. Prakash et al.335 found XRF and SEM techniques useful for the identification of differences between cation exchange membranes employed in coagulation recovery from water treatment plant residues. Ground waters flowing under artesian pressure from the Ballimore region of central New South Wales, Australia, are known to contain 95% NaHCO3. Carbon dioxide effervesces from these ground waters as they discharge from boreholes. XRF data336 showed that the most plausible explanation for the high CO2 content was the mantle, with the gas initially delivered to the fractured strata by magmatic activity.
XRF, XRD and UV-Vis techniques337 were successful in identifying the optimum conditions for Mn2+ removal from acid mine drainage by sulfate reducing bacteria. Frau and Ardau338 reported XRD, SEM and WDXRF studies to assist in the understanding of arsenic mobility in the Baccu Locci stream catchment in Sardinia which had previously been affected by mining activities. Three main mechanisms for the gradual release of arsenic were proposed: oxidation of residual arsenopytite to scorodite, decomposition of scorodite into hydroxide or oxide of Felll and finally the release from Felll hydroxides. A team from the Czech Republic339 reported the effective removal of arsenic compounds from strongly contaminated mining waters. XRD and XRF analyses supported by IR and Raman spectroscopy helped to define the two-stage precipitation process that brought about significant ecological and economic improvements. The Bemidji aquifer340 in Minnesota, USA, is known as a site of subsurface petroleum contamination. XRF, XRD, SEM and Mossbauer spectroscopy were used to characterise the biogeochemical transformation of the iron minerals present. Sar et al.341 used TEM and EDXRF in a project to develop a biosorbent for the removal of toxic radionuclides ThlV and UVl by a metal sequestration process.
The fate of heavy metals (Cu, Pb and Zn) from their sources to their final sink in marine sediments was estimated by Mikulic et al.342 Four sources were identified; long range transport, traffic, anti-fouling paints and eroded materials, which annually introduce some 155 kg of Cu, 175 kg of Pb and 666 kg of Zn into Punat Bay, Croatia. Analyses by ICP-MS, ICP-AES and XRF of sediments from the Szczecin Lagoon,343 collected in October 1997 after an exceptional flood of the Oder river, were compared with samples collected in December 2000. The flood was shown to have increased the levels of Cu, Cr, Mn, P and possibly Cd, Pb and Zn due to the enhanced transport of redox sensitive and anthropogenic elements in the river. The sediments appear to be the most polluted with heavy metals within the Polish Exclusive Economic Zone of the Baltic Sea. XRF, NAA and gamma spectrometry were used by Kadyrzhanov et al.344 to measure elements and radionuclide composition in soils, water, bottom sediments and vegetation collected at 15 sites in Kazakhstan along the Syrdarya river and its tributaries. EDXRF analyses of sediments in the coastal zones of Costa Rica345 showed that the beaches of the Caribbean and North Pacific regions showed the greatest concentration of Ca. This was indicative of the abundant reef structures nearby. Beaches of the Central and South Pacific were found to have the greatest iron concentrations, pointing towards lithosphere contribution. It was particularly interesting to note that no evidence of elements associated with anthropogenic pollution was found. The origin346 of elevated levels of arsenic in sediments from a kettle-hole pond in Arlington, MA, USA, was found to be NaAsO2 and As2O3 applied to the pond to control aquatic macrophytes. A total of 68 sediment samples were analysed by XRF to reveal maximum arsenic levels of 2600 mg kg−1. Measurements of 210Pb by NAA confirmed that the date of deposition of the pollutants coincided with records for use of the herbicides. Abandoned mines and ore processing sites are often visited by analysts seeking to measure the consequences of previous activities. XRF and ICP techniques were used by analysts in Leipzig, Germany,347 to determine heavy metals, metalloids and non-metals in stream sediments and waters from an abandoned copper mine in the Mansfeld region of Germany. Smith and Melville348 used XRF data to show that the formation and oxidation cycles of iron monosulfates played an important role in controlling water quality in the drainage system of the Tweed river flood plain in eastern Australia. A comparison4 of metal analytes in sediments by EDXRF and ICP-OES demonstrated that EDXRF could yield the same profile as ICP-OES for seasonal variations but “in a more practical way”. Tung349 also realised the advantages of EDXRF over conventional chemical digestion methods for major oxides and trace metals in marine sediments. The blessing of the non-destructive nature of the XRF technique coupled with its speed and the avoidance of hazardous chemicals that we have appreciated for so long seems to be reaching the wet chemistry bench.

Other environmental applications included the evaluation of sulfation of marble by dry deposition.350 A good relationship between the levels of sulfate deposited on the marble and SO2 concentrations in the air suggested that marble could serve as an indicator of atmospheric pollution by SO2. Holyska et al.188 compared sandstone from three quarries in Poland with a sample from a tomb thought to be 100 years old to elucidate the mechanism for stone deterioration due to acid rain and humid SO2 gas. Concentrations of Ca, Mg and Fe leached from the samples were measured by EDXRF and TXRF. A comprehensive review of all aspects of environmental analysis can be found in our companion Atomic Spectrometry Update,351 which confirms the wealth of scientific endeavour devoted to this increasingly important application for our analytical skills.

9.4 Archaeological, cultural heritage and forensic
XRF continues to have a major role to play in the analysis of archaeological artefacts and a variety of items of importance in terms of cultural heritage. A number of review articles have covered this topic. In this respect, there is significant overlap in the use of portable XRF (q.v., Section 7), a technique that extends the non-destructive nature of XRF to the convenience of taking the instrument to the artefact. Adriaens352 presented an overview of past and current European research activities in the conservation of Europe’s vast cultural heritage, emphasising specifically the use and availability of analytical techniques. Mallory-Grenough and Greenough353 considered a range of techniques (including XRF) that are widely used to support Earth science research that can be applied to archaeological problems. As part of a more general review of the application of accelerator techniques to art and archaeological artefacts, Calligaro et al.354 considered a specific PIXE-XRF technique that could be applied to samples that were too sensitive for exposure to charged particles. Mantler and Klikovits355 questioned whether XRF was really non-destructive in the analysis of art objects and other delicate samples. They concluded that a typical 100 s exposure by EDXRF using conventional 100 W tubes caused no visible harm to paintings and illuminated manuscripts, but that a WDXRF 3 kW exposure for several minutes can leave visible signs of yellowing, brittleness and even mechanical degradation. A wider review of X-ray analysis in art and archaeology was undertaken by Schreiner et al.356 from the Austrian Academy of Fine Arts, who described the techniques covering radiography and diffraction, as well as XRF. Ferretti357 was more specific in investigating the problems and solutions associated with fluorescence from the collimator when using Si(PIN) and drift detectors in analysing archaeological and historical materials.
One of the major applications of XRF in the characterisation and provenancing of archaeological artefacts and items of historical importance is the analysis of pottery and other ceramic materials. Martian et al.358 undertook a multi-technique provenancing study of Iron Age pottery from Este, N. Italy, drawing comparisons with previous data for pottery from the town of Padova. Firing experiments carried out with clay that matched the composition of the studied potsherds indicated that a well controlled and standardised technology was used in the Iron Age, perhaps indicating the existence of a single workshop at Este. In a second contribution, Martian359 extended this study from a wider selection of localities in the Veneto region, NE Italy. A study of cooking and painted ware from a Late Antique kiln at Lucera, Italy, by Gliozzo et al.360 using a range of techniques led to insights into the production cycle, including origin of raw materials, preparation of paste and firing temperatures. Del Rio et al.361 used a range of techniques to characterise Bronze Age ceramics from sites in SW Spain, undertaking a preliminary interpretation of the results in terms of the prehistoric technology of pottery manufacture and functionality. Late Roman pottery from the Tavoliere area (S. Italy) was studied by Eramo et al.,362 again using a number of techniques to characterise the petrology, mineralogy and chemical composition. Cooking pottery appeared to be made from local alluvial clayey silt. All the ceramics appeared to have been fired under oxidising conditions at temperatures between 600 and 800 °C. Ancient pottery from the Tel Al-Baharia site, Damascus, Syria, was analysed by Bakraji363 using radioisotope XRF. The statistical analysis of results indicated that most of the samples originated from 4 sources, although further work was required to show whether they were local or not. Prehistoric pottery from NW Sudan was analysed by Klein et al.,364 who demonstrated a local origin. Hall365 undertook a cluster analysis study of EDXRF data from Late Jomon pottery sherds from the Kanto region, Japan. The opportunistic nature of some investigations is illustrated by the work of Figueiredo and colleagues366 who undertook an emergency archaeological intervention in the Old City of Lisbon, Portugal. Ceramic foundry crucibles were collected from a layer of embankment debris used after the destructive earthquake of 1755. Once again, a range of techniques was used (XRF, XRD and micro-SRXRF) and the presence of Hg and traces of Au and Cu was interpreted as indicating that one of the crucibles may have been used to manipulate gold amalgams.
Often related to pottery investigations are studies of glazes, as these too can often be used for research into provenancing or elucidating production technology. Comodi et al.367 examined a collection of ceramics from the Middle Ages, found in the Saepinum area, Campobasso, Italy, using XRD, XRF and SEM and micro-Raman techniques. One class of object (Altilia products) had a tin-opacified lead glaze coating, the other (Terravecchia) had transparent high-lead glaze. It was proposed that the principal advantage of the high lead content was ease of preparation and application, with the risk that the reduction of lead oxide to metallic lead during the manufacturing process increased, leading to wastage. Li and colleagues from the Shanghi Institute of Ceramics368 studied Ru ware glaze of the Northern Song dynasty (960–1126 AD). Chinese Jingdezhen, blue and white imperial porcelain (Yuan, Ming and Qing dynasties) was characterised by Wu et al.369 from the same Institute, interest being particularly in raw materials and production details. Colomban and Sagon370 undertook an analogous study of Vietnamese (15th Century) blue and white porcelain and stoneware. Fan et al.371 undertook the non-destructive analysis of ancient celadon (900–1200 AD) using SR. Statistical analysis of the results was used to identify production age in this Chinese language publication. In another SR study, Cheng et al.372 used multivariate statistical analysis to provenance glazed artefacts to two different periods and to demonstrate that the different coloured glazes were from varying proportions of Co, Cu and Fe. Fabbri et al.373 characterised both the bodies and glazes of tableware ceramic materials (1st–4th Century AD) recovered during the excavation of a theatre in Valcamonica, N. Italy), classifying the artefacts into a number of groups.
During the present review period, several groups reported studies on glass materials. Jembrih-Simburger374 used XRF and ion beam analysis to examine iridescent Art Nouveau glass artefacts in a study particularly designed to use the EDXRF results to address authenticity issues. Clusters of groups of glass could be associated with glass manufacturers. Roman glass fragments were characterised by Fredrickx et al.150 using both EPMA and micro-SRXRF, data being used to classify the fragments. EDXRF contributed to a study of the luminescence mechanisms in early medieval blue-glass mosaic tesserae by Galli et al.375. Pollution-induced deterioration of glass was the object of a study by Robinet et al.376 This study was largely based on Raman spectroscopy of white crystalline deposits on 19th and 20th Century artefacts in the collections of the National Museums of Scotland, being identified as mainly sodium formate. EDXRF contributed to identifying the high levels of sodium (and more rarely potassium) and low levels of calcium in the glass. It was thought that the degradation was caused by a combination of high levels of formic acid (and possibly formaldehyde) and high relative humidity generated within the display cases or storage cabinets. Another aspect of this field which attracted some interest was the work of Castellato et al.,377 whose interest lay in medieval and renaissance glass technology from specified Tuscan sites in Italy. Analysis of mainly non-vitreous finds from the archaeological site (such as production waste, refractory materials, crucibles and raw materials) using a range of techniques, including XRF, was used to provenance raw materials to sources in identified local sand quarries.
Following on from the last work, corrosion and surface degradation were the focus of two further reports. Lan et al.378 studied the effects of air pollution and climatic factors on the corrosion of marble under field conditions. Objects were exposed to the outdoor environment at four test sites in Vietnam for a period of 3–24 months. XRF and XRD were used to identify the only corrosion product as gypsum, which was washed away by rain. The factors influencing the rate of corrosion were rainfall, sulfur dioxide concentration in air, and relative humidity. In a complementary study, black crusts and patinas on marble from the Parthenon and Erechtheum at the Acropolis in Athens were investigated by Maravelaki-Kalaitzaki379 using a number of techniques, including EDXRF. Black encrustations were found to be composed of gypsum, calcite and elements which originated from atmospheric pollution, including Al, Fe, Mn, Pb, Ti, Si and Zn. Orange–brown accretions on the Parthenon comprised calcium oxalate, hydroxyapatite, hematite and other elemental components. Si, P and Fe may have originated from ancient pigments. Pb in patinas on the Erechtheum was identified with cerussite, which may have had a similar pigment origin.

Murals and paintings can also be analysed non-destructively by EDXRF, as is illustrated by the work of Kallithrakas-Kontos and Maravelaki-Kalaitzaki,380 who used the technique to identify pigments decorating Hellenistic figurines, as well as the uniformity of a treatment of barium hydroxide applied to stone. Mesoamerican mural samples containing blue pigments were analysed using XRF and PIXE by del Rio and colleagues,381 who found that the most characteristic pigment was Maya blue. Paulus and Knuutinen382 looked at the composition and properties of cadmium aquarelle colours from six different manufacturers to find out if the pigments contained cadmium salts and to assess their ageing properties. The overall objective of this work was to choose water colours suitable for conservation applications as modern aquarelle colours are being produced without cadmium. Kanngiesser et al.383 continued her interest in developing applications of a three dimensional micro-XRF by using a table-top setup to investigate paint layers. Although diffuse-reflectance spectroscopy was the main technique of interest to Dupuis and Menu384 in evaluating pigment particles in organic layers, micro-XRF and XRD were used to confirm results.
A number of groups have used XRF to examine inks and manuscripts, including Hahn et al.,385 who used micro-XRF to investigate historical iron-gall inks with the intention of distinguishing the ink used by one artist and if possible to identify the chronological order of manuscripts. Applications included manuscripts by Mozart, Goethe and Arnim. In a second contribution from this research grouping,386 the oxidation and migration processes of inorganic compounds in iron-gall inks was studied, by micro-XRF and micro-XANES, showing that Cu was a second element with an important role to play in paper degradation processes due to iron-gall ink corrosion. Hayez et al.387 used micro-Raman spectroscopy to study a Persian Herati lacquered manuscript with XRF and XPS to carry out supplementary measurements to identify the pigments used. Reiche et al.388,389 published two reports that investigated metal point drawings. In one, the silverpoint drawings in a sketch book of Albrecht Durer (1471–1528) were studied. Minor elements found in most sketches included Cu and traces of Zn, except for one which contained Zn, presumably because of the use of a different silver point. In a second contribution, an analysis of the composition of the metal points was used to develop new criteria for the attribution of sketches to Albrecht Durer and Jan van Eyck. Both these studies were undertaken by SRXRF.
The characterisation of coins and alloy artefacts is another popular application of XRF. Linke et al.390 used EDXRF as well as SEM and PIXE to analyse medieval silver coins from the Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna, and the Oesterreichische Nationalbank and were able to use trace element data to assign coins to their mint. Vijayan et al.391 analysed Indian punch marked silver coins by EDXRF, showing that Ag, Au, Cu, Fe and Pb were significant constituents, whereas As, Co, Cr, Ni and Ti appeared to indicate the decline and impoverishment of the issuing authority. Beck et al.392 looked at the surface enrichment of archaeological silver–copper alloys, and although this was a PIXE and SEM study, the conclusions are of relevance to those using EDXRF techniques. Specifically, the authors replicated silver–copper blanks of various compositions and developed a model of direct surface enrichment that allowed them to propose a relationship between surface and core content, which was applied to Roman coins from Chateaubleau, France. The multi-element analysis of coins was the topic of a study by Nayak et al.,393 in this case silver and copper coins from the British rule of India. Santra et al.394 also analysed Indian coins by EDXRF and PIXE, obtaining good agreement between these techniques.
The versatility of XRF in this field of application is shown by several unusual applications, including one by Edwards and colleagues395 who showed how XRF, GC-MS and NMR could be used as complementary measurements to Raman spectroscopy in analysing archaeological samples from the Barber-surgeon’s medicine chest on the Mary Rose, a Tudor warship that sank in 1545. A range of artefacts were identified, including resins (terpenoids), sulfates, carbonates, oxides, amorphous carbon (soot) and minerals associated with silt. TXRF was used by Carvalho et al.396 to study the distribution of trace elements along bones originating from the 13th Century to elucidate information about dietary habits and environment conditions of contemporary populations, as well as the uptake of these elements from the surrounding soil. This study concluded that high Fe and Mn values throughout the bone tissue originated from the surrounding soil, that the Pb had both a post- and ante-mortem origin and that the measured Sr and Zn levels originated from in vivo incorporation into hydroxyapatite bone matrix. A fossilized calotte (skull cap from an ancient type of individual showing distinctive skull features) from Lagoa Santa in Brazil was studied by Anjos et al.397 using EDXRF. In addition to elements that were associated with the surrounding limestone deposits, small differences in the Ca/Sr ratio suggested to the investigators that different parts of the calotte had been mounted with pieces from different individuals. An innovative investigation was carried out by Spolnik et al.398 using EDXRF and EPMA to analyse suspended particulate matter deposited in a church at Rocca Pietore in the Italian Alps. This investigation was instigated because of the use of a hot air ‘blow-in’ heating system, which is popular in the region, and its potentially deleterious effects on works of art. The principal effects observed were abrasion of plastered walls, re-suspension of particulate pollutants, and the generation of nitrogen dioxide, all attributable to the heating system.

Forensic applications of EDXRF have been illustrated this year by the work of Hall and Chambliss,399 who used the technique to analyse current-sized $10 US Federal Reserve Notes to establish a digital spectral library that could be used to evaluate questioned bank notes. Particular interest was shown in the use of chrome green ink on early issues, and its progressive change in elemental composition over the period 1928–1988. XRF was used by Kautenburger et al.400 to distinguish legal ivory from ivory of black market origin, principally to distinguish the origin of ivory by elephant population and by region.
9.5 Industrial
Numerous publications in this review period are dedicated to industrial applications using XRF to characterise the material in order to elucidate its properties or quality. As this review emphasises practical aspects of the XRF method, most of these papers will not be discussed in this section. Readers interested should refer to the companion ASU review on Industrial Analyis: Metals, Chemicals and Advanced Materials.401
As the environment is of major importance for all of us and the re-use of waste can only be encouraged, a few papers with regard to this subject are brought to your attention. Bingham and Hand402 presented research in which durable phosphate glasses were formed by vitrifying waste filter cakes from two metal finishing operations. Compositional analyses were performed by EDXRF and other complementary techniques. High performance glass could be obtained because of the high level of Fe and Zn in the wastes. Furthermore, the vitrification process was most successful on a waste sample collected from a metal phosphating process due to its high P2O5 content. Another study of waste incorporation in silicate glasses was published by Silva and Castanho.403 Chemical resistant glasses with up to 40% m/m of added galvanic solid waste and 28% m/m of re-used silica powders were produced and, subsequently, characterised by XRD and XRF. A more remarkable study404 described the preparation of silica gels from rice hull. Analyses of the produced silica gels with multiple techniques such as XRF revealed that the sample could have potential as chromatographic material, based on the small number of elemental impurities detected by XRF.
The synthesis and characterisation of inorganic catalytic materials by XRF continues to be very useful. A wide range of catalyst support materials were characterised, most of them immobilised using different modification techniques to improve their specific catalytic behaviour. In a significant number of contributions zeolites were used or synthesised as support material. Somerset et al.405 used the X-ray fluorescence technique to determine quantitatively the Al and Si content in fly ash precipitates as indices for the alkaline hydrothermal conversion of fly ash compounds into zeolites. The SiO2/Al2O3 ratio obtained in the precipitates ranged from 1.4 to 2.5. Ratio factors higher than 1.5 favoured the formation of faujasite zeolite. Additional information and a more detailed description of the characterisation and modification procedures of different types of zeolites, mesoporous molecular sieves, or other inorganic catalysts, in combination with their resulting catalytic activity, can be consulted in the ASU review referred to above on Industrial Analysis.401
A significant number of papers reported research results in the field of nano-materials applied for catalytic purposes, wherein the XRF technique featured as the technique for analytical characterisation. Toebes et al.406 prepared carbon nano-fibre supported platinum catalysts using Pt(NH3)4(NO3)2 as a precursor using both an ion adsorption technique and a homogeneous deposition precipitation method. Analyses of the platinum catalyst with H2-chemisorption, ICP-AES, TEM and XRF revealed a linear relationship between the active sites of the catalyst and the metal loading. Furthermore, the highest Pt loading (around 4% m/m) could be achieved with the homogeneous deposition precipitation method. Readers interested in the application of XRF to the characterisation of nano-catalysts are alerted to further contributions.407–411
Several analytical XRF methods were established to determine the chemical composition of ceramic materials, all presented by Gazulla et al.412–414 The first paper described an analytical WDXRF method for the characterisation of different raw materials used in ceramics. Several certified reference materials were applied to validate this method. The results showed that most of the elements, with the exception of the light elements (B, F, Li) and organic and inorganic carbon, could be determined by this XRF method. In the second paper, a methodology was developed for the characterisation of ceramic oxide refractory materials. Calibration and validation standards were prepared from mixtures of reference materials and analysed in the form of beads. Combining the elemental data with XRD data, the researchers could elucidate the deterioration of the refractories in industrial service. In the last paper, a methodology was given to determine the pigment phase and the chemical composition in Cr-containing ceramic pigments using both XRD and WDXRF, in order to establish the purity of the material and to assign a pigment class.
Research performed on the determination of the geochemistry and the quality of coal samples was considered in a few contributions. A study was carried out to analyse lignite samples, collected in coal basins in Turkey, using X-ray fluorescence spectrometry.415 Enriched concentrations for Cr and especially Ni were detected, and also for Bi, Co, Cu, Mo, Sc and V in comparison with the corresponding values of most coals in the world. A similar research study was performed on coal from Iran,416 reflecting increased concentrations of the trace elements Ba, Ca, Mg, Mn, Si and Sr. Two papers described the changes in geochemistry and mineralogy of coal due to alteration processes over time in coal seams. The former paper417 investigated the alteration of coals caused by igneous intrusions. INAA and XRF spectrometry were utilised to determine the contents of 57 elements, in combination with XRD for sample mineralogy determination. Using data handling statistics, elements could be subdivided into groups and linked to certain mineralogical classifications. Furthermore, three zones ranging from unaltered coal, through altered coal to highly coked coal, could be recognised and the chemical composition elucidated. The latter418 evaluated the geochemical and mineralogical anomalies of Chinese coals attributed to siliceous low-temperature hydrothermal fluids.
X-Ray fluorescence spectrometry remains a frequently applied analytical technique in the construction and building industry, for instance, to study the chemical composition of various types of Portland cement clinker,419 or to evaluate other processes in cement production. Barros et al.420 studied the incorporation ratio of the waste impurities CdO, PbO and ZnO into cement clinckers using a simulator device. X-Ray fluorescence analyses and energy dispersive scanning microprobe analyses of the tested products demonstrated that Zn will be evaporated in the cement kilns due to the influence of chlorine, and that the Cd and Pb incorporation ratio in the cement clinkers will be around 50% m/m. Ozkahraman and Isik421 used the XRF technique to determine the elemental composition of adhesive aggregates of tiles, obtained from 10 different companies. Subsequently, the adhesive strength of these test samples was determined. The results proved that adhesive aggregates with a high content (80–95% m/m) of SiO2 and a low content (0.5–3.4% m/m) of CaCO3 possessed the highest pull-out adhesive strength. Analysts in Italy422 responded to their government’s initiative to recycle more construction and demolition waste materials. Characterisation by both XRF and XRD indicated that the former waste could be re-utilised by the building industry. By reducing the material to 0.6–0.125 mm grain size, it could be recycled for use in the preparation of new mortar and concrete, whilst the finer fraction could be considered as a component in the preparation of cements, bricks and tiles. A publication by Xie et al.423 described a WDXRF method to quantify urea–formaldehyde (UF) resin and phenol–formaldehyde (PF) resin contents in medium density fibreboard (MDF). The element Cu, added to the UF resin as a labelling agent, and the existing Na-ion in the PF resin, were taken as fingerprints, respectively, for UF and PF resins. Linear calibration curves were established and the presence of the different resins in MDF could be determined.
The implementation of EU Directives on Packaging and Packaging Waste, Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment (WEEE) and Restriction on Hazardous Substances (RoHS) resulted in the development of XRF equipment and application programmes to monitor the concentration levels of the toxic elements Cd, Cr, Hg and Pb. A new benchtop liquid nitrogen free EDXRF system was developed for the determination of these elements in plastics and polymers.424 At the European X-ray Conference 2004, an application for in situ analyses and screening of plastics to control the toxic metal content using a small, lightweight, battery operated portable XRF analyser was presented.220 An extended screening study of the four toxic metals in packaging materials using XRF was also performed and the results were presented at the same conference.425 More than 300 samples were analysed with WDXRF using precalibrated spectral lines. Packaging materials exceeding the maximum allowable concentration of heavy metals could predominantly be assigned to the colouring agents and the pigments, especially red and yellow.
9.6 Clinical and biological
During this review period X-ray fluorescence spectrometry featured as an analytical tool to support clinical and biological research topics. Supplementary information can be consulted in the companion ASU review on Clinical and Biological Materials, Foods and Beverages.426,427
The majority of research into in vivo measurements of Pb in bone using the 109Cd K X-ray fluorescence is benefiting from continuous improvements. Fleming et al.428 investigated the effects of measurement distance and source activity on Pb determinations in a bone phantom. Activities of 1000 MBq yielded a superior measurement precision for a source-to-sample distance of 9 mm, coupled with a sample-to-detector distance of 25 mm, whereas activities of 710 and 320 MBq resulted in a source-to-sample distance of 4 mm and a sample-to-detector distance of 20 mm. The measurement uncertainty improved 18% and the reproducibility 39% compared with former protocols. Ahmed et al.429 studied the source-to-sample distance in relation to the energy deposition in a leg phantom model. Decreasing the sample-to-source distance from 2.0 cm to 0.5 cm resulted in an increase by 11% of the total energy deposited in the sample. The influence of different sets of phantoms used for calibration of bone Pb measurements was evaluated by Nie et al.430 Generally, all collected data were adjusted for the difference in composition of the phantoms during spectral analysis. The research showed that the common practice of setting the ratio of the Ca edge amplitude to the coherent scatter amplitude as a constant was only applicable for spectra acquired at the same system resolution, otherwise the ratio of the Ca edge amplitude to the coherent area should be used instead. Chinese researchers431 offered a calibration procedure for Pb in bone measurements using a set of tibia phantoms and applied a normalisation of the Pb X-ray intensity to the coherent scatter intensity.
As most of the non-invasive in vivo methods covered the determination of Pb in bones and tissues, it is interesting to note several contributions describing the determination of other metals. Graham and O’Meara432 applied an XRF system equipped with an 125I source to measure the Ag content in skin tissues. Experiments with Ag-doped skin phantoms indicated that a detection limit of 3–4 mg kg−1 could be achieved using a measurement time of 10–20 min. Two studies were presented by Studinski et al.189,433 for the determination of As in phantoms and tissues. The former described in vivo measurements using Monte Carlo simulations and an XRF system with a 125I source. These experiments resulted in detection limits for As of 2.6 ± 0.5 mg kg−1 and 5.7 ± 1.1 mg kg−1, depending on skin thickness. The latter contained data of experiments obtained with a 109Cd X-ray source on an 8 mm thick phantom and an effective dose of 0.3 μSv. Detection limits of 3.5 ± 0.2 mg kg−1 and 10.3 ± 0.5 mg kg−1 in, respectively, 90° and 180° measurement geometries, were achieved for 30 min measurement time. Preliminary in vivo measurements for the quantification of bone Sr levels in humans were performed by Pejovic-Milic et al.434 An XRF system using a 109Cd source to excite the Sr K X-rays, with the source-to-detector in 90° geometry, was applied. Detection limits of 0.25 mg Sr g−1 Ca were obtained, which is sufficient for monitoring Sr levels in human tissues. Shilstein et al.435 presented a phantom-based feasibility study for in vivo determinations of Zn in the prostate, allowing measurements through a 2–3 mm thick layer of the rectal wall. The use of an XRF topographic technique resulted in a minimisation of the Zn interference from non-prostatic tissue.
Several monitoring studies were presented using the 109Cd X-ray fluorescence technique for the determination of Pb in bone. Lin et al.436 measured blood and bone Pb levels among minorities living in the Boston area. Higher levels of Pb accumulation were observed for individuals older than 55 years and, moreover, with predominantly white participants. Coyle et al.437 examined the bone and blood Pb content of three workers active in the plastics industry. Severe Pb poisoning was observed and attributed to uncontrolled use of powdered lead sulfate stabilizers. A monitoring study among German and Swedish lead-smelter workers was carried out by Schutz et al.438 Beside bone Pb measurements also blood, plasma and urine samples were analysed for Pb. High bone Pb values were recorded for the German smelters due to historical lead exposure of considerable magnitude. Accumulated lead exposure may increase the risk of a number of chronic age-related diseases and can cause a decline in cognitive function over the course of time. Studies on this topic were presented in a number of publications.439–445
In biomedical applications, the XRF technique is frequently used to support cancer risk predictions and to follow-up the status of the diseases. Abnet et al.446 performed XRF measurements to determine Cu, Fe, Ni, S and Zn in single 5 μm thick sections from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded esophageal biopsy specimens. The study revealed that only high Zn concentrations could be strongly associated with a reduced risk of developing esophageal cancer. Farquharson and Geraki447 combined trace element XRF with EDXRD to predict the disease state in breast tissues. The concentrations of Cu, Fe, K and Zn were determined in 77 breast tissues, half classified as diseased, using an X-ray fluorescence system with a synchrotron radiation source. XRF data alone proved to be an unreliable indicator of disease state, but combined XRF and EDXRD data did possess the ability to predict the tissue state. Gurol et al.448 evaluated an EDXRF method by comparison with the standard methods to determine elements such as Ca, Cl, K, P and S in human urinary stones in order to speed up analyses of patients with urinary stone diseases. Ekinci and Ekinci449 analysed blood samples with an EDXRF spectrometer equipped with 241Am and 55Fe sources. The blood samples were dried at 300 °C, milled and mixed with 40% m/m cellulose prior to formation of a thin pellet to minimise inter-element enhancement effects. The elements Ca, Cl, Fe, I, In, K, Mo, Rb and Sn were determined to follow-up the disease state of schizophrenic, lung cancer and leukemia patients. Some additional work on this topic may also be of interest.450,451
Stephens and Calder452 described an EDXRF method for monitoring 30 non-organic trace elements in plant leaves. To overcome the high background caused by the organic matrix, polarised X-rays in Cartesian geometry were used. The sample preparation involved pulverising and briquetting of dried samples. Analysis of a suite of NIST plant and tobacco leaf reference materials proved the accuracy of the method. Bamford et al.453 extended the quantitative analytical capabilities of the EDXRF method for plant-based samples by using Rutherford Backscattering Spectrometry (RBS) data as input for the light elements in the EDXRF analysis. The RBS analysis indicated that the light elements could be considered as C7H10O5, which can be implemented in the EDXRF method and, therefore, improved accuracy was obtained. Ali454 combined PIXE and 109Cd radioisotope XRF measurements for the analysis of biological samples. Comparative analyses of NIST certified reference materials with regard to the performance characteristics showed that PIXE analyses were more sensitive for light elements (Z from 19 to 30), while XRF was better for the heavier elements (Z greater than 33). A combination of both techniques allowed an extended characterization of 15–20 light and heavy elements in biological samples. Cheburkin and Shotyk455 designed an XRF analyser for determining Ti in plant and peat materials using monochromatic excitation from a crystal diffraction monochromator and Co target X-ray diffraction tube. In addition to Ti with a detection limit of 0.9 mg kg−1, the minor elements Ca, Cl, Cr, K, Mn, S and P could also be determined at low mg kg−1 levels. A few studies reporting the determination of macro and trace elements in medicinal plants using EDXRF may also be of interest to this topic.456–458
X-Ray fluorescence spectrometry proved to be useful for the analysis of food and beverage samples. Trace element analyses of Cu, Fe, Mo, Ni, Pb, V and Zn in red and white wines from Brazil using EDXRF were presented by Anjos et al.459 The XRF equipment was based on a low power 2.25 W tube and an Si(Li) detector. Pre-concentration of the liquid sample was performed using ammonium pyrrolidinedithiocarbamate as chelating agent, followed by a membrane filtration. Lower levels of the measured elements were achieved in regard to previously published data, with the exception of Mo. Perring and Andrey460 developed and validated a WDXRF method for the determination of Ca, Cl, Fe, K, Mg, Na, P, S and Zn in milk-based products. Pellets of 4 g were prepared under 2 t pressure and calibrations using 29 reference samples were established. Validation was performed by comparing the acquired XRF values with data obtained from the reference methods i.e., ICP-AES and potentiometry for Cl. An alternative method for the determination of Ca concentrations in human milk by EDXRF using 241Am and 55Fe sources was presented by Ekinci et al.461 Jastrzebska et al.,462 for his part, proposed an WDXRF method for P measurements in food samples. Comparative analyses with the standard molybdenum blue method demonstrated the validity of the method.
9.7 Thin films and coatings
Literature published during this review period continues to reflect the ability of X-ray fluorescence spectrometry to assist in understanding the many processes used for the production of thin films. Eze463 used a combination of EDXRF and XRD to study the effect of oxygen partial pressure on the thermal deposition of CdO thin films on glass substrates. Qasrawi et al.464 confirmed the stoichiometry of deposited AgIn5S8 thin films on glass substrates by thermal evaporation. Bacaksic et al.465 used EDXRF to investigate the diffusion of Cu in n-type ZnS by spray pyrolysis over the temperature range 80–400 °C. Kwon et al.466 reported EDXRF studies of Mn+ implanted neutron-transmutation-doped GaAs bulks to show the formation of (Ga1−xMnx)As thin films. Photoluminescence confirmed that the films were p-type semiconductors. Long et al.467 studied TiB2 coatings deposited over Ni substrates by electroplating. The smooth black coatings were found to be Ni0.75Ti0.25O. A linear relationship was found between coating thickness and time of electrolysis. The coating hardness was shown to deteriorate due to the presence of K. Kranasnikov et al.468 were concerned with the oxidation effects in epitaxial Fe2O3 layers on MgO and MgAl2O4 substrates prepared by pulsed laser deposition. Some coatings were also covered in a protective layer of BaTiO3 to prevent further oxidation of Fe3O4 to Fe2O3. Naploszek-Bilnik et al.469 were concerned with the influence of Al powder in a galvanic bath for the electrodeposition of Ni and Al layers on Ni matrices. The half width of the diffraction peaks was used to determine the size of the Ni crystallites. The mechanism of incorporation of the solid particles into the layer structure was explained as Ni2+ adsorption/desorption processes on the metal powder. Eba and Sakurai470 also used the combination of XRF and XRD to study electro-deposits from an aqueous solution of Cu and Zn. Variations in film quality of high density plasma phosphosilicate glass were studied by Lan and Wang.471 Out-gassing of oxygen and moisture from the chemical vapour deposition chamber were found to be related to the P concentration. Wagner et al.472 used XRF and RBS to investigate amorphous films of the Ag-As-S system prepared by the spin-coating technique. Haschke and Lecomte473 demonstrated the good repeatability and stability of a μXRF spectrometer used for the analysis of AuPd coatings on lead frames. Hershberger et al.474 assessed reaction films of zinc dialkyldithiophosphate formed on flats of polished steel using grazing incidence XRF. Films formed thermally were found to contain more Zn than those produced mechanically.
The effects of current density and electrolyte temperature on surface roughness and grain size distribution were used by Jiang et al.475 in their characterisation of films of Sn electro-deposited on steel substrates. Neshati and Fardi476 subjected organic coatings of commercial grade Zn rich epoxy polyamide on steel to salt spray and humidity tests, as described in ASTM B117 and D-2247. XRD and XRF analysis were then used to reveal the best quality coatings. Kuribayashi et al.477 sputter coated Pt–Ir alloy and their oxides such as PtO, PtO2 and IrO2 on Si(100) substrates and used XRF, XRD and XPS to characterise the films produced. A comparative study of structural, compositional, thermal and optical properties of non stoichiometric (Zn, Fe)S chalcogenide pellets and thin films was reported by Deulkar et al.478 Several Ni–Mn–Ga and one Co–Ni–Ga ferromagnetic shape-memory alloys were deposited on glass substrates as a series of films produced by laser ablation techniques for characterisation by Chung et al.479 using XRF, XRD and TEM.
Publications on the characterisation of elements implanted in silicon were dominated this year by several papers from Dakhel. Using EDXRF and XRD480 this group investigated Eu2O3 as a thick gate dielectric for Si,481 reported the electrical conduction and dielectric properties of Gd2O3 grown on quartz and Si(p) substrates,482 concentrated on Nd2O3 films prepared by the reactive synthesis method to form MOS devices,483,484 were concerned with (Gd–In) oxide films and485–487 completed the output from the University of Bahrain with work on (Eu–In) oxide films. Putkomen et al.486 used XRF to analyse stoichiometry and look for possible impurities in Mg–Al–O films grown by atomic layer deposition (ALD) at 100–400 °C on to soda-lime-silicate glass and Si(100) substrates. Puurunen et al.489 also used ALD in applications where layers of inorganic material with uniform thickness down to the nanometre range were required. The formation of physical Al2O3 islands was reported in the Zr–Al–O films grown on hydrogen-terminated silicon after investigations using RBS, XRF, ICP-OES and TEM. Batalov et al.490 reported the structure, impurity and photoluminescence of mechanically polished layers of single crystal silicon designed as light-emitting devices in the near infrared region. Damlencourt et al.491 focused on the growth of HfO2 by ALD at 350 °C on pseudo-morphic Si1−xGex thin films (where x
					= 15% and 25%) to obtain high quality with the thinnest interfacial layer possible. Jin et al.492 studied self-assembled organic monolayers grown on hydrogen-terminated Si(111) by XPS, XRF, X-ray standing waves (XSW) and X-ray reflectivity (XRR).

Nano-scale profiling of layer by layer assembled metal/organophosphonate films was reported in two publications by Libera et al.493,494 after studies using XRR, XRF and XSW. Zheng et al.495 used XRF to measure the Mn concentration of Wurlzite-type ZnO tetra-pod nano-structures prepared by evaporating Zn metal under a humid Ar flow. Mathur et al.496 grew Pb1−xCoxS films using the solution growth technique and used XRF for compositional analysis with XRD and atomic force microscopy to show the presence of nanometre-size grains in the films. Kawazu et al.497 used XRF to confirm the formation of Au–TiO2 hybrid nanoparticles in silicate films made by the sol–gel method. Xue and Shi498 studied the morphology, chemical composition, structure and magnetic properties of amorphous Fe1−xPx alloy nanowires. Muffler et al.499 used EDXRF and optical spectroscopy to investigate nanocrystalline ZnS thin layers prepared by ion layer gas reaction, a low cost deposition method for compound semiconductor thin films.
Interest continued to be shown in the development of solar cell devices with a report by Rusu et al.500 on a novel chemical close-spaced vapour transport technique for the growth of CuGaSe2 thin films. The films produced from Cu precursors deposited on clean and Mo coated soda-lime glass substrates were characterised by XRF, XRD and SEM. Belevich501 used XRF and XRD to study the growth of CuInSe2 films. XRF was used by Chaure et al..502 to assess the stoichiometry of CuInGaSe2 multi-layers formed by electro-deposition. The same group at Sheffield Hallam University also studied CuInGaSeS2 films grown on glass/Mo substrates by selenisation and sufidation. Alberts503 published work on a novel two stage growth technique for the deposition of single phase CuInGaSe2. Palm et al.504 supported work on the commercial production of first generation CuInGaSeS2 photo-voltaic devices and began support work for the development of a pilot line for second generation products with improved performance characteristics. Sharma et al.505 used XRF, XRD, EPMA and DSC to characterise Ge2OSe8O thin films that resulted in intriguing near-surface or sub-surface property changes depending upon the energy of the induced Ni ion.
Finally in this section, Nygård et al.506 applied an FP method for the quantitative determination of single and multiple layer thickness measurements with the aim of working towards a possible application for on-line analysis in the electronics industry. Results showed that the accuracy obtained for single layers was very good whereas the agreement for multiple layers was poorer. Scheuerlein et al.507 reported thickness measurements of Sn–Ag hot dip coatings on large hadron collide super-conducting strands by coulometry, XPS and XRF.
9.8 Chemical state, speciation and crystal characterisation
Applications for soft X-ray emission spectroscopy continue to feature in the literature describing studies of chemical bonding in materials. Kurmaev et al.508 presented work on skutterudite compounds (CoAs3 and CoSb3) where intensity ratios of the Co L2 to L3 emission lines were found to be 0.20 for CoAs3 and 0.15 for CoSb3. The difference was attributed to a decrease in Coster–Kronig processes on CoAs3 compared with the smaller carrier density in CoSb3. The same group509 also looked at the chemical bonding in biomaterials. Vitamin B12 was characterised by a strong Co–C bond and a relatively weak Co–N bond. Paracetamol and aspirin were shown to form oxygen lone-pair pi orbitals and C Kα emission spectra from human teeth were used to assist in the understanding of the early stages in enamel decay. Another group from the Russian Academy of Sciences510 published work on the electronic structure LiBC to show incomplete hybridisation of the C 2p–B 2p states. Grebennikov511 looked at intensity ratios for Lβ and Lα lines in transition metal oxides. Kikas et al.512 reported excitation-decay processes at the F 1s photo-absorption edge in LiF. The electronic structure of lanthanum calcium oxoborates was reported by Nelson et al.513 who used La 3d and 4d, Ca 2p, B 1s and O 1s lines to evaluate surface and near-surface chemistry. Liu et al.514 studied XRF spectra from P and B atoms to report the chemical bonding in boron sub-phosphides.
A review of the chemical speciation of trace elements in biological and environmental systems was presented by Chai et al.515 with examples given for measurements of: Se in mammalian organism, Hg in rat brain and liver, Cr in rat organs and Cr-rich yeast, organohalogens in pine needles and marine organisms and iodine in sea-water, soil, marine plants and thyroid gland. Orescanin et al.516 described a rapid, sensitive and selective procedure for the determination of CrIII and CrVI in environmental and industrial liquids. Samples were pre-concentrated with ammonium pyrrolodine dithiocarbamate to show different reaction behaviours at different pH ranges prior to analysis by EDXRF. Tsujimura et al.517 reported speciation of S in silicate melts and glasses from the wavelength shift of S Kα. Tanabe et al.518 also examined the chemical valence state of S in particulates collected from a number of industrial cities in Asia. Reznichenko et al.519 used XRF, XRD and Raman scattering to study defect structures in niobium oxides. A team in Turkey520 measured L shell fluorescence intensity ratios for elements with atomic numbers ranging from 66 to 90 (Dy–Th). A second publication521 concentrated on elements 71 to 78 (Lu–Pt). Nagg et al.522 measured changes in the oxidation state of Mn to demonstrate ageing effects in Mn–bentonite. Eba and Sakurai523 assisted crystallographers troubled by differences familiar to those working with spinel-type oxides. Intensity ratios of Mn Kβ satellite and Kβ5 lines were found to be related to Mn sites occupancy in tetrahedral A and octahedral B structures. Kulshreshtha et al.524 observed variations in Ag Kβ/Kα ratio from Ag+ ions in AgBr, AgCl, Ag2CO3, AgI, AgNO3 and Ag2SO4 compounds. The variations were explained in terms of the charge transfer occurring between Ag+ and the co-ordinating anions. Drewes et al.525 used EDXRF, Raman and IR spectroscopy to characterise a novel type of heteropolyanion [Sb4Mo12(OH)6O48]10−. Pankratova et al.526 used XRF and Mossbauer spectroscopy to examine the forms of Fe in a series of binary tellurides FexTi1−xTe1.45. Catalano et al.527 used a combination of XRF and XRD to study uranium speciation in contaminated sediments from the Hanford site, Washington State, USA. U L(lll) edge XAFS spectra demonstrated that U occurred predominantly as a uraniumVI silicate.
Readers may also be interested in the following industrial applications for chemical state investigations: BaZrO3 for melt processing of single crystal YBCO superconductors,528 AsxSe100−x characterisation529 and ZnO doped LiNbO3 single crystal growth530 in electronic devices, surface fatigue in titanium alloys521 and 1s core hole spectroscopy in 3d transition metal complexes.532



Abbreviations
 




AAS
Atomic absorption spectrometry


AD
Anno Domini


ALD
Atomic layer deposition


ASTM
American Society for Testing and Materials


BC
Before Christ


CCA
Chromated copper arsenate


CRM
Certified reference material


DSC
Differential scanning calorimetry


EDXRD
Energy dispersive X-ray diffraction


EDXRF
Energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence


EPA
Environmental Protection Agency


EPMA
Electron probe microanalysis


EU
European Union


EXAFS
Extended X-ray absorption fine structure


EXRS
European X-ray Conference


FP
Fundamental parameters


FTIR
Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy


GC-MS
Gas chromatography–mass spectrometry


HR-ICP-MS
High resolution-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry


IAEA
International Atomic Energy Agency


ICP-AES
Inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry


ICP-MS
Inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry


ICP-OES
Inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectrometry


INAA
Instrumental neutron activation analysis


LIBS
Laser induced breakdown spectroscopy


MC
Monte Carlo


MDF
Medium density fibreboard


NAA
Neutron activation analysis


NASA
National Aeronautics and Space Administration


NE
North-east


NIST
National Institute of Standards and Technology


NMR
Nuclear magnetic resonance


PCA
Principal component analysis


PF
Phenol-formaldehyde


PGE
Platinum group elements


PGM
Platinum group metals


PIXE
Particle-induced X-ray emission


PM
Particulate matter


PTFE
Poly(tetrafluoroethylene)


PUF
Polyurethane foam


PVC
Poly(vinyl chloride)


PXRF
Portable X-ray fluorescence


RBS
Rutherford backscattering spectrometry


REE
Rare earth elements


RoHS
Restriction on hazardous substances


SEM-EDS
Scanning electron microscopy-energy dispersive spectrometry


S
South


SI
Système International d’Unités


SIMS
Secondary ion mass spectrometry


Si(Li)
Lithium-drifted silicon


Si(PIN)
Silicon detector device


SR
Synchrotron radiation


SRM
Standard reference material


SW
South-west


TEM
Transmission electron microscope


TGA
Thermogravimetric analysis


TXRF
Total reflection X-ray fluorescence


UF
Urea–formaldehyde


USA
United States of America


UV-VIS
Ultraviolet-visible spectroscopy


WDXRF
Wavelength dispersive X-ray fluorescence


WEEE
Waste electrical and electronic equipment


XAFS
X-Ray absorption fine structure spectroscopy


XAS-XANES
X-Ray absorption spectroscopy-X-ray absorption near edge structure


XPS
X-Ray photoelectron spectroscopy


XRD
X-Ray diffraction


XRF
X-Ray fluorescence


XRR
X-Ray reflectivity


XSW
X-Ray standing waves



Z

Mass atomic number



10 References
C. Zerrouki, M. Chassevent, N. Fourati, E. Tollens and J. J. Bonnet, J. Phys. IV, 2004, 118, 149–155 Search PubMed .
A. Rahmani, F. Benyaich, M. Bounakhla, E. Bilal, J. Moutte, J. J. Gruffat and F. Zahry, J. Phys. IV, 2004, 118, 447–455 Search PubMed .
E. B. Norman, R. M. Larimer, G. Rech, J. Lee, C. Vue, T. Leubane, K. Zamvil and L. Guthrie, Am. J. Phys., 2004, 72(5), 652–654 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. G. Barreto, J. Nozaki, E. De Oliveira, V. F. Do Nascimento, P. Henrique, A. Aragao, I. S. Scarminio and W. J. Barreto, Talanta, 2004, 64(2), 345–354 CrossRef .
P. Bode, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 379(2), 181–187 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Hubbell, P. N. Trehan, N. Singh, B. Chand, D. Mehta, M. L. Garg, R. R. Garg, S. Singh and S. Puri, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 2004, 33(2), 621–621 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Bamford, D. Wegrzynek, E. Chinea-Cano and A. Markowicz, Nukleonika, 2004, 49(3), 87–95 Search PubMed .
H. K. Yoshihara, Spectrochimica Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(8), 1305–1310 CrossRef .
E. D. Greaves and A. Manz, Lab Chip, 2005, 5(4), 382–391 RSC .
K. Sakurai and M. Mizusawa, Nanotechnology, 2004, 15(6), S428–S431 CrossRef CAS .

          J. A. Nicolosi, R. B. Shen, B. Scruggs, W. T. Elam and M. Solazzi, Denver X-ray Conference 2004.
H. P. Lima, G. P. Guedes, A. F. Barbosa and J. M. Seixas, IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., 2004, 53(2), 378–383 CrossRef CAS .
H. Schwenke, J. Knoth, P. A. Beaven, R. Kiehn and J. Buhrz, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(8), 1159–1164 CrossRef .
K. A. Janulewicz, A. Lucianetti, G. Priebe and P. V. Nickles, X-ray Spectrom., 2004, 33, 262–266 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Reyes-Mena, D. Clark Turner, E. Bard and C. Jensen, Denver X-ray Conference 2004.
J. D. Brownridge and S. M. Shafroth, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85(7), 1298–1300 CrossRef CAS .
G. V. Pavlinsky, A. Y. Dukhanin, A. Y. Portnoy and A. V. Kjun, Rad. Phys. Chem., 2005, 72(4), 429–435 CrossRef CAS .
M. Huber, G. Angloher, C. Hollerith, A. Ruedig, J. Jochum, W. Potzel and F. von Feilitzsch, X-ray Spectrom., 2004, 33(4), 253–255 CrossRef CAS .
M. Huber, S. Bechstein, B. Beckhoff, F. von Feilitzsch, J. Jochum, M. Krumrey, A. Rudig and G. Ulm, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2004, 520(1–3), 234–236 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bechstein, B. Beckhoff, R. Fliegauf, J. Weser and G. Ulm, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(2), 215–221 CrossRef .
M. G. Kozin, I. L. Romashkina, S. A. Sergeev, L. V. Nefedov, V. A. Andrianov, V. N. Naumkin, V. P. Koshelets and L. V. Filippenko, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2004, 520(1–3), 250–253 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Jach, J. A. Small and D. E. Newbury, presented at Denver X-ray Conference, August, 2004.
F. S. Porter, G. V. Brown, K. R. Boyce, R. L. Kelley, C. A. Kilbourne, P. Beiersdorfer, H. Chen, S. Terracol, S. M. Kahn and A. E. Szymkowiak, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2004, 75(10), 3772–3774 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Bruijn, N. H. R. Baars, W. M. B. Tiest, A. Germeau, H. F. C. Hoevers, P. A. J. de Korte, W. A. Mels, M. L. Ridder, E. Krouwer, J. J. van Baar and R. J. Wiegerink, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2004, 520(1–3), 443–445 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Zink, K. D. Irwin, G. C. Hilton, D. P. Pappas, J. N. Ullom and M. E. Huber, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2004, 520(1–3), 52–55 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Chervenak, F. M. Finkbeiner, T. R. Stevenson, D. J. Talley, R. P. Brekosky, S. R. Bandler, E. Figueroa-Feliciano, M. A. Lindeman, R. L. Kelley, T. Saab and C. K. Stahle, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2004, 520(1–3), 460–462 CrossRef CAS .
F. d’Acapito and C. Maurizio, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2004, 520(1–3), 602–605 CrossRef CAS .
C. Maurizio, D. Pergolesi, F. Gatti, F. d’Acapito, M. Razeti, A. Balerna and S. Mobilio, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2004, 520(1–3), 610–612 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Kemmer, presented at the European X-ray Spectrometry (EXRS) Conference, Alghero, Sardinia, June 2004.

          H. Soltau, P. Lechner, G. Lutz, L. Struder, C. Fiorini and A. Longoni, presented at European X-ray Spectrometry (EXRS) Conference, Alghero, Sardinia, June 2004.

          H. Soltau, P. Lechner, G. Lutz, L. Struder, C. Fiorini and A. Longoni, presented at Denver X-ray Conference, Denver, CO, August 2004.
P. Lechner, A. Pahlke and H. Soltau, X-ray Spectrom., 2004, 33(4), 256–261 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hansen and C. Reckleben, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., 2004, 51(3), 1283–1288 CrossRef CAS .
T. Eggert, O. Boslau, P. Goldstrass and J. Kemmer, X-ray Spectrom., 2004, 33(4), 246–252 CrossRef CAS .

          O. Boslau, T. Eggert, P. Goldstrass and J. Kemmer, presented at Denver X-ray Conference, August 2004.
W. Metzger, J. Engdahl, W. Rossner, O. Boslau and J. Kemmer, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., 2004, 51(4), 1631–1635 CrossRef CAS .
M. Marisaldi, C. Labanti and H. Soltau, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., 2004, 51(4), 1916–1922 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Tull, J. S. Iwanczyk, B. E. Patt, S. Barkan and L. Feng, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., 2004, 51(4), 1803–1807 CrossRef CAS .
C. Streli, P. Wobrauschek and I. Schraik, Spectrochim. Acta Part B, 2004, 59(8), 1211–1213 CrossRef .
J. Goulon, A. Rogalev, G. Goujon, C. Gauthier, E. Moguiline, A. Sole, S. Feite, F. Wilhelm, N. Jaouen, C. Goulon-Ginet, P. Dressler, P. Rohr, M. O. Lampert and R. Henck, J. Synchrotron Radiat., 2005, 12, 57–69 CAS .
T. Pantazis, Spectroscopy, 2005, 9–9 Search PubMed .

          A. Huber, J. Pantazis, R. Redus and T. Pantazis, presented at Denver X-ray Conference, Denver, CO, August, 2004.
P. Kump, M. Necemer and J. Drinovec, X-ray Spectrom., 2004, 33(2), 107–111 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sokolov, A. Loupilov and V. Gostilo, X-ray Spectrom., 2004, 33(6), 462–465 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Omote, A. Tsukiyama, M. Kuraibayashi and T. Saito, presented at Denver X-ray Conference August 2004, Denver, CO.
A. Shariff, P. Kristiansson, V. Auzelyte, M. Elfman, K. G. Malmqvist, C. Nilsson, J. Pallon and M. Wegden, Nuc. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res. Sec. B-Beam Interactions Mater. At., 2004, 219–20, 494–498 Search PubMed .
A. Ruzin, S. Marunko and Y. Gusakov, J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 95(9), 5081–5087 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. Saito, T. Yamagami and K. Mori, in Next Generation in Scientific Ballooning,  2004, vol. 33, pp. 1741–1745 Search PubMed .
G. L. Khym, K. H. Kim, S. U. Kim and H. J. Yang, J. Korean Phys. Soc., 2004, 45, S538–S541 Search PubMed .
F. Borges, J. M. F. dos Santos, T. Dias, F. P. Santos and C. A. N. Conde, X-ray Spectrom., 2004, 33(2), 124–127 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. B. Monteiro, R. E. Morgado, J. M. F. dos Santos and C. A. N. Conde, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2004, 522(3), 407–412 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Giles, J. K. Hartwell, K. M. Miller and S. L. Howard, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2005, 264(1), 113–119 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Beaven, M. Marmotti, R. Kampmann, J. Knoth and H. Schwenke, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(8), 1329–1334 CrossRef .
F. V. Levchanovski, B. Gebauer, E. I. Litvinenko, A. S. Nikiforov, V. I. Prikhodko, C. Schulz and T. Wilpert, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2004, 529(1–3), 413–416 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fant, M. J. French, P. Murray, P. Seller, S. Manolopoulos and S. L. Thomas, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2004, 535(1–2), 442–447 CrossRef CAS .
M. Z. Kabir and S. O. Kasap, J. Vacuum Sci. Technol. A, 2004, 22(3), 975–980 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yagi, K. Inoue and T. Oka, J. Synchrotron Radiat., 2004, 11, 456–461 CrossRef .
P. Falus, M. A. Borthwick and S. G. J. Mochrie, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2004, 75(11), 4383–4400 CrossRef CAS .
E. Miyata, N. Tawa, G. Koizumi, M. Mlki and K. Miyaguchi, Jpn J. Appl. Phys. Part-2 Lett. Express Lett., 2004, 43(6B), L808–L810 Search PubMed .
M. Cargnelli, H. Fuhrmann, M. Giersch, A. Gruber, A. Hirtl, T. Ishiwatari, P. Kienle, J. Marton and J. Zmeskal, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2004, 535(1–2), 389–393 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. O’Meara and J. L. Campbell, X-ray Spectrom., 2004, 33(2), 146–157 CrossRef CAS .
E. D. Greaves, L. Bennum, F. Palacios and J. A. Alfonso, X-ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(194) Search PubMed .
T. Papp, M. C. Lepy, J. Plagnard, G. Kalinka and E. Papp-Szabo, X-ray Spectrom., 2005, 34, 106 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Eggert, presented at Denver X-ray Conference, Denver, CO., USA, August 2004.
A. Shariff, B. G. Martinsson, V. Auzelyte, M. Elfman, P. Kristiansson, K. G. Malmqvist, C. Nilsson, J. Pallon and M. Wegden, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 219–20, 110–114 CrossRef .
A. Y. Portnoi, G. V. Pavlinskii, A. Y. Dukhanin, P. Zuzaan and B. Erdemchimeg, J. Anal. Chem., 2004, 59(11), 1057–1065 CrossRef CAS .
E. Yilmaz and C. Can, X-ray Spectrom., 2004, 33, 439 CrossRef CAS .

          R. P. Gardner, W. Guo and F. Li, presented at Denver X-ray Conference, August 2004.
P. O. Verkhovodov, X-ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(2), 169–171 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Willis and G. R. Lachance, X-ray Spectrom., 2004, 33, 181 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Willis and G. R. Lachance, X-ray Spectrom., 2004, 33(3), 204–211 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. R. Vrebos and J. P. Willis, X-ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(1), 73–79 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Ying, Q. Wang, G. Z. Cao and M. F. Yu, Spectrosc. Spectr. Anal., 2004, 24(12), 1681–1683 CAS .
R. Sitko, X-ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(1), 11–18 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Fernandez, V. G. Molinari and F. Teodori, X-ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(1), 7–10 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mukoyama and K. Taniguchi, X-ray Spectrom., 2005, 34, 240 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kubala-Kukus and M. Pajek, X-ray Spectrom., 2004, 33(4), 301–305 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pajek, A. Kubala-Kukus, D. Banas, J. Braziewicz and U. Majewska, X-ray Spectrom., 2004, 33(4), 306–311 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pajek and A. Kubala-Kukus, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(10–11), 1739–1745 CrossRef .
M. K. Tiwari, A. K. Singh and K. J. S. Sawhney, Anal. Sci., 2005, 21(2), 143–147 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Rousseau, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(9), 1491–1502 CrossRef .
A. Brunetti, M. S. del Rio, B. Golosio, A. Simionovici and A. Somogyi, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(10–11), 1725–1731 CrossRef .
C. Zarkadas and A. G. Karydas, X-ray Spectrom., 2004, 33(6), 447–454 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Mandal, S. Santra, D. Mitra, M. Sarkar and D. Bhattacharya, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 217(1), 104–112 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kitov, X-ray Spectrom., 2005, 34, 52 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kumar, D. Mehta and N. Singh, X-ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(1), 80–82 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kocsonya, I. Demeter, I. Kovacs and Z. Szokefalvi-Nagy, X-ray Spectrom., 2004, 33(5), 387–390 CrossRef CAS .

          R. P. Gardner and W. Guo, presented at Denver X-ray Conference, August 2004.

          V. Roessiger, presented at European X-ray Conference, Alghero, Sardinia, June 2004.
P. O. Verkhovodov, X-ray Spectrom., 2004, 33(4), 273–276 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sitko and B. Zawisza, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(1), 95–100 CrossRef .
X. H. Ying, Z. X. Lin and G. Z. Cao, Chin. J. Anal. Chem., 2004, 32(10), 1385–1388 CAS .
V. K. Egorov and E. V. Egorov, X-ray Spectrom., 2004, 33(6), 360–371 CrossRef CAS .
W. Jark, X-ray Spectrom., 2004, 33(6), 455–461 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Price, G. W. Fraser, J. F. Pearson, J. P. Nussey, I. B. Hutchinson, A. D. Holland, K. Turner and D. Pullan, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2004, 75(7), 2314–2319 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hosokawa, Y. Miyoshi, H. Tanabe, T. Takamatsu, K. Obori and J. Kawai, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59, 1301–1304 CrossRef .
S. Ohzawa, S. Komatani and K. Obori, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59, 1295–1299 CrossRef .
T. Emoto, Y. Sato, Y. Konishi, X. Ding and K. Tsuji, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(8), 1291–1294 CrossRef .
Y. Yan and X. Ding, X-ray Spectrom., 2005, 34, 235–239 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bjeoumikhov, N. Langhoff, J. Rabe and R. Wedell, X-ray Spectrom., 2004, 33(4), 312–316 CrossRef CAS .
R. Padilla, P. Van Espen, A. Abrahantes and K. Janssens, X-ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(1), 19–27 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Havrilla and T. Miller, Powder Diffr., 2004, 19(2), 119–126 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lankosz, M. Szczerbowska-Boruchowska, J. Chwiej, J. Ostachowicz, A. Simionovici and S. Bohic, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(10–11), 1517–1521 CrossRef .
T. Weizhi, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2004, 262(1), 223–228 CrossRef .
W. Malzer, O. Hahn and B. Kanngiesser, X-ray Spectrom., 2004, 33(4), 229–233 CrossRef CAS .
O. Hahn, D. Oltrogge and H. Bevers, Archaeometry, 2004, 46, 273–282 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bartoll, A. Unger, K. Puschner and H. Stege, Stud. Conserv., 2003, 48(3), 195–202 Search PubMed .
A. M. Scheidegger, D. Grolimund, M. Vespa, M. Harfouche, E. Wieland, R. Dahn and D. Cui, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2004, 68(11), A363–A363 .
M. A. Marcus, A. Manceau and M. Kersten, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2004, 68(14), 3125–3136 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Kemner, S. D. Kelly, B. Lai, J. Maser, E. J. O’Loughlin, D. Sholto-Douglas, Z. H. Cai, M. A. Schneegurt, C. F. Kulpa and K. H. Nealson, Science, 2004, 306(5296), 687 .
E. R. Doering, G. J. Havrilla and T. C. Miller, J. Nondestruct. Eval., 2004, 23(3), 95–105 CrossRef .
H. Takamaru, Y. Kashiwaya and K. Ishii, Tetsu To Hagane-J. Iron Steel Inst. Jpn., 2004, 90(7), 472–479 Search PubMed .
L. Vincze, B. Vekemans, F. E. Brenker, G. Falkenberg, K. Rickers, A. Somogyi, M. Kersten and F. Adams, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76(22), 6786–6791 CrossRef CAS .
B. Vekemans, L. Vincze, F. E. Brenker and F. Adams, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(10), 1302–1308 RSC .
K. Janssens, K. Proost and G. Falkenberg, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(10–13), 1637–1645 CrossRef .
A. Erko, F. Schafers, A. Firsov, W. B. Peatman, W. Eberhardt and R. Signorato, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(10–11), 1543–1548 CrossRef .
H. Riesemeier, K. Ecker, W. Gorner, B. R. Muller, M. Radtke and M. Krumrey, X-ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(2), 160–163 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hirai, S. Yasuami, A. Kobayashi, J. Nishino, M. Shibata, K. Yamaguchi, K. Y. Liu, S. Kawado, T. Yamamoto, S. Noguchi, M. Takahashi, I. Konomi, S. Kimura, M. Hasegawa, N. Awaji, S. Komiya, T. Hirose, S. Ozaki, T. Okajima, T. Ishikawa and H. Kitamura, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2004, 521(2–3), 538–548 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. Patterson, R. Abela, H. Auderset, Q. Chen, F. Fauth, F. Gozzo, G. Ingold, H. Kuhne, M. Lange, D. Maden, D. Meister, P. Pattison, T. Schmidt, B. Schmitt, C. Schulze-Briese, M. Shi, M. Stampanoni and P. R. Willmott, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2005, 540(1), 42–67 CrossRef CAS .
A. von Bohlen, R. Hergenroder, C. Sternemann, M. Paulus, M. Radtke and H. Riesemeier, Instrum. Sci. Technol., 2005, 33(2), 137–150 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yasa, Y. Li, C. B. Mammen, J. Als-Nielsen, J. Hoszowska, C. Mocuta and A. Freund, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84(23), 4744–4746 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Marcus, A. A. MacDowell, R. Celestre, A. Manceau, T. Miller, H. A. Padmore and R. E. Sublett, J. Synchrotron Radiat., 2004, 11, 239–247 CrossRef CAS .
A. Manceau, M. A. Marcus, N. Tamura, O. Proux, N. Geoffroy and B. Lanson, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2004, 68(11), 2467–2483 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cauzid, P. Philippot, A. Somogyi, A. Simionovici and P. Bleuet, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76(14), 3988–3994 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. Marques, J. P. Marques, C. Casaca and M. L. Carvalho, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(10–11), 1675–1680 CrossRef .
R. R. Martin, S. J. Naftel, A. J. Nelson, A. B. Feilen and A. Narvaez, J. Environ. Monit., 2004, 6(10), 783–786 RSC .
C. A. Perez, H. J. Sanchez, R. A. Barrea, M. Grenon and J. Abraham, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(3), 392–397 RSC .
K. Shirasawa, A. Ide-Ektessabi, A. Koizumi, M. Azechi and S. Sie, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 2004, 137–40, 827–830 CrossRef .
N. Zoeger, P. Wobrauschek, C. Streli, G. Pepponi, P. Roschger, G. Falkenberg and W. Osterode, X-ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(2), 140–143 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Martin, I. M. Kempson, S. J. Naftel and W. M. Skinner, Chemosphere, 2005, 58(10), 1385–1390 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Flinn, D. Hunter, D. H. Linkous, A. Lanzirotti, L. N. Smith, J. Brightwell and B. F. Jones, Physiol. Behav., 2005, 83(5), 793–803 Search PubMed .
A. Ide-Ektessabi, T. Kawakami, R. Ishihara, Y. Mizuno and T. Takeuchi, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 2004, 137–40, 801–804 CrossRef .
N. Q. Liu, E. Zhang, X. E. Wang, Z. Y. Zhang, Z. F. Chai, Y. Y. Huang, W. He, X. Q. Zhao, A. J. Zuo and R. Yang, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(2), 255–260 CrossRef .
A. Wennerberg, A. Ide-Ektessabi, S. Hatkamata, T. Sawase, C. Johansson, T. Albrektsson, A. Martinelli, U. Sodervall and H. Odelius, Clin. Oral Implants Res., 2004, 15(5), 505–512 CrossRef .
G. Weseloh, M. Kuhbacher, H. Bertelsmann, M. Ozaslan, A. Kyriakopoulos, A. Knochel and D. Behnel, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2004, 259(3), 473–477 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kuhbacher, G. Weseloh, A. Thomzig, H. Bertelsmann, G. Falkenberg, M. Radtke, H. Riesemeier, A. Kyriakopoulos, M. Beekes and D. Behne, X-ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(2), 112–117 CrossRef CAS .
J. Osan, S. Torok, B. Alfoldy and G. Falkenberg, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(5), 701–708 CrossRef .
J. Jernstrom, M. Eriksson, J. Osan, G. Tamborini, S. Torok, R. Simon, G. Falkenberg, A. Alsecz and M. Betti, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(11), 1428–1433 RSC .
M. Toyoda, K. Kaibuchi, M. Nagasono, Y. Terada, T. Tanabe, S. Hayakawa and J. Kawai, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(8), 1311–1315 CrossRef .
M. C. Camerani, B. Golosio, A. Somogyi, A. S. Simionovici, B. M. Steenari and I. Panas, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76(6), 1586–1595 CrossRef .
W. S. Yue, Y. Li, X. L. Li, X. H. Yu, B. Deng, J. F. Liu, T. M. Wan, G. L. Zhang, Y. Y. Huang, W. He and W. Hua, J. Synchrotron Radiat., 2004, 11, 428–431 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Ma, S. Tohno, M. Kasahara and S. Hayakawa, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 217(4), 657–665 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Ma, S. Tohno, M. Kasahara and S. Hayakawa, Atmos. Environ., 2004, 38(19), 2951–2964 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Oger, I. Daniel, B. Cournoyer and A. Simionovici, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(10–11), 1681–1686 CrossRef .
J. Y. Shi, Y. X. Chen, Y. Y. Huang and W. He, Micron, 2004, 35(7), 557–564 CrossRef CAS .
N. K. Blute, D. J. Brabander, H. F. Hemond, S. R. Sutton, M. G. Newville and M. L. Rivers, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2004, 38(22), 6074–6077 CrossRef CAS .
G. Sarret, J. Balesdent, L. Bouziri, J. M. Garnier, M. A. Marcus, N. Geoffroy, F. Panfili and A. Manceau, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2004, 38(10), 2792–2801 CrossRef CAS .
D. Grolimund, M. Senn, M. Trottmann, M. Janousch, I. Bonhoure, A. M. Scheidegger and M. Marcus, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(10–11), 1627–1635 CrossRef .
Z. Smit, K. Janssens, K. Proost and I. Langus, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 219–20, 35–40 CrossRef .
P. Fredrickx, I. De Ryck, K. Janssens, D. Schryvers, J. P. Petit and H. Docking, X-ray Spectrom., 2004, 33(5), 326–333 CrossRef .
Y. Gohshi, J. Kawai and K. Taniguchi, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(8), 1047–1048 CrossRef .
C. Streli, P. Wobrauschek, G. Pepponi and N. Zoeger, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(8), 1199–1203 CrossRef .
M. K. Tiwari, K. J. S. Sawhney, B. G. Sankar, V. Raghuvanshi and R. V. Nandedkar, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(8), 1141–1147 CrossRef .
K. Tsuji and F. Delalieux, X-Ray Spectrom., 2004, 33(4), 281–284 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Sanchez and M. C. Valentinuzzi, X-ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(2), 164–168 CrossRef CAS .
P. E. Koulouridakis, E. A. Domazos, S. M. Galani-Nikolakaki and N. G. Kallithrakas-Kontos, Microchim. Acta, 2004, 146(3–4), 245–250 Search PubMed ; P. E. Koulouridakis and N. G. Kallithrakas-Kontos, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76(15), 4315–4319 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. F. Gomes, A. A. Menegario, D. C. Pellegrinotti, M. F. Gine and V. F. Nascimento, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(9), 1481–1484 CrossRef .
N. Awaji, K. Nomura, S. Doi, M. Takemura, Y. Kamimuta, M. Takahashi, S. Ozaki, J. Iihara, K. Miyatake, N. Yamazaki, K. Inoue, N. Yagi and S. Komiya, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., Part 1, 2004, 43(4A), 1644–1648 CrossRef CAS .
N. Awaji, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(8), 1133–1139 CrossRef .
S. Kurunczi and K. Sakurai, X-ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(1), 56–58 CrossRef CAS .
S. Torok, J. Osan, B. Beckhoff and G. Ulm, Powder Diffr., 2004, 19(1), 81–86 CrossRef CAS .
W. D. Chang, H. H. Hung, T. E. Dann, T. W. Huang and S. Y. Wu, Chin. J. Phys., 2004, 42(5), 607–618 Search PubMed .
O. Zucchi, I. A. Schiavetto, M. J. Salvador and S. Moreira, Instrum. Sci. Technol., 2005, 33(2), 215–227 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. M. Costa, M. J. Anjos, R. T. Lopes, C. A. Perez and C. R. F. Castro, X-ray Spectrom., 2005, 34, 183–188 CrossRef CAS .
S. Moreira, C. B. Vieira, B. Coraucci, R. Stefanutti and E. F. O. Jesus, Instrum. Sci. Technol., 2005, 33(1), 73–85 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Salvador, S. Moreira, D. A. Dias and O. Zucchi, Instrum. Sci. Technol., 2004, 32(3), 321–333 CrossRef CAS .
V. S. Poli, M. H. Tabacniks, M. A. Rizzutto, N. Added, F. R. Espinoza-Quinones and S. M. Palacio, Braz. J. Phys., 2004, 34(3A), 970–972 Search PubMed .
P. Rostam-Khani, M. J. P. Hopstaken, P. Vullings, G. Noij, O. O'Halloran and W. Claassen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–232, 720–724 CrossRef CAS .
D. Caputo, P. Bacciaglia, C. Carpanese, M. L. Polignano, P. Lazzeri, M. Bersani, L. Vanzetti, P. Pianetta and L. Moro, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151(5), G289–G296 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hellin, W. Fyen, J. Rip, T. Delande, P. W. Mertens, S. De Gendt and C. Vinckier, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(12), 1517–1523 RSC .
D. Hellin, J. Rip, S. Arnauts, S. De Gendt, P. W. Mertens and C. Vinckier, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(8), 1149–1157 CrossRef .
T. C. Miller, C. M. Sparks, G. J. Havrilla and M. R. Beebe, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(8), 1117–1124 CrossRef .
Y. Mori, K. Uemura, H. Kohno, M. Yamagami, T. Yamada, K. Shimizu, Y. Onizuka and Y. Iizuka, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(8), 1277–1282 CrossRef .
K. Hozawa and J. Yugami, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., Part 1, 2004, 43(1), 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
N. Tokuda, S. Nishiguchi, S. Yamasaki, K. Miki and K. Yamabe, Gettering Def. Eng. Semicond. Technol., 2004, 95–96, 641–646 Search PubMed ; N. Tokuda, S. Nishiguchi, S. Yamasaki, K. Miki and K. Yamabe, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151(4), F81–F86 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Sparks, M. R. Beebe, J. Bennett, B. Foran, C. Gondran and A. Hou, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(8), 1227–1234 CrossRef .
C. Carpanese, B. Crivelli and T. Caniatti, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(8), 1183–1187 CrossRef .
G. Pepponi, C. Streli, P. Wobrauschek, N. Zoeger, K. Luening, P. Pianetta, D. Giubertoni, M. Barozzi and M. Bersani, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(8), 1243–1249 CrossRef .
M. R. Frost, M. French and W. Harris, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–232, 734–737 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zaray, K. Kropfl, K. Szabo, G. Taba, E. Acs, B. Berlinger, M. Dogan, B. Salih and A. Akbulut, Microchem. J., 2005, 79(1–2), 145–148 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ovari, M. Mages, S. Woelfl, W. von Tuempling, K. Kropfl and G. Zaray, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(8), 1173–1181 CrossRef .
G. Pepponi, P. Lazzeri, N. Coghe, M. Bersani, E. Gottardini, F. Cristofolini, G. Clauser and A. Torboli, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(8), 1205–1209 CrossRef .
T. Golob, U. Dobersek, P. Kump and M. Necemer, Food Chem., 2005, 91(4), 593–600 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wagner and J. Boman, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(8), 1125–1132 CrossRef .
B. Sures, F. Thielen, F. Baska, J. Messerschmidt and A. von Bohlen, Environ. Res., 2005, 98(1), 83–88 CrossRef CAS .
M. Schmeling, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(8), 1165–1171 CrossRef .
M. Hallquist and J. Boman, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(8), 1193–1197 CrossRef .
B. Holynska, J. Gilewicz-Wolter, B. Ostachowicz, M. Bielewski, C. Streli and P. Wobrauschek, X-ray Spectrom., 2004, 33(5), 342–348 CrossRef CAS .
R. Silva, E. Almeida, E. P. E. Valencia and V. F. Nascimento, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2004, 260(1), 3–7 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. P. Marco and E. A. Hernandez-Caraballo, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(8), 1077–1090 CrossRef .
T. Martinez, J. Lartigue, P. Avila-Perez, G. Zarazua, M. Navarrete, S. Tejeda and A. Ramirez, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2004, 259(3), 511–514 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kubala-Kukus, J. Braziewicz and M. Pajek, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(8), 1283–1289 CrossRef .
M. Pajek, A. Kubala-Kukus and J. Braziewicz, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(8), 1091–1099 CrossRef .
M. L. Carvalho, A. F. Marques, M. T. Lima and U. Reus, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(8), 1251–1257 CrossRef .
S. Boeykens and C. Vazquez, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(8), 1189–1192 CrossRef .
F. Esaka, K. Watanabe, H. Fukuyama, T. Onodera, K. T. Esaka, M. Magara, S. Sakurai and S. Usuda, J. Nucl. Sci. Technol., 2004, 41(11), 1027–1032 Search PubMed .
H. Tanida, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(8), 1071–1076 CrossRef .

          K. Tsuji, K. Tetsuoka and T. Naganura, book of abstracts, European X-ray Spectrometry Conference, 6th–11th June 2004, Sassari, Sardinia, 2004 Search PubMed.
T. Awane, T. Kimura, K. Nishida, N. Ishikawa and S. Tanuma, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59, 1235 CrossRef .
T. Imazono, Y. Hirayama, S. Ichikura, O. Kitakami, M. Yanagihara and M. Watanabe, Jpn J. Appl. Phys. Part-1, 2004, 43(7A), 4334–4337 CrossRef CAS .
X. D. Hou, Y. H. He and B. T. Jones, Appl. Spectrosc. Rev., 2004, 39(1), 1–25 CrossRef CAS .
F. L. Melquiades and C. R. Appoloni, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2004, 262(2), 533–541 CrossRef CAS .
D. N. Papadopoulou, G. A. Zachariadis, A. N. Anthemidis, N. C. Tsirliganis and J. A. Stratis, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(12), 1877–1884 CrossRef .
C. N. Zwicky and P. Lienemann, X-ray Spectrom., 2004, 33(4), 294–300 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yamada, H. Saisho, T. Hirai and J. Hirano, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(8), 1323–1328 CrossRef .
M. Mages, S. Woelfl, M. Ovari, W. Von Tumpling and F. Encina, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(8), 1265–1272 CrossRef .
M. Ardid, J. L. Ferrero, D. Juanes, J. L. Lluch and C. Roldan, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(10–11), 1581–1586 CrossRef .
F. P. Romano, G. Calvi, E. Furia, S. Garraffo, C. Marchetta, G. Pappalardo, L. Pappalardo, F. Rizzo and A. Rovelli, X-ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(2), 135–139 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Longoni, C. Fiorini, C. Guazzoni, S. Buzzetti and M. Bellini, book of abstracts, European X-ray Spectrometry Conference, 6th–11th June 2004, Sassari, Sardinia, 2004 Search PubMed.
H. Ida and J. Kawai, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(12), 1524–1528 RSC .
T. Keller, H. Butz, M. Lein, M. Kwiatkowski, A. Semjonow, H. J. Luboldt, P. Hammerer, C. Stephan and K. Jung, Clin. Chem., 2005, 51(3), 532–539 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kawai, T. Yamada and H. Fujimura, Bunseki Kagaku, 2004, 53(3), 183–186 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ida and J. Kawai, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(1), 89–93 CrossRef .
H. Ida and J. Kawai, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 379(4), 735–738 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ida and J. Kawai, Anal. Sci., 2004, 20(8), 1211–1215 CAS .
H. Ida and J. Kawai, Bunseki Kagaku, 2004, 53(7), 753–755 CAS .
M. Roff, D. A. Bagon, H. Chambers, E. M. Dilworth and N. Warren, Ann. Occup. Hyg., 2004, 48(3), 209–217 CrossRef CAS .
M. Roff, D. A. Bagon, H. Chambers, E. M. Dilworth and N. Warren, Ann. Occup. Hyg., 2004, 48(3), 257–265 CrossRef CAS .
O. Nygren and O. Aspman, Aust. J. Chem., 2004, 57(10), 1021–1028 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Piorek, book of abstracts, European X-ray Spectrometry Conference, 6th–11th June 2004, Sassari, Sardinia, 2004 Search PubMed.
P. D. Taylor, M. H. Ramsey and P. J. Potts, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2004, 38(24), 6824–6831 CrossRef CAS .
L. Q. Ge, W. C. Lai and Y. C. Lin, X-ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(1), 28–34 CrossRef CAS .

          P. J. Potts, F. Bernadini, M. C. Jones, O. Williams-Thorpe and P. C. Webb, book of abstracts, European X-ray Spectrometry Conference, 6th–11th June 2004, Sassari, Sardinia, 2004 Search PubMed.
G. M. E. Kamh, Environ. Geol., 2005, 47(4), 482–492 Search PubMed .
S. J. Bachofer, Spectrosc. Lett., 2004, 37(2), 115–128 CrossRef CAS .
M. Omand, J. L. Campbell and J. A. Maxwell, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2005, 229(1), 123–136 CrossRef CAS .
L. Schaefer and B. Fegley, Icarus, 2004, 168(1), 215–219 CrossRef CAS .

          P. J. Potts, G. W. Fraser, G. Butcher and D. Tallboys, Biennial National Atomic Spectroscopy Symposium (12th), 12–14th July, 2004, Plymouth, England, p. 56.
C. Zarkadas and A. G. Karydas, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(10–11), 1611–1618 CrossRef .
T. Sawada, A. Hokura, S. Yamada, I. Nakai and Y. Shindo, Bunseki Kagaku, 2004, 53(3), 153–160 CrossRef CAS .
I. Nakai, S. Yamada, Y. Terada, Y. Shindo and T. Utaka, X-ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(1), 46–51 CrossRef CAS .
R. Cesareo, A. Castellano, G. Buccolieri, S. Quarta and M. Marabelli, X-ray Spectrom., 2004, 33(4), 289–293 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Felicia, G. Fronterotta, M. Piacentini, C. Nicolais, S. Sciuti, M. Vendittelli and C. Vazio, J. Cultural Heritage, 2004, 5(1), 17–25 Search PubMed .
A. G. Karydas, D. Kotzamani, R. Bernard, J. N. Barrandon and C. Zarkadas, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 226(1–2), 15–28 CrossRef CAS .
G. Pappalardo, E. Costa, C. Marchetta, L. Pappalardo, F. P. Romano, A. Zucchiatti, P. Prati, P. A. Mando, A. Migliori, L. Palombo and M. G. Vaccari, J. Cultural Heritage, 2004, 5(2), 183–188 Search PubMed .
S. Röhrs and H. Stege, X-ray Spectrom., 2004, 33, 396–401 CrossRef CAS .
M. Uda, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 226(1–2), 75–82 CrossRef CAS .
F. Rosi, C. Miliani, I. Borgia, B. Brunetti and A. Sgamellotti, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2004, 35(8–9), 610–615 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ricci, I. Borgia, B. G. Brunetti, C. Miliani, A. Sgamellotti, C. Seccaroni and P. Passalacqua, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2004, 35(8–9), 616–621 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Szokefalvi-Nagy, I. Demeter, A. Kocsonya and I. Kovacs, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 226(1–2), 53–59 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Echard, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(10–11), 1663–1667 CrossRef .
H. Moller, Zkg Int., 2004, 57(6), 24−+ Search PubMed .
H. M. Solo-Gabriele, T. G. Townsend, D. W. Hahn, T. M. Moskal, N. Hosein, J. Jambeck and G. Jacobi, Waste Manage., 2004, 24(4), 413–424 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yamada, M. Karui, H. Shintani, K. Okamoto and T. Nakamura, J. Nucl. Sci. Technol., 2004, 41(2), 207–213 Search PubMed .

          A. Sokolov, D. Docenko, E. Bliakher, O. Shirokobrod and J. Koskinen, book of abstracts, European X-ray Spectrometry Conference, 6th–11th June 2004, Sassari, Sardinia, 2004 Search PubMed.
T. P. Rao and C. R. Preetha, Sep. Purif. Rev., 2003, 32(1), 1–17 Search PubMed .
M. E. Foulkes, A. Scothern, E. Menéndez-Alonso and S. J. Hill, 12th Biennial National Atomic Spectroscopy Symposium, 2004, p. 2004 Search PubMed .
M. Zougagh, J. M. C. Pavon and A. G. de Torres, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2005, 381(6), 1103–1113 CrossRef CAS .
E. D. M. Ferreira, T. Morelli, I. Moreira and M. S. de Carvalho, J. Braz. Chem. Soc., 2004, 15(4), 563–569 CAS .
E. Ferreira, R. J. A. L’Amour, J. M. N. Carmo, J. L. Mantovano and M. S. de Carvalho, Microchem. J., 2004, 78(1), 1–5 CrossRef .
B. Zawisza and R. Sitko, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(8), 995–999 RSC .
R. K. W. Merkle, M. Loubser and P. P. H. Graser, X-ray Spectrom., 2004, 33(3), 222–224 CrossRef CAS .
M. Loubser, C. Strydom and H. Potgieter, X-ray Spectrom., 2004, 33(3), 212–215 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Sieber, L. L. Yu, A. F. Marlow and T. A. Butler, X-ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(2), 153–159 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dolgopolova, D. J. Weiss, R. Seltmann, C. Stanley, B. Coles and A. K. Cheburkin, Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 2004, 84(12), 889–899 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Worley and L. P. Colletti, Powder Diffr., 2004, 19(1), 87–89 CrossRef CAS .
T. C. Miller and G. J. Havrilla, X-ray Spectrom., 2004, 33(2), 101–106 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Holmes, D. K. Watkins and R. D. Norris, Mar. Geol., 2004, 209(1–4), 31–43 CrossRef CAS .
T. Westerhold, T. Bickert and U. Rohl, Palaeogeogr. Palaeoclimatol. Palaeoecol., 2005, 217(3–4), 205–222 CrossRef .
S. G. Driese, Z. H. Li and S. P. Horn, Quaternary Res., 2005, 63(2), 136–149 Search PubMed .
A. Bahr, F. Lamy, H. Arz, H. Kuhlmann and G. Wefer, Mar. Geol., 2005, 214(4), 309–322 CrossRef CAS .
O. Duntze, F. Watermann and L. Giani, J. Plant Nutr. Soil Sci.—Z. Pflanzenernahr. Bodenkunde, 2005, 168(1), 53–59 Search PubMed .
N. Karakaya, M. C. Karakaya, A. Temel, S. Kupeli and C. Tunoglu, Clays Clay Miner., 2004, 52(4), 495–509 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Marques, D. G. Schulze, N. Curi and S. A. Mertzman, Geoderma, 2004, 119(3–4), 179–195 CrossRef CAS .
L. V. Solov’eva, M. A. Gornova, A. E. Markova and V. I. Lozhkin, Geochem. Int., 2004, 42(3), 220–235 Search PubMed .
S. E. Haggerty and T. Birkett, Lithos, 2004, 76(1–4), 535–549 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Wang, G. H. Li, Q. Zhang and Y. M. Wang, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2004, 28(1), 81–88 Search PubMed .
J. Enzweiler and M. A. Vendemiatto, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2004, 28(1), 103–112 Search PubMed .
G. K. Pedersen, S. A. S. Pedersen, J. Steffensen and C. S. Pedersen, Bull. Geol. Soc. Denmark, 2004, 51, 159–177 Search PubMed .
M. Bellezza, S. Merlino and N. Perchiazzi, Eur. J. Mineral., 2004, 16(6), 957–969 CrossRef CAS .
A. Buchl and S. Gier, Geol. Mag., 2003, 140(6), 649–659 CrossRef .
X. H. Wang, Y. S. Gao, Y. M. Wang and S. I. Andreev, Geostand. Newsl.—J. Geostand. Geoanal., 2003, 27(3), 251–257 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Petrov, Y. N. Kornakov, I. Korotaeva, E. A. Anchutina, L. A. Persikova, V. E. Susloparova, I. N. Fedorova and V. A. Shibanov, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2004, 28(1), 89–102 Search PubMed .
Y. Idris, I. Funtua and I. M. Umar, Chem. Erde-Geochem., 2004, 64(4), 385–398 Search PubMed .
D. Perez, M. Rubio, A. Bonalumi, J. Sfragulla, A. Lopez, A. Guereschi, C. Vazquez, M. Gozalvez, M. Luchesi, R. G. Badini, S. L. Cuffini, G. Sphan, M. Inga, A. Germanier and R. E. Servant, X-ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(1), 59–63 CrossRef CAS .
D. N. Castendyk, J. L. Mauk and J. G. Webster, Appl. Geochem., 2005, 20(1), 135–156 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sei, A. A. Toure, J. Olivier-Fourcade, H. Quiquampoix, S. Staunton, J. C. Jumas and M. Womes, Appl. Clay Sci., 2004, 27(3–4), 235–239 CrossRef CAS .
I. Funtua, Instrum. Sci. Technol., 2004, 32(5), 529–536 CrossRef CAS .
D. Merabet, N. Benabdeslam, N. Bezzi, T. Ikhlef and H. Arkoub, Ann. Chim.—Sci. Mater., 2004, 29(5), 69–85 CrossRef CAS .
I. Natatou, Z. Adamou, K. Ikhiri, A. Boos, J. Guille, F. Rastegar and M. Burgard, Ann. Chim.—Sci. Mater., 2005, 30(1), 67–76 CAS .
A. H. El-Sheikh, M. F. Tutunji, G. A. W. Derwish and S. M. Musleh, J. Adv. Oxid. Technol., 2004, 7(2), 161–171 Search PubMed .
V. S. Aleksandrova, O. P. Zykova and E. Y. Markiv, Russian J. Appl. Chem., 2004, 77(1), 30–33 Search PubMed .
M. Hassan and H. El-Shall, Appl. Clay Sci., 2004, 27(3–4), 219–222 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. A. Robertson and C. E. Feather, X-ray Spectrom., 2004, 33(3), 164–173 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yoon, C. Yoon, C. S. Park, T. Ko, N. S. Kim and K. N. Han, Miner. Metall. Process., 2005, 22(1), 59–64 Search PubMed .
S. B. Deshpande, Y. Khollam, Y. B. Bhoraskar, S. K. Date, S. R. Sainkara and H. S. Potdar, Mater. Lett., 2005, 59(2–3), 293–296 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Deulkar, C. H. Bhosale and M. Sharon, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2005, 89(2–3), 211–215 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mergen, Br. Ceram. Trans., 2004, 103(1), 42–46 CrossRef CAS .
A. Martinez-Frias, R. Benito, G. Wilson, A. Delgado, T. Boyd and K. Marti, J. Mater. Process. Technol., 2004, 147(2), 204–210 CrossRef .
F. Deutsch, M. Stranger, A. E. Kaplinskii, L. Samek, P. Joos and R. Van Grieken, J. Environ. Sci. Health Part A, 2004, 39(3), 539–558 Search PubMed .
J. Braziewicz, L. Kownacka, U. Majewska and A. Korman, Atmos. Environ., 2004, 38(13), 1989–1996 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Bruno, A. F. Almeida, V. N. Filho, M. L. Aguiar, J. A. S. Goncalves and J. R. Coury, Int. J. Environ. Pollut., 2004, 22(4), 476–489 Search PubMed .
A. Viksna, E. S. Lindgren, P. Standzenieks and J. Jacobsson, X-ray Spectrom., 2004, 33(6), 414–420 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Marcazzan, M. Ceriani, G. Valli and R. Vecchi, X-ray Spectrom., 2004, 33(4), 267–272 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gatari, J. Boman and D. Maina, X-ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(2), 118–123 CrossRef .
H. M. El-Tahir, E. S. Lindgren and F. I. Habbani, X-ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(2), 144–152 CrossRef .
C. Bennet, P. Jonsson and E. S. Lindgren, X-ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(1), 1–6 CrossRef CAS .
P. Jonsson, C. Bennet, I. Eliasson and E. S. Lindgren, Atmos. Environ., 2004, 38(25), 4175–4181 CrossRef CAS .
Y. I. A. Koleleni, Discov. Innov., 2003, 15(3–4), 203–212 Search PubMed .
O. F. Carvacho, K. Trzepla-Nabaglo, L. L. Ashbaugh, R. G. Flocchini, P. Melin and J. Celis, Atmos. Environ., 2004, 38(31), 5349–5352 CrossRef CAS .
E. Yamada, S. Funoki, Y. Abe, S. Umemura, D. Yamaguchi and Y. Fuse, Anal. Sci., 2005, 21(2), 89–94 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zereini, F. Alt, J. Messerschmidt, A. Von Bohlen, K. Liebl and W. Puttmann, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2004, 38(6), 1686–1692 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Lesniewska, B. Godewska-Zylkiewicz, B. Bocca, S. Caimi, S. Caroli and A. Hulanicki, Sci. Total Environ., 2004, 321(1–3), 93–104 CrossRef CAS .
G. C. Lough, J. J. Schauer, J. S. Park, M. M. Shafer, J. T. Deminter and J. P. Weinstein, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39(3), 826–836 CrossRef CAS .
R. Carvalho-Oliveira, R. M. K. Pozo, D. J. A. Lobo, A. Lichtenfels, H. A. Martins-Junior, J. Bustilho, M. Salki, I. M. Sato and P. H. N. Saldiva, Environ. Res., 2005, 98(1), 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
C. U. Ro, H. Hwang, Y. Chun and R. Van Grieken, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39(6), 1409–1419 CrossRef CAS .
Z. B. Shi, L. T. Shao, T. P. Jones and S. L. Lu, J. Geophys. Res.-Atmos., 2005, 110(D1) Search PubMed  , art no.-D01303.
C. J. Ma, S. Tohno and M. Kasahara, Atmos. Environ., 2005, 39(4), 739–747 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Ma, S. Tohno, M. Kasahara and S. Hayakawa, Atmos. Environ., 2004, 38(27), 4519–4529 CrossRef CAS .
K. D. Perry, S. S. Cliff and M. P. Jimenez-Cruz, J. Geophys. Res.-Atmos., 2004, 109(D23) Search PubMed  , art no.-D23S28.
C. Kuang, T. Neumann, S. Norra and D. Stuben, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2004, 11(2), 73–83 Search PubMed .
D. R. Gomez, S. L. Reich, L. E. Dawidowski and C. Vazquez, J. Environ. Monit., 2005, 7(1), 52–59 RSC .
H. M. Ortner, B. L. W. Hoflich, Y. Thomassen, M. Wentzel and B. Zelenka, Chem. Analit., 2005, 50(1), 199–221 Search PubMed .
Y. Kashiwaya, A. Tsubone, K. Ishii and H. Sasamoto, Isij Int., 2004, 44(10), 1774–1779 Search PubMed .
M. Harper, T. S. Hallmark, M. E. Andrew and A. J. Bird, J. Environ. Monit., 2004, 6(10), 819–826 RSC .
R. Foster, Denver X-ray Conf., 2004 Search PubMed .
Z. Spolnik, A. Worobiec, J. Injuk, D. Neilen, H. Schellen and R. Van Grieken, Microchim. Acta, 2004, 145(1–4), 223–227 Search PubMed .
K. J. Koistinen, R. D. Edwards, P. Mathys, J. Ruuskanen, N. Kunzli and M. J. Jantunen, Scand. J. Work Environ. Health, 2004, 30, 36–46 Search PubMed .
V. Szilagyi and Z. Hartyani, Microchem. J., 2005, 79(1–2), 37–41 CrossRef CAS .
C. Vanhoof, V. Corthouts and K. Tirez, J. Environ. Monit., 2004, 6(4), 344–350 RSC .
N. Jorgensen, J. Laursen, A. Viksna, N. Pind and P. E. Holm, Environ. Int., 2005, 31(1), 43–52 CrossRef CAS .
T. D. Hettipathirana, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(2), 223–229 CrossRef .
A. K. Krishna and P. K. Govil, Environ. Geol., 2004, 47(1), 38–44 Search PubMed .
M. Bakac, Instrum. Sci. Technol., 2004, 32(5), 555–566 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Pfeifer, A. Gueye-Girardet, D. Reymond, C. Schlegel, E. Temgoua, D. L. Hesterberg and J. W. Q. Chou, Geoderma, 2004, 122(2–4), 205–234 CrossRef CAS .
R. Salminen, I. Bogatyrev, V. Chekushin, S. P. Glavatskikh, V. Gregorauskiene, H. Niskavaara, L. Selenolk, M. Tenhola and O. Tomilina, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2004, 28(2), 333–341 Search PubMed .
J. J. Marques, D. G. Schulze, N. Curi and S. A. Mertzman, Geoderma, 2004, 121(1–2), 31–43 CrossRef CAS .
S. Torok, J. Osan, L. Vincze, S. Kurunczi, G. Tamborini and M. Betti, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(5), 689–699 CrossRef .
V. Petrosyan, A. Orlova, C. E. Dunlap, E. Babayan, M. Farfel and M. von Braun, Environ. Res., 2004, 94(3), 297–308 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Clark, V. Thuppil, R. Clark, S. Sinha, G. Menezes, H. D'Souza, N. Nayak, A. Kuruvilla, T. Law, R. Dave and S. Shah, J. Occup. Environ. Hyg., 2005, 2(1), 38–44 Search PubMed .
N. Givelet, G. Le Roux, A. Cheburkin, B. Chen, J. Frank, M. E. Goodsite, H. Kempter, M. Krachler, T. Noernberg, N. Rausch, S. Rheinberger, F. Roos-Barraclough, A. Sapkota, C. Scholz and W. Shotyk, J. Environ. Monit., 2004, 6(5), 481–492 RSC .
L. Ukonmaanaho, T. M. Nieminen, N. Rausch and W. Shotyk, Water Air Soil Pollut., 2004, 158(1), 277–294 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Vilarinho, D. Soares, J. Barbosa and F. Castro in Advanced Materials Forum II,  2004, vol. 455–456, pp. 839–843 Search PubMed .
K. Gopal, S. B. Srivastava, S. Shukla and J. L. Bersillon, J. Environ. Biol., 2004, 25(4), 469–475 Search PubMed .
P. Prakash, D. Hoskins and A. K. SenGupta, J. Membrane Sci., 2004, 237(1–2), 131–144 CrossRef CAS .
S. Schofield and J. Jankowski, Chem. Geol., 2004, 211(1–2), 111–134 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yoo, K. Sasaki, N. Hiroyoshi and M. Tsunekawa, Mater. Trans., 2004, 45(7), 2422-+ Search PubMed .
F. Frau and C. Ardau, Mineral. Mag., 2004, 68(1), 15–30 Search PubMed .
A. Dousova, D. Kolousek, F. Kovanda, V. Machovic and M. Novotna, Appl. Clay Sci., 2005, 28(1–4), 31–42 CrossRef .
J. M. Zachara, R. K. Kukkadapu, P. L. Gassman, A. Dohnalkova, J. K. Fredrickson and T. Anderson, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2004, 68(8), 1791–1805 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sar, S. K. Kazy and S. F. D’Souza, Int. Biodeterior. Biodegrad., 2004, 54(2–3), 193–202 Search PubMed .
N. Mikulic, V. Orescanin, T. Legovic and R. Zugaj, Environ. Geol., 2004, 46(1), 62–70 Search PubMed .
G. P. Glasby, P. Szefer, J. Geldon and J. Warzocha, Sci. Total Environ., 2004, 330(1–3), 249–269 CrossRef CAS .
K. K. Kadyrzhanov, D. S. Barber, V. P. Solodukhin, V. L. Poznyak, I. V. Kazachevskiy, B. B. Knyazev, S. N. Lukashenko, S. Khazhekber, J. D. Betsill and H. D. Passell, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2005, 263(1), 197–205 CrossRef CAS .
A. Salazar, O. G. Lizano and E. J. Alfaro, Rev. Biol. Trop., 2004, 52, 61–75 Search PubMed .
J. L. Durant, T. Ivushkina, K. MacLaughlin, H. Lukacs, J. Gawel, D. Senn and H. F. Hemond, Wat. Res., 2004, 38(13), 2989–3000 Search PubMed .
R. Wennrich, J. Mattusch, P. Morgenstern, K. Freyer, H. C. Treutler, H. J. Stark, L. Bruggemann, A. Paschke, B. Daus and H. Weiss, Environ. Geol., 2004, 45(6), 818–833 Search PubMed .
J. Smith and M. D. Melville, Appl. Geochem., 2004, 19(11), 1837–1853 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. T. Tung, Ann. Chim., 2004, 94(11), 837–846 CrossRef CAS .
T. T. N. Lan, N. T. P. Thoa, R. Nishimura, Y. Tsujino, M. Yokoi and Y. Maeda, Atmos. Environ., 2005, 39(5), 913–920 CrossRef CAS .
O. T. Butler, J. M. Cook, C. F. Harrington, S. J. Hill, J. Rieuwerts and D. L. Miles, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(2), 130–157 RSC .
A. Adriaens, Trends Anal. Chem., 2004, 23(8), 583–586 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Mallory-Greenough and J. D. Greenough, Can. J. Earth Sci., 2004, 41(6), 655–657 CrossRef .
T. Calligaro, J. C. Dran, J. Salomon and P. Walter, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 226(1–2), 29–37 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mantler and J. Klikovits, Powder Diffract., 2004, 19(1), 16–19 CrossRef CAS .
M. Schreiner, B. Fruhmann, D. Jembrih-Simburger and R. Linke, Powder Diffract., 2004, 19(1), 3–11 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ferretti, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 226(3), 453–460 CrossRef CAS .
L. Maritan, C. Mazzoli, L. Nodari and U. Russo, Appl. Clay Sci., 2005, 29(1), 31–44 CrossRef CAS .
L. Maritan, Eur. J. Mineral., 2004, 16(2), 297–307 CrossRef CAS .
E. Gliozzo, C. Fortina, I. M. Turbanti, M. Turchiano and G. Volpe, Archaeometry, 2005, 47, 13 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. del Rio, L. G. Sanjuan, V. H. Perez and M. J. H. Arnedo, Geoarchaeol.—Int. J., 2005, 20(3), 263–284 Search PubMed .
G. Eramo, R. Laviano, I. M. Muntoni and G. Volpe, J. Cultural Heritage, 2004, 5(2), 157–165 Search PubMed .
E. H. Bakraji, Instrum. Sci. Technol., 2004, 32(3), 263–270 CrossRef CAS .
M. Klein, F. Jesse, H. U. Kasper and A. Golden, Archaeometry, 2004, 46, 339–356 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Hall, J. Archaeol. Sci., 2004, 31(10), 1439–1450 Search PubMed .
M. O. Figueiredo, T. P. Silva, J. P. Veiga, A. M. D. Diogo and L. Trindade, Appl. Phys. A, 2004, 79(2), 327–329 CrossRef .
P. Comodi, M. Bernardi, A. Bentivoglio, G. D. Gatta and P. F. Zanazzi, Archaeometry, 2004, 46, 405–419 CrossRef CAS .
W. D. Li, J. Z. Li, Z. Q. Deng, J. Wu and J. K. Guo, Ceram. Int., 2005, 31(3), 487–494 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, J. Z. Li, Z. Q. Deng and C. S. Wang, Sci. China Series E—Eng. Mater. Sci., 2004, 47(3), 366–375 Search PubMed .
P. Colomban and G. Sagon, Archaeometry, 2004, 46, 125–136 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Fan, S. L. Feng, Q. Xu, Y. Lei, X. Q. Feng, L. Cheng, Y. Y. Huang, W. He, K. S. Quan and Y. M. Shen, High Energy Phys. Nucl. Phys.—Chin. Ed., 2003, 27, 101–104 Search PubMed .
L. Cheng, S. L. Feng, Q. Xu, Y. Y. Huang, W. He and Z. R. Lu, High Energy Phys. Nucl. Phys.—Chin. Ed., 2003, 27, 97–100 Search PubMed .

          B. Fabbri, S. Gualtieri, A. Ruffini, K. Movassaghi and M. Alavi, in Euro Ceramics VIII,  2004, pts 1–3, vol. 264–268, pp. 2403–2406 Search PubMed .
D. Jembrih-Simburger, C. Neelmeijer, B. Mader and M. Schreiner, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 226(1–2), 119–125 CrossRef CAS .
A. Galli, M. Martini, C. Montanari and E. Sibilia, Radiat. Measure., 2004, 38(4–6), 799–803 Search PubMed .
L. Robinet, K. Eremin, B. C. del Arco and L. T. Gibson, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2004, 35(8–9), 662–670 CrossRef CAS .
U. Casellato, F. Fenzi, P. Guerriero, S. Sitran, P. A. Vigato, U. Russo, M. Galgani, M. Mendera and A. Manasse, J. Cultural Heritage, 2003, 4(4), 337–353 Search PubMed .
T. T. N. Lan, R. Nishimura, Y. Tsujino, Y. Satoh, N. T. P. Thoa, M. Yokoi and Y. Maeda, Corrosion Sci., 2005, 47(4), 1023–1038 Search PubMed .
P. Maravelaki-Kalaitzaki, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 532(2), 187–198 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kallithrakas-Kontos and P. Maravelaki-Kalaitzaki, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2004, 262(3), 713–719 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. del Rio, P. Martinetto, A. Somogyi, C. Reyes-Valerio, E. Dooryhee, N. Peltier, L. Alianelli, B. Moignard, L. Pichon, T. Calligaro and J. C. Dran, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(10–11), 1619–1625 .
J. Paulus and U. Knuutinen, Appl. Phys. A, 2004, 79(2), 397–400 CrossRef .
B. Kanngiesser, W. Malzer, A. F. Rodriguez and I. Reiche, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(1), 41–47 CrossRef .
G. Dupuis and M. Menu, Appl. Phys. A, Mater. Sci. Process., 2005, 80(4), 667–673 Search PubMed .
O. Hahn, W. Malzer, B. Kanngiesser and B. Beckhoff, X-ray Spectrom., 2004, 33(4), 234–239 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kanngiesser, O. Hahn, M. Wilke, B. Nekat, W. Malzer and A. Erko, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(10–11), 1511–1516 CrossRef .
V. Hayez, S. Denoel, Z. Genadry and B. Gilbert, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2004, 35(8–9), 781–785 CrossRef CAS .
I. Reiche, M. Radtke, A. Berger, W. Gorner, T. Ketelsen, S. Merchel, J. Riederer, H. Riesemeier and M. Roth, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(10–11), 1657–1662 CrossRef .
I. Reiche, A. Berger, W. Gorner, S. Merchel, M. Radtke, J. Riederer, H. Riesemeier and M. Roth, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 226(1–2), 83–91 CrossRef CAS .
R. Linke, M. Schreiner and G. Demortier, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 226(1–2), 172–178 CrossRef CAS .
V. Vijayan, T. R. Rautray and D. K. Basa, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 225(3), 353–356 CrossRef CAS .
L. Beck, S. Bosonnet, S. Reveillon, D. Eliot and F. Pilon, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 226(1–2), 153–162 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Nayak, T. R. Rautray and V. Vijayan, Ind. J. Pure Appl. Phys., 2004, 42(5), 319–322 CAS .
S. Santra, D. Mitra, M. Sarkar, D. Bhattacharya, A. Denker, J. Opitz-Coutureau and J. Rauschenberg, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2005, 229(3–4), 465–470 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. M. Edwards, M. G. Sibley, B. Derham and C. P. Heron, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2004, 35(8–9), 746–753 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Carvalho, A. F. Marques, M. T. Lima and U. Reus, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59, 1251–1257 CrossRef .
M. J. Anjos, R. T. Lopes, S. M. F. Mendonca de Souza and E. F. O. de Jesus, X-ray Spectrom., 2005, 34, 189–193 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Spolnik, L. Bencs, A. Worobiec, V. Kontozova and R. Van Grieken, Microchim. Acta, 2005, 149(1–2), 79–85 Search PubMed .
G. S. Hall and C. R. Chambliss, Appl. Spectrosc., 2004, 58(11), 1334–1340 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kautenburger, J. Wannemacher and P. Muller, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2004, 260(2), 399–404 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fisher, P. Goodall, M. W. Hinds, S. N. Nelms and D. M. Penny, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(12), 1567–1595 RSC .
P. A. Bingham and R. J. Hand, J. Hazard. Mater., 2005, 119(1–3), 125–133 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Silva and S. Castanho, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2004, 348, 211–217 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Quirit and E. C. Llaguno, Philipp. Agric. Sci., 2004, 87(3), 322–334 Search PubMed .
V. S. Somerset, L. F. Petrik, R. A. White, M. J. Klink, D. Key and E. Iwuoha, Talanta, 2004, 64(1), 109–114 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Toebes, M. K. van der Lee, L. M. Tang, M. H. H. in’t Veld, J. H. Bitter, A. J. van Dillen and K. P. de Jong, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108(31), 11611–11619 CrossRef CAS .
E. Carpio, P. Zuniga, S. Ponce, J. Solis, J. Rodriguez and W. Estrada, J. Mol. Catal. A—Chemical, 2005, 228(1–2), 293–298 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Feng, R. S. K. Wong, X. J. Hu and P. L. Yue, Catal. Today, 2004, 98(3), 441–446 CrossRef CAS .
O. S. N. Sum, J. Y. Feng, X. J. Hu and P. L. Yue, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2004, 59(22–23), 5269–5275 CAS .
F. Teng, Z. J. Tian, G. X. Xiong and Z. S. Xu, Catal. Today, 2004, 93–95, 651–657 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang and B. Q. Xu, Acta Chim. Sin., 2005, 63(1), 86–90 Search PubMed .
M. F. Gazulla, M. P. Gomez, A. Barba and M. Orduna, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2004, 28(2), 203–212 Search PubMed .
M. F. Gazulla, M. P. Gomez, A. Barba and J. C. Jarque, X-ray Spectrom., 2004, 33(6), 421–430 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Gazulla, M. P. Gomez, A. Barba and S. Mestre, X-ray Spectrom., 2004, 33(6), 431–438 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Celik and A. I. Karayigit, Energy Sources, 2004, 26(4), 339–352 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yazdi and A. E. Shiravani, Int. J. Coal Geol., 2004, 60(1), 73–79 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Golab and P. F. Carr, Int. J. Coal Geol., 2004, 57(3–4), 197–210 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. Dai, D. H. Li, D. Y. Ren, Y. G. Tang, L. Y. Shao and H. B. Song, Appl. Geochem., 2004, 19(8), 1315–1330 CrossRef CAS .
A. Emanuelson, S. Hansen and E. Viggh, Cem. Concr. Res., 2003, 33(10), 1613–1621 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Barros, J. A. S. Tenorio and D. C. R. Espinosa, J. Hazard. Mater., 2004, 112(1–2), 71–78 CrossRef CAS .
H. T. Ozkahraman and E. C. Isik, Construct. Build. Mater., 2005, 19(4), 251–255 Search PubMed .
G. Bianchini, E. Marrocchino, R. Tassinari and C. Vaccaro, Waste Manage., 2005, 25(2), 149–159 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Q. Xie, M. Feng and J. Deng, Wood Fiber Sci., 2004, 36(3), 337–343 Search PubMed .
J. Valley, Spectroscopy, 2004, 13–13 Search PubMed .

          C. Vanhoof and K. Tirez, book of abstracts, European X-ray Spectrometry Conference, 6th–11th June 2004, Sassari, Sardinia, 2004 Search PubMed .
A. Taylor, S. Branch, D. Halls, M. Patriarca and M. White, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(4), 505–556 RSC .
A. Taylor, S. Branch, D. Halls, M. Patriarca and M. White, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(4), 323–369 RSC .
D. E. B. Fleming, D. R. Chettle, F. E. McNeill and A. G. P. Weedon, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 217(3), 471–478 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ahmed, D. E. B. Fleming and J. M. O’Meara, Phys. Med. Biol., 2004, 49(17), N267–N276 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Nie, D. R. Chettle, F. E. McNeill and J. M. O’Meara, Phys. Med. Biol., 2004, 49(19), N325–N334 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Huang, L. Tian, H. S. Cheng and P. Pei, Spectrosc. Spectr. Anal., 2004, 24(11), 1470–1472 CAS .
S. A. Graham and J. M. O’Meara, Phys. Med. Biol., 2004, 49(15), N259–N266 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. N. Studinski, F. E. McNeill, D. R. Chettle and J. M. O’Meara, X-ray Spectrom., 2004, 33(4), 285–288 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pejovic-Milic, I. M. Stronach, J. Gyorffy, C. E. Webber and D. R. Chettle, Med. Phys., 2004, 31(3), 528–538 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Shilstein, A. Breskin, R. Chechik, G. Feldman and D. Vartsky, Phys. Med. Biol., 2004, 49(4), 485–499 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lin, R. Kim, S. W. Tsaih, D. Sparrow and H. Hu, Environ. Health Perspect., 2004, 112(11), 1147–1151 CAS .
P. Coyle, M. J. Kosnett and K. Hipkins, Am. J. Ind. Med., 2005, 47(2), 172–175 CrossRef CAS .
A. Schutz, M. Olsson, A. Jensen, L. Gerhardsson, J. Borjesson, S. Mattsson and S. Skerfving, Int. Arch. Occup. Environ. Health, 2005, 78(1), 35–43 Search PubMed .
A. S. Ettinger, M. M. Tellez-Rojo, C. Amarasiriwardena, T. Gonzalez-Cossio, K. E. Peterson, A. Aro, H. Hu and M. Hernandez-Avila, Environ. Health Perspect., 2004, 112(8), 926–931 CAS .
J. H. Schafer, T. A. Glass, J. Bressler, A. C. Todd and B. S. Schwartz, Environ. Health Perspect., 2005, 113(1), 31–35 CAS .
B. S. Schwartz, B. K. Lee, K. Bandeen-Roche, W. Stewart, K. Bolla, J. Links, V. Weaver and A. Todd, Epidemiology, 2005, 16(1), 106–113 CrossRef .
D. A. Schaumberg, F. Mendes, M. Balaram, M. R. Dana, D. Sparrow and H. Hu, JAMA, J. Am. Med. Assoc., 2004, 292(22), 2750–2754 Search PubMed .
S. W. Tsaih, S. Korrick, J. Schwartz, C. Amarasiriwardena, A. Aro, D. Sparrow and H. Hu, Environ. Health Perspect., 2004, 112(11), 1178–1182 CAS .
M. G. Weisskopf, R. O. Wright, J. Schwartz, A. Spiro, D. Sparrow, A. Aro and H. Hu, Am. J. Epidemiol., 2004, 160(12), 1184–1193 .
R. O. Wright, E. K. Silverman, J. Schwartz, S. W. Tsaih, J. Senter, D. Sparrow, S. T. Weiss, A. Aro and H. Hu, Environ. Health Perspect., 2004, 112(6), 746–750 CAS .
C. C. Abnet, B. Lai, Y. L. Qiao, S. Vogt, X. M. Luo, P. R. Taylor, Z. W. Dong, S. D. Mark and S. M. Dawsey, J. Natl Cancer Inst., 2005, 97(4), 301–306 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Farquharson and K. Geraki, X-ray Spectrom., 2004, 33(4), 240–245 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gurol, E. Ergen, A. Karabulut, R. Polat, K. Altinkaynak and G. Budak, Instrum. Sci. Technol., 2004, 32(1), 69–76 CrossRef .
R. Ekinci and N. Ekinci, J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer, 2004, 86(4), 379–385 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kallinteri, D. Fatouros, P. Klepetsanis and S. G. Antimisiaris, J. Liposome Res., 2004, 14(1–2), 27–38 Search PubMed .
F. Zhang, N. Q. Liu, X. F. Wang, L. Zhu and Z. F. Chai, Biol. Trace Elem. Res., 2004, 97(2), 125–133 CrossRef CAS .
W. E. Stephens and A. Calder, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2004, 527(1), 89–96 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Bamford, M. Jaksic, Z. Medunic, D. Wegrzynek, E. Chinea-Cano and A. Markowicz, X-ray Spectrom., 2004, 33(4), 277–280 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ali, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 222(3–4), 567–576 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Cheburkin and W. Shotyk, X-ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(1), 69–72 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ekinci, R. Ekinci, R. Polat and G. Budak, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2004, 260(1), 127–131 CrossRef CAS .
I. Queralt, M. Ovejero, M. L. Carvalho, A. F. Marques and J. M. Llabrés, X-ray Spectrom., 2005, 34, 213–217 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Ray, P. K. Nayak, T. R. Rautray, V. Vijayan and S. Jena, Ind. J. Phys. Proc. Ind. Assoc. Cultiv. Sci.—Part B, 2004, 78(1), 103–105 Search PubMed .
M. J. Anjos, R. C. Barroso, R. T. Lopes, E. F. O. de Jesus, S. M. Simabuco and C. R. F. Castro, X-ray Spectrom., 2004, 33(6), 407–409 CrossRef .
L. Perring and D. Andrey, X-ray Spectrom., 2004, 33(2), 128–135 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ekinci, R. Ekinci, R. Polat and G. Budak, J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer, 2005, 91(2), 155–160 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jastrzebska, B. Brudka, T. Szymanski and E. Szlyk, Food Chem., 2003, 83(3), 463–467 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Eze, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2005, 89(2–3), 205–210 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. Qasrawi, T. S. Kayed and I. Ercan, Mater. Sci. Eng. B—Solid State Mater. Adv. Technol., 2004, 113(1), 73–78 CrossRef .
E. Bacaksiz, T. D. Dzhafarov, V. D. Novruzov, K. Ozturk, M. Tomakin, T. Kucukomeroglu, M. Altunbas, E. Yanmaz and B. Abay, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2004, 201(13), 2948–2952 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Kwon, Y. Shon, W. C. Lee, D. J. Fu, H. C. Jeon, T. W. Kang, T. W. Kim and X. J. Fan, J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 96(4), 2029–2032 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Long, Z. C. Guo and X. Y. Han, Trans. Nonferrous Met. Soc. China, 2004, 14, 132–135 Search PubMed .
S. A. Krasnikov, A. S. Vinogradov, K. H. Hallmeier, R. Hohne, M. Ziese, P. Esquinazi, T. Chasse and R. Szargan, Mater. Sci. Eng. B—Solid State Mater. Adv. Technol., 2004, 109(1–3), 207–212 .
I. Naploszek-Bilnik, A. Budniok and E. Lagiewka, J. Alloy. Compd., 2004, 382(1–2), 54–60 CrossRef CAS .
H. Eba and K. Sakurai, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2004, 571(2), 149–158 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Lan and Y. L. Wang, Thin Solid Films, 2004, 469–70, 438–443 CrossRef .
T. Wagner, T. Kohoutek, V. Perina, A. Mackova, V. Hnatowitz, S. O. Kasap, M. Krbal, M. Frumar and M. Vlcek, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 219–20, 875–879 CrossRef .
M. Haschke and J. C. Lecomte, J. Phys. IV, 2004, 118, 213–219 Search PubMed .
J. Hershberger, O. O. Ajayi and G. R. Fenske, Tribol. Int., 2005, 38(3), 299–303 CrossRef CAS .
T. Jiang, N. Hall, A. Ho and S. Morin, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 471(1–2), 76–85 CrossRef CAS .
J. Neshati and M. R. Fardi, Surface Eng., 2004, 20(4), 299–303 Search PubMed .
K. Kuribayashi, Y. Fujita, H. Isige and T. Iwanuma, Mater. Sci. Eng. B—Solid State Mater. Adv. Technol., 2004, 109(1–3), 188–191 .
S. H. Deulkar, C. H. Bhosale and M. Sharon, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2004, 65(11), 1879–1885 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Chung, V. A. Chernenko, V. V. Khovailo, J. Pons, E. Cesari and T. Takagi, Mater. Sci. Eng. A—Struct. Mater. Prop. Microstruct. Process., 2004, 378(1–2), 443–447 CrossRef .
A. A. Dakhel, Eur. Phys. J.—Appl. Phys., 2004, 28(1), 59–64 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Dakhel, J. Alloy. Compd., 2005, 388(2), 177–185 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Dakhel, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2004, 201(4), 745–755 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Dakhel, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2004, 393(4–6), 528–534 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Dakhel, Solid-State Electron., 2005, 49(4), 562–566 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Dakhel, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2004, 65(11), 1765–1771 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Dakhel, Physica B-Condensed Matter, 2004, 353(3–4), 255–262 Search PubMed .
A. A. Dakhel, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 476(2), 366–372 CrossRef CAS .
M. Putkonen, M. Nieminen and L. Niinisto, Thin Solid Films, 2004, 466(1–2), 103–107 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Puurunen, W. Vandervorst, W. F. A. Besling, O. Richard, H. Bender, T. Conard, C. Zhao, A. Delabie, M. Caymax, S. De Gendt, M. Heyns, M. M. Viitanen, M. de Ridder, H. H. Brongersma, Y. Tamminga, T. Dao, T. de Win, M. Verheijen, M. Kaiser and M. Tuominen, J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 96(9), 4878–4889 CrossRef CAS .
R. I. Batalov, R. M. Bayazitov, N. M. Khusnullin, E. I. Terukov, V. K. Kudoyarova, G. N. Mosina, B. A. Andreev and D. I. Kryzhkov, Phys. Solid State, 2005, 47(1), 1–4 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Damlencourt, O. Weber, O. Renault, J. M. Hartmann, C. Poggi, F. Ducroquet and T. Billon, J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 96(10), 5478–5483 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jin, C. R. Kinser, P. A. Bertin, D. E. Kramer, J. A. Libera, M. C. Hersam, S. T. Nguyen and M. J. Bedzyk, Langmuir, 2004, 20(15), 6252–6258 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Libera, R. W. Gurney, S. T. Nguyen, J. T. Hupp, C. Liu, R. Conley and M. J. Bedzyk, Langmuir, 2004, 20(19), 8022–8029 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Libera, R. W. Gurney, C. Schwartz, H. Jin, T. L. Lee, S. T. Nguyen, J. T. Hupp and M. J. Bedzyk, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109(4), 1441–1450 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Zheng, H. Liu, X. X. Zhang, V. A. L. Roy and A. B. Djurisic, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85(13), 2589–2591 CrossRef CAS .
N. Mathur, R. K. Joshi, G. V. Subbaraju and H. K. Sehgal, Physica E—Low-Dimensional Syst. Nanostruct., 2004, 23(1–2), 56–60 Search PubMed .
M. Kawazu, M. Nara and T. Tsujino, J. Sol–Gel Sci. Technol., 2004, 31(1–3), 109–112 CAS .
D. S. Xue and H. G. Shi, Nanotechnology, 2004, 15(12), 1752–1755 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Muffler, F. Muller, M. C. Lux-Steiner and C. H. Fischer, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97(1) Search PubMed  , art no.-014310.
M. Rusu, S. Wiesner, D. F. Marron, A. Meeder, S. Doka, W. Bohne, S. Lindner, T. Schedel-Niedrig, C. Giesen, M. Heuken and M. C. Lux-Steiner, Thin Solid Films, 2004, 451–52, 556–561 CrossRef .
N. N. Belevich, Inorg. Mater., 2004, 40(7), 680–685 CrossRef CAS .
N. B. Chaure, A. P. Samantilleke, R. P. Burton, J. Young and I. M. Dharmadasa, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 472(1–2), 212–216 CrossRef CAS .
V. Alberts, Semiconductor Sci. Technol., 2004, 19(1), 65–69 Search PubMed .
J. Palm, V. Probst and F. H. Karg, Solar Energy, 2004, 77(6), 757–765 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sharma, M. Vashistha and I. P. Jain, Opt. Mater., 2004, 27(3), 395–398 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nygard, K. Hamalainen, S. Manninen, P. Jalas and J. P. Ruottinen, X-ray Spectrom., 2004, 33(5), 354–359 CrossRef CAS .
C. Scheuerlein, G. A. Izquierdo, N. Charras, L. R. Oberli and M. Taborelli, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151(6), E206–E212 CrossRef CAS .
E. Z. Kurmaev, A. Moewes, I. R. Shein, L. D. Finkelstein, A. L. Ivanovskii and H. Anno, J. Phys.—Condensed Matter, 2004, 16(6), 979–987 CrossRef CAS .
E. Z. Kurmaev, J. P. Werner, A. Moewes, S. Chiuzbaian, M. Bach, W. Y. Ching, W. Motozaki, T. Otsuka, S. Matsuya, K. Endo and M. Neumann, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 2004, 137–40, 811–815 CrossRef .
P. F. Karimov, N. A. Skorikov, E. Z. Kurmaev, L. D. Finkelstein, S. Leitch, J. MacNaughton, A. Moewes and T. Mori, J. Phys.—Condensed Matter, 2004, 16(28), 5137–5142 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Grebennikov, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 2004, 137–40, 741–746 CrossRef .
A. Kikas, T. Kaambre, A. Saar, K. Kooser, E. Nommiste, I. Martinson, V. Kimberg, S. Polyutov and F. Gel’mukhanov, Phys. Rev. B, 2004, 70(8) Search PubMed  , art no.-085102.
A. J. Nelson, T. van Buuren, T. M. Willey, C. Bostedt, J. J. Adams, K. I. Schaffers, L. Terminello and T. A. Callcott, J. Electron Spectrosc. Rel. Phenom., 2004, 137–40, 541–546 CrossRef .
Z. L. Liu, J. Kawamura, M. Nagasono, K. Maeda and J. Kawai, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 2004, 135(1), 73–81 CrossRef CAS .
Z. F. Chai, Z. Y. Zhang, W. Y. Feng, C. Y. Chen, D. D. Xu and X. L. Hou, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(1), 26–33 RSC .
V. Orescanin, L. Mikelic, S. Lulic and M. Rubcic, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2004, 527(2), 125–129 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tsujimura, X. Y. Xue, M. Kanzaki and M. J. Walter, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2004, 68(24), 5081–5101 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tanabe, Y. Tanaka, D. Tanaka, Y. Taniguchi, M. Toyoda, J. Kawai, N. Ishii, C. L. Riu, Y. Yilixiati, S. Hayakawa, Y. Kitajima and Y. Terada, Bunseki Kagaku, 2004, 53(12), 1411–1418 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Reznichenko, L. A. Shilkina, E. S. Gagarina, Y. I. Yuzyuk, O. N. Razumovskaya and A. V. Kozinkin, Crystallogr. Rep., 2004, 49(5), 820–827 CrossRef CAS .
E. Oz, E. Baydas, M. Ertugrul and Y. Sahin, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2004, 260(1), 75–79 CrossRef .
Y. Ozdemir, R. Durak, K. Esmer and M. Ertugrul, J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer, 2005, 90(2), 161–168 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. Nagy, A. Komlosi and J. Konya, J. Colloid Interf. Sci., 2004, 278(1), 166–172 CrossRef CAS .
H. Eba and K. Sakurai, J. Solid State Chem., 2005, 178(1), 370–375 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Kulshreshtha, D. N. Wagh and H. N. Bajpei, X-ray Spectrom., 2005, 34, 200–202 CrossRef CAS .
D. Drewes, G. Vollmer and B. Krebs, Z. Anorg. Allgemeine Chem., 2004, 630(15), 2573–2575 Search PubMed .
O. Y. Pankratova, A. V. Zabolotnaya, V. V. Panchuk, V. G. Semenov, R. A. Zvinchuk and A. V. Suvorov, Russian J. General Chem., 2004, 74(11), 1637–1640 Search PubMed .
J. G. Catalano, S. M. Heald, J. M. Zachara and G. E. Brown, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2004, 38(10), 2822–2828 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. Kirby, A. Van Riessen, C. E. Buckley and V. W. Wittorff, J. Mater. Sci., 2005, 40(1), 97–106 CrossRef CAS .
N. I. Mashin, R. V. Lebedeva and A. N. Tumanova, J. Anal. Chem., 2004, 59(4), 345–347 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhao, X. Wang, B. Wang, W. Wen and T. Y. Zhang, Appl. Phys. B—Lasers Opt., 2004, 78(6), 769–774 Search PubMed .
A. C. Sekkal, C. Langlade and A. B. Vannes, Mater. Sci. Eng. A—Struct. Mater. Prop. Microstruct. Process., 2005, 393(1–2), 140–146 CrossRef .
P. Glatzel and U. Bergmann, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2005, 249(1–2), 65–95 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2005
Table Content:

AAS	Atomic absorption spectrometry
AD	Anno Domini
ALD	Atomic layer deposition
ASTM	American Society for Testing and Materials
BC	Before Christ
CCA	Chromated copper arsenate
CRM	Certified reference material
DSC	Differential scanning calorimetry
EDXRD	Energy dispersive X-ray diffraction
EDXRF	Energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence
EPA	Environmental Protection Agency
EPMA	Electron probe microanalysis
EU	European Union
EXAFS	Extended X-ray absorption fine structure
EXRS	European X-ray Conference
FP	Fundamental parameters
FTIR	Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy
GC-MS	Gas chromatography–mass spectrometry
HR-ICP-MS	High resolution-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry
IAEA	International Atomic Energy Agency
ICP-AES	Inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry
ICP-MS	Inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry
ICP-OES	Inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectrometry
INAA	Instrumental neutron activation analysis
LIBS	Laser induced breakdown spectroscopy
MC	Monte Carlo
MDF	Medium density fibreboard
NAA	Neutron activation analysis
NASA	National Aeronautics and Space Administration
NE	North-east
NIST	National Institute of Standards and Technology
NMR	Nuclear magnetic resonance
PCA	Principal component analysis
PF	Phenol-formaldehyde
PGE	Platinum group elements
PGM	Platinum group metals
PIXE	Particle-induced X-ray emission
PM	Particulate matter
PTFE	Poly(tetrafluoroethylene)
PUF	Polyurethane foam
PVC	Poly(vinyl chloride)
PXRF	Portable X-ray fluorescence
RBS	Rutherford backscattering spectrometry
REE	Rare earth elements
RoHS	Restriction on hazardous substances
SEM-EDS	Scanning electron microscopy-energy dispersive spectrometry
S	South
SI	Système International d’Unités
SIMS	Secondary ion mass spectrometry
Si(Li)	Lithium-drifted silicon
Si(PIN)	Silicon detector device
SR	Synchrotron radiation
SRM	Standard reference material
SW	South-west
TEM	Transmission electron microscope
TGA	Thermogravimetric analysis
TXRF	Total reflection X-ray fluorescence
UF	Urea–formaldehyde
USA	United States of America
UV-VIS	Ultraviolet-visible spectroscopy
WDXRF	Wavelength dispersive X-ray fluorescence
WEEE	Waste electrical and electronic equipment
XAFS	X-Ray absorption fine structure spectroscopy
XAS-XANES	X-Ray absorption spectroscopy-X-ray absorption near edge structure
XPS	X-Ray photoelectron spectroscopy
XRD	X-Ray diffraction
XRF	X-Ray fluorescence
XRR	X-Ray reflectivity
XSW	X-Ray standing waves

Z
	Mass atomic number

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2005
