Graphene /zinc nano-composites by electrochemical co-deposition  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CP42385E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CP42385E
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 14034-14040Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsGraphene/zinc nano-composites by electrochemical co-deposition

        
          
            Matthias 
            Hilder
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Orawan 
            Winther-Jensen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Bjørn 
            Winther-Jensen
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Douglas R. 
            MacFarlane
          
        
      ab
aMonash University, School of Chemistry, Clayton, 3800, Vic, Australia. E-mail: matthias.hilder@monash.edu;   Tel: +61 3 990 20323
bMonash University, Department of Materials Engineering, Clayton, 3800, Vic, Australia
Received 
      13th July 2012
    , Accepted 4th September 2012First published on 6th September 2012AbstractWe describe for the first time the electrochemical co-deposition of composites based on a reactive base metal and graphene directly from a one-pot aqueous mixture containing graphene oxide and Zn2+. In order to overcome stability issues the Zn2+ concentration was kept below a critical threshold concentration, ensuring stable graphene oxide suspensions in the presence of cationic base metal precursors. This approach ensures the compatibility between the cationic base metal precursor and graphene oxide, which is more challenging compared to previously reported anionic noble metal complexes. Spectroscopic evidence suggests that the reason for destabilisation is zinc complexation involving the carboxylate groups of graphene oxide. The composition of the electrodeposited co-composites can be tuned by adjusting the concentration of the precursors in the starting mixture. The nano-composites show zinc particles (<3 nm) being uniformly dispersed amongst the graphene sheets. It is also demonstrated that the composites are electrochemically active and suitable for energy storage and energy conversion applications. However, a factor limiting the discharge efficiency is the reactivity of the base metal (low reduction potential and small particle size) which undergoes rapid oxidation when exposed to aqueous electrolytes.
Introduction
Graphene is arguably one of the most intensively studied materials in recent times. It is basically a 2-dimensional honeycomb structure of sp2 hybridised carbon.1 It has many properties which make it favourable for electrochemical applications,2 including thinness, electrical conductivity, optical transparency and robustness. Since ideal graphene sheets do not carry any chemical functionality, it is electrochemically stable as well as chemically inert. This makes graphene an ideal material to be incorporated into electric devices. The lack of chemical reactivity results in high compatibility, which makes it a very attractive component for composite materials. Also specific chemical reactivity can be introduced by carrying out chemical reactions involving the polar functional groups of graphene oxide (GO: a highly oxidised form of graphene which is a commonly used precursor to make graphene) which include epoxide, carboxylic acid, phenol and aldehyde groups.3
As mentioned above graphene is attractive for many potential electrochemical applications including electrodes, sensors, batteries, fuel cells, capacitors, solar cells, and photo catalysts amongst others.4,5 While the key property here is the conductivity, graphene itself is hardly electrochemically active and acts merely as a conductive host matrix for electroactive components. Thus graphene is often combined with other materials to form composites in which graphene adds conductivity while the co-material adds specific chemical or electrochemical activity. Graphene composites involve for example polymers which can either be mechanically blended together or covalently linked by carrying out specific chemical reactions involving the chemical functional groups of the polymer and of graphene oxide (see above).6 Such composites combine electrical conductivity and mechanical flexibility. For solar cells7–11 and water splitting catalysts12–14 metal oxide pigments have been exfoliated into the graphene structure. Also metal–graphene composites have been prepared.15,16 These however usually include novel metals such as gold, platinum, palladium or silver, while graphene composites incorporating more reactive base metals have not yet been reported. This would be of great interest since such composites are of significant importance for energy storage/conversion applications and for electro-catalysis.
While commonly graphene is prepared by reducing graphene oxide using the hazardous reducing reagent hydrazine, we reported a mild alternative approach based on electrochemical methods.17 By applying a reduction potential to an aqueous suspension of graphene oxide it is possible to electrochemically reduce graphene oxide to conductive graphene. Our previous research interests were based on zinc/graphite composites for energy storage and conversion applications and electrodeposition of graphene.18 Combining these research efforts the question of interest was whether it is possible to replace the graphite in the zinc/graphite composites by electrodeposited graphene resulting in composite materials with superior performance and properties. With the starting materials being graphene oxide and Zn2+, both precursors would be (i) in the oxidised state and (ii) dispersed in water. Thus it would be possible to start from a one-pot aqueous reaction mixture and simultaneously co-deposit graphene/zinc composites by applying a reduction potential.
Metal/graphene composite films have been previously prepared using simultaneous co-deposition from one-pot aqueous reaction mixture.19,20 These however involved anionic metal complexes such as [PdCl4]2− or [PtCl6]2−. However, these complexes are anionic and very compatible with the anionic graphene oxide particles (anionic through deprotonation of phenol and carboxylic acid groups). Using cationic precursors such as Zn2+ has not yet been reported. The challenge here is to overcome compatibility issues where the Zn2+ cation reacts and forms complexes with the anionic carboxylate and phenol groups of graphene oxide. Secondly, previous papers describe graphene/metal composites of very inert noble metals including silver, gold, platinum and palladium. Such are chemically and electrochemically stable not affected by corrosion. For energy storage/conversion applications however it is desirable to incorporate reactive base metals which can be electrochemically discharged to produce energy which powers devices. Only metal oxide/graphene composites exist but to our knowledge graphene/composites incorporating reactive base metals have not yet been reported.
Thus the aim of this study is to overcome stability issues between graphene oxide and cationic Zn2+ precursors and then co-deposit in an aqueous one-pot mixture both species simultaneously, resulting in the formation of composite films consisting of electrochemically reduced graphene and electrochemically active zinc metal.
Experimental section
Materials and reagents
Graphene oxide was synthesised from graphite, following a modified Hummers method as originally presented by Kovtyukhova and colleagues.21,22 In short, graphite (extra pure, Merck) was pre-oxidised using a mixture of concentrated sulphuric acid (p.a., Merck), potassium peroxodisulfate (p.a., Merck) and phosphorous oxide (p.a., Merck). In the second oxidation step the pre-oxidised graphite was subjected to a mixture of concentrated sulphuric acid (p.a., Merck) and potassium permanganate (laboratory grade, Chem Supply). The product was treated with hydrogen peroxide (p.a., Merck), filtrated and washed with hydrochloric acid (analytical grade, Univar). Dialysis was considered not of crucial importance for this study. In the last step, exfoliation of the dispersed GO was achieved by sonicating the dispersion using a Brandson Digital Sonifier (S450D, 500W, 30% amplitude) for 30 minutes.23
The zinc content of the co-deposited film composites was determined from acid digested samples (2 M hydrochloric acid solution; analytical grade, Univar). The system was buffered using about 0.1 g of hexamine (BDH, England) and then titrated against a 0.01 M solution of ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid disodium salt (EDTA; BDH, AnalaR, Australia), which was standardised against a 1000 ppm zinc standard solution (Merck, Germany) from pink to yellow using xylenolorange as an indicator.
Reagents were either used to act as standard electrolytes or to adjust the pH and were sodium chloride (Merck, p.a.), potassium chloride (Merck, p.a.), sodium hydroxide (Merck, p.a.) and hydrochloric acid (UNIVAR, analytical reagent).
Characterisation and electrochemical methods
All depositions and electrochemical characterisations were carried out using a multi-channel potentiostat and controlled using VMP2 EC-lab 9.56 software. The requirements for the working and counter electrodes are that they should be electrically conductive, electrochemically stable in the potential range of interest (e.g. −1.5 to +0.5 V vs. SCE) and chemically inert. Titanium fulfilled all these requirements and thus the three-electrode setup consisted of a titanium sheet working electrode and a titanium mesh counter electrode (the mesh provides the high surface area required). The reference was a standard calomel reference electrode (SCE). It should be mentioned that the composites could also be deposited successfully onto gold substrates. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) was carried out in the range of −1.5 V to +0.5 V vs. SCE using a scan rate of 20 mV s−1. The solutions were stirred with a magnetic stirrer. It is important to mention that without stirring no deposition was observed. Constant potential deposition experiments were carried out by applying voltages of −1.4 V vs. SCE. The systems studied were aqueous suspensions of equi-volumetric amounts of Zn (0.0125 M) and GO (various amounts: 1.5, 0.75, 0.15 mg mL−1) at a pH of 5.5–6.5. The pH was determined using a calibrated 785 DMP Titrino Merohm pH meter.
Conductivities of the GO/Zn2+ suspensions were determined by impedance methods (1 Hz to 5 MHz, 3 measurements per frequency). A two platinum electrode setup was used and the results were calibrated against a KCl standard solution.
The samples were mounted on an aluminium stub with double-sided conductive carbon tape and painted followed by sputtering with iridium coated using a Polaron SC5750. The images were recorded using a Philips XL30 Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope. An accelerating voltage of 2 kV was used for the secondary electron images and 20 kV for mapping (ZnKα1) and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (Inca, manufactured by Oxford Instruments Pty. Ltd).
The sample was dispersed in water and sonicated for 30 seconds. The dispersion was then cast over a copper grid with strong carbon film and dried. Transmission Electron Microscopy was then performed using a Philips CM20 TEM at 200 kV.
Infrared spectra (IR) were recorded on the solid neat samples using a Perkin Elmer FTIR Spectrum One equipped with a diamond attenuated total reflectance attachment (32 scans, resolution of 4 cm−1). The spectra were baseline and ATR corrected.
Raman spectra were recorded using a Renishaw RM 2000 Raman Confocal Microscope equipped with a 785 nm laser. The excitation energy was set to 10% and a scan rate of 10 cm−1 per second was chosen. The signal position was calibrated against silicone.
Results and discussion
The concept is summarised in Fig. 1. Having an aqueous precursor mixture containing GO and Zn2+ ensures homogenous distribution of the reactants in the suspension plus the existence of both species in the oxidised state. Applying a reduction potential should simultaneously convert both precursors to the reduced state electrochemically, leading to the co-deposition of uniform graphene/metal composites.
 Fig. 1  Schematic of graphene/zinc composites by electrochemical co-deposition. Having both species (e.g. Zn2+ and GO) in the oxidised state in a one-pot aqueous mixture allows us to simultaneously reduce them to zinc metal and graphene by applying a reduction potential. Co-deposition results in the formation of good quality uniform composites. 
In our previous study of electro-deposition of graphene directly from aqueous suspensions of GO we identified the conductivity of the deposition medium of crucial importance for the process.13 A too low conductivity fails to efficiently transfer charge from the electrode to the dispersed GO. With increasing conductivity the electric double layer, formed by polarisation of the solvent molecules by the negative surface charges of GO (carboxylate, phenolate), shrinks until it cannot effectively prevent the dispersed GO sheets to approach and form destabilised agglomerates. The upper limit for the GO/Zn system at pH 6.0 was found to be at a total Zn2+ concentration of 4 mM, which corresponds to a conductivity of 1.25 mS cm−1 (equi-volumetric ratios of GO1.5 mgmL−1Zn0.008M). Fig. 2 shows pictures of the stable precursor mixture.
 Fig. 2  Aqueous mixture containing GO and Zn2+ (slightly acidic). While high Zn2+ concentrations result in destabilisation of the suspension, the mixture remains stable for low concentrations. The mechanism of destabilisation is mainly caused by chemical interaction between Zn2+ and anionic groups of GO (e.g. carboxylate, phenolate) 
Higher Zn2+ concentrations lead to destabilisation. This value is much smaller compared to the previously reported GO/NaCl system (25 mS cm−1).13 Thus, besides the stabilising electric double layer, an additional mechanism is assumed to be responsible for destabilising the GO/Zn system. This is supported by the fact that the conductivity can be increased by adding sodium chloride solution to the GO/Zn system without any destabilisation (e.g. 10 mS cm−1 were measured for stable systems with compositions of GO1.5mgmL−1Zn0.0125MNaCl0.25M). This additional mechanism is thought to involve specific chemical interactions involving the Zn2+ cations and the deprotonated carboxylate anions of GO, particularly since the latter is a multi-dentate ligand. This was further supported by carrying out control experiments at different pH values. Under basic conditions stable mixtures were not obtained even if concentration of Zn2+ much lower than reported above was used (e.g. <1 mS cm−1). Destabilisation induced by centres of nucleation can be excluded. Although increasing the pH of the GO–Zn2+ mixture would result in the formation of a Zn(OH)2 precipitate which could potentially act as a nucleation centre and destabilise GO, this possibility can be excluded since in a control experiment the pH was increased of both reactants individually, ensuring that the Zn2+ precursor has been quantitatively converted into soluble [Zn(OH)4]2− complexes. Even then it was not possible to prepare stable GO/Zn2+ suspensions. Increasing the pH produced a higher concentration of deprotonated anionic carboxylate groups, which react with Zn2+ resulting in destabilisation due to complex formation. The ATR-FTIR of the isolated precipitate provides spectroscopic evidence of the formation of Zn–GO complexes (Fig. 3). The carboxylic acid group in GO has CS symmetry and consequently the stretching vibrations energetically degenerate, resulting in a single υ(CO) signal at 1732 cm−1. Upon deprotonation the symmetry is increased (C2V) and the IR spectrum shows two signals, a νasy(CO2−) at 1510 cm−1 and νsy(CO2−) at 1384 cm−1, for the anionic carboxylate group. This is typically observed in the spectra of carboxylate complexes. Other signals of interest include the υ(OH) signal (3600–2200 cm−1), υ(CC) signals (1650–1560 cm−1) and the υ(OH) signals (1055–1042 cm−1). To make sure that the precipitate contained zinc, samples were acid digested and complexiometrically titrated against EDTA. The results revealed a zinc content of w = 15.1%. It is not surprising that coordination of Zn leads to destabilisation while Na does not. While sodium is a hard Lewis acid which forms complexes of ionic character (e.g. high charge density, high electronegativity, non-polarisable bonds, large energy separation between the HOMO and LUMO), Zn2+ is a soft Lewis acid whose complexes can be described as being dominated by highly directional covalent interactions (e.g. low charge density, moderate electronegativity, polarisable bonds, little energy separation between the HOMO and LUMO). The formation of these rigid covalent bonds is responsible for the destabilisation of the suspension. This is not surprising considering the nature of the carboxylate ligand of GO. It is multidentate and features bridging and chelating coordination modes. Thus crosslinking results in the formation of polymeric, 3D complexes which are generally highly insoluble.
 Fig. 3  ATR-FTIR of graphene oxide and zinc graphene oxide complex. Upon coordination the CO signal of GO disappears, resulting in symmetric and asymmetric ν(CO2−) components. 
Applying a reduction voltage of −1.4 V (vs. SCE) to the reaction mixture GO1.5mgmL−1Zn0.0125M results in electro-deposition on the working electrode. To prove that the deposited film contains graphene, Raman spectra were recorded of the deposits (Fig. 4). The spectrum shows the G′ band (2545 cm−1), the G band (1605 cm−1) and the D band (1312 cm−1). This proves the presence of graphene in the deposits. The intensity of the D peak, which can be used as a measure for the defect density, is higher than the G band. This is in agreement with previous observations, which show that this is typical for reduced graphene while the situation is reversed for graphene oxide.18
 Fig. 4  Raman spectrum of deposited graphene/zinc composite (785 nm laser). The presence of the G′ band, the G band and the D band prove the presence of graphene in the composite film. 
Scanning electron micrographs of the so-obtained zinc/graphene composites are presented in Fig. 5. The scanning electron microscope image (SEM) clearly shows the porous nature of the graphene matrix, forming coral and leave like structures. However, zinc particles cannot be identified in the images.
 Fig. 5  Scanning electron microscopy images at various magnifications. The porous structure of the composite can be clearly seen (scale bar: 5–200 μm). 
Despite the apparent absence of zinc in the SEM images, the energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy clearly shows that the deposited films contain zinc (Fig. 6). Mapping using ZnKα1 radiation does not show areas of increased zinc concentration. This suggests that the metal is uniformly dispersed in the graphene matrix beyond the degree of recognition under the resolution achievable at the chosen conditions.
 Fig. 6  Although no individual zinc particles can be seen, energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy shows the presence of zinc. Mapping using ZnKα1 radiation indicates that there are no agglomerations of zinc, suggesting it is evenly distributed in the graphene matrix. Please note that there are signals of iridium (the samples were sputtered with an iridium coating), sodium chloride (used as an electrolyte), titanium (the substrate) and silicone (glue). 
To confirm this hypothesis, images were recorded using transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The higher resolution clearly shows the presence of zinc particles (Fig. 7). From the images the dimensions are estimated to be smaller than 3 nm. What is most fascinating, however, is the outstanding quality of the deposited films. The zinc particles are absolutely evenly and uniformly dispersed throughout the graphene sheets. This high degree of homogeneity can be explained in terms of the specific interactions between the carboxylate groups of GO and Zn2+. The oxygen containing groups of GO (e.g. carboxylic acid, phenol, epoxide etc.) seem to act as templates. Their interaction with Zn2+ fixates their position evenly distributed over the sheet. At the time of co-reduction this distribution results in very uniform and homogeneous composite films of superior quality. It is also thought that these specific zinc–oxygen interactions are responsible for the small particle size. Rather than growing in batches and forming films the multitude of evenly dispersed oxygen containing groups forces the zinc particles to grow as isolated centres, resulting in the formation of zinc particles being as small as 3 nm. This is confirmed by the IR spectra, which proves the existence of specific interactions involving the oxygen containing GO groups and Zn2+. The TEM images also show the sheet structure of the graphene matrix.
 Fig. 7  Transmission electron microscopy shows zinc as small dark dots being very evenly distributed in the graphene matrix (scale bar: 10–20 nm). Higher magnification allows estimation of the particle size of the deposited zinc to be smaller than 3 nm. 

Fig. 8 shows the electrochemical characteristics of the co-deposition process. The CV shows that the onset of the electro-reduction of the GO/Zn2+ precursor starts earlier compared to pure Zn2+. This onset can be assigned to electro-reduction of graphene oxide. At the same time the reduction current of the GO/Zn2+ mixture has a steep increase (e.g. becoming increasingly negative), which is typical for electro-deposition of zinc. More importantly, after electro-deposition, the CV shows an oxidation peak in the range of −1.0 to −0.4 V, which is caused by oxidation of zinc metal back to Zn2+. This is interesting since it means that the zinc species deposited is indeed electrochemically active zinc metal. A rough evaluation of the charge transferred during deposition and discharge reveals that only about 50% of the deposited zinc is being electrochemically reoxidised. This is not surprising since the TEM reveals that the particles are very small (3 nm). Considering the standard reduction potential of zinc, its chemical reactivity and the high reactive surface area given by the small particle size the low conversion efficiency is not utterly surprising. All these factors make zinc metal very reactive and thus it is prone to corrosion once exposed to an aqueous electrolyte. Thus aqueous corrosion competes with electrochemical oxidation, resulting in low electrochemical conversion efficiencies. It is worth pointing out that although Zn2+ and GO reduction occur at roughly the same potential, the electrode kinetics are much higher for zinc. The reason is that GO is negatively charged due to partial deprotonation of oxygen containing functional groups (e.g. carboxylic acid, phenol). Thus the negative GO particles are electrostatically repelled by the negative anode. Therefore high impact stirring is required. The micro-vibrations caused by the magnetic stirrer hitting the walls of the glass beaker accelerated the anode and the GO particles to be accelerated and statistically colliding with one another, resulting in GO reduction at the time of contact. The repulsive forces are thus overcome by the propelling kinetic forces provided by the stirring. Such observations have not only been observed for graphene oxide deposition but also other systems including titania.24
 Fig. 8  CV of Zn2+ (0.0125 M, pH 6.0), GO (1.5 mg mL−1, pH 6.0) and the GO/Zn mixture (GO1.5mgmL−1Zn0.0125M, pH 5.5). The CVs were recorded at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1 against a SCE. 

Table 1 shows how the composition of the composite can be tuned simply by changing the concentration of the reactants in the precursor mixture. The reduction charge is distinguished between Zn2+, GO and parasitic H+ reduction. Finally it is estimated how much of the deposited zinc metal can be electrochemically discharged and converted into energy (e.g. oxidation).
Table 1 Electrochemical characteristics and composition of co-deposited films dependent on concentration of the reactants in the starting mixture




 
GO1.5mgmL−1
GO0.075mgmL−1
GO0.15mgmL−1


Zn0.0125M
Zn0.0125M
Zn0.0125M




Zn deposited
43.3%
49.9%
64.6%


Zntotal(edta)/Qdep(electrochem)
 
 
 


Other
56.7%
50.1%
34.4%


100%-Zndeposited
 
 
 


Discharge efficiency
39.4%
47.7%
44.6%


Zndis(electrochem)/Zntotal(edta)
 
 
 


Zn lost
60.6%
52.3%
50.5%


100%-disch. eff.
 
 
 




Firstly, the composition can be tuned by adjusting the relative concentration of the precursor in the reaction mixture. Note, however, that the zinc concentration in the mixture can only be increased indirectly. A direct increase increases the conductivity to a degree exceeding the critical concentration, thus resulting in destabilisation of the mixture. Thus the relative Zn concentration can be achieved by keeping the concentration of zinc constant and lowering the GO concentration. This gives high concentrations of zinc (relative to GO) while ensuring a stable, homogenous good quality precursor mixture. The charge (Q) transferred during the co-deposition experiment was determined as the product of deposition time (t) and current (I) e.g. Q = I × t. It can be assumed that this reduction charge consists of (i) reduction of Zn2+ to zinc metal; (ii) reduction of GO to graphene; and (iii) water/proton reduction resulting from the aqueous medium. To quantify the total amount of zinc, which deposits during the process, complexiometric EDTA titrations were carried out on acid digested samples of the deposited composites.
Since each mg of zinc produces 0.82 mA h of charge, the fraction of the deposition charge attributed to Zn2+ reduction to the total reduction charge can be estimated.

Table 1 shows that with increasing relative zinc concentration (e.g. with decreasing GO concentration) in the starting mixture, the percentage of charge used for Zn2+ reduction goes up (43.3% for GO1.5mgmL−1Zn0.0125M, 49.9% for GO0.75mgmL−1Zn0.0125M and 64.4% for GO0.15mgmL−1Zn0.0125M). This also means that with increasing relative Zn2+ concentration, the compositions of the co-deposited films are richer in electrochemically active zinc metal. The composition of the composites can thus be tuned by adjusting the relative concentrations of precursors in the starting mixture. As mentioned above the other reduction processes involve GO reduction as well as the competing parasitic water/proton reduction. To study the composition of the deposited films in more detail using the GO1.5mgmL−1Zn0.0125M mixture, 0.0705 g were deposited with 0.25 mA h as thick films (several millimeters). The solid content of this aqua-gel was 0.2 mg, giving a solid content of roughly 0.3%. As mentioned above, it was estimated from EDTA measurements that 50% of the 0.25 mA h could be assigned to Zn2+ reduction (0.125 mA h). Considering that 0.82 mA h reduce 1.0 mg of Zn2+, 0.125 mA h reduce 0.152 mg, meaning that 0.48 mg of the film consists of graphene, resulting in a zinc content of roughly 75%. The other 0.125 mA h are used up to reduce graphene oxide to graphene and H+ to hydrogen. Since the reduction of graphene is very complex no exact estimate on the ratio of graphene oxide to H+ reduction can be made except that it is safe to say that we have spectroscopic evidence for graphene being deposited and that hydrogen reduction likely competes with GO reduction considering that both processes happen at the same potential. Both of these processes are included in Table 1 labelled under other. Since (i) the reduction of GO and Zn2+ occurs at similar potentials and since (ii) it has been shown above that the composition of the deposited composite films reflects the composition in the starting mixture and since (iii) the selectivity of the two reduction process can be assumed to be independent of the concentrations of the reactants, it can be assumed that the zinc content of the deposits can be controlled over a wide range. Due to the favourable electrochemical reduction kinetics for Zn2+, the zinc content in the deposits will always be higher than the zinc content in the precursor mixtures (e.g. see discussion above covering the challenging electrochemical reduction of the negatively charged GO anions on the negative anode). An exact estimate however is difficult since the Zn2+ interacts with the anionic groups present in GO (see IR and TEM section). Here it is also worth pointing out that high zinc concentrations are desirable since in general the zinc metal is the electroactive component primarily determining the performance while the graphene acts as a conductive but inert host.
The discharge efficiencies, e.g. how much of the actually deposited zinc metal (from EDTA titration) gets electrochemically converted (from oxidation current during electrochemical discharge experiment) seems to be independent of the film composition, suggesting that roughly half of the deposited metal can be electrochemically converted into energy while the other half is lost. This is also in agreement with the charge estimate performed on the CV data. Common reasons are (i) poor adhesion, (ii) structural unavailability (e.g. the metal sits on a position which does not encourage electrochemical conversion due to the lack of conductivity), or (iii) competing reactions (e.g. aqueous corrosion). Although all factors may contribute to the overall efficiency the determining factor is likely to be competing reactions. Zinc is a reactive base metal and at the same time the deposited particles are tiny (3 nm), making the composite very reactive and thus prone to corrosion once exposed to aqueous electrolytes. Exposed to the aqueous electrolyte, it quickly undergoes oxidation and thus significant amounts get lost and thus are unavailable to be electrochemically oxidised and converted to electrical energy. Carrying out the discharge experiments at lower current (e.g. 0.5 mA compared to 1.0 mA), the discharge efficiency was reduced to 30%. At lower currents, the oxidation process takes longer. The zinc metal is exposed to the corroding aqueous electrolyte for a longer amount of time. It undergoes oxidation, resulting in lower discharge efficiencies. Nevertheless, it is worth emphasising the fact that the material was made electrochemically from a one-pot aqueous mixture and that the deposited film contained both graphene and reactive zinc metal, which can be electrochemically discharged. Moreover, it is worth mentioning that the fact that it is possible to electrochemically discharge the deposited films (e.g. oxidise) proves that zinc is indeed present in its metallic form. Discharge experiments on neat deposited graphene films (in the absence of zinc metal) result in efficiencies of less than 1% (a little bit of charge stored on the graphene surface can be discharged: capacitance).
Conclusion
In summary, GO/Zn2+ precursor suspensions are stable if the concentration of the latter is sufficiently low, e.g. the total concentration of (Zn2+) <0.0065 M; conductivity <1.25 mS cm−1 (at pH 6). The low concentrations are necessary to prevent chemical interactions between the positive Zn2+ cations and the deprotonated anionic carboxylate groups of GO. This interaction is also the reason why GO suspensions cannot be stabilised in the presence of coordinating metal cations if the pH is basic (e.g. increased degree of GO deprotonation). IR data provide spectroscopic evidence of the presence of Zn–GO complexes.
Applying a reduction potential of −1.4 V to the aqueous one-pot mixture containing Zn2+ and GO results in simultaneous electrochemical reduction of both species and thus in the formation of co-deposited graphene/zinc composite films. The so-obtained films consist of tiny zinc particles (smaller than 3 nm) which are uniformly dispersed in the conductive graphene host, resulting in high quality zinc/graphene nano-composits. The composition of the composites can be tuned by adjusting the concentration of the reactants in the one-pot mixture.
It has also been shown that the zinc metal in the nano-composite is electrochemically active. It is thus suitable for electrochemical applications. In aqueous electrolytes, however, the highly reactive material undergoes rapid aqueous corrosion, which reduces its overall electrochemical discharge efficiency.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the Australian Centre of Excellence for Electromaterials Science for funding. OWJ, DRM and BWJ are grateful to the Australian Research Council for Fellowships. We would also like to acknowledge the Monash University Centre for Electron Microscopy and Mark Greaves from CSIRO for providing electron microscopic facilities.
References
K. P. Loh, Q. L. Bao, P. K. Ang and J. X. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2277 RSC .
R. L. McCreery, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2646 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Dreyer, S. Park, C. W. Bielawski and R. S. Ruoff, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 228 RSC .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 782 RSC .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6575 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Cai and M. Song, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 7906 RSC .
S. Wang, S. P. Jiang and X. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 3338 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Z. Xiong and X. S. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3634 RSC .
K. Gotoh, T. Kinumoto, E. Fujii, A. Yamamoto, H. Hashimoto, T. Ohkubo, A. Itadani, Y. Kuroda and H. Ishida, Carbon, 2011, 49, 1118 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gomathi, K. Gopalakrishnan and C. N. R. Rao, Mater. Res. Bull., 2010, 45, 1894 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Meng, D. S. Geng, J. A. Liu, M. N. Banis, Y. Zhang, R. Y. Li and X. L. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 18330 CAS .
W. Wang, J. Yu, Q. Xiang and B. Cheng, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 119–120, 109 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, B. Guo, J. Yu, J. Ran, B. Zhang, H. Yan and J. R. Gong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10878 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, C. Liu, W. Wang, B. Cheng and J. Yu, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 3193 RSC .
K. Gotoh, K. Kawabata, E. Fujii, K. Morishige, T. Kinumoto, Y. Miyazaki and H. Ishida, Carbon, 2009, 47, 2120 CrossRef CAS .
K. Vinodgopal, B. Neppolian, I. V. Lightcap, F. Grieser, M. Ashokkumar and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 1987 CrossRef CAS .
H.-L. Guo, X.-F. Wang, Q.-Y. Qian, F.-B. Wang and X.-H. Xia, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2563 CrossRef .
M. Hilder, B. Winther-Jensen, D. Li, M. Forsyth and D. R. MacFarlane, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 9187 RSC .
C. Liu, K. Wang, S. Luo, Y. Tang and L. Chen, Small, 2011, 7, 1203 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-G. Zhou, J.-J. Chen, F.-B. Wang, Z.-H. Sheng and X.-H. Xia, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 5951 RSC .
N. I. Kovtyukhova, P. J. Ollivier, B. R. Martin, T. E. Mallouk, S. A. Chizhik, E. V. Buzaneva and A. D. Gorchinskiy, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 771 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Hummers and R. E. Offeman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1958, 80, 1339 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, M. B. Muller, S. Gilje, R. B. Kaner and G. G. Wallace, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 101 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhao, J. Yu, J. Fan, P. Zhai and S. Wang, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 2052 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2012
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of graphene/zinc composites by electrochemical co-deposition. Having both species (e.g. Zn2+ and GO) in the oxidised state in a one-pot aqueous mixture allows us to simultaneously reduce them to zinc metal and graphene by applying a reduction potential. Co-deposition results in the formation of good quality uniform composites.	 

 	Fig. 2  Aqueous mixture containing GO and Zn2+ (slightly acidic). While high Zn2+ concentrations result in destabilisation of the suspension, the mixture remains stable for low concentrations. The mechanism of destabilisation is mainly caused by chemical interaction between Zn2+ and anionic groups of GO (e.g. carboxylate, phenolate)	 

 	Fig. 3  ATR-FTIR of graphene oxide and zinc graphene oxide complex. Upon coordination the CO signal of GO disappears, resulting in symmetric and asymmetric ν(CO2−) components.	 

 	Fig. 4  Raman spectrum of deposited graphene/zinc composite (785 nm laser). The presence of the G′ band, the G band and the D band prove the presence of graphene in the composite film.	 

 	Fig. 5  Scanning electron microscopy images at various magnifications. The porous structure of the composite can be clearly seen (scale bar: 5–200 μm).	 

 	Fig. 6  Although no individual zinc particles can be seen, energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy shows the presence of zinc. Mapping using ZnKα1 radiation indicates that there are no agglomerations of zinc, suggesting it is evenly distributed in the graphene matrix. Please note that there are signals of iridium (the samples were sputtered with an iridium coating), sodium chloride (used as an electrolyte), titanium (the substrate) and silicone (glue).	 

 	Fig. 7  Transmission electron microscopy shows zinc as small dark dots being very evenly distributed in the graphene matrix (scale bar: 10–20 nm). Higher magnification allows estimation of the particle size of the deposited zinc to be smaller than 3 nm.	 

 	Fig. 8  CV of Zn2+ (0.0125 M, pH 6.0), GO (1.5 mg mL−1, pH 6.0) and the GO/Zn mixture (GO1.5mgmL−1Zn0.0125M, pH 5.5). The CVs were recorded at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1 against a SCE.	 


Zn deposited	43.3%	49.9%	64.6%
Zntotal(edta)/Qdep(electrochem)	 	 	 
Other	56.7%	50.1%	34.4%
100%-Zndeposited	 	 	 
Discharge efficiency	39.4%	47.7%	44.6%
Zndis(electrochem)/Zntotal(edta)	 	 	 
Zn lost	60.6%	52.3%	50.5%
100%-disch. eff.	 	 	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2012
