Integrating surface plasmon resonance and slow photon effects in nanoporous anodic alumina photonic crystals for photocatalysis   - Catalysis Science & Technology (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9CY00627C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9CY00627C
(Paper)
Catal. Sci. Technol., 2019, 9, 3158-3176Integrating surface plasmon resonance and slow photon effects in nanoporous anodic alumina photonic crystals for photocatalysis†

        
          
            Siew Yee 
            Lim
          
        
      abc, 
      
        
          
            Cheryl Suwen 
            Law
          
        
      abc, 
      
        
          
            Lina 
            Liu
          
        
      ad, 
      
        
          
            Marijana 
            Markovic
          
        
      ae, 
      
        
          
            Andrew D. 
            Abell
          
        
      *bcf and 

        
          
            Abel 
            Santos
          
        
      *abc
aSchool of Chemical Engineering, The University of Adelaide, 5005 Adelaide, Australia. E-mail: abel.santos@adelaide.edu.au
bInstitute for Photonics and Advanced Sensing (IPAS), The University of Adelaide, 5005 Adelaide, Australia. E-mail: andrew.abell@adelaide.edu.au
cARC Centre of Excellence for Nanoscale BioPhotonics (CNBP), The University of Adelaide, 5005 Adelaide, Australia
dSchool of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Ningxia University, 7520021 Yinchuan, P.R. China
eCenter of Chemistry, Institute of Chemistry, Technology and Metallurgy, University of Belgrade, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia
fDepartment of Chemistry, The University of Adelaide, 5005 Adelaide, Australia
Received 
      3rd April 2019
    , Accepted 15th May 2019First published on 18th May 2019AbstractThis study explores the potential of gold-coated titania-functionalized nanoporous anodic alumina distributed Bragg reflectors (Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs) as platforms to enhance photocatalytic reactions by integrating “slow photons” and surface plasmon resonance (SPR). The photocatalytic degradation rate of methylene blue – a model organic compound with a well-defined absorption band in the visible spectral region – by these composite photonic crystals (PCs) upon visible-NIR light irradiation is used as an indicator to identify coupling effects between the “slow photon” effect and SPR. Our study demonstrates that the photocatalytic enhancement in Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs is strongly associated with “slow photon” effect, while the contribution of SPR to the overall photocatalytic enhancement is weak due to the localized generation of surface plasmons on the top surface of the composite PC structure. Photocatalytic enhancement is optimal when the characteristic photonic stopband of these PCs partially overlaps with the absorption band of methylene blue, which results in edges being positioned away from the absorption maximum of the organic dye. The overall photocatalytic degradation for methylene blue is also correlated to the type of noble metal coating and the geometric features of the PC structures. These results establish a rationale for further development of noble metal-coated NAA-based hybrid plasmonic–photonic crystal photocatalyst platforms to optimally integrate “slow photons” and SPR for enhancing the efficiency of photocatalytic reactions and other light harvesting applications.
Introduction
Semiconductor photocatalysts harvest the energy of incoming photons to drive chemical reactions for solar-to-fuel conversion and environmental remediation, including hydrogen (H2) energy generation,1–3 water treatment,4–11 air purification,12,13 ammonia (NH3) synthesis,14,15 carbon dioxide (CO2) reduction16,17 and warfare agent destruction.18,19 In land-mark studies, Fujishima20 and Carey21 reported production of clean H2 energy and degradation of organic pollutants by semiconducting titanium dioxide (TiO2) under UV light irradiation, respectively. TiO2 remains a benchmark semiconducting material for photocatalysis applications due to its strong oxidizing capability, remarkable stability against photo- and chemical corrosion, non-toxicity and low cost.22 However, the high recombination rate of electron/hole (e−/h+) pairs (i.e. ∼90%) and the large energy bandgap (i.e. ∼3.0–3.2 eV) of TiO2 only enable efficient absorption of UV light (i.e. ∼4% of the solar spectrum), limiting the practical capability of this material for sunlight-driven photocatalysis applications.23
Various approaches have been devised to overcome the intrinsic limitations of TiO2, including doping,24,25 coupling with other semiconducting metal oxides,26,27 surface modification,28,29 engineering of mesoporous structures30,31 and incorporation of noble metals.7–9,32 Enhanced photocatalytic performance of hybrid noble metal/TiO2 composite structures is associated with localized surface plasmon resonances (SPR), which are collective oscillations of the conducting electrons in the noble metal driven by the electromagnetic field generated by incident photons.33,34 For instance, Lu et al. (2012)5 demonstrated that hybrid Au nanoparticle-decorated TiO2 nanocrystalline platforms have ∼52% superior performance compared to uncoated TiO2 nanocrystalline particles in the photocatalytic degradation of 2,4-dichlorophenol under visible light irradiation. This photocatalytic enhancement is associated with SPR, which can extend absorption of the semiconductor material to a longer wavelength range (i.e. visible spectrum), while also reducing the recombination rate of e−/h+ pairs by forming a heterojunction between the semiconductor and the noble metal. Photocatalytic reactions can be further enhanced by engineering the structure of hybrid noble metal–TiO2 photocatalyst materials in the form of photonic crystals (PCs), including nanotubes,35 inverse opals5,36 and bio-inspired PC structures.37 For instance, hybrid Au nanoparticle-decorated TiO2 inverse opal PC structures outperform Au nanoparticle-decorated TiO2 nanocrystalline counterparts, with ∼56% enhancement in the photodegradation of the same organic pollutant.5 PC structures can enhance light–matter interactions for photocatalysis via Bragg diffraction, multiple scattering and the “slow photon” effect.9,38–40 Bragg diffraction inhibits propagation of light within the spectral range of the PC's photonic stopband (PSB). However, multiple scattering increases the confinement of light at those wavelengths away from the PSB so the light trapped within the PC's structure can be used by the semiconductor to speed up photocatalytic reactions. The “slow photon” effect occurs at the frequency edges of the PSB, where slow photons (i.e. photons with strongly reduced group velocity) are primarily localized in the high (i.e. red edge of the PSB) and low (i.e. blue edge of the PSB) dielectric parts of the PC's structure. This effect significantly increases the lifetime of photons and the overall light absorption of the semiconductor. Coupling of SPR and PC effects in hybrid noble metal–TiO2 PC photocatalyst structures can thus significantly enhance the overall photon-to-electron conversion rate by rational management of photons at the nanoscale. However, the fabrication of TiO2-based PCs presents intrinsic limitations and technical challenges, including limited spectral controllability of the PC's PSB features, restriction to small areas and long processing times (i.e. TiO2-based inverted opal PCs), and light scattering due to the over-etching of the PC structure in hydrofluoric acid (HF)-based electrolytes (i.e. TiO2-based nanotubular PCs produced by anodization). These drawbacks limit practical utilization of TiO2-based PCs for efficient and large-scale photocatalytic applications.41–46
Significant effort has been devoted to large scale production of alternative materials that can be engineered into high-performance TiO2-based PC photocatalyst platforms for real-life applications. We have recently demonstrated that TiO2-functionalized nanoporous anodic alumina photonic crystals (NAA-PCs), with rationally engineered optical properties, provide superior performance to conventional photocatalyst platforms in the photodegradation of a variety of organic pollutants.10,11 NAA is an ideal platform to develop PC structures due to its highly controllable and versatile nanoporous structure composed of cylindrical nanopores. The optical features of the characteristic PSB in NAA-PCs can be modulated with precision by engineering their nanoporous structure in the form of different PC architectures, including distributed Bragg reflectors (DBRs),11,47 bandpass filters,48,49 Fabry–Pérot interferometers,50,51 gradient-index filters,10,52–54 hybrid photonic crystals,55 and optical microcavities.56–58 NAA-PCs have been used in optical chemo- and biosensing,50,51 light filtering,47 optical encoding54 and photocatalysis.10,11 The nanoporous structure of NAA-PCs facilitates mass transfer of ionic and molecular species involved in photocatalytic reactions and efficient management of photons by controlled light–matter interactions to increase photon-to-electron conversion rates for high-performance photocatalytic applications.4,10,11
In this study, we analyze the photocatalytic performance of hybrid Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs by monitoring the photodegradation of a model organic compound. Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs are fabricated by two-step pulse anodization and chemically modified by a sol–gel method and deposition of Au (Fig. 1). The effect of various fabrication parameters (i.e. anodization period, pore widening time, noble metal deposition time, starting anodization voltage and type of noble metal coating) on the photocatalytic performance of these hybrid PCs under controlled visible-NIR irradiation is systematically investigated. The photocatalytic degradation of methylene blue by Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs allows the identification and quantification of photocatalytic performance enhancements associated with coupling effects between slow photons and SPR.
 Fig. 1  Fabrication of gold-coated titania-functionalized nanoporous anodic alumina distributed Bragg reflectors (Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs) by two-step pulse anodization for their application in photocatalysis. a) Schematic showing the fabrication of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs by two-step pulse anodization, surface functionalization with photoactive TiO2 and deposition of metallic Au. b) Schematic illustrating the photocatalytic assessment of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs under controlled visible-NIR irradiation conditions, with details showing the surface plasmon resonance (SPR) (top) and the chemical and electronic band structures (bottom) of the composite PC structures (note: Eg = energy bandgap, hv = excitation energy, CB = conduction band and VB = valence band). c) Transmission spectrum of a reference Au-TiO2-NAA-DBR showing the region of the “slow photon” (SP) effect induced by the blue and red edges of the photonic stopband (PSB) and the SPR effect associated with the metallic Au film on the top of the PC structure (note: Au-TiO2-NAA-DBR produced with anodization period – TP = 985 s, pore widening time – tpw = 24 min, Au deposition time – τD = 30 s and medium = air). 
Experimental section
Materials
High purity (99.9997%) aluminum (Al) foil, 0.32 mm thick, was supplied by Goodfellow Cambridge Ltd. (UK). Oxalic acid (H2C2O4), perchloric acid (HClO4), copper(II) chloride (CuCl2), hydrochloric acid (HCl), chromic acid (H2CrO4), titanium(IV) butoxide (Ti(OBu)4), hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and methylene blue (C16H18ClN3S, MB) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Australia). Ethanol (C2H5OH, EtOH) and phosphoric acid (H3PO4) were supplied by ChemSupply (Australia). Aqueous solutions used in this study were prepared with ultrapure Milli-Q® water (18.2 mΩ cm).
Fabrication of NAA-DBRs
NAA-DBRs were synthesized by two-step pulse anodization under voltage control conditions.56,59 1.5 × 1.5 cm2 Al square chips were sonicated in EtOH and ultrapure water for 15 min each, dried under air stream and electropolished in a mixture of EtOH and HClO4 4:1 (v:v) at 20 V and 5 °C for 3 min. Anodization was performed in an electrochemical reactor with a circular window of 1 cm in diameter. The first anodization step was performed in 0.3 M H2C2O4 at 40 V and 6 °C for 20 h. The resulting NAA layer was removed by wet chemical etching in a mixture of 0.2 M H2CrO4 and 0.4 M H3PO4 at 70 °C for 3 h. The second anodization step was carried out using the same acid electrolyte and temperature as in the first anodization step. The anodization process started with a constant voltage step of 40 V for 10 min. The anodization profile was subsequently switched to a pulse mode, in which each asymmetric stepwise pulse consisted of three stages: (i) a high voltage (HV) stage at a constant voltage of 50 V, (ii) a decreasing voltage ramp at a rate of 0.078 V s−1 from 50 V to 20 V, and (iii) a low voltage (LV) stage at a constant voltage of 20 V. The anodization period (TP) – total time for each pulse – was calculated using eqn (1) as the contribution of each pulse stage (i.e. time at the HV stage – tHV, time at the decreasing ramp stage – tLV−HV, and time at the LV stage – tLV). While the number of pulses, tLV−HV and tLV was fixed at 60 pulses, ∼385 s and 8 min, respectively, tHV was systematically modified from 30 to 120 s, with ΔtHV = 30 s. TP = tHV + tLV−HV + tLV(1)
The anodization period (TP) and pore widening time (tpw) were systematically manipulated from 895 to 985 s with ΔTP = 30 s and from 0 to 24 min with Δtpw = 12 min, respectively. Note that NAA-DBRs were pore widened in an aqueous solution of 5 wt% H3PO4 at 35 °C after fabrication.
The effect of the pore diameter and interpore distance (or lattice constant) on the top surface of NAA-DBRs on the photocatalytic performance of these composite photocatalyst platforms was assessed. The geometric features of NAA-DBRs were systematically modified by a three-step pulse anodization approach, using different starting anodization voltages (Vo) ranging from 60 to 100 V with ΔVo = 20 V. The first and second anodization steps were performed at Vo using the same acid electrolyte, though the duration of the latter was set to 45, 30 and 15 min for Vo = 60, 80 and 100 V, respectively. After the second anodization step, a pore widening treatment was carried out for 20, 20 and 35 min, respectively, to thin the oxide barrier layer located at the nanopore bottom tips and allow the effective flow of electrolytic species and the translation of anodization voltage modifications into porosity changes. The third anodization step was performed in pulse anodization mode at fixed tHV = 120 s (i.e. TP = 985 s) (vide supra).
Surface functionalization and top coating of NAA-DBRs
The surface of NAA-DBRs was chemically functionalized with layers of photoactive TiO2 through a sol–gel method. EtOH (97 v%) and titanium(IV) butoxide (3 v%) were mixed under magnetic stirring for 10 min to prepare a TiO2 sol. NAA-DBRs were then immersed in the TiO2 sol for 24 h to functionalize the inner surface of NAA-DBRs. Surface-functionalized NAA-DBRs were then washed with EtOH to remove any excess of TiO2 sol and titanium(IV) butoxide. After washing, TiO2-NAA-DBRs were dried in an oven at 50 °C for 10 min to evaporate residual EtOH. The top surface of TiO2-NAA-DBRs was subsequently coated with an ultrathin layer of noble metal (i.e. Au or Ag) using a sputter coater equipped with a film thickness monitor (sputter coater 108auto, Cressington, USA). To investigate the effect of surface plasmon resonance (SPR) on the photocatalytic performance of noble metal-TiO2-NAA-DBRs, the deposition time (τD) of the noble metal was systematically varied from 0 to 60 s with an interval of ΔτD = 30 s. The effect of different noble metal coatings (i.e. Au and Ag) was also studied.
Optical characterization
Prior to optical characterization, the remaining Al substrate was selectively dissolved from the backside of NAA-DBRs by wet chemical etching in a saturated solution of HCl/CuCl2, using an etching cell with a Viton® mask featuring a circular window of 5 mm in diameter. The absorption and transmission spectra of NAA-DBRs fabricated under various conditions were obtained in air and water at normal incidence (i.e. θ = 0°) from 200 to 900 nm with a resolution of 1 nm using a UV-visible-NIR spectrophotometer (Cary 60, Agilent, USA). The absorption spectrum of 5 mg L−1 MB in a 10 mm path length polystyrene cuvette was acquired from 200 to 800 nm to determine the absorption band of MB (Fig. S1 – ESI†). The reflection spectra of NAA-DBRs produced under various fabrication conditions at normal incidence were obtained in air and water. The surface of NAA-DBRs was illuminated with white light from a tungsten source (LS-1LL, Ocean Optics, USA) using a bifurcated optical probe. The collection fiber in the optical probe collected and transferred the light reflected from the illumination spot (∼2 mm in diameter) to a miniature spectrometer (USB 4000+VIS-NIR-ES, Ocean Optics, USA). The interferometric color displayed by NAA-DBRs as a function of various fabrication parameters was characterized through digital pictures, using a Canon EOS 700D digital camera equipped with a Tamron 90 mm F2.8 VC USD macro mount lens with an autofocus function under natural light illumination. The position of the central wavelength of the photonic stopband of NAA-DBRs was estimated by Gaussian fittings using OriginPro 8.5®.
Photocatalytic degradation of the model organic dye
The photocatalytic performance of noble metal-TiO2-NAA-DBRs produced with different TP, tpw, τD, Vo and noble metal coatings was assessed under simulated solar light irradiation conditions using photocatalytic degradation of methylene blue (MB) as an indicator, which is a model organic dye with a well-defined absorption band within the visible spectral range (i.e. MB – λAbs-MB = 664 nm). Photocatalytic reactions were performed in a transparent reactor, in which noble metal-TiO2-NAA-DBRs with an effective area of 1 cm2 were immersed in a 2 mL solution mixture of 5 mg L−1 MB and 100 mM H2O2. The solution was stirred magnetically in a dark vessel (i.e. solar simulator) for 30 min to ensure an adsorption and desorption equilibrium prior to irradiation. The system was then illuminated with a 150 W (∼3000 lumens) halogen lamp (HL250-A, Amscope, Australia) at room temperature to simulate solar light. The absorbance of the solution mixture at λAbs-MB = 664 nm was analyzed for each illumination time interval (i.e. 15 min) using a UV-visible spectrophotometer in order to determine the concentration of MB throughout time. A calibration line establishing the correlation between the absorbance and the concentration of MB was used to obtain the photocatalytic conversion ratio (Ct/Co), where Co is the concentration of MB after stirring in the dark for 30 min and Ct is the concentration at a given illumination time t (Fig. S2 – ESI†). This parameter was used to establish the kinetic model for this photocatalytic system. The average photocatalytic degradation rates were summarized in contour maps generated using OriginPro 8.5®, using a triangulation algorithm in which the coordinates of the intersection point were computed with linear interpolation.
Chemical and structural characterization
The nanoporous structure of NAA-DBRs produced under various conditions was characterized using a field emission gun scanning electron microscope (FEG-SEM FEI Quanta 450). FEG-SEM images were analyzed with ImageJ to establish the geometric features of NAA-DBRs.60 The chemical composition of NAA-DBRs before and after surface functionalization with TiO2 was analyzed by energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectroscopy during FEG-SEM characterization.
Results and discussion
Structural characterization of NAA-DBRs

Fig. 2 depicts the representative FEG-SEM images and a schematic definition of the structural features of NAA-DBRs produced by pulse anodization. NAA-DBRs feature an organized nanoporous geometry in two planar directions: (i) honeycomb-like distribution of nanopores across the top plane and (ii) periodically modulated nanopore diameter in depth along the normal plane (Fig. 2a). The main structural parameters of Au-NAA-DBRs include the total pore length (Lp), interpore distance (dint), pore diameter (dp), period length (LTP) and noble metal thickness (LD). Fig. 2b shows arrays of homogeneously distributed, hexagonally arranged nanopores across the top surface NAA-DBRs, where the average dp is 31 ± 4 nm with no pore widening treatment. The cross-sectional view FEG-SEM image displays the constant voltage anodization (CA) step, during which straight cylindrical nanopores are produced (Fig. 2c). Alternating stacked layers of NAA with periodic modulation of nanopore diameter are produced during the pulse anodization (PA) stage, as indicated by LTP in the schematic in Fig. 2a and the white arrowheads shown in Fig. 2d. These periodic layers feature straight cylindrical pores with branched tips that form during high and low voltage anodization stages, respectively. Nanopore branching is associated with the growth of nanopores under non-steady conditions (i.e. low voltage anodization), which is characterized by a current recovery stage in the anodization profile.53Fig. 2e shows the linear dependence of LTP on TP, where LTP increases at a rate of 1.00 ± 0.10 nm s−1 with TP. The geometric features (i.e. dp and dint) of NAA-DBRs also follow a linear trend with Vo, where dp and dint increase at a rate of 1.94 ± 0.04 and 2.78 ± 0.05 nm s−1 with increasing Vo, respectively (Fig. 2f).
 Fig. 2  Nanoporous structure of NAA-DBRs produced by pulse anodization. a) Illustration describing the geometric features of gold-coated NAA-DBRs including the total pore length (Lp), interpore distance (dint), pore diameter (dp), period length (LTP) and Au thickness (LD) (note: H = top horizontal plane and N = vertical normal plane). b) Representative top view FEG-SEM image of a NAA-DBR produced by two-step pulse anodization with anodization period TP = 985 s, number of anodization pulses Np = 60 pulses and pore widening time tpw = 0 min (scale bar = 500 nm). c) General cross-sectional view FEG-SEM image of a NAA-DBR, where CA and PA represent the constant (CA) and pulse voltage anodization (PA) steps (scale bar = 5 μm). d) Magnified view of the white square shown in c) (scale bar = 1 μm). e) Linear correlation establishing the dependency of LTP and TP from 895 to 985 s. f) Linear dependence of dint and dp on the voltage during the constant anodization step (Vo). 
Effect of anodization parameters on the optical properties of NAA-DBRs

Fig. 3 presents a representative two-step pulse anodization profile used to produce NAA-DBRs as well as the combined effect of TP and tpw on the central position of the characteristic photonic stopband (λC) of NAA-DBRs in air and water.
 Fig. 3  Effect of anodization period (TP) and pore widening time (tpw) on the optical properties of NAA-DBRs. a) Representative anodization profile of NAA-DBRs produced by pulse anodization with TP = 985 s and Np = 60 pulses. b) Digital pictures of NAA-DBRs produced with different TP and tpw values. c) and d) Central position of the characteristic photonic stopband (PSB – λC) as a function of TP and tpw, where the medium filling the nanoporous structure of NAA-DBRs is air and water, respectively. 
The anodization profile demonstrates that the current density (i.e. output) follows the pulse anodization voltage (i.e. input) applied during the second anodization step (Fig. 3a). However, a slight current recovery period was observed as compared to NAA-DBRs fabricated in H2SO4 electrolyte.11,47 This is due to the thicker oxide barrier layer located at the nanopore bottom tips under these fabrication conditions.61 To understand the effect of TP and tpw on the optical properties of NAA-DBRs, a set of NAA-DBRs was produced by systematically modifying TP from 895 to 985 s with ΔTP = 30 s and tpw from 0 to 24 min with Δtpw = 12 min. Fig. 3b depicts the interferometric color displayed by these photonic crystal structures in air, where some NAA-DBRs display vivid color from purplish blue to red, while others display transparent color (i.e. black background). The position of the characteristic PSB dictates the interferometric color displayed by the NAA-DBRs. As such, these PCs feature transparent and vivid colors when the characteristic photonic stopband (PSB) falls within the NIR and visible regions of the spectrum, respectively (Fig. S3 – ESI†). The intensity of the characteristic PSB also plays a major role in the intensity of the interferometric color of NAA-DBRs. For instance, NAA-DBRs produced with TP = 895 and 955 s at tpw = 0 min display weak green and red colors, respectively, as compared to the vivid colors shown by their analogue NAA-DBRs produced at tpw = 12 min (i.e. intense blue and red, respectively). The digital images also demonstrate that the interferometric color of NAA-DBRs red-shifts with increasing TP. For example, NAA-DBRs produced with TP = 895, 925, 955 and 985 s at tpw = 24 min show vivid blue, green, orange and red color, respectively. In contrast to the effect of TP, the interferometric color of NAA-DBRs blue-shifts with tpw, as revealed by the red, gold and green vivid colors observed for NAA-DBRs fabricated at TP = 925 s with increasing tpw, from 0 to 24 min with Δtpw = 12 min, respectively. The correlation between TP and λC establishes a linear relationship with tpw from 0 to 24 min, where the slopes of the linear fittings were 3.59 ± 0.09, 3.54 ± 0.03 and 3.22 ± 0.09 nm s−1, respectively (Fig. 3c). λC can be tuned from 421 ± 1 nm (TP = 895 s and tpw = 6 min) to 854 ± 1 nm (TP = 985 s and tpw = 0 min) for the range of anodization parameters studied, demonstrating that λC red-shifts with increasing TP and blue-shifts with increasing tpw. The optical properties of NAA-DBRs were characterized in water to identify photocatalytic enhancements associated with the “slow photon” effect, since the photocatalytic degradation of MB was performed in aqueous solution. Fig. 3d shows the linear dependence of λC on TP in water, in which the former parameter red-shifts at a rate of 3.26 ± 0.08, 3.44 ± 0.23 and 3.42 ± 0.10 nm s−1 with the latter parameter for tpw = 0, 12 and 24 min, respectively. These results also demonstrate that λC blue-shifts with increasing tpw. The position of the characteristic PSB of NAA-DBRs in water can be tuned from 483 ± 1 nm (TP = 895 s and tpw = 6 min) to 887 ± 1 nm (TP = 985 s and tpw = 0 min), as denoted in the transmission spectra shown in Fig. S4 (ESI†). When the medium filling the nanoporous structures of NAA-DBRs is changed from air to water, the position of the characteristic PSB is red-shifted at an average rate of 46 ± 17, 42 ± 14 and 80 ± 13 nm s−1 for tpw = 0, 12 and 24 min, respectively (Fig. 3c and d). These red-shifts are associated with the filling of the nanoporous network of NAA-DBRs with a medium of higher refractive index than air (i.e. nair = 1.00 RIU and nwater = 1.33 RIU). These results demonstrate that the optical characteristics of NAA-DBRs can be precisely tuned across the visible-NIR spectrum by systematically manipulating the fabrication parameters (i.e. TP and tpw).
Effect of surface functionalization of TiO2 and noble metal coating on the properties of NAA-DBRs

Fig. 4 depicts the effect of the deposition of TiO2 layers and noble metal (i.e. Au) on the chemical and optical characteristics of NAA-DBRs. Photoactive layers of TiO2 were deposited onto the inner surface of NAA-DBRs by the sol–gel method to develop a photoactive composite photonic crystal structure for photocatalysis.
 Fig. 4  Chemical and optical characterization of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs after surface functionalization with photoactive layers of TiO2 and top coating with metallic Au. a) Energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectra of a representative NAA-DBR with insets showing the schematic composition of NAA-DBRs (left) and the percentage of main elements present (right) before and after surface functionalization with TiO2 (note: NAA-DBR produced with TP = 985 s and tpw = 24 min). b) Transmission spectrum of the representative NAA-DBR in water showing the surface plasmon resonance band (SPR) and characteristic photonic stopband (PSB) before and after coating the top surface with Au for a deposition time (τD) of 30 s. c) FEG-SEM images of the representative NAA-DBR from (b) before and after Au coating (scale bar = 500 nm). 

Fig. 4a shows the energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectra, including insets of graphical illustration of NAA-DBRs (left) and percentage of main elements (right), before and after depositing TiO2 onto the inner surface of NAA-DBRs. The EDX spectrum for the as-produced NAA-DBRs indicates that the percentage of elements such as Al, O and C was 80.4 ± 8.0, 18.2 ± 1.8 and 1.4 ± 0.1%, respectively. These atoms correspond to the chemical composition of the photonic structures, where Al and O atoms correspond to alumina (Al2O3) and C atoms are associated with contaminants incorporated into the alumina structure from the acid electrolyte (i.e. oxalic acid) during anodization. After surface functionalization with TiO2 layers, the percentages of Al, O, C and Ti were determined to be 72.6 ± 7.3, 23.4 ± 2.3, 1.7 ± 0.2 and 2.3 ± 0.2%, respectively. The relative percentage increment in the characteristic peaks of O and Ti atoms after TiO2 deposition indicates that photoactive TiO2 layers were successfully deposited onto the inner surface of NAA-DBRs. The top surface of NAA-DBRs was also coated with thin layers of Au by sputtering to provide the surface plasmon resonance (SPR) in the composite photonic crystal structures. Fig. 4b shows the transmission spectra of a representative NAA-DBR in water before and after coating with a thin film of Au for 30 s. Before coating, the position of the characteristic PSB is located at 804 ± 1 nm. After Au coating for 30 s (LD = 5 ± 1 nm), a less intense characteristic PSB is observed at 806 ± 1 nm, which is statistically the same as that of the as-produced NAA-DBR. This suggests that incorporation of Au does not shift the PSB of NAA-DBRs and slow photons still exist in these PC structures. This observation is in good agreement with previous studies.7 However, an extraordinary optical transmission band due to surface plasmon resonance (λSPR) is observed at 481 ± 1 nm in Au-coated NAA-DBRs, which corresponds to the characteristic SPR band of Au. The successful deposition of a thin film of Au is further supported by the representative top view FEG-SEM images shown in Fig. 4c, in which the pore diameter (dp) in a NAA-DBR at tpw = 24 min is reduced from 81 ± 6 to 70 ± 4 nm after Au deposition. However, Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs maintain their original morphology after Au deposition (Fig. S5 – ESI†). The XRD spectra also successfully demonstrate the deposition of TiO2 and Au, where the three characteristic peaks corresponding to an amorphous alumina (Al2O3) phase in the XRD spectra of the as-produced NAA-DBRs (i.e. 45°, 65° and 78°) undergo a slight shift and decrease in intensity after surface functionalization of TiO2 followed by Au coating (Fig. S6 – ESI†). A weak characteristic peak corresponding to polycrystalline Au in the XRD spectrum of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs (i.e. 39°) is also observed. This indicates that while TiO2 layers are crystallographically amorphous, the deposited Au film is polycrystalline. The successful deposition of Au and TiO2 layers on NAA-DBRs was further characterized by FEG-SEM image analysis, contact angle measurement and EDX spectroscopy (Fig. S7 – ESI†).
As these results demonstrate, Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs are ideal model platforms to integrate and engineer slow photons and surface plasmon resonances. SPR modes are characterized by an extraordinary transmission band (λSPR) that can be controlled by modifying the geometric features of nanopores (i.e. dp, dint and LD) at the top plane of NAA-DBRs (horizontal plane). The Bragg modes (i.e. slow photons), characterized by the PSB, can be tuned by modifying the period length (LTP) along the normal plane of the NAA-DBR structure. These versatile hybrid plasmonic–photonic crystal structures enable the engineering of photocatalytic enhancements by coupling between slow photon and SPR effects.
Assessment of photocatalytic degradation of MB by Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs
The photocatalytic performance of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs was analyzed by monitoring the degradation of MB molecules under visible-NIR irradiation. The absorption maximum of MB (λAbs-MB) is located at 664 nm (Fig. S1 – ESI†). The concentration of this organic dye at a given illumination time t (Ct) was estimated from a previously established calibration line (Fig. S2 – ESI†). The photocatalytic performance of the hybrid plasmonic–photonic crystal structures was fitted to the linearized pseudo-first order kinetics model shown in eqn (2): −ln(Ct/Co) = kt(2)where Co is the concentration at adsorption and desorption equilibrium and k is the kinetic constant.
Photocatalytic degradation of MB was carried out with 100 mM H2O2 solution to provide photogeneration of additional charge carriers from the relatively thin photoactive TiO2 layer in Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs. The simulated solar light irradiation used in our study has a spectral distribution of 0.12% UV (350–400 nm), 64.60% visible (400–750 nm) and 35.28% NIR (800–1025 nm). Therefore, these photocatalytic reactions were mostly driven by visible-NIR irradiation (Fig. S8 – ESI†).
Effect of fabrication parameters of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs on the photocatalytic degradation of MB
NAA-DBRs are 1D photonic crystals with a well-defined PSB that can be precisely tuned across the spectral regions by modifying the anodization parameters. Functionalization of the inner surface of NAA-DBRs with TiO2 layers provides these nanoporous PCs with essential photocatalytic activity to photodegrade organic molecules. However, these composite semiconductor PCs also provide opportunities to further enhance the efficiency of photocatalytic reactions by the engineered “slow photon” effect. Slow photons have reduced group velocity at those spectral regions near the blue and red edges of the characteristic PSB.62 This effect enhances the photon-to-electron conversion rate since photons have a longer lifespan within the composite photonic structures. The top surface of TiO2-NAA-DBRs can also be coated with thin films of noble metals to further enhance the photocatalytic performance of the composite platform by SPR, which minimizes the recombination rate of electron/hole pairs at the hybrid heterojunction Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs, and extends the absorption of visible light by the hybrid plasmonic–photonic crystal structure.5 Photocatalytic degradation of methylene blue was analyzed under simulated solar light irradiation as an indicator to identify photocatalytic enhancements associated with coupling effects between slow photons and SPR in Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs. The anodization period (TP), pore widening time (tpw) and Au deposition time (τD) of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs were systematically modified from TP = 895 to 985 s with ΔTP = 30 s, from tpw = 0 to 24 min with Δtpw = 12 min, and from τD = 0 to 60 s with ΔτD = 30 s, respectively. Fig. 5 depicts the linearized pseudo-first order kinetics for the photocatalytic degradation of MB by Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs (tpw = 0 min) with different TP and τD values, where the slope corresponds to the kinetic constant (k) or the photocatalytic performance of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs. The obtained results for Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs with tpw = 12 and 24 min are provided in Fig. S9 and S10 (ESI†), respectively. A summary of the k values obtained from linear fittings of these linearized pseudo-first order photodegradation kinetics of MB is provided in Table S1 (ESI†) and Fig. 6. Fig. 6a–c illustrate the contour maps summarizing the effect of TP and τD on the k values for Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs produced with tpw = 0, 12 and 24 min, respectively, and Fig. 6d–f depict the correlation between the absorption band of MB and the position of the blue and red edges of the characteristic PSB of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs fabricated with tpw = 0, 12 and 24 min, respectively.
 Fig. 5  Photocatalytic degradation kinetics of methylene blue (MB) by Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs fabricated by two-step pulse anodization at fixed pore widening time (tpw = 0 min), and variable Au deposition time (τD = 0, 30 and 60 s) and anodization period (TP = a) 895 s, b) 925 s, c) 955 s and d) 985 s) under controlled irradiation conditions (note: black dotted lines correspond to the photodegradation of MB in control NAA-DBRs without photoactive TiO2 layers). 
 Fig. 6  Combinational effect of the anodization period (TP), pore widening time (tpw), Au deposition time (τD) and position of the blue and red edges of the characteristic stopband (PSB) of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs on the photocatalytic degradation rates (k) of methylene blue (MB). a–c) Contour plots showing the combined effect of TP and τD on k values for the photodegradation of MB by Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs with tpw = 0, 12 and 24 min, respectively. d–f) Relative position of the blue and red edges of the characteristic PSB of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs produced with varying TP from 895 to 985 s with ΔTP = 30 s with respect to the absorption band of MB for tpw = 0, 12 and 24 min, respectively (note: the white gap inside the absorption band of MB denotes the absorption maximum of MB – λabs-MB = 664 nm, while the blue and red vertical lines on the PSB correspond to the blue and red edges of the PSB). 

Fig. 6a shows a homogeneous bimodal dependency of k on TP and τD, as indicated by the equidistant color field lines with TP and τD and the two local maxima of k at TP = 895 s and τD = 0 s and at TP = 955 s and τD = 0 s. When τD is fixed at 0 s (i.e. no SPR in the composite PC structures), k decreases from TP = 895 to 925 s (i.e. from k = 1.83 ± 0.06 to 1.26 ± 0.04 h−1), increases to a maximum of kinetic constant at TP = 955 s (i.e. kmax = 2.22 ± 0.08 h−1), and decreases again to a lower k value at TP = 985 s (i.e. k = 1.57 ± 0.05 h−1). These results denote that at τD = 0 s, Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs produced with TP = 955 s photodegrade MB molecules more efficiently than their counterparts produced at different anodization periods. This result can be correlated with the relative position of the edges of the characteristic PSB and the absorption band of MB (Fig. 6b). Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs produced with TP = 955 s achieve the highest k value since the characteristic PSB of these PCs partially overlaps with the absorption band of MB, with the PSB's blue edge located ∼89 nm away from the absorption maximum of MB (i.e. λAbs-MB = 664 nm). On the other hand, Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs fabricated with TP = 925 s show the lowest k value, where the distance between the PSB's blue edge and the absorption maximum of MB is the shortest (i.e. ∼22 nm). The relative position between the red and blue edges of the characteristic PSB and the absorption band of the model organic compound are critical in enhancing light–matter interactions and boosting photon-to-electron conversion rates. The photocatalytic performance of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs is significantly enhanced when the edges of the characteristic PSB partially overlap with the absorption band of MB.10,62–65 However, when the edges of the PSB fall within the absorption maximum of MB or are too far from the absorption band of MB (TP = 925 and 985 s), the photocatalytic performance is reduced significantly. The poor photocatalytic performance observed for Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs produced with TP = 925 s is attributed to the screening effect by MB molecules at their absorption maximum (i.e. λAbs-MB = 664 nm; ∼2.9 a.u.). Under such a configuration, most of the irradiated light is absorbed by MB molecules before it reaches the inner surface of the composite PC structures. This dramatically reduces the photocatalytic efficiency of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs due to the poor utilization of incoming photons by the photoactive TiO2 layer. This observation is in good agreement with previous studies.10 It is worth noting that the characteristic PSB of the second best performing Au-TiO2-NAA-DBR structure (TP = 895 s) is also partially overlapped with the absorption band of MB, though with a reasonable distance between the PSB's red edge and the absorption maximum of MB (i.e. ∼36 nm). When a characteristic PSB is completely outside the absorption band of MB, the photocatalytic degradation rate of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBR is strongly dependent on the geometric features of the nanoporous PC structures and independent on the “slow photon” effect. The main geometric factor affecting the photocatalytic performance of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs in this situation is the total pore length (LP), which is directly proportional to the anodization time.10,66,67 The overall light absorption of the composite PC structure enhances with increasing LP, leading to an increase in the photogeneration of charge carriers and the overall photodegradation rate achieved by Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs. Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs produced with TP = 985 s have the longest pore length (i.e. total anodization time = 17.4 h) as compared to their analogues fabricated with shorter TP (i.e. from 15.9 to 16.9 h). In summary, this analysis reveals that the photocatalytic performance of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs produced with tpw = 0 min, τD = 0 s and varying TP follows the order 955 > 895 > 985 > 925 s.

Fig. 6a shows that this trend is consistent with increasing thickness of the Au coating (from τD = 0 to 60 s) in Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs produced at tpw = 0 min. However, these hybrid plasmonic–photonic crystal structures achieve lower k values in general, as indicated by the color field distribution with increasing τD. The minimum kinetic constant (kmin) of 0.76 ± 0.02 h−1 is achieved by those Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs fabricated with TP = 925 s and τD = 60 s (i.e. black region of the contour map), denoting that the k values decrease with increasing τD. This phenomenon can be explained by analyzing the optical characteristics of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs as a function of τD. The optical behavior of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs is equivalent to the sum of their transmission, absorption and reflection. To gain further insight into the effect of τD on the photocatalytic behavior of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs, we analyzed the optical transmission, absorption and reflection of a representative Au-TiO2-NAA-DBR produced with TP = 925 s, tpw = 24 min and medium = air (Fig. 7). The transmission spectra of these hybrid plasmonic–photonic crystal structures show a characteristic SPR band at 491 ± 1 nm for Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs synthesized with τD = 30 and 60 s (Fig. 7a). This SPR band results from an extraordinary transmission of light and can be controlled by modifying the geometric features of the nanopores on the top surface of the hybrid plasmonic–photonic crystal structures. However, as the orange shaded region in the transmission spectra indicates, the deposition of a thin layer of gold on the top surface of the TiO2-NAA-DBR reduces the intensity of the characteristic PSB with increasing τD, and also red-shifts slightly its position from 612 ± 1 to 615 ± 1 nm when τD is increased from 0 to 60 s. The absorption spectra at different τD values (Fig. 7b) confirm that the position of the characteristic PSB is slightly red-shifted with increasing τD. Though the intensity of the characteristic PSB is similar in all the cases, the overall light absorption by the composite PC structure increases significantly with increasing τD. Fig. 7c demonstrates that the intensity of the characteristic PSB in the reflection spectrum decreases with increasing τD, while its position remains practically constant (only a slight red shift is observed, from 612 ± 1 to 613 ± 1 nm when τD is increased from 0 to 60 s). The effect of the deposition of the thin Au layer can also be observed in the interferometric color of the Au-TiO2-NAA-DBR, which switches from red to gold color with increasing τD. This analysis indicates that the transmission and reflection of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs decrease with increasing τD, while their optical absorption increases. As the k values reveal, Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs have a poorer photocatalytic performance with increasing τD. This observation is attributable to the light screening effect by the thin Au layer deposited on the top surface of TiO2-NAA-DBRs, which reduces the amount of incident photons that travel across the bulk photocatalyst platforms. The localized position of the Au thin film on the top surface of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs implies that no effective Schottky barrier is formed between the Au nanostructure and the functional TiO2 layer deposited onto the inner surface of TiO2-NAA-DBRs. The absence of an effective hybrid heterojunction between Au and TiO2 and the absorption of light by the Au film prevent the effective transfer of photo-excited electrons from the Au layer to the semiconductor layers and the photogenerated carriers are mainly recombined in the Au layer, worsening the overall photocatalytic degradation of MB molecules by Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs.
 Fig. 7  Optical characterization of a representative Au-TiO2-NAA-DBR produced with anodization period TP = 955 s and pore widening time tpw = 24 min in air (note: shaded regions correspond to the magnified views of the photonic stopbands (PSBs) for different τD values shown on the right side). a) Transmission spectra of the Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs as a function of the Au deposition time (τD). b) Absorption spectra of the Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs as a function of τD. c) Reflection spectra and digital pictures of the Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs as a function of τD. 

Fig. 6b shows a k maximum of 2.23 ± 0.08 h−1 at TP = 895 s and τD = 0 s, and a minimum of 0.82 ± 0.03 h−1 at TP = 925 s and τD = 60 s for Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs fabricated with tpw = 12 min. The contour map reveals a smooth variation of k with TP and τD, as indicated by the homogeneous distribution of color fields. However, the effect of TP on the photocatalytic performance of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs is less significant than that of τD at tpw = 12 min. The dependence of k on τD is stronger at longer deposition times, as indicated by the denser distribution of color fields and field lines with increasing τD. The photocatalytic performance of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs decreases with increasing τD, which is in good agreement with the results obtained for Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs fabricated with tpw = 0 min. The photocatalytic performance of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs (tpw = 12 min) is strongly dependent on the relative position between the edges of the characteristic PSB and the absorption band of MB molecules (Fig. 6e). The photocatalytic enhancement associated with the “slow photon” effect is apparent when the characteristic PSB partially overlaps with the absorption band of MB. Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs produced with TP = 895 s achieve the kmax since more than half of the characteristic PSB is located outside the absorption maximum of MB (i.e. ∼123 nm away). In contrast, Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs fabricated with TP = 925 s provide the worst k since the characteristic PSB of PCs is located under the absorption maximum of MB (i.e. PSB's blue edge ∼27 nm away from λAbs-MB = 664 nm). The characteristic PSB of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs fabricated with TP = 985 s is entirely outside the absorption band of MB. Under this configuration, the photocatalytic performance of these composite PCs relies exclusively on the total length of the nanopores. These Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs show slightly superior performance to their counterparts fabricated with TP = 925 and 955 s at any τD = 0, 30 and 60 s, respectively. Hence, the photodegradation rate of MB in Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs produced with tpw = 12 min follows the order TP = 895 > 985 > 955 > 925 s.

Fig. 6c summarizes the photocatalytic performance of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs fabricated with tpw = 24 min as a function of TP and τD. As the contour map shows, kmax (i.e. 2.45 ± 0.13 h−1) and kmin (i.e. 0.92 ± 0.03 h−1) are located at TP = 895 s and τD = 0 s and TP = 955 s and τD = 60 s, respectively. The distribution of color fields and field lines is denser within the area around the local maximum, for TP < 925 s and τD < 30 s, indicating a strong dependence of k on these fabrication conditions. However, at TP > 925 s, the kinetic constant becomes less dependent on τD as indicated by the broad color fields and field lines. The k values decrease with increasing τD and the photocatalytic performance of these Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs follows the order TP = 895 > 985 > 955 > 925 s. This behavior is analogous to that of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs produced at different pore widening times, though the overall k values are slightly higher than those of their counterparts produced at tpw = 0 and 12 min. The photocatalytic performance order of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs fabricated at tpw = 24 min is dictated by the relative position of the characteristic PSB of these composite PC structures with respect to the absorption band of MB (Fig. 6f). The “slow photon” effect significantly enhances the photodegradation of MB when the characteristic PSB partially falls within the absorption band of MB and its edges are positioned far away from the absorption maximum of MB. As Fig. 6f shows, Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs fabricated with TP = 895 s achieve kmax = 2.45 ± 0.13 h−1, the characteristic PSB of these Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs is slightly overlapped with the absorption band of MB, with the PSB's red edge located far away from the absorption maximum of MB (i.e. ∼134 nm away). When the distance between the absorption maximum of MB and the blue edge of the PSB of these Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs is the narrowest (i.e. ∼5 nm for Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs produced with TP = 955 s), the photocatalytic performance is the worst as compared to that of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs produced with a shorter anodization period (i.e. TP = 895 and 925 s). This result is attributable to the light screening effect by MB molecules at those spectral regions near the absorption maximum of MB. It is noteworthy that Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs fabricated with TP = 985 s show a photocatalytic behavior that is independent of the “slow photon” effect since the PSB is located far away from the absorption band of MB. Under this configuration, the photocatalytic performance of these Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs relies strongly on the total pore length, achieving the second best performance at any τD.
To summarize, Fig. 6a–c show that Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs fabricated with tpw = 24 min provide the highest kmax and kmin values. These kmax and kmin were found to be 8–9% and 12–17% higher than those of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs produced with shorter tpw. The superior performance achieved by Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs at tpw = 24 min can be associated with the broader and more intense characteristic PSB of these composite PCs, which provides a more efficient collection and utilization of incident photons to photodegrade MB molecules. An enhancement in photocatalytic degradation of MB in Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs is strongly dependent on the “slow photon” effect. This enhancement is apparent when the edges of the characteristic PSB of these composite PCs partially overlap with the absorption band of MB, though they are positioned far away from the absorption maximum of MB. When the vicinity of the characteristic PSB is near the absorption maximum of MB, the photocatalytic performance of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs is significantly reduced due to the light screening effect (i.e. MB molecules absorb light efficiently in these spectral regions so incoming photons cannot reach the photoactive layers within the nanoporous PC structure). When the characteristic PSB of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs is located completely outside the absorption band of MB, the photocatalytic performance relies exclusively on the geometric features of the nanoporous PC and is independent of the “slow photon” effect. Our study also indicates that while incorporation of a nanoporous plasmonic structure enhances the overall collection of incident photons in Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs, this is not translated into an effective utilization of SPR photons in the photocatalytic reaction. This is due to the isolated position of the Au film on the top surface of the PC structure. Incident light is partially absorbed by the Au film to generate SPR photons, minimizing the amount of incoming photons that travel across the PC structure. SPR photons are localized onto the top surface of the PC structure and cannot be efficiently transferred into the TiO2 photoactive layer on the inner surface of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs. As a result, the incorporation of the Au film worsens the photocatalytic performance of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs.
Effect of the noble metal coating type on the photodegradation of MB
The SPR effect associated with the type of noble metal coating on the photocatalytic performance of these composite PC structures was studied by coating TiO2-NAA-DBRs fabricated with TP = 985 s and tpw = 24 min with thin films of Au and Ag with varying deposition time (τD), from 0 to 60 s with ΔτD = 30 s. The optical transmission of these composite PC structures was characterized and analyzed. Table S2 (ESI†) and Fig. 8 summarize the effect of Au and Ag coatings on the kinetic constant and optical transmission of noble metal-coated TiO2-functionalized NAA-DBRs. Fig. 8a and b show the transmission spectra of Au- and Ag–TiO2-NAA-DBRs as a function of τD, respectively. In general, the intensity of the characteristic PSB of these noble metal-TiO2-NAA-DBRs decreases with increasing τD due to the absorption by the nanoporous metallic layer deposited on the top surface of these composite PCs. These PC structures show 1st and 2nd order characteristic PSBs, which are denoted by the red and purple shaded regions in Fig. 8a and b, and also characteristic SPR bands for Au- and Ag–TiO2-NAA-DBRs located at 497 ± 1 nm and 335 ± 1 nm, respectively. Magnified views of the characteristic PSBs (shaded regions in Fig. 8a and b) for Au- and Ag–TiO2-NAA-DBRs are shown in Fig. 8c and d, respectively. Fig. 8c shows that the change in the position of the 1st and 2nd order PSBs of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs with the Au coating is almost negligible, in agreement with our previous observations (Fig. 7). On the other hand, Fig. 8d shows that the features of the 1st and 2nd order PSBs of Ag–TiO2-NAA-DBRs blue-shift their position and broaden their width with increasing τD. Fig. 8e and f summarize the photocatalytic performance of Au- and Ag–TiO2-NAA-DBRs as a function of τD in terms of linearized pseudo-first order kinetics for the photodegradation of MB, where the insets correspond to the photocatalytic degradation rates (k – slopes of linear fittings) of each system. These results demonstrate that the photocatalytic degradation rate of MB by both Au- and Ag–TiO2-NAA-DBRs worsens with increasing τD. The k values achieved by Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs produced at τD = 0, 30 and 60 s were 1.67 ± 0.05, 1.54 ± 0.07 and 1.41 ± 0.06 h−1, respectively. These results demonstrate that non-coated TiO2-NAA-DBRs outperform their Au-coated counterparts by a 7–16% superior performance in degrading MB. Ag–TiO2-NAA-DBRs synthesized with τD = 0 s have the highest k value (i.e. 1.67 ± 0.05 h−1) when compared to Ag-coated analogues fabricated with τD = 30 and 60 s, which achieve k values of 1.44 ± 0.06 and 1.35 ± 0.05 h−1, respectively. It is thus clear that non-coated TiO2-NAA-DBRs provide a 14–19% superior performance in degrading MB compared to Ag-coated composite PCs. In summary, Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs perform more efficiently than Ag–TiO2-NAA-DBRs at any τD. Ag nanostructures provide enhanced SPR effects as compared to their Au-based counterparts. However, the chemical stability of Au against surface oxidation and dissolution in aqueous environments makes Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs superior platforms to photodegrade MB molecules.
 Fig. 8  Optical characterization and photocatalytic degradation assessment of Au- and Ag–TiO2-NAA-DBRs produced with TP = 985 s and tpw = 24 min. a and b) Transmission spectra of Au- and Ag–TiO2-NAA-DBRs as a function of the deposition time (τD), respectively (note: medium = air). c and d) Magnified views of the photonic stopbands (PSBs) of Au- and Ag–TiO2-NAA-DBRs from the shaded regions shown in (a) and (b) at different τD values, respectively. e and f) Photocatalytic degradation kinetics of methylene blue (MB) in Au- and Ag–TiO2-NAA-DBRs, respectively (note: black dotted lines correspond to the photocatalytic degradation of MB in control NAA-DBRs without the photoactive TiO2 layer with insets compiling the values of the kinetic constant (k) for MB). 
Effect of geometric features of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs on the photocatalytic degradation of MB
The position of the SPR band of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs (λSPR) can be readily controlled by modifying the pore diameter (dp) and interpore distance (dint) of nanopores at the top plane of NAA-DBRs (horizontal plane – Fig. 2a). To demonstrate the tuneability and effect of the position of the SPR band on the photodegradation of MB, the geometric features (i.e. dp and dint) of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs at the top horizontal plane were systematically modified by a three-step anodization approach, in which the starting anodization voltage (Vo) and Au deposition time (τD) were modified from Vo = 60 to 100 V with ΔVo = 20 V, and from τD = 0 to 60 s with ΔτD = 30 s. The fabrication parameters of the third anodization step (i.e. pulse anodization mode) were fixed to TP = 985 s, number of pulses = 60 pulses, and tpw = 0 min to maintain the position and features of the characteristic PSB, which were established by the period length (LTP) along the normal plane of the NAA-DBR structure. Fig. S11 (ESI†) demonstrates that the PSB of these PCs in the reflection spectrum does not change its position significantly with varying Vo, both in air and water. The average λC in Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs in air and water was 835 ± 14 and 865 ± 9 nm, respectively. Under such a configuration, the characteristic PSB is located outside the absorption band of MB and therefore the photocatalytic system is independent of the “slow photon” effect. Table S3 (ESI†) and Fig. 9 summarize the correlation of the photocatalytic performance of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs with Vo and τD.
 Fig. 9  Combinational effect of starting anodization voltage (Vo) and Au deposition time (τD) on the kinetic constant (k) for the photodegradation of methylene blue (MB) by Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs. a) Photocatalytic degradation kinetics of MB by Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs fabricated by three-step pulse anodization with τD = 0, 30 and 60 s and anodization voltage (Vo) of 60 V (left), 80 V (center) and 100 V (right) (note: black dotted lines correspond to the photodegradation of MB in control NAA-DBRs without the photoactive TiO2 layer). b) Schematic of the nanoporous structures of NAA-DBRs fabricated by three-step pulse anodization. c) Contour map showing the combined effect of Vo and τD on k values for the photodegradation of MB by Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs. 

Fig. 9a presents the photocatalytic degradation kinetics of MB as a function of Vo and τD, in which the slope of the fitting lines corresponds to k – an indicator of the photocatalytic performance. As these results demonstrate, in general k decreases with increasing τD. This can be attributable to the isolated position of the nanoporous Au layer on the top plane of the composite PC structures. The Au thin film acts as a screen that absorbs the majority of the incoming light and prevents its efficient propagation across the bulk Au-TiO2-NAA-DBR structure, minimizing the overall photocatalytic performance due to a localized generation of SPR-excited photons on the top surface (i.e. photons are not transferred efficiently to the photoactive TiO2 layer). Fig. 9b illustrates the idealized structure of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs fabricated by three-step pulse anodization, in which the high starting anodization voltage in the second step is followed by a reduction of the anodization voltage during the third step that leads to branching of nanopores. The contour graph shown in Fig. 9c summarizes the dependency of the photocatalytic performance of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs on Vo and τD. The smooth and homogeneous distribution of color fields and field lines implies a relatively weak dependence of k on these fabrication parameters, though the effect of Vo on k is less significant than that of τD. The maximum and minimum k values (1.52 ± 0.07 and 0.59 ± 0.06 h−1) are located at Vo = 80 V and τD = 0 s, and Vo = 100 V and τD = 60 s, respectively. The kmax (1.51 ± 0.05 h−1) located at Vo = 100 V and τD = 0 s is statistically the same as the maximum k observed at Vo = 80 V and τD = 0 s, with only ∼1% of difference. In contrast, the k (1.26 ± 0.03 h−1) located at Vo = 60 V is ∼17% smaller than that achieved by Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs produced at Vo = 80 and 100 V. It is also worth noting that the photocatalytic performance of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs produced with Vo = 60 V is relatively similar with increasing τD as compared to the significant decrease observed in Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs produced with Vo = 80 and 100 V. The average k value of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs produced with Vo = 60 V at various τD values was found to be 1.18 ± 0.14 h−1.

Table 1 summarizes the geometric characteristics – dp and dint – of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs produced at different Vo values and the percentage decrement in k as a function of the fabrication parameters – Vo and τD. The dp and dint of nanopores at the top surface of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs (τD = 0 s) increase with increasing Vo (i.e. from 70 to 150 nm and from 157 to 272 nm, respectively). Larger dp and dint enhance the absorption of light by the PC structure, increasing the photogeneration of e−/h+ pairs in the photoactive TiO2 layer and improving the photocatalytic performance of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs (τD = 0 s). This effect is demonstrated by the k values observed for Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs produced with Vo = 60, 80 and 100 V (Fig. 9c). k decreases slightly with increasing τD for Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs produced with Vo = 60 V, with an average reduction of photocatalytic performance of ∼1% and 19% when τD is varied from 0 to 30 s and from 0 to 60 s, respectively. However, Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs fabricated with Vo = 80 and 100 V show a significantly higher reduction in k with τD (i.e. ∼28% and 60% for τD from 0 to 30 s, and ∼33% and 61% for τD from 0 to 60 s, respectively).
Table 1 Effect of the starting anodization voltage (Vo) of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs produced by three-step pulse anodization on the pore diameter (dp), interpore distance (dint) and the decrease in percentage of kinetic constant (k) at different Au deposition times (τD), from 0 to 60 s





V
o (V)

d
p (nm)

d
int (nm)

k decrement fromτD= 0 to 30 s (%)

k decrement fromτD= 0 to 60 s (%)




60
70 ± 1
157 ± 1
1
19


80
106 ± 1
211 ± 2
28
60


100
150 ± 1
272 ± 3
33
61




Photocatalytic degradation mechanism
Based on these results, we propose a possible photocatalytic degradation mechanism to describe the photocatalytic degradation of the organic dye by Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs driven under visible-NIR irradiation (400–1025 nm) with the addition of H2O2. Upon light irradiation, charge carriers (i.e. electrons and holes) are produced in the conduction and valence bands, respectively, of the photoactive TiO2 layer deposited onto the inner surface of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs. Photogenerated holes induce oxidation of H2O in the aqueous organic solution, which is in contact with the photoactive TiO2 layer. This generates OH˙ radicals, which can degrade the organic dye molecules to liberate CO2 and H2O. Photogenerated electrons also react with H2O2 to produce OH˙ radicals and OH− ions, of which the latter are oxidized into OH. radicals by photogenerated holes in the valence band of the photoactive TiO2 layer. Our results indicate that enhancements in the photodegradation of methylene blue are strongly associated with slow photons in Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs. This light–matter interaction increases the lifespan of incoming photons with specific energies (i.e. wavelengths close to the blue and red edges of the PSB), which spend longer time within the structure of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs. This can then be exploited more efficiently by the photoactive TiO2 layer to generate extra e−/h+ pairs that speed up the photocatalytic degradation of MB. The photocatalytic enhancement associated with this effect is found to be maximum when the edges of the characteristic PSB of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs are in close proximity to the blue and red sides of the absorption band of MB. Overlapping the PSB with the absorption maximum of MB worsens dramatically the performance of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs due to the light screening effect, since in this spectral region only a small portion of the incoming light reaches the photoactive TiO2 layer to generate extra e−/h+ pairs that can be utilized by the composite PC structures to photodegrade MB molecules. Deposition of a thin Au layer on the top surface of TiO2-NAA-DBRs provides an additional feature to the system in the form of a surface plasmon resonance band, which extends the overall light absorption of the non-coated TiO2-NAA-DBR structure. However, SPR-excited photons generated by the Au layer deposited on the top surface of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs are not fully utilized by the photocatalytic platform due to the isolated configuration between the Au layer and the photoactive TiO2 layer in the inner surface of the composite PC structure. The majority of the incoming light is absorbed by the nanoporous Au layer before it reaches the photoactive surface of TiO2-NAA-DBRs, and the overall photocatalytic performance of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs decreases with the thickness of the Au layer (i.e. more light is absorbed by the Au layer). Our analysis also demonstrates that though Ag has a better SPR than Au, Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs perform better than their Ag-coated counterparts. This is due to the higher chemical stability of Au in aqueous solution. The overall photocatalytic performance of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs can be enhanced by engineering the geometric features (i.e. dp, dint, LTP and Lp) of these nanoporous composite semiconductor PC structures. The rational design of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs enables an efficient management of photons by “slow photon” and SPR effects, tuning the relative position of the edges of the characteristic PSB and SPR with respect to the absorption band of MB.
Comparison with benchmark Photocatalyst materials

Table 2 compiles the photocatalytic performances of representative benchmark photocatalytic materials with and without noble metal (i.e. Ag) and photonic crystal structure (i.e. inverse opal and DBR), where the photodegradation of MB molecules was conducted under visible light irradiation conditions.
Table 2 Compilation of representative kinetic constants (k) for the photocatalytic degradation of MB molecules by various benchmark TiO2-based photocatalyst materials




TiO2-based photocatalyst

k (h−1)
Ref




P25 nanoparticles
0.64

4



Inverse opal
1.32

4



NAA-DBRs
2.45
This study


Ag-P25 nanoparticles
1.56

6



Ag-inverse opal
0.64

8



Ag-NAA-DBRs
1.44
This study




The photocatalytic degradation rate of MB by as-produced P25 TiO2 nanoparticles, TiO2 inverse opals and TiO2-NAA-DBRs was found to be 0.64, 1.32 and 2.45 h−1, respectively.4 It is clear that TiO2-NAA-DBRs perform more efficiently than these reference materials, with a ∼74 and 46% superior performance, respectively. Incorporation of SPR effects in noble metal-coated photocatalysts can enhance their performance due to extended light absorption and minimization of charge carrier recombination rates. The k values for Ag-coated P25 TiO2 nanoparticles, TiO2 inverse opals and TiO2-NAA-DBRs were found to be 1.56, 0.64 and 1.44 h−1, respectively.6,8 This demonstrates that Ag-P25 TiO2 nanoparticles perform much better than Ag–TiO2 inverse opals (∼59% superior performance), and slightly better than Ag–TiO2-NAA-DBRs (∼8% superior performance) in the photodegradation of MB. This result can be associated with a better interfacial connection between the noble metal coating and the semiconductor material in Ag-P25 TiO2. However, Ag–TiO2-NAA-DBRs outperform Ag–TiO2 inverse opals by ∼56% enhancement. A direct comparison with these studies could not be completely correct due to small differences in experimental conditions (i.e. loading of catalysts, spectral distribution and power of light illumination, specific area and volume). However, these results demonstrate that TiO2-NAA-DBRs are promising photocatalyst platforms that provide new opportunities to develop high-performance photocatalyst materials with broad applicability.
Conclusions
This study provides new insights into the design and engineering of high-performance photocatalyst platforms with rationally designed optical properties to harness light–matter interactions for photocatalysis. The photocatalytic capabilities of NAA-based photonic crystals functionalized with photoactive layers of TiO2 and noble metal coatings have been systematically assessed, using the degradation rate of a model organic dye as an indicator to identify enhancements associated with different optical phenomena. Noble metal-TiO2-NAA-DBRs were produced with various fabrication parameters (i.e. anodization period, starting anodization voltage, pore widening time, noble metal deposition time and type of noble metal coating) to enable the fine-tuning of the optical properties (i.e. position and features of PSB and SPR bands) of these composite PC structures across the spectral regions. Our results indicate that the best photocatalytic degradation rate for methylene blue (i.e. k = 2.45 h−1) is achieved by Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs produced with Vo = 40 V, TP = 895 s, tpw = 24 min and τD = 0 s. Enhancements in the photocatalytic performance are strongly dependent on the “slow photon” effect, being optimal when the edges of the characteristic PSB of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs are partially overlapped with the absorption band of methylene blue, but away from its maximum to avoid the undesired light screening effect. Photodegradation rate enhancements in noble metal-TiO2-NAA-DBRs are independent of the “slow photon” effect when the characteristic PSB is completely outside the absorption band of MB. Under such a configuration, enhancements are solely dependent on the total pore length of the noble metal-TiO2-NAA-DBRs, and the thicker the PC structure the more efficient the photocatalytic performance. This study also reveals that enhancements in the photocatalytic performance of noble metal-TiO2-NAA-DBRs by SPR in the noble metal layer are not significant due to the isolated behavior of the nanoplasmonic structure, which is localized in the top surface of the composite PC structures. As a result, the majority of light is absorbed in the metallic coating before it reaches the bulk PC structure, worsening the overall photocatalytic performance. The type of noble metal coating (i.e. Ag and Au) also plays a critical role in the overall photocatalytic performance of noble metal-TiO2-NAA-DBRs, where Au coatings are demonstrated to provide superior performance compared to Ag coatings due to the higher chemical stability of Au in aqueous solution. This study also demonstrates that the photocatalytic performance of non-coated TiO2-NAA-DBRs enhances with increasing pore diameter and interpore distance through enhanced light scattering and absorption.
In summary, a rational and optimal design of noble metal-TiO2-NAA-DBRs is essential to efficiently utilize and manage “slow photon” and SPR effects for photocatalytic reactions. This study provides a strong foundation for improving the design of NAA-based photoactive photonic crystals, generating new opportunities to spread the applicability of these engineered materials across various photocatalytic applications such as sanitation of water, production of clean hydrogen and carbon dioxide reduction.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the support provided by the Australian Research Council (ARC) through the grant number CE140100003, the School of Chemical Engineering, the University of Adelaide (UoA), the Institute for Photonics and Advanced Sensing (IPAS), and the ARC Centre of Excellence for Nanoscale BioPhotonics (CNBP). The authors thank the Adelaide Microscopy (AM) Centre for FEG-SEM and EDX characterization.
References
K. Kim, P. Thiyagarajan, H.-J. Ahn, S.-I. Kim and J.-H. Jang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 6254–6260 RSC .
R. Bopella, S. T. Kochuveedu, H. Kim, M. J. Jeong, F. Marques Mota, J. H. Park and D. H. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 7075–7083 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Zhou, J. Bao, Y. Xu, J. Zhang, J. Xie, M. Guan, C. Wang, L. Wen, Y. Lei and Y. Xie, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7088–7098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zheng, S. Meng, J. Chen, J. Wang, J. Xian, Y. Shao, X. Fu and D. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 21263–21273 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, H. Yu, S. Chen, X. Quan and H. Zhao, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 1724–1730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ko, C. K. Banerjee and J. Sankar, Composites, Part B, 2011, 42, 579–583 CrossRef .
Z. Cai, Z. Xiong, X. Lu and J. Teng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 545–553 RSC .
Z. Chen, L. Fang, W. Dong, F. Zheng, M. Shen and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 824–832 RSC .
S. Meng, D. Li, L. Fu and X. Fu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 23501–23511 RSC .
S. Y. Lim, C. S. Law, M. Markovic, L. F. Marsal, N. H. Voelcker, A. D. Abell and A. Santos, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 1169–1184 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Lim, C. S. Law, M. Markovic, J. K. Kirby, A. D. Abell and A. Santos, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 24124–24136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Curti, C. B. Mendive, M. A. Grela and D. W. Bahnemann, Mater. Res. Bull., 2017, 9, 155–165 CrossRef .
S. Zhao, Z. Qu, N. Yan, Z. Li, W. Zhu, J. Pan, J. Xu and M. Li, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 30841–30850 RSC .
H. Hirakawa, M. Hashimoto, Y. Shiraishi and T. Hirai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 10929–10936 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, Y. Guo, R. Jiang, F. Qin, H. Zhang, W. Lu, J. Wang and J. C. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 8497–8508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Hou, W. H. Hung, P. Pavaskar, A. Goeppert, M. Aykol and S. B. Cronin, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 929–936 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jiao, Y. Wei, K. Chi, Z. Zhao, A. Duan, J. Liu, G. Jiang, Y. Wang, X. Wang, C. Han and P. Zheng, Energy Technol., 2017, 5, 877–883 CrossRef CAS .
V. Štengl, T. M. Grygar, F. Opluštil and T. Němec, J. Hazard. Mater., 2012, 227–228, 62–67 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Sengele, D. Robert, N. Keller, V. Keller, A. Herissan and C. Colbeau-Justin, J. Catal., 2016, 334, 129–141 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Carey, J. Lawrence and H. M. Tosine, Bull. Environ. Contam. Toxicol., 1976, 16, 697–701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Anpo, Catal. Surv. Jpn., 1997, 1, 169–179 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2891–2959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Asahi, T. Morikawa, T. Ohwaki, K. Aoki and Y. Taga, Science, 2001, 293, 269–271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Choi, A. Termin and M. R. Hoffmann, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 13669–13679 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, L. Yu, Y. Hu, C. Guo, F. Zhang and X. W. Lou, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 183–187 RSC .
M. Zalfani, B. van der Schueren, Z.-Y. Hu, J. C. Rooke, R. Bourguiga, M. Wu, Y. Li, G. V. Tendeloo and B.-L. Su, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 21244–21256 RSC .
H. Fu, T. Xu, S. Zhu and Y. Zhu, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 8064–8069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Jian, P.-X. Gao, W. Cai, B. S. Allimi, S. P. Alpay, Y. Ding, Z. L. Wang and C. Brooks, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 970–975 RSC .
J. G. Yu, Y. R. Su and B. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1984–1990 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bleta, P. Alphonse and L. Lorenzato, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 2039–2048 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hirakawa and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 3928–3934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, G. Liu, J. Yu and W. Fan, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 21337–21354 RSC .
S. K. Ghosh and T. Pal, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 4797–4862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. G. J. Wijnhoven and W. L. Vos, Science, 1998, 281, 802–804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, L. Zhang, M. N. Hedhili, H. Zhang and P. Wang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 14–20 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-T. Dinh, H. Yen, F. Kleitz and T.-O. Do, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 6618–6623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, D.-B. Xiong, W. Zhang, H. Su, Q. Liu, J. Gu, S. Zhu and D. Zhang, Catal. Today, 2016, 274, 15–21 CrossRef CAS .
E. Yablonovitch, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1987, 58, 2059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, H. Zhao, M. Wu, B. Van der Schueren, Y. Li, O. Deparis, J. Ye, G. A. Ozin, T. Hasan and B.-L. Su, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605349 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Curti, J. Schneider, D. W. Bahnemann and C. B. Mendive, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3903–3910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Steins, B. E. Wilson and S. G. Rudisill, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2763–2803 RSC .

          D. P. Gaillot and C. J. Summers, in Atomic Layer Deposition of Nanostructured Materials, ed. N. Pinna and M. Knez, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, 1st edn,  2012, ch. 15, pp. 345–371 Search PubMed .
V. Likodimos, Appl. Catal., A, 2018, 230, 269–303 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lee, A. Mazare and P. Schmuki, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9385–9454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Galusha, C.-K. Tsung, G. D. Stucky and M. H. Bartl, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 4925–4930 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Law, S. Y. Lim and A. Santos, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 4642 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Santos, T. Peirera, C. S. Law and D. Losic, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 14846–14857 RSC .
Sukarno, C. S. Law and A. Santos, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 7541–7550 RSC .
C. S. Law, G. M. Sylvia, M. Nemati, J. Yu, D. Losic, A. D. Abell and A. Santos, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 8929–8940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. S. Law, S. Y. Lim, A. D. Abell and A. Santos, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 10039–10048 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Santos, J. H. Yoo, C. V. Rohatgi, T. Kumeria, Y. Wang and D. Losic, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 1360–1373 RSC .
A. Santos, C. S. Law, D. W. C. Lei, T. Pereira and D. Losic, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 18360–18375 RSC .
A. Santos, C. S. Law, T. Pereira and D. Losic, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 8091–8100 RSC .
S. Y. Lim, C. S. Law, L. F. Marsal and A. Santos, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 9455 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Chen, T. Kumeria, F. Ding, A. Evdokiou, D. Losic and A. Santos, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 9879–9888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. S. Law, S. Y. Lim, A. D. Abell, L. F. Marsal and A. Santos, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 14139–14152 RSC .
C. S. Law, S. Y. Lim, R. M. Macalincag, A. D. Abell and A. Santos, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 4418–4434 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Rahman, L. F. Marsal, J. Pallarès and J. Ferré-Borrull, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 13375–13381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Abràmoff, P. J. Magalhães and S. J. Ram, BioPhotonics International, 2004, 11, 36–42 Search PubMed .
A. Santos, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 5581–5599 RSC .
S. Nishimura, N. Abrams, B. A. Lewis, L. I. Halaoui, T. E. Malluok, K. D. Benkstein, J. van de Lagemaat and A. J. Frank, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 6306–6310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, T. Kunitake and S. Fujikawa, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 13000–13004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Deparis, S. R. Mouchet and B.-L. Su, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 30525–30532 RSC .
H. Zhao, Z. Hui, J. Liu, Y. Li, M. Wu, G. V. Tendeloo and B.-L. Su, Nano Energy, 2018, 47, 266–274 CrossRef CAS .
A. Santos, V. S. Balderrama, M. Alba, P. Formentín, J. Ferré-Borrull, J. Pallarès and L. F. Marsal, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1050–1054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. Brzózka, A. Brudzisz, K. Hnida and G. D. Sulka, in Electrochemically Engineered Nanoporous Materials: Methods, Properties and Applications, ed. D. Losic and A. Santos, Springer International Publishing, Cham,  2015, ch. 8, vol. 220, pp. 219–288 Search PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9cy00627cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Fabrication of gold-coated titania-functionalized nanoporous anodic alumina distributed Bragg reflectors (Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs) by two-step pulse anodization for their application in photocatalysis. a) Schematic showing the fabrication of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs by two-step pulse anodization, surface functionalization with photoactive TiO2 and deposition of metallic Au. b) Schematic illustrating the photocatalytic assessment of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs under controlled visible-NIR irradiation conditions, with details showing the surface plasmon resonance (SPR) (top) and the chemical and electronic band structures (bottom) of the composite PC structures (note: Eg = energy bandgap, hv = excitation energy, CB = conduction band and VB = valence band). c) Transmission spectrum of a reference Au-TiO2-NAA-DBR showing the region of the “slow photon” (SP) effect induced by the blue and red edges of the photonic stopband (PSB) and the SPR effect associated with the metallic Au film on the top of the PC structure (note: Au-TiO2-NAA-DBR produced with anodization period – TP = 985 s, pore widening time – tpw = 24 min, Au deposition time – τD = 30 s and medium = air).	 
TP = tHV + tLV−HV + tLV	(1)

 	Fig. 2  Nanoporous structure of NAA-DBRs produced by pulse anodization. a) Illustration describing the geometric features of gold-coated NAA-DBRs including the total pore length (Lp), interpore distance (dint), pore diameter (dp), period length (LTP) and Au thickness (LD) (note: H = top horizontal plane and N = vertical normal plane). b) Representative top view FEG-SEM image of a NAA-DBR produced by two-step pulse anodization with anodization period TP = 985 s, number of anodization pulses Np = 60 pulses and pore widening time tpw = 0 min (scale bar = 500 nm). c) General cross-sectional view FEG-SEM image of a NAA-DBR, where CA and PA represent the constant (CA) and pulse voltage anodization (PA) steps (scale bar = 5 μm). d) Magnified view of the white square shown in c) (scale bar = 1 μm). e) Linear correlation establishing the dependency of LTP and TP from 895 to 985 s. f) Linear dependence of dint and dp on the voltage during the constant anodization step (Vo).	 

 	Fig. 3  Effect of anodization period (TP) and pore widening time (tpw) on the optical properties of NAA-DBRs. a) Representative anodization profile of NAA-DBRs produced by pulse anodization with TP = 985 s and Np = 60 pulses. b) Digital pictures of NAA-DBRs produced with different TP and tpw values. c) and d) Central position of the characteristic photonic stopband (PSB – λC) as a function of TP and tpw, where the medium filling the nanoporous structure of NAA-DBRs is air and water, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 4  Chemical and optical characterization of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs after surface functionalization with photoactive layers of TiO2 and top coating with metallic Au. a) Energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectra of a representative NAA-DBR with insets showing the schematic composition of NAA-DBRs (left) and the percentage of main elements present (right) before and after surface functionalization with TiO2 (note: NAA-DBR produced with TP = 985 s and tpw = 24 min). b) Transmission spectrum of the representative NAA-DBR in water showing the surface plasmon resonance band (SPR) and characteristic photonic stopband (PSB) before and after coating the top surface with Au for a deposition time (τD) of 30 s. c) FEG-SEM images of the representative NAA-DBR from (b) before and after Au coating (scale bar = 500 nm).	 
−ln(Ct/Co) = kt	(2)

 	Fig. 5  Photocatalytic degradation kinetics of methylene blue (MB) by Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs fabricated by two-step pulse anodization at fixed pore widening time (tpw = 0 min), and variable Au deposition time (τD = 0, 30 and 60 s) and anodization period (TP = a) 895 s, b) 925 s, c) 955 s and d) 985 s) under controlled irradiation conditions (note: black dotted lines correspond to the photodegradation of MB in control NAA-DBRs without photoactive TiO2 layers).	 

 	Fig. 6  Combinational effect of the anodization period (TP), pore widening time (tpw), Au deposition time (τD) and position of the blue and red edges of the characteristic stopband (PSB) of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs on the photocatalytic degradation rates (k) of methylene blue (MB). a–c) Contour plots showing the combined effect of TP and τD on k values for the photodegradation of MB by Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs with tpw = 0, 12 and 24 min, respectively. d–f) Relative position of the blue and red edges of the characteristic PSB of Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs produced with varying TP from 895 to 985 s with ΔTP = 30 s with respect to the absorption band of MB for tpw = 0, 12 and 24 min, respectively (note: the white gap inside the absorption band of MB denotes the absorption maximum of MB – λabs-MB = 664 nm, while the blue and red vertical lines on the PSB correspond to the blue and red edges of the PSB).	 

 	Fig. 7  Optical characterization of a representative Au-TiO2-NAA-DBR produced with anodization period TP = 955 s and pore widening time tpw = 24 min in air (note: shaded regions correspond to the magnified views of the photonic stopbands (PSBs) for different τD values shown on the right side). a) Transmission spectra of the Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs as a function of the Au deposition time (τD). b) Absorption spectra of the Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs as a function of τD. c) Reflection spectra and digital pictures of the Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs as a function of τD.	 

 	Fig. 8  Optical characterization and photocatalytic degradation assessment of Au- and Ag–TiO2-NAA-DBRs produced with TP = 985 s and tpw = 24 min. a and b) Transmission spectra of Au- and Ag–TiO2-NAA-DBRs as a function of the deposition time (τD), respectively (note: medium = air). c and d) Magnified views of the photonic stopbands (PSBs) of Au- and Ag–TiO2-NAA-DBRs from the shaded regions shown in (a) and (b) at different τD values, respectively. e and f) Photocatalytic degradation kinetics of methylene blue (MB) in Au- and Ag–TiO2-NAA-DBRs, respectively (note: black dotted lines correspond to the photocatalytic degradation of MB in control NAA-DBRs without the photoactive TiO2 layer with insets compiling the values of the kinetic constant (k) for MB).	 

 	Fig. 9  Combinational effect of starting anodization voltage (Vo) and Au deposition time (τD) on the kinetic constant (k) for the photodegradation of methylene blue (MB) by Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs. a) Photocatalytic degradation kinetics of MB by Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs fabricated by three-step pulse anodization with τD = 0, 30 and 60 s and anodization voltage (Vo) of 60 V (left), 80 V (center) and 100 V (right) (note: black dotted lines correspond to the photodegradation of MB in control NAA-DBRs without the photoactive TiO2 layer). b) Schematic of the nanoporous structures of NAA-DBRs fabricated by three-step pulse anodization. c) Contour map showing the combined effect of Vo and τD on k values for the photodegradation of MB by Au-TiO2-NAA-DBRs.	 

60	70 ± 1	157 ± 1	1	19
80	106 ± 1	211 ± 2	28	60
100	150 ± 1	272 ± 3	33	61

P25 nanoparticles	0.64	
4

Inverse opal	1.32	
4

NAA-DBRs	2.45	This study
Ag-P25 nanoparticles	1.56	
6

Ag-inverse opal	0.64	
8

Ag-NAA-DBRs	1.44	This study
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9cy00627c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
