Engineering nanostructured electrodes away from equilibrium for lithium -ion batteries  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0JM04240D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0JM04240D
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 9969-9983Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsEngineering nanostructured electrodes away from equilibrium for lithium-ion batteries

        
          
            Yanyi 
            Liu
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Dawei 
            Liu
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Qifeng 
            Zhang
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Guozhong 
            Cao
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA
Received 
      5th December 2010
    , Accepted 15th February 2011First published on 2nd March 2011AbstractBoosted by the rapid advances of science and technology in the field of energy materials, Li-ion batteries have achieved significant progress in energy storage performance since their commercial debut in 1991. The development of nanostructured electrode material is regarded as one of the key potentials for the further advancement in Li-ion batteries. This feature article summarizes our recent efforts in the synthesis and characterization of nanostructured electrode materials for high-performance Li-ion batteries. The electrode materials include manganese oxide nanowall arrays, vanadium oxide nanofibers and films, vanadium oxide–carbon nanocomposites, lithium iron phosphate–carbon nanocomposite films, and titanium oxide nanotube arrays. Enhanced Li+ intercalation capacities, improved rate capabilities and better cyclic stability were achieved by constructing micro- or nanostructure, controlling materials crystallinity and introducing desired defects on the surface and/or in the bulk. The fabrication of binderless and additive-free nanostructured electrodes for Li-ion batteries via sol–gel processing is also highlighted.Yanyi LiuYanyi Liu is a Ph.D. student under the supervision of Professor Guozhong Cao in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at University of Washington. Her current research is mainly focused on sol–gel processing and electrochemical characterizations of nanostructured materials for energy storage devices.Dawei LiuDr Dawei Liu is a postdoc associate under the supervision of Professor Guozhong Cao in Department of Materials Science and Engineering at University of Washington, Seattle, WA. He has published six first-authored refereed papers and one book chapter. His specific research project is focused on nanostructured electrodes for efficient lithium ion intercalation.Qifeng ZhangDr Qifeng Zhang is currently working at University of Washington as a Research Assistant Professor. His research interests involve engineering applications of nano-structured materials on electrical devices including solar cells, UV light-emitting diodes (LEDs), field-effect transistors (FETs), and gas sensors.Guozhong CaoDr Guozhong Cao is Boeing-Steiner Professor of Materials Science and Engineering and Chemical Engineering at the University of Washington. He has published over 250 refereed papers and 5 books including “Nanostructures and Nanomaterials”. His current research is focused mainly on nanomaterials for energy conversion and storage.
1. Introduction
In the 21st century, environmental issues, limited irreversible fossil-fuel supplies and the worldwide thirst for energy have significantly advanced the exploration and development of renewable energy technologies, such as solar cells, wind and hydro-power.1 However, better energy storage technologies are always key issues due to the requirements of continuity and portability of the power supplies in our modern life with constant motion and desire for uninterrupted connection. Among the various available technologies for energy storage, Li-ion batteries have become the prime candidates to power the next generation of automobiles, and been listed as serious competitors for small scale decentralized applications such as photovoltaics.2 This is due to the fact that Li-ion batteries offer the best combination of high energy density, power density and output voltage, and the technology relies on a rich and versatile chemistry providing a wide range of electrode materials resources.3
Li-ion batteries are comprised of three primary components: a cathode and an anode separated by an electrolyte, the same device structure as conventional batteries. The most commercially popular electrode materials are graphite or titanium oxide (TiO2) for the anode, and lithium salts (lithium cobalt oxide, LiCoO2, lithium manganese oxide, LiMn2O4, or lithium iron phosphates, LiFePO4) or oxides (vanadium pentoxide, V2O5, or manganese dioxide, MnO2) for the cathode. As illustrated schematically in Fig. 1, during discharging of a battery, Li ions are extracted from the anode and diffuse towards the cathode through the non-aqueous electrolyte and a porous separator, and subsequently are intercalated into the cathode, while the electrons are transported from the anode to the cathode via an external circuit. During charging, the Li ions and current flow in the reverse direction, and this is realized by applying a certain voltage from an external electrical power supply.4 The reactions within a Li-ion battery composed of LiFePO4 as cathode and TiO2 as anode can be written as eqn (1)–(3): Cathode: LiFePO4 ↔ Li1-xFePO4 + x Li+ + x e−(1) Anode: TiO2 + x Li+ + x e− ↔ LixTiO2(2) Overall: LiFePO4 + TiO2 ↔ Li1−xFePO4 + LixTiO2(3)
 Fig. 1  A schematic drawing showing a complete Li-ion battery. During the discharging process, Li+ diffuse from the anode (negative side) to the cathode (positive side) through the Li+ conducting electrolyte, while electrons flow from the anode to the cathode via an outer circuit. 
Li-ion batteries store electrical energy as potentially available chemical energy, and the energy storage process in Li-ion batteries requires Faradic oxidation and reduction of the electrochemically active materials to release charges, which can perform electrical work when they flow between two electrodes. The Faradic reactions in Li-ion batteries usually occur with phase changes.5 Thermodynamically the potential difference between two electrodes of a battery is constant throughout the discharge or charge process (Fig. 2 (a)). In comparison, the charge storage process is non-Faradic in a double-layer capacitor, and the voltage on the capacitor changes linearly with the number of charges. The discharging/charging behavior of ideal batteries and capacitors is shown in Fig. 2 (b). The real discharging/charging curves of electrode materials often show sloping manner, which is related to the crystallinity, crystallite size, crystal structure or intercalation mechanisms. The storage energy of a battery is presented by the area under the potential–capacity curve, and calculated by the integral of the product of potential V and charge Q. E = ∫V dQ(4)
 Fig. 2  Comparison of discharge/charge behavior of (a) an ideal battery and (b) an ideal double-layer capacitor. 
There are a few criteria which are essential to evaluate and illustrate the characteristics of the materials for Li-ion batteries: Li+ intercalation capacity and energy storage, discharge/charge rate (rate capability) and discharge/charge cycle life (cyclic stability). Li+ intercalation capacity relies on the number of accessible Li+ intercalation sites within the material, and the energy storage is decided by both capacity and working voltage. Rate capability is determined by the kinetics of Li+ diffusion and charge transfer in solid electrodes during Li+ intercalation/deintercalation. The charge and discharge processes in a Li-ion battery often involve irreversible structural or/and phase transformations during interconversion of the electrode materials, which brings about the decay of cycle life in Li-ion batteries. Nanomaterials offer unique mechanical, electrical and optical properties endowed by the confined dimensions with alarge surface area, surface energy and accommodation of volume changes,6 therefore nanostructured electrode materials for Li-ion batteries have been widely investigated, and high Li+ storage capacities with good rate capabilities and cyclic stabilities were observed.7–9
The new concepts of improving electrode materials performance for Li-ion batteries are focused on engineering nanostructures, crystallinity and surface chemistry for enhanced lithium ion intercalation capability.7,10,11 There have been a good number of studies on nanostructured electrode materials for Li-ion batteries based on the above aspects. The one-dimensional (1D) V2O5 submicro-belts prepared by the sol–gel method exhibited high initial discharge capacity of 346 mAh/g and stayed at 240 mAh/g after 20 cycles.12 V2O5 nanofibers formed by the electrospinning technique followed by hydrothermal treatment possessed 350 mAh/g electrochemical capacity with close to 100% coulombic efficiency in these V2O5 nanofibers.13 These nanostructured materials have shown much improved electrochemical properties in comparison with conventional macro- or micro-sized cathode materials for Li-ion batteries.14,15 LiFePO4 was first synthesized and tested as a cathode material for Li-ion batteries in 1997,16,17 and it suffered from limited electronic conductivity. Therefore carbon coating18,19 or aliovalent cation doping20 have been explored to accelerate the Li+ diffusion and intercalation. For example, the electrochemically deposited carbon coated LiFePO4 (C-LFP)/polypyrrole (PPy) composite cathodes demonstrated 92% of the capacity charged at 0.1 C when rapidly discharged at 10 C (within 6 min).21 The much enhanced intercalation properties could be attributed to the optimized nanostructure, good electrical conductivity and charge transfer from the carbon defects around LiFePO4 nanoparticles. Various nanostructured MnO2 with different morphologies (nanowires, nanorods, nanoneedles) and phases (α-, β-, γ-) possessed favorable electrochemical properties benefited from the minimized Li+ diffusion distance, poor crystallinity, fast diffusion kinetics and decreased electrode polarization.22 A novel hierarchically porous MnO2 nanomaterial with a high surface area of 142 m2 g−1 showed very high specific capacitance of 258 F/g and a good reversibility due to its favorable phase, hierarchically porous structure and high surface area.23
Conventional Li-ion battery cathode electrode processing includes mixing ∼80 wt.% electroactive materials with ∼8–10 wt.% conductive additives (typically acetylene black) and ∼10–12 wt.% binder (typically poly(vinylidene fluoride), PVDF, dissolved in n-methyl-2-pyrrolidone, NMP, solvent), followed by tape-casting onto current collectors.24,25 Such fabrication processes are being widely applied in both industrial products and academic studies, however they suffer greatly from the following: (1) increased processing cost and time by complicated multi-processing steps, (2) poor accommodation of mechanical strain and integrity which could decrease the cyclic stability of Li-ion batteries, (3) low volume/mass energy density introduced by electrochemically inactive binders and (4) possible side reactions among binders, additives and active materials during battery cycles affecting intercalation properties.26 Fabrication of binderless and additive-free film electrodes has been carried out by sputtering,27 pulsed laser deposition28 and electrostatic sol-spray deposition.29 Among all these alternative methods for battery electrode processing methods, the sol–gel based solution method could be one of the most cost-effective ways with easy manipulation and control.
A sol–gel process is a wet-chemical method primarily used for the fabrication of inorganic and organic, crystalline and amorphous materials.30 A sol refers to a colloidal suspension of very small solid particles in a continuous liquid medium, which could maintain stability under appropriate conditions (concentration, pH value, composition, etc.). A gel is a solid three-dimensional cross-linked network spanning and entangling through the liquid medium due to the surface tension effects, and the network structure may be supported by physical or chemical bonds. Gels can be categorized into different types: hydrogels, organogels, xerogels, etc. A typical sol–gel process consists of two procedures: hydrolysis (eqn (5)) and condensation (eqn (6)), which occur both sequentially and in parallel.31 Condensation results in the formation of nanoscale clusters, the morphology and microstructure of which could be controlled by manipulating the hydrolysis and condensation reactions. M(OEt)4 + x H2O → M(OEt)4 − x(OH)x + x EtOH(5) M(OEt)4 − x(OH)x + M(OEt)4 − x(OH)x → (OEt)4 − x(OH)x − 1M-O-M(OEt)4 − x(OH)x − 1 + H2O(6)
The sol–gel process is a cost effective and low-temperature technique and it realizes fine control and molecular-level homogeneity of the chemical product. The preparation of the precursor sol can be followed by versatile materials fabrication methods in making thin films or other nanostructured materials, for example, dip coating or spin coating thin films on a substrate, synthesis of nanospheres or nanobelts by the hydrothermal method, and acting as the precursors for electrophoretic deposition. The sol–gel process can be diversely used in nanoscience and nanotechnology in the fields of optics, electronics, energy, biosensors and medicine, and it can be applied for the synthesis of complex compounds, which would be difficult for solid-state reaction or other chemical methods.
In a previous feature article, Wang et al.32 reviewed fabrication of vanadium pentoxide nanorods, nanotubes, core–shell nanocables, and tuning interlayer distance of hydrous vanadium pentoxide thin films for Li-ion batteries via sol–gel processing followed by drop-casting or template-assisted electrodeposition.33–39 The significantly enhanced Li+ intercalation properties were achieved in the vanadium pentoxide electrodes with special nanostructure designs. In this feature article, we focus on our recent research on various nanostructured electrode materials for Li-ion batteries, including V2O5 nanofibers and nanostructured films, MnO2 nanowall arrays, TiO2 nanotube arrays and LiFePO4–C nanocomposite films. We demonstrate that the much enhanced energy storage properties achieved in nanostructured electrodes are attributed to (1) large surface energy and surface area for Faradic reactions and easy transport of mass and charges in nanostructured electrodes, (2) poor crystallinity and defects for easy phase transition and larger intercalation capacity, and (3) intimately mixed carbon for better electrical conduction for high specific power. All the electrochemical characterizations were carried out in a standard three-electrode cell, with Pt foil serving as counter electrode, Ag/Ag+ as reference electrode and 1 M LiClO4 in propylene carbonate as the electrolyte. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) and chronopotentiometry (CP) at different current densities and cyclic stability were measured and compared with other reports. More detailed experimental information and electrochemical properties will be discussed in the following sections.
2. Design and fabrication of nanostructured electrodes
It has been widely studied and proved that the nanostructured electrode materials for Li-ion batteries are endowed with these characteristics:7,11,40,41 (1) short Li+ diffusion path results in faster intercalation/deintercalation process, which brings higher specific power and better electronic/ionic conductivity; (2) high surface area and surface energy provide more electrode–electrolyte contact area, which offers more accessible intercalation sites leading to higher capacity at charge/discharge rate; (3) new thermodynamics and/or kinetics permit enhanced phase transitions and rate capability during Li+ intercalation/deintercalation; (4) better strain accommodation and mechanical integrity during Li+ removal/insertion improve the cyclic stability.
From earlier studies on various nanostructured orthorhombic V2O5: single-crystal V2O5 nanorod arrays,34–36 V2O5·nH2O nanotube arrays,37 Ni/V2O5·nH2O core/shell nanocable arrays,38 V2O5·nH2O films,33,39 and V2O5/TiO2 composite nanorod arrays and films.42,43 it was found that by engineering the nanostructure, the intercalation properties and rate performances of vanadium pentoxide electrodes were significantly enhanced in comparison with conventional bulk vanadium oxide electrodes for Li-ion batteries.32 The improved electrochemical properties could be ascribed to the short Li+ diffusion path, large surface areas as well as the optimized interlayer structure.44
Recently we broadened our research interests and efforts into diversified nanostructured electrode materials: mesoporous hydrous MnO2 nanowall arrays,45,46 mesoporous V2O5 nanofibers,47 cathodic deposited nanostructured V2O5 films48 and LiFePO4–carbon nanocomposite films.49 These nanostructured materials via solution-based and template-less fabrication presented enhanced electrochemical properties with high Li+ intercalation capacity and good cyclic stability, which demonstrate their great potential as future electrode materials for Li-ion batteries.
Manganese dioxide (MnO2) can form a wide range of crystalline structures: α-MnO2, ε-MnO2, β-MnO2, γ-MnO2,50 and due to its high Li+ intercalation capacity of more than 200 mAh/g with good cyclic stability, nanostructured MnO2 has been intensively investigated as promising electrode materials in electrochemical capacitors and Li-ion batteries.22,23,51–55 In our lab, template-free hydrous MnO2 nanowall array films were deposited at a constant voltage of −1.8 V on a platinum (Pt) coated silicon (Si) wafer on the cathode side out of a 0.1 M concentrated solution with Mn(CH2COO)2·4H2O and Na2SO4 dissolved in deionized (DI) water.45,46 It was proposed that the growth mechanism of the nanowall arrays was composed of the three following steps: (1) electrolysis of water at the cathode surface (eqn (7)), (2) increase in local pH in the vicinity of the cathode which induced precipitation of Mn(OH)2 on the cathode (eqn (8)) and (3) oxidation of unstable Mn(OH)2 into stable hydrous manganese dioxide MnO2·0.5H2O (eqn (9)) (Fig. 3 (a)). 2 H2O + 2e− → H2 + 2 OH−(7) Mn2+ + 2 OH− → Mn(OH)2(8) 2 Mn(OH)2 + O2 → 2 MnO2 + 2 H2O(9)
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic drawing of the proposed growth mechanisms of hierarchically porous hydrous MnO2 nanowall arrays derived from cathodic deposition: due to the increased pH value resulting from water electrolysis (blue area has high pH value), the precipitation of Mn(OH)2 nanoparticles from the electrolyte occurred accompanied with the release of H2 gas bubbles at cathode surface; (b) SEM image of hierarchically structured nanowall arrays; (c) TEM image of stacked nanoparticles in a nanowall with voids (pores).46 
The SEM and TEM images in Fig. 3 (b,c) show the hierarchically grown highly porous nanostructured hydrous MnO2 nanowalls were composed of closely stacked spherical nanoparticles of 50 nm. A large Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area of 96.2 m2 g−1 with a pore size distribution centered at a diameter of 4.2 nm were measured, and this surface area was higher than the template-fabricated mesoporous MnO2 around 91 m2 g−1,56 MnO2 nanowires of ∼69 m2 g−157 and self-assembled mesoporous-nanostructured manganese oxide of ∼70 m2 g−1.58
It was observed that the cathodic deposited MnO2 nanowall array films prepared at −1.8 V in 0.1 M precursor with a thickness of 500 nm possessed a more favorable hierarchically mesoporous structure with higher discharge capacities and better cyclic stability in comparison with cathodic deposited MnO2 nanowall arrays of other thicknesses or the anodic deposited MnO2 (Fig. 4(a,b)). The initial capacity was as high as 256 mAh/g, then dropped to 239 mAh/g in the second cycle and remained at 175 mAh/g after 30 cycles.46 The high discharge capacities were related with the nanowall array structure with large surface area and short diffusion path which are advantageous for intercalation/deintercalation. The cyclic stability improvement could be attributed to the mesoporous nanostructure of cathodic deposited MnO2 nanowall arrays, which could accommodate more strain and provide mechanical integrity during Li+ insertion/extraction. Moreover the honeycomb macroporous structure could facilitate the penetration and accessibility of electrolyte to the bottom of the arrays.59–63
 Fig. 4  Comparisons of discharge capacities of cathodic deposited MnO2 nanowall arrays (a) of different thicknesses for 30 cycles; (b) with anodic deposited MnO2 in the first 10 cycles.46 
Vanadium oxide (V2O5) is one of the strong and favorable competitors for cathode materials in Li-ion batteries, due to the high Li+ intercalation capacity (theoretical capacity 450 mAh/g), faster discharge/charge rate, easy fabrication method and good cyclic stability during Li+ intercalation.64–72 Electrospinning is a versatile and popular method to fabricate a rich variety of nanostructured ultra-thin fibers, including organic, inorganic and composite materials.73 In our lab, mesoporous vanadium pentoxide nanofibers were fabricated using a combination of electrospinning and sol–gel methods. The precursor for electrospinning was prepared from V2O5 powders, H2O2 and poly(vinylpyrrolidone) (PVP) via the sol–gel route. The as-spun V2O5 nanofibers were collected on Pt foils and further annealed in air at 500 °C for 1 h, as shown in the SEM images in Fig. 5 (a,b).47 The yellowish nanofibers were ∼350 nm in diameter and tens of microns in length and consisted of interconnected nano-sized platelet particles with highly porous structure. The V2O5 nanofibers presented pure orthorhombic phase with interplanar distance and grain size estimated to be ∼4.37 Å and 15.5 nm respectively. A large BET surface area of 97 m2 g−1 with the pore size distribution centered at a diameter of 4–5 nm confirmed the mesoporous structure composed of non-rigid aggregates of platelet-like particles or assemblages of slit-shaped pores, which were in good agreement with SEM observations.74,75
 Fig. 5  SEM images of V2O5 nanofiber after annealing at 500 °C in air for 1 h (scale bar = 100 nm).47 

Fig. 6 (a) presents the CP curves of mesoporous V2O5 nanofibers in the 1st cycle tested in a voltage range between −0.5 V and 0.1 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) at a current density of 625 mAh/g. The two well-defined plateaus in the −0.4 V to −0.3 V and −0.2 V to −0.1 V regions revealed the facilitated phase transitions during Li+ insertion/removal processes in this mesoporous nanostructure. The initial discharge and charge capacities were 377 mAh/g and 372 mAh/g respectively. The charge/discharge capacity of mesoporous V2O5 nanofibers remained at 347 mAh/g for the 10th cycle and a loss of 0.78% of the capacity per cycle was observed for the following 30 cycles (Fig. 6(b)), which demonstrated the higher Li+ intercalation capacity with better cyclic stability in comparison with other nanostructured V2O5 cathodes.33–39 This excellent electrochemical property of V2O5 nanofibers cathodes for Li-ion batteries could be attributed to the high surface area and short charge transport distance within 20 nm provided by the mesoporous electro-spun V2O5 nanofibers. Moreover the V2O5 nanofibers with nanopores could offer a better accommodation for volume change during Li+ insertion/extraction, and this results in an improved cyclic stability as observed in this study.
 Fig. 6  (a) Chronopotentiometric discharge–charge curves of mesoporous V2O5 nanofibers in the 1st cycle with a current density 625 mA g−1. (b) The discharge/charge capacity of mesoporous V2O5 nanofibers as a function of cycle number.47 
As one of the important forms of nanostructured V2O5 materials, V2O5 films fabricated by various methods have been widely investigated: electrophoretic deposition,33,35,36 anodic deposition76 and sputtering,60etc. To the best of the authors' knowledge, for the first time, V2O5 thin films with unique nanostructures were prepared by means of cathodic deposition from an aqueous solution made from V2O5 and H2O2. During cathodic deposition, the V5+ species from V2O5 colloidal particles and dioxovanadate cations, VO2+ (generated from V2O5 and H2O277,78), got reduced on the surface of FTO glass at the negative side (eqn (10–11)), which could serve as nucleation centers initiating and catalyzing the formation of V2O5·nH2O through low pH conditions (eqn (12)):76,79,80 V2O5 + 4 H+ ↔ 2 VO2+ + 2 H2O(10) VO2+ + e− → VO2(11) 2 [VO2]+ + nH2O → V2O5·nH2O + 2 H+(12)
After annealing the as-deposited V2O5−x·nH2O films at 500 °C in the air, the V2O5 film showed a preferred oriented orthorhombic phase with a crystallite size of 35.1 nm calculated from XRD patterns (Fig. 7 (a)).48 The “wrinkled” nanostructure of V2O5 films was detected by SEM to be composed of fine nanocrystallites of 20–30 nm separated by 10 nm gaps as shown in Fig. 7 (b).
 Fig. 7  (a) XRD patterns of the as-deposited V2O5−x·nH2O film, hydrous V2O5−x·nH2O films annealed at 250 °C and V2O5 films annealed at 500 °C in the air. (b) SEM image of the 500 °C annealed V2O5 film.48 
The cyclic voltammogram of a 500 °C annealed nanostructured V2O5 film in Fig. 8 (a) presented all the cathodic/anodic peaks corresponding to four phase transitions among α, ε, δ, γ, and ω phases within the potential range of 0.6–1.8 V (vs. Ag+/Ag).65–67 The partially reversible ε/α and δ/ε phase transitions were able to be observed in CV and this could become a proof of facilitated thermodynamics and kinetics of phase transitions. The rate capability tests (Fig. 8 (b)) showed high discharge capacities at fast discharge rate: 160 mAh/g at 30 C; 120 mAh/g at 70 C. The high energy density (900 Wh/kg at 1.3 C) and power density (28 kW kg−1 at 70 C), enhanced phase transitions as well as the good cyclic stability could be ascribed to the unique nanostructure in this research (Fig. 7 (b)): the 20–30 nm nanocrystallites provided a shorter diffusion path for Li+ intercalation/deintercalation, and the 10 nm wrinkled gaps offered a higher surface area with more accessible intercalation sites which favored the electrolyte penetration and interface reactions.81,37 This nanostructure could effectively enhance the phase transition during Li+ intercalation/deintercalation, as shown from CV curves in Fig. 8 (a). This nanostructured V2O5 films could also offer more space freedom, therefore the film's mechanical integrity and stability during battery testing could be well maintained which would result in a good cyclic stability.46
 Fig. 8  (a) The cyclic voltammograms of 500 °C annealed V2O5 films with a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 in 1 M LiClO4/PC electrolyte solution for the 1st cycle (solid line) and 8th cycle (dash-dot line). (b) The discharge capacities of 500 °C annealed V2O5 films at various current densities from 200 mA g−1 (1.3 C) to 12.5 A g−1 (70 C).48 
Lithium iron phosphate (LiFePO4) has been attracting intense interest both in academic and industrial fields because of its high theoretical capacity of 170 mAh/g, flat voltage at ∼3.4 V, and good thermal and chemical stability.16 Moreover it offers economic and environmental advantages of being low cost and less toxic.82,83 In our lab, uniform and crack-free LiFePO4/C nanocomposite film cathodes were obtained by spreading LiFePO4 sol on a Pt coated Si wafer, followed by ambient drying overnight and annealing/pyrolysis at elevated temperatures in nitrogen gas. The crystallite size was calculated to be 19.4 nm in LiFePO4–C composite films annealed at 600 °C.49Fig. 9 (a) shows the SEM image of a 600 °C annealed LiFePO4/C nanocomposite film with a homogeneous distribution of carbon particles in the film and some coated on the surface of LiFePO4 particles, which was proved by EDX results.49 The charge capacity of the LiFePO4/C nanocomposite film for the 1st cycle was 167 mAh/g followed by a discharge capacity of 312 mAh/g (Fig. 9 (b)), showing that the amount of Li+ that intercalated into the film exceeded the theoretical value for stoichiometric crystalline LiFePO4. The high intercalation performance could be attributed to nanocrystallites sized under 20 nm which could greatly enhance the phase transition during Li+ intercalation/deintercalation due to the high surface energy, and favor kinetic processes including a short transport pathway and a high and effective contact area with the electrolyte.84–86 It has been investigated that for nanomaterials with nano-sized crystallites, the contributions from pseudocapacitance and capacitance to the total storage capacity could become non-negligible.87–89 For example, the capacitive contribution to the total stored charge in TiO2 (anatase) nanoparticles could become 55% to 15% when the nanocrystallites were sized 7 nm to 30 nm respectively.90 The high discharge capacities observed in this study could also be attributed to the pseudocapacitive contribution from LiFePO4 nanocrystallites.
 Fig. 9  (a) SEM image of LiFePO4/C nanocomposite films annealed at 600 °C. (b) The first and second charge/discharge curves of sol–gel derived LiFePO4/C nanocomposite cathode films annealed at 600 °C at a discharge rate of 200 mA g−1.49 
3. Control of crystallinity
As discussed in the first section of this article, well crystallized electrode materials usually assure well defined Faradic redox reactions in electrochemical active materials during Li+ intercalation/deintercalation, as indicated by the long and elegant plateaus in potential–capacity curves (Fig. 2 (a)). However, those electrode materials often suffer from limited capacity or poor rate capability, due to the restricted Li+ diffusion paths and intercalation sites in the long-range well ordered structure in perfect crystalline materials. Poor crystalline materials with loose packing of ions and lack of long-range ordered structure could offer more open sites for Li+ intercalation which result in high capacity. Poor crystalline materials may also provide better accommodation of volume change during Li+ insertion/extraction, and this could result in more facilitated Li+ intercalation/deintercalation paths with better cyclic stability. There have been some studies on the poor crystalline materials, e.g., ZnSb, MnO2, with excellent electrochemical performance for the electrodes of Li-ion batteries.91,92
Li+ intercalation properties in V2O5 have been demonstrated to change appreciably by modifying its crystallinity or interlayer spacing. The addition of 20 mol.% TiO2 into V2O5 films or 25 mol.% TiO2 into V2O5 nanorod arrays retards the crystallization of V2O5 as well as the crystallite growth during annealing process, and this results in an almost 100% improvement in Li+ intercalation performance over pure V2O5 electrodes.42,43 It was also found that by controlling the annealing temperatures for V2O5·nH2O xerogel films, the crystallinity, compositions of crystalline water and interplanar distances could be manipulated to favor the Li+ intercalations.39 For example, the optimized composition V2O5·0.3H2O films annealed at 250 °C exhibited the highest initial Li+ intercalation capacity of 275 mAh/g, and retained a stable capacity of 185 mAh/g after 20 cycles, which was better than the well crystallized orthorhombic V2O5 films, or V2O5·1.6H2O films at room temperature.
Most recently, we have studied the influence of crystallinity on Li-ion intercalation properties in different electrode materials, for example, LiFePO4/C nanocomposite film cathodes,49 Mn-doped V2O5 films,93 N2 annealed V2O5 films94 and TiO2 nanotube arrays,95 and V2O5/carbon nanocomposites.96 It has been further proved that the kinetics and thermodynamics of materials with controlled crystallinity could be more favored by Li+ intercalation, which results in higher capacity and better cyclic stability.
Sol–gel processing derived LiFePO4/C nanocomposite film cathodes were annealed in various temperatures from 500 °C to 800 °C in N2 gas after spreading sols on Pt coated Si wafers.49 The XRD patterns of LiFePO4/C composite powders annealed at 500 °C, 600 °C, 700 °C and 800 °C are shown in Fig. 10 (a). The powders without annealing were amorphous since there was no detectable peak in the XRD pattern; the patterns of powders annealed at 500 °C, 600 °C, 700 °C and 800 °C exhibited the main peaks of olivine LiFePO4 phase, however with different intensity and shape, which is related to increased crystallinity and ordering of the olivine LiFePO4 phase at elevated annealing temperatures from 500 °C to 800 °C. The growth of crystallite size from 16.1 nm at 500 °C to 30.8 nm at 800 °C could also be calculated from XRD patterns using Scherrer's equation.
 Fig. 10  (a) X-Ray diffraction patterns of sol–gel derived LiFePO4/C composite powders at room temperature and heat treated at 500 °C, 600 °C, 700 °C and 800 °C. (b) Discharge capacities of sol–gel derived LiFePO4/C nanocomposite cathode films annealed at 500–800 °C at a discharge rate of 200 mA g−1.49 
The Li+ intercalation property for LiFePO4/C nanocomposite films annealed at different temperatures (500–800 °C) at 200 mA g−1 were tested and are shown in Fig. 10 (b). The film annealed at 600 °C shows the best capacity and cycle stability, as it delivers the highest discharge capacity of 312 mAh/g for the initial cycle, and stays at 218 mAh/g after 20 cycles. In comparison, the 500 °C annealed films delivered a high discharge capacity similar to the 600 °C films, however it is followed by a drastic drop and then poor cyclic stability since the 3rd cycle. The initial Li+ intercalation capacity for 700 °C and 800 °C films are 228 mAh/g and 120 mAh/g, which decrease to 148 mAh/g and 99 mAh/g after 20 cycles. This series of comparison shows that the LiFePO4/C nanocomposite films treated at 600 °C with controlled crystallinity possess the most beneficial structure for Li+ intercalation. The 600 °C films are less compact and more disordered in comparison with the well crystallized phase, thus it provides a more flexible structure which could accommodate more Li+ and facilitate the diffusion within this structure. The poor cyclic stability within the 500 °C films could be ascribed to the over-loosely packed microstructure which may experience irreversible change or loose contact with current collector with increased cycles. The 700 °C and 800 °C films have more compact and well crystallized structures, which give limited freedom and restricted space for Li+ diffusion and intercalation, thus lower discharge capacities are observed. The best electrochemical properties in 600 °C films could also be ascribed to the small crystallite size below 20 nm, which favors the kinetics of phase transition during Li+ intercalation/deintercalation. A reduced crystallite size decreases the polarization associated with electronic and/or ionic resistance, and thus improves the reversible capacity. The larger particles and crystallites in the films annealed at elevated temperatures present as transport limitation both for Li+ and electron diffusion, which results in capacity loss.
It has been studied that by doping or adding different elements into the V2O5 system, the nucleation and crystallite growth could be hindered, resulting in a lower crystallinity compared to the undoped V2O5 fabricated under the same conditions. Recently in our lab, stable and homogeneous Mn-doped V2O5 films were prepared via sol–gel processing, in which H2O2 and V2O5 as were used as sol precursors and Mn2+ was directly added during sol preparation.93 The films were dried at ambient temperature followed by annealing in air at 250 °C for 3 h. The XRD patterns (Fig. 11 (a)) showed that the pristine V2O5 films possessed diffraction peaks for both hydrous and orthorhombic V2O5 phases; while for Mn-doped V2O5 films, there was only a diffraction peak designated to hydrous V2O5 and the broadened peak represented a poorer crystallinity in comparison with undoped V2O5 films. The interlayer distances were calculated to be ∼11.3 Å for Mn-doped V2O5 films, slightly larger than ∼11 Å for un-doped V2O5 films, which could be due to the doping of larger Mn2+ ions into V2O5 lattice. The grain size of Mn-doped V2O5 films was calculated to be ∼1.5 nm from XRD patterns, smaller than the undoped V2O5 films with ∼3.5 nm. This showed that the Mn doping has resulted in the suppression of the formation of orthorhombic V2O5 and grain growth.97,98
 Fig. 11  (a) XRD patterns of a) V2O5 films and b) Mn-doped V2O5 films. (b) The discharge capacity of V2O5 films and Mn-doped V2O5 films, at a current density of 680 mA g−1, potential ranging from 0.5 V to −1.4 V vs. Ag/Ag+.93 
The cyclic performance revealed that the Mn-doped V2O5 films only lost less than 3.0% of the discharge capacity after 50 cycles, compared with 40% capacity loss for the un-doped V2O5 films (Fig. 11 (b)). The improved Li+ intercalation property could be attributed to the effective Mn-doping retarding the nucleation and grain growth during crystallization. The poor crystallinity in the Mn-doped V2O5 films could offer more Li+ intercalation sites, and alleviate the strain accompanying the Li+ intercalation/deintercalation. This structure results in a higher Li+ intercalation capacity and better cyclic stability.
Crystallinity could also be manipulated by annealing materials in different gases, which could change the thermodynamic conditions for nucleation and grain growth. V2O5 xerogel films were fabricated by spreading V2O5 sol onto fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) glass substrates followed by annealing at 300 °C for 3 h in N2 and air.94 In comparison with air annealed V2O5 films, N2 annealed films presented poorer crystallinity judging from the broadened shape and lower intensity of the diffraction peaks (Fig. 12 (a)). The grain size was calculated based on XRD patterns, to be 14.3 nm for air annealed V2O5 films, and 5.1 nm for N2 annealed films. The comparisons of chronopotentiometric curves of air and N2 annealed V2O5 films for the 1st, 20th, and 50th cycle (Fig. 12 (b,c)) show: (1) the lack of plateaus and sloping manner of charge/discharge curves show the evidence of poor crystallinity in N2 annealed V2O5 films; (2) the N2 annealed V2O5 films start with a low Li+ intercalation capacity (68 mAh/g), which increase to 154 mAh/g at the 20th cycle, and decayed a little to 148 mAh/g at the 50th cycle. This forms a huge contrast with the well crystallized V2O5 films, which show a high capacity of 152 mAh/g for the initial cycle, and then dropped drastically to 74 mAh/g and 44 mAh/g at the 20th and 50th cycle. The improved electrochemical property in poor crystalline materials was also found in other materials systems,99 and it could be ascribed to the poor crystallinity nature and retarded grain size growth after annealing samples in inert gases.
 Fig. 12  (a) XRD patterns of V2O5 xerogel films annealed in air and nitrogen at 300 °C after 3 h, showing the coexistence of both hydrous and orthorhombic vanadium oxide; Chronopotentiometric discharge/charge curves in the 1st, 20th and 50th cycles at a current density 600 mA g−1 of V2O5 films annealed in (b) air and (c) nitrogen at 300 °C for 3 h. Potential ranging from 0.6 V to −1.4 V vs. Ag/Ag+.94 
The effect of N2 annealing and poor crystallinity to electrochemical properties were also confirmed in the study on N2 annealed TiO2 nanotube arrays.95 TiO2 nanotube arrays were synthesized by anodic oxidation method recorded in reference on titanium foil,100 followed by calcination from 300 °C to 500 °C for 3 h in N2 gas. The annealed TiO2 tube arrays show anatase phase with better crystallinity with increased annealing temperatures. The Li+ discharge capacity and cyclic stability of those TiO2 tube arrays are compared in Fig. 13. The amorphous as-grown TiO2 tube arrays show a high initial discharge capacity as 202 mAh/g, however followed by a drastic drop since the 2nd cycle until only 40 mAh/g for the 50th cycle, which shows similar phenomena in amorphous TiO2 electrodes.101 The 400 °C and 500 °C annealed TiO2 tube arrays show much better cyclic stability, however the Li+ discharge capacity is around 160 mAh/g, which is much lower than 300 °C annealed samples. The 300 °C annealed TiO2 tube arrays possess a high initial discharge capacity of 240 mAh/g, and stay at 148 mAh/g after 50 cycles. The combination of high Li+ storage capacity and good cyclic stability could be ascribed to the poor crystallinity in 300 °C annealed TiO2 tube arrays. This poor crystallinity provides better structural support for Li+ insertion/extraction after many cycles in comparison with the loose structure in as-grown amorphous TiO2 nanotubes. It also offers more available Li+ intercalation sites thus results in higher discharge capacity compared with those well crystallized samples.
 Fig. 13  Li+ intercalation discharge capacity of amorphous as-grown TiO2 nanotube arrays, and anatase TiO2 nanotube arrays annealed at 300, 400, and 500 °C in N2 for 3 h as a function of cyclic numbers. The potential was ranging from −0.6 V to −2.1 V vs. Ag/Ag+ at a current density of 320 mA g−1.95 
Coherent hydrous vanadium pentoxide (V2O5·nH2O)–carbon cryogel (CC) nanocomposites were synthesized by dynamic electrodeposition of hydrous vanadium pentoxide onto the porous carbon scaffold, which was derived from resorcinol (R) and formaldehyde (F) organic hydrogels.96 The resorcinol–formaldehyde (RF) derived carbon cryogels (CCs) were prepared through a series of processes including gelation, solvent exchange, freeze-drying and pyrolysis,102–105 then the CCs films were fixed between two Pt meshes and immersed in VOSO4 solution (pH = 1.8) for potentiodynamic electrodeposition, which was carried out at a voltage ranging from 0.6 V to 2.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl for up to 300 cycles.96Fig. 14 (a) shows the schematic drawing of synthesis of nanocomposites by electrodeposition of V2O5·nH2O inside the pores of CC films and this reaction (eqn (13)) could be realized in aqueous solution at pH = 1.8 through oxidation of V4+ to V5+.76 2 VO2+ + 3 H2O → V2O5 + 6 H+ + 2 e−(13)
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic drawings of the synthesis and microstructure of coherent nanocomposites in which V2O5·nH2O was deposited and coated onto surface of carbon cryogel scaffold. (b) The pore size distribution of V2O5·nH2O–carbon cryogels by nitrogen sorption isotherms. (c) Cyclic voltammetry curves of hydrous V2O5, carbon cryogel, and V2O5·nH2O–carbon cryogels in the voltage window between 0.5 V and −1.5 V vs. Ag/Ag+ at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1. (d) The specific discharge capacity for V2O5·nH2O–carbon cryogels and V2O5·nH2O as a function of cycle numbers.96 
The surface morphologies of as-fabricated V2O5·nH2O–carbon cryogel (CC) nanocomposites were observed to be homogeneous across the sample,96 which suggested a uniform deposition of V2O5·nH2O throughout the porous carbon cryogel films. This was further proved by pore size distribution derived from nitrogen sorption isotherms (Fig. 14(b)) showing that the peak pore size of CC films of 8 nm decreased to a smaller size of 6 nm after the deposition with a shrunk pore volume from 0.98 cm3/g to 0.42 cm3/g. The reduction in the pore volume and pore size were presumably due to the successful deposition of V2O5·nH2O inside the porous carbon cryogel films, which took some of the void space and resulted in the change of the porous structure.

Fig. 14 (c) compares the cyclic voltammograms of V2O5·nH2O–CCs nanocomposites, V2O5·nH2O film and pristine CC film electrodes at voltages ranging from −1.5 V to 0.5 V (vs. Ag/Ag+) with a scan rate of 1 mV s−1. Compared with the more distinctive anodic and cathodic peaks related to Li+ intercalation and deintercalation observed in V2O5·nH2O film, the coherent V2O5·nH2O–CC nanocomposites possessed broader and more overlapped bumps, which could be attributed to the poor crystallinity and different electrochemical potentials of Li+ intercalation/deintercalation caused by dissimilar environments of V2O5 surrounded by amorphous CCs. The CC film did not demonstrate any anodic/cathodic peaks related to Li+ intercalation/deintercalation, which could well prove the attribution of V2O5·nH2O to the Li+ insertion/removal during charge/discharge process. The specific Li+ intercalation capacity of V2O5·nH2O–CC nanocomposites were 280 mAh/g initially and retained 257 mAh/g after 20 cycles, which was higher than the V2O5·nH2O films showing initial specific capacity of 151 mAh/g and dropped to 96 mAh/g for the 20th cycle as shown in Fig. 14 (d). The much improved electrochemical properties of V2O5·nH2O–CC nanocomposites could be attributed to the shortened mass and charge diffusion distance and enhanced electrical conductivity introduced by the porous carbon cryogel scaffold. This porous nanocomposite structure also improved the reversibility and mechanical support during charge/discharge processes by offering extra accommodation of the stress accompanied with Li+ insertion/removal.106 The large surface energy and poor crystallinity in V2O5·nH2O–CC nanocomposites could allow easy phase transition and benefit the surface or interface redox reactions, leading to a much expanded range of reversible Li+ intercalation/deintercalation processes.107,108
4. Manipulation of surface chemistry and defects
Electrochemical intercalation comprises of three simultaneous and sequential processes: (1) redox reaction at the interface between electrode and electrolyte; (2) nucleation and growth of new phase starting at the interface; (3) charge and mass transfer from interface to electrode bulk. Surface defects are expected to serve as nucleation sites to promote the phase transitions at the interface between electrode and electrolyte; defects in bulk may favor the propagation or growth of new phases during charge and discharge processes in Li-ion batteries. Therefore, Li+ intercalation capacity and rate capability could be enhanced by manipulating surface chemistry and defects.109,110 In addition, defects could enhance charge transfer. Annealing samples with reactive gas and substitutional doping are the common routes to manipulate the surface chemistry or introduce defects into the materials.111 Aside from enhancing Li+ storage energy and improving kinetics, appropriate manipulation of surface chemistry and defects might also protect the nanomaterials on the electrode surface from dissolving into the electrolyte after long-time repeated intercalation/deintercalation cycles, therefore effectively improve the cyclic stability of Li-ion batteries.10
We have conducted various experiments recently on the effects of surface chemistry and defects on Li+ intercalation/deintercalation properties: CO gas annealed TiO2 nanotube arrays,112 N2 gas annealed V2O5 xerogel films,94 cathodic deposited V2O5 nanostructured thin films,48 Mn doped V2O5 films93 and LiFePO4/C nanocomposite films.49 It was found that by manipulating the surface chemistry or introducing defects, the intercalation properties and rate performances could be significantly improved, and this could be ascribed to the facilitated nucleation and phase transitions, as well as enhanced electrical conductivity for charge transfer.
The V2O5 xerogel films were annealed at 300 °C for 3 h in N2 and air.94 In comparison with air annealed V2O5 films, N2 annealed films presented poorer crystallinity with much smaller grain size. The optical absorption spectra of V2O5 films annealed in air and N2 are shown in Fig. 15 (a) with photographic images in the inset. The dark green color showed in the N2 annealed V2O5 films indicates the presence of V4+ and V3+ valence states. The comparison of absorption edges suggests a narrower bandgap for N2 annealed V2O5 films, which could be due to the existence of defects in lower valence states. The electrochemical impedance analysis also confirmed an improved electrical conductivity in V2O5 films with defects, such as V4+, V3+ species and possible associated oxygen vacancies in the N2 annealed films.
 Fig. 15  (a) Absorption spectra of V2O5 films annealed in air and nitrogen at 300 °C for 3 h; the inset presents a photograph of films after annealing in air (left) and nitrogen (right) at 300 °C for 3 h. (b) The Li+ intercalation discharge capacities of V2O5 films annealed in air and N2 at 300 °C for 3 h as a function of cycle number. The potential was ranging from 0.6 V to −1.4 V vs. Ag/Ag+ at a current density of 600 mA g−1.94 
The cyclic stabilities of N2 and air annealed V2O5 films are compared in Fig. 15 (b), and it was found that the discharge capacity of air annealed films dropped drastically from 152 mAh/g for the 1st cycle to 44 mAh/g for the 50th cycle. Interestingly, the discharge capacity of N2 annealed films started low at 68 mAh/g for the 1st cycle, and rapidly increase to154 mAh/g at the 20th cycle then retained 148 mAh/g at the 50th cycle. The enhanced intercalation capacity with good cyclic stability could be explained not only by crystallinity, but also by the surface defects, such as V4+ or V3+ species and associated oxygen vacancies in the N2 annealed films, which could (1) improve the electrical conductivity and electrolyte–electrode interfacial charge transfer ability;95 (2) act as coating layers preventing the possible dissolution of V2O5 films in the electrolyte and ensuring integrity of film surface morphology after cycles;7 (3) serve as nucleation centers in the phase transitions during Li+ intercalation/deintercalation.113 Similar phenomena were observed in nanostructured V2O5 films with surface defects.109,114
The anodization derived TiO2 nanotube arrays were calcined at 400 °C for 3 h in respective dry gas flows of N2 and CO.112 The electrochemical impedance spectra of CO and N2 annealed nanotube arrays are shown in Fig. 16 (a) and the electrode resistance and charge-transfer resistance were calculated to be 66 Ω and 38 Ω for N2 annealed TiO2 nanotube arrays, and 60 Ω and 26 Ω for CO annealed TiO2 nanotube arrays, which indicated a higher charge-transfer rate of Li+ in the electrode of CO annealed TiO2 nanotubes. The XPS result (Fig. 16 (b)) of the Ti2p spectrum of CO annealed TiO2 nanotube arrays proved the existence of a small amount of Ti3+ (∼456.8 eV) and Ti–C (∼454.9 eV) in addition to the two characteristic Ti4+ peaks of Ti2p1/2 at ∼465 eV and Ti2p3/2 at ∼459 eV.115,116 The improved charge-transfer conductivity of CO annealed TiO2 nanotube arrays observed in the impedance study could be attributed to the presence of surface Ti–C species and Ti3+ and oxygen vacancy groups detected in XPS.117,118
 Fig. 16  (a) Electrochemical impedance spectra presented as Nyquist plots of titania nanotube arrays annealed in N2 and CO at 400 °C for 3 h and measured in 1 M LiClO4 in propylene carbonate with testing frequencies from 100 kHz to 0.05 Hz. The inset depicts the ideal impedance curve representing the Li+ intercalation process into electrodes. (b) Ti2p XPS spectra of TiO2 nanotube arrays annealed in CO gas at 500 °C for 3 h with Ti–C species and Ti3+ state detected. (c) The Li+ intercalation capacity at 320 mA g−1 of TiO2 nanotube arrays annealed in N2 and CO at 400 °C for 3 h as a function of cycle number. (d) The initial discharge capacities of TiO2 nanotube arrays annealed in N2 and CO at 400 °C for 3 h as a function of applied discharge current density.112 
The cyclic stability studies of N2 and CO annealed TiO2 nanotube arrays for Li+ intercalation are shown in Fig. 16 (c) and it was found that the CO annealed TiO2 nanotube arrays possessed a high Li+ intercalation capacity of 223 mAh/g in the initial cycle and retained 179 mAh/g after 50 cycles, which was higher than N2 annealed TiO2 nanotube arrays with 164 mAh/g and 145 mAh/g for the 1st and 50th cycles. A comparison of rate intercalation capability between CO and N2 annealed TiO2 nanotube arrays (Fig. 16 (d)) showed that the intercalation capacity of N2 annealed nanotube arrays reduced more rapidly than CO annealed ones, and the CO annealed nanotube arrays approximately doubled the intercalation capacities at higher rate, e.g. 101 mAh/g and 50 mAh/g at 10 A g−1 for CO and N2 annealed TiO2 nanotube arrays respectively. The much enhanced Li+ intercalation properties in CO annealed TiO2 nanotube arrays could be explained by the increased electrical conductivity and facilitated phase transition during Li+ intercalation/deintercalation by the presence of surface defects, Ti–C species and Ti3+ with oxygen vacancies, which could facilitate charge transport accompanying rapid intercalation reactions at the interface. Moreover these defects could serve as nucleation sites to promote phase transitions during Li+ intercalation and this results in a higher intercalation capacity under high current densities.
Doping is one of the most effective methods to introduce and distribute defects homogeneously into the bulk of materials. Mn2+ was directly doped into V2O5 films during sol preparation, and XPS results showed that there was ∼18% of V4+ in the Mn-doped V2O5, and the presence of V4+ was most probably associated with oxygen vacancies by charge compensation. 93Fig. 17 presents the Li+ intercalation capacity as a function of current density for V2O5 films and Mn-doped V2O5 films. It clearly shows that the discharge capacity of Mn-doped V2O5 films is higher than that of undoped V2O5 films at identical current density, which demonstrates a better kinetics and much improved rate capability in Mn-doped V2O5 films compared to undoped V2O5 films. The cyclic performance after many cycles of Li+ insertion/extraction in Mn-doped V2O5 films is also better than the undoped V2O5 films (Fig. 11 (b)). The excellent intercalation property in Mn-doped V2O5 films can be ascribed to the following three aspects: (1) the presence of oxygen vacancies could result in the formation of more open structure and easy access for Li+ intercalation and diffusion, which results in better cyclic stability and faster intercalation; (2) the oxygen vacancies may serve as possible nucleation centers for phase transition offering more intercalation sites; (3) the conductivity of Mn-doped V2O5 can also be enhanced owing to the presence of lower valence vanadium ions and associated oxygen vacancies, which could be beneficial for charge transfer during Li+ intercalation/deintercalation.
 Fig. 17  Relationship between discharge capacity and current density for undoped V2O5 and Mn-doped V2O5, the potential was ranging from 0.5 V to −1.4 V vs. Ag/Ag+. 93 
The sol–gel route derived LiFePO4/C nanocomposite films were introduced in previous sections for their excellent Li+ intercalation performance due to their nanostructure and poor crystallinity.49 In this section, we will discuss the electrochemical properties from the third aspect—carbon nanocoating as surface defects. A schematic drawing (Fig. 18 (a)) demonstrates the distribution and co-existence of carbon with LiFePO4. The carbon residue from ascorbic acid forms an amorphous nano-network in LiFePO4/C nanocomposite films, connecting the individual LiFePO4 particles; carbon also wraps around the LiFePO4 particles, and acts as both a nano-coating to improve the electrical conductivity and surface defect to enhance the Li+ diffusion. The conventional electrode process adds 15–20 wt% of conductive additives (carbon black etc.) and binder (PVDF etc.) to the active materials with particle sizes of micrometre scale, which often gives an inadequate contact between particles thus impeding the effective Li+ diffusion in certain areas. In addition, the additives and binders bring in noticeable mass which further results in a low specific energy and power density counted for the whole electrode. In contrast to the conventional configuration, the carbon network and nano-coating introduced by sol–gel chemistry in this work guarantees a better electrical conductivity, enhanced Li+ diffusion and higher electrochemical performance as discussed below.
 Fig. 18  (a) A schematic drawing comparing traditional electrode composed of active materials, conductive additives and binders (left), and sol–gel derived LiFePO4/C nanocomposite cathode films, with LiFePO4 nanocrystallites and carbon nanocoating (right). (b) Li+ intercalation capacities of sol–gel derived LiFePO4/C nanocomposite cathode films annealed at 600 °C as a function of cycles under different discharge rates.49 
The charge–discharge performance at different charging rates of LiFePO4/C nanocomposite film cathodes annealed at 600 °C is shown in Fig. 18 (b). The as-prepared LiFePO4/C nanocomposite film cathodes demonstrate a high initial specific discharge capacity of 327 mAh/g at a current density of 100 mA g−1 (0.6 C). When the current density is 200 mA g−1 (1.2 C), the initial capacity is 312 mAh/g, and the initial capacities show 171 mAh/g and 139 mAh/g at higher rates of 300 mA g−1 (1.8 C) and 500 mA g−1 (3 C) respectively. The high discharge capacity at fast intercalation rates in LiFePO4/C nanocomposite films could be explained not only by the nano-sized LiFePO4 crystallites and poor crystallinity, but also the carbon nano-coating wrapping around LiFePO4 particles. Serving as both surface defect and enhanced electronic conductive layer, the carbon nano-coating is beneficial for nucleation, phase transition and charge transfer, which are the three main processes during Li+ intercalation/deintercalation.
5. Concluding remarks
This feature article summarized the most updated studies in our group, on constructing nanostructured electrode materials, controlling crystallinity of materials and manipulating surface defects to achieve much enhanced Li+ intercalation properties. The nanostructured electrode materials can possess much enhanced Li+ intercalation performance due to the large surface energy favoring the phase transition and reduced diffusion path providing improved transport properties. In addition, the extraordinarily large surface area offers better accessibility to the electrolyte resulting in more intercalation sites. Nanostructured electrodes also allow the easy volume change accompanied with the Li+ insertion and extraction. Electrode materials with poor crystallinity and/or bulk or surface defects all exhibit better Li+ intercalation properties, due to their higher energy state, more open structure, and more reaction sites. The electrode materials, nanostructured or with poor crystallinity or with defects, described in this paper all possess higher Gibbs free energy than that of a perfect bulk crystal counterpart; in other words, they are all far from thermodynamic equilibrium. The electrodes away from equilibrium may offer a new direction of research for the advancement of electroactive materials to achieve much improved Li+ intercalation properties and, thus, lead to the development of more efficient Li-ion batteries.
Acknowledgements
This research work has been financially supported in part by Nation Science Foundation (DMR-0605159 and CMMI-1030048) and Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL). D.W.L. would like to acknowledge the graduate fellowship from the University of Washington Center for Nanotechnology (CNT).
References
N. Armaroli and V. Balzani, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 52–66 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Tarascon, N. Recham, M. Armand, J. N. Chotard, P. Barpanda, W. Walker and L. Dupont, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 724–739 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359–367 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Linden and T. B. Reddy, Handbook Of BatteriesMcGraw-Hill, New York,  2002 Search PubMed .

          B. E. Conway, Electrochemical supercapacitors, Scientific fundamentals and technological applications, Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, New York,  1999 Search PubMed .

          G. Z. Cao, Nanostructures and Nanomaterials, Synthesis, Properties and Applications, Imperial College, London,  2004 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang and G. Z. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2251–2269 CrossRef CAS .
M. Armand and J. M. Tarascon, Nature, 2008, 451, 652–657 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Bruce, Solid State Ionics, 2008, 179, 752–760 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Liu and G. Z. Cao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1218–1237 RSC .
J. Liu, G. Z. Cao, Z. G. Yang, D. H. Wang, D. Dubois, X. D. Zhou, G. L. Graff, L. R. Pederson and J. G. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2008, 1, 676–697 CrossRef CAS .
X. Z. Ren, Y. K. Jiang, P. X. Zhang, J. H. Liu and Q. L. Zhang, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2009, 51, 133–138 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Ban, N. A. Chernova and M. S. Whittingham, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 522–525 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Chan, H. L. Peng, R. D. Twesten, K. Jarausch, X. F. Zhang and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 490–495 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Lee, N. Yabuuchi, B. M. Gallant, S. Chen, B. S. Kim, P. T. Hammond and Y. Shao-Horn, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 531–537 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Padhi, K. S. Nanjundaswamy and J. B. Goodenough, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 1188–1194 CAS .
A. K. Padhi, K. S. Nanjundaswamy, C. Masquelier, S. Okada and J. B. Goodenough, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 1609–1613 CAS .
Y. G. Wang, Y. R. Wang, E. J. Hosono, K. X. Wang and H. S. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7461–7465 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Kim, G. Cheruvally and J. H. Ahn, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2008, 12, 799–805 Search PubMed .
S. Y. Chung, J. T. Bloking and Y. M. Chiang, Nat. Mater., 2002, 1, 123–128 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Huang and J. B. Goodenough, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 7237–7241 CrossRef CAS .
F. Y. Cheng, J. Z. Zhao, W. Song, C. S. Li, H. Ma, J. Chen and P. W. Shen, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 2038–2044 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Chen, X. P. Dong, J. L. Shi, J. J. Zhao, Z. L. Hua, J. H. Gao, M. L. Ruan and D. S. Yan, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 855–860 RSC .
J. W. Fergus, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 939–954 CrossRef CAS .
D. Jugovic and D. Uskokovic, J. Power Sources, 2009, 190, 538–544 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yoo, C. W. Frank, S. Mori and S. Yamaguchi, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 1945–1953 CrossRef CAS .
H. K. Kim, T. Y. Seong and Y. S. Yoon, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2002, 5, A252–A255 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kuwata, J. Kawamura, K. Toribami, T. Hattori and N. Sata, Electrochem. Commun., 2004, 6, 417–421 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Chen, E. M. Kelder and J. Schoonman, Thin Solid Films, 1999, 342, 35–41 CrossRef CAS .

          C. J. Brinker and G. W. Scherer, Sol–Gel Science: The Physics and Chemistry of Sol–Gel Processing, Academic Press,  1990 Search PubMed .
G. Z. Cao, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 19921–19931 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, K. Takahashi, K. Lee and G. Z. Cao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1133–1144 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang and G. Z. Cao, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51, 4865–4872 CrossRef CAS .
K. Takahashi, S. J. Limmer, Y. Wang and G. Z. Cao, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 9795–9800 CrossRef CAS .
K. Takahashi, S. J. Limmer, Y. Wang and G. Z. Cao, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. Part 1-Regul. Pap. Brief Commun. Rev. Pap., 2005, 44, 662–668 Search PubMed .
K. Takahashi, Y. Wang and G. Z. Cao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, K. Takahashi, H. M. Shang and G. Z. Cao, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 3085–3088 CrossRef CAS .
K. Takahashi, Y. Wang and G. Z. Cao, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 48–51 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, H. M. Shang, T. Chou and G. Z. Cao, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 11361–11366 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Arico, P. Bruce, B. Scrosati, J. M. Tarascon and W. Van Schalkwijk, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 366–377 CrossRef CAS .
J. Maier, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 805–815 CrossRef .
K. Takahashi, Y. Wang, K. Lee and G. Cao, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2006, 82, 27–31 CAS .
K. Lee and G. Z. Cao, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 11880–11885 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang and G. Z. Cao, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 2787–2804 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Liu, Q. F. Zhang, P. Xiao, B. B. Garcia, Q. Guo, R. Champion and G. Z. Cao, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 1376–1380 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Liu, B. B. Garcia, Q. F. Zhang, Q. Guo, Y. H. Zhang, S. Sepehri and G. Z. Cao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1015–1023 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Yu, C. G. Chen, S. H. Xie, Y. Y. Liu, K. S. Park, X. Y. Zhou, Q. F. Zhang, J. Y. Li and G. Z. Cao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011 10.1039/c0ee00313a  , in press.
Y. Y. Liu, M. Clark, Q. F. Zhang, D. M. Yu, D. W. Liu, J. Liu and G. Z. Cao, Advanced Energy Materials, 2011 DOI:10.1002/aenm.201000037  , in press.
Y. Liu, D. Liu, Q. Zhang, D. Yu, J. Liu and G. Cao, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 2559–2565 Search PubMed .
M. S. Whittingham and P. Y. Zavalij, Solid State Ionics, 2000, 131, 109–115 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Rossouw, D. C. Liles, M. M. Thackeray, W. I. F. David and S. Hull, Mater. Res. Bull., 1992, 27, 221–230 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Johnson, D. W. Dees, M. F. Mansuetto, M. M. Thackeray, D. R. Vissers, D. Argyriou, C. K. Loong and L. Christensen, J. Power Sources, 1998, 75, 183–184 Search PubMed .
H. E. Wang, D. Qian, Z. G. Lu, Y. K. Li, R. J. Cheng and Y. J. Li, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2007, 68, 1422–1427 CrossRef CAS .
F. Jiao and P. G. Bruce, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 657–660 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Zhu, H. A. Zhou, M. Hibino, I. Honma and M. Ichihara, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 381–386 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Zhou, J. Zhang, T. Xue, D. D. Zhao and H. L. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 905–910 RSC .
D. H. Park, S. H. Lee, T. W. Kim, S. T. Lim, S. J. Hwang, Y. S. Yoon, Y. H. Lee and J. H. Choy, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 2949–2956 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Chen, J. H. He, C. B. Zhang and H. He, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 18033–18038 CrossRef CAS .
K. Le Van, H. Groult, A. Mantoux, L. Perrigaud, F. Lantelme, R. Lindstrom, R. Badour-Hadjean, S. Zanna and D. Lincot, J. Power Sources, 2006, 160, 592–601 CrossRef CAS .
C. Navone, J. P. Pereira-Ramos, R. Baddour-Hadjean and R. Salot, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A2287–A2293 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, H. W. Xu, P. C. Chen, D. W. Zhang, C. X. Ding and C. H. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2009, 193, 846–850 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu, J. L. Shui and C. H. Chen, Solid State Commun., 2005, 135, 485–489 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Huang, J. P. Tu, X. H. Xia, X. L. Wang, J. Y. Xiang, L. Zhang and Y. Zhou, J. Power Sources, 2009, 188, 588–591 CrossRef CAS .
C. Delmas, H. Cognacauradou, J. M. Cocciantelli, M. Menetrier and J. P. Doumerc, Solid State Ionics, 1994, 69, 257–264 CrossRef CAS .
C. Delmas, S. Brethes and M. Menetrier, J. Power Sources, 1991, 34, 113–118 CrossRef CAS .
C. Leger, S. Bach, P. Soudan and J. P. Pereira-Ramos, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, A236–A241 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ohzuku, A. Ueda, M. Nagayama, Y. Iwakoshi and H. Komori, Electrochim. Acta, 1993, 38, 1159–1167 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Li, D. M. Zhang and F. X. Yang, J. Mater. Sci., 2009, 44, 2435–2443 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Kang, Y. S. Meng, J. Breger, C. P. Grey and G. Ceder, Science, 2006, 311, 977–980 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Armstrong, D. W. Tee, F. La Mantia, P. Novak and P. G. Bruce, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3554–3559 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Tarascon and D. Guyomard, Electrochim. Acta, 1993, 38, 1221–1231 CrossRef CAS .
G. Pistoia and G. Wang, Solid State Ionics, 1993, 66, 135–142 CrossRef .
D. Li and Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1151–1170 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Luo, J. J. Zhang and Y. Y. Xia, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 5618–5623 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Thommes, Annual Review of Nano Research, World Scientific, Singapore,  2009 Search PubMed.
E. Potiron, A. L. La Salle, A. Verbaere, Y. Piffard and D. Guyomard, Electrochim. Acta, 1999, 45, 197–214 CrossRef CAS .
O. W. Howarth and J. R. Hunt, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 1979, 1388–1391 RSC .
C. J. Fontenot, J. W. Wiench, M. Pruski and G. L. Schrader, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 10496–10504 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Fontenot, J. W. Wiench, M. Pruski and G. L. Schrader, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 11622–11631 CrossRef CAS .
E. Potiron, A. Le Gal La Salle, S. Sarciaux, Y. Piffard and D. Guyomard, J. Power Sources, 1999, 81–82, 666–669 CrossRef CAS .
P. Liu, S. H. Lee, C. E. Tracy, Y. F. Yan and J. A. Turner, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 27–30 CrossRef CAS .
V. Srinivasan and J. Newman, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2006, 9, A110–A114 CrossRef CAS .
N. Meethong, H. Y. S. Huang, W. C. Carter and Y. M. Chiang, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2007, 10, A134–A138 CrossRef CAS .
C. Delacourt, P. Poizot, S. Levasseur and C. Masquelier, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2006, 9, A352–A355 CrossRef CAS .
X. D. Yan, G. L. Yang, J. Liu, Y. C. Ge, H. M. Xie, X. M. Pan and R. S. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 5770–5774 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Reidy, J. D. Holmes and M. A. Morris, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2006, 26, 1527–1534 Search PubMed .
J.-y. Luo, Y.-g. Wang, H.-m. Xiong and Y.-y. Xia, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4791–4795 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, X.-L. Wu, M.-H. Cao and Y.-G. Guo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 3345–3351 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, G. R. Li, L. P. An, T. Y. Yan, X. P. Gao and H. Y. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 6143–6148 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, J. Polleux, J. Lim and B. Dunn, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 14925–14931 CrossRef CAS .
C.-M. Park and H.-J. Sohn, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 47–52 CrossRef CAS .
W. C. West, N. V. Myung, J. F. Whitacre and B. V. Ratnakumar, J. Power Sources, 2004, 126, 203–206 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Yu, S. T. Zhang, D. W. Liu, X. Y. Zhou, S. H. Xie, Q. F. Zhang, Y. Y. Liu and G. Z. Cao, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 10841–10846 RSC .
D. W. Liu, Y. Y. Liu, B. B. Garcia, Q. F. Zhang, A. Q. Pan, Y. H. Jeong and G. Z. Cao, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 8789–8795 RSC .
D. W. Liu, P. Xiao, Y. H. Zhang, B. B. Garcia, Q. F. Zhang, Q. Guo, R. Champion and G. Z. Cao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 11175–11180 CrossRef CAS .
A. Q. Pan, D. W. Liu, X. Y. Zhou, B. B. Garcia, S. Q. Liang, J. Liu and G. Z. Cao, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 3893–3899 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Wei, C. W. Ryu and K. B. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2007, 165, 386–392 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Zhan, C. Z. Wang, K. Nikolowski, H. Ehrenberg, G. Chen and Y. J. Wei, Solid State Ionics, 2009, 180, 1198–1203 Search PubMed .
B. Kang and G. Ceder, Nature, 2009, 458, 190–193 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xiao, B. B. Garcia, Q. Guo, D. W. Liu and G. Z. Cao, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 2441–2447 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Kim, H. W. Ryu, J. H. Moon and J. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2006, 163, 196–200 Search PubMed .
A. Feaver, S. Sepehri, P. Shamberger, A. Stowe, T. Autrey and G. Z. Cao, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 7469–7472 CrossRef CAS .
B. B. Garcia, A. M. Feaver, Q. F. Zhang, R. D. Champion, G. Z. Cao, T. T. Fister, K. P. Nagle and G. T. Seidler, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 104 Search PubMed .
S. Sepehri, B. B. Garcia and G. Z. Cao, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2009, 599–603 Search PubMed .
S. Sepehri, B. B. Garcia, Q. F. Zhang and G. Z. Cao, Carbon, 2009, 47, 1436–1443 Search PubMed .
Y. S. Hu, X. Liu, J. O. Muller, R. Schlogl, J. Maier and D. S. Su, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 210–214 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Cao, J. S. Hu, H. P. Liang and L. J. Wan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 4391–4395 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Wang, D. W. Choi, J. Li, Z. G. Yang, Z. M. Nie, R. Kou, D. H. Hu, C. M. Wang, L. V. Saraf, J. G. Zhang, I. A. Aksay and J. Liu, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 907–914 CrossRef CAS .
K. E. Swider-Lyons, C. T. Love and D. R. Rolison, Solid State Ionics, 2002, 152–153, 99–104 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Rolison and B. Dunn, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 963–980 RSC .
N. Meethong, Y. H. Kao, S. A. Speakman and Y. M. Chiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1060–1070 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Liu, Y. H. Zhang, P. Xiao, B. B. Garcia, Q. F. Zhang, X. Y. Zhou, Y. H. Jeong and G. Z. Cao, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 6816–6820 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Jung, H. Shin, J. R. Kim, J. Y. Kim and K. S. Hong, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 11732–11737 CrossRef CAS .
D. Sun, C. W. Kwon, G. Baure, E. Richman, J. MacLean, B. Dunn and S. H. Tolbert, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 1197–1204 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Macak, H. Tsuchiya and P. Schmuki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 2100–2102 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, E. G. Garza, K. Lam and C. M. Jones, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2000, 158, 246–251 CrossRef CAS .
S. Petigny, H. Mostefa-Sba, B. Domenichini, E. Lesniewska, A. Steinbrunn and S. Bourgeois, Surf. Sci., 1998, 410, 250–257 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nörenberg, F. Dinelli and G. A. D. Briggs, Surf. Sci., 2000, 446, L83–L88 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:
Yanyi Liu	Yanyi Liu is a Ph.D. student under the supervision of Professor Guozhong Cao in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at University of Washington. Her current research is mainly focused on sol–gel processing and electrochemical characterizations of nanostructured materials for energy storage devices.
Dawei Liu	Dr Dawei Liu is a postdoc associate under the supervision of Professor Guozhong Cao in Department of Materials Science and Engineering at University of Washington, Seattle, WA. He has published six first-authored refereed papers and one book chapter. His specific research project is focused on nanostructured electrodes for efficient lithium ion intercalation.
Qifeng Zhang	Dr Qifeng Zhang is currently working at University of Washington as a Research Assistant Professor. His research interests involve engineering applications of nano-structured materials on electrical devices including solar cells, UV light-emitting diodes (LEDs), field-effect transistors (FETs), and gas sensors.
Guozhong Cao	Dr Guozhong Cao is Boeing-Steiner Professor of Materials Science and Engineering and Chemical Engineering at the University of Washington. He has published over 250 refereed papers and 5 books including “Nanostructures and Nanomaterials”. His current research is focused mainly on nanomaterials for energy conversion and storage.
Cathode: LiFePO4 ↔ Li1-xFePO4 + x Li+ + x e−	(1)
Anode: TiO2 + x Li+ + x e− ↔ LixTiO2	(2)
Overall: LiFePO4 + TiO2 ↔ Li1−xFePO4 + LixTiO2	(3)

 	Fig. 1  A schematic drawing showing a complete Li-ion battery. During the discharging process, Li+ diffuse from the anode (negative side) to the cathode (positive side) through the Li+ conducting electrolyte, while electrons flow from the anode to the cathode via an outer circuit.	 
E = ∫V dQ	(4)

 	Fig. 2  Comparison of discharge/charge behavior of (a) an ideal battery and (b) an ideal double-layer capacitor.	 
M(OEt)4 + x H2O → M(OEt)4 − x(OH)x + x EtOH	(5)
M(OEt)4 − x(OH)x + M(OEt)4 − x(OH)x → (OEt)4 − x(OH)x − 1M-O-M(OEt)4 − x(OH)x − 1 + H2O	(6)
2 H2O + 2e− → H2 + 2 OH−	(7)
Mn2+ + 2 OH− → Mn(OH)2	(8)
2 Mn(OH)2 + O2 → 2 MnO2 + 2 H2O	(9)

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic drawing of the proposed growth mechanisms of hierarchically porous hydrous MnO2 nanowall arrays derived from cathodic deposition: due to the increased pH value resulting from water electrolysis (blue area has high pH value), the precipitation of Mn(OH)2 nanoparticles from the electrolyte occurred accompanied with the release of H2 gas bubbles at cathode surface; (b) SEM image of hierarchically structured nanowall arrays; (c) TEM image of stacked nanoparticles in a nanowall with voids (pores).46	 

 	Fig. 4  Comparisons of discharge capacities of cathodic deposited MnO2 nanowall arrays (a) of different thicknesses for 30 cycles; (b) with anodic deposited MnO2 in the first 10 cycles.46	 

 	Fig. 5  SEM images of V2O5 nanofiber after annealing at 500 °C in air for 1 h (scale bar = 100 nm).47	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Chronopotentiometric discharge–charge curves of mesoporous V2O5 nanofibers in the 1st cycle with a current density 625 mA g−1. (b) The discharge/charge capacity of mesoporous V2O5 nanofibers as a function of cycle number.47	 
V2O5 + 4 H+ ↔ 2 VO2+ + 2 H2O	(10)
VO2+ + e− → VO2	(11)
2 [VO2]+ + nH2O → V2O5·nH2O + 2 H+	(12)

 	Fig. 7  (a) XRD patterns of the as-deposited V2O5−x·nH2O film, hydrous V2O5−x·nH2O films annealed at 250 °C and V2O5 films annealed at 500 °C in the air. (b) SEM image of the 500 °C annealed V2O5 film.48	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) The cyclic voltammograms of 500 °C annealed V2O5 films with a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 in 1 M LiClO4/PC electrolyte solution for the 1st cycle (solid line) and 8th cycle (dash-dot line). (b) The discharge capacities of 500 °C annealed V2O5 films at various current densities from 200 mA g−1 (1.3 C) to 12.5 A g−1 (70 C).48	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) SEM image of LiFePO4/C nanocomposite films annealed at 600 °C. (b) The first and second charge/discharge curves of sol–gel derived LiFePO4/C nanocomposite cathode films annealed at 600 °C at a discharge rate of 200 mA g−1.49	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) X-Ray diffraction patterns of sol–gel derived LiFePO4/C composite powders at room temperature and heat treated at 500 °C, 600 °C, 700 °C and 800 °C. (b) Discharge capacities of sol–gel derived LiFePO4/C nanocomposite cathode films annealed at 500–800 °C at a discharge rate of 200 mA g−1.49	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) XRD patterns of a) V2O5 films and b) Mn-doped V2O5 films. (b) The discharge capacity of V2O5 films and Mn-doped V2O5 films, at a current density of 680 mA g−1, potential ranging from 0.5 V to −1.4 V vs. Ag/Ag+.93	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) XRD patterns of V2O5 xerogel films annealed in air and nitrogen at 300 °C after 3 h, showing the coexistence of both hydrous and orthorhombic vanadium oxide; Chronopotentiometric discharge/charge curves in the 1st, 20th and 50th cycles at a current density 600 mA g−1 of V2O5 films annealed in (b) air and (c) nitrogen at 300 °C for 3 h. Potential ranging from 0.6 V to −1.4 V vs. Ag/Ag+.94	 

 	Fig. 13  Li+ intercalation discharge capacity of amorphous as-grown TiO2 nanotube arrays, and anatase TiO2 nanotube arrays annealed at 300, 400, and 500 °C in N2 for 3 h as a function of cyclic numbers. The potential was ranging from −0.6 V to −2.1 V vs. Ag/Ag+ at a current density of 320 mA g−1.95	 
2 VO2+ + 3 H2O → V2O5 + 6 H+ + 2 e−	(13)

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic drawings of the synthesis and microstructure of coherent nanocomposites in which V2O5·nH2O was deposited and coated onto surface of carbon cryogel scaffold. (b) The pore size distribution of V2O5·nH2O–carbon cryogels by nitrogen sorption isotherms. (c) Cyclic voltammetry curves of hydrous V2O5, carbon cryogel, and V2O5·nH2O–carbon cryogels in the voltage window between 0.5 V and −1.5 V vs. Ag/Ag+ at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1. (d) The specific discharge capacity for V2O5·nH2O–carbon cryogels and V2O5·nH2O as a function of cycle numbers.96	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Absorption spectra of V2O5 films annealed in air and nitrogen at 300 °C for 3 h; the inset presents a photograph of films after annealing in air (left) and nitrogen (right) at 300 °C for 3 h. (b) The Li+ intercalation discharge capacities of V2O5 films annealed in air and N2 at 300 °C for 3 h as a function of cycle number. The potential was ranging from 0.6 V to −1.4 V vs. Ag/Ag+ at a current density of 600 mA g−1.94	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Electrochemical impedance spectra presented as Nyquist plots of titania nanotube arrays annealed in N2 and CO at 400 °C for 3 h and measured in 1 M LiClO4 in propylene carbonate with testing frequencies from 100 kHz to 0.05 Hz. The inset depicts the ideal impedance curve representing the Li+ intercalation process into electrodes. (b) Ti2p XPS spectra of TiO2 nanotube arrays annealed in CO gas at 500 °C for 3 h with Ti–C species and Ti3+ state detected. (c) The Li+ intercalation capacity at 320 mA g−1 of TiO2 nanotube arrays annealed in N2 and CO at 400 °C for 3 h as a function of cycle number. (d) The initial discharge capacities of TiO2 nanotube arrays annealed in N2 and CO at 400 °C for 3 h as a function of applied discharge current density.112	 

 	Fig. 17  Relationship between discharge capacity and current density for undoped V2O5 and Mn-doped V2O5, the potential was ranging from 0.5 V to −1.4 V vs. Ag/Ag+. 93	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) A schematic drawing comparing traditional electrode composed of active materials, conductive additives and binders (left), and sol–gel derived LiFePO4/C nanocomposite cathode films, with LiFePO4 nanocrystallites and carbon nanocoating (right). (b) Li+ intercalation capacities of sol–gel derived LiFePO4/C nanocomposite cathode films annealed at 600 °C as a function of cycles under different discharge rates.49	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
