A multifunctional C + epoxy/Ag-paint cathode enables efficient and stable operation of perovskite solar cells in watery environments   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5TA03802B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5TA03802B
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 16430-16434A multifunctional C + epoxy/Ag-paint cathode enables efficient and stable operation of perovskite solar cells in watery environments†

        
          
            Zhanhua 
            Wei‡
, 
      
        
          
            Xiaoli 
            Zheng‡
, 
      
        
          
            Haining 
            Chen
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xia 
            Long
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Zilong 
            Wang
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Shihe 
            Yang
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China. E-mail: chsyang@ust.hk
Received 
      26th May 2015
    , Accepted 14th July 2015First published on 14th July 2015AbstractOrganic/inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted wide attention mainly due to the rapid rise in their power conversion efficiency (PCE), but their long-term stability is now becoming an even more important issue given that the active perovskite material is moisture sensitive. Herein we report a hole-transporter-free PSC based on a C + epoxy electrode that can serve as both a hole-selective extractor and a water-rejecting barrier. After boosting with a silver paint coating, the whole device is not only efficient at ∼11% but also waterproof. When immersed in water, no performance degradation occurred at the first 80 min. More impressively, when the cell stability was investigated in some harsh environments, e.g., high humidity and 50 °C thermal stressing, nearly no performance degradation was observed within the testing time span.
Organic/inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have been attracting intense attention in the last few years due to their high power conversion efficiency (PCE) and low-cost and solution-based processes. In a typical PSC, the perovskite material is sandwiched between a n-type material (like TiO2, ZnO or PCBM) and a p-type material (like spiro-MeOTAD, PTAA or PEDOT:PSS),1–7 and a noble metal (gold or silver) back contact electrode needs to be deposited. This kind of PSC has achieved impressive PCEs with a certified value of 20.1%. However, such PSCs invariably suffer from the very poor long-term stability problem.8 Two main instability factors stand out that are now holding back PSCs, including moisture sensitivity of the perovskite materials and air sensitivity of the organic hole transporter materials (HTMs).
To ameliorate the air sensitivity of organic HTMs, replacing organic HTMs with inorganic HTMs9,10 or developing HTM-free PSCs11–14 are promising routes. In particular, carbon-based HTM-free PSCs are receiving increasing research and industrial attention due to the impressive PCEs that can be achieved with a very low material and manufacturing cost and with a relatively good long-term stability.15–26 Recently, we firstly introduced an in situ reactive embedment method for engineering the carbon/perovskite interface and achieved a high PCE of >11% based on a very simple PSC design.27–31 Our carbon-based PSCs also exhibited an obviously higher long-term stability in a dry ambient environment compared to other types of HTM-based PSCs reported. However, the photovoltaic structure is still not moisture defensible because moisture can penetrate through the porous carbon layer and easily decompose the perovskite active material as illustrated in Fig. 1A. This touches upon the second, by far the most important, instability issue of PSCs, the moisture sensitivity of the perovskite materials.32
 Fig. 1  Three kinds of carbon-based HTM-free PSCs working up the ladder from being moisture sensitive to becoming waterproof: (A) a pure carbon-based device, where moisture can permeate through the carbon layer and cause perovskite decomposition. (B) C + epoxy-based device, where moisture is rejected by the hydrophobic C + epoxy thin film. (C) C + epoxy/Ag paint-based device, where the boosting compact hydrophobic Ag paint layer makes the device waterproof. Note that the electrical contacts are also increasingly improved from (A) to (C). 
In the work reported here, we address the sticky problem of perovskites' sensitivity to moisture by adopting a two-step strategy. In the first step, we replaced the pure carbon electrode with a mixed carbon electrode (carbon and epoxy). In doing so, the epoxy binder in the carbon electrode not only improved the interface electrical contact between the perovskite and carbon electrode by cementation but also dramatically cut back the penetration of moisture into the perovskite layer. In the second step, a thin hydrophobic Ag paste layer was uniformly coated on the C + epoxy electrode, and this again not only further suppressed the penetration of water but also further reduced the electrical contact resistance. Consequently, we were able to demonstrate the first generation of C + epoxy/Ag paint-based waterproof PSCs with a high PCE of ∼11%. By stacking in tandem with such carbon-based perovskite solar cells, we have successfully fabricated a water splitting photoelectrochemical cell that can deliver a steady solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency of 5.54% for over 60 min.
As illustrated in Fig. 1A, perovskite can easily decompose in an open system and humid environment, even when it is protected by a thick carbon layer. Clearly, the penetrability of moisture through the porous carbon layer is due to the fact that the carbon particles are loosely packed and the carbon surface contains hydrophilic functional groups. As a result, H2O can reach the perovskite layer and “catalyze”33 the decomposition of CH3NH3PbI3 into PbI2, HI and CH3NH2, as shown in eqn (1). (1)
Moreover, the facile release of HI and CH3NH2 from perovskite further shifts forward the decomposition equilibrium, meaning that even a single molecule of water is sufficient to degrade the perovskite layer. To avert this problem, we ventured to use a hydrophobic C + epoxy layer instead of pure carbon to cap the perovskite thin film (Fig. 1B). In this case, the porous carbon surfaces are modified by the epoxy resins, which in turn effectively reject moisture and thus protect the perovskite. Equally important, the epoxy resins can help to strongly cement the carbon electrode and perovskite. Such a cementation method involves a series of complex physical and chemical processes, including infiltration, adhesion, curing and other steps. In this way, epoxy can bind and fix adjoining material components, forming a three-dimensional cross-linked structure. However, the mesopores still stay in the C + epoxy thin film, meaning that it can only reject moisture but not water droplets. To further enhance the performance of the C + epoxy-based device and make the whole device waterproof, we deposited another highly conductive, compact and hydrophobic Ag paint layer on the as-deposited C + epoxy layer (see Fig. 1C).
In general, the C + epoxy paint used in this work is made up of a carbon material, epoxy, additives and solvent in a weight ratio of 8:1:0.3:0.7. From SEM and TEM images shown in Fig. S1,† one can see that the carbon material is made up of graphite flakes and carbon black. The resistance and Hall effect measurements (Fig. S2†) show that the as-prepared C + epoxy paint is highly conductive (0.0132 ohm cm) and the hole carrier mobility is 1.91 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is nearly four orders of magnitude higher than that of P3HT (3 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) and spiro-MeOTAD (2 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1).34 Drawing on our previous experience on nanocarbon-based PSCs,28,35 these advantages make the as-prepared C + epoxy layer an ideal hole extraction electrode material in HTM-free PSCs. Hence, we fabricated such HTM-free PSCs with the configuration of FTO/meso-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/C + epoxy. For direct comparison, devices with the configuration of FTO/meso-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/C and FTO/meso-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/C + epoxy/Ag paint were also fabricated. Details of the fabrication processes can be found in the ESI (Experimental section and Fig. S3†).

Fig. 2A presents the cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the as-fabricated C + epoxy-based PSCs. It can be seen that a ∼350 nm meso-TiO2 thin film is filled with perovskite and another ∼450 nm perovskite capping layer is also observed. The perovskite capping layer is seamlessly covered by another C + epoxy paint layer, where carbon particles are densely packed and embedded in the epoxy matrix. Fig. 2B illustrates the energy level diagram of the C + epoxy-based and C + epoxy/Ag paint-based PSCs. After light excitation, the electron is excited to the conduction band (CB) of CH3NH3PbI3 and injected into the CB of TiO2 and finally collected by FTO glass. Meanwhile, the hole generated in the valance band (VB) of CH3NH3PbI3 is transported to carbon through the epoxy interlayer, and collected by Ag in Ag paint-based PSCs. What is more, the epoxy interlayer formed between carbon and perovskite layers could effectively block hole recombination from C to TiO2.
 Fig. 2  Cell structure, performance and working principle of the carbon + epoxy-based PSCs: (A) cross-sectional SEM image of a C + epoxy-based PSC device. (B) Energy level diagram of C + epoxy-based PSCs. (C) J–V curves under 1 sun AM 1.5 illumination. (D) J–V curves of the three kinds of PSC devices under dark conditions. (E) Electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) and (F) corresponding enlargement of the three kinds of PSC devices tested under short-circuit and 1 sun illumination conditions. 
Current–voltage (J–V) curves of the different carbon-based PSCs were recorded to determine their performance difference. As shown in Fig. 2C, the pure carbon-based PSC displays a really low performance with a Voc of 0.85 V, Jsc of 11.90 mA cm−2 and FF of 0.48, which finally results in a low PCE of 4.89%. In contrast the C + epoxy-based PSC shows an obviously high performance with Voc, Jsc, and FF increasing to 0.99 V, 18.17 mA cm−2 and 0.51, respectively, which hence gives a really high PCE of 9.17%. Obviously, C + epoxy-based devices present a higher Voc than pure carbon-based devices, and this should be ascribed to the blocking of the charge recombination route from C to TiO2. A similar blocking effect was reported previously by us and others.30,36 The higher Jsc should be due to the seamless connection between C + epoxy and perovskite layers.22 After coating Ag paint on C + epoxy film, the FF value of PSCs is further enhanced to about 0.6, which leads to a higher PCE value of 10.70%. The improvement in FF should result from the decrease in the series resistance of the contact electrode.
To gain further insight into the performance difference of these PSCs, dark J–V curves were recorded and are shown in Fig. 2D. While the onset voltage for the different PSCs shows the following order: C + epoxy/Ag paint > C + epoxy > C, the leakage current density is in the order of C + epoxy/Ag paint < C + epoxy < C. This result is consistent with the J–V data under illumination. Moreover, the dark J–V curves reveal that the C + epoxy/Ag paint device presents a smaller series resistance (Rs) and a larger shunt resistance (Rshunt) than the C + epoxy-based device, which is responsible for the higher FF achieved by the former. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) is a powerful tool for characterizing interfacial impedance in solar cells, which is strongly associated with photovoltaic performance. Herein, EIS of the above three nanocarbon-based PSCs were investigated at short-circuit under 1 sun illumination and detailed fitting data using an equivalent circuit are summarized in Table S1.† As shown in Fig. 2E and F, pure carbon-based PSCs show two semicircles, similar to what was observed in our previous work. As confirmed previously, the semicircle at high frequency could be assigned to the charge transport in the porous carbon electrode (R1), while the semicircle at low frequency corresponds to charge transfer at the interface (R2). Interestingly, only one semicircle was observed for the C + epoxy and C + epoxy/Ag electrodes, which can be explained by the more compact connection between carbon nanoparticles in the two electrodes, leading to a greatly reduced charge transport resistance and thus the absence of the high frequency semicircle. As can also be seen in Fig. 2E, the C + epoxy/Ag paint and C + epoxy based PSCs present a much smaller charge transfer resistance (R2) at the interface than the C based ones, suggesting a better interface contact for the former two devices. Because of the faster charge transfer, it is reasonable that the C + epoxy/Ag paint and the C + epoxy based PSCs showed a higher Voc and a higher FF than those of the C based devices. Besides, the C + epoxy/Ag-based PSCs show a much smaller Rs (only ∼20 ohm) than C-based (∼28 ohm) and C + epoxy-based (∼28 ohm) PSCs, in keeping with the higher FF of the C + epoxy/Ag-based PSCs.
Since perovskite is very sensitive to moisture, the water repellency of the device becomes very important for overall stability. Fig. 3A shows the contact angle test results and the corresponding SEM images of the as-fabricated C, C + epoxy and C + epoxy/Ag paint thin films. The pure C thin film is loosely mesoporous and hydrophilic with a small contact angle of 18.2°, while carbon nanoparticles are closely packed together in the C + epoxy thin film which shows a relatively high hydrophobicity with a contact angle of 99.8°. After Ag paint coating, the C + epoxy/Ag paint thin film becomes more hydrophobic with the contact angle increasing up to 121.8°. As indicated in the SEM image, the C + epoxy/Ag paint film is solid and thought to block moisture and even water from perovskite. To test the environmental stability of the different carbon-based PSCs, the devices were stored and tested every day under the ambient RH of 60%–80%. The curve of normalized efficiency as a function of storage time is presented in Fig. 3B. The C-based device shows a rapid decrease in efficiency to 40% of the initial efficiency after 16 days. In contrast, C + epoxy-based and C + epoxy/Ag based devices reveal steady efficiency even after 20 days, and almost no performance degradation is observed for the C + epoxy/Ag paint-based device.
 Fig. 3  Environmental stability evaluation of the different nanocarbon-based PSCs. (A) Contact angle photographs and SEM images of the three films: C, C + epoxy and C + epoxy/Ag paint. (B) Normalized efficiency as a function of storage time in the ambient atmosphere of Hong Kong (RH ∼ 60 to 80%). (C) Normalized efficiency as a function of soaking time in water (measured by recording J–V curves of the PSCs immersed in water). The inset shows the measurement setup. 
Encouraged by the surprisingly good cell stability in such a high humidity environment, we took a step further to investigate the cell stability in water. So far, the waterproof capability of PSCs seems to border on the impossible, but our new nanocarbon-based PSCs stand a chance since the carbon layer is easily processible, flexible and modifiable. For waterproof capability investigation, two electric wires are welded on the anode and cathode separately. And then, the whole device is directly soaked into water (the inset of Fig. 3C). In-water J–V curves are subsequently recorded and the corresponding curves of normalized PCE as a function of soaking time are shown in Fig. 3C. Unfortunately, the efficiency of the C-based device drops to zero immediately after they are placed in water, while the efficiency of the C + epoxy-based device also decreases rapidly in the first 5 min and to nearly zero in ten minutes. It is thought that water can still penetrate through the mesoporous C + epoxy paint layer and cause the decomposition of CH3NH3PbI3 into PbI2. Surprisingly, the C + epoxy/Ag paint-based device shows almost no performance degradation in the first 80 min. Though the performance of this device also decreases after immersion in water for a longer time as shown in Fig. S4A,† the waterproof capability demonstrated here is compelling and it heralds the great potential of perovskite-based photoelectric devices.
To show more clearly the waterproof capability of the new electrode, a device was made in which a circle of the perovskite active layer was covered by the C + epoxy/Ag paint cathode. When this device was directly immersed in water for ∼1 s, only the protected circle of perovskite was intact as shown in Fig. S4B† (black brown), whereas the rest of the perovskite layer decomposed rapidly into PbI2 (yellow). Remarkably, it took about 16 h to completely decompose the protected perovskite circle. In other words, the C + epoxy/Ag paint electrode can fully protect perovskite from the attack of water in the first 1–2 h by dramatically slowing down water penetration and perovskite decomposition. As shown in the micrograph, the decomposition began from the edge of the circle and slowly diffused into the middle. Meanwhile, the PbI2 layer outside the circle dissolved in water. We suspect that the nanoscale feature of the circle edge in conjunction with the hydrophobic nature of the capping layers plays an important role in encumbering the sideway etching of the sandwiched perovskite layer. Therefore, we can conclude that after coating the C + epoxy/Ag paint, the PSCs can not only work efficiently and stably in a high humidity environment, but also in bulk water for a good amount of time.
After further optimization, the best PSCs based on the new cathode have achieved a PCE of 10.99% with a Voc of 0.97 V, Jsc of 19.20 mA cm−2 and FF of 0.59, as shown in Fig. 4A. The corresponding incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectrum is presented in Fig. 4B. An integration of the IPCE spectrum with the AM 1.5 G solar photon flux yields a current density of 18.66 mA cm−2, which is consistent with the J–V test result. In addition, the hysteresis effect was also tested by recording J–V curves at different scan directions. As shown in Fig. S5,† a small hysteresis effect was observed in the C + epoxy/Ag-based PSCs, thanks to a combination of the improved infiltration of the perovskite, the good crystallinity of perovskite films, and the increased interfacial charge transfer rate between the perovskite and carbon electrode. To confirm this observation, the stabilized power output curve near the maximum power point was also recorded. As clearly indicated in Fig. 4C, the device exhibits a stabilized efficiency of 10.78% for 10 hours under 1 sun illumination and even in the high humidity environment (RH: 70%–80%), which attests to the small hysteresis and high stability of our PSCs. In another stability testing of our PSCs, we investigated the effect of the environmental thermal stressing on the cell performance in an oven at 50 °C (ambient humidity: 70%–90%). Impressively, as shown in Fig. 4D, almost no performance degradation of the cell is observed after the thermal stressing lasts for as long as 250 h. We attribute the good thermal stability chiefly to two factors. The first factor lies in the good stability of the C/CH3NH3PbI3 interface. Notably, the carbon nanoparticle layer is hermetic, chemically inert, thermally/mechanically staunch, and strongly attached to the perovskite layer thanks to the excellent cross-linking ability of epoxy. Second, the tight sealing of the Ag paint may suppress or even prevent any possible decomposition catalyzed by moisture.
 Fig. 4  (A) J–V curve and (B) IPCE spectrum of the best-performing PSC device. (C) Timing profile of the stabilized power output of the device near the maximum power point (MPP). (D) Thermal stressing result at 50 °C at the ambient RH of 70–90%. 
By taking advantage of the good cell stability in the high humidity environment of our PSCs, we attempted to use the cells to drive water-splitting by connecting the PSC and an electrolytic cell in tandem loaded with a Pt catalyst without special encapsulation (see Fig. S6†). Even without extensive optimization, this device has already achieved a considerable solar-to-hydrogen (STH) efficiency of 5.65%. Most remarkably, the PSC-driven electrolytic cell reveals a very stable current output of 4.50 mA cm−2 for nearly 60 min, corresponding to a steady STH efficiency of 5.54% as shown in Fig. S6C.† We are aware that there are already some reports on perovskite-based water splitting systems,37–39 but, to our knowledge, this is the first PSC-driven water splitting device that can work stably for hours without significant performance decay.
Conclusions
To sum up, we have designed a carbon-based composite cathode for waterproof and HTM-free PSCs. The first generation of such devices has demonstrated an excellent waterproof performance and a high PCE of ∼11%. The much desired waterproof capability was realized by a two-step conductive paint encapsulation strategy: (1) the C + epoxy paint not only serves as a hole extraction electrode but also partly encapsulates the cell; (2) a modified Ag paint further seals the whole device and improves PCE by decreasing the contact resistance. This PSC device has also been incorporated into a photoelectrochemical water splitting system, demonstrating a very stable STH efficiency of 5.54% for as long as 60 min. It is believed that there is still ample room for performance enhancement by developing a new carbon/polymer paint to facilitate the charge transfer process at the interface of perovskite/polymer/carbon. All in all, the new cathode design will endow PSCs with an unprecedented benefit of being waterproof and spur on their eventual commercialization in the future.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the HK Innovation and Technology Fund (ITS/004/14) and the HK-RGC General Research Funds (GRE No. HKUST 606511).
Notes and references
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Nature, 2015, 517, 476–480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          http://www.nrel.gov/ncpv/images/efficiency_chart.jpg
        .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S. J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316–318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Noh, S. H. Im, J. H. Heo, T. N. Mandal and S. I. Seok, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1764–1769 CAS .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Im, I. H. Jang, N. Pellet, M. Gratzel and N. G. Park, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 927–932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, Q. Chen, G. Li, S. Luo, T.-b. Song, H.-S. Duan, Z. Hong, J. You, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, Science, 2014, 345, 542–546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Qin, S. Tanaka, S. Ito, N. Tetreault, K. Manabe, H. Nishino, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3834–3840 CAS .
J. A. Christians, R. C. Fung and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 758–764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shi, Y. Luo, H. Wei, J. Luo, J. Dong, S. Lv, J. Xiao, Y. Xu, L. Zhu, X. Xu, H. Wu, D. Li and Q. Meng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 9711–9718 CAS .
J. J. Shi, J. Dong, S. T. Lv, Y. Z. Xu, L. F. Zhu, J. Y. Xiao, X. Xu, H. J. Wu, D. M. Li, Y. H. Luo and Q. B. Meng, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 063901–063905 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Aharon, S. Gamliel, B. E. Cohen and L. Etgar, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 10512–10518 RSC .
W. A. Laban and L. Etgar, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3249–3253 CAS .
L. Liu, A. Mei, T. Liu, P. Jiang, Y. Sheng, L. Zhang and H. Han, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1790–1793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, T. Liu, L. Liu, M. Hu, Y. Yang, A. Mei and H. Han, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9165–9170 CAS .
M. Hu, L. Liu, A. Mei, Y. Yang, T. Liu and H. Han, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 17115–17121 CAS .
Z. Ku, Y. Rong, M. Xu, T. Liu and H. Han, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 3132–3137 Search PubMed .
H. Han, M. Xu, Y. Rong, Z. Ku, A. Mei, T. Liu and L. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 8607–8611 Search PubMed .
Y. Rong, Z. Ku, A. Mei, T. Liu, M. Xu, S. Ko, X. Li and H. Han, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2160–2164 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mei, X. Li, L. Liu, Z. Ku, T. Liu, Y. Rong, M. Xu, M. Hu, J. Chen, Y. Yang, M. Grätzel and H. Han, Science, 2014, 345, 295–298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Yang, J. Y. Xiao, H. Y. Wei, L. F. Zhu, D. M. Li, Y. H. Luo, H. J. Wu and Q. B. Meng, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 52825–52830 RSC .
H. Zhou, Y. Shi, Q. Dong, H. Zhang, Y. Xing, K. Wang, Y. Du and T. Ma, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 3241–3246 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, X. Yang, H. Wang, M. Cheng, J. Zhao and L. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 16140–16146 CAS .
Z. Liu, M. Zhang, X. Xu, L. Bu, W. Zhang, W. Li, Z. Zhao, M. Wang, Y. B. Cheng and H. He, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 3967–3973 RSC .
X. Xu, H. Zhang, K. Cao, J. Cui, J. Lu, X. Zeng, Y. Shen and M. Wang, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 3088–3094 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wei, K. Yan, H. Chen, Y. Yi, T. Zhang, X. Long, J. Li, L. Zhang, J. Wang and S. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3326–3333 CAS .
Z. Wei, H. Chen, K. Yan and S. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2014, 53, 13239–13243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yan, Z. Wei, J. Li, H. Chen, Y. Yi, X. Zheng, X. Long, Z. Wang, J. Wang, J. Xu and S. Yang, Small, 2015, 11, 2269–2274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, Z. Wei, K. Yan, Y. Yi, J. Wang and S. Yang, Faraday Discuss., 2015, 176, 271–286 RSC .
H. Chen, Z. Wei, X. Zheng and S. Yang, Nano Energy, 2015, 15, 216–226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Han, S. Meyer, Y. Dkhissi, K. Weber, J. M. Pringle, U. Bach, L. Spiccia and Y. B. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8139–8147 CAS .
J. M. Frost, K. T. Butler, F. Brivio, C. H. Hendon, M. van Schilfgaarde and A. Walsh, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2584–2590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Snaith and M. Grätzel, Adv. Mat., 2007, 19, 3643–3647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qiu, S.-F. Leung, Q. Zhang, B. Hua, Q. Lin, Z. Wei, K.-H. Tsui, Y. Zhang, S. Yang and Z. Fan, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2123–2129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, Y. Wu, J. Liu, C. Qin, X. Yang, A. Islam, Y.-B. Cheng and L. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 629–640 CAS .
J. Luo, J.-H. Im, M. T. Mayer, M. Schreier, M. K. Nazeeruddin, N.-G. Park, S. D. Tilley, H. J. Fan and M. Grätzel, Science, 2014, 345, 1593–1596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Gurudayal, D. Sabba, M. H. Kumar, L. H. Wong, J. Barber, M. Gratzel and N. Mathews, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3833–3839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Chen, J. S. Manser and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 974–981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, characterization of C + epoxy and perovskite thin films (Fig. S1–S4), investigation of the hysteresis effect (Fig. S5) and results of perovskite-based electrolysis (Fig. S6). See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta03802b‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Three kinds of carbon-based HTM-free PSCs working up the ladder from being moisture sensitive to becoming waterproof: (A) a pure carbon-based device, where moisture can permeate through the carbon layer and cause perovskite decomposition. (B) C + epoxy-based device, where moisture is rejected by the hydrophobic C + epoxy thin film. (C) C + epoxy/Ag paint-based device, where the boosting compact hydrophobic Ag paint layer makes the device waterproof. Note that the electrical contacts are also increasingly improved from (A) to (C).	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 2  Cell structure, performance and working principle of the carbon + epoxy-based PSCs: (A) cross-sectional SEM image of a C + epoxy-based PSC device. (B) Energy level diagram of C + epoxy-based PSCs. (C) J–V curves under 1 sun AM 1.5 illumination. (D) J–V curves of the three kinds of PSC devices under dark conditions. (E) Electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) and (F) corresponding enlargement of the three kinds of PSC devices tested under short-circuit and 1 sun illumination conditions.	 

 	Fig. 3  Environmental stability evaluation of the different nanocarbon-based PSCs. (A) Contact angle photographs and SEM images of the three films: C, C + epoxy and C + epoxy/Ag paint. (B) Normalized efficiency as a function of storage time in the ambient atmosphere of Hong Kong (RH ∼ 60 to 80%). (C) Normalized efficiency as a function of soaking time in water (measured by recording J–V curves of the PSCs immersed in water). The inset shows the measurement setup.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) J–V curve and (B) IPCE spectrum of the best-performing PSC device. (C) Timing profile of the stabilized power output of the device near the maximum power point (MPP). (D) Thermal stressing result at 50 °C at the ambient RH of 70–90%.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, characterization of C + epoxy and perovskite thin films (Fig. S1–S4), investigation of the hysteresis effect (Fig. S5) and results of perovskite-based electrolysis (Fig. S6). See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta03802b
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
