Recent developments in the photodetector applications of Schottky diodes based on 2D materials  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TC00949D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TC00949D
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 6122-6150Recent developments in the photodetector applications of Schottky diodes based on 2D materials

        
          
            Bhuvaneshwari 
            Ezhilmaran†
a, 
      
        
          
            Abhinandan 
            Patra†
b, 
      
        
          
            Stenny 
            Benny
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Sreelakshmi 
            M. R.
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Akshay 
            V. V.
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            S. Venkataprasad 
            Bhat
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Chandra Sekhar 
            Rout
          
          
        
      *b
aSRM Research Institute & Department of Physics and Nanotechnology, SRM Institute of Science and Technology, Kattankulathur, Tamil Nadu-603203, India. E-mail: venkatab@srmist.edu.in
bCentre for Nano and Material Sciences, Jain University, Jain Global Campus, Jakkasandra, Ramanagaram, Bangalore-562112, India. E-mail: csrout@gmail.com; r.chandrasekhar@jainuniversity.ac.in
Received 
      27th February 2021
    , Accepted 18th April 2021First published on 19th April 2021AbstractIn recent years, 2D layered materials have emerged as potential candidates in the opto-electronic field due to their intriguing optical, electrical and mechanical properties. Photodetectors based on 2D materials have been reported to exhibit excellent photodetection capability due to their tunable bandgap and ability to detect broadband spectrum ranging from UV to NIR. Schottky junction-based detectors are highly sensitive and fast responsive compared to other heterojunction devices. Schottky contacted devices are fabricated by constructing a heterojunction of a semiconductor with a metal or a metal-like material. In the case of 2D material-based photodetectors, either the semiconductor or the metal belongs to the 2D family. The detection properties of Schottky contacted devices are mainly dependent on the junction properties such as the barrier height. The photodetection performance of detectors with 2D materials is observed to be superior and further it can be enhanced by tuning the properties through various strategies. Herein, the basic concepts, detection mechanism and evaluation parameters of Schottky junction-based photodetectors and the recent developments in Schottky junction-based photodetectors achieved using various 2D materials in the past five years are reviewed. Emerging strategies to enhance the performance by adjusting the Schottky barrier height are elaborated. Finally, the summary and future prospects are provided.
Bhuvaneshwari Ezhilmaran
Bhuvaneshwari Ezhilmaran received her MSc degree in physics from PSGR Krishnammal College, Tamil Nadu, India in 2016. She is currently pursuing her PhD at SRM Research Institute, SRM Institute of Science and Technology. Her research focuses on solution derived functional layers for energy conversion applications including photodetectors.
Abhinandan Patra
Abhinandan Patra received his MSc degree in Physics from the College of Engineering and Technology under Biju Patnaik University of Technology (BPUT), Odisha, India in 2019. He is presently pursuing his PhD degree at the Centre for Nano and Material Sciences, Jain University. His interest is in exploring the synthesis and comprehensive characterization of novel functionalized layered 2D nanomaterials and their composites for electrochemical storage and energy conversion applications.
Left to right: Stenny Benny, M. R. Sreelakshmi, V. V. Akshay
Stenny Benny received her MSc degree in physics from St. Joseph's College, Devagiri, Calicut in 2019. She is currently pursuing her PhD at SRM Research Institute, SRM Institute of Science and Technology. Her research interest is in exploring various strategies to improve the properties of functional materials used in energy conversion technologies such as thin film photovoltaics.M. R. Sreelakshmi received her MSc degree in physics from the Central University of Kerala, Kasaragod in 2019. She is currently pursuing her PhD at SRM Research Institute, SRM Institute of Science and Technology. Her research focuses on the synthesis and properties of inorganic semiconductor heterojunctions for photodetector applications.V. V. Akshay received his MSc degree in Materials Science from Mangalore University, Mangalore, in 2020. He is currently pursuing his PhD at SRM Research Institute, SRM Institute of Science and Technology. His research interest is in exploring emerging chalcogenide semiconductor materials and their applications in optoelectronic devices.
S. Venkataprasad Bhat
Dr S. Venkataprasad Bhat is Research Associate Professor at SRM Research Institute, SRM Institute of Science and Technology (SRMIST), Tamil Nadu, India. Before joining SRMIST, he has worked as a post-doctoral research associate at Birck Nanotechnology Centre, Purdue University, USA for 3 years after completing his doctoral studies in materials science at Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research (JNCASR), Bengaluru, India under the supervision of Prof. C. N. R. Rao. He received his BSc degree in Physics from Kannur University, Kerala and MSc degree in Physics from Savitribai Phule Pune University, Maharashtra, India. His research interest is in solution based methods for making functional materials and their energy conversion applications including photovoltaics, photodetectors, photocatalysis and solid-state lighting.
Chandra Sekhar Rout
Dr Chandra Sekhar Rout is Associate Professor at the Centre for Nano & Material Sciences (CNMS), Jain University. Before joining CNMS, He was a DST-Ramanujan Fellow at IIT Bhubaneswar, India (2013–2017). He received his BSc (2001) and MSc (2003) degrees from Utkal University and his PhD from JNCASR, Bangalore (2008) under the supervision of Prof. C. N. R. Rao, Bharat Ratna. He did his postdoctoral research at the National University of Singapore (2008–2009), Purdue University, USA (2010–2012) and UNIST, South Korea (2012–2013). He was awarded the prestigious Ramanujan Fellowship and Young Scientist award by the Department of Science and Technology, Govt. of India in 2013, emerging investigator award 2017 from Elsevier, IAAM medal 2017 from the International Association of Advanced Materials 2017, and Young researcher award from Venus International Foundation in 2015. His research interests include the preparation and characterization of 2D layered materials and their hybrids for chemical sensors and biosensors, supercapacitors and energy storage devices, field emitters and electronic devices. He has authored more than 150 research papers in international journals and edited 3 books. His current h-index is 42 with total citations >7500. He was ranked among top 2% scientists in India by the Stanford study in 2020. He serves as a board member in various reputed journals and is associate editor of “RSC Advances,” a journal of Royal Society of Chemistry, and “American Journal of Engineering and Applied Sciences” of Science Publications. He has completed several sponsored projects funded by the Government of India and supervised PhD, postdoc and MSc students. He has delivered more than fifty invited talks in various national and international conferences and travelled to several countries such as the USA, the UK, Israel, Singapore, South Korea, Brazil, Russia, etc. for collaboration purposes.
1. Introduction
2D materials have attracted great interest in the optoelectronic field due to their high charge carrier mobility, optical absorption, large specific surface area to volume ratio and tunable electronic and optical properties.1–3 Graphene, a well-known and widely explored 2D material, is of great demand in optoelectronic applications due to its flawless optical transparency, higher conductivity, strong interaction with photons and excellent mechanical flexibility.4–6 Its zero bandgap limits its functionality in terms of photocarrier lifetime and dark current.7 Analogous to graphene, semiconducting 2D materials with optoelectronic properties and tunable bandgap similar to graphene have been reported, including transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs),8,9 metal chalcogenides,3,8 black phosphorous (BP),10,11 germanane,12 and hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN).13
A photodetector is an opto-electronic device that converts a light signal into an electrical signal via various photo-related phenomena. Photodetectors are extensively used in many applications such as remote sensing, thermal imaging, environmental monitoring, and communication systems.14 The photodetector construction as well as device configuration is of significant importance for achieving efficient detection properties. In a legitimate photodetector, an ohmic contact is sandwiched between a semiconductor and binary metal electrodes. For the fabrication of an asymmetric Schottky device, the ohmic contact is substituted with a Schottky contact.15 Schottky junction photodetectors are more sensitive, fast responsive,16 and also have the capability of detecting optical signals due to the presence of an in-built interfacial potential deprived of any applied bias voltage.17,18 Schottky diode-based photodetectors have exhibited excellent photoresponse characteristics but the performance of inorganic semiconductor-based devices is limited in terms of spectral range. In the case of 2D materials, the optical absorption can be fine-tuned from the UV to the infrared spectral region by tuning the thickness, interface, band structure, etc.19–21 Also, the photodetection capability of photodetectors based on 2D materials is higher than that of conventional photodetectors as well as other semiconductor based devices.22
There are review articles discussing photodetectors based on various 2D materials such as graphene,23 MoS2,22 TMDCs,24 other 2D materials beyond graphene and TMDCs,25 black phosphorous,26 and MXenes27–29 and also infrared photodetectors based on 2D materials.30 Koppens et al. reviewed the photodetectors based on graphene and other 2D material hybrid systems such as the combination of different 2D materials, 2D materials with plasmonic nanoparticles or quantum dots, and 2D materials integrated with Si waveguides.2 Xie et al. summarized photodetectors including photoconductors, phototransistors and photodiodes based on two-dimensional layered materials beyond graphene, in which the techniques used to improve the light–matter interactions were addressed.1 The strategies adopted to enhance various photodetection parameters were also widely discussed in the literature such as the technologies adopted to improve the sensitivity and light absorption,2,8 ways to enhance the performance in the infrared region,31 options to overcome the drawbacks related to the high noise and power consumption in graphene based detectors, the response speed of detectors with TMDCs, and the stability of BP detectors.3 Device architecture based techniques were also reported.32–34 The importance of contacts for achieving enhanced performance was also considered and reviewed.13,16 Specific strategies for low resistance contacts to various 2D materials including Fermi level de-pinning, hybridization, phase engineering, dimensional scaling and even contact placement were reviewed.13 Various physical and chemical strategies for tuning the electronic and other properties,35,36 doping, contact and interface engineering of 2D TMDCs were summarized.20 The band structure engineering and strain induced piezoelectric/piezoresistive properties of 2D materials were also reviewed.19,21 A few reviews discussed self-powered 2D photodetectors and the techniques used to improve their self-powered performance.17,18
In recent years, two dimensional material based Schottky diode photodetectors with excellent photoresponse have been reported, and, owing to the large number of studies available on Schottky diode based 2D material photodetectors, a clear understanding of the photodetection capability with respect to the material structure and device configuration is achieved.13,22,25,35–38 However, a critical analysis focusing on the recent developments in highly responsive Schottky contacted 2D photodetectors and the strategies utilized to overcome the associated difficulties as well as improve their performance cannot be found in the literature. Thus, at this point, it is necessary and appropriate to summarize the recent trends and developments in this field. In the current audit, we primarily pioneer the basic concept of Schottky junction for photodetector applications. The evaluation parameters of photodetectors and the photodetection mechanism of 2D material-based photodetectors as well as Schottky junction diode (SJD) based photodetectors are particularized. The latest advancements in SJD based 2D materials including graphene, TMDCs, black phosphorous and other 2D materials and their photodetection performance are deliberated with precision. The strategies applied to enhance the photodetection properties of SJDs, importance of self-powered photodetectors and the recent trends are appraised. Finally, future perspectives are suggested.
2. Rudimentary idea of Schottky junction for photodetector applications
The basic device configuration of a conventional nanoscale photodetector is a sandwiched structure in which a semiconductor is fused between two ohmic metal contacts39 and an external bias delivers the withdrawal for the photogenerated electron–hole pairs.40 Maintaining both high gain of photodetection and high responsivity, one of the ohmic components can be substituted by a Schottky barrier contact, resulting in the formation of a highly sensitized fast responsive timed Schottky junction photodetector (SJP). On the other hand, it works without an external bias and uses the built-in potential to separate the photogenerated carriers.6 On the basis of interfaces, SJPs can be classified into metal–metal interface, metal–semiconductor interface and degenerate semiconductor interfacial layer structure due to their different work function and band alignments. Graphene possessing excellent characteristics of a semiconductor can be the main classification in the metal–semiconductor interface as the graphene–semiconductor interface is well established in this research field.41
2.1. Junction with metal and metal
Every interface works depending on the band alignment and the Fermi energy (energy associated with the Fermi energy level). With the acknowledged position of the Fermi energy level and band structure (conduction band and valence band) along with the value of work function, we can comprehend the mechanism of any interface. When any two random metals come up with one another, the system wants to be in an equilibrium state as before. Hence, electrons from low work function (eΦ1) metal-1 flow to the high work function (eΦ2) metal-2 as there is no potential barrier between the interfaces (Fig. 1A(a)),42 which keeps the system stable by adjusting the Fermi energy as well as aligning the Fermi levels. As a result, a space charge region (SCR) is formed at the borderline with a positive charge cloud in metal-1 and additional free electrons in metal-2.43 The shift in the work function is called the contact potential (ΔVc) which is crucial for the metal–metal interface: eΔVc = e(Φ2 − Φ1)(1)Due to the surface rearrangement (mainly relaxation and reconstruction) at the interface, the actual value of the work function of the metal is not as accurate as the experimental value. Thus, the calculation of work function separately for each metal has no real significance which is clearly reflected while describing the electronic properties of these interfaces.
 Fig. 1  (A) Diagram of the generation of an interface with metal and metal: (a) band structure of metals I and II with work functions eΦ1 and eΦ2, respectively (EF = Fermi energy level with no contact); (b) band structure of the conduction bands at the metal edge and the contact between the two metals; and (c) simplified diagram of the contact with metal and metal. (B) Graphical diagram of energy level alterations before and after contact with the metal and semiconductor: (a) semiconductor (n-type) and metal (high-work function), (b) semiconductor (n-type) and metal (low-work function), (c) semiconductor (p-type) and metal (high work function), and (d) semiconductor (p-type) and metal (low work function) (reproduced with permission from ref. 42; permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.). 
2.2. Junction with a metal and a semiconductor
When a metal and a semiconductor come into close contact with each other, a thermodynamic equilibrium is attained by the flow of charge carriers from one section to another, creating a SCR or a depletion layer between them. It is again basically due to the variance between the work function of the metal (Φm) and the electron affinity of the semiconductor (χs) connected with the presence of superficial states or interface states in the semiconductor. Numerous phenomena can be observed depending on the type of the semiconductor (n-type or p-type). The location of the Fermi level is quite different in both the types and the flow of charges will also vary accordingly.44 The order of magnitude of carrier density is higher in metals as compared to semiconductors, making the shielding less effective, which causes the extension of the SCR into a few nanometers. In Fig. 1B it is observed that the upward (n-type) and downward (p-type) movement of the depletion layer due to the stream of charges at the interface to make the Fermi levels aligned is what holds the junction at one place. The ideal barrier height for the semiconductor (n-type) contact is given by the parameter ϕnB (n-type) which is called Schottky barrier height (SBH). Basically, it is the potential barrier that has to be overcome by the electrons in the metal in order to move to the semiconductor. This can be gauged by45 ϕnB = (Φm− χs)(2)Likewise, the SBH in the case of a p-type semiconductor can be calculated by taking the energy gap (Eg) into account.45 ϕpB = Eg + χs − Φm(3)On the other hand, there is a built-in potential barrier (Vbi) on the semiconductor side which is the potential engrossed by the electrons present in the conduction band to transport into the metal.45 Vbi = ϕB − Φm(4)When we apply a positive bias and a negative bias to the system, Vbi increases and decreases with respect to the SBH and the system operates in reverse and forward bias, respectively. Thermionic emission and field emission are two ideal mechanisms for a Schottky junction. The equation to calculate the width of the SCR is given by47 Wd = [2εs(Vbi + V)/eNd]1/2(5)where εs is the permittivity of the semiconductor, V is the applied potential and Nd is the dopant concentration. The equation for current density can be written as follows:44 (6) (7)where JsT is the reverse saturation current, A* is the effective Richardson constant for thermionic emission , m* is the effective mass of electron, k is Boltzmann's constant, h is Planck's constant and T is the absolute temperature.7,33 The basic working principle of a SJD based photodetector can be given as follows: when the system illuminates, the photo-excited charge carriers are driven in the opposite direction which is due to the Vbi at the interface. As a result, an electric current flows in the system. Using these features, Wang et al. demonstrated the utilization of a Schottky junction diode for the detection of biomolecules, UV light and gases, thus opening up the path for SJD based photodetectors.46 Moreover, it is worth noting that this type of device can sustain without the application of an external bias, as verified by Zhang et al. in 2010. They synthesized a self-driven SJD based UV photodetector via the assembly of antimony-doped zinc oxide nanobelt and gold Schottky contact.47 Without an external bias, the highly sensitized system provided a fast response to ultraviolet light. Luo et al. also fabricated a gallium-doped cadmium sulfide nanoribbon/Au SJD based self-driven photodetector.48 Later, a lot of element-doped and SJD based self-driven photodetectors were investigated vividly over the past decade or so.
2.3. Schottky junction of 2D materials

2.3.1. Junction with graphene and metals. 
The graphene–metal junction works in a similar manner to the metal–metal work interface as discussed before. sp2 hybridized graphene, being a zero-band-gap semiconductor, lacks the ability to provide a prolonged lifetime for the charge carriers. Due to this reason, the crucial parameters of a photodetector such as high responsivity, sensitivity and quantum efficiency are compromised. Having a zero-band gap, graphene can be treated as a metal and thus in this junction there will not be any potential barrier. The transfer of charge carriers occurs through physisorption or chemisorption processes.49 Due to the large carrier density and limited density of states (DOS), a tiny alteration in the distribution of electrons can lead to a potential difference, resulting in abrupt changes in the vacuum level. Thereby, depletion is created at the interface.49


2.3.2. Schottky Junction with graphene and semiconductors. 
The graphene–semiconductor Schottky junction is analogous to the metal–semiconductor junction. The Fermi energy level of graphene can be easily adjusted using an applied potential and the SBH can be revised by monitoring the charge carrier transport at the interface.6,43 After the path-breaking studies by Filippo Giannazzo on graphene–SiC,50 the use of the graphene–semiconductor Schottky junction51 has become the standardized procedure in the fields of photodetectors, gas sensors, solar cells, and photovoltaics and many other opto-electronic devices. Depending on the quality of the interface at the junction, sometimes the presence of surface states leads to the lowering of the Fermi level and hence a huge leakage current. However, the graphene–semiconductor junction can be favorably modified by dumping the defects and impurities along with the deterrence of charge trapping sites to achieve a better on–off ratio as well as high detectivity.6,17,40 Thus, the tunable properties of graphene can be used to construct the graphene–semiconductor Schottky junction in such a way that it can have superior light absorption properties and exhibit high photo-responsivity. The combinations such as graphene–Si,85 graphene–Ge,142 graphene–GaN,84 CdSe,241 ZnO86 and graphene–SiC39 have drawn attention for applications in the field of opto-electronic devices due to their unique characteristics. Fig. 210 shows the tunable band gap of semiconductor materials and conventional semiconductors which can be used for tuning the band alignment for the metal–semiconductor or semiconductor–Schottky junction.
 Fig. 2  Divergence of the energy gap values for various 2D semiconductor constituents with the energy gap for conventional semiconductors. The top bars show a range of tunable band-gap values which can be achieved by changing the number of layers, straining, doping, defect engineering or alloying (Reprinted with permission from A. Castellanos-Gomez, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4280–4291, Copyright © 2015 American Chemical Society). 


2.3.3. Schottky junction with other 2D materials and semiconductors. 
Other than graphene, there are a number of 2D materials that show excellent behaviour while forming Schottky junction with another semiconductor. These materials include two-dimensional metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs – MoS2, WS2, VS2 MoSe2, WSe2), MXenes, and black phosphorous. The 2D TMTDC–semiconductor Schottky junction offers high photocurrent which can be used to produce ultrasensitive and broad-spectrum photodetectors. From the previous equations, we understood that the SBH depends upon the work function of a metal. By tuning the conduction band or valence band, i.e., by tuning the band alignment and the work function, we can achieve the desired value of SBH. But, in general, the SBH lies in between the Schottky and Bardeen limits. The trail edges of the metal that dripped into the semiconductor called metal-induced gap states (MIGS) cause the pinning of Fermi levels, which occurs at the interface states in the case of the Bardeen limit.52 The SBH values can be calculated by using the following equations:45,52 ϕnB = (SΦM − χsc) + (1 − S)ΦIS(8) (9)Depending upon the value of S, the SBH may (if S = 1) or may not (if S = 0) depend on ΦM. Thus, at the Bardeen limit, there is a strong pinning effect at the interface, whereas it seems too ineffective at the Schottky–Mott limit.52

3. Evaluation parameters of 2D material-based photodetectors
The efficient operation and constructive architecture of a photodetector relies on different figure-of-merit (FOM) parameters53–55 which have to be considered. The key parameters that decide the valuable maneuvering of a photodetector are mainly detectivity (D), quantum efficiency (QE), response time (τ), photocurrent density (IL), dark current density (ID), photo-responsivity (R), on–off ratio, noise equivalent power (NEP), linear dynamic range, gain, etc. Flexibility and stability are referred to as the retention of some parameters such as light or dark current density, gain, etc. under extreme conditions, i.e., bending angles periodically or bending through so many cycles, which are basically unitless. The formulas and units of these parameters are described briefly in the following.
3.1. Detectivity (D)
Detectivity is a significant parameter of a photodetector as it determines the sensitivity of a device. The equation for ‘D’ is given as follows:8,40 (10)where S, Δf and NEP represent the active area of a device, electrical bandwidth and noise equivalent power, respectively. The unit of detectivity is cm Hz1/2 W−1 or jones. Apart from NEP, dark current density is actually responsible for the detection. So another form of the above equation is given by8 (11)where R represents the photoresponsivity and Idark is the dark current density.
3.2. Quantum efficiency (QE)
Quantum efficiency gives an idea about the efficiency of photodetectors in terms of the conversion of photons into charge and is expressed in percentage. It is the ratio of the number of electrons or holes converted through the stimulation of photons of an applied energy source. Hence, it can be termed internal quantum efficiency (IQE) or external quantum efficiency (EQE) depending upon the number of absorbed photons or incident photons, respectively. The equation for ‘QE’ is given by40 (12)where q is the charge of the particle, c is the velocity of light and h is Planck's constant.
3.3. Response time (τ)
Response time describes the speed of a photodetector and includes both rise (τrise) time and decay (τdecay) time of the charge carrier. It interprets the time span of charge transfer and production of the maximum output current, i.e., from ten to ninety or ninety to ten percentage of it. Response time is strongly affected by the defects and the recombination or separation of charge carriers, which is measured in seconds. Due to the shortening of charge carrier path length, there is efficient light absorption along with less leakage current. Hence the response time increases.
3.4. Photocurrent density (IL)
Photocurrent density is the current flowing through the device per unit area under light illumination. Contrarily, dark current density (ID) is the current flowing through the device under dark conditions or without light incidence per unit area. Both of them are expressed in A cm−2.
3.5. Photoresponsivity (R)
Photoresponsivity is another parameter that regulates the swiftness of the response of a photodetector to any optical signal. Basically, it is the ratio of current density to input power density:40 (13)Here Iphoto is the difference between the photocurrent and dark current densities. Its unit is A W−1 or V W−1. Using eqn (12), it can be written as follows: (14)
3.6. On–off ratio
The on–off ratio is the ratio of current density under illumination to dark current density.8,40 The on–off ratio matters as it provides the proficiency of the photodetector. It is unitless. Its formula is given by8,40 (15)
3.7. Noise equivalent power (NEP)
NEP is the least power of a photo signal which is obtained at a signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of 1, i.e., this indicates that the device can detect the weakest signal of light even at 1 Hz output of electrical bandwidth of noise measurement. The equation for NEP is given by8 (16)where in is the noise current. There are three types of noise current: shot noise due to ID, Johnson noise due to thermal oscillations and flicker noise due to low current. NEP is measured in W Hz−1/2. As NEP varies inversely with D, the lower the NEP, the higher the sensitivity of a photodetector.
3.8. Linear dynamic range (LDR)
The logarithmic expression indicating the linear behavior of a photodetector in a certain spectral range is called the linear dynamic range (LDR). The current response of the PD changes mostly in the linear-side with the incident illumination power within a spectral range. If the LDR value is high, then it means that the photodetector can easily detect both weak as well as strong signals and is expressed in decibels. The equation for this is assumed as21 (17)where ‘*’ indicates the value of current density deviation from the linear scale.
3.9. Gain (G)
Gain or photoconductivity gain is designated as the number of transient electrons or holes across the device per the amount of incident photons. So it is calculated as the ratio of trapped holes and electrons to that of the time required for them to pass through the device under light illumination. (18)where τ1 and τ2 are the carrier lifetime and the transient time, respectively, d is the channel length, μ is the carrier mobility and V is the applied potential.21 It is unitless.
4. Types of photodetectors and general photodetection mechanisms of photodetectors based on 2D materials
As we know, a device that converts an optical signal into an electrical signal is called a photodetector (PD). The unpretentious mechanism underlying PDs is as follows: when the superfluous charge carriers are produced due to light illumination at the junction, augmentation in terms of the conductivity of the system is observed. These fluctuations in conductivity are the detection mechanism of a PD. A PD device works as a photoconductor (PC), photodiode (PDE) or phototransistor (PT) on the basis of its architecture.21 The basic designs of these PD architectures are shown in Fig. 3.56
 Fig. 3  The schematic cross-sectional images demonstrating the designs of different NIR photodetectors: (a) multilayer photodiode and crosswise configurations of (b) a photoconductor and (c) a phototransistor (reproduced with permission from ref. 56; permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.). 
A photoconductor is assembled by inserting a photosensitive layer between two metal electrodes, and whenever the photosensitive layer is illuminated, a bias potential is developed. Thus, the carriers are separated and accumulated at the ends. This is called the photoconductive effect, and keeping this principle photoconductors are used in various optoelectronic devices. The gain of PC is given by the equation below; a single electron–hole pair can be produced by a single photon with an EQE > 100% and it requires non-injecting contacts with the metal and semiconductor. (19)where τp, tn, μp, and μn represent the minority carrier lifetime, electron transit lifetime and carrier mobilities, respectively.21,42
Photodiodes are quite homologous to photovoltaic devices having a similar vertical structure. They consist of a p–n junction diode working under reverse-bias voltage and the charge carriers are unglued by Vbi and collected at the electrodes. The response time and sensitivity of these devices can be upgraded by expanding the width of the SCR as much as possible as noticed in PIN photodiodes. In PIN diodes, the ‘p’ and ‘n’ regions are separated by an intrinsic region denoted as ‘i’ and, under reverse bias, the depletion layer expands up to the width of the ‘i’ region. The photocurrent density of the PDE is given by40 IL = e(Wd + Ln + Lp)GL(20)where L is the length (Ln and Lp for n- and p-types, respectively) of the PDE and GL is the generation rate of excess carriers.
A phototransistor is basically a bipolar transistor which possesses high gain through transistor action. The device owns a large junction area and mostly operates in the base open circuit. Due to the photo-selective effect, the holes are swept back to the base and the base becomes positive w.r.t. the emitter. The electrons get injected from the emitter to the base which is the rudimentary concept of transistor action. IC = βIB(21) IE = IC + IB(22)where the gain of the phototransistor is β and IC, IB and IE correspond to the collector, base and emitter currents, respectively.21
After the discovery of graphene,57 the exploration of other emerging 2D materials has attracted tremendous attention due to their tunable optical and electronic properties relevant to the domain of photodetectors and other optoelectronic devices. To date, a lot of studies have been conducted on 2D material-based PDs achieving a great deal of improvement in their performance and stability. TMDCs are a class of 2D materials which have unique properties like excellent conductivity, mechanical strength, elasticity and optical activity due to the van der Waals force of attraction between the layers.58–60 For instance, graphene having zero band gap, a short-span carrier lifetime and wideband illumination absorption is one of the widely studied and potential candidates for photodetector applications.58,61 But its high ID is the only disadvantage that limits the plausible usage of graphene in the optoelectronic field. The basic photodetection mechanism of PDs based on 2D materials can be well understood by bunch of physical effects which have a key role in the photocurrent generation due to either optical conversion (photovoltaic effect, photoconductive effect and photogating effect) or thermal agitation (photo-thermoelectric effect and photo-bolometric effect).31,62–64 In the following section, we have discussed each effect thoroughly and their mechanism involving photodetection is given vividly. Fig. 431 shows the mechanism of all the effects through which the photodetection mainly occurs.
 Fig. 4  (a–d) Graphic map to four photocurrent engendered mechanisms (reproduced from G. Rao, X. Wang, Y. Wang, P. Wangyang, C. Yan, J. Chu, L. Xue, C. Gong, J. Huang, J. Xiong and Y. Li, InfoMat, 2019, 1, 272–288, permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.). 
4.1. Photovoltaic effect
In a metal–semiconductor junction, there is a manifestation of built-in potential (Vbi) which is attributed to the generation of charge carriers in the interface region. The initiation of these electrons and holes drives the flow of current in the direction of electric field. This Vbi modulation can be done through heterostructure formation, by using gate voltage, changing properties with different dopants and altering the interface with dissimilar work function metals (ΦM).65 The nonlinearity of the rectification characteristics and the output current (ID and IL) favours the photodetection mechanism. So, to achieve better IQE and EQE, and low ID, typically these PDs can be operated at zero bias or reverse bias potential. The basic mechanism enlightens that whenever the incident light (photons) possessing a higher energy as compared to the band gap of the system (Eg) plunges, the charge carriers get ejected by the engrossed photons and Vbi aids in unscrambling the electron–hole pairs. Then, these carriers get accumulated at the electrodes, resulting in short circuit current (Iscct) and open circuit voltage (Vocct). This leads to the improved performance of the photodetector. Sometimes, the rapid generation of photocarriers can be achieved by applying an external bias voltage. Hence, more electron–hole pairs are produced through induced ionization and the gain is enhanced. This is why this effect is also called the photoelectric effect.66,67 The photocurrent Ipc is given by67 Ipc = SVqμΔn(23)here, Δn is the photoinduced charge carrier density. On the basis of this effect, the photocurrent generation of several 2D TMDCs is verified. Mainly, in a MoS2 monolayer photodetector the photocurrent was due to the photoinduced carriers.68 In 2009, Xia et al. proved that the photocurrent is produced (without an external bias) only due to the core bias and doping concentration.46,69 A responsivity of 1 mA W−1 was obtained by Muller et al. by introducing single-layer graphene into multi-layer Ti/Pd/Au electrodes under light illumination of a 632.8 nm wavelength without an external applied voltage.70 Lee et al. also validated the fact that Vbi is induced at the metal–graphene interface which is responsible for the charge generation and separation without the bias.71
4.2. Photoconductive effect
Photoconductivity is different from the photovoltaic effect as there is an essential need for an additional applied voltage which is responsible for the induction of some extra charge carriers.72,73 These carriers are ascribed to the increment of the free charge carrier percentage in the depletion layer. Subsequently the conductivity of the system increases and the resistance decreases. The conductance (σ) of the system can be found by73 Δσ = Δneμ(24)when the photon energy is greater than Eg, the electron–hole pairs are separated through the external potential (Vext) and a photocurrent (IL) is induced. Under dark conditions, only the free existing carriers are driven by Vext, resulting in a low dark current (ID). Therefore, the total photocurrent is given by56 Ipc = IL − ID(25)Moreover, it works only due to an external bias (Vext) and gives a high conductivity gain to devices built based on the principle of the photovoltaic effect.74
4.3. Photo-gating effect
The photo-gating effect comes under the photoconductivity effect since here the charged trap states (localized fluctuating gate) contribute to the increment in conductance. In the long run, the charge carriers are generated by the incidence of photons and if the carriers get trapped in the localized trap states, then the conductance is strongly influenced by these states. In due course of time, these electrons and holes become unconstrained; however, the de-trapping process is time-consuming.75,76 Hence, the carrier lifetime increases and therefore the photoconductivity gain also raises. In the case of ambipolar or unipolar semiconductors, the photocurrent can be less or greater than ID. Depending upon the gate voltage, the negative or positive value of the photocurrent is decided in an ambipolar semiconductor. The photocurrent equation is given by75,76 (26)where Vg is the local gate voltage.77,78 The photodetection in few-layer (0.6–1.55 μm) MoTe2 showed a sensitive steady fast response under 637 nm light illumination at a backgated voltage of 10 V.79 Some other examples that are based on this effect use graphene/SiO2 lightly doped Si,80 QDs/WSe2,81 graphene/MoS2,82 QDs/InGaZnO83 and graphene/carbon nanotubes.84 In all these materials the high gain is caused by the photo-gating effect.
4.4. Photo-thermoelectric effect
The photo-thermoelectric effect is the thermally induced electric effect caused by optical irradiation. Here, the Seebeck effect plays a crucial role which changes the whole dynamics of the system. The effect includes hot carriers which are later transported and induce a voltage in association with the Seebeck effect. When the illumination spot size is comparable to the size of the device channel, a temperature gradient (ΔT) is formed at the channel.84–87 At different doping levels (low and high doping levels) there will be a variation in the Seebeck coefficient (S1, S2) and the induced photovoltage (VPTE) can be calculated using the equation:88 VPTE = (S2 − S1)ΔT(27)Due to this photovoltage, charge carrier separation occurs and thus a photocurrent is produced without an applied bias. Therefore, the conductance can be calculated using the Mott formula as follows: (28)Without the local light spot, the temperature gradient can be created by varying the light illumination at different doping levels of the device channel and thus a better-quality interface of 2D materials is required for the production of VPTE in the range of μV to mV.88 The sign of photocurrent basically depends on the Seebeck coefficient and the polarity of the hot carriers in the interface. Lemme and co-workers constructed a graphene-based interface using the PTE mechanism in 2011.89 In the same year (2011), Son et al. elaborated that the photocurrent measured using the pump–probe technique originates from the dual gate voltage and PTE mechanism.90 Gabor and his team also provided important information regarding the dual gate voltage and photodetection exhibited by 2D materials through this hot carrier mechanism.91
4.5. Photo-bolometric effect
The photo-bolometric effect is especially related to the variation of resistivity in materials (whose resistivity varies with temperature) through the hot carriers induced by light irradiation (TE effect). As we know, temperature affects the resistivity of materials that have free electrons and holes. Afterward, the current in the system starts to fluctuate at a fixed bias voltage. PBE devices are analogous to photoconductive devices with the requirement of an external bias to produce a photocurrent, whereas in PTE devices the process is self-driven, i.e., without an external bias.92 Here the change in voltage is given by92 (29)where IDC is the applied DC bias voltage. Here, in the bolometric effect, the photocurrent increases with the external bias linearly. The sign of photocurrent relies on the fluctuation (increment or decrement) of resistivity and temperature explicitly. For example, Yan et al. fabricated a hot electron bolometer using dual gated bilayer graphene.92 They carried out a temperature dependent study on hot carriers and explained the photodetection mechanism on the basis of PBE.93
4.6. Photodetection mechanisms in Schottky junction diodes of 2D materials
Previously, the major types of the mechanism of photodetection have been reviewed on the basis of various physical phenomena. It was discussed that the Schottky junction formation and SBH concept plays a decisive role in the photodetection mechanism. By controlling the SBH, we can obtain highly responsive as well as sensitive photodetectors with a high gain. So, to control these parameters, we need to be aware of the mechanism of working of Schottky junction-based photodetectors and it is elaborated in the section below.
Graphene–semiconductor based Schottky junction is widely used due to the tunability of the Fermi energy level of graphene and the choice of a semiconductor having an appropriate energy gap. So, the carriers gain sufficient energy through illumination to easily exceed the barrier. Correspondingly, we can incorporate an interfacial layer which can expand the SBH resulting in the reduction of ID and the improvement of the signal-to-noise ratio. On the basis of the above mechanism, graphene/GaN,94 graphene/Si,95 graphene/ZnO96,97 and graphene/Ge98 have been studied. Maxim Trushin proposed another mechanism where he used the theory of thermionic emission to explain that the SBH of the graphene–metal junction can be modified with the out-of-plane momentum of charge carriers and the finite lifetime of quasi-particles. Hence, he derived the thermionic constant and replaced it with the Richardson constant, keeping both the conditions, i.e., Ef < kβT and Ef > kβT, in mind.99 Using thermionic emission, An et al. also fabricated a graphene–Si (p-type) Schottky junction based metal–semiconductor–metal (MSM) photodetector and the detection performance was studied at zero bias.100
Chang et al. studied the photodetection operation of Gr/SnS2/Gr assembly and verified the modulation of the SBH in a SJP.101 The difference between the work function of Gr (4.6 eV) and the electron affinity of SnS2 (4.1 eV) is 0.5 eV. So, there was the formation of a higher SBH at the interface because the Fermi energy level of SnS2 shifted downwards as compared to the Fermi level of Gr in the SCR, whereas, in the accumulation region, this SBH can be surpassed by the tunneling and thermionic current as EF approaches the conduction band. The assembly is shown in Fig. 5a101 and the optical and SEM images of the system in Fig. 5b. In Fig. 5c101 and Fig. 5d, the I–V and transfer characteristics are well depicted. At a higher gate voltage, the n-type nature is well observed with a higher conductance as seen in the transfer characteristics. Under illumination, the dominancy of photocurrent over thermionic and tunneling current can be well portrayed as the drain current (ID < drain current) amplified at every applied gate voltage in the ON state (Fig. 5d). But, at the OFF state of gate voltage, the photo-response ratio is much higher than that in the ON state gaining on tunneling and thermionic current. The lower contact resistance contributes to the low on–off current ratio of the system and the photoswitching characteristics are shown in Fig. 5e,101 showing that the system provides high photoresponsivity and photosensitivity.101
 Fig. 5  Characteristics of SnS2-based photodetectors. (a) Schematic illustration of device fabrication on Gr ribbons. (b) Optical image of the fabricated device. The magnified SEM image of a 1 μm distance between two electrodes. (c) Current vs. voltage curve of the Gr–SnS2–Gr device in the dark and in light conditions. (d) Comparison of the transfer curves for a Gr–SnS2–Gr photodetector measured in the dark and under light conditions at 5 V bias and 171 mW cm−2. The inset shows the variation of photoresponse with gate voltage. The foot plan shows the band structure of the photodetector after tuning the gate voltage in the on and off states. (e) Due to the incident pulsed laser light (intensity: 2.55 × 104 mW cm−2 under a bias of 2 V) photoswitching performance of the device (Reprinted with permission from R. J. Chang, H. Tan, X. Wang, B. Porter, T. Chen, Y. Sheng, Y. Zhou, H. Huang, H. Bhaskaran and J. H. Warner, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 13002–13010, Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society). 
Liao et al. fabricated a photovoltaic diode based on WC Schottky contact with light doping of boron over a diamond layer and it could detect UV light excellently. The photocurrent of the assembly decreased at high temperature due to the contraction of the SCR, resulting in a decrease of the SBH. The responsivity also decreased due to the rapid recombination process at the Schottky interface.102 Sorifi et al. fabricated the same MSM SJP using Ti/GaSe/Au assembly. This MSM structure basically consists of a series of Schottky barrier contacts. As soon as they provided current across the assembly, one contact became forward biased acting as the anode and another became reverse biased acting as the cathode. A current was induced in the system due to the separation of charges by the electric field.103 Zeng et al. studied a temperature dependent graphene–Si array–Si (n-type) SJP and showed that the SBH decreased due to the inhomogeneity of the barrier and the ideality factor increased.95 Lee et al. fabricated a graphene/ZnO based photodiode which showed an enhancement in photoresponsivity due to the SBH tuned through back-gate voltage, resulting in rapid activation of electron–hole pairs.104 Hong and his team optimized the SBH by the incorporation of an aluminum metal layer in a MoS2105 thin film to build a high response phototransistor.106 Islam et al. built a WSe2 based Schottky contact, the mechanism of which is explained through the photogating effect. When hole transportation occurs from a high SBH, there is an increment in drain current at the time of gate modulation. On the other side, when hole transportation occurs in the reverse direction, the photoresponse and drain current seemed to be as usual during gate modulation.107Fig. 6c and d show the high work function of the Schottky junction due to the pinning of the Fermi level. The depressed ϕB is because of the fact that the metal and semiconductor have different work functions at the drain–source interface.107Fig. 6a shows the device structure and mechanism of the SJP and Fig. 6b shows its optical image.107
 Fig. 6  (a) Device assembly and measurement scheme of the WSe2 phototransistor. (b) 10 lm scaled optical microscopy image of one of the phototransistors. (c and d) High ϕB and low ϕB are produced because of the Fermi-level pinning and metal–semiconductor work function difference at the drain and source contact in the metal–semiconductor interface, respectively (Reprinted from A. Islam and P. X.-L. Feng, J. Appl. Phys., 2017, 122, 085704, with permission from AIP Publishing). 
Wang et al. provided information regarding a Au/graphene/Au SJP where the observed dual plasmonic resonance was attributed to the strong sandwiching of graphene into the bilayer of Au nanoparticles. At resonance and other wavelengths, the localized electric field and light trapping sites were improved by the tunneling of hot electrons through the junction.108 Iqbal et al. prepared a Au/graphene/Ge SJP wherein, with a negative gate voltage, the holes contributed to the conductivity of graphene, whereas in the Schottky junction the mobility of electrons increased resulting in a high dark current. At a positive gate voltage, the SBH is greater which influenced the current density. Moreover, they showed that the SBH depends solely on the applied gate voltage and the photocurrent increased exponentially with both negative and positive bias. The key role was played by the junction resistance to hold back the holes fleeting from graphene to the metal layer and the drain–source voltage reinforced the photoresponsivity of the SJP.109
Black phosphorous110,111 (direct energy gap and excellent charge carrier mobility) and MXene28,112,113 (having high conductivity and a layered structure) based SJPs has attracted attention in the last few years due to their excellent potential for photodetection applications. A variety of Schottky junction semiconductors with 2D black phosphorous (BP) have been studied, in which the photo-ejected charge carriers are separated by an electric field and passed into the other contact under light illumination, resulting in a peak in the current as well as stable photoresponsivity.114 Perovskite based photodetectors14,115 are also commonly used in the field of photodetection due to their tunable properties and unique band structure. The built-in potential and the modulated SBH in perovskite materials are the crucial parameters which led to the partitioning and transportation of free carriers. The SCR in these systems can be widened by reverse bias and a high photocurrent could be induced due to the large accumulation of photocarriers at the electrodes.116
5. Recent developments in the SJD of 2D materials for photodetector applications
5.1. Schottky junction based on graphene
In 2004, Geim and his group came up with the idea of separating monolayered graphene from graphite.117 Graphene is used in many optoelectronic applications including phototransistors, solar cells, sensors, photodetectors, etc. due to its monoatomic layer thickness, high tensile strength, excellent toughness, high carrier mobility, excellent optical transparency and wide absorption spectrum.118,119 Graphene based photodetectors were investigated by fabricating junctions with semiconductors such as Si,120 GaN,121 GaAs,122 ZnO,23 SnO2,123 and other 2D materials.124–127 Shen et al. demonstrated a high performance Schottky junction device wherein directly grown graphene nanowalls (NWs) were used as the electrode. The device exhibited a high on/off ratio of about 2 × 107, a responsivity of 0.52 A W−1, a rise-time of 40 μs, and an ultralow measured dark current noise of 3.1 fA Hz−1.128 The SBH in the graphene/Si photodetector was observed to be modulated by tuning the reverse bias voltage,129 growth time and thermal stress.130 An infrared photodetector based on graphene NW and silicon heterojunction operating through the photo-thermionic effect exhibited a slow relaxation process in graphene with a weak acoustic phonon interaction. Strong infrared absorption and hot-carrier relaxation processes of graphene NWs along with silicon resulted in a photo-to-dark current ratio of 2 × 104, a responsivity of 138 mA W−1, and a specific detectivity of 1.4 × 1010 jones.131 A graphene/Si device with an Al2O3 anti-reflection layer showed good photodetection performance, especially internal quantum efficiency exceeding 100%, in the UV region. The ultra-shallow junction at the interface resulted in high separation of the photoexcited carriers and reduced surface recombination, and hence an increase in the photocurrent.132 Goykhman et al. reported an on-chip integrated metal-single layer graphene/Si plasmonic Schottky PD with a responsivity of 85 mA W−1 at 1550 μm under a reverse bias of 1 V. The responsivity was further improved to 0.37 A W−1 with a bias of 3 V due to the avalanche carrier multiplication effect.133 Casalino et al. have demonstrated a free-space single layer graphene/Si photodetector operating at 2 μm. The internal responsivities were estimated to be 7.2 mA W−1 and 24 mA W−1 depending on the absorption of graphene. However, an increase in dark current was also observed with an increase in the external bias.134 The external gate voltage dependent SBH modulation was observed in graphene/ZnO diodes.104,135 The gate tunable carrier type along with Schottky barrier height modulation was observed in a graphene/Te diode.136 The improvement in the quantum efficiency was achieved in a graphene/TiO2 diode through the hot carrier multiplication effect.137 A graphene–Si hybrid photodetector showed a photoresponsivity as high as 70 A W−1 with transparent ZnO as the top gate electrode which controlled the band bending at the interface. The on/off photoswitching ratio of the proposed photodetector was over 104 in a wide wavelength range (395–850 nm) by tuning the bias voltage. The difference in carrier transport characteristics of graphene and Si leads to an almost 100 times increase in responsivity compared with the conventional graphene detectors.138 As the thickness of graphene influences the crystallographic properties, a metallic/2D/Si heterostructure device was fabricated with varying graphene thickness. The device had demonstrated good rectifying characteristics, SBH reduction due to the rounding effect under light and the ability to detect longer wavelengths.139 The design of the device structure influences the performance, for example, a graphene/Si based Schottky diode was observed to possess a low dark current, a low NEP, and a high photoconductive gain due to the novel varactor device configuration.140 A graphene/Si device fabricated on a silicon on insulator (SOI) substrate showed an enhancement in operating speed upon the reduction in the thickness of the photoactive Si layer which hindered the speed limiting diffusion current.141 The rippled design of a ZnO/graphene/Ag stretchable photodetector resulted in a high carrier mobility, improved optical absorption, a photoresponsivity of 106 A W−1, a photoconductive gain of 107 and a detectivity of 1013 jones. The device showed an ability to be turned off by applying a suitable gate voltage and exhibited stable performance after 30% of stretching142 A self-integrated graphene/InGaN nanorod array/graphene device showed excellent photodetection performance in the UV region due to the 1D/2D heterojunction structure143 (Fig. 7(a–c)). A graphene/4H-SiC/graphene device showed tunability in the SBH with bias. The reduced SBH due to the improved absorption and the lifetime of photogenerated carriers of graphene resulted in a high responsivity of 40 A W−1 at 6 V with an EQE of 1.38 × 104%.144 A single layer graphene/carbon nanotube thin film based broadband detector exhibited good photodetection performance with reproducibility and the ability to probe a fast switching optical signal with a frequency of 5400 Hz.145 The performance of a p+-bilayer graphene/n-Hg0.8133Cd0.1867Te heterojunction was analyzed through simulation studies and validated using Chu's methods and a model based on drift-diffusion tunneling. The studies exhibited the ability of the device to work as a very long wavelength infrared photodetector with remarkable performance. Such performance was attributed to the carrier multiplication mechanism in graphene146 (Fig. 7(d–f)). In the case of graphene/GaAs based self-powered Schottky devices, the nanostructure of GaAs impacts the performance. For instance, Wu et al. demonstrated a graphene/GaAs nanosheet device with a fast response time of 71 μs.122 A monolayer graphene/GaAs nanocone array revealed the capability of the device for detecting optical signals with a frequency of 2000 Hz.147 A solution processed flexible ZnO/graphene device exhibited a high photo-to-dark current ratio of 102 and the photocurrent remained almost 95% of the maximum after 1000 bending cycles.148 Xiao et al. studied the dependence of photodetection performance on the lateral size of the junction of the graphene/WS2/Si detector.149 ZnO top gate-modulated graphene/germanium Schottky junction with Al2O3 passivation exhibits potential for infrared photodetection with a high responsivity of 0.75 A W−1.150 By comparing all the graphene-based reports, one can understand that graphene enables ultrafast, ultra-sensitive photodetection due to its intrinsic bandwidth, broadband absorption, utilization of integration with the waveguide, plasmonic enhancement, high conductive gain, etc.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the working principle of individual graphene/InGaN NR/graphene. (b) Energy band diagram of the photogenerated carrier transport mechanism of the graphene/InGaN NR device. (c) Spectral responsivity and EQE of the device under UV light illumination (340–500 nm) at a bias of 1 V (source (a–c): Y. Zheng, W. Wang, Y. Li, J. Lan, Y. Xia, Z. Yang, X. He and G. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 13589–13597, Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society). (d) The schematic energy bandgap diagram of a p+-BLG/n-Hg0.8133Cd0.1867TeVLWIR photodetector under illumination and reverse bias conditions. (e) The electric field profile across the device under different external biasing conditions demonstrating a high electric field. (f) J–V characteristics under different light illumination intensities (source (d–f): Reproduced from ref. 146 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry). 
5.2. Transition metal dichalcogenide (TMDC) based Schottky junction
The class of layered transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) includes over 40 compounds with the formula of MX2, where M denotes the transition metal from group IV to VII and X denotes the chalcogen such as S, Se and Te.151,152 TMDCs consist of a hexagonally packed metal atomic layer sandwiched by two chalcogen atomic layers. The weak van der Waals force between the layers along the Z-axis allows the bulk to be isolated to a monolayer. The different and fascinating optical and electronic properties of a monolayer compared to its bulk counterparts make them significant in photodetection applications.153,154 A monolayer MoS2 based self-contacted MSM detector exhibited a photoresponsivity of 15 A W−1 and a response time of 2 μs with drain and gate voltages of 4 V and 8 V, respectively.155 Nagamine et al. investigated the metallic and semiconducting phase dependent opto-electronic properties of MoS2 fabricated by the EB radiation method.105 The fast response was due to the short lifetime of the photo-excited carriers.156 An improvement in the photodetection of the MoS2 device was observed with porous Si. This was attributed to the higher barrier height, light trapping and junction area of the porous Si compared to planar Si.157 Liu et al. reported a lateral graphene/MoS2/graphene heterostructure photodetector with a responsivity of 2 × 103 mA W−1 and the maximum specific detectivity was as high as 1013 jones.158 An in-plane lateral graphene/MoS2 heterostructure showed good rectification characteristics, a photoresponsivity of 1.1 × 105 A W−1, and a detectivity of 1.4 × 1014 jones due to the strong absorption, improved photogenerated carrier separation and quick charge transportation.159 A thin p-type MoS2/graphene Schottky photodetector was demonstrated with a barrier height of 139 meV which resulted in a high photocurrent and a wide spectral range of detection with wavelength selectivity.160 Geng et al. fabricated a solution processed ultrathin MoSe2 nanosheet based heterojunction photodetector which exhibited an ultra-high response speed up to 30 ns, a high sensitivity to visible-near infrared light and a detectivity of ∼1.2 × 1012 jones.161 The top electrical contact is one of the important factors determining the photoresponse characteristics. Kumar et al. studied the influence of the top electrical contact on the photodetection performance of a MoS2 UV photodetector. Among the three different contacts ITO, Au/Ag and Pt/Ti, the ITO based one exhibited a very high detectivity of 1.81 × 1014 jones, a large photoresponsivity of 1.37 × 105 and a superior responsivity of 3 × 104 A W−1.162 A few-layer MoS2/(PEA)2SnI4 heterojunction device exhibited improved performance when few-layer graphene flakes were used as a contact. The spectral response peak was observed to be shifted in a wide spectral range from the band edge of MoS2 towards (PEA)2SnI4 which was tuned by the applied external bias163 (Fig. 8(a–c)). A single layer MoS2/Pd Schottky device exhibited a faster response than the one with ohmic conduction and an increase in photocurrent with a decrease in laser wavelength,164 whereas a bilayer MoS2/Ti device demonstrated a persistent photoconductivity of the device depending on the MoS2 channel length rather than the contact.165 A photodetector with lateral MoS2 grown on Au exhibited good detection capability with and without an external bias at 1310 nm due to the internal photoemission mechanism of the MoS2/Au electrode.166
 Fig. 8  (a) Spectral responsivity under different bias conditions. (b) Detectivity and (c) time-dependent photocurrent of the graphene/(PEA)2SnI4/MoS2/graphene detector (source (a–c): C. Fang, H. Wang, Z. Shen, H. Shen, S. Wang, J. Ma, J. Wang, H. Luo and D. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 8419–8427, Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society). (d) I–Vds curves of pristine WS2 and WSe2/WS2 photodetectors at Vgs = 40 V under dark and illumination conditions. (e) I–Vgs curves of the WSe2/WS2 photodetector under different illumination intensities. (f) Energy band diagram of a WSe2/WS2 photodetector (source (d–f): Reprinted with permission from T. H. Tsai, Z. Y. Liang, Y. C. Lin, C. C. Wang, K. I. Lin, K. Suenaga and P. W. Chiu, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 4559–4566, Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society). 
The charge carrier transport in the MoS2 and WSe2 device was observed to be controlled by the applied gate and drain voltages which modulated the barrier height between the metal and TMDC layer.167 A roentgenium-contacted WS2/WSe2 (monolayer/nanodots) photodetector showed ultrafast interlayer excitonic dynamics in the WSe2/WS2 heterojunction.168 They found the responsivity and gain to be 3 × 102 A W−1 and 7 × 102 electrons per photon, respectively. Fig. 8d–f show the I–V characteristics and operating mechanism of the WSe2/WS2 photodetector. Mossicotte et al. reported a graphene/WSe2/graphene photodetector with an ultrahigh response speed of 5.5 ps by optimizing the thickness of WSe2 and applied bias. The improvement in performance was ascribed to the photocarrier transport dynamics at the given bias.169 The channel length dependent photoresponse characteristics of a WS2 based device revealed SBH reduction upon trap state filling at the Au metal contact/WS2 which enabled current injection from the electrodes. A device with a 200 nm channel length exhibited a high gain and a very low dark current at 4 V bias. An increase in the channel length resulted in an increase in series resistance and therefore degradation of the performance.170 A chemically exfoliated graphene/WS2/graphene device showed the dependence of interface trap density on the external bias, which resulted in tunable barrier height and capacitance at the interface.171 Single and bilayer WS2 based Au/WS2/graphene devices showed a tunable rectifying behaviour with external gate voltage and laser irradiation. The bilayer device exhibited higher conductivity and responsivity compared to the single layer one.172 The tunability of polarity behavior from p-type to ambipolar and to n-type of a WS2 based device was achieved by modulating the bias voltage. The change was ascribed to the transition of band structures and SBHs under different bias.173 The current modulation obtained ranged from 2.25 × 103 at −60 V to 1.65 × 103 at +60 V and the photocurrent was enhanced to 52 μA when varying Vds to 1 V. The photoconductive response was thus enhanced to 122% when varying Vds from 0.5 to 1 V.109 The idea of a multimodal photodetector platform choosing both a lateral and a vertical diode structure enables a high gain and a fast response by switching between lateral and vertical operations which can be controlled with drain and gate voltages.174 A vertical Au/WSe2/ITO photodetector exhibited a very low dark current in the order of 10−12 A with a good self-powered photodetection ability in terms of response speed and the dark-to-photocurrent ratio.175 Luo et al. demonstrated a phase-transition modulated, dual-mode photodetector using the WSe2/VO2 heterojunction. Utilizing the insulator to metal transition (IMT) characteristics of VO2, a high photodetectivity of 1.87 × 1013 jones in the insulating phase and a high responsivity of 6.6 A W−1 in the metallic phase were achieved. The dual mode capability of the device was attributed to the change in the type II heterojunction to the Schottky junction upon the IMT which regulates the barrier height at the interface. The device also exhibited the tunability of photoresponse through laser writing and erasing functions.176
The advancements in polarization-sensitive photodetectors were made by Zhong and his team. A few-layer PdSe2-based photodetector was fabricated using micromechanical exfoliation and its electrical and opto-electrical properties were analyzed. Its strong linear dichroism behaviour enables to the detection of polarized light. lso It showed a photocurrent on/off ratio of >102 and a fast response time of <11 ms.177 PdSe2 deposited by atmospheric pressure chemical vapor deposition was observed to be stable in ambient environment for more than 6 months. In addition, the photodetector device showed a responsivity of 660 A W−1 under 914 nm laser irradiation.178 A detector composed of a vertically grown PtSe2/Si nanowire array showed good photodetection capability at 10 kHz with an external bias of −5 V, also exhibiting the ability to respond even at 120 kHz. Its good performance was ascribed to the better carrier transportation across the vertical layer and the improved charge carrier separation efficiency at the interface.179 A single layer ReSe2 FET encapsulated between h-BN demonstrated the highest mobility of ∼166 cm2 V−1 s−1 at 200 K under a bias of 47 V. The high mobility was attributed to the low-contact resistance along with a low SBH and reduced charge scattering of h-BN. Also, an enhancement in photocurrent, response speed, and broadband detection was observed upon Co+ doping.180 Xu et al. demonstrated few-layered HfS2 phototransistors with optimized thickness and appropriate metal contact engineering which exhibited a very high on/off ratio of ≈107, an exceptional photoresponsivity of around 890 A W−1 and a gain of 2300 under an external potential of 80 V.181
5.3. Black phosphorous based Schottky junction diodes
Black phosphorus (BP) is an emerging 2D material which has gained much importance in recent years because of its highly anisotropic crystal structure unlike other 2D materials, tunable bandgap structure (0.2–3 eV) and higher carrier mobility than the common transition metal dichalcogenides.114,182–184 BP is an advantageous material due to its non-toxicity, intrinsic ambipolar behaviour, and tunable thermal conductivity to fabricate functional electronic, significant photonic, and optoelectronic devices. Wu et al. showed for the first time that black phosphorus can be used in the assembly of an excellent UV photodetector with a specific detectivity of 3 × 1013 jones and a photo-responsivity of 9 × 104 A W−1 with an applied bias of 3 V.182 The photodetection performance of a BP based photodetector was observed to be improved by optimizing the channel length, processing temperature and incident photon energy.114 The channel length dependent photoresponse characteristics are shown in Fig. 9(a–d). Graphene–BP heterostructure diodes were observed to operate efficiently at NIR wavelengths with a photoresponsivity of 3.3 × 103 A W−1, a gain of 1.13 × 109 and τrise was nearly 4 ms at 1550 nm.185 A Fabry–Perot cavity enhanced BP/MoS2 heterojunction diode based mid-wave infrared detector reached a high response speed of 3 ns186 (Fig. 9e and f). Ye et al. demonstrated a broadband photodetector using a vertical photogate heterostructure of BP-on-WSe2 in which BP acts as the photogate and WSe2 as the conductive channel. Inkjet printed BP showed stability against oxidation for 30 days after encapsulation with parylene-C. The BP/graphene/Si device exhibited broadband detection with a response speed of 0.55 ms.111 Ultrahigh visible and infrared photoresponsivity at room temperature can reach up to 103 A W−1 and 5 × 10−1 A W−1, respectively, and visible and infrared specific detectivity of up to 1014 and 1010 jones, respectively, are obtained at room temperature.187 Recently Zou et al. demonstrated a Schottky barrier-controlled device with BP and the MAPbI3−xClx perovskite layer. The device demonstrated tunable photoresponse characteristics by the field-assisted de-trapping process of photogenerated carriers in the channel between the perovskite and source electrode.188
 Fig. 9  (a) Length-scaling dependence on the photoresponse asymmetric photoresponse of the device featuring a very short channel length. (b) Channel-length dependence of the photogenerated current at 20 and 300 K. (c) Energy-band diagram of the black phosphorus semiconductor. (d) Photoresponsivity of the devices with different channel lengths at different temperatures (source (a–d): M. Huang, M. Wang, C. Chen, Z. Ma, X. Li, J. Han and Y. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3481–3485). (e) Response of a Fabry–Perot enhanced BP/MoS2 photodiode. (f) Response of a FP enhanced BP/MoS2 device when illuminated with a pulsed laser (2 ns pulses) centered around a wavelength of 2.3 μm. The top plot shows the measured BP/MoS2 device photocurrent, and the bottom plot shows the analog output signal of pulse emission (source (e and f): Reprinted with permission from W. Yan, V. R. Shrestha, Q. Jeangros, N. S. Azar, S. Balendhran, C. Ballif, K. B. Crozier and J. Bullock, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 13645–13651, Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society). 
5.4. Schottky junction diodes with other 2D materials

5.4.1. Metal chalcogenides. 
In recent years, metal chalcogenides such as SnS2, In2S3, InSe, GaSe, etc. received great attention as transition metal chalcogenides in the 2D family due to their efficient photodetection performance and stability. SnS2 based detectors showed stability and a fast response speed of 5 μs.189 A WSe2/SnS2 photodetector showed an efficient performance in terms of a high photo-to-dark current ratio and specific detectivity.190 A graphene contacted SnS2 photodetector exhibited an excellent photodetection capability by charge trapping at the interface and SBH modulation.101Fig. 10a and b show the schematic representation of the transport mechanism of photo-induced carriers and the energy band diagram. The controlled synthesis of ultrathin β-InS3 by the space confined chemical vapor deposition method led to an improvement in the photodetection performance of graphene/InS3 in the near infrared region.191 An InSe/Au Schottky junction diode showed weak Fermi-level pinning at the interface, leading to a very low dark current below 1 pA and high photodetection performance.192 A GaSe based device with the conventional MSM structure exhibited a high photoresponsivity of 2.6 A W−1 at 380 nm.103 A GeSe based device exhibited a high photoconductive gain of 5.3 × 102 at 4 V in the near infra-red region.193 NbS3 photodetectors exhibited broadband photodetection with a very low noise current and good air stability at room temperature.194 A 2D PtSe2/Si device showed a high photocurrent at 1–7 μm due to the increased absorption and suppressed photocarrier recombination.195 The rectification characteristics of a GeSe/MoSe2 detector were improved by tuning the gate bias.196
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration explaining the transport mechanism of photoinduced carriers within SnS2 channels of different thicknesses. (b) Energy band diagram demonstrating the photogating mechanism of the SnS2 channel with Gr electrodes (source (a and b): Reprinted with permission from R. J. Chang, H. Tan, X. Wang, B. Porter, T. Chen, Y. Sheng, Y. Zhou, H. Huang, H. Bhaskaran and J. H. Warner, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 13002–13010, Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society). (c) MXene device pulse response–excitation by 100 fs pulses of 830 nm light at 8 V bias under various indicated optical powers (source (c): reproduced from ref. 200 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry). (d) Iph/Idark ratio along with photon energy of light at the Au/h-BN and Gr/h-BN junction. (e) Power dependence of the photocurrent for different energies of photons at the Au/h-BN junction and (f) at the graphene/h-BN junction (source (d–f): Reprinted with permission from Y. R. Kim, T. L. Phan, Y. S. Shin, W. T. Kang, U. Y. Won, I. Lee, J. E. Kim, K. Kim, Y. H. Lee and W. J. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 10772–10780, Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society). 


5.4.2. MXenes. 
MXenes are emerging as new candidates to the 2D family with the general stoichiometric formula of Mn+1XnTx (n = 1, 2, 3), where M denotes the transition metal, X denotes carbon or nitrogen and Tx denotes the surface functional groups.28,197 MXenes have attracted much attention owing to their fascinating optical and electrical properties.27,198 Their work function and other electrical properties can be tuned using surface functional groups and transition metals.28 Ti3C2Tx is a well-known MXene used for photodetection applications. A Ti3C2Tx–GaAs–Ti3C2Tx detector with Au as the metal contact exhibited good photodetection properties in the spectral range from visible to NIR.199 A flexible detector with Ti3C2Tx and TiO2 demonstrated UV detection capability with a responsivity of 6 mA W−1 and an on/off ratio of light of 103.200Fig. 10c demonstrates the pulse response of the MXene device under various optical sources.


5.4.3. Others. 
Liquid phase exfoliated 2D boron nanosheets revealed self-powered photodetection capability with a photoresponsivity of 9.17 μA W−1 and a response speed of 0.02 s in the UV region.201 A h-BN based photodetector with graphene and Au demonstrated dark current to be as low as 10−13 A, a photo-to-dark current ratio of 225 and a response speed in the order of microseconds. Fig. 10d shows the dependence of the photo-to-dark current ratio on wavelength. The improvement was attributed to the asymmetric contacts. The small hole barrier at the Au/h-BN junction was responsible for the high photocurrent, and the large electron barrier at the graphene/h-BN interface was attributed to the low dark current. The asymmetric behaviour generated additional hot carriers which enable a high photocurrent that can overcome the Schottky barrier.124Fig. 10e and f depict the power dependency of photocurrent for different photon energies at the Au/h-BN junction and at the graphene/h-BN junction. A h-BN based flexible device exhibited a fast response speed of 0.2 s due to the band to band excitation of nanosheets and the internal photoemission of the h-BN/Cu junction.202 CVD grown Bi2O2Se nanosheets which were transferred to a Si substrate by the non-corrosive transfer method exhibited high photodetection ability in terms of high photoresponsivity (104 A W−1), photoconductive gain (104), detectivity (1013), response speed (ms) and low dark current (pA) in the visible region.203 Zhu et al. established reduced graphene oxide (rGO)/Si Schottky devices with a high on/off ratio and a fast response in the visible region.204 Recently, Chaitara et al. demonstrated solution processed ultra-thin Bi2O2S nanosheet photodetectors with a photoresponsivity of 4 A W−1, an EQE of more than 600%, a normalized photo-to-dark ratio of 1.3 × 1010 W−1 and a response speed of 100 ms in the NIR region (Table 1).205
Table 1 Comparative photodetection performance of the Schottky contacted photodetector devices based on 2D materials




Active layer
Spectral range
Responsivity (A W−1)
Detectivity (jones)
Response time (s)
Bias voltage (V)
Ref.




Graphene/Si
Vis-NIR
0.5 × 10−3
—
0.36 × 10−10
80

127



Graphene/Si
Vis
0.52
5.77 × 1013
40 × 10−6
0

128



Graphene/4HC-SiC/graphene
UV
40
9 × 1011
—
6

144



Graphene/Si
IR
138 × 10−3
1.6 × 109
370 × 10−6
0

131



Graphene/ZnO
UV
113
—
0.7 × 10−3
−1

138



Graphene/CNT
UV-NIR
209 × 10−3
4.87 × 1010
68 × 10−6
−3

145



Graphene/GaAs
NIR
1.73 × 10−3
1.83 × 1011
72 × 10−6
0

147



Graphene/WS2/Si
Vis-NIR
54.5
4.1 × 1012
45 × 10−6
−0.3

149



Graphene/Ge
NIR
0.75
2.5 × 109
60 × 10−6
−10

150



PDMS/graphene/Cu
UV
3 × 106
4.2 × 1013
10 × 10−3
0

142



Graphene/InGaN
UV
2.7 × 104
—
47.7 × 10−6
1

143



MoS2
Vis
15
—
2 × 10−6
8

155



MoS2/(PEA)2SnI4
Vis-NIR
0.121
8.09 × 109
34 × 10−3
0

163



Graphene–MoS2
Vis
1.1 × 105
1.4 × 1014
100 × 10−3
−5

159



Graphene–MoS2
Vis-NIR
1.26
4.2 × 1010


2

160



MoS2
UV
3 × 104
1.81 × 1014
32 × 10−3
2

162



MoS2/WS2
Vis
4.36 × 10−3
4.36 × 1013
4 × 10−3
0

206



MoSe2
Vis
0.8 × 10−3
1.2 × 1012
30 × 10−9
0

161



MoTe2/Au hollow nanorods
NIR
5.07
6.34 × 1011
Millisecond
−5

207



WSe2/graphene
Vis-NIR
20 × 10−3
—
5.5 × 10−10
0.4

169



Au/WSe2/ITO
Vis-NIR
0.1
—
50 × 10−6
0

175



PdSe2
Vis
3.5 × 10−3
—
11 × 10−3
1

177



PtSe2
UV-NIR
12.65
2.5 × 1013
10.1 × 10−6
−5

179



HfS2
Vis
890
1.3 × 1010
38 × 10−3
80

181



BP
Vis
7 × 106
—
0.005
−15

114



BP
UV-Vis-NIR
9 × 104
3 × 1013
200
−80

182



BP/MoS2
MWIR
0.11
1.7 × 109
3 × 10−9
5

186



BP-on-WSe2
UV-Vis-IR
103
104
9 × 10−4
0.5

187



BP/MAPbI3−xClx
UV-NIR
108
9 × 1013
10 × 10−3
−2

188



SnS2
Vis
14.634
—
5 × 10−6
0.15

189



WSe2/SnS2
Vis
244
1.29 × 1013
24 × 10−3
1

190



Gr/In2S3
Vis
0.49 × 10−3
3.05 × 107
—
1

191



Gr/SnS2/Gr
Vis
20
4 × 1014
—
20

101



GaSe
Vis
2.6
1.0 × 1012
1.2
5

103



NbS3
Vis-MWIR
24.7
5.7 × 108
11.6 × 10−6
0

194



Ti2C2Tx/GaAs/Ti2C2Tx
Vis
278 × 10−3
11.6 × 1010
225 × 10−10
8

199



Ti2C2Tx/TiO2
UV
6 × 10−3
—
2.54
5

200



Boron
UV
91.7 × 10−6
1.6 × 108
1.8
0

201



Bi2O2Se
Vis
3.5 × 104
9 × 1013
0.44 × 10−3
0.5

203



Bi2O2S
Vis-NIR
4
—
100 × 10−3
5

205






6. Several strategies for the enhancement in the photodetection of SJD based photodetectors
In recent years, several strategies have been adopted to improve the photodetection performance of 2D materials including gating, surface modification, doping, band structure engineering, etc. (Fig. 11).
 Fig. 11  Various approaches used to improve the photodetection performance of Schottky contacted 2D materials. 
6.1. Photogating
As we know, through the photogating effect, the localized charged traps modify the SBH and tune the Fermi level, resulting in high photoresponse and gain of a PD. Quantum dots have the ability to increase light absorption and they can inject photocarriers into 2D thin layer materials. Wu et al. fabricated a photodetector composed of CsPbI3−xBrx perovskite QDs and monolayer MoS2. Due to the combined effect of photogating and Schottky barrier modulation with gate voltage, an optimized device showed a responsivity of 7.7 × 104 A W−1, a specific detectivity of ≈5.6 × 1011 jones, and an EQE exceeding 107%. A graphene/MoS2 Schottky detector was observed to have an improvement in the on–off ratio, mobility and subthreshold voltage by back gate voltage modulation which alters the SBH.208 An ultrahigh responsivity of 1.4 × 104 A W−1, broadband detection due to the photogating effect from the trap states, and improved photoconductivity and response speed were observed for a mesoscopic multilayer MoS2 based detector.209 Trap-assisted gating affects the carrier density and the Fermi level in 2D materials. The photogating effect changes the Fermi-level position, and therefore a change in photoconductivity from negative to positive was observed in a MoTe2 device.210 Multilayer WSe2 covered with nitrogen doped graphene quantum dots showed a photoresponsivity of 2578 A W−1 which is 480% higher than that of other reported multilayer WSe2 based photodetectors. The improvement was attributed to backgate voltage modulation211 (Fig. 12a–c). In another work, a HfO2 encapsulated MoS2 photodetector demonstrated gate controllable gain and speed. By tuning the gate voltage the responsivity was increased 4-fold and the strong negative gate voltage led to a higher response speed of 10 ms.212 The photogating effect induced by the traps extended the spectral detection range of the WS2/WSe2 detector168 and improved the photoconductive gain in MoS2212 and MoTe2/graphene based detectors.213
 Fig. 12  (a) Optical microscopy image of multilayer WSe2 and multilayer WSe2/N-GQDs. (b) ML WSe2/NGQD photodetector responsivity as a function of both back-gate voltage and bias voltage. (c) The dependence of the ML WSe2/N-GQD photodetector responsivity on back-gate voltage with different power densities (source (a–c): Reprinted with permission from D. A. Nguyen, H. M. Oh, N. T. Duong, S. Bang, S. J. Yoon and M. S. Jeong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 10322–10329, Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society). (d) Schematic illustration of the ReS2 TFTs before and after O2 plasma treatment with a resistor network model (source (d): J. Shim, A. Oh, D. H. Kang, S. Oh, S. K. Jang, J. Jeon, M. H. Jeon, M. Kim, C. Choi, J. Lee, S. Lee, G. Y. Yeom, Y. J. Song and J. H. Park, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6985–6992). (e) Semi-logarithmic I–V curves of h-BN based detectors with variations in the carbon concentration. (f) Dark current and photocurrent plot of the h-BN device under 20 V bias (source (e and f): Reprinted with permission from Y. Wang, Y. Wang, J. Meng, Y. Tian, Y. Tian, Y. Chen, Y. Chen, G. Wang, G. Wang, Z. Yin, Z. Yin, P. Jin, P. Jin, J. You, J. You, J. Wu, X. Zhang and X. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 27361–27367, Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society). 
6.2. Surface modification
Different types of surface modifications such as oxygen treatment, hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) treatment, nitrogen treatment and laser designing play a pivotal role in boosting the functioning of a PD. Bartolomeo et al. demonstrated a highly responsive graphene/Si device in which single-layer graphene was transferred onto a nanotip patterned Si substrate. The nanotip pattern led to the linear tuning of the barrier height, an improvement in light absorption and carrier collection.214 The Schottky barrier of a graphene/Al:ZnO detector under UV light was observed to be stable by the double surface plasma treatment which reduced the interface states between graphene and Al:ZnO. The self-powered device showed photoresponsivity and response time of 0.039 A W−1 and 37 μs, respectively.215 The electronic properties of MoTe2 were tuned by in situ Al modification which led to an enhancement in the gain due to surface functionalization. The increased carrier concentration and mobility and the change in transport characteristics resulted in a gain of 195.216 The photodetection performance of a multilayer MoS2 based device was improved by the localized Au/MoS2 Schottky junction. The patterned Au nanodisks led to an enhancement in photogain by the generation of additional hole traps, which affects the charge neutrality in the channel and encourages the electron injection from the source.217 The surface modification of ReS2 by oxygen plasma treatment enhanced the mobility, on/off ratio and speed. The improvement in performance was due to the defects created by the O2 treatment which affects the drain current and the recombination of photo-generated carriers.218Fig. 12d presents the schematic illustration of the device before and after plasma treatment with the resistor network model. The faster response speed and the broadband detection of graphene based Schottky devices were achieved by laser patterning. A photodetector with laser patterned epitaxial graphene sandwiched between un-patterned epitaxial graphene exhibited a nanosecond response and wavelength independent detection from 200 to 1064 nm with a responsivity of 0.1 A W−1.219 The carrier polarity of MoTe2 was modulated by N2 and O2 treatment. The device exhibited an EQE of 7.84 × 102, and rise and fall times of 29 and 38 ms, respectively. The separation and collection of photogenerated carriers was improved by the addition of a MoO3 film.220 A transition from ohmic contact to Schottky contact was observed in a ZnO/graphene device after the H2O2 surface treatment.221 The surface modification of graphene with MoO3 in a graphene/Si photodetector improved the detectivity and external quantum efficiency of the device by the increase in SBH at the interface and the decrease in series resistance.222
6.3. Doping
Altering different dopants and their concentrations can also be helpful to improve the performance of a PD. The photoresponse characteristics of graphene/Si solar cells were observed to be enhanced to 3 orders of magnitude by adding a P3HT thin film. The improvement in performance compared to bare graphene/Si solar cells was attributed to the surface charge doping from P3HT to graphene.223 Wang et al. reported an improvement in the photodetection performance of h-BN based devices by carbon doping. Doping assists in the formation of defects, grain boundaries, as well as reduced band gap, and therefore an increase in photocurrent.224Fig. 12e and f present the semi-logarithmic I–V curves and the dark and photocurrent plot of h-BN based devices. Effective surface transfer of electron and hole doping on a few-layer BP FET device through in situ surface functionalization with Cs2CO3 and MoO3 layers was studied. A significant enhancement in electron mobility up to 27 cm2 V−1 s−1 was observed after 10 nm Cs2CO3 modification. In contrast, MoO3 exhibits giant hole-doping effects on the hole mobility of BP devices, reaching 200 cm2 V−1 s−1.225 An enhancement in the responsivity of SnS2 was achieved by Sb doping which altered the Schottky barrier width and enhanced the optical absorption. The decrease in Schottky barrier boosted the photocurrent tunneling at the metal–semiconductor interface.189
6.4. Contact engineering
To tune the SBH properly, contact engineering with different metals and semiconductors can be utilized, which would modify the Fermi level along with the band structure. A multilayer HfS2 based detector exhibited good photoresponse characteristics, increased mobility, and high on/off ratio and gain due to the reduction in the Schottky barrier between the metal and semiconductor.181 A MoS2 based detector demonstrated a high responsivity of 1.4 × 104 A W−1 and a decay time of 100 μs when Mo was used as the back metal contact. The reduced Schottky barrier between graphene and Ag made the MoS2/graphene based device have a high on/off current ratio of 4 × 108.226 An improvement in the photodetection of a WS2 based self-powered photodetector was achieved through proper contact engineering which modulates the SBH.227 Miao et al. fabricated a black phosphorus SJD with gold and aluminum electrodes which exhibited a photoresponsivity of 0.035 A W−1 and a fast response time of less than 2 ms.110Fig. 13a shows the semi-logarithmic I–V curve of devices with different channel lengths.
 Fig. 13  (a) Semi-logarithmic IDS–VDS characteristics of long channel length (L ≈ 1 μm) and ultrashort channel length (L ≈ 30 nm)/BP Schottky diodes (source (a): J. Miao, S. Zhang, L. Cai and C. Wang, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1500346). (b) The performance of a graphene/ZnO detector under different strains with an illumination intensity of 25.12 μW cm−2. Dependence of responsivity on (c) strain and (d) Schottky barrier height change (source (b and d): S. Liu, Q. Liao, S. Lu, Z. Zhang, G. Zhang and Y. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1347–1353). (e) Photocurrent of an InSe photodetector as a function of illumination power at 530 nm recorded in the three environments of the panel. (f) I–t characteristics at VSD = 1 V with illumination at 530 nm (power density: 450 mW μm−2) under different atmospheres (source (e and f): reproduced from ref. 233 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry). 
6.5. Strain engineering
The electronic structure, carrier behaviour and transport dynamics of 2D materials can be tuned by the strain modulation technique. Upon the application of 0.349% strain, a 17% enhancement in photosensing properties was observed in a graphene/ZnO device (Fig. 13b). The piezopotential induced by the displacement of atoms in ZnO improved the carrier separation efficiency by lowering the conduction band energy and hence led to an increase in SBH between graphene and ZnO.228 The photoresponsivity dependence on the strain and SBH change is depicted in Fig. 13c and d, respectively. Zhu et al. fabricated a fiber-shaped ZnO/graphene device where the ZnO arrays were grown on a Zn wire, and a graphene film is wrapped outside. The novel structure and the conformal contact between ZnO and graphene enhanced the charge carrier separation and collection. Further, the performance was improved upon the application of −0.33% compressive strain due to the piezoelectric field.97 A 26% enhancement in the responsivity of a ZnO/graphene detector was observed under a tensile strain of 0.44% on the ZnO nanowire. The enhancement in performance was attributed to the positive piezopotential which improved the injection of photo-induced electrons from ZnO into graphene.229 Maiti et al. reported a strain-induced absorption-enhanced MoTe2 nanocrystal-based silicon photonic microring-integrated photodetector with a high responsivity of ∼0.5 A W−1 at 1550 nm and a low noise equivalent power of 90 pW Hz–0.5. A device with MoTe2 wrapped around a non-planarized silicon waveguide exhibited a decrease in the bandgap, a reduction in dark current and an enhancement in the photoresponse characteristics.230 In another work, In2S3 was coupled with Si nano-grating and the resulted strain suppressed the dark current by one order of magnitude and increased the photocurrent by two orders of magnitude. The improvement was endorsed by the change in the local band structure of In2S3 and resulted in a successive built-in electric field induced by charge localization.231
6.6. Defect engineering
Defect engineering also helps to enhance the FOMs of a PD to some extent by creating vacancies or defects. Xie et al. demonstrated a reduction in the dark current and room temperature detection in the terahertz region by vacancy engineering of a MoS2 device. The vacancy concentration and resistivity of MoS2 were thought to be responsible for the generation and transport of extra carriers driven by terahertz radiation. MoS2.19 possessed a higher carrier concentration, a reduced bandgap and a low resistivity. The device achieved a high photoresponsivity of 10 mA W−1 upon 2.52 THz illumination.232 An improvement in the response speed of InSe detectors was achieved when the devices were exposed to air. Passivation of Se vacancies by oxygen species led to a decrease in the trap state density as well as in Fermi-level pinning ensuring the escalation of the SBH and change in speed.233Fig. 13e and f demonstrate the photocurrent and I–t characteristics of a detector under three environments.
6.7. Other strategies
Apart from all the above approaches, some additional modifications can also be implemented, which is conferred as follows to achieve a better operation of a PD. A Ag incorporated graphene/Si device exhibited broadband detection with increased optical absorption due to the plasmonic Ag nanoparticles.234 Unsuree et al. reported an improvement in graphene/Si photodetectors by increasing the local electric field in graphene. The electric field enhancement at the graphene edges led to a 10-fold increase in the photoresponse.235 The photodetection performance of a single layer graphene/Si device was improved by the integration of the Fabry–Perot cavity. The optical absorption of graphene is enhanced by multiple reflections at the cavity resonance.236 An enhancement in the photoresponsivity as well as response speed of a Si/GNW device was observed upon the insertion of a diamond like carbon layer. The improvement was ascribed to the better adhesion and the graphitization transition of the carbon layer at high temperature which encourages the charge transport.237 The spectral detection range of a ReS2 based detector was extended from visible to near IR by PPh3 doping and the insertion of an APTES layer.238 A MoS2/Znpc Schottky device exhibited a response speed of 8 ms by gate modulation and the introduction of an Al2O3 passivation layer.239 The photodetection performance of a graphene/Ge device was observed to be enhanced by the introduction of an Al2O3 interfacial layer.240 2D/2D vertical stacking of a MoS2 metallic/semiconducting device exhibited reduced carrier recombination, a higher carrier density, and a high EQE due to the proper interface matching.241 An ultrafast response speed of 12 μs was achieved for a graphene/PtSe2/β-Ga2O3 device by utilizing a 2D/3D stacking structure.242 The photoelectric properties of MoS2 were observed to be enhanced by laser micro-patterning. The localized modification and thinning of films induced by laser patterning resulted in a 4-fold increase in the photocurrent.243 The photoresponse characteristics with different laser modified areas is shown in Fig. 14a. The tunability of the rectification behaviour of a MoS2 based device with asymmetrical contacts was achieved by tuning the external gating and laser illumination.244 The optical absorption and photoresponsivity of a Au–MoS2 device was observed to be improved by the introduction of a gap-mode plasmon structure.245 The improvement in the light absorption and photodetection performance of an InSe/Ti2CTx photodetector was achieved upon patterning of the plasmonic structure of Ti2CTx.246 Qi et al. improved the contact at the MoTe2/Au interface through phase engineering where the SBH was controlled by a simple thermal annealing process.108 Jeon et al. constructed a hybrid black phosphorus/Au nanoparticle-based photodetector with a responsivity of 6000 A W−1 and 500 A W−1 in the visible and NIR regions, respectively, which were 60 and 500 times more than those of black phosphorus photodetectors.247Fig. 14b and c show the I–V characteristics and the measured responsivity under different wavelengths. A Si quantum dot coupled graphene/Si hybrid structured device exhibited excellent photodetection efficiency. The Si quantum dots increased the built-in potential at the junction and reduced the optical reflection.248 The optical characteristics of Si quantum dots are shown in Fig. 14d. The photodetection efficiency of an InSe based photodetector was observed to be improved by the avalanche effect. Fig. 14e depicts the photocurrent spectra of the InSe detector with and without Al nanodisks. Fig. 14f shows the dark-field scattering spectrum of Al nanodisks. The large Schottky barrier at the interface of InSe/Al causes avalanche multiplication. When the metal contact (Al) was patterned on the photosensitive layer (InSe), a plasmonic enhancement of the photosensitivity was observed.249 Wang et al. conducted a study on a dual-surface plasmon enhanced Si Schottky photodetector with graphene inserted between Au nanoparticles as the hybrid electrode. This proposed device showed a broad range of sensitivity from ultraviolet to near-infrared light (360–1330 nm) at room temperature, with a response speed of 360 ns and a 3 dB bandwidth of 780 kHz at zero bias. The enhanced performance arises from the effective increase in electric field and light capturing phenomena of the device at resonant and off-resonant wavelengths.108 Liu et al. investigated the role of ultrathin insulator layers in Metal Insulator Semiconductor (MIS) structured self-powered photodetectors. Reduced dark current and enhanced photosensitivity were observed in a graphene/Si device with the introduction of a graphene oxide intermediate layer.250 An improvement in the performance of MoS2/Pd devices with the insertion of Al2O3 and HfO2 layers was observed.251 The dark current of a MoS2/GaAs photodetector was decreased upon the insertion of h-BN between them due to the photo-induced doping and the highest detectivity of 1.9 × 1014 jones was observed.252 A MoTe2/Ge heterojunction device exhibited a 4-fold decrease in dark current upon the introduction of a thin GeO2 layer, whereas reduced responsivity and detectivity were observed.253 The NIR detection performance of a MoTe2 based detector was found to be improved by the introduction of gold hollow nanorods. The enhancement was ascribed to the rapid increase in the absorption rather than the electron transport at the interface.207 The effect of an interface oxide layer (SiO2) in graphene/Si diodes was explored and an improvement in response speed was achieved. The device exhibited an ultrafast response speed in the order of tens of nanoseconds by engineering the thickness and doping concentration of the Si substrate which governed the drift and diffusion current upon light illumination.254
 Fig. 14  (a) Photoresponse characteristics of MoS2 devices with different laser modified areas (source (a): Reprinted with permission from J. Lu, J. H. Lu, H. Liu, B. Liu, K. X. Chan, J. Lin, W. Chen, K. P. Loh and C. H. Sow, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6334–6343, Copyright © 2014 American Chemical Society). (b) Dark current and photocurrent of BP and BP-Au NP devices using a 405 nm wavelength laser. (c) Responsivity of the BP-Au NP device using 655, 785, and 980 nm wavelength lasers (source (b and c): Reprinted from S Jeon, J. Jia, J. Ju and S. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2019, 115, 183102 with permission from AIP Publishing). (d) Optical absorption and PL spectra of Si QDs (source (d): T. Yu, F. Wang, Y. Xu, L. Ma, X. Pi and D. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4912–4919). (e) Photoresponse of the device patterned with an Al nanodisk array as a function of laser illumination intensity at 5, 15, and 30 V bias voltages. (f) Photocurrent spectra of InSe (blue) and InSe decorated with Al nanodisks (red), and the dark-field scattering spectrum of the Al nanodisk arrays (green) (source (e and f): Reprinted with permission from S. Lei, F. Wen, L. Ge, S. Najmaei, A. George, Y. Gong, W. Gao, Z. Jin, B. Li, J. Lou, J. Kono, R. Vajtai, P. Ajayan and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3048–3055, Copyright © 2015 American Chemical Society). 
6.8. SJD of 2D material based self-powered photodetectors
Self-powered photodetectors are designed to be portable, lightweight, compact, and low power consuming, and self-reliantly accomplish photodetection without an external bias. Schottky junction diodes have the capability of operating in the self-powered mode due to the built-in electric field at the junction which can effectively separate the carriers without any external bias. The self-powered graphene/Ge photodetector showed a high on/off ratio of 2 × 104 and a photoresponsivity of 51.8 mA W−1.98 Periyagounder et al. reported a graphene and silicon self-powered photodetector with a barrier potential of 0.76 eV which had a responsivity of over 500 mA W−1, an on/off ratio of 105, and a τ of 130 μs without bias.255 Power dependent photoresponse characteristics are shown in Fig. 15a and b. Wu et al. investigated the self-powered photovoltaic photodetection capability of single layer MoS2–WS2 lateral heterostructures. The device exhibited a spectral responsivity of 4.36 mA W−1 and a detectivity of 4.36 × 1013 jones in the visible region.206 A CdSe/graphene based device exhibited an improvement in the light on/off ratio and photoresponse time.256 A CdSe nanobelt/graphene flexible detector showed a responsivity of 8.7 A W−1, a sensitivity of 1.2 × 105 and a response time of 70 ms under 633 nm light irradiation with a 3500 Hz switching frequency.257 The self-powered detection was observed with a graphene/MoSe2/Au device due to the asymmetrical contact nature where the Schottky junction between MoSe2 and graphene enabled the device to work without any bias and the ohmic conduction between Au and MoSe2 resulted in a fast response.258 A graphene/single GaAs nanowire Schottky junction photovoltaic device demonstrated a high photoresponsivity of 231 mA W−1 and a fast recovery time of 85/118 μs at zero bias.259 Luo et al. fabricated a bilayer graphene/gallium arsenide SJD based near infrared self-powered photodetector. Its electrical characterization indicates that the heterostructure with an AlOx nanofilm sustains the conventional photovoltaic features after overlay passivation. An enhancement in photoresponse characteristics was observed after the addition of an AlOx passivation layer.260 The I–V characteristics and photoresponse of a graphene/GaAs device with and without an intermediate layer are shown in Fig. 15e and f. The vertical Schottky structure of Au/MoS2/ITO led to improved self-powered photodetection in the broadband spectrum.206 The photovoltaic detection of a MoS2 based device was observed by employing the unilateral junction design and narrow bandgap of black arsenic phosphorus. The reduced trapping at the interface due to the unilateral depletion region greatly enhanced the photovoltaic detection of the device.261 A self-powered GeSe device with asymmetric contacts of Cr/Au and Pd/Au demonstrated good reproducible photodetection performance in the NIR region.262 Zhou et al. constructed a WSe2 based self-powered photodetector with an asymmetric contact geometry. The device showed a responsivity of 2.31 A W−1, a detectivity of 9.16 × 1011 jones and an ultra-low dark current of only ≈1 fA.227 A SnS/graphene photodetector exhibited a high responsivity of 1.7 × 104 A W−1 and a fast response speed. The high performance was attributed to the better separation of carriers at the interface.263 An In2S3 based photodetector exhibited self-powered performance with a responsivity of 740 mA W−1 and a response speed of 10 ms. The asymmetric contact combined with the photogating effect suppressed the reverse current and extended the lifetime of the photogenerated carriers.264 An InSe self-powered photodetector was fabricated by loading a gold plasma nanoparticle array on the upper layer. The detection range was observed to be extended up to the NIR region.265 A self-powered UV photodetector created on two dimensional boron nitride nanosheets exhibited a high photocurrent, a fast response and good stability.266 A MXene/Si based photodetector exhibited good performance due to the effective disjunction and transference of the light-excited carriers.112Fig. 15c and d show the power dependent J–V and photoresponse characteristics. Zheng et al. reported a SnO2 quantum dot coupled graphene/bulk-Si Schottky device with excellent photodetection performance due to the increased optical absorption and built-in potential at the graphene/Si interface.123 A self-powered photodetector based on the FA1−xCsxPbI3 perovskite with a PdSe2 layer showed a broad response range from the deep ultraviolet to near-infrared region. Also, the device showed a high on/off ratio (≈104), a good polarization sensitivity (≈6.04) and a response speed of 3.5/4 μs.267
 Fig. 15  (a) Laser power dependent on/off ratio and responsivity of the photodetector. (b) Photoresponse of the Gr/Si photodetector under different light intensities upon the illumination of a 532 nm laser (source (a and b): reproduced from ref. 255 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry). (c) J–V curves of a Ti3C2Tx/n-Si heterostructure device under illumination at various energy intensities. (d) Power-dependent photoresponsivity and Iph/Idark ratio (source (c and d): Z. Kang, Y. Ma, X. Tan, M. Zhu, Z. Zheng, N. Liu, L. Li, Z. Zou, X. Jiang, T. Zhai and Y. Gao, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1700165). I I–V characteristics and (f) photoresponse of a graphene/GaAs device with and without an AlOx intermediate layer (source (e and f): Reprinted from ref. 260 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.) 
7. Conclusion and future directions
In this review article, we assessed the recent advances and future perspectives of Schottky contacted photodetectors based on 2D materials along with their basic concepts and evaluation parameters. Ultrathin few layered 2D materials and their heterostructures were described to show enhanced photodetection performance in a broad wavelength range due to an ultrahigh surface-to-volume ratio, tunable electronic and optical properties and active surface sites. The Schottky contact between the 2D materials and metals can greatly enhance the photodetector performance where the Schottky barrier acts as a “gate” controller for the current leaving through the barrier. If the SBH is adjusted, then it can lead to a large difference in current values of the photodetector device and is the basis to achieve enhanced performance. Herein, we provided comprehensive information on the latest developments in photodetectors based on different 2D materials including graphene, TMDCs, metal oxides, black phosphorous and their heterojunctions. Finally, we discussed different approaches to further enhance the photodetection performance of these Schottky contacted 2D materials.
Although Schottky contacted 2D materials have shown promising photodetection performance, the novel emerging 2D materials and their heterojunctions need to be further explored and their working mechanisms need to be investigated by spectroscopic experiments. Perovskite materials are emerging as an important class of advanced optoelectronic materials, and Schottky contacted devices based on the heterostructures of perovskites and 2D materials may evolve as efficient photodetector devices with a dramatically improved sensitivity or external spectral response varying from the UV-Vis to the NIR region. Further, self-powered flexible and printable photodetectors based on Schottky contacted 2D materials and their hybrids with perovskites need to be explored in detail. Still, there is plenty of room for investigation in this research field. A lot of changes have been made starting from decreasing the number of layers and optimizing the doping concentration to use different approaches such as defect and vacancy engineering, intercalation of other atoms, forming alloys and fabricating heterostructures in different anisotropic directions which will result in enhanced performance of a PD. For example, the responsivity of graphene based devices can be improved by introducing an intermediate layer with optimum thickness such as Al2O3 and by surface modification techniques. The response speed of TMDC based devices can be enhanced by altering the SBH via the photogating effect. Doping of perovskite quantum dots could improve the carrier separation as well as the optical absorption. Integrating with Au plasmonic nanoparticles could enhance the performance of the 2D materials in Schottky devices in terms of responsivity and wide spectral detection range. Introducing MXenes and their quantum dots in 2D material based composites could also significantly enhance the detection capability.
In-depth research is needed to be carried out to address the drawbacks such as a low power and temperature operation in different interfering surroundings, speed, multifunctionality and stability. Also, due to the availability of a wide range of metals or metal-like materials, the selection of an appropriate metal with suitable work function, electron affinity of the semiconducting material, its interface and energy band structure, etc. need to be investigated to gain insights into the detection mechanism. By utilizing piezotronic and piezophototronic effects of the Schottky contacted photodetectors of 2D materials, enhanced performance can be achieved. We believe that, with further exploration on Schottky junction photodetectors of 2D materials and their heterojunctions, this research segment can emerge as the best contender for the development of future photodetectors and optoelectronic devices.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the Department of Science and Technology (DST)-SERB Early Career Research Project (Grant No. ECR/2017/001850), DST (DST/NM/NT/2019/205(G); DST/TDT/SHRI-34/2018), and Karnataka Science and Technology Promotion Society (KSTePS/VGST-RGS-F/2018-19/GRD No. 829/315). The authors would also like to acknowledge the support from SRMIST and DST-SERB (File No. ECR/2015/000513), Government of India.
References
C. Xie, C. Mak, X. Tao and F. Yan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1603886 CrossRef .
F. H. L. Koppens, T. Mueller, P. Avouris, A. C. Ferrari, M. S. Vitiello and M. Polini, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 780–793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Huo and G. Konstantatos, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801164 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Lancellotti, T. Polichetti, F. Ricciardella, O. Tari, S. Gnanapragasam, S. Daliento and G. Di Francia, Thin Solid Films, 2012, 522, 390–394 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, S. P. Lau and F. Yan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5638–5679 RSC .
X. Li, L. Tao, Z. Chen, H. Fang, X. Li, X. Wang, J. Bin Xu and H. Zhu, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2017, 4, 021306 Search PubMed .
S. Tongay, M. Lemaitre, X. Miao, B. Gila, B. R. Appleton and A. F. Hebard, Phys. Rev. X, 2012, 2, 1–10 Search PubMed .
M. Long, P. Wang, H. Fang and W. Hu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1803807 CrossRef .
M. Chhowalla, Z. Liu and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2584–2586 RSC .
A. Castellanos-Gomez, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4280–4291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, X. Hu, J. Yu, S. Liu, Z. Shu, Q. Zhang, H. Li, Y. Ma, H. Xu and T. Zhai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706587 CrossRef .
N. G. Sahoo, R. J. Esteves, V. D. Punetha, D. Pestov, I. U. Arachchige and J. T. McLeskey, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 1–5 CrossRef .
D. S. Schulman, A. J. Arnold and S. Das, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 3037–3058 RSC .
H. Wang and D. H. Kim, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 5204–5236 RSC .

          M. S. Tyagi, Met. Schottky Barrier Junctions Their Applications,  1984, pp. 1–60 Search PubMed .
A. Allain, J. Kang, K. Banerjee and A. Kis, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1195–1205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Tian, Y. Wang, L. Chen and L. Li, Small, 2017, 13, 1–22 Search PubMed .
H. Qiao, Z. Huang, X. Ren, S. Liu, Y. Zhang, X. Qi and H. Zhang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2020, 8, 1900765 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, T. Shen, C. Wang, Y. Zhang, J. Qi and H. Zhang, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12, 106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, K. Xu, F. Pan, C. Zhou, F. Zhou and Y. Chai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1603484 CrossRef .
X. Bao, Q. Ou, Z. Q. Xu, Y. Zhang, Q. Bao and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2018, 3, 1800072 CrossRef .
H. S. Nalwa, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 30529–30602 RSC .
D. H. Shin and S. H. Choi, Micromachines, 2018, 9, 350 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Miao, S. Zhang, L. Cai and C. Wang, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1500346 CrossRef .
F. Wang, Z. Wang, L. Yin, R. Cheng, J. Wang, Y. Wen, T. A. Shifa, F. Wang, Y. Zhang, X. Zhan and J. He, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6296–6341 RSC .
L. Zhang, B. Wang, Y. Zhou, C. Wang, X. Chen and H. Zhang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2020, 8, 72–81 Search PubMed .
B. Wang, S. Zhong, P. Xu and H. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 403, 126336 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, A. Ren, J. Wu and Z. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2000907 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, S. Zhong, Y. Ge, H. Wang, X. Luo and H. Zhang, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 891–918 CrossRef CAS .
X. Guan, X. Yu, D. Periyanagounder, M. R. Benzigar, J. K. Huang, C. H. Lin, J. Kim, S. Singh, L. Hu, G. Liu, D. Li, J. H. He, F. Yan, Q. J. Wang and T. Wu, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2020, 2001708 Search PubMed .
G. Rao, X. Wang, Y. Wang, P. Wangyang, C. Yan, J. Chu, L. Xue, C. Gong, J. Huang, J. Xiong and Y. Li, InfoMat, 2019, 1, 272–288 CrossRef CAS .
E. P. Mukhokosi, G. V. S. Manohar, T. Nagao, S. B. Krupanidhi and K. K. Nanda, Micromachines, 2020, 11, 1–30 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wang, J. Han, X. Chen and X. Wang, InfoMat, 2019, 1, 33–53 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Cui, Y. Yang, J. Li, F. Teng and X. Wang, Crystals, 2017, 7, 149 CrossRef .
H. Wang, H. Yuan, S. Hong and Y. Cui, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2664–2680 RSC .
S. Bertolazzi, M. Gobbi, Y. Zhao, C. Backes and P. Samorì, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6845–6888 RSC .
F. Yi, H. Ren, J. Shan, X. Sun, D. Wei and Z. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 3152–3188 RSC .
V. W. Brar, M. C. Sherrott and D. Jariwala, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6824–6844 RSC .
Y. Xu, C. Cheng, S. Du, J. Yang, B. Yu, J. Luo, W. Yin, E. Li, S. Dong, P. Ye and X. Duan, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 4895–4919 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lin, Y. Lu, J. Xu, S. Feng and J. Li, Nano Energy, 2017, 40, 122–148 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, L. Tao, Z. Chen, H. Fang, X. Li, X. Wang, J.-B. Xu and H. Zhu, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2017, 4, 021306 Search PubMed .
M. Mathew and C. S. Rout, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 395–416 RSC .

          H. Lüth, Surfaces and Interfaces of Solids,  1993, pp. 372–428 Search PubMed .

          Y. Wang, Disruptive Wide Bandgap Semiconductors, Related Technologies, and Their Applications,  2018 DOI:10.5772/intechopen.77024 .
R. T. Tung, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2001, 35, 1–138 CrossRef .
J. Zhou, Y. Gu, Y. Hu, W. Mai, P.-H. Yeh, G. Bao, A. K. Sood, D. L. Polla and Z. L. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 191103 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yang, W. Guo, J. Qi, J. Zhao and Y. Zhang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 223113 CrossRef .
D. Wu, Y. Jiang, Y. Zhang, Y. Yu, Z. Zhu, X. Lan, F. Li, C. Wu, L. Wang and L. Luo, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 23272–23276 RSC .
W. Liu, J. Wei, X. Sun and H. Yu, Crystals, 2013, 3, 257–274 CrossRef CAS .
I. Shtepliuk, T. Iakimov, V. Khranovskyy, J. Eriksson, F. Giannazzo and R. Yakimova, Crystals, 2017, 7, 162 CrossRef .
S. Sonde, F. Giannazzo, V. Raineri and E. Rimini, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2009, 247, 912–915 CrossRef .
M. L. Cohen, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., 1979, 16, 1135–1136 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hnilička, A. Voda and H.-J. Schröder, Sens. Actuators, A, 2005, 120, 494–506 CrossRef .
A. Asgari and S. Razi, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, 14604–14615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. Prabhakar, N. Mathews, K. B. Jinesh, K. R. G. Karthik, S. S. Pramana, B. Varghese, C. H. Sow and S. Mhaisalkar, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 9678–9683 RSC .
N. Li, Z. Lan, L. Cai and F. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 3711–3729 RSC .
J. Ye, M. F. Craciun, M. Koshino, S. Russo, S. Inoue, H. Yuan, H. Shimotani, A. F. Morpurgo and Y. Iwasa, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 13002–13006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. K. Chaudhari, H. Jin, B. Kim, D. S. Baek, S. H. Joo and K. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 24564–24579 RSC .
S. Z. Butler, S. M. Hollen, L. Cao, Y. Cui, J. A. Gupta, H. R. Gutiérrez, T. F. Heinz, S. S. Hong, J. Huang, A. F. Ismach, E. Johnston-Halperin, M. Kuno, V. V. Plashnitsa, R. D. Robinson, R. S. Ruoff, S. Salahuddin, J. Shan, L. Shi, M. G. Spencer, M. Terrones, W. Windl and J. E. Goldberger, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2898–2926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chia and M. Pumera, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 909–921 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pierucci, H. Henck, J. Avila, A. Balan, C. H. Naylor, G. Patriarche, Y. J. Dappe, M. G. Silly, F. Sirotti, A. T. C. Johnson, M. C. Asensio and A. Ouerghi, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4054–4061 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sun and H. Chang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4133–4156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gao, Y. Yi, X. Wang, H. Meng, D. Lei, X. Yu, P. K. Chu and J. Li, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900763 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wen, J. Fu, L. Han, Y. Liu, M. Peng, L. Zheng, Y. Zhu, X. Sun and Y. Zi, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 11893–11902 RSC .
H. Zhou, J. Li and B. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 6558–6564 RSC .
W. Jiang, T. Zheng, B. Wu, H. Jiao, X. Wang, Y. Chen, X. Zhang, M. Peng, H. Wang, T. Lin, H. Shen, J. Ge, W. Hu, X. Xu, X. Meng, J. Chu and J. Wang, Light: Sci. Appl., 2020, 9, 160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, C. Gao, H. Duan, B. Lu, X. Pan and E. Xie, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 640–645 CrossRef CAS .
O. Lopez-Sanchez, D. Lembke, M. Kayci, A. Radenovic and A. Kis, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 497–501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xia, T. Mueller, R. Golizadeh-Mojarad, M. Freitag, Y. Lin, J. Tsang, V. Perebeinos and P. Avouris, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1039–1044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Mueller, F. Xia, M. Freitag, J. Tsang and P. Avouris, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 1–6 CrossRef .
E. J. H. Lee, K. Balasubramanian, R. T. Weitz, M. Burghard and K. Kern, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 486–490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P.-F. Wang, Y. Liu, J. Yin, W. Ma, Z. Dong, W. Zhang, J.-L. Zhu and J.-L. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 887–896 RSC .
S. Schuler, D. Schall, D. Neumaier, B. Schwarz, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi and T. Mueller, ACS Photonics, 2018, 5, 4758–4763 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yang, J. Chen, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, J. He and X. Fang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808182 CrossRef .
H. Fang and W. Hu, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700323 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Ye, P. Wang, W. Luo, F. Gong, L. Liao, T. Liu, L. Tong, J. Zang, J. Xu and W. Hu, Nano Energy, 2017, 37, 53–60 CrossRef CAS .
T. Q. Trung, V. Q. Dang, H.-B. Lee, D.-I. Kim, S. Moon, N.-E. Lee and H. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 35958–35967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Luo, M. Zhu, Y. tan, H. Sun, W. Luo, G. Peng, Z. Zhu, X.-A. Zhang and S. Qin, AIP Adv., 2018, 8, 115106 CrossRef .
H. Huang, J. Wang, W. Hu, L. Liao, P. Wang, X. Wang, F. Gong, Y. Chen, G. Wu, W. Luo, H. Shen, T. Lin, J. Sun, X. Meng, X. Chen and J. Chu, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 445201 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Guo, W. Wang, H. Nan, Y. Yu, J. Jiang, W. Zhao, J. Li, Z. Zafar, N. Xiang, Z. Ni, W. Hu, Y. You and Z. Ni, Optica, 2016, 3, 1066–1070 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hu, D. Dong, X. Yang, K. Qiao, D. Yang, H. Deng, S. Yuan, J. Khan, Y. Lan, H. Song and J. Tang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 27, 1603605 CrossRef .
W. Zhang, C.-P. Chuu, J.-K. Huang, C.-H. Chen, M.-L. Tsai, Y.-H. Chang, C.-T. Liang, Y.-Z. Chen, Y.-L. Chueh, J.-H. He, M.-Y. Chou and L.-J. Li, Sci. Rep., 2015, 4, 1–8 CAS .
D. K. Hwang, Y. T. Lee, H. S. Lee, Y. J. Lee, S. H. Shokouh, J. Kyhm, J. Lee, H. H. Kim, T.-H. Yoo, S. H. Nam, D. I. Son, B.-K. Ju, M.-C. Park, J. D. Song, W. K. Choi and S. Im, NPG Asia Mater., 2016, 8, e233 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Y. Liu, S. Qin, Y. Xu, R. Zhang and F. Wang, Nano Res., 2016, 10, 1880–1887 CrossRef .
W. Liu, W. Wang, Z. Guan and H. Xu, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 4918–4924 RSC .
T. J. Echtermeyer, P. S. Nene, M. Trushin, R. V. Gorbachev, A. L. Eiden, S. Milana, Z. Sun, J. Schliemann, E. Lidorikis, K. S. Novoselov and A. C. Ferrari, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3733–3742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lu, P. Jiang and X. Bao, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–10 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Liu, Y. Liu, S. Dong, H. Xu, Y. Wu, L. Hao, B. Cao, M. Li, Z. Wang, Z. Han and K. Yan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 49830–49839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Lemme, F. H. L. Koppens, A. L. Falk, M. S. Rudner, H. Park, L. S. Levitov and C. M. Marcus, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4134–4137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. W. Song, M. S. Rudner, C. M. Marcus and L. S. Levitov, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4688–4692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. M. Gabor, J. C. W. Song, Q. Ma, N. L. Nair, T. Taychatanapat, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, L. S. Levitov and P. Jarillo-Herrero, Science, 2011, 334, 648–652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, W. Yin, Q. Han, X. Yang, H. Ye, Q. Lv and D. Yin, Chin. Phys. B, 2016, 25, 118103 CrossRef .
J. Yan, M.-H. Kim, J. A. Elle, A. B. Sushkov, G. S. Jenkins, H. M. Milchberg, M. S. Fuhrer and H. D. Drew, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 472–478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sun, J.-P. Chou, Q. Ren, Y. Zhao, J. Yu and W. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 110, 173105 CrossRef .
J.-J. Zeng and Y.-J. Lin, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 133506 CrossRef .
D. Ju, X. Liu, Z. Zhu, S. Wang, S. Liu, Y. Gu, J. Chang, Q. Liu and Y. Zou, Nanotechnology, 2019, 30, 375701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhu, S. Wang, Y. Zhu, X. Liu, Y. Zou, Y. Gu, D. Ju and H. Zeng, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1800136 CrossRef .
L.-H. Zeng, M.-Z. Wang, H. Hu, B. Nie, Y.-Q. Yu, C.-Y. Wu, L. Wang, J.-G. Hu, C. Xie, F.-X. Liang and L.-B. Luo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 9362–9366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Trushin, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 112, 171109 CrossRef .
Y. An, A. Behnam, E. Pop and A. Ural, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 013110 CrossRef .
R. J. Chang, H. Tan, X. Wang, B. Porter, T. Chen, Y. Sheng, Y. Zhou, H. Huang, H. Bhaskaran and J. H. Warner, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 13002–13010 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liao, Y. Koide and J. Alvarez, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 033504 CrossRef .
S. Sorifi, M. Moun, S. Kaushik and R. Singh, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2020, 2, 670–676 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lee, Y. Lee, D. Young Kim, E. B. Song and S. Min Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 242114 CrossRef .
Y. Nagamine, J. Sato, Y. Qian, T. Inoue, T. Nakamura, S. Maruyama, S. Katsumoto and J. Haruyama, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2020, 117, 043101 CrossRef CAS .
Y. K. Hong, G. Yoo, J. Kwon, S. Hong, W. G. Song, N. Liu, I. Omkaram, B. Yoo, S. Ju, S. Kim and M. S. Oh, AIP Adv., 2016, 6, 055026 CrossRef .
A. Islam and P. X.-L. Feng, J. Appl. Phys., 2017, 122, 085704 CrossRef .
L. Wang, S.-J. He, K.-Y. Wang, H.-H. Luo, J.-G. Hu, Y.-Q. Yu, C. Xie, C.-Y. Wu and L.-B. Luo, Nanotechnology, 2018, 29, 505203 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Z. Iqbal, M. M. Faisal, A. M. Afzal, S. S. Haider, S. R. Ali, M. A. Kamran, T. Alharbi and T. Hussain, Phys. E, 2020, 117, 113837 CrossRef CAS .
J. Miao, S. Zhang, L. Cai and C. Wang, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1500346 CrossRef .
G. Hu, T. Albrow-Owen, X. Jin, A. Ali, Y. Hu, R. C. T. Howe, K. Shehzad, Z. Yang, X. Zhu, R. I. Woodward, T.-C. Wu, H. Jussila, J.-B. Wu, P. Peng, P.-H. Tan, Z. Sun, E. J. R. Kelleher, M. Zhang, Y. Xu and T. Hasan, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1–10 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Kang, Y. Ma, X. Tan, M. Zhu, Z. Zheng, N. Liu, L. Li, Z. Zou, X. Jiang, T. Zhai and Y. Gao, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1700165 CrossRef .
B. Wang, S. Zhong, P. Xu and H. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 403, 126336 CrossRef CAS .
M. Huang, M. Wang, C. Chen, Z. Ma, X. Li, J. Han and Y. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3481–3485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang and D. H. Kim, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 5204–5236 RSC .
C. Xie, C. Liu, H. Loi and F. Yan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 30, 1903907 CrossRef .
A. K. Geim, Science, 2009, 324, 1530–1534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. G. Papageorgiou, I. A. Kinloch and R. J. Young, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2017, 90, 75–127 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shim, H. Y. Park, D. H. Kang, J. O. Kim, S. H. Jo, Y. Park and J. H. Park, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1600364 CrossRef .
M. Amirmazlaghani, F. Raissi, O. Habibpour, J. Vukusic and J. Stake, IEEE J. Quantum Electron., 2013, 49, 589–594 CAS .
K. Xu, C. Xu, Y. Xie, J. Deng, Y. Zhu, W. Guo, M. Xun, K. B. K. Teo, H. Chen and J. Sun, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2015, 62, 2802–2808 Search PubMed .
Y. Wu, X. Yan, X. Zhang and X. Ren, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 183901 CrossRef .
Z. Zheng, J. Yao, L. Zhu, W. Jiang, B. Wang, G. Yang and J. Li, Mater. Horiz., 2018, 5, 727–737 RSC .
Y. R. Kim, T. L. Phan, Y. S. Shin, W. T. Kang, U. Y. Won, I. Lee, J. E. Kim, K. Kim, Y. H. Lee and W. J. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 10772–10780 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Tan, Y. Fan, Y. Zhou, Q. Chen, W. Xu and J. H. Warner, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7866–7873 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Azadmanjiri, V. K. Srivastava, P. Kumar, Z. Sofer, J. Min and J. Gong, Appl. Mater. Today, 2020, 19, 100600 CrossRef .
F. Xia, T. Mueller, Y. M. Lin, A. Valdes-Garcia and P. Avouris, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 839–843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shen, X. Liu, X. Song, X. Li, J. Wang, Q. Zhou, S. Luo, W. Feng, X. Wei, S. Lu, S. Feng, C. Du, Y. Wang, H. Shi and D. Wei, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 6020–6025 RSC .
Y. An, A. Behnam, E. Pop, A. Ural, Y. An, A. Behnam, E. Pop and A. Ural, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 013110 CrossRef .
Q. Zhou, X. Liu, E. Zhang, S. Luo, J. Shen, Y. Wang and D. Wei, AIP Adv., 2017, 7, 125317 CrossRef .
X. Liu, Q. Zhou, S. Luo, H. Du, Z. Cao, X. Peng, W. Feng, J. Shen and D. Wei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 17663–17669 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wan, Y. Xu, H. Guo, K. Shehzad, A. Ali, Y. Liu, J. Yang, D. Dai, C. Te Lin, L. Liu, H. C. Cheng, F. Wang, X. Wang, H. Lu, W. Hu, X. Pi, Y. Dan, J. Luo, T. Hasan, X. Duan, X. Li, J. Xu, D. Yang, T. Ren and B. Yu, npj 2D Mater. Appl., 2017, 1, 1–8 CrossRef .
I. Goykhman, U. Sassi, B. Desiatov, N. Mazurski, S. Milana, D. De, A. Eiden, J. B. Khurgin, J. Shappir, U. Levy and A. C. Ferrari, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3005–3013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Casalino, C. Russo, A. Ciajolo, E. Di Gennaro, M. Iodice and G. Coppola, ACS Photonics, 2018, 5, 4577–4585 CrossRef CAS .
R. Liu, X. You, X. Fu, F. Lin, J. Meng, D. Yu and Z. Liao, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 1–6 Search PubMed .
H. Liu, R. Gao, J. Yang, F. Yang, T. Wang, Z. Zhang, X. Liu, H. Jia, B. Xu and H. Ma, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 525, 146476 CrossRef CAS .
Y. K. Lee, H. Choi, H. Lee, C. Lee, J. S. Choi, C. G. Choi, E. Hwang and J. Y. Park, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Nie, J. G. Hu, L. B. Luo, C. Xie, L. H. Zeng, P. Lv, F. Z. Li, J. S. Jie, M. Feng, C. Y. Wu, Y. Q. Yu and S. H. Yu, Small, 2013, 9, 2872–2879 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Apicella, T. A. Fasasi, S. Wang, S. Lei and A. Ruotolo, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2019, 5, 1900594 CrossRef CAS .
A. Levi, M. Kirshner, O. Sinai, E. Peretz, O. Meshulam, A. Ghosh, N. Gotlib, C. Stern, S. Yuan, F. Xia and D. Naveh, ACS Photonics, 2019, 6, 1910–1915 CrossRef CAS .
H. Selvi, E. W. Hill, P. Parkinson and T. J. Echtermeyer, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 18926–18935 RSC .
G. Haider, Y. H. Wang, F. J. Sonia, C. W. Chiang, O. Frank, J. Vejpravova, M. Kalbáč and Y. F. Chen, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2020, 8, 1900653 CrossRef .
Y. Zheng, W. Wang, Y. Li, J. Lan, Y. Xia, Z. Yang, X. He and G. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 13589–13597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, X. Xu, X. Chen and J. Cai, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2020, 117, 071102 CrossRef .
T. F. Zhang, Z. P. Li, J. Z. Wang, W. Y. Kong, G. A. Wu, Y. Z. Zheng, Y. W. Zhao, E. X. Yao, N. X. Zhuang and L. B. Luo, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 1–8 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bansal, K. Sharma, P. Jain, N. Sardana, S. Kumar, N. Gupta and A. K. Singh, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 39579–39592 RSC .
L. B. Luo, J. J. Chen, M. Z. Wang, H. Hu, C. Y. Wu, Q. Li, L. Wang, J. A. Huang and F. X. Liang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 2794–2800 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ju, X. Liu, Z. Zhu, S. Wang, S. Liu, Y. Gu, J. Chang, Q. Liu and Y. Zou, Nanotechnology, 2019, 30, 375701 CrossRef CAS .
R. Xiao, C. Lan, Y. Li, C. Zeng, T. He, S. Wang, C. Li, Y. Yin and Y. Liu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1901304 CrossRef CAS .
K. E. Chang, C. Kim, T. J. Yoo, M. G. Kwon, S. Heo, S. Kim, Y. Hyun, J. I. Yoo, H. C. Ko and B. H. Lee, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2019, 5, 1800957 CrossRef .
N. Choudhary, M. A. Islam, J. H. Kim, T. J. Ko, A. Schropp, L. Hurtado, D. Weitzman, L. Zhai and Y. Jung, Nano Today, 2018, 19, 16–40 CrossRef CAS .
S. Susarla, A. Kutana, J. A. Hachtel, V. Kochat, A. Apte, R. Vajtai, J. C. Idrobo, B. I. Yakobson and C. S. Tiwary, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702457 CrossRef .
C. R. Ryder, J. D. Wood, S. A. Wells and M. C. Hersam, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3900–3917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gong, Y. Zhang, W. Chen, J. Chu, T. Lei, J. Pu, L. Dai, C. Wu, Y. Cheng, T. Zhai, L. Li and J. Xiong, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700231 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Khadka, T. E. Wickramasinghe, M. Lindquist, R. Thorat, S. H. Aleithan, E. Martin, E. Stinaff, S. Khadka, T. E. Wickramasinghe, M. Lindquist, R. Thorat, S. H. Aleithan, M. E. Kordesch and E. Stinaff, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 110, 261109 CrossRef .
C. Zhang, W. Chan, S. Tiwari, F. Rana and H. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6–11 Search PubMed .
J. Ma, H. Bai, W. Zhao, Y. Yuan and K. Zhang, Sol. Energy, 2018, 160, 76–84 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, Y. Chen, C. You, Y. Liu and X. Kong, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 779, 140–146 CrossRef CAS .
W. Deng, Y. Chen, C. You, B. Liu, Y. Yang, G. Shen, S. Li, L. Sun, Y. Zhang and H. Yan, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2018, 4, 1800069 CrossRef .
P. Vabbina, N. Choudhary, A. A. Chowdhury, R. Sinha, M. Karabiyik, S. Das, W. Choi and N. Pala, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 15206–15213 CrossRef CAS .
X. Geng, Y. Yu, X. Zhou, C. Wang, K. Xu, Y. Zhang, C. Wu, L. Wang, Y. Jiang and Q. Yang, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 2641–2651 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kumar, A. Sharma, Y. T. Ho, A. Pandey, M. Tomar, A. K. Kapoor, E. Y. Chang and V. Gupta, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 835, 155222 CrossRef CAS .
C. Fang, H. Wang, Z. Shen, H. Shen, S. Wang, J. Ma, J. Wang, H. Luo and D. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 8419–8427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. F. Wang, H. M. Zhao, S. H. Shen, Y. Pang, P. Z. Shao, Y. T. Li, N. Q. Deng, Y. X. Li, Y. Yang and T. L. Ren, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 201904 CrossRef .
A. Di Bartolomeo, A. Grillo, F. Urban, L. Iemmo, F. Giubileo, G. Luongo, G. Amato, L. Croin, L. Sun, S. Liang and L. K. Ang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1800657 CrossRef .
Y. Mao, P. Xu, Q. Wu, J. Xiong, R. Peng, W. Huang, S. Chen, Z. Wu and C. Li, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2021, 7, 2001138 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, D. Lee, M. Choi, D. Qu, X. Liu, C. Ra and W. Yoo, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 1–7 Search PubMed .
T. H. Tsai, Z. Y. Liang, Y. C. Lin, C. C. Wang, K. I. Lin, K. Suenaga and P. W. Chiu, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 4559–4566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Massicotte, P. Schmidt, F. Vialla, K. G. Schädler, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, K. J. Tielrooij and F. H. L. Koppens, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 11, 1–6 Search PubMed .
Y. Fan, Y. Zhou, X. Wang, H. Tan, Y. Rong and J. H. Warner, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2016, 4, 1573–1581 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Desai, N. Adhikari and A. B. Kaul, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 25805–25816 RSC .
H. Huang, Y. Sheng, Y. Zhou, Q. Zhang, L. Hou, T. Chen, R. Chang and J. H. Warner, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 6874–6881 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, L. Huang, Y. Xiao, Y. Li, Y. Zhao, D. Luo, L. Tao, M. Zhang, T. Feng, Z. Zheng and X. Feng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 2745–2751 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Namgung, J. Shaver, S. Oh and S. J. Koester, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 10500–10506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Luo, F. Wu, M. Long and X. Chen, Nanotechnology, 2018, 29, 444001 CrossRef .
H. Luo, B. Wang, E. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Sun, Q. Li, S. Fan, C. Cheng and K. Liu, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2019, 6, 041407 Search PubMed .
J. Zhong, J. Yu, L. Cao, C. Zeng, J. Ding, C. Cong and Z. Liu, Nano Res., 2020, 6, 1780–1786 CrossRef .
W. Xu, J. Jiang, H. Ma, Z. Zhang, J. Li, B. Zhao, R. Wu, X. Yang, H. Zhang, B. Li, W. Shu, Z. Zhang, B. Li, Y. Liu, L. Liao and X. Duan, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 2091–2097 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zeng, S. Lin, Z. Lou, H. Yuan, H. Long, Y. Li, W. Lu, S. P. Lau, D. Wu and Y. H. Tsang, NPG Asia Mater., 2018, 10, 352–362 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Khan, S. Rehman, I. Akhtar, S. Aftab, H. M. S. Ajmal, W. Khan, D. K. Kim and J. Eom, 2D Mater., 2019, 7, 015010 CrossRef .
K. Xu, Z. Wang, F. Wang, Y. Huang, F. Wang, L. Yin, C. Jiang and J. He, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7881–7887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, G. Koon, D. Xiang, C. Han, C. Toh, E. Kulkarni, I. Verzhbitskiy, A. Carvalho, A. Rodin, S. Koenig and G. Eda, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 8070–8077 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Huang and X. Ling, Small, 2017, 13, 1700823 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Chen, N. Li, X. Chen, W. J. Ong and X. Zhao, 2D Mater., 2017, 5, 014002 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, B. N. Shivananju, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, W. Yu, S. Xiao, T. Sun, W. Ma, H. Mu, S. Lin, H. Zhang, Y. Lu, C. W. Qiu, S. Li and Q. Bao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 36137–36145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yan, V. R. Shrestha, Q. Jeangros, N. S. Azar, S. Balendhran, C. Ballif, K. B. Crozier and J. Bullock, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 13645–13651 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Ye, P. Wang, W. Luo, F. Gong, L. Liao, T. Liu, L. Tong, J. Zang, J. Xu and W. Hu, Nano Energy, 2017, 37, 53–60 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zou, Y. Li, G. Tang, P. You and F. Yan, Small, 2019, 15, 1901004 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liu, X. Liu, Z. Chen, L. Miao, X. Liu, B. Li, L. Tang, K. Chen, Y. Liu, J. Li, Z. Wei and X. Duan, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 463–468 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, X. Hu, S. Zhou, H. Song, Q. Zhang, L. Pi, L. Li, H. Li, J. Lü and T. Zhai, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1–8 Search PubMed .
L. Chen, Z. Li and C. Yan, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 23662–23667 RSC .
Q. Zhao, W. Jie, T. Wang, A. Castellanos-gomez and R. Frisenda, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2001307 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, B. Jiang, Z. Zhang, Z. Wang, X. He, D. Wan, X. Zou, X. Liu, L. Liao and F. Shan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2020, 116, 141101 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, P. Wu, Z. Wang, M. Luo, F. Zhong, X. Ge, K. Zhang, M. Peng, Y. Ye, Q. Li, H. Ge, J. Ye, T. He, Y. Chen, T. Xu, C. Yu, Y. Wang, Z. Hu, X. Zhou, C. Shan, M. Long, P. Wang, P. Zhou and W. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2005037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Shawkat, S. Bin Hafiz, M. M. Islam, S. A. Mofid, D. Chanda, T. Roy, D. Ko and Y. Jung, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 15542–15550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hussain, S. H. A. Jaffery, A. Ali, C. D. Nguyen, S. Aftab, M. Riaz, S. Abbas, S. Hussain, Y. Seo and J. Jung, Sci. Rep., 2021, 11, 3688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 992–1005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, J. Lu, K. Luo, Y. Li, K. Chang, K. Chen, J. Zhou, J. Rosen, L. Hultman, P. Eklund, P. O. Å. Persson, S. Du, Z. Chai, Z. Huang and Q. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 4730–4737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Montazeri, M. Currie, L. Verger, P. Dianat, M. W. Barsoum and B. Nabet, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, Z. Li, F. Ni, W. Ouyang and X. Fang, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 1828–1833 RSC .
D. Ma, R. Wang, J. Zhao, Q. Chen, L. Wu, D. Li, L. Su, X. Jiang, Z. Luo, Y. Ge, J. Li, Y. Zhang and H. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 5313–5323 RSC .
S. Veeralingam, L. Durai, P. Yadav and S. Badhulika, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2021, 3, 1162–1169 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Fu, C. Zhu, X. Zhao, X. Wang, A. Chaturvedi, C. Zhu, X. Wang, Q. Zeng, J. Zhou, F. Liu, B. K. Tay, H. Zhang, S. J. Pennycook and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804945 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Zhu, X. Li, Y. Guo, X. Li, P. Sun and X. Zang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 4–9 Search PubMed .
B. Chitara, T. B. Limbu, J. D. Orlando, Y. Tang and F. Yan, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 16285–16291 RSC .
W. Wu, Q. Zhang, X. Zhou, L. Li, J. Su, F. Wang and T. Zhai, Nano Energy, 2018, 51, 45–53 CrossRef CAS .
J. You, Y. Yu, K. Cai, D. Zhou, H. Zhu, R. Wang, Q. Zhang, H. Liu, Y. Cai, D. Lu, J. K. Kim, L. Gan, T. Zhai and Z. Luo, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 1636–1643 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tian, Z. Tan, C. Wu, X. Wang, M. A. Mohammad, D. Xie, Y. Yang, J. Wang, L. Li, J. Xu and T. Ren, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 1–9 Search PubMed .
G. A. Saenz, G. Karapetrov, J. Curtis and A. B. Kaul, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 1–11 CAS .
H. J. Kim, K. J. Lee, J. Park, G. H. Shin, H. Park, K. Yu and S. Y. Choi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 38563–38569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Nguyen, H. M. Oh, N. T. Duong, S. Bang, S. J. Yoon and M. S. Jeong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 10322–10329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kufer and G. Konstantatos, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7307–7313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yu, S. Li, Y. Zhang, W. Ma, T. Sun, J. Yuan, K. Fu and Q. Bao, Small, 2017, 13, 1–8 Search PubMed .
A. Di Bartolomeo, F. Giubileo, G. Luongo, L. Iemmo, N. Martucciello, G. Niu, M. Fraschke, O. Skibitzki, T. Schroeder and G. Lupina, 2D Mater., 2017, 4, 1–11 Search PubMed .
L. Duan, F. He, Y. Tian, B. Sun, J. Fan, X. Yu, L. Ni, Y. Zhang, Y. Chen and W. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 8161–8168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Qi, C. Han, X. Rong, X. W. Zhang, M. Chhowalla, A. T. S. Wee and W. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 9464–9472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lee, J. Park, Y. Yun, J. Lee and J. Heo, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1900053 CrossRef .
J. Shim, A. Oh, D. H. Kang, S. Oh, S. K. Jang, J. Jeon, M. H. Jeon, M. Kim, C. Choi, J. Lee, S. Lee, G. Y. Yeom, Y. J. Song and J. H. Park, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6985–6992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Singh, V. Nalla, W. Chen, A. T. S. Wee and W. Ji, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 5969–5975 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Aftab, S. Rabia, S. Yousuf, M. U. Khan, R. Khawar, A. Younus, M. Manzoor, M. W. Iqbal and M. Z. Iqbal, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 15687–15696 RSC .
D. Chen, Y. Xin, B. Lu, X. Pan, J. Huang, H. He and Z. Ye, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 529, 147087 CrossRef CAS .
D. Xiang, C. Han, Z. Hu, B. Lei, Y. Liu, L. Wang, W. P. Hu and W. Chen, Small, 2015, 11, 4829–4836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Aydın, S. Kalkan, C. Varlikli and C. Çelebi, Nanotechnology, 2018, 29, 145502 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Wang, J. Meng, Y. Tian, Y. Tian, Y. Chen, Y. Chen, G. Wang, G. Wang, Z. Yin, Z. Yin, P. Jin, P. Jin, J. You, J. You, J. Wu, X. Zhang and X. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 27361–27367 CrossRef CAS .
D. Xiang, C. Han, J. Wu, S. Zhong, Y. Liu, J. Lin, X. Zhang, A. H. C. Neto, A. Thye, S. Wee, W. Chen, W. P. Hu and O. Barbaros, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 1–8 Search PubMed .
S. S. Chee, D. Seo, H. Kim, H. Jang, S. Lee, S. P. Moon, K. H. Lee, S. W. Kim, H. Choi and M. H. Ham, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804422 CrossRef .
C. Zhou, S. Raju, B. Li, M. Chan, Y. Chai and C. Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802954 CrossRef .
S. Liu, Q. Liao, S. Lu, Z. Zhang, G. Zhang and Y. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1347–1353 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, Q. Liao, Z. Zhang, X. Zhang, S. Lu, L. Zhou and M. Hong, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 3476–3485 CrossRef CAS .
R. Maiti, C. Patil, M. A. S. R. Saadi, T. Xie, J. G. Azadani, B. Uluutku, R. Amin, A. F. Briggs, M. Miscuglio, D. Van Thourhout, S. D. Solares, T. Low, R. Agarwal, S. R. Bank and V. J. Sorger, Nat. Photonics, 2020, 14, 578–584 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, J. Yao, J. Yan, W. Gao, L. Huang, Z. Zheng, M. Zhang and J. Li, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 1427–1435 RSC .
Y. Xie, F. Liang, S. Chi, D. Wang, K. Zhong, H. Yu, H. Zhang, Y. Chen and J. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 7351–7357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhao, W. Wang, F. Carrascoso-Plana, W. Jie, T. Wang, A. Castellanos-Gomez and R. Frisenda, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 252–262 RSC .
M. E. Ayhan, G. Kalita and M. Tanemura, RSC Adv., 2014, 51, 26866–26871 RSC .
N. Unsuree, H. Selvi, M. Crabb, J. Alanis, P. Parkinson and T. Echtermeyer, 2D Mater., 2019, 6, 041004 CrossRef CAS .
M. Casalino, U. Sassi, I. Goykhman, A. Eiden, E. Lidorikis, S. Milana, D. De Fazio, F. Tomarchio, M. Iodice, G. Coppola and A. C. Ferrari, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 10955–10963 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, L. Tang, W. Luo, S. Feng, C. Leng, H. Shi and X. Wei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 4692–4702 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Jo, H. Y. Park, D. H. Kang, J. Shim, J. Jeon, S. Choi, M. Kim, Y. Park, J. Lee, Y. J. Song, S. Lee and J. H. Park, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6711–6718 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, F. Zhuge, J. Hou, L. Lv, P. Luo, N. Zhou, L. Gan and T. Zhai, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 4062–4073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. H. Lee, C. Kim, T. J. Yoo, H. J. Hwang, K. E. Chang and M. G. Kwon, Nanophotonics, 2021, 10, 1573–1579 CrossRef .
W. Wang, X. Zeng, J. H. Warner, Z. Guo, Y. Hu, Y. Zeng, J. Lu, W. Jin, S. Wang, J. Lu, Y. Zeng and Y. Xiao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 33325–33335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wu, Z. Zhao, W. Lu, L. Rogée, L. Zeng, P. Lin, Z. Shi, Y. Tian, X. Li and Y. H. Tsang, Nano Res., 2021, 14, 1973–1979 CrossRef .
J. Lu, J. H. Lu, H. Liu, B. Liu, K. X. Chan, J. Lin, W. Chen, K. P. Loh and C. H. Sow, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6334–6343 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, W. Xu, T. Chen, R. J. Chang, Y. Sheng, Q. Zhang, L. Hou and J. H. Warner, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 37258–37266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Jin, K. J. Lee, C. M. Park, G. H. Shin, W. Hong, D. Oh and S. Y. Choi, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2021, 54, 145301 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, J. Jeon, J. H. Park, M. S. Jeong, B. H. Lee, E. Hwang and S. Lee, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 8804–8810 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jeon, J. Jia, J. Ju and S. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2019, 115, 183102 CrossRef .
T. Yu, F. Wang, Y. Xu, L. Ma, X. Pi and D. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4912–4919 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lei, F. Wen, L. Ge, S. Najmaei, A. George, Y. Gong, W. Gao, Z. Jin, B. Li, J. Lou, J. Kono, R. Vajtai, P. Ajayan and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3048–3055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Yang, D. R. Lambada and S. Shafique, Sens. Actuators, A, 2020, 314, 112232 CrossRef .
X. Liu, F. Li, M. Xu and J. Qi, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 28041–28047 RSC .
Z. Xu, S. Lin, X. Li, S. Zhang, Z. Wu, W. Xu, Y. Lu and S. Xu, Nano Energy, 2016, 23, 89–96 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, R. Liang, S. Zhang, Y. Liu, W. Cheng, C. Sun and J. Xu, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 127–132 CrossRef CAS .
H. Selvi, N. Unsuree, E. Whittaker, M. P. Halsall, E. W. Hill, A. Thomas, P. Parkinson and T. J. Echtermeyer, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 3399–3409 RSC .
D. Periyanagounder, P. Gnanasekar, P. Varadhan, J. H. He and J. Kulandaivel, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 9545–9551 RSC .
W. Jin, Y. Ye, L. Gan, B. Yu, P. Wu, Y. Dai, H. Meng, X. Guo and L. Dai, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2863–2867 RSC .
Z. Gao, W. Jin, Y. Zhou, Y. Dai, B. Yu, C. Liu, W. Xu, Y. Li, Y. H. Peng, Z. Liu and L. Dai, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 5576–5581 RSC .
B. Liu, C. Zhao, X. Chen, L. Zhang, Y. Li, H. Yan and Y. Zhang, Superlattices Microstruct., 2019, 130, 87–92 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Luo, X. Yan, J. Zhang, B. Li, Y. Wu, Q. Lu, C. Jin, X. Zhang and X. Ren, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 9212–9217 RSC .
L. B. Luo, H. Hu, X. H. Wang, R. Lu, Y. F. Zou, Y. Q. Yu and F. X. Liang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 4723–4728 RSC .
F. Wu, Q. Li, P. Wang, H. Xia, Z. Wang, Y. Wang, M. Luo, L. Chen, F. Chen, J. Miao, X. Chen, W. Lu, C. Shan, A. Pan, X. Wu, W. Ren, D. Jariwala and W. Hu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–8 CrossRef .
M. Hussain, S. Aftab, S. Hassan, A. Jaffery, A. Ali, S. Hussain, D. N. Cong, R. Akhtar, Y. Seo, J. Eom and P. Gautam, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Mohan Kumar, X. Fu, P. Ilanchezhiyan, S. U. Yuldashev, D. J. Lee, H. D. Cho and T. W. Kang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 32142–32150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lu, Z. Zheng, J. Yao, W. Gao, Y. Xiao, M. Zhang and J. Li, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 7196–7205 RSC .
M. Dai, H. Chen, R. Feng, W. Feng, Y. Hu, H. Yang, G. Liu, X. Chen, J. Zhang, C. Y. Xu and P. Hu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 8739–8747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Aldalbahi, M. Rivera, M. Rahaman, A. F. Zhou, W. M. Alzuraiqi and P. Feng, Nanomaterials, 2017, 7, 454 CrossRef PubMed .
L. H. Zeng, Q. M. Chen, Z. X. Zhang, D. Wu, H. Yuan, Y. Y. Li, W. Qarony, S. P. Lau, L. B. Luo and Y. H. Tsang, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1901134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† BE and AP authors contributed equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Bhuvaneshwari Ezhilmaran
	Bhuvaneshwari Ezhilmaran received her MSc degree in physics from PSGR Krishnammal College, Tamil Nadu, India in 2016. She is currently pursuing her PhD at SRM Research Institute, SRM Institute of Science and Technology. Her research focuses on solution derived functional layers for energy conversion applications including photodetectors.

Abhinandan Patra
	Abhinandan Patra received his MSc degree in Physics from the College of Engineering and Technology under Biju Patnaik University of Technology (BPUT), Odisha, India in 2019. He is presently pursuing his PhD degree at the Centre for Nano and Material Sciences, Jain University. His interest is in exploring the synthesis and comprehensive characterization of novel functionalized layered 2D nanomaterials and their composites for electrochemical storage and energy conversion applications.

Left to right: Stenny Benny, M. R. Sreelakshmi, V. V. Akshay
	Stenny Benny received her MSc degree in physics from St. Joseph's College, Devagiri, Calicut in 2019. She is currently pursuing her PhD at SRM Research Institute, SRM Institute of Science and Technology. Her research interest is in exploring various strategies to improve the properties of functional materials used in energy conversion technologies such as thin film photovoltaics.
	M. R. Sreelakshmi received her MSc degree in physics from the Central University of Kerala, Kasaragod in 2019. She is currently pursuing her PhD at SRM Research Institute, SRM Institute of Science and Technology. Her research focuses on the synthesis and properties of inorganic semiconductor heterojunctions for photodetector applications.
	V. V. Akshay received his MSc degree in Materials Science from Mangalore University, Mangalore, in 2020. He is currently pursuing his PhD at SRM Research Institute, SRM Institute of Science and Technology. His research interest is in exploring emerging chalcogenide semiconductor materials and their applications in optoelectronic devices.

S. Venkataprasad Bhat
	Dr S. Venkataprasad Bhat is Research Associate Professor at SRM Research Institute, SRM Institute of Science and Technology (SRMIST), Tamil Nadu, India. Before joining SRMIST, he has worked as a post-doctoral research associate at Birck Nanotechnology Centre, Purdue University, USA for 3 years after completing his doctoral studies in materials science at Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research (JNCASR), Bengaluru, India under the supervision of Prof. C. N. R. Rao. He received his BSc degree in Physics from Kannur University, Kerala and MSc degree in Physics from Savitribai Phule Pune University, Maharashtra, India. His research interest is in solution based methods for making functional materials and their energy conversion applications including photovoltaics, photodetectors, photocatalysis and solid-state lighting.

Chandra Sekhar Rout
	Dr Chandra Sekhar Rout is Associate Professor at the Centre for Nano & Material Sciences (CNMS), Jain University. Before joining CNMS, He was a DST-Ramanujan Fellow at IIT Bhubaneswar, India (2013–2017). He received his BSc (2001) and MSc (2003) degrees from Utkal University and his PhD from JNCASR, Bangalore (2008) under the supervision of Prof. C. N. R. Rao, Bharat Ratna. He did his postdoctoral research at the National University of Singapore (2008–2009), Purdue University, USA (2010–2012) and UNIST, South Korea (2012–2013). He was awarded the prestigious Ramanujan Fellowship and Young Scientist award by the Department of Science and Technology, Govt. of India in 2013, emerging investigator award 2017 from Elsevier, IAAM medal 2017 from the International Association of Advanced Materials 2017, and Young researcher award from Venus International Foundation in 2015. His research interests include the preparation and characterization of 2D layered materials and their hybrids for chemical sensors and biosensors, supercapacitors and energy storage devices, field emitters and electronic devices. He has authored more than 150 research papers in international journals and edited 3 books. His current h-index is 42 with total citations >7500. He was ranked among top 2% scientists in India by the Stanford study in 2020. He serves as a board member in various reputed journals and is associate editor of “RSC Advances,” a journal of Royal Society of Chemistry, and “American Journal of Engineering and Applied Sciences” of Science Publications. He has completed several sponsored projects funded by the Government of India and supervised PhD, postdoc and MSc students. He has delivered more than fifty invited talks in various national and international conferences and travelled to several countries such as the USA, the UK, Israel, Singapore, South Korea, Brazil, Russia, etc. for collaboration purposes.
eΔVc = e(Φ2 − Φ1)	(1)

 	Fig. 1  (A) Diagram of the generation of an interface with metal and metal: (a) band structure of metals I and II with work functions eΦ1 and eΦ2, respectively (EF = Fermi energy level with no contact); (b) band structure of the conduction bands at the metal edge and the contact between the two metals; and (c) simplified diagram of the contact with metal and metal. (B) Graphical diagram of energy level alterations before and after contact with the metal and semiconductor: (a) semiconductor (n-type) and metal (high-work function), (b) semiconductor (n-type) and metal (low-work function), (c) semiconductor (p-type) and metal (high work function), and (d) semiconductor (p-type) and metal (low work function) (reproduced with permission from ref. 42; permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.).	 
ϕnB = (Φm− χs)	(2)
ϕpB = Eg + χs − Φm	(3)
Vbi = ϕB − Φm	(4)
Wd = [2εs(Vbi + V)/eNd]1/2	(5)
	(6)
	(7)

 	Fig. 2  Divergence of the energy gap values for various 2D semiconductor constituents with the energy gap for conventional semiconductors. The top bars show a range of tunable band-gap values which can be achieved by changing the number of layers, straining, doping, defect engineering or alloying (Reprinted with permission from A. Castellanos-Gomez, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4280–4291, Copyright © 2015 American Chemical Society).	 
ϕnB = (SΦM − χsc) + (1 − S)ΦIS	(8)
	(9)
	(10)
	(11)
	(12)
	(13)
	(14)
	(15)
	(16)
	(17)
	(18)

 	Fig. 3  The schematic cross-sectional images demonstrating the designs of different NIR photodetectors: (a) multilayer photodiode and crosswise configurations of (b) a photoconductor and (c) a phototransistor (reproduced with permission from ref. 56; permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.).	 
	(19)
IL = e(Wd + Ln + Lp)GL	(20)
IC = βIB	(21)
IE = IC + IB	(22)

 	Fig. 4  (a–d) Graphic map to four photocurrent engendered mechanisms (reproduced from G. Rao, X. Wang, Y. Wang, P. Wangyang, C. Yan, J. Chu, L. Xue, C. Gong, J. Huang, J. Xiong and Y. Li, InfoMat, 2019, 1, 272–288, permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.).	 
Ipc = SVqμΔn	(23)
Δσ = Δneμ	(24)
Ipc = IL − ID	(25)
	(26)
VPTE = (S2 − S1)ΔT	(27)
	(28)
	(29)

 	Fig. 5  Characteristics of SnS2-based photodetectors. (a) Schematic illustration of device fabrication on Gr ribbons. (b) Optical image of the fabricated device. The magnified SEM image of a 1 μm distance between two electrodes. (c) Current vs. voltage curve of the Gr–SnS2–Gr device in the dark and in light conditions. (d) Comparison of the transfer curves for a Gr–SnS2–Gr photodetector measured in the dark and under light conditions at 5 V bias and 171 mW cm−2. The inset shows the variation of photoresponse with gate voltage. The foot plan shows the band structure of the photodetector after tuning the gate voltage in the on and off states. (e) Due to the incident pulsed laser light (intensity: 2.55 × 104 mW cm−2 under a bias of 2 V) photoswitching performance of the device (Reprinted with permission from R. J. Chang, H. Tan, X. Wang, B. Porter, T. Chen, Y. Sheng, Y. Zhou, H. Huang, H. Bhaskaran and J. H. Warner, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 13002–13010, Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Device assembly and measurement scheme of the WSe2 phototransistor. (b) 10 lm scaled optical microscopy image of one of the phototransistors. (c and d) High ϕB and low ϕB are produced because of the Fermi-level pinning and metal–semiconductor work function difference at the drain and source contact in the metal–semiconductor interface, respectively (Reprinted from A. Islam and P. X.-L. Feng, J. Appl. Phys., 2017, 122, 085704, with permission from AIP Publishing).	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the working principle of individual graphene/InGaN NR/graphene. (b) Energy band diagram of the photogenerated carrier transport mechanism of the graphene/InGaN NR device. (c) Spectral responsivity and EQE of the device under UV light illumination (340–500 nm) at a bias of 1 V (source (a–c): Y. Zheng, W. Wang, Y. Li, J. Lan, Y. Xia, Z. Yang, X. He and G. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 13589–13597, Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society). (d) The schematic energy bandgap diagram of a p+-BLG/n-Hg0.8133Cd0.1867TeVLWIR photodetector under illumination and reverse bias conditions. (e) The electric field profile across the device under different external biasing conditions demonstrating a high electric field. (f) J–V characteristics under different light illumination intensities (source (d–f): Reproduced from ref. 146 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Spectral responsivity under different bias conditions. (b) Detectivity and (c) time-dependent photocurrent of the graphene/(PEA)2SnI4/MoS2/graphene detector (source (a–c): C. Fang, H. Wang, Z. Shen, H. Shen, S. Wang, J. Ma, J. Wang, H. Luo and D. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 8419–8427, Copyright © 2019 American Chemical Society). (d) I–Vds curves of pristine WS2 and WSe2/WS2 photodetectors at Vgs = 40 V under dark and illumination conditions. (e) I–Vgs curves of the WSe2/WS2 photodetector under different illumination intensities. (f) Energy band diagram of a WSe2/WS2 photodetector (source (d–f): Reprinted with permission from T. H. Tsai, Z. Y. Liang, Y. C. Lin, C. C. Wang, K. I. Lin, K. Suenaga and P. W. Chiu, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 4559–4566, Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Length-scaling dependence on the photoresponse asymmetric photoresponse of the device featuring a very short channel length. (b) Channel-length dependence of the photogenerated current at 20 and 300 K. (c) Energy-band diagram of the black phosphorus semiconductor. (d) Photoresponsivity of the devices with different channel lengths at different temperatures (source (a–d): M. Huang, M. Wang, C. Chen, Z. Ma, X. Li, J. Han and Y. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3481–3485). (e) Response of a Fabry–Perot enhanced BP/MoS2 photodiode. (f) Response of a FP enhanced BP/MoS2 device when illuminated with a pulsed laser (2 ns pulses) centered around a wavelength of 2.3 μm. The top plot shows the measured BP/MoS2 device photocurrent, and the bottom plot shows the analog output signal of pulse emission (source (e and f): Reprinted with permission from W. Yan, V. R. Shrestha, Q. Jeangros, N. S. Azar, S. Balendhran, C. Ballif, K. B. Crozier and J. Bullock, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 13645–13651, Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration explaining the transport mechanism of photoinduced carriers within SnS2 channels of different thicknesses. (b) Energy band diagram demonstrating the photogating mechanism of the SnS2 channel with Gr electrodes (source (a and b): Reprinted with permission from R. J. Chang, H. Tan, X. Wang, B. Porter, T. Chen, Y. Sheng, Y. Zhou, H. Huang, H. Bhaskaran and J. H. Warner, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 13002–13010, Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society). (c) MXene device pulse response–excitation by 100 fs pulses of 830 nm light at 8 V bias under various indicated optical powers (source (c): reproduced from ref. 200 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry). (d) Iph/Idark ratio along with photon energy of light at the Au/h-BN and Gr/h-BN junction. (e) Power dependence of the photocurrent for different energies of photons at the Au/h-BN junction and (f) at the graphene/h-BN junction (source (d–f): Reprinted with permission from Y. R. Kim, T. L. Phan, Y. S. Shin, W. T. Kang, U. Y. Won, I. Lee, J. E. Kim, K. Kim, Y. H. Lee and W. J. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 10772–10780, Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society).	 

Graphene/Si	Vis-NIR	0.5 × 10−3	—	0.36 × 10−10	80	
127

Graphene/Si	Vis	0.52	5.77 × 1013	40 × 10−6	0	
128

Graphene/4HC-SiC/graphene	UV	40	9 × 1011	—	6	
144

Graphene/Si	IR	138 × 10−3	1.6 × 109	370 × 10−6	0	
131

Graphene/ZnO	UV	113	—	0.7 × 10−3	−1	
138

Graphene/CNT	UV-NIR	209 × 10−3	4.87 × 1010	68 × 10−6	−3	
145

Graphene/GaAs	NIR	1.73 × 10−3	1.83 × 1011	72 × 10−6	0	
147

Graphene/WS2/Si	Vis-NIR	54.5	4.1 × 1012	45 × 10−6	−0.3	
149

Graphene/Ge	NIR	0.75	2.5 × 109	60 × 10−6	−10	
150

PDMS/graphene/Cu	UV	3 × 106	4.2 × 1013	10 × 10−3	0	
142

Graphene/InGaN	UV	2.7 × 104	—	47.7 × 10−6	1	
143

MoS2	Vis	15	—	2 × 10−6	8	
155

MoS2/(PEA)2SnI4	Vis-NIR	0.121	8.09 × 109	34 × 10−3	0	
163

Graphene–MoS2	Vis	1.1 × 105	1.4 × 1014	100 × 10−3	−5	
159

Graphene–MoS2	Vis-NIR	1.26	4.2 × 1010	
	2	
160

MoS2	UV	3 × 104	1.81 × 1014	32 × 10−3	2	
162

MoS2/WS2	Vis	4.36 × 10−3	4.36 × 1013	4 × 10−3	0	
206

MoSe2	Vis	0.8 × 10−3	1.2 × 1012	30 × 10−9	0	
161

MoTe2/Au hollow nanorods	NIR	5.07	6.34 × 1011	Millisecond	−5	
207

WSe2/graphene	Vis-NIR	20 × 10−3	—	5.5 × 10−10	0.4	
169

Au/WSe2/ITO	Vis-NIR	0.1	—	50 × 10−6	0	
175

PdSe2	Vis	3.5 × 10−3	—	11 × 10−3	1	
177

PtSe2	UV-NIR	12.65	2.5 × 1013	10.1 × 10−6	−5	
179

HfS2	Vis	890	1.3 × 1010	38 × 10−3	80	
181

BP	Vis	7 × 106	—	0.005	−15	
114

BP	UV-Vis-NIR	9 × 104	3 × 1013	200	−80	
182

BP/MoS2	MWIR	0.11	1.7 × 109	3 × 10−9	5	
186

BP-on-WSe2	UV-Vis-IR	103	104	9 × 10−4	0.5	
187

BP/MAPbI3−xClx	UV-NIR	108	9 × 1013	10 × 10−3	−2	
188

SnS2	Vis	14.634	—	5 × 10−6	0.15	
189

WSe2/SnS2	Vis	244	1.29 × 1013	24 × 10−3	1	
190

Gr/In2S3	Vis	0.49 × 10−3	3.05 × 107	—	1	
191

Gr/SnS2/Gr	Vis	20	4 × 1014	—	20	
101

GaSe	Vis	2.6	1.0 × 1012	1.2	5	
103

NbS3	Vis-MWIR	24.7	5.7 × 108	11.6 × 10−6	0	
194

Ti2C2Tx/GaAs/Ti2C2Tx	Vis	278 × 10−3	11.6 × 1010	225 × 10−10	8	
199

Ti2C2Tx/TiO2	UV	6 × 10−3	—	2.54	5	
200

Boron	UV	91.7 × 10−6	1.6 × 108	1.8	0	
201

Bi2O2Se	Vis	3.5 × 104	9 × 1013	0.44 × 10−3	0.5	
203

Bi2O2S	Vis-NIR	4	—	100 × 10−3	5	
205


 	Fig. 11  Various approaches used to improve the photodetection performance of Schottky contacted 2D materials.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Optical microscopy image of multilayer WSe2 and multilayer WSe2/N-GQDs. (b) ML WSe2/NGQD photodetector responsivity as a function of both back-gate voltage and bias voltage. (c) The dependence of the ML WSe2/N-GQD photodetector responsivity on back-gate voltage with different power densities (source (a–c): Reprinted with permission from D. A. Nguyen, H. M. Oh, N. T. Duong, S. Bang, S. J. Yoon and M. S. Jeong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 10322–10329, Copyright © 2018 American Chemical Society). (d) Schematic illustration of the ReS2 TFTs before and after O2 plasma treatment with a resistor network model (source (d): J. Shim, A. Oh, D. H. Kang, S. Oh, S. K. Jang, J. Jeon, M. H. Jeon, M. Kim, C. Choi, J. Lee, S. Lee, G. Y. Yeom, Y. J. Song and J. H. Park, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6985–6992). (e) Semi-logarithmic I–V curves of h-BN based detectors with variations in the carbon concentration. (f) Dark current and photocurrent plot of the h-BN device under 20 V bias (source (e and f): Reprinted with permission from Y. Wang, Y. Wang, J. Meng, Y. Tian, Y. Tian, Y. Chen, Y. Chen, G. Wang, G. Wang, Z. Yin, Z. Yin, P. Jin, P. Jin, J. You, J. You, J. Wu, X. Zhang and X. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 27361–27367, Copyright © 2020 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Semi-logarithmic IDS–VDS characteristics of long channel length (L ≈ 1 μm) and ultrashort channel length (L ≈ 30 nm)/BP Schottky diodes (source (a): J. Miao, S. Zhang, L. Cai and C. Wang, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1500346). (b) The performance of a graphene/ZnO detector under different strains with an illumination intensity of 25.12 μW cm−2. Dependence of responsivity on (c) strain and (d) Schottky barrier height change (source (b and d): S. Liu, Q. Liao, S. Lu, Z. Zhang, G. Zhang and Y. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1347–1353). (e) Photocurrent of an InSe photodetector as a function of illumination power at 530 nm recorded in the three environments of the panel. (f) I–t characteristics at VSD = 1 V with illumination at 530 nm (power density: 450 mW μm−2) under different atmospheres (source (e and f): reproduced from ref. 233 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Photoresponse characteristics of MoS2 devices with different laser modified areas (source (a): Reprinted with permission from J. Lu, J. H. Lu, H. Liu, B. Liu, K. X. Chan, J. Lin, W. Chen, K. P. Loh and C. H. Sow, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6334–6343, Copyright © 2014 American Chemical Society). (b) Dark current and photocurrent of BP and BP-Au NP devices using a 405 nm wavelength laser. (c) Responsivity of the BP-Au NP device using 655, 785, and 980 nm wavelength lasers (source (b and c): Reprinted from S Jeon, J. Jia, J. Ju and S. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2019, 115, 183102 with permission from AIP Publishing). (d) Optical absorption and PL spectra of Si QDs (source (d): T. Yu, F. Wang, Y. Xu, L. Ma, X. Pi and D. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4912–4919). (e) Photoresponse of the device patterned with an Al nanodisk array as a function of laser illumination intensity at 5, 15, and 30 V bias voltages. (f) Photocurrent spectra of InSe (blue) and InSe decorated with Al nanodisks (red), and the dark-field scattering spectrum of the Al nanodisk arrays (green) (source (e and f): Reprinted with permission from S. Lei, F. Wen, L. Ge, S. Najmaei, A. George, Y. Gong, W. Gao, Z. Jin, B. Li, J. Lou, J. Kono, R. Vajtai, P. Ajayan and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3048–3055, Copyright © 2015 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Laser power dependent on/off ratio and responsivity of the photodetector. (b) Photoresponse of the Gr/Si photodetector under different light intensities upon the illumination of a 532 nm laser (source (a and b): reproduced from ref. 255 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry). (c) J–V curves of a Ti3C2Tx/n-Si heterostructure device under illumination at various energy intensities. (d) Power-dependent photoresponsivity and Iph/Idark ratio (source (c and d): Z. Kang, Y. Ma, X. Tan, M. Zhu, Z. Zheng, N. Liu, L. Li, Z. Zou, X. Jiang, T. Zhai and Y. Gao, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1700165). I I–V characteristics and (f) photoresponse of a graphene/GaAs device with and without an AlOx intermediate layer (source (e and f): Reprinted from ref. 260 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.)	 
Footnote
† BE and AP authors contributed equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
