Low-dimensional halide perovskites: review and issues  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TC05658C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TC05658C
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 2189-2209Low-dimensional halide perovskites: review and issues

        
          
            Kootak 
            Hong†
a, 
      
        
          
            Quyet Van 
            Le†
b, 
      
        
          
            Soo Young 
            Kim
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Ho Won 
            Jang
          
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Research Institute of Advanced Materials, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Republic of Korea. E-mail: hwjang@snu.ac.kr
bSchool of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Chung-Ang University, Seoul, 06974, Republic of Korea. E-mail: sooyoungkim@cau.ac.kr
Received 
      10th December 2017
    , Accepted 26th January 2018First published on 30th January 2018AbstractHalide perovskites are emerging materials for future optoelectronics and electronics due to their remarkable advantages such as a high light absorption coefficient, long charge carrier diffusion length, facile synthesis method, and low cost. As polycrystalline halide perovskite thin films, which have been studied so far, have crucial limitations, low-dimensional halide perovskites have attracted attention due to their unique optical properties and charge transport properties, which have not been observed before. This review highlights the limitations of polycrystalline halide perovskites thin films and the unique characteristics of low-dimensional halide perovskite nanostructures including their electrical, optical, and chemical properties. After introducing the recent developments of various low-dimensional halide perovskite nanostructures including the synthesis methods, their properties, and applications, a brief overview of the challenges of low-dimensional halide perovskites as candidates for future optoelectronics and electronic devices is provided.
Kootak Hong
Kootak Hong is currently a PhD candidate in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Seoul National University (SNU). He received his BS degree from the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, SNU, in 2013. His current research interests focus on nanoelectronics in oxide semiconductors and hybrid perovskite materials and their applications.
Quyet Van Le
Quyet Van Le is currently a PhD student at the School of Chemical Engineering and Material Science, Chung-Aung University, Seoul, South Korea. He received his master's degree from Chung-Ang University. He is interested in the fabrication of perovskite materials, including thin films and nanostructures for applications in solar cells, light emitting diodes, photodetectors, and memory devices.
Soo Young Kim
Soo Young Kim is a Professor in the Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science at Chung-Ang University. He received his PhD degree in materials science and engineering from Pohang University of Science and Technology, South Korea, in 2007. After his postdoctoral period at Georgia Institute of Technology, USA, he joined Chung-Ang University in 2009. His research is focused on the fabrication and optimization of halide perovskite materials and two-dimensional materials such as graphene and transition metal dichalcogenides for improving the performance of organic solar cells, perovskite solar cells, photodetectors, light emitting diodes, and gas sensors.
Ho Won Jang
Ho Won Jang is an Associate Professor of the Department of Materials Science and Engineering in SNU. He earned his PhD from the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Pohang University of Science and Technology, in 2004. He worked as a Research Associate at the University of Wisconsin-Madison from 2006 to 2009. Before he joined SNU in 2012, he worked in the Korea Institute of Science and Technology as a Senior Research Scientist. His research interests include the synthesis of oxides and 2D materials and their applications in nanoelectronics, solar water splitting cells, sensors, plasmonics, metal–insulator transitions, and ferroelectricity.
1. Introduction
Halide perovskites, as light harvesting materials, are promising candidates for solving the impending energy shortage, and have been researched intensively ever since dye-sensitized solar cells containing halide perovskites were first reported in 2009.1 Having demonstrated unprecedented rapid developments and breakthroughs in halide perovskite solar cells,2–11 a halide perovskite-based solar cell showed a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 22.7%, which is larger than that of organic photovoltaics, dye-sensitized solar cells, and other conventional thin film solar cells.12 Their extraordinary PCE, which has not been seen in other materials, results from excellent optical and charge-transport properties such as high external quantum efficiency,13,14 excellent light absorption coefficient,15,16 long charge carrier diffusion length,17,18 and long lifetime.19,20 Moreover, these excellent optical and electronic properties make halide perovskites outstanding candidates for other optoelectronic and electronic devices such as light emitting diodes (LEDs),21–25 photodetectors,14,26–29 lasers,30–33 memory devices,34–36 and field-effect transistors (FETs).37
Halide perovskites, which have the general formula ABX3 (A: monovalent organic cations or inorganic cations, B: divalent cations, X: halide anions), are composed of a three-dimensional framework of corner-sharing metal halide octahedra. As A, B, and X can be substituted by various elements, halide perovskites can have good compositional flexibility.38–45 Owing to this compositional flexibility, the optical and electronic properties of halide perovskites can be appropriately tuned and optimized to the desired characteristics for each application. In addition, as halide perovskite thin films can be fabricated by solution-based processes, such as simple spin-coating, halide perovskite thin films with various compositions can be synthesized easily by low-cost, large-scale, and facile methods.3,46–50 However, the solution-processed halide perovskite thin films that have been researched so far have crucial drawbacks, which impede the commercialization of halide perovskite-based optoelectronic and electronic devices, such as current–voltage (I–V) hysteresis,9,48,51,52 performance degradation, and intrinsic low stability.53–55 These drawbacks originate from the migration of unintentional ionic defects and grain boundaries owing to low-temperature solution-processed halide perovskite polycrystalline thin film fabrication processes.48,56,57
To overcome the limitations of halide perovskite polycrystalline thin films, there has recently been intensive research on single-crystalline bulk halide perovskites and low-dimensional halide perovskites, such as on the synthesis of halide perovskites with high crystalline quality, and investigation of their intrinsic properties and their applications.31,58–66 For a comprehensive understanding of halide perovskites, single-crystalline bulk halide perovskites are promising materials to investigate the intrinsic properties of halide perovskites, as they are free of grain boundaries and have a low trap density.18,38,67,68 However, low-dimensional halide perovskites show optical and electrical properties, which have not been seen before in halide perovskite thin films. The unexpected optical and electrical properties result from quantum size effects, large surface-to-volume ratio, and anisotropic geometry.69 Moreover, from the viewpoint of application, low-dimensional halide perovskites are somewhat more promising for future optoelectronic and electronic devices than bulk single-crystalline halide perovskites. With compositional flexibility and solution-based processing, low-dimensional halide perovskites of varied shapes and sizes can be synthesized easily. Therefore, various efforts have been made in synthesizing low-dimensional halide perovskites, including zero-dimensional (0D) halide perovskites such as quantum dots (QD), nanoparticles,63,64,70 one-dimensional (1D) halide perovskites such as nanowires and nanorods,31,58,59 and two-dimensional (2D) halide perovskites such as nanoplatelets and nanosheets71,72 as well as in studying their application to solar cells,73 LEDs,65,74 photodetectors,75 lasers,31 and memory devices42 (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Schematic of various low-dimensional perovskites with lots of merits for applications. Reproduced with permission from ref. 31, 42, 74, 140 and 150. 
In this review, we present the recent developments of low-dimensional halide perovskite nanostructures, including synthesis methods, their properties, and applications. We begin with the limitations of polycrystalline halide perovskite thin films and the potential of low-dimensional halide perovskites and their advantages in terms of optical and electrical properties. In the following section, we will review the various synthesis methods of each type of low-dimensional halide perovskite, and the advantages and disadvantages of each synthesis method. After emphasizing the remarkable properties of low-dimensional halide perovskites, including their chemical and physical properties, we will discuss recent studies on the applications of low-dimensional halide perovskite nanostructures in optoelectronics and electronic devices. Finally, we provide a brief overview of the challenges of low-dimensional halide perovskites as candidates for future optoelectronic and electronic devices.
2. Why low-dimensional halide perovskites?
2.1. Limitations of polycrystalline halide perovskite thin films
Halide perovskites can sufficiently absorb light with only 300 nm of thickness owing to their extraordinary light absorption coefficient.15 Moreover, as halide perovskites can be synthesized by a simple spin-coating method, numerous studies on the synthesis and properties of halide perovskites and their applications have been based on polycrystalline thin films. For halide perovskite polycrystalline thin films, morphology control, grain size, uniformity, and surface coverage are significant factors to achieve high-performance halide perovskite-based optoelectronic and electronic devices.76,77 Therefore, intensive research studies have focused on the fine control of the crystallization and morphology of halide perovskites,76,78,79 and it has been shown that halide perovskites can be strong candidates for future optoelectronic and electronic devices.21,73,80,81 However, it is difficult to fabricate high-performance optoelectronic and electronic devices based on polycrystalline halide perovskite thin films, owing to a number of critical drawbacks.29,56,82,83
One of the drawbacks of polycrystalline halide perovskite thin films is mobile ionic defects due to the low-temperature solution process.48,56 These ionic defects are inevitably formed in polycrystalline halide perovskite thin films. For the case of CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3), , , and  exist in polycrystalline MAPbI3 thin films as ionic defects. As shown in Fig. 2a, polycrystalline halide perovskite thin films exhibit hysteretic I–V characteristics as the ionic defects can migrate under an external bias.29 Eames et al. demonstrated that ionic defects in MAPbI3, especially , have a low activation energy for migration, by a first-principles calculation.56 The migration of ionic defects by open-circuit voltage, when the MAPbI3-based solar cells were illuminated, also supported the low activation energy for the migration of ionic defects.84 The I–V hysteresis in polycrystalline halide perovskite thin films, which originates from ionic defect migration, is a significant drawback that negatively affects the performance and reliability of halide perovskite-based optoelectronics.52 Tress et al. reported on the rate-dependent current density–voltage (J–V) hysteresis in MAPbI3-based solar cells (Fig. 2b).57 MAPbI3-based solar cells showed different J–V curves with various voltage scan rates. Although the ionic defects are not strongly electronically active as recombination centers for photogenerated carriers, they lower the charge collection efficiency by screening the field. To alleviate or eliminate the hysteretic behavior of halide perovskite-based optoelectronics and electronic devices, researchers have reported various methods such as solvent engineering3,85 and interface engineering.86–94 Nevertheless, polycrystalline halide perovskite thin film-based optoelectronic and electronic devices still show I–V hysteresis.
 Fig. 2  (a) Dark and photocurrent hysteresis curves with various sweep voltage rates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 29. (b) Current–voltage curves of TiO2-based MAPbI3 devices with pronounced hysteresis. Reproduced with permission from ref. 57. (c) C-AFM measurement setup. (d) Topography AFM image of the perovskite thin film. The locations where the C-AFM tip measured the grain and GB current are labelled with a red triangle and a blue square, respectively. The scale bar is 1 mm. (e and f) Local dark current measured at the GB (e) and on the grain (f), respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 87. (g) Schematic diagram showing the degradation of the perovskite film in moisture. (h) Schematic showing the interaction of moisture with a bare perovskite film. Reproduced with permission from ref. 83. 
Polycrystalline halide perovskite thin films naturally have grain boundaries. These grain boundaries cause performance degradation, acting as charge recombination sites for photogenerated carriers.95–97 Therefore, many researchers have attempted to reveal how the grain boundaries in halide perovskites affect the performance of halide perovskite-based optoelectronic and electronic devices. Among them, Shao and co-workers extensively studied ion migration at grain boundaries and inner grains by a combination of nanoscopic and macroscopic electrical measurements,98 as shown in Fig. 2c. They demonstrated that ion migration occurs at the grain boundary favorably, and faster ion migration can occur at higher angle grain boundaries owing to the open structure (Fig. 2d–f). They also observed that large-grained halide perovskites with fewer boundaries show good PCE and lower magnitude of hysteresis. These results implied that high performance of halide perovskite-based devices can be obtained by higher crystallinity and larger halide perovskite grains. Furthermore, the grain boundaries in halide perovskite thin films are favorable paths for moisture as well as ionic defects, owing to the open structure (Fig. 2g and h).83 Moisture stability is a key issue for the commercialization of halide perovskite-based optoelectronics and electronic devices, as moisture causes degradation of halide perovskites. Qing et al. reported on the scaling behavior of moisture-induced grain degradation. The halide perovskite thin films with larger grains show higher moisture stability.83 The authors also suggested a method to enhance the moisture stability by increasing the grain size of the halide perovskite film and improving the quality of the grain boundaries by modifying the amorphous region to prevent moisture infiltration.
Although halide perovskites have high potential as next-generation optoelectronic materials, from the point of view of high performance, performance reliability, and stability, polycrystalline halide perovskite thin films, fabricated by typical solution methods, have shown limitations that originate from naturally formed ionic defects and grain boundaries. There are also some problems in the fabrication process of polycrystalline halide perovskite thin films. For example, halide perovskites cannot be uniformly coated with a one-step method,47 and the precursor solution should be finely controlled when a two-step method is used.99 In addition, polycrystalline halide perovskite thin films show temperature-related problems such as phase transition85,100,101 and compositional degradation resulting from low thermal stability.102,103
Unless these limitations and drawbacks are overcome, halide perovskite-based devices will be difficult to commercialize. To achieve high-performance, reliable, and stable halide perovskite-based optoelectronic and electronic devices, ionic defect- and grain boundary-free, and highly crystalline halide perovskites are prerequisites.
2.2. Merit of low-dimensional halide perovskites
Motivated by previously reported nanostructured semiconductor materials, many researchers have recently focused on the synthesis of low-dimensional nanostructure halide perovskites and investigation of their properties and applications. Various low-dimensional halide perovskites including 0D nanostructures such as quantum dots and nanocrystals,70 1D nanostructures such as nanowires and nanorods,31 and 2D nanostructures such as nanoplatelets and layered structures72 have been reported with various synthesis methods and their applications.
Depending on the dimensionality and size, low-dimensional halide perovskites show significantly different optical properties due to the quantum size effects. Low-dimensional halide perovskites show a peculiar density of states (DOS) depending on the dimensionality.69 As shown in Fig. 3a, the DOS in bulk materials is proportional to the square root of energy (E1/2), whereas the DOS of 2D systems exhibits an E0 dependence for the single quantized state, the DOS of the 1D systems shows a E−1/2 dependence for each quantized state, and the DOS of 0D systems is a δ-function. In addition, the bandgap of materials can be varied by the number of atoms, as shown in Fig. 3b. Owing to the quantum confinement effect, low-dimensional nanostructure halide perovskites show unique physical properties such as high luminescence, and wider optical bandgap, which have not been observed in their bulk counterparts.
 Fig. 3  Quantum size effect in nanostructured semiconductors. (a) Density of states, (b) energy band diagram for bulk and various nanostructure semiconductors. 
Because low-dimensional halide perovskites are synthesized in a single-crystalline state, low-dimensional halide perovskites have higher crystallinity than conventional spin-coated polycrystalline halide perovskite thin films. With high crystallinity of halide perovskites, low-dimensional halide perovskites have fewer ionic defects and grain boundaries than polycrystalline halide perovskite thin films. The low-dimensional halide perovskites, therefore, show enhanced photogenerated carrier transport properties, and the devices based on them show superior performance, reliability, and stability, because the drawbacks that existed in polycrystalline halide perovskite thin films are not present in low-dimensional halide perovskites.104–106 Moreover, low-dimensional halide perovskites exhibit unique charge transport properties, which originate from their morphologies. Owing to the anisotropic geometry and large surface-to-volume ratio, the charge transport in low-dimensional halide perovskites is profoundly affected by the surface state and charge transport direction.
Therefore, low-dimensional halide perovskites have been shown to be promising materials for future optoelectronic and electronic devices, and such devices based on low-dimensional halide perovskites still have the potential to be improved in terms of performance and stability. With high crystallinity, superior charge transport properties, and quantum size effects, the optical and electronic properties of low-dimensional halide perovskites can be tuned and optimized to the desired characteristics for each application with facile synthesis methods. In the following section, we carefully review the synthesis methods of low-dimensional halide perovskites and their unique dependence on morphology control.
3. Synthesis and properties of low-dimensional halide perovskites
The synthesis methods and properties of low-dimensional halide perovskites such as nanowires, nanosheets, and nanoparticles with various chemical compositions have been widely reported.107,108 The halide perovskites synthesized in terms of low-dimension (0D, 1D and 2D) can be divided into two groups, in terms of molecular structure. The first group is 3D halide perovskites, which have also been researched in the form of polycrystalline thin films, and their chemical formula is ABX3.71,72 The other group is layered perovskites, also called quasi-2D halide perovskites, with the chemical formula R(NH3)2An−1BnX3n+1.109,110 Unlike 3D halide perovskites, layered halide perovskites have long alkyl chain cations which increase the stability of halide perovskites by blocking moisture penetration.93 In the following sections, various synthesis methods of low-dimensional halide perovskites based on 3D halide perovskites and layered halide perovskites, and their unique properties are discussed.
3.1. 2D halide perovskites
Since the discovery of graphene,111 many researchers have paid attention to 2D materials such as transition metal dichalcogenides,112 hexagonal boron nitride,113 and black phosphorous114 owing to their exotic properties. Their strong quantum confinement, large bandgap, and flexibility have caused 2D materials to be considered as promising candidates for many optoelectronic applications. For halide perovskites, 2D quantum wells and the electronic coupling between the top and bottom layers occur when the thickness of halide perovskites approaches the atomic level such as nanosheets, nanoflakes, and nanoplatelets. There have been many reports on the synthesis of 2D halide perovskites and elucidation of their properties and applications.72,73,109,115 In this section various synthesis methods of 2D halide perovskites such as nanosheets and nanoplatelets and their unique properties are discussed.

3.1.1. By solution-phase growth. 
Although the mechanical exfoliation method is the simplest way to obtain 2D materials, there is a critical limitation, in that it can only be applied to a halide perovskite with a large organic cation, which are called layered perovskites.116 Moreover, mechanical exfoliation shows other limitations, i.e., that the size, number of layers, and chemical composition cannot be controlled and the yield is very low. To overcome these limitations of mechanical exfoliation, there have been reports on the synthesis of solution-phase growth of single- and few-layer 2D halide perovskites by several groups. As shown in Fig. 4a, the number of 2D halide perovskite layers can be controlled by solution-phase growth.117 For example, Dou et al. reported the direct growth of atomically thin 2D halide perovskites (C4H9NH3)2PbX4 and (C4H9NH3)2(MA)2X7 (X = Cl, Br, I, or mixed halide) from solution.109 The co-solvent of the diluted halide perovskite solution and organic solvents such as chlorobenzene, acetonitrile and dimethylformamide were dropped on the preheated substrates to synthesize 2D halide perovskite nanosheets by a solvent-evaporation-induced recrystallization method. Uniform square-shaped atomically thin 2D halide perovskites were obtained with high yield and excellent reproducibility (Fig. 4b–d). As chlorobenzene and acetonitrile in the co-solvent evaporate quickly and reduce the solubility of (C4H9NH3)2PbX4 and (C4H9NH3)2(MA)2X7 in dimethylformamide, it is possible that uniform solvent evaporation and crystallization can occur and ultrathin 2D halide perovskite nanosheets can be formed. By controlling the number of layers and the chemical composition, various photoluminescence (PL) spectra can be achieved (Fig. 4e). Because the structural relaxation of the in-plane crystal lattice increased the optical bandgap, the lattice expansion in 2D halide perovskite nanosheets resulted in the PL shift.
 Fig. 4  (a) The 〈100〉-oriented halide perovskite series with the general formula of (RNH3)2An−1MnX3n+1. The thicknesses of inorganic slabs increase and toward the 3D structure with increasing n. Reproduced with permission from ref. 116. (b) Structural illustration of a single-layer (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4. (c and d) AFM and TEM images of several single-layer (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4. (e) Photoluminescence of different 2D halide perovskites. (C4H9NH3)2PbCl4 (i), (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4 (ii), (C4H9NH3)2PbI4 (iii), (C4H9NH3)2PbCl2Br2 (iv), (C4H9NH3)2PbBr2I2 (v), and (C4H9NH3)2(MA)Pb2Br7 (vi). Reproduced with permission from ref. 108. (f) Graphical depiction of the pseudo-colored PL intensity measured as a function of excitation wavelength. (g) Time-resolved PL decay and fitting curves of light emission at 515 nm from CsPbBr3 nanoplatelets with a 375 nm pulse laser. Reproduced with permission from ref. 61. (h) UV/Vis absorption and (i) photoluminescence (PL) spectra of (PEA)2PbX4 NSs (X = Cl, Br, I) with different compositions. (j) Photograph of solutions of (PEA)2PbX4 NSs with different compositions under irradiation with a 365 nm UV lamp. (k) Degradation of a (PEA)2PbI4 NS film and a MAPbI3 QD film under ambient conditions with a relative humidity of 65%. Reproduced with permission from ref. 109. 
Ligand-mediated solution-phase growth is another method that has been widely employed to synthesize nanostructure semiconductors. Although ligands and surfactants contaminate the surface of nanomaterials and hinder the charge transport of nanomaterials, the shape of nanomaterials can be easily controlled with high yields and reproducibility. Several studies employed ligand-mediated solution-phase growth to synthesize 2D halide perovskite nanostructures such as nanosheets and nanoplatelets. For example, Sun et al. reported a ligand-assisted, room-temperature reprecipitation strategy for the colloidal synthesis of various low-dimensional CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, I, or mixed halide) nanostructures.61 The 2D CsPbBr3 nanoplatelets can be synthesized from CsPbX3 nanocrystals with the assistance of oleic acid and octylamine. The 2D CsPbBr3 nanoplatelets showed different optical properties with other CsPbBr3 nanostructures, such as the first absorption onset of approximately 508 nm and the PL emission peak of approximately 510 nm. As shown in Fig. 4f and g, the 2D CsPbBr3 nanoplatelets showed enhanced lifetime according to time-resolved PL decay results (1440 ns). The enhanced lifetime can be obtained by the increased in-plane single-crystalline geometry and few defects and surface states in 2D CsPbBr3 nanoplatelets. With the ligand-mediated solution-phase growth, shape- and thickness-controlled and monodispersed 2D halide perovskites such as nanosheets and nanoplatelets can be synthesized on a large scale.
Recently, Yang and co-workers reported a facile and fast crystallization method for single- and few-layer free-standing (C8H9NH3)2PbX4 (X = Cl, Br, I, or mixed halide) nanosheets without the assistance of ligand and substrates.110 They used various solvents, which are miscible with dimethylformamide but cannot dissolve the halide perovskites, to control the lateral size of ultrathin 2D perovskite nanosheets. As higher concentrations of halide perovskites dissolve in higher-polarity solvents, smaller lateral sized 2D halide perovskite nanosheets were synthesized in a higher-polarity solvent. The ultrathin 2D (C8H9NH3)2PbX4 nanosheets showed bright, spectrally narrow, and tunable PL, and these optical properties could be tuned by changing the halide composition, as shown in Fig. 4h–j. Moreover, single-layer (C8H9NH3)2PbI4 showed superior stability under ambient conditions and light irradiation to 3D perovskites quantum dots. Under an environment with a relative humidity of 65%, the single-layer (C8H9NH3)2PbI4 maintained a comparable emission intensity with the initial value for more than 100 h, whereas MAPbI3 quantum dots degraded rapidly and their PL completely disappeared within 96 h (Fig. 4k). Thus, ultrathin 2D (C8H9NH3)2PbX4 nanosheets with good stability, brightness, and tunable PL have the potential to be building blocks for future optoelectronic devices such as field-effect transistors, photodetectors, solar cells, and light emitting diodes.


3.1.2. By chemical vapor deposition. 
Although high quality 2D materials can be obtained by mechanical exfoliation and solution-phase growth, there are critical limitations with respect to thickness controllability, scalability and uniformity. To overcome these limitations, various deposition methods, such as atomic layer deposition,118 pulsed laser deposition119 and chemical vapor deposition (CVD),120 have been employed to synthesize thickness-controlled, wafer-scale, high quality 2D materials. Among the deposition methods, CVD is one of the most well-known deposition methods for the synthesis of high-quality 2D materials on a large scale. There have been a tremendous number of reports on the synthesis of 2D materials grown by CVD such as graphene,121 and transition metal dichalcogenides122 and their applications.123,124 For halide perovskites, a non-van der Waals-type 2D perovskite can be synthesized by CVD methods. The synthesis of 2D halide perovskites such as nanosheets and nanoplatelets have been reported by several groups. For example, Xiong's group reported for the first time the synthesis of various compositions of halide perovskite nanoplatelets by using the CVD method.71 The synthesis set-up for 2D halide perovskite nanoplatelets is illustrated in Fig. 5a. To synthesize a 2D halide perovskite, they employed a two-step method. First, lead halide (PbX2, X = Cl, Br, I, or mixed halide) nanoplatelets were synthesized on muscovite mica substrates using van der Waals epitaxial growth by the CVD method. The as-grown PbX2 nanoplatelets were converted into MAPbX3 nanoplatelets by a vapor-phase conversion method, as depicted in Fig. 5b. Using the two-step method, MAPbX3 nanoplatelets with a lateral size of 5–30 μm and a thickness ranging from several layers to several hundreds of nanometers could be synthesized. The in-plane orientation of the PbX2 platelets confirmed the van der Waals epitaxial growth owing to the three-fold symmetry of the mica surface lattice, and the nanoplatelets maintained their morphology after conversion into MAPbX3. Moreover, the ratio of the thickness of MAPbX3 nanoplatelets to that of PbX2 nanoplatelets is 1.81, which agrees with the lattice constant ratio of MAPbX3 and PbX2 along the c-axis. This implies that the thickness of CVD-grown 2D MAPbX3 nanoplatelets can be easily controlled by monitoring the thickness of the counterpart of the PbX2 nanoplatelets. As PbX2 nanoplatelets, which have various halide compositions, can be prepared easily, MAPbX3 nanoplatelets, the counterparts of PbX2, also can be easily synthesized by a vapor-phase conversion reaction. The electron-diffusion lengths of CVD-grown 2D MAPbI3 nanoplatelets were approximately 210 nm which is much longer than that of bulk MAPbI3. This longer electron-diffusion length resulted from the high crystal quality of the halide perovskite platelet prepared by the CVD method.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of the synthesis setup using a home-built vapor-transport system. (b) Thickness of PbI2 platelets before (images above data line) and after being converted to CH3NH3PbI3 (images below data line). Reproduced with permission from ref. 71. (c) Schematic illustration of the solution process to fabricate 2D PbI2 nanosheets and the vapor-phase conversion process to transform PbI2 into 2D MAPbI3 perovskite nanosheets. (d−g) AFM topography images of 2D MAPbI3 nanosheets with different thicknesses. Scale bars: 2 μm. (h) Normalized PL spectra of 2D perovskite nanosheets with different thicknesses. (i) PL peak position and energy gap as a function of the number of unit cells in perovskites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 72. 
Liu and co-workers also reported 2D MAPbI3 nanoplatelets using a two-step CVD growth method.72 They also used the two-step method to synthesize 2D MAPbX3 nanoplatelets, but the difference between the reports from Xiong's group is that the 2D PbX2 nanoplatelets were synthesized by solution-phase growth, as shown in Fig. 5c. By controlling the cooling rate and concentration of the precursor solution, various low-dimensional PbX2 nanostructures could be synthesized, and the PbX2 nanostructure could be used as a template for the growth of low-dimensional halide perovskite nanostructures. As shown in Fig. 5d–g, ultrathin 2D MAPbI3 nanoplatelets were successfully synthesized using the 2D PbX2 nanoplatelet template. The 2D MAPbI3 nanoplatelets exhibited high quantum efficiency in terms of the PL yield (Fig. 5h). As the number of layers decreased, the PL emission peaks showed a blueshift, and 2D MAPbI3 nanoplatelets showed a larger change in optical bandgaps, unlike halide perovskites, which have large organic cations (Fig. 5i). This indicates that a broader range of optical properties of 2D MAPbI3 can be obtained compared with other halide perovskites, especially those with large organic cations.

3.2. 1D halide perovskites
1D nanostructure semiconductors such as nanorods and nanowires have been investigated for decades as excellent platforms for photonics and nanoelectronics owing to their anisotropic geometry, large surface-to-volume ratio, and charge confinement in two dimensions. Compared with polycrystalline halide perovskite thin films, 1D halide perovskites show superior optical properties resulting from higher crystallinity such as charge diffusion length and lifetime. Therefore, 1D halide perovskites are considered as building blocks for various applications. Recently, several solution processing methods have been introduced for the fabrication of highly crystalline nanowires and nanorods.
The solvent-evaporation-induced recrystallization method has been employed to synthesize halide perovskite nanowires and their arrays.59 The growth procedure of halide perovskite nanowires in this method can be described as evaporation-induced self-assembly. When the precursor solution was dropped on the substrates, the evaporation of the solvent resulted in supersaturated crystal growth with the c-axis parallel to the surface. The self-assembly growth of nanowires originates from the low symmetry of halide perovskites and strong intermolecular interactions. The advantages of solvent-evaporation-induced recrystallization methods are that halide perovskite nanowires can be synthesized on any substrate, and nanowire patterning and alignment are also possible by selected area treatment. Using this method, various compositions and morphologies of halide perovskite nanowires and nanorods have been synthesized by controlling the precursor solution.

3.2.1. By solution-phase growth. 
The synthesis of halide perovskite nanowires via stricter directing adducts was presented by Petrov et al.58 The perovskite nanowires were formed through an intermediate phase such as MAI–PbI2–dimethylformamide (DMF) and formamidinium iodide (FAI)–PbI2–DMF, acting as structural directing agents. Typically, a PbI2 film was first deposited on a substrate. Next, the PbI2 coated substrate was dipped into a solution of MAI or FAI in a mixture solution of DMF and IPA. Finally, the halide perovskite nanowire was obtained by annealing on a hot plate at 100 °C for 5 min. In this method, I− plays a crucial role in the formation of nanowires, owing to the stable intermediate compound with PbI2, MA+/FA+ and DMF. In addition, the layered structure of PbI2 is also the key for the intermediate phase formation, whereas PbCl2 or PbBr2 do not have a layered structure. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of perovskite nanowire synthesis by this method are presented in Fig. 7a. Similarly, Zhu et al. demonstrated that the perovskite nanowires can also be obtained by post-treatment of a perovskite film with a mixture of DMF and IPA.125
Halide perovskite nanowires with a diameter of 50–400 nm and length of 10 μm can be achieved by a slip-coating method.126 Specifically, a saturated precursor of MAPbI3 in DMF was dropped onto a glass slide and covered with another glass slide. Afterward, the upper slide glass was slowly moved, exposing the thin liquid film perovskite precursor to ambient air, resulting in solvent evaporation and perovskite nanowire formation (Fig. 6a).126 A SEM image of a perovskite nanowire fabricated by this method is shown in Fig. 7b. The effect of the solvent on the perovskite precursor was also investigated. An experiment with the same procedure was conducted using γ-butyrolactone (GBL) as a solvent. However no anisotropic growth of perovskite occurred due to the higher boiling point of GBL.126
 Fig. 6  Schematic of the process to fabricate 1D perovskite nanodots via (a) slip-coating, (b) blade-coating, (c) nanofluidic channel, (d) self-template, (e) extrusion and (f) vapor-phase synthesis using template. Reproduced with permission from ref. 125–128, 132 and 149. 
 Fig. 7  SEM images of perovskite nanowires fabricated from (a) structure directing adduct, (b) slip-coating, (c) nanofluidic channel, (d) self-template, (e) extrusion and (f) ligand-directing. Reproduced with permission from ref. 58 and 125–129. 
Deng and co-workers synthesized aligned single-crystalline MAPbI3 nanowire arrays using a modified solvent-evaporation-induced recrystallization method combined with blade coating (Fig. 6b).127 By varying the concentration of the precursor solution and coating speed, the density of the MAPbI3 nanowire arrays and diameter of the MAPbI3 nanowires could be controlled. The synthesized aligned single-crystalline MAPbI3 nanowire arrays show high moisture stability and high mechanical flexibility.
One of the novel methods to obtain a halide perovskite nanowire is controlled growth using an open fluidic channel.128 In a specific experiment, a saturated MAPbI3/DMF was dropped on arrays of a nanostructured SiO2 substrate, as shown in Fig. 6c. The halide perovskite precursor was driven through the channel by capillary forces. At the channel entrances, a stable cluster and nuclei of an MAPbI3–DMF intermediate phase was formed, initiating the growth of nanowires in the channels. The uniform halide perovskite nanowire array is displayed in Fig. 7c. The growth mechanism of halide perovskite nanowires in an open fluidic channel can be classified as a solvent-evaporation-induced supersaturation driven crystallization. Thus, the concentration of the precursor and solvents, the surface tension, and temperature are important parameters to control the growth of perovskite nanowires.128
3.2.1.1. By self-template-directing. 
The self-template-directed fabrication of porous MAPbBr3 nanowires was introduced by Zhuo et al.129 The studies suggested that porous halide perovskite nanowires can be obtained through the reaction of Pb-containing nanowires with MAPbBr3 and HBr in an organic solution. Pb-Containing nanowires were fabricated based on cysteine coordination.129 As Pb-containing nanowires were added into (MAPbBr3 + HBr)/IPA solution, MAPbBr3 was quickly formed on the surface, whereas the interior remained unchanged. The dissolution of organic compounds in a Pb-containing precursor results in the formation of pores in the nanowire, assisting the conversion of the nanowire precursor to a halide perovskite nanowire (Fig. 6d).129 A SEM image of porous MAPbBr3 is shown in Fig. 7d.
3.2.1.2. By extrusion. 
Recently, Oener et al. demonstrated that the halide perovskite nanowire can be fabricated through the extrusion of a perovskite precursor through an anodized aluminium oxide (AAO) template.130 A schematic illustrating the extrusion process is displayed in Fig. 6e. First, a solution of MAPbB3 in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) was dropped onto a free-standing AAO template placed on an O-ring. A syringe was connected with a plastic tube in order to reduce the pressure in the sealed air, facilitating the filling of the halide perovskite solution into AAO pores.130 As a result of the low pressure in the sealed air, the halide perovskite solution was extruded through the AAO template. Next, the halide perovskite nanowire was obtained by annealing the AAO template on a hot plate at a temperature of 120 °C. A SEM image of extruded nanowire is shown in Fig. 7e. The length and diameter of the halide perovskite nanowire produced by this method depend on the pore size and the applied pressure gradient time.130
3.2.1.3. By surfactant-directed solution-phase growth. 
The solution-phase growth using surfactants was first introduced by Zhang et al.131 In this report, nanowires of the inorganic perovskite with a composition of CsPbX3 (X: I, Br, Cl) were synthesized by reacting cesium oleate with PbX2 in the presence of oleyamine (OAM) and oleic acid (OA) in octadecene (ODE) at the temperature of 150–200 °C. Two main factors that affect the growth of halide perovskite nanowires in this method are the reaction time and the ratio of surfactants in the solutions. Typically, at the initial stage (t < 10 min), perovskite nanocubes were formed in the solution. At a later stage (40–90 min), the halide perovskite nanocubes transformed into halide perovskite nanowires (Fig. 7f). However, as the reaction time increased, larger halide perovskite crystals were observed accompanied by the disappearance of the halide perovskite nanowire. In addition, by changing the reaction solvent from ODE to OAM, the reaction showed much lower kinetics but higher yield of halide perovskite nanowires.131


3.2.2. By vapor-phase growth. 
In general, vapor-phase-grown nanostructure materials exhibit low defect density and higher crystallinity compared to nanostructured materials prepared from solution processes. The growth of halide perovskite nanowires has been successfully developed by several groups.104,106,132,133 For example, Chen et al. reported the vapor-phase growth of single-crystal CsPbX3 nanowire networks with controlled orientation along the [001] directions and with the (100) facets exposed, using a CVD reactor (Fig. 8a).104 More recently, Shoaib et al. demonstrated that the controlled growth of in-plane directional halide perovskite nanowires with a diameter of a few hundred nanometers and length up to several millimeters can be achieved by CVD.132 The ultralong halide perovskite nanowires were aligned along the groove direction of the M-plane sapphire substrates. The halide perovskite vapor precursor including CsBr and PbBr2 were first graphoepitaxy-nucleated at the nanogrooves of the sapphire substrate which further grew into 1D halide perovskite nanowires along the (100) planes with low surface energy (Fig. 8b). The growth pressure and temperature play important roles in this process in order to obtain directional, ultralong, halide perovskite nanowires.132 In another work, Waleed et al. reported the diameter of a vertically aligned CsPbI3 in nanoengineering templates using a vapor–solid–solid reaction.133 The fabrication procedure is shown in Fig. 6f. The anodic nanoporous alumina membranes (AAMs) were employed as a template for the growth of all-inorganic halide perovskite nanowires (CsPbI3). It should be noted that, in this report, Pb nanoclusters were used to grow the perovskite nanowire instead of PbI2. By using this process, the diameter and length of the halide perovskite nanowire can be controlled precisely. SEM cross-sectional and top-view images of vertically aligned halide perovskite nanowires are shown in Fig. 8c and d.
 Fig. 8  SEM images of vapor-phase synthesis 1D perovskite nanowires, (a) random nanowire, (b) aligned nanowire and (c and d) vertically aligned nanowire. Reproduced with permission from ref. 130–132. 

3.3. 0D halide perovskites

3.3.1. By ligand-assisted precipitation. 
The non-template synthesis of MAPbBr3 was performed by Schmidt et al. for the first time.134 In this work, MAPbBr3 nanocrystals were obtained at room temperature by employing octylammonium bromide and octadecylammonium bromide as organic capping ligands. As a result, these halide perovskite nanocrystals showed bright PL at 527 and 530 nm with a quantum yield of 20%.134 The ligand-assisted reprecipitation method (LARP) for the fabrication of halide perovskite nanocrystals was further developed by Zhang and co-workers (Fig. 9a).135 Specifically, halide perovskite nanocrystals were simply achieved by vigorously stirring a halide perovskite precursor solution including PbX2, MAX, DMF, and long-chain organic ligands such as n-octylamine and oleic acid in a poor solvent such as toluene or hexane. The PL quantum yield of the halide perovskite nanocrystal prepared by LARP was reported to be up to 70%.135 It should be noted that by changing the type and concentration of organic ligands, the crystal morphology of the halide perovskite can be tuned from nanodots to nanosheets and nanowires.61
 Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of the synthesis of perovskite nanodots via (a) ligand-assisted reprecipitation method, (b) hot injection method and (c) SiO2 mesoporous template. Reproduced with permission from ref. 135 and 137. 


3.3.2. By hot injection growth. 
Colloidal synthesis of halide perovskite nanocrystals at relatively high temperatures of 140–200 °C was reported by Protesescu and coworkers in 2014.136 The synthesis process is illustrated in Fig. 9b. This method takes advantage of the ionic nature of chemical bonding in CsPbX3 compounds. The crystallization of CsPbX3 is achieved by reacting lead halide (PbX2) and Cs-oleate in a high-boiling-point organic solvent such as octadecene at 140–200 °C. Long-chain organic ligands such as oleic acid and oleylamine are employed to confine the crystal size of the resulting nanocrystals. The majority of crystal growth occurred within the first 3 s after the injection of Cs-oleate into PbX2 in octadecene owing to the fast nucleation and growth kinetics. The crystal size of the CsPbX3 nanocrystal fabricated by this process depends on the reaction temperature rather than the reaction time. Thus, by tuning the crystal temperature, the crystal size of nanocrystals can be precisely controlled. The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image, PL, absorption, and time results in PL of monodispersed halide perovskite nanocrystals are shown in Fig. 10a. The obtained halide perovskite nanocrystals exhibit significantly high quantum yields of 50–90%.136 However, this method is not applicable to the synthesis of organometal lead halide perovskite nanocrystals owing to the low stability of organic cations at high temperature.
 Fig. 10  Monodisperse CsPbX3 NCs and their structural characterization, (a) schematic of the cubic perovskite lattice, (b and c) transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of CsPbBr3 NCs, (d) X-ray diffraction patterns for typical ternary and mixed-halide perovskite NCs, (e) colloidal solution of CsPbX3 in toluene under a UV lamp (λ = 350 nm), (f) PL spectra of CsPbX3 NCs (g) typical optical absorption and PL spectra, (h) time-resolved PL decays for all sample shown in (g) except for CsPbCl3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 136. 


3.3.3. By using templates. 
Another strategy to fabricate perovskite nanocrystals is by using mesoporous templates. Kovalenko and colleagues discovered that mesoporous silica functions well as templates for preparing perovskite nanocrystals on a large scale.137 The synthesis method is shown in Fig. 9c. The halide perovskite nanocrystals were obtained by simply dipping and drying the mesoporous templates in a perovskite precursor. The crystal size and quantum confinement of the perovskite nanocrystal fabricated using this method were determined by the size of pores of the templates. Despite all these advantages, the applications of this method in electronic and optoelectronic devices are still very limited owing to the insulating property of the mesoporous template.

4. Applications of low-dimensional halide perovskites
4.1. Solar cells
Apart from 3D bulk halide perovskite, 2D halide perovskites have also been intensively investigated as active layers in solar cells. Compared with 3D halide perovskites, the stability of 2D halide perovskites is significantly increased. The first 2D halide perovskite-based solar cell was reported by Smith et al.138 In this work, the 2D halide perovskite was obtained by mixing C6H5(CH3)2NH3I (PEAI), MAI (MAI) and PbI2 with a molar ratio of 2:2:3. As a result, a 2D halide perovskite with a structure of (PEA)2(MA)2[Pb3I10] was obtained. The number of layers (n) was determined to be 3. The decrease in dimension results in an increase in the bandgap and exciton binding energy. Halide perovskite solar cells with a structure of fluorinated indium tin oxide (FTO)/TiO2/(PEA)2(MA)2[Pb3I10]/spiro-OMeTAD/gole show a PCE of 4.71%. It should be noted that the 2D halide perovskite remained stable after 46 days, whereas the 3D halide perovskite started to decompose after 4–5 days, as is evident from the XRD spectra in Fig. 11b. Other than PEAI, butylammonium (BA) can also be used to fabricate 2D halide perovskites, which was demonstrated by Cao et al.114 The highest performance of a 2D halide perovskite-based solar cell was reported by Quan and coworkers.139 In this work, the effect of layer number on the performance of halide perovskite solar cells was investigated. The number of layers was tuned from n = 1 (pure 2D) to n = 40–60 (quasi-2D) and 3D (Fig. 11a). Interestingly, the halide perovskite with n = 40–60 showed improved absorption, carrier mobility, and exciton diffusion length compared to the pure 2D halide perovskite, and its stability was superior to that of 3D halide perovskites. The J–V curves and stability of perovskites with different n are shown in Fig. 11c–e. As can be observed from Fig. 11f, the layer perovskite with n < 60 maintained their initial value up to 1440 h under air ambient. In contrast, the efficiency of 3D halide perovskite-based solar cells significantly dropped after a few hours. The improved stability of 2D and quasi-2D halide perovskites was suggested to originate from the van der Waals interactions between the capping organic molecules, which was confirmed by DFT simulation.138 One approach to improve the stability of perovskite solar cells is to use an all-inorganic halide perovskite (CsPbX3), which has been reported by many groups. CsPbI3 with an absorption bandgap of 1.73 eV is the most suitable material for solar cells. Unfortunately, at a temperature less than 320 °C, the orthorhombic phase (δ-CsPbI3) with an absorption bandgap of 2.82 eV is thermodynamically preferred.139 Swanrnkar and co-workers found that a α-CsPbI3 perovskite in the form of quantum dots is stable for months in ambient air and could function well as an active layer in solar cells.38 The method to deposit a highly conductive CsPbI3 nanocrystal film was developed in order to use it in solar cells. Typically, CsPbX3 colloid in octane was spin-coated on TiO2/FTO substrates. The CsPbI3 nanocrystal-coated substrates were then immersed in saturated methyl acetate (MeOAc). This process was repeated several times to produce a perovskite nanocrystal film with the desired thickness. As a result, CsPbI3 nanocrystal-based solar cells exhibit a PCE of 10.77% with a Voc of 1.23 eV and fill factor of 0.65. The structure, FE-SEM image, and J–V curve of CsPbI3 solar cells are shown in Fig. 11g–i. This work demonstrated that 0D perovskite materials are feasible for solar cell applications. More recently, Sanehira et al. improved the PCE of CsPbI3 quantum dot solar cells up to 13.43% by increasing the charge carrier mobility of quantum dot films through surface chemistry based on A-site cation halide salt (MA or FA cation) treatments.140
 Fig. 11  (a) Unit cell structure of (C8H9NH3)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 perovskites with different n values, showing the evolution of dimensionality from 2D (n = 1) to 3D (n = ∞), (b) DFT simulation of the formation energy of perovskites with different n values in different atmospheres. Comparison of J–V curves for different number of perovskite layers. (c) Simulation using experimental absorption spectra and bandgaps, and mobility of 0.1 cm2 V−1 s−1. (d) Simulation with radiative recombination of 5 × 10−10 cm3 s−1 and gradually decreasing mobility for lower n. The same trap density is used for all cases. The perovskite layer was estimated to be 200 nm thick. (e) Experimental curve. (f) Device stability test as a function of n value. Reproduced with permission from ref. 139. (g) Schematic of the device with TEM images of CsPbI3 NCs. (h) SEM cross-section of CsPbI3 perovskite solar cells. (i) J–V curves of the device measured in air as a function of time. Reproduced with permission from ref. 140. 
4.2. Light emitting diodes
Recently, perovskite materials have been considered as the most promising emissive materials for light emitting diodes. One of the effective strategies to improve the performance as well as stability of halide perovskite LEDs is to utilize low-dimensional halide perovskites.
Cao and co-workers are the first group to use low-dimensional perovskites in LEDs.141 Typically, MAPbBr3 nanoplates with a quantum yield of 85% were obtained through a modified ligand-assisted precipitation method and used as an emissive layer in LEDs. The schematic of the device structure and device performance of halide perovskite nanoplate-based LEDs is shown in Fig. 12a. A pure green color with maximum luminescence as high as 10590 cd m−2 was recorded (Fig. 12b and c). However, the external quantum efficiency (EQE) still remains relatively low at 0.48%. More recently, Si et al. demonstrated the in situ growth of CsPbBr3 nanoplates passivated by phenylbutylamine (PBA), resulting in 2D halide perovskites with a structure of PBA2(CsPbBr3)n−1PbBr4.142 The PBA2(CsPbBr3)n−1PbBr4 film with n ranging from 12–16 shows a smooth surface, low trap densities, narrow emission bandwidths, and high PL quantum yield, improving the EQE of LED up to 10.4%.142 Other than 2D perovskites, quasi-2D halide perovskites have also been widely used in LEDs. Yuan et al. demonstrated the brightest and most efficient near-infrared LED based on quasi-2D perovskites with an EQE of 8.8% and a radiance of 80 W srm−2.143 In this work, quasi-2D halide perovskites were prepared by incorporating phenylethyl ammonium (PEA) into the MAPbI3 perovskite, resulting in PEA2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 structures. The numbers of layers were modulated by changing the molar ratio of PEAI to MAI. Interestingly, the quasi-2D halide perovskites with n = 3 and n = 5 displayed a significantly increased PL quantum yield (QY) of 10.1 and 10.6% whereas that of the 3D perovskite was negligible. The layer-dependent QYs of quasi-2D perovskites are shown in Fig. 12d. The enhancement of QY in quasi-2D perovskites with n = 3 and n = 5 can be explained by a carrier funneling effect, as shown in Fig. 12e–g.
 Fig. 12  (a) Device architecture for a PeLED with perovskite nanoplatelets as the emitter, and the flat-band energy level diagram of different layers of materials, showing conduction and valence band levels with respect to vacuum. (b) Electroluminescence spectrum from a standard device with PVK:PBD weight ratio of 64/36 at an applied voltage of 4–7 V. Inset: Photograph of a working device at 7 V. (c) Current–voltage and brightness–voltage characteristics for the control device (neat perovskite without PVK:PBD) and devices with PVK:PBD (w/w ratio of 70:30, 64:36, and 58:42) layer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 142. (d) Evolution of the PLQY with increasing excitation intensity for perovskites with different 〈n〉 values. (e) The carrier transfer process in a 〈n〉 = 3 perovskite. (f) Carrier transfer process in a 〈n〉 = 5 perovskite. (g) Multiphase perovskite materials PEA2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 channel energy across an inhomogeneous energy landscape, concentrating carriers to the smallest bandgap emitters. The arrows represent the carrier transfer process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 144. (h) The device structure. (i) Cross-sectional TEM image showing the multiple layers of material with distinct contrast. Scale bar, 50 nm. (j) Flat-band energy level diagram. (k) The EL spectra (straight line) of CsPbX3 quantum dot LEDs under an applied voltage of 5.5 V, and the PL spectra (dashed line) of QDs dispersed in hexane. Reproduced with permission from ref. 145. 
Since halide perovskite quantum dots with PL of 90% were demonstrated, halide perovskite quantum dots have been widely used in LEDs. The first all-inorganic halide perovskite quantum dot (CsPbX3) LED was reported by Zeng's group.144 The device structure and their full color emission are shown in Fig. 12h–k. Although the halide perovskite quantum dots exhibit extremely high QY, the performance of the perovskite quantum dot-based LEDs is relatively low, with an EQE of 0.12% and maximum luminance of 946 cd m−2. Therefore, aside from the QY, assembly of quantum dots into the thin film and the removal of organic ligands need to be considered to obtain high-efficiency halide perovskite quantum dot LEDs. For instance, Li and colleagues improved the EQE of all-inorganic halide perovskite quantum dot LEDs up to 6.27% by carefully controlling the purification process of quantum dots with hexane/ethyl acetate mixed solvents.145 In another work, Li et al. obtained highly efficient halide perovskite quantum dot LEDs with an EQE of 5.7% by employing trimethylaluminum (TMA) as the cross-linking agent for improving the surface coverage of the halide perovskite quantum dot layer.146 Zhang et al. applied another strategy to improve the performance of halide perovskite LEDs by doping Cs-cation into FAPbBr3 quantum dots. The resulting device exhibited an EQE of 2.8% and a remarkably high luminance of 55005 cd m−2.147 These results confirmed the important role of halide perovskite quantum dots in LEDs.
4.3. Photodetectors
The photodetectors based on polycrystalline halide perovskite thin films exhibit performance degradation because the defects can be migrated by an external bias.29 The performance degradation can be avoided using low-dimensional halide perovskites which have high crystallinity and nanostructures.72,75,148,149 For example, unlike their 3D bulk-phase counterpart, 2D nanostructure semiconductors exhibit strong quantum confinement and tunable optical bandgap varying with thickness, which is a fascinating property for optoelectronic applications, especially photodetectors. There have been attempts to apply 2D nanostructure halide perovskites in optoelectronics. Liu et al. reported a CVD-grown 2D MAPbI3 nanoplatelet-based photodetector.72 Although the gate voltage did not affect the source–drain current of the photodetector, which is different from the bulk counterpart, the current of the device was significantly enhanced even under the illumination of a dim light. The significantly enhanced photocurrent is attributed to the strong light–matter interaction and broadband photoresponse of a single unit-cell halide perovskite nanosheet. The photodetector showed higher responsivity (22 A W−1 under a 405 nm laser, 12 A W−1 under a 532 nm laser) and faster response time than photodetectors based on bulk halide perovskite polycrystalline films. Song and co-workers reported solution-processed flexible photodetectors based on 2D CsPbBr3 nanosheets (Fig. 13a).150 The 2D CsPbBr3 nanosheet-based photodetector showed electronic transport properties, high on/off ratio (>103), and fast response & recovery time (19 μs and 25 μs, respectively). Moreover, 2D CsPbBr3 nanosheet-based photodetectors showed much higher ambient stability and mechanical flexibility than bulk halide perovskite thin film-based photodetectors. As shown in Fig. 13b and c, the photodetectors showed a constant current value regardless of the bending state and maintained the device performance after 10000 cycles of the bending–recovery test. Compared with an MAPbBr3-based photodetector, 2D CsPbBr3 nanosheet-based photodetectors showed less degradation under ambient conditions. By incorporating carbon nanotubes within CsPbBr3 nanosheets as conductive carrier tracks, a highly conductive composite film was obtained.151 As a result, a highly efficient halide perovskite photodetector with EQE and responsivity as high as 7488% and 31.1 A W−1, respectively, was recorded. Cheng et al. reported a novel heterojunction where the 2D halide perovskite was sandwiched between WSe2 and graphene.152 The study shows that a graphene/2D halide perovskite/graphene vertical stack displays an exceptionally high photoresponsivity of up to 950 A W−1, whereas a graphene/WSe2/2D halide perovskite/graphene heterojunction shows a high on/off ratio of 106. 1D nanostructures such as nanowires and nanorods have been considered as a building block for future optoelectronics, especially photodetectors, owing to their unique properties. Compared with their bulk counterparts, 1D nanostructure semiconductors have higher crystallinity, larger surface-to-volume ratio, lower trap density, lower recombination rate, and long lifetime of photogenerated carriers. Therefore, there have been reports of 1D halide perovskite-based photodetectors using these unique properties. For example, Horváth et al. reported a MAPbI3 nanowire-based broadband photodetector.59 The MAPbI3 nanowires in photodetectors were fabricated by using a solvent-evaporation-induced recrystallization method, and Pt contacts were deposited through a simple hard mask. The device showed higher performance than the state-of-the-art photodetectors made of few-layer MoS2 and graphene. However, the large-scale fabrication of 1D halide perovskite photodetectors and their fabrication into integrated optoelectronics are difficult, because the 1D halide perovskites are randomly aligned with poor uniformity. To fabricate aligned 1D halide perovskites with high uniformity, Deng et al. reported a facile method to produce highly aligned single-crystalline MAPb(I1−xBrx)3 nanowire arrays and their application to photodetectors.153 As shown in Fig. 13d–f, single-crystalline halide perovskite nanowire arrays were fabricated by a fluid-guided antisolvent vapor-assisted crystallization method. The photodetector showed a broad photoresponse from 380 nm to 780 nm, and the figures-of-merit, especially responsivity, are the highest values that have ever been reported. By controlling the halide composition, the first absorption peak can be tuned. With various halide compositions of MAPb(I1−xBrx)3, Deng and co-workers have successfully fabricated integrated devices for wavelength detection. The ultrahigh performance of the 1D halide perovskite nanowire array resulted from the single-crystalline structure, smooth surface, large area uniformity, and long carrier diffusion length.
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration of the flexible photodetector. (b) Photoresponse at 5 V of the CsPbBr3 nanosheet photodetector for the 1st and 10000th bending–recovery cycle. (c) Stability comparison of normalized photocurrent of CsPbBr3 and MAPbBr3 photodetectors. Reproduced with permission from ref. 150. (d) Schematic illustration of a MAPbI3 NW array photodetector. (e and f) SEM images of the photodetector with different magnification. Reproduced with permission from ref. 154. (g) Probable schematics of carrier transportation of the CsPbBr3 film with drop-coating and centrifugal-casting under light irradiation. (h) I–V logarithm curves of PD with different film fabrication methods under a 532 nm laser (0.40 mW cm−2). Reproduced with permission from ref. 156. 
All-inorganic perovskite nanocrystals of CsPbI3 was employed in photodetectors by Ramasamy in 2016 for the first time.154 Halide perovskite nanocrystals in colloidal solution can be assembled into thin films via spin-coating or centrifugal casting. Large-area, dense packs and a pinhole-free structure are the prerequisites to obtain high performance of halide perovskite nanocrystal based photodetectors. Dong and co-workers reported that high-quality films of perovskite nanocrystals with preferred-orientation can be achieved by centrifugal-casting (Fig. 13g).155 As a result, the photocurrent increased from 0.67 to 2.77 μA with a centrifugal-cast film compared to that of a drop-coated film (Fig. 13h).155 The enhancement is attributed to the improved photogenerated charge carrier transportation. Another strategy to use perovskite nanocrystals in photodetectors is to incorporate them with TiO2 nanowires/nanotubes, which was reported by Zheng et al.156
4.4. Image sensors
One of the interesting applications of nanostructured perovskite materials is in image sensing.106 In this research, 2D halide perovskite nanowire arrays with desirable optical properties and crystallinity were fabricated through vapor-phase growth on a porous alumina membrane (PAM) and used in a proof-of-concept image sensor with 1024 photodiode pixels. The concept of the device is shown in Fig. 14a. In this study, each pixel has a footprint of 200 × 200 μm with a periodicity of 400 μm, which consists of approximately 1.6 × 105 perovskite nanowires. The I–V curves of individual pixels are shown in Fig. 14b. The asymmetric nature of the I–V curve implies that the pixel device is a Schottky photodiode. The nanowire device shows a specific detectivity of 1010 Jones in the wavelength range from 450–780 nm. The photocurrent rise time and fall time were measured to be 20.47 ms and 13.81 ms, which are faster than human-eye pattern recognition (>40 ms). Therefore, this device can be considered for use in electronic-eye applications. The full sensor device was characterized using the setup displayed in Fig. 14c and d. The projections of imaged character “H” and a heart symbol on the image sensor are shown in Fig. 14e and f. It is obvious that these symbols were clearly resolved, suggesting the reliable imaging function of the sensor.106
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic of the measurement setup. (b) I–V curves under different illumination intensities (white color light). Inset: Band structure of a single-pixel device under zero bias and in the dark. (c) Photograph of an image sensor mounted on a printing circuit board. (d) Schematic of the measurement setup. (e) Original and imaged letter (“H”). (f) Original and imaged heart symbol. Reproduced with permission from ref. 1. 
4.5. Lasers
Lasers have great potential as light sources if they can be integrated into optoelectronic circuits. With the miniaturization of devices, nanolasers have become more important. Nanostructured semiconductors have been considered as strong candidates for nanolasers. However, harsh synthesis conditions of nanostructured semiconductors for nanolasers and their poor stability are major limitations in integrating nanolasers into future optoelectronic devices. With facile solution synthesis methods, tunable bandgap, and remarkable physical properties, low-dimensional halide perovskites have been attempted to be applied to nanolasers.
Biexciton lasing in the layered perovskite (C6H13NH3)2PbI3 was observed by Kondo et al. in 1998.157 However, the developments of halide perovskite materials in lasers have started in earnest during the last few years. Compared to their 3D bulk halide perovskite counterparts, nanostructures exhibit significantly improved performance. Whispering gallery mode (WGM) cavities have been widely employed in nanostructured halide perovskite-based lasers. Planner WGM lasers using perovskite nanoplates were demonstrated by Zang et al.158 In this work, the perovskite nanoplates were chemically deposited onto a mica substrate (Fig. 15a). Well-defined polygonal MAPb3−aXa perovskite WGM nanocavities were grown with remarkably high quality, resulting in a lasing threshold of 37 μJ cm−2. The use of 2D halide perovskites in lasers was further improved by Quing Liao and colleagues.159 The solution grown MAPbBr3 WGM microdisk laser shows single-mode lasing with a low threshold of 3.6 μJ cm−2.159
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic of the optical setup. A pulsed laser (400 nm, 150 fs, 1 kHz) excites the sample from the top globally. The spot size is large enough to cover the whole cavity to ensure high pumping injection efficiency and reduce the local heating effect. The NIR PL from perovskite waveguides inside the cavities confined by their planar polygonal structures. (b) Far-field optical image of two typical MAPbI3 nanoplatelets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 159. Visible lasing from MAPbBr3 NWs. (c) 2D pseudo-color plots of NW emission spectra as a function of pump fluence for MAPbBr3. (d) Widely tunable lasing emission wavelength at room temperature from single-crystal NW lasers of mixed lead halide perovskites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 161. Lasing in perovskite CsPbX3 NC films. (e) Evolution from PL to whispering-gallery-mode (WGM) lasing with increasing pump intensity in a microsphere resonator of diameter 15 mm, covered by a film of CsPbBr3 NCs. (f) Single pump laser shot mode structure of random lasing from a CsPb(Br/Cl)3 NC film. The inset shows path-length distribution averaged over 256 pump laser shots. Reproduced with permission from ref. 162. 
Single-crystal halide perovskite nanowire lasing has been reported by several groups. Remarkably, Zhu et al. reported room temperature and wave-tunable lasing from MAPbX3 (X: I, Br, Cl) single-crystal nanowire with a very low lasing threshold of 220 nJ cm−2, high quality factor of 3600 and lasing QY approaching 100%.160 Broad range lasing based on MAPbX3 was also demonstrated (Fig. 15d). The outstanding lasing performance is owing to their long charge carrier lifetime and low nonradiative recombination rate. To increase the stability, the all-inorganic perovskite CsPbX3 was fabricated and tested in lasers. Eaton et al. reported the synthesis of high-quality 1D CsPbBr3 and CsPbCl3 nanowires and their application in nanolasers.30 The 1D CsPbX3 (X = Br, I) nanowire showed strong emissive properties and the emission wavelength can be tuned by halide substitution over 100 nm. The 1D CsPbBr3 nanowires exhibited low lasing thresholds and comparable quality factors. Unlike other halide perovskites, the 1D CsPbBr3 nanowires were stable for weeks under ambient conditions and during continuous lasing.
All-inorganic halide perovskite (CsPbX3) nanocrystal lasing was reported by Yukanin.161 The study suggests that room temperature optical amplification can be obtained in the entire visible range, owing to the tunable bandgap of perovskite nanocrystals. The pump threshold was measured to be 5 μJ cm−2. Two different lasing modes observed were WGM utilizing silica microspheres as high-finesse resonators, conformally coated with CsPbX3 nanocrystals and random lasing in films of CsPbX3 nanocrystals.161
4.6. Memory devices
Resistive switching memory (ReRAM) is composed of a metal–insulator–metal structure which can store information by two stable resistive states. In 2015, Yoo et al. discovered that organolead halide perovskite is applicable as an insulator in ReRAM, which was further confirmed by several groups.162 The use of low-dimensional perovskite materials such as 2D and 0D perovskites has also been demonstrated.
Seo and co-workers reported the resistive switching of (C4H9NH3)(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1.163 The performance of ReRAM based on (C4H9NH3)(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 as a function of n was studied. The I–V characteristics of ReRAM with n ranging from 1–3 and ∞ are displayed in Fig. 16a–f. As can be seen the (C4H9NH3)(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 showed resistive switching behavior regardless of the value of n. However, as the value of n increased, the on/off ratio and accuracy of switching was significantly decreased. The decreases in device performance were thought to come from the increase of dimensionality from 2D to quasi-2D and 3D, which led to the changes in the valence band maximum and conduction band maximum, resulting in the difference in the Schottky barrier height at the interface of both electrodes (Ag and Pt).
 Fig. 16  
I–V characteristics of (a) BA2PbI4, (b) BA2MAPb2I7, (c) BA2MA2Pb3I10, and (d) MAPbI3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 164. (e) Schematic of the flexible PeQD memory device with a structure of PET/ITO/PMMA/PeQDs:PMMA/PMMA/Ag. Inset: Energy band diagram of the PeQD memory device. (f) I–V characteristics of a flexible memory device before and after 10 cycles of bending. Inset: Photograph of the as-fabricated flexible PeQD memory device under bending conditions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 42. 
The resistive switching behavior was also observed in halide perovskite quantum dots, which were reported by Yang and colleagues.42 In this work, in order to be used as an insulating layer, halide perovskite quantum dots (MAPbBr3) were embedded in a PMMA matrix. The structure of perovskite quantum dot-based ReRAM is displayed in Fig. 16e. Interestingly, the halide perovskite quantum dot-based ReRAM exhibits a stable resistive switching effect with an on/off ratio of over 103. The I–V curves of perovskite quantum dot ReRAM are shown in Fig. 16f. The switching mechanism of this ReRAM is related to charge trapping and detrapping in perovskite quantum dots.
5. Summary and outlook
Halide perovskites have been considered as novel active materials in recent years owing to their exceptional performance in solar cells, LEDs, photodetectors, X-ray imaging detectors, resistive switching memory devices, and lasers. The nanostructured engineering of halide perovskite materials from 3D to 0D plays an important role in maximizing the potential of these materials in electronic as well as optoelectronic devices. In this review, we summarized the current progress of low-dimensional halide perovskite materials including 2D, quasi-2D, 1D, and 0D in terms of their synthesis methods, optical properties, electrical properties, and applications. It is suggested that 1D halide perovskites are superior in photodetection and lasing devices, whereas 2D and 0D halide perovskites are better in LEDs and solar cells. The cutting-edge techniques and key parameters to obtain high-quality low-dimensional halide perovskites were discussed. The advantages and disadvantages of each type of low-dimensional halide perovskite in each application were identified and compared, providing a guideline for optimizing the device performance and finding new applications of these nanostructured materials. The potential applications of low-dimensional halide perovskite materials for electronic and optoelectronic devices can be classified as follows.
(1) 2D halide perovskite: due to the facile fabrication process, controllable morphology, high absorption, high PLQY and good stability, 2D and quasi-2D halide perovskite materials can be diversely applied in a wide range of applications such as photodetectors, lasers, resistive switching memory devices, solar cells and LEDs.
(2) 1D halide perovskite: perovskite nanowires were suggested as the most promising materials for optoelectronic devices such as photodetectors and lasers, owing to their high crystallinity, superior charge carrier mobility, low defects and high PLQY. However, the applications of these materials in other devices were very limited due to their rough morphology and incomplete surface coverage which severely deteriorate the device performance.
(3) 0D halide perovskite: Halide perovskite quantum dots were mostly employed as emissive layers in LEDs and lasers due to their exceptional PLQY of up to 90%. Besides, the utilization of these quantum dots in solar cells, photodetectors and resistive switching memory devices has also been demonstrated. However, the efficiencies of these devices were inferior to that of other low dimensional and 3D halide perovskite based devices due to the random orientation and the excess of long-chain organic ligands on the surface of quantum dots which substantially reduced the charge carrier mobility of the quantum dot film. Thus, the self-assembly of halide perovskite quantum dots into a thin film and the removal of organic ligands were considered as the key parameters to improve the performance of halide perovskite quantum dot based devices.
Although low-dimensional halide perovskite nanomaterials have been intensively and extensively investigated in recent years, there are still many problems to be resolved in order employ them in practical applications. Among those, stability is one the most important prerequisites in order to commercialize the halide perovskite-based devices. It was reported that low-dimensional perovskites exhibit better stability in comparison with the 3D structure. Still, it does not meet the requirement for practical applications. Thus, investigations on the stability of low-dimensional halide perovskite materials, such as optimizing the composition to stabilize the perovskite structure or finding new passivation materials that can protect the halide perovskite structure without changing its optical and electrical properties, are urgent. The poor stability of halide perovskite materials can be improved by optimizing the Goldschmidt tolerance factor (t). The tolerance factor can be modulated by changing the A site or X site. The organic cations in the composition have a huge impact on the stability of halide perovskite materials. The most investigated perovskite material is MAPbI3. However, it was reported that MAPbI3 is intrinsically unstable. By partially replacing MA (2.17 Å) by FA (2.53 Å), the value of the tolerance factor was increased from 0.91 to 0.99 improving the stability of halide perovskite materials.164 It should be noted that pure FAPbI3 is also unstable with the tolerance factor larger than 1. Cs or Rb was found to be a suitable candidate as a dopant to reduce the tolerance factor of FAPbI3, and thus improve its stability.164 The use of mixed halides (I with Br or Cl) was also reported to be a good strategy to improve the stability of halide perovskite materials.164,165 Therefore, we believe that the lifetime of low-dimensional halide perovskite materials can be improved by considering the t factor. Moreover, synthesis processes that allow the fabrication of highly uniform low-dimensionality perovskite materials on a large scale need to be addressed. The toxicity of Pb-based halide perovskite materials is another big concern. It is obvious that Pb2+ in perovskite can be easily dissolved in a polar solvent such as water, and spread into the living environment, causing a significant health hazard. So far, the replacement of Pb2+ by Sn2+ has been reported. Unfortunately, Sn-based halide perovskite materials are far less stable than Pb-based halide perovskites owing to the oxidation of Sn2+ to Sn4+. Nevertheless, several groups have successfully improved the stability of Pb-free halide perovskites. Liao et al. reported that the incorporation of PEA into FASnI3 resulted in the change of 3D to quasi 2D perovskite, significantly increasing the stability of a solar cell device up to 100 h without appreciable degradation.110 Waleed et al. fabricated MASnI3 nanowire arrays using an alumina template and applied this material as a photodetector.166 The MASnI3 nanowire array-based photodetector is operable up to 8 days, which is much longer than the MASnI3 thin film (30 min). Therefore, the outlook toward the stabilization of low-dimensional lead-free halide perovskite materials is very optimistic and needs more attention in the near future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the Basic Science Research Program (2017R1A2B3009135), the Future Material Discovery Program (2016M3D1A1027666, 2017M3D1A1039379), and the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korean government (MSIP) (No. 2017K1A3A1A67014432) and the Nano Material Technology Development Program (2016M3A7B4910) through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) and the International Energy Joint R&D Program (20168510011350) of the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP).
References
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Stoumpos, C. D. Malliakas and M. G. Kanatzidis, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 9019–9038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Heo, S. H. Im, J. H. Noh, T. N. Mandal, C.-S. Lim, J. A. Chang, Y. H. Lee, H.-J. Kim, A. Sarkar, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and S. I. Seok, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 486 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu and T. L. Kelly, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 8, 133 CrossRef .
H. J. Snaith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 3623–3630 CrossRef CAS .
P. Calado, A. M. Telford, D. Bryant, X. Li, J. Nelson, B. C. O’Regan and P. R. F. Barnes, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-S. Kim, C.-R. Lee, J.-H. Im, K.-B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J.-H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Grätzel and N.-G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. G. Kim, K. C. Kwon, Q. V. Le, K. Hong, H. W. Jang and S. Y. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2016, 319, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
Best Research Cell, Efficiencies: http://www.nrel.gov/pv/assets/images/efficiency-chart.png.
B. S. Passmore, J. Wu, M. O. Manasreh and G. J. Salamo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 233508 CrossRef .
L. Dou, Y. Yang, J. You, Z. Hong, W.-H. Chang, G. Li and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-K. Tang, Z.-F. Xu, D.-Y. Zhang, S.-X. Hu, W.-M. Lau and L.-M. Liu, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 7843 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Green, Y. Jiang, A. M. Soufiani and A. Ho-Baillie, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4774–4785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Science, 2013, 342, 344–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Dong, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, P. Mulligan, J. Qiu, L. Cao and J. Huang, Science, 2015, 347, 967–970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, H. T. Yi, X. Wu, R. Haroldson, Y. N. Gartstein, Y. I. Rodionov, K. S. Tikhonov, A. Zakhidov, X. Y. Zhu and V. Podzorov, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kiermasch, P. Rieder, K. Tvingstedt, A. Baumann and V. Dyakonov, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 39333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-H. Kim, H. Cho, J. H. Heo, T.-S. Kim, N. Myoung, C.-L. Lee, S. H. Im and T.-W. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1248–1254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Wong, M. Lai, S. W. Eaton, Y. Yu, E. Lin, L. Dou, A. Fu and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5519–5524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Veldhuis, P. P. Boix, N. Yantara, M. Li, T. C. Sum, N. Mathews and S. G. Mhaisalkar, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6804–6834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. V. Le, J. B. Kim, S. Y. Kim, B. Lee and D. R. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 4140–4147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. V. Le, M. Park, W. Sohn, H. W. Jang and S. Y. Kim, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1600448 CrossRef .
X. Hu, X. Zhang, L. Liang, J. Bao, S. Li, W. Yang and Y. Xie, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 7373–7380 CrossRef CAS .
R. Dong, Y. Fang, J. Chae, J. Dai, Z. Xiao, Q. Dong, Y. Yuan, A. Centrone, X. C. Zeng and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1912–1918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fang and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2804–2810 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. C. Kwon, K. Hong, Q. V. Le, S. Y. Lee, J. Choi, K.-B. Kim, S. Y. Kim and H. W. Jang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 4213–4222 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Eaton, M. Lai, N. A. Gibson, A. B. Wong, L. Dou, J. Ma, L.-W. Wang, S. R. Leone and P. Yang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 1993–1998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Liu, X. He, J. Ren, Q. Liao, J. Yao and H. Fu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5766–5773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xing, X. F. Liu, Q. Zhang, S. T. Ha, Y. W. Yuan, C. Shen, T. C. Sum and Q. Xiong, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 4571–4577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fu, H. Zhu, C. C. Stoumpos, Q. Ding, J. Wang, M. G. Kanatzidis, X. Zhu and S. Jin, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7963–7972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Choi, S. Park, J. Lee, K. Hong, D.-H. Kim, C. W. Moon, G. D. Park, J. Suh, J. Hwang, S. Y. Kim, H. S. Jung, N.-G. Park, S. Han, K. T. Nam and H. W. Jang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6562–6567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Choi, Q. V. Le, K. Hong, C. W. Moon, J. S. Han, K. C. Kwon, P.-R. Cha, Y. Kwon, S. Y. Kim and H. W. Jang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 30764–30771 CAS .
C. Gu and J.-S. Lee, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 5413–5418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Chin, D. Cortecchia, J. Yin, A. Bruno and C. Soci, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fang, Q. Dong, Y. Shao, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 679 CrossRef CAS .
E. T. Hoke, D. J. Slotcavage, E. R. Dohner, A. R. Bowring, H. I. Karunadasa and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 613–617 RSC .
Q. Chen, N. De Marco, Y. Yang, T.-B. Song, C.-C. Chen, H. Zhao, Z. Hong, H. Zhou and Y. Yang, Nano Today, 2015, 10, 355–396 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. McMeekin, G. Sadoughi, W. Rehman, G. E. Eperon, M. Saliba, M. T. Hörantner, A. Haghighirad, N. Sakai, L. Korte, B. Rech, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2016, 351, 151–155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yang, F. Li, C. P. Veeramalai and T. Guo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 110, 083102 CrossRef .
G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, C. Menelaou, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 982–988 CAS .
C. Lee, J. Hong, A. Stroppa, M.-H. Whangbo and J. H. Shim, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 78701–78707 RSC .
P. Kanhere, S. Chakraborty, C. J. Rupp, R. Ahuja and Z. Chen, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 107497 RSC .
W. Zhang, S. Pathak, N. Sakai, T. Stergiopoulos, P. K. Nayak, N. K. Noel, A. A. Haghighirad, V. M. Burlakov, D. W. deQuilettes, A. Sadhanala, W. Li, L. Wang, D. S. Ginger, R. H. Friend and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 10030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Im, H.-S. Kim and N.-G. Park, APL Mater., 2014, 2, 081510 CrossRef .
Z. Xiao, Y. Yuan, Y. Shao, Q. Wang, Q. Dong, C. Bi, P. Sharma, A. Gruverman and J. Huang, Nat. Mater., 2014, 14, 193 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Xiao, F. Huang, W. Huang, Y. Dkhissi, Y. Zhu, J. Etheridge, A. Gray-Weale, U. Bach, Y.-B. Cheng and L. Spiccia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 9898–9903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P.-W. Liang, C.-Y. Liao, C.-C. Chueh, F. Zuo, S. T. Williams, X.-K. Xin, J. Lin and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3748–3754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. K. Elumalai and A. Uddin, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 157, 476–509 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chen, M. Yang, S. Priya and K. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 905–917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xu, T. Zhang, G. Li and Y. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11450–11461 CAS .
Q. Chen, H. Liu, H.-S. Kim, Y. Liu, M. Yang, N. Yue, G. Ren, K. Zhu, S. Liu, N.-G. Park and Y. Zhang, Phys. Rev. X, 2016, 6, 031042 Search PubMed .
E. Tenuta, C. Zheng and O. Rubel, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 37654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Eames, J. M. Frost, P. R. F. Barnes, B. C. O’Regan, A. Walsh and M. S. Islam, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Tress, N. Marinova, T. Moehl, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 995–1004 CAS .
A. A. Petrov, N. Pellet, J.-Y. Seo, N. A. Belich, D. Y. Kovalev, A. V. Shevelkov, E. A. Goodilin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. B. Tarasov and M. Graetzel, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 587–594 CrossRef CAS .
E. Horváth, M. Spina, Z. Szekrényes, K. Kamarás, R. Gaal, D. Gachet and L. Forró, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6761–6766 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Deng, D. Dong, K. Qiao, L. Bu, B. Li, D. Yang, H.-E. Wang, Y. Cheng, Z. Zhao, J. Tang and H. Song, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 4163–4170 RSC .
S. Sun, D. Yuan, Y. Xu, A. Wang and Z. Deng, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3648–3657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. C. Smith, E. T. Hoke, D. Solis-Ibarra, M. D. McGehee and H. I. Karunadasa, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 11414–11417 CrossRef .
Z. Ning, X. Gong, R. Comin, G. Walters, F. Fan, O. Voznyy, E. Yassitepe, A. Buin, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, Nature, 2015, 523, 324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Deng, X. Xu, X. Zhang, Y. Zhang, X. Jin, L. Wang, S.-T. Lee and J. Jie, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 4797–4802 CrossRef CAS .
T. Chiba, K. Hoshi, Y.-J. Pu, Y. Takeda, Y. Hayashi, S. Ohisa, S. Kawata and J. Kido, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 18054–18060 CAS .
Q. V. Le, J. W. Shin, J.-H. Jung, J. Park, A. Ozturk and S. Y. Kim, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2017, 17, 8169–8174 CrossRef .
W. Wei, Y. Zhang, Q. Xu, H. Wei, Y. Fang, Q. Wang, Y. Deng, T. Li, A. Gruverman, L. Cao and J. Huang, Nat. Photonics, 2017, 11, 315 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wei, Y. Fang, P. Mulligan, W. Chuirazzi, H.-H. Fang, C. Wang, B. R. Ecker, Y. Gao, M. A. Loi, L. Cao and J. Huang, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 333 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lorenzo, A. Giovanni, B. Elisa, G. Diego, P. Andrea, G. Erik and L. Carlo, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2013, 46, 423001 CrossRef .
F. P. García de Arquer, X. Gong, R. P. Sabatini, M. Liu, G.-H. Kim, B. R. Sutherland, O. Voznyy, J. Xu, Y. Pang, S. Hoogland, D. Sinton and E. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14757 CrossRef PubMed .
S. T. Ha, X. Liu, Q. Zhang, D. Giovanni, T. C. Sum and Q. Xiong, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2014, 2, 838–844 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Y. Xue, Z. Wang, Z.-Q. Xu, C. Zheng, B. Weber, J. Song, Y. Wang, Y. Lu, Y. Zhang and Q. Bao, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3536–3542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tsai, W. Nie, J.-C. Blancon, C. C. Stoumpos, R. Asadpour, B. Harutyunyan, A. J. Neukirch, R. Verduzco, J. J. Crochet, S. Tretiak, L. Pedesseau, J. Even, M. A. Alam, G. Gupta, J. Lou, P. M. Ajayan, M. J. Bedzyk, M. G. Kanatzidis and A. D. Mohite, Nature, 2016, 536, 312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-H. Kim, C. Wolf, Y.-T. Kim, H. Cho, W. Kwon, S. Do, A. Sadhanala, C. G. Park, S.-W. Rhee, S. H. Im, R. H. Friend and T.-W. Lee, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 6586–6593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Deng, X. Yang, D. Dong, B. Li, D. Yang, S. Yuan, K. Qiao, Y.-B. Cheng, J. Tang and H. Song, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7963–7969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Deng, E. Peng, Y. Shao, Z. Xiao, Q. Dong and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1544–1550 CAS .
Z. Xiao, D. Wang, Q. Dong, Q. Wang, W. Wei, J. Dai, X. Zeng and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 867–872 CAS .
Q. Wang, Y. Shao, Q. Dong, Z. Xiao, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2359–2365 CAS .
Z. Xiao, C. Bi, Y. Shao, Q. Dong, Q. Wang, Y. Yuan, C. Wang, Y. Gao and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2619–2623 CAS .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Nature, 2015, 517, 476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. V. Kovalenko, L. Protesescu and M. I. Bodnarchuk, Science, 2017, 358, 745–750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, S. Tan, P. D. Lund and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2284–2311 Search PubMed .
Q. Wang, B. Chen, Y. Liu, Y. Deng, Y. Bai, Q. Dong and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 516–522 CAS .
Y. Deng, Z. Xiao and J. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500721 CrossRef .
P. Luo, W. Xia, S. Zhou, L. Sun, J. Cheng, C. Xu and Y. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 3603–3608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, A. Buin, A. H. Ip, W. Li, O. Voznyy, R. Comin, M. Yuan, S. Jeon, Z. Ning, J. J. McDowell, P. Kanjanaboos, J.-P. Sun, X. Lan, L. N. Quan, D. H. Kim, I. G. Hill, P. Maksymovych and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, D. Moghe, S. Hafezian, P. Chen, M. Young, M. Elinski, L. Martinu, S. Kéna-Cohen and R. R. Lunt, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 23086–23094 CAS .
A. Guerrero, J. You, C. Aranda, Y. S. Kang, G. Garcia-Belmonte, H. Zhou, J. Bisquert and Y. Yang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 218–224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, W. Shi, J. Kong, D. Huang, H. E. Katz, J. Yu and A. D. Taylor, Small Methods, 2017, 1, 1700244 CrossRef .
Q. Wang, Q. Dong, T. Li, A. Gruverman and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6734–6739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Min, Z.-G. Zhang, Y. Hou, C. O. Ramirez Quiroz, T. Przybilla, C. Bronnbauer, F. Guo, K. Forberich, H. Azimi, T. Ameri, E. Spiecker, Y. Li and C. J. Brabec, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 227–234 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhou, S. Pang, Z. Liu, H. Xu and G. Cui, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19205–19217 CAS .
G. Grancini, C. Roldán-Carmona, I. Zimmermann, E. Mosconi, X. Lee, D. Martineau, S. Narbey, F. Oswald, F. De Angelis, M. Graetzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Shit and A. K. Nandi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 10182–10190 RSC .
Z. Chu, M. Yang, P. Schulz, D. Wu, X. Ma, E. Seifert, L. Sun, X. Li, K. Zhu and K. Lai, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 2230 CrossRef PubMed .
T. S. Sherkar, C. Momblona, L. Gil-Escrig, J. Ávila, M. Sessolo, H. J. Bolink and L. J. A. Koster, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1214–1222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-W. Lee, S.-H. Bae, N. De Marco, Y.-T. Hsieh, Z. Dai and Y. Yang, Mater. Today Energy, 2017 DOI:10.1016/j.mtener.2017.07.014 .
Y. Shao, Y. Fang, T. Li, Q. Wang, Q. Dong, Y. Deng, Y. Yuan, H. Wei, M. Wang, A. Gruverman, J. Shield and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1752–1759 CAS .
Y. Fu, F. Meng, M. B. Rowley, B. J. Thompson, M. J. Shearer, D. Ma, R. J. Hamers, J. C. Wright and S. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5810–5818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. N. F. Hoque, N. Islam, Z. Li, G. Ren, K. Zhu and Z. Fan, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 2692–2698 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. E. Eperon, G. M. Paterno, R. J. Sutton, A. Zampetti, A. A. Haghighirad, F. Cacialli and H. J. Snaith, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19688–19695 CAS .
R. J. Sutton, G. E. Eperon, L. Miranda, E. S. Parrott, B. A. Kamino, J. B. Patel, M. T. Hörantner, M. B. Johnston, A. A. Haghighirad, D. T. Moore and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502458 CrossRef .
B. Conings, J. Drijkoningen, N. Gauquelin, A. Babayigit, J. D'Haen, L. D'Olieslaeger, A. Ethirajan, J. Verbeeck, J. Manca, E. Mosconi, F. D. Angelis and H.-G. Boyen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500477 CrossRef .
J. Chen, Y. Fu, L. Samad, L. Dang, Y. Zhao, S. Shen, L. Guo and S. Jin, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 460–466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, S. Zhou, S. Jin, H. Li and T. Zhai, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 11–27 RSC .
L. Gu, M. M. Tavakoli, D. Zhang, Q. Zhang, A. Waleed, Y. Xiao, K. H. Tsui, Y. Lin, L. Liao, J. Wang and Z. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9713–9721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. K. Misra, B.-E. Cohen, L. Iagher and L. Etgar, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 3712–3721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dou, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 11165–11173 RSC .
L. Dou, A. B. Wong, Y. Yu, M. Lai, N. Kornienko, S. W. Eaton, A. Fu, C. G. Bischak, J. Ma, T. Ding, N. S. Ginsberg, L.-W. Wang, A. P. Alivisatos and P. Yang, Science, 2015, 349, 1518–1521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liao, H. Liu, W. Zhou, D. Yang, Y. Shang, Z. Shi, B. Li, X. Jiang, L. Zhang, L. N. Quan, R. Quintero-Bermudez, B. R. Sutherland, Q. Mi, E. H. Sargent and Z. Ning, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 6693–6699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. F. Jaramillo, K. P. Jørgensen, J. Bonde, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch and I. Chorkendorff, Science, 2007, 317, 100–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, F. Ma and M. Sun, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 16801–16822 RSC .
L. Li, Y. Yu, G. J. Ye, Q. Ge, X. Ou, H. Wu, D. Feng, X. H. Chen and Y. Zhang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Cao, C. C. Stoumpos, O. K. Farha, J. T. Hupp and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7843–7850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Niu, A. Eiden, G. V. Prakash and J. J. Baumberg, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 171111 CrossRef .
Z. Cheng and J. Lin, CrystEngComm, 2010, 12, 2646–2662 RSC .
H. G. Kim and H.-B.-R. Lee, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 3809–3826 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang and J. Hao, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 8859–8878 RSC .
K. C. Kwon, S. Choi, K. Hong, C. W. Moon, Y.-S. Shim, D. H. Kim, T. Kim, W. Sohn, J.-M. Jeon, C.-H. Lee, K. T. Nam, S. Han, S. Y. Kim and H. W. Jang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2240–2248 CAS .
K. C. Kwon, K. S. Choi and S. Y. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 4724–4731 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chang Kwon, S. Choi, J. Lee, K. Hong, W. Sohn, D. M. Andoshe, K. S. Choi, Y. Kim, S. Han, S. Y. Kim and H. W. Jang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 15534–15542 CAS .
J. Bai, L. Liao, H. Zhou, R. Cheng, L. Liu, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2555–2559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. He, K. Ghosh, U. Singisetti, H. Ramamoorthy, R. Somphonsane, G. Bohra, M. Matsunaga, A. Higuchi, N. Aoki, S. Najmaei, Y. Gong, X. Zhang, R. Vajtai, P. M. Ajayan and J. P. Bird, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5052–5058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhu, S. Gu, X. Shen, N. Xu, Y. Tan, S. Zhuang, Y. Deng, Z. Lu, Z. Wang and J. Zhu, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 871–876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Horvath, M. Spina, Z. Szekrenyes, K. Kamaras, R. Gaal, D. Gachet and L. Forro, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6761–6766 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Deng, X. Zhang, L. Huang, X. Xu, L. Wang, J. Wang, Q. Shang, S. T. Lee and J. Jie, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2201–2208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Spina, E. Bonvin, A. Sienkiewicz, B. Nafradi, L. Forro and E. Horvath, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 19834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhuo, J. Zhang, Y. Shi, Y. Huang and B. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2015, 54, 5693–5696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Z. Oener, P. Khoram, S. Brittman, S. A. Mann, Q. Zhang, Z. Fan, S. W. Boettcher and E. C. Garnett, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 6557–6563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhang, S. W. Eaton, Y. Yu, L. Dou and P. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 9230–9233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shoaib, X. Zhang, X. Wang, H. Zhou, T. Xu, X. Wang, X. Hu, H. Liu, X. Fan, W. Zheng, T. Yang, S. Yang, Q. Zhang, X. Zhu, L. Sun and A. Pan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 15592–15595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Waleed, M. M. Tavakoli, L. Gu, S. Hussain, D. Zhang, S. Poddar, Z. Wang, R. Zhang and Z. Fan, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4951–4957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. C. Schmidt, A. Pertegás, S. González-Carrero, O. Malinkiewicz, S. Agouram, G. Mínguez Espallargas, H. J. Bolink, R. E. Galian and J. Pérez-Prieto, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 850–853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, H. Zhong, C. Chen, X.-G. Wu, X. Hu, H. Huang, J. Han, B. Zou and Y. Dong, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4533–4542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Protesescu, S. Yakunin, M. I. Bodnarchuk, F. Krieg, R. Caputo, C. H. Hendon, R. X. Yang, A. Walsh and M. V. Kovalenko, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3692–3696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. N. Dirin, L. Protesescu, D. Trummer, I. V. Kochetygov, S. Yakunin, F. Krumeich, N. P. Stadie and M. V. Kovalenko, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 5866–5874 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. N. Quan, M. Yuan, R. Comin, O. Voznyy, E. M. Beauregard, S. Hoogland, A. Buin, A. R. Kirmani, K. Zhao, A. Amassian, D. H. Kim and E. H. Sargent, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2649–2655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Swarnkar, A. R. Marshall, E. M. Sanehira, B. D. Chernomordik, D. T. Moore, J. A. Christians, T. Chakrabarti and J. M. Luther, Science, 2016, 354, 92–95 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Sanehira, A. R. Marshall, J. A. Christians, S. P. Harvey, P. N. Ciesielski, L. M. Wheeler, P. Schulz, L. Y. Lin, M. C. Beard and J. M. Luther, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, eaao4204 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ling, Z. Yuan, Y. Tian, X. Wang, J. C. Wang, Y. Xin, K. Hanson, B. Ma and H. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 305–311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Si, Y. Liu, Z. He, H. Du, K. Du, D. Chen, J. Li, M. Xu, H. Tian, H. He, D. Di, C. Lin, Y. Cheng, J. Wang and Y. Jin, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 11100–11107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yuan, L. N. Quan, R. Comin, G. Walters, R. Sabatini, O. Voznyy, S. Hoogland, Y. Zhao, E. M. Beauregard, P. Kanjanaboos, Z. Lu, D. H. Kim and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 872 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Song, J. Li, X. Li, L. Xu, Y. Dong and H. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7162–7167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, L. Xu, T. Wang, J. Song, J. Chen, J. Xue, Y. Dong, B. Cai, Q. Shan, B. Han and H. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603885 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Li, F. W. R. Rivarola, N. J. L. K. Davis, S. Bai, T. C. Jellicoe, F. de la Peña, S. Hou, C. Ducati, F. Gao, R. H. Friend, N. C. Greenham and Z.-K. Tan, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3528–3534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, H. Liu, W. Wang, J. Zhang, B. Xu, K. L. Karen, Y. Zheng, S. Liu, S. Chen, K. Wang and X. W. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606405 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Deng, X. Zhang, L. Huang, X. Xu, L. Wang, J. Wang, Q. Shang, S.-T. Lee and J. Jie, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2201–2208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Song, L. Xu, J. Li, J. Xue, Y. Dong, X. Li and H. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4861–4869 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Song, L. Xu, J. Li, J. Xue, Y. Dong, X. Li and H. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4861–4869 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, D. Yu, J. Chen, Y. Wang, F. Cao, Y. Wei, Y. Wu, L. Wang, Y. Zhu, Z. Sun, J. Ji, Y. Shen, H. Sun and H. Zeng, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 2015–2023 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-C. Cheng, G. Wang, D. Li, Q. He, A. Yin, Y. Liu, H. Wu, M. Ding, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 367–373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Deng, L. Huang, X. Xu, X. Zhang, X. Jin, S.-T. Lee and J. Jie, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 2482–2489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Ramasamy, D.-H. Lim, B. Kim, S.-H. Lee, M.-S. Lee and J.-S. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 2067–2070 RSC .
Y. Dong, Y. Gu, Y. Zou, J. Song, L. Xu, J. Li, J. Xue, X. Li and H. Zeng, Small, 2016, 12, 5622–5632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zheng, F. Zhuge, Y. Wang, J. Zhang, L. Gan, X. Zhou, H. Li and T. Zhai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 1703115,  DOI:10.1002/adfm.201703115 .
T. Kondo, T. Azuma, T. Yuasa and R. Ito, Solid State Commun., 1998, 105, 253–255 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, S. T. Ha, X. Liu, T. C. Sum and Q. Xiong, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5995–6001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liao, K. Hu, H. Zhang, X. Wang, J. Yao and H. Fu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3405–3410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, Y. Fu, F. Meng, X. Wu, Z. Gong, Q. Ding, M. V. Gustafsson, M. T. Trinh, S. Jin and X. Y. Zhu, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 636–642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yakunin, L. Protesescu, F. Krieg, M. I. Bodnarchuk, G. Nedelcu, M. Humer, G. De Luca, M. Fiebig, W. Heiss and M. V. Kovalenko, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. Yoo, M. Lyu, J.-H. Yun, C. J. Kang, Y. J. Choi and L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6170–6175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-Y. Seo, J. Choi, H.-S. Kim, J. Kim, J.-M. Yang, C. Cuhadar, J. S. Han, S.-J. Kim, D. Lee, H. W. Jang and N.-G. Park, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 15278–15285 RSC .
T. A. Berhe, W.-N. Su, C.-H. Chen, C.-J. Pan, J.-H. Cheng, H.-M. Chen, M.-C. Tsai, L.-Y. Chen, A. A. Dubale and B.-J. Hwang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 323–356 CAS .
G. P. Nagabhushana, R. Shivaramaiah and A. Navrotsky, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 7717–7721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Waleed, M. M. Tavakoli, L. Gu, Z. Wang, D. Zhang, A. Manikandan, Q. Zhang, R. Zhang, Y.-L. Chueh and Z. Fan, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 523–530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Kootak Hong
	Kootak Hong is currently a PhD candidate in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Seoul National University (SNU). He received his BS degree from the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, SNU, in 2013. His current research interests focus on nanoelectronics in oxide semiconductors and hybrid perovskite materials and their applications.

Quyet Van Le
	Quyet Van Le is currently a PhD student at the School of Chemical Engineering and Material Science, Chung-Aung University, Seoul, South Korea. He received his master's degree from Chung-Ang University. He is interested in the fabrication of perovskite materials, including thin films and nanostructures for applications in solar cells, light emitting diodes, photodetectors, and memory devices.

Soo Young Kim
	Soo Young Kim is a Professor in the Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science at Chung-Ang University. He received his PhD degree in materials science and engineering from Pohang University of Science and Technology, South Korea, in 2007. After his postdoctoral period at Georgia Institute of Technology, USA, he joined Chung-Ang University in 2009. His research is focused on the fabrication and optimization of halide perovskite materials and two-dimensional materials such as graphene and transition metal dichalcogenides for improving the performance of organic solar cells, perovskite solar cells, photodetectors, light emitting diodes, and gas sensors.

Ho Won Jang
	Ho Won Jang is an Associate Professor of the Department of Materials Science and Engineering in SNU. He earned his PhD from the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Pohang University of Science and Technology, in 2004. He worked as a Research Associate at the University of Wisconsin-Madison from 2006 to 2009. Before he joined SNU in 2012, he worked in the Korea Institute of Science and Technology as a Senior Research Scientist. His research interests include the synthesis of oxides and 2D materials and their applications in nanoelectronics, solar water splitting cells, sensors, plasmonics, metal–insulator transitions, and ferroelectricity.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of various low-dimensional perovskites with lots of merits for applications. Reproduced with permission from ref. 31, 42, 74, 140 and 150.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Dark and photocurrent hysteresis curves with various sweep voltage rates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 29. (b) Current–voltage curves of TiO2-based MAPbI3 devices with pronounced hysteresis. Reproduced with permission from ref. 57. (c) C-AFM measurement setup. (d) Topography AFM image of the perovskite thin film. The locations where the C-AFM tip measured the grain and GB current are labelled with a red triangle and a blue square, respectively. The scale bar is 1 mm. (e and f) Local dark current measured at the GB (e) and on the grain (f), respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 87. (g) Schematic diagram showing the degradation of the perovskite film in moisture. (h) Schematic showing the interaction of moisture with a bare perovskite film. Reproduced with permission from ref. 83.	 

 	Fig. 3  Quantum size effect in nanostructured semiconductors. (a) Density of states, (b) energy band diagram for bulk and various nanostructure semiconductors.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) The 〈100〉-oriented halide perovskite series with the general formula of (RNH3)2An−1MnX3n+1. The thicknesses of inorganic slabs increase and toward the 3D structure with increasing n. Reproduced with permission from ref. 116. (b) Structural illustration of a single-layer (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4. (c and d) AFM and TEM images of several single-layer (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4. (e) Photoluminescence of different 2D halide perovskites. (C4H9NH3)2PbCl4 (i), (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4 (ii), (C4H9NH3)2PbI4 (iii), (C4H9NH3)2PbCl2Br2 (iv), (C4H9NH3)2PbBr2I2 (v), and (C4H9NH3)2(MA)Pb2Br7 (vi). Reproduced with permission from ref. 108. (f) Graphical depiction of the pseudo-colored PL intensity measured as a function of excitation wavelength. (g) Time-resolved PL decay and fitting curves of light emission at 515 nm from CsPbBr3 nanoplatelets with a 375 nm pulse laser. Reproduced with permission from ref. 61. (h) UV/Vis absorption and (i) photoluminescence (PL) spectra of (PEA)2PbX4 NSs (X = Cl, Br, I) with different compositions. (j) Photograph of solutions of (PEA)2PbX4 NSs with different compositions under irradiation with a 365 nm UV lamp. (k) Degradation of a (PEA)2PbI4 NS film and a MAPbI3 QD film under ambient conditions with a relative humidity of 65%. Reproduced with permission from ref. 109.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of the synthesis setup using a home-built vapor-transport system. (b) Thickness of PbI2 platelets before (images above data line) and after being converted to CH3NH3PbI3 (images below data line). Reproduced with permission from ref. 71. (c) Schematic illustration of the solution process to fabricate 2D PbI2 nanosheets and the vapor-phase conversion process to transform PbI2 into 2D MAPbI3 perovskite nanosheets. (d−g) AFM topography images of 2D MAPbI3 nanosheets with different thicknesses. Scale bars: 2 μm. (h) Normalized PL spectra of 2D perovskite nanosheets with different thicknesses. (i) PL peak position and energy gap as a function of the number of unit cells in perovskites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 72.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic of the process to fabricate 1D perovskite nanodots via (a) slip-coating, (b) blade-coating, (c) nanofluidic channel, (d) self-template, (e) extrusion and (f) vapor-phase synthesis using template. Reproduced with permission from ref. 125–128, 132 and 149.	 

 	Fig. 7  SEM images of perovskite nanowires fabricated from (a) structure directing adduct, (b) slip-coating, (c) nanofluidic channel, (d) self-template, (e) extrusion and (f) ligand-directing. Reproduced with permission from ref. 58 and 125–129.	 

 	Fig. 8  SEM images of vapor-phase synthesis 1D perovskite nanowires, (a) random nanowire, (b) aligned nanowire and (c and d) vertically aligned nanowire. Reproduced with permission from ref. 130–132.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of the synthesis of perovskite nanodots via (a) ligand-assisted reprecipitation method, (b) hot injection method and (c) SiO2 mesoporous template. Reproduced with permission from ref. 135 and 137.	 

 	Fig. 10  Monodisperse CsPbX3 NCs and their structural characterization, (a) schematic of the cubic perovskite lattice, (b and c) transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of CsPbBr3 NCs, (d) X-ray diffraction patterns for typical ternary and mixed-halide perovskite NCs, (e) colloidal solution of CsPbX3 in toluene under a UV lamp (λ = 350 nm), (f) PL spectra of CsPbX3 NCs (g) typical optical absorption and PL spectra, (h) time-resolved PL decays for all sample shown in (g) except for CsPbCl3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 136.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Unit cell structure of (C8H9NH3)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 perovskites with different n values, showing the evolution of dimensionality from 2D (n = 1) to 3D (n = ∞), (b) DFT simulation of the formation energy of perovskites with different n values in different atmospheres. Comparison of J–V curves for different number of perovskite layers. (c) Simulation using experimental absorption spectra and bandgaps, and mobility of 0.1 cm2 V−1 s−1. (d) Simulation with radiative recombination of 5 × 10−10 cm3 s−1 and gradually decreasing mobility for lower n. The same trap density is used for all cases. The perovskite layer was estimated to be 200 nm thick. (e) Experimental curve. (f) Device stability test as a function of n value. Reproduced with permission from ref. 139. (g) Schematic of the device with TEM images of CsPbI3 NCs. (h) SEM cross-section of CsPbI3 perovskite solar cells. (i) J–V curves of the device measured in air as a function of time. Reproduced with permission from ref. 140.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Device architecture for a PeLED with perovskite nanoplatelets as the emitter, and the flat-band energy level diagram of different layers of materials, showing conduction and valence band levels with respect to vacuum. (b) Electroluminescence spectrum from a standard device with PVK:PBD weight ratio of 64/36 at an applied voltage of 4–7 V. Inset: Photograph of a working device at 7 V. (c) Current–voltage and brightness–voltage characteristics for the control device (neat perovskite without PVK:PBD) and devices with PVK:PBD (w/w ratio of 70:30, 64:36, and 58:42) layer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 142. (d) Evolution of the PLQY with increasing excitation intensity for perovskites with different 〈n〉 values. (e) The carrier transfer process in a 〈n〉 = 3 perovskite. (f) Carrier transfer process in a 〈n〉 = 5 perovskite. (g) Multiphase perovskite materials PEA2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 channel energy across an inhomogeneous energy landscape, concentrating carriers to the smallest bandgap emitters. The arrows represent the carrier transfer process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 144. (h) The device structure. (i) Cross-sectional TEM image showing the multiple layers of material with distinct contrast. Scale bar, 50 nm. (j) Flat-band energy level diagram. (k) The EL spectra (straight line) of CsPbX3 quantum dot LEDs under an applied voltage of 5.5 V, and the PL spectra (dashed line) of QDs dispersed in hexane. Reproduced with permission from ref. 145.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration of the flexible photodetector. (b) Photoresponse at 5 V of the CsPbBr3 nanosheet photodetector for the 1st and 10000th bending–recovery cycle. (c) Stability comparison of normalized photocurrent of CsPbBr3 and MAPbBr3 photodetectors. Reproduced with permission from ref. 150. (d) Schematic illustration of a MAPbI3 NW array photodetector. (e and f) SEM images of the photodetector with different magnification. Reproduced with permission from ref. 154. (g) Probable schematics of carrier transportation of the CsPbBr3 film with drop-coating and centrifugal-casting under light irradiation. (h) I–V logarithm curves of PD with different film fabrication methods under a 532 nm laser (0.40 mW cm−2). Reproduced with permission from ref. 156.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic of the measurement setup. (b) I–V curves under different illumination intensities (white color light). Inset: Band structure of a single-pixel device under zero bias and in the dark. (c) Photograph of an image sensor mounted on a printing circuit board. (d) Schematic of the measurement setup. (e) Original and imaged letter (“H”). (f) Original and imaged heart symbol. Reproduced with permission from ref. 1.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic of the optical setup. A pulsed laser (400 nm, 150 fs, 1 kHz) excites the sample from the top globally. The spot size is large enough to cover the whole cavity to ensure high pumping injection efficiency and reduce the local heating effect. The NIR PL from perovskite waveguides inside the cavities confined by their planar polygonal structures. (b) Far-field optical image of two typical MAPbI3 nanoplatelets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 159. Visible lasing from MAPbBr3 NWs. (c) 2D pseudo-color plots of NW emission spectra as a function of pump fluence for MAPbBr3. (d) Widely tunable lasing emission wavelength at room temperature from single-crystal NW lasers of mixed lead halide perovskites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 161. Lasing in perovskite CsPbX3 NC films. (e) Evolution from PL to whispering-gallery-mode (WGM) lasing with increasing pump intensity in a microsphere resonator of diameter 15 mm, covered by a film of CsPbBr3 NCs. (f) Single pump laser shot mode structure of random lasing from a CsPb(Br/Cl)3 NC film. The inset shows path-length distribution averaged over 256 pump laser shots. Reproduced with permission from ref. 162.	 

 	Fig. 16  
I–V characteristics of (a) BA2PbI4, (b) BA2MAPb2I7, (c) BA2MA2Pb3I10, and (d) MAPbI3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 164. (e) Schematic of the flexible PeQD memory device with a structure of PET/ITO/PMMA/PeQDs:PMMA/PMMA/Ag. Inset: Energy band diagram of the PeQD memory device. (f) I–V characteristics of a flexible memory device before and after 10 cycles of bending. Inset: Photograph of the as-fabricated flexible PeQD memory device under bending conditions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 42.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
