Organic materials as charge hosts for pseudocapacitive energy storage  - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3SE00406F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D3SE00406F
(Perspective)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2023, 7, 2802-2818Organic materials as charge hosts for pseudocapacitive energy storage

        
          
            Suman 
            Yadav
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Dhiraj Siddhartha 
            Ingle
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Kotagiri 
            Venkata Rao
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Narendra 
            Kurra
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad, Kandi-502284, Sangareddy, Telangana State, India. E-mail: kvrao@chy.iith.ac.in; narendra@chy.iith.ac.in
Received 
      27th March 2023
    , Accepted 4th May 2023First published on 5th May 2023AbstractOrganic materials with tunable redox properties have become versatile charge storage materials due to their abundant precursors and sustainability. Environmentally benign nature and recyclability make them attractive over other classes of electrode materials. This perspective provides prospects for organic materials such as conducting polymers, two-dimensional covalent organic frameworks (2D COFs), polyaromatic hydrocarbons and their hybrids towards the design of simultaneous high charge storage with high-rate capabilities. Non-diffusional redox processes give rise to pseudocapacitance, a key parameter that overcomes the sluggish ion diffusion kinetics. The emerging area of organic materials for electrochemical energy storage is expanding beyond metal and metal-ion based rechargeable batteries. All-organic based hybrid metal-ion capacitors turn out to be the futuristic choice for sustainable energy storage. The scope for exploiting supramolecular principles towards the rational design of molecular assemblies via non-covalent interactions is discussed. Advancement of inorganic–organic hybrid architectures for the design of hybrid energy storage devices for a sustainable future is highly desired.Right to left: Suman Yadav, Dhiraj S. Ingle, Kotagiri Venkata Rao, and Narendra KurraSuman Yadav is a graduate student in the Department of Chemistry, IIT Hyderabad, India. She did her master’s in chemistry at the National Institute of Technology, Jalandhar, India. Her research focuses on developing functional materials for multivalent metal-ion batteries. Dhiraj Siddhartha Ingle is a graduate student in the Department of Chemistry, IIT Hyderabad, India. He received his M. Sc. degree from Sant Gadge Baba Amravati University, India in 2018. His research interests are based on development of conjugated porous organic polymers for gas adsorption and separation applications. Dr Venkata Rao Kotagiri is working as an Assistant Professor at the Department of Chemistry, IIT Hyderabad, India. His group at IIT Hyderabad focuses on various aspects of supramolecular polymers of π-systems and porous organic polymers for carbon capture. Dr Narendra Kurra is an assistant professor in the Department of Chemistry at IIT Hyderabad, India. His research focuses on developing functional materials for electrochemical energy storage applications.
1. Introduction
Drastic changes in human lives after the COVID-19 pandemic and occurrence of on-going wars among nations have created an energy crisis worldwide. 195+ nations have signed “The Paris Agreement” to make our planet clean and green by fighting against climate change.1 Development of sustainable energy technologies has a direct connection with the decarbonization strategy and the extent of renewable share could govern the rate of clean energy transformation.2,3 Solar, wind and thermal resources are surplus in the environment; however, their intermittency hinders direct deployment as per the energy demand in various market sectors.4 Moreover, the success of renewables is subject to the development of low cost and high-performance energy storage solutions.5 Electrochemical energy storage relies on efficient, pollution-free, and compact ways of storing energy and has become the priority technology due to its impressive gravimetric and volumetric performance metrics.6 Sustainability, affordability and safety besides performance are the key parameters in exploring new materials for the design of advanced energy storage devices.7 Matured Li-ion batteries are the dominant technologies of the portable electronics market; however, the current scenario of democratic reserves of Li and scarcity of cobalt may not be sufficient for meeting the ever increasing energy demands.8,9
Beyond Li-ion battery technologies, there is an urgent search for earth-abundant materials as charge storage hosts.10,11 Sluggish solid state diffusion of metal-ions causes power limitations in metal-ion batteries.12 Fast charging could lead to heating effects and possibly thermal runaway, which is responsible for the early failure of a battery. Limitations with direct integration of renewables with batteries hinder the development of autonomous energy solutions. High-rate performance (charging time scales of a few tens of seconds to a few minutes) remains the major issue with most of the metal-ion based battery technologies.13 In principle, it is possible to operate them in a high-power mode but at the expense of limited cycling life.14 Alternative energy technologies are being devised with earth-abundant materials. The International Energy Agency (IEA) prediction shows that there will be ever increasing energy demands from personal electronic gadgets by 2030, adding up to more than 200 GW of new energy capacity.15 Therefore, it is important to develop novel materials, architectures and devices that can store high energy while simultaneously delivering high power and can last for thousands of cycles without failure.
Low cost, abundancy, and environmental friendliness make organic materials a versatile class of materials for energy harvesting and storage applications.16,17 Molecular design principles enable the introduction of redox active functionalities besides creating porous scaffolds (Fig. 1). Fundamentally, organic materials can be synthesized by employing earth abundant elements such as C, N, O, H, and S unlike the uncertainty associated with some of the inorganic charge hosts (Fig. 1a).18 Numerous permutations and combinations led to the design of novel functional organic materials. In the current era of rechargeable world, design of materials must be carried out to comply with the reversible electrochemical (de)sorption and/or (de)insertion of electrolyte ions. Starting from traditional redox active molecules to advanced organic materials were explored in a variety of rechargeable energy storage devices (Fig. 1b and c). Moreover, the ease of processability of organic materials via doctor blade coating and roll-to-roll manufacturing enables development of large-scale sustainable energy storage solutions (Fig. 1d). Due to intrinsic strength of covalent bonding, organic materials are expected to show tolerance against possible bond scission during continuous charge–discharge cycles.6 Such characteristics of organic materials are encouraging, that led to numerous efforts in developing anode and cathode based organic materials for rechargeable battery applications.19–22 There have been comprehensive reviews on systematic design of organic materials for rechargeable metal-ion and metal-based batteries. Shea et al., comprehensively reviewed organic materials for a variety of metal-ion battery applications.17 For instance, Qin et al., summarized the efforts on organic materials for multivalent metal-ion batteries.23 Liu et al., summarized concise efforts on porous organic polymers as electrode materials for supercapacitors.24 The versatility of organic materials further enabled the exploration of rechargeable energy storage devices such as organic batteries, redox flow batteries and metal–air batteries.25
 Fig. 1  Organic materials as emerging charge storage hosts for sustainable energy storage. (a) Earth abundant elements such as C, H, N, O, and S are the basic constituents which can form numerous organic compounds by the phenomenon of catenation. (b) Conventional molecular synthesis principles to synthesize redox active molecules including but not limited to thiophene, pyrrole, aniline, quinones, diimides, etc. (c) Representative redox active polymeric materials developed during the past few decades. (d) The futuristic design of all-organic based flexible and sustainable electrochemical energy storage devices. 
The design of organic materials with pseudocapacitive characteristics and further demonstration of hybrid metal-ion capacitors with high-rate high energy applications is an emerging topic of research. Diffusion-free movement of ionic charge carriers without phase changes makes organic pseudocapacitive materials on par with traditional inorganic based pseudocapacitive materials. Importantly, the sustainable nature of organic materials is going to be an attractive feature that may outweigh performance metrics in the long run. This perspective brings out some of the early efforts in these directions and provides a further roadmap towards expanding this field towards commercialization feasibility. The key aspect lies in going beyond molecular design, exploiting the “supramolecular” approach to leverage non-covalent interactions towards the design of flexible molecular based architectures. Unlike the rigid backbone of inorganic materials, organic materials show flexibility and can accommodate volumetric changes upon insertion of metal-ions.22 To the best of our knowledge, there are hardly any reviews or perspectives on organic material-based hybrid metal-ion capacitors. Due to emergence of organic materials in energy storage devices such as rechargeable batteries and supercapacitors, perspectives on their entry into hybrid metal-ion capacitors are much needed at this moment.
2. Electrochemical tunability of organic materials
Carbon is a unique yet versatile element in the periodic table.26 The type of hybridization and adjustable bonding capabilities brought diversity and a rich historical heritage to carbon nanomaterials.27 Nanoallotropes of carbon molecules such as zero dimensional (0D) fullerenes, one-dimensional (1D) carbon nanotubes, and 2D graphene contributed significantly to the advancement of nanoscience in the late 20th century.28 Carbon remains the basic element which plays a dual role in the world of inorganic and organic classes of materials. For instance, activated carbon and graphite are typical electrode materials that are being employed in supercapacitors and Li-ion batteries, respectively.29 Catenation is a well-known phenomenon through which carbon can combine with itself or with other light elements (H, O, N and S) to form billions of organic compounds. Conventional organic synthesis typically exploits the usage of reagents in the presence of heat, light and/or catalysts to break old bonds and form new bonds. Redox activity of organic materials can be introduced by the choice of functionality that enables the ease of redox switching properties. Molecular design principles enabled the development of a diverse range of redox organic systems including but not limited to small molecules, porous organic polymers,30,31 poly aromatic hydrocarbons32–34 and conducting polymers.35
2.1. Historical evolution of organic materials for energy storage applications
Urea was the first molecule which was synthesized in a laboratory in 1828 by Friedrich Wöhler (Fig. 2). Earlier it was thought that vital forces were required for the generation of organic compounds from biological sources.36,37 But after the synthesis of urea in the laboratory, numerous organic compounds have been synthesized. Typical synthesis of organic molecules involves breaking and making covalent bonds that deal with molecular structures only. Subsequently, numerous advancements rapidly expanded the field of organic chemistry, and the focus has shifted to the functionality aspect as well. Thus, fundamental organic chemistry remains the locus of different subdomains such as supramolecular, polymers, molecular electronics and beyond. Intermolecular interactions dealt with non-covalent interactions, which were pioneered by Charles J. Pedersen in 1967 through synthesis of crown ether forming complexes with alkali metals.38 Later in 1969, Lehn et al. synthesized cryptands and Cram et al. synthesized many organic molecules which form complexes through non-covalent interactions. These non-covalent interactions are dynamic and reversible in nature.39 Pedersen, Lehn and Cram were awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1987 for their contributions to structure specific interactions with high selectivity.40 Lehn coined the term ‘supramolecular chemistry’, which emphasizes chemistry which goes ‘beyond the molecule’.41 Further developments in this field led to the design of ordered functional organic materials via supramolecular polymerization.42 Understanding the supramolecular interactions among charge hosts and between charge hosts and ions is also crucial to design organic materials for energy storage (Fig. 2). In particular, diffusion of metal-ions in host materials is governed by supramolecular interactions.
 Fig. 2  Historical evolution of synthesis of organic molecules into organic materials. Since the synthesis of the first organic molecule, urea, in the laboratory in 1828, a lot of advancements have led to the expansion of organic chemistry over the past two centuries. Supramolecular chemistry relies on the non-covalent interactions leading to assemblies with specific functionalities, mimicking processes associated with biological systems such as molecular recognition, transportation and reactivity. Supramolecular electronics has been the trending research area over the past decade (graphic is reproduced from ref. 42 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2013). Small molecule based organic compounds were employed as battery electrodes in the early 1960s. Emergence of organic pseudocapacitive materials has enabled the sustainable design of organic hybrid energy storage devices with simultaneous high rates and high capacities over the past decade. 
Parallel efforts were devoted towards the development of organic materials for energy storage applications which began in the 1960s–1970s.43 The electrochemical capacity of benzoquinone compounds was first studied and the main issue was due to the high level solubility of carbonyl compounds in aprotic electrolytes, causing rapid decay of capacity.43 Carbonyl based organic materials were also employed as electrodes for primary and rechargeable Li-ion batteries.44 Moreover, due to successful implementation of inorganic materials in rechargeable battery applications, the progress on development of organic materials was not so impressive during the late 20th century. Due to ever increasing energy demand, these inorganic materials are being extensively employed. Hence they are on the verge of a resource crisis in the near future.45 Consequently, the focus was shifted to the development of new renewable materials. For this purpose, organic materials are being revisited due to their light weight, abundancy and environmental benignity. By comparing the toxicity of their inorganic counterparts, organic materials are found to be relatively safer and possibly recyclable in some cases. Generally organic compounds show much higher theoretical capacity than inorganic compounds.22
On the other hand, the development of conducting polymers such as polyacetylene in the 1970s brought about a paradigm shift in the field of organic chemistry.46 Specifically, polyaniline (PANI), polythiophene (PTH) and polypyrrole (PPy) showed an advantage over benzoquinone compounds owing to less solubility in electrolytes with better electronic/ionic conductivity.35 The maximum practical capacity achieved by these conducting polymers was ∼150 mA h g−1 which was very low compared to the theoretical capacity.47 After the 1950s, perylene diimide (PDI) dyes became very popular owing to their electron accepting nature with high chemical and thermal stability.48 Moreover, PDIs also display novel self-assembly behaviour which is explored for the synthesis of various functional supramolecular polymers. Interestingly, the operational potential window of PDIs was tuned by altering the electron withdrawing and donating functional groups attached to PDIs.49 Further exploration of a variety of arylene diimides including but not limited to pyromellitic diimide (PMDI) and naphthalene diimide (NDI) opened avenues for development of organic materials for energy storage applications (Fig. 2).50 These polyaromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) may not suffer from solubility issues in the electrolytes and the conductivity issue has been addressed either through extended π-conjugation or through incorporation of external conductive additives. After understanding the redox chemistry and charge storage mechanism in various organic molecules, recent major focus in energy storage devices has been devoted to achieving high rates and high-density energy storage with an enlarged operational voltage window.51 In this context, understanding supramolecular interactions plays a pivotal role in controlling the assemblies of organic semiconductors and in regulating the interaction of electrolyte ions with organic electrode materials in a precise manner. Such a kind of design may help overcome sluggish diffusion kinetics besides the high degree of reversibility.
Organic batteries were explored in the early 1980s and subsequent commercialization was paused due to instabilities associated with conducting polymer-based cathode hosts.52 LIBs incorporating inorganic electrode materials were commercialized by Sony in 1991, and organic materials have been given less importance since then. In the beginning of the 21st century, Nakahara et al. made pioneering efforts towards design of organic batteries by employing redox switching properties of the 2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-4-piperidinyl-N-oxyl (TEMPO) radical at applied potentials.53 Again, small molecules suffer from solubility issues in the organic solvents of battery electrolytes.14 Oligomeric and polymeric strategies were implemented to suppress the solubility issues of organic electrode materials. The ‘revisit’ of organic materials for battery applications came into the limelight in 2008 when the bright future scope for organic batteries was emphasized by Armand and Tarascon in their seminal paper.6 A lot more effort was devoted to develop organic electrode materials for battery applications.54 Because of their affordability, eco-friendliness, flexibility and tunability of redox properties, organic materials have drawn attention towards development of sustainable energy storage systems. This further led to the wide extension of organic materials for capacitive/pseudocapacitive and hybrid metal-ion capacitor applications.
2.2. Charge storage mechanisms involving organic materials
Charge storage mechanisms are broadly classified into non-faradaic and faradaic, where charge reorganization and/or transfer across the electrode| electrolyte interface is the governing factor.55 In the case of non-faradaic charge storage, electrical double layer (EDL) formation without charge transfer is the dominant phenomenon.56 Typically, porous organic materials exhibit the EDL type charge storage mechanism and it is important to design accessible porosity for the adsorption/desorption of electrolyte ions. The faradaic mechanism is associated with charge transfer across the electrode|electrolyte interface, and the majority of organic materials exhibit this type of mechanism. Diffusion-limited redox reactions suffer from low power density and rate performance. Sometimes the boundary between battery-like and pseudocapacitive type charge storage characteristics gets blurred as both of them involve redox reactions. But the most common approach is to analyse the current response with respect to the scan rate via electrochemical analysis. In the case of surface-controlled processes, the current response is linearly proportional to the scan rate while for diffusion-limited processes the current response is linearly proportional to the square root of the scan rate.
Depending on the type of the organic system and associated functional groups, the charge storage mechanism is referred to as doping reactions that involve electrochemical reactions at redox active groups (for instance, CO and CN reactions). Usually, organic semiconductors which are electron deficient and easy to undergo reduction are termed n-type organic semiconductors.7 On the other hand, p-type organic semiconductors are easy to oxidize and are electron rich in nature. Generally, n-type organic semiconductors are considered anodes (or negative electrodes). After reduction, these n-type organic semiconductors become negatively charged and can be stabilized by positive metal ions via electrostatic interactions. Thus, n-type organic materials switch their redox between neutral and negatively charged states. Typically, n-type materials go through the reduction cycle first, which involves combination of electrons and positively charged counterions. p-type organic semiconductors serve as cathodes (or positive electrodes) and after oxidation, the positive charges get generated on these organic semiconductors, which get stabilized by counter anions to maintain charge neutrality. Switching between neutral and positively charged states is observed in the case of p-type materials.19 Typically, p-type materials show higher redox potentials than n-type materials, that is the underlying governing factor for the choice of the cathode and anode for constructing an energy storage device. Depending on practical redox potential values, n-type materials can be employed as either anodes or cathodes. Bipolar type materials exhibit either oxidation or reduction as they consist of both p-type and n-type components. Electron donating substituents make organic π-systems electron rich species (or p-type) while electron withdrawing substituents bring electron deficiency (or n-type), signifying tunable redox properties based on the type of the substituents. Carbonyl (–CO) reactions are prevalent in organic compounds containing carboxylate, quinone, imide and anhydride containing materials.57
Conductive polymers such as polyacetylene, polypyrrole, polythiophenes and polyaniline have shown charge storage properties through redox doping reactions.58 Due to the p-type nature of conductive polymers, they were employed as cathodes in LIBs.59 Intrinsically, the doping level of conductive polymers is less than 50%, and the maximum practical capacity reached up to 150 mA h g−1. Doping/dedoping could lead to the swelling of the polymers and utilization of redox active groups to their full extent may lead to mechanical integrity issues. This subtle problem has motivated the development of alternative organic cathode materials.
The key directions for organic charge storage materials include (i) development of redox active groups with well-known functional groups such as quinones, carboxylates, imines, alkenes and redox-active centers; (ii) extension of organic electrode materials to be suited for post Li-ion chemistries; (iii) development of all-organic based hybrid energy storage devices for high rate and high energy storage applications.17 Specifically, the design of materials for pseudocapacitive energy storage is in high demand due to simultaneous achievement of high energy storage and high-power density, which may not be possible with capacitive or battery-type electrodes alone.
3. Organic materials as high-capacity, high-rate charge storage hosts
The trade-off between the energy and power density of batteries and supercapacitors is fundamentally governed by their underlying charge storage mechanisms.60 Porous carbonaceous materials store charge through the formation of electrical double layers across electrode|electrolyte interfaces. As there is no charge transfer across the interface, the amount of charge stored is limited by the surface area that is accessible to electrolyte ions.14 However, the fast kinetics associated with the adsorption/desorption processes in supercapacitors make them deliver high power densities (>5 kW kg−1). In contrast, Li-ion batteries involve the intercalation of ions with subsequent redox reactions giving rise to high charge storage capacities. However, the sluggish solid-state diffusion of Li-ions through the bulk of the electrode materials causes poor rates and power performance.9
Pseudocapacitive materials rely on either surface confined redox reactions or non-diffusive intercalative redox reactions where the kinetics of charge storage resembles that of a capacitive type besides the high amount of charge stored simultaneously.61 Conway defines pseudocapacitance as a special case where the derivative dQ/dV (the charge Q of the electrode is a continuous function of V) turns out to be a constant value.62 Traditionally, numerous transition metal compounds such as RuO2, MnO2, Nb2O5 and Ti3C2Tx have been explored as pseudocapacitive materials based on either surface confined or diffusion-less intercalation redox reactions.51 Practical usage of inorganic pseudocapacitive materials is hindered by their lack of abundancy and cost-effectiveness despite exhibiting impressive performance metrics. Moreover, inorganic electrode materials involving alloying or conversion reactions as charge storage mechanisms could experience significant structural changes during charge/discharge cycles.63 It is imperative to develop electrode materials that are low cost and sustainable and can work well with aqueous and non-aqueous electrolytes. Therefore, ideal electrode materials should have high density of redox active sites besides electrical/ionic conductive pathways for enabling fast charge transport and access to redox sites. Importantly, organic electrode materials involving redox reactions may not have significant structural changes but rather involve rearrangement of local bonding.64,65 Inorganic electrode materials should have voids and/or channels, which probably should match the size and charge of ions.66 In the case of organic electrode materials, the size and charge of counterions may not affect the redox chemistry significantly.
The comparison of electrochemical performance of inorganic and organic pseudocapacitive materials in terms of potential window and charge storage capacities is provided in Fig. 3. Metal oxides such as TiO2(B) and RuO2·xH2O show typical specific capacities above 140 mA h g−1. However, mediocre electronic conductivity of TiO2(B) limits the high rate performance and the expensive nature of Ru hinders commercialization. MnO2 also suffers from poor electronic conductivity issues, which may not be suitable for high rate performance. Phase changes associated with metal dichalcogenides limit the electrochemical stability of the electrodes. Metal nitrides and carbides are impressive in terms of their metal-like electronic conductivity and appear to be potential candidate materials for high rate performance. But their charge storage capacities turned out to be lower than 80 mA h g−1, which need to be enhanced for the design of high energy high-rate devices. Traditional conducting polymers (CPs) showed specific capacity up to 150 mA h g−1, which is comparable to that of TiO2(B) in addition to high rate performance. However, CPs suffer from swelling issues that limit their cycling performance. Among emerging organic pseudocapacitive materials, polyaromatic hydrocarbons show impressive electrochemical performance over 2D COFs and inorganic based pseudocapacitors. Specifically, perylene diimide–hexaazatrinaphthylene (PHATN) showed an impressive specific capacity of 250 mA h g−1 in base electrolytes with a limited potential window of 1 V. Hexabenzocoronene systems showed capacities up to 100 mA h g−1 in non-aqueous electrolytes. Furthermore, fine tuning of PAHs could improve charge storage capacities and the extent of conjugation/doping would guarantee high rate performance.
 Fig. 3  Comparison of specific capacity versus potential plots of (a) inorganic (this figure has been reproduced from ref. 51 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2020)51 and (b) organic based pseudocapacitive electrode materials. 
Some of the early efforts were focused on developing porous organic materials for supercapacitor applications.67 Microporous polymer networks (MPNs) have shown great promise as electrode materials for supercapacitors due to their high surface area and controllable doping levels. Specifically, the conductivity issue was solved by choosing conjugated structures with high temperature polymerization. Hao et al., developed a series of porous triazine based organic frameworks with micropores.67 Different scaffolds such as 2D and 3D porous networks were synthesized by employing 1,3,5-tricyanobenzene as a building block. Such kinds of porous organic frameworks showed typical Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface areas in the range of 1000–2500 m2 g−1. The robustness of the MPNs was confirmed by performing continuous charge–discharge cycles in an ionic liquid electrolyte with a capacitance retention of 85% after 10000 cycles.
3.1. Conducting polymers as traditional redox systems
Traditionally, conducting polymers (CPs) have been explored as pseudocapacitive materials due to their high conductivity and redox activity.35,68 Typical conducting polymers including but not limited to polyaniline (PANI), polypyrrole (PPy), polythiophene (PTH) and poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) have been explored as supercapacitor electrodes extensively.35 Design strategies were employed for improving the kinetics of charge transfer in conducting polymer electrodes by aiming for high electrical conductivity. The charge carrier concentration, mobility, rapid kinetics and availability of solvated counterions are essential for the high conductivity of CPs. Reduction (n-doping) involves injection of electrons into the conduction band whereas oxidation (p-doping) involves removing an electron from the valence band.69 Interestingly, a charged polymer brings about deformation in the local structure, which leads to shifting of the valence band edge (upwards) and conduction band edge (downwards) accordingly. As a consequence, new types of energy bands are created in the forbidden gap, that gets delocalized over the entire polymer chain forming a charge ‘island’.70 Higher the extent of ionization of polymer chains (doping), greater the extent of overlap of these charge islands. Such a kind of extended delocalization effect over the polymer chain enables conduction of electricity.
The extent of doping in conducting polymers is based on strength of electron affinity of dopant ions.71 For instance, PPy showed maximum doping up to 40 mol%, which depends on the type of counterion and synthesis conditions used. Electronic conductivity is governed by two major factors-density and mobility of charge carriers.47 High-level doping introduces high charge carrier density but at the expense of mediocre mobility. Intrachain mobility is augmented by sp2 carbon conjugation through the resonance effect, that leads to free movement of charge carriers along the chain. Conjugation also promotes π–π stacking which minimizes the distance between stacked chains, facilitating interchain transport. Usually, conducting polymers are stable in the p-doped state compared to the n-doped state. It was demonstrated that the doping level can be improved by introducing side chains with electron-donating or withdrawing groups, but at the compromise of limiting their practical capacity.22 Moreover, continuous charging/discharging cycles cause swelling and shrinking of the deposited polymer which may lead to loss of mechanical integrity and electrical contact with current collectors. These factors result in poor power performance and cycling life due to dissolution effects by overcharging. Therefore, design aspects need to be considered for the stable and long-lasting design of conducting polymer electrodes for energy storage applications. Strategies were developed for improving the cycling stability of p-type CP electrodes by depositing thin (∼5 nm) carbonaceous shells onto their surface.72
Conjugated polymers with n-type doping levels are generally limited by their unstable nature due to injected electrons. Thus, the balance of electronic conduction and redox activity can be maintained through the complementary combination of π-conjugation and redox activity. However, earlier efforts were limited by the irreversible nature of doping/dedoping processes. Poor electronic conductivity remains the major challenge for the n-doped state.76 Liang et al., designed “π-conjugated redox polymer”, poly{[N,N′-bis(2-octyldodecyl)-1,4,5,8-naphthalenedicarboximide-2,6-diyl]-alt-5,5′-(2,2′-bithiophene)} (P(NDI2OD-T2)), that was n-doped to a high doping level of 50% in a reversible and stable manner.76 Such kinds of conjugated structures of organic materials are electrically conductive, potentially eliminating the use of high amounts of conductive carbon additives for electrical transport purposes.76 Though 95% of theoretical capacity was noted at a charging rate of 100C, the absolute capacity (∼54 mA h g−1) was not highly impressive. Such a kind of low gravimetric capacity was attributed to their higher molecular weight over conventional p-type conducting polymers. Design of organic donor–acceptor complexes to improve electrical conductivity and mitigate solubility issues showed promise for expanding organic electrodes for energy storage applications.77 However, cycling stability still needs to be improved by screening the various stoichiometric compositions of acceptor–donor complexes. Of late, a lot of conducting polymers have been explored for Li-ion and Na-ion battery applications. Some of the compounds show sloping charge–discharge profiles with high discharge capacities up to 900 mA h g−1.78–81
3.2. 2D covalent organic frameworks for pseudocapacitive energy storage
Two-dimensional (2D) materials have a large theoretical surface area that is available for adsorption of electrolyte ions. For instance, graphene has a theoretical surface area of ∼2630 m2 g−1, extensively explored for electrochemical applications.82 2D covalent organic frameworks (COFs) are crystalline organic materials, that have become attractive charge storage materials due to combination of micro/meso porosity besides the redox active functionality.83 Quinone derivatives such as benzoquinone, naphthoquinone and anthraquinone were employed as electrode materials in metal-ion half cells for estimation of their lithiation and sodiation capacities.84 Diffusion limitations were overcome by the design of 2D COFs with quinone as redox active moieties. The main bottleneck for employing 2D COFs for energy storage applications was due to inherent moisture instability and oxidation at high electrode potentials.
The stability issue was improved by employing β-ketoenamine linkages for the design of a new class of COFs.85 DeBlase et al., incorporated redox-active 2,6-diaminoanthraquinone (DAAQ) moieties into a 2D COF. The main aspect of this report was the stability of a 2D COF in 1 M H2SO4 electrolyte (Fig. 4a). The redox electrochemistry is highly reversible, which is due to switching of quinones to dihydroxy and vice versa during protonation/deprotonation cycles. However, the reported practical capacitance was around ∼50 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1, which was due to the usage of a low percentage of redox active groups (∼3%). However, by controlling the kinetics of growth of the COF, the electrochemical performance was enhanced significantly. It was demonstrated that conductivity was improved by growing a COF thin film (a few hundreds of nanometres) on a Au substrate (Fig. 4a).73 Areal capacitance was enhanced by an order of magnitude higher than that of the powdery type of COF (Fig. 4b and c). Furthermore, the electrical conductivity of the 2D COF film was improved by electropolymerizing 3,4-ethyelendioxythiophene (EDOT) to obtain PEDOT-infiltrated COF films (Fig. 4d). Due to improved electrical conductivity, a 40-fold enhancement in the capacitance was observed in comparison to the bare COF film (Fig. 4e).74 In contrast, a 2D covalent triazine based framework exhibited a typical EDL type charge storage mechanism when tested in room temperature ionic liquid, EMIM–BF4.67
 Fig. 4  Covalent organic frameworks (COFs) for pseudocapacitive charge storage. (a) Random orientation of a powdery form of a DAAQ–TFP COF current collector, showing limited charge storage capacity. An oriented thin film of DAAQ–TFP COF on a Au current collector giving rise to enhanced charge storage capacity. (This figure has been reproduced from ref. 73 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2015).73 (b) Cyclic voltammograms of powdered DAAQ–TFP in 1 M H2SO4 electrolyte at 50 mV s−1 scan rate show only the availability of 3% redox-active sites (this figure has been reproduced from ref. 73 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2015).73 (c) Thin film (180 nm) of DAAQ–TFP has 20% available redox active surface (this figure has been reproduced from ref. 73 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2015).73 (d) Schematic of electrochemical polymerization of PEDOT (EDOT incorporated in DAAQ–TFP COF film pores) (this figure has been reproduced from ref. 74 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2016).74 (e) Charge as a function of scan rate for DAAQ–TFP COF and DAAQ–TFP COF modified with PEDOT (this figure has been reproduced from ref. 74 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2016).74 
Zou et al., employed HAQ COF as an electrode material in MgSO4 electrolyte.75 A pseudocapacitive type of charge storage was observed as the current response is linearly proportional to the scan rate. The Mg-ion diffusion coefficient was estimated to be in the order of 10−7 cm2 s−1 and such a kind of high diffusivity was attributed to the porous nature of the COF electrode material. Microporosity and heteroatom doping are the key attributes which affect the relative permittivity of electrode materials and hence the electrochemical performance. Besides the development of organic materials as redox active charge hosts, redox active electrolytes were developed. Thus, electrolyte contributes to the additional charge storage capacity by participating in reversible redox reactions. For instance, quinone (Q)–hydroquinone (HQ) redox couples are well-known as redox active additives to electrolytes where additional charge storage capacities from electrolytes add up to the electrode materials.86 The theoretical capacitance of the HQ/Q couple was estimated to be ∼1750 F g−1, which is three times the theoretical capacitance of graphene (550 F g−1) and eight times higher than that of conventional porous carbons.87 However, in these systems, the rate and operation voltage window are limited due to sluggish diffusion kinetics. Instability of the oxidized species could limit the long-term cycling stability too. HQ was adsorbed onto various conventional electrode materials such as activated carbon, graphene and conducting polymers for obtaining additional charge storage capacity besides improving electrochemical reversibility.88–90 Leveraging intramolecular hydrogen bonding, H2Q/Q incorporation into the COF backbone improved the stability and charge storage capacities. TpPa-(OH)2 showed a specific capacitance of 416 F g−1 at a current density of 0.5 A g−1.118
Li et al., studied the pseudocapacitive performance of conjugated microporous polymers (CMPs).91 Redox active triazatruxene based CMPs showed maximum gravimetric capacitance up to 180 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1. These CMPs showed n-type behavior and showed redox type charge storage in 1 M Na2SO4 electrolyte. Even though there are no definitive redox peaks observed unlike in the case of 2D COFs, systematic studies should be performed to understand the charge storage mechanism of CMPs.
3.3. Polyaromatic hydrocarbons for pseudocapacitive energy storage
Diimides and dianhydrides exhibit a two-electron-redox reaction per molecule. These systems stack spontaneously via π–π interactions, limiting the solubility in many electrolytes, which is advantageous for long-term stability.92 However, rate performance in these organic systems is limited by strong π–π stacking between aromatic rings which makes the diffusion of ions sluggish. On the other hand, the operating voltage window is limited by the redox potential of organic molecules. To address these issues, Russell et al., demonstrated high-rate electrochemical performance of a perylene diimide–hexaazatrinaphthylene (PHATN) organic system (Fig. 5a). Perylene diimide (PDI) and hexazatrinapthylene (HATN) were polymerized into the PHATN scaffold via Suzuki coupling followed by photocyclization.93 The design principles leverage the complementary electroactive nature of PDI and HATN, giving rise to dual advantages of enlarged potential windows of operation besides maximum charge storage capacity. The contortion effect reduced the π–π stacking to create nanoscale voids that facilitated movement of electrolyte ions towards the redox active sites for enabling the high-rate performance. It was estimated that PHATN exhibits theoretical capacitance ∼ 996 F g−1 by taking the delocalization of charges across their π-network. The maximum practical specific capacitance of PHTAN was ∼690 F g−1 at (∼250 mA h g−1) a current density of 0.5 A g−1. This means 70% of the theoretical value was attained. This could be attributed to the contortion effect which enables the ions to access the maximum number of electrochemically active sites. The cyclic voltammograms (CVs) displayed two pairs of reversible redox peaks, at −0.7 V and −1.0 V vs. Hg/HgO (Fig. 5b). To understand the nature of electrochemical kinetics during charge storage, dependence of current on the scan rate was analysed. The kinetic parameter ‘b’ value was estimated from logi versus log(scan rate), which is close to 1, signifying surface controlled processes.
 Fig. 5  Polyaromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) for pseudocapacitive energy storage. (a) Perylene diimide–hexaazatrinaphthylene (PHATN) with ideal pore size 2.3 nm and angle of contortion ∼23° (this figure has been reproduced from ref. 93 with permission from Nature Material, copyright 2021).93 (b) CVs of PHATN at different scan rates (30–75 mV s−1), showing broad reduction and oxidation peaks which are due to sequential reduction of PDI and HATN monomers (this figure has been reproduced from ref. 93 with permission from Nature Material, copyright 2021).93 (c) Specific capacitance as a function of current density for various pseudocapacitive materials (this figure has been reproduced from ref. 93 with permission from Nature Material, copyright 2021).93 (d) CVs of a fluorinated-contorted hexabenzocoronene (F-cHBC) anode at scan rates from 0.1 mV s−1 to 10 mV s−1. The inset shows a log(ip) versus log(scan rate) plot, and kinetic parameter ‘b’ is estimated to be 0.87. (This figure has been reproduced from ref. 96 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2018).96 (e) Charge–discharge curves of OCH3-cHBC and CH3-cHBC at current density 1.0 A g−1 (this figure has been reproduced from ref. 97 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2022).97 (f) Oriented aminopyrine on oxidized few walled nanotubes (FWNTs) stores more charge compared to FWNT and glassy carbon (GC) platforms. (This figure has been reproduced from ref. 98 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, copyright 2015).98 (g) Specific capacity variation with the cycle number of polymerised pyrene derivatives; the initial increase in the capacity is due to additional time for the diffusion of active species into the electrode pores and hence ions can access more inside the electrode (this figure has been reproduced from ref. 98 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, copyright 2015).98 
Interestingly, a charging time scale of four seconds (corresponding to a current density of 75 A g−1) achieved 62% of the maximum capacitance value. This is the typical charging time scale of pseudocapacitive materials (10 seconds to 10 minutes). Based on impedance spectroscopy, capacitance values were estimated to be 400 and 200 F g−1 at charging time scales of 1 s and 0.1 s, respectively. Only an 8% decrease in capacitance was observed after continuous charge–discharge cycles without a change in the coulombic efficiency even after 50000 cycles. Thus, PHTAN showed impressive capacitance, rate performance and cycling stability over inorganic electrode materials (Fig. 5c). Distinctly, PHATN showed redox activity at high pH values (basic media) in the negative potential window unlike the case of p-type conducting polymers which exhibit redox activity in an acidic medium. The comparison of the potential window of operation and capacity of various organic and inorganic electrode materials is summarized in Table 1.
Table 1 Comparison of electrochemical performances of representative organic and inorganic pseudocapacitive electrode materialsa




S. no.
Electrode materials
Potential window
Electrolyte
Specific capacitance
Capacitance retention
References





a KOH – potassium hydroxide, LiClO4 – lithium perchlorate, H2SO4 – sulphuric acid, NaNO3 – sodium nitrate, HClO4 – perchloric acid, Na2SO4 – sodium sulphate, NaClO4 – sodium perchlorate, PHATN – perylene diimide–hexaazatrinaphthylene, PPy – polypyrrole, PEDOT – poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene), GOx – graphene oxide, PPOT – poly(pyrrole-co-o-toluidine), TAT-CMP – triazatruxene-based conjugated microporous polymer, P-aCN – phosphorus-incorporating steam-activated nanoporous carbons, HAB-Ni MOF – hexaaminobenzene (HAB)-derived two-dimensional nickel–organic frameworks, and HAB-Cu MOF – hexaaminobenzene (HAB)-derived two-dimensional copper–organic frameworks.





1
PHATN
−1.2 V to −0.7 V
6 M KOH
689 F g−1
50000 cycles (92%)

93



2
Quinone/PPy
−0.1 V to 0.5 V
0.5 M LiClO4
385 F g−1
10000 cycles (75%)

87



3
Nanofiber/PEDOT
−0.2 V to 0.8 V
1 M H2SO4
180 F g−1
350000 cycles (90%)

120



4
Polythiourea/GOx
0 V to 1 V
1 M H2SO4
400 F g−1
5000 cycles (72%)

121



5
PPOT
−0.4 V to 0.6 V
1 M NaNO3
290 F g−1
1000 cycles (81%)

122



6
Lignin/graphene
0.2 V to 0.8 V
0.1 M HClO4
432 F g−1
3000 cycles (96%)

123



7
TAT-CMP-1
−1.0 V to 0.0 V
1 M Na2SO4
141 F g−1
10000 cycles (95%)

91



TAT-CMP-2
183 F g−1


8
P-aCN
0.0 V to 2.0 V
1 M NaClO4
265 F g−1
100000 cycles (96%)

124



9
HAB-Ni MOF
−0.75 V to −0.25 V
1 M KOH
420 F g−1
12000 cycles (90%)

125



HAB-Cu MOF
−0.55 V to −0.1 V
215 F g−1


10
TiO2(B)
1 V to 3 V
1 M LiPF6
414 F g−1
1000 cycles (100%)

131



11
RuO2·xH2O
1 V
1 M H2SO4
1485 F cm−3
5000 cycles (82%)

132



12
LaMnO2.91
1.27 V
1 M KOH
567 F g−1
—

133



13
T-Nb2O5
1.2 V to 3 V
1 M LiClO4
280 F g−1
1000 cycles (100%)

134



14
MoS2
1 V to 3 V
1 M LiPF6
324 F g−1
3000 cycles (80%)

135



15
VN
1.2 V
1 M KOH
300 F g−1
10000 cycles (95%)

136



16
Ti3C2Tx
0.9 V
3 M H2SO4
440 F g−1
10000 cycles (98%)

137



17
MnO2
0.9 V
1 M Na2SO4
200 F g−1
10000 cycles (100%)

138





The electrochemical stability window of aqueous electrolytes is limited by the thermodynamic decomposition potential of water which is 1.23 V.94 Moving to organic electrolytes is a trivial option but the solubility against conventional carbonate solvents poses a critical challenge for organic materials. Besides polymerization strategies, small molecule based organic materials such as crystalline polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) have been explored for energy storage applications. Such kinds of PAHs can overcome the solubility issues associated with conventional organic anodes in aprotic electrolytes. The potential use of contorted hexabenzocoronene (cHBC) as an anode material for Li-ion batteries was investigated.95 Park et al.,96 studied capacitive energy storage in a small molecule based system by introducing fluorine into contorted hexabenzocoronene (F-cHBC) (Fig. 5d). Due to the electron withdrawing nature of –F groups, the HOMO–LUMO energy levels decreased (3.28 eV when compared to 3.39 eV for cHBC) and the electrochemical response shifted to a pseudocapacitive type. Furthermore, electrochemical analysis showed that Li-ion uptake and release showed pseudocapacitive in the case of F-cHBC and diffusion-limited in the case of cHBC based on the ‘b’ value. A typical lithiation capacity of 100 mA h g−1 was achieved at a current density of 7 A g−1. Similarly, a sodiation capacity of 65 mA h g−1 was achieved at a current density of 4 A g−1.
Park et al., studied the effect of electron donating substituents (–CH3, –OCH3) on the charge storage properties of contorted hexabenzo coronene (cHBC) in Li-ion containing organic electrolyte (Fig. 5e).97 At a charging time scale of 45 seconds (corresponding current density of 8 A g−1), methoxy substituted cHBC showed lithiation capacity ∼100 mA h g−1, signifying the pseudocapacitive Li-ion charge storage host. The clear influence of the substituent –CH3versus –OCH3 was realized by constructing separate Li-ion half cells. Reversible lithiation capacities of 220 and 147 mA h g−1 were noted for methoxy and methyl substituted cHBC, respectively, at a current density of 1 A g−1. The polar nature of the –OCH3 group results in strong negative electrostatic potential near the oxygen atom with enhanced capacity up to 50%. Thus, contortion plays a major role in improving the diffusion kinetics of electrolyte ions while substituents help in enhancing the charge storage capacities. The role of contortion in improving the kinetics of large cations, anions and multivalent ions may be studied for the design of post Li-ion based energy storage devices.
Zhao et al., employed 3,4,9,10-perylenetetracarboxylic diimide (PTCDI) as an anode material for studying ammonium ion storage capacity.99 Compared to an aqueous medium, PTCDI materials showed hardly any dissolution in an organic solvent medium. Most importantly, ammonium ions undergo reduction via a one electron process to produce hydrogen gas, thus limiting the overpotential of −1 V vs. SHE. Further studies should be performed to understand the kinetic effects of increasing the overpotential of the reduction process. Thangavel et al., demonstrated perylene-3,4,9,10-tetracarboxylic acid dianhydride (PTCD) as a charge host for sodium ion storage due to availability of multiple redox binding sites.100 Despite the large size of the Na-ion (1 Å), stable charge storage capacity up to 100 mA h g−1 was reported at a current density of 0.25 A g−1 without any structural changes during sodiation/desodiation cycles. The ease of incorporation of sodium ions into the aromatic rings of PTCD via the enolation process avoids structural changes.
Bachman et al., introduced polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons into functionalized carbon nanotube arrays.101 Systematic studies revealed that pyrene and its derivatives could be a better choice for the reversibility and stable electrochemical behavior. An average lithiation capacity of ∼200 mA h g−1 was achieved due to the oriented nature of pyrene on the oxidized few walled carbon nanotubes (Fig. 5f). This means oriented organic materials provide accessible redox active sites which participate in charge storage contribution. It was noticed that there was hardly any capacity loss after 1000 continuous charge–discharge cycles. The initial increase in the capacity of the electrodes was due to enhanced accessibility of the electrolyte ions to the redox active sites (Fig. 5g). Table 1 summarizes and provides a comparison of the electrochemical performance metrics of organic and inorganic based pseudocapacitive materials. Due to the compatibility of organic materials with a variety of ionic charge carriers, it is possible to construct asymmetric devices by combining them with cost-effective inorganic charge storage materials.
4. Organic materials for hybrid metal-ion capacitors
Hybrid energy storage devices are expected to exhibit simultaneous high energy and high rate performance as they combine both the capacitive and faradaic charge storage mechanisms in a single device.102 The energy density of a supercapacitor is enhanced by increasing the operating voltage and the high rate performance is maintained by high surface area carbonaceous based electrodes. Hybrid metal-ion capacitors store charge through intercalation of cations into a battery-type electrode (normally the negative electrode or anode) and ion adsorption on the positive electrode (or cathode). The battery-type electrode shows a characteristic plateau-type potential profile, but the hybrid device cell voltage varies linearly with time during constant charge–discharge cycles. Such a characteristic variation of potential with time is useful in determining the state of the charge of the device in a precise manner.103 In place of battery anodes, pseudocapacitive electrodes are being employed for simultaneous achievement of high energy density and high-power density. Moreover, hybrid metal-ion capacitors may not be necessarily charged using a direct current (dc) source unlike the case of batteries. The merits in terms of energy-power performance and compatible integration with renewables motivate the development of functional materials that are cost-effective and easy to process for enabling scalable manufacturing.
Hybrid metal-ion capacitors employ intercalating redox active hosts as negative electrodes and adsorption type porous activated carbons as positive electrodes.104 For instance, a typical lithium-ion capacitor combines layered graphitic carbon with high surface area activated carbon in LiPF6 organic electrolyte. Amatucci et al. were the first to propose a non-aqueous hybrid Li-ion capacitor (LIC) in 2001, with activated carbon/Li4Ti5O12 (LTO) in 1 M LiBF4 in acetonitrile.105 The LIC exhibited 100% coulombic efficiency and negligible volumetric changes and delivered a maximum energy density of 18 W h kg−1. Some of the organic materials such as azo compounds and carboxylates may be well suited anodes for the design of organic based LICs. For instance, azo compounds showed a flat discharge plateau (∼1.55 V vs. Li+/Li), with a higher discharge capacity of ∼190 mA h g−1 at a current density of 100 mA g−1.106
Based on the redox chemistry and operating potentials, three types of organic hybrid energy storage devices were demonstrated (Fig. 6a–c).
 Fig. 6  Organic based asymmetric supercapacitors. (a–c) Schematics of asymmetric devices – n-type organic//AC, p-type organic//AC and n-type organic//p-type organic electrode materials. (d) CVs of an asymmetric device having PHATN as the negative electrode and activated carbon as the positive electrode at different scan rates in 6 M KOH electrolyte with a cell voltage of 1.3 V (this figure has been reproduced from ref. 93 with permission from Nature Material, copyright 2021).93 (e) Charge–discharge curves of the cell at different C-rates (this figure has been reproduced from ref. 93 with permission from Nature Materials, copyright 2021).93 (f) Charge–discharge profiles of a Li-ion hybrid capacitor employing pseudocapacitive methoxy-group-coordinated contorted hexabenzocoronene (OCH3-cHBC) as an anode and activated carbon as an adsorption electrode at different current densities. (This figure has been reproduced from ref. 97 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2022).97 (g) Ragone plot comparing energy-power densities of various Li-ion capacitors. (This figure has been reproduced from ref. 97 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2022).97 
Configuration-I: n-type organic (negative electrode)//activated carbon (positive electrode).
Configuration-II: activated carbon//p-type organic.
Configuration-III: n-type organic//p-type organic.
Due to ambipolar electrochemical behaviour of activated carbon, it was employed either as a positive or negative electrode depending on the n (or p) type of organic electrode materials (Fig. 6a). Composition of the organic material may not remain the same for the configuration-III type of hybrid energy storage devices.
An asymmetric device was fabricated by pairing PHATN as a negative electrode and activated carbon as a positive electrode.93 Due to the aqueous nature of the electrolyte, the maximum cell voltage was limited to 1.3 V only (Fig. 6d). Charge–discharge profiles showed clearly slopy types at C-rates from 11C to 225C. Capacity was retained up to 46% when the charging time scale changed from 5 minutes to 16 seconds (Fig. 6e). Due to complementary windows of operation of electrodes, the device showed stable electrochemical performance for 10000 cycles without loss of capacity by maintaining a coulombic efficiency of 100%. Unlike aqueous electrolytes, organic electrolytes offer an extended potential window of operation due to stability of solvents beyond thermodynamic decomposition potential of water. A hybrid Li-ion capacitor was designed by pairing an OCH3-cHBC anode with an activated carbon cathode in Li-ion containing organic electrolyte (Fig. 6f).97 A maximum energy density of 198 W h kg−1 at a power density of 130 W kg−1 was reported with a maximum cell voltage of 3 V. The highest power density of up to 6.6 kW kg−1 at an energy density of 7.6 W h kg−1 was achieved. A capacity retention of 80% (at a current density of 6 A g−1) was observed for the organic LIC beyond 10000 cycles. As shown in Fig. 6g, the organic LIC device can be charged/discharged over a time scale of 1 h to 3.6 seconds. Over different time scales of operation, the organic device stores superior energy density and delivers higher power density in comparison to inorganic based LICs. This is clearly advantageous for organic materials as their redox nature can be tunable depending on the choice of the substituent and diffusion kinetics of ions may be altered through contortion effects.
Activated carbons suffer from poor electronic conductivity (∼10 S cm−1) and kinetics of ion storage at high charging currents. Thus, activated carbon remains the limiting electrode for design of high-power density metal-ion capacitors. The total capacitance of the hybrid metal-ion capacitor is also limited by the low capacity (∼40 mA h g−1) carbon electrodes which involve a double layer charge storage mechanism. 1/Ctotal = 1/C− + 1/C+(1) C+ < C−(2) Ctotal ∼ C+(3)
By replacing activated carbon with pseudocapacitive conducting polymers, it is possible to improve 3–4 times the capacity of the positive electrodes. Looking at the organic type of anionic charge hosts, conducting polymers such as PANI, PPy and PEDOT are the optimal choices in the design of high-power hybrid metal-ion capacitors. Moreover, conducting polymers are p-type and are known to store anionic charge carriers with subsequent redox reactions, resulting in higher specific capacities over traditional activated carbons.
The electropolymerization strategy was employed to grow PEDOT and PANI on gold coated flexible plastic substrates.107 An asymmetric solid-state supercapacitor was fabricated by employing polyvinyl alcohol (PVA)/H2SO4 gel electrolyte as shown in Fig. 7a. Fibrous nanostructured morphology of the CPs shortens the ion diffusive pathways, resulting in high rate performance. Both PEDOT and PANI are electroactive in protic electrolytes and their complementary potential of operation enabled the enlargement of the voltage window of operation of the device up to 1.6 V (Fig. 7b and c). The asymmetric organic device exhibited a maximum power density of 2.8 W cm−3 at an energy density of 9 mW h cm−3, which is superior to that of carbonaceous and metal oxide-based ASC solid state devices.109 New types of conducting polymers were developed to fabricate symmetric and asymmetric devices for evaluating their electrochemical performance with traditional devices.
 Fig. 7  All-organic based hybrid devices. (a) Schematic of an asymmetric supercapacitor fabricated by employing PEDOT and PANI conducting polymers as negative and positive electrodes, respectively (this figure has been reproduced from ref. 107 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015).107 (b) Cyclic voltammograms of PEDOT and PANI conducting polymers at a scan rate of 80 mV s−1 (this figure has been reproduced from ref. 107 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015).107 (c) CVs of a solid state asymmetric device at different scan rates in the voltage window of 0 to 1.6 V (this figure has been reproduced from ref. 107 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015).107 (d) Scheme of charge transfer in all organic sodium hybrid capacitors (this figure has been reproduced from ref. 100 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017)100 (e) Ragone plot showing the comparison of performance metrics of all-organic NIHC with those of supercapacitors and rechargeable batteries (this figure has been reproduced from ref. 100 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017).100 (f) All-organic potassium ion hybrid capacitors (this figure has been reproduced from ref. 108 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2022)108 and (g) Ragone plot showing comparison of performance metrics of all organic KIHC with those of other hybrid metal-ion capacitors (this figure has been reproduced from ref. 108 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2022).108 
All-organic based symmetrical devices were fabricated to understand the anodic and cathodic stability of organic materials under the influence of applied potentials when interfaced with electrolytes. For instance, Naoi et al., constructed an electrochemical capacitor by pairing highly conductive poly(1,5-diaminoanthraquinone) [poly(DAAQ)] as both anode and cathode materials with an operating voltage window of 2.3 V at C-rates of 30C to 90C. The symmetric electrochemical capacitor exhibited a power density of 10 kW kg−1 at an energy density of 25 W h kg−1.110 Tomai et al., demonstrated an all organic energy storage device which is a metal-free aqueous redox capacitor consisting of dichloroanthraquinone (DCAQ) as the anode and tetrachlorohydroquinone (TCHQ) as the cathode. This capacitor has the capability of storing energy density beyond 20 W h kg−1, which was attributed to the proton rocking-chair like energy storage mechanism.111
Organic electrode materials were also employed in non-aqueous electrolytes for the design of hybrid metal-ion capacitors. Dissolution effects and anodic and cathodic decomposition of solvents affect the stability and voltage window of operation of devices. Pseudocapacitive organic electrode materials show better rate performance over conventional battery-type organic electrodes.112,113 Thangavel et al., worked on all organic Na ion-based hybrid capacitors and used perylene-3,4,9,10-tertracarboxylic dianhydride (PTCDA) and polyaniline (PANI) as the anode and cathode respectively (Fig. 7d).100 An all-organic hybrid Na-ion capacitor delivered a maximum energy density of ∼95 W h kg−1 and power density up to 7 kW kg−1 (Fig. 7e). Interestingly, the device showed a capacitance retention of 89% over 5000 cycles.100 PANI electrode materials were employed in the design of a K-ion capacitor as well, which reflects the suitability of the same organic material for different sizes of ionic charge carriers. An all-organic potassium ion-based hybrid capacitor was made by employing dipotassium terephthalate (K2TP) as an anode (Fig. 7f).108 The K2TP structure allows the (de)intercalation of potassium ions without much volumetric change, making it a robust host for the design of potassium ion capacitors. To reduce the size of K2TP and improve the electrical conductivity, ball milling was performed by mixing it with a conductive carbon additive. A full cell K-ion capacitor showed a high energy density of 153 W h kg−1 and a maximum power density of ∼6.7 kW kg−1 with cycling stability up to 10000 cycles (Fig. 7g). Table 2 summarizes a variety of organic material compositions in the design of asymmetric and hybrid metal-ion capacitor devices. While preliminary efforts showed the feasibility of organic materials for sustainable energy storage, systematic studies must be performed for the constructive progress of this field of research. In situ and operando studies could provide more insights on the mechanism of charge storage and other minor stability issues for long-term operation.
Table 2 Asymmetric and hybrid metal-ion capacitor devices based on organic materialsa




S. no.
Anode
Cathode
Electrolyte
Capacitance retention
Energy (W h kg−1)
Power (W kg−1)
References





a rGO – reduced graphene oxide, PANI – polyaniline, RuO2 – ruthenium dioxide, PTO – pyrene-4,5,9,10-tetraone, ZnSO4 – zinc sulphate, AQ – anthraquinone, DHB – 1,2-dihydroxybenzene, DCAQ – dichloroanthraquinone, TCHQ – tetrachlorohydroquinone, OCH3-cHBC – methoxy-substituted contorted hexabenzocoronene, AC – activated carbon, and TEAClO4 – tetraethylammonium perchlorate.





1
Li4Ti5O12 (LTO)
AC
1 M LiBF4
5000 cycle (90%)
18
—

105



2
PHATN
AC
6 M KOH
10000 cycles (100%)
19
93

93



3
OCH3-cHBC
AC
1.3 M LiPF6
13000 cycles (80%)
200
130

97



4
PEDOT
PANI
PVA/H2SO4
10000 cycles (85%)
9 mW h cm−3
3 W cm−3

107



5
Poly(DAAQ)
Poly(DAAQ)
1 M TEAClO4
—
25
10200

110



6
AQ
DHB
1 M H2SO4
—
10
200

107



7
DCAQ
TCHQ
0.5 M H2SO4
10000 cycles (100%)
20
—

111



8
PTCDA
PANI
NaClO4
5000 cycles (89%)
97
7000

100



9
K2TP
PANI
KPF6
10000 cycles (80%)
153
7000

108



10
rGO/RuO2
rGO/PANI
2 M H2SO4
2500 cycle (70%)
7
50000

127





5. Perspectives
Historical evolution of organic materials starting from conducting 1D polymers, 2D and 3D porous organic polymers to contorted polyaromatic hydrocarbons clearly shows the trend of emergence of organic materials for hybrid energy storage applications. A lot of effort was devoted to the development of organic materials for rechargeable battery applications.25 The recent trend of electrification in various sectors demands the development of sustainable energy storage solutions. Organic materials have become attractive due to their abundant precursors, tunable redox properties and controllable architectures.17,23,24 Early research efforts explored the electrochemistry of small molecules; however, inevitable poor electrical conductivity and solubility remained major issues.114 Conducting polymers showed promise as redox charge storage materials due to their conductivity and insolubility. But underutilization of redox active sites and swelling of polymer chains during charge/discharge cycles caused mechanical instability limiting the long-term stability.72 Overcharging of conducting polymers caused dissolution issues in the electrolyte medium. 2D COFs appear to have a better porous architecture than conducting polymers as the 2D morphology enables maximum accessibility of electrolyte ions to redox active sites. However, poor electronic conductivity of COFs and their high molecular weight resulted in limited gravimetric capacity. Some strategies were developed for improving charge transfer kinetics by infiltration of CPs across 2D COFs or hybridizing with 3D graphene architectures.126 Contorted polyaromatic hydrocarbons turned out to be a good choice for organic pseudocapacitive materials as their conductivity can be improved through extended conjugation. However, long term cycling stability of organic electrodes under voltage stress conditions should be tested for evaluating their electrochemical robustness.
The solubility and mechanical stability issues can be addressed through the development of hybrid electrode materials and choosing appropriate electrolyte formulations. Some of the strategies such as incorporating organic materials into conductive carbon hosts such as graphene and carbon nanotubes have been tried out to improve the rate performance and cycling life.115,128 Grafting organic materials onto conductive platforms could improve the charge transfer kinetics.129,130 For instance, MXenes are an emerging class of conductive 2D metal carbides and nitrides.116 Moreover, MXene sheets are abundant in polar surface groups (O, –OH, –F, and –Cl), which can be exchanged with other terminations such as –NH, –S, –Se, etc.116 Such a kind of diverse surface chemistry enables covalent or noncovalent interactions with organic materials. Moreover, MXene sheets are negatively charged due to the presence of electronegative groups and are able to form electrostatic assemblies with positively charged materials. All these driving forces are key to the formation of functional organic-MXene scaffolds for improving the electrochemical performance. Such kinds of organic–inorganic hybrid materials take advantage of improved conductivity and capacity besides the rate and cycle life performance. Moreover, MXene materials are amenable for solution processability and hence compatible with the processing of hybrids of organic materials. Solid state electrolytes may be explored for resolving solubility issues.
Activated carbons that are being used regularly in these capacitive devices show limited capacitance values and their processability remains the major issue. To overcome these issues, a futuristic molecular design for high rate and high-capacity energy storage devices is proposed. First, we must select redox active organic semiconductors having a slightly out of plane structure. This will not only help avoid strong π–π stacking interactions in the solid state but also create molecular scale voids that can facilitate the easy mobility of ions. This design will be particularly useful to avoid the strong π–π stacking interactions in 1D and 2D polymers upon stacking (supramolecular assembly) of polymer chains (1D) and sheets (2D) in the solid state (Fig. 8). As a result, fast ionic mobility is feasible through such assemblies of supramolecular polymers. Interestingly, in the case of 3D polymers, even planar building blocks can also serve the purpose as π–π stacking is prevented owing to their tetrahedral geometry. Furthermore, it is possible to incorporate more than one organic semiconductor using a multicomponent approach with distinct redox properties to maximize the potential window of operation. Compared to small molecular based organic semiconductors, multicomponent based organic materials are expected to display robust electrochemical performance. Unlike inorganic materials, regulated organic material assemblies exhibit structural flexibility upon intercalation and deintercalation of ionic charge carriers. As a result, these organic materials are promising candidates to achieve better charge storage capacities and cycling stability compared to some of the inorganic materials. Another major advantage of organic polymers is their solution processability using doctor blade coating, spray and dip coating methods besides synthesis scalability. Redox active organic materials with extended π-conjugation enables electron or hole transport, while porous or contortion effects promote fast diffusion of ions, that brings pseudocapacitive charge storage behaviour. Most importantly, it is possible to design organic materials which can exhibit intrinsic pseudocapacitance while operating at high potential windows >3.5 V vs. Li/Li+. In the case of inorganic materials, nanostructuring of typical battery-like electrodes brings in extrinsic pseudocapacitive behaviour with high potential window of operation. Advancement of pseudocapacitive energy storage demands development of high-capacity high voltage pseudocapacitive materials with long term cycling stability.
 Fig. 8  Tuning of redox potential of organic materials through a supramolecular approach. Non-planar organic building blocks (single or multicomponent) can form a variety of assemblies such as one-dimensional, two-dimensional and three-dimensional, which can be regulated via non-covalent interactions. Prototypes of organic based hybrid energy storage devices have been demonstrated. Leveraging scalable synthesis and processing with added smart functionalities, organic materials have the potential for development of sustainable energy storage devices. The critical challenges and solutions for the advancement of organic hybrid energy storage for a sustainable future are highlighted. 
All organic electrodes are demonstrated for Na-ion and K-ion hybrid capacitors.100,108 Looking at the performance metrics, it was found that energy density of organic hybrid metal-ion capacitors is around 40% of that of LIBs while maintaining the same power density as EDLCs. A typical graphite//AC LIC exhibits an energy density of 40–60 W h kg−1; however, sluggish diffusion of Li-ions through the solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) of graphite limits the rate performance. Sometimes, pre-intercalation of graphitic electrodes is required for preventing ion starvation effects. Beyond Li-ion chemistries is a path forward and venturing into hybrid metal-ion capacitors with earth abundant charge carriers is an attractive area of research. However, the progress of organic materials for hybrid energy storage applications is lagging due to a lack of understanding of the nature of the SEI that gets formed on organic electrode materials. Operando techniques including but not limited to electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance (EQCM), X-ray diffraction (XRD), X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) and atomic force microscopy (AFM) should be employed to probe the changes in the mass and structural and surface chemistry of the organic materials under charge/discharge conditions. Such studies would provide guidance on better design of electrode materials and architecture for long term stability. Unlike inorganic materials, organic materials may be suitable for a wide range of cations such as Zn2+, Mg2+ and Al3+.129 This would enable the development of all-organic based hybrid multivalent metal-ion capacitors. The challenging aspect is the sluggish diffusion kinetics of high charge density cations through organic electrode materials. Diffusion energy barriers may be reduced through the design of open architectures of organic electrode materials. Validation of reliable electrochemical testing protocols must be developed for studying the electrochemical aspects of multivalent charge carriers. The emerging area of solid-state energy storage devices is appealing; some of the organic polymers form gels which could be employed as ionically conducting media. This would enable the sustainable development of electrodes, electrolytes, and thus energy storage devices for future needs. The compatible design of organic materials with a variety of aqueous and non-aqueous electrolytes would enable the construction of all-organic based hybrid energy storage devices.
For practical applications, coulombic efficiency of organic materials is expected to be >99%. A first cycle coulombic efficiency of above 90% is required for commercialisation purposes. Either the intrinsic electrical conductivity of organic materials must be improved or proper design of organic materials with conductive additives without blocking the redox active sites is needed. In the case of organic materials with low initial coulombic efficiency, either chemical or electrochemical pre-intercalation strategies may be developed for efficient design of hybrid devices.
Cost and resource availability are the major factors for successful deployment of organic based hybrid energy storage devices. Large scale synthesis of raw materials needs to be evaluated. Since processing techniques have been well established, one can implement them for the fabrication of electrode materials. In terms of resource abundance and environmental benignity, organic materials are in a better position than inorganic materials. However, the major challenge for organic materials comes from thermal and chemical stability in the case of small molecules. Recently developed porous organic polymers such as polyimides displayed excellent thermal stability up to 500 °C.117 Moreover, they also showed excellent chemical stability against acidic and basic media.85 Similar to inorganic electrode materials, some of the organic materials are sensitive to oxygen and moisture, which may be the root cause for degradaton of electrode materials.
2D metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), where metal centers get complexed with organic linkers and the accessibility of redox active sites is enabled by the intrinsic porosity of such materials. So far, metal centers have helped stabilising the framework while organic linkers undergo redox reactions. Futuristic design strategies include development of highly conductive and high-density redox sites for high capacity and high-power electrodes. It was demonstrated that the pseudocapacitive characteristic of nickel hexaamino benzene (N-HAB) MOF originates from ligands rather than the metal center.118 Therefore, design of conductive MOFs where the stability of conjugated redox active ligands can be provided by metal centers and porous architecture allows ion accessibility to the redox active sites.119 Design of conductive MOFs is very much needed for the effective utilization of redox centers with facile charge transport for high capacitance and high rate behaviour.
Due to the ease of processing by doctor blade and roll-to-roll manufacturing methods, organic materials can be processed at large scales. Commercial energy storage devices employ typical mass loadings in the range of ∼10 mg cm−2. Preliminary efforts on organic materials are focused on the material level performance and high mass loading alone cannot solve the problem and pertaining issues are due to large polarisation, low power and rate performance besides manufacturing difficulties. Utilization of 3D electrode architectures with ‘nanowiring’ contacts extending to the given thickness would ensure the rate and power performance besides the optimal areal capacity. Organic based energy storage devices are much more relevant for flexible applications than inorganic ones.
Supramolecular chemistry has been established very well.42 Self-healing is another aspect of organic materials that can be exploited for the design of long-lasting electrode materials. Some of the redox active organic systems may be soluble in solvents, which may be complexed with metal-ions to form insoluble extended coordination networks. Some of the principles can be implemented in terms of self-healing properties by introducing a molecular recognition approach. By integrating design principles at various length scales and bringing synergy between accessible redox active sites and flexible structural aspects, it is possible to design smart electrode materials that are long lasting and recyclable. Given the versatility of organic materials in terms of flexibility, abundancy, light weight, and low cost, these are expected to be key materials for disruptive technologies in the near future. So, low cost is the driving force behind the commercial reality of organic materials that is the key to sustainable development of energy storage devices for large scale stationary storage applications. As organic electrode materials performance metrics match those of inorganic based materials, the commercialization aspect is governed by the cost factor. Due to the abundant nature of the basic constituent elements for the design of organic materials, their commercialization would be a reality. However, mass loading effects and cycling stability under voltage stress tests should be performed and validated for the commercial implementation of organic electrode materials. The temperature effect on the organic device performance must be studied to gain knowledge on the influence of thermal fluctuations on electrochemical performance.
Author contributions
S. Y. – Conceptualization, drafting, writing and reviewing, D. S. I. – drafting, writing and reviewing; K. V. Rao - reviewing, editing and supervision, N. K. – reviewing, editing, funding acquisition, project administration, supervision and validation. All authors have read through the draft and contributed adequately to developing the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
Authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
SY acknowledges the scholarship support from University Grants Commission (UGC), India. NK acknowledges support from the Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad (grant number: SG-111), India and Science and Engineering Research Board, India for the financial support (CRG/2021/001094).
Notes and references

          C.-F. Schleussner, The Paris Agreement – the 1.5 °C Temperature Goal, Climate Analytics,  2022 Search PubMed .
M. S. Dresselhaus and I. L. Thomas, Nature, 2001, 414, 332–337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Grätzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Chen, C. Li, M. Grätzel, R. Kostecki and S. S. Mao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7909–7937 RSC .
R. Van Noorden, Nature, 2014, 507, 26–28 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Armand and J. M. Tarascon, Nature, 2008, 451, 652–657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lu and J. Chen, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2020, 4, 127–142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359–367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Manthiram, ACS Cent. Sci., 2017, 3, 1063–1069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Goodenough and K.-S. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1167–1176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, J. Lu, Z. Chen and K. Amine, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800561 CrossRef PubMed .
M. S. Whittingham, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11414–11443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Fleischmann, J. B. Mitchell, R. Wang, C. Zhan, D.-e. Jiang, V. Presser and V. Augustyn, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 6738–6782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 1151–1163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          Global and regional trends in residential electricity consumption, Gadgets and Gigawatts,  2009, https://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/gigawatts2009.pdf, accessed 24 January 2023 Search PubMed.
Y. Xu, M. Zhou and Y. Lei, Mater. Today, 2018, 21, 60–78 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Shea and C. Luo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 5361–5380 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chandra, D. Roy Chowdhury, M. Addicoat, T. Heine, A. Paul and R. Banerjee, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 2074–2080 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Song and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2280–2301 RSC .
M. Lee, J. Hong, H. Kim, H.-D. Lim, S. B. Cho, K. Kang and C. B. Park, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2558–2565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kim, J. E. Kwon, B. Lee, J. Hong, M. Lee, S. Y. Park and K. Kang, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7258–7264 CrossRef CAS .
T. B. Schon, B. T. McAllister, P.-F. Li and D. S. Seferos, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 6345–6404 RSC .
K. Qin, J. Huang, K. Holguin and C. Luo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3950–3992 RSC .
X. Liu, C.-F. Liu, S. Xu, T. Cheng, S. Wang, W.-Y. Lai and W. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 3181–3225 RSC .
G. Kwon, Y. Ko, Y. Kim, K. Kim and K. Kang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2021, 54, 4423–4433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Dresselhaus, A. Jorio, M. Hofmann, G. Dresselhaus and R. Saito, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 751–758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Clancy, M. K. Bayazit, S. A. Hodge, N. T. Skipper, C. A. Howard and M. S. P. Shaffer, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 7363–7408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Rao, C. L. Pint, A. E. Islam, R. S. Weatherup, S. Hofmann, E. R. Meshot, F. Wu, C. Zhou, N. Dee, P. B. Amama, J. Carpena-Nuñez, W. Shi, D. L. Plata, E. S. Penev, B. I. Yakobson, P. B. Balbuena, C. Bichara, D. N. Futaba, S. Noda, H. Shin, K. S. Kim, B. Simard, F. Mirri, M. Pasquali, F. Fornasiero, E. I. Kauppinen, M. Arnold, B. A. Cola, P. Nikolaev, S. Arepalli, H.-M. Cheng, D. N. Zakharov, E. A. Stach, J. Zhang, F. Wei, M. Terrones, D. B. Geohegan, B. Maruyama, S. Maruyama, Y. Li, W. W. Adams and A. J. Hart, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 11756–11784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Fleischmann, Y. Zhang, X. Wang, P. T. Cummings, J. Wu, P. Simon, Y. Gogotsi, V. Presser and V. Augustyn, Nat. Energy, 2022, 7, 222–228 CrossRef CAS .
S. Das, P. Heasman, T. Ben and S. Qiu, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 1515–1563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tian and G. Zhu, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 8934–8986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Ingle, A. C. Yadav, K. Kumari, S. K. Singh, D. J. Babu and K. V. Rao, Chem. Commun., 2023, 59, 454–457 RSC .
Q. Li, Y. Zhang, Z. Xie, Y. Zhen, W. Hu and H. Dong, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 2411–2430 RSC .
K. Venkata Rao, R. Haldar, T. K. Maji and S. J. George, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 156–163 RSC .
A. M. Bryan, L. M. Santino, Y. Lu, S. Acharya and J. M. D'Arcy, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 5989–5998 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wöhler, Ann. Phys., 1828, 88, 253–256 CrossRef .
C. A. Tsipis and P. A. Karipidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 2307–2318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Pedersen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1967, 89, 7017–7036 CrossRef CAS .
J.-M. Lehn, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 151–160 RSC .

          https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/chemistry/1987/speedread
        .
J.-M. Lehn, Science, 1993, 260, 1762–1763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Sagade, K. Venkata Rao, U. Mogera, S. J. George, A. Datta and G. U. Kulkarni, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 559–564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. L. Williams, J. J. Byrne and J. S. Driscoll, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1969, 116, 2 CrossRef CAS .
H. Alt, H. Binder, A. Köhling and G. Sandstede, Electrochim. Acta, 1972, 17, 873–887 CrossRef CAS .
C. Vaalma, D. Buchholz, M. Weil and S. Passerini, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 18013 CrossRef .

          T. A. Skotheim, R. L. Elsenbaumer and J. R. Reynolds, Handbook of Conducting Polymers, Second Edition, Revised and Expanded. M-I Transition in Doped Conducting Polymers,  1995 Search PubMed .
P. Novák, K. Müller, K. S. V. Santhanam and O. Haas, Chem. Rev., 1997, 97, 207–282 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Würthner, C. R. Saha-Möller, B. Fimmel, S. Ogi, P. Leowanawat and D. Schmidt, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 962–1052 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Würthner, Chem. Commun., 2004, 14, 1564–1579 RSC .
N. Zindy, J. T. Blaskovits, C. Beaumont, J. Michaud-Valcourt, H. Saneifar, P. A. Johnson, D. Bélanger and M. Leclerc, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 6821–6830 CrossRef CAS .
C. Choi, D. S. Ashby, D. M. Butts, R. H. DeBlock, Q. Wei, J. Lau and B. Dunn, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 5, 5–19 CrossRef .
C. K. Chiang, Polymer, 1981, 22, 1454–1456 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nakahara, S. Iwasa, M. Satoh, Y. Morioka, J. Iriyama, M. Suguro and E. Hasegawa, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2002, 359, 351–354 CrossRef CAS .
H. Su, Y. Song, Y. Hu, Y. Ma, W. Liu, H. Liu and Q. Liu, Cryst. Growth Des., 2021, 21, 3668–3676 CrossRef CAS .

          A. J. Bard and L. R. Faulkner, Electrochemical Methods: Fundamentals and Applications, Wiley, New York, 2nd edn,  2001 Search PubMed ; A. J. Bard and L. R. Faulkner, Russ. J. Electrochem., 2002, 1364–1365 Search PubMed .
T. S. Mathis, N. Kurra, X. Wang, D. Pinto, P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1902007 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, J. Lee, J. Y. Cheong, Y. Wang, G. Duan, H. Hou, S. Jiang and I.-D. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 4228–4267 RSC .
X. Jia, Y. Ge, L. Shao, C. Wang and G. G. Wallace, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 14321–14340 CrossRef CAS .
N. Oyama, T. Tatsuma, T. Sato and T. Sotomura, Nature, 1995, 373, 598–600 CrossRef CAS .
M. Winter and R. J. Brodd, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4245–4270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gogotsi and R. M. Penner, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 2081–2083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          B. E. Conway, Electrochemical Capacitors: Scientific Fundamentals and Technology Applications, Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, New-York,  1999 Search PubMed .
J. Meng, H. Guo, C. Niu, Y. Zhao, L. Xu, Q. Li and L. Mai, Joule, 2017, 1, 522–547 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang and Y. Yao, Joule, 2018, 2, 1690–1706 CrossRef CAS .
A. Vizintin, J. Bitenc, A. Kopač Lautar, K. Pirnat, J. Grdadolnik, J. Stare, A. Randon-Vitanova and R. Dominko, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 661 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Li, Z. Wei, A. Manthiram, Y. Feng, J. Ma and L. Mai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 9406–9431 RSC .
L. Hao, J. Ning, B. Luo, B. Wang, Y. Zhang, Z. Tang, J. Yang, A. Thomas and L. Zhi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 219–225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shi, L. Peng, Y. Ding, Y. Zhao and G. Yu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 6684–6696 RSC .
A. J. Heeger, S. Kivelson, J. R. Schrieffer and W. P. Su, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1988, 60, 781–850 CrossRef CAS .
I. Bargigia, L. R. Savagian, A. M. Österholm, J. R. Reynolds and C. Silva, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 294–308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Shi, T. Zhao, J. Xi, D. Wang and Z. Shuai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 12929–12938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Liu, L. Finn, M. Yu, H. Wang, T. Zhai, X. Lu, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2522–2527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. DeBlase, K. Hernández-Burgos, K. E. Silberstein, G. G. Rodríguez-Calero, R. P. Bisbey, H. D. Abruña and W. R. Dichtel, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 3178–3183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Mulzer, L. Shen, R. P. Bisbey, J. R. McKone, N. Zhang, H. D. Abruña and W. R. Dichtel, ACS Cent. Sci., 2016, 2, 667–673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zou, Z. Tian, V. S. Kale, W. Wang, S. Kandembeth, Z. Cao, J. Guo, J. Czaban-Jóźwiak, L. Cavallo, O. Shekhah, M. Eddaoudi and H. N. Alshareef, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 2203193,  DOI:10.1002/aenm.202203193 .
Y. Liang, Z. Chen, Y. Jing, Y. Rong, A. Facchetti and Y. Yao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4956–4959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lee, J. Hong, S.-K. Jung, K. Ku, G. Kwon, W. M. Seong, H. Kim, G. Yoon, I. Kang, K. Hong, H. W. Jang and K. Kang, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 20, 462–469 CrossRef .
X. Han, G. Qing, J. Sun and T. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 5147–5151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, B. Zhang, J. Wang, H. Zhao, W. Ma, L. Xu, W. Zhang, K. Zhou, Y. Du and G. He, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 8468–8473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, X. Rui, G. Long, W. Chen, Q. Yan and Q. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 7354–7358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sun, Z.-j. Li, H.-g. Wang, D. Bao, F.-l. Meng and X.-b. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 10662–10666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. McAllister, J.-L. Li, D. H. Adamson, H. C. Schniepp, A. A. Abdala, J. Liu, M. Herrera-Alonso, D. L. Milius, R. Car, R. K. Prud'homme and I. A. Aksay, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4396–4404 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, P. Pachfule and A. Thomas, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 6871–6913 RSC .
C. R. DeBlase, K. E. Silberstein, T.-T. Truong, H. D. Abruña and W. R. Dichtel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16821–16824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kandambeth, A. Mallick, B. Lukose, M. V. Mane, T. Heine and R. Banerjee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19524–19527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Roldán, C. Blanco, M. Granda, R. Menéndez and R. Santamaría, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 1699–1701 CrossRef PubMed .
S.-K. Kim, J. Cho, J. S. Moore, H. S. Park and P. V. Braun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 903–910 CrossRef CAS .
C. Singh and A. Paul, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 11382–11390 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, Z. Lin, X. Huang, Y. Wang, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5779–5784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Vlad, K. Arnould, B. Ernould, L. Sieuw, J. Rolland and J.-F. Gohy, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 11189–11193 RSC .
X.-C. Li, Y. Zhang, C.-Y. Wang, Y. Wan, W.-Y. Lai, H. Pang and W. Huang, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 2959–2965 RSC .
S. K. Lee, Y. Zu, A. Herrmann, Y. Geerts, K. Müllen and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 3513–3520 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Russell, V. A. Posey, J. Gray, R. May, D. A. Reed, H. Zhang, L. E. Marbella, M. L. Steigerwald, Y. Yang, X. Roy, C. Nuckolls and S. R. Peurifoy, Nat. Mater., 2021, 20, 1136–1141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Khomenko, E. Raymundo-Piñero and F. Béguin, J. Power Sources, 2006, 153, 183–190 CrossRef CAS .
J. Park, C. W. Lee, S. H. Joo, J. H. Park, C. Hwang, H.-K. Song, Y. S. Park, S. K. Kwak, S. Ahn and S. J. Kang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 12589–12597 RSC .
J. Park, C. W. Lee, J. H. Park, S. H. Joo, S. K. Kwak, S. Ahn and S. J. Kang, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1801365 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Park, S. H. Joo, M. Kang, J. H. Park, B. Kim, S. K. Kwak, S. Ahn and S. J. Kang, ACS Energy Lett., 2022, 7, 4142–4149 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Bachman, R. Kavian, D. J. Graham, D. Y. Kim, S. Noda, D. G. Nocera, Y. Shao-Horn and S. W. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7040 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhao, Y. Lei, L. Shi, Z. Tian, M. N. Hedhili, Y. Khan and H. N. Alshareef, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202212941 CAS .
R. Thangavel, K. Kaliyappan, D.-U. Kim, X. Sun and Y.-S. Lee, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 7122–7130 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Bachman, R. Kavian, D. J. Graham, D. Y. Kim, S. Noda, D. G. Nocera, Y. Shao-Horn and S. W. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7040 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Ding, W. Hu, E. Paek and D. Mitlin, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 6457–6498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Lukatskaya, B. Dunn and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12647 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Aravindan, J. Gnanaraj, Y.-S. Lee and S. Madhavi, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11619–11635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. G. Amatucci, F. Badway, A. D. Pasquier and T. Zheng, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2001, 148, A930 CrossRef CAS .
C. Luo, O. Borodin, X. Ji, S. Hou, K. J. Gaskell, X. Fan, J. Chen, T. Deng, R. Wang, J. Jiang and C. Wang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 2004–2009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Kurra, R. Wang and H. N. Alshareef, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 7368–7374 RSC .
G. Vardhini, S. Suriyakumar and M. M. Shaijumon, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2022, 5, 9595–9604 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shao, M. F. EI-Kady, J. Sun, Y. Li, Q. Zhang, M. Zhu, H. Wang, B. Dunn and R. B. Kaner, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 9233–9280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Naoi, S. Suematsu and A. Manago, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 420–426 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tomai, S. Mitani, D. Komatsu, Y. Kawaguchi and I. Honma, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 3591 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Chang, T. Huang, J. Yu, J. Li, J. Wang and Q. Wei, Batteries Supercaps, 2021, 4, 1567–1587 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Guo, N. Chen and L. Qu, Adv. Energy Sustainability Res., 2021, 2, 2100022 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, Q. Zhang, L. Li, Z. Niu and J. Chen, Chem, 2018, 4, 2786–2813 CAS .
T. Nokami, T. Matsuo, Y. Inatomi, N. Hojo, T. Tsukagoshi, H. Yoshizawa, A. Shimizu, H. Kuramoto, K. Komae, H. Tsuyama and J.-i. Yoshida, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19694–19700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gogotsi and B. Anasori, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 8491–8494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. V. Rao, R. Haldar, T. K. Maji and S. J. George, Polymer, 2014, 55, 1452–1458 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Lukatskaya, D. Feng, S.-M. Bak, J. W. F. To, X.-Q. Yang, Y. Cui, J. I. Feldblyum and Z. Bao, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 15919–15925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Sheberla, J. C. Bachman, J. S. Elias, C.-J. Sun, Y. Shao-Horn and M. Dincă, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 220–224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Acharya, L. M. Santino, Y. Lu, H. Anandarajah, A. Wayne and J. M. D'Arcy, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 482–491 RSC .
S. Witomska, Z. Liu, W. Czepa, A. Aliprandi, D. Pakulski, P. Pawluć, A. Ciesielski and P. Samorì, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 482–487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Hou, Q. Yang, H. Lu and Y. Li, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2016, 133, 43794 CrossRef .
S.-K. Kim, Y. K. Kim, H. Lee, S. B. Lee and H. S. Park, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 1094–1101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Park, S. H. Kwon, S. G. Lee, M. S. Choi, D. H. Suh, P. Nakhanivej, H. Lee and H. S. Park, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 724–732 CrossRef CAS .
D. Feng, T. Lei, M. gogotsiskaya, J. Park, Z. Huang, M. Lee, L. Shaw, S. Chen, A. Yakovenko, A. Kulkarni, J. Xiao, K. Fredrickson, J. Tok, X. Zou, Y. Cui and Z. Bao, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 30–36 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, A. Ciesielski, F. Richard, P. Chen, E. A. Prasetyanto, L. De Cola and P. Samorì, Small, 2016, 12, 1044–1052 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, J. Jiang, H. Li and X. S. Zhao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4009–4015 RSC .
M. Xue, F. Li, J. Zhu, H. Song, M. Zhang and T. Cao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1284–1290 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Guo, Y. Ma, X. Dong, J. Huang, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 11737–11741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dai, Y. Wang, X. Li, M. Cui, Y. Gao, H. Xu and X. Xu, Electrochim. Acta, 2022, 421, 140470 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, G. Wu, X. Liu, W. Li and M. Li, Nano Energy, 2017, 31, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ma, D. Kong, Y. Xu, X. Xie, Y. Tao, Z. Xiao, W. Lv, H. D. Jang, J. Huang and Q. H. Yang, Small, 2017, 13, 1701026 CrossRef PubMed .
J. T. Mefford, W. G. Hardin, S. Dai, K. P. Johnston and K. J. Stevenson, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 726–732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Augustyn, J. Come, M. A. Lowe, J. W. Kim, P.-L. Taberna, S. H. Tolbert, H. D. Abruña, P. Simon and B. Dunn, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 518–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Cook, H. S. Kim, T. C. Lin, C. H. Lai, B. Dunn and S. H. Tolbert, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601283 CrossRef .
D. Choi, G. E. Blomgren and P. N. Kumta, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1178 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kayali, A. VahidMohammadi, J. Orangi and M. Beidaghi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 25949–25954 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, Z. A. Hu, N. An, Y. Y. Yang, Z. M. Li and H. Y. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 22865–22872 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:
Right to left: Suman Yadav, Dhiraj S. Ingle, Kotagiri Venkata Rao, and Narendra Kurra	Suman Yadav is a graduate student in the Department of Chemistry, IIT Hyderabad, India. She did her master’s in chemistry at the National Institute of Technology, Jalandhar, India. Her research focuses on developing functional materials for multivalent metal-ion batteries. Dhiraj Siddhartha Ingle is a graduate student in the Department of Chemistry, IIT Hyderabad, India. He received his M. Sc. degree from Sant Gadge Baba Amravati University, India in 2018. His research interests are based on development of conjugated porous organic polymers for gas adsorption and separation applications. Dr Venkata Rao Kotagiri is working as an Assistant Professor at the Department of Chemistry, IIT Hyderabad, India. His group at IIT Hyderabad focuses on various aspects of supramolecular polymers of π-systems and porous organic polymers for carbon capture. Dr Narendra Kurra is an assistant professor in the Department of Chemistry at IIT Hyderabad, India. His research focuses on developing functional materials for electrochemical energy storage applications.

 	Fig. 1  Organic materials as emerging charge storage hosts for sustainable energy storage. (a) Earth abundant elements such as C, H, N, O, and S are the basic constituents which can form numerous organic compounds by the phenomenon of catenation. (b) Conventional molecular synthesis principles to synthesize redox active molecules including but not limited to thiophene, pyrrole, aniline, quinones, diimides, etc. (c) Representative redox active polymeric materials developed during the past few decades. (d) The futuristic design of all-organic based flexible and sustainable electrochemical energy storage devices.	 

 	Fig. 2  Historical evolution of synthesis of organic molecules into organic materials. Since the synthesis of the first organic molecule, urea, in the laboratory in 1828, a lot of advancements have led to the expansion of organic chemistry over the past two centuries. Supramolecular chemistry relies on the non-covalent interactions leading to assemblies with specific functionalities, mimicking processes associated with biological systems such as molecular recognition, transportation and reactivity. Supramolecular electronics has been the trending research area over the past decade (graphic is reproduced from ref. 42 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2013). Small molecule based organic compounds were employed as battery electrodes in the early 1960s. Emergence of organic pseudocapacitive materials has enabled the sustainable design of organic hybrid energy storage devices with simultaneous high rates and high capacities over the past decade.	 

 	Fig. 3  Comparison of specific capacity versus potential plots of (a) inorganic (this figure has been reproduced from ref. 51 with permission from Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2020)51 and (b) organic based pseudocapacitive electrode materials.	 

 	Fig. 4  Covalent organic frameworks (COFs) for pseudocapacitive charge storage. (a) Random orientation of a powdery form of a DAAQ–TFP COF current collector, showing limited charge storage capacity. An oriented thin film of DAAQ–TFP COF on a Au current collector giving rise to enhanced charge storage capacity. (This figure has been reproduced from ref. 73 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2015).73 (b) Cyclic voltammograms of powdered DAAQ–TFP in 1 M H2SO4 electrolyte at 50 mV s−1 scan rate show only the availability of 3% redox-active sites (this figure has been reproduced from ref. 73 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2015).73 (c) Thin film (180 nm) of DAAQ–TFP has 20% available redox active surface (this figure has been reproduced from ref. 73 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2015).73 (d) Schematic of electrochemical polymerization of PEDOT (EDOT incorporated in DAAQ–TFP COF film pores) (this figure has been reproduced from ref. 74 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2016).74 (e) Charge as a function of scan rate for DAAQ–TFP COF and DAAQ–TFP COF modified with PEDOT (this figure has been reproduced from ref. 74 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2016).74	 

 	Fig. 5  Polyaromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) for pseudocapacitive energy storage. (a) Perylene diimide–hexaazatrinaphthylene (PHATN) with ideal pore size 2.3 nm and angle of contortion ∼23° (this figure has been reproduced from ref. 93 with permission from Nature Material, copyright 2021).93 (b) CVs of PHATN at different scan rates (30–75 mV s−1), showing broad reduction and oxidation peaks which are due to sequential reduction of PDI and HATN monomers (this figure has been reproduced from ref. 93 with permission from Nature Material, copyright 2021).93 (c) Specific capacitance as a function of current density for various pseudocapacitive materials (this figure has been reproduced from ref. 93 with permission from Nature Material, copyright 2021).93 (d) CVs of a fluorinated-contorted hexabenzocoronene (F-cHBC) anode at scan rates from 0.1 mV s−1 to 10 mV s−1. The inset shows a log(ip) versus log(scan rate) plot, and kinetic parameter ‘b’ is estimated to be 0.87. (This figure has been reproduced from ref. 96 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2018).96 (e) Charge–discharge curves of OCH3-cHBC and CH3-cHBC at current density 1.0 A g−1 (this figure has been reproduced from ref. 97 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2022).97 (f) Oriented aminopyrine on oxidized few walled nanotubes (FWNTs) stores more charge compared to FWNT and glassy carbon (GC) platforms. (This figure has been reproduced from ref. 98 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, copyright 2015).98 (g) Specific capacity variation with the cycle number of polymerised pyrene derivatives; the initial increase in the capacity is due to additional time for the diffusion of active species into the electrode pores and hence ions can access more inside the electrode (this figure has been reproduced from ref. 98 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Limited, copyright 2015).98	 


1	PHATN	−1.2 V to −0.7 V	6 M KOH	689 F g−1	50000 cycles (92%)	
93

2	Quinone/PPy	−0.1 V to 0.5 V	0.5 M LiClO4	385 F g−1	10000 cycles (75%)	
87

3	Nanofiber/PEDOT	−0.2 V to 0.8 V	1 M H2SO4	180 F g−1	350000 cycles (90%)	
120

4	Polythiourea/GOx	0 V to 1 V	1 M H2SO4	400 F g−1	5000 cycles (72%)	
121

5	PPOT	−0.4 V to 0.6 V	1 M NaNO3	290 F g−1	1000 cycles (81%)	
122

6	Lignin/graphene	0.2 V to 0.8 V	0.1 M HClO4	432 F g−1	3000 cycles (96%)	
123

7	TAT-CMP-1	−1.0 V to 0.0 V	1 M Na2SO4	141 F g−1	10000 cycles (95%)	
91

TAT-CMP-2	183 F g−1
8	P-aCN	0.0 V to 2.0 V	1 M NaClO4	265 F g−1	100000 cycles (96%)	
124

9	HAB-Ni MOF	−0.75 V to −0.25 V	1 M KOH	420 F g−1	12000 cycles (90%)	
125

HAB-Cu MOF	−0.55 V to −0.1 V	215 F g−1
10	TiO2(B)	1 V to 3 V	1 M LiPF6	414 F g−1	1000 cycles (100%)	
131

11	RuO2·xH2O	1 V	1 M H2SO4	1485 F cm−3	5000 cycles (82%)	
132

12	LaMnO2.91	1.27 V	1 M KOH	567 F g−1	—	
133

13	T-Nb2O5	1.2 V to 3 V	1 M LiClO4	280 F g−1	1000 cycles (100%)	
134

14	MoS2	1 V to 3 V	1 M LiPF6	324 F g−1	3000 cycles (80%)	
135

15	VN	1.2 V	1 M KOH	300 F g−1	10000 cycles (95%)	
136

16	Ti3C2Tx	0.9 V	3 M H2SO4	440 F g−1	10000 cycles (98%)	
137

17	MnO2	0.9 V	1 M Na2SO4	200 F g−1	10000 cycles (100%)	
138


 	Fig. 6  Organic based asymmetric supercapacitors. (a–c) Schematics of asymmetric devices – n-type organic//AC, p-type organic//AC and n-type organic//p-type organic electrode materials. (d) CVs of an asymmetric device having PHATN as the negative electrode and activated carbon as the positive electrode at different scan rates in 6 M KOH electrolyte with a cell voltage of 1.3 V (this figure has been reproduced from ref. 93 with permission from Nature Material, copyright 2021).93 (e) Charge–discharge curves of the cell at different C-rates (this figure has been reproduced from ref. 93 with permission from Nature Materials, copyright 2021).93 (f) Charge–discharge profiles of a Li-ion hybrid capacitor employing pseudocapacitive methoxy-group-coordinated contorted hexabenzocoronene (OCH3-cHBC) as an anode and activated carbon as an adsorption electrode at different current densities. (This figure has been reproduced from ref. 97 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2022).97 (g) Ragone plot comparing energy-power densities of various Li-ion capacitors. (This figure has been reproduced from ref. 97 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2022).97	 
1/Ctotal = 1/C− + 1/C+	(1)
C+ < C−	(2)
Ctotal ∼ C+	(3)

 	Fig. 7  All-organic based hybrid devices. (a) Schematic of an asymmetric supercapacitor fabricated by employing PEDOT and PANI conducting polymers as negative and positive electrodes, respectively (this figure has been reproduced from ref. 107 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015).107 (b) Cyclic voltammograms of PEDOT and PANI conducting polymers at a scan rate of 80 mV s−1 (this figure has been reproduced from ref. 107 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015).107 (c) CVs of a solid state asymmetric device at different scan rates in the voltage window of 0 to 1.6 V (this figure has been reproduced from ref. 107 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015).107 (d) Scheme of charge transfer in all organic sodium hybrid capacitors (this figure has been reproduced from ref. 100 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017)100 (e) Ragone plot showing the comparison of performance metrics of all-organic NIHC with those of supercapacitors and rechargeable batteries (this figure has been reproduced from ref. 100 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017).100 (f) All-organic potassium ion hybrid capacitors (this figure has been reproduced from ref. 108 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2022)108 and (g) Ragone plot showing comparison of performance metrics of all organic KIHC with those of other hybrid metal-ion capacitors (this figure has been reproduced from ref. 108 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2022).108	 


1	Li4Ti5O12 (LTO)	AC	1 M LiBF4	5000 cycle (90%)	18	—	
105

2	PHATN	AC	6 M KOH	10000 cycles (100%)	19	93	
93

3	OCH3-cHBC	AC	1.3 M LiPF6	13000 cycles (80%)	200	130	
97

4	PEDOT	PANI	PVA/H2SO4	10000 cycles (85%)	9 mW h cm−3	3 W cm−3	
107

5	Poly(DAAQ)	Poly(DAAQ)	1 M TEAClO4	—	25	10200	
110

6	AQ	DHB	1 M H2SO4	—	10	200	
107

7	DCAQ	TCHQ	0.5 M H2SO4	10000 cycles (100%)	20	—	
111

8	PTCDA	PANI	NaClO4	5000 cycles (89%)	97	7000	
100

9	K2TP	PANI	KPF6	10000 cycles (80%)	153	7000	
108

10	rGO/RuO2	rGO/PANI	2 M H2SO4	2500 cycle (70%)	7	50000	
127


 	Fig. 8  Tuning of redox potential of organic materials through a supramolecular approach. Non-planar organic building blocks (single or multicomponent) can form a variety of assemblies such as one-dimensional, two-dimensional and three-dimensional, which can be regulated via non-covalent interactions. Prototypes of organic based hybrid energy storage devices have been demonstrated. Leveraging scalable synthesis and processing with added smart functionalities, organic materials have the potential for development of sustainable energy storage devices. The critical challenges and solutions for the advancement of organic hybrid energy storage for a sustainable future are highlighted.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
