Standalone anion- and co-doped titanium dioxide nanotubes for photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical solar-to-fuel conversion   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6NR05742J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6NR05742J
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 17496-17505Standalone anion- and co-doped titanium dioxide nanotubes for photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical solar-to-fuel conversion†

        
          
            Yuchen 
            Ding
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Prashant 
            Nagpal
          
        
      *bcd
aChemistry and Biochemistry, University of Colorado Boulder, USA
bChemical and Biochemical Engineering, University of Colorado Boulder, USA. E-mail: pnagpal@colorado.edu
cMaterials Science and Engineering, University of Colorado Boulder, USA
dRenewable and Sustainable Energy Institute (RASEI), University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO 80303, USA
Received 
      20th July 2016
    , Accepted 16th September 2016First published on 16th September 2016AbstractSeveral strategies are currently being investigated for conversion of incident sunlight into renewable sources of energy, and photocatalytic or photoelectrochemical production of solar fuels can provide an important alternative. Titanium dioxide (TiO2) has been heavily investigated as a material of choice due to its excellent optoelectronic properties and stability, and anion-doping proposed as a pathway to improve light absorption as well as improving the efficiency of oxygen production. While several studies have used morphological tuning, elemental doping, and surface engineering in TiO2 to extend its absorption, there is a need to optimize simultaneously charge transport and improve interfacial chemical reaction kinetics. Here we show anion-doped (nitrogen, carbon) standalone TiO2 nanotube membranes that absorb visible light for the water-splitting reaction, using both wireless (photocatalysis) and wired (photoelectrochemical) solar-to-fuel conversion (STFC) cells. Using simulated solar radiation, we show generation of hydrogen as a solar fuel using visible light photocatalysis. Furthermore, using a model we elucidate detailed photophysics and photoelectrochemical properties of these nanotubes, and explain the kinetics of photogenerated charge carriers following light absorption. We show that while visible light induces a superlinear photoresponse for catalytic reduction and may benefit from higher incident light intensity, ultraviolet light shows a linear photoresponse and saturation with higher light flux due to trapping of photogenerated charges (mainly electrons). These results can have important implications for design of other metal–oxide membranes for solar fuel generation, and appropriate design of dopants and induced energy levels in these photocatalysts.
1. Introduction
The Sun is the primary source of energy on earth, and generation of required chemical fuels from sunlight and abundantly available chemical feedstocks can provide a sustainable source of renewable energy. Several strategies are currently being investigated for generating fuels from the Sun, including photocatalysis and photoelectrochemical reduction of water and carbon dioxide. Nanostructured titanium dioxide (TiO2) has generated a lot of interest for these solar-to-fuel conversion (STFC) applications due to its unique optical and electronic properties, chemical stability, and large surface area.1–13 Hollow nanotubes provide additional advantages over TiO2 nanoparticles in STFC performance8–10 due to the realization of photon capture and charge transport in orthogonal directions, which simultaneously improve light absorption and charge separation. However, large bandgap (∼3.2 eV), defects or surface states, poor water oxidation kinetics (high oxygen evolution overpotential) are important factors limiting the total STFC efficiency. Though efforts like morphology tuning, elemental doping and surface modification have been proposed to improve their efficiency,9–13 a lack of insight into the detailed mechanism and kinetics of photogenerated charge carriers following light absorption has impeded further progress. Here, we describe the fabrication of undoped, anion-doped (nitrogen (N), carbon (C)) and co-doped (nitrogen, copper) standalone TiO2 nanotube membranes, and their detailed optical, electronic, voltammetry and impedance study to understand the effect of elemental doping on light absorption, charge transport and charge transfer processes. We also provide a detailed model to describe the photodynamics of charge carriers generated following light absorption, and propose ways to better utilize these membranes for efficient STFC. Using both wireless (photocatalytic hydrogen evolution and methylene blue degradation measurements) and wired (photoelectrochemical cell) devices, we evaluated the STFC efficiency of these nanotubes in terms of different photochemical and photophysical effects. These results can help us understand the solar to fuel conversion process in these nanotubes and pave the way for designing optimal solar to fuel conversion devices.
2. Experimental
2.1 TiO2 nanotubes (NTs) growth
Electrochemical anodization of titanium metal was used for TiO2 nanotube growth.3,9,12,14 A typical two-electrode system with 99.6% titanium sheet (1′′ × 0.5′′) and platinum coated electrodes were used as anode and cathode, respectively. Ethylene glycol (EG) containing 1 wt% NH4F (etchant) and 5 wt% water was used as electrolyte. The nanotubes were grown for 3 hours with an applied 30 V DC voltage. Anion doping was conducted simultaneously with the nanotube growth by adding 5 wt% hexamethylenetetramine and 5% L-ascorbic acid into the electrolyte as nitrogen and carbon precursors, respectively. For cation doping, a polarity switch (titanium sheet as cathode) was used to facilitate the driving of cation ions into nanotubes. 1% cation ion (Nb5+ and Cu2+) was used at a lower voltage (∼15 V), and the dopants were incorporated for 30 seconds with every 30 min nanotube growth. Co-doped (cation–anion) samples were made by combining cation and anion doping cycles. All samples were annealed in air at 500 °C for 2 hours (with a ramping rate of 4 °C min−1).
2.2 Stand-alone TiO2 nanotube membrane
Annealed TiO2 nanotubes were delaminated from the titanium foil using the same setup for nanotube growth, with +60 V DC bias applied to the nanotubes. Typically, the delamination took 20 to 30 minutes. The delaminated thin film was carefully washed with ethanol to remove the remaining electrolyte.
2.3 Ultraviolet-visible (UV-VIS) spectroscopy
UV-VIS spectra were measured using VWR UV-1600PC spectrophotometer. The samples were sandwiched between two clean glass slides for measurements.
2.4 Scanning electron emission images
Field Emission SEM (JEOL JSM-7401F) was used to characterize the morphology and structure of the nanotubes. Nanotubes on the Ti metal sheet were sputtered with gold before the imaging. A built-in Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectrometry (EDS) setup was used for elemental analysis (with Noran Software).
2.5 Electrochemical characterization
Electrochemical properties of these electrodes were measured using a Bio-logic SP-200 potentiostat/galvanostat. The potentiodynamic characteristics (dark and light linear sweep voltammetry, LSV) of the Ti/TiO2 NTs electrode were measured in 0.5 M (pH = 6.5) Na2SO4 solution with a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. A three-electrode configuration with platinum wire as counter electrode, and Ag/AgCl (filled with 1 M KCl solution) electrode as reference electrode was used. Photodynamic evaluation was carried out under 1 Sun illumination using a 300 W xenon lamp (adjusted to 100 mW cm−2 light intensity, with an AM 1.5 filter). The chronoamperometry (CA) technique was used to evaluate the generation of photocurrent, under +0.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl reference.
Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) was used to evaluate the kinetic properties of these photocatalysts under AC polarization. Using the same conditions for LSV measurement, the experiments were conducted in a frequency range from 100 kHz to 100 mHz, with an amplitude of 10 mV AC polarization on a +0.2 V vs. reference DC bias, with a 10 min delay to stabilize the systems. Bode plots and Nyquist plots were extracted from the measurements and fitted to a suggested equivalent circuit using the Z-fit function in EC-Lab software (Bio-logic).
A Mott–Schottky plot (1/C2–E) was extracted from the stair-potentio-electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (SPEIS) data. This experiment was done in the same three-electrode configuration cell setup as described above, under a constant frequency of 1 kHz and DC potential polarization.
Open-circuit potential (OCP) decay/relaxation was measured using the same three-electrode setup to evaluate the charge transfer characteristics of the nanotube–electrolyte surface. The measurements were first taken in the dark for at least 25 min (to stabilize the OCP), and then under UV irradiation, until the change of OCP was small (>35 min). The UV irradiation was then turned off and the relaxation measurements were taken for about 2 hours.
2.6 Incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) measurement
The IPCE was measured using the same three-electrode configuration as mentioned above. Monochromatic light with less than 10 nm FWHM was obtained using a monochromator (Princeton Instruments, Model: FA2448) with a 150 W halogen lamp. Light intensity was measured using a calibrated power meter (Newport, Model: 1918). Current density in the dark and the light was recorded with the chronoamperometry technique under 0.5 V bias (vs. reference). The IPCE was calculated using the following formula:15  where jph is the photocurrent density, and Pmono and λ are the intensity and the wavelength of the monochromatic light, respectively.
2.7 Photocatalytic methylene blue degradation test
Photocatalytic degradation of methylene blue (MB) was carried out in a capped quartz cuvette containing 3 ml 0.05 mM (150 nmol) methylene blue solution and a wireless Ti/TiO2 electrode, with an exposed surface area of about 1 cm2. The whole system was irradiated with 365 nm monochromatic light (5.1 mW cm−2) using a 4 W UV lamp. The absorption of the solution was taken at 0, 10, 40, 80 and 120 min using a calibrated UV spectrometer; the decrease of absorption and the fading of the blue color indicates the degradation of the methylene blue dye. The decrease of the absorption peak around 670 nm was used to calculate the kinetic constant of the reaction and the quantum yield of photocarrier generation.
The degradation exhibits clear first-order reaction character, the (apparent) reaction rate constant (k) was extracted from the slope of the ln(Absorbance)–t plot.
The quantum yield (QE) can be calculated by the ratio of photon-induced charge carriers (here holes) to the number of incident photons,16      where I is the illumination intensity of the UV light, S is the sample irradiation area, the factor 22 is the stoichiometric number for the MB degradation reaction, where one MB dye molecule consumes 22 holes for complete degradation.
2.8 Current sensing AFM (CSAFM) measurements
CSAFM measurements were done using a modified Molecular Imaging PicoSPM II setup. The CSAFM tips used were coated in-house, using a thermal evaporator, with 5 nm of 99.99% Cr and 15 nm of 99.99% Au (Kurt J. Lesker). The contact mode with deflection was set to about −2 V for imaging. I–V curves were taken with a varying bias ranging from −5 to 5 V applied to the samples. TiO2 nanotubes were scratched from the titanium substrate and dispersed in ethanol. A thin layer of TiO2 nanotubes was formed on ITO coated glass by drop casting. The sample was placed on a transparent ITO substrate and connected using a wire attached to the ITO using conductive silver paste.
From the I–V and ln(I)–V characteristics, we obtained the carrier density and mobility of these nanotubes. From the equations below, the carrier density was extracted from the slope of the ln(I)–V curve in the intermediate biased region. Together with the conductivity taken from the slope of the I–V curve, we obtain the carrier mobility of the TiO2 nanotubes.12,14,17    μ = σ/newhere n is the carrier density, m* = m0 and ε = 31ε0 are the effective mass of an electron and the dielectric constant for TiO2 nanotubes, respectively.12R and RITO are the measured resistance and the resistance of the ITO layer, respectively, with their difference giving the resistance of the nanotubes. D is the contact diameter of the probe.
2.9 STM and STS measurements
Scanning Tunneling Microscope images were obtained using a customized Molecular Imaging PicoScan 2500 setup with PicoSPM II controller and an STM nosecone (N9533A series, Agilent Technologies). Chemically etched Pt–Ir tips (90:10) (Agilent Technologies) were used for imaging and taking spectroscopy in room temperature and atmospheric conditions. Images were taken with pre-amp sensitivity set to 1 nA V−1. Tunneling spectroscopy was obtained with a varied bias range from −5 to 5 V applied to the tip with at a scan rate of 1 V s−1. For STM measurements, the pre-amp sensitivity was set to 1 nA V−1. The samples were prepared using the same procedure as the CSAFM measurements.
2.10 Photocatalytic hydrogen evolution test
Around 20 mg nanotubes were scratched from the metal sheet. A photochemical approach was used to deposit platinum nanoparticles on the TiO2 nanotubes. The nanotube powder was dispersed in 5 ml ethanol under sonication and the system was flushed with nitrogen for 30 min. A 0.2 ml chloroplanitic acid–ethanol solution (with 1 mg ml−1 platinum) was injected and irradiated with UV light using a 4 W UV lamp. After 2 hours, the products were centrifuged and washed with ethanol at least twice. Photocatalytic hydrogen evolution tests were conducted in a septum-sealed reactor with 60 ml volume. The platinum-deposited nanotubes were dispersed in a 10 ml 1:1 (vol) methanol–water mixture and added to the reactor. The whole system was purged with argon gas for 15 min before irradiating with AM 1.5 solar light (1 sun). The gas from the reactor was monitored with calibrated gas chromatography (Agilent GB1530, TCD detector, argon carrier gas, molecular sieves 5A packed column) by using a syringe (0.1 ml) injection method.
3. Results and discussion
Titanium dioxide nanotubes were fabricated using the electrochemical anodization technique (Fig. 1a and c).8,9,12,14
 Fig. 1  (a) Undoped and doped TiO2 nanotube thin films delaminated from the titanium metal substrates, showing transparent (Undoped), translucent (N-doped) and opaque (Cu, N-codoped and C-doped) characteristics. (b) Photocatalytic water splitting schematics showing the water, solar energy in, fuels out configuration using TiO2 nanotube stand-alone membrane. (c) Field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) image of undoped TiO2 nanotubes, showing a diameter of 80 nm and wall thickness of 5 nm. (d) Electron disperse spectroscopy (EDS) showing the atomic percentage of the carbon-doped TiO2 nanotubes. (e) Atomic percentage of elements detected by EDS for doped TiO2 nanotubes. (f) Ultraviolet-visible (UV-VIS) spectrum of stand-alone undoped/doped TiO2 nanotube thin films. (g) Current-sensing atomic force microscopy (CSAFM) measurements on undoped TiO2 nanotubes, showing I–V and ln(I)–V behavior with calculated carrier density (n) and mobility (μ). 
The applied voltage, solvent type, contents of water and etchant, growing time are crucial parameters controlling the diameter, length, wall thickness, and density of these nanotubes. This method has also been used to make other nanotubular metal–oxide nanostructures.9 We recently reported a modified electrochemical cell for growing doped TiO2 nanotubes by combining electrochemical anodization with an electrophoretic effect, which allows incorporation of the dopant simultaneously with nanotube growth.12 Doping of precursors in the electrolyte is driven by the electric field and incorporated in the pores of the nanotubes, followed by heat treatment at high temperature to obtain elemental doping. Anion-doping is achieved by precursor addition, and cation-doping or co-doping utilizes a growing and doping method where polarity switching using alternate current is utilized to drive the positively charged cations into the nanotubes. Doping levels are controlled by the precursor amount in the electrolyte, varying the alternating current waveform and a number of other modifications (Fig. 1c–e). Dopants create states in the electronic bandgap of TiO2 nanotubes, which help shift their absorption to higher wavelengths and improve absorption of incident sunlight.6,12,13 As shown in delaminated standalone TiO2 nanotube thin films (Fig. 1a), we were able to incorporate different dopants (with controllable amount) to tune the thin film absorption from transparent (Undoped) to translucent (N-doped) or opaque (Cu, N-doped and C-doped) membranes. In a typical electrochemical cell, a titanium metal sheet and platinated metal mesh were used as the anode and cathode. An ethylene glycol (EG) electrolyte with 1 wt% NH4F (etchant) and 5 wt% water was used to ensure relatively longer nanotube growth. To make doped nanotubes, hexamethylenetetramine and L-ascorbic acid were added as nitrogen and carbon precursors, respectively. After 3 hours growth under an applied 30 V DC voltage, the nanotubes were carefully washed and annealed to improve their crystallinity and decompose the precursors. TiO2 nanotubes with ∼3 μm length, 80 nm diameter and 5 nm wall thickness (Fig. 1c and S1†) were grown using the described parameters. These nanotubes show anatase phases, verified using the X-ray diffraction peaks, and the morphology and phases do not change with doping (Fig. S2†).12,14 Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) reveals about 6% and 2% for nitrogen and carbon dopants (Fig. 1d and e) in the two samples, each with 5 wt% precursors. The relatively low doping-level for the carbon-doped sample is mainly due to the mismatch of atomic radius18 between carbon and oxygen (C: 77 pm, O: 73 pm) and the partial oxidation of carbon to form CO2 in the ambient atmosphere. The similar atomic radius (N: 74 pm) between nitrogen and oxygen ensures a higher dopant corporation in nitrogen-doped nanotubes.
To facilitate rational design of high-performance photocatalysts for STFC and provide better insights into the STFC process in these doped nanotube membranes, we decoupled the entire STFC process into three main events:6,15 photon absorption by the semiconductor photocatalysts; transport of light-induced charge carriers to the photocatalyst surface; and the injection of surface carriers to the molecules (semiconductor–electrolyte interfacial charge transfer).ηSTFC = ηabs × ηtransport × ηtransfer
Here, we focused on anion-doped nanotubes, since the incorporation of copper revealed a significant drop of STFC efficiency compared to undoped nanotubes, also seen in the decrease of photocurrent generation and the quantum yield of methylene blue degradation (Fig. S3†). We utilized a series of optical, electrical, and electrochemical characterization techniques to decouple the effects of doping on these three processes. Optical absorption determines the number or fraction of photons in the incident sunlight that can be absorbed and utilized for STFC by these nanotubes. The absorption efficiency is reflected in the bandgap and absorption coefficient of these materials. TiO2 is a wide-bandgap semiconductor with a bandgap around 3.2 eV (anatase) or 3.0 eV (rutile),9 which limits its utilization of solar spectrum only in the ultra-violet range (∼4%). Low absorption coefficient due to its indirect band character results in inefficient photon capture, which is mitigated by using longer nanotubes. Dopants create internal (donor or acceptor) states inside the band gap of TiO2,7,13,19 resulting in band-edge shrinking and enhanced light absorption in these doped nanotubes. As shown in the ultraviolet-visible (UV-VIS) spectra (Fig. 1f), the bandgap of the nanotubes change from 3.10 eV to 2.93 and 2.49 eV for nitrogen and carbon-doped samples (Table 1, row 2), respectively. The electronic bandgap extracted from scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS) also revealed (Fig. S4†) a decrease of energy bandgap for doped nanotubes (Table 1, row 3). A slightly higher electronic bandgap value demonstrates the existence of exciton-like traps,20 most likely arising from oxygen vacancies observed in these nanotubes,14 which might be the reason for the relatively low carrier mobility in these nanotubes. Furthermore, band edge tilting and interband peaks shown in the density of states (DOS) plot for doped nanotubes are further proof of the presence of dopant states inside the nominal TiO2 bandgap. To evaluate the participation of these states in the STFC processes, we conducted further photoelectrochemical and photophysical studies.
Table 1 Parameters obtained from optoelectronic characterizations




Sample
Method
Undoped
N-Doped
C-Doped





E
op (eV)
UV-VIS
3.10
2.93
2.49



E
el (eV)
STS
3.23
3.04
2.79



n (cm−3)
CSAFM
2.08 × 1018
4.41 × 1018
3.32 × 1018



μ (cm2 V−1 s−1)
CSAFM
0.135
0.116
0.018




The photon-induced electron–hole pairs need to be transported (though electric field-assisted drift or chemical potential-assisted diffusion) to the surface of the nanotubes, and utilized for the formation of chemical fuels. During this process, these free photogenerated charge carriers can be trapped by defect states, or even recombine. Charge carrier density and charge mobility are key parameters to evaluate the charge transport efficiency in these nanotubes. We used current sensing atomic force microscopy (CSAFM) (Fig. 1g and S5†) to study the transport of photogenerated and electrically injected charges, through single nanotubes.12 This technique provided us with insights into individual nanotube properties beyond the conventional two- or four-probe electronic characterization, since it reveals potential variation in intrinsic material characteristics, instead of ensemble device performance. Conductivity and carrier density derived from the slope of I–V and ln(I)–V relation in the intermediate-biased region were used to obtain the carrier mobility of these nanotubes.17 The doped nanotubes showed improved conductivity due to the increase in their carrier density (Table 1, row 4), which is contributed by the release of free carriers from the dopant levels. However, a small decrease of carrier mobility (Table 1, row 5) was observed in the doped nanotubes, which can be caused by carrier trapping in the interband/surface states or the smaller mobility of holes (compared with electrons) generated by the anion dopants.
Electrochemical measurements were used to evaluate the performance of these nanotube photoanodes (wired devices) in the dark and under irradiation.15,21,22 The combination of the voltammetry and impedance technique is an effective tool to study the charge transport and transfer process in the nanotube and the nanotube–electrolyte interface, providing detailed information to access solar energy conversion efficiency using these photocatalysts. Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) in a three-electrode (3-e) configuration (Fig. 2a) was used to characterize the current–voltage behavior under both dark and 1 sun (AM 1.5) conditions.
 Fig. 2  (a) Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) measurement on undoped/doped TiO2 nanotubes in a three-electrode configuration, showing their current–voltage (J–V) behavior in the dark (D) and AM 1.5 (1 SUN) irradiation (L). (b) Three-electrode chronoamperometry (CA) with 0.5 V bias vs. Ag/AgCl reference, showing both the dark and light current–time (J–t) behavior of undoped/doped TiO2 nanotubes. (c) Incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) measurement in a three-electrode configuration, with 0.5 V bias vs. Ag/AgCl. 
A polarization current (dark) was detected only with an applied potential of over 2.2 V. Light irradiation results in the onset of photocurrent with an applied voltage above the flat band, driving electrons to the counter electrode and holes to the TiO2 nanotube surface, showing typical photoanode behavior. Photocurrent increases with applied voltage and saturates due to full extraction of the available photocarriers. The stable photocurrent measured from chronoamperometry (CA) under same bias (0.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl) (Fig. 2b) indicates the relative intensity of photocurrent generation (Table 2, row 2), N-doped > C-doped > Undoped TiO2 nanotubes, which directly reflects the total efficiency for their application as photoanodes for STFC. A constant photocurrent indicates the stability of these nanotube electrodes during the measurement.
Table 2 Parameters obtained from a series of electrochemical characterizations




 
Method
Undoped
N-Doped
C-Doped





J
ph (mA cm−2)
CA
0.045
0.166
0.069



E
pec (eV)
IPCE
3.05
2.92
2.70



k
ct (s−1)
OCP decay
1.23 × 10−3
2.34 × 10−3
1.74 × 10−3



τ
eff (ms)
PEIS
4.08
0.622
0.879



R
ct (kΩ cm2)
PEIS
48.3
6.01
7.95



C
total (μF cm−2)
PEIS
14.7
33.3
142



n (cm−3)
Mott–Schottky
3.28 × 1018
8.65 × 1018
4.63 × 1018




To study the photoresponse of these nanotubes with photon energy, we performed incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) measurement15 under monochromatic light irradiation (Fig. 2c). IPCE under same bias (0.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl) reflects the relative efficiency of these nanotube photoanodes. From the onset of IPCE, we clearly observed the band edge shrinking in doped samples, especially for the carbon-doped sample. The optical bandgap and electrochemical bandgap (Table 2, row 3) match for Undoped and nitrogen-doped nanotubes, with a 0.2 eV difference in the carbon-doped photoanode. Interestingly, higher energy photons do not increase the IPCE significantly in carbon-doped nanotubes, as seen in Undoped and nitrogen-doped nanotubes. Deep traps created by carbon dopants could explain both the mismatch of bandgap and the plateau IPCE character in carbon-doped samples.
To quantify the charge transfer efficiency, we compared the charge injection rate constant through open-circuit potential (OCP) decay measurements23 (Fig. 3a).
 Fig. 3  (a) Decay of open circuit potential (OCP) with the blocking of UV irradiation, with the calculated charge transfer rate constant. (b) Bode plot of undoped/doped TiO2 nanotubes, showing the frequency-dependent phase (Arg(Z)) of complex impedance in dark conditions, with a calculated charge transfer effective lifetime. (c) Equivalent circuit used to fit the experimental data taken from n-type semiconductor–electrolyte system. (d) Nyquist plot with equivalent circuit fitting of undoped/doped TiO2 nanotubes, showing the relation between the real and imaginary part of the complex impedance in dark conditions, with extracted charge transfer resistance and trap capacitance. (e) Mott–Schottky plot at 1 kHz. 
Under ultraviolet (UV) radiation, the photon-induced holes transport to the nanotube surface and the final equilibrium is achieved when the rate of charge accumulation equals the rate of surface recombination and charge injection. The negative shift of OCP (Fig. S6†) indicates a typical n-type semiconductor character upon irradiation. The irradiation is then blocked, leading to a decay of surface charges, as shown in the exponential decay character of OCP:VOCP = Vdark + ΔVOCP = Vdark + Vph = A − Bexp(−kctt)where A, B are constants (V) and kct is the charge transfer rate constant (s−1).
The magnitude of the charge transfer rate constant (Table 2, row 4), reveals the relative ease of charge transfer of surface-accumulated holes to water molecules. A significant increase of charge transfer rate constant was observed with anion doping, especially in nitrogen doped samples. This can be explained by the decrease of water oxidation activation energy due to the dopant on the surface.
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) is an important tool to study the behavior of charge carriers under AC perturbation,23–29 which allows us to understand the charge transport behavior in the bulk nanotubes and the charge transfer process in the nanotube–electrolyte interface. The simplification of a complex electronic process to lumped circuit elements (resistors or capacitors) enables us to determine charge transport and transfer efficiency (ηtransport, ηtransfer) with an equivalent circuit fitting.30–32 Bode plots (a phase plot) and Nyquist plots (the relation between the real part and imaginary part of complex impedance) were used in our EIS investigations. The minimum of frequency-dependent phase (Fig. 3b) was related to the ease of charge transfer process by:26,29  where τeff(ms) was the effective time that the surface holes were quenched by the water. A significant decrease of the effective time (Table 2, row 5) in doped nanotubes demonstrated that dopants facilitate the injection of surface holes, corresponding to the charge transfer rate constant obtained from OCP decay tests.
An equivalent circuit (Fig. 3c) for a typical n-type semiconductor–electrolyte system was used to fit the impedance data23 (Fig. 3d). This equivalent circuit contains the solution resistance (Rs), capacitance of double layer (Cdl), charge transfer resistance (Rct), space charge capacitance and resistance (Csc and Rsc), and the capacitance and resistance (C1–C3, R1–R3) contributed from traps. Here, we focused on the charge transfer resistance (Rct) and the trap capacitance (Ctrap = C1 + C2 + C3) to evaluate the dopant effect24 in surface charge transfer and trapping, respectively. A significant decrease of the charge transfer resistance (Table 2, row 6) was observed with anion doping, especially for nitrogen-doped samples. These values (Undoped ≫ C-doped > N-doped) follow the trend of increasing charge transfer rate constant in OCP decay measurements or decreasing the effective time extracted from the frequency-dependent phase, showing effective promotion of hole injection in doped TiO2 nanotubes. As for charge trapping, only a small increase of trap capacitance was observed for the nitrogen-doped sample (Table 2, row 7), indicating a slight deterioration of its charge transport performance. However, a notable increase of the trapping effect was seen in carbon-doped nanotubes, which is due to the carbon as deep dopant. Compared to nitrogen dopant, this poor charge transport property can significantly lower its STFC efficiency, though it has a much larger photon capture ability (Fig. 4). These results also correlate with the decrease of mobility in doped nanotubes, measured from CSAFM.
 Fig. 4  A three dimensional plot (with projection) showing the relative efficiency of undoped/doped TiO2 nanotubes in photoelectrochemical solar energy conversion, in aspects of absorption, charge transport and transfer, using the bandgap, charge mobility and charge lifetime as parameters, respectively. Arrows point to the desired design of high efficiency. 
Mott–Schottky curve (Fig. 3e) exhibits the DC potential-dependent capacitance behavior of these nanotubes. Multiple linear regions with varied slopes indicate different internal levels inside the bandgap. Carrier density (Nd) and flat band potential (Efb) can be obtained from the slope and x-intercept of Mott–Schottky curve, respectively, based on the Mott–Schottky equation for n-type semiconductors:15,21  where ε = 31ε0 is the dielectric constant12,33 of a TiO2 nanotube. An increase of charge carrier density (Table 2, row 8), following the same trend of N-doped > C-doped > Undoped measured from CS-AFM was observed in these doped nanotubes (Fig. 4).
These changes, however, were not significant compared to the initial high carrier density in undoped TiO2 nanotubes, caused by high density of oxygen vacancies.14 This also explained a very small shift of the flat band position.
To characterize the interplay of all these photophysical processes, we used a model (Fig. 5a) to describe the photogeneration, charge recombination, trapping effect, and charge injection in these TiO2 nanotubes.7 The photogenerated electron–hole pairs can be quenched through conduction band–valence band recombination, electron trap-assisted recombination, conduction band-dopant state recombination, or injection into water molecules. These charge carriers are generated directly from conduction band–valence band, and dopant state-conduction band excitation, or relax from the valence band to these dopant states for anion doping. In a steady state, using the charge balance and charge neutrality relation, we can derive the following equations:      n + nt = p + pdR = r × p + rd × pdwhere n is electron density in the conduction band, p and pd is the hole density in the valence band and dopant states; nt and N are trapped electrons and the total number of trap states available; rt and rdt are the trapping and detrapping rate between the conduction band and electron trap states; α and γ are the rate constants for the conduction band–valence band and conduction band-dopant state recombination; β and δ are the rate constants for trap-assisted recombination for the valence band and dopant state; gb and gd are the photogeneration rates for the conduction band–valence band (UV excitation) and conduction band-dopant state (visible excitation); R is the photocatalysis rate; and r and r′ are the corresponding rate constant for hole and electron injection. The observed photocurrent is linearly proportional to the rate of photocatalysis (R). For the ultraviolet STFC process, g = gb and gd = 0. Since rdp is smaller than the rest of the processes, pd ≈ 0. For visible light photoexcitation, g = gd and p = 0.
 Fig. 5  (a) A simple model used to describe the photophysical processes, including photogeneration, charge recombination, trapping, and injection in TiO2 nanotubes. (b) Intensity-dependent photocurrent density generation in nitrogen-doped and (c) carbon-doped TiO2 nanotubes at varied wavelength. (d) Log–log plot of the light intensity-dependent photocurrent of undoped/doped TiO2 nanotubes measured at band edge excitation. (e) Log–log plot of the light intensity-dependent photocurrent of N-doped TiO2 nanotubes excited with different energy photons. 
From the above equations, we derived a relationship between the rate of photocatalysis and the rate of photogeneration. For visible light STFC, we derived:g = γpd(pd − nt) + δpdnt + r × pd  
We identified two major regimes for doped TiO2 STFC rates: Unimolecular recombination (mainly for ultraviolet photoexcitation), where γ, α ≪ β, δ and pd, p ≫ nt resulting in g ∝ p, with a pd linear slope R ∝ g; and Trapping-dominant recombination for visible light STFC, where N is large, therefore nt ∝ pd−x (using the second equation) and g ∝ pd(1−x), where x is between 0 and 1. This results in a superlinear slope R ∝ g1/(1−x), which depends on the trapping rate and recombination rate.
Bimolecular recombination, where γ ≫ δ or α ≫ β; and n, p, pd ≫ nt can result in square root dependence between the STFC rate with incident light intensity R ∝ g0.5. However, it is not observed in most STFC processes with TiO2 due to the large recombination rate between trapped electrons and holes (β, δ), and the strong density of electron traps (oxygen vacancies) present in these metal–oxide nanostructures.
To test the relationship between the photocurrent generation and the input photon flux, intensity-dependent photocurrent measurements were taken, using the same setup as for IPCE measurement. We observed an interesting trend in both nitrogen and carbon-doped TiO2 nanotubes (Fig. 5b and c). With the increase of photon energy, the intensity-dependent photocurrent showed a transition from superlinear to linear (Fig. 5d), pointing to a change in mechanism from the trap-dominant recombination, to unimolecular recombination between trapped electrons (a large number of trapped electrons due to excitation to higher energy electron states and lower activation energy for electron trapping) and photogenerated holes in the valence band. To compare the trapping effects in different nanotubes for bandedge excitation, we tested the STFC vs. photon fluence relationship (Fig. 5e) for these nanotubes. A slope of Undoped < N-doped < C-doped reflects the increasing trend of trapping effect in these samples, which matches well with the EIS and CSAFM measurements.
Apart from photoelectrochemical assessment using undoped/doped TiO2 nanotube photoanodes, the photocatalytic methylene blue (MB) degradation technique16,34 was used to evaluate these nanotubes as stand-alone photocatalysts. This measurement was based on the oxidation of methylene blue by the photogenerated holes, which have been widely used for photodegradation of organic waste in water purification. From the absorption decrease, the stoichiometry relation between MB and the holes, and the flux of photons, the quantum yield of the photocatalysts was estimated. This process follows the first order reaction character (Fig. 6a), and an increase of quantum yield was shown in doped nanotubes (Fig. 6b), especially for the nitrogen-doped sample. Due to the fast charge transfer between the photogenerated holes and methylene blue molecules, we only observe a small increase of quantum yield in the carbon-doped sample. With carbon doping, the benefit of higher photon capture ability is offset by the poor charge transport and carrier trapping.
 Fig. 6  (a) First-order reaction plot (ln(Abs)–t) and (b) calculated quantum yield of methylene blue (MB) degradation using TiO2 nanotubes under UV irradiation. (c) Hydrogen generation amount with time under AM 1.5 (1 sun) irradiation and (d) calculated hydrogen generation rate from photocatalytic hydrogen evolution measurements using stand-alone undoped/doped TiO2 nanotubes powders, with 1 wt% photodeposited platinum nanoparticles and 50% (vol) methanol hole sacrificial agent to enhance the efficiency. Undoped TiO2 nanotubes without platinum deposition; platinum-deposited commercial P25 TiO2 nanoparticles were used as comparison. The bar lines in (b) and (d) represent error bars for our measurements. 
To test the STFC capability of these nanotubes, we used the photocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) from these photocatalysts, using the hydrogen generation rate to evaluate their total solar energy to fuel conversion efficiency as standalone photocatalysts. Due to the large overpotential for hydrogen generation, HER co-catalysts (e.g. platinum) were normally deposited for hydrogen generation. Simultaneously, sacrificial agents (e.g. methanol) were used to facilitate hole quenching. In these tests, platinum nanoparticles were deposited through a photochemical process.7 Commercial P25 TiO2 nanoparticles with deposited platinum and undoped TiO2 nanotube without platinum co-catalyst were used for comparison. A remarkable increase (more than 2 fold) of the hydrogen generation rate (Fig. 6c and d) was seen in doped nanotube photocatalysts and the trend N-doped > C-doped > Undoped matched well with the photoelectrochemical and methylene blue degradation measurements. The generation of hydrogen is stable for several hours during our measurements. After screening several anion- and co-doped TiO2 membranes, we obtained the highest quantum yield for N-doped samples, along with stable generation of the STFC product. Furthermore, a 30% higher efficiency than the commercial P25 TiO2 nanoparticles demonstrates the advantage of using light absorption and charge carrier transport in the orthogonal direction in these one-dimensional nanotubes.
4. Conclusions
In conclusion, we have synthesized and studied a series of undoped, anion doped (N, C) and co-doped TiO2 nanotubes with a modified electrochemical anodization technique. We tested these nanotubes via a series of wired and standalone photoanode catalysts. Photoelectrochemical measurements, methylene blue degradation, and photocatalytic hydrogen evolution tests consistently showed the STFC trend N-doped > C-doped > Undoped TiO2 nanotubes. To understand betterdopant effects in light absorption, charge transport and charge transfer, detailed optical, electric, electrochemical studies were conducted. In general, dopants increase light absorption through the excitation of internal dopant states, the magnitude of which depends on the bandgap shrinkage. However, some dopants (especially deep dopants, like carbon here) deteriorated the charge transport. While the lower bandgap and higher photon capture ability allowed them to enhance significantly the visible light to fuel conversion efficiency, irradiation with higher energy photons led to saturation of this efficiency and poor utilization of incident light energy for formation of solar fuels. On the other hand, dopants also increased the charge transfer rate, possibly through the decrease of activation energy required for water oxidation. Using several anion- and co-doped TiO2 nanotube membranes, our results show the highest quantum yield for photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical reactions with nitrogen-doped standalone TiO2 membranes, and stable STFC using hydrogen evolution. Furthermore, we developed a detailed photophysical and photoelectrochemical model to explain the detailed kinetics of charge carriers formed using solar irradiation. We showed that while visible light STFC induces a superlinear photoresponse in these doped TiO2 standalone membranes and may benefit from higher light intensity or solar concentrators, ultraviolet light shows a linear photoresponse using AM1.5 irradiation and shows saturation of solar fuel production at higher photon flux due to charge trapping. The realization of optimal solar energy conversion requires optimization of each process, including using the dopants to help improve the light capture and charge transfer, and simultaneously improve charge transport. Therefore, this study could have important implications in improving the efficiency of solar energy conversion in the design of optimal STFC devices.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) CAREER Award CBET-1351281.
References
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef .
A. L. Linsebigler, J. T. Yates Jr., G. Lu and J. T. Yates, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 735–758 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Roy, O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose and C. A. Grimes, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1259–1278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2891–2959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ma, X. L. Wang, Y. S. Jia, X. B. Chen, H. X. Han and C. Li, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9987–10043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Schneider, M. Matsuoka, M. Takeuchi, J. L. Zhang, Y. Horiuchi, M. Anpo and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9919–9986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Singh, I. J. C. Beltran, J. C. Ribot and P. Nagpal, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 597–603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. K. Mor, O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose, K. Shankar and C. A. Grimes, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 2011–2075 CrossRef CAS .
P. Roy, S. Berger and P. Schmuki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 2904–2939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang and P. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6506 CAS .
X. Chen, L. Liu, P. Y. Yu and S. S. Mao, Science, 2011, 331, 746–750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Alivov, V. Singh, Y. Ding, L. J. Cerkovnik and P. Nagpal, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 10839–10849 RSC .
S. Piskunov, O. Lisovski, J. Begens, D. Bocharov, Y. F. Zhukovskii, M. Wessel and E. Spohr, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 150730154333006 Search PubMed .
Y. Alivov, H. H. Funke, V. Singh and P. Nagpal, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 2153–2159 CAS .

          Z. Chen, H. N. Dinh and E. Miller, Photoelectrochemical Water Splitting: Standards, Experimental Methods, and Protocols, Springer,  2013 Search PubMed .
A. Houas, H. Lachheb, M. Ksibi, E. Elaloui, C. Guillard and J.-M. Herrmann, Appl. Catal., B, 2001, 31, 145–157 CrossRef CAS .
F. A. Padovani and R. Stratton, Solid-State Electron., 1966, 9, 695–707 CrossRef .

          D. R. Lide, CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, 94th Edition, 2013–2014,  2013, vol. 53 Search PubMed .
R. Asahi, T. Morikawa, H. Irie and T. Ohwaki, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9824–9852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Richter and C. a. Schmuttenmaer, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 769–772 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. Memming, Semiconductor Electrochemistry, Wiley,  2015 Search PubMed .
A. J. Nozik and R. Memming, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 13061–13078 CrossRef CAS .
N. Baram and Y. Ein-Eli, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 9781–9790 CAS .
G. I. Roberts and C. R. Crowell, J. Appl. Phys., 1970, 41, 1767–1776 CrossRef .
T. Lopes, L. Andrade, H. A. Ribeiro and A. Mendes, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 11601–11608 CrossRef CAS .
M. Adachi, M. Sakamoto, J. Jiu, Y. Ogata and S. Isoda, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 13872–13880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. McCann, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1982, 129, 551 CrossRef CAS .
L. Bertoluzzi and J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 2517–2522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kern, R. Sastrawan, J. Ferber, R. Stangl and J. Luther, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 47, 4213–4225 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisquert, D. Cahen, G. Hodes, S. Rühle and A. Zaban, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 8106–8118 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisquert, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2008, 77, 235203 CrossRef .
J. Bisquert, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2010, 646, 43–51 CrossRef CAS .

          O. Madelung, in Semiconductors: Data Handbook, Springer, 3rd edn,  2004 Search PubMed .
D. Chatterjee and S. Dasgupta, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2005, 6, 186–205 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6nr05742jThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 
μ = σ/ne

 	Fig. 1  (a) Undoped and doped TiO2 nanotube thin films delaminated from the titanium metal substrates, showing transparent (Undoped), translucent (N-doped) and opaque (Cu, N-codoped and C-doped) characteristics. (b) Photocatalytic water splitting schematics showing the water, solar energy in, fuels out configuration using TiO2 nanotube stand-alone membrane. (c) Field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) image of undoped TiO2 nanotubes, showing a diameter of 80 nm and wall thickness of 5 nm. (d) Electron disperse spectroscopy (EDS) showing the atomic percentage of the carbon-doped TiO2 nanotubes. (e) Atomic percentage of elements detected by EDS for doped TiO2 nanotubes. (f) Ultraviolet-visible (UV-VIS) spectrum of stand-alone undoped/doped TiO2 nanotube thin films. (g) Current-sensing atomic force microscopy (CSAFM) measurements on undoped TiO2 nanotubes, showing I–V and ln(I)–V behavior with calculated carrier density (n) and mobility (μ).	 
ηSTFC = ηabs × ηtransport × ηtransfer


E
op (eV)	UV-VIS	3.10	2.93	2.49

E
el (eV)	STS	3.23	3.04	2.79

n (cm−3)	CSAFM	2.08 × 1018	4.41 × 1018	3.32 × 1018

μ (cm2 V−1 s−1)	CSAFM	0.135	0.116	0.018

 	Fig. 2  (a) Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) measurement on undoped/doped TiO2 nanotubes in a three-electrode configuration, showing their current–voltage (J–V) behavior in the dark (D) and AM 1.5 (1 SUN) irradiation (L). (b) Three-electrode chronoamperometry (CA) with 0.5 V bias vs. Ag/AgCl reference, showing both the dark and light current–time (J–t) behavior of undoped/doped TiO2 nanotubes. (c) Incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) measurement in a three-electrode configuration, with 0.5 V bias vs. Ag/AgCl.	 


J
ph (mA cm−2)	CA	0.045	0.166	0.069

E
pec (eV)	IPCE	3.05	2.92	2.70

k
ct (s−1)	OCP decay	1.23 × 10−3	2.34 × 10−3	1.74 × 10−3

τ
eff (ms)	PEIS	4.08	0.622	0.879

R
ct (kΩ cm2)	PEIS	48.3	6.01	7.95

C
total (μF cm−2)	PEIS	14.7	33.3	142

n (cm−3)	Mott–Schottky	3.28 × 1018	8.65 × 1018	4.63 × 1018

 	Fig. 3  (a) Decay of open circuit potential (OCP) with the blocking of UV irradiation, with the calculated charge transfer rate constant. (b) Bode plot of undoped/doped TiO2 nanotubes, showing the frequency-dependent phase (Arg(Z)) of complex impedance in dark conditions, with a calculated charge transfer effective lifetime. (c) Equivalent circuit used to fit the experimental data taken from n-type semiconductor–electrolyte system. (d) Nyquist plot with equivalent circuit fitting of undoped/doped TiO2 nanotubes, showing the relation between the real and imaginary part of the complex impedance in dark conditions, with extracted charge transfer resistance and trap capacitance. (e) Mott–Schottky plot at 1 kHz.	 
VOCP = Vdark + ΔVOCP = Vdark + Vph = A − Bexp(−kctt)

 		 

 	Fig. 4  A three dimensional plot (with projection) showing the relative efficiency of undoped/doped TiO2 nanotubes in photoelectrochemical solar energy conversion, in aspects of absorption, charge transport and transfer, using the bandgap, charge mobility and charge lifetime as parameters, respectively. Arrows point to the desired design of high efficiency.	 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 
n + nt = p + pd
R = r × p + rd × pd

 	Fig. 5  (a) A simple model used to describe the photophysical processes, including photogeneration, charge recombination, trapping, and injection in TiO2 nanotubes. (b) Intensity-dependent photocurrent density generation in nitrogen-doped and (c) carbon-doped TiO2 nanotubes at varied wavelength. (d) Log–log plot of the light intensity-dependent photocurrent of undoped/doped TiO2 nanotubes measured at band edge excitation. (e) Log–log plot of the light intensity-dependent photocurrent of N-doped TiO2 nanotubes excited with different energy photons.	 
g = γpd(pd − nt) + δpdnt + r × pd

 		 

 	Fig. 6  (a) First-order reaction plot (ln(Abs)–t) and (b) calculated quantum yield of methylene blue (MB) degradation using TiO2 nanotubes under UV irradiation. (c) Hydrogen generation amount with time under AM 1.5 (1 sun) irradiation and (d) calculated hydrogen generation rate from photocatalytic hydrogen evolution measurements using stand-alone undoped/doped TiO2 nanotubes powders, with 1 wt% photodeposited platinum nanoparticles and 50% (vol) methanol hole sacrificial agent to enhance the efficiency. Undoped TiO2 nanotubes without platinum deposition; platinum-deposited commercial P25 TiO2 nanoparticles were used as comparison. The bar lines in (b) and (d) represent error bars for our measurements.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6nr05742j

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
