Coupling surface plasmon resonance of gold nanoparticles with slow-photon-effect of TiO 2 photonic crystals for synergistically enhanced photoelectroc ...  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3EE43278E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3EE43278E
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1409-1419Coupling surface plasmon resonance of gold nanoparticles with slow-photon-effect of TiO2 photonic crystals for synergistically enhanced photoelectrochemical water splitting†

        
          
            Xing 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yang 
            Liu
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Shuit-Tong 
            Lee
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shihe 
            Yang
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Zhenhui 
            Kang
          
        
      *a
aInstitute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials (FUNSOM) and Collaborative Innovation Center of Suzhou Nano Science and Technology, Soochow University, Suzhou, 215123, China. E-mail: yangl@suda.edu.cn; zhkang@suda.edu.cn
bNano Science and Technology Program & Department of Chemistry, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong, P.R. China
Received 
      2nd October 2013
    , Accepted 7th January 2014First published on 8th January 2014AbstractThe slow photon effect of a photonic crystal (PC) is a promising characteristic for tuning light–matter interactions through material structure designing. A TiO2 bi-layer structure photoanode was constructed by fabricating a TiO2 PC layer through a template-assisted sol–gel process on a TiO2 nanorod array (NR) layer. Gold nanoparticles (Au NPs) with an average size of about 10 nm were deposited in situ into the TiO2 bi-layer structure. The extended photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting activity in visible light was ascribed to the energetic hot electrons and holes that were generated in the Au NPs through the excitation and decay of surface plasmons. By alternating the characteristic pore size of the TiO2 PC layer, the slow photon region at the red edge of the photonic band gap could be purposely tuned to overlap with the strong localized surface plasmon resonance (SPR) region of Au NPs. The matching slow photon effect of TiO2 PC (with a characteristic pore size of 250 nm) intensified the SPR responses (central at 536 nm) of Au NPs. Consequently, more hot electrons were generated in the Au NPs and injected into the conduction band of TiO2, resulting in improved PEC water splitting efficiency in the visible light region. Under simulated sunlight illumination, the photoconversion efficiency of the well matching Au/TiO2 photoanode approached 0.71%, which is one of the highest values ever reported in Au/TiO2 PEC systems. The work reported here provides support for designing coupling plasmonic nanostructures with PC-based materials to synergistically enhance PEC water splitting efficiency.

Broader context
Photoelectrochemial (PEC) water splitting is one of the most promising strategies to directly convert and store solar energy in the form of hydrogen. Searching for a kind of single- or multi-component photoelectrode material with high activity in the whole solar spectrum and concurrently long-term stability is still a challenge. Plasmonic metal nanostructures are the rising stars as photoactive materials due to their many exclusive properties such as high stability and extensively tunable optical response induced by surface plasmon resonance (SPR). Some pioneering endeavors had attempted to design a highly efficient photoactive system by combination of plasmonic metal nanostructures with semiconductors. However, the currently reported solar-to-hydrogen efficiencies based on these composite systems are still unsatisfactory. In this work, an Au/TiO2 composite photoelectrode was constructed by modifying Au nanoparticles (NPs) on a TiO2 bi-layer structure with bottom nanorod array layer and top photonic crystal (PC) layer. By selectively tuning the slow-photon region of the TiO2 PC by altering the structure parameters to match with the SPR region of Au NPs, a synergistically enhanced PEC water splitting efficiency was achieved.

Introduction
Water splitting driven by sunlight is one of the most promising strategies for large-scale production of hydrogen. Hydrogen is one of the most ideal fuel sources due to its zero-carbon emission, recyclability, and high energy conversion efficiency.1 Titanium dioxide (TiO2) has always been regarded as an efficient photocatalyst for cleaving water into hydrogen and oxygen due to its abundance, low cost, low toxicity, superior photostability, and high intrinsic catalytic activity under ultraviolet (UV) illumination.2–4 However, TiO2 has a large optical-band gap (3.2 eV for anatase and 3.0 eV for rutile),5 low electron mobility (1 cm2 V−1 s−1),6 and short minority carrier (hole) diffusion length (10–100 nm).7,8 Thus, the photoelectric conversion efficiency of a pure TiO2 photoanode is very low even in the UV region.9 Two strategies have been widely used to extend the work spectrum of TiO2 to the visible (VIS) and infrared (IR) regions. These strategies are doping TiO2 with non-metallic elements, such as H, C, N, S, or V, and coupling TiO2 with a second photoactive component, such as a dye-based compound or narrow-band-gap semiconductor.10–19 However, stability and efficiency are often compromised with these strategies, limiting practical large-scale applications.4,20 Thus, there is an urgent need to develop a synergistic TiO2-based multicomponent photoelectrode system with concurrently improved efficiency and stability.
Plasmonic metallic nanostructures have attracted considerable attention in photovoltaic areas due to their strong interactions with light through excitation of surface plasmon resonance (SPR).21–23 The frequency and intensity of SPR are strongly related to the size, composition, shape, and the nature of metallic nanostructures, making it possible to design plasmonic structures that interact with the entire solar spectrum and beyond.24,25 Due to their intriguing photoactive properties, plasmonic metal nanostructures have been assembled with wide band gap semiconductors, such as TiO2, Fe2O3, and ZnO, to construct materials for visible-light-responsive photoelectrochemical (PEC) electrodes.26–30 The plasmon-enhanced solar-to-energy conversion efficiency in these systems has been ascribed to three possible mechanisms. (i) SPR induces light absorption and subsequent transfer of hot electrons from the plasmonic nanostructures to the conduction band of the semiconductors in contact.31–33 (ii) Near-field electromagnetic enhancement can amplify the absorption of light and increase the generation and separation rates of electron–hole pairs in the semiconductor.28,29,34,35 (iii) Scattering of resonant photons can increase the length of the average photon path in the composite photoactive materials.36 However, the solar-to-energy efficiencies of plasmonic nanostructure-based hybrid photoelectrodes remain unsatisfactory, because the SPR intensity is not strong enough to harvest sufficient incident light. Therefore, in addition to optimizing the SPR intensity and range of the plasmonic nanostructure, improving the design of the photoelectrode structure is another important strategy for enhancing the SPR effects and increasing the efficiency of solar energy use by plasmonic metallic nanostructures.
Slow photons (i.e., photons that propagate with a reduced group velocity) can be observed in an ordered photonic crystal (PC) at a frequency near the photonic-stop-band (PGB) edges due to the strong interaction of light with the periodic dielectric structure.37–39 This effect has an immense potential for increasing the length of the optical path, which leads to a delay and storage of light in the PC.38 The PGB of a particular PC can be tuned by altering the size of the structural repeat unit according to Bragg's law.37 Therefore, it is possible to manipulate the interactions between light and matter just by tuning the structure parameters of PC. Some pioneering endeavors have attempted to improve solar-to-energy efficiency by modifying the optical interaction within a PC-based material. In most cases, the increases in light conversion efficiencies resulted from compromises between Bragg's reflectance and the slow photon effect of PCs to interact with incident light.40–43
The SPR of plasmonic metal nanostructures usually exhibit a strong optical absorption at a specific region. Thus, one can exclusively tune the slow photon effect region to overlap with the strong SPR region to obtain maximal harvesting of light. However, few studies have investigated the synergistic effects of plasmonic metal nanostructures and semiconductor PCs on light harvesting and conversion efficiencies. Lu et al. fabricated a photocatalyst by infiltrating plasmonic Au nanoparticles (NPs) into TiO2 PC, causing increased efficiency of photocatalytic degradation of 2,4-dichlorophenol.44 Zhang et al. constructed a photoanode by assembling Au NPs on anodic TiO2 nanotube arrays with a top ring layer for PEC water splitting in visible light.45 However, the single TiO2 ring layer at the top exhibits an indistinctive optical behavior of PC. In addition, the PGB cannot be easily tuned by altering the size of the pores due to the limitations in the synthesis method. Therefore, controllable construction of three-dimensional large-scale PCs with easily tunable PGB is important for coupling the SPR effect of plasmonic metal nanostructures.
In this study, we constructed a TiO2 bi-layer structure in which a three dimensional highly-ordered TiO2 PC layer fabricated through a template-assisted sol–gel process uniformly covered a vertically oriented TiO2 NR layer. These TiO2 bi-layer structures are referred to as TiO2 NRPCs hereafter. Au/TiO2 composited photoanodes were then constructed with the TiO2 NRPCs as scaffolds supporting the plasmonic Au NPs. Because the TiO2 PCs were replicated from polystyrene (PS) sphere opal structure templates, the PGB could be easily tuned over the entire solar spectrum by altering the size of the PS spheres. The PGB of the TiO2 PC was selectively tuned to couple with the SPR region of the Au NPs, allowing us to investigate if the efficiency of PEC water splitting by the Au/TiO2 photoanode was synergistically enhanced. The results showed that the SPR of Au NPs efficiently extended the PEC activity of TiO2-based photoanode to visible light. In addition, compared with TiO2 NRPCs of different characteristic pore sizes, visible-light harvesting and conversion efficiency reached the highest value when the slow photon region of TiO2 NRPCs better overlapped with the strong SPR region of Au NPs.
Experimental
Preparation of TiO2 NRs
Vertically oriented TiO2 NRs on FTO glasses were synthesized through a hydrothermal method reported previously with further modification.46 FTO glasses (0.9 cm × 1.5 cm) were cleaned by sequential ultrasonic cleaning in acetone, ethanol and deionized water and then dried in nitrogen gas. Prior to the growth of NRs, TiO2 seed crystals were deposited on the FTO current-conducting side by immersing the FTO glasses in 25 mM TiCl4 aqueous solution and keeping for 30 min at 70 °C, followed by annealing in air at 450 °C for 1 h. In a typical synthesis, 15 ml of aqueous HCl solution (38 wt%) and 15 ml deionized water were added to a Teflon-lined stainless steel autoclave (40 ml) and stirred for 5 minutes. And then, 0.5 ml of tetrabutyl titanate was added to the 30 ml of aqueous HCl solution and continued to stir for another 5 minutes. Subsequently, the seeded FTO glass was immersed into the autoclave with an angle against the wall of the autoclave. The autoclave was sealed and heated to 150 °C in an electric oven and kept for 9 h. After the autoclave naturally cooled to ambient temperature, the FTO substrate was taken out of the autoclave and thoroughly rinsed with ethanol and deionized water.
Synthesis of the TiO2 NRPC film
TiO2 PC layer was synthesized through a template-assisted sol–gel technique.44 A polystyrene (PS) sphere opal template was first fabricated via a solvent-evaporation-induced convective assembling method47 on the TiO2 NRs and then served as the sacrificed template for TiO2 sol filtration. Typically, the FTO/TiO2 NR substrate was placed vertically in a vessel with PS sphere suspension solution of an optimum concentration (diluted with deionized water and sonicated for 20 min). Then, the vessel was kept in a vacuum electric oven with a vacuum degree of 500 mm mercury column at 40 °C until the solvent was totally evaporated, leaving a highly ordered hexagonal closed-packing PS opal film on the substrate. Subsequently, the substrate was vertically immersed into a TiO2 precursor sol and taken out after 10 min, then dried naturally in the ambient atmosphere. The TiO2 precursor sol was obtained by sequential addition of 2 ml absolute ethanol, 0.4 ml concentrated hydrochloric acid, 1 ml tetrabutyl titanate and 0.8 ml deionized water with continuous intense stirring for 0.5 h. The top TiO2 PC film was obtained by removing the PS opal template by annealing at 500 °C for 3 h with a heating and cooling rate of 1 °C min−1.
Deposition of Au NPs into the TiO2 NRPCs
Au NPs were in situ deposited into the TiO2 NRPCs through a facile ionic layer adsorption and thermal-reduction (ILATR) approach. In brief, 10 ml HAuCl4 (1 mM) and 10 ml ethanol–water (2:3) mixing solution were separately poured into two clean glass vessels and heated to boil in an electric oven which had been set to 110 °C. The TiO2 NRPC substrate was first immersed into the HAuCl4 solution for 30 s and then dried in the oven for 2 min. Subsequently, the substrate with adsorbed AuCl(OH)3− was submerged into the ethanol–water mixing solution for 10 min. Then the trivalent Au ions were reduced to metallic Au NPs by ethanol and a color change from white to light burgundy of the TiO2 NRPC substrate can be observed. Increasing the ILATR number can enhance the loading density and also the sizes of the Au NPs. In this work, the ILATR cycles were optimized to be three for an optional loading density and sizes of the Au NPs deposited into the TiO2 NRPCs.
Characterization
The morphologies of the samples were characterized by a JEOL JSM-6700F field-emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM). Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images and element mapping were obtained by using a Tecnai G2 F20 electron microscope at an acceleration voltage of 200 kV. UV-Vis absorption spectra were obtained using a Shimadzu 3600 UV-Vis-NIR spectrophotometer with fine BaSO4 powder as reference. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the samples were measured by a Shimadzu thin film diffractometer equipped with Cu-Kα radiation (λ = 1.540598 Å). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) test were performed on a Perkin-Elmer model PHI 5600 XPS system with a resolution of 0.3–0.5 eV from a monochromatic aluminum anode X-ray source. The photoelectrode was fabricated by securing a copper wire on the exposed electric conductive parts of the FTO with a silver conducting paint and subsequently sealed on all edges with epoxy resin except the active working areas. All PEC measurements were performed in a three electrode mode with a photoelectrode as the working electrode, a coiled Pt wire as the counter electrode, a Ag/AgCl reference electrode, and 1 M KOH aqueous solution (pH = 13.5) as the electrolyte. All photoelectrodes were illuminated from the front side using a 300 W Xe lamp equipped with an AM 1.5 G filter (Model 81094, Newport) to simulate the solar spectrum. The light intensity was calibrated to 100 mW cm−2 by a Si diode (Model 818, Newport). The evolution of gases was measured by using a gas chromatograph with nitrogen as the carrier gas. Visible light illumination was obtained by passing the AM 1.5 light through a 420 nm long-wave-pass optical filter. Electrochemical measurements were performed on an electrochemical analyzer (660D, CHI Instruments). The incident photon to current efficiency (IPCE) was recorded under illumination of monochromatic light from a xenon lamp using a monochromator (Jobin-Yvon, TRIAX 320) and detected by a computer-controlled Stanford SR830 lock-in amplifier with a Stanford SR540 chopper.
Results and discussion

Fig. 1a shows the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the synthesized TiO2 NRs, from which we can see that the TiO2 nanorods grew in a highly perpendicular orientation on the fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) glass. The average diameter and length of the nanorods were estimated to be ∼100 nm and ∼2 μm, respectively. The TiO2 NR layer had a relatively ordered surface. Thus, large-scale self-assembly of PS spheres (with uniform diameters of 300 nm) occurred in an orderly manner with a face-centered cubic arrangement on the surface of the TiO2 NR layer (Fig. 1b). The close-packed plane that was oriented parallel to the underlying substrate was the (111) plane. Fig. 1c is the SEM image of TiO2 NRPCs taken from a crack of the top layer film, from which we can see that a highly-ordered TiO2 inverse opal film replicated from the PS opal structure template, intimately covered on the TiO2 NRs. It should be noted that the rinsing step in the TiO2 precursor infiltration process effectively prevented the resonant precursor from forming a bulk titania layer on the surface (Fig. S1†). The surface titania layer may significantly weaken the optical response of TiO2 PCs due to random light scattering. The cross-sectional SEM image in the inset of Fig. 1c showed that the TiO2 PC film had a thickness of about 3.4 μm and fit snugly onto the TiO2 NR layer. The overall thickness of the TiO2 NRPCs was 5–6 μm, which is suitable for PEC water splitting, as it provides a compromise between the optical absorption depth and majority charge carrier transport length.1 TiO2 NRPCs were constructed with two types of functional structures (i.e., bottom NRs layer and top PC layer) with huge specific areas and ordered interspaces, which were ideal for loading a secondary photoactive component. The average characteristic pore sizes of the TiO2 PC were about 250 nm according to a high-resolution SEM image that clearly showed the high-caliber TiO2 PC (Fig. 1d). The pore size of the TiO2 PC, with respect to the size of the PS spheres, was reduced by nearly 17% due to shrinkage during the removal of the PS template by annealing.41 The TiO2 PC layer, which was constructed on the TiO2 NR layer through template-assisted sol–gel preparation, formed a more compact junction between the two TiO2 layers compared with that achieved by direct transfer of the TiO2 PC layer onto the TiO2 NR layer. The compact junction between the two TiO2 layers is beneficial for transporting charge carriers across the junction.
 Fig. 1  Top view SEM image of (a) TiO2 NRs on the FTO substrate (inset: cross-sectional view SEM image, scale bar is 500 nm), (b) PS opal structure assembled on TiO2 NRs, (c) TiO2 NRPCs (inset: cross-sectional view SEM image, scale bar is 2 μm), (d) TiO2 PC structure on TiO2 NRs. 
The SEM images in Fig. 2a and b showed that the Au NPs were successfully deposited into the TiO2 NRPCs. Au NPs with an average size of about 10 nm were well-dispersed on the TiO2 NRPCs surface. The low-magnification transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of the Au/TiO2 NRPCs detached from the FTO substrate (Fig. 2c) provided further proof that the Au NPs with narrow size distributions were filtered into the TiO2 PC. Actually, a large amount of Au NPs was also observed on the side walls of the TiO2 nanorods (Fig. S2†). The sizes of the Au NPs determined from the TEM image (Fig. 2c) were consistent with the results obtained from the SEM image in Fig. 2b. It is noteworthy that the Au NPs were actually well-dispersed in the whole netted texture of the TiO2 PC (Fig. 2c). These results provide persuasive proof that the Au NPs grew in situ on the surface of TiO2 NRPCs rather than forming in solution and subsequently deposited on the surface. A high-resolution TEM image of a selected area from the Au/TiO2 NRPCs (Fig. 2d) showed that the walls of the TiO2 PC were composed of TiO2 nanoparticles with preferentially exposed (101) crystallographic planes. Au NPs with exposed (111) crystal faces that are in intimate contact with the TiO2 nanoparticles were easily distinguished due to differences in contrast. The scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) image (Fig. 2e) also clearly showed that the Au NPs were well distributed within the TiO2 PC. Further, energy-dispersive X-ray spectrometry (EDS) mapping of the distributions of Ti, O, and Au (Fig. 2f–i, respectively) in a selected area further confirmed the composition and structure of the Au/TiO2 NRPCs. It should be noted that no Au NPs generated on the surface of TiO2 in the absence of ethanol in the synthesis process of a contrast experiment. The result illustrated that the Au NPs generated from the reduction of HAuCl4 by ethanol rather than the Ti3+ in TiO2 as reported before.33
 Fig. 2  (a) Low-magnification and (b) high-resolution SEM images of Au/TiO2 NRPCs on the FTO substrate. (c) Low-magnification and (d) high resolution TEM images of Au/TiO2 NRPCs peeled from the FTO substrate. (e) STEM image of Au/TiO2 NRPCs. (f–i) EDS element mapping images of Ti, O, and Au from the selected area marked with red lines in (e). 
The recorded XRD patterns of TiO2 NRs, TiO2 NRPCs, and Au/TiO2 NRPCs (Fig. 3a) showed that the TiO2 NRs grew on the FTO substrate as a tetragonal rutile phase with representative diffraction peaks, including (101), (002), and (112) (JCPDS no. 21-1276). The peak intensity of (002) was more pronounced than that of the other two diffraction peaks, suggesting that the TiO2 nanorods were highly perpendicular to the FTO surface in the direction that (001) grew. Compared with the XRD patterns of TiO2 NRs and TiO2 NRPCs, two additional diffraction peaks were observed at 25.4° and 41.4° and were ascribed to the (101) crystal plane of anatase TiO2 and the (111) crystal plane of rutile TiO2, respectively (JCPDS no. 1-562 and JCPDS 21-1276). However, the TiO2 PCs that were fabricated through the same process on the FTO substrate had a pure anatase phase without observable diffraction peaks at 41.4°.41 Therefore, the presence of the anatase (101) diffraction peak was due to the growth of TiO2 PC on TiO2 NRs, whereas the weak rutile (111) diffraction peak may be caused by the rutile-TiO2 NRs induced growth of rutile TiO2 nanoparticles during the sol–gel and annealing processes. No additional diffraction peaks were observed for the Au/TiO2 NRPCs relative to the TiO2 NRPCs, which was presumably due to the relatively low incorporation and small size of the Au NPs.
 Fig. 3  (a) XRD patterns of the FTO substrate, TiO2 NRs, TiO2 NRPCs and Au/TiO2 NRPCs. FTO substrate (■); rutile-TiO2 (*); anatase-TiO2 (#). High resolution XPS spectra of (b) Ti 2p, (c) O 1s and (d) Au 4f of Au/TiO2 NRPCs. 
In order to demonstrate the metallic state of the Au NPs, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was performed to investigate the specific surface composition and chemical environment of Au/TiO2 NRPCs. The full survey spectra of the Au/TiO2 NRPCs revealed the presence of Ti, O, and Au (Fig. S3†). The high-resolution Ti 2p XPS spectra were ascribed to Ti 2p3/2 and Ti 2p1/2 correspondingly centered at binding energies of 458.9 and 464.6 eV, which were consistent with the typical values of TiO2.10,49 The high-resolution O 1s core-level XPS spectra had two peaks centered at 530.2 and 532.0 eV (Fig. 3c). The peak centered at 530.2 eV corresponded to the characteristic peak of Ti–O–Ti.10 The other peak located at 532.0 eV was attributed to Ti–OH, which has been reported to exhibit a binding energy that is 1.5–1.8 eV higher than that of Ti–O–Ti.49,50 The Au 4f core-level XPS spectra (Fig. 3d) are resolved into two single peaks of Au 4f7/2 and Au 4f5/2, which were respectively centered at 84.0 and 87.7 eV, and confirmed the metallic state of the Au NPs in the Au/TiO2 NRPCs.32,44
In order to compare the optical properties of TiO2 NRs, Au/TiO2 NRs, TiO2 NRPCs, and Au/TiO2 NRPCs, diffused reflectance UV-Vis spectra were examined. The peak positions of the PGB of the TiO2 NRPCs and the SPR of the Au NPs were closely connected to the dielectric constant of the surrounding media.22,40 Thus, all samples were completely filled with the electrolyte solution that was used for PEC characterization during the reflectance spectra measurements to obtain more realistic insights into the optical properties of these photoanodes. The optical reflectance of the TiO2 NRs decreased sharply at a wavelength that was shorter than 415 nm (Fig. 4a), which was due to the strong intrinsic light absorption of rutile-phase TiO2 (Eg = 3.0 eV). In addition, slight absorption in the visible region was caused by undetectable light scattering and absorption of the FTO substrate, which were demonstrated to be negligible for the PEC water splitting processes.51 The additional light absorption region centered at 536 nm is ascribed to the SPR absorption of loaded Au NPs on the TiO2 surface. The SPR peak red-shifted by 8 nm with respect to that of the freely dispersed Au NPs (Fig. S4†), which may be attributed to the increased dielectric constant of the surrounding media.22 As reported by Suzushi et al., highly qualified PC structures can result in Bragg reflection at the blue edge and slow photon effects at the red edge with respect to the PGB. At the red edge of PGB, light propagate with decreased group velocity and can be described as a sinusoidal standing wave that has its highest amplitude in the high refractive index part in the PC structure. However, the standing wave at the blue edge is predominantly localized in the low refractive index part of the PCs, i.e., in the electrolyte voids (Fig. 4b).40 This implies that an absorber in the high dielectric part had stronger interactions with light at wavelengths in the red-edge region of the PGB. A Bragg reflection peak centered at 450 nm (marked with a dark arrow in Fig. 4a) was observed in the reflectance spectra of the TiO2 NRPCs. The slow-photon region, which had a peak at 518 nm (marked with red arrow), almost completely overlapped with the LSPR region of the Au NPs. It is worth noting that the Bragg reflection region was outside of the TiO2 intra-band absorption region and the strong SPR absorption region of Au NPs (approximately 450–600 nm). Thus, the slow photon effect of the PC layer may play the leading role in enhancing the efficiency of light harvesting. By carefully analyzing the reflectance spectra of TiO2 NRPCs, we found two intra-band absorption characteristics for TiO2 in the ultraviolet region, which were ascribed to the two kinds of TiO2 crystalline phases in the TiO2 NRPCs. Compared with the reflectance spectra of Au/TiO2 NRs, Au/TiO2 NRPCs exhibited a significant diminution in reflectance, which may be due to an increased amount of loaded Au NPs in the porous structure of the top layer of the TiO2 PC. Although quantitative evaluation was not possible, the contribution of the slow photon effect of the TiO2 PC to the reduced reflectance in the visible region may also be important, because the PC structure was retained after infiltration of the Au NPs.
 Fig. 4  (a) Diffused reflectance UV-Vis spectra of TiO2 NRs, Au/TiO2 NRs, TiO2 NRPCs, Au/TiO2 NRPCs. All samples were prior filled with 1 M KOH aqueous solution to ensure the same dielectric environment during the measurement processes. (b) Schematic optical band structure of PCs and electric field distributions of light near the blue edge and red edge of the photonic band gap. The green part indicates the high-dielectric region relative low-dielectric interval region. 
To assess the photocatalytic activity for solar energy driven water splitting, PEC characterizations were performed for TiO2 NR, TiO2 NRPC, Au/TiO2 NR, and Au/TiO2 NRPC photoanodes. A standard three-electrode electrochemical cell with a Pt wire counter electrode and an Ag/AgCl reference electrode was used for all of the PEC measurements in our experiments. The electrolyte solution was 1 M KOH aqueous solution (pH = 13.5) which had been bubbled with N2 flow for 1 h to exclude the dissolved oxygen. The working electrodes were illuminated from the front side with simulated sunlight from a 300 W Xe lamp equipped with an AM 1.5 G filter. The potentials were measured versus the Ag/AgCl reference electrode and were converted to the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) scale using the Nernst equation:11ERHE = EAg/AgCl + E°Ag/AgCl + 0.059 pH

E
RHE is the converted potential versus RHE. EAg/AgCl is the external potential measured against the Ag/AgCl reference electrode. E°Ag/AgCl is the standard potential of Ag/AgCl at 25 °C (0.1976 V). Representative curves of chopped light-current density versus time (I–t) are shown in Fig. 5a for the four kinds of photoanodes measured at 1 V external potential vs. RHE. We found that all of the photoanodes exhibited excellent sensitivity to light illumination. There was a sharp increase in the current densities from several μA cm−2 in the dark to mA cm−2 scale in the presence of light. In addition, the photocurrent density of the TiO2 NRPC photoanode reached 0.68 mA cm−2, which was slightly higher than that of the TiO2 NRs photoanode (0.59 mA cm−2). As reported before, a tiny band bending at the interface of the rutile/anatase core/shell of the TiO2 nanorod would block the photogenerated hole transfer from the rutile core to the anatase shell, slightly decreasing the photocatalytic activity.9 However, the rutile/anatase heterojunction did not extensively exist except for at the interface between the anatase TiO2 PC layer and the rutile TiO2 NR layer, which could be easily overcame to transport charge carriers under light illumination and an applied bias voltage. This drawback was also compensated by the longer optical path and the increased chemical reaction interfaces in TiO2 NRPCs compared with those of TiO2 NRs. We also found that the loaded Au NPs largely enhanced the photocurrent density with respect to the pristine photoanodes. Fig. 5b shows a set of linear sweep voltammograms for the four kinds of photoanodes in a potential window between −0.2 and 1.5 V vs. RHE. We found that the onset potentials for the photocurrents of all four of the photoanodes were around 0.2 V vs. RHE. The current density steeply increased during potential anodic sweeping and achieved prompt saturation of the photocurrent density around 0.8 V vs. RHE, suggesting efficient charge separation and collection of the photoanodes.9 The photoconversion efficiency (η) of a water-splitting photoanode with an external potential can be calculated via the following equation:η = I (1.23 − Vapp)/Plight
 Fig. 5  Comparisons of PEC properties of four different photoanodes: TiO2 NRs (dark purple solid line), TiO2 NRPCs (green solid line), Au/TiO2 NRs (pink solid line), Au/TiO2 NRPCs (pale purple solid line). (a) Chronoamperometry measurements of four different photoanodes at an external potential of 1 V vs. RHE with repeated on/off circles of simulated sunlight illumination. (b) Linear sweep voltammetry measurements under dark and simulated sunlight illumination with a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. The dark scan results were plotted as the corresponding dotted lines. (c) Photoconversion efficiency as a function of applied potential versus RHE. (d) The evolution of H2 and O2 gases of the four kinds of photoanodes under simulated sunlight illumination. The external potentials imposed on the four kinds photoanodes are derived from the extreme point of photoconversion efficiency: TiO2 NRs (0.74 V vs. RHE), TiO2 NRPCs (0.71 V vs. RHE), Au/TiO2 NRs (0.65 V vs. RHE), Au/TiO2 NRPCs (0.64 V vs. RHE). (e) IPCE spectra measured at 1.23 vs. RHE for the four photoanodes. (f) Amperometric I–t curves of the four different kinds of photoanodes measured at 1 V vs. RHE with repeated on–off cycles of simulated sunlight coupled with a 420 nm cut-off optical filter. 

V
app is the applied external potential versus RHE. I is the externally measured current density. Plight is the power density of the illumination. Fig. 5c shows the calculated photoconversion efficiencies as a function of external potential versus RHE from the results in Fig. 5b. The maximum photoconversion efficiencies for the TiO2 NRs, TiO2 NRPCs, Au/TiO2 NRs, and Au/TiO2 NRPCs photoanodes were 0.22% (at 0.74 V vs. RHE), 0.26% (at 0.71 V vs. RHE), 0.48% (at 0.65 V vs. RHE), and 0.71% (at 0.64 V vs. RHE), respectively.
It is critical to check the evolution of H2 and O2 in the PEC water-splitting experiment. Evolution of H2 and O2 gases versus time for the four kinds of photoanodes under simulated sunlight is shown in Fig. 5d. Illumination with simulated sunlight caused simultaneous evolution of H2 and O2 from the photoanodes and Pt counter electrode at a stoichiometric ratio of approximately 2:1, which suggests complete water splitting. The hydrogen evolution rates (and Faradic efficiencies) of the TiO2 NRs, TiO2 NRPCs, Au/TiO2 NRs, and Au/TiO2 NRPCs photoanodes were 8.0 μmol h−1 cm−2 (95.1%), 8.5 μmol h−1 cm−2 (91.0%), 14.4 μmol h−1 cm−2 (92.8%), and 20.4 μmol h−1 cm−2 (90.9%). The amounts of H2 and O2 that evolved were slightly less than the theoretical amount, possibly due to gas leakage or dissolution in the electrolyte solution. These results (as shown in Fig. 5) demonstrated that loading with Au NPs efficiently improved the photocurrent and enhanced the solar-to-hydrogen efficiency of the TiO2-based photoanodes.
Incident-photon-to-current-conversion efficiency (IPCE) tests were performed to identify the active PEC spectra for the TiO2 NRs, TiO2 NRPCs, Au/TiO2 NRs, and Au/TiO2 NRPC photoanodes. Extended PEC activity in visible light was observed due to the presence of the Au NPs (Fig. 5e). The shapes of the IPCE active spectra of the Au/TiO2 composite photoanodes in the visible region (shown in the inset of Fig. 5e) appeared to be similar to that of the SPR absorption spectrum of the Au NPs. Further, amperometric I–t characterization results for the four photoanodes illuminated with repeated on–off cycles of visible light (λ > 420 nm) are shown in Fig. 5f. One can observe a steeply increased transient photocurrent of the Au/TiO2 NR (0.22 mA cm−2) and Au/TiO2 NRPC (0.47 mA cm−2) photoanodes when visible light illumination was turned on, whereas photocurrents were not observed for the TiO2 NR and TiO2 NRPC photoanodes. These results clearly illustrated that the SPR of the Au NPs contributed to the PEC activity in visible light. A plasmon-induced electromagnetic field had been proposed as one of the possible mechanisms to explain the enhanced photon-to-electricity efficiency of the plasmonic metal/semiconductor system. However, this mechanism usually occurs at a wavelength where the SPR absorption region of the plasmonic nanostructure and the photolytic activity region of the semiconductor overlapped.28,48 Here, no rule changes could be observed for the IPCE of the four photoanodes in the ultraviolet region and the change scope was very small (Fig. 5e). On the other hand, a negative effect caused by the loaded Au NPs which can block the semiconductor from light absorption and therefore discount the PEC activity in the intrinsic absorption region.28 Therefore, the insignificant change in photo-to-electricity efficiency in the ultraviolet region may be a compromised result of the positive and negative effects caused by the SPR of Au NPs. Resonant photon scattering usually occurs for large plasmonic nanostructures (those with diameters larger than ∼50 nm).21 Therefore, this mechanism was ruled out as an explanation for the plasmon-enhanced PEC activity. Plasmon-induced heating was also ineffective for complete PEC water splitting.28 Consequently, we concluded that the SPR-induced mechanism of hot electron transfer was the prominent mechanism for improved PEC properties in the presence of simulated sunlight.
In order to investigate the influence of TiO2 PCs on the plasmonic PEC water-splitting efficiency, TiO2 NRPCs with varying photon forbidden bands were fabricated by altering the characteristic pore size of the top layer of TiO2 PC. Two other TiO2 NRPCs with different pore sizes were fabricated by replicating from opal templates with PS spheres in 260 nm and 360 nm. TiO2 NRPCs with a characteristic pore size of xxx nm will be defined as TiO2 NRPCs (xxx) for simplification. A disordered porous TiO2 layer was replicated from a disordered PS opal template, which was obtained by mixing an isocyatic suspension solution of 260 nm and 360 nm PS spheres and evaporating the water. The thicknesses of the three TiO2 bi-layer films were controlled to be similar to that of TiO2 NRPCs (250) by adjusting the concentration of the suspension solution of PS spheres. TiO2 NRPCs replicated from the 260 nm and 360 nm PS templates exhibited characteristic pore sizes of 216 nm and 292 nm, respectively, as shown in the SEM images in Fig. 6a and b. Fig. 6c shows a disordered TiO2 porous layer grown on the TiO2 NRs. The cross-sectional SEM images in the insets showed that the thicknesses of the TiO2 NRPCs (216), TiO2 NRPCs (292), and disordered TiO2 bi-layer were about 3.5 μm, 3.2 μm, and 3.4 μm, respectively. The UV-Vis reflectance spectra for the three kinds of TiO2 bi-layer structures (Fig. 6d) showed that the Bragg reflection peaks (indicated by dark arrows) near the blue edge of the PGB for the TiO2 NRPCs (216) and the TiO2 NRPCs (292) were approximately centered at 410 nm and 600 nm. Enhanced absorption peaks (marked by dotted circles) in the region corresponding to the location of slow photon effect at the red edge of the PGB for the TiO2 NRPCs (216) and the TiO2 NRPCs (292) were approximately centered at 455 nm and 680 nm, respectively. As expected, the disordered TiO2 bi-layer structure did not exhibit an optical behavior like PC (i.e. no characteristic photonic stop band resulted from the disordered TiO2 bi-layer). Subsequently, the three TiO2 bi-layer structure photoanodes were sensitized with Au NPs through the same processes described in the Experimental section. The SEM images of the Au/TiO2 NRPCs (216), Au/TiO2 NRPCs (292), and Au/TiO2 bi-layer are shown in Fig. S8,† from which one can see that Au NPs well dispersed in these porous TiO2 films with similar size and density.
 Fig. 6  Top view and corresponding cross-sectional view (inset) SEM images of (a) TiO2 NRPCs (216), (b) TiO2 NRPCs (292), and (c) disordered TiO2 bi-layer. (d) UV-Vis diffused reflectance spectra of the three TiO2 films on the FTO substrate. Scale bar of all insets in (a), (b) and (c) are 2 μm. 
Subsequently, IPCE and chopped-light amperometric I–t characterizations were performed on the Au/TiO2 NRPCs (216), Au/TiO2 NRPCs (292), and disordered Au/TiO2 bi-layer structure photoanodes. The IPCE spectra showed that all of the photoanodes exhibited PEC activities in the visible region (Fig. 7a), which was ascribed to the SPR effects of the Au NPs. Interestingly, the shapes of the IPCE spectra varied with the TiO2 scaffolds of the Au/TiO2 composited photoanodes. The amperometric I–t curves (shown in Fig. 7b) showed that all photoanodes exhibited an instant photoelectrical response under visible light illumination. Compared with the photocurrent density of the disordered Au/TiO2 bi-layer, an increase and slight decrease were found for Au/TiO2 NRPCs (216) and Au/TiO2 NRPCs (292), respectively. These variations of photocurrent density were well consistent with the IPCE spectra in the visible region.
 Fig. 7  (a) IPCE spectra measured at 1.23 vs. RHE for the three photoanodes: disordered Au/TiO2 bi-layer structure (green solid line), Au/TiO2 NRPCs (216) (purple solid line), Au/TiO2 NRPCs (292) (pink solid line). (Inset shows the magnified IPCE spectra in the region marked by green dotted rectangular frame.) (b) Corresponding amperometric I–t curves of these three kinds of photoanodes measured at 1 V vs. RHE with repeated on–off cycles of simulated sunlight coupled with a 420 nm cut-off optical filter. 
In order to quantitatively compare the photoactivities of these Au/TiO2 bi-layer photoanodes in the visible region, an IPCE enhancement factor (the ratio of the IPCE of Au/TiO2 NRPC photoanodes to that of the disordered Au/TiO2 bi-layer photoanode) as a function of wavelength was used. As shown in Fig. 8, it is clearly seen that the IPCE enhancement factor curves of all the three Au/TiO2 NRPCs show an enhancement in the spectral region corresponding to their respective slow photon region. For the Au/TiO2 NRPCs (250), a maximal enhancement factor reached ∼2.0 in the region from 450 to 580 nm, which was well consistent with the slow photon region of TiO2 NRPCs (250). As theoretically and experimentally demonstrated by Ozin and Sakoda et al., the photon density in the slow photon region is larger in the high refractive index part than in the electrolyte or air voids in an inverse-opal PC. And then, an increased probability of photons being absorbed by the absorber in the high dielectric part was expected.52–55 Ozin's studies experimentally demonstrated that the photoactivity of TiO2 could be dramatically enhanced by a factor of over 2 by using the slow photons with energies close to the electric bang-gap of the semiconductor under monochromatic or white-light irradiation.54,55 And also, these experimentally obtained amplification factors were well consistent with the calculated maximum (∼2.1) of the amplification factor by a scalar-wave-approximation (SWA) approach.53 Here, our experiment results can also be explained by considering the influence of slow photon effects. Since the Au NPs were deposited on the surface of TiO2 (with a high refractive index of 2.5), stronger interactions between the SPR effect of Au NPs and the localized light in the TiO2 part would occur when the slow photon region of TiO2 NRPCs overlapped with the SPR region of Au NPs. Then, an improved plasmonic PEC water splitting efficiency was obtained due to enhanced light-harvesting caused by the amplified SPR intensity of Au NPs.
 Fig. 8  IPCE enhancement factor (the ratio of the IPCE of Au/TiO2 NRPC photoanodes to that of the disordered Au/TiO2 bi-layer photoanode) as a function of the wavelength in the visible region. 
It should also be noted that a competing effect resulted from Bragg reflection of the PC which suppresses the photoactivities was observed for the Au/TiO2 NRPCs (292) in the region from 560 to 640 nm. While for the Au/TiO2 NRPCs (250), the Bragg reflection region from 400 to 450 nm was out of the SPR region of Au NPs and would not largely suppress the plasmonic PEC activities in the visible region. And also, unlike Au/TiO2 NRPCs (216) which caused a Bragg reflection in the ultraviolet region, the Bragg reflection region of Au/TiO2 NRPCs (250) was out of the intrinsic absorption region of TiO2. Therefore, the hugely improved PEC performance of Au/TiO2 NRPCs (250) was achieved by selectively amplifying the plasmonic PEC activities in the SPR region by coupling the slow photon effect of TiO2 PC and simultaneously avoiding the negative effect of Bragg reflection of TiO2 PC.
In addition, we also compared the PEC activities of four Au/TiO2 composited photoanodes which were obtained by depositing Au NPs on single-layer TiO2 PCs (with characteristic size of 216 nm, 250 nm and 292 nm, respectively) or a disordered TiO2 porous layer. The results (shown in Fig. S9†) also well illustrated that a better coupling between the slow photon effect of the TiO2 PCs and the SPR effect of the Au NPs could enhanced the PEC activity in the visible region. However, the obtained photoconversion efficiencies of the single-layer Au/TiO2 composited photoanodes were inferior to the double-layer Au/TiO2 composite photoanodes under simulated sunlight illumination. The higher photoconversion efficiency of these double-layer Au/TiO2 composite photoanodes may benefit from the increased thickness of the active layer while not greatly reduced the charge-carrier collection efficiency due to the higher electron transport rate in the TiO2 NR layer. These comprehensive comparisons persuasively demonstrated that intentionally tuning the position of the PGB to maximize the positive role of the slow photon effect of the TiO2 NRPCs efficiently improved the PEC water splitting efficiency of the Au/TiO2 NRPC photoanode.

Fig. 9 shows a schematic of the proposed mechanism for the synergistic action of the slow photon effect of TiO2 PC and the SPR effect of Au NPs for PEC water-splitting with visible light. When photon energies approached the PGB from the red side, light propagated with decreased group velocity and had the highest amplitude in the high refractive index part (i.e., the Au-loaded TiO2) of the PC structure.40 These localized slow photons from the TiO2 PC increased the SPR absorbance of the loaded Au NPs when the slow-photon region was tuned to overlap with the SPR region. Surface plasmons that were photoexcited in the Au NPs decayed into hot electron–hole pairs, with the hot electrons transiently occupying normally empty states in the Au conduction band above the Fermi energy. A majority of the hot electrons were transferred to the conduction band of TiO2 either by overcoming the Schottky barriers at the interface between the Au NPs and TiO2 or through a tunneling effect. This process leaves behind the energetic positive charges (figuratively taken as holes) on the Au NPs, which can be filled by water oxidation.56–58 The non-equilibrated electrons in the conduction band of TiO2 were then transferred to the counter-electrode to execute water reduction with the assistance of an external potential.
 Fig. 9  Schematic diagram for the synergy of the slow photon effect of TiO2 PC and SPR enhanced PEC water splitting under light illumination. The left panel is the schematic drawing of Au/TiO2 NRPCs. Light transmission with a decreased group velocity in the TiO2 PC layer at the red edge of PGB (i.e. slow photon effect). The right panel is the energy diagram of the composite plasmonic photoanode and the mechanism of SPR PEC water splitting. Ecb, conduction band level; Evb, valence band level; Ef, Fermi level at the equilibrium state; φb, the Schottky barrier formed at the Au/TiO2 interface. 
In this work, the hugely improved PEC performance of the Au/TiO2 NRPC (250) photoanode was beneficial from the better coupling of the slow-photon effects of the TiO2 PCs and the SPR effect of the Au NPs, as well as the ideal photoelectrode construction for loading large amounts of active Au NPs and supporting extensive Au/TiO2 interfaces. Although high for a plasmonic PEC water splitting system, the reported solar-to-hydrogen efficiency here is still low for practical use. But, there are many rooms for further improving the efficiency of this photoelectrode system by optimizing the loading density, sizes and shapes of the Au NPs and the thickness of the active layer of the photoelectrode for more efficient light capturing. And also, replacing the rutile nanorod arrays with single-crystalline anatase nanowire arrays may further enhance the photoconversion efficiency by increasing the electron transport rate.
Conclusion
In summary, we designed a series of Au/TiO2 composite photoanodes by constructing two promising TiO2 functional structures (i.e., NRs and PCs) as scaffolds for Au NPs. These photoanodes efficiently executed PEC water splitting in the ultraviolet and visible regions. Optical and PEC characterization clearly showed that the PEC activity in visible light was due to the plasmonic photosensitization of the Au NPs. These Au NPs absorbed visible photons through localized SPR and generated energetic hot electrons and holes to implement water reduction and oxidation, respectively. We demonstrated that the slow photon effect of the TiO2 PCs could tune the SPR intensity and subsequently influenced the solar-to-hydrogen efficiency at a specific wavelength region. The calculated solar-energy conversion efficiency approached 0.71% for the Au/TiO2 NRPC (250) photoanode, which formed a slow photon effect in the SPR region (450–600 nm) of Au NPs. The huge enhancement in photoconversion efficiency was ascribed to the improved coupling of the slow-photon effects of the TiO2 PCs and the plasmonic photosensitization of the Au NPs, as well as the ideal photoelectrode construction for loading large amounts of active Au NPs. The position of the PGB of the TiO2 NRPCs was easily tuned from ultraviolet to visible and near the infrared region by selectively altering the characteristic size of the PS opal template. And also, it was possible to use the entire solar spectrum by manipulating the SPR resonant wavelength of the plasmonic nanostructure by changing the shape, size, and composition. These extensive tunable optical properties of PCs and plasmonic nanostructures provide multiple choices for coupling these two photoactive components to synergistically enhance PEC water splitting. The work reported here provides rational strategies for designing plasmonic metal/semiconductor composite photoelectrodes to synergistically enhance PEC water splitting efficiency.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Basic Research program (973 Program) (2012CB825803, 2013CB932702), the National Natural Foundation of China (5113206, 21073127, 21071104), the specialized Research Fund for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education (20123201110018), a Suzhou Planning Project of Science and Technology (ZXG2012028), a Foundation for the author of National Excellent Doctoral Dissertation of China (200929), and a Project funded by the Priority Academic Program development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions.
Notes and references
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. Mckone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446 CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37 CAS .
X. B. Chen and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2891 CAS .
X. B. Chen, S. H. Shen, L. J. Guo and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6503 CAS .
A. B. Murphy, P. R. F. Barnes, L. K. Randeniya, I. C. Plumb, I. E. Grey, M. D. Horne and J. A. Glasscock, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2006, 31, 1999 CAS .
E. Hendry, M. Koeberg, B. O'Regan and M. Bonn, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 755 CAS .
A. L. Linsebigler, G. Lu and J. T. Yates, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 735 CAS .
P. Salvador, J. Appl. Phys., 1984, 55, 2977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Hwang, C. Hahn, B. Liu and P. Yang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5060 CAS .
X. Chen, L. Liu, Y. Y. Peter and S. S. Mao, Science, 2011, 331, 746 CAS .
S. Hoang, S. Guo, N. T. Hahn, A. J. Bard and C. B. Mullins, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 26 CAS .
R. Asahi, T. Morikawa, T. Ohwaki, K. Aoki and Y. Taga, Science, 2001, 293, 269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen and C. Burda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Klosek and D. Raftery, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 2815 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Youngblood, S. H. A. Lee, K. Maeda and T. E. Mallouk, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Youngblood, S. H. A. Lee, Y. Kobayashi, E. A. Hernandez-Pagan, P. G. Hoertz, T. A. Moore, A. L. Moore, D. Gust and T. E. Mallouk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gao, H. Li, W. Sun, Q. Chen, F. Tang and L. Peng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 7531 CAS .
J. H. Bang and P. V. Kamat, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1970 CrossRef CAS .
R. Trevisan, P. Rodenas, V. Gonzalez-Pedro, C. Sima, R. S. Sanchez, E. M. Barea, I. Mora-Sero, F. Fabregat-Santiago and S. Gimenez, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 141 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat, K. Tvrdy, D. R. Baker and J. G. Radich, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Hou and S. B. Cronin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 23, 1612 CrossRef .
S. Linic, P. Christopher and D. B. Ingram, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wang, B. B. Huang, Y. Dai and M. H. Whangbo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 9813 RSC .
M. Rycenga, C. M. Cobley, J. Zeng, W. Li, C. H. Moran, Q. Zhang, D. Qin and Y. Xia, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xia, Y. Xiong, B. Lim and S. E. Skrabalak, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 48, 60 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Gao, C. Liu, H. E. Jeong and P. Yang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Cushing, J. Li, F. Meng, T. R. Senty, S. Suri, M. Zhi, M. Li, A. D. Bristow and N. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. M. Chen, C. K. Chen, C.-J. Chen, L.-C. Cheng, P. C. Wu, B. H. Cheng, Y. Z. Ho, M. L. Tseng, Y.-Y. Hsu, T.-S. Chan, J.-F. Lee, R.-S. Liu and D. P. Tsai, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, W. Hou, P. Pavaskar, M. Aykol and S. B. Cronin, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Thomann, B. A. Pinaud, Z. Chen, B. M. Clemens, T. F. Jaramillo and M. L. Brongersma, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tian and T. Tatsuma, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 7632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Primo, T. Marino, A. Corma, R. Molinari and H. García, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 6930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. K. Zhang, B. B. Huang, X. Y. Qin, X. Y. Zhang, Y. Dai and M. H. Whangbo, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 9079 RSC .
M. K. Kumar, S. Krishnamoorthy, L. K. Tan, S. Y. Chiam, S. Tripathy and H. Gao, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 300 CrossRef CAS .
W. B. Hou, W. H. Hung, P. Pavaskar, A. Goeppert, M. Aykol and S. B. Cronin, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 929 CrossRef CAS .
C. Burda, X. Chen, R. Narayanan and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Yablonovitch, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1987, 58, 2059 CrossRef CAS .
T. Baba, Nat. Photonics, 2008, 2, 465 CrossRef CAS .
A. Imhof, W. L. Vos, R. Sprik and A. Lagendijk, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1999, 83, 2942 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nishimura, N. Abrams, B. A. Lewis, L. I. Halaoui, T. E. Mallouk, K. D. Benkstein, J. V. D. Lagemaat and A. J. Frank, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 6303 CrossRef PubMed .
L. I. Halaoui, N. M. Abrams and T. E. Mallouk, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 6334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Yip, Y.-M. Chiang and C.-C. Wong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 8735 CAS .
X. Q. Chen, J. H. Ye, S. X. Ouyang, T. Kako, Z. S. Li and Z. G. Zou, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lu, H. Yu, S. Chen, X. Quan and H. Zhao, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 1724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, L. Zhang, M. N. Hedhili, H. Zhang and P. Wang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 14 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu and E. S. Aydil, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Jiang, J. F. Bertone, K. S. Hwang and V. L. Colvin, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 2132 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Pu, G. Wang, K.-D. Chang, Y. Ling, Y.-K. Lin, B. C. Fitzmorris, C.-M. Liu, X. Lu, Y. Tong, J. Z. Zhang, Y.-J. Hsu and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3817 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, H. Wang, Y. Ling, Y. Tang, X. Yang, R. C. Fitzmorris, C. Wang, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. McCafferty and J. P. Wightman, Surf. Interface Anal., 1998, 26, 549–564 CrossRef CAS .
I. S. Cho, Z. Chen, A. J. Forman, D. R. Kim, P. M. Rao, T. F. Jaramillo and X. Zheng, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4978 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          K. Sakoda, Optical Properties of Photonic Crystals, Springer-Verlag, Berlin,  2001 Search PubMed .
G. V. Freymann, S. John, S. Wong, V. Kitaev and G. A. Ozin, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 053108 CrossRef PubMed .
J. I. L. Chen, G. V. Freymann, S. Y. Choi, V. Kitaev and G. A. Ozi, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1915 CrossRef CAS .
J. I. L. Chen, E. Loso, N. Ebrahim and G. A. Ozin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mubeen, J. Lee, N. Singh, S. Kramer, G. D. Stucky and M. Moskovits, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, S. Mubeen, X. Ji, G. D. Stucky and M. Moskovits, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5014 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Warren and E. Thimsen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5133 CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ee43278eThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

Broader context
Photoelectrochemial (PEC) water splitting is one of the most promising strategies to directly convert and store solar energy in the form of hydrogen. Searching for a kind of single- or multi-component photoelectrode material with high activity in the whole solar spectrum and concurrently long-term stability is still a challenge. Plasmonic metal nanostructures are the rising stars as photoactive materials due to their many exclusive properties such as high stability and extensively tunable optical response induced by surface plasmon resonance (SPR). Some pioneering endeavors had attempted to design a highly efficient photoactive system by combination of plasmonic metal nanostructures with semiconductors. However, the currently reported solar-to-hydrogen efficiencies based on these composite systems are still unsatisfactory. In this work, an Au/TiO2 composite photoelectrode was constructed by modifying Au nanoparticles (NPs) on a TiO2 bi-layer structure with bottom nanorod array layer and top photonic crystal (PC) layer. By selectively tuning the slow-photon region of the TiO2 PC by altering the structure parameters to match with the SPR region of Au NPs, a synergistically enhanced PEC water splitting efficiency was achieved.


 	Fig. 1  Top view SEM image of (a) TiO2 NRs on the FTO substrate (inset: cross-sectional view SEM image, scale bar is 500 nm), (b) PS opal structure assembled on TiO2 NRs, (c) TiO2 NRPCs (inset: cross-sectional view SEM image, scale bar is 2 μm), (d) TiO2 PC structure on TiO2 NRs.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Low-magnification and (b) high-resolution SEM images of Au/TiO2 NRPCs on the FTO substrate. (c) Low-magnification and (d) high resolution TEM images of Au/TiO2 NRPCs peeled from the FTO substrate. (e) STEM image of Au/TiO2 NRPCs. (f–i) EDS element mapping images of Ti, O, and Au from the selected area marked with red lines in (e).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) XRD patterns of the FTO substrate, TiO2 NRs, TiO2 NRPCs and Au/TiO2 NRPCs. FTO substrate (■); rutile-TiO2 (*); anatase-TiO2 (#). High resolution XPS spectra of (b) Ti 2p, (c) O 1s and (d) Au 4f of Au/TiO2 NRPCs.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Diffused reflectance UV-Vis spectra of TiO2 NRs, Au/TiO2 NRs, TiO2 NRPCs, Au/TiO2 NRPCs. All samples were prior filled with 1 M KOH aqueous solution to ensure the same dielectric environment during the measurement processes. (b) Schematic optical band structure of PCs and electric field distributions of light near the blue edge and red edge of the photonic band gap. The green part indicates the high-dielectric region relative low-dielectric interval region.	 
ERHE = EAg/AgCl + E°Ag/AgCl + 0.059 pH
η = I (1.23 − Vapp)/Plight

 	Fig. 5  Comparisons of PEC properties of four different photoanodes: TiO2 NRs (dark purple solid line), TiO2 NRPCs (green solid line), Au/TiO2 NRs (pink solid line), Au/TiO2 NRPCs (pale purple solid line). (a) Chronoamperometry measurements of four different photoanodes at an external potential of 1 V vs. RHE with repeated on/off circles of simulated sunlight illumination. (b) Linear sweep voltammetry measurements under dark and simulated sunlight illumination with a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. The dark scan results were plotted as the corresponding dotted lines. (c) Photoconversion efficiency as a function of applied potential versus RHE. (d) The evolution of H2 and O2 gases of the four kinds of photoanodes under simulated sunlight illumination. The external potentials imposed on the four kinds photoanodes are derived from the extreme point of photoconversion efficiency: TiO2 NRs (0.74 V vs. RHE), TiO2 NRPCs (0.71 V vs. RHE), Au/TiO2 NRs (0.65 V vs. RHE), Au/TiO2 NRPCs (0.64 V vs. RHE). (e) IPCE spectra measured at 1.23 vs. RHE for the four photoanodes. (f) Amperometric I–t curves of the four different kinds of photoanodes measured at 1 V vs. RHE with repeated on–off cycles of simulated sunlight coupled with a 420 nm cut-off optical filter.	 

 	Fig. 6  Top view and corresponding cross-sectional view (inset) SEM images of (a) TiO2 NRPCs (216), (b) TiO2 NRPCs (292), and (c) disordered TiO2 bi-layer. (d) UV-Vis diffused reflectance spectra of the three TiO2 films on the FTO substrate. Scale bar of all insets in (a), (b) and (c) are 2 μm.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) IPCE spectra measured at 1.23 vs. RHE for the three photoanodes: disordered Au/TiO2 bi-layer structure (green solid line), Au/TiO2 NRPCs (216) (purple solid line), Au/TiO2 NRPCs (292) (pink solid line). (Inset shows the magnified IPCE spectra in the region marked by green dotted rectangular frame.) (b) Corresponding amperometric I–t curves of these three kinds of photoanodes measured at 1 V vs. RHE with repeated on–off cycles of simulated sunlight coupled with a 420 nm cut-off optical filter.	 

 	Fig. 8  IPCE enhancement factor (the ratio of the IPCE of Au/TiO2 NRPC photoanodes to that of the disordered Au/TiO2 bi-layer photoanode) as a function of the wavelength in the visible region.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic diagram for the synergy of the slow photon effect of TiO2 PC and SPR enhanced PEC water splitting under light illumination. The left panel is the schematic drawing of Au/TiO2 NRPCs. Light transmission with a decreased group velocity in the TiO2 PC layer at the red edge of PGB (i.e. slow photon effect). The right panel is the energy diagram of the composite plasmonic photoanode and the mechanism of SPR PEC water splitting. Ecb, conduction band level; Evb, valence band level; Ef, Fermi level at the equilibrium state; φb, the Schottky barrier formed at the Au/TiO2 interface.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ee43278e

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
