Sustainable water generation: grand challenges in continuous atmospheric water harvesting  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2EE01234K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2EE01234K
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 3223-3235Sustainable water generation: grand challenges in continuous atmospheric water harvesting

        
          
            Primož 
            Poredoš
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            He 
            Shan
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Chenxi 
            Wang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Fangfang 
            Deng
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Ruzhu 
            Wang
          
        
      *ab
aInstitute of Refrigeration and Cryogenics, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China. E-mail: rzwang@sjtu.edu.cn
bEngineering Research Center of Solar Power & Refrigeration, MOE China, Shanghai 200240, China
Received 
      15th April 2022
    , Accepted 7th June 2022First published on 7th June 2022AbstractSorption- and radiative sky cooling-based atmospheric water harvesting (AWH) technologies hold promise to provide decentralized fresh water in highly remote and arid regions. The recent emergence of advanced energy materials such as hygroscopic metal–organic frameworks, hydrogels and nanoporous composite sorbents, in addition to radiative sky cooling materials provided the necessary means for AWH. However, truly continuously operational devices are yet to be developed and field-tested. The research focus is now facing a paradigm shift, as future AWH systems are challenged to provide water generation on a kilogram scale, finally meeting a recommended daily water intake per person. This criterion can be adeptly met with continuously operated devices in comparison to discontinuous ones, providing much needed compactness alongside energy and mass efficiency. Here we critically discuss the drawbacks of current energy materials as well as system designs that hinder the use of continuous AWH. Based on identified challenges we outline viable scientific and technological paths. In addition, a possible synergistic effect of sorbents and radiative sky cooling materials on material and system levels to achieve 24 hour continuous fresh water generation is discussed. The provided development paths can spur voluminous avenues into sustainable continuous AWH exploration, making the ultimate goal “to provide fresh water for all” a step closer.

Broader context
Water scarcity affects four billion people. To alleviate this challenge, the atmosphere holding six times the total volume of rivers worldwide emerges as a sustainable source of water. Atmospheric water harvesting takes advantage of porous hygroscopic materials, such as metal–organic frameworks, hydrogels and salt-embedded sorbents along with day-time radiative sky cooling materials. Over the last five years, a myriad of conceptual prototypes, ranging from discontinuous–diurnal to batch and continuously operated devices have attracted substantial attention. However, the field is lacking a comprehensive material- and device-level perspective pertinent to the future progress of continuously operated devices. In order to achieve a water yield beyond the required daily water intake per person, multicyclic operational devices are critically needed, ensuring energy and mass efficiency. This perspective provides a critical overview of recent batch and continuously operated devices, with a focus on future advancements on material and system levels. A set of possible development paths can spur a multitude of new research directions, bringing commercially attractive devices with freshwater generation capabilities one step closer in water-stressed regions.

1. Introduction
Access to clean water is a global challenge and formally recognized technological priority, since four billion people are facing water scarcity at various levels.1 According to National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), the energy imbalance of the Earth is increasing, accelerating the Earth's heating rate due to increased emission of greenhouse gases.2 Moreover, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) reported an average increase of the annual area of drylands of 1% per year over the time period 1961–2013. In light of this global problem, the United Nations General Assembly in 2015 introduced the Sustainable Development Goal 6 (SDG-6) aimed to ensure availability and sustainable management of fresh water for all.3 As freshwater scarcity poses a serious threat to reaching global sustainable development, several new technologies have been introduced, one such being atmospheric water harvesting (AWH).
AWH has been recently recognized as a viable solution due to ubiquitous atmospheric water availability. It is estimated that the atmosphere holds 12.9 tera tons of water, six times the total volume of rivers worldwide.4 The atmospheric water content increased by 0.08 ± 0.04 g kg−1 per decade between 1979 and 2016 over land.5 Out of many AWH technologies, the three including fog capturing,6 water vapor dewing7 and sorption-based AWH8 are the most known and recognized.9 Fog capturing based on a bio-mimic strategy is a promising technology that works predominantly in highly humid ambient with relative humidity (RH) above 65%.10 For instance, inspired by the Namib desert beetle, a fog collector utilizing a superhydrophobic–superhydrophilic fabric with additionally deposited copper particles achieved improved water generation rates11 at 1.4 g h−1 cm−2. However, unlike passive dewing, the active dewing-based AWH using vapor compression refrigeration is energy inefficient in arid regions.12 Considering factors such as available energy and infrastructure on-site along with the geographical and hydrological conditions, the most viable technological solutions have been recognized as sorption-based AWH (SAWH) and radiative cooling AWH (RAWH) in terms of energy efficiency, (semi) passive operation and sustainability.13,14 Both technologies can provide water harvesting from the atmosphere almost anytime and anywhere with a wide operating RH window of ∼10–100%.15,16 RAWH can be classified in two categories, the first corresponding to the dewing process of ambient air15 and the second one to the dewing of the elevated-temperature humid air above the ambient air temperature.17 All subsequent RAWH notations consider the first case unless explicitly stated otherwise.
Even though a multitude of sorbent and radiative sky cooling (RC) materials with encouraging characteristics have been developed recently, only a few papers focused on synergistic development of continuously operated AWH systems. Despite the irrefutable importance of these materials, the majority of current lab-scale AWH systems with a small floor area achieved a relatively low water yield of up to ∼0.3 L day−1 during the field testing. This value shows the apparent mismatch (Fig. 1a) between the absolute amount of water generated and the water demand per capita with up to 4 L day−1 per person18 (specifically 3.7 L for men and 2.7 L for women) being recommended by the US National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine. The easiest solution to increase the water yield beyond 4 L day−1 up to several dozens is to simply scale-up existing AWH systems, although this might lead to inefficient and bulky systems. However, an untapped potential of continuously operated devices in providing compact and efficient solutions for water generation is still largely neglected. The main advantage of such devices over discontinuous ones is the enhanced compactness of devices, as less material is needed for elevated water generation. For the future AWH systems it is undisputedly important to provide fresh water generation throughout the entire day-time, with possible extension into night-time. This can only be achieved either by batch or truly continuous systems. A recent study confirmed this, showing a global potential for drinking water generation by using solar-driven AWH devices with continuous cycling, possibly ensuring fresh water for a billion people worldwide.19 In order to render the scale-up process of AWH devices viable, a better understanding of the importance of specific materials and system characteristics inherent to continuous water generation is critically needed to alleviate possible disadvantages, such as device complexity and high costs.
 Fig. 1  Personal daily water requirements and intrinsic ambient properties for one day. (a) The mismatch between water generation and water requirement per person per day of current net-zero energy (quasi) continuous AWH systems. (b) Intrinsic ambient properties of a typical day (an example: Shanghai, China, September 9th and 10th, 2021) that must be considered for future development of (quasi) continuous AWH systems. 
Two main obstacles toward achieving truly continuously operated SAWH or RAWH have been identified: 1. The external factor – the mismatch between the available water in the atmosphere in the form of moisture and the solar energy owing to the intrinsic properties of a typical day (Fig. 1b) and 2. The internal factor – relatively rudimentary system designs, which do not necessarily consider underlying sorbent and radiative sky cooling materials’ properties. The SAWH systems require heat in the form of direct-solar utilization or electricity (PV-based) to drive the desorption process, while the available moisture in terms of air RH is typically lower during the noon-time (Fig. 1b). The same mismatch is also a critical issue to be solved for future RAWH systems, as even though the reflectivity of the RC material in the solar spectrum approaches unity, the solar energy flux is still one order of magnitude higher than the available net cooling power from the RC material, which translates into critically low fresh water generation.
 Fig. 2  Schematics showing basic mechanisms associated with SAWH and RAWH technologies and its operational modes. (a) Basic mechanisms associated with SAWH and RAWH. Note that sensible cooling, condensation and collection processes are shared among SAWH and RAWH. (b) Simple presentation of the sorption-based and radiative sky cooling material-based AWH technologies. (c) Operational modes depicting SAWH and RAWH processes. Based on different operational strategies of sorbent rotation, SAWH can utilize either discontinuous, quasi continuous (batch) or continuous operation. RAWH is basically a continuous process, with possible interruptions of condensation and water collection process in the case of high parasitic heat gains. 
The main focus of this perspective is put towards net zero-energy (quasi) continuously operated SAWH and RAWH systems. The term net zero-energy refers to exploitation of renewable energy, such as solar PV-, wind-based electricity, solar thermal, etc. by main and auxiliary systems to generate fresh water. Here, we provide novel outlooks on how to achieve truly continuously operated net zero-energy AWH devices based on sorption and radiative cooling materials. We highlight the chief bottlenecks of the current materials and systems, and list possible solutions that are needed to improve SAWH and RAWH technologies. In addition, a discussion on the potential synergistic effects of sorbents and radiative sky cooling materials on the material and system level is provided. Furthermore, an integrated interdisciplinary approach to meet the demands for all-day truly continuous operation of SAWH devices with high water yield is briefly discussed.
Fresh water generation mechanisms and operational modes
Both SAWH and RAWH technologies (Fig. 2b) are similar in terms of the fresh water generation mechanisms, as they share the last three steps – sensible cooling, condensation and collection. The SAWH working mechanism is based on five steps: (1) Sorption of water molecules from air to a highly hygroscopic material under low temperature, high humidity conditions, (2) desorption of the water under high temperature to yield concentrated water vapor thus increasing its dew point temperature, (3) sensible-cooling of the concentrated humid air to its dew-point temperature, (4) the condensation of the water vapor by removing the latent heat, thus forming liquid water and (5) the collection of water droplets in a water tank (Fig. 2a, SAWH path). RAWH on the other hand reduces the complexity of the system, as it requires two less steps in comparison to SAWH: (1) sensible-cooling of humid air owing to inherent properties of radiative sky cooling materials, (2) condensation of the water vapor and (3) the collection of the water (Fig. 2a, RAWH path).
In terms of operational modes, the SAWH works in three distinctive modes (Fig. 2c): (1) discontinuous, where the sorbent material completes only one sorption/desorption cycle per day, (2) quasi continuous (batch) mode, where the sorbent material completes multiple sorption/desorption cycles per day, and (3) continuous mode, where the sorption and desorption take place at the same time within the device. The latter case is possible when sufficient heat on one side of the sorbent is provided to drive the desorption process, while the rest of the sorbent is kept at low (ambient) temperature, thus ensuring the sorption mechanism.20 Thermodynamically speaking, RAWH technology can provide continuous operational mode for the entire day (Fig. 2c), however in the case of extremely low humidity or high solar gains the continuity of the fresh water generation can be endangered.15
2. Materials for continuous AWH exploration
The essence of SAWH and RAWH systems are materials with intrinsic properties tailored for the AWH applications. SAWH devices require solid hygroscopic porous sorbents with a large surface area exhibiting high water uptake, fast sorption and desorption kinetics, good cycling stability and low desorption energy consumption.21 Besides solid sorbents, ionic liquids such as [EMIM][Ac] have also demonstrated possible continuous water generation driven by simultaneous absorption/desorption.22 However, liquid sorbents lack an internal structure and are much harder to deploy in compact systems due to a smaller available specific surface area, which also results in slow sorption kinetics. In general, four different classes of solid sorbents are predominantly used for AWH: physical, chemical, composite and polymeric (composite) sorbents. Traditional physical sorbents, such as silica gel and zeolite exhibit reasonable water uptake in a moderate range of RH. Their mainstream adaptability in AWH is limited by low vapor sorption potential, low thermal conductivity and high regeneration temperatures (>100 °C).23 Chemical sorbents containing hygroscopic salts, such as LiCl, CaCl2 and MgCl2 demonstrate a significantly higher water uptake in a wide range of RH. LiCl has been found as one of the most promising inorganic salts among LiCl, CaCl2, MgSO4, and MgCl2 for AWH applications in an arid climate.8,24 In contrast to CaCl2, LiCl shows up to 20% better sorption kinetics under 20% RH25 by comparing the derivative water uptake (g g−1 h−1) of both salts. In a humid environment with 70% RH, the kinetics of the CaCl2 are more favorable within 100 min of the sorption process. However, after 200 min the LiCl maintains a good water sorption rate with no visible deterioration, unlike CaCl2 demonstrating sluggish kinetics. Equilibrium sorption water uptake of LiCl, CaCl2 and MgCl2 confined in a silica gel KSK host matrix displays comparable values at 0.70, 0.70 and 0.72 g g−1, respectively.24 Nevertheless, a major disadvantage of MgCl2 is the lack of thermal stability. At higher regeneration temperatures (>110 °C) a chemical reaction between chloride ions and water vapor forms corrosive HCl acid.26
During the sorption process three distinctive mechanisms are observed: chemisorption, deliquescence and solution absorption.8 If not contained, deliquesence can cause salt leaching and possible corrosion of the device. In the case of multicyclic operation, salts are prone to form crystal agglomerates during the hydration process, which reduces the kinetics owing to the formation of the crystalline salt passivation layers.27 Recent progress of composite salt-based sorbents virtually eliminated the agglomeration and deliquescence problem, while enhancing the kinetics and sorption capacity (LiCl@rGO–SA:28 1.01, 1.52, 2.76 g g−1 at 15%, 30% 60% RH, respectively, 30 °C for 480 min, Fig. 3a), and scalability. The design of these sorbents is based on the diffusion of salts inside the hierarchically nanoporous matrixes,29 including polymeric networks,30,31 fibrous substances,32,33 microporous open-cell foams,34 and hollow containers.20 Polymeric sorbents in the form of coordination polymers, such as metal–organic frameworks35 (MOFs) and three-dimensional networks containing hydrophilic polymers in the form of hydrogels36 are also popular as a matrix for next-generation composite AWH materials. MOFs and MOF-based composite salt sorbents are known to have exceptionally high porosity leading to ultra-fast and ultra-high water uptake (LiCl@MIL-101(Cr):8 0.68 g g−1 at 30% RH, 30 °C for 160 min) in a low RH environment. On the contrary, various state-of-the art hydrogels and their corresponding composite salt-based sorbents have demonstrated remarkable hygroscopic activity with moderate kinetics predominantly in high RH conditions (SMAG:37 6.1 g g−1 at 90% RH, 25 °C for 600 min; BINA:25 5.6 g g−1 at 70% RH, 25 °C for 700 min). The main drawbacks affecting widespread use of polymeric sorbents are currently related to complex synthesis, high production costs and challenging continuous production.30,31
 Fig. 3  Intrinsic properties of a composite sorbent LiCl@rGO–SA28 and cellulose nanofiber-based structural radiative sky cooling material.44 (a) Water uptake of LiCl@rGO–SA during the sorption and desorption process with the temperature of 30 °C at 15%, 30% and 60% RH, and at 90 °C, 6% RH, respectively.28 (b) Variation of ambient, dew and RC material temperatures along the net cooling power within a 24 hour time frame of a cellulose-based RC material.44 Adapted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2019 The American Association for the Advancement of Science. Dew temperatures were obtained separately from an online weather database45 (1469 ft, 33.65°N, 112.03°W, USA, October 9th and 10th, 2018). (c) Derivative water uptake representing sorption and desorption processes. (d) Left: Angular dependence of surface emissivity on a horizontal surface for blackbody and real surface. Right: Angular dependence for the real surface showing possible enhanced surface emissivity predominantly in the zenith direction indicating the highest surface emissivity and atmospheric transmission. Blackbody surface emissivity is invariant to surface inclination. 
RAWH devices operate on the basis of the dew-cooling mechanism, provided by the spectrally selective RC materials. Daytime RC was made possible in the last decade using different advanced energy materials including metal oxides, biomimetic materials, nanophotonic structures, metamaterials, polymer-based films, paints, and coatings. These materials achieve ∼40–110 W m−2 of net cooling power even under direct sunlight.38–41 The day-time sub-ambient cooling (Fig. 3b) is achieved by leveraging two mechanisms acting simultaneously: high reflectance in the solar spectrum 0.3–2.5 μm and high emissivity over the atmospheric window within the long-wave infrared range 8–13 μm. Currently, the most advanced RC materials have reached a relatively mature stage both in terms of scalability and radiative sky cooling performance, thus becoming suitable for real-world applications such as sub-ambient non-evaporative water cooling42,43 and AWH.15,17
Material development paths for continuous AWH
Despite the relative maturity of SAWH materials several challenges on the material level associated with continuously operated AWH devices still exist. The first challenge is related to the sorption/desorption kinetics (Fig. 3c). While higher sorption equilibrium capacity is more desired in discontinuous systems, where the sorption takes place during the night-time, fast sorption kinetics is preferred in (quasi) continuous systems in order to achieve fast sorption and desorption for multicyclic device operation. Recently reported composite sorbent LiCl@rGO–SA28 with exceptional water uptake has extremely high ratios of sorption vs. desorption water uptake at 14:1, 7:1 and 6:1 at 15%, 30%, and 60% RH, respectively (Fig. 3c). So far, no scientific study reported a sorbent with the sorption/desorption ratio approaching 1:1 in a wide range of RH.13,29–31,46 Encouraging sorption–desorption uptake ratios at 4:1 in the 30–60% RH range have been very recently reported for polymer films composed of biomass and LiCl.47 Therefore, the progress of future sorbent materials used for continuous AWH should be further oriented towards equalized sorption vs. desorption time. The above discussed topic illustrates current mismatch between sorption and desorption rates, exposing a meaningful challenge for sorbent materials.
The key to achieve better sorption kinetics is to improve the micro/nano scale vapor and thermal transport simultaneously. Intra- and inter-crystalline diffusion coefficients referring to sorption kinetics along with 3-D highly thermally conductive networks forming sorbent matrix besides the sorbent thickness, density and porosity, referring to sorbent kinetics should be considered.48,49 In general, highly porous materials with a high BET surface area, enlarging the exposure area to humid air, are preferred in achieving fast sorption kinetics owing to a highly mesoporous network with large accessible pore volumes. As recently highlighted in the case of zeolite-like porous aluminophosphate, larger intervals between solid structures offer a high potential in realizing rapid transfer of water molecules within the interparticle spaces and micropores.50 Moreover, special care should be dedicated to composite sorbents using hygroscopic salts, as high salt wt% has a detrimental effect on sorption kinetics.47 Additional insight into sorption kinetics of hygroscopic hydrogels can be provided by a mechanistic model, showing the importance of the interdependence between the liquid transport through the nanopores in addition to the vapor transport through micropores of the polymer network.51 Similar mechanistic models illuminating chief design parameters for all kinds of sorbents are severely needed for future development of sorbents for continuous AWH. Tailor-made sorbents should be characterized by the semi-linear water-sorption isotherm with a reduced step-wise water uptake beginning at low RH representing an arid environment, while maintaining excellent kinetics under a wide RH range. Further theoretical explorations oriented towards optimized sorption kinetics are possible using single-crystal X-ray diffraction measurements35 complemented by a multiscale computational approach utilizing Grand Canonical Monte Carlo,50 Molecular Dynamics52 simulations and Density Functional Theory35,53 calculations. In addition to improved sorption/desorption kinetics, new mechanisms are encouraged to be examined in the AWH field.
Very recently a possible alternative stimulus for the desorption process akin to the photomolecular effect was introduced.54 The preliminary theoretical analysis of this newly established mechanism points to reduced latent heat during water evaporation, which has been experimentally confirmed in a PVA hydrogel prepared using a freeze-dried method.55 Owing to complex interactions between single and clustered water molecules, and functional groups of polymer chains, three types of water have been confirmed using Raman spectroscopy in PVA hydrogels: free water acting as bulk water, along an intermediate and bound water.56 Weak and strong interactions, respectively, between the polymer networks and the latter types of water can be associated. The reduced evaporation enthalpy phenomenon has been further discussed by the water cluster evaporation theory. Water molecules escape the nanostructured gel network as a bound water cluster, which consists of multiple water molecules linked together by hydrogen bonds.55 Another step toward a comprehensive theoretical understanding of this phenomenon has recently turned to the dual nature of light, where light can be treated as an electromagnetic radiation. A large electrical field gradient acting over the water–vapor interface induces a quadruple force on polar water molecules, which in turn pulls water clusters from the interface.57 A possible research path, linking the electromagnetic nature of light and the water–solid matter interactions has been additionally confirmed by the highest evaporation rate in PVA hydrogels using green (520 nm) LED illumination.54,57 Further research into the interactions between the water molecules, solid matter and different energy sources, such as ultrasound, electrical, magnetic, and electromagnetic fields is thus obviously needed. Fundamental knowledge related to this mechanism could spur the development of new metamaterials with enhanced evaporation performance going beyond theoretical limits, thus bringing more efficient desorption. Possible use of a wide variety of energy sources rather than solar energy is very important for future night-time fresh water generation. Other important sorbent characteristics that must be considered for continuous SAWH systems are: (1) anisotropic thermal conductivity and directional mass transfer in case of a moving sorbent with simultaneous sorption and desorption, (2) cycling and structure stability with accomplished several thousands and up to 1 million cycles for future real-world large-scale systems, (3) air quality (PM2.5 and PM10 particulate matter, dust, etc.) impact on the pore filling process with possible deteriorating sorption kinetics, indicating an urgent need for the development of advanced strategies related to impurities rejection of sorbent materials,58 (4) low specific heat in order to quickly heat up and cool down the sorbent for multicyclic AWH operation. The above presented key development points are oriented toward continuous SAWH.
Unlike material for sorption-based AWH, RC materials rely heavily on the optical properties of a solid matter. One of the most important RC materials’ characteristics severely impacting the AWH potential is the reflectivity in the solar spectrum (Rsolar). As shown in Fig. 3b, the amplitude defining the difference between the RC material's night-time and daytime temperature is extremely large with current RC materials having Rsolar ∼ 0.96.15,38–42,44 Here we note that improper thermal management of a system based on the RC material severely impacts the amplitude. However, even with exceptional thermal insulation these systems hardly achieve deep sub-ambient temperatures,59 since the solar irradiation intensity at 1 kW m−2 is one order of magnitude higher in comparison to the emissive power of RC materials (∼0.1 kW m−2). Therefore, one of the highest priorities for the future development of RC materials should be increasing the RC material's Rsolar to approach unity (>0.99).
The second possible research direction could be oriented at adaptive RC material properties by achieving tunable emissivity in terms of directional distribution of thermal radiation from the RC material surface. As the direct optical path through the atmosphere in the zenith direction leads to the highest surface emissivity and atmospheric transmission besides the smallest atmospheric radiation,60 future RC materials should achieve emissivity with specific angular dependence (Fig. 3d). This condition is certainly important due to different daily spatio-temporal distribution of clouds in the atmosphere, since cloudy conditions have a severe detrimental effect on the cooling performance.61 Another application of tunable emissivity could be focused toward inclined surfaces with the goal to direct surface emission towards the zenith direction. For instance, a recent advance in self-driven electrochromic devices with tunable optical and thermal management shows one potential technological integration,62 while a vertical-cavity enhanced resonant thermal emitter demonstrated tunable emittance that can achieve maximum performance at a certain angle.63 Broader challenges associated with RC materials are related to longevity, reliability and cycle stability during prolonged operation, especially for polymer-based scalable RC films. Rsolar gradually decreases as the material deteriorates under the influence of oxidation of metal layers, moisture, UV light and chemicals.64 Lastly, RC material sensitivity toward dust and particles should be considered especially when used in regions with high airborne particulate and pollutant matter.
The further development of RC materials in terms of net cooling power might soon approach a plateau, as the physical mechanism is based on the radiative heat transfer with known limitations and boundary conditions.65 However, owing to the intrinsic properties of hygroscopic sorbent and RC materials suitable for AWH, the latest trend in new AWH material design is oriented towards synergistic integration of sorption and radiative sky cooling mechanisms. The next-generation composite materials could leverage sustainable materials with RC properties, coupled with a chemical sorbent, such as LiCl.66 This could bring all-weather, truly continuous AWH even closer to reality on a material level. Assuming that the viability of these hybrid S(R)AWH-based materials is successfully demonstrated, more research studies concerning devices tested in arid regions under real-world conditions are indispensable.
3. Possible advancements in system designs
Promising hygroscopic sorbent and RC materials with extraordinary performance have been used for several proof-of-concept devices for both SAWH and RAWH applications. The majority of conceptual SAWH devices introduced monocyclic operation with only one sorption/desorption process.13,21,67,68 Although expecting to achieve enhanced water generation with a reduced amount of the sorbent, few solar-driven multicyclic SAWH devices were reported. The majority of these introduced batch water generation.28,69–72 Recently only one conceptual truly continuously operated prototype has been tested under laboratory conditions using artificial light.20 The first step towards continuous AWH was to achieve multiple sorption–desorption cycles in batches. The study provided by Xu et al. demonstrated an important pathway for solar-driven sustainable batch AWH28 with ultrahigh water productivity up to 2120 mLwater kgsorbent−1 day−1 under one sun irradiation. The device design was simple with four sorbent beds consisting of LiCl@rGO–SA with the length L1 (Fig. 4a(S1)), where three sorbent beds were shaded and exposed to ambient air using forced convection capturing water from air. The fourth and the most top positioned sorbent bed was exposed to sun, releasing water vapor in the downward direction, where the condensation process occurred. The advanced design of this device provided an additional function of enhanced air flow. Compared to the passive condenser operation, the active one decreased the temperature difference between the condenser and the ambient by more than 10 °C. In an effort to further improve the batch mechanism and thus the overall water yield, the highest average desorption kinetics can be achieved by faster switching between sorption beds. This is conceivable by the two-step approach (1) a higher amount of smaller sorbet beds (L2 and L3 in Fig. 4a(S2) and (S3)) that must be switched rapidly and (2) solar energy concentration73 by extending the solar absorber to the sides of the device. However, this concept could be energy inefficient as every switch introduces heat losses on account of the heating-up and cooling-down of a sorbent bed. The next step to achieving truly continuously operated SAWH has already been taken, by coating the rotating cylinder with a composite sorbent composed of carbon hollow capsules with LiCl inside20 (Fig. 4a(S4)). This lab-scale device achieved higher specific water generation in comparison to the batch-mode operated one with up to 2560 mLwater kgsorbent−1 day−1 under one sun irradiation. In comparison to the S1 device, the S4 device used a rotating mechanism that provided a continuous cylinder rotation. Sorption and water vapor condensation rates were not augmented by using active mechanisms, such as enhanced air flow provided by fans. The water vapor that desorbed from the illuminated surface of the cylinder condensed on the inner sides of a copper condenser. Unlike the S1 device with the downward vapor flow using the “back-side” configuration of the desorption area, the S4 leverages the buoyancy-assisted vapor transport owing to the “front-side” configuration. The main differentiation between these two is the location of the solar absorption and desorption processes. Both processes occur on the same side while using a “front-side” configuration in comparison to opposite sides characterized by the “back-side” one.74
 Fig. 4  Possible paths for future SAWH, RAWH, multi-stage SAWH and hybrid S(R)AWH system designs leveraging intrinsic air, hygroscopic sorbent and RC material properties. (a) Development path for continuously operated SAWH based on existing conceptual devices (S1 and S4) to provide high-yield compact sorption-based AWH. (b) Development path for continuously operated RAWH based on the existing conceptual device (R1) in order to achieve continuously operated RAWH in harsh ambient conditions, down to 10% RH. (c) Multi-stage concept of the continuously operated SAWH device, providing an elevated temperature range across all stages with increased water yield and energy efficient water generation. (d) System-wide synergistic effect of a hybrid SAWH and RAWH system, providing fresh water generation during the day and night-time. 
While the S4 approach in comparison to S1 showed slightly better water generation per sorbent mass, future scale-up based on the S4 approach remains questionable in terms of water generation per volume. The design improvement, as shown in S5, could ensure compactness of the continuously operated device. Under certain design parameters (S5: W and H vs. S4: R4), the sorbent area per device volume of S5 (m2sorbent L−1device) can be more than doubled in comparison to S4. Also, device S5 in comparison to S4 provides a significantly better ratio between the desorption area (parameter E, Fig. 4a) and the sorption area. In order to fully leverage both S4 and S5 concepts, sorbents with anisotropic thermal conductivity75 and structure that ensure directional water vapor diffusion are required. For instance, vertically aligned pores in the GO–SA matrix produced by the directional freezing casting method28 could improve the energy and mass efficiency of the entire system. Additional care must be taken to ensure good thermal and mass barriers into continuously operated SAWH devices, since the linear/rotational movement of a sorbent introduces severe mass losses.
Comparatively, continuous RAWH devices have received less attention. To date, only one research study demonstrated almost uninterrupted continuously operated RAWH device, operated in semi passive mode.15 The system design consisted of a spectrally selective RC material with the transparent insulating film on top of it with the function to suppress the parasitic heat gains from ambient (Fig. 4b(R1)). On the sides of the device, a radiation shield was placed to reduce the atmospheric radiative heat gains as well as direct solar radiation at a large zenith angle. The net cooling power of the radiative condenser depends on four main thermal fluxes: radiative cooling power of a spectrally selective emitter, radiative heat gains from the sun and the atmosphere, and parasitic heat gains from the ambient. The available net cooling power is then used for sensible cooling of the air down to its dew point temperature, and to overcome the latent heat of condensation, which triggers the formation of the liquid water droplets on a cold surface. The surface of the selective emitter in direct contact with the moist air was impregnated by a 2 μm thick superhydrophobic carbon nanofiber, inducing dropwise condensation with a gravity-independent jumping mechanism for passive removal of water droplets. The device achieved dew harvesting with the RH down to 65%. However, continuous 24 hour water generation with one interruption at about noon time was showcased only in the case of RH > 90%. Moreover, experiments were performed with a special environmental experimental chamber that enabled controlled RH with fans providing air circulation. The next step to achieving truly continuously operated RAWH devices with RH down to 30% could be realized by using cooling energy concentration and localization (Fig. 4b(R2)). In this strategy, the cooling energy, provided by the RC material is concentrated and directed towards the smaller surface area at the bottom of the RC material, marked as a condensing part in Fig. 4b(R2). Consequently, a larger net cooling power per smaller surface area achieves a dewing process under harsh ambient conditions at low RH. This approach critically needs validation by the means of numerical simulations, which could provide an insight into the temperature gradient along the RC material73 and identify the boundaries within cooling energy concentration and localization is viable. Another possible variant (Fig. 4b(R3)) would be the insertion of an additional radiative shield and the second thin film insulation layer, that could synergistically provide an even higher cooling energy performance of the system. Shielding of the device from the wind is also important to suppress heat gains from the ambient air, especially in the case of higher wind speeds. Moreover, as currently RC materials hardly achieve Rsolar values close to unity (0.99 or higher), an additional sun shield59 could be deployed in order to ensure only diffuse sunlight exposure of the selective emitter during the day-time period. The sun shield combined with the one- or the two-barrier thin film, where the latter twin-film configuration achieves the highest degree of temperature gradient from the top to the bottom of the radiation shield provides the lowest degree of parasitic heat gains from the ambient. An additional step toward increasing the compactness of the device in terms of specific water yield kgwater L−1device can be realized by applying an RC material to all surfaces that are available for emitting heat, including inner sides of a radiation shield (Fig. 4b(R4)). To check the viability of this concept, multiphysics simulations utilizing a ray tracing method76 that consider rays originating from the sun, the atmosphere and the RC material in order to find the optimal inclination angle of the radiation shield (φ in Fig. 4b(R4)) must be undertaken.
Distinct attention should be devoted to the overall thermal management of radiative coolers with enhanced air flow. With the transparent film on the top of the radiative sky cooling material and non-transparent thermal insulation, such as conventional solid thermal insulation applied on all other external surfaces except for the condensing part, a larger net cooling power is still attainable using forced convection of ambient air. Moreover, the increased velocity of the air flowing over the condensing surface increases the condensate mass flow rate.77
The importance of multi-staging and system-wide hybridization
The majority of experimental SAWH studies neglected the importance of system-wide heat and mass transfer analysis, which pinpoints limiting factors of a certain system design and offers means to improve the energy and mass efficiency resulting in a greater water yield.78 Given the exponential relation that describes the capability of air to absorb the moisture, a larger temperature difference between the desorption and condensation sides leads to a higher partial water pressure difference, substantially increasing the water yield. Lately, one of the first approaches by applying the perforated thermal insulation panel between the desorption and condensation parts of a batch-operated single stage SAWH system has been observed.28 The temperature difference increased by ∼50% and yielded ∼25% higher vapor diffusional flux. A similar effect, but with significantly increased water yield and energy efficiency can be achieved by leveraging the multi-stage approach in future continuously operated SAWH devices. Each stage introduces the heat resistance layer that increases the temperature difference across the entire range of stages, while the multiple desorption–condensation pairs enable latent heat recycling (Fig. 4c). Hence, future continuously operated SAWH systems should consider a multi-stage approach with enhanced heat and mass barriers across the stages. Given the reduced time of sorbent movement in the case of batch operated SAWH devices, a multi-stage approach seems more applicable in comparison to SAWH with constant sorbent motion.
In light of the previous comment on the importance of elevated air temperature in the system, the combination of RC material with sorbent-based continuous AWH systems might be more suitable to lower the temperature of the sorbent during the sorption process rather than increase the condensation rates. The concept of sorbent cooling provided by RC materials during night-time operation has been explored in one of the early conceptual monocyclic SAWH device.79 The sorption process in nature is exothermic, which has a detrimental effect on the sorption kinetics. In the short- to mid-term future a system-wide integration of RAWH and SAWH could be utilized for 24 hour continuously operated hybrid S(R)AWH (Fig. 4d). During the day-time sorbents provide saturated water vapor with elevated temperature above the ambient that is predominantly condensed on the surface covered by the RC material. The night-time ambient properties with high RH together with the RC material's intrinsic properties ensure a dewing process, in that way virtually extending fresh water generation capabilities to day and night.
4. Summary and outlook
In response to the urgent need to provide safely managed drinking water in impoverished countries that face severe water scarcity, truly continuously operational and sustainable devices are yet to be deployed. Here we provided an outlook with the possible future development paths with the aim to make the development of multicyclic continuously operated sorption and radiative sky cooling AWH (Fig. 5) far less tedious.
 Fig. 5  Outlook for continuously operated SAWH, RAWH and hybrid S(R)AWH, providing safely managed drinking water. 
First and foremost, the physicochemical properties of sorbent-based and RC materials are far from ideal. For instance, equalized kinetics for the sorption and desorption process for sorbents and increased solar reflectivity close to unity for RC materials could bring a much needed push in accomplishing continuous AWH. Along with the possible integration of both sorption and RC mechanisms on material and system levels, this strategy seems beneficial in providing the necessary bridge between both worlds in terms of extended operation, with the final goal of achieving 24 hour operation. Future advanced energy materials tailored for specific AWH use are required to provide satisfactory chemical and cycling stability. For extensive use in freshwater applications the material must be produced in a scalable and cost-effective manner, with emphasis on environmental friendliness.
The second important contribution is expected to come from applied thermal engineering science, which is challenged to design continuously operated SAWH and RAWH devices with consistent system performance over a wide range of RH values, down to 10%. Latest advancements in thermal engineering, such as thermal concentration and localized heating and cooling showed relatively simple and cost-effective solutions to overcome grand challenges associated with system designs. To augment the fresh water yield, multi-stage continuously operated SAWH proof-of-concepts are essential to accentuate energy efficiency along compactness and portability of the devices. A better understanding of the physical mechanism on a system level and corresponding system metrics is critical for the development of both new materials and composites as well as new devices. A large mismatch between the absolute water production of lab-scale devices with small floor areas and the water demand per capita calls for additional research directions, focused on bridging this disparity. Further inquiries of novel systems should focus on the increased compactness of such devices, increasing the quantity of generated water (Lwater) versus the floor, weight, and volumetric characteristics of systems (Ldevice, kgdevice, kgsorbent, m2solar, m2RC mat.).
In terms of 24 hour continuous operation, SAWH and RAWH technologies are close to the verge of this achievement. RAWH could relatively easily accomplish this challenge single-handedly with the advancement of RC material and suitable system design. SAWH devices on the other hand need substantially more effort to ensure fresh water generation during the night-time. Therefore, a diverse interdisciplinary approach is needed to achieve this goal. In arid regions with high water scarcity, solar energy is abundant. However, due to apparent mismatch of available solar energy for desorption and relatively high RH during the night-time, novel approaches to utilize solar energy throughout a 24 hour time period must be pursued. Given the relatively low solar-to-electrical energy conversion efficiency, almost ∼80% of available solar energy is wasted. The complexity of the AWH devices is therefore potentiated by incorporation of photovoltaic/thermal solutions. While batteries are already an excellent solution to store electrical energy, the main challenge with thermal storage is related to ineffective thermal utilization owing to heat losses and ineffective heat direction. Innovations in this field enable the use of an adsorption thermal battery, based on a thermochemical reversible reaction that has an ultra-high energy storage density with negligible thermal loss.80 In addition to heating energy, mechanical energy for linear or rotational movement is obviously needed. Future systems could leverage different principles that provide mechanical energy harvesting,81 such as a buoyancy-driven effect, mass-exchange effect provided by the water transfer from/to sorbent beds, gravitational- and centrifugal force-based mechanisms or wind energy exploitation.
In conclusion, AWH offers a unique opportunity to provide simple, affordable devices for fresh water generation in arid regions. Here, we have highlighted challenges that need urgent resolution in order to achieve truly continuous AWH. With the provided recommendations and guidelines in the form of possible future development paths, the development of next-generation sustainable net zero-energy devices to ensure safely managed drinking water for people living in water-stressed regions, is soon expected to become a reality.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This research work was funded by the Research Fund for International Young Scientists of the National Natural Science Foundation of China [No. 52150410421], the Foundation for Innovative Research Groups of the National Natural Science Foundation of China [No. 51521004], and the Shanghai Agriculture Applied Technology Development Program of China [No. 2019-02-08-00-08-F01124]. The authors thank ITEWA (Innovative Team on Energy-Water-Air Nexus) research group members for the encouragement and support.
References
M. M. Mekonnen and A. Y. Hoekstra, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1500323 CrossRef .
N. G. Loeb, G. C. Johnson, T. J. Thorsen, J. M. Lyman, F. G. Rose and S. Kato, Geophys. Res. Lett., 2021, 48, e2021GL093047 CrossRef .
Global Indicator Framework for the Sustainable Development Goals and Targets of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (United Nations, 2018).

          I. A. Shiklomanov, A Summary of the Monograph World Water Resources, UNESCO,  1998 Search PubMed .
M. P. Byrne and P. A. O’Gorman, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 4863–4868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ju, H. Bai, Y. Zheng, T. Zhao, R. Fang and L. Jiang, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1247 CrossRef .
B. Gido, E. Friedler and D. M. Broday, Atmos. Res., 2016, 182, 156–162 CrossRef .
J. Xu, T. Li, J. Chao, S. Wu, T. Yan, W. Li, B. Cao and R. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 5202–5210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tu, R. Wang, Y. Zhang and J. Wang, Joule, 2018, 2, 1452–1475 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yu, T. Zhu, J. Zhang, M. Ge, S. Fu and Y. Lai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 2200359 CrossRef CAS  Online Ver.
Z. Yu, H. Zhang, J. Huang, S. Li, S. Zhang, Y. Cheng, J. Mao, X. Dong, S. Gao, S. Wang, Z. Chen, Y. Jiang and Y. Lai, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2021, 61, 85–92 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hua, J. Xu and R. Wang, Nano Energy, 2021, 85, 105977 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, X. Xu, X. Sheng, P. Lin, J. Tang, L. Pan, Y. V. Kaneti, T. Yang and Y. Yamauchi, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 12535–12566 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, C. Lin, J. Huang, C. Chi and B. Huang, Global Challenges, 2021, 5, 2000058 CrossRef .
I. Haechler, H. Park, G. Schnoering, T. Gulich, M. Rohner, A. Tripathy, A. Milionis, T. M. Schutzius and D. Poulikakos, Sci. Adv., 2021, 7, eabf3978 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Kalmutzki, C. S. Diercks and O. M. Yaghi, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704304 CrossRef .
M. Zhou, H. Song, X. Xu, A. Shahsafi, Y. Qu, Z. Xia, Z. Ma, M. A. Kats, J. Zhu, B. S. Ooi, Q. Gan and Z. Yu, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2021, 118, e2019292118 CrossRef CAS .

          Institute of Medicine, Dietary Reference Intakes for Water, Potassium, Sodium, Chloride, and Sulfate, The National Academies Press, Washington, DC,  2005 Search PubMed .
J. Lord, A. Thomas, N. Treat, M. Forkin, R. Bain, P. Dulac, C. H. Behroozi, T. Mamutov, J. Fongheiser, N. Kobilansky, S. Washburn, C. Truesdell, C. Lee and P. H. Schmaelzle, Nature, 2021, 598, 611–617 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Li, Y. Shi, M. Wu, S. Hong and P. Wang, Nano Energy, 2020, 67, 104255 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ejeian and R. Z. Wang, Joule, 2021, 5, 1678–1703 CrossRef .
H. Qi, T. Wei, W. Zhao, B. Zhu, G. Liu, P. Wang, Z. Lin, X. Wang, X. Li, X. Zhang and J. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lu, W. Shi, Y. Guo, W. Guan, C. Lei and G. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2110079 CrossRef CAS .
Y. I. Aristov, J. Eng. Thermophys., 2007, 16, 63–72 CrossRef .
A. Entezari, M. Ejeian and R. Wang, ACS Mater. Lett., 2020, 2, 471–477 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yuan, H. Zhang, F. Yang, N. Zhang and X. Cao, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 54, 761–776 CrossRef .
R. Younesi, G. M. Veith, P. Johansson, K. Edström and T. Vegge, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1905–1922 RSC .
J. Xu, T. Li, T. Yan, S. Wu, M. Wu, J. Chao, X. Huo, P. Wang and R. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 5979 RSC .
K. Yang, T. Pan, Q. Lei, X. Dong, Q. Cheng and Y. Han, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2021, 55, 6542–6560 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, X. Wang and F. Kapteijn, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 8303–8377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, J. Bae, Z. Fang, P. Li, F. Zhao and G. Yu, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 7642–7707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shan, Q. Pan, C. Xiang, P. Poredoš, Q. Ma, Z. Ye, G. Hou and R. Wang, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2021, 2, 100664 CrossRef CAS .
F. Deng, C. Wang, C. Xiang and R. Wang, Nano Energy, 2021, 90, 106642 CrossRef CAS .
F. Deng, C. Xiang, C. Wang and R. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 6576–6586 RSC .
N. Hanikel, X. Pei, S. Chheda, H. Lyu, W. S. Jeong, J. Sauer, L. Gagliardi and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2021, 374, 454–459 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lei, Y. Guo, W. Guan, H. Lu, W. Shi and G. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202200271 CAS .
F. Zhao, X. Zhou, Y. Liu, Y. Shi, Y. Dai and G. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806446 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Li, X. Liu, W. Li, Z. Lin, B. Zhu, Z. Li, J. Li, B. Li, S. Fan, J. Xie and J. Zhu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2021, 16, 153–158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Mandal, Y. Fu, A. C. Overvig, M. Jia, K. Sun, N. N. Shi, H. Zhou, X. Xiao, N. Yu and Y. Yang, Science, 2018, 362, 315–319 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhai, Y. Ma, S. N. David, D. Zhao, R. Lou, G. Tan, R. Yang and X. Yin, Science, 2017, 355, 1062–1066 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. Raman, M. A. Anoma, L. Zhu, E. Rephaeli and S. Fan, Nature, 2014, 515, 540–544 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhao, A. Aili, Y. Zhai, J. Lu, D. Kidd, G. Tan, X. Yin and R. Yang, Joule, 2019, 3, 111–123 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Goldstein, A. P. Raman and S. Fan, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17143 CrossRef .
T. Li, Y. Zhai, S. He, W. Gan, Z. Wei, M. Heidarinejad, D. Dalgo, R. Mi, X. Zhao, J. Song, J. Dai, C. Chen, A. Aili, A. Vellore, A. Martini, R. Yang, J. Srebric, X. Yin and L. Hu, Science, 2019, 364, 760–763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Pepper Ridge WX & Lightning - nr. Cave Creek Rd & Union Hills Dr - KAZPHOEN36, web page, accessed: 29.5.2022, https://www.wunderground.com/dashboard/pws/KAZPHOEN36.
L. Zhang, W. X. Fang, C. Wang, H. Dong, S. H. Ma and Y. H. Luo, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2021, 8, 898–913 RSC .
Y. Guo, W. Guan, C. Lei, H. Lu, W. Shi and G. Yu, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 2761 CrossRef CAS .
A. LaPotin, Y. Zhong, L. Zhang, L. Zhao, A. Leroy, H. Kim, S. R. Rao and E. N. Wang, Joule, 2021, 5, 166–182 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, L. Hua, H. Yan, B. Li, Y. Tu and R. Wang, Joule, 2020, 4, 435–447 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, J. Xu, M. Xu, C. Huang, R. Wang, T. Li and X. Huai, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 193 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. Díaz-Marín, L. Zhang, Z. Lu, M. Alshrah, J. C. Grossman and E. N. Wang, Nano Lett., 2022, 22, 1100–1107 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Ohkubo, S. Gin, M. Collin and Y. Iwadate, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 3761 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Geitner, S. Götz, R. Stach, M. Siegmann, P. Krebs, S. Zechel, K. Schreyer, A. Winter, M. D. Hager, U. S. Schubert, S. Gräfe, B. Dietzek, B. Mizaikoff, M. Schmitt and J. Popp, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2018, 122, 2677–2687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          Y. Tu, J. Zhou, S. Lin, M. Alshrah, X. Zhao and G. Chen, 2022, arXiv:2201.10385 DOI:10.48550/arXiv.2201.10385.
F. Zhao, X. Zhou, Y. Shi, X. Qian, M. Alexander, X. Zhao, S. Mendez, R. Yang, L. Qu and G. Yu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 489–495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, F. Zhao, Y. Guo, B. Rosenberger and G. Yu, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaaw5484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          Y. Tu and G. Chen, 2022, arXiv:2202.10646 DOI:10.48550/arXiv.2202.10646.
H. Yao, P. Zhang, Y. Huang, H. Cheng, C. Li and L. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1905875 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, L. Zhu, A. Raman and S. Fan, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. B. Smith, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 1696–1701 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Tso, K. C. Chan and C. Y. H. Chao, Renewable Energy, 2017, 106, 52–61 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gong, J. Ai, W. Li, J. Zhu, Q. Zhang, J. Liu, Y. Jin and H. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 50319–50328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Celanovic, D. Perreault and J. Kassakian, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 075127 CrossRef .
D. Zhao, A. Aili, Y. Zhai, S. Xu, G. Tan, X. Yin and R. Yang, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2019, 6, 021306 Search PubMed .
A. S. Farooq, P. Zhang, Y. Gao and R. Gulfam, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2021, 144, 110910 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, S. Gao, H. Zhong, B. Zhang, M. Cui, M. Jiang, S. Wang and Z. Wang, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2022, 3, 100879 CrossRef .
B. Wang, X. Zhou, Z. Guo and W. Liu, Nano Today, 2021, 40, 101283 CrossRef CAS .
N. Asim, M. Badiei, M. A. Alghoul, M. Mohammad, N. A. Samsudin, N. Amin and K. Sopian, Rev. Environ. Sci. Bio/Technol., 2021, 20, 257–279 CrossRef CAS .
H. Park, I. Haechler, G. Schnoering, M. D. Ponte, T. M. Schutzius and D. Poulikakos, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 2237–2245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wu, W. Su, Q. Li, Y. Tao and H. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 38906–38915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yang, T. Pan, I. Pinnau, Z. Shi and Y. Han, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105326 CrossRef CAS .
N. Hanikel, M. S. Prévot, F. Fathieh, E. A. Kapustin, H. Lyu, H. Wang, N. J. Diercks, T. G. Glover and O. M. Yaghi, ACS Cent. Sci., 2019, 5, 1699–1706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ni, G. Li, S. V. Boriskina, H. Li, W. Yang, T. J. Zhang and G. Chen, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16126 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, Z. Xu, L. Zhao, B. Bhatia, Y. Zhong, S. Gong and E. N. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 1771 RSC .
T. Li, M. Wu, S. Wu, S. Xiang, J. Xu, J. Chao, T. Yan, T. Deng and R. Wang, Nano Energy, 2021, 89, 106338 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Ahmed, M. Jongewaard, M. Li and E. R. Blatchley, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52, 4738–4745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Poredoš, N. Petelin, B. Vidrih, T. Žel, Q. Ma, R. Wang and A. Kitanovski, iScience, 2022, 25, 103565 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Xu, L. Zhang, L. Zhao, B. Li, B. Bhatia, C. Wang, K. L. Wilke, Y. Song, O. Labban, J. H. Lienhard, R. Wang and E. N. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 830 RSC .
H. Kim, S. R. Rao, E. A. Kapustin, L. Zhao, S. Yang, O. M. Yaghi and E. N. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1191 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Y. Zeng, B. C. Zhao and R. Z. Wang, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2021, 2, 100578 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fu, X. Mei, D. Yurchenko, S. Zhou, S. Theodossiades, K. Nakano and E. M. Yeatman, Joule, 2021, 5, 1074–1118 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Broader context
Water scarcity affects four billion people. To alleviate this challenge, the atmosphere holding six times the total volume of rivers worldwide emerges as a sustainable source of water. Atmospheric water harvesting takes advantage of porous hygroscopic materials, such as metal–organic frameworks, hydrogels and salt-embedded sorbents along with day-time radiative sky cooling materials. Over the last five years, a myriad of conceptual prototypes, ranging from discontinuous–diurnal to batch and continuously operated devices have attracted substantial attention. However, the field is lacking a comprehensive material- and device-level perspective pertinent to the future progress of continuously operated devices. In order to achieve a water yield beyond the required daily water intake per person, multicyclic operational devices are critically needed, ensuring energy and mass efficiency. This perspective provides a critical overview of recent batch and continuously operated devices, with a focus on future advancements on material and system levels. A set of possible development paths can spur a multitude of new research directions, bringing commercially attractive devices with freshwater generation capabilities one step closer in water-stressed regions.


 	Fig. 1  Personal daily water requirements and intrinsic ambient properties for one day. (a) The mismatch between water generation and water requirement per person per day of current net-zero energy (quasi) continuous AWH systems. (b) Intrinsic ambient properties of a typical day (an example: Shanghai, China, September 9th and 10th, 2021) that must be considered for future development of (quasi) continuous AWH systems.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematics showing basic mechanisms associated with SAWH and RAWH technologies and its operational modes. (a) Basic mechanisms associated with SAWH and RAWH. Note that sensible cooling, condensation and collection processes are shared among SAWH and RAWH. (b) Simple presentation of the sorption-based and radiative sky cooling material-based AWH technologies. (c) Operational modes depicting SAWH and RAWH processes. Based on different operational strategies of sorbent rotation, SAWH can utilize either discontinuous, quasi continuous (batch) or continuous operation. RAWH is basically a continuous process, with possible interruptions of condensation and water collection process in the case of high parasitic heat gains.	 

 	Fig. 3  Intrinsic properties of a composite sorbent LiCl@rGO–SA28 and cellulose nanofiber-based structural radiative sky cooling material.44 (a) Water uptake of LiCl@rGO–SA during the sorption and desorption process with the temperature of 30 °C at 15%, 30% and 60% RH, and at 90 °C, 6% RH, respectively.28 (b) Variation of ambient, dew and RC material temperatures along the net cooling power within a 24 hour time frame of a cellulose-based RC material.44 Adapted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2019 The American Association for the Advancement of Science. Dew temperatures were obtained separately from an online weather database45 (1469 ft, 33.65°N, 112.03°W, USA, October 9th and 10th, 2018). (c) Derivative water uptake representing sorption and desorption processes. (d) Left: Angular dependence of surface emissivity on a horizontal surface for blackbody and real surface. Right: Angular dependence for the real surface showing possible enhanced surface emissivity predominantly in the zenith direction indicating the highest surface emissivity and atmospheric transmission. Blackbody surface emissivity is invariant to surface inclination.	 

 	Fig. 4  Possible paths for future SAWH, RAWH, multi-stage SAWH and hybrid S(R)AWH system designs leveraging intrinsic air, hygroscopic sorbent and RC material properties. (a) Development path for continuously operated SAWH based on existing conceptual devices (S1 and S4) to provide high-yield compact sorption-based AWH. (b) Development path for continuously operated RAWH based on the existing conceptual device (R1) in order to achieve continuously operated RAWH in harsh ambient conditions, down to 10% RH. (c) Multi-stage concept of the continuously operated SAWH device, providing an elevated temperature range across all stages with increased water yield and energy efficient water generation. (d) System-wide synergistic effect of a hybrid SAWH and RAWH system, providing fresh water generation during the day and night-time.	 

 	Fig. 5  Outlook for continuously operated SAWH, RAWH and hybrid S(R)AWH, providing safely managed drinking water.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
