An AIPH-decorated semiconducting nanoagonist for NIR-II light-triggered photothermic/thermodynamic combinational therapy   - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2CC01207C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2CC01207C
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2022, 58, 7400-7403An AIPH-decorated semiconducting nanoagonist for NIR-II light-triggered photothermic/thermodynamic combinational therapy†

        
          
            Guangzhao 
            Yang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xi 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shan 
            Zhou
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wen 
            Zhou
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chao 
            Yin
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Chen 
            Xie
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Quli 
            Fan
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Wei 
            Huang
          
        
      b
aState Key Laboratory of Organic Electronics and Information Displays & Institute of Advanced Materials (IAM), Nanjing University of Posts & Telecommunications, 9 Wenyuan Road, Nanjing 210023, China. E-mail: iamcyin@njupt.edu.cn; iamcxie@njupt.edu.cn; iamqlfan@njupt.edu.cn
bFrontiers Science Center for Flexible Electronics (FSCFE), MIIT Key Laboratory of Flexible Electronics (KLoFE), Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi'an 710072, China
Received 
      28th February 2022
    , Accepted 6th June 2022First published on 6th June 2022AbstractA multifunctional semiconducting nanoagonist with high photothermic conversion efficiency (86.2%) and alkyl radical generation ability was developed. The nanoagonist demonstrated excellent anticancer performance through NIR-II light-triggered photothermic/thermodynamic combinational therapy both in vitro and in vivo.
Photothermic therapy (PTT), which is based on the photothermic conversion pathway resulting from the nonradiative decay of photothermic agents (PTAs) under light irradiation, has exhibited obvious superiorities in cancer therapy, including minimal invasiveness, ideal therapeutic effect, easy operation process, and high selectivity to lesion sites.1,2 In PTT, light irradiation is an indispensable element. Although near-infrared-I (650–950 nm) light shows stronger tissue penetration ability than ultraviolet-visible light, the photon scattering effect of NIR-I light when passing through the biological tissues is still non-negligible,3 which is unfavorable for deep tumor PTT. Recently developed PTT that was conducted over the near-infrared-II (NIR-II, 1000–1700 nm) biowindow possesses greater superiority over NIR-I PTT, which can be reflected in three aspects. First, NIR-II light exhibits attenuated photon scattering relative to that of NIR-I light,4,5 which is beneficial to further increase the therapeutic depth. Second, biological tissues show higher tolerance to NIR-II light irradiation compared to NIR-I light,6,7 which allows the usage of NIR-II light with a higher power. Third, some biological components, such as skin, fat, and blood, exhibit relatively weak absorption toward NIR-II light,8 which is beneficial for reducing the adverse effects of PTT on normal tissues. Therefore, NIR-II PTT has promising potential for clinical applications.
Among numerous NIR-II PTAs, semiconducting polymers (SPs) have shown great promise owing to their high absorption coefficient and long absorption wavelength.9 However, no matter whether organic or inorganic nanomaterials are used as the PTAs, the incomplete ablation or recidivation of tumor lesions is recurrent after a single NIR-II PTT, which makes the therapeutic effect unsatisfactory.10–13 Generally, two factors contribute to such a poor therapeutic performance. On the one hand, upon intravenous administration, only a small portion of the NIR-II PTAs passively target the tumor site via the enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effect because the EPR effect is inadequate in tumors,14 thus leading to a poor accumulation efficiency. On the other hand, the heat shock protein (HSP) which is overexpressed by tumor cells under hyperthermia, would trigger the anti-apoptosis mechanisms, thereby compromising the efficacy of PTT.15,16 Thus, optimizing the nano-formula of NIR-II PTAs to endow them with superior functionalities is highly desired for achieving improved therapeutic performance.
Herein, we developed a 2,2′-azobis[2-(2-imidazolin-2-yl)propane]dihydrochloride (AIPH)-decorated semiconducting nanoagonist (SPN@AIPH) for NIR-II light-triggered photothermic/thermodynamic combination therapy against cancer (Scheme 1). AIPH is an azo compound that encounters decomposition under heating conditions to produce alkyl radicals.17 These toxic radicals can kill cells through oxidizing cell components, which implies the promising potential for cancer ablation.18 Such a process is defined as “thermodynamic therapy”. The fabrication of SPN@AIPH can be divided into four steps. First, a NIR-II absorptive semiconducting polymer (SP) with D-A1–D-A2 architecture was synthesized via Stille coupling polymerization (Fig. S1, ESI†), which was verified by 1H NMR (Fig. S3, ESI†). Besides, gel permeation chromatography (GPC) measurement indicated a large molecular weight of SP with a narrow polydispersity index (PDI) (Table S1, ESI†), further confirming the successful coupling polymerization. Second, the hyaluronic acid (HA)-based amphiphilic polymer (HA-DSPE-PEG) was prepared through amidation followed by a “click” reaction (Fig. S2, ESI†), which was confirmed by 1H NMR characterization (Fig. S4, ESI†). HA was employed here because it could specifically recognize the CD44 receptors overexpressed on the tumor cell surfaces, thus improving the targeting capability toward the tumor.19 Third, the semiconducting polymer nanoparticles (SPNs) were prepared through a nanoprecipitation approach using the SP and HA-DSPE-PEG. Finally, the AIPH was decorated on the surface of the SPNs by electrostatic adsorption, yielding the multifunctional nanoagonist (SPN@AIPH). The loading efficiency of AIPH was determined as 2.06% (ESI†). Both the SPNs and SPN@AIPH showed homogeneous spherical morphology (Fig. 1a and b). Dynamic light scattering (DLS) indicated the average diameters of the SPNs and SPN@AIPH as 52.3 and 53.7 nm, respectively (Fig. 1a and b). The SPNs showed a large negative surface charge of −25.1 mV (Fig. 1c), which was attributed to the HA decoration on the nanoparticle surface. However, the zeta potential obviously increased to −18.2 mV for SPN@AIPH (Fig. 1c), which confirmed that the AIPH was successfully adsorbed to the surface of the SPNs and therefore partially neutralized the negative charge of the SPNs. The stability of AIPH in the nanoparticles was studied, which showed that AIPH should not decompose into radicals under physiological conditions (Fig. S5, ESI†), demonstrating the good stability of AIPH-loaded nanoparticles. Both the SPNs and SPN@AIPH exhibited broad absorption bands covering from the UV-vis to NIR-II region (Fig. 1d), implying the high promise of the prepared nanoparticles to be activated by NIR-II light.
 Scheme 1  Schematic diagram of the preparation process of SPN@AIPH (a) and the photothermic/thermodynamic combinational therapy toward tumors under NIR-II light irradiation (b). 
 Fig. 1  Representative transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images and DLS results of the SPNs (a) and SPN@AIPH (b). (c) The ζ potential of the SPNs and SPN@AIPH in aqueous dispersion. (d) The absorption spectra of the SPNs and SPN@AIPH in aqueous dispersion. (e) Heating curves of the SPN@AIPH with different concentrations when exposed to NIR-II light (1064 nm, 1 W cm−2, 0.196 cm2) for 600 s. (f) The temperature evolution of SPN@AIPH (50 μg mL−1) under laser on and off. (g) Plot of cooling time as a function of the negative natural logarithm of the temperature driving force acquired from the cooling process of SPN@AIPH in Fig. 1f. (h) Temperature changes of the SPN@AIPH (50 μg mL−1) under NIR-II laser (1064 nm, 1 W cm−2, 0.196 cm2) irradiation for five laser on/off cycles. (i) The absorption spectra of ABTS+˙ generated from ABTS under the treatment of SPN@AIPH at 44 °C for different times. 
Then we investigated the NIR-II light-triggered photothermic effect of SPN@AIPH. A concentration-dependent temperature increase was clearly observed for SPN@AIPH in the presence of NIR-II light excitation (Fig. 1e). In particular, the SPN@AIPH reached a high temperature of 57 °C after laser irradiation for 7 min when the concentration of SPN@AIPH was fixed at 100 μg mL−1 (Fig. 1e). In contrast, pure water showed negligible temperature increase under the same conditions (Fig. 1e). Besides, a power density-dependent temperature increase was observed for the SPN@AIPH at the concentration of 50 μg mL−1 (Fig. S6, ESI†). The photothermic conversion efficiency (PCE) of SPN@AIPH was calculated to be 86.2% according to the acquired data (Fig. 1f and g and Fig. S7, ESI†) and the previously reported method.20 Such a high PCE offered the promising potential for SPN@AIPH to conduct NIR-II light-triggered photothermic/thermodynamic combination therapy. In addition, when the SPN@AIPH (50 μg mL−1) was treated with five cycles of laser on/off, the plateau temperature in each cycle was almost the same (Fig. 1h), which demonstrated the superior photothermic stability of the SPN@AIPH. Then the release and decomposition of AIPH from SPN@AIPH was investigated. It was well known that the alkyl radicals produced from AIPH decomposition could react with 2,2′-azino-bis(3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid) (ABTS) to generate the ABTS+˙, which presented a characteristic absorption from 500 to 950 nm.17 As shown in Fig. 1i, a time-dependent absorbance increase was detected for the mixture of SPN@AIPH and ABTS under incubation at 44 °C, indicating the efficient generation of alkyl radicals from SPN@AIPH under mild heating. Similar results were obtained under NIR-II light irradiation (Fig. S8, ESI†), indicating the efficient generation of alkyl radicals by light. Thus, the SPN@AIPH is promising for photothermic/thermodynamic combination therapy.
We next studied the cellular uptake and therapeutic effects of the SPN@AIPH. Owing to the non-fluorescent feature of SPNs or SPN@AIPH, fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) was co-encapsulated in the nanoparticles to visualize the cellular uptake behaviour. It was clearly observed that the 4T1 cells exhibited strong green fluorescence from the cytoplasm in the presence of SPN or SPN@AIPH treatment (Fig. 2a). However, no green fluorescence was detected from 4T1 cells in the control group (cells without any treatments) (Fig. 2a). Besides, flow cytometry also demonstrated the efficient internalization of both SPNs and SPN@AIPH by 4T1 cells (Fig. 2b). Then the cancer targeting ability of the HA-conjugated nanoparticles was studied. Nanoparticles without HA conjugation (SPN0) were prepared via encapsulating FITC and SP into DSPE-PEG. SPN@AIPH and SPNs were also loaded with FITC to give SPN-FITC@AIPH and SPN-FITC, respectively. For NIH3T3 cells and 4T1 cells pre-treated with HA, all the nanoparticles had similar cellular uptake (Fig. S9b and c, ESI†). In contrast, SPN-FITC@AIPH and SPN-FITC had a significantly higher uptake than SPN0 for 4T1 cells without pre-treatment (Fig. S9a, ESI†). These results indicated the high cancer specificity of HA-conjugated nanoparticles owing to the specific binding of HA with the CD44 receptor. The excellent cellular uptake capability of the nanoparticles made them promising candidates for cancer therapy. The intracellular radical level under nanoparticle treatment was detected by the DCFH-DA probe. For SPN@AIPH-incubated cells, the green fluorescence in the cells after irradiation was higher than that before irradiation (Fig. S10, ESI†), indicating the increased radical level in the cells. In contrast, for SPN-incubated cells, the green fluorescence was almost unchanged before and after irradiation (Fig. S10, ESI†), indicating no generation of radicals. We subsequently examined the in vitro therapeutic performance of SPNs and SPN@AIPH in the presence or absence of light irradiation. No matter whether treated with SPNs or SPN@AIPH, 4T1 cells showed high survival rates in the absence of light (Fig. 2c), which indicated low cytotoxicity of the nanoparticles. Once receiving NIR-II light (1064 nm, 1 W cm−2) irradiation for 5 min, the viability of the 4T1 cells gradually decreased with increasing the concentration of either SPNs or SPN@AIPH (Fig. 2d). However, the SPN@AIPH showed stronger cell killing ability than the SPNs under the same conditions. For instance, when the nanoparticle concentration was fixed at 8 μg mL−1, the 4T1 cells treated with SPN@AIPH were severely killed (survival rate: 20%) after light irradiation for 5 min; however, the SPN-treated cells still maintained a relatively high survival rate (∼50%) (Fig. 2d). When the concentration was increased to 16 μg mL−1, the cell viability reached 8.1% for the SPN@AIPH group (Fig. S11, ESI†), which was much lower than that at 8 μg mL−1. Furthermore, the live-dead staining was performed to intuitively display the therapeutic efficacy of the nanoparticles. For the “SPN only” and “SPN@AIPH only” groups, the 4T1 cells were almost completely stained with green fluorescence (Fig. 2e), suggesting good biocompatibility of these nanoparticles. For the “SPN + light” group, the cells were stained with red fluorescence approximately by half (Fig. 2e), demonstrating the mild cell killing efficacy. Impressively, almost all the cells were stained with red fluorescence in the “SPN@AIPH + light” group (Fig. 2e). Furthermore, the statistical data from flow cytometry indicated the optimal cell killing performance for the “SPN@AIPH + light” group (Fig. S12, ESI†). These results revealed the superior cancer cell ablation ability of SPN@AIPH over SPNs under NIR-II light irradiation, which is beneficial for anti-tumor applications in vivo.
 Fig. 2  (a) Confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) images of 4T1 cells treated with FITC co-encapsulated SPNs (middle) or SPN@AIPH (right). 4T1 cells without any treatments were employed as a control (left). The blue fluorescence dye is DAPI. (b) Flow cytometry analysis of 4T1 cells treated with FITC co-encapsulated SPNs or SPN@AIPH for 8 h. Cell viabilities of 4T1 cells treated with SPNs or SPN@AIPH under various concentrations without (c) or with (d) NIR-II light irradiation. (e) Live/dead staining of 4T1 cells receiving different treatments (i: SPN only; ii: SPN@AIPH only; iii: SPN + light; iv: SPN@AIPH + light). Live and dead cells were stained with calcein AM and PI and presented in green and red colors, respectively. 
Encouraged by the ideal combination therapy performance of SPN@AIPH in vitro, its anticancer ability was further evaluated in vivo. Before doing this, we performed in vivo imaging to investigate the tumor accumulation ability and metabolism process of the nanoparticles. Because the SPN@AIPH has no fluorescence signals, a NIR-II dye, PCPDTBT,21 was encapsulated in the nanoparticles to monitor their biodistribution in vivo. Upon intravenous injection, the NIR-II fluorescence from the tumor gradually enhanced over time, which reached the signal plateau at 24 h post-injection (Fig. S13a, ESI†). Besides, the liver showed the strongest signals among the major organs (Fig. S13a, ESI†), indicating the predominant hepatobiliary clearance procedure of the nanoparticles. The liver signal reached the plateau at 24 h post-injection and almost reached the same level as the background at 72 h post-injection (Fig. S13, ESI†). Subsequently, 4T1 tumor bearing mice were intravenously injected with PBS, SPNs, or SPN@AIPH and then received local irradiation by NIR-II light. The temperature of the tumor site from SPN or SPN@AIPH-treated mice gradually increased under light excitation, which reached almost the same plateau at 50 °C after 5 min of irradiation (Fig. 3a and b). In contrast, PBS-treated mice showed negligible temperature elevation under the same irradiation conditions (Fig. 3a and b). These results indicated that the prepared nanoparticles could effectively accumulate in the tumor region, which should be attributed to the suitable size and HA-decorated surface of the nanoparticles. After therapy, the tumor volumes were continuously recorded for 15 days. Mice treated with PBS only, SPN only, SPN@AIPH only, or PBS + light showed negligible tumor suppression effect (Fig. 3c). Although the tumor growth exhibited visible inhibition for the mice treated with SPN + light, the recurrence was observed from the fifth day after therapy (Fig. 3c). In contrast, the tumors from mice that received the treatment of SPN@AIPH + light were significantly restrained and no obvious recurrence was detected during the whole study period (Fig. 3c). Histological examinations of tumor sections suggested severe cell necrosis for the mice that received SPN@AIPH + light treatment, while moderate cell death was detected for mice treated with SPN + light (Fig. 3d). No distinct tumor necrosis was observed for other groups (control, SPN, SPN@AIPH, and control + light) (Fig. 3d). These results manifested the satisfactory therapeutic outcome of the SPN@AIPH under NIR-II light irradiation resulting from the combinational effect. During the whole investigation period, no distinct body weight changes were observed for all the experimental groups (Fig. S14, ESI†). In addition, no appreciable tissue damage was detected from the histological examinations of major organs excised from mice in all the groups (Fig. S15, ESI†). These data implied the admirable biocompatibility of the developed nanoparticles, suggesting their high feasibility for antitumor applications in living bodies.
 Fig. 3  (a) Infrared thermal images of the mice receiving different treatments (PBS, SPNs, or SPN@AIPH) under continuous laser irradiation (1064 nm, 1 W cm−2, illumination area: 0.785 cm2). (b) The temperature changes of tumors from mice receiving different treatments (PBS, SPNs, or SPN@AIPH) under continuous laser irradiation for 600 s. (c) Changes in tumor volume of mice receiving different treatments during the whole therapeutic period. (d) Histological examination of tumor slices excised from mice receiving various treatments. Control: mice treated with PBS. Scale bar: 100 μm. 
In summary, we developed an AIPH-decorated semiconducting nanoagonist (SPN@AIPH), which showed excellent capabilities of photothermic conversion efficiency (PCE: 86.2%) and alkyl radical generation. Besides, the SPN@AIPH demonstrated good biocompatibility and admirable cancer cell uptake as well as tumor accumulation ability. Furthermore, both in vitro and in vivo therapies were conducted, which reflected the best anticancer performance of the SPN@AIPH compared with other treatments with high biosafety under NIR-II light irradiation. Our study not only provided a nanoagonist for cancer therapy but also highlighted an efficient strategy to construct multifunctional nanomedicines for combinational therapy toward deep lesions.
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61905122, 22174070, and 62005127), Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (BK20200751 and BK20190735), Science and Technology Innovation Project for Overseas Students of Nanjing, the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions (YX030003), and the Research startup fund of NJUPT (NY220068 and NY219006).
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Notes and references
X. Z. Li, L. Liu, S. L. Li, Y. P. Wan, J. X. Chen, S. Tian, Z. M. Huang, Y. F. Xiao, X. Cui, C. Y. Xiang, Q. L. Tan, X. H. Zhang, W. S. Guo, X. J. Liang and C. S. Lee, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 12901–12911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Wei, F. L. Xin, J. Zhang, M. Wu, T. Qiu, Y. T. Lan, S. Y. Qiao, X. L. Liu and J. F. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 1093–1096 RSC .
C. Yin, X. Z. Li, Y. Wang, Y. Y. Liang, S. Zhou, P. C. Zhao, C. S. Lee, Q. L. Fan and W. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2104650 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Hong, A. L. Antaris and H. J. Dai, Nat. Biomed. Eng., 2017, 1, 0010 CrossRef CAS .
H. P. Dang and L. F. Yan, Biomed. Mater., 2021, 16, 022001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Jiang, P. K. Upputuri, C. Xie, Y. Lyu, L. L. Zhang, Q. H. Xiong, M. Pramanik and K. Y. Pu, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4964–4969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yin, G. H. Wen, C. Liu, B. G. Yang, S. E. Lin, J. W. Huang, P. C. Zhao, S. H. D. Wong, K. Y. Zhang, X. Y. Chen, G. Li, X. H. Jiang, J. P. Huang, K. Y. Pu, L. D. Wang and L. M. Bian, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 12201–12211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Smith, M. C. Mancini and S. M. Nie, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 710–711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, X. Zhen and X. Q. Jiang, Acta Polym. Sin., 2021, 52, 687–707 CAS .
Y. Y. Jiang, J. G. Huang, C. Xu and K. Y. Pu, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, B. Sun, X. Y. Jiang, Z. Y. Yuan, S. Y. Chen, P. F. Sun, Q. L. Fan and W. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2021, 9, 1002–1008 RSC .
G. H. Wen, X. Z. Li, Y. C. Zhang, X. Q. Han, X. Y. Xu, C. Liu, K. W. Y. Chan, C. S. Lee, C. Yin, L. M. Bian and L. D. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 33492–33499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yin, H. Zhang, B. Sun, S. Y. Chen, X. Y. Jiang, X. F. Miao, P. F. Sun, W. B. Hu, Q. L. Fan and W. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2106575 CrossRef CAS .
D. Huang, L. N. Sun, L. Huang and Y. Z. Chen, J. Pers. Med., 2021, 11, 124 CrossRef PubMed .
H. J. Liu, M. M. Wang, X. X. Hu, S. S. Shi and P. S. Xu, Small, 2020, 16, 2003398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. T. Sun, X. X. Chen, X. Wang, S. Liu, J. Liu and Z. G. Xie, Mater. Chem. Front., 2019, 3, 127–136 RSC .
S. Shen, C. L. Zhu, D. Huo, M. X. Yang, J. J. Xue and Y. N. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 8801–8804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Q. Wang, F. Gao and X. Z. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 9029–9033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. X. Shi, W. C. Sun, C. B. Liu, G. Y. Gu, B. Ma, W. L. Si, N. N. Fu, Q. Zhang, W. Huang and X. C. Dong, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 113–120 RSC .
X. Z. Li, D. Zhang, C. Yin, G. H. Lu, Y. P. Wan, Z. M. Huang, J. H. Tan, S. L. Li, J. D. Luo and C. S. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 15983–15991 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Ni, W. H. Shi, Y. X. Liu, L. K. Yin, Z. X. Guo, W. Zhou and Q. L. Fan, Small, 2022, 18, 2200152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2cc01207cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Schematic diagram of the preparation process of SPN@AIPH (a) and the photothermic/thermodynamic combinational therapy toward tumors under NIR-II light irradiation (b).	 

 	Fig. 1  Representative transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images and DLS results of the SPNs (a) and SPN@AIPH (b). (c) The ζ potential of the SPNs and SPN@AIPH in aqueous dispersion. (d) The absorption spectra of the SPNs and SPN@AIPH in aqueous dispersion. (e) Heating curves of the SPN@AIPH with different concentrations when exposed to NIR-II light (1064 nm, 1 W cm−2, 0.196 cm2) for 600 s. (f) The temperature evolution of SPN@AIPH (50 μg mL−1) under laser on and off. (g) Plot of cooling time as a function of the negative natural logarithm of the temperature driving force acquired from the cooling process of SPN@AIPH in Fig. 1f. (h) Temperature changes of the SPN@AIPH (50 μg mL−1) under NIR-II laser (1064 nm, 1 W cm−2, 0.196 cm2) irradiation for five laser on/off cycles. (i) The absorption spectra of ABTS+˙ generated from ABTS under the treatment of SPN@AIPH at 44 °C for different times.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) images of 4T1 cells treated with FITC co-encapsulated SPNs (middle) or SPN@AIPH (right). 4T1 cells without any treatments were employed as a control (left). The blue fluorescence dye is DAPI. (b) Flow cytometry analysis of 4T1 cells treated with FITC co-encapsulated SPNs or SPN@AIPH for 8 h. Cell viabilities of 4T1 cells treated with SPNs or SPN@AIPH under various concentrations without (c) or with (d) NIR-II light irradiation. (e) Live/dead staining of 4T1 cells receiving different treatments (i: SPN only; ii: SPN@AIPH only; iii: SPN + light; iv: SPN@AIPH + light). Live and dead cells were stained with calcein AM and PI and presented in green and red colors, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Infrared thermal images of the mice receiving different treatments (PBS, SPNs, or SPN@AIPH) under continuous laser irradiation (1064 nm, 1 W cm−2, illumination area: 0.785 cm2). (b) The temperature changes of tumors from mice receiving different treatments (PBS, SPNs, or SPN@AIPH) under continuous laser irradiation for 600 s. (c) Changes in tumor volume of mice receiving different treatments during the whole therapeutic period. (d) Histological examination of tumor slices excised from mice receiving various treatments. Control: mice treated with PBS. Scale bar: 100 μm.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2cc01207c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
