 In situ localized formation of cesium lead bromide nanocomposites for fluorescence micro-patterning technology achieved by organic solvent polymeriza ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TC06687J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TC06687J
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 3409-3417
In situ localized formation of cesium lead bromide nanocomposites for fluorescence micro-patterning technology achieved by organic solvent polymerization†

        
          
            Louwen 
            Zhang‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Yanan 
            Liu‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Zongsong 
            Gan
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Jun 
            Su
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Yihua 
            Gao
          
        
      *ac
aSchool of Physics & Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics (WNLO) & Key Laboratory of Information Storage System, Engineering Research Center of Data Storage Systems and Technology, Ministry of Education of China, Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST), Wuhan 430074, China. E-mail: gaoyihua@hust.edu.cn; ganzongsong@hust.edu.cn
bShenzhen Huazhong University of Science and Technology Research Institute, Shenzhen 518057, China
cCollege of Materials Science and Engineering, Guangxi Key Laboratory of Optical and Electronic Materials and Devices, Guilin University of Technology, Guilin 541004, China
Received 
      6th December 2019
    , Accepted 20th January 2020First published on 7th February 2020AbstractHerein, a novel and facile strategy for luminescent patterning of inorganic perovskites is proposed by using 532 nm femtosecond laser pulses. In a one step process in situ synthesis and arbitrary patterning of cesium lead bromide/polymer nanocomposites on glass substrates under laser irradiation is achieved, which is ascribed to organic solvent polymerization. The power threshold for machining nanocomposites can be reduced significantly by using heat-conducting substrates, providing the possibility for Cs-based halide perovskites to be integrated onto flexible substrates. Moreover, the resulting nanocomposites exhibit bright fluorescence with a narrow spectral width of 20 nm due to the uniform size distribution, comparable to the perovskite nanocrystals prepared by the conventional liquid-phase method. Repeatable and continuous laser-processed lines with 1.2 μm minimum line width are developed successfully. These findings suggest that this patterning strategy has potential application prospects in miniature anti-counterfeiting patterns and high-resolution display technology.
Introduction
Over the past decade, an unexpected improvement in the photoelectric conversion efficiency of solar cells based on lead halide perovskite materials has been achieved, from the initial 3.8% to the recently authenticated 25.2%.1–6 The many excellent physical properties of lead halide perovskite materials and their extensive application prospects in optoelectronic devices have stimulated people's serious attention and attracted increased research interest around the world.7–13 In recent years, as a novel class of inorganic luminescence materials, all-inorganic cesium lead halide (CsPbX3, X = Cl, Br, I) perovskite nanocrystals have been shown to not only have excellent photophysical properties such as high photoluminescence (PL) quantum yields, high color purity and tunable emission wavelength over the visible spectral region, but also have better environmental stability than organometallic hybrid perovskites.14–18 Innovations in preparation methods,19–21 stability optimization,22,23 and performance improvements of optoelectronic devices24–26 are currently the main research hotspots in terms of inorganic halide perovskite nanocrystals. However, by comparison with organometallic hybrid perovskites, few research studies have been conducted on the patterning technologies of inorganic perovskites.27 Owing to the facile solution processability, fast crystallization behaviour, and low cost of inorganic perovskites, it is urgently necessary to explore and develop new technologies for Cs-based perovskite system to satisfy the requirements of patterned devices and aesthetic standards.
As a mature idea for microstructural designs, patterning technologies have been extensively used in conductive polymers, metal oxides and semiconductor materials.28–30 So far, the common methods such as lithography patterning, microcontact printing, inkjet printing, and nano-imprint patterning have been proposed for patterned metal halide perovskites.31–34 However, each individual approach has its own shortcomings in terms of cost, simplicity and convenience. For example, lithography patterning technology requires not only a well-designed mask, but also a variety of processing steps.35 A simple, fast and precise patterning strategy remains a challenge for integration and miniaturization of display devices based on cesium lead halide perovskites. Thus, it is urgently needed to develop other more convenient and efficient processing technologies for all-inorganic perovskites, which are conducive to efficient and uncomplicated patterning and device functionalization.
It is worth mentioning that femtosecond lasers, which appeared in the 1980s, have the characteristics of ultra-short pulses, ultra-high electric field intensity and ultra-high peak power. Ultra-precise and three-dimensional machining can be realized by the nonlinear interaction of femtosecond lasers with matter, which has been widely used in the micro/nanomachining field. As early as 1994, femtosecond lasers were first used to fabricate structures of micrometer scale on the surface of silicon and silver.36,37 The machining accuracy on the material surface was improved to nanometer scale in a subsequent report.38 Several years ago, the free-form patterning of CH3NH3PbBr3 perovskite crystals was implemented through microscale heating, which depended on an inverse relationship between solute solubility and local temperature controlled by a 750 nm continuous-wave laser.39 Again, this strategy was used to design luminescent MAPbX3 nano- and microcrystal patterns with different geometries on Si substrates, assisted by the spontaneous formation of MA cations under localized irradiation of a 800 nm femtosecond laser.40 These two works strongly illustrate the obvious advantages of laser technology in the patterned design of perovskite crystals: (i) precise control of crystallized coordinates in a desired area of various substrates, (ii) effectively shortened processing time, (iii) a facile and convenient patterning method with programmable control. Likewise, the laser technology shows infinite possibilities in the patterning applications of all-inorganic cesium lead halide perovskite systems.
In this work, for luminescent patterning technologies, we proposed a novel and facile strategy to fabricate luminescent patterns of in situ crystallized CsPbBr3/CsPb2Br5–polymer nanocomposites by using a 532 nm femtosecond laser (170 fs pulse width). This method employed simple and ligand-free perovskite precursors that involved a single organic solvent (γ-butyrolactone, GBL for short). The localized growth of the nanocomposites benefited from ring-opening polymerization of the GBL solvent, which was caused by laser-induced nonlinear absorption and energy deposition. The arbitrary patterns of the laser-processed nanocomposites could be developed with high resolution at the micron scale via controlling the focus position of the femtosecond laser in the precursor solution. The effects of laser processing parameters, such as laser power, writing speed, and exposure time, on the patterning appearances were described systemically. Moreover, the laser power threshold for machining nanocomposites could be reduced significantly by improving the heat absorption ability of the substrate (sputtering a thin gold film), and the patterning applications of Cs-based perovskite nanocomposites on the flexible substrates could be implemented. A series of outstanding luminescent microscale patterns based on nanocomposites revealed that this reliable laser patterning technology might have huge development potential for applications such as miniature anti-counterfeiting patterns and high-resolution displays.
Results and discussion

Fig. 1(a) depicts the patterning processes of cesium lead bromide–polymer nanocomposites fabricated by using a 532 nm femtosecond laser. The manufacturing processes mainly includes three steps: the preparation of perovskite precursors and laser-processed samples, laser direct writing synthesis, and the removal of residual liquids. More relevant information is described in detailed in the Experimental section (ESI†). Briefly, the precursor ink for laser writing was simply prepared by adding lead bromide (PbBr2) and cesium bromide (CsBr) into GBL solvent, which is often used as a solvent for perovskite materials.41 A small amount of precursor solution was dropped into the preformed square groove on the glass substrates. Subsequently, a fast, mask-free, and a programmable method was employed to produce a variety of patterns in a femtosecond laser setup (see Fig. 1(b)). Fig. S1 in the ESI† shows the dependence of the actual laser power on the setting Q value entered into the computer control system. After laser direct writing, the residual precursor solution was cleaned out with ethyl acetate solution, and the resulting patterns could be stably attached to the glass substrates.
 Fig. 1  Organic solvent polymerization activating the in situ formation of cesium lead bromide nanocomposites by using 532 nm femtosecond laser pulses. (a) Schematic illustration of three steps in the patterning processes. (b) The sketch map of femtosecond laser setup. (c) Schematic illustrating the processes of in situ nucleation and localized growth for luminescent patterns based on nanocomposites under the action of femtosecond laser pulses. 
In this work, GBL solvent is crucial to the laser-induced localized growth of the luminescent nanocomposites. To verify this, we adopted the same method for laser processing of pure GBL solvent. Stable and continuous line arrays based on GBL could be developed by controlling the laser power and writing speed, as shown in Fig. S2–S4 and Video S1 (ESI†). It can be concluded from these scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images that the optimum laser power and writing speed for laser fabrication of GBL-based polymer patterns on glass substrates are 48.33 mW and 2 μm s−1, respectively. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images further show that the obtained polymer lines are easily destroyed within ten seconds by electron beam radiation (Fig. S5 in the ESI†). The laser-processed polymer lines are amorphous and their surface is smooth (Fig. S6 in the ESI†). Note that neither the glass substrates nor GBL solvent can absorb the 532 nm wavelength light from the femtosecond laser (Fig. S7 in the ESI†). In other words, the sample system has no intrinsic absorption at the laser wavelength. However, owing to the extremely localized environment (high temperature, high pressure, and ultra-high electric field intensity) around the focus of femtosecond lasers at room temperature, the processed materials will also undergo complex nonlinear absorption processes such as laser-induced multiphoton absorption and multiphoton ionization, leading to the permanent changes in micro–nano structures. When the formation of polymers is induced by a femtosecond laser, the process of two-photon absorption depends on the pulse energy. The probability of the occurrence of two-photon absorption can be expressed as:42 (1)where σ(2) is the coefficient of two-photon absorption of the processed material, I is the intensity of incident light, and h and v are Planck's constant and the frequency of the incident light.
Moreover, the pulse repetition rate also determines the results of femtosecond laser-induced microstructures. Femtosecond lasers with a high repetition rate can produce thermal accumulation effects in the process of interaction with transparent materials, and the temperature in the laser focusing area can reach several thousand degrees Celsius.43 For the femtosecond laser with high repetition rate (80 MHz) used in this work, the required time of photon heating electron and electron–phonon coupling (<1 ps) is much smaller than that of thermal diffusion (>0.1 s) during laser writing, resulting in a thermal field around the laser focus, which plays a significant role in promoting the ring-opening polymerization of the GBL solvent. The energy density of this thermal source is approximately a spherical Gaussian distribution:43 E(r) = E0exp(−r2/w02)(2)where E0 is established by setting the volume integral of eqn (2) as the tested absorbed energy, r is the radius length of the light spot, and w0 is the radius of the focused laser beam at the position of 1/e. Thus, the linear patterns based on pure GBL solvent are mainly attributed to laser-induced nonlinear absorption and energy deposition. When the energy accumulates to a certain threshold, the ring-opening polymerization of GBL solvent occurs in the desired areas.
Based on the above analysis of solvent polymerization, we can describe the in situ crystallized processes of luminescent nanocomposites, as illustrated in Fig. 1(c). In the precursor solution, the GBL solvent is virtually saturated with the perovskite precursors. When the perovskite precursors are irradiated using a femtosecond laser, the ring-opening polymerization of the GBL solvent will be implemented by laser-induced nonlinear absorption and energy accumulation, and the amount of GBL solvent will be severely depleted in the laser-irradiated area. Simultaneously, the process of solute precipitation results in the localized growth of cesium lead bromide nanocrystals (Video S2, ESI†). Consequently, the resulting luminescent patterns are composed of cesium lead bromide nanocrystals crosslinked with polymers based on GBL.
To better understand the morphology, crystal structure and composition of the laser-processed nanocomposites, Fig. 2 shows a series of characterizations for the basic laser-fabricated patterns of dots and lines. From a view on the micron scale, the laser-fabricated dot and line arrays exhibit high homogeneity and repeatability (Fig. 2(a)–(c) and Fig. S8, S9 in the ESI†). Notably, the line arrays consist of 3 × 3 small arrays, including six lines with the line spacing of 6 μm. The length and width of the resulting lines are 30 μm and 1.2 μm, respectively. We can detect that the processed patterns can still adhere firmly to the glass substrates after washing with ethyl acetate. Besides, the enlarged SEM and scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) images show that the line patterns are constructed by nanocrystals of dozens of nanometers in size (Fig. 2(d) and (e)). The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images for the laser-processed dots and lines further confirm that the patterns are composed of many nanocrystals (Fig. 2(f) and (g) and Fig. S10 and S11 in the ESI†).
 Fig. 2  Characterization of cesium lead bromide nanocomposites fabricated by femtosecond laser pulses. Low-magnification SEM images of (a) dot arrays and (b) line arrays. (c and d) Enlarged SEM images of line arrays. (e) A typical STEM image of a single line. (f and g) TEM images of a single line, insets: the corresponding HRTEM images. (h) The SAED pattern. (i) EDS of a laser-processed line. (j) Elemental mapping images of a laser-processed line for Cs, Pb, and Br. 
In order to further determine the crystal structure of nanocrystals, high resolution TEM (HRTEM) and selected area electron diffraction (SAED) measurements were carried out. The lattice fringes in the HRTEM images reveal the excellent crystallinity of the laser-processed patterns based on nanocrystals (insets of Fig. 2(f) and (g)). The lattice spacings of 0.583 and 0.412 nm respectively correspond to the (100) and (110) planes of cubic CsPbBr3, and the lattice spacings of 0.321 and 0.304 nm respectively correspond to the (114) and (213) planes of tetragonal CsPb2Br5. Thus, the nanocomposites prepared by this laser processing technique contain CsPbBr3/CsPb2Br5 dual-phase nanocrystals. The reason is most likely due to the fact that the maximum solubility of CsBr in GBL solvent is obviously lower than that of PbBr2, leading to the formation of partial lead-rich cesium lead bromide nanocrystals in final product. Examination of the SAED pattern also verifies the coexistence of CsPbBr3 and CsPb2Br5 nanocrystals in the nanocomposites (Fig. 2(h)). In addition to (110), (200) and (222) planes corresponding to cubic CsPbBr3, the (230) plane of CsPb2Br5 is also found from the diffraction information. Furthermore, the energy dispersive spectrum (EDS) and the elemental maps show the uniform spatial distributions of Cs, Pb, and Br in the laser-processed nanocomposites (Fig. 2(i), (j) and Fig. S12 in the ESI†).
Most importantly, uniform green fluorescence can be observed from the laser-fabricated lines using an excitation wavelength of 460 nm (Fig. 3(a)). The PL spectrum shows the emission peak centered at 517 nm with a narrow full width at half maximum (FWHM) of 20 nm (Fig. 3(b)). The narrow spectral width of laser-processed nanocomposites is similar to that of perovskite nanocrystals prepared by a conventional liquid-phase method, which is attributed to a uniform size distribution of nanocrystals, as confirmed in the size distribution map (Fig. 3(c)). The size of the resulting nanocrystals is mainly concentrated at about 30 μm, and the average size is approximately 32 μm. Besides, the line width of repeatable and continuous laser-processed lines can be as small as 1.2 μm in this study, as shown in Fig. 3(d). Compared with the organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite lines prepared by a laser in previous works, the line width of our products is much smaller.39,40 This presents significant practical advantages in high-resolution fluorescence display technology. To sum up, the laser-fabricated micro-patterns based on nanocomposites are constructed by dual-phase cesium lead bromide nanocrystals and polymers of GBL, and possess high-resolution and high-quality fluorescence properties.
 Fig. 3  The fluorescence properties and display resolution of laser-processed lines on glass substrates. (a) The fluorescent image and (b) PL spectrum of line arrays. (c) Size distribution of nanocrystals in the laser-processed lines. (d) The minimum line width (1.2 μm) of continuous laser-processed lines. 
Obviously, the machining parameters determine the appearances of laser-processed dots and lines on the glass substrates. First, variations of the dot diameter according to different laser powers and exposure times were studied (Fig. S13–S15 in the ESI†). We find that the increasing trend in dot diameter is more strongly dependent on laser power, and the effect of exposure time appears to be considerably smaller. When the laser power is too small or the radiation time is too short, it is hard to produce the dots steadily and repeatedly due to lack of sufficient energy to ensure the organic solvent’s polymerization. With increasing laser power, the laser energy will exceed the damage threshold of the machined materials, leading to a shock wave. Under the action of shock wave, the precursor solution diffuses rapidly around, resulting in a significant increase from 1.48 to 4.05 μm in dot diameter. This is also the reason why the green fluorescence is observed all around the dots but not at the center (Fig. S16 in the ESI†). But this effect can not be obtained with a lower laser power by simply increasing the exposure time. At an extreme laser power, the precursor solutions are easy to boil in the local high-temperature environment, giving rise to poor repeatability of the laser processing.
For the line patterns on glass substrates, we investigated the dependence of line width on laser power and writing speed (Fig. 4(a)–(d) and Fig. S17–S21 in the ESI†). We see that when the laser power is small (<32.6 mW, at fixed writing speed of 2 μm s−1) or the writing speed is fast (>5 μm s−1, at fixed power of 37.45 mW), discontinuous lines are obtained, whereas continuous lines consisting of aggregated nanocomposites are fabricated under appropriate parameters. The fluorescent images of line patterns fabricated at different laser powers and writing speeds are displayed in Fig. S22 and S23 in the ESI.† The critical factors for the continuity of the lines are that the instantaneous energy generated can reach the energy threshold for polymerizing the GBL solvent at a given power, and that there is enough time to achieve energy accumulation needed to satisfy the requirements of stable solvent polymerization. As the power increases, the line width noticeably increases (Fig. 4(a) and (c)). The change of line width with power from 20.15 to 48.33 mW is mainly due to the enhancement in energy accumulation, which promotes the precipitation of nanocrystals. The further increase in line width at a higher power is also attributed to the shock wave, diffusing precursor solution to both sides of the lines. The line width does not change much with the acceleration of writing speed (Fig. 4(b) and (d)). But the aggregated nanocomposites decrease dramatically when the writing speed is greater than 2 μm s−1. This is related to the quite limited polymerization of the GBL solvent, resulting from a lack of sufficient residence time to accumulate energy. Besides, with the increase of writing speed, the fluorescence brightness and uniformity of the lines becomes worse and worse because of a greatly reduced amount of precipitated nanocrystals (Fig. S23 in the ESI†). Continuity and uniformity are necessary for perfect laser-processed lines with bright fluorescence. On this basis, a narrow line width is beneficial to high-resolution display. Therefore, the optimum laser power and writing speed of line patterns on glass substrates are around 32.6 mW and 2 μm s−1, respectively.
 Fig. 4  The dependence of line patterns on femtosecond laser parameters (laser power and writing speed). The SEM images of laser-processed lines obtained on the (a and b) glass substrates and (e and f) Au-coated glass substrates under different (a and e) laser powers and (b and f) writing speeds. (c, d, g and h) The corresponding variations in line width of laser-processed lines in (a, b, e and f). 
Additionally, integrating laser-processed patterns onto flexible substrates may expand the applications of this crystallization mode. However, the laser-processed patterns with nanocomposites could not be obtained directly on polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrates (Fig. S24 in the ESI†). Although operating at a lower power, the PET substrates are easily destroyed in the focal region of femtosecond laser pulses. To this end, we have to try to further reduce the power threshold for the formation of nanocomposites, so as not to seriously damage the flexible substrates. Initially, an attempt is made on Au-coated glass substrates (Fig. 4(e)–(h) and Fig. S25–S29 in the ESI†). Most notably, a marked decline from 32.60 to 16.93 mW was achieved in power threshold required for continuous line fabrication. As the power increases, the line width on Au-coated glass substrates increases much quicker than that on glass substrates (Fig. 4(c) and (g)). The line width decreases gradually with the increase of writing speed, and the lines are always continuous (Fig. 4f). All these prove that heat transfer materials (e.g. Au film) can provide a large amount of energy for GBL solvent polymerization, resulting in the reduction of the power threshold.
Then, we also deposited a thin Au film on PET flexible substrates. The construction of line patterns on flexible substrates is realized by the exploration of technical parameters. The optimum laser power and writing speed are 11.34 mW and 4.0 μm s−1, respectively (Fig. S30–S33 in the ESI†). Unfortunately, the obtained line patterns do not adhere well to the flexible substrates, and a fraction of nanocrystals are easily removed during the final washing process. Successful integration of patterns on flexible substrates is due to the fact that heat conduction substrates provide sufficient energy for the polymerization of the GBL solvent, even at a low laser power. However, the laser-processed lines do not emerge at a slightly higher power (16.93 mW), which is caused by excessive energy deposited in GBL solvent. It can be seen that the energy provided by the Au film is very large, leading to a small window of machining power for pattern preparation. It is further proved that the polymerization degree of the GBL solvent determines the growth of the resulting crystals, which is mainly controlled by the amount of deposition energy.
Finally, Fig. 5 presents fluorescent patterns consisting of lines with arbitrary shapes on glass substrates. The writing trajectory of the laser-fabricated patterns is controlled by various programs in a programmable system. In Fig. 5(a) and (d), the low-magnification SEM images for the Chinese name and English abbreviation of Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST) demonstrate that the well-defined words are made up of continuous and uniform lines with arbitrary shape. Moreover, the laser-fabricated lines are stacked with nanocrystals (Fig. 5(b) and Fig. S34 in the ESI†). The fluorescence images of these words present homogeneous green fluorescence at the micron scale (Fig. 5(c) and (e)). In addition, this laser patterning technique is suitable for arbitrarily well-designed hollow patterns. The animal (horses, pigs, and tortoises) patterns and simple geometric designs with homogeneous fluorescence were also successfully obtained (Fig. 5(f)–(k)). Thus, the patterning method can rapidly and precisely accomplish the fabrication of in situ, fluorescent, laser-processed cesium lead bromide nanocomposites and opens up a new route for luminescence patterning technologies.
 Fig. 5  
In situ, fluorescent, laser-processed Cs–Pb–Br nanocomposite patterns consisting of lines with arbitrary shape on glass substrates. Low-magnification SEM images of the (a) Chinese name and (d) English abbreviation of HUST. (b) A local enlarged SEM image of (a). Fluorescent images of the (c) Chinese name and (e) English abbreviation of HUST. (f–h) Fluorescent images of animal (horses, pigs, and tortoises) patterns. (i–k) Fluorescent images of simple geometric designs. 
Conclusions
In conclusion, a fast, mask-free, and programmable method using 532 nm femtosecond laser pulses was proposed for luminescent patterned application of inorganic perovskites in this work. This method enabled in situ nucleation and localized growth of cesium lead bromine nanocrystals at room temperature, which come from organic solvent polymerization caused by laser-induced nonlinear absorption and energy deposition. The resulting appearances of the laser-processed products could be affected by the laser processing parameters, such as laser power, writing speed, and exposure time. The laser power threshold for machining nanocomposites could be reduced significantly by the aid of thermal conductive substrates, which was beneficial to the integration of the Cs-based perovskite system on flexible substrates. More importantly, the as-obtained patterns on glass substrates showed a minimum line width of 1.2 μm and homogeneous green fluorescence with a narrow FWHM of 20 nm under suitable laser processing conditions. The excellent optical properties and ultra-small line width shown in this study revealed that this reliable laser patterning technology opened up a fast approach for the preparation of inorganic perovskite materials with uniform size and showed potential value for applications such as miniature anti-counterfeiting labels and high-resolution displays.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
L. W. Z. conducted SEM and TEM analyses, and Y. N. L. performed the fluorescence measurements. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (11674113, 61775068, 11874025, 61821003). Y. H. G. thanks Prof. Zhong Lin Wang for the support of experimental facilities in WNLO of HUST.
References
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S. J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Gratzel, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 838 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Xiong, Y. Rui, Y. Li, Q. Zhang and H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 6848 RSC .
Z. Xu, X. Yin, Y. Guo, Y. Pu and M. He, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 4746 RSC .
NREL Best Research-Cell Efficiencies, Chart, 2019, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-effificiency.html.
H. C. Wang, Z. Bao, H. Y. Tsai, A. C. Tang and R. S. Liu, Small, 2018, 14, 1702433 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. H. Kim, J. S. Kim and T. W. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2018, 1804595 Search PubMed .
Y. Wei, Z. Cheng and J. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 310 RSC .
X. He, Y. Qiu and S. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700775 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Y. Chen, H. Y. Lin, K. M. Chiang, W. L. Tsai, Y. C. Huang, C. S. Tsao and H. W. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605290 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhang, S. Shen, M. Li, L. Li, J. Zhang, L. Fan, F. Cheng, C. Li, M. Zhu, Z. Kang, J. Su, T. Zhai and Y. Gao, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1801744 CrossRef .
Q. Zhang, R. Su, X. Liu, J. Xing, T. C. Sum and Q. Xiong, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 6238 CrossRef .
C. Chen, L. Zhang, T. Shi, G. Liao and Z. Tang, Nanomaterials, 2019, 9, 1751 CrossRef .
L. Protesescu, S. Yakunin, M. I. Bodnarchuk, F. Krieg, R. Caputo, C. H. Hendon, R. X. Yang, A. Walsh and M. V. Kovalenko, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3692 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, L. Xu, M. Zhu, C. Li, L. Li, J. Su and Y. Gao, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 818, 152913 CrossRef .
Q. A. Akkerman, V. D'Innocenzo, S. Accornero, A. Scarpellini, A. Petrozza, M. Prato and L. Manna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10276 CrossRef .
H. Cho, Y. H. Kim, C. Wolf, H. D. Lee and T. W. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2018, 1704587 CrossRef .
Q. Pan, H. Hu, Y. Zou, M. Chen, L. Wu, D. Yang, X. Yuan, J. Fan, B. Sun and Q. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 10947 RSC .
Q. A. Akkerman, S. G. Motti, A. R. Srimath Kandada, E. Mosconi, V. D'Innocenzo, G. Bertoni, S. Marras, B. A. Kamino, L. Miranda, F. De Angelis, A. Petrozza, M. Prato and L. Manna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 1010 CrossRef .
D. Yang, M. Cao, Q. Zhong, P. Li, X. Zhang and Q. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 757 RSC .
C. Bi, S. V. Kershaw, A. L. Rogach and J. Tian, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1902446 CrossRef .
H. Zhao, L. Wei, P. Zeng and M. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 9813 RSC .
J. Song, J. Li, L. Xu, J. Li, F. Zhang, B. Han, Q. Shan and H. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800764 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, S. Shen, L. Li, Z. Zhang, N. Liu and Y. Gao, J. Inorg. Mater., 2019, 34, 37 CrossRef .
M. Lu, X. Zhang, Y. Zhang, J. Guo, X. Shen, W. W. Yu and A. L. Rogach, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1804691 CrossRef .
X. Yang, J. Wu, T. Liu and R. Zhu, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1800110 CrossRef .
W. S. Beh, I. T. Kim, D. Qin, Y. Xia and G. M. Whitesides, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 1038 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Guo, X. Teng, S. Rahman and H. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 630 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. Kim, S. M. Kim, Y. H. Jang and G. Y. Jung, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 171114 CrossRef .
G. Wang, D. Li, H. C. Cheng, Y. Li, C. Y. Chen, A. Yin, Z. Zhao, Z. Lin, H. Wu, Q. He, M. Ding, Y. Liu, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, e1500613 CrossRef .
C. R. Kagan, T. L. Breen and L. L. Kosbar, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 3536 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kim, M. S. Jung, S. Lee, Y. J. Choi, J. K. Kim, S. U. Chai, W. Kim, D. G. Choi, H. Ahn, J. H. Cho, D. Choi, H. Shin, D. Kim and J. H. Park, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702369 CrossRef .
Z. Gu, K. Wang, H. Li, M. Gao, L. Li, M. Kuang, Y. S. Zhao, M. Li and Y. Song, Small, 2017, 13, 1603217 CrossRef .
W. Qiao, W. Huang, Y. Liu, X. Li, L. S. Chen and J. X. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Du, X. Liu, G. Korn, J. Squier and G. Mourou, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1994, 64, 3071 CrossRef .
P. P. Pronko, S. K. Dutta, J. Squier, J. V. Rudd, D. Du and G. Mourou, Opt. Commun., 1995, 114, 106 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Joglekar, H. Liu, G. J. Spooner, E. Meyhöfer, G. Mourou and A. J. Hunt, Appl. Phys. B: Lasers Opt., 2003, 77, 25 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Chou, B. S. Swartzentruber, M. T. Janish, K. C. Meyer, L. B. Biedermann, S. Okur, D. B. Burckel, C. B. Carter and B. Kaehr, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 3736 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Arciniegas, A. Castelli, S. Piazza, S. Dogan, L. Ceseracciu, R. Krahne, M. Duocastella and L. Manna, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701613 CrossRef .
M. Jung, S. G. Ji, G. Kim and S. I. Seok, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2011 RSC .

          R. W. Boyd, Nonlinear optics, Academic Press, New York, US, 3rd edn,  2008, pp. 549–559 Search PubMed .
S. M. Eaton, H. Zhang and P. R. Herman, Opt. Express, 2005, 13, 4708 CrossRef .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9tc06687j‡ L. W. Z. and Y. N. L. contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Organic solvent polymerization activating the in situ formation of cesium lead bromide nanocomposites by using 532 nm femtosecond laser pulses. (a) Schematic illustration of three steps in the patterning processes. (b) The sketch map of femtosecond laser setup. (c) Schematic illustrating the processes of in situ nucleation and localized growth for luminescent patterns based on nanocomposites under the action of femtosecond laser pulses.	 
	(1)
E(r) = E0exp(−r2/w02)	(2)

 	Fig. 2  Characterization of cesium lead bromide nanocomposites fabricated by femtosecond laser pulses. Low-magnification SEM images of (a) dot arrays and (b) line arrays. (c and d) Enlarged SEM images of line arrays. (e) A typical STEM image of a single line. (f and g) TEM images of a single line, insets: the corresponding HRTEM images. (h) The SAED pattern. (i) EDS of a laser-processed line. (j) Elemental mapping images of a laser-processed line for Cs, Pb, and Br.	 

 	Fig. 3  The fluorescence properties and display resolution of laser-processed lines on glass substrates. (a) The fluorescent image and (b) PL spectrum of line arrays. (c) Size distribution of nanocrystals in the laser-processed lines. (d) The minimum line width (1.2 μm) of continuous laser-processed lines.	 

 	Fig. 4  The dependence of line patterns on femtosecond laser parameters (laser power and writing speed). The SEM images of laser-processed lines obtained on the (a and b) glass substrates and (e and f) Au-coated glass substrates under different (a and e) laser powers and (b and f) writing speeds. (c, d, g and h) The corresponding variations in line width of laser-processed lines in (a, b, e and f).	 

 	Fig. 5  
In situ, fluorescent, laser-processed Cs–Pb–Br nanocomposite patterns consisting of lines with arbitrary shape on glass substrates. Low-magnification SEM images of the (a) Chinese name and (d) English abbreviation of HUST. (b) A local enlarged SEM image of (a). Fluorescent images of the (c) Chinese name and (e) English abbreviation of HUST. (f–h) Fluorescent images of animal (horses, pigs, and tortoises) patterns. (i–k) Fluorescent images of simple geometric designs.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9tc06687j
‡ L. W. Z. and Y. N. L. contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
