Review of recent research on flexible multifunctional nanopapers  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7NR04656A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7NR04656A
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 15181-15205Review of recent research on flexible multifunctional nanopapers

        
          
            Ahmed 
            Barhoum
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Pieter 
            Samyn
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Thomas 
            Öhlund
          
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Alain 
            Dufresne
          
          
        
      e
aDepartment of Materials and Chemistry (MACH), Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Brussels, Belgium. E-mail: ahmed.barhoum@science.helwan.edu.eg; ahmed.abdelrasoul@vub.ac.be
bChemistry Department, Faculty of Science, Helwan University, 11795 Helwan, Cairo, Egypt
cInstitute for Materials Research (IMO-IMOMEC), Applied and Analytical Chemistry, Hasselt University, B-3590 Diepenbeek, Belgium
dDepartment of Natural Sciences, Mid-Sweden University, S-85170 Sundsvall, Sweden
eUniv. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LGP2, F-38000 Grenoble, France
Received 
      28th June 2017
    , Accepted 8th September 2017First published on 11th September 2017AbstractTraditional paper and papermaking have struggled with a declining market during the last few decades. However, the incorporation of nanotechnology into papermaking has brought possibilities to develop low-cost, biocompatible and flexible products with sophisticated functionalities. The functionality of nanopapers emerges from the intrinsic properties of the nanofibrous network, the additional loading of specific nanomaterials (NMs), or the additional deposition and patterning of thin films of nanomaterials on the paper surface. A successful development of functional nanopapers requires understanding how the nanopaper matrix, nanofillers, nanocoating pigments, nanoprinting inks, processing additives and manufacturing processes all interact to provide the intended functionality. This review addresses the emerging area of functional nanopapers. This review discusses flexible and multifunctional nanopapers, NMs being used in nanopaper making, manufacturing techniques, and functional applications that provide new important possibilities to utilize papermaking technology. The interface where NM research meets traditional papermaking has important implications for food packaging, energy harvesting and energy storage, flexible electronics, low-cost devices for medical diagnostics, and numerous other areas.Ahmed BarhoumAhmed Barhoum is Asst. Prof. at Helwan University. He obtained his Ph.D. degree in Chemical Engineering and worked as a Postdoc-Fellow (2011–2016) at Vrije Universiteit Brussel. His research interests focus on the fabrication of nanostructured particles, nanofibers, and polymer nanocomposites and their applications in photocatalysis, water treatment, bio- and chemical sensors, and drug delivery. Barhoum has received several scientific grants: FWO-Postdoc (2016), FWO-PhD (2015), Medastar Erasmus Mundus (2012), Welcome Erasmus Mundus (2012), and Campus France (2012). He is the Editor-in-Chief of the Handbook of Nanoparticles and Architectural Nanostructured Materials (2017) and Handbook of Nanofibers (2018), published by Elsevier and Springer.Pieter SamynPieter Samyn is a senior researcher at the Institute for Materials (IMO-IMOMEC) of Hasselt University. After obtaining his Ph.D. degree in Materials Science (2007) from Ghent University, he became a postdoc at the University of Freiburg (2010–2017) and the Freiburg Institute for Advanced Studies (FRIAS). His research focuses on the valorization of side-products from the paper and pulp industry by nanotechnological routes, bio-based coatings, polymer engineering, surface engineering and analytical tools. He was a visiting researcher at the ETH (2007) and University of Toronto (2013). He has received several scientific awards and grants, including a FWO postdoc grant (2008), Robert Bosch Junior Professorship (2011), Baden-Württemberg Juniorprofessoren program (2012) and Heinz-Maier Leibnitz Preis (2012).Thomas ÖhlundThomas Öhlund received his Ph.D. in Engineering Physics from Mid-Sweden University in 2014. He holds a senior research position at Mid-Sweden University and his research interests include the synthesis, solution-processing, and inkjet-printing of functional nanomaterials, printed electronics and cellulose-based substrates for novel applications. He conducted visiting research at Åbo Akademi University in 2012. He has received the 2017 Skills Prize from the Gunnar Sundblad Research Foundation & the Swedish Forest Industries Federation. He is a visiting scholar at Stanford University (2017–2018).Alain DufresneAlain Dufresne received his Ph.D. in 1991 from INSA Toulouse (Electronics) and was then a Post-doc at Polytechnique Montreal, and a Lecturer at INSA Lyon. He was appointed Associate Professor in 1993, and then Professor in 2001, at Grenoble University. Since 2003 he has been a Professor at Grenoble INP. He was a visiting professor at UFRJ and Embrapa Fortaleza (Brazil), and UKM (Malaysia). His research interests focus on the processing and characterization of renewable nanocomposites. He has published more than 250 peer-reviewed papers. He has received the 2016 International Nanotechnology Division Award and the FiberLean® Technologies Prize awarded by TAPPI and is in the 2016 top 300 most cited researchers in materials science and engineering of Elsevier Scopus Data.
1. Introduction
Paper materials are among the oldest materials known to mankind for storage and exchange of information. Although its function as a writing medium has been declining, paper has become more versatile and its demand in a variety of applications is steadily increasing. Paper can be used for healthcare, diagnostics, energy harvesting and storage, and microfluidics, and as a carrier for various electronic circuits and devices. These new applications require suitable functionality, either at the level of single paper fibers or at the level of the final paper product. Furthermore, they require suitable mechanical properties such as high robustness and low weight.
Conventional papers are highly porous materials with various desired properties such as renewability, biodegradability, recyclability, affordability and favorable mechanical properties including strength and flexibility. Broadly, there are two fundamental steps in traditional papermaking:1 (i) pulping, beating, and refining the fibrous raw materials in order to isolate the cellulose fiber from the raw material source, the cell walls are fibrillated to produce many microfibrils; (ii) interweaving the fibers into a finished mat of material, which constitutes paper. The paper sheet is formed when a very dilute water suspension of the separated fibers flows onto a very fine wire mesh, leaving the water to drain through and the cellulose fibers to settle together and dry, forming a paper web. While the bulk properties of paper rely on the internal structure of the open porous paper web formed through complex interactions of cellulose fibers, the surface properties can be readily engineered to further enhance the optical, biological, chemical and mechanical surface properties.2 Nowadays, paper consists of a wide range of products with very different applications such as educational, communication, artistic, cultural, storage and transportation of goods such as bank paper, waterproof paper, banana paper, electronic paper, inkjet paper, laid paper, etc.
Conventional papers are highly porous, rough, and hygroscopic and therefore not highly compatible with most coating suspensions and printing inks. Thus, paper is often loaded with various non-fibrous additives to improve the strength, smoothness and optical characteristics, as well as to hinder extensive penetration of liquids. Mineral fillers are added to the base paper, typically between 10 and 20%, to fill in the voids around crossing-fibre areas.1 The use of fillers improves the sheet formation, optical properties, and printability, while it reduces the gas permeability and the production cost. Paper coating colors contain pigments and binders in water, with a solid content of typically 50–70%.3 The coating pigments fill in crevices on the paper surface and create a smooth and flat surface with enhanced printing properties. The type, shape, size (size distribution), and relative concentration of the filler and coating pigments are the main properties which determine the base paper properties, coating structure, and the resulting paper performance.4–7
The introduction of nanotechnology in papermaking originally emerged from intentions to optimize the processing technology, reduce energy consumption and improve sheet formation. Paper is a low-cost porous substrate and the presence of only a very small volume of NMs can produce devices with unique functions. The functionality of the NMs may strongly depend on their morphology and ordering and can also be classified as follows:8 0D structures (e.g. metal and metal oxide NPs), 1D structures (e.g., CNTs, CNFs, and CNWs), 2D structures (e.g. nanoclay and graphene) or 3D structures. Another classification is generally used, depending on their origin: inorganic, organic, carbon-based or composites. The use of NMs in papermaking nowadays mainly focuses on the use of raw nanomaterials and nanoadditives. To date, a number of nanopapers have been developed in order to create products with additional functionalities including protected papers,9 low-gas-permeable papers,10 transparent papers,11,12 superhydrophobic papers,13–15 fire-retardant papers,16,17 photocatalytic papers,18 antimicrobial papers,19,20 conductive papers,21,22 magnetic papers,23–25 sensor papers,26–29 printed-electronic papers,30,31 shape-memory papers,32 and papers for energy harvesting and energy storage.33–35
This review will focus on some recent developments in the creation of multifunctional nanopapers. First, an overview of nanopaper substrates from different resources (e.g. cellulose NMs, carbon NMs, and polymer nanofibers) is presented, followed by the creation of additional functionalities through the incorporation of various types of NMs.
2. Formation and processing of nanopaper substrates
Nanopaper can be defined as a highly porous material manufactured in the form of thin sheets from wood pulp or other fibrous substances and it contains particles that have one or more dimensions in the size range of 1 nm to 100 nm. Nanopapers can be produced from a wide range of NMs (e.g. cellulose NMs, carbon NMs, polymer nanofibers, and ultralong metal oxide nanowires). They may be also filled with various nano-additives (e.g. nanofillers, nanocoating pigments and nanoprinting inks) to improve their dimensional stability and specific properties such as surface smoothness and optical and electrical performance. Inorganic, carbon, and cellulose-based NMs with high aspect ratio have been successfully developed and are used in papermaking.36 Many techniques have been developed to fabricate nanopapers, including electrospinning, solution processing such as air-brushing, or self-assembling methodologies such as LbL assembly of polyelectrolytes and inorganic nanowires. Simple filtration techniques can also be employed for making nanopapers, such as filtration of CNT dispersions for the fabrication of buckypapers. The different types of nanopaper substrates are described below.
2.1 Cellulose nanopapers
Cellulose nanopapers can be produced from various sources of natural fibers (cellulose raw materials) which are the structural cells of plants. Cellulose raw materials in papermaking can be classified as wood-based raw materials and non-wood based raw materials (bagasse, bamboo, kenaf, reed, straw, and grasses). Wood provides about 93% of the world's virgin fiber requirement,37 while the other sources (non-wood) contribute the remainder. The hierarchical structure of wood and natural fibers with an arrangement of cellulose fibrils into the cell wall allows disintegrating the fibrous structure into nanoscale morphologies including either single or bundles of elementary fibrils.38 At the nanoscale level, wood fibers are a cellulosic-fibrillar composite made of fibrous raw materials (cellulose fibers), hemicelluloses, lignin, and extractives.39 Cellulose fibers in their simplest form are elementary cellulosic microfibrils, containing both crystalline and amorphous regions.40 This semicrystalline structure is responsible for the high strength and unique properties of wood fibers. The proportion of these components and their structures vary in hardwoods and softwoods and also between species. Mechanical and/or chemical treatments are often required to extract the CNFs from the cell wall of wood.41
To date, different types of cellulose NMs have been developed in recent years and they were categorized depending on their geometry: cellulose microfibers (CMFs),45 cellulose nanofibers (CNFs),46 and cellulose nanowhiskers (CNWs) or nanocrystals (CNCs).47 These novel forms of cellulose NMs combine unique properties of cellulose such as hydrophilicity, assembling, a broad modification capacity, and formation of versatile morphologies (Fig. 1). The production, characterization, and applications of these novel forms of cellulose NMs are generating much research activity worldwide.48 Details of the structure, dimensions, properties and production methods of cellulose NMs are found in several reviews.49,50 Alternatively, bacterial nanocellulose (BC) has a similar morphology of a very fine cellulose network and consists of a pure and highly crystalline form of cellulose produced by bacteria from glucose, e.g. acetic acid bacteria of the genus Gluconacetobacter.22 However, the large-scale industrial production of BC is still in a state of development.
 Fig. 1  Different forms of cellulose fibers: (a) SEM image of cellulose pulp fibers,42 (b) SEM image of CNFs,42 (c) TEM image of CNCs,43 and (d) SEM image of bacterial cellulose (BC) nanofibers.44 Copyright 2011, Springer;42 Copyright 2008, Royal Society of Chemistry;43 and Copyright 2009, Royal Society of Chemistry,44 respectively. 
The wide range of production techniques for CMFs and CNFs range from top-down methods (i.e. enzymatic and mechanical grinding) to the bottom-up production of CNFs (e.g. bacterial nanocellulose and electrospinning). The production of CMFs or CNFs by fibrillation of cellulose plant cell fibers requires the mechanical isolation of individual fibrils by grinding,51 cryo-crushing,52 or high-pressure homogenization.53 The processing over 10 to 20 cycles with a pressure drop of about 55 MPa typically results in microfibrils with a diameter of 100 nm to 1 μm and the length from a few hundreds of micrometers to a maximum of 1 mm (CMFs). The more severe conditions under 5–20 passes combined with pressures of 55 to 210 MPa typically result in the production of CNFs with smaller diameter and length.54 However, the main disadvantage of this mechanical treatment is a high energy consumption, over 25000 kW h per ton.55 CNCs consist of highly crystalline and stiff needle-like fibers with relatively lower aspect ratio, typically having a diameter of 2 to 20 nm and a length of 100 to 600 nm.56 CNCs are commonly produced by acid hydrolysis of pulp fibers or microcrystalline cellulose in combination with a sonication treatment using sulfuric, hydrochloric or phosphoric acid to dissolve the amorphous domains.57 The resulting surface charge of CNCs highly depends on the type of acid: e.g. they are weakly negatively charged if prepared with HCl but become more negatively charged if prepared with H2SO4.49 CNCs produced by HCl hydrolysis show a limited dispersibility in water over a wide range of pH values, compared with those obtained by H2SO4 hydrolysis.58
Early studies assess the potential of using both CNFs and CNCs directly in cellulose-based nanopapers with some unique characteristics, including low thermal expansion, high smoothness, high optical transparency, enhanced barrier properties, low coefficient of thermal expansion and further possibilities for surface functionalization.59 The formation of nanostructured fiber networks and the occurring fiber interactions can be well understood by considering the effects of high specific surface area of the nanofibers and porosity under different drying conditions:60 compared with water-free nanopaper, the paper becomes softer with different deformation behaviors when the water in CNF hydrogels is exchanged with liquid CO2, supercritical CO2, and tert-butanol, followed by evaporation, supercritical drying, and sublimation, respectively.60 CNF and CNC films provide good oxygen gas barrier resistance, where the oxygen molecules penetrated much more slowly within cellulose nanopaper due to the higher nanofiber/whisker entanglements.61 However, the barrier properties of cellulose nanopaper decrease in the presence of moisture due to their hydrophilic nature: in particular, CNFs and CNCs provide high water vapor transmission rates due to their hydrophilicity, which can be improved after surface modification, acetylation, or in the presence of lignin.62 CNFs and CNCs have a high surface area, high flexibility and a large number of hydroxyl groups on their surface, which provide nanopapers with a high tensile strength (up to 214 MPa) and Young's modulus (up to 14 GPa).63 Therefore, CNF and CNC-based papers have increasingly been used for advanced applications of high strength and light weight materials, such as porous magnetic aerogels, display substrates, photocatalysis, and humidity sensors,64 The addition of CNFs by 10 wt% to unrefined pulp can increase the tensile strength from 20 to 34 N with a significant grammage reduction. The addition of CNFs by 5 wt% (as dry) can help to increase the filler content from 30 to 50 wt% without affecting the paper strength.65 A comparison of cellulose nanopaper, traditional paper, and plastic was reported in previous reviews, as summarized in Table 1.24 The properties and prices of cellulose nanopapers were compared to the properties of conventional paper substrates, as given in Table 2.31
Table 1 Comparison of cellulose nanopaper, traditional paper, and plastic. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.66




Characteristics
Cellulose nanopaper
Traditional paper
Paper plastic




Surface roughness (nm)
5
5000–10000
5


Porosity (%)
20–40
50
0


Pore size (nm)
10–50
3000
0


Optical transparency at 550 nm (%)
90
20
90


Max loading stress (MPa)
200–400
6
50


Coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE) (ppm K−1)
12–28.5
28–40
20–100


Printability
Good
Excellent
Poor


Young modulus (GPa)
7.4–14
0.5
2–2.7


Bending radius (mm)
1
1
5


Renewability
High
High
Low




Table 2 Comparison of the properties and cost of classical printed electronics substrates (plastic and conventional paper) and cellulose nanopaper. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry31




Material
Surface roughness (nm)
Young modulus (GPa)
Coefficient of thermal expansion (ppm K−1)
Paper transparency
Price (€ m−2)
Scale up




PET
≈0.5–2
≈2–2.5
50–200
Yes
4–6
Yes


Conventional paper
≈10
≈2
—
No
6–7
Yes


Cellulose nanopaper (based on NFCs)
≈2–40
≈10
≈8–13
Yes
15–200
No


Cellulose nanopaper (based on TEMPO-CNFs)
≈0.2–0.5
≈10–13
≈7.2–7.9
Yes
200–500
No




The presence of nanocellulose in paper favorably improves the smoothness of the paper surface with a reduction of 20 to 30% in surface porosity and is therefore applied as a treatment for inkjet printing.67 Cellulose nanopapers were used as substrates for printing electrically conductive patterns to create flexible paper-based electrical devices. The dense packing of CNFs and CNCs with diameters below 100 nm causes only the ink carrier to be absorbed through the pores while the inkjet NPs remain on the paper surface. In contrast, the traditional pulp paper has large cavities in the range of 20 to 60 mm and the inkjet NPs flow into the pore structures. Consequently, the inkjet NPs – lines on the nanopaper – show a narrower width and a lower electrical resistance than traditional paper.67 Therefore, electrically conductive patterns of Ag nanowires could be successfully printed on transparent nanopaper made of CNFs in order to make paper solar cells (Fig. 2).68 The high affinity and high degree of entanglement between CNFs and Ag nanowires ensured good performance after folding (flexibility): the cellulose nanopaper maintains its high conductivity and the paper solar cells still generate electrical power. However, the application of CNFs and CNCs can improve the surface smoothness and mechanical properties of the base paper. There are several drawbacks of using CNFs and CNCs in papermaking:65 (i) poor retention in the fibrous materials; (ii) a relatively high cost; (iii) negative impact on the drainage and drying of paper, (iv) greater sensitivity to tearing, and (v) high energy consumption. Therefore, the industrial use of CNFs and CNCs in the papermaking industry has been limited.65
 Fig. 2  Silver NP lines on pulp paper (a): Ag NPs flowed into the pore structures immediately after printing; and nanopaper (b): Ag NP lines on nanopaper show a narrow width of 0.9 mm.69 Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
2.2 Carbon nanopapers
Carbon nanopapers (CNPs) are non-woven fibrous entangled assemblies of carbon NMs with a 2D paper-like morphology, held together by van der Waals forces between carbon NM junctions, similar to ordinary paper made from wood pulp fiber.70,71 Carbon nanopapers are made of carbon-based NMs (e.g. carbon nanofibers, graphene, and CNTs) and non-ionic surfactants (e.g. Triton X-100 and sodium lauryl sulfate), which aid their dispersion into aqueous or organic solvents (Fig. 3). The suspension should be sonicated for sufficient time and then filtered through a hydrophilic or hydrophobic membrane with the aid of pressure, leaving the carbon individuals to bond by van der Waals forces. After filtration, the carbon nanopaper may be dried in an oven at 120 °C for 2 h to remove the remaining solvent.32 The porosity and pore sizes of the carbon nanopaper are determined by the weight concentration of the carbon individuals. Alternatively, the carbon nanopaper can be obtained by mechanical pressing/rolling.72 The selection of a suitable dispersant, pH value, and concentration of the carbon NMs and the dispersant is a critical issue in preventing agglomeration of carbon NMs.73 The van der Waals force interaction between the carbon NMs and the dispersant can often be mechanically strong and quite stable and therefore there is no assurance that all of the dispersant is removed from the paper film after formation. Washing the nanopaper produced with an effective organic solvent (e.g. methanol or ethanol) for the removal of the dispersant has been performed, but it was found to cause cracking and deformation of the films. It has also been found that dispersants such as Triton X (non-ionic surfactants) can lead to cell lysis and in turn tissue inflammatory responses, even at very low concentrations.74 To overcome these limitations, conductive, flexible nanopapers are made of an aqueous dispersion of cellulose and carbon NMs. The composite nanopapers made of carbon and cellulose NMs are electroconductive materials with extreme flexibility (Fig. 3) and have already been widely used as electrodes in electrochemical devices.
 Fig. 3  Fabrication of conductive, flexible nanopaper aerogels. (a) Aqueous dispersion of CNTs and CNFs. (b) A web film made of slurry in (a). (c) A freeze-dried conductive nanopaper (200 μm thick). (d)–(f) SEM of conductive nanopaper with different magnifications.75 Copyright 2013, Elsevier. 
The continuous network made of individual CNTs, graphene nanosheets or carbon nanofibers acts as a conductive path for electrons, making these nanopapers electrically conductive.32 Moreover, the combination of both unique thermal and electrical properties of carbon nanopaper will help to produce novel multifunctional materials.32 Therefore, attractive techniques have been developed for making carbon nanopaper substrates.76 The buckypapers, made of single-walled and multiple-walled CNTs, are self-supporting mats, which form thin membranes consisting of a dense network of entangled CNT ropes and appear as uniform, smooth, and crack-free paper-like sheets.17,77 Buckypaper owes its name to the Buckminster fullerene, the 60-carbon fullerene. The most common technique for preparing buckypapers is the dispersion and vacuum filtration of a suspension of CNTs. The agglomeration of CNTs may reduce the mechanical strength and the thermal and electrical conductivity of the buckypapers. To achieve the ideal structure of buckypapers: (i) the CNTs should be long and straight in the buckypaper; (ii) all the CNTs should be aligned and connected with others to form a network structure. The alignment of the CNTs in the buckypapers can lead to better thermal and electrically conductive properties.78 However, due to the different qualities of CNTs used, various results of strength, thermal and electronic properties were reported in the literature. The alignment of the CNTs in the nanopaper can be done by self-assembly or applying a magnetic field.79 However, the effect of self-assembly and magnetic alignment is limited and cannot effectively solve the agglomeration problems of CNTs.72 Buckypapers with high strain up to 15.36 MPa and an electrical conductivity of 61.17 S cm−1 were obtained by supercritical fluid (SCF) drying.80 The mixing of multiwalled CNTs with NFC in aqueous suspension and filtration provides a tough nanopaper substrate with up to 17 wt% of multi-walled CNTs commingled with CNFs, in contrast with the rather brittle nature of CNT composites.81 Flexible electrode materials made of CNT paper exhibited a reversible discharge capacity of ∼200 mA h g−1 at a current density of ∼0.08 mA cm−2.82 A reversible discharge capacity of 572 mA h g−1 was achieved for CNT/carbon layer paper at 0.2 mA cm−2.83 In addition, the relatively high production cost of CNTs and the difficulty of making stable CNT dispersions limited the practical application of CNT paper as flexible electrodes for energy production and energy storage devices.
Recently, graphene has replaced the CNTs; graphene aqueous dispersions can be chemically prepared from commercially available, inexpensive graphite.84 The as-prepared graphene nanopaper exhibits ultrastrong paper-like characteristics and presents a smooth surface with a shiny metallic luster on both sides.85 The graphene nanopapers are electrically conductive and mechanically stable with an electrical conductivity of 351 S cm−1, a Young's modulus of 41.8 GPa, and a tensile strength of 293.3 MPa.86 These flexible, robust graphene nanopapers find potential use as electrodes in flexible energy production, conversion, and storage devices.87 High-performance graphene nanopapers have been prepared from an aqueous solution of functional graphene with benzenesulfonic acid, resulting in improved properties with great potential in mainly gas diffusion barriers, electromagnetic shielding, thermal management, and anticorrosion.88 The key to understanding the unique mechanical properties of graphene paper lies in studying the collective behavior of stacked graphene nanosheets along with the interlayer adhesion (water molecules).89
Silicon is an attractive anode material because of its highest known charging capacity (∼4200 mA h g−1). However, the insertion of Li ions into and extraction from Si are accompanied by a huge volume change (up to 400%) causing pulverization and rapid capacity fading.75 To overcome this limitation, Wong and coworkers90 have developed a composite nanopaper (binder-free) made of graphite oxide and Si NPs as an anode material for Li-ion batteries. Fig. 4 shows a flow diagram of the process used in this study, where Si NPs were obtained through ashing of rice husk and converted into a composite nanopaper by vacuum filtration. The nanopaper anode yielded an initial capacity of 1000 mA h g−1 at a high applied current density of 1000 mA g−1.90
 Fig. 4  Schematic diagram of the process used to convert rice husk into Si NPs and the subsequent fabrication of the composite paper with GO solution and battery fabrication. Thermal annealing at 700 °C under an argon atmosphere is used to convert the GO into more conductive reduced GO, which improved the conductivity of the composite paper.90 Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
2.3 Inorganic nanopapers
Besides the carbon nanopapers, a few investigations have been dedicated to 1D metal oxide NPs and nanofibers for producing inorganic nanopapers. Inorganic nanopapers based on transition-metal oxides (MOx) are promising for energy applications, but a suitable binder is necessary to produce them in parallel with a high electric resistance. Similar to making regular paper, flexible conductive inorganic-based nanopaper can be fabricated via vacuum filtration of a homogeneous conductive MOx suspension, followed by a pressing and peeling-off process. The thickness of the resulting nanopaper is around tens of micrometers and can be tuned by simply adjusting the mass of the materials to be added. Recently, Yao et al.91 have synthesized a transparent MoO3-based nanopaper to be used as an electrode material. The nanopaper was prepared by dispersing MoO3 nanobelts (3–200 μm in length and 300 nm in width and a thickness of 60 nm) in water and vacuum-filtering the mixture. The MoO3 nanopaper formed on the membrane during filtration was dried in air and peeled off (see Fig. 5). The produced nanopaper exhibited an excellent optical transmittance of 95.6% and a good flexibility to withstand folding and unfolding, in parallel with a good specific capacitance of 1198 F g−1 at 2 mV s−1 and high stability over 20000 charging/discharging cycles.91 Manufacturing additives such as CNTs and graphene may improve the characteristics of this class of nanopaper, but impairs the optical transparency.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic diagram illustrating the process using vacuum filtration and the hot-pressing method to fabricate MoO3 nanopaper. (b) SEM side-view image of MoO3 nanopaper. (c) SEM top-view image of MoO3 nanopaper. (d) Optical image of flexible MoO3 nanopaper. (e) The contact angle of MoO3 nanopaper.92 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
2.4 Electrospun nanopaper
Electrospinning provides a simple and versatile method for generating ultrathin fibers from a rich variety of polymers and solvents and even with the incorporation of reinforcing particles or void-forming agents.60,93 Appropriate solutions for electrospinning can be prepared by dissolving nearly any thermoplastic polymer in its respective solvent.94 The basic setup for electrospinning is so simple that it has already found widespread use in many research laboratories (Fig. 6a). During the electrospinning process, a solid nanofiber is generated as the electrified jet (viscous polymer solution) is continuously stretched due to the electrostatic repulsions between the surface charges and the evaporation of the solvent.95 The electrospinning technique has been recently used to produce polymer, cellulose and carbon nanofiber mats, which can further be used as a substrate for functional nanopapers with enhanced properties such as porosity, specific surface area, and electrical conductivity.95–97 To date, a number of electrospinning techniques based on the conventional needle electrospinning model have been developed, including, among others, multi-jet electrospinning, electroblowing, bubble electrospinning, cylindrical porous hollow tube electrospinning, coaxial electrospinning, melt electrospinning, self-bundling electrospinning, charge injection electrospinning, nanospider electrospinning, etc. Shivalingappa Lingaiah and Kunigal Shivakumar98 developed a method of producing nanopaper from a commercial P84 NT polyimide (PI) using an electrospinning and fiber heat fusing approach. The measured modulus and strength were 871 MPa and 57.1 MPa, respectively, for randomly oriented fibers. These values doubled on increasing the fiber alignment (a drum speed of about 2000 rpm).98 Ultralong metal oxide (MOx) nanowires can be further assembled into a two-dimensional nanopaper. Wang et al.99 successfully fabricated a highly flexible photosensor (TiO2 nanopaper) composed of ultralong TiO2 nanowires via a facile electrospinning method. The TiO2 nanopaper shows a high photo-dark current ratio of 760 and 600 under 254 nm and 365 nm UV light, respectively. These nanopapers also exhibit excellent mechanical flexibility and durability. Possible mechanisms of the improved mechanical performance of this TiO2 nanopaper have been discussed in detail.99 Electrospinning and deposing nanofibers onto paper allows the design and controlled fabrication of electrospun 3D structures such as grids, walls, hollow cylinders, or three-dimensional logos. When a printing paper is placed on the grounded conductive plate, the paper acts as a collector substrate where residual solvents from the electrospun fibers infiltrate the paper substrate and enhance the charge transfer between the deposited fibers and the ground plate via the fibrous paper network.100 The properties of CNFs obtained by electrospinning depend on (i) the degree of polymerization of cellulose, (ii) the solvent system, (iii) spinning conditions, and (iv) post-spinning treatments.101 A short review on the processing of polysaccharides, cellulose, and chitosan, and their derivatives, including cellulose acetate, ethyl cellulose and hydroxypropyl cellulose, has been published before.102
 Fig. 6  Schematic representation for preparing the silicon nanofiber paper-like material. (a) Electrospinning process and subsequent magnesiothermic reduction of the electrospun SiO2 nanofibers. Digital photographs of (b) SiO2 nanopaper, (c) etched Si nanopaper, and (d) carbon-coated Si nanopaper as used in the Li-ion battery configuration. Copyrights 2015, Nature.104 
Paper-like substrates can be created by electrospinning from a very broad range of materials. Papers prepared from aromatic polyamide fibers according to traditional papermaking methods are problematic because the fiber dispersing performance is poor, while an electrospun aromatic polyamide fiber paper based material has excellent mechanical performance and is more stable.103 Other paper-like materials composed of sponge-like Si nanofibers coated with a carbon layer have been used for Li-ion batteries: as such, the paper-like material of porous Si nanofibers is made via magnesiothermic reduction of electrospun SiO2 nanofiber paper (see Fig. 6).61 Carbon-coated Si nanofiber electrodes achieved a capacity of 802 mA h g−1 after 659 cycles with a Coulombic efficiency of 99.9%, which is over two times higher than conventional graphite anodes.104 Hybrid poly(vinylidene fluoride)-TiO2 nanofiber mats have been prepared by a combination of electrospinning and electrospraying and can be used as photocatalytic paper.105 The electrospinning of poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) fibers in combination with a polymethacylate coating offers the potential for fabrication of paper-based biosensors, which can be employed for immobilization of the dengue antibody and subsequent detection of dengue enveloped virus in enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.106 In general, the electrospinning technique can be used for the deposition of nanoscale coatings on paper or single cellulosic fibers.107
3. Nanomaterial types for functional papers
Functional papers can be created by various techniques involving the deposition of a solution containing functional NMs. The high oxygen (hydroxyl) density of nanoporous cellulose fibers constitutes an effective nanoreactor for in situ syntheses of metal NPs, acting as an anchoring point for the ions in the cellulose fibers via ion–dipole interactions and stabilization by strong bonding interaction with their surface atoms.108 Metal and metal oxide NPs can be deposited on cellulose fibers through electrostatic interactions between the positively charged cellulose (e.g. after cationic modification) and either negatively charged NPs or negative metal complex ions. Layer-by-layer (LBL) assembly is a recently developed technique that allows for depositing multilayer films on cellulose fibers. The deposition and growth of metal and metal oxide NPs have been realized by the electrostatic assembly of cellulosic fibers that were alternatingly dipped in polyelectrolytes and in a colloidal NP solution.109,110 LbL deposition has been employed for functionalization of nanopaper surface with a wide variety of compounds (e.g. proteins, polysaccharides, conducting polymers or NPs). As such, the texture of the nanopapers can be tuned depending on the properties of the nanofibers and multilayered nanopapers are made in combination with different post-functionalization techniques.110 Alternatively, the functional NMs are either dissolved or dispersed in the solution to form the functional ink that is printed or coated on the paper using a suitable method. A suitable combination of printed films builds the functional application or device on the paper.
The type of functional material added to the paper structure can be either organic or inorganic, and usually has an electric property that is conductive, semiconductive or insulating. The combination of two or more NMs, i.e. hybrid NMs, may achieve more desirable functional properties than any of the single materials would achieve on their own: e.g., insulating layers with high permittivity and good printability can be achieved by combining inorganic NPs with an insulating polymer.111,112 Alternatively, the NMs might provide some additional properties such as the emission of light, or a chemical or biological sensing function. Among others, the main important classes of functional NMs in papermaking can be categorized as follows.
Organic NMs are usually less costly and easier to apply by solution processes than inorganic materials. Organo-modified nanoclay in the paper industry acts as a gas barrier and a waterproofing agent.80 Organic materials and films usually provide good elasticity with a higher tolerance to bending and stretching and are in that respect more suitable to apply on flexible substrates such as paper. However, organic NMs mostly provide worse electrical performance.
Metal NPs or metal precursors can be used for conductive films if high conductivity is required. Silver is the most commonly used metal mainly because it has the highest conductivity of all metals (1.59 μΩ cm) and is easy to process from stable solutions compared to more reactive metals. However, the price of silver is high which is problematic for low-cost applications. Lower-cost metals such as Cu, Ni, and Al have been solution-processed and applied to paper substrates with some success, although the processing is less straightforward than for silver. Examples of inorganic semiconductors are Si, chalcogenides or metal oxides such as CuO and ZnO. Transition metal dichalcogenides are inorganic materials that have attracted enormous interest in recent years: they are layered materials with strong in-plane bonding but weak layer–layer bonding, which enables exfoliation into 2D flakes with exciting electronic and optical properties.113
4. Functionality of nanopaper substrates
Besides the intrinsic properties of nanopapers due to the nanofibrous network, the additional loading of specific NPs delivers unique functions so that cellulosic paper products can be used for advanced applications. The porous paper structure offers unique advantages over plastic, metals, and ceramics.114 Paper substrates provide flexibility, thinness, light weight, and abundant storage capability, in addition to being much cheaper and easier to process than other substrates.115 A non-exhaustive overview of some functionalities for nanopapers obtained in combination with specific NPs used as fillers within the nanopaper is presented below.
4.1 Transparent nanopapers
Transparent papers are particularly interesting as a platform for transparent, electrically conductive electrodes, which are important for solar cells and lighting devices. Zhu et al.116 have made a comprehensive review of transparent paper: while the diameter of CNFs is much smaller than the light wavelength, the light scattering effects are significantly decreased in comparison with paper-based cellulose microfibers.116 Since the size of CNFs and CNCs is much less than the wavelength of visible light, the papers made of CNFs and CNCs are highly transparent with large light scattering in the forward direction,117 in parallel with decreased opacity and brightness.118 Therefore, the optical properties and light transmittance largely depend on the fiber diameter and packing density:116e.g. clear transparent nanopapers consist of 3 to 15 nm CNFs obtained after full nanofibrillation of the pulp fibers (haze values 4.9–11.7%), while hazy transparent nanopapers consist of CNFs and some cellulose microfibers (haze values 27–87%).119 As the compressed microfibers partly retain their hollow shape, the compressed cavity causes light scattering by the refractive index difference between air and cellulose. By combining both CNFs and CNWs, the transmittance of nanopaper can be tuned: by increasing the CNW content, the optical haze of the hybrid nanopaper could be decreased and its transparency could be increased.120
Among the different nanopaper types, CNF papers produced from chemically modified CNFs are considered to be the most promising transparent substrates for a higher optical transmittance (lower haze).85 The optical transmittance of CNC films consisting of 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl radical oxidized CNCs exhibited higher optical transmittance than films made of sulfuric acid treated CNCs, partly due to the differences in fiber geometry and aspect ratio.121 However, chemically modified nanopapers typically have low thermal durability which is problematic during sintering and other post-processing of nanomaterial layers. The latter can be improved by reducing the carboxylate content in the CNF while still maintaining a high optical transmittance.122 Using a novel partial dissolution strategy, Chen et al.123 fabricated nanopapers having a transmittance similar to PET films (90% at 550 nm) and having promising mechanical properties and high thermal stability up to 130 °C. Both the transmittance and optical haze of a transparent paper are of importance, and both can be altered by modifying the porosity and the size of the fibers. Hu et al.124 developed highly transparent and hazy paper using a mixture of cellulose NMs and ordinary cellulose. At a 60/40 ratio of NFC/cellulose, the transmittance was similar to that of PET, but the haze of the hybrid paper was much higher than that for PET. A high transmittance and a high haze is a desirable combination for thin film solar cells because the light trapping will increase, enhancing the efficiency. In addition, the hybrid paper was cheaper to manufacture and had better shape stability than nanopaper, since it used regular fibers as a reinforcing backbone. Fang et al.125 introduced a novel transparent paper made of wood fibers with combined properties of an ultrahigh optical transparency of 96% and an ultrahigh haze of 60%, which is a requirement to increase the light scattering and consequently the light absorption in the active materials and which is a needed function for solar cell substrates (see Fig. 7).125 The dependence of the optical properties of nanopapers on the cellulose fiber diameter can be explained through a radiative-transfer theory and multiple scattering method simulations, resulting in a good control over the optical properties of highly transparent nanopapers for use in optoelectronics.116 Moreover, the optical transparency can be maintained during heating up to 150 °C: therefore, the nanofiber papers can be further processed by continuous roll-to-roll processes.126
 Fig. 7  Regular paper and transparent nanopaper made of wood fibers: SEM image of (a) regular paper, and (b) transparent paper, the inset shows a magnified SEM image (scale bar is 100 μm). (c) Tensile strength. A simulation model of intersliding (d) two untreated-wood fibers and (e) two TEMPO-oxidized wood fibers. (f) Variation of potential energy of the model systems as a function of relative sliding.125 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 
4.2 Water-repellent nanopaper
The creation of hydrophobic and superhydrophobic papers has been intensively investigated and several routes to control the wetting properties of papers have been reviewed elsewhere.127 The presence of nano- and/or microstructures in combination with proper surface chemistry is critical for non-wetting surfaces. The superhydrophobic papers can be prepared by grafting or coating cellulose surfaces with hydrophobic synthetic polymers or inorganic moieties. Other methods include the transformation of these products into micro- or nanostructured shapes and finally the application onto target substrates. The physical adsorption of specific substances such as polymer aggregates or inorganic microparticles/nanoparticles is a facile route to prepare non-wetting surfaces: e.g., transparent and superhydrophobic layers were deposited by spray-coating of alcohol dispersions of SiO2 NPs,13 or surface-modified TiO2 NPs were added to the paper pulp.128 Zhang et al.129 prepared superhydrophobic coatings based on a block copolymer of polystyrene-poly(methyl methacrylate) (PS-co-PMMA) and SiO2 NPs for common printing paper. Fig. 8 shows the water absorption of regular and superhydrophobic papers while soaking, and their optical images are shown in Fig. 8b and c, respectively. The micro/nanostructures of this composite coating cause common papers to possess superhydrophobic surfaces with low adhesion.129 Nanopaper films consisting of CNFs have been hydrophobized by mild esterification and reaction with anhydride molecules and long alkyl chains.130 The acetylation of nanopaper has been compatible with maintaining optical transparency while both improving moisture and thermal resistance for flexible devices.131 According to other methods, the wetting properties of transparent nanopapers have been patterned and tailored by modifying the nanopaper with either alkyl- or perfluoroalkyl thiols.132 However, the surface hydrophobization of single nanocellulose fibers may have an adverse effect on interfibrillar bonding and the resulting material strength. Therefore, a concept of physical cross-linking of CNFs with chitosan has created water-resistant nanopapers, as the change in environmental conditions reduces the hydration of chitosan and promotes physical interactions between CNFs and chitosan over those with water.133 The porous structures of CNF films have been uniformly coated by chemical vapor deposition of 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorodecyl-trichloro-silane (PFOTS), or the native cellulose nanofibrils have been functionalized with a hydrophobic but oleophilic TiO2 to produce water-repellent and oil-absorbent substrates floating on water.134 The superhydrophobic NFC surfaces mimicking hierarchical biomimetic surfaces were made by air-brushing techniques followed by quick drying and surface modification either before or after the air-brushing.135 Novel approaches for the hydrophobic functionalization of CMFs or CNFs and their processing into nanopapers have been realized by the physical adsorption of organic NPs at the surfaces of micro- or nanofibrillated cellulose fibers.136
 Fig. 8  (a) Plots of water absorption versus soaking time of conventional (common) and superhydrophobic paper; optical images of common (b) or superhydrophobic paper (c) when they are soaked in water. Superhydrophobic paper hardly takes any time to reach the equilibrium of absorption while the common paper takes ∼120 s.129 Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
4.3 Fire-retardant nanopapers
The fire performance of paper and other highly combustible materials needs to be considered for applications where fire safety is important. Improvements in fire retardant performance can be achieved by reducing:137 (i) volatiles from the organic materials; (ii) reaction agents such as oxygen; and (iii) heat. One of the most important mechanisms of fire retardancy is generally attributed to the formation of char during the combustion process. The char obtained during the early combustion stage thermally insulates the organic material and inhibits the formation and escape of volatiles:138 traditionally, most fire-retardant nanocomposites are made from layered silicates such as nanoclay and organic polymers. More recently, fire-retardant nanopaper structures have been developed and applied as fire-retardant barriers on combustible materials. For example, the CNT buckypaper, in particular, has been used as an effective fire-retardant shield when applied to the surface of the organic material. The buckypaper acts as a physical barrier to the diffusion of oxygen but it also slows the escape of combustion products from the decomposition of organic materials. The hybrid buckypaper combining CNTs with Mg(OH)2 NPs showed improvements in fire-retardant performance compared to a buckypaper due to a synergy between fire-retardant mechanisms enabled by the CNTs and the Mg(OH)2 NPs,137 and was applied as a skin layer in epoxy/carbon fiber composites showing a high fire-retardant performance. The flame-resistance of glass fiber reinforced polyester composites was improved by applying hybrid buckypaper with graphite nanosheets onto the surfaces.139 The nanopaper coating also enhanced the structural stability of the samples under fire conditions.
Alternatively, CNF-based nanocomposites with oriented clay can be used as an effective alternative to current flame retardant materials. Although hybrid materials with high inorganic content (>50 wt%) usually show low strain-to-failure, the toughness of clay/CNF hybrid nanopaper could benefit from the CNF matrix (Fig. 9a).16 The CNF matrix provided unusual ductility to the nanocomposite, allowing inorganic contents as high as 90% by weight. The clay/NFC nanopaper was fire-retardant and self-extinguishing and had good oxygen barrier properties. In the following study, it was demonstrated that CNF/clay nanocomposites with highly ordered clay platelets systematically improved fire-retardancy with increasing the clay concentration (Fig. 9b).140 When used as surface layers on glass fiber/epoxy composites, the materials showed much longer time to ignition and delayed production of dangerous smoke. The mechanisms of fire-retardancy were identified as:16 (i) the in-plane orientation of the clay, resulting in low thermal-conductivity so that CNF degradation was delayed, (ii) the oxygen-barrier properties of the clay nanosheets providing an oxygen-depleted environment during thermal degradation, and (iii) the proximity to the clay surfaces, helping the CNFs to form a thermally stable char upon combustion.16
 Fig. 9  (a) The cross-sectional structure of hybrid CNFs/clay nanopaper with flame-retardancy and unusual ductility: the CNFs (green line) form a matrix surrounding the clay platelets.16 Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (b) Vertical flammability test of CNF/montmorillonite (MTM) (reference residue 0 wt% for a pure CNF sample).140 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
4.4 Electrically conductive nanopapers
Electrically conductive nanopapers are useful for various applications such as electromagnetic shielding, electrostatic dissipation, and electrodes for energy storage devices. Patterning of conductive films by printing of conductive inks can be used for the creation of electronic circuits and devices on paper. Conductive cellulose nanopapers have been made in combination with graphene nanosheets,22,141 Ag nanowires,68,142 and CNTs.143,144 Hu et al.144 showed that commercial papers could be made highly conductive with a sheet resistance as low as 1 ohm per square (Ω per sq) by applying a conformal coating of CNTs and Ag-nanowire films on the paper surface. Koga et al.68 used a simple filtration process of the aqueous dispersions of Ag nanowires and CNTs through cellulose nanopaper. The filtration coating provides uniformly conductive networks, whereas conventional coating processes cause self-aggregation and uneven distribution of the CNTs.68 Carbon-based NMs such as CNTs and graphene nanosheets have attracted significant attention for a range of applications in printed and flexible electronics. CNTs can have either semiconductive, semimetallic, or metallic properties depending on their chirality and diameter. Graphene is a single layer of graphite, the two-dimensional sp2-bonded allotrope of carbon. It has high charge carrier mobility, intrinsic flexibility as well as impressive thermal and chemical stability. The sp2-bonded structure of CNTs and graphene gives rise to promising electrical properties that have been further exploited in applications such as thin-film transistors (TFTs), supercapacitors and photovoltaics.145 The combination of CNTs with in situ polymerization of pyrrole allows creating nanopapers with further enhancement in electrical conductivity and electrochemical properties even when using small amounts of CNTs.146 The mixing of CNTs with CNFs in aqueous suspension is a critical issue to avoid agglomeration, but homogeneous suspensions with up to 17 wt% CNTs can be obtained after surface treatment with an appropriate surfactant:81 the purpose of CNT surface treatment is not only to provide CNT dispersions in water, but it also ensures a homogeneous CNF/CNT suspension mixture. The resulting nanopaper structures show a combination of high electrical conductivity, good bending flexibility, and high tensile strength. CNF-based nanopapers have been made electrically conductive by the assembly with Ag nanowires, using a pressured extrusion papermaking technique followed by cross-linking with hydroxypropylmethyl cellulose.147
Lin et al.22 prepared conductive graphene nanopapers using ultralarge monolayer graphene oxide (GO) nanosheets. They found that large-size GO nanosheets had a positive impact on the self-alignment, mechanical properties, thermal, and electrical conductivity of graphene nanopapers. Recently, vacuum based depositions such as sputtering were developed to produce highly conductive channels on a nanopaper surface. This can be done without heating; therefore, paper properties such as directional stability, mechanical properties, surface smoothness, or paper appearance will not be affected.69,148 Kang et al.149 fabricated nanopapers made of graphene nanosheet coated cellulose fibers. The graphene nanosheet coating and a continuous network through a bridge of cellulose fibers provide the nanopapers produced with a high electric conductivity. Yang et al.150 developed nanopapers made of graphene nanosheet-coated CO3O4 fibers and used it as an anode material for Li-ion batteries. Conductive organic-based NMs have also been used for producing electrically conductive nanopapers. Polymers such as polyaniline can be made conductive by protonation of the emeraldine base using a functionalized acid such as dodecyl benzenesulfonic acid, while the polymer poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) is doped with poly(styrene sulfonic acid) (PSS). The PEDOT:PSS can be dispersed in water to create functional conductive ink patterns on paper, although the concentration usually needs to be less than 2 wt% to avoid aggregation.68
4.5 Thermally conductive nanopapers
Paper-based thermal conductors have been much less investigated than electrical conductors, as the thermal conductivity and thermal stability of cellulose nanopapers are relatively low. Nevertheless, paper-based thermal conductors are highly interesting as low-cost, light weight, and thermally conductive multifunctional materials. Moreover, thermally conductive papers can address the heat dissipation in electronic devices on the paper. For nanopapers made of graphite oxide, there is a known large increase in thermal conductivity when evolving to reduced graphite oxide after thermal annealing due to the removal of functional groups and the reduction in structural defects.151 Zhu et al.152 reported a highly thermally conductive, electrically insulating nanocomposite paper with layered boron nitride nanosheets, stabilized by CNF. In these composite nanopapers, the boron nitride nanopaper formed a network with a thermal conductivity comparable to that of Al alloys, while CNFs provided high mechanical strength (Fig. 10). Alternatively, a bilayer design was developed with a thin layer of boron nitride nanosheets coated on CNF nanopaper through a solution-based process at room temperature, resulting in a thermally conductive, electrically insulating, and optically transparent nanopaper.153 The thermally conductive nanopaper has also been made using microcrystalline cellulose as the paper matrix, and a filler composed of SiC nanowires and Ag NPs.154 The Ag NPs lowered the interfacial thermal resistance at the silicon carbide nanowire interfaces. CNTs with superior thermal conductivity (∼6000 W mK−1) have attracted increasing attention for applications in many aspects.155 Recently, Gonnet et al.156 developed a novel approach to produce buckypaper mats by aligning SWCNT mats into epoxy matrices. In-plane SWNT mat alignment is achieved by magnetically aligning the CNTs under a high magnetic field prior to the composite loading. The nanopaper produced showed a high thermal conductivity of about 42 W mK−1. However, the thermal conductivity drops significantly by almost an order of magnitude when the aligned SWCNT mats were loaded with epoxy, and become comparable to the value for the non-aligned composite.156
 Fig. 10  Thermally conductive nanopaper using boron nitride nanosheets and nanofibrillated cellulose (NFC). The thermal conductivity of the thermally conductive nanopaper is comparable with that of Al alloy.152 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
4.6 Magnetic nanopapers
Magnetic devices such as magnetoresistive sensors are typically manufactured onto rigid and expensive substrates such as SiO2. New organic platforms are desired for the implementation of low-cost, flexible and wearable magnetic devices. Paper-based thin magnetic films have been investigated by the sputtering of permalloy.123,157 The research suggested that the surface properties of commercially available paper usually constitute the bottleneck to the realization of high-performing thin magnetic and magnetoelectronic films.123,157 Furthermore, the mechanical properties of the paper are important since mechanical stresses in the magnetic coating during the fabrication process or device operation can deteriorate the magnetic properties.158 Chen et al.123 sputtered thin films of permalloy on regular paper and nanopaper and found that the porosity and surface roughness of the regular paper deteriorated the performance of the magnetic film. However, on the nanopaper, the magnetic coercivity and saturation magnetization were similar to those on conventional SiO2 substrates. Hence, the authors argued that nanopaper is suitable as an alternative organic platform for the fabrication of magnetic and magneto-electronic devices. A magnetic nanopaper was made by using a freeze-dried BC aerogel as a template for the controlled growth of Fe2O3 and Co ferromagnetic NPs as a nanofiller that was later compacted to produce magnetic nanopaper.24Fig. 11 shows that the magnetic NPs are located on the CNF surface and upon compaction, magnetic nanopaper is obtained with a high density of NPs.24 Due to the high porosity and surface area of the structures based on the aerogel, the nanopapers can be used in microfluidic devices.
 Fig. 11  A schematic representation showing the synthetic steps of stiff magnetic nanopaper. (1) Conversion of BC hydrogels into (2) cellulose aerogels by freeze-drying. (3) Immersion of a dry cellulose-aerogel in a hot aqueous solution of FeSO4/CoCl2 results in the formation of insoluble complexes. (4) Decomposition of the insoluble complexes into ferrite NPs upon immersion in a hot NaOH/KNO3 solution (5) SEM image of the magnetic aerogel after freeze-drying. Left insets: Photograph of the aerogel. (6) SEM image of a magnetic nanopaper obtained by drying and compression. Inset: Higher magnification image.24 Copyright 2010, Nature. 
4.7 Bioactive nanopapers
The functionalization of cellulose NMs with bioactive molecules has been exploited as a means for creating bioactive surfaces that can serve as a platform for diagnostic, sensing or catalytic devices, due to its biocompatibility, high hydrophilicity, and high surface area. Therefore, the specific biomolecules should be efficiently immobilized to introduce functionalities suitable for biomedical applications. The specific binding of proteins or enzymes to cellulose nanopapers allows controlling the interactions with cells. In order to overcome some disadvantages that limit the usage of enzymes in end uses, such as low stabilities and difficult recovery, several methods for enzyme immobilization on cellulose were developed.159 The CNFs and nanopapers can be easily chemically modified and consequently used as biosensors and diagnostics, pharmaceutics, cell culture and tissue engineering or wound dressings.160 In general, TEMPO oxidization of NFC introduces carboxylic groups and negative charges on the fiber surface that are able to drive the adsorption of biomolecules and take part in covalent cross-linking reactions, while an additional chemical cross-linking step of the biomolecules can prevent most desorption of these molecules.161 The proteins can be conjugated to functionalized CNFs through different mechanisms using amine, epoxy or carboxylic acid reactive groups:162 the conjugation reactions are performed in solution and immobilization can be achieved by spin-coating of the protein–CNF conjugates or spreading of the protein–CNF conjugates on a support, which makes it an affordable scalable method. The protein affinity of bio-active nanocellulose and passivation of the bioactive cellulose nanopaper can be further controlled in the presence of copolymers, e.g. by modification with block and random copolymers of poly(2-(dimethylamino)ethyl methacrylate) (PDMAEMA) and poly(oligo(ethylene glycol) methyl ether methacrylate) (POEGMA):163 the reversible adsorption of the copolymers may prevent nonspecific interactions with proteins. As a result, the bio-active material can be obtained with minimum fouling and excellent selectivity.
Antibacterial nanopaper is sometimes desired, such as in making paper for medical use and food packaging. Because many of the NMs have antimicrobial properties, antimicrobial papers can be prepared by coating thin films of such NMs on the paper or incorporating the NMs during the paper fabrication. Antimicrobial papers have been made by utilizing graphene164 and CNTs,165 and by utilizing NPs of Au, Ag, ZnO and TiO2.166–169 The Cu NPs and their oxides show a broad antimicrobial activity for bacteria, fungi, and algae.70 The antimicrobial properties of metal and metal oxide NPs are size dependent, whereas smaller NPs (∼10 nm) provide a greater antimicrobial effect than larger ones (∼100 nm). The aggregation of NPs on the paper surface results in an efficient antimicrobial paper, although the homogeneous distribution of NPs over the paper surface is preferred for better contact and reaction with the microorganisms. The metal and metal oxide NPs such as Ag, Au, Cu, CuO, and ZnO NPs bind to the membrane of the bacterial cell and penetrate into the cells.170 The assembly of Ag NPs for antimicrobial nanopapers can be directed by the electrostatic assembly.19 Recently, it has been proved that the antimicrobial activity of these NPs is size dependent.171,172 For example, tiny Ag NPs of about 10 nm in diameter show greater antibacterial activity than 100 nm NPs against E. coli bacteria, which may be caused by several mechanisms: (i) tiny NPs can effectively adsorb onto the surface of the cell membrane and drastically affect functions such as cell permeability and respiration;173 (ii) tiny NPs penetrate inside the bacteria cells and cause further damage by binding to DNA;174 and (iii) tiny NPs act as a source of M+ ions, providing M+ ions that are more available than any free M+ ions in the bulk medium. Therefore tiny NPs can efficiently catalyze the formation of free radicals inside the bacterial cells, which may lead to cell death.175 The potential toxicity of tiny NPs of Cu, Ag, and ZnO to humans is still a matter of considerable debate. A strong binding between the NPs and cellulose fibers is required to reduce possible exposure and transportation of NPs to the human body.
Recently, Morales-Narváez et al.176 developed optical sensing papers based on nanopaper composites using different pathways (see Fig. 12), including exploiting the HO-containing groups of the BC as a reducing agent for the chemical reduction of noble metal ions (e.g. Ag+, and Au+) to metal NPs (Route A; Fig. 12A); adding BC as a nanonetwork to embed metallic NPs (e.g. Ag and Au NPs) during their synthesis (Route B; Fig. 12); and producing surface carboxylic (–COO−) groups on the CNFs, for subsequent coupling with functionalized NPs (Route C; Fig. 12C and D).176 As a result, the nanopapers exhibit plasmonic or photoluminescent (PL) properties using different optically active NMs, which can provide a platform for optical biosensing applications.
 Fig. 12  Schematic representation (A, B) showing the fabrication of antibacterial nanopaper. In situ deposition of (A) Ag NPs on BC nanopaper and (B) Au NPs on BC nanopaper. Schematic representation (C, D) showing the fabrication of photoluminescent nanopaper. (C) Deposition of the streptavidin-coated CdSe@ZnS quantum dots on BC nanopaper. (D) Aminosilica-coated NaYF4:Yb3+@Er3+ MPs on BC nanopaper.176 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
4.8 Photocatalytic nanopapers
Photocatalytic papers have potential applications such as disinfection, toxin passivation, and environmental purification. The development of photocatalytic papers has commonly relied on TiO2 NPs,177,178 although the use of ZnO nanorods has also been effective in the preparation of photocatalytic papers. The photocatalytic effect of TiO2 could be enhanced in the presence of Ag by forming Ag/TiO2 nanobelt heterostructures, which are transformed into self-supporting nanopapers with porous structures by means of a paper-making process.179 Kong et al.180 developed photoactive electrodes made of CoSe2 NPs grown on carbon fiber paper. The obtained electrode showed excellent photocatalytic activity towards hydrogen fuel production. The developed nanopaper electrodes are an attractive catalyst material for large-scale water-splitting technology.180
The challenges for communalization of photocatalyst nanopaper are: (i) the photooxidation activity of NPs that tends to decompose paper substrates and reduces the paper strength; and (ii) the penetration of the target molecules and light into the NP surfaces in the bulk of paper substrates. To avoid these drawbacks and achieve maximum photoactivity, a homogeneous distribution of the photocatalytic NPs over the paper is required. The targeted molecules must be diffused away from the catalytic sites. Thus the porosity and thickness of photocatalytic papers should be optimized to enhance the penetration of the target molecules, to avoid blockage for future targets.181 The upconversion of optical radiation into photons of higher energy could be achieved by embedding liquid-core capsules containing a dye within a sheet of CNFs. In addition, sensitizers and emitter compounds are encapsulated to allow harvesting of the energy of the whole deep-red sunlight region.182 A review of photocatalytic papers has been compiled by Pelton et al.183
5. Emerging applications of nanopapers
Paper-based NMs can be used as the main platform for batteries, supercapacitors, fuel cells, solar cells, ultrafiltration membranes, biosensors, electronic devices, and healthcare monitoring systems, among others.184 Nanopapers have promising characteristics such as a large surface area, high porosity, good electric conductivity, high mechanical strength and excellent chemical stability in a wide variety of liquid electrolytes. The self-assembly of graphene nanosheets, CNTs and CNFs into 3D structures is particularly promising for developing new materials with improved mechanical and electrical properties.
5.1. Batteries
Nanopapers attract extensive research attention in energy harvesting and storage due to its low cost and environmentally friendly nature. Carbon and cellulose nanopapers have been studied extensively as flexible electrode materials or supporting substrates for active materials in batteries and supercapacitors, and fuel cells.33 Carbon nanopapers were demonstrated in a flexible Li-rechargeable battery.34 Graphene nanopapers were demonstrated in a flexible Li-rechargeable battery by Gwon et al.,185 who found that the graphene-paper electrode achieves a very high energy density and power density, and a better lifetime compared to non-flexible conventional electrode architectures. Carbon/cellulose nanopapers have unique characteristics over conventional materials; light weight, strong, bendable, rechargable, with high energy density and based on renewable raw materials.186 Hu et al.75 fabricated composite nanopaper, made of CNT–cellulose aerogels and coated with Si by a plasma-enhanced CVD method. This CNT–cellulose nanopaper showed an excellent performance as Li-ion battery anodes for flexible electronics.75 A recent investigation showed that the mixing of multiwalled CNTs with CNFs in aqueous suspension and filtration provides a tough nanopaper with up to 17 wt% of CNTs commingled with CNFs, in contrast with the rather brittle nature of CNT composites.49 The flexible electrodes made of CNT paper exhibited a reversible discharge capacity of ∼200 mA h g−1 at a current density of ∼0.08 mA cm−2.50 More interestingly, a reversible discharge capacity of 572 mA h g−1 was achieved for CNTs/carbon layer paper at 0.2 mA cm−2.51 However, the high production cost of CNTs and the difficulty of making stable CNT dispersions in combination with nanocellulose limited the practical application of CNT paper as battery electrodes. Furthermore, the flexible nanocomposite design allowed large mechanical deformation and a wide range of temperatures and electrolytes. Fig. 13 shows the device structure of the CNT nanopapers (electrodes) for Li-ion batteries, in which the battery electrode materials (LiMn2O4 nanorods as a cathode and Li4Ti5O12 particles as an anode) were coated on the surface of the CNT paper.187
 Fig. 13  CNT nanopaper as a collector for the LiMn2O4 nanorod cathode and the Li4Ti5O12 nanopowder anode in a Li-ion battery. (b) Galvanostatic charging and discharging curves of the cathode (3.5–4.3 V) and the anode (1.3–1.7 V) half cells. (c) A 5 cm2 nanopaper battery lighting up a LED device. (d) Cycling performance of half cells with different rates. The half cells were tested with Li-metal as the counter electrode.187 Copyright 2009, National Academy of Sciences. 
Choi et al.188 developed a new class of batteries called “h-nanomat cell”, see Fig. 14. This cell is based on the unitized separator/electrode assembly (SEA) that consists of: (i) current collector-/binder-free electrode comprising solely single-walled CNT-netted electrode active materials and (ii) CNF separator membranes.188 Very recently, a carbon-free conducting nanopaper has been used as a cathode platform for Li-O2 batteries, consisting of conductive nanowires with a chitin binder and fabricated by liquid diffusion-induced crystallization and vacuum filtration methods.189 Li et al.190 demonstrated a buckypaper cathode in a hybrid electrolyte Li–air battery (HyLAB) that showed outstanding discharging performances. This cathode is made of a buckypaper with 5 wt% Pt supported on CNTs. The HyLAB with Pt/CNTs achieved a discharging capacity of 306 mA h g−1 and a cell voltage of 3.15 V at 0.2 mA cm−2.190
 Fig. 14  A photograph showing the electrochemical activity of an h-nanomat cell after repeated twisting/untwisting deformation.188 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
5.2. Supercapacitors
Flexible nanopaper electrodes with high conductivity hold exciting potential for assembling high-performance flexible supercapacitors. Carbon-based nanopaper can be successfully fabricated and employed as electrodes for supercapacitors. Carbon-based nanopaper electrodes increase the total volumetric capacitance by eliminating the occupancy of cellulose fibers, which have no contribution to energy storage. However, such nanopaper has the disadvantage of either sluggish ion diffusion or low specific energy. To overcome these limitations, developing porous metal oxide (MOx) paper-like electrodes with high conductivity and specific capacitance is viable. Recently, Fan et al.35 developed a supercapacitor with high energy density using MnO2/graphene nanopaper as an anode and carbon nanofibers as a cathode. The designed supercapacitor exhibited superior electrochemical performance (a voltage range of 0–1.8 V, an energy density of 51.1 Wh kg−1, and retaining of 97% specific capacitance over 1000 cycles).35 Solution processing of supercapacitors was done by Hu et al.,191 who manufactured supercapacitors by rod-coating and inkjet-printing of CNT ink on commercial paper, achieving a specific capacity of 33 F g−1. Lin et al.192 combined the polyaniline (conductive polymer) with aligned multi-walled CNTs to fabricate nanopaper electrodes for a transparent flexible supercapacitor with a specific capacitance of 233 F g−1. The hybrid electrode improved the capacitance by a factor of 36 compared with using only multi-walled CNTs, and by a factor of 23 compared with using only polyaniline.192 Pushparaj and his coworkers186 combined cellulose and CNTs to fabricate flexible CNT–cellulose electrodes for supercapacitors and Li-ion batteries. These two essential materials fulfill the desired characteristics to provide an inherent flexibility as well as porosity to the system. The supercapacitor–battery hybrid energy devices based on nanocomposite units are shown in Fig. 15.186
 Fig. 15  Supercapacitor–battery hybrid energy devices based on a MWCNTs/polyaniline nanopaper. (a) Arrangement of a supercapacitor and a battery in a parallel configuration. (b) A discharge curve of a battery and a supercapacitor is plotted as a function of time. (c) Schematic diagram of a three-terminal hybrid energy device that can act as both a supercapacitor and a battery. The battery is discharged with terminals 1 and 2 shorted. This simultaneously charges the supercapacitor following the double-layer formation at the electrode interface. Subsequently, the supercapacitor is discharged across terminals 1 and 3. An additional separator (glass-fiber) is normally added along with excess cellulose spacer to improve the behavior. (d) The discharge behavior of the battery and subsequent discharge of the supercapacitor.186 Copyright 2007, National Academy of Sciences. 
5.3. Solar and fuel cells
Solar cells require highly transparent substrates, but also benefit from high optical haze to increase the light scattering and consequently the absorption in the active materials. Common transparent substrates such as glass and plastics exhibit high transparency but unfortunately also a low optical haze (<20%). Recently, Fang et al.193 developed a novel transparent paper based on TEMPO-oxidized nanocellulose, which had ultrahigh optical transparency (∼96%) and simultaneously very high optical haze (∼60%), thus delivering an optimal substrate design for solar cell devices (Fig. 16).125 The lamination of transparent nanopapers on solar-cell devices may increase the device efficiency by 10–20% due to the increased light scattering.125
 Fig. 16  Optical properties of the transparent paper, nanopaper, and PET. (a) Total optical transmittance versus wavelength measured. (b) Transmission haze versus wavelength. (c) Transmission haze of transparent paper with varying paper thicknesses at 550 nm. (d) Optical transmission haze versus transmittance for different substrates at 550 nm. Transparent paper developed in this work located in the cyan area is the most suitable for solar cells. While glass and PET, in the green area, are suitable for displays due to their low haze and high transparency.125 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 
Fuel cell technology converts energy stored in chemical fuels (hydrogen and oxygen gas) into electricity with high efficiency and zero emission of harmful exhaust gases. Fuel cells typically comprise a proton-conducting electrolyte membrane sandwiched between the anode and cathode electrocatalyst layers; usually made of Pt NPs on a carbon black support. The most commonly used ionomer membrane in full cells is Nafion®, which has good mechanical strength, chemical stability and a high proton conductivity (>100 mS cm−1).194 However, Nafion is expensive and difficult to recycle, and the proton conductivity depends strongly on humidity. Furthermore, its mechanical stability is compromised at >110 °C. Also, Nafion has relatively high methanol cross-over in direct methanol fuel cells. Cellulose nanopaper can be an alternative ionomer membrane for fuel cells due to its low cost, mechanical toughness, good gas barrier properties, and acidic oxygen functional groups. Recently, Bayer et al.194 developed a nanocellulose membrane for fuel cells, in which the proton conductivity increased up to 120 °C. Nanocellulose membranes showed four times higher tensile strength and three orders of magnitude lower hydrogen permeability compared to the conventional Nafions membranes. A maximum proton conductivity of 4.7 mS cm−1 at 120 °C and 100% RH was achieved.194 Recently, Gadim and coworkers19 mixed Nafion with bacterial cellulose, obtaining nanocomposite membranes with lower conductivity (40 mS cm−1 at 40 °C and 98% RH) and power density.195 Hasani-Sadrabadi and coworkers added acid-hydrolyzed CNCs into Nafion. The acid-hydrolyzed CNCs reduced methanol cross-over and increased the proton conductivity while maintaining the conductivity at higher temperature.196
5.4. Ultrafiltration membranes
Membrane nanofiltration (NF) is a key technology for water treatment for the removal of various contaminants. Commercially available membranes used for water treatment are usually produced from polymers derived from fossil resources.197 Production of these membranes requires chemicals and large amounts of energy. Nanofibrillated cellulose (NFC) can be readily processed into membranes. NFC membranes can be easily prepared by water removal from NFC suspensions, for example, with a vacuum filtration process. Upon drying, the fibrils self-assemble to give a mesoporous structure suitable for separation purposes.198 Recently, cellulose nanopaper membranes have been successfully used for organic solvent nanofiltration and water purification. Mautner et al.197 produced four types of nanopapers using four types of nanocellulose (wood-derived nanocellulose, cellulose nanocrystals, TEMPO-oxidized cellulose nanofibrils and bacterial cellulose) that were suitable for ultrafiltration. Tailoring the membrane thickness and selecting NFC with different lengths and diameters can produce membranes for a wide range of potential applications.197 The potential of NFC-derived membranes for use in ultrafiltration and water treatment has been highlighted in a review.198
5.5. Flexible electronics
Nanopapers used as paper electronics are under development for the next generation of flexible electronics. As a low-cost substrate with excellent printing compatibility, nanopaper has attracted much research attention recently. The surface smoothness and the porous structure of cellulose nanopaper will be ideal for such manipulation, especially for ions. However, cellulose nanopaper is not electrically conductive for electrons. Adding highly conductive carbon-NMs CNTs, graphene, and CNFs either as a thin film or making a carbon nanopaper increases the functionality and application of paper substrates as sensors.199
Shape memory nanopapers have been utilized for a number of applications as actively moving polymers, which can undergo significant macroscopic deformation in a predefined manner between/among shapes in the presence of an appropriate stimulus.200 Zhang et al.97 made electrospun nanofiber membranes, consisting of a thermoplastic Nafion polymer and ultrathin electrospun polyacrylonitrile (PAN)-based carbonization nanofiber membranes, for electrically activated shape memory nanocomposites. These active nanopapers can be triggered quickly by applying a low voltage and achieving complete shape recovery behavior only takes 5 s.97 Lee et al.201 made a foldable organic memory device on nanopaper made of CNFs. A memory device fabricated on nanopaper can encompass a large variety of functional electronics with directly printable, disposable and foldable characteristics. Nogi and his co-workers202 used cellulose nanopapers with a high surface smoothness as a substrate for the antenna to transmit and receive signals, which is an important component of a satellite, a computer, or other radio-frequency identification (RFID)-based devices. As shown in Fig. 17, the antenna is made by screen-printing V-shaped Ag nanowire lines on the surface of a smooth cellulose nanopaper. The high surface smoothness and a distinct 3D network of nanocellulose make this nanopaper durable even when folded.202 White arrows in Fig. 17b indicate cracks in the Ag lines caused by folding. Paper-based memory devices with foldable characteristics have been previously reported in the literature.202–205
 Fig. 17  Photographs of the folded Ag nanowire lines on (a) coated photopaper, (b) conventional pulp paper, and (c) cellulose nanopaper. (d) Return losses of cellulose nanopaper based antennas before (solid line) and after folding (dotted line).202 Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
High-dielectric composite nanopaper for electronic applications such as transistors and antennas have been formed by mixing small amounts of conductive Ag nanowires with CNFs while avoiding the formation of a percolation network.111 Organic field-effect transistors with high transparency could be fabricated on tailored nanopapers with improved mechanical and electrical characteristics attributed to the high binding capacity between polymer dielectric and cellulose nanopapers.206 Nanocrystalline cellulose could be used simultaneously as the substrate and as the gate dielectric layer in an ‘interstate’ structure for thin transparent nanopaper-based field effect transistors.207 A MoS2 phototransistor was built on a flexible, transparent nanopaper with an electrolyte gate dielectric.208 The MoS2 phototransistor showed an excellent photoresponsivity (∼1.5 kA W−1), about two times higher than for devices reported in previous studies. The developed device exhibited a high transparency of about 82%, which suggests that it is feasible to achieve an ecofriendly phototransistor with durable flexibility and great photoresponsivity, see Fig. 18.208 Therefore, cellulose nanopapers are promising for high-performance disposable electronics such as smart labels, paper displays, and point-of-care systems for self-analysis in bioscience applications, among others.
 Fig. 18  MoS2 phototransistor on transparent cellulose nanopaper. (A) Optical transmittance of a single nanopaper (black line) and a MoS2 phototransistor sandwiched between two layers of nanopaper (red line). (B) Photograph of an array of phototransistors. (C). Transfer characteristics of the phototransistor without illumination (blue), under illumination but without passivation (red), and with both illumination and passivation (black). (D) Cross section view.208 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The good thermal stability and chemical durability of CNF papers make it possible to build organic thin-film transistors on nanopapers using a similar process to that for an array on the conventional glass by lithographic and solution-based processes.209 The screen-printing of Ag electrodes and thermal evaporation of small-molecule organic semiconductors was combined to fabricate organic field-effect transistor active-matrix arrays onto paper:210 the devices showed a mobility of 0.56 cm2 V−1 s−1, an on/off ratio of 109, and a cut-off frequency of 39 kHz. The hybrid semiconductors can be made by mixing Si NPs with a polymer and adjusting the NP-to-polymer ratio to enable semiconducting paths between the NPs.
Jung et al.211 have successfully fabricated a key electrical component on a flexible cellulose nanofibrillar paper. The decoration with Ag NPs allows creating flexible resistive nonvolatile memory devices for information storage, including switching between different resistance ratio levels.212 The tendency for using nanocellulose in printed electronics has been steadily increasing in recent applications.213 Despite a clear demonstration that cellulose nanopapers are feasible and eco-friendly materials to fabricate high-performance flexible electronics, there are a few drawbacks in using these nanopapers in printed electronic applications. These drawbacks come from the porous structure, hygroscopicity and absorptive nature and complicated roughness of nanocelluose papers at different length scales. However, these undesired characteristics could be circumvented by laminating nanocellulose papers by a thin plastic film. Otherwise, in electronic devices where specifically high temperatures are required, the coating of cellulose nanopapers by sputtering with Cu NPs provides better thermal stability and activity in the radiofrequency range.214 The development of smart paper electronics has become a reality, by realizing the interaction between nanopaper electronic devices and humans through a self-powered system: as such, it can be used as transparent paper-based anti-theft systems or anti-fake systems in precious packaging and documents.215
5.6. Sensors and analytical devices
Nanopapers offer unique properties: passive liquid transport, they are biodegradable and compatible with many chemical and biochemical moieties, and exhibit piezoelectricity. Hence, nanopaper is an attractive low-cost material for analytical devices. Many types of paper-based sensors have been implemented, including biosensors,26 touch sensors,27 thermosensitive sensors28 and ion sensors.29 Nanopaper analytical devices have shown significant progress in detecting a broad range of analytes in physiological fluids including drugs, proteins, viruses, bacteria, hormones, and chemical contaminants.216 For a truly low-cost sensing system, not only does a sensor need to be applied onto the paper, but a suitable readout is also required. A simple optical readout system for paper-based sensors was suggested by Liana et al.217 Paper-based sensing platforms have been summarized in a few reviews.218,219 Sadollahkhani et al.220 have developed a colorimetric disposable paper coated with ZnO@ZnS core–shell NPs for detecting Cu2+ ions in aqueous solutions. Zhao et al.221 recently developed paper-based bioassays using Au NPs colorimetric probes for detecting DNase I (adenosine). Tseng et al.222 prepared eco-friendly plasmonic nanopapers with a highly sensitive unique localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR). Nie et al.223 developed a microfluidic paper-based glucose biosensor (Fig. 19).223 The sensitivity of this biosensor paper is slightly lower than that of a similar carbon bioelectrode being used to measure glucose concentration in bulk solution. The filter paper coated with Ag or Au NPs demonstrates the potential to be used in surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy, where diverse analytes can be studied in situ such as binary mixtures that are separated by paper chromatography.224 The incorporation of Au NPs into CNF nanopapers could be realized through either electrostatic interactions or click reactions by coupling between quaternary ammonium, azido, alkyne and amino functional groups, and is used for chemosensing applications.225 Another type of mechanical strain sensor was fabricated from highly stretchable piezoresistive graphene-nanocellulose nanopaper embedded in an elastomeric matrix, using crumpled graphene and nanocellulose that were vacuum filtered through a polycarbonate membrane.226
 Fig. 19  Schematic diagram of a biosensor sensing device. (a) Three electrodes printed on a paper substrate and a paper channel in direct contact with the double-sided adhesive tape. (b) A photograph of the paper-based sensing device. (c) Construction of the sensing device; two printed carbon electrodes, as working and counter electrodes, and a printed Ag/AgCl electrode, as a reference electrode.223 Copyright 2010, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Transparent and luminescent nanopapers were produced from CNFs and functionalized by rare-earth luminescent NPs, grafted to the CNF matrix. These nanopapers show potential applications in sensors and ion probe applications.227 Giese et al.228 developed cellulose nanopapers that undergo rapid and reversible changes in color upon swelling; these show potential applications in pressure sensing, biosensing, optics, chiral separation, functional membranes, and tissue engineering. Jung et al.229 developed a plasmonic nanopaper by coating Ag NPs on nano gap-rich cellulose fibers. This plasmonic nanopaper was used as a chromatographic column for the separation of small molecules in aqueous solution. The buckypapers are found to be sensitive to the geometry of local defects.230 Thus, it has been used as a sensing layer to monitor the strain and damage of the composite. Research studies showed that the free-standing buckypaper's in-plane tensile sensing properties are poor and emerge nonlinear. However, the alignment of buckypapers leads to good in-plane sensing performance, especially in the direction perpendicular to the alignment.231 The use of CNTs and buckypaper-based strain sensors was reviewed in the literature.232,233
5.7. Biomedical and healthcare applications
Using paper as a base for biomedical applications such as low-cost point-of-care diagnostic devices is attractive for several reasons: (i) it is inexpensive and biodegradable, therefore allowing disposable devices; (ii) paper wicks aqueous fluids, which helps passive transport of fluids in the devices; and (iii) the porosity of paper means a higher active surface area, which can increase the reaction rate and sensitivity in biosensing applications. Paper-based point-of-care devices often utilize superhydrophobic areas that guide and restrain the liquid analyte to the sensing locations. One method that has been used to pattern superhydrophobic areas on paper-based devices is the inkjet-printing of a PDMS-solution.234 Nanopapers for healthcare monitoring were recently developed by Nassar and his co-workers (Fig. 20).235 The system was implemented as a hybrid construction on cellulose nanopaper, using AgNP-based ink for the interconnects and thin Si-based chips for the active components of the circuitry. The data collected from the sensors were wirelessly transmitted to a smartphone application and visualized in real time.235 Such examples show that nanopapers can be a suitable platform for wearable healthcare monitoring systems and multifunctional sensing.236
 Fig. 20  3D-stacked paper-based healthcare monitoring system. Beginning from the top, layer (1) contains an active RFID tag printed on paper with a flexible Si-based radio chip for wireless data communication; layer (2) contains a printed power source; layer (3) contains the processing unit with a flexible Si-based microprocessor (μP); layer (4) contains sensor readout circuitry fully printed on paper; and layer (5) contains the sensor arrays.235 Copyright 2017, Wiley. 
Cellulose nanopapers represent an interesting emerging biocompatible nanomaterial. The wide range biomedical applications of cellulose nanopapers are shown by its common use as biocompatible membranes to repair skin in cases of burns, wounds and ulcers. BC nanopaper accelerates the epithelialization process, and avoids infections in several wound-healing treatments, including chronic wounds and diabetic foot wounds. Currently, the main commercial use of cellulose nanopapers (membranes) is as wound dressing devices, known under several trademarks, such as Xcell®, Membracell®, Bionext®, Bioprocess® and Gengiflex® (Fig. 21).237
 Fig. 21  Application of a bacterial cellulose (BC) membrane as a wound dressing. Copyright 2017, Elsevier.237 
6. Future prospects and outlooks
Although paper is usually associated with packaging and printing of text and images, the applications of paper can be widely extended. During the fabrication of paper, both its bulk and surface properties can be readily engineered to reach desired optical, biological, chemical, mechanical, magnetic or electrical properties. Paper structures incorporating NMs as functional elements have an interesting and promising future. Many devices and applications utilizing functional and flexible nanopapers have been demonstrated; a few of these have been discussed in this review. From an environmental perspective, it is important to consider the biocompatibility of the materials used, as well as the number of materials needed and the energy requirements of the manufacturing processes. Research in the emerging field of paper-based functionality will continue and eventually enable various low-cost, energy efficient and biocompatible functional products, some of which might possess unique functionality that is not available today.
Abbreviations

CMFsCellulose microfibers
CNCsCellulose nanocrystals
CNFsCellulose nanofibers
CNTsCarbon nanotube
CNWsCellulose nanowhiskers
GOGraphene oxide
LbLLayer-by-layer
MTMMontmorillonite (clay with plate-shaped particles)
NMsNanomaterials
NPsNanoparticles
0DZero dimensional
1DOne dimensional
2DTwo dimensional
3DThree dimensional
NFCNanofibrillated cellulose
BCBacterial cellulose
MOxMetal oxide

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
References

          R. A. Gill, in Applications of Wet-End Paper Chemistry, Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht,  1995, pp. 54–75 Search PubMed .
Y. H. Ngo, D. Li, G. P. Simon and G. Garnier, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 163, 23–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Barhoum, H. Rahier, R. E. Abou-Zaied, M. Rehan, T. Dufour, G. Hill and A. Dufresne, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 2734–2744 CAS .
N. Kumar, N. K. Bhardwaj and S. K. Chakrabarti, J. Coat. Technol. Res., 2011, 8, 605–611 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. El-Sheikh, A. Barhoum, S. El-Sherbiny, F. Morsy, A. A.-H. El-Midany and H. Rahier, Arabian J. Chem., 2014 DOI:10.1016/j.arabjc.2014.11.003 .
F. A. Morsy, S. M. El-Sheikh and A. Barhoum, Arabian J. Chem., 2014 DOI:10.1016/j.arabjc.2014.11.032 .
S. El-Sherbiny, S. M. El-Sheikh and A. Barhoum, Powder Technol., 2015, 279, 290–300 CrossRef CAS .
V. V. Pokropivny and V. V. Skorokhod, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2007, 27, 990–993 CrossRef CAS .
M. Afsharpour, F. T. Rad and H. Malekian, J. Cult. Herit., 2011, 12, 380–383 CrossRef .
J. Ebrahimpour Kasmani, S. Mahdavi, A. Alizadeh, M. Nemati and A. Samariha, BioResources, 2013, 8, 3646–3656 CrossRef .
H. Zhu, Z. Fang, C. Preston, Y. Li and L. Hu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 269–287 CAS .
H. Zhu, Z. Fang, C. Preston, Y. Li and L. Hu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 269–287 CAS .
H. Ogihara, J. Xie, J. Okagaki and T. Saji, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 4605–4608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Huang, K. Chen, C. Lin, R. Yang and R. A. Gerhardt, J. Mater. Sci., 2011, 46, 2600–2605 CrossRef CAS .
O. Werner, C. Quan, C. Turner, B. Pettersson and L. Wågberg, Cellulose, 2010, 17, 187–198 CrossRef CAS .
A. Liu, A. Walther, O. Ikkala, L. Belova and L. A. Berglund, Biomacromolecules, 2011, 12, 633–641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wu, W. Zhu, C. Zhang, Z. Liang and B. Wang, Carbon, 2010, 48, 1799–1806 CrossRef CAS .
S. Baruah, M. Jaisai, R. Imani, M. M. Nazhad and J. Dutta, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2010, 11, 55002 CrossRef PubMed .
N. C. T. Martins, C. S. R. Freire, R. J. B. Pinto, S. C. M. Fernandes, C. Pascoal Neto, A. J. D. Silvestre, J. Causio, G. Baldi, P. Sadocco and T. Trindade, Cellulose, 2012, 19, 1425–1436 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jaisai, S. Baruah and J. Dutta, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2012, 3, 684–691 CrossRef PubMed .
R. E. Anderson, J. Guan, M. Ricard, G. Dubey, J. Su, G. Lopinski, G. Dorris, O. Bourne and B. Simard, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2400 RSC .
X. Lin, X. Shen, Q. Zheng, N. Yousefi, L. Ye, Y.-W. Mai and J.-K. Kim, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 10708–10719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Small and J. H. Johnston, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 331, 122–126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. T. Olsson, M. A. S. Azizi Samir, G. Salazar-Alvarez, L. Belova, V. Ström, L. A. Berglund, O. Ikkala, J. Nogués and U. W. Gedde, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 584–588 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Chia, S. Zakaria, S. Ahamd, M. Abdullah and S. M. Jani, Am. J. Appl. Sci., 2006, 3, 1750–1754 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yang, S. W. Jeong, S. J. Chang, K. H. Kim, M. Jang, C. H. Kim, N. H. Bae, G. S. Sim, T. Kang, S. J. Lee, B. G. Choi and K. G. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 34978–34984 CAS .

          T. Unander, H. E. Nilsson and B. Oelmann, in Polymers and Adhesives in Microelectronics and Photonics, 2007. Polytronic 2007. 6th International Conference on,  2007, pp. 12–17 .
T. Dinh, H.-P. Phan, D. V. Dao, P. Woodfield, A. Qamar and N.-T. Nguyen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 8776–8779 RSC .
J. Ding, N. He, G. Lisak, W. Qin and J. Bobacka, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 243, 346–352 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ihalainen, A. Määttänen, J. Järnström, D. Tobjörk, R. Österbacka and J. Peltonen, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2012, 51, 6025–6036 CrossRef CAS .
F. Hoeng, A. Denneulin and J. Bras, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 13131–13154 RSC .
H. Lu, Y. Liu and J. Leng, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2012, 297, 1138–1147 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Ra, E. Raymundo-Piñero, Y. H. Lee and F. Béguin, Carbon, 2009, 47, 2984–2992 CrossRef CAS .
H. Qu, J. Hou, Y. Tang, O. Semenikihin and M. Skorobogatiy, Can. J. Chem., 2017, 95(2), 169–173 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fan, J. Yan, T. Wei, L. Zhi, G. Ning, T. Li and F. Wei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2366–2375 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shen, Z. Song, X. Qian, F. Yang and F. Kong, BioResources, 2010, 5, 1328–1331 CAS .
G. A. Smook, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2007, 45, 15–27 CrossRef .
K. Syverud, G. Chinga-Carrasco, J. Toledo, P. G. Toledo, A. Isogai, K. Axnas, J. Ruokolainen, J. Laine, P. Larsson, O. Ikkala and T. Lindström, Carbohydr. Polym., 2011, 84, 1033–1038 CrossRef CAS .
D. Klemm, B. Heublein, H.-P. Fink and A. Bohn, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 3358–3393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Ohad and D. Mejzler, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Gen. Pap., 1965, 3, 399–406 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jose Chirayil, L. Mathew and S. Thomas, Rev. Adv. Mater. Sci., 2014, 37, 20–28 Search PubMed .
T. T. T. Ho, T. Zimmermann, R. Hauert and W. Caseri, Cellulose, 2011, 18, 1391–1406 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Habibi, A.-L. Goffin, N. Schiltz, E. Duquesne, P. Dubois and A. Dufresne, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 5002 RSC .
F. G. Torres, O. P. Troncoso, D. Lopez, C. Grande, C. M. Gomez, B. Risberg, P. Gatenhom, A. Paredez, S. Persson, T. Raab, S. Vorwerk and H. Youngs, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 4185 RSC .
N. Lavoine, I. Desloges, A. Dufresne and J. Bras, Carbohydr. Polym., 2012, 90, 735–764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. P. S. Abdul Khalil, Y. Davoudpour, M. N. Islam, A. Mustapha, K. Sudesh, R. Dungani and M. Jawaid, Carbohydr. Polym., 2014, 99, 649–665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Eichhorn, J. E. Gough, S. J. Eichhorn, G. J. Exarhos, O. J. Rojas, J. F. Revol, C. Weder, M. Tenkanen, M. Shtein, J. Kieffer, J. Lahann and N. A. Kotov, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 303–315 RSC .
S. J. Eichhorn, A. Dufresne, M. Aranguren, N. E. Marcovich, J. R. Capadona, S. J. Rowan, C. Weder, W. Thielemans, M. Roman, S. Renneckar, W. Gindl, S. Veigel, J. Keckes, H. Yano, K. Abe, M. Nogi, A. N. Nakagaito, A. Mangalam, J. Simonsen, A. S. Benight, A. Bismarck, L. A. Berglund and T. Peijs, J. Mater. Sci., 2010, 45, 1–33 CrossRef CAS .
D. Klemm, F. Kramer, S. Moritz, T. Lindström, M. Ankerfors, D. Gray and A. Dorris, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5438–5466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. P. S. Abdul Khalil, A. H. Bhat and A. F. Ireana Yusra, Carbohydr. Polym., 2012, 87, 963–979 CrossRef CAS .
V. da C. Correia, V. dos Santos, M. Sain, S. F. Santos, A. L. Leão and H. Savastano Junior, Cellulose, 2016, 23, 2971–2987 CrossRef CAS .
A. Chakraborty, M. Sain and M. Kortschot, Holzforschung, 2005, 59, 102–107 CrossRef CAS .
H. Taheri and P. Samyn, Cellulose, 2016, 23, 1221–1238 CrossRef CAS .
N. Siddiqui, R. H. Mills, D. J. Gardner and D. Bousfield, J. Adhes. Sci. Technol., 2011, 25, 709–721 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Spence, R. A. Venditti, O. J. Rojas, Y. Habibi and J. J. Pawlak, Cellulose, 2011, 18, 1097–1111 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mariano, N. El Kissi and A. Dufresne, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2014, 52, 791–806 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. F. Santos, M. A. Pereira-da-Silva, J. E. Oliveira, L. H. C. Mattoso and E. S. Medeiros, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2016, 16, 6535–6539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. H. Marchessault, F. F. Morehead and N. M. Walter, Nature, 1959, 184, 632–633 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sehaqui, N. Ezekiel Mushi, S. Morimune, M. Salajkova, T. Nishino and L. A. Berglund, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 1043–1049 CAS .
H. Sehaqui, Q. Zhou, O. Ikkala and L. A. Berglund, Biomacromolecules, 2011, 12, 3638–3644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Nair, J. Zhu, Y. Deng and A. J. Ragauskas, Sustainable Chem. Processes, 2014, 2, 23 CrossRef .
R. A. Khan, S. Salmieri, D. Dussault, J. Uribe-Calderon, M. R. Kamal, A. Safrany, M. Lacroix, M. Rosa, M. Kalyva, S. Sabella, P. Pompa, R. Cingolani and A. Athanassiou, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2010, 58, 7878–7885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Henriksson, L. A. Berglund, P. Isaksson, T. Lindström and T. Nishino, Biomacromolecules, 2008, 9, 1579–1585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Luo, J. Zhang, X. Li, C. Liao and X. Li, J. Nanomater., 2014, 2014, 1–13 Search PubMed .

          K. Oksman, A. P. Mathew, A. Bismarck, O. Rojas and M. Sain, Handbook of Green Materials, World Scientific,  2014 Search PubMed .
J. Huang, H. Zhu, Y. Chen, C. Preston, K. Rohrbach, J. Cumings and L. Hu, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2106–2113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          W. T. Luu, D. W. Bousfield and J. Kettle, PaperCon,  2011, pp. 2222–2233 Search PubMed .
H. Koga, M. Nogi, N. Komoda, T. T. Nge, T. Sugahara and K. Suganuma, NPG Asia Mater., 2014, 6, e93 CrossRef CAS .
M.-C. Hsieh, C. Kim, M. Nogi, K. Suganuma, J. Shirakami, R. H. A. Ras, O. Ikkala, J. Nogués, U. W. Gedde, O. Ikkala and T. Lindström, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 9289 RSC .
H. Chu, Z. Zhang, Y. Liu and J. Leng, Carbon, 2014, 66, 154–163 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, J. Gou, G. Song and J. Ou, Composites, Part B, 2009, 40, 134–140 CrossRef .
D. Wang, P. Song, C. Liu, W. Wu and S. Fan, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 75609 CrossRef PubMed .
X.-S. Wang, Engineering, 2011, 3, 3723 Search PubMed .
J. B. Cornett and G. D. Shockman, J. Bacteriol., 1978, 135, 153–160 CAS .
L. Hu, N. Liu, M. Eskilsson, G. Zheng, J. McDonough, L. Wågberg and Y. Cui, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 138–145 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kim, Y. Lu, T. Kim, J.-W. Han, M. Meyyappan and J. Li, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 12092–12097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. N. Ventura, R. A. Stone, K.-S. Chen, H. H. Hariri, K. A. Riddle, T. J. Fellers, C. S. Yun, G. F. Strouse, H. W. Kroto and S. F. A. Acquah, Carbon, 2010, 48, 987–994 CrossRef CAS .
A. Deneuve, K. Wang, I. Janowska, K. Chizari, D. Edouard, O. Ersen, M. J. Ledoux and C. Pham-Huu, Appl. Catal., A, 2011, 400, 230–237 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lu, J. Gou, J. Leng and S. Du, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 174105 CrossRef .
Z. Li, J. Xu, J. P. O'Byrne, L. Chen, K. Wang, M. A. Morris and J. D. Holmes, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2012, 135, 921–927 CrossRef CAS .
M. Salajkova, L. Valentini, Q. Zhou and L. A. Berglund, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2013, 87, 103–110 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Ng, J. Wang, Z. P. Guo, J. Chen, G. X. Wang and H. K. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2005, 51, 23–28 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, A. I. Minett, Y. Liu, C. Lynam, P. Sherrell, C. Wang and G. G. Wallace, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 566–570 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, D. Li, C. O. Too and G. G. Wallace, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2604–2606 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, M. B. Müller, S. Gilje, R. B. Kaner and G. G. Wallace, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 101–105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, M. B. Müller, K. J. Gilmore, G. G. Wallace and D. Li, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3557–3561 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li and R. B. Kaner, Science, 2008, 320, 1170–1171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Huang, X. Ouyang and L. J. Lee, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 10178–10185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. V. Medhekar, A. Ramasubramaniam, R. S. Ruoff and V. B. Shenoy, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2300–2306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. Wong, R. Suriyaprabha, R. Yuvakumar, V. Rajendran, Y.-T. Chen, B.-J. Hwang, L.-C. Chen and K.-H. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 13437–13441 CAS .
B. Yao, L. Huang, J. Zhang, X. Gao, J. Wu, Y. Cheng, X. Xiao, B. Wang, Y. Li and J. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6353–6358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Huang, B. Yao, J. Sun, X. Gao, J. Wu, J. Wan, T. Li, Z. Hu, J. Zhou, P. K. Chu, J. Zhou, K. F. Huo, K. Huo and Y. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 2897–2903 CAS .
F. H. Zhang, Z. C. Zhang, C. J. Luo, I.-T. Lin, Y. Liu, J. Leng and S. K. Smoukov, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 11290–11293 RSC .
A. H. Torbati, R. T. Mather, J. E. Reeder and P. T. Mather, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part B, 2014, 102, 1236–1243 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Li and Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1151–1170 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bao, X. Lou, Q. Zhou, W. Dong, H. Yuan and Y. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 2611–2621 CAS .
F. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Y. Liu and J. Leng, Smart Mater. Struct., 2014, 23, 65020 CrossRef .
S. Lingaiah and K. Shivakumar, Eur. Polym. J., 2013, 49, 2101–2108 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, J. Cheng, M. Shahid, M. Zhang and W. Pan, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 26220–26225 RSC .
G. Luo, K. S. Teh, Y. Liu, X. Zang, Z. Wen and L. Lin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 27765–27770 CAS .
C. W. Kim, D. S. Kim, S. Y. Kang, M. Marquez and Y. L. Joo, Polymer, 2006, 47, 5097–5107 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ohkawa, Molecules, 2015, 20, 9139–9154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Google Patents, 2013.
Z. Favors, H. H. Bay, Z. Mutlu, K. Ahmed, R. Ionescu, R. Ye, M. Ozkan and C. S. Ozkan, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 8246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ramasundaram, A. Son, M. G. Seid, S. Shim, S. H. Lee, Y. C. Chung, C. Lee, J. Lee and S. W. Hong, J. Hazard. Mater., 2015, 285, 267–276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hosseini, P. Azari, E. Farahmand, S. N. Gan, H. A. Rothan, R. Yusof, L. H. Koole, I. Djordjevic and F. Ibrahim, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 69, 257–264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, J. Miao, N. Maeda, D. Frey, R. J. Linhardt and T. J. Simmons, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 15029–15034 CAS .
J. He, T. Kunitake and A. Nakao, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 4401–4406 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. B. Pinto, P. A. A. P. Marques, M. A. Martins, C. P. Neto and T. Trindade, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2007, 312, 506–512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, S. Fu and L. Peng, Fibers Polym., 2013, 14, 1794–1802 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Inui, H. Koga, M. Nogi, N. Komoda and K. Suganuma, in 14th IEEE International Conference on Nanotechnology, IEEE,  2014, pp. 470–473 .
M. Crippa, A. Bianchi, D. Cristofori, M. D'Arienzo, F. Merletti, F. Morazzoni, R. Scotti and R. Simonutti, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 484–492 RSC .
Q. Hua Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman and M. S. Strano, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 699–712 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Kong and Y. F. Hu, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2012, 403, 7–13 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Tobjörk and R. Österbacka, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1935–1961 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhu, S. Parvinian, C. Preston, O. Vaaland, Z. Ruan and L. Hu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3787 RSC .
L. Hu, G. Zheng, J. Yao, N. Liu, B. Weil, M. Eskilsson, E. Karabulut, Z. Ruan, S. Fan, J. T. Bloking, M. D. McGehee, L. Wågberg and Y. Cui, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 513–518 CAS .
H. Fukuzumi, T. Saito, T. Iwata, Y. Kumamoto and A. Isogai, Biomacromolecules, 2009, 10, 162–165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-C. Hsieh, H. Koga, K. Suganuma, M. Nogi and Z. Cai, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 41590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xu, J. Zhou, L. Jiang, G. Lubineau, T. Ng, B. S. Ooi, H.-Y. Liao, C. Shen, L. Chen, J. Y. Zhu, W. Gindl, S. Veigel, J. Keckes, H. Yano, K. Abe, M. Nogi, A. N. Nakagaito, A. Mangalam, J. Simonsen, A. S. Benight, A. Bismarck, L. a. Berglund and T. Peijs, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 12294–12306 RSC .
X. Sun, Q. Wu, S. Ren and T. Lei, Cellulose, 2015, 22, 1123–1133 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yagyu, T. Saito, A. Isogai, H. Koga and M. Nogi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 22012–22017 CAS .
J. Chen, M. Akin, L. Yang, L. Jiao, F. Cheng, P. Lu, L. Chen, D. Liu and H. Zhu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 27081–27090 CAS .
Z. Fang, H. Zhu, C. Preston, X. Han, Y. Li, S. Lee, X. Chai, G. Chen and L. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 6191 RSC .
Z. Fang, H. Zhu, Y. Yuan, D. Ha, S. Zhu, C. Preston, Q. Chen, Y. Li, X. Han, S. Lee, G. Chen, T. Li, J. Munday, J. Huang and L. Hu, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 765–773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nogi, C. Kim, T. Sugahara, T. Inui, T. Takahashi and K. Suganuma, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 181911 CrossRef .
P. Samyn, J. Mater. Sci., 2013, 48, 6455–6498 CrossRef CAS .
L. Huang, K. Chen, C. Lin, R. Yang and R. A. Gerhardt, J. Mater. Sci., 2011, 46, 2600–2605 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, H. Feng, W. Zao, M. Ling and Y. Zhao, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 48443–48448 RSC .
H. Sehaqui, T. Zimmermann and P. Tingaut, Cellulose, 2014, 21, 367–382 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yagyu, S. Ifuku and M. Nogi, Flex. Print. Electron., 2017, 2, 14003 CrossRef .
J. Guo, W. Fang, A. Welle, W. Feng, I. Filpponen, O. J. Rojas and P. A. Levkin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 34115–34122 CAS .
M. S. Toivonen, S. Kurki-Suonio, F. H. Schacher, S. Hietala, O. J. Rojas and O. Ikkala, Biomacromolecules, 2015, 16, 1062–1071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Korhonen, M. Kettunen, R. H. A. Ras and O. Ikkala, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 1813–1816 CAS .
H. Mertaniemi, A. Laukkanen, J.-E. Teirfolk, O. Ikkala, R. H. A. Ras, T. Lindström, L. A. Berglund, O. Ikkala, M. Ankerfors, T. Lindström, M. Ritala, R. H. A. Ras, O. Ikkala, A. Laukkanen, K. Abe, M. Nogi, A. Nakagaito, A. Mangalam, J. Simonsen, A. Benight, A. Bismarck, L. Berglund and T. Peijs, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 2882 RSC .
V. K. Rastogi, D. Stanssens and P. Samyn, Carbohydr. Polym., 2016, 141, 244–252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Knight, F. Ip, C. Zeng, C. Zhang and B. Wang, Fire Mater., 2013, 37, 91–99 CrossRef CAS .
D. Porter, E. Metcalfe and M. J. K. Thomas, Fire Mater., 2000, 24, 45–52 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhuge, J. Gou and C. Ibeh, Fire Mater., 2012, 36, 241–253 CrossRef CAS .
F. Carosio, J. Kochumalayil, F. Cuttica, G. Camino and L. Berglund, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 5847–5856 CAS .
F. Liu, S. Song, D. Xue and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1089–1094 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Preston, Z. Fang, J. Murray, H. Zhu, J. Dai, J. N. Munday and L. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 1248–1254 RSC .
B. Fugetsu, E. Sano, M. Sunada, Y. Sambongi, T. Shibuya, X. Wang and T. Hiraki, Carbon, 2008, 46, 1256–1258 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hu, J. W. Choi, Y. Yang, S. Jeong, F. La Mantia, L.-F. Cui and Y. Cui, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 21490–21494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. O. Weiss, H. Zhou, L. Liao, Y. Liu, S. Jiang, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5782–5825 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lay, J. A. Méndez, M. À. Pèlach, K. N. Bun and F. Vilaseca, Cellulose, 2016, 23, 3925–3937 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Song, Y. Jiang, L. Shi, S. Cao, X. Feng, M. Miao, J. Fang, G. Chen, L. B. Hu, S. H. Ko, G. Chen, T. Li, J. Munday, J. S. Huang and L. B. Hu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 13694–13701 RSC .
T. T. Nge, M. Nogi and K. Suganuma, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 5235 RSC .
Y.-R. Kang, Y.-L. Li, F. Hou, Y.-Y. Wen and D. Su, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 3248 RSC .
X. Yang, K. Fan, Y. Zhu, J. Shen, X. Jiang, P. Zhao, S. Luan and C. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 997–1002 CAS .
G. Xin, H. Sun, T. Hu, H. R. Fard, X. Sun, N. Koratkar, T. Borca-Tasciuc and J. Lian, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4521–4526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, Y. Li, Z. Fang, J. Xu, F. Cao, J. Wan, C. Preston, B. Yang and L. Hu, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3606–3613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhou, Z. Yang, W. Luo, X. Han, S.-H. Jang, J. Dai, B. Yang and L. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 28838–28843 CAS .
Y. Yao, X. Zeng, G. Pan, J. Sun, J. Hu, Y. Huang, R. Sun, J.-B. Xu and C.-P. Wong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 31248–31255 CAS .
W.-T. Hong and N.-H. Tai, Diamond. Relat. Mater., 2008, 17, 1577–1581 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gonnet, Z. Liang, E. S. Choi, R. S. Kadambala, C. Zhang, J. S. Brooks, B. Wang and L. Kramer, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2006, 6, 119–122 CrossRef .

          M. Akin and L. Rissing, in 2015 IEEE 65th Electronic Components and Technology Conference (ECTC), IEEE,  2015, pp. 705–713 .
D. Sander, R. Skomski, A. Enders, C. Schmidthals, D. Reuter and J. Kirschner, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1998, 31, 663–670 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu and J. Y. Chen, J. Bioact. Compat. Polym., 2016, 31, 553–567 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, T. Nypelö, C. Salas, J. Arboleda, I. C. Hoeger and O. J. Rojas, J. Renewable Mater., 2013, 3, 195–211 CrossRef .
R. Weishaupt, G. Siqueira, M. Schubert, P. Tingaut, K. Maniura-Weber, T. Zimmermann, L. Thöny-Meyer, G. Faccio and J. Ihssen, Biomacromolecules, 2015, 16, 3640–3650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Arola, T. Tammelin, H. Setälä, A. Tullila and M. B. Linder, Biomacromolecules, 2012, 13, 594–603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Vuoriluoto, H. Orelma, B. Zhu, L.-S. Johansson and O. J. Rojas, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 5668–5678 CAS .
W. Hu, C. Peng, W. Luo, M. Lv, X. Li, D. Li, Q. Huang and C. Fan, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4317–4323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Deokar, L.-Y. Lin, C.-C. Chang and Y.-C. Ling, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 2639 RSC .
N. C. T. Martins, C. S. R. Freire, C. P. Neto, A. J. D. Silvestre, J. Causio, G. Baldi, P. Sadocco and T. Trindade, Colloids Surf., A, 2013, 417, 111–119 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ghule, A. V. Ghule, B.-J. Chen and Y.-C. Ling, Green Chem., 2006, 8, 1034 RSC .
N. C. T. Martins, C. S. R. Freire, R. J. B. Pinto, S. C. M. Fernandes, C. Pascoal Neto, A. J. D. Silvestre, J. Causio, G. Baldi, P. Sadocco and T. Trindade, Cellulose, 2012, 19, 1425–1436 CrossRef CAS .
R. Tankhiwale and S. K. Bajpai, Colloids Surf., B, 2009, 69, 164–168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-R. Li, X.-B. Xie, Q.-S. Shi, H.-Y. Zeng, Y.-S. Ou-Yang and Y.-B. Chen, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2010, 85, 1115–1122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ivask, I. Kurvet, K. Kasemets, I. Blinova, V. Aruoja, S. Suppi, H. Vija, A. Käkinen, T. Titma, M. Heinlaan, M. Visnapuu, D. Koller, V. Kisand and A. Kahru, PLoS One, 2014, 9, e102108 Search PubMed .
A. Barhoum, M. F. Rehan, H. Rahier, M. Bechelany and G. Van Assche, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8(16), 10551–10561 CAS .
I. Sondi and B. Salopek-Sondi, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2004, 275, 177–182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Morones, J. L. Elechiguerra, A. Camacho, K. Holt, J. B. Kouri, J. T. Ramírez and M. J. Yacaman, Nanotechnology, 2005, 16, 2346–2353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Kim, E. Kuk, K. N. Yu, J.-H. Kim, S. J. Park, H. J. Lee, S. H. Kim, Y. K. Park, Y. H. Park, C.-Y. Hwang, Y.-K. Kim, Y.-S. Lee, D. H. Jeong and M.-H. Cho, Nanomedicine, 2007, 3, 95–101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Morales-Narváez, H. Golmohammadi, T. Naghdi, H. Yousefi, U. Kostiv, D. Horák, N. Pourreza and A. Merkoçi, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 7296–7305 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Matsubara, M. Takada, S. Koyama, K. Hashimoto and A. Fujishima, Chem. Lett., 1995, 24, 767–768 CrossRef .
S. Izadyar and S. Fatemi, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2013, 52, 10961–10968 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhou, G. Du, P. Hu, Y. Yin, J. Li, J. Yu, G. Wang, J. Wang, H. Liu, J. Wang and H. Zhang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2011, 197, 19–25 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kong, H. Wang, Z. Lu and Y. Cui, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 4897–4900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Baruah, M. Jaisai, R. Imani, M. M. Nazhad and J. Dutta, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2010, 11, 55002 CrossRef PubMed .
A. J. Svagan, D. Busko, Y. Avlasevich, G. Glasser, S. Baluschev and K. Landfester, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8198–8207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Pelton, X. Geng and M. Brook, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2006, 127, 43–53 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Sharifi, S. Ghobadian, F. R. Cavalcanti and N. Hashemi, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 52, 1453–1472 CrossRef .
H. Gwon, H.-S. Kim, K. U. Lee, D.-H. Seo, Y. C. Park, Y.-S. Lee, B. T. Ahn and K. Kang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1277 CAS .
V. L. Pushparaj, M. M. Shaijumon, A. Kumar, S. Murugesan, L. Ci, R. Vajtai, R. J. Linhardt, O. Nalamasu and P. M. Ajayan, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 13574–13577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hu, J. W. Choi, Y. Yang, S. Jeong, F. La Mantia, L.-F. Cui and Y. Cui, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 21490–21494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-H. Choi, S.-J. Cho, S.-J. Chun, J. T. Yoo, C. K. Lee, W. Kim, Q. Wu, S.-B. Park, D.-H. Choi, S.-Y. Lee and S.-Y. Lee, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5677–5686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-W. Jung, H.-G. Im, D. Lee, S. Yu, J.-H. Jang, K. R. Yoon, Y. H. Kim, J. B. Goodenough, J. Jin, I.-D. Kim and B.-S. Bae, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 673–680 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, K. Huang and Y. Xing, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 81, 20–24 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hu, H. Wu and Y. Cui, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 183502 CrossRef .
H. Lin, L. Li, J. Ren, Z. Cai, L. Qiu, Z. Yang and H. Peng, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 82–85 Search PubMed .
Z. Fang, H. Zhu, Y. Yuan, D. Ha, S. Zhu, C. Preston, Q. Chen, Y. Li, X. Han, S. Lee, G. Chen, T. Li, J. Munday, J. Huang and L. Hu, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 765–773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Bayer, B. V. Cunning, R. Selyanchyn, M. Nishihara, S. Fujikawa, K. Sasaki and S. M. Lyth, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 4805–4814 CrossRef CAS .
T. D. O. Gadim, C. Vilela, F. J. A. Loureiro, A. J. D. Silvestre, C. S. R. Freire and F. M. L. Figueiredo, Ind. Crops Prod., 2016, 93, 212–218 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Hasani-Sadrabadi, E. Dashtimoghadam, R. Nasseri, A. Karkhaneh, F. S. Majedi, N. Mokarram, P. Renaud and K. I. Jacob, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 11334 CAS .
A. Mautner, K.-Y. Lee, T. Tammelin, A. P. Mathew, A. J. Nedoma, K. Li and A. Bismarck, Int. J. Environ. Sci.Technol., 2016, 13(8), 1861–1872 CrossRef CAS .
P. Orsolini, B. Michen, A. Huch, P. Tingaut, W. R. Caseri and T. Zimmermann, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 25884–25897 CAS .
B. Kim, Y. Lu, T. Kim, J.-W. Han, M. Meyyappan and J. Li, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 12092–12097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lu, Y. Liu and J. Leng, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2012, 297, 1138–1147 CrossRef CAS .
B.-H. Lee, D.-I. Lee, H. Bae, H. Seong, S.-B. Jeon, M.-L. Seol, J.-W. Han, M. Meyyappan, S.-G. Im and Y.-K. Choi, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 38389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nogi, N. Komoda, K. Otsuka and K. Suganuma, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4395 RSC .
D.-H. Lien, Z.-K. Kao, T.-H. Huang, Y.-C. Liao, S.-C. Lee and J.-H. He, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7613–7619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. H. Kim, H. J. Kim, I. Bae, S. K. Hwang, D. B. Velusamy, S. M. Cho, K. Takaishi, T. Muto, D. Hashizume, M. Uchiyama, P. André, F. Mathevet, B. Heinrich, T. Aoyama, D.-E. Kim, H. Lee, J.-C. Ribierre and C. Park, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 61921 Search PubMed .
K. Nagashima, H. Koga, U. Celano, F. Zhuge, M. Kanai, S. Rahong, G. Meng, Y. He, J. De Boeck, M. Jurczak, W. Vandervorst, T. Kitaoka, M. Nogi and T. Yanagida, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 1043–1049 Search PubMed .
Z. Fang, H. Zhu, C. Preston, X. Han, Y. Li, S. Lee, X. Chai, G. Chen and L. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 6191 RSC .
D. Gaspar, S. N. Fernandes, A. G. de Oliveira, J. G. Fernandes, P. Grey, R. V. Pontes, L. Pereira, R. Martins, M. H. Godinho and E. Fortunato, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 94008 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, W. Bao, A. Gong, T. Gong, D. Ma, J. Wan, J. Dai, J. N. Munday, J.-H. He, L. Hu, D. Zhang, S. Y. Lee, D. Jena, W. Choi, K. Kim, S. Gong and Z. Ma, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 14237–14242 RSC .
Y. Fujisaki, H. Koga, Y. Nakajima, M. Nakata, H. Tsuji, T. Yamamoto, T. Kurita, M. Nogi and N. Shimidzu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 1657–1663 CrossRef CAS .
B. Peng, X. Ren, Z. Wang, X. Wang, R. C. Roberts and P. K. L. Chan, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Jung, T.-H. Chang, H. Zhang, C. Yao, Q. Zheng, V. W. Yang, H. Mi, M. Kim, S. J. Cho, D.-W. Park, H. Jiang, J. Lee, Y. Qiu, W. Zhou, Z. Cai, S. Gong and Z. Ma, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7170 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Nagashima, H. Koga, U. Celano, F. Zhuge, M. Kanai, S. Rahong, G. Meng, Y. He, J. De Boeck, M. Jurczak, W. Vandervorst, T. Kitaoka, M. Nogi and T. Yanagida, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 1043–1049 Search PubMed .
F. Hoeng, A. Denneulin, J. Bras, T. Lindström, T. Nishino, J. Dai, H. Dai, L. Hu, B. Kippelen, S. Tapin-Lingua, J. Zhou, T. Kitaoka, M. Nogi, T. Yanagida, Z. Cai, S. Gong and Z. Ma, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 13131–13154 RSC .
E. Lizundia, M. Delgado-Aguilar, P. Mutjé, E. Fernández, B. Robles-Hernandez, M. R. de la Fuente, J. L. Vilas and L. M. León, Cellulose, 2016, 23, 1997–2010 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhong, H. Zhu, Q. Zhong, J. Dai, W. Li, S.-H. Jang, Y. Yao, D. Henderson, Q. Hu, L. Hu and J. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 7399–7406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. W. Martinez, S. T. Phillips, G. M. Whitesides and E. Carrilho, Anal. Chem., 2010, 82, 3–10 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. D. Liana, B. Raguse, J. J. Gooding and E. Chow, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 19201–19209 CAS .
D. D. Liana, B. Raguse, J. J. Gooding and E. Chow, Sensors, 2012, 12, 11505–11526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Mahadeva, K. Walus and B. Stoeber, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 8345–8362 CAS .
A. Sadollahkhani, A. Hatamie, O. Nur, M. Willander, B. Zargar and I. Kazeminezhad, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 17694–17701 CAS .
W. Zhao, M. M. Ali, S. D. Aguirre, M. A. Brook and Y. Li, Anal. Chem., 2008, 80, 8431–8437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-C. Tseng, C.-C. Yu, D. Wan, H.-L. Chen, L. A. Wang, M.-C. Wu, W.-F. Su, H.-C. Han and L.-C. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 5140–5145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Nie, C. A. Nijhuis, J. Gong, X. Chen, A. Kumachev, A. W. Martinez, M. Narovlyansky and G. M. Whitesides, Lab Chip, 2010, 10, 477–483 RSC .
L. M. Cabalín and J. J. Laserna, Anal. Chim. Acta, 1995, 310, 337–345 CrossRef .
J. Guo, I. Filpponen, P. Su, J. Laine and O. J. Rojas, Cellulose, 2016, 23, 3065–3075 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yan, J. Wang, W. Kang, M. Cui, X. Wang, C. Y. Foo, K. J. Chee and P. S. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2022–2027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, Z. Wei, X. Feng, M. Miao, L. Sun, S. Cao, L. Shi and J. Fang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 140821102225008 Search PubMed .
M. Giese, L. K. Blusch, M. K. Khan, W. Y. Hamad and M. J. MacLachlan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 8880–8884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jung, M. Park, M. Kang and K.-H. Jeong, Light: Sci. Appl., 2016, 5, e16009 CrossRef .
M. D. Rein, O. Breuer and H. D. Wagner, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2011, 71, 373–381 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, H. Wei, Y. Liu and J. Leng, Struct. Health Monit. Int. J., 2015, 14, 127–136 CrossRef .
W. Obitayo and T. Liu, J. Sens., 2012, 2012, 1–15 CrossRef .
P. Dharap, Z. Li, S. Nagarajaiah and E. V. Barrera, Nanotechnology, 2004, 15, 379–382 CrossRef CAS .
A. Määttänen, U. Vanamo, P. Ihalainen, P. Pulkkinen, H. Tenhu, J. Bobacka and J. Peltonen, Sens. Actuators, B, 2013, 177, 153–162 CrossRef .
J. M. Nassar, K. Mishra, K. Lau, A. A. Aguirre-Pablo and M. M. Hussain, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2017, 1600228 CrossRef .
J. Park, Y. Lee, M. Ha, S. Cho, H. Ko, Y. Li, F. Xu, J. Li, Y. Yuan, X. He, T. L. Ren, H. Zhu, M. S. Dresselhaus, G. Chen and Z. Ren, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 2999–3018 RSC .
G. F. Picheth, C. L. Pirich, M. R. Sierakowski, M. A. Woehl, C. N. Sakakibara, C. F. de Souza, A. A. Martin, R. da Silva and R. A. de Freitas, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2017, 104, 97–106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:
Ahmed Barhoum	Ahmed Barhoum is Asst. Prof. at Helwan University. He obtained his Ph.D. degree in Chemical Engineering and worked as a Postdoc-Fellow (2011–2016) at Vrije Universiteit Brussel. His research interests focus on the fabrication of nanostructured particles, nanofibers, and polymer nanocomposites and their applications in photocatalysis, water treatment, bio- and chemical sensors, and drug delivery. Barhoum has received several scientific grants: FWO-Postdoc (2016), FWO-PhD (2015), Medastar Erasmus Mundus (2012), Welcome Erasmus Mundus (2012), and Campus France (2012). He is the Editor-in-Chief of the Handbook of Nanoparticles and Architectural Nanostructured Materials (2017) and Handbook of Nanofibers (2018), published by Elsevier and Springer.
Pieter Samyn	Pieter Samyn is a senior researcher at the Institute for Materials (IMO-IMOMEC) of Hasselt University. After obtaining his Ph.D. degree in Materials Science (2007) from Ghent University, he became a postdoc at the University of Freiburg (2010–2017) and the Freiburg Institute for Advanced Studies (FRIAS). His research focuses on the valorization of side-products from the paper and pulp industry by nanotechnological routes, bio-based coatings, polymer engineering, surface engineering and analytical tools. He was a visiting researcher at the ETH (2007) and University of Toronto (2013). He has received several scientific awards and grants, including a FWO postdoc grant (2008), Robert Bosch Junior Professorship (2011), Baden-Württemberg Juniorprofessoren program (2012) and Heinz-Maier Leibnitz Preis (2012).
Thomas Öhlund	Thomas Öhlund received his Ph.D. in Engineering Physics from Mid-Sweden University in 2014. He holds a senior research position at Mid-Sweden University and his research interests include the synthesis, solution-processing, and inkjet-printing of functional nanomaterials, printed electronics and cellulose-based substrates for novel applications. He conducted visiting research at Åbo Akademi University in 2012. He has received the 2017 Skills Prize from the Gunnar Sundblad Research Foundation & the Swedish Forest Industries Federation. He is a visiting scholar at Stanford University (2017–2018).
Alain Dufresne	Alain Dufresne received his Ph.D. in 1991 from INSA Toulouse (Electronics) and was then a Post-doc at Polytechnique Montreal, and a Lecturer at INSA Lyon. He was appointed Associate Professor in 1993, and then Professor in 2001, at Grenoble University. Since 2003 he has been a Professor at Grenoble INP. He was a visiting professor at UFRJ and Embrapa Fortaleza (Brazil), and UKM (Malaysia). His research interests focus on the processing and characterization of renewable nanocomposites. He has published more than 250 peer-reviewed papers. He has received the 2016 International Nanotechnology Division Award and the FiberLean® Technologies Prize awarded by TAPPI and is in the 2016 top 300 most cited researchers in materials science and engineering of Elsevier Scopus Data.

 	Fig. 1  Different forms of cellulose fibers: (a) SEM image of cellulose pulp fibers,42 (b) SEM image of CNFs,42 (c) TEM image of CNCs,43 and (d) SEM image of bacterial cellulose (BC) nanofibers.44 Copyright 2011, Springer;42 Copyright 2008, Royal Society of Chemistry;43 and Copyright 2009, Royal Society of Chemistry,44 respectively.	 

Surface roughness (nm)	5	5000–10000	5
Porosity (%)	20–40	50	0
Pore size (nm)	10–50	3000	0
Optical transparency at 550 nm (%)	90	20	90
Max loading stress (MPa)	200–400	6	50
Coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE) (ppm K−1)	12–28.5	28–40	20–100
Printability	Good	Excellent	Poor
Young modulus (GPa)	7.4–14	0.5	2–2.7
Bending radius (mm)	1	1	5
Renewability	High	High	Low

PET	≈0.5–2	≈2–2.5	50–200	Yes	4–6	Yes
Conventional paper	≈10	≈2	—	No	6–7	Yes
Cellulose nanopaper (based on NFCs)	≈2–40	≈10	≈8–13	Yes	15–200	No
Cellulose nanopaper (based on TEMPO-CNFs)	≈0.2–0.5	≈10–13	≈7.2–7.9	Yes	200–500	No

 	Fig. 2  Silver NP lines on pulp paper (a): Ag NPs flowed into the pore structures immediately after printing; and nanopaper (b): Ag NP lines on nanopaper show a narrow width of 0.9 mm.69 Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 3  Fabrication of conductive, flexible nanopaper aerogels. (a) Aqueous dispersion of CNTs and CNFs. (b) A web film made of slurry in (a). (c) A freeze-dried conductive nanopaper (200 μm thick). (d)–(f) SEM of conductive nanopaper with different magnifications.75 Copyright 2013, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic diagram of the process used to convert rice husk into Si NPs and the subsequent fabrication of the composite paper with GO solution and battery fabrication. Thermal annealing at 700 °C under an argon atmosphere is used to convert the GO into more conductive reduced GO, which improved the conductivity of the composite paper.90 Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic diagram illustrating the process using vacuum filtration and the hot-pressing method to fabricate MoO3 nanopaper. (b) SEM side-view image of MoO3 nanopaper. (c) SEM top-view image of MoO3 nanopaper. (d) Optical image of flexible MoO3 nanopaper. (e) The contact angle of MoO3 nanopaper.92 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic representation for preparing the silicon nanofiber paper-like material. (a) Electrospinning process and subsequent magnesiothermic reduction of the electrospun SiO2 nanofibers. Digital photographs of (b) SiO2 nanopaper, (c) etched Si nanopaper, and (d) carbon-coated Si nanopaper as used in the Li-ion battery configuration. Copyrights 2015, Nature.104	 

 	Fig. 7  Regular paper and transparent nanopaper made of wood fibers: SEM image of (a) regular paper, and (b) transparent paper, the inset shows a magnified SEM image (scale bar is 100 μm). (c) Tensile strength. A simulation model of intersliding (d) two untreated-wood fibers and (e) two TEMPO-oxidized wood fibers. (f) Variation of potential energy of the model systems as a function of relative sliding.125 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Plots of water absorption versus soaking time of conventional (common) and superhydrophobic paper; optical images of common (b) or superhydrophobic paper (c) when they are soaked in water. Superhydrophobic paper hardly takes any time to reach the equilibrium of absorption while the common paper takes ∼120 s.129 Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) The cross-sectional structure of hybrid CNFs/clay nanopaper with flame-retardancy and unusual ductility: the CNFs (green line) form a matrix surrounding the clay platelets.16 Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (b) Vertical flammability test of CNF/montmorillonite (MTM) (reference residue 0 wt% for a pure CNF sample).140 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  Thermally conductive nanopaper using boron nitride nanosheets and nanofibrillated cellulose (NFC). The thermal conductivity of the thermally conductive nanopaper is comparable with that of Al alloy.152 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  A schematic representation showing the synthetic steps of stiff magnetic nanopaper. (1) Conversion of BC hydrogels into (2) cellulose aerogels by freeze-drying. (3) Immersion of a dry cellulose-aerogel in a hot aqueous solution of FeSO4/CoCl2 results in the formation of insoluble complexes. (4) Decomposition of the insoluble complexes into ferrite NPs upon immersion in a hot NaOH/KNO3 solution (5) SEM image of the magnetic aerogel after freeze-drying. Left insets: Photograph of the aerogel. (6) SEM image of a magnetic nanopaper obtained by drying and compression. Inset: Higher magnification image.24 Copyright 2010, Nature.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic representation (A, B) showing the fabrication of antibacterial nanopaper. In situ deposition of (A) Ag NPs on BC nanopaper and (B) Au NPs on BC nanopaper. Schematic representation (C, D) showing the fabrication of photoluminescent nanopaper. (C) Deposition of the streptavidin-coated CdSe@ZnS quantum dots on BC nanopaper. (D) Aminosilica-coated NaYF4:Yb3+@Er3+ MPs on BC nanopaper.176 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  CNT nanopaper as a collector for the LiMn2O4 nanorod cathode and the Li4Ti5O12 nanopowder anode in a Li-ion battery. (b) Galvanostatic charging and discharging curves of the cathode (3.5–4.3 V) and the anode (1.3–1.7 V) half cells. (c) A 5 cm2 nanopaper battery lighting up a LED device. (d) Cycling performance of half cells with different rates. The half cells were tested with Li-metal as the counter electrode.187 Copyright 2009, National Academy of Sciences.	 

 	Fig. 14  A photograph showing the electrochemical activity of an h-nanomat cell after repeated twisting/untwisting deformation.188 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  Supercapacitor–battery hybrid energy devices based on a MWCNTs/polyaniline nanopaper. (a) Arrangement of a supercapacitor and a battery in a parallel configuration. (b) A discharge curve of a battery and a supercapacitor is plotted as a function of time. (c) Schematic diagram of a three-terminal hybrid energy device that can act as both a supercapacitor and a battery. The battery is discharged with terminals 1 and 2 shorted. This simultaneously charges the supercapacitor following the double-layer formation at the electrode interface. Subsequently, the supercapacitor is discharged across terminals 1 and 3. An additional separator (glass-fiber) is normally added along with excess cellulose spacer to improve the behavior. (d) The discharge behavior of the battery and subsequent discharge of the supercapacitor.186 Copyright 2007, National Academy of Sciences.	 

 	Fig. 16  Optical properties of the transparent paper, nanopaper, and PET. (a) Total optical transmittance versus wavelength measured. (b) Transmission haze versus wavelength. (c) Transmission haze of transparent paper with varying paper thicknesses at 550 nm. (d) Optical transmission haze versus transmittance for different substrates at 550 nm. Transparent paper developed in this work located in the cyan area is the most suitable for solar cells. While glass and PET, in the green area, are suitable for displays due to their low haze and high transparency.125 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  Photographs of the folded Ag nanowire lines on (a) coated photopaper, (b) conventional pulp paper, and (c) cellulose nanopaper. (d) Return losses of cellulose nanopaper based antennas before (solid line) and after folding (dotted line).202 Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 18  MoS2 phototransistor on transparent cellulose nanopaper. (A) Optical transmittance of a single nanopaper (black line) and a MoS2 phototransistor sandwiched between two layers of nanopaper (red line). (B) Photograph of an array of phototransistors. (C). Transfer characteristics of the phototransistor without illumination (blue), under illumination but without passivation (red), and with both illumination and passivation (black). (D) Cross section view.208 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 19  Schematic diagram of a biosensor sensing device. (a) Three electrodes printed on a paper substrate and a paper channel in direct contact with the double-sided adhesive tape. (b) A photograph of the paper-based sensing device. (c) Construction of the sensing device; two printed carbon electrodes, as working and counter electrodes, and a printed Ag/AgCl electrode, as a reference electrode.223 Copyright 2010, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 20  3D-stacked paper-based healthcare monitoring system. Beginning from the top, layer (1) contains an active RFID tag printed on paper with a flexible Si-based radio chip for wireless data communication; layer (2) contains a printed power source; layer (3) contains the processing unit with a flexible Si-based microprocessor (μP); layer (4) contains sensor readout circuitry fully printed on paper; and layer (5) contains the sensor arrays.235 Copyright 2017, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 21  Application of a bacterial cellulose (BC) membrane as a wound dressing. Copyright 2017, Elsevier.237	 
CMFs	Cellulose microfibers
CNCs	Cellulose nanocrystals
CNFs	Cellulose nanofibers
CNTs	Carbon nanotube
CNWs	Cellulose nanowhiskers
GO	Graphene oxide
LbL	Layer-by-layer
MTM	Montmorillonite (clay with plate-shaped particles)
NMs	Nanomaterials
NPs	Nanoparticles
0D	Zero dimensional
1D	One dimensional
2D	Two dimensional
3D	Three dimensional
NFC	Nanofibrillated cellulose
BC	Bacterial cellulose
MOx	Metal oxide

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
