Self-healing and shape memory metallopolymers: state-of-the-art and future perspectives  - Dalton Transactions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9DT04360H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9DT04360H
(Perspective)
Dalton Trans., 2020, 49, 3042-3087Self-healing and shape memory metallopolymers: state-of-the-art and future perspectives

        
          
            Gulzhian I. 
            Dzhardimalieva
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Bal C. 
            Yadav
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Shakti 
            Singh
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Igor E. 
            Uflyand
          
          
        
      *c
aLaboratory of Metallopolymers, The Institute of Problems of Chemical Physics RAS, Academician Semenov avenue 1, Chernogolovka, Moscow Region, 142432 Russian Federation. E-mail: dzhardim@icp.ac.ru
bNanomaterials and Sensors Research Laboratory, Department of Physics, Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar University, Raebareli Road, Lucknow-226025, India. E-mail: bcyadava@bbau.ac.in; shakti665@gmail.com
cDepartment of Chemistry, Southern Federal University, B. Sadovaya Str. 105/42, Rostov-on-Don, 344006 Russian Federation. E-mail: ieuflyand@sfedu.ru
Received 
      11th November 2019
    , Accepted 24th January 2020First published on 24th January 2020AbstractMetallopolymers (MPs) or metal-containing polymers have shown great potential as self-healing and shape memory materials due to their unique characteristics, including universal architectures, composition, properties and surface chemistry. Over the past few decades, the exponential growth of many new classes of MPs that deal with these issues has been demonstrated. This review presents and assesses the latest achievements and problems associated with the use of MPs as self-healing and shape memory materials. Among the most widely used MPs with self-healing properties, metal complexes based on polymers containing phenol, carboxylic acid, pyridine, azole, histidine and urethane donor fragments are identified. Particular attention is paid to the principles of action of the shape memory MPs. Of considerable interest is the use of MPs as functional materials for sensors, soft electronic devices, transistors, conductors, nanogenerators, bone tissue engineering, etc. Finally, the problems and future prospects of MPs with self-healing and shape memory properties are outlined. This review also analyzes articles published over the past five years.Gulzhian I. DzhardimalievaGulzhian I. Dzhardimalieva, Dr Sci. (Chem.), PhD is the Head of Laboratory, Institute of Problems of Chemical Physics Russian Academy of Sciences and Professor of Department of Applied Mechanics, Moscow Aviation Institute (National Research University). She received her PhD in 1987 from the Institute of Chemical Physics, RAS in Moscow, and her Doctorate in Chemistry in 2010 from Institute of Problems of Chemical Physics RAS in Chernogolovka. The scope of her scientific interest is: metal-containing monomers and polymers on their base, macromolecular metal carboxylates, coordination polymers, metallopolymer nanocomposites, and nanomaterials. She has been invited as a researcher of Auburn University, USA (2001), Warsaw Technology University, Poland (2002, 2011), Bremen University, Germany (2007), Turin University, Italy (2008), and Institute of Composite and Biomedical Materials CNR, Neapol, Italy (2011, 2013). She was issue editor of Journal of Inorganic and Organometallic Polymers and Materials (2016, Vol. 26, 6).Bal C. YadavDr Bal C. Yadav received his PhD degree in 2001 from Department of Physics, University of Lucknow, India. Currently, he is an Associate Professor/Coordinator of Department of Applied Physics, School for Physical Sciences in the Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar University, Lucknow. He is the recipient of the prestigious Young Scientist Award-2005 instituted by the State Council of Science and Technology. Also, Dr Yadav was selected in 2011 for Brain Pool International Fellowship of South Korea. His current research interests include the synthesis of metal oxide nanoparticles, metallopolymers, etc., characterization and their applications as sensors.Shakti SinghShakti Singh enrolled himself at Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar University in 2013 to study applied physics. In 2017, he became MPh. He currently works as a researcher at Nanomaterials and Sensors Research Laboratory, Department of Physics, Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar University, Lucknow. His current research interests include nanotechnology, polymer thin films, sensors, and self-healing materials.Igor E. UflyandProf. Igor E. Uflyand, Dr Sci. (Chem.) is the Head of Chemistry Department, Southern Federal University, Rostov-on-Don, Russia. He was born in 1956 and graduated from Rostov State University, Department of Physical and Colloid Chemistry. Prof. Uflyand received his PhD in 1981 and his Doctorate in Chemistry in 1996 from the Rostov State University. He received the title of Professor in 1996. The scope of his scientific interest is: coordination and organometallic chemistry, metal chelate monomers and polymers on their basis, metal-containing polymers, catalysis by metal complexes, and nanomaterials.
1. Introduction
Over the past two decades, self-healing and shape memory materials have become one of the most promising areas of research in modern materials science. Self-healing is one of the most interesting and complex abilities to heal or repair damage.1–4 Self-healing materials can increase the service life, safety and energy efficiency of synthetic materials and reduce the environmental impact of synthetic materials.5–16 They can be useful in a wide range of applications, for example, in the fields of biomedicine, biomaterials, and tissue engineering, in sensors and shape memory devices, in contaminant removal, and in smart materials.17–20 Pioneering studies on self-healing materials were inspired by biological systems, as Nature shows vivid examples of the effective repair of a wide variety of damage.21,22 Unfortunately, synthetic materials are not able to repair damage to such an extent to date.
Among the self-healing materials, special attention is paid to self-healing polymers (SHPs), since they exhibit a wide variety of properties and functions.23–32 The concept of self-healing is becoming more and more important every year for the manufacture of sustainable and durable materials, while maintaining the unique variability of polymers.33 Recent years have been characterized by significant progress in the production of such polymers and the creation of different principles and processes that allow the material to heal.34–41
Shape memory polymers (SMPs) are polymeric materials that can change from a permanent shape to one or more temporary shapes and subsequently recover their permanent shape in response to external stimuli (for example, light, magnetism, heat, or chemicals).42–53 Currently, SMPs have been the subject of extensive research due to their promising applications in biomedicine, textiles, aerospace, etc. (Fig. 1).54–57
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of (A) self-healing and (B) shape memory effects for polymers. ©2018 L. Ruiz-Rubio, L. Pérez-Álvarez, B. Artetxe, J. M. Gutiérrez-Zorrilla and J. L. Vilas. Originally published in ref. 57 under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported license. Available from: DOI: 10.5772/intechopen.78013. 
Modern SHPs are divided into extrinsic and intrinsic SHPs depending on whether healing agents are used. For some extrinsic self-healing materials, the healing agent is usually stored in various hollow fibers or microcapsules before being introduced into the polymer matrix.28,58,59 In addition, damage can be healed using a solid healing agent, such as thermoplastic particles or fibers.60–62 In this case, extrinsic self-healing can heal cracks repeatedly. However, the number of such healing agents is limited.
In contrast, intrinsic SHPs contain reversible covalent and non-covalent bonds, whose reconfigurations allow restoration of the polymer structure after damage.63–67 The idea of intrinsic healing is based on the fact that weak bonds will be broken during damage or when exposed to an external stimulus with the formation of low molecular weight species, which, in turn, can more easily/rapidly recover, leading to faster healing. As a result, the original polymer structure is restored after healing and, thus, its mechanical properties are completely reinstated, and the material can be healed many times.
The reversible covalent bonds,68–73 for example, disulfide bonds74,75 or Diels–Alder reaction,76,77 are usually incorporated into polymers as cross-linkages, therefore, they will first break and reform under the influence of external stimuli, leading to repeated self-healing. Among the dynamic non-covalent bonds78–84 in SHPs, hydrogen bonds,85–87 ionic interactions,88,89 π–π stacking interactions,90 and host–guest interactions should be noted.91 The disadvantage of weaker non-covalent bonds is that the materials based on them are mechanically less robust than their covalently bound analogues, and creep often becomes a big problem, since such bonds are often rearranged even under normal mechanical load.
Among the reversible noncovalent bonds, metal–ligand (M–L) bonds provide great versatility in terms of bond strength (50–400 kJ mol−1) and binding dynamics by changing the metal ion or pH of the system, which leads to polymers with controlled mechanical properties.92–112 This allows the use of various well-studied M–L combinations for the construction of self-healing and shape memory materials. In recent years, numerous supramolecular metallopolymers (MPs) have found wide applications as functional materials with promising properties (Fig. 2).113
 Fig. 2  Schematic representation of synthesis, types and applications of supramolecular metallopolymers [reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright (2018) Taylor & Francis]. 
Metallopolymers (MPs) or metal-containing polymers are one of the main classes of polymers discovered in the 20th century.114–120 Distinguishing features that allow a reliable identification of MPs as a particular class of chemical compounds are the presence of a polymeric chain (of an organic, inorganic, hybrid or biological nature) and metal centers. Their properties can be adjusted by changing the interaction strength of metal centers with the polymer backbone.121–125 Supramolecular MPs are highly interesting materials with properties combining the technological advantages of polymers (workability, mechanical properties, solubility, etc.) with the functionalities of metal centers (special electrochemical, optical, magnetic properties).126 Therefore, these compounds have outstanding potential for use in a broad range of advanced sustainable applications.113,121,127 The inclusion of flexible or even switchable M–L bonds in supramolecular architectures makes it possible to influence their useful functions,128 for example, for the creation of thermo-129,130 and light-responsive materials,131 as well as luminescent materials.132–136 In addition, building blocks of MPs can be carefully selected to build a convenient platform for the development of new intelligent materials with customizable and specific properties.
Already early pioneering work showed the high potential of MPs as self-healing and shape memory materials. The construction of MPs is a new strategy for significantly increasing the effectiveness of such materials, and research on MPs in this field is impressive. Materials scientists are designing MPs as innovative solutions to improve the effectiveness of self-healing and shape memory materials. Combined with the rich and ever-growing array of ligands and synthesis methods for varieties of metals, these compounds have outstanding potential for use in a wide variety of self-healing and shape memory materials.
Collectively, the goal of this Perspective is to provide a panoramic overview of the conceptual framework for using M–L interactions to create SHPs and SMPs and to consider general trends and design principles for metallopolymer-based SHPs and SMPs. The rapid growth of research in this promising and interesting field makes this Perspective timely. We did not set a goal to give an exhaustive analysis of the entire array of experimental data obtained to date. In order to demonstrate the potential and problems of self-healing and shape memory MPs, the most interesting recent (over the past 5 years) examples of such materials were selected and an overview of some new directions and applications for the next decade and beyond was presented. This review will mainly discuss the main types of metallopolymer-based SHPs and SMPs, classified by the nature of the ligands used, and their selected applications in sensors, soft electronic devices, transistors, conductors, nanogenerators, bone tissue engineering, etc. (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  The main types of ligand systems used to produce self-healing and shape memory metallopolymers, as well for their application in various fields. 
2. The main types of self-healing metallopolymers
The healing mechanisms of metallopolymers are based on two interacting effects. The basic concept underlying SHPs is to create a specific physical flow that can subsequently close a cavity or damaged area. This is mainly related to mobility and can be described using the concept of free volume or voids. Most SHPs developed to date require heating the damaged area above the glass transition temperature, and then applying pressure to ensure contact, wetting, diffusion, and re-entanglement of the polymer chains. In this case, the healing process is usually slow and inefficient and is therefore not applied in practice. The second effect is due to the presence of reversible chemical bonds to restore mechanical and functional integrity. In self-healing MPs, there are two reversible interactions: undirected ionic interactions between positively charged metal complexes and negatively charged counterions, and also directed M–L interactions. If weak and dynamic metal complexes are used, decomplexing and rearrangement of the complexes can cause the necessary mobility. In addition, ionic metal complexes can induce the formation of ionic clusters. The rearrangement of these clusters can also cause the necessary mobility (also without opening the complexes). The properties of MPs can be adjusted by choosing different pairs of M–L. To date, a significant number of self-healing metallopolymers have been obtained and their number continues to grow every year. In this section, they are classified by the nature of ligand systems.
2.1. Phenolic ligands
The reversible formation of M–L bonds, such as a metal–catechol, is one of the most characteristic phenomena in biomacromolecules with self-healing properties, for example, in byssus threads of mussels. Many species of marine mussels attach to hard substrates in the rocky intertidal zone of wave-swept seashores using a set of protein-based attachment threads known as byssus. The core of the thread is the area responsible for the self-healing observed in byssal threads. It is protected by an outer cuticle and a proteinaceous coating that can withstand large cyclic strains in the turbulent intertidal zone, despite its high hardness (≈0.1 GPa). The strong adhesion of mussel byssal to substrate surfaces underwater is regulated by coordination between 3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (DOPA) ligands in byssal protein and Fe(III). This became the basis for the production of biomimetics and SHPs containing M–DOPA complexes.29,137–141 A typical example is catechol-functionalized polymers mixed with metal ions (V3+, Fe3+, Al3+), which show a pH-controlled degree of crosslinking, rapid network formation, and self-healing behavior.106 It is important that the mechanical properties (e.g., shear modulus and relaxation time) of the obtained MPs can be controlled depending on the type of metal ion and pH. It should be noted that Fe3+–catechol interaction can lead to the formation of mono-, bis- and tris-chelated complexes by an external choice of the pH value.
In another interesting example, a dual self-catalytic system based on ferric ions (Fe3+) and DOPA efficiently triggers the free-radical polymerization of self-healing hydrogels at low temperature without any external stimuli.142 Of interest is a copolymer binder with Fe3+–catechol cross-links, which can cause a self-healing property for silicon anodes (Fig. 4).143 The large volume expansion of silicon leads to the destruction of the M–L bond, which is restored due to the presence of monomer units, which are sufficiently flexible.
 Fig. 4  Diagram of the process of recovering a copolymer binder in the Si anodes [reprinted with permission from ref. 143. Copyright (2019) American Chemical Society]. 
The inclusion of iron–catechol cross-links in a dry, loosely cross-linked epoxy network leads to a significant improvement in its properties.144 It turned out that the iron-containing MP shows an increase in stiffness, tensile strength, and tensile toughness by two to three orders of magnitude compared to the iron-free precursor upon obtaining recoverable hysteretic energy dissipation and preservation of the initial extensibility. The improvement in properties is due to the combined effects of both an increased cross-link density created by reversible iron–catechol complexes and the formation of chain-restricting ionomer nanodomains. The coordination of acrylate polymers with Ca2+ and Mg2+ ions in seawater has led to a significant improvement in the mechanical properties of MPs from initially viscous to tough, hard materials.29 In addition, the decrease in swelling in seawater compared to deionized water due to higher osmotic pressure resulted in greater toughness (∼5 MPa) and self-healing efficiency (∼80%). MPs have been developed that combine competitive compressive strength, stiffness, impact strength, rapid recovery, self-healing, injection and cytocompatibility.145 For these purposes, a double network (DN) strategy was used, the first network structure of which is rigid and brittle, and the second structure is soft and plastic to improve the mechanical characteristics of the resulting MPs. The binary network consisted of DOPA–CH (CH is chitosan), genipin, Fe(III) ions, and non-functionalized CH (Fig. 5a). It contained one DOPA–CH network with double cross-linked (DC) covalent bonds (genipin mediated) and catechol–Fe(III) bonds, and another CH network with only covalent cross-links and additional covalent cross-links between the two networks. After applying uniaxial compression at 50% strain (Fig. 5b), the DN hydrogel remained intact, while a single network (SN) (cross-linked only through covalent bonds) was fragmented, showing that the DN strategy yielded more resilient gels. DN hydrogels reached 2.46 ± 0.34 MPa in compressive strength, which is more than two-fold of DC, and did not fracture until 90% deformation due to the synergistic effect of individual networks (Fig. 5c). The improvement in the mechanical properties was achieved both by introducing the mechanism of energy dissipation and by adjusting the stoichiometry of catechol–Fe(III) coordination depending on the pH value. Self-healing tests showed (Fig. 5d and e) that the DN hydrogel had fully recovered, while the SN hydrogel still had a scar after 5 min. It has been confirmed that self-healing is the result of the dynamic nature of the catechol–Fe(III) coordination bond.
 Fig. 5  High toughness DC/DN hydrogels based on the catechol–Fe(III) complexes and genipin-mediated covalent cross-links of CH. (a) Illustration of a concept leading to the DC and DN hydrogels. (b and c) Hydrogel robustness: (b) Images of two different hydrogels cross-linked with 0.5% (w/v) genipin:DN and 0.5% (w/v) genipin:SN before and after compression at 50% strain. (c) Typical compressive stress–strain curves for various hydrogels with 0.5% (w/v) genipin. (d and e) Self-healing test of hydrogels: (d) Images of the DN and (e) SN hydrogels before cutting with a blade (initial), cut (yellow arrow) and after resting for 5 min (recover) [reprinted with permission from ref. 145. Copyright (2017) John Wiley and Sons]. 
Epoxidized natural rubber (ENC) with polydopamine (PDA) groups based on M–L bonds has interesting self-healing properties (Fig. 6).146 The tensile strength of PDA@ENR can reach 2.4 MPa and the material can be healed at room temperature at a healing efficiency of 80%. In addition, it exhibited self-healing properties at −10 °C and under water conditions.
 Fig. 6  (a) The cutting/healing process of the Fe3+/PDA@ENR elastomer. (b) Typical stress–strain curves of samples after being healed for a prescribed time at room temperature. The inset photos show the high stretchability of the self-healed sample (healing for 24 h). (c) Repeated self-healing ability of the Fe3+/PDA@ENR elastomer over several cutting/healing cycles. (d) Self-healing efficiency of an elastomer at various temperatures and in damp air for 12 h before self-healing and in water [reprinted with permission from ref. 146. Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society]. 
Nitrile rubber (NBR) with high strength and recycling ability was developed based on the Fe3+–catechol bonds.147 NBR exhibited valuable mechanical properties, for example, the tensile strength of a modified NBR with 2.5 phr Fe3+ reached 8.93 MPa, which was much higher than most non-covalent supramolecular rubbers. In addition, due to the reversible Fe3+–catechol coordination bonds, NBR has an excellent recyclability (about 90% performance retention rate), which differs significantly from that of ordinary vulcanized rubber. DOPA-terminated telechelic polyurethane (PU) was designed to coordinate with Ca2+ to form dynamic non-covalent bonds.148 The tensile stress of the developed PUs increases with the amount of metal cation added, while the tensile strain decreases slightly. The Ca2+–catechol coordination can be dynamically destroyed and restored under the influence of seawater, rendering MP with excellent self-healing properties (up to 84% based on toughness).
2.2. Carboxylic acids
Other interesting SHPs were synthesized based on carboxyl-containing polymers. Thus, the polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) polymer was obtained cross-linked by the abundant Zn(II)–carboxylate interactions (Fig. 7).149 Since the coordination equilibrium is dependent on temperature, the mechanical strength of this MP changes rapidly and reversibly with heating or cooling, in particular, the soft-rigid switching ability σ can reach 8000 when ΔT = 100 °C. Based on these features, this MP exhibits fast thermal-healing properties.
 Fig. 7  Obtaining and characterization of the PDMS–COO–Zn polymer. (a) Synthesis and structure of the polymer. (b) Isothermal titration calorimetry data of PDMS–COO− with ZnCl2 in anhydrous ethanol at 25 °C. (c) Hot compressing of the powder lead to the block sample. (d) Schematic structure of the polymer network at various temperatures [reprinted from ref. 149 under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License]. 
Aluminum ions were used to cross-link carboxyl-modified polysiloxanes with self-healing and reprocessing properties (Fig. 8, left).150 The main parameters affecting the mechanical and self-healing properties of MPs are chain length, density of carboxylic grafting, and the amount of Al(III) ions (Fig. 8, right). In particular, MPs with a lower carboxyl grafting density recover more efficiently than samples with more grafted carboxyls, even without heating. However, an increase in Al(III) does not affect the efficiency of self-healing, since the healing mechanism includes not only the Al(III)–carboxylate recombination process, but also the diffusion of the interfacial chains.
 Fig. 8  (left) Synthesis of a carboxyl-modified polydimethylsiloxane (CPDMS) and cross-linking through Al(III)–carboxylate coordination. (right) (a) Stress–strain curves for primary and healed Al(III)–CPDMS samples and (b) measurements of healing efficiency. (c) Stress relaxation curves of the Al(III)–CPDMS samples and (d) tensile profiles of the initial and reprocessed Al2–CPDMS4k—10k sample by heat-pressing [reproduced from ref. 150 with permission from the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) and The Royal Society of Chemistry]. 
Of interest are hydrogels of poly(AAm-co-AA-co-N-hydroxymethyl acrylamide), where AAm is acrylamide and AA is acrylic acid, consisting of chemical crosslinking induced by hydroxymethyl acrylamide units and physical crosslinking obtained from carboxyl–Fe3+ complexes.151 Optimal MPs have high tensile strength (8.56 MPa), significant modulus of elasticity (15.5 MPa), remarkable toughness (37.85 MJ m−3) and excellent tearing energy (7062 J m−2). In addition, tough MPs show excellent self-healing (95% toughness recovery within 50 min), pH-triggered healing, shape memory and plasticity abilities.
A tough self-healing MP based on P(AA-co-AAm) cross-linked by divalent cobalt ions was obtained (Fig. 9).152 In this system, weak hydrogen bonds are reversible sacrificial bonds to release energy, while strong M–L bonds are the basis for the integrity of MPs. It is important that MPs have excellent mechanical properties (elongation at break >1200%, compression stress >600 kPa and compressibility >90%).
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic representation of the effect of the internal crosslinking of the P(AA-co-AAm)/CoCl2 hydrogel; (b) a digital photograph of a cross-linked P(AA-co-AAm)/CoCl2 hydrogel; (c) cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the freeze-dried P(AA-co-AAm)/CoCl2 hydrogel (scale bar = 20.0 μm); (d) cross-sectional SEM image of the freeze-dried P(AA-co-AAm)/CoCl2 after swelling equilibrium (scale bar = 400.0 μm) [reprinted with permission from ref. 152. Copyright (2019) John Wiley and Sons]. 
2.3. Pyridine-containing ligands
A significant number of self-healing polymers were obtained on the basis of metal complexes with pyridine-containing ligands. In this section, we consider the main representatives of this type of ligand.

2.3.1. Pyridine. 
As a typical example of such ligands, we note PDMS with pendant pyridine fragments, which forms a stretchable self-healing polymer as a result of interaction with cobalt ions at room temperature. The MP obtained is characterized by a tensile strength of 0.13 MPa, elongation at a break of 560% and a high healing efficiency of more than 90% (Fig. 10).153
 Fig. 10  The method of preparation and structure of the stretchable PDMS elastomer [Reproduced from ref. 153 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry]. 


2.3.2. Iminopyridine. 
Two PDMS polymers cross-linked by various Zn(II)–diiminopyridine complexes (designated PDMS–NNN–Zn and PDMS–MeNNN–Zn, respectively) were obtained (Fig. 11).154 It is important that these MPs are similar in coordination modes, but differ in coordination dynamics. Thus, poorer mechanical strength, but higher stretchability and better self-healing properties are characteristic of the PDMS–MeNNN–Zn polymer, since the M–L bond in this MP is weaker but more dynamic. Cracks in PDMS–MeNNN–Zn polymer films can be completely healed at room temperature in just 30 min with a healing efficiency of over 90%.
 Fig. 11  Self-healing properties. (a) Optical microscope images of damaged and healed PDMS–MeNNN–Zn 25 °C. (b) Photos giving the cutting/healing/stretching process of PDMS–MeNNN–Zn films at 25 °C. (c) Typical stress–strain curves and (d) self-healing efficiencies of PDMS–NNN–Zn healing for described times at room temperature [reprinted with permission from ref. 154. Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society]. 
SHPs were also obtained by incorporating two dynamic and reversible imine and M–L bonds into the short siloxane chain. These MPs are characterized by autonomous self-healing, controlled degradability and ultra-high adjustable stretchability (up to 800% strain) depending on the M:L ratio (Fig. 12).155 It is important that the use of two types of bonding allows the material to restore 88% of its mechanical strength after physical damage.
 Fig. 12  Preparation of stretchable, self-healing, and degradable materials using a combination of imine and M–L bonds [reproduced from ref. 155 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry]. 


2.3.3. Terpyridine. 
The self-healing property was also found in MPs based on 2,2′,6′,2′′-terpyridine (tpy), which were reversibly assembled and disassembled via M–L interactions.156–160 An example of this behavior is the use of Cd(II) acetate for crosslinking tpy-containing polymers.161 The resulting MPs are able to repeatedly heal cracks at a temperature above 70 °C. The basic concept can be improved by using Mn(II) chloride as a crosslinking salt, which leads to the formation of chloride bridges and, thus, to much weaker interactions and superior healing behavior.162 Rigid supramolecular MPs containing M-bis-tpy sites and photoswitchable azobenzene groups in the main chain should be noted (Fig. 13).163 The resulting MPs demonstrated light-triggered contraction and fast self-healing after rupture due to the reversible formation of ZnII–tpy coordination bonds. At the same time, for the related CoII derivative, it is possible to control the reversible light-triggered expansion–contraction at the sub-molecular level at the liquid–solid interface. Finally, the optomechanical response is absent in the case of the FeII complex due to quenching by transferring energy from the excited azobenzene photoswitch to the lowest-lying excited state, localized on the FeII–tpy complex.164
 Fig. 13  The chemical structure of rod-like photoswitchable MPs based on MII–tpy complexes of two ditopic ligands [reprinted with permission from ref. 163. Copyright (2015) John Wiley and Sons]. 
The multistimuli-responsive SHP nanocomposite based on tpy ligand-terminated PU on the surface of multi-walled carbon nanotubes (CNTs) has superior mechanical properties.8 The tensile strength and tensile strain-at-break of the CNT/PU polymer nanocomposite increased from 14.2 MPa and 620% to 22.8 MPa and 1076%, respectively, with the addition of Zn2+. The MP nanocomposite showed a rare combination of strong, tough, and elastic mechanical properties and was able to self-heal when various stimuli were used, including remotely controlled near infrared (NIR) light (4.2 mW mm−2, 30 min), relatively low temperatures (90 °C, 1 h), and/or solvents, all with excellent healing efficiency (i.e., above 93%) and short healing time.
The corresponding contributions of hard and soft blocks of the M–L containing block copolymers (BCPs) to the self-healing property have been studied.165 For this purpose, various BCPs consisting of hard polystyrene (PS) block, soft n-butyl acrylate (BA) block and donor tpy fragments at different places in the soft block, formed a complex with Mn(II) chloride. The obtained MPs showed a macroscopic scratch healing behavior and the molecular mobility of polymer chains. In particular, MPs, consisting only of a pure soft block with tpy fragments, allow complete healing to be achieved within 20 min (Fig. 14).
 Fig. 14  Scheme of crosslinking of BCPs with Mn(II) chloride and optical micrographs showing scratch healing in a MP at 100 °C (scale bars = 100 μm) [reprinted from ref. 165 under a Creative Commons CC-BY license]. 
The simple complexes of Fe(II), Co(II), and Ni(II) with the perfluoroalkylamide derivative of 4-aminophenyl-tpy of ML2 composition spontaneously self-assemble in gels that demonstrate an unprecedentedly rapid self-healing.110 It is important that the morphological features, thermal stability in aqueous dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), and mechanical properties depend on the nature of the metal ion. Excellent self-healing properties have also been established in supramolecular metallogels based on gluconic acid acetal and tpy groups.158 It should be noted that the hybrid gel from a self-assembled supramolecular gel and nanostructured polypyrrole (PPy) combines the dynamic assembly/disassembly nature of the M–L bond and the conductive nanostructure of the PPy and has high conductivity (12 S m−1), attractive mechanical and electrical self-healing behavior without any external stimuli, as well as increased mechanical strength and flexibility.99 Supramolecular assembled gels were obtained by adding Ni2+, Co2+, Fe2+, and Zn2+ ions to tpy incorporated norbornene-based polymers (Fig. 15).166 It is interesting that the fastest self-healing properties are characteristic of MPs based on Zn2+, which is a metal with a lower binding affinity. In particular, the healed gel showed almost the same values of storage (G′) and loss (G′′) moduli as the initial Zn-complex gel, which indicated a good ability to self-heal.
 Fig. 15  (top) Self-assembly scheme through M–tpy interaction; (bottom) (a) self-healing concept with norbornene-based polymer, (b) illustration of the self-healing ability of the Zn-complex gel at room temperature without an external stimulus, and (c) storage (G′) and loss (G′′) moduli of the Zn complex gel and self-healing gels [reprinted from ref. 166 under a Creative Commons Attribution license]. 


2.3.4. 2,2′-Bipyridine. 
Among the most widely used M–L systems for the production of SHPs, MPs with 2,2′-bipyridine (bpy)-containing ligands should be noted.167 For example, SHP was obtained by incorporating a 6-phenyl-bpy-based cyclometalated Pt(II) complex into the PDMS backbone (Fig. 16). The combination of Pt⋯Pt and π–π interactions between the cyclometalated Pt(II) complexes allows the crosslinking of linear PDMS polymer chains into an elastic film. The resulting MP can be stretched more than 20 times in comparison with its original length. The damaged MP can be healed at room temperature without any healants or external stimuli. In addition, surface aging does not affect the self-healing property.
 Fig. 16  Proposed structure and photograph of the PDMS-PtL film. A photograph of a stretching film with one half dyed with 0.5% phthalocyanine prior to healing. The initial and final lengths are 2 mm and 20 mm, respectively [reprinted with permission from ref. 167. Copyright (2016) John Wiley and Sons]. 
Similar SHPs were obtained by crosslinking nonpolar PDMS polymers with Fe2+ and Zn2+ complexes with bpy-5,5′-dicarboxylic amide (Fig. 17).97 The self-healing efficiency (fracture strain of the healed sample compared to the deformation of the initial sample) was 76 ± 22% for Zn(OTf)2–PDMS films. It is noteworthy that the effects of surface aging do not affect the healing efficiency. At the same time, for other zinc polymers Zn(ClO4)2–PDMS and ZnCl2–PDMS, lower healing efficiencies of 55 ± 21% and 21 ± 3%, respectively, were obtained. Interestingly, Fe2+ polymers have little self-healing ability at room temperature due to the kinetically inert bond of Fe2+–N(bpy).
 Fig. 17  (a) Self-healing experiments for Zn(OTf)2-PDMS polymer at ambient conditions without any intervention. (b and c) Image of self-healed Zn(OTf)2–PDMS under tensile stress (>250% strain): (b) cutting the initial film into two parts, followed by self-healing (the connection of the edges of the cut films is highlighted in red dot box; (c) rupturing of the initial film into two pieces under tensile stress, and then the ruptured surface was gently pushed back together and underwent self-healing. (d) A histogram of the self-healing efficiency of all MPs under ambient conditions after 48 h [reprinted with permission from ref. 97. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society]. 


2.3.5. Pyridine-2,6-dicarboxamide. 
A remarkable example of SHP based on M–L coordination is the complex of the FeIII ion with PDMS containing a fragment of pyridine-2,6-dicarboxamide (pdca), which is characterized by high stretchability, high dielectric strength, autonomous self-healing and mechanical actuation (Fig. 18).99 The symmetric tridentate pdca ligand has a central pyridine atom with strong binding ability to the FeIII ion and two neighboring weaker amide donor fragments. Although the binding energy of Npyridyl–FeIII is similar to the energy of the classical covalent bond type (calculated Ebinding = 145.0 kcal mol−1), the Oamido–FeIII interaction is closer to the hydrogen bond (calculated Ebinding = 40.7 kcal mol−1).
 Fig. 18  Scheme of bond rupture under the influence of mechanical stress and its reversible formation in the FeIII–Hpdca complex together with the calculated binding energies [reprinted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright (2016) Springer Nature]. 
Medium and weak M–L bonds can easily break and restore, while the Npyridyl–FeIII bonds are retained, which allows polymer chains to reversibly unfold and re-fold. SHP can be stretched more than 100 times compared to its original length without breaking (Fig. 19a and b). Healing (room temperature, 48 h) resulted in the restoration of fracture strain of 1700 ± 60% and a high healing efficiency of 90% (Fig. 19c). It is important that healing occurred even at −20 °C, which gave a healing efficiency of 68% after 72 h (Fig. 19d).
 Fig. 19  (a) Optical microscope images of damaged and healed samples. (b) Optical images of the healed film before and after stretching. (c) Stress–strain curves of a film healed at room temperature for different periods of time. (d) The stress–strain curves of the film healed at −20 and 0 °C for 72 h, and the stress–strain curves of the film healed at room temperature for 48 h after surface aging for 24 h [reprinted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright (2016) Springer Nature]. 
A nonlinear rheological characterization of the dynamics of dissociation and the reformation of interchain and intrachain crosslinkings in a polymer cross-linked with dynamic M–L bonds was used (Fig. 20).168 It turned out that dynamic bonds sensitive to shear rate can be broken by continuous shear. When the shear or extension rate was much higher than the relaxation rate, the M–L bonds between and within the chains could be dissociated and the polymer chains would become very aligned. Thus, after the cessation of stretching at a higher strain, a greater interchain transformation occurred, since the configurations of the chains changed.
 Fig. 20  Illustration of the dynamic M–L bond of the coordinated pdca–PDMS–Fe(III) system reform at higher strain [reprinted with permission from ref. 168. Copyright (2019) American Chemical Society]. 
The strength and dynamics of M–L bonds have a significant effect on the self-healing ability of MPs. For example, Fe–Hpdca–PBCA polymers, where PBCA is poly(butadiene-co-acrylonitrile), have good self-healing properties with a healing efficiency of 15 ± 5% after healing at 25 °C for only 4 h (Fig. 21a and b).169 An increase in healing time up to 24 h leads to a 97% recovery in toughness compared to the original film. However, in this case, the healing process slowed down significantly and the efficiency of self-healing became lower. At the same time, for this system, the healing efficiency was only 3.7 ± 0.8% at 25 °C for 7 days, which was associated with the entanglement of the polymer chains (Fig. 21c and d).
 Fig. 21  (a) Stress–strain curves at a strain rate of 10 mm min−1 and (b) self-healing efficiency of the MP films healing for the described time at room temperature. (c) Stress–strain curves at a strain rate of 50 mm min−1 and (d) self-healing efficiency of the MP films healing for the described time at room temperature [reproduced from ref. 169 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry]. 
Self-healing properties were also found in the dual physical cross-linked PEG/PAA DN hydrogel, where PEG is poly(ethylene glycol), in which the first physical network is ferric ion cross-linked linear chain extensions of PEG (PEG-H2pdca) and the second physical network is PAA–Fe3+ gel.170 The M–L coordination and the DN structure allow this hydrogel to withstand tensile stresses of up to 0.4 MPa and a relative elongation of 1560% with a healing efficiency of 96.8% for 12 h. The ability to self-healing is due to a large number of mobile M–L and hydrogen bonds in the network. The healed hydrogel has a high tensile property and can be stretched to large deformation without fracture (Fig. 22a). In addition, the crack almost disappears after 12 h (Fig. 22b).
 Fig. 22  (a) Photographs showing the excellent healing efficiency of hydrogels. (b) Optical microscopy images of the damaged hydrogel with complete healing of MP [reprinted with permission from ref. 170. Copyright (2018) John Wiley and Sons]. 


2.3.6. 2,6-Bis(1′-methylbenzimidazolyl)pyridine. 
The trifunctional poly(propylene oxide) (PPO) with 2,6-bis(1′-methylbenzimidazolyl)pyridine (Mebip) and 2-ureido-4[1H]pyrimidinone (UPy) fragments was used for the creation of self-healing and shape memory MPs.171 In this system, the complexation between Mebip ligands and Zn2+ ions leads to the cross-linking of polymer chains, while the UPy dimerization created a hydrogen bonding network (Fig. 23). The use of chemical and thermal stimuli allows independent disassembly of M–L bonds and UPy dimers, which leads to selective and customizable healing properties in combination with double and triple shape-memory effects.
 Fig. 23  Synthesis of polymers based on the PPO core with (i) UPy units (M1), and (ii) Mebip ligands (M2) that are coordinated with Zn(NTf2)2 and form a network (M2·Zn(NTf2)2). The figure also shows a representation of the networks M1–M2·Zn(NTf2)2 with binding motifs and the orthogonal response to a chemical or heat. The NTf2− counterions are omitted for clarity [reprinted with permission from ref. 171. Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society]. 

2.4. Azoles
Azole ligands provide wide opportunities for the synthesis of MPs with promising self-healing properties. As a typical example, we note triazole (TIA)-pyridine based acrylic MPs, cross-linked by metal salts.104 It turned out that the presence of counterions (for example, chloride) promotes self-healing. At the same time, MPs synthesized with non-coordinating counterions such as sulfate, acetate and tetrafluoroborate self-heal at higher temperatures or do not self-heal at all due to insufficient network mobility.
The PDMS polymer containing the Co(II)–TIA complex also has self-healing properties.172 The notch on the film almost disappeared after healing at 120 °C for 24 h, although distinct healed scars were still visible (Fig. 24a). Healing efficiency depends on the time and temperature of healing (Fig. 24b and c). In particular, a longer healing time and a higher healing temperature lead to a higher healing efficiency.
 Fig. 24  Self-healing properties of the MP film. (a) Microscopic image of the film before and after healing at 120 °C; (b) stress–strain curves of a film healed at various temperatures for 24 h; (c) stress–strain curves of a film healed at 120 °C for different times; (d) stress–strain curves of a film healed at room temperature with pretreatment with methanol [reproduced from ref. 172 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry]. 
The use of Fe(III)–TIA bonds in the same PDMS allows one to obtain a highly elastic MP, which can be stretched to 3400% strain at a low loading rate (1 mm min−1).173 This MP is self-healing at mild temperatures with a healing efficiency of more than 90% (Fig. 25), which can be explained by the unique strength of the M–L bond and the coordination conformation of the Fe(III)–TIA complex.
 Fig. 25  Self-healing experiments for Fe–TIA–PDMS. (a) Microscopic images of the film before and after healing at 60 °C. (b) Stress–strain curves of the films healed at 60 °C at various times (thickness: 1 mm; width: 7 mm; gage length: 2 mm; loading speed: 5 mm min−1). (c) Photographs showing stretching of the healed film. (d) A photograph of the fracture incision of a healed film [reprinted with permission from ref. 173. Copyright (2016) John Wiley and Sons]. 
A multiphase SHP based on a network of dynamic zinc–imidazole bonds in a soft matrix of a hard/soft two-phase brush copolymer was developed (Fig. 26, left).98 The mechanical and dynamic properties of SHPs depend on parameters such as the backbone/brush degree of polymerization (DP), brush density, and M:L ratio. These MPs have excellent self-healing ability under environmental conditions without any intervention (Fig. 26, right).
 Fig. 26  (left) Design concept for the multiphasic spontaneous SHPs using zinc–imidazole bonds; (right) stress–strain curve for a MP with L/Zn = 4.0 at room temperature with ambient humidity. The histogram of the toughness recovery for each sample [reprinted with permission from ref. 98. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society]. 
Polyacrylonitrile-r-poly(butyl acrylate) with Fe3+–tetrazole bonds without any stimulus can quickly and autonomously heal the damage done at ambient temperature (Fig. 27).174 Interestingly, the healing experiments were conducted using two strips of different colors (with or without malachite green). Then, two strips were cut from the middle, and strips of different colors were intertwined and healed at ambient temperature for 30 min.
 Fig. 27  (a) Stretch strips added with or without dyes (malachite green); (b) cut two different colors of the stretch strips and contact them together; (c) MPs were healed at room temperature for about 30 min; (d) tensile testing were measured using an electronic universal machine for testing materials with microcomputer control [reproduced from ref. 174 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry]. 
ZnCl2 was effectively coordinated with the same polymer for high self-healing efficiency.175 An increase in the healing time from 1 h to 4 h leads to an increase in the maximum stress from 0.18 to 0.36 MPa and the healing efficiency from 44.5% to 90.2%. The healing efficiencies were about 90.3%, 82.1%, 69.2%, 56.4% and 38.4% after a five-fold self-healing process, respectively. The healing efficiencies were about 90%, 71%, 62% and 39.5% for self-healing MPs for acrylonitrile (AN):ZnCl2 = 50:1, 75:1, 100:1 and blank, respectively at ambient temperature. The stretch strips were not broken and the mechanical properties were not significantly reduced after healing for 4 h.
The dynamic zinc–imidazole bonds are formed during the interaction of a three-armed polymer based on benzene-1,3,5-tricarboxamide with metal ions.176 For the MP with DP = 33 (Fig. 28A and B), the mechanical properties were weak due to the low DP value, and the stress decreased during stretching and ultimately reached about 0.44 MPa. The toughness was restored by 55% after self-healing within 10 h and fully recovered after 16 h. In contrast, the MP with DP = 71 exhibits stable tensile properties and excellent self-healing ability (Fig. 28C and D). With a further increase in the healing time to 2 h, all rupture stress and strain were restored, but no break occurred in the damaged area. Long polymer chains with the effective physical entanglement promote the self-healing process.
 Fig. 28  Self-healing experiments: (A and B) star-imidazole-containing polymer (S-ICP-1, DP = 33)/Zn(NTf2)2 complex, (C and D) S-ICP-3 (DP = 71)/Zn(NTf2)2 complex, and (E) the image of the tensile test of S-ICP-3/Zn(NTf2)2 complex after self-healing for 1 h. L/M = 4.34 [reprinted with permission from ref. 176. Copyright (2019) John Wiley and Sons]. 
A MP with self-healing ability was also obtained by the interaction of Ni(II) with poly(2-hydroxyethyl-co-1-(3-imidazolyl)propyl aspartamide) at 50 and 100 mol% Ni(II).177 In a self-healing experiment, the MP-gel plate was cut into two parts(I), then the damaged surfaces were connected together and a small drop of water was placed on the cut line without any external intervention (II and III). It turned out that after about 6 h in the area of attachment(IV), a clear cut line disappeared. In addition, the connected parts after healing were strong enough(V) so that they could be stretched without fracturing with tweezers. It is important that the self-healing property is repeatable and effective.
Self-healing MPs (over 90% self-healing efficiency under mild conditions) were successfully synthesized from a bifunctional monomer of 2-(3-(3-imidazolylpropyl)ureido)ethyl acrylate due to the combination of hydrogen bonding and Zn(II)–imidazole interactions (Fig. 29).178
 Fig. 29  Synthesis of MPs and optical microscopy images of the scratched MP film before and after treatment at 60 °C [reprinted with permission from ref. 178. Copyright (2019) Elsevier]. 
Zinc–imidazole interaction was also used as a healing component for the synthesis of self-healing PDMS at room temperature.179 Damaged samples were healed at 25 °C with different healing times of 12, 24, and 31 h, respectively, before a tensile test (Table 1). As expected, healing effectiveness increased with increasing healing time. In particular, 31 hour healing at room temperature led to an almost complete recovery (over 98%) in both the ultimate tensile strength (UT) and the ultimate extensibility (UE).
Table 1 Self-healing test results of MPs




 

U
T (kPa)

U
E (%)

U
T healing efficiency (%)

U
E healing efficiency (%)




Original
60.73 ± 2.61
211 ± 10
—
—


12 h healed
43.61 ± 5.34
128 ± 10
71 ± 9
58 ± 2


24 h healed
57.20 ± 1.13
181 ± 8
94 ± 1
86 ± 4


31 h healed
59.93 ± 2.76
207 ± 9
99 ± 5
98 ± 4




Random poly(AAm-co-vinylimidazole) based hydrogels exhibit self-healing ability due to the reversible dissociation and re-association of the imidazole–metal coordination (Fig. 30).180
 Fig. 30  Structure of a MP with a dual-crosslinking strategy and photographs of a cut and self-healed sample. The red color of the sample is due to the addition of rhodamine B [reprinted with permission from ref. 180. Copyright (2019) John Wiley and Sons]. 
A covalent/supramolecular hybrid construction strategy has been proposed for the production of polyurea MPs in which covalent bonds are responsible for providing high modulus and elasticity, while supramolecular bonds provide extreme stretchability and rapid self-healing at room temperature.181 One of the typical hybrid polyurea elastomers (Zn/imidazole = 0.25) can completely restore the mechanical properties of fully cut samples for 3 h at room temperature. Another MP with Zn/imidazole = 0.5 showed a 100% healing efficiency after repair at room temperature for 12 h. Of interest is to include imidazole–zinc bonds in a disulfide-based cross-linked network to study the effect of non-covalent bonds on the healing efficiency of a dynamic covalent network (Fig. 31).182 The test, which depends on the healing time, revealed a higher healing efficiency of the covalent network due to the addition of non-covalent bonds because of their faster exchange dynamics compared to dynamic covalent bonds.
 Fig. 31  Synthesis of disulfide bonds and Zn2+–imidazole bonds co-cross-linked network [reprinted with permission from ref. 182. Copyright (2017) Elsevier]. 
The interaction of biodegradable polyaspartamide derivatives conjugated with histamine with Cu(II), Ni(II), and Zn(II) ions in an aqueous solution were used to prepare the MP gels.183 In the case of a Cu(II)-coordinated gel, autonomous self-healing was observed after two pieces were attached and a small drop of water was added to the cut line.
As in the case of metal–catechol interactions, histidine (His)–metal complexes play a decisive role in high toughness and self-healing of byssal threads. For example, the coordination number 5 is characteristic of Zn2+–His complexes, and these five ligands averaged three His residues (each providing coordination with one nitrogen atom) and one aspartate residue (providing coordination with two oxygen atoms). An analysis of stretched and damaged threads revealed significant changes in the Zn2+ coordination structure, in particular, the exchange of amino acid ligands with water and an increase in the length of coordination bonds. However, the healed threads showed a return to the native coordination structure. Thus, His–metal interactions act as reversible sacrificial bonds. Therefore, many research groups have developed SHPs based on His–metal chemistry.184 For example, when His-containing methacrylate copolymers were cross-linked with Zn2+, the supramolecular network exhibited thermally activated self-healing properties.185,186 The type of counterion and the presence of protective groups for His fragments of carboxylic acids affect the ability to heal. A metallo-hydrogel based on His and Zn2+ ions, developed using coordination driven self-assembly, demonstrates instant intrinsic self-healing (Fig. 32).187
 Fig. 32  (A) Digital images showing the self-healing properties of the Zn–His metallopolymer. (a) Two MP blocks brought in contact with each other, (b) two blocks self-heal with the formation of one block, (c) four blocks self-heal with the formation of one block, (d) the self-healed single block made from four blocks passed vertically. (B) Dynamic oscillatory rheology for quantifying the recovery rate by shearing the Zn–His hydrogel at increasing strain from 0.01 to 500% at a frequency of 1 Hz, after which the recovery was monitored at 1% strain and 1 Hz. (C) Thixotropic behavior using oscillatory rheology for three cycles with a periodic change in strain from 0.1% to 100%. His–Zn concentration = 100 mM [reproduced from ref. 187 with permission from the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) and The Royal Society of Chemistry]. 
A self-healing MP was obtained by the cross-copolymerization of ZnCl2-decorated ENR and His-modified cellulose nanocrystal (CNC).188 The elastomer sample was cut by using razor blade into two completely separated parts, then brought into contact and kept in the open for complete healing (Fig. 33, left). The scar at the site of damage completely disappeared after healing within 2 min (Fig. 33, right). In addition, the healed sample could bear stretching again up to about 1000% strain without failure.
 Fig. 33  Optical images of damaged (left) and healed (right) samples [reprinted with permission from ref. 188. Copyright (2018) John Wiley and Sons]. 
An important parameter for the self-healing properties of MPs is the coordination number (the number of His fragments in each monomer unit) (Fig. 34).189 By adjusting the concentrations of the peptide Gly–Gly–His and Zn2+, MPs can achieve a set of demanding mechanical characteristics, including a Young's modulus of 7–123 kPa, fracture strain of 434–781%, toughness of 630–1350 kJ m−3, and self-healing time of ∼1 h.
 Fig. 34  Self-healing properties of MPs. (A) Photos of MP stretching before and after healing. Scale bar = 5 mm. (B) Stress–strain curves of MPs at a strain rate of 30% min−1 healed for different times at room temperature. (C) Normalized recovery percentages of fracture strain, fracture stress and toughness with different healing times corresponding to (B) [reprinted from ref. 189 under a Creative Commons Attribution License]. 
Similar self-healing MPs were obtained by introducing His–M bonds into heterodimeric coiled coil forming peptides, which serve as a non-covalent cross-link for PEG-based hydrogels and are involved in the formation of higher-order assemblies through intermolecular His–M bonds as a second cross-linking mode.190
2.5. Urethane ligands
Promising ligand systems for producing self-healing metallopolymers are a variety of polyurethanes. For example, the self-healing properties of a cross-linked PU acid can be controlled by combining several weak and strong M–L bonds and varying the nature of metals (Fig. 35).191 In particular, the Fe3+-containing polymer showed the self-healing ability with a tensile strength of 9.1 MPa and breaking strain of 1110%. After healing at 60 °C for 24 h, the healing efficiency was almost 100%. Replacing Fe3+ with Tb3+ led to an increase in mechanical strength to 12.6 MPa and a decrease in the tensile strength by 1000% due to the stronger coordination of Tb3+ than Fe3+. The healing efficiency still reached 100% after heating at 60 °C for 24 h.
 Fig. 35  (left) Synthesis of intrinsic SHPs containing various M–L bonds. The dashed line indicates the weak M–L bond and the solid line indicates the strong M–L bond. (right) Schematic representation of the cleavage and reformation of various M–L bonds during self-healing [reprinted with permission from ref. 191. Copyright (2018) John Wiley and Sons]. 
The self-healing PU was synthesized based on the Cu(II)–dimethylglyoxime-urethane complex with synergetic triple dynamic bonds (Fig. 36).192 It demonstrates high mechanical performance (a tensile strength and toughness up to 14.8 MPa and 87.0 MJ m−3, respectively). The self-healing of a MP at room temperature leads to an instantly recovered tensile strength of 1.84 MPa and a continuously increasing strength up to 13.8 MPa.
 Fig. 36  Design of PU elastomer with superior self-healing properties. (A) Molecular structure of the elastomer. (B) The schematic structure of the elastomer. Triple dynamic bonds, including reversible covalent bonds (green arc and gray stick), M–L (gray stick and orange circle) and hydrogen bonds (blue polygons), form hybrid dynamic networks [reprinted with permission from ref. 192. Copyright (2019) John Wiley and Sons]. 
Another self-healing MP is obtained by coordinating Al(III) ions with a modified PDMS using M–L bonds.193 In this MP, quadruple hydrogen bonds are not only capable of rapidly recovering after fracture, but can also dissipate the strain energy as a weak dynamic bond. At the same time, treble Al–L bonds, acting as strong dynamic bonds, contribute to the creation of robust molecular networks, which leads to a significant improvement in the robustness and elasticity of the self-healing MP. Due to the accuracy of the construction, the synthesized MP has all the desired properties, including a high tensile stress (2.6 MPa), exceptional toughness (∼14.7 MJ m−3), high stretchability (∼1700%) and excellent self-healing ability (90%). The self-healing PU was also synthesized by the interaction of a pyridine-containing PU with Fe2+ ions (Fig. 37).194 The strong reversible M–L bond provides mechanical strength and self-healing ability. Due to the optimization of the M–L ratio, the resulting MP has a very high tensile strength of 4.6MPa at a strain of about 498% and a high Young's modulus (3.2MPa). In addition, the MP shows an extremely high self-healing efficiency: approximately 96% of the tensile strength at room temperature and about 30% at 5 °C.
 Fig. 37  (a) A typical PU consisting of hexamethylene diisocyanate, poly(propylene glycol) and a simple mono-pyridine group containing diol. (b) Schematic representation of metal-coordinated PU and the proposed coordination geometry during the loading and recovery process. (c) Photographs of the pristine PU and the corresponding Fe2+-coordinated PU. (d) Photographs of a highly stretched complex. (e) Photographs of loading 0.98kg by a complex rod (2.2mm in diameter) [reprinted with permission from ref. 194. Copyright (2019) John Wiley and Sons]. 
2.6. Other ligands
A simple approach was developed to create a coordination cross-linked MP with exceptional mechanical properties, self-healing and recycling capabilities by introducing Co–cyano coordination into the NBR matrix.195 The damaged MP can practically restore the initial tensile strength and fracture strain of 1378% (73% of the primary fracture strain) when healed at 160 °C for 1 h. In addition, after healing at 190 °C for 10 min, the tensile strength of 4.2 MPa and 72% deformation of the primary fracture were restored. Of interest is the creation of photonic elastomers based on MPs with tunable mechanical strength, angle-independent structural coloring and the ability to self-repair.196 In particular, a self-healing MP based on the M–L interaction between amino terminal PDMS and cerium trichloride (CeCl3), in which monodisperse SiO2 nanoparticles located in isotropic structures were incorporated, was used as a matrix. The photonic elastomers can heal scratches or cuts to ensure sustainable optical and mechanical properties (Fig. 38).
 Fig. 38  Self-healing ability of photonic elastomers. (a) Optical microscopy images of abrased photonic elastomer before (left panel) and after healing (right panel) at room temperature for 48 h. (b) Reflectance spectra of the original (black curve), abrased (red curve) and healed (green curve) photonic elastomer. (c) Photographs of two pieces of green-colored photonic elastomer (top panel) and blue and green-colored photonic elastomer (bottom panel) for self-healing at 60 °C for 24 h. (d) Stress–strain tests of a green photonic elastomer at various healing times (12, 24, and 48 h) at 60 °C [reprinted with permission from ref. 196. Copyright (2018) John Wiley and Sons]. 
An approach based on the formation of a polymer network carrying two types of host–guest inclusion complexes of β-cyclodextrin (β-CD) with adamantane (Ad) and ferrocene (Fc) with the properties of self-healing, expansion–contraction and shape memory was developed (Fig. 39).197 The copolymers obtained with AAm or N-isopropylacrylamide (NIPAM) as the main chain were used to produce a supramolecular MP as a result of host–guest interactions. The self-healing of two separated pieces of MP was observed with and without the presence of an oxidizing agent and could be felt for 2 or 3 h, respectively, in wet conditions, although its recovery time increased to ca. 72 h to achieve an adhesive strength ratio >68%.
 Fig. 39  (a) Redox-responsive supramolecular MP with the properties of self-healing, expansion–contraction and shape memory. (b) The chemical structure of the host–guest inclusion complex used for the manufacture of (c) polymer networks. (d) When two halves of a β-CD-Ad-Fc PNIPAM gel were held together with or without ammonium cerium nitrate (CAN) under wet conditions, the pieces adhere to (e) restore the original gel. Healing was not observed if a competitive guest molecule was applied to one of the cut surfaces [reprinted with permission from ref. 197. Copyright (2015) John Wiley and Sons]. 
The self-healing DN films were obtained in which the first network is based on the dynamic interaction of the aldehyde groups on the modified PEG and the amino groups on CH, and the second on the M–L bond.198 The self-healing order is as follows: (CH/PEG)15 film > (CH/PEG)15–Ca2+ film > (CH/PEG)15–Zn2+ film > (CH/PEG)15–Cu2+ film. The deep cut disappears after the injection of ultrapure water into the broken film for 30 min (Fig. 40a). For the (CH/PEG)15–Ca2+ film, the cut also self-heals after 30 min, but leaves a mark on the surface of the (CH/PEG)15–Ca2+ film (Fig. 40b). At the same time, for the (CH/PEG)15–Cu2+ film, the cut clearly decreases after 60 min, but it takes longer to fully heal the cut (Fig. 40c). Finally, for the (CH/PEG)15–Zn2+ film, the cut noticeably decreases after 30 min and self-heals after 60 min with the remaining mark (Fig. 40d).
 Fig. 40  Self-healing process of the Schiff base-boned (CH/PEG)15 film (a), (CH/PEG)15–Ca2+ film (b), (CH/PEG)15–Cu2+ film (c) and (CH/PEG)15–Zn2+ film (d). Scale in the figure is the same [reprinted with permission from ref. 198. Copyright (2018) Elsevier]. 
Self-healing MPs were obtained by the interaction of an amphiphilic polymer containing a hydrophobic Schiff base ligand, poly(N, N-dimethylacrylamide-co-2-(benzylidene-hydrazonomethyl)-phenol), and Cu2+, Co2+, Ca2+, Mn2+, Pb2+ and Fe2+ ions.199 For example, the Cu-containing MP was cut into two halves, then these were placed together and after 1 min it healed itself, as evidenced by the disappearance of the cut crack. Such a short healing time indicates that this MP has fast self-healing properties. The presence of a platform of supramolecular MPs cross-linked by the combination of M–L bond and hydrophobic interaction must be noted.200 The resulting Ni-containing MP based on salicylaldehyde benzoyl hydrazone-terminal PEG showed a quick self-healing ability and a reversible pH response property.
An interesting class of multifunctional materials are polymers based on metal–thioether coordination.201 Thus, thioether-based acrylate BCPs are combined with the advantage of reversible metal–thioether bonds for the manufacture of a new type of “smart” thermoplastic materials (Fig. 41).202 These materials are endowed with self-healing ability in environmental conditions. For example, samples of the BCP–Ag compound in the molten state were cut to a depth of 70–90% of the initial thickness and left for 6 h at room temperature in air for healing. The final sample returned to its original state in appearance and was stretchable. The self-healed dog-bone samples were able to recover ≈80% of all initial mechanical properties, including tensile strength, breaking strain and toughness.
 Fig. 41  Illustration of thioether BCPs as universal thermoplastic materials. PMMA is poly(methyl methacrylate), PMTEA is poly(thioether monomer) and PBA is poly(n-butyl acrylate) [reprinted with permission from ref. 202. Copyright (2017) John Wiley and Sons]. 
The Cu(I)–thioether bond was successfully combined with polymer ligands to form self-healing MPs (Fig. 42).203 The damaged emissive and stretchable films can self-heal under ambient conditions for 72 h.
 Fig. 42  Representative photos of a MP sample for a self-healing test. The sample was allowed to self-heal under ambient conditions for 72 h before stretching. Scale bar: 1 cm [reprinted with permission from ref. 203. Copyright (2019) Elsevier]. 
Pincer ligands are another interesting type of chelating agents that bind strongly to three adjacent coplanar sites in the meridional configuration. The mechanistic advantage of such complexes is that their dynamic response, associated with the kinetics of ligand exchange, can vary independently of the thermodynamics of complexation, and therefore they are more often used to create self-healing MPs. As a typical example, we note the conversion of the SCS pincer–palladium complex to a self-healing MP using a multivalent pyridine crosslinking agent.204 The resulting MP can be completely healed by heating at 100 °C for 3 h (scratch sizes: depth 14.9 μm and width 30.4 μm).
2.7. Metal-containing ionomers
One of the interesting subgroups of self-healing materials is ionomers, which bear up to 15 mol% of ionic groups in the polymer and have improved tensile strength, fracture resistance, toughness and flexibility. It is important that the properties of ionomers depend on the nature of their structure (ion pairs used), ion content (level of neutralization) and the elastic behavior of the main chain. The healing properties of a number of ionomers with various fractions of the side carboxylate groups completely neutralized by Na+, Zn2+ or Co2+ as counter ions correlated with network dynamics, supramolecular reversibility, and macroscopic surface scratch.205 It turned out that the effective lifetime of a supramolecular bond is an important parameter to determining the ideal range of viscoelasticity for good macroscopic healing. In particular, the supramolecular bond lifetime from 10 and 100 s leads to the production of samples with complete healing of surface scratches and good mechanical robustness. For a series of model ionomers with pendant carboxylate groups, the prerequisites and tools for optimizing the self-healing efficiency were determined.206 For example, to achieve optimal damage repair, the ion fraction in these systems should be within 5 mol%, and the chain dynamics should be suitable to provide excellent self-healing at moderate healing temperatures. Poly(butyl acrylate-co-acrylic acid) ionomers with different proportions of cobalt counter ions were used to quantify and link the macroscopic healing timescale obtained by quantifying time to completely interfacial strength recovery for two ionomeric contacted surfaces. It was found that the kinetics of healing closely matches the timescales of network and cluster formation.207
The dual-component elastomer was constructed on the basis of a hard network of Zn2+ cross-linked low molecular weight polyacrylic acid (PAA) and a soft covalent network built of three monomers (Fig. 43).208 It has interesting parameters, in particular, the tensile and compression stress are 4.08 and 6.90 MPa, respectively. In addition, the self-healing efficiencies of the tensile and compression modes reach 80% and 95%, respectively.
 Fig. 43  (a) Diagram of the process for producing HHM–PAA1–Znx (x = 0.3–0.6) elastomers. HHM–PAA1–Znx (x = 0.3–0.6) refers to a 1:x molar ratio of the carboxylic acid of PAA to Zn2+ and the M–L interactions in the blend of PAA-Zn. (b) Elastomers were loaded and unloaded for 1000 consecutive cycles at a tensile strain of 20%. (c) Elastomers were bent for 1200 consecutive cycles. (d) Elastomers were compressed and uncompressed for 300 consecutive cycles. The soft copolymer of 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate (HEMA), 2-hydroxyethyl acrylate (HEA), and methacrylic acid (MAA) monomers is encoded as HHM [reprinted with permission from ref. 208. Copyright (2019) John Wiley and Sons]. 
Self-healing physically cross-linked MPs obtained by the interaction of N-carboxyethyl CH and acrylic–Fe3+ have excellent self-healing ability and mechanical properties (Fig. 44).209 In particular, the maximum tensile strength and elongation at the break of MPs can reach up to 280 kPa and 1900%, respectively. In addition, MPs have good conductivity due to Fe3+ migration, and their self-healing efficiency can reach 98% for 2.5 h.
 Fig. 44  Synthesis scheme for the N-carboxyethyl chitosan (CEC)/PAA-Fe3+ hydrogels [reprinted with permission from ref. 209. Copyright (2019) John Wiley and Sons]. 
The addition of metal salts to the PAA emulsion to obtain cross-linked PAA through a solution casting process improved the solvent resistance, creep resistance and tensile strength of linear PAAs.210 PAA networks cross-linked with divalent zinc cations exhibit excellent tensile strength and recyclability. In addition, the anions of zinc salts have an obvious effect on the improvement and recyclability of the resulting PAA networks.
Thus, in recent years, a fairly wide range of MPs with self-healing properties have been obtained and it is not limited to the examples given here. At present, obtaining MPs does not present significant synthetic difficulties; therefore, one should expect a significant expansion in the number of self-healing MPs and the expansion of their types.
3. Stimuli-responsive self-healing metallopolymers
Recently, interest in stimuli-responsive polymers has increased significantly, especially in their use as self-healing materials.3,12,38,200,211–217 The rapid development of responsive SHPs is mainly the use of dynamic (reversible) chemical bonds that can be broken and reformed under relatively mild physicochemical conditions/stimuli, which often intersect with the inherent responsiveness of the bulk materials.36,37 Therefore, the healing behavior of these materials is often accompanied by (spatially-temporarily controlled) microphase separation, gel–sol transition, volume/shape change, or photochromic response. In addition, the M–L coordination is sensitive to the external environment, which provides an effective approach to creating stimuli-responsive self-healing materials.168 Over the past two decades, many self-healing metallopolymers have been produced that respond to stimuli such as heat, light, pH, etc.137,154,218
Temperature is the main and widely available stimulus used to create already developed responsive SHPs. Compared to other non-autonomic self-healing systems, this mechanism is most applicable because of its relatively simple control. If heat is applied and the polymers are brought to an elevated temperature, polymer chains acquire sufficient mobility to slowly fill/seal/close microscopic and macroscopic damage, such as gaps, cuts, tears, cracks, perforations and punctures. After such damage is cured, the polymer is cooled down to room temperature and the reversible network is formed again. As an example of SHPs, MPs based on the trifunctional PPO with Mebip and UPy fragments should be noted.171 The use of thermal stimuli allows independent disassembly of M–L bonds and UPy dimers, which results in selective and customizable healing properties. In another interesting example, when His-containing methacrylate copolymers were cross-linked with Zn2+, the supramolecular network showed thermally activated self-healing properties.185,186
Light is a clean, inexpensive, and non-invasive stimulus that can be delivered precisely in time and space by remote activation using lasers and other illuminating devices. In addition, the advantage of this mechanism is that photoreactions are usually very fast and can be selectively initiated by applying light of the appropriate wavelength (visible light or UV-light). Light also allows you to better control over the healing process, as it can be localized in certain sites. MPs have astounding optical properties, which makes coordination chemistry particularly attractive for optically trackable healable polymers. The bonding between metal and polymers can be controlled using reversible bonds from low to high dissociation energies, which provide tunability and controlled self-healing properties of macromolecules by incorporating various metal ions and ligands. So, MPs based on Zn(II)–tpy coordination sites and carrying photoisomerizable units of diazobenzene and/or solubilizing luminescent phenylene–ethylene fragments are of interest.163 It should be noted that UV radiation cannot penetrate deep into tissues and can damage biological components, and has only a small fraction of sunlight, which can complicate the use of azomolecules in biomedical and solar energy applications.
Chemoresponsive materials have attracted particular interest due to the simple control and integration of pH gradients in both laboratorial and industrial applications, as well as in biological processes at the tissue/organ or cellular level. In particular, the hydrogels of poly(AAm-co-AA-co-N-hydroxymethyl acrylamide), consisting of chemical crosslinking induced by hydroxymethyl acrylamide units and physical crosslinking obtained from carboxyl–Fe3+ complexes, showed excellent pH-triggered healing.151 The platform of supramolecular MPs cross-linked by a combination of M–L bond and hydrophobic interaction should be noted.200 The resulting Ni-containing MP based on salicylaldehyde benzoyl hydrazone-terminal PEG showed a fast self-healing ability and a reversible pH response property.
Although mono-responsive MPs have been extensively studied, researchers took advantage of M–L coordination to prepare a variety of multi-responsive MPs.92 These MPs offer the possibility of creating multi-responsive self-healing hybrid systems, the properties of which can be adjusted by changing the combination of polymers and metal ions used. Thus, MPs based on polyvinyl alcohol acetoacetate and Fe3+ ions exhibited multi-responsive self-healing properties, such as responsiveness to pH, redox, light irradiation and temperature.219 Amphiphilic MPs based on a hydrophobic Schiff base ligand, poly(N,N-dimethylacrylamide-co-2-(benzylidene-hydrazonomethyl)-phenol), and divalent metal ions (Cu2+, Co2+, Ca2+, Mn2+, Pb2+ and Fe2+) showed stimuli-responsive behavior toward pH and competing ligands (EDA/EDTA).199 The multistimuli-responsive SHP nanocomposite based on tpy ligand-terminated PU on the surface of CNTs has excellent healing efficiency (that is, above 93%) and a short healing time.8
4. Shape memory metallopolymers
Shape memory MPs undergo reversible shape memory and recovery processes through dynamic dissociation and recombination of M–L interactions.105,220–222 When MPs are deformed under external stress, their temporary shape will be rigidly fixed if a certain stimulus is used to stimulate the formation of reversible interactions. When M–L interactions are broken by the application of another stimulus, the deformed MP will then recover to its permanent shape. The simplest SMPs include only one M–L interaction and thus can only remember one temporary shape in each shape memory cycle, realizing dual shape memory effect. When two or more non-interfering reversible interactions, which are responsive to different stimuli, are combined in one ensemble, it is possible to create SMPs with triple or multi shape memory effect. Currently, despite significant research in the field of dual-SMPs, there are only a few reported examples on triple-shaped memory effect SMPs due to common difficulties in the design and manufacture of triple SMPs. SMPs help establish temporary shapes or restore permanent ones in response to external stimuli. Indeed, the thermo-, photo- and chemo-responsive shape-memory properties were achieved through the use of reversible M–L bonds.223 For example, a liquid crystal elastomer containing 2,6-bis(1′-ethylbenzimidazolyl)pyridine (EtBip) groups has exhibited UV light and thermally induced shape-memory properties. In addition, these polymers demonstrate the ability to change shape under the influence of metal ions. An example is the activation of shape memory recovery after placing a thermally fixed film in a solution containing Fe2+ ions. It is important that at the same time the color of the film changes to purple due to the complexation of Fe2+ and EtBip (Fig. 45) and there is a transition of the liquid crystalline form to the isotropic form.
 Fig. 45  Pictures of the shape memory behavior of an elastomer. Fixation of the sample of the elastomeric film (a) in a temporary shape by heating and stretching (b). (c) Film recovery and color change under the influence of 1 mM solution of Fe(OTf)2 in 1:1 water:THF. (d) Removal of a significant amount of Fe(OTf)2 under the influence of a 10 mM solution of diethylenetriamine in 1:1 water:THF [reprinted with permission from ref. 223. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society]. 
In another interesting example, crosslinking the linear poly(p-dioxanone) polymers bearing bpy units with Fe(II) ions leads to the formation of a permanent network, in which the crystallizing segments of polymer are a thermal trigger for SMPs (Fig. 46).224 The fixing ratio (Rf) of 100% and the recovery ratio of 93% can be achieved in MPs by adjusting the content of Fe(II) and the length of the polymer chain.
 Fig. 46  Digital photos of the deformation and recovery process [reproduced from ref. 224 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry]. 
A hydrogen bonded and covalently cross-linked hydrogel derived from AA, 2-vinyl-4,6-diamino-1,3,5-triazine and a crosslinking agent (PEG diacrylate) was used for the formation of another SMP based on the reversible Ca2+–carboxyl coordination bonds.225 Due to the effect of reversible Ca2+–carboxyl binding, the prepared MP has impressing shape memory properties. The host–guest CD–PEG interaction was used to create a shape memory MP.226 It was prepared in situ from poly(ethylene glycol) methyl ether methacrylate, AAm and sodium acrylate in a solution of β-CD. Since grafted acrylate fragments have a stronger affinity for Fe3+ than for Fe2+, the shape memory behavior induced by ascorbic acid was demonstrated in this MP system.
Temporary switches were used for fixing temporary shapes and recovering permanent states, based on the light-triggered complexation and decomplexation processes. For example, a chemically cross-linked hydrogel was constructed (Fig. 47), in which the M–imidazole bond served as temporary crosslinks, remembering deformed shapes.227 The photolysis reaction of coexisting diphenyliodonium nitrate can lead to the protonation of imidazole moieties, which causes the decomplexation of temporary crosslinks and light-triggered shape recovery processes.
 Fig. 47  (a) Shape memory MP that uses imidazole–metal interactions as temporary crosslinks; (b) photos showing the light-triggered shape memory behavior [reproduced from ref. 227 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry]. 
Recently, attention has been paid to polymers with the triple/multi shape memory property that can store two or more temporary shapes and regulate transitions between them. The examples of such SMPs are systems with a wide range of transition temperature or multiphase systems in which the transition between different shapes is triggered by heating.24,42 Thus, a stretchable MP based on a DN structure with a triple shape memory effect was developed (Fig. 48),228 which uses Ca2+–alginate binding and poly(BA)–diol ester bond as temporary crosslinks. The first network is a chemically cross-linked poly(AAm), which determines the permanent state. After straight hydrogel deformation, the crosslinking of alginate in aqueous Ca2+ solutions can reliably block the deformation, which leads to one stabilized temporary shape. The fixation of a second temporary shape occurs as a result of the formation of poly(BA)–diol ester bonds in alkaline solutions.
 Fig. 48  Schematic representation of a DN hydrogel with a triple shape memory effect. (a) Chemical structures of a hydrogel, (b) photos showing triple shape memory on a macro scale, (c) shape memory after self-healing, (d) self-healing during shape memory [reproduced from ref. 228 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry]. 
The triple shape memory behavior was demonstrated not only at the macro scale, but also at the micro scale. Thus, applying this strategy, a MP was obtained both with a multiresponsive property and with an excellent triple shape memory effect (Fig. 49).229 This is a DN hydrogel obtained from AAm and a crosslinking agent in the presence of biopolymer-based CH and oxidized dextran.
 Fig. 49  The processes and mechanisms of triple shape memory and shape recovery, triple shape recovery, which can be implemented in stages or in a single stage [reproduced from ref. 229 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry]. 
In the SMP based on a copolymer of 2-ethylhexyl methacrylate with 2-carboxyethyl acrylate (Fig. 50a), the interaction of Cu(II) with the dangling side groups of the carboxylic acid increases strength and reduces ductility due to the formation of covalent M–L bonds.230 Interestingly, the Cu(II) carboxylate forms a dimeric structure in which two Cu(II) cations are bonded to four different carboxylate anions (Fig. 50b).
 Fig. 50  (a) Synthesis of a linear copolymer of a copolymer of 2-ethylhexyl methacrylate with 2-carboxyethyl acrylate and its appearance after molding (rectangle, top right). (b) Interaction of the copolymer with Cu(II) acetate and its appearance after molding (rectangle, bottom right) [reprinted with permission from ref. 230. Copyright (2018) John Wiley and Sons]. 
Dynamic ionic bonds were incorporated into the waterborne PAA to form adaptable polymer networks.210 Metal salts were added to the PAA emulsion to produce cross-linked PAA via solution casting process. The PAA–Zn(OAc)2 sample was crimped at 70 °C and cooled to 10 °C to fix the temporary shape (Fig. 51a). The temporary shape can return to its original shape in the absence of stress after heating to 70 °C (Fig. 51b). During the first cycle, the shape fixity (Rf) was 99.8% and shape recovery (Rr) was 86.3%. The partial unrecoverable strain can be attributed to the sluggish recovery instead of irreversible plastic deformation. After the second cycle, accumulative strain was not observed. Rf and Rr were 99.8% and 84.9%, respectively, and remained constant in subsequent cycles. Several cycles of shape memory demonstrated the robustness of PAA–Zn(OAc)2.
 Fig. 51  Shape memory effect of PAA–Zn(OAc)2. (a) Visual demonstration of the shape memory performance. (b) Successive shape memory cycles [reprinted with permission from ref. 210. Copyright (2019) Elsevier]. 
Solid-state plasticity due to the dynamic exchange of covalent bonds in the SMP network provides a permanent reconfiguration of the shape.105 M–L interactions possess the high strength of covalent bonds, while maintaining the dynamic reversibility of supramolecular bonds. The SMP networks were developed, in which the M–L bonds make it easy to control the behavior of plasticity over a wide temperature range by simply changing the metal ion (Fig. 52a). By controlling the diffusion of two different metal ions during the preparation of the polymer film, plasticity behavior with a spatial gradient is achieved, which provides unique versatility when changing shape (Fig. 52b). After the release of the external deformation force, a fan-shaped permanent shape was obtained (Fig. 52c) as a result of a regional change in stress relaxation. This newly created permanent shape can be further controlled by elasticity-based shape memory to fix a temporary shape that can be recovered.
 Fig. 52  The shape memory MP with gradient plasticity. (a) The preparation of a gradient shape-memory sample. (b) The gradient distribution of metal ions and the corresponding stress relaxation behavior at 100 °C. (c) Demonstration of universality when changing shape as a result of elasticity and gradient plasticity; scale bar = 10 mm [reprinted with permission from ref. 105. Copyright (2017) John Wiley and Sons]. 
The interaction of the pyridine-containing PU with CuCl2 results in a shape-memory PU that demonstrates not only a rapid tensile shape recovery, but also an excellent crimp shape recovery.231 In particular, the MP containing suitable M–L coordination interactions shows more than 99% shape fixation and over 95% shape recovery.
The Cu+-containing physically cross-linked CH hydrogels were obtained by exploiting ammonia fumigation and reduction of Cu2+ using NaHSO3.232 The CH–Cu+/NH3 hydrogels showed obvious shape memory after exposure to air using different coordination numbers of Cu2+ and Cu+. The cut-out strip (Fig. 53a) of the initial CH–Cu2+/NH3 hydrogel (i.e., the hydrogel before reduction with NaHSO3) was bent into a U shape and kept for 48 h in 5 mL of deionized water (Fig. 53c), and it slowly stretched after being removed (Fig. 53e).In contrast, when the strip of the prepared CH–Cu+/NH3 hydrogel was subjected to the same procedures (Fig. 53b and d), the hydrogel strip remained U shape slowly changing its color from brown to blue (Fig. 53f).
 Fig. 53  Shape memory of CH–Cu+/NH3 hydrogels. (a) and (b) Cut-out strips of CH–Cu2+/NH3 and CH–Cu+/NH3 hydrogels, respectively. (c) and (d) Kept into a U shape for 48 h in deionized water. (e) and (f) CH–Cu2+/NH3 and CH–Cu+/NH3 hydrogels taken out from deionized water [reprinted from ref. 232 under a NOCC (the “License”)]. 
Another large class of SMPs are ionomers containing carboxylate or sulfonate functional groups that are neutralized to produce metal counter-ions (e.g., Na+, K+, Mg+2, Ca+2, Zn+2, Al+3).233 As a typical example, mention is made of shape memory compounds formed from the commercial poly(ethylene-co-methacrylic acid) ionomer and zinc stearate.234 The microphase separation of the ion-pairs with the formation of dispersed ionic aggregates acted as a permanent network, and the crystalline phase of a phase-separated zinc stearate was a reversible, temporary network. The shape memory behavior was repeated for five consecutive shape memory cycles with values of fixed shape and shape recovery equal to ∼92% and ∼97%, respectively. The shape memory behavior of 3D printed objects was demonstrated using the Surlyn 9520 commercial olefin ionomer, which is zinc-neutralized poly(ethylene-co-methacrylic acid).235 The initial fixity for 3D printed and compression-molded samples was similar, but the initial recovery was much lower for the 3D printed sample (R = 58%) than that for the compression-molded sample (R = 83%). The fixity and recovery in subsequent shape memory cycles is greater for the 3D printed part than for the compression-molded part. These characteristics make it possible to directly form complex shapes of thermoplastic SMPs that can be recovered in three dimensions using an appropriate trigger such as heat.
The microstructure of elastomeric blends of zinc-neutralized carboxyl-terminated polybutadiene and poly(styrene-co-4-vinylpyridine) consisted of microphase-separated glassy nanodomains of a predominantly second polymer, which served as cross-link junctions that were connected with polybutadiene chains.236 The elastomer showed good shape memory properties for large deformations, and its shape recovery efficiency could reach 81% in the first cycle and 97% ± 1% in the next seven cycles.
NIR-induced shape memory ionomers based on commercial polymers as the framework and various metal ions have demonstrated a high shape recovery ratio of more than 93%.237 For example, to test the NIR light-induced shape memory properties of ionomers, poly(vinyl alcohol)-PAA ionomers cross-linked with Fe3+ were made using a simple ionic cross-linking method (Fig. 54). The light-induced shape memory properties of the ionomer can be easily adapted by simply adjusting the species and content of metal ions due to the specific photothermal effect of each ion. In addition, dynamic ionic cross-linked interaction causes light-induced plasticity, which leads to repeated programming of these ionomers to new permanent shapes without affecting their shape memory properties.
 Fig. 54  (left) Preparation route of ionomers. (right) Thermally induced shape memory cycle of PVA–PAA–Fe [reproduced from ref. 237 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry]. 
5. Selected applications of self-healing and shape memory metallopolymers
Self-healing and shape memory MPs are a very promising class of materials due to their superior properties and integrated functions.238–241 Thus, these MPs have been used in many different applications, ranging from optical devices, for example, OLEDs,242 to catalysis,243,244 luminescent materials,245,246 cancer treatment drugs247 and biomedical technology.248,249 The increased reliability and durability of these MPs prompted researchers to develop specific applications for self-healing and shape memory materials. This section discusses the use of self-healing and shape memory MPs for transistors, sensors, conductive inks, optoelectronic devices, etc.
One of the promising areas is the development of soft electronic devices based on MPs with strong mechanical properties, conductivity, and biocompatibility that can be imparted using M–L dynamic bonds. It should be noted that wearable electronic devices have been the focus of increased attention recently.250–252 In particular, such devices must resist deformation and have the ability to self-repair in the event of mechanical damage.253–260
As an example, we consider a self-healing proton conductor made by mixing solutions of Cu(II) acetate and oxalic acid.261 A composite with high conductivity can be easily prepared by blending metallogel with CNTs (Fig. 55a). It is noteworthy that the system can also impart the induced self-healing ability to other gel networks that do not have this ability (Fig. 55b).
 Fig. 55  (a) Demonstration of the restoration of the bulk conductivity of a metallogel composite based on oxalic acid used to close an electrical circuit. (b) “LEGO-car” made using (1) an oxalic acid-based metallogel and (2) rhodamine B, (3) with lanazole and (5) with multi-walled CNTs (1 wt%); (4) is a diaminocyclohexane-bis(amine) gel [reprinted with permission from ref. 261. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society]. 
An energy-harvesting triboelectric nanogenerator (TENG) was developed, which is a power source and a self-powered electronic skin (Fig. 56).262 It is important that the triboelectric-charged layer and the TENG electrode have intrinsic and autonomous self-healing properties under ambient conditions. In addition, it has high performance characteristics: fast healing time (30 min, 100% efficiency at 900% strain), high transparency (88.6%), and inherent superstretchability (>900%). Its triboelectrically charged layer and electrode are obtained by introducing dynamic M–L interactions in PDMS networks and dynamic hydrogen bonds in an ionic hydrogel, respectively. Even after 500 cutting-and-healing cycles or at an ultimate stress of 900%, TENG retains its functionality.
 Fig. 56  (a) Applications and the diagram of an exploded view of the EHTS-TENG. (b) Photographs showing the transparency of HTS-PDMS, HTS-c-hydrogel, and EHTS-TENG devices with and without paraffin wax as a separator. (c) Reactions to form HTS-PDMS. Here, HTS-PDMS is a healable, transparent and stretchable PDMS, HTS-c-hydrogel is a healable, transparent and stretchable conducting hydrogel, and EHTS-TENG is a fully self-healable, transparent, and stretchable triboelectric nanogenerator [reprinted with permission from ref. 262. Copyright (2019) John Wiley and Sons]. 
A two-layer ultra-responsive self-healable photodetector has been developed, which can restore both its structure and its sensing property after deformation (Fig. 57).263 In this bilayered structure, the top layer is Ni0.2Zn0.8Fe2O4 (NZF) obtained by the citrate gel method, which acts as a sensing layer. The lower layer is urea-formaldehyde (U-F) microcapsules with flaxseed oil and NZF core, which acts as a healing layer to successfully restore film sensing property after deformation. The characteristics of the photodetector are: photoresponse and NZF recovery time before deformation of 1.74 s and 3.28 s at 100 mW cm−2, respectively; the response and recovery after healing of 1.75 s and 2.84 s, respectively. It is important that a solar light photodetector based on microcapsules is able to restore 98.5% of its sensing property.
 Fig. 57  Schematic diagram depicting the self-healing phenomenon with a bilayered ultra responsive self-healable photodetector [reprinted with permission from ref. 263. Copyright (2019) Elsevier]. 
A tough self-healing electrolyte based on P(AA-co-AAm), cross-linked by Co2+ ions, was obtained.152 When this hydrogel electrolyte was used to make a two-layer capacitor with activated carbon electrodes, an excellent capacity was achieved (134.1 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1). This supercapacitor can retain its capacitance even after bending, twisting, compressing, self-healing, and 5000 cycles. The M–L coordination between bpy-5,5′-dicarboxylic amide of functionalized PDMS and Fe2+ or Zn2+ salts was used to produce a self-healing dielectric elastomer of organic field-effect transistors (OFETs).97 The introduction of the M–L bond in dielectrics led to an increase in dielectric constant compared to PDMS and hysteresis-free transfer characteristics due to improved polarization and reduced operating voltage of the transistor, while maintaining a stable capacitance without the appearance of undesirable ionic effects. The columbic interaction between chloride and metal ion in transistors with FeCl2–PDMS and ZnCl2–PDMS dielectric prevents the drift of mobile anions under the gate. Fully stretchable transistors with FeCl2–PDMS dielectrics were manufactured and they showed ideal transfer characteristics. In particular, they have stable transfer characteristics and low gate leakage current after 1000 cycles at 100% strain. A MP based on pdca-modified PDMS and Fe3+ was used in a dielectric actuator (Fig. 58).99 An area extension of 3.6% was obtained without damage after applying a strong electric field of 17.2 MV m−1.
 Fig. 58  A self-healing device can be triggered in response to an alternating electric field [reprinted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright (2016) Springer Nature]. 
The G–Zn–tpy MP modified by the introduction of the conductive Ppy polymer showed a high conductivity of about 12 S m−1 due to Ppy and self-healing due to the reversible sol–gel transition property of G–Zn–tpy.102 These properties allowed the development of an electrical circuit for LED illumination using this gel as a conductor. After cutting, the LED turned off, but after 1 min the circuit self-healed at ambient temperature and the LED turned on again.
Ink based on an intrinsically self-healing conductive MP hydrogel containing ferric ions and the conductive Ppy polymer should be noted, but Ppy made a major contribution to the conductivity.264 In addition, fast healing kinetics was achieved for both mechanical (2 min) and electrical (30 s) healing. Recovery to 90% and 96% in conductivity was noted after 30 s and 1 min of cutting, respectively. An effective rewritable paper strategy was developed based on color or luminescence switching triggered by dynamic M–L coordination (Fig. 59).265 This type of rewritable paper can be conveniently used for multicolor water-jet printing using aqueous solutions containing various metal salts as ink. In particular, for the zinc complex in the presence of polar solvents, there is a chemical equilibrium resulting from dissociation/coordination between the zinc complex and the ligand + zinc salts, which will lead to a change in luminescence. It is important that printed images on water-jet rewritable paper can be stored for a long time (>6 months).
 Fig. 59  Water-jet printing of rewritable paper: a scheme of the writing and erasing processes of water-jet printing of rewritable paper based on the L–Zn interaction, as well as water-jet prints by a commercially available inkjet printer with cartridges refilled with water on the rewritable paper based on the L–Zn interaction. Scale bar = 1 cm [reprinted from ref. 265 under a Creative Commons CC BY license]. 
In another interesting example, a simple inking strategy was proposed to store visual information (for example, writing, printing, etc.) by modifying the surface of substrates with polyphenols and the subsequent formation of M–phenolic bonds.266 This strategy can use different substrates, polyphenols (e.g., tannic acid, gallic acid, and pyrogallol) and metal ions (e.g., CuII, FeIII, and TiIV) to meet the requirements for various applications (e.g., printing, writing, painting and stamping). In addition, the disadvantages of traditional inks (e.g., ink precipitation and color fading) can be overcome.
The self-healing Fe+3/PDA@ENR was processed to create a strain sensor by incorporating CNTs into the elastomer (Fig. 60).146 In particular, a self-healing and nanostructured conductive layer was deposited on a self-healing elastomeric substrate, cross-linked by M–L coordination bonds, forming a sensor with a hierarchical structure. The resulting sensors have high sensitivity, low detection limit (0.05% strain), excellent self-healing ability, and excellent reproducibility. It is noteworthy that self-healed sensors are still able to accurately register not only tiny physiological actions (such as speech, swallowing and coughing), but also large human movements (bending of the fingers and neck, and touching). In addition, harsh treatments, including bending more than 50000 times and mechanical washing, could not affect the sensitivity and stability of self-healed sensors when monitoring human movements.
 Fig. 60  Schematic representation of the sensors during cutting/healing process (a). SEM images showing the cross-section of the sensors with a scale bar of 500 μm (b) and 10 μm (c). TEM images of the conductive layer of the sensors with a scale bar of 1 μm (d) and 200 nm (e). Changes in the electrical resistance of the sensors with different thicknesses of the conductive layers before and after cutting/healing process (f). Demonstration of electrical self-healing ability of the sensors (8 drop-casting cycles) when connected into a circuit with an LED light (g) [reprinted with permission from ref. 146. Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society]. 
An easy and simple, but effective method was developed to generate new materials based on intrinsic autonomous SHPs, and these can be easily mechanically and chemically fine-tuned (Fig. 61).167 A capacitive-based pressure sensor that shows good sensitivity and dynamic response (∼0.33 kPa−1) before and after healing was made on the basis of this MP.
 Fig. 61  (a) Normalized sensitivity curves for a capacitance-based pressure sensor using SHP as the dielectric layer. Optical microscope image of the dielectric structuring and design of the device; the dynamic sensor response of a pristine (b) and healed (c) sensor with simple repetitive finger tapping for 20 s [reproduced from ref. 167 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry]. 
The tunable, self-healing positive/negative piezoresistive Zn/His@CNC elastomer was used to manufacture a self-healing strain sensor with a positive/negative resistance response (Fig. 62).188 A self-healing strain sensor with a positive sensing response (P-sensor) was obtained by simple assembly of an elastomeric substrate and a nanostructured conductive rubber layer by drop-casting. A self-healing strain sensor embedded with the flexible yarn electrode showed a negative sensing response (N-sensor) through the morphological effects of CNTs at the interfaces between the flexible yarn electrode and the conductive matrix.
 Fig. 62  Scheme of the manufacturing steps of self-healing sensors with tunable positive/negative piezoresistivity [reprinted with permission from ref. 188. Copyright (2018) John Wiley and Sons]. 
Self-healing hydrogels were used for bone tissue engineering. For example, a hydrogel with a double network based on the hyaluronic acid (HA) macromolecule, modified with bisphosphonate groups and Ca2+ ions, as well as conjugated with silk microfibers through a coating of calcium phosphate, and a UV cross-linkable prepolymer of HA-bisphosphonate-AAm.267 This hydrogel showed high stability and an increase of ≈1500% in storage modulus. In addition, a significant acceleration in bone regeneration rate was revealed on the model of a rat cranial critical defect, since the bone formation rate was 220% higher than in the untreated groups (Fig. 63).
 Fig. 63  New bone formation after hydrogel implantation in a model of a rat cranial critical defect measured using micro-CT analysis: (a–d) 3D reconstruction views and (e–h) sagittal cross-section views. Images (a) and (e) correspond to 4 weeks after hydrogel implantation; (b) and (f) to 4 weeks after surgery without hydrogel placement; (c) and (g) to 8 weeks after hydrogel implantation; and (d) and (h) to 8 weeks after surgery without hydrogel placement. (i) Quantification of the newly formed bone volume per defect. Representative cross-sections of the explants from the defect area were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) after hydrogel implantation for 4 weeks (j) and 8 weeks (k), respectively. Black arrows: osteoblast-like cells; white arrows: inflammatory cells; yellow arrows: periosteum; red arrows: blood cells. The scale bar is (a–h) 2 mm and (j and k) 100 μm [reprinted with permission from ref. 267. Copyright (2017) John Wiley and Sons]. 
In another interesting example, electrostatic interactions were used to create an injectable and self-healing hydrogel by mixing HA-bisphosphonate and acrylated bisphosphonate with magnesium chloride (Fig. 64).268 It turned out that the shear thinning property, compressibility, and stress relaxation profile of this hydrogel made it possible to introduce it and quickly place it in specially made defect sites. In addition, studies of encapsulation with human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) in these MPs have shown their ability to initiate cell spreading and osteogenesis, as demonstrated by the expression of important osteogenic markers.
 Fig. 64  Relative gene expression of important bone markers from hMSCs encapsulated in hydrogels [reprinted with permission from ref. 268. Copyright (2017) John Wiley and Sons]. 
A CH-based self-healing MP with a stiffness of 1.5 kPa in the same range as the stiffness of neuronal tissues (0.1–1 kPa) can be used to enhance differentiation of encapsulated murine neural progenitors (Fig. 65).269 The zebrafish-based neural injury model was used in this system to confirm that only neural spheroids encapsulated in hydrogels of adequate stiffness can significantly heal neural damage.269–271
 Fig. 65  Functional assay for the central nervous system rescue in zebrafish using a self-healing MP. (a) Treatment procedures. (b) Spontaneous contraction of embryos studied at the stage of 18 somites. (c) Coiling contractions within 2 min counted at 24 hpf. (d) The hatching rate of the embryos estimated at 48 hpf, which serves as the indicator for the rescue of the nervous function. Here WT is a wild-type blank control and EtOH is an untreated damaged group [reprinted with permission from ref. 269. Copyright (2015) John Wiley and Sons]. 
It is also worth noting the self-healing MP based on CH and oxidized sodium alginate, which was developed for the transfer of neural stem cells (NSCs) to the central nervous system (Fig. 66).269 It is important that the stiffness of the hydrogel can be precisely controlled in the range from 100 to 1000 Pa, which allows one to fine tune the growth and differentiation of the rat NSCs. The feasibility of this system for CNS cell-based therapy has also been demonstrated by uniform distribution of cells after the injection of the NSC-loaded hydrogels into the mice brains.
 Fig. 66  The expression of important neural markers from the encapsulated NSCs is shown here [reprinted with permission from ref. 269. Copyright (2015) John Wiley and Sons]. 
Calcium carbonate nanoparticles were introduced into the alginate-PAA hydrogel to create an ionic conductor (Fig. 67).272 In this system, the self-healing properties are due to the ionic interactions between Ca2+ and the negatively charged alginate and PAA chains. In addition, Ca2+ ions give the system ionic conductivity, so the integration of these ionic conductors with a dielectric layer allows one to create a self-healing capacitor. The developed device was used to detect human motion and measure blood pressure through area-facilitated changes in the capacitance. It is important that this device also exhibited the properties of self-healing due to the self-healing ionic conductor, and mimicked important properties such as self-healing, elasticity, and deformability of natural skin.
 Fig. 67  (top) Photographs of a sensor attached to a bending finger, and a change in capacitance with the movement of a finger. (bottom) Real-time capacitance measurements from a blood-pressure sensor as pressure rises and falls [reprinted with permission from ref. 272. Copyright (2017) John Wiley and Sons]. 
6. Conclusions
As can be seen from the contents of this review, the current stage of the development of self-healing and shape memory metallopolymers has reached its peak in the accumulation of experimental facts and their theoretical interpretation and generalization; all major research groups are involved in this promising area of modern coordination chemistry. MPs have shown great potential as self-healing and shape-memory materials due to their unique optical, electrochemical, and magnetic properties. The incorporation of self-healing and shape memory MPs in the design and development of electronic devices is a promising strategy to synergize the reliability and longevity of such devices.
7. Perspectives
How do we see the development of this interesting and promising area of using metallopolymers?
First of all, it should be noted that the range of MPs used for these purposes is quite wide and is not limited to the examples given here. A huge selection of MPs with a wide arsenal of synthetic strategies for their preparation, the simplicity of many approaches, scalability and an acceptable price/quality ratio provide a methodological platform for creating promising self-healing and shape memory MPs. It is important to develop MPs whose polymer chains include non-traditional heteroatoms, for example, selenium or tellurium. In addition, several new approaches have been studied in the last decade, and one can expect that the development will continue on a high level. Among the design strategies for self-healing metallopolymers, the use of enthalpically and/or entropically favored M–L interactions, which can usually occur spontaneously, should be noted. This is favorable for the development of metallopolymers that can be self-healed without any external stimuli. Equally important is the combination of thermodynamic stability and kinetic lability of M–L bonds for designing self-healing metallopolymers. Finally, it is important to include a variety of functions in the structure of the metallopolymer to expand the areas of their practical use.
However, the mechanical stability of such systems has come to the fore as they are characterized by poor mechanical properties at very low values of the E-module. Thus, the study of self-healing MPs should be focused on a combination of high mechanical stability and excellent self-healing properties. Many strategies have been applied to improve mechanical properties, including tensile strength, compressive strength, and impact strength, to create strong metallopolymers that can also be used as self-healing and shape memory polymers. An example is the shape memory metallopolymers that have two different cross-links that form a physical network or a chemical network, one of which is used to fix temporary shapes and the other to preserve the original shapes. Thus, reversible switches used for shape memory effect can also play an important role in enhancing the viscosity of metallopolymers. According to a similar energy dissipation mechanism, building double/triple cross-links in one network is another effective approach for creating self-healing and shape memory metallopolymers with good mechanical properties.
Despite their enormous potential, commercialization of the proposed MPs is still far from reality. It is of interest to introduce self-healing properties into some commercially available metallopolymers. In fact, there are still some problems that must be overcome in order to begin the effective technological development of such systems. In particular, self-healing and shape memory MPs must be improved toward achieving better mechanical properties. An important problem is the development of a standard methodology for characterizing such MPs, since each sample is tested in its own way and therefore it is difficult to compare different types of MPs. Unfortunately, for many self-healing and shape memory MPs the exact mechanism of action and behavior is not fully understood. Additional problems arise because of the requirements for precise control and initiation of such systems. An example is self-healing MPs with “embodied intelligence” that can detect damage, report it, healing or adjust the properties and structure of materials to mitigate damage and avoid breakdowns or future damage.
One development over the years is the combination of the effect of shape memory with self-healing, which can be broadly divided into two strategies: Close-then-Heal (CTH)273–278 and Shape Memory Assisted Self-Healing (SMASH).113,279–284 CTH is suitable for macroscopic crack closure, which requires preliminary programming of the needs of the shape memory component, while SMASH is more suitable for microscopic crack closure, which does not require preliminary programming. In general, in the CTH method, the shape memory polymer only plays the role of crack closure while the healing action is triggered by dispersed microcapsules or other types of healing agents. However, in the SMASH method, the shape memory polymer helps in crack closure and healing is brought about by suitable chemistry by the SMP itself. As a typical example, we note self-healing and shape memory MPs based on two types of bonds: dynamic reversible M–L coordination bonds and irreversible covalent bonds (Fig. 68).285 MPs consisted of a four-armed PEG modified with DOPA terminal groups with Fe3+ ions. At various pH values, MPs showed an adjustable shape memory property and an adjustable one. In particular, at pH = 9, bis- and tris-catechol–Fe3+ coordination (without mono-coordination) is formed, and the MPs have the properties of self-healing and shape memory, as well as excellent mechanical properties.
 Fig. 68  Synthesis of the self-healing and shape memory MP. (A) Synthesis of the 4-armed PEG. (B) The formation of MPs with self-healing capacity regulated by the Fe3+ coordination and pH-induced shape memory [reproduced from ref. 285 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry]. 
In addition, to date, as a rule, it is impossible to recognize correlations between the content, structural features and properties of MPs, which largely hinders the scientifically based approach to structuring these systems and predicting their promising properties. Therefore, still some important challenges have to be overcome. In particular, the development toward multifunctional self-healing and shape memory MPs will be a major trend in the next years. Advancements in these areas could provide significant benefits to the robustness and damage tolerance of diverse MPs, enabling new generations of human-compatible electronics and robotics for applications.
Abbreviations

AAAcrylic acid
AAmAcrylamide
AdAdamantane
ANAcrylonitrile
BA
n-Butyl acrylate
BCPBlock copolymer
Bpy2,2′-Bipyridine
β-CDβ-Cyclodextrin
CHChitosan
CNCCellulose nanocrystal
CNTCarbon nanotube
CTHClose-then-Heal
DCDouble cross-linked network
DMSODimethyl sulfoxide
DNDouble network
DOPA3,4-Dihydroxyphenylalanine
DPDegree of polymerization
ENREpoxidized natural rubber
EtBip2,6-Bis(1′-ethylbenzimidazolyl)pyridine
FcFerrocene
HAHyaluronic acid
HisHistidine
LLigand
MMetal
Mebip2,6-Bis(1′-methylbenzimidazolyl)pyridine
MPMetallopolymer
NBRNitrile rubber
NIPAM
N-Isopropylacrylamide
NIRNear infrared
PAAPolyacrylic acid
PBCAPoly(butadiene-co-acrylonitrile)
PCLPoly(ε-caprolactone)
PDAPolydopamine
PDMSPolydimethylsiloxane
pdcaPyridine-2,6-dicarboxamide
PEGPoly(ethylene glycol)
PPOPoly(propylene oxide)
PpyPolypyrrole
PSPolystyrene
PUPolyurethane
SEMScanning electron microscopy
SHPSelf-healing polymer
SMASHShape Memory Assisted Self-Healing
SMPShape memory polymer
SNSingle network
TENGTriboelectric nanogenerator
TIATriazole
tpy2,2′,6′,2′′-Terpyridine
UPy2-Ureido-4[1H]pyrimidinone

Conflicts of interest
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.
Acknowledgements
The reported study was funded by RFBR and DST according to the research project no. 19-53-45025.
References

          A. L. Yarin, M. W. Lee, S. An and S. S. Yoon, Self-Healing Nanotextured Vascular Engineering Materials, Springer,  2019 Search PubMed .
P. F. Zhang and G. Q. Li, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2016, 57, 32–63 CrossRef .
L. M. de Espinosa, G. L. Fiore, C. Weder, E. J. Foster and Y. C. Simon, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2015, 49–50, 60–78 CrossRef .
X. K. D. Hillewaere and F. E. Du Prez, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2015, 49–50, 121–153 CrossRef .

          G. Wypych, Self-Healing Materials: Principles and Technology, ChemTech Publ.,  2017 Search PubMed .
F. K. Shi, M. Zhong, L. Q. Zhang, X. Y. Liu and X. M. Xie, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 6221–6227 RSC .
S. Thakur and N. Karak, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 12334–12342 RSC .
Q. Zheng, Z. Mac and S. Gong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3324–3334 RSC .
H. G. Wei, Y. R. Wang, J. Guo, N. Z. Shen, D. W. Jiang, X. Zhang, X. R. Yan, J. H. Zhu, Q. Wang, L. Shao, H. F. Lin, S. Y. Wei and Z. H. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 469–480 RSC .
M. Zhong, Y. T. Liu and X. M. Xie, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 4001–4008 RSC .
Q. Zhang, L. Liu, C. Pan and D. Li, J. Mater. Sci., 2018, 53, 27–46 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, X. Ding and M. W. Urban, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2015, 49–50, 34–59 CrossRef .
G. Thangavel, M. W. M. Tan and P. S. Lee, Nano Convergence, 2019, 6, 29 CrossRef PubMed .
O. Speck and T. Speck, Biomimetics, 2019, 4, 26 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Ohtake, Mol. Syst. Des. Eng., 2018, 3, 804–818 RSC .
H. I. Lee, V. Vahedi and P. Pasbakhsh, Polym. Rev., 2016, 56, 225–261 CrossRef .
Z. Sun, F. Lv, L. Cao, L. Liu, Y. Zhang and Z. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 7944–7948 CrossRef .
B. O. Okesola and D. K. Smith, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 4226–4251 RSC .
D. J. Cornwell and D. K. Smith, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 279–293 RSC .
P. S. Yavvari, S. Pal, S. Kumar, A. Kar, A. K. Awasthi, A. Naaz, A. Srivastava and A. Bajaj, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2017, 3, 3404–3413 CrossRef .

          S. Zechel, M. D. Hager and U. S. Schubert, Self-Healing Polymers: From Biological Systems to Highly Functional Polymers, in Functional Polymers, Polymers and Polymeric Composites: A Reference Series, ed. M. A. Jafar Mazumder, H. Sheardown and A. Al-Ahmed, Springer Nature,  2019, pp. 666–717 Search PubMed .

          M. J. Harrington, O. Speck, T. Speck, S. Wagner and R. Weinkamer, Biological Archetypes for Self-Healing Materials, in Self-healing Materials, ed. M. D. Hager, S. van der Zwaag and U. S. Schubert, Springer,  2016, pp. 307–344 Search PubMed .
Y. S. Ryu, K. W. Oh and S. H. Kim, Macromol. Res., 2016, 24, 874–880 CrossRef .

          M. D. Hager, S. van der Zwaag and U. S. Schubert, Characterization of Self-Healing Polymers: From Macroscopic Healing Tests to the Molecular Mechanism, in Self-healing Materials, ed. M. D. Hager, S. van der Zwaag and U. S. Schubert, Springer,  2016, pp. 113–142 Search PubMed .
M. Scheiner, T. J. Dickens and O. Okoli, Polymer, 2016, 83, 260–282 CrossRef .
M. U. Ocheje, B. P. Charron, A. Nyayachavadi and S. Rondeau-Gagné, Flexible Printed Electron., 2017, 2, 043002 CrossRef .
C. C. Su and J. S. Chen, Key Eng. Mater., 2017, 727, 482–489 Search PubMed .
V. K. Thakur and M. Kessler, Polymer, 2015, 69, 369–383 CrossRef .
J. Li, H. Ejima and N. Yoshie, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 19047–19053 CrossRef .
W. Xu, L. B. Huang and J. Hao, Nano Energy, 2017, 40, 399–407 CrossRef .
J. Kötteritzsch, M. D. Hager and U. S. Schubert, Polymer, 2015, 69, 321–329 CrossRef .
K. Urdl, A. Kandelbauer, W. Kern, U. Müller, M. Thebault and E. Zikulnig-Rusch, Prog. Org. Coat., 2017, 104, 232–249 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Schneiderman and M. A. Hillmyer, Macromolecules, 2017, 50, 3733–3749 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Imato and H. Otsuka, Dynamic Covalent Chemistry, Wiley,  2017 Search PubMed .
L. N. Neumann, C. Weder and S. Schrettl, Chimia, 2019, 73, 277–282 CrossRef CAS .
A. Campanella, D. Döhler and W. H. Binder, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2018, 39, 1700739 CrossRef .
Y. Yang and M. W. Urban, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1800384 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, X. Lu, S. Sun, C. Yu and H. Xia, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2019, 7, 4876–4926 RSC .
D. L. Taylor and M. in het Panhuis, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9060–9093 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shi, H. Carstensen, K. Hölzl, M. Lunzer, H. Li, J. Hilborn, A. Ovsianikov and D. A. Ossipov, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 5816–5823 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cui, Z. Ma, L. Pan, C. H. An, J. Liu, Y. F. Zhou and Y.-S. Li, Mater. Chem. Front., 2019, 3, 464–471 RSC .
Q. Zhao, H. J. Qi and T. Xie, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2015, 49–50, 79–120 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, H. M. Chen, D. Liu, W. X. Wang, Y. Liu and S. B. Zhou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 12988–12999 CrossRef CAS .
B. Q. Y. Chan, Z. W. K. Low, S. J. W. Heng, S. Y. Chan, C. Owh and X. J. Loh, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 10070–10087 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lu, X. Le, J. Zhang, Y. Huang and T. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 1284–1294 RSC .
M. D. Hager, S. Bode, C. Weber and U. S. Schubert, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2015, 49–50, 3–33 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, Y. G. Jia, C. Zhao and X. X. Zhu, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2019, 105, 100572 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Jose, J. J. George, S. Siengchin and J. Parameswaranpillai, Introduction to Shape-Memory Polymers, Polymer Blends and Composites: State of the Art, Opportunities, New Challenges and Future Outlook, in Shape Memory Polymers, Blends and Composites, ed. J. Parameswaranpillai, S. Siengchin, J. George and S. Jose, Springer,  2020, pp. 1–19 Search PubMed .

          Y. Zheng, J. Shen and S. Guo, Optical, Electrical, and Magnetic Properties of Shape-Memory Polymers, Polymer Blends, and Composites, in Shape Memory Polymers, Blends and Composites, ed. J. Parameswaranpillai, S. Siengchin, J. George and S. Jose, Springer,  2020, pp. 237–268 Search PubMed .
Q. Zhao, W. Zou, Y. Luo and T. Xie, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501297 CrossRef .
Y. Hu, C.-H. Lu, W. Guo, M. A. Aleman-Garcia, J. Ren and I. Willner, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 25, 6867–6874 CrossRef .
J. Ban, L. Mu, J. Yang, S. Chen and H. Zhuo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 14514–14518 RSC .
C. L. Lewis and E. M. Dell, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2016, 54, 1340–1364 CrossRef CAS .
H.-M. Chen, L. Wang and S.-B. Zhou, Chin. J. Polym. Sci., 2018, 36, 905–917 CrossRef CAS .
F. Pilate, A. Toncheva, P. Dubois and J. M. Raquez, Eur. Polym. J., 2016, 80, 268–294 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-C. Jiang, Y.-Y. Xiao, Y. Kang, M. Pan, B.-J. Li and S. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 20276–20293 CrossRef CAS .

          L. Ruiz-Rubio, L. Pérez-Álvarez, B. Artetxe, J. M. Gutiérrez-Zorrilla and J. L. Vilas, Shape Memory Hydrogels Based on Noncovalent Interactions, in Shape-Memory Materials, ed. A. E. Ares, InTech,  2018, pp. 95–111 Search PubMed .
H. Ullah, K. A. M. Azizli, Z. B. Man, M. B. C. Ismail and M. I. Khan, Polym. Rev., 2016, 56, 429–485 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Zhu, M. Z. Rong and M. Q. Zhang, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2015, 49, 175–220 CrossRef .
B. Jony, M. Thapa, S. B. Mulani and S. Roy, Smart Mater. Struct., 2019, 28, 025037 CrossRef .
A. Kotrotsos, P. Tsokanas, S. Tsantzalis and V. Kostopoulos, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2019, 136, 47478 CrossRef .
K. Pingkarawat, C. Dell'Olio, R. J. Varley and A. P. Mouritz, Polymer, 2016, 92, 153–163 CrossRef CAS .
J. Dahlke, S. Zechel, M. D. Hager and U. S. Schubert, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1800051 CrossRef .
D. B. Amabilino, D. K. Smith and J. W. Steed, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 2404–2420 RSC .
F. Wurthner, C. R. Saha-Moller, B. Fimmel, S. Ogi, P. Leowanawat and D. Schmidt, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 962–1052 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Krieg, M. M. C. Bastings, P. Besenius and B. Rybtchinski, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 2414–2477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. D. Jones and J. W. Steed, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 6546–6596 RSC .
Z. P. Zhang, M. Z. Rong and M. Q. Zhang, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2018, 80, 39–93 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mukherjee, W. L. A. Brooks, Y. Q. Dai and B. S. Sumerlin, Polym. Chem., 2016, 7, 1971–1978 RSC .
L. Hu, X. Cheng and A. Zhang, J. Mater. Sci., 2015, 50, 2239–2246 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Neal, D. Mozhdehi and Z. Guan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4846–4850 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jiang, A. Bhaskaran, H. M. Aitken, I. C. G. Shackleford and L. A. Connal, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2019, 40, 10 Search PubMed .
P. Chakma and D. Konkolewicz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 9682–9695 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nevejans, N. Ballard, M. Fernández, B. Reck, S. J. García and J. M. Asua, Polymer, 2019, 28, 121670 CrossRef .
L. Ling, J. Li, G. Zhang, R. Sun and C.-P. Wong, Macromol. Res., 2018, 26, 365–373 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, Q. Zhao, L. Yang, W. Zou, X. Xi and T. Xie, ACS Macro Lett., 2016, 5, 805–808 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Lee and S. H. Cha, Macromol. Res., 2017, 25, 640–647 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, N. Zhang, B. Zhang, B. Zhang and J. Song, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 44706–44715 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gyarmati, B.Á Szilágyi and A. Szilágyi, Eur. Polym. J., 2017, 93, 642–669 CrossRef CAS .
A. Feula, A. Pethybridge, I. Giannakopoulos, X. Tang, A. Chippindale, C. R. Siviour, C. P. Buckley, I. W. Hamley and W. Hayes, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 6132–6141 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, C. S. Tan, Z. Yu, Y. Lan, C. Abell and O. A. Scherman, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604951 CrossRef .
N. Roy, B. Bruchmann and J.-M. Lehn, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 3786–3807 RSC .

          Q. Zhang, L. Wang and X. Jia, Self-Healing Properties of PU and PU Nanocomposites, in Polyurethane Polymers: Composites and Nanocomposites, ed. S. Thomas, J. Datta, J. Haponiuk and A. Reghunadhan, Elsevier,  2017, pp. 337–364 Search PubMed .
H. M. van der Kooij, A. Susa, S. J. Garcia, S. van der Zwaag and J. Sprakel, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701017 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, X. Liu, S. Li, T. Li, Y. Song, Z. Li, W. Zhang and J. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 29120–29129 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Zhu, Q. Ye, X. M. Lu and Q. H. Lu, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 5086–5092 RSC .
L. Liu, C. Pan, L. Zhang and B. Guo, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2016, 37, 1603–1610 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Zhu, H. Y. Xuan, J. Y. Ren and L. Q. Ge, Soft Matter, 2015, 11, 8452–8459 RSC .
Y. Ren, R. Y. Lou, X. C. Liu, M. Gao, H. Z. Zheng, T. Yang, H. G. Xie, W. T. Yu and X. J. Ma, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 6273–6276 RSC .
Y. Yang and M. W. Urban, Polym. Chem., 2017, 8, 303–309 RSC .
Y. Takashima, K. Yonekura, K. Koyanagi, K. Iwaso, M. Nakahata, H. Yamaguchi and A. Harada, Macromolecules, 2017, 50, 4144–4150 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mauro, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2018, 2018, 2090–2100 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, Y. Zhang and W. Liu, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2017, 71, 1–25 CrossRef .

          A. Winter and U. S. Schubert, Block Copolymers with Element Blocks: The Metal-Bisterpyridine Linkage, in New Polymeric Materials Based on Element-Blocks, ed. Y. Chujo, Springer,  2019, pp. 307–346 Search PubMed .
S.-Y. Wang, J.-Y. Huang, Y.-P. Liang, Y.-J. He, Y.-S. Chen, Y.-K. C. Bentz and S. M. Cohen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 14992–15001 CrossRef .
A. Levy, R. Feinstein and C. E. Diesendruck, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 7256–7260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-L. Rao, A. Chortos, R. Pfattner, F. Lissel, Y.-C. Chiu, V. Feig, J. Xu, T. Kurosawa, X. Gu, C. Wang, M. He, J. W. Chung and Z. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 6020–6027 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mozhdehi, J. A. Neal, S. C. Grindy, Y. Cordeau, S. Ayala, N. Holten-Andersen and Z. Guan, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 6310–6321 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Li, C. Wang, C. Keplinger, J.-L. Zuo, L. Jin, Y. Sun, P. Zheng, Y. Cao, F. Lissel, C. Linder, X.-Z. You and Z. Bao, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 618–624 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Grindy, R. Learsch, D. Mozhdehi, J. Cheng, D. G. Barrett, Z. Guan, P. B. Messersmith and N. Holten-Andersen, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1210–1216 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zoetebier, M. Hempeniusand and G. Vancso, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 636–639 RSC .
Y. Shi, M. Wang, C. Ma, Y. Wang, X. Li and G. Yu, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6276–6281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, Z. Wang and H. Xia, Polym. Chem., 2017, 8, 2581–2585 RSC .
B. Sandmann, B. Happ, S. Kupfer, F. H. Schacher, M. D. Hager and U. S. Schubert, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2015, 36, 604–609 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, G. Zhang, N. Zheng, Q. Zhao and T. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 12599–12602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Krogsgaard, V. Nue and H. Birkedal, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 844–857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Sutar and T. K. Maji, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 8055–8074 RSC .
P. Dastidar, S. Ganguly and K. Sarkar, Chem. – Asian J., 2016, 11, 2484–2498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Cametti, M. Cetina and Z. Džolić, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 7223–7229 RSC .
L. Arnedo-Sanchez, N. Nonappa, S. Bhowmik, S. Hietala, R. Puttreddy, M. Lahtinen, L. De Cola and K. Rissanen, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 7309–7316 RSC .
M. Häring and D. D. Díaz, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 13068–13081 RSC .
C.-H. Li and J.-L. Zuo, Adv. Mater., 2019 DOI:10.1002/adma.201903762 .
I. E. Uflyand and G. I. Dzhardimalieva, J. Coord. Chem., 2018, 71, 1272–1356 CrossRef CAS .

          G. I. Dzhardimalieva and I. E. Uflyand, Chemistry of Polymeric Metal Chelates, Springer,  2018 Search PubMed .
R. L. N. Hailes, A. M. Oliver, J. Gwyther, G. R. Whittell and I. Manners, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 5358–5407 RSC .
Y. Wang, D. Astruc and A. S. Abd-El-Aziz, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 558–636 RSC .
K. Y. Zhang, S. Liu, Q. Zhao and W. Huang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2016, 319, 180–195 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Bentz and S. M. Cohen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 14992–15001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, P. Yang, P. Pageni and C. Tang, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2017, 38, 1700109 CrossRef PubMed .
R. A. Musgrave, A. D. Russell, D. W. Hayward, G. R. Whittell, P. G. Lawrence, P. J. Gates, J. C. Green and I. Manners, Nat. Chem., 2017, 9, 743–750 CrossRef CAS .
A. Winter and U. S. Schubert, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 5311–5357 RSC .
A. Abd-El-Aziz and C. Agatemor, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym. Mater., 2018, 28, 369–382 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhu, Y. Sha, J. Yan, P. Pageni, M. A. Rahman, Y. Yan and C. Tang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4329 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhao, X. Liu, L. Zhang, G. Qiu, D. Astruc and H. Gu, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2017, 337, 34–79 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, X. Wang and Z. Guo, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 2622–2631 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, W. Wei and H. Xiong, Soft Matter, 2016, 12, 1411–1418 RSC .
A. Alkan and F. R. Wurm, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2016, 37, 1482–1493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wang, Z. Gao, M. Yuan, J. Zhu and F. Wang, Polym. Chem., 2016, 7, 3664–3668 RSC .
P. Wang, H. Wang, Y. Fang, H. Li, J. He, Y. Ji, Y. Li, Q. Xu, J. Zheng and J. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 32930–32938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, E. J. Choi, I. Varga, P. M. Claesson, S.-H. Yun and C. Song, Polym. Chem., 2018, 9, 1032–1039 RSC .
M. Garah, E. Borre, A. Ciesielski, A. Dianat, R. Gutierrez, G. Cuniberti, S. Bellemin-Laponnaz, M. Mauro and P. Samori, Small, 2017, 13, 1701790 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Aliprandi, M. Mauro and L. De Cola, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 10 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Li, G. S. M. Tong, Q. Wan, G. Cheng, W.-Y. Tong, W.-H. Ang, W.-L. Kwong and C.-M. Che, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 1653–1673 RSC .
L. Herkert, A. Sampedro and G. Fernandez, CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 8813–8822 RSC .
L. Wang and Q. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 1044–1097 RSC .
P. Chen, Q. Li, S. Grindy and N. Holten-Andersen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 11590–11593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Shi, P. Ding, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, D. Ossipov and J. Hilborn, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2019, 40, 1800837 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Rahim, S. L. Kristufek, S. Pan, J. J. Richardson and F. Caruso, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 1904–1927 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. N. Xia, X. M. Xiong, J. Wang, M. Z. Rong and M. Q. Zhang, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 2736–2742 RSC .
W.-C. Huang, F. Ali, J. Zhao, K. Rhee, C. Mou and C. J. Bettinger, Biomacromolecules, 2017, 18, 1162–1171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Andersen, Y. Chen and H. Birkedal, Biomimetics, 2019, 4, 30 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Jia, Y. Zeng, P. Tang, D. Gan, W. Xing, Y. Hou, K. Wang, C. Xie and X. Lu, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 5625–5632 CrossRef CAS .
Y. K. Jeong and J. W. Choi, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 8364–8373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Filippidi, T. R. Cristiani, C. D. Eisenbach, J. H. Waite, J. N. Israelachvili, B. K. Ahn and M. T. Valentine, Science, 2017, 358, 502–505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Azevedo, A. M. S. Costa, A. Andersen, I. S. Choi, H. Birkedal and J. F. Mano, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700759 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Han, X. Wu, X. Zhang and C. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 20106–20114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Cheng, M. Yan, L. Cao, J. Huang, X. Cao, D. Yuan and Y. Chen, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 3912–3920 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xu, D. Sheng, X. Liu, F. Ji, Y. Zhou, L. Dong and H. Wu, Polym. Int., 2019, 68, 1084–1090 CrossRef CAS .
J.-C. Lai, L. Li, D.-P. Wang, M.-H. Zhang, S.-R. Mo, X. Wang, K.-Y. Zeng, C.-H. Li, Q. Jiang and X.-Z. You, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2725 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lei, W. Huang, Q. Huang and A. Zhang, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 261–268 RSC .
H. Ding, X. Liang, X. N. Zhang, Z. L. Wu, Z. Li and G. Sun, Polymer, 2019, 171, 201–210 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dai, W. Zhang, L. Sun, X. Wang, W. Jiang, Z.-w. Zhu, H.-b. Zhang and C.-c. Yang, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 467–472 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Liu, S. Liang, Y. W. Huang, C. Y. Hu and J. X. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 12088–12091 RSC .
D.-P. Wang, J.-C. Lai, H.-Y. Lai, S.-R. Mo, K.-Y. Zeng, C.-H. Li and J.-L. Zuo, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 3232–3242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Pignanelli, B. Billet, M. Straeten, M. Prado, K. Schlingman, M. J. Ahamed and S. Rondeau-Gagné, Soft Matter, 2019, 15, 7654–7662 RSC .
D.-C. Jeong, J. Lee, Y. H. Ro and C. Song, Polym. Chem., 2017, 38, 1923–1931 RSC .
Y. Li, J. Guo, B. Dai, L. Geng, F. Shen, Y. Zhang and X. Yu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 521, 190–196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yang, A. Wang, L. Zhang, X. Zhou, G. Yang, Y. Li, Y. Zhang, B. Zhang, J. Song and Y. Feng, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 15173–15179 RSC .
Y. Zhan, S. Hiraoka, Y.-H. Liu, S.-M. Peng and Y.-T. Chan, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 9274–9284 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Bode, M. Enke, R. K. Bose, F. H. Schacher, S. J. Garcia, S. van der Zwaag, M. D. Hager and U. S. Schubert, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 22145–22153 RSC .

          S. Bode, M. Enke, M. Hernandez, R. Bose, A. Grande, S. van der Zwaag, U. Schubert, S. Garcia and M. Hager, Characterization of Self-Healing Polymers: From Macroscopic Healing Tests to the Molecular Mechanism, in Self-healing Materials, ed. M. Hager, S. van der Zwaag and U. Schubert, Springer,  2016, pp. 113–142 Search PubMed .
S. Götz, M. Abend, S. Zechel, M. D. Hager and U. S. Schubert, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2019, 136, 47064 CrossRef .
E. Borré, J.-F. Stumbé, S. Bellemin-Laponnaz and M. Mauro, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 1313–1317 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Borre, J.-F. Stumbe, S. Bellemin-Laponnaz and M. Mauro, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 8344–8347 RSC .
R. K. Bose, M. Enke, A. M. Grande, S. Zechel, F. H. Schacher, M. D. Hager, S. J. Garcia, U. S. Schubert and S. van der Zwaag, Eur. Polym. J., 2017, 93, 417–427 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, H. Moon, K. Paeng and C. Song, Polymers, 2018, 10, 1173 CrossRef PubMed .
J. F. Mei, X. Y. Jia, J. C. Lai, Y. Sun, C. H. Li, J. H. Wu, Y. Cao, X. Z. You and Z. Bao, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2016, 37, 1667–1675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, X. Zhu, C. H. Li, Y. Cai, X. Jia and Z. Bao, Macromolecules, 2019, 52, 660–668 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Mo, J. C. Lai, K. Y. Zeng, D. P. Wang, C. H. Li and J. L. Zuo, Polym. Chem., 2019, 10, 362–371 RSC .
S. Liu, K. Li, I. Hussain, O. Oderinde, F. Yao, J. Zhang and G. Fu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 6632–6638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sautaux, L. M. de Espinosa, S. Balog and C. Weder, Macromolecules, 2018, 51, 5867–5874 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Jia, J. F. Mei, J. C. Lai, C. H. Li and X. Z. You, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 8928–8930 RSC .
X. Y. Jia, J. F. Mei, J. C. Lai, C. H. Li and X. Z. You, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2016, 37, 952–956 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, M. Chen, Y. Niu, Q. Tao, L. Bai, H. Chen and Z. Cheng, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 47316–47323 RSC .
M. Chen, W. Wang, H. Chen, L. Bai, Z. Xue, D. Wei, H. Yang and Y. Niu, Macromol. Res., 2019, 27, 96–104 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, J. Tan, Z. Guan and Q. Zhang, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2019, 40, 1800909 CrossRef PubMed .
N. B. Tran, J. R. Moon, Y. S. Jeon, J. Kim and J.-H. Kim, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2017, 295, 655–664 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cui, Y. Song, J. P. Wang, J. K. Wang, Q. Zhou, T. Qi and G. L. Li, Polymer, 2019, 174, 143–149 CrossRef CAS .
I. Oh, S. I. Jeon, I. J. Chung and C. H. Ahn, Macromol. Res., 2019, 27, 435–443 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dutta and R. K. Das, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2019, 304, 1900195 CrossRef .
J. H. Xu, W. Chen, C. Wang, M. Zheng, C. D. Ding, W. Jiang, L. H. Tan and J. J. Fu, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 6026–6039 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, J. Zhu, J. Yu and Z. Hu, Mater. Today Commun., 2017, 13, 282–289 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Moon, Y. S. Jeon, Y. J. Kim and J. H. Kim, J. Polym. Res., 2019, 26, 12 CrossRef .
S. Zechel, M. D. Hager, T. Priemel and M. J. Harrington, Biomimetics, 2019, 4, 20 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Enke, S. Bode, J. Vitz, F. H. Schacher, M. J. Harrington, M. D. Hager and U. S. Schubert, Polymer, 2015, 69, 274–282 CrossRef CAS .
M. Enke, F. Jehle, S. Bode, J. Vitz, M. J. Harrington, M. D. Hager and U. S. Schubert, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2017, 218, 1600458 CrossRef .
B. Sharma, A. Singh, T. K. Sarma, N. Sardana and A. Pal, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 6427–6432 RSC .
X. Liu, G. Su, Q. Guo, C. Lu, T. Zhou, C. Zhou and X. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706658 CrossRef .
L. Zeng, M. Song, J. Gu, Z. Xu, B. Xue, Y. Li and Y. Cao, Biomimetics, 2019, 4, 36 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Tunn, M. J. Harrington and K. G. Blank, Biomimetics, 2019, 4, 25 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, C. Xie, C. Yu, G. Fei, Z. Wang and H. Xia, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2018, 39, 1700678 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhang, Z. Liu, X. Wu, Q. Guan, S. Chen, L. Sun, Y. Guo, S. Wang, J. Song, E. M. Jeffries, C. He, F.-L. Qing, X. Bao and Z. You, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901402 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wu, J. Wang, J. Huang and S. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 7387–7396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Gai, L. Liu, C. H. Li, R. K. Bose, D. Li and N. Guo, ChemPlusChem, 2019, 84, 432–440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. F. Zhang, X. T. Liu, K. Yang and S. G. Zhao, Macromol. Res., 2019, 27, 803–810 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tan, Q. Lyu, Z. Xie, M. Li, K. Wang, K. Wang, B. Xiong, L. Zhang and J. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 31, 1805496 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Miyamae, M. Nakahata, Y. Takashima and A. Harada, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 8984–8987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ren, H. Xuan, W. Dai, Y. Zhu and L. Ge, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 448, 609–617 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tang, X. Chen, L. Wang and G. Qu, Polym. Chem., 2017, 8, 4680–4687 RSC .
L. Tang, S. Liao and J. Qu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 27365–27373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, M. Li, L. Cheng and T. Li, Polym. Chem., 2017, 8, 6527–6533 RSC .
J. Zhang, M. Li, L. Cheng and T. Li, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2018, 219, 1700430 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, H. Peng, P. Wu, H. Liu and J. Zhang, Polymer, 2019, 179, 121616 CrossRef CAS .
S. Götz, R. Geitner, M. Abend, M. Siegmann, S. Zechel, J. Vitz, S. Gräfe, M. Schmitt, J. Popp, M. D. Hager and U. S. Schubert, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2018, 39, 1800495 CrossRef PubMed .
R. K. Bose, N. Hohlbein, S. J. Garcia, A. M. Schmidt and S. van der Zwaag, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 1697–1704 RSC .
N. Hohlbein, A. Shaaban, A. R. Bras, W. Pyckhout-Hintzen and A. M. Schmidt, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 21005–21017 RSC .
R. K. Bose, N. Hohlbein, S. J. Garcia, A. M. Schmidt and S. van der Zwaag, Polymer, 2015, 69, 228–232 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, W. Niu, S. Zhang, S. Wu, W. Ma and B. Tang, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2019, 220, 1800571 CrossRef .
B. Fu, B. Cheng, X. Bao, Z. Wang, Y. Shangguan and Q. Hu, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2019, 136, 47885 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, Y. Lei, C. Zhou, B. Wu, Y. Jiang and J. Lei, Eur. Polym. J., 2019, 118, 474–480 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. R. Amaral and G. Pasparakis, Polym. Chem., 2017, 8, 6464–6484 RSC .
L. Zhai, A. Narkar and K. Ahn, Nano Today, 2019 DOI:10.1016/j.nantod.2019.100826 .
M. Wei, Y. Gao, X. Li and M. J. Serpe, Polym. Chem., 2017, 8, 127–143 RSC .
J. M. Korde and B. Kandasubramanian, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 9709–9757 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rosenfeld and P. A. Levkin, Adv. Biosyst., 2019, 3, 1800293 CrossRef .
M.-M. Song, Y.-M. Wang, X.-Y. Liang, X.-Q. Zhang, S. Zhang and B.-J. Li, Soft Matter, 2019, 15, 6615–6625 RSC .
T. Yan, K. Schroeter, F. Herbst, W. H. Binder and T. Thurn-Albrecht, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 32356 CrossRef PubMed .
A. J. McConnell, C. S. Wood, P. P. Neelakandan and J. R. Nitschke, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 7729–7793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tie, H. Liu, J. Lv, B. Wang, Z. Mao, L. Zhang, Y. Zhong, X. Feng, X. Sui and H. Xu, Soft Matter, 2019, 15, 7404–7411 RSC .
M. Wang, L. Wang, Y. Xu, L. Fu and H. Yang, Soft Mater., 2019, 17, 342–349 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, J. L. Hu, C. Zhang, J. Han, Y. Wang and B. Kumar, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 97–100 RSC .
J. Odent, J. M. Raquez, P. Dubois and E. P. Giannelis, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 13357–13363 RSC .
B. T. Michal, B. M. McKenzie, S. E. Felder and S. J. Rowan, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 3239–3246 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, Z. Wen, Y. Hui, M. Yang, K. Yang, Q. Zhou and Y. Wang, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 4177–4184 RSC .
Z. Q. Ren, Y. Y. Zhang, Y. M. Li, B. Xu and W. G. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 6347–6354 RSC .
W. Feng, W. F. Zhou, Z. H. Dai, A. Yasin and H. Y. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 1924–1931 RSC .
W. Feng, W. F. Zhou, S. D. Zhang, Y. J. Fan, A. Yasin and H. Y. Yang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 81784–81789 RSC .
X. X. Le, W. Lu, J. Zheng, D. Y. Tong, N. Zhao, C. X. Ma, H. Xiao, J. W. Zhang, Y. J. Huang and T. Chen, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 6715–6720 RSC .
H. Xiao, W. Lu, X. X. Le, C. X. Ma, Z. W. Li, J. Zheng, J. W. Zhang, Y. J. Huang and T. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 13292–13295 RSC .
Y. Vidavsky, S. Bae and M. N. Silberstein, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2018, 56, 1117–1122 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zou, H. Chen, S. Chen and H. Zhuo, J. Mater. Sci., 2019, 54, 5136–5148 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Yu, Y. Li, Z. P. Feng, Z. H. Zhang, P. Li, Y. Chen, S. S. Chen, P. W. Li and Z. M. Yang, eXPRESS Polym. Lett., 2019, 13, 785–793 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Cavicchi, M. Pantoja and M. Cakmak, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2016, 54, 1389–1396 CrossRef CAS .
R. Dolog and R. A. Weiss, Polymer, 2017, 128, 128–134 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhao, F. Peng, K. A. Cavicchi, M. Cakmak, R. A. Weiss and B. D. Vogt, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 27239–27249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xie, C. Huang, F. Wang, L. Huang, R. A. Weiss, J. Leng and Y. Liu, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 7322–7330 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bai, J. Zhang, D. Wen, B. Yuan, P. Gong, J. Liu and X. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 20723–20732 RSC .

          L. Santo, F. Quadrini, D. Bellisario and L. Iorio, Applications of Shape-Memory Polymers, and Their Blends and Composites, in Shape Memory Polymers, Blends and Composites, ed. J. Parameswaranpillai, S. Siengchin, J. George and S. Jose, Springer,  2020, pp. 311–329 Search PubMed .

          J. Vohlídal and M. Hissler, Metallo-Supramolecular Polymers, in Smart Inorganic Polymers: Synthesis, Properties, and Emerging Applications in Materials and Life Sciences, ed. E. Hey-Hawkins and M. Hissler, Wiley,  2019, pp. 141–162 Search PubMed .
C. Fernandes, G. B. Heggannavar, C. Fernandes, G. B. Heggannavar, M. Y. Kariduraganavar, G. R. Mitchell, N. Alves and P. Morouço, Appl. Mech. Mater., 2019, 890, 237–247 Search PubMed .

          L. He and W. Bu, Synthesis, Design, Characterization, and Application of Metallo-supramolecular Polymers, in Non-covalent Interactions in the Synthesis and Design of New Compounds, ed. A. M. Maharramov, K. T. Mahmudov, M. N. Kopylovich and A. J. L. Pombeiro, Wiley,  2016, pp. 283–311 Search PubMed .
J. Xiang, C.-L. Ho and W.-Y. Wong, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 6905–6930 RSC .
K. Wei, Z. Gao, H. Liu, X. Wu, F. Wang and H. Xu, ACS Macro Lett., 2017, 6, 1146–1150 CrossRef CAS .
S. Elmas, W. Beelders, S. J. Bradley, R. Kroon, G. Laufersky, M. Andersson and T. Nann, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 10206–10214 CrossRef CAS .
M. H.-Y. Chan, M. Ng, S. Y.-L. Leung, W. H. Lam and V. W.-W. Yam, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 8639–8645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Schulze, A. Winter, C. Friebe, E. Birckner and U. S. Schubert, ACS Macro Lett., 2017, 6, 181–184 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dag, M. Callari, H. Lu and M. H. Stenzel, Polym. Chem., 2016, 7, 1031–1036 RSC .
M.-H. Wei, B. Li, R. L. A. David, S. C. Jones, V. Sarohia, J. A. Schmitigal and J. A. Kornfield, Science, 2015, 350, 72–75 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Talebian, M. Mehrali, N. Taebnia, C. P. Pennisi, F. B. Kadumudi, J. Foroughi, M. Hasany, M. Nikkhah, M. Akbari, G. Orive and A. Dolatshahi-Pirouz, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1801664 CrossRef PubMed .
M. D. Bartlett, M. D. Dickey and C. Majidi, NPG Asia Mater., 2019, 11, 21 CrossRef .
S. Latif, S. Amin, S. S. Haroon and I. A. Sajjad, Mater. Res. Express, 2019, 6, 062001 CrossRef CAS .
T.-P. Huynh, P. Sonar and H. Haick, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604973 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Z. Zhang, Y. Wang, T. Cheng, W. Y. Lai, H. Pang and W. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5181–5199 RSC .
J. Xu, S. Wang, G.-J. N. Wang, C. Zhu, S. Luo, L. Jin, X. Gu, S. Chen, V. R. Feig, J. W. F. To, S. Rondeau-Gagne, J. Park, B. C. Schroeder, C. Lu, J. Y. Oh, Y. Wang, Y.-H. Kim, H. Yan, R. Sinclair, D. Zhou, G. Xue, B. Murmann, C. Linder, W. Cai, J. B.-H. Tok, J. W. Chung and Z. Bao, Science, 2017, 355, 59–64 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Larson, B. Peele, S. Li, S. Robinson, M. Totaro, L. Beccai, B. Mazzolai and R. Shepherd, Science, 2016, 351, 1071–1074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Kim, H. H. Lee, K. H. Oh and J. Y. Sun, Science, 2016, 353, 682–687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Segev-Bar, G. Konvalina and H. Haick, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1779–1784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Segev-Bar, N. Bachar, Y. Wolf, B. Ukrainsky, L. Sarraf and H. Haick, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2016, 2, 1600206 CrossRef .
H. Jin, T.-P. Huynh and H. Haick, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4194–4202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Kahn, O. Lavie, M. Paz, Y. Segev and H. Haick, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7023–7028 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Feldner, M. Häring, S. Saha, J. Esquena, R. Benerjee and D. D. Diaz, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 3210–3217 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Lai, H. M. Wu, H. C. Lin, C. L. Chang, H.-H. Chou, Y.-C. Hsiao and Y.-C. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 40, 1904626 CrossRef .
S. Singh, A. Bhaduri, R. K. Tripathi, K. B. Thapa, R. Kumar and B. C. Yadav, Sol. Energy, 2019, 188, 278–290 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Darabi, A. Khosrozadeh, R. Mbeleck, Y. Liu, Q. Chang, J. Jiang, J. Cai, Q. Wang, G. Luo and M. Xing, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700533 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ma, P. She, K. Y. Zhang, H. Yang, Y. Qin, Z. Xu, S. Liu, Q. Zhao and W. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Dai, Q. Yu, Y. Tian, X. Xie, A. Song, F. Caruso, J. Hao and J. Cui, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 29305–29311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Shi, F. Wang, W. Zhu, Z. Xu, S. Fuchs, J. Hilborn, L. Zhu, Q. Ma, Y. Wang, X. Weng and D. A. Ossipov, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700591 CrossRef .
K. Zhang, Q. Feng, J. Xu, X. Xu, F. Tian, K. W. K. Yeung and L. Bian, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701642 CrossRef .
T. C. Tseng, L. Tao, F. Y. Hsieh, Y. Wei, I. M. Chiu and S. h. Hsu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3518–3524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Y. Hsieh, T. C. Tseng and S. H. Hsu, Neural Regener. Res., 2015, 10, 1922–1923 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wei, J. Y. Zhao, Y. M. Chen, P. B. Zhang and Q. Q. Zhang, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 37841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Lei, Q. K. Wang, S. T. Sun, W. C. Zhu and P. Y. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700321 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Zhang, W. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Y.-F. Zhang, H. Hingorani, Z. Liu, J. Liu and Q. Ge, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 10328–10336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, L. Cao, D. Yuan and Y. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 40996–41002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhang and G. Li, Polymer, 2015, 64, 29–38 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lu, J. Fan and G. Li, Polymer, 2016, 105, 10–18 CrossRef CAS .
M. Anthamatten, K. Cavicchi, G. Li and A. Wang, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2016, 54, 1319–1339 CrossRef .
P. Zhang, B. Ogunmekan, S. Ibekwe, D. Jerro, S.-S. Pang and G. Li, J. Intell. Mater. Syst. Struct., 2016, 27, 1792–1801 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yuan, V. S. Bonab, A. Patel and I. Manas-Zloczower, Polymer, 2018, 147, 196–201 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Menon, G. Madras and S. Bose, Polym. Chem., 2019, 10, 4370–4388 RSC .
N. Van Herck and F. E. Du Prez, Macromolecules, 2018, 51, 3405–3414 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, D. Davydovich, C. C. Hornat, X. Liu and M. W. Urban, Chem, 2018, 4, 1928–1936 CAS .
L. F. Fan, M. Z. Rong, M. Q. Zhang and X. D. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 38538–38546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-Y. Lai, H.-Q. Wang, J.-C. Lai and C.-H. Li, Molecules, 2019, 24, 3224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lu, T. Tian, S. Wu, T. Xiang and S. Zhou, Polym. Chem., 2019, 10, 1920–1929 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
Gulzhian I. Dzhardimalieva	Gulzhian I. Dzhardimalieva, Dr Sci. (Chem.), PhD is the Head of Laboratory, Institute of Problems of Chemical Physics Russian Academy of Sciences and Professor of Department of Applied Mechanics, Moscow Aviation Institute (National Research University). She received her PhD in 1987 from the Institute of Chemical Physics, RAS in Moscow, and her Doctorate in Chemistry in 2010 from Institute of Problems of Chemical Physics RAS in Chernogolovka. The scope of her scientific interest is: metal-containing monomers and polymers on their base, macromolecular metal carboxylates, coordination polymers, metallopolymer nanocomposites, and nanomaterials. She has been invited as a researcher of Auburn University, USA (2001), Warsaw Technology University, Poland (2002, 2011), Bremen University, Germany (2007), Turin University, Italy (2008), and Institute of Composite and Biomedical Materials CNR, Neapol, Italy (2011, 2013). She was issue editor of Journal of Inorganic and Organometallic Polymers and Materials (2016, Vol. 26, 6).
Bal C. Yadav	Dr Bal C. Yadav received his PhD degree in 2001 from Department of Physics, University of Lucknow, India. Currently, he is an Associate Professor/Coordinator of Department of Applied Physics, School for Physical Sciences in the Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar University, Lucknow. He is the recipient of the prestigious Young Scientist Award-2005 instituted by the State Council of Science and Technology. Also, Dr Yadav was selected in 2011 for Brain Pool International Fellowship of South Korea. His current research interests include the synthesis of metal oxide nanoparticles, metallopolymers, etc., characterization and their applications as sensors.
Shakti Singh	Shakti Singh enrolled himself at Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar University in 2013 to study applied physics. In 2017, he became MPh. He currently works as a researcher at Nanomaterials and Sensors Research Laboratory, Department of Physics, Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar University, Lucknow. His current research interests include nanotechnology, polymer thin films, sensors, and self-healing materials.
Igor E. Uflyand	Prof. Igor E. Uflyand, Dr Sci. (Chem.) is the Head of Chemistry Department, Southern Federal University, Rostov-on-Don, Russia. He was born in 1956 and graduated from Rostov State University, Department of Physical and Colloid Chemistry. Prof. Uflyand received his PhD in 1981 and his Doctorate in Chemistry in 1996 from the Rostov State University. He received the title of Professor in 1996. The scope of his scientific interest is: coordination and organometallic chemistry, metal chelate monomers and polymers on their basis, metal-containing polymers, catalysis by metal complexes, and nanomaterials.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of (A) self-healing and (B) shape memory effects for polymers. ©2018 L. Ruiz-Rubio, L. Pérez-Álvarez, B. Artetxe, J. M. Gutiérrez-Zorrilla and J. L. Vilas. Originally published in ref. 57 under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported license. Available from: DOI: 10.5772/intechopen.78013.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic representation of synthesis, types and applications of supramolecular metallopolymers [reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright (2018) Taylor & Francis].	 

 	Fig. 3  The main types of ligand systems used to produce self-healing and shape memory metallopolymers, as well for their application in various fields.	 

 	Fig. 4  Diagram of the process of recovering a copolymer binder in the Si anodes [reprinted with permission from ref. 143. Copyright (2019) American Chemical Society].	 

 	Fig. 5  High toughness DC/DN hydrogels based on the catechol–Fe(III) complexes and genipin-mediated covalent cross-links of CH. (a) Illustration of a concept leading to the DC and DN hydrogels. (b and c) Hydrogel robustness: (b) Images of two different hydrogels cross-linked with 0.5% (w/v) genipin:DN and 0.5% (w/v) genipin:SN before and after compression at 50% strain. (c) Typical compressive stress–strain curves for various hydrogels with 0.5% (w/v) genipin. (d and e) Self-healing test of hydrogels: (d) Images of the DN and (e) SN hydrogels before cutting with a blade (initial), cut (yellow arrow) and after resting for 5 min (recover) [reprinted with permission from ref. 145. Copyright (2017) John Wiley and Sons].	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) The cutting/healing process of the Fe3+/PDA@ENR elastomer. (b) Typical stress–strain curves of samples after being healed for a prescribed time at room temperature. The inset photos show the high stretchability of the self-healed sample (healing for 24 h). (c) Repeated self-healing ability of the Fe3+/PDA@ENR elastomer over several cutting/healing cycles. (d) Self-healing efficiency of an elastomer at various temperatures and in damp air for 12 h before self-healing and in water [reprinted with permission from ref. 146. Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society].	 

 	Fig. 7  Obtaining and characterization of the PDMS–COO–Zn polymer. (a) Synthesis and structure of the polymer. (b) Isothermal titration calorimetry data of PDMS–COO− with ZnCl2 in anhydrous ethanol at 25 °C. (c) Hot compressing of the powder lead to the block sample. (d) Schematic structure of the polymer network at various temperatures [reprinted from ref. 149 under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License].	 

 	Fig. 8  (left) Synthesis of a carboxyl-modified polydimethylsiloxane (CPDMS) and cross-linking through Al(III)–carboxylate coordination. (right) (a) Stress–strain curves for primary and healed Al(III)–CPDMS samples and (b) measurements of healing efficiency. (c) Stress relaxation curves of the Al(III)–CPDMS samples and (d) tensile profiles of the initial and reprocessed Al2–CPDMS4k—10k sample by heat-pressing [reproduced from ref. 150 with permission from the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) and The Royal Society of Chemistry].	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic representation of the effect of the internal crosslinking of the P(AA-co-AAm)/CoCl2 hydrogel; (b) a digital photograph of a cross-linked P(AA-co-AAm)/CoCl2 hydrogel; (c) cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the freeze-dried P(AA-co-AAm)/CoCl2 hydrogel (scale bar = 20.0 μm); (d) cross-sectional SEM image of the freeze-dried P(AA-co-AAm)/CoCl2 after swelling equilibrium (scale bar = 400.0 μm) [reprinted with permission from ref. 152. Copyright (2019) John Wiley and Sons].	 

 	Fig. 10  The method of preparation and structure of the stretchable PDMS elastomer [Reproduced from ref. 153 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry].	 

 	Fig. 11  Self-healing properties. (a) Optical microscope images of damaged and healed PDMS–MeNNN–Zn 25 °C. (b) Photos giving the cutting/healing/stretching process of PDMS–MeNNN–Zn films at 25 °C. (c) Typical stress–strain curves and (d) self-healing efficiencies of PDMS–NNN–Zn healing for described times at room temperature [reprinted with permission from ref. 154. Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society].	 

 	Fig. 12  Preparation of stretchable, self-healing, and degradable materials using a combination of imine and M–L bonds [reproduced from ref. 155 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry].	 

 	Fig. 13  The chemical structure of rod-like photoswitchable MPs based on MII–tpy complexes of two ditopic ligands [reprinted with permission from ref. 163. Copyright (2015) John Wiley and Sons].	 

 	Fig. 14  Scheme of crosslinking of BCPs with Mn(II) chloride and optical micrographs showing scratch healing in a MP at 100 °C (scale bars = 100 μm) [reprinted from ref. 165 under a Creative Commons CC-BY license].	 

 	Fig. 15  (top) Self-assembly scheme through M–tpy interaction; (bottom) (a) self-healing concept with norbornene-based polymer, (b) illustration of the self-healing ability of the Zn-complex gel at room temperature without an external stimulus, and (c) storage (G′) and loss (G′′) moduli of the Zn complex gel and self-healing gels [reprinted from ref. 166 under a Creative Commons Attribution license].	 

 	Fig. 16  Proposed structure and photograph of the PDMS-PtL film. A photograph of a stretching film with one half dyed with 0.5% phthalocyanine prior to healing. The initial and final lengths are 2 mm and 20 mm, respectively [reprinted with permission from ref. 167. Copyright (2016) John Wiley and Sons].	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Self-healing experiments for Zn(OTf)2-PDMS polymer at ambient conditions without any intervention. (b and c) Image of self-healed Zn(OTf)2–PDMS under tensile stress (>250% strain): (b) cutting the initial film into two parts, followed by self-healing (the connection of the edges of the cut films is highlighted in red dot box; (c) rupturing of the initial film into two pieces under tensile stress, and then the ruptured surface was gently pushed back together and underwent self-healing. (d) A histogram of the self-healing efficiency of all MPs under ambient conditions after 48 h [reprinted with permission from ref. 97. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society].	 

 	Fig. 18  Scheme of bond rupture under the influence of mechanical stress and its reversible formation in the FeIII–Hpdca complex together with the calculated binding energies [reprinted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright (2016) Springer Nature].	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Optical microscope images of damaged and healed samples. (b) Optical images of the healed film before and after stretching. (c) Stress–strain curves of a film healed at room temperature for different periods of time. (d) The stress–strain curves of the film healed at −20 and 0 °C for 72 h, and the stress–strain curves of the film healed at room temperature for 48 h after surface aging for 24 h [reprinted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright (2016) Springer Nature].	 

 	Fig. 20  Illustration of the dynamic M–L bond of the coordinated pdca–PDMS–Fe(III) system reform at higher strain [reprinted with permission from ref. 168. Copyright (2019) American Chemical Society].	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Stress–strain curves at a strain rate of 10 mm min−1 and (b) self-healing efficiency of the MP films healing for the described time at room temperature. (c) Stress–strain curves at a strain rate of 50 mm min−1 and (d) self-healing efficiency of the MP films healing for the described time at room temperature [reproduced from ref. 169 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry].	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Photographs showing the excellent healing efficiency of hydrogels. (b) Optical microscopy images of the damaged hydrogel with complete healing of MP [reprinted with permission from ref. 170. Copyright (2018) John Wiley and Sons].	 

 	Fig. 23  Synthesis of polymers based on the PPO core with (i) UPy units (M1), and (ii) Mebip ligands (M2) that are coordinated with Zn(NTf2)2 and form a network (M2·Zn(NTf2)2). The figure also shows a representation of the networks M1–M2·Zn(NTf2)2 with binding motifs and the orthogonal response to a chemical or heat. The NTf2− counterions are omitted for clarity [reprinted with permission from ref. 171. Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society].	 

 	Fig. 24  Self-healing properties of the MP film. (a) Microscopic image of the film before and after healing at 120 °C; (b) stress–strain curves of a film healed at various temperatures for 24 h; (c) stress–strain curves of a film healed at 120 °C for different times; (d) stress–strain curves of a film healed at room temperature with pretreatment with methanol [reproduced from ref. 172 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry].	 

 	Fig. 25  Self-healing experiments for Fe–TIA–PDMS. (a) Microscopic images of the film before and after healing at 60 °C. (b) Stress–strain curves of the films healed at 60 °C at various times (thickness: 1 mm; width: 7 mm; gage length: 2 mm; loading speed: 5 mm min−1). (c) Photographs showing stretching of the healed film. (d) A photograph of the fracture incision of a healed film [reprinted with permission from ref. 173. Copyright (2016) John Wiley and Sons].	 

 	Fig. 26  (left) Design concept for the multiphasic spontaneous SHPs using zinc–imidazole bonds; (right) stress–strain curve for a MP with L/Zn = 4.0 at room temperature with ambient humidity. The histogram of the toughness recovery for each sample [reprinted with permission from ref. 98. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society].	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) Stretch strips added with or without dyes (malachite green); (b) cut two different colors of the stretch strips and contact them together; (c) MPs were healed at room temperature for about 30 min; (d) tensile testing were measured using an electronic universal machine for testing materials with microcomputer control [reproduced from ref. 174 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry].	 

 	Fig. 28  Self-healing experiments: (A and B) star-imidazole-containing polymer (S-ICP-1, DP = 33)/Zn(NTf2)2 complex, (C and D) S-ICP-3 (DP = 71)/Zn(NTf2)2 complex, and (E) the image of the tensile test of S-ICP-3/Zn(NTf2)2 complex after self-healing for 1 h. L/M = 4.34 [reprinted with permission from ref. 176. Copyright (2019) John Wiley and Sons].	 

 	Fig. 29  Synthesis of MPs and optical microscopy images of the scratched MP film before and after treatment at 60 °C [reprinted with permission from ref. 178. Copyright (2019) Elsevier].	 

Original	60.73 ± 2.61	211 ± 10	—	—
12 h healed	43.61 ± 5.34	128 ± 10	71 ± 9	58 ± 2
24 h healed	57.20 ± 1.13	181 ± 8	94 ± 1	86 ± 4
31 h healed	59.93 ± 2.76	207 ± 9	99 ± 5	98 ± 4

 	Fig. 30  Structure of a MP with a dual-crosslinking strategy and photographs of a cut and self-healed sample. The red color of the sample is due to the addition of rhodamine B [reprinted with permission from ref. 180. Copyright (2019) John Wiley and Sons].	 

 	Fig. 31  Synthesis of disulfide bonds and Zn2+–imidazole bonds co-cross-linked network [reprinted with permission from ref. 182. Copyright (2017) Elsevier].	 

 	Fig. 32  (A) Digital images showing the self-healing properties of the Zn–His metallopolymer. (a) Two MP blocks brought in contact with each other, (b) two blocks self-heal with the formation of one block, (c) four blocks self-heal with the formation of one block, (d) the self-healed single block made from four blocks passed vertically. (B) Dynamic oscillatory rheology for quantifying the recovery rate by shearing the Zn–His hydrogel at increasing strain from 0.01 to 500% at a frequency of 1 Hz, after which the recovery was monitored at 1% strain and 1 Hz. (C) Thixotropic behavior using oscillatory rheology for three cycles with a periodic change in strain from 0.1% to 100%. His–Zn concentration = 100 mM [reproduced from ref. 187 with permission from the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) and The Royal Society of Chemistry].	 

 	Fig. 33  Optical images of damaged (left) and healed (right) samples [reprinted with permission from ref. 188. Copyright (2018) John Wiley and Sons].	 

 	Fig. 34  Self-healing properties of MPs. (A) Photos of MP stretching before and after healing. Scale bar = 5 mm. (B) Stress–strain curves of MPs at a strain rate of 30% min−1 healed for different times at room temperature. (C) Normalized recovery percentages of fracture strain, fracture stress and toughness with different healing times corresponding to (B) [reprinted from ref. 189 under a Creative Commons Attribution License].	 

 	Fig. 35  (left) Synthesis of intrinsic SHPs containing various M–L bonds. The dashed line indicates the weak M–L bond and the solid line indicates the strong M–L bond. (right) Schematic representation of the cleavage and reformation of various M–L bonds during self-healing [reprinted with permission from ref. 191. Copyright (2018) John Wiley and Sons].	 

 	Fig. 36  Design of PU elastomer with superior self-healing properties. (A) Molecular structure of the elastomer. (B) The schematic structure of the elastomer. Triple dynamic bonds, including reversible covalent bonds (green arc and gray stick), M–L (gray stick and orange circle) and hydrogen bonds (blue polygons), form hybrid dynamic networks [reprinted with permission from ref. 192. Copyright (2019) John Wiley and Sons].	 

 	Fig. 37  (a) A typical PU consisting of hexamethylene diisocyanate, poly(propylene glycol) and a simple mono-pyridine group containing diol. (b) Schematic representation of metal-coordinated PU and the proposed coordination geometry during the loading and recovery process. (c) Photographs of the pristine PU and the corresponding Fe2+-coordinated PU. (d) Photographs of a highly stretched complex. (e) Photographs of loading 0.98kg by a complex rod (2.2mm in diameter) [reprinted with permission from ref. 194. Copyright (2019) John Wiley and Sons].	 

 	Fig. 38  Self-healing ability of photonic elastomers. (a) Optical microscopy images of abrased photonic elastomer before (left panel) and after healing (right panel) at room temperature for 48 h. (b) Reflectance spectra of the original (black curve), abrased (red curve) and healed (green curve) photonic elastomer. (c) Photographs of two pieces of green-colored photonic elastomer (top panel) and blue and green-colored photonic elastomer (bottom panel) for self-healing at 60 °C for 24 h. (d) Stress–strain tests of a green photonic elastomer at various healing times (12, 24, and 48 h) at 60 °C [reprinted with permission from ref. 196. Copyright (2018) John Wiley and Sons].	 

 	Fig. 39  (a) Redox-responsive supramolecular MP with the properties of self-healing, expansion–contraction and shape memory. (b) The chemical structure of the host–guest inclusion complex used for the manufacture of (c) polymer networks. (d) When two halves of a β-CD-Ad-Fc PNIPAM gel were held together with or without ammonium cerium nitrate (CAN) under wet conditions, the pieces adhere to (e) restore the original gel. Healing was not observed if a competitive guest molecule was applied to one of the cut surfaces [reprinted with permission from ref. 197. Copyright (2015) John Wiley and Sons].	 

 	Fig. 40  Self-healing process of the Schiff base-boned (CH/PEG)15 film (a), (CH/PEG)15–Ca2+ film (b), (CH/PEG)15–Cu2+ film (c) and (CH/PEG)15–Zn2+ film (d). Scale in the figure is the same [reprinted with permission from ref. 198. Copyright (2018) Elsevier].	 

 	Fig. 41  Illustration of thioether BCPs as universal thermoplastic materials. PMMA is poly(methyl methacrylate), PMTEA is poly(thioether monomer) and PBA is poly(n-butyl acrylate) [reprinted with permission from ref. 202. Copyright (2017) John Wiley and Sons].	 

 	Fig. 42  Representative photos of a MP sample for a self-healing test. The sample was allowed to self-heal under ambient conditions for 72 h before stretching. Scale bar: 1 cm [reprinted with permission from ref. 203. Copyright (2019) Elsevier].	 

 	Fig. 43  (a) Diagram of the process for producing HHM–PAA1–Znx (x = 0.3–0.6) elastomers. HHM–PAA1–Znx (x = 0.3–0.6) refers to a 1:x molar ratio of the carboxylic acid of PAA to Zn2+ and the M–L interactions in the blend of PAA-Zn. (b) Elastomers were loaded and unloaded for 1000 consecutive cycles at a tensile strain of 20%. (c) Elastomers were bent for 1200 consecutive cycles. (d) Elastomers were compressed and uncompressed for 300 consecutive cycles. The soft copolymer of 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate (HEMA), 2-hydroxyethyl acrylate (HEA), and methacrylic acid (MAA) monomers is encoded as HHM [reprinted with permission from ref. 208. Copyright (2019) John Wiley and Sons].	 

 	Fig. 44  Synthesis scheme for the N-carboxyethyl chitosan (CEC)/PAA-Fe3+ hydrogels [reprinted with permission from ref. 209. Copyright (2019) John Wiley and Sons].	 

 	Fig. 45  Pictures of the shape memory behavior of an elastomer. Fixation of the sample of the elastomeric film (a) in a temporary shape by heating and stretching (b). (c) Film recovery and color change under the influence of 1 mM solution of Fe(OTf)2 in 1:1 water:THF. (d) Removal of a significant amount of Fe(OTf)2 under the influence of a 10 mM solution of diethylenetriamine in 1:1 water:THF [reprinted with permission from ref. 223. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society].	 

 	Fig. 46  Digital photos of the deformation and recovery process [reproduced from ref. 224 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry].	 

 	Fig. 47  (a) Shape memory MP that uses imidazole–metal interactions as temporary crosslinks; (b) photos showing the light-triggered shape memory behavior [reproduced from ref. 227 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry].	 

 	Fig. 48  Schematic representation of a DN hydrogel with a triple shape memory effect. (a) Chemical structures of a hydrogel, (b) photos showing triple shape memory on a macro scale, (c) shape memory after self-healing, (d) self-healing during shape memory [reproduced from ref. 228 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry].	 

 	Fig. 49  The processes and mechanisms of triple shape memory and shape recovery, triple shape recovery, which can be implemented in stages or in a single stage [reproduced from ref. 229 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry].	 

 	Fig. 50  (a) Synthesis of a linear copolymer of a copolymer of 2-ethylhexyl methacrylate with 2-carboxyethyl acrylate and its appearance after molding (rectangle, top right). (b) Interaction of the copolymer with Cu(II) acetate and its appearance after molding (rectangle, bottom right) [reprinted with permission from ref. 230. Copyright (2018) John Wiley and Sons].	 

 	Fig. 51  Shape memory effect of PAA–Zn(OAc)2. (a) Visual demonstration of the shape memory performance. (b) Successive shape memory cycles [reprinted with permission from ref. 210. Copyright (2019) Elsevier].	 

 	Fig. 52  The shape memory MP with gradient plasticity. (a) The preparation of a gradient shape-memory sample. (b) The gradient distribution of metal ions and the corresponding stress relaxation behavior at 100 °C. (c) Demonstration of universality when changing shape as a result of elasticity and gradient plasticity; scale bar = 10 mm [reprinted with permission from ref. 105. Copyright (2017) John Wiley and Sons].	 

 	Fig. 53  Shape memory of CH–Cu+/NH3 hydrogels. (a) and (b) Cut-out strips of CH–Cu2+/NH3 and CH–Cu+/NH3 hydrogels, respectively. (c) and (d) Kept into a U shape for 48 h in deionized water. (e) and (f) CH–Cu2+/NH3 and CH–Cu+/NH3 hydrogels taken out from deionized water [reprinted from ref. 232 under a NOCC (the “License”)].	 

 	Fig. 54  (left) Preparation route of ionomers. (right) Thermally induced shape memory cycle of PVA–PAA–Fe [reproduced from ref. 237 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry].	 

 	Fig. 55  (a) Demonstration of the restoration of the bulk conductivity of a metallogel composite based on oxalic acid used to close an electrical circuit. (b) “LEGO-car” made using (1) an oxalic acid-based metallogel and (2) rhodamine B, (3) with lanazole and (5) with multi-walled CNTs (1 wt%); (4) is a diaminocyclohexane-bis(amine) gel [reprinted with permission from ref. 261. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society].	 

 	Fig. 56  (a) Applications and the diagram of an exploded view of the EHTS-TENG. (b) Photographs showing the transparency of HTS-PDMS, HTS-c-hydrogel, and EHTS-TENG devices with and without paraffin wax as a separator. (c) Reactions to form HTS-PDMS. Here, HTS-PDMS is a healable, transparent and stretchable PDMS, HTS-c-hydrogel is a healable, transparent and stretchable conducting hydrogel, and EHTS-TENG is a fully self-healable, transparent, and stretchable triboelectric nanogenerator [reprinted with permission from ref. 262. Copyright (2019) John Wiley and Sons].	 

 	Fig. 57  Schematic diagram depicting the self-healing phenomenon with a bilayered ultra responsive self-healable photodetector [reprinted with permission from ref. 263. Copyright (2019) Elsevier].	 

 	Fig. 58  A self-healing device can be triggered in response to an alternating electric field [reprinted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright (2016) Springer Nature].	 

 	Fig. 59  Water-jet printing of rewritable paper: a scheme of the writing and erasing processes of water-jet printing of rewritable paper based on the L–Zn interaction, as well as water-jet prints by a commercially available inkjet printer with cartridges refilled with water on the rewritable paper based on the L–Zn interaction. Scale bar = 1 cm [reprinted from ref. 265 under a Creative Commons CC BY license].	 

 	Fig. 60  Schematic representation of the sensors during cutting/healing process (a). SEM images showing the cross-section of the sensors with a scale bar of 500 μm (b) and 10 μm (c). TEM images of the conductive layer of the sensors with a scale bar of 1 μm (d) and 200 nm (e). Changes in the electrical resistance of the sensors with different thicknesses of the conductive layers before and after cutting/healing process (f). Demonstration of electrical self-healing ability of the sensors (8 drop-casting cycles) when connected into a circuit with an LED light (g) [reprinted with permission from ref. 146. Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society].	 

 	Fig. 61  (a) Normalized sensitivity curves for a capacitance-based pressure sensor using SHP as the dielectric layer. Optical microscope image of the dielectric structuring and design of the device; the dynamic sensor response of a pristine (b) and healed (c) sensor with simple repetitive finger tapping for 20 s [reproduced from ref. 167 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry].	 

 	Fig. 62  Scheme of the manufacturing steps of self-healing sensors with tunable positive/negative piezoresistivity [reprinted with permission from ref. 188. Copyright (2018) John Wiley and Sons].	 

 	Fig. 63  New bone formation after hydrogel implantation in a model of a rat cranial critical defect measured using micro-CT analysis: (a–d) 3D reconstruction views and (e–h) sagittal cross-section views. Images (a) and (e) correspond to 4 weeks after hydrogel implantation; (b) and (f) to 4 weeks after surgery without hydrogel placement; (c) and (g) to 8 weeks after hydrogel implantation; and (d) and (h) to 8 weeks after surgery without hydrogel placement. (i) Quantification of the newly formed bone volume per defect. Representative cross-sections of the explants from the defect area were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) after hydrogel implantation for 4 weeks (j) and 8 weeks (k), respectively. Black arrows: osteoblast-like cells; white arrows: inflammatory cells; yellow arrows: periosteum; red arrows: blood cells. The scale bar is (a–h) 2 mm and (j and k) 100 μm [reprinted with permission from ref. 267. Copyright (2017) John Wiley and Sons].	 

 	Fig. 64  Relative gene expression of important bone markers from hMSCs encapsulated in hydrogels [reprinted with permission from ref. 268. Copyright (2017) John Wiley and Sons].	 

 	Fig. 65  Functional assay for the central nervous system rescue in zebrafish using a self-healing MP. (a) Treatment procedures. (b) Spontaneous contraction of embryos studied at the stage of 18 somites. (c) Coiling contractions within 2 min counted at 24 hpf. (d) The hatching rate of the embryos estimated at 48 hpf, which serves as the indicator for the rescue of the nervous function. Here WT is a wild-type blank control and EtOH is an untreated damaged group [reprinted with permission from ref. 269. Copyright (2015) John Wiley and Sons].	 

 	Fig. 66  The expression of important neural markers from the encapsulated NSCs is shown here [reprinted with permission from ref. 269. Copyright (2015) John Wiley and Sons].	 

 	Fig. 67  (top) Photographs of a sensor attached to a bending finger, and a change in capacitance with the movement of a finger. (bottom) Real-time capacitance measurements from a blood-pressure sensor as pressure rises and falls [reprinted with permission from ref. 272. Copyright (2017) John Wiley and Sons].	 

 	Fig. 68  Synthesis of the self-healing and shape memory MP. (A) Synthesis of the 4-armed PEG. (B) The formation of MPs with self-healing capacity regulated by the Fe3+ coordination and pH-induced shape memory [reproduced from ref. 285 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry].	 
AA	Acrylic acid
AAm	Acrylamide
Ad	Adamantane
AN	Acrylonitrile
BA	
n-Butyl acrylate
BCP	Block copolymer
Bpy	2,2′-Bipyridine
β-CD	β-Cyclodextrin
CH	Chitosan
CNC	Cellulose nanocrystal
CNT	Carbon nanotube
CTH	Close-then-Heal
DC	Double cross-linked network
DMSO	Dimethyl sulfoxide
DN	Double network
DOPA	3,4-Dihydroxyphenylalanine
DP	Degree of polymerization
ENR	Epoxidized natural rubber
EtBip	2,6-Bis(1′-ethylbenzimidazolyl)pyridine
Fc	Ferrocene
HA	Hyaluronic acid
His	Histidine
L	Ligand
M	Metal
Mebip	2,6-Bis(1′-methylbenzimidazolyl)pyridine
MP	Metallopolymer
NBR	Nitrile rubber
NIPAM	
N-Isopropylacrylamide
NIR	Near infrared
PAA	Polyacrylic acid
PBCA	Poly(butadiene-co-acrylonitrile)
PCL	Poly(ε-caprolactone)
PDA	Polydopamine
PDMS	Polydimethylsiloxane
pdca	Pyridine-2,6-dicarboxamide
PEG	Poly(ethylene glycol)
PPO	Poly(propylene oxide)
Ppy	Polypyrrole
PS	Polystyrene
PU	Polyurethane
SEM	Scanning electron microscopy
SHP	Self-healing polymer
SMASH	Shape Memory Assisted Self-Healing
SMP	Shape memory polymer
SN	Single network
TENG	Triboelectric nanogenerator
TIA	Triazole
tpy	2,2′,6′,2′′-Terpyridine
UPy	2-Ureido-4[1H]pyrimidinone

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
