Atomic spectrometry update. Environmental analysis  - Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B700371B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B700371B
(Atomic Spectrometry Update)
J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2007, 22, 187-221Atomic spectrometry update. Environmental analysisOwen T. Butler*a, Jennifer M. Cookb, Chris F. Harringtonc, Steve J. Hilld, John Rieuwertsd and Douglas L. MilesbaHealth and Safety Laboratory, Harpur Hill, Buxton, UK SK17 9JN. E-mail: owen.butler@hsl.gov.ukbBritish Geological Survey, Keyworth, Nottingham, UK NG12 5GGcUniversity of Leicester, University Road, Leicester, UK LE1 7RHdUniversity of Plymouth, Drake Circus, Plymouth, UK PL4 8AAReceived 9th January 2007First published on 22nd January 2007Contents1 Air analysis1.1 Sampling and sample preparation1.2 Instrumental techniques for bulk analysis of particles1.3 Instrumental techniques for analysis of individual particles1.4 Online and (near) real time measurement techniques1.5 Isotopic analysis2 Water analysis2.1 Sample preparation2.2 Speciation2.3 Instrumental analysis2.4 Metrology and data quality3 Analysis of soils, plants and related materials3.1 Sample preparation3.2 Speciation3.3 Instrumental analysis4 Analysis of geological materials4.1 Reference materials4.2 Solid sample introduction4.3 Sample treatment4.4 Instrumental analysis5 Glossary of termsReferencesAbstractThis is the twenty-second annual review published in JAAS of the application of atomic spectrometry to the chemical analysis of environmental samples. In the analysis of air, there is ongoing use of XRF techniques for the measurement of particles collected on filters. There is continuing interest in the determination of trace levels of mercury species in the atmosphere. Isotope ratio measurement protocols are attracting wider interest as a potential tool for source apportionment studies. In the analysis of plant and water matrices, elemental speciation protocols for elements such as As, Hg, Sb, Se and Sn continue to receive considerable attention. Portable XRF instruments are now attracting interest for the rapid analysis of contaminated soil. In the geochemical measurement arena, laser ablation continues to go from strength to strength in being adopted as a solid sampling tool and interest is expanding to its use for the in situ determination of isotope ratios. To support this technique, a number of institutes are now preparing the next generation of CRM standards that are being characterized at the required micrometre scale.1 Air analysisThis section highlights noteworthy areas of research and development in the analysis of aerosols, particulates and gases by atomic spectrometric techniques which have been reported since the last Update.11.1 Sampling and sample preparationMeasurement uncertainty is now an important consideration for analytical laboratories. Whilst there have been numerous articles, reports and guidance on calculating uncertainties associated with analytical determinations performed in the laboratory, fewer publications are available on estimating variability associated with the sampling step. It is timely therefore to review papers that take steps to quantify the variability associated with taking air samples. Flanagan and co-workers from RTI in North Carolina2 used data from the US Speciation Trends Network (STN) to contrast the variability of replicate measurements on air filter samples undertaken in the laboratory with the total combined variability associated with both sampling and analytical steps. The STN network of over 225 monitoring sites has been established by the US EPA to provide data on the chemical composition of PM2.5 airborne particles in support of National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS). The RTI researchers, using data from the six of these sites, each of which had a co-located pair of air samplers, estimated the uncertainty associated with the sampling step. Rather than applying a cause and effect approach, i.e., examining the effect of individual measurement components in order to provide a whole system uncertainty budget, which the authors suggest would be a daunting task, they used measurement data from these six sampling sites coupled with a simple statistic, namely the average relative difference between paired data points. Five measured parameters were evaluated: gravimetric analysis, total organic carbon by the TOT method, ammonium and sulfate ions by IC and total iron and sulfur by EDXRF. No attempt was made to explicitly quantify the concentration dependence on uncertainty but data examined were, in any case, well above instrumental MDL. Average relative differences from co-located filter pairs were calculated to be 9.3% for gravimetric analysis, 14.2% for total organic carbon analysis, 8.2% for SO42−, 10.0% for NH4+, 8% for S and 16.6% for Fe. Corresponding values derived from repeat laboratory analysis of filter and leachate samples were 4.6%, 5.5%, 3.9%, 0.8%, 1.6% and 2.4%, respectively, for the six measurands. The authors considered that some of the added variability is due to general field sampling effects such as spatial variability in atmospheric concentrations around sampling sites and variability between actual air sampler units, namely tolerances associated with the particle size selective cut-off of the sampler inlets and air volume metering systems. With respect to specific assays, the authors suggest that uncertainty in the determination of total organic carbon in filter samples is in part attributable to recognised laboratory variability, namely sub-sampling of filter punches from a particular filter sample and timing differences between individual TOT instruments in differentiating between the evolution of organic and elemental carbon from the filter. They suggest that sampling issues such as contamination and/or evaporation of the organic carbon (OC) deposit on filter samples may arise before the samples reache the laboratory. Similar evaporative losses from filters may well be associated with ammonium ion species collected on filter samples. The authors pointed to metallic particulate contamination from components within air sampler devices as contributing to the variability associated with Fe measurements by EDXRF. Based upon this archived data set and the average relative difference between paired data points, they were able to develop a new uncertainty of measurement estimation which they compared with the approach used to date in the STN network. Currently a value of 5% of the measurand is used as an estimation of the field sampling uncertainty. Percentage ratios of uncertainties estimations, current approach against the new approach, were determined to be 62% for gravimetric analysis, 104% for OC analysis, 179% for SO42−, 83% for NH4+, 111% for S and 37% for Fe. The authors conclude that the current approach appears to generate reasonable uncertainty estimates associated with the sampling step but that estimates need to be revised for SO42− analysis and that the Fe contamination issues need to be addressed.High volume air sampling techniques are often employed to ensure that sufficient sample mass is collected for subsequent laboratory analysis and to enable lower MDL to be achieved. Given the large flow rate often employed with these sampling devices—a cubic metre of air per minute is typical—it is necessary to employ large diameter filters to minimise the effect of back pressure on the sampling pumps. The use of such filters often necessitates sub-sampling during the filter dissolution step and this is frequently carried out by punching out filter discs for subsequent analysis. Argentinian workers3 performed a filter homogeneity experiment involving the distribution of twelve elements collected on filters. They punched discs, 6.5 cm in diameter, from each of eleven filters sampled as part of an urban PM10 air monitoring programme. Each whole filter measured 25.4 × 20.3 cm and, taken together, the five filter discs had a surface area equivalent to half a filter (∼500 cm2). Filters were digested using a microwave-assisted dissolution procedure involving a HNO3–HClO4–HF acid mixture. Analysis was subsequently carried out by axial viewing ICP-AES. The largest variation was for elements such as Cd and Ni where a standard deviation of around 15% was noted. However, it may be that the data for these two elements have to be treated with some caution as instrumental measurement variability could have played a significant part. The estimated limit of quantification (10σ criterion) for these two elements, based upon digestion of blank filter punches, was estimated to be ∼50 ng for Cd and ∼250 ng for Ni, but some of the filter punches had levels of Cd as low as 80 ng and 230 ng for Ni. A better element to examine is probably Pb. Here, the authors determined standard deviations of around 10%. The estimated LoQ for Pb by their ICP-AES technique was determined to be 250 ng with the lowest filter loading measured as 4800 ng, i.e., some twenty times higher. It is relevant therefore to benchmark Pb results obtained in this paper against filter sub-sampling requirements set out in the recently published EN 14902 standard. This states that the standard deviation should ideally be less than 5% based upon measurement of a marker element such as Pb. Variability in the deposition of particles onto filters can be related to particle size and associated issues such as static effects and interaction with walls of sampler devices, but also imperfection in individual filters, i.e., variability in thickness across an individual filter, can potentially result in localised variable air flow rates.Research into developing new procedures for the sampling of mercury species in the ambient air continues to attract attention, as uncertainties still exist as to the fate of mercury arsing from anthropogenic pollution in the wider environment. In a short communication, German workers4 devised a simple field deployable sampling system to estimate rapidly potential mercury emissions emanating from flood plains. Simplicity was the name of the game and their system consisted of a glass bell-jar chamber, two gold sorbent traps in series, a battery operated pump and a gas meter. Offline analysis of the traps was carried out back in the laboratory but plans are afoot to use a portable real-time mercury analyser so that fast on-site measurements can be performed. Bloom and co-workers5 describe the extensive validation work they have carried out on a procedure for the sampling and analysis of Me2Hg, a species that has been reported in gas vent pipes from landfill sites. The publication describes in detail a procedure to trap Me2Hg onto graphitised carbon (Carbotrap™) with subsequent laboratory analysis involving an isothermal GC separation step and analysis by the CVAFS technique. Initially, in the laboratory, the sample containing Me2Hg is desorbed from the field trap and refocused onto a laboratory Carbotrap™. Subsequently, the effluent from the GC column is broken down to elemental mercury vapour prior to analysis by CVAFS. A high temperature pyrolytic cracking column is used to effect this change. The authors built a standard atmosphere rig to generate a known concentration of Me2Hg in order to validate the proposed sampling protocol. Parameters investigated included the effect of temperature and humidity on sampling and the effect of co-sampled species such as hydrogen sulfide and other semi-volatile organic compounds. Sampling flow rates and sample volumes were then optimised. The method detection limit was calculated to be 0.01 ng m−3 for a nominal 50-litre air sample. Samples, collected in low to moderate humidity, were considered to be stable for over 28 days if kept dry and stored in the dark at less than 4 °C. Losses of around 10% were noted over the same period if the sampling traps were kept at ambient conditions. In summary, the authors recommend the more stringent storage conditions and, as a precaution, purging the traps after collection with dry argon or nitrogen if long term storage prior to analysis is contemplated.Ongoing potential exposure to metals in workplace air means that we need to refine methods for sampling and analysis of such metallic species to ensure that human health is not adversely affected. An emerging issue is the potential for worker exposure to Pb arising from metallic surfaces coated with a lead oxide based paint or from the dismantling of redundant petrochemical plant pipe work that historically was used for handling leaded petrol. Plasma based cutting torches are often used and it is therefore possible, at the high temperatures involved, for volatile lead species to be released. It is thus timely to highlight a paper by Chinese workers6 who have developed a denuder-filter sampling assembly to trap volatile Pb species. A commercial honeycomb denuder from Ogawa and Company, more typically used to collect gaseous species such as SO2 and NH3, was modified for this purpose. They found that a nitric acid–glycerine–ammonium hydrogen sulfate based denuder coating was best for trapping volatile Pb species. Volatile Pb species were generated, under controlled laboratory conditions, either by a hydride generation method or by an evaporation process at high temperature in a furnace involving a starting source of lead chloride. They noted trapping efficiencies in excess of 98%. Breakdown studies, by using two denuders in series, indicated that the denuder capacity was at least 5 μg but further studies are warranted to investigate the potential effect of co-sampled particles or condensed species in the field. Interestingly, the authors determined an average 360 ng m−3 of volatile Pb in their own laboratory air!There is renewed interest in the potential for occupational exposure to beryllium and its compounds so it is timely to briefly mention a number of conference presentations published recently as full papers. Harper7 reviews the status of workplace aerosol sampling procedures and their relevance to the assessment of Be exposure. Brisson et al.8 review the analytical challenges for the determination of low levels of Be in workplaces and Agrawal et al.9 present results of a validation exercise for a new field based sampling and analysis method for Be-containing particulates in the workplace which involves the use of a portable fluorimeter.Italian researchers have highlighted the novel potential of using exhaled breath condensate (EBC) as a sample medium for assessing the effects of occupational exposure arising from inhalation of metalliferous aerosols. In a recent paper, they measured CrVI in the EBC of chrome platers.10 Post-shift, workers were asked to breathe tidally through a mouthpiece for 15 min into a chilled (−5 °C) collection flask. The potential carry-through of chromium-contaminated saliva into the collection vessel was minimised by periodic rinsing of the mouth with water during the breathing exercise. In a separate paper the authors suggest that alpha-amylase could be used as a marker of salivary contamination as it is not found in EBC.11 Samples could therefore be discarded if this marker is measured in substantial quantities in the EBC collection tube. The CrVI in EBC samples was extracted and pre-concentrated into an organic phase using an ion pairing agent, tetrabutylammonium ion, and subsequently reacted with 1,5-diphenylcarbazide to form a coloured complex. However, total chromium measurement by ETAAS was subsequently preferred to the colorimetric procedure on account of its greater sensitivity. The authors found detectable levels of CrVI in EBC in nine of the ten workers at a chrome plating workshop who were tested immediately post-shift. Further research in required but the authors suggest that with EBC analysis, in combination with the more classical biomonitoring matrices such as urine and blood, a more fundamental understanding of exposure mechanisms may be in the offing.1.2 Instrumental techniques for bulk analysis of particlesInstrumental techniques such as XRF have a long tradition in the analysis of air filter samples, but now more sensitive techniques such as ICP-MS are increasingly being used. In response, XRF manufacturers are developing new energy dispersive XRF instruments that offer improvements in detection limits. Sponik and co-workers12 from the University of Antwerp have optimised a method, involving the use of a new EDXRF design, for the analysis of air filter samples. This new instrument uses a 3-D polarised X-ray beam geometry together with secondary targets to drastically reduce the continuum spectrum from the X-ray tube. In summary, the resultant enhancement in signal to noise ratios delivers a significant decrease in detection limits. Other instrument refinements have also helped. A high-powered X-ray source coupled to a highly efficient Ge-based detector allows the efficient excitement of k-lines of elements of interest such as Cd. Compared with l-lines, k-lines are less prone to spectral and matrix effects. These researchers used an aerosol generation system, employing a desolvated nebuliser, to prepare synthetic filter calibration standards. Instrument calibration checks were carried out using the NIST 2783 certified reference filter standard. A corresponding NIST 2783 certified blank filter standard was measured ten times using the optimised instrumental conditions to determine method detection limits. Data presented suggest that they were able to determine a limit of detection for Cd of 10 ng cm−2 (3σ criterion, 300 s acquisition time). Cadmium is a difficult element to measure by XRF techniques at trace levels. Calculations performed by this author suggest that their detection limit equates to ∼125 ng Cd when an air filter with a typical 40 mm active surface diameter is exposed. The corresponding quantification limit is calculated to be ∼400 ng (10σ criterion). To put this latter figure into context, the EU has proposed a 6 ng m−3 ambient air limit value for Cd and that measurement techniques should be able to quantify down to 2.4 ng m−3 below which modelled air data can be used. This equates to ∼400 ng Cd on a filter for a nominal 168 m3 of air, a volume that would be sampled over seven days if a sampler operating at a nominal flow rate of 1 m3 h−1 were to be used, as is the case with the United Kingdom urban air monitoring network.Such is the low mass concentration of metals in ambient air (for example key elements such as As and Cd are often at levels less than 1 ng m−3 in urban air) that their determination remains technically challenging despite advances in instrument design as described above. Synchrotron radiation X-ray fluorescence spectrometry (SRXRF), however, is an extremely sensitive technique that has historically been used in a number of air monitoring studies. Bukowiecki and co-workers13 in Switzerland have combined the use of this technique with a novel air sampler design to provide both particle size and time resolved airborne elemental data at hourly intervals. Fundamental to this study was their use of a rotating drum impactor (RDI) sampler. A PM10 sampler inlet was used to initially filter out larger particles. This wheel-like sampler was equipped with impaction plates sited below slit orifices to provide 2.5, 1.0 and 0.1 μm particle size cutoff sampling. Mylar film was used as the impaction substrate on the inside of the drum sampler. By rotating the drum at a fixed rate, fresh Mylar substrate could be exposed to sample air thus providing the required temporal resolution. Multi-element standard solutions were spotted onto blank Mylar film, at a nominal 2.5 ng per element per spike, to generate a relative instrument sensitivity curve. Elemental intensities were normalized to Se Kα and could be extrapolated to other elements as the shape of the relative sensitivity curve can be predicted from theory. To determine the absolute sensitivity of Se Kα, the XRF beam was scanned over the dried spikes in small step-wise intervals of 0.1 mm to determine the spike deposition area as well as the mass area density, so that intensity for a selected element could be linked to an absolute sensitivity (cps pg−1) value. Method detection limits were determined to be less than 50 pg m−3 for many elements (3σ criterion and 15 s counting time). The authors estimated that uncertainties in elemental results were typically in the range 10–15% for elements with Z > 20 and were largely attributable to uncertainties in the calibration and the extrapolation of the beam cross section to the impaction spot size. To assess the quality of the quantitative results, a comparison was carried out by co-locating a high volume PM10 air sampler alongside the drum sampler in the field. Filter samples from the high volume sampler were collected daily and were subsequently analysed by WDXRF. The hourly data from each of the three impaction stages was aggregated into daily avenge values so that a comparison with the high volume air sampler could be made. For many elements, significant correlations were found between the two approaches with R2 values of between 0.6 and 0.9. The authors conclude that temporally resolved data, obtainable together with information on particle size, will provide a clearer picture of the role of trace metals in ambient air and will assist in providing valuable data for source apportionment modelling. Along similar lines, Han et al.14 used a RDI sampler, developed and widely used by investigators at the University of California, to assess the transport of natural and anthropogenic aerosol sources from mainland Asia to a sampling site on the island of Jeju, situated between Korea and Japan. The RDI sampler they used had the capability of sizing particles to eight cutoffs in the range 0.07–5.0 μm. Using a SR-XRF beam spot size of 1.0 mm2 and a counting time of 30 s, they claim that a quantification level of ∼100 pg m3 for transition metals with uncertainties in the range 5–15% is possible. Taiwanese researchers evaluated the potential of the SR-XRF technique for the elemental analysis of particulate matter collected on PTFE membrane filters.15 Method optimization studies suggested that a two-step measurement process would be useful, with one set of instrumental conditions for lighter elements such as Ca, Si and Ti and a second set of conditions optimized for heavier elements such as Br and Pb. The calibration strategy involved the use of external standards prepared by depositing varying quantities of the NIST SRM 1648 urban particulate matter onto blank PTFE filters. Elemental concentrations on these calibration filters had been previously verified by a LA-ICP-MS approach. Detection limits, obtained through the repeat analysis of blank filters, were found to be in the range 1–10 ng m−3 for elements such as Cr, Cu, Pb and Zn. Field validation studies were carried out by the re-analysis of filters by ICP-MS following an acid dissolution step. Relative percentage differences between the two approaches were found to be typically less than 20% for elements such as Pb and Zn but increased substantially when elemental concentrations below 20 ng m−3 were measured, suggesting that further validation work is warranted. Synchrotron based spectroscopic techniques are proving to be a useful tool in archaeological research and investigations into historical climate change. Fresia and Borsato,16 together with co-workers at the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility at Grenoble, have used the SRXRF technique in association with the XAFS technique to determine not only the elemental composition but also the speciation profile of elements within Alpine stalagmites. Stalagmites can provide a useful archive of climate change as their growth rings can be accurately dated using U-series dating. The composition and thickness of these growth rings can provide evidence of various associations between solar activity, climate change and the hydrological environment and the resultant impact on human species. Through examination of such growth rings, these researchers hypothesised that sulfate containing aerosols emanating from volcanic emissions gave rise to solar reflection and thus resulted in a period of cool summers around the time of the demise of the recently discovered Iceman, which may help explain the degree of preservation of his corpse. For a comprehensive review of developments in all aspects of XRF, the reader should consult the latest Update on this subject.17Canadian workers18,19 have evaluated, in detail, the suitability of various analytical techniques for the analysis of low levels of Be in workplace air particles. Worker exposure to Be-containing particles, via inhalation, ingestion and dermal routes, can result in sensitisation and chronic beryllium disease. There are emerging concerns that a traditional benchmark, such as workplace exposure standards based upon mass per unit volume (for airborne particles) or mass per unit area (for deposited particles), may be somewhat inadequate in this scenario. Other metrics such as particle size, surface area and the morphology and form of the Be may need to be investigated. The aim of the study was to evaluate performance of techniques for the analysis of dust from workplace settings, where the potential levels of Be may be low, and to date may not have been investigated, rather than workplaces with higher levels of Be containing particles, such as nuclear and military environments, that have rigorous control standards and which routinely undertake monitoring programmes. Settled dust from undisturbed, elevated places such as machinery tops and rafters was taken for analysis. Dust samples were collected from aluminium smelters, a magnesium-processing factory, a factory treating electrolytic pools from aluminium smelters and a factory processing electrolytes near to an aluminium smelter. Beryllium in particles from the aluminium smelter operations was found to be concentrated in the range 60–80 ppm, confirming similar results recently obtained in this author’s laboratory. This is significant as the Be content in the bauxite ore raw material is typically less than 5 ppm, indicating a preconcentration effect during the smelting process. Interestingly, they found that a mixed acid digestion based upon NIOSH 7300 method (HNO3–HCl acid mixture) was effective. Analysis was subsequently carried out by ETAAS and ICP-MS techniques. In this author’s laboratory a metaborate based fusion, with subsequent analysis by ICP-AES, was required to fully solubilise similar powdered samples without leaving residues. However, with the current absence of any suitable matrix matched alumina based materials with a certified Be concentration, it is difficult to assess the relative merits, at this stage, of any proposed digestion procedures. The Canadian researchers evaluated techniques such as Auger microscopy, SEM, TEM, XRD and TOF-SIMS as techniques of potential use in examining the morphology of Be-containing particles. They concluded that, since Be was typically at concentrations of less than 0.01% (m/m) in bulk powder samples, the above techniques may be inadequate if Be is not concentrated in individual particles. The same authors undertook further work using the TOF-SIMS technique on these workplace dust samples.19 They concluded that this technique has the potential to qualitatively detect Be to levels as low as 1 ng absolute in particles as small as 60 nm in diameter. They suggested that combining this technique with the quantitative nature of the ICP-MS technique would provide a useful instrumental combination for the interrogation of particles in the workplace.1.3 Instrumental techniques for analysis of individual particlesBeddows and Halle20 discuss the potential for the development of an in situ, real-time, LIBS system for the identification and classification of bio-aerosols in the wider urban environment. They suggest that, at face value, the applicability of the LIBS technique may be limited by the chemical information it provides. Owing to the hard ablation nature of the laser-generated plasma, particle identification has to be inferred from characteristic atomic/ionic emissions only. This contrasts with the soft ionisation approaches available with laser based particle mass spectrometers, where spectral data from polyatomic and molecular fragments may be obtained. In fact the authors suggest that softer ionisation approaches not involving lasers may be better suited to the analysis of delicate organic based bio-aerosols. They concluded that hybrid laser based systems might have a future, for example by combining alternative detection end points such as the Raman technique with softer desorption/ionisation methods. With regard to LIBS-only techniques, there is a growing consensus within this particular research community about the limitation of the technique for the analysis of single-aerosol particles and bio-aerosol particles in particular.Potgieter-Vermaak and Van Grieken21 have undertaken a preliminary evaluation of a micro-Raman technique for the characterisation of individual aerosol particles. Results obtained to date suggest that the technique has potential for obtaining molecular information on inorganic particles as small as 1 μm although organic and heterogeneous particles are proving to be somewhat more challenging. The filter media upon which particles are sampled was found to be an important consideration. In summary, the authors suggest that the Raman technique could potentially be usefully employed in association with more established techniques such as EMPA.1.4 Online and (near) real time measurement techniquesNew regulations are now emerging in the USA designed to cap the emissions, from stationary sources such as coal-fired boilers, of hazardous air pollutants such as Hg. Furthermore, a clear skies bill, if passed, will allow Hg emission trading between industries. For accountability purposes, robust measurement techniques delivering up to date information will be required and continuous emissions monitoring (CEM) techniques are preferable. A US company is developing a CEM for stack Hg measurements based upon XRF.22 In their prototype system, stack air from a chimney is extracted into a sampling chamber from where a representative aliquot is taken and pulled through a treated filter. All sample transport lines are heated to minimise the potential for deposition losses caused by condensation. The treated filter, which is patented, is designed to quantitatively trap both the elemental and oxidised species of mercury that can co-exist in combustion gas streams. After a set sampling period, typically of the order of 10–30 min, the filter tape is advanced so that the sample can be analysed in an XRF measurement chamber and, at the same time, a fresh filter is exposed for sampling. Paired field-testing against reference methods was carried out at two coal-fired plants. At the first plant, the reference method used was the Ontario-Hydro speciation method, which uses a series of filter and impinger samplers to selectively trap particulate and volatile elemental and oxidised mercury species, for subsequent off-line analysis in a laboratory using a CVAAS or CVAFS technique. Results suggest that the data from the prototype on-line XRF system, if defined as relative accuracy, was within the 25% of this reference method. The US EPA relative accuracy specification limit for new emerging measurement technologies is 20%, which suggests that this new technology could become a recognised alternative measurement technique. However, there were concerns about the statistical evaluation of paired data from this field trial. Firstly, the levels emitted from this facility were found to be quite low, less than 3 μg per dry standard cubic metre, while the imprecision of the reference method, at this concentration based upon duplicate samplers, was estimated to be ∼22%. Secondly, it was found that some 96% of the emitted mercury was in an elemental form, and since oxidised forms of Hg can be appreciable in boiler emissions, it was felt that this field test was not fully representative of the entire source category. In the second field test, the reference method used was US EPA method 29, which consists of a filter and impinger sampling train designed to trap both particulate and volatile forms of Hg. The stack effluent was spiked with additional Hg to give a final mercury concentration in the range 20–40 μg per dry standard cubic metre. Paired data suggested that the average ratio of the prototype XRF method to EPA method 29 was 0.91, i.e., an average 9% deviation from the reference value. The ratio range was between 0.78 and 1.10 for twelve paired sampling runs. The calculated relative accuracy was 17%, thus meeting the EPA specification limit for emerging measurement technologies. In this facility, it was estimated that about ∼20% of the mercury was in an oxidized form and hence this field trial was adjudged to be somewhat more representative than the first trial.Regulatory drivers are reducing Hg emissions from point sources and, coupled with the decline in the handling and usage of mercury in the workplace, have shifted the interest somewhat to the measurement of Hg in air in non-occupational settings. In the US, the agency for toxic substances and disease registry (ATSDR) has established a minimum risk level of 300 ng m−3 for elemental Hg vapour in residential settings. Vapour intrusion from chemicals such as Hg is an emerging issue, as exemplified by the vogue for ‘loft living’, i.e., renovated buildings, which historically were used for industrial purposes. Cultural use of Hg, within certain ethnic communities, in high-density living units with communal entrances and facilities, has also been identified as a possible source of exposure. Garetano and co-workers23 describe work they have carried out using a field-deployable instrument that offers real-time measurement capability. It is a ZAAS system with a long-path cell that offers remarkable sensitivity. According to the instrument manufacturer, its detection limit is claimed to be ∼2 ng m−3 with measurements possible every second. Six site visits were carried out and spot checks were carried out at 227 locations within 67 buildings. Mercury was also determined in 37 nearby outside locations to calculate environmental background values. The outdoor mean value was 5 ng m−3 with the 95th percentile at 17 ng m−3. These outdoor values compared favourably with ambient air Hg measurements made by local authorities. Indoors, 35% of the buildings tested had Hg vapour concentrations exceeding 17 ng m−3 and these were predominantly found in communal spaces such as hallways. The value of a portable real time instrument in assessing spatial variability was quickly realized in one particular building where the airborne concentration ranged from 35 to 2022 ng m−3, suggesting a particular point source such as a spill. A similar instrument was mounted on a roof rack on a car by researchers from the Jozef Stefan Institute in Ljubljana, to survey around the Idrija Hg mine.24 Used in conjunction with a GPS system, a 2-D contour map was quickly established. Airborne concentrations ranged from below 10 ng m−3 to a high of over 2 μg m−3. Such high values were noted in the vicinity of the mine’s disused Hg distillation plant. In the same paper, Swedish colleagues from the Lund Institute of Technology used a differential absorption LIDAR technique for a 3-D mapping survey over the same site. With this instrument they were able to estimate a flux emission rate of 2 g h−1 in the vicinity of the same disused plant.1.5 Isotopic analysisContinuing the Hg biogeochemical cycling theme, researchers are now employing species specific isotope dilution (SSID) protocols to assist in the reliable determination of a group of environmentally relevant Hg species such as Hg0, HgCl2, (CH3)2Hg and CH3HgCl. A research group at Umeå University in Sweden have developed a means of generating species-specific standards on demand.25 Permeation tube standards, i.e., sealed plastic tubes containing liquid standards held at constant temperature and in equilibrium with the resultant headspace gas, were prepared with the following species specific enriched isotopes: 202Hg0, 201HgCl2, (CH3)2198Hg and CH3201HgCl. By passing a sweep gas over the tubes, these gaseous standards are released at a constant rate by diffusion through the walls of the permeation tube. An on-line isotope dilution measurement capability can be achieved by blending such standards into a gas sampling line. The Swedish workers used a thermal desorption GC-ICP-MS approach to assist in the validation of this protocol. Gas samples were manipulated on-line using a filter coated with tetraethyl borate and Hg species were trapped on twin sorbent tubes connected in series, namely Tenax and Au–Pt wire, prior to the thermal desorption step. The authors feel that their SSID approach offers the potential for the efficient correction for matrix induced losses and species transformation and should be a valuable analytical tool in future Hg biogeochemical studies. The permeation tube approach is amenable to deployment in the field. Branfireun and co-workers26 used an enriched 202HgII isotope source to assess the fate and transportation of contemporary Hg deposition in a boreal wetland. The isotopic spike was applied to a small experimental wetland plot (12 m × 8 m) at a loading of 25 μg m−2. This spike was approximately five times the average Canadian Hg deposition loading. Subsequent to the spike, pore water, peat and vegetation samples were collected and analysed for total Hg. A FI-CV-ICP-MS technique was used which involved a SnCl2 reduction procedure and a gold trap pre-concentration step. Solid samples were pre-digested using a concentrated nitric–sulfuric acid mixture and all samples were subjected to a BrCl oxidation step. Methylmercury in the samples was isolated using an atmospheric pressure water vapour distillation procedure. The distillates were derivatised using a tetraethylborate step and pre-concentrated onto a carbon based trap. Quantification was achieved using a TD-GC-ICP-MS procedure. Typical method detection limits for total Hg were 0.04 ng L−1 for liquid samples and 0.2–1 ng g−1 for solid samples. For methylmercury determinations, MDL obtained were 1 pg L−1 and 1–10 pg g−1, respectively. To quantify the isotope concentration to the desired levels of precision, the authors found that the spike had to be at least 0.5–1% in excess of the native mercury concentration. This enriched isotope was easily detected in samples in the three months following the spiking experiment. Interestingly, at one location, 6% of the inorganic spike was subsequently detected as labelled Me202Hg, thus emphasising the important role that wetlands play in the overall biogeochemical cycle of this element.Advances in isotopic ratio mass spectrometric (IRMS) methods, through the measurement of stable carbon isotopic (δ13C) compositions, are now offering the potential to discriminate between emissions sources of organic compounds. Australian workers describe their preliminary investigations using a TD-GC-IR-MS method as a means of differentiating between sources of VOCs in the environment.27 Results using VOC standards were obtained that were comparable, within analytical error, to analysis made by a direct GC-IR-MS technique, suggesting that the TD step caused negligible isotopic fractionation. A viable environmental method to track the source and fate of VOCs, making use of easy to deploy sorbent tube samplers, is now potentially available. Wen and co-workers28 investigated the use of a GCF-IRMS technique to determine carbon isotopic compositions of atmospheric formaldehyde and acetaldehyde species. These carbonyl species are key components in photochemical reactions influencing smog processes and the IRMS technique offers the potential to track the source and fate of such species. Sampling of atmospheric carbonyl species typically involves their derivatisation as a carbonyl-DNPH derivative. Initial work focused on gaining an understanding of the relationship between the δ13C of carbonyl derivatives and the δ13C of the underivatised carbonyls. Formaldehyde and acetaldehyde standards were used to test this relationship and to ascertain possible fractionation effects during the actual derivatisation step. DNPH reagent with a known stable carbon isotope composition was used and experiments were carried out both in solutions and in simulated atmospheric sampling exercises, i.e., DNPH impregnated sorbent sampling tubes charged with vaporised carbonyl compounds within a test atmosphere chamber. Their conclusion was that no carbon isotope fractionation should occur during the synthesis of the DNPH derivatives under the study conditions used. Subsequently, ambient air samples for formaldehyde and acetaldehyde were taken at two distinct locations: an industrial site near to a petrochemical facility and at a bus station in a busy urban environment. Differences could be seen in the isotopic composition of these carbonyl compounds from the two sources, reflecting 13C compositional differences found in carbonyl precursors such as methane and non-methane hydrocarbons arising from differing industrial processes.Canadian workers have described a method to measure13C/12C ratios of individual carbon fractions of atmospheric particles collected on quartz fibre filters.29 A TOT based combustion analyser was coupled to an IRMS technique with an intermediate GC separation step. A step-wise thermal heating programme was utilised to separate the organic carbon (COC) from elemental carbon (CEC) species. The method was validated by measuring several selected carbon based standards with known isotopic composition. The overall accuracy and precision of the method was found to be 0.3‰. Analysis of air particulate matter collected in the vicinity of a road tunnel site, dominated by vehicular emissions, showed that δ13COC values were very close to those of CEC, i.e., δ13COC−EC
					∼ 0. This indicated that very little isotopic fractionation had occurred, as would have been expected during the high temperature combustion of a homogenous fuel source, i.e., predominantly diesel soot emissions. In contrast, the analysis of air particulate matter collected at a forest site showed that δ13 COC values were different from those of CEC, i.e., δ13COC−EC > 4%. This indicated a mixing and ageing of predominantly biogenic carbonaceous sources as would typically arise from regional biomass burning episodes. Based upon the use of this hyphenated technique, the authors anticipate that isotopic compositions, i.e., δ13 CEC and COC within individual carbon fractions in atmospheric particulate matter, can be expected to reveal information about their sources and formation processes. Elemental carbon, as in diesel soot, is inert and is likely to preserve the source characteristics but organic carbon tends to be reactive and over time will both age and mix, thus giving modified δ13 COC values.Currie and Kessler30 report the exploratory development of a hybrid reference material which, they hope, will assist in the future measurement of 14C in the elemental carbon fraction of atmospheric particles by AMS. According to the authors, valid 14C in elemental carbon species can be useful, not only for apportionment of elemental carbon sources, but also for demonstrating whether such data can serve as a surrogate for 14C PAH measurements. PAH source apportionment has vital implications for both health effects and combustion source identification. Such a link would be extremely helpful for measurements in time capsule samples, such as ice cores, where PAH abundances are far too low to permit direct 14C assays. The proposed prototype RM was prepared by mixing two NIST materials, SRM 1515 Apple Leaves and SRM 2975 Forklift Diesel Soot, thus providing both a chemical and isotopic compositional mix of relevance to atmospheric carbonaceous particles. The RM produced had a total carbon mass fraction of ∼0.55 and was found to be relatively homogenous, both chemically and isotopically (14C) at the 0.5–1 mg level. The authors then employed this hybrid RM for the comparative evaluation of the thermal optical kinetic (TOK) and TOT combustion methods for the isolation of elemental carbon for micro-molar carbon AMS. Key findings from this study were that both methods exhibited biomass carbon leakage, i.e., charring of organic carbon species that subsequently are incorrectly measured as elemental/refractory carbon. For the TOT method, this leakage was found to be ∼8% and for the TOK approach the leakage was found to be ∼3%.2 Water analysisThis section highlights new developments and improved analytical methods using atomic spectroscopy to determine trace metal(loid)s and their associated elemental species in environmental water samples that have been reported since the last Update.12.1 Sample preparation2.1.1 Sample collection, preservation and filtration. The use of different on-site or in situ testing methods for different water types has been reported. Two new field test kits for drinking water containing As near to the WHO guideline value of 10 μg l−1 have been evaluated.31 A batch of 136 water samples from western Nevada were analysed for As using the Quick Arsenic™ and Hach EZ™ field test kits and compared with laboratory measurements by HG-AFS. Calculation of the Spearman rank correlation coefficient indicated a significant (P < 0.001) linear agreement between both test kits and the values determined by HG-AFS. Both kits correctly identified all of the samples with high As content as being above the US EPA regulatory and WHO guideline value of 10 μg l−1 for As in drinking water. Although these tests were limited to waters from one area of the USA, they may offer a cost-effective approach for the assessment of water quality in areas affected by naturally high As content, such as Bangladesh. An on-site preservation technique32 for AsIII and AsV using ion-exchange adsorption of samples preserved with EDTA and acetic acid has been developed and used to test drinking water in five US states. The results for AsIII using the field method agreed well with subsequent laboratory based analysis of the samples. The Donnan Membrane Technique (DMT) which makes use of a cation-exchange membrane to sample the free metal ion concentration in situ in natural waters has been used together with ICP-MS.33 Humic acid was used as a ligand to measure the very low free metal ion concentrations common in natural waters in combination with the developed field DMT cell. The fraction of the total metal concentration that was measured as free metal ion ranged between: 0.95–9.1% for CdII; 1.7–5.1% for NiII; 0.069–1.9% for PbII; 0.015–0.6% for CuII; and 4.3–13% for ZnII. The work showed that the DMT can follow changes in the concentration of free metal ions in surface river water on time scales of less than one day.New approaches to sample collection have been evaluated for sampling unusual hydrological compartments. Rausch et al.34 tested two different samplers for bog pore waters at different depths and a range of filter materials, to establish Cd, Co, Cr, Cu, Mn, Mo, Ni, Pb, V and Zn concentration profiles using SF-ICP-MS. A syringe-type sampler requiring manual filtration and a dialysis chamber was used to collect humic-rich pore waters from bogs at pristine and contaminated sites. Four different 0.45 μm filters were evaluated for the syringe filter system, all of which gave low blank values. Pre-cleaned filters generated strong filtration artefacts for Cu and Mo. Metal concentrations at the pristine sites were at the low ng l−1 level, except for Mn and Zn, which were in the low μg l−1 range. A novel ice core melter system that uses fraction collectors to collect discrete, high-resolution and continuous melt-water samples for determination of 8 major ions by ion-chromatography, 32 trace elements by SF-ICP-MS and stable O and H isotopes by IRMS has been described.35 Fabrication of the device is explained in detail and the determination of procedural blanks, method detection limits, sample decontamination and data reproducibility are reported and discussed. The reproducibility of all the data acquired by the system was confirmed by replicate analysis of parallel sections of an ice core.A sample preservation procedure for As speciation in surface freshwaters affected by acid mine drainage,36 characterized by low pH and high metallic content, has been compared with two published protocols. It involves acidification with 6 M HCl followed by in situ clean-up with a cation-exchange resin. This gives a longer preservation time of at least 48 h compared with the two existing methods, which involved addition of EDTA which stabilized the samples for 3 hours, or in situ clean-up with a cation-exchange resin, which resulted in partial co-adsorption of As onto iron precipitates. In each case As speciation was carried out using HPLC-HG-AFS.One of the most common operations carried out on water samples after collection in a suitable vessel is filtration. Not only does this remove particulate matter, but it can also be used to determine the proportion of an element in a particular size fraction, be it true particulate or colloidal matter. Ultra-filtration has been used37 to partition trace amounts of Cu, Fe, Mn, Ni and Zn associated with the colloidal and suspended particulate phases in sea-water, prior to their analysis by IC, ICP-AES and AAS. The suspended particulate phase was separated into three size groups via suction filtration using cellulose acetate and nitrate filter membranes. The colloidal fractions were isolated using ultra-filtration membranes with nominal molecular weight limits (NMWL) of 300000, 50000, 30000, 10000 and 500. Concentrations of Cu, Mn, Ni and Zn were found to increase with decreasing size of the suspended particulate matter, while the opposite was true for Fe. This type of data is important for the development of models for metal transport in different aquatic systems. The use of cascade ultrafiltration followed by competing ligand-exchange has been investigated for the determination of the dynamic speciation of Al, Fe and Ni in fresh waters.38 Metal species were fractionated via filtration and characterized based on metal–complex dissociation constants as: free metal ions; labile metal complexes; slowly labile metal complexes; and inert metal complexes. GF-AAS was used to determine the kinetics of the metal complex dissociation. Experimental results compared favorably with the predictions of a computer simulation of metal speciation in aqueous systems dominated by humic acid. Cascade ultrafiltration coupled with dynamic speciation provided a more comprehensive insight into the physical and chemical characteristics of the metal species than either of these techniques could alone.2.1.2 Pre-concentration and separation procedures. Three main trends have dominated the literature on the pre-concentration of trace elements in waters: cloud point extraction; SPE using columns containing chemical adsorbents; and biosorbent packed columns. Two reviews39,40 of cloud point extraction have been published, illustrating the developments in the use of surfactants for separating and pre-concentrating inorganic ions, metal species and oxidation states. In cloud point extraction, the elements of interest are pre-concentrated from solution using a complexing agent and a non-ionic surfactant, followed by heating to the cloud point temperature. Detection has usually been by either GF-AAS or FAAS and delivers LODs in the 40 ng l−1 to 40 μg l−1 range, depending on the instrumentation used, the element and the initial sample volume taken. The analytical strategies developed for the isolation and pre-concentration of trace metals using synthetic ion-exchange resins in various batch and column configurations have been reviewed (68 refs.),41 as have the latest developments in metal biosorption by microbial biomass to assist analyte pre-concentration, matrix separation and speciation analysis.42A number of novel approaches to analyte pre-concentration have been reported. A method for the removal of anions from water samples employs electrochemically controlled solid-phase extraction (EC-SPE) interfaced on-line to ES-MS or ICP-MS.43 With polypyrrole coated electrodes, 3 μM bromide spiked into tap water was detected using ICP-MS. The authors used the technique to extract low concentrations of anions from solution in the presence of significantly higher concentrations of fluoride and sulfate ions. Various physical aspects of the electrodes, such as the surface morphology and the polypyrrole film thickness, were examined using SEM and AFM. Electrochemical control of the technique makes it particularly well suited for inclusion in a miniaturized lab-on-a-chip system. The use of a sequential flow injection (SI) system involving a bead-injection lab-on-valve (BI-LOV) system has been reported.44 The potential of the SI-BI-LOV system for the determination of CrVI in natural waters containing high levels of salts, using 1,5-diphenylcarbazide loaded poly(styrene-divinylbenzene) beads, was demonstrated using GF-AAS as the detector. The methodology was validated by determining the total Cr in a natural water CRM (NIST 1640) after off-line oxidation of all the Cr species to CrVI. A similar approach was used for the speciation of CrIII and CrVI in natural water samples.45 The automatic pre-concentration and speciation of the two species was facilitated using SPE onto hydrophilic chelating Sepharose beads. LODs for the system were 10 ng l−1 for CrIII and 20 ng l−1 for CrVI, when using GF-AAS detection. Hennebruder et al.46 have developed a technique for the enrichment of REE from surface waters using counter-current chromatography (CCC), prior to their measurement by ICP-MS. Samples were acidified to pH 2 and pre-concentrated using ethylhexyl phosphate as the stationary phase. The results from the system were compared with SPE using the same samples and stationary phase. The light and middle REE were recovered with 100% efficiency, which was an improvement on the SPE method. However, recoveries for Yb and Lu were low and poorly reproducible by CCC, whereas SPE provided significantly better results.2.2 SpeciationSpeciation analysis has figured strongly in the recent literature, with particular emphasis on As, Hg, organotin and Se in various water types. The trend identified last year for using ICP-MS to speciate compounds containing heteroatoms has continued, presumably reflecting the increasing availability of ICP-MS instruments equipped with collision or reaction cell technology. The majority of publications on speciation have featured separation by HPLC and GC, but molecular MS in combination with elemental MS has also been used.A number of important review papers detailing chemical speciation of different elements in a wide range of environmental matrices, including information on the analysis of water, have been published. A review47 of hyphenated techniques for As speciation analysis includes information about the most dominant species in various water bodies. An important review48 of all aspects of As speciation in environmental samples details all of the steps involved in the determination, including sample collection, treatment and measurement. It also describes the As-containing species found in the natural environment, including those associated with the degradation of chemical warfare agents, such as diphenylarsinic acid (DPAA). A useful comparison49 between CE-UV, HG-AAS and HPLC-ICP-MS for the speciation of As in groundwaters showed that the LODs for the three methods were 100–500 μg l−1, 100–200 ng l−1 and 100–200 ng l−1, respectively. The determination of mercury speciation in environmental samples has been reviewed (104 refs.),50 with particular emphasis on analytical artefacts and method validation. This review highlights the rigorous analytical procedures required at each stage of sample collection, treatment and measurement, including the problems specific to water analysis. Sampling is generally the most critical step for water analysis, with the best materials for sample storage and processing being Pyrex and Teflon after a severe cleaning procedure. The paper also describes a number of other factors to be aware of when determining Hg speciation in a range of environmental matrices other than water.The determination of some novel environmental As species in different water samples has been described. A method51 for the determination of the chemical warfare agents DPAA and phenylarsonic acid (PAA) in water samples by HPLC-ICP-MS has been developed. DPAA and PAA were separated from arsenite (AsIII), arsenate (AsV), methylarsonic acid (MA), dimethylarsinic acid (DMA) and trimethylarsine oxide (TMAO) using a cation-exchange column and gradient elution with a nitrate buffer. The recovery of DPAA and PAA from spiked groundwaters was quantitative using SPE. The majority of As found in process water from an industrial fluoride-rich environment has been reported52 to be hexafluoroarsenate (HFA). The determination of the HFA anion involved anion-exchange chromatography coupled to ICP-MS, giving an LOD of 6 ng l−1 as As. The chemical forms of As in highly sulfidic waters53 play a key role in the mobility of As in sulfur rich environments. IC-ICP-MS was used to investigate groundwater from a sulfidic aquifer. The As–S species found were thioarsenates, rather than the expected thioarsinites: unexpectedly, oxidation of AsIII to AsV was observed, which was related to the high affinity between AsIII and S, leading to S addition to the free electron pair of AsIII.The development of a novel technique for the rapid speciation of Hg and As in spiked waters using a chip-based electrophoresis system directly interfaced to AFS has been reported in a series of publications from a research group based in China.54–56 VG was used to convert the analytes from the microfluidic chip into their respective volatile species, prior to detection by AFS. The specially designed interface between the separation and detection systems was a concentric “tube-in-tube” design for introducing potassium borohydride solution around the chip effluent as a sheath flow and reductant for VG. Inorganic mercury (HgII) and methylmercury (MeHg) were separated as their cysteine complexes in 64 s.54 The migration times, peak areas and peak heights showed a short term stability of 0.7–2.9% RSD for analyte concentrations of between 2 and 4 mg l−1. The LODs were 53 μg l−1 for HgII and 161 μg l−1 for MeHg (as Hg) and the recoveries for spiked water samples ranged from 92 to 108%. The same system was used for the speciation analysis of inorganic As.55 Baseline separation of AsIII and AsV was achieved within 54 s using a chip containing a 90 mm long channel at 2500 V and an electrolyte buffer at pH 8.9. The precisions (RSD, n = 5) ranged from 1.9 to 1.4% for migration time, 2.1 to 2.7% for peak area and 1.8 to 2.3% for peak height for the two As species at a concentration of 3 mg l−1. The LODs were 76 and 112 μg l−1 (as As) for AsIII and AsV, respectively, and the recoveries for waters spiked at 1 mg l−1 ranged from 94 to 106%. In a further development, the group used FI coupled to the microfluidic CE-AFS system described above.56 The FI system was interfaced to the chip via a flow-through chamber and baseline separation of HgII and MeHg was achieved within 60 s using a 8 cm × 50 μm id capillary at 3.0 kV. The LODs were 100 μg l−1 for HgII and 200 μg l−1 for MeHg (as Hg), with a throughput of 60 samples per hour. The recoveries of both Hg species in spiked waters were in the range 93–106%. It is clear from these reports that this system offers significant potential for further development: however, at this stage the LODs reported are orders of magnitude poorer than would be required for routine water analysis applications.A number of speciation methods based on GC-MS analysis have been developed. A Spanish group has described a simple method for the simultaneous determination of trimethyllead, dimethyllead, triethyllead, diethyllead, MeHg, ethylmercury, HgII, monobutyltin (MBT), dibutyltin (DBT), tributyltin (TBT) and Sn in environmental samples.57 A comparison of preconcentration of the analytes on C-70 fullerenes and multiwalled nanotubes (MWNTs) indicated no significant differences between them in terms of sensitivity, selectivity, precision or reusability. However, MWNTs, C-60 and C-70 fullerenes were shown to be superior to graphitized carbon black or reversed-phase C18 for the extraction of the 11 species studied. Detection limits of 0.5 to 2.0 μg l−1 were obtained using a 50 ml sample volume and a sorbent column containing 160 mg MWNTs. The same group reported58 a similar method for the simultaneous measurement of Hg and Sn compounds by GC-MS. The analytes were complexed with NaDDC prior to their retention on a C-60 fullerene column and elution with ethyl acetate containing sodium tetra-n-propylborate as a derivatizing agent. For a sample volume of 50 ml and the MS instrument in its most sensitive, single ion monitoring (SIM) mode, the LODs were between 0.8 and 1.5 μg l−1. The speciation of Hg in sea-water using solid phase microextraction (SPME) with GC-MS involved a derivatization step to convert the analytes to their phenylated analogues.59 After extraction of the derivatized compounds, they were directly desorbed from the SPME fibre in the injector of the GC prior to their separation and quantification. The absolute LODs for were 0.02 ng MeHg and 0.05 ng HgII.Methods used for the speciation of organotin compounds in environmental water samples have reached a level of maturity where automated, high throughput and commercially validated protocols are being reported. Devos et al.60 have used an automated headspace solid phase microextraction GC-MS protocol for the simultaneous determination of MBT, DBT, TBT, monophenyltin (MPhT), diphenyltin (DPhT) and triphenyltin (TPhT) in sea-water. The method was based on derivatization with sodium tetraethylborate and deuterated organotin analogues, synthesized in-house, as internal standards for calibration by ID-MS. The LOQ values for saline water were between 1.3 and 15 ng l−1 and the methodology was used for the routine analysis of samples from the port of Antwerp. Another automated system61 employed on-line HG and a programmable temperature-vaporizing injection inlet for the determination of DBT and TBT in waters by GC-MS in SIM mode. The injector configuration, in particular the initial inlet temperature, injection volume and solvent characteristics, had a significant effect on the speciation measurements. Under optimized conditions the LODs for DBT and TBT were 120 and 9 μg l−1, respectively, and saline water spiked at 2 μg l−1 was used to validate the procedure. A standard GC-MS instrument with EI ionization has been used to develop a fast, simple and reliable method for the simultaneous determination of MBT, DBT and TBT in waters.62 Isotope dilution analysis using a commercially available spike solution containing a mixture of MBT, DBT and TBT enriched in 119Sn was used for quantification of the species. The LODs for 100 ml samples of natural, waste and sea-water were between 0.18 and 0.25 ng l−1 for the three organotin compounds. Studies on the stability of butyltin compounds in sea-water showed that the addition of glacial acetic acid (1% v/v) preserved the species for at least 5 days at room temperature.Speciation methods for Se based on the use of HPLC or IC separations coupled to elemental detection have been used for a variety of water types. A new method63 for the analysis of selenite (SeIV), selenate (SeVI) and selenocyanate (SeCN) has been described for the analysis of wastewater samples from an oil refinery plant. The analytes were separated by anion-exchange chromatography and detected at m/z 77, 78 and 82 using ICP-MS. Elution of the three species was complete in 7.5 min using an unusual mobile phase composed of cyanuric acid modified with acetonitrile and perchloric acid. The absolute LODs for the three species with a 500 μl sample loop were between 0.04 and 0.09 ng. The system was validated by analysing spiked waste water samples and gave recoveries between 80 and 110%. In all of the samples analysed, SeCN was the most abundant Se-containing species, reaching concentrations up to 90 ppb. SeIV was detected in only one sample and SeVI was not found in any. A porous graphite stationary phase has been evaluated64 for the simultaneous pre-concentration and separation of organic and inorganic Se species in mineral waters. The use of formic acid at pH 2.6 permitted the separation of SeIV, SeVI, SeCN, selenomethionine, selenocystine and selenoethionine. Using heptafluorobutyric acid as the injection medium allowed for enrichment of all the species at the top of the column and facilitated the injection of large sample volumes of up to 1 ml. With these injection conditions and measurement of 80Se using an ICP-MS instrument with a collision/reaction cell, LODs between 2 and 8 ng l−1 (as Se) were possible. A HPLC-ICP-MS system for the determination of inorganic Se species has been reported.65 The novelty of the system was the nano-titanium dioxide vapour generation device that was used to couple the HPLC system to the ICP-MS detector. This provided LODs for SeIV of 60 ng l−1 and for SeVI of 30 ng l−1, because of the high efficiency of the conversion of the inorganic ion to the corresponding volatile products and the lower blank levels achieved because traditional reagents were not used. The system was validated using spiked natural water samples.Inorganic and organic Sb species and their stability after sample collection have been investigated using anion-exchange HPLC. Nash et al.66 developed HPLC-ICP-MS methodologies based on strong and weak anion-exchange chromatography, in conjunction with a range of aqueous eluents. The optimal separation of SbV, SbIII and trimethylantimony dichloride (TMSb) was achieved using an ammonium tartrate eluent under controlled pH conditions and rapid pH gradient elution profiles. LODs were in the sub μg l−1 range. A report67 on the separation of SbIII, SbV and TMSb in sea-water by HPLC-HG-AFS included an investigation into the stability of the analytes during sample storage. This showed that SbIII is readily oxidized to SbV over a few hours when stored in a refrigerator at 4 °C. However, when the sea-water was immediately mixed with EDTA after collection and then refrigerated, no oxidation of SbIII was observed for up to a week. Studies of this type are often overlooked, but are important and should be undertaken as part of the method validation process.Interesting recent papers on new developments in environmental water analysis have focused on heteroatom speciation. Both GC and HPLC separation have been used for the analysis of P-containing compounds. The determination of organophosphorus pesticides in spiked river water samples using SPME and GC with molecular and elemental mass spectrometry detection has been reported.68 The optimized SPME procedure was evaluated by means of two different detection systems: GC-MS and GC-ICP-MS. Pesticides containing Br, Cl, P and S were determined using ICP-MS detection. LODs ranged from 0.8 to 504 ng l−1 for SPME-GC-MS and 0.09 to 143 ng l−1 for SPME-GC-ICP-MS. Guo et al.69 described the measurement of Glyphosate, a P-containing pesticide, and its breakdown products in water, using IC-ICP-MS. A polar anion-exchange column with citric acid as the eluent was used to separate the decomposition products prior to detection of 31P by ICP-MS. Based on a 500 μl sample injection, the LOD was 0.7 μg l−1 as P and the method was validated by spike recovery from a water sample. Reversed phase ion-pairing HPLC-ICP-MS was used for the analysis of organophosphorus chemical warfare agent degradation products, including ethyl methylphosphonic acid (the major breakdown product of the nerve agent VX), isopropylmethylphosphonic acid (the major hydrolysis product of the nerve agent Sarin) and methylphosphonic acid (the final hydrolysis product of both chemical warfare agents). A collision/reaction cell ICP-MS instrument was used to detect P+ and PO+ at m/z 31 and 47, respectively. The LODs were between 140 and 300 μg l−1 for each compound and the separation was achieved in less than 15 min. An interesting application70 of IC-ICP-MS for the speciation of halogens and organohalogens in the pore water of peat bogs has been reported. Pore waters from a pristine peat bog in southern Chile were sampled using a “sipping” device constructed in-house, which allows in situ sampling to a depth of 6 m. Total Br and I were determined by ICP-MS and total Cl by ion chromatography with conductivity detection. The different inorganic species of Br and I were measured by IC-ICP-MS and the organohalogen species were calculated as the difference between total concentrations and the sum of the inorganic species. A purge and trap pre-concentration system was coupled to capillary GC-MIP-AES to determine chlorophenols in water samples.71 Three differently substituted compounds, 2-chlorophenol, 2,4-dichlorophenol and 2,4,6-trichlorophenol, were initially acetylated prior to being purged from the liquid sample. Detection limits for 5 ml of water ranged from 23 to 150 ng l−1, which are lower than the limits reported for the current US EPA method.2.3 Instrumental analysis2.3.1 Atomic absorption spectrometry. A portable device for continuous determination of dissolved gaseous Hg in natural waters has been reported.72 The field performance of the fully automated instrument was tested on sea-water and lagoon water and provided an absolute LOD of 0.5 pg.2.3.2 Atomic emission spectrometry. The use and development of different sample introduction methods for AES detection has been reported. The performance of a new nebulizer system that allows the simultaneous determination of elements that form volatile hydrides and those elements that do not, without any instrumental changes, has been evaluated73 through the analysis of the hydride-forming elements Sb and Sn along with V and Zn. Interferences from transition metal ions were found to be insignificant for the determination of the four elements in the presence of L-cysteine. The LODs were between 0.5 and 5 μg l−1 and recovery experiments performed on the NIST 1643c Trace Metals in Water CRM were in agreement with the certified values.2.3.3 Vapour generation methods. Some new developments in vapour generation have been reported for a range of elements including As, Cd, Hg and Sb. Arbab-Zavar et al.74 described a method for the determination of HgII in spiked tap and river waters, using a batch electrochemical VG system coupled to ETV-AAS. Graphite tubes coated with Ir were used to trap the elemental Hg at room temperature, prior to atomization. Under the optimized conditions the calibration curve was linear from 3 to 100 μg l−1 and the LOD was 1 μg l−1. In a related paper75 a similar electrolytic VG system was used for the determination of Cd in spiked tap water. In this instance the analyser was a flame heated, T-type, quartz tube atomizer AAS system with deuterium background correction. The calibration range was smaller for this system, up to 20 μg l−1, but the LOD was lower at 0.2 μg l−1. Electrochemical VG systems appear to have a number of advantages over chemical VG systems, mainly because tetrahydroborate is not required; this reagent can be expensive, unstable and susceptible to contamination, which limits its real potential for ultra-trace analysis. A new photochemical VG system76 involving a single reagent has been reported for the speciation of inorganic HgII and MeHg. The vapour is generated using formic acid and reaction with the analytes under natural light or ultraviolet (UV) irradiation, followed by detection via AFS. The method can be used for speciation studies because, in the presence of UV, both HgII and MeHg can be converted to a vapour and measured, whereas under natural light only HgII can be converted. The concentration of MeHg can therefore be determined by difference. It offers a simple, cheap and effective speciation procedure for Hg in water. No time-consuming off-line pre-oxidation of MeHg is required and the use of a single reagent minimizes the potential for contamination; a simple HgII standard can be used for calibration. The linear dynamic range was up to 25 mg l−1 with UV and 300 mg l−1 with natural light, and the LOD for total Hg was 3 μg l−1. The simultaneous determination of As and Sb in sea-water by continuous HG coupled to axial view ICP-OES has been reported.77 Pre-reduction with thiourea and pre-concentration by co-precipitation with lanthanum in a PTFE knotted reactor was required. The protocol generated LODs of 0.17 μg l−1 for As and 0.27 μg l−1 for Sb, using a 16 ml sample volume. The determination of inorganic and total Hg in water was used to demonstrate a high-intensity focused ultrasound sample introduction system for CV-AAS.78 Various designs of slotted-tube atom trap79 have been used in conjunction with VG to determine Cd and Pb in water CRMs.2.3.4 X-ray fluorescence spectrometry. The chemical mapping of polar ice by micro-XRF has been reported.80 A customized sample holder was developed and the equipment was modified to include a thermal control system to keep the samples frozen solid and unaltered during analysis. Analysis of ice samples from Antarctica showed the technique to be sensitive and non-destructive, so that experiments could be repeated to confirm results and interesting areas such as crystal grain boundaries or specific inclusions investigated further. Integration times and resolution could be adjusted to optimize sensitivity. Artificial ice samples prepared from ultra-pure water were used to investigate possible contamination effects or experimental artefacts.2.3.5 Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry. A number of publications describe the use of ICP-MS for the measurement of isotope ratios. Petrov and Quetel,81 working at the Institute for Reference Materials and Measurements (IRMM), Belgium, determined Fe isotope ratios in sea-water samples by using a single detector double focusing magnetic sector ICP-MS instrument at medium resolution setting. The analysis of Fe isotopes in sea-water is a particularly challenging analytical measurement by ICP-MS because of the ultra-low levels of natural Fe and the presence of high concentrations of salt in the samples. In this study these effects were overcome by using Mg(OH)2 co-precipitation to concentrate and isolate the Fe from the salt matrix. The method achieved an expanded uncertainty (coverage factor, k = 2) value (U) of 2–3% for the measurement of 56Fe/57Fe in samples containing 300–450 ng l−1 Fe and salinity of 0.1%. The precise determination of S isotopic ratios in sea-water and sedimentary marine pore water samples, using a double focusing SF-ICP-MS instrument, has been reported in a Technical Note.82 An HDPE column packed with anion exchange resin was used to isolate S as the sulfate ion from the sample matrix. A platinum guard electrode and an Aridus membrane desolvation system were used to reduce isobaric interferences from oxygen and hydrogen species on 32S to acceptable levels and so allow the 34S/32S ratio to be measured in the low resolution mode, with the benefit of higher signal intensities. A procedure has been described for the accurate measurement of Si isotope ratios by multi-collector ICP-MS.83 Dissolved Si was pre-concentrated and separated from other major elements in natural surface waters using anion-exchange chromatography. The optimized sample preparation procedure gave a Si recovery of >97% and almost complete elimination of the major elements. The high-resolution capability of the instrument allowed for interference-free measurement of 28Si and 29Si, using conventional solution nebulization for sample introduction. However, owing to the magnitude of the polyatomic interferences around 30Si, mostly from 14N16O, measurements of this isotope required exact matching of the analyte and nitric acid concentrations in all the solutions. Isotope abundance ratio measurements were made using the bracketing standards approach and mass-bias variation was corrected using on-line addition of Mg. The method was applied to the measurement of Si isotope ratios in Lake Tanganyika.84 The difference in Δ29Si values between the surface and deeper waters in the lake suggested biological isotopic discrimination induced by diatom biomineralization and highlight how Si isotope ratio measurements can be used in studies related to climate variability, nutrient dynamics and other environmental changes.The use of ICP-MS instrumentation for ultra-trace analysis of water has been described. A team from the National Research Council of Canada (NRCC) reported the ultra-trace determination of mercury in water by VG isotope dilution ICP-MS.85 Samples were reduced on-line after gold trapping, using the conventional approach. The detection characteristics of SF-ICP-MS and ICP-TOF-MS were compared using a river water CRM (NRCC ORMS-3). No significant difference in final Hg concentration was detected using either instrument, or FI sample introduction to generate a transient or steady-state signal. The main difference was the 2-fold enhancement of the precision of the isotope ratio measurement with the TOF instrument compared with the SF. Method detection limits for SF-ICP-MS were 0.024 pg g−1 using direct VG and 0.15 pg g−1 following gold trapping. These were lower than the LODs of 0.30 and 0.87 pg g−1 obtained using direct VG and gold trapping, respectively, with ICP-TOF-MS detection. This paper illustrates the main characteristics and strengths of the two instrument designs. A method using a single detector double focusing magnetic sector ICP-MS instrument, with a microflow nebuliser and a desolvation system, has been developed for the direct determination of all the REE in melted Antarctic ice.86 The direct analysis of REE in these sample types is difficult because of the low analyte concentrations, small sample sizes usually available and formation of interfering metal oxides. The use of a desolvation system for sample introduction reduced spectral interferences due to oxide formation and the system provided LODs ranging from 0.001 pg g−1 for Ho, Tm and Lu to 0.03 pg g−1 for Gd.2.4 Metrology and data qualityA good example of an international intercomparison of the analytical methods for the measurement of dissolved Fe in sea-water was reported by Bowie et al.87 In this blind trial, 24 laboratories analysed acidified filtered sea-water from the South Atlantic Ocean for dissolved Fe using different analytical techniques. Storage, homogeneity and time-series stability experiments conducted over 2.5 years indicated an inter-bottle variability of less than 7%, although there was a decrease in Fe concentration before a stable value was reached, suggesting that acidification may not be the most satisfactory way of stabilizing the samples. The mean consensus concentration value for dissolved Fe in the sample was 0.59 nM. The methods used in this study included flow injection chemiluminescence, flow injection catalytic spectrophotometry and ID-ICP-MS using a high resolution mass spectrometer: the first two methods gave a significantly (P = 0.05) higher dissolved Fe concentration than the last.3 Analysis of soils, plants and related materialsThis section reports progress on the development of analytical techniques for soils, plants and related materials during the past year and follows on from last year’s Update.1 A major theme emerging from the review is the speciation of As, Hg, Sb and Se, with particular attention being paid to their speciation in plant materials. Another theme is the continued and wider use of XRF, including X-ray microfluorescence, for the biogeochemical characterisation of soils and plants.3.1 Sample preparation3.1.1 Sample dissolution. Sample preparation methods for solid environmental samples, with an emphasis on current procedures, have recently been reviewed,88 and a comparative study made of sample preparation methods for stream sediments.89 This latter study highlighted the limitations of using HNO3–HClO4 and HCl–HNO3 for the quantitative extraction of some elements. The results from a study on the characteristics of fine particles left in solution after dissolution of plant materials has also been reported.90 It was found that the decomposition method employed had a marked effect on the composition of fine particles left in solution and could possibly result in significant negative errors.Microwave digestion has again been utilised to good effect to aid elemental determinations in a variety of media. Vieira et al.91 used it to address the problem whereby the precipitation of the fluorides of Al, Ca, Fe and Mg during HNO3–HF digestion of soil samples containing high concentrations of Si reduces their total recovery. Of four dissolution procedures attempted on a CRM, the most successful was microwave-assisted acid digestion, followed by separation and HF dissolution of the silicate residues and complexation of fluoride ions by boric acid. Acceptable recoveries were obtained for all elements determined by ICP-OES. Melaku et al.92 compared microwave acid digestion techniques, using various mixtures of HF, HNO3 and HCl to determine a number of trace metals in two soil CRM by ICP-MS. The most accurate and precise results (recovery 91–110% and precision generally <5%) were obtained with an aqua regia mixture of 2 ml HNO3 and 6 ml HCl. The optimization of microwave-assisted digestion of sediments to determine Hg and Sn has also been reported.93 The methodology was designed for use with FI-HG-QFAAS and was optimised using an experimental design approach. The optimal conditions were found to be 0.2% HCl (v/v) and 0.5% NaBH4 (w/v) with a furnace temperature of 875 °C. Various microwave-assisted digestion methods gave acceptable recoveries for Pt and Rh in a road dust CRM determined by ICP-MS but clear differences between the methods were reported for other elements.943.1.2 Extraction techniques. A comparative study of acid extractable and total digestion methods for the determination of inorganic elements in peat by ICP-AES has been reported.95 While the results suggested the general efficacy of HNO3 for many elements, the need for HF when determining Al, Co, Cr, Ti, and V was clearly demonstrated. Pressurised liquid extraction has been evaluated for use with environmental samples. Both acetic acid and formic acid are reported to offer benefit for total metal extractions96 whilst pressurised hot water has been used to extract soil K.97 Vaisanen et al.98,99 described an ultrasound-assisted sequential extraction based on the well-known, 5-step Tessier procedure, for ICP-OES determination of trace metals and arsenic in contaminated soils which included the use of CRM samples. High accuracy and precision were reported for most elements but As was over-estimated. The method yielded an improvement in speed. Kalembkiewicz and Soco100 evaluated several sequential extraction procedures, including the Tessier and BCR schemes, for their success in extracting Cr from soils. Total recovery was found to vary from 18.2% (BCR) to 96.5% (Tessier). Kartal et al. have reported the use of modified BCR schemes for the determination of metals in sediments101 and vegetables.102 A more novel approach offering an alternative to the BCR method has been reported by Hill’s group in Plymouth.103 This is an application of their sequential extraction method presented previously and offers potential as a fast screening method for the bioavailability of metals in the environment. Alternative fractionation schemes have been reported for automated use exploiting micro-sequential injection104 and for soils with a high carbonate content.105 Maruchi and Rocha106 have reported a procedure employing microwave-assisted acid digestion or photodegradation in the presence of ammonium persulfate in acid medium for phosphorus fractionation in plant materials. Supersonic extraction has also been used in yet another modification of the Tessier sequential extraction method.107Soylack et al.108 described an interesting procedure for the extraction of trace amounts of Co, Cr, Cu, Fe, Mn and Pb from soils and sediments, prior to determination by AAS. The metals were coprecipitated with erbium hydroxide in a 0.05 M NaOH medium and the precipitate dissolved in 1 M HNO3. Recovery exceeded 95% and the time required for coprecipitation was approximately 30 min.A range of solid phase extractants have been reported offering potential for use with environmental samples including modified Amberlite resins with modified functionality using pyrocatechol violet,109 2-hydroxyacetophenone-thiosemicarbazone,110 1-(2-pyridylazo)-2-naphthol,111 Ambersorb-527 with EDTA,112 Amberlyst 36 for the determination of Cd,113 Chromosorb 108 for the determination of Cr,114N-(3,5-dimethylphenyl)-N′-(4-aminobenzenesulfonate)-thiourea,115 2,4-dihydroxybenzylidenethiorhodanine,116 5,7-dichloroquinoline-8-ol-embedded styrene–ethylene glycol dimethacrylate,117 and more common resins such as Chelex-100.118,119A procedure for determining the plant-available fraction of metals from sediments was described by Almeida et al.120 Metals were extracted enzymatically using pepsin and their concentrations determined by AAS. Interpretation of the data was suggestive of interesting processes involving organic ligands at the rhizosphere–sediment interface. However, the results, when compared with those from other extraction techniques, including sequential extraction, were contradictory and the authors recommended a combination of different approaches when investigating metal availability from sediments to plants. In another study of soil–plant interactions, Kubova et al.,121 investigated the use of chelating ion-exchange solid phase extraction for determination of Al availability, compared with other methods including various sequential and single extractions. They reported that the method tested was the most sensitive indicator of increasing Al toxicity to plants. A method for the determination of the halogens (Br, Cl and I) has been reported based on their extraction into aqueous solution using tetramethylammonium hydroxide.122Several workers have reported extraction procedures for speciation studies. Enzyme assisted extraction has been described for plant materials.123 The authors suggest that careful selection of the enzyme mixture can overcome the disadvantage that the extraction efficiency is very organism specific. Several groups have reported on extractions suitable for As species,124,125 although the use of L-cysteine remains popular.126,1273.2 SpeciationMany of the speciation studies of soils and related materials this year have focused on determinations of Sb, As, Hg and Se species, particularly with respect to plant tissues.Miravet et al.128 described a novel method for extraction of antimony species for determination by IC-HG-AFS. Prepared samples of several terrestrial plants were subjected to 4 hours of end-over-end shaking and 1 hour of sonication extraction with 0.1 M citric acid. Inorganic and methyl Sb species were detected and extraction efficiency was validated by the use of a Tobacco Leaf CRM. The same group have also reported the use of on-line photooxidation by peroxodisulfate prior to using the same technique.129 However, problems with the speciation of Sb from plant materials were highlighted by Foster et al.,130 who noted that the solvents used to extract Sb and other metals from plant tissues are inappropriate for speciation studies. Amereih et al.131 extracted Sb species from urban soils using citric acid and ultrasound and analysed the extracts by on-line isotope dilution after chromatographic separation. The predominant species was SbV and levels of inorganic Sb decreased to background within a few metres of busy roads. Oxidation state studies for Sb in soils have also been reported using X-ray absorption near-edge structure spectroscopy.132As in the previous year, arsenic speciation has received a lot of attention, although largely using established techniques to monitor the element’s mobility in specific case studies, e.g., the Bilbao estuary in northern Spain,133 soils in the Baia-Mare district of Romania,134 semi-arid soils,135 Cornish soils136 and marine salt marshes.137 A useful review of the techniques used for speciation of arsenic in plants was provided by Quaghebeur and Rengel,138 who noted the problems of species transformations during sample handling and preparation. The issue of validation has been addressed by Leermakers et al.48 who stressed the need for appropriate reference materials. Mihucz et al.139 detected arsenate, arsenite and dimethylarsinic acid in the xylem sap of Cucumis sativus L. grown hydroponically in As-containing solutions. The results indicate that arsenite was taken up by the plant more easily than arsenate. Photochelatins and other related thiols have also been studied as complexing biomolecules for As and Cd in Brassica juncea plant tissue.140 The speciation was achieved using size exclusion chromatography coupled to ICP-MS and reported for the first time the presence of an arsenic glutathione synthetase complex, which was confirmed using MS/MS. Speciation of As was achieved by flow injection analysis and HPLC-DF-ICP-MS. Ruiz-Chancho et al.141 extracted As species from soils using LC-HG-AFS. The authors devised a protocol to ensure the stability of the extracted species over time using a phosphoric acid and ascorbic acid extraction solution with purging of the extracts after microwave extraction. An interesting study of the release of arsenic from wood treated with chromated copper arsenate (CCA) has been reported.142 Both AsIII and AsV were detected in soil samples collected below specially constructed decks after exposure to weathering for one year. The authors estimate that, of the 28000 t of As used in the State of Florida on CCA-treated wood products in 2000, approximately 4600 t had already leached.Shade and Hudson143 described a novel technique for the speciation of mercury in various media, including soils and sediments. The procedure determines monomethyl Hg and mercuric Hg by cold-vapour AFS, after their separation by a thiol-functionalised silica resin column and conversion to Hg0. The authors report high sample throughput, acceptable accuracy and precision and an absolute detection limit of <1 pg. Although GC-AFS is widely used to determine Hg species in sediments the recoveries are often low. For example, the determination of methylmercury in sediment was reported this year with a recovery of 70%.144 Mercury speciation has been considered by Leermakers et al.50 who report on verification and accuracy requirements to meet quality assurance needs. X-ray absorption spectroscopy was used by Bernaus et al.145 to determine the Hg species present in soils and other media at the famous Hg mining area of Almaden, Spain. Potential interfering compounds were analysed by ICP-AES and samples were further characterised by electron microscopy and synchrotron-based techniques. Cinnabar (HgS) was the main Hg species in soils and ore samples. The speciation of Hg within soil fractions sorted by particle size has also been reported for the Asturias area of Spain.146Selenium speciation was once more a topic of interest this year. Most studies have tended to focus on plant materials, especially Brassica juncea,147–150 although Se speciation in soils developing on reclaimed mine land151 and in Se deficient soils treated with Se fertiliser granules152 have also been reported. Bryszewska et al.153 used enzymes, including protease and cellulose, to extract Se from rye seedlings. HPLC was used for separation and ICP-MS for analysis but selenate and selenite were not detected and organic species could not be determined. Slekovec and Goessler154 extracted Se from vegetable samples with a 9:1 methanol–water solution and attempted to separate Se species using an anion-exchange chromatographic column with 10 mM citric acid solution. Analysis by ICP-MS revealed that most, or all, of the Se in the vegetables was in the selenate form. Some selenite and selenomethionine was detected in extracts from garlic. Se speciation in buckwheat has also been reported155 using enzymatic hydrolysis followed by HPLC-UV-HG-AFS. The same technique was used in the development of a method to determine Se compounds in plant leaves.156 As is often the case, the authors identified the need for suitable reference materials and standards and reported the presence of several unidentified species.Another study worthy of mention is that of Voegelin et al.,157 who used EXAFS and XRF to determine forms of Zn in soils at various times after the application of brass foundry dust, containing ZnO, to the soils. The ZnO had dissolved after 6 months and half of the dissolved Zn had precipitated, mainly as Zn-layered double hydroxide. The remaining Zn may have precipitated as a Zn-phyllosilicate phase, along with some Zn adsorption. Thereafter, there was no major change in Zn speciation for the remainder of the experiment, which lasted 4 years in total.3.3 Instrumental analysis3.3.1 Atomic absorption spectrometry. As in previous years,1 many reported applications employing AAS are fairly routine determinations of metals in samples of polluted soils and sediments collected in regions of the world where, presumably, more sensitive multi-element techniques are not available. However, some of these studies provide useful contributions to specific areas of interest. Such examples include an investigation of the metal content of indigenous plants used for medicinal purposes,158 metal levels in sugar cane from an area influenced by a municipal landfill system159 and a comprehensive study of Pb in urban soils from selected cities in the Philippines.160Techniques based on electrothermal AAS have been developed for the analysis of plant materials and soils. Acar et al.161 investigated the use of an ETAAS-based method for the determination of trace elements in lichens, in a program to evaluate the use of lichens as biomonitors of aerial deposition of trace metals such as Cd and Pb. The authors sought to optimise parameters such as pyrolysis and atomisation temperatures and modifier mixtures and reported acceptable recoveries and detection limits for Cd, Cu, Mn and Pb of 0.06 μg l−1, 0.66 μg l−1, 0.16 μg l−1 and 1.26 μg l−1, respectively. Panichev et al.162 proposed the determination of CrVI compounds in plant materials by ETAAS, after leaching the samples with 0.1 M Na2CO3. Pyrolysis and atomisation times were optimised, results were in good agreement with CRM values and a LOD of 0.024 μg g−1 was achieved. Flow injection on-line microcolumn preconcentration was coupled with ETAAS by Rojas et al.163 for the determination of Rh in soil and plant samples. The silica gel-based microcolumn contained 1,5-bis(di-2-pyridyl)methylene thiocarbohydrazide and the system was optimised with a 60 s pre-concentration time and a sample flow rate of 3.5 ml min−1. Good accuracy and a LOD of 1 ng ml−1 were reported.The use of slurry atomisation continues to find application for environmental samples. Slurry extraction ETAAS was used by Felipe-Sotelo et al.164 to determine Mo in soils and other solid materials. Several advantages were reported including good precision and accuracy, low cost, rapid analysis and a LOD of 0.1 μg g−1. The Simplex method was used to optimise HCl and HNO3 concentrations and sample mass and ultrasonic power were also optimised. The same group also used this approach to determine Sb in marine sediments.165 Cd, Cr and Pb in marine sediments were determined by Pereira et al. using ETAAS.166 The performance of a range of modifiers was evaluated and results presented for several reference materials. Acar167,168 investigated the use of various permanent chemical modifiers for the ETAAS determination of Cd and Pb in soils. Stabilisation of analytes and reduction in interferences were found with Mo, Mo–Ir and Mo–Ru coatings of platforms inserted into pyrolytic graphite tubes. Good accuracy and LODs of 0.07 μg g−1 for Cd and 0.09 μg g−1 for Pb were reported. Similarly, the effect of slurry stability, particle size, matrix modifier and furnace conditions for the determination of Pb and Cd in soils has been reported.169 The mechanism of the matrix modification was discussed. The direct determination of Pb in compost by slurry sampling ETAAS has been evaluated using both reference materials and conventional digestion techniques.170 A screening method for Hg in soils based on solid sampling ETAAS has been reported, offering an analysis time of 6–10 min per sample, a detection limit of 25 ng g−1 and RSD values between 3–12%.171Shi et al.172 developed a technique for the determination of Cd and Hg in plant materials, based on nebulous phase reaction and cold vapour AAS (CVAAS). The objective was to reduce losses of Cd and volatile Hg from solution and the authors report good accuracy and precision and LODs of 21 ng l−1 for Cd and 8 ng l−1 for Hg. The Cd content of Finnish linseed has been determined with respect to estimated consumer uptake.173 The study revealed differences between the three varieties examined and an increase in Cd uptake with greater nitrogen fertilization. The variability of metal contents in the sea rush Juncos maritimus has been determined by measuring the levels of a range of metals in the sediment, rhizosediments and plant tissue.174 Various factors were found to effect uptake in addition to seasonal variability. Finally, CVAAS has been used in a study of heavy metals by vegetables grown on contaminated soils and their bioavailability in the human gastrointestinal tract.1753.3.2 Atomic emission spectrometry. There have been few applications of ICP-AES for studies on soils and sediments. The technique was used to determine the rare earth elements in a study of their accumulation in soils treated with calcium superphosphate,176 the chemical fractionation of heavy metals in andisols following extensive periods of fertilisation management in Japan,177 and in studies to assess the contamination of sediments by heavy metals in polluted areas, e.g., the Cheliff river in Algeria,178 but most of these studies are not particularly novel in terms of the application of ICP-AES. An exception was the report by Schreiber et al.,179 who studied the mobility of trace elements in soils via online coupling of rotating coiled columns to ICP-AES. Leaching solutions were fed through columns containing the sample enabling real-time data on the leaching process to be obtained and the authors state that the procedure gives substantial time-savings compared with traditional batch procedures. A similar approach using rotating coiled columns has been reported by Fedotov et al.180 for mobility and fractionation studies. The application of ICP-AES to determine trace elements in plant materials has been more common. Masson et al.181 investigated the use of hydride generation coupled to ICP-AES for the determination of Se in plant samples. The authors state that there were no interferences from transition metals or from Ca, K, Mg and P in the plant samples and report good precision, accuracy and sensitivity for Se (LOD of 0.15 μg l−1). A more novel approach has been presented by Fan et al.,182 who have used the volatilization of Co, Cr, Mn and Ni as their pyrrolidinecarbodithioate chelates from an electrothermal atomiser for sample introduction. Other studies have been fairly routine in terms of instrumentation, but have looked at a wide variety of sample types including spices and herbs,183 medicinal herbs,184 forest berries,185 edible mushrooms,186 teas187,188 and mustard seeds.189 Perhaps the most unusual of these studies was the determination of 55 elements in the millipede Oxidus gracilis, together with soil and plant samples from their habitat to determine the potential use of millipedes in environmental pollution studies.190It is becoming rare to see MIP-AES being used in environmental studies. However, the technique has been used for the simultaneous determination of the hydrides of As, Sb, Se and Sn plus Hg from slurries of environmental samples including marine sediments.1913.3.3 Atomic fluorescence spectrometry. Relatively few studies have used AFS for the analysis of soils and related materials this year. Most of these have been investigations of speciation128,141,143 and are therefore discussed in Section 3.2. One exception was the determination of Cd in corn samples using vapour generation-AFS.192 The study investigated the transfer of both Cd and Zn from soil to corn.3.3.4 Mass spectrometry. 3.3.4.1 Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry. This year, ICP-MS has again been coupled with, or used alongside, novel techniques for the analysis of soils and related materials. Ranville et al.193 developed a technique whereby sedimentation field-flow fractionation was coupled with ICP-MS to investigate the elemental distributions of mobile soil colloids. The technique highlighted variations in element ratios which were indicative of differences in mineralogy over the range of colloid sizes studied and which allowed the authors to gain insights into colloid transport processes in soils.Mason et al.194 attempted to determine cation and anion availability in soils simultaneously, using a mixed binding layer (MBL) in diffusive gradients in thin films (DGT). The MBL consisted of ferrihydrite and Chelex-100 cation-exchange resin; 1 M HCl, rather than HNO3, was used as the eluent to reduce interference. The authors reported successful uptake of Cd, Cu, Mn, Mo, P and Zn across a range of pH levels and ionic strengths. Results were significantly correlated with data from single ferrihydrite or Chelex binding layers, indicating that the MBL could be used to determine cation and anion availability from soils in a single assay.ICP-MS procedures involving isotope dilution procedures have been reported. Mestek et al.195 investigated different calibration strategies for the determination of Pt in soils. The isotope dilution method and the external calibration method were used for Pt quantification and the authors were able to reduce usual interferences from hafnium oxide and tungsten oxide by off-line mathematical correction, although this was only applicable to samples with low Hf. The determination of Pd in road dust has been compared by two methods: external calibration with mathematical correction of spectral interferences and isotope dilution following extraction into dibutyl sulfide solution.196 The uncertainties on the results were similar for both methods. Petrov et al.197 have compared nebulization with external calibration, hydride generation with external calibration, isotope dilution with nebulization and isotope dilution with hydride generation for sample introduction in the determination of Pb. The best detection limits and accuracy were obtained using isotope dilution techniques in hydride generation and sample nebulization mode. Isotope dilution was also used by Inagaki et al.198 to determine Se in sediments. This study employed an octapole reaction cell and it was found that the intensity of Se+ was enhanced almost four-fold by the addition of 5% (v/v) acetic acid, whereas that for Ar2+ was barely enhanced.A number of other studies have measured the isotope ratios of U in environmental samples. 234U and 230Th were determined by FIA-ICP-MS in an application to look at the uranium series disequilibrium in marine sediments.199 Two studies have looked at low levels of U in soil samples collected in the vicinity of the Chernobyl nuclear power plant,200,201 whilst the sample clean-up required for such studies has also been investigated.202 The determination of 99Tc in both soils and radioactive wastes has been achieved using anion exchange chromatography coupled to ICP-MS.203 In another application, high precision measurement of Hg isotopic ratios in sediments was achieved using cold vapour generation multi-collector ICP-MS.204 This study confirmed that the long term precision and accuracy possible using this technique was sufficient to detect even small differences in Hg isotopic ratios in sediment samples. The interaction of the lanthanides with humic substances has been investigated using CE-ICP-MS.205 The authors suggest that humic substances form a range of tri- to tetradentate complexes under environmental conditions. On-line high-speed counter current chromatography (HSCCC) was coupled to ICP-MS by Wu et al.206 for the determination of Pu in soils. 1% tri-n-octylamine in heptane was used as the stationary phase and interferences from U and Th were eliminated. The 239Pu concentration obtained was comparable with that from the more traditional technique of anion-exchange separation ICP-MS. In another study,207 Pu isotopes were determined in sediment cores using sector field ICP-MS with an off-line anion exchange chromatographic system. A conical concentric nebulizer and a 150 s counting time were used to achieve detection limits down to 0.35 fg. A more rapid method has been reported by Ohtsuka et al.208 to determine Pu isotopes in soil samples within 60 min. This was achieved using an alkaline fusion method with an induction heating device. The Pu concentrations were then determined by flow injection-ICP-MS using a solid extraction resin after preconcentration by batch extraction with a chelating resin. The limits of detection were 9.2 fg for 239Pu and 4.3 fg for 240Pu. Epov et al.209 reported the use of ICP-MS for the determination of Pu in plant materials. The sample was microwave-digested and the Pu concentration was determined by flow injection ICP-MS with a dynamic reaction cell following online preconcentration and matrix separation by an anion-exchange resin. A detection limit of 2.9 fg g−1 was achieved for 239Pu.As in previous years, the range of applications of ICP-MS to environmental samples this year is very diverse. A cross section of the more unusual reports includes the determination of organophosphorus chemical warfare agent residues in soils,210 As diagenesis at the sediment–water interface of a recently flooded freshwater sediment,211 high-resolution dendrochemical analysis of flood-affected oaks using laser ablation ICP-MS, analysis of sludge from municipal wastewater treatment plants destined for agricultural use,212 tracing the source of heavy metals in soils using Cd and Pb isotopes,213 and a multi-element survey of wild edible fungi and blackberries in the UK.2143.3.4.2 Accelerator mass spectrometry. Since its introduction in the late 1970s AMS has become a powerful tool for the measurement of trace amounts of natural radionuclides in environmental samples. This development has been reviewed,215 focusing on the introduction of smaller accelerators, novel detection systems and current analytical capabilities. AMS has been used widely, as in previous years, in paleoenvironmental investigations. Lawson et al.216 measured 14C in samples from 6 peat cores in northern Greece spanning a time period from 20000 years BP until nearly the present day. The results showed that tree cover in the study area increased rapidly at the onset of the Holocene and provided evidence for milder periods between 10500 and 7500 years BP. In a study of radiocarbon in charcoal fragments in southern Quebec, Canada, Talon et al.217 demonstrated that forest fires in the area were common in the early Holocene but did not occur, at least to the same intensity, from the mid-Holocene onwards. In a similar study in British Columbia, Sanborn et al.218 used 147 charcoal samples recovered from 29 sites to reconstruct the Holocene fire history of an inland temperate rainforest watershed. Bos et al.219 investigated AMS radiocarbon in terrestrial organic materials in the south of the Netherlands and were able to reconstruct a detailed history of environmental changes in the study area, demonstrating significant climatic changes in the early Holocene. In a further study the same group studied lake-level fluctuations and small-scale vegetation patterns during the late glacial employing AMS 14C dating on four sediment cores.220 In Norway, a record of Holocene flood events has been established based on lake-fill sedimentary succession in a small basin in the upper Glomma catchment.221 Based on 14C data, about 115 discrete flood events were detected with a recurrence interval of about 90 years. Similar studies in this area also include an investigation of late Pleistocene and Holocene glacial activity in Venezuela,222 lake level fluctuations in the Southwest Yukon territory in Canada,223 and a study of the sediment record for the last 1300 years in Lake sills in Switzerland.224Marine sediments have also been studied using AMS. One interesting study evaluated the potential process blanks associated with radiocarbon dating of alkenones.225 Two strategies were used: the dating of samples of known age and multiple measurement on identical samples. The study showed that the potential contamination associated with the procedure does not lead to a systematic bias of the results of alkenone dating to either younger or older sediments. A conservative estimate of measurement precision of 17 parts per thousand was given for modern samples. A study of the 6700 year stratigraphy for the Santa Barbara Basin in California showed a late Holocene shift towards larger 14C age differences in samples, inferring the influx of a more 14C depleted (and thus older and oxygen depleted) source of sub-sill bottom water into the Basin.226 Marine sediments have also been studied with respect to relative sea-level changes in the Nanortalik area in southern Greenland,227 environmental changes in the southern Bering Sea,228 fluctuating bottom currents on the Porcupine Bank, Ireland,229 and the dating of sediment cores collected from the Ulleung Basin in the Japan Sea.230Carbon-14 measurements were used by Rethemeyer et al.231 to investigate the fate of organic matter in agricultural soils in Germany. The organic matter was divided into operationally defined fractions using methods including density fractionation. Reductions in the carbon-14 concentration of the humin fraction with increasing soil depth indicated higher levels of stable organic material at lower levels of the soil profile, compared with the surface horizons. Relatively small decreases of 14C in the humic acid fraction with depth suggested that recently applied organic material can be readily transported down the soil profile. Li et al.232 determined 129I concentrations in vegetation from the Beijing area of China, using AMS after pre-concentration with alkaline wet ashing, extraction-back extraction and precipitation. The pre-concentration procedure was successful in separating and purifying 129I from the samples and concentrations were reported to be lower than in areas near to nuclear facilities in Europe but higher than in samples collected in the pre-nuclear period. Variation in the Rb:Sr ratio has been used to study the degree of pedogenesis and weathering in the NW region of China.233 The study showed an enhancement in chemical weathering under today’s climate. Finally, demonstrating the increasing application of this technique, anaerobically preserved plant remains from New Guinea have been used to confirm doubts about the antiquity of betel-nut in this region.2343.3.4.3 Other mass spectrometry techniques. Bacon et al.235 used thermal ionisation mass spectrometry (TIMS) to determine Pb isotopes in grass growing in upland soils of Scotland, which the authors had spiked with enriched 207Pb. The objective of the study was to determine whether such grass could be used as an indicator of atmospheric deposition of Pb by investigating the relative contribution of deposition and uptake. The results indicated that most of the Pb in the grass samples (>90% in some cases) had been deposited. TIMS has also been used to determine the sources of anthropogenic Pb in sediments from an artificial lake236 and for traceability studies when measuring Cd, Cu, Pb and Zn in sediments as part of a interlaboratory comparison.237Several groups have reported the use of laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy for studies on soils, including the development of in situ standardless analysis of polluted soils,238 and Cr polluted soils.239,2403.3.5 X-ray fluorescence spectrometry. One of the advantages of portable XRF is clearly its potential for in situ analysis and PXRF instruments have again been used in the field in studies of the terrestrial environment. For example, Custo et al.241 describe a soil characterisation survey in a region of Argentina using in situ analysis by XRF, and note the time savings achieved. However, a comparison of XRF and FAAS has been reported for the determination of As, Cr and Cu in polluted soils.242 The study indicated that whilst XRF can be used effectively for field analysis, laboratory analysis may be needed to confirm results. In another study243 comparing XRF data for As, Cd, Cu, Fe, Mn, Ni, Pb and Zn in 81 soil samples with results obtained following dissolution and ICP-AES analysis, both the isotope excitation and tube excitation PXRF instruments employed proved effective for a rapid quantitative assessment of metal contamination and for monitoring the efficacy of remediation strategies.Synchrotron XRF was used in a study by Punshon et al.244 to detect trace metals in individual growth rings of a tree that was known from previous studies to have been exposed to elevated metal levels. They detected Ni and associated metals to be constrained within a particular growth ring, clearly indicating metal uptake had taken place for a short and well-defined period of time. However, a similar study by Martin et al.245 suggested that dendronanalysis is a poor method for evaluating exposure at a large scale, since although tree ring metal may be used to evaluate the metal uptake by individual trees, the metals’ mobility in the stem makes it difficult to establish a reliable chronology.Several authors have reported on research undertaken with energy dispersive XRF (EDXRF). Margui et al.246,247 used the method to determine several major and minor elements in plants growing on waste heaps adjacent to a Pb–Zn ore processing plant. They demonstrated that, whilst microwave digestion of samples with HNO3, H2O2 and HF was not able to fully dissolve Cu, Fe, K and Mn because of silica residues in the plants, EDXRF was not prone to these problems of matrix destruction and poor recovery. Several other groups have employed EDXRF for the analysis of plants, including ginseng root tissues,248 vegetables249 and leaves.250 An interesting study by Alfonso et al.251 has looked at the distribution of trace metals in offshore sediments.251 They determined 16 metals in sub-surface sediments collected from 56 stations. The results, which were obtained using factorial and cluster analysis, indicated that two different sedimentary environments could be distinguished. Carvalho et al.252 used EDXRF, together with TXRF, to investigate the distribution of macro- and micro-nutrients in plants that had been purposely exposed to toxic levels of Cd. The authors reported increased levels of Cu, Fe, Mn and Zn, and decreased levels of K, in Cd-stressed cells. TXRF has also been used to assess heavy metal accumulation in two species of Tillandsia to evaluate their potential use as metal accumulators in biomonitoring studies.253Compared with EDXRF, fewer studies of soils and related materials have used wavelength dispersive XRF in the past year. Margui et al.254 used WDXRF to determine a large number of major and minor elements in plant materials. Analysis of a CRM demonstrated that the technique, whilst being relatively simple and rapid, was also reasonably accurate, with recoveries of 94–107% reported. The instrument was calibrated using CRM and spiked samples of synthetic cellulose; matrix effects were corrected by a linked computer program. Other studies have tended to focus on single plant species, such as the hyperaccumulator Gossia bidwilli,255 although the technique has also been used in a much broader study looking at edaphic influences on plant community adaptation.256Evidently, much use has been made this year of X-ray microfluorescence, sometimes referred to as micro-XRF, which utilises a high-intensity, ultra-narrow X-ray beam, in some cases 10 μm wide. Cousin et al.257 used micro-XRF, together with an electron scanning microprobe, to demonstrate the spatial distribution of trace elements in individual soil aggregates: for example, aggregate interiors were reported to be richer in Cr, Cu and Fe whilst Ni and Zn were more evenly distributed. Terzano et al.258 used micro-XRF to demonstrate that, in soils contaminated by Cu and treated with fused coal fly ash, Cu can be trapped within porous zeolite particles, thus demonstrating the potential for this particular remediation technique. A further example is the study by Echeverria et al.,259 who used micro-XRF, with scanning electron microscopy, in an investigation of the mechanisms of Pb2+ retention on illite. Synchrotron based X-ray microfluorescence has also been used to study metal transport dynamics by measuring Pb and Zn patterns in sub-surface soil horizons,260 the speciation and solubility of Cu, Pb, and Zn in contaminated soils,261 Hg in polluted soils262 and the spatial and temporal variability of arsenic solid-state speciation in soils from contaminated sites.2634 Analysis of geological materials4.1 Reference materialsReference materials are one of the cornerstones of geoanalysis, usually to assure data quality, but they are also employed as calibration standards, particularly when no suitable alternatives are available. In his annual bibliographic review of developments in RMs and analytical methods used in geoanalysis, Valladon264 observed that MC-ICP-MS is now providing many isotopic ratios on ‘classical’ geological RMs and that LA-ICP-MS is a major contributor of new data on RMs. He also highlighted the need for more RMs for environmental research, including those characterised for organometallic compounds or species.Jochum265 and his colleagues at the Max-Planck Institute have rendered a great service to the geoanalytical community by developing a new database called GeoReM specifically for RMs of geochemical and mineralogical interest. This relational database contains published analytical and compilation values for major and trace element concentrations plus radiogenic and stable isotope ratios, together with metadata about the analytical values, sample information and references. It contains more than 750 geological RMs and isotopic standards and can be accessed at http://georem.mpch-mainz.gwdg.de.It is now a requirement that a certified value for a CRM must be accompanied by an uncertainty that takes into account all sources of error associated with its measurement. Certification by at least one primary method, such as ID-ICP-MS or INAA, is also stipulated. As a result, plans are afoot to re-certify some of the South African Reference Materials (SARMs) that were originally certified through interlaboratory studies in the 1970s. An initial study described how Ba, Cu, Ni, Pb and Zn in SARM 3 and SARM 4 were re-certified to comply with the new ISO requirements.266 The ID-ICP-MS results obtained were supported by good comparability with results reported in the literature since 1978 as well as the certified values. The International Association of Geoanalysts reported the certification of a slate sample OU-6,267 through an interlaboratory programme conducted in close compliance with ISO Guide 35 (1989). They have now published the certificate of analysis for this material, which encompasses ten major oxides and thirty-five trace elements; information values are given for nine other oxides or elements.268 Similarly, a basaltic CRM, named BEM, prepared by Chengdu University of Technology,269 has been characterised by more than ten different analytical methods, including NAA. Certified values and uncertainties for ten major oxides and forty-four trace elements are given, along with four recommended and nine information values.Several new biogenic carbonate RMs have been characterised recently. The Geological Survey of Japan have undertaken the difficult task of defining reference values for trace elements in Coral JCp-1 and Giant Clam JCt-1, for use in geochemical studies of these materials.270 They were dissolved in nitric acid and analysed by ICP-MS without pre-concentration or ion-exchange, to minimise contamination. Standard addition was used to overcome the effect of the calcium matrix, and interferences from calcium polyatomics were monitored, resulting in precisions of ≤10% for 200 mg test portions. The trace element contents of JCp-1 were generally within the range of values previously reported for corals. However, it was noted that other methods of pre-treatment of coral samples are likely to produce different values. Elemental fingerprinting of fish otoliths, which are mainly biogenic aragonite, is an accepted technique in fish stock identification. However, research in this area has been impeded by the lack of suitable CRMs so it is good to see that a new fish otolith CRM (FEBS-1) has been developed by the National Research Council, Canada.271 Not only is it certified for Ba, Ca, Li, Mg, Mn, Na and Sr, with full estimates of uncertainty, but indicative values for Cd, Cu, Ni, Pb and Zn are provided, although these elements are too inhomogeneously distributed to allow certification.Developments in LA-ICP-MS have fuelled a demand for reference materials that are homogeneous at the micrometre scale. Many LA practitioners use the NIST synthetic glass CRMs SRM 610–616 to derive their primary calibrations. However, the major element composition of these glasses is very different from that of most geological samples and is not ideally suited for all applications. Thus, the USGS272 have prepared four synthetic reference glasses with a basaltic matrix (GSA-1G, GSC-1G, GSD-1G and GSE-1G), containing trace elements in groups at about 0.01, 5, 50 and 500 μg g−1. Their major element composition was established by EPMA, while the trace elements were determined by LA-ICP-MS and two ID techniques using TIMS and ICP-MS. In all, seven USGS reference glasses, BCR-2G, BHVO-2G, BIR-1G and the four new GS ones, were found to be homogeneous at the micrometre scale for lithophile elements. The trace element data from the different techniques agreed within error limits of 1–5% and preliminary working values for 51 trace elements are provided. In a separate study to characterise the new basaltic glass RMs by LA-ICP-MS, Guillong et al.273 confirmed that these materials are better suited for the analysis of samples containing high concentrations of iron, especially when using laser wavelengths greater than 200 nm. Odegard et al.274 prepared a synthetic titanite glass for in situ analysis by direct fusion of the starting materials by resistance heating in graphite electrodes at 1600–1700 °C and then quenching. Preliminary investigations indicated homogeneity at the resolution usually used for LA-ICP-MS, i.e., tens of micrometres.Several groups have investigated the homogeneity of glass RMs with respect to the rare earth elements. Researchers in the Czech Republic275 studied the basalts BCR-2G, BHVO-2G and BIR-1G by comparing solution analysis of the original powdered RM with data obtained by LA-ICP-MS on the reference glasses. The two methods yielded REE concentrations that were identical within uncertainty limits and the LA data agreed well with the published values, with differences in the range 0–10% for most elements. In a parallel piece of work, Kent et al.276 determined the REE content of eleven widely used geological RMs, including rock powders and synthetic glass standards, by ID-MC-ICP-MS. All materials were analysed in replicate and the data were typically reproducible to better than 1%. They also reported that there had been no discernable change in the concentrations of the REEs in BCR-2G and BHVO-2G during glass manufacture. Because of the good agreement with other published REE abundances, the authors claim that these data provide some of the best current estimates of the REE content of these RMs.With the increasing capability of modern instrumentation, geological RMs with well-characterised isotope ratios are at a premium for assessing accuracy of data. Because of a lack of suitable RMs for microanalytical work, Kasemann and co-workers277 determined the Li isotope compositions of seven USGS basaltic glass standards (see ref. 272) and NIST SRM 610, 612 and 614 synthetic glasses by bulk (MC-ICP-MS and TIMS) and microanalytical (SIMS) techniques. The Li isotope data obtained by MC-ICP-MS and TIMS agreed within analytical error for both sets of standards. Although data obtained by SIMS for the USGS samples were acceptable, systematic differences were found between SIMS and MC-ICP-MS for the high silica synthetic NIST 600 series of glasses, which seemed to be related to a matrix effect in the SIMS analysis.The MPI-DING glasses are a set of geological RMs that have been specially prepared and extensively analysed for use with microanalytical techniques. To extend their usefulness, preliminary reference values for 208Pb/206Pb and 207Pb/206Pb for seven of these glasses, derived from high precision TIMS and MC-ICP-MS data, have been reported by Jochum et al.278 The Pb concentrations in these RMs vary between 0.4 and 20 μg g−1, making them suitable for a wide range of analytical scenarios. The authors note that any heterogeneity in the glasses is generally lower than the reproducibility obtained from in situ microanalytical techniques.Boron isotopes are often used as tracers in geoscience. Rosner and Meixner279 determined the B concentration and isotope composition of ten silicate RMs; isotopes were measured by positive and negative TIMS methodologies and concentrations by ICP-AES. Through an unbroken chain of direct comparison with internationally recognised RMs, they were able to provide well-constrained δ11B values for four RMs, including three MPI-DING glasses, which should be of great use particularly for microanalytical techniques.4.2 Solid sample introduction4.2.1 Laser ablation ICP-MS. In recent years significant advances have been made in understanding the processes involved in the ablation of geological samples. Many of these developments have been captured by Sylvester280 in his review of the LA-ICP-MS literature published in 2003. He includes a useful summary of the parameters that influence laser ablation and the stoichiometry of the resulting aerosol, which may be of particular value to those new to this field. Mokgalaka and Gardea-Torresdey281 have written a more general treatise (99 refs.) on the principles and applications of LA-ICP-MS, primarily in relation to environmental chemistry.The group from ETH Zürich have done much to improve our knowledge of the fundamental processes involved in LA-ICP-MS. From SEM observations of particles and agglomerates generated under different ablation conditions, they showed that condensed nano-particles, roughly 10 nm in diameter, formed on ablation; these were transported as micron-sized agglomerates by the carrier gas.282 Their structure was matrix dependent, with silicates and metals forming linear agglomerates, whereas calcium fluorite produced particle agglomerates with a cotton-like structure. They have also turned their attention to considering conditions within the plasma that affect analyte response.283 To do this they recorded the variation in signal from different carrier gas flow rates at different plasma powers for two different laser ablation systems and carrier gases. Major differences in analyte sensitivities were obtained, reflecting the relative vaporisation and atomisation efficiencies of the laser generated aerosol. The largest signal was achieved using the 193 nm laser with helium as the carrier gas. This combination produces an aerosol that does not contain a significant proportion of particles >150 μm: it can be vaporised within a very narrow range of axial positions, minimising analyte loss by radial spread within the ICP. They emphasise the importance of optimising the ICP-MS for minimum elemental fractionation within the ion source by monitoring, for example, the U/Th ratio, rather than aiming solely for maximum analyte signal.The new basaltic glass RMs GSA-1G, GSC-1G, GSD-1G and GSE-1G produced by the USGS (see Section 4.1) were characterised using a prototype solid state LA system capable of operating at 193, 213 and 266 nm in single spot and scanning modes, as well as commercially available 266 nm Nd:YAG and 193 nm ArF excimer lasers.273 Similar results were obtained for most laser wavelengths and energy densities with the exception of scanning mode ablation at 266 nm without matrix-matched calibration, where deviations of up to 60% were found. However, results acquired with a matrix-matched calibration agreed with those obtained by spot analysis. The authors confirmed that the greater abundance of large particles produced when NIST SRM 610 is ablated in scanning mode is responsible for elemental fractionation effects caused by incomplete vaporisation of large particles in the plasma.The group at ISAS Dortmund have continued their studies on the use of near-IR femtosecond-LA (795 nm) and investigated the feasibility of using non-matrix matched calibrations for the analysis of a wide range of solid samples, represented by brass, aluminium and silicate glass. The initial experiments were conducted with the IR fs LA system coupled to an axially viewed ICP-AES instrument.284 It was established by monitoring the Zn/Cu ratios that, by using fluences well above the threshold, fractionation was effectively suppressed, allowing accurate, non-matrix matched analysis. Similar experiments were performed with ICP-MS detection in order to provide better sensitivity.285 Although the authors believe that fs-LA-ICP-MS is close to being a technique where non-matrix matched calibration can be applied, they still need to establish whether this is true for trace element determinations.LA-ICP-MS is now recognised as a sensitive, efficient and cost effective approach to determining the composition of individual inclusions. As a prelude to routine analysis, the precision, accuracy and detection limits of the technique were assessed using sets of multi-element synthetic fluid inclusions spanning a wide variety of concentrations and sizes.286 Five multi-element standard solutions were incorporated as fluid inclusions in quartz crystals at 750 °C and 7 kbar. Analytical precision for the alkali elements was typically better than 15% RSD, whereas most other elements were reproducible within 30%. These results were independent of the size of inclusion: even inclusions as small as 5 μm across gave reproducible results provided the signals were well above background. The analyses yielded results that were typically within 15% of the nominal value and detection limits allowed quantitative analysis at the low μg g−1 level. Crucially, one of the largest sources of uncertainty was in the estimation of the concentration of the internal standard by microthermometry; various approaches to reduce this error were discussed.Applications of LA-ICP-MS continue to expand as the technique grows in maturity. It has been used to establish the precise distributions of the PGEs in a Sudbury ore deposit.287 Two fused pyrrhotite standards containing all six PGEs were synthesized and their compositions confirmed by solution-based analysis. These were then used as calibration standards while ablating various ore textures with a 266 nm Nd:YAG laser. The majority of the PGEs were found to occur as discrete platinum group minerals, but a significant fraction was incorporated as solid solution in sulfides and sulfarsenides. Boulyga et al.288 used a Nd:YAG laser at its fundamental IR wavelength of 1064 nm—something not often reported nowadays—modified to produce a large ablated spot area of 0.7 mm diameter. The special laser conditions, combined with SF-ICP-MS, enabled them to perform high sensitivity analyses for PGEs in different geological RMs. The samples were spiked with 99Ru, 108Pd, 191Ir and 194Pt and pressed into pellets for direct LA, thus losing any spatial resolution in the 1 g sub-samples selected.For some time trace element fingerprinting of diamonds by LA-ICP-MS has been useful in forensic applications but now truly quantitative analysis has been reported.289 Two approaches to preparing synthetic carbon-based calibration standards were tested, one involving the use of a hydrocarbon oil and the other based on cellulose; the natural 13C content in diamond provided the internal standard in both cases. The oil based standards tended to volatilise even when not being ablated, adding to the overall carbon background. Their preparation was time consuming and the oil was found to degrade over time, resulting in the formation of precipitates. Doped cellulose pellets were preferred as they were simpler to use and delivered better accuracy and precision. Typical detection limits were 5–20 ppb for the REEs and <500 ppb for the transition elements.In any determination of the REEs by ICP-MS consideration needs to be given to the potential for interferences on the middle-light REEs from oxides of barium and the LREEs. Kent and Ungerer290 measured oxide production rates during LA-ICP-MS and confirmed that if the plasma conditions are optimised so that ThO+/Th+ is below about 2.5%, then contributions from Ba and the LREE are not significant for a broad range of compositions, except for the measurement of Gd in LREE enriched samples and Eu in materials where Ba/Eu ≫1000.The arena where LA is making the most impact currently is the in situ determination of isotope ratios. In the right hands, the precision of 238U–206Pb age determinations in zircons by LA-ICP-MS can be almost comparable to those achieved by ion microprobe. Chang and co-workers291 measured five zircons of known ages ranging between 50 and 1800 Ma using a 213 nm Nd:YAG laser coupled to a single collector high resolution ICP-MS instrument, with pit craters of 30–40 μm in diameter. The ages they obtained agreed well with previously published TIMS ages with a maximum deviation from the TIMS age for individual spot analyses of ∼4%. The problems they identified included lack of an ideal set of standards and an inability to make an accurate correction for non-radiogenic Pb. To obtain more reliable ages for young zircons, Hirata et al.292 sought to improve the measurement of 204Pb by removing mercury from the argon make up gas using a device containing activated charcoal. This device reduced the uncertainty on the 204Pb signal caused by 204Hg, which resulted in improvements in the reliability of the other Pb isotopic data after correction for non-radiogenic Pb. They also provided data to show that young zircons could be dated from pits as small as 20 μm in diameter using a 193 ArF excimer laser coupled to quadrupole ICP-MS. Storey et al.293 demonstrated that U–Pb dating by LA-ICP-MS can be extended to other accessory phases that contain common Pb in their lattice, using titanite (CaTi2SiO5) as an example. The analytical methodology was based on that used previously for zircon U–Pb analysis with a 213 nm Nd:YAG laser and quadrupole ICP-MS, employing the zircon standard 91500 as an external calibration standard. In addition, they incorporated in-line gold traps on the argon and helium carrier gas lines to adsorb mercury entrained in the gas supply lines, which reduced the 204Hg signal by about 70%. Researchers at NIST294 reported the synthesis of solid glass standards doped with Pb of known isotopic abundance using the sol–gel method. Correction factors generated from ablating sol–gel disks spiked with SRM 981 (Common Lead Isotopic Standard) and SRM 982 (Equal-Atom Lead Isotopic Standard) produced Pb isotope ratios for SRM 612 Trace Elements in Glass that were in excellent agreement with published measurements. Future plans are to produce multi-element doped sol–gels with known isotopic ratios in a variety of sol–gel matrices, e.g., Si, Zr, Ti, with particular interest in light elements where fractionation effects are more prevalent, as well as uranium for Pb–U dating. It will be interesting to follow these developments.Geoanalysts have been exploring a wide range of isotopic systems using LA-ICP-MS for in situ measurements. Tiepolo et al.295 were able to obtain geologically meaningful δ11B data from a single spot (60–80 μm diameter) in samples containing at least 10 ppm B by LA-MC-ICP-MS. Although instrumental mass bias was the major source of fractionation, effects due to drift in ion counter efficiencies were found to be significant. The method developed, using the sample–standard bracketing technique with SRM 610 as an external standard, was used to elicit the B isotope composition of ashes from Mount Etna. Magnesium isotopic compositions of olivine were measured by LA-MC-ICP-MS using an ArF 193 nm excimer laser, with a precision of about 0.2‰.296 A laser-induced matrix effect was observed in which systematically heavier Mg isotope compositions were measured in olivines with lower Mg contents. After correction for matrix effects, the Mg isotope composition of olivine from the Moon was shown to be identical with that of the Earth’s mantle. In situ microanalysis of marine carbonates in fossils from well-defined sedimentary rock successions by LA-MC-ICP-MS has contributed to refinements in the records of 87Sr/86Sr sea-water variations over geological time.297 Improvements in the precision and accuracy of in situ measurements of Hf isotopes in zircons have been reported.298 A new design of ablation cell, plus mixing nitrogen into the carrier gas, provided improved sensitivity and signal stability. In addition, independent mass bias factors for Hf and Tb in the isobaric interference correction produced more reliable Hf isotope data. Foster and Vance299 described their methodology for generating accurate and precise radiogenic and stable Nd isotope data in geological materials with relatively high Nd contents, e.g., apatite, titanite and ferromanganese nodules, by LA-MC-ICP-MS. Care in minimising oxide formation when optimising the plasma conditions, plus the addition of relatively large amounts of nitrogen to the Ar–He carrier gas, reduced the BaO+/Ba+ ratio to around 0.02%. An iterative approach to the correction for isobaric Sm isotopes was adopted, which resulted in an accuracy of 0.005% on the 143Nd/144Nd ratio for Sm/Nd contents as high as 1.2. The importance of employing state-of-the-art LA techniques to obtain accurate U-series ages is highlighted in research lead by the Australian National University in Canberra.300,301 They demonstrated the ability to measure 234U/238U and 230Th/238U activity ratios with in-run precisions of 1‰ and 3‰, respectively, at a spatial resolution of 90 μm in materials containing 100–500 μg U g−1. Calibration using silicate glasses was observed to impart a small but significant matrix bias for iron oxides and highlights the continuing need for matrix-matched standards to obtain accurate U-series chronologies by LA-MC-ICP-MS.The spatial resolution of sulfur isotope ratios in solid samples can provide an insight into geological and biological processes not possible from bulk analysis alone. However, sulfur isotopes are difficult to determine by ICP-MS because of the number of potential interferences, particularly from oxygen polyatomics. Mason et al.302 looked at two alternative approaches for the measurement of 34S/32S and 33S/32S in sulfur-rich materials by LA-MC-ICP-MS. They found that significant interference from C-, H-, O- and N-based polyatomic ions could be attenuated in a collision/reaction cell by introducing a mixture of helium and xenon gases. Although xenon attenuated the O2+ ions by approximately two orders of magnitude, through a rapid charge transfer reaction, the transmission of S+ ions was reduced by up to 50%; however, the net effect was still a factor of 10 improvement in the S+/O2+ ratio. The second approach was to use a SF-ICP-MS instrument in medium resolution mode of ca. 5000 to avoid the O2+ isobars. Mass discrimination was corrected using a combined method of external normalisation against a 37Cl/35Cl or 30Si/29Si standard, with further calibration against pressed pellet AgS standard RMs. Both sets of instrumentation gave comparable data but it was not possible to measure Δ33S with the collision cell machine because of interference from 32S1H. Similarly, Bendall and co-workers303 operated their MC-ICP-MS instrument at a resolution of 4000, which they claimed was high enough to completely resolve all interferences on 32S and 34S when ablating sulfur-rich minerals.A lively debate has ensued following the publication of a paper by Košler and co-workers304 on the analysis of iron isotopes in meteorite Fe–Ni alloys by LA-MC-ICP-MS. Concern was expressed that the Fe isotope variations reported by Košler et al. were much higher than predicted or found using solution ICP-MS.305 It was argued that the observed spread in the data was due to inappropriate correction for mass bias and non-resolved spectral interferences. In reply, Košler and his colleagues306 presented counter arguments to each point raised, while acknowledging the importance and potential pitfalls of measuring stable isotopes by LA-MC-ICP-MS.4.2.2 Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy. LIBS has many attributes that make it an attractive as a field portable sensor for geochemical, exploration or environmental analysis.307 It requires little or no sample preparation, provides simultaneous multi-element detection and analysis, and has high sensitivity for light elements, which is an advantage over other field portable techniques like XRF. Recent developments in broadband LIBS mean that it is able to detect virtually all elements in an unknown target material at a resolution of 0.1 nm, and it will be interesting to see whether this potential is realised.The ability of LIBS to sample remotely has made it particularly attractive for applications in planetary science. Thus, instruments based on this technology are being developed for use on future missions to Mars.308–310 It has been shown that LIBS can distinguish between different basaltic rock types and provide reasonable estimates of whole rock composition at a distance of over 5 m.309 Three different methodologies310 for the quantitative elemental analysis of rock samples by LIBS at a distance of 3 m were conducted in an atmosphere similar to that on Mars, i.e., 9 mbar CO2. For all the methods evaluated, matrix effects could be corrected relatively simply by taking into account the difference in the number of atoms vaporised. The best accuracy over short distances was achieved using an external standard to normalise the signal intensity. Although the calibration-free strategy produced poorer accuracy than those employing internal or external standards, it was considered to be useful for the direct identification of rocks over considerable distances. Because LIBS and Raman spectroscopy both interrogate samples using high-intensity laser beams and the data they produce are complementary, Wiens et al.311 have tested the idea of constructing a novel instrument that utilises both techniques. Such an instrument would have great advantages for planetary exploration but would also be applicable to fieldwork requiring portable equipment. Remote LIBS and Raman spectra were generated together on a number of mineral samples at a distance of 8.3 m. Although the results were encouraging, there are several obstacles to devising a single instrument capable of utilising both techniques, including the differing spectral range and required detection sensitivity. With improvements in the relevant technology, this may yet prove to be commercially viable venture in the future.Recently published applications of LIBS include: the direct determination of Al in archaeological clays;312 the analysis of beryl,313 where it has proved very difficult to find an element to serve as an internal standard; and the diagnosis and analysis of uncorroded and artificially weathered glasses,314 with its relevance to the practice of glass conservation. Yaroshchyk and co-workers315 have developed analytical software to model LIBS emission spectra and predict sample composition via a proposed calibration-free algorithm. Use of the model for the analysis of major elements in bauxites, brass and mineral samples achieved promising results in that the data for the majority of elements were within 25% of the certified values. Further refinements to the model are planned.4.2.3 Slurry sampling. Although slurry-based sample introduction has been used by its devotees for many years, each laboratory appears to have its own set of conditions for carrying out this type of analysis, making it difficult to appreciate where the significant developments lie. There have been evaluations of slurry sampling-ETAAS procedures for the determination of Sb in marine sediments and atmospheric dusts,165 Cr, Ni and V in coal fly ash, soils and sediments316 and Mo in coal fly ash, sediment, soil and urban dust.164 The addition of HF in the treatment of silicate materials has a number of advantages, including the removal of much of the matrix before atomisation; it also slows down the otherwise rapid deterioration of the graphite tube. Several authors note the potential risk of HF damaging the Ti probes widely used to homgenise the slurries ultrasonically: some suggest ways of avoiding this. Other investigations considered the use of permanent modifiers for the determination of Cd, Cr and Pb in marine sediments,166 Pb in coal fly ash317 and Cd in coal.318Coupling slurry sampling to ETV-ICP-MS, while providing higher sensitivity and lower limits of detection, also requires the ICP-MS instrument to record transient signals of several isotopes efficiently, thereby reducing its multi-element capability. Attempts to analyse silicate materials without any pre-treatment, except sample grinding, proved to be misguided as large matrix interferences were encountered, necessitating the use of the standard additions method for quantification.319 Chemical vapour generation, combined with ID, provided an extension of previous work with ETV-ICP-MS detection for the determination of As, Ge, Hg, Pb, Sb, Se and Sn in coal slurries320 and Hg, Pb and Se in sediments.3214.3 Sample treatment4.3.1 Sample dissolution. The successful application of microwave-assisted digestion techniques to geological samples is very dependent on the sample type and the chemical bonding of the elements of interest. A recent review of microwave techniques for environmental analytical chemistry contains some relevant references but is mainly concerned with the extraction of organic compounds from various matrices.322 Coal lends itself to microwave digestion because of its high organic carbon content, although there are differing opinions as to what conditions are required to effect a complete digestion.323,324 Fadda323 treated 0.5 g of powdered coal in low pressure PFA vessels with a mixture of HF–HCl–HNO3–HClO4, whereas Wang et al.324 developed a method using HNO3 only in high temperature quartz vessels able to withstand high temperatures and pressures. After digestion at 250 °C and 7.5 MPa, quantitative dissolution was validated for 19 trace elements; although Hg was lost in the subsequent evaporation stage, almost no carbon remained in the final solution. Navarro and co-workers93 optimised an aqua regia microwave-assisted digestion of sediments for the determination of Sn and Hg in the same extract; a number of CRMs were used to test the applicability of the method. Zachariadis and colleagues325 experimented with different combinations of HF, HNO3 and HClO4 in high pressure PTFE vessels to dissolve archaeological glass samples with a soda-lime composition. After a four-stage microwave programme, the digests were quenched with boric acid before measurement by ICP-AES with matrix-matched standards; NIST SRM 621 was used to evaluate recoveries for 12 major and minor elements.4.3.2 Separation and pre-concentration. Research on developing reliable and cost effective methods to determine gold and the PGEs continues unabated because of their economic and geological importance. The standard method employing nickel sulfide fire assay and tellurium precipitation has been revisited, with the aim of controlling the volatility of OsO4 and reducing blank levels.326 Digestion of the tellurium precipitate was carried out by placing the test tube in an ultrasonic bath to which ice was added to reduce the temperature, which prevented loss of Os. In this way all six PGEs were successfully determined by ICP-MS and lower LoDs were obtained by purifying some of the reagents prior to analysis. A novel method for determining Au at ultra-low concentrations, i.e., <10 pg g−1, in geological samples has been developed by Pitcairn and co-workers.327 It involved an HF–aqua regia digestion, chromatographic separation of Au from matrix elements using DIBK supported on an inert resin, and analysis by ICP-MS. A combination of 4% NH4OH followed by de-ionised water was used to elute the Au from the DIBK-resin. The samples were then dried down and re-dissolved in 1 ml of 12 M HCl, which was then diluted to 20 ml to provide a solution in 5% HCl for measurement by ICP-MS. A detection limit of 2 pg g−1 was achieved using 5% HCl as the wash solution, to minimise any memory effects, and rhenium as the internal standard.Many of the exacting separation methodologies formerly required in the measurement of isotope ratios by TIMS are now being re-examined to see if efficiency gains can be made in preparation schemes for use with MC-ICP-MS. Nebel-Jacobsen and co-workers328 developed a separation scheme for the combined determination of the U–Pb age and the initial Hf isotope composition of an individual zircon grain. The zircon was spiked with tracers and digested in HF–HNO3 before Pb, Lu, U and Hf (in that order) were sequentially separated from the zircon matrix on a single ion-exchange column filled with Eichrom® Ln Spec resin. Using only about 100 μl of washed resin kept the blanks low while achieving better than 90% yields for all four elements. Similarly, Le Fèvre and Pin329 devised a preparation scheme for the concomitant measurement of the Lu–Hf and Sm–Nd radiogenic isotope systems on the same rock digest. After spiking with enriched tracers, the sample was decomposed by fusion with a LiBO2 flux. First Hf was separated using U-TEVA Spec extraction chromatography material in 3 M HNO3 for measurement by MC-ICP-MS. The REEs were then separated as a group from the same solution by conventional cation-exchange in nitric acid–oxalic acid medium. After evaporation of the REE fraction, Lu, Nd and Sm were isolated using two tandem columns filled with RE Spec and Ln Spec resins for analysis by TIMS. Again recoveries greater than 90% were achieved with satisfactory blanks. A study of W isotopes in kimberlites330 necessitated the development of a one-step anion-exchange technique following removal of calcium and magnesium from solution to optimise the efficient separation of W from other elements. Rock samples were digested in a mixture of HF, HClO4 and HNO3, dried down and H2SO4 added to precipitate the alkaline earth elements. After further treatment the supernatant solution was separated on a column containing AG1X-8 anion resin conditioned with 0.1 mol l−1 HF. At low HF molarities, Hf, Ti, W and Zr formed fluoride complexes which were retained on the resin and then sequentitally stripped off the column for determination by MC-ICP-MS. A precision of 0.4ε on 182W/183W was achieved. Exciting new developments using methods to anneal zircons before dissolution are discussed in Section 4.4.4.4.3.3 Speciation studies. Many speciation studies of elements such As, Cr, Hg, Sb, Se and Sn aspire to understand their transformations throughout complex environmental cycles, in which geological substrates, such as sediments or soils, comprise only one of the various sample media under consideration. For this reason the reader is directed to Sections 3.2 and 2.2 of this Update, which cover much of the other relevant literature. Two reviews, one on As48 and the other on Hg,50 are noteworthy as they provide perspectives on speciation and the validation of techniques for the analysis of a range of environmental samples. Both papers include sections on the extraction of species from sediments, which is recognised to be a critical step. This issue was also considered by Georgiadis et al.,125 who tested several strategies to extract the more readily mobile and bioavailable As species from soils and sediments while minimising the transformation between AsIII and AsV. Phosphate solutions containing 0.5% sodium diethyldithiocarbamate trihydrate produced the most promising results, with detection by HPLC-HG-AFS; rapid conversion of AsIII to AsV was observed with 10 mM phosphate alone.Several methods have been developed specifically to determine metallic species in sediments. A study of extraction methods for the speciation of Sb in marine sediments used HPLC with a post-column photo-oxidation step and HG-AFS for detection.331 The extraction medium most compatible with this system was citric acid in an ascorbic acid medium; between 55 and 65% of the total Sb was recovered from the marine sediment CRMs PACS-1 and PACS-2. More successful was the use of single and triple spike procedures for determining butyltin compounds in sediments using GC-ICP-MS.332 The triple spike methodology, in which each butyltin species is enriched with a different Sn isotope, was used to monitor interconversions between species while selecting the solid–liquid extraction procedure, in this case an acetic acid–methanol (3 + 1) mixture. The single isotope spiking procedure, using a mixture of MBT, DBT and TBT chlorides enriched with 119Sn, together with the triple spike method, were validated during a laboratory inter-comparison aimed at quantifying DBT and TBT in a sediment test sample; full uncertainty budgets were calculated for both approaches. Microwave alkaline extraction of CrVI from sediments was shown to preserve the Cr speciation better than previously published methods.333 The samples were double spiked with 50CrIII and 53CrVI, which provided a means of monitoring any interconversion between the species during anion-exchange chromatography and measurement by ICP-MS. The feasibility of applying pressurised liquid extraction (PLE) to speciation studies of organometallic compounds in sediments and biological tissues has been reviewed.96 Although it appears to be a promising technique for single elements such as As, Se or Sn in biological materials, finding suitable conditions for the simultaneous extraction of several elements from sediments on a quantitative basis requires more work.4.4 Instrumental analysis4.4.1 Atomic absorption spectrometry. Information from Valladon’s264review of the literature published in 2003 has been used to assess current issues in the application of AAS to the analysis of geological materials.334 The authors concluded that it is still a very active field of research, representing 15% of the references in the compilation. Not surprisingly, a significant proportion of these papers proposed methods of separation and pre-concentration to improve the sensitivity of the technique. Ojeda and Rojas335 have provided a comprehensive review (148 refs.) of the application of AAS to the determination of Rh in a range of different materials including geological samples. Because Rh is often determined with other PGEs, the article is more a review of methods for PGEs rather than just Rh.Chemical vapour generation combined with on-line preconcentration has been successfully applied to the analysis of sediments by AAS. The sol–gel technique was used to prepare a novel material containing bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)-dithiophosphinic acid, which was used to preconcentrate Hg from digested sediments prior to measurement by CVAAS.336 Bolea et al.119 used a Chelex 100 column on-line to remove iron prior to the determination of Sb by HG-QT-AAS. This allowed Sb concentrations at the μg g−1 level to be measured in sediments and similar materials containing percent levels of iron. Other methodologies applicable to the analysis of sediments can be found in Section 3.3.1 of this Update.A group of workers based in Brazil have continued to develop methods using solid sampling graphite furnace high-resolution continuum source AAS, specifically for the determination of Cd337 and Pb338 in coal. Under optimised conditions, interference-free measurements against aqueous calibrations gave detection limits of 2 and 80 ng g−1, respectively, for a sample mass of 1 g.4.4.2 Atomic emission and atomic fluorescence spectrometry. In her review of recent applications of ICP techniques to geological and environmental materials, Linge339 stressed that inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES) and ICP-MS should be regarded as complementary techniques. A trend in both techniques towards on-line preconcentration and separation methodologies was noted. However, most of the literature she reviewed related to ICP-MS, confirming that ICP-MS is the preferred technique for geochemical analysis of trace elements. While ICP-AES continues to be employed in routine applications, there have been very few new developments of significance for geoanalysts. Zachariadis325 demonstrated the importance of matrix-matched standards and optimisation of plasma parameters when analysing glass specimens by ICP-AES with axial viewing. Gásquez340 devised a rapid method for the determination of REEs in apatite as an indicator for mineral exploration in granitic rocks. Leaching with 0.14 mol l−1 nitric acid was shown to provide selective dissolution of the apatite minerals; the determination of nine strategic REEs by ICP-AES after separation with Dowex 50WX8 cation-exchange resin was considered to be sufficiently diagnostic of the REE distribution for most rock systems.AFS is routinely used in many laboratories to determine Hg and the hydride-forming elements but there has been very little novel work reported during the review period. Li341 demonstrated that it is feasible to determine trace amounts of gold in geological samples by chemical VG non-dispersive AFS. After baking the sample in a muffle furnace, it was digested in a 1 + 1 (v/v) mixture of HNO3 and HCl. The liquid was decanted and thiourea resin was added to absorb the Au from solution. After shaking for an hour, the resin was separated and the Au statically eluted with 0.5% thiourea in a boiling water bath. On cooling, 4 ml of 50% HCl and 1 ml of 1% DDTC were added and diluted to 25 ml with water for subsequent measurement by VG-AFS, with potasssium tetrahydroborate as the reductant. A detection limit of 0.23 ng ml−1 in solution was achieved and a precision of 1.7% RSD at a concentration of 20 ng ml−1. Trace amounts of DDTC greatly enhanced the efficiency of generating the volatile species. A high surface/volume ratio and rapid gas–liquid separation were essential for the generation of the volatile Au species and the flow rates of carrier and shield gases had a significant impact on the Au signal intensity.4.4.3 Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry. During this review period it is evident that one of the main drivers in ICP-MS development has been the measurement of isotopic systems in geological matrices, be it using a quadrupole or magnetic sector instrument. Although this review is limited to the application of ICP-MS technology to the analysis of geological materials, the Update on mass spectrometry342 should be consulted for a broader perspective. A review of developments in ICP-MS between 2003 and 2005343 includes some perceptive comments about the lack of originality in many papers, not assisted by the large number of journals available, and the lack of consistency in standards of refereeing.4.4.3.1 Quadrupole-based instrumentation. The determination of As and Se by ICP-MS is plagued with spectral interferences, although various strategies can be adopted to improve the sensitivity and specificity of these measurements. A simple solution proposed for the analysis of geological samples was the addition of 4% ethanol to HF–HNO3 rock digests.344 Although this is a relatively large amount of organic solvent, the use of a microconcentric nebuliser reduced the solvent load on the plasma to such an extent that there was a negligible carbon deposit on the sampling cone after one hour of continuous aspiration of 4% (v/v) ethanol. The ionisation of As+ was improved, mainly via a charge transfer reaction from C+ species to the analyte atoms, while interferences from ArCl+ and doubly charged REEs were suppressed. The limit of quantification for As was 6.4 ng g−1 in the solid with the addition of ethanol and 22 ng g−1 without. It is interesting to note the paucity of proper certified values for As in the 18 geological RMs analysed: examination of results from recent GeoPT proficiency testing exercises shows that it is not easy to achieve consensus values for As in rocks. A simple method to determine baseline concentrations of Se in sediments developed by Pinho et al.345 involved a two-stage digestion, first refluxing with aqua regia before the addition of concentrated HCl and heating at 70 °C to reduce all SeVI to SeIV. Quantification by ICP-MS using the low abundance 82Se isotope achieved a detection limit of 0.030 ± 0.002 μg g−1 Se. Interference from 81Br1H was minimised by the removal of bromide as Br2 in the first stage of the digestion and sample throughput was around 50 samples in 3 days. In contrast, a rather more complex procedure for the measurement of Se in sediments employing ID has been devised by Inagaki and co-workers.198 After the addition of a 78Se spike, the samples were digested with HNO3, HClO4 and HF using a protocol involving an elaborate evaporation process to remove bromine. Strong cation-exchange disk filtration was employed to remove REE from the digest solution and acetic acid was added to improve the sensitivity for Se+ by means of a carbon-enhancement effect. Interfering Ar2+ species were almost eliminated by use of hydrogen as the reaction gas in an octapole reaction cell. The signal to background ratio for 78Se+ and 80Se+ was improved about four-fold by the addition of 5% v/v acetic acid and, with the virtual elimination of all interfering species, reliable Se isotope ratios and concentrations were obtained with small uncertainties. Another approach to the determination of Se isotope ratios in selenium-rich geological samples is described by Layton-Matthews et al.346 Loss of Se during digestion with a mixture of HNO3, HClO4 and HF was minimised by avoiding the use of HCl and maintaining the temperature below 80 °C. The residue obtained after decomposition was immediately sealed after the addition of 6 M HCl to reduce all SeVI to SeIV. Quantitative separation and enrichment of Se was achieved on a thioglycollic cotton fibre column before determination by continuous HG coupled to an ICP-MS instrument fitted with a collision/reaction cell. The reaction cell was pressurised with argon mixed with 5% hydrogen to minimise the Ar2+ based interferences. Although the method reproduces isotope ratios measured by other techniques within experimental error, the throughput was only 6–8 samples a day and separation of the Se was always necessary to achieve the required counting statistics.Isotope dilution has been used to overcome problems in the determination of the lithium content of silicate rocks arising from machine drift and matrix effects.347 Samples plus a Li spike (96% 6Li) were digested with HF and HClO4 and taken up in HNO3 before introduction into the ICP-MS instrument via a FI system. Prior to analysis, the 7Li/6Li ratio of the commercial calibration standard was determined by TIMS because it was known to be quite variable; its Li ratio differed from natural abundance by more than 15%—perhaps a lesson to some of us. By this method, 0.5 μg g−1 Li could be measured in a 1 mg test portion of rock or mineral at a dilution factor of about 100 with a precision of typically 1.7%, making it particularly useful for analysis of samples with low Li contents where a limited amount of material is available, such as mineral separates or synthetic glass CRMs.For applications where the best precision is not required, fit for purpose isotope ratios can be generated using quadrupole ICP-MS. To obtain accurate U isotope ratios in sediment samples affected by a nearby nuclear discharge, Zheng and Yamada202 employed a two-stage cleanup using anion-exchange and TEVA extraction chromatography. A spike of 233U was added to monitor the yield and the samples subjected to a simple nitric acid leach before separation. Anion exchange was required to separate U from the sample matrix, particularly to remove the large amounts of iron present that would otherwise affect the efficiency of the TEVA resin. It also separated U from thorium, thus avoiding the potential interference of 232ThH2+ on the low abundance 234U isotope. After careful optimisation of detector deadtime, mass bias corrections and dwell time, precisions of better than 0.5% and 2.0% RSD were obtained for the 235U/238U and 234U/238U ratios, respectively, on only 90 ng of U. In contrast, Godoy et al.199 determined 234U and 230Th in marine sediments using UTEVA cartridges for separation and pre-concentration in an on-line FI system, with 236U and 229Th spikes. The age determinations for deep-sea sediments based on 230Th/234U data obtained by this method agreed well with independent AMS-14C dates.4.4.3.2 Magnetic sector instrumentation. A review of developments in the measurement of isotope ratios in the earth and environmental sciences in 2003 emphasised the changing nature of the roles of TIMS and MC-ICP-MS.348 The increased availability of MC-ICP-MS instruments has fuelled the rapid expansion of published applications in this area and this trend looks set to continue.In a general review of Si stable isotopes in the Earth’s surface, the analytical capabilities of SIRMS, MC-ICP-MS and SIMS for these measurements are compared and ways of modelling Si fractionation discussed.349 The authors advocate that more effort should be expended on providing a suitable RM, assessing the homogeneity of NBS 28 Silica Sand standard and reporting all data based on the same isotopic ratio. These remarks were vindicated by the results of a re-assessment of Si isotope RMs made by Reynolds et al.350 using MC-ICP-MS. They reported that the Si isotope composition of IRMM-018 was significantly lighter than that of the NBS 28 standard. This was in direct contrast to results published by other workers including Ding et al.351 using SIRMS, and inconsistent with other recently published absolute Si isotope abundances. It was advocated that NBS 28 should remain the zero point to avoid problems with future assessments of stable Si isotope variations. Meanwhile, an interlaboratory calibration of NBS 28 and other RMs is under way in an attempt to resolve the observed discrepancies and establish a reliable scale for reporting Si isotopes.Factors controlling the precision and accuracy of Pb isotopic dates of meteorites have been reviewed.352 Further improvements requiring better control over mass fractionation, enhanced detection sensitivity and lower blanks, as well as more effective techniques for removing non-radiogenic Pb, are proposed. Tanimizu and Ishikawa353 have re-examined the precision and reproducibility of Pb isotope ratio measurements by MC-ICP-MS with Tl-normalisation for rock samples. They paid great attention to achieving total recovery of Pb and complete removal of Hg and Tl in the chemical separation, as well as minimising the matrix and memory effects. The Pb isotope ratios of 11 rock RMs from the Geological Survey of Japan determined using this technique were in good agreement with results previous reported by TIMS and MC-ICP-MS.Precise Fe isotope ratios are difficult to achieve by MC-ICP-MS because of the large argide, oxide and hydroxide interferences occurring on the main iron isotope peaks. Poitrasson and Freydier354 explored the use of high resolution MC-ICP-MS, with nickel isotopes spikes to correct for mass bias instead of copper used previously. After matrix separation by anion-exchange chromatography no remaining interferences were observed on the plateaux used for the mass spectrometric measurements. They obtained a reproducibility on natural samples of about 0.013‰ per amu (2 SD) on both Δ57Fe/54Fe and Δ56Fe/54Fe values over a four month period. This performance opened the way for detailed Fe isotopic studies of magmatic processes via granites. Dideriksen and co-workers355 chose to develop a 58Fe–54Fe double spike to correct for instrumental mass bias when determining iron isotope ratios in carbonate minerals. It enabled rapid determination of Fe isotope composition with a precision of ±0.05‰ (2 SD), which was relatively insensitive to the presence of non-isobaric matrix elements compared with the sample–standard bracketing method. Analysis of IRMM-14 standards doped with sodium and magnesium demonstrated that double spiking corrected effectively for instrumental mass bias even when the concentrations of these elements exceeded that of Fe.One of the greatest challenges of MC-ICP-MS measurements is the correction for mass bias. For the determination of Mo isotopes, Pietruszka and co-workers selected an external sample–standard bracketing technique with zirconium doping in preference to a double spike of two enriched Mo isotopes, mainly because of its relative simplicity and lack of memory effects.356 They developed a procedure involving two-step column chemistry for Mo separation that provided high yields and low blanks. Based on analyses of molybdenites, they showed that the precision of their method was similar to published double-spike data, i.e., ±0.02–0.03‰ per amu. Potential matrix effects in the MC-ICP-MS measurement were evaluated and found to be either insignificant or controllable. Malinovsky et al.357 preferred to use a double spike of 104Pd and 105Pd to correct for instrumental mass bias, because they felt that doping with either Zr or Ru would limit the number of interference-free Mo isotopes that could be measured. They had to sacrifice 92Mo because of mechanical limitations of the instrument in positioning the detectors for the wide mass coverage required. They usually employed a single pass through a column of Chelex 100 chelating resin to separate Mo from most matrix elements, including iron, but for some samples a second pass was necessary to remove traces of Zr and reduce the iron content to an acceptable level. The method was applied to the analysis of freshwater sediments and molybdenites; long term reproducibility (2 SD) was between 0.04 and 0.14% for four separate Mo isotopic ratios.Developments reported in the measurement of other isotope systems of interest to earth scientists include those of Hg in sediments,204 Pu in marine sediment cores,207 Rb in rocks,358 Th in carbonates359 and U in soils.2004.4.4 Other mass spectrometric techniques. Because thermal ionisation mass spectrometry (TIMS) is a mature analytical technique, the relatively small number of recent publications on developments in TIMS is no indicator of its continuing importance in providing isotopic data to earth scientists, in spite of the rapid increase in reported applications of MC-ICP-MS. The 2006 Update on mass spectrometry points out that these two techniques have complementary strengths and that TIMS is often used to validate MC-ICP-MS measurements.342 Both techniques require painstaking separation and purification of the samples to obtain the best precision for isotope ratios.A significant advance in U–Pb zircon chronology has been the development of a pre-treatment that eliminates the effects of lead loss through natural radiation damage.360 The method, termed chemical abrasion TIMS, involves heating selected zircons to over 800 °C for 48 h; this anneals areas of the crystal lattice damaged by natural radiation. The zircons are then subjected to a series of HF partial leaches at progressively higher temperatures, which remove the areas responsible for the lead loss first, leaving residual material which represents a closed-system zircon. With the right material, geological ages could be discriminated to within 0.1%. This technique opens up a number of possibilities, including its use in the preparation of zircon standards for interlaboratory calibrations and microprobe techniques. It is interesting to note that Connelly361 employed a similar strategy to improve the digestion of garnets for Lu–Hf chronology. By heating the garnets to over 1000 °C, he annealed any zircon inclusions, which substantially reduced their dissolution in 12 M HCl at 210 °C while enhancing the solubility of the garnet. Lutetium and Hf were then isolated from the matrix elements in two ion-exchange steps prior to measurement by MC-ICP-MS. Other sample pre-treatments relevant to TIMS and MC-ICP-MS are discussed in Section 4.3.2.Progress has been made in optimising the isotope spikes used to correct for mass fractionation for TIMS. Gopalan and co-workers362 argue that, on currently available technology, TIMS is better suited for achieving high precision measurement of Ca isotopes than MC-ICP-MS. They showed that the use of a 42Ca–43Ca double spike, rather than the 42Ca–48Ca or 43Ca–48Ca pairs conventionally used, had two main advantages. Firstly, as the chosen normalising isotopes and 40Ca–44Ca ratio to be determined only differ in their average mass by 0.5 mass units, this results in more accurate mass bias corrections using the exponential law. Secondly, in contrast to the other double-spike pairs, all four Ca isotopes can be measured simultaneously in a single multi-collector sequence, thus eliminating errors caused by rapid fluctuations or drifts in fractionation. This also reduced the total run time considerably, and hence the range of in-run fractionation. A new method for the determination of δ34S by TIMS using a 33S–36S double spike to correct for instrument fractionation has been reported.363 The technique is based on the production of singly charged arsenic sulfide ions (AsS+) from a single rhenium filament using silica gel to enhance the ionisation. Precision of the method was similar to that obtained by SIRMS but required about one tenth of the sample.Improved procedures for the determination of sulfur and carbon isotopes in geological materials by SIRMS have also been proposed. A continuous flow elemental analyser coupled to IRMS provided a simple and rapid method of introducing samples into the mass spectrometer after oxidation and gas purification.364 If strict analytical protocols were observed, including adjustment of the amounts of standard and sample to match the signal from the reference gas, precisions of ±0.1‰ for δ34S and δ13C could be obtained. High precision measurements of all four stable S isotopes in sulfide minerals were achieved by coupling the laser ablation SF6 method to GC-IRMS.365 The technique involves fluorination of sulfide, separation of the gaseous product by GC and the removal of mass 131 interferences via a liquid nitrogen–ethanol trap. The technique lends itself to the in situ analysis of sulfide minerals with laser spots of ∼150 μm diameter; an optimum sample size of 100 to 200 nmol S gave precisions of 0.1‰ for δ33S and 0.5‰ for δ36S (2σ).Analytical developments in secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) have been reviewed,342 particularly in relation to applications of interest to earth scientists.366 The latter reference highlights significant progress in U–Pb geochronology, sources of uncertainty during analysis and secondary ion yields. SIMS has many characteristics that make it suitable for measuring Mg/Ca ratios in primary calcite and diagenetic minerals in planktonic foraminifera.367 Measurement of oxygen isotope ratios in Fe–Mg–Ca garnets by SIMS can be plagued by instrumental mass fractionation effects.368 A correction scheme using at least three reliable end-member standards, plus a standard of intermediate composition, was recommended. SIMS was also used to verify a laser-extraction technique to determine δ18O in authigenic and biogenic silica particles.369Developments in the performance of ion microprobes for U series dating continue to be published. Pb isotope dating of minerals at a lateral scale of <5 μm by ion probe (nano-SIMS) has been demonstrated.370 The sensitivity proved adequate for the analysis of minerals containing moderate to high amounts of U but was not sufficient for minerals with lower U contents. A high resolution ion microprobe (SHRIMP) is able to measure in situ all the isotopes required to determine U–Pb and U-series ages. When applied to dating uraniferous opals371 two major limitations became apparent. Firstly, U concentrations in the opals needed to be in excess of 20 μg g−1 in order to obtain a large enough signal. Secondly, the drift of the U–Pb ratios was only weakly correlated with changes in other ratios. A range of different zircon reference samples was used to investigate some abnormal 207Pb/206Pb ratios obtained periodically and devise a means of correcting for them.372 The use of reference samples with very different ages was shown to be effective in monitoring instrument performance.Recent advances and future trends in accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS) in the Earth sciences have been highlighted.215 Developments include novel detection systems, new analytical capabilities and a trend to smaller machines. An important new area is dating using cosmogenic radionuclides produced in situ at the surface of the Earth by the interaction of cosmic radiation with the silicate in surface rocks, where the nuclides 10Be, 14C, 26Al and 36Cl are particularly relevant. Although applications of 26Al have expanded because of the increased availability of AMS instrumentation, no interlaboratory comparison has been carried out and no RM is commercially available. Four meteorite samples were distributed in a round robin exercise to address this issue.373 Although the results were not statistically different from each other, on further examination some bias between different laboratories was observed; more work on evaluating and stating measurement uncertainty is required.4.4.5 X-ray techniques. Geological matrices are often used to evaluate new XRF calibration procedures and methods of matrix correction. Han et al.374 demonstrated that the fundamental parameter (FP) method could fully correct for matrix effects when analysing low-alloy steels, NIST glasses and Chinese geological RMs by WDXRF. Sitko375 proposed the use of theoretical influence coefficients, rather than the FP method, for the analysis of samples of intermediate thickness by WDXRF and validated this approach using a combination of geological CRMs, four-element polycrystals and ferroelectric ceramics. Different linear regression models to construct calibration curves for XRF were compared in a case study.376 The models were evaluated using data acquired by the measurement of 16 geological RMs, ranging from basic to acidic in composition, prepared as fused glass beads. The conclusions, which could be applied to other analytical techniques, indicated that the use of more complex regression models than the ordinary least squares approach was mandatory for geoanalytical systems. Uncertainties on individual results using error propagation equations were presented.X-ray fluorescence is not often considered to be the method of choice for the determination of rare earth elements but two approaches have been reported recently. Nakayama and Nakamura377 prepared low dilution lithium borate glass beads (1 + 1 sample and flux) for the measurement of 23 major and trace elements, including the REE, in igneous rocks. However, for complete vitrification of the mixture, heating twice at 1200 °C with agitation was required. The calibration standards were prepared from ultra-pure reagents rather than rock RMs, and detection limits ranged from 6.5 mg kg−1 for Ce to 0.7 mg kg−1 for Gd. Sitko et al.378 determined the REE composition of apatites by WDXRF. After digestion in aqua regia, 1 ml of solution was pipetted onto a membrane filter and dried prior to measurement. Analysis was performed using one lanthanum standard and the FP approach to calculate the REE radiation intensities, plus theoretical corrections for REE peak overlaps.The value of portable XRF instrumentation (PXRF) in field investigations is gaining increasing acceptance. This technique was used to conduct a survey of eight dolerite outcrops in the Preseli Mountains in South Wales, UK, to assess geochemical variations within and between them for archaeological provenancing.379 Because data obtained by PXRF is affected by rock weathering, a separate laboratory study was undertaken to construct a depth profile of elemental concentrations through the weathered layer of dolerite and rhyolite outcrops.380 A correction factor was derived for each element, based on the ratio of the weathered surface concentration to that in fresh rock, and improved data were obtained for a significant number of elements, although further work is required to evaluate the procedure fully. The advantages and limitations of a bench top TXRF spectrometer for fast and simple screening of contaminated soils and sediments have been described.381 An EDXRF instrument on board ship was shown to be capable of measuring 18 major and minor elements simultaneously on over 200 samples of a sediment core within 24 hours of recovery.382 Sample preparation and analytical procedures were developed to be compatible with conditions on board ship and were shown to be fit for purpose.Several recent studies of fluid inclusions by synchrotron radiation XRF have been reported. The composition of single inclusions in apatite crystals from granites in China provided insights into the relationship between gold mineralisation and magma evolution.383 However, the inclusions had to be less than 15 μm from the crystal surface for successful analysis. The distribution of mineral inclusions in natural diamonds has been mapped using synchrotron μXRF in order to assess the level of metal impurities.384 Correction for the absorption of the characteristic X-rays by the host mineral is essential for accurate elemental concentrations. A procedure for standardless quantification of single inclusions based on a non-iterative FP method has been proposed.385 From statistical error calculations, the critical parameters were shown to be estimates of the inclusion depth and the irradiated fluid thickness.Micro-PIXE analyses of trace element distributions in single grains and fluid inclusions can be useful in prospecting for economically important minerals.386 A combination of PIXE and diagnostic leaching has been used to characterise the distribution of gold in a variety of ores from Western Australia.387For a more comprehensive review of developments in XRF instrumentation and applications, the reader should consult the XRF Update in this series.175 Glossary of termsAASAtomic absorption spectrometryAFSAtomic fluorescence spectrometryAMSAccelerator mass spectrometryBCRCommunity Bureau of ReferenceBPBefore presentCCACopper chromium arsenicCCCCounter current chromatographyCE-UVCapillary electrophoresis-ultraviolet spectrophotometryCE-ICP-MSCapillary electrophoresis-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometryCEMContinuous emission monitoringCRMCertified reference materialCV-AASCold vapour atomic absorption spectrometryCV-AFSCold vapour atomic fluorescence spectrometryDBTDibutyltinDMADimethylarsenic acidDIBKDiisobutyl ketoneDNPH2,4-DinitrophenylhydrazineDPhTDiphenyltinEBCExhaled breath condensateEDXRFEnergy dispersive X-ray fluorescenceEDTAEthylenediaminetetraacetic acidENEuropean committee for standardisationEPMAElectron microprobe analyserES-MSElectrospray-mass spectrometryETAASElectrothermal atomic absorption spectrometryETV-AASElectrothermal vaporisation-atomic absorption spectrometryETV-ICP-MSElectrothermal vaporisation-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometryFIFlow injectionFI-CV-ICP-MSFlow injection-cold vapour-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometryFI-HG-QF-AASFlow injection-hydride generation-quartz furnace-atomic absorption spectrometryFI-ICP-MSFlow injection-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometryFPFundamental parameterGCGas chromatographyGC-AFSGas chromatography-atomic fluorescence spectrometryGC-C-IR-MSGas chromatography-combustion-isotope ratio-mass spectrometryGC-ICP-MSGas chromatography-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometryGC-IR-MSGas chromatography-isotope ratio-mass spectrometryGC-MIP-AESGas chromatography-microwave induced plasma-atomic emission spectrometryGC-MSGas chromatography-mass spectrometryGF-AASGraphite furnace-atomic absorption spectrometryGPSGlobal positioning systemHDPEHigh density polyethyleneHFAHexafluoroarsenateHG-AASHydride generation-atomic absorption spectrometryHG-AFSHydride generation-atomic fluorescence spectrometryHG-ICP-MSHydride generation-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometryHG-QT-AASHydride generation-quartz tube-atomic absorption spectrometryHPLCHigh-performance liquid chromatographyHPLC-ICP-MSHigh-performance liquid chromatography-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometryHPLC-DF-ICP-MSHigh-performance liquid chromatography-double focusing-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometryHPLC-HG-AFSHigh-performance liquid chromatography-atomic fluorescence spectrometryICIon chromatographyIC-HG-AFSIon chromatography-hydride generation-atomic fluorescence spectrometryIC-ICP-MSIon chromatography-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometryICP-AESInductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometryICP-MSInductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometryICP-TOF-MSInductively coupled plasma-time of flight mass spectrometryIDIsotope dilutionID-ICP-MSIsotope dilution-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometryID-MSIsotope dilution-mass spectrometryINAAInstrumental neutron activation analysisIRMMInstitute for Reference Materials and MeasurementsIRMSIsotope ratio mass spectrometryISOInternational Standards OrganisationLALaser ablationLA-ICP-MSLaser ablation-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometryLA-MC-ICP-MSLaser ablation-multicollector-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometryLC-HG-AFSLiquid chromatography-hydride generation-atomic fluorescence spectrometryLC-ICP-MSLiquid chromatography-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometryLIBSLaser induced breakdown spectrometryLoDLimit of detectionLoQLimit of quantificationMAMethylarsonic acidMBTMonobutyltinMC-ICP-MSMulticollector-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometryMDLMethod detection limitMIP-AESMicrowave induced plasma-atomic emission spectrometryMMAMonomethylarsenicMeHgMethylmercuryMe2HgDimethylmercuryMPhTMonophenyltinMS/MSTandem mass spectrometryNAANeutron activation analysisNAAQSNational Ambient Air Quality StandardsNd:YAGNeodymium doped yttrium aluminium garnetNIOSHNational Institute of Occupational Safety and HealthNISTNational Institute of Standards and TechnologyNRCCNational Research Council of CanadaNTIMSNegative thermal ionisation mass spectrometryOCOrganic carbonPGEPlatinum group elementPIXEParticle-induced X-ray emissionPFAPerfluoroalkoxyPLEPressurised liquid extractionPTFEPoly(tetrafluoroethylene)PXRFPortable X-ray fluorescenceRDIRotating drum impactorREERare earth elementRMReference materialRSDRelative standard deviationRTIResearch Triangle InstituteSeCNSelenocyanateSEMScanning electron microscopySF-ICP-MSSector field-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometrySHRIMPSensitive high mass resolution ion microprobesSIMSSecondary ion mass spectrometrySIRMSStable isotope ratio mass spectrometrySPESolid phase extractionSPMESolid phase microextractionSRMStandard Reference MaterialSRXRFSynchrotron radiation X-ray fluorescenceSTNSpeciation trends networkSSIDSpecies specific isotope dilutionTBTTributyltinTD-GC-ICP-MSThermal desorption-gas chromatography-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometryTD-GC-IR-MSThermal desorption-gas chromatography-isotope ratio-mass spectrometryTEMTransmission electron microscopyTIMSThermal ionisation mass spectrometryTMAOTrimethylarsine oxideTMSbTrimethylantimony dichlorideTOF-SIMSTime of flight-secondary ion mass spectrometryTOKThermal optical kineticTOTThermal optical transmissionTPhTTriphenyltinTXRFTransmission X-ray fluorescenceUSGSUnited States Geological SurveyUVUltravioletWDXRFWavelength dispersive X-ray fluorescenceXAFSX-ray absorption fine structure spectrometryXRDX-ray diffractionXRFX-ray fluorescenceUS EPAUnited States Environmental Protection AgencyVOCVolatile organic carbonVGVapour generationWHOWorld Health OrganisationZAASZeeman atomic absorption spectrometry6 ReferencesO. T. Butler, J. M. Cook, C. F. Harrington, S. J. Hill, J. Rieuwerts and D. L. Miles, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(2), 217–243 RSC .J. B. Flanagan, R. K. M. Jayanty, E. E. Rickman and M. R. Peterson, J. Air Waste Manage. Assoc., 2006, 56(4), 492–499 .J. Marrero, R. J. Rebagliati, D. Gomez and P. Smichowski, Talanta, 2005, 68(2), 442–447 CrossRef CAS .F. Bohme, J. Rinklebe, H. J. Stark, R. Wennrich, S. Mothes and H. U. Neue, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. Int., 2005, 12(3), 133–135 CrossRef .N. S. Bloom, A. K. Grout and E. M. Prestbo, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 546(1), 92–101 CrossRef CAS .B. C. Zhang, T. Wu and J. C. Yu, Anal. Sci., 2005, 21(9), 1031–1036 CrossRef CAS .M. Harper, J. Environ. Monit., 2006, 8(6), 598–604 RSC .A. Agrawal, J. Cronin, J. Tonazzi, T. M. McCleskey, D. S. Ehler, E. M. Minogue, G. Whitney, C. Brink, A. K. Burrell, B. Warner, M. J. Goldcamp, P. C. Schlecht, P. Sonthalia and K. Ashley, J. Environ. Monit., 2006, 8(6), 619–624 RSC .M. J. Brisson, K. Ashley, A. B. Stefaniak, A. A. Ekechukwu and K. L. Creek, J. Environ. Monit., 2006, 8(6), 605–611 RSC .M. Goldoni, A. Caglieri, D. Poli, M. V. Vettori, M. Corradi, P. Apostoli and A. Mutti, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2006, 562(2), 229–235 CrossRef CAS .A. Mutti, M. Corradi, M. Goldoni, M. V. Vettori, A. Bernard and P. Apostoli, Chest, 2006, 129(5), 1288–1297 Search PubMed .Z. Spolnik, K. Belikov, K. Van Meel, E. Adriaenssens, F. De Roeck and R. Van Grieken, Appl. Spectrosc., 2005, 59(12), 1465–1469 CrossRef CAS .N. Bukowiecki, M. Hill, R. Gehrig, C. N. Zwicky, P. Lienemann, F. Hegedus, G. Falkenberg, E. Weingartner and U. Baltensperger, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39(15), 5754–5762 CrossRef CAS .J. S. Han, K. J. Moon, S. Y. Ryu, Y. J. Kim and K. D. Perry, Atmos. Environ., 2005, 39(17), 3113–3125 CrossRef CAS .C. F. Wang, M. C. Yuan, C. Y. Chang and S. C. Huang, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2006, 268(1), 15–23 CrossRef CAS .S. Frisia, A. Borsato, J. Susini and A. Somogyi, Archaeometry, 2005, 47, 209–219 CrossRef CAS .P. J. Potts, A. T. Ellis, P. Kregsamer, C. Streli, C. Vanhoof, M. West and P. Wobrauschek, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(10), 1076–1107 RSC .M. Rouleau, C. Dion, P. Plamondon, G. Kennedy, G. L'Esperance and J. Zayed, J. Toxicol. Environ. Health, Part A, 2005, 68(21), 1889–1905 Search PubMed .M. Rouleau, C. Dion, P. Plamondon, G. L'Esperance and J. Zayed, J. Toxicol. Environ. Health, Part A, 2005, 68(21), 1907–1916 Search PubMed .D. C. S. Beddows and H. H. Telle, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(7–8), 1040–1059 CrossRef .S. S. Potgieter-Vermaak and R. van Grieken, Appl. Spectrosc., 2006, 60(1), 39–47 CrossRef CAS .K. J. Hay, B. E. Johnsen, P. R. Ginochio and J. A. Cooper, J. Air Waste Manage. Assoc., 2006, 56(5), 657–665 CAS .G. Garetano, M. Gochfed and A. H. Stern, Environ. Health Perspect., 2006, 114(1), 59–62 CrossRef CAS .R. Gronlund, H. Edner, S. Svanberg, J. Kotnik and M. Horvat, Atmos. Environ., 2005, 39(22), 4067–4074 CrossRef .T. Larsson, E. Bjorn and W. Frech, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(11), 1232–1239 RSC .B. A. Branfireun, D. P. Krabbenhoft, H. Hintelmann, R. J. Hunt, J. P. Hurley and J. W. M. Rudd, Water Resour. Res., 2005, 41(6) Search PubMed  , art no.: W06016.N. Turner, M. Jones, K. Grice, D. Dawson, M. Ioppolo-Armanios and S. J. Fisher, Atmos. Environ., 2006, 40(18), 3381–3388 CrossRef CAS .S. Wen, Y. L. Feng, Y. X. Yu, X. H. Bi, X. M. Wang, G. Y. Sheng, J. M. Fu and P. A. Peng, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39(16), 6202–6207 CrossRef CAS .L. Huang, J. R. Brook, W. Zhang, S. M. Li, L. Graham, D. Ernst, A. Chivulescu and G. Lu, Atmos. Environ., 2006, 40(15), 2690–2705 CrossRef CAS .L. A. Currie and J. D. Kessler, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2005, 5, 2833–2845 CAS .C. M. Steinmaus, C. M. George, D. A. Kalman and A. H. Smith, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2006, 40(10), 3362–3366 CrossRef CAS .S. Karori, D. Clifford, G. Ghurye and G. Samanta, J. Am. Water Works Assoc., 2006, 98(5), 128–141 CAS .E. J. J. Kalis, L. P. Weng, F. Dousma, E. J. M. Temminghoff and W. H. Van Riemsdijk, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2006, 40(3), 955–961 CrossRef CAS .N. Rausch, L. Ukonmaanaho, T. M. Nieminen, M. Krachler, G. Le Roux and W. Shotyk, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2006, 558(1–2), 201–210 CrossRef CAS .E. C. Osterberg, M. J. Handley, S. B. Sneed, P. A. Mayewski and K. J. Kreutz, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2006, 40(10), 3355–3361 CrossRef CAS .D. Sanchez-Rodas, V. Oliveira, A. M. Sarmiento, J. L. Gomez-Ariza and J. M. Nieto, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2006, 384(7–8), 1594–1599 CrossRef CAS .R. K. Singhal, J. Preetha, R. Karpe, K. Tirumalesh, S. C. Kumar and A. G. Hegde, Environ. Int., 2006, 32(2), 224–228 CrossRef CAS .N. M. Hassan, J. D. Murimboh, A. L. R. Sekaly, R. Mandal, C. L. Chakrabarti and D. C. Gregoire, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2006, 384(7–8), 1558–1566 CrossRef CAS .M. D. Bezerra, M. A. Z. Arruda and S. L. C. Ferreira, Appl. Spectrosc. Rev., 2005, 40(4), 269–299 CrossRef .E. K. Paleologos, D. L. Giokas and M. I. Karayannis, Trends Anal. Chem., 2005, 24(5), 426–436 CrossRef CAS .P. Pohl, Trends Anal. Chem., 2006, 25(1), 31–43 CrossRef CAS .B. Godlewska-Zylkiewicz, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2006, 384(1), 114–123 CAS .G. Liljegren, N. Forsgard, C. Zettersten, J. Pettersson, M. Svedberg, M. Herranen and L. Nyholm, Analyst, 2005, 130(10), 1358–1368 RSC .X. B. Long, M. Miro and E. H. Hansen, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77(18), 6032–6040 CrossRef CAS .X. B. Long, M. Miro and E. H. Hansen, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(11), 1203–1211 RSC .K. Hennebruder, W. Engewald, H. J. Stark and R. Wennrich, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 542(2), 216–221 CrossRef CAS .E. Terlecka, Environ. Monit. Assess., 2005, 107(1–3), 259–284 CrossRef CAS .M. Leermakers, W. Baeyens, M. De Gieter, B. Smedts, C. Meert, H. C. De Bisschop, R. Morabito and P. Quevauviller, Trends Anal. Chem., 2006, 25(1), 1–10 CrossRef CAS .K. F. Akter, Z. Chen, L. Smith, D. Davey and R. Naidu, Talanta, 2005, 68(2), 406–415 CrossRef CAS .M. Leermakers, W. Baeyens, P. Quevauviller and M. Horvat, Trends Anal. Chem., 2005, 24(5), 383–393 CrossRef CAS .S. Imai, Y. Kawanaka, N. Wang and S. J. Yun, Bunseki Kagaku, 2005, 54(7), 631–636 CrossRef CAS .D. Wallschlager and J. London, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(9), 993–995 RSC .S. Stauder, B. Raue and F. Sacher, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39(16), 5933–5939 CrossRef CAS .F. Li, D. D. Wang, X. P. Yan, J. M. Lin and R. G. Su, Electrophoresis, 2005, 26(11), 2261–2268 CrossRef CAS .F. Li, D. D. Wang, X. P. Yan, R. G. Su and J. M. Lin, J. Chromatogr., A, 2005, 1081(2), 232–237 CrossRef CAS .D. D. Wang, F. Li and X. P. Yan, J. Chromatogr., A, 2006, 1117(2), 246–249 CrossRef CAS .J. Munoz, M. Gallego and M. Valcarcel, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77(16), 5389–5395 CrossRef CAS .J. Munoz, M. Gallego and M. Valcarcel, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 548(1–2), 66–72 CrossRef CAS .S. Mishra, R. M. Tripathi, S. Bhalke, V. K. Shukla and V. D. Puranik, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 551(1–2), 192–198 CrossRef CAS .C. Devos, M. Vliegen, B. Willaert, F. David, L. Moens and P. Sandra, J. Chromatogr., A, 2005, 1079(1–2), 408–414 CrossRef CAS .H. Serra and J. M. F. Nogueira, J. Chromatogr., A, 2005, 1094(1–2), 130–137 CrossRef CAS .G. Centineo, P. Rodriguez-Gonzalez, E. B. Gonzalez, J. I. G. Alonso, A. Sanz-Medel, N. F. Cardona, J. L. A. Mares and S. B. Nebot, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2006, 384(4), 908–914 CrossRef CAS .N. Miekeley, R. C. Pereira, E. A. Casartelli, A. C. Almeida and M. D. Carvalho, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(5), 633–641 CrossRef .M. Dauthieu, M. Bueno, K. Darrouzes, N. Gilon and M. Potin-Gautier, J. Chromatogr., A, 2006, 1114(1), 34–39 CrossRef CAS .Y. C. Sun, Y. C. Chang and C. K. Su, Anal. Chem., 2006, 78(8), 2640–2645 CrossRef CAS .M. J. Nash, J. E. Maskall and S. J. Hill, Analyst, 2006, 131(6), 724–730 RSC .I. De Gregori, W. Quiroz, H. Pinochet, F. Pannier and M. Potin-Gautier, J. Chromatogr., A, 2005, 1091(1–2), 94–101 CrossRef CAS .N. Fidalgo-Used, M. Montes-Bayon, E. Blanco-Gonzalez and A. Sanz-Medel, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(9), 876–882 RSC .Z. X. Guo, Q. T. Cai and Z. G. Yang, J. Chromatogr., A, 2005, 1100(2), 160–167 CrossRef CAS .H. Biester, D. Selimovic, S. Hemmerich and M. Petri, Biogeosciences, 2006, 3(1), 53–64 Search PubMed .N. Campillo, N. Aguinaga, P. Vinas, I. Lopez-Garcia and M. Hernandez-Cordoba, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 552(1–2), 182–189 CrossRef CAS .L. Fantozzi, R. Ferrara and E. Lanzillotta, Environ. Technol., 2005, 26(11), 1303–1308 CrossRef CAS .T. Zoltan, Z. Benzo, M. Murillo, E. Marcano, C. Gomez, J. Salas and M. Quintal, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2005, 382(6), 1419–1430 CrossRef CAS .M. H. Arbab-Zavar, G. H. Rounaghi, M. Chamsaz and M. Masrournia, Chem. Analit., 2005, 50(3), 517–527 Search PubMed .M. H. Arbab-Zavar, M. Chamsaz, A. Youssefi and M. Aliakbari, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 546(1), 126–132 CrossRef CAS .C. B. Zheng, Y. Li, Y. H. He, Q. Ma and X. D. Hou, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(8), 746–750 RSC .E. Pena-Vazquez, A. Bermejo-Barrera and P. Bermejo-Barrera, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(12), 1344–1349 RSC .C. Fernandez, A. C. L. Conceicao, R. Rial-Otero, C. Vaz and J. L. Capelo, Anal. Chem., 2006, 78(8), 2494–2499 CrossRef CAS .H. Matusiewicz and M. Krawczyk, Microchem. J., 2006, 83(1), 17–23 CrossRef CAS .M. C. M. Fourcade, J. M. Barnola, J. Susini, R. Baker, G. Durand, M. de Angelis and P. Duval, J. Glaciol., 2005, 51(173), 325–332 Search PubMed .I. Petrov and C. R. Quetel, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(10), 1095–1100 RSC .C. F. You and M. D. Li, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(12), 1392–1394 RSC .E. Engstrom, I. Rodushkin, D. C. Baxter and B. Ohlander, Anal. Chem., 2006, 78(1), 250–257 CrossRef .L. Y. Alleman, D. Cardinal, C. Cocquyt, P. D. Plisnier, J. P. Descy, I. Kimirei, D. Sinyinza and L. Andre, J. Great Lakes Res., 2005, 31(4), 509–519 Search PubMed .L. Yang, S. Willie and R. E. Sturgeon, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(11), 1226–1231 RSC .P. Gabrielli, C. Barbante, C. Turetta, A. Marteel, C. Boutron, G. Cozzi, W. Cairns, C. Ferrari and P. Cescon, Anal. Chem., 2006, 78(6), 1883–1889 CrossRef CAS .A. R. Bowie, E. P. Achterberg, P. L. Croot, H. J. W. de Baar, P. Laan, J. W. Moffett, S. Ussher and P. J. Worsfold, Mar. Chem., 2006, 98(1), 81–99 CrossRef CAS .J. Sneddon, C. Hardaway, K. Bobbadi and A. Reddy, Appl. Spectrosc. Rev., 2006, 41(1), 1–14 CrossRef CAS .K. Shirin, S. Naseem, S. A. Sheikh, S. Shafiq and S. Latif, J. Chem. Soc. Pak., 2005, 27(5), 501–507 Search PubMed .X. P. Wang, W. J. Gao and S. L. Xiang, Spectrosc. Spectral Anal., 2006, 26(2), 348–352 CAS .E. C. Vieira, M. Y. Kamogawa, S. G. Lemos, J. D. Nobrega and A. R. D. Nogueira, Rev. Bras. Ciencia Solo, 2005, 29(4), 547–553 Search PubMed .S. Melaku, R. Dams and L. Moens, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 543(1–2), 117–123 CrossRef CAS .P. Navarro, J. C. Raposo, G. Arana and N. Etxebarria, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2006, 566(1), 37–44 CrossRef CAS .M. Niemela, H. Kola, P. Peramaki, J. Piispanen and J. Poikolainen, Microchim. Acta, 2005, 150(3–4), 211–217 CrossRef .C. Yafa and J. G. Farmer, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2006, 557(1–2), 296–303 CrossRef CAS .E. Alonso-Rodriguez, J. Moreda-Pineiro, P. Lopez-Mahia, D. Prada-Rodriguez, E. Fernandez-Fernandez, S. Muniategui-Lorenzo, A. Moreda-Pineiro, A. Bermejo-Barrera and P. Bermejo-Barrera, Trends Anal. Chem., 2006, 25(5), 511–519 CrossRef CAS .K. S. Crane, B. L. Webb, P. S. Allen and V. D. Jolley, Commun. Soil Sci. Plant Anal., 2005, 36(19–20), 2687–2697 CrossRef CAS .A. Vaisanen and A. Kiljunen, Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 2005, 85(14), 1037–1049 CrossRef .A. Vaisanen and A. Ilander, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2006, 570(1), 93–100 CrossRef .J. Kalembkiewicz and E. Soco, Polish J. Environ. Stud., 2005, 14(5), 593–598 Search PubMed .S. Kartal, Z. Aydin and S. Tokalioglu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2006, 132(1), 80–89 CrossRef CAS .S. Tokalioglu, S. Kartal and A. Gultekin, Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 2006, 86(6), 417–430 CrossRef CAS .R. Santamaria-Fernandez, M. R. Cave and S. J. Hill, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2006, 557(1–2), 344–352 CrossRef CAS .E. H. Hansen, M. Miro, X. B. Long and R. Petersen, Anal. Lett., 2006, 39(7), 1243–1259 CrossRef CAS .M. Sulkowski and A. V. Hirner, Appl. Geochem., 2006, 21(1), 16–28 CrossRef CAS .A. K. Maruchi and F. R. P. Rocha, Microchem. J., 2006, 82(2), 207–213 CrossRef CAS .F. S. Sun, M. Xie and C. F. Wu, Chem. Speciation Bioavailability, 2005, 17(4), 137–146 Search PubMed .M. Soylak, S. Saracoglu, U. Divrikli and L. Elci, Talanta, 2005, 66(5), 1098–1102 CrossRef CAS .M. Soylak, M. Tuzen and I. Narin, Quim. Nova, 2006, 29(2), 203–207 CAS .G. P. Chandra, K. Seshaiah, Y. K. Rao and M. C. Wang, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2006, 54(8), 2868–2872 CrossRef CAS .S. Tokalioglu, H. Buyukbas and S. Kartal, J. Braz. Chem. Soc., 2006, 17(1), 98–106 CAS .S. Baytak and A. R. Turker, J. Hazard. Mater., 2006, 129(1–3), 130–136 CrossRef CAS .A. Makishima and E. Nakamura, Anal. Chem., 2006, 78(11), 3794–3799 CrossRef CAS .M. Tuzen and M. Soylak, J. Hazard. Mater., 2006, 129(1–3), 266–273 CrossRef CAS .Z. Xin, Y. Q. Zhou, Z. J. Huang, Q. F. Hu, J. Chen and G. Y. Yang, Microchim. Acta, 2006, 153(3–4), 187–191 CrossRef CAS .X. C. Dong, Y. Han, Q. F. Hu, J. Chen and G. Y. Yang, J. Braz. Chem. Soc., 2006, 17(1), 189–193 CAS .R. S. Praveen, S. Daniel and I. P. Rao, At. Spectrosc., 2006, 27(2), 35–43 CAS .N. Manouchehri and A. Bermond, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2006, 557(1–2), 337–343 CrossRef CAS .E. Bolea, D. Arroyo, F. Laborda and J. R. Castillo, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2006, 569(1–2), 227–233 CrossRef CAS .C. M. R. Almeida, A. P. Mucha and M. Vasconcelos, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2005, 12(5), 271–277 CrossRef .J. Kubova, P. Matus, M. Bujdos and J. Medved, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 547(1), 119–125 CrossRef CAS .K. Tagami, S. Uchida, I. Hirai, H. Tsukada and H. Takeda, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2006, 570(1), 88–92 CrossRef CAS .J. Mattusch, M. Cimpean and R. Wennrich, Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 2006, 86(9), 629–640 CrossRef CAS .T. Mrak, Z. Slejkovec and Z. Jeran, Talanta, 2006, 69(1), 251–258 CrossRef CAS .M. Georgiadis, Y. Cai and H. M. Solo-Gabriele, Environ. Pollut., 2006, 141(1), 22–29 CrossRef CAS .J. Frank, M. Krachler and W. Shotyk, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(2), 204–207 RSC .E. A. Cordos, T. Frentiu, M. Ponta, B. Abraham and J. Marginean, Chem. Speciation Bioavailability, 2006, 18(1), 1–9 Search PubMed .R. Miravet, E. Bonilla, J. F. Lopez-Sanchez and R. Rubio, J. Environ. Monit., 2005, 7(12), 1207–1213 RSC .R. Miravet, E. Bonilla, J. F. Lopez-Sanchez and R. Rubio, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2006, 20(1), 12–19 CrossRef CAS .S. Foster, W. Maher, F. Krikowa, K. Telford and M. Ellwood, J. Environ. Monit., 2005, 7(12), 1214–1219 RSC .S. Amereih, T. Meisel, R. Scholger and W. Wegscheider, J. Environ. Monit., 2005, 7(12), 1200–1206 RSC .S. Mitsunobu, T. Harada, K. Hoshino and Y. Takahashi, Chem. Lett., 2005, 34(12), 1656–1657 CrossRef CAS .J. C. Raposo, O. Zuloaga, J. Sanz, U. Villanueva, P. Crea, N. Etxebarria, M. A. Olazabal and J. M. Madariaga, Mar. Chem., 2006, 99(1–4), 42–51 CrossRef CAS .E. A. Cordos, T. Frentiu, M. Ponta, J. Marginean, B. Abraham and C. Roman, Chem. Speciation Bioavailability, 2006, 18(1), 11–25 Search PubMed .M. Gutierrez-Ruiz, M. Villalobos, F. Romero and P. Fernandez-Lomelin, in Advances in Arsenic Research, American Chemical Society, Washington,  2005, vol. 915, pp. 235–252 Search PubMed .C. Hutton, D. W. Bryce, W. Russeau, H. J. Glass, L. E. T. Jenkin, W. T. Corns and P. B. Stockwell, Mineral. Mag., 2005, 69(5), 577–589 Search PubMed .S. Foster, W. Maher, A. Taylor, F. Krikowa and K. Telford, Environ. Chem., 2005, 2(3), 177–189 Search PubMed .M. Quaghebeur and Z. Rengel, Microchim. Acta, 2005, 151(3–4), 141–152 CrossRef CAS .V. G. Mihucz, E. Tatar, I. Virag, E. Cseh, F. Fodor and G. Zaray, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2005, 383(3), 461–466 CrossRef CAS .A. P. Navaza, M. Montes-Bayon, D. L. LeDuc, N. Terry and A. Sanz-Medel, J. Mass Spectrom., 2006, 41(3), 323–331 CrossRef CAS .M. J. Ruiz-Chancho, R. Sabe, J. F. Lopez-Sanchez, R. Rubio and P. Thomas, Microchim. Acta, 2005, 151(3–4), 241–248 CrossRef CAS .B. I. Khan, H. M. Solo-Gabriele, T. G. Townsend and Y. Cai, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2006, 40(3), 988–993 CrossRef CAS .C. W. Shade and R. J. M. Hudson, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39(13), 4974–4982 CrossRef CAS .J. B. Shi, C. Y. Liao, Y. W. Wang and G. B. Jiang, Spectrosc. Spectral Anal., 2006, 26(2), 336–339 CAS .A. Bernaus, X. Gaona and M. Valiente, J. Environ. Monit., 2005, 7(8), 771–777 RSC .R. Fernandez-Martinez, J. Loredo, A. Ordonez and M. I. Rucandio, Environ. Pollut., 2006, 142(2), 217–226 CrossRef CAS .M. Montes-Bayon, M. J. D. Molet, E. B. Gonzalez and A. Sanz-Medel, Talanta, 2006, 68(4), 1287–1293 CrossRef CAS .A. P. Vonderheide, S. Mounicou, J. Meija, H. F. Henry, J. A. Caruso and J. R. Shann, Analyst, 2006, 131(1), 33–40 RSC .S. V. K. Yathavakilla, M. Shah, S. Mounicou and J. A. Caruso, J. Chromatogr., A, 2005, 1100(2), 153–159 CrossRef CAS .S. Mounicou, M. Shah, J. Meija, J. A. Caruso, A. P. Vonderheide and J. Shann, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(4), 404–412 RSC .A. L. Ryser, D. G. Strawn, M. A. Marcus, S. Fakra, J. L. Johnson-Maynard and G. Moller, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2006, 40(2), 462–467 CrossRef CAS .P. Loganathan and M. J. Hedley, Aust. J. Soil Res., 2006, 44(2), 155–163 Search PubMed .M. A. Bryszewska, W. Ambroziak, J. Rudzinski and D. J. Lewis, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2005, 382(5), 1279–1287 CrossRef CAS .M. Slekovec and W. Goessler, Chem. Speciation Bioavailability, 2005, 17(2), 63–73 Search PubMed .P. Smrkolj, V. Stibilj, I. Kreft and M. Germ, Food Chem., 2006, 96(4), 675–681 CrossRef CAS .D. Mazej, I. Falnoga, M. Veber and V. Stibilj, Talanta, 2006, 68(3), 558–568 CrossRef CAS .A. Voegelin, S. Pfister, A. C. Scheinost, M. A. Marcus and R. Kretzschmar, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39(17), 6616–6623 CrossRef CAS .N. Fatima, F. Perveen, Z. T. Maqsood and I. U. Siddiqui, J. Chem. Soc. Pak., 2005, 27(4), 393–397 Search PubMed .S. I. Segura-Munoz, A. D. Oliveira, M. Nikaido, T. M. B. Trevilato, A. Bocio, A. M. M. Takayanagui and J. L. Domingo, Environ. Int., 2006, 32(1), 52–57 CrossRef CAS .L. F. Ona, A. Melinda, P. Alberto, J. A. Prudente and G. C. Sigua, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2006, 13(3), 177–183 CrossRef CAS .O. Acar, S. Ozvatan and M. Ilim, Turk. J. Chem., 2005, 29(4), 335–344 Search PubMed .N. Panichev, K. Mandiwana, M. Kataeva and S. Siebert, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(5), 699–703 CrossRef .F. S. Rojas, C. B. Ojeda and J. M. C. Pavon, Ann. Chim., 2005, 95(6), 437–445 CrossRef .M. Felipe-Sotelo, M. J. Cal-Prieto, A. Carlosena, J. M. Andrade, E. Fernandez and D. Prada, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 553(1–2), 208–213 CrossRef CAS .M. J. Cal-Prieto, M. F. Sotelo, A. Carlosena, J. M. Andrade, E. Fernandez and D. Prada, At. Spectrosc., 2006, 27(1), 7–12 CAS .L. A. Pereira, I. Amorim and J. B. B. da Silva, Talanta, 2006, 68(3), 771–775 CrossRef CAS .O. Acar, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 542(2), 280–286 CrossRef CAS .O. Acar, Anal. Sci., 2006, 22(5), 731–735 CrossRef CAS .H. W. Sun, X. H. Wen and S. X. Liang, Spectrosc. Spectral Anal., 2006, 26(5), 950–954 CAS .F. Laborda, B. Soria, M. P. Gorriz and J. R. Castillo, At. Spectrosc., 2005, 26(6), 215–220 CAS .M. Resano, E. Garcia-Ruiz, M. Aramendia and M. A. Belarra, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(12), 1374–1380 RSC .W. W. Shi, W. E. Gan and Q. C. Su, Spectrosc. Spectral Anal., 2005, 25(7), 1135–1138 CAS .H. R. Kymalainen and A. M. Sjoberg, Agric. Food Sci., 2006, 15(1), 3–11 Search PubMed .C. M. R. Almeida, A. P. Mucha and M. Vasconcelos, Mar. Environ. Res., 2006, 61(4), 424–438 CrossRef CAS .M. Intawongse and J. R. Dean, Food Addit. Contam., 2006, 23(1), 36–48 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhang, L. B. Deng and W. H. Ye, J. Environ. Sci. (China), 2006, 18(1), 130–134 Search PubMed .B. Z. Zhao, M. Maeda, J. B. Zhang, A. N. Zhu and Y. Ozaki, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2006, 13(2), 90–97 CrossRef CAS .M. Belhadj, M. R. Ghezzar, F. Abdelmalek, A. A. Benahmed, B. Ouddane and A. Addou, Fresenius’ Environ. Bull., 2006, 15(3), 186–192 CAS .M. Schreiber, M. Otto, P. S. Fedotov and R. Wennrich, Chemosphere, 2005, 61(1), 107–115 CrossRef CAS .P. S. Fedotov, E. Y. Savonina, R. Wennrich and B. Y. Spivakov, Analyst, 2006, 131(4), 509–515 RSC .P. Masson, D. Orignac and T. Prunet, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 545(1), 79–84 CrossRef CAS .Z. F. Fan, B. Hu and Z. C. Jiang, Talanta, 2006, 68(4), 1359–1365 CrossRef CAS .U. Divrikli, N. Horzum, M. Soylak and L. Elci, Int. J. Food Sci. Technol., 2006, 41(6), 712–716 CrossRef CAS .S. Basgel and S. B. Erdemoglu, Sci. Total Environ., 2006, 359(1–3), 82–89 CrossRef CAS .M. Moilanen, H. Fritze, M. Nieminen, P. Sirpa, J. Issakainen and J. Piispanen, For. Ecol. Manage., 2006, 226(1–3), 153–160 Search PubMed .N. Dursun, M. M. Ozcan, G. Kasik and C. Ozturk, J. Sci. Food Agric., 2006, 86(7), 1087–1094 CrossRef CAS .S. Gezgin, M. M. Ozcan and E. Atalay, J. Med. Food, 2006, 9(1), 123–127 CrossRef CAS .T. Li, L. J. Yu, M. T. Li and W. Li, Microchim. Acta, 2006, 153(1–2), 109–114 CrossRef CAS .E. Bloem, S. Haneklaus and E. Schnug, Landbauforsch. Volkenrode, 2005, 55(4), 205–210 Search PubMed .K. Nakamura and J. Taira, Biometals, 2005, 18(6), 651–658 Search PubMed .H. Matusiewicz and M. Slachcinski, Microchem. J., 2006, 82(1), 78–85 CrossRef CAS .Y. P. Ke, Q. Sun, Z. R. Yang, J. J. Xin, L. Chen and X. D. Hou, Spectrosc. Lett., 2006, 39(1), 29–43 CrossRef CAS .J. F. Ranville, D. J. Chittleborough and R. Beckett, Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J., 2005, 69(4), 1173–1184 CAS .S. Mason, R. Hamon, A. Nolan, H. Zhang and W. Davison, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77(19), 6339–6346 CrossRef CAS .O. Mestek, A. Fonverne and J. Polak, Chem. Listy, 2005, 99(10), 718–725 CAS .J. Polak, O. Mestek and M. Suchanek, Accreditation and Quality Assurance, 2006, 10(11), 627–632 Search PubMed .P. K. Petrov, G. Wibetoe and D. L. Tsalev, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2006, 61(1), 50–57 CrossRef .K. Inagaki, A. Takatsu, A. Nakama, S. Eyama, T. Yarita, K. Okamoto and K. Chiba, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2006, 385(1), 67–75 CrossRef CAS .M. Godoy, J. M. Godoy, R. Kowsmann, G. M. dos Santos and R. P. da Cruz, J. Environ. Radioact., 2006, 88(2), 109–117 CrossRef CAS .S. F. Boulyga and K. G. Heumann, J. Environ. Radioact., 2006, 88(1), 1–10 CrossRef CAS .V. P. Mironov, J. L. Matusevich, V. P. Kudrjashov, P. I. Ananich, V. V. Zhuravkov, S. F. Boulyga and J. S. Becker, Radiochim. Acta, 2005, 93(12), 781–784 CrossRef CAS .J. Zheng and M. Yamada, Talanta, 2006, 68(3), 932–939 CrossRef .A. Bartosova, P. Rajec and A. Klimekova, Chem. Pap., 2006, 60(2), 125–131 Search PubMed .D. Foucher and H. Hintelmann, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2006, 384(7–8), 1470–1478 CrossRef CAS .J. E. Sonke and V. J. M. Salters, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2006, 70(6), 1495–1506 CrossRef CAS .J. F. Wu, Y. R. Jin, G. Q. Zhou and L. X. Zhang, Chin. J. Anal. Chem., 2005, 33(10), 1397–1400 CAS .J. Zheng and M. Yamada, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2005, 267(1), 73–83 CrossRef .Y. Ohtsuka, Y. Takaku, K. Nishimura, J. Kimura, S. Hisamatsu and J. Inaba, Anal. Sci., 2006, 22(2), 309–311 CrossRef CAS .V. N. Epov, K. Benkhedda and R. D. Evans, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(9), 990–992 RSC .D. D. Richardson, B. B. M. Sadi and J. A. Caruso, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(4), 396–403 RSC .S. S. Chow and M. Taillefert, in Advances in Arsenic Research, American Chemical Society, Washington,  2005, vol. 915, pp. 220–234 Search PubMed .D. Goi, F. Tubaro and G. Dolcetti, Waste Manage., 2006, 26(2), 167–175 CrossRef CAS .C. Cloquet, J. Carignan, G. Libourel, T. Sterckeman and E. Perdrix, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2006, 40(8), 2525–2530 CrossRef CAS .C. A. Weeks, M. Croasdale, M. A. Osborne, L. Hewitt, P. F. Miller, P. Robb, M. J. Baxter, P. D. Warriss and T. G. Knowles, Food Addit. Contam., 2006, 23(2), 140–147 CrossRef CAS .A. J. T. Jull and G. S. Burr, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 2006, 243(3–4), 305–325 CrossRef CAS .I. T. Lawson, S. Al-Omari, P. C. Tzedakis, C. L. Bryant and K. Christanis, Holocene, 2005, 15(6), 873–887 Search PubMed .B. Talon, S. Payette, L. Fillon and A. Delwaide, Quat. Res., 2005, 64(1), 36–43 CrossRef .P. Sanborn, M. Geertsema, A. J. T. Jull and B. Hawkes, Holocene, 2006, 16(3), 415–427 Search PubMed .J. A. A. Bos, D. J. Huisman, P. Kiden, W. Z. Hoek and B. van Geel, Palaeogeogr. Palaeoclimatol. Palaeoecology, 2005, 227(4), 259–289 Search PubMed .J. A. A. Bos, S. J. P. Bohncke and C. R. Janssen, J. Paleolimnology, 2006, 35(2), 211–238 Search PubMed .A. G. Boe, S. O. Dahl, O. Lie and A. Nesje, Holocene, 2006, 16(3), 445–455 Search PubMed .N. D. Stansell, M. B. Abbott, P. J. Polissar, A. P. Wolfe, M. Bezada and V. Rull, J. Quat. Sci., 2005, 20(7–8), 801–812 Search PubMed .L. Anderson, M. B. Abbott, B. P. Finney and M. E. Edwards, Holocene, 2005, 15(8), 1172–1183 Search PubMed .A. Blass, F. S. Anselmetti, M. Grosjean and M. Sturm, Eclogae Geol. Helv., 2005, 98(3), 319–332 Search PubMed .G. Mollenhauer, D. Montlucon and T. I. Eglinton, Radiocarbon, 2005, 47(3), 413–424 CAS .A. Schimmelmann, C. B. Lange, E. B. Roark and B. L. Ingram, J. Sediment. Res., 2006, 76(1–2), 74–80 Search PubMed .C. J. Sparrenbom, O. Bennike, S. Bjorck and K. Lambeck, J. Quat. Sci., 2006, 21(1), 29–48 Search PubMed .S. A. Gorbarenko, I. A. Basov, M. P. Chekhovskaya, J. Southon, T. A. Khusid and A. Artemova, Deep-Sea Res., Part II, 2005, 52(16–18), 2174–2185 CrossRef .L. K. Ovrebo, P. D. W. Haughton and P. M. Shannon, Mar. Geol., 2006, 225(1–4), 279–309 CrossRef .M. H. Park, J. H. Kim, B. J. Ryu, I. S. Kim and H. W. Chang, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., 2006, 243(1), 211–215 Search PubMed .J. Rethemeyer, C. Kramer, G. Gleixner, B. John, T. Yamashita, H. Flessa, N. Andersen, M. J. Nadeau and P. M. Grootes, Geoderma, 2005, 128(1–2), 94–105 CrossRef CAS .B. Li, P. Q. Zhang, C. Y. Chen, M. He and Z. F. Chai, Chin. J. Anal. Chem., 2005, 33(7), 904–908 CAS .Z. D. Jin, J. J. Cao, J. L. Wu and S. M. Wang, Earth Surf. Processes Landforms, 2006, 31(3), 285–291 Search PubMed .A. Fairbairn and P. Swadling, Radiocarbon, 2005, 47(3), 377–382 CAS .J. R. Bacon, I. J. Hewitt and P. Cooper, J. Environ. Monit., 2005, 7(8), 785–791 RSC .S. Gioia, M. M. Pimentel, M. Tessler, E. L. Dantas, J. E. G. Campos, E. M. Guimaraes, M. T. S. Maruoka and E. L. C. Nascimento, Sci. Total Environ., 2006, 356(1–3), 125–142 CrossRef CAS .J. Wang, M. T. Zhao, N. Guan and H. Lu, Accredit. Qual. Assur., 2006, 11(4), 188–194 Search PubMed .M. Corsi, G. Cristoforetti, M. Hidalgo, S. Legnaioli, V. Palleschi, A. Salvetti, E. Tognoni and C. Vallebona, Appl. Geochem., 2006, 21(5), 748–755 CrossRef CAS .J. B. Sirven, B. Bousquet, L. Canioni, L. Sarger, S. Tellier, M. Potin-Gautier and I. Le Hecho, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2006, 385(2), 256–262 CrossRef CAS .J. B. Sirven, B. Bousquet, L. Canioni and L. Sarger, Anal. Chem., 2006, 78(5), 1462–1469 CrossRef CAS .G. Custo, S. Boeykens, L. Dawidowski, L. Fox, D. Gomez, F. Luna and C. Vazquez, Anal. Sci., 2005, 21(7), 751–756 CrossRef CAS .E. Makinen, M. Korhonen, E. L. Viskari, S. Haapamaki, M. Jarvinen and L. Lu, Water, Air, Soil Pollut., 2006, 171(1–4), 95–110 CrossRef .C. Kilbride, J. Poole and T. R. Hutchings, Environ. Pollut., 2006, 143(1), 16–23 CrossRef CAS .T. Punshon, A. Lanzirotti, S. Harper, P. M. Bertsch and J. Burger, J. Environ. Qual., 2005, 34(4), 1165–1173 CrossRef CAS .R. R. Martin, S. J. Naftel, S. M. Macfie, K. W. Jones, H. Feng and C. Trembley, X-ray Spectrom., 2006, 35(1), 57–62 CrossRef CAS .E. Margui, I. Queralt, M. L. Carvalho and M. Hidalgo, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 549(1–2), 197–204 CrossRef CAS .E. Margui, R. Padilla, M. Hidalgo, I. Queralt and R. Van Grieken, X-ray Spectrom., 2006, 35(3), 169–177 CrossRef CAS .M. Rahman and Z. K. Punja, Plant Physiol. Biochem., 2005, 43(12), 1103–1114 CrossRef CAS .O. Dogan and E. Tirasoglu, J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer, 2006, 101(1), 141–145 CrossRef CAS .M. Pouzar, T. Cernohorsky and T. Sakra, Chem. Analit., 2006, 51(1), 173–178 Search PubMed .J. A. Alfonso, M. Martinez, S. Flores and Z. Benzo, J. Coast. Res., 2006, 22(3), 502–510 Search PubMed .M. L. Carvalho, L. Ascensao, T. Magalhaes and A. Casimiro, X-ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(5), 406–410 CrossRef CAS .E. D. Wannaz, H. A. Carreras, C. A. Perez and M. L. Pignata, Sci. Total Environ., 2006, 361(1–3), 267–278 CrossRef CAS .E. Margui, M. Hidalgo and I. Queralt, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(9–10), 1363–1372 CrossRef .D. R. Fernando, G. N. Batianoff, A. J. Baker and I. E. Woodrow, Plant, Cell Environ., 2006, 29(5), 1012–1020 CrossRef CAS .W. E. Dubbin, M. G. Penn and M. E. Hodson, Geoderma, 2006, 131(1–2), 76–88 CrossRef CAS .I. Cousin, S. Cornu, J. Rose, V. Deschatrettes, D. Montagne, B. Clozel and P. Chevallier, Soil Sci., 2005, 170(7), 516–529 CrossRef CAS .R. Terzano, M. Spagnuolo, L. Medici, B. Vekemans, L. Vincze, K. Janssens and P. Ruggiero, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39(16), 6280–6287 CrossRef CAS .J. C. Echeverria, I. Zarranz, J. Estella and J. J. Garrido, Appl. Clay Sci., 2005, 30(2), 103–115 CrossRef CAS .F. van Oort, A. G. Jongmans, L. Citeau, I. Lamy and P. Chevallier, Eur. J. Soil Sci., 2006, 57(2), 154–166 CrossRef CAS .T. A. Kirpichtchikova, A. Manceau, L. Spadini, F. Panfili, M. A. Marcus and T. Jacquet, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2006, 70(9), 2163–2190 CrossRef CAS .A. Bernaus, X. Gaona, D. van Ree and M. Valiente, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2006, 565(1), 73–80 CrossRef CAS .Y. Arai, A. Lanzirotti, S. R. Sutton, M. Newville, J. Dyer and D. L. Sparks, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2006, 40(3), 673–679 CrossRef CAS .M. Valladon, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2005, 29(3), 339–371 Search PubMed .K. P. Jochum, L. Nohl, K. Herwig, E. Lammel, B. Toll and A. W. Hofmann, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2005, 29(3), 333–338 Search PubMed .A. Botha, A. I. Barzev, S. M. Linsky and J. L. Fischer, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(10), 1044–1050 RSC .J. S. Kane, Geostand. Geoanal. Research, 2004, 28(1), 53–80 Search PubMed .P. J. Potts and J. S. Kane, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2005, 29(2), 233–236 Search PubMed .C. H. Tong, S. C. Zhou, J. C. Li, X. H. Liu and J. P. Wu, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2005, 29(2), 225–231 Search PubMed .M. Inoue, M. Nohara, T. Okai, A. Suzuki and H. Kawahata, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2004, 28(3), 411–416 Search PubMed .R. E. Sturgeon, S. N. Willie, L. Yang, R. Greenberg, R. O. Spatz, Z. Chen, C. Scriver, V. Clancy, J. W. Lam and S. Thorrold, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(10), 1067–1071 RSC .K. P. Jochum, M. Willbold, I. Raczek, B. Stoll and K. Herwig, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2005, 29(3), 285–302 Search PubMed .M. Guillong, K. Hametner, E. Reusser, S. A. Wilson and D. Gunther, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2005, 29(3), 315–331 Search PubMed .M. Odegard, O. Skar, H. Schiellerup and N. J. Pearson, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2005, 29(2), 197–209 Search PubMed .L. Strnad, M. Mihaljevic and O. Sebek, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2005, 29(3), 303–314 Search PubMed .A. J. R. Kent, B. Jacobsen, D. W. Peate, T. E. Waight and J. A. Baker, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2004, 28(3), 417–429 Search PubMed .S. A. Kasemann, A. B. Jeffcoate and T. Elliott, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77(16), 5251–5257 CrossRef CAS .K. P. Jochum, J. Pfander, J. D. Woodhead, M. Willbold, B. Stoll, K. Herwig, M. Amini, W. Abouchami and A. W. Hofmann, Geochem. Geophys. Geosyst., 2005, 6 Search PubMed .M. Rosner and A. Meixner, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2004, 28(3), 431–441 Search PubMed .P. J. Sylvester, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2005, 29(1), 41–52 Search PubMed .N. S. Mokgalaka and J. L. Gardea-Torresdey, Appl. Spectrosc. Rev., 2006, 41(2), 131–150 CrossRef CAS .H. R. Kuhn and D. Gunther, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2005, 383(3), 434–441 CrossRef CAS .Z. K. Wang, B. Hattendorf and D. Gunther, J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom., 2006, 17(5), 641–651 CrossRef CAS .Q. Z. Bian, J. Koch, H. Lindner, H. Berndt, R. Hergenroder and K. Niemax, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(8), 736–740 RSC .Q. Z. Bian, C. C. Garcia, J. Koch and K. Niemax, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(2), 187–191 RSC .M. M. Allan, B. W. D. Yardley, L. J. Forbes, K. I. Shmulovich, D. A. Banks and T. J. Shepherd, Am. Mineral., 2005, 90(11–12), 1767–1775 CrossRef CAS .M. A. E. Huminicki, P. J. Sylvester, L. J. Carbi, C. M. Lesher and M. Tubrett, Econ. Geol., 2005, 100(8), 1631–1646 CrossRef CAS .S. F. Boulyga and K. G. Heumann, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2005, 383(3), 442–447 CrossRef CAS .S. Rege, S. Jackson, W. L. Griffin, R. M. Davies, N. J. Pearson and S. Y. O'Reilly, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(7), 601–611 RSC .A. J. R. Kent and C. A. Ungerer, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(11), 1256–1262 RSC .Z. S. Chang, J. D. Vervoort, W. C. McClelland and C. Knaack, Geochem. Geophys. Geosyst., 2006, 7 Search PubMed .T. Hirata, T. Iizuka and Y. Orihashi, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(8), 696–701 RSC .C. D. Storey, T. E. Jeffries and M. Smith, Chem. Geol., 2006, 227(1–2), 37–52 CrossRef CAS .W. C. Davis, S. J. Christopher and G. C. Turk, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77(19), 6389–6395 CrossRef CAS .M. Tiepolo, C. Bouman, R. Vannucci and J. Schwieters, Appl. Geochem., 2006, 21(5), 788–801 CrossRef CAS .M. D. Norman, M. T. McCulloch, H. S. O'Neill and G. M. Yaxley, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(1), 50–54 RSC .C. J. Adams, H. J. Campbell and W. L. Griffin, Chem. Geol., 2005, 220(1–2), 67–82 CrossRef CAS .T. Iizuka and T. Hirata, Chem. Geol., 2005, 220(1–2), 121–137 CrossRef CAS .G. L. Foster and D. Vance, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(3), 288–296 RSC .J. P. Bernal, S. M. Eggins and M. T. McCulloch, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(11), 1240–1249 RSC .S. M. Eggins, R. Grun, M. T. McCulloch, A. W. G. Pike, J. Chappell, L. Kinsley, G. Mortimer, M. Shelley, C. V. Murray-Wallace, C. Spotl and L. Taylor, Quat. Sci. Rev., 2005, 24(23–24), 2523–2538 CrossRef .P. R. D. Mason, J. Kosler, J. C. M. de Hoog, P. J. Sylvester and S. Meffan-Main, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(2), 177–186 RSC .C. Bendall, Y. Lahaye, J. Fiebig, S. Weyer and G. P. Brey, Appl. Geochem., 2006, 21(5), 782–787 CrossRef CAS .J. Kosler, R. B. Pedersen, C. Kruber and P. J. Sylvester, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(3), 192–199 RSC .I. Horn, R. Schoenberg and F. von Blanckenburg, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(2), 211–213 RSC .J. Kosler, R. Pedersen, C. Kruber and P. Sylvester, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(2), 214–216 RSC .R. S. Harmon, F. C. DeLucia, C. E. McManus, N. J. McMillan, T. F. Jenkins, M. E. Walsh and A. Miziolek, Appl. Geochem., 2006, 21(5), 730–747 CrossRef CAS .B. Salle, D. A. Cremers, S. Maurice, R. C. Wiens and P. Fichet, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(6), 805–815 CrossRef .J. R. Thompson, R. C. Wiens, J. E. Barefield, D. T. Vaniman, H. E. Newsom and S. M. Clegg, J. Geophys. Res. [Planets], 2006, 111(E5) Search PubMed .B. Salle, J. L. Lacour, P. Mauchien, P. Fichet, S. Maurice and G. Manhes, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2006, 61(3), 301–313 CrossRef .R. C. Wiens, S. K. Sharma, J. Thompson, A. Misra and P. G. Lucey, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 61(10), 2324–2334 CrossRef .J. Anzano, J. Gutierrez and M. Villoria, Anal. Lett., 2005, 38(12), 1957–1965 CrossRef CAS .N. J. McMillan, C. E. McManus, R. S. Harmon, F. C. De Lucia and A. W. Miziolek, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2006, 385(2), 263–271 CrossRef CAS .N. Carmona, M. Oujja, E. Rebollar, H. Romich and M. Castillejo, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(7–8), 1155–1162 CrossRef .P. Yaroshchyk, D. Body, R. J. S. Morrison and B. L. Chadwick, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2006, 61(2), 200–209 CrossRef .M. Felipe-Sotelo, A. Carlosena, J. M. Andrade, M. J. Cal-Prieto, E. Fernandez and D. Prada, Microchem. J., 2005, 81(2), 217–224 CrossRef CAS .M. L. Munoz and A. J. Aller, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(3), 329–337 RSC .L. Bianchin, D. Nadvorny, A. F. da Silva, M. G. R. Vale, M. M. da Silva, W. N. L. dos Santos, S. L. C. Ferreira, B. Welz and U. Heitmann, Microchem. J., 2006, 82(2), 174–182 CrossRef CAS .P. F. Rodriguez, J. M. Marchante-Gayon and A. Sanz-Medel, Talanta, 2006, 68(3), 869–875 CrossRef CAS .M. A. Vieira, A. S. Ribeiro and A. J. Curtius, Microchem. J., 2006, 82(2), 127–136 CrossRef CAS .M. A. Vieira, A. S. Ribeiro, L. F. Dias and A. J. Curtius, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(5), 643–652 CrossRef .K. Srogi, Anal. Lett., 2006, 39(7), 1261–1288 CrossRef CAS .S. Fadda, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2005, 29(1), 143–156 Search PubMed .J. Wang, T. Nakazato, K. Sakanishi, O. Yamada, H. Tao and I. Saito, Talanta, 2006, 68(5), 1584–1590 CrossRef CAS .G. Zachariadis, E. Dimitrakoudi, A. Anthemidis and J. Stratis, Talanta, 2006, 68(5), 1448–1456 CrossRef CAS .Z. X. Li and Y. H. Feng, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(1), 90–93 RSC .I. K. Pitcairn, P. E. Warwick, J. A. Milton and D. A. H. Teagle, Anal. Chem., 2006, 78(4), 1290–1295 CrossRef CAS .Y. Nebel-Jacobsen, E. E. Scherer, C. Munker and K. Mezger, Chem. Geol., 2005, 220(1–2), 105–120 CrossRef CAS .B. Le Fevre and C. Pin, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 543(1–2), 209–221 CrossRef CAS .Y. V. Sahoo, S. Nakai and A. Ali, Analyst, 2006, 131(3), 434–439 RSC .M. Potin-Gautier, F. Pannier, W. Quiroz, H. Pinochet and I. de Gregori, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 553(1–2), 214–222 CrossRef CAS .P. Rodriguez-Gonzalez, J. I. Garcia Alonso and A. Sanz-Medel, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(10), 1076–1084 RSC .G. M. M. Rahman, H. M. S. Kingston, T. G. Towns, R. J. Vitale and K. R. Clay, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2005, 382(4), 1111–1120 CrossRef CAS .L. P. Bedard and M. Wiedenbeck, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2005, 29(1), 23–25 Search PubMed .C. B. Ojeda and F. S. Rojas, Talanta, 2006, 68(5), 1407–1420 CrossRef CAS .F. Mercader-Trejo, E. R. de San Miguel and J. de Gyves, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(11), 1212–1217 RSC .E. Curiel-Reyna, A. Herrera, V. M. Castano and M. E. Rodriguez, Mater. Manuf. Processes, 2005, 20(5), 813–822 Search PubMed .D. L. Gallindo Borges, A. F. da Silva, A. J. Curtius, B. Welz and U. Heitmann, Microchim. Acta, 2006, 154(1–2), 101–107 CrossRef .K. L. Linge, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2005, 29(1), 7–22 Search PubMed .J. A. Gasquez, E. DeLima, R. A. Olsina, L. D. Martinez and M. de la Guardia, Talanta, 2005, 67(4), 824–828 CrossRef CAS .Z. X. Li, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(4), 435–438 RSC .J. R. Bacon, K. L. Linge, R. R. Parrish and L. Van Vaeck, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(8), 785–818 RSC .D. Beauchemin, Anal. Chem., 2006, 78(12), 4111–4135 CrossRef CAS .Z. C. Hu, S. Gao, S. H. Hu, H. L. Yuan, X. M. Liua and Y. S. Liu, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(11), 1263–1269 RSC .J. Pinho, J. Canario, R. Cesario and C. Vale, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 551(1–2), 207–212 CrossRef .D. Layton-Matthews, M. I. Leybourne, J. M. Peter and S. D. Scott, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(1), 41–49 RSC .T. Moriguti, A. Makishima and E. Nakamura, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2004, 28(3), 371–382 Search PubMed .J. D. Woodhead, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2005, 29(1), 26–36 Search PubMed .I. Basile-Doelsch, J. Geochem. Explor., 2006, 88(1–3), 252–256 CrossRef CAS .B. C. Reynolds, R. B. Georg, F. Oberli, U. Wiechert and A. N. Halliday, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21(3), 266–269 RSC .T. Ding, D. Wan, R. Bai, Z. Zhang, Y. Shen and R. Meng, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2005, 69(23), 5487–5494 CrossRef CAS .Y. Amelin, Meteorit. Planet. Sci., 2006, 41(1), 7–17 CrossRef CAS .M. Tanimizu and T. Ishikawa, Geochem. J., 2006, 40(2), 121–133 CrossRef CAS .F. Poitrasson and R. Freydier, Chem. Geol., 2005, 222(1–2), 132–147 CrossRef CAS .K. Dideriksen, J. A. Baker and S. L. S. Stipp, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2006, 70(1), 118–132 CrossRef CAS .A. J. Pietruszka, R. J. Walker and P. A. Candela, Chem. Geol., 2006, 225(1–2), 121–136 CrossRef CAS .D. Malinovsky, I. Rodushkin, D. C. Baxter, J. Ingri and B. Ohlander, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2005, 245(1–3), 94–107 CrossRef CAS .O. Nebel, K. Mezger, E. E. Scherer and C. Munker, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2005, 246(1–3), 10–18 CrossRef CAS .E. K. Potter, C. H. Stirling, M. B. Andersen and A. N. Halliday, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2005, 247(1–3), 10–17 CrossRef CAS .J. M. Mattinson, Chem. Geol., 2005, 220(1–2), 47–66 CrossRef CAS .J. N. Connelly, Geochem. Geophys. Geosyst., 2006, 7 Search PubMed .K. Gopalan, D. Macdougall and C. Macisaac, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2006, 248(1–2), 9–16 CrossRef CAS .J. L. Mann and W. R. Kelly, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2005, 19(23), 3429–3441 CrossRef CAS .N. V. Grassineau, Appl. Geochem., 2006, 21(5), 756–765 CrossRef CAS .S. Ono, B. Wing, D. Rumble and J. Farquhar, Chem. Geol., 2006, 225(1–2), 30–39 CrossRef CAS .E. Deloule and M. Wiedenbeck, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2005, 29(1), 37–40 Search PubMed .K. L. Bice, G. D. Layne and K. Dahl, Geochem. Geophys. Geosyst., 2005, 6 Search PubMed .D. Vielzeuf, M. Champenois, J. W. Valley, F. Brunet and J. L. Devidal, Chem. Geol., 2005, 223(4), 208–226 CrossRef CAS .J. Crespin, A. Alexandre, C. Sonzogni and F. Sylvestre, J. Geochem. Explor., 2006, 88(1–3), 423–426 CrossRef CAS .R. A. Stern, I. R. Fletcher, B. Rasmussen, N. J. McNaughton and B. J. Griffin, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2005, 244(2–3), 125–134 CrossRef CAS .A. A. Nemchin, L. A. Neymark and S. L. Simons, Chem. Geol., 2006, 227(1–2), 113–132 CrossRef CAS .L. P. Black, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2005, 29(2), 169–182 Search PubMed .S. Merchel and W. Bremser, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2005, 239(3), 217–226 CrossRef CAS .X. Y. Han, S. J. Zhuo, R. X. Shen, P. L. Wang and A. Ji, J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer, 2006, 97(1), 68–74 CrossRef CAS .R. Sitko, X-ray Spectrom., 2006, 35(2), 93–100 CrossRef CAS .M. Guevara, S. P. Verma, F. Velasco-Tapia, R. L. S. Cruz and P. Giron, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2005, 29(3), 271–284 Search PubMed .K. Nakayama and T. Nakamura, Anal. Sci., 2005, 21(7), 815–822 CrossRef CAS .R. Sitko, B. Zawisza and M. Czaja, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(8), 741–745 RSC .M. C. Jones, O. Williams-Thorpe, P. J. Potts and P. C. Webb, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2005, 29(3), 251–269 Search PubMed .P. J. Potts, F. Bernardini, M. C. Jones, O. Williams-Thorpe and P. C. Webb, X-ray Spectrom., 2006, 35(1), 8–18 CrossRef CAS .H. Stosnach, Anal. Sci., 2005, 21(7), 873–876 CrossRef CAS .K. Wien, D. Wissmann, M. Kolling and H. D. Schulz, Geo-Mar. Lett., 2005, 25(4), 248–264 Search PubMed .Y. H. Tang, C. M. Han, Z. K. Bao, Y. Y. Huang, W. He and W. Hua, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(4), 439–446 CrossRef .H. Sitepu, M. G. Kopylova, D. H. Quirt, J. N. Cutler and T. G. Kotzer, Am. Mineral., 2005, 90(11–12), 1740–1747 CrossRef CAS .J. Cauzid, P. Philippot, A. Somogyi, B. Menez, A. Simionovici and P. Bleuet, Chem. Geol., 2006, 227(3–4), 165–183 CrossRef CAS .M. Ahmed, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2005, 265(1), 39–45 CrossRef CAS .W. R. Goodall, P. J. Scales and C. G. Ryan, Minerals Eng., 2005, 18(10), 1010–1019 Search PubMed .This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2007
Table Content:
AAS	Atomic absorption spectrometry
AFS	Atomic fluorescence spectrometry
AMS	Accelerator mass spectrometry
BCR	Community Bureau of Reference
BP	Before present
CCA	Copper chromium arsenic
CCC	Counter current chromatography
CE-UV	Capillary electrophoresis-ultraviolet spectrophotometry
CE-ICP-MS	Capillary electrophoresis-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry
CEM	Continuous emission monitoring
CRM	Certified reference material
CV-AAS	Cold vapour atomic absorption spectrometry
CV-AFS	Cold vapour atomic fluorescence spectrometry
DBT	Dibutyltin
DMA	Dimethylarsenic acid
DIBK	Diisobutyl ketone
DNPH	2,4-Dinitrophenylhydrazine
DPhT	Diphenyltin
EBC	Exhaled breath condensate
EDXRF	Energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence
EDTA	Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
EN	European committee for standardisation
EPMA	Electron microprobe analyser
ES-MS	Electrospray-mass spectrometry
ETAAS	Electrothermal atomic absorption spectrometry
ETV-AAS	Electrothermal vaporisation-atomic absorption spectrometry
ETV-ICP-MS	Electrothermal vaporisation-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry
FI	Flow injection
FI-CV-ICP-MS	Flow injection-cold vapour-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry
FI-HG-QF-AAS	Flow injection-hydride generation-quartz furnace-atomic absorption spectrometry
FI-ICP-MS	Flow injection-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry
FP	Fundamental parameter
GC	Gas chromatography
GC-AFS	Gas chromatography-atomic fluorescence spectrometry
GC-C-IR-MS	Gas chromatography-combustion-isotope ratio-mass spectrometry
GC-ICP-MS	Gas chromatography-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry
GC-IR-MS	Gas chromatography-isotope ratio-mass spectrometry
GC-MIP-AES	Gas chromatography-microwave induced plasma-atomic emission spectrometry
GC-MS	Gas chromatography-mass spectrometry
GF-AAS	Graphite furnace-atomic absorption spectrometry
GPS	Global positioning system
HDPE	High density polyethylene
HFA	Hexafluoroarsenate
HG-AAS	Hydride generation-atomic absorption spectrometry
HG-AFS	Hydride generation-atomic fluorescence spectrometry
HG-ICP-MS	Hydride generation-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry
HG-QT-AAS	Hydride generation-quartz tube-atomic absorption spectrometry
HPLC	High-performance liquid chromatography
HPLC-ICP-MS	High-performance liquid chromatography-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry
HPLC-DF-ICP-MS	High-performance liquid chromatography-double focusing-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry
HPLC-HG-AFS	High-performance liquid chromatography-atomic fluorescence spectrometry
IC	Ion chromatography
IC-HG-AFS	Ion chromatography-hydride generation-atomic fluorescence spectrometry
IC-ICP-MS	Ion chromatography-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry
ICP-AES	Inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry
ICP-MS	Inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry
ICP-TOF-MS	Inductively coupled plasma-time of flight mass spectrometry
ID	Isotope dilution
ID-ICP-MS	Isotope dilution-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry
ID-MS	Isotope dilution-mass spectrometry
INAA	Instrumental neutron activation analysis
IRMM	Institute for Reference Materials and Measurements
IRMS	Isotope ratio mass spectrometry
ISO	International Standards Organisation
LA	Laser ablation
LA-ICP-MS	Laser ablation-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry
LA-MC-ICP-MS	Laser ablation-multicollector-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry
LC-HG-AFS	Liquid chromatography-hydride generation-atomic fluorescence spectrometry
LC-ICP-MS	Liquid chromatography-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry
LIBS	Laser induced breakdown spectrometry
LoD	Limit of detection
LoQ	Limit of quantification
MA	Methylarsonic acid
MBT	Monobutyltin
MC-ICP-MS	Multicollector-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry
MDL	Method detection limit
MIP-AES	Microwave induced plasma-atomic emission spectrometry
MMA	Monomethylarsenic
MeHg	Methylmercury
Me2Hg	Dimethylmercury
MPhT	Monophenyltin
MS/MS	Tandem mass spectrometry
NAA	Neutron activation analysis
NAAQS	National Ambient Air Quality Standards
Nd:YAG	Neodymium doped yttrium aluminium garnet
NIOSH	National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health
NIST	National Institute of Standards and Technology
NRCC	National Research Council of Canada
NTIMS	Negative thermal ionisation mass spectrometry
OC	Organic carbon
PGE	Platinum group element
PIXE	Particle-induced X-ray emission
PFA	Perfluoroalkoxy
PLE	Pressurised liquid extraction
PTFE	Poly(tetrafluoroethylene)
PXRF	Portable X-ray fluorescence
RDI	Rotating drum impactor
REE	Rare earth element
RM	Reference material
RSD	Relative standard deviation
RTI	Research Triangle Institute
SeCN	Selenocyanate
SEM	Scanning electron microscopy
SF-ICP-MS	Sector field-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry
SHRIMP	Sensitive high mass resolution ion microprobes
SIMS	Secondary ion mass spectrometry
SIRMS	Stable isotope ratio mass spectrometry
SPE	Solid phase extraction
SPME	Solid phase microextraction
SRM	Standard Reference Material
SRXRF	Synchrotron radiation X-ray fluorescence
STN	Speciation trends network
SSID	Species specific isotope dilution
TBT	Tributyltin
TD-GC-ICP-MS	Thermal desorption-gas chromatography-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry
TD-GC-IR-MS	Thermal desorption-gas chromatography-isotope ratio-mass spectrometry
TEM	Transmission electron microscopy
TIMS	Thermal ionisation mass spectrometry
TMAO	Trimethylarsine oxide
TMSb	Trimethylantimony dichloride
TOF-SIMS	Time of flight-secondary ion mass spectrometry
TOK	Thermal optical kinetic
TOT	Thermal optical transmission
TPhT	Triphenyltin
TXRF	Transmission X-ray fluorescence
USGS	United States Geological Survey
UV	Ultraviolet
WDXRF	Wavelength dispersive X-ray fluorescence
XAFS	X-ray absorption fine structure spectrometry
XRD	X-ray diffraction
XRF	X-ray fluorescence
US EPA	United States Environmental Protection Agency
VOC	Volatile organic carbon
VG	Vapour generation
WHO	World Health Organisation
ZAAS	Zeeman atomic absorption spectrometry

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2007
